Security and Loss 
Prevention: 
An Introduction
5th Edition
Philip P. Purpura
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier

Publisher: 
Amy Pedersen
Acquisitions Editor: 
Pam Chester
Project Manager: 
Jay Donahue
Marketing Manager: 
Marissa Hederson
Designer: 
Elsevier Design Group
Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
525 B Street, Suite 1900, San Diego, California 92101-4495, USA
84 Theobald’s Road, London WC1X 8RR, UK
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
Copyright © 2008, Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights Department in 
Oxford, UK: phone: (+44) 1865 843830, fax: (+44) 1865 853333, E-mail: permissions@elsevier.
co.uk. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier homepage (http://elsevier.com), 
by selecting “Customer Support” and then “Obtaining Permissions.”
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Application Submitted
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-0-12-372525-7
For all information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications visit our Web site at www.books.
elsevier.com/security
Printed in The United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4

Dedication
To my family.
To the millions of military, public safety, security and loss prevention, and other professionals 
who seek global security and safety.

About the Author
Philip P. Purpura, Certified Protection Professional, is a college educator, consult-
ant, expert witness, and writer. He is Director of the Security Training Institute and 
Resource Center and Coordinator of the Security for Houses of Worship Project in 
South Carolina. Purpura began his security career in New York City and held manage-
ment and proprietary and contract investigative positions. He also worked with a pub-
lic police agency. Purpura is the author of six other books: Terrorism and Homeland 
Security: An Introduction with Applications (Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2007); Security Handbook, 2nd ed. (Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann,
 2003; Albany, NY: Delmar, 1991); Police & Community: Concepts & Cases (Need-
ham, MA: Allyn & Bacon, 2001); Criminal Justice: An Introduction (Boston, 
MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1997); Retail Security & Shrinkage Protection 
(Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1993); and Modern Security & Loss Preven-
tion Management (Boston, MA: Butterworth, 1989). Purpura was contributing editor 
to three security periodicals; wrote numerous articles published in journals, magazines, 
and newsletters; and has been involved in a variety of editorial projects for publish-
ers. He holds an associate’s degree in police science from the State University of New 
York at Farmingdale, and bachelor’s and master’s degrees in criminal justice from the 
University of Dayton and Eastern Kentucky University, respectively. He also studied 
in several foreign countries. He serves on the ASIS International Council on Academic 
Programs.
xxi

Preface
The fifth edition of Security and Loss Prevention: An Introduction continues to draw on 
many disciplines for answers to protection challenges facing practitioners while helping 
the reader to understand the security and loss prevention profession. A major focus is 
placed on loss problems and countermeasures.
Terminology, concepts, and theories, at the foundation of this profession, are 
emphasized. The book has been updated with newer laws, statistics, research, strategies 
of protection, technology, events, and issues. At the same time, the contents retain basic 
information on the body of knowledge of security and loss prevention.
The many disciplines within this book include law, criminal justice, business, 
accounting, risk management, emergency management, fire protection, safety, sociology, 
and psychology. The publications supporting this book include articles from journals 
and a variety of other periodicals, books, research reports from numerous organizations, 
codes, and guidelines. The book has been updated and aligned with ASIS International 
research on security tasks, knowledge, and skills of practitioners.
A major change is the inclusion of Chapters 12, 13, 15, and 16. These chapters 
explain the threats of terrorism, natural disasters, and accidents, while including an “all 
hazards” preparation and protection approach. Public and private sector strategies and 
issues are explained. The book shows an awareness that, beyond the attention terrorism 
has received since the 9/11 attacks, security and loss prevention practitioners continue 
to face the same basic challenges they faced prior to the attacks, such as violence in the 
workplace, theft, and cybercrime.
Several new topics are included in the fifth edition. Examples are internal and exter-
nal metrics, competitive bidding, contract life management, digital evidence, globaliza-
tion, homeland security, pandemics, quarantine enforcement, and the cascade effect.
Because we are in the “information age” and the protection of both information 
technology (IT) and information are so important today, a major theme of this book is 
to connect the traditional security manager and physical security specialist to IT security. 
This is not a claim to make the reader an IT security expert. Rather, the reader will learn 
about similarities and differences of physical and IT security; internal and external IT 
risks and countermeasures; and the mindset of the IT security specialist. The convergence 
of physical security and IT security, as covered in the contents, makes an understanding of 
IT especially important to the security and loss prevention practitioner. Our “information 
age” has brought with it an explosion of data, information, and “hype” that challenge us 
to probe and shape knowledge for our personal and professional life. To assist the reader, 
xxiii

xxiv 
PREFACE
critical thinking skills are presented as a tool to go beyond collecting “facts” as we seek 
to understand causes, motives, and change. In addition, because all security strategies 
either protect people and assets, accomplish nothing, or help offenders (see Chapter 3), 
practitioners will benefit by thinking critically as they plan, select vendors, and implement 
and manage security strategies that will make or break their careers.
The fifth edition includes learning objectives and key terms at the beginning of each 
chapter, key terms in bold within each chapter, definitions, examples, illustrations, pho-
tos, boxed scenarios, boxed international topics for global perspectives, and career boxes 
that explain various specializations in security.
The student or practitioner will find this book to be user-friendly and interactive, as 
in previous editions. Several features will assist the reader in understanding not only the 
basics but also the “reality” of the field. The reader is placed in the role of the practitioner 
through various exercises. Within each chapter, the loss problems are described and are 
followed by a discussion of the nuts-and-bolts countermeasures. Sidebars in each chapter 
emphasize significant points and facilitate critical thinking about security issues. Cases 
titled “You Be the Judge” appear in the text. These fictional accounts of actual cases deal 
with security-related legal problems. The reader is asked for a verdict based on the mate-
rial at hand and then is directed to the end of the chapter for the court’s ruling. Additional 
boxed cases appear in chapters and offer bits of interesting information or analyze a loss 
problem relevant to the subject matter of the chapter. The case problems at the ends of 
chapters bridge theory to practice and ask the reader to apply the general concepts of the 
chapter to real-world situations. These exercises enable the student to improve analytical 
and decision-making skills, consider alternative strategies, stimulate controversy in group 
discussions, make mistakes and receive feedback, and understand corporate culture and 
ethical guidelines.
This new edition also serves as a helpful directory; professional organizations and 
sources of information that enhance protection programs are included with web addresses 
at the ends of chapters.
This book also helps applicants prepare for the Certified Protection Professional 
examination, which is sponsored by ASIS International. Numerous topics included in the 
examination are covered in this book.
The first few chapters provide an introduction and foundation for protection pro-
grams and strategies. Chapter 1 defines security and loss prevention and presents a critical 
perspective of the history of security and loss prevention. The second chapter concen-
trates on the growth of the security industry and profession and related challenges. The 
next three chapters provide a foundation from which protection programs can become 
more efficient and effective. Chapter 3 focuses on security as a profession, risk analysis, 
planning, evaluation, research, and security standards and regulations. Chapter 4 pro-
vides an overview of civil and criminal law and includes discussions of premise protec-
tion, negligence, and arrest law. Chapter 5 explains the why and how of recruiting people 
and organizations to assist with loss prevention efforts. Chapters 6, 7, and 8 emphasize 
 strategies for curbing internal and external crime threats. These include job applicant 
screening, policies, procedures, and physical security. Chapter 9, on purchasing security 

services and systems, is vital because not all security specialists are wise consumers, and 
the best plans are useless when followed by poor purchasing decisions. Chapter 10 pro-
vides practical information on investigations. The strategies of accountability, accounting, 
and auditing are described in Chapter 11, with an explanation as to why these tools are 
essential for survival. Chapter 12 focuses on risk management, business continuity, and 
emergency management as a foundation for Chapter 13 on life safety, fire protection, 
emergencies, and disasters. Chapter 14 emphasizes workplace safety and OSHA. The top-
ics of terrorism and homeland security are discussed in Chapter 15. Chapter 16 empha-
sizes protecting critical infrastructures, key assets, and borders. Chapter 17 explains 
security and loss prevention at retail, financial, educational, and healthcare organizations. 
The topics of workplace violence, personnel protection, substance abuse, and informa-
tion security are in Chapter 18. The final chapter focuses on trends, education, research, 
training, and employment.
The traditional focus of security—security officers, fences, and alarms—is too nar-
row to deal with an increasingly complex world. Practitioners are being asked to do more 
with fewer resources and prove that the money spent on protection has a return on invest-
ment. In a world of rapid change, senior management expects security and loss preven-
tion practitioners to produce answers quickly. The true professional maintains a positive 
attitude and sees problems as challenges that have solutions.
The tremendous growth of the security and loss prevention profession provides 
 fertile ground to advance in a rewarding career. In such a competitive world, the survival 
and protection of businesses and institutions, technological innovations, and the national 
interest depend greatly on security and loss prevention programs. This book should inspire 
and motivate students and practitioners to fulfill these vital protection needs.
Preface xxv

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the many people who contributed to this fifth edition. Gratitude 
goes to my family for their support and patience. I am thankful to security practition-
ers, educators, librarians, and others who helped to provide a wealth of information to 
support the contents of this book. The hardworking Security team at Elsevier, including 
Amy Pedersen, Pam Chester, Marissa Hederson, Greg deZarn-O’Hare, Jay Donahue, and 
Alisa Andreola, are to be recognized for their talents and skills in publishing this book. 
I am grateful for the team effort, among so many people, for without it this book could 
not be published.
xxvii

KEY TERMS
• critical thinking
• security
• loss prevention
• Chief Security Officer (CSO)
• Great Wall of China
• Hammurabi, King of Babylon
• polis
• Praetorian Guard
• vigiles
• feudalism
• comitatus
• posse comitatus
• Posse Comitatus Act
• frankpledge system
• tithing
• Magna Carta
• Statute of Westminster
• watch and ward
• Henry Fielding
• Bow Street Runners
• Sir Robert Peel
• Metropolitan Police Act
• Allan Pinkerton
• Henry Wells
• William Fargo
• William Burns
• Washington Perry Brink
• Edwin Holmes
• George Wackenhut
• first wave societies
• second wave societies
• third wave societies
• convergence of IT and physical security
• convergence of enterprise security
3
The History of Security and 
Loss Prevention: A Critical 
Perspective
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the purpose of critical thinking and how to think critically.
2. Define security and loss prevention.
3. List the benefits of studying the history of security and loss prevention.
4. Trace the early development of security and policing.
5. Describe the growth of security companies in the United States.
6. Explain the convergence of IT and physical security and the convergence of enterprise 
security.
7. Describe 21st century/post-9/11 security challenges.
1

4          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
Why Critical Thinking?
September 11, 2001, marked a turning point in the history of security. In a devastating ter-
rorist onslaught, knife-wielding hijackers crashed two airliners into the World Trade Center 
in New York City, creating an inferno that caused the 110-story twin skyscrapers to col-
lapse. About 3,000 people were killed, including responding firefighters and police. During 
the same morning, another hijacked airliner crashed into the Pentagon, causing additional 
deaths and destruction. A fourth hijacked airliner failed to reach its target and crashed when 
heroic passengers learned of the other attacks and struggled with hijackers to control the 
airliner. The attacks were immensely successful and cost-effective for the terrorists. With a 
loss of 19 terrorists and expenses between $400,000 and $500,000, the attackers were able 
to kill thousands, cause hundreds of billions of dollars in economic damage and spending 
on counterterrorism, and significantly affect global history. With such a huge kill ratio and 
investment payoff for the terrorists, governments and the  private sector must succeed in 
controlling terrorism.
Because of these devastating attacks, not only have homeland defenses, military strategies, 
public safety, and private sector security changed, but also our way of thinking has changed. We 
cannot afford to have failures in our planning and imagination of what criminals can do. To 
improve security, we must seek new tools to assist us in our thinking processes.
Here we begin with critical thinking skills to counter “business as usual.” Critical 
thinking helps us to become active learners: to not only absorb information, but to probe and 
shape knowledge. The critical thinker cuts through “hype” and emotion and goes beyond col-
lecting “facts” and memorizing information in an effort to understand causes, motives, and 
changes. Critical thinking skills provide a foundation for creative planning while helping us 
to anticipate future events.
The critical thinker asks many questions, and the questions are often easier to formu-
late than the answers. Critical thinking requires us to “jump out of our own skin” to see the 
world from the perspective of others. Although this is not an easy process, we are much better 
informed before we make our conclusions and decisions.
Critical thinking is not to be used as a tool to open up the floodgates of criticism in the 
workplace. It is to be applied discreetly to understand the world and to meet challenges.
A professional’s success depends on his or her thinking process applied to everyday 
duties and long-range planning. Critical thinking adds an extra edge to the repertoire of tools 
available to security and loss prevention practitioners.
Safi and Burrell (2007: 54) write:
Theorists have hypothesized that critical thinking is correlated with internal motiva-
tion to think. Cognitive skills of analysis, interpretation, explanation, evaluation and 
correcting one’s own reasoning are at the heart of critical thinking.
Critical thinking can be learned with practice and guidance by changing the 
actions involved in making decisions so that they become part of permanent 
behavior in homeland security intelligence analysis, threat protection and security 
planning.
Security challenges have become increasingly complex because as we plan for protec-
tion and face a multitude of threats in a rapidly changing environment, we must expect the 
unexpected, while staying within our budgets. The security practitioner should be creative, 
have an excellent imagination, apply critical thinking skills, and carefully prioritize security 
strategies to produce the best possible security program.
Although critical thinking skills are applied to a critical perspective of history in this 
chapter, students and practitioners are urged to continue this thinking process throughout this 
book. It is hoped that your conclusions and decisions will be enhanced to improve security 
and loss prevention.

Why Think Critically about the History of Security and Loss Prevention?         5
To prime the reader’s mind for the explanation of critical thinking, Chapter 3 applies 
critical thinking to security planning by suggesting that all security strategies be placed 
under one of the following three models: it protects people and assets; it accomplishes 
nothing; or it helps offenders.
How Can We Think Critically?
Our world is filled with many efforts to influence our thinking. Examples are the media, 
advertisers, politicians, educators, and writers. This author is biased just like other writers, 
and within these pages is a North American interpretation of security. Although an effort has 
been made to write an objective book here, it is impossible for any writer, and biases sur-
face. Objectivity is fostered in this book through an introduction to critical thinking skills, a 
multidisciplinary approach, international perspectives, boxed topics and questions, a variety 
of references, Web exercises, and case problems at the end of chapters that bridge theory to 
practice and ask the reader to make  decisions as a practitioner.
With so much competition seeking to influence us, choices become difficult and confus-
ing. And, as we think through complex challenges, we need a method of sorting conflicting 
claims, differentiating between fact and opinion, weighing “evidence” or “proof,” being 
perceptive to our biases and those of others, and drawing logical conclusions. Ellis (1991: 
184–185) suggests a four-step strategy for critical thinking:
Step 1: Understand the point of view.
• Listen/read without early judgment.
• Seek to understand the source’s background (e.g., culture, education, experience, and 
values).
• Try to “live in their shoes.”
• Summarize their viewpoint.
Step 2: Seek other views.
• Seek viewpoints, questions, answers, ideas, and solutions from others.
Step 3: Evaluate the various viewpoints.
• Look for assumptions (i.e., an opinion that something is true, without evidence), 
exceptions, gaps in logic, oversimplification, selective perception, either/or thinking, 
and personal attacks.
Step 4: Construct a reasonable view.
• Study multiple viewpoints, combine perspectives, and produce an original viewpoint 
that is a creative act and the essence of critical thinking.
Why Think Critically about the History of Security 
and Loss Prevention?
The intent here is to stimulate the reader to go beyond memorizing historical events, names, 
and dates. If you have read several books in this field, the history chapters sound very similar. 
Did the writers, including this one, become complacent and repeat what has been written 
repeatedly about the history of this field? How do you know that the history of security and 
loss prevention as presented in this book and in others is objective?
Recorded history is filled with bias. Historians and scholars decide what subjects, 
events, innovations, countries, ethnic groups, religions, men, and women should be included 
or excluded from recorded history. In reference to the history of security and loss prevention, 

6          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
what have we missed? What subjects have been overemphasized? (A case problem at the end 
of this chapter asks the reader to critically think about the history of security and loss pre-
vention.) In the policing field, for example, Weisheit, Baker, and Falcone (1995: 1) note that 
history and research reflect a bias toward urban police, at the expense of rural police. Do 
security researchers and writers overemphasize large proprietary security programs and large 
security service firms? What about the thousands of proprietary security programs at small 
companies and the thousands of small security service firms? Another question is what role 
did women and minorities play in the  history of this field?
What country do you think has had the most impact on police and security in the United 
States? Our language, government, public and private protection, law, and many other aspects 
of our lives have deep roots in England. However, what about the role of other countries in 
the development of police and private security methods? Stead (1983: 14–15) writes of the 
French as innovators in crime prevention as early as the 1600s under King Louis XIV. During 
that time, crime prevention was emphasized through preventive patrol and street lighting. 
Germann, Day, and Gallati (1974: 45–46) write of early Asian investigative methods that used 
psychology to elicit confessions.
A critical thinking approach “opens our eyes” to a more objective perspective of histori-
cal events. The author is not seeking to rewrite history, or to change the basic strategies of 
security and loss prevention. Rather, the aim is to expand the reader’s perception and knowl-
edge as a foundation for smarter protection in a complex world.
Security and Loss Prevention Defined
Within our organized society, security is provided primarily by our armed forces, law enforce-
ment agencies, and private security. The 9/11 attacks resulted in several changes in the way 
in which we organize public and private security. Post-9/11 security changes are covered in 
subsequent chapters.
During the last decades of the 20th century, the methods of private security became 
more specialized and diverse. Methods not previously associated with security emerged as 
important components of the total security effort. Security officers, fences, and alarms have 
been the hallmark of traditional security functions. Today, with society becoming increasingly 
complex, additional specialization—auditing, safety, fire protection, information technology 
(IT) security, crisis management, executive protection, terrorism countermeasures, to name a 
few—continuously are being added to the security function. Because of the increase in diverse 
specializations within the security function, many practitioners favor a broader term for all 
of these functions, known as loss prevention.
Another reason for the growing shift in terminology from security to loss prevention 
involves the negative connotations of security. Saul Astor (1978: 27) points out:
In the minds of many, the very word “security” is its own impediment.
 … Security carries a stigma; the very word suggests police, badges, alarms, 
thieves, burglars, and some generally negative and even repellent mental images…. 
Simply using the term “loss prevention” instead of the word “security” can be 
a giant step toward improving the security image, broadening the scope of the 
security function, and attracting able people.
Because of additional specialization included in the security function and the frequently 
negative connotations associated with the term security, the all-encompassing term for describ-
ing the contents of this book is loss prevention. The security function and other specialized fields 
(auditing, safety, fire protection, etc.) are subsumed in loss prevention.
Security is narrowly defined as traditional methods (security officers, fences, and alarms) 
used to increase the likelihood of a crime-controlled, tranquil, and uninterrupted environment 
for an individual or organization in pursuit of objectives.
Loss prevention is broadly defined as almost any method (e.g., security officers, safety, audit-
ing) used by an individual or organization to increase the likelihood of preventing and controlling 
loss (e.g., people, money, productivity, materials) resulting from a host of adverse occurrences 

(e.g., crime, fire, accident, natural disaster, error, poor supervision or management, bad invest-
ment). This broad definition provides a foundation for the loss prevention practitioner whose 
innovations are limited only by his or her imagination. It is hoped that these concepts not only will 
guide the reader through this book but also reinforce a trend in the use of these definitions.
Various employment titles are applied to individuals who perform security and loss 
prevention duties within organizations. The titles include Vice President, Director, or Manager 
of Security, Corporate Security, Loss Prevention, or Assets Protection.
Another title receiving attention is the Chief Security Officer (CSO). The Chief Security 
Officer Guideline (ASIS International, 2004) is designed “… as a model for organizations to 
utilize in the development of a leadership function to provide a comprehensive, integrated 
security risk strategy to contribute to the viability and success of the organization.” This 
guideline is a response to an increasingly serious threat environment, and it recommends that 
the CSO report to the most senior level executive of the organization. The guideline lists spe-
cific risks, job duties and services, and skills required. The CSO designation and the guideline 
supporting it provide an excellent reference from which the security profession and senior 
management can draw on to improve the protection of people and assets and help organiza-
tions survive in a world filled with risks.
CSO (2004) defines the CSO position as follows:
The title Chief Security Officer (CSO) was first used principally inside the infor-
mation technology function to designate the person responsible for IT security. At 
many companies, the term CSO is still used in this way. CISO, for Chief Information 
Security Officer, is an equivalent term, and today the CISO title is becoming more 
prevalent for leaders with an exclusive  infosecurity focus.
The CSO title is also used at some companies to describe the leader of the 
“corporate security” function, which includes the physical security and safety of 
employees, facilities and assets. More commonly, this person holds a title such as 
Vice President or Director of Corporate Security. This function has historically 
been distinct from information security.
Increasingly, Chief Security Officer means what it sounds like: The CSO 
is the executive responsible for the organization’s entire security posture, both 
physical and digital.
Research conducted by Booz Allen Hamilton (2005) for ASIS International, the 
Information Systems Security Association, and the Information Systems Audit and Control 
Association, found that placing all security functions under one individual (“the strongest 
or most powerful of the various security elements”) may not be beneficial (“an obvious 
and flawed option”) for all organizations because it can reduce the influence of important 
managers in enterprisewide security. The study recommended a “business-focused council of 
leaders” consisting of representatives from various specializations—such as risk management, 
law, safety, and business continuity—who “come together using the corporate strategy as a 
common element on which to focus.”
History          7
Security is narrowly defined; loss prevention is broadly defined.
History
Why Study the History of Security and Loss Prevention?
We should study the history of security and loss prevention because
• We learn of the origins of the profession and how it developed.
• We can see how voids in security and safety within society were filled by the private sector.

8          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
• We can learn of noted practitioners and theorists and their challenges, failures, and 
successes.
• We can compare security in the past to security in the present to note areas of 
improvement and areas requiring improvement.
• We can learn how security services and systems have been controlled and regulated.
• We can learn of the interaction of private security and public police over time.
• History repeats itself. We should strive to avoid the mistakes of the past and continue 
with successes.
• We can learn how social, economic, political, and technological forces have affected 
security over time.
• The past assists us in understanding the present, and it offers us a foundation to 
anticipate future events.
Early Civilizations
Prehistoric human beings depended on nature for protection because they had not learned how 
to build strong houses and fortifications. In cold climates, caves provided protection and shel-
ter, whereas in the tropics, trees and thickets were used. Caves were particularly secure because 
rocky walls guarded tribes on all sides except at the cave mouth. To protect the entrance, redun-
dant (i.e., duplicating to prevent failure) security was employed: large rocks acted as barriers 
when they were rolled in front of entrances; dogs, with their keen sense of smell, served to alarm 
and attack; and fires added additional defense. By living on the side of a mountain with access 
via a narrow, rocky ledge, cave dwellers were relatively safe from enemies and beasts. Early 
Pueblo Indians, living in what is now New Mexico and Arizona, ensured greater protection for 
themselves in their dwellings by constructing ladders that could be pulled in, and this defense 
proved useful until enemies attacked with their own ladders. In fact, in early civilizations, as 
today, security measures have never been foolproof, and adversaries typically strive to circum-
vent (i.e., to go around) defenses.
Throughout history, redundant security has been used to block adversaries attempting to 
circumvent defenses.
The Great Wall of China is the longest structure ever built. It was constructed over 
hundreds of years beginning in the 400s BC. Hundreds of thousands of workers lived their 
lives near the wall and participated in this huge project that stretched 4,000 miles and reached 
heights of 25 feet. Unfortunately, the wall provided protection only from minor attacks; when 
a major invasion force struck, the defense could not withstand the onslaught. The army of 
Mongol leader Genghis Khan swept across the wall during the AD 1200s and conquered 
much of China. Since 1949, the Chinese government has restored some sections of the mostly 
collapsed wall, which is a major tourist attraction (Feuerwerker, 1989: 373–374).
It is interesting to note the changing character of security through history. In earlier years, 
huge fortifications could be built with cheap labor, and a king could secure a perimeter with 
many inexpensive guards. Today, physical barriers such as fences and walls are expensive, as 
is the posting of security forces at physical barriers. One 24-hour post can cost over $100,000 
annually for security personnel and physical security systems.
As societies became more complex, the concepts of leadership, authority, and organiza-
tion began to evolve. Mutual association created social and economic advantages but also 
inequities, so people and assets required increased protection. Intergroup and  intragroup 
conflicts created problems whose “solutions” often took the form of gruesome punishments, 

including stoning, flaying, burning, and crucifying. A person’s criminal record was car-
ried right on his or her body, through branding and mutilation. By 1750 BC the laws of 
Hammurabi, King of Babylon, not only codified the responsibilities of the individual to the 
group and the rules for private dealings between individuals, but also discussed retributive 
penalties (Germann, Day, and Gallati, 1974: 43).
Ancient Greece
Between the ninth and third centuries BC, ancient Greece blossomed as an advanced commercial 
and culturally rich civilization. The Greeks protected their advancing civilization with the polis, or 
city-state, which consisted of a city and the surrounding land protected by a centrally built fortress 
overlooking the countryside. A stratified society brought the ruling classes constant fear of revolu-
tion from below. Spartans, for example, kept their secret agents planted among the lower classes 
and subversives. During the time of the Greek city-states, the first police force evolved to protect 
local communities, although citizens were responsible for this function. The Greek rulers did not 
view local policing as a state responsibility, and when internal conflicts arose, they used the army. 
During this era, the Greek philosopher Plato introduced an advanced concept of justice, in which 
an offender not only would be forced to pay a sort of retribution, but also would be forced into a 
method of reform or rehabilitation.
Early Civilizations          9
Ancient Egyptians sealed the master locksmith in the tomb to prevent security leaks.
Ancient Rome
The civilization of ancient Rome also developed both commercially and culturally before the 
birth of Christ. Rome was located only 15 miles from the sea and could easily share in the 
trade of the Mediterranean. This city sat on seven hills overlooking the Tiber River, which 
permitted ease in fortification and defense. A primitive but effective alarm system was used 
by placing geese at strategic locations so their very sensitive hearing would trigger squawking 
at the sound of an approaching army.
The Roman regime was well designed to carry on the chief business of the Roman 
state, which was war. A phalanx of 8,000 foot-soldiers became the basic unit of a Roman 
army equipped with helmets, shields, lances, and swords. Later, a more maneuverable 
legion of 3,600 men armed in addition with iron-tipped javelins was used. These legions 
also were employed to maintain law and order. The first emperor of Rome, Augustus 
(63 BC–AD 14), created the Praetorian Guard to provide security for his life and property. 
These urban cohorts of 500 to 600 men were deployed to keep the peace in the city. Some 
believe that after about AD 6 this was the most effective police force until recent developments 
in law enforcement. Modern-day coordinated patrolling and preventive security began with 
the subsequent nonmilitary vigiles, night watchmen who were active in both policing and 
firefighting (Post and Kingsbury, 1977; Ursic and Pagano, 1974).
The Romans have an interesting history in fire protection. During the 300s BC, slaves 
were assigned firefighting duties. Later, improved organization established divisions encom-
passing hundreds of people, who carried water in jars to fires or brought large pillows so 
victims trapped in taller structures could jump with improved chances for survival. The 
completion of the aqueducts to Rome aided firefighting by making water easier to obtain. 
Hand pumps and leather hoses were other innovations.
The Middle Ages in Europe
During the Dark Ages, the period in history after the destruction of the ancient Greek and Roman 
empires, feudalism gradually developed in Europe. Overlords supplied food and security to those 

10          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
who farmed and provided protection around castles fortified by walls, towers, and a drawbridge 
that could be raised from its position across a moat. Even then, security required registration, 
licensing, and a fee—Henry II of England (reigned AD 1154–1189) destroyed more than 1,100 
unlicensed castles that had been constructed during a civil war (Brinton, et al., 1973: 167).
Another mutual arrangement was the war band of the early Germans, the comitatus, 
by which a leader commanded the loyalty of followers, who banded together to fight and win 
booty. To defend against these bands of German barbarians, many landowners throughout 
Europe built their own private armies. (The term posse comitatus denotes a body of citizens that 
authority can call on for assistance against offenders. The Posse Comitatus Act is a Civil War–
era act that generally prohibits the military from engaging in civilian law enforcement. This law 
has been labeled as archaic because it limits the military from responding to disasters.)
Much of the United States’ customs, language, laws, and police and security methods can 
be traced to its English heritage. For this reason, England’s history of protection is examined 
here.
Between the 7th and 10th centuries, the frankpledge system and the concept of tithing fostered 
increased protection. The frankpledge system, which originated in France and spread to England, 
emphasized communal responsibility for justice and protection. The tithing, or group of 10 families, 
shared the duties of maintaining the peace and protecting the community.
In 1066, William, Duke of Normandy (in present-day France), crossed the English 
Channel and defeated the Anglo-Saxons at Hastings. A highly repressive police system devel-
oped under martial law as the state appropriated responsibility for peace and protection. 
Community authority and the tithing system were weakened. William divided England into 
55 districts, or shires. A reeve, drawn from the military, was assigned to each district. (Today, 
we use the word sheriff, derived from shire-reeve.) William is credited with changing the 
law to make a crime an offense against the state rather than against the individual and was 
instrumental in separating police from judicial functions. A traveling judge tried the cases of 
those arrested by the shire-reeves.
In 1215 King John signed the Magna Carta, which guaranteed civil and political liber-
ties. Local government power increased at the expense of the national government, and com-
munity protection increased at the local level.
Another security milestone was the Statute of Westminster (1285), issued by King 
Edward I to organize a police and justice system. A watch and ward was established to keep 
the peace. Every town was required to deploy men all night, to close the gates of walled towns 
at night, and to enforce a curfew.
What similarities can you draw between security strategies of earlier civilizations and 
those of today?
More Contemporary Times
England
For the next 500 years, repeated attempts were made to improve protection and justice in 
England. Each king was confronted with increasingly serious crime problems and cries from 
the citizenry for solutions. As England colonized many parts of the world and as trade and 
commercial pursuits brought many people into the cities, urban problems and high crime 
rates persisted. Merchants, dissatisfied with the protection afforded by the government, hired 
private security forces to protect their businesses.
By the 18th century, the Industrial Revolution compounded urban problems. Many 
citizens were forced to carry arms for their own protection, because a strong government 
policing system was absent. Various police and private security organizations did strive to 

More Contemporary Times          11
reduce crime; Henry Fielding, in 1748, was appointed magistrate, and he devised the strat-
egy of preventing crime through police action by helping to form the famous Bow Street 
Runners, the first detective unit. The merchant police were formed to protect businesses, and 
the Thames River police provided protection at the docks. During this period, more than 160 
crimes, including stealing food, were punishable by death. As pickpockets were being hanged, 
others moved among the spectators, picking pockets.
Do you think policing and justice were impotent during the early Industrial Revolution 
in England? Do you think we have a similar problem today in the United States?
Peel's Reforms
In 1829, Sir Robert Peel worked to produce the Metropolitan Police Act that resulted in 
a revolution in law enforcement. Modern policing was born. Peel’s innovative ideas were 
accepted by Parliament, and he was selected to implement the act that established a full-time, 
unarmed police force with the major purpose of patrolling London. Peel is credited also with 
reforming the criminal law by limiting its scope and abolishing the death penalty for more 
than 100 offenses. It was hoped that such a strategy would gain public support and respect for 
the police. Peel was very selective in hiring his personnel, and training was an essential part of 
developing a professional police force. Peel’s reforms are applicable today and include crime 
prevention, the strategic deployment of police according to time and location, a command of 
temper rather than violent action, record keeping, and crime news distribution.
Although Sir Robert Peel produced a revolution in law enforcement in 1829, crime and 
the private security industry continued to grow.
Early America
The Europeans who colonized North America had brought with them the heritage of their mother 
countries, including various customs of protection. The watchman system and collective responses 
remained popular. A central fortification in populated areas provided increased security from hos-
tile threats. As communities expanded in size, the office of sheriff took hold in the South, whereas 
the functions of constable and watchman were the norm in the Northeast. The sheriff’s duties 
involved apprehending offenders, serving subpoenas, and collecting taxes. Because a sheriff was 
paid a higher fee for collecting taxes, policing became a lower priority. Constables performed a 
variety of tasks such as keeping the peace, bringing suspects and witnesses to court, and eliminat-
ing health hazards. As in England, the watch system had its share of inefficiency, and to make 
matters worse, those convicted of minor crimes were sentenced to serve time on the watch.
The watch also warned citizens of fire. In colonial towns, each home had to have two 
fire buckets, and homeowners were subject to a fine if they did not respond to a fire, buck-
ets in hand. A large fire in Boston in 1679 prompted the establishment of the first paid fire 
department in North America (Bugbee, 1978: 5).
The Growth of Policing
The period of the middle 1800s was a turning point for both law enforcement and private secu-
rity in America, as it had been in England. Several major cities (e.g., New York, Philadelphia, 

12          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
The History of Loss Prevention in a Nutshell
Loss prevention has its origin in the insurance industry. Before the Civil War, insurers 
gave minimal attention to the benefits of loss prevention. For instance, in the fire insur-
ance business, executives generally viewed fires as good for business. Insurance rates 
were based on past loss experience, premiums were paid by customers, losses were paid 
to unfortunate customers, and a profit was expected by the insurer. When excessive fire 
losses resulted in spiraling premiums, the changing nature of the fire insurance busi-
ness created a hardship for both the insurer and the insured. Insurance executives were 
forced to raise premiums to cover losses, and customers complained about high rates. 
The predominance of wooden construction (even wooden chimneys) in dense urban 
areas made fire insurance unaffordable for many. A serious fire peril persisted.
After the Civil War, loss prevention began to gain momentum as a way to reduce 
losses and premiums. Fire insurance companies formed the National Board of Fire 
Underwriters, which, through the use of engineering, investigation, research, and edu-
cation, was credited with preventing losses. In 1965, the board was merged into the 
American Insurance Association (AIA). AIA activities have brought about the develop-
ment of the National Building Code, a model code adopted by many municipalities to 
reduce fire losses.
Today, executives throughout the insurance industry view loss prevention as 
essential. Many insurers have loss prevention departments to aid themselves and cus-
tomers. Furthermore, customers (i.e., the insured), to reduce premiums, have become 
increasingly concerned about preventing losses. Management in many businesses insti-
tuted loss prevention strategies (e.g., fire protection). The security department within 
businesses repeatedly handle these strategies, which results in an expanded role for 
security. Expansion of the security function to such fields as fire protection and safety 
has led to the use of the broader term loss prevention rather than security.
San Francisco) organized police forces, often modeled after the London Metropolitan Police. 
However, corruption was widespread. Numerous urban police agencies in the Northeast 
received large boosts in personnel and resources to combat the growing militancy of the labor 
unions in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Many of the large urban police departments origi-
nally were formed as strikebreakers (Holden, 1986: 23). Federal policing also experienced 
growth during this period. The U.S. Treasury had already established an investigative unit in 
1864. As in England, an increase in public police did not quell the need for private security.
The Growth of Security Companies
In 1850, Allan Pinkerton, a cooper, opened a detective agency in the United States after becoming 
the Chicago Police Department’s first detective. Because public police were limited by geographic 
jurisdiction, they were handicapped when investigating and apprehending fleeing offenders. 
This limitation facilitated the growth of private security. Pinkerton (see Figure 1-1) and others 
became famous as they pursued criminals across state boundaries throughout the country. Today, 
Pinkerton Service Corporation is a subsidiary of Securitas, based in Stockholm, Sweden.
During the 1800s, because public police were limited by geographic jurisdiction and 
restrained from chasing fleeing offenders, private security filled this need and became a 
growth industry.

More Contemporary Times          13
To accompany Americans’ expansion westward during the 19th century and to ensure 
the safe transportation of valuables, Henry Wells and William Fargo supplied a wide-open 
market by forming Wells, Fargo & Company in 1852, opening the era of bandits accosting stage-
coaches and their shotgun riders. Wells Fargo was acquired by Burns International Services 
Corporation. The name Wells Fargo is exclusive to Wells Fargo & Company, a large financial 
services business.
Another security entrepreneur, William Burns, first was a Secret Service agent who 
directed the Bureau of Investigation that preceded the FBI. In 1910, this experienced inves-
tigator opened the William J. Burns Detective Agency (see Figure 1-2), which became the 
investigative arm of the American Bankers Association. Today, Burns International Services 
Corporation is a subsidiary of Securitas.
Washington Perry Brink, in 1859, also took advantage of the need for the safe trans-
portation of valuables. From freight and package delivery to the transportation of payrolls, 
his service required increased protection through the years as cargo became more valuable 
and more vulnerable. Following the killing of two Brink’s guards during a robbery, the 
armored truck was initiated in 1917. Today, the Brink’s Company is a leading global security 
services company. It provides secure transportation services, and it monitors home security 
systems.
Edwin Holmes is another historical figure in the development of private security in the 
United States. He pioneered the electronic security alarm business. During 1858, Holmes had 
a difficult time convincing people that an alarm would sound on the second floor of a home 
when a door or window was opened on the first floor. His sales strategy was to carry door-
to-door a small model of a home containing his electric alarm system. Soon sales soared, and 
FIGURE 1-1 Major Allan Pinkerton, President Lincoln, and General John A. McClellan, Antietam, MD, October 
1862. Courtesy: National Archives.

14          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
the first central office burglar alarm monitoring operation began. Holmes Protection Group, 
Inc., was acquired by ADT Security Services, Inc., at the end of the 20th century.
Since 1874, ADT Security Services, Inc., has been a leader in electronic security 
services. Originally known as American District Telegraph, ADT has acquired numerous 
security companies since its inception. Today, it is a unit of Tyco Fire and Security Services. 
ADT is a provider of electronic security services (i.e., intrusion, fire protection, closed-cir-
cuit television or CCTV, access control) to millions of commercial, federal, and residential 
customers.
The Wackenhut Corporation is another leader in the security industry. Founded in 
1954 by George Wackenhut, a former FBI agent, the corporation extended its services 
to government agencies, which resulted in numerous contracts since its inception. The 
Wackenhut Corporation is the U.S.-based division of Group 4 Securicor, located in the 
United Kingdom.
Railroads and Labor Unions
The history of private security businesses in the United States must include two important 
events of the 19th century: the growth of railroads and labor unions.
Although railroads were valuable in providing the vital East–West link that enabled 
the settling of the American frontier, these powerful businesses used their domination 
of transportation to control several industries, such as coal and kerosene. Farmers were 
especially hurt in economic terms because they had no alternative but to pay high fees 
to transport their products via the railroads. The monopolistic practices of railroads cre-
ated considerable hostility; when Jesse James and other criminals robbed trains, citizens 
applauded. Railroads could not rely on public police protection because of jurisdictional 
boundaries. Consequently, numerous states passed laws enabling railroads to organize pro-
prietary security forces with full arrest powers and the authority to apprehend criminals 
transcending multiple jurisdictions. Railroad police numbered 14,000 by 1914. During 
World War I, they were deputized by the federal government to ensure protection of this 
vital transportation network.
The growth of labor unions at the end of the 19th century resulted in increased 
business for security firms who acted as strikebreakers for large corporations. However, 
this venture proved costly. A bloody confrontation between Pinkerton men and workers 
FIGURE 1-2 In 1910, William J. Burns, the foremost American investigator of his day and the first director 
of the government agency that became the FBI, formed the William J. Burns Detective Agency.

at the Carnegie steel plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania, resulted in eight deaths (three 
security men and five workers). Pinkerton’s security force surrendered. The plant then 
was occupied by federal troops. Senate hearings followed the Homestead disaster and 
“anti-Pinkertonism” laws were enacted to restrict private security. However, local and 
state police forces began to emerge quickly to deal with strikers (Shelden, 2001: 84). 
Later, the Ford Motor Company and other businesses were involved in bloody confron-
tations. Henry Ford had a force of about 3,500 security personnel, spies, and “sluggers” 
(i.e., private detectives), who were augmented by various community groups such as the 
Knights of Dearborn and the Legionnaires. The negative image brought to the public 
eye by newspaper coverage tarnished many businesses and security firms. Prior to World 
War II, pressure from Congress, the Roosevelt Administration, labor unions, and the 
ACLU caused corporate management to shift its philosophy to a softer “public relations” 
approach (Shelden, 2001: 92).
The Great Wars
World Wars I and II brought about an increased need for protection in the United States. 
Sabotage and espionage were serious threats. Key industries and transportation systems 
required expanded and improved security. The social and political climate in the early 20th 
century reflected urban problems, labor unrest, and worldwide nationalism. World War I 
compounded these turbulent times and people’s fears. Security became a primary concern. A 
combination of the “war to end all wars,” Prohibition, intense labor unrest, and the Great 
Depression all overtaxed public police. Private security companies helped fill the void.
By the late 1930s, Europe was at war again, and the Japanese were expanding in the 
Far East. A surprise Japanese bombing of the Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor in 1941 jolted the 
United States into World War II, and security concerns appeared again. The United States 
went into full production, and protection of vital industries became crucial, leading the federal 
government to bring plant security personnel into the army as an auxiliary to military police. 
By the end of the war, more than 200,000 of these security workers had been sworn in.
The Third Wave
In the decades following World War II, private security expanded even more; during the 1950s, 
the Korean War and the unrelenting “cold war” created worldwide tension and competi-
tion between the democracies and communist regimes. The Department of Defense, in 1952, 
strengthened the security requirements of defense industries to protect classified information 
and materials. When the Soviets successfully launched the first earth satellite (Sputnik, in 1957) 
and first reached the moon with an unmanned rocket (1959), Americans were stunned. The 
technological race became more intense, and information protection became more important.
The turbulent 1960s created massive social and political upheaval in the United 
States, and public police forces were overwhelmed by responses to the unpopular 
Vietnam war; protests over the denial of civil rights to minority groups; the assassina-
tions of President John F. Kennedy, Senator Robert Kennedy, and the Reverend Martin 
Luther King, Jr.; and rising crime and drug problems. Private security boomed.
Protests, crime, terrorism, and limited public police resources marked the 1970s, 
1980s, and 1990s. By this time, the advanced nations of the world had developed into 
what Alvin Toffler’s (1980) The Third Wave and John Naisbitt’s (1982) Megatrends call 
third wave societies: societies based on information and technology. (First wave societies 
had agriculture as a foundation, and these dominated the world for thousands of years, 
deriving energy from human and animal power. Offenders stole cattle, gold, and other 
valuables. Second wave societies occurred during the Industrial Revolution when produc-
tion was powered by irreplaceable energy sources such as coal and oil. Criminals focused 
on money and booming economic conditions.) With the depletion of world resources, the 
world is becoming more dependent on technology and information; and “third wave” 
criminals exploit technology to commit their crimes, the extent of which is limited only by 
technological innovation and the offenders’ imaginations.
More Contemporary Times          15

16          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
“Has Cybercrime Surpassed Physical Crime?”
Gips (2006: 24) asked the preceding question in response to an IBM survey of mostly 
chief information officers. Sixty percent viewed cybercrime as more costly to their 
business than physical crime. Gips notes that it is difficult to measure and compare 
cybercrime and physical crime because “studies that attempt to quantify security losses 
across sectors and types of crime are based on extrapolation and guesswork.” He 
argues that the cost of physical crime in the United States easily outpaces the cost of 
cybercrime. Gips refers to several sources on annual costs of crime: the FBI estimates 
that cybercrime costs about $400 billion and counterfeit goods cost about $250 bil-
lion; the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners estimates that occupational crime 
(e.g., altering checks, setting up fictitious accounts) costs about $652 billion; cargo 
theft costs “tens of billions” of dollars according to the International Cargo Security 
Council; retailers lose about $40 billion from shrinkage and inventory loss; and physi-
cal crime losses often exclude indirect costs, such as defending and paying judgments 
on lawsuits alleging negligent security. Gips concludes his arguments by noting that 
“if you think you are at risk for cybercrime, that’s likely where you will devote your 
resources. And if the risk lies elsewhere, that could mean that the company’s more 
costly vulnerabilities will not be adequately addressed.”
Convergence of IT and Physical Security
Today, the third wave is continuing with three notable occurrences affecting security. First, 
terminology is changing. Examples are cybercrime and denial of service. Second, two distinct 
security camps have emerged: information technology (IT) security specialists and physical 
security specialists. Generally, the former possess a background geared to protect against 
computer-related crime and unauthorized intrusions into IT systems, whereas the latter focus 
on traditional security duties (e.g., perimeter security, access controls, and contract security 
forces). Third, both camps often use similar terminology and perform similar duties. Terms 
common to both groups include denial of access and intrusion detection. Similar duties can 
be far reaching and include investigations, information security, loss prevention, and risk 
management. Jim Spencer (2000: 1-13), writing in iSecurity, adds that these two groups have 
their own suppliers, consultants, publications, associations, and trade shows.
For several years, cross-training has been a buzzword for various vocations, such as for 
investigators and auditors. History repeats itself and we have a need for cross-training for 
IT and physical security specialists. Each specialist can assist the other with data, technolo-
gies, access controls, biometrics, investigations, and business continuity, among other areas. 
Cooperative planning is essential. Suppose an employee is fired at a company. Security officers 
and access control systems customarily deny the former employee entrance to the company 
facility. However, today, protection requires broader applications because of remote access to 
IT systems. An offender no longer has to physically trespass to steal and do harm to an organi-
zation. We can only guess at the number of times the traditional security manager has done an 
excellent job of ensuring that security officers are patrolling, physical security is operational, 
and the facility is protected, except that a hacker has penetrated the corporate IT system and 
stolen proprietary information or caused other harm to the business. Physical security special-
ists and IT specialists must work together for comprehensive protection. As explained earlier, 
an executive with a title such as Vice President of Security, Vice President of Loss Prevention, 
or Chief Security Officer can manage all aspects of security (i.e., physical and digital), work 
to ensure organizational survival, and report to senior executives.
Convergence of IT and physical security means that both specializations and related 
technologies unite for common objectives. Efforts to secure access to databases, e-mail, and 
organizational intranets are merging with access controls, fire and burglar alarm systems, and 

More Contemporary Times          17
video surveillance. Physical security is increasingly relying on IT systems and related software. 
Both IT systems and physical security systems have sensors that generate data that is man-
aged. As examples, an IT system will have an antivirus program and a physical security system 
will have motion detectors.
Bernard (2007: 475) notes that “convergence relating to security is occurring at two levels: 
technology and management.” At the technology level is the convergence of digital information 
technology with electronic security systems. At the security management level, convergence is 
the integration of physical security functions, IT security, and security risk management.
There are advantages from the convergence of IT and physical security. These include 
the opportunity for security personnel to monitor physical security remotely from almost 
anywhere in the world, less travel time and expenses for monitoring and investigations, and 
easier software upgrades. Two disadvantages are a virus may affect physical security when 
sharing a single server; and an organization’s bandwidth may reach its limit from the require-
ments of video surveillance.
Gural (2005: 9) cites a report from Forrester Research that shows increases in organiza-
tional spending that brings traditional security functions—CCTV, access controls, and security 
officer duties—onto the same platform as such functions as IT network access management. In 
addition, software is increasingly being used for detection and response instead of relying on 
only personnel. Security Management (Tech Talk, 2004: 45) notes that as traditional physical 
security increasingly relies on IT systems, IT specialists in organizations are playing a larger role 
in physical security decisions. IT specialists want to ensure that physical security technology 
is compatible with the network and safe from virus infections and hackers. Physical security 
purchasing decisions in organizations often consist of a committee of personnel from security or 
loss prevention, IT, and operations. Generally, the IT department has a larger budget than the 
security department, and this may increase the clout of IT in purchasing decisions. Furthermore, 
if IT managers can convince senior management that cybercrime is a greater threat than physi-
cal crime, then this also will influence the direction of the security budget (Computer Business 
Review, 2006).
Another player in corporate management change is the facility manager. This individual, 
often an engineer, ensures that the company’s infrastructure, which houses people and operations, 
functions at optimum efficiency to support business goals. The traditional security department is 
likely to feel a “pull” toward IT or the facility manager because its boundaries are dissolving as a 
result of information and communications technology. The process of management is increasingly 
dependent on information, who controls it, what is done with it, and its dissemination. The power 
of IT especially is growing (Freeman, 2000: 10).
There are those who may claim the demise of the traditional security manager, who will 
be replaced by the IT manager or facility manager. The argument is that if an offender enters a 
facility and steals a computer, this crime is minor in comparison to, say, the potential harm from 
a hacker accessing a company’s IT system. Such reasoning misses the broad, essential functions 
performed by the traditional security manager and staff. Examples are preventing crimes against 
people, responding to crimes, rendering first aid, conducting investigations, working with public 
police to arrest offenders, life safety, and fire protection. At the same time, traditional security 
practitioners must be put on notice to become involved in lifelong learning of IT systems, which 
touch all aspects of their traditional duties.
Convergence of Enterprise Security
Convergence of enterprise security refers to the merging of security functions throughout the 
entire business enterprise (i.e., business organization). Research conducted by Booz Allen 
Hamilton (2005) for ASIS International, and others, showed a trend of convergence of all 
components of security in organizations. The research report titled Convergence of Enterprise 
Security Organizations explains convergence in broad business terminology and emphasizes 
an enterprisewide view of risk. “Delivering on convergence is not just about organizational 
integration; rather it is about integrating the security disciplines with the business’ mission 
to deliver shareholder value.” “To be effective this converged approach should reach across 
people, processes, and technology, and enable enterprises to prevent, detect, respond to, and 

18          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
recover from any type of security incident.” The research report referred to an incident at the 
Sumitomo Mitsui Bank in London, England, to illustrate the importance of merging security 
functions throughout the entire business enterprise. Although the bank had strong IT security 
measures, hackers took advantage of a lapse in physical security by posing as janitors and 
installing devices on computer keyboards that permitted them to obtain valuable login infor-
mation. In 2004, in only three days the MyDoom e-mail virus caused about $22.6 billion in 
damages as it spread to more than 200 countries. Besides the initial costs of such incidents, 
long-term harm can damage reputation and brand, and if the incident threatens the public 
good, regulators may enact stricter regulations of business practices.
Surveys and interviews from the Booz Allen Hamilton research point to several internal 
and external drivers that are influencing the trend in convergence. They are
• Rapid expansion of the enterprise ecosystem. Enterprises are becoming more complex 
in a global economy of external partners.
• Value migration from the physical to information-based and intangible assets. Value is 
continuing to shift from physical to information-based assets.
• New protective technologies blurring functional boundaries. Technology is causing an 
overlap between physical and IT security.
• New compliance and regulatory regimes. Regulations are increasing in response to 
new threats and business interactions.
• Continuing pressure to reduce cost. Enterprises are constantly striving to efficiently 
reduce risk.
Many companies have two security directors, one for IT and the other for physical 
security. Do you agree with this approach? Why or why not?
Twenty-First Century/Post-9/11 Security Challenges
The last decade of the 20th century offered warnings of what was to come in the next century. 
The 1990s brought the first bombing of the World Trade Center, the bombing of the Murrah 
Federal Building in Oklahoma City, the first war with Iraq, crimes resulting from the Internet, 
the increased value of proprietary information, and attention to violence in the workplace.
As we know, not long into the 21st century, on September 11, 2001, terrorists attacked the 
World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Following the attacks, a crisis in confidence in govern-
ment occurred. Citizens asked: How could the most powerful nation on earth be subject to such 
a devastating attack? What went wrong? Who is to blame? In response to the crisis, President 
George Bush declared war on terrorism. He appointed a new Cabinet position, the Office of 
Homeland Defense, to coordinate counterterrorism. The attacks also led to greater police pow-
ers for search and seizure and electronic surveillance, and the age-old question of how to bal-
ance police powers and constitutional rights.
These bold, surprise attacks, subsequent bioterrorism (i.e., anthrax attacks through the 
U.S. Postal System), the war in Afghanistan, and the second war in Iraq show the difficult chal-
lenges facing our world in this new century. The United States and its allies are not only faced 
with conflict in Iraq, Afghanistan, and other regions, but also old and emerging state competi-
tors and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The 21st century has also recorded huge natural disasters that—along with the prob-
lem of terrorism—necessitate a rethinking of emergency management and business continu-
ity. Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, in 2005, devastated Gulf-coast states. Katrina flooded New 
Orleans. The December 2004 Sumatran Tsunami killed almost 300,000 people and affected 18 
countries around the Indian Ocean. The human and financial strain on nations in preparing for 
and responding to natural and accidental threats is overwhelming. These challenges require global 
cooperation, a broad base of knowledge, skills from many disciplines, and continued research.

References          19
Search the Web
Access the Web and seek an international perspective by visiting the New Scotland 
Yard, which includes links to history: http://www.met.police.uk
Use your favorite search engines to check the sites of major security companies. For 
example: http://www.pinkertons.com/
What did you learn from these sites?
From a business perspective, security and loss prevention practitioners are faced with 
serious challenges and questions as they assist their employers with surviving in a constantly 
changing world filled with risks. How can businesses and institutions protect employees, 
assets, and operations from terrorism and other risks? What does the future hold? Who will 
pay for protection? Although this book offers some insight into these questions, the answers 
are still being developed.
A rethinking of strategies will meet these threats. Through improved education, train-
ing, research, professionalism, creativity, astute planning, and support from our business and 
government leaders, security professionals will provide a safer environment.
Case Problems
1A. 
 As a security manager you are asked to speak to a local college class on the history 
and development of the security and loss prevention field. What five significant 
points in the history of this field do you emphasize?
1B.  
 As a part-time security officer and a full-time college student, you are now 
working on an assignment to think critically about the history of security and loss 
prevention and prepare a typed report. The assignment requires you to focus on 
some aspect of the history of security and loss prevention that you believe is biased 
or inaccurate, and to explain your interpretation of historical events.
1C. 
 As Director of Security for a corporation, you are responsible for security officer 
operations, investigations, and physical security. You presently report to the 
Senior Vice President. A pending reorganization may place you, your department, 
and its budget under the supervision of either the Director of IT or the Director 
of Facilities. You may become an Assistant Director. Time is now available for 
possible negotiation. Changes will be finalized in three months. Soon you will be 
meeting with the Senior Vice President. Are you in favor of the pending changes? 
What suggestions do you offer? If you would like to maintain the present position 
of security, what justification and value do you offer your supervisor and the 
corporation? What justification and value do you think your supervisor will 
present to you to support change?
References
ASIS International. (2004). Chief Security Officer Guideline. www.asisonline.org, retrieved 
May 1, 2006.
Astor, S. (1978). Loss Prevention: Controls and Concepts. Stoneham, MA: Butterworth.
Bernard, R. (2007). “Convergence of Physical Security and IT.” In J. Fay (Ed.), Encyclopedia 
of Security Management, 2nd ed. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann Pub.
Booz Allen Hamilton. (2005). Convergence of Enterprise Security Organizations. (November 
8). www.securitymanagement.com, retrieved January 27, 2006.

20          THE HISTORY OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION: A CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE
Brinton, C., et al. (1973). Civilization in the West. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bugbee, P. (1978). Principles of Fire Protection. Boston: National Fire Protection 
Association.
CSO. (2004). “What Is a Chief Security Officer?” CSO (September 13). http://www.csoon-
line.com/research/leadership/cso_role.html, retrieved May 1, 2006.
Computer Business Review. (2006). “Survey Says Cyber Crime Overtakes Physical Crime.” 
Computer Business Review Online. www.cbronline.com, retrieved March 24, 2006.
Ellis, D. (1991). Becoming a Master Student, 6th ed. Rapid City, SD: College Survival, Inc.
Feuerwerker, A. (1989). “Great Wall of China.” World Book Encyclopedia. Chicago, IL.
Freeman, J. (2000). “Security Director as Politician.” Security Technology & Design 
(August).
Germann, A., Day, F., and Gallati, R. (1974). Introduction to Law Enforcement and Criminal 
Justice. Springfield, IL: Thomas Pub.
Gips, M. (2006). “Has Cybercrime Surpassed Physical Crime?” Security Management, 50 
(July).
Gural, A. (2005). “Convergence Proves More Than Fad.” Security Director News, 2 
(February).
Holden, R. (1986). Modern Police Management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Naisbitt, J. (1982). Megatrends. New York: Warren Books.
Post, R., and Kingsbury, A. (1977). Security Administration: An Introduction, 3rd ed. 
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Safi, A., and Burrell, D. (2007). “Developing Critical Thinking Leadership Skills in Homeland 
Security Professionals, Law Enforcement Agents and Intelligence Analysts.” Homeland 
Defense Journal, 5 (June).
Shelden, R. (2001). Controlling the Dangerous Classes. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Spencer, J. (2000). “Of a Single Mind.” iSecurity (November).
Stead, P. (1983). The Police of France. New York: Macmillan.
Tech Talk. (2004). “IT Gains Clout in Making Security Decisions.” Security Management, 
48 (June).
Toffler, A. (1980). The Third Wave. New York: Morrow.
Ursic, H., and Pagano, L. (1974). Security Management Systems. Springfield, IL: Charles C. 
Thomas.
Weisheit, R., Baker, L., and Falcone, D. (1995). Crime and Policing in Rural and Small Town 
America: An Overview of the Issues. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice.

2
• private sector
• public sector
• human resources
• asset
• operations of enterprises
• risk
• threat
• hazard
• all-hazards
• all-hazards preparedness concept
• metrics
• internal metrics
• methodological problems
• direct losses
• indirect losses
• external metrics
• contract security
• proprietary security
• privatization
• mercenary
• deterrence
• reactive strategies
• proactive strategies
• Private Security Officer Employment 
Authorization Act of 2004
• ethics
KEY TERMS
The Business, Careers, and 
Challenges of Security 
and Loss Prevention
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the risks and losses facing our society.
2. Define and illustrate metrics and explain why it is important.
3. Describe the security industry.
4. Define and explain privatization.
5. Describe the types of employment available in the security and loss prevention 
vocation.
6. Explain the limitations of the criminal justice system.
7. List and discuss the challenges of the security industry.
21

Introduction
Security is “big business” globally, and there are many career opportunities and challenges in 
this profession. Several drivers are affecting the growth of this industry:
• Crimes, fires, accidents, and natural and other disasters pose threats to the general 
public and the public and private sectors worldwide.
• Offenders from throughout the world are constantly seeking to exploit vulnerabilities that 
they can pinpoint in government, businesses, institutions, nonprofits, and individuals.
• The 9/11 attacks, other terrorist threats, and the conflicts in Iraq, Afghanistan, and 
other locations illustrate the need for global security and safety.
• Government laws and mandates to improve homeland security and protect critical 
infrastructure and key assets are placing increasing responsibilities on protection programs.
• The challenges of risk management, such as increasing insurance premiums, are 
forcing businesses, institutions, and organizations to enhance their security and loss 
prevention programs to reduce risks.
• There is increased pressure on the security and loss prevention vocation and industry 
to improve professionalism, performance, and value to enterprises.
This chapter begins with basic definitions as a foundation for an explanation of what 
this business is about and what it seeks to accomplish. Subsequent paragraphs explain the 
importance of metrics as a way to show the value and performance of security and loss pre-
vention. Another important topic in this business is customer service (explained in Chapter 5).
The practitioners in this vocation must be mindful of value, performance, and customer 
service as vital strategies to survive in this business. These strategies are important for both 
proprietary and contract security organizations.
Businesses, often referred to as the private sector, exist to generate profit. Government, 
often referred to as the public sector, serves the general public and is supported by tax dollars. 
Both sectors contain security and loss prevention programs to protect people, assets, and the 
operations of enterprises from a broad variety of threats and hazards that can result in harm and 
losses. Here we emphasize protecting people connected in some way to organizations, as opposed 
to protecting the general public through the efforts of our armed forces and law enforcement 
agencies and other first responders. The people in organizations are referred to as employees or 
human resources. They must be protected if an enterprise is to continue its operations and pur-
sue its objectives. However, other groups of people are connected to organizations and require 
protection. Examples are customers, vendors, and visitors. In fact, people are not required to 
be on the premises to receive protection, as in the case of an organization protecting customer 
information as required by law. From a business perspective, an asset is a resource controlled by 
an organization that can produce economic benefit. Examples are many and include cash, stocks, 
inventory, property, equipment, patents, copyrights, and goodwill. The operations of enterprises 
refer to the utilization of human resources and assets to pursue organizational objectives.
The millions of employees in the security and loss prevention vocation protect people, 
assets, and the operations of enterprises.
The practitioners in the security and loss prevention vocation must be mindful of value, 
performance, and customer service as vital strategies to survive in this business.
22          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION

Quinley and Schmidt (2002: 4), from the insurance and risk management discipline, 
define risk as “a measure of the frequency or probability of a negative event and the sever-
ity or consequences of that negative event.” Leimberg et al. (2002: 82), from the same dis-
cipline, define risk as “exposure to damages that arises from property damage or bodily 
injury.” Haddow and Bullock (2003: 15), from the emergency management discipline, use 
the definition of risk from the National Governors Association: “… susceptibility to death, 
injury, damage, destruction, disruption, stoppage and so forth.” ASIS International (2003: 5), 
from the security discipline, defines risk as “the possibility of loss resulting from a threat, secu-
rity incident, or event.” Risk is defined here as the measurement of the frequency, probability, 
and severity of losses from exposure to threats or hazards. The management and measurement 
of risk are important processes that are continually being developed. These topics are explained 
in subsequent chapters.
A threat is a serious, impending, or recurring event that can result in loss, and it must 
be dealt with immediately. For instance, management in a corporation is informed that an 
employee stated that he intends to kill other employees, or, in another corporation, an increase 
in workplace violence occurs. A retailer typically incurs losses from internal theft and shoplift-
ing. The expansion of e-commerce presents retailers with additional security concerns.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2004: 66) defines hazard as “something that 
is potentially dangerous or harmful, often the root cause of an unwanted outcome.” The U.S. 
Department of Justice (2000: 37) defines hazard as “any circumstances, natural or manmade, that 
may adversely affect or attack the community’s businesses or residences.” Hazard is defined here 
as a source of danger that has the potential to cause unwanted outcomes such as injury, death, 
property damage, economic loss, and environmental damage that adversely impact our society.
Table 2-1 depicts several threats/hazards that can cause losses. The frequency and cost 
of each loss vary. Each type of threat/hazard has its own specialist to work toward solutions. 
Introduction          23
Table 2-1 Threats/Hazards
Criminal Acts 
Natural Disasters 
Miscellaneous
Arson 
Earthquake 
Accident
Assault 
Excessive Snow/Ice 
Bad Investment
Burglary 
Floods/Excessive Rain 
Business
Computer Crime 
Hurricane 
Interruption
Counterfeiting 
Landslide 
Equipment Failure
Embezzlement 
Lightning 
Error
Espionage 
Pandemic 
Explosion
Extortion 
Pestilence 
Fire
Fraud 
Tidal Wave 
Litigation
Identity Theft 
Tornado 
Mine Disaster
Kidnapping 
Tsunami 
Nuclear
Larceny/Theft 
Volcanic Eruption 
Accident
Murder 
 
Oil Spill
Product Tampering 
 
Pollution
Riot 
 
Poor Safety
Robbery 
 
Poor Supervision
Sabotage 
 
Power Outage
Sexual Assault 
 
Sexual Harassment
Shoplifting 
 
Sonic Boom
Substance Abuse 
 
Strike
Terrorism 
 
Unethical Conduct
Vandalism 
 
War
 
 
Waste

For instance, a rash of robberies in a liquor store may require additional public law enforcement 
assistance and the installation of a more sophisticated alarm system from the private sector. 
Numerous injuries at a manufacturing plant may require assistance from a safety specialist. The 
loss prevention manager—a specialist in his or her own right or with the assistance of a 
specialist—must plan, implement, and monitor programs to anticipate, prevent, and reduce loss.
Another important term is all-hazards. It refers to multiple types of hazards, including 
natural disasters (e.g., hurricane) and human-made events (e.g., inadvertent accidents, such 
as an aircraft crash, and deliberate events, such as the terrorist bombing of an aircraft). Another 
type is technological events. An example is an electric service blackout resulting from a vari-
ety of possible causes. The term all-hazards is important because it relates to the all-hazards 
preparedness concept. This means that different hazards contain similarities, and organiza-
tions can benefit, to a certain degree, from generic approaches to emergency management and 
business continuity. This provides an opportunity for efficient and cost-effective planning. In 
other words, how you prepare for one hazard may be similar for other hazards. This topic is 
covered in greater depth in a later chapter.
Metrics
Since the business of security and loss prevention is to protect people, assets, and the opera-
tions of enterprises, it is imperative that management in this vocation develop methods to 
measure security and loss prevention, loss events, and the cost of losses. Senior executives 
are sure to ask for evidence of the program’s successes, effectiveness, return on investment, 
and when losses do occur, the cost and why it occurred. Methods of measurement can also 
be used to brief senior executives, help support a budget increase and additional resources, 
and justify human resources (e.g., proving one’s value to the organization). Senior execu-
tives are also interested in what is driving the security and loss prevention program. Is it 
risks, legal requirements, regulations, or other factors?
Methods of measurement are referred to as metrics. These measurements show the value 
and performance that security and loss prevention brings to the business enterprise. Metrics 
are a vital component of quality management and essential when communicating with senior 
executives. Examples of metrics related to security are numerous and depend on business 
objectives and need. What may be a high priority metric for one business may not be impor-
tant in another business.
Modern technology provides the opportunity to remotely monitor global operations, 
collect data, and report. In addition, the Web provides easy access to a variety of information 
and data to assist metrics.
Internal Metrics
Internal metrics focus on measurements within an organization. Examples of internal met-
rics include the annual number of theft incidents and the monetary value of company assets 
recovered; the percentage of employees hired and then released each year because it was later 
learned that they had falsified their backgrounds; the number of malfunctions of an access 
control system each month; and the number of contract security officers that are replaced each 
year due to poor performance.
Kovacich and Halibozek (2006: xxvii) define a security metric as “the application of 
quantitative, statistical, and/or mathematical analyses to measuring security functional costs, 
benefits, successes, failures, trends and workload—in other words, tracking the status of each 
security function in those terms.” They describe two basic methods of tracking costs and ben-
efits. The first is through recurring costs from day-to-day operations, such as security officer 
duties and investigations of loss of assets. Metrics can depict trends, such as whether the cost 
of protection is going up or down. The second method is through formal project plans that 
have a set schedule of beginning and ending dates, with specific objectives and costs that serve 
to track (i.e., metrics) time, expenses, and accomplishments.
Wailgum (2005) writes that metrics provide the numbers and context on performance 
of the security function. He adds that metrics vary by security executive, organization, and 
24          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION

industry. Wailgum offers examples of how metrics are used by various businesses. He refers 
to a retail chain of thousands of stores. One metric used is the number of robberies per 
1,000 stores. This figure is compared to the rates of other similar retail chains. Another 
metric is cash loss as a percentage of sales for every retail unit. The retailer uses many other 
metrics.
Wailgum provides another illustration through a utility company that uses metrics 
to gauge its compliance with federal regulations. It compares performance on “readiness 
reviews” among different facilities. Readiness reviews assess whether employees understand 
threat plans and what to do when the threat level is raised or lowered. It also covers physical 
security and emergency action plans, among other areas. Another example is penetration test-
ing to breach security. How far can someone reach without a badge? Can someone talk his 
or her way around delivery procedures? These evaluations can be quantified and compared 
over time.
Metrics are subject to methodological problems. This means that measurements are not 
perfect and subject to a host of factors that may result in inaccuracies. Factors that can distort 
metrics include variations and inconsistencies in the use of definitions, exclusion of indirect 
losses, inconsistencies in reporting, bias, miscalculations, the possibility of fraud, and dif-
ficulty when making comparisons among organizations. Furthermore, metrics may produce 
more evidence about the way in which the enterprise is managed than about actual events and 
losses. For instance, one company that maintains a zero tolerance for violence in the work-
place shows data indicating numerous incidents of threats and violence, while another similar 
company, with a corporate culture that almost ignores the problem, shows few incidents.
Why Emphasize Both Direct and Indirect Losses?
The methodology of metrics should include direct and indirect losses. Businesses, insti-
tutions, and organizations can suffer extensive direct losses from threats and hazards. 
Additionally, indirect losses can be devastating and often surpass direct losses. Direct 
losses are immediate, obvious losses, whereas indirect losses are prolonged and often 
hidden. A burglary at a business, for example, may show the loss of, say, $1,000 from 
a safe. However, on close inspection of indirect losses, total losses may include the following: 
damage to the door or window where the break-in occurred; replacement of the destroyed 
safe; insurance policy deductible; increase in insurance premium; loss of sales from a delay 
in opening the business; customer dissatisfaction; and employee time required to speak with 
police, insurance representatives, and repair people. Depending on the seriousness of the loss, 
additional indirect losses could include adverse media attention, permanent loss of custom-
ers, employee morale problems, turnover, and negative reactions from shareholders. Security 
practitioners can help justify their position and their value to the business community by 
demonstrating total losses resulting from each incident and all hazards.
External Metrics
External metrics focus on society-wide measurements. Examples include the risk of crimes or 
natural disaster in a geographic area. External metrics help enterprises make business deci-
sions, such as the geographic location for business investment and the types of insurance to 
purchase. They have many uses for security and loss prevention programs, including planning 
and budgeting for strategies to prevent crimes, fires, and accidents.
Several external sources measure risk, society-wide loss events, and the cost of losses. 
Public and private sector organizations collect data and publish reports that may or may not 
be available to the general public. The U.S. Department of Justice publishes crime statistics 
that are easily accessible on the Web. The U.S. Department of State publishes information on 
terrorism and safety in other countries that is also easily accessible on the Web. Risk manage-
ment and insurance firms offer services for a fee that estimate risks and costs from all-hazards. 
A government agency may withhold data and reports due to reasons of national security, 
whereas a corporation may see its data and reports as proprietary information and/or subject 
to sale. As with internal metrics, methodological problems exist with external metrics.
Metrics          25

Here we take a look at some public and private sector organizations that serve as a gauge 
of risks facing not only society, but also business enterprises, institutions, and other organizations 
within society. An emphasis is placed on the risk of crimes, fires, and accidents because, tradition-
ally, security and loss prevention practitioners have expended considerable time and resources on 
these problems. However, as explained in this book, our world is becoming increasingly complex 
and practitioners are facing a broader variety of risks.
Crimes
In 1930, Congress passed the first legislation mandating the collection of crime data. The task 
was assigned to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), within the U.S. Department of Justice, 
and each year the Uniform Crime Report (UCR) provides data on crime trends. It helps to calcu-
late quality of life in communities throughout the country; set government policy; plan funding; 
and gauge the effectiveness of anticrime strategies. The data are collected by police agencies 
that report it to the FBI. There are many weaknesses of the UCR, and the data have been called 
notoriously inaccurate. Examples of UCR problems are as follows: it represents reported crimes, 
and many crimes are not reported to police; only local and state crimes are reported, not fed-
eral crimes or crimes at institutions (e.g., jails and prisons); definitions of crimes vary among 
states; and the data have been subject to political manipulation. To improve the UCR, the FBI 
is refining a newer system—the National Incident-Based Reporting System—that collects data 
that are more specific. In 1972, because of the shortcomings of the UCR, the National Crime 
Victim Survey (NCVS) began to collect crime data from households. It was found that there 
was a significantly higher rate of crime than what was reported in the UCR. Forcible rape, rob-
bery, aggravated assault, burglary, and larceny were reported by the NCVS at rates two to three 
times greater than rates reported in UCR data. NCVS data are gathered by the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (U.S. Department of Justice) and the U.S. Census Bureau (Fagin, 2005: 34–41).
Although the methodology of collecting crime data by official sources is prob-
lematic, crime is a serious problem, and millions of crimes are committed each year in 
the United States. In 2004, the UCR showed 1,367,009 violent crimes and 10,328,255 
property crimes. Both categories showed a decrease in crime by about 1% from the 
previous year (FBI, 2006). Other sources of crime data are available from individual 
states, educational institutions, and self-report surveys conducted by researchers who use 
questionnaires to gather anonymous input on crimes committed by offenders.
Barkan (2006: 75) writes that crime data gathered outside the United States is highly 
inconsistent. Some nations gather crime data similar to the United States, while other nations 
do not collect such data. Three major sources of international crime data are the International 
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the World Health Organization, and the United 
Nations. The collection of global crime data also suffers from methodological problems.
Chamard (2006: 2) notes that there are few studies on the victimization of businesses 
in the United States, even though crime costs the U.S. economy at least $186 billion annually 
and businesses suffer disproportionately from crime in comparison to households and indi-
viduals. She argues that the UCR underreports crimes against businesses. Chamard refers to a 
British study of small businesses that found that nearly two-thirds had suffered some form of 
victimization over a five-year span. She reports on cross-national surveys that suggest, “retail 
businesses may have an overall burglary risk that is ten times greater than the risk faced by 
households.”
Fires
Fire represents another serious hazard facing organizations. Two major sources that measure 
the fire problem are the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and the U.S. Fire 
Administration (USFA). The National Fire Data Center (NFDC) of the USFA periodically 
publishes Fire in the United States, a 10-year overview of fires in the United States. It is 
designed to motivate corrective action, set priorities, serve as a model for state and local 
analysis of fire data, and serve as a baseline for evaluating programs. Because of the time it 
takes for states to submit data, the publication lags the date of data collection.
26          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION

The U.S. Fire Administration (2005) reported that the U.S. fire problem is one of 
the worst in the industrial world. In 2005, the fire problem resulted in the following 
losses: 3,675 civilian deaths and 17,925 injuries; 115 firefighter deaths while on duty; 
1.6 million fires reported and many went unreported; property loss at about $10.7 bil-
lion; and there were 31,500 intentionally set structure fires resulting in 315 civilian deaths. 
Furthermore, fire killed more Americans than all natural disasters combined and 83% of all 
civilian fire deaths occurred in residences (U.S. Fire Administration, 2006).
Accidents
Accidents pose another serious hazard facing organizations and their employees when on 
and off the job. The Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2006) reported 
4.4 million injuries and illnesses among private sector firms in 2003, with about 32% of 
work-related injuries occurring in goods-producing industries and 68% in services. The same 
year recorded 5,559 worker deaths, including 114 additional deaths from the previous year 
among self-employed workers and 61 more from workplace violence.
The National Center for Injury Prevention and Control (2006) reported that 
society-wide there are about 160,000 deaths each year from injuries, and millions more 
people are injured and survive. In 2000, the 50 million injuries that required medical treat-
ment will ultimately cost $406 billion, including $80.2 billion in medical care costs and $326 
billion in productivity losses.
The Security Industry
The security industry is a multibillion-dollar business. Every decade seems to bring an increased 
need for security. Internal theft, computer crime, street crime, terrorism, natural disasters, and 
so on bring greater demands for protection. In the United States, thousands of companies 
provide contract security services and investigations. In addition, there are manufacturers of 
products and systems and thousands of alarm installation firms.
The Freedonia Group (2006), a market research firm, publishes “World Security 
Services.” It reported the following:
• U.S. demand for private contracted security services will grow 4.3% annually through 
2010. This is a $39 billion industry. Guarding and alarming monitoring will remain 
dominant. Other services include security consulting, systems integration, armored 
transport, prison management, and private investigations.
• World demand for private contracted security services will grow 7.7% annually 
through 2008 based on heightened fears of global terrorism and rising crime. This is a 
$95 billion industry. Guarding will remain dominant.
• U.S. demand for electronic security products and systems will grow 8.7% annually 
through 2008. This is a $10 billion industry.
• World demand for electronic security products and systems will grow at 8.4% yearly 
through 2008. This is a $49 billion industry.
The American Society for Industrial Security, known as ASIS International (ASIS), is a 
major organization of security professionals who are at the forefront of improving the secu-
rity industry through education and training, certifications, research, security guidelines, and 
global collaborative initiatives. The ASIS Foundation funded research by Eastern Kentucky 
University, with support from the National Institute of Justice, to focus on three primary 
areas: (1) the size and economic strength of the various security sectors, including security 
services and providers of security technology; (2) changes in security trends pre and post 
9/11; and (3) the nature of the relationship between private security and law enforcement. 
Preliminary findings included the following (ASIS Foundation, 2004):
• Company security budgets in the United States increased 14% from 2001 to 2002, 
decreased slightly in 2003, and increased 10% in 2004.
The Security Industry          27

28          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
• More companies are purchasing computer/network security systems (40%), burglar 
alarms (26%), and closed-circuit television (CCTV; 24%) than any other types of 
security systems or products.
• Ninety percent of companies stated that security-related contacts with law enforcement 
had remained the same.
In 2005, the final report was released, and it contained results of four different nation-
wide surveys: (1) all U.S. companies; (2) ASIS companies (ASIS members identified as security 
managers for companies); (3) ASIS security services (ASIS members identified as managers of 
companies that provide security services); and (4) local law enforcement agencies. A sample 
of the findings is listed next (Collins et al., 2005):
• In the next fiscal year, all three types of companies expected increases in security 
budget/revenue.
• ASIS companies were about 20% more likely than all U.S. companies to report 
increased investments in security as a result of the 9/11 attacks.
• Over one-half of ASIS companies indicated an increased emphasis on information 
security following the 9/11 attacks, compared to 31% of all U.S. companies.
• Of all U.S. companies, finance–insurance–real estate continue to be most impacted by 
9/11, in comparison to transportation–communication–utilities, agriculture–mining–
construction, manufacturing, and wholesale–retail.
• For all U.S. companies, the top three concerns were computer/network security, 
liability insurance, and employee theft. For ASIS companies, the top three were access 
control, property crime, and a tie between workplace violence and terrorism.
• One-half of ASIS companies reported increased contact with police agencies since 
9/11, whereas only 10% of all U.S. companies reported increased contact. The 
researchers concluded that larger companies and those with professional security 
personnel have been much more likely to develop public-private partnerships than 
smaller companies have.
• The least common type of contact with police agencies among ASIS companies and 
U.S. companies was on cyber-crimes. The researchers surmise that the reason could be 
attributed to limited knowledge of cyber-crime by police or inadequate response.
Contract versus Proprietary Security
Contract security refers to businesses that seek a profit by offering a host of security services 
to businesses, institutions, and organizations. Examples of services include security officers, 
investigations, consulting, and monitoring alarm systems. Depending on its unique needs and 
weighing several factors, an entity requiring security may prefer to establish its own security, 
known as proprietary (in-house) security, of which there are thousands. In addition, an orga-
nization may use both contract and proprietary security (see Figure 2-1).
The Report of the Task Force on Private Security (U.S. Department of Justice, 1976b: 
146–147 and 249–257) lists several factors to consider concerning contract versus proprietary 
security officers. Contract security generally is less expensive, although there are exceptions. 
The service company typically handles recruitment, selection, training, and supervision. 
Hiring unqualified security officers and rapid turnover are two primary disadvantages of con-
tract services. Many contract officers are “moonlighting” and subject to fatigue. Questions 
concerning insurance and liability between the security company and the client may be hazy.
A major advantage of a proprietary force is that greater control is maintained over 
personnel, including selection, training, and supervision, and of course, such a force is more 
familiar with the unique needs of the company. Salaries and benefits, however, often make 
establishment of a proprietary force more expensive.
Research is needed to ascertain the number of security officers employed in both 
contract and proprietary security in the United States and the impact the 9/11 attacks 
has had on these numbers. Wagner (2006: 2) reports that 1.5 million are employed in 

the nation’s security companies. The U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community 
Oriented Policing Services (2004: 1–2) states that studies of the private security industry 
suggest there may be as many as 90,000 private security organizations employing about 
2 million security officers and other practitioners in the United States. Parfomak (2004: 8–9)
writes that overall employment of U.S. security officers has declined, although increases 
have occurred in certain infrastructure sectors. He notes that there was a sharp increase in 
demand for security officers following the 9/11 attacks, but it was short term. For decades, 
security officers have outnumbered public police in most locales.
The U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics (2006: 6) reports 1.1 mil-
lion employed in police protection, in 2003, as follows: 157,000 federal, 106,000 state, and 
856,000 local. According to the FBI (2006), in 2004, 14,254 state, city, university and college, 
metropolitan and nonmetropolitan county, and other law enforcement agencies employed 
675,734 sworn officers and 294,854 civilians, who provided law enforcement services to 
more than 278 million people nationwide. The FBI-UCR Program defines sworn law enforce-
ment officers as individuals who carry a firearm and a badge, have full arrest powers, and 
are paid from government funds. Civilians working in law enforcement agencies perform a 
variety of functions (e.g., dispatch, records) at a lower cost than if sworn officers performed 
the tasks.
The Security Industry          29
FIGURE 2-1 Businesses often employ both proprietary and contract security personnel.
Privatization
Privatization is the contracting out of government programs, either wholly or in part, 
to for-profit and not-for-profit organizations. There is a growing interdependence of the 
public and private sectors. A broad array of services is provided to government agencies by 
the private sector today, from consulting services to janitorial services. Both government 
and the private sector are operating hospitals, schools, and other institutions formerly 
dominated by government. For crime control efforts, we see private security patrols in resi-
dential areas, private security officers in courts, and private prisons. Business people make 
themselves attractive to governments when they claim that they can perform services more 
efficiently and at a lower cost than the public sector.
Privatization is not a new concept. In the late 1600s, much security and incar-
ceration for early urban areas was supplied by the private sector. By the 1700s, 

30          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
government dominated these services. Today, privatization can be viewed as a move-
ment to demonopolize and decentralize services dominated by government. This 
movement to privatize criminal justice services encourages shared responsibility for 
public safety (Bowman, 1992: 15–57).
Another factor fueling the privatization movement is victim and citizen dissat-
isfaction with the way in which government is handling crime. Increasing numbers of 
citizens are confronting crime through neighborhood watches, citizen patrols, crime 
stoppers, hiring private attorneys to assist prosecutors, and dispute  resolution.
Critics of privatization argue that crime control by government is rooted in 
constitutional safeguards and crime control should not be contracted to the private 
sector. Use of force and searches by the private sector, punishment in private prisons, 
and liabilities of governments and contractors are examples of the thorny issues that 
face privatization.
Since the 9/11 attacks, and because U.S. military engagements in Afghanistan 
and Iraq have strained U.S. military resources, private security companies have been 
increasingly guarding military installations in the United States. Supporters note that 
these private security officers are supervised and trained by Department of Defense 
(DOD) specifications, and they provide an invaluable service. Critics argue that there 
is concern about the caliber and training of these security officers and some work 
for American subsidiaries of foreign-owned companies. This concern led to a U.S. 
Government Accountability Office (GAO) investigation that found that some contrac-
tors had hired felons and that training records had been falsified. The GAO found that 
the contracts cost 25% more than contracts later put out for bid. And, the Army relied 
on what the contractors said they were doing and provided very little monitoring. 
The DOD pledged to improve management and oversight of private security officers 
(Marks, 2006; U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2006).
Private military and private security companies (PMPSCs) are providing a wide 
variety of services for a profit in geographic areas facing conflict. These firms are 
growing rapidly worldwide. Governments, corporations, organizations, and indi-
viduals are relying on these companies for many reasons. A national government, for 
example, may need additional personnel because human resources and expertise are 
stretched to the limit and a rebel group is gaining strength. A corporation, organiza-
tion (e.g., nonprofit aid group), or individual may require protection for operations 
in a foreign country containing an insurgency and weak police and military forces. In 
addition, a country may be dangerous because of a hodgepodge of self-defense forces, 
mercenary units, militias, and vigilante squads that maintain their own agendas. The 
uncontrolled proliferation of conventional arms has hastened the growth of armed 
groups (Purpura, 2007).
Zarate (1998) writes that the term mercenary is difficult to define and United 
Nations members disagree on its definition. He refers to a mercenary as “a soldier-
for-hire, primarily motivated by pecuniary interests, who has no national or territo-
rial stake in a conflict and is paid a salary above the average for others of his rank.” 
Zarate sees the legal issues involving mercenaries as unclear, but views the legal status 
of companies that provide military and security services—such as training, security and 
other noncombat activities—as outside the mercenary concerns of the international 
community.
Zarate offers two concerns: (1) PMPSCs could be hired by insurgents or 
foreign governments to destabilize an established regime, or a government could 
hire a PMPSC to suppress a national liberation movement (e.g., group fighting 
colonialism or racism); and (2) PMPSCs that assist multinational corporations will 
act solely for the benefit of the corporation in foreign countries and create semi-
sovereign entities supported by the government. He adds that PMPSCs are regulated 
in most countries. In the United States, regulations are stringent, and registration with 
the U.S. government is required.

Careers: Loss Prevention Services and Specialists          31
In Iraq, companies helping to rebuild the country with multibillion dollar U.S. 
government appropriations initially relied on U.S. forces for protection. However, the 
growing insurgency forced U.S. forces to be redirected, and companies quickly sought 
assistance from PMPSCs (Flores and Earl, 2004).
The hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan provide excellent opportunities for 
PMPSCs, and especially those firms with employees possessing military backgrounds 
that can provide support to the U.S. military and train the armies of weak countries. 
The U.S. Army (2006: 6–4 and 8–17) notes, “training support from contractors enables 
commanders to use Soldiers and Marines more efficiently.” The support includes insti-
tutional training, developing security ministries and headquarters, and establishing 
administrative and logistic systems. In addition, theater support contractors (i.e., local 
vendors in hostile areas) supply a host of products and services. Examples are concrete 
security barriers, fencing, construction, sanitation, and trucking. As the United States 
pursues a global war on terrorism, with limited armed forces, private contractors are 
in demand.
What are your views on privatization?
Careers: Loss Prevention Services and Specialists
Many services and specialists from the private sector can help the practitioner develop an 
effective loss prevention program. These services and specialists can be proprietary or attain-
able through outside sources. Table 2-2 lists various facilities requiring security and loss 
prevention programs. Since the 9/11 attacks, many of these facilities have been referred to 
as “critical infrastructure.” Table 2-3 lists security and loss prevention services and products 
from the private sector. Table 2-4 lists specialists and consultants who can aid loss prevention 
efforts. These tables are not conclusive because protection programs are becoming increas-
ingly specialized and diversified. Therefore, additional specialization will evolve to aid these 
programs.
Most loss prevention managers are generalists, which means that they have a broad 
knowledge of the field plus specialized knowledge of the risks facing their employer. When 
feasible, these managers should develop a multidisciplinary staff to assist in protection objec-
tives. The staff should represent various specializations as appropriate, such as security, safety, 
and fire protection.
Career: Manufacturing Security
Manufacturers make products, which, in turn, are sold, either to wholesalers, 
distributors, or directly to consumers. Professionals within the manufacturing security 
specialty are responsible for issues involving not only sales transactions, but also trans-
port issues, ordering and purchasing of raw materials, and the protection of resources 
against loss or theft. Manufacturers are becoming increasingly aware of the potential 
for loss. Prevention of loss can be accomplished only through employing competent 
security directors and managers who can help integrate the security function into the 
total operation instead of allowing it to remain isolated. Depending on the products 
being manufactured, individuals in this specialty may work in a variety of environ-
ments, including exposure to varying weather conditions and involvement with chemi-
cal processing areas.

32          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Table 2-2 Locations Requiring Security and Loss Prevention Programs
• Agriculture/Food Facilities
• Airport/Airline
• Campus/School
• Commercial Buildings
• Cultural Properties
• Defense Industries and Facilities
• Drinking Water
• Emergency Services
• Energy Facilities
• Financial Institution
• Gaming/Wagering
• Government Building
• Hotel/Motel/Restaurant
• Housing/Residential
• Industrial
• Library
• Medical
• National Monument
• Nuclear Plant
• Park/Recreation
• Port
• Postal/Shipping
• Retail Store/Mall
• Sports/Entertainment Facility
• Telecommunications
• Transportation
• Wholesale/Warehouse
• Others
Table 2-3 Security Services and Products from the Private Sector
  Services
• Armored Transportation (see Figure 2-2)
• Business Continuity/Emergency Management
• Canine
• Central Alarm Station
• Consulting
• Counterterrorism
• Detection of Deception (e.g., polygraph)
• Executive Protection
• Honesty Shopping
• Information Security
• Investigations
• Risk Analysis/Security Survey
• Security Officers
• Technical Surveillance Countermeasures
• Undercover Investigations
• Others
  Products
• Access Control Systems
• Barriers
• Closed-Circuit Television
• Doors
• Fire Alarm Systems
• Glazing
• Intrusion Detection Systems
• Lighting
• Locks/Keys
• Safes/Vaults
• Vehicles
• Weapons
• Others
Table 2-4 Specialists and Consultants Who Can Assist Loss Prevention Efforts
• Accountant
• Auditor
• Architect
• Business Consultant
• Computer/IT Consultant
• Criminologist
• Critical Infrastructure Consultant
• Education/Training Consultant
• Engineering Consultant
• Forensic Scientist
• Landscape Architect
• Lifesafety/Fire Consultant
• Lighting Consultant
• Locksmith
• Marketing Consultant
• Risk Management Consultant
• Others

The Limitations of the Criminal Justice System          33
FIGURE 2-2 Employees wear bullet-resistant vests and personal hold-up alarms to help protect them as they pick up 
and deliver valuable shipments.
Entry-level management positions generally require at least an associate’s 
degree and often a bachelor’s degree. Most positions require two-plus years of 
general security experience and may require some specialty-specific training or 
 experience. A Certified Protection Professional (CPP) designation is preferred for 
many positions. The salary range for most positions is $30,000 to $50,000.
Mid-level management positions generally require a bachelor’s degree and five-
plus years of general security experience and may require some specialty-specific train-
ing or experience. A CPP designation is required or desired for many positions.
Source: Courtesy of ASIS International (2005). “Career Opportunities in Security.” 
www.asisonline.org.
The Limitations of the Criminal Justice System: 
Implications for Loss Prevention Practitioners
Federal, state, and local governments spent over $185 billion for criminal and civil jus-
tice in 2003 (U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2006: 1). Despite 
this huge sum, many theories underpinning crime prevention and law enforcement measures 
have come under increased scrutiny. For example, the strategy of deterrence has been ques-
tioned. This criminal justice system strategy seeks to prevent crime through state-imposed 
punishment. This model points out that offenders rationally consider the risks and rewards 
of crime prior to acting. Numerous offenders simply find that “crime pays,” because the 
certainty of punishment is a myth and the odds are in the offender’s favor. John E. Conklin 
(2001: 466), a criminologist, writes: “People have imperfect knowledge of the maximum 
penalties for various crimes, but their perceptions of the severity of sanctions, the certainty 
with which they will be administered, and the promptness of punishment influence their 
choice of behavior.” Since the impact of deterrence is questionable, crime prevention is a 
key strategy to reduce losses.

34          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Another limitation of the criminal justice system is that tight budgets and limited 
resources and personnel are the main reasons why public safety agencies play a minor role 
in private loss prevention programs. Public police agencies cannot afford to assign person-
nel to patrol inside business establishments or watch for employee theft. An occasional 
(public) police patrol and a response to a crime are the primary forms of assistance that 
public police can provide to businesses. Prosecutors are unwilling to prosecute certain 
crimes against businesses because of heavy caseloads. Consequently, public protection is 
being supplemented or replaced by private security and volunteer efforts in many locales.
Law enforcement agencies expend much of their resources on street crime, traffic prob-
lems, and other issues of public safety. Although some law enforcement officers maintain an 
expertise in security, computer crime, accounting, fraud, intelligence, and other specializations 
helpful to businesses, the number of officers possessing such backgrounds is too few to assist 
the volume of threats facing the private sector.
Besides public police agencies, other first-responding agencies—fire departments, emer-
gency medical services, and emergency management agencies—also have limited resources. 
Consequently, the private sector must develop security and loss prevention programs and hire 
specialists to ameliorate all-hazards.
In your opinion, what are the most serious problems of the criminal justice system, and 
what are your solutions?
The Basic Differences between Public Police and Private Security
The primary differences pertain to the employer, the interests served, basic strategies, 
and legal authority. Public police are employed by governments and serve the general 
public. Tax dollars support public police activities. On the other hand, private security 
personnel are employed by and serve private concerns (e.g., businesses) that provide 
the funds for this type of protection. There are exceptions to these general statements. 
For instance, government agencies sometimes contract protection needs to private secu-
rity companies to cut costs. Also, public police often are involved in efforts to assist 
business owners in preventing crimes through security surveys and public education.
Another difference involves basic strategies. Public police devote considerable 
resources to reactive strategies to crimes. This entails rapid response to serious crimes, inves-
tigation, and apprehension of offenders. Law enforcement is a key objective. In contrast, 
private security personnel stress the prevention of crimes; arrests are often de-emphasized. 
These generalizations contain exceptions. For instance, public police have introduced proac-
tive strategies to reduce crime through aggressive patrol methods and enhanced information 
systems that assist police officers on the street in identifying suspects they encounter.
The legal authority of public police and private security personnel is another 
distinguishing characteristic. Public police derive their authority from statutes and 
ordinances, whereas private security personnel function commonly as private citizens. 
Public police have greater arrest, search, and interrogation powers. Depending on the 
jurisdiction and state laws, private security personnel may be deputized or given special 
commissions that increase powers.
The United States employs an average of 2.3 full-time law enforcement officers for 
every 1,000 inhabitants in communities (FBI, 2006).

Challenges of the Security Industry          35
Challenges of the Security Industry
During the 1970s, business and government leaders increasingly viewed the growing private 
security industry as an ally of the criminal justice system. Both crime-fighting sectors have 
mutual and overlapping functions in controlling crime. With this thinking in mind, the U.S. 
Department of Justice provided financial support for the production of important research 
reports. The Rand Report (U.S. Department of Justice, 1972: 30) focused national attention 
on the problems and needs of the private security industry. This report stated, “the typical 
private guard is an aging white male, poorly educated, usually untrained, and very poorly 
paid.” This conclusion has met with criticism because the research sample was small, and, 
thus, did not represent the entire security industry. However, with the assistance of this report 
and its recommendations, the professionalism of private security improved.
The Rand Report was a great aid (because of limited literature in the field) to the Report of 
the Task Force on Private Security (U.S. Department of Justice, 1976b). This report of the National 
Advisory Committee on Criminal Justice Standards and Goals represented the first national effort 
to set realistic and viable standards and goals designed to maximize the ability, competency, and 
effectiveness of the private security industry for its role in the prevention and reduction of crime. 
A major emphasis of the report was that all businesses that sell security services should be licensed 
and all personnel in private security work should be registered.
The task force’s urging of stricter standards for the security industry reflected a need to 
reduce ineptitude and industry abuses, while striving toward professionalism. The task force 
focused on minimal hiring, training, and salary standards that are still problems today. These 
minimal standards enable companies to reduce costs and provide potential clients with low 
bids for contract service. Thus, professionalism is sacrificed to keep up with competition. The 
task force recommended improved hiring criteria, higher salaries (especially to reduce turn-
over), and better training, among other improvements. Both studies recommended state-level 
regulation of the security industry in general as a means of creating more uniformity.
Another major study of the security industry funded by the U.S. Department of Justice 
was titled Private Security and Police in America: The Hallcrest Report (Cunningham and 
Taylor, 1985). It focused research on three major areas: (1) the contributions of both public 
police and private security to crime control; (2) the interaction of these two forces and their level 
of cooperation; and (3) the characteristics of the private security industry. Several industry prob-
lems and preferred solutions were discussed in this report, as covered in subsequent pages.
The U.S. Department of Justice funded a second Hallcrest Report titled Private Security 
Trends: 1970–2000, The Hallcrest Report II (Cunningham et al., 1990). This report provided 
a study of security trends to the 21st century. Some of its predictions are listed next. This list 
can assist us in thinking critically about security today.
• Crime against business in the United States will cost $200 billion by the year 2000.
• Since the middle 1980s, companies have been less inclined to hire security managers 
with police and military backgrounds and more inclined to hire those with a business 
background.
• During the 1990s, in-house security staffs will diminish with an increased reliance on 
contract services and equipment.
• The negative stereotypical security personnel are being replaced with younger, 
better-educated officers with greater numbers of women and minority group 
members. However, the problems of quality, training, and compensation remain.
• The false-alarm problem is continuing. There is a massive waste of public funds when 
police and fire agencies must respond to current levels of false alarms. Between 97% 
and 99% of all alarms are false.
Upon selecting at least one prediction of the Hallcrest Report II, is the prediction true today?

36          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Cooperation between Public Police and Private Security
The following statements are from Law Enforcement and Private Security: Sources and Areas 
of Conflict (U.S. Department of Justice, 1976a: 6):
A persistent problem noted by several research reports involves disrespect and 
even conflict between public and private police.
Some law enforcement officers believe that being a “public servant” is of 
a higher moral order than serving private interests. . . . They then relegate private 
security to an inferior status. . . . This perceived status differential by law enforce-
ment personnel manifests itself in lack of respect and communication, which 
precludes effective cooperation.
These problems persist in the 21st century, even though many public police work 
part-time in the private security industry and, upon retiring, secure positions in this vocation. 
To reduce conflict, the Task Force Report and the Hallcrest Reports recommended liaison 
be implemented between public and private police. During the 1980s, the International 
Association of Chiefs of Police, the National Sheriffs’ Association, and the American Society 
for Industrial Security began joint meetings to foster better cooperation between the pub-
lic and private sectors (Cunningham et al., 1991). This effort continued into the 1990s. 
Suggested areas of increased cooperation included appointing high-ranking practitioners from 
both sectors to increase communication, instituting short training lessons in established train-
ing programs, and sharing expertise.
According to a 2004 national policy summit on public police and private security cooper-
ation, only 5–10% of law enforcement chief executives participate in partnerships with private 
security (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, 2004). 
Although both groups have a lot to offer each other, they are not always comfortable working 
together. Police continue to criticize security over their lower standards for screening and train-
ing, and they may see security as a threat to their domain. Police often fall short of understand-
ing the important role of private security. At the same time, some security personnel see police 
as elitists and claim that police are not concerned about security until they seek a position in the 
security field. Here are observations by participants of the 2004 national policy summit:
• Issues include respect (that is, law enforcement’s lack of respect for security), 
trust, training differentials, and competition.
• Community policing calls on law enforcement to develop relationships with various 
sectors of the community. Police departments meet regularly with local clergy, business 
groups, neighborhood associations, and other groups. They do not seem to meet 
regularly with groups of corporate security directors and managers of security businesses.
• Information sharing is difficult. Corporations do not feel they receive timely 
information from police, and they fear that information they give to the police may 
end up in the newspaper. Police fear that the corporate sector may not treat law 
enforcement information discreetly.
• There is much role confusion between the public and private sectors, such as 
confusion about what will be done in an emergency. If a company’s plant suffers an 
explosion, police may immediately declare it a crime scene, and then the company’s 
security staff may not be able to respond as needed. Likewise, in the post-9/11 era, 
law enforcement officers show up to conduct risk assessments but often are not as 
knowledgeable about them as private security.
• A city may simultaneously have some outstanding partnerships but also some 
counterproductive relationships. The 9/11 attacks helped in building relationships. 
The true measure of success, however, is whether a partnership accomplishes 
something and is lasting.
• Both parties have a responsibility for improving partnerships.
• Each side should educate the other about its capabilities, before a crisis erupts, so each 
will know when to call on the other and what help to expect (and to offer). Integrated 
training may break down some barriers.

Cooperation between both groups takes many forms and occurs at many levels of 
government. To varying degrees, both groups share information with each other, attend each 
other’s conferences, and plan together for protection and emergencies. They even work side-by-
side at certain sites, such as downtown districts, government buildings, and special events.
An improved partnership between both groups can be beneficial to our nation by 
improving planning and emergency response and by sharing information, expertise, and 
training. At the 2004 national policy summit, public police and private security leaders 
recommended that both groups should make a formal commitment to cooperate. Also, the 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and/or the U.S. Department of Justice should 
fund relevant research and training; create an advisory council to oversee partnerships to 
address tactical issues and intelligence sharing, improve selection and training for private 
security personnel, and create a national partnership center; and organize periodic summits 
on relevant issues. On the local level, immediate action should be taken to improve joint 
response to critical incidents; coordinate infrastructure protection; improve communica-
tions and data interoperability; bolster information sharing; prevent and investigate high-
tech crime; and plan responses to workplace crime (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of 
Community Oriented Policing Services, 2004: 3–4).
The 9/11 attacks caused the federal government to develop numerous programs 
and strategies to enhance homeland security. The federal government expanded its role 
in regulating certain aspects of private industries to protect against terrorism and other 
risks, especially since the private sector owns 85% of U.S. critical infrastructure. Federal 
law enforcement agencies are working with private sector executives, including security 
executives, to control terrorism. The U.S. Treasury Department, for example, has directed 
companies in not only the finance business, but also brokerage firms, casinos, and other 
businesses, to reduce terrorist financing by taking specific steps at their own expense, such 
as establishing or expanding anti-money-laundering programs. The U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration provide guidelines to the food industry to prevent terrorist attacks on the 
nation’s food supply.
To facilitate communications and to share information on homeland security with pri-
vate industry, the federal government hosts conferences and training sessions. Federal initia-
tives include disaster-preparedness grants involving coordination efforts of local governments 
and businesses.
Another initiative is the Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs). These are 
generally private sector networks of organizations that the federal government has helped to 
create to share information on threats to critical industries and coordinate efforts to identify 
and reduce vulnerabilities.
A variety of other public-private sector information-sharing programs is operating. 
For example, the Homeland Security Information Network-Critical Infrastructure (HSIN-CI) 
enables key executives in the public and private sectors to receive alerts and notifications from 
the DHS via phone (landline and wireless), e-mail, fax, or pager. It is set up on a regional basis 
with regional Web sites, and not every region receives the same alerts.
Regulation of the Industry
The security vocation has its share of charlatans, who tarnish the industry, and as with many 
types of services offered the public, government intervention has taken the form of licensing and 
registration. The Task Force Report and Hallcrest Reports recommend regulation of the security 
industry by all states. To protect consumers, the majority of states have varied laws that regu-
late, through licensing and registration, contract security officer services, private investigators, 
polygraph and other detection of deception specialists, and security alarm businesses. Security 
consultants are generally not regulated, but consumers should verify professional memberships 
and certifications. Although government regulation does not guarantee that all security practi-
tioners will perform in a satisfactory manner, it does prevent people who have criminal records 
from entering the profession. Those applicants who have lived in multiple states should have 
their backgrounds checked for each jurisdiction. Attention to this type of background investiga-
tion varies.
Challenges of the Security Industry          37

38          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Another way in which the industry is regulated is through local, state, and federal agen-
cies that contract out private security services and mandate various contract requirements 
(e.g., education, training, and character) to enhance professionalism and competence. Certain 
industries are regulated by government and require stringent security standards. For example, 
the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission issues rules and standards that must be followed by 
licensees of nuclear reactors to ensure safety and security. A variety of businesses, institutions, 
and other organizations also issue requirements. However, the lowest bidder on a contract may 
be selected and professionalism may be sacrificed.
Attempts have been made through Congress to pass a national law to regulate the 
security industry. Rep. Bob Barr (R-GA) introduced H.R. 2092, The Private Security 
Officers Quality Assurance Act of 1995. It languished in Congress in various forms when 
Rep. Matthew Martinez (D-CA) introduced a similar bill. Known as the Barr-Martinez Bill, 
if passed, it would have provided state regulators with expedited FBI criminal background 
checks of prospective and newly hired security officers. The minimal training standards 
of the bill were stricken, which would have required 8 hours of training and 4 hours 
of on-the-job training for unarmed officers and an additional 15 hours for armed officers. 
Critics argued that states are against such a national law and state regulations are sufficient. 
Finally, Congress passed the Private Security Officer Employment Authorization Act of 2004 
(included in the National Intelligence Reform Act of 2004) that enables security service busi-
nesses and proprietary security organizations in all 50 states to check if applicants have a 
criminal history record with the FBI, which may emanate from one or more states. (National 
training requirements were not included in the legislation.) This law is significant and it adds 
strength to criminal records checks of security officer applicants. Traditional name-based 
searches can result in false positives (i.e., an applicant’s name is incorrectly matched to an 
offender’s name or similar name) and false negatives (i.e., an applicant’s name does not result 
in a match because the applicant is using a different name or a database was omitted from 
investigation). Because applicants may use different names and other bogus identifying infor-
mation, fingerprints provide increased accuracy in background investigations. Security firm 
access to the FBI’s Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS) under the 
act also includes access to the Violent Gangs and Terrorism Organization File. Although not 
all security organizations are required to check these fingerprint databases for their appli-
cants, the effort and expense prevents litigation and the possibility that an applicant is a ter-
rorist or other criminal. Cost is one of several factors that influence the extent of background 
investigations (Friedrick, 2005: 11).
Which government agency (or agencies) in your state regulates the private security 
industry? What are the requirements for contract security (“guard”) companies, private 
detectives, and security alarm installers?
The Need for Training
Numerous research reports and other publications have pointed to the need for more training 
of personnel in the security industry. Training of all security officers should be required by law 
prior to assignment. Training topics of importance include customer service, ethics, criminal 
law and procedure, constitutional protections, interviewing, surveillance, arrest techniques, 
post assignments and patrols, report writing, safety, fire protection, and specialized topics for 
client needs. Firearms training is also important, even though a small percentage of security 
officers are armed.
The harsh realities of the contract security business hinder training. Low pay and the 
enormous turnover of officers lead many security executives to consider costly training difficult 
to justify. With liability a constant threat and with insurance often unaffordable, many secu-

rity firms are simply gambling by not adequately preparing their officers for the job. Security 
training is inconsistent and sometimes nonexistent. The Task Force Report and the Hallcrest 
Reports stress the need for improved recruitment, selection, pay, and training within the security 
industry.
Efforts in Congress and in the legislatures of many states have been aimed at increasing 
training. However, there has been no success in Congress for a national training mandate, 
and state training requirements vary. Because quality training means increases in costs in the 
competitive contract security business, such legislation has often been controversial.
Security Letter (McCrie, 2005: 2) reported that the United States lags behind other 
countries on security training. The Province of Ontario, Canada, requires 40 hours of train-
ing. Training hours required in Europe are Hungary: 350; Spain: 260; Sweden: 120; United 
Kingdom: 38; France: 32; and Germany: 24. In the United States, the required hours are 
AK: 48; CA, FL, and OK: 40; ND: 32; NY: 24; IL: 20; LA and VA: 16; MN and OR: 12; 
AZ, CT, GA, and UT: 8; AR: 6; NC, NV, SC, TN, and WA: 4; TX: 1; and 29 other states 
and DC: 0.
In essence, what we have seen following these national reports and recommendations 
is an industry that needs to do more to help professionalize the industry and security person-
nel. It is easy to forget about these reports and recommendations as a businessperson under 
pressure to reduce expenses and turn a profit while facing employee turnover, the pressure to 
ensure security officers are on client posts, and competition from low bidders. Furthermore, 
the security industry plays a strong role in influencing government laws and regulations that 
can result in added expenses for businesses. Unfortunately, we have seen changes resulting 
from many lawsuits claiming negligent security. Fear of such litigation motivates the industry 
to change. On the bright side, many security service companies are professional, set high 
standards for themselves, and have improved the industry. It is hoped that these companies 
continue to set an example to be followed by others.
ASIS International, in its effort to increase professionalism and develop guidelines 
for the security industry, published Private Security Officer Selection and Training (ASIS 
International, 2004). This guideline was written for proprietary and contract security and 
regulatory bodies. Its employment screening criteria include 18 years of age for unarmed and 
21 years of age for armed security officers; high school diploma, GED, or equivalent; finger-
prints; criminal history check; drug screening; and other background checks. The training 
requirements include 48 hours of training within the first 100 days of employment.
Ethics
A code of ethics is a partial solution to strengthen the professionalism of security practi-
tioners. Such a code helps to guide behavior by establishing standards of ethical conduct. 
Twomey, Jennings, and Fox (2001: 28–31) describe ethics as a branch of philosophy dealing with 
values that relate to the nature of human conduct. They write that “conduct and values within 
the context of business operations become more complex because individuals are working 
together to maximize profit. Balancing the goal of profits with the values of individuals and 
society is the focus of business ethics.” Twomey and colleagues note that capitalism succeeds 
because of trust; investors provide capital for a business because they believe the business will 
earn a profit.
Customers rely on business promises of quality and the commitment to stand behind a 
product or service. Having a code makes good business sense because consumers make purchas-
ing decisions based on past experience or the experiences of others. Reliance on promises, not 
litigation, nurtures good business relationships.
Twomey and colleagues write of studies that show that those businesses with the 
strongest value systems survive and do so successfully. Citing several companies, they argue, 
“bankruptcy and/or free falls in the worth of shares are the fates that await firms that make 
poor ethical choices.”
A host of other problems can develop for a business and its employees when unethical 
decisions are made. Besides a loss of customers, unethical decisions can result in criminal and 
civil liabilities. Quality ethics must be initiated and supported by top management, who must 
Challenges of the Security Industry          39

40          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
set an example without hypocrisy. All employees must be a part of the ethical environment 
through a code of ethics and see it spelled out in policies, procedures, and training.
International business presents special challenges when promoting ethical decision mak-
ing because cultures differ on codes of ethics. Business management must take the lead and 
research and define guidelines for employees.
Another challenge develops when a security practitioner’s employer or supervisor vio-
lates ethical standards or law. What you do not want to do is to become part of the problem 
and subject yourself to a tarnished reputation or criminal and civil liabilities. When faced with 
such difficult dilemmas, refer to your professional background and its code of ethics.
The Web is a rich source of information on ethics. The Task Force Report and ASIS 
International are sources for codes of ethics for the security profession. The former has one 
code for security management (as does ASIS International) and a code for security employ-
ees in general. A sample of the wording, similar in both codes, includes “to protect life and 
property,” and “to be guided by a sense of integrity, honor, justice and morality….” (U.S. 
Department of Justice, 1976b: 24). Management, supervision, policies, procedures, and train-
ing help to define what these words mean.
Here are guidelines for ethical decisions:
• Does the decision violate law, a code of ethics, or company policy?
• What are the short-term and long-term consequences of your decision for your 
employer and yourself?
• Is there an alternative course of action that is less harmful?
• Are you making a levelheaded decision, rather than a decision based on emotions?
• Would your family support your decision?
• Would your supervisor and management support your decision?
The False Alarm Problem
Another persistent problem that causes friction between public police and the private sector is 
false alarms. It is generally agreed that more than 95% of all alarm response calls received by 
public police are false alarms. However, the definition of “false alarm” is subject to debate. It 
often is assumed that, if a burglar is not caught on the premises, the alarm was false. Police 
do not always consider that the alarm or the approaching police could have frightened away 
a burglar.
The Task Force and Hallcrest Reports discussed the problem of false alarms. Many 
police agencies nationwide continue to spend millions of dollars each year in personnel and 
equipment to respond to these calls. For decades, municipalities and the alarm industry have 
tried various solutions. Police agencies have selectively responded or not responded to alarms. 
City and county governments have enacted false alarm control ordinances that require a per-
mit for an alarm system and impose fines for excessive false alarms. The industry claims that 
the end users cause 80% of the problems. It continues its education campaign while trying a 
multitude of strategies, such as offering a class for repeat offenders instead of a fine, setting 
standards of exit delay at no fewer than 45 seconds and entry times of at least 30 seconds, 
and audio and video verification of alarms. Since the industry is installing 15% more systems 
each year, these efforts must continue (Southerland, 2000: 1).
Martin (2005: 160–163) writes that jurisdictions across North America are adopting 
ordinances and policies that specify a nonresponse policy to unverified alarm activations. 
As an alarm industry advocate, he argues that this change places a financial burden on 
businesses and increases the risk of burglary. In Salt Lake City, a person must be physically 
present on the property to visually verify that a crime is in progress, before the police accept 
a call for service; CCTV confirmation is not considered sufficient. Martin sees public police 
as more qualified to respond to alarms than private security officers. Martin refers to the 
strategy of Enhanced Call Verification to reduce false alarms. This strategy requires two calls 
from the alarm-monitoring center to the user to determine if an error has occurred, before 
police are called.

Challenges of the Security Industry          41
Search the Web
Several security associations exist to promote professionalism and improve the secu-
rity field. Go to the Web site of ASIS International (www.asisonline.org), formerly the 
American Society for Industrial Security, founded in 1955. With a membership over 
33,000, it is the leading general organization of protection executives and specialists. 
Its monthly magazine, Security Management, is an excellent source of information. 
This association offers courses and seminars. ASIS International offers three certifica-
tions: Certified Protection Professional (CPP); Physical Security Professional (PSP); and 
Professional Certified Investigator (PCI). For each certification, the candidate must pay 
a fee for administration, meet eligibility requirements, and successfully pass an exami-
nation.
Whereas ASIS International is the leading professional association of security 
executives and specialists, the International Foundation for Protection Officers (IFPO), 
founded in 1988, is the leading professional association of security officers who are on 
the front lines of protecting businesses, institutions, other entities, and our infrastructure. 
The IFPO (www.ifpo.org) has global reach and serves to help professionalize officers 
through training and certification. It has developed several distance delivery courses and 
programs: the Entry Level Protection Officer (ELPO), the Basic Protection Officer (BPO), 
the Certified Protection Officer (CPO) program, the Security Supervisor (SSP) program, 
and the Certified Security Supervisor (CSS) program. All programs are designed for self-
paced home study and some are available on-line. Many corporations and institutions have 
included these programs in their professional development programs for security person-
nel. The IFPO publishes Protection News, a quarterly newsletter of valuable information, 
trends, and commentary.
How does each group promote professionalism and improve the security field?
Here are additional Web sites related to this chapter:
Bureau of Justice Statistics: www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/cvict.htm
Ethics Education Resource Center: www.aacsb.edu/resource_centers/EthicsEdu/
default.asp
Federal Bureau of Investigation: www.fbi.gov/ucr/ucr.htm
International Association of Chiefs of Police: www.theiacp.org/
International Association of Security and Investigative Regulators: 
www.iasir.org
Markkula Center for Applied Ethics: www.scu.edu/ethics
National Association of Security Companies: www.nasco.org
National Fire Protection Association: www.nfpa.org/
Security Industry Association: www.siaonline.org/
U.S. Department of Homeland Security: www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/
What do you think are the most serious problems facing the private security industry 
and what are your solutions?
Many issues affect the “false alarm” problem. Solutions include user training, proper 
equipment, fines, and Enhanced Call Verification. A key question is: Who will pay for alarm 
response—the public or the users?

42          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Case Problems
2A. As Manager of Loss Prevention for five retail stores, you are seeking a promotion 
to Regional Director of Loss Prevention. The position involves responsibilities for 
several more stores and subordinates. You are scheduled for an interview soon for 
the position, and an interview topic will be metrics. Before studying metrics related 
to the company and your work, you seek to go back to the basics of metrics to serve 
as a foundation. Prepare a list of five general questions on metrics and answer the 
questions to prepare for your interview. Examples of basic questions are: What are 
metrics? What are the purposes of metrics?
2B. As a city police detective specializing in white-collar crime, you enjoy the 
challenges of your work and look forward to retirement in five years to become 
an insurance fraud investigator. You often work with the private sector, and 
you are frequently in contact with corporate security investigators. As an active 
member of a local police-security council, you are assigned the task of developing 
a plan to improve police-security cooperation at all levels in the city. What are 
your specific plans that you will present to the council?
2C. As a uniformed security officer, how would you handle the following situations?
• Another security officer says that you can leave two hours early during second 
shift and she will “punch you out.”
• You are assigned to a stationary post at a shipping and receiving dock, and a 
truck driver asks you to “look the other way” for $500 cash.
• A security officer that you work with shows you how to make the required 
physical inspections around the plant without leaving your seat.
• During the holidays, a group of coworkers planning a party on the premises 
asks you if you want to contribute to a fund to hire a stripper/ prostitute.
• You are testifying in criminal court in a shoplifting case, and the defense attorney 
asks you to state whether you ever lost sight of the defendant when the incident 
occurred. The case depends on your stating that you never lost sight of the 
defendant. You actually lost sight of the defendant once. How do you respond?
• Your best friend wants you to provide a positive recommendation for him when 
he applies for a job where you work, even though he has an arrest record.
• You see your supervisor take company items and put them in the trunk of her vehicle.
2D. As a corporate security manager, how would you handle the following 
situations?
• Two contract security officers fail to show up for first shift. The contract 
manager says that screened and trained replacements are unavailable, but two 
new applicants are available. You are required to make an immediate decision. 
Do you accept the two applicants, who lack a background investigation and 
state-mandated training?
• A vendor offers you a condo at the beach for a week if you support his firm’s 
bid for an access control system. You know that the system is not the best and 
that it will cost your company slightly more than the best system. The condo 
will save you about $1,500 on your summer vacation. What is your decision?
• Your employer is violating environmental laws. You know that if the 
government learns of the violations, your company will be unable to survive 
financially criminal and civil action and pollution controls. You will certainly 
lose your job. What do you do?
• While reviewing CCTV video footage, you see your boss inappropriately 
touching a coworker who recently filed a sexual harassment suit against the 
boss, who vehemently denied the allegations. You placed the pinhole-lens 
camera in the office supply closet to catch a thief, not expecting to see your 
boss touching the coworker. No one knows of the placement of the camera 
and the video footage, except you. Your boss, who is the vice president of 
finance, has been especially helpful to your career, your excellent raises and 
bonuses, and the corporate security budget. What do you do?

• You are testifying in a case of negligent security concerning a manufacturing 
plant in your region of responsibility. The plaintiff’s attorney asks you if 
any security surveys have ever been conducted at the site where the murder 
occurred. You know that a survey conducted prior to the murder showed the 
need for increased security at the site. Such information would secure a victory 
for the plaintiff. What is your response to the question?
References
ASIS Foundation. (2004). The ASIS Foundation Security Report: Scope and Emerging Trends, 
Preliminary Findings. www.asisonline.org, retrieved January 6, 2005.
ASIS International. (2003). General Security Risk Assessment Guideline. www.asisonline.org, 
retrieved May 10, 2006.
ASIS International. (2004). Private Security Officer Selection and Training. www.asisonline.org, 
retrieved January 3, 2005.
Barkan, S. (2006). Criminology: A Sociological Understanding, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Prentice-Hall.
Bowman, G., et al. (1992). Privatizing the United States Justice System. Jefferson, NC: 
McFarland Pub.
Chamard, S. (2006). “Partnering with Businesses to Address Public Safety Problems.” Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing (April).
Collins, P., et al. (2005). “The ASIS Foundation Security Report: Scope and Emerging 
Trends.” Alexandria, VA: ASIS, International.
Conklin, J. (2001). Criminology, 7th ed. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Cunningham, W., et al. (1991). Private Security: Patterns and Trends. Washington, D.C.: 
National Institute of Justice (August).
Cunningham, W., et al. (1990). Private Security Trends: 1970–2000, The Hallcrest Report II. 
Boston: Butterworth–Heinemann.
Cunningham, W., and Taylor, T. (1985). Private Security and Police in America: The Hallcrest 
Report. Portland, OR: Chancellor Press.
Fagin, J. (2005). Criminal Justice. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
FBI. (2006). Crime in the United States, 2004. www.fbi.gov/ucr/cius_04/offenses_reported, 
retrieved May 8, 2006.
Flores, T., and Earl, J. (2004). “What Are Security’s Lessons in Iraq?” Security Management, 
48 (November).
Freedonia Group. (2006). “World Security Services.” http://freedonia.ecnext.com/coms2/sum-
mary_0285, retrieved May 8, 2006.
Friedrick, J. (2005). “New Law Empowers Security Firms, Private Employers with 
Information.” Security Director News, 2 (September).
Haddow, G., and Bullock, J. (2003). Introduction to Emergency Management. Boston: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Kovacich, G., and Halibozek, E. (2006). Security Metrics Management: How to Manage the 
Costs of an Assets Protection Program. Boston: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann.
Leimberg, S., et al. (2002). The Tools & Techniques of Risk Management & Insurance. 
Cincinnati, OH: The National Underwriter Co.
Marks, A. (2006). “Security at Military Bases: A Job for Private Firms?” The Christian 
Science Monitor (April 27). www.csmonitor.com/2006/0427/p02s01–usmi.htm, retrieved 
April 28, 2006.
Martin, S. (2005). “What’s Best for Alarm Response Policies?” Security Management, 49 (March).
McCrie, R. (2005). “Training: Ontario Introduces a Bill Requiring 40 Hrs. Pre-Assignment.” 
Security Letter, XXXV (January 3).
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. (2006). “The Economic Costs of 
Injuries.” www.cdc.gov/nipc/factsheets/Cost_of_Injury.htm, retrieved May 8, 2006.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration. (2006). “OSHA Facts.” www.osha.gov, 
retrieved May 8, 2006.
References          43

Parfomak, P. (2004). “Guarding America: Security Guards and US Critical Infrastructure 
Protection” (November 12). www.fas.org/sgp/crs/RL32670.pdf, retrieved March 6, 2006.
Purpura, P. (2007). Terrorism and Homeland Security: An Introduction with Applications. 
Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann Pub.
Quinley, K., and Schmidt, D. (2002). Business at Risk: How to Assess, Mitigate, and Respond 
to Terrorist Threats. Cincinnati, OH: The National Underwriter Co.
Southerland, R. (2000). “Dispatch to Nowhere.” Access Control & Security Systems 
Integration, 1 (February).
Twomey, D., Jennings, M., and Fox, I. (2001). Anderson’s Business Law and the Regulatory 
Environment, 14th ed. Cincinnati, OH: West Legal Studies.
U.S. Army. (2006). Counterinsurgency (FM-324). Washington, DC: Headquarters, Department 
of the Army.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2004). National Response Plan. www.dhs.gov, 
retrieved January 12, 2005.
U.S. Department of Justice. (2000). Critical Incident Protocol—A Public and Private 
Partnership. www.ojp.usdoj.gov, retrieved November 18, 2003.
U.S. Department of Justice. (1976a). Law Enforcement and Private Security: Sources and 
Areas of Conflict. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice. (1976b). Report of the Task Force on Private Security. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice. (1972). Private Police in the United States: Findings and Recommen-
dations 1. (The Rand Report) Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2006). Justice Expenditure and 
Employment in the United States, 2003 (April). www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/jeeus03.
pdf, retrieved May 17, 2006.
U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services. (2004). National 
Policy Summit: Building Private Security/Public Policing Partnerships to Prevent and 
Respond to Terrorism and Public Disorder. www.cops.usdoj.gov, retrieved January 4, 
2005.
U.S. Fire Administration. (2005). Fire in the United States 1992–2001, 13th ed. www.usfa.
fema.gov/statistics/reports/pubs/fius13th.shtm, retrieved May 8, 2006.
U.S. Fire Administration. (2006). “The Overall Fire Picture, 2005.” www.usfa.dhs.gov/statis-
tics/quickstats/, retrieved November 10, 2006.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2006). Contract Security Guards: Army’s Guard 
Program Requires Greater Oversight and Reassessment of Acquisition Approach (April). 
www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-06–284, retrieved April 5, 2006.
Wagner, D. (2006). “Private Security Guards Play Key Roles Post-9/11.” The Arizona 
Republic (January 22). www.azcentral.com, retrieved January 30, 2006.
Wailgum, T. (2005). “Where the Metrics Are.” CSO (February). www.csoonline.com, retrieved 
February 9, 2005.
Zarate, J. (1998). “The Emergence of a New Dog of War: Private International Security 
Companies, International Law, and the New World Order.” Stanford Journal of International 
Law, 34 (January).
44          THE BUSINESS, CAREERS, AND CHALLENGES OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION

47
Foundations of Security 
and Loss Prevention
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain precisely how the security and loss prevention field has reached the status of a 
profession.
2. List and explain the three-step risk analysis process.
3. Discuss planning and its importance.
4. Discuss standards and regulations.
5. Explain and illustrate how to evaluate security and loss prevention programs.
6. Describe the characteristics of proprietary security programs.
3
KEY TERMS
• Oscar Newman
• Crime Prevention Through 
Environmental Design (CPTED)
• situational crime prevention (SCP)
• routine activities theory
• Donald Cressey
• risk analysis
• cost/benefit analysis
• annual loss exposure
• planning
• budgeting
• value added
• systems perspective
• National Technology Transfer and 
Advancement Act
• consensus standards
• standard of care
• code war
• regulations
• Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
• codes
• recommended practices
• Underwriters Laboratories (UL)
• National Fire Protection Association
• Security Industry Association
• American Society for Testing and 
Materials
• American National Standards Institute
• International Organization for 
Standardization
• pretest-posttest design
• experimental control group design
• scientific method
• division of work
• authority
• responsibility
• power
• delegation of authority
• chain of command
• span of control
• unity of command
• line personnel

48          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
The Security and Loss Prevention Profession
The security and loss prevention field has reached the status of a profession. If we look to 
other professions as models to emulate, we see the following in each, just as we see in the secu-
rity and loss prevention profession: a history and body of knowledge recorded in books and 
periodicals; associations that promote advancement of knowledge, training, certification, and a 
code of ethics; and programs of higher education that prepare students for the profession.
Theoretical Foundations
The challenges of security and loss prevention in a complex world have created an intense 
search among practitioners to seek answers to protection problems. Many fields of study offer 
answers for the practitioner, and thus, a multidisciplinary approach to the problem of loss is 
best. Here we present a summary of theories and concepts to illustrate the multidisciplinary 
nature of security and loss prevention and its theoretical foundation.
The work of Oscar Newman (1972) is the bedrock of many security designs worldwide. 
He argued that informal control of criminal behavior could be enhanced through architectural 
design that creates “defensible space” and changes residents’ use of public places while reduc-
ing fear. Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) evolved from Newman’s 
concept of defensible space. CPTED consists of architectural, landscape, and urban design 
that promotes crime prevention and is applicable to a broad variety of businesses, institutions, 
and facilities.
Situational crime prevention (SCP) is closely related to CPTED. It contains the physical 
design characteristics of CPTED and managerial and user behaviors that impact opportunities 
for criminal behavior. Lab (2004) writes that instead of making changes in a community, SCP 
focuses on specific problems, places, people, or times. Lab (2004) sees the theoretical basis 
for SCP from multiple perspectives, such as routine activities theory. It stresses that some 
people engage in regular or routine activities that increase their risk of victimization (Felson, 
1998). Three factors must occur for victimization under this theory: (1) an attractive target; 
(2) a motivated offender; and (3) the absence of “guardianship” (e.g., nearby people who can 
protect an intended victim).
Employee theft and embezzlement are huge problems for businesses. Criminologist Donald 
Cressey (1971) developed a formula that offers insight into causation and preventive measures. 
The formula is: motivation + opportunity + rationalization = theft. Cressey, in his classic study, 
observed that embezzlers’ financial problems are “nonshareable” because of embarrassment or 
shame, and they rationalize their illegal behavior. Other researchers describe a form of embezzle-
ment called “collective embezzlement,” which involves groups of two or more people. Financial 
industries, such as banks, stock brokerages, and insurance, have been victimized by collective 
embezzlement (Pontell and Calavita, 1993).
Psychologist Abraham Maslow (1954) is noted for his “hierarchy of human needs.” 
He claimed that people have a variety of needs such as basic physiological needs, safety and 
security needs, and societal needs. These needs can be met in the workplace through, for 
instance, clean lavatories, a safe working environment, and praise and rewards. The implica-
tions are that as employers do more to meet human needs, losses (e.g., internal theft) may 
drop. Research should focus on the relationship among types of needs met by employers and 
types of losses reduced.
• staff personnel
• formal organization
• informal organization
• organization chart
• directive system
• policies
• procedures
• manual
• autocratic style
• democratic style

The snapshot of theory presented here is a beginning point from which to build. 
Chapters 7 and 8 provide more details and greater depth on theories of crime and crime 
prevention. The social sciences are by no means the only disciplines helpful to security and 
loss prevention. In subsequent chapters, theory and concepts are drawn from law, marketing, 
accounting, fire science, safety, and risk management.
Security Periodicals
There are many security periodicals published by a variety of associations and organizations. 
Periodicals serve as a platform, not only for the theoretical foundation of the security and loss 
prevention profession, but also to introduce readers to new developments, security strategies 
and technology, research, laws, issues, professional development, and a host of other topics. 
What follows are noted periodicals in this discipline. The Web sites for the periodicals are 
located at the end of this chapter.
The Journal of Security Administration is the vanguard among journals in the security 
field. It is a semi-annual scholarly journal affiliated with the Security and Crime Prevention 
Section of the Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences.
The Journal of Security Education is the official journal of the Academy of Security 
Educators and Trainers, a professional group working to assist the development of degree 
programs and training courses. This journal reports on new or changing education and train-
ing programs and serves as a forum to discuss the professional needs of practitioners and the 
protection needs of organizations.
Security Journal is published by Palgrave Macmillan Journals and supported by the 
ASIS International Foundation. The editorial staff is from the United States and the United 
Kingdom. The journal publishes articles on a variety of topics on the latest developments and 
techniques of security management. Articles include findings and recommendations of indepen-
dent research. Two other journals from this publisher are Risk Management: An International 
Journal and Crime Prevention and Community Safety: An International Journal.
Security Management is a monthly magazine published by ASIS International. Each 
issue contains a wealth of informative articles on a broad range of topics written by experi-
enced security professionals.
Protection News, published by the International Foundation of Protection Officers, is a 
newsletter containing current trends of the security industry and covering topics on life safety 
and the protection of property.
Several periodicals focus on information technology and related threats and solutions. 
Examples are Information Security and SC Magazine.
By typing various security specializations in a search engine, such as “school security,” 
“healthcare security,” “transportation security,” the reader can obtain a wealth of information 
on associations, professional development, training, certifications, and periodicals.
Security Associations
Up to this point in this book, a number of professional associations have been named and 
their objectives summarized. Others will follow. The private sector contains numerous asso-
ciations dedicated to improving the world in which we live and promoting safety and secu-
rity. These missions are accomplished by enhancing the knowledge, skills, and capabilities of 
members through training and education; offering certifications to demonstrate competence; 
conducting research; producing “best practices” and standards; disseminating information; 
communicating the group’s goals; forming partnerships to reach common objectives; partici-
pating in community service; and advocating positions on key issues.
Professional associations typically require annual dues that pay for administrative and 
other expenses that are beneficial to members. Membership benefits include opportunities 
to network among peers; subscriptions to the group’s periodicals and informative e-mails; 
members-only Web site privileges; discounts on national and regional educational programs 
and seminars; opportunities to serve on specialized committees; and career guidance and 
placement services.
The Security and Loss Prevention Profession          49

50          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Readers are urged to join one or more professional associations that fit their specializa-
tions and interests for a truly enriching experience for career development and service. What 
we invest in our membership activities impacts what we receive in return.
If you were to begin a career in the security and loss prevention vocation, would you 
join a professional association? Why or why not?
Methods for Protection Programs
Before a program of security and loss prevention is implemented, careful planning is essential. 
Planning should begin by identifying the threats, hazards, and risks that face an organization. 
These terms are defined in the preceding chapter.
Risk Analysis
There are many perspectives and methods of risk analysis from government, the private 
sector, researchers, and writers. Instead of engaging in a debate about the topic, we pre-
sent some perspectives here, beginning with a basic three-step process of risk analysis. This 
simplified approach will assist the reader and provide a foundation for those who decide to 
enter “the jungle of risk analysis” and join the fray by studying the literature and differences in 
terminology, definitions, and methodology. For instance, the term risk analysis is used inter-
changeably with risk assessment, risk evaluation, and other terms.
James F. Broder (2006: 4), author of Risk Analysis and the Security Survey, writes: 
“Risk assessment analysis is a rational and orderly approach, as well as a comprehensive solu-
tion, to problem identification and probability determination. It is also a method for estimat-
ing the expected loss from the occurrence of an adverse event. The key word here is estimating 
because risk analysis will never be an exact science—we are discussing probabilities.”
This chapter defines risk analysis as a method to estimate the expected loss from specific 
risks using the following three-step process: (1) conducting a loss prevention survey; (2) iden-
tifying vulnerabilities; and (3) determining probability, frequency, and cost.
Conducting a Loss Prevention Survey
The purpose of a loss prevention survey is to pinpoint threats, hazards, and vulnerabilities 
(e.g., weaknesses, such as inadequate access controls, unsafe conditions) and develop a foun-
dation for improved protection. The survey should tailor its questions to the unique needs 
of the premises to be surveyed. Essentially, the survey involves a day-and-night, possibly 
multiple-day, physical examination of the location requiring a loss prevention program. The 
merging of information technology (IT) specialists into the risk analysis process is vital for 
comprehensive protection. For example, IT specialists can be involved in penetration testing 
of the IT system to identify protection needs.
The list that follows, expanded from Crawford (1995: 85–90), is a beginning point for 
topics for the survey.
 1. Overall threats and hazards, geography, climate (possible natural disasters), and 
nearby hazards and potential targets that can impact the entity
 2. Social, economic, and political climate surrounding the facility and in the region
 3. Past events, litigation, and complaints
 4. Condition of physical security, fire protection, safety measures, and business 
continuity plans
 5. Hazardous substances and protection measures
 6. Policies and procedures and their enforcement

 7. Quality of security personnel (e.g., applicant screening, training, and supervision; 
properly registered and licensed)
 8. Protection of people, assets, and operations on and off the premises
 9. Protection of IT systems and information
10. Protection of communications systems (e.g., telephones, fax machines, and e-mail)
11. Protection of buildings, grounds, and utilities
12. Protection of parking lots
13. Protection of products, services, goodwill, and image
The survey document usually consists of a checklist in the form of questions that remind 
the practitioner or committee of what to examine. A list attached to the survey can contain 
the targets—for example, people, money, inventory, equipment, IT systems—that must be 
protected and the present strategies, if any, used to protect them. Also helpful are computer 
software generating three-dimensional views of the facility, geographic information systems, 
maps, and blueprints.
Identifying Vulnerabilities
Once the survey is completed, vulnerabilities can be isolated. For example, access controls may 
be weak for both the facility and IT; certain policies and procedures may be ignored; and spe-
cific people, assets, or enterprise operations may require improved protection. Vulnerabilities 
may also show that security, fire, and life-safety strategies are outdated and must be brought 
up to current codes and standards.
Determining Probability, Frequency, and Cost
The third step requires an analysis of the probability, frequency, and cost of each loss. 
Shoplifting and employee theft are common in retail stores, and numerous incidents can add 
up to serious losses. Fire and explosion are hazards at a chemical plant; even one incident 
can be financially devastating. The frequency of shoplifting and employee theft incidents at a 
retail store will likely be greater than the frequency of fires and explosions at a chemical plant. 
However, it is impossible to pinpoint accurately when, where, and how many times losses will 
occur. When the questions of probability, frequency, and cost of losses arise, practitioners can 
rely on their own experience, metrics, communication with fellow practitioners, information 
provided by trade publications, risk management or security consulting firms, and risk analysis 
software.
As an alternative to the preceding three-step process, the “General Security Risk 
Assessment Guideline” (ASIS International, 2003) offers a seven-step process to identify risks 
at specific locations and to begin planning to select and implement security and loss preven-
tion strategies.
1. Understand the organization and identify the people and assets at risk. This includes 
information, reputation, and goodwill.
2. Specify loss risk events/vulnerabilities. Each site often has a unique history of losses 
and unique weaknesses.
3. Establish the probability of loss risk and frequency of events.
4. Determine the impact of the events. This includes the cost of losses from tangible or 
intangible assets.
5. Develop options to mitigate risks.
6. Study the feasibility of implementation of options. This focuses on practical security 
options that are aligned with the objectives of the enterprise.
7. Perform a cost/benefit analysis. This process seeks to analyze the value of the benefits 
from an expenditure. This is a three-step process: “identification of all direct and 
indirect consequences of the expenditure; assignment of a monetary value to all costs 
and benefits resulting from the expenditure; and discounting expected future costs and 
revenues accruing from the expenditure to express those costs and revenues in current 
monetary values.”
Methods for Protection Programs          51

52          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
It is argued that security directors of large, complex organizations should use quantitative, 
rather than qualitative, risk analysis when exposures cannot be evaluated intuitively, espe-
cially for the protection of IT and e-business (Jacobson, 2000: 142–144). The process begins 
with a mathematical model that can be simple or complex. A simple formula is ALE = I × F, 
where “ALE” is annual loss exposure, “I” is impact (i.e., dollar loss if the event occurs), and 
“F” is frequency (i.e., the number of times the event will occur each year). Software tools are 
available to organize and automate complex risk analyses. Debate continues over when to use 
quantitative risk analysis, its cost and value, how much guesswork goes into the process, and 
which formula and software are best. Two points are clear: (1) there are many opinions and 
styles of risk analysis, and (2) what works for one organization may not work for another.
The “General Security Risk Assessment Guideline” recognizes that, in certain cases, 
data may be lacking for a quantitative risk analysis. Consequently, a qualitative approach can 
be applied through multistep processes as described previously. The “Guideline” offers both 
qualitative and quantitative approaches.
In the preceding chapter, the importance of totaling direct and indirect losses was covered. 
Here we apply this financial strategy to exposure and potential losses to IT systems, as an illustra-
tion. Trusecure conducted research on 300 organizations following the Melissa virus catastrophe 
in 1999. The average victimized company had 1,120 employees and 196 infected PCs, and 8.7 
infected servers (including e-mail and e-commerce) that were down for two days. Respondents 
claimed an average of $1,700 in losses. Total costs were probably more than sevenfold higher 
when consideration is given to such losses as staff time spent repairing damage, lost productivity, 
public relations damage, and lost business (Tippett, 2001: 36–38). Thus, when calculating loss 
exposure, include total potential losses.
Why do you think the ASIS International’s “General Security Risk Assessment 
Guideline” offers quantitative and qualitative approaches?
Planning
Planning results in a design used to reach objectives. It is better to know where one is going 
and how to get there than to adhere to a philosophy of “we’ll cross that bridge when we get 
to it.” A serious consequence of poor planning is the panic atmosphere that develops when 
serious losses occur; emotional decisions are made when quickly acquiring needed systems 
and services. This sets up an organization for unscrupulous salespeople who prey on the 
panic.
An integral purpose of the planning process is to fulfill organizational goals and 
objectives. Those who plan protection should have a clear understanding of organizational 
needs, corporate culture, and customer needs. Because of global competitiveness, downsiz-
ing, restructuring, and a variety of hazards and threats, today’s enterprises are in a state of 
constant change and reengineering. To survive, a support function such as security must be a 
team player, adapt quickly to change, meet challenges in a positive and creative manner, and 
show how it is contributing to the enterprise.
Budgeting is closely related to planning because it pertains to the money required to 
fulfill plans. Modern practitioners state their protection plans in financial terms that justify 
expenditures, save the organization money, and if possible, bring in a return on investment. 
The concept of value added means that all corporate departments must demonstrate their 
value to the organization by translating expenditures into bottom-line impact. Corporate 
financial officers ask, “Is security contributing to our business and profit success, and if it is, 
how?” Metrics provides the opportunity to quantify performance. Illustrations of financial 
leverage for security include calculating total direct and indirect losses for each loss incident; 
conducting an undercover investigation to pinpoint not only theft, but also substance abuse 

and safety problems; hiring a bad check specialist who recovers several times his or her sal-
ary; purchasing an access control system that performs multiple roles, such as producing 
time and attendance data; and installing a closed-circuit television (CCTV) system that not 
only assists investigations, but helps to locate production problems to improve efficiency 
and cut costs.
A risk analysis provides input for planning protection. Security strategies generally take 
the form of personnel, systems, and policies and procedures. Some of the many factors that 
go into the planning process follow:
 1. Has the problem been carefully and accurately identified?
 2. How much will it cost to correct the problem, and what percent of the budget will be 
allocated to the particular strategy?
 3. Is the strategy practical?
 4. Is the strategy cost effective? For example, a loss prevention manager debates an 
increase in the staff of loss prevention officers or the purchase of a CCTV system. 
The staff increase will cost $40,000 per officer (three officers × $40,000 per year 
= $120,000 per year). CCTV will cost $150,000. After considering the costs and 
benefits of each, the manager decides on the CCTV system because by the second year 
the expense will be lower than hiring three extra officers.
 5. Does the cost of the strategy exceed the potential loss? For example, it would not be 
cost effective to spend $5,000 to prevent theft from a $50 petty cash fund.
 6. Does the strategy relate to unique needs? Often, strategies good for one location may 
not be appropriate for another location.
 7. How will the strategy relate to the entire loss prevention program? A systems approach 
is wise. The interrelatedness of each strategy should be considered. For example, CCTV 
can be used in a retail store to prevent both shoplifting and employee theft. Security 
personnel are needed to respond to incidents. CCTV can also save on personnel costs 
and management can remotely monitor multiple sites.
 8. Does the strategy conform to the goals and objectives of the organization and the loss 
prevention program?
 9. How does the strategy compare to contract loss prevention programs? Will the 
strategy interfere with any contract service?
10. How will insurance carriers react?
11. If a government contract is involved, what regulations must be considered?
12. Does the strategy create the potential for losses greater than what is being prevented? 
For example, applying a chain and lock to the inside handles of a double door 
makes it more difficult for a burglar to enter; however, what if a fire takes place and 
employees must escape quickly?
13. Does the strategy reduce the effectiveness of other loss prevention strategies? For 
example, a chain-link fence with colorful plastic woven through the links and high 
hedges will prevent people from seeing into the property and hinder an offender’s 
penetration, but this strategy also will cause observation problems for patrolling 
police.
14. Will the loss prevention strategy interfere with productivity or business operations? 
For example, in a high-risk environment, how much time will be necessary to 
search employees who leave and return at lunchtime? What if 1,000 employees 
Methods for Protection Programs          53
Modern security and loss prevention practitioners state their protection plans in finan-
cial terms that justify expenditures, save the organization money, and if possible, bring 
in a return on investment.

54          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
leave for lunch? As another example, if the loss prevention manager requires 
merchandise loaded into trucks to be counted by three separate individuals, will 
this strategy slow the shipping process significantly?
15. Will the strategy receive support from management, employees, customers, clients, and 
visitors? Can any type of adverse reaction be predicted?
16. Does the strategy have to conform to local codes, ordinances, or laws? For example, 
in certain jurisdictions, perimeter fences must be under a specific height and use of 
barbed wire is restricted.
17. Will the strategy lower employee morale or lead to a distrust of management?
18. Are there any possible problems with civil liberties violations?
19. How will the union react to the strategy?
20. Was participatory management used to aid in planning the strategy?
21. Can the strategy be effectively implemented with the present number of loss 
prevention personnel?
22. Will the strategy cause a strain on personnel time?
23. What are the characteristics of the area surrounding the location that will receive 
the loss prevention strategy? These characteristics must be considered to improve 
the quality of strategies. For example, if loss prevention strategies are planned for a 
manufacturing plant, what factors outside the plant must be considered? (Factors of 
consideration include crime, fire, and accident rates.) Also, certain nearby sites may 
be subject to disaster: nuclear plants, airports, railroads (transportation of hazardous 
materials), educational institutions (student unrest), forests (fire), hazardous industries 
(chemicals), and military installations, among others. Weather conditions are 
important to consider as well. Storms can activate alarms. Excessive rainfall can cause 
losses due to flooding. Heavy snow can result in a variety of losses. Earthquake and 
volcanic actions are additional factors to consider.
24. When considering loss prevention strategies such as burglar or fire alarms, what is the 
response time of public services such as police, fire, and emergency medical service? 
Where is the nearest facility housing each service?
25. Will loss prevention strategies be able to repel activity from local criminals, a gang, or 
organized crime?
26. Will the strategy shift crime to another target?
27. Does the strategy attempt to “loss-proof” or eliminate all losses? This often is an 
impossible objective to reach. Loss prevention practitioners sometimes are surprised 
by the failure of a strategy that was publicized as a panacea.
28. If the strategy is not implemented, what is the risk of loss?
29. Will a better, less expensive strategy accomplish the same objective?
30. Can any other present strategy be eliminated when the new strategy is implemented?
31. What other strategies are more important? Are priorities established?
32. Should a pilot program be implemented (say, at one manufacturing plant instead of at 
all plants) to study the strategy for problems and corrective action?
33. How will the strategy be evaluated?
Incomplete Protection Plans
Andrew Smith, security manager at Tecsonics, Inc., a fast-growing electronics firm, 
was assigned the task of preparing a plan and one-year budget for information security. 
Two months later, Andrew was in front of senior executives who were eager to learn 
how proprietary information would be protected in such a fiercely competitive indus-
try. At the beginning of the presentation, Andrew emphasized that the survival and 
growth of Tecsonics depended on its information security program. The four major 
strategies for protection for the first year included electronic soundproofing, also 

Planning from a Systems Perspective
The systems perspective looks at interactions among subsystems. When actions take place in one 
subsystem, other subsystems are affected. For example, the criminal justice system is composed of 
three major subsystems: police, courts, and corrections. If, during one day, the police make 100 
arrests for public intoxication, then the court and corrections subsystems must react by accom-
modating these arrestees. There are many other examples of systems: a loss prevention depart-
ment, a business, government, a school, an automobile, the human body, and so on. All these 
systems have subsystems that interact and affect the whole system. In each system, subsystems 
are established to attain overall system objectives and goals.
Similar to other systems, a loss prevention department can be analyzed in terms of inputs, 
processes, outputs, and feedback. As an example, look at a loss prevention department’s imme-
diate reaction and short-term planning concerning an employee theft incident (see Figure 3-1). 
The loss prevention department receives a call from a supervisor who has caught an employee 
stealing: the input. The process is the analysis of the call, planning, and the action taken (i.e., 
dispatching of loss prevention personnel). The outputs (i.e., activity at the scene) are the arrival 
of the personnel, questioning, and note taking. Feedback involves communications from the 
on-site loss prevention personnel to the loss prevention department; this helps to determine if 
the output was proper or if corrections are necessary. For instance, suppose that an on-the-spot 
arrest was required. Then additional outputs might be necessary, possibly including assistance 
from a local public police department.
The systems perspective described in Figure 3-1 is for planning a short-term, immediate 
action. Figure 3-2 illustrates long-term loss prevention planning from a systems perspective.
In Figure 3-2, the inputs of goals and objectives relate to upper management’s expec-
tations of the loss prevention function. The resources include money, material, and human 
resources. Information, research, reports, risk analyses, and metrics all aid in decision mak-
ing within the planning process. The outputs are the loss prevention programs and strate-
gies evolving from the planning process that will prevent and reduce losses while increasing 
profits. Feedback, an often-overlooked activity, is essential for effective planning; and evalu-
ation is an integral part of feedback. Ineffective programs and strategies must be eliminated. 
Other programs and strategies may need modification. Evaluation helps to justify programs 
and strategies.
Methods for Protection Programs          55
referred to as shielding, which would involve the use of a copper barrier throughout 
one conference room to cut off radio waves from a spy’s bugging equipment. Cost: 
$250,000. The second strategy was to spend $85,000 for countermeasure “sweeps” 
to detect bugs in select locations on the premises. The third strategy was to upgrade 
the access control system at a cost of $200,000. The fourth strategy was to hire an IT 
security specialist for $90,000 annually.
Before Andrew was five minutes into his presentation, the rapid-fire questions 
began: “What is the return on investment?” “Are the plans cost effective?” “Did you 
perform a risk analysis?” “What are other similar businesses doing?” “Why should we 
spend so much money on shielding and sweeps when we can use cheaper methods, such 
as holding meetings in unexpected locations, preparing good policies and procedures, 
promoting employee education, and keeping certain sensitive information out of the IT 
system and locked up in a safe?” One sarcastic, hard-nosed executive quipped: “You 
would probably spend millions on shielding and sweeps and not realize that one of our 
male scientists could go out of town to a seminar, get cornered by a foxy broad, and 
get drunk as she pumps him for information!” Unfortunately for Andrew, everybody 
was laughing while he wished he had done a better job of preparing for his presentation 
(Purpura, 1989: 43–44).

56          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
FIGURE 3-1 A systems perspective of a loss prevention department’s immediate reaction and short-term planning 
relevant to an employee theft incident.
FIGURE 3-2 Long-term loss prevention planning from a systems perspective.
Loss prevention practitioners must be prepared when asked by senior management, 
“How do you know the loss prevention plans and strategies are working?”
Critical Thinking for Security Planning
Maxims of Security
1. Security is never foolproof. The term foolproof is a misnomer. Instead of bur-
glarproof, bulletproof, or fireproof, replace proof with resistant.
2. State-of-the-art security has its vulnerabilities. History is filled with grand secu-
rity strategies that failed.
3. Through history, security designers have been in constant competition with 
adversaries seeking to devise methods to circumvent defenses. This is a “cat and 
mouse” cycle where one side takes the lead, often temporarily, until the other 
side produces a superior technique. Today, we see this competition with such 
areas as physical security, IT security, and counterterrorism.

Methods for Protection Programs          57
4. Related to #3, the design of security plays a role in an adversary’s plan of pene-
tration and attack. Terrorists and other criminals fine-tune their plans according 
to how a target is protected.
5. Security often is as good as the time it takes to get through it. The longer the 
time delay facing the offender, the greater the protection and chances that he or 
she will abort the offense, be apprehended, or seek another target (i.e., displace-
ment).
6. The “harder” the target or defensive strategy, the more likely the offender 
will seek weaker defenses at the same target or seek a completely new tar-
get.
7. Security must focus on not only what is leaving a facility (e.g., company 
assets), but also what is entering (e.g., weapons, explosives, illegal drugs, and 
anger).
Three Models of Security
All security strategies fall under one of the following models:
1. It protects people, assets, and/or the operations of enterprises.
2. It accomplishes nothing.
3. It helps offenders.
Illustrations of security protecting people, assets, and/or the operations of enter-
prises are seen when a hospital security officer escorts nurses to their vehicles at night, 
when a safe proves too formidable for a burglar who leaves the scene, or when a 
manufacturing process is protected through access controls and other security methods. 
Security accomplishes nothing when security officers sleep on the job or fail to make 
their rounds or when alarm systems remain inoperable. Sometimes unknown to security 
practitioners and those they serve are the security strategies that actually help offend-
ers. This can occur when security officer applicants are poorly screened, hired, and 
then they commit crimes against their employer. The ordinary padlock is an example of 
how physical security can assist offenders. An unlocked padlock hanging on an opened 
gate can invite padlock substitution, in which the offender replaces it with his or her 
padlock, returns at night to gain access, and then secures the gate with the original pad-
lock. Such cases are difficult to investigate because signs of forced entry may be absent. 
Fences, another example, often are built with a top rail and supports for barbed wire 
that are strong enough to assist and support people, rather than the fence and barbed 
wire. Also, attractive-looking picket fences have been knocked down by offenders and 
used as ladders.
Security practitioners should identify and classify all security strategies under 
these models to expose useful, wasteful, and harmful methods. This endeavor should be 
a perpetual process within risk analysis, careful planning, critical thinking, testing, and 
research to facilitate cost-effective, results-oriented security. Although these challenging 
goals require time and effort, the net result is a superior security and loss prevention 
program.
Using a critical thinking approach, what are your views on any of the maxims or models 
of security? How can they be modified or enhanced?

58          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Standards and Regulations
Standards and regulations serve as resources for employees in the public and private sectors 
who seek to optimize professionalism, competence, and quality within their organizations 
that are reflected in the products and services they generate. There is much confusion and 
controversy over standards and regulations. Here we begin with a federal government per-
spective, basic definitions, and then information specific to security and loss prevention.
Standards
The National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act (NTTAA), which became law in 
March 1996, directs federal agencies to adopt private sector standards, wherever possible, 
rather than create proprietary, nonconsensus standards. The act also directs the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology to bring together all levels of government for the same 
purpose. The NTTAA cites “standard” or “technical standard” as including common and 
repeated use of rules, conditions, guidelines or characteristics for products or related processes 
and production methods, and related management systems practices.
There are many types of standards that serve a wide variety of purposes. They are clas-
sified in numerous ways. Standards based on purpose include terminology standards that 
standardize nomenclature, test and measurement standards that define methods to assess 
performance, and product and service standards that promote quality. Standards may also be 
classified by the intended user group. Examples are company standards that are meant for a 
single business, industry standards for a particular industry, international standards, and gov-
ernment standards. Standards may also specify requirements, such as performance standards 
that describe how a product is supposed to function and design standards that define how a 
product is to be built.
Standards are developed by hundreds of U.S., international, foreign, and regional organi-
zations. Research on standards can be confusing and time-consuming. The end of this chapter 
offers federal government Web sites helpful for finding standards and regulations.
Consensus standards are accepted industry practices developed through a consensus 
process (i.e., open to review and modifications by experts who agree on how a specific task 
should be performed prior to the final standard). Consensus standards do not have the force 
of law unless a jurisdiction adopts them as law. Professional groups also publish “guidelines” 
or “guides” (also without the force of law) that offer organizations information and factors to 
consider when developing programs (e.g., security or fire protection).
Standards may help an industry prevent legislation that is burdensome and expensive to 
that industry. For instance, if an industry voluntarily produces standards that promote security 
and safety, then government security regulations for that industry may be averted.
Although standards may not be adopted as law by a jurisdiction, they may be used to establish 
a standard of care or used during litigation. Angle (2005: 22) defines standard of care as “the concept 
of what a reasonable person with similar training and equipment would do in a similar situation.” 
In the emergency medical field, for example, a practitioner can prevent a claim of negligence if he or 
she performs in the same way as another reasonable person with the same training and equipment. 
In other words, everyone has certain expectations of performance.
An employer can face a claim of negligence by failing to adhere to policies and procedures, 
standards, or legal mandates (Fried, 2004: 30). Suppose employees are injured during an emer-
gency evacuation and sue. Experts may be hired by opposite sides of the civil case to provide 
expertise and testimony on whether the employer provided a safe workplace and properly planned 
for emergencies. Comparisons may be made of what reasonable prudent management would do. 
If the defense side can show that management did everything “reasonable management” would 
have done under the same circumstances, then the employer has a good chance of showing that it 
acted reasonably and should not be liable for injuries.
Fried makes interesting observations about standards and litigation. He notes that if 
industry experts seek to develop a standard to benefit themselves or others, or to sell products 
or services, then the standard would not have significant weight in court. Another question 

sure to surface is how the standard was developed. Consensus standards often do not meet 
the scientific rigor of, say, how the medical profession uses multiple blind tests to determine 
if a drug works. Fried (2004: 30) writes: “Thus, for any standard to pass legal muster under 
the Daubert challenge (requiring proof that a standard or conclusion is based on scientific 
or sound research), the standard needs to be tested and proven to be correct. Otherwise the 
standard is just a suggestion.”
Although the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), for example, outlines ideal 
actions and what an ideal manager should achieve based on industry experts, failure to meet 
standards does not mean law was violated or someone is negligent. A judge may declare a 
standard introduced in court as not applicable in that jurisdiction because no court or legal 
body authorized it, even though an expert witness might argue that an unofficial standard has 
become an industry standard of practice. Fried writes that if over 50% of employers follow a 
conduct—whether or not from a standard—that conduct could be considered the reasonable 
industry standard that should be followed.
In reference to settling lawsuits involving negligent security, courts have ruled incon-
sistently. Acceptable security in one jurisdiction may be unacceptable in another. However, 
security standards foster uniform security. Those against standards cite costs and argue that it 
is impossible to standardize security because each location and business is unique.
A government jurisdiction can adopt a standard as law and enforce it. For example, this 
has been done by many jurisdictions with the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. The NFPA has no 
enforcement authority.
Competition over Standards
There is competition among organizations over producing and publishing standards. 
A major issue is which organization is best suited to prepare standards in a particular 
field. Swope (2006: 20–23) uses the term code war to describe rival groups lobbying 
governments to accept their competing sets of standards. For instance, for many years the 
business community has urged governments to standardize building codes among cities 
and states to reduce construction costs. On one side of the competition is the International 
Code Council (ICC), a group supported by government building and code enforcement 
officials, architects, and building owners and managers. The National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) heads the other side. It is supported by fire chiefs and unions repre-
senting building specialists. Government and industry prefer one code, and they are faced 
with a major question: “Which code to choose?” Swope (2006: 22) writes that the code 
war also involves the ICC and NFPA acting as “two publishing houses engaged in a war 
for book sales.” When a government adopts a model code or when codes change, officials, 
architects, engineers, construction specialists, and others must purchase up-to-date copies. 
Each code group earns tens of millions of dollars annually from publication sales.
A major difference between the ICC and the NFPA is how they update their code-
books. The ICC allows only building officials to vote on changes. The ICC sees this as 
a way to prevent special interests (e.g., trade unions, manufacturers) from influencing 
the codes. The NFPA permits all its members to vote, although checks and balances are 
applied to prevent undue influence.
Other groups are also in competition. For instance, ASIS International and the 
NFPA each have committees involved in the subject of security. The question is which 
group is most appropriate to produce security guidelines or standards? Both groups are 
involved in producing guidelines. ASIS International produced several excellent security 
guidelines (many discussed in this book) on such topics as risk assessment, chief security 
officer, private security officer selection and training, and business continuity.
The NFPA produced “NFPA 730, Guide for Premises Security.” It is based on risk 
assessment principles and includes information on physical security, security personnel, 
and security at certain occupancies (e.g., educational, healthcare). Another publication 
Standards and Regulations          59

60          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Regulations
Regulations are rules or laws enacted at the federal, state, or local levels with the requirement 
to comply. These requirements may address health, product safety, environmental effects, or 
other matters in the public interest. A regulation may consist of agency-developed technical 
specifications or private sector standards. The NTTAA endorses the use of private sector 
standards.
Federal regulations are contained in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). A widely 
known example of federal regulations is found in Title 29 CFR, Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA). OSHA is a federal agency, under the U.S. Department of 
Labor, established to administer the law on safety and health in the workplace.
Angle (2005: 21) offers these definitions: “Codes are standards that cover broad 
subject areas, which can be adopted into law independently of other codes, or standards.”
“Recommended practices are standards, which are similar in content to standards and 
codes, but are nonmandatory in compliance.”
Its is important to note that the terms regulations, standards, codes, and recommended 
practices are used interchangeably in the literature and by the public and private sectors. 
OSHA, for example, uses the term standards in the content of regulations.
Post-9/11 Standards and Regulations
Prior to the 9/11 attacks, many business enterprises set their own internal security standards 
and policies. This still occurs; however, certain industries have been following external regula-
tions and standards for many years. Examples include businesses involved with government 
contracts, or the nuclear, financial, or aviation industries. Institutions such as healthcare facili-
ties and colleges have also been influenced by regulations and standards. OSHA has played 
a major role in influencing businesses and institutions in promoting a safe environment, even 
through crime prevention methods. And, locales have enacted ordinances to increase security 
at convenience stores.
The passage of the NTTAA resulted in a proliferation of standards developers and 
standards, and the 9/11 attacks resulted in even more growth of security standards and regula-
tions. The federal government has spearheaded efforts to protect infrastructure and key assets 
through many initiatives and regulations, as described in this book. Security and loss preven-
tion practitioners must continue to study and apply guidelines, standards, and regulations 
pertaining to their specific industry. These resources help to formulate internal policies and 
procedures. Businesses involved in transportation, for instance, refer to the U.S. Department 
of Transportation and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The banking and finance 
industry refers to the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Drinking water and wastewater 
is “NFPA 731, Installation of Electronic Premises Security Systems.” It is a standard 
with specific requirements for the installation of various security systems. NFPA 730 
was difficult to gain consensus among committee membership. The NFPA Standards 
Council appointed to the Premises Security Technical Committee representatives from 
the insurance industry, ASIS International, Underwriters Laboratories, the Security 
Industry Association, and other groups. It began as a code, then it became a recom-
mended practice, and then a guide. The NFPA defines “guide” as “a document that is 
advisory or informative in nature and that contains only non-mandatory provisions . . . 
the document as a whole is not suitable for adoption into law” (Moore, 2005).
Is the competition over standards beneficial or detrimental to our society and the secu-
rity profession? Justify your view.

treatment systems are guided by the Environmental Protection Agency. And, as we know, 
besides government regulations, many organizations publish standards of a general nature 
and for specific industries.
Several benefits result from adherence to guidelines, standards, and regulations. These 
include greater safety and security, the prevention of losses and litigation, enhanced risk man-
agement, and uniformity.
Standard-Setting Organizations
From the perspective of manufacturing and installing security and loss prevention products 
and systems, standards serve as written and tested guidelines that promote uniformity and 
quality. Additional benefits of standards include preventing people from installing unsafe 
systems, helping manufacturers define how their products converge with IT networks, and 
assisting the industry in the highly standards-oriented federal market. 
Manufacturers have been producing their products in accordance with safety standards 
for many years. During the 1920s, for example, Underwriters Laboratories (UL), an inde-
pendent testing organization, worked with insurers to establish a rating system for alarm 
products and installations. This system assists insurers in  setting premiums for customers. 
An alarm company may show customers that its service is of a higher standard than a com-
petitor’s. UL has various listings, and it requires that an alarm company advertise its listing 
specifically. What a company has to do to obtain a listing as a central station burglar alarm 
company differs widely from what it has to do to be listed as a residential monitoring station; 
providing fire-resistant construction, backup power, access controls, and optimal response 
time following an alarm are a few examples.
Consumers, in general, are more familiar with UL as an organization promoting 
the electrical safety of thousands of retail products. Companies pay a fee to have UL test 
their products for safety according to UL standards. The famous UL label often is seen 
attached to the product. Sometimes the UL label is attached to a product without testing 
and authorization.
The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) establishes standards for fire protec-
tion equipment and construction that have been adopted by government agencies, in addition 
to companies in the private sector. Beginning in 1898, in cooperation with the insurance 
industry, the NFPA has produced standards covering sprinklers, fire hoses, and fire doors, 
among other forms of fire protection.
The Security Industry Association (SIA) is an international trade association that 
promotes education, research, and technical standards. It represents manufacturers, dis-
tributors, service providers, and others in the security industry. SIA standards promote 
the interests of its membership by developing common, open, interoperability protocols 
and performance standards and through standards-related venues. SIA follows American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) principles on developing standards like other standards 
writing bodies.
The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM International), organized in 
1898, has grown into one of the largest voluntary standards development systems in the 
world. ASTM is a nonprofit organization providing a forum for producers, consumers, gov-
ernment, and  academia to meet to write standards for materials, products, systems, and ser-
vices. Among its standards-writing committees are committees that focus on security, safety, 
and fire protection.
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI), organized in 1918, is a non-
profit organization that coordinates U.S. voluntary national standards and represents the 
United States in international standards bodies such as the International Organization for 
Standardization. ANSI approves and accredits standards for products and personnel certifica-
tion that are developed by standards-setting organizations, government agencies, consumer 
groups, businesses, and others. It does not develop its own standards. The ANSI Web site 
contains other groups’ standards. ANSI serves both private and public sectors in an effort to 
develop standards that exist in all industries, such as safety and health, information processing, 
banking, and petroleum.
Standards and Regulations          61

62          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
The International Organization for Standardization is a worldwide federation of national 
standards bodies from just about all countries. It is a nongovernmental group based in Geneva, 
Switzerland, established in 1947 with the purpose of promoting standardization globally to 
facilitate the international exchange of goods and services. Its agreements are published as 
International Standards, also known as ISO standards. According to Wikipedia (2006), ISO 
does not stand for “International Standards Organization.” ISO is not an acronym; it comes 
from the Greek word isos, meaning “equal.”
Evaluation of Loss Prevention Programs
How can a loss prevention program be evaluated? First, a research design can assist in the 
evaluation. A look at a few simplified research designs demonstrates how loss prevention 
programs are determined to be successful or unsuccessful.
One design is the pretest-posttest design. A robbery prevention program can serve as 
an example. First, the robbery rate is measured (by compiling statistics) before the robbery 
prevention program is implemented. The program then is implemented and the rate measured 
again. Robbery rates before and after program implementation are compared. If the robbery 
rate declined, then the robbery prevention program may be the causative factor.
A loss prevention training program can serve as another example. Loss prevention per-
sonnel are tested prior to the training program, and their test scores are saved. The training 
program is implemented. After the program is completed, another similar test is given the 
personnel. The pretest scores are compared to the posttest scores. Higher posttest scores may 
indicate that the training program was effective.
Another evaluation design or research method is called the experimental control group 
design. As an example, a crime prevention program within a corporation is subject to evalu-
ation. Within the corporation, two plants that are characteristically similar are selected. One 
plant (the experimental plant) receives the crime prevention program, while the other plant 
(the control plant) does not. Before the program is implemented, the rate of crime at each 
plant is measured. After the program has been in effect for a predetermined period of time, 
the rate of crime is again measured at each plant. If the crime rate has declined at the “experi-
mental” plant while remaining the same at the “control” plant, then the crime prevention 
program may be successful.
A good researcher should be cautious when formulating conclusions. In the crime 
prevention program at the plant, crime may have declined for reasons unknown to the 
researcher. For instance, offenders at the experimental plant may have refrained from crime 
because of the publicity surrounding the crime prevention program. However, after the 
initial impact of the program and the novelty expired, offenders could possibly continue 
to commit crimes. In other words, the program may have been successful in the beginning 
but soon became ineffective. Thus, continued evaluations are vital to strengthen research 
results.
Scientific Method
To assist planning and research, the scientific method can be used. Four steps are involved: state-
ment of the problem, hypothesis, testing, and conclusion. As an example, employee theft will 
serve as the problem. The hypothesis is a statement whereby the problem and a possible solution 
(i.e., loss prevention strategy) are noted. Testing involves an attempt to learn whether the strategy 
reduces the problem. Several research designs are possible. Here is an example of the presentation 
of the problem according to the style of scientific methodology:
• Problem: Employee theft.
• Hypothesis: Employee theft can be reduced by using CCTV.
• Testing: Control group (plant A—no CCTV); experimental group (plant B—CCTV).
• Conclusion: After several months of testing, plant A maintained previous levels of 
employee theft, whereas plant B showed a drop in employee theft. Therefore, CCTV 
may be an effective loss prevention strategy to reduce employee theft.

To strengthen research results, continued testing is necessary. In the example, CCTV can 
be tested at other, similar locations. Further, other strategies can be combined with CCTV to 
see if the problem can be reduced to a greater extent.
Sources of Research Assistance
A need exists for more research to identify successful and unsuccessful loss prevention meth-
ods. Four potential sources of research assistance are in-house, university, private consulting, 
and insurance companies.
In-house research may be the best because proprietary personnel are familiar with the 
unique problems at hand. Salary costs could be a problem, but a loss prevention practitio-
ner with a graduate degree can be an asset to loss prevention planning and programming. 
In-house research, however, can result in increased bias by the researcher because superiors 
may expect results that conform to their points of view.
University researchers usually have excellent credentials. Many educators are required 
to serve the community and are eager to do research that can lead to publication. The cost is 
minimal.
Private consulting firms often have qualified personnel to conduct research and make 
recommendations to enhance protection. This source can be the most expensive because these 
firms are in business for profit. Careful consideration and a scrutiny of the consulting staff 
are wise. The buyer should beware.
Insurance companies are active in studying threats, hazards, and risks. They also 
participate in varying degrees in research projects relevant to crime, fire, and safety. 
A major function of this industry is risk management, whereby strategies are recommended 
to reduce possible losses.
Evaluation of Loss Prevention Programs          63
Performance Measures
Traditionally, public police performance has been measured by reported crime rates, 
overall arrests, crimes cleared by arrest, and response time to incidents. These metrics 
have become institutionalized, and substantial investments have been made to develop 
IT systems to capture such data. However, this data may tell little about police effec-
tiveness in reducing crime and the fear of crime (U.S. Department of Justice, 1993: ix). 
Furthermore, do these measures reflect outmoded policing, and do they fail to account 
for many important contributions police make to the quality of life, such as efforts at 
community cohesion and crime prevention? Here is an example of performance mea-
sures for police that have implications for security:
• Goal: Promoting secure communities.
• Methods and activities: Promoting crime prevention and problem-solving 
initiatives.
• Performance indicators: Programs and resources allocated to crime prevention, 
public trust and confidence in police, and reduced public fear of crime (DiIulio, 
1993: 113–135).
What lessons can security practitioners learn from research on performance 
measures in the public sector? Do security programs contain traditional systems of 
measuring performance that reflect outmoded security efforts, while failing to account 
for important contributions to protection and the business enterprise?
Performance measures do exist in security programs today, but how can they be 
improved? To improve security programs, research should be directed at enhancing 
traditional performance measures and metrics that more accurately reflect customer 
satisfaction, security expenditures, and return on investments.

64          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Proprietary Security
Proprietary security programs and organizations in general are characterized by the organiza-
tional terms and practical management tools described in the following two lists. These terms 
and topics also apply to contract security businesses.
Basics of Organization: The Vocabulary
• Division of work: Work is divided among employees according to such factors as 
function, clientele, time, and location.
• Authority: The right to act.
• Responsibility: An obligation to do an assigned job.
• Power: The ability to act.
• Delegation of authority: A superior delegates authority to subordinates to spread the 
workload. A superior can delegate authority, but a person must accept responsibility. 
Responsibility cannot be delegated. For example, the sergeant delegated to loss 
prevention officers the authority to check employee lunch boxes when employees left 
the plant.
• Chain of command: Communications go upward and downward within an organized 
hierarchy for the purpose of efficiency and order.
• Span of control: The number of subordinates that one superior can adequately 
supervise. An example of a broad span of control would be one senior investigator 
supervising 20 investigators. An example of a narrow span of control would be one 
senior investigator supervising five investigators. An adequate span of control depends 
on factors such as the amount of close supervision necessary and the difficulty of the 
task.
• Unity of command: To prevent confusion during an organized effort, no subordinate 
should report to more than one superior.
• Line personnel: Those in the organized hierarchy who have authority and function 
within the chain of command. Line personnel can include uniformed loss prevention 
officers, sergeants, lieutenants, captains, and other superiors.
• Staff personnel: Specialists with limited authority who advise line personnel. For 
example, the loss prevention specialist advised the captain about a more efficient 
method of reducing losses.
• Formal organization: An official organization designed by senior management 
whereby the “basics of organization” are applied to produce the most efficient 
organization possible.
• Informal organization: An unofficial organization produced by employees with 
specific interests. For example, several employees spend time together (during breaks 
and lunch) because they are active as community volunteers.
• Organization chart: A pictorial chart that visually represents the formal organization. 
Many of the “basics of organization” actually can be seen on organization charts (see 
Figure 3-3).
Basics of Organization: The Practical Management Tools
• Directive system: A formal directive system is a management tool used to 
communicate information within an organized group. The communications can 
be both verbal and written. A verbal directive can be as simple as a superior 
informing a subordinate of what work needs to be done. The formal verbal 
directive system also can include meetings in which verbal communications are 
exchanged.
• Policies: Policies are management tools that control employee decision making. 
Policies reflect the goals and objectives of management.
• Procedures: Procedures are management tools that point out a particular way of doing 
something; they guide action. Many procedures actually are plans that fulfill the 

requirements of policies. The loss prevention manager must maintain an open mind 
when feedback evolves from policies and procedures. For instance, suppose only two 
security officers are assigned to search the belongings carried by 1,000 employees as 
they end their shift. Long lines of irritated employees may develop. Consequently, 
changes must be made.
• Manual: A manual is like a “rule book” for an organized group; it contains policies 
and procedures.
It is important to note that if an organization’s structure is too rigid, employees may be 
hindered from fulfilling business objectives. Participation by subordinates in decision making 
and a team atmosphere of cooperation have been shown to increase morale and motivation. 
Leadership style will also influence success. The autocratic style sees managers making all 
decisions, whereas the democratic style seeks opinions from employees as input for deci-
sions. Following decades of research, psychologists have concluded that no one style is best. 
Effective managers use both. For example, a manager may be autocratic with a trainee and 
democratic with a seasoned employee (Levy and Weitz, 2001: 534).
Proprietary Security          65
FIGURE 3-3 Small loss prevention department.
What Are the Duties of a Security Manager?
The duties of security managers vary widely. Here, a generalization is presented.
Security managers plan, prioritize tasks, concentrate on pressing problems, 
and strive to stay within their budget. They delegate tasks and supervise subordi-
nates and contractors who perform security services. Another duty is to ensure that 
security systems are functioning properly. Security managers may spend all day at 
their desks and computers sending and responding to e-mails, preparing reports, 
conducting research on the Web, reading, or talking on the telephone. With modern 
technology, such tasks can be performed almost anywhere. On other days they may 
split their time in the office or doing administrative work with visits to  various 
locations on and off the premises for inspections or investigations. They may attend 
meetings, conduct or receive training, and attend a college course. Since they are 

66          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
What is your opinion of the duties of a security manager?
interacting with people so much, they must have excellent human relations and 
communications skills.
Physical security and access controls are often part of their job; only authorized 
people should be on the premises. Security managers also realize that offenders can 
cause harm from remote locations by using a computer; consequently, security manag-
ers and IT specialists are increasingly working together. If an alleged crime occurs or 
an incident requires investigation, the manager may conduct the investigation, delegate 
the task, or contract the work to an outside firm. Workplace safety is another impor-
tant issue, and this includes fire safety, emergency procedures, and the prevention of 
accidents. All security personnel and volunteers from the workforce may receive special 
training to prevent and suppress fires and render first aid. As risks surface, security 
managers prepare policies and procedures, in cooperation with other employees, in an 
effort to prevent losses.
A company may require the manager to spend a great deal of time providing train-
ing programs to employees on a host of topics, from employee protection to informa-
tion security. Security managers may be responsible for a certain geographic area and 
visit corporate locations over several weeks to conduct a variety of duties as described 
previously. To reduce costs, businesses may add additional duties—outside traditional 
security duties—to the security manager’s position. Examples include supervision of 
landscaping, parking, a fleet of vehicles, a mail system, and a cafeteria. Security manag-
ers must be flexible and available for emergencies at any hour, since the employer and 
employees depend on them for protection.
Search the Web
The Web contains a wealth of information on the security and loss prevention 
profession. Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
Academy of Security Educators and Trainers: www.asetcse.org
American National Standards Institute: www.ansi.org
American Society for Testing and Materials: www.astm.org
ASIS International, Security Management: www.asis.com
finding regulations: http://standards.gov/standards_gov/v/Regulations/index.cfm
finding standards: http://standards.gov/standards_gov/v/Standards/index.cfm
Information Security: http://informationsecurity.techtarget.com
International Foundation of Protection Officers, Protection News: www.ifpo.org
International Organization for Standardization: www.iso.org
Journal of Security Administration: www.wiu.edu/users/mfkac/jsa/
National Fire Protection Association: www.nfpa.org
Palgrave Macmillan Journals, Security Journal: www.palgrave-journals.com/sj/index.
html
SC Magazine: www.scmagazine.com
Security Industry Association: www.siaonline.org
The Haworth Press, Journal of Security Education: www.haworthpress.com
Underwriters Laboratories (UL): www.ul.com

References          67
Case Problems
3A. As the Chief Security Officer for a global manufacturer of a variety of products, you 
have in your budget only enough money to subscribe to three security periodicals. 
You search the Web and select three. Which ones did you choose?
3B. As a loss prevention manager, you have been asked to prepare a speech to a group of 
security practitioners. The topic is “Planning Security and Loss Prevention Programs 
and Strategies.” Outline the speech or prepare notecards for your presentation.
3C. Refer to the box in this chapter titled “Incomplete Protection Plans.” If you were 
an outside security consultant hired by Andrew Smith, what would you suggest to 
help him prior to his meeting with senior executives?
3D. As a security manager, you believe that the 3 P.M. meeting today with the Vice 
President of Finance will not bring good news. Each business quarter seems to show 
poor profits and the need for cutbacks in all departments. When you enter her 
office for the meeting, the VP, Alaine Nell, gets right to the point: “Your security 
budget to protect the three openings at the plant must be cut by 50%.” She draws 
a sketch of the huge square plant and notes that the three openings are costing 
$500,000 annually for 24-hour-a-day security officer protection, including overtime. 
She states that each post requires four officers (three on and one off during each 24-
hour period) at $40,000 apiece. She requests a financial plan for the next five years. 
Prepare such a plan, providing hypothetical information if needed.
3E. You are a security specialist at a port. Your supervisor has assigned you the task 
of preparing a list of the laws, regulations, standards, government agencies, and 
private sector organizations pertaining to security at ports. Prepare the list by 
conducting research on the Web.
3F. Design an organization chart for a loss prevention department of 35 people 
at an industrial plant. Write a one-page justification of your design to satisfy 
management. Provide hypothetical information about the plant if needed.
References
ASIS International. (2003). “General Security Risk Assessment Guideline.” www.asisonline.
org/guidelines/guidelines.htm, retrieved January 3, 2006.
Angle, J. (2005). Occupational Safety and Health in the Emergency Services, 2nd ed. Clifton 
Park, NY: Thomas Delmar Pub.
Broder, J. (2006). Risk Analysis and the Security Survey, 3rd ed. Burlington, MA: Elsevier 
Butterworth Heinemann.
Crawford, J. (1995). “Security, Heal Thyself.” Security Management (May).
Cressey, D. (1971). Other People’s Money: A Study in the Social Psychology of Embezzlement. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
DiIulio, J. (1993). Performance Measures for the Criminal Justice System (October). 
Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Felson, M. (1998). Crime and Everyday Life: Insights and Implications for Society. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Fried, G. (2004). “Ask the Expert.” Public Venue Security (May/June).
Jacobson, R. (2000). “What Is a Rational Goal for Security?” Security Management 
44 (December).
Lab, S. (2004). Crime Prevention: Approaches, Practices and Evaluations, 5th ed. www.lex-
isnexis.com/anderson/criminaljustice
Levy, M., and Weitz, B. (2001). Retailing Management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper & Row.
Moore, W. (2005). “NFPA 730 and NFPA 731: The New NFPA Security Guide and Standard 
Increase the Quality and Reliability of Security System Installations.” NFPA Journal 
(January/February).
Newman, O. (1972). Defensible Space. New York: Macmillan.

68          FOUNDATIONS OF SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION
Pontell, H., and Calavita, K. (1993). “The Savings and Loan Industry.” In Beyond the Law: 
Crime in Complex Organizations. M. Tonry and A. Reiss, Editors. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Purpura, P. (1989). Modern Security and Loss Prevention Management. Boston: Butterworth-
Heinemann.
Swope, C. (2006). “The Code War.” Governing, 19 (January).
Tippett, P. (2001). “Calculating Risk.” Information Security, 4 (March).
U.S. Department of Justice. (1993). A Police Guide to Surveying Citizens and Their 
Environment. (October). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Wikipedia. (2006). “International Organization for Standardization.” http://enwikipedia.org/
wiki/International_Organization_for_Standardination, retrieved June 3, 2006.

KEY TERMS
• dual court system
• limited jurisdiction courts
• courts of general jurisdiction
• appellate jurisdiction
• intermediate state appellate courts
• state supreme court
• U.S. Magistrate’s Courts
• U.S. District Courts
• U.S. Courts of Appeals
• U.S. Supreme Court
• federal and state constitutions
• common law
• case law
• legislative law
• criminal law
• felonies
• misdemeanors
• civil law
• substantive law
• procedural law
• tort law
• false imprisonment
• malicious prosecution
• battery
• assault
• trespass to land
• trespass to personal property
• infliction of emotional distress
• defamation (libel and slander)
• invasion of privacy
• negligence
• legal duty
• proximate cause
• foreseeability
• prior similar incidents rule
• totality of the circumstances test
69
Law
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
 1. Summarize the judicial systems of the United States.
 2. Explain the origins of law.
 3. List and define at least five torts.
 4. Discuss the theory of premises security claims and negligence.
 5. Explain contract law.
 6. Outline civil justice procedures
 7. Explain the relationship among administrative law, compliance auditing, and the 
Federal Sentencing Guidelines.
 8. Summarize labor law and its relationship to private security.
 9. Outline criminal justice procedures.
10. Explain the legal guidelines for arrest, use of force, searches, and questioning.
4

70          LAW
Introduction
A good foundation in law is an essential prerequisite to loss prevention programming. Many 
crucial decisions by practitioners are circumscribed by legal parameters, and the consequences 
of these decisions can be serious. An arrest without the proper legal authority and evidence 
can result in civil and criminal action against security personnel. Negligence is a serious con-
cern that results from the failure to exercise due care in the use of force, for example. This is 
why training is so important; it becomes a major issue in a lawsuit against security. Numerous 
lawsuits also have been directed at those responsible for security, who are claimed to be neg-
ligent for not providing a safe environment, which caused a person to become a crime victim. 
Consequently, security and loss prevention decisions must take into consideration the legal 
environment. We begin with the structure of our judicial systems.
Judicial Systems
Our nation has a dual court system of federal and state courts. This means that, in addition 
to a federal court system, each of the 50 states (as well as the District of Colombia and the 
territories like Guam) has its own court system (Purpura, 1997: 200–212).
State Court Systems
States commonly have a three- or four-tier court system. Keeping in mind state variation, the 
tiers, from lowest to highest, are
• Courts of limited or special jurisdiction
• Courts of general jurisdiction (major trial courts)
• Intermediate appellate courts
• State supreme court (the court of last resort)
Limited jurisdiction courts handle minor cases—the bulk of the judicial caseload, traffic 
violations, and misdemeanors. An example of this court is the justice of the peace, which in 
many states has been reformed or eliminated. When found, it exists more frequently in rural 
• conscious disregard
• contract
• remedies for breach of contract
• nondelegable duty
• respondeat superior
• vicarious liability
• plaintiff
• defendant
• discovery
• motion
• pretrial conference
• verdict
• administrative agencies
• administrative inspections
• administrative searches
• compliance auditing
• due diligence
• Federal Sentencing Guidelines
• Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)
• Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002
• Financial Modernization Act of 1999
• National Labor Relations Act
• Weingarten rights
• arrest
• probable cause
• booking
• initial appearance
• preliminary hearing
• arraignment
• plea bargaining
• trial
• reasonable force
• deadly force
• exclusionary rule
• Miranda warnings

Judicial Systems         71
than urban areas. The magistrate’s court resembles the justice of the peace, although there may 
be differences in some states. Small, medium, and large cities have established municipal courts 
to handle a variety of justice duties. Courts of special jurisdiction hear cases only in a single 
area of law, be it criminal, drug, family, juvenile, or probate (wills and transfers of assets).
State laws or constitutions define jurisdiction between lower and higher courts that 
may hold concurrent jurisdiction over some misdemeanors. Courts of general jurisdiction 
have jurisdiction over all cases involving civil law and criminal law. A person accused of a 
felony would be prosecuted in this type of court. Courts of general jurisdiction have a vari-
ety of names, which can create confusion in understanding court systems among the states. 
Courts of general jurisdiction may have appellate jurisdiction over lower court decisions 
(such as a misdemeanor tried in a court of limited jurisdiction). Appellate jurisdiction is the 
authority of a court to review and revise the decision of an inferior court.
Appeals to intermediate state appellate courts offer litigants a chance to change an unfa-
vorable trial court decision by arguing that the lower court judgment was based on a revers-
ible error. The party bringing the appeal might contend, for instance, that the trial court erred 
when it allowed inadmissible testimony, or that the jury was given improper instructions.
All states have a court of last resort that may be called the state supreme court. The 
highest court in the state will receive much of its caseload from the intermediate appellate 
court if one exists. The highest court in the state interprets the law, applies it to the case at 
hand, and renders a decision as the court of last resort in the state.
Each year, in the states, courts of limited jurisdiction handle about 61,000,000 cases, and 
courts of general jurisdiction handle about 31,000,000 cases. Most of the cases involve traffic, civil, 
criminal, domestic, and juvenile matters. Intermediate state appellate courts are involved in about 
187,000 cases, while state supreme courts deal with about 85,000 cases (Neubauer, 2005: 82).
Federal Court System
The federal system divides into two major categories: the legislative courts and the constitu-
tional courts. Congress established legislative courts under Article I of the U.S. Constitution. 
An example of these courts of special jurisdiction is the tax court, which handles disputes 
between taxpayers and the Internal Revenue Service. Congress also created district and 
appellate courts in the District of Colombia and territorial courts. Article III of the U.S. 
Constitution provided for the U.S. Supreme Court and authorized Congress to create the 
lower federal judiciary. Four constitutional courts are: U.S. Magistrate’s Courts, U.S. District 
Courts, U.S. Courts of Appeal, and the U.S. Supreme Court.
The U.S. Magistrate’s Courts are the lowest level of jurisdiction of the federal court sys-
tem. U.S. magistrate judges conduct initial appearances and preliminary hearings, determine 
bail and conditions of release, conduct preliminary stages of felony cases, issue search and 
arrest warrants to federal law enforcement officers such as FBI agents, review cases involving 
prisoners, and deal with numerous civil matters. Their authority covers all tasks performed 
by federal district judges except trying and sentencing felony defendants. Decisions by mag-
istrate judges can be appealed to the federal district courts.
U.S. District Courts are similar to the courts of general jurisdiction in state court systems. 
These courts hear criminal and civil cases.
The U.S. Courts of Appeals, often referred to as circuit courts, have jurisdiction over 
specific geographic areas and are the intermediate appellate courts of the federal system. The 
Courts of Appeals review cases from the district courts of each region, the U.S. Tax Court, 
and from certain federal administrative agencies.
The U.S. Supreme Court is the highest court of our nation. It receives and disposes of 
about 8,000 cases each year, most by a brief decision that the issue is not important enough 
to be heard. In that case the lower court decision is left standing. Each year the Court decides 
about 80 cases of great national importance.
Each year, the approximate caseload of other federal courts is as follows: U.S. 
Magistrate’s Courts—880,000; U.S. District Courts—386,000; and U.S. Courts of Appeals—
58,000. The majority of all these cases involve criminal and civil matters and prisoner peti-
tions (Neubauer, 2005: 60).

72          LAW
Origins of Law
Five major sources of law are federal and state constitutions, common law, case law, legislative 
law, and administrative law. Federal and state constitutions are at the foundation of our govern-
ment and legal system. The U.S. Constitution specifies powers of the federal government, powers 
reserved to the states, and the rights of citizens as contained in the Bill of Rights. Courts interpret 
the Constitution and render decisions on issues, such as whether a federal or state law is unconsti-
tutional. State constitutions, although subordinate to the U.S. Constitution, are the supreme law 
within the respective state and superior to any local government constitution or charter.
English common law is the major source of law in the United States. Common law 
generally refers to law founded on principles of justice determined by reasoning accord-
ing to custom and universal consent handed down from one generation to another. The 
development of civilization is reflected in common law. Specific acts were, and still are, 
deemed criminal. These acts, even today, are referred to as common law crimes: treason, 
murder, robbery, battery, larceny, arson, kidnapping, and rape, among others. Common 
law is reinforced by decisions of courts of law. After our nation gained independence from 
England, the common law influence remained. Nineteen states have perpetuated common 
law through case law (i.e., judicial precedent). Eighteen states have abolished common law 
and written it into statutes. The remaining states have either adopted common law via rati-
fication or are unclear about exactly how it is reflected in the state system.
Case law, sometimes referred to as judge-made law, involves the interpretation of 
statutes or constitutional concepts by federal and state appellate courts. Previous case 
decisions or precedent cases have a strong influence on court decisions. Precedents clarify 
both statutes and court views to limit ambiguity. When a new case comes into existence, 
earlier case decisions are used as a reference for decision making. Because the justice sys-
tem is adversarial in nature, opposing attorneys refer to past cases (i.e., precedents) that 
support their individual contentions. The court makes a decision between the opposing 
parties. Societal changes often are reflected in decisions. Because the meaning of legal 
issues evolves from case law, these court decisions are the law. Of course, later court 
review of previous decisions can alter legal precedent.
Legislative law from the federal government is passed by Congress under the authority 
of the U.S. Constitution. Likewise, individual state constitutions empower state legislatures 
to pass laws. Legislative laws permit both the establishment of criminal laws and a justice 
system to preside over criminal and civil matters. A court later may decide that a legislative 
law is unconstitutional; this illustrates the system of “checks and balances” that enables one 
government body to check on another.
Criminal law pertains to crimes against society (Table 4-1). Each state and the federal gov-
ernment maintains a criminal code that classifies and defines offenses. Felonies are considered 
Table 4-1 Criminal Law and Tort Law
 
Criminal Law 
Tort Law
Definition: 
Crime as a public wrong 
A civil or private wrong
Punishment/Sanction: 
Fine, probation, incarceration  
Money damages
 
 or death
Who brings the action: 
The State 
The plaintiff
Who can appeal: 
Defendant found guilty can appeal. 
Both parties can appeal
 
 The State usually does not appeal 
 
 after losing a case.
Standard of proof required: 
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt  
A preponderance of evidence
 
 (a higher standard of proof than 
 (greater weight of facts proven)
 
 is required in a civil case)
Source: Reprinted from Criminal Justice: An Introduction, Philip. P. Purpura, Copyright Reed Elsevier Inc, 1997, 
with Permission from Elsevier.

more serious crimes, such as burglary and robbery. Misdemeanors are less serious crimes, such 
as trespassing and disorderly conduct.
Civil law adjusts conflicts and differences between individuals (Table 4-2). Examples of 
civil law cases are accidental injuries, marital disputes, breach of contract, sales that dissatisfy 
customers, and disputes with a government agency.
Law is also classified as substantive law and procedural law (Table 4-2). Substantive law 
defines criminal offenses (e.g., murder, embezzlement) and specifies punishments. Procedural 
law covers the formal rules for enforcing substantive law and the steps required to process a 
criminal case (e.g., arrest, bail).
Tort Law and Controls Over Private Security          73
Table 4-2 Substantive Law and Procedural Law
 
Criminal Law 
Civil Law
Substantive Law  
Procedural Law  
Substantive Law  
Procedural Law
(Legal definitions 
(Law guiding the 
(Law defining rights 
(Law guiding the
of crimes, penalties) 
criminal justice 
and duties among 
civil justice process)
 
process) 
people)
Capital crimes 
Jurisdiction of cases 
Tort law 
Jurisdiction of cases
Felonies 
Rules of evidence 
Contract law 
Rules of evidence
Misdemeanors 
Other rules 
Other civil law 
Other rules
Violations
Source: Reprinted from Criminal Justice: An Introduction, Philip. P. Purpura, Copyright Reed Elsevier Inc, 1997, 
with Permission from Elsevier.
Legal Quiz
Prime your mind with the following questions that are answered in this chapter.
1. Can a person be arrested and sued for the same act?
2. Do most employers monitor Internet access by employees?
3. Do employers customarily place covert closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras 
in restrooms?
4. Are employers prohibited by law from installing Global Positioning System 
(GPS) technology in company vehicles?
5. Is it true that the vast majority of civil and criminal cases never make it to 
trial?
6. Do administrative searches by government regulatory agencies require a search 
warrant?
7. Are private security personnel required by the U.S. Supreme Court to read 
Miranda warnings to suspects prior to questioning?
Tort Law and Controls Over Private Security
Public police officers have greater police powers than private security officers, who typically 
possess citizen’s arrest powers. In conjunction with greater police powers, public officers 
are limited in their action by the Bill of Rights of the U.S. Constitution. On the other hand, 
private officers, possessing fewer powers, for the most part, are not as heavily restricted by 
constitutional limitations. Authority and limitations on private officers result from tort law, 

74          LAW
the body of state legislative statutes and court decisions that govern citizens’ actions toward 
each other and allows lawsuits to recover damages for injury (Table 4-1). Tort law is the 
foundation for civil actions in which an injured party may litigate to prevent an activity or 
recover damages from someone who has violated his or her person or property. Most civil 
actions are based not on a claim of intended harm, but on a claim that the defendant was 
negligent. This is especially so in cases involving private security officers. Tort law requires 
actions that have regard for the safety and rights of others; otherwise, negligence results. 
The essence of the tort law limitations on private security officers is fear of a lawsuit and 
the payment of damages.
The primary torts relevant to private security are as follows:
 1. False imprisonment: The intentional and forceful confinement or restriction of 
the freedom of movement of another person, also called false arrest. The elements 
necessary to create liability are detention and its unlawfulness.
 2. Malicious prosecution: Groundless initiation of criminal proceedings against 
another.
 3. Battery: Intentionally harmful or offensive touching of another.
 4. Assault: Intentional causing of fear of harmful or offensive touching.
 5. Trespass to land: Unauthorized entering upon another person’s property.
 6. Trespass to personal property: Taking or damaging another person’s possessions.
 7. Infliction of emotional distress: Intentionally causing emotional or mental distress in 
another.
 8. Defamation (libel and slander): Injury to the reputation of another by publicly 
making untrue statements. Libel refers to the written word; slander, to the spoken 
word.
 9. Invasion of privacy: Intruding on another’s physical solitude, the disclosure of private 
information about another, public misrepresentation of another’s actions.
10. Negligence: Causing injury to persons or property by failing to use reasonable care or 
by taking unreasonable risk.
Civil action is not the only factor that hinders abuses by the private sector. Local and 
state ordinances, rules, regulations, and laws establish guidelines for the private security 
industry. This usually pertains to licensing and registration requirements. Improper or illegal 
action is likely to result in suspension or revocation of a license. Criminal law presents a 
further deterrent against criminal action by private sector personnel. Examples are laws pro-
hibiting impersonation of a public official, electronic surveillance, breaking and entering, and 
assault. Conduct can result in both a crime and a tort: in other words, a security practitioner 
can be arrested and sued.
Some court cases have applied select constitutional limitations, from the Bill of Rights, 
to private sector action, especially if private security is working with public police or if 
off-duty police are working part-time to assist private sector security efforts. Public police 
and private security are also subject to federal and state laws that impose civil liability. For 
example, 42 USC Section 1983, is a federal law that imposes civil liability for intentional 
violations of constitutional, civil, or statutory rights of individuals by persons “acting under 
color of state law” (i.e., the misuse of power by a person possessing government author-
ity). This action is more likely against public police than private security. Nemeth (2005: 
159) asks whether a private security officer who detains a suspect and who is granted 
authority by regulatory bodies and licensure agencies and is empowered by legislation is 
“acting under color of state law”? His answer to this question is that some claimants have 
persuaded courts that private security action falls “under color of state law,” but such 
decisions are rare, and he notes that it is difficult to define Section 1983 liability of private 
security officers.
Union contracts also can limit private security. These contracts might stipulate, for 
instance, that employee lockers cannot be searched and that certain investigative guidelines 
must be followed.

Legal Theory of Premises Security Claims          75
Match the Tort
Suppose you are a security manager: identify the tort(s) related to each scenario.
• A retail customer was frightened by one of your security officers who hurt the 
customer’s arm, and, in front of other customers, loudly accused the customer of 
shoplifting.
• You learn that an employee of a company department that is missing cash has been 
locked in an office by the department manager and ordered not to leave.
• An administrative assistant in the human resources department told people in the 
community that a specific employee is to be fired for sexual harassment, although 
you are only investigating allegations of such behavior.
Legal Theory of Premises Security Claims
Negligence results when a failure to exercise a reasonable amount of care in a situation causes 
harm to another (see Figure 4-1). For instance, management should take steps to ensure the 
safety of individuals on the premises. Numerous premises security claims have been directed 
at management for failing to provide adequate protection for employees, customers, residents, 
or students who were injured by a third-party criminal act (e.g., sexual assault, robbery).
The legal theory of premises security claims follows. States allow monetary damages 
to the plaintiff who is injured as a proximate cause of the defendant’s (e.g., management’s) 
breach of a legal duty to provide protection. The definitions of legal duty, proximate cause, 
and the related concept of foreseeability distinguish the law among the states. Legal duty 
refers to management’s duty to maintain the premises in a reasonably safe condition for invi-
tees (e.g., customers on the property of a retail store). Proximate cause means that the breach 
FIGURE 4-1 Assaults in parking lots have led to lawsuits alleging negligent security. 
Source: Philip P. Purpura, Criminal Justice: An Introduction (Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1997), p. 4.

76          LAW
of the legal duty is the actual cause of the harm. Foreseeability refers to whether the harm 
was likely to occur based on the safety history (e.g., crime metrics) of the premises and nearby 
property. If harm was likely, there is a duty to protect invitees.
Nemeth (2005: 136–137) writes:
The whole theory of negligence operates from the measure of the average man 
or woman—the ‘reasonable person’ standard. What should we expect from the 
average person in his or her dealings with others?… In the law of negligence, the 
unreasonable person is needlessly careless and even reckless and fails to take those 
precautions necessary to prevent injury to others.
To succeed in a negligence case, the plaintiff must prove that the defendant (e.g., a busi-
ness) owed a duty to protect the victim; the defendant breached the duty; and the breach of 
the duty was the proximate cause of the crime and harm to the victim. To defend the case, the 
defendant seeks to show that a duty was not owed to the plaintiff; that there was no breach 
of duty; or by refuting the argument that any breach of a duty was a proximate cause of the 
victimization (Kaminsky, 1995: 7–11).
The legal theory of premises security claims has evolved over the years. The prior 
similar incidents rule, for instance, means that a plaintiff must demonstrate that there had 
been a prior similar incident on the premises. However, courts became critical of this rule in 
the 1990s because it had the effect of being a “one free rape rule.” At that time, the major-
ity of jurisdictions shifted to a totality of the circumstances test: prior similar incidents and 
other factors, such as the nature of the business, its surrounding locale, security training, and 
whether customary security measures for the particular industry were applied (Gordon and 
Brill, 1996: 2–3). A third test courts place on security-related cases is conscious disregard: 
whether management or the security program knew of a problem or vulnerability but did 
nothing.
A lawsuit means that security faces a very big test. Management either pays for 
adequate protection initially to prevent a serious incident or possibly pays later, following a 
lawsuit. Most of these cases never make it to the trial stage and are settled out of court, which 
complicates research. In addition to providing basic protection for people and assets, a good 
security and loss prevention program becomes an investment in litigation prevention, even 
though premises security claims continue within our society. Apartment and condominium 
complexes and parking lots at a variety of locations are particularly prone to claims of inad-
equate security. However, many other types of sites are subject to lawsuits, such as shopping 
malls, retail stores, educational institutions, hotels and motels, restaurants and bars, office 
buildings, and healthcare facilities.
Negligence involves many types of situations pertaining to protection programs. 
Security personnel have been held liable for negligent use of force and firearms. Managers and 
supervisors have been found negligent in the areas of applicant screening and the training and 
supervision of employees. And such negligence is not only restricted to the security industry. 
Any organization and employee can be subject to negligence. A hospital, for example, may 
find itself in a lawsuit after a patient is sexually assaulted by an orderly because the human 
resources department did not check on the orderly’s background.
Do businesses and institutions in your locale provide reasonable protection for people 
on the premises? Should premises security lawsuits be permitted? Why or why not?
You Be the Judge*
On August 1, Ken Yates and his family arrived at their motel about 6:30 P.M. While he 
was unloading the car, Yates was approached, threatened at gunpoint, and told to hand 

Legal Theory of Premises Security Claims          77
over his money. He resisted and was shot in the ensuing scuffle. Even though there had 
been a security officer on duty, no one intervened to help Yates.
Yates sued the motel, claiming that his injuries were caused by management’s fail-
ure to provide an adequate number of trained security officers. Yates’s expert witness 
supported this claim. However, he conceded that even if the motel had two officers on 
duty, the incident might have occurred outside the officers’ direct observation. In addi-
tion, under cross-examination, the expert witness conceded that he had never developed 
or studied a security plan for a hotel or motel whose security needs required two security 
officers, so his expertise in the manner was limited.
The trial court dismissed the case, saying there was no evidence that having two 
officers on duty would have prevented the assault. Yates appealed, insisting that the inn 
could have done more to ensure his safety.
How did the appeals court rule?
Make your decision; then turn to the end of the chapter for the court’s decision.
*Reprinted with permission from Security Watch (January 15, 2000), Aspen Pub.
Business Justification versus Employees’ Expectation of Privacy
Technical advances have the potential to invade privacy, and there is the potential for 
abuse. The issues include employer monitoring of computer, Internet, e-mail, and tele-
phone use by employees and the application of closed-circuit television (CCTV) and 
Global Positioning System (GPS) technology.
The American Management Association reported that 73% of major U.S. com-
panies conduct some form of employee monitoring at work. Fifty-four percent of 
employers surveyed monitor Internet access and 38% monitor e-mail (Blotzer, 2000: 
29–31). Courts attempt to balance business justification against employees’ expectation 
of privacy.
When an employer electronically measures the productivity of an employee on 
a computer, stress can result and privacy issues can surface. Employers should com-
municate with employees about the monitoring and why it is being used (e.g., as a 
supervisory tool). For use of the Internet by employees, written policies should clearly 
state guidelines and the consequences of violations. Employers may choose to state that 
employees should assume there is no privacy, that they should reserve personal Internet 
access and e-mail for their home computers, and that the employer reserves the right to 
access employee e-mail.
Telephone monitoring is another thorny issue. Businesses are capable of 
generating reports on the number of calls made by telemarketers, and to improve 
quality, supervisors may listen to telephone conversations. Legal risks may surface. 
Essentially, an employer may listen to a telephone conversation when one party 
consents. It is best for an employer to notify employees of telephone monitoring and 
obtain their consent in writing. If a conversation becomes personal during monitor-
ing, the listening must stop. Since many states require “two-party” consent to moni-
tor, provide customers with the following message: “This call may be monitored for 
quality purposes.”
CCTV presents additional concerns. It is a widely used method of preventing 
crime and conducting investigations. Cameras may be placed overtly or covertly to 
observe people in public areas. Employers must avoid placing cameras in restrooms, 
dressing rooms, locker rooms, and areas containing an expectation of privacy.
Employers are increasingly installing GPS technology in company vehicles and 
other items to track movements to improve efficiency and protection (McShane, 
2005). GPS technology consists of satellites and receivers that allow people and 

78          LAW
devices to pinpoint their precise location on the earth. The application of this tech-
nology is broad, and as the cost drops, the number of uses is increasing. Portable GPS 
devices are used by people to help with navigation (e.g., new cars are being equipped 
with GPS systems). The military uses GPS to guide cruise missiles to prespecified 
targets.
Employers will strengthen their position when they inform employees of the types 
of monitoring conducted in the workplace, post signs, and ask employees to sign a con-
sent form containing policies. The enforcement of policies must be done in a uniform 
manner to avoid charges of unfair employment practices.
Zachary (2006) writes that employee use of e-mail and the Internet can expose 
employers to potential liability. Examples include confidential information inadver-
tently misdirected, libelous communications, and workplace jokes that were later used 
against an employer in hostile environment sexual harassment cases. Zachary notes 
that employers have a legally protected interest in controlling employee computer 
usage. She emphasizes the importance of policies on employee computer use and refers 
to the following New Jersey appellate court decision to support her contention. The 
following case summary is from Zachary. In Jane Doe, individually and as guardian ad 
litem for Jill Doe, a minor, v. XYC Corp., 887 A.2d 1156 (Super. Ct. N.J. 2005), the 
court held that an employer had a legal duty to report an employee’s viewing of child 
pornography to authorities and take effective action within the company to stop the 
activities. The employee was an accountant for the defendant company and worked 
in a cubicle that opened onto a hallway. People walking past the cubicle could see the 
employee’s computer screen. An IT manager reviewing computer log reports learned 
that the employee was visiting pornographic sites. Two IT managers told the employee 
to stop, but they did not inform their superiors. About a year later, the employee’s 
immediate supervisor told the senior network administrator about the recurring prob-
lem, and log reports again showed that the employee was visiting pornographic sites. 
A senior IT manager informed the senior network administrator that he was not to 
access any employee logs because it was against company policy. The IT manager was 
wrong. The company actually had a policy providing it with the right to review, audit, 
access, and disclose all e-mails over the company system. And, employees were to 
visit only Web sites of a business nature. Violators were to be reported to the human 
resources department for possible disciplinary action. The policy was to be signed by 
each employee.
In October 2000, the employee married the plaintiff, who had a 10-year-old 
daughter. A few months later, a coworker of the employee complained to management 
about the employee visiting pornographic sites at work, but no action was taken. At 
home, the employee began to secretly videotape and photograph the stepdaughter in 
seminude positions. At work, the problem continued, the employee was confronted, 
and the employee agreed to stop the viewing of pornography. Later, the employee trans-
mitted three photos of the stepdaughter over the Internet from his workplace. When 
photos of the stepdaughter were found in the company dumpster, a search warrant was 
executed at the employee’s workspace, and e-mails showed contact with pornographic 
sites and others with a similar interest. The employee was terminated and later arrested. 
Thereafter, the employee’s wife filed a suit for negligence against the employer for per-
mitting the employee to use, view, and download child pornography at work without 
reporting him.
The trial court ruled in favor of the company, noting that the company did 
not have a duty to investigate private communications of the employee and did not 
have control over the employee’s conduct at home. The appellate court disagreed. 
It found the following: there was no expectation of privacy on the part of the 
employee; the company was on notice of the activities (i.e., internal reports from 
coworkers); and it had a duty to investigate, report the activities to the authorities, 
and stop the activities. Under tort law, a company has a duty to control an employee 

Civil Justice Procedures          79
acting outside the scope of employment in order to prevent that employee from 
intentionally harming others. The case was remanded to the lower court to answer 
the question of whether the employer’s breach of duty was the proximate cause of 
harm to the stepdaughter.
What is your opinion of privacy issues, such as employer monitoring in the workplace?
Contract Law
A contract is an agreement between parties to do or to abstain from doing some act. The law 
may enforce the agreement by requiring that a party perform its obligation or pay money 
equivalent to the performance. These court requirements are known as remedies for breach 
of contract. Specific circumstances may create defenses for failure to perform contract stipula-
tions. Contracts may be express or implied. In an express contract, written or oral, the terms 
are stated in words. An implied contract is presumed by law to have been made from the 
circumstances and relations of the parties involved.
Several areas in the security and loss prevention field are relevant to the law of con-
tracts. The company that provides a service or system to a client company may be liable for 
breach of contract following a dispute. A contract usually states liabilities for each party. 
For instance, if a third party is harmed (e.g., a person illegally arrested on the premises by 
a private security officer from a contract service hired by a client company), the contract 
will commonly establish who is responsible and who is to have insurance for each risk. 
However, in third-party suits, courts have held a specific party liable even though the 
contract stipulated that another party was to be responsible in the matter. This principle is 
known as nondelegable duty.
In the common law principle of respondeat superior (i.e., let the master respond), an 
employer (master) is liable for injuries caused by an employee (servant). This is also called 
vicarious liability. Typically, the injured party will look beyond the employee, to the employer, 
for compensation for damages. Proper supervision and training can prevent litigation. 
Businesses typically pay for liability insurance to cover this risk.
Civil Justice Procedures
The following list describes civil procedures both before a trial and during a trial (Purpura, 
2003: 162–165). This list is a generalization. Civil procedures require much time, and the 
process can be expensive. Over 95% of civil (and criminal) cases are settled before reaching 
the trial stage. In other words, many civil cases are settled out of court. Many of the strate-
gies and procedures used in civil trials are also used in criminal trials, although the rules will 
vary. These procedures include discovery, motions, jury selection, questioning of witnesses 
in court by opposing attorneys, judge’s instruction to a jury, verdict, posttrial motions and 
many more.
 1. Plaintiff initiates lawsuit resulting from commission of tort, breach of contract, or 
other event.
 2. Defendant prepares defense after receiving summons (i.e., court order to appear in 
court) and complaint (i.e., a pleading of facts and claims filed in court). Failure to 
appear in court and defend a complaint can result in losing the lawsuit.
 3. Opposing attorneys confer and communicate issues, evidence, and settlement options. 
This may take place anytime throughout the proceedings.

80          LAW
 4. Discovery is the state in which opposing attorneys obtain all factual information (e.g., 
documents) in possession of the other. This stage helps to narrow the issues and saves 
time in dispensing justice.
 5. Motions filed in court. A motion is a request to a judge for a decision on an issue or 
to take action on an issue—for example, a motion to dismiss a case.
 6. Answer is the response to the lawsuit. The defendant files an answer with the court 
and includes denials and counterclaims.
 7. Pretrial conference is the stage in which opposing attorneys and the judge meet to 
work toward settlement or face trial.
 8. If a case proceeds to trial, opposing attorneys question potential jurors and a jury is 
selected.
 9. Opening statements are comments from opposing attorneys who explain facts to the 
judge and jury once the trial begins.
10. Presentation of plaintiff’s case is done by the plaintiff’s attorney. The plaintiff’s 
attorney presents evidence, such as witnesses and documents, to support allegations in 
the complaint.
11. Defendant’s motion for dismissal is the stage in which the defendant’s attorney 
moves for a dismissal if the attorney believes that the plaintiff’s case failed to prove 
allegations. If the judge denies the motion for dismissal, the trial continues.
12. Presentation of defendant’s case occurs when the defendant’s attorney presents 
evidence to disprove (rebut) the plaintiff’s case.
13. Plaintiff’s rebuttal occurs when the plaintiff’s attorney attempts to disprove the 
presentation of the defendant’s attorney (from the preceding stage).
14. Defendant’s rebuttal occurs when the defendant’s attorney attempts to disprove newer 
issues argued by the plaintiff’s attorney (from the preceding stage).
15. Motion for directed verdict means that either or both parties move for a directed 
verdict. In other words, the judge takes the decision away from the jury and 
informs them of what to decide. This situation results from a failure of evidence, 
overwhelming evidence, or the law applied to the facts favors one of the parties. If the 
motion is denied, the trial continues.
16. Closing arguments are summaries of the evidence presented to the jury by the 
plaintiff’s attorney and the defendant’s attorney.
17. Judge’s instructions are given to the jury.
18. Jury’s verdict occurs when the jury makes a decision.
19. Posttrial motions occur after a trial. An example is the motion for a new trial.
20. Judgment occurs when the judge declares which party prevailed at the trial (i.e., which 
party won the lawsuit) and the amount of recovery to be awarded.
Administrative Law
Administrative law is designed to ensure that as businesses seek profit, fairness and safety 
are maintained. Many federal and state agencies and executive departments influence loss 
prevention policies and programs. On the federal level, these include the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), 
and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), among others. (All three 
are discussed in various sections of this book.) Likewise, on the state level, similar bodies 
exist to regulate various activities such as the security industry. Administrative agencies are 
formed because legislative and executive branches of government typically lack the exper-
tise to regulate specialized areas. Therefore, independent agencies are formed that are less 
susceptible to direct political influence. Administrative agencies are government bodies that 
regulate various activities, make rules, conduct investigations, perform law-enforcement 
functions, issue penalties, and initiate criminal and civil litigation. Federal agencies docu-
ment rules in the Federal Register, published by the General Services Administration. State 
agency manuals perform a similar function. Local governments follow generally accepted 
fire and building codes.

Recordkeeping, Reporting, Inspections, and Searches
Although administrative agencies seek information from individuals and businesses to fulfill 
their mandated duties, recordkeeping is costly and a threat to privacy. Recordkeeping and 
reporting requirements also encounter constitutional issues as specified in the 5th Amendment 
of the Bill of Rights. This amendment contains the privilege against self-incrimination (i.e., a 
person cannot be compelled to give evidence against himself or herself). However, exceptions 
exist. For example, in the administrative context, a corporation may not claim the privilege. 
And, the privilege applies to communications that are testimonial in nature, not previously 
recorded records (Hall, 2006: 144–145).
Federal, state, and local administrative agency personnel visit business sites to conduct 
inspections and tests. An OSHA inspector may visit a workplace to ensure that safety regula-
tions are in force to protect employees. An Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) inspector 
may test ground water near a facility to check on the composition of the water. Local health 
departments check restaurants for compliance with health codes. Inspections face issues related 
to invasion of privacy, even through most administrative inspections do not focus on crimes, 
but rather administrative violations. Inspections and tests can be considered under the 4th 
Amendment, which prohibits government from conducting unreasonable searches and seizures 
and requires warrants to be issued based on probable cause. Courts recognize that administra-
tive inspections differ from searches related to criminal cases because of the following rationale: 
administrative inspections are not usually conducted to gather evidence for prosecution, but 
if prosecution is sought, the 4th Amendment applies; because society is so complex, the 4th 
Amendment must be relaxed to facilitate effective monitoring of compliance with administrative 
law; and the expectation of privacy at a business is lower than at a home. Furthermore, admin-
istrative inspections differ from administrative searches. The latter require 4th Amendment 
protections. To illustrate, an inspector may inspect the public area of a restaurant (e.g., dining 
room), but a demand to visit the owner’s office or closed kitchen results in a search because of a 
greater expectation of privacy. One type of exception to the 4th Amendment requirement occurs 
when consent to search is provided by the business. Another exception to 4th Amendment 
safeguards is closely regulated businesses (e.g., nuclear plants and firearms businesses). The 
legal standard for obtaining an administrative search warrant, also known as an inspection 
warrant, is lower than what is required to obtain a search warrant in a criminal case (Camera v. 
Municipal Court 387 US 523, 1967). Probable cause may not be required, as long as reasonable 
inspection standards were established by the legislature (Hall, 2006: 146–151).
Compliance Auditing
Compliance auditing pertains to a survey of whether an organization is conforming to gov-
ernment regulations. A business, for example, can prepare its own checklist and conduct its 
own audit, based on the requirements of regulatory laws, such as the posting of laws, licenses, 
certificates, and policies and plans. OSHA is one of many agencies that require such compli-
ance, subject to penalties, as described in a subsequent chapter.
Environmental protection is an especially important area of growing concern, and it 
serves as another example of the importance of compliance auditing. During the 1970s and 
1980s, federal, state, and local governments in the United States passed hundreds of environ-
mental statutes and regulations focusing on discharges to the air, land, and water; the manu-
facture, transport, storage, and disposal of goods and their by-products; and the location of 
facilities. The 1990s began the era of enforcement of these laws on the federal, state, and local 
levels. Consequently, U.S. industry spends tens of billions of dollars to comply with these laws 
and prevent severe criminal and civil penalties, imprisonment, and liability for personal inju-
ries and property damage. The EPA provides audit protocols (i.e., detailed checklists that can 
be customized to a particular facility) to guide industry in developing programs at facilities 
to evaluate their compliance with requirements under federal laws (Environmental Protection 
Agency, 2006). The American Society for Testing and Materials (2006) standard practices 
E1527 (WK7383 is a revision of E1527 for compliance with new Environmental Protection 
Agency regulations) and E1528 on environmental site assessment often are referred to as the 
Administrative Law          81

82          LAW
foundation for designing an environmental compliance audit. This type of audit often is used 
as part of a due diligence investigation when, for example, a company buys a plant and land. 
Also, it will help in the “innocent landowner defense” under federal environmental law. Due 
diligence is the attention and care legally expected in checking on the accuracy of information 
and omissions. Businesses that audit themselves and put forth efforts to reach compliance 
may receive a lighter sanction under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines and in certain states 
(Chilcutt, 1995: 41–43).
Do you believe our government is too tough on businesses? Why or why not?
Federal Sentencing Guidelines
The federal government views incarceration of corporate executives as a strong deterrent to 
 corporate crime. The Federal Sentencing Guidelines, which apply to all federal crimes, contain stiff 
sentencing provisions and strong economic penalties for corporate crimes such as  environmental 
violations, fraud, and safety and health violations. In reference to environmental crimes, the FBI 
has about 450 pending environmental crimes cases—roughly half of which are Clean Water Act 
cases. Most investigations are conducted jointly with other federal agencies, such as the EPA and 
the U.S. Coast Guard, as well as with state regulatory agencies (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
2003). Examples of sentences include the former chairman of a Georgia chemical company who 
was sentenced to 9 years in prison for exposing workers to  dangerous chemicals in the workplace. 
In another case, a Florida man received 13 years for dumping toxic waste into Tampa’s sewer 
system. The states and state judges are taking environmental crimes more seriously (Kenworthy 
2000: 3A). Examples of cases involving accounting fraud are explained in a later chapter.
The sentencing guidelines are a judicial strategy to encourage corporations to enforce 
compliance with legal requirements and avert ignorance of the law throughout a corporation. 
Communications and training are essential to corporate compliance programs. The guide-
lines themselves state the importance of corporate programs exercising due diligence (i.e., 
attention and care) in preventing, detecting, and reporting criminal conduct of employees 
and other agents—customary duties of security programs. Research reveals that many com-
panies had compliance programs in place when their problems occurred, but the programs 
failed to penetrate the culture. Consequently, an effective ethics program must embrace the 
entire corporation (Edwards and Goodell, 1994: 1).
Sentencing is controversial and sentences vary. Lynch (2005) writes that although the 
6th Amendment provides a right to a jury trial, the reality of the criminal justice system is 
that about 97% of defendants sentenced in federal court enter into plea-bargaining with 
prosecutor, defense attorney, and judge. He argues that we have a system of charge and 
sentence bargaining, and criticizes the common practice of prosecutors filing more-serious 
charges against defendants to exert leverage to induce a guilty plea to reduced charges. 
Lynch emphasizes that in the U.S. Supreme Court landmark ruling in United States v. Booker 
(2005) changes may occur to improve sentencing. This decision declared the federal sentenc-
ing guidelines to be advisory only and not legally binding standards. A judge cannot be over-
ruled simply for a sentence that is inconsistent with the guidelines. The ruling weakens the 
U.S. Sentencing Commission that was established to guide judges in their sentencing.
What is your opinion of the impact of the U.S. Supreme Court landmark ruling in 
United States v. Booker (2005) on the sentencing of federal offenders?

Administrative Law          83
A Comprehensive Compliance Program
Whether public or private, organizations are required to maintain corporate compliance 
programs if they seek the benefit of prosecutorial discretion from a U.S. attorney and 
sentencing mitigation from a U.S. District Court (Maatman, 2004). Because compli-
ance is such a serious issue, seven recommendations are presented here that can assist a 
corporation in proving it has taken steps to comply with laws. These recommendations 
can apply to numerous compliance programs.
1. Ensure that line management is attentive to regulatory compliance. Appoint one 
or more compliance officers to manage the program.
2. Communicate relevant policies, procedures, and standards to all employees.
3. Audit and monitor all relevant activities.
4. Establish a training program for all employees.
5. Establish an incentive program.
6. Avoid delegating authority to individuals that the organization should have 
known are likely to commit illegal acts. Discipline wrongdoers.
7. Evaluate the whole effort through an outside expert.
Impact of Legislation on Private Security Operations
ASIS International–funded research showed that legislation directly impacts not only 
organizations in general, but also private security operations (Collins et al., 2005). The top 
three acts cited in this research as having the most impact on security policies and pro-
cedures were the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), 
the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002, and the USA Patriot Act of 2001. The Patriot 
Act and the USA Patriot Improvement and Reauthorization Act of 2005 are covered 
later in this book. HIPPA, SOX, and the Financial Modernization Act of 1999 are 
explained here.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA): HIPPA is a 
law designed to improve healthcare services delivery, lower costs by reducing paper records 
and claims, enhance electronic transmission of documents, secure medical data and patient 
information, prevent errors in the healthcare system, and transfer funds more securely. 
IT systems play a major role in fostering these activities. The act establishes compliance 
rules to reach the objectives of this legislation. The Department of Health and Human 
Services is the regulatory agency for this act, and it issues various standards, such as those 
for information security. Typical of legislation, many questions remain unanswered and 
answers often develop from litigation and case law. For example, how is an organization to 
know when security measures are reasonable under the risk analysis and risk management 
sections of the law, and how to answer law enforcement demands for patient information 
protected by privacy laws.
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002: SOX was enacted following several high-
profile accounting scandals. The act is administered by the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, a federal government administrative agency. The legislation seeks to 
prevent fraud and impacts the processes and accountability for financial reporting 
in publicly traded U.S. companies. SOX makes executives responsible for establish-
ing, evaluating, and monitoring the effectiveness of internal controls over financial 
and operational processes. Senior executives must sign an attestation that they are 
responsible and that the internal controls meet the requirements of SOX. Some SOX 
compliance provisions are becoming standard operating procedure for all businesses, 
besides publicly held ones. Specifics of the law include using accounting controls, 
identifying how companies report financial results and disclose executive compen-
sation, holding company executives and external auditors directly accountable for 

84          LAW
the accuracy of financial reports, and protecting employees who blow the whistle 
on suspected fraud. Security and audit departments in corporations have become 
involved with SOX because these departments investigate internal fraud. Chapter 11 
elaborates on SOX.
Financial Modernization Act of 1999: This act, also known as the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act or GLB, includes provisions to ensure security and confidentiality of customer 
financial information held by financial institutions. The Federal Trade Commission, an 
administrative agency, is the primary administrator of GLB. The act requires an assess-
ment of internal and external risks and the sufficiency of existing security. The GLB 
Act applies to “financial institutions,” which include banks, securities firms, insurance 
companies, and many other businesses providing financial products and services to 
consumers. The services include lending, servicing consumer loans, transferring or safe-
guarding money, reporting credit, preparing individual tax returns, providing financial 
advice or credit counseling, providing residential real estate settlement services, collect-
ing consumer debts, and many other activities. IT security practitioners in particular are 
involved in the compliance requirements of GLB.
Labor Law
The NLRB controls relations between management and labor. It is essential that management 
and loss prevention practitioners be familiar with labor laws to avert charges of unfair labor 
practices. Surveillance and investigation of union activities are violations of the National 
Labor Relations Act (NLRA), which makes it an unfair labor practice to interfere with, 
restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise of the rights to self-organize, to assist labor 
organizations, and to bargain collectively through representatives. One type of surveillance, 
photographing activities of striking workers, is unlawful unless there is a legitimate purpose, 
such as gathering evidence for the prosecution of criminal acts (e.g., assault or destruction of 
property). In one case, a security service company took 60,000 pictures and collected thou-
sands of hours of video that were used in court against strikers, who ended up owing $64 
million in fines (Sunoo, 1995: 58).
Care must be exercised when instituting loss prevention strategies during management-
labor tension. Precautions (e.g., additional officers, CCTV) to protect company property may 
be construed as interference with union activities. For example, courts have declared illegal 
the observance by officers of who is going in and out of union meetings. Also, it has been held 
that even “creating the impression” of surveillance (e.g., management implying that surveil-
lance is taking place) is illegal. The NLRB found that aiming CCTV on a company building in 
which a union meeting was held created the impression of surveillance. Undercover investiga-
tions that conduct labor surveillance are illegal.
The National Labor Relations Board periodically changes its position on recurring and 
important issues for both unionized and nonunion employers. The following summaries are 
from the work of Bloom and Bryant (2005: 84–92) and explain how NLRB decisions guide 
employers. As a foundation, if an employer maintains an unlawful rule, even if it is not 
enforced, the NLRB views the rule as an unfair labor practice.
The NLRB has found that rules prohibiting “loud, abusive or foul language” or “using 
abusive or threatening language to anyone on company premises” are unlawful as written. 
The board’s justification for this view is that without further definitions by the employer 
of “abusive or foul language,” the rules could reasonably be interpreted by employees as 
prohibiting lawful activity. The NLRB reversed direction on this issue in Lutheran Heritage 
Village-Livonia (NLRB, No. 75, 2004). The board reasoned that an employer has a right to 
maintain order and a “civil and decent workplace.” The board also found no support for 
the contention that the rule would prohibit lawful union activity. In another rule of conduct 
in the same case, the NLRB found no problem with a rule prohibiting “harassment of other 
employees, supervisors, and any other individuals in any way.”

Criminal Justice Procedures          85
On another issue impacting all employers, regardless of the presence of a union, the 
NLRB has ruled that nonunion employees do not have the right to have a representative pres-
ent during an interview that might lead to disciplinary action. This is a current right of union-
ized employees. The board found that the so-called Weingarten rights of unionized employees 
do not apply to employees not represented by a union (IBM Corporation, NLRB, No. 148, 
2004). This case overruled a 2000 decision by the board and the decision is the fourth time in 
the past 23 years that the board has altered its position on this issue. The issue of Weingarten 
rights originated in 1975, when the U.S. Supreme Court (NLRB v. J. Weingarten Inc., No. 
251, 1975) upheld a decision by the NLRB that unionized employees have a legal right to 
insist on union representation during an investigatory interview conducted by their employer, 
provided that the employee reasonably believes that the interview might result in disciplinary 
action. The U.S. Supreme Court explained that this right arises from federal labor laws that 
are a “guarantee of the right of employees to act in concert for mutual aid and protection.” 
The right is limited to situations when an employee specifically requests representation. An 
employer is not required to state this right to employees. Since this decision, the NLRB has 
frequently changed its position on whether Weingarten rights apply to employees who are 
not unionized.
Another reversal occurred in Oakwood Care Center, NLRB, No. 75, 2004. This case 
impacts security industry employers that either provide or use temporary security staff to 
supplement permanent workers. In an earlier decision (M. B. Sturgis, Inc., NLRB No. 1298, 
2000), the board approved temporary workers hired through a staffing company to be 
included along with a company’s nonunion regular workers in voting for union representa-
tion. In the Oakwood ruling, union organizers are prohibited from conducting a union elec-
tion with a mix of employees unless both employers agree that the union can include both 
types of workers.
Criminal Justice Procedures
The following list describes procedural law for criminal cases. Because jurisdictional proce-
dures vary, a generalization is presented here.
 1. The purpose of an arrest is to bring a person into the criminal justice system so that 
he or she may be held to answer criminal charges.
 2. A citation frequently is used by public police instead of a formal arrest for less 
serious offenses (e.g., traffic violations). If the conditions set forth in the citation are 
not followed, a magistrate of the appropriate court will issue a misdemeanor arrest 
warrant.
 3. All arrests must be based on probable cause, which is stated in arrest warrants. 
Probable cause is reasonable grounds to justify legal action, more than mere suspicion. 
Police officers, security officers, and able witnesses and victims typically provide the 
foundation of probable cause through their observations of offenders.
 4. Booking takes place when an arrestee is taken to a police department or jail so that a 
record can be made of the person’s name, the date, time, location of offense, charge, 
and arresting officer’s name. Fingerprinting and a photograph are part of the booking 
process.
 5. Because our system of justice has a high regard for civil liberties as expressed in the 
Bill of Rights, the accused is informed of his or her Miranda rights, by public police, 
prior to questioning and when the subject is in custody.
 6. After booking, and without unnecessary delay, the accused is taken before a 
magistrate for the initial appearance. At this appearance, the magistrate has the 
responsibility of informing the accused of constitutional rights, stating the charge, and 
setting bail (if necessary).
 7. Also after booking, the arresting officer will meet with the prosecutor, or a 
representative, to review evidence. A decision is made whether to continue 
legal action or to drop the case. A case may be dropped by the prosecutor for 

86          LAW
insufficient evidence or because the defendant is suffering from a problem better 
handled by a social service agency.
 8. The prosecutor prepares an “information” when prosecution is initiated. It cites the 
defendant’s name and the charge and is signed by the complainant (e.g., the person 
who witnessed the crime). Then an arrest warrant is prepared by the proper judicial 
officer. The defendant already may be in custody at this point.
 9. At the initial appearance, the magistrate will inform the defendant about the right 
to have a preliminary hearing. The defendant and the defense attorney make this 
decision. This hearing is used to determine if probable cause exists for a trial. The 
courtroom participants in a preliminary hearing are a judge, defendant, defense 
attorney, and prosecutor. The prosecutor has the “burden of proof.” Witnesses may be 
called by the prosecutor to testify.
10. Federal law and the laws of more than half the states require that probable cause to 
hold a person for trial must result from grand jury action. The 5th Amendment of 
the Bill of Rights states such a requirement. When probable cause is established in an 
action ordered by a judge or prosecutor, the grand jury will return an “indictment” or 
“true bill” against the accused. A “presentment” results from an investigation initiated 
by a grand jury establishing probable cause. Based on the indictment or presentment, 
an arrest warrant is issued.
11. At an arraignment the accused enters a plea to the charges. The four plea options 
are guilty, not guilty, nolo contendere (no contest), and not guilty by reason of 
insanity.
12. Few defendants reach the trial stage. Plea bargaining is an indispensable method to 
clear crowded court dockets. Essentially, it means that the prosecutor and defense 
attorney have worked out an agreement whereby the prosecutor reduces the charge 
in exchange for a guilty plea. Charges also may be dropped if the accused becomes a 
witness in another case.
13. Pretrial motions can be entered by the defense attorney prior to entering a plea at 
arraignment. Some examples are a “motion to quash” an indictment or information 
because the grand jury was improperly selected; a “continuance” requested by the 
defense attorney because more time is needed to prepare the case; or a “change of 
venue” requested when pretrial publicity is harmful to the defendant’s case and the 
defense hopes to locate the trial in another jurisdiction so that an impartial jury is 
more likely to be selected.
14. The accused is tried by the court (judge) or a jury. The system of justice is 
basically adversarial, involving opponents. This is apparent in a trial, where the 
prosecutor and defense attorney make brief opening statements to the jury. The 
prosecutor then presents evidence. Witnesses are called to the stand to testify; 
they go through direct examination by the prosecutor, followed by defense cross-
examination. The prosecutor attempts to show the defendant’s guilt “beyond 
a reasonable doubt.” The defense attorney strives to discredit the evidence. 
Redirect examination rebuilds evidence discredited by cross-examination. Recross-
examination may follow. After the prosecutor presents all the evidence, the defense 
attorney may move for acquittal. This motion commonly is overruled by the judge. 
Then the defense attorney presents evidence. Defense evidence undergoes direct 
and redirect examination by the defense and cross- and recross-examination by the 
prosecutor.
15. Next, the judge will “charge the jury,” which means that the jury is briefed by 
the judge on the charge and how a verdict is to be reached based on the evidence. 
In certain states, juries have a responsibility for recommending a sentence after a 
guilty verdict; the judge will brief the jury on this issue. Closing arguments are then 
presented by opposing attorneys.
16. The jury retires to the deliberation room; a verdict follows. A not guilty verdict 
signifies release for the defendant. A guilty verdict leads to sentencing. Motions and 
appeals may be initiated after the sentence.

Criminal Justice Procedures          87
How Much Power is in the Hands of Private Security Officers?
Can they
• Make an arrest without probable cause?
• Arrest for a felony?
• Arrest for a misdemeanor?
• Use force to complete an arrest?
• Search an arrestee following an arrest?
• Question a suspect or arrestee without public police being present?
• Be barred from using seized evidence as the police are under the exclusionary rule?
These questions are answered in the nearby paragraphs.
Arrest Law
Because our justice system places a high value on the rights of the individual citizen, private 
security and public police personnel cannot simply arrest, search, question, and confine a 
person by whim. A consideration of individual rights is an important factor. The Bill of Rights 
of the U.S. Constitution affords citizens numerous protections against government. The 4th 
and 5th Amendments of the Bill of Rights demonstrate how individual rights are safeguarded 
during criminal investigations.
Amendment IV—The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, 
papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be vio-
lated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath 
or affirmation; and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the per-
son or things to be seized.
 Amendment V—… nor shall [any person] be compelled in any criminal case to 
be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without 
due process of law.
The 6th, 8th, and 14th Amendments are other important amendments frequently asso-
ciated with our criminal justice process. Briefly, the 6th Amendment pertains to the right to 
trial by jury and assistance of counsel. The 8th Amendment states that “excessive bail shall 
not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.” 
The 14th Amendment bars states from depriving any person of due process of law or equal 
protection of the laws.
The 4th Amendment stipulates guidelines for the issuance of warrants. Public police 
obtain arrest and search warrants from an impartial judicial officer. Sometimes immediate 
action (e.g., chasing a bank robber) does not permit time to obtain warrants before arrest and 
search. In such a case, an arrest warrant is obtained as soon as possible. Private security should 
contact public police for assistance in securing warrants and in apprehending suspects.
A knowledge of arrest powers is essential for those likely to exercise this authority. 
These powers differ from state to state and depend on the statutory authority of the type of 
individual involved. Generally, public police officers have the greatest arrest powers. They 
also are protected from civil liability for false arrest, as long as they had probable cause that 
the crime was committed. Those in the private sector usually have arrest powers equal to 
citizen’s arrest powers, which mean that they are liable for false arrest if a crime was not, in 
fact, committed—regardless of the reasonableness of their belief. An exception is apparent if 
state statutes point out that security personnel have arrest powers equal to public police only 
on the protected property. If private sector personnel are deputized or given a special con-
stabulary commission, their arrest powers are likely to equal those of public police.

88          LAW
Whoever makes an arrest must have the legal authority to do so. Furthermore, the 
distinction between felonies and misdemeanors, for those making arrests, is of tremendous 
importance. Generally, public police can arrest someone for a felony or a misdemeanor com-
mitted in his or her view; the viewing amounts to probable cause. Arrest for a felony not seen 
by public police is lawful with probable cause (e.g., a radio broadcast describing a robber). 
Arrest for a misdemeanor not seen by public police generally is unlawful; a warrant is needed 
based on probable cause. There are exceptions to this misdemeanor rule; for example, public 
police can arrest in domestic violence cases or cases of driving under the influence, when the 
offense is fresh although not observed by police. On the other hand, private security personnel 
have fewer powers of arrest (equal to citizen’s arrest powers). Basically, citizen arrest powers 
permit felony arrests based on probable cause but prohibit misdemeanor arrests.
A serious situation exists when, for example, a private security officer arrests and 
charges a person for a felony when in fact the offense was a misdemeanor and the jurisdic-
tion does not grant security officers such misdemeanor arrest power. Many employers in the 
private sector are so fearful of an illegal arrest and subsequent legal action that they prohibit 
their officers from making arrests without supervisory approval. It is imperative that private 
sector personnel know state arrest law; proper training is a necessity.
Force
During the exercise of arrest powers, force may be necessary. The key criterion is reasonable 
force. This means force should be no more than what is reasonably necessary to carry out 
legitimate authority. If an arrestee struggles to escape but is subdued to the ground and stops 
resisting, it would be unreasonable for the arrestor to strike the arrestee. Deadly force is 
reserved for life-threatening situations, never to defend property. Unreasonable force can lead 
to difficulties in prosecuting a case, as well as civil and criminal litigation.
Searches
Ordinarily, public police conduct a search of an arrestee right after an arrest. This has been 
consistently upheld by courts for the protection of the officer who may be harmed by a con-
cealed weapon. However, evidence obtained through an unreasonable search and seizure is 
not admissible in court; this is known as the exclusionary rule.
The 4th Amendment prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures applies 
only to government action. Searches by private citizens, including security officers, even if 
“unreasonable,” are therefore not “unconstitutional” and the exclusionary rule does not 
apply, as ruled in Burdeau v. McDowell, 256 US 465, 1921 (Inbau, et al., 1996: 54; Nemeth, 
2005: 83–104). At the same time, the law of searches by private security officers is not clear 
and varies widely. Even though private security may not be restrained by the 4th Amendment, 
a lawsuit may result following a search. A search is valid when consent is given and where, in 
a retail environment, a shoplifting statute permits the retrieval of merchandise. A search for 
weapons following an arrest may be justified through common law, which states that citizens 
have the right of self-defense. The recovery of stolen goods as the basis for a search is typi-
cally forbidden, except in some state shoplifting statutes. Whenever possible, private security 
personnel should let public police conduct searches in order to transfer potential liability.
Call It “Inspection,” Not “Search and Seizure”
Norman M. Spain (1996: 4–7), an authority on legal issues in security, states that pri-
vate security officers generally are not bound by constitutional constraints of search 
and seizure as are public police, unless they are “tainted by the color of law”—that is, 
jointly working with public police. Spain favors the term inspection instead of search 
for private security, because the 4th Amendment does not apply in most private set-
tings. He cites various targets for inspections in private settings: a locker, a vehicle 
entering or leaving a facility, or the belongings of an employee.

Criminal Justice Procedures          89
  Spain recommends a formal inspection policy that would be backed by common 
law—employers have the right to take reasonable measures to protect their property 
against theft. All parties (e.g., employees, contractors, and visitors) should be given notice 
through, for example, signs and publications. The policy should have four components:
1. A formal statement that the company reserves the right to inspect
2. Illustrations of types of inspections
3. A list of items that employees should not have in their possession (e.g., illegal 
drugs, weapons, company property removed without authorization)
4. A statement of penalties, including those for not cooperating
Spain cautions that a “pat-down” of a person’s body or inspections of pockets may 
result in a civil action alleging invasion of privacy, unless the site requires intense security.
Questioning
An important clause of the 5th Amendment states that a person cannot be compelled in any 
criminal case to be a witness against himself or herself. Therefore, what constitutional protec-
tions does a suspect have on being approached by an investigator for questioning? Here again, 
the law differs with respect to public and private sector investigations.
A suspect that is in custody and about to be questioned about a crime by public police 
must be advised of
1. The right to remain silent
2. The fact that statements can be used against the person in a court of law
3. The right to an attorney, even if the person has no money
4. The right to stop answering questions
These rights, known as the Miranda warnings, evolved out of the famous 1966 U.S. Supreme 
Court case known as Miranda v. Arizona. If these rights are not read to a person (by public police) 
before questioning, statements or a confession will not be admissible as evidence in court.
Are private security personnel required to read a subject the Miranda warnings prior to 
questioning? The U.S. Supreme Court has not yet required the reading. Many private sector 
investigators read suspects the Miranda warnings anyway, to strengthen their case. Any type of 
coercion or trick during questioning is prohibited by private security as well as public police. 
A voluntary confession by a suspect is in the best interest of public and private investigators. If 
security personnel are working jointly with public police (as in a cooperative protection effort), 
or if a police officer is working part-time in security, then the warnings should be read.
Another topic concerning questioning of subjects pertains to disciplinary hearings. As 
written earlier, the NLRB extends to union employees the right of representation during an 
interview that might lead to disciplinary action. This is not a right of nonunion employees.
Search the Web
Here is a list of general-purpose Web sites pertaining to this chapter:
 Cornell Law School: www.law.cornell.edu/
 Federal Register: www.gpoaccess.gov/fr/index.html
 Lawyers and the Law: http://lawyers.com
 Resource on law: http://www.lexisone.com/legalresearch/legalguide/practice_areas/
practice_areas_fa.htm
 Washburn University School of Law: www.washlaw.edu

90          LAW
Case Problems
4A. You are a loss prevention officer with three years of experience and a newly 
acquired college degree. The plant manager of loss prevention has selected you for 
a special assignment: design and conduct an eight-hour training program on law 
for company loss prevention (security) officers. The grapevine indicates that success 
on this project could lead to a promotion to training officer, a position vacant at 
this time. You are required to (1) formulate an outline of topics to be covered and 
the hours for each topic, (2) justify in one to three sentences why each topic is 
important, and (3) prepare an examination of 10 (or 20) questions.
4B. You are a member of a jury on a civil case involving the question of negligent 
security. In this case, a young man was killed by a stray bullet at a restaurant 
parking lot at night during the weekend as he approached a group of rowdy 
people about to fight. The restaurant had a history of three gun incidents prior 
to the murder: one month earlier a shot was fired into the restaurant, without 
injury; three months earlier police arrested a subject for assault in the parking 
lot and confiscated a pistol; and five months earlier police found a revolver in 
the bushes in the parking lot following an arrest for public intoxication. Each 
incident occurred at night during the weekend. Following these three incidents, the 
restaurant maintained the same level of security on the premises—good lighting 
and training employees to call police when a crime occurred. Does the business 
owe a duty to provide a safe environment to those who enter the premises? Did 
the restaurant breach that duty? If the duty was breached, was it the proximate 
cause of the criminal act and the victimization? Is the restaurant negligent? Why 
or why not?
4C. As a security manager at a chemical plant, you learn that a plant executive is 
receiving kickbacks while dealing with a shady toxic disposal service company as 
a contractor for the plant. Two months earlier you learned from another source 
the same information, and you reported your investigative findings to your 
superior, who stated that he would handle the situation. You are wondering why 
the same executive is in the same job and the same shady toxic disposal service 
company is still a contractor for your employer. What do you do at this point and 
why?
4D. Research and prepare a report on the laws of arrest and search and seizure in your 
state for citizens, private security officers, private detectives, and public police.
4E. Create, in writing, situations in which each of the preceding types of individuals 
in case problem 4D can make a legal arrest. In each of the situations you create, 
describe appropriate search and seizure guidelines.
The rapid change brought on by computers and the Internet has been characterized as 
a “Wild West” legal environment (Heiser, 2000: 24). Security specialists, whether involved 
in IT, physical security, or other areas, should be knowledgeable of legal trends and issues 
pertaining to cyberlaw. What follows here are helpful Web sites.
U.S. Department of Justice Cybercrime (http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/
cybercrime/searching.html). This site contains a broad array of topics. The list includes 
federal codes related to cybercrime; how to report Internet-related crime; search and 
seizure of computers and electronic evidence; computer intrusion cases; intellec-
tual property crime; economic espionage; privacy issues; and manuals, reports, and 
 documents.
David Loundy’s E-Law (http://www.loundy.com/). This is a personal site of an 
attorney and cyberlaw professor who is a leader in electronic law. The site contains a 
long list of links to other legal Web sites and sites helpful to security in general.

References          91
The Decision for “You Be the Judge”
The appeals court said the trial court acted properly. Yates had failed to show that another 
security officer would have prevented the assault. [Walsh v. Ramada Franchise Systems, Inc. 
et al., No. 98–5040, US Ct. of App. for the 6th Circ., 1999 US App. Lexis 11281.] Comment: 
What methods do you use to arrive at staffing levels for your officers? How would you defend 
those methods in court?
The motel was lucky; Yates’s expert failed to show that more security officers would 
have been more effective. If the expert had testified that similarly sized and located motels 
used more security officers, the motel would have been in the difficult position of defending 
its use of only one officer.
Benchmarking your practices against industry norms and against companies in your 
neighborhood is an excellent way to assess whether your company is doing enough to secure 
your grounds.
References
American Society for Testing and Materials. (2006). “Standards.” www.astm.org, retrieved 
June 13, 2006.
Bloom, H., and Bryant, M. (2005). “Labor Law’s Changing Tides.” Security Management, 
49 (August).
Blotzer, M. (2000). “Privacy in the Digital Age.” Occupational Hazards 62 (July).
Chilcutt, D. (1995). “Making Sense of Environmental Compliance.” Risk Management 
(November).
Collins, P., et al. (2005). “The ASIS Foundation Security Report: Scope and Emerging 
Trends.” Alexandria, VA: ASIS, International.
Edwards, G., and Goodell, R. (1994). “Three Years Later: A Look at the Effectiveness of 
Sentencing Guidelines.” Ethics Journal (Fall-Winter).
Environmental Protection Agency. (2006). “Compliance Incentives and Auditing.” 
http://www.epa.gov/compliance/incentives/auditing/protocol.html, retrieved June 17, 
2006.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2003). “Facts and Figures 2003, Environmental Crimes.” 
http://www.fbi.gov/libref/factsfigure/enviro.htm, retrieved June 17, 2006.
Gordon, C., and Brill, W. (1996). “The Expanded Role of Crime Prevention Through 
Environmental Design in Premises Liability” (April). Washington, DC: National Institute 
of Justice.
Hall, D. (2006). Administrative Law: Bureaucracy in a Democracy, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Heiser, J. (2000). “You’ll Hear From My Lawyer.” Information Security, 3 (October).
Inbau, F., Farber, B. and Arnold, D. (1996). Protective Security Law, 2nd ed. Boston: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Kaminsky, A. (1995). A Complete Guide to Premises Security Litigation. Chicago, IL: 
American Bar Association.
Kenworthy, T. (2000). “It’s a New World: Polluters Go to Prison.” USA Today (April 21).
Lynch, T. (2005). “Changing of the Gavel.” Legal Times (January 24).
Maatman, G. (2004). “Ignoring Federal Sentencing Guidelines Is Risky: New Document Sets 
Criteria for Corporate Ethics and Compliance Programs.” National Underwriter Property 
& Casualty-Risk & Benefits Management, 108 (November 15).
McShane, L. (2005). “GPS Technology in Workplaces Raises Privacy Concerns.” Associated 
Press (November 18).
Nemeth, C. (2005). Private Security and the Law. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-
Heinemann.
Neubauer, D. (2005). America’s Courts and the Criminal Justice System, 8th Ed. Belmont, 
CA: Thomas Wadsworth.

92          LAW
Purpura, P. (1997). Criminal Justice: An Introduction. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Purpura, P. (2003). The Security Handbook, 2nd Ed. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Spain, N. (1996). “Call It ‘Inspection’ (Not ‘Search and Seizure’).” Security Management 
Bulletin (May 10).
Sunoo, B. (1995). “Managing Strikes, Minimizing Loss.” Personnel Journal (January).
Zachary, M. (2006). “Labor Law: New Source of Liability for Employee Internet Use.” 
Supervision, 67 (June).

KEY TERMS
• internal relations
• external relations
• customer driven
• value added
• marketing
• market segmentation
• target marketing
• return on investment
• intranet
• designated spokesperson
• prosecution threshold
93
Internal and External 
Relations
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Define internal and external relations.
2. Explain methods of marketing security and the value of marketing.
3. Discuss internal relations.
4. Explain how an intranet and e-mail can assist security.
5. Discuss external relations.
6. Explain how to work with the media.
7. Debate the issues of prosecution.
8. Debate the issues of loss prevention attire.
5
Internal and External Relations
This chapter explains why it is so important to recruit people and organizations to assist with 
security and loss prevention efforts. With practitioners being asked to handle increasingly complex 
problems, often with limited resources, it is vital that all possible sources of assistance be solicited. 
Strategies are delineated here for improving relations between the loss prevention department and 
those groups that loss prevention serves and works with in reducing losses. Internal relations refer 
to cooperative efforts with individuals and groups within an organization that a loss prevention 
department serves. External relations refer to cooperative efforts with external individuals and 
groups that assist in loss prevention objectives.
In reference to examples for the internal relations chart (clockwise, Figure 5-1), upper 
management dictates loss prevention goals. Information technology (IT) and loss prevention 
departments are increasingly working closer together because of threats and hazards facing 

94          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS
IT systems. A risk management department in an organization can provide the foundation 
for prioritizing risks and developing broad strategies to deal with risks. Both the human 
resources and loss prevention departments should coordinate activities relevant to applicant 
screening and workplace violence. When labor problems (e.g., unrest, strike) are anticipated, 
losses can be minimized through cooperative efforts. In addition, labor union contracts and 
labor law stipulate limitations on loss prevention activities (e.g., the questioning of suspect 
employees). Loss prevention practitioners are wise to tune in on feedback and criticism from 
formal and informal employee groups. By listening to and satisfying employee needs (e.g., 
clean restrooms, a well-run cafeteria, and recreational programs), with other departments, an 
organization can reduce losses. When new facilities are being planned, architects, engineers, 
and loss prevention practitioners can jointly design prevention strategies into the plan and 
thereby save money by not having to install equipment after construction is completed. Trade 
secrets and other proprietary information must be under strict security, especially in research 
and development. Accountants and auditors can help create cooperative strategies against 
losses. Furthermore, the loss prevention manager should be given an opportunity to review 
their findings. At various times, a loss prevention department may require legal assistance. 
Because loss prevention personnel are the backbone of the program, the manager should do 
everything possible (e.g., professional development, give praise and pay raises, and institute 
participatory management) to satisfy their needs. Good rapport with the external relations 
department ensures that appropriate security and loss prevention information is released to 
outsiders and that this information is in the best interest of the organization. Communicating 
with management in general is vital for many reasons. For instance, the objectives of the 
loss prevention program can be transmitted to all employees via meetings with management. 
Feedback from management also assists in planning loss prevention strategies that do not 
hinder productivity or profit.
In reference to examples for the external relations chart (clockwise, Figure 5-2, begin-
ning with law enforcement agencies), public safety agencies are an essential ingredient of 
private sector loss prevention programs. Good communications and cooperation are impor-
tant in case crimes occur or a disaster strikes. Business continuity planning should consider 
a variety of resources in the community (e.g., police, fire, medical). Educational institutions 
can provide expertise, research assistance, and potential employees. The loss prevention 
manager may want to serve on a college advisory committee or speak to classes to spread 
the word about loss prevention. When possible, the news media should be recruited to aid in 
loss prevention objectives. Other businesses and loss prevention peers with similar problems 
FIGURE 5-1 Internal relations.
Upper management
Human Resources
department
Labor union
Employee informal
groups
Employee formal
groups
New facilities planners
Research and development
Accountants and internal
auditors
Legal department
Loss prevention
employees
External relations department
Management in general
Loss Prevention
Program
IT
Risk management

Internal and External Relations         95
can be a good source of ideas. Insurance companies can provide information to improve 
prevention strategies while reducing premiums. Independent auditors and certified public 
accountants can point out weaknesses in the loss prevention program to protect against 
fraud and other crimes. When people (e.g., customers) visit the premises, they should not 
be seriously inconvenienced by loss prevention systems (e.g., access controls), but at the 
same time, losses must be prevented. Friendly dialogue and cooperative efforts should be 
emphasized when government administrative agencies are involved in a loss prevention 
program. To enhance all the preceding relations, the security and loss prevention practitio-
ner is wise to emphasize two-way  communication and understanding, and partnering for 
mutual benefits.
Benefits of Good Relations
The following are reasons why good internal and external relations are important to a loss 
prevention program. Good relations
 1. Build respect for the loss prevention department, its objectives, and its personnel.
 2. Reinforce compliance with policies and procedures to prevent losses.
 3. Foster assistance with loss prevention activities, such as programs and investigations.
 4.  Provide a united front against vulnerabilities, extend the impact of strategies, and 
save money.
 5. Educate employees, community residents, and others.
 6. Improve understanding of complex security problems.
 7. Reduce rumors and false information.
 8. Improve understanding of the loss prevention program.
 9. Stimulate consciousness-raising relevant to loss prevention.
10. Make the loss prevention job easier.
Law enforcement
agencies
Emergency
medical service
Emergency
management
Rescue squad
Hospitals
Educational
institutions
News media
Other
businesses
Loss prevention peers
and organizations
Insurance companies
Independent auditors
and CPAs
Customers, clients,
visitors, vendors,
truckdrivers, and
contractors
Government
administrative
agencies
Loss Prevention
Program
Fire department
FIGURE 5-2 External relations.
Good internal and external relations enhance the effectiveness of security and loss pre-
vention programs.

96          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS
Internal Relations
Customer-Driven Security and Loss Prevention Programs
Like well-managed companies, security and loss prevention programs should be customer 
driven through constant contact with customers who provide feedback and direction for 
improvements in performance. Customers should be made aware that they are receiving 
value from the services provided. Corporations often use the term value added. It means that 
all corporate departments must prove their value to the business by translating expenditures 
into bottom-line impact. Security departments must go beyond preparing a report of security 
accomplishments. Examples are as follows: The investment in training security officers in first 
aid and CPR provided life-saving assistance in the past 12 months to three employees and one 
customer. The hiring of a bad check specialist recovered three times her salary. The expendi-
tures for workers’ compensation fraud investigations saved hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
The investment in security technology saved personnel costs.
Marketing
Marketing consists of researching a target market and the needs of customers and developing 
products and services to be sold at a profit. Marketing also is considered the study of con-
sumer problems as opportunities.
The concepts of marketing are universally applicable. Market segmentation divides a 
market into distinct groups of consumers. When one or more of the market segments is chosen 
for a specific product or service, this is known as target marketing. To illustrate, for security 
programs, market segmentation within a corporation can yield the following groups: executives, 
women, salespeople, production workers, and truck drivers. Once the market is segmented, a 
protection program can be designed for each target market. Research and risk analyses will 
produce a foundation from which to satisfy the protection needs of each type of customer. For 
those security programs that are so general in nature that few customers find them appealing, 
marketing strategies may be the solution to generate interest. Loss prevention influence over a 
target group or groups is better than no influence at all (Purpura, 1989: 141–148).
These seven strategies contain a heavy emphasis on marketing and are designed to pro-
duce a high-quality security program (Wozniak, 1996: 25–28):
1. Identify all internal and external customers of security services and determine what 
the customers want and how security can tell whether they are satisfied with the 
quality of the services rendered.
2. Focus on the customer and his or her perspective. Security should avoid an “us versus 
them” viewpoint.
3. Facilitate teamwork by meeting with representatives of all internal departments to 
discuss security issues and to seek solutions.
4. Listen and be receptive to customer concerns. In one hospital, employees complained 
about the need to enter their departments outside regular business hours. In response, the 
security department used its technology to customize access control for each department.
5. Develop definitions. Ensure that customers and security share each group’s definitions 
of security and loss prevention.
6. Set priorities among customers. One hospital ranked its customers as follows: patients 
or outside customers, employees, and employees’ families.
7. Take action and be prepared to constantly adapt to new circumstances.
Do you think marketing concepts can really assist a security manager, or does marketing 
consist of theories that have no practical value in the real world?

Internal Relations          97
Surveys Improve Security Services and Add Value
McCoy (2006: 44–46), a director of security, writes of how he improved security 
through the use of internal surveys. He notes that security departments are in a difficult 
position with customer relations because security must enforce policies and conduct 
investigations. However, he seeks positive views of security from customers by ascer-
taining customer needs and fulfilling these needs. McCoy recruited an outside firm to 
conduct surveys and collect data. The firm provided benchmarks for internal customer 
service because of its experience with hundreds of clients. As McCoy’s department 
received feedback from the research, specific changes were put in place for continuous 
improvement that was followed by more research. Survey questions focused on access, 
response time, expertise, courtesy, value, and other subjects. The response rate was 
about 30%. Surveys often produce unexpected results, and in McCoy’s case he learned 
that background screening generated numerous complaints because of the length of time 
required for the check. The average time to complete a check was 14 days, and many 
managers resented the delay when bringing in a new employee. The security depart-
ment processed about 4,000 screenings annually, with a denial rate of 4%. To improve 
performance, the security department began to use a management system model for 
continuous improvement; background screening was reduced to 5 days by selecting a 
vendor that emphasized speed, besides accuracy. This accomplishment was highlighted 
in a security awareness letter prior to a survey. Survey data was used to justify requests 
for additional personnel and other resources, and to require security certification to 
enhance skills. In essence, through internal surveys, the security department improved 
performance and internal relations.
International Perspective: Market Research to Improve Crime Prevention
Crime prevention by residents in the community is not a unitary construct; it is com-
posed of various types of preventive activities (Hope and Lab, 2001: 7–22). Research 
from a British crime survey revealed that citizens take part in five clear groupings of 
preventive activities. An understanding of the groupings, and the characteristics of citi-
zens who choose the groupings, can assist those in the public and private sectors who 
market crime prevention programs. Here are the groupings:
• Evening Precautions: Actions taken at night to protect against attack, such as 
special transportation arrangements.
• Self-Defense: Taking self-defense classes and carrying weapons and personal alarms.
• Neighborhood Watch: Membership in a watch group and marking property.
• Technological Security: Burglar alarms and timed lights.
• Fortress Security: Door and window locks and grills.
This British research showed that people’s use of various preventive methods represents 
their different perceptions of crime, their “routine activities,” their aims and needs, 
and to a lesser extent, demographic variables. Only particular types of people will 
adopt certain crime prevention methods, and more extensive research is needed on 
this topic.
Corporate security practitioners should consider surveying employees to ascertain 
what is on their minds (i.e., understanding customers) as input for selecting the best pos-
sible security methods. Survey questions can focus on perceptions of security and safety 
on and off the premises, their “routine activities,” and their needs. Such information 
provides a foundation for market segmentation and target marketing.

98          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS
Human Relations on the Job
Getting along with others is a major part of almost everyone’s job. Many say it is half of their 
job. The result of such effort is increased cooperation and a smoother working environment.
These suggestions can help a person develop good human relations:
 1. Make getting along with others as well as possible a conscious goal. Cooperation 
increases productivity.
 2. Say hello to as many employees as possible, even if you do not know them.
 3. Smile.
 4. Think before you speak.
 5. Be aware that nonverbal communication such as body language, facial expression, and 
tone of voice may reveal messages not included in your oral statements.
 6. Listen carefully.
 7. Maintain a sense of humor.
 8. Try to look at each person as an individual. Avoid stereotyping (i.e., applying an 
image of a group to an individual member of a group).
 9. Personalities vary from one person to another.
10. People who are quiet may be shy, and these people should not be interpreted as being 
aloof.
11. Carefully consider rumors and those who gossip. Such information often is inaccurate.
12. Remember that when you speak about another person your comments often are 
repeated.
13. If possible, avoid people with negative attitudes. A positive attitude increases 
the quality of human relations and has an impact on many other activities (e.g., 
opportunity for advancement).
14. Do not flaunt your background.
15. Everybody makes mistakes. Maintain a positive attitude and learn from mistakes.
Management Support
Support from senior management is indispensable for an effective loss prevention program, and 
it can be enhanced through good human relations. Frequent dialogue between loss prevention 
practitioners and senior management should be a high priority. One method of gaining the 
interest of management is to show loss prevention has a return on investment. This means that 
money invested in security and loss prevention can generate not only savings, but also a profit. 
A good knowledge of business principles and practices can aid the practitioner who must speak 
“business management language” for effective communications. A loss prevention practitioner 
who does not speak “business management language” would be wise to enroll in management 
and accounting courses at a local college.
In one large corporation, the strategy of the security department to gain management support 
is to quantify its worth and prove it can provide services more efficiently than an outside contractor. 
This is the reality of proprietary security today as it struggles to survive and escape the outsourcing 
and downsizing trends. This corporation’s security department tracks everything from the number 
of investigations conducted to the turnover rate of security officers. Such information (i.e., metrics) 
helps the security function evaluate and improve its services to its internal customers. Surveys are 
also used to measure customer satisfaction. Additionally, the department measures losses avoided 
because of security action. For example, the department takes credit for the annual savings from 
an investigation that reveals that a worker’s compensation claim that the corporation has been 
paying for several years is fraudulent. Another avenue to gain management support is to show 
that a $50,000-a-year investigator can recover an average of $500,000 in lost inventory each year 
(Hollstein, 1995: 61–63).
Orientation and Training Programs
Beginning with a new employee’s initial contact with a business, an emphasis should be placed 
on loss prevention. Through the employment interview, orientation, and training, an atmosphere 

of loss prevention impressed on the new people sets the stage for consciousness-raising about the 
importance of reduced losses through prevention strategies.
Specifically, orientation and training sessions should include a description of the loss 
prevention plan pertaining to crimes, fires, and accidents. Program objectives, benefits to 
employees, and how employees can help reduce losses also are topics of concern. Other topics 
include access controls and cards, information security, emergency procedures, and various 
loss prevention services, systems, policies, and procedures.
Loss Prevention Meetings
Meetings with superiors, with employees on the same level as the loss prevention manager, 
and with subordinates all strengthen internal relations because communication is fostered. 
When the loss prevention manager meets with superiors, goals and objectives often are 
transmitted to the manager. Essentially, the manager does a lot of listening. However, after 
listening, the manager usually has an opportunity to explain the needs of the loss prevention 
program while conforming to senior management’s expectations. This two-way communica-
tion facilitates mutual understanding.
Meetings with other managers vary, depending on the type of organization. For 
instance, a meeting between the human resources manager and the loss prevention manager 
helps to resolve problem areas. One typical conflict pertains to disciplinary decisions. Another 
problem area between both departments evolves from applicant screening. Both departments 
should meet, work together, and formulate a cooperative plan.
When a loss prevention manager meets with subordinates, internal relations are 
enhanced further. Morale and productivity often are heightened when subordinates are given 
an opportunity to express opinions and ideas. A manager who is willing to listen to subordi-
nates fosters improved internal relations.
Intranet and E-Mail
The communications technology of today offers a security and loss prevention program 
superb opportunities to market its services (Huneycutt, 2000: 103–107; Richardson, 
2000: 24–26). This involves informing customers of available services, providing helpful 
information, requesting assistance from customers, seeking input on the needs of custom-
ers to improve protection, and illustrating the value of security and loss prevention to the 
organization.
An intranet is an in-house, proprietary electronic network that is similar to the Internet. 
To prepare an internal Web page for security, a committee can be formed composed of man-
agement, security personnel, a Web master to take a leadership role, and an employee from 
the internal relations department. Next, ascertain through a survey what the customers of 
security would like to see on the Web page. Consideration must be given to what not to post 
and possible external access by nonemployees. Moderation should be used with visual images 
so the site does not require excessive time to load to a customer’s computer. Visuals of police 
badges and handcuffs should be avoided to favor a partnering, loss prevention approach. To 
help market the site, it can be placed on the home page of the organization’s intranet.
An organization’s security and loss prevention internal Web site can contain the fol-
lowing:
 1. Goals, objectives, polices, and procedures
 2. Services offered
 3. Educational material on a host of topics such as personal protection, property 
protection, IT security, and information security
 4. Answers to frequently asked questions
 5. Links to resources and information
 6. Information on how to obtain parking privileges and access cards
 7. Information on how to handle various emergencies
 8. An incident form for reporting and avenues to report off-line anonymously
Internal Relations          99

100          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS
 9. A bomb threat form
10. A survey form for feedback to improve security
11. A quarterly report on incidents and accomplishments to show the value of security 
and security personnel
12. An e-mail feature for ease of interaction and to request information
13. A counter to record the number of “hits” at the Web site
E-mail is a convenient way to communicate. Management and other internal customers can 
be sent a quarterly report on vulnerabilities, incidents, direct and indirect losses, prevention 
strategies, and achievements. “Tooting one’s own horn” should not be perceived as bragging, 
but a method to inform others that the past budget allocation was worthwhile. For example, 
achievements may include lowering shrinkage and increasing profits, foiling a criminal con-
spiracy, and quickly extinguishing a fire. Such a report for superiors will better prepare them 
for meetings, budgets, and decisions associated with loss prevention.
As a security manager, what types of information would you avoid placing on the 
Internet and a company intranet?
Involvement Programs
The essence of involvement programs is to motivate employees who are not directly associ-
ated with the loss prevention department to participate in loss prevention objectives. How 
can this be accomplished? Here are some suggestions: The employee responsible for the low-
est shrinkage among several competing departments within a business wins $200 and a day 
off. The employee with the best loss prevention idea of the month wins $50. Those people 
who become involved should be mentioned in loss prevention reports to show others the 
benefits of participating in loss prevention activities. Another strategy is the use of anonymity 
and reward for reporting information helpful to loss prevention objectives.
External Relations
Law Enforcement
Without the assistance of public law enforcement agencies, criminal charges initiated by the 
private sector would not be possible. Public police and prosecutors are the main components 
of public law enforcement. Police frequently are guided by a prosecutor, who is often referred 
to as the chief law enforcement officer. The prosecuting attorney has broad discretion to 
initiate criminal cases. Community sentiment and powerful groups almost always have an 
influence on a prosecutor’s discretion. Various alternatives are open to a prosecutor. If there 
is sufficient evidence, the prosecutor can charge an individual. Charges frequently are reduced 
after a defendant has agreed to plead guilty to a lesser offense, and this plea bargaining pro-
cess avoids an expensive trial.
Unless private security officers adhere to the basic requirements within local jurisdic-
tions, cases cannot be prosecuted successfully. An example can be seen in shoplifting cases. 
Depending on state law and local prosecutor requirements, a jurisdiction may require appre-
hension of a shoplifter after the offender leaves the store with the item instead of apprehend-
ing within the store. Many prosecutors feel that this strengthens the case.
External relations with law enforcement agencies are vital for loss prevention programs. 
Sharing information is a major factor in enhancing this working relationship. Law enforcement 
agencies often provide information that aids the private sector. Intelligence information pertain-
ing to the presence in an area of professional criminals, bad-check violators, counterfeiters, and 

con artists assists the private sector in preventing losses. Because of cybercrime, police agencies 
are increasingly working with the private sector to investigate and prosecute hackers and other 
cyberoffenders.
Public Safety Agencies
In addition to law enforcement, other public safety agencies such as fire departments, emer-
gency medical services, rescue squads, and emergency management agencies are helpful to loss 
prevention programs. An analysis of these services is particularly important when a new facil-
ity is being planned. Factors relevant to emergency response time, equipment, and efficiency 
assist in planning the extent and expense of a loss prevention program.
Very little is accomplished by overtly criticizing local public safety agencies for their defi-
ciencies. This action results in negative attitudes and strained relations. Moreover, in the future, 
the severity of losses very well may depend on action taken by these agencies.
Several strategies help create good relations:
 1. Do not become too aggressive when striving toward good external relations.
 2. Speak on the same vocabulary level as the person with whom you are communicating.
 3. Do not brag about your education and experience.
 4. Do not criticize public safety practitioners, because these comments often are 
repeated.
 5. Try to have a third party, such as a friend, introduce you to public safety personnel.
 6. Join organizations to which public safety personnel belong.
 7. Join volunteer public safety organizations (e.g., the local public police reserve or 
volunteer fire department), if possible.
 8. Speak to civic groups.
 9. Ask to sit in on special training programs and offer to assist in training.
10. Try to join local or regional criminal intelligence meetings, where information is 
shared and crimes are solved.
11. Create a softball league with private and public sector participation. Have a picnic at 
the end of the season. Try to obtain company funds for these activities.
12. Obtain a position on an advisory committee at a college that has a criminal justice, 
security and loss prevention, homeland security, or fire science program.
13. Form an external loss prevention advisory board and ask local public safety heads to 
volunteer a limited amount of time. Secure company funds to sponsor these as dinner 
meetings.
14. Accept official inspections and surveys by public safety practitioners.
15. Begin an organization, such as a local private sector–public sector cooperative 
association, that has common goals.
The Community
When a new industry moves to a community, external relations become especially important. 
Residents should be informed about safety plans. Safety is a moral obligation, as well as a 
necessity, to ensure limited losses and business survival. As shown in the media, over and over 
again, community resistance to certain industries is strong. Consequently, an industry with a 
history of adverse environmental impact must cultivate relations that assure residents that safety 
has improved to the point of causing minimal problems and an extremely low probability of 
accidents. Engineers, scientists, senior management, and other support personnel are needed 
to provide community residents, politicians, and resistance groups with a variety of informa-
tion and answers. Another consideration involves reassuring the community that a proposed 
industry will not adversely drain public service resources while creating additional community 
problems.
To promote strong ties to the community, companies often become involved in commu-
nity service projects. Employees volunteer time to worthy causes such as helping the needy and 
mentoring youth. ASIS International promotes a Security for Houses of Worship Project that 
External Relations          101

102          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS
offers security practitioners an opportunity to partner with college security and criminal justice 
academic programs to protect houses of worship (Purpura, 1999).
The Media
The media can help or hinder a loss prevention program. Efforts must be made to recruit the 
media. Difficulties often arise because members of the media usually are interested in infor-
mation beyond that offered by interviewees. It is worthwhile to maintain positive relations; 
negative relations may create a vicious cycle leading to mutual harm.
In almost all large organizations, educated and experienced media relations personnel 
handle the media. Loss prevention practitioners should take advantage of such an organiza-
tional structure. This, in effect, insulates the loss prevention department from the media. Policy 
statements should point out that comments to the media are released through a designated 
spokesperson. When all loss prevention personnel clearly understand the media policy, mis-
takes and embarrassing situations are minimized. An example of a mistake is the story about 
a young police officer who was confronted by an aggressive news reporter about a homicide 
investigation. Investigators had one lead: clear shoe prints under the window of entry to the 
crime scene. It was hoped that the suspect would be discovered with the shoes that matched 
the prints. Unfortunately, the news reporter obtained this information from the young officer. 
The local newspaper printed the story and mentioned the shoes. After reading the newspaper, 
the offender destroyed the shoes, and the case became more difficult to solve. There had never 
been a clear policy statement concerning the media within the organization. Another blunder 
may take place if the amount of valuables (e.g., cash) stolen in a burglary or robbery is revealed 
to the media, or the fact that the offenders overlooked high-priced valuables during the crime. 
Both types of information, broadcast by the media, have been known to cause future crimes at 
the same location.
When working with the media and answering questions, Sewell (2007: 4) recommends 
projecting sincerity and credibility, keeping it simple, understanding the reporter’s question 
before answering, and being ready to think on the spur of the moment. An article in Security 
Management, “Stress from the Press—and How to Meet It” (1980: 8–11), states many useful 
ideas concerning relations with the media. The article stresses the importance of preparation, 
knowing what you want to say, being prepared for tricky questions, and carefully phrasing 
answers. Numerous firms train executives in effective communication techniques. These courses 
vary, but most participants learn how to deal with hostile questioning and receive feedback and 
coaching with the assistance of videotaping. The courses generally run for one to three days and 
can cost thousands of dollars per participant.
The article recommends several “don’ts” for interviews with the media:
1. Don’t return any hostility from the interviewer.
2. Don’t lose the audience. Speak clearly and use simple words.
3. Don’t say “no comment.” If you can’t answer the questions, at least tell the audience 
why.
4. Don’t make up answers. If you do not know an answer, say so.
5. Don’t say “off the record.” If you don’t want it repeated, don’t say it.
6. Don’t offer personal opinions. You are on the air to represent your company, and 
everything you say will appear to be company policy.
External Loss Prevention Peers
The practitioner who exists in a vacuum is like a student who doesn’t pay attention. No 
knowledge is obtained. Through formal and informal associations with peers, the practitioner 
inevitably becomes involved in a learning experience. One of the results of relations with peers 
is information that can improve loss prevention programming.
No individual is an expert about everything. If a group of experts comes together, a 
broad spectrum of ideas results. When a loss prevention practitioner does not know the 
answer to a particular question, a call or e-mail to a peer can produce an answer. Peers are 

helpful in the selection of services and systems, budget preparation, and even presentations 
to management.
Many formal organizations are open to practitioners. The one organization known by 
almost all practitioners is ASIS International. This organization is at the forefront in upgrad-
ing the security and loss prevention field by educating members and increasing professional-
ism. Local chapters, national meetings, seminars, and specialized committees and councils 
bring peers together for mutually beneficial relations.
Special Problems
Certain select areas of concern overshadow both internal and external relations. Two impor-
tant areas are prosecution decisions and loss prevention attire.
Prosecution Decisions
Prosecution decisions concerning employee–offenders, usually for theft, often are difficult 
for management. The difficulty arises because a wise manager considers numerous variables. 
No matter what decision is made, the company may suffer in some way. The situation is 
tantamount to “damned if we do and damned if we don’t.” The following are benefits of 
prosecuting:
1. Prosecuting deters future offenders by setting an example. This reduces the potential 
for future losses.
2. The company will rid itself of an employee–offender who may have committed 
previous offenses.
3. The company will appear strong, and this will generate greater respect from 
employees.
4. Morale is boosted when “rotten apple” employees are purged from the workforce.
5. If a company policy states that all offenders will be prosecuted, then after each 
prosecution, employees will know that the company lives up to its word and will not 
tolerate criminal offenses.
6. The company aids the criminal justice system and the community against crime.
7. Local law enforcement will feel that the company is part of the war against crime. 
This will reinforce cooperation.
8. A strong prosecution policy will become known inside and outside the company. 
Those seeking employment who also are thinking of committing crimes against the 
company will be deterred from applying for work.
The following are benefits of not prosecuting:
1. The company shows sympathy for the employee–offender. Therefore, employees say 
the company has a heart. Morale is boosted.
2. Not prosecuting saves the company time, money, and wages for those employees such 
as witnesses and the investigator, who must aid in the prosecution.
3. If the employee–offender agrees to pay back the losses to the company and he or she 
is not fired, the company will not lose an experienced and trained employee in whom 
it has invested.
4. The criminal justice system will not be burdened by another case.
5. Sometimes companies initiate prosecution, an arrest is made, and then management 
changes its mind. This creates friction with law enforcement agencies.
6. Possible labor trouble is avoided.
7. Possible litigation is avoided.
8. Prosecution sometimes creates friction among human resources, internal and external 
relations, and loss prevention departments.
9. Giving bad news to financial supporters, stockholders, customers, and the community 
is avoided.
Special Problems          103

104          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS
To complicate the prosecution decision even more, the policy statement concerning pros-
ecution must be carefully worded by management. There is no perfect statement that can apply 
to all incidents. A look at a strict policy statement illustrates this problem. Suppose a company 
policy states that all employees committing crimes against the business will be impartially and 
vigorously prosecuted. Thereafter, what if a 15-year employee, with an excellent work record 
and accumulated company-paid training, is caught stealing a box of envelopes? How would 
you handle this decision as a senior executive?
Employees Smoking Marijuana
An undercover investigation at the Southern Manufacturing Plant by public and private 
investigators revealed that seven experienced and well-trained employees smoke mari-
juana before work.
The company loss prevention and human resources managers met with senior 
management to decide what to do. One solution was to fire all the employees; however, 
these offending employees had good work records and considerable work experience, 
and the company had invested heavily in their training. The loss prevention and human 
resources managers suggested that the employees be confronted and threatened with 
firing unless they participated in an Employee Assistance Program through a local alco-
hol and drug abuse program and submitted to drug testing. The managers stated that 
another local business had a similar problem and a contract was formulated between 
the business and the government agency dealing with alcohol and drug abuse problems. 
Senior management at Southern favored this idea.
Later, the employees were confronted and surprised. They all admitted that they 
liked their jobs and were willing to participate in a drug abuse program on their own 
time to avoid being fired. By this time, the local alcohol and drug abuse commission had 
agreed to conduct a program for these employees. The local police chief and prosecutor 
favored the program as an innovative diversion from the criminal justice system.
Senior management was satisfied. Internal and external relations were improved. 
The company provided a second chance for the employees and did not lose experienced 
workers or the money invested in their training.
Many organizations would not choose this lenient path. Numerous organizations 
would terminate the substance abusing employees who were under the influence at 
work, especially in industries that are regulated and/or involved in public safety and 
security.
Much economic crime is disposed of privately (Cunningham et al., 1991: 4). The Report of 
the Task Force on Private Security (U.S. Department of Justice, 1976: 128) adds interesting 
perspectives to the issue:
[I]t would appear that a large percentage of criminal violators known to private 
security personnel are not referred to the criminal justice system. A logical conclusion 
would be that there is a “private” criminal justice system wherein employer repri-
mands, restrictions, suspensions, demotions, job transfers, or employment termina-
tions take the place of censure by the public system. . . . [I]n many instances private 
action is more expedient, less expensive, and less embarrassing to the company. Fear 
of lawsuits or protecting the offender from a criminal record may be important. 
However, violations of due process, right to counsel, and other individual rights are 
more likely to occur under such a system. The criminal justice system is established 
for the purpose of resolving criminal offenses and can be a viable resource for the 
private security sector in this regard.

Special Problems          105
Another factor affecting prosecution is the prosecution threshold, which is the monetary 
level of the alleged crime that must be met before prosecution. Trends indicate a rise in dollar 
amounts of individual instances of theft that are partly tied to employee perception of changes 
in company and prosecutor policies concerning prosecution thresholds. An article in Security 
Management Bulletin [“Finding Where the (Financial) Bodies Are Buried,” 1993: 4–5] states: “In 
the 1970s, an employee who stole $10,000 would have been prosecuted. Today, in many places, 
that amount won’t even produce a criminal referral.”
Should management in companies seek to prosecute or not prosecute employee offenders?
Loss Prevention Attire
The appearance of loss prevention personnel has an impact on how people perceive a loss 
prevention program. A vital part of appearance is attire (i.e., uniforms). Wrinkled, messy 
uniforms send a message to observers that loss prevention objectives are not very important. 
A variety of people observe loss prevention personnel: employees, customers, visitors, sales-
people, truck drivers, law enforcement personnel, and the community in general. What type 
of message to these people is desired from an effective loss prevention program? Obviously, 
neat, good-looking attire is an asset and shows professionalism.
Attire can project two primary images: subtlety or visibility. Subtle attire consists of 
blazers or sports jackets (see Figure 5-3). It is generally believed that blazers project a warmer, 
less threatening, and less authoritarian image. Increased visibility and a stricter image are pro-
jected through traditional uniforms. However, it is vital that traditional uniforms do not look 
similar to those worn by public police; this can cause mistakes by citizens needing aid, public 
police resent private security officers wearing such uniforms, and state regulatory authorities 
over the private security industry may prohibit uniforms (and vehicles) that appear as public 
police.
FIGURE 5-3 Security officers at a museum. Courtesy of Wackenhut Corporation. Photo by Ed Burns.

106          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS
Case Problems
5A. As a security supervisor, you have received reports that a security officer assigned 
to the employee parking lot is having repeated verbal confrontations with 
employees. One report described the officer’s use of profane language and threats. 
Specifically, what do you say to this officer, and what actions do you take? How 
do you repair internal relations?
5B. You are a loss prevention supervisor, and two company employees report to 
you that a loss prevention officer is intoxicated while on duty. You approach 
the officer, engage in conversation, and smell alcohol on his breath. What do 
you do? An added complication is that this particular officer has a brother in 
the local police department who has provided valuable aid during past loss 
Do you favor traditional uniforms or blazers for security officers? Why?
Search the Web
Check out the following sites on the Web:
 American Marketing Association: www.marketingpower.com/
 Marketing virtual library: www.knowthis.com/
 Professional Associations and Institutes: http://ritim.cba.uri.edu/resources/
 Public Relations Society of America: www.prsa.org/
 Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology: http://siop.org/
All security and loss prevention personnel must realize that they have only one oppor-
tunity to create a first, favorable impression.
Research on the psychological influence of the public police uniform should be considered 
by those who plan uniforms for the private sector. It has been shown in psychological tests 
that individuals associate the color blue with feelings of security and comfort, and the color 
black with power and strength. Other research shows black and brown being perceived as 
strong and passive, but also bad, and eliciting emotions of anger, hostility, and aggression. 
Darker police uniforms may send negative subconscious signals to citizens. One experiment 
showed that lighter-colored sheriff’s uniforms were rated higher for warmth and friendliness 
than darker uniforms. Furthermore, a half-dark uniform (i.e., light shirt, dark pants) sends 
a better message than an all-dark uniform. Research on the traditional uniform versus the 
blazer shows mixed results. The Menlo Park, California, police tried the blazer for eight 
years but found that assaults on police increased and that it did not command respect. After 
18 months of wearing blazers, the police of this department displayed fewer authoritarian 
characteristics when compared to police from other nearby agencies (Johnson, 2001: 27–32). 
For the private sector, research questions are: Do light-colored uniforms or blazers send 
more positive signals than dark-colored apparel? Do blazers really create a less authoritarian 
atmosphere than uniforms? What impact do blazers have on assaults and respect for private 
security officers?

Case Problems          107
prevention investigations. Furthermore, the officer has had a good work record 
while employed by the company for five years. After you carefully study the 
advantages and disadvantages of various internal and external ramifications to 
proposed actions, what do you do?
5C. While a loss prevention officer was routinely patrolling the inner storage rooms 
of a manufacturing facility, he accidentally stumbled on two employees engaged 
in sexual intercourse. All three were shocked and surprised. The man and woman 
should have been selecting orders for shipment. The woman cried and begged 
the loss prevention officer to remain silent about this revelation. The man also 
pleaded for mercy, especially because both were married to other people. When 
the officer decided that he should report the matter, the man became violent. A 
fight developed between the officer and the man and woman. The officer was able 
to radio his location and within 10 minutes other officers arrived. The pair has 
been brought to the loss prevention office. What do you do as the loss prevention 
supervisor?
5D. You are a newly hired security manager for an electronics company of 2,000 
employees. You were told by your supervisor, the vice president of human 
resources, “You are here to bring our security program into the 21st century.” 
Apparently, the previous security manager did not meet management’s expectations. 
As you speak with employees and public safety practitioners in the community, you 
get the impression that you need to “build many bridges.” What are your ideas for 
improving internal and external relations?
5E. An unfortunate explosion and injuries took place at Smith Industries, and a 
company vice president designates you, a loss prevention supervisor, to speak to the 
media. It has been only one hour since the explosion, the investigation is far from 
complete, and you have no time to prepare for the media representatives who have 
arrived. As you walk to the front gate, several news people are anxiously waiting. 
The rapid-fire questions begin: “What is the extent of injuries and damage?” “Is it 
true that both high production quotas and poor safety have caused the explosion?” 
“What dangers will the community face due to this explosion and future ones?” 
“What are your comments about reports that safety inspectors have been bribed by 
Smith Industries executives?” How do you, as a loss prevention supervisor with the 
authority and responsibility to respond to media questions, answer each question?
5F. Because of your experience and college education, you are appointed manager 
of loss prevention at a large manufacturing facility in a small city. It is your 
understanding that the local police chief is introverted and uncooperative with 
strangers. The chief has an 11th-grade education and is extremely sensitive about 
this deficiency. He refuses to hire college graduates. Despite these faults, he is 
respected and does a good job as a police administrator. The local fire chief is 
the police chief’s brother. Both have similar backgrounds and character traits. 
Furthermore, the local prosecutor is a cousin of both chiefs. A “clannish” situation 
is apparent. As the loss prevention manager, you know that you will have to rely 
on as much cooperation as possible from these public officials. What do you do to 
develop good relations with them?
5G. Allen Dart has worked for the Music Manufacturing Company for 14 years. He 
has always done above-average work and was recently promoted to production 
supervisor. One afternoon when Allen was leaving the facility, he dropped 
company tools from under his coat in front of a loss prevention officer. Allen 
was immediately approached by the officer, who asked Allen to step inside to the 
loss prevention office. At this time, Allen broke down and began crying. Before 
anybody could say a word, Allen stated that he was very sorry and that he would 
not do it again. Later, the loss prevention and human resources managers met to 
discuss the incident. An argument developed because the loss prevention manager 
wanted to seek prosecution, whereas the human resources manager did not. How 
do you, as a vice president in this company, resolve the situation?

108          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS
References
Cunningham, W., et al. (1991). Private Security: Patterns and Trends. Washington, D.C.: 
National Institute of Justice.
“Finding Where the (Financial) Bodies Are Buried.” (1993). Security Management Bulletin 
(August 25).
Hollstein, B. (1995). “Internal Security and the Corporate Customer.” Security Management 
(June).
Hope, T., and Lab, S. (2001). “Variation in Crime Prevention Participation: Evidence from 
the British Crime Survey.” Crime Prevention and Community Safety: An International 
Journal, 3.
Huneycutt, J. (2000). “Nothing But Net.” Security Management, 44 (December).
Johnson, R. (2001). “The Psychological Influence of the Police Uniform.” FBI Law 
Enforcement Bulletin, 70 (March).
McCoy, R. (2006). “Better Service Through Surveys.” Security Management, 50 (May).
Purpura, P. (1989). Modern Security and Loss Prevention Management. Boston: Butterworth-
Heinemann.
Purpura, P. (1999). Security for Houses of Worship: A Community Service Manual for ASIS 
Chapters. Alexandria, VA: ASIS International.
Richardson, N. (2000). “A Blueprint for Value.” Security Management 44 (March).
Sewell, J. (2007). “Working with the Media in Times of Crisis: Key Principles for Law 
Enforcement.” FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin, 76 (March).
“Stress from the Press—and How to Meet It” (1980). Security Management 24 (February).
U.S. Department of Justice. (1976). Report of the Task Force on Private Security. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Wozniak, D. (1996). “Seven Steps to Quality Security.” Security Management (March).

6
Applicant Screening 
and Employee Socialization
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Define applicant screening and employee socialization.
2. Summarize the legal guidelines for applicant screening.
3. Explain each of the following and how it relates to the employment environment: 
equal employment opportunity, affirmative action, quotas, diversity, and sexual 
harassment.
4. List and explain at least four applicant screening methods.
5. Describe how to enhance employee socialization.
KEY TERMS
• applicant screening
• socialization
• Equal Pay Act of 1963
• Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII
• Age Discrimination in Employment Act 
of 1967
• Equal Employment Opportunity  
Act of 1972
• Rehabilitation Act of 1973
• Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978
• Americans with Disabilities Act 
of 1990
• Civil Rights Act of 1991
• disparate impact
• disparate treatment
• Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
• Griggs v. Duke Power
• Bakke v. University of California
• equal employment opportunity 
(EEO)
• affirmative action (AA)
• quotas
• diversity
• sexual harassment
• quid pro quo
• hostile working environment
• negligent hiring
• diploma mills
• bona fide occupational qualification
• validity
• reliability
• Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002
• Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1971
• Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction 
Act of 2003
• job reference immunity statutes
• Employee Polygraph Protection Act 
of 1988
• agent of socialization
109

Applicant screening and employee socialization are primary loss prevention 
strategies.
Introduction
One of the most important assets of an organization is its personnel. The purpose of applicant 
screening is to find the most appropriate person for a particular job. Several methods are 
available for screening applicants, such as interviewing and testing.
The culmination of the applicant screening process results in hiring an applicant. 
At this stage, an organization already has invested considerable personnel, money, and time in 
making the best possible choice. The next step is to develop a productive employee. This can 
be accomplished through adequate socialization, which is a learning process that, it is hoped, 
produces an employee who will benefit the organization. Two primary methods of socializa-
tion are employee training and example setting by superiors.
Both applicant screening and employee socialization are primary loss prevention strate-
gies. If an organization can select honest, stable, and productive people, less has to be done to 
protect the organization from employees and protect employees from employees. If employees 
can be socialized to act safely and protect company assets, security and loss prevention strate-
gies are enhanced further.
Employment Law
Government regulation affects the balance and working relationship between employers and 
employees in three major areas: (1) the prohibition of employment discrimination; (2) the 
promotion of a safe and healthy workplace; and (3) fair negotiation between management and 
labor concerning terms of employment (Mann and Roberts, 2001: 858). Here we begin with 
major federal laws prohibiting employment discrimination, followed by applicant screening 
methods. The laws on workplace safety and labor are covered in other chapters.
It is important to note that beyond the federal law emphasized here, and executive 
orders of presidents, are state and municipal laws that exceed federal legal requirements and 
state court decisions that interpret state laws. For instance, several states consider sexual ori-
entation a “protected class.” Also, many corporations have policies to protect employees on 
the basis of sexual orientation (DeCenzo and Robbins, 2005: 62).
Federal Legislation
• Equal Pay Act of 1963: This legislation requires that men and women be paid equally 
if they work at the same location at similar jobs. Exceptions include a seniority or 
merit system and earnings through quantity or quality of production. The act is 
enforced by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).
• Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII: This law prohibits employment discrimination 
based on race, color, religion, gender, or national origin. Title VII prohibits 
discrimination with regard to any employment condition, including recruiting, 
screening, hiring, training, compensating, evaluating, promoting, disciplining, 
and firing. It also prohibits retaliation against an individual who files a charge of 
discrimination. The law impacts both public and private sectors. Title VII requires 
that organizations go beyond discontinuing discriminatory practices and gives 
preferences to minority group members in employment decisions; this is referred to as 
affirmative action. Congress established the EEOC to enforce Title VII.
• Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967: The ADEA prohibits employment 
discrimination on the basis of age in areas such as hiring, firing, and compensating. 
110          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION

It applies to private employers with 20 or more employees and all government units. 
This law protects employees between 40 and 65 years of age, but in 1978 the law was 
amended to afford protection to age 70, and then in 1986 the law was amended again 
to eliminate the upper age limit. Mandatory retirement is prohibited, absent a suitable 
defense. The act is enforced by the EEOC.
• Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972: The purpose of this federal law (EEO) 
is to strengthen Title VII by providing the EEOC with additional enforcement 
powers to file suits and issue cease-and-desist orders. Further, EEO expands 
coverage to employees of state and local governments, educational institutions, and 
private employers of more than 15 persons. EEO programs are implemented by 
employers to prevent discrimination in the workplace and to offset past employment 
discrimination.
• Rehabilitation Act of 1973: This act requires government agencies and contractors 
with the federal government to take affirmative action to hire those with physical or 
mental handicaps. The act is enforced by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance 
Procedures.
• Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978: This law requires pregnancy to be treated as any 
other type of disability. And, EEO protection is afforded to pregnant employees.
• Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990: The ADA prohibits discrimination against 
individuals with disabilities and increases their access to services and jobs. The 
law requires employers to make reasonable accommodations for employees with 
a disability if doing so would not create an undue hardship for the employer. 
Reasonable accommodations include making existing facilities accessible and 
modifying a workstation. This law has had a significant impact on the security and 
safety designs of buildings. Access controls, doorways, elevators, and emergency alarm 
systems are among the many physical features of a building that must accommodate 
disabled people. The act is enforced by the EEOC.
• Civil Rights Act of 1991: This legislation provides additional remedies to deter 
employment discrimination by codifying disparate impact concepts and allowing 
plaintiffs to demand a jury trial and seek damages. Ivancevich (2001: 74) writes: 
“Disparate impact or unintentional discrimination occurs when a facially neutral 
employment practice has the effect of disproportionately excluding a group based 
upon a protected category.” (The U.S. Supreme Court expanded the definition of 
illegal discrimination to include disparate impact as illustrated in the Griggs case.) 
This act requires businesses to prove that the business practice that led to the 
charge of discrimination was not discriminatory but job related for the position and 
consistent with business necessity. The act is enforced by the EEOC.
Disparate treatment is another type of discrimination whereby an applicant claims 
that he or she was not hired because of a discriminatory reason. Examples are asking only 
one applicant about age or asking only female applicants about child care.
• Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993: This legislation requires employers to provide 
12 weeks of unpaid leave for family and medical emergencies without employees 
suffering job loss. The act is enforced by the Department of Labor.
U.S. Supreme Court Decisions
When laws are passed, the courts play a role in helping to define what the legislation means. 
Such court cases evolve, for example, when the EEOC develops and enforces guidelines based 
on their interpretation of legislation. Confusion over how to interpret the legislation has led 
to many lawsuits and some conflicting court decisions. What follows here are two famous 
U.S. Supreme Court cases from an historical context to illustrate the development of the issues 
and laws.
Griggs v. Duke Power (1971): In 1968, several employees of the Duke Power Company 
in North Carolina were given a pencil-and-paper aptitude test for manual labor. Willie Griggs 
and 12 other black workers sued their employer with the charge of job discrimination under 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Their contention was that the pencil-and-paper aptitude test 
Employment Law          111

112          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION
had little to do with their ability to perform manual labor. The U.S. Supreme Court decided 
that a test is inherently discriminatory if it is not job related and differentiates on the basis 
of race, sex, or religion. Furthermore, employers are required to prove that their screening 
methods are job related.
Bakke v. University of California (1978): Reverse discrimination was the main issue of this 
case. Allan Bakke, a white man, sued the Davis Medical School under the “equal protection” 
clause of the 14th Amendment because it set aside 16 of 100 openings for minorities, who were 
evaluated according to different standards. The Court concluded that the racial quota system 
was unacceptable because it disregarded Bakke’s right to equal protection of the law, and that 
affirmative action programs are permissible as long as applicants are considered on an individual 
basis and a rigid number of places has not been set aside. Race can be a key factor in the selection 
process; however, multiple factors must be considered.
What do all these laws and cases mean for those involved in applicant screening? Basically, 
all screening methods must be job related, valid, and nondiscriminatory. Included in this 
mandate are interviews, background investigations, and tests. Simply put, the EEOC regards 
all screening tools as capable of discriminating against applicants.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
The EEOC does not have the power to order employers to stop a discriminatory practice 
or to provide back pay to a victim. However, the EEOC has the power to sue an employer 
in federal court. The EEOC requires employers to report employment statistics annually. It 
investigates claims, collects facts from all parties, seeks an out-of-court settlement, and pro-
motes mediation.
According to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of General 
Counsel (2005), over 24,000 callers a month speak with EEOC customer service repre-
sentatives. Another 15,000 customers a month receive answers to questions through other 
technology. Customers can communicate in more than 150 different languages by telephone, 
fax, written correspondence, e-mail, and web inquiries. During FY 2005, the agency resolved 
66% of private sector charges within 180 days or fewer, 51,060 charges out of 77,441 total 
resolutions. Fifty-two percent of appeals were resolved within 180 days or fewer (3,899 out 
of 7,490 appeals received). The FY 2005 litigation workload was 944 suits, with 561 active 
and 383 filed. Seventy-three percent of cases involved Title VII, 12% involved the ADA, and 
10% involved the ADEA. Federal District Court litigation activity resulted in about $108 
million in monetary relief for FY 2005. The top five defendants versus EEOC were as fol-
lows: Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, Inc. ($50 million); Ford Motor Co. ($10.2 million); Home 
Depot, USA, Inc. ($5.5 million); Dial Corp. ($3.3 million); and Hamilton Sundstrand Corp. 
($1.2 million).
Denial of Equal Employment Opportunities Because of Sex
Women’s access to employment opportunities continues to be obstructed by sex bias 
in some workplaces, particularly in jobs traditionally held by men. In a case brought 
against a nationwide manufacturer of household products, the Commission alleged that 
Dial Corporation’s use of a physical “work tolerance” test for production operator 
positions at a food processing plant in Iowa intentionally discriminated against female 
applicants and also had a disparate impact on women (Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission, Office of General Counsel, 2005). In EEOC v. Dial Corp (S.D. Iowa Sept. 
29, 2005), EEOC presented at trial the testimony of an expert witness that 97% of men 
pass the test while only 40% of women succeed, that the test is more difficult than the 
job, that the scoring is subjective, and that the test does not accomplish its stated objec-
tive of reducing injuries. EEOC also presented testimony from 10 of approximately 40 
unsuccessful female applicants, focusing on their experience in performing jobs that 
require heavy lifting. The company presented two expert witnesses, who testified that 

EEO, AA, and Quotas
Equal employment opportunity, affirmative action, and quotas are important terms  relevant 
to staffing organizations (Heneman et al., 1997: 62–64). Equal employment opportunity 
(EEO) refers to practices that are designed so that all applicants and employees are treated 
similarly without regard to protected characteristics such as race and sex. For example, sup-
pose a vacant position requires applicants to undergo a written job knowledge test and an 
interview to assess applicants. Anyone is free to apply for the position, and all who apply will 
be given both the test and the interview. How well each performs on both screening methods 
determines who is hired. Thus, all applicants have an equal opportunity and the job will be 
offered following an unbiased assessment.
Affirmative action (AA) focuses on procedures employers use to correct and abolish 
past discriminatory employment practices against minority group members, women, and 
those in other groups, while setting goals for hiring and promoting persons from under-
represented groups. AA may be voluntarily undertaken by an employer or court ordered. 
In our previous example, AA could result if there was a failure to recruit women and minority 
group members or if the job knowledge test was biased. Then management would make a good 
faith effort to meet certain hiring goals, for instance, by improved recruiting.
Quotas are rigid hiring and promotion requirements. In our previous example, a hir-
ing formula would be set that specifies the number or percent of women and minorities to be 
hired.
These concepts, as applied in the workplace, have raised considerable legal turmoil and 
controversy over whether in fact they have been successful in correcting discrimination. The 
issue of “reverse discrimination” has intensified the debate. Court decisions provide guide-
lines for employers.
Diversity
Diversity in the workforce encompasses many different dimensions, including sex, race, natio-
nal origin, religion, age, and disability (Byars and Rue, 1997: 8). The workforce, historically 
dominated by white men, is being increasingly replaced with workers from diverse backgrounds. 
DeCenzo and Robbins (2005: 13) write that much of the workforce change is attributed to 
federal legislation prohibiting discrimination, and minority and female applicants are the fast-
est growing segments of the workforce. Projections for the workforce show that half of the new 
entrants into the workplace will be women, the average age of employees will climb, immi-
grant employees will have language and cultural differences, and as companies become more 
global, there will be an increasing need to respond to the unique needs of individual employees, 
including their languages, values, and customs. Diversity facilitates tolerance of different behavioral 
styles and wider views, which can lead to greater responsiveness to diverse customers. The challenge 
of learning to manage a diverse workforce is an investment in the future.
Employment Law          113
the production operator job is in the 99th percentile of all jobs in the economy with 
respect to the physical strength required, that the test is very like the job and therefore 
is content valid, and that the test had in fact reduced injuries.
The jury returned a verdict for EEOC, finding that the company’s continued use 
of the work tolerance test since April 2001 (when the company became aware of the 
test’s disparate impact on women) constituted intentional sex discrimination against 
women. The court later ruled that the test had had a disparate impact on women 
since its inception in January 2000. The judgment provides approximately $3.38 
million in back pay, benefits, prejudgment interest, and compensatory damages to 52 
class members. It also prohibits the company from implementing any preemployment 
screening device for five years without first consulting EEOC, and provides job offers 
with rightful place wages to all class members.

114          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION
In August of 2000, ASIS International held a conference on “Women and Minorities 
in Security.” The conference was noteworthy because this field has been dominated by white 
males since the beginning. The speakers were straightforward with the challenges facing 
minorities and the security industry. With an increasingly diverse society, recruitment of 
women and minorities is essential; however, public and media perceptions of security—often 
in a negative light—make recruitment difficult. Women have played an increasing role in 
the industry, but more needs to be done to recruit more women, African Americans, and 
Hispanics (Hamit, 2000: 60–62).
ASIS International is in a key position to take the lead to meet the challenges of diver-
sity in the security industry. Solutions include a recruitment campaign; improved partnering 
among the ASIS, proprietary and contract security organizations, and colleges and  universities; 
internships; and mentoring.
You Be the Judge*
Facts of the Case
When security officer Bronislav Zaleszny was passed over for promotion to supervisor, 
he decided that his Eastern European origin was at least one of the reasons (his English 
was rather thickly accented). So he went to the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission and filed a charge against his employer, Hi-Mark Home Products, alleging 
discrimination on the basis of national origin.
During the month after the EEOC notified the company of the charge, Zaleszny’s 
troubles multiplied. First, Hi-Mark informed the police that products had been disap-
pearing for months, that the disappearances evidently had occurred during Zaleszny’s 
shift, and that Zaleszny was a reasonable suspect. Second, the company terminated 
him on suspicion of theft. Police arrested Zaleszny, but a preliminary hearing resulted 
in dismissal of the charges against him.
Zaleszny fumed with anger at his former employer. He sued, alleging that Hi-Mark 
had prosecuted him maliciously and had fired him in retaliation for his EEOC complaint.
Exactly Who Prosecuted, and Exactly Who Knew about the EEOC Complaint?
In court, the company argued that Zaleszny’s allegations really couldn’t stand up 
to logical analysis. “We didn’t prosecute him, maliciously or otherwise,” Hi-Mark 
noted. “We truthfully told the police everything we knew about the disappearance of 
our products, and we said that on the basis of the facts, Mr. Zaleszny seemed to us 
to be a logical suspect. Then, completely on their own discretion, the police and the 
district attorney initiated charges against him. We disagree that the prosecution was 
malicious, but whether it was or not, we’re not the ones who prosecuted.”
In answer to Zaleszny’s retaliatory-firing allegation, Hi-Mark’s director of 
corporate security took the stand. “I’m the company official who recommended 
Mr. Zaleszny’s termination,” she testified, “and when I made the recommendation, 
I didn’t know about his EEOC complaint. Yes, the Commission had notified our com-
pany, and yes, our HR department knew, but I didn’t! And if I didn’t know about the 
complaint when I fired him, then the firing obviously wasn’t a retaliation.”
Did Zaleszny win his suit against Hi-Mark Home Products?
Make your decision; then turn to the end of the chapter for the court decision.
*Reprinted with permission from Security Management Bulletin, a publication of the 
Bureau of Business Practice, Inc., 24 Rope Ferry Road, Waterford, CT 06386.

Sexual Harassment
The EEOC defines sexual harassment as unwelcome sexual conduct that has the purpose or 
effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimi-
dating, hostile, or offensive work environment. Although the Civil Rights Act was passed in 
1964, only during the 1970s did courts begin to recognize sexual harassment as a form of 
gender discrimination under Title VII. Thereafter, the EEOC issued guidelines for determining 
what activity is sexual harassment, and these guidelines influence courts.
The two theories upon which an action for sexual harassment may be brought are explained 
here. Quid pro quo involves an employee who is required to engage in sexual activity in exchange 
for a workplace benefit. For example, a male manager tells his female assistant that he will get her a 
promotion and raise if she engages in sex with him. A second theory of sexual harassment is hostile 
working environment, which occurs when sexually offensive behavior by one party is unwelcome 
by another and creates workplace difficulties. Examples include unwelcome suggestive remarks or 
touching, and posted jokes or photos of a sexual nature.
Employers, who are vicariously liable for sexual harassment, must take immediate and 
appropriate corrective action; otherwise, civil and criminal legal action can be devastating. 
Besides legal action for harassment, these tort actions may be initiated: assault, battery, inten-
tional infliction of emotional distress, and false imprisonment. In addition, these criminal 
charges may be filed: assault, battery, and sexual assault.
Bryant (2006: 50–58) notes that harassment claims go beyond sexual harassment and 
involve allegations of unlawful discrimination against members of any of the “protected classes.” 
She writes that to file a discrimination lawsuit, most individuals obtain a right-to-sue letter from 
the EEOC and then contact a private attorney. However, in some cases the EEOC initiates action. 
Bryant categorizes actionable workplace harassment of a nonsexual nature into three groups:
• Harassment because of an individual’s affiliation or association with a particular 
religious or ethnic group. Examples are harassing a person who is of the Islamic faith, 
paying an employee less because of being Hispanic, or intimidating an individual who 
associates with a particular religious or ethnic group.
• Harassment because of physical or cultural traits. Examples are harassment of a Muslim 
woman for wearing a headscarf or not hiring a man because he has an accent.
• Harassment because of perception pertains to bullying. The National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health defines bullying as “repeated intimidation, slandering, 
social isolation, or humiliation by one or more persons against another.”
The following list offers guidance when taking action against the problem of sexual harassment and 
other types of workplace harassment (Bryant, 2006: 50–58; Warfel, 2005: 14–20):
1. Ensure that top management takes the lead to establish a zero tolerance policy.
2. Communicate the policy and reporting procedures to all employees, including strong 
prohibitions against retaliation for reporting.
3. Provide relevant training.
4. Ensure that reported incidents are taken seriously and thoroughly and promptly 
investigated, and that corrective action is taken if the allegations are true.
5. Ensure that the human resources department is notified about each complaint.
6. Maintain confidentiality, providing information only on a “need to know” basis.
Employment Law          115
Cases of Sexual Harassment
Sexual harassment can occur in any work environment, from the fields to the factory 
floor to the boardroom. Teenagers are a group particularly vulnerable to sexual harass-
ment. Many of EEOC’s suits involving the harassment of young women occur in the 
setting of restaurants and retail establishments, typical part-time jobs for teens (Equal 

116          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION
Screening Methods
Screening methods vary among organizations and depend on such factors as regulatory 
requirements of certain industries, budget, the number of personnel available to investigate 
applicants, outsourcing to service firms, and the types of positions open. Certain employers 
expend minimal efforts to properly screen, using the excuse that their hands are tied because 
of legal barriers. Others follow legal guidelines and screen carefully. The EEOC, the Office 
of Personnel Management, and the Departments of Justice and Labor have adopted and 
published the “Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures,” which is periodically 
updated and serves as a guide for determining the proper use of tests and other selection 
procedures for any employment decision such as hiring, promotion, demotion, retention, 
training, and transfers. These guidelines also contain technical standards and documentation 
requirements for the validation of selection procedures as described in the “Standards for 
Educational and Psychological Tests,” prepared by the American Psychological Association 
and other groups. Courts rely on such guidelines in deciding cases.
Negligent hiring is a serious problem resulting from an employee who was an unfit 
candidate for hiring and retention. The courts have established screening standards from 
negligence cases; awards have been made to victims who have sued, claiming the employer 
was negligent in not conducting a reasonable inquiry into the background of an employee 
who, for example, had a history of physical violence. The term reasonable inquiry has  various 
definitions. The theory supporting negligent hiring involves foreseeability. It is defined as 
Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of General Counsel, 2005). In EEOC v. 
Midamerica Hotels Corp. d/b/a Burger King (E.D. Mo. Dec. 7, 2004), at a Burger King 
franchise in Missouri, the EEOC found evidence that a restaurant manager subjected 
female employees, most of them teenagers, to repeated groping, sexual comments, and 
demands for sex. The women complained to their first line supervisors and to a district 
manager, but no action was taken until they learned how to contact the corporate office. 
Under a consent decree, the company will pay a total of $400,000 to seven women, and 
is prohibited from future sex discrimination and from rehiring the restaurant manager. 
In addition, the company, which operates 37 Burger King restaurants in four states, will 
distribute its sexual harassment policy, complaint procedure, and hotline information to 
all current employees and new hires at its restaurants. The company also will display in 
all restaurants a new poster containing information about its sexual harassment policy, 
place the hotline number and an explanation of the sexual harassment policy on all 
employee paychecks, and require managers to attend sexual harassment training.
In another case, EEOC v. Carmike Cinemas, Inc. (E.D.N.C. Sept. 26, 2005), 
teenage boys were the victims in a case against a large movie theater chain. A 29-year-
old male concessions manager in the chain’s Raleigh, North Carolina, theater subjected 
16- and 17-year-old boys he supervised to offensive verbal and physical sexual conduct 
over a 9-month period. The manager had previously served more than two years in 
prison after being convicted of two counts of taking indecent liberties with a minor. 
Several of the boys complained about the manager, but the theater failed to take correc-
tive action. The manager was finally discharged only when he violated the company’s 
“no call/no show” rule, occasioned by his arrest for failing to register as a sex offender. 
Under a consent decree, 14 victims will share $765,000 and the company is prohibited 
from future discrimination. In addition, the company will take the following actions 
at 13 theaters in North Carolina and Virginia: revise its sexual harassment policy, 
provide a copy to all new employees, display an 11- by 17-inch poster summarizing 
the policy, provide sexual harassment training to all new employees at the time of hire 
and annually to all managers and employees, and report semiannually to the EEOC on 
complaints of sexual harassment by employees, including the identities of the complain-
ant and alleged harasser and the action taken by the company.

Screening Methods          117
follows by Black (1991: 449): “The ability to see or know in advance; e.g. the reasonable 
anticipation that harm or injury is a likely result from certain acts or omissions. In tort law, 
the ‘foreseeability’ element of proximate cause is established by proof that an actor, as person 
of ordinary intelligence and prudence, should reasonably have anticipated danger to others 
created by his negligent act.” An employer can take a number of steps to screen applicants 
and prevent negligent hiring.
First, careful planning is required. Input from a competent attorney can strengthen the 
legality of the screening process. No single screening tool should be used to assess an appli-
cant. Multiple measures always are best.
It is important that the job duties and qualifications be clearly defined through a job 
analysis. Noe et al. (2006: 151–157) write that there is no “one best way” for analyzing jobs. 
They offer various methods of job analysis that include questionnaires focusing on topics such 
as work behaviors, work conditions, and job characteristics. An important point they make 
is that errors in the job analysis process result mostly from job descriptions (based on job 
analyses) being outdated because of our rapidly changing world.
Help-wanted advertisements should be worded carefully to attract only those who meet the 
requirements of the job. This also prevents expensive turnover and charges of discrimination.
To save money, the most expensive screening methods should be performed last. The 
time and labor spent reading application forms is less expensive than conducting background 
investigations.
An employer can be held liable for negligent hiring if an employee causes harm that could 
have been prevented if the employer had conducted a reasonable background check.
Resumes and Applications
Applications must be carefully studied. Job seekers are notorious for exaggerating and actu-
ally lying. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey did a study by using a question-
naire to ask applicants if they had ever used certain equipment that really did not exist. More 
than one-third of the applicants said that they had experience with the nonexistent equipment 
(“Lying on Job Applications May Be Widespread,” 1988: 13).
Diploma mills, which provide a “degree” for a fee, with little or no work, are another 
problem. Research in the 1990s showed not only that one-third of resumes were fraudulent, 
but that the problem was increasing (Bachler, 1995: 51–60). Employers then began more 
thorough checks of applicant backgrounds and whether the degree granting institution of 
applicants was accredited. Then diploma mill con artists came up with bogus accreditation 
associations; watermarks, holographs, and encrypting on the diplomas; and toll-free numbers 
so employers can “verify” the graduate. Today, the problem is compounded by on-line degree 
programs and the difficulty of distinguishing between quality on-line degree programs and 
bogus programs. Databases that list accredited schools may list only those that receive federal 
financial aid. There is no national accrediting body, only regional ones. Solutions include care-
fully studying transcripts, asking specific questions about course work, requesting samples 
of course work (e.g., research papers), and being cautious about credit for “life education” 
(“Fighting Diploma Mills by Degrees,” 2005: 18).
Signs of deception on resumes and applications include inconsistencies in verbal and 
written statements and among background documents. Periods of “self-employment” may 
be used to hide institutionalization. Not signing an application may be another indicator of 
deception. Social Security numbers are issued by the state, and that can assist in verifying 
past residence. A thorough background investigation is indispensable to support information 
presented by the applicant.

118          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION
Employers are increasingly adding clauses and disclaimers to applications. Clauses include 
a statement on EEO and AA, employment at will (i.e., employer’s decision to terminate employ-
ees), and the resolution of grievances through arbitration rather than litigation. Disclaimers warn 
an applicant of refusal to hire or discharge for misstatements or omissions on the application.
Today, most companies use the Internet to recruit applicants by including a recruitment 
section in their Web site. The use of the Internet to solicit applications has its advantages 
and disadvantages. Advantages, when compared to traditional recruitment methods, include 
the opportunity to attract more applicants globally, lower cost, convenience, and speed. 
Disadvantages include the workload of possibly screening numerous applications, ignoring 
other means of recruiting, and hiring too quickly without screening properly.
Applicants also establish their own Web sites containing their resume and other infor-
mation. Because “Googling” a name is simple, applicants may place themselves at a competi-
tive disadvantage if they establish a Web site or blog that contains information, photographs, 
or art that would be offensive to an employer.
Interview
When the applicant is asked general questions about work experience and education, open-
ended questions should be formulated so the interviewee can talk at length. “What were your 
duties at that job?” elicits more information than short-answer questions requiring “yes” or 
“no” responses. Answers to questions should be compared to the application and resume.
Some employers ask the applicant to complete an application at home to be mailed in 
before the interview. Before the interview, while the applicant is waiting in an office, he or 
she is asked to complete another application. Both applications are then compared before the 
interview for consistency. Many employers require the application to be completed on-line.
The following information concerns questions prohibited during the entire screening 
process, including the application form. Court rulings under EEO legislation have stressed 
repeatedly that questions (and tests) must be job related. This legal requirement is known as 
a bona fide occupational qualification (BFOQ).
Questions pertaining to arrest records generally are unlawful, but it depends on the posi-
tion. An arrest does not signify guilt. The courts have stated that minority group members have 
suffered disproportionately more arrests than others. A question that asks about a conviction, 
however, may be solicited. It is not an absolute bar to employment. Here again, minority group 
members have disproportionately more convictions. Certain offenses can cause an employer 
to exclude an applicant, depending on the particular job. Therefore, questions of arrest and 
conviction must be job related (e.g., related to loss prevention) and carefully considered.
Unless a “business necessity” can be shown, questions concerning credit records, charge 
accounts, and owning one’s own home are discriminatory because minority group applicants 
often are poorer than others. Unless absolutely necessary for a particular job, height, weight, 
and other physical requirements are discriminatory against certain minority groups (e.g., 
Latino, Asian, and women applicants often are physically smaller than other applicants).
Other unlawful questions, unless job related, include asking age, sex, color, or race; 
maiden name of applicant’s wife or mother; and membership in organizations that reveal race, 
religion, or national origin.
The questions that can be asked of an applicant and on an application form, among 
others, are name, address, telephone number, Social Security number, past experience and sal-
ary, reasons for leaving past jobs, education, convictions, U.S. citizenship, military experience 
in U.S. forces, and hobbies.
Under the ADA, an employer may ask applicants if they need reasonable accommo-
dations for the hiring process. If the answer is yes, the employer may ask for reasonable 
documentation concerning the disability. Generally, the employer may not ask whether 
an applicant will need reasonable accommodations to do the job; however, pre-employment 
inquiries can be made regarding the ability of the applicant to perform job-related functions 
(Twomey et al., 2001: 789).
Extensive research on the interview process shows that without proper care, it can be 
unreliable, low in validity, and biased against certain groups. In Watson v. Fort Worth Bank 

and Trust, 108 Supreme Court 2791 (1988), the Court ruled that subjective selection methods 
such as the interview must be validated by traditional criterion-related or content-validation 
procedures. Research has pointed to concrete steps that can be taken to increase the utility of 
the personnel selection interview. First, the interview should be structured, standardized, and 
focused on a small number of goals (e.g., interpersonal style or ability to express oneself). 
Second, ask questions dealing with specific situations (e.g., “As a security officer, what would 
you do if you saw a robbery in progress?”). Third, use multiple interviewers and ensure that 
women and minority group members are represented to include their perspectives on the 
applicants (Noe et al., 2006: 234–235).
Screening Methods          119
Validity asks how accurately a test predicts job success. Reliability asks if a test is con-
sistent in measuring performance.
Tests
The testing of applicants varies considerably. Here is a summary of various types of tests 
(DeCenzo and Robbins, 2005: 94–96, 179–180; Noe et al., 2006: 239–244).
• Physical ability tests may predict performance and occupational injuries and 
disabilities. These tests are likely to have an adverse impact on applicants with 
disabilities and women. However, key questions are as follows: Is the physical ability 
essential for the job and is it mentioned prominently in the job description? Is there 
a probability that the inability to perform the job would cause risk to the safety or 
health of the applicant or others?
• Cognitive ability tests measure a person’s ability (e.g., verbal, quantitative, 
reasoning) to learn and perform a job. Highly reliable commercial tests that 
measure cognitive abilities are available, and they are generally valid predictors of 
job performance. The predictive validity of these tests is higher for jobs that are 
subject to change and require adaptability. Cognitive ability tests typically have an 
adverse impact on the hiring of minority group members, and some have favored 
abandoning these tests.
• Personality inventories attempt to measure personality characteristics and categorize 
applicants by what they are like, such as agreeable and conscientious. When such 
tests ask job applicants to answer intimate questions, such as their sex practices, class 
action lawsuits can result. These tests have been criticized for questionable validity 
and low reliability.
• Assessment center is a method to test applicants on their ability to handle duties 
encountered on the job. Multiple raters evaluate applicant performance on exercises, 
such as how to respond to an e-mail from a customer who has a complaint. These tests 
are expensive to prepare, job content validity is high, and they are low in adverse impact.
• Medical examinations are given to determine whether applicants are physically 
capable of performing the job. The ADA requires employers to make medical inquiries 
directly related to the applicant’s ability to perform job-related duties and requires 
employers to make reasonable accommodations to help handicapped individuals to 
perform the job. This act requires that the medical exam cannot be conducted until 
after the job offer has been provided to the applicant.
• Honesty tests are paper-and-pencil tests that measure trustworthiness and attitudes 
toward honesty. Thousands of companies have used this evaluation tool on millions 
of workers, and its use is increasing as employers deal with the legal restrictions of the 
polygraph. These tests have helped employers screen job candidates, and validity and 
reliability studies have been published in scholarly journals.

120          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION
• Drug tests have grown dramatically in a drug-oriented world. Employers expect 
workers to perform their jobs free from the influence of intoxicating substances, 
and accidents must be prevented. The opposing view favors protection from an 
invasion of an individual’s right to privacy. Employers in regulated or safety-sensitive 
industries are required by law to test for alcohol or drugs. Numerous employers 
conduct such tests as a loss prevention measure. Drug tests vary in terms of cost, 
quality, and accuracy. A drug test can result in a “false positive,” showing that 
a person tested has used drugs when that is not so. A “false negative” can show 
that the individual has not used drugs when, in fact, the opposite is true. Another 
problem with drug testing is cheating. Simply stated, if an observer is not present 
when a urine sample is requested, a variety of ploys may be used by an abuser to 
deceive an employer. For example, “clean” urine may be substituted. Such deception 
is a huge problem. Another strategy of drug testing is to measure drug usage from a 
sample of a person’s hair. Some experts view this method as more accurate than urine 
sampling.
Hire the Right Person, Not the Wrong One!
An error in hiring can bring crime to the workplace, loss of proprietary information, 
and litigation. Security managers have a duty to work with employers to avoid hiring 
an employee who
• Has been convicted of embezzlement, but is handling accounts payable
• Has a history of convictions for computer crimes, but is a corporate IT 
specialist
• Has a history of convictions for felony drug offenses, robberies, and burglaries, 
but is working with the cleaning crew
• Has been convicted of securities violations and insider trading, but is working 
in the corporate public information department
• Has a history of child molestation convictions, but is working in corporate 
daycare
• Is a convicted rapist, but is working as a security officer escorting female 
employees to their vehicles at night
• As a temporary employee is collecting trash throughout the premises and is 
really a news reporter seeking a story
• While working in research and development, is really an industrial spy 
collecting information to sell to a competitor
• Has been hired as a security officer, but is really a terrorist and the “inside 
person”
Background Investigations
With restrictions on the use of the polygraph, employers have turned to background inves-
tigations to verify job applicant information. This can range from inquiries made by the 
employer to the use of a credit reporting agency, a background investigative firm, or private 
investigator.
Numerous laws pertain to background investigations. The Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act 
of 2002 requires publicly traded companies to conduct background investigations, especially 
for applicants for positions involving financial matters, trade secrets, IT systems, and other 
sensitive areas. Employers must also adhere to privacy laws pertaining to the acquisition and 
protection of sensitive background information (e.g., financial, health).

The Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1971 (FCRA), enforced by the Federal Trade 
Commission, is a major law that seeks to protect consumers from abuses of credit reporting 
agencies while controlling many aspects of background and other types of investigations. (State 
laws must also be considered.) If a company conducts investigations with in-house investiga-
tors, instead of contracting the work to a service firm, the impact of the FCRA may be less 
burdensome. However, most companies cannot afford in-house investigators.
Under the FCRA, an employer is required to notify a job applicant that a background 
report will be obtained from an outside firm. The employer must receive written permission from 
the applicant prior to seeking a report. Some states require that a free copy be provided to the 
applicant. An employer who takes “adverse action” (e.g., not hiring) against the applicant, based 
on the report (credit, criminal, or otherwise), must do the following: notify the applicant about 
the development, show the applicant the report, provide information on the applicant’s rights 
under the FCRA, and allow the applicant to dispute any inaccurate information in the report 
with the reporting agency. Following this process, if the employer still takes adverse action, the 
applicant must be notified of the action, with justification.
The EEOC has issued guidelines to protect applicants against discrimination from back-
ground investigations. For example, before an employer makes an adverse decision on hiring 
or promoting based on the candidate’s personal financial data, the information should be job 
related, current, and severe. An employer, for instance, may decide not to offer a financial 
position to a candidate who has serious, current debt. The FCRA prohibits the use of nega-
tive information that is older than seven years. Applicants can bring legal action if they are 
rejected because of a poor credit record but can show good reasons for their financial prob-
lems (Giles, 2000: 107–111).
In an amendment to the FCRA in 2003, ASIS International and other groups were 
able to lobby for a provision in the law that removes workplace misconduct investigations 
(e.g., theft, violence, harassment) from the notice and disclosure requirements of the act. 
This occurred through the Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003, also called the 
FACT Act. Prior to this amendment, employers who used outside investigative firms for cases 
of employee misconduct were required to notify the suspect prior to the investigation, which 
could result in evidence or witness tampering.
An applicant’s criminal history, if any, is a prime concern of employers, especially when 
the applicant is applying for a security position. Asking about an applicant’s arrest record is 
generally unlawful, but conviction records legally are obtainable in most jurisdictions; they 
usually are public records on file at court offices. If an applicant appears to have no convic-
tions, it is possible that the background investigator did not search court records in other 
jurisdictions where the applicant has lived.
The FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) database holds an enormous 
amount of information on offenders and stolen items. However, its use is restricted to crimi-
nal justice agencies. For the screening of security officers, refer to Chapter 2 for the Private 
Security Officer Employment Authorization Act of 2004 that enables private security organi-
zations to check with the FBI on security applicants.
Past employment is a crucial area of inquiry because it reveals past job performance. A 
customary response by employers is to provide dates of employment, positions, and salary. 
However, human resources offices may be reluctant to supply negative information because 
of the potential for a defamation suit. Many states have passed job reference immunity 
statutes that shield employers from lawsuits when sharing adverse information with other 
employers on employee or former employee work history. For protection, employer state-
ments must be truthful, made in good faith, and made for a legitimate purpose. In those 
states with such laws, a copy of the law can be attached to the release (to be signed by the 
applicant) authorizing the background check; this may prompt the applicant and the former 
employer to release more information. Also, the previous employer can be tactfully advised 
that withholding information could result in liability for negligent referral (Nixon, 2005).
The personal references supplied by the applicant usually are those of people who will 
make favorable comments about the applicant. If an investigator can obtain additional refer-
ences from contacting references, more will be learned about the applicant.
Screening Methods          121

122          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION
Most colleges will verify an applicant’s attendance and degree over the telephone. 
College transcripts can be checked out by mail as long as a copy of the applicant’s authoriza-
tion is enclosed. This conforms to privacy legislation. When educational records are received, 
the investigator should study characteristics and look for inconsistencies.
The private use of public records is on the increase for background investigations. As 
we know, conviction records are available in most jurisdictions. Records from state motor 
vehicle departments can reveal a history of careless driving behavior. A motor vehicle report 
(MVR) can serve as a cross-check for name, date of birth, and physical description. Federal 
court records expose violations of federal laws, civil litigation, and bankruptcy. Chapter 10 
discusses online databases for acquiring information.
Nadell (2004: 108–116) offers seven steps to effective background checks to protect orga-
nizations from negligent hiring allegations while promoting a safe and secure environment:
1. Prepare and distribute to all employees a background screening policy that conforms 
to all state and federal laws. This lets employees know that promotions depend on 
background screening.
2. Communicate the policy by placing signs at select locations on the premises.
3. Place a notice about background screening and drug testing on the company 
Web site.
4. Disclose the screening methods to job applicants.
5. Use the job application process to ask all legally allowable questions.
6. Ensure that temporary employment agencies perform background checks and request 
a copy of the check.
7. Ensure that vendors and contractors perform background checks and request a copy 
of the check.
History and Controversy: Polygraph and PSE
Background information on the polygraph and psychological stress evaluator (PSE) 
will assist the reader in understanding the controversy and subsequent legal restric-
tions on these devices. In 1895, Cesare Lombroso used the first scientific instrument 
to detect deception through changes in pulse and blood pressure. In 1921, Dr. John 
A. Larson developed the polygraph, which measured blood pressure, respiration, and 
pulse. By 1949, Leonard Keeler added galvanic skin response (i.e., electrical changes 
on the surface of the skin).
The PSE was developed for the U.S. Army in 1964 by Robert McQuiston, Allan 
Bell, and Wilson Ford. After it was rejected by the Army, McQuiston patented a civilian 
version and marketed it to the private sector.
When questions are asked during a polygraph exam, bodily changes are 
recorded on graph paper or a computer. The examiner interprets these readings 
with reference to questions asked. Persons have been known to try to “fool” the 
polygraph by biting their tongues or pressing a toe into a thumbtack previously 
hidden in their shoes. The PSE has a few variations, but basically it records voice 
stress as questions are asked. There is no hookup, so it can be used covertly.
A disadvantage of the PSE is that only one factor is being recorded, as 
opposed to the multiple factors of the polygraph. Training for administering and 
interpreting the PSE is shorter than for the polygraph. The accuracy of either device 
is subject to considerable debate, especially concerning the PSE. University of Utah 
research concluded that the polygraph can be over 90% accurate (U.S. Department 
of Justice, 1978: 8). Gardner and Anderson (2007: 240) write that “… in 2002 a 
panel of leading scientists confirmed a US congressional study done in 1983, with 
both studies reporting that lie detector tests do a poor job of identifying spies or 
other national security risks and are likely in security screening to produce false 

Employee Socialization
Socialization, the learning process whereby an employee gains knowledge about the employer 
and how to become a productive worker, is broader in scope than orientation and training 
programs. Employers who understand the socialization process are likely to enhance the value 
of employees to the organization. Furthermore, losses can be reduced as employees adhere to 
loss prevention strategies. The following emphasizes orientation, training programs, examples 
set by superiors, and employee needs.
Employee Socialization          123
accusations about innocent people.” Much depends on the training and skill of the 
examiner behind the device. The polygraph has been responsible for eliminating 
undesirable job applicants, in addition to assisting with criminal and civil cases, but 
at the same time, abuses have occurred that resulted in the passage of the Employee 
Polygraph Protection Act.
Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988 (EPPA) was passed by Congress and 
signed into law by then-president Ronald Reagan on June 27, 1988. It became effective 
on December 27. The act prohibits most private employers from using polygraph or “lie 
detector” tests to screen job applicants and greatly restricts the use of these instruments to 
test present employees. The EPPA defines the term lie detector to include any device that is 
used to render a diagnostic opinion regarding the honesty of an individual. The congres-
sional Office of Technology Assessment estimated that 2 million polygraph exams had been 
conducted each year—90% by private employers.
The EPPA states that it is unlawful for an employer to directly or indirectly force 
an employee to submit to a polygraph test. Discrimination against those who refuse to be 
tested or who file a complaint under the EPPA is prohibited. Employers who violate the 
EPPA may be assessed a civil penalty up to $10,000 for each violation. In addition, the 
Secretary of Labor may seek a restraining order enjoining the employer from violating the 
act. The law provides individuals with the right to sue employers in federal and state courts 
for employment reinstatement, promotion, and payment of lost wages and benefits.
A few kinds of employees are exempt from the act and can be tested, including 
employees of
• National security organizations or defense industries
• Federal, state, and local governments
• Businesses involved with controlled substances
• Certain security service firms, such as armored car or security alarm firms
In addition, a limited exemption exists for any employer who is conducting an 
ongoing investigation involving economic loss or injury; the suspect employee must 
have had access to the subject of the investigation, and reasonable suspicion must be 
present. Considerable justification and documentation is required. Chapter 10 contains 
proper testing procedures under the EPPA.
Should the EPPA be amended to permit more widespread use of the polygraph in the 
workplace to screen job applicants for honesty?

124          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION
Loss Prevention Orientation for New Employees
When new employees begin to work for an organization, the orientation session plays a sig-
nificant role in the socialization process. Employees learn about company policies, procedures, 
departments, products and services, customers, and the community (Noe et al., 2006: 314). 
Examples set at the beginning can go a long way in preventing future problems and losses. The 
orientation program should be designed to acquaint the new employees with the “big picture” 
of loss prevention. Such discussion can enhance the employees’ understanding of the objec-
tives of the loss prevention program, how employees can help, and the benefits to everyone.
Employee Training
In this discussion the focus is on training protection personnel, but the principles that follow 
can apply to a variety of training programs for a broad spectrum of employees.
Despite the training problems of the security industry, as covered in Chapter 2, increasing 
numbers of practitioners in the field realize the importance of training. Consequently, training 
standards and programs constantly are being upgraded. Although training costs money, the 
investment is well worth it. Training helps to prevent problems such as critical incidents and 
litigation. Training provides personnel with an improved understanding of what is expected of 
them, heightens morale and motivation, and reduces disciplinary problems. All these benefits 
are impossible unless there is management support for training.
Planning Training
Step 1: Training Needs
Several questions need to be answered. Who are the recipients of the training (loss prevention 
personnel or regular employees; new or experienced employees)? What training programs are 
available? What deficiencies were noted in employee evaluations? What are the suggestions 
from supervisors? What are the suggestions from employees? Of particular importance is to 
conduct a job analysis to pinpoint the skills required for the job.
Step 2: Budget
Before the training program is prepared, an estimate of money available is necessary, since one 
cannot spend what one does not have.
Step 3: Behavioral Objectives
Each behavioral objective consists of a statement, usually one sentence, which describes the 
behavioral changes that the student should undergo because of the training. For example, loss 
prevention officers must explain how the 5th Amendment to the Bill of Rights relates to the 
private sector.
Step 4: Training Program Outline
With the use of the behavioral objectives, an outline is prepared. It can be considered a step-
by-step sequence for training.
Step 5: Learning Medium
The method of presentation is described. Various strategies are available, such as lecture, 
discussion, demonstration, case method, role playing, and e-learning (on-line learning).
Hipkiss (2006: 29) writes of learning through alternatives to the classroom. She notes 
that the classroom is just one way to learn and that people learn in many ways. Hipkiss 
argues that employers are realizing that experiential learning—by doing, reflection, and 
real-world application—has greater value than sitting in a classroom.
Many training programs use a mixture of techniques. Scenario training or simulations, for 
example, create workplace situations that trainees will encounter on the job. For this to be successful, 

Employee Socialization          125
managers must determine what types of behavior or performance are desired. Then the training is 
designed around such objectives. Several trainees can participate in each scripted scenario, acting as 
security officers, employees, customers, visitors, and evaluators. As the scenarios change, so should 
the roles of the trainees. Examples of scenarios are assisting a visitor who is lost and upset about 
being late to a meeting, assisting a handicapped person who must deal with an inoperable elevator, 
barring access to an estranged spouse of an employee, and responding to a report of employee theft. 
A variation of scenario training is written scenario testing whereby the trainee reads a script and 
decides what to do and why. As with all training methods, feedback by the instructor is essential 
so performance can be improved (Dominguez, 1999: 29–30).
Technology-based training methods involving CD-ROM, DVD, Internet, or intranet are 
popular and used by many organizations. Each is characterized by advantages and disadvan-
tages. Major advantages are flexibility as to the location (i.e., globally) and time (i.e., 24/7) of 
training, cost savings on travel, and management’s ability to track employee progress. Whereas 
the traditional classroom offers an instructor who can provide immediate guidance and feed-
back to students, technology-based training methods, such as computer-assisted, self-paced, 
and distance learning offer a mixture of approaches in providing guidance and feedback to 
students.
Step 6: Evaluation, Feedback, and Revision
After the training is completed, the students should provide valuable feedback to the instructor. 
An evaluation questionnaire, completed by students, can guide the instructor in revising the 
training program. The training is further validated through interviews of participants and super-
visors a few months after the training to see if the training helped participants to perform their 
tasks effectively and to identify topics requiring more or less attention. Audits can be used to 
further assess the success of training. This can entail observing an employee on the job, checking 
the quality of written reports, or hiring external investigators to audit the courtesy of employees 
or perform access penetration tests.
Learning Principles
 1. Learning results in a behavioral change. Learning objectives are stated in terms of 
specific behaviors. When a student is able to perform a task that he or she was unable 
to perform before a training program, then behavior has changed.
 2. Tests are used to measure the changed behavior.
 3. If the proper conditions for learning are presented to students, learning will take place. 
The teacher should help the student to learn by facilitating learning through effective 
instructional methods.
 4. An instructional program should begin with basic introductory information to develop 
a foundation for advanced information.
 5. Feedback, an instructor informing the student whether a response was correct or 
incorrect, is vital to learning.
 6. An instructional program must consider the learner’s ability to absorb information.
 7. A student will be more receptive to learning if information is job related.
 8. Conditioning aids the learning process. Conditioning can be perceived as a method 
of molding or preparing a student for something through constant practice; for 
example, repetitive drills so that employees know exactly what to do in case of fire.
 9. Increased learning will take place if the practice is spread out over time as opposed 
to a single, lengthy practice session.
10. Information that is learned and understood is remembered longer than that which is 
learned by rote.
Wasted Training
In an article in Administrative Management, “How Not to Waste Your Training Dollars,” 
Donald J. Tosti (1980: 44) declares that American businesses and government agencies 

spend billions of dollars annually on training, and about half of that amount is wasted. Tosti 
describes “Seven Deadly Sins of Training,” which are still applicable today:
 1. Using training to solve motivational problems.
 2. Making training more complicated than is necessary.
 3. Training personnel at the wrong time, such as training all of an organization’s 
employees for a program that will be instituted in two years.
 4. Overtraining, such as instructing retail clerks on the theoretical aspects of their job 
before explaining important procedural aspects of retailing.
 5. Failing to understand the true costs of training.
 6. Failing to calculate training on a cost-effective basis. Evaluations of training 
programs help to predict benefits. Questions of concern are as follows: Did 
employees learn and apply the new information? Are losses reduced? Was the 
training worth the money?
 7. Following fads in training.
Think about a training program or course you attended in the past. In what ways could 
it have been improved?
U.S. Army Guard Program, Contractors’ Training Requirements 
(U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2006: 21)
 1. Use of force
 2. Antiterrorism, threats, definition, and identification
 3. Security operations, basic functions, patrolling techniques and responsibilities
 4. Response to hostage situations; initial actions prior to military police response
 5. Personnel identification procedures, package and vehicle search procedures, and 
contraband identification/seizure procedures
 6. Firearm (pistol and/or shotgun) qualification and safety
 7. Unarmed self-defense
 8. Oleoresin capsicum (OC) spray techniques, use, and application
 9. Nightstick and police baton use and techniques
10. Clearing, securing, and protecting crime scene
11. Use of interpersonal skills, verbal skills, de-escalation, nonverbal actions
12. Techniques for searches, 4th Amendment rights, consent and seizure
13. Application of handcuffs
14. Hand and arm signals, basic traffic control techniques
15. Recording of police information and sworn statements
16. Contract security guard authority and jurisdiction
17. Prevention of sexual harassment
18. Customer service
19. Military customs and courtesies
Examples Set by Superiors
Poor example setting is pervasive in many organizations. All organizations have informal 
rules that serve as guides to action. These rules often are transmitted to subordinates from 
superiors. The length of the 15-minute coffee break varies within organizations, as does the 
126          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION

time when the 11:00 A.M. meeting begins; the amount of time allowed before an employee 
is considered late also varies; the number of minor safety violations permitted before strict 
disciplinary action differs from one organization to another as well as from one superior to 
another. Clearly, superiors serve as teachers and role models. The actions of superiors greatly 
affect subordinate performance. Poor supervision results in both low subordinate productivity 
and losses.
A supervisor can be perceived to be what sociologists call an agent of socialization, 
a person who plays a dominant role in the socialization of an individual. In society, par-
ents, teachers, and clergy are agents of socialization. In a business organization, a supervi-
sor becomes an agent of socialization after establishing a working relationship with a new 
employee. The superior first makes the new employee feel some degree of belonging, in calm-
ing the uneasy new worker. The superior may have to skillfully break down the old methods 
that the new subordinate may have carried over from a previous job.
Because first impressions are lasting, the initial part of the socialization process is 
important. A good example must be set in the beginning.
Employee Socialization          127
Based on your experience, can you think of any poor examples set by superiors in the 
workplace?
Poor Example Set by Ralph Marks, Loss Prevention Manager
The Locost retail store chain emphasized the importance of loss prevention proce-
dures as an aid to increased profits. All employees were expected to adhere to these 
procedures. The loss prevention manager at each store was expected to reinforce the 
program. Each store’s employees looked to the loss prevention manager for guidance.
At one particular store, Ralph Marks, the loss prevention manager, made a serious 
mistake. All retail employees were permitted to make purchases and receive a 15% 
discount. Procedures dictated that items bought were to be recorded and then stored 
under a designated counter until the end of the day. When Ralph Marks bought a stereo 
for his car, he did not follow the appropriate procedures. He installed the stereo during 
working hours, which also compounded the poor example. By the end of the working 
day, all retail employees had seen or heard of this incident. This poor example caused 
many employees to lose respect for the manager and the loss prevention program.
Employee Needs
The way an organization responds to employee needs has an impact not only on the socializa-
tion process, but also on losses. When employee needs are met, workers also learn about the 
employment environment. They learn that management and supervisors care; employees learn 
to respect and appreciate the employment environment while helping to reduce losses.
What are employee needs? Psychologist Abraham Maslow (1954) became famous for 
designing a “hierarchy of needs” in the early 1950s (see Figure 6-1). Maslow’s view is that 
people are always in a state of want, but what they want depends on their level within the 
hierarchy of human needs.
Lower level needs must be satisfied before upper level needs. Maslow’s hierarchy of 
needs follows:
• Basic physiological needs. Survival needs such as food, water, and the elimination of 
wastes can be satisfied with employer assistance. A well-run company cafeteria and 
clean lavatories are examples.

FIGURE 6-1 Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.
• Safety and security needs. This need relates to order in one’s life. A person needs to 
feel free from anxiety and fear. Adequate wages, medical insurance, and workplace 
safety help to satisfy these needs.
• Societal needs. The need to be loved and have friends and the need for esteem can be 
fulfilled by supervisors. A supervisor should praise a subordinate when appropriate. 
Employees should receive recognition or awards after completing a good job. 
Employee socials also are helpful.
• Esteem and status needs. A person needs to be competent, to achieve, and to gain 
approval and respect.
• Self-actualization needs. This need is at the top of the hierarchy of needs. It signifies 
that a person has reached his or her full potential, whether as a janitor, homemaker, 
doctor, or whatever. An organization and its superiors can do a lot (e.g., training, 
promotion) in assisting an employee to fulfill this need.
Employees learn which needs are satisfied and which are not. Suppose a workplace has 
a terrible cafeteria, dirty lavatories, poor wages, an inadequate safety program, authoritarian 
supervisors, and poor training and promotional opportunities. What level of losses would be 
sustained at this workplace in comparison to another that adhered to Maslow’s hierarchy of 
human needs?
How do you think corporate downsizing affects Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs 
and loss prevention?
Search the Web
Employers and job applicants are becoming increasingly knowledgeable about the 
validity and reliability of tests, especially because of the need to eliminate or to detect 
discrimination. The Buros Institute of Mental Measurement (www.unl.edu/buros/) 
evaluates published tests and acts as a consumers’ evaluation service.
Here are additional Web sites related to this chapter:
American Psychological Association: www.apa.org/science/standards.html
ASIS International, “Preemployment Background Screening Guideline”: www.
asisonline.org/guidelines/guidelinespreemploy.pdf
EEOC’s National Contact Center: info@ask.eeoc.gov
Federal Trade Commission: www.ftc.gov
Society for Human Resource Management: www.shrm.org/
U.S. Department of Labor: www.dol.gov/dol/allcfr/Title_41/Part_60–3/toc.htm
128          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION

Case Problems
6A. Plan and write a step-by-step screening process for applicants interested in 
uniformed loss prevention positions. Formulate an application form. Pay 
particularly close attention to applicable laws.
6B. You are seeking a position as a security officer at a research and development 
company. Officers at this site wear blazers and focus on access controls and 
protecting people and information. The job pays well, with opportunities for 
advancement, so you strive to do your best at each stage of the applicant screening 
process. You now must complete an assessment center “in-basket” exercise while 
thinking as a security officer. You are to prioritize the following items, with 
justification for each, upon reaching the scene of an assault in the parking lot.
• A witness to the assault approaches you to offer information.
• Someone who is scaling the perimeter fence is screaming for help because of 
being stuck in the razor ribbon.
• An employee approaches you for help because he locked his keys in his car. 
• You receive a radio transmission from your supervisor who wants to meet with 
you immediately.
• The victim is down and bleeding.
• You must complete an incident report for this case.
• A car alarm has been activated.
6C. You are a candidate for the position of security manager for a large shopping mall 
near a major city. The number of candidates has been narrowed to six, and the mall 
human resources manager has decided to use an “in-basket” exercise to further narrow 
the list of candidates. The “in-basket” exercise consists of a series of memoranda/e-
mails, telephone calls, and radio transmissions that the mall security manager would 
encounter in the job. Your task is to read all items, set priorities among them, and 
write what action you would take and the reasoning for your action for each item. The 
date is September 24. The time to complete this assignment is 60 minutes. It is possible 
that all candidates will be handed additional memoranda/e-mails, telephone messages, 
or radio transmissions during the exercise. A review panel (police captain, firefighter, 
college educator, and mall security officer) will evaluate each candidate’s work without 
knowing the identity of the writer. [Source: Philip P. Purpura, Retail Security and 
Shrinkage Protection (Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1993), pp. 327–329.]
Item 1
TO: Mall Security Manager
FROM: Mall Manager
SUBJECT: Security Seminar
DATE: September 20
Several merchants would like a seminar on security before the busy holiday season. Please 
get back to me as soon as possible.
Item 2
TO: Mall Security Manager
FROM: Human Resources Manager, Bigmart Department Store
SUBJECT: Selection of Store Detective
DATE: September 24
Please walk over to review the applications for store detective. I have no idea who would 
be the best one.
Item 3
TELEPHONE MESSAGE: September 21
Mr. John Poston, a mall customer, called again. He is still irate about the damage to his 
car window when Security Officer Mallory broke into the vehicle after Mr. Poston left 
his keys in the ignition. Mr. Poston is threatening to sue.
Case Problems          129

Item 4
TELEPHONE MESSAGE: September 20
Mrs. Johnson, owner of the Befit Health Store, thinks someone is entering her store at 
night. She is very upset and worried, and wants you to meet her at her store.
Item 5
TO: Mall Security Manager
FROM: Mall Manager
SUBJECT: Application Verification
DATE: September 22
The Westwood Mall office called to verify your application for their job opening in security. Are 
you planning to begin another job? Please let me know immediately. Let’s talk.
Item 6
RADIO TRANSMISSION: September 24, 11:15 A.M.
“Four year old boy lost at south end of mall. We have not been able to locate for one hour.”
Item 7
TELEPHONE MESSAGE: September 23
Attorney for the plaintiff who was assaulted in the parking lot last month wants you to 
call him right away.
Item 8
TO: Mall Security Manager
FROM: Mall Manager
SUBJECT: Emergency Plans
DATE: September 16
In speaking with other mall managers at a recent seminar, they mentioned updating their 
emergency plans. We probably need to do this, too. Please respond.
Item 9
RADIO TRANSMISSION: September 24, 11:20 A.M.
“Small fire in stock room of Smith’s Department Store. We can put it out.”
Item 10
TO: Mall Security Manager
FROM: Paula Reed, Security Officer
SUBJECT: Pay Raise
DATE: September 23
I am not pleased about my raise of only $0.15 per hour. I have been doing a good job 
and I really work hard when we get busy. The male security officers are making much 
more than my rate per hour. I believe that this difference is because I am a black 
woman. We have talked about this already, but you haven’t done anything about it. I 
want something done right away or I will take legal action.
Item 11
TELEPHONE MESSAGE: September 22
The manager of Hall Stuart Clothes wants to know why it took so long for security to 
respond to a shoplifting incident yesterday.
6D. You are a security manager who has just been given an assignment by the vice 
president of human resources to obtain a copy of an e-mail containing racial jokes 
that has been circulating in the company. She has received complaints about the e-
mail and wants you to bring it to a meeting to provide input for corrective action. 
130          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION

A short time later you obtain the e-mail, which contains the story of a young man 
named Boy. One of the sentences states: “I axed my mudder for some money. She 
had only too bucks so I axed my fiend, Kenya spare a quarter. He said no so Afro 
a chair at him.” As the security manager, what do you suggest at the meeting?
The Decision for “You Be the Judge”
Ultimately, no, but the company had to run a gauntlet before breaking out into the clear. 
There were conflicting judgments at two lower court levels, but finally a higher court ruled in 
favor of Hi-Mark. In the end, Zaleszny did not win anything. This case is based on Griffiths 
v. CIGN, 988 F 2nd 457 3rd Circuit Court (1993). The names in this case have been changed 
to protect the privacy of those involved.
Comment
The fact that Zaleszny’s company had to go through appeals can give you pause. You might 
suppose that simple logic should have upheld Hi-Mark from the outset. If the company didn’t 
prosecute, how could it be guilty of malicious prosecution? If the manager who fired Zaleszny 
didn’t know about his EEOC complaint, how could the firing have been a retaliation for the 
complaint? And why didn’t these lines of reasoning prevail right away? Because logic doesn’t 
always prevail in court. Often, other variables are in play, including the effectiveness with 
which a case is presented, a jury’s understanding of a judge’s instructions, the extent to which 
all parties understand the relevant law, and even the personalities in the courtroom.
The two questions that confronted this company can be minefields. What should you 
do about prosecution of a crime suspect? Can you safely fire an employee who has engaged 
in a protected activity, such as complaining to a federal watchdog agency? Be sure to get a 
qualified attorney’s advice whenever you face these questions.
References
Bachler, C. (1995). “Resume Fraud: Lies, Omissions, and Exaggerations.” Personnel Journal 
(June).
Black, H. (1991). Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th ed. St. Paul, MN: West Pub.
Bryant, M. (2006). “Harassment Lawsuits and Lessons.” Security Management, 50 (April).
Byars, L., and Rue, L., (1997). Human Resource Management, 5th ed. Chicago: Irwin Pub.
DeCenzo, D., and Robbins, S. (2005). Fundamentals of Human Resource Management, 8th 
ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Dominguez, E. (1999). “Training That Triumphs.” Security Management, 43 (June).
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of General Counsel. (2005). “FY 2005 
Annual Report.” www.eeoc.gov/litigation/05annrpt/index.html, retrieved June 16, 2006.
“Fighting Diploma Mills by Degrees” (2005). Security Management, 49 (May).
Gardner, T., and Anderson, T. (2007). Criminal Evidence: Principles and Cases, 6th ed. 
Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.
Giles, F. (2000). “Checking Credit When It’s Due.” Security Management, 44 (June).
Hamit, F. (2000). “ASIS Confronts a Changing Demographic.” Security Technology & 
Design, 10 (October).
Heneman, H., et al. (1997). Staffing Organization, 2nd ed. Middleton, WI: Irwin Pub.
Hipkiss, A. (2006). “Learning Moves out of the Classroom.” Personnel Today (May 16).
Ivancevich, J. (2001). Human Resources Management, 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Pub.
“Lying on Job Applications May Be Widespread” (1988). Security (February).
Mann, R., and Roberts, B. (2001). Essentials of Business Law, 7th ed. Cincinnati, OH: West.
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper & Row.
Nadell, B. (2004). “The Cut of His Jib Doesn’t Jibe.” Security Management, 48 
(September).
References          131

Nixon, B. (2005). “How to Avoid Hiring Hazards.” Security Management, 49 (February). 
www.securitymanagement.com/library/001706.html, retrieved February 4, 2005.
Noe, R., et al. (2006). Human Resource Management: Gaining a Competitive Advantage, 5th 
ed. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Tosti, D. (1980). “How Not to Waste Your Training Dollars.” Administrative Management, 
41 (February).
Twomey, D., et al. (2001). Anderson’s Business Law and the Regulatory Environment, 14th 
ed. Cincinnati, OH: West.
U.S. Department of Justice. (1978). “Validity and Reliability of Detection of Deception.” 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2006). Contract Security Guards: Army’s Guard 
Program Requires Greater Oversight and Reassessment of Acquisition Approach (April). 
www.gao.gov/new.items/d06284.pdf, retrieved April 5, 2006.
Warfel, W. (2005). “SEX ED: Insulating Yourself from Sexual Harassment Litigation.” Risk 
Management Magazine, 52 (February).
132          APPLICANT SCREENING AND EMPLOYEE SOCIALIZATION

7
Internal Threats  and 
Countermeasures
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Describe the broad spectrum of internal threats.
2. Explain the internal theft problem.
3. Outline at least five management countermeasures to prevent internal theft.
4.  List and explain the steps involved in confronting an employee suspected of internal 
theft.
5.  Explain integration, open architecture, and convergence in reference to physical 
security.
6.  Outline access control methods and systems, including the types of cards used for 
access.
7. List and describe at least three types of locks.
8. List and describe at least five types of interior intrusion detection sensors.
9. Describe CCTV technology, including IP-based network systems.
10. Explain the characteristics of safes.
• threat
• internal loss prevention
• theft of time
• telework
• universal threats
• employee theft
• pilferage
• embezzlement
• occupational fraud
• Donald R. Cressey 
• employee theft formula
• Edwin Sutherland
• differential association
• accountability
• accounting
• auditing
• inventory system
• marking property
• metal detectors
• integrated system
• open architecture
• identity management system
• access controls
• authentication
• authorization
• cryptography
• encryption
• common user provisioning
KEY TERMS
133

• interoperable
• digital certificate systems
• tailgating
• pass back
• biometric security systems
• mechanical locks
• electromechanical locks
• deadbolt
• latches
• cylinder
• lock picking
• master key system
• intrusion detection system
• sensors
• control unit
• annunciator
• dual technologies
• digital video recorders
• network video recorder
• Internet protocol (IP)-based network 
cameras
• analog technology
• digital technology
• compression
• charged coupled device (CCD) or 
“chip” camera
• multiplex
• video motion detection
• intelligent video systems
• fire-resistive (or record) safe
• burglary-resistive (or money) safe
Introduction
A threat is a serious, impending or recurring event that can result in loss, and it must be dealt 
with immediately. Internal loss prevention focuses on threats from inside an organization. 
Crimes, fires, and accidents are major internal loss problems. Examples of internal threats 
include violence in the workplace, theft of proprietary information, sabotage, infiltration by 
gangs or organized crime, and terrorism. Losses can result from full-time, part-time, and tem-
porary employees; contractors; vendors; and other groups who have access to the worksite both 
physically and remotely. Productivity losses also illustrate the range of internal losses. Such 
losses can result from poor plant layout or substance abuse by employees. Other productivity 
losses result from employees who loaf, arrive at work late, leave early, abuse coffee breaks, 
socialize excessively, use the Internet for nonwork-related activities, and prolong work to create 
overtime; these abuses are called theft of time. Faulty measuring devices, which may or may not 
be known to employees, are another cause of losses. Scales or dispensing devices that measure 
things ranging from truck weight to copper wire length are examples.
We can see that the spectrum of internal threats is broad. Although this chapter focuses 
on internal theft and associated countermeasures, the strategies covered also apply to many 
internal and external (e.g., burglary and robbery) threats.
Universal IT Threats
Although the media often concentrate on a few high-profile cyberattacks from outside 
organizations, the greatest threat to corporate information technology systems is from 
within (i.e., from employees). Because news of many insider attacks is not released to 
the public, the frequency of the following scenario is impossible to gauge: A systems 
administrator in one hospital learned that she was about to be fired, so she arranged 
for a “severance package” for herself by encrypting a critical patient database. Her 
supervisor feared the worst and loss of his job, so in exchange for the decryption key, 
the manager arranged for a termination “bonus” and an agreement that the hospital 
would not prosecute (Shaw et al., 2000: 62).
134          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES

Introduction          135
The dilemma facing the hospital, as to whether to meet the offender’s demands or 
prosecute, can produce interesting debate. How long could the hospital function with-
out the critical patient database? How much time would be required by the criminal 
justice system to resolve the case? As we know from previous chapters, there are several 
procedural steps to a criminal case, and the decision to prosecute has its advantages 
and disadvantages.
From a loss prevention perspective, the following methods would have placed 
the hospital in an improved position: maintain strict confidentiality about the impend-
ing firing of the employee, follow established policies and procedures pertaining to fir-
ing employees, exercise extreme caution, block the employee’s access to the IT system 
and other vulnerable locations and systems, and always back up data. Technical solu-
tions alone are not the answer because internal attacks are a “people problem” requir-
ing personnel security solutions. The challenges include the expense of money and 
time for increased security. Conviction checks may be ineffective with IT personnel 
because their misdeeds are likely to be unrecorded and, as in the case of the hospital 
systems administrator, unreported. At-risk behaviors, however, can lead to exposure 
by supervisors and coworkers. Examples include personnel who avoid procedures and 
hack into a system to fix problems, curious individuals who explore the system while 
violating security policies, and individuals who cause outages to facilitate their own 
travel or advancement.
A growing threat is the insider who steals proprietary or confidential  information 
such as customer identifying information and financial information. These losses can 
also result from accidental losses of data or attacks by hackers.
Two additional concerns are the growing remote workforce and the devices 
used to work away from the traditional worksite. Laptop and handheld computers, 
high-speed Internet, wireless networks, and smart cell phones have facilitated telework 
(i.e., working away from the traditional worksite by transmitting information via com-
munication technology). Many other devices also aid the mobile workforce, includ-
ing personal digital assistants (PDAs), digital cameras, and USB memory sticks—all 
of which are high-capacity storage devices. Because of telework, traditional internal 
threats are also becoming external threats. For instance, an employee working off-site 
may have his company laptop computer stolen from his home or while traveling. He 
may also be victimized by hacking while working off-site. Furthermore, because of 
technology, an employee can cause losses (e.g., embezzlement or theft of proprietary 
information) for an organization while off the premises as well as when on the prem-
ises. Differentiating internal from external threats is becoming increasingly difficult 
and blurred, especially because we have entered the era of universal threats. In other 
words, employees and organizations face the same threats whether work is accom-
plished on or off the premises.
Jordon (2006: 16) writes that both public and private sectors are increasingly 
embracing telework because of efforts to ensure continuity of operations when a 
disaster strikes. He refers to the Federal Telework Survey that showed that 41% of 
responding federal employees indicated that they telework, up from 19% the previous 
year. The research also showed that federal IT professionals expanded their support for 
telework initiatives. Jordan’s article adds that telework is not just a technological issue, 
it is also an organizational and cultural change issue, and agencies must share best 
practices. From a security perspective, it is also a socialization issue to prevent losses.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Science and Technology 
Directorate and the Executive Office of the President, Office of Science and 
Technology Policy (2004: 42) warned that the greatest threat to critical infra-
structure (e.g., food, water, electricity) is from the insider who performs actions 
that could destroy or degrade systems and services. Insider threats develop from 
individuals who have authorization to access information and infrastructure 
resources. These threats are difficult to guard against because the offenders are 
on the inside and trusted. They exploit vulnerabilities and have advantages over 

136          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
outsiders in choosing the time, place, and method of attack. The Science and 
Technology Directorate and the Office of Science and Technology Policy (2004: 
42–44) offer research directions for protection against insider threats:
Intent Detection: This involves examining combinations of observations, actions, 
relationships, and history to sense possible offending behavior. Various 
methods are used to support this approach, including surveillance, cataloging, 
pattern recognition, and computational analysis. These methods are applicable 
to the physical and cyber domains.
Detection and Monitoring: Detection should draw attention to early recognition 
of a pattern of action that is erratic or outside the norm. Computer models are 
necessary to distinguish between random behavior and behavior indicative of 
a possible internal threat. Then computer systems must monitor the possible 
problem.
Protection and Prevention: This includes security measures that are overt or 
covert. Examples are incremental access, job-specific access controls, and 
repetitive checking. These measures and others require research to build 
solutions to internal threats.
Taylor et al. (2006: 7) write that vulnerability from within an organization is the 
most dangerous and serious threat. They report that 73% of the risk to computer secu-
rity is from internal sources, while 23% is attributable to external sources. In compari-
son to outsiders, Taylor et al. note that insiders find it easier to circumvent IT security 
because they are familiar with the system; in many instances breaches from within are 
not detected; an internal cybercrime can be covered up by using a special program; and 
detection may not surface in an audit. Computer industry research shows the average 
internal attack costs a company $2.7 million, compared with $57,000 for an external 
attack (Shaw et al., 2000: 62–66). Randazzo et al. (2004: 2) write that estimates of 
internal attacks are difficult to formulate because of under-reporting to law enforce-
ment authorities and organization fear of negative publicity and increased liability. 
They point to statistics that vary on the prevalence of internal and external cyberat-
tacks, the methodological problems of annual surveys and in-depth case studies, and 
the importance of examining incidents from both behavioral and technical perspectives 
simultaneously. These research problems make it difficult to gauge internal and exter-
nal threats to IT systems. Examples of two surveys are the FBI (2005) Computer Crime 
Survey and the Computer Security Institute/FBI (2005) CSI/FBI Computer Crime and 
Security Survey. Both surveys depend on organizations to report their victimizations. 
In the former survey, 44% of respondents had experienced intrusions from within their 
organizations. In the latter survey, respondents compared internal and external IT secu-
rity incidents in their respective organizations, and they reported that there were more 
security incidents from external sources; however, more respondents did not know the 
number of internal incidents when compared to the number of incidents from external 
sources (44% versus 35%). In a subsequent survey (Computer Security Institute/FBI, 
2006: 11–12), CSI/FBI Computer Crime and Security Survey, some questions and 
reporting on internal versus external threats were changed from the earlier survey, 
which made comparisons difficult. The 2006 report stated that most respondents do 
not see insiders as responsible for most of their organization’s cyber losses; however, a 
significant number of respondents believe that insiders are responsible for substantial 
losses. In addition, for all categories of attacks or misuse, a trend shows the detection 
of such attacks appears to be decreasing. Interestingly, the dollar amount of losses 
resulting from security breaches decreased substantially from 2004 to 2005 due to a 
drop in the number of respondents. Negative publicity from reporting computer crime 
to police is  a major concern of organizations.

To personalize the information presented in this chapter, three businesses are described: 
a retail lumber business (see Figure 7-1), a clothing manufacturing plant (see Figure 7-2), and 
a research facility (see Figure 7-3). Suppose you are a loss prevention specialist working for a 
corporation that has just purchased these three businesses. Your supervisor informs you that 
you are responsible for recommending modifications at these facilities to improve internal loss 
prevention. First, read this chapter and then proceed to the case problem pertaining to these 
businesses at the end of the chapter.
Internal Theft
How Serious Is the Problem?
Internal theft also is referred to as employee theft, pilferage, embezzlement, stealing, pecula-
tion, and defalcation. Employee theft is stealing by employees from their employers. Pilferage 
is stealing in small quantities. Embezzlement occurs when a person takes money or property 
that has been entrusted to his or her care; a breach of trust occurs. Peculation and defalcation 
are synonyms for embezzlement. Whatever term is used, this problem is an insidious menace 
to the survival of businesses, institutions, and organizations. This threat is so severe in many 
workplaces that employees steal anything that is not “nailed down.”
The total estimated cost of employee theft varies from one source to another, mainly 
because theft is defined and data are collected in so many different ways. An often-cited 
statistic, from The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, is that 30% of business failures result from 
employee theft. The National White Collar Crime Center reports that losses due to employee 
theft range from $20 to $90 billion annually to upwards of $240 billion annually when intel-
lectual property theft is included (National Association of Credit Management, 2005). The 
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (2006: 8) conducted research that found that the 
Internal Theft          137
FIGURE 7-1 Woody’s Lumber Company. Woody’s Lumber Company has suffered declining profits in recent years. 
A recently hired manager quickly hired six people to replace the previous crew, which was fired for internal theft. 
Four additional people were quickly hired for part-time work. The process for conducting business is to have 
customers park their cars in the front of the store, walk to the sales counter to pay for the desired lumber, receive
a pink receipt, drive to the rear of the store, pick up the lumber with the assistance of the yard crew, and then 
depart through the rear auto exit. At the lumber company, loss prevention is of minimal concern. An inoperable 
burglar alarm and two fire extinguishers are on the premises.

138          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
FIGURE 7-2 Smith Shirt Manufacturing Plant. In the past two years, the Smith plant has shown declining profits. 
During this time, managers believed that employee theft might be the cause, but they were unsure of what to do 
and were worried about additional costs. Employees work one shift from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M. five days per week and 
are permitted to go to their cars to eat lunch from noon to 1 P.M. A total of 425 employees are divided as follows: 
350 sewing machine operators, 15 maintenance personnel, 20 material handlers, 20 miscellaneous workers, 2 retail 
salespeople, 5 managers, and 13 clerical support staff members. A contract cleanup crew works from 6 to 8 A.M. 
and from 5 to 7 P.M. on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday; Sunday cleanup is from 1 to 4 P.M. The crewmembers 
have their own keys. Garbage dumpster pickup is 7 A.M. and 7 P.M. Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. The plant 
contains a fire alarm system and four fire extinguishers. One physical inventory is conducted each year.
FIGURE 7-3 Compulab Corporation. Compulab Corporation is a research business with tremendous potential. 
However, it seems that whenever it produces innovative research results, a competitor claims similar results soon 
afterward. Compulab employs 33 people, including a research director, 2 assistants, 10 scientist-researchers, 
8 computer specialists, and an assortment of office staff. The facility is open 24 hours a day, 7 days per week, and 
employees work a mixture of shifts each month and remotely from their homes and other locations. Almost every 
employee has his or her own key for entrance into the building.

typical organization loses 5% of its revenues to occupational fraud, defined as follows: “The 
use of one’s occupation for personal enrichment through the deliberate misuse or misapplica-
tion of the employing organization’s resources or assets.” They claim that if this figure were 
multiplied by the U.S. Gross Domestic Product, which in 2006 was about $13 trillion, the 
losses would translate to about $652 billion in annual fraud losses. These figures may be 
higher when direct and indirect costs are combined. Indirect costs can include a slowing of 
production or an insurance premium hike after a claim. Research by Baker and Westin (1987: 
12) mentions employee morale and damage to public image as expensive indirect costs fol-
lowing major internal crimes.
Why Do Employees Steal?
There is no one reason why employees steal from their employers. However, two major causes 
of employee theft are employee personal problems and the environment. Employee personal 
problems often affect behavior on the job. Financial troubles, domestic discord, drug abuse, 
and excessive gambling can contribute to theft. It is inappropriate to state that every employee 
who has such problems will steal, but during trying times, the pressure to steal may be greater. 
A wise employer should be alert to troubled employees and suggest referral to an Employee 
Assistance Program (see Chapter 18).
The environment is perhaps the strongest factor behind internal theft. Politicians, corpo-
rate executives, and other “pillars of society” are constantly being found guilty of some form 
of crime. Inadequate socialization results. In other words, poor examples are set: employ-
ees may observe managerial illegalities and then act similarly. In many businesses, because 
so many people are stealing, those who do not steal are the deviants and outcasts; theft 
becomes normal and honesty becomes abnormal. Some managers believe that employee theft 
improves morale and makes boring jobs exciting. In many workplaces, employees are actually 
instructed to be dishonest. This can be seen when receiving department workers are told by 
their supervisor to accept overages during truck deliveries without notifying the vendor.
Internal Theft          139
“Let’s Not Fire Him for Stealing—He’s a Good Employee”
An undercover investigation at Smith’s lumberyard #7 revealed that the yard boss, 
Joe Crate, was stealing. The undercover investigator, Jimmy Wilson, worked at yard 
#7 and found that Joe was stealing about $80 worth of building products per week. 
Each evening Joe would hide merchandise near the back gate, and when it was time to 
close up and lock the gate, he would quickly load his vehicle, which was conveniently 
parked nearby.
Before Jimmy was assigned to another yard, he met with a vice president and 
the manager of yard #7 at company headquarters. During the meeting, Jimmy asked, 
“Are you going to fire Joe Crate?” The VP stated, “Let’s not fire him for stealing—he’s a 
good employee.” Then the VP explained: “Joe’s salary is $10 per hour, which is equal 
to $400 per week. If Joe steals about $80 per week, then Joe’s salary is about equal to 
$480 per week. If we hired a carpenter to build the lumber sheds that Joe is building 
at yard #7, it would cost us almost twice as much.” Jimmy could not believe what he 
was hearing, especially from the VP. He did not say a word and listened to instructions 
for his next assignment.
What are your views of the way in which internal theft was handled at Smith’s lumber-
yard #7 in the preceding box?

140          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
When employees steal, a hodgepodge of rationalizations (excuses) are mentally reviewed 
to relieve guilt feelings. Some of these rationalizations are “Everybody does it,” “It’s a fringe 
benefit,” and “They aren’t paying me enough.”
Donald R. Cressey analyzed thousands of offenders to ascertain common factors associ-
ated with inside thievery (Lary, 1988: 81). He found three characteristics that must be present 
before theft would be committed. Cressey’s employee theft formula is
Motivation + Opportunity + Rationalization = Theft
Motivation develops from a need for money to finance a debt or a drug problem or to win 
approval from others. Opportunity occurs at many unprotected locations, such as a loading 
dock. Rationalizations relieve guilt, as stated already. This formula illustrates the need for 
security and an honest environment.
Edwin Sutherland, a noted criminologist, offered his theory of differential association 
to explain crime. Simply put, criminal behavior is learned during interaction with others, and 
a person commits crime because of an excess of definitions favorable to violation of law over 
definitions unfavorable to violation of law. The implication of this theory for the workplace 
is that superiors and colleagues in a company are probably a more important determinant of 
crime than is the personality of the individual. Conklin (2001: 278–279) writes in his crimi-
nology textbook that a former head of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Division 
of Enforcement stated bluntly: “Our largest corporations have trained some of our brightest 
young people to be dishonest.”
A study of college student knowledge of how to commit computer crimes found that 
threat of punishment had little influence on their misdeeds. In this study, the strongest pre-
dictor of computer crime was differential association with others who presented definitions 
favorable to violation of the law (Skinner and Fream, 1997: 495–518).
The implications for security from differential association theory point to the importance 
of ethical conduct by top management, who should set a good example in the socialization of 
all employees. In addition, since criminal laws can be impotent, preventive security strategies are 
essential.
How Do Employees Steal?
The methods used to steal from employers are limited by employee imagination. Typically, 
employees pilfer items by hiding them under their clothing before leaving the workplace. 
Methods that are more sophisticated involve the careful manipulation of accounting records. 
Collusion among several employees (and outsiders) is common. The kinds of item to be 
taken (e.g., tools, a piano, cash) and the obstacles (e.g., loss prevention strategies) dictate the 
method of theft. A tool can be hidden in a person’s pocket or underwear, and a piano might 
be pilfered piece by piece over a year and then assembled in a home garage. Some employee 
theft methods follow:
1. Wearing manufactured items while leaving the workplace—for example, wearing 
pilfered underwear or wearing scrap lead that has been molded to one’s body 
contours
2.  Smuggling out pilfered items by placing the item in a lunchbox, pocketbook, bundle 
of work clothes, umbrella, newspaper, hat, or even one’s hair
3.  Hiding merchandise in garbage pails, dumpsters, or trash heaps to be retrieved later
4.  Returning to the workplace after hours, with a pass key, and helping oneself to goods
5.  Truck drivers turning in fictitious bills to employers for fuel and repairs and then 
splitting the money with truck stops
6. Collusion between truck drivers and receiving personnel
7. Executives padding expense accounts
8.  Purchasing agents receiving kickbacks from vendors for buying high-priced goods
9.  Retail employees pocketing money from cash sales and not recording the transaction
10.  Padding payrolls as to hours and rate of pay

Management Countermeasures          141
11.  Maintaining nonexistent or fired employees on a payroll and then cashing the 
paychecks
12.  Accounts payable employees paying fictitious bills to a bogus account and then cashing 
the checks for their own use
Possible Indicators of Theft
Certain factors may indicate that theft has occurred:
1. Inventory records and physical counts that differ
2. Inaccurate accounting records
3. Mistakes in the shipping and receiving of goods
4. Increasing amounts of raw materials needed to produce a specific quantity of goods
5. Merchandise missing from boxes (e.g., every pallet of 20 boxes of finished goods has 
at least two boxes short a few items)
6. Merchandise at inappropriate locations (e.g., finished goods hidden near exits)
7. Security devices found to be damaged or inoperable
8. Windows or doors unlocked when they should be locked
9. Workers (e.g., employees, truck drivers, repair personnel) in unauthorized areas
10. Employees who come in early and leave late
11. Employees who eat lunch at their desks and refuse to take vacations
12.  Complaints by customers about not having their previous payments credited to their 
accounts
13. Customers who absolutely have to be served by a particular employee
14. An unsupervised, after-hours cleaning crew with their own keys
15. Employees who are sensitive about routine questions concerning their jobs
16. An employee who is living beyond his or her income level
17. Expense accounts that are outside the norm
Management Countermeasures
Management Support
Without management support, efforts to reduce losses are doomed. A good management 
team sets both a foundation for strategies and an atmosphere in which theft is not  tolerated. 
Support for budget requests and appropriate policies and procedures are vital.
Effective Planning and Budgeting
Before measures are implemented against internal theft, a thorough analysis of the problem is 
necessary. What types of losses are occurring, where, by whom, when, and why?
Internal and External Relations
Good internal and external relations can play a role in preventing employee theft. Loss 
prevention practitioners who show appropriate courtesy, demeanor, and appearance are 
respected by employees. Prompt investigations of incidents indicate that losses are a major 
concern.
With a heightened prevention atmosphere within a workplace, an external reputation is 
sure to follow. Outside people with ulterior motives will think twice before applying for a job.
Job Applicant Screening and Employee Socialization
The screening of job applicants from full-time to part-time and temporary workers is  a 
major theft-prevention technique. Whatever steps are taken, an atmosphere of loss prevention 
should exist from every applicant’s initial contact.

142          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Accountability, Accounting, and Auditing
Accountability defines a responsibility for and a description of something. For example, 
John Smith is responsible (i.e., is held accountable) for all finished products in a plant, and  
he maintains accurate records (i.e., a description) of what is in stock. Accounting is concerned 
with recording, sorting, summarizing, reporting, and interpreting business data. Auditing is 
an examination or check of a system to uncover deviations. Personnel audit physical security 
by checking intrusion alarm systems, closed-circuit television (CCTV), and so  on. An auditor 
audits the accounting records of a company to see if the records are reliable and to make sure 
embezzlement has not occurred.
Policy and Procedural Controls
Policy and procedural controls coincide with accountability, accounting, and auditing. In each 
of these three functions, policies and procedures are communicated to employees through 
manuals and memos. Policies are management tools that control employee decision making 
and reflect the goals and objectives of management. Procedures guide action to fulfill the 
requirements of policies.
As an example, a company policy states that, before trash is taken to outside dumpsters, 
a loss prevention officer must be present to check for stolen items. Procedures point out that, 
to conform to this policy, the head of the cleaning crew must call the loss prevention office 
and wait for an officer to arrive before transporting the trash outside.
Signs
Placing messages about loss prevention on the premises is another method. The message must 
be brief, to the point, and in languages for diverse readers. An example of a message is “Let’s all 
work together to reduce losses and save jobs.”
Loss Reporting and Reward System
Numerous organizations have established a toll-free number to facilitate ease of loss report-
ing. A company Web site and intranet are other avenues to facilitate loss reporting. A reward 
system is a strategy to reinforce reporting. One method employed is to provide the informant 
with a secret number that is required to pick up reward money at a bank at a time convenient 
to the caller, who is encouraged to send a substitute to strengthen anonymity.
The Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002 requires publicly traded companies to provide 
a system of reporting anonymously, with penalties for noncompliance. Research shows that 
the best avenue to encourage reporting is through a confidential, 24-hour hotline operated by 
a third party (Greene, 2004).
Research by Scicchitano et al. (2004: 7–19) found that, among the large retailers they sur-
veyed, management encouraged employees to report dishonesty that they observed in the work-
place. In addition, companies use a variety of methods (e.g., posters, announcements) to promote 
peer reporting. All the respondents used a toll-free hotline and one-half used financial incentives. 
No clearly established methods of reporting were noted from the research. The researchers 
emphasized that corporate climate plays an important role in facilitating peer reporting.
Investigation
Employee thieves often are familiar with the ins and outs of an organization’s operation and 
can easily conceal theft. In addition, a thorough knowledge of the loss prevention program 
is common to employee thieves. Consequently, an undercover investigation is an effective 
method to outwit and expose crafty employee thieves and their conspirators.
Property Losses and Theft Detection
To remedy property losses within an organization, several strategies are applicable.  Closed-
circuit television (CCTV), both overt and covert, and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) are 
popular methods discussed in other parts of this book. Here, an emphasis is placed on inventory 

system, marking property, and use of metal detectors. An inventory system maintains account-
ability for property and merchandise. For example, when employees borrow or use equipment or 
tools, a record is kept of the item, its serial number, the employee’s name, and the date. On return 
of the item, both the clerk and the user make a notation, including the date. Inventory also refers 
to merchandise for sale, raw materials, and unfinished goods. This topic will be covered at greater 
length in Chapter 11 on accounting, accountability, and auditing.
Marking property (e.g., tools, computers, furniture) serves several useful purposes. 
When property is marked with a serial number or a special substance, or a firm’s name is 
etched with an engraving tool, thieves are deterred because the property can be identified if 
the thief is caught. Publicizing the marking of property reinforces the deterrent effect.
Besides the popular use of a pinhole lens camera for covert surveillance to catch an offender, 
another investigative technique is to use fluorescent substances to mark property. An ultraviolet 
light (black light) is necessary to view these invisible marks, which emerge as a surprise to the 
offender. Organizations sometimes experience the theft of petty cash. To expose such theft, fluo-
rescent substances, in the form of powder, crayon, or liquid, are used to mark money. The typical 
scenario involves a few suspects who are the only people with access to petty cash after hours. 
Before these after-hour employees arrive, the investigator handling the case places bills previously 
dusted with invisible fluorescent powder in envelopes at petty cash locations. The bills even can be 
written on with the invisible fluorescent crayon. Statements such as “marked money” can be used 
to identify the bills under ultraviolet light. Serial numbers from the bills are recorded and retained 
by the investigator. Before the employees are scheduled to leave, the “planted” bills are checked. 
If the bills are missing, then the employees’ hands are checked under an ultraviolet light. Glowing 
hands expose the thief, and identification of the marked money carried by the individual strength-
ens the case. The marked money must be placed in an envelope because the fluorescent powder 
may transfer to other objects and onto an honest person’s hands. A wrongful arrest can lead to a 
false-arrest suit. A check of a suspect’s bills, for the marked money, helps avoid this problem. Many 
cleaning fluids appear orange under an ultraviolet light. The investigator should analyze all cleaning 
fluids on the premises and select a fluorescent color that is different from the cleaning substances. 
Other items that may fluoresce include lotions, plastics, body fluids, and some drugs.
Another method of marking property is by applying microdots. Microdots contain a 
logo or ID number, and the dots are painted or sprayed on property. A microscope is used 
to view the dots that identify the owner of the property. As with other methods of marking 
property, the purpose is to reduce losses from internal and external sources of theft. One 
utility company, for example, suffered millions of dollars of losses from the theft of copper 
wire and equipment, so it applied the dots to copper assets to help identify company property 
during investigations and recovery (Canada.com, 2007).
Walk-through metal detectors, similar to those at airports, are useful at employee 
access points to deter thefts of metal objects and to identify employee thieves. Such detectors also 
uncover weapons being brought into an area. Handheld metal detectors are also  helpful. It 
is important to note that metal detectors may be overrated because certain firearms, knives, and 
other weapons are made primarily of plastic. Consequently, scanners are an expensive option 
to identify contraband, as covered in the next chapter.
Insurance, Bonding
If insurance is the prime bulwark against losses, premiums are likely to skyrocket and become 
too expensive. For this reason, insurance is best utilized as a supplement to other methods 
of loss prevention that may fail. Fidelity bonding is a type of employee honesty insurance for 
employees who handle cash and perform other financial activities. Bonding deters job appli-
cants and employees with evil motives. Some companies have employees complete bonding 
applications but do not actually obtain the bond.
Confrontation with the Employee Suspect
Care must be exercised when confronting an employee suspect. The following recommenda-
tions, in conjunction with good legal assistance, can produce a strong case. The list of steps 
Management Countermeasures          143

144          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
presents a cautious approach. Many locations require approval of management before an 
arrest.
1. Never accuse anyone unless absolutely certain of the theft.
2. Theft should be observed by a reliable person. Do not rely on hearsay.
3.  Make sure you can show intent: the item stolen is owned by the organization, and it 
was removed from the premises by the person confronted.
In steps 4 through 14, an arrest has not been made.
4. Ask the suspect to come to the office for an interview. Employees do not have a right 
to have an attorney present during one of these employment meetings. If the suspect is 
a union employee and requests a union representative, comply with the request.
5.  Without accusing the employee, he or she can be told: “Some disturbing information 
has surfaced, and we want you to provide an explanation.”
6.  Maintain accurate records of everything. These records may become an essential part 
of criminal or civil action.
7. Never threaten a suspect.
8.  Never detain the suspect if the person wants to leave. Interview for less than one hour.
9. Never touch the suspect or reach into the suspect’s pockets.
10.  Request permission to search the suspect’s belongings. If left alone in a room under 
surveillance, the suspect may take the item concealed on his or her person and hide it 
in the room. This approach avoids a search.
11.  Have a witness present at all times. If the suspect is female and you are male, have 
another woman present.
12.  If permissible under the Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988, ask the 
suspect to volunteer for a polygraph test and have the suspect sign a statement of 
voluntariness. Follow EPPA guidelines.
13.  If a verbal admission or confession is made by the suspect, have him or her write it 
out, and have everyone present sign it.
14.  Ask the suspect to sign a statement stipulating that no force or threats were applied.
15.  For the uncooperative suspect, or if prosecution is favored, call the public police, but 
first be sure you have sound evidence as in step 3.
16.  Do not accept payment for stolen property because it can be construed as a bribe and 
it may interfere with a bond. Let the court determine restitution.
17. Handle juveniles differently from adults; consult the public police.
18. When in doubt, consult an attorney.
Prosecution
Many feel strongly that prosecution is a deterrent, whereas others maintain that it hurts morale 
and public relations and is not cost effective. Whatever management decides, it is imperative that 
an incident of theft be given considerable attention so that employees realize that a serious act has 
taken place. Establish a written policy that is fair and applied uniformly.
Research
Although employee theft is a significant national problem, limited research is available. 
The Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (2006) periodically publishes a Report to the 
Nation on Occupational Fraud and Abuse. Some of its findings from research of actual cases 
are as follows:
1. Occupational fraud is very difficult to detect.
2. The fraud is more likely to be detected by a tip rather than an audit or internal controls.
3. Organizations that had an anonymous fraud hotline suffered lower losses.
4. Industries with the highest median losses per scheme were wholesale, construction, 
and manufacturing. Government and retailers were among those with the lowest 
median losses.

5. Small businesses suffer disproportionate fraud losses. The median loss at organizations 
with fewer than 100 employees was $190,000 per scheme, and the most common 
schemes were employees fraudulently writing company checks, skimming revenues, 
and processing fraudulent invoices.
6. Small businesses generally do a poor job of proactively detecting fraud.
7. The higher the position of the offender in the organization, the greater the losses.
8. Most of the cases of fraud in the study involved either employees in the accounting 
department or upper management.
9. Almost two-thirds of victimized organizations routinely conducted background checks 
on applicants; however, less than 8% of offenders had prior convictions. ACFE data 
show that although background checks are important, certain methods are vital for 
detecting fraud, such as fraud training, surprise audits, and anonymous reporting.
Another research project was conducted by the University of Minnesota and the American 
Management Association with funds from the U.S. Department of Justice (Clark and Hollinger, 
1980: 106). Thirty-five corporations including 4,985 employee respondents anonymously pro-
vided data. Conclusions from this research report are listed next:
1.  In the three industries studied (retail stores, electronic manufacturers, and hospitals), 
employees most likely to be involved in theft constitute a significant portion of the 
workforce: salespersons, engineers, and nurses.
2. The dissatisfied employee was found more frequently to be involved in theft.
3.  The most consistent predictor of theft involvement was the employee’s perceived 
chance of being caught.
4.  Theft decreased when a negative reaction by management and coworkers increased.
5.  Informal coworker sanctions are twice as influential in changing behavior as formal 
management responses.
6. Prevention measures have an effect on theft.
7.  Those companies with a clearly defined antitheft policy had a lower incidence of theft.
8.  Theft can be lowered by communicating antitheft policies to employees (e.g., through 
signs or memos).
9.  A lesser degree of theft was found in businesses that had theft-prevention strategies 
within the inventory system.
10. Pre-employment screening deters theft.
11. Lower levels of theft can be achieved by instituting several strategies at once.
Speed (2003: 31–48) writes that employee dishonesty is a complex problem, and man-
agement encounters difficulty when planning the most appropriate strategies to combat 
it. He focused his research on a major retailer in the United Kingdom to learn how loss 
prevention could be better targeted. Speed studied company records of employee offenders 
and surveyed attitudes of a sample of employees. He proposed a management strategy that 
divides employees into four groups, based on age and length of service, and then he designed 
loss prevention strategies for each group. The four groups and the strategies for each are 
summarized next:
• First group: Employees 20 years of age or younger, new to the company.
• Second group: Employees in their 20s, employed with the company for about two 
years.
• Third group: Employees with greater length of service and experience than the first 
two groups.
• Fourth group: Employees with considerably greater length of service or are much 
older.
Speed’s research shows that the first group presents great risk of theft because they are 
less likely to be deterred by disapproval by others or by losing their job. However, more of 
them fear being caught than the slightly more experienced employees. The first group commits 
the simplest types of offenses with the lowest values. Strategies for this group include restricted 
Management Countermeasures          145

146          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
access to high-risk operations and ensuring they are complying with systems. The second group 
also presents great risk of theft because they are confident they will avoid detection. They 
commit high value offenses but are influenced more than the first group by the possibility of 
losing their job. The recommended strategy for this group is to portray the risks of criminal-
ity and the possibility of prosecution. Theft among the third group is less common, but more 
complex and less easy to detect. This group is more likely to be deterred by disapproval by 
others. Controls that remove opportunities are less likely to be successful with this group. A 
more successful strategy is to remind them of the status and benefits they maintain within the 
company and the financial impact of offending. The fourth group represents the lowest risk 
but the greatest confidence of not being caught. This group is similar to the third group on 
other characteristics.
Physical Security Countermeasures
Integration, Open Architecture, and Convergence
The physical security strategies covered in subsequent pages are being increasingly combined 
into what is called integrated systems. Keener (1994: 6) offers this definition: “An integrated 
system is the control and operation by a single operator of multiple systems whose percep-
tion is that only a single system is performing all functions.” These computer-based systems 
include access controls, alarm monitoring, CCTV, electronic article surveillance, fire protection 
and safety systems, HVAC, environmental monitoring, radio and video media, intercom, point-
of-sale transactions, and inventory control. Traditionally, these functions existed separate 
from each other, but increasingly they are integrated and installed within facilities worldwide, 
controlled and monitored by operators and management at a centralized workstation or from 
remote locations.
The benefits of integrated systems include lower costs, a reduction in staff, improved 
 efficiency, centralization, and reduced travel and time costs. For example, a manufacturing 
 executive at corporate headquarters can monitor a branch plant’s operations, production, inven-
tory, sales, and loss prevention. Likewise, a retail executive at headquarters can watch the sales 
floor, special displays, point-of-sale transactions, customer behavior, inventory, shrinkage, and 
loss prevention. These “visits” to worldwide locations are conducted without leaving the office!
Integration requires careful planning and clear answers to many questions, such as the 
following:
• Will the integrated system truly cost less and be easier to operate and maintain than 
separate systems? Obtain separate quotations on integrated and interconnected 
systems.
• Does the supplier truly have expertise across all the applications?
• Is the integration software listed or approved by a third-party testing agency such as 
Underwriters Laboratories?
• Do authorities prohibit integration of certain systems? Some fire departments prohibit 
integrating fire alarm systems with other systems.
Robert Pearson (2000: 20) writes
When attending a conference or trade show, it becomes obvious that every vendor 
and manufacturer claims to have the “total integrated solution.” It would appear 
that one would only need to place an order at any number of display booths and 
all the security problems at a user’s facility would simply vanish. The vendors 
and manufacturers freely use terms such as integrated systems, enterprise systems 
and digital solutions in an effort to convince end users to purchase systems and 
components.
Pearson goes on to describe a typical security alarm system as composed of sensors that 
connect to a data-gathering panel connected to a computer at a security control center. Integration 

would mean that sensors, card readers, and other functions would connect to the same data-gath-
ering panel that reports to the same computer. Which multiple functions are integrated depends 
on the manufacturer. Some manufacturers began with energy management and added security 
alarm systems in later years; others began with security alarm systems and added access con-
trol. Pearson points out that integration is not easy to define because, for example, a question 
surfaces as to where separate functions come together. Different data-gathering units typically 
do not connect to a single computer; one reason for this is that there is no standard protocol 
among manufacturers’ data-gathering systems. Thus, integrating functions among different 
manufacturers via a single computer is often challenging and produces various approaches. 
However, integration firms exist that specialize in application-specific software that combines 
systems for a specific client.
Besides integration, another term used loosely in the security industry is open archi-
tecture. It refers to the building of hardware and software whose specifications are public 
(Webopedia, 2006). “This includes officially approved standards as well as privately designed 
architectures whose specifications are made public by the designers. The opposite of open is 
closed or proprietary. The great advantage of open architecture is that anyone can design add-
on products for it. By making an architecture public, however, manufacturers allow others 
to duplicate its product.” To illustrate, Windows is closed and many lawsuits have been filed 
over clones. David Swartz (1999: 24) notes that the bottom line is that field security hardware 
is not interchangeable from one manufacturer to the next. As a result, most systems available 
today preclude the customer from (1) switching to more advanced products, (2) integrating 
products from other vendors, or (3) choosing the best product. However, Pearson (2001: 16) 
adds that if security systems used open architecture, safeguards would have to be added to 
prevent compromise. Today, standard operating systems, proprietary application programs, 
and data-gathering unit protocols that are proprietary combine to provide protection for the 
end user.
James Coleman (2000: 38–44) describes trends that help us to understand how physi-
cal security is developing. He sees standardizing on a common operating system, something 
often insisted upon by IT personnel to simplify support requirements. (This relates to the 
convergence of IT and physical security as discussed in Chapter 1.) Microsoft NT is the 
choice of many organizations. Coleman notes that every major access control manufacturer 
has responded to this trend by developing an NT-based product. Such products are becoming 
increasingly feature rich with improved performance with each new release and the capability 
to integrate new products, such as asset tracking. Another trend is how security devices com-
municate with each other. For many years, dedicated wiring has been used to connect security 
components. With computer networks becoming standard infrastructure in offices and plants, 
they are being used to connect portions of security systems.
As we know, convergence is characterized by the integrated security system residing on the 
organization’s network. Although this trend results in IT professionals asking many questions 
about how security systems will affect IT systems, the benefits of convergence include moni-
toring from almost anywhere, lower personnel costs, and less traveling.
Dean (2005: 30) provides other examples of the benefits of convergence: with the 
access system on the organization’s network, an employee needs only one access card to enter 
company facilities worldwide; and to enhance information security over documents, a card is 
required to be inserted into a reader attached to a printer.
Another trend, serving as a foundation for convergence, is the use of Internet Protocol (IP) 
technology to communicate between devices. IP-based products operate on a pre- existing net-
work. An alternative to installing coaxial cable between system components, IP-based products 
can be connected to the existing LAN/WAN. LAN refers to local area networks that involve 
communication within a limited area. WAN refers to wide area networks for internal com-
munication on a global scale (e.g., multinational corporate units).
Bernard (2006: 28–32) refers to another aspect of convergence known as identity man-
agement system (IDMS). It is used to manage identities and privileges of computer systems 
and people. Bernard touts the benefits of IDMS by explaining, for example, the following: 
“Physical security can leverage the HR enrollment of employees by integrating the physical 
Physical Security Countermeasures          147

148          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
access control system with the IDMS, so the access control privileges are managed automati-
cally along with IT privileges as HR enrolls, re-assigns and terminates employees.”
Bernard notes that the federal government is aware of the importance of IDMS in its 
personal identity verification systems mandated by Homeland Security Presidential Directive 
(HSPD) 12. This mandate points to a single smart access card to be used for both physi-
cal and IT security among federal agencies. In response to HSPD-12, the National Institute 
of Standards and Technology (NIST) developed a new standard for secure identification: 
the Federal Information Processing Standard Publication 201 (FIPS 201), Personal Identity 
Verification (PIV) for federal employees and contractors. Examples of two requirements are 
a background check of individuals applying for a card, and the card must be a smart card. 
Besides government, the private sector is embracing the concept.
Bernard’s advice to physical security practitioners is to realize that IDMS requires much 
planning and coordination with IT; include physical security in the initial budget; and develop 
strategy, policy, and procedures in concert with IT.
Hunt (2006: 57–58) offers physical security specialists guidelines for convergence and 
working with the IT department:
• Connecting a security device to a network increases traffic across the network, so 
communicate bandwidth (i.e., communications capacity) needs to the IT department.
• When planning a new wireless access point, consider the impact on existing wireless 
networks.
• Ensure that physical security is part of the IT plan for backing up and restoring 
devices on the network.
• Since organizations take network segments offline periodically for maintenance, work 
with the IT department to ensure continuity of physical security.
• Read the IT manual on steps for approving changes to software or computers.
• Find out if the organization complies with IT security standards, such as Generally 
Accepted Information Security Principles or ISO: 17799.
• If physical security changes require entrance into a network closet, take digital before 
and after photos of the wiring or videotape the installation.
Access Controls
Access controls regulate people, vehicles, and items during movement into, out of, and within 
a building or facility. With regulation, assets are easier to protect. If a truck can enter a busi-
ness facility easily, back up to the shipping dock so that the truck driver can load valuable 
cargo illegally, and then drive away, that business cannot last long. However, if the truck has 
to stop at the facility’s front gate, where a uniformed officer issues a pass and records the 
license and other information, and appropriate paperwork is exchanged at the shipping dock 
under the watchful eyes of another officer who restricts the driver’s access into the facility, 
then these controls can prevent losses.
Access controls are vital for the everyday movement of employees, customers, vendors, 
service people, contractors, and government inspectors. Any of these people can be someone who 
would steal. In addition to merchandise, proprietary information must be protected.
At one corporation, a security officer permitted two salespeople from another company to 
enter a restricted area involved in new product development. The officer was fired.
Access control varies from simple to complex. A simple setup includes locks and keys, 
officers checking identification badges, and written logs of entries and exits. More complex 
systems use an access card that, when placed at a card reader, records identifying information 

on the card and when access was granted, and then activates an electronic unlocking device 
while a CCTV system observes and records the entry. A prime factor influencing the kind of 
system employed is need. A research laboratory developing a new product requires strict access 
controls, whereas a retail business would require minimal controls.
Controlling Employee Traffic
The fewest entrances and exits are best for access control and lower costs. Officers can 
observe people entering and departing. If possible, employees should be routed to the entrance 
closest to the workplace away from valuable assets.
Unauthorized exits locked from within create a hazard in case of fire or other emer-
gency. To ensure safety yet fewer losses, emergency exit alarms on each locked door are a 
worthwhile investment. These devices enable quick exit, or a short delay, when pressure is 
placed against a horizontal bar that is secured across the door. An alarm is sounded when 
these doors are activated, which discourages unauthorized use.
Searching Employees
Management can provide in the contract of employment that reasonable detentions are permis-
sible; that reasonable searches may be made to protect people and company assets; and that 
searches may be made at any time of desks, lockers, containers carried by employees, and vehicles 
(Inbau et al., 1996: 47 and 68; Nemeth, 2005: 84). Case law has permitted an employer to use a 
duplicate key, known to the employee, to enter a locker at will. On the other hand, an employee 
who uses a personal lock has a greater expectation of privacy, barring a written condition of 
employment to the contrary that includes forced entry. When a desk is assigned to a specific 
employee, an expectation of privacy exists, unless a contract states otherwise. If employees jointly 
have access to a desk to obtain items, no privacy exists.
Policies and procedures on searches should consider input from management, an attor-
ney, employees, and a union if on the premises. Also, consider business necessity, what is 
subject to search, signed authorization from each employee, signs at the perimeter and in the 
workplace, and searches of visitors and others.
Physical Security Countermeasures          149
Should management and security have the right to search employees and others on the 
premises? Why or why not?
Visitors
Visitors include customers, salespeople, vendors, service people, contractors, and govern-
ment employees. A variety of techniques are applicable to visitor access control (Figure 7-4). 
An appointment system enables preparation for visitors. When visitors arrive without an 
appointment, the person at reception should lead him or her to a waiting room. Whatever 
the reason for the visit, the shortest route to specific destinations, away from valuable assets 
and dangerous conditions, can avert theft and injuries. Lending special equipment, such as a 
hardhat, may be necessary. A record or log of visits is wise. Relevant information would be 
name of the visitor, driver’s license number and state, date of visit, time entering and leaving, 
purpose, specific location visited, name of employee escorting visitor, and temporary badge 
number. These records aid investigators. Whenever possible, procedures should minimize 
employee–visitor contact. This is important, for instance, in the shipping and receiving depart-
ment, where truck drivers may become friendly with employees and conspiracies may evolve. 
When telephones, restrooms, and vending machines are scattered throughout a plant, truck 
drivers and other visitors who are permitted easy access may actually steal the place blind. 
These services should be located at the shipping and receiving dock, and access to outsiders 
should be limited.

150          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Controlling the Movement of Packages and Property
The movement of packages and property also must be subject to access controls. Some loca-
tions require precautions against packaged bombs, letter bombs, and other hazards. Clear 
policies and procedures are needed for incoming and outgoing items. To counter employee 
theft, outgoing items require both scrutiny and accountability. Uniformed officers can check 
outgoing items, while a property pass system serves the accountability function.
Employee Identification System
The use of an employee identification (card or badge) system will depend on the number 
of employees that must be accounted for and recognized by other employees. An ID system 
not only prevents unauthorized people from entering a facility, but also deters unauthorized 
employees from entering restricted areas. For the system to operate efficiently, clear policies 
should state the use of ID cards, where and when the cards are to be displayed on the person, 
who should collect cards from employees who quit or are fired, and the penalties for non-
compliance. A lost or stolen card should be reported so that the proper information reaches 
all interested personnel. Sometimes ID systems become a joke and employees refuse to wear 
the badges, or they decorate them or wear them in odd locations on their persons. To sustain 
an ID system, proper socialization is essential.
Simple ID cards contain employer and employee names. A more complex system would 
include an array of information: name, signature, address, employee number, physical charac-
teristics (e.g., height, weight, hair and eye colors), validation date, authorized signature, loca-
tion of work assignment, thumbprint, and color photo. ID cards often serve as access cards.
Contractors, visitors, and other nonemployees require an ID card that should be clearly 
distinguishable from employee ID cards. Temporary ID badges can be printed with a chemical 
that causes the word void to appear after a set period.
FIGURE 7-4 Interactive kiosk that manages a variety of visitors. Courtesy: Honeywell Security.

Lamination discourages card tampering: if an attempt is made to alter the card, it will 
be disfigured. To laminate a card, a paper ID card is inserted into a plastic case and then 
placed in a laminating machine that bonds a clear plastic coating over the card.
Pearson (2005: 66) offers anticounterfeiting measures that include the following: holo-
grams that are added to the clear overlay of the printed badge; ultraviolet printing that uses an 
ultraviolet ribbon to print UV-sensitive images or text and requires a black light to see it; invis-
ible alphanumeric type viewed only by a laser; and secret symbols or letters on the badge.
The area where ID cards are prepared, and relevant equipment and supplies, must be 
secure. In addition, the equipment and software should be password protected.
Automatic Access Control
The Security Industry Association traces the development of access control systems as 
described next (D’Agostino, 2005: 1–2). Traditionally, access control systems have been at the 
center of electronic security systems at buildings that include access control, ID badges, alarm 
systems, and CCTV. Authentication (i.e., verifying identity) and authorization (i.e., verify-
ing that the identified individual is allowed to enter) have typically occurred as a single-step 
process in access control. Depending on security needs, access control has been designed for 
1-factor authentication (e.g., card or personal identification number or biometric), 2-factor 
authentication (e.g., card-plus-PIN or card-plus-biometric), or 3-factor authentication (e.g., 
card-plus-PIN and biometric).
Cryptography (i.e., the study of coded or secret writings to provide security for infor-
mation) became part of access control systems with the use of encryption (i.e., hardware or 
software that scrambles data, rendering it unintelligible to an unauthorized person intercept-
ing it) to protect passwords and other information. These methods continue in importance as 
Ethernet networks (i.e., a trademark for a system of communications between computers on 
a LAN) replace proprietary equipment connections and as security systems increasingly rely 
on IP messages and shared networks with other businesses. Traditionally, because no secu-
rity standards existed for these systems, manufacturers applied their own designs. However, 
according to the Security Industry Association, change is required to establish standards 
because of the following drivers:
• The convergence of physical and IT security
• Common user provisioning that permits a single point of employee registration and 
dismissal (usually in a human resources system) with assignment of physical and IT 
privileges
• Large customers (e.g., the federal government) require their facilities to be 
interoperable (i.e., products or systems working with other products or systems)
• Enterprisewide access controls that involve technology and business processes and 
procedures enabling a single credential to be used across the boundaries of an 
enterprise (e.g., the federal government Personal Identity Verification program)
• Digital certificate systems, which are the electronic counterparts to driver licenses and 
other ID, are used to sign electronic information and serve as part of the foundation 
of secure e-commerce on the Web, and are essential for physical access control system 
integration with IT
The traditional lock-and-key method of access control has its limitations. For instance, keys 
are difficult to control and easy to duplicate. Because of these problems, the need for improved 
access control, and technological innovations, a huge market has been created for electronic card 
access control systems. These systems contain wired and wireless components. The benefits of 
these systems include the difficulty of duplicating cards and cost savings because security officers 
are not required at each access point. The card contains coded information “read” by the system 
for access or denial. These systems contain a central control enabling a variety of functions such 
as enrollment of ID and cards, monitoring of entry points and readers, logging of access and 
egress events, and voiding of lost or stolen cards. Stand-alone systems use battery power and are 
easy to install because there is no need for a power line or transmission of data, although the data 
collected at the lock can be gathered via a touring security officer or a wireless system.
Physical Security Countermeasures          151

152          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Before an automatic access control system is implemented, several considerations are 
necessary. Safety must be a prime factor to ensure quick exit in case of emergency. Another 
consideration deals with the adaptability of the system to the type of door presently in use. 
Can the system accommodate all traffic requirements? How many entrances and exits must 
be controlled? Will there be an annoying waiting period for those who want to gain access? 
Are additions to the system possible? What if the system breaks down? Is a backup source of 
power available (e.g., generators)?
Tailgating and pass back are other concerns. Tailgating means an authorized user is 
followed by an unauthorized user. To thwart this problem, a security officer can be assigned 
to each access point, but this approach is expensive when compared to applying CCTV, 
revolving doors, and turnstiles. Revolving doors can be expensive initially, and they are not 
an approved fire exit. Optical turnstiles contain invisible infrared beams to count people 
entering and leaving to control tailgating and pass back. These sensors can be installed in 
a doorframe and connected to an alarm system and CCTV. Pass back refers to one person 
passing an opening and then passing back the credential so another person can pass through 
the opening.
A summary of cards used in card access systems follows:
• Smart cards contain an integrated circuit chip within the plastic that serves as a 
miniature computer as it records and stores information and personal identification 
codes in its large memory. Security is increased because information is held in the card, 
rather than the reader. These cards permit a host of activities from access control to 
making purchases, while almost eliminating the need for keys or cash. This type of 
card is growing in popularity as its applications expand.
• Proximity cards (also referred to as RFID) need not be inserted into a reader but 
placed in its “proximity.” A code is sent via radio frequency, magnetic field, or 
microchip-tuned circuit. This card is in wide use today.
• Contact Memory Buttons are stainless steel buttons that protect an enclosed computer 
chip used for access. The information in the button can be downloaded or updated 
with a reader like other systems. These buttons are known for their durability, serve 
to ensure accountability of security officers on patrol, and are applied as an asset tag. 
The buttons are used widely.
• Magnetic stripe cards are plastic, laminated cards (like credit cards) that have a 
magnetic stripe along one edge onto which a code is printed. When the card is 
inserted, the magnetically encoded data are compared to data stored in a computer 
and access is granted on verification. This card is in wide use today.
• Weigand cards employ a coded pattern on a magnetized wire within the card to 
generate a code number. To gain access, the card is passed through a sensing reader. 
Other technologies have reduced the popularity of this type of card.
• Bar-coded cards contain an array of tiny vertical lines that can be visible and 
vulnerable to photocopying, or invisible and read by an infrared reader. Other 
technologies have reduced the popularity of this type of card.
• Magnetic dot cards contain magnetic material, often barium ferrite, laminated between 
plastic layers. The dots create a magnetic pattern that activates internal sensors in a 
card reader. This card is rarely used.
Access card systems vary in terms of advantages, disadvantages, and costs. Each type of 
card can be duplicated with a sufficient amount of knowledge, time, and equipment. A mag-
netic stripe is easy to duplicate. A piece of cardboard with a properly encoded magnetic stripe 
functions with equal efficiency. Magnetic dot cards are vulnerable to deciphering. Although 
bar-coded cards also are easy to duplicate, they can be made more secure by covering the code 
with an opaque patch, which prevents photocopying. Many software programs are available 
that can generate bar codes, so fully concealing the code adds more security. Weigand and 
proximity cards are more difficult to duplicate but higher in cost. The Weigand card has the 
disadvantage of wear and tear on the card that passes through a slot for access. Proximity 
cards have the advantage of the sensing element being concealed in a wall, and the card 

 typically can be read without removing it from a pocket. Smart cards are expensive, but they 
can be combined with other card systems; also, they are convenient because of the capability 
of loading and updating the card applications over the Web (Barry, 1993: 75; Garcia, 2006: 
156–157; Gersh, 2000: 18; Toye, 1996: 23).
Biometric security systems have been praised as a major advance in access control because 
such systems link the event to a particular individual, whereas a key, card, personal identifica-
tion number (PIN), or password may be used by an unauthorized individual. These systems 
verify an individual’s identity through fingerprint scan, hand scan (hand geometry) (see Figure 
7-5), iris scan (the iris is the colored part around the pupil of the eye), retina scan (the retina 
is the sensory membrane lining the eye and receiving the image formed by the lens), voice pat-
terns, physical action of writing, and facial scan. The biometric leaders are fingerprint, hand, 
iris, and face recognition (Piazza, 2005: 41–55). Research continues to improve biometrics. 
Voice and writing are being refined, and research is being conducted on gait, body odor, 
heartbeat, and inner ear bones. In the near term, we will not see facial scan pick a known 
terrorist out of a crowd, but the technology is evolving. Digitized photos shot at angles or in 
poor light can be flawed. The challenge with facial scan is identifying a person on the move 
(Philpott, 2005: 16–21).
Basically, biometric systems operate by storing identifying information (e.g., fingerprints, 
photos) in a computer to be compared with information presented by a subject requesting 
access. The applications are endless: doors, computers, vehicles, and so on. Although biometric 
systems have been touted as being invincible, no security is foolproof, as illustrated by terror-
ists who cut off the thumb of a bank manager to gain entry through a fingerprint-based access 
control system. In addition, researchers have constructed fake fingers by taking casts of real 
fingers and molding them into Play-Doh. The researchers developed a technique to check for 
moisture as a way to reduce this ploy (Aughton, 2005). Harowitz (2007: 48–50) writes that a 
biometric fingerprint system may also be subject to defeat by using a fingerprint from dusting 
a latent print with graphite powder and covering it with fingerprint tape. Again, checking for 
moisture reduces this problem. She also writes that although iris recognition systems are less 
likely to be spoofed than biometric fingerprint systems, “iris recognition systems have been 
spoofed with high-resolution photographs with an eyehole cut for the pupil and custom contact 
lenses with high-resolution iris patterns printed on them.” Research is being conducted to find 
vulnerabilities in biometric systems and correct them.
Access controls often use multiple technologies, such as smart card and biometrics. One 
location may require a card and a PIN (see Figure 7-6), whereas another requires scanning a 
Physical Security Countermeasures          153
FIGURE 7-5 Verifying identity through hand geometry. Courtesy: HID Corporation.

154          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
finger and a PIN. Many systems feature a distress code that can be entered if someone is being 
victimized. Another feature is an alarm that sounds during unauthorized attempted entry. 
Access systems can be programmed to allow select access according to time, day, and location. 
The logging capabilities are another feature to ascertain personnel location by time, date, and 
the resources expended (e.g., computer time, parking space, cafeteria). These features provide 
information during investigations and emergencies.
We are seeing an increasing merger of card access systems and biometric technology, 
and thus, missing or stolen cards are less of a concern. We will see more point-of-sale readers 
that accept biometric samples for check cashing, credit cards, and other transactions. The use 
of biometric systems will become universal—banking, correctional facilities, welfare control 
programs, and so forth.
Locks and Keys
The basic purpose of a lock-and-key system is to hinder unauthorized entry. Attempts to enter 
a secure location usually are made at a window or door to a building or at a door somewhere 
within a building. Consequently, locks deter unauthorized access from outsiders and insiders. 
Many see a lock only as a delaying device that is valued by the amount of time needed to defeat 
it. Zunkel (2003: 32) notes: “… it is important that designers know that a lock by itself is only 
part of a larger system that includes the door, the wall, the perimeter and a security plan.”
Standards related to locking systems include those from American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI), American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), Underwriters 
Laboratories (UL), and the Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association (BHMA). Local 
ordinances may specify requirements for locks.
Two general ways to classify locks are mechanical and electromechanical. Mechanical locks 
include the common keyed lock and the pushbutton lock that contains a keypad to enter an access 
code to release the lock. Electromechanical locks include an electronic keypad that is connected 
to an electric strike, lock, or magnetic lock. When the access code is entered, the strike or lock is 
released to open the door (Department of Defense, 2000: D-5).
There are many types of locks and locking systems that range from those that use 
simple, ancient methods to those that apply modern technology, including electricity, com-
puters, and wireless components. Here, we begin with basic information as a foundation for 
understanding locks. Locking devices are often operated by a key, numerical combination, 
FIGURE 7-6 Card reader and key pad. Courtesy: Diebold, Inc.

card, or electricity. Many locks (except padlocks) use a deadbolt and latch. The deadbolt (or 
bolt) extends from a door lock into a bolt receptacle within the doorframe. Authorized entry 
is made by using an appropriate key to manually move the bolt into the door lock. Latches 
are spring loaded and less secure than a deadbolt. They are cut on an angle to permit them to 
slide right into the strike when the door is closed (see Figure 7-7). Unless the latch is equipped 
with a locking bar (deadlatch), a knife can possibly be used to push the latch back to open 
the door.
The cylinder part of a lock contains the keyway, pins, and other mechanisms that permit 
the deadbolt or latch to be moved by a key for access (see Figure 7-8). Double-cylinder locks, 
in which a cylinder is located on each side of a door, are a popular form of added security 
as compared to single-cylinder locks. Double-cylinder locks require a key for both sides; 
however, fire codes may prohibit such locks. With a single-cylinder lock, a thief may be able 
to break glass or remove a wood panel and then reach inside to turn the knob to release the 
lock. For safety’s sake, locations that use double-cylinder locks must prepare for emergency 
escape by having a key readily available.
Key-in-knob locks are used universally but are being replaced by key-in-the-lever locks (see 
Figure 7-9) to be ADA compliant. As the name implies, the keyway is in the knob or lever. Most 
contain a keyway on the outside and a button on the inside for locking from within.
Entrances for Handicapped
The Internal Revenue Service offers a tax credit to eligible businesses that comply with provi-
sions of the ADA to remove barriers and promote access for individuals with disabilities. The 
door hardware industry offers several products and solutions to aid the disabled (see Figure 
7-10). Electrified door hardware such as magnetic locks and electromechanical locks retracts 
the latch when energized.
Physical Security Countermeasures          155
FIGURE 7-7 Latch and door strike.
FIGURE 7-8 Cylinder.

156          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
FIGURE 7-9 Mechanical lock with lever requiring no wiring, electronics, or batteries. Courtesy: Ilco Unican.
FIGURE 7-10 Entrances for handicapped. Courtesy: Von Duprin Division of Ingersoll-Rand Company.

Attacks and Hardware
There are several ways to attack locks. One technique, as stated earlier, is to force a knife 
between the doorframe (jamb) and the door near the lock to release the latch. However, when 
a deadlatch or deadbolt is part of the locking mechanism, more forceful methods are needed. 
In one method, called “springing the door,” a screwdriver or crowbar is placed between the 
door and the doorframe so that the bolt extending from the door lock into the bolt receptacle 
can be pried out, enabling the door to swing open (see Figure 7-11). A 1-inch bolt will hinder 
this attack.
In “jamb peeling,” another method of attack, a crowbar is used to peel at the doorframe 
near the bolt receptacle so that the door is not stopped from swinging open. Strong hardware 
for the doorframe is helpful. In “sawing the bolt,” a hacksaw is applied between the door and 
the doorframe, similar to the placement of the screwdriver in Figure 7-11. Here again, strong 
hardware, such as a metal bolt composed of an alloy capable of withstanding a saw blade, will 
impede attacks. Some offenders use the cylinder-pulling technique: the cylinder on the door is 
actually ripped out with a set of durable pliers or tongs. A circular steel guard surrounding the 
cylinder (see Figure 7-11) will frustrate the attacker. Offenders also are known to use automobile 
jacks to pressure doorframes away from a door.
Both high-quality hardware and construction will impede attacks, but the door itself 
must not be forgotten. If a wood door is only 1/4-inch thick, even though a strong lock is 
attached, the offender may simply break through the door. A solid wood door 1 3/4 inches 
thick or a metal door is a worthwhile investment. Wood doorframes at least 2 inches thick 
provide durable protection. When a hollow steel frame is used, the hollow area can be filled 
with cement to resist crushing near the bolt receptacle. An L-shaped piece of iron secured with 
one-way screws will deter attacks near the bolt receptacle for doors swinging in (see Figure 
7-12). When a padlock is used in conjunction with a safety hasp, the hasp must be installed 
correctly so that the screws are not exposed (see Figure 7-13).
Many attacks are by forced entry, which is easier to detect than when the use of force is 
minimal. Lock picking is one technique needing a minimum amount of force. It is used infre-
quently because of the expertise required, although picks are available on the Internet. Lock 
picking is accomplished by inserting a tension wrench (an L-shaped piece of metal) into the 
cylinder and applying tension while using metal picks to align the pins in the cylinder as a key 
would to release the lock (see Figure 7-8). The greater the number of pins, the more difficult 
it is to align them. A cylinder should have at least six pins.
A more difficult attack utilizes a blank key, matches, and a file. The blank key is placed 
over a lighted match until carbon is produced on the key. Then the key is inserted into the cyl-
inder. The locations where the pins have scraped away the carbon signify where to file. Needless 
to say, this method is time-consuming and calls for repeated trials. Offenders sometimes covertly 
Physical Security Countermeasures          157
FIGURE 7-11 Deadbolt and door frame.

158          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
FIGURE 7-12 L-shaped plate.
FIGURE 7-13 Safety hasp.
borrow a key, quickly press it into a bar of soap or wax, return the key, and then file a copy on 
a blank key. This method illustrates the importance of key control.
After gaining access, an offender may employ some tricks to make sure nobody enters 
while he or she is busy. This is accomplished, for instance, by inserting a pin or obstacle in 
the keyway and locking the door from the inside.
Whatever hardware is used, the longer it takes to attack a lock, the greater is the dan-
ger for the offender. Six or more pins and pick-resistant, impression-resistant cylinders inhibit 
unauthorized access. One further point: most burglary insurance policies state that there must 
be visible signs of forced entry to support a claim.
Other methods of entry may be used by offenders. A thief may simply use a stolen key 
or a key (or access card) borrowed from another person. Unfortunately, intruders often enter 
restricted areas because somebody forgot to use a locking device. This mistake renders the 
most complex locks useless. 
The methods of defeating lock-and-key systems do not stop here. Innovative thieves and 
various kinds of locks, keys, and access systems create a hodgepodge of methods that loss 
prevention practitioners should understand.

Types of Locks
Volumes have been written about locks. The following briefly summarizes simple and more 
complex locks:
• Warded (or skeleton key tumbler) lock: This older kind of lock is disengaged when a 
skeleton key makes direct contact with a bolt and slides it back into the door. It is an 
easy lock to pick. A strong piece of L-shaped metal can be inserted into the keyway 
to move the bolt. Warded locks are in use in older buildings and are recognized by a 
keyway that permits seeing through. Locks on handcuffs are of the warded kind and 
can be defeated by a knowledgeable offender.
• Disc tumbler (or wafer tumbler) lock: The use of this lock, originally designed for 
the automobile industry, has expanded to desks, cabinets, files, and padlocks. Its 
operation entails spring-loaded flat metal discs, instead of pins, that align when the 
proper key is used. These locks are mass produced, inexpensive, and have a short life 
expectancy. More security is offered than warded locks can provide, but disc tumbler 
locks are subject to defeat by improper keys or being jimmied.
• Pin tumbler lock: Invented by Linus Yale in 1844, the pin tumbler lock is used widely 
in industry and residences (see Figure 7-8). Its security surpasses that of the warded 
and disc tumbler kinds.
• Lever lock: Lever locks vary widely. Basically, these locks disengage when tumblers are 
aligned by the proper key. Those found in cabinets, chests, and desks often provide 
minimal security, whereas those found in bank safe deposit boxes are more complex 
and provide greater security. The better quality lever lock offers more security than the 
best pin tumbler lock.
• Combination lock: This lock requires manipulating a numbered dial(s) to gain 
access. Combination locks usually have three or four dials that must be aligned in 
the correct order for entrance. These locks provide greater security than key locks 
because a limited number of people probably will know the lock combination, keys 
are unnecessary, and lock picking is obviated. They are used for safes, bank vaults, 
and high-security filing cabinets. With older combination locks, skillful burglars are 
able actually to listen to the locking mechanism to open the lock; more advanced 
mechanisms have reduced this weakness. A serious vulnerability results when an 
offender watches the opening of a combination lock with either binoculars or a 
telescope. Retailers sometimes place combination safes near the front door for 
viewing by patrolling police; however, unless the retailer uses his or her body to 
block the dial from viewing, losses may result. This same weakness exists where 
access is permitted by typing a secret code into a keyboard for access to a parking 
lot, doorway, or secure area.
• Combination padlock: This lock is similar in operation to a combination lock. It is 
used on employee or student lockers and in conjunction with safety hasps or chains. 
Some of these locks have a keyway so they can be opened with a key.
• Padlock: Requiring a key, this lock is used on lockers or in conjunction with hasps or 
chains. Numerous kinds of construction are possible, each affording differing levels 
of protection. Low-security padlocks contain warded locks, whereas more secure ones 
have disc tumbler, pin tumbler, or lever characteristics. Serial numbers on padlocks are 
a security hazard similar to combination padlocks.
Other kinds of locks include devices that have a bolt that locks vertically instead of hori-
zontally. Emergency exit locks with alarms or “panic alarms” enable quick exit in emergencies 
while deterring unauthorized door use. Sequence locking devices require locking the doors in a 
predetermined order; this ensures that all doors are locked because the outer doors will not lock 
until the inner doors are locked.
The use of interchangeable core locks is a method to deal with the theft, duplication, or loss 
of keys. Using a special control key, one core (that part containing the keyway) is simply replaced 
by another. A different key then is needed to operate the lock. This system, although more expen-
sive initially, minimizes the need for a locksmith or the complete changing of locks.
Physical Security Countermeasures          159

160          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Automatic locking and unlocking devices also are a part of the broad spectrum of meth-
ods to control access. Digital locking systems open doors when a particular numbered com-
bination is typed. If the wrong number is typed, an alarm is sounded. Combinations can be 
changed when necessary. Electromagnetic locks use magnetism, electricity, and a metal plate 
around doors to hold doors closed. When the electricity is turned off, the door can be opened. 
Remote locks enable opening a door electronically from a remote location. Before releasing the 
door lock, an officer seated in front of a console identifies an individual at a door by use of 
CCTV and a two-way intercom. Backup power is essential for these systems.
Trends taking place with locks and keys include increasing use of electronics and 
microchip technology. For example, hybrids have been developed whereby a key can serve as 
a standard hardware key in one door and an electronic key in another door. “Smart locks” 
have grown in popularity. These locks combine traditional locks with electronic access con-
trol; read various types of access cards for access; use a tiny computer to perform multiple 
functions, including holding data (e.g., access events); and can be connected to an access control 
system for uploading and downloading data. Most contain a tiny battery; others are con-
nected to a power supply.
Wireless locking systems and RF online locking systems make use of modern technol-
ogy, although care must be exercised in the evaluation and purchasing process. A pilot proj-
ect helps to ensure reliability. Signals are hindered by metallic materials (e.g., steel buildings). 
These systems avoid the use of wire between the lock and the access control panel. Since 
these locks are battery operated, a backup power source is essential. In one case, during an 
emergency, the locks of a building became useless when the battery power in the locks ran 
out. The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 
offer standards for locks that are followed by manufacturers.
Although card access systems are used universally, locks and keys are still used to pro-
tect a variety of assets.
Master Key Systems
In most instances, a lock accepts only one key that has been cut to fit it. A lock that has been 
altered to permit access by two or more keys has been master keyed. The master key system 
allows a number of locks to be opened by the master key. This system should be confined to 
high-quality hardware utilizing pin tumbler locks. A disadvantage of the master key system is 
that if the master key is lost or stolen, security is compromised. A change key fits one lock. A 
submaster key will open all locks in, for instance, a wing of a building. The master key opens 
locks covered by two or more submaster systems.
Key Control
Without adequate key control, locks are useless and losses are likely to climb. Accountability 
and proper records are necessary, as with access cards. Computerized record-keeping pro-
grams are available for key control. Keys should be marked with a code to identify the cor-
responding lock; the code is interpreted via a record stored in a safe place. A key should never 
be marked, “Key for room XYZ.” When not in use, keys should be positioned on hooks in a 
locked key cabinet or vault. The name of the employee, date, and key code are vital records to 
maintain when a key is issued. These records require continuous updating. Employee turnover 
is one reason why precise records are vital. Departing employees will return keys (and other 
valuables) if their final paycheck is withheld. Policies should state that reporting a lost key 
would not result in punitive action; an investigation and a report will strengthen key control. 
If key audits check periodically who has what key, control is further reinforced. To hinder 
duplication of keys, “do not duplicate” may be stamped on keys, and company policy can 

clearly state that key duplication will result in dismissal. Lock changes are wise every eight 
months and sometimes at shorter intervals on an irregular basis. Key control also is impor-
tant for vehicles such as autos, trucks, and forklifts. These challenges and vulnerabilities of 
traditional lock and key systems have influenced organizations in switching to modern access 
control and biometric systems.
Physical Security Countermeasures          161
As a security manager, how do you solve the following problem? Because of employ-
ees who quit, were laid off, or fired, many keys are not being returned and remaining 
employees are expressing concern about their safety.
Intrusion Detection Systems
An intrusion detection system detects and reports an event or stimulus within its detection 
area. A response to resolve the reported problem is essential. The emphasis here is on interior 
sensors. Sensors appropriate for perimeter protection are stressed in Chapter 8.
What are the basic components of an intrusion detection system? Three fundamen-
tal components are sensor, control unit, and annunciator. Sensors detect intrusion by, for 
example, heat or movement of a human. The control unit receives the alarm  notification from 
the sensor and then activates a silent alarm or annunciator (e.g., a light or siren), which usually 
produces a human response. There are a variety of intrusion detection systems, and they can be 
wired or wireless. Several standards exist for intrusion detection systems from UL, ISO, the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and other groups. Types of interior sensors 
are explained next (Garcia, 2006: 104–122; Honey, 2003: 48–94).
Interior Sensors
A balanced magnetic switch consists of a switch mounted to a door (or window) frame and 
a magnet mounted to a moveable door or window. When the door is closed, the magnet holds the 
switch closed to complete a circuit. An alarm is triggered when the door is opened and the 
circuit is interrupted. An ordinary magnetic switch is similar to the balanced type, except that 
it is simpler, is less expensive, and provides a lower level of security. Switches provide good 
protection against opening a door; however, an offender may cut through a door or glass. 
(Chapter 8 provides illustrations of switch sensors.)
Mechanical contact switches contain a pushbutton-actuated switch that is recessed into 
a surface. An item is placed on it that depresses the switch, completing the alarm circuit. 
Lifting the item interrupts the circuit and signals an alarm.
Pressure-sensitive mats contain two layers of metal strips or screen wire separated by 
sections of foam rubber or other flexible material. When pressure is applied, as by a person 
walking on the mat, both layers meet and complete an electrical contact to signal an alarm. 
These mats are applied as internal traps at doors, windows, and main traffic points, as well 
as near valuable assets. The cost is low, and these mats are difficult to detect. If the mat is 
detected by the offender, he or she can walk around it.
Grid wire sensors are made of fine insulated wire attached to protected surfaces in a 
grid pattern consisting of two circuits, one running vertical, the other horizontal, and each 
overlapping the other. An interruption in either circuit signals an alarm. This type of sensor 
is applied to grill work, screens, walls, floors, ceilings, doors, and other locations. Although 
these sensors are difficult for an offender to spot, they are expensive to install, and an offender 
can jump the circuit.
Trip wire sensors use a spring-loaded switch attached to a wire stretched across a 
protected area. An intruder “trips” the alarm (i.e., opens the circuit) when the wire is pulled 

162          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
loose from the switch. These sensors are often applied to ducts but can be applied to other 
locations. If the sensor is spotted by an offender, he or she may be able to circumvent it.
Vibration sensors detect low-frequency energy resulting from the force applied in an 
attack on a structure (see Figure 7-14). These sensors are applied to walls, floors, and ceilings. 
Various sensor models require proper selection.
Capacitance sensors create an electrical field around metallic objects that, when dis-
turbed, signals an alarm (see Figure 7-15). These sensors are applied to safes, file cabinets, 
grills at openings (e.g., windows), and other metal objects. One sensor can protect many 
objects; however, it is subject to defeat by using insulation (e.g., heavy gloves).
Infrared photoelectric beam sensors activate an alarm when an invisible infrared beam 
of light is interrupted (see Figure 7-16). If the system is detected, an offender may jump over 
or crawl under the beam to defeat it. To reduce this vulnerability, tower enclosures can be used 
to stack sensors.
Ultrasonic motion detectors create a pattern of inaudible sound waves that are transmit-
ted into an area and monitored by a receiver. These detectors operate on the Doppler effect, 
which is the change in frequency that results from the motion of an intruder. These detectors 
are installed on walls or ceilings or used covertly (i.e., disguised within another object). They 
are subject to nuisance alarms from high-pitched noises or air currents and can be defeated 
by objects blocking the sensor or by fast or slow movement. The use of this detector is limited 
because of false alarms.
Microwave motion detectors operate on the Doppler frequency-shift principle. An energy 
field is transmitted into an area and monitored for a change in its pattern and frequency, which 
results in an alarm. Because microwave energy penetrates a variety of construction materials, care 
is required for placement and aiming. However, this can be an advantage in protecting multiple 
rooms and large areas with one sensor. These sensors can be defeated (like ultrasonic ones) by 
objects blocking the sensor or by fast or slow movement.
FIGURE 7-14 Vibration sensor.
FIGURE 7-15 Capacitance sensor.

Passive infrared (PIR) intrusion sensors are passive in that they do not transmit a sig-
nal for an intruder to disturb. Rather, moving infrared radiation (from a person) is detected 
against the radiation environment of a room. When an intruder enters the room, the level of 
infrared energy changes, and an alarm is activated. Although the PIR is not subject to as many 
nuisance alarms as ultrasonic and microwave detectors, it should not be aimed at sources of 
heat or surfaces that can reflect energy. The PIR can be defeated by blocking the sensor so it 
cannot pick up heat.
Passive audio detectors listen for noise created by intruders. Various models filter out 
naturally occurring noises not indicating forced entry. These detectors can use public address 
system speakers in buildings, which can act as microphones to listen to intruders. The actual 
conversation of intruders can be picked up and recorded by these systems.  To enhance this sys-
tem, CCTV can provide visual verification of an alarm condition,  video in real time, and still 
images digitally to security or police, and evidence. The audio also can be two-way, enabling 
security to warn the intruders. Such audiovisual systems must be applied with extreme care to 
protect privacy, confidentiality, and sensitive information, and to avoid violating state and fed-
eral wiretapping and electronic surveillance laws.
Fiber optics is used for intrusion detection and for transmission of alarm signals. It 
involves the transportation of information via guided light waves in an optical fiber. This sen-
sor can be attached to or inserted in many things requiring protection. When stress is applied 
to the fiber optic cable, an infrared light pulsing through the cable reacts to the stress and 
signals an alarm.
Physical Security Countermeasures          163
FIGURE 7-16 Infrared photoelectric beam system.
Intrusion detection systems only detect and report an alarm condition. These systems do 
not stop or apprehend an intruder.
Trends
Two types of sensor technologies often are applied to a location to reduce false alarms, prevent 
defeat techniques, or fill unique needs. The combination of microwave and passive infrared 
sensors is a popular example of applying dual technologies (see Figure 7-17). Reporting can be 

164          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
designed so an alarm is signaled when both sensors detect an intrusion (to reduce false alarms) or 
when either sensor detects an intrusion. Sensors are also becoming “smarter” by sending sensor 
data to a control panel or computer, distinguishing between humans and animals, and activating 
a trouble output if the sensor lens is blocked. Supervised wireless sensors have become a major 
advancement because sensors can be placed at the best location without the expense of running a 
wire; these sensors are constantly monitored for integrity of the radio frequency link between the 
sensor and panel, status of the battery, and whether the sensor is functioning normally (Garcia, 
2006: 104; O’Leary, 1999: 36–48).
Operational Zoning
Operational zoning means that the building being protected has a segmented alarm system, 
whereby the alarm can be turned on and off within particular zones depending on usage. For 
example, if an early morning cleaning crew is in the north end of a plant, then that alarm is 
turned off while other zones still have the alarm on. Furthermore, zoning helps to pinpoint 
where an intrusion has occurred.
Alarm Monitoring
Today, many entities have an alarm system that is monitored by an in-house station (e.g., 
a console at a secure location) or from a central station (contract service) located off the 
premises. These services easily can supply reports of unusual openings and closings, as well as 
those of the regular routine. Chapter 8 covers alarm signaling systems.
Closed-Circuit Television
Closed-circuit television, or CCTV (see Figure 7-18), assists in deterrence, surveillance, 
apprehension, and prosecution. This technology is also helpful in civil cases to protect an 
Workshop
Canteen
Office
Sales
Window
Door
Stores
Key:
Passive infra-red/ 
microwave detector
Magnetic contact
Remote keypad to operate 
system
Control panel
P
P
C
C
C
C
C
RK
P
P
CP
C
C
C
C
C
RK
P
C
CP
P
P
C
RK
P
C
C
RK
FIGURE 7-17 Commercial intrusion alarm system.

organization’s interests. The applications go beyond security and justice. For instance, CCTV 
can serve as a tool to understand production problems or customer behavior. Although it may 
be costly initially, CCTV reduces personnel costs because it allows the  viewing of multiple 
locations by one person. For instance, throughout a manufacturing plant, multiple cameras are 
installed, and one security officer in front of a console monitors the cameras. Accessories 
include pan (i.e., side-to-side movement), tilt (i.e., up-and-down movement), and zoom lenses, 
referred to as “PTZ” in the industry, which are mechanisms that permit viewing mobility 
and opportunities to obtain a close look at suspicious activity. Additional system capabilities 
include recording incidents and viewing when limited light is present. Modern technology has 
greatly altered CCTV capabilities, as described in subsequent paragraphs.
Standards for CCTV systems are from several sources. These include ANSI, SIA, 
National Electrical Manufacturers Association, American Public Transportation Association, 
government agencies, ISO/International Electrotechnical Commission, and the International 
Code Council. England and Australia are especially active preparing CCTV standards.
During the 1950s, CCTV began its development. The traditional CCTV system that 
came into greater use in the 1970s consisted of analog recording systems, solid-state cameras, 
and coaxial cable (Siemon Company, 2003; Suttell, 2006: 114). This older technology applied 
multiple cameras connected through cabling to a camera control unit and a multiplexer that 
fed several videocassette recorders (VCR) in a central control room. The images were viewed 
real time via several monitors. The disadvantages of this technology include the following: 
the control room is a single point of failure within the security infrastructure; if a camera is 
moved, cable is required for the connection; the use of VCRs results in numerous cassette 
tapes requiring storage space; and humans are necessary to change and store tapes.
Older technology, such as the VCR that could record for a limited number of hours, 
was followed by time-lapse recorders (i.e., single frames of video are stored at intervals over 
an extended period of time) with recording capabilities up to several hundred hours, plus an 
alarm mode in which the recorder reverts to real time when an alarm condition exists. Real-
time setting records 30 frames a second; time-lapse video may record between one frame a 
second and one frame every eight seconds. Time-lapse recorder features included a quick 
search for alarm conditions during playback, the playing of recorded video frames according 
to the input of time by the user, and the interface with other security systems such as access 
controls to ensure a video record of all people entering and departing.
Advances in technology have improved the capabilities of CCTV systems. A new gen-
eration CCTV system developed with unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) cabling (i.e., a cable 
with multiple pairs of twisted insulated copper conductors in a single sheath) that enabled 
cameras to run on the existing infrastructure. Digital video recorders (DVR) were introduced 
in the mid-1990s, and with them, several advantages over analog, including recording on hard 
disk drives like a file is stored on a personal computer. Other advantages are avoiding tape 
Physical Security Countermeasures          165
FIGURE 7-18 Closed-circuit television (CCTV) sign. Camera at top.

166          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
 storage, remote viewing, easy playback and searches, improved quality of images, and longer 
life of recordings. Another advance is digital recording in networking, which is referred to as 
network video recorder (NVR). Rather than many DVRs networked together, an NVR is the 
camera system. An NVR is digital cameras managed by specially designed computer operating 
software designed to manage video surveillance (Alten, 2005: 8).
Internet protocol (IP)-based network cameras permit IP networking of video to be 
shared where the network reaches, including offsite storage. IP video can be controlled and 
viewed from a PDA, phone, laptop computer, or other mobile device. It is also encrypted. IP-
based CCTV systems, including IP cameras, IP video servers, and IP keyboards, can be located 
almost anywhere. In addition, the IP keyboard can control the PTZ and other management 
functions such as recording and searching. When the existing infrastructure in a building is 
used, a building can become automated on one cable system and include not only CCTV, but 
also access control, fire/safety systems, voice, network traffic, and other systems.
It is important to distinguish between the older analog technology and the newer digital 
technology. Analog signals are used in their original form and placed, for example, on a tape. 
Most earlier electronic devices use the analog format (e.g., televisions, record players, cassette 
tape recorders, and telephones). Analog technology is still applied today. With digital technol-
ogy, the analog signals are sampled numerous times and turned into numbers and stored in a 
digital system. Today, many devices contain digital technology (e.g., high-definition TV, CDs, 
fiber-optic telephone lines, and digital telephones).
Even with the shift to IP-based network systems for CCTV, video is still transmitted over 
coaxial cable, twisted pair wire, fiber-optic cable, microwave, radio frequency, and telephone 
lines. What we have is the opportunity (as with other electronic security systems) for, say, an 
executive in New York to monitor inside a business in Hong Kong.
Wireless video transmission (e.g., RF or microwave) is an option under certain circum-
stances. Examples include flexible deployment whereby cameras must be moved periodically 
(e.g., changing exhibition hall), covert surveillance requiring quick and easy installation, at 
emergency sites, and historical buildings where a cable route is not possible. Careful planning is 
required prior to the installation of transmitters and receivers to prevent the radio signal from 
being blocked. Line of sight is an important issue. Interference can result from environmental 
conditions such as metallic buildings, aluminum siding, solar flares, lightning, heavy rain, 
snow, and high wind (Chan, 2005: 46–48).
When IT personnel are approached about including CCTV on a network, they are often 
concerned about how much bandwidth the video will use. To allay fears, one option at a 
multibuilding facility is to maintain a DVR at every building for storage of video so all video 
is not transmitted to the central computer.
For those end users using traditional analog technology while moving toward an IP-
based retrofit, options include using “hybrid” products that accommodate both analog and 
IP-based signals. Lasky (2006: 38) advises against a full IP retrofit at this time because there 
are too many variables that are not standardized with IP cameras, a major one being the 
amount of bandwidth required on a network with numerous IP cameras.
Organizations that employ CCTV systems may consider streaming video surveillance 
from remote sites to regional centers. Although this approach can be challenging, it can also 
reduce plant and personnel costs. A key factor in this decision is compression because band-
width limitations affect the amount of video that can be exchanged between transmitting and 
receiving sites. Similar to a roadway tunnel, only a certain number of vehicles can enter the 
tunnel at any one time. However, if the vehicles are made smaller, more can fit. Compression 
is the amount of redundant video that can be stripped out of an image before storage and 
transmission, and there are various compression techniques (Mellos, 2005: 34).
Another concern, as physical security personnel increasingly rely on a network, is access to 
the network for a variety of security-related information. In this case, the IT personnel have the 
option of placing such security information on a subnet to prevent access to the whole network.
Changing technology has brought about the charged coupled device (CCD) or “chip” 
camera, a small, photosensitive unit designed to replace the tube in the closed-circuit camera. 
CCD technology is found in camcorders. CCD cameras have certain advantages over tube 

cameras: CCD cameras are more adaptable to a variety of circumstances, they have a longer 
life expectancy, “ghosting” (i.e., people appearing transparent) is less of a problem, there is 
less intolerance to light, less power is required, and less heat is produced, thereby requiring 
less ventilation and permitting installation in more locations.
Another technology for capturing images digitally is the complementary metal oxide semi-
conductor (CMOS). This camera is less popular than the CCD camera and more complex. Both 
types of cameras convert light into electric charge and process it into electronic signals.
Digital cameras are replacing analog cameras. Although analog signals can be converted 
into digital signals for recording to a PC, quality may suffer. Digital cameras use digital signals 
that are saved directly to hard drive, but space on a hard drive is limited for video. Network 
cameras are analog or digital video cameras connected to the Internet with an IP address.
Increasing “intelligence” is being built into CCTV–computer-based systems. Multiplex 
means sending many signals over one communications channel. Video multiplex systems mini-
mize the number of monitors security personnel must watch by allowing numerous cameras to 
be viewed at the same time on one video screen. The pictures are compressed, but a full view is 
seen of each picture. If an alarm occurs, a full screen can be brought up. The digital multiplex 
recorder enables users to record events directly to a hard drive, reducing storage space.
The prolonged watching of CCTV monitors (i.e., screens) by personnel, without falling 
asleep, has been a challenge since the origin of these systems. Personnel that are not rotated 
periodically become fatigued from watching too much TV. This serious problem is often over-
looked. People may “test” the monitoring of the system by placing a bag or rag over a camera 
or even spraying the lens with paint. If people see that there is no response, CCTV becomes 
a hoax. The use of dummy cameras is not recommended because, when people discover the 
dummy, CCTV can be perceived as a deceitful farce.
Users of CCTV systems are especially interested in the recording capabilities of their 
systems, knowing their personnel are often occupied with multiple tasks (e.g., answering ques-
tions for customers, providing information over the telephone) and unable to watch monitors 
continuously. When an event does occur, these systems permit a search of recordings by date, 
time, location, and other variables.
CCTV capabilities can be enhanced by using video motion detection (VMD). A video 
motion detector operates by sending, from a camera, a static (i.e., having no motion) picture to 
a memory evaluator to analyze the image for pixel changes. Any change in the picture, such as 
movement, activates an alarm. These systems assist security officers in reacting to threats and 
reduce the burden of increasing camera usage. Tse (2006: 42) refers to a study by an Australian 
firm that found that after 12 minutes of continuous watching of monitors, an operator would 
often miss up to 45% of scene activity, and after 22 minutes, up to 95% is overlooked.
The integration of VMD and intelligent video systems (IVS) is a developing technology that 
offers a variety of promising functions that aim to precisely define alarm conditions, enhance 
the capabilities of CCTV systems, and reduce the problem of humans missing important events 
on monitors. These systems enable the user to preselect actions that are programmed into 
the digital video system, and this software signals an alarm when such an event takes place. 
Examples of events triggering an alarm include stopped or moving vehicles, objects that are 
abandoned or removed, and loitering of people (Duda, 2006: 48–50).
Cameras commonly are placed at public streets, access points, passageways, shipping 
and receiving docks, merchandise storage areas, cashier locations, parts departments, and 
overlooking files, safes, vaults, and production lines. In the workplace, the location of cam-
eras requires careful planning to avoid harming employee morale. A key restriction on the 
placement of cameras is that they must not be applied to an area where someone has a reason-
able expectation of privacy (e.g., restrooms, locations where individuals change clothes).
The extent of the use of hidden surveillance cameras is difficult to measure, especially 
because many individuals are unaware of the existence of these cameras in workplaces. 
Pinhole lenses are a popular component of hidden surveillance cameras. They get their name 
from the outer opening of the lens, which is 1/8 to 1/4 inch in diameter and difficult to spot. 
Cameras are hidden in almost any location, such as clocks, file cabinets, computers, sprinkler 
heads, and mannequins.
Physical Security Countermeasures          167

168          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Security Officers
Security officers play an important role in countering internal losses. They must be integrated 
with technology, and this entails quality training and supervision. When uniformed officers 
patrol on foot inside a facility—through production, storage, shipping, receiving, office, 
and sales floor areas—an enhanced loss prevention atmosphere prevails. Unpredictable and 
irregular patrols deter employee theft (among other losses). A properly trained officer looks 
for deviations, such as merchandise stored or hidden in unusual places, and tampered devices 
(e.g., locks, alarms, and CCTV). Thoroughly searching trash containers deters employees 
from hiding items in that popular spot. Losses also are hindered when officers identify and 
check people, items, and vehicles at access points.
Safes, Vaults, and File Cabinets
Safes
Protective containers (see Figure 7-19) secure valuable items (e.g., cash, confidential informa-
tion). These devices generally are designed to withstand losses from fire or burglary. Specifications 
It is important to note that when the network is down, IP cameras, NVR, and other 
technology tied to the network are down; therefore, emergency plans are essential to 
maintain business continuity.
FIGURE 7-19 Safe with electronic lock. Courtesy: Sargent & Greenleaf, Inc.

vary, and an assessment of need should be carefully planned. Management frequently is shocked 
when a fire-resistive safe in which valuable items are “secured” enables a burglar to gain entry 
because the safe was designed only for fire. The classic fire-resistive (or record) safe often has a 
square (or rectangular) door and thin steel walls that contain insulation. During assembly, wet 
insulation is poured between the steel walls; when the mixture dries, moisture remains. During 
a fire, the insulation creates steam that cools the safe below 350°F (the flash point of paper) 
for a specified time. The FBI maintains safe insulation files to assist investigators. Record safes 
for computer media require better protection because damage can occur at 125°F, and these 
records are more vulnerable to humidity. Fire safes are able to withstand one fire; thereafter, the 
insulation is useless.
The classic burglary-resistive (or money) safe often has a thick, round door and thick 
walls. Round doors were thought to enhance resistance, but today many newer burglary-resis-
tive safes have square or rectangular doors. The burglary-resistive safe is more costly than the 
fire-resistive safe.
Better quality safes have the Underwriters Laboratories (UL, a nonprofit testing orga-
nization) rating (see Table 7–1). This means that manufacturers have submitted safes for 
testing by UL. These tests determine the fire- or burglary-resistive properties of safes. For 
example, a fire-resistive container with a UL rating of 350–4 can withstand an  external tem-
perature to 2000°F for four hours while the internal temperature will not exceed 350°F. The 
UL test actually involves placing a safe in an increasingly hot furnace to simulate a fire. An 
explosion impact test requires another safe of the same model to be placed in a preheated 
(2000°F) furnace for half an hour. Then the heat is lowered slightly for another half hour 
before the safe is dropped 30 feet onto rubble. If the safe is still intact, it is returned to the 
furnace for an hour at 1700°F before it is allowed to cool so that the papers inside can be 
checked for damage. In reference to burglary-resistive containers, a UL rating of TL15, for 
example, signifies weight of at least 750 pounds and resistance to an attack on its door by 
common tools for a minimum of 15 minutes. UL-rated burglary-resistive safes also contain 
UL-listed combination locks and other UL-listed components. UL is constantly toughening 
its standards. When selecting a safe, consider recommendations from insurance companies 
and peers, whether or not safe company employees are bonded, and how long the company 
has been in business.
Attacks
Before a skilled burglar attacks a safe, he or she studies the methods used to protect it. Inside 
information (e.g., a safe’s combination) is valuable, and scores of employees and former 
employees of attacked firms have been implicated in burglaries. Listed next are major attack 
techniques of two types: with force and without force.
Attack methods using force include the following:
• Rip or peel: Most common, this method is used on fire-resistive safes that have 
lightweight metal. Like opening a can of sardines, the offender rips the metal from a 
corner. The peel technique requires an offender to pry along the edge of the door to 
reach the lock.
• Punch: The combination dial is broken off with a hammer. A punch is placed on the 
exposed spindle, which is hammered back to enable breakage of the lock box. The 
handle then is used to open the door. This method is effective against older safes.
• Chop: This is an attack of a fire-resistive safe from underneath. The safe is tipped over 
and hit with an ax or hammer to create a hole.
• Drill: A skillful burglar drills into the door to expose the lock mechanism; the lock 
tumblers are aligned manually to open the door.
• Torch: This method is used against burglar-resistive safes. An oxygen-acetylene cutting 
torch melts the steel. The equipment is brought to the safe, or the offender uses 
equipment from the scene.
• Carry away: The offender removes the safe from the premises and attacks it in a 
convenient place.
Physical Security Countermeasures          169

170          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Table 7-1 UL Testing of Safes
 
Resistance  
 
Class 
to Attack 
Attack Time 
Description
Fire
350-* 
Not tested 
N/A 
For paper and document storage
150-* 
Not tested 
N/A 
For storage of magnetic computer tapes
 
 
 
 and photographic film
125-* 
Not tested 
N/A 
For storage of flexible disks
Burglary
TL-15 
Door or  
15 min 
Resists against entry by common mechanical and
 
 front face 
 
 electrical tools or combination of these means, 
 
 
 
Group 2, 1, or 1R combination lock.**
TL-15X6 
6 sides 
15 min 
Same as above
TRTL-15X6 
6 sides 
15 min 
Resists against entry by common mechanical, 
 
 
 
 electrical tools and cutting torches or combination 
 
 
 
 of each, Group 1, 1R, M, 2 combination lock or, 
 
 
 
 Type 1 high-security electronic lock.**
TL-30 
Door or  
30 min 
Same tools as TL-15, Group 1 or 1R 
 
 front face 
 
 combination lock.**
TL-30X6 
6 sides 
30 min 
Same tools as TL-15, Group 2, 1 or 1R 
 
 
 
 combination lock.**
TRTL-30 
Door or  
30 min 
Same tools as TRTL 15X6, Group 1 or 
 
 front face 
 
 1R combination lock, encased in a minimum 3”
 
 
 
 of concrete or in a larger safe or container.**
TRTL-30X6 
6 sides 
30 min 
Same tools as TRTL 15X6, Group 1 or 1R 
 
 
 
 combination lock.**
TRTL-60X6 
6 sides 
60 min 
Same tools as TRTL-15, Group 1 or 1R combination
 
 
 
 lock, minimum weight 750 lbs., body 1” thick 
 
 
 
 solid open hearth steel.
TXTL-60X6 
6 sides 
60 min 
Same tools as TRTL-15 + up to 8 oz. of 
 
 
 
  nitroglycerine with a maximum of 4 oz., per test, 
Group 1 or 1R combination lock or Type 1 high-
security electronic lock, minimum weight 1000 
lbs., wall thickness not specified.
*Hour rating 4, 2 or 1. Before inside temperature reaches 350, 150, or 125°F as shown by class
designation.
**Minimum weight 750 lbs., body 1” steel, minimum tensile strength of 50,000 PSI.
 UL 2058: new standard for Type 1 high-security electronic lock for safes.
Combination Locks (These products are tested in accordance with UL 768)
 Group 1. Highly resistant to expert or professional manipulation. Used in safes designated as TRTL-
15X6, TRTL-30, TRTL-30X6, TRTL-60X6, and TXTL-60X6.
 Group 1R. These locks meet all of the requirements of Group 1 and are resistant against 
radiological methods of manipulation.
 Group M. Moderate resistant to skilled manipulation, these are found in TL-15, TL-15X6, 
TL-30, and TL30X6 safes, ATM safes, gun safes, and fire-rated record containers.
 Group 2. Resistant to semiskilled manipulation, these locks are found in non-Listed safes, insulated 
record containers, and residential security containers.
Source: Correspondence (June 7, 2006) with UL, 1285 Walt Whitman Rd., Melville, NY 11747.

Physical Security Countermeasures          171
Attack methods using no force include the following:
• Office search: Simply, the offender finds the safe combination in a hiding place (e.g., 
taped under a desk drawer).
• Manipulation: The offender opens a safe without knowing the combination by 
using sight, sound, and touch—a rare skill. Sometimes the thief is lucky and opens a 
safe by using numbers similar to an owner’s birth date, home address, or telephone 
number.
• Observation: An offender views the opening of a safe from across the street with the 
assistance of binoculars or a telescope. To thwart this, one should place the numbers 
on the top edge of the dial, rather than on the face of the dial.
• Day combination: For convenience, during the day, the dial is not completely turned each 
time an employee finishes using the safe. This facilitates an opportunity for quick access. 
An offender often manipulates the dial in case the day combination is still in effect.
• X-ray equipment: Metallurgical X-ray equipment is used to photograph the combination 
of the safe. White spots appear on the picture that helps to identify the numerical 
combination. The equipment is cumbersome, and the technique is rare.
The following measures are recommended to fortify the security of safes and other  containers:
1. Utilize alarms (e.g., capacitance and vibration), CCTV, and adequate lighting.
2. Secure the safe to the building so it is not stolen. (This also applies to cash registers 
that may be stolen in broad daylight.) Bolt the safe to the foundation or secure it in a 
cement floor. Remove any wheels or casters.
3. Do not give a burglar an opportunity to use any tools on the premises; hide or secure 
all potential tools (e.g., ladder or torch).
4. A time lock permits a safe to be opened only at select times. This hinders access even 
if the combination is known. A delayed-action lock provides an automatic waiting 
period (e.g., 15 minutes) from combination use to the time the lock mechanism 
activates. A silent signal lock triggers an alarm when a special combination is used to 
open a safe.
5. At the end of the day, turn the dial several times in the same direction.
6. A written combination is risky. Change the factory combination as soon as possible. 
When an employee who knows the combination leaves, change it.
7. Maintain limited valuables in the safe through frequent banking.
8. Select a safe with its UL rating marked on the inside. If a burglar identifies the rating 
on the outside, an attack is made easier.
Vaults
A walk-in vault is actually a large safe; it is subject to similar vulnerabilities from fire and 
attack. Because a walk-in vault is so large and expensive, typically, only the door is made of 
steel, and the rest of the vault is composed of reinforced concrete. Vaults are heavy enough 
to require special support within a building. They commonly are constructed at ground level 
to avoid stress on a building.
File Cabinets
Businesses that sustain loss of their records from theft, fire, flood, or other threats or hazards face 
serious consequences, such as the possibility of business failure and litigation. Certain types of 
records require protection according to law. Some vital records are customer-identifying informa-
tion, accounts receivable, inventory lists, legal documents, contracts, research and development, 
and human resources data. Records help to support losses during insurance claims.
File cabinets that are insulated and lockable can provide fair protection against fire 
and burglary. The cost is substantially lower than that of a safe or vault, but valuable records 
demanding increased safety should be placed in a safe or vault and copies stored off-site. Special 
computer safes are designed to protect against forced entry, fire, and moisture that destroys 
computer media.

172          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Case Problems
7A. Consult the floor plans for Woody’s Lumber Company, the Smith Shirt 
manufacturing plant, and Compulab Corporation (Figures 7-1, 7-2, and 7-3). 
Draw up a priority list of 10 loss prevention strategies for each company that you 
think will reduce risks from internal losses. Why did you select as top priorities 
your first three strategies in each list?
7B. As a corporate security manager, you learn that an IT specialist at the same 
company is extremely upset because he did not receive a promotion and raise he 
was expecting. This very intelligent young man told his supervisor that he would 
get back at the company for the injustice before he quits. What do you do?
7C. You are a security officer at a manufacturing plant where an employee informs you 
about observing another employee hiding company property near a back door. You 
check the area near the door and find company property under boxes. What action 
do you take?
7D. As a security officer, you learn that officers on your shift and your immediate 
supervisor have secretly installed, without authorization, a pinhole lens camera in the 
women’s restroom. You refuse to be involved in peeping. The officers have been your 
friends since high school, and you socialize with them when off duty. One day the 
chief security officer summons you to her office and questions you concerning the 
whereabouts of the pinhole lens camera. What do you say?
References
Alten, J. (2005). “Shhh . . . Don’t tell Anyone That DVRs Are Becoming Obsolete.” Security 
Director News, 2 (March).
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. (2006). 2006 ACFE Report to the Nation on 
Occupational Fraud and Abuse. www.acfe.com/documents/2006-rttn.pdf, retrieved July 
13, 2006.
Aughton, S. (2005). “Researchers Crack Biometric Security with Play-Doh.” PC PRO. www.
pcpro.co.uk/news/81257, retrieved December 14, 2005.
Baker, M., and Westin, A. (1987). “Employer Perceptions of Workplace Crime.” Washington, 
DC: US Department of Justice.
Search the Web
Use your favorite search engines to see what vendors have to offer and prices for the 
following products: access control systems, locks, interior intrusion detection systems, 
closed-circuit television, and safes.
Also, check out the following sites:
American National Standards Institute: www.ansi.org
American Society for Testing and Materials: www.astm.org
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners: www.acfe.com/home-live.asp
Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association: www.buildershardware.com/
International Organization for Standardization: www.iso.org
National Fire Protection Association: www.nfpa.org
National White Collar Crime Center: www.nw3c.org/
Security Industry Association: www.siaonline.org
Underwriters Laboratories (UL): www.ul.com

Barry, J. (1993). “Don’t Always Play the Cards You Are Dealt.” Security Technology & 
Design (July-August).
Bernard, R. (2006). “Web Services and Identity Management.” Security Technology & 
Design, 16 (January).
Canada.com (2007). “Hydro Lost Millions from Theft, Damage Last Year.” Vancouver Sun 
(February 7). www.canada.com, retrieved February 9, 2007.
Chan, H. (2005). “Overcoming the Challenges of Wireless Transmission.” Security Technology 
& Design, 15 (October).
Clark, J. and Hollinger, R. (1980). “Theft by Employees.” Security Management, 24 
(September).
Coleman, J. (2000). “Trends in Security Systems Integration.” Security Technology & Design, 
10 (August).
Computer Security Institute/FBI. (2005). CSI/FBI Computer Crime and Security Survey. 
www.GoCSI.com, retrieved July 11, 2006.
Computer Security Institute/FBI. (2006). CSI/FBI Computer Crime and Security Survey. 
www.GoCSI.com, retrieved July 14, 2006.
Conklin, J. (2001). Criminology, 7th ed. Boston: Allyn & Bacon Pub.
D’Agostino, S., et al. (2005). “The Roles of Authentication, Authorization and Cryptography in 
Expanding Security Industry Technology.” www.siaonline.org, retrieved May 30, 2006.
Dean, R. (2005). “Ask The Expert.” Security Products, 9 (September).
Department of Defense. (2000). User’s Guide on Controlling Locks, Keys and Access Cards. 
Port Hueneme, CA: Naval Facilities Engineering Service Center.
Duda, D. (2006). “The Ultimate Integration—Video Motion Detection.” Security Technology 
& Design, 16 (June).
FBI. (2005). FBI Computer Crime Survey. www.fbi.gov/publications/ccs2005.pdf, retrieved 
January 13, 2006.
Garcia, M. (2006). Vulnerability Assessment of Physical Protection Systems. Burlington, MA: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Gersh, D. (2000). “Untouchable Value.” iSecurity (November).
Greene, C. (2004). “Hang Up on Fraud with Confidential Hotlines.” Fraud Alert. Chicago, 
IL: McGovern & Greene.
Honey, G. (2003). Intruder Alarms, 2nd ed. Oxford, UK: Newnes.
Harowitz, S. (2007). “Faking Fingerprints and Eying Solutions.” Security Management, 51 
(March).
Hunt, S. (2006). “Integrated Security Solutions: Getting to Know It.” Security Products, 10 
(February).
Inbau, F., et al. (1996). Protective Security Law, 2nd ed. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Jordan, B. (2006). “Telework’s Growing Popularity.” Homeland Defense Journal, 4 (June).
Keener, J. (1994). “Integrated Systems: What They Are and Where They Are Heading.” 
Security Technology & Design (May).
Lary, B. (1988). “Thievery on the Inside.” Security Management (May).
Lasky, S. (2006). “Video from the Top.” Security Technology & Design, 16 (June).
Mellos, K. (2005). “A Choice You Can Count On.” Security Products, 9 (October).
National Association of Credit Management. (2005). “Embezzlement/Employee Theft.” 
Business Credit, 107 (February).
Nemeth, C. (2005). Private Security and the Law. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-
Heinemann.
O’Leary, T. (1999). “New Innovations in Motion Detectors.” Security Technology & Design, 
9 (November).
Pearson, R. (2000). “Integration vs. Interconnection: It’s a Matter of Semantics,” Security 
Technology & Design, 11 (November).
Pearson, R. (2001). “Open Systems Architecture: Are We There Yet.” Security Technology & 
Design, 11 (January).
Pearson, R. (2005). “Well-Designed Badges Help Prevent Loss.” Security Technology & 
Design, 15 (July).
References          173

174          INTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Philpott, D. (2005). “Physical Security—Biometrics.” Homeland Defense Journal, 3 (May).
Piazza, P. (2005). “The Smart Cards Are Coming . . . Really.” Security Management, 49 (January).
Randazzo, M., et al. (2004). “Insider Threat Study: Illicit Cyber Activity in the Banking and 
Finance Sector.” Washington, D.C.: US Secret Service.
Scicchitano, M., et al. (2004). “Peer Reporting to Control Employee Theft.” Security Journal, 
17 (April).
Siemon Company. (2003). “Video over 10G ip™.” www.siemon.com, retrieved July 24, 
2006.
Shaw, E., et al., (2000). “Managing the Threat from Within.” Information Security,  3 
(July).
Skinner, W., and Fream, A. (1997). “A Social Learning Theory Analysis of Computer 
Crime among College Students.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 34 
(November).
Speed, M. (2003). “Reducing Employee Dishonesty: In Search of the Right Strategy.” Security 
Journal, 16 (April).
Suttell, R. (2006). “Security Monitoring.” Buildings, 100 (May).
Swartz, D. (1999). “Open Architecture Systems: The Future of Security Management.” 
Security Technology & Design, 9 (December).
Taylor, R., et al. (2006). Digital Crime and Digital Terrorism. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education.
Toye, B. (1996). “Bar-Coded Security ID Cards Efficient and Easy.” Access Control 
(March).
Tse, A. (2006). “The Real World of Critical Infrastructure.” Security Products, 10 (May).
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Science and Technology Directorate and the Executive 
Office of the President, Office of Science and Technology Policy. (2004). The National Plan 
for Research and Development in Support of Critical Infrastructure Protection. www.dhs.
gov, retrieved June 13, 2005.
Webopedia. (2006). “Open Architecture.” www.webopedia.com/TERM/O/open_architec-
ture.html, retrieved July 16, 2006.
Zunkel, D. (2003). “A Short Course in High-Security Locks.” Security Technology & Design, 
13 (February).

KEY TERMS
External Threats and 
Countermeasures
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
 1. Describe methods of unauthorized entry.
 2. List and define the five “Ds” of security.
 3. Explain how environmental design can enhance security.
 4. Discuss perimeter security and list and define five types of barriers.
 5. List and explain methods to protect buildings against terrorism.
 6. Explain window and door protection.
 7. Describe the application of intrusion detection systems to perimeter protection.
 8. Explain lighting illumination and at least five types of lamps.
 9. Describe parking lot and vehicle controls.
10. Explain the deployment and monitoring of security officers.
11. Explain the importance of communications and the control center.
12. Discuss the use of protective dogs.
• external loss prevention
• forced entry
• smash and grab attacks
• surreptitious entry
• aura of security
• redundant security
• layered security
• environmental security design
• Oscar Newman
• defensible space
• natural surveillance
• natural territorial reinforcement
• Crime Prevention Through 
Environmental Design (CPTED)
• “Broken Windows” theory
• situational crime prevention
• rational choice theory
• routine activities theory
• lifestyle perspectives
• perimeter
• clear zones
• natural barriers
• structural barriers
• human barriers
• animal barrier
• energy barriers
• passive vehicle barriers
• active vehicle barriers
8
175

176          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Many organizations have developed formidable perimeter security to prevent unau-
thorized entry, while not realizing that the greatest threat is from within.
• common wall
• land use controls
• target-rich environment
• stand-off distance
• blast and antiramming walls
• keep out zones
• fiber optics
• bypass
• spoofing
• point protection
• spot or object protection
• area protection
• perimeter protection
• local alarm
• central station
• remote programming
• lumens
• illuminance
• foot-candle (FC)
• lux
• color rendition
• traffic calming strategies
• stationary post
• foot or vehicle patrols
• contraband
Introduction
External loss prevention focuses on threats from outside an organization. This chapter con-
centrates on countermeasures to impede unauthorized access from outsiders. If unauthorized 
access is successful, numerous losses are possible from such crimes as assault, burglary, rob-
bery, vandalism, arson, and espionage. Naturally, employees as well as outsiders or a con-
spiracy of both may commit these offenses. Furthermore, outsiders can gain legitimate access 
if they are customers, repair technicians, and so on.
Internal and external countermeasures play an interdependent role in minimizing losses; 
a clear-cut division between internal and external countermeasures is not possible because of 
this intertwined relationship. In addition, as explained in the preceding chapter, we are in an 
era of universal threats. This means that because of telework, employees and organizations 
face the same threats whether work is accomplished on or off the premises.
The IT perspective is important to produce comprehensive security. IT specialists use 
terms such as denial of access and intrusion detection, as do physical security specialists; 
however, IT specialists apply these terms to the protection of information systems. As IT and 
physical security specialists learn from each other, a host of protection methods will improve, 
examples being integration of systems, investigations, and business continuity planning.
Methods of Unauthorized Entry
A good way to begin thinking about how to deter unauthorized entry is to study the methods 
used by offenders. Both management (to hinder penetration) and offenders (to succeed in 
gaining access) study the characteristics of patrols, fences, sensors, locks, windows, doors, 
and the like. By placing yourself in the position of an offender (i.e., think like a thief) and then 
that of a loss prevention manager, you can see, while studying Woody’s Lumber Company, the 
Smith Shirt manufacturing plant, and Compulab Corporation (discussed in Chapter 7), that a 
combination of both perspectives aids in the designing of defenses. (Such planning is requested 
in a case problem at the end of this chapter.)

Forced entry is a common method used to gain unauthorized access. Windows and doors 
are especially vulnerable to forced entry. Offenders repeatedly break or cut glass (with a glasscut-
ter) on a window or door and then reach inside to release a lock or latch. To stop the glass from 
falling and making noise, the offender uses a suction cup or tape to remove or hold the broken 
glass together. Retail stores may be subject to smash and grab attacks: a store display window is 
smashed, merchandise is quickly grabbed, and the thief immediately flees. A complex lock may be 
rendered useless if the offender is able to go through a thin door by using a hammer, chisel, and saw. 
Forced entry also may be attempted through walls, floors, ceilings, roofs, skylights, utility tunnels, 
sewer or storm drains, and ventilation vents or ducts.
Unauthorized access also can be accomplished without force. Wherever a lock is 
supposed to be used, if it is not locked properly, access is possible. Windows or doors left 
unlocked are a surprisingly common occurrence. Lock picking or possession of a stolen key 
or access card renders force unnecessary. Dishonest employees are known to assist offenders 
by unlocking locks, windows, or doors and by providing keys and technical information. 
Offenders sometimes hide inside a building until closing and then break out following an 
assault or theft. Tailgating and pass back are other methods of gaining access without force, 
as covered in the preceding chapter. Sly methods of gaining entry are often referred to as sur-
reptitious entry.
Countermeasures
Countermeasures for external (and internal) threats can be conceptualized around the 
five “Ds”:
• Deter: The mere presence of physical security can dissuade offenders from committing 
criminal acts. The impact of physical security can be enhanced through an aura of 
security. An aura is a distinctive atmosphere surrounding something. Supportive 
management and security personnel should work to produce a professional security 
image. They should remain mum on such topics as the number and types of intrusion 
detection sensors on the premises and security system weaknesses. Security patrols 
should be unpredictable and never routine. Signs help to project an aura of security 
by stating, for example, PREMISES PROTECTED BY HIGH-TECH REDUNDANT 
SECURITY. Such signs can be placed along a perimeter and near openings to buildings. 
The aura of security strives to produce a strong psychological deterrent so offenders will 
consider the success of a crime to be unlikely. It is important to note that no guarantees 
come with deterrence. (Criminal justice policies are in serious trouble because deterrence 
is faulty; criminals continue to commit crimes even while facing long sentences.) In the 
security realm, deterrence must be backed up with the following four “Ds.”
• Detect: Offenders should be detected and their location pinpointed as soon as 
they step onto the premises or commit a violation on the premises. This can be 
accomplished through observation, closed-circuit television (CCTV), intrusion sensors, 
duress alarms, weapons screenings, protective dogs, and hotlines.
• Delay: Security is often measured by the time it takes to get through it. Redundant 
security refers to two or more similar security methods (e.g., two fences; two types of 
intrusion sensors). Layered security refers to multiple security methods that follow one 
another and are dissimilar (e.g., perimeter fence, strong doors, a safe). Both redundant 
and layered security creates a time delay. Thus, the offender may become frustrated 
and decide to depart, or the delay may provide time for a response force to arrive to 
make an apprehension.
• Deny: Strong physical security, often called target hardening, can deny access. A steel 
door and a safe are examples. Frequent bank deposits of cash and other valuables 
extend the opportunity to deny the offender success.
• Destroy: When you believe your life or another will be taken, you are legally 
permitted to use deadly force. An asset (e.g., proprietary information) may require 
destruction before it falls into the wrong hands.
Countermeasures          177

178          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Which “D” do you view as most important? Which “D” do you view as least impor-
tant? Explain your answers.
Construction and Environmental Security Design
When a new facility is being planned, the need for a coordinated effort by architects, fire protec-
tion and safety engineers, loss prevention practitioners, and local police and fire officials can-
not be overstated. Further, money is saved when security and safety are planned before actual 
construction rather than accomplished by modifying the building later.
Years ago, when buildings were designed, loss prevention features were an even smaller 
part of the planning process than today. Before air conditioning came into widespread use, 
numerous windows were required for proper ventilation, providing thieves with many entry 
points. Today’s buildings also present problems. For example, ceilings are constructed of 
suspended ceiling tiles with spaces above the tiles that enable access by simply pushing up the 
tiles. Once above the tiles, a person can crawl to other rooms on the same floor. Roof access 
from neighboring buildings is a common problem for both old and new buildings. Many of 
these weak points are corrected by adequate hardware such as locks on roof doors and by 
intrusion sensors.
Architects are playing an increasing role in designing crime prevention into building 
plans. Environmental security design includes natural and electronic surveillance of walkways 
and parking lots, windows and landscaping that enhance visibility, improved lighting, and 
other architectural designs that promote crime prevention. Additionally, dense shrubbery can 
be cut to reduce hiding places, and grid streets can be turned into cul-de-sacs by using bar-
ricades to reduce ease of escape.
During the late 1960s and early 1970s, Oscar Newman (1972), an architect, conducted 
innovative research into the relationship between architectural design and crime prevention 
that developed into the concept of defensible space. He focused on the built environment, 
studied more than 100 housing projects, and identified design elements that inhibit crime. For 
instance, Newman favored the creation of surveillance opportunities, called natural surveil-
lance, through both windows for residents and clear lines of sight; this increases the potential 
to report crimes. Another strategy, known as natural territorial reinforcement, provides clear 
boundaries between public and private areas through such features as landscaping, signs, and 
fences. These boundaries send a message to potential intruders to avoid entering the area, and 
the strategy enables easier identification of intruders. He also recognized that the neighborhood 
surrounding the residential setting influences safety. An essential part of defensible space is to 
create designs that increase residents’ use of public places while reducing fear of crime; this is 
hoped to have a snowballing effect. Oscar Newman found that physical design features of pub-
lic housing affect both the rates of victimization of residents and their perception of security.
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) is multidisciplinary and 
goes beyond the concept of defensible space. It includes psychological and sociological issues of 
deterring offender behavior and influencing resident behavior in preventing crime. CPTED 
is applicable not only to public housing but also to businesses, industries, public buildings, 
transportation systems, and schools, among others. In the past, the U.S. Department of Justice 
has funded CPTED programs in several cities.
An illustration of how CPTED is applied can be seen with the design of Marriott hotels 
(Murphy, 2000: 84–88). To make offenders as visible as possible, traffic is directed toward 
the front of hotels. Lobbies are designed so that people walking to guest rooms or elevators 
must pass the front desk. On the outside, hedges are emphasized to produce a psychologi-
cal barrier that is more appealing than a fence. Pathways are well lit and guide guests away 
from isolated areas. Parking lots are characterized by lighting, clear lines of sight, and access 
control. Walls of the garage are painted white to enhance lighting. On the inside of hotels, 

the swimming pool, exercise room, and vending and laundry areas have glass doors and 
walls to permit maximum witness potential. One application of CCTV is to aim cameras at 
persons standing at the lobby desk and install the monitor in plain view. Since people can 
see themselves, robberies have declined. CPTED enhances traditional security methods such 
as patrolling officers and emergency call boxes.
Research from the United Kingdom has extended the reach of CPTED. The UK 
Design Against Crime (DAC) Program seeks a wide group of design professionals to 
develop creative and often subtle design solutions to combat crime and fear of crime. The 
DAC is a holistic, human-centered approach that facilitates crime prevention without 
inconveniencing people or creating a fortress environment. Examples include the follow-
ing: a fence with a top rail that is angled to discourage young people from sitting on the 
fence and “hanging out”; the playing of classical music to prevent youth from congregat-
ing in certain areas; and the “antitheft handbag” that has a short strap, a carefully located 
zipper, thick leather, and an alarm (Davey et al., 2005: 39–51).
Since the physical environment can influence behavior, offenders may decide whether to 
 commit a crime at a location after they determine the following (Taylor and Harrell, 1996: 1–32):
1. How easy will it be to enter?
2. How visible, attractive, or vulnerable do targets appear?
3. What are the chances of being seen?
4. If seen, will the people in the area do something about it?
5. Is there a quick, direct route from the location?
CPTED is enhanced through the “Broken Windows” theory of James Q. Wilson 
and George Kelling (1982). This theory suggests that deteriorated buildings that remain in 
disrepair and disorderly behavior attract offenders and crime while increasing fear among 
residents. If someone breaks a window and it is not repaired, more windows may be broken, 
and a continuation of dilapidated conditions may signal that residents do not care. Minor 
problems, such as vandalism, graffiti, and public intoxication, may grow into larger problems 
that attract offenders and destroy neighborhoods. However, residents can increase safety and 
security when they take pride in the conditions of their neighborhood.
Another theory related to CPTED is situational crime prevention (SCP). “This approach 
encompasses many CPTED principles; however, it focuses on managerial and user behavior 
factors that affect opportunities for criminal behavior in a specific setting for a specific crime, 
whereas CPTED focuses on changing the physical design aspects of environments to deter crimi-
nal activity” (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2003: 2–19).
Lab (2004: 177) writes: “Instead of attempting to make sweeping changes in an entire 
community or neighborhood, situational prevention is aimed at specific problems, places, 
people, or times. The situational approach assumes that a greater degree of problem identifi-
cation and planning will take place prior to program implementation and that the impact will 
be more focused and, perhaps, identifiable.”
Lab (2004: 177) traces SCP to the crime prevention work of the British Home Office 
(Clark, 1983) in the late 1970s. The goal was to successfully address different crime problems.
Lab (2004: 178–179) sees the theoretical basis for SCP from the following perspec-
tives:
• Rational choice theory: Individuals make calculated decisions about crime based on 
many inputs, including the potential payoff, the risks, and needs.
• Routine activities theory: Day-to-day activities of people result in the convergence 
of motivated offenders with victims. Examples: Multiple-income households leave 
more homes unoccupied and subject to burglary. Increased mobility in society brings 
victims and offenders together more so than in the past.
• Lifestyle perspectives: This approach focuses on the activity of the victim as a 
contributing factor in criminal acts and victimization. Individual lifestyle and 
behavioral choices can lead to victimization. For example, an individual who 
frequents bars where fights occur often increases the risk of assault.
Countermeasures          179

180          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Perimeter Security
Perimeter means outer boundary, and it is often the property line and the first line of defense 
against unauthorized access (see Figure 8-1). Building access points such as doors and win-
dows also are considered part of perimeter defenses at many locations. Typical perimeter 
security begins with a fence and gate and may include multiple security methods (e.g., card 
access, locks, sensors, lighting, CCTV, and patrols) to increase protection (see Figure 8-2). 
Technology can extend security surveillance beyond the perimeter, as illustrated with radar 
that is applied by a facility near a waterway (see Figure 8-3).
The following variables assist in the design of perimeter security:
 1.  Whatever perimeter security methods are planned, they should interrelate with the 
total loss prevention program and business objectives.
 2.  Perimeter security needs to be cost effective. When plans are presented, management 
is sure to ask: “What type of return will we have on our investment?”
 3.  Although the least number of entrances strengthens perimeter security, the plan must 
not interfere with normal business and emergency events.
 4.  Perimeter security has a psychological impact on potential intruders. It signals a 
warning to outsiders that steps have been taken to block intrusions. Offenders 
actually “shop” for vulnerable locations.
 5.  Even though a property line may be well protected, the possibility of unauthorized 
entry cannot be totally eliminated. For example, a fence can be breached by going 
over, under, or through it.
 6.  Penetration of a perimeter is possible from within. Merchandise may be thrown 
over a fence or out of a window. Various things are subject to smuggling by persons 
walking or using a vehicle while exiting through a perimeter.
 7.  The perimeter of a building, especially in urban areas, often is the building’s walls. 
An offender may enter through a wall (or roof) from an adjoining building.
 8.  To permit an unobstructed view, both sides of a perimeter should be kept clear of 
vehicles, equipment, and vegetation. This allows for what is known as clear zones.
 9.  Consider integrating perimeter intrusion sensors with landscape sprinkler systems. 
Trespassers, protesters, and other intruders will be discouraged, and, when wet, they 
are easier to find and identify.
FIGURE 8-1 Perimeter security. Courtesy: Wackenhut Corporation. Photo by Ed Burns.

10.  Perimeter security methods are exposed to a hostile outdoor environment not found 
indoors. Adequate clothing and shelter are necessary for security personnel. The 
selection of proper security systems prevents false alarms from animals, vehicle 
vibrations, and adverse weather.
11. Perimeter security should be inspected and tested periodically.
Countermeasures          181
FIGURE 8-2 Multiple security methods increase protection.
FIGURE 8-3 Radar extends security surveillance beyond the perimeter at a facility near a waterway. 
Courtesy: Honeywell Security.

182          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
International Perspective: Physical Security Proves Its Value
Forty hooded demonstrators seemed to have appeared out of nowhere at the front gate of 
a breeding farm in the English countryside, where a pharmaceutical giant breeds animals 
for government-mandated testing of new medicines. A video recording of the incident 
showed protesters rocking the perimeter fence and harassing employees. What follows 
here is a description of how this business responded to its protection needs (Gips, 1999: 
42–50).
For simplicity’s sake, we will refer to this actual company as “PC” for pharmaceuti-
cal company. One threat facing the PC was the 50 or so incidents from animal activists in 
one year. Consequently, protection against sabotage, terrorism, and infiltration by animal 
rights activists became top priorities. Measures included physical security and access con-
trol, internal theft countermeasures, information safeguards, and bomb threat response. 
Protection was afforded not only to 2,000 scientists, support personnel, intellectual property, 
and physical assets, but also to the company image.
The PC favors a layered approach to physical security, which begins with strong 
perimeter protection. At the breeding farm, a seven-foot-high fence bounds the site and 
security officers monitor the farm from a gatehouse that doubles as a control room 
for intrusion and fire detection and CCTV. Because no police are nearby, a PC facility 
12 miles away provides backup. The PC’s response to protestors is low-key in part 
because in England simple trespass is a civil, not a criminal, matter. Protestors, even 
if verbally abusive, can be arrested only if they are violent; then police will make the 
arrests. Protestors generally want media attention, so they usually surrender to security 
when found on the premises. They know they will not be arrested, and no civil action 
will be initiated.
At another PC facility, security integration is shown through CCTV cameras, 
mounted every 75 yards along the perimeter, which work with video motion detection and 
infrared sensors. Although continuous recording occurs, when motion is detected, the 
action appears on a monitor for evaluation in the control room. This facility requires 
vehicles to pass through a raising-arm barrier. Pedestrians must register at a gatehouse, and 
employees use their Wiegand access control cards as they pass through a full-height 
antipassback turnstile. Doors are alarmed, and windows are treated with antibandit 
glazing to delay an offender.
To reduce internal theft from employees and contractors, personnel are reminded 
of their responsibility to secure valuables, vulnerable areas have restricted access, doors 
are kept locked, and a crime prevention day is held. Information is protected through an 
awareness course, security bulletins, secure fax and videoconferencing facilities, a high 
priority on IT security, technical surveillance sweeps, and tours under close controls.
The animal activist threat is handled through counterintelligence (i.e., 
a database of information), vetting (i.e., examination of all personnel to prevent 
infiltration or the planting of devices to collect information), and public relations 
(i.e., outreach to explain the importance of research with animals). To deal with bomb 
threats, PC facilities are too large for a dedicated team to conduct a search, so each 
employee is responsible for checking for anything unusual in his or her work area. 
Also, all incoming mail passes through an X-ray scanner. One lesson from all this pro-
tection is that losses can be much more expensive than security.
Barriers
Post and Kingsbury (1977: 502–503) state, “the physical security process utilizes a number of 
barrier systems, all of which serve specific needs. These systems include natural, structural, 
human, animals, and energy barriers.” Natural barriers are rivers, hills, cliffs, mountains, 

Countermeasures          183
foliage, and other features difficult to overcome. Fences, walls, doors, and the architectural 
arrangement of buildings are structural barriers. Human barriers include security officers who 
scrutinize people, vehicles, and things entering and leaving a facility. The typical animal bar-
rier is a dog. Energy barriers include protective lighting and intrusion detection systems.
The most common type of barrier is a chain-link fence topped with barbed wire. A 
search of the Web shows many industry standards for fences from ASTM, UL, ISO, and other 
groups from the United States and overseas. For example, ASTM F 567 focuses on materials 
specifications, design requirements, and installation of chain-link fencing.
One advantage of chain-link fencing is that it allows observation from both sides: a pri-
vate security officer looking out and a public police officer looking in. Foliage and decorative 
plastic woven through the fence can reduce visibility and aid offenders. Opposition to chain-
link fencing sometimes develops because management wants to avoid an institutional-looking 
environment. Hedges are an alternative.
It is advisable that the chain-link fence be made of at least 9-gauge or heavier wire 
with 2" × 2" diamond-shaped mesh. It should be at least 7 feet high. Its posts should be set 
in concrete and spaced no more than 10 feet apart. The bottom should be within 2 inches 
of hard ground; if the ground is soft, the fence can become more secure if extended a few 
inches below the ground. Recommended at the top is a top guard—supporting arms about 1 
or 2 feet long containing three or four strands of taut barbed wire 6 inches apart and facing 
outward at 45 degrees.
Barbed wire fences are less effective and used less frequently than chain-link fences. Each 
strand of barbed wire is constructed of two 12-gauge wires twisted and barbed every 4 inches. 
For adequate protection, vertical support posts are placed 6 feet apart, and the parallel strands 
of barbed wire are from 2 to 6 inches apart. A good height is 8 feet.
Concertina fences consist of coils of steel razor wire clipped together to form cylinders 
weighing about 55 pounds. Each cylinder is stretched to form a coil-type barrier 3 feet high 
and 50 feet long. The ends of each 50-foot coil need to be clipped to the next coil to obviate 
movement. Stakes also stabilize these fences. This fence was developed by the military to act 
as a quickly constructed barrier. When one coil is placed on another, they create a 6-foot-high 
barrier. One coil placed on two as a base provides a pyramid-like barrier that is difficult to 
penetrate. Concertina fences are especially helpful for quick, temporary repairs to damaged 
fences.
Razor ribbon and coiled barbed tape are increasing in popularity. They are similar to 
concertina fencing in many ways. Every few inches along the coil are sharp spikes, looking 
something like a small-sharpened bow tie.
Gates are necessary for traffic through fences. The fewer gates, the better because, like 
windows and doors, they are weak points along a perimeter. Gates usually are secured with 
a chain and padlock. Uniformed officers stationed at each gate and fence opening increase 
security while enabling the observation of people and vehicles.
Vehicle barriers control traffic and stop vehicles from penetrating a perimeter. The 
problems of vehicle bombs and drive-by shootings have resulted in greater use of vehicle bar-
riers. These barriers are assigned government-certified ratings based on the level of protection; 
however, rating systems vary among government agencies. One agency, for example, tests 
barriers against 15,000-pound trucks traveling up to 50 miles per hour, while another agency 
tests 10,000-pound trucks traveling the same speed. Passive vehicle barriers are fixed and 
include decorative bollards, large concrete planters, granite fountains, specially engineered and 
anchored park benches, hardened fencing, fence cabling, and trees. An alternative to bollards 
is a plinth wall—a continuous low wall of reinforced concrete with a buried foundation (U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security, 2003: 2–33). Moore (2006) notes alternatives to bollards, 
including tiger traps (i.e., a path of paving stones over a trench of low-density concrete that will 
collapse under a heavy weight) and NOGOs (i.e., large, heavy bronze blocks). Active vehicle 
barriers are used at entrances and include gates, barrier arms, and pop-up type systems that are 
set underground and, when activated, spring up to block a vehicle (True, 1996: 49–53). As we 
know, no security method is foolproof, and careful security planning is vital, including ADA 
requirements. In 1997, to protest government policy, the environmental group Greenpeace 

184          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
penetrated government security in Washington, D.C., and dumped four tons of coal outside 
the Capitol building. The driver of the truck drove the wrong way up a one-way drive leading 
to the building!
Walls are costly and a substitute for fences when management is against the use of a 
wire fence. Attractive walls can be designed to produce security equal to fences while blending 
into surrounding architecture. Walls are made from a variety of materials: bricks, concrete 
blocks, stones, or cement. Depending on design, the top of walls 6 or 7 feet high may contain 
barbed wire, spikes, or broken glass set in cement. Offenders often avoid injury by throwing 
a blanket or jacket over the top of the wall (or fence) before scaling it. Many jurisdictions 
prohibit ominous features at the top of barriers. Check local ordinances. An advantage of 
a wall is that outsiders are hindered from observing inside. However, observation by public 
police during patrols also is hindered; this can benefit an intruder.
Hedges or shrubbery are useful as barriers. Thorny shrubs have a deterrent value. These 
include holly, barberry, and multiflora rose bushes, all of which require a lot of watering. 
The privet hedge grows almost anywhere and requires minimal care. A combination of hedge 
and fence is useful. Hedges should be less than 3 feet high and placed on the inside to avoid 
injury to those passing by and to create an added obstacle for someone attempting to scale the 
fence. Any plants that are large and placed too close to buildings and other locations provide 
a climbing tool, cover for thieves, and a hiding place for stolen goods.
Municipal codes restrict the heights of fences, walls, and hedges to maintain an attrac-
tive environment devoid of threatening-looking barriers. Certain kinds of barriers may be 
prohibited to ensure conformity. Planning should encompass research of local standards.
The following list can help a security manager eliminate weak points along a perimeter or 
barrier.
1. Utility poles, trees, boxes, pallets, forklifts, tools, and other objects outside a building 
can be used to scale a barrier.
2. Ladders left outside are an offender’s delight. Stationary ladders are made less 
accessible via a steel cage with a locked door.
3. A common wall is shared by two separate entities. Thieves may lease and occupy or 
just enter the adjoining building or room and then hammer through the common wall.
4. A roof is easy to penetrate. A few tools, such as a drill and saw, enable offenders to 
cut through the roof. Because lighting, fences, sensors, and patrols rarely involve the 
roof, this weakness is attractive to thieves. A rope ladder often is employed to descend 
from the roof, or a forklift might be used to lift items to the roof. Vehicle keys should 
be hidden and other precautions taken.
5. Roof hatches, skylights, basement windows, air-conditioning and other vent and duct 
systems, crawl spaces between floors and under buildings, fire escapes, and utility 
covers may need a combination of locks, sensors, steel bars, heavy mesh, fences, and 
inspections. A widely favored standard is that any opening greater than 96 square 
inches requires increased protection.
Protecting Buildings against Terrorism
To help justify security and loss prevention expenditures, executives should refer to the 
Reference Manual to Mitigate Potential Terrorist Attacks against Buildings (U.S. Department 
of Homeland Security, 2003: iii), here referred to as FEMA 426. This publication notes that 
building designs can serve to mitigate multiple hazards. For example, hurricane window 
design, especially against flying debris, and seismic standards for nonstructural building com-
ponents apply also to bomb explosions. Next, Purpura (2007) describes protection methods 
from FEMA 426.
FEMA 426 refers to site-level considerations for security that include land use controls, 
landscape architecture, site planning, and other strategies to mitigate risks of terrorism and 
other hazards. Land use controls, including zoning and land development regulations, can affect 
security because they define urban configurations that can decrease or increase risks from 
crime and terrorism. For instance, managing stormwater on-site can add security through 

water retention facilities that serve as a vehicle barrier and blast setback. This reduces the need 
for off-site pipes and manholes that can be used for access or to conceal weapons. FEMA 426 
offers several building design suggestions to increase security (see Figure 8-4).
A target-rich environment is created when people, property, and operations are con-
centrated in a dense area. There are advantages and disadvantages to a dense cluster. An 
advantage is the possibility to maximize stand-off (i.e., protection when a blast occurs) from 
the perimeter. Additional security benefits are a reduction in the number of access and surveil-
lance points and a shorter perimeter to protect. A dense cluster of buildings can possibly save 
energy costs through, for instance, heat transfer from heat-producing areas to heat-consuming 
areas. In addition, external lighting would not be dispersed over a large area, requiring more 
lights and energy. In contrast, dispersed buildings, people, and operations spread the risk. 
However, dispersal can increase the complexity of security (e.g., more access points), and it 
may require more resources (e.g., security officers, CCTV, lighting perimeter protection).
FEMA 426 recommends that designers consolidate buildings that are functionally com-
patible and have similar threat levels. For instance, mailrooms, shipping and receiving docks, 
and visitor screening areas, where people and materials are often closely monitored prior to 
access, should be isolated and separated from concentrations of people, operations, and key 
assets.
Countermeasures          185
1
Locate assets stored on site but
outside of the facility within view
of occupied rooms in the facility
2
Eliminate parking beneath facilities
3
Minimize exterior signage or other
indications of asset locations
4
Locate trash receptacles as far
from the facility as possible
5
Eliminate lines of approach
perpendicular to the building
6
Locate parking to obtain stand-off
distance from facility
7
Illuminate building exteriors or
sites where exposed assets are
located
8
Minimize vehicle access points
9
Eliminate potential hiding places
near facility; provide an unob-
structed view around facility
10
Site facility within view of other
occupied facilities on the installation
11
Maximize distance from facility to
installation boundary
12
Locate facility away from natural
or man-made vantage points
13
Secure access to power/heat
plants, gas mains, water supplies, and
electrical service
1
2
9
10
12
3
9
7
6
13
8
4
5
11
FIGURE 8-4 Summary of site mitigation measures. Source: U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2003). Reference 
Manual to Mitigate Potential Terrorist Attacks against Buildings, FEMA 426 (December). Washington, D.C.: FEMA.

186          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
The design of open space with protection in mind offers several benefits: the ease with 
which to monitor and detect intruders, vehicles, and weapons; stand-off value from a blast; 
pervious open space that permits stormwater to percolate back into the ground, reducing the 
need for pipes, manholes, and other covert access points and weapon concealment sites; and 
wetland or vegetated area to improve aesthetic value while hindering vehicle intrusion.
Here are other suggestions for buildings from FEMA 426:
• Provide redundant utility systems to continue life safety, security, and rescue functions 
in case of an emergency.
• Since hardened glazing may cause windows not to blow out in a blast, a system for 
smoke removal is essential.
• When possible, elevate fresh-air intakes to reduce the potential of hazardous materials 
entering a building from ground level. The intakes should be sloped down and have 
screens in case a device is thrown toward the opening.
• Manipulation of the HVAC system could minimize the spread of a hazardous agent. 
Filtration systems are another option, although expensive.
Mitigation for Explosive Blasts
Stand-off distance is the distance between an asset and a threat. FEMA 426 views distance 
as the most effective and desirable strategy against a blast because other methods may vary 
in effectiveness, be more costly, and result in unintended consequences. A blast wall can 
become a part of the fragmentation if a bomb is detonated close to it. Urban environments 
create challenges when designing stand-off distance because land is often expensive. There 
is no ideal stand-off distance; numerous variables take part in planning, such as the type of 
threat or explosive, construction characteristics and target hardening, and desired level of 
protection.
Blast and antiramming walls provide an expensive option for protecting buildings, 
especially in urban areas where stand-off distance may be unavailable. Revel (2003: 40) 
writes that a test of a blast wall conducted by the U.S. Government’s Technical Support 
Working Group (TSWG) showed the effectiveness of this security method. The blast wall 
sustained an explosion more powerful than the one that destroyed the Murrah Federal 
Building (Oklahoma City bombing) and the effects on the test building behind the blast wall 
were reduced by about 90%. The blast wall was constructed by first inserting in the ground 
18-foot blast posts, with 9 feet extending above the ground. Then steel-jacketed concrete 
and rebar-filled panels were lowered between the posts in an interlocking pattern. When the 
explosion occurred, the posts twisted and deflected the blast above and back from the pan-
els, directing the force up and beyond the lower structural steel of the building and around 
the ends of the wall. The blast wall is also capable of absorbing large vehicle impact at high 
speeds.
Although several building design features can mitigate explosive blasts, many factors 
enter into the design of buildings, including cost, purpose, occupancy, and location. A high-
risk building should incorporate more mitigation features than a low-risk building. Significant 
changes to existing buildings may be too expensive; therefore, lower cost changes must be 
sought. Bollards and strong gates are less expensive than making major structural changes to 
a building. In addition, trees, vegetative groupings, and earth berms offer some degree of blast 
shielding. Examples of mitigation features from FEMA 426 are as follows:
• Avoid “U” or “L” shaped building designs that trap the shock waves of a blast. 
Circular buildings reduce a shock wave better than a rectangular building because of 
the angle of incidence of the shock wave.
• Avoid exposed structural elements (e.g., columns) on the exterior of a facility.
• Install as much glazing (i.e., windows) as possible away from the street side.
• Stagger doors located across from one another in interior hallways to limit the force 
of a blast through the building.
• High-security rooms should be blast- and fragment-resistant.
• Provide pitched roofs to permit deflection of launched explosives.

Keep out zones help to maintain a specific distance between vehicles or people and a 
building. This is accomplished by installing perimeter security (e.g., fences), access controls, 
bollards, and other security methods. If terrorists plan to attack a specific building, they will 
likely use surveillance to study security features, look for vulnerabilities, and try to penetrate 
access controls and defenses through creative means.
Glazing
Annealed glass, also called plate glass, is commonly used in buildings. It has low strength, 
and upon failure, it fractures into razor sharp pieces. Fully thermally tempered glass (TTG) 
is four to five times stronger than annealed glass, and upon failure, it will fracture into small 
cube-shaped fragments. Building codes generally require TTG anywhere the public can touch 
(e.g., entrance doors). Wire-reinforced glass is made of annealed glass with an embedded layer 
of wire mesh. It is applied as a fire-resistant and forced entry barrier. All three types of glass 
present a dangerous hazard from a blast (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2003).
Traditionally, window protection focused on hindering forced entry. Today, we are 
seeing increasing designs that mitigate the hazardous effects of flying glass from a variety of 
risks, besides explosion. Experts report that 75% of all damage and injury from bomb blasts 
results from flying and falling glass. Vendors sell shatter-resistant film, also called fragment 
retention film (FRF), that is applied to the glass surface to reduce this problem. Conversely, a 
report on the 1993 World Trade Center attack claimed that the destroyed windows permitted 
deadly gases to escape from the building, enabling occupants to survive. A balanced design 
(i.e., type of glass, glass frame, and frame to building) means that all the window components 
have compatible capacities and fail at the same pressure levels. The U.S. General Services 
Administration publishes glazing protection levels based on how far glass fragments would 
enter a space and cause injuries. It is important to note that the highest level of protection for 
glazing may not mitigate the effects from a large explosion (U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security, 2003).
Blast curtains are window draperies made of special fabrics designed to stop glass 
window shards that are caused by explosions and other hazards. Various designs serve to 
catch broken glass and let the gas and air pressure dissipate through the fabric mesh. The 
fibers of these curtains can be several times as strong as steel wire. The U.S. General Services 
Administration establishes criteria for these products (Owen, 2003: 143–144).
Glass can be designed to block penetration of bullets, defeat attempted forced entry, 
remain intact following an explosion, and protect against electronic eavesdropping. The 
Web shows many standards for glazing from the American Architectural Manufacturers 
Association (AAMA), ANSI, UL, ASTM, Consumer Product Safety Commission, ISO, and 
overseas groups. Security glazing should be evaluated on comparative testing to an estab-
lished national consensus standard such as ASTM F1233, Standard Test Method for Security 
Glazing Materials and Systems. Important issues for glazing include product life cycle, dura-
bility, installation, maintenance, and framing (Saflex, Inc., 2005).
Underwriters Laboratories classifies bullet-resistant windows into eight protection lev-
els, with levels 1 to 3 rated against handguns and 4 to 8 rated against rifles. Level 4 or higher 
windows usually are applied by government agencies and the military. Protective windows are 
made of either glass or plastic or mixtures of each.
Laminated glass absorbs a bullet as it passes through various glass layers. The advantage 
of glass is in its maintenance: it is easy to clean and less likely to scratch than plastic. It is less 
expensive per square foot than plastic but heavier, which requires more workers and stronger 
frames. Glass has a tendency to spall (i.e., chip) when hit by a bullet. UL752-listed glass holds 
up to three shots, and then it begins to shatter from subsequent shots.
Two types of plastic used in windows are acrylic and polycarbonate. Both vary in thick-
ness and are lighter and more easily scratched than glass. Acrylic windows are clear and mono-
lithic, whereas glass and polycarbonate windows are laminates consisting of layers of material 
bonded one on top of another. Acrylic will deflect bullets and hold together under sustained 
hits. Some spalling may occur. Polycarbonate windows are stronger than acrylics against high-
powered weapons. Local codes may require glazing to pop out in an emergency.
Countermeasures          187

188          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
In addition to protective windows, wall armor is important because employees often 
duck below a window during a shooting. These steel or fiberglass plates also are rated.
Burglar-resistant windows are rated (UL 972, Burglary Resisting Glazing Material); 
available in acrylic and polycarbonate materials; and protect against hammers, flame, “smash 
and grab,” and other attacks. Combined bullet- and burglar-resistant windows are available. 
Although window protection is an expense that may be difficult to justify, insurers offer dis-
counts on insurance premiums for such installations.
Electronic security glazing, containing metalized fabrics, can prevent electromagnetic sig-
nals inside a location from being intercepted from outside, while also protecting a facility from 
external electromagnetic radiation interference from outside sources. Standards for this type 
of glazing are from the National Security Agency, NSA 65–8.
Window Protection
Covering windows with grating or security screens is an additional step to impede entrance 
by an intruder or items being thrown out by a dishonest employee. Window grating consists of 
metal bars constructed across windows. These bars run horizontally and vertically to produce 
an effective form of protection. Although these bars are not aesthetically pleasing, they can be 
purchased with attractive ornamental designs. Security screens are composed of steel or stain-
less steel wire (mesh) welded to a frame. Screens have some distinct advantages over window 
grating. Employees can pass pilfered items through window bars more easily than through a 
screen. Security screens look like ordinary screens, but they are much heavier in construction 
and can stop rocks and other objects.
When planning window protection, one must consider the need for emergency escape 
and ventilation. To ensure safety, certain windows can be targeted for the dismantling of win-
dow protection during business hours.
Window Locks
Businesses and institutions often contain windows that do not open. For windows that do 
open, a latch or lock on the inside provides some protection. The double-hung window, often 
applied at residences, is explained here as a foundation for window protection. It consists of 
top and bottom windows that are raised and lowered for user convenience. When the top 
window is pushed up and the bottom window pushed down, a sash lock containing a curved 
turn knob locks both parts of the whole window in place (see Figure 8-5). By inserting a knife 
under the sash lock where both window sections meet, an offender can jimmy the latch out 
of its catch. If an offender breaks the glass, the sash lock can be unlocked by reaching inside. 
With such simple techniques known to offenders, more complicated defenses are necessary. 
Nails can be used to facilitate a quick escape while maintaining good window security: one 
drills a downward-sloping hole into the right and left sides of the window frame where the 
top and bottom window halves overlap and inserts nails that are thinner and longer than the 
holes. This enables the nails to be quickly removed during an emergency escape. If a burglar 
attacks the window, he or she cannot find or remove the nails (see Figure 8-5). Another 
method is to attach a window lock requiring a key (see Figure 8-5). These locks are capable of 
securing a window in a closed or slightly opened position. This can be done with the nail (and 
several holes) as well. The key should be hidden near the window in case of emergency.
Electronic Protection for Windows
Four categories of electronic protection for windows are foil, vibration, glass-breakage, and 
contact-switch sensors. Window foil, which has lost much of its popularity, consists of lead 
foil tape less than 1-inch wide and paper thin that is applied directly on the glass near the 
edges of a window. In the nonalarm state, electricity passes through the foil to form a closed 
circuit. When the foil is broken, an alarm is sounded. Window foil is inexpensive and easy 
to maintain. One disadvantage is that a burglar may cut the glass without disturbing the 
foil. Vibration sensors respond to vibration or shock. They are attached directly on the glass 
or window frame. These sensors are noted for their low false alarm rate and are applicable 

to fences, walls, and valuable artwork, among other things. Glass-breakage sensors react to 
glass breaking. A sensor the size of a large coin is placed directly on the glass and can detect 
glass breakage several feet away. Some types operate via a tuning fork, which is tuned to 
the frequency produced by glass breaking. Others employ a microphone and electric ampli-
fier. Contact switches activate an alarm when opening the window interrupts the contact. In 
Figure 8-6, this sensor protects a door and roof opening.
Additional ideas for window protection follow:
1. A strong window frame fastened to a building prevents prying and removal of the 
entire window.
2. First floor windows are especially vulnerable to penetration and require increased 
protection.
3. Consider tinting windows to hinder observation by offenders.
4. Windows (and other openings) that are no longer used can be bricked.
5. Expensive items left near windows invite trouble.
6. Cleaning windows and windowsills periodically increases the chances of obtaining 
clear fingerprints in the event of a crime.
Doors
Many standards apply to doors, from the AAMA, ANSI, ASTM, BHMA, National Association 
of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM), NFPA, Steel Door Institute (SDI), UL, and 
ISO. In addition, other countries have standards.
Doors having fire ratings must meet certain frame and hardware requirements. 
Decisions on the type of lock and whether electronic access will be applied also affect hard-
ware. Decisions on doors are especially crucial because of their daily use and the potential for 
satisfying or enraging users and management (Schumacher, 2000: 40).
Businesses and institutions generally use aluminum doors. Composed of an aluminum 
frame, most of the door is covered by glass. Without adequate protection, the glass is vulner-
able, and prying the weak aluminum is not difficult. The all-metal door improves protection 
at the expense of attractiveness.
Hollow-core doors render complex locks useless because an offender can punch right 
through the door. Thin wood panels or glass on the door are additional weak points. More 
expensive, solid-core doors are stronger; they are made of solid wood (over an inch thick) 
Countermeasures          189
FIGURE 8-5 Double-hung window (view from inside).

190          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
without the use of weak fillers. To reinforce hollow-core or solid-core doors, one can attach 
16-gauge steel sheets, via one-way screws.
Whenever possible, door hinges should be placed on the inside. Door hinges that face 
outside enable easy entry. By using a screwdriver and hammer, one can raise the pins out of 
the hinges to enable the door to be lifted away. To protect the hinge pins, it is a good idea to 
weld them so they cannot be removed in this manner. Another form of protection is to remove 
two screws on opposite sides of the hinge, insert a pin or screw on the jamb side of the hinge 
so that it protrudes about half an inch, and then drill a hole in the opposite hole to fit the pin 
when the door is closed. With this method on both top and bottom hinges, even if the hinge 
pins are removed, the door will not fall off the hinges (see Figure 8-7).
Contact switches applied to doors offer electronic protection. Greater protection is pro-
vided when contact switches are recessed in the edges of the door and frame. Other kinds of 
electronic sensors applied at doors include vibration sensors, pressure mats, and various types 
of motion detectors aimed in the area of the door.
More hints for door security follow:
1. A wide-angle door viewer within a solid door permits a look at the exterior prior to 
opening a door.
2. Doors (and windows) are afforded extra protection at night by chain closures. These 
frequently are seen covering storefronts in malls and in high-crime neighborhoods.
3. To block “hide-in” burglars (those who hide in a building until after closing) from 
easy exit, require that openings such as doors and windows have a key-operated lock 
on the inside as well as on the outside.
FIGURE 8-6 Switch sensors have electrical contacts that make or break an electrical circuit in response to a physical 
movement.

4. Almost all fire departments are equipped with power saws that cut through door 
locks and bolts in case of fire. Many firefighters can gain easy access to local buildings 
because building owners have provided keys that are located in fire trucks. Although 
this creates a security hazard, losses can be reduced in case of fire.
5. All doors need protection, including garage, sliding, overhead, chain-operated, and 
electric doors.
Countermeasures          191
FIGURE 8-7 Pin to prevent removal of door.
Intruding Neighbors
The Finch Brothers Supermarket Company maintained a busy warehouse stocked with 
hundreds of different items for local Finch supermarkets. The company leased the large 
warehouse to accommodate the increasing number of supermarkets. After 18 months 
at this location, managers were stumped as to why shrinkage was over 4%. Several 
precautions were taken to avert losses: perimeter security consisted of intrusion sen-
sors, lighting, and a security officer. A perpetual inventory was maintained.
Eventually, Finch’s loss prevention manager’s job was on the line, so he began 
a secret, painstaking, and continuous surveillance of the warehouse at night. After 
an agonizing week went by, he made an astonishing discovery. A printing company 
building next door was only 7 feet away from the warehouse, and printing company 
employees on the late shift were able to slide a 12′ × 16² × 2² board from a third-story 
window to a window of the same height at the warehouse. Within 30 minutes, the 
group of thieves hauled and threw many burlap sacks of items from one building to 
another. With camera equipment, the manager recorded the crime. Police were later 
notified and arrests made.
The thieves confessed that, when they worked the 11 P.M. to 8 A.M. shift, they 
stole merchandise from the warehouse. They stated that a maintenance man, who vis-
ited the warehouse each day, left the window open so the board could be slipped in. 
They added that dim lighting and the fact that intrusion sensors existed only on the 
first floor were factors that aided their crimes.

192          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Intrusion Detection Systems
Standards for intrusion detection systems are from UL, the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE), and ISO, plus other groups in the United States and overseas. 
UL, for example, “lists” installation companies that are authorized to issue UL Certificates 
on each installation. This means that the installer conforms to maintenance and testing as 
required by UL, which conducts unannounced inspections.
Table 8-1 describes intrusion detection systems; these systems have gone through several 
generations, leading to improved performance. Not in the table is magnetic field, which consists 
of a series of buried wire loops or coils. Metal objects moving over the sensor induce a current 
and signal an alarm. Research shows that the vulnerability to defeat (VD) for magnetic field 
and infrared photo beam is high. Microwave, electric field, fence disturbance, seismic sensor 
cable, taut wire, and video motion systems all have a medium VD. The VD for ported coaxial 
cable systems is low. Visible sensors are relatively easy to defeat but cost effective for low-security 
applications. Multiple sensors, and especially covert sensors, provide a higher level of protection 
(Clifton and Vitch, 1997: 57–61; Reddick, 2005: 36–42; Shelton, 2006: 80–82).
Fiber optics is a growing choice for intrusion detection and transmission. Fiber optics 
refers to the transportation of data by way of guided light waves in an optical fiber. This 
differs from the conventional transmission of electrical energy in copper wires. Fiber optic 
applications include video, voice, and data communications. Fiber optic data transmission is 
more secure and less subject to interference than older methods.
Fiber optic perimeter protection can take the form of a fiber optic net installed on a 
fence. When an intruder applies stress on the cable, an infrared light source pulsing through 
the system notes the stress or break and activates an alarm. Optical fibers can be attached to 
or inserted within numerous items to signal an alarm, including razor ribbon, security grills, 
windows, and doors, and it can protect valuable assets such as computers.
Garcia (2006: 83–84) views intrusion sensor performance based on three characteristics: 
probability of detection of the threat, nuisance alarm rate, and vulnerability to defeat. The 
probability of detection depends on several factors including the desired threat to be detected 
(e.g., walking, tunneling), sensor design, installation, sensitivity adjustment, weather, and 
maintenance/testing. According to Garcia, a nuisance alarm rate results from a sensor inter-
acting with the environment, and a sensor cannot distinguish between a threat and another 
event (e.g., vibration from a train). A false alarm rate results from the equipment itself, and 
it is caused by inadequate design, failure, or poor maintenance. Vulnerability to defeat varies 
among systems. Bypass means the adversary circumvented the intrusion detection system. 
Spoofing means the adversary traveled through the detection zone without triggering an 
alarm; depending on the sensor, one strategy is by moving very slowly. Garcia emphasizes the 
importance of proper installation and testing of intrusion detection systems.
No one technology is perfect; many protection programs rely on dual technology to strengthen 
intrusion detection. In the process of selecting a system, it is wise to remember that manufacturers’ 
claims often are based on perfect weather. Security decision makers must clearly understand the 
advantages and disadvantages of each type of system under a variety of conditions.
Applications
Intrusion detection systems can be classified according to the kind of protection provided. 
There are three basic kinds of protection: point, area, and perimeter. Point protection (see 
Figure 8-8) signals an alarm when an intrusion is made at a special location. It is also referred 
to as spot or object protection. Files, safes, vaults, jewelry counters, and artwork are targets 
for point protection. Capacitance and vibration systems provide point protection and are 
installed directly on the object. These systems often are used as a backup after an offender has 
succeeded in gaining access. Area protection (see Figure 8-9) detects an intruder in a selected 
area such as a main aisle in a building or at a strategic passageway. Microwave and infrared 
systems are applicable to area protection. Perimeter protection (see Figure 8-10) focuses on 
the outer boundary of the premises. If doors and windows are part of the perimeter, then 
contact switches, vibration detectors, and other devices are applicable.

Countermeasures          193
Table 8-1 Types of Intrusion Alarm Systems*
System 
Graphic Idea 
Concept 
Advantages 
Disadvantages
Motion detection
Fence-mounted 
 
Detection depends on  
Ease of installation; early detection  
Frequent false alarms (weather and
 sensor 
 
 movement of fence 
 on interior fence; relatively inex- 
 birds); conduit breakage; dependent
 
 
 
 pensive; requires little space; 
 on quality, rigidity of fence, 
 
 
 
 follows terrain easily 
 and type of installation
Seismic sensor 
 
Detection depends on  
Good for any site shape, uneven  
False alarms from ground vibrations
 cable (buried) 
 
 ground movement 
 terrain; early warning; good 
 (vehicles, thunderstorms, heavy
 
 
 (intruder walking over 
 in warm climate with little rain 
 snow); not recommended for heavy
 
 
 buried movement sensors, or 
 
 snow regions; difficult installation
 
 
 other seismic disturbances) 
 
 and maintenance
Balanced 
 
Detection depends on touching  
Few false alarms; good for selected  
Not to be used independently; for
 capacitance 
 
 of cable, interfering with 
 areas of fence, rooftops, curves,  
 selected areas only
 
 
 balance of cable 
 corners, any terrain
Taut wire 
 
Detection depends on deflecting,  
Good for any terrain or shape;  
Relatively expensive; possible false
 
 
 stretching, or releasing the 
 can be used as interior fence;  
 alarms from snow, ice, birds, etc.; 
 
 
 tension of wire that triggers 
 extremely low false alarm rates 
 temperature changes require
 
 
 alarming mechanism 
 adjustments
Energy field
Microwave 
 
Based on line of sight; detection  
Does not require a great deal  
Not good on hilly or heavily contoured
 sensor 
 
 depends on intrusion into 
 of maintenance 
 terrain; costly installation; potential
 
 
 volumetric area above ground 
  
 false alarms caused by weather
 
 
 between transmitter and 
  
 (snow, ice, wind, and rain);
 
 
 receiver 
  
 vegetation must be removed
(Continued)

194          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Energy Field
Infrared photo 
 
Based on line of sight; detec- 
Good for short distances,  
Distances between transmitter and
 beam sensor 
 
 tion depends on intrusion 
 building walls, and 
 receiver must be short, requiring
 
 
 into beam(s) stacked 
 sally ports 
 more intervals; potential false alarms
 
 
 vertically above ground 
 
 by animals and weather conditions
 
 
 
 
 (fog, dust, snow); voltage surges
Ported coaxial 
 
Detection depends on inter- 
Adaptable to most terrains 
False alarms caused by heavy rain
 cable 
 
 ruption of field in terms of 
 
 (pooling of water), high winds, tree
 
 
 mass, velocity, and length 
 
 roots; relatively expensive
 
 
 of time 
 
 installation and maintenance
Video motion 
 
Detection depends on  
Good for enhancing another  
Lighting is a problem
 detection 
 
 change in video-monitor 
 system; good for covering
 
 
 signal 
 weak spots
Electric field 
 
Detection depends on penetration  
Good on hilly or heavily contoured  
Requires more maintenance; sensor
 sensor 
 
 of volumetric field created by 
 terrain; can be freestanding 
 wires must be replaced every 3
 
 
 field wires and sensor wires 
 or fence-mounted 
 years; vegetation must be controlled
*Sources: Information from New York State Department of Corrections, Pennsylvania Department of Corrections, South Carolina Department of 
Corrections, and Federal Bureau of Prisons. Reproduced from U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, Stopping Escapes: Perimeter Security (U.S. 
Government Printing Office, August 1987), p. 6.
Table 8-1 Types of Intrusion Alarm Systems*—Cont'd
System 
Graphic Idea 
Concept 
Advantages 
Disadvantages

Countermeasures          195
Control Unit
As described in Chapter 7, intrusion detection systems contain three major components: once 
a sensor detects an intruder, a control unit receives this information and activates an annun-
ciator (e.g., noise or light) to summon security or police. Figure 8-11 shows a control unit 
with user instructions.
Alarm Signaling Systems
Alarm signaling systems transmit data from a protected area to an annunciation system. 
Local ordinances and codes may restrict certain systems, designate to whom the alarm may 
be transmitted, limit the length of time the alarm is permitted to sound, and fine the user of 
FIGURE 8-8 Point protection.
FIGURE 8-9 Area protection.

196          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
FIGURE 8-10 Perimeter protection.
FIGURE 8-11 Alarm control unit with user instructions.

the system for excessive false alarms. In addition, police agencies vary on policies pertaining 
to their response to alarms.
Local alarm systems notify, by sound or lights, people in the hearing or seeing range 
of the signal. This includes the intruder, who may flee. Typically, a siren or bell is activated 
outside a building. Often, local alarms produce no response—in urban areas responsible 
action may not be taken, and in rural areas nobody may hear the alarm. These alarms are 
less expensive than other signaling systems but are easily defeated. If a local alarm is used 
during a robbery, people may be harmed. Research from the UK (Coupe and Kaur, 2005: 
53–72) points to the benefits of delayed-audible alarms during a burglary that are triggered 
as the offender enters the premises but sound a few minutes later so CCTV cameras have an 
opportunity to record the offender and police still have time to respond prior to the offender’s 
escaping if they are notified promptly. Combining these strategies with an immediate silent 
alarm to a central station increases the opportunity for an arrest.
A central station alarm system receives intrusion or fire signals or both at a computer 
console located and monitored a distance away from the protected location. When an alarm 
signal is received, central station personnel contact police, firefighters, or other responders. 
Central station services employ sales, installation, service, monitoring, and response person-
nel. Proprietary monitoring systems are similar to central station systems, except that the 
former does the monitoring and the system is operated by the proprietary organization. 
Resources for central station design are available from UL, NFPA, and the Security Industry 
Association (Patterson, 2000: 80).
Technology drives advances in central station capabilities. They include remote video 
monitoring, global positioning system (GPS), and off-site video storage. Remote video monitor-
ing enables a central station operator to view what triggered an alarm to verify the need for 
a human response. GPS permits real-time tracking (e.g., location, direction, and speed) and 
archiving of moving assets and people. Off-site video storage, especially at a UL-listed central 
station, affords increased protection and backup for video recordings. It also helps to prevent 
the problem of offenders taking recording equipment with them as they leave the crime scene 
and, thus, destroy evidence (Evans, 2005: 44–46).
Various data transmission systems are utilized to signal an alarm. Here, the earlier tech-
nology is covered first before the modern technology.
Automatic telephone dialer systems are of two kinds: tape dialer and digital dialer. Tape 
dialer systems seldom are used today. They deliver a prerecorded or coded message to an inter-
ested party (e.g., central station, police department) after that party answers the telephone. 
Digital dialers do not use a recorded tape message; coded electronic pulses are transmitted, and 
an electronic terminal decodes the message onto a panel or teletype.
With direct connect systems the intrusion device is connected by wire directly to an 
alarm receiver located on the premises, at a police station, or some other location. Local ordi-
nances may not permit direct reporting to police stations. A variation of this method is the 
“buddy” alarm system, in which the alarm signal is transmitted via direct wire to a neighbor, 
who calls the police. These systems usually are silent alarms.
Radio frequency (RF) and microwave data transmission systems often are applied where 
telephone lines are not available or where hardwire lines are not practical. The components include 
transmitter, receiver, and repeaters to extend range, battery backup, and solar power.
Fiber optic data transmission systems, as discussed earlier, transport data by way of 
light waves within a thin glass fiber. These cables are either underground or above ground. 
The components include transmitter, receiver, repeaters, battery backup, and solar power. 
Fiber optic systems are more secure than direct wire.
Signals should be backed up by multiple technologies. Options for off-site transmission of 
activity include satellite, local area network (LAN), wide area network (WAN), cellular, and the 
Internet. Cellular is especially useful for backup, since it is more likely to remain in operation in 
certain disasters. It can also be used as a primary transmission method (Zwirn, 2003: 74–83).
Among the advances in alarm monitoring is remote programming. Using this method, 
a central station can perform a variety of functions without ever visiting the site. Capabilities 
include arming and disarming systems, unlocking doors, performing diagnostics and correc-
tions, and, with access systems, adding or deleting cards.
Countermeasures          197

198          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Alarm systems also may be multiplexed or integrated. Multiplexing is a method of 
transmitting multiple information signals over a single communications channel. This single 
communications channel reduces line requirements by allowing signal transmission from many 
protected facilities. Two other advantages are that information that is more detailed can be 
transmitted, such as telling which detector is in an alarm state, and transmission line security is 
enhanced with encoding. Integrated systems, as covered in Chapter 7, combine multiple systems 
(e.g., alarm monitoring, access controls, and CCTV).
CCTV
CCTV allows one person to view several locations. This is a distinct advantage when protect-
ing the boundaries of a facility, because it reduces personnel costs.
Television programs and movies sometimes portray an intruder penetrating a perimeter 
barrier by breaking through when a CCTV camera had momentarily rotated to another location. 
Usually, the camera just misses the intruder by returning to the entry point right after the intruder 
gains access. Such a possibility can be averted via overlapping camera coverage. If cameras are 
capable of viewing other cameras, personnel can check on viewing obstructions, sabotage, van-
dalism, or other problems. In addition, covert CCTV surveillance should also be considered for 
outdoor applications in conjunction with overt CCTV surveillance.
Tamper-proof housings will impede those interested in disabling cameras. Different 
models are resistant to bullets, explosion, dust, and severe weather. Housings are manufac-
tured with heaters, defrosters, windshield wipers, washers, and sun shields.
Low-light-level cameras provide the means to view outside when very little light is 
available. When no visible light is available, an infrared illuminator creates light, invisible to 
the naked eye, but visible to infrared-sensitive cameras. Another option is thermal imaging 
cameras, which sense heat from an intruder and are especially helpful to spot them in dark-
ness, fog, smoke, and foliage (Pierce, 2006: 24–28).
An essential aspect of CCTV is proper monitoring. To reduce fatigue and ensure good-
quality viewing, it is a good idea to rotate personnel every two hours if possible, limit TV 
monitors to fewer than 10, arrange the monitors in a curved configuration in front of the 
viewer, control the lighting over the console to avoid glare on the monitor screens or tilt the 
monitors if necessary, place the monitors in an order that permits easy recognition of camera 
locations, provide a swivel chair that hampers the opportunity for sleeping, and assign tasks 
to the viewer (e.g., communications, logging). The previous chapter covers technology that 
has enhanced monitoring and CCTV systems.
Lighting
From a business perspective, lighting can be justified because it improves sales by making a business 
and merchandise more attractive, promotes safety and prevents lawsuits, improves employee 
morale and productivity, and enhances the value of real estate. From a security perspective, two 
major purposes of lighting are to create a psychological deterrent to intrusion and to enable detec-
tion. Good lighting is considered such an effective crime control method that the law, in many 
locales, requires buildings to maintain adequate lighting.
A major study on the effect of lighting on the incidence of crime was conducted in 
England by Painter and Farrington (1999). Three residential areas were selected. One was 
the experimental area that contained improved lighting. The second was labeled the adjacent 
area. And the third served as the control area. Lighting in the adjacent and control areas 
remained unchanged. The research included the question of whether improved lighting might 
result in a reduction of crime in the adjacent area. The research results showed a marked 
reduction in a variety of crimes in the experimental area, whereas crime in the adjacent and 
control areas remained the same.
One way to analyze lighting deficiencies is to go to the building at night and study the 
possible methods of entry and areas where inadequate lighting will aid an offender. Before the 
visit, one should contact local police as a precaution against mistaken identity and to recruit 
their assistance in spotting weak points in lighting.

Three sources for information on lighting are the Illuminating Engineering Society of 
North America (IESNA), the National Lighting Bureau, and the International Association of 
Lighting Management Companies. The IESNA provides information on recommended light-
ing levels for a variety of locations.
Negligence Caused by Lighting Deficiency
Entities have an obligation to create a safe environment through lighting. In addition to 
moral and societal obligations, legal responsibilities are illustrated in the Illinois case of 
Fancil v. Q.S.E. Foods, Inc. In this case, a police officer’s widow won a wrongful death 
suit because a storeowner had disconnected his backdoor light even though the location 
had been burglarized several times and the owner was aware that local police checked 
the business during the evenings. A burglar hidden in a dark area shot the officer. The 
court found the storeowner guilty of negligence through this failure to provide adequate 
lighting (U.S. Department of Justice, 1976: 183).
Countermeasures          199
What lighting level will aid an intruder? Most people believe that under conditions of 
darkness a criminal can safely commit a crime. However, this view may be faulty, in that one 
generally cannot work in the dark. Three possible levels of light are bright light, darkness, and 
dim light. Bright light affords an offender plenty of light to work but enables easy observa-
tion by others; it will deter crime. Without light—in darkness—a burglar finds that he or she 
cannot see to jimmy a door lock, release a latch, or perform whatever work is necessary to 
gain access. However, dim light provides just enough light to break and enter while hindering 
observation by authorities. Support for this view was shown in a study of crimes during full-
moon phases, when dim light was produced. This study examined the records of 972 police 
shifts at three police agencies, for a two-year period, to compare nine different crimes during 
full-moon and non-full-moon phases. Only one crime, breaking and entering, was greater dur-
ing full-moon phases (Purpura, 1979: 350–353). Although much case law supports lighting 
as an indicator of efforts to provide a safe environment, security specialists are questioning 
conventional wisdom about lighting (Berube, 1994: 29–33). Because so much nighttime light-
ing goes unused, should it be reduced or turned off? Does an offender look more suspicious 
under a light or in the dark with a flashlight? Should greater use be made of motion-activated 
lighting? How would these approaches affect safety and cost-effectiveness? These questions 
are ripe for research.
What are your views on nighttime lighting? Should certain locations turn it off?
Illumination
Lumens (of light output) per watt (of power input) are a measure of lamp efficiency. Initial 
lumens-per-watt data are based on the light output of lamps when new; however, light output 
declines with use. Illuminance is the intensity of light falling on a surface, measured in foot-
candles (English units) or lux (metric units). The foot-candle (FC) is a measure of how bright 
the light is when it reaches 1 foot from the source. One lux equals 0.0929 FC. For measures 
of illuminance, values not labeled as vertical are generally assumed to be horizontal FC 

200          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
(or lux). The light provided by direct sunlight on a clear day is about 10,000 FC; an overcast 
day would yield about 100 FC; and a full moon, about 0.01 FC. A sample of outdoor lighting 
illuminances recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (2003) 
are as follows: guarded facilities, including entrances and gatehouse inspection, 10 FC (100 lux); 
parking facilities, garages, and covered parking spaces, 6 FC (60 lux) on pavement and 5 FC 
(50 lux) for stairs, elevators, and ramps; and for fast-food restaurant parking, general parking 
at schools and hotels/motels, and common areas of multifamily residences and dormitories, 
3 FC (30 lux).
Care should be exercised when studying illuminance. Horizontal illuminance may not 
aid in the visibility of vertical objects such as signs and keyholes. FC vary depending on the 
distance from the lamp and the angle. If you hold a light meter horizontally, it often gives a 
different reading than if you hold it vertically. Are the FC initial or maintained? Maintenance 
and bulb replacement ensure high-quality lighting (National Lighting Bureau, n.d.: 1–36; 
Smith, 1996: 1–4).
Lamps
The following lamps are applied outdoors (National Fire Protection Association, 2005: 
12–13; National Lighting Bureau, n.d.: 1–36; Smith, 1996: 1–4):
• Incandescent lamps are commonly found at residences. Electrical current passes 
through a tungsten wire enclosed in a glass tube. The wire becomes white-hot and 
produces light. These lamps produce 17 to 22 lumens per watt, are the least efficient 
and most expensive to operate, and have a short lifetime of from 500 to 4,000 hours.
• Halogen and quartz halogen lamps are incandescent bulbs filled with halogen gas (like 
sealed-beam auto headlights) and provide about 25% better efficiency and life than 
ordinary incandescent bulbs.
• Fluorescent lamps pass electricity through a gas enclosed in a glass tube to produce 
light, producing 67 to 100 lumens per watt. They create twice the light and less than 
half the heat of an incandescent bulb of equal wattage and cost 5 to 10 times as 
much. Fluorescent lamps do not provide high levels of light output. The lifetime is 
9,000 to 17,000 hours. They are not used extensively outdoors, except for signage.
• Mercury vapor lamps also pass electricity through a gas. The yield is 31 to 63 
lumens per watt, and the life is over 24,000 hours with good efficiency compared to 
incandescent lamps. Because of their long life, these lamps are often used in street 
lighting.
• Metal halide lamps are also of the gaseous type. The yield is 80 to 115 lumens per 
watt, and the efficiency is about 50% higher than mercury vapor lamps, but the lamp 
life is about 6,000 hours. They often are used at sports stadiums because they imitate 
daylight conditions, and colors appear natural. Consequently, these lamps complement 
CCTV systems, but they are the most expensive light to install and maintain.
• High-pressure sodium lamps are gaseous, yield about 80 to 140 lumens per watt, have 
a life of about 24,000 hours, and are energy efficient. These lamps are often applied 
on streets, parking lots, and building exteriors. They cut through fog and are designed 
to allow the eyes to see more detail at greater distances.
• Low-pressure sodium lamps are gaseous, produce 150 lumens per watt, have a life 
of about 15,000 hours, and are even more efficient than high-pressure sodium. These 
lamps are expensive to maintain.
Each type of lamp has a different color rendition, which is the way a lamp’s output 
affects human perceptions of color. Incandescent, fluorescent, and certain types of metal 
halide lamps provide excellent color rendition. Mercury vapor lamps provide good color 
rendition but are heavy on the blue. High-pressure sodium lamps, which are used extensively 
outdoors, provide poor color rendition, making things look yellow. Low-pressure sodium 
lamps make color unrecognizable and produce a yellow-gray color on objects. People find 
sodium vapor lamps, sometimes called anticrime lights, to be harsh because they produce a 
strange yellow haze. Claims are made that this lighting conflicts with aesthetic values and 

that it affects sleeping habits. In many instances, when people park their vehicles in a parking 
lot during the day and return to find their vehicle at night, they are often unable to locate it 
because of poor color rendition from sodium lamps; some report their vehicles as being stolen. 
Another problem is the inability of witnesses to describe offenders accurately.
Mercury vapor, metal halide, and high-pressure sodium take several minutes to produce 
full light output. If they are turned off, even more time is required to reach full output because 
they first have to cool down. This may not be acceptable for certain security applications. 
Incandescent, halogen, and quartz halogen have the advantage of instant light once electricity 
is turned on. Manufacturers can provide information on a host of lamp characteristics includ-
ing the “strike” and “restrike” time.
Lighting Equipment
Fresnel lights have a wide flat beam that is directed outward to protect a perimeter, glaring in 
the faces of those approaching. A floodlight “floods” an area with a beam of light, resulting 
in considerable glare. Floodlights are stationary, although the light beams can be aimed to 
select positions. The following strategies reinforce good lighting:
1. Locate perimeter lighting to allow illumination of both sides of the barrier.
2.  Direct lights down and away from a facility to create glare for an intruder. Make sure 
the directed lighting does not hinder observation by patrolling officers.
3. Do not leave dark spaces between lighted areas for offenders to move within. Design 
lighting to permit overlapping illumination.
4. Protect the lighting system: locate lighting inside the barrier, install protective covers 
over lamps, mount lamps on high poles, bury power lines, and protect switch boxes.
5. Photoelectric cells will enable lights to go on and off automatically in response to 
natural light. Manual operation is helpful as a backup.
6. Consider motion-activated lighting for external and internal areas.
7. If lighting is required in the vicinity of navigable waters, contact the U.S. Coast Guard.
8. Try not to disturb neighbors by using intense lighting.
9. Maintain a supply of portable, emergency lights and auxiliary power in the event of a 
power failure.
10. Good interior lighting also deters offenders.
11.  If necessary, join other business owners to petition local government to install 
improved street lighting.
Parking Lot and Vehicle Controls
In the preceding chapter, considerable attention was focused on access controls. Here, parking 
lot and vehicle controls are discussed as integral components of access controls.
A well-designed parking lot is a chief prerequisite to construction. Space usually is lim-
ited, and the layout of parking spaces and traffic lanes demands care. Employee access control 
to a building is easier when a parking lot is on one side of a building rather than surrounding 
the building. Vehicles should be parked away from shipping and receiving docks, garbage 
dumpsters, and other crime-prone locations.
Executives and other employees should have permanent parking stickers, whereas visitors, 
delivery people, and service groups should be given a temporary pass to be displayed on the wind-
shield. Stickers and passes allow uniformed officers to locate unauthorized vehicles.
Parking lots are more secure when these specific strategies are applied: CPTED, access 
controls, signs, security patrols, training, lighting, CCTV, and panic buttons and emergency 
phones. Crimes often occur in parking lots, and these events can harm employee morale and 
result in lawsuits, unless employees (and customers) are protected. Hospitals, for example, 
supply an escort for nurses who walk to their vehicles after late shifts. Employee education 
about personal safety, locking vehicles, and additional precautions prevent losses.
Certain types of equipment can aid a parking lot security/safety program. Cushman 
patrol vehicles, capable of traveling through narrow passageways, increase patrol mobility. 
Countermeasures          201

202          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Bicycles are another option. A guard house or security booth (unfortunately called guard 
shack at times) is useful as a command post in parking lots.
Various technologies can be applied to controlling vehicles at access points. One exam-
ple is automatic license plate recognition systems that apply image-processing technology that 
reads a vehicle’s license plate and uses infrared light to illuminate a plate in the dark. A high-
speed camera is used to photograph a plate, and then the recorded information is compared 
to a database. Besides access controls, the applications include fleet management, locating 
stolen vehicles, and border security (National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology 
Center, 2006: 1).
The threat of terrorism has influenced the design of parking lots and vehicle controls. 
Different types of parking lots present various security issues. Surface lots keep vehicles away 
from buildings, consume large amounts of land, and may add to storm water runoff volume. On-
street parking provides no setback. A garage may require blast resistance. If the garage is under a 
building, a serious vulnerability exists, since an underground bomb blast can be devastating.
A designer can propose minimizing vehicle velocity because, for example, a bollard that 
can stop a 15,000-pound truck moving at 35 MPH may not be able to stop the same truck 
moving at 55 MPH (FEMA 426). The road itself can become a security measure by avoiding a 
straight path to a building. A straight road enables a vehicle to gather speed to ram a barrier, 
penetrate a building, and then detonate a bomb. Approaches should be parallel to the build-
ing and contain high curbs, trees, or berms to prevent vehicles from leaving the road. Curving 
roads with tight corners offer another strategy.
Traffic calming strategies are subtler and communicate appropriate speed. Examples are 
speed humps and raised crosswalks. A speed hump is not as rough as a speed bump. The latter 
is often used in parking lots. All these strategies reduce speed and liability while increasing 
safety. Drawbacks are that the response time of first responders increases, and snow removal 
may become difficult.
Security Officers
Officers normally are assigned to stationary (fixed) posts or to patrol. A stationary post is at a 
door or gate where people, vehicles, and objects are observed and inspected. Stationary posts 
also involve directing traffic or duty at a command post where communications, CCTV, and 
alarms are monitored. Foot or vehicle patrols conducted throughout the premises and along 
perimeters identify irregularities while deterring offenders. Examples of unusual or harmful 
conditions that should be reported are damaged security devices, holes in perimeter fences 
or other evidence of intrusion, hidden merchandise, unattended vehicles parked inappropri-
ately, keys left in vehicles, employees sleeping in vehicles or using drugs, blocked fire exits, 
cigarette butts in no-smoking areas, accumulations of trash, and odors from fuels or other 
combustibles. In contrast to public police officers, private security officers act in primarily a 
preventive role and observe and report.
Before security officers are employed, far-sighted planning ensures optimum effective-
ness of this service. What are the unique characteristics of the site? How many people and 
what assets require protection? How many hours per day is the facility open? How many 
employees? How many visitors and vehicles are admitted daily? What are the particular vul-
nerabilities? How will security officers interact with other loss prevention measures?
Security officers are expensive. Wages, insurance, uniforms, equipment, and training add up 
to a hefty sum per officer per year. If each officer costs $30,000 per year for a proprietary force 
and 5 officers are required for the premises at all times, to maintain all shifts seven days per week 
requires approximately 20 officers. The cost would be about $600,000 per year. To reduce costs, 
many companies switch to contract security services and/or consider technological solutions.
Several specific steps can be taken to improve the effectiveness of officers. Three of 
the most critical are careful applicant screening, sound training, and proper supervision. 
Management should ensure that officers know what is expected of them. Policies, procedures, 
and day-to-day duties are communicated via verbal orders, memos, and training programs. 

Policies should ensure that supervisors check on officers every hour. Irregular, unpredictable 
patrols hinder offenders. Rotating officers reduces fatigue while familiarizing them with a 
variety of duties. Providing inspection lists for adverse conditions will keep them mentally 
alert. The formal list should be returned with a daily report. Courtesy and a sharp appearance 
command respect from employees and visitors.
Monitoring Officers
Historically, watch clocks have been used to monitor officer patrols along preplanned routes. 
The officer on patrol carried this older technology, consisting of a timepiece that contained 
a paper tape or disc divided into time segments. A watch clock was operated by an officer 
via keys mounted in walls at specific locations along a patrol route. These keys were often 
within metal boxes and chained to walls. When inserted into the watch clock, the key made 
an impression in the form of a number on the tape or disc. Supervisors could examine this to 
see whether the officer visited each key location and completed the scheduled route. Keys were 
located at vulnerable locations (e.g., entry points, flammable storage areas). Good supervision 
prevented officers from disconnecting all the keys at the beginning of the shift, bringing them 
to one location for use in the watch clock (and, thus, avoiding an hourly tour), and returning 
the keys at the end of the shift.
Automatic monitoring systems are another way to monitor patrols and keep records. 
Key stations are visited according to a preplanned time schedule and route. If an officer does 
not visit a key station within a specific time period, a central monitoring station receives a trans-
mitted signal, and if contact cannot be made, personnel are dispatched.
Bar-code or touch button technology provides other avenues for monitoring patrols. A 
security officer carries a wand that makes contact with a bar code or touch button to record 
data that is later downloaded into a computer. Bar codes or buttons are affixed at vulner-
able locations for a swipe by the wand to record the visit by the officer, who can also swipe 
bar codes or buttons that represent various conditions (e.g., fire extinguisher needs recharging). 
Supervision of these systems ensures that officers are patrolling properly and conditions are 
being reported (Arnheim, 1999: 48–58). To improve the efficiency of a security officer, the 
officer can use a wireless tablet PC (see Figure 8-12), which enables the officer to leave a 
monitoring post and take the workstation with him or her. If, for example, an officer must 
leave a control center to investigate an incident, the officer can bring the tablet PC and con-
tinue to watch CCTV, monitor alarms, and open doors for employee access.
Lower burglary and fire insurance premiums are possible through the use of monitored 
patrols. Insurance personnel may subject records to inspection.
Contraband Detection
Contraband is an item that is illegal to possess or prohibited from being brought into a 
specific area. Examples are weapons, illegal drugs, and explosives. Security officers play a 
crucial role in spotting contraband at businesses, schools, airports, courthouses, and many 
other locations. They use special devices to locate contraband, and these devices are as good 
as the personnel behind them. Here is an overview of these devices (“Scanning for Trouble,” 
2000: 1–3):
• Metal detectors transmit a magnetic field that is disturbed by a metallic object, which 
sets off a light or audio signal. Two types of metal detectors are handheld and walk-
through. False alarms are a common problem.
• X-ray scanners use pulsed energy to penetrate objects that are shown on a color 
monitor. Drugs, plastic explosives, and firearms with plastic parts are difficult to 
identify with this method of detection.
• Dual-energy systems use X-rays at different energy levels to classify objects as 
organic, inorganic, or mixed. Colors are assigned to each classification to help spot 
contraband. When color and shape are observed, these systems are good at detecting 
explosives, since most are organic.
Countermeasures          203

204          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
• Computed tomography scanners are like CAT scanners used in hospitals. An X-
ray source is spun around an object taking slice pictures that show on a computer. 
Although this device is expensive, detection of items is good.
Armed versus Unarmed Officers
The question of whether to arm officers is controversial. Probably the best way to answer this 
question is to study the nature of the particular officer’s assignment. If violence is likely, then 
officers should be armed. Officers assigned to locations where violent crimes are unlikely do 
not need firearms, which, if worn by officers, could be offensive. The trend is toward unarmed 
officers because of liability issues.
If weapons are issued to officers, proper selection of officers and training are of the utmost 
importance. Instructions on the use of force and firearms safety, as well as practice on the firing 
range every four months, will reduce the chances of accidents, mistakes, and costly lawsuits.
Communications and the Control Center
As emergency personnel know, the ability to communicate over distance is indispensable. Every 
officer should be equipped with a portable two-way radio; this communication aid permits offi-
cers to summon assistance and notify superiors about hazards and impending disasters. Usually, 
officers on assignment communicate with a control center that is the hub of the loss preven-
tion program. FEMA 426 (U.S. Department of Homeland Security 2003: 3–45) recommends 
redundant communications. The control center is the appropriate site for a console containing 
alarm indicators, CCTV monitors, door controls, the public address system, and an assortment 
of other components for communication and loss prevention (see Figure 8-13).
Because of the convergence of IT and physical security, the traditional security control 
center may be within a network operations center. Some organizations may choose to  outsource 
a portion of operations. Since these operations are critical, they must be secure both electroni-
cally and physically (Milne, 2005).
FIGURE 8-12 The tablet PC is a mobile workstation enabling a security officer to leave a post and do many things 
mobile that are done from a desktop PC, such as view CCTV, monitor alarms, and open doors. Courtesy: Hirsch 
Electronics, Santa Ana, CA.

Because personnel will seek guidance from a control center in the event of an emer-
gency, that center must be secure and operational at all times. A trend today is automated 
response systems programmed into the control center because so many decisions and actions 
are required for each type of emergency (Patterson, 2000: 76–81). The control center is under 
increased protection against forced entry, tampering, or disasters when it contains a locked 
door, is located in a basement or underground, and is constructed of fire-resistant materials. 
An automatic, remotely operated lock, released by the console operator after identifying the 
caller, also enhances security. Bullet-resistant glass is wise for high-crime locations. FEMA 
426 (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2003: 3–47) recommends a backup control 
center, possibly at an off-site location. Whoever designs the control center should be well 
versed in ergonomics, which deals with the efficient and safe partnership between people and 
machines.
Protective Dogs
Classified as an animal barrier, a dog can strengthen security at a protected site. An alarm 
dog patrols inside a fenced area or building and barks at the approach of a stranger, but does 
not attempt to attack. These dogs retreat when threatened but continue to bark. Such bark-
ing may become so alarming to an intruder that he or she will flee. A guard or attack dog 
is similar to an alarm dog, with an added feature of attacking an intruder. To minimize the 
possibility of a lawsuit, a business should selectively apply and adequately fence in these dogs, 
and should post warning signs. An experienced person on call at all times is needed to respond 
to emergencies. Another type of attack dog is the sentry dog. This dog is kept on a leash and 
responds to commands while patrolling with a uniformed officer. The advantages are numer-
ous. These animals protect officers. Their keen senses of hearing and smell are tremendous 
assets when trying to locate a hidden offender (or explosives or drugs). Dogs can discern the 
slightest perspiration from people under stress, enabling the dogs to sense individuals who 
are afraid of them. An ingredient in stress perspiration irritates dogs, which makes frightened 
persons more susceptible to attack. When an “attack” command is given, a German shepherd 
has enough strength in its jaws to break a person’s arm.
In addition to the possibility of a lawsuit if a dog attacks someone, there are other disad-
vantages to the use of dogs. If proprietary dogs are part of the protective team, personnel and 
kennel facilities are needed to care for the dogs. These costs and others include the purchase 
of dogs and their training, medical care, and food. Using a contract service would probably be 
Countermeasures          205
FIGURE 8-13 Security officer at console managing access control, CCTV, alarm monitoring, and video imaging. 
Courtesy: Diebold, Inc.

206          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
more feasible. Another disadvantage is the possibility that dogs may be poisoned, anesthetized, 
or killed. An offender also may befriend a dog. Dogs should be taught to accept food only from 
the handler. Neighbors near the protected premises often find dogs noisy or may perceive them 
as offensive for other reasons.
Since the 9/11 attacks, interest in canines has increased. At the same time, there is a 
need for consistent standards for training, quality assurance, kenneling, selection of handlers, 
and presentation of evidence. Definitions also present a problem. For example, there is no 
consistent definition as to what constitutes an explosive detection canine. The Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives has developed the National Odor Recognition 
Testing initiative, which could be a standard to which dogs could be certified. Research is being 
conducted on the possible use of chemical warfare agent detector dogs and GPS technology 
in conjunction with remote commands for searches, surveillance, and tracking of persons 
(Harowitz, 2006: 36–38).
Which strategies do you view as affording the best protection against unauthorized 
entry? Support your answer.
International Perspective: UN Efforts at Global Crime Prevention
In 1951, the United Nations established the Ad Hoc Advisory Committee of Experts to 
advise the UN on crime matters. In 1971, the group’s name changed to the Committee 
on Crime Prevention and Control.
Several strategies are employed by the UN to prevent crime and improve justice. 
The UN fosters UN norms in national legislation, conducts research, and provides 
technical expertise to countries. Every five years since 1955, the UN has held a congress 
on crime issues, where successful policies and strategies are shared (United Nations, 
1993: 1–19).
In light of the crime problem, the UN asked its member states to prepare an 
inventory of crime prevention measures so the information can be published and 
shared worldwide. The inventory focuses on four sections:
• Crime prevention through social measures: This approach tackles the root 
causes of crime and works to improve the family, schools, activities for youth, 
employment, and health.
• Situational crime prevention: These measures involve the management, design, 
or manipulation of the environment to reduce opportunities for criminal 
behavior and increase the risk for the offender. Specific strategies include 
hardening the target through security surveys, building and design codes, 
publicity and awareness campaigns, and insurance incentives to install physical 
security. Additional measures are marking property, natural surveillance (i.e., 
designing the inside and outside of buildings so people can more easily observe 
others), Neighborhood Watch, and citizen patrols.
• Community crime prevention: This approach recognizes that physical security 
should be part of a broader, community-based response to crime. Community 
policing and multiagency cooperation are also a part of this approach.
• Planning, implementation, and evaluation of crime prevention: The first step 
in this approach is an analysis of crime and victimization. Compiling and 
analyzing the location and nature of offenses and many other characteristics 
of a crime enhance crime prevention planning and implementation. Evaluation 
assesses whether preventive measures were successful (United Nations, 1990).

Case Problems          207
In essence, crime is a global problem, and many of the crime prevention methods 
applied in the United States are applied overseas. The UN is asking member nations to 
compile and share their ideas on how best to reduce crime.
When the 10th congress on crime prevention was held (United Nations, 2000), 
there was much concern about transnational organized crime and the need for 
increased global cooperation among nations. There was also continued emphasis on 
the preceding four categories. However, ethical concerns focused on situational crime 
prevention because it is seen as a more repressive approach and more harmful to soci-
ety than other methods of crime prevention. This criticism included the development 
of a “fortress society,” the erosion of civil liberties through CCTV, and inconvenient 
security checks. Conversely, these arguments met counterclaims, such as the success of 
CPTED and situational crime prevention in reducing crime, and the public’s acceptance 
of increased security.
Search the Web
Use your favorite search engine to see what vendors have to offer and prices for the 
following: fences, window protection or glazing, door protection, exterior intrusion 
detection systems, security lighting, and protective dogs.
Check out the following sites on the Web:
American Institute of Architects, Security Resource Center: www.aia.org/security
American National Standards Institute: www.ansi.org
American Society for Testing and Materials: www.astm.org
American Society of Landscape Architects: www.asla.org
Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association: www.buildershardware.com/
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America: www.iesna.org
International Association of Lighting Management Companies: www.nalmco.org
International CPTED Association: www.cpted.net
International Organization for Standardization: www.iso.org
National Crime Prevention Council: www.ncpc.org
National Fire Protection Association: www.nfpa.org
National Lighting Bureau: www.nlb.org
Security Industry Association: www.siaonline.org
Technical Support Working Group: www.tswg.gov
Underwriters Laboratory (UL): www.ul.com
United Nations Crime and Justice Information Network: www.uncjin.org
U.S. General Services Administration: www.gsa.gov
Case Problems
8A. Study the characteristics of Woody’s Lumber Company, the Smith Shirt 
manufacturing plant, and Compulab Corporation (refer to Figures 7-1, 7-2, 
and 7-3). Establish a priority list of what you think are the 10 most important 
countermeasures for each location to prevent unauthorized entry. Why did you 
select as top priorities your first three strategies in each list?
8B. As a security manager for a corporation, you made several written 
recommendations to management to improve perimeter security at corporate 

208          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
headquarters located in a suburban environment. Management rejected your 
plans because “headquarters will look like a prison.” What measures can you 
include in your new plan that provide security and are aesthetically pleasing?
8C. As a newly hired security manager for an office building, a site for research and 
development, you are faced with three immediate challenges: (1) some employees 
are not wearing required ID badges from the time they first enter the building to 
when they depart; (2) during off-hours there are too many security system false 
alarms; and (3) public police are responding to about half of these alarms. What do 
you do?
8D. You are a physical security specialist for a corporation with locations worldwide. 
Your next big assignment from your supervisor, the VP of Loss Prevention, is to 
work with a corporate IT specialist to apply Internet technology to the integration 
of access controls, intrusion detection, and CCTV systems. Basically, the VP 
wants to “visit” all corporate locations from her office. The IT specialist that you 
must work with constantly complains, feels that the corporate IT infrastructure 
has reached its maximum capacity, and seems to be distrustful of loss prevention 
personnel. How do you gain his cooperation, promote harmony, and get the job 
done?
8E. You are a physical security specialist for a major global corporation based in the 
United States. Upon conducting a security survey of a large corporate building in 
a medium-size city in the United States, you listed the following vulnerabilities. 
Prepare solutions for each vulnerability and prioritize the list so the most serious 
items are corrected as soon as possible (Purpura, 2007).
Item A
The building contains an underground garage with minimal controls (i.e., an access gate 
opened by an employee access card).
Item B
The front of the building is on Main Street, close to the street, and any vehicles can park at 
the front on the street. The three other sides of the building contain parking lots close to the 
building and accessible through an access gate opened by an employee access card.
Item C
The rear lobby of the building is at ground level and at the ending point of a straight road of 
one-eighth mile long.
Item D
In the last 12 months, two employees were robbed at night outside the building in the park-
ing lots.
Item E
Corporate offices, functions, assets, and utilities are clearly marked by signs inside and outside 
the building.
Item F
Air intakes for the building are at ground level at the rear of the building.
Item G
Although employees use a card key to access the building, tailgating is a problem.
Item H
A minimum number of security officers on the premises results in gaps in security and at 
access points as they are called off-post to obtain mail and conduct other errands.
Item I
Executive staff have their names on designated parking spaces.

Item J
Two garbage dumpsters are located up against the rear of the building.
Item K
The rear of the building faces nearby hills containing a variety of buildings.
References
Arnheim, L. (1999). “A Tour of Guard Patrol Systems.” Security Management (November).
Berube, H. (1994). “New Notions of Night Light.” Security Management (December).
Clark, R. (1983). “Situational Crime Prevention: Its Theoretical Basis and Practical Scope.” 
In M. Tonry and N. Morris (eds.). Crime and Justice, 4. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Clifton, R., and Vitch, M. (1997). “Getting a Sense for Danger.” Security Management 
(February).
Coupe, T., and Kaur, S. (2005). “The Role of Alarms and CCTV in Detecting Non-residential 
Burglary.” Security Journal, 18.
Davey, C., et al. (2005). “Design Against Crime: Extending the Reach of Crime Prevention 
through Environmental Design.” Security Journal, 18.
Evans, R. (2005). “Remote Monitoring.” Security Products, 9 (March).
Garcia, M. (2006). Vulnerability Assessment of Physical Protection Systems. Burlington, MA: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Gips, M. (1999). “A Pharmacopoeia of Protection.” Security Management, 43 (March).
Harowitz, S. (2006). “Dog Use Dogged by Questions.” Security Management, 50 (January).
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. (2003). Guideline for Security Lighting 
for People, Property, and Public Spaces. New York, NY: IESNA.
Lab, S. (2004). Crime Prevention: Approaches, Practices and Evaluations, 5th ed. www.lexis-
nexis.com/anderson/criminaljustice
Milne, J. (2005). “Build Your Own Security Operations Center.” Secure Enterprise (August 
1). www.secureenterprisemag.com, retrieved September 26, 2005.
Moore, M. (2006). “Defensive Devices Designed to Blend In with New York.” USA Today 
(July 31). www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2006-07-31-ny-security_x.htm, retrieved 
August 1, 2006.
Murphy, P. (2000). “Grounds for Protection.” Security Management, 44 (October).
National Fire Protection Association. (2005). “NFPA 730, Guide for Premises Security, 2006 
Edition.” Quincy, MA: NFPA.
National Lighting Bureau. (n.d.). Lighting for Safety and Security. Washington, D.C.: 
National Lighting Bureau.
Newman, O. (1972). Defensible Space. New York: Macmillan.
National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Center. (2006). “No License to 
Steal.” TECHbeat (Spring).
Owen, D. (2003). Building Security: Strategies & Cost. Kingston, MA: Reed.
Painter, K., and Farrington, D. (1999). “Street Lighting and Crime: Diffusion of Benefits in 
the Stoke-on-Trent Project.” In K. Painter and N. Tilly (eds.), Crime Prevention Studies. 
Monsey, NY: Criminal Justice Press.
Patterson, D. (2000). “How Smart Is Your Setup?” Security Management, 44 (March).
Pierce, C. (2006). “Thermal Video for the Mainstream?” Security Technology & Design, 16 
(May).
Post, R., and Kingsbury, A. (1977). Security Administration: An Introduction, 3rd ed. 
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Purpura, P. (1979). “Police Activity and the Full Moon.” Journal of Police Science and 
Administration, 7 (September).
Purpura, P. (2007). Terrorism and Homeland Security: An Introduction with Applications. 
Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann.
References          209

210          EXTERNAL THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Reddick, R. (2005). “What You Should Know about Protecting a Perimeter.” Security 
Products, 9 (April).
Revel, O. (2003). “Protective Blast and Anti-Ramming Wall Development.” Security 
Technology & Design (November).
Saflex, Inc. (2005). “Introduction to Security Glazing.” www.saflex.com, retrieved June 1, 
2005.
“Scanning for Trouble.” (2000). Security Watch, 2908 (April 15).
Schumacher, J. (2000). “How to Resolve Conflict with Proper Systems Integration.” Security 
Technology & Design, 10 (October).
Shelton, D. (2006). “The New and Improved Moat.” Security Technology & Design, 16 
(March).
Smith, M. (1996). “Crime Prevention through Environmental Design in Parking Facilities” 
(April). Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice.
Taylor, R., and Harrell, A. (1996). “Physical Environment and Crime.” Washington, D.C.: 
National Institute of Justice.
True, T. (1996). “Raising the Ramparts.” Security Management (October).
United Nations. (2000). “Effective Crime Prevention: Keeping Pace with New Developments.” 
Vienna, Austria: Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the 
Treatment of Offenders. www.uncjin.org, retrieved August 16, 2006.
United Nations. (1990). “Inventory of Comprehensive Crime Prevention Measures.” Havana, 
Cuba: Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of 
Offenders.
United Nations. (1993). “Work of the United Nations in Crime Prevention and Criminal 
Justice.” Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (June).
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2003). Reference Manual to Mitigate Potential 
Terrorist Attacks against Buildings, FEMA 426 (December). Washington, D.C.: FEMA.
U.S. Department of Justice (1976). Report of the Task Force on Private Security. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Wilson, J., and Kelling, G. (1982). “Broken Windows: The Police and Neighborhood Safety.” 
Atlantic Monthly (March).
Zwirn, J. (2003). “Alarm Design That Rings True.” Security Management. (April).

KEY TERMS
• security services
• security systems
• vendors
• key performance indicators
• competitive bid
• request for information
• request for quotation
• request for proposal
• work breakdown structure
• outsourcing
• contract lifecycle management
• due diligence
Services and Systems: 
Methods Toward Wise 
Purchasing Decisions
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Discuss pitfalls when purchasing security/loss prevention services and systems.
2. List five specific purchasing rules and eight sources of information.
3. List guidelines and inquisitive questions that improve purchasing decisions when 
seeking security services.
4. List guidelines and inquisitive questions that improve purchasing decisions when 
seeking security systems.
5. Name and explain three types of bids in the purchasing process.
6. Explain outsourcing.
Introduction
One topic often neglected in the security literature is how to make wise purchasing  decisions 
when obtaining security services and systems. The best security plans are useless when poor 
purchasing decisions are made to implement those plans. Security services include activities 
performed by personnel to further the goals of security and loss prevention. Security officers 
represent a large part of available security services. Security systems include manufactured 
items that protect people and assets. An example is an intrusion detection system. This chap-
ter emphasizes security services and systems, keeping in mind the understanding that fire 
protection and safety are integral components of an effective loss prevention program.
9
211

Most business executives and institutional administrators do not know how to select 
security services or systems or even what questions to ask vendors. Frequently, money is 
wasted and the results after the purchases are made are disappointing. A  specialist in the field 
who is not a salesperson can improve decision making.
During their careers, loss prevention practitioners are most likely to purchase all kinds 
of services and systems. Purchasing decisions have a definite impact on career opportunities 
and on the success of loss prevention programs. Care is required during decision making to 
obtain the best services and systems for the money at hand. This task is difficult when one is 
confronted with a multitude of salespeople and a varied market that is taking in billions of 
dollars per year.
Pitfalls when Purchasing Security Services and Systems
Suppliers of services and systems are not immune to the temptation of unethical and illegal 
activities for profit. Vendors have been known to misrepresent information,  exaggerate, lie, 
and fail to deliver what was promised. Vendors are sellers or salespeople. The rotten-apple 
syndrome is prevalent in this industry just as it is in other facets of life—there are unscrupu-
lous vendors as well as honest ones.
A U.S. Department of Justice (1972: 59) publication, Private Police in the United States: 
Findings and Recommendations, states
On the basis of regulatory-agency reports of the number of complaints filed and 
the reasons for licenses being suspended and revoked, and on the basis of impres-
sions gleaned from security executives, we  conclude that substantial dishonesty 
and poor business practices exist. The former entails common crimes by some 
security employees and employers, including burglary, robbery, theft, and extor-
tion. The latter include franchising licenses, operating without a license, failure to 
perform services paid for, misrepresenting price or service to be  performed, and 
negligence in performing security duties.
Purchasers of security officer services may be billed for hours not worked. Because this 
service industry is so competitive, some companies bid very low, knowing that they will have 
to bill the client for phantom services (services not rendered) to make a profit. Other com-
panies lie to clients about training and experience. Promised supervision may not take place. 
Liability insurance coverage may be exaggerated or nonexistent. Investigative companies 
that conduct overt and undercover investigations are known to deceive clients about exces-
sive losses through scary weekly reports in order to lengthen investigations and thereby reap 
greater profits.
Techniques employed by people selling systems include selling unneeded equipment. 
Alarm systems composed of outdated technology, which are overstocked at  warehouses, 
are pushed on buyers who do not realize that offenders can easily defeat these systems. 
Salespeople conveniently delete information concerning extra personnel needed, additional 
hardware required, software problems, and expensive maintenance. Vendors sell  technology 
that makes customers think they are monitoring remotely, but with real-time delay, it is not so. 
Demo videos are sent to prospective buyers with systems operating under ideal conditions of 
perfect weather and lighting (Strauchs, 2001: 98). Some security system installers set sensors 
to detect minor intrusions during a test and then, following the test, lower the sensitivity of 
the sensor to reduce false alarms. One specific tactic involves reinforcing the purchaser’s fear. 
Crime, fire, and accident dangers are intertwined within high-pressure sales pitches.
McCumber (2006: 55–58) notes that hype is also a problem in the IT security industry. 
He offers the example of an IT salesperson who exaggerated a problem that a customer would 
pay a high price to avoid. The salesperson demonstrated the vulnerability on his laptop and 
showed how his company’s software solution eradicated the problem. When the salesperson 
offered to load the software onto the customer’s IT system to show its effectiveness, and 
emphasizing how he could easily delete it, the salesperson was escorted to the exit.
212          SERVICES AND SYSTEMS: METHODS TOWARD WISE PURCHASING DECISIONS

Many vendors adhere to ethical conduct. The point of the industry criticism here is that 
the buyer should be aware of these practices when confronted with a purchasing decision.
The Report of the Task Force on Private Security (U.S. Department of Justice, 1976: 
146–147) and the first Hallcrest report (U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 
1985: 71) stated several recommendations for improving the industry with the  consumer in 
mind. For example, both reports favor certified training for alarm service personnel.
The following five cardinal rules, designed with the consumer in mind, can put the 
buyer on the road toward making wise purchasing decisions:
1. Buyer beware.
2. Properly evaluate the needs of the organization to be protected.
3. Acquire information and know the state of the art.
4. Analyze the advantages and disadvantages of each service or system. Apply critical 
thinking skills.
5. Avoid panic buying.
A risk analysis will assist the buyer in pinpointing weaknesses and evaluating needs. If 
the buyer has a list of weaknesses and needs, the salesperson will be hindered from influencing 
the buyer into purchasing something unnecessary. To acquire information about services and 
systems, eight beneficial sources are the Web, standards and related organizations, peers, consul-
tants not affiliated with any vendors, seminars, courses, trade publications, and salespeople.
Is the security industry the only industry where the buyer should beware? Support your 
answer.
Purchasing Security Services          213
Purchasing Security Services
Questions When Considering Contract Security Officers
1.  Does the company conform to state and local regulatory law, such as registration, 
licensing, training, and bonding?
2.  What are the contract company’s liability and other insurance coverage? Request 
copies of policies. Are there lawsuits pending against the company?
3. Have there been any EEO complaints against the company?
4. What is the company’s Dun and Bradstreet financial rating?
5. Is the company willing to customize service for client company needs?
6. Does the company have the ability to provide extra officers?
7. Can the company perform expanded services, such as investigations?
8. Have you been invited to visit the company’s offices?
9.  Have you read the employment application form and company publications (e.g., 
orders, regulations, training literature)?
10.  What type of background screening is conducted on applicants? Can you set up an 
agreement whereby your company interviews officers before assignment? Do you 
require personnel folders to help you select the best candidates?
11. How often during a shift does a supervisor visit?
12. How does the company ensure the honesty of its officers?
13. How are disciplinary problems handled?
14. In general, how is morale? What is the turnover rate?
15. What is the extent of training?
16. What equipment is supplied to officers?

214          SERVICES AND SYSTEMS: METHODS TOWARD WISE PURCHASING DECISIONS
17. What are the pay scales and benefits?
18.  What is the wage-to-rate ratio? This shows the portion of the total rate received by 
each officer.
Many security firms draft their contracts so that much of the risk is on the customer. 
An attorney should review contracts and negotiate changes. It is important that both parties 
know the amount of duty the security company is agreeing to. The contract should specify 
number of officers and hours, location of officers, and equipment. If, for example, an assault 
takes place on the 10th floor of a building, the security company may go back to the contract 
and read that an officer was assigned only to the lobby and that more services were available, 
but the client refused them (Finnerty, 1996: 4–7).
Heil (2006: 57–64) recommends that customers of contract security services  carefully 
consider the low bidder before final selection. A low bidder may result in poor quality offi-
cers and increased liability. He also favors ongoing expectations for performance during the 
contract through metrics (also called key performance indicators) that can be tied to finan-
cial rewards or penalties for the vendor. These metrics include the following: no-show rates, 
missed tours, missed supervisory visits, complaints against officers, violations of policies and 
procedures, and inappropriate uniform and appearance.
When one is dealing with contract companies, it is good to know the views of these 
business people: a portion of the managers in contract guard companies refer to their voca-
tion as a “nickel-and-dime-business” with a “never-ending turnover of  bodies.” The former 
comment refers to the awarding of contracts by clients based on slim  differences in bids. The 
latter comment refers to the high turnover of officers because of low wages.
Contract Undercover Investigators
A common scenario in businesses is the panic atmosphere after the discovery of a high 
inventory-shrinkage statistic following an inventory. When this happens, management wants 
immediate action even when it is predisposed to avoid panic buying. Management often 
recruits an outside firm specializing in undercover investigations. The undercover investigator 
secretly infiltrates employee informal groups, as a regular employee, to gather information 
about losses.
With an understanding of how contract undercover investigation services operate, the 
client will obtain better results. When speaking to a service representative, the client needs 
to find out the cost and probable length of the investigation. These investigations last from 
six to eight weeks but may require months to yield success. The cost varies from $1,500 
to $2,000 per week (Ferraro, 2000: 70). The client should ask the representative about the 
backgrounds of investigators, selection methods (for employment and assignment), training, 
and supervision. Are investigators bonded? Proof should be provided. Are they prepared to 
testify in court, if necessary? How many reports will the client receive each week? Undercover 
investigators send reports to their immediate supervisor, who edits them before sending a 
report to the client. The reporting phase of the investigation is the time when unscrupulous 
activity by the service company may take place. Supervisors are known to withhold from cli-
ents good information to submit later during “dry weeks,” when no substantial information 
is uncovered. Frightening reports about losses can scare clients into paying for unnecessarily 
lengthy investigations. When clients become impatient and ask why the investigation is taking 
so long, sometimes the service company’s response is that “a break in the case is right around 
the corner and we just need a few more weeks.” If put under excessive pressure by supervi-
sors, investigators may succumb to exaggerated reports and may even invent information. 
Although these practices produce a negative image of undercover investigative services, not 
all of these companies are unethical. Undercover investigations are a widely used and effective 
method to combat losses.
Consultants
Why would an executive require the services of a loss prevention consultant? Two major rea-
sons are (1) the executive lacks knowledge about loss prevention and there is an absence of a 

proprietary loss prevention practitioner; or (2) the executive is a loss prevention practitioner 
but lacks expertise in a specialized field.
A consultant is contacted when a loss problem needs to be corrected—for instance, a 
baffling shrinkage problem, the loss of trade secrets, protection against terrorism, or numer-
ous workplace accidents. Consultants also can be a tremendous asset when an organization 
is contemplating a loss prevention program for the first time or when an established pro-
gram suffers from morale or training problems. New ideas can stimulate greater efficiency 
and effectiveness. Consultants can act as a company’s representatives in negotiating contract 
 services and purchasing systems.
Executives sometimes refrain from hiring a consultant because they feel that it will 
reflect adversely on their ability. A consultant can be a cost-effective investment, but the buyer 
must beware.
A client interested in a successful consulting experience will be involved in three specific 
phases: (1) selection, (2) direction, and (3) evaluation. The objective of the selection phase is 
to contact the most appropriate person for the job. The executive must first clearly define the 
problem and then search for the individual with the required background.
Select a consultant who is independent, that is, not affiliated with any particular service 
or system. Also, ask how much money and time are required to complete the work.
In the second phase, the client assists the consultant in becoming familiar with the business 
and the problem. The consultant is introduced to select personnel. A tour of the premises is 
another part of what is known as the startup time, which can easily consume a day. The 
consultant will be preoccupied with collecting information via interviews, observation, and 
records. The consultant will ask many questions. A previously prepared survey or checklist 
form is brought by the consultant as a reminder of what specific questions to ask or areas to 
check. Clients may request a one-day survey followed by verbal advice, whereas other assign-
ments may last for weeks, months, or years.
When sufficient information has been collected, and the consultant has a good grasp of 
the problem and possible solutions, he or she presents a report of findings and recommendations 
to the client. Naturally, the consultant is in an advisory capacity, and the executives in charge 
have the authority and must accept the responsibility of instituting the recommendations.
The third and final phase for the client pertains to evaluating the consultant. A standard 
personnel evaluation form provides several relevant questions (e.g., works well with others, 
is flexible, communicates clearly). However, the primary question is this: was the problem 
uncovered and satisfactorily remedied?
Certifications in Security
Most states have no regulation for security and loss prevention consultants. When registration 
or licensing is required, it often is accomplished via the laws regulating security officers and 
private investigators. With such minimal controls, almost anybody can call himself or herself 
a consultant. Hence, charlatans appear who tarnish the field and create a bad image that 
reflects on competent professionals.
In light of the scarcity of regulations or standards for security and loss prevention 
consultants and managers, and to reinforce professionalism in this field, ASIS International 
created the Certified Protection Professional (CPP) program in 1972. To qualify for CPP 
certification, the applicant must meet certain education and experience requirements, affirm 
adherence to the CPP Code of Professional Responsibility, receive endorsement by a person 
certified as a CPP, and achieve a passing grade on the written examination. ASIS International 
also offers two other certifications: Physical Security Professional (PSP) and Professional 
Certified Investigator (PCI).
In addition to ASIS International CPPs as a source of consultants, another source, 
although small, is the International Association of Professional Security Consultants (IAPSC), 
founded in 1984. Members of this professional association are required to have education 
and experience, and the CPP is accepted as a component of the qualifications for membership. 
Like ASIS, the IAPSC requires its members to adhere to a code of ethics. The IAPSC offers the 
Certified Security Consultant program.
Purchasing Security Services          215

216          SERVICES AND SYSTEMS: METHODS TOWARD WISE PURCHASING DECISIONS
For you, as a practitioner, what are the benefits of obtaining certifications in security?
Purchasing Security Systems
The National Burglar and Fire Alarm Association (NBFAA) provides consumer tips through 
its Web site for selecting security systems. The NBFAA is a nonprofit association that pro-
motes professionalism and standards in the industry.
The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA, 2005) is another source of 
 information, especially in reference to standards. For example, “NFPA 731, Standard for the 
Installation of Electronic Premises Security Systems, 2006 Edition” contains information on 
standards of other organizations (e.g., ANSI, SIA, and UL), definitions, fundamentals, and 
various systems.
Questions When Considering a Security System
1. What can the system do?
2.  What is the total cost of the system, including installation, additional personnel, 
training, maintenance, finance charges, and so on? When the purchaser buys in large 
volume, the greater profit for the vendor may result in lower prices.
3. Is the total price competitive with other vendors?
4.  Can the system adapt to new technological developments? What modifications are 
possible? Costs?
5.  How long will it take for the system to be installed and become operational? If 
the manufacturer contracts the installation to a subcontractor, how are standards 
maintained and inspections conducted, and what are the related stipulations in the 
contract?
6. What is the system life?
7. What does the warranty cover?
8.  What maintenance is required and by whom? Since a system is useless when it fails 
and is not repaired, are preventive maintenance and emergency maintenance part of 
the contract?
9. Have we checked the company’s Dun and Bradstreet rating?
10.  Does the vendor have appropriate business licenses? Does the vendor conform to 
applicable state laws requiring training or registration?
11.  Is the vendor a member of trade associations that help members stay current on new 
technology and product developments?
12.  What is the background of personnel involved with the product? Are professional 
engineers employed? Do licensed contractors do electrical work? Is pre-employment 
screening conducted? Are employees trained and certified?
13.  Have we requested references from the vendor from current users of the same 
product? Have we followed up on those references?
14.  Does the manufacturer freely release information about its systems to outsiders? 
(Offenders are known to pose as writers, reporters, or customers to acquire system 
information.)
15.  Have the system and its components been evaluated by an independent testing 
organization? If applicable, does it meet NFPA and other standards?
16.  How will the system be evaluated? Can security personnel, in a controlled test, “trip” 
a sensor to ensure reliability?

Rather than purchase a security system, a company may choose the option of leasing. 
Security vendors, manufacturers, and integrators are not only offering products, technical 
support, and installation, but also equipment leasing, rentals, and specialized services. For 
security executives on a tight budget, and for those searching for value-added services and 
an improved return on investment, creative avenues should be researched to acquire security 
systems and services. Among the benefits of leasing is the opportunity to keep up with newer 
technology, quicker, rather than having to retain older, purchased equipment to recoup the 
investment (Whittemore, 2007: 20). A financial analysis of purchasing versus leasing is best.
System Acquisition
Khairallah (2006: 159–272) provides a foundation for acquiring security systems as described 
next. Once a security need is established, a preliminary design is prepared, and when manage-
ment approves the plan and funding, the next step is to prepare a solicitation for the market to 
obtain pricing and availability of the products and services. The solicitation process is referred 
to as a competitive bid. Three types of bids are explained in subsequent paragraphs: request 
for information (RFI), request for quotation (RFQ), and request for proposal (RFP). The type 
of bid to employ depends on such factors as the complexity of the project and the purchasing 
policies of the company. In addition, elements of multiple types of bids may be used.
A request for information serves to gather information for an RFQ or RFP. The RFI is 
especially helpful when security needs are unusual and the security practitioner is searching 
for guidance. The RFI is not specific as to what will be purchased; it describes mission and 
functions broadly. Essentially, the market helps with problem solving. One drawback to the 
nonspecific nature of the RFI is that vendors typically recommend products that they sell 
instead of meeting the customer’s need.
A request for quotation seeks the costs of the required components of the security 
system. It also contains other elements including project management, scheduling and cost 
controls, system demonstration, freight and insurance, installation, system testing, user train-
ing, warranty, and post-installation support. The RFQ provides an opportunity to compare 
bidders.
A request for proposal contains the elements of an RFQ, plus equipment performance 
criteria. There are several variations of the RFP. The National Contract Management 
Association offers a listing of contract types and conditions. Khairallah notes that even for 
a trained professional it is nearly impossible to know all the features of all security products 
from the numerous manufacturers. He recommends that the RFP be well organized and 
indexed. Khairallah suggests using a technique from federal government contracting called 
work breakdown structure (WBS). This process separates parts of a project into clearly defin-
able tasks, and it includes features and capabilities from the preliminary design. The security 
practitioner can use the WBS to check each bid to ensure that all components of the project 
are included and vendors can respond to each section. For the security practitioner, this pro-
cess facilitates ease of comparison and helps with the ranking of bids.
Following the evaluation of the written proposals, the next step is to request a product 
demonstration from the most likely vendors that can meet the requirements of the RFP. As the 
evaluation of vendor proposals ends, the security practitioner prepares a written report for man-
agement to pinpoint the most favorable bidder. Once the contract is awarded, there are specific 
stages of installation and implementation. They include inspections, testing, and training.
Purchasing Security Systems          217
You Be the Judge*
Carl Simpson, the security director at Southeast Tool Company, was fighting 
mad. The plant had been burglarized again, but that was nothing new. What had him 
angry was that the alarm system the company had leased recently had failed to detect 
the intrusion.

218          SERVICES AND SYSTEMS: METHODS TOWARD WISE PURCHASING DECISIONS
Outsourcing
Outsourcing is purchasing, from outside companies, services that were previously performed 
in-house. In Business at the Speed of Thought, Bill Gates writes: “An important reengineering 
principle is that companies should focus on their core business and outsource everything else.” 
Internet connectivity has produced a global economy with intense competition requiring man-
agement to concentrate on new challenges and opportunities or be left behind. For success and 
profit, management staff are learning that they must focus on what the company does best and 
outsource support functions. Outsourcing improves a company’s focus, frees internal resources 
for other purposes, reduces costs, and shares risks. Consequently, activities that do not contribute 
directly to the bottom line and are part of “the cost of doing business” are ripe targets for out-
sourcing. Examples are human resources, risk management, environmental management, safety, 
and security (Caldwell, 2001: 18–20).
Here, we consider some outsourcing decisions. A frequent outsourcing decision con-
cerns choosing between in-house and contract security officer services. Consider the fol-
lowing generalized advantages and disadvantages. With in-house, the advantages are lower 
turnover and increased control over hiring, training, and quality. In addition, officers often 
have greater loyalty and are familiar with unique needs. The disadvantages are higher costs 
and total responsibility for security. With contract services, the advantages are lower costs, 
fewer human resources duties, and shared responsibilities. The disadvantages are less direct 
control, less impact on hiring and loyalty, and higher turnover. It is not uncommon for a 
contract security officer to work for months without the client knowing that the officer has 
a felony record. One solution is for the contractor to maintain a personnel folder on-site for 
each officer and for it to contain a copy of the application, background check, training, and 
regulatory papers (Maurer, 2000: 14–18).
“Get Security Systems International on the phone,” snapped Simpson at his 
secretary.
Once SSI came on the line, Simpson began his attack: “We had $135,000 worth 
of precision machine tools stolen last night, and your people are responsible. According 
to our contract, you’re supposed to make sure this alarm system works. It doesn’t, so 
your company had better come up with $135,000.”
The manager of SSI just laughed. “Calm down and reread your contract,” he 
said. “It has what’s called an exculpatory clause, which says that SSI is not responsible 
for any loss caused by burglary.”
“But this was your fault!” Simpson cried.
“It doesn’t matter,” replied the manager. “The clause covers us even if we’re 
negligent.” He chuckled, “I can tell you’ve never dealt with a burglar alarm company 
before. Almost all alarm contracts have an exculpatory clause in them.”
But Simpson refused to give up without a fight. He had Southeast sue SSI for 
breach of contract, breach of warranty, and negligence, despite the exculpatory clause 
in the contract. “It’s not fair,” Simpson argued. “When we contracted with SSI, we put 
the safety of our company in their hands. They took on the responsibility, and they 
shouldn’t be able to use a catch-all clause to escape liability for their negligence.”
Did the court agree?
Make your decision; then turn to the end of the chapter for the court’s decision.
*Reprinted with permission from Security Management—Plant and Property 
Protection, a publication of Bureau of Business Practice, Inc., 24 Rope Ferry Road, 
Waterford, CT 06386.

Another outsourcing decision involves choosing between in-house and off-site access 
control. For many years, central stations have serviced clients by monitoring  intrusion and 
fire detection systems. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, central stations began to offer access 
control services. This avenue works well in multitenant facilities with both limited entry points 
and visitors, and a preference to avoid the presence of a security officer. Off-site access controls 
typically include audio and video systems. Conversely, facilities characterized by many visitors 
and exception-based entry requests can result in access delays if access is controlled off-site. 
Delay becomes more problematic if people must wait in adverse weather. The screening of 
packages presents another problem for off-site access controls; personnel on-site may be neces-
sary for this task (Friedenfelds, 2006: 42–46).
Outsourcing may include hiring a systems integrator. Selecting the best integrator is a 
crucial and tricky process. Seek evidence of financial stability, insurance bonding, and a close 
relationship between the integrator and manufacturers. In addition, visit customers of the 
integrator, seek an open architecture, and get IT personnel involved.
In the IT sphere, “managed security” is a growing trend involving outsourcing of secu-
rity technologies, infrastructure, and services. Many companies with in-house staff simply 
cannot keep up with all the pressing IT security issues (DeJesus, 2001: 34–49).
Adler et al. (2005: 61–65) write about the popularity of outsourcing and the impor-
tance of the process being well managed to meet corporate objectives. They note that the key 
to success is to have a plan for every step of the process of outsourcing, beyond selecting the 
vendor and integrating the service into company operations. They suggest a model known 
as contract lifecycle management (CLM) that contains four primary steps: (1)  contract 
 governance and oversight, (2) RFP, (3) due diligence, and (4) contract  negotiation and execu-
tion. Governance consists of a council of specialists from such areas as procurement, legal, 
finance, operations, and IT, who participate in all phases of the CLM. The second step is the 
RFP. Step three, due diligence, is the attention and care expected in checking the accuracy 
of information and omissions. This step can begin with an RFI from vendors and include 
a variety of information. Examples are vendor operations, financial information, licensure 
requirements, insurance, and a list of clients. The contract negotiation and execution is the 
last step. It focuses on the final terms between the client and the vendor and the signing of 
the contract. Adler et al. add three elements to a successful transition: (1) a team to oversee 
and manage the change; (2) communication to affected people, with explanations of the 
reasons for the change and its impact; and (3) key performance indicators that are often in 
contracts.
Outsourcing          219
Is outsourcing a good or bad idea? Justify your answer.
Career: Security Sales, Equipment, and Services
This security specialty can be stimulating, challenging, and financially rewarding. New 
security-related products and services have resulted from emerging threats and evolv-
ing high technology, and the number of companies offering various security services 
has grown as a result. Sales positions can range from products such as barriers, alarm 
systems, sophisticated biometrics, CCTV, biological detection equipment, and risk 
 management software, to uniformed security services. Sales and service personnel may 
be employed by a product manufacturer to sell that particular company’s products or 
by an independent dealer that represents a variety of products. Entry-level positions may 
involve making sales calls, handling advertising queries, staffing and organizing sales 
booths, demonstrating products, and providing input on government proposal requests. 
In addition to typical management functions, mid-level management responsibilities 

may include directing and motivating sales personnel, organizing sales and marketing 
campaigns, preparing and presenting proposals, conducting briefings, and managing a 
trade show booth.
Entry-level management positions may call for a college degree, depending on the 
size and nature of the employer. It is recommended that broad-based education and 
experience be achieved in areas such as accounting, industrial engineering, manage-
ment, marketing, human resources, communications, statistics, or labor relations. The 
nature and extent of the desired education and experience and the entry-level salary 
range can vary depending on the type of product or service being provided, the size of 
the vendor, and other factors.
Mid-level management positions require the experience to perform a wide range of 
functions as indicated previously. The ability to effectively deal with a range of people and the 
capability to present information verbally and in writing are particularly important.
Source: Courtesy of ASIS International (2005). “Career Opportunities in Security.” 
www.asisonline.org.
Search the Web
Use your favorite search engines to view what is on-line for “security services” and 
“security systems.” Also, check out the following sites:
ASIS International: www.asisonline.org
International Association of Professional Security Consultants: www.iapsc.org
National Burglar and Fire Alarm Association: www.alarm.org
National Fire Protection Association: www.nfpa.org
Case Problem
9A. Select a specific security service or system. Study the state of the art. Then list, in 
order of priority, 10 questions you would ask vendors. Explain why the first three 
questions are placed at the top of the list.
The Decision for “You Be the Judge”
The court did not agree with Simpson’s reasoning and dismissed Southeast’s lawsuit against 
SSI. The court held that the clause was valid and clear in totally absolving SSI from liability 
for the burglary. If your company has leased a burglar alarm system, check the contract to see 
if it has an exculpatory clause. If it does, take heart. Not all courts have upheld the validity of 
such clauses in all circumstances. Check with your company’s lawyer to find out where your 
state courts stand on this issue.
This case is based on L. Luria & Son v. Alarmtech International, 384 So2d 947. The 
names in this case have been changed to protect the privacy of those involved.
References
Adler, S., et al. (2005). “The Inside Story on Outsource Planning.” Security Management, 49 
(August).
Caldwell, G. (2001). “Do It Yourself or Outsource It?” Security Technology & Design, 12 
(March).
220          SERVICES AND SYSTEMS: METHODS TOWARD WISE PURCHASING DECISIONS

References          221
DeJesus, E. (2001). “Managing Managed Security.” Information Security, 4 (January).
Ferraro, E. (2000). “End Game.” Security Management, 44 (August).
Finnerty, J. (1996). “Who’s Liable, the Security Firm or You?” Risk Management Advisor 
(May).
Friedenfelds, L. (2006). “Is Outsourcing Right for You?” Security Technology & Design, 16 
(February).
Heil, R. (2006). “Guarding Against Poor Performance.” Security Management, 50 (June).
Khairallah, M. (2006). Physical Security Systems Handbook: The Design and Implementation 
of Electronic Security Systems. Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Maurer, R. (2000). “Outsourcing: An Option or a Threat?” Security Technology & Design, 
10 (August).
McCumber, J. (2006). “Truth in Advertising.” Security Technology & Design, 16 (April).
National Fire Protection Association. (2005). “NFPA 731, Standard for the Installation of 
Electronic Premises Security Systems, 2006 Edition.” Quincy, MA: NFPA.
Strauchs, J. (2001). “Which Way to Better Controls?” Security Management, 45 (January).
U.S. Department of Justice. (1972). Private Police in the United States: Findings and 
Recommendations. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice (1976). Report of the Task Force on Private Security. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice. (1985). Crime and Protection 
in America (Executive Summary of the Hallcrest Report). Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.
Whittemore, S. (2007). “Leasing Offers Attractive Benefits to Security Directors.” Security 
Director News, 4 (January).

• proprietary investigation
• contract investigation
• private investigations
• public investigations
• overt investigation
• undercover investigation
• qualified privilege
• attorney/client privilege
• direct evidence
• circumstantial evidence
• hearsay evidence
• chain of custody of evidence
• interview
• interrogation
• open-ended questions
• close-ended questions
• Freedom of Information Law
• identity theft
• phishing
• modus operandi
• artificial intelligence
• data mining
• link analysis
• Identi-Kit
• digital evidence
• digital forensics
• surveillance
• deposition
KEY TERMS
Investigations
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. List and discuss the six basic investigative questions.
2. Describe at least five types of investigations in the private sector.
3. Differentiate among proprietary and contract investigations, private and public 
investigations, and overt and undercover private investigations.
4. List and explain at least five subject areas important to the investigative process.
5. Explain both digital evidence and digital forensics.
10
Introduction
An investigation is a search for information. Information is obtained from many sources, 
including the following: people, such as victims, witnesses, suspects, and informants; physical 
evidence, such as fingerprints, DNA, shoe prints, and tool marks; and information technology, 
such as the Web and databases.
223

224          INVESTIGATIONS
There are six basic questions to ask in an investigation:
1. Who? Who are the individuals involved in the particular incident being investigated? 
Names, addresses, and telephone numbers are important.
2. What happened? What is the story of the incident? For instance, what happened 
before, during, and after a theft incident?
3. Where? The location of the incident and the movement of people and objects are 
important. For example, where exactly were witnesses and the suspect when the theft 
occurred?
4. When? A notation of the times of particular activities during an incident is necessary 
for a thorough investigation. If a particular theft occurred between 7 and 8 P.M. on 
April 9, and Joe Doe is a suspect, he later can be exonerated because he really was at 
another location at that time.
5. How? The focus of this question is how the incident was able to take place in the face 
of (or absence of) loss prevention measures. After a theft, investigators often attempt 
to find out how the thief was able to circumvent security. In the case of an industrial 
accident, investigators study how the accident occurred while safety equipment was 
supposedly in use.
6. Why? This question can be difficult to answer. However, the answer can lead to the 
discovery of a pressing problem that may not be obvious. An example is seen with 
numerous losses in a manufacturing plant brought about by low employee morale. In 
this case, theft and destruction of company property can be reduced by, for example, 
increasing management’s concern for employees through praise, a sports program, 
contests, and high-quality meals in the cafeteria.
The answer to the “why” question helps to establish the motive for the loss activity. Once 
the motive is established, suspects can be eliminated. A recently fired employee would have a 
motive of retribution for setting fire to his or her former place of employment.
Investigations are not always criminal in nature, and not every investigation requires 
answering all six investigative questions. Once an investigator gathers sufficient information, a 
report is often written and submitted to a supervisor. After that, the information in the report 
results in action or inaction by supervisors and management. Typically, investigative reports 
lead to either punitive or nonpunitive action. Punitive action can include discipline or prosecu-
tion or both. Nonpunitive action can include exonerating a suspect, hiring an applicant, pro-
moting an employee, or obtaining an insurance reimbursement. Investigations can also result 
in corrective action such as an improved loss prevention program.
Investigations are unique to each type of business, institution, or organization served. 
The varieties and depths of investigations vary; they reflect management’s needs, objectives, 
and budget. The personnel involved also vary and may include company investigators, audi-
tors, IT specialists, contract investigators, public police, and attorneys. 
The following steps can guide the process of an investigation:
1. the decision to begin an investigation
2. selection of a supervisor and investigator
3. planning, objectives, and methods of investigation
4. gathering accurate facts
5. accurate, factual report to management
6. management decision making
As covered in Chapter 4, ASIS International–funded research showed that legislation 
directly affects not only organizations in general, but also private security operations (Collins 
et al., 2005). The top three acts cited in this research as having the most impact on security 
policies and procedures were the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA), the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002, and the USA Patriot Act of 2001. 
Major reasons for these laws are to protect corporate assets and prevent corporate crime. 
SOX, for example, has forced businesses to develop internal investigation teams to comply 

with regulations and improve the protection of assets and stockholder investments. This 
includes increased attention to employee theft and fraud, workplace violence, sexual harass-
ment, due diligence, and other issues (Daniels, 2006: 22–23).
Types of Investigations
There are several types of investigations in the private sector. The following list illustrates 
some of the more common ones, categorized according to the target of the investigation.
The laws or “ground rules” for each type of investigation vary. In addition, the poli-
cies of organizations guide investigations, although subservient to law. The term workplace 
investigation is a generic term focusing on a wide variety of allegations. Examples are mis-
conduct, substance abuse, and threats and violence. An applicant background investigation 
requires adherence to the laws discussed in Chapter 6. A private investigation of an alleged 
criminal offense requires knowledge of criminal law and evidence. In a private-sector criminal 
investigation, the notification of public police depends on such factors as whether company 
investigators arrested the suspect and whether management seeks to prosecute. A financial 
investigation checks on alleged fraud or embezzlement. Computer crime investigations focus 
on a variety of acts involving computers and information systems. The Internet has expanded 
the scope and complexity of these investigations. In an accident investigation, the investigator 
usually is knowledgeable about safety, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, workers’ com-
pensation insurance, and applicable laws. A major objective of a fire and arson investigation 
is to determine the probable cause of the fire. Sophisticated equipment may be used to locate 
and identify any substance employed to accelerate the fire. A civil or negligence and liability 
investigation involves, among other things, gathering evidence to determine whether a failure 
to exercise reasonable care in a situation caused harm to someone or something. For example, 
a customer (plaintiff) may seek to show that a retail store (defendant) with poor housekeeping 
caused the customer’s injury. Both the plaintiff initiating the suit and the defendant are likely 
to conduct investigations and present evidence in court. A civil court decides on both liability 
(who is responsible) for a negligent act and any obligation (money award to the plaintiff) 
enforceable by the court. Insurance investigations, which at times result in litigation, are con-
ducted to determine losses and their causes, and to assist in deciding on indemnification. Both 
the insurer and the insured may conduct separate investigations before an insurance claim is 
settled. Investigations of labor matters (e.g., workers’ activities during a strike) are often sen-
sitive. Legal counsel is necessary to guide the investigator because of associated federal and 
state laws. Due diligence is the attention and care legally expected in checking the accuracy 
of information and omissions. It can range from determining a customer’s financial status to 
assessing the desirability of acquisition targets.
Proprietary and Contract Investigations
A proprietary investigation is undertaken by an in-house company employee who performs 
investigative work. A contract investigation requires the contracting of an outside company 
(agency) to supply investigative services for a fee.
There are inadequate and varied laws regulating contract investigative employees and 
firms. However, several jurisdictions have effective regulation (e.g., requirements of license, 
residency, training, experience, no felony convictions, examination, and insurance) that protect 
clients.
For the most part, proprietary investigators are not subject to government regulation. 
Many businesses, institutions, and organizations maintain their own investigators. Large cor-
porations, utilities, insurance companies, and banks are some of the many concerns that rely 
on a large staff of proprietary investigators.
Numerous firms utilize both contract and proprietary investigators. If a large corpora-
tion has a particular season when the investigative workload is heavy, some of the extra work-
load can be assigned to a contract investigation company. This approach frees proprietary 
investigators for more pressing and specialized problems.
Types of Investigations          225

226          INVESTIGATIONS
Citizens frequently obtain a distorted picture of private investigations via television, 
which produces misconceptions that falsify the various kinds of investigative work—work 
that is interesting, exciting, and also often boring. Another misconception is that many inves-
tigators in the private sector are armed. Few are armed, and those who are rarely use their 
weapons.
Private and Public Investigations
Private investigations serve the private sector (e.g., businesses and private citizens). Public 
investigations feature public police agencies, for the most part, serving the public. Both 
investigative efforts often are entwined. This can be seen, for example, when an office build-
ing is burglarized and company investigators call local police in a joint effort to solve the 
crime. However, how much time and effort can the public police devote to the office building 
burglary in comparison to the company investigators? Public police can devote only limited 
resources to such a crime. Typically, a uniformed public police officer will arrive for a pre-
liminary investigation, and an incident report will be completed. Next, the incident report 
is transferred to a detective unit. Within a day or two, a detective arrives at the scene of the 
crime and conducts a follow-up investigation that involves gathering additional information 
and perhaps some placation, a public relations effort that assures the citizens that the police 
are doing everything possible to solve the crime. Generally, public police devote more time 
and effort to crimes against people than crimes against property.
The inability of the criminal justice system to assist adequately in private loss prevention 
efforts can also be illustrated by clearance rates, which are the proportion of cases solved by 
an arrest. Clearance rates (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2006) are higher for crimes against 
people (e.g., murder, 62%; rape, 41%; robbery, 25%) and lower for crimes against property 
(e.g., burglary, 13%; larceny, 18%). These 2005 clearance rates show a decline of from 1 to 
9% in comparison to the clearance rates of 1998 for the same types of crimes (Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, 1999). The success of private-sector investigations is difficult to gauge, since 
many firms do not prosecute and the outcome of investigations is usually confidential and 
unpublished.
Overt and Undercover Private Investigations
An overt investigation is an obvious investigation. People coming into contact with the overt 
investigator know that an investigation is taking place. A common scenario would be a com-
pany investigator, dressed in a conservative suit, arriving at the scene of a loss to interview 
employees and collect evidence. An undercover investigation (UI), on the other hand, is a 
secret investigation. In a typical approach, an undercover investigator is hired as a regular 
employee, a truck driver, for example, and collects information by associating with employees 
who are not knowledgeable about the undercover investigation. Law prohibits such investiga-
tors from collecting information on union activities.
Each type of investigation serves many useful purposes. An overt investigation that 
begins immediately after a loss shows that the loss prevention staff is on the job. This in 
itself acts as a deterrent. An overt investigation does not have to be in response to a loss; for 
example, preemployment investigations prevent losses.
An example can illustrate the usefulness of a UI. The XYZ warehouse is losing thou-
sands of dollars of merchandise every week. Management believes that employees are stealing 
the merchandise. In an effort to reduce losses, management decides to hire a private inves-
tigator. The investigator interviews numerous employees over a two-week period, but the 
case remains unsolved. An executive of the company argues to management that the private 
investigator idea is a waste. The executive points out that the private investigator is unfamiliar 
with the warehouse operations, cannot penetrate the employee informal organizations, has no 
informers, is wasting time during surveillance from another building, and has no substantial 
leads. After three weeks, the private investigator is terminated. The vocal executive argues for 
a UI. A loss prevention service company is contacted, and an undercover investigator is placed 
in the warehouse. After three weeks, the new investigator penetrates the informal employee 

organization. Four key employees are implicated and fired. Losses are reduced. The company 
decides to conduct a yearly UI as a loss prevention strategy.
Accident at Hardy Furniture Plant
The Hardy Furniture Plant provided more than 700 jobs to Clarkston residents as 
sales boomed. Most workers at the plant were satisfied with their jobs. Unfortunately, 
a group of young forklift drivers was becoming increasingly bored while transporting 
furniture throughout the plant. One day, two forklifts collided, and both drivers were 
hospitalized with broken arms and legs. The forklifts were damaged slightly; furniture 
on the forks was a total loss. Immediately, the company loss prevention staff began 
an investigation. The forklift drivers and witnesses were interviewed. All interviewees 
reported that neither forklift operator saw the other because excessive furniture on the 
forks obstructed their views. Investigators and a forklift mechanic inspected the fork-
lifts and found no irregularities.
The investigators became suspicious when all of the interviewees produced iden-
tical stories during questioning. Later, another round of questioning included nonwit-
nesses. Finally, after two weeks of persistent interviewing, the case broke when an older 
employee, loyal to the company, informed investigators that several bored employees 
bet on forklift drivers who were “playing chicken” while racing toward each other. It 
was learned that five previous contests had taken place involving hundreds of dollars 
in cash. Also, one minor accident had occurred that resulted in damaged furniture. Two 
supervisors were involved in covering up the loss of the damaged furniture.
When the investigation was complete, loss prevention investigators filled out 
appropriate reports and presented their findings to management. The two forklift driv-
ers and the two supervisors were fired.
Types of Investigations          227
Undercover Investigation of Missing Shirts
The Chester Garment Company, headquartered in New York City, experienced a loss 
of hundreds of men’s shirts at its plant in North Carolina. Company executives were 
concerned and worried because they had no experience with such losses and no loss 
prevention program.
The plant manager in North Carolina had notified the New York office that 
900 shirts were missing. Because of their limited knowledge of loss prevention strate-
gies, company executives decided to contact Harmon Lorman Associates, a company 
specializing in loss prevention and investigations. A meeting between managers of the 
investigative company and the garment company decided that an undercover investiga-
tor, assigned to the North Carolina plant, would be a wise strategy. The UI would cost 
$1,500 per week for an unspecified time period.
One week later, the investigator, Gary Stewart, arrived at the Chester Garment 
Plant in North Carolina to seek employment. The plant manager, who was the only 
plant employee who knew about the UI, hired Gary and assigned him to shipping and 
receiving.
Gary was from New York and educated at a college in North Carolina. The investi-
gative company felt that his experience, a college degree in criminal justice, and his living 
experience in the South would add up to a good background for this assignment. Anyway, 
he was the only company investigator who had lived in the South.
Harmon Lorman executives told Chester executives that Gary had been working 
with them for a year and a half. In addition, they told them that Gary had extensive expe-
rience and loss prevention training. The truth was that Gary had been recently hired with 

228          INVESTIGATIONS
six months of previous investigative experience. Gary had no previous loss prevention 
training; he had a criminal justice degree with no loss prevention or business courses.
After two weeks at the plant, Gary had established numerous contacts. His 
fictitious background (“cover”) pointed out that he grew up in Maryland and that he 
arrived at the Chester Garment plant because a friend said that he could get a job there 
while taking a semester off from college. Gary obtained North Carolina license plates 
as soon as he entered North Carolina from New York.
Gary mailed three to five reports per week to his supervisor at Harmon Lorman 
Associates. The first few reports contained background information on the plant, such 
as the plant layout and the names, addresses, telephone numbers, description of autos, 
and plate numbers of select employees. Thereafter, the reports contained informa-
tion pertaining to loss prevention features and loss vulnerabilities. Janitorial service, 
employee overtime, Saturday activities, and any unusual events were also reported.
Within three months of undercover investigation, Gary had made close contacts 
with employees and had worked in numerous assignments throughout the plant. His 
findings showed numerous instances of pilferage by many employees. Women sewing-
machine operators were hiding several manufactured shirts under their outer clothes 
immediately before the workday ended.
Gary’s reports were “edited” by his superiors and then sent to the home of one 
of Chester Garment’s executives. After three months, Chester Garment executives 
became impatient. They wanted better quality results and threatened to terminate the 
investigation.
Harmon Lorman executives assured Chester Garment executives that “a break in 
the case was imminent.” Increased pressure was put on investigator Gary Stewart, who 
realized that the investigation was being prolonged for profit. He responded by withhold-
ing information from reports for dry spells when good information was unavailable. As 
the investigation went on, the report quality went down.
Finally, after two more weeks, Chester Garment executives ordered an inventory 
at the plant. Surprisingly, half of the missing shirts were accounted for and a previous 
inventory was criticized as inaccurate. The undercover investigation was terminated. 
Gary returned to New York.
What type of investigative work do you think you would prefer as a career?
Important Considerations
The following considerations relate to investigations in general:
1. The supervision of investigators must be adequate to produce tangible results. Rarely 
will a supervisor/investigator ratio of 1 to 20 prove adequate. Investigators may 
require close supervision by attorneys and other specialists.
2. Sensitive and confidential information must be safeguarded.
3. Information resulting from investigations can be used to improve loss prevention 
efforts and reduce vulnerabilities. For example, if machine shop workers are 
constantly stealing company tools, then it may be a good idea to have all workers 
provide their own tools.
4. Investigations can support the loss prevention budget by documenting vulnerabilities 
and losses.
5. Investigations should be cost effective. If an investigation costs more than the loss, the 
expense of the investigation may not be worthwhile. For example, the loss of a box of 
pencils is not worth an investigator’s time when losses that are more serious are occurring.

Law          229
6. Although computer crimes can be committed remotely, modern technology also permits 
investigations to be conducted remotely. For example, instead of an investigator visiting 
stores to check out CCTV videos of cashier-customer transactions, a system can link 
CCTV with register data to be viewed together on-line.
7. The investigator’s job is to collect information and facts. Supervisors and managers 
decide what to do with the investigative results.
8. An investigation may be required of senior management because of criminal, civil, or 
regulatory misconduct. Authorization and direction for such a sensitive investigation 
may come from the corporate board of directors.
Law
Knowledge of law is indispensable to the investigative process. For example, as explained 
in Chapter 6, the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1971 and the Fair and Accurate Credit 
Transaction Act of 2003 guide investigations of employment applicants and incidents involv-
ing employees in the workplace.
Another important area of law pertains to electronic surveillance (electronic devices 
used to listen to conversations) and wiretapping (listening to telephone communications). 
The U.S. Supreme Court has called these techniques a “dirty business.” Generally, both 
are prohibited unless under court authority. However, because of the difficulty of detection 
and the advantages in information gathering, some private (and public) sector investigators 
violate the law. Federal law imposes a $10,000 fine and up to five years in prison for these 
offenses. In addition, a lawsuit may occur. Although private conversations of two parties 
cannot be recorded unless under court order, if one of the parties approves, recordings are 
legal. Examples include one party cooperating with an investigation or serving as an UI. An 
employee in the workplace, using a company telephone (or computer), does not generally 
have an expectation of privacy, especially if the employer informs employees of monitoring.
Conflict of interest is another concern. An example of conflict of interest can be 
seen when a full-time public police officer works part-time for a private investigative firm. 
Generally, states prohibit one person from holding dual commissions (i.e., public police com-
mission and private investigator license). The Report of the Task Force on Private Security 
(U.S. Department of Justice, 1976: 238) states that “a citizen might file a defamation-of-char-
acter suit against a city, law enforcement agency, or officer by claiming that surveillance con-
ducted by an off-duty law enforcement officer working as a private investigator gave others 
the impression he was the target of a law enforcement criminal investigation.” Other issues 
can evolve, such as a suspect’s rights during  questioning by a public police officer working 
part-time in private security. The task force recommended that public police officers should 
be “strictly forbidden” from performing private-sector investigative work.
Poorly executed investigations can result in liability. In one case, a bank investigator 
believed that a loan manager had mob connections and an investigation was conducted, 
resulting in termination. Police brought charges, but the judge dismissed the case on 
groundless charges, and the manager sued and was awarded damages. In another case, an 
oil company terminated an agent who was manipulating prices, but the prosecutor declined 
to bring charges because of insufficient evidence. When a truck driver stated to someone 
that the agent was a “thief,” the agent sued for slander. Investigators can protect themselves 
from slander and libel by the use of privilege when issuing reports. Qualified privilege per-
mits defamatory statements if made in the discharge of duty and without malice. At one 
company, an employee was fired for a security violation and sued by claiming defamation 
from a security report, but the court held that the investigator was responsible for reporting 
security breaches, that she acted within her authority, and that her report was privileged. 
Attorney/client privilege (also referred to as confidential communications) is another form 
of protection. It involves statements between persons who have a necessary relation of trust 
to help communication. The statements cannot be disclosed. To facilitate this privilege, 
investigators should ensure that reports are issued directly to counsel. However, the best 
defense is accurate reports (Ray, 2000: 94).

230          INVESTIGATIONS
Roman (2005), an attorney, offers suggestions of what to avoid during workplace investi-
gations. Failure to investigate cases of discrimination or harassment can result in liability 
under antidiscrimination laws. Courts have held that no investigation was evidence that the 
employer acted with “malice or reckless indifference.” Using a biased investigator can harm 
a case. Examples include assigning an investigator from the accused’s chain of command 
and following up on leads from the accused, but not from the accuser. Roman emphasizes 
the importance of conducting thorough, objective, and unbiased investigations. To avoid 
claims for defamation and invasion of privacy, the employer and investigator should disclose 
 information only on a “need to know” basis. To prevent loss of credibility as an investigator, 
do not state to the accused that the accuser is a chronic complainer or whiner.
Reibold (2005: 18–29), an attorney, writes of the legal liabilities of hiring private inves-
tigators (PIs). Those who hire PIs can be held vicariously liable for torts committed by PIs, 
directly liable for actions of PIs, and negligent in hiring and supervising them. A lawsuit may 
be directed at an employer, a law firm, and a PI agency. Lawsuits against PIs and those who 
hire them may involve trespass, invasion of privacy, infliction of emotional distress, assault 
and battery, and conversion after gathering garbage from a subject’s trash container. The 
defense argument that the PI was an independent contractor has been rejected by courts.
Reibold offers the following suggestions when screening a PI firm: ensure the PI is properly 
licensed; request references; determine if the PI is a member of a professional association that pro-
motes ethics; use a Freedom of Information Act request to the state regulatory authority to check 
on the PI; require the PI to contractually indemnify the entity hiring the PI; and upon verifying 
the PI’s liability insurance, request that the PI add the entity hiring the PI to the policy.
Evidence
Laws govern the introduction of evidence into judicial proceedings to ensure fairness and due 
process. Evidence law is contained in federal and state constitutions, statutes, and case law.
There are several classifications of evidence. Direct evidence directly proves or disproves 
a fact without drawing an inference (i.e., conclusion). Examples are a confession, an eyewit-
ness identification of a suspect, and physical evidence (e.g., contraband in possession of the 
accused). Circumstantial evidence indirectly proves or disproves a fact and an inference must 
be made. Examples are a statement by the accused that he or she was with the victim right 
before the victim was murdered, and physical evidence, such as fingerprints and DNA found 
at a crime scene (Gardner and Anderson, 2007: 62–63). Another type of evidence is hearsay 
evidence. It is second-hand information or what someone heard. Courts favor first-hand 
information through personal observation or the use of other senses. Hearsay evidence is 
generally inadmissible in court, although there are exceptions, such as a dying declaration or 
a spontaneous declaration by an offender following a crime.
The accountability of physical evidence, especially before it reaches a court of law, can 
have a definite impact on a case. The chain of custody of evidence must be maintained. This 
refers to the written accountability of persons having possession of evidence from its initial 
discovery, through judicial proceedings, and to its final location. A loss scene should be pro-
tected, photographed, videotaped, and sketched before evidence is touched. The proper label-
ing, packaging, and storage of evidence is equally important. The accountability of evidence 
often is brought forth in court. Attorneys are sure to scrutinize the paperwork and procedures 
associated with the evidence. The following questions are among the many frequently asked 
in court. Who saw the evidence first? Who touched it first? Where was it taken? By whom? 
How was it stored? Was the storage area locked? Who had the keys or access code?
International Perspective: Overseas Investigations
Global business has resulted in increasing demand for overseas investigations. Such 
investigations are conducted for a variety of reasons, including potential locations for 

investment (see the Chapter 16 box titled “International Perspective: Supply Chain 
Risks and Security”). The following information provides tips and guidelines for over-
seas investigations (Van Nostrand and Luizzo, 1995: 33–35).
Carefully plan and check with the following U.S. agencies on the Web:
• U.S. Department of State ensures that passports are current and valid for all 
countries not off limits to U.S. citizens. Some countries require a special visa. 
Fact sheets on-line are provided on many countries and include information on 
such topics as political stability and crime.
• Central Intelligence Agency maintains fact books on countries.
• U.S. Department of Health and Human Services determines whether travel to 
particular countries requires immunization.
• U.S. Department of Commerce publishes information to alert U.S. citizens to 
countries that may be dangerous to U.S. travelers.
• Because legal systems vary among countries, a major rule in conducting a 
foreign investigation is to study the legal and policing system of the respective 
country.
• Investigations are fundamentally about personal interaction, so another major 
rule is to study and understand the host culture and try to speak some of the 
language.
• The international investigator who travels to many countries and freely 
investigates is actually Hollywood fantasy. Foreign countries do not permit 
such activities and neither does the U.S. Department of State. Without careful 
research, an investigator can find himself or herself in jail in a foreign country.
• An option is to work with an official of the foreign country, such as a police 
official or attorney, or contract the investigation to an investigator in that 
country. The key is to select someone who has experience in the country, has 
reliable contacts, and speaks the language.
• Avoid bringing a firearm to a foreign country. Illegal possession of a firearm 
aboard any U.S. airline is a felony.
Another source is the Overseas Security Advisory Council (n.d.). OSAC “is a 
Federal Advisory Committee with a U.S. Government Charter to promote security 
cooperation between American business and private sector interests worldwide and 
the U.S. Department of State. OSAC currently encompasses the 34-member core 
Council, an Executive Office, over 100 Country Councils, and more than 3,500 con-
stituent member organizations and 372 associates.” The objectives of OSAC are to 
facilitate cooperation between State Department security functions and the private 
sector, exchange information on the overseas security environment and suggestions for 
security planning, and recommend methods to protect the competitiveness of American 
businesses operating worldwide.
Interviewing and Interrogation
Interviewing and interrogation are methods of gathering information from people. During an 
interview, the suspect supplies information willingly; but during an interrogation, the suspect 
is often unwilling. The investigator needs to know the techniques associated with each type 
of situation. Although a few recognized training programs focus on conducting interviews 
and interrogations, no single method holds all the answers and is applicable in all situations. 
Investigators often use a variety of methods.
Why are interviews or interrogations conducted? A primary reason is to learn the truth. 
Other reasons are to obtain evidence or a confession to aid in prosecution, eliminate suspects, 
recover property, and obtain information that results in corrective action. This chapter 
Interviewing and Interrogation          231

232          INVESTIGATIONS
emphasizes investigations in the private sector, although many of the ideas presented are used 
in public-sector investigations.
The preliminaries include
1. Maintaining records
2. Planning the questioning
3. Making an appointment, if necessary
4. If a procedure or law question arises, consulting with a superior or an attorney
5. Questioning in privacy, if possible, and ensuring that the interviewee can leave when 
he or she chooses
6. Making sure someone of the same sex as the interviewee is present
7. Identifying yourself to the interviewee
8. Openly recording the questioning, if possible
Regarding the interviewee:
1. Consider the interviewee’s background, intelligence, education, biases, and emotional 
state.
2. Communicate on the same level.
3. Watch for nervousness, perspiration, and fidgeting.
4. Reluctance to talk can indicate that the interviewee feels the need to protect himself or 
herself or others.
5. Responding freely can indicate that the interviewee may need to relieve guilt or may 
want to cause problems for an enemy not involved in the loss.
The objectives of the investigator include
1. Establishing good rapport (e.g., asking, “How are you?”)
2. Maintaining good public relations
3. Maintaining eye contact
4. Not jumping to conclusions
5. Maintaining an open mind
6. Listening attentively
7. Being perceptive to every comment and any slips of the tongue
8. Maintaining perseverance
9. Controlling the interview
10. Carefully analyzing hearsay
Strategies by the investigator include the following:
1. Asking open-ended questions, those questions that require lengthy answers—for example, 
“What happened at the plant before the accident?” Close-ended questions require short 
yes or no answers that limit responses—for example, “Were you close to the accident?”
2. Maintaining silence makes many interviewees feel uncomfortable. Silence by an 
investigator, after an interviewee answers an open-ended question, may cause the 
interviewee to begin talking again.
3. Building up interviewee memory by having the interviewee relate the story of an 
incident from its beginning.
4. To test honesty, asking questions to which you know the answers.
5. Using trickery. For example, stating that the suspect’s fingerprints were found at the 
crime scene. In Frazier v. Cupp 394 US 731 (1969), the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the 
use of false information to obtain a confession.
The reader probably is familiar with movies and television programs that portray the 
interrogation process as a “third degree,” in which one bright light hangs over the seated 
suspect in a dark room and investigators stand around constantly asking questions and using 
violence when they try to “break” the suspect. Court action against police has curbed this 
abuse. However, because of the unpleasant connotations associated with interrogations, for 

the private sector, to prevent litigation, a less threatening term such as intensive interview is 
more appropriate.
During interrogation or intensive interview (an extension of the interview)
1. Discuss the seriousness of the incident.
2.  Request the story several times. Some investigators request the story backward to 
catch inconsistencies.
3.  Appeal to emotions; for example, “Everybody makes mistakes. You are not the first 
person who has been in trouble. Don’t you want to clear your conscience?”
4. Point out inconsistencies in statements.
5. Confront the interviewee with some of the evidence.
Polygraph: Proper Testing Procedures under the Employee 
Polygraph Protection Act
In the course of a workplace investigation, an employer cannot suggest to employees the 
possible use of a polygraph instrument until these 10 conditions are satisfied:
1. Economic loss or injury. The employer must administer the test as part of an 
investigation of a specific incident involving economic loss or injury to the busi-
ness, such as theft or sabotage.
2. Access. The employee who is to be tested must have had access to the property 
that is the subject of the investigation.
3. Reasonable suspicion. The employer must have a reasonable suspicion of the 
worker’s involvement in the incident under investigation.
4. Before the test, an employer’s failure to adhere to guidelines can void a test and 
subject the employer to fines and liability. The employee who is to be tested 
must be notified in writing at least 48 hours, not counting weekends and holi-
days, prior to the test:
• Where and when the examination will take place
• The specific matter under investigation
• The basis for concluding that the employee had access to the property being 
investigated
• The reason the employer suspects the employee of involvement
• The employee’s right to consult with legal counsel or an employee 
representative before each phase of the test
Also before the test, the employee must be provided with the following:
•  Oral and written notice explaining the nature of the polygraph, its physical 
operation, and the test procedure
• Copies of all questions that will be asked during the test
•  Oral and written notice, in language understood by the employee and bearing 
the employee’s signature, advising the worker of his or her rights under the EPPA
5. Procedural requirements for polygraph examinations include the following:
• The test must last at least 90 minutes unless the examinee terminates the test.
• Either party, employer or employee, can record the test with the other’s 
knowledge.
Why would a private security investigator choose to “interview” rather than “interrogate”?
Interviewing and Interrogation          233

234          INVESTIGATIONS
• Questions cannot pertain to religious, political, or racial matters; sexual 
behavior; or beliefs, affiliations, or lawful activities related to unions or 
labor organizations; and they cannot be asked in a degrading or needlessly 
intrusive manner.
• A worker can be excused from a test with a physician’s written advisement 
that the subject suffers from a medical or psychological condition or is 
undergoing treatment that might cause abnormal responses during the 
examination.
• An employee has the right to consult with counsel before, during, and 
after the examination but not to have counsel present during the actual 
examination.
• An employee must be advised that his or her confessions may be grounds for 
firing or demotion and that the employer may share admissions of criminal 
conduct with law enforcement officials.
• A worker can terminate or refuse to take a test and cannot be demoted or 
fired for doing so. But, the employer can demote or fire the worker if he or 
she has enough separate supporting evidence to justify taking that action.
 6.  After the test, the employee has a right to a written copy of the tester’s opinion, 
copies of the questions and corresponding replies, and an opportunity to dis-
cuss the results with the employer before an employer can take action against 
a worker based on the test results. An employee may be disciplined, fired, or 
demoted on the basis of the test results if the employer has supporting evidence, 
which can include the evidence gathered to support the decision to administer 
the test, to justify such action. Test results cannot be released to the public, 
only to the employee or his or her designate; the employer; a court, government 
agency, arbitrator, or mediator (by court order); or appropriate government 
agency if disclosure is admission of criminal conduct (without court order). 
The examiner may show test results, without identifying information, to other 
examiners in order to obtain second opinions.
 7.  Qualifications of examiners. An employer can be liable for an examiner’s 
failure to meet requirements, which cover licensing, bonding, or professional 
liability coverage; testing guidelines; and formation of opinions.
 8.  Waiving employee rights. A worker cannot be tested—even at his or her insis-
tence—if the employer cannot meet procedural requirements and prove rea-
sonable suspicion and access. Employees may not waive their rights under the 
EPPA except in connection with written settlement of a lawsuit or pending legal 
action.
 9.  State law and collective bargaining agreements. The EPPA does not preempt 
any state or local law or collective bargaining agreement that is more restric-
tive than the act.
10.  Record-keeping requirement. Records of polygraph exams should be kept for at 
least three years by the employer and the examiner, who must make them avail-
able—within 72 hours upon request—to the Department of Labor.
Source: U.S. Chamber of Commerce. See Chapter 6 for the Employee Polygraph 
Protection Act of 1988.
Information Sources
Traditional information sources include interviewing people in person; traveling to a govern-
ment agency, library, or other location to comb through records and information; obtaining 
information over the telephone; and conducting surveillance. Additionally, the Internet has 

made it easier than ever to investigate personal and business information. For a nominal fee, 
a variety of information can be obtained with a computer from the comfort of one’s office or 
home, as illustrated here:
www.pimall.com/
This excellent site offers a wealth of information and links to information brokers, 
private investigators (PIs), a PI store, PI associations, training, and magazines.
www.ussearch.com/
This site can be used to locate someone, conduct a background check, trace phone 
numbers, obtain a satellite photo, and seek the following records: criminal, 
Department of Corrections, court, real estate, bankruptcies, divorce, and death. 
Business searches include due diligence and verification of professional licenses.
www.datahawk.com/
This site is similar to the preceding sites; costs are readily available.
www.teldir.com/
To check for people outside the United States, this site has links to Yellow Pages, White 
Pages, business directories, e-mail listings, and more from more than 150 countries.
global.lexisnexis.com/about.aspx
This site offers an extensive search of legal, news, and business sources.
www.dnb.com
Offers a variety of business information.
One problem with these databases is selecting the most appropriate information 
broker. Another problem is that data may not be verified. In addition, the scope of the 
search must be considered. What geographic area and what months or years were searched? 
Information brokers must adhere to legal restrictions and should provide such guidelines 
to clients.
Despite the problems with databases, such information sources are used in a variety 
of ways by security practitioners. One airport security director uses such databases to 
locate owners of vehicles abandoned in the airport’s parking lots. Another security practi-
tioner conducts asset searches of employees suspected of fraud; a database may show that 
an employee earning $45,000 per year has purchased a $600,000 house.
For those security practitioners who outsource information searches to PIs or other 
firms, evaluations of vendors are necessary to gauge adherence to legal and ethical standards, 
accuracy, completeness, timeliness, cost, and other consumer requirements.
Legal Restrictions When Collecting Information
Investigator ability to obtain usable information in today’s privacy-protected environment has 
been reduced. In earlier years, the “old boy” network was in greater use. It consists of employ-
ees in both the public and private sectors who informally assist each other with information. 
For example, a retired police officer joins an investigative firm and contacts friends from the 
police agency where he or she was previously employed to obtain criminal history information 
on individuals subject to a private-sector investigation. There have been indictments against 
people involved in acquiring nonpublic information.
The reality of information acquisition is that no information is totally secure from 
unauthorized acquisition. Although difficult to measure, information is periodically 
obtained in an unethical or illegal manner. For example, a private-sector investigator pays 
money to an employee of a bank to secure nonpublic information about an individual. This 
activity should be condemned because it violates individual rights and laws.
Another problem for the investigator results when he or she mistakenly collects information 
that is not usable in court. In litigation, information improperly obtained and not authenticated or 
certified by the respective agency could subject a litigation team to civil or criminal action, unless 
the records are subpoenaed or are part of a court action (civil or criminal). Another challenge is 
waiting for a Freedom of Information Law request to obtain documents, which can take as long 
as a year. The Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) grants citizens access to public documents 
Information Sources          235

236          INVESTIGATIONS
because an informed electorate is essential to safeguard democracy and because publicity is a pro-
tection against official misconduct. This law requires all federal agency documents to be publicly 
disclosed, unless exempted. This law also recognizes the need to restrict intrusions into a private 
individual’s affairs.
The Internet as a Liability and an Asset
Here, we illustrate how the Internet can harm and help businesses. First, we see how 
a manager was scammed, and then we see how corporations can protect themselves 
against extremist groups.
Care should be exercised with the Internet because it contains a variety of 
fraudulent information. Internet fraud is rising rapidly and the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), a federal regulatory agency that enforces laws to reduce financial 
fraud, has reported many cases of individuals and companies attempting to deceive 
investors and others through the Internet. In one case, a credit manager tried the 
Internet to investigate the creditworthiness of a customer seeking a large order of 
computer components. The manager checked the Web site of the customer and found 
impressive graphics, solid financial data, multiple corporate locations across the coun-
try, impressive biographies of corporate executives, and testimonials (with links) to 
customers and vendors. Following this research, the manager knew that his days of 
spending hours on the telephone checking credit references were over, and he approved 
the large order. When the bill was past due, he called the customer, but the telephone 
had been disconnected, and he checked the Web site, but it was gone. He was vic-
timized by a scam that set up the Web site on an Internet service provider (ISP) host 
instead of obtaining a domain name. The scammers paid for their ISP account with 
a stolen credit card number. The testimonials were e-mail links to confederates. The 
“ship to” address was leased space paid for by a check from a shell corporation with 
a bank account established with fraudulent identification. All the merchandise was 
gone. To prevent such victimization, obtain business credit reports, use the SEC’s data-
base (http://www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm), enter PR Newswire (http://www.prnewswire.
com/), type the company name into your favorite search engines, use the telephone to 
check credit and other references, and consider a thorough investigation by a specialist 
(Mendell, 1999: 130).
On the other hand, the Internet is a useful source of information to protect per-
sonnel and businesses against extremist groups. Activists, for example, are known to 
place their plans (e.g., demonstrations) on-line. Security practitioners should conduct 
on-line searches by entering key words such as “anticapitalism” and “socialism.” 
Research “sucks.com” sites such as “walmart-sucks.com” that have been created to 
vent at companies. Through these searches, corporations will be better prepared to 
protect people and assets (Snow, 2000: 60–64).
Identity Theft
Identity theft is the illegal acquisition of another individual’s personal identifying information 
to be used fraudulently for illegal gain. The Bureau of Justice Statistics reported that in 2004, 
3.6 million households, representing 3% of the households in the United States, discovered 
that at least one member of the household was  victimized by identity theft during the previ-
ous 6 months (Baum, 2006: 1). The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) reported that in 2003, 
identity theft cost consumers $3.8  billion and businesses $32.9 billion (Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, Financial Crimes Section, 2005). There are many ways in which an offender 
can steal personal and business information, and there are many types of crimes committed 
by using such information.

Traditional methods of obtaining personal and business information include looking over 
another’s shoulder at a bank or ATM; searching trash (i.e., “dumpster diving”); impersonation 
over the telephone; stealing a wallet or mail; fraudulently ordering a copy of a victim’s credit 
record; or going to a cemetery to locate a deceased person whose age, if living, would approximate 
the offender’s age and securing documents to develop the identity. The Internet has expanded the 
opportunities to steal identities. As we know from previous pages, various Web sites offer a wealth 
of personal information. In addition, hackers penetrate corporate databases and e-commerce Web 
sites and download credit card numbers. ChoicePoint, a huge data broker, unwittingly sold con-
sumer ID information to offenders posing as businesspersons. Other companies, such as Bank of 
America, Time Warner, Wachovia, MCI, and Ameritrade, have lost data on millions of customers 
(Brenner, 2005: 4–5). Phishing is another threat; it is a word coined from the analogy that offend-
ers use e-mail bait to fish for personal information. The technique often uses spam or pop-up 
messages that trick people into disclosing a variety of sensitive identification information.
An offender can use a victim’s identity to secure credit cards, open bank and checking 
accounts, apply for a loan, purchase and sell a home or car, establish cellular service, file for 
bankruptcy, obtain a job, seek workers’ compensation, file a lawsuit, and commit a crime in 
the victim’s name. The possible offenses are endless, and victims often learn about the identity 
theft months after it occurred.
Congress passed the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 to make iden-
tity theft a federal crime. This crime is investigated by the FBI, the U.S. Postal Service, and the U.S. 
Secret Service. To increase consumer awareness of identity theft, the FTC created the Identity Theft 
Clearinghouse. It collects complaints from victims and offers resources to restore credit.
Personal protection strategies include the following:
• Protect personal and financial information in public, over the telephone, and on-line. 
Carry only necessary ID.
• Closely study bills and completely destroy unneeded papers containing personal 
information.
• When making on-line transactions, be sure they are made over secure, encrypted 
connections and verify the address and telephone numbers on Web sites.
• If you have been victimized, contact creditors, the three major credit reporting 
agencies (Equifax, 800–525–6285; Experian, 888–397–3742; and TransUnion, 800–
680–7289), and file a report (and obtain a copy) with police.
Organizational strategies that protect proprietary information also help to protect busi-
ness financial information and customer information. Information security for organizations 
is explained later in this book.
Investigative Leads
Investigative work requires patience and perseverance, and difficult cases often tax the abilities 
of investigators as they search for answers. Investigative leads are aids to the investigator.
Scene of the Loss
A search of the scene of a loss can provide answers to investigative questions. Offenders at a 
crime scene often leave something (e.g., fingerprints) or take something with them (e.g., stolen 
item), either of which ties them to the crime.
Because RFID tags are increasingly being attached to consumer goods, evidence (e.g., 
knife) at a crime scene may contain such a tag, and the tag can possibly be traced through 
the supply chain to a retailer. If the item was purchased with a bankcard or other digital ID, 
the customer can possibly be identified. RFID tags can also be applied to chain of custody 
requirements of evidence.
The loss scene requires protection from unauthorized persons. Photographs, video, 
and sketches should be made without disturbing the characteristics of the scene and before 
evidence is removed.
Investigative Leads          237

238          INVESTIGATIONS
Offenders at a crime scene often leave something or take something with them, either 
of which ties them to the crime.
Victims
Care and empathy for victims are essential in the investigative process. However, sometimes 
the victim is an offender. Good leads can be obtained by checking the background of the 
victim. The victim can be a business or organization or a person. A person owning a failing 
business may have perpetrated an accident, arson, or other crime to collect on an insurance 
policy. A male employee may falsely claim that he was attacked at work by his wife’s lover. 
Sometimes employees are hurt off the job but are able to go to work, claim injury on the job, 
and hope for improved compensation. In most instances, the victim is not an offender; how-
ever, the investigator must maintain an open mind.
Motive
The motive behind a loss is an important consideration. Questions of concern include 
these: Who will gain from the loss? Are there any ulterior motives? What types of persons 
would create such a loss? Why? The investigator also must recognize that the human 
factor may not be involved in the loss. Equipment malfunction or weather may be the 
cause.
Witnesses
Investigative leads frequently are acquired from witnesses. Good interviewing is important and 
can turn up valuable leads.
Informants
Why do informants divulge information? Sometimes, they do so because they are seeking 
favors or money, because they see it as their duty, or because they want to get someone 
in trouble (e.g., competitor, unfaithful lover). Informants often supply misinformation 
to investigators. An investigator can test an informant by asking questions to which he 
or she knows the answers. An investigator must never become too involved with infor-
mants or perform any unethical or criminal activity to acquire information. Obviously, 
an informant’s identity must be protected, unless a court requires otherwise. Many inves-
tigators (private and public) have money in their budgets specifically designed to pay 
informants for information. (Chapter 7 explains loss reporting and reward system.) A 
common practice of investigators is to catch an individual in violation of a rule or law 
but not seek punishment (e.g., prosecute) if that individual supplies the investigator with 
useful information.
Modus Operandi
MO stands for modus operandi, or method of operation. An investigator may ask, “What 
method was used by the burglar?” Because people differ, they commit crimes in different 
ways. Many police departments have MO files on offenders. When a crime takes place, inves-
tigators may check the MO files for suspects who are known to commit crimes in a certain 
way. A particular offender may use a specific tool during a burglary. A robber may wear a 
unique style of clothing during robberies. A saboteur at a manufacturing plant may be using 
a particular type of wire cutter. Sometimes, a rare MO is discovered—for example, a burglar 
who defecates at the crime scene.

Computers and Software
Computers and various types of software assist investigators. Artificial intelligence uses software 
and databases containing a variety of stored investigative information to analyze data to link crime 
scene evidence to a suspect. Data mining seeks useful information from a large amount of informa-
tion or databases to develop patterns and anomalies. With enormous amounts of data (e.g., travel 
records, expense accounts, and telephone and e-mail records) available to investigators, data min-
ing saves time. Link analysis is especially helpful with complex investigations. It also involves large 
amounts of information and seeks commonalties and relationships among, for example, people, 
organizations, and geographic locations.
Harold (2006: 66–72) emphasizes the value of data mining. He writes that an investiga-
tor, who is able to ask the right questions, and a computer programmer, who is able to trans-
late the questions into effective code, can produce answers for investigations. He explains the 
case of an employee thief who stole valuables in an office building of 5,000 employees. The 10 
victims had worked all hours of the day and night, weekends, and one holiday. The building 
could be entered only with an access card, and there were 65 access points. All entries were 
recorded in the access control computer. One and a half million access control records were 
used to form a database. Then a table was created containing the distinct dates, times, victims, 
and building locations of the thefts. With millions of records to review, there was only one 
query for the database: Who was in the building when all the thefts occurred? One employee 
was revealed who was targeted for further investigation and eventually prosecuted.
The Identi-Kit, which police have used for years, consists of hundreds of overlays of 
facial features (e.g., eyes, noses, chins) that a victim or witness selects to create a drawing of 
the suspect. Computer-aided identification software uses the same principle and stores more 
than 100,000 facial features.
Digital Investigations and Evidence
Digital evidence is electronically stored records or information located on a computer, server, 
storage network, or other media. Investigators are finding that the locations of digital evi-
dence are varied. Besides computers, laptops, and personal digital assistants (PDAs), digital 
evidence may also be found in such devices as digital cameras, cell phones, MP3 players, 
iPods, Xboxes, DVD players that contain hard drives, and even a mouse that has features 
similar to a flash storage drive. Ordinary items such as watches and pens can also be suspect 
and hold memory cards. In addition, because of wireless technology, a wireless hard drive can 
be hidden almost anywhere (Bartolomie, 2005: 5).
Digital forensics is the application of investigative and scientific skills and specialized tools 
and software to examine digital media to collect evidence. Investigators preserve a digital crime 
scene by making a copy of the data and then search for evidence from such sources as e-mails and 
files, which may be hidden or deleted. Digital forensics is a growing field supporting investiga-
tors who seek evidence in cases involving Internet abuse, fraud, extortion, cyberattacks, theft of 
confidential information, intelligence, sexual harassment, child pornography, on-line defamation, 
breach of contract, negligence, insurance claims, and other areas.
The following list offers guidelines for digital evidence (Lang, 2005: 55–74; Mallery, 
2005: 44–50):
• For the workplace, policies and procedures are important to ensure that employees 
know that the company owns workstations, company information, IT systems, data, and 
hard-copy files, and that monitoring and searches may occur.
• Avoid assigning the IT department to investigate because the investigation should be 
objective and the IT department should not examine its own department.
• Usually, begin cybercrime investigations internally instead of contacting public police 
immediately.
• Large entities often maintain a digital forensic department, separate from IT. Smaller 
concerns outsource.
Investigative Leads          239

240          INVESTIGATIONS
• The International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists and the 
International Society of Forensic Computer Examiners both offer certifications that 
enhance professionalism and competence.
• Management must decide whether to contact police during the investigation. Cases 
involving embezzlement at a public company or child pornography are examples of 
cases requiring police notification.
• If an employee refuses to give up personal property (e.g., iPod) that contains evidence, 
seek assistance from public police. A search warrant may be the next step.
• Once items are seized, maintain a chain of custody. Company policies and procedures 
should ensure proper handling and preservation of digital evidence so it is not altered 
or destroyed. For example, special techniques can produce an exact copy of the media 
that is then used to conduct the examination.
• Opposing counsel in a case is sure to attack the evidence and how it was handled and 
examined. To comply with Federal Rules of Evidence (e.g., Rule 702), a digital forensic 
examiner must build case testimony from a foundation of documented science, accepted 
procedures, and reliability. The National Institute for Standards and Technology tests 
commercial forensic products, and the results can assist experts.
Donnelly (2005: 59–61) writes that iPods—those trendy music players—provide 
offenders with huge storage capacity as portable hard drives. These devices are becom-
ing more frequent in the workplace and enable offenders to copy sensitive data. Donnelly 
describes one case in which police served a search warrant at the home of a suspect book-
keeper. As police collected computers, hard drives, and other related equipment, they noticed 
an iPod and it was also seized. Forensic examiners at a lab examined the suspect’s equipment, 
except the iPod, and found no evidence of embezzlement. Careful to treat the iPod as any 
other external hard drive and to preserve its integrity, an examiner made a complete copy of 
the iPod’s hard drive, to be used for examination. It contained two data partitions: one held 
music and the other held data files of illegal financial transactions (i.e., the evidence used 
for prosecution).
Interestingly, an iPod can be used as a mobile forensic device once it is configured and 
loaded with forensic software. Such a device avoids bringing bulky equipment into the field. 
Add-ons include voice-recording capability and a camera connection to download photos to 
the iPod for storage (Donnelly, 2005: 61–62).
Rules involving cell phones, camera phones, and other personal electronic devices 
should be included in workplace policies and procedures and communicated to employees. 
Generally, security personnel cannot seize a personal device such as a cell phone that may con-
tain evidence. Public police can be called for assistance, and they would follow such guidelines 
as listed next (Dunnagan and Schroader, 2006: 46–53):
• Public police must have a search warrant prior to seizing and searching a device, or 
obtain a signed consent form.
• Do not change the condition of evidence. If the cell phone is on or off, do not change it.
• Bring the device, power and other cables, and all accessory devices to a lab for 
processing. Use forensically sound software and tools and validate evidence. No one 
software package can examine all cell phones.
• Text messages that pass through a messaging center may remain on a server for only a 
few days, so process the device as soon as possible.
• Place a seized cell phone in a Faraday bag to block all wireless signals; an alternative 
is aluminum foil. This prevents data from being remotely erased.
Nagosky (2005:1–9), of the FBI, writes about digital photos. He notes that film-based 
photos can be manipulated by, for example, selection of exposure times, or by crop and splice, 
whereby two different negatives are combined. To counter such manipulation, a negative can 
be requested. Digital photos are also subject to manipulation by, for example, adding and 
deleting items. Detection of manipulation is through, for example, density of the image based 
on light exposure and splice lines. Nagosky offers these recommendations for digital photos as 

evidence: preserve the original; concentrate on integrity of the image (i.e., chain of custody); 
store it on a compact disc that can be written to only once and then is only readable; and 
limit access to files.
Gips (2005: 26–28) reports on the Digital Video Evidence System (DVES) that has the 
potential to ensure the integrity of digital video and photographs. Developed by researchers 
at John Hopkins University, the process is touted as easy to use, inexpensive, and invulner-
able to attack. The process is described as equal to signed evidence tape for bits of data. 
An algorithm extracts data from digital video and creates something like a digital fingerprint 
of each frame, followed by encryption. These digital signatures are stored separately from 
the video footage. An investigator would record evidence with a camcorder and then attach 
the camcorder to a small computer that would generate a digital signature and store the data 
on a memory stick. The investigator would then enter his or her ID card and code on the 
small computer.
Another topic related to digital evidence is the eDiscovery amendments to the Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure that became effective December 1, 2006. These rules address corporate 
electronically stored information (ESI) that may be subpoenaed in a civil case. Such informa-
tion includes e-mail, voice mail, and data on computer drives. To avoid court sanctions and an 
adverse settlement, a corporate team (e.g., attorney, IT specialist, CSO) must adhere to the rules 
by identifying, preserving, and producing ESI. The rules require parties to meet early on discovery 
of ESI and allow a request for limiting ESI discovery if sufficient detail and costs are provided as 
to why compliance is burdensome (Plante, 2007: 20).
Surveillance
Surveillance, watching or observing, is an investigative aid used widely to acquire informa-
tion. Among the kinds of cases in which surveillance is helpful are these examples: assembly 
line workers are suspected of stealing merchandise; an employee is suspected of passing trade 
secrets to another company; truck drivers, while on their routes, experience unexplainable losses 
between company facilities; and an employee, claiming to be unable to work because of an on-
the-job accident, is observed building an extension on his home.
Two major kinds of surveillance are stationary and moving. Stationary surveillance 
requires the investigator to remain in one spot while observing—for example, an investiga-
tor sitting in an auto watching a suspect’s house. This type can be tedious and frustrating. In 
moving surveillance, investigators follow a suspect—for example, tailing a truck driver whose 
cargo was “lost.”
During surveillance, an investigator must be careful not to attract attention. The person 
being watched usually has the advantage and can attempt to lose the investigator through a 
variety of quick moves (e.g., going out a back door, jumping on a bus, driving through a red 
light). Therefore, the investigator must blend into the environment to prevent detection.
Another type of surveillance is audio surveillance. This includes wiretapping and eaves-
dropping, which are restricted by law.
Equipment used during surveillance can include binoculars, a telescope, communica-
tion equipment, cameras, listening devices, video and audio recorders, and global positioning 
system (GPS) tracking devices. One of the most successful methods of surveillance is the use 
of a concealed pinhole lens camera. If a video motion sensor is used, time will not have to be 
spent on reviewing many hours of tape. Investigators must keep informed about these devices 
and related legal restrictions on usage.
Surveillance          241
Concealed pinhole lens cameras are a popular method of surveillance. What is your 
opinion of this technique?

242          INVESTIGATIONS
Information Accuracy
An investigation is essentially an information-gathering process. The accuracy of the informa-
tion not only reflects on the investigator but also has a direct bearing on the consequences of 
the investigation. The following guidelines are helpful in obtaining accurate information:
1. Double-check information whenever possible.
2. Ask the same questions of several people. Compare the results.
3. To check on the reliability of a source, ask questions for which you know the answers.
4. Cross-check information; for example, if you have a copy of a person’s employment 
application and college transcript, cross-check name, date of birth, and so on.
5. Read information back to a source to check for accuracy.
6. If possible, check the background of a person providing information or check the 
accuracy of a records system.
7. Maintain accurate notes, records, photographs, and sketches; do not depend on 
memory for details.
8. If you are unable to write notes or a report, for instance, while driving an auto, record 
the information on a tape recorder.
9. Provide adequate security for information and records to prevent tampering or loss.
Report Writing
Report writing usually begins after the investigator has invested time and energy in collecting 
sufficient information on the basic investigative questions. How well these reports are prepared 
will have a definite impact on the investigator’s career. Many supervisors get to know their sub-
ordinates more through reports than from any other means of communication. Furthermore, 
many supervisors consider report writing a major skill when promoting investigators.
Reports have a variety of uses aside from punitive results. They are used by management 
to analyze critical problems (e.g., excessive thefts or accidents). Summations of many reports 
can assist planning and budgetary efforts. Reports also may be used in litigation.
Investigators usually record information in a small notebook before completing a report. 
An investigator has many thoughts in mind during an investigation that prevents the report 
from being written as the investigation proceeds. In addition, after appropriate information is 
collected, the investigator has an overall view of the incident; this assists in the development 
of an outline that will improve the structure of the report.
Standard reports are used by many investigators. These reports are formulated by man-
agement to guide investigators in answering important questions. A typical standard report 
begins with a heading that includes the type of incident, date, time, and location. Next is a list 
of persons involved in the incident along with their addresses, telephone numbers, ages, and 
occupations. Another section can include a list of evidence. The narrative, sometimes called 
“the story,” follows, usually written in chronological order. The end of the report contains 
a variety of information such as the investigator’s name and the status of the investigation. 
Diagrams and photographs may be attached. Report characteristics vary depending on need.
During report writing, the investigator should get to the point in easily understood 
language. An impressive vocabulary is not an asset to a report. Neatness and good gram-
mar are important. Supervisors often complain about poor narratives written by subordi-
nates. Let us look at some blunders that have reflected on the investigator:
• “When the employee was approached by loss prevention staff he had a switchblade he 
had bought in his lunch box.”
• “A telephone pole of manufacturing plants within our corporation showed that 15 
percent of employees were ignoring loss prevention rules.”
• “The woman caused the loss because her newborn son was branded as illiterate.”
• “The sick employee was honestly in bed with the doctor for two weeks even though 
he did not give her any relief.”

Career: Investigations
The process of investigation is an important function in both the public and private 
sectors. It is a very broad field and includes many subspecialties. Investigators use a 
variety of tools and techniques such as interviewing, evidence collection and process-
ing, physical and technical surveillance, computer forensics, database searches, and 
crime analysis algorithms. Like most security measures, an effective investigations 
program serves both as a deterrent to crime and a response once a crime has been 
committed.
Entry-level management positions generally prefer a four-year degree. Criminal 
justice and criminology are popular, but a business degree is acceptable. Two-year degrees 
can help the entry-level aspirant. Depending on the position, no experience may be 
required, but specialty areas usually require at least one to two years in the respective area. 
Experience from police or security investigations is taken into consideration. The salary 
range is $35,000 to $55,000, depending on many factors.
Mid-level management positions, requiring expertise in multiple investigative 
and business disciplines, generally require a degree in an appropriate discipline, as 
well as five or more years of demonstrated success in the field. Professional cer-
tifications such as the Professional Certified Investigator and the Certified Fraud 
Examiner are often desired as an indicator of professionalism and qualifications. 
Mid-level investigative managers may expect a salary range from $60,000 to 
$85,000.
Source: Courtesy of ASIS International (2005). “Career Opportunities in Security.” www.
asisonline.org.
Testimony          243
Testimony
Security practitioners periodically testify in depositions or in court. A deposition is a pretrial dis-
covery method whereby the opposing party in a case asks questions of the other party (e.g., 
victim, witness, expert) under oath, usually in an attorney’s office, and while a word-for-word 
transcript is recorded. Depositions help to present the evidence of each side of a case and assist 
the justice system in settling cases before the expensive trial stage. Most civil and criminal 
cases never make it to trial.
Well-prepared testimony in both criminal and civil cases can be assured most readily by 
the following suggestions. (See Table 10-1 for additional advice.)
1. Prepare and review notes and reports. Recheck evidence that has been properly labeled 
and identified. Confer with an attorney.
2. Dress in a conservative manner, if not in uniform. Appear well groomed.
3. Maintain good demeanor (conduct, behavior). Do not slouch or fidget. Do not argue 
with anyone. Remain calm (take some deep breaths without being obvious).
4. Pause and think before speaking. Do not volunteer information beyond what is 
requested. Never guess. If you do not know an answer, say so.
5. If you bring notes, remember that the opposing attorney can request that the notes 
become part of the evidence. Recheck notes to prevent any unwanted information 
from entering the case.
6. Request feedback from associates to improve future performance.

244          INVESTIGATIONS
Table 10-1 Brief Review of Common Tactics of Cross-Examination
Counsel’s Tactic 
Example 
Purpose 
Officer’s Response
Rapid-fire questions 
One question after another with  
To confuse you; attempt to force inconsistent 
Take time to consider the question; be deliberate in
 
 little time to answer. 
 answers. 
  answering, ask to have the question
 repeated, remain calm.
Condescending counsel 
Benevolent in approach, over- 
To give the impression that you are inept,  
Firm, decisive answers, asking for the questions to be
 
 sympathetic in questions to the  
 lack confidence, or may not be a reliable 
 repeated if improperly phrased.
 
 point of ridicule. 
 witness. 
Friendly counsel 
Very courteous, polite; questions tend 
To lull you into a false sense of security, where 
Stay alert; bear in mind that the purpose of defense is
 
 to take you into his confidence. 
 you will give answers in favor of the defense. 
 to discredit or diminish the effect of your testimony.
Badgering, belligerent 
Counsel staring you right in the  
To make you angry so that you lose the sense 
Stay calm, speak in a deliberate voice, giving
 
 face, shouts “That is so, isn’t it,  
 of logic and calmness. Generally, rapid 
 prosecutor time to make appropriate objections.
 
 officer?” 
 questions will also be included in this approach. 
Mispronouncing officer’s 
Your name is Jansen, counsel 
To draw your attention to the error in 
Ignore the mispronunciation and concentrate on the
 name; using wrong rank 
 calls you Johnson. 
 pronunciation rather than enabling you to  
 question counsel is asking.
 
 
 concentrate on the question asked, so that
 
 
 you will make inadvertent errors in testimony. 
Suggestive question (tends 
“Was the color of the car blue?” 
To suggest an answer to his or her question in 
Concentrate carefully on the facts, disregard the
 to be a leading question   
 an attempt to confuse or to lead you. 
suggestion. Answer the question.
 allowable on cross-
 examination) 
 
 
Demanding a yes or no  
“Did you strike the defendant with 
To prevent all pertinent and mitigating details 
Explain the answer to the question; if stopped by
 answer to a question 
 your club?” 
 from being considered by the jury. 
 counsel demanding a yes or no answer, pause until
 that needs explanation 
 
 
 the court instructs you to answer in your own words.
Reversing witness’s words 
You answer, “The accident occurred  
To confuse you and demonstrate a lack of 
Listen intently whenever counsel repeats back
 
 27 feet from the intersection.”  
 confidence in you. 
 something you have said. If counsel makes an
 
 Counsel says, “You say the accident  
 
 error, correct him or her.
 
 occurred 72 feet from the
 
 intersection?” 
 

Testimony          245
Repetitious questions 
The same question asked several 
To obtain inconsistent or conflicting answers 
Listen carefully to the question and state, “I have
 
 times slightly rephrased. 
 from you. 
 just answered that question.”
Conflicting answers 
“But Officer Smith, Detective  
To show inconsistency in the investigation.  
Remain calm. Conflicting statements have a
 
 Brown just said . . .” 
This tactic is normally used on measurements, 
 tendency to make a witness extremely nervous.
 
 
 times, and so forth. 
Be guarded in your answers on measurements, 
 
 
 
 times, and so forth. Unless you have exact 
 
 
 
 knowledge, use the term “approximately.” Refer to
 
 
 
 your notes.
Staring 
After you have answered, counsel  
To have a long pause that one normally feels 
Wait for the next question.
 
 stares as though there were more  
 must be filled, thus saying more than
 
 to come. 
 necessary. To provoke you into offering more
 
 
 than the question called for. 
Source: Reproduced from The Training Keys with permission of the International Association of Chiefs of Police, Gaithersburg, MD.

246          INVESTIGATIONS
Case Problems
10A.  The Loreton Company, a California-based manufacturer of televisions, 
continuously increased profits because of high output at six company-owned plants 
in the United States and overseas. A recent inventory at a distribution facility 
located outside Los Angeles showed that more than 200 televisions were missing. 
The management of the Loreton Company became desperate about the losses. 
You are a partner at Klein and Smith Loss Prevention Associates, a consulting 
firm specializing in loss problems. Loreton Company executives contact you for 
assistance. A meeting is arranged. After competition with two other security and 
loss prevention firms, Loreton executives decide on a two-month contract for your 
firm’s services. You are in charge. What are your specific plans and actions?
10B.  You are senior investigator for the Bolt Corporation, which is a top 100 
corporation with large holdings in electrical supplies, oil and gas exploration, 
and pharmaceuticals. Because you have an excellent record and 11 years of 
varied investigative experience with Bolt, you are selected by the director of loss 
prevention to train five newly hired college-educated investigators. The director 
stresses that you will design a 105-hour training program to span three weeks. 
After three weeks, the investigators will be assigned to various divisions within 
Bolt, where they will receive specialized training while working with experienced 
investigators. The director states that your typed curriculum design is due 
tomorrow for a 4 P.M. loss prevention meeting. She requires that you list the topics, 
hours for each topic, and why the particular topics and hours were chosen.
References
Bartolomie, J. (2005). “Hide and Seek.” TECHbeat (Summer).
Baum, K. (2006). “Identity Theft, 2004.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 
Office of Justice Programs.
Brenner, L. (2005). “How to Guard Your Identity.” Parade (July 31).
Collins, P., et al. (2005). “The ASIS Foundation Security Report: Scope and Emerging 
Trends.” Alexandria, VA: ASIS International.
Daniels, R. (2006). “Compliance Forcing Firms to Take Investigative Stance.” Security 
Director News, 3 (March).
Donnelly, D. (2005). “iPods Sing for Investigators.” Security Management, 49 (March).
Dunnagan, K., and Schroader, A. (2006). “Dialing for Evidence: Finding and Protecting 
Forensic Treasures in Mobile Phones.” Law Officer Magazine (January/February).
Search the Web
Refer to the Web sites in this chapter to check the variety of personal and business 
information available.
Check “sucks.com” sites and search “anticapitalism” to view sites that are in 
contention with corporate America.
Here are additional sites relevant to this chapter:
ASIS International, Professional Certified Investigator: www.asisonline.org/
certification/pci/pciabout.xml
International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists: www.iacis.info/
iacisv2/pages/home.php
International Society of Forensic Computer Examiners: www.isfce.com/
Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC): www.osac.gov/

References          247
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (1999). Crime in the United States 1998. Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2006). Crime in the United States 2005. www.fbi.gov/ucr/
05cius/offenses/clearances/index.html, retrieved October 2, 2006.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Financial Crimes Section. (2005). “Financial Crimes 
Report to the Public.” http://www.fbi.gov/publications/financial/fcs_report052005/fcs_
report052005.htm, retrieved October 4, 2006
Gardner, T., and Anderson, T. (2007). Criminal Evidence: Principles and Cases, 6th ed. 
Belmont, CA: Thomas Higher Education.
Gips, M. (2005). “Digital Video May Have Its Day in Court.” Security Management, 49 
(November).
Harold, C. (2006). “The Detective and the Database.” Security Management, 50 (March).
Lang, D. (2005). “Dos and Don’ts for Digital Evidence.” Security Management, 49 (June).
Mallery, J. (2005). “Cyberforensics: The Ultimate Investigative Tool.” Security Technology & 
Design, 15 (December).
Mendell, R. (1999). “Is the Internet Just a Web of Misinformation?” Security Management, 
43 (June).
Nagosky, D. (2005). “The Admissibility of Digital Photographs in Criminal Cases.” FBI Law 
Enforcement Bulletin, 74 (December).
Overseas Security Advisory Council. (n.d.). “About OSAC.” https://www.osac.gov/About/
index.cfm, retrieved February 10. 2007.
Plante, W. (2007). “New Rules for Your Electronically Stored Information: FRCP’s eDiscov-
ery Rules.” Security Technology & Design, 49 (April).
Ray, D. (2000). “When Bad Things Happen to Good Businesses.” Security Management, 44 
(October).
Reibold, R. (2005). “The Hidden Dangers of Using Private Investigators.” South Carolina 
Lawyer, 17 (July).
Roman, G. (2005). “Ten Things to Avoid During Workplace Investigations.” RJL New s letter. 
www.rothgerber.com/newslettersarticles/le0054.asp, retrieved March 7, 2005.
Snow, E. (2000). “Adapting Technologies to the Task.” Security Management, 44 (June).
U.S. Department of Justice. (1976). Report of the Task Force on Private Security. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Van Nostrand, G., and Luizzo, A. (1995). “Investigating in a New Environment.” Security 
Management (June). 

• accounting
• accountability
• auditing
• purchase requisition
• purchase order
• invoice
• receiving report
• kickback
• inventory
• shrinkage
• periodic inventory system
• perpetual inventory system
• attest function
• American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants
• National Association of State Boards of 
Accountancy
• Association of Certified Fraud Examiners
• forensic accounting
• internal control questionnaire
• fraud
• Enron Corporation
• Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002
• Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board
• governance
• risk management
• compliance
KEY TERMS
Accounting, 
Accountability, and 
Auditing
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Define and explain accounting, accountability, and auditing.
2. Describe how accountability is applied to the areas of cashier operations, purchasing, 
and inventory.
3. Describe the functions of auditors.
4. Explain the problem of fraud and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
5. Define and explain the importance of governance, risk management, and compliance.
11
249

Introduction
Accounting, often referred to as the language of business, is concerned with recording, 
sorting, summarizing, reporting, and interpreting data related to business transactions. 
Accounting information assists executives, auditors, investors, regulators, and others in 
decision making. Virtually every type of concern requires accounting records. For the 
most part, bookkeepers perform the day-to-day recording of business data; accountants 
design the accounting systems and prepare and interpret reports. For example, a book-
keeper in a business, after counting cash and checking cash sales receipts, records the 
amount in the cash receipts journal. Or, based on accounting data—specifically, inven-
tory reports—an accountant decides that shrinkage is too high in a particular business; 
the loss prevention department is notified.
Accounting is the language of business.
Accountability defines a responsibility for and a description of something. For example, John 
Smith is responsible (i.e., is held accountable) for all finished products in a plant, and he 
maintains accurate records (i.e., an inventory) of what is in stock. Another example would 
be a loss prevention officer keeping a log of people entering and leaving a restricted area. Or, 
while a truck is being loaded for shipment, a clerk records on a tally the number of items being 
shipped. In these examples, employees sign their names to the documents (inventory, log, and 
tally); they are responsible, and accountability is maintained.
Auditing is an examination or check of something; the major purpose of an audit is to 
uncover deviations. An audit can be simple or intricate. For example, a loss prevention officer 
audits (checks) a CCTV system to ensure that it is working properly. Or, an auditor examines 
the financial records of a company and reports that they are fair, reliable, and conform to 
company policies and procedures.
Accounting
Within a business, for example, the accounting department has control over financial mat-
ters that are vital to business operations. Common components of an accounting department 
are cashiering operations, accounts receivable, accounts payable, payroll, and company 
bank accounts. Each component of an accounting department has the responsibility for 
maintaining records that are scrutinized by management to ascertain the financial posi-
tion of the business. Without adequate loss prevention strategies or controls in financial 
transactions and records, organizations could not survive.
Potential losses are possible throughout the accounting department. A cashiering opera-
tion must be protected, not only from burglary and robbery, but also from employee theft. 
Accounts receivable must be protected from opportunities that allow employees to destroy 
bills and pocket cash. Accounts payable also needs protection; employees in collusion with 
supply company employees have been known to alter invoices to embezzle money. A frequent 
scheme by some payroll clerks is to maintain fictitious employees on the payroll and cash 
their paychecks.
Accounting also is a system of principles and procedures that enable clerks and book-
keepers to record financial data in a logical manner. A record of an individual transaction does 
not have as much impact as the summation of transactions in a financial statement or business 
report (see Table 11–1). The accounting statements assist management in decision making.
250          ACCOUNTING, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND AUDITING 

Accounting statements assist management in answering many questions:
What is the financial condition of the concern?
What is the financial value?
Was there a profit or loss?
Which part of a firm is doing well (or poorly)?
How serious are losses from hazards?
Because security and loss prevention practitioners often investigate financial matters 
and manage a budget, they are well advised to study accounting at the college level to prepare 
for their careers.
Accountability
The definition of formal accountability points to the documentation or description of some-
thing. Informal accountability usually is verbal and results in no documentation; for example, 
Accountability          251
Table 11-1 Financial Statements of Two Separate Companies
 
Trico Corporation Balance Sheet June 30, 20_ 
 
 
Assets 
 Liabilities 
 
Cash 
4,000 
Accounts payable 
44,000 
Accounts receivable 
100,300 
Notes payable 
100,000 
Inventory 
100,000 
 
 
144,000
Equipment 
34,000 
 
 
Land 
80,000 
 
Capital 
Buildings 
300,400 
 
 
 
618,700 
Preferred stock 
74,700 
 
 
Common stock 
400,000 
 
 
 
 
474,700
Total assets 
618,700 
Total liabilities and capital 
 
618,700
Simple examples of an income statement and a capital statement follow. Note that “expenses” and “net 
income” are two additional major categories of accounting besides assets, liabilities, and capital.
Quality Loss Prevention Service Income Statement for month ended October 31, 20_
Sales and service 
 
11,800
Operating expenses: 
 
 Salary expenses 
6,000 
 Supplies expense 
1,100 
 Rent expense 
1,400 
 Miscellaneous expense 
1,300 
 
 
−9,800
Net income 
 
2,000
Quality Loss Prevention Service Capital Statement for month ended October 31, 20_
Capital, October 2, 20_ 
 
10,000
Net income for the month 
2,000 
Less withdrawals 
−1,000 
Increase in capital 
 
 1,000
Capital, October 31, 20_ 
 
11,000

a loss prevention manager asks a subordinate if a fire extinguisher was checked (audited). 
The subordinate states that it was audited. Thus, a basic audit of a loss prevention device is 
accomplished. What if two weeks pass, a fire takes place near the particular fire extinguisher, 
and it is found to be inoperable? An employee who tries to extinguish the fire with the inop-
erable extinguisher complains to management. Superiors ask the loss prevention manager if 
the extinguisher was checked. The manager states that it was audited. The superiors ask for 
documentation to support the statements. Because of the verbal accountability, no record 
exists. From that point on, the loss prevention manager realizes the value of formal account-
ability and develops an excellent system of records.
The importance of accountability must not be underestimated. It is a key survival 
strategy. Documentation can result from many types of loss prevention activities. Examples 
are a variety of investigative reports (e.g., crimes, accidents); security surveys; security system 
maintenance; alarm activations; visitor logs; crime prevention, fire protection, and life safety 
plans; meetings; policies and procedures; and training. As well as assisting a loss prevention 
practitioner when supporting a contention, documentation can assist in planning, budgeting, 
preparing major reports, and providing general reference.
Accountability is a key survival strategy.
Cashier Operations
A detailed procedure for accountability in retailing is illustrated next (Curtis, 1980: 14):
The key to front end control is accountability. Each cashier must have his or her 
own cash register drawer. Relief cashiers should bring their own drawer, and the 
cashier going on relief should lock up her cash or remove her drawer during relief 
periods. The relief person should also sign the register tape when taking over, and 
the regular cashier should sign when leaving the register.
The head cashier should periodically review register detail tapes, watching for 
continuity of transaction numbers. If the last transaction on the  register Monday night 
was number 112334, then the first transaction on Tuesday morning must be 112335. 
If it is not, the missing chronological numbers may indicate theft of several sales by 
the cashier and destruction of the tape containing the missing transaction numbers.
Retail cashier operations have been enhanced by computers. More on retail account-
ability and point-of-sale accounting systems in Chapter 17 regarding retail security.
Purchasing
Because procedures vary and various types of computer software are available to enhance 
purchasing systems, a generalized approach to purchasing is presented here. Four forms are 
discussed in the subsequent purchasing system: purchase requisition, purchase order, invoice, 
and receiving report.
When a company orders merchandise, equipment, or supplies, for example, the order 
should be documented to avoid any misunderstandings. Suppose a maintenance department 
head at a plant seeks to order an item. Generally, the documentation process begins when the 
order is written on a standard form known as a purchase requisition. This form may also be 
completed in the company computerized accounting information system. The purchase req-
uisition lists, among other things, the originator (who placed the order), the date, the item, a 
description, justification for need, and cost. Once the originator completes the purchase req-
uisition and makes a copy for filing, superiors approve or disapprove the purchase and sign 
the requisition. If it is approved, the purchasing department reviews the purchase requisition 
252          ACCOUNTING, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND AUDITING 

and selects the best vendor. The purchasing staff completes a prenumbered purchase order. 
Copies of the purchase order are sent to the originator, the receiving department, and the 
accounts payable department; the purchasing department retains the original purchase order. 
The purchase order contains, among other things, the originator, the item, quantity, possibly 
an item code number from a vendor catalog, and the cost. The purchase order is sent to the 
vendor. Upon fulfillment of the order, the vendor sends an invoice to the buyer’s accounts 
payable department. An invoice contains the names and addresses of both the buyer and the 
vendor, cost, item, quantity, date, and method of shipment.
When the accounts payable department receives the invoice, it checks the invoice for 
accuracy by comparing it with a copy of the purchase order. Cost, type of item, proper quan-
tity, and address of buyer are checked.
The receiving and purchasing departments of the buyer receive copies of the invoice to 
check it for accuracy. To decrease the possibility of mistakes (or collusion), the purchase order 
and invoice sent to the receiving department may have the number of items deleted. When the 
merchandise arrives, the receiving person records the number of items and type, and checks for 
irregularities (e.g., damage). This form often becomes a receiving report. Copies are sent to the 
purchasing and accounts payable departments. The purchasing department compares the receiv-
ing report with the invoice. The accounts payable department makes payment after examining the 
purchase order, invoice, and the receiving report. These three documents and a copy of the check 
constitute the inactive file for this purchase (see Figure 11–1).
This purchasing system may appear complicated; however, without such accountability, 
losses can increase. For example, in one company, accounting employees in collusion with outside 
supply company employees altered records so items paid for were never delivered, but sold on the 
black market for illegal gain. In another case, a mid-level accountant for a utility company submit-
ted bogus check requests for payments to vendors. The accountant had set up accounts for phony 
companies at a bank, and when the utility paid the “vendors,” the accountant simply transferred 
the money to his personal account at the same bank (Mann and Roberts, 2001: 470).
Another widespread vulnerability in purchasing results from a kickback. This means 
that the purchaser receives something of value from the seller for buying the seller’s product 
or service. Losses occur if the product or service is inferior and overpriced in comparison to 
the competition. For example, in a secret deal, John Doe Forklift Company agrees to pay 
Richard Ring, purchaser for Fence Manufacturing, $1000 cash for each forklift purchased at 
an inflated cost. After the forklifts are delivered, it is discovered that the forklift tires are too 
smooth for the outside gravel and dirt grounds of the manufacturing company. With limited 
traction, the forklifts frequently get stuck, and employees are unable to work until delivery 
trucks return and pull the forklifts free. The losses include both cash and lost time.
Accounting controls and loss prevention strategies in purchasing include the following 
suggestions:
 1.  Centralize all purchasing through a purchasing department.
 2.  Maintain accountability through documents (standard forms), signatures, and 
carefully designed computer software.
 3.  Separate duties and responsibilities so that each person and department can check on 
the others’ work.
 4. Test by deliberate error.
 5. Use unalterable paper to prevent alterations or erasures.
 6.  Prenumber purchase order forms (and other forms when needed).
 7. Conduct loss prevention checks without notice.
 8. Conduct periodic audits.
 9.  Scrutinize the purchasing department to prevent favoritism and kickbacks. Use 
competitive bidding.
10.  Prohibit gifts or favors from vendors (sellers).
11.  Screen applicants for employment.
12.  Develop clear policies and procedures.
Accountability          253

FIGURE 11-1 Accountability and paper trail for purchase of two items by ABC company.
254          ACCOUNTING, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND AUDITING 

Inventory
In a wholesale or retail business, merchandise is continuously purchased and sold. This sale of 
merchandise is the primary source of revenue. A substantial amount of a business’s resources 
is invested in saleable merchandise, and this merchandise is the largest asset. Therefore, this 
asset must be protected. The term inventory includes merchandise for sale, raw materials, and 
unfinished goods. Inventory is reported on the balance sheet as an asset.
Shrinkage is the amount of merchandise that has disappeared through theft, has become 
useless because of breakage or spoilage, or is unaccounted for because of sloppy recording. It 
is often expressed as a percentage. Levy and Weitz (2001: 548) define shrinkage as “the differ-
ence between the recorded value of inventory (at retail prices) based on merchandise bought 
and received and the value of the actual inventory (at retail prices) in stores and distribution 
centers divided by retail sales during the period.” For example, if accounting records indicate 
the inventory should be $1,500,000, the actual count of the inventory reveals $1,236,000, and 
sales were $4,225,000, the shrinkage is 6.2%, or ($1,500,000 – $1,236,000)/$4,225,000.
In many businesses, shrinkage of 3% or more is a serious loss problem. Loss prevention 
managers frequently express the objective of their job as lowering shrinkage. An accurate 
measurement of shrinkage depends on the quality of the inventory system; both have a defi-
nite impact on the loss prevention program and its manager.
Two primary inventory systems are the periodic and the perpetual systems. The periodic 
inventory system results in a physical count of merchandise only at specific intervals, usually 
once per year. When this system is used, daily revenue from sales is recorded in accounting 
records, but no transaction is recorded to adjust the inventory account to reflect the fact that 
a sale was made. The periodic system makes it difficult to measure shrinkage accurately. To 
make matters worse, when a monthly or quarterly financial statement is necessary for a par-
ticular business using the periodic inventory system, managers sometimes estimate the inven-
tory without taking a physical count.
The perpetual inventory system uses accounting records that maintain an up-to-date 
inventory count. These systems typically are computerized. Handheld microcomputer tech-
nology and point-of-sale (POS) computers capture data through bar-code scanning. RFID 
is increasingly replacing bar codes. In addition to recording daily revenue from sales, an 
individual inventory record is maintained for each type of merchandise sold, which enables a 
continuous count. Thus, the accounting records reflect cost of goods sold and the inventory 
quantity. This information provides a better opportunity to measure shrinkage than that avail-
able with the periodic system.
To increase the accuracy of an inventory and the shrinkage statistic, these strategies are 
recommended:
 1.  Maintain a careful inventory system.
 2.  Establish accountability.
 3.  Standardize forms and procedures for the count.
 4.  Make sure employees can count accurately.
 5.  If possible, do not subject employees to extensive inventory counts at any one time.
 6.  Automate the process by using handheld microcomputer technology that captures 
data.
 7.  Conduct surprise counts of a sample of the merchandise at erratic time intervals. 
Compare manual counts with computer data.
 8.  If possible, require prenumbered requisition forms for merchandise taken out of 
inventory.
 9.  Prohibit unnecessary people (e.g., truck drivers, service people, and other employees) 
from entering merchandise storage areas.
10.  Use an undercover investigator to participate in the inventory count.
11.  The loss prevention manager should have an opportunity to examine the methods 
used to formulate the shrinkage statistic, especially because it will reflect on him or 
her and on the loss prevention program.
Accountability          255

Radio Frequency Identification: Great Potential, But Vulnerable
RFID was applied as early as World War II when it was used to identify aircraft. Today, 
it has wide applications beyond protecting library books and merchandise at retail 
stores. The system has three basic components: tags, readers, and a host computer.
RFID tags contain tiny semiconductor chips and antennas. Many tags appear as 
paper labels, while others are embedded into such items as containers or wristbands. 
Each tag is programmed with a unique identifier that permits wireless tracking of the 
tag and the object holding the tag. Tags can hold a large amount of data, including 
serial numbers, time stamps, travel history, and technical data. Similar to television 
and radio, RFID uses various frequency bands. A tiny battery powers active tags, and 
passive tags are powered by a reader that “wakes up” the tag when it is within range 
of the reader.
Readers contain an antenna that communicates with tags and an electronics 
module networked to a computer. The reader performs security functions including 
encryption/decryption and user authentication. Software connects the RFID system 
to the IT system where supply chain management or asset management databases are 
located.
Supply chains benefit from RFID technology through increased efficiency and 
decreased labor costs and losses. To illustrate, readers installed at loading dock doors 
detect tags on pallets of merchandise passing by. The reader signals the tags to transmit 
their identities and other data to the reader that forwards the data to a computer. The 
computer then credits or debits the inventory depending on whether the merchandise 
is entering or leaving.
The applications of RFID are broad and include tracking of property, evidence, 
passports, visas, inmates in prison, and visitors at facilities. RFID may prove more 
efficient than bar codes for recording, locating, and tracking. RFID technology is also 
applicable to access controls (National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology 
Center, 2005: 6–8).
RFID is not without vulnerabilities. Johnston and Warner (2005: 116), who 
conducted tests on RFID at Los Alamos National Laboratory, warn that low-end tags 
can be counterfeited and that readers can be tampered with, replaced, or controlled 
remotely. Tags can also be removed from one object and placed on another. RFID 
signals can be blocked or jammed. Organizations should test these systems at unpre-
dictable times. High-end systems that use cryptography, challenge-response protocols, 
rotating passwords, or tamper detection technology afford increased protection but 
are used infrequently. Another vulnerability is that a tag could contain a software virus 
that, when scanned by a reader, could spread through an RFID system.
Auditing
Auditors
An auditor examines business accounting records to check for irregularities. These irregulari-
ties may include (1) deviations from the particular firm’s accounting methods, (2) mistakes, and 
(3) criminal activity. During an audit of financial records by an independent auditor, known as 
a certified public accountant (CPA), guidance is provided by state and federal statutes, court 
decisions, a contract with the client, and professional standards as established by Generally 
Accepted Auditing Standards and Generally Accepted Accounting Practices. Because it is 
impossible to check every financial record and transaction, a CPA narrows an audit to certain 
records, such as financial reports and areas where problems are common to the particular 
concern. How accounting data are recorded and summarized is frequently studied.
256          ACCOUNTING, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND AUDITING 

Auditing          257
At times, a CPA may encounter misleading financial information that attempts to make 
a business look better than its true financial position. The misleading information often is 
an attempt by management to attract investors. To counter this problem, cautious investors 
are more likely to favor a business that has had an audit by an outside independent CPA, as 
opposed to no audit or one performed by an internal auditor.
When an independent CPA completes an audit, a report is prepared. If a business’s 
financial records are dependable and credible, then the CPA expresses this favorable opinion 
in the audit report. This is known as the attest function.
CPAs, like other skilled professionals, are liable for damages proximately caused by 
their negligence. A CPA is liable to a client when he or she negligently fails to detect or fraudu-
lently conceals signs that an employee of the client is embezzling. In addition, the CPA is liable 
for not detecting and reporting to the client that internal audit controls are lax (Twomey et 
al., 2001: 926).
Requirements for becoming a CPA are found in the Board of Accountancy in each state 
and jurisdiction. Generally, to sit for the CPA examination developed by the American Institute 
of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) and administered by the National Association of State 
Boards of Accountancy, a candidate must have a bachelor’s or master’s degree with an empha-
sis in accounting. For final certification, a candidate who passes the examination with only a 
bachelor’s degree needs two years of work experience. A candidate who passes the examination 
with 150 credit hours needs one year of work experience for certification.
Many firms maintain internal auditors. These internal auditors audit various inter-
nal activities that independent auditors may or may not audit. For instance, in addition to 
studying specific accounting records, internal auditors may examine whether management’s 
policies and procedures are being followed. An internal auditor may also conduct surprise 
audits.
Public (e.g., federal, state, municipal) and private investigation practitioners have 
expanded their competency in accounting. A major reason for this is a response to increased 
investigations into the white-collar crime arena.
Cross-training can be used to reduce the knowledge gap between auditor and criminal 
investigator. Cross-training involves the auditor being trained in criminal investigation and the 
criminal investigator being trained in auditing. An auditor’s training could include criminal 
law, evidence, interviewing, and interrogation. A criminal investigator’s training could include 
accounting principles and procedures and auditing. Both should have training in information 
systems and related investigative methods.
The Association of Certified Fraud Examiners promotes professionalism, training, and 
certification (CFE). Bodnar and Hopwood (2004: 105) write: “Forensic accounting is one of 
several terms that is used to describe the activities of persons who are concerned with pre-
venting and detecting fraud. The terms ‘fraud examiner,’ ‘fraud auditor,’ and ‘loss prevention 
professional’ are also descriptive of this type of activity.”
Internal Control Questionnaire
A popular and convenient way to conduct an audit is through an internal control ques-
tionnaire. These questionnaires are used by public accounting firms, internal audit depart-
ments, and other organizations that are involved in reviews of internal controls (Bodnar and 
Hopwood, 2004: 131–132). A typical questionnaire has a list of questions to remind the 
person conducting the audit to focus attention on specific areas of concern. Questionnaire 
results provide feedback that help to pinpoint and correct deviations and deficiencies. Here 
are sample questions from the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (1978: 54) 
for a small business. Many of the questions are relevant to other organizations.
• Are accounting records kept up-to-date and balanced monthly?
• Are monthly or quarterly financial reports available to the owner?
• Are the personal funds of the owner and his or her personal income and expenses 
completely segregated from the business?

• Does the company practice “separation of functions” (e.g., separate check preparation 
from check authorization) so accountability is assigned and each employee can check 
on the other?
• Are employees rotated periodically among financial jobs and are they required to take 
vacations?
• Are over-the-counter receipts controlled by cash register tapes, counter receipts, and 
so on?
• Are employees who handle funds bonded?
• Do two different people reconcile the bank records and make out the deposit slip?
• Are prenumbered checks used?
• Is the owner’s signature required on checks?
• Does the owner review the bank reconciliation?
• Does the owner never sign blank checks?
• Do different people reconcile the bank records and write the checks?
• Are work orders or sales invoices prenumbered and controlled?
• Is credit granted only by the owner?
• Is the person responsible for inventory someone other than the bookkeeper?
• Are periodic physical inventories taken?
• Are perpetual inventory records maintained?
• Are there detailed records available of property assets and allowances for 
depreciation?
• Does someone other than the bookkeeper always do the purchasing?
• Are suppliers’ monthly statements compared with recorded liabilities regularly?
• Does the owner approve, sign, and distribute payroll checks?
IT Staffers Influenced to Go Bad
In what may be a trend, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which 
enforces laws to reduce fraudulent financial reporting, is increasingly charging IT 
directors with securities fraud. Sensormatic Electronics Corp., for example, was in 
trouble because its home security systems firm had its IT personnel roll back com-
puter clocks so sales could be booked sooner to inflate revenue figures. In another 
company, Bio Clinic Corp., more than 400 invoices with a value of $6 million, which 
had already been paid, were added into the ledger a second time (to falsify revenue) 
by reprogramming the accounting software. The SEC notes that IT directors are 
responsible for the accuracy and integrity of the documents and data generated by a 
company computer system. In addition, they should know if unauthorized changes 
have been made in general ledger, accounts receivable, and other accounting software 
(Nash, 1999: 20).
Fraud
Fraud is a broad term that includes a variety of offenses that share the elements of deceit or 
intentional misrepresentation of fact, with the intent of unlawfully depriving a person or orga-
nization of property or legal rights. It is a multibillion dollar problem. Although subsequent 
paragraphs emphasize fraud by top executives, fraud can occur at any level of an organiza-
tion. Chapter 7 describes internal theft and fraud.
The FBI partners with many public agencies (e.g., Securities and Exchange Commission; 
Internal Revenue Service) and private sector organizations (e.g., AICPA; Dunn & Bradstreet) 
258          ACCOUNTING, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND AUDITING 

Fraud          259
to combat fraud. Through fiscal year 2005, FBI investigations of corporate fraud resulted in 
497 indictments and 317 convictions, with numerous cases pending plea agreements and tri-
als. From July 1, 2002, through March 31, 2005, accomplishments regarding corporate fraud 
cases were as follows: $2.2 billion in restitution, $34.6 million in recoveries, $79.1 million in 
fines, and $27.9 million in seizures (Federal Bureau of Investigation, Financial Crimes Section, 
2005: B2).
In 2001, one of the most infamous corporate scandals began to unfold from the 
Houston-based energy company known as Enron Corporation. It filed for bankruptcy protec-
tion with $63 billion in assets, while its stock closed under $1 a share. A year earlier one share 
sold for $75. Unfortunately, investors lost billions of dollars. Many company employees had 
received compensation in the form of company stock, and they lost billions of dollars in their 
retirement and life savings, besides losing their jobs.
The collapse of Enron resulted from years of “creative accounting,” whereby top 
executives hide billions of dollars in debt and made failing ventures appear successful and 
profitable. In 2006, former Enron founder, Kenneth Lay, age 64, was convicted of fraud, 
conspiracy, and lying to banks. A month later, he died of a heart attack. Interestingly, a judge 
followed legal precedent and vacated Lay’s conviction. Other former Enron executives were 
convicted and sentenced to prison. Andrew Fastow, former chief financial officer, cooperated 
with prosecutors and was sentenced to 6 years in prison. He helped to secure the prosecution’s 
case against former chief executive officer, Jeffrey Skilling, who was sentenced in 2006 to 24 
years in prison following his conviction for fraud, conspiracy, insider trading, and lying to 
auditors. The judge also approved a settlement requiring Skilling to surrender $43 million in 
assets for a restitution fund for Enron retirees and shareholders. Skilling’s sentence was close 
to the 25-year sentence that former WorldCom chief executive officer Bernard Ebbers received 
for his involvement in an $11 billion accounting fraud. In 2002, the accounting firm that 
audited Enron, Arthur Andersen, was forced to surrender its CPA licenses pending prosecu-
tion by the U.S. Department of Justice.
Unfortunately, as the memory of Enron and WorldCom is still fresh in the minds 
of executives, some continue to falter and face indictments. Consequently, as written in 
Chapter 2, the impact of deterrence is questionable and prevention is a key strategy to reduce 
losses.
Why do you think fraud is such a huge problem?
Although the Enron case was not the only corporate scandal that created uproar over 
fraudulent accounting practices, it did spark legislation seeking to control the problem. As 
explained in Chapter 4, the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002 seeks to prevent fraud and 
affects the processes and accountability for financial reporting in publicly traded U.S. com-
panies. It redesigned the federal regulations and reporting requirements of public compa-
nies. The act makes executives responsible for establishing, evaluating, and monitoring the 
effectiveness of internal controls over financial and operational processes. SOX emphasizes 
the importance of an audit committee as an essential component of a public company’s 
board of directors. Some SOX provisions are becoming standard operating procedure for 
all businesses, besides publicly held ones. The law includes accounting controls and how 
companies report financial results and executive compensation. It holds company executives 
and external auditors directly accountable for the accuracy of financial reports and pro-
tects employees who blow the whistle on suspected fraud. Security and audit departments 
in  corporations have become involved with SOX because these departments investigate 
internal fraud.

Sox established the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), which reg-
ulates the conduct of auditors and influences management in public companies. The PCAOB 
promulgates rules and imposes sanctions in conjunction with Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) review. The SEC is a federal administrative law enforcement agency that 
protects investors. SOX also increased criminal sentences for fraud. It broadened the scope 
of violations pertaining to obstruction of justice and includes acts of knowingly destroying, 
altering, or falsifying documents to interfere with any federal investigation. In addition, SOX 
restricts nonaudit services of outside auditors, such as bookkeeping services related to finan-
cial statements, IT financial system guidance, and investment banking services.
Wilson (2004: 7) provides a view of how two security directors applied SOX in their 
respective corporations, as described next. In one company, the security director lobbied for 
and was assigned to the corporate SOX task force. It focused on SOX, section 404, on inter-
nal controls, which pertains to management’s assessment of internal controls, while requiring 
executives and auditors to confirm the effectiveness of those controls. The task force prepared 
fraud policies, internal controls, and best practices. In addition, data analysis techniques were 
implemented to search for anomalies in a variety of departments and reporting documents. 
A financial integrity department was established with the following objectives: determining 
risk potential, improving internal controls, identifying technology solutions, communicating 
the code of conduct and fraud policies, and implementing prevention programs. In the other 
corporation, the security director played a limited role in SOX and focused on section 302. 
This pertains to anonymous, confidential reporting by employees of accounting and auditing 
irregularities and other problems.
Although privately held businesses and nonprofit organizations are not required by law 
to conform to SOX, increased concern over accounting irregularities is causing management 
in a variety of entities to consider some provisions of SOX. This concern impacts decisions of 
public companies planning to merge with private companies and of private companies plan-
ning to become public companies.
Another point about SOX is that compliance is expensive and time-consuming. 
Companies are spending millions of dollars to comply with the law.
Do you think there is too much pressure on executives to reach business goals? Explain 
your answer.
Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance
Zoellick and Frank (2005: 1) note that corporate boards of directors and senior management 
are generally aware of the importance of setting objectives and managing programs that 
involve governance, risk management, and compliance (GRC). They write about seven opera-
tional concerns, drawn from the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, to promote effective compli-
ance and ethics programs to strengthen GRC operations. Earlier, in Chapter 4, compliance 
auditing and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines were explained. The next chapter includes risk 
management. Here, GRC is defined from the perspectives of Zoellick and Frank (2005: 3–6), 
followed by the seven operational concerns.
Governance is “the process by which the board sets the objectives for an organization 
and oversees progress toward those objectives.” “Risk management means different things 
in different contexts.” “The old view of risk . . . managed by buying insurance . . . ” “What has 
happened . . . board members and senior management are using the language and techniques of 
risk management to address a much broader range of organizational concerns.” “ . . . risk man-
agement is part of the process of making decisions.” “ . . . risk management supports risk taking 
260          ACCOUNTING, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND AUDITING 

Case Problems          261
and the organization’s ability to compete.” [Compliance refers to an  organization adhering 
to numerous laws, regulations, and initiatives.] “Monitoring and supporting  compliance 
is not just a matter of keeping the regulators happy; it is the way that the organization moni-
tors and maintains its health.”
Here is a list of core GRC operations (Zoellick and Frank, 2005: 13–16):
1. Establish and support policies, procedures, and controls. This creates the foundation 
to ensure that the GRC program works.
2. Maintain centralized oversight. The key is high-level oversight of the program from 
top management.
3. Maintain decentralized administration and accountability. Ensure accountability for 
every unit of the organization.
4. Establish communication channels across all organization levels. Communications 
should provide up-to-date policies, procedures, and controls.
5. Audit, monitor, and report. Methods must be implemented to ensure that policies and 
procedures are being employed.
6. Provide uniform support, remediation, and enforcement. Ensure consistent incentives 
to comply and discipline for violators.
7. Implement continuous process improvement. Management must respond to feedback 
to improve GRC.
Search the Web
To learn more about preventing and detecting fraud, embezzlement, and other white-
collar crimes, check these Web sites:
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Anti-Fraud and Corporate 
Responsibility Center: http://antifraud.aicpa.org/
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners: www.cfenet.com/
Institute of Management & Administration: www.ioma.com/
National Coalition for the Prevention of Economic Crime: www.ncpec.org/
National White Collar Crime Center: www.nw3c.org/
Securities and Exchange Commission: www.sec.gov/
Case Problems
11A.  With reference to the purchasing accountability section of this chapter and Figure 
11-1, design an accountability system to strengthen control and prevent losses when 
merchandise travels from the receiving department to the originator. Look for any 
other weaknesses and suggest controls.
11B.  You are a CSO for a medium-sized corporation that manufactures computer 
components. Your boss asks you to prepare a plan of antifraud strategies. Prepare a 
list of what you think are the top five strategies that will be the heart of your plan.
11C.  As a corporate IT director, you have been asked by a top executive to program 
software so revenue will appear greater than it actually is because of a slowing 
economy. What are your choices in the matter, and how do you respond to the 
executive?
11D.  As director of loss prevention for a corporation, you learn that the company 
president and the head of IT have conspired to fraudulently alter financial records 
to show revenue higher than what is expected. What do you do?

References
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. (1978). “A Small Business Internal 
Control Questionnaire.” The Journal of Accountancy (July).
Bodnar, G., and Hopwood, W. (2004). Accounting Information Systems, 9th ed. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Curtis, B. (1980). “Executive Insights.” Security World, 17 (February).
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Financial Crimes Section. (2005). “Financial Crimes 
Report to the Public.” http://www.fbi.gov/publications/financial/fcs_report052005/fcs_
report052005.htm, retrieved October 4, 2006.
Johnston, R., and Warner, J. (2005). “The Dr. Who Conundrum.” Security Management, 49 
(September).
Levy, M., and Weitz, B. (2001). Retailing Management, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Irwin.
Mann, R., and Roberts, B. (2001) Essentials of Business Law, 7th ed. Cincinnati, OH: 
West.
Nash, K. (1999). “IT Staffers Charged in Accounting Frauds.” Computerworld (December).
National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Center. (2005). “Technology Primer: 
Radio Frequency Identification.” TECHBeat (Summer).
Twomey, D. (2001). Anderson’s Business Law & the Regulatory Environment, 14th ed. 
Cincinnati, OH: West.
Wilson, R. (2004). “Sarbanes-Oxley: Lessons from Security Directors.” Security Director 
News, 1 (August).
Zoellick, B., and Frank, T. (2005). “Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance: An 
Operational Approach” (May 16). http://gilbane.com/publications/GRC_Operational_
Approach_PD1_0_050512.pdf, retrieved October 28, 2006.
262          ACCOUNTING, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND AUDITING 

• risk
• risk management
• risk perception theory
• risk communication theory
• insurance brokers
• risk management process
• first party risks
• third party risks
• risk financing
• risk control
• Delphi approach
• game theory
• enterprise risk management
• event risk management
• financial risk management
• insurance
• shared risk
• commercial package policy
• bond
• fidelity bond
• surety bond
• Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 
2002
• cyber insurance
• claims management
• business continuity
• NFPA 1600 Standard on Disaster/
Emergency Management and Business 
Continuity Programs
KEY TERMS
Risk Management, Business 
Continuity, and Emergency 
Management
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Define risk management and explain its purpose.
2. Describe the role of the risk manager.
3. Explain the risk management process, risk modeling, risk management tools, and 
enterprise risk management.
4. List and explain at least eight types of insurance.
5. Elaborate on the insurance claims process.
6. Discuss how to establish a business continuity plan.
7. Explain the role of government in risk management, all-hazards preparedness, and 
emergency management.
12
263

264          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Note: Portions of this chapter are from: Purpura, P. (2007). Terrorism and Homeland 
Security: An Introduction with Applications. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-
Heinemann.
Risk Management
As defined in Chapter 2, risk is the measurement of the frequency, probability, and severity 
of losses from exposure to threats or hazards (e.g., crime, fire, accident, and natural disaster). 
The wise businessperson is knowledgeable about all exposures. Business interruption, for 
example, results from crime, fire, accident, flood, tornado, and the like. Another exposure is 
liability. A customer might become injured on the premises after falling or be harmed in some 
way when using a product manufactured by a business.
The most productive way of handling unavoidable risks is to manage them as well as pos-
sible. Hence, the term risk management has evolved. Risk management makes the most efficient 
before-the-loss arrangement for an after-the-loss continuation of a business. Insurance is a major 
risk management tool. Leimberg et al. (2002: 6), from the insurance industry, define risk manage-
ment as follows: “A preloss exercise that reflects an organization’s postloss goals; a process to 
recognize and manage faulty and potentially dangerous operations, trends, and policies that could 
lead to loss and to minimize losses that do occur.”
Risk management is important to not only businesses, but also our whole society. It is 
applicable to government, institutions, all types of organizations, the family, and individuals. 
The purpose of risk management is to protect people and assets.
Risk management and loss prevention are naturally intertwined. Loss prevention is another 
tool for risk managers to make their job easier. Insurance is made more affordable through loss 
prevention methods. Additional risk management tools are described in subsequent pages.
Both loss prevention and risk management originated in the insurance industry. 
Fire insurance companies, soon after the Civil War, formed the National Board of Fire 
Underwriters, which was instrumental in reducing loss of life and property through preven-
tion measures. Today, loss prevention has spread throughout the insurance industry and into 
the business community. Risk management is also an old practice. The modern history of risk 
management is said by many insurance experts to have begun in 1931, with the establishment 
of the insurance section of the American Management Association. The insurance section 
holds conferences and workshops for those in the insurance and risk management field.
• emergency management
• systems theory
• chaos theory
• decision theory
• management theory
• organizational behavior theory
• risk perception and communication 
theory
• social constructionist theory
• Weberian theory
• Marxist theory
• all-hazards preparedness concept
• generic emergency management
• specialized emergency management
• Civil Defense Programs
• community-based mitigation
• Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA)
• mitigation
• response
• recovery
• preparedness
• interoperability
• National Response Plan (NRP)
• National Incident Management System 
(NIMS)
• National Preparedness Goal
• logistics
• U.S. Northern Command (NORTH-
COM)
• Posse Comitatus Act

Risk management theory draws on probability and statistics, mathematics, engineering, 
economics, business, and the social sciences, among other disciplines. The study of risk has 
expanded to include the understanding of the psychological, cultural, and social context of 
risk. The expanding nature of the study of risk is illustrated by the two theories that follow 
(Borodzicz, 2005: 14–47).
• Risk perception theory focuses on how humans learn from their environment and react 
to it. Psychologists apply a cognitive research approach to understand how humans 
gain knowledge through perception and reasoning. For instance, risk can be researched 
by isolating a variable and simulating it in a laboratory with a group of subjects in an 
experiment involving risk decision making (e.g., gambling). The psychometric approach 
is another method of researching risk; it involves a survey to measure individual views 
of risks. Research on risk perception shows that people find unusual risks to be more 
terrifying than familiar ones and, interestingly, the familiar risks claim the most lives; 
voluntary risk (e.g., smoking) is preferred over imposed risk (e.g., a hazardous industry 
moving near one’s home); and people have limited trust in official data.
• Risk communication theory concerns itself with communication perceptions of 
experts and lay citizens. Although experts work to simplify information for lay 
citizens, communication of simplified information and behavior change may not be 
successful. Research on this topic focuses on lay citizen perceptions of risk within the 
context of psychological, social, cultural, and political factors. Risk communication 
theory is important because it holds answers for educating and preparing citizens for 
emergencies.
The Role of the Risk Manager
Traditionally, businesses purchased insurance through outside insurance brokers. Generally, 
a broker brings together a buyer and a seller. Insurance brokers are especially helpful when a 
company seeking insurance has no proprietary risk manager to analyze risks and plan insur-
ance coverage. Not all businesses can afford the services of a broker or a proprietary risk 
manager; however, risk management tools are applicable to all entities.
The risk manager’s job varies with the company served. He or she may be responsible 
for insurance only; or for security, safety, and insurance; or for loss prevention, insurance, 
investments, and business continuity. One important consideration in the implementation of a 
risk management (or loss prevention) program is that the program must be explained in finan-
cial terms to top executives. Is the program cost effective? What is the return on investment? 
Financial benefits and financial protection are primary expectations of top executives that the 
risk manager must consider during decision making. Leimberg et al. (2002: 4) write
It is extremely difficult to measure tangible benefits against a nonevent (i.e., the 
catastrophic loss did not occur due to our highly effective risk management pro-
gram). Yet this is the challenge facing all risk managers. Ultimately, the metrics 
that senior management uses to gauge success—for example, earnings growth and 
return on invested capital—must also serve as the yardsticks used to measure the 
effectiveness of risk management.
Research in England of the activities of risk managers in 30 different organizations 
showed five major factors influenced risk managers’ roles. Top management had a major 
influence on the risk manager in the form of direct instruction on primary tasks. External 
influences included recommendations from outside groups to increase attention to risk man-
agement within businesses and requirements for risk reporting. The nature of the business, 
corporate developments (e.g., expansion and exposures), and characteristics of the risk man-
agement department (e.g., resources available) also influenced the role of the risk manager 
(Ward, 2001: 7–25).
Among the many activities of the traditional risk manager are to develop specifications for 
insurance coverage wanted, meet with insurance company representatives, study various policies, 
Risk Management          265

266          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
and decide on the most appropriate coverage at the best possible price. Coverage may be required 
by law or contract, such as workers’ compensation insurance and vehicle liability insurance. 
Plant and equipment should be reappraised periodically to maintain adequate insurance cover-
age. In addition, the changing value of buildings and other assets, as well as replacement costs, 
must be considered in the face of depreciation and inflation (Bieber, 1987: 23–30).
It is of tremendous importance that the expectations of insurance coverage be clearly 
understood. The risk manager’s job could be in jeopardy if false impressions are communicated 
to top executives, who believe a loss is covered when it is not. Certain things may be excluded 
from a specific policy that might require special policies or endorsements. Insurance policies 
state what incidents are covered and to what degree. Incidents not covered are also stated. An 
understanding of stipulations concerning insurance claims, when to report a loss, to whom, and 
supporting documentation is essential in order not to invalidate a claim.
During this planning process, loss prevention measures are appraised in an effort to reduce 
insurance costs. Because premium reductions through loss prevention are a strong motivating 
force, risk managers may view strategies, such as security officers, as a necessary annoyance.
Deductibles are another risk management tool to cut insurance expenses. There are sev-
eral forms of deductibles, but generally the policyholder pays for small losses up to a specified 
amount (e.g., $1,000, $10,000), while the insurance carrier pays for losses above the specified 
amount, less the deductible.
A major concern for the risk manager in the planning process is what amount of risk is to 
be assumed by the business beyond that covered by insurance and loss prevention strategies. A 
delicate balance should be maintained between excessive protection and excessive exposure.
Today, the risk manager’s job has become more complicated, and executives through-
out corporations—from finance to human resources to corporate boards of directors—are 
increasingly concerned about risks. Financial failures and corporate scandals (e.g., Enron 
and WorldCom) illustrate the variety of risks businesses face. Regulatory laws, such as the 
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002, reinforce the legal obligations of businesses to properly 
identify, assess, and manage risks. In addition, country-specific risks are becoming more 
important as international business operations and the global economy grow (Moody, 
2006).
The Risk Management Process
As the risk management discipline developed, a need arose for a systematic approach for 
evaluating risk. Leimberg et al. (2002: 2–3) describe what is known as the risk management 
process.
Step 1, Risk Identification: Risks must be identified prior to being managed. Risks are 
divided into various categories. For example, first party risks involve owned assets. 
Damage to a company truck is a first party risk. Third party risks pertain to liability 
resulting from business operations. If a company truck is involved in a traffic accident, 
the company may be liable for property damage and injury to others not connected to 
the company. Risk identification is challenging because many threats and hazards face 
organizations, as listed in Chapter 2.
Step 2, Quantitative Analysis: Risk quantification applies probability, statistics, tools, and 
software to anticipate the maximum and expected financial loss from each identified 
risk. If a fire destroys a building costing $10 million to replace, the maximum loss is 
$10 million. However, loss prevention methods (e.g., fire-resistive construction and 
a sprinkler system) can reduce the loss significantly. Risk quantification for physical 
assets is usually easier than for public liability and worker safety.
Step 3, Evaluate Treatment Options: This step uses identified risks and quantitative 
analysis as a foundation to prepare measures to reduce exposure. Two methods 
included in this step are risk financing and risk control. Risk financing is very broad 
and can be categorized as “on-balance sheet” and “off-balance sheet.” The former 
includes insurance policy deductibles and self-insured loss exposures; essentially, a 
business absorbs losses. The latter includes insurance policies and contractual transfers 

of risk. Transferring risks “off-balance sheet” is not free, and costs can increase. For 
instance, if insured losses increase in frequency, insurance premiums and deductibles 
are likely to rise. Risk control, also known as loss prevention, involves precautions 
(e.g., security and safety methods) to reduce risk.
Step 4, Implementation: Once the treatment options are studied and planned, the next 
step is to put the selected options into practice.
Step 5, Monitoring and Adjusting: The risk management process concludes with program 
oversight, analysis, and modifications.
Risk Modeling
The process of selecting which exposures deserve increased attention is difficult. Although 
no person or technology can predict the future, methodologies are available to help estimate 
risk, while serving as a foundation for prioritizing and planning. Risk modeling offers various 
methodologies to estimate risk; however, it is not a “crystal ball.” The Rand Corporation, 
for example, developed the Delphi approach, during World War II. It consists of sending a 
structured questionnaire to a group of experts and then conducting a statistical analysis to 
generate probabilistic forecasts. To enhance the process, the experts may play the role of an 
adversary making decisions. Another type of risk modeling is game theory. In reference to 
the problem of terrorism, Starner (2003: 32) states: “Game theory suggests that the likeli-
hood—and targets—of a future terrorist attack can be modeled by understanding the opera-
tional and behavioral characteristics of the terrorist organization.” It involves the concept 
that adversaries are rational and make choices based on their information and rules. Game 
theory is a method to get inside the minds of terrorists. The key is to know adversaries and 
their rules to anticipate their actions.
Modeling helps insurance companies understand risks and set premiums. Since the 
9/11 attacks, for example, insurers have been asking specific questions about the number of 
employees at individual buildings at specific geographic locations so they can compute the 
risk they are accepting. For instance, if 3,000 employees are at one location, it represents a 
$3 billion workers’ compensation exposure in a state that puts a $1 million price tag on a life 
(Stoneman, 2003: 18).
Risk Management Tools
Within the risk management process, and before a final decision is made on risk management 
measures, the practitioner should consider the following tools for dealing with risk:
• Risk avoidance: This approach asks whether to avoid the risk. For example, the 
production of a proposed product is canceled because the danger inherent in the 
manufacturing process creates a risk that outweighs potential profits. Or, a bank 
avoids opening a branch in a country subject to political instability or terrorism.
• Risk transfer: Risk can be transferred to insurance. The risk manager works with an 
insurance company to tailor a coverage program for the risk. This approach should 
not be used in lieu of loss prevention measures but rather to support them. Insurance 
should be last in a series of defenses. Another method of transferring risk is to lease 
equipment rather than own it. This would transfer the risk of obsolescence.
• Risk abatement: In abatement, a risk is decreased through a loss prevention measure. 
Risks are not eliminated, but the severity of loss is reduced. Sprinklers, for example, 
reduce losses from fire. Sand bags assist in delaying erosion (Figure 12-1).
• Risk spreading: Potential losses are reduced by spreading the risk among multiple 
locations. For example, a copy of vital records is stored at a remote, secure location. 
In another example, following the 9/11 attacks, companies have spread operations 
among multiple locations to facilitate business continuity and survivability.
• Risk assumption: In the assumption approach, a company makes itself liable for 
losses. In one path, no action is taken and no insurance is obtained. This may result 
because the chance for loss is minute. Another path, self-insurance, provides for 
Risk Management          267

268          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
periodic payments to a reserve fund in case of loss. Risk assumption may be the 
only choice for a company if insurance cannot be obtained. With risk assumption, 
prevention strategies become essential.
Enterprise Risk Management
A trend today in the risk management field is known as enterprise risk management (ERM). 
Leimberg et al. (2002: 6) define it as “a management process that identifies, defines, quantifies, com-
pares, prioritizes, and treats all of the material risks facing an organization, whether or not it is insur-
able.” It refers to a comprehensive risk management program that addresses a variety of business 
risks. Examples are risk of profit or loss; uncertainty regarding the organization’s goals as it faces 
its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats; and risk of accident, fire, crime, and disasters. 
When all of these risks are packaged into one program, planning is improved and overall risk can 
be reduced. Because risks frequently are uncorrelated (i.e., all of them causing loss in the same year), 
insurance costs are lower. For instance, the following risks are unlikely to occur in the same year: fire, 
adverse movement in a foreign currency, and homicide in the workplace (Rejda, 2001: 64–66).
Leimberg et al. (2002: 6) describe the trend of two separate and distinct forms of risk 
management. Event risk management focuses on traditional risks (e.g., fire) that insurance cov-
ers. Financial risk management protects the financial assets of a business from risks that insur-
ers generally avoid. Examples are foreign currency exchange risk, credit risk, and interest rate 
movements. Various capital risk transfer tools are available to protect financial assets. ERM 
seeks to combine event and financial risk for a comprehensive approach to business risks.
Since ERM is interdisciplinary in nature, corporations are forming committees for plan-
ning. At Hallmark Cards, Inc., the enterprise risk management oversight committee consists 
of personnel from finance, risk management, legal, human resources, IT, and internal audit 
(Conley, 2000: 43–50).
FIGURE 12-1 Florida hotel faces risk of beach erosion from Hurricane Irene. Courtesy: Ty Harrington/FEMA.
Should a security and loss prevention executive or a CSO be part of an enterprise risk 
management committee? Why or why not?

Insurance          269
International Perspective: Risk Management in a Multinational Business
Morris (2001: 22–30) writes about overseas business operations and the need for answers 
to specific questions about each country in which business will be conducted. She begins 
with the following questions: How is business conducted in comparison to the United 
States? How strong is the currency? How vulnerable is the area to natural disasters, fire, 
and crime? What are the potential employment practices liability issues? What is the 
record of accomplishment of shipments to and from the area?
  Political risks are especially challenging in overseas operations. Are terrorist groups 
or the government hostile to foreign companies and their employees? Does the host gov-
ernment have a record of instability and war, seizing foreign assets, capping increases in 
the price of products or adding taxes to undermine foreign investments, and imposing 
barriers to control the movement of capital out of the country?
  Eighty percent of the terrorist acts committed against U.S. interests abroad target U.S. 
businesses, rather than governmental or military posts. These threats include kidnapping, 
extortion, product contamination, workplace violence, and IT sabotage.
  The concept of enterprise risk management can be especially helpful with multina-
tional businesses because of a multitude of threats. A key challenge for the risk manager 
is to bring together a full range of resources and network in the United States and over-
seas prior to potential losses so, if a loss occurs, a speedy and aggressive response helps 
the business to rebound.
  Options for insurance include buying it in the home country and arranging cover-
age for overseas operations; however, this may be illegal in some countries that require 
admitted insurance. Another approach is to let the firm’s management in each country 
make the insurance decision, but this means that the corporate headquarters has less 
control of risk management. A third avenue is to work with a global insurer who has 
subsidiaries or partner insurers in each country; this approach offers uniform coverage 
globally. A key question in these approaches: Is the insurer financially solvent to pay 
the insured following a covered loss?
Insurance
Insurance is the transfer of risk from one party (the insured) to another party (the insurer), in 
which the insurer is obligated to indemnify (compensate) the insured for economic loss caused 
from an unexpected event during a period of time for which the insured makes a premium 
payment to the insurer. This permits the insured to avoid holding a large amount of liquid 
capital (cash) in reserve to pay for huge losses; the liquid capital can be invested. The essence 
of insurance is the sharing of risks; insurance permits the insured to substitute a small cost (the 
premium) for a large loss under an arrangement whereby the fortunate many who escape loss 
will indirectly assist in the compensation of the unfortunate few who experience loss. For an 
insurance company to function properly, a large number of policyholders are required. This 
creates a shared risk.
The technical aspects of the insurance industry involve the skills of statisticians, econo-
mists, financial analysts, engineers, attorneys, physicians, and, of course, risk managers and 
loss prevention specialists, among others. Insurance companies must carefully set rates, metic-
ulously draft contracts, establish underwriting guidelines (i.e., accepting or rejecting risks for 
an insurance company), and invest funds prudently.
Insurance rates are dependent on two primary variables: the frequency of claims and the 
cost of each claim. When insurance companies periodically review rates, the “loss experience” 
of the immediate past is studied.

270          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
The insurance industry is subject to two forms of control: competition among insur-
ance companies and government regulation. Competition enables the consumer to compare 
rates and coverage for the best possible buy. Government regulatory authorities in each state 
or jurisdiction have a responsibility to the public to assure the solvency of each insurance 
company so policyholders will be indemnified when appropriate. Furthermore, rates should 
be neither excessive nor unfairly discriminatory. Problems with the state system of regulation 
came to light following the case of Martin Frankel, who looted $200 million from insurance 
companies he owned during the 1990s (Gurwitt, 2001: 18–24). Since the case affected insur-
ers in five states, Congress asked the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) to investigate. A 
fall 2000 report by the GAO blamed the states for inadequate regulatory policies, procedures, 
practices, and investigations, and a lack of information sharing. There are calls for a federal 
regulatory system, but the states will fight for the revenue—$10.2 billion in insurer premium 
taxes and fees while spending $839 million to regulate the industry. Insurance industry execu-
tives argue that “50 monkeys are better than one gorilla.”
To check on the financial health of an insurer, contact an insurance company rating 
service and look for a rating of A+ or better. Examples of these firms are A.M. Best and 
Standard & Poor’s.
Types of Insurance
Insurance can be divided into two broad categories: government and private. Government 
insurance programs include Social Security, Medicare, unemployment insurance, workers’ 
compensation, retirement, insurance on checking and savings accounts in banks, flood insur-
ance, and numerous other programs on the federal and state levels.
In the United States, the private insurance industry is divided into property and liability 
(casualty) insurance and life and health insurance. This industry employs millions in the United 
States, among thousands of insurance companies, while administering trillions of dollars in 
assets. Outside the United States, the private insurance industry is divided into life and nonlife 
(or general) insurance. In 2005, world insurance premium volume totaled $3.4 trillion, and the 
United States wrote about one-third of this volume (Insurance Information Institute, 2006).
Property and liability insurance covers fire, ocean marine, inland marine (i.e., goods 
shipped on land), and liability insurance, which is a broad field such as general liability (e.g., 
from sales of products, professional services), automobile, crime, workers’ compensation, 
boiler and machinery, glass, and nuclear, among other types. The property and liability field 
also includes multiple-line insurance (i.e., two or more perils covered under one policy) and 
fidelity and surety bonds.
Advisory organizations have been established in the property and liability field to offer 
a variety of research services to insurance companies, develop policy forms, and pool loss 
statistics among insurance companies to increase the accuracy of rates. Two major advi-
sory organizations are the Insurance Services Office (ISO) and the American Association of 
Insurance Services (AAIS).
Because types of insurance are numerous, varied and confusing, groups such as the 
ISO develop insurance contracts and forms and seek standardization. This group’s effort is 
illustrated through the commercial package policy (CPP) that contains multiple coverage in 
a single policy, fewer gaps in coverage, lower premiums because individual policies are not 
purchased, and convenience. The CPP is used by retail stores, office buildings, manufacturers, 
motels, hotels, apartments, schools, churches, and many other organizations. CPP coverage 
commonly contains two or more coverage parts. A business may select, for example, coverage 
focusing on commercial property, general liability, auto, and crime (Rejda, 2001: 266–268).
Crime Insurance and Bonds
Two basic kinds of protection against crime losses are (1) fidelity and surety bonds and 
(2) burglary, robbery, and theft insurance. The first covers losses caused by dishonesty or 
 incapacitation from persons entrusted with money or other property that violate this trust. 
The second type of protection covers theft by persons who are not in a position of trust.

Various crime coverage forms, which describe what is covered, are currently in use. 
These forms can be issued as a monoline policy or as part of a CPP. Malecki (2006) notes 
that, in 2006, there was a general “tightening” of coverage conditions of commercial crime 
forms. For instance, courts have strengthened the exclusion that commercial crime insurance 
is not intended to cover employees who committed theft or dishonesty prior to issuance of a 
policy.
The Surety Association of America has developed forms pertaining to employee dishon-
esty and loss from forgery. Examples include Form A, Employee Dishonesty; Form B, Forgery 
or Alteration; and Forms O and P, Public Employee Dishonesty. The coverage of Form A, 
a bond, includes embezzlement of funds by a company’s treasurer or stealing by a cashier.
What are the differences between insurance and a bond? A bond is a legal instrument 
whereby one party (the surety) agrees to indemnify another party (the obligee) if the obligee 
incurs a loss from the person bonded (the principal or obligor). Although a bond may seem 
like insurance, there are differences between them. Generally, a bonding contract involves three 
parties, whereas an insurance contract involves two. With a bond, the surety has the legal 
right to attempt collection from the principal after indemnifying the obligee; collection would 
be absurd by an insurer against an insured party, unless fraud was evident. Another difference 
is that insurance is easier to cancel than a bond. The insured can cancel insurance by simply 
notifying the insurer or by nonpayment of premium. Breach of the insurance contract by the 
insured or nonpayment of premium are the insurer’s frequent reasons for cancellation and a 
legal defense by the insurer to avoid liability. On the other hand, with a bond, the surety is 
liable to the beneficiary even though breach of contract or fraud occurred by the principal.
Fidelity Bond
Generally, a fidelity bond requires that an employee(s) be investigated to limit the risk of 
dishonesty for the insured. If the bonded employee violates the trust, the insurer (bonding 
company) indemnifies the employer (insured) for the amount of the policy.
Fidelity bonds may be of two kinds: (1) those in which an individual is specifically 
bonded, by name or by position, and (2) “blanket bonds,” which cover a whole category of 
employees.
Surety Bond
A surety bond essentially is an agreement providing for compensation if there is a failure 
to perform specified acts within a certain period of time. One of the more common surety 
bonds is called a contract construction bond. It guarantees that the contractor(s) involved in 
construction will complete the work that is stipulated in the construction contract, free from 
debts or encumbrances.
Several types of surety bonds are used in the judiciary system. A fiduciary bond ensures 
that persons appointed by the court to supervise the property of others will be trustworthy. A 
litigation bond ensures specific conduct by defendants and plaintiffs. A bail bond ensures that 
a person will appear in court; otherwise, the entire bond is forfeited.
Burglary, Robbery, and Theft Insurance
Understanding the definitions for burglary, robbery, and theft is important when studying 
insurance contracts. In reference to businesses, a valid burglary insurance claim requires the 
unlawful taking of property from a closed business that was entered by force. In the absence 
of visible marks showing forced entry, a burglary policy is inapplicable. Robbery is the unlaw-
ful taking of property from another by force or threat of force. Without force or threat of 
force, robbery has not occurred. Theft is a broad, catchall term that includes all crimes of 
stealing, plus burglary and robbery.
Despite the availability of insurance, crime against property is one of the most under-
insured perils. Estimates are that less than 10% of loss to property from ordinary crime is 
insured. Risk assumption remains the often-used tool to handle the crime peril.
Insurance          271

272          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Federal Crime Insurance
The Federal Crime Insurance Program, established by Congress, began operation in 1971 
to counter the difficulty of obtaining adequate burglary and robbery insurance, particularly 
in urban areas. The program was discontinued in 1995. Private insurers and their agents 
administered the coverage, and the federal government, through the Federal Insurance 
Administration, was the bearer of the risk.
Kidnapping and Extortion Insurance
Another form of crime insurance covers losses from a ransom paid in a kidnapping or through 
extortion. During the 1970s, an upsurge in domestic and international kidnappings and ter-
rorism created a need for this form of insurance. U.S. banks and corporations with overseas 
executives are especially interested in this coverage. These policies cover executives, their 
families, ransom money during delivery to extortionists, and corporate negligence during 
negotiations, among other areas of coverage.
Higgins and Cullison (2005) report that the number of reported kidnappings worldwide 
is growing, although many of these crimes are unreported. In 2004, there were about 14,500 
reported cases. What was once a problem concentrated in Latin America has become a global 
criminal enterprise. Unfortunately, in certain regions, a portion of ransom payments goes to 
police or security officials. Government no-ransom pronouncements are often followed by 
denials that a ransom was paid to free a hostage. The U.S. government has a policy of not 
paying ransom. However, American companies and individuals produce ransom and negotiate 
through intermediaries hired by insurers.
Terrorism Insurance
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (TRIA) was passed by Congress to calm the insur-
ance industry that faced claims resulting from the 9/11 attacks and concern over subsequent 
attacks. The act requires insurance companies to provide terrorism coverage to businesses 
willing to purchase it. Participating insurance companies pay out a claim (a deductible) before 
TRIA pays for the loss. TRIA losses are capped at $100 billion. The act is viewed as important 
to the U.S. economy to support recovery in the event of attacks. TRIA was set to expire at 
the end of 2005; however, President Bush signed a two-year extension. The extension raised 
industry deductibles and copayments to increase the insurance industry role in the program 
(BOMA Files, 2006: 20).
Cyber Insurance
Traditional insurance products often do not cover cyber risks. Thus, more and more insurers 
are offering businesses cyber insurance against risks such as viruses, denial of service attacks, 
theft of customer and proprietary information, and intellectual property disputes (France, 
2006). Because this insurance field is developing as technology advances, the insured must 
be careful in selecting an insurer and understanding the definitions, terms, and limitations of 
these policies.
You Be the Judge #1*
Cliff Hawkins, the newest member of Conway Excavation’s repair crew, pulled his roll-
ing tool chest to a stop and extended his hand to his new supervisor.
“Well,” said Dave Greco, smiling and shaking Hawkins’s hand, “it looks like you 
brought everything but the kitchen sink.”
“A good mechanic can’t do much without a good set of tools,” replied Hawkins, 
patting the chest gently. “It took me five years and almost $3,000 to build up this set. 
Which reminds me”—he glanced around the garage—“if you expect me to leave these 
tools here, you’d better have some kind of security.”

Fire Insurance
Historically, the fire policy was one of the first kinds of insurance developed. For many 
years, it has played a significant role in assisting society against the fire peril. Prior to 1873, 
fire insurance contracts were not standardized. Each insurer developed its own contract. 
Omissions in coverage, misinterpretations, and conflicts between insurer and insured 
resulted in considerable problems. These individualized contracts and resultant ambiguities 
caused the state of Massachusetts, in 1873, to establish a standard contract. Seven years 
later, the standard contract became mandatory for all insurance companies in the state. 
Today, except for minor variations in certain states, the wording of fire insurance contracts 
is very similar. However, in recent years, these standard fire policies have diminished in 
importance as broad coverage policies have increased in number.
An understanding of insurance rating procedures provides risk managers and loss pre-
vention managers with the knowledge to propose investments in fire protection that can show 
a return on investment. Factors that influence fire insurance rates include the ability of the 
community’s fire alarm, fire department, and water system to minimize property damage once 
a fire begins. Class 1 communities have the greatest suppression ability, whereas Class 10 has 
the least. Strategies such as convincing the community to take steps to improve its grade and 
installing sprinkler systems in buildings can produce a return on investment (Williams et al., 
1995: 341–345).
Property and Liability Insurance
Business Property Insurance
The building and personal property coverage form is one of several property forms devel-
oped by the ISO program. It covers physical damage loss to commercial buildings, business 
personal property (e.g., furniture, machinery, inventory), and personal property of others in 
“You’ve got nothing to worry about,” replied Greco. “We lock up at night, and 
nothing has ever been stolen yet.”
However, there is a first time for everything. A short time after Hawkins started 
working for Conway Excavation, the garage was broken into. Hawkins’s tools were 
stolen.
“I thought you said my tools would be safe here,” Hawkins fumed when he faced 
Greco.
“I never said that,” Greco corrected him. “I said this garage had never been 
broken into. And it hadn’t.”
“Yeah, well, I hope this company is prepared to reimburse me,” Hawkins said.
Greco sat up in his chair, surprised. “Reimburse you?” he echoed. “No way! 
You knew our security wasn’t very extensive, but you chose to leave your tools here 
anyway.”
“I had to leave my tools here,” Hawkins said angrily.
Greco shrugged. “Still, they were your tools and their loss isn’t this company’s 
responsibility.”
“We’ll see about that,” Hawkins said as he stormed out of the office.
Hawkins went to court to try to force Conway Excavation to reimburse him for 
his stolen tools. Did Hawkins get his money?
Make your decision; then turn to the end of the chapter for the court’s decision.
*Reprinted with permission from Security Management—Plant and Property 
Protection, a publication of Bureau of Business Practice, Inc., 24 Rope Ferry Road, 
Waterford, CT 06386.
Insurance          273

274          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
the control of the insured. Additional coverage includes debris removal,  pollutant removal, 
and fire department service charge. A cause-of-loss form is added to the policy to have a 
complete contract. A basic cause-of-loss form covers fire, lightning, explosion, windstorm or 
hail, smoke, aircraft or vehicles, riot, vandalism, sprinkler leakage, and other perils. A broader 
form can be selected to expand coverage to, for example, glass breakage and earthquake 
(Rejda, 2001: 268–274).
Another important kind of insurance is business income insurance (formerly called busi-
ness interruption insurance). It indemnifies the insured for profits and expenses lost because 
of damage to property from an insured peril.
Liability Insurance
Legal liability for harm caused to others is one of the most serious risks. Negligence can result 
in a substantial court judgment against the responsible party. There are several kinds of expo-
sures in the liability area for businesses. Relevant factors are the functions performed, rela-
tionships involved, and care for others required, such as the employee–employer relationship, 
a contract situation, consumers of manufactured products, and professional acts. Examples 
of liability exposures are bodily injury or death of customers, product liability, completed 
operations (i.e., faulty work away from the premises), environmental pollution, personal 
injury (e.g., false arrest, violation of right of privacy), sexual harassment, and employment 
discrimination.
In many jurisdictions, the law views the failure to obtain liability insurance against the 
consequences of negligence as irresponsible financial behavior. Mandatory liability insurance 
for automobile operators in all states is a familiar example.
Several kinds of business liability insurance are available. The commercial general 
liability (CGL) policy, developed by ISO, is widely used and can be written alone or as part 
of a CPP.
Workers’ Compensation Insurance
Workers’ compensation coverage includes loss of income and medical and rehabilitation 
expenses that result from work-related accidents and occupational diseases. An employer 
can obtain the coverage required by law through three possible avenues: (1) commercial 
insurance companies, (2) a state fund or a federal agency, or (3) self-insurance (i.e., risk 
assumption).
Risk and Insurance Management Society, Benchmark Survey
The Risk and Insurance Management Society (RIMS) publishes an annual Benchmark 
Survey (formerly called Cost of Risk Survey). The purpose of the survey is to provide 
an opportunity for risk managers to measure their organization’s risk management 
performance. The survey provides data to assist risk managers in structuring insurance 
programs, making cost comparisons to others in the same industry, and preparing rec-
ommendations to senior executives.
  A major gauge in the survey is the cost of risk (COR) per $1,000 of revenue. The 
2005 survey showed that the total cost of risk (TCOR) was down for the first time since 
2001. Almost every industry showed a decrease in the median premium per $1,000 of 
revenue for 2005. Following the 9/11 attacks, insurance costs increased through 2003. 
In 2004, insurance costs fell in most lines, except for workers’ compensation, which 
caused a slight increase in TCOR. In 2005, the median TCOR fell about 11%. Despite 
Hurricanes Rita, Wilma, and Katrina, the property and casualty insurance industry 
earned about $55 billion in 2005 (Insurance Newsnet, 2006).

You Be the Judge #2*
A vice president had been embezzling money from the Michigan Mining Corporation 
for several years, but Security Director Steve Douglas finally caught him. It was some-
thing of a Pyrrhic victory, however—the culprit was nabbed, but the company was out 
$135,000. Luckily, MMC had comprehensive business insurance that Douglas was 
sure would cover most of the loss.
The security director looked over the two policies, but they were poorly written 
and very confusing, so he called Lester Blank, the agent who handled the policies.
“I limped through the policies,” Douglas explained, “and I think I get the gist of 
them. MMC’s covered for $100,000, right?”
“Wrong,” Blank said. “The second policy replaced the first. You’re only covered 
for $50,000.”
Douglas was stunned, but he recovered quickly. “Now, wait a minute,” he said. 
“I may not have caught every mixed-up word in these policies, but the second one says 
we can collect on the first one for up to a year after its expiration date, provided the 
loss occurred during the time the first policy was in effect.”
“But the total limit is still $50,000,” insisted the insurance agent. “You’ll find a 
clause to that effect in the second policy, if you read carefully.”
“If I read carefully!” Douglas cried. “This second policy is so full of spelling and 
clerical errors that it’s anybody’s guess what it means. One look at this piece of slipshod 
writing and any court will side with us.”
Therefore, MMC went to court, claiming that because the policy was so 
 complicated and poorly written, it should be interpreted in the company’s favor.
Did the court agree with MMC?
Make your decision; then turn to the end of the chapter for the court’s  decision.
*Reprinted with permission from Security Management—Plant and Property 
Protection, a publication of Bureau of Business Practice, Inc., 24 Rope Ferry Road, 
Waterford, CT 06386.
Insurance          275
Claims
When an insured party incurs a loss, a claim is made to the insurer to cover the loss as stipu-
lated in the insurance contract. For an insurance company, the settling of losses and adjust-
ing differences between itself and the policyholder is known as claims management. Care is 
necessary by the insurer because underpayments can lead to lost customers, yet overpayments 
can lead to bankruptcy.
An insurance company investigation of a claim commonly includes (1) a determination 
that there has been a loss, (2) a determination that the insured has not invalidated the insur-
ance contract, (3) an evaluation of the proof of loss, and (4) an estimate of the amount of 
loss. An example of item 2 occurs when the insured has not fulfilled obligations under the 
insurance contract, such as not protecting property from further damage after a fire or not 
adequately maintaining loss prevention measures.
Furthermore, most insurance contracts specify that the insured party must give immedi-
ate notice of loss. The purpose is to give the insurer an opportunity to study the loss before 
evidence to support the claim has been damaged. Failure to provide immediate notice may 
render the insurance invalid. The insured usually has 60 to 90 days to produce proof of loss. 
The insured is expected to provide accounting records, bills, and so on that might help in 
establishing the loss.

276          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Before a settlement is reached, the insurer checks the coverage, the claim is investi-
gated, and loss reports and claim papers are prepared. Then the insurance company claims 
department studies the loss, the policy is interpreted and applied to the loss, and a payment 
is approved or disapproved.
Insurance companies employ different classifications of adjusters to settle claims. An 
insurance agent (i.e. salesperson) may serve as an adjuster for small claims up to a certain 
amount. A company adjuster is more experienced about claims and handles larger losses. 
Independent adjusters offer services to insurance companies for a fee. Public adjusters repre-
sent the insured party for a fee.
From the insurance industry’s perspective, the work of an adjuster is demanding. A high 
priority is to satisfy claimants in order to retain customers. At the same time, the interests and 
assets of the insurance company must be protected. Some claimants make honest mistakes 
in estimating losses. They may place a value on destroyed property that is above the market 
value. Exaggerations are common. Confusion may arise when claimants have not carefully 
read their insurance policy. Consequently, a process of education and negotiation often takes 
place between the adjuster and the claimant. Once the claimant signs the proof of loss papers 
or cashes the settlement check, this signifies that the claimant is satisfied and that further 
rights to pursue the claim are waived. In a certain number of claims, an agreement is not 
reached initially. The policy states the terms for settling claims. Typically, arbitration results. 
Each party appoints a disinterested party to act as arbitrator. The two arbitrators then select 
a third disinterested party. Agreements between two of the three arbitrators are binding. In 
liability cases, the court takes the place of arbitrators.
Dishonest claimants are a serious problem for the insurance industry, and for society. 
Insurance fraud is pervasive and costly. Policyholders are the ultimate group that pays for 
these crimes through increased premiums.
Arson is unfortunately a popular way of defrauding insurance companies. Generally, 
a property owner sets a fire to collect on an insurance policy. A professional arsonist may 
be recruited. Law enforcement agencies and the insurance industry have increased efforts to 
combat arson through additional arson investigators, improved training, better detection equip-
ment, and computers that search data for patterns of those who defraud insurance companies.
Claims for Crime Losses
A loss prevention practitioner or risk manager may be confronted with important decisions 
in a claim in an attempt to minimize losses for his or her employer. Although crime claims are 
emphasized here, several points are applicable to other types of claims.
When a person or business takes out an insurance policy to cover valuables, the insur-
ance agent may not require proof that the valuables exist. However, when a claim is filed, 
the insurer becomes very interested in not only evidence to prove that the valuables were 
stolen (e.g., police report), but also evidence that the valuables in fact existed. Without proof, 
indemnification may become difficult. To avoid this problem, several steps are useful. First, 
the insured should prepare an inventory of all valuables. Accounting records and receipts are 
good sources for the inventory list. The list should include the item name, serial number, date 
it was purchased, price, and a receipt. Photographs and video of valuables are also useful. 
Copies should be located in two separate safe places.
Bonding Claims
Numerous insurance companies have found the fidelity bond business to be generally unprof-
itable. To compound the situation, businesspeople have attempted to used fidelity bond 
claims to cover losses from mysterious disappearance and general inventory shortages, rather 
than for their intended purpose—coverage for internal theft. For these reasons, when a claim 
takes place, the insurer and insured have a tendency to enter negotiations as adversaries. The 
strength of the loss prevention practitioner’s case will definitely affect the settlement. Care 
must be exercised throughout the interaction with the insurer so as not to in any way invali-
date the contract. Furthermore, the burden of proof for losses rests entirely on the insured.

Before 1970, the insurer investigated applicants and notified the insured of any crimi-
nal history of the applicant that would bar coverage. Because of economy measures and 
the difficulty of checking into a person’s background, many insurers have made a shift to 
the insured for verifying the applicant’s past. Bonds stipulate that past dishonesty by the 
employee justifies an exclusion from bonding from the day the information is discovered; 
if a loss occurs and the insurer can prove that this information was known to the insured 
company but not reported to the insurer, the bond is likely to be invalid.
Another way to invalidate a bond is through restitution by the employee to the 
employer without notifying the insurer. In many cases, the employee is eager to pay back what 
was stolen but makes only a few payments before absconding. Thereafter, if a claim is made, 
the bond is useless.
In reference to the burden of proof, the loss prevention practitioner should have 
considerable expertise when dealing with the insurer on behalf of his or her employer. 
Confusion often arises from the “exclusionary clause” of the fidelity bond policy. This 
clause essentially states that the bond does not cover losses that are dependent on proof 
from inventory records or a profit and loss computation. Prior to 1970, these records were 
not even allowed to establish the extent of losses even though employees had confessed. 
However, in the early 1970s, courts began to be more flexible in limiting the exclusionary 
clause and thus allowing inventory records and associated computations to establish the 
amount of loss when independent proof also was introduced to establish that there was loss 
due to employee theft.
A confession is of prime importance to bonding claims. A guilty verdict in a criminal 
court or a favorable labor arbitration ruling are additional assets for the claimant.
Business Continuity          277
What do you think are the most difficult challenges of a risk manager’s job?
Business Continuity
As we know, businesses and government face an enormous number of exposures to threats 
and hazards, and risk refers to the measurement of the frequency, probability, and severity 
of these exposures. Risk management helps business and government executives study and 
manage risks so they can prioritize risks and then plan and take action under limited bud-
gets. Risk management is at the foundation of planning and action against risks. Business 
continuity is the term applied in the private sector (business) for planning and action against 
risks. Emergency management is the term applied in the public sector (government) for 
planning and action against risks. Here, we begin with a discussion of business continu-
ity, and then we turn to emergency management to understand the role of government in 
emergencies.
Business continuity is defined by ASIS International (2004: 7) as follows: “A compre-
hensive managed effort to prioritize key business processes, identify significant threats to nor-
mal operation, and plan mitigation strategies to ensure effective and efficient organizational 
response to the challenges that surface during and after a crisis.”
The essence of business continuity is an up-to-date, comprehensive plan to increase the 
survivability of a business when it faces an emergency. Examples of topics in the plan are 
employee safety; IT backup; customer support; and limited, if any, recovery time. There is 
a lack of consistency in the private sector with business continuity planning. Top executives 
view and support it differently among businesses.
Many factors influence the success of business continuity. Examples are local infrastruc-
ture and the resources of public safety agencies. Because of recovery challenges following the 
9/11 attacks, increased public-private sector cooperation has occurred.

278          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Garris (2005: 28–32) writes that in our litigious society, organizations that fail to plan 
for emergencies could be held liable for injuries or deaths. He  recommends  learning about 
codes,  regulations, and laws that are an essential foundation of plans. Sources include the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the National Fire Protection Association, 
the Environmental Protection Agency, the Americans with Disabilities Act, as well as city 
and state authorities. Garris writes that 44% of all businesses that suffer a disaster never 
reopen.
Guidance for Business Continuity Planning
The NFPA 1600 Standard on Disaster/Emergency Management and Business Continuity 
Programs has been acknowledged by the U.S. Congress, American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI), and the 9/11 Commission. It has been endorsed by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, the National Emergency Management Association, and others. This 
standard has been referred to as the “National Preparedness Standard” for all organizations, 
including government and business. NFPA 1600 serves as a benchmark of basic criteria for 
a comprehensive program, and it contains elements from emergency management and busi-
ness continuity. There has been a convergence of these fields and a convergence of public and 
private sector efforts. Disasters (e.g., the 9/11 attacks) are showing the vital interdependencies 
of the public and private sectors.
The NFPA 1600 includes standards on program management, risk assessment, mitiga-
tion, training, and logistics, among other standards. It also contains definitions of terms and 
lists of resources and organizations.
The NFPA 1600 is not without its detractors (Davis, 2005). The Business Continuity 
Institute, located in the United Kingdom, claims that there is no business continuity document, 
and in NFPA 1600, business continuity is buried within emergency management. In addition, 
there are groups (e.g., ANSI) looking to the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) for enhanced business continuity standards.
The Business Continuity Guideline (ASIS International, 2004) offers an in-depth, mul-
tistep process for business continuity planning. It includes interrelated processes and activities 
that help in creating, testing, and maintaining an organizationwide plan for emergencies. Here 
is a sample of questions from the appendix of the guideline:
• Has your organization planned for survival?
• Is the business continuity plan up-to-date?
• Have the internal audit, security, and insurance units reviewed the plan?
• Has a planning team been appointed?
• Has a risk assessment been conducted?
• Are people protected?
• Have critical business processes been identified and ranked?
• Is technology (i.e., data, systems) protected?
• Have resources required for recovery been identified?
• Have personnel been trained and exercises conducted?
• Has a crisis management center been identified?
• Have alternative worksites been identified?
Another source for business continuity planning, especially for small and medium-
sized businesses, is the Department of Homeland Security Web site www.ready.gov. It offers 
guidelines, sample emergency plans, tips for mail safety, security suggestions, and it uses an 
all-hazards approach.
Methodology for Business Continuity
Moskal (2006: 56–62), with an IT background, offers a business continuity management 
methodology to sort, summarize, and organize business requirements in a methodical manner.

He writes that one barrier to planning and preparation is lack of support and funding from 
management. Citing a list of real world events that cost businesses billions of dollars, Moskal 
also supports his arguments for business continuity planning by referring to business surviv-
ability, cost of downtime (e.g., lost revenue, lost customers), penalties from contract stipula-
tions on deadlines, and legal requirements (especially as a public company). His seven-step 
methodology is as follows:
1. Risk assessment report containing the identification of critical functions; business 
process threats and vulnerabilities, ranked by risk level; and risk-mitigating safeguards 
and costs.
2. Business impact analysis report containing critical business functions and 
workflow, qualitative and quantitative impacts of disruption, and recovery time 
objectives.
3. Disaster recovery plan containing resources, actions, and tasks to manage the 
recovery.
4. Business recovery plan containing advance plans, arrangements, and procedures 
for the complete recovery of business processes, including employees, workspace, 
equipment, and facilities.
5. Business resumption plan containing plans for continued availability of essential 
business processes and operations. It includes facility and operations management, as 
well as IT systems.
6. Contingency planning containing plans to respond to specific system or operation 
failures. Resources may include alternate work areas, reciprocal agreements, 
workaround procedures, and replacement resources.
7. Crisis management focuses on overall coordination of organizational response to a 
crisis to protect people and minimize damage to profitability, reputation, or ability to 
operate.
Persson (2005) sees the need for increased effort to provide quantitative, accurate, 
empirical reporting on how business continuity planning is working. He favors the use of 
metrics and lists the following benefits:
• They present activities in objective terms.
• Metrics help focus on issues. For example, if recovery time objective (RTO) is 6 hours 
on paper, but testing shows it is 24 hours, this issue needs to be addressed.
• It can be included in personnel objectives (i.e., responsibilities) and measured.
Here is a sample of metrics applicable to continuity planning from Persson’s IT perspective:
• Disaster recovery planning (DRP) as a percentage of total IT budget. This may be 
between 2% and 8%.
• Percentage of mission-critical applications covered. The goal should be to recover 
100%.
• Anticipated recovery time.
• Total number of outages per year by category (e.g., power, network, virus).
Drawing on Persson’s IT work, metrics can be applied more broadly. Examples include 
the business continuity budget as a percentage of assets or revenue; the number of full-time 
employees (may be less than 1.0) who work on business continuity per $10 million of assets 
or revenue; and metrics can be compared within and among industries.
Business Continuity          279
What do you think influences senior executive interest in business continuity planning?

280          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Emergency Management
Bullock et al. (2006: 1–2) write that there is no single definition of emergency management 
because the discipline “has expanded and contracted in response to events, the desires 
of Congress, and leadership styles.” They note that emergency management “has clearly 
become an essential role of government” and the “Constitution entrusted the states with 
responsibility for public health and safety—hence, responsibility for public risks—and 
assigns the federal government to a secondary, supportive role. The federal role was 
originally conceived such that it intervenes when the state, local, or individual entities are 
overwhelmed.”
Bullock et al. (2006: 2) define emergency management as “the discipline dealing with 
risk and risk avoidance.” Here, we define emergency management as preparation for poten-
tial emergencies and disasters and the coordination of response and resources during such 
events.
McEntire (2004: 14–18) writes that the discipline of emergency management is going 
through a massive transformation. He refers to issues such as definitions of terms, what 
hazards to focus on, what variables to explore (e.g., location of buildings, building con-
struction, politics, critical incident stress), and what disciplines should contribute to emer-
gency management. McEntire notes that there is no single overarching theory of emergency 
management because it would be impossible to develop a theory that would contain every 
single variable and issue involving disasters. He sees systems or chaos theory as gaining 
recognition because they incorporate many causative variables. McEntire also offers other 
theories and concepts (below), that he views as relevant to emergency management. Notice 
the similarities in some of the following theories to those explained under risk management 
(i.e., risk perception theory; risk communication theory):
• Systems theory involves diverse systems that interact in complicated ways and 
impact vulnerability. These systems include natural, built, technological, social, 
political, economic, and cultural environments.
• Chaos theory has similarities to systems theory in that many variables interact 
and affect vulnerability. This theory points to the difficulty of detecting simple 
linear cause-and-effect relationships and it seeks to address multiple variables 
simultaneously to mitigate vulnerability.
• Decision theory views disasters as characterized by uncertainty and limited 
information that results in increased vulnerability to causalities, disruption, 
and other negative consequences. This theory focuses on perceptions, 
communications, bureaucracy, politics, and other variables that impact the 
aftermath of disasters.
• Management theory explains disasters as political and organizational problems. 
Vulnerability to disasters can be reduced through effective leadership and improved 
planning. Leaders have the responsibility to partner with a wide variety of players 
to reach objectives that reduce vulnerability.
• Organizational behavior theory sees agencies concerned about their own interests 
and turf, without understanding how their action or inaction affects others. 
Cultural barriers, a lack of communications, and other variables limit partnering 
to increase efficiency and effectiveness. Improved communications during the 9/11 
attacks in New York City would have saved some of the lives of firefighters, police, 
and others.
• Risk perception and communication theory focuses on the apathy of citizens 
prior to disasters. Vulnerability can increase if citizens do not understand 
the consequences of disasters and do not take action for self-protection (e.g., 
evacuation). Citizens may be more likely to reduce their vulnerability if authorities 
communicate risk accurately and convincingly.
• Social constructionist theory shifts from hazards that we cannot control to the 
role of humans in disasters, who determine through decisions the degree of 
vulnerability; for example, citizen decisions to reside in areas subject to mudslides.

• Weberian theory looks to culture—including values, attitudes, practices, and 
socialization—as contributing to increased vulnerability. Other factors under 
this theory resulting in greater vulnerability are weak emergency management 
institutions and a lack of professionalization among emergency managers.
• Marxist theory explains economic conditions and political powerlessness as playing 
roles in disaster vulnerability. The poor and minorities are more likely to reside in 
vulnerable areas and are often unable to act to protect themselves. The Hurricane 
Katrina disaster serves as an example; thousands of citizens were trapped in 
flooded New Orleans, which was built below sea level.
Risk Management in Government
Risk management is as important in the public sector as it is in the private sector. Risk man-
agement helps government executives study and manage risks so they can prioritize risks and 
then plan and take action under limited budgets. For government, exposures and risks are 
enormous and broad—affecting local, state, national, and global levels. Examples include 
liability, crime, workers’ compensation, fire, war, terrorism, proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction (WMD), disease and pandemics, natural disasters, conflicts over natural 
resources, and issues of migration.
Although the private sector, especially the insurance industry, has played a lead role in 
advancing the discipline of risk management, local and state governments are increasingly 
employing risk management methods. The Public Risk Management Association (PRIMA), 
the largest network of public risk management practitioners, states: “Risk management in 
the public sector finds itself at a challenging moment in time.” “… [T]here is a very high 
level of interest in the subject, but a lack of clarity and consistency as to its meaning, form 
and purpose.” The group sees pockets of advanced risk management practice in the United 
States; however, most small government entities do not have a formal risk management unit. 
PRIMA sees various segments of the discipline spread among departments in government (e.g., 
insurance, purchasing, finance) and efforts to unify the function under the emerging concept 
of enterprise risk management have just begun in the public sector (Public Risk Management 
Association, 2003).
On the federal government level, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), a 
federal “watchdog,” is a strong proponent of risk management. It has argued for risk man-
agement to be applied at all levels of government, including the Departments of Homeland 
Security and Defense and the FBI. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005: 
124–125) stated: “… [A] vacuum exists in which benefits of homeland security investments 
are often not quantified and are almost never valued in monetary terms.” The GAO argues 
for criteria for quantifiable and nonquantifiable benefits of homeland security spending so 
analysts can develop information to inform management.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2004c: 54) stated: “We will guide our 
actions with sound risk management principles that take a global perspective and are for-
ward-looking. Risks must be well understood, and risk management approaches developed, 
before solutions can be implemented.”
All-Hazards Preparedness Concept
“All hazards” include natural disasters (e.g., hurricanes, earthquakes) and human-made 
events (e.g., inadvertent accidents, such as an aircraft crash, and deliberate events, such as the 
terrorist bombing of an aircraft). Another category is technological events (e.g., an electric 
service blackout resulting from a variety of possible causes). FEMA (2004) states: “The all-
hazards preparedness concept is simple in that how you prepare for one disaster or emergency 
situation is the same for any other disaster.” The all-hazards approach is important because 
it plays a role in preventing our nation from over-preparing for one type of disaster at the 
expense of other disasters (Figure 12-2).
It is argued here that the all-hazards approach seeks to maximize the efficiency and 
cost effectiveness of emergency management efforts through a realization that different 
Emergency Management          281

282          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
disasters contain similarities that can benefit, to a certain degree, from generic approaches to 
emergency management. This includes generally similar emergency services, equipment, and 
products. Conversely, there is a point at which generic emergency management must divide 
into specialized emergency management. For example, the detonation of a “dirty-bomb” or 
an approaching hurricane necessitates evacuation; however, the victims and the scene of these 
disasters require markedly different expertise, treatment, and equipment.
The History of Emergency Management
Haddow and Bullock (2003: 1–13) traced the development of emergency management as 
described next. The first example of the federal government becoming involved in a disaster 
was when, in 1803, a Congressional Act was passed to provide financial assistance to a New 
Hampshire town that was destroyed by fire. During the Great Depression (1930s), President 
Franklin D. Roosevelt spent enormous federal funds on projects to put people to work and to 
stimulate the economy. Such projects had relevance to emergency management. The Tennessee 
Valley Authority was created to not only produce hydroelectric power, but to reduce flooding.
During the 1950s, as the Cold War brought with it the threat of nuclear war, Civil Defense 
Programs grew. These programs were characterized by communities and families building bomb 
shelters as a defense against attack from the Soviet Union. Air raid drills became common at 
schools; children practiced going under their desks or kneeling down in the hall while covering 
their heads. Civil defense directors, often-retired military personnel, were appointed at the local 
and state levels, and these individuals represent the beginning of emergency management in the 
United States. The Federal Civil Defense Administration (FCDA) provided technical assistance 
to local and state governments. Another agency, the Office of Defense Mobilization (ODM), 
was established in the Department of Defense (DOD) to quickly amass materials and produc-
tion in the event of war. In 1958, both the FCDA and the ODM were merged into the Office of 
Civil and Defense Mobilization.
A series of destructive hurricanes in the 1950s resulted in ad hoc Congressional legisla-
tion to fund assistance to the affected states. The 1960s also saw its share of natural disasters 
that resulted in President John F. Kennedy’s administration, in 1961, creating the Office of 
Emergency Preparedness to deal with natural disasters. The absence of flood insurance on the 
standard homeowner policy prompted Congress to enact the National Flood Insurance Act 
of 1968, which created the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). This noteworthy act 
included the concept of community-based mitigation, whereby action was taken against the 
risk prior to the disaster. When a community joined the NFIP, the program offered federally 
FIGURE 12-2 The U.S. government is working to provide an all-hazards response capability. Courtesy: 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

subsidized, low-cost flood insurance to citizens in exchange for the community enacting an 
ordinance banning future development in its floodplains. As a voluntary program, the NFIP 
was not successful. The Flood Insurance Act of 1972 created an incentive for communities to 
join the NFIP. This act required mandatory purchase of flood insurance for homeowner loans 
backed by federal mortgages, and a significant number of mortgages were federally backed.
The 1970s brought to light the fragmentation of federal, state, and local agencies respon-
sible for risk and disasters. Over 100 federal agencies added to the confusion and turf wars. 
Unfortunately, the problems were compounded during disasters. The administration of President 
Jimmy Carter sought reform and consolidation of federal emergency management. The Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) was established by Executive Order 12127 on March 
31, 1979. The goal of this effort was to consolidate emergency preparedness, mitigation, and 
response into one agency, with a director who would report directly to the president. John 
Macy, who was in the Carter cabinet, became the director of FEMA. He emphasized simi-
larities between natural hazards preparedness and civil defense and developed an “all-hazards” 
approach containing direction, control, and warning as goals common to all emergencies.
Through the 1980s, FEMA experienced numerous troubles and criticism. The top 
priority of FEMA became preparation for nuclear attack, at the expense of other risks. 
Environmental cleanup (e.g., Love Canal) became another priority. States saw their funding 
for emergency management decline. By the end of the 1980s, FEMA was in need of serious 
reform. FEMA’s problems included tension with its partners at the state and local level over 
priorities and funding, and difficulty in responding to natural disasters. In 1989, Hurricane 
Hugo became the worst hurricane in a decade and caused 85 deaths and damage of more 
than $15 billion as it slammed into South Carolina, North Carolina, and other locations. 
The FEMA response was so poor that Senator Ernest Hollings (D-SC) called the agency the 
“sorriest bunch of bureaucratic jackasses.” The FEMA problems with Hurricane Andrew, in 
1992, in Florida, further eroded confidence in the agency.
Reform in FEMA finally occurred in 1993 when President William Clinton nominated 
James L. Witt, of Arkansas, to be director. Witt was the first director with emergency manage-
ment experience, and he was skilled at building partnerships and serving customers. Inside FEMA, 
Witt fostered ties to employees, reorganized the agency, and supported new technologies to 
deliver disaster services. Externally, he improved relationships with state and local governments, 
Congress, and the media. Subsequent disasters, such as the Midwest floods in 1993 that resulted 
in nine states being declared disaster areas and the Northridge, California, earthquake in 1994, 
tested the reforms FEMA had made. Witt was elevated to be a member of President Clinton’s 
cabinet, illustrating the importance of emergency management. Witt then sought to influence the 
nation’s governors in elevating state emergency management directors to cabinet posts.
The World Trade Center bombing in 1993 and the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995 
brought the issue of terrorism to the forefront of emergency management. A major question 
surfaced: Which agency would be in charge following a terrorist attack? Prior to the 9/11 
attacks, several federal agencies sought leadership against terrorism. Major agencies included 
FEMA, the Department of Justice (DOJ) (it contains the FBI), the DOD, the National Guard, 
and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Coordination was poor as agen-
cies pursued their own agendas. The DOD and the DOJ received the most funds. State and 
local governments felt unprepared and complained about their vulnerabilities and needs. The 
9/11 attacks resulted in a massive reorganization of the federal government and the creation 
of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to better coordinate both actions against ter-
rorism and homeland security.
In September of 2005, FEMA experienced another setback when its director, Michael 
Brown, was relieved as commander of Hurricane Katrina (Figure 12–3) relief efforts along the 
Gulf Coast, and he was sent back to Washington, D.C. Three days later, he resigned. Critics 
argued that he was the former head of an Arabian horse association and that he had no back-
ground in disaster relief when his friend and then-FEMA Director, Joe Allbaugh, hired him in 
2001 to serve as FEMA’s general counsel. Although “finger-pointing” occurred by politicians 
at all levels of government as the relief effort became overwhelmed, Michael Brown became 
the classic scapegoat. Following the Katrina disaster, there were calls for reform of FEMA.
Emergency Management          283

284          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Emergency Management Disciplines
Haddow and Bullock (2003) divide emergency management into the disciplines of mitigation, 
response, recovery, preparedness, and communications. Although they emphasize natural 
hazards, their writing provides a foundation for multiple risks.
Mitigation
Haddow and Bullock (2003: 37) define mitigation as “a sustained action to reduce or elimi-
nate risk to people and property from hazards and their effects.” It looks at long-term solu-
tions to reduce risk, as opposed to preparedness for emergencies and disasters.
Mitigation programs require partners outside traditional emergency management. 
Examples are land-use planners, construction and building officials, and community leaders. 
The tools of mitigation include hazard identification and mapping and building codes.
Response
Response includes activities that address the short-term, direct effects of an incident, and it seeks to 
save lives, protect property, and meet basic human needs. Depending on the emergency, response 
can entail applying intelligence to lessen the effects or consequences of an incident; increased 
security; investigations; public health and agricultural surveillance and testing processes; immu-
nizations, isolation, or quarantine; operations to disrupt illegal activity; and arresting offenders. 
First responders at emergencies and disasters are usually local police, fire, emergency medical spe-
cialists, and not state or federal personnel. Besides local, state, and federal responses, volunteer 
organizations and the business community respond to emergencies and disasters.
All 50 states and six territories of the United States operate an office of emergency 
management. The names of these offices vary, as does the placement in the organizational 
structure of each jurisdiction. National Guard Adjutant Generals lead these offices in most 
states, followed by leadership by civilian employees. Governors rely primarily on their state 
National Guard for responding to disasters. National Guard resources include personnel, 
communications systems, air and road transport, heavy construction equipment, mass care 
and feeding equipment, and assorted supplies (e.g., tents, beds, blankets, medical). When a 
state is overwhelmed by a disaster, the governor may request federal assistance under a presi-
dential disaster or emergency declaration.
FIGURE 12-3 In 2005, Hurricane Katrina flooded sections of New Orleans, left hundreds of thousands of people 
homeless, and overwhelmed government response. Courtesy: Gary Nichols, DOD.

The Homeland Security Act of 2002 established the DHS to reduce our nation’s vulner-
ability to terrorism, natural disasters, and other emergencies, and to assist in recovery. The 
Secretary of Homeland Security is responsible for coordinating federal operations in response 
to emergencies and disasters.
Recovery
Recovery involves actions to help individuals and communities return to normal. It serves 
to restore infrastructure, basic services, government, housing, businesses, and other func-
tions in a community. Haddow and Bullock (2003: 95) view the goal of effective recovery 
as bringing all the players together to plan, finance, and prepare a recovery strategy. Besides 
action by all levels of government, recovery includes the role of the insurance industry, which 
provides financial support. However, the federal government plays the largest role in techni-
cal and financial support for recovery. The range of grant and assistance programs that the 
federal government has been involved in over the years, especially through FEMA, has been 
enormous and cost tens of billions of dollars.
Preparedness
Before a disaster strikes, preparation is vital. Preparedness includes risk management to iden-
tify threats, hazards, and vulnerabilities. Then all levels of government and the private sector 
plan and prepare for disasters through planning, training, exercises, and identifying resources 
to prevent, protect against, respond to, and recover from disasters. Preparedness is the job of 
everyone and all sectors of our society.
Communications
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security emphasizes the importance of communications, 
information management, and information and intelligence sharing. Also important are a 
common operating picture and systems interoperability to disseminate warnings, commu-
nicate operational decisions, prepare for requests, and maintain overall awareness across 
jurisdictions. Jurisdictional systems must be able to work together and not interfere with one 
another (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2004a: 49).
During the 9/11 attacks at the World Trade Center, an unforeseen enemy of first 
responders was their own communications systems. During the months following the attacks, 
a serious flaw was found in the police and fire radio systems: they were incompatible. When 
the first WTC tower collapsed, police were notified to evacuate the second tower, but fire-
fighters (on a different system) did not hear the warning and hundreds of first responders 
died. This serious problem can be solved by what has been called interoperability—the ability 
of multiple agencies to communicate using technology.
Emergency Management          285
National Response Plan, National Incident Management System, and 
National Preparedness Goal
The 9/11 attacks changed dramatically emergency response plans in the United States. 
Besides a host of manmade and natural hazards—such as accidents, earthquakes, hurri-
canes, and floods—the United States faces creative, asymmetrical attacks by terrorists who 
resort to WMD. This range of hazards and threats has resulted in the need for a unified 
and coordinated national approach to emergency management. This need is met through 
the National Response Plan (NRP) (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2004b), the 
National Incident Management System (NIMS) (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 
2004a), and the National Preparedness Goal (the Goal). Both the NRP and the NIMS are 
national, rather than federal plans, and aim to align the patchwork of federal emergency 
management plans into an effective and efficient structure, while coordinating the capa-
bilities and resources of all levels of government and the private sector.

286          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
According to the Department of Homeland Security, the NRP is an all- hazards 
approach incorporating best practices and procedures from many incident  management 
disciplines. It ties together emergency management activities to include prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery.
The NRP is designed to coordinate structures, roles, and responsibilities among 
federal, state, and local levels of government. It requires cooperation, collaboration, 
and information sharing among jurisdictions, as well as between the public and private 
sectors. It groups capabilities and resources that are most likely to be needed during an 
incident. Examples are firefighting, search and rescue, and mass care. It outlines core 
responsibilities and expertise for specific contingencies (e.g., radiological, biological, 
cyber). The NRP describes common processes and specific administrative require-
ments (e.g., fiscal, worker safety and health). It also includes a glossary, acronyms, and 
authorities.
The NRP priorities are to save lives, protect health and safety, secure the home-
land, protect and restore critical infrastructure, conduct investigations to resolve inci-
dents, protect property, and facilitate recovery.
The NRP multiagency coordination structure includes the responsibilities of 
the president and a flexible national capability that addresses local, regional, and 
national issues. It is a signed and binding agreement among 32 federal departments 
and agencies, the American Red Cross, and the National Voluntary Organizations 
Active in Disasters. The Department of Homeland Security maintains the NRP.
The principal authorities that guide the structure and implementation of the NRP 
are numerous federal laws, executive orders, and presidential directives. The NRP lists 
42 laws. An example is the Homeland Security Act of 2002. Another example is the 
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1974. Amended 
in 2002, and known as the Stafford Act, this federal law establishes the programs and 
processes for the federal government to provide disaster and emergency assistance to 
states, local governments, tribal nations, individuals, and nonprofit organizations. It 
covers all hazards, including terrorism. This act includes the process for governors to 
request federal assistance from the president.
The Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)-5, Management of 
Domestic Incidents, February 28, 2003, is intended to establish a single, comprehen-
sive NRP and NIMS. This directive designates the Secretary of Homeland Security to 
administer these programs.
The NIMS was developed with input from many groups in the public and private 
sectors. It represents best practices; strives for standardization; and contains a core set 
of doctrines, concepts, principles, terminology, and organizational processes. HSPD-5 
requires all federal agencies and departments to adopt the NIMS and make it a require-
ment for state and local organizations to receive federal preparedness assistance. The 
NIMS Integration Center publishes standards, guidelines, and compliance protocols. 
The DHS offers no-cost, on-line training for the NIMS, and thousands have completed 
the training.
NIMS emphasizes standardization. Examples include standardization in incident 
command structure, planning, training, exercises, personnel qualifications and certifi-
cation, equipment, resource management, forms, and information management.
On December 17, 2003, the president issued Homeland Security Presidential 
Directive 8 “National Preparedness” (HSPD-8). The purpose of HSPD-8 is to “estab-
lish policies to strengthen the preparedness of the United States to prevent and respond 
to threatened or actual domestic terrorist attacks, major disasters, and other emer-
gencies by requiring a national domestic all-hazards preparedness goal, establishing 
mechanisms for improved delivery of Federal preparedness assistance to State and local 
governments, and outlining actions to strengthen preparedness capabilities of Federal, 
State, and local entities.” The goal will guide federal departments and agencies, state, 
territorial, local and tribal officials, the private sector, nongovernment organizations, 
and the public in determining how to most effectively and efficiently strengthen 

The Military          287
The Military
The military has the capability to provide significant resources to civilian authorities in the 
event of a disaster (Figures 12-4 and 12-5). Federal troops can provide communications, 
transportation, food, water, shelter, and other assets under what is referred to as logistics. 
Specifically, U.S. Northern Command (NORTH-COM), in the DOD, is charged with protect-
ing the United States from foreign attacks and is responsible for supplying military resources 
to emergency responders. The DOD emphasizes that it understands its role in assisting civilian 
authorities—serve to support, not take the lead.
A state’s governor is responsible for disaster response, with the option of requesting 
assistance from FEMA. Then, if necessary, FEMA can contact the DOD for assistance. Once 
the request arrives, DOD officials must determine whether the request is legal under the Posse 
Comitatus Act (PCA), a post-Civil War–era act that generally prohibits the military from engag-
ing in civilian law enforcement. The PCA does not apply to the U.S. Coast Guard in peacetime 
or to the National Guard in Title 32 (United States Code) or State Active Duty status.
Prohibiting direct military involvement in civilian law enforcement is in keeping with 
long-standing U.S. law and policy limiting the military’s role in domestic affairs. However, 
this law has been labeled as archaic because it limits the military from responding to disasters. 
Consequently, a modification of the law is an option.
Congress enacted a number of exceptions to the PCA that allow the military, in certain 
situations, to assist civilian law enforcement agencies in enforcing the laws of the United 
States. The most common example is counterdrug assistance (Title 10 USC, Sections 371–
381). Other examples include
• The Insurrection Act (Title 10 USC, Sections 331–335). This act, passed in 1807, 
allows the president to use U.S. military personnel at the request of a state legislature 
or governor to suppress insurrections. It also allows the president to use federal troops 
to enforce federal laws when rebellion against the authority of the United States 
makes it impracticable to enforce the laws of the United States. This law was invoked 
in 1992 when California Governor Pete Wilson requested federal troops to quell race 
riots in Los Angeles. President George H.W. Bush dispatched 4,000 active-duty troops.
• Assistance in the case of crimes involving nuclear materials (Title 18 USC, Section 
831). This statute permits DOD personnel to assist the Justice Department in 
enforcing prohibitions regarding nuclear materials, when the attorney general and 
the secretary of defense jointly determine that an “emergency situation” exists that 
poses a serious threat to U.S. interests and is beyond the capability of civilian law 
enforcement agencies.
• Emergency situations involving chemical or biological weapons of mass destruction 
(Title 10 USC, Section 382). When the attorney general and the secretary of defense 
jointly determine that an “emergency situation” exists that poses a serious threat 
to U.S. interests and is beyond the capability of civilian law enforcement agencies. 
DOD personnel may assist the Justice Department in enforcing prohibitions regarding 
biological or chemical weapons of mass destruction.
preparedness for terrorist attacks, major disasters, and other emergencies. The goal 
utilizes a Capabilities-Based Planning approach: planning, under uncertainty, to pro-
vide capabilities suitable for a wide range of threats and hazards, within an economic 
framework that necessitates prioritization and choice. Capabilities-Based Planning 
addresses uncertainty by analyzing a wide range of possible scenarios (e.g., WMD, 
natural disasters, cyber, pandemic influenza) to identify required capabilities. The 
purpose of the goal is to develop readiness priorities, targets, and metrics. It focuses on 
three key questions: How prepared do we need to be? How prepared are we? How do 
we prioritize efforts to close the gap?

288          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
FIGURE 12-4 U.S. Navy Search and Rescue specialist prepares to bring a Hurricane Katrina Victim onboard a 
helicopter. Courtesy: Jay C. Pugh, USN.
FIGURE 12-5 U.S. Army soldier directs Hurricane Katrina victims away from helicopter following rescue. 
Courtesy: Robert McRill, USN.

An example of the DOD assisting in past disasters includes Hurricane Katrina, in August 
of 2005, when New Orleans was flooded and city residents were forced to evacuate. Because 
Gulf-state and FEMA resources were overwhelmed, the DOD provided massive aid to assist 
victims, conduct search-and-rescue missions, maintain order, and deal with the flooding.
The Military          289
The Katrina Disaster
Despite the best intentions and efforts of the specialists who formulated the “all-haz-
ards” National Response Plan, the National Incident Management System, and the 
National Preparedness Goal, Hurricane Katrina, in 2005, showed the difficulty of 
planning for disasters. The hurricane caused about 1,300 deaths, the flooding of New 
Orleans, and enormous destruction along Gulf-coast states. The media, reporting from 
New Orleans, offered vivid coverage of looters, snipers, fires, bloated corpses, victims 
sitting on rooftops or swimming through toxic water, and the awful conditions at the 
Superdome where people sought shelter and help from the government. Today, many 
victims of Hurricane Katrina are living in cities across the United States and are unable 
or unwilling to return to their communities while rebuilding goes on.
One major lesson from the Hurricane Katrina disaster was the collapse of inter-
governmental relations. The NRP calls for an immediate activation of a joint opera-
tions center to bring together all levels of government. Why did this NRP requirement 
occur so slowly? Why did each level of government appear inept with its authority? 
Why were the resources inadequate? Did the federal government place too much 
emphasis on the threat of terrorism at the expense of emergency management? Local, 
state, and federal officials blamed each other for the response failures, and the issues 
were politicized. Interestingly, officials received warning of the approaching hurri-
cane. A WMD attack is unlikely to be preceded by a warning. If a warning preceded 
Hurricane Katrina and government reacted so inadequately, what type of government 
reaction can citizens expect from a surprise WMD attack?
Another major lesson was the chaos that can result from a serious disaster, 
whether from a WMD attack, pandemic, or other cause. Leaders should learn from the 
Katrina disaster and enhance planning at all levels of government.
In 2006, following congressional hearings that exposed the shortcomings of 
government response to Hurricane Katrina, a revised NRP was formulated to react 
more quickly with improved resources. U.S. Government Accountability Office 
(2006) staff visited the affected areas, interviewed officials, and analyzed a vari-
ety of information. It found widespread dissatisfaction with the preparedness and 
response, and many of the lessons that emerged from Hurricane Katrina were simi-
lar to those the GAO identified more than a decade ago with Hurricane Andrew. 
For example, the president should designate a senior official in the White House to 
oversee federal preparedness and response to major disasters. Again, in 2006, the 
GAO recommended that, prior to disasters, the leadership roles, responsibilities, 
and lines of authority for all levels of government must be clearly defined prior to 
disasters. The GAO also emphasized the need for strong advance planning among 
responding organizations, as well as robust training and exercises to test plans in 
advance of disasters. Changes are inevitable for all future plans, because disasters 
are often unpredictable and public and private sector plans typically fall short of 
need during major disasters.
Following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, as of mid-December 2005, FEMA had 
distributed nearly $5.4 billion in assistance to more than 1.4 million registrants under 
the Individuals and Households Program (IHP) to meet necessary expenses and seri-
ous needs, such as temporary housing and property repair. Because of the devastation, 
FEMA also activated expedited assistance to provide fast-track money to victims. GAO 

290          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
investigators found rampant fraud with expedited assistance. FEMA made millions of 
dollars in payments to thousands of registrants who used Social Security numbers that 
were never issued or belonged to deceased or other individuals, and several hundred 
registrants used bogus damaged property addresses. FEMA made duplicate expedited 
assistance payments of $2,000 to about 5,000 of the 11,000 debit card recipients—once 
through the distribution of debit cards and again through a check or electronic funds 
transfer. Although most of the payments were applied to necessities, some funds were 
used for adult entertainment, to purchase bail bond services, to pay traffic tickets, and 
to purchase weapons. The GAO recommended improvements by FEMA to automate 
the validation of identities and damaged properties (U.S. Government Accountability 
Office, 2006).
What are your suggestions to improve government response to disasters?
Search the Web
Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
Insurance and Risk Management:
American Association of Insurance Services: www.aaisonline.com/
American Insurance Association: www.aiadc.org
A.M. Best: www.ambest.com/
American Risk and Insurance Association: www.aria.org
Coalition Against Insurance Fraud: www.insurancefraud.org/
General advice: FREEADVICE.com
Insurance Committee for Arson Control: www.arsoncontrol.org/
Insurance Services Office: www.iso.com
International Risk Management Institute: www.irmi.com
National Alliance for Insurance Education & Research: www.TheNational
Alliance.com
Public Risk Management Association: www.primacentral.org
Risk and Insurance Management Society: www.rims.org
Risk World: www.riskworld.com
Society for Risk Analysis: www.sra.org
Standard & Poor’s: www.standardandpoors.com
State Risk and Insurance Management Association: www.strima.org
Surety & Fidelity Association of America: www.surety.org/
Business Continuity and Emergency Management:
Business Continuity Institute: www.thebci.org
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: www.bt.cdc.gov
DRI International: www.drii.org
Emergency Management Accreditation Program: www.emaponline.org/index.cfm
Federal Emergency Management Agency: www.fema.org
International Association of Emergency Managers: www.iaem.com
National Emergency Management Association: www.nemaweb.org
Office for Domestic Preparedness: www.ojp.usdoj.gov/odp/
The International Emergency Management Society: www.tiems.org

Case Problems          291
U.S. Department of Homeland Security: www.dhs.gov/odp
U.S. Department of Homeland Security: www.ready.gov (Site for business 
continuity planning.)
U.S. Northern Command: http://www.northcom.mil
Case Problems
12A.  As a loss prevention manager, you will soon explain to top management why they 
should provide support and funds to initiate a risk management program by hiring 
a risk manager. Research and answer the following questions to prepare for your 
meeting.
 
 
(a) How will a risk manager help to perpetuate the business?
 
 
(b) How can a risk manager produce a return on investment?
 
 
(c) How are five risk management tools applied?
 
 
(d)  How will the risk manager and loss prevention manager work together, and 
what will each do for the company?
12B.  You are a corporate risk management executive responsible for insurance, business 
continuity, and the corporate safety and security departments for all corporate 
locations. You are challenged by the following list of tasks upon returning to your 
office. Prioritize these tasks and explain why you placed them in your particular 
order of importance.
Item A
E-mail message. At your request, an insurance company representative replies that she can 
meet with you at your convenience to explain why the corporate liability insurance premium 
will rise by 10% next year.
Item B
Telephone voice message. An accident on the premises between a truck and a forklift has 
resulted in two injured employees. The director of human resources wants to meet with you 
immediately.
Item C
E-mail message. As treasurer of a regional risk management association, you are assigned to 
arrange the next meeting, including location, meal, and speaker.
Item D
Your “to do list” states that you need to re-evaluate the risks facing the corporation and 
implement an improved risk management plan that maximizes risk management tools and is 
more financially sound.
Item E
Telephone call. A security officer on the premises calls and states: he cannot locate a security 
supervisor; there is a fire in the warehouse; he can extinguish it; and you do not have to call 
the fire department.
Item F
Telephone voice message. Your boss wants to meet with you immediately because insurance 
covered only 50% of losses from an accident at another corporate plant.
Item G
Telephone voice message. An attorney representing a plaintiff/employee in a sexual  harassment 
suit against the corporation wants to speak with you.

Item H
Telephone voice message. The emergency management director for the local county wants to 
meet with you about cooperation on joint planning and training.
Item I
E-mail message. The information technology (IT) director needs to meet with you as soon as 
possible. The corporate IT business continuity plan was rejected by one of the insurers of the 
corporation.
The Decision for “You Be the Judge #1”
Hawkins was reimbursed for the stolen tools. The court held that when Hawkins left his tools 
in the work area overnight with the knowledge and consent of his employer, his employer 
accepted temporary custody of the property. This situation is known as a bailment, and in 
such a situation, the party accepting custody of the property usually is responsible for its care 
and safekeeping. Under the laws of the state in which this case was tried, Conway Excavation 
might have escaped liability for the theft of Hawkins’s tools if it had taken more extensive 
steps to make the garage secure. Instead, it had to pay him some $3,000.
This case is based on Harper v. Brown & Root 398 Sa2d 94. The names in this case 
have been changed to protect the privacy of those involved.
The Decision for “You Be the Judge #2”
The court disagreed with MMC, concluding that, although the policy was complicated and 
full of errors, it was not ambiguous in spelling out the limits of its liability—$50,000. MMC 
would have to absorb the rest of the loss itself. Security Director Douglas could have saved 
his company a lot of money if he had taken the time to read the insurance policy when it was 
first issued. That’s the time to ask questions and demand clarification. If you can’t understand 
the policy, find someone who can; the insurance agent or your company’s attorney are two 
of the best people to ask. After the company puts in a claim, it may be too late to clear up 
the ambiguities.
This case is based on Davenport Peters v. Royal Globe Ins., 490 FSupp 286. The names 
in this case have been changed to protect the privacy of those involved.
References
ASIS International. (2004). Business Continuity Guideline. www.asisonline.org, retrieved 
November 15, 2006.
Bieber, R. (1987). “The Making of a Risk Manager—Part One.” Risk Management 
(September).
BOMA Files. (2006). “Terrorism Insurance Program Extended in Final Days of Session.” 
Buildings, 100 (February).
Borodzicz, E. (2005). Risk, Crisis & Security Management. West Sussex, England: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Bullock, J., et al. (2006). Introduction to Homeland Security, 2nd ed. Burlington, MA: 
Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann.
Conley, J. (2000). “Leaders of the Evolution.” Risk Management, 47 (December).
Davis, S. (2005). “NFPA 1600.” www.davislogic.com, retrieved March 17, 2005.
FEMA. (2004). “All-Hazards Preparedness.” www.fema.gov/preparedness/hazards_prepare.
shtm, retrieved March 1, 2005.
France, L. (2006). “Cyber Liability.” Rough Notes (March). http://www.roughnotes.com/
rnmagazine/03cdindex06.htm, retrieved May 8, 2006.
Garris, L. (2005). “Make-or-Break Steps for Disaster Preparation.” Buildings, 99 (February).
Gurwitt, R. (2001). “The Riskiest Business.” Governing, 14 (March).
292          RISK MANAGEMENT, BUSINESS CONTINUITY, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Haddow, G., and Bullock, J. (2003). Introduction to Emergency Management. Boston: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Higgins, A., and Cullison, A. (2005). “Dutch Court Fight Lays Bare Reality of Kidnap 
Industry.” The Wall Street Journal Online (September 22). http://online.wsj.com/article/0, 
SB112735374607948223,00.html, retrieved September 22, 2005.
Insurance Information Institute. (2006). “International Insurance Fact Book.” www.interna-
tionalinsurance.org/international/overview/, retrieved November 13, 2006.
Insurance Newsnet. (2006). “RIMS Benchmark Survey Book Records Total Cost of Risk Down 
in 2005” (May 25). www.insurancenewsnet.com, retrieved November 14, 2006.
Leimberg, S., et al. (2002). The Tools & Techniques of Risk Management & Insurance. 
Cincinnati, OH: The National Underwriter Co.
Malecki, D. (2006). “Who Knew What When?” Rough Notes (March). http://www.rough-
notes.com/rnmagazine/03cdindex06.htm, retrieved May 8, 2006.
McEntire, D. (2004). “The Status of Emergency Management Theory: Issues, Barriers, and 
Recommendations for Improved Scholarship.” Paper presented at the FEMA Higher 
Education Conference, Emmitsburg, MD, June 8. www.training.fema.gov/EMIWeb/edu/
highpapers.asp, retrieved February 14, 2006.
Moody, M. (2006). “Risk Management: A Board Issue Yet?” Rough Notes (April). www.
roughnotes.com/rnmagazine/2006/april06/04p034.htm, retrieved May 8, 2006.
Morris, B. (2001). “Risk Takes on the World.” Risk & Insurance, 12 (April 16).
Moskal, E. (2006). “Business Continuity Management: Post 9/11 Disaster Recovery 
Methodology.” Disaster Recovery Journal, 19 (Spring).
Persson, J. (2005). “The Time Has Come for DRP Metrics.” Disaster Recovery Journal, 18 
(Winter). www.drj.com, retrieved January 28, 2005.
Public Risk Management Association. (2003). Core Competency Statement: A Framework for 
Public Risk Management, www.primacentral.org, retrieved February 18, 2005.
Rejda, G. (2001). Principles of Risk Management and Insurance, 7th ed. Boston, MA: 
Addison Wesley.
Starner, T. (2003). “Modeling for Terrorism.” Risk & Insurance (April 1).
Stoneman, B. (2003). “An Aversion to Dispersion.” Risk & Insurance (September 15).
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2004a). National Incident Management System. 
www.dhs.gov, retrieved February 10, 2005.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2004b). National Response Plan. www.dhs.gov, 
retrieved January 12, 2005.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2004c). Securing Our Homeland: U.S. Department 
of Homeland Security Strategic Plan. www.dhs.gov, retrieved October 1, 2004.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005). Agency Plans, Implementation, and 
Challenges Regarding the National Strategy for Homeland Security (January). www.gao.
gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-33, retrieved February 15, 2005.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2006). “Statement by Comptroller General David 
M. Walker on GAO’s Preliminary Observations Regarding Preparedness and Response 
to Hurricanes Katrina and Rita” (February 1). www.gao.gov/new.items/d06365r.pdf, 
retrieved February 3, 2006.
Ward, S. (2001). “Exploring the Role of the Corporate Risk Manager.” Risk Management: 
An International Journal, 3.
Williams, C., et al. (1995). Risk Management and Insurance, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
References          293

Life Safety, Fire Protection, 
and Emergencies
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the significance of life safety and name two sources for life safety planning.
2. Discuss the problem posed by fire.
3. Describe the roles of private organizations and public fire departments in fire 
protection.
4. List and explain five fire prevention strategies.
5. List and explain five fire suppression strategies.
6. Describe the roles of public police and emergency medical services in public safety.
7. List and describe three human-made emergencies and three natural disasters.
KEY TERMS
• life safety
• Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA)
• NFPA 101 Life Safety Code
• authority having jurisdiction
• building codes
• fire codes
• fire prevention
• fire suppression
• HAZMAT
• floor wardens
• areas of refuge
• sheltering-in-place
• integrated fire suppression systems
• standpipes
• fire brigade
• performance-based fire protection
• public safety
• personal protective equipment
• triage
• weapon of mass destruction (WMD)
• pandemic
• zoonotic diseases
• quarantine enforcement
13
Note: Portions of this chapter are from: Purpura, P. (2007). Terrorism and Homeland Security: 
An Introduction with Applications. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann.
Life Safety
Life safety pertains to building construction design that increases safety, what organizations 
and employees can do in preparation for emergencies, and what they can do once an  emergency 
295

296          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
occurs. Citizens cannot depend on government during the initial stages of an emergency. Citizens 
facing emergencies—in their home, workplace, and in public—must take steps to protect them-
selves for a duration that may last from a few minutes to possibly days until government, first 
responders, and assistance arrive. Although this chapter focuses on life safety in the workplace, 
protection methods for a variety of emergencies, at home or in public, are available from numer-
ous sources (see “Search the Web” at the end of the chapter).
Standards, Regulations, and Codes
Standards, regulations, and codes (explained in Chapter 3) provide a foundation for pro-
fessionals involved in life safety programs. Here, we provide a brief overview. Consensus 
standards are accepted industry practices developed by experts who agree on how a specific 
task should be performed. Consensus standards do not have the force of law unless a juris-
diction adopts them as law, as done by many jurisdictions with the National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) 101 Life Safety Code. Although standards may not be adopted as law 
by a jurisdiction, they may be used to establish a standard of care or used during litigation. 
Regulations are rules or laws enacted at the federal, state, or local levels with the requirement 
to comply. Codes are standards that cover broad subject areas that can be adopted into law.
OSHA Regulations
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is a federal agency established 
to administer the law on safety and health in the workplace. Its regulations, as are other fed-
eral regulations, are contained in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). A widely known 
example of federal regulations is found in Title 29 CFR, OSHA.
An example of an OSHA regulation that promotes life safety is 1910.38 Emergency 
Action Plans. It includes these minimum elements:
• An emergency action plan must be in writing, kept in the workplace, and available to 
employees for review.
• Procedures for reporting a fire or other emergency.
• Procedures for emergency evacuation, including type of evacuation and exit route 
assignments.
• Procedures to account for all employees after evacuation.
• Procedures to be followed by employees performing rescue or medical duties.
• An employer must have and maintain an employee alarm system that uses a distinctive 
signal for each purpose.
• An employer must designate and train employees to assist in a safe and orderly 
evacuation of other employees.
• An employer must review the emergency action plan with each employee.
Another OSHA regulation oriented toward life safety is 1910.39 Fire Protection Plans. 
It includes these minimum elements:
• A fire protection plan must be in writing, kept in the workplace, and available to 
employees for review.
• A list of all major five hazards, proper handling and storage procedures for hazardous 
materials, potential ignition sources and their control, and the type of fire protection 
equipment necessary to control each major hazard.
• Procedures to control accumulations of flammable and combustible waste materials.
• Procedures for regular maintenance of safeguards installed on heat-producing 
equipment to prevent the accidental ignition of combustible materials.
• The name or job title of employees responsible for maintaining equipment to prevent or 
control sources of ignition or fires and for control of fuel source hazards.
• An employer must inform employees upon initial assignment to a job of the fire 
hazards to which they are exposed and review with each employee those parts of the 
fire protection plan necessary for self-protection.

NFPA 101 Life Safety Code
The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code is used in every state and adopted statewide in 38 states. It 
is also used by numerous federal agencies. The state fire marshal’s office serves as a resource 
if one seeks to find out if the code has been adopted in a particular locale and which edition 
is being used. The code is published every three years.
The state fire marshal often serves as the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ), meaning 
the person or office charged with enforcing the code. In some jurisdictions, the AHJ is the 
fire department or building department. For some occupancy, there is more than one AHJ. A 
hospital, for example, may require approval for life safety from multiple authorities having 
jurisdictions. 
The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code publication begins with a  disclaimer of liability as 
paraphrased next. NFPA codes, standards, recommended practices, and guides are developed 
through a consensus standards development process approved by the American National 
Standards Institute (ANSI). This process recruits volunteers with varied expertise and view-
points to achieve consensus on fire and other safety issues. The NFPA does not independently 
test, evaluate, or verify the accuracy of information contained in its codes and standards. It 
does not list, certify, test, or inspect products, designs, or installations. The NFPA disclaims 
liability for any personal injury or property damage resulting from the use of its documents. 
Its documents are not released to render professional or other services, and the NFPA has no 
enforcement powers.
The history of NFPA 101 began with a presentation by R. H. Newbern at the 1911 Annual 
Meeting of the NFPA. The following year, his presentation resulted in the Committee on Safety 
to Life publishing “Exit Drills in Factories, Schools, Department Stores and Theaters.” This com-
mittee studied notable fires and causes of loss of life, and prepared standards for the construction 
of stairways, fire escapes, and egress routes. The publication of additional pamphlets, which were 
widely circulated and put into general use, provided the foundation for the NFPA 101 Life Safety 
Code. New material and revisions to the code continued through the 20th century. National atten-
tion focused on the importance of adequate exits and fire safety following the Cocoanut Grove 
Night Club Fire in Boston in 1942, resulting in 492 deaths. The code was increasingly being used 
for regulatory purposes.
The 1991 edition contained numerous new requirements for mandatory sprinklers in a 
variety of facilities. The 1994 edition contained new requirements for egress, areas of refuge, 
and ramps to conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines. 
In the 2003 edition, the first part consists of Chapters 1 through 11 (except Chapter 5) 
and is called the base chapters or fundamental chapters. Chapter 5 explains the  performance-
based option (i.e., building design features meeting specific Life Safety Code performance 
objectives). Many of the provisions of the first part are mandatory for specific occupan-
cies. Some provisions are mandated only when referenced by a specific occupancy, whereas 
other provisions are exempted for specific occupancy. The statement “where permitted by 
Chapters 12 through 42” refers to provisions that can be used only where specifically permit-
ted by an occupancy chapter (e.g., educational, healthcare, lodging, and industrial). One can 
find an example in Chapter 7, 7.2.1.6.1 on delayed egress locks that are allowed only when 
permitted by Chapters 12 through 42. If the permission is not found in an occupancy chap-
ter, the delayed egress lock cannot be used in that type of facility. Other types of restricted 
permission are found for such features as double cylinder locks, security grills, and revolving 
doors.
Here are samples from the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code:
Chapter 1 Administration
1.1.2 Danger to Life from Fire. The Code addresses those construction, pro-
tection, and occupancy features necessary to minimize danger to life from fire, 
including smoke, fumes, or panic.
1.1.3 Egress Facilities. The Code establishes minimum criteria for the 
design of egress facilities so as to allow prompt escape of occupants from build-
ings or, where desirable, into safe areas within buildings.
Life Safety          297

298          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
Chapter 3 Definitions
3.2.4 Labeled. Equipment or materials to which has been attached a label, 
symbol, or other identifying mark of an organization that is acceptable to the 
authority having jurisdiction and concerned with product evaluation, that main-
tains periodic inspection of production of labeled equipment or materials, and by 
whose labeling the manufacturer indicates compliance with appropriate standards 
or performance in a specified manner.
3.2.5 Listed. Equipment, materials, or services included in a list published 
by an organization that is acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction and 
concerned with evaluation of products or services, that maintains periodic inspec-
tion of production of listed equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of 
services, and whose listing states that either the equipment, material, or service 
meets appropriate designated standards or has been tested and found suitable for 
a specified purpose.
Chapter 7 Means of Egress
7.1.10 Means of Egress Reliability.
7.1.10.1 Means of egress shall be continuously maintained free of all obstructions 
or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency.
7.2.1.5 Locks, Latches, and Alarm Devices.
7.2.1.5.1 Doors shall be arranged to be opened readily from the egress side when-
ever the building is occupied.
7.2.1.5.2 Locks, if provided, shall not require the use of a key, a tool, or special 
knowledge or effort for operation from the egress side.
7.2.1.6 Special Locking Arrangements.
7.2.1.6.1 Delayed-Egress Locks. Approved, listed, delayed egress locks shall be 
permitted to be installed on doors serving low and ordinary hazard contents 
in buildings protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic fire 
detection system in accordance with Section 9.6 or an approved, supervised 
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 9.7, and where permitted 
in Chapter 12 through Chapter 42, provided that the following criteria be met:
(1)  The doors shall unlock upon actuation of one of the following:
 
(a)  An approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 
Section 9.7
 
(b) Any heat detector
 
(c)   Not more than two smoke detectors of an approved, supervised auto-
matic fire detection system in accordance with Section 9.6
 
(2)  The doors shall unlock upon loss of power controlling the lock or locking 
mechanism.
 
(3)  An irreversible process shall release the lock within 15 seconds, or 30 
seconds where approved by the authority having jurisdiction, upon appli-
cation of a force to the release device required in 7.2.1.5.9 under the fol-
lowing conditions:
 
(a) The force shall not be required to exceed 67 N (15 lbf).
 
(b)  The force shall not be required to be continuously applied for more than 
3 seconds.
 
(c)  The initiation of the release process shall activate an audible signal in 
the vicinity of the door.
 
(d)  Once the door lock has been released by the application of force to the 
releasing device, relocking shall be by manual means only.
 
(4)  A readily visible, durable sign in letters not less than 25 mm (1 in.) high and 
not less than 3.2 mm (1/8 in.) in stroke width on a contrasting background that 
reads as follows shall be located on the door adjacent to the release device:
PUSH UNTIL ALARM SOUNDS
DOOR CAN BE OPENED IN 15 SECONDS

7.2.1.7 Panic Hardware and Fire Exit Hardware.
7.2.1.7.1 Where a door is required to be equipped with panic or fire exit hard-
ware, such hardware shall meet the following criteria:
 
(1)  It shall consist of a cross bar or a push pad, the actuating portion of which 
extends across not less than one-half of the width of the door leaf.
 
(2)  It shall be mounted as follows:
 
(a)  New installations shall be not less than 865 mm (34 in.), nor more than 
1220 mm (48 in.), above the floor.
 
(b)  Existing installations shall be not less than 760 mm (30 in.), nor more 
than 1220 mm (48 in.), above the floor.
 
(3)  It shall be constructed so that a horizontal force not to exceed 66 N (15 lbf) 
actuates the cross bar or push pad and latches.
7.2.1.7.3 Required panic hardware and fire exit hardware, in other than deten-
tion and correctional occupancies as otherwise provided in Chapter 22 and 
Chapter 23, shall not be equipped with any locking device, set screw, or other 
arrangement that prevents the release of the latch when pressure is applied to 
the releasing device.
7.9 Emergency Lighting.
7.9.1.1 Emergency lighting facilities for means of egress shall be provided in 
accordance with Section 7.9 for the following:
 
(1)  Buildings or structures where required in Chapter 11 through Chapter 42
 
(2)  Underground and limited access structures as addressed in Section 11.7
 
(3) High-rise buildings as required by other sections of this Code
 
(4) Doors equipped with delayed-egress locks
 
(5)  Stair shaft and vestibule of smokeproof enclosures, for which the following 
also apply:
 
(a)  The stair shaft and vestibule shall be permitted to include a standby 
generator that is installed for the smokeproof enclosure mechanical 
ventilation equipment.
 
(b)  The standby generator shall be permitted to be used for the stair shaft 
and vestibule emergency lighting power supply.
Chapter 9 Building Service and Fire Protection Equipment
9.7.1 Automatic Sprinklers.
9.7.1.1 Each automatic sprinkler system required by another section of this Code 
shall be in accordance with one of the following:
 
(1) NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems
 
(2)  NFPA 13R, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential 
Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height
 
(3)  NFPA 13D, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and 
Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes
9.7.1.2 Sprinkler piping serving not more than six sprinklers for any isolated 
hazardous area shall be permitted to be connected directly to a domestic water 
supply system having a capacity sufficient to provide 6.1 mm/min (0.15 gpm/ft2) 
throughout the entire enclosed area. An indicating shutoff valve, supervised in 
accordance with 9.7.2 or NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler 
Systems, shall be installed in an accessible, visible, location between the sprinklers 
and the connection to the domestic water supply.
Chapter 11 Special Structures and High-Rise Buildings
11.8.2 Extinguishing Requirements.
11.8.2.1 High-rise buildings shall be protected throughout by an approved, super-
vised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 9.7. A sprinkler con-
trol valve and a waterflow device shall be provided for each floor.
11.8.4 Emergency Lighting and Standby Power.
11.8.4.1 Emergency lighting in accordance with Section 7.9 shall be provided.
Life Safety          299

300          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
9/11 Transcripts Released
The following is from a USA TODAY (Cauchon, et al., 2003) news story on the radio 
transmissions and telephone calls during the 9/11 attacks:
A man on the 92nd floor called the police with what was—though he did 
not know it—the question of his life. “We need to know if we need to get 
out of here, because we know there’s an explosion,” said the caller, who 
was in the south tower of the World Trade Center. A jet had just crashed 
into the Trade Center’s north tower. “Should we stay or should we not?” 
The officer on the line asked whether there was smoke on the floor. Told 
no, he replied: “I would wait ‘til further notice.” “All right,” the caller said. 
“Don’t evacuate.” He then hung up. Almost all the roughly 600 people 
in the top floors of the south tower died after a second hijacked airliner 
crashed into the 80th floor shortly after 9 a.m. The failure to evacuate the 
building was one of the day’s great tragedies. The exchange between the 
office worker and the policeman was one of many revealed when the Port 
Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owned and patrolled the 
office complex, released  transcripts of 260 hours of radio transmissions 
and telephone calls on 9/11.
Morgan Stanley
The following is from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, READYBusiness 
(n.d.):
In 1993, when terrorists attacked the World Trade Center for the first time, 
financial services company Morgan Stanley learned a life-saving lesson. 
It took the  company 4 hours that day to evacuate its employees, some of 
whom had to walk down 60 or more flights of stairs to safety. While none 
of Morgan Stanley’s employees was killed in the attack, the company’s 
management decided its disaster plan just wasn’t good enough. Morgan 
Stanley took a close look at its operation, analyzed the potential disaster 
risk and developed a multi-faceted disaster plan. Perhaps just as impor-
tantly, it practiced the plan frequently to provide for employee safety in the 
event of another disaster. On September 11, 2001, the  planning and prac-
tice paid off. Immediately after the first hijacked plane struck One World 
Trade Center, Morgan Stanley security executives ordered the company’s 
3800 employees to evacuate from World Trade Center buildings Two and 
Five. This time, it took them just 45 minutes to get out to safety!
The crisis management did not stop at that point, however. Morgan 
Stanley offered grief counseling to workers and increased its security pres-
ence. It also used effective communications strategies to provide timely, 
appropriate information to management and employees, investors and 
clients, and regulators and the media. Morgan Stanley still lost 13 people 
on September 11th, but many more could have died if the company had 
not had a solid disaster plan that was practiced repeatedly. In making a 
commitment to prepare its most valuable asset, its people, Morgan Stanley 
ensured the firm’s future.

Life Safety          301
Does the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Place Enough Emphasis on 
Protecting Civilian Facilities?
Sternberg and Lee (2006: 1–19) write that when disasters strike, people’s safety often 
depends on the buildings they occupy. They argue that the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security is misdirected by placing too much emphasis on protecting infrastructures 
(e.g., transportation, utilities, and government buildings) at the expense of improving 
protection at civilian facilities (e.g., apartment and office buildings). Sternberg and Lee 
offer specific suggestions to improve the protection of civilian facilities:
• The protection of civilian facilities necessitates a category of homeland security 
that deserves discrete federal, state, and local attention.
• The federal government should do more to facilitate incentives, support, 
information, training, technology, and research to protect civilian facilities.
• The challenge is not for government to find a central solution for protecting 
civilian facilities, but rather to find policy solutions that motivate more 
managers in civilian facilities to assess risks and search for solutions.
• Governments at all levels must work to improve and clarify regulations so that 
investments in protection at civilian facilities increase.
Building Design and Building Codes
Making changes in building design and building codes is a slow process, and new codes often 
do not apply to existing buildings. Experts (e.g., structural engineers), industry groups (e.g., 
real estate), and government leaders frequently disagree over what changes, if any, should be 
made. The following information on trends in building design and  building codes since the 
9/11 attacks is from Gips (2005: 43–49), the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(2005), and the International Code Council (2004):
• Guidance for local governments for building codes is found with the International 
Code Council (ICC) or the NFPA. The ICC’s International Building Code (IBC) has 
been widely adopted in the United States. The NFPA writes the Life Safety Code 
(LSC) and the Building Construction and Safety Code (BCSC). The LSC has been 
adopted by far more jurisdictions than the BCSC.
• The IBC establishes minimum standards for the design and installation of building 
systems, and it addresses issues of occupancy, safety, and technology. It plays a major 
role in transforming lessons from the 9/11 attacks into updated building codes, and 
it relies on research from the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST). The NIST detailed reports on the collapse of the 
World Trade Center (WTC) towers, and its reports also include the impact of natural 
hazards (e.g., hurricanes) on tall buildings.
• NIST research found the following factors in the collapse sequence of the WTC towers: 
each aircraft severed perimeter columns, damaged interior core columns, and knocked off 
fireproofing from steel; jet fuel initially fed the fires, followed by building contents, and air 
from destroyed walls and windows; and floor sagging and exposure to high temperatures 
caused the perimeter columns to bow inward and buckle.
• NIST recommendations that could have improved the WTC structural performance 
on 9/11 are as follows: fireproofing less susceptible to being dislodged; perimeter 
columns and floor framing with greater mass to enhance thermal and buckling 
performance; compartmentation to retard spread of fire; windows with improved 
thermal performance; fire-protected and hardened elevators; and redundant water 
supply for standpipes.

302          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
• One successful code change of the IBC is that buildings 420 feet and higher (about 
42 floors) must have a minimum three-hour structural fire-resistance rating, whether 
sprinklers are present or not. The earlier rating was for two hours, with sprinklers. 
The reasoning for the change is that fire departments are generally not capable of 
supplying adequate water pressure and flow to floors above 420 feet, and the building 
must be able to stand on its own.
• IBC proposals that were rejected: widen stairs from 44 inches to 72 inches in 
buildings 20 stories and higher and encasing stairwells in either concrete or masonry 
in buildings 25 stories and higher.
• Both the ICC and the NFPA have committees that focus on NIST research that may 
serve to support changes in their respective building codes. Issues drawing attention 
include evacuation procedures, fire resistance, collapse, redundant water supplies, and 
how to prevent metal-detection equipment from hindering emergency egress.
• Although the NFPA is hesitant about endorsing alternative escape systems, it 
does acknowledge the following that need further study: use of elevators during 
emergencies, platforms that move along the outside of a building, high-wire escape to 
nearby buildings, and parachutes.
• The new Seven World Trade Center (WTC) building at “ground zero” has gone beyond 
building code requirements. It is protected against progressive collapse by, for example, 
spray-on fireproofing that is five times more adhesive that what is required by existing 
standards. Stairs and elevators are fully encased in reinforced concrete. (FEMA found 
that at the WTC, during the attacks, plasterboard that was designed to provide fire 
resistance to the stairways was knocked off by the impact of the jets.) In the new WTC, 
fire stairs are located at opposite ends of the building. (FEMA noted that the jets were 
able to destroy two sets of emergency stairways because they were close together.) In the 
new WTC, stairs have triple redundancy for light: emergency lighting, battery power, 
and photoluminescent paint.
• Chicago is another city enhancing building safety following the 9/11 attacks. The 
emphasis is more on planning than building designs, and like other locales, it ties 
building height to safety requirements. For instance, buildings 540 feet or higher must 
file an emergency evacuation plan with the city’s office of emergency communications. 
The plan includes evacuation procedures, posting of a floor plan, a list of occupants 
needing assistance, drills, marked stairwells to identify floor number, and the site of 
re-entry locations.
• Innovations and changes in buildings for safety include sensors in HVAC systems 
to detect WMD, multiple HVAC systems to isolate fire and other hazards, HVAC 
“nanofilters” to capture harmful agents, stairway pressurization to reduce smoke, and 
wider stairs for evacuation and emergency response.
• ICC (2004) research of the building departments of the 15 most populated cities in 
the United States found that officials varied in their reporting of top concerns. The 
most often cited concern was inadequate resources during the building boom for 
permitting and plan inspection services.
• Eight of the 15 building departments in the ICC research stated that they were 
involved in some form of response program concerning the risk of terrorism.
• All 15 cities expressed concerns about weather and natural disasters, and emergency 
plans are in place, drills are conducted, and supplies (e.g., cots, water, and generators) 
are stockpiled.
• Dr. W. Gene Corley (2004), team leader of the WTC Building Performance Study, 
writes that NFPA data from a 10-year study of 8,000 commercial fires showed that 
sprinklers do not operate about 16% of the time. He notes that despite this risk 
of failure, model codes increasingly rely on sprinklers, while reducing fire-resistant 
construction. In addition, although many view fire barriers as costly excess, first 
responders see them as lifesavers and another method to prevent building collapse.
• Local governments have been slow to make changes in building or life safety codes 
since the 9/11 attacks. However, insurance companies can raise premiums on coverage 

for buildings not meeting recommended criteria. Such insurer action can lead to 
stricter building codes.
• Although terrorism may appear as a remote threat to building owners, an “all 
hazard” approach brings to light numerous risks. This broader perspective impacts 
building codes, the standard of care that courts might impose for building protection, 
and liability issues.
Fire Protection
The Problem of Fire
As written in Chapter 2, the U.S. Fire Administration (2005b) reported that the U.S. fire 
problem is one of the worst in the industrial world. In 2005, the fire problem resulted in the 
following losses: 3,675 civilian deaths and 17,925 injuries; 115 firefighter deaths while on 
duty; 1.6 million fires reported and many went unreported; property loss at about $10.7 bil-
lion; and there were 31,500 intentionally set structure fires resulting in 315 civilian deaths. 
Furthermore, fire killed more Americans than all natural disasters combined, and 83% of 
all civilian fire deaths occurred in residences (U.S. Fire Administration, 2006). Most human 
casualties in fires result from smoke and the toxic fumes or gases within it.
The U.S. Fire Administration (2002) reported that each year there are about 15,500 
high-rise structural fires, and three-quarters of these fires are in residential structures. The 
challenges posed by high-rise fires include the following:
• Smoke and flame movement in high-rise structures is very different from other 
structures.
• High-rises often contain multiple types of occupancies such as residential, commercial, 
restaurant, and underground parking. Each type presents challenges that must be 
approached differently.
• Exits from high-rises are limited, and emergency evacuation is difficult.
• High-rise fires require significantly more personnel and equipment to extinguish than 
do other types of fires.
Private Organizations Involved in Fire Protection
As explained in Chapter 3, a number of private organizations assist public and private 
sector efforts at security, safety, and fire protection. This assistance is through research, 
standards, and publications. Examples of these private organizations include NFPA and 
UL. Another related private organization is Factory Mutual Global. This organization 
works to improve the effectiveness of fire protection systems and new fire suppression 
chemicals, as well as cost evaluation of fire protection systems. It tests materials and 
equipment submitted by manufacturers. An approval guide is published, and like UL, it 
issues labels to indicate that specific products have passed its tests.
Fire Departments
Fire departments are local institutions. There are about 31,000 local fire departments in the 
United States and over one million firefighters, of which about 750,000 are volunteers. Over 
half of firefighters protect small, rural communities of fewer than 5,000 residents, and these 
locales rely on volunteer departments with scarce resources. One of the best strategies for 
these locales, outside major metropolitan areas, is to develop mutual aid agreements to share 
resources. This approach improves preparation and response to fires and emergencies (U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security, n.d.).
Historically, fire departments have focused on fire prevention and fire suppression. 
However, in the past 30 years, fire departments have expanded services to include emergency 
medical needs, hazardous material incidents, terrorism response, natural disasters, specialized 
rescue, and other community needs. Because of these additional community requirements and 
Fire Protection          303

304          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
the need for research on the changing nature of the fire service, the U.S. Fire Administration 
(USFA) and the International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) are working together to 
enhance risk management capabilities of local fire departments. The goals of this initiative are 
to design risk management programs based on community vulnerabilities and service com-
mitments, improve firefighter safety, and provide evaluative tools for response systems. One 
avenue of research in this initiative is to employ geographic information system (GIS) computer 
simulation to develop staffing and deployment models that will be recommended for depart-
ments of various sizes serving different communities. The research results will be available to 
fire service standards  setting committees such as the NFPA (U.S. Fire Administration, 2005a).
The “Firefighting Annex,” within the National Response Plan (U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security, 2004), states that the primary agency for coordination during a significant 
fire is the U.S. Department of Agriculture/Forest Service, with support from the Departments 
of Commerce, Defense, Homeland Security, Interior, and the Environmental Protection Agency. 
The function is to detect and suppress wildland, rural, and urban fires resulting from an 
Incident of National Significance and to provide personnel and equipment to supplement all 
levels of government in firefighting.
Fire Department Protection Efforts
Public fire protection tasks often involve private-sector loss prevention practitioners. These 
tasks include facility planning, prefire planning, codes, and inspections.
Facility Planning
In many locales, it is legally mandatory that public fire personnel review construction plans 
for new facilities. This may entail consultation with architects, engineers, and loss prevention 
practitioners on a number of subjects ranging from fire codes to water supplies for sprinkler 
systems. On-site inspections by fire personnel ensure compliance with plans. Fire and water 
department officials often prepare recommendations to local government bodies concerning 
improvements in water supply systems for new industrial plants to ensure an adequate water 
supply in the event of a fire. Cooperation and planning with interested parties can create an 
improved atmosphere for preventing and suppressing fires.
Prefire Planning
Preparatory plans assist fire personnel in case of fire. An on-site survey is made of a particular 
building with the aid of a checklist. Then the actual prefire plans are formulated for that struc-
ture. Drawings and computer-aided designs are used to identify the  location of exits, stairs, 
firefighting equipment, hazards, and anything else of importance. Additional information is 
helpful: construction characteristics and that of adjacent  buildings, types of roofs, number of 
employees, and the best response route to the building. Prefire plans also serve as an aid to 
training. Naturally, firefighting personnel do not have the time to prepare prefire plans for all 
structures in their jurisdiction. One- and two-family  residential structures are omitted in favor 
of more complex structures where greater losses can occur, such as schools, hospitals, theaters, 
hotels, and manufacturing plants.
Public Education
This strategy involves educating the public about the fire problem and how to prevent it. The 
public can become a great aid in reducing fires if people are properly recruited through educa-
tion campaigns. Public education programs utilize mass media, contests, lectures, and tours of 
firehouses. Building inspections also educate the public by pointing out fire hazards.
Codes
Years ago, as the United States was evolving into an industrial giant, buildings were con-
structed without proper concern for fire prevention. Building codes in urban areas either did 
not exist or were inadequate to ensure construction designed to prevent fire-related losses. 

In fact, a year before the Great Chicago Fire in 1871, Lloyd’s Insurance Company of London 
halted the writing of policies in that city because of fire-prone construction practices.
Prompted by the difficulty in selling insurance because of higher rates for hazardous 
buildings and the losses incurred by some spectacular fires, insurance companies became 
increasingly interested in fire prevention strategies. Improvements in building construction 
and fire departments slowly followed.
Although insurance associations played an important role in establishing fire standards, 
government support was necessary to enforce fire codes. Today, local governments enforce 
state regulations and local ordinances that support fire codes. Fire department personnel 
inspect structures to ensure conformance to codes. To strengthen compliance by owners of 
buildings, penalties are meted out for violations so that fire hazards are reduced. Penalties 
usually are in the form of fines.
Codes can be in the form of fire codes and building codes. Frequently, there is disagree-
ment about what should be contained in each and what responsibility and authority should 
be given to fire inspectors as opposed to building inspectors.
Generally, construction requirements go into building codes, and these codes are 
enforced by building inspectors. Model building codes are from the Building Officials 
Code Administrators, Southern Building Code Congress International and the International 
Conference of Building Officials, the new International Building Code, and NFPA 101. The 
building codes contain fire resistance ratings of floors, walls, ceilings and other construction 
features that affect code requirements for electrical installations, sprinkler systems, exits, 
vents, and the like (Bangor and Faust, 2001: 68–71).
Fire codes, enforced by firefighting personnel, deal with the maintenance and condition 
of various fire prevention and suppression features of buildings (e.g., sprinkler systems). In 
addition, fire codes cover hazardous substances, hazardous occupancies, and general precau-
tions against fire.
Codes have afforded buildings greater fire protection, especially when compared to earlier 
days. However, in some localities codes are of poor quality. A prime factor is construction costs. 
Interest group (e.g., the construction industry) pressure on government officials who stipulate 
codes has been known to weaken codes. It is a sad case when a high-rise building catches fire 
and people perish because no sprinklers were installed on upper floors, and the fire department 
was ill equipped to suppress a fire so high up. Later, the media broadcasts the tragedy, and gov-
ernment officials meet to satisfy the public outcry. Stronger fire codes often emerge. A similar 
scenario occurs with weak building codes following natural disasters (e.g., a hurricane).
Inspections
The primary purpose of building inspections by firefighting personnel is to uncover deviations 
from the fire code. The frequency and intensity of these inspections vary. Because of budget 
constraints and a shortage of personnel, many fire departments are not able to conduct enough 
inspections to equal national standards of several inspections per year for hazardous buildings. 
The NFPA Inspection Manual outlines methods for conducting inspections.
Legal Implications
Fire marshals are provided with broad powers to ensure public safety. This is especially evi-
dent in fire inspections and investigations, in rights to subpoena records, and in fire marshal’s 
hearings. Most courts have upheld these powers.
In almost all local jurisdictions, the state has delegated police powers so that local officials 
regulate safety conditions through ordinances. Fire ordinances stipulate inspection procedures, 
number of inspections, violations, and penalties. When differences of opinion develop over 
individual rights (e.g., of a building owner) versus fire department police powers, the issue is 
often resolved by the courts. Chapter 4 differentiates administrative inspection and administra-
tive search warrant. It also notes that the legal standard for obtaining an administrative search 
warrant, also known as an inspection warrant, is lower than what is required to obtain a search 
warrant in a criminal case (Hall, 2006: 146–151).
Fire Protection          305

306          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
Fire Prevention and Fire Suppression Strategies
Businesses and institutions can do a lot to protect against fire. Fire prevention focuses on 
strategies that help to avoid the inception of fires. Fire suppression applies personnel, equip-
ment, and other resources to suppress fires.
The following strategies are emphasized in subsequent pages:
Fire Prevention 
Fire Suppression
Inspections 
Integrated systems
Planning 
Detection of smoke and fire
Safety 
Contact the fire department
Good housekeeping 
Extinguishers
Storage and transportation of hazardous 
Sprinklers
 substances and materials 
Standpipe and hose systems
Evacuation 
Fire-resistive buildings
Training 
Training and fire brigades
The fire triangle (see Figure 13-1) symbolizes the elements necessary for a fire. Fire requires 
heat, fuel, oxygen, and then a chemical chain reaction. When all three characteristics, plus a 
chemical chain reaction, are present, there will be fire. If any one is missing, either through preven-
tion strategies (e.g., good housekeeping, safety) or suppression (i.e., extinguishment), fire will not 
occur. Heat often is considered the ignition source. A smoldering cigarette, sparks from a welder’s 
torch, or friction from a machine can produce enough heat to begin a fire.
FIGURE 13-1 Fire triangle.

Almost every working environment has fuels, heat, and oxygen. Loss prevention practi-
tioners, and all employees in general, must take steps to reduce the chances for fire by isolating 
fuels and controlling heat. Not much can be done about pervasive oxygen, but fuels such as 
gasoline and kerosene should be stored properly away from sources of heat.
Fire Prevention Strategies
Inspections
Inspections or audits to check on fire hazards are the mainstay of any organization’s strategy 
against fires (Breisch, 1989: 40–44). Checklist questions include the following: Are new facil-
ity designs and manufacturing processes being submitted to appropriate personnel for fire 
protection review? Do employees receive periodic training on fire prevention and suppression 
systems, polices, and procedures (see Figure 13-2)? What is the condition of fire suppression 
equipment? Are plant wastes and other combustibles disposed of properly? The basic pur-
pose of inspections is to uncover deficiencies. Then corrective action becomes the heart of the 
inspection prevention strategy.
Planning
Feedback from inspections helps to plan strategies against fire losses. An interdisciplinary 
planning group often is an excellent source for plans. Fire department personnel, architects, 
engineers, insurance specialists, loss prevention practitioners, and others can provide a mul-
titude of ideas. Management support is an important ingredient in the planning process. 
By supplying adequate personnel, funding, and policies and procedures, management can 
strengthen the fire protection program. Earlier, OSHA regulations pertaining to fire protec-
tion plans were explained.
Safety
Some safety strategies for a fire prevention program follow:
1. Set up smoking and no smoking areas that are supervised, safe, and clearly marked 
with signs.
2. In smoking areas, provide cigarette butt and match receptacles or sand urns.
3. When fire protection equipment or systems are planned, select those that have been 
approved by a reputable testing organization (e.g., UL).
Fire Prevention and Fire Suppression Strategies          307
FIGURE 13-2 Training and inspections improve fire protection.

4. In the use of heating systems, such as boilers, maintain safety when lighting up, during 
usage, and when shutting down.
5. Examine motors frequently to ensure safe operation and to prevent overheating.
6. Never overload electrical circuits.
7. Maintain lightning protective devices (e.g., lightning rods).
8. Employ an electrician who is safety conscious.
9. Prohibit the use of welding equipment near flammable substances or hazardous materials.
10. Watch sparks during and after welding.
11. Train employees to create an atmosphere of safety.
12. Conduct inspections and correct deficiencies.
13. Ensure fire protection standby for hazardous operations.
Good Housekeeping
Good housekeeping is another fire prevention strategy. It consists of building care, mainte-
nance, cleanliness, proper placement of materials, careful waste and garbage disposal, and 
other general housekeeping activities.
Hazardous Materials (HAZMAT) Incidents
HAZMAT refers to substances that are toxic, poisonous, radioactive, flammable, or explosive 
and can cause injury or death from exposure (Schottke, 2007: 450). The prevention of disas-
ters from hazardous substances and materials is extremely important. Such materials are used 
in every community and transported by trucks, railcars, ships, barges, and planes. Examples 
of hazardous substances and materials are plastics, fuels, and corrosive chemicals (e.g., acids). 
A tremendous amount of information exists concerning their physical and chemical proper-
ties, methods for storage and transportation, and the most appropriate strategies in the event 
of fire or accident. Numerous federal (e.g., OSHA and U.S. Department of Transportation) 
and state agencies and laws and regulations promote HAZMAT safety.
HAZMAT responses require caution because the effects can be deadly and first 
responders do not want to become victims themselves. Approaches, with proper protec-
tive clothing, should be made from upwind, uphill, and upstream, and vehicles should 
be parked facing out for quick escape. Top priorities during a HAZMAT incident are to 
protect yourself and others from exposure and contamination, isolate the area, identify 
the substance for subsequent action, and deny entry to reduce exposure.
Evacuation and Medical Services
Whatever fire prevention strategies are planned, a key factor must be to prevent injuries and 
deaths. Two vital considerations are evacuation and medical services. Evacuation plans and 
drills help people prepare for the risk of fire and other emergencies (Figure 13-3). Smoke and fire 
alarms often provide warning for escape. Emergency exit maps and properly identified emer-
gency doors also prevent injuries and deaths. Employees should turn off all equipment, utilize 
designated escape routes, avoid elevators, and report to a predetermined point on the outside 
to be counted. While employees are evacuating, firefighters may be entering the premises. At 
this point, a coordinated traffic flow is crucial. Firefighting equipment and personnel need to be 
directed to the fire location. Personnel should also be assigned to crowd control.
If injuries do take place, the quickness and quality of emergency medical services can save 
lives and unnecessary suffering. Preplanning will improve services. Specific employees should 
be trained to administer first aid while waiting for public emergency medical services.
Here is a list of suggestions to promote safety and fire protection in buildings (Azano 
and Gilbertie, 2003; Carter et al., 2004; Quinley and Schmidt, 2002; U.S. Fire Administration, 
2004). An emphasis is placed on evacuation.
• A committee should be formed to plan life safety.
• Life safety plans should be coordinated with public safety agencies and a variety of 
groups on the premises (e.g., management, employees in general, safety and security 
officers, and others).
308          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES

• Training, education, drills, and exercises are an investment in life safety. Records 
should be maintained of such activities for regulators, insurers, and others. The 
records should be secured in multiple locations.
• A chain of command and hierarchy of life safety volunteers should be maintained. For 
example, a building executive can choose floor wardens who can choose assistant floor 
wardens and searchers. Floor wardens and assistants are trained, and then they train 
occupants and lead drills. Searchers ensure no one is left behind.
• Training for floor wardens and assistants should include these topics: the variety of 
risks (e.g., fire, workplace violence), the evacuation plan, escape routes, safety, means 
of communication, what to do if someone is injured, where to assemble outside the 
building, and counts.
• Wardens can be supplied with evacuation kits containing flashlight, reflective vest, 
clipboard for recording employees outside the building, and a flag to mark the 
rendezvous point.
• Evacuation plans should include occupants with special needs, and employees should 
be assigned to assist them.
• Evacuation of high-rise buildings is complicated because of the number of occupants 
and the time needed to evacuate, especially those in upper floors. A minor fire may 
require evacuation of the floor containing the fire and two floors both above and 
below the fire. A serious fire would require a total evacuation.
• Evacuation plans should include areas of refuge (e.g., oversized landing at a stairwell 
or sealed smoke or fire compartments on a floor) and how they will be used. A 
method of communication should be installed at the area of refuge.
Fire Prevention and Fire Suppression Strategies          309
FIGURE 13-3 Principles of exit safety.

• Before opening a door during a fire emergency, feel the door with the back of your hand 
to gauge temperature. If it is warm, opening it may cause smoke and fire to enter. This 
means you may be forced to stay in your office or apartment. Stuff the cracks around 
the door with towels. Telephone the fire department to inform them about your location 
and go to the window with a flashlight or wave a sheet.
• If the door is not warm, brace your body against it, stay low, and slowly open it. If 
there is no smoke or fire, evacuate.
• If smoke is around you, stay low because smoke rises. Place a cloth over your mouth 
and nose.
• Employee information is crucial during an emergency, and it should be up-to-date. 
Also important is a contact list of public safety agencies, medical services, regulators, 
government officials, critical suppliers, and others.
• Building and site maps are important to indicate such features as utility shutoffs, 
water lines, electrical and other utilities, floor plans, exits, stairways, hazards, and 
high-value assets.
• Practitioners responsible for safety and fire protection programs should seek feedback 
to improve performance. Feedback can be gathered from training, drills, and exercises. 
Also, audits can expose deficiencies in the expertise of personnel, equipment, systems, 
communications, and coordination with others.
• An airborne hazard (e.g., WMD) outside a building may necessitate sheltering-in-
place. For example, a plume of hazardous material may be approaching a high-rise 
building with no time to evacuate, and traffic would block escape. Ideal rooms to 
shelter-in-place would be on the opposite side of the approaching plume, above the 
first floor, windowless, and with a minimum number of vents and doors. Duct tape or 
other materials can be used to seal the room, and the HVAC system should be turned 
off. Because many hazardous agents are heavier than air, occupants should shelter-in-
place in upper floors.
Training
Through training, fire prevention becomes everybody’s responsibility. Employees must 
first understand the disastrous effects of serious fire losses. This includes not only harm to 
humans, but also lost productivity and jobs. Topics within training can include safety, good 
housekeeping, hazardous substances and materials, evacuation, and first aid. Knowledge 
is transmitted via on-line courses, lectures, videos, demonstrations, drills, visits by public 
fire prevention personnel, pamphlets, and posted fire prevention signs. Incentive programs, 
whereby employees compete for prizes (e.g., the best fire prevention poster) also can increase fire 
prevention awareness.
310          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
Haphazard Fire Protection at Bestbuy Service Company
The Bestbuy Service Company was a unique and rapidly growing business that sold 
numerous consumer items similar to those in department stores. Bestbuy’s success was 
due to a no-frills store design and customer self-service. Each store essentially was a 
warehouse located away from main roads. Loss prevention was of minimal concern to 
management. Strategies against crime, fire, and accidents were haphazard.
One store, which also served as a distribution center, had an unfortunate experi-
ence. Late one afternoon, before closing, a salesperson threw a lighted cigarette butt 
into a trash container. The trash and then some boxes nearby caught fire. When store 
personnel were surprised by the spreading fire, they panicked. The first thing they all 
did was to run out of the warehouse with the customers. While the employees watched 
the burning warehouse in amazement, the manager asked if anybody had called the fire 
department. Nobody responded, so he used his cell phone to call the fire  department. 

Fire Prevention and Fire Suppression Strategies          311
The manager continued to watch the fire and remembered that the automatic sprinklers 
were turned off because of freezing temperatures. Also in his thoughts were the thou-
sands of dollars’ worth of merchandise burning up.
For the Bestbuy Company, the store and its contents were a tremendous loss. 
Insurance covered only a small part of the losses, especially because many insurance 
company recommendations went unheeded: the local fire department was never con-
tacted for prefire plans, and employees were never trained for simple fire procedures. 
Senior management was clearly at fault.
What do you think can improve fire prevention in the United States?
Fire Suppression Strategies
The success of fire suppression strategies depends primarily on preplanning, preparation, 
equipment quality, and the readiness of personnel.
Integrated Systems
Integrated fire suppression systems perform a variety of functions (Suttell, 2006: 78–80). 
Detectors can measure smoke and the rate of temperature rise. If danger is evident, an alarm 
is sounded at the earliest stages of a fire. The fire can be extinguished automatically by water 
from sprinklers. Other functions include displaying CCTV video or AutoCAD floorplans on 
a computer screen to pinpoint the fire, notifying the fire department of the fire and its exact 
location, activating a public address (PA) system to provide life safety messages to occupants, 
starting up emergency generators for emergency lights and other equipment, detecting changes 
in sprinkler system water pressure, turning off certain electrical devices and equipment (e.g., 
shutting down fans that spread fire and smoke), venting specific areas, closing doors, creating 
safe zones for occupants, and returning elevators to ground level to encourage the use of emer-
gency stairways. If a human being were to analyze the fire threat and make these decisions, the 
time factor would obviously be greater than the split second needed by a computer.
Because buildings often contain integrated fire and security systems, it is important that 
engineers with verified skills design such systems. In addition, the local fire department can 
be contacted for their input. It is often recommended that the fire alarm system be planned 
as the first priority because of the need to deal with the fire authority’s jurisdiction and codes 
and standards.
Detection of Smoke and Fire
Many businesses utilize a combination of the following detectors for increased protection:
• Smoke detectors are widely used, especially since most human casualties in fires result 
from smoke and the toxic fumes or gases within smoke. These detectors operate with 
photoelectric light beams and react when smoke either blocks the beam of light or enters a 
refraction chamber where the smoke reflects the light into the photo cell.
• Ionization detectors are sensitive to invisible products of combustion created during 
the early stages of a fire. These detectors are noted for their early warning capabilities.
• Thermal detectors respond to heat either when the temperature reaches a certain degree 
or when the temperature rises too quickly. The latter is known as a rate-of-rise detector. 
Thermal detectors are made with either feature or a combination of both.
• Flame detectors detect flame and glowing embers. These detectors are sensitive to 
flames not visible to the human eye. The infrared kind is responsive to radiant energy 
that humans cannot see.

312          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
• Sprinkler water flow detectors contain a seal that melts when heat rises to a specific 
temperature. Then water flows from the sprinkler system. An alarm is activated when 
the water flow closes pressure switches.
• Carbon monoxide detectors protect against what is often called the “silent killer,” 
because carbon monoxide is difficult to detect. In fact, victims, in their drowsy state, 
may be wrongly diagnosed as being substance abusers.
• Gas detectors monitor flammable gases or vapors. These devices are especially 
valuable in petroleum, chemical, and other industries where dangerous gases or vapors 
are generated.
• Combination detectors respond to more than one fire-producing cause or employ 
multiple operating principles. Examples include smoke/heat detector or rate-of-rise/
fixed temperature heat detector.
Contact the fire department. Sometimes simple steps are overlooked. When a serious fire 
begins, the local fire department must be contacted as soon as possible to reduce losses. The best 
strategy to prevent a situation in which everybody thought somebody else had contacted the fire 
department is to ask: “Who called the fire department?” Another problem develops when people 
think that they can extinguish a fire without outside assistance. It is not until precious time has 
elapsed and serious danger exists that the fire department is contacted.
Alarm signaling systems are automatic or manual. With automatic systems, an attach-
ment of a siren or a bell to a smoke or fire detection device or sprinkler system will notify 
people in the immediate area of a smoke or fire problem. This type of alarm is called a local 
alarm. Unless incorporated into this system, a local alarm will not notify a fire department. 
Automatic systems also consist of a local alarm and an alarm that notifies a central station or 
a fire department. Many large industries have a central, proprietary monitoring station that 
checks smoke, fire, burglar, and other sensors. Manual fire alarm signaling systems use a pull 
station fixed to a wall. This is a local alarm unless an alarm signal is transmitted to a central 
station or fire department.
Portable Extinguishers
The following classes of fires provide a foundation for firefighting and use of portable extin-
guishers:
• Class A fires consist of ordinary combustible materials such as trash, paper, fibers, 
wood, drapes, and furniture.
• Class B fires are fueled by a flammable liquid, such as gasoline, oil, alcohol, or 
cleaning solvents.
• Class C fires occur in live electrical circuits or equipment such as generators, motors, 
fuse boxes, computers, or copying machines.
• Class D fires, the rarest of the four types of fires, are fueled by combustible metals 
such as sodium, magnesium, and potassium.
• Class K fires involve combustible cooking fuels such as vegetable or animal oils or fats 
(Carter, 2004: 186).
Portable fire extinguishers are used to douse a small fire by directing onto it a substance 
that cools the burning material, deprives the flame of oxygen, or interferes with the chemical 
reactions occurring in the flame. Ratings and effectiveness of these extinguishers are in NFPA 
10, Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers (Nolan, 2001: 83–85).
Employees and loss prevention practitioners must be knowledgeable about the proper 
use of extinguishers. If the wrong extinguisher is used, a fire may become more serious. Water 
must not be used on a flammable liquid such as gasoline (Class B fire) because the gasoline 
may float on the water and spread the fire. Neither should one spray water on electrical fires 
(Class C fires) because water conducts electricity, and electrocution may result. Many loca-
tions use multipurpose dry chemical extinguishers that can be applied to A, B, or C fires. This 
approach reduces confusion during a fire. Class D fires are extinguished with dry powder 
extinguishers. Class B extinguishers have been used on Class K fires with limited effectiveness. 

Class K extinguishing agents are usually wet chemicals—water-based solutions of potassium 
carbonate, potassium acetate, or potassium citrate (Carter, 2004: 187).
Fire extinguishers should be checked at least every week during a loss prevention officer’s 
patrol. Systems are available whereby extinguishers are connected to a control panel via an 
electrical cable. If the extinguisher is removed from its bracket, a signal is sent to the control 
panel. In addition, this system provides a reading of whether the extinguisher is pressurized to 
the correct level. Service companies recharge extinguishers when necessary. A seal is attached 
to the extinguisher that certifies its readiness. For those servicing fire extinguishers, 2008 is 
the year certification requirements begin, and it is based on NFPA 10 (Conroy, 2006).
An Angry Ex-Employee’s Revenge
Albert Drucker had been warned numerous times about pilfering small tools from the 
maintenance department at Bearing Industries. When he was caught for the third time, 
via a strict inventory system, management decided to fire him. When Drucker was 
informed, he went into a rage and stormed out of the plant. While leaving, he vowed, 
“I’m gonna get you back for this.” Management maintained that it made the right 
decision.
Two weeks later, Drucker was ready with his vindictive plan. At 2:00 one morn-
ing, he entered the Bearing plant by using a previously stolen master key. No loss 
prevention systems or services hindered his entrance. Within 15 minutes, he collected 
three strategically located fire extinguishers. When Drucker arrived home, he quickly 
emptied the contents of the extinguishers and then filled each one with gasoline. By 
5:30 a.m., Drucker had replaced the three extinguishers and he was home sleeping.
At 2:00 p.m., two days later, when the Bearing plant was in full production, 
Drucker sneaked into the plant unnoticed and placed, on a pile of old rags, a book of 
matches with a lighted cigarette underneath the match heads. By the time Drucker was 
a few miles away, the old rags and some cardboard boxes were on fire. When employ-
ees discovered the fire, they were confident that they could extinguish it. They reached 
for the nearest extinguishers and approached the fire. To their surprise, the fire grew 
as they supplied it with gasoline. Their first reaction was to drop the extinguishers 
and run; one extinguisher exploded while the fire intensified. The fire caused extensive 
damage but no injuries or deaths. The police and management suspected arson. When 
police investigators asked management if there was anybody who held a grudge against 
the company, Albert Drucker’s name was mentioned. He was arrested a week later and 
charged with arson.
Fire Prevention and Fire Suppression Strategies          313
Sprinklers
A sprinkler system consists of pipes along a ceiling that contain water under pressure, with 
an additional source of water for a constant flow. Attached to the pipes, automatic sprinklers 
are placed at select locations. When a fire occurs, a seal in the sprinkler head ruptures at a 
pre-established temperature, and a steady stream of water flows.
Sprinklers are an effective fire suppression strategy. Angle et al. (2001: 199) note that the 
NFPA has kept records of automatic sprinkler performance for more than 80 years; that organi-
zation reports: “These remarkably comprehensive records show that in 95 percent of the some 
117,770 fires in sprinklered buildings (where the Association has reliable data), the sprinklers 
have performed satisfactorily.” The failure of a sprinkler system most often is due to human 
error—the water supply was turned off at the time of the fire.
A sprinkler system is a worthwhile investment for reducing fire losses. Lower insurance 
premiums actually can pay for the system over time.

314          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
There are several kinds of automatic sprinkler systems. Two popular ones are the wet-
pipe and dry-pipe systems. With the wet-pipe system (Figure 13-4), water is in the pipes at 
all times and is released when heat ruptures the seal in the sprinkler head. This is the most 
common system and is applicable where freezing is no threat to its operation. Where freezing 
temperatures and broken pipes are a problem, the dry-pipe system is useful. Air pressure is 
maintained in the pipes until a sprinkler head ruptures. Then the air escapes, and water enters 
the pipes and exits through the opened sprinklers.
Older buildings may have pipes that apply fire-suppressant chemicals such as carbon 
dioxide or Halon. Fire codes now prohibit these chemicals. The former absorbs oxygen, creat-
ing a danger to humans, whereas the latter depletes the earth’s ozone layer.
Standpipe and Hose Systems
Standpipe and hose systems enable people to manually apply water to fires in buildings. 
Standpipes are vertical pipes that allow a water supply to reach an outlet on each floor of a 
building. In multiple-story structures, standpipes often are constructed within fire-resistant 
fire stairs as an added defense for the standpipes, hoses, and firefighting personnel. The typical 
setup is a folded or rolled 2 1/2–inch hose enclosed in a wall cabinet and identified with fire 
emergency information (Figure 13-5). A control valve, which looks like a small spoked wheel, 
enables water to flow. Automatic extinguishing systems (e.g., sprinklers) often are the pre-
ferred system; however, the standpipe and hose systems are advantageous when the automatic 
system fails or is not present, when sections of a building are not accessible to outside hose 
lines and hydrants, and when properly trained employees are capable of fire suppression.
Training is essential for employees if they are to have the responsibility of fighting a fire. 
With hoses, two people are required: one to stretch the hose to its full length and another to 
turn the water flow valve. Without training, employees may be injured if they do not under-
stand the danger of turning the valve before the hose is stretched. This could cause the coiled 
section of the hose to react to the water pressure by acting like a whip and possibly striking 
someone.
Fire Walls and Doors
Fire walls are constructed in buildings to prevent the spread of fire. These walls are made of mate-
rials that resist fire and are designed to withstand fire for several hours. Fire walls are weakened 
by openings such as doorways. Therefore, fire doors at openings help to strengthen the fire wall 
FIGURE 13-4 Total concept of the wet-pipe automatic sprinkler system.

FIGURE 13-5 Standpipe system including wall cabinet, hose with nozzle, and valves. A portable fire extinguisher 
is also contained in the cabinet.
Fire Prevention and Fire Suppression Strategies          315
when resisting fire. Fire doors often are designed to close automatically in case of fire. Nationally 
recognized testing laboratories study the reliability of these doors.
Stairwells
During evacuation, stairwells (made of masonry construction) provide a fire-resistant path 
for escape. Fire codes often require stairwells to withstand a fire for at least two hours. 
Stairwells may be equipped with fans to reduce smoke during evacuation.
Access Control
During an emergency, electronically controlled doors should be connected to the life safety system 
to permit escape. From a security perspective, this presents a problem because an alarm condition 
may provide an opportunity for an offender to enter or exit with ease. To deal with such a vulner-
ability, CCTV and security officers can be applied to select locations.
Codes mandate the use of exit devices that enable quick escape during emergencies. 
A door locked from the outside may be easily unlocked from the inside to allow theft or 
unauthorized passage. Therefore, the door needs to be secured from both sides while per-
mitting quick escape in case of an emergency. Often, the solution is a controlled exit device 
(Figure 13-6). One type of controlled exit device stays locked for a fixed time, usually 15 
seconds, after being pushed, while sounding an alarm. Signage and Braille are required to 
alert people of the delay as it provides time for security to respond. In a true emergency, 
such a device should be unlocked immediately through a tie-in with the building’s fire pro-
tection system as specified in NFPA 101 (Zunkel, 2000: 34–38).
The Las Vegas MGM Grand Hotel fire in 1985 provides a graphic example of security 
(locked exit doors) being one of the major reasons for a large loss of life. All the exit doors to 
the stairwell had a controlled exit device (panic hardware). However, once the occupants were 
in the stairwell, they encountered smoke. Unfortunately, the doors were locked on the stairwell 
side to ensure security for each floor. A person had to exit the building on the first floor to regain 
access. With heavy smoke rising in the stairwell, and no access to any of the upper floors, the 
occupants were trapped and died (Moore, 1997: 61–62).
Fire-Resistive Buildings
If a person stops to think about the tons of combustible materials transported into a building 
during construction and as it becomes operational, he or she may be hesitant to enter. Wood 

316          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
in construction and furnishings, cloth and fibers in curtains and carpets, paper, cleaning flu-
ids, and other combustibles are hazardous. However, reinforced concrete or protected steel 
construction and fire-resistive roofs, floors, ceilings, walls, doors, windows, carpets, furniture, 
and so on all help to produce greater fire protection.
Training and Fire Brigades
With the threat of fire, employee training is of tremendous importance. Of top priority 
 during a fire is to safeguard lives and then to secure valuable assets. If specific employees are 
responsible for fire suppression, thorough training is necessary. This is especially true when 
local public firefighting capabilities are incompatible with the type of fire that may develop 
at a site. In this case, a private fire department at the site is appropriate and referred to as 
a fire brigade. OSHA 1910.156 contains requirements for organizing, operating, training, 
and equipping industrial fire brigades when established by an employer. Although fire 
brigades are expensive, all brigade members must be trained and equipped as professional 
firefighters.
Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance
NFPA 25 establishes minimum requirements for inspecting, testing, and maintenance of 
water-based fire protection systems. The types of systems contained in this standard include 
sprinklers, standpipe and hose systems, and water supplies. Of particular concern during 
inspecting, testing, and maintenance is whether changes in a building impact fire protection 
and codes. Documentation of the process is essential to reinforce corrective action and for 
the AHJ.
FIGURE 13-6 Emergency exit. Courtesy: Sargent & Greenleaf, Inc.
Performance-Based Design
A performance-based fire protection approach is an alternative to following a rigid set 
of guidelines by evaluating hazards and planning the most appropriate protection in 
 innovative ways to meet performance goals. Supported by codes, this approach is also 

Public Safety Agencies          317
driven by computer software that runs fire models, technical analysis that is less  subjective 
than traditional planning, and performance-based design that offers  comparisons 
of products. Chapter 5 of NFPA 101 explains the performance-based option: 
“Performance-based design is an engineering approach to fire protection that is based 
on a specific design goal as opposed to the normal prescriptive code requirements based 
on occupancies.” For example, a fire code might require exit travel distance at 250 feet. 
This requirement may not be appropriate in all cases. Performance-based design would 
seek fire safety through a goal, such as evacuation of the building within 4 minutes 
(Jelenewicz, 2006: 34).
What do you think can improve fire suppression in the United States?
Public Safety Agencies
Public safety involves primarily government employees who plan, train, and equip them-
selves for emergencies. They respond as quickly as possible to the scene of an emergency 
to save lives, care for the injured, protect people and property, and restore order. During 
an emergency at a corporation or institution, when proprietary life safety specialists (e.g., 
security officers, floor wardens, and employees trained in fire fighting and first aid) perform 
their duties, their work will “merge” with the duties of arriving first responders (e.g., police, 
firefighters). Because of this interrelationship, joint planning and training prior to an emer-
gency can improve coordination, life safety, and public safety.
All first responders face serious safety issues. Examples are traffic accidents, disease, 
emotionally upset family members, violent offenders, and hazardous materials. Personal 
protective equipment (PPE) is essential; it depends on the type of incident. At a minimum, 
PPE must include universal precautions (e.g., gloves, mask, protective eyewear) to prevent 
disease transmission, but it can range to a bullet-resistant vest for high-risk incidents or 
locations.
Thus far in this chapter, emphasis has been placed on public fire departments within 
public safety. However, other agencies of government play an important role in public safety 
and responding to emergencies. They include emergency management (see the preceding chap-
ter), police, and emergency medical services.
Police
In the United States, there are 13,524 municipal police agencies, 3,070 sheriff’s departments, 
plus state police agencies and dozens of federal law enforcement agencies. Employees of 
these agencies, divided into sworn/not sworn, are as follows: local police, 440,920/124,995; 
sheriff’s departments, 164,711/129,112; state, 56,384/30,680; and federal, 88,000/72,000 
(Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2003).
Public police play a crucial role in responding to “all hazard” emergencies. At the scene 
of an emergency, police direct traffic, maintain order, keep crowds back, assist victims, protect 
potential crime scenes, and conduct investigations.
As with public fire departments, public police are also involved in the integration of life 
safety and public safety prior to emergencies. They may meet with private security manage-
ment to coordinate efforts at protecting people and assets. Police often maintain floor plans 
of banks and other high-risk locations to assist them when responding to crimes, such as a 
robberies and hostage incidents. Violence in the workplace has caused public police to plan, 
train, and drill with institutions (e.g., schools) and businesses.

318          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
Emergency Medical Service (EMS)
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (n.d.) reports that there are over 155,000 nation-
ally registered emergency medical technicians (EMTs). Houser et al. (2004), researchers for 
the RAND Corporation, list 500,000 emergency medical service responders. Carter et al. 
(2004: 691) write: “Emergency medical responses constitute more than 50 percent of total 
emergency responses for many fire departments across the country. In some jurisdictions, 
emergency medical calls make up 70 to 80 percent of the fire department’s total emergency 
responses per year.”
Firefighters are increasingly improving their skills at emergency medical services, and 
they can deliver lifesaving techniques to stabilize patients while waiting for EMTs and para-
medics. Some firefighters are also EMT qualified. In comparison to EMTs, paramedics receive 
more training and perform more procedures during a medical emergency. States vary on train-
ing and qualification for these positions.
During a medical emergency, numerous critical, time-sensitive decisions must be made 
(Angle, 2005: 118). Examples are the safest and quickest route to the scene; medical treat-
ment techniques; drug dosages; and the most appropriate method of transporting the patient. 
Triage (Figure 13-7) is a term relevant to sites of medical emergencies, and it is defined as fol-
lows: “A quick and systematic method of identifying which patients are in serious condition 
and which patients are not, so that the more seriously injured patients can be treated first” 
(Carter, 2004: 954).
FIGURE 13-7 U.S. Air Force firefighter triages victims during mass casualty exercise at Jacksonville International 
Airport, FL. Courtesy: U.S. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt. Shelley Gill.

Emergencies
Planning and training are two key strategies to mitigate losses when emergencies occur. 
Employees must know what to do to protect lives and assets. Business continuity plans are 
essential for business survival. Businesses must apply risk management and risk analysis tools 
to identify vulnerabilities and dependencies. “What if” scenarios help businesses plan. What 
if a major supplier is destroyed by a natural disaster? What if an electric service blackout 
occurs? What if IT service is interrupted? What if a pandemic necessitates restricted travel? 
How would these events affect business, and what can be done to strengthen business 
 continuity?
Human-Made Emergencies
Accidents
Although many accidents are caused by human error, other factors, such as weather conditions 
or poor equipment design, may cause accidents. An accident at, for example, a manufactur-
ing plant has the potential for serious injury, death, and production slowdown. Thousands of 
lives, hundreds of thousands of injuries, and billions of dollars of losses are sustained each year 
because of accidents. Safety and related issues are explained in the next chapter.
Bomb Threats, Explosions, and Terrorism Hoaxes
Because of past bombings and terrorism, bomb threats and the possibility of bombings 
are taken very seriously today. Even the commonly circulated statistic that 98% of bomb 
threats are hoaxes makes decision makers more concerned than ever about the other 2%. 
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) reports hundreds of bombing incidents 
in the United States each year. Pipe bombs and Molotov cocktails are often encountered 
in these incidents (Office of Justice Programs, 2000: 2–3). Accurate statistics are difficult 
to gather on bomb threats, attempts, and actual bombings. Organizations may not report 
threats. Police agencies may “play down incidents” to prevent copycat threats and bombings 
(Estenson, 1995: 120).
Here are basic strategies for protection against bomb threats and explosions:
1. Seek management support and prepare a plan and procedures.
2. Ensure that employees know what to ask if a bomb threat is made (Figure 13-8).
3. Establish criteria and procedures for evacuation. Post routes. The evacuation decision 
can be especially difficult for management because of safety concerns versus the 
thousands of dollars in productivity lost due to evacuation of large numbers of 
employees.
4. Recruit and train all employees to observe and report suspicious behavior, items, or 
vehicles. In addition, never approach or touch something suspicious.
5. Control parking and access according to the unique characteristics and requirements 
of the facility.
6. Control and verify outsiders (e.g., service personnel) prior to access.
7. Screen mail and deliveries. Route mail and deliveries to a specific location or building for 
screening instead of permitting direct access to employees (see Figure 13-9).
8. Maintain unpredictable patrols to avoid patterns that can be studied by offenders.
9. Inspect the exterior and interior of buildings.
10.  Ensure that emergency plans, response teams (e.g., fire brigades), and public safety 
agencies are coordinated for action. What are the qualifications, experience, and 
response time of the nearest bomb squad?
Terrorism hoaxes, like bomb threats, are a serious problem for police and homeland 
security agencies and the private sector. Hoaxes result in an expensive drain on personnel and 
first responder resources, while hindering worker productivity during evacuations. Authorities 
Emergencies          319

320          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
must take threats seriously because it is difficult to distinguish between a real threat and a hoax. 
Disruption of our daily lives results when a threat is received and an evacuation and search is 
required at, say, a building, bridge, tunnel, or cruise ship. Congress has increased penalties to 
deter hoaxes, and judges can sentence offenders to prison for five years. Skilled investigators and 
their techniques and technology have produced positive results in apprehending offenders. For 
example, a “dirty bomb” threat was made against seven football stadiums on several Internet 
sites in October 2006. A grocery store clerk, named Jake Brahm of Wauwatosa, Wisconsin, was 
arrested. In another case, Jose Quinonez called into San Diego’s 9-1-1 center in January 2005 
FIGURE 13-9 Suspect letter and package indicators.
FIGURE 13-8 Smith Corporation bomb threat form.

and stated he had smuggled foreign chemists across the Mexican border and they were traveling 
to Boston with nuclear material. He was subsequently arrested (Hall, 2007).
Weapon of Mass Destruction (WMD)
A weapon of mass destruction (WMD) is something capable of inflicting mass casualties and/or 
destroying or rendering high-value assets as useless. Although chemical,  biological, nuclear, and 
radiological weapons often serve as examples of WMD, many things can be used as a WMD. 
This became painfully true from the September 11, 2001, attacks when airliners, loaded with 
fuel, became missiles, killed thousands of people, leveled the 110-story Twin Towers of the 
World Trade Center, and hit the Pentagon. The range of potential WMD attacks depends on 
the creativity of the enemy. Examples include blowing up a train filled with toxic chemicals as 
it travels near a town while the wind is blowing toward the town; driving a fuel truck loaded 
with explosives into a corporate headquarters’ underground garage; placing a radiological 
device, disguised as HVAC equipment, near the intake vents of a crowded building during its 
peak business hours; and attacking key electrical substations and high-voltage transmission 
lines to cause a cascade of power failures that disrupt almost all aspects of life, and then exploit 
the crisis by attacking other targets. The number of “soft” targets capable of being targeted is 
astounding. The threat of WMD and response are explained in Chapter 15.
Strikes
The direct and indirect costs of a strike are astronomical. Major losses include productivity, 
profits, employees and customers who never return, vandalism, additional loss prevention 
services, and legal fees.
The best defense for a strike is early preparation. When a labor contract is close to 
expiring, a strike is possible. A company that anticipates a strike should build up inventory 
and oversupply customers. Management should contact local law enforcement agencies to 
ensure that peace is maintained and property protected. Security is likely to focus on perimeter 
protection for the facility, the protection of key executives and their families, and evidence 
gathering. Both public police and security should work together to maintain order. Chapter 4 
covers labor law and issues relevant to security.
Civil Disturbances
Demonstrations and precipitating incidents have evolved into destructive riots. Demon-strations 
are common as groups display their views. A typical precipitating incident is a public police 
arrest of a minority group member for a minor charge. Sometimes, all it takes for a crowd to go 
into a contagious frenzy is a rock thrown into the crowd. Deaths, injuries, and extensive prop-
erty damage can result from a civil disturbance. Public police may not be able to contain rioters, 
and the private sector must be prepared for the worst. Summer months and high temperatures, 
when people gather out of doors, may precede a civil disturbance. Rumors also are dangerous. 
The social and political climate can be analyzed for possible predicting indicators.
Technological Emergencies
A technological emergency is the interruption of a vital service such as a utility (e.g., electric 
service blackout). These events have varied causes. A prolonged electric service blackout 
results in extreme hardship in communities. For businesses, it affects not only production, 
but also security and loss prevention measures. Without a source of electric power, alarms, 
CCTV, access control, electrically activated extinguishing systems, and other systems are use-
less. Secondary power sources (e.g., generators) should be in place for all vital services.
Natural Disasters
Windstorms
Hurricanes, typhoons, tornadoes, and cyclones are regionally specific names characterized by 
extremely violent and destructive winds. In the United States, the Atlantic and Gulf coasts are 
Emergencies         321

322          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
more susceptible to hurricanes, whereas tornadoes occur in many parts of the country. Loss 
prevention efforts should concentrate on studying local climate conditions and then preparing 
contingency plans. The following measures are useful:
1. Design buildings for maximum wind velocity expected.
2. Closely follow weather reports.
3. Close down business if necessary.
4. Establish a safe area for people.
5. Instruct people to stay away from windows.
6.  Open doors and windows on the side of the building away from the storm. This will 
help to equalize pressure and prevent building collapse.
7. Acquire emergency power sources.
8. Set up a communications system.
9. Anchor and protect company property from being damaged or blown away.
10. Cooperate with local officials.
11. Take steps to hinder looting.
Floods
Lowlands along bodies of water are subject to flooding. Dams and dikes have reduced 
this problem, but flooding is still a threat to many locales. Some practical remedies are 
these:
1. Work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which provides assistance to those areas 
subject to frequent flooding.
2. Work with local officials to enhance safety and to hinder looting.
3. Provide a safe place for valuable assets.
4. Exit from the flood area in time to avoid being marooned. Secure adequate gasoline 
for vehicles.
5. If a team remains at a business site, ensure adequate supplies, such as food, blankets, 
a boat, life preservers, rope, communications equipment, first-aid kit, sandbags, and 
pumps.
6. Store valuable records, equipment, tools, and chemicals above the expected flood level. 
Shut off utilities.
Blizzards
Blizzards are snowstorms accompanied by high winds and very cold temperatures. Sufficient 
warning usually is obtained from weather forecasts. Injuries and deaths occur because 
people do not reach proper shelter. If a blizzard is forecast, employees should be sent home. 
Preplanning is essential if employees have a chance of being stranded at work. Food, bedding, 
a heat supply, radios, communications equipment, and televisions will aid those stranded.
Earthquakes
Stringent building codes and adequate building design in suspect areas (e.g., California) are 
vital for reduced losses. Building collapse, damage to bridges, and falling debris are major 
causes of injuries and deaths. If indoors, one should take cover in a basement or under rein-
forced floors or doorways. If outdoors, one should watch out for falling objects and electrical 
wires.
The December 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake caused a series of tsunamis (i.e., 
large destructive waves) that killed almost 300,000 people and affected 18 countries around 
the Indian Ocean. The human and financial strain on nations to prepare and respond 
to such natural disasters is overwhelming (Figure 13-10). The challenges require global 
 cooperation.

Emergencies          323
FIGURE 13-10 U.S. Navy helicopter arrives with supplies for tsunami survivors on Sumatra, Indonesia, in 2005. 
Courtesy: Jacob J. Kirk, USN.
International Perspective: The U.S. View of Hazards: Thoughts from Europe
Here is a critical thinking perspective of the U.S.-driven paradigm that social and 
technological approaches to mitigation can act, overall, to reduce the incidence or 
severity of disastrous events. Rockett (2001: 71–74) counters the U.S. paradigm by 
arguing that disasters are not the result of external forces, but rather the way we live 
our lives. Social, political, and economic forces are as much the cause of disasters 
as the natural environment. We already know where earthquakes, hurricanes, and 
flooding are likely to occur. Furthermore, we also know that many technologies (e.g., 
automobiles, which cause pollution) carry with them the power of mass disruption. 
Consequently, disaster reduction will result only from fundamental changes in politi-
cal and social mores.
Rockett’s viewpoint is illustrated when people, businesses, and organizations 
insist on congregating on a well-known tectonic fault when predictable earthquakes 
cause multibillion-dollar losses. Yes, we are speaking of Los Angeles as one example. 
However, this is a global problem. Other types of predictable disasters occur when, for 
example, a Yangtze or Bangladesh flood kills tens of thousands of people. Such hazards 
of the environment are impossible to eliminate, and continuing to have children and 
building in these areas load the costs of disasters.
What Rockett suggests is to change social structure, and not social reaction. 
“Progress in disaster reduction will occur when we accept that we are the creators of 
disaster rather than its victims.” Rockett argues that as we build stronger structures 
and invent more efficient mitigation systems, we run the risk of engendering a false 
sense of safety and security that will, when the bigger event arrives, lead to an even 
greater catastrophe.

324          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
Pandemics
A pandemic is an outbreak of an infectious disease that affects humans over a large geo-
graphic area. Pandemics have occurred throughout history, with many from zoonotic diseases 
resulting from the domestication of animals. Zoonotic diseases are diseases transmitted from 
animals to humans. Examples are the West Nile virus that can cause encephalitis, avian 
influenza, and human monkeypox. One type of avian influenza is the “bird flu” strain that is 
causing a great deal of concern worldwide.
Examples of pandemics occurring through history include the bubonic plague, also called 
the “Black Death,” that killed about 20 million Europeans during the 1300s, seven cholera 
pandemics through the 1800s and 1900s, and numerous influenza pandemics. The 1918–1919 
“Spanish flu” caused the highest number of known influenza deaths. Over 500,000 people died 
in the United States, and up to 50 million may have died worldwide. Many people died within the 
first few days of infection, and nearly half of those who died were young, healthy adults (Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Department of Health and Human Services, 2006).
The CDC and the World Health Organization (WHO) have extensive surveillance 
programs to monitor and detect influenza activity worldwide. The CDC is involved in pre-
paredness activities through vaccine development and production, stockpiling of medications, 
research, risk communications, and unified initiatives with other organizations.
A vaccine is unlikely to be available in the early stages of a pandemic. Scientists must 
select the virus strain that will provide the best protection. Then manufacturers use the strain 
to produce a vaccine. Antiviral medications are available, but they may not work because 
virus strains can become resistant to the medications.
According to the CDC, the severity of the next influenza pandemic cannot be predicted. 
Modeling studies suggest that the impact could be substantial. Between 15% and 35% of the 
U.S. population could be affected, and the economic impact could range between $71 and 
$166 billion (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Department of Health and Human 
Services, 2006).
Reissman et al. (2006: 2) write that pandemic influenza preparedness plans from the 
United States and WHO focus on (1) surveillance and early detection, (2) community con-
tainment (e.g., movement restrictions and facility closure), and (3) vaccines and antiviral 
medication. However, they note that “relatively little attention has been paid to identifying 
and managing psychological and social factors likely to influence human behavior during a 
pandemic.” Examples are numerous and include how citizens will respond to containment, 
the need for healthcare and mental health services, and the impact on religious and cultural 
rituals surrounding burial and grieving.
Pandemics present numerous issues for businesses, besides homeland security and 
emergency management. How will businesses function when large numbers of customers stay 
home and employees call in sick?
A pandemic is likely to last longer than most emergencies and may include “waves” 
separated by months. The number of healthcare workers and first responders available to 
work may be reduced because of exposure and the need to care for ill family members. In 
addition, resources, vaccines, and medications in many locations could be limited (Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Department of Health and Human Services, 2006).
During a pandemic, people who have had contact with symptomatic persons may 
be asked to voluntarily quarantine themselves. Those with and without symptoms may wear 
facemasks to control the spread of disease. Government may decide to close schools and 
other locations of mass gatherings. If a pandemic is particularly lethal, healthcare workers 
would implement corpse-management procedures to safely destroy infected human remains, 
and government would apply emergency powers to enforce measures such as rationing and 
 curfews (Tucker, 2006).
What is your opinion of Rockett’s contentions?

A serious pandemic can result in quarantine enforcement. It is the use of government 
authorities, such as police, healthcare specialists, or the military, to restrict the movement of 
people, by force, if necessary, for purposes of public health and safety. Quarantine enforce-
ment can create controversy over protection of public health versus civil liberties.
Employers should prepare plans for the risk of a pandemic. Here are ideas to begin a 
checklist.
• Prepare a business impact study.
• Support vaccination.
• Use infection control measures (e.g., cough etiquette, hand washing, facemasks, and 
sick leave).
• Cross-train so healthy employees can perform the duties of sick employees.
• Plan for teleworking.
• Maintain contact with customers through various technologies.
Case Problems          325
What do you think is the most serious potential emergency facing your community or 
organization? What protection methods do you recommend?
Search the Web
Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
 American National Standards Institute: www.ansi.org
 American Society for Testing and Materials: www.astm.org
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: www.cdc.gov
 Factory Mutual Global: www.fmglobal.com/
 Federal Emergency Management Agency: www.fema.gov
 Federal Register: http://fr.cos.com/
 finding regulations: http://standards.gov/standards_gov/v/Regulations/index.cfm
 finding standards: http://standards.gov/standards_gov/v/Standards/index.cfm
 International Association of Chiefs of Police: www.theiacp.org
 International Association of Fire Chiefs: www.iafc.org
 International Association of Fire Fighters: www.iaff.org/
 International Organization for Standardization: www.iso.org
 National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians: www.naemt.org
 National Fire Protection Association: www.nfpa.org
 National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration: www.noaa.gov/index.html
 OSHA: www.osha.gov
 Underwriters Laboratories (UL): www.ul.com
 U.S. Department of Homeland Security: www.dhs.gov
 U.S. Department of Transportation, Office of Hazardous Materials Safety: http://
hazmat.dot.gov/
 U.S. Fire Administration: www.usfa.dhs.gov/
Case Problems
13A.  You are a loss prevention manager at company headquarters. Your superior tells 
you to design a fire protection program for a new window and door manufacturing 
plant. A lot of woodcutting with electric circular saws will take place at this plant. 

326          LIFE SAFETY, FIRE PROTECTION, AND EMERGENCIES
Workers then will assemble the windows and doors using electric drills. A large 
stock of wood products will be stored in the plant. What will you recommend to the 
architects who will design the building? What are your fire prevention plans? What 
are your fire suppression plans?
13B.  You are a loss prevention manager at an office building containing 800 employees. Your 
supervisor requests that you prepare criteria for evacuation of the building in case of a 
bomb threat. List criteria for management to consider and estimate the cost of a two-
hour evacuation if the average employee earns $40,000 annually.
13C.  As a corporate loss prevention manager, you have been assigned the task of 
designing a protection plan against windstorms for manufacturing plants located 
along the coast of Florida and those located in Kansas. What general plans do you 
have in mind?
References
Angle, J. (2005). Occupational Safety and Health in the Emergency Services, 2nd ed. Clifton 
Park, NY: Thomas Delmar.
Angle, J., et al. (2001). Firefighting Strategies and Tactics. Albany, NY: Delmar.
Azano, H., and Gilbertie, M. (2003). “Making Planning a Priority.” Security Management (May).
Bangor, T., and Faust, J. (2001). “Basic Fire Protection Strategies.” Security Technology & 
Design, 11 (April).
Breisch, S. (1989). “Is Your Workplace Fireproof?” Safety and Health (July).
Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2003). Law Enforcement Statistics. www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs, 
retrieved December 4, 2006.
Carter, W., et al. (2004). Firefighter’s Handbook: Essentials of Firefighting and Emergency 
Response, 2nd ed. Clifton Park, NY: Thomas Delmar.
Cauchon, D., et al. (2003). “Just-Released Transcripts Give Voice to the Horror.” USA 
TODAY (August 28). www.usatoday.com, retrieved August 29, 2003.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Department of Health and Human Services. 
(2006). “Key Facts about Pandemic Influenza.” www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic/keyfacts.htm, 
retrieved January 24, 2006.
Conroy, M. (2006). “NFPA 10, 2007—What’s New?” NFPA Journal (November/December). 
www.nfpa.org/publicJournalDetail.asp?categoryID=1340&itemID=30734&src=NFPAJou
rnal, retrieved December 2, 2006.
Corley, W. (2004). “A Call for Balanced Fire Protection.” Buildings, 98 (June).
Estenson, D. (1995). “Should Bomb Blasts Be Kept Quiet?” Security Management (November).
Gips, M. (2005). “The Challenge of Making Safer Structures.” Security Management, 49 
(March).
Hall, D. (2006). Administrative Law: Bureaucracy in a Democracy, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Hall, M. (2007). “Terrorism Hoaxes Still Plaguing Law Agencies.” USA Today (January 18). 
http://usatoday.com, retrieved January 19, 2007.
Houser, A., et al. (2004). Emergency Responder Injuries and Fatalities. Santa Monica, CA: 
RAND Corp.
International Code Council. (2004). “Resources Top Building Official Concerns.” Building 
Safety Bulletin, II (July).
Jelenewicz, C. (2006). “Performance-Based Design.” Buildings, 100 (May).
Moore, W. (1997). “Balancing Life Safety and Security Needs.” Security Technology and 
Design (January-February).
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2005). “Latest Findings from NIST World 
Trade Center Investigation.” www.nist.gov, retrieved April 8, 2005.
Nolan, D. (2001). Encyclopedia of Fire Prevention. Albany, NY: Delmar.
Office of Justice Programs. (2000). A Guide for Explosion and Bombing Scene Investigation. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.

References          327
Quinley, K., and Schmidt, D. (2002). Businesses at Risk: How to Assess, Mitigate, and 
Respond to Terrorist Threats. Cincinnati, OH: The National Underwriter Co.
Reissman, D., et al. (2006). “Pandemic Influenza Preparedness: Adaptive Responses to an 
Evolving Challenge.” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 3.
Rockett, J. (2001). “The U.S. View of Hazards and Sustainable Development: A Few Thoughts 
from Europe.” Risk Management: An International Journal, 3.
Schottke, D. (2007). First Responder: Your First Response in Emergency Care. Sudbury, MA: 
Jones and Bartlett.
Sternberg, E., and Lee, G. (2006). “Meeting the Challenge of Facility Protection for Homeland 
Security.” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 3.
Suttell, R. (2006). “Fire Protection System Design.” Buildings, 100 (June).
Tucker, P. (2006). “Preparing for Pandemic.” The Futurist (January-February).
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (n.d.). “About First Responders.” www.dhs.gov/
dhspublic, retrieved February 11, 2005.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2004). National Response Plan. www.dhs.gov, 
retrieved January 12, 2005.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, READYBusiness. (n.d.). Testimonials. www.ready.
gov/business/testimonials.html, retrieved January 3, 2005.
U.S. Fire Administration. (2004). “Danger Above: A Factsheet on High-Rise Safety.” 
(November 23). http://usfa.fema.gov/safety/atrisk/high-rise/high-rise.shtm, retrieved April 
4, 2005.
U.S. Fire Administration. (2005a). “Enhancing Risk Management Capabilities of Local Fire 
Departments.” http://www.usfa.dhs.gov/about/media/2005releases/060705.shtm, retrieved 
November 10, 2006.
U.S. Fire Administration. (2005b). Fire in the United States 1992–2001, 13th ed. www.usfa.
fema.gov/statistics/reports/pubs/fius13th.shtm, retrieved May 8, 2006.
U.S. Fire Administration. (2002). “Highrise Fires.” www.usfa.dhs.gov/downloads/pdf/tfrs/
v2i18.pdf, retrieved November 10, 2006.
U.S. Fire Administration. (2006). “The Overall Fire Picture, 2005.” www.usfa.dhs.gov/statis-
tics/quickstats/, retrieved November 10, 2006.
Zunkel, D. (2000). “Delayed Egress Magnetic Locks Are a Technology Standard.” Security 
Technology & Design, 10 (February).

KEY TERMS
• safety in the workplace
• safety
• accident
• injury
• workers’ compensation laws
• Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA)
• William Steiger Occupational Safety and 
Health Act of 1970
• National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (NIOSH)
• hazard communication standard
• Globally Harmonized System of 
Classification and Labeling 
of Chemicals
• Hazardous Waste Operations and 
Emergency Response Standard
• bloodborne pathogens standard
• lockout/tagout
• OSHA Whistleblower Program
• willful violation
• serious violation
• accident proneness theory
• safety performance assessment
Safety in the 
Workplace
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the importance of safety.
2. Discuss the history of safety legislation and workers’ compensation.
3. Explain OSHA’s development, goals, jurisdiction, standards, recordkeeping 
requirements, and inspections.
4. Describe at least four strategies for improving safety in the workplace.
14
Introduction
Safety in the workplace is a broad concept that includes a host of methods that aim to reduce 
risks from a variety of threats and hazards to the workplace such as accidents, violence, and 
natural disasters. This chapter focuses on workplace accidents and related safety methods.
Safety is a major loss prevention measure to reduce the likelihood of accidents and inju-
ries. When accidents and injuries occur, both losses and a drain on profits inevitably result. 
Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary defines safety as “the condition of being safe from under-
going or causing hurt, injury, or loss” and “to protect against failure, breakage, or accident.” 
Accident is “an unfortunate event resulting from carelessness, unawareness, ignorance, or a 
combination of causes.” Injury is “hurt, damage, or loss sustained.”
329

330          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
Examples of hazards in the workplace are as follows:
• Inadequate training (Figure 14-1)
• Noncompliance with safety policies and procedures
• Failure to use safety devices or equipment
• Dangerous storage of toxic or flammable substances
• Poorly supported ladders and scaffold
• Electrical malfunctions
• Blocked aisles, exits, and stairways
• Poor ventilation
• Insufficient lighting
• Excessive noise
• Horseplay; running
Accident Statistics and Costs
Since the early 1900s, great strides have been made to increase safety in the workplace. 
Safer machines, improved supervision, and training all have helped to prevent accidents. If 
one were to apply the industrial fatality rate that existed in 1910 to the present workforce 
in the United States, more than 1.3 million workers would lose their lives each year from 
industrial accidents. In the past, a manual worker’s welfare was of minimal concern to man-
agement; the loss of life or limb was “part of the job” and “a normal business risk.” In the 
construction of tall buildings, it was expected that one life would be lost for each floor. A 
20-story building would yield 20 lost lives. During tunnel construction, two worker deaths 
per mile was the norm. Coal mining experienced exceedingly high death rates (Anderson, 
1975: 5–6).
As written in Chapter 2, the Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2006a) 
reported 4.4 million injuries and illnesses among private sector firms in 2003, with about 
32% of work-related injuries occurring in goods-producing industries and 68% in services. 
The same year recorded 5,559 worker deaths, including 114 additional deaths from the previ-
ous year among self-employed workers and 61 more from workplace violence. The National 
Center for Injury Prevention and Control (2006) reported that society-wide there are about 
160,000 deaths each year from injuries and millions more are injured and survive. In 2000, 
the 50 million injuries that required medical treatment will ultimately cost $406 billion, 
including $80.2 billion in medical care costs and $326 billion in productivity losses.
Direct and indirect losses are costly; for example, the death of a worker in a manufactur-
ing plant immediately creates a tremendous direct loss to family and friends. Direct losses also 
involve an immediate loss of productivity, medical costs, and insurance administration. Indirect 
costs include continued grief by family and friends, continued loss of productivity, profit loss, 
selection and training of a new employee, overtime for lost production, and possible litigation. 
In addition, internal and external relations may suffer. The lowering of employee morale can 
result from the belief that management is incompetent or does not care. Rumors frequently 
follow. In the eyes of the community, the company may appear to have failed.
History of Safety Legislation
In 18th century England, as the Industrial Revolution progressed, a number of statutes govern-
ing working conditions were passed. One of the first statutes for safety resulted from a serious 
outbreak of fever at cotton mills near Manchester in 1784. Because child labor was involved, 
widespread attention added to public concern and government pressure to improve the danger-
ous and unsanitary conditions in factories. A few years later, additional legislation dealt with 
hours, conditions of labor, prevention of injury, and government inspectors. In 1842, the Mines 
Act provided for punitive compensation for preventable injuries caused by unguarded mining 
machinery. Subsequent to this law, a series of mining accidents caused more laws to be passed 
for miner safety. During this time, “strong evidence” pointed to incompetent management and 

Accident Type:
Crushed by Dump
Truck Body
N/ A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
2 Weeks at Site
2 Months
25-Male
Truck Driver
General Contractor
Clear, Warm
Weather Conditions:
Type of Operation:
Size of Work Crew :
Collective Bargaining
Competent Safety Monitor on
Site:
Safety and Health Program in
Effect:
Was the Worksite Inspected
Regularly:
Training and Education
Provided:
Employee Job Title:
Age & Sex:
Experience at this Type of
Work:
Time on Project:
Following its inspection, OSHA issued one citation for one alleged serious violation of its
construction standards. Had the required training been provided to the employee, this fatality
might have been prevented.
A truck driver was crushed and killed between the frame and dump box of a dump truck.
Apparently a safety "overtravel" cable attached between the truck frame and the dump box
malfunctioned by catching on a protruding nut of an air brake cylinder. This prevented the
dump box from being fully raised, halting its progress at a point where about 20 inches of
space remained between it and the truck  frame. The employee, apparently assuming that
releasing the cable would allow the dump box to continue up-ward, reached between the rear
dual wheels and over the frame, and disengaged the cable with his right hand. The dump box
then dropped suddenly, crushing his head. The employee had not received training or
instruction in proper operating procedures and was not made aware of all potential hazards in
his work.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF ACCIDENT
INSPECTION RESULTS
ACCIDENT SUMMARY No. 15
SOURCES OF HELP
ACCIDENT PREVENTION RECOMMENDATIONS
Construction Safety and Health Standards (OSHA 2207) which contains all OSHA job
safety and health rules and regulations  (1926 and 1910) covering construction. OSHA-
funded free consultation services.
Employees must be instructed to recognize and avoid unsafe conditions associated with their
work  (29 CFT 1926.21 (b)(2)).
Consult your telephone directory for the number of your local OSHA area or regional
office for further assistance and advice (listed under U.S. Labor Department or under the
state government section where states administer their own OSHA programs).
NOTE:  The case here described was selected as being representative of fatalities caused by 
improper work practices. No special emphasis or priority is implied nor is the cases necessarily a
recent occurrence. The legal aspects of the incident have been resolved, and the case is now
closed.
FIGURE 14-1 Accident Report, Crushed by Dump Truck Body. Courtesy: OSHA.
History of Safety Legislation          331

332          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
the neglect of safety rules. Laws relating to factory safety also were expanded. More and more 
trades were brought under the scope of the law.
In the United States, textile factories increased in number between 1820 and 1840. 
Massachusetts, first of the United States to follow England’s example, passed laws in 1876 and 
1877 that related to working children and inspection of factories. Important features pertained to 
dangerous machinery and necessary safety guards. As years passed, some industries increasingly 
realized that hazards were potentially harmful to workers, production, and profits. Consequently, 
more and more industrialists became safety conscious. However, serious hazards still existed in 
the workplace through the 20th century (Grimaldi and Simmonds, 1975: 33–43).
Workers’ Compensation
Increasing concern for workers led to workers’ compensation laws. In essence, these laws 
require employers to compensate injured employees. England passed such laws in 1897, and 
the United States followed in 1902, when Maryland passed this country’s first workers’ com-
pensation law—although, essentially, the Maryland law was so restrictive that it was almost 
useless. In 1911, Wisconsin passed the first effective workers’ compensation law. Seven other 
states passed similar legislation during that year. Amid controversy between businesspeople 
and groups interested in the welfare of laborers, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional-
ity of these laws in 1916. Businesspeople argued that they could never bear such compensa-
tion costs nor could they control accidents. They predicted that the cost of goods would rise 
considerably. Those who favored workers’ compensation laws believed that these laws would 
provide the impetus for greater safety, because business owners and managers would want to 
control losses.
Workers’ compensation laws provided insurance companies with a new opportunity. As 
states enacted these laws, business owners became concerned about their ability to pay for 
workers’ compensation. Therefore, insurance companies sold casualty insurance policies to 
businesses that needed the security from a possible workers’ compensation burden. A concur-
rent benefit of such insurance was that insurance companies were willing to reduce premiums 
if a company instituted accident prevention measures. To remain competitive, insurance com-
panies provided safety specialists who would survey a business and recommend prevention 
strategies (e.g., safeguards on machines). Businesspeople became increasingly interested in 
safety; insurance companies developed safety expertise.
Today, all states have workers’ compensation laws. These laws vary from state to state, but 
each requires the reporting of injures that are compensable. Private insurance companies insure 
most employers for workers’ compensation judgments. Other employers are self-insured (insur-
ance provided by the employer and not purchased through a private insurance company; it is 
regulated by a state insurance commissioner) or place this insurance with state insurance funds. 
When an employee is injured, medical benefits usually are granted, and benefits for wages lost 
are granted when an employee is incapacitated and cannot work.
The workers’ compensation system of today has its problems. Because dealings with the 
insurance industry are frequently adversarial, injured employees often believe that the system 
helps them only when they obtain the services of an attorney. Insurers, on the other hand, 
claim that they must protect their interests and that fraud (i.e., worker malingering) is a very 
serious problem.
Are workers’ compensation laws necessary today? Support your viewpoint.
The Development of OSHA
With the advent of improved safety conditions, accidents and injuries declined until the 
1950s. In the late 1950s, rates leveled off until the late 1960s, when accidents and injuries 
began to increase. This upward turn caused the federal government to become increasingly 

Occupational Safety and Health Administration          333
concerned about safety. Several safety-related laws were passed during the 1960s, but none 
was as monumental as the federal law creating OSHA. OSHA stands for the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration, a federal agency, under the U.S. Department of Labor, 
established to administer the law on safety and health resulting from the William Steiger 
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970. This federal legislation was signed into law by 
then-president Richard Nixon and became effective on April 28, 1971. The basic purpose of 
the OSHA legislation was to provide a safe working environment for employees engaged in 
a variety of occupations.
The OSHA act was significant because it was the first national safety legislation apply-
ing to every business connected with interstate commerce. Mason (1976: 21) notes: “The need 
for such legislation was clear. Between 1969 and 1973 [in the United States] more persons 
were killed at work than in the Vietnam war.”
The Secretary of Labor via ten regional offices administers OSHA. The secretary has the 
authority and responsibility to establish occupational safety and health standards. Workplace 
inspections can result in citations issued to employers who violate standards (Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration, 2006b: 15).
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) performs numer-
ous functions that aid OSHA and those striving for worker safety. These functions relate to 
research, the development of criteria and standards for occupational safety and health, train-
ing OSHA personnel and others (e.g., employers and employees), and providing publications 
dealing with both toxic substances and strategies on how to prevent occupational injuries 
and illnesses. NIOSH is under the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
OSHA’s Strategic Management Plan
The OSHA act of 1970 states that it is “to assure so far as possible every working man and 
woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions and to preserve our human 
resources.” OSHA’s 2003–2008 strategic management plan contains three overarching goals 
(Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2003a):
• Reduce occupational hazards through direct intervention (e.g., consultation)
• Promote a safety and health culture through compliance assistance, cooperative 
programs and strong leadership
• Maximize OSHA’s effectiveness and efficiency by strengthening its capabilities and 
infrastructure
“OSHA’s strategic management plan also covers issues not traditionally addressed by the 
agency but that account for many work-related injuries, illnesses and deaths, such as workplace 
violence and work-related motor vehicle accidents. OSHA intends to use a variety of coop-
erative programs and outreach efforts to assist employers and employees in addressing these 
problems. In addition, the agency will focus on emergency preparedness, helping workplaces 
get ready to respond to workplace emergencies such as natural disasters or terrorist attacks.”
The Act’s Jurisdiction
OSHA rules extend to all employers and their employees in the 50 states, the District of 
Colombia, Puerto Rico, and other U.S. possessions. An employer is anyone who maintains 
employees and engages in a business affecting commerce. This broad coverage involves a mul-
titude of fields: manufacturing, construction, agriculture, warehousing, retailing, longshoring, 
education, and so on. The act does not cover self-employed persons, family-owned and oper-
ated farms, and workplaces protected by other federal agencies. Although federal agencies are 
not covered by OSHA, agencies are required to maintain a safe working environment equal to 
those groups under OSHA’s jurisdiction. OSHA affects state and local government employees 
(Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2006b: 6–7).

334          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
OSHA Standards
OSHA promulgates legally enforceable standards to protect employees in the workplace. 
Since OSHA standards are constantly being updated and reviewed, it is the employer’s respon-
sibility to keep up-to-date. Two sources for standards and changes are the Web sites of OSHA 
and the Federal Register.
There are actually thousands of OSHA standards. Some pertain to specific industries 
and workers, whereas others are general and practiced by most industries. Examples include 
safety requirements for machines, equipment, and employees, such as requiring face shields 
or safety glasses during the use of certain machines; prevention of electrical hazards (Figure 
14-2); adequate fire protection; adequate lunchrooms, lavatories, and drinking water; 
 precautions against infectious diseases; and monitoring of employee exposure to chemical 
or toxic hazards.
The following standards demonstrate OSHA’s concern for worker safety and health.
Subpart 1—Personal Protective Equipment
1910.132 General requirements.
(a) Application. Protective equipment, including personal protective equipment 
for eyes, face, head, and extremities, protective clothing, respiratory devices, 
and protective shields and barriers, shall be provided, used, and maintained in a 
sanitary and reliable condition wherever it is necessary by reason of hazards of 
processes or environment, chemical hazards, radiological hazards, or mechani-
cal irritants encountered in a manner capable of causing injury or impairment in 
the function of any part of the body through absorption, inhalation or physical 
contact.
Subpart K—Medical and First Aid
1910.151 Medical services and first aid.
(a) The employer shall ensure the ready availability of medical personnel for 
advice and consultation of matters of plant health.
(b) In the absence of an infirmary, clinic, or hospital in near proximity to the 
workplace which is used for the treatment of all injured employees, a person or 
persons shall be adequately trained to render first aid. Adequate first aid supplies 
shall be readily available.
(c) Where the eyes or body of any person may be exposed to injurious corrosive 
materials, suitable facilities for quick drenching or flushing of the eyes and body 
shall be provided within the work area for immediate emergency use.
OSHA Hazard Communication Standard
The Hazard Communication Standard (1910.1200) covers over 7 million workplaces, more 
than 100 million employees, and some 945,000 hazardous chemical products, with hundreds 
of new ones being introduced annually. The Hazard Communication Standard (HCS), also 
known as a “right to know law,” requires all employers who have employees who may be 
exposed to hazardous substances on the job to inform them about such substances and how 
to deal with them. Employers are required to write and implement a hazard communication 
program, conduct a chemical inventory, ensure that a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) is 
available for each chemical, label chemical containers, and train employees on the safe use of 
chemicals (e.g., protective equipment, procedures). The information shared under the HCS 
requirements provides the foundation for a chemical safety and health program in the work-
place (Occupational Safety & Health Administration, 2006c).
OSHA is involved in the development of the Globally Harmonized System of 
Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS). It includes uniform provisions for classifica-
tion of chemicals, labels, and safety data sheets. The GHS has been adopted by the United 
Nations and an international goal is to recruit as many countries as possible to participate in 
the GHS (Occupational Safety & Health Administration, 2006c).

ACCIDENT SUMMARY No. 57
Accident Type:
Electrocution
Clear/Hot/Humid
2
N/A
No
Partial
No
Some
Helper
17-Male
One Month
One Month
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF ACCIDENT
INSPECTION RESULTS
ACCIDENT PREVENTION RECOMMENDATIONS
SOURCES OF HELP
Window Shutter
Installers
Weather Conditions:
Type of Operation:
Size of Work Crew:
Collective Bargaining
Competent Safety Monitor on
Site:
Safety and Health Program in
Effect:
Was the Worksite Inspected
Regularly:
Training and Education
Provided:
Employee Job Title:
Age & Sex:
Experience at this Type of
Work:
Time on Project:
One employee was climbing a metal ladder to hand an electric drill to the journeyman installer
on a scaffold about five feet above him. When the victim reached the third rung from the
bottom of the ladder he received an electric shock that killed him.
As a result of its investigation, OSHA issued citations for violations of construction standards.
1.   Use approved ground fault circuit interrupters or an assured equipment grounding
      conductor program to protect employees on construction sites [29 CFR 1926.404(b)(1)].
2.   Use equipment that provides a permanent and continuous path from circuits, equipment,
      structures, conduit or enclosures to ground [29 CFR 1926.404(d)(6)].
3.   Inspect electrical tools and equipment daily and remove damaged or defective equipment
      from use until it is repaired [29 CFR 1926.404(b)(iii)(c)].
NOTE:   The case here described was selected as being representative of fatalities caused by
improper work practices. No special emphasis or priority is implied nor is the case necessarily a
recent occurrence. The legal aspects of the incident have been resolved, and the case is now
closed.
   OSHA General Industry Standards [CFR parts 1900-1910] and OSHA Construction
    Standards [CFR Part 1926] which together include all OSHA job safety and health rules
    and regulations covering construction.
   OSHA-funded free consultation services listed in telephone directories under U.S. Labor
    Department or under the state government section where states administer their own
    OSHA programs.
   OSHA Safety and Health Training Guidelines for Construction (Available from the National
     Technical Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161; 703/487-
     4650; Order No. PB-239-312/AS): a set of 15 guidelines to help construction employers
     establish a training program in the safe use of equipment, tools, and machinery on the
     job.
   Courses in construction safety are offered by the OSHA Training Institute, 1555 Times
    Drive, Des Plaines, IL 60018, 708/297-4810.
The investigation revealed that the extension cord had a missing grounding prong and that a
conductor on the green grounding wire was making intermittent contact with the energizing
black wire thereby energizing the entire length of the grounding wire and the drill's frame. The
drill was not double insulated.
FIGURE 14-2 Accident Report, Electrocution. Courtesy: OSHA.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration          335

336          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
OSHA HAZWOPER Standard
The Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response Standard (HAZWOPER) 
(1910.120 and 1926.65) applies to a variety of public and private employers and employ-
ees engaged in operations that include clean-up of hazardous substances required by 
a government body; voluntary clean-up operations at hazardous waste sites; operations 
involving hazardous wastes that are conducted at treatment, storage, and disposal facilities; 
and emergency response operations related to hazardous substances. Training is essential to 
comply with this standard. It must focus on the duties employees perform without endanger-
ing themselves or others. The planning of training must also include consideration of hazards 
to the community and what capabilities personnel need to respond to the hazards, including 
a worst-case scenario. Training and equipment may include first responder capabilities and 
use of PPE (Occupational Safety & Health Administration, 2006d). These issues are serious, 
as illustrated by the multi-billion dollar lawsuits filed by New York City firefighters who 
claimed lung damage due to inadequate PPE during their response to the collapse of the Twin 
Towers. One further note is that hazmat events are regulated by not only OSHA, but also the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standard
The bloodborne pathogens standard (1910.1030) limits exposure to blood and other poten-
tially infectious materials, which could lead to disease or death. The standard covers all 
employees facing potential exposure. Employers are required to establish an exposure control 
plan covering safety procedures, protective equipment, and the control of waste. The hepa-
titis B vaccination is to be made available to all employees who have occupational exposure 
to blood. Postexposure evaluation and follow-up is to be made available to all employees 
who have had an exposure incident, including laboratory tests at no cost to the employee. 
Exposure records must be confidential and kept for the duration of employment plus 30 years. 
Training is required on all aspects of this standard, and the training records must be main-
tained for three years (Occupational Safety & Health Administration, 2006e).
Lockout/ Tagout
OSHA standard 1910.147 is designed to control hazardous energy. Better known as lockout/
tagout, the aim is to prevent the accidental startup of machines or other equipment during main-
tenance and servicing. The rule requires that hazardous energy sources must be isolated and 
rendered inoperative before work can begin. Elements of a lockout/tagout program are writ-
ten procedures, training, and audits (Occupational Safety & Health Administration, 2006f).
Examples of OSHA citations involving this standard include Lifetime Doors, for 37 
alleged violations after employees suffered finger amputations at the door manufacturing 
plant. OSHA proposed penalties of $1.1 million. In another case, an employee of Hanna 
Paper Recycling entered a baler to dislodge a jammed cardboard bale and was crushed to 
death between the bale and the gathering ram. OSHA cited Hanna for 19 alleged violations 
and proposed penalties of $59,200 (“Lockout/Tagout,” 2001: 17).
OSHA Recordkeeping and Reporting
Before the development of OSHA’s centralized recordkeeping system, workplace statistics 
on injuries and illnesses were kept by some states and private organizations. No uniform, 
standardized system existed. Today, with the help of OSHA’s comprehensive statistics, it is 
easier to pinpoint serious hazards and work toward improvements. In addition, employee 
awareness and safety precautions are enhanced through knowledge about injuries, illnesses, 
and hazards.
In 2006, the OSHA Web site offered the following guideline for recordkeeping. All 
employers covered by the OSHA act must report to OSHA any incident on the premises 
resulting in a fatality or the in-patient hospitalization of three or more employees within 8 
hours. The Log of Work-Related Injuries and Illnesses (Form 300) is used to list injuries and 
illnesses and track days away from work, restrictions, or transfers. The Injury and Illness 

Confined Area Entry
Hazards that are not easily seen, smelled, or felt can be deadly risks to people who 
work in confined areas. For instance, storage tanks may reduce oxygen or leak com-
bustible or toxic gases. The cardinal rule for entry into a confined area is, “Never trust 
your senses!” A harmless-looking situation may indeed be a potential threat. Some of 
the deadliest gases and vapors have no odor. Before entry, the following safety strate-
gies are recommended: proper training, equipment to identify hazards, and an entry 
permit issued by a safety specialist. Schroll (2006: 44) emphasizes the importance of 
equipment. He writes that personnel should be able to select appropriate monitoring 
equipment and know how to use it. He also refers to personal protective equipment 
(PPE), especially respiratory protection. In addition, personnel should know the opera-
tion of harnesses and retrieval devices. OSHA’s standard for confined spaces, Title 
29 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 1910.146, contains the requirements for 
practices and procedures to protect employees from the hazards of entry into permit-
required confined spaces.
In the petroleum industry, for example, a storage tank had been rinsed and 
vented for several days. When it was checked with gas detection equipment, no flam-
mable gases were measured. However, after workers removed loose rust, scale, and sedi-
ment, the percentage of flammable gas rose, and the gas ignited.
As another example, two employees of a fertilizer company descended into an old 
35-foot well to repair a pump. The well was covered with a concrete slab and entry was 
made through a covered manhole. About 6 feet below the opening was a plank platform. 
When the first worker dropped to the platform, he was immediately overcome and fell 
unconscious into the water below. His partner sought help quickly. When two helpers 
entered the well, they, too, fell unconscious into the water below. A passerby, in an attempt 
to save the drowning men, jumped into the water and drowned also. By this time, the fire 
department had arrived. The fire chief, wearing a self-contained breathing apparatus, went 
to rescue the victims. On the platform, he removed his facemask to give instructions to 
those above and was overcome. Subsequent tests revealed that the well atmosphere con-
tained a lethal concentration of hydrogen sulfide. Five men died from pulmonary paralysis 
(Chacanaca, 1996: 61–65).
What would you say and do if your supervisor ordered you to enter a confined area 
without first taking safety precautions?
Occupational Safety and Health Administration          337
Report (Form 301) serves to record supplementary information about cases; a workers’ com-
pensation or insurance form can be used as an alternative document if it contains the same 
information. The Summary (Form 300A) shows totals for the year in each category. The 
employer is responsible for keeping the records up-to-date and available to OSHA inspec-
tors. Employers with 10 or fewer employees, or those employers classified in a low-hazard 
industry (e.g., insurance or real estate), do not have to keep injury and illness records unless 
informed to do so by OSHA or the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Occupational Safety & Health 
Administration, 2001).
Additional Employer Responsibilities
An employer is required to post specific OSHA-related material for employee review. The OSHA 
poster “Job Safety and Health Protection” informs employees about their rights and responsibili-
ties and must be displayed in an appropriate location for employees. Copies of the OSHA act and 
relevant rules and regulations must be available if requested by employees.

338          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
If an employer receives a Citation and Notification of Penalty, the employer must post 
the citation, or a copy, near the place where each violation occurred to inform employees of 
hazards. The citation must remain posted for three working days or until the violation is cor-
rected, whichever is longer. These requirements are mandatory even if the citation is contested 
(Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2005a: 7).
The OSHA Whistleblower Program helps to ensure that employees are free to report 
safety and health violations. The OSHA act prohibits any person from discharging, retaliating, 
or discriminating against any employee because the employee exercised rights under the Act 
(Occupational Safety & Health Administration, 2006b: 16).
OSHA Inspections
An important priority of OSHA compliance inspectors was to view the workplace as it func-
tions on a typical day. To attain this goal and to prevent an employer from altering typical 
workplace characteristics by concealing unsafe conditions, inspections frequently were made 
unannounced. However, only a few years after this practice began, it was challenged in the 
courts. In 1975, the president of a utility installation company, who posted a copy of the Bill 
of Rights on his office wall, sued while claiming that the Fourth Amendment restricts war-
rantless searches. The federal appellate court upheld the employer’s contention. The case was 
appealed, and in May 1978 the Supreme Court, in Marshall v. Barlow, ruled that the Fourth 
Amendment protection against unreasonable searches protects commercial establishments as 
well as private homes. Therefore, OSHA inspectors must obtain a warrant before making an 
inspection, unless employers consent. Such a warrant is to be based on administrative  probable 
cause: the inspector is required to show a judicial officer that the inspection is part of OSHA’s 
general administrative plan to enforce safety and health laws, or upon evidence of a violation 
(Hall, 2006: 146–151; Dreux, 1995: 53).
When an inspection takes place, the employer and even employee representatives may 
join the inspector. The inspector is obligated to show credentials that contain a photograph 
and serial number. The number can be verified via the nearest OSHA office. Typically, 
machinery, equipment, and other workplace characteristics are examined. The inspector 
can interview the employer and employees in public or in private. Any interference with the 
inspector’s duties can result in stiff penalties. The employer is wise to document the inspection 
and comments by the inspector through note taking. This information may become useful if 
a disagreement or a dispute of a citation or penalty evolves.
Because millions of workplaces are subject to inspections, OSHA has established priori-
ties. Obviously, workplaces with serious accidents will be subject to inspections.
During the 2005–2006 fiscal year, OSHA targeted about 4,400 high-hazard worksites 
for unannounced comprehensive inspections. This site-specific inspection program was based 
on a survey of injuries and illnesses from approximately 80,000 employers. OSHA also 
inspected some establishments that did not respond to the survey and 400 workplaces that 
reported low injury and illness rates to review the actual degree of compliance with OSHA 
requirements (Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Office of Communications, 
2005).
OSHA has a staff of about 2,300, including 1,300 compliance safety and health officers. 
Twenty-six states operate their own OSHA State Programs with about 3,000 state employees, 
including 1,300 compliance safety and health officers. Federal OSHA conducts about 38,000 
inspections each fiscal year. The state programs conduct about 58,000 inspections each fiscal 
year (Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2003b).
The National Federation of Independent Business recommends the following 
strategies during an OSHA inspection (Gaudio, 2005):
• Manage the inspection process to minimize operational disruptions;
• Control the flow of information to OSHA so that when the inspection has ended, the 
employer understands the significance of the evidence OSHA has gathered;
• Present the worksite in the best possible light; and

OSHA Fines Two Businesses
The following information is from news releases that describe OSHA investigations and 
fines.
OSHA National News Release 06–1961–NAT (Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, Office of Communications, 2006):
OSHA cited Thomas Industrial Coatings Inc. of Pevely, Mo., for 33 
willful, including “instance-by-instance” willful [i.e., each violation 
of a standard], and eight serious alleged violations of job safety and 
health standards. Proposed penalties total $2,362,500. OSHA’s cita-
tions resulted from the investigation of two fatal workplace accidents 
within two months involving the painting contractor. Both accidents 
occurred at the same bridge painting worksite in Kansas City and the 
same suspended scaffold. One employee died when he fell through a 
hole in the platform while he was painting. The other employee fell to 
his death while dismantling the scaffold. The instance-by-instance will-
ful violations alleged the lack of fall protection and training for employ-
ees, especially in the use of fall protection and the safe dismantling of 
the scaffold. The single willful citations alleged the lack of safe scaffold 
access; that a qualified person did not design the scaffold; and that 
there were no competent persons to supervise the work. The citations 
also alleged the employer failed to inspect the scaffold and its compo-
nents and to secure the suspension cables properly. The serious citations 
addressed other unsafe practices including the employer’s permitting 
debris that employees could trip over in front of the large platform holes 
and overloading the personnel lift.
OSHA Regional News Release, OSHA-06–1937–DAL (U.S. Department of Labor, 
Office of Public Affairs, 2006):
A Wynnewood [OK] employer’s alleged failure to protect employ-
ees from safety and health hazards has resulted in citations for 22 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration          339
• Be proactive by addressing OSHA’s compliance concerns during the inspection so 
OSHA does not issue citations.
As expected, the atmosphere at the worksite might be chaotic and an OSHA inspector 
can receive conflicting information from different sources. Thus, an employer should desig-
nate one principal contact person to act as OSHA’s main contact during every inspection to 
control the flow of information.
By understanding OSHA’s concerns early in the inspection process, the employer can 
provide information that refutes OSHA’s factual findings or interpretation of the OSHA stan-
dard or regulations. This information may ultimately convince OSHA not to issue citations 
or at least to minimize penalties.
Each inspection is different, so the need for counsel will depend on individual circum-
stances. On one hand, a routine inspection that does not stem from a significant injury or 
fatality may be handled without an attorney. On the other hand, an employer is strongly 
advised to have counsel directly involved during an OSHA inspection when a major accident 
or event such as a catastrophic accident, serious injury or employee fatality has occurred. If 
the inspection results from a fatality or serious injuries and/or you decide that you would like 
a lawyer during the inspection process, the compliance officer will typically delay for a short 
period. The best strategy is often to allow OSHA to perform the walk-around inspection and 
review documents and then to have an attorney present later in the inspection when OSHA 
wants to begin interviews.

340          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
OSHA: Criticism and Controversy
Through the years since its inception, OSHA has been the target of considerable criticism and 
controversy. Most of the OSHA battles have taken place on Capitol Hill, when different inter-
est groups pressure legislators either to maintain and expand OSHA or to reduce or eliminate 
it. The forces in favor of OSHA are primarily OSHA itself, the AFL-CIO labor organization, 
and select legislators. Those opposed to OSHA consist mainly of businesspeople, business 
organizations, and select legislators. Some say the controversy essentially is between “big 
labor” and “big business.”
The main arguments against OSHA are the following:
1. “Regulatory overkill” is a major theme of those against OSHA. Many business 
organizations believe that OSHA has gone beyond what is necessary for fostering 
a safe and healthy workplace. Businesspeople and employers often rate OSHA as 
the prime example of excessive government regulation; they state that the agency’s 
overzealous inspectors afflict employers with rules.
2. OSHA is not cost effective. It provides limited benefits.
3. The costs of OSHA, reduced productivity, lost jobs, and higher prices for goods add 
to inflation and are a threat to companies’ competitive position.
4. OSHA and other government bureaucrats, who are appointed rather than elected 
and thus are not accountable to the people, are making decisions that businesspeople 
should be making for themselves.
5. OSHA has had an impact on the labor-management process that has compounded 
labor troubles. Many unions have become involved in worker safety and employees’ 
rights under OSHA to the point where productivity is hindered.
6. Numerous employers have become paranoid due to adverse publicity and labor 
disputes arising from unnecessary OSHA citations.
alleged violations of standards from the U.S. Department of Labor’s 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). Proposed 
penalties total $154,800. Wynnewood Refining Co. was cited following 
an initial inspection that began May 9 and again on May 12 following 
a fire and explosion at the refinery plant in Wynnewood. The facility, 
which produces gasoline, propane, propylene, butane, fuel oils, asphalts, 
distillates and solvents, is a subsidiary of Gary-Williams Energy Corp. 
based in Denver. There are about 184 employees at the Wynnewood 
site. The willful violation was for failing to properly maintain processing 
equipment relating to the operation of the hydrofluoric acid alkylation 
unit when it was evident that flare line leaks were occurring, exposing 
employees to hydrocarbons and hydrofluoric acid. A willful violation is 
issued for intentional disregard of or plain indifference to the OSHA law 
and regulations. Serious violations include failure to provide required 
fall protection, properly maintain electrical equipment, provide adequate 
respiratory protection and provide the required machine guarding. A 
serious violation is one in which there is a substantial probability that 
death or serious physical harm could result from a hazardous condition 
about which the employer knew or should have known. One other-than-
serious citation was issued for failing to maintain required employee 
injury and illness recordkeeping.
For cases as above, the employer has 15 working days from receipt of the cita-
tions and proposed penalties to comply and pay the penalties, to request and partici-
pate in an informal conference with the OSHA area director, or to contest the citations 
before the independent Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission.

Safety Strategies         341
The major arguments in favor of OSHA are these:
1. OSHA is essential to reinforce a safe and healthy workplace for employees.
2. Many deaths and injuries have been prevented because of OSHA.
3. In today’s technologically complex business world, employees need protection that 
only government regulation can provide.
4. Employers who oppose OSHA are too interested in the costs of safety and health, and 
in productivity and profits, and they are not concerned enough about employees.
5. There are employers who have a favorable attitude toward OSHA and benefit from its 
existence. These employers actively work with OSHA in a joint effort to prevent and reduce 
safety and health problems. To these businesspeople, OSHA compliance is cost effective.
Assistance with Problems
There are many sources of assistance for employers concerned about workplace safety or 
health problems:
1. Many insurance companies provide specialists who visit, inspect, and recommend 
stategies for preventing and eliminating hazards at client workplaces.
2. Trade associations and employer groups have become more conscious about safety and 
health.
3. Trade unions and employee groups are often interested in coordinated activities for 
preventing and eliminating hazards.
4. The National Safety Council has an extensive information service.
5. Local doctors may be willing to provide information on a consulting basis about 
workplace medical matters. The Red Cross is a source of first-aid training. An 
employer who is not able to locate a local chapter should contact the American 
National Red Cross.
6. The Web and libraries contain a wealth of information on safety and health matters.
7. Local colleges and universities may have educational programs in the field of 
occupational safety and health. If an employer contacts the relevant departments, 
educators may provide useful information.
8. Free on-site consultation is offered in many states through agreements between OSHA 
and either a state or private contractor. These consultants do not write citations but expect 
cooperation or OSHA will be contacted. Enforcement action is rare, especially because the 
employer requested the consultant and showed a concern for safety and health.
Although this chapter emphasizes accidents in the workplace, other safety issues should 
be considered for a comprehensive loss prevention program. Examples include work-
place violence and natural disasters. Furthermore, OSHA guidelines go beyond pre-
venting accidents. For instance, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security, OSHA has published guidelines for emergencies, including terrorist events.
Safety Strategies
The OSHA Small Business Handbook states four basic elements to all good safety and health 
programs (Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2005b: 6–7):
1. Management commitment and employee involvement.
2. Worksite analysis to identify all hazards.
3. Hazard prevention and control methods are put in place and maintained.
4. Managers, supervisors, and employees are trained to understand and deal with 
worksite hazards.

342          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
Safety and Health Committee
A safety and health committee can be an important part of an effective loss prevention pro-
gram. When employees jointly communicate about and work toward increased safety and 
health, employees develop a greater awareness of associated problems and solutions. At meet-
ings, topics to discuss can include past accidents and illnesses, OSHA standards and inspec-
tions, and cases of accidents, illnesses, and remedies that occurred at similar facilities.
Socialization and Incentive Programs
Training is a prime strategy for accident prevention. The objective of training is to change the 
behavior of the employee. He or she should think and act in a safe manner. Training is useless 
unless employees are motivated to continually act in a safe manner. Even if familiar with safety 
procedures and other relevant information, an employee will not necessarily “practice what 
is preached.” A method for stimulating the employee to act safely and to use safety knowl-
edge is necessary. This objective is accomplished through incentive programs. Businesses may 
develop such programs on their own or outsource the work to a service firm. Examples of 
incentives are as follows: Every time a manufacturing plant reaches a million hours without a 
lost-time accident, every employee receives a gift. Another approach is safety bingo: Numbers 
are drawn every workday for a week and posted on a sign in the employee parking lot. If an 
employee completes a row, $25 is awarded. If the whole card is filled, $1,000 is won. When 
lost-time accidents occur, the game is halted until a month later. Companies often set safety 
goals for individual departments, which facilitate a competitive spirit to win prizes. Safety, 
rewarded by merit pay increases for employees, will also reduce accidents.
What are the results of such incentive programs? Safety incentives provide a power-
ful, cost-effective management tool to prevent accidents. Enthusiasm and safety awareness 
increase. Employees are more vigilant about other workers’ safety. Incentive programs provide 
fun in the workplace, which results in higher morale. As accidents decline, so do insurance 
premiums for workers’ compensation. Money is saved. Fewer accidents mean fewer produc-
tion interruptions and greater profits. It is feasible to use incentives for a comprehensive loss 
prevention effort involving not only safety but also crime and fire prevention.
The Dangers of Safety Incentive Programs
There are three basic types of safety incentive/reward programs as described here, 
along with concerns (Atkinson, 2000: 32–38).
Traditional programs offer rewards to employees for going a certain period with-
out a recordable injury. The focus is on results. OSHA, labor unions, and some employ-
ers argue that these programs may be used by employers to take the place of formal 
programs. In addition, employees may feel pressured not to report injuries because 
coworkers would be upset about not winning incentives, and so a serious workplace 
hazard might go undetected by management.
Behavior-based programs offer rewards to employees for behaviors (e.g., wear-
ing personal protective equipment) that promote safety. Labor groups say that this 
approach places safety on the shoulders of employees and then management blames 
them when accidents occur. Furthermore, employers watch actions and may ignore 
hazards that can be corrected.
Safety activities offer rewards to employees for suggestions to improve safety, 
identifying and correcting hazards, participating in inspections, and serving on a com-
mittee, among other activities.
Whereas the first two programs often involve a greater level of participation, safety 
activities are frequently voluntary; however, everyone should be involved in safety. Since 
each type of program can create concern, the employer and employees should seek to 
understand each one and capitalize on the beneficial aspects of each.

Investigations
After an accident, an investigation is vital to prevent future accidents; the cause of an accident 
can be pinpointed so that corrections can follow. Established procedures important for well-
planned accident investigations include the following:
1. Respond quickly to reinforce that loss prevention personnel are “on the job.” This 
will also show employees that management cares. Ensure that the injured receive 
proper medical attention.
2. Protect the scene of the accident to prevent unintentional or intentional harm to 
evidence.
3. If required, contact appropriate regulatory agencies and insurers.
4. Find out the following: who was involved, where did it occur, when did it happen, 
who was injured, what occurred, what was damaged, and how did the accident take 
place?
5. Try to pinpoint the cause. Investigate possible direct and indirect causes. Study 
equipment, work procedures, the environment, and the employees involved. Is a drug 
test required?
6. Estimate injuries and direct and indirect costs.
7. Use a standard accident report that fits management’s requirements and aids the 
investigative inquiry.
8. Maintain an open mind, remaining aware that some employees attempt fraudulent 
workers’ compensation claims by staging an accident or by providing false 
information.
9. If necessary, complete appropriate forms (e.g., workers’ compensation, OSHA).
10.  Prepare a presentation for the safety and health committee concerning the accident. 
Solicit feedback from the committee to solve problems.
11. Follow up on corrective action to ensure safety.
One of the most difficult questions to answer during an accident investigation is the 
cause; often considerable controversy is generated. Opinions vary, but facts are necessary. 
There are two primary causes of accidents: unsafe conditions and unsafe acts by people. 
Frequently, unsafe conditions (e.g., unguarded moving parts, poor lighting) are known, but 
corrections are not made because of inaction or costs. Unsafe acts by people can result from 
ignorance, poor training, negligence, drugs, fatigue, emotional upset, poor attitude, and high 
production demands. Other circumstances also can cause accidents. One of the oldest and 
most controversial theories of accident causation is the accident proneness theory. This theory 
suggests that people who repeatedly have accidents are accident prone. Many experts agree that 
about 20% of the people have most of the accidents, whereas the remaining 80% have virtually 
no accidents.
Haaland (2005: 51–57) writes that the literature in the discipline of safety shows 
that 90% of accidents are attributed to human error. He notes specific human traits that 
have been linked through empirical research to accident proneness. One of these traits 
is conscientiousness and Haaland defines it as “an individual’s degree of organization, 
persistence, and motivation in goal-directed behavior.” Those who are low in this trait 
tend to ignore safety rules and get into more accidents. Extreme extroversion and extreme 
introversion are other traits linked to accident proneness. The former is characterized by 
being sociable and outgoing, but also easily distracted and having a shorter attention span. 
The latter is characterized by limited interpersonal interactions and possibly hesitation 
before seeking assistance. Haaland adds that unsafe employees are also characterized by 
other behaviors harmful to the bottom line, such as arriving late to work, more absences, 
and poorer levels of productivity and quality. Consequently, employers can systematically 
hire applicants who are less likely to become involved in accidents and injuries. A safety 
performance assessment measures personality traits that influence safety in the workplace. 
It consists of written statements and an applicant can complete the assessment at a kiosk 
or through a Web site.
Safety Strategies          343

Additional Safety Measures
Other safety measures are to display safety posters, create a safety-by-objectives program, and 
recognize employees with excessive accident records and reassign or retrain those workers. 
Safety posters or signs are effective if certain guidelines are used. Research indicates that if the 
safety message is in negative terms (e.g., “Don’t let this happen to you,” followed by a picture 
of a person with a physical injury), it causes fear, resentment, and sometimes anger. Posters 
with positive messages (e.g., “Let’s all pitch in for safety”) produce better results. Posters 
and signs (see Figure 14.3) are more potent when they reflect the diversity of employees 
(e.g., multiple languages), are located in appropriate places, are not too numerous, and have 
 attractive colors. A safety-by-objectives program is a derivative of management by objectives. 
In a manufacturing plant, department heads formulate safety objectives for their departments. 
Management makes sure that objectives are neither too high nor too low. Incentives are used 
to motivate employees. After a year, the objectives are studied to see if the objectives were 
reached. Future objectives are modified or increased.
Search the Web
Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
American Red Cross: www.redcross.org/
Federal Register: http://fr.cos.com/
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH): www.cdc.gov/
niosh/homepage.html
National Safety Council: www.nsc.org/
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA): www.osha.gov
344          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
Harry Nash, Machinist, Is Injured Again
As Harry Nash was cutting a piece of metal on a band saw, he accidentally cut off his 
thumb. Workers in the surrounding area rushed to his aid. The foreman and the loss 
prevention manager coordinated efforts to get him and his thumb to the hospital as 
quickly as possible. After Harry was in the care of doctors, the foreman and the loss 
prevention manager began an investigation. A look at Harry’s record showed that he 
had been working for the company for eight years. During the first year, he slipped on 
some oil on the workplace floor and was hospitalized for three weeks with a sprained 
back. The third year showed that he accidentally drilled into his finger with a drill 
press. The report stated that Harry did not receive any training from a now-retired 
foreman, who should have instructed Harry on drill press safety techniques. By the 
fifth year, Harry had had another accident. While carrying some metal rods, he fell and 
broke his ankle because he forgot about climbing one step to enter a newly constructed 
adjoining building.
Even though Harry had had no training in operating the band saw, the loss 
prevention manager and the foreman believed that Harry was accident prone. The 
foreman, angry with Harry spoiling the department’s safety record and incentive gifts, 
wanted Harry fired. The loss prevention manager was undecided about the matter.
Later, management, the foreman, and the loss prevention manager decided to 
assign Harry to a clerical position in the shipping department. Harry eventually col-
lected workers’ compensation for his lost thumb.

References          345
FIGURE 14-3 Safety signs.
Case Problems
14A.  As a loss prevention practitioner for a large corporation, you are asked by a 
local college professor to lecture on the pros and cons of OSHA. What will your 
comments be to the class?
14B.  If you were a company safety and loss prevention manager, how would you react 
to an OSHA inspection? What conditions in your company do you think would 
influence your reaction?
14C.  In reference to the case describing Harry Nash, do you feel that the loss prevention 
manager and the foreman were justified in labeling Harry as accident prone? 
Support your answer.
References
Anderson, C. (1975). OSHA and Accident Control Through Training. New York, NY: 
Industrial Press.
Atkinson, W. (2000). “The Dangers of Safety Incentive Programs.” Risk Management, 47 (August).
Chacanaca, M. (1996). “Specialty-Confined-Space Rescues.” Emergency (February).
Dreux, M. (1995). “When OSHA Knocks, Should an Employer Demand a Warrant?” 
Occupational Hazards (April).
Gaudio, B. (2005). “OSHA Inspection … Can It Happen to You?” NFIB Business Toolbox 
(January 21). http://www.nfib.com/object/IO_19802.html, retrieved December 17, 2006.
Grimaldi, J., and Simmonds, R. (1975). Safety Management. Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin.
Haaland, D. (2005). “Who’s the Safest Bet for the Job?” Security Management, 49 (February).
Hall, D. (2006). Administrative Law: Bureaucracy in a Democracy, 3rd Ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Education.
“Lockout/Tagout” (2001). Occupational Hazards, 63 (January).
Mason, J. (1976). “OSHA: Problems and Prospects.” California Management Review, 19 (Fall).
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control (2006). “The Economic Costs of Injuries.” 
www.cdc.gov/nipc/factsheets/Cost_of_Injury.htm, retrieved May 8, 2006.

346          SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (2005a). “Employer Rights and Responsibilities 
Following an OSHA Inspection.” http://www.osha.gov/Publications/osha3000.pdf, 
retrieved November 9, 2006.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (2005b). Small Business Handbook. 
http://www.osha.gov/Publications/smallbusiness/small-business.pdf, retrieved November 9, 
2006.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (2003a). “OSHA’s 2003–2008 Strategic 
Management Plan Goals: 15% Drop in Fatality Rates, 20% Drop in Injury and 
Illness Rates by 2008.” http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_
table=NEWS_RELEASES&p_id=10214, retrieved December 14, 2006.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (2003b). “Frequently Asked Questions.” 
http://www.osha.gov/as/opa/osha-faq.html, retrieved December 17, 2006.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2006a). “OSHA Facts.” www.osha.gov, 
retrieved May 8, 2006.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2006b). “All About OSHA.” http://www.
osha.gov/Publications/all_about_OSHA.pdf, retrieved November 9, 2006.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2006c). “Hazard Communication.” http://www.
osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=FEDERAL_REGISTER&p_
id=18890, retrieved December 15, 2006.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2006d). “Frequently Asked Questions: 
HAZWOPER.” http://www.osha.gov/html/faq-hazwoper.html, retrieved November 10, 
2006.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2006e). “Bloodborne pathogens—1910.1030.” 
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_
id=10051, retrieved December 15, 2006.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2006f). “The control of hazardous energy (lock-
out/tagout)—1910.147.” http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_
table=STANDARDS&p_id=9804, retrieved December 15, 2006.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration (2001). “Recordkeeping.” http://www.osha.
gov/Publications/osha3169.pdf, retrieved November 9, 2006.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Office of Communications (2005). “OSHA 
Announces Targeted Inspection Plan for 2005” (August 9). www.osha.gov, retrieved 
December 17, 2006.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Office of Communications (2006). “U.S. 
Department of Labor’s OSHA Fines Thomas Industrial Coatings Following Two Worker 
Fatalities in Kansas City” (National News Release 06–1961–NAT, October 30). www.
osha.gov, retrieved December 20, 2006.
U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Public Affairs (2006). “Serious Violations of Health and 
Safety Standards Bring Wynnewood Refining Co. $154,800 in Fines from U.S. Department 
of Labor’s OSHA” (OSHA Regional News Release: OSHA-06–1937–DAL, November 9). 
www.osha.gov, retrieved December 20, 2006.
Schroll, C. (2006). “Confined space training: follow these 17 key steps.” Industrial Safety & 
Hygiene News, 40 (April).
                                                                                

KEY TERMS
• terrorism
• Sicarii
• Zealots
• Assassins
• French Revolution
• “Reign of Terror”
• Ku Klux Klan
• state terrorism
• guerilla warfare
• Palestinian Liberation Organization
• Crusades
• Islam
• Prophet Muhammad
• Muslims
• Sunni
• Shiite
• fundamentalism
• psychological causes of terrorism
• rational choice causes of terrorism
• structural causes of terrorism
• international terrorism
• globalization
• asymmetrical warfare
• 9/11 attacks
• al-Qaida
• domestic terrorism
• anarchism
• ecoterrorism
• Animal Liberation Front (ALF)
• Earth Liberation Front (ELF)
• extremism
• Ruby Ridge incident
• Christian Identity
• Waco incident
• Oklahoma City bombing
• Patriot movement
349
Terrorism and 
Homeland Security
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Explain the definition, history, and causes of terrorism.
2. Describe international terrorism and domestic terrorism.
3. Discuss terrorist methods and weapons.
4. List and describe weapons of mass destruction and response.
5. Describe homeland security.
6. Examine the measurement of terrorism.
7. Differentiate national security and homeland security.
8. Describe government action against terrorism.
9. Discuss the role of the private sector in homeland security.
15

• cellular model of organization
• leaderless resistance
• secondary explosion
• improvised explosive device (IED)
• weapon of mass destruction (WMD)
• weapon of mass effect (WME)
• Anthrax
• Aum Shinrikyo cult
• radiological dispersion device
• homeland security
• National Security Strategy of the United 
States
• National Strategy for Homeland 
Security
• U.S. Northern Command (NORTH-
COM)
• Defense Against Weapons of Mass 
Destruction Act of 1996
• Antiterrorism and Effective Death 
Penalty Act of 1996
• USA Patriot Act of 2001
• USA Patriot Improvement and 
Reauthorization Act of 2005
• Homeland Security Act of 2002
• Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS)
• first responders
• Homeland Security Advisory System
• business interruption
• Information Sharing and Analysis 
Centers (ISACs)
• Overseas Security Advisory Council 
(OSAC)
• American Red Cross
• Salvation Army
• National Volunteer Organizations 
Against Disasters
• Citizen Corps
• USA Freedom Corps 
Note: Major portions of this chapter are from: Purpura, P. (2007). Terrorism 
and Homeland Security: An Introduction with Applications. Burlington, MA: Elsevier 
Butterworth-Heinemann Pub.
Terrorism
Terrorism Defined
Poland (2005: 2–5) writes of the complexity of defining terrorism. Many definitions exist and 
there is no international agreement on how to define the term. This results in methodologi-
cal problems for both research and data collection and conflicts over efforts at international 
counterterrorism.
The United Nations has struggled with the term for many years. It has been argued 
that one state’s “terrorism” is another state’s “freedom fighter.” Or, simply put, terrorism is a 
“dirty word” drenched in emotion, and it describes what the “other guy” has done.
The FBI (n.d.) defines terrorism as “the unlawful use of force or violence against per-
sons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment 
thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives.” The United States Department of 
State (2006: 9) chooses the definition of terrorism contained in Title 22 of the U.S. Code, 
Section 2656f(d): “The term ‘terrorism’ means premeditated, politically motivated violence 
perpetrated against noncombatant targets [e.g., civilians; military personnel who are unarmed 
and/or not on duty] by subnational groups or clandestine agents.”
History
Terrorism has existed for centuries. Ancient terrorists were “holy warriors” as we see with 
certain terrorists today. During the first century in the Middle East, the Sicarii and the 
Zealots, Jewish groups in ancient Palestine, fomented revolution against the occupying 
forces of Rome. The Sicarii instilled fear by using a dagger to stab Romans and Roman 
sympathizers during the day at crowded holiday festivities. The throngs provided cover for 
350          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY

the killers and heightened terror because people never knew when an attacker would strike. 
The Zealots-Sicarii believed that by confronting the Romans, the Messiah would intervene 
and save the Jewish people. Between 66 and 70 A.D., revolution became a reality. However, 
it ended in disaster for the Zealots-Sicarii. With thousands of Jews killed and the Jewish 
state in shambles, the survivors fled to the top of Masada where their abhorrence to being 
subjected to control by the Romans, who surrounded them, resulted in mass suicide. Today, 
we have the term “zealot,” meaning fanatical partisan.
In analyzing the methods of the Zealot-Sicarii, and drawing parallels to modern-day 
terrorism, Poland (2005: 26–27) writes that “the primary purpose of the Sicarii terrorist 
strategy, like so many terrorist groups today, seems to be the provocation of indiscriminate 
countermeasures by the established political system and to deliberately provoke repression, 
reprisals, and counterterrorism.” Poland refers to Northern Ireland where, for hundreds of 
years, Catholics have battled Protestants. Simonsen and Spindlove (2004: 70–75) explain 
that during the 16th century, James I, King of England, offered land in Ireland to Scottish 
settlers for the purpose of establishing the Protestant church in Ireland. Conflict ensued with 
Catholics, but the Protestant landowners prevailed. Catholics were regulated to a life of pov-
erty. Poland cites incidents during the twentieth century when Catholics, protesting peacefully 
against Protestants and British rule, were killed and wounded when police and British Security 
Forces overreacted.
Poland draws another parallel from the Zealot-Sicarii movement to recent times. The 
Irgun Zvai Leumi-al-Israel, led by Menachem Begin, terrorized the British military govern-
ment of Palestine between 1942 and 1948 in an effort to establish a Jewish state. The Irgun 
perpetrated many bombings and assassinations, leading to a cycle of terror and counter-
terror. Manifestos of the Irgun argued “No Masada.” Irgun fighters had actually studied 
terrorist methods of the Sicarii and the Irish Republican Army. Eventually, the British turned the 
problem over to the United Nations, and in 1948, the country of Israel was born.
The Assassins were another religious sect that used terrorism to pursue their goals 
(Weinzierl, 2004: 31–32). This group gave us the term “assassin” that literally means “hash-
ish-eater,” a reference to the drug taking that allegedly occurred (perhaps rumor) prior to 
murdering someone. During the 11th and 12th centuries, this group evolved from the Shiites 
of the present-day Mideast and they believed that the Muslim community needed the puri-
fied version of Islam to prepare for the arrival of the Inman, the Chosen of God and leader 
of humanity. The Assassins waged a war against the majority Sunni Muslim population. Their 
terror strategies consisted of using unconventional means, establishing mountain fortifica-
tions from which terror attacks were launched, and using daggers like the Sicarii. Although 
the Assassins were not successful in reforming the Islamic faith or in recruiting many converts, 
they are remembered for their innovations in terrorist strategies, namely the suicide mission 
and using disguise and deception. Acting under God, they were promised a place in paradise 
for their ultimate sacrifice as they sought out and killed Sunni religious and political leaders. 
Even today, we see conflict between Shiites and Sunni, as in Iraq.
Terrorism          351
Through history and today, we see the deep roots of religion within terrorism.
Secular motivations for terrorism were within the French Revolution, a major historic 
milestone in the history of terrorism. The French Revolution ended absolute rule by French 
kings and strengthened the middle class. The “Reign of Terror” (1793–1794), from which the 
word “terrorism” evolved, saw leadership from Maximilien Robespierre, who led the Jacobin 
government in executing, by guillotine, 12,000 people declared enemies of the Revolution. 
During the “Reign of Terror,” terrorism was viewed in a positive light and Robespierre declared 
that terrorism is prompt justice and a consequence of democracy applied during a time of 
urgent need. In 1794, when Robespierre prepared a new list of traitors of the  revolution, 

352          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
those fearing their names were on the list, executed him at the guillotine, and thus, the “Reign 
of Terror” ended. By this time, terrorism was beginning to be characterized in a negative light. 
Edmund Burke, a British political leader and writer, criticized the French Revolution and pop-
ularized the term “terrorism” in the English language as a repulsive action. This state terrorism 
of the French government was significant in the history of terrorism because the terror was not 
justified by religion or God, but by the masses to promote a political ideology (Weinberg and 
Davis, 1989: 24–25). Greenberg (2001:1) writes: “Over the next century the Jacobin spirit 
infected Russia, Europe and the United States.” Anarchist terrorist groups worked to foment 
revolution. In Russia, the Narodnaya Volya (meaning “people’s will”) was born in 1878 to 
destroy the Tsarist regime. They assassinated Alexander II in 1881, but the success sealed their 
fate because they were crushed by the Tsarist regime. This group did inspire other anarchists. 
During an anarchist-led labor protest at Chicago’s Haymarket Square in 1886, a bomb was 
thrown into the crowd as police intervened. A riot ensued and several police and demonstra-
tors were killed or injured. This incident hurt the labor movement. The anarchists were tried 
and sentenced to be hanged or imprisoned. Because there had been insufficient evidence, a few 
years later the Governor of Illinois pardoned the surviving anarchists.
As the 19th century gave way to the 20th century, anarchists and others dissatisfied 
with established order adopted terrorism as a strategy to reach their goals (Laqueur, 1999). 
Terrorist attacks and assassinations occurred in France, Italy, Spain, Germany, Ireland, India, 
Japan, the Balkans, and the Ottoman Empire, among other areas. Bombs were detonated 
in cafes, theaters, and during parades. In the United States, two Presidents were assassi-
nated—Garfield (1881) and McKinley (1901). This era also saw an increase in nationalism 
and struggles for statehood as native groups revolted and used terrorism to free themselves 
from imperial control and European colonialism. The assassination of Austrian heir Archduke 
Ferdinand in 1914 is a famous illustration of how terrorism was used for nationalistic goals. 
Gavrilo Princip, a member of the Pan-Serbian secret group called the Black Hand planned 
to kill Ferdinand to help southern Slavs. The assassination actually became the precipitating 
incident that triggered World War I and doomed the Austrian Empire. We can see that terror-
ism can sometimes have a profound impact on world affairs.
Although global terrorism was primarily left-wing oriented through history, during the 
late 18th century and early 20th century, conservative, right-wing groups formed to maintain 
the status quo and prevent change. In the United States, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), a right-wing 
group, was formed in 1865 by Confederate Army veterans who believed in the superiority of 
whites (Chalmers, 1981). The major goal of the KKK is to hinder the advancement of blacks, 
Catholics, Jews, and other minority groups. Klan methods include wearing white robes and 
hoods, burning crosses (at meetings and to frighten nonmembers), intimidation, tar-and-feath-
ering, lynching, and murder. The KKK evolved through periods of strength and weakness. 
During the mid-20th century, it was revived to oppose racial integration and it applied ter-
rorist strategies, such as murder and bombing. Because of infighting, splits, court cases, FBI 
infiltration, and imprisonment, membership has declined.
Because of the spread of communism, especially the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 in 
Russia that overthrew the Czar, many political leaders worldwide became fearful and took 
brutal steps to eliminate communists, socialists, and other left-wing activists within their own 
countries. Repressive regimes included the Nazis led by Adolph Hitler in Germany and the 
fascists led by Benito Mussolini in Italy, both becoming allies during World War II. Violence 
by a government to repress dissidence among its own population, or supporting such violence 
in another country, is called state terrorism. Following the end of World War II in 1945, a 
resurgence of nationalism among European colonies in the Middle East, Asia, and Africa 
resulted in violent uprisings. A combination of guerilla warfare and terrorism occurred. The 
former was characterized by larger units resembling the military and operating from a geo-
graphic area over which they controlled, and the latter involving smaller groups blending into 
the population and planning spectacular attacks for maximum media attention.
According to Greenberg (2001), it was Algeria’s Front de Liberation Nationale (FLN), 
fighting for independence from France in the 1950s, that set the tone for terrorism to come. The 
FLN raised the cost to France for its colonialism by bombing coastal tourist resorts, thereby 

randomly killing French families on vacation. By the 1960s, this precedent was copied world-
wide by Palestinian and Irish nationalists, Marxists in Africa and Latin America, the Weather 
Underground in the United States, the Marxist Baader-Meinhoff Gang in the former West 
Germany, and the Red Brigades in Italy. Terrorist methods were being applied by not only 
nationalists seeking independence, but also by those with ethnic and ideological agendas.
It was during the 1970s, that Yasser Arafat’s Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO), 
and its splinter groups, while locked in a cycle of shocking violence with Israel, pioneered the 
hijacking of jet airlines to publicize their goal of Palestinian statehood. Black September, as 
one splinter group was known, staged an outrageous attack at the 1972 Munich Olympics in 
Germany and murdered 11 Israeli athletes. This attack became a major, global media event 
and inspired other terrorists.
During the mid-1980s, state-sponsored terrorism grew again and supported terrorist 
attacks against Western targets in the Middle East. Sponsors of terrorism included Syria, 
Libya, Iran, Iraq, and North Korea.
Religion and Politics
Confusion may arise over whether a terrorist group has a religious agenda, a political agenda, 
or both. Religious conflict has a long history and it characterizes several groups today. At the 
same time, religious conflict may be used as a front for a hidden political agenda.
The Crusades helps us to understand the long history of religion and violence. These 
eight major military expeditions originated in Western Europe between 1096 and 1270 (dur-
ing the Middle Ages) with the purpose of recapturing Palestine from the Muslims because it 
was the area where Jesus had lived. In fact, Jerusalem is considered Holy Land to Muslims, 
Christians, and Jews. This was an era when Western Europe was expanding its economy 
and Christianity. Kings, nobles, knights, and peasants joined the Crusades and fought, not 
only for Christianity, but also for territory and wealth. Battles were won and lost, Jerusalem 
changed hands multiple times, and there was no significant impact, except for expanded 
trade. Subsequent attempts at organizing crusades failed as Europe turned its attention west-
ward to the Atlantic Ocean toward the New World. The Holy Land was left to the Muslims 
(Queller, 1989).
The violence between the Israelis and the Palestinians is an example of religious and politi-
cal conflict. Several wars have been fought between Israel and its Arab neighbors. Israeli military 
superiority resulted in the capture of land from its Arab neighbors. Because the PLO saw that 
Arab allies were unable to drive Israeli armed forces from occupied lands, the PLO began a cam-
paign of terrorism, as did other groups. The goals are to destroy Israel and form an Arab state in 
Palestine. Today, a political solution is slowly developing as Israeli forces continue to withdraw 
from occupied lands, although the withdrawals are marred by violence from both sides.
Wilkinson (2003: 124) writes that the al-Qaida network portray themselves as fight-
ing a holy war and use religious language to legitimize their terrorist attacks. However, their 
political agenda is to force the U.S. military to withdraw from the Middle East, they want to 
overthrow regimes that side with the West and fail to follow “true” Islam, and they seek to 
unite all Muslims. Al-Qaida uses the Muslim communities and mosques in the West to recruit, 
seek aid, and conduct covert operations, even though the majority of Muslims who live in the 
West reject terrorism.
The conflict among some worshippers of Islam helps us to understand some of the 
religious violence today. Islam is one of the world’s largest religions and it refers to the religious 
doctrine preached by the Prophet Muhammad during the A.D. 600s. Those who believe in 
this doctrine are called Muslims. Over one-fifth of the global population is Muslim and they 
reside in countries throughout the world. Conflicts among Muslims over the rightful succes-
sion of Muslim rulers led to disputes within Islam. Civil war resulted in two Muslim sects that 
remain today, along with a history of conflict. The Sunni branch is the larger of the two sects 
and members dominate the Middle East. They are followers of the teachings of Muhammad. 
Al-Qaida is primarily Sunni. Shiite is the minority sect. They believe that Ali, cousin and son-
in-law of Muhammad, is the Prophet of Islam. Shiite activism promoted the Iranian  revolution 
Terrorism          353

354          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
of 1979 and emphasized that Islam should be lived as a tool of the oppressed, besides being a 
religious doctrine. Although Iraq is mostly Shiite, as is Iran, Iraq was ruled by the Sunni minor-
ity in Iraq under Saddam Hussein, until his regime was toppled by U.S.-led forces in 2003. The 
conflict that followed pitted the formerly oppressed Shiites (supported by coalition forces to 
establish a new government) against Sunnis.
Ford (2001) writes about opinions and perceptions of the United States by Arabs and 
others. Many Arabs see the carnage of 9/11 (Figure 15-1) as retribution for unjust policies by 
America. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a primary topic of contention. The perception is 
that Israel can get away with murder and the United States will turn a blind eye. Arab media 
shows countless photos of Israeli soldiers killing and wounding Palestinians and Israeli tanks 
plowing through Palestinian neighborhoods. Ford refers to the dominance of state-run media 
in the Middle East and how it often fans the flames of anti-American and anti-Israeli feelings 
because it helps to divert citizens away from the shortcomings of their own government.
Ford notes that the United States has provided billions of dollars of military and 
economic aid to Israel and other regional allies to strengthen U.S. interests in the oil-rich 
region. He writes: “It is this double standard that creates hatred.” According to Ford, 
Middle Easterners argue that if the United States does not rethink the policies that cause anti-
American sentiment, trying to root out terrorism will fail.
Greenberg (2001) writes about fundamentalism that refers to a strict adherence to the 
basic tenants of a belief system to reach purity in that belief system as defined by its leaders; 
it fosters intolerance of others’ beliefs and it can generate terrorism. Greenberg points out 
that the causes of the growth of fundamentalism include the 1979 Israel-Egypt peace agree-
ment, the Iranian revolution, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He adds that Islamic 
fundamentalists fear the spread of satanic Western values and influence and they believe that 
“to destroy America is to do God’s work.” Of great concern is how dangerous this mixture 
of religion and terrorism has become, as evidenced by the al-Qaida attacks of September 
11, 2001. Future attacks might be more devastating and include weapons of mass destruc-
tion. Although al-Qaida has received a lot of attention, we should not lose sight of the “big 
 picture” of global terrorism and the need for broad solutions.
FIGURE 15-1 Destruction of the World Trade Center in New York City following the September 11, 2001 terrorist 
attack.

Causes of Terrorism
An understanding of the causes of terrorism is an important foundation for planning success-
ful solutions. Roach, et al. (2005: 7–25) have developed a rough framework that diagnoses 
terrorism through an analysis of immediate causes and prior causes from individual, group, 
societal, or national history. Then, each family of causes can be tackled by an equivalent 
family of intervention principles, using specific targeted methods. Examples include target 
hardening, disrupting financing, attempting to resolve ethnic conflict, and socialization (e.g., 
working with institutions to promote diversity and tolerance).
Kegley (2003: 10–11) writes that while one perspective of terrorism sees it like a disease 
requiring a remedy, an opposing view sees it as a legitimate response to unjustified repression. 
The causes include perceived political, social, and economic inequities, as well as the intrusion 
of one culture on another. The explanations and causes of terrorism are offered from many 
perspectives. Three major categories are psychological, rational choice, and structural. What 
follows here is a summary of research, including the work of Clayton et al., (2003).
Psychological Causes of Terrorism
Psychological causes of terrorism look to factors within an individual that influence acts 
of terrorism. Researchers often note that terrorists are not mentally disturbed. In fact, the 
recruiting process to obtain new recruits is selective since psychopathology can result in fric-
tion within a terrorist group and when completing missions (Hudson, 1999). In addition, it 
is not valid to apply one set of generalized psychological characteristics to all terrorists. The 
research on the personal backgrounds of terrorists shows conflicting results. Research shows 
that terrorists were unsuccessful in their personal lives, jobs, and educations. At the same time, 
research shows terrorists from middle-class or upper-class backgrounds with university educa-
tion (Clayton et al., 2003). Palestinian suicide bombers who terrorized Israel were often poor, 
with limited education and hope for the future. Their salvation was paradise after killing Jews. 
Conversely, the 9/11 terrorists were well-educated professionals living middle-class lives.
Silke (1998: 51–69) writes that most terrorists feel that they are doing nothing wrong 
when they kill, injure, and destroy property. He claims that terrorists are not mentally ill, but 
they share a psychological condition known as psychopathic personality disorder (also called 
anti-social personality disorder), which is the absence of empathy for others. He cites the case 
of Nezar Hindawi, who in 1986, sent his pregnant Irish girlfriend on an El Al flight to Israel, 
claiming that he would marry her soon. She apparently was not aware that Hindawi had hid 
a bomb from the Abu Nidal Organization in her belongings.
Terrorists typically rationalize and minimize their actions by referring to historical 
events and injustices. They plan carefully and are patient until everything is in place. Violent 
behavior develops through a process of gradual moral disengagement. Previously abhorrent 
violence is eventually accomplished callously.
Social learning models offer explanations for terrorism. Bandura (1977) emphasizes 
learning through observing and modeling the behaviors of others. Many terrorists grow up in 
locations where violence is both the norm and a daily event. The repeated success of aggres-
sive behavior encourages groups to engage in violence.
Rational Choice Causes of Terrorism
Rational choice causes of terrorism view terrorism as a logical political choice among alterna-
tive actions (Crenshaw, 1990). Rational choice explanations help us to understand the circum-
stances surrounding terrorist decisions to choose violence. For instance, global media exposure 
of terrorist violence and its aims can be beneficial to the terrorist group.
Another aspect of rational choice is the timing of terrorist attacks. Terrorists may 
attack on an anniversary of a significant event or on an enemy’s holy day or national holiday. 
Timothy McVeigh blew up the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City on the 
second anniversary of the deaths of the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas, a clash he blamed 
on the FBI.
Terrorism          355

356          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
Structural Causes of Terrorism
Structural causes of terrorism explain terrorism as a response to social-structural conditions (i.e., 
stable, enduring patterns of social relationship or social positions) that groups are powerless 
to deal with through conventional political or military methods. These conditions include 
citizen access to services, rights, and protection. The social structures include the laws and 
policies of government, the role of police and military forces, and the geographic location of 
the group. Social and political oppression in an environment of weak social structures may 
result in terrorism and revolution.
Relative deprivation theory helps us to understand terrorism (Barken and Snowden, 
2001: 17). Basically, a group’s rising expectations and disappointments lead to feelings of 
deprivation and frustration. When group members compare their plight with more fortunate 
groups, the ill feelings are compounded. Violence is seen as a viable option. The living condi-
tions of Palestinians in and near Israel serve as an example.
Terrorism may also be shaped by efforts to maintain cultural identity and autonomy. 
An example of this is the past violence between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland.
The U.S. Government (2003), in the National Strategy for Combating Terrorism, 
describes a building process from which terrorism emerges. Underlying conditions include 
poverty, corruption, and religious and ethnic conflict. Although these conditions may 
be real or manufactured, terrorists use these problems to legitimize violence and gain 
 support.
The international environment can facilitate terrorism through, for example, open bor-
ders that enable terrorists to seek havens and travel to targets. States around the world—either 
through ignorance or intent—offer safe houses, training, communications systems, and finan-
cial opportunities that support terrorist operations. A terrorist organization can then thrive in 
a stable environment. Leadership links the components of the building process and provides 
direction for goals. Because leaders may be apprehended or killed, certain terrorist groups 
have opted for a decentralized and autonomous cell structure.
An understanding of the root causes of terrorism is an important foundation for plan-
ning successful solutions.
International Terrorism
The FBI (n.d.) defines international terrorism as “the unlawful use of force or violence com-
mitted by a group or individual, who has some connection to a foreign power or whose 
activities transcend national boundaries, against persons or property to intimidate or coerce 
a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political 
or social objectives.” According to the U.S. Department of State (2004: xii), “the term 
international terrorism means terrorism involving citizens or the territory of more than one 
country.”
Martin (2003: 228) seeks objectivity by comparing perceptions of international terror-
ism by those from the West and those from developing nations. Western governments are 
critical of international terrorism because (1) democratic justice is the norm and terrorism is 
seen as criminal behavior, (2) the West is often a target of terrorism, and (3) the West finds 
specific methods of warfare to be acceptable and terrorism is not one of them. Developing 
nations may find terrorism to be acceptable because (1) anticolonial revolutionaries (also 
called terrorists) have become national leaders, (2) terrorism was the best choice to freedom 
from colonialism, and (3) many revolutionaries crafted an effective fusion of ideology and 
 terrorism that became justified and legitimate.

The concept of globalization helps us to understand international terrorism. 
Globalization is a process of worldwide changes that are increasingly integrating and 
remolding the lives of the people of the world (Bailey, 2003: 75). Economic changes are 
the driving force behind globalization. Citizens of countries throughout the world are 
seeing their products and services sold globally, and they are buying from other coun-
tries. Modern technology and communications have enabled American movies, television 
programs, and music to reach almost anywhere in the world. McDonald’s hamburgers 
and Kentucky Fried Chicken are sold in cities throughout the world. Likewise, the United 
States is a huge market for other countries. The ideology of capitalism and its goal of 
wealth are often seen as the driving forces behind the global economy. This ideology origi-
nated from Western (European) cultural beliefs and values. The process of globalization 
involves not only economic changes, but also political, social, and cultural changes. The 
United States is at the forefront of globalization through its military might, huge economy, 
power, and influence. Citizens of less developed nations perceive threats to their native cul-
ture and society from Western ideas, democratic values, and differences in religion. People 
in conservative cultures are angered by inequities, injustice, and the age-old problem of the 
“haves and the have-nots.” Western industrialized nations are a ripe target for discontent. 
Samuel Huntington (1996), who wrote The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of the 
World Order, has often been quoted following the 9/11 attacks. He predicted that in the 
21st century, wars would be fought, not between nations, but between different cultures 
and religions.
International Terrorists
When terrorists stage an attack domestically that has domestic implications, the attention 
they receive for their cause may not be as intense as a cross-border attack in another country. 
Terrorists may also select domestic targets that have international connections to enhance 
global attention to their cause. Examples of international targets include diplomats, tourists, 
foreign business people, and the locations they inhabit or visit. By bringing their struggle into 
the international arena, a low-budget, spectacular attack, on a symbolic or well-known target, 
can reap enormous, immediate publicity. Such political violence has been termed asymmetrical 
warfare, “a term used to describe tactics, organizational configurations, and methods of con-
flict that do not use previously accepted or predictable rules of engagement” (Martin, 2003: 
216). This means that terrorists, who have an arsenal that is no match to, say, a superpower, 
can be successful when they apply imaginative, well-planned, low-budget, surprise attacks 
against a much stronger enemy. This occurred with the 9/11 attacks on September 11, 2001, 
when al-Qaida suicide operatives, using box cutters, commandeered airliners and transformed 
them into missiles that totally destroyed the Twin Towers in New York City and damaged 
the Pentagon, while killing almost 3,000 people. Many countries, especially the United States, 
were forced to re-think their war fighting and counterterrorism capabilities because, clearly, 
the “wake-up call” is that conventional methods of deterrence, security, and war are no match 
against creative, determined terrorists.
In past decades, international terrorists (Figure 15-2) targeted U.S. citizens and inter-
ests overseas. The most memorable attacks include the suicide truck bombings of the U.S. 
Marine barracks in Beirut, in 1983, killing 241 military service personnel; the 1988 bomb-
ing of Pan American Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, which killed 189 Americans; 
the 1996 bombing of Al-Khobar Towers in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, resulting in the deaths 
of 19 U.S. military personnel; the 1998 bombing of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and 
Tanzania, which killed 12 Americans and many others; and the attack on the USS Cole in 
the port of Aden, Yemen, in 2000, killing 17 U.S. Navy members.
The true number of terrorist organizations is difficult to gauge because these groups are 
dynamic, splinter groups form, and groups change their names. The U.S. Department of State 
(2006), in Country Reports on Terrorism 2005, lists 42 foreign terrorist organizations, fol-
lowed by “a list of other groups of concern.” The annual Country Reports contain a variety of 
information, including descriptions of terrorist groups, countries containing terrorist groups, 
and U.S. counterterrorism strategies.
Terrorism          357

358          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
Al-Qaida (a.k.a. International Front for Fighting Jews and Crusaders)
Description
Al-Qaida was established by Osama bin Laden in 1988 with Arabs who fought in 
Afghanistan against the Soviet Union. The group helped finance, recruit, transport, 
and train Sunni Islamic extremists for the Afghan resistance. The goals of al-Qaida are 
to unite Muslims to fight the United States as a means of defeating Israel, overthrow-
ing regimes it deems “non-Islamic,” and expelling Westerners and non-Muslims from 
Muslim countries. Its eventual goal would be establishment of a pan-Islamic caliphate 
throughout the world. Al-Qaida leaders issued a statement in February 1998 under the 
banner of “The World Islamic Front for Jihad Against the Jews and Crusaders” saying 
it was the duty of all Muslims to kill U.S. citizens, civilian and military, and their allies 
everywhere. Al-Qaida merged with al-Jihad (Egyptian Islamic Jihad) in June 2001, 
renaming itself “Qaidat al-Jihad.”
FIGURE 15-2 The Faces of Global Terrorism, Wanted Poster. Courtesy: U.S. Department of State.

Activities
Even as al-Qaida’s top leaders continue to plot and direct terror attacks worldwide, ter-
rorists affiliated with al-Qaida but not necessarily controlled by bin Laden have increas-
ingly carried out high-profile attacks. In 2005, bin Laden’s deputy Ayman al-Zawahiri 
appeared to say that al-Qaida was responsible for multiple attacks against the London 
public transportation system. The extent of leadership involvement in planning the attack 
is unclear, and homegrown United Kingdom-based extremists may have been inspired 
rather than directed by al-Qaida. Over the past four years, al-Qaida, its affiliates and 
those inspired by the group were also involved in many anti-U.S. or anti-Coalition 
attacks in Africa, Europe, the Middle East, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq, including 
suicide bombings and vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices.
In 2003 and 2004, Saudi-based al-Qaida operatives and associated extremists 
launched more than a dozen attacks, killing at least 90 people, including 14 Americans 
in Saudi Arabia. Al-Qaida may have been connected to the suicide bombers and plan-
ners of the November 2003 attacks in Istanbul that targeted two synagogues, the 
British Consulate, and the HSBC Bank, resulting in more than 60 dead. Pakistani 
President Musharraf blames al-Qaida for two attempts on his life in December 2003.
In October 2002, al-Qaida directed a suicide attack on the French tanker MV 
Limburg off the coast of Yemen that killed one and injured four. The group also carried 
out the November 2002 suicide bombing of a hotel in Mombasa, Kenya, which killed 15. 
Al-Qaida probably provided financing for the October 2002 Bali bombings by Jemaah 
Islamiya that killed more than 200. On September 11, 2001, 19 al-Qaida suicide attack-
ers hijacked and crashed four U.S. commercial jets—two into the World Trade Center in 
New York City, one into the Pentagon near Washington, D.C., and a fourth into a field in 
Shanksville, Pennsylvania—leaving nearly 3,000 individuals dead or missing. In October 
2000, al-Qaida conducted a suicide attack on the USS Cole in the port of Aden, Yemen, 
with an explosive-laden boat, killing 17 U.S. Navy sailors and injuring 39.
Al-Qaida also carried out the August 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in 
Nairobi and Dar es Salaam killing at least 301 individuals and injuring more than 
5,000 others. Al-Qaida and its supporters claim to have shot down U.S. helicopters and 
killed U.S. service members in Somalia in 1993, and to have conducted three bombings 
that targeted U.S. troops in Aden in December 1992.
Strength
Al-Qaida’s organizational strength is difficult to determine in the aftermath of extensive 
counterterrorist efforts since 9/11. The arrests and killing of mid-level and senior al-
Qaida operatives have disrupted some communication, financial, and facilitation nodes 
and disrupted some terrorist plots. Additionally, supporters and associates worldwide 
who are inspired by the group’s ideology may be operating without direction from al-
Qaida’s central leadership, though it is impossible to estimate their numbers. Al-Qaida 
also serves as a focal point of inspiration or imitation for a worldwide network that is 
comprised of many Sunni Islamic extremist groups.
Location/Area of Operation
Al-Qaida’s worldwide networks are augmented by ties to local Sunni extremists. The 
group was based in Afghanistan until Coalition forces removed the Taliban from power 
in late 2001. While the largest concentration of senior al-Qaida members now resides 
in Pakistan, the network incorporates members of al-Qaida in Iraq and other associates 
throughout the Middle East, Southeast Asia, Africa, and Europe who continue working 
to carry out future attacks against U.S. interests.
External Aid
Al-Qaida primarily depends on donations from like-minded supporters and individuals 
who believe that their money is supporting a humanitarian or other cause. Some funds 
Terrorism          359

360          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
Domestic Terrorism
The FBI (n.d.) defines domestic terrorism as “groups or individuals who are based and operate 
entirely within the United States and Puerto Rico without foreign direction and whose acts are 
directed at elements of the U.S. government or population.”
Domestic terrorism, also called “homegrown terrorism,” is difficult to define, categorize, 
and research. White (2003: 207–208) offers an analysis of the problems of conceptualizing domes-
tic terrorism. He notes that law enforcement in the United States has historically labeled terrorism 
or political violence under various crime labels (e.g., arson, homicide). White also writes that the 
United States has had a long history of political violence, but only recently have more than a few 
scholars studied the problem under the label of “terrorism.”
White refers to three early authors who pioneered publications on domestic (U.S.) ter-
rorism. He praised H. Cooper and coauthors who wrote the Report of the Task Force on 
Disorders and Terrorism in 1976. This publication focused on the civil disorders of the time, 
the political context of domestic terrorism, and the need for emergency planning.
Two other pioneers are J. Bell and Ted Gurr (1979) who emphasized the historical context 
of terrorism and how it has been applied by the strong to control the weak, and by the weak to 
fight the strong. Examples in American history include the genocide against American Indians 
by Europeans, industrialists versus unions, and vigilantism (e.g., KKK).
Domestic Terrorists
Griset and Mahan (2003: 85–93) divide homegrown terrorism into five categories based 
on ideology. These researchers state that their categories may overlap. The categories are 
explained next with additional historical information from several sources.
State-Sponsored Terrorism
Government authorities, including Congress and the president, have passed laws and sup-
ported policies that have intimidated Americans and fostered violence. The Removal Act 
of 1830 required the forced march of Indian tribes from the east coast to Oklahoma; many 
Indians died during the march, and upon reaching reservations, the conditions were poor. In 
another example, during the late 1800s and early 1900s, many city and state police agencies 
were formed or expanded to serve as strikebreakers (Holden, 1986: 23).
Leftist Class Struggles
Identifying with Marxism, the 1960s and 1970s saw leftist groups embroiled in antiwar 
and civil rights struggles. The Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) began in 1960 to 
support the “liberal” policies of the Democratic Party. It called for an alliance of blacks, 
students, peace groups, and liberal organizations. As with many other leftist groups of the 
time, an “anti-establishment” theme prevailed (i.e., government and business were corrupt 
and change was needed to help the less fortunate). In 1965, the SDS organized the first anti-
Vietnam War march in Washington, D.C., which resulted in increased popularity for the 
are diverted from Islamic charitable organizations. Additionally, parts of the organiza-
tion raise funds through criminal activities; for example, al-Qaida in Iraq raises funds 
through hostage-taking for ransom, and members in Europe have engaged in credit 
card fraud. United States and international efforts to block al-Qaida funding have 
hampered the group’s ability to raise money.
Source: U.S. Department of State (2006).

SDS among students. The SDS led many campus disturbances and sit-down demonstrations 
in building. Military draft resistance became a top priority. As the Vietnam War intensified, 
the SDS divided into competing groups, each supporting violence and terrorism. One of the 
most noted splinter groups was the Weather Underground Organization (WUO.) This group 
advocated revolution against capitalism. It was responsible for almost 40 bombings, including 
those inside the U.S. Capitol and the Pentagon. When the war ended, interest in the WUO 
waned (Poland, 1988: 91–92).
Violence against nonviolent civil rights workers sparked the Black Power movement 
during the 1960s. It advocated political, economic, and cultural awakening. One splinter 
group of this movement was the Black Panthers, formed in 1966, in Oakland, California. A 
tactic of the Black Panthers was to dispatch members to police stops to observe. The Panthers 
would arrive carrying law books and an open display of shotguns and rifles (legal at the time). 
This paramilitary movement grew and Panthers wore black berets and black leather jackets 
as they marched and chanted slogans. The FBI viewed the Panthers as a threat to domestic 
security; gun battles and arrests occurred, and by the late 1970s, the group began its decline 
(Martin, 2003: 311 and 318).
During the 1980s, the May 19 Communist Organization (M19CO) emerged from 
members of the SDS, Black Panthers, and other groups. The group’s name came from the 
birthdays of Ho Chi Minh (North Vietnamese Communist leader) and Malcolm X (American 
Black Muslim leader). This group sought links to radical black, Hispanic, and women’s move-
ments. The overall goal was violent revolution. By the end of the decade, the group split apart 
and members were imprisoned for crimes such as bombings, murders, and robberies (Poland, 
1988: 90).
Following the Spanish-American War in 1898, Puerto Rico was ceded to the United States 
by the Treaty of Paris. The resolve of Puerto Rican nationalists in seeking independence from the 
United States was illustrated in 1950 following an uprising that was quickly suppressed by 
government troops. On November 1, 1950, nationalists tried to assassinate President Truman 
while he was at Blair House, across from the White House. A gun battle erupted, one police 
officer was killed, Truman was unharmed, and the independence movement gained national atten-
tion. The next attack occurred on March 1, 1954, again in Washington, D.C., when several nation-
alists fired shots at legislators while Congress was in session, wounding five. In 1974, the Armed 
Forces for National Liberation (FALN) was formed. Its agenda for independence leaned to the far 
left. The FALN introductory attack consisted of bombing five banks in New York City. Over 200 
bombings followed, targeting federal and local government buildings, the military (especially in 
Puerto Rico), and businesses. The FALN was also known for ambushing and shooting U.S. armed 
services personnel (Poland, 1988: 72–76).
Anarchists/Ecoterrorists
Anarchism is a political ideology that reached America from 19th century Europe, opposed 
centralization by government, and favored the poor and working class. Martin (2003: 38–39) 
argues that anarchists were among the first anti-establishment radicals who opposed both 
capitalism and Marxism and advocated revolution; although they never offered a plan for 
replacing a central government. Anarchism in the United States was linked to the labor move-
ment and the advocacy of a bombing campaign against industry and government (Combs, 
2003: 163).
The Ecoterror movement in the United States focuses on both the dangers of humans 
encroaching on nature and preserving wilderness. The FBI (2002) defines ecoterrorism as the 
use or threatened use of violence of a criminal nature against innocent victims or property by 
an environmentally oriented, subnational group for environmental-political reasons or aimed 
at an audience beyond the target, often of a symbolic nature.
Ted Kaczynski (A.K.A. the Unabomber) was a modern day ecoterrorist. He was an anti-
industrialist who targeted scientists and engineers. In 1996 he was arrested after a 17-year inves-
tigation that involved 16 bombings, including three deaths and many injuries. Upon pleading 
guilty in federal court, he is now serving a life sentence without the possibility of release.
Terrorism          361

362          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
Two major, domestic ecoterrorist groups are the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) and the 
Earth Liberation Front (ELF). The FBI (2002) estimates that ALF and ELF have committed 
over 600 criminal acts in the United States since 1996, resulting in damage exceeding $43 
million. Arson is the most destructive practice of ALF and ELF.
ALF is committed to ending the abuse and exploitation of animals. They seek to cause 
economic loss or destruction of the victim company’s property. Victims include fur companies, 
mink farms, restaurants, and animal research laboratories.
ELF promotes “monkeywrenching,” a euphemism for acts of sabotage and vandalism 
against companies that are perceived to be harming the environment. An example is “tree 
spiking,” in which metal spikes are hammered into trees to damage logging saws.
Racial Supremacy
Continuing with the Griset and Mahan (2003: 86) typology of domestic terrorism, they view 
the racial supremacy and religious extremists classifications as right wing, but separate them 
based on their aims. Their research from multiple sources shows that “these two categories 
often overlap, but they have also developed separately—white supremacists without religion, 
and religious extremists without racism.” The KKK, as covered earlier, has advocated hate for 
over a century. Griset and Mahan add that there are also black separatist groups in the United 
States calling themselves the “Nation of Islam” and they are followers of the Messenger Elijah 
Muhammad.
White supremacists are often critical of the U.S. Constitution and our government. 
These right-wing groups are diversified and include Skinheads, neo-Nazi Aryan Nations, 
militant gun advocates, antitax protesters, and survivalists.
Religious Extremists
This is the fifth typology of domestic terrorism according to Griset and Mahan (2003: 
91–92). As covered earlier in this chapter, global religious terrorism has had a  significant 
impact on terrorism in many countries. Domestically, White (2004: 11) refers to the 
Christian Identity movement and their claims that Jews are descendents of the devil, 
nonwhite people evolved from animals, and Caucasians are created in the image of God. 
Hoffman (1998) claims that Christian Patriot influence played a role in the Oklahoma City 
bombing, and those religious extremists, not necessarily of the Islamic faith, are involved in
terrorism.
Ruby Ridge, Waco, and Oklahoma City
The decade of the 1990s provides an excellent example of how citizen confrontations 
with the federal government can foment hate and violence from extremists. Martin 
(2003: G-8) defines extremism as follows: “Political opinions that are intolerant 
toward opposing interests and divergent opinions. Extremism forms the ideological 
foundation for political violence. Radical and reactionary extremists often rationalize 
and justify acts of violence committed on behalf of their cause.”
The Ruby Ridge (Idaho) incident occurred in 1992 when U.S. Marshals tried to arrest 
Randy Weaver for failing to appear in court on charges of trying to sell illegal firearms to 
federal agents. Weaver was a white supremacist and believer in Christian Identity. Martin 
(2003: G-5) offers this definition for Christian Identity: “The American adaptation of 
Although a lot of attention and resources are focused on international terrorists, 
domestic terrorists are also a serious threat.

Terrorism          363
Anglo-Israelism. A racial supremacist mystical belief that holds that Aryans are the chosen 
people of God, the United States is the Aryan ‘Promised Land,’ non-Whites are soulless 
beasts, and Jews are biologically descended from the devil.” During the siege of Weaver’s 
mountain cabin by federal agents, a U.S. Marshal was killed, as well as Weaver’s son. An 
FBI sniper fatally shot Weaver’s pregnant wife as she stood in the cabin doorway prior to 
Randy Weaver’s surrender. The Ruby Ridge incident became a symbol and inspiration for 
the struggle of right-wing extremists.
Another symbolic incident that inflamed right-wing extremists was the Waco 
incident, although it had nothing to do with right-wing extremism. On February 28, 
1993, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF), with numerous agents, 
tried to serve arrest and search warrants for illegal firearms on Vernon Howell, A.K.A. 
David Koresh. Koresh led the Branch Davidians at the Mount Carmel compound 
outside of Waco, Texas. He claimed that the end was near and that he was the second 
coming of Christ who would save the world. The ATF assault and gun battle involved 
thousands of rounds being fired from both sides. The media captured the fierce battle 
and showed, on television, ATF agents on an A-frame roof being hit by rounds fired 
through the wall from inside the compound as the agents attempted, but failed, to enter 
a window. Four ATF agents were killed and another 20 were injured, plus an unknown 
number of casualties on the Branch Davidian side.
Following the failed assault, the FBI was enlisted and a 51-day siege began. 
Continuous negotiations were unable to resolve the standoff as the Branch Davidians 
waited for a message from God. The FBI stopped electricity and water to the com-
pound and bright lights and loud music were aimed at the compound at night to force 
members to leave. Some members did leave. Finally, on April 19, 1993, following 
unsuccessful negotiations, tear gas was pumped and fired into the compound. Fires 
began and then explosions from ammunition and combustibles created a huge fire. 
Seventy-five people, mostly women and children, perished; nine survived. The FBI, 
and especially the ATF, received an enormous amount of criticism, from many quar-
ters, over the Waco incident (Combs, 2003: 178–179).
The Oklahoma City bombing was a major terrorist incident in the United States 
that occurred on April 19, 1995, when a powerful truck bomb exploded in front of 
the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building (Figure 15-3). The attack killed 168 people and 
injured more than 500. The nine-story downtown building contained offices of the 
ATF, Secret Service, Drug Enforcement Administration, among other federal offices, 
and a day-care center. A rented Ryder truck served as the delivery weapon and it was 
converted into a mobile bomb containing ammonium nitrate, fuel oil, and Tovex (i.e., 
a high explosive that acted as a booster). The truck exploded near supporting columns 
at the front of the building, and then from the bottom up, floor slabs broke off in a 
“progressive collapse.” The force of the explosion caused damage over several blocks 
in all directions (Poland, 2005: 184–186).
Initially, it was thought that a Middle East terrorist group targeted the build-
ing, but this was not the case. A clean-cut white male named Timothy McVeigh was 
arrested by authorities and prosecuted, convicted, and sentenced to death. In 2001, he 
was executed by lethal injection at the U.S. penitentiary in Terre Haute, Indiana.
McVeigh was a member of the Patriot movement that developed in the early 
1990s. This group believes in “true” American ideals of individualism, armed citizens, 
and minimum interference from government. They distrust government and view it as 
no longer reflecting the will of the people, intrusive, and violently oppressive (Martin, 
2003: 313).
 Besides McVeigh, Terry Nichols, a friend from their service in the U.S. Army, was 
also arrested and convicted for the bombing. Interestingly, April 19, 1995, the day of 
the Oklahoma City attack, was the second anniversary of the law enforcement disaster 
at Waco.

364          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
FIGURE 15-3 Bombed Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City. Courtesy: DOD photo by Sgt. Preston 
Chasteen.
Terrorist Methods
Because of the loose, flexible, transnational network structure of modern terrorist organiza-
tions, facilitated by modern technology, terrorists can work together on funding, sharing 
intelligence, training, planning, and executing attacks (U.S. Government, 2003).
The cellular model of organization has helped transnational and homegrown terrorist 
groups adapt to threats from law enforcement and the military. This model is decentralized, 
rather than centralized. A decentralized cell is characterized by more discretion, very little, 
if any, communication within a larger chain of command, more self-sufficiency, and greater 
pressure to be creative and resourceful. This approach has also been referred to as leaderless 
resistance. Because a cell consists of a few members, and they know each other well, infiltra-
tion by government agents is very difficult. Since communication within a centralized chain 
of command or between cells in unnecessary, the interception of telephone calls, e-mails, and 
other forms of communication are less of a risk. Examples of successful cells with leaderless 
resistance are the al-Qaida network and the McVeigh-Nichols group.
Prior to the 9/11 attacks, the Taliban in Afghanistan permitted Osama bin Laden to oper-
ate al-Qaida training camps until the Taliban fell to U.S. forces. Because of global concern about 
terrorism and the efforts of many nations in combating it, there has been a shift by many ter-
rorist to “home schooling,” on-line training, and on-the-job training, as in Iraq. The Web offers 
a huge volume of information on political groups, terrorist groups, targets, methods and tactics 
of terrorism, bomb making, homeland security, policing, the military, and so forth.
The list that follows illustrates the range of methods terrorists employ and their cunning 
and creativity.

• Terrorists often falsify their identity, carry forged documents, and practice 
deception. They may change their appearance to deceive (e.g., shave a beard, wear 
a religious cross, carry a bible, and dress as the enemy).
• Terrorists, such as al-Qaida, are characterized by long-range planning, intense 
intelligence gathering, meticulous surveillance of potential targets, and the ability to 
conduct simultaneous attacks.
• They may communicate an anonymous threat to a potential target to monitor 
response and procedures.
• Terrorists often emulate military methods as they plan, train, and execute their 
attacks. They have a high level of concern for security of operations and they are in 
need of funds, weapons, communications equipment, and vehicles.
• They may use the identification, uniforms, or vehicles of delivery, utility, emergency 
or other type of service to access a target. Or, dress as females to lower the 
perceived threat.
• A terrorist may be planted in an organization as an employee to obtain information. 
The terrorist may work for a service or consulting firm to access many locations.
• Terrorists may attempt to detect surveillance by conducting dry runs of 
planned activities, using secondary roads and public transportation, employing 
neighborhood lookouts and tail vehicles, and establishing prearranged signals.
• Terrorists are keenly aware that counterterrorism analysts study terrorist groups, 
seek intelligence, and piece together information to anticipate terrorist plans and 
attacks. Studies of terrorist groups and their methods are available from many 
sources. Terrorists study these resources and, in a “cat and mouse game,” seek to 
mislead analysts by releasing bogus information to disrupt the intelligence process. 
Terrorists maintain an advantage over analysts because terrorists plot and analysts 
must seek to uncover the plot.
• Domestic right-wing terrorists are less organized than terrorists with links to the 
Middle East. The Christian Identify movement, with connections to the KKK, and 
World Church of the Creator members, are noted for limited planning and random 
violence by lone wolves.
• ALF and ELF commit arson through the use of improvised incendiary devices 
equipped with crude timing components. Members develop intelligence through 
surveillance of targets and reviews of industry publications. They may post details 
of their bombing devices and targets on their Web sites.
• ALF and ELF, like al-Qaida, have a decentralized structure and operate in cells. 
ALF and ELF carry out direct action according to Web-posted guidelines. Each cell 
is autonomous and anonymous.
Methods of Violence
Terrorists favor certain types of violent acts. These include bombings, suicide bombings, 
assassinations, assaults, kidnappings, and hijacking. Terrorists have tremendous advantages 
over authorities as they secretly plan their surprise attacks with discretion and flexibility 
over target location, victims, time of attack, weapons, and creative methods.
Bombings are a favored method of violence chosen by terrorists because of the poten-
tial for high casualties and severe property damage. The terrorist can remain at a distance 
from a detonated bomb and avoid injury and initial capture. The secondary explosion is a 
horrible terrorist ploy: an initial explosion draws first responders, assets, bystanders, and 
the media; then, a second, larger bomb is detonated for more devastating losses. Suicide 
bombings are especially effective, inexpensive, shock society and government, and guaran-
tee media coverage. The terrorist can precisely deliver the bomb and there is no need for an 
escape plan or concern about interrogation by authorities.
Terrorist Weapons
Terrorists employ a variety of small arms, grenades, mortars, and explosives. Four weapons 
used by terrorists are the AK-47, RPG-7, Stinger missile, and SA-7. These are explained next.
Terrorism          365

366          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
AK-47 (Soviet rifle). This weapon was invented by Mikhail Kalashnikov and it became 
the standard rifle for the Soviet Army in 1949 until it was succeeded by the AKM. During the 
Cold War, the AK-47 (Figure 15-4) was supplied by the former Soviet Union to anti-Western 
armed forces and insurgent terrorists. It became a symbol of left-wing revolution and it is 
still in the arsenal of armies, guerrillas, and terrorists. Between 30 and 50 million copies and 
variations of the AK-47 were distributed globally to make it the most widely used rifle in the 
world.
RPG-7 (Rocket Propelled Grenade). Issued by the former Soviet Union, China, and 
North Korea, this simple weapon is effective against a variety of targets within a range of 
about 500 meters for a fixed target (e.g., building) and about 300 meters when fired at a mov-
ing target. The RPG-7 (Figure 15-5) is a shoulder-fired, muzzle-loaded, antitank and antiper-
sonnel grenade launcher. It can also bring down a helicopter. The RPG-7 fires a fin-stabilized, 
oversized grenade from a tube. The launcher weighs 15.9 pounds and has an optical sight. 
Upon firing, it leaves a telltale blue-gray smoke and flash signature that helps to identify the 
firer. U.S. forces in Vietnam used sandbags and chicken wire on vehicles to cause the RPG-
7 grenade to explode before meeting the skin of vehicles. This technique continues to be 
applied, as in Iraq. Additional protection methods include avoiding the same route, pushing 
through ambush positions to avoid setting up a target, smoke grenades, and aerial surveillance 
(Mordica, 2003). The RPG is widely available in illegal international arms markets and is in 
the arsenal of many terrorists groups, such as those in the Middle East and Latin America.
Stinger. The U.S.-made stinger is a single person, portable, heat seeking, shoulder-fired 
surface-to-air missile (SAM). It proved its value when the Afghan Mujahedeen forced the 
Soviets out of Afghanistan during the late 1980s. The Stinger has targeted jets, helicopters, 
and commercial airliners.
FIGURE 15-4 AK-47, Soviet Assault Rifle.
FIGURE 15-5 Rocket propelled grenade and launcher. Source: www.hamasonline.com

SA-7. When the Soviet Union collapsed, thousands of SAMs were sold and found their way 
into the arsenals of several terrorist and guerrilla groups. The SA-7, also called the Grail, uses an 
optical sight and tracking system with an infrared (i.e., heat-seeking) device to reach aircraft.
Bombs and Other Explosives
A bomb can be placed in almost anything—a pipe, letter, book, package, cell phone, radio, 
vehicle, bicycle, podium, pillow, and so forth. Terrorist bombs are mostly improvised. In 
other words, they construct bombs from readily available materials or the misappropria-
tion of military or commercial blasting supplies. The Web or terrorist training and manuals 
provide instructions. Improvised explosive device (IED) is the name for such assembled 
bombs that kill or maim. In an IED, the trigger activates the fuse that ignites the explosive. 
These three components are integrated in various ways in IEDs. Nails and other materials 
may be added to the IED to increase lethality. An IED may contain an anti-handling device 
that causes it to detonate when it is handled or moved. Coalition personnel in Iraq have 
been repeatedly killed when IEDs—hidden along roads in trash containers, light poles, 
dead people (including Americans) and animals, and other locations—were detonated 
while convoys and patrols passed nearby.
Weapons of Mass Destruction
A weapon of mass destruction (WMD) is something capable of inflicting mass casualties and/
or destroying or rendering high-value assets as useless. Although chemical, biological, nuclear, 
and radiological weapons often serve as examples of WMD, many things can be used as a 
WMD. This became painfully true from the 9/11 attacks.
The term weapon of mass effect (WME) describes the human reactions and events sur-
rounding the use of a WMD that may result in limited or no casualties or physical damage. The 
mass effect may be sensationalized media reporting, panic, and social and political change.
Biological Weapons
The use of biological weapons has a long history. The United States, England, the former Soviet 
Union, and many other countries have developed biological weapons over many decades. 
Treaties attempt to eliminate production of such weapons and destroy current inventories.
Like chemical weapons, biological weapons may be perceived as a “poor person’s atomic 
bomb” and developing countries may look to these WMD as an avenue to deter enemies. A 
biological weapons program is easy to disguise because the same biotechnology equipment is 
used in pharmaceutical manufacturing.
Biological weapons cause flu-like symptoms and then death. Detection and containment are 
difficult because the onset of symptoms and then the identification of the agent are delayed.
The delivery methods for biological agents vary and include sprayer, artillery shell, and 
missile. The strategy for respiratory infections is to create a cloud of suspended microscopic 
droplets containing bacterial or virus particles. 
The Centers for Disease Control Web site offers extensive information on WMD. Five 
common types of biological agents are bacteria, rickettsiae, viruses, fungi, and toxins.
Anthrax is emphasized here because it was used to attack the United States in 2001. It 
is a deadly infectious disease caused by the bacterium called Bacillus anthracis. Its occurrence 
is rare in the United States, it is not contagious, and the victims must be directly exposed to 
it. Infection occurs in three forms: cutaneous (i.e., from a cut on the skin), inhalation, and 
intestinal (i.e., eating tainted meat). Symptoms: for cutaneous anthrax, a skin ulcer; for inhala-
tion anthrax, respiratory failure; and for intestinal anthrax, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. 
Treatment includes antibiotics administered early on and a vaccine exists.
During the fall of 2001, following the 9/11 attacks, letters containing anthrax spores 
were mailed to news media personnel and congressional officials, leading to the first case of 
intentional release of anthrax in the United States (U.S. General Accounting Office, 2003). 
Several states and Washington, D.C., were affected. Eleven people were victimized by the cuta-
neous form and 11 from the inhalation form. Five people died, all from inhalation anthrax. 
Terrorism          367

368          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
The anthrax was in the form of white powder placed in envelopes. During mail processing at 
post offices, other government offices, and businesses, it was released and it contaminated air, 
equipment, buildings and people who touched and inhaled the spores. Besides the unfortunate 
casualties, the attacks caused enormous disruptions and expenses to organizations. At about 
the same time, other countries reported similar attacks.
Chemical Weapons
Chemical weapons evolved more recently in history than biological weapons. World War I 
became the first battleground noted for massive casualties from chemical weapons. Compared 
to other major WMD, chemical agents such as pulmonary, blood, and blister are relatively 
easy to manufacture. Nerve agents are more difficult to produce. These substances are also 
commercially available, examples being cleaning fluids and insecticides.
Chemical agents may work immediately or cause delayed reactions. Some are difficult to 
detect because they are odorless and tasteless. Most chemical agents are in a liquid form that 
must be aerosolized into droplets to be inhaled to be effective.
As with other WMD, dual use equipment and technology help terrorists disguise their 
intentions. Imagine the casualties from a chemical attack by a crop duster over a sports sta-
dium, or by use of the Global Positioning System (GPS) to guide planes (manned or unmanned 
drones) to a target, or by backing up a truck to a building HVAC system.
Terrorists have employed chemical weapons in the past. The Aum Shinrikyo cult, estab-
lished in 1987, aimed to take over Japan and then the world to purify everyone. On March 20, 
1995, Aum members pierced bags of the chemical nerve agent sarin on five separate subway 
trains as they converged on central Tokyo. The attack killed twelve passengers and injured up to 
6,000 as they fled while sickened and bleeding. The cult had previously tried, but failed, to use 
biological agents. Interestingly, Japanese police were scheduled to raid the cult’s headquarters 
in Tokyo on March 22nd to seize WMD. However, the cult had infiltrated the Japanese police, 
were tipped off about the impending raid, and they hastily launched the attack. The casualties 
would have been worse, but the sarin was not pure and the method of release was primitive.
Nuclear Weapons
To end World War II in the Pacific against the Japanese, and to avoid massive U.S. casualties 
from an invasion of the Japanese mainland, President Harry Truman approved the dropping 
of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. Both cities were obliterated and sus-
tained massive casualties. Then, an arms race began that continues today. The “nuclear club” 
has expanded from the United States to the United Kingdom, France, Russia, the People’s 
Republic of China, India, Pakistan, Israel, South Africa, North Korea, and other countries that 
possess covert development programs (e.g., Iran).
According to the United Nations, Office on Drugs and Crime (n.d.), when the Cold War 
ended, a black market in Soviet-era weapons began to flourish. Former Soviet citizens partici-
pated in smuggling nuclear materials from poorly secured facilities to unknown buyers and 
transnational criminal organizations. The market for nuclear materials includes “rogue states,” 
desperate national liberation movements, and suppressed ethnic groups. What makes matters 
worse is that there are 280-armed conflicts of varying intensity occurring in the world.
The explosion of a nuclear weapon creates a large fireball. Everything in the fireball 
vaporizes, including soil and water, and the fireball goes upward creating a large mushroom 
cloud. Radioactive material from the weapon mixes with the particles in the cloud and then 
the mixture falls to earth in what is called fallout. Because fallout is composed of particles, it 
may be carried by wind for long distances. Since the fallout is radioactive, it can contaminate 
anything it lands on, such as water resources and crops (Centers for Disease Control, n.d.).
Radiological Weapons
Radiological weapons contain radioactive material that, although not exploding itself, is 
scattered by a conventional explosive. These weapons are often called “dirty bombs” and 
consist of radioactive material attached to a conventional bomb. The technical name for 

“dirty bomb” is radiological dispersion device (RDD). It may contain radioactive material that is 
sealed in metal to prevent dispersal when handling it. Upon explosion, initial fatalities may be 
low, but climb over time due to cancer. However, the actual harm will depend on the grade of 
the radioactive material and the amount released. This weapon can make buildings and land 
unusable for many years. Its use can cause enormous expenses, fear, panic, and sensational-
ized media coverage.
Because terrorists are known to be creative, we can only surmise as to how they would 
construct a RDD and where it would be applied. It may become part of a vehicle bomb, deto-
nated in a school, or introduced into food or water supplies.
Commercially available radiological materials are used in many industries to, as examples, 
sterilize food, detect flaws in metal, and to treat cancer. Many sources are not secure.
The detonation of a RDD is a serious possibility in the future. In November of 1995, 
Chechen rebels placed a RDD, using dynamite and cesium 137, in Moscow’s Izmailovo Park. 
It was not detonated. In 2002, suspected al-Qaida member Jose Padilla, trained in terrorist 
camps in Afghanistan, was arrested in Chicago for his role in a plot to explode a RDD in the 
United States.
Homeland Security          369
Do you think terrorists will use Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) in the future? 
Why or why not?
Homeland Security
Homeland Security Defined
Homeland security is an evolving concept. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
is continuously developing its mission under changing circumstances and events. Numerous 
variables influence the DHS, such as terrorist incidents, natural disasters, public opinion, and 
politics.
The Office of Homeland Security (2002) provides the following definition: “Homeland 
security (HS) is a concerted national effort to prevent terrorist attacks within the United 
States, reduce America’s vulnerability to terrorism, and minimize the damage and recover 
from attacks that do occur.” How this definition evolves is subject to debate. Will HS become 
more responsive to “all hazards,” such as hurricanes and pandemics? Will it increase its 
emphasis on emergency management? Will it expand its cooperation with the private sector? 
HS is in its infancy and its evolution remains to be seen. At the same time, numerous publi-
cations help to define the problem of terrorism and the strategies of homeland security and 
national security (Figure 15-6).
The Measurement of Terrorism
Data collected on terrorism influence not only government action against it—such as 
laws, plans, policies, budgets, and strategies—but also evaluations of government action. 
Measurements of terrorism also impact the business of counterterrorism, decisions on the 
geographic locations of business investment, and tourism.
Disagreement exists over the methodology applied to the measurement of terrorism, and 
methodological differences influence both conclusions on terrorism and policy. Ideally, mea-
surements of terrorism should be value free, providing an objective foundation for government 
policy. Official government data has been a major source of information on terrorism. Do 
measurements of terrorism really reflect the administration of counterterrorism (e.g., how 
terrorism is defined; number of intelligence analysts and enforcement officers; number of 
investigations and arrests; and data collection and software), rather than actual terrorism?

370          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
Besides government measurements of terrorism, other sources of research on terrorism 
are universities and the private sector. The topics of research on terrorism that influence policy 
are varied and include surveys of citizens’ perceptions of terrorism and their fear of terrorism, 
and the role of the media in influencing perceptions of terrorism and terrorism itself.
The methodological problems of measuring terrorism include inconsistency in terminol-
ogy, varied criteria of what acts to include and exclude from data, researcher bias, difficulty 
in making comparisons among different sources of data, political interference, and excessive 
delay in publishing data.
Grosskopf (2006) writes that “although terrorist attacks are often measured in loss of 
life and destruction, the immeasurable toll and intended consequence of terrorism is fear. The 
power of terror lies not only in attacks themselves, but also in the expectation and unpredict-
ability of an attack.” Grosskopf calls for more attention to fear and its consequences.
The U.S. Department of State (DOS), Office of Inspector General (OIG) (2005), 
reported that in April of 2005, less than one month before the DOS was to issue its 2004 
mandated annual report, Patterns of Global Terrorism, the DOS ceased publishing it and 
instead published the first of its Country Reports on Terrorism (CRT). This new report 
excluded the statistical data on significant international terrorist incidents that were found 
in the Patterns reports. Simultaneously, the National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) pub-
lished a separate report entitled A Chronology of Significant International Terrorism 2004 
that included statistical data that previously had been in the Patterns reports. The NCTC’s 
2004 report showed an increase in the number of reported significant international terrorist 
incidents between 2003 and 2004. The NCTC stated that the increase was “primarily the 
result of a modified reporting methodology as well as an increase in staff devoted to identify-
ing terrorist incidents.”
National Counterterrorism Center
The NCTC was established by The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 
2004. The Director of the Center is appointed by the President with advice and consent of 
the Senate. The purpose of the Center is detection, prevention, disruption, preemption, and 
mitigation of transnational terrorism against the people and interests of the United States. 
The Center analyzes and integrates global intelligence, excluding purely domestic informa-
tion, and it facilitates the exchange of information among government agencies. It conducts 
strategic operational planning for counterterrorism activities, including diplomatic, financial, 
FIGURE 15-6 Numerous publications help to define the problem of terrorism and the strategies of homeland 
security and national security.

military, homeland security, and law enforcement. The Center does not direct the execution of 
 operations. The Center works with the CIA to prepare an annual report to the President.
The NCTC’s 2004 report indicated about 9,300 individuals wounded or killed in 
 significant international terrorist incidents as compared to 4,271 a year earlier. Of those, 1,907 
were killed in 2004 in comparison to 625 deaths in 2003. Of the 68 Americans killed in 2004, 
all but eight were killed in Iraq and Afghanistan. The overwhelming number of victims were 
non-U.S. citizens, and many were Muslims. In 2004, there were 651 significant attacks, com-
pared to 208 in 2003, about a threefold increase. Ten percent of the total (64 attacks) were 
against U.S. interests, down from over one-third from the previous year. The NCTC contends 
that terrorist attacks are becoming more deadly. The top five attacks in 2004 resulted in over 
4,000 wounded and dead. Also, terrorism is becoming less U.S. focused and more global in 
scope (Perl, 2006: 4).
National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism
The National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT) is a non-profit 
institution focused on deterring and preventing terrorism on U.S. soil and mitigating its con-
sequences. It was formed following the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing and is funded through 
the Department of Homeland Security. The MIPT sponsors research on procedures, training, 
and equipment relevant to emergency responders.
The MIPT Terrorism Knowledge Base (TKB) is a team effort of the MIPT, DFI International, 
the Rand Corporation, and university professors. This user-friendly Web resource provides infor-
mation on domestic and international terrorism, terrorist incidents, and terrorist groups. It contains 
research, interactive maps, data, and links to other resources.
The TKB methodologies include data that is integrated from multiple terrorism incident 
resources, including both the RAND and NCTC incident tracking systems. Terrorism group 
and leader profiles are from DFI International. An indictment database is also contained in 
the TKB.
The following TKB data is from the National Memorial Institute for the Prevention 
of Terrorism (2006). For domestic terrorism (i.e., defined as incidents by local nationals 
against a purely domestic target), between January 1, 2003, and December 31, 2005, the 
TKB reported 33 attacks in North America, primarily by ALF and ELF, with most labeled 
as “attacked business target,” “attacked private citizens and property target,” and “attacked 
government target.” No injuries or fatalities were reported. For domestic terrorism during the 
same period, the TKB reported that the Middle East/Persian Gulf region had the highest num-
bers in three categories at 1,882 incidents, 6,671 injuries, and 3,313 fatalities. The regions of 
North America and East and Central Asia showed the lowest numbers among other regions 
for domestic terrorism.
For international terrorism (i.e., defined as incidents when terrorists go abroad to 
attack, or choose a domestic target with links to other countries, or attack an aircraft), 
between January 1, 2003, and December 31, 2005, the TKB reported that the Middle East/
Persian Gulf region had the highest numbers in the three categories at 458 incidents, 2,029 
injuries, and 774 fatalities.
MIPT data comparing 2004 with 2005 show the following: Global incidents overall 
increased about 50%. Whereas the Middle East and South Asia (i.e., includes Pakistan, 
Afghanistan, and India) account for this increase, terrorist incidents in other regions of the 
world decreased by an average of almost 40%. Domestic incidents increased more than inter-
national incidents, pointing to an increase in internal conflicts among nations. There was also 
a 35% increase in fatalities and a 15% increase in injuries. As the measurement of terrorism 
is being refined, we are seeing a sharing of the same data among organizations.
National Security and Homeland Security
Here we look at the “big picture” of security for the United States. The Office of Homeland 
Security (2002) discussed the link between the National Security Strategy of the United 
States (NSSUS) and the National Strategy for Homeland Security (NSHS). The Preamble 
Homeland Security          371

372          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
to the U.S. Constitution defines the federal government’s basic purpose as “… to form a 
more perfect Union, establish justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the com-
mon defense, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves 
and our Posterity.” The National Security Strategy of the United States aims to ensure the 
sovereignty and independence of the United States, with our values and institutions intact. 
It includes the application of political, economic, and military power (Figure 15-7) to 
ensure the survival of our nation. Both the NSSUS and the NSHS complement each other 
by addressing the challenge of terrorism. This link between both major strategies is important 
because “America has sought to protect its own sovereignty and independence through a 
strategy of global presence and engagement. In so doing, America has helped many other 
countries and peoples advance along the path of democracy, open markets, individual lib-
erty, and peace with their neighbors.” At the same time, there are enemies who disagree 
with America’s role in the world and use violence to express their views. Because the United 
States is a great power, terrorists must use unconventional methods and weapons. They also 
take advantage of America’s free society and openness to covertly insert terrorists into the 
United States.
According to the White House under President George W. Bush, the Office of Homeland 
Security (2002) released the National Strategy for Homeland Security as a comprehensive and 
shared vision of how best to protect America from terrorist attacks. This strategy was com-
piled with the assistance of many people in a variety of occupations in the public and private 
sectors. A major goal was to facilitate shared responsibility and cooperation.
Publication of the NSHS preceded Congressional approval of the DHS. The intent of 
the executive branch of government in publishing the NSHS was to provide a strategic vision 
for the proposed DHS that was eventually supported by Congress through the Homeland 
Security Act of 2002.
The NSHS concentrates on six critical mission areas:
• Intelligence and Warning
• Border and Transportation Security
• Domestic Counterterrorism
• Protecting Critical Infrastructure and Key Assets
• Defending Against Catastrophic Threats
• Emergency Preparedness and Response
FIGURE 15-7 U.S. Air Force F-16C fighter jet. Military power is an option to ensure the survival of the United States. 
However, other options, such as diplomacy, are available to settle differences among nations. Courtesy : Senior Airman Sean Sides.

Homeland security and national security are intertwined because of the global scope of 
terrorism and the interdependencies of the United States with other countries. Whether we are 
referring to aviation security, border security, security of containerized cargo entering ports, intel-
ligence, or other aspects of security, international cooperation is essential to integrate domestic 
and international security strategies to avoid gaps that could be exploited by terrorists.
The Rand Corporation (Larson and Peters, 2001) provides additional insight into the 
relationship between national security and homeland security. When the prevention of terror-
ist attacks fail, government must respond through five missions:
• Assist civilians: First responders and local agencies and resources are the backbone 
of this effort.
• Ensure continuity of government: The 9/11 attacks illustrated the need for the 
protection of government leaders.
• Ensure continuity of military operations: Terrorist attacks could require domestic 
assistance from the military, besides an armed response to terrorists. Defense 
planners must protect military personnel and resources. The 9/11 attack on the 
Pentagon serves as an example.
• Border and coastal defense: The border of the United States includes thousands 
of miles along the Canadian border, the Mexican border, and the east and west 
coasts. Access controls and inspections are necessary for people, vehicles, and 
goods reaching the United States. This overwhelming workload falls on a variety of 
federal, state, and local agencies.
• National air defense: For many years, the Air Force operated the North American 
Air Defense Command (NORAD) to detect and provide warning of missile or 
bomber attacks, especially during the Cold War. Following the 9/11 attacks, the 
Department of Defense formed the U.S. Northern Command (NORTH-COM) to 
provide air and other types of defense for the United States.
Besides the NSSUS and the NSHS, which together take precedence over all other national 
strategies, there are other, more specific, strategies of the United States that are subsumed 
within the twin concepts of national security and homeland security. They are
• National Defense Strategy
• National Strategy for Combating Terrorism
• National Strategy to Combat Weapons of Mass Destruction
• National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace
• National Drug Control Strategy
• National Money Laundering Strategy
U. S. Government Action Against Terrorism
The U.S. Government (2003) issued a National Strategy for Combating Terrorism that 
focused on four fronts as explained next.
Defeat. This goal of the 4D strategy aims to defeat terrorist organizations of global reach 
through diplomatic, economic, information, law enforcement, military, financial, intelligence, 
and other instruments of power. The United States cannot wait for terrorists to attack and then 
respond. Thus, the United States will attack terrorist sanctuaries, leadership, command, commu-
nications, material support, and finances. Then, the United States will work with regional part-
ners to squeeze and isolate terrorists. Terrorists who seek WMD will be high priority targets.
Deny. All nations must accept responsibility for taking action against terrorists within their 
borders. This means denying terrorists sanctuary and the opportunity to exist, train, plan, and 
execute attacks. Nations will be held accountable for the actions of their “guests.”
Diminish. This goal seeks to reduce political, social, and economic conditions that 
terrorists exploit. “While we recognize that there are many countries and people living 
with poverty, deprivation, social disenfranchisement, and unresolved political and regional 
disputes, those conditions do not justify the use of terror.” The United States works with 
other nations to reduce unfortunate conditions and to win the “war of ideas” in support of 
Homeland Security          373

374          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
democratic values and to promote economic freedom. Furthermore, finding a solution to the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is vital.
Defend. Terrorists are an adaptive enemy who are empowered by modern technology and 
emboldened by success, while avoiding the strengths of the United States and exploiting its 
vulnerabilities. The United States will defend its people, territory, national interests, and 
democratic principles. Within this strategy is the adage that the best defense is a good offense. 
The plan includes a focused effort from the entire U.S. society—federal, state, and local gov-
ernments, the private sector, and the American people. A major component of defense is the 
National Strategy for Homeland Security.
In September of 2006, the executive branch of government updated the National Strategy 
for Combating Terrorism (U.S. Government, 2006). Although the strategy remains primarily the 
same, the update noted successes in degrading al-Qaida and the need to adjust counterterrorism 
measures as terrorists change their methods. Challenges that remain include terrorists that are more 
dispersed, the impossibility of preventing all attacks, the threat of WMD, nations such as Syria and 
Iran that support terrorists, and the use of modern technology (e.g., the Internet) by terrorists.
The U.S. Department of State (2004) reiterates the National Strategy for Combating 
Terrorism and also emphasizes five “tools.”
• Diplomacy: Through diplomacy, the U.S. Department of State promotes allies for 
mutual benefit.
• Law Enforcement: International law enforcement cooperation increased following 
the 9/11 attacks and it continues to expand.
• Intelligence: Quality intelligence shared among nations helps to track down 
terrorists and expose their plans.
• Financial: Countries throughout the world are waging a campaign to investigate, 
identify, and interdict the flow of money to terrorists groups. Recommendations 
have been developed among nations to protect their financial systems from terrorist 
financiers.
• Military: In Iraq, Afghanistan, and other locations, military forces are combating 
terrorists.
Legislative Action Against Terrorism
Laws, executive orders, and presidential directives provided the legal foundation for the 
war against terrorism prior to and following the 9/11 attacks. Here is a list of relevant laws 
enacted by Congress.
The Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction Act of 1996, also called Nunn-
Lugar, was influenced by three major terrorist attacks: the World Trade Center bombing in 
1993, the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995, and the Tokyo subway sarin gas attack in 1995. 
This Act provided the impetus for increased federal government preparedness activities, and 
funding for training and equipment for first responders to respond to terrorism and WMD.
The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 was designed to prevent 
terrorist acts, enhance counterterrorism methods, and increase punishments. It provided fund-
ing for antiterrorism measures by federal and state authorities and includes the death penalty 
under Federal law when a death results from a terrorist act.
The USA Patriot Act of 2001 includes a broad array of measures to protect the United 
States. It focuses on counterterrorism funding, enhanced police surveillance, anti-money laun-
dering programs, border protection, victim compensation, information sharing, strengthening 
criminal laws against terrorism, and improved intelligence.
The Act expanded police powers to investigate and apprehend terrorist suspects. It autho-
rizes roving wiretaps. This means that police can obtain a warrant for a wiretap on any telephone 
used by a suspected terrorist. Prior to the Act, judicial authorization was required for each tele-
phone. In addition, federal law enforcement officers can obtain search warrants that can be used 
nationwide and their subpoena powers were increased to obtain e-mail records of terrorists.
The Act relaxed restrictions on sharing information among U.S. law enforcement agen-
cies and the intelligence community. The Treasury Department was provided with greater 

authority to force foreign banks dealing with U.S. banks to release information on large 
accounts suspected of money laundering.
Under the Act, immigrant terrorist suspects can be held up to seven days for questioning 
without specific charges. Criminal penalties were enhanced for terrorist acts, financing and 
harboring terrorists, and possession of WMD.
An erosion of civil liberties became a major concern of those critical of the Patriot 
Act. To allay some of these fears, lawmakers included sunset provisions in this law so that 
expanded police powers would expire in four years.
The USA Patriot Improvement and Reauthorization Act of 2005 extended the Patriot 
Act, although it will face debate in four years on certain provisions. According to the White 
House, since the Patriot Act was first enacted, it has been vital to the war against terrorism 
and protecting the American people, while breaking up terror cells and prosecuting terrorist 
operatives in several states (U.S. Government, White House, 2006).
The Homeland Security Act of 2002 began the largest single reorganization of the 
federal government since 1947 when President Truman created the Department of Defense. 
President George W. Bush signed it into law on November 25, 2002. The Act was created 
primarily because of criticism that the 9/11 attacks could have been prevented if federal 
agencies had an improved system of cooperating with each other and sharing intelligence. 
The Act
• Established the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), as an agency of the 
executive branch of government, with a DHS secretary who reports to the president. 
The DHS consolidated 22 agencies, with about 170,000 employees, under one 
unified organization with the aim of improving defenses against terrorism, 
coordinating intelligence, and minimizing the damage from attacks and natural 
disasters.
• Established within the office of the president the Homeland Security Council to 
advise the president.
• Detailed an organization chart and management structure for the DHS.
• Listed agencies and programs to be transferred to the DHS.
• Stated the responsibilities of the five directorates of the DHS: Information Analysis 
and Infrastructure Protection; Science and Technology; Border and Transportation 
Security; Emergency Preparedness and Response; and Management.
Hogue and Bea (2006: 4) write that homeland security is an outgrowth of decades of 
debate and organizing by government for emergency preparedness and civil defense. Major 
issues at the center of this debate include: the boundaries and limitations of jurisdiction 
among federal government departments and agencies and between federal and state govern-
ments; requirements for a response from the Department of Defense; and the sufficiency of 
federal statutory policies for unforeseen emergencies.
Homeland Security          375
The 9/11 Commission Report
The 9/11 Commission Report was prepared by the National Commission on Terrorist 
Attacks Upon the United States (2004). This Commission was an independent, bipar-
tisan group created by congressional legislation and President George W. Bush in late 
DHS does not have overarching authority for directing all aspects of the home-
land security mission. As examples, the Department of Justice, the Department of 
Health and Human Services, and the Department of Defense are still major players 
in homeland security.
Gilmore Commission, 2003

376          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
2002 to prepare an account of the 9/11 attacks, the U.S. response, and recommenda-
tions to guard against future attacks. This document of over 400 pages is summarized 
next from the Executive Summary.
Findings
• U.S. air defense on 9–11–01 depended on close interaction between the Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) and the North American Aerospace Defense 
Command (NORAD). At the time of the attacks, protocols were unsuited for 
hijacked planes being used as WMD. NORAD planning focused on hijacked 
planes coming from overseas. Senior military and FAA leaders had no effective 
communication with each other. Even the President could not reach some senior 
officials.
• None of the measures adopted by the U.S. government from 1998 to 2001 
disturbed or even delayed the progress of the al-Qaida 9/11 plot. The terrorists 
located and exploited a broad array of weaknesses in security. They studied publicly 
available materials on aviation security and used weapons with less metal content 
than a handgun. Airline personnel were trained to be nonconfrontational in the 
event of a hijacking.
• Operational failures included not sharing information linking individuals in the 
USS Cole attack to the 9/11 terrorists, not discovering fraud on visa applications 
and passports, and not expanding no fly lists to include names from terrorist watch 
lists.
• “The most important failure was one of imagination.” Leaders did not understand 
the gravity of the threat from al-Qaida.
• Terrorism was not the overriding national security concern under the Clinton or 
pre-9/11 Bush administrations. The attention Congress gave terrorism was “episodic 
and splintered across several committees.”
• The FBI was not able to link intelligence from agents in the field to national 
priorities.
• The U.S. government failed at pooling and efficiently using intelligence from the 
CIA, FBI, State Department, and military.
• U.S. diplomatic efforts were unsuccessful at persuading the Taliban regime in 
Afghanistan to stop offering sanctuary to al-Qaida and to expel bin Laden to a 
country where he could face justice.
• “Protecting borders was not a national security issue before 9/11.”
• Following the attacks, first responders performed well and saved many lives. In 
New York, decision-making was hampered by problems in command and control. 
Radios were unable to assist multiple commands in responding in a unified 
fashion.
Recommendations
• Because of action by our government, we are safer today than on September 11, 
2001. “But we are not safe.” Therefore, we make the following recommendations.
• “The enemy is not just ‘terrorism.’ It is the threat posed specifically by Islamist 
terrorism, by bin Laden and others who draw on a long tradition of extreme 
intolerance within a minority strain of Islam that does not distinguish politics from 
religion, and distorts both. The enemy is not Islam, the great world faith, but a 
perversion of Islam.”
• Post-9/11 efforts rightly included military action to topple the Taliban and pursue 
al-Qaida. A broad array of methods must be continued for success: diplomacy, 
intelligence, covert action, law enforcement, economic policy, foreign aid, and 
homeland defense.
• A strategy of three dimensions is proposed: attack terrorists and their organizations; 
prevent the continued growth of Islamist terrorism through coalition efforts, a 
vision for a better future, and support for public education and economic openness; 

State and Local Governments
Security and loss prevention practitioners should understand the roles, capabilities, and limi-
tations of state and local governments in homeland security. Such information serves as input 
for business continuity planning.
The United States has over 87,000 jurisdictions of overlapping federal, state, and local 
governments. This system presents challenges as HS is increased through enhanced coordina-
tion and communications, law enforcement and prevention, emergency response, and policy 
development and implementation. All states and many local jurisdictions have established a 
homeland security office in the executive branch to deal with terrorist attacks and a variety of 
other risks. Coordination is vital to avoid duplication and to produce the best possible multi-
agency emergency response to serious events.
Every day, minor or major disasters strike in American and it is the local agencies that 
respond. Fire fighters, police, and emergency medical technicians are the first responders who 
rush to the scene to preserve life and to reduce property damage. Consequently, a terrorist 
attack or natural disaster becomes a local event, and the FBI, DHS, and FEMA do not arrive 
until later. A U.S. Conference of Mayors report noted in 2003, “When you dial 9–1–1, the 
phone doesn’t ring in the White House … those calls come in to your city’s police, fire, and 
emergency medical personnel … our domestic troops.”
In its fifth and final annual report to the President and Congress, the Gilmore 
Commission released several critical statements pertaining to the federal role in leading 
state and local jurisdictions to improve HS. The full name of the Commission is: Advisory 
Panel to Assess Domestic Response Capabilities for Terrorism Involving Weapons of Mass 
Destruction (2003). A major question asked by the Commission was: “If local respond-
ers are in fact our first line of defense, have we succeeded in effectively empowering and 
enhancing State and local capabilities?” The Commission’s extensive research included the 
following: States feel the federal government is giving them some support, although areas for 
improvement still exist; the deficit in intelligence and information sharing requires continued 
improvement; and inequality in funding is another problem.
and protect against and prepare for terrorist attacks by applying biometric 
identifiers, improving transportation security, sharing information, improving 
federal funding to high risk cities, enhancing first responder capabilities and 
communications, and cooperating with the private sector that controls 85% of the 
nation’s infrastructure.
• Establish a National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) to build unity of effort 
across the U.S. government, including the CIA, FBI, DOD, and Homeland Security. 
The NCTC would not make policy, which would be the work of the President and 
the National Security Council.
• Appoint a National Intelligence Director (NID) to oversee the NCTC. The NID should 
report to the President, yet be confirmed by the Senate. The system of “need to know” 
should be replaced by a system of “need to share.”
The 9/11 Commission officially ended in August of 2004 after issuing its recom-
mendations. However, it continued operating with private funds as the 9/11 Public 
Discourse Project to monitor federal government progress on the recommendations. 
In December 2005, the Commission met for the last time to provide a “report card” 
on government action. The Commission gave the government several “Fs” and “Ds” 
and one “A.” It characterized the failures as “shocking” and “scandalous” because of 
a lack of urgency by the government. The government received an “F” on such issues 
as allocating funds to cities based upon risk, improving radio communications for first 
responders, and prescreening airline passengers. The only “A” was for controlling 
terrorist financing.
Homeland Security          377

378          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
Homeland Security Advisory System
The DHS established the Homeland Security Advisory System (HSAS) to assist the 
Nation in remaining vigilant, prepared, and ready to deter terrorist attacks. The 
following threat conditions each represent an increasing risk of attack and some 
suggested protective measures are listed for federal departments and agencies.
• Low Condition (Green) is declared when there is a low risk of attack. 
Protective measures should include: training, assessment of vulnerabilities, and 
mitigation of vulnerabilities.
• Guarded Condition (Blue) results when there is a general risk of attack. In 
addition to the measures taken in the previous level, the following measures 
should be considered: checking communications with designated emergency 
response or command locations, reviewing and updating emergency response 
procedures, and providing the public with protective information.
• Elevated Condition (Yellow) is declared when there is significant risk of 
terrorist attacks. This level builds upon measures taken in lower threat 
conditions and adds increasing surveillance of critical locations, coordinating 
emergency plans among jurisdictions, refining protective measures according to 
the threat, and implementing appropriate contingency and emergency response 
plans.
• High Condition (Orange) reflects a high risk of attack. In addition to 
protective measures in the previous threat conditions, the following measures 
should be considered: coordinating security efforts with federal, state, and 
local law enforcement agencies or any National Guard or other armed forces 
organizations; enhancing protection at public events and considering alternative 
venues or even cancellation; preparing to execute contingency procedures, such 
as dispersing a workforce; and restricting threatened facility access to essential 
personnel only.
• Severe Condition (Red) is declared when there is a severe risk of attack. Under 
most circumstances, during this condition, the intense protective measures are 
not intended to be sustained for substantial periods of time. In addition to 
the protective measures in previous threat conditions, the following measures 
should be considered: increasing and directing personnel to address critical 
emergency needs; assigning emergency response personnel and prepositioning 
and mobilizing specially trained teams or resources; monitoring, redirecting, 
or constraining transportation systems; and closing public and government 
facilities.
Since the HSAS was implemented following 9/11, it has been subjected to much 
criticism and even ignored by the governments and citizens it was supposed to assist. 
It has been labeled a “damned if you do, damned if you don’t” system. When a height-
ened level of alert is declared and an attack does not occur, complaints surface about 
the cost, waste of resources, and unnecessarily frightening the public and desensitizing 
them to alerts. Too many alerts can cause “alert fatigue” and a nonchalant attitude 
during subsequent alerts. If a warning is not issued when intelligence indicates a pos-
sible attack, and an attack does occur, authorities face serious repercussions (Bannon, 
2004).
States and localities actually do not have to follow the HSAS. However, facili-
ties under federal jurisdiction, such as nuclear power plants and airports, must follow 
specific procedures. Also, no standards are set for each alert level for state and local 
governments.
The effectiveness of the HSAS is difficult to ascertain. An elevated risk may cause 
terrorists to abort an attack. Or, the intense vigilance of authorities and citizens may 
uncover and disrupt terrorist plans.

Despite the criticism of the HSAS, it is an important system to provide warning of 
the possibility of attack and it serves to help us to remain vigilant, prepared, and ready. 
A major difficulty surrounding the HSAS is when and where to declare a heightened 
level of alert.
Homeland Security          379
Response to Weapons of Mass Destruction
Although the following information is aimed primarily at first responders facing WMD, 
security practitioners in the private sector can benefit from these guidelines and recommenda-
tions.
Chemical Attack
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Office for Domestic Preparedness (2004) dis-
tributed a video on guidelines for first responders facing WMD incidents. A summary of this 
program, that emphasizes a chemical attack, follows.
A WMD attack has potential to incapacitate first responders, by direct or secondary 
contact (e.g., contaminated victims). The scene must be controlled and large numbers of 
victims may require decontamination. In the Tokyo sarin attack, some first responders and 
hospital staff were contaminated by victims’ clothing, shoes, and skin. It is important to 
remember that responders cannot help others if they become victims themselves.
Steps for First Responders
Recognize the danger. Pay close attention to the dispatcher’s report. For example, multiple victims 
leaving a building, falling to the ground, coughing and complaining of dizziness. Upon approach-
ing the scene, be aware of wind direction, weather conditions, type of building, occupancy, and 
number of victims. The victims of a chemical attack may experience SLUDGE:
Salivation
Lacrimation (tearing)
Urination
Defecation
Gastrointestinal distress
Emesis (vomiting)
Protect yourself. Do not rush into an area if you see multiple people down. You may 
become part of the problem. Warn others about the situation and report the facts and dangers. 
Be aware that a secondary explosion or sniper may be next. Emergency vehicles should be 
at least 300 feet away from the victims or dangerous area. Anyone entering the “hot zone” 
should wear the highest level of protection (i.e., vapor tight, fully-encapsulated suit with self-
contained breathing apparatus).
Control the scene. Access controls should be maintained at 360 degrees around the 
scene and only authorized, properly trained and equipped personnel, should be admitted. 
When HAZMAT personnel arrive, they will identify the “hot zones” based upon readings 
from detection equipment. Public address systems can keep victims informed on procedures 
while responders maintain safe distances. At the same time, remember to preserve evidence, 
since the incident location is also a crime scene.
Rescue and decontaminate the victims. As soon as possible, victims should be brought to 
a shower area that can be established with fire trucks and related equipment. The outer layer of 
clothing should be removed and the victims should be flushed and then covered. Up to 80% of 
contaminants can be removed by taking off the outer layer of clothing. Kits are available that per-
mit privacy curtains for the decontamination corridor. Runoff of the water should be controlled. 
Further decontamination may be necessary prior to sending patients to hospitals and triage areas.

380          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
Call for additional help. Establish a command post at 700 to 2,000 feet away to coor-
dinate operations. Ensure space is available to expand the command post as other agencies 
respond. A variety of agencies may respond such as more local units, state units, FEMA, the 
FBI, public health, and the DOD.
Biological Attack
Bioterrorism is difficult to detect. Indications of an attack are likely to surface when victims 
visit hospitals and a trend is discovered through centralized reporting to local and state health 
agencies. The CDC is the agency that monitors public health threats. At hospitals, victims 
would be treated. The federal government has a “rapid response team” of medical personnel 
who have been vaccinated from a variety of biological threats and can enter infected locales. 
Vaccines do not exist for all biological threats. During an outbreak, an area (e.g., city) may 
require quarantine, backed by the military.
Radiation Attack
The Council on Foreign Relations (2004) and the Central Intelligence Agency (1998) offer the 
following information on responding to radiation attacks:
• Specialized equipment is required to determine the size of the affected area and if 
the level of radioactivity presents long-term hazards. Radiological materials are not 
recognized by senses, and are colorless and odorless.
• To reduce exposure to radiation, victims would need to be decontaminated by 
removing irradiated clothing, washing the body, and purging inhaled or ingested 
materials. These methods do not protect against “penetrating radiation” (e.g., gamma 
rays or neutrons).
• People endangered by “penetrating radiation” should go as far as possible from 
the source and maximize the amount of shielding between themselves and the 
source.
• Potassium iodide is recommended to prevent medical problems and cancer of 
the thyroid gland, but it offers no protection against other types of radiation 
problems.
• The onset of symptoms requires days to weeks.
• The incident area would require evacuation, and decontamination to remove 
radioactive material and keep radioactive dust from spreading. Contaminated 
buildings, roads, and soil may have to be removed.
• Many communities have neglected plans for a radiation attack since the Cold 
War ended. Since the 9/11 attacks, first responders have improved their response 
capabilities that vary.
• The federal response would come from several departments, namely the Departments 
of Homeland Security, Energy, and Defense. Federal agencies responding would 
include the FBI and EPA.
Nuclear Attack
Although a nuclear weapon is difficult to construct, deliver, and detonate, worst case scenar-
ios must be considered. Depending on the type of bomb, casualties could be enormous, along 
with an awful impact on physical and mental health, the economy, and society. If a warning 
occurs, people should take shelter in basements and subways, unless time is available for an 
evacuation of the area to several miles away.
First responders must be properly trained and equipped to perform their duties follow-
ing a nuclear explosion. Enormous numbers of victims would need treatment and hospitals 
may be destroyed. Medical problems would include thermal radiation burns, wounds, frac-
tures, and infection. Potassium iodide is recommended. The radioactive fallout from the blast 
requires people to be decontaminated. Refer to the above “radiation attack” discussion for 
additional information applicable to nuclear attack.

Homeland Security          381
Precautions for Organizational Mail Systems
Businesses, institutions, and other organizations should take precautions for mail as it 
enters the premises. Here is a list of protection measures to be applied depending on the 
threat.
• Prepare emergency plans, policies, and procedures for suspect mail.
•  Isolate the mail area and limit access. Isolate the ventilation system of the mail 
area. Consider handling mail at a separate, isolated building.
• If necessary, use gloves (see Figure 15-8) and protective masks.
• Do not touch or smell anything suspicious.
• Be suspicious of mail. See the following guidelines on anthrax and the Chapter 13 
figure on suspect letter and package indicators.
• Consider technology: X-ray for bombs, use letter and package tracking systems and 
automatic letter openers, and scan letters and send them electronically.
Official Centers for Disease Control (CDC) Health Advisory Distributed via 
Health Alert Network, October 12, 2001: HOW TO HANDLE ANTHRAX 
AND OTHER BIOLOGICAL AGENT THREATS
Many facilities in communities around the country have received anthrax threat letters. 
Most were empty envelopes; some have contained powdery substances. The purpose of 
these guidelines is to recommend procedures for handling such incidents.
Do Not Panic
1. Anthrax organisms can cause infection in the skin, gastrointestinal system, 
or the lungs. To do so, the organism must be rubbed into abraded skin, swal-
lowed, or inhaled as a fine, aerosolized mist. Disease can be prevented after 
exposure to the anthrax spores by early treatment with the appropriate antibi-
otics. Anthrax is not spread from one person to another person.
2. For anthrax to be effective as a covert agent, it must be aerosolized into very 
small particles. This is difficult to do, and requires a great deal of technical 
FIGURE 15-8 The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States was followed by bioterrorism in 
which anthrax was spread through the mail system, necessitating precautions.

382          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
skill and special equipment. If these small particles are inhaled, life-threatening 
lung infection can occur, but prompt recognition and treatment are effective.
Suspicious Unopened Letter or Package Marked with Threatening Message Such 
as “Anthrax”:
1. Do not shake or empty the contents of any suspicious envelope or package.
2. PLACE the envelope or package in a plastic bag or some other type of con-
tainer to prevent leakage of contents.
3. If you do not have any container, then COVER the envelope or package with 
anything (e.g., clothing, paper, trash can, etc.) and do not remove this cover.
4. Then LEAVE the room and CLOSE the door, or section off the area to prevent 
others from entering (i.e., keep others away).
5. WASH your hands with soap and water to prevent spreading any powder to 
your face.
6. What to do next …
• If you are at HOME, then report the incident to local police.
• If you are at WORK, then report the incident to local police, and notify your 
building security official or an available supervisor.
7. LIST all people who were in the room or area when this suspicious letter or 
package was recognized. Give this list to both the local public health authorities 
and law enforcement officials for follow-up investigations and advice.
Envelope with Powder and Powder Spills Out Onto Surface:
1. DO NOT try to CLEAN UP the powder. COVER the spilled contents immedi-
ately with anything (e.g., clothing, paper, trash can, etc.) and do not remove this 
cover!
2. Then LEAVE the room and CLOSE the door, or section off the area to prevent 
others from entering (i.e., keep others away).
3. WASH your hands with soap and water to prevent spreading any powder to 
your face.
4. What to do next …
• If you are at HOME, then report the incident to local police.
• If you are at WORK, then report the incident to local police, and notify your 
building security official or an available supervisor.
5. REMOVE heavily contaminated clothing as soon as possible and place in 
a plastic bag, or some other container that can be sealed. This clothing bag 
should be given to the emergency responders for proper handling.
6. SHOWER with soap and water as soon as possible. Do Not Use Bleach Or 
Other Disinfectant On Your Skin.
7. If possible, list all people who were in the room or area, especially those who 
had actual contact with the powder. Give this list to both the local public health 
authorities so that proper instructions can be given for medical follow-up, and 
to law enforcement officials for further investigation.
Question of Room Contamination by Aerosolization
For example: small device triggered, warning that air handling system is contaminated, 
or warning that a biological agent released in a public space.
1. Turn off local fans or ventilation units in the area.
2. LEAVE area immediately.
3. CLOSE the door, or section off the area to prevent others from entering (i.e., 
keep others away).
4. What to do next …
 
 •  If you are at HOME, then dial “911” to report the incident to local police 
and the local FBI field office.

Private Sector          383
• If you are at WORK, then dial “911” to report the incident to local police 
and the local FBI field office, and notify your building security official or an 
available supervisor.
5. SHUT down air handling system in the building, if possible.
6. If possible, list all people who were in the room or area. Give this list to both the 
local public health authorities so that proper instructions can be given for medi-
cal follow-up, and to law enforcement officials for further investigation.
Private Sector
In addition to government action against terrorism, there is a vast community of private 
sector businesses, organizations, associations, and volunteers that also play a major role in 
homeland security and the protection of American interests. Furthermore, joint public/private 
sector initiatives exist.
Losses and Costs from the 9/11 Attacks
About 3,000 persons were killed in the 9/11 attacks, including those at the Pentagon. 
Thousands were injured, and others, including rescue workers, were affected by respiratory 
problems from the lingering smoke and dust at the WTC site. Direct costs from casualties 
included medical expenses, workers compensation payments, accidental death and dismem-
berment claims, and life insurance payments. Thousands of people needed counseling to deal 
with personal losses.
Although the U.S. economy was in a recession beginning in March 2001, the 9/11 
attacks did cause a temporary disruption of the nation’s economy. Specifically, airlines suf-
fered, consumer spending and business investment fell, and hundreds of thousands of layoffs 
occurred, mainly in the travel and leisure sectors.
Business interruption occurred following the 9/11 attacks, although it can result from 
many other risks (e.g., natural disaster, accident) besides terrorism. It is defined as “the loss 
of profits of a business that suffers an indemnified loss when it is unable to manufacture its 
product(s) or provide its service” (Quinley and Schmidt, 2002: 33). Interdependencies within 
a business’s operations or between separate businesses (e.g., a supplier to another business) 
can broader the interruption.
The Homeland Security Market
The homeland security market is a multi-billion dollar industry of products and services. 
Many companies have made handsome profits and have seen their stock prices rise con-
siderably because of the need to enhance homeland security. Examples of products include 
luggage screening systems, WMD sensors, systems to track foreigners visiting the United 
States, and physical security. Services include the privatization of counterterrorism. 
Public-Private Sector Partnerships
Reimer (2004: 10–12) sees the national system of preparedness for terrorism as a work in 
progress requiring a series of partnerships among the various levels of government, the public 
and private sectors, and the military. He notes that the strength of these partnerships will 
determine our level of preparedness. With the private sector owning 85% of U.S. critical infra-
structure, Reimer emphasizes that private sector cooperation is essential. However, Reimer 
writes of the need for a common definition of “critical infrastructure” and the importance of 
defining the responsibilities of the public and private sectors.
Weidenbaum (2004: 189) argues that “the multifaceted national response to the September 
11 terrorist attacks are altering the balance between the public and private sectors in the U.S.” 
He describes the federal government effort against terrorism as a “mega priority” of programs 

384          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
and activities. This includes increased spending on the military and homeland security, special 
assistance and funding to companies heavily affected, and an expansion of government regula-
tion of private activity, especially business. Weidenbaum notes that terrorism results in a hidden 
tax on businesses in the United States and overseas, in the form of added costs of operation. In 
a business, security is an expense that raises the cost of production. Security expenses include 
security officers, security systems, and personnel investigations. Other costs are higher insurance 
premiums and larger inventories (to protect against delays).
To facilitate communications and to share information on homeland security with private 
industry, the federal government hosts conferences and training sessions. Another initiative is 
the Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs). These are generally private sector net-
works of organizations that the federal government has helped to create to share information 
on threats to critical industries and coordinate efforts to identify and reduce vulnerabilities. For 
example, the North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC) shares threat indications and 
analyses to help participants in the electricity sector take protective action.
The Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC) promotes security cooperation 
between the U.S. Department of State and businesses with interests overseas. OSAC objec-
tives include sharing information, promoting methods for security planning, and publishing 
a variety of helpful guides.
According to a 2004 national policy summit on public police and private security 
cooperation, only 5% to 10% of law enforcement chief executives participate in partnerships 
with private security (U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing 
Services, 2004: 2). At the same time, cooperation between both groups takes many forms 
and occurs at many levels of government. To varying degrees, both groups share informa-
tion with each other, attend each other’s conferences, and plan together for protection and 
emergencies. They even work side-by-side at certain sites, such as downtown districts, gov-
ernment buildings, and special events. Plus, many off-duty police officers work part-time 
in security and retire to assume a security position. An improved partnership between both 
groups can be beneficial to our nation.
Business and Organizational Countermeasures Against Terrorism
As a security practitioner considering countermeasures against terrorism, numerous factors 
come into play as a foundation for planning. These factors include employees and their families, 
facilities and assets, the type of products and/or services offered to customers, domestic and/or 
international operations, and terrorist groups that may target the entity and their methods and 
weapons. Businesses should plan for a variety of possible scenarios. Examples include mass 
casualties, the loss of manufacturing capacity or a major supplier, an extended power outage, 
the disruption of shipping at a port, or fear that causes employees and customers to stay home. 
Planning to counter terrorism must be integrated with business continuity planning. Numerous 
sources of information are available to assist planning. These include the Web (see the end of 
this chapter), publications, government agencies, and private firms. Here is a list of suggestions 
to protect against terrorism.
• Terrorists have tremendous advantages over defenses because they search for 
vulnerabilities and strike almost anywhere with surprise. A British terrorism expert, Paul 
Wilkinson, stated, “Fighting terrorism is like a goalkeeper. You can make a hundred 
brilliant saves, but the only shot people remember is the one that gets past you” (Leader, 
1997). Creative and astute security planning is essential.
• Maintain awareness of controversies that may increase exposure to terrorism.
• Reevaluate security, safety, and emergency plans. Seek cooperation with public safety 
agencies.
• Select a diverse committee for input for security and safety plans. Permit committee 
members to use their imaginations to anticipate weaknesses in protection.
• Increase employee awareness of terrorism and terrorist methods and tricks. Stifle 
and trick potential terrorists through creativity (e.g., avoid signs on the premises that 
identify departments, people, and job duties; periodically alter security methods).

• Know the business of tenants and whether they would be possible targets for 
violence.
• Consider the security and safety of childcare facilities used by employees.
• Intensify access controls by using a comprehensive approach covering people, vehicles, 
mail, deliveries, services, and any person or thing seeking access.
• Carefully screen employment applicants, vendors, and others seeking work.
• Secure and place under surveillance HVAC systems (e.g., air intake systems) and 
utilities.
• Once the best possible security and safety plans are implemented, remember that an 
offender (internal or external or both) may be studying your defenses to look for 
weaknesses to exploit.
Citizen Volunteers
The National Strategy for Homeland Security (Office of Homeland Security 2002: 12) makes 
the following statements concerning the importance of citizens becoming involved in home-
land security.
All of us have a key role to play in America’s war on terrorism. Terrorists may 
live and travel among us and attack our homes and our places of business, gov-
ernance, and recreation. In order to defeat an enemy who uses our very way of 
life as a weapon—who takes advantage of our freedoms and liberties—every 
American must be willing to do his or her part to protect our homeland.
Brian Jenkins, a noted authority on terrorism, points out that although public and pri-
vate sectors maintain contingency plans to put into effect during heightened states of alert and 
emergencies, citizens must “learn to take care of themselves, to be mentally tough and self-
reliant. Those who expect the government to protect them from everything are in for a lot of 
disappointments.” He writes that for homeland security to succeed, citizens must be involved 
in the defense of their communities, and with quality training, “the entire United States can be 
turned into a vast neighborhood watch—a difficult environment for terrorists.” Jenkins goes 
on to note that there will never be enough police and firefighters to protect all citizens. And, 
the first people at the scene of an attack are the unfortunate people who are there at the time 
of the attack. They need to learn how to protect themselves and others until first responders 
arrive (Jenkins, 2003).
Volunteer organizations also play a vital role of assistance in homeland security. Two note-
worthy, national groups are the American Red Cross and the Salvation Army. Red Cross chapters 
have been involved in a variety of community-based programs for many years. These include ser-
vices for seniors, volunteers for hospitals and nursing homes, food pantry and hot lunch programs, 
homeless shelters, and youth programs. The Salvation Army also has a long history of helping 
people. It is an evangelical organization dedicated to helping needy people through free tempo-
rary shelter and meals. The Salvation Army’s thrift stores receive donated clothes and household 
goods that are sold to generate revenue. Both the Red Cross and the Salvation Army partner with 
all levels of government to support the immediate, critical needs of disaster victims. These needs 
include food, shelter, and clothing.
Many other volunteer groups assist disaster victims. The National Volunteer 
Organizations Against Disasters (NVOAD) consists of several national groups that rely on 
NVOAD to coordinate disaster response for increased efficiency.
In 2002, the federal government launched Citizen Corps to coordinate and channel citi-
zen volunteers to help with homeland security and disaster preparedness efforts. Citizen 
Corps is a part of USA Freedom Corps—a federal government program that facilitates a 
partnership of nonprofit, business, educational, faith-based, and other sectors to increase 
citizen involvement in their communities. USA Freedom Corps seeks to create a culture of 
service, citizenship, and responsibility, while increasing civic awareness and community 
involvement.
Private Sector          385

386          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY
Get Ready Now
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security publishes a concise brochure entitled, “Get 
Ready Now,” to help individuals and families prepare for terrorist attacks or other 
emergencies. The brochure describes what to include in an emergency supply kit, a 
family communications plan, and emergency plans.
Are You Ready?
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) publishes Are You Ready? An 
In-depth Guide to Citizen Preparedness. This publication presents disaster survival tech-
niques and how to prepare for and respond to both natural and man-made disasters. It 
is a comprehensive guide to personal emergency preparedness that includes information 
on how to prepare a disaster supply kit, how to locate and evacuate to a shelter, emer-
gency planning for people with disabilities, and care for pets during an emergency. The 
guide covers natural hazards (e.g., hurricanes and earthquakes), technological hazards 
(e.g., hazardous materials), and terrorism.
Search the Web
Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
Center for Defense Information: www.cdi.org
Centers for Disease Control (CDC): www.bt.cdc.gov
Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence: www.st-andrews.ac.uk/
intrel/research/cstpv/
Central Intelligence Agency: www.odci.gov
CIA World Factbook: www.odci.gov/cia/publications/factbook
Federal Bureau of Investigation: www.fbi.gov
Federal Emergency Management Agency: www.fema.gov
Government Accountability Office: www.gao.gov
International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism: www.ict.org.il/
MIPT Terrorism Knowledge Base: www.tkb.org
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States: www.9-
11commission.gov
National Counterintelligence Center: www.ncix.gov
National Counterterrorism Center: www.nctc.gov
Office of the President: www.whitehouse.gov
Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC): www.ds-osac.org/
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute: web.sipri.org
United Kingdom Security Service (MI5): www.mi5.gov.uk
United Nations: www.un.org
UN International Court of Justice: www.icj-cij.org
U.S. Department of Defense: www.defenselink.mil
U.S. Department of Homeland Security: www.dhs.gov
U.S. Department of State: www.state.gov
Animal Liberation Front: www.animalliberationfront.com/
Earth Liberation Front: www.earthliberationfront.com/
Hezbollah: www.hizbollah.org/

Case Problems
15A.  As a Chief Security Officer for a major international corporation, prepare a prioritized 
list of five general items about terrorism and homeland security that you would consider 
and apply in business continuity planning for domestic operations. In addition, prepare 
a prioritized list of five general items about terrorism and security for international 
operations. Compare the lists and study the findings.
15B.  As a security executive for a corporation based in the U.S., your superior appoints 
you to a committee involved in strategic business planning. Business plans are 
being prepared for operations in Venezuela and Thailand. Your assignment is to 
research these countries and prepare reports on political stability, safety, security, 
and health issues. What resources do you use? What are your findings and 
recommendations?
15C.  As a security executive for a corporation based in the U.S., what private and public 
sector groups would you seek partnerships with to enhance the survivability of your 
organization in case of a serious emergency?
References
Advisory Panel to Assess Domestic Response Capabilities for Terrorism Involving Weapons 
of Mass Destruction. (2003). Forging America’s New Normalcy: Securing Our Homeland, 
Preserving Our Liberty, www.rand.org, retrieved March 5, 2004.
Bailey,G. (2003). “Globalization.” In A. del Carmen (Ed.), Terrorism: An Interdisciplinary 
Perspective, 2nd ed. Toronto: Thomas Learning, Inc.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social Learning Theory. NY: General Learning Press.
Bannon, A. (2004). “Color-coding—or just color-confusing?” Homeland Protection 
Professional, 3 (September).
Barkan, S., and Snowden, L. (2001). Collective Violence. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Bell, J., and Gurr, T. (1979). “Terrorism and Revolution in American.” In H. Graham and T. 
Gurr (Eds.), Violence in America. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Centers for Disease Control. (n.d.). Frequently Asked Questions About a Nuclear Blast. www.
bt.cdc.gov/radiation, retrieved August 5, 2004.
Central Intelligence Agency. (1998). Chemical/Biological/Radiological Incident Handbook 
(October). www.fas.org, retrieved June 4, 2004.
Chalmers, D. (1987). Hooded Americanism: The History of the Ku Klux Klan, 3rd ed. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Clayton, C., et al. (2003). “Terrorism as Group Violence.” In H. Hall (Ed.), Terrorism: 
Strategies for Intervention. Binghamton, NY: The Haworth Press.
Combs, C. (2003). Terrorism in the Twenty-First Century, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Council on Foreign Relations. (2004). “Responding to Radiation Attacks.” www.terroris-
manswers.org, retrieved October 6, 2004.
Crenshaw, M. (1990). “The Logic of Terrorism: Terrorist Behavior as a Product of Strategic 
Choice.” In H. Hall (Ed.), Terrorism: Strategies for Intervention.
FBI. (n.d.). Counterterrorism. http://denver.fbi.gov/inteterr.htm, retrieved January 14, 
2004.
Islamic Resistance Movement-HAMAS: www.hamasonline.com
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals: www.peta.org/
White Aryan Resistance: www.resist.com/
References          387

FBI. (2002). “The Threat of Ecoterrorism.” http://www,fbi.gov/congress/congress02/jar-
boe021202.htm, retrieved May, 3 2004.
Ford, P. (2001). “Why Do They Hate Us?” The Christian Science Monitor. September 27.
Greenberg, D. (2001). “Is Terrorism New?” Slate.com. http://historynewsnetwork.org, 
retrieved March 15, 2004.
Griset, P., and Mahan, S. (2003). Terrorism in Perspective. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Pub.
Grosskopf, K. (2006). “Evaluating the Societal Response to Antiterrorism Measures.” Journal 
of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 3.
Hoffman, B. (1998). Inside Terrorism. NY: Colombia University Press.
Hogue, H., and Bea, K. (2006). “Federal Emergency Management and Homeland Security 
Organization: Historical Developments and Legislative Options.” CRS Report for 
Congress (June 1). www.fas.org/sgp/crs/homesec/RL33369.pdf, retrieved June 22, 2006.
Holden, R. (1986). Modern Police Management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Hudson, R. (1999). The Sociology and Psychology of Terrorism: Who Becomes a Terrorist 
and Why? Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. In H. Hall 
(Ed.), Terrorism: Strategies for Intervention.
Huntington, S. (1996). The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of the World Order. NY: 
Simon & Schuster.
Jenkins, B. (2003). “All Citizens Now First Responders.” USA Today. (March 23).
Kegley, C. (2003). The New Global Terrorism: Characteristics, Causes, Controls. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Laqueur, W. (1999). The New Terrorism: Fanaticism and the Arms of Mass Destruction. NY: 
Oxford University Press.
Larson, E., and Peters, J. (2001). Preparing the US Army for Homeland Security: Concepts, 
Issues, and Options. Santa Monica, CA: RAND. In Kettl, D. (2004). System Under Stress: 
Homeland Security and American Politics. Washington, D.C.: CQ Press.
Leader, S. (1997). “The Rise of Terrorism.” Security Management (April).
Martin, G. (2003). Understanding Terrorism: Challenges, Perspectives, and Issues. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Pub.
Mordica, G. (2003). “Phase Four Operations in Iraq and the RPG-7.” News from the Front. 
(November-December).
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States. (2004). The 9/11 
Commission Report. www.9–11commission.gov/, retrieved July 26, 2004.
National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism. (2006). “MIPT Terrorism 
Knowledge Base.” www.tkb.org, retrieved March 18, 2006.
Office of Homeland Security. (2002). National Strategy for Homeland Security. Washington, 
D.C.: The White House. (July).
Perl, R. (2006). “Terrorism and National Security: Issues and Trends.” CRS Issue Brief for 
Congress (February 21). www.hsdl.org/homesec/docs/crs/nps21–022806–05.pdf, retrieved 
March 13, 2006.
Poland, J. (2005). Understanding Terrorism: Groups, Strategies, and Responses, 2nd Ed. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Poland, J. (1988). Understanding Terrorism: Groups, Strategies, and Responses. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Queller, D. (1989). “Crusades.” World Book, Vol. 4. Chicago: World Book, Inc.
Quinley, K. and Schmidt, D. (2002). Business At Risk: How to Assess, Mitigate, and Respond 
to Terrorist Threats. Cincinnati, OH: The National Underwriter Co.
Reimer, D. (2004). “The Private Sector Must Be a Partner in Homeland Security.” Homeland 
Security, 1 (September).
Roach, J., et al. (2005). “The Conjunction of Terrorist Opportunity: A Framework for 
Diagnosing and Preventing Acts of Terrorism.” Security Journal, 18.
Silke, A. (1998). “Terrorism.” The Psychologist, 14.
Simonsen, C., and Spindlove, J. (2004). Terrorism Today, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
388          TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY

United Nations, Office on Drugs and Crime. (n.d.). Terrorism and Weapons of Mass 
Destruction. www.unodc.org/unodc/terrorism_weapons_mass_destruction, retrieved April 
21, 2004.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Office for Domestic Preparedness. (2004). Weapons 
of Mass Destruction and the First Responder (Video) (January).
U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services. (2004). National 
Policy Summit: Building Private Security/Public Policing Partnerships to Prevent and 
Respond to Terrorism and Public Disorder. www.cops.usdoj.gov, retrieved January 4, 
2005.
U.S. Department of State. (2006). Country Reports on Terrorism 2005. http://www.state.
gov/s/ct/rls/crt/c17689.htm, retrieved January 4, 2007.
U.S. Department of State, Office of Inspector General. (2005). “Review of the Department 
of State’s Country Reports on Terrorism-2005.” http://oig.state.gov/documents/organiza-
tion/58021.pdf, retrieved Mach 15, 2006.
U.S. Department of State. (2004). Patterns of Global Terrorism 2003. www.state.gov, 
retrieved August 31, 2005.
U.S. General Accounting Office. (2003). “Public Health Response to Anthrax Incidents of 
2001.” www.gao.gov, retrieved January 16, 2004.
U.S. Government. (2003). National Strategy for Combating Terrorism. www.whitehouse.
gov/, retrieved March 5, 2004.
U.S. Government. (2006). National Strategy for Combating Terrorism. www.whitehouse.
gov/, retrieved September 5, 2006.
U.S. Government, White House. (2006). “Fact Sheet: Safeguarding America: President Bush 
Signs Patriot Act Reauthorization.” www.whitehouse.gov/, retrieved March 11, 2006.
Weidenbaum, M. (2004). “Government, Business, and the Response to Terrorism.” In T. 
Badey (Ed.) Homeland Security. Guilford, CT: McGraw-Hill/Dushkin.
Weinberg, L., and Davis, P. (1989). Introduction to Political Terrorism. NY: McGraw Hill.
Weinzierl, J. (2004). “Terrorism: Its Origin and History.” In A. Nyatepe-Coo and D. Zeisler-
Vralsted (Eds.) Understanding Terrorism: Threats in an Uncertain World. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
White, J. (2004). Defending the Homeland: Domestic Intelligence, Law Enforcement, and 
Security. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/ Thomson Learning.
White, J. (2003). Terrorism: An Introduction, 4th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/ Thomson 
Learning.
Wilkinson, P. (2003). “Why Modern Terrorism? Differentiating Types and Distinguishing 
Ideological Motivations.” In C. Kegley (Ed.), The New Global Terrorism: Characteristics, 
References          389

KEY TERMS
• cascade effect
• critical infrastructure (CI)
• critical infrastructure protection (CIP)
• sector-specific agencies
• sector-specific plans
• National Infrastructure Protection Plan 
(NIPP)
• key resources
• key assets
• Homeland Security Operations Center
• Information Sharing and Analysis 
Centers (ISACs)
• bioterrorism
• agroterrorism
• Public Health Security and Bioterrorism 
Preparedness and Response Act of 
2002
• Project BioShield Act of 2004
• penetration test
• Chernobyl
• Three-Mile Island
• Bhopal, India
• Texas City, Texas
• Exxon Valdez
Protecting Critical 
Infrastructures, Key Assets, 
and Borders
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Define critical infrastructure and key assets.
2. Explain the role of the federal government in protecting critical infrastructures and key 
assets.
3. Describe at least 10 recommendations from the National Infrastructure Protection 
Plan for the private sector.
4. Name and describe vulnerabilities and protection measures for at least five 
infrastructure sectors.
5. Explain the threats to cyberspace and information technology and protection measures.
6. Name and explain the roles of the government agencies involved in border and 
transportation security.
7. Name and describe vulnerabilities and protection measures for at least four 
transportation sectors.
16
391

• Emergency Planning and Community 
Right-to-Know Act of 1986
• Cybersecurity
• denial-of-service attack
• Trojan horse
• virus
• worm
• logic bomb
• dumpster diving
• social engineering
• spam
• phishing
• keylogging programs
• spyware
• malware
• blended cyber threats
• blended cyber-physical attack
• cyberwarfare
• encryption
• National Industrial Security Program
• General Services Administration (GSA)
• Federal Protective Service
• U.S. Marshals Service
• U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status 
Indicator Technology (US-VISIT)
• critical layers of defense
• U.S. Customs and Border Protection
• Container Security Initiative
• Advanced Manifest Rule
• Customs-Trade Partnership Against 
Terrorism (C-TPAT)
• U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE)
• U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services
• Transportation Security Administration 
(TSA)
• Aviation and Transportation Security 
Act of 2001
• Intelligence Reform and Terrorism 
Prevention Act of 2004
• Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA)
• Federal Air Marshal Service
• Man-Portable Air Defense Systems 
(MANPADS)
• transportation choke points
• Maritime Transportation Security Act 
of 2002
• Security and Accountability For Every 
(SAFE) Port Act of 2006
• supply chain
• anthrax attacks
Note: Major portions of this chapter are from: Purpura, P. (2007). Terrorism 
and Homeland Security: An Introduction with Applications. Burlington, MA: Elsevier 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Critical Infrastructure
Following the 9/11 attacks, concern increased over the vulnerability of essential services and 
products that sustain our nation and its business. Several vital services and products, if harmed 
by an attack or subject to a natural disaster, can result in a disruption of the economy and daily 
activities of citizens. We all depend on such systems as water, food, energy, transportation, and 
communications. In addition, our modern society depends on a complex network of interdepen-
dencies among services and products. If one essential service or product is attacked or subject to a 
natural disaster, other services and products may be affected. This is known as the cascade effect. 
For instance, if a power failure occurs, businesses, institutions, and many daily activities would 
be hindered. The creativity and patience of terrorists make the protection of critical infrastructure 
essential. Imagine the chaos in a locale from simultaneous bombings of a high-rise building, electri-
cal power, the 9-1-1 emergency communications system, and the water supply for fighting fires.
Critical Infrastructure Defined
The Patriot Act, Section 1016(e), defines critical infrastructure (CI) as “the systems and assets, 
whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United States that the incapacity or destruction of 
such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security, national economic security, 
392          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 

national public health or safety, or any combination of those matters.” A generally accepted 
estimate is that 85% of the U.S. critical infrastructure is owned by the private sector.
The National Strategy for Homeland Security (Office of Homeland Security, 2002: ix) states
Our society and modern way of life are dependent on networks of infrastructure—both 
physical networks such as our energy and transportation systems and virtual networks 
such as the Internet. If terrorists attack one or more pieces of our critical infrastructure, 
they may disrupt entire systems and cause significant damage to the Nation. We must 
therefore improve protection of the individual pieces and interconnecting systems that 
make up our critical infrastructure. Protecting America’s critical infrastructure and key 
assets will not only make us more secure from terrorist attack, but will also reduce our 
vulnerability to natural disasters, organized crime, and computer hackers. America’s 
critical infrastructure encompasses a large number of sectors. The U.S. government will 
seek to deny terrorists the opportunity to inflict lasting harm to our Nation by protect-
ing the assets, systems, and functions vital to our national security, governance, public 
health and safety, economy, and national morale.
This strategy identifies eight major critical infrastructure protection (CIP) initiatives:
• Unify America’s infrastructure protection effort in the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS).
• Build and maintain a complete and accurate assessment of America’s critical 
infrastructure and key assets.
• Enable effective partnership with state and local governments and the private sector.
• Develop a national infrastructure protection plan.
• Secure cyberspace.
• Harness the best analytic and modeling tools to develop effective protective solutions.
• Guard America’s critical infrastructure and key assets against “inside” threats.
• Partner with the international community to protect our transnational infrastructure.
The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key Assets 
(White House, 2003a: 9) identifies the following CI sectors and key assets for protection:
Agriculture and Food: 1,912,000 farms; 87,000 food-processing plants
Water: 1,800 federal reservoirs; 1,600 municipal wastewater facilities
Public Health: 5,800 registered hospitals
Emergency Services: 87,000 U.S. localities
Defense Industrial Base: 250,000 firms in 215 distinct industries
Telecommunications: 2 billion miles of cable
Energy
Electricity: 2,800 power plants
Oil and Natural Gas: 300,000 producing sites
Transportation (Figure 16-1)
Aviation: 5,000 public airports
Passenger Rail and Railroads: 120,000 miles of major railroads
Highways, Trucking, and Busing: 590,000 highway bridges
Pipelines: 2 million miles of pipelines
Maritime: 300 inland/coastal ports
Mass Transit: 500 major urban public transit operators
Banking and Finance: 26,600 FDIC-insured institutions
Chemical Industry and Hazardous Materials: 66,000 chemical plants
Postal and Shipping: 137 million delivery sites
Key Assets
National Monuments and Icons: 5,800 historic buildings
Nuclear Power Plants: 104 commercial nuclear power plants
Dams: 80,000 dams
Government Facilities: 3,000 government-owned/operated facilities
Commercial Assets: 460 skyscrapers
Critical Infrastructure          393

The Role of Government in Protecting Critical Infrastructure and Key 
Resources (CI/KR)
A major mission area stated in the National Strategy for Homeland Security is protecting criti-
cal infrastructure. In December 2003, President George W. Bush issued Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive 7 (HSPD-7), establishing a policy for federal departments and agencies 
to identify and prioritize CI and protect them from terrorist attacks. HSPD-7 designates a sec-
tor-specific department or agency for each sector to coordinate and collaborate with relevant 
agencies, state and local government, and the private sector. The DHS is responsible for (1) 
developing a national CIP plan consistent with the Homeland Security Act of 2002, (2) rec-
ommending CIP measures in coordination with public and private sector partners, and (3) 
disseminating information.
The term sector-specific agencies (SSAs) has been used to identify federal departments 
and agencies with protection responsibilities for specific sectors of CI. SSAs are required 
to develop sector-specific plans (SSPs). SSAs are listed next (U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security, 2005a: 3; U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2006a: 20; U.S. Government 
Accountability Office 2005c: 75–76).
• Department of Homeland Security (DHS): Responsible for emergency services; 
government facilities; information and telecommunications; transportation systems 
(with Department of Transportation); chemicals; postal and shipping sectors; 
dams; commercial facilities; and nuclear reactors, materials, and waste (with the 
Department of Energy and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission). Examples of 
specific functions include protection of federal property throughout the country by 
the Federal Protective Service, the Secret Service’s role in coordinating site security at 
designated special events, and the National Cyber Response Coordination Group’s 
role in coordinating national cyber emergencies.
• Department of Defense (DOD): Responsible for defense industrial base and 
physical security of military installations, activities, and personnel.
• Department of Energy (DOE): Responsible for developing and implementing policies 
and procedures for safeguarding power plants (except for commercial nuclear power 
facilities), oil, gas, research labs, and weapons production facilities.
• Department of Justice (DOJ): Through its Criminal Division and the FBI, the DOJ 
works to prevent the exploitation of the Internet, computer systems, or networks.
FIGURE 16-1 The transportation system is one of several critical infrastructure sectors. Containerized cargo arriving 
in port to be unloaded.
394          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 

• Department of State (DOS): Responsible for matters of international CIP, given its 
overseas mission.
• Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS): Responsible for public health, 
healthcare, and food (other than meat, poultry, and egg products).
• Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): Responsible for drinking water and 
wastewater treatment systems.
• Department of Agriculture: Responsible for agriculture and food (meat, poultry, 
and egg products).
• Department of the Treasury: Responsible for banking and finance.
• Department of the Interior: Responsible for national monuments and icons.
According to the U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005c: 78), all eight CIP 
initiatives are being addressed by federal agencies. The DHS, DOD, and HHS cited activity 
in each of the eight initiatives. Specific examples cited by the GAO include the following: 
DHS began the Transportation Worker Identification Credential Program to enhance access 
security in the nation’s transportation system; the Food and Drug Administration, within 
HHS, issued security guidance to the food industry, including employee background checks; 
the DOS developed diplomatic agreements with Mexico and Canada to permit background 
checks of truck drivers; and the DOE conducted polygraph examinations and financial dis-
closures of employees in the energy field.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005c: 81) reported challenges to CIP 
efforts and noted an almost infinite number of potential terrorist targets. A major challenge is 
the federal government’s management and planning of CIP. This entails delineating the roles 
and responsibilities of federal and nonfederal entities, establishing objectives and milestones, 
setting time frames for reaching objectives, and preparing performance measures. Other con-
cerns included the need for better training and procedures to detect counterfeit documents 
and identity fraud.
In June 2006, following interim plans and feedback from the public and private sectors, 
the National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 
2006a) was released by the DHS pursuant to HSPD-7. It takes the National Strategy for 
Homeland Security to the next level through an identification of assets, assessment of vulner-
abilities, and prioritization of assets to guide protection programs.
The term critical infrastructure/key resources has replaced the term critical infrastructure/key 
assets in the NIPP. As defined in the Homeland Security Act of 2002, key resources are pub-
licly or privately controlled resources essential to the minimal operations of the economy and 
government. Key assets are individual targets (Figure 16-2) whose destruction could cause 
large-scale injury, death, or destruction of property, and/or profoundly damage national pres-
tige, and confidence (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2006b).
NIPP objectives include protecting critical infrastructure and key resources (CI/KR); 
managing long-term risk; assessing vulnerability; prioritizing; maintaining a national inven-
tory of CI/KR; mapping interdependencies among assets; articulating security partner roles 
and responsibilities; identifying incentives for voluntary action by the private sector; facilitat-
ing best practices, information exchange, training, and metrics; strengthening linkages between 
physical and cyber efforts; and promoting CI/KR cooperation among international partners.
HSPD-7 requires that the NIPP be integrated with other national plans. The NIPP states 
that it will support the Nation Response Plan (NRP) during the prevention phase by providing 
information on CI/KR, vulnerabilities, and protection programs. During incident response, 
NIPP information will be shared through the National Incident Management System (NIMS) 
established communications mechanisms.
Kochems (2005: 3) describes the responsibilities of the federal government and the pri-
vate sector to protect against terrorism:
The federal government—not the private sector—is responsible for preventing 
terrorist acts through intelligence gathering, early warning, and domestic coun-
terterrorism. The private sector is responsible for taking reasonable precautions, 
much as it is expected to take reasonable safety and environmental precautions. 
Critical Infrastructure          395

The federal government also has a role in defining what is “reasonable” as a per-
formance-based metric and facilitating information sharing to enable the private 
sector to perform due diligence (e.g., protection, mitigation, and recovery) in an 
efficient, fair, and effective manner.
NIPP Risk Management Framework
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2007a) notes that “risk management, a strategy 
for helping policymakers make decisions about assessing risk, allocating resources, and taking 
actions under conditions of uncertainty, has been endorsed by Congress, the President, and 
the Secretary of DHS as a way to strengthen the nation against possible terrorist attacks.” 
The NIPP risk management framework includes the following activities (U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security, 2006a: 29–30):
• Set security goals: Define specific outcomes, conditions, end points, or performance 
targets that collectively constitute an effective protective posture.
• Identify assets, systems, networks, and functions: Develop an inventory of the assets, 
systems, and networks, including those located outside the United States, that comprise 
the nation’s CI/KR and the critical functionality therein; collect information pertinent to 
risk management that takes into account the fundamental characteristics of each sector.
• Assess risks: Determine risk by combining potential direct and indirect consequences 
of a terrorist attack or other hazard.
• Prioritize: Aggregate and analyze risk assessment results to develop a comprehensive 
picture of asset, system, and network risk; establish priorities based on risk; and 
determine protection and business continuity initiatives that provide the greatest 
mitigation of risk.
• Implement protective programs: Select sector-appropriate protective actions or 
programs to reduce or manage the risk identified; secure the resources needed to 
address priorities.
• Measure effectiveness: Use metrics and other evaluation procedures at the national and 
sector levels to measure progress and assess the effectiveness of the national CI/KR 
protection program in improving protection, managing risk, and increasing resiliency.
Both output and outcome metrics will be used by SSAs and the DHS to track progress 
on specific activities outlined in the SSPs. Output metrics include the number of vulnerability 
FIGURE 16-2 The Statue of Liberty National Monument is a key asset of national pride requiring protection. 
Courtesy: DOD photo by Petty Officer 3rd class Kelly Newlin, U.S. Coast Guard.
396          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 

assessments performed by a certain date. Outcome metrics include a reduced number of facili-
ties assessed as high risk, following the implementation of protective measures. The DHS notes 
that selecting outcome metrics for protection programs is challenging because risk reduction 
is not directly observable. For example, it is difficult to measure the prevention of a terrorist 
attack or the extent of mitigation from a potential attack.
Examples of metrics include the total number of assets in each sector; the percent of 
high-consequence assets to total assets (to determine which sectors should receive a higher 
priority); and the percent of high-consequence assets that have been assessed for readiness, 
response, and recovery capability.
Critical Infrastructure          397
Incidents by Target
One source of data on terrorism that is categorized by target (e.g., critical infrastruc-
tures) is the National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT) 
Terrorism Knowledge Base (TKB), as discussed in the preceding chapter under “The 
Measurement of Terrorism.” The TKB is a user-friendly Web resource on domestic and 
international terrorism. Among the site’s tools, its page on “Incidents by Target” lists 
critical infrastructure sectors along with number of incidents, injuries, and fatalities for 
the years specified by the user.
NIPP Recommendations for the Private Sector
The following recommended homeland security practices for the private sector are from the 
NIPP (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2006a: 171–173). The recommendations are 
based on best practices in use by various sectors and other groupings.
• Asset, System, Network, and Function Identification:
– Incorporate the NIPP framework for the assets, systems, and networks under their 
control; and
– Voluntarily provide CI/KR-related data to DHS to facilitate national CI/KR 
protection program implementation with appropriate information protections.
• Assessment, Monitoring, and Reduction of Risks/Vulnerabilities:
– Conduct appropriate risk and vulnerability assessment activities using tools or 
methods that are rigorous, well documented, and based on accepted practices in 
industry or government;
– Implement measures to reduce risk and mitigate deficiencies and vulnerabilities 
corresponding to the physical, cyber, and human security elements of CI/KR protection;
– Maintain the tools, capabilities, and protocols necessary to provide an appropriate 
level of monitoring of networks, systems, or a facility and its immediate 
surroundings to detect possible insider and external threats;
– Develop and implement personnel screening programs to the extent feasible for 
personnel working in sensitive positions; and
– Manage the security of computer and information systems while maintaining 
awareness of vulnerabilities and consequences to ensure that systems are not used to 
enable attacks against CI/KR.
• Information Sharing:
– Connect with and participate in the appropriate national, State, regional, local, and 
sector information-sharing mechanisms;
– Develop and maintain close working relationships with local (and, as appropriate, 
Federal, State, Territorial, and tribal) law enforcement and first-responder 
organizations relevant to the company’s facilities to promote communications, 
with appropriate protections, and cooperation related to prevention, 
remediation, and response to a natural disaster or terrorist event;

398          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
– Provide applicable information on threats, assets, and vulnerabilities to appropriate 
government authorities, with appropriate information protections;
– Share threat and other appropriate information with other CI/KR owners and operators;
– Participate in activities or initiatives developed and sponsored by relevant NIPP Sector 
Coordinating Council or entity that provides the sector coordinating function;
– Participate in, share information with (with appropriate protections), and support State 
and local CI/KR protection programs, including coordinating and planning with Local 
Emergency Planning Committees;
– Collaborate with other CI/KR owners and operators on security issues of mutual 
concern; and
– Use appropriate measures to safeguard information that could pose a threat and 
maintain open and effective communications regarding security measures and issues, as 
appropriate, with employees, suppliers, customers, government officials, and others.
• Planning and Awareness:
– Develop and exercise appropriate emergency response, mitigation, and business 
continuity-of-operations plans;
– Participate in Federal, State, local, or company exercises and other activities to enhance 
individual, organization, and sector preparedness;
– Demonstrate continuous commitment to security and resilience across the entire company;
– Develop an appropriate security protocol corresponding to each level of the Homeland 
Security Advisory System. These plans and protocols are additive so that as the threat 
level increases for company facilities, the company can quickly implement its plans to 
enhance physical or cybersecurity measures in operation at those facilities and modify 
them as the threat level decreases;
– Utilize NFPA 1600 Standard on Disaster/Emergency Management and Business 
Continuity Programs, endorsed by DHS and Congress, when developing Emergency 
Response and Business Continuity-of-Operations Plans if the sector has not developed 
its own standard;
– Document the key elements of security programs, actions, and periodic reviews as part of 
a commitment to sustain a consistent, reliable, and comprehensive program over time;
– Enhance security awareness and capabilities through periodic training, drills, and 
guidance that involve all employees annually to some extent and, when appropriate, 
involve others such as emergency response agencies or neighboring facilities;
– Perform periodic assessments or audits to measure the effectiveness of planned physical 
and cybersecurity measures. These audits and verifications should be reported directly 
to the CEO or his/her designee for review and action;
– Promote emergency response training, such as the Community Emergency Response 
Team training offered by the U.S. Citizen Corps, for employees;
– Consider including programs for developing highly secure and trustworthy operating 
systems in near-term acquisition or R&D priorities;
– Create a culture of preparedness, reaching every level of the organization’s workforce, 
which ingrains in each employee the importance of awareness and empowers those 
with responsibilities as first-line defenders within the organization and community;
– As the organization performs R&D or acquires new or upgraded systems, consider 
only those that are highly secure and trustworthy;
– Encourage employee participation in community preparedness efforts, such as Citizen 
Corps, schools, Red Cross, Second Harvest, etc.;
– Work with others locally, including government, nongovernmental organizations, and 
private sector entities, both within and outside its sector, to identify and resolve gaps 
that could occur in the context of a terrorist incident, natural disaster, or other emergency;
– Work with the DHS to improve cooperation regarding personnel screening and 
information protection; and
– Identify supply chain and “neighbor” issues that could cause workforce or 
production disruptions for the company.

Critical Infrastructure Sectors          399
Sharing Information on Critical Infrastructure
A variety of information-sharing programs has been established. The Homeland 
Security Operations Center (HSOC) serves as a central, national information-shar-
ing and domestic incident management system. It increases coordination among 
all levels of government and the private sector. The HSOC operates 24 hours a 
day, provides real-time situational awareness and monitoring of the homeland, 
coordinates incidents and response, and issues advisories and bulletins on threats 
and protective measures. The HSOC communicates with its partners through the 
Homeland Security Information Network (HSIN), an Internet-based counterter-
rorism tool that uses encryption and a secure network. Another tool, the HSIN-
Critical Infrastructure, is designed to communicate real-time information (e.g., 
alerts and notifications) to CI owners and operators.
The DHS/Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection Daily Open Source 
Report is a Monday through Friday e-mail report divided by CI sectors. It is intended 
to educate and inform personnel engaged in the protection of CI. The content includes 
a variety of news reports on CI from many media outlets and information bulletins.
The DHS has established Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) to 
promote the sharing of information and work among CI sectors. These are volun-
tary organizations among CI sectors, such as food, electricity, and financial services. 
Industry associations (e.g., American Chemistry Council) often take the lead in form-
ing ISACs and arrange meetings, establish Web sites, provide technical assistance, 
and issue warnings. The level of activity of ISACs varies.
Congress has promoted information sharing through the Intelligence Reform and 
Terrorism Protection Act of 2004, also known as the 9/11 Reform Bill. It requires the 
president to facilitate an “information sharing environment” (ISE) with appropriate levels 
of government and private entities. An ISE Council manages and promotes this effort.
The Infrastructure Security Partnership (TISP) is a private sector group organized 
to bring together a variety of public and private sector organizations to collaborate on 
all-hazards facing the nation’s built environment. TISP facilitates dialogue among those in 
the design and construction industries. A major goal of TISP is to improve security in the 
nation’s CI. It promotes the transfer of research to codes, standards, and public policy.
Within the states, approaches vary on protecting CI and sharing information. One 
private sector concern is the possibility of a leak of sensitive information from the 
information-sharing process. For example, if a company reports a cyberattack and the 
information is reported in the media, profits may suffer. Also, private sector proprietary 
information must be protected because it is valuable.
Critical Infrastructure Sectors
Agriculture and Food
The U.S. agriculture and food industry accounts for almost one-fifth of the gross domestic 
product (GDP) and a significant percentage of that figure contributes to the U.S. export 
economy. National and international confidence in the safety of the products of this industry 
is important. The greatest threats to this industry are disease and contamination. There is 
Do you think businesses are reluctant to share critical infrastructure information with 
government? Why or why not?

400          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
an urgent need to improve and validate methods for detecting bioterrorist agents in food 
products. The White House (2003a: 37) states that although rapid use of threat information 
could prevent an attack from spreading, serious institutional barriers and disincentives (e.g., 
economic harm) for sharing such information exist.
“The use of natural agents in attacks on agriculture or directly on people is commonly 
described as bioterrorism” (Congressional Budget Office, 2004: 39). Chalk (2003: 2) defines agro-
terrorism as “the deliberate introduction of a disease agent, either against livestock or into the food 
chain, to undermine socioeconomic stability and/or generate fear.” Terrorism, disease, and disasters in 
this sector of CI can cause serious health problems, economic losses, and panic.
An attack on the food supply can take place at numerous points between the farm and 
human consumption. Examples are farms, processing plants, retail stores, and restaurants. 
Whether domestic or imported, food could be subject to biological or chemical agents. An illustra-
tion of a terrorist attack on food occurred in 1984 when members of an Oregon religious group, 
who followed an Indian-born guru named Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, secretly applied salmonella 
bacteria to a restaurant salad bar to poison residents of a community to influence an election. Over 
750 people became ill. Disgruntled employees have caused other incidents of food sabotage.
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) estimates that 76 million illnesses, 325,000 hos-
pitalizations, and 5,000 deaths occur annually due to food contaminated from various causes 
(Mead, et al., 1999). Although unintentional, the 2001 outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease 
in Britain showed the high expense from disease in the food chain. About four million cattle 
were destroyed, and the cost to the British economy (primarily agriculture and tourism) was 
about $48 billion (Gewin, 2003).
The primary federal regulatory agencies responsible for food safety are the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA). Inspectors from the DHS’s Bureau of Customs and Border Protection assist 
other agencies with inspecting imports. States also conduct inspections.
The FDA has regulatory authority over about 80% of the nation’s food supply. The 
USDA’s Food Safety and Inspection Service regulates the safety, quality, and labeling of most 
meats, as well as poultry and egg products. The EPA’s role is to protect public health and 
the environment from pesticides and promote safer pest management (Congressional Budget 
Office, 2004: 42–43).
Laws that defend the agriculture and food system against terrorism, disasters, and emer-
gencies include the Homeland Security Act of 2002. It created the DHS that is responsible 
for consolidating federal response to emergencies, including agroterrorism, into a single plan 
called the National Response Plan. Another law, the Public Health Security and Bioterrorism 
Preparedness and Response Act of 2002, also called the Bioterrorism Act, bolstered the FDA’s 
ability to identify domestic and foreign facilities that provide food, inspect food imports, 
and notify food businesses that become involved in the contamination of food supplies. 
Regulations under the authority of this law require food businesses in the chain of supply 
to maintain records to identify the immediate previous sources and subsequent recipients 
of food. HSPD-9, of January 2004, directed HHS, USDA, and EPA to increase their efforts 
in prevention, surveillance, emergency response, and recovery. The Project BioShield Act of 
2004 requires action to expand and expedite the distribution of vaccines and treatments to 
combat potential bioterrorism agents (Congressional Budget Office, 2004: 43).
Protection issues and strategies for the agriculture and food industry include the follow-
ing (Chalk, 2003; Congressional Budget Office, 2004: 44):
• Use risk management methods.
• Establish more extensive labeling and tracking systems for animals and food products 
to help pinpoint sources of contamination.
• Establish full tracking of ownership of the most hazardous materials (e.g., nitrates) 
that can be used as weapons.
• Establish enhanced incentives and protections for reporting new incidents of food 
contamination, improper sales of hazardous materials, unsafe processing and handling 
procedures, and incomplete inspections.

• Modify vulnerable practices in the industry.
• Increase the number of inspectors in the food chain and strengthen the capabilities of 
forensic investigations for early detection and containment.
• Foster improved links among the agriculture, food, and intelligence communities.
• Continue research on vaccinations.
• The FDA established the Office of Food Safety, Defense, and Outreach (OFSDO) to 
consolidate its educational services with its counterterrorism and chief medical officer 
responsibilities.
• The USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) offers training and a variety 
of information including notices, regulations, emergency resources, and security 
guidelines. It offers Model Food Security Plans that are voluntary for egg, meat, and 
poultry facilities. These plans are risk-based and include how to identify threats, 
such as disgruntled employees or terrorists. The FSIS Security Guidelines for Food 
Processors contains information on food security management; access controls; 
internal security; and security for slaughter and processing, storage, water and ice, and 
mail.
• The Food Products Association (FPA) is the largest trade association serving the 
food and beverage industry worldwide. It operates a Center for Food Security & 
Emergency Preparedness (CFSEP), offering on-site vulnerability assessments, training, 
security plan development, awareness training, and crisis management to members 
and nonmembers.
Water
As we know, water is essential to our lives, and its protection is vital. The water sector has 
two major components: fresh water supply and wastewater collection and treatment. The 
United States has 170,000 public water systems that depend on reservoirs, dams, wells, aqui-
fers, treatment systems, pumping stations, and pipelines. There are 19,500 municipal sanitary 
sewer systems in the United States, including 800,000 miles of sewer lines. This sector also 
includes storm water systems that collect storm water runoff (White House, 2003a: 39).
To prioritize protection, the water sector is studying four primary areas of possible 
attack (White House, 2003a: 39):
• Physical damage to assets and release of toxic chemicals used in water treatment
• Contamination of the water supply
• Cyberattack on water information systems
• Interruption of service from another CI sector
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005c: 87–88) reported similar vulnerabili-
ties. It noted the challenges of protection include a lack of redundancy in vital systems; this 
increases the probability that an attack will render a water system inoperable. The GAO rec-
ommended that federal funds for utilities focus on high-density areas and those areas serving 
critical assets (e.g., military bases). Recommendations also included technological upgrades in 
physical security and monitoring of water systems.
Threats to water systems are varied. In one community, security was increased when 
vandals victimized a water reservoir. The offenders broke into a control room, opened 
two valves, and began to drain the water out of the reservoir. Making matters worse, they 
opened another valve and flooded the control room. A sensor signaled the drop in the water 
level of the reservoir. Following this event, an intrusion alarm system was installed at access 
points. Another threat is the disgruntled employee. This may be a more serious threat than 
outsiders because employees are knowledgeable of system weaknesses and security mea-
sures. However, almost anybody has access to thousands of miles of pipe, and an offender 
can patch into a neighborhood line and introduce a poison after the water has been treated 
and tested for safety. This type of attack could sicken a neighborhood or people in an office 
building. Experts argue that to poison a reservoir or other large water source would require 
truckloads of poisons or biological agents. If an airplane containing anthrax crashed into a 
Critical Infrastructure Sectors          401

402          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
water source, this attack is likely to fail because of fire or the inability of the anthrax to dif-
fuse effectively (Winter and Broad, 2001).
HSPD-7, of December 2003, confirmed the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
as the lead agency for identifying, prioritizing, and coordinating the protection of drinking 
water and water treatment systems. Under HSPD-7, the Water Security Division of the EPA 
has been assigned the responsibility of preparing a water sector plan for the NIPP that the 
DHS must produce. The plan must identify assets, prioritize vulnerabilities, develop protec-
tion programs, and measure effectiveness. Other HSPDs relevant to the EPA are HSPD-8 
(strengthens preparedness), HSPD-9 (surveillance program and laboratory network for early 
warning of an attack), HSPD-10 (a classified document on decontamination), and HSPD-10: 
Biodefense for the 21st Century (strengthens biodefense).
The Public Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Act of 2002 
addresses, in Title IV, drinking water protection. It requires water systems serving over 3,300 
persons to conduct an assessment of vulnerabilities and prepare response measures. Other 
federal laws support safe drinking water.
Protection issues and strategies for the water sector include the following (White House, 
2003a: 39–40):
• Several methodologies are available to conduct a vulnerability assessment of water 
utilities. These are available from the EPA, Sandia National Laboratories, the 
Association of Metropolitan Sewerage Agencies, and other groups.
• As with all sectors, improve protection of digital control systems and supervisory 
control and data acquisition systems.
• Consider new technology, such as small robots placed in pipes to detect tainted water.
• Secure openings (e.g., manhole covers) to prevent the dumping of substances into 
systems.
• Properly store and secure chemicals.
• Use redundancy to increase the reliability of systems.
• Increase training and awareness.
• The EPA provides helpful information on security at its Web site.
• The DHS and EPA work with the water ISAC to coordinate information on threats 
and other topics of interest to this sector.
• The American Water Works Association (AWWA) is the largest organization of water 
supply professionals in the world. It is an international scientific and educational 
society dedicated to improving drinking water. The group offers training and 
education opportunities, conferences, and publications on security. Two other related 
groups are the National Rural Water Association (NRWA) and the Association of 
State Drinking Water Administrators (ASDWA).
In late December 2006, the nation’s first guidelines for the physical protection of water 
and wastewater systems were released. These voluntary guidelines were jointly developed by 
the American Society of Civil Engineers, the AWWA, and the Water Environment Federation, 
with a grant from the EPA. The guidelines are part of a program to address physical infra-
structure security needs for water supply, wastewater and stormwater, and online contaminant 
monitoring systems. The program includes guidelines to improve security, the development of 
voluntary standards, and training materials.
Protecting Digital Control Systems and Supervisory Control and Data 
Acquisition Systems
Many industries in the United States have transformed the way in which they con-
trol and monitor equipment by using digital control systems (DCSs) and supervisory 
control and data acquisition systems (SCADAs). These systems are computer-based 
and are capable of remotely controlling sensitive processes that were once controlled 

Critical Infrastructure Sectors          403
only manually on-site. The Internet is used to transmit data, a change from the closed 
networks of the past. Many sectors use this technology, including water, chemical, 
transportation, energy, and manufacturing.
In one case, an engineer used radio telemetry to access a waste management 
system to dump raw sewage into public waterways and the grounds of a hotel. The 
offender worked for the contractor who supplied the remote equipment to the waste 
management system. In another case, during a penetration test (i.e., an authorized test 
of defenses), service firm personnel were able to access the DCS/SCADA of a utility 
within minutes. Personnel drove to a remote substation, noticed a wireless network 
antenna, and without leaving their vehicle, they used their wireless radios and con-
nected to the network in 5 minutes. Within 20 minutes, they had mapped the network, 
including SCADA equipment, and accessed the business network and data. CI sectors 
must understand the risks of wireless communication (U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Office of Inspector General, 2005). Methods to protect these systems include 
computer access controls, encryption of communications, virus protection, data recov-
ery capabilities, and manual overrides.
The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace (White House, 2003b: 32) empha-
sizes the importance of protecting DCS/SCADA as a national priority because disrup-
tion of these systems can result in problems for public health and safety. Security is 
challenging for several reasons, including the requirement of research and development 
to implement effective security systems, and the possibility that security could affect the 
performance of processes. The DHS is working with the U.S. Department of Energy to 
partner with private industry to increase awareness of vulnerabilities, foster training, 
promote certification of software and hardware, and develop best practices and new 
technology.
Energy
Energy is another critical infrastructure sector (White House, 2003a: 50–53). It supports our 
quality of life, economy, and national defense. Presidential Decision Directive 63 (PDD 63) 
and HSPD-3 called for cooperation between government and individual infrastructures for 
increased protection, and the Department of Energy (DOE) was designated as the lead agency 
for the energy sectors. The energy sector is often divided into two industries: (1) electricity 
and (2) oil and natural gas.
Electricity
The physical system of electricity consists of three major parts. Generation facilities include 
fossil fuel plants, hydroelectric dams, and nuclear power plants. Transmission and distribu-
tion systems link the national electricity grid while controlling electricity as customers use 
it. Control and communication systems maintain and monitor critical components. PDD 63 
identified the electrical grid as CI.
The electricity industry is highly regulated. Regulators include the Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission (FERC) and state utility regulatory commissions. The Nuclear Regula tory 
Commission (NRC) regulates nuclear plants and related activities.
The DOE designated the North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC) as the 
sector coordinator for electricity. Following the serious power blackout in New York in 
1965, the electric industry established NERC consisting of public and private utilities from 
the United States and Canada. The aim of this group is to develop guidelines and procedures 
to prevent disruptions of power. This group also coordinates guidelines on physical and 
cybersecurity.
Serious vulnerabilities exist with the equipment used in the production and transmission 
of electricity, and electronic monitoring devices, because these assets are outdoors and have 
minimal protection. The National Research Council reported that an assault on any individual 

404          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
segment of a network would likely result in minimal local disruption, but a coordinated attack 
on key assets could cause a long-term, multistate blackout.
In December 2004, the DHS reported that power company employees in Nevada were 
on routine patrol when they found that nuts, bolts, and supporting cross members had been 
removed from five transmission line towers. The company noted that if one tower fell, eight 
more could be brought down at the same time; however, because of redundancy in the trans-
mission system, loss of electricity would not occur.
An example of a broad, regional disruption is the Northeast-Midwest blackout of 
August 14, 2003. It affected about 50 million people and took five days to fully restore 
service, although most customers had power within 24 hours. The DOE estimated the total 
cost of this blackout at $6 billion, mostly from lost income and earnings. This emergency 
illustrated the importance of preparation. For example, in New York City, many high-rise 
buildings had no backup generators, traffic lights did not work (causing gridlock), service sta-
tions were unable to sell gas (causing vehicles to stop and block traffic), and clean water was in 
jeopardy because no backup power existed at water facilities. These problems were repeated 
throughout the region of the blackout, and it has been suggested that codes should be estab-
lished for emergency backup generators (Congressional Budget Office, 2004: 37).
Protection issues and strategies for the electricity sector include the following 
(Congressional Budget Office, 2004: 32–37; White House, 2003a: 50–53):
• Many of the assets present unique protection challenges. Examples are power 
generation facilities and substations.
• The owners and operators of the electric system are a heterogeneous group, and data 
are needed to conduct analyses of this sector’s interdependencies. Such data would 
help to plan protection priorities and strategies.
• One serious issue is the lack of metrics to determine and justify security investments. 
In the case of natural disasters or accidents, such metrics are more readily available.
• To increase reliability, this sector is seeking to build a less vulnerable grid, while 
looking to redundancy in its transmission and distribution facilities.
• To improve recovery from equipment failure (e.g., transformers), utilities should 
maintain adequate inventories of spare parts, and the design of parts should be 
standardized.
• This sector has initiated intra-industry working groups to address security issues and 
an ISAC to gather incident information and relay alert notices.
• The FERC and the DOE have worked together to enhance physical and cybersecurity.
• Power management control rooms are perhaps the most protected component of this 
sector. NERC guidelines require a backup system, and security requirements are being 
formulated.
Oil and Natural Gas
Oil and natural gas businesses are closely integrated. The oil industry includes crude oil trans-
port, pipelines, refining, storage, terminals, ports, ships, trucks, trains, and retail stores. The 
natural gas industry includes production, transmission, and distribution. There are 278,000 
miles of natural gas pipelines and 1,119,000 miles of natural gas distribution lines in the 
United States (White House, 2003a: 52). The oil and natural gas industries face similar chal-
lenges as the electric industry. Examples are issues of reliability, redundancy, risk management, 
and security.
Dams
According to the National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and 
Key Assets (White House, 2003a: 76), dams are a key asset and vital to our economy and 
communities. The Congressional Budget Office (2004: 30–31) reported that about 80,000 
dams were listed in the National Inventory of Dams. These structures are major components 
of CI sectors that provide not only electricity, but also water to population and agricultural 
areas. Failure of a dam can cause loss of life, property damage, serious economic loss, and the 

lost value of services (e.g., power, water, irrigation, and recreation). Locations downstream are 
most vulnerable, as in the Johnstown Flood of 1889 that caused 2,200 deaths. In 1976, the 
failure of the newly built Teton Dam, in Idaho, resulted in 11 deaths, 20,000 homes evacu-
ated, and about $800 million in damages (more costly than the dam itself).
Most dams are small and the federal government is responsible for roughly 10% of 
dams. The remaining ones belong to state and local governments, utilities, and the private 
sector. Under current law, owners are responsible for safety and security. Because of the need 
to improve the management of risks pertaining to dams, the DHS (i.e., FEMA’s National Dam 
Safety Program) is focusing on the following: (1) partnering on a host of issues (e.g., risk 
assessment methodologies) with owners, government agencies, the Association of State Dam 
Safety Officials, and the United States Society of Dams; (2) prioritizing dams for protection; 
(3) studying security technology (e.g., sensors and barriers to prevent an attack by watercraft); 
and (4) improving emergency management (White House, 2003a: 76).
Critical Infrastructure Sectors          405
Besides the risks of terrorism, other criminal acts, natural disasters, and accidents, criti-
cal infrastructure sectors also face the risk of equipment failure that can disrupt vital 
services.
Nuclear Power Plants
The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key Assets 
(White House, 2003a: 74–75) views nuclear power plants as key assets that represent U.S. 
economic power and technological advancement. A disruption of these facilities could have 
significant impact on the safety and health of citizens and harm the economy.
Nuclear power supplies about 20% of U.S. electricity from 103 commercial nuclear reac-
tors in 31 states. This source of power has created much controversy (Congressional Budget 
Office, 2004: 9–19; Hebert, 2005). It has been touted as an option to reduce dependence on 
fossil fuels (i.e., oil, natural gas, and coal) and Middle East oil. Some environmentalists have 
favored nuclear power to reduce “greenhouse” gases caused by fossil fuels. Opponents refer 
to nuclear plant disasters. In 1986, the Chernobyl nuclear plant, in Ukraine, exploded due to 
design deficiencies and safety problems not present in U.S. reactors. This disaster spread radio-
active substances across northern Europe. Residents of Chernobyl had to permanently relocate, 
and agricultural lands were permanently contaminated. Thirty-one people died in the fire and 
meltdown, and cancer rates climbed in the area. The 1979 Three-Mile Island partial nuclear 
meltdown in Pennsylvania resulted in some radioactive material escaping into the atmosphere 
before the reactor could be shut down. The accident was blamed on feed water pumps that 
stopped, followed by pressure that began to build, and a safety valve that became stuck. About 
150,000 people were forced to evacuate, and litigation resulted in damages of about $70 mil-
lion (mainly from the evacuation). The biggest cost was from the loss of Three Mile Island’s 
Unit 2 that cost ratepayers $700 million to build and $1 billion to defuel and decontaminate. 
This incident resulted in a halt to nuclear reactor construction in the United States.
Another controversy over nuclear power resulted from a report from the public interest 
group Riverkeeper (Welch, 2006: 96). The report focused on the Indian Point nuclear plant 
located 24 miles north of New York City. The group asserts that a successful terrorist attack 
could kill 44,000 people, increase cancer deaths, and cost over $2 trillion. In addition, evacu-
ation of 17–20 million people would be very difficult. The report asks why a nuclear plant 
is located so close to the city. The NRC disputed the contents of the report and accused the 
group of sensationalism, especially because of the report title, “Chernobyl on the Hudson?”
Construction costs have been another criticism of nuclear reactors. For example, in 1976 
the Seabrook plant in New Hampshire was projected to cost $850 million for two reactors and 

406          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
be completed in six years. Fourteen years later the project was finished at a cost of $7 billion, 
and the second reactor was canceled.
Terrorists find nuclear plants attractive targets because of the potential for mass casu-
alties and long-term environmental damage. Attacks may involve a 9/11 type of strike using 
an airliner, internal sabotage by an employee, a truck or boat bomb, an assault by a team 
aiming to plant an explosive, or a combination of these methods. Alternatives to attacking 
a reactor consist of planting explosives at nuclear waste or fuel locations to spread radioac-
tive materials. Assaults of nuclear plants have occurred in Spain by Basque separatists, in 
Russia by Chechens, in South Africa during the apartheid era, and a rocket attack targeted 
a French nuclear plant. Captured al-Qaida documents in Afghanistan contained diagrams 
of U.S. nuclear plants.
Debate continues over whether the concrete containment structure of a reactor could 
withstand a crash by a wide-bodied, fully fueled airliner. Reactors have walls 3.5 to 6 feet 
thick.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), an independent agency created by 
Congress through the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, regulates and licenses nuclear 
plants. It also regulates security and safety at the plants. NRC responsibilities include stor-
age, transportation, and disposal of high-level waste.
The NRC, in conjunction with other federal agencies, develops physical security 
criteria or standards for nuclear operations. These standards involve defenses against both 
internal and external threats. A possible internal threat is someone on the inside, with 
or without cooperation from others, who commits sabotage or theft of special nuclear 
materials (SNM). SNM can be used to manufacture a nuclear weapon. An external threat 
could be posed by several people who are dedicated to their objectives, are well trained 
in military skills, and possess weaponry and explosives. An insider may be part of this 
threat. Radiological sabotage of nuclear materials, during shipment or at the plant site, can 
endanger the public by exposure to radiation. Theft or diversion of SNM could be used for 
extortion, terrorism, publicity, or financial gain.
NRC security criteria stress redundancy and in-depth protection. Examples are two 
barriers and two intrusion alarm systems. A backup is required for every sensor, transmitter, 
processor, and alarm so terrorists cannot simply cut a line and catch a facility off-guard. 
Separate monitoring systems operate at nuclear plants. Three specific monitoring systems 
are security, fire, and safety. The security system is similar to a proprietary central station. 
A recordkeeping function is essential, especially to comply with stringent NRC recordkeep-
ing regulations.
Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 73, explains elements of an acceptable 
nuclear security program. It includes physical security organization, supervision, training, 
physical barriers, intrusion detection, access requirements, communications, testing, main-
tenance, armed response requirements, and secure transportation of nuclear materials.
NRC regulations require an armed response force present at a nuclear facility at all 
times (Figure 16-3). Criteria established by the NRC reinforce adequate selection, training, 
and weapons. Sufficient power is expected from the response force to counter an adver-
sary. This entails the use of deadly force in self-defense or in the defense of others. Local 
law enforcement assistance is to be called in the event of an attack. However, because of a 
response time delay from local authorities, the primary armed defense is expected from the 
on-site nuclear security force.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2006c) refers to the design basis threat 
(DBT), which describes the threat that plants must be prepared to defend against in terms of 
the number of attackers and their training, weapons, and tactics. The revised DBT requires 
plants to defend against a large number of attackers, expanded weapons, and an increase 
in the size of a vehicle bomb. At the same time, the DBT does not include the threat of 
an airborne attack. In addition, NRC regulations do not require plants to protect against 
attacks directed against sites by an enemy of the United States.
The Congressional Budget Office (2004: 16) stated: “Despite the many efforts by nuclear 
plants since September 11, emergency preparedness that would help to contain losses may not 

fully reflect the realities of the current terrorist threat.” The U.S. Government Accountability 
Office (2005c: 91–92) noted challenges for the NRC. For example, the NRC does not have 
a system for better utilizing information from security inspections to identify problems that 
may be common to all plants. Another challenge involves weaknesses in the force-on-force 
exercises, such as using more defenders than what would be available during an actual attack, 
not training forces in terrorist tactics, and using unrealistic weapons (rubber guns) that do not 
simulate actual gunfire. Other issues pertain to the use of automatic weapons, deadly force, 
and arrest authority.
Protection issues and strategies for nuclear facilities include the following (Congressional 
Budget Office, 2004: 13–17; White House, 2003a; 74–75):
• The DOE and the EPA maintain programs for the safe disposal of high-level 
radioactive waste.
• Under agreement with the NRC, states may regulate low-level radioactive materials, 
such as those used by medical, research, and food irradiation facilities. These locations 
are sources for a “dirty bomb,” and thus, security is vital.
• The NRC requires strict security and emergency plans at nuclear facilities and for 
nuclear materials in transit. Information security is also a top priority.
• Security has been enhanced since the 9/11 attacks, including more restricted site access 
and improved coordination with law enforcement and military authorities.
• The NRC, the DHS, and other organizations are working together to improve 
security.
• Options to improve protection include the following: increasing security against 
both ground and air assaults; adding physical features to better shield containment 
structures against heavy arms or aircraft; constructing safer storage facilities for 
spent nuclear materials; and improving protection during transportation of related 
materials.
• The Price-Anderson Act, a 1957 amendment to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 
provides financial support for the nuclear power industry. It creates insurance limits 
beyond what is available through commercial insurers. Other sources of federal 
assistance are available in an emergency.
Nuclear security also entails protection at four nuclear weapons production sites and three 
national laboratories that design nuclear weapons. The DOE and its National Nuclear 
Security Administration (NNSA) are responsible for these facilities.
Critical Infrastructure Sectors          407
FIGURE 16-3 Security officers at a nuclear generating plant. Courtesy: Wackenhut Corporation. Photo by Ed Burns.

408          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
Chemical Industry
The chemical sector provides another illustration of interdependencies among infrastruc-
tures and the ways a disruption in one sector can have a cascading affect (Congressional 
Budget Office, 2004: 21–28; White House, 2003a: 65–66). Chemical products depend on 
raw materials, electricity, and transportation, among other needs. The products from this 
industry include fertilizer for agriculture, chlorine for water purification, polymers that 
create plastics from petroleum for many household and industrial products, and a variety 
of medicines and other healthcare products. This industry also includes oil and gas produc-
tion. The chemical sector is the top exporter in the United States, totaling 10 cents out of 
every dollar. As with other sectors, timely delivery of products is essential for customers. 
Businesses with “just-in-time” delivery systems maintain a small inventory of chemicals. 
Municipal water systems often hold only a few days’ supply of chlorine for disinfecting 
drinking water.
Protection of the chemical industry is important not only because of our dependence on 
its products and for economic reasons, but also because of its flammable and toxic substances 
and the risks of fire, explosion, theft, and pollution. The EPA is the primary federal agency 
responsible for protecting the public and the environment from chemical accidents. It lists 
over 300 chemicals as “extremely hazardous,” meaning that harm could result in humans 
from exposure for only a short time.
The EPA Risk Management Program monitors facilities that handle hazardous sub-
stances beyond a threshold limit. Nearly 15,000 facilities are in the program, and many 
smaller facilities and retailers (e.g., gasoline stations) are excluded. The DHS is concerned 
about all potential targets and the smaller ones that are dispersed, more difficult to defend, and 
possibly attractive to terrorists.
A chemical accident that caused widespread losses occurred in 1984 in Bhopal, India, 
where a fatal pesticide was released from a Union Carbide Corporation plant. Nearly 4,000 
people were killed, and India’s courts ordered the company to pay $470 million in compensa-
tion to more than 566,000 survivors and dependents, including thousands of victims who were 
permanently disabled. When the accident occurred, there was no emergency response, atmo-
spheric conditions were at their worst, building standards were inadequate, and there was no 
zoning to limit housing near the plant. In the United States, the greatest loss of life from a chemi-
cal accident came in 1947 from a ship containing fertilizer that exploded in Texas City, Texas, 
and spread fire to other ships and to industrial facilities. About 600 lives were lost. Another 
U.S. disaster was the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989 in Alaska. When this ship ran aground, 
240,000 barrels of crude oil, with a value of $25 million, spilled. Exxon paid about $3 billion 
for mostly cleanup activities.
Safety in the chemical industry has been strengthened through federal laws. The 
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 resulted from the Bhopal 
accident and was the first federal initiative to promote safety specifically in chemical facilities. It 
requires plant operators to participate in community emergency planning, provide informa-
tion to local planners about chemicals on-site, and notify local authorities of a release. The 
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 mandated a role for the EPA in risk management plan-
ning for the chemical industry. Operators must have programs to prevent, detect, and mitigate 
releases of chemicals. The Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2002 requires vulnerabil-
ity assessments for chemical facilities along U.S. waterways. State and local governments are 
Do you think security at nuclear power plants is weakened when U.S. Government 
Accountability Office reports and other reports are available for public access on the 
Web and describe general security vulnerabilities and protection methods, even though 
classified versions of reports have limited circulation? Explain your answer.

heavily involved in chemical safety through emergency preparedness, and FEMA has provided 
technical support and training.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005c: 90) noted security challenges facing 
the chemical industry. It wrote that the federal government has not comprehensively assessed 
the industry’s vulnerability to terrorist attacks, and the extent of voluntary efforts by the 
industry is unclear. In 2006, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (2006a) reiterated 
the same points and added the following: while the EPA formerly led federal efforts to ensure 
chemical facility security, the DHS is now the lead agency to protect these facilities from ter-
rorist attacks; the DHS is developing a Chemical Sector-Specific Plan to coordinate all sectors, 
assess vulnerabilities, and develop protection programs; and Congress should provide the 
DHS with the authority to require the chemical industry to address plant security.
The fiscal 2007 Homeland Security spending bill, signed into law by President Bush, 
provides the DHS with the authority to set rules for chemical plant security for the first time. 
However, controversy developed in the Senate over a provision in the law that prohibits states 
from maintaining stricter laws than the federal government. Senators argued that the provi-
sion reduces community safety (Strohm, 2007).
In June of 2007, the DHS gained the authority to enforce, for the first time ever, national 
chemical facility security standards. Recognizing that not all facilities face the same risk, DHS 
will determine which plants are “high risk” and require vulnerability assessments and site 
security plans with an emphasis on access controls and the prevention of theft and sabotage. 
A comprehensive approach will include chemicals in transit and a reduction in standstill time 
(e.g., unattended cars) for rails cars holding toxic substances. The DHS will  inspect, audit, 
and penalize to ensure compliance (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2007).
Telecommunications
The telecommunications sector has consistently provided reliable and vital communications 
and processes to meet the needs of businesses and governments, while subject to technologi-
cal advances, business and competitive pressures, and changes in government regulations. This 
sector’s cyber and physical assets have faced a challenging threat environment (White House, 
2003a: 47–49).
The telecommunications sector provides voice and data service to public and private 
customers through the Public Switched Telecommunications Network (PSTN), the Internet, 
and private enterprise networks. The PSTN includes switched circuits for telephone, data, 
and leased point-to-point services. Components of the system are connected by nearly two bil-
lion miles of fiber-optic and copper cable. The physical PSTN is the backbone of this sector, 
with cellular, microwave, and satellite technologies extending service to mobile customers. 
Advances in data network technology and increasing demand for data services have helped 
to create the rapid growth of the Internet. Internet service providers (ISPs) enable customers 
to access the Internet. International PSTN and Internet traffic travels by underwater cables. 
Enterprise networks support the voice and data needs and operations of large enterprises.
The PSTN and the Internet are becoming increasingly interconnected, software driven, 
and remotely managed, while the physical assets of this industry are increasingly concentrated 
in shared facilities. Wireless telecommunications is growing through an infrastructure of base 
stations and radio-cell towers.
The telecommunications sector is vulnerable to a variety of risks, including adverse 
weather, unintentional cable cuts, and crime. The 9/11 attacks resulted in significant collateral 
damage to this sector. However, the damage was offset by diverse and redundant communica-
tions capabilities.
As in other sectors, government and business leaders may have different perspectives 
on risks, security, and reliability. In the telecommunications sector, agreement on these issues 
remains a challenge. Protection issues and strategies in this sector include the following (White 
House, 2003a: 48–49):
• As with other sectors, because interdependencies could result in a cascading effect, 
redundancy and diversity are major concerns.
Critical Infrastructure Sectors          409

410          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
• Government and industry continue to work together to understand vulnerabilities, 
develop countermeasures, and raise awareness about physical and cyber threats.
• The DHS works with this industry to define an appropriate security threshold and 
develop requirements.
• The DHS works with other nations to consider innovative communications paths to 
strengthen the reliability of this sector globally.
• Public-private partnerships that influence telecommunications security and reliability 
include the President’s National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee 
and Critical Infrastructure Protection Board (PCIPB), the Government Network 
Security Information Exchanges, the Telecommunications ISAC, and the Network 
Reliability and Interoperability Council of the FCC.
Cyberspace and Information Technology
Cyberspace and information technology (IT) are essential components of the telecommunica-
tions sector, our economy, and society. The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace (White 
House, 2003b: iii-vii) states
“The way business is transacted, government operates, and national defense is 
conducted have changed. These activities now rely on an independent network of 
information technology infrastructures called cyberspace.… Cyberspace is com-
posed of hundreds of thousands of interconnected computers, servers, routers, 
switches, and fiber optic cables that allow our critical infrastructures to work.
This National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace is part of our overall effort to 
protect the Nation. It is an implementing component of the National Strategy for 
Homeland Security and is complemented by a National Strategy for the Physical 
Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key Assets.
In October 2001, President Bush issued Executive Order 13231, authorizing a protec-
tion program for cyberspace and the physical assets that support such systems. This order 
was complemented by the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) and the 
Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2002. A combination of acts, relevant presidential direc-
tives, and statutory authorities provides the legal foundation for action to secure cyber-
space. The FISMA, for example, requires each federal agency to develop, document, and 
implement an agencywide information security program (U.S. Government Accountability 
Office, 2006b: 4).
The following list provides a summary of the National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace 
(White House, 2003b: vii-60):
• The economy is fully dependent on IT and the information infrastructure. The 
Internet is at the core of these systems. Many components of infrastructure sectors 
are controlled by these information systems. Examples are water treatment plants, 
electrical transformers, trains, and stock markets. Of primary concern is the threat 
of attacks to disrupt CI, the economy, and national security.
• Attack tools and methodologies are becoming widely available, and the sophistication 
of users is improving. Enhanced cyber threat analysis is needed to address trends 
related to threats and vulnerabilities.
• In peacetime, our enemies may conduct espionage on our government, university 
research centers, and private companies. They may seek to prepare for cyber strikes 
by mapping U.S. IT, identifying key targets, and lacing IT with back doors and other 
means of access.
• The strategy provides direction for the federal government, and it identifies steps 
that can be taken by state and local governments and the private sector to improve 
collective cybersecurity.
• Strategic objectives are to prevent cyberattacks, reduce national vulnerability, and 
minimize damage and recovery time from attacks that do occur.

• The Secretary of the DHS will have responsibility to develop a comprehensive plan for 
securing cyberspace, provide crisis management and technical assistance, coordinate 
with other government agencies and the private sector, and support research.
• Five national priorities are (1) a national cyberspace security response system, (2) a 
national cyberspace security threat and vulnerability reduction program, (3) a national 
cyberspace security awareness and training program, (4) securing government’s 
cyberspace, and (5) national security and international cyberspace security cooperation.
In June 2003, the DHS established the National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) to 
address cybersecurity issues and to coordinate a cybersecurity strategy. The NCSD also serves 
to coordinate a public/private partnership supporting the U.S. Computer Emergency Response 
Team (US-CERT), ISAC partnerships, and the Cyber Warning Information Network, among 
other initiatives.
Cyber Threats
There are many threats to cyberspace and information technology, and an “all-hazards” 
approach is best for protection. We often think about hackers attacking computer systems; 
however, the threats are broad and include criminals, spies, disgruntled employees, natural 
disasters, accidents, and errors.
The beginning of Chapter 7, under “Universal IT Threats,” offers a variety of information on 
cyber threats, such as the insider threat, the vulnerability of telework, the costs of losses, and 
the difficulty of measuring computer crime.
Cyberattacks offer several advantages to offenders. They include no physical intru-
sion, safety for the offender, profit, no significant funding, usually no state sponsor, immense 
challenges for IT specialists and investigators, and enormous potential harm to victims. 
Cybersecurity focuses on methods to counter threats from a host of offenders and others who 
harm cyberspace and information technology and create losses.
Computer crimes can be divided into four categories according to Taylor et al. (2006: 
9–15). These categories are as follows:
• Computer as a target: This includes the attacker who alters data. A business can 
be harmed, if say, decisions are made based on the altered data. Another example 
is denying use of the system by legitimate individuals. Among the variations of 
this example is the denial-of-service attack. This networking prank initiates many 
requests for information to clog the system, slow performance, and crash the site. It 
may be used to cover up another cybercrime. Defacement of a Web site is another 
example in this category, which may be referred to as malicious acts.
• Computer as instrument of a crime: In this category, the offender uses the computer to 
commit a crime. Examples are theft, fraud, and threats.
• Computer as incidental to a crime: This category involves the use of a computer to 
facilitate and enhance crimes. For example, computers that speed transactions aid 
money laundering. In addition, offenders use computers to maintain records of their 
illegal enterprises.
• Crimes associated with the prevalence of computers: This category includes crimes 
against the computer-related industry and its customers. An example is software 
piracy.
Common terms associated with cyber threats are as follows. A Trojan horse is a pro-
gram, unknown to the user, which contains instructions that exploit a known vulnerability in 
software. A virus or worm seeks to cause damage to an application or network and delete files. 
A worm is similar to a virus except it can self-replicate (i.e., spread itself across networks and 
the Internet). Defenses include behavior blockers that stop suspicious code based on behavior 
patterns, not signatures, and applications that quarantine viruses in shielded areas. A logic 
bomb contains instructions in a program that creates a malicious act at a predetermined time. 
Programs are available that monitor applications seeking to change other applications or files 
when such a bomb goes off.
Critical Infrastructure Sectors          411

412          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
Dumpster diving involves searching garbage for information, sometimes used to support 
social engineering (i.e., using human interaction or social skills to trick a person into revealing 
sensitive information). An example of social engineering is a person being convinced to open 
an e-mail attachment or visit a malicious Web site. Another example is a hacker telephoning 
a corporate employee and claiming to be a corporate IT technician needing an access code to 
repair the system.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005e) studied spam, phishing, and spy-
ware threats to federal IT systems, and its findings have relevance to state and local govern-
ments and the private sector. The three threats are among the top emerging cyber threats. 
Explanations of each follow.
Spam is the distribution of unsolicited commercial e-mail. It has been a nuisance to 
individuals and organizations by inundating them with e-mail advertisements for services, 
products, and offensive subject matter. Spammers can forge an e-mail header so the message dis-
guises the actual source. The spam problem is made worse because it is a profitable business. 
Sending spam is inexpensive and sales do result.
As with other security methods through history, adversaries constantly seek methods to 
circumvent defenses. This is an ongoing “cat and mouse” competition. Antispam measures 
have caused spammers to design techniques to bypass detection and filtration. Spammer tech-
niques include using alternate spelling, disguising the addresses in e-mails, and inserting the 
text as an image so a filter cannot read it. Compromised systems are regularly being used to 
send spam, making it difficult to track the source of spam.
Phishing is a word coined from the analogy that offenders use e-mail bait to fish for per-
sonal information. The origin of the word is from 1996 when hackers were stealing America 
Online (AOL) accounts by scamming passwords from unsuspecting AOL customers. Hackers 
often replace f with ph, and thus, the name phishing developed.
Phishing often uses spam or pop-up messages that trick people into disclosing a variety 
of sensitive identification information (e.g., credit card and Social Security numbers and pass-
words). For example, one ploy is for a phisher to send e-mails appearing as a legitimate business 
to potential victims. The e-mail requests an “update” of ID information or even participation in 
“enhanced protection against hackers, spyware, etc.” Phishing applies a combination of techni-
cal methods and social engineering.
Zeller (2006) reports that keylogging programs are gaining in popularity and replacing 
phishing by groups of global cybercriminals. Keylogging programs copy the keystrokes of 
computer users and send the information to offenders. These programs exploit security weak-
nesses and examine the path that carries information from the keyboard to other parts of the 
computer. Sources of the keylogging programs include Web pages, software downloads, and 
e-mail attachments. Since these programs are often hidden inside other software and infect 
computers, they are under the category of Trojan horses.
Spyware lacks an accepted definition by experts and even proposed legislation (U.S. 
Government Accountability Office, 2005e: 31). The definitions vary depending on whether 
the user consented to the downloading of the software, the types of information the spyware 
collects, and the nature of the harm. Spyware is grouped into two major purposes: advertis-
ing and surveillance. Often in exchange for a free service (e.g., allegedly scanning for threats), 
spyware can deliver advertisements. It can collect Web surfing history and online buying habits, 
among other information. Other types of software are used for surveillance and to steal infor-
mation. Consumers find it difficult to distinguish between helpful and harmful spyware.
Spyware is difficult to detect, and users may not know their system contains it. Spyware 
typically does not have its own uninstall program, and users must remove it manually or use 
a separate tool. Some types of spyware install multiple copies, and it can disable antispyware 
and antivirus applications and firewalls.
Malware (malicious software) is programs that create annoying or harmful actions. 
Often masquerading as useful programs or embedded into useful programs so users activate 
them, malware can include spyware, viruses, and worms.
The potential for financial gain has caused spammers, malware writers, and hackers to 
combine their methods into blended cyber threats. Security analysts are seeing an increase in 

blended threats and destructive payloads. Blended cyber threats combine the characteristics of 
different types of malicious code to bypass security controls. According to the U.S. Government 
Accountability Office (2005e: 44–45), several federal agencies found that current enterprise 
tools from vendors that protect against cyber threats are inadequate and impede efforts to 
detect, prevent, remove and analyze incidents. In the DOJ, for example, IT specialists, without 
employing certain tools from vendors, could gain greater control over systems by implementing 
tighter security controls, such as limiting users’ rights to modify and change certain features 
on their computers. The GAO and the National Institute of Standards and Technology have 
advised agencies to use a layered security (defense-in-depth) approach, including strong pass-
words, patches, antivirus software, firewalls, software security settings, backup files, vulner-
ability assessments, and intrusion detection systems.
Not only could a blended cyberattack cause harm, but also a blended cyber-physical 
attack can aggravate damage and hamper recovery. Probable targets are CI, companies sup-
porting U.S. policies, response and recovery assets, and security systems. An example of a 
blended cyber-physical attack is penetrating a digital control system and supervisory control 
and data acquisition system (DCS/SCADA) to alter a manufacturing process to cause a fire 
and then physically attacking a fire brigade and their equipment.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005e) further describes cyber threats as 
follows:
• Terrorists may use phishing scams or spyware/malware in order to generate funds or 
gather sensitive information.
• Criminal groups are increasingly using cyber intrusions that attack systems for 
monetary gain; further, organized crime groups are using spam, phishing, and 
spyware/malware to commit identity theft and online fraud.
• Foreign intelligence services use cyber tools as part of their information-gathering and 
espionage activities.
• Hackers sometimes break into networks for the thrill of the challenge or for bragging 
rights in the hacker community. While remote cracking once required a fair amount of 
skill or computer knowledge, hackers can now download attack scripts and protocols 
from the Internet and launch them against victim sites. Thus, while attack tools have 
become more sophisticated, they have also become easier to use.
• Insider threats include the disgruntled organization insider as a principal source of 
computer crimes. Insiders may not need a great deal of knowledge about computer 
intrusions because their knowledge of a target system often allows them to gain 
unrestricted access to cause damage to the system or to steal system data. The insider 
threat also includes outsourcing vendors. Employees who accidentally introduce 
malware into systems also fall into this category.
• Botnet operators are hackers; however, instead of breaking into systems for the 
challenge or bragging rights, they take over multiple systems to enable them to 
coordinate attacks and distribute malware, spam, and phishing scams. The services 
of these networks are sometimes made available on underground markets (e.g., 
purchasing a denial-of-service attack; servers to relay spam or phishing scams).
Critical Infrastructure Sectors          413
“Bots”
Cybercrime through the use of networks of bots is a serious and growing threat. 
“Networks of bots” refers to personal computers (PCs) infected with malicious soft-
ware that enables the hacker to control the PCs.
“Bots,” also known as “Internet Bots,” are software applications that operate 
automated tasks over the Internet. Bots perform repetitive tasks at a much higher rate 
than humans perform and use automated script to fetch, analyze, and file information 
from Web servers (Wikipedia, 2007).

414          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
Acohido and Swartz (2006) write about hackers who use networks of bots as 
described next. From his home in Downey, California, Jeanson Ancheta, a 19-year-old 
high school dropout, controlled thousands of compromised PCs, or bots, which earned 
him enough cash to purchase a BMW and spend hundreds of dollars a week on clothes 
and car parts. However, he was caught by authorities and pleaded guilty to federal 
charges of hijacking thousands of PCs and selling access to others to spread spam and 
attack Web sites. The threat is global, as evidenced by the arrest of Farid Essebar, an 
18-year-old resident of Morocco, who was involved in Internet bots. Tim Cranton, 
director of Microsoft’s Internet Safety Enforcement Team, refers to bot networks as the 
tool of choice for those using the Internet to commit crimes. Authorities note that young 
men make up the majority of “bot herders,” and they assemble networks of infected 
PCs to acquire cash by spreading adware (i.e., pop-up advertisements for dating, porn, 
gambling and other activities). The offenders are paid for each PC they attack with ads. 
Although neophytes are slack about covering their tracks, they provide authorities with 
insight about their methods. In contrast, more sophisticated offenders work with orga-
nized crime groups who are more difficult to apprehend. Researchers estimate a 7% 
infection rate for PCs. That translates to about 48 million of the 681 million PCs con-
nected to the Internet globally may be controlled by a bot network. McAfee, the large 
cybersecurity firm, detected 28,000 distinct bot networks in 2005, triple the number 
from the year before. The security firm nCircle noted $197 billion in annual losses to 
U.S. businesses from computer crimes.
Cyberwarfare
Billo and Chang (2004) describe cyberwarfare as follows:
[U]nits organized along nation-state boundaries, in offensive and defen-
sive operations, using computers to attack other computers or networks 
through electronic means. Hackers and other individuals trained in software 
programming and exploiting the intricacies of computer networks are the 
primary executors of these attacks. These individuals often operate under 
the auspices and possibly the support of nation-state actors. In the future, 
if not already common practice, individual cyber warfare units will execute 
attacks against targets in a cooperative and simultaneous manner.
The objectives of such attacks include the acquisition of classified information, 
the defacement of Web pages, denial of service, and the disruption of equipment. The 
United States has faced attacks by China, Russia, and several other countries.
Information Technology Security
Information technology security is complex, and those who work in this field face enormous 
challenges. Chittister and Haimes (2006: 1–20) write that the emphasis in IT security is tilted 
toward short-term tactical measures—such as firewalls and patches—rather than long-term, 
strategic approaches. They cite the work of Wulf and Jones (2004): “The truth is that we 
don’t know how to build secure information systems.” Chittister and Haimes argue that 
this is a global problem, losses in the United States alone from cyberattacks are estimated to 
surpass $100 billion annually, security breaches continue unabated, and security cannot be 
achieved on an ad hoc basis through piecemeal and uncoordinated responses. They emphasize 
enhanced security through the following principles: (1) cybersecurity must be a high priority 
of top management; (2) an emphasis on risk management throughout the entire development 
of cybersecurity; and (3) a realization that “risk of software intrusion must be assessed and 
managed throughout the lifecycle of software development, focusing on both the functionality 

Critical Infrastructure Sectors          415
of software development and on the people involved in the process, knowing that hackers will 
exploit every weakness in the system.”
Croy (2005) writes that more entities understand the business value of IT, and once 
IT is better integrated into the organization, the next step is the integration of IT security, 
physical security, business continuity planning, and insurance into comprehensive risk man-
agement planning. To justify security expenditures, Croy notes: “Executives are also becom-
ing more directly involved because of government regulations such as Gramm-Leach-Bliley, 
Sarbanes-Oxley, and HIPAA that hold them personally and legally liable for business issues 
including access to critical information, financial controls, customer privacy, and physical 
security.”
Kiyota (2000: 104) refers to an integrated information security architecture (IISA) as a 
well-reasoned and thoroughly researched plan for developing and implementing an effective 
security program to serve an enterprise’s goals and needs. An IISA is an avenue to build a 
security infrastructure from the ground up. It consists of these steps: (1) evaluating an orga-
nization’s internal and external risks; (2) determining what defensive tools and protocols are 
needed; and (3) planning for the implementation of a defense of new and legacy systems for 
today’s “virtual perimeter” environment. The IISA provides a base for policies, procedures, 
and contingency plans. Furthermore, by adopting security standards, an organization can 
monitor its performance. Standards provide a baseline for measuring effectiveness that can 
result in improvements.
Best practices for IT security are varied and helpful to enhance security. However, it is 
important to note that “best practices” are an ideal state, and reality means that such practices 
are not universally applicable; each entity is different, and management must make organiza-
tion-specific decisions (Landoll, 2005: 110).
One source for best practices is ISO 17799. It is an internationally recognized generic 
standard for IT security and covers 10 sections:
•  Security Policy
•  System Access Control
•  Computer and Operations Management
•  System Development and Maintenance
•  Physical and Environmental Security
•  Compliance
•  Personnel Security
•  Security Organization
•  Asset Classification and Control
•  Business Continuity Management
ISO/IEC 27001 is another IT security standard. It is from ISO and the International 
Electrotechnical Commission. ISO/IEC 27001 is a certification standard specifying certain 
requirements and can be used in conjunction with ISO 17799.
Another international standard is the Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology (COBIT) produced by the Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
and the IT Governance Institute. COBIT provides IT specialists with best practices to maxi-
mize IT resources and develop security and control.
Here is a list of basic strategies from a variety of sources to enhance IT secu-
rity (Computer Security Institute/FBI, 2006; Sager, 2000: 40; Savage, 2006: 23–28; and 
Thompson, 1997: 25–30):
1. Establish an IT security committee to plan and lead through a risk management 
approach.
2. Conduct an economic evaluation of security expenditures (e.g., return on 
investment).
3. Invest in quality training because IT security changes rapidly and it is important to 
ensure that all employees are involved in security.
4. Monitor and track alert bulletins and best practices.

416          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
5. Consider efforts to establish generally accepted benchmarks for securing computer 
networks. Such standards define levels of security that an organization can measure 
itself against.
6. Use a layered approach to security. This creates multiple “roadblocks” for 
offenders.
7. Ensure that IT security and information security are well coordinated and integrated. 
Remember that a variety of devices can hold data, including flash storage devices, 
personal digital assistants (PDA), digital cameras, cell phones, MP3 players, iPods, 
Xboxes, and DVD players. In addition, ordinary items such as watches and pens can 
hold memory cards. And, because of wireless technology, a wireless hard drive can be 
hidden almost anywhere.
8. Use policies and procedures to strengthen security.
9. Provide physical security for computer facilities and include servers, desktops, laptops, 
and other equipment.
10.  When designing a computer facility, avoid glass walls or doors, single paths for power 
to communications lines, uncontrolled parking, underground locations (because of 
flooding), multitenant buildings, signs describing the facility, and information about 
the facility on the Web.
11.  Automatic access control systems for a computer facility are popular in combination 
with limited entrances; the double-door entry concept; visual verification; badge 
identification systems; and access control according to time, place, and specific 
personnel. Access controls are required not only for a computer facility, but also for 
all computers. This includes protection against unauthorized remote access. Biometric 
access control systems enable identification by fingerprints and so forth. Access to 
sensitive data must be safeguarded on the premises and from remote locations, even 
by legitimate computer users.
12.  Passwords or codes are identification procedures that permit access only after the 
proper code is entered into the computer. The code should be changed periodically. 
Alarms to signal attempts at unauthorized access should be incorporated into 
software.
13.  Firewalls are software and hardware controls that permit system access only to users 
who are registered with a computer. Attempts to gain access are challenged by the 
use of passwords. These challenges are “layers” that data must go through before 
reaching its destination. A firewall sits between a company’s internal computer 
network and outside communications. Firewall products offer a range of features 
such as file or virus checking, log and activity reports, encryption, security and 
authentication schemes, and monitoring and alarm mechanisms for suspicious 
events or network intruders. Putting up a firewall is similar in certain respects to 
implementing physical security—assess the vulnerability, determine need, and after 
understanding the technology, decide on a proper level of protection.
14.  Use intrusion detection software that is like a physical intrusion detection system, only 
for the network.
15.  Be proactive and conduct searches for hacker programs that may be used in an attack. 
Hackers tend to brag about their successes to the hacker community, so check out 
sites that attract hackers.
16.  Carefully evaluate new techniques, such as those that purport to filter and trace 
malicious software sent over the Web.
17.  Disable unused services. Most software programs include services that are installed by 
default. These unused services can be a path for hackers.
18.  Update software for improved security. Quickly install security patches. Software 
firms develop “patches” for protection when hackers attack their programs. Thus, 
when a patch is offered to a client, it should be installed as quickly as possible.
19.  Use decoy programs that trick hackers into attacking certain sites where they can be 
observed and tracked while the important sites remain secure.

20.  Because wireless networks increase the range of wired networks (by using radio 
waves to transmit data to other wireless devices), “signal leakage” is a security risk. 
Protection methods include policies, firewalls, and encryption.
21.  Audit IT security through frequent, rigorous vulnerability testing. Use monitoring 
software to gauge attacks and misuse. Such tools are available from many commercial 
sources.
22.  Because of the trend of companies concentrating on their core business and 
outsourcing everything else, “managed security services” is an option. Essentially, 
the work contracted to an outside firm can be as broad as surrendering “enterprise 
security” to the contractor. This includes security technologies, infrastructure, 
services, and management. Many questions evolve from this concept. Examples: 
What is to be retained, and what is to be outsourced? How will proprietary 
information be protected? Who is to be responsible for losses?
23.  Refer to publication guides of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
U.S. Department of Commerce. Examples are “Computer Security Incident Handling 
Guide,” “Guide to Selecting Information Technology Security Services,” and “Guide 
to Selecting Information Technology Security Products.”
Encryption
Many practitioners in the computer field consider encryption to be the best protection mea-
sure for data within a computer or while it is being transmitted. Once the domain of govern-
ment, encryption has traditionally been used to protect military or diplomatic secrets. During 
the 1970s, the private sector began marketing encryption products, and with the growth of 
computers and the Internet, encryption likewise grew.
Encryption consists of hardware or software that scrambles (encrypts) data, rendering it 
unintelligible to an unauthorized person intercepting it. The coding procedure involves rules or 
mathematical steps, called an algorithm, that convert plain data into coded data. This transfor-
mation of data is accomplished through what is called a key, which is a sequence of numbers or 
characters or both. The key is used in both transmitting and receiving equipment. Key security 
is vital because it is loaded into both ends of the data link. Furthermore, encryption tools should 
be changed periodically because breaches have become something of a game. Developers of 
encryption systems are finding that their estimates of how long it would take to crack the codes 
are too long. Rapidly evolving technology has shortened the life of promising encryption sys-
tems. Another point is noted by computer expert John M. Carroll (1996: 249), who adds that, 
when you become mesmerized by the wonder of some promising crypto device, ask yourself one 
question: “How much do I trust the person who sold me this gadget?” He extends this question 
to the international level by claiming that it would be unlikely for any country, even an ally, to 
provide an encryption system to another without retaining the keys.
Controversy has developed over whether the U.S. government should have the power 
to tap into every telephone, fax, and computer transmission by controlling keys. From the 
law enforcement perspective, such control is necessary to investigate criminals, terrorists, and 
spies. Opponents claim violations of privacy and damage to the ability of American businesses 
to compete internationally.
The growth of the Internet and business on the Internet has created the need for encryption 
to secure electronic interactions. Internet users are seeking privacy, confidentiality, and verifica-
tion of individuals and businesses they are dealing with. The public key infrastructure (PKI) and 
its authentication and encryption capabilities have evolved as a solution to these needs. Whereas 
the handshake or handwritten agreement has been tradition for centuries, a modern trend is the 
digital handshake and signature through the PKI. The PKI addresses three primary security needs: 
authentication, nonrepudiation, and encryption. The first need verifies an individual’s identity. 
The second need means that an individual cannot deny he or she has provided a digital signature 
for a document or transaction.
Today, encryption products are used widely to protect public and private information. 
Modern encryption technology can secure data on mobile devices and encrypt and decrypt 
Critical Infrastructure Sectors          417

418          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
e-mail. To protect data on laptops or other computers, an option is full-disk encryption with 
token-based authentication. In one case, a hospital IT security director was concerned that phy-
sicians were using PDAs containing patient information without proper safeguards to protect 
data if the device was lost or stolen. Encryption served as the solution to protect the hospital 
from embarrassment and legal liability. Businesses and government are typically interested 
in encryption for mobile devices and storage. Financial services organizations are especially 
concerned about financial transactions, besides storage. The retail and hospitality sectors are 
concerned about point-of-sale and payment information security (Piazza, 2007: 66–73; Smith, 
2006: 10–13).
Inside the Mind of an IT Security Professional
Critical thinking skills are essential to “think securely” while exposing IT security 
hype. Jay Heiser (2001: 106), an IT security specialist, notes that the ability to make 
intuitive, quick, and useful decisions about IT security is a learned skill that improves 
with practice and time. This does not mean that the security specialist is a good guesser; 
it means that the specialist has enough experience, judgment, and “sense” to make 
intelligent guesstimates based on relatively small amounts of information. Heiser states 
“determine the relevance of a vulnerability to your systems, evaluate the source of the 
warning, and then analyze its historical context and exploitability within your com-
puting environment. If you can’t do that, you’ll be constantly blown by the wind, and 
you’ll have no credibility with your employer.” Heiser recommends the following:
1. Do not accept a security warning at face value. Vendors want your money and 
are notorious for exaggerating risks.
2. Know where to go for proven analysis, but remember that the experts are often 
wrong. Find multiple sources.
3. Recognize that no attack is ever completely new. Each attack is a variation of 
something old. Understand what happened before to develop present solutions.
4. Most vulnerabilities are never exploited because most do not offer attackers 
something useful. Attackers have consistent goals and methods. Vulnerabilities 
that are inconsistent with the needs of cybercriminals are rarely a problem.
Defense Industry Base
Private sector defense industries play a crucial role in supporting the U.S. military (White 
House, 2003a: 45–46). These industries manufacture a wide variety of weapons (e.g., fighter 
jets, tanks, ships, and small arms), support equipment, and supplies essential to national 
defense and military operations (Figure 16-4). Also, many companies provide important ser-
vices (e.g., IT, maintenance, security, and meals) to the military.
For several decades, the Department of Defense has identified its own critical assets and 
those it depends on in the private sector. For example, private utilities service many military 
bases. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005c: 93) acknowledged that the DOD 
has taken steps to protect military installations. However, the GAO claims the DOD lacks 
a single organization with authority to manage and integrate installation preparedness and 
prepare a comprehensive plan.
Because of market competition and attrition, the DOD now relies on a single or lim-
ited number of private sector suppliers to fulfill essential needs. These circumstances require 
enhanced risk management and security.
The DOD, the DHS, and the private sector work to identify CI and protection require-
ments. These groups, and the intelligence and law enforcement communities, are working to 
establish policies and mechanisms to improve the exchange of security-related information. 

Critical Infrastructure Sectors          419
FIGURE 16-4 Defense industries are a component of critical infrastructure and supply weapons, vehicles, uniforms, 
and other products and services to support the U.S. military. Courtesy: DOD photo by Petty Officer 2nd Class Erik A. 
Wehnes, U.S. Navy.
The DOD is also working with defense industry contractors to address national emergency 
situation requirements, such as response time and supply and labor availability.
The DOD operates the National Industrial Security Program (NISP). This program inte-
grates information, personnel, and physical security to protect classified information entrusted 
to contractors. The goal is to ensure that contractors’ security programs deter and detect espio-
nage and counter the threat posed by adversaries seeking classified information. According to 
DOD’s Defense Security Service (DSS), which administers the NISP, attempts by foreign agents to 
obtain information from contractors have increased over the last several years and are expected 
to increase further. The U.S. General Accounting Office (2004: 2–4) found that the DSS cannot 
provide adequate assurances to federal government agencies that its oversight of contractors 
reduces the risk of information compromise, and it is unable to provide this assurance because 
its performance goals and measures do not relate directly to the protection of classified informa-
tion. Furthermore, the DSS maintains files on contractor facilities’ security programs and their 
security violations, but it does not analyze this information. By not analyzing information on 
security violations and how well classified information is being protected across all facilities, 
DSS cannot identify systemic vulnerabilities and make corrective changes to increase protection. 
As a result, government agencies are not being kept informed of possible compromises of their 
information. Remedies include establishing results-oriented performance goals and measures to 
assess whether DSS is achieving its mission and identifying information that needs to be ana-
lyzed to spot trends regarding how contractors are protecting classified information.
Outsourcing and complex mergers and acquisitions of domestic and foreign companies 
have produced challenges for the DOD in ensuring that its prime contractors’ second-, third-, 
and fourth-tier subcontractors fulfill supply and security requirements in a national emer-
gency and during peacetime. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005d: 3) noted 
that the DSS oversight of contractors under foreign ownership, control, or influence (FOCI) 
depends on contractors self-reporting. DSS then verifies the extent of the foreign relationship 
and works with the contractor on protective measures. The GAO found that the DSS cannot 
ensure that its approach under FOCI is sufficient to reduce the risk of a foreign nation gaining 
unauthorized access to U.S. classified information. Violations of FOCI policies were found by 
the GAO. Remedies include central collection and analysis of information, use of counterin-
telligence data, research tools, training for DSS staff, and lower turnover.

420          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
Career: Government/Industrial Security
Government/industrial security professionals protect a variety of special categories of 
classified information in accordance with the National Industrial Security Program 
(NISP). Personnel within this specialty must meet the requirements, restrictions, and 
other safeguards within the constraints of applicable law and the Code of Federal 
Regulations necessary to prevent unauthorized disclosure of classified information 
released by U.S. government departments and agencies to their contractors.
Entry-level management positions require an academic degree from an accredited 
institution and 3 to 5 years of experience in the government or an industrial security 
field, preferably in a supervisory role. Necessary specialty-specific training or experi-
ence includes successful application of security regulations and some exposure to secu-
rity budgetary issues. Professional certifications or a document record of involvement 
in professional security activities or training and education are a plus. Other prerequi-
sites include a proven, positive track record in problem solving and customer relations. 
The salary range is from $55,000 to $75,000, depending on a variety of factors.
Mid-level management positions require a baccalaureate or advanced degree 
from an accredited institution and 5 to 10 years experience in the government or indus-
trial security field with supervisory or previous managerial experience. Necessary spe-
cialty-specific training or experience includes professional certification (CPP, PCI, PSP, 
ISP, CFE, etc.) preferred, or a documented record of professional security training from 
U.S. government-sponsored training sessions. Other preferred prerequisites include a 
proven track record in problem solving, policy development, customer relations, suc-
cessful application of security regulations, and budgetary development.
Source: Courtesy of ASIS International. (2005). “Career Opportunities in Security.” www.
asisonline.org.
Government is a critical infrastructure sector. It is broad based and includes the 
defense industrial base, emergency services, public healthcare, public utilities, public 
transportation, and the postal system. It also includes government buildings, national 
monuments, and dams.
Key Assets
As written and defined at the beginning of this chapter, the term critical infrastructure/key 
resources has replaced the term critical infrastructure/key assets in the NIPP. Again, key 
resources are publicly or privately controlled resources essential to the minimal opera-
tions of the economy and government. Key assets are individual targets whose destruction 
could cause large-scale injury, death, or destruction of property, and/or profoundly damage 
national prestige, and confidence (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2006b). For 
simplicity’s sake, and because we are discussing individual targets, we will emphasize the 
term key assets here.
In contrast to CI, key assets represent a variety of unique facilities, sites, and structures that 
require protection (White House, 2003a: 71). One category of key assets consists of facilities 
and structures of technological and economic power. Examples of these key assets are nuclear 
power plants and dams.

Critical Infrastructure Sectors          421
Another category of key assets includes national monuments and symbols that have 
historical significance and represent U.S. traditions, values, and political power. These sites 
attract tourists and media attention. The U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI) is the lead 
agency responsible for the security and safety of 70,000 employees, 200,000 volunteers, 1.3 
million daily visitors, and over 507 million acres of public land that includes several national 
monuments (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2005b: 5). Protection challenges for the 
DOI are balancing security and public access; securing assets in remote areas; and addressing 
jurisdictional issues among federal, state, and local jurisdictions, and in some cases, private 
foundations. The DOI has improved security at high-profile sites, created a central security 
office, and developed a risk management and ranking methodology as a foundation for secu-
rity spending priorities. The DOI works with numerous law enforcement agencies, including 
the DHS, especially during high-profile events. State and local governments are also involved 
in the protection of monuments, symbols, and icons.
Government facilities are categorized as key assets (White House, 2003a: 77). This 
category includes buildings owned and leased by the federal government for use by federal 
entities. Government buildings—whether federal, state, or local—are subject to a variety 
of serious internal and external threats, similar to commercial high-rise buildings, and they 
require comprehensive protection.
In the federal system, the General Services Administration (GSA) is a primary agency 
charged with managing federal facilities; however, other government organizations are 
involved in protecting facilities (e.g., DOD). The GSA controls over 8,000 buildings, including 
office buildings, courthouses, and border stations. It owns most of the major departmental 
headquarters in Washington, D.C. (e.g., Departments of State, Justice, and Interior) and most 
of the key multiagency federal office buildings in major cities. The GSA has developed security 
standards and works with other groups (e.g., DHS) to enhance protection. It faces similar 
challenges as the DOI, namely balancing security and public access. The Federal Protective 
Service (FPS), transferred from the GSA to the DHS, serves as a law-enforcement and security 
service to federal buildings. The FPS offers a broad range of services, such as patrol, security, 
investigative, canine, and WMD response. The FPS and the U.S. Marshals Service (USMS) 
provide law enforcement and security services to federal buildings that house court functions. 
Both of these groups have worked together to enhance protection. Numerous private security 
companies also protect federal facilities. Privately owned buildings that house federal tenants 
present unique challenges that may create friction between the government and nonfederal 
occupants. The GSA must work with lessors to implement security enhancements. In federally 
owned buildings, federal laws and regulations are enforced. In buildings shared by federal and 
nonfederal tenants, federal laws and regulations that, for example, prohibit weapons apply 
only to those spaces occupied by federal tenants.
The 1995 Oklahoma City bombing led former President Clinton to direct the U.S. 
Department of Justice (1995) to assess the vulnerability of federal office buildings in the 
United States. Prior to the study and publication, “Vulnerability Assessment of Federal 
Facilities,” there were no governmentwide standards for security at federal facilities and no 
central database of the security in place at such facilities. Because of its expertise in court secu-
rity, the U.S. Marshals Service coordinated the study that focused on the approximately 1,330 
federal office buildings housing about 750,000 federal civilian employees. One major result 
of the study was the development of standards focusing on perimeter security, entry security, 
interior security, and security planning. Another result of the study was the division of federal 
buildings into five security levels, based on staffing size, use, and the need for public access. 
A Level I building has 10 or fewer federal employees and is a “storefront” type of operation, 
such as a military recruiting office. A Level V building is critical to national security, such as 
the Pentagon. Recommended minimum security standards apply to each security level.
The Oklahoma City bombing also led to Executive Order 12977, establishing the 
Interagency Security Committee (ISC) to address the quality and effectiveness of physical 
security requirements for federal facilities. In 2003, Executive Order 13286 transferred the 
leadership of the ISC from the Administrator of General Services to the Secretary of Homeland 

422          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
Security. In July 2004, based on Homeland Security Presidential Directive/HSPD-7, the ISC 
began reviewing federal agencies’ physical security plans to better protect the nation’s critical 
infrastructure and key resources. The ISC issued its updated “Security Design Criteria” on 
September 29, 2004, which set forth enhanced physical security requirements for the con-
struction of new federal buildings, as well as for major renovations of existing buildings.
State and local government institutions also are involved in security efforts to protect 
government buildings, especially at criminal justice facilities. Jails and prisons have tradition-
ally maintained tight security for obvious reasons. Police agencies, especially following the 
unrest of the 1960s, have strengthened security in and around police buildings, including 
communications centers, evidence and weapons storage rooms, and crime labs. Following 
violence in the judicial system, courts have also increased security (Figure 16-5). Because of 
the 6th Amendment right of defendants to a public trial, court security is especially challeng-
ing. Each major component of the criminal justice system—police, courts, and corrections—is 
connected with organizations that promote either accreditation or performance measures 
containing security enhancements.
Commercial centers, office buildings, sports stadiums, and theme parks comprise 
another category of key assets (White House, 2003a: 78–79). A large number of people con-
gregate at these locations to conduct business, shop, and enjoy restaurants and entertainment. 
Life safety and public safety are important objectives at these sites for protection against all 
hazards, besides terrorist attacks. Day-to-day protection is the responsibility of private sec-
tor proprietary and contract security personnel with the assistance of physical security and 
fire protection technology. Public safety agencies provide emergency response. The federal 
government, especially the DHS, provides assistance through advisories and alerts; efforts to 
bring groups together to enhance protection; and designation of an event (e.g., Superbowl) as 
a National Security Special Event, resulting in federal law enforcement participation and aid. 
Various guidelines, standards, codes, and regulations involving private sector organizations 
and government agencies also play an important role in protecting people and assets.
Border and Transportation Security
Border and transportation security are intertwined because various transportation modes and 
travelers continuously seek access through border entry and exit points. Government agen-
cies, transportation systems, and travelers must comply with specific legal requirements to 
increase security and safety along borders and within borders. The legal issues are complex, 
FIGURE 16-5 Government facilities, such as courts, are key assets requiring protection. Walk-through metal 
detector, left; X-ray scanner, right. Courtesy: Wackenhut Corporation. Photo by Ed Burns.

considering the borders of the United States include a 5,525-mile border with Canada, a 
1,989-mile border with Mexico, and 95,000 miles of shoreline and navigable waterways. All 
people and goods legally entering the United States must be processed through an air, land, or 
seaport point of entry. Over 500 million people legally enter the United States each year, and 
330 million are noncitizens. Eight-five percent enter via land, often as a daily commute. The 
trade across U.S. borders amounted to $1.35 trillion in imports and $1 trillion in exports in 
2001 (Office of Homeland Security, 2002: 21).
As we know, terrorists are elusive, crafty, and patient as they search for vulnerabilities 
in potential targets. The proliferation of WMD has created opportunities for terrorists to 
become more lethal and inflict mass casualties and severe economic harm. Consequently, the 
global transportation system that crosses borders and has access to all communities must be 
protected against terrorists who may use this system as a means of delivering WMD. The 
National Strategy for Homeland Security (Office of Homeland Security, 2002: 22–23 and 59–
61) promotes the following major initiatives to improve border and transportation security:
• Consolidate principal border and transportation security agencies in the DHS.
• Create “smart borders” through improvements in management systems, databases, 
coordination, intelligence, and international cooperation. Increase the information 
available on inbound goods and passengers so border agencies can apply risk-based 
management tools.
• Increase the security of shipping containers that move about 90% of the world’s 
cargo. This initiative includes identifying high-risk containers, prescreening containers, 
using technology to inspect, designing containers with security features, and, when 
possible, placing inspectors at foreign ports to screen U.S.-bound containers.
• Implement the Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001 (ATSA). The goals 
of this act are to secure the air travel systems; recognize the importance of security 
for all forms of transportation; strengthen partnerships among federal, state, and 
local governments and the private sector; and protect critical transportation assets 
such as ports, pipelines, rail, and highway bridges.
• Recapitalize the U.S. Coast Guard. Increase funding to improve the aging fleet, 
command and control systems, shore facilities, and multiple missions.
• Reform immigration services within the DHS to improve administration and 
enforcement of laws.
• Pursue a sustained international agenda to counter global terrorism and improve 
homeland security.
• Work with key trading partners to create systems to verify the legitimacy of people 
and goods entering the United States.
• Seek international support on many fronts such as intensified law enforcement 
cooperation and improved security standards for travel documents (e.g., passports 
and visas).
A major federal government initiative of border security is U.S. Visitor and Immigrant 
Status Indicator Technology (US-VISIT). This is a system for integrating data on the entry 
and exit of certain foreign nationals into and out of the United States. The process begins 
overseas and continues through a visitor’s arrival and departure from the United States. 
The program involves entrance eligibility determinations by the Departments of Homeland 
Security and State. In 2001, the USA PATRIOT Act provided that, in developing this entry 
and exit data system, the Attorney General (now the Secretary of Homeland Security has this 
responsibility) and Secretary of State were to focus particularly on the utilization of biomet-
ric technology (e.g., digital fingerprints) and the development of tamper-resistant documents 
readable at ports of entry. It also required that the system be able to interface with law 
enforcement databases to identify and detain individuals who pose a threat to national secu-
rity. The ultimate goal of this challenging, multibillion dollar program is to check all people 
entering and departing the United States (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2007b).
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2007b: 3), in its role studying federal pro-
grams and expenditures for Congress, notes
Border and Transportation Security          423

424          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
[W]e focus on the progress the nation has made in strengthening or enhancing the 
critical layers of defense that either were penetrated by the terrorist hijackers of 
9/11, or which our work or that of the Inspectors General shows are vulnerable to 
terrorist exploitation.… These layers provide a series of independent, overlapping 
and reinforcing redundancies—domestically, for example, at airports as well as 
land and sea ports of entry, or outside the country, at consular offices—designed 
to raise the odds that terrorist activity can be identified and intercepted.
[I]t is important that TSA continue to invest in and develop technologies 
for better detecting existing and emerging threats involving explosives. This is 
especially important in light of the alleged August 2006 plot to detonate liquid 
explosives on board multiple commercial aircraft bound for the United States 
from the United Kingdom.
Government Agencies with Roles in Border and Transportation Security
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), established in 2003, is the unified border agency 
of the DHS (U.S. Customs and Border Protection, n.d.). The CBP contains the inspectional 
workforce and border authorities of legacy (i.e., predecessor agency) U.S. Customs, legacy 
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), legacy USDA Animal and Plant Health 
Inspection Service (APHIS), and the entire U.S. Border Patrol. This united force consists of 
over 40,000 employees.
The priority mission of CBP is homeland security. It is charged with managing, secur-
ing, and controlling the U.S. borders. CBP goals include facilitating the efficient movement of 
legitimate cargo and people while maintaining security and detecting and preventing contra-
band (i.e., anything illegal) from entering the country.
The CBP is involved in numerous initiatives, some of which are described next. The 
Container Security Initiative (CSI) extends the zone of security outward so that U.S. borders 
are the last line of defense, not the first. Maritime containers that present a risk for terrorism 
are identified and inspected at foreign ports before they are shipped to the United States. This 
initiative involves using intelligence and automated advance information to identify and target 
high-risk containers; detection technology; and smarter, tamper-evident containers. Teams of 
CBP officials work with host nations in the screening process. This initiative is important 
because 90% of global trade is transported in cargo containers, half of incoming trade to the 
United States arrives by containers onboard ships, and nine million cargo containers arrive on 
ships and are offloaded at U.S. seaports annually.
The CBP receives electronic information on over 95% of all U.S.-bound sea cargo 
before it arrives. Under the Advanced Manifest Rule, all sea carriers, with few exceptions 
(e.g., bulk carriers), must provide cargo descriptions and valid consignee addresses 24 hours 
before cargo is loaded at the foreign port for shipment to the United States. Under the Sea 
Automated Manifest System, the data include cargo type, manufacturer, shipper, country of 
origin, routing, and the terms of payment. Using computer systems to analyze the data, the 
CBP assigns a numeric score to each shipment indicating its level of risk. High-risk containers 
are flagged to receive a security inspection.
Because CBP resources are limited, industry partnership programs bring the trade com-
munity into the process of homeland security to prevent terrorism and focus on other threats 
such as money laundering and smuggling contraband. An example of an industry partnership 
is the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism (C-TPAT). This initiative is part of the 
extended border strategy and entails Customs working with importers, carriers, brokers, and 
other businesses to improve supply chain security. America’s Counter Smuggling Initiative 
(ACSI) is a component of C-TPAT and designed to counter the smuggling of drugs and the 
possible introduction of WMD in cargo and conveyances. The Business Anti-Smuggling 
Coalition (BASC) is a private-sector-led coalition, without government mandates, that focuses 
on the challenges of preventing the concealment of contraband in trade. Businesses follow 
BASC security standards. The Carrier Initiative Program (CIP) offers CBP antidrug smuggling 

training to air, sea, and land transport companies. Carriers sign agreements with the CBP that 
offer benefits to both groups. Carriers agree to prevent smuggling by securing their facilities 
and conveyances, and the CBP conducts security surveys followed by recommendations to 
improve security. A carrier’s cooperation and compliance may become a mitigating factor if 
narcotics are found on board a conveyance and authorities are assessing a fine. The Free and 
Secure Trade (FAST) initiative offers expedited clearance of low-risk shipments to carriers and 
importers enrolled in C-TPAT.
C-TPAT has been criticized because it is a voluntary government-business initiative. 
Hoffer (2006: 30) writes that import traders and their supply chain partners evaluate their own 
supply chain security methods and provide proof of conforming to security guidelines to gain 
“trusted” status to receive less screening of their imported cargo. He argues that C-TPAT is pre-
ventive theory without effectiveness due to no specific government mandate for compliance.
The CBP continues to rely on technology as an important component of border security. 
It does not rely on any single technology or inspection process. Instead, it applies multiple 
technologies in different combinations to increase the likelihood that a WMD will be detected. 
The technology includes large-scale X-ray and gamma-imaging systems, mobile truck X-ray, 
and a variety of portable and handheld radiation detection technologies. A variety of technol-
ogies is used for surveillance. Examples are outdoor sensors, CCTV, night-vision equipment, 
and aircraft, including Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). Biometric verification is another 
helpful and growing technology. For example, both the Mexican border and the Canadian 
border contain entry points that are equipped with the Biometric Verification System. It is 
designed to read the fingerprint encoded on a border-crossing card and compare it to the 
fingerprint of the person presenting the card to detect imposters.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
The U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) is the largest investigative arm of the 
DHS, and it focuses on immigration and customs law enforcement within the United States 
(U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 2005). The Office of Detention and Removal 
(DRO) is a division of ICE that removes unauthorized aliens from the United States. DRO 
resources and expertise transport aliens, manage them while they are in custody and their 
cases are pending, and remove aliens from the United States when ordered. DRO’s primary 
customers are the CBP and the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.
DRO established the National Fugitive Operations Program (NFOP) to apprehend, 
process, and remove from the United States those aliens who have failed to surrender for 
removal or to comply with a removal order. NFOP teams focus on fugitive cases, especially 
cases involving criminal aliens. The “ICE Most Wanted” program publicizes the names, faces, 
and other ID features of the 10 most wanted fugitive criminals sought by ICE.
ICE contains an Office of Investigations that concentrates on many types of violations, 
including those pertaining to national security, the transfer of WMD and arms, critical tech-
nology, commercial fraud, human trafficking, illegal drugs, child pornography/exploitation, 
and immigration fraud. In addition, ICE special agents conduct investigations involving the 
protection of critical infrastructure industries that may be victimized by attack, sabotage, 
exploitation, or fraud. In the financial sector, for example, ICE investigates illegal money 
laundering, insurance schemes, bulk cash smuggling, intellectual property rights, counterfeit 
goods smuggling, and other crimes.
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), within the DHS, grants immigration and 
citizenship benefits, promotes awareness and understanding of citizenship, ensures the integ-
rity of the U.S. immigration system, and contributes to the security of the United States. This 
agency works with the U.S. Department of State, CBP, and ICE. The CIS, with its thousands 
of federal employees and contractors working worldwide, are responsible for establishing 
policies and procedures, and immigration and naturalization adjudication, such as the adju-
dication of immigrant visa petitions.
Border and Transportation Security          425

426          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
Transportation Security Administration
Following the 9/11 attacks, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) was created 
under the Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001 (ATSA) (U.S. Transportation 
Security Administration, n.d.). Originally, the TSA was in the Department of Transportation, 
but it was transferred to the DHS in March 2003. The mission of the TSA is to protect the 
U.S. transportation system while facilitating freedom of movement of people and commerce. 
The ATSA gave the TSA regulatory authority over all transportation modes. Although the 
9/11 attacks resulted in the airline industry being a top priority for protection by the TSA, this 
agency recognizes the importance of securing all forms of transportation.
The TSA issues and administers Transportation Security Regulations (TSRs), which are 
codified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Chapter XII. Many TSRs are 
former rules of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that were transferred to TSA when 
it assumed the FAA’s civil aviation security role in 2002.
The TSA has developed numerous initiatives to increase protection in the transporta-
tion sector. TSA programs and strategies are discussed in subsequent pages under the various 
transportation modes.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2007a) notes the difficulty of protecting the 
transportation system:
DHS and the components of DHS responsible for transportation and port secu-
rity have taken steps to apply risk management principles with varying degrees of 
progress. The Transportation Security Administration has not completed a meth-
odology for assessing risk, and until the overall risk to the entire transportation 
sector is identified, it will be difficult to determine where and how to target limited 
resources to achieve the greatest security gains.
Transportation Sectors
The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key Assets 
(White House, 2003a) identifies transportation as one of several critical infrastructure sectors. 
Interdependencies exist between the transportation sector and nearly every other sector, and 
a disruption of this sector can have a cascading affect on other sectors. For example, the agri-
culture and food sector is dependent on the transportation sector to ship goods to customers. 
The transportation sector is vital to our economy and national security, including mobilization 
and deployment. The lead agencies for the transportation sector are the DHS in collaboration 
with the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT).
The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 directly affects the security 
of public transportation. It requires the DHS to develop a National Strategy for Transportation 
Security. This act contains provisions designed to address many of the transportation and border 
security vulnerabilities identified and recommendations made by the 9/11 Commission. It includes 
provisions designed to strengthen aviation security, information sharing, visa issuance, border 
security, and other areas. The focus of the act includes the identification of the transportation 
infrastructure, risk-based security priorities, protection strategies, and research and development.
Aviation
The aviation system is vast and made up of thousands of entry points. In the United States, it 
consists of two main parts: (1) airports, aircraft, and supporting personnel and assets; and (2) 
aviation command, control, communications, and IT systems to support and maintain safe use 
of airspace.
There are 19,000 General Aviation airports, 453 commercial airports, 211,000 active air-
craft, and 550,000 active pilots and instructors. General Aviation airports involve primarily rec-
reational flying but also include such activities as medical services, aerial advertising, and aerial 
application of chemicals (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2004: 57).
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), within the DOT, regulates civil aviation to 
promote safety and air traffic control. It issues airport operating certifications depending on 

the type of aircraft served. The FAA also issues certifications for aviation employees, aircraft, 
airlines, and other purposes.
Security varies at airports and it depends on the type of airport and aircraft (Figures 
16–6 and 16–7). General Aviation airports present a serious security vulnerability. Here, the 
emphasis is on commercial airports.
Prior to the 9/11 attacks, security at airports was the responsibility of private carriers 
and state and local airport owners. Following the attack, Congress passed the ATSA, estab-
lishing the TSA as the responsible authority for aviation security. In other words, the TSA is 
charged with federalizing security at commercial airports in the United States and replacing 
private screeners with federal screeners. The TSA applies several layers of security to protect 
the air transportation sector.
Transportation Sectors          427
FIGURE 16-6 Commercial airports maintain extensive security.
FIGURE 16-7 Security varies at General Aviation airports.

428          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
TSA Programs
The TSA operates various screening programs to increase aviation security. Secure Flight 
involves prescreening passengers through a comparison of Passenger Name Records (PNRs) 
from domestic flights to names in the Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB) established by 
the Terrorist Screening Center (TSC). Another challenge is effective and efficient screening 
of passengers and baggage arriving at airports for flights. The GAO has published several 
reports on aviation security and screening. It has repeatedly stated that challenges remain, 
such as hiring, training and deploying screeners and measuring performance of screeners and 
detection equipment.
Various technologies are applied to detect explosives, weapons, metals, and plastics. 
Examples include X-ray systems, metal detectors, biometrics, explosive trace detection (ETD) 
systems, and body scanning.
The screening of cargo transported on commercial passenger aircraft is another seri-
ous concern and vulnerability that does not receive enough attention. Calls to eliminate this 
practice face opposition from the passenger airline business that sees it as a source of income 
in an industry confronted with tight profit margins. A major issue is the source of funding for 
a thorough screening system for such cargo.
Another program focuses on explosive detection through canine teams. On March 9, 
1972, a Trans World Airlines jet took off from JFK International airport in New York bound 
for Los Angeles. Initially, the flight was normal, but then the airline received an anonymous 
telephone call warning of a bomb on the flight. The aircraft returned to JFK, passengers were 
evacuated, and a bomb-sniffing dog named Brandy conducted a search of the aircraft. Brandy 
found the bomb 12 minutes before it was set to explode. This successful conclusion of a dan-
gerous situation resulted in the establishment of the FAA Explosives Detection Canine Team 
Program, designed to place certified teams at strategic locations in the United States so aircraft 
with a possible bomb can be diverted quickly to an airport with such a program.
Airlines are required to provide basic security training for all aircrew members. The 
TSA is required by law to provide optional, hands-on self-defense training if crew members 
request it. Under the Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, a pilot, flight engineer, or naviga-
tor is authorized to use firearms to defend the aircraft. Crew members are trained in the use 
of force and firearms, defensive tactics, psychology of survival, and legal issues.
The Federal Air Marshal Service (FAMS) began in 1968 as the FAA Sky Marshal 
Program. This was a time when the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)-affiliated 
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) attracted world attention by introduc-
ing the hijacking of aircraft, which spawned subsequent hijackings (Poland, 1988: 103–104). 
The mission of the FAMS is to detect, deter, and defeat hostile acts targeting U.S. air carriers, 
passengers, and crews. The training requirements are stringent and include behavioral obser-
vation, intimidation tactics, close quarters self-defense, and a higher standard for handgun 
accuracy than officers of any other federal law enforcement agency. The number of Federal 
Air Marshals is classified information. During the Fall 2005 reorganization of the DHS, 
FAMS was transferred from ICE to TSA to improve coordination of aviation security.
Another TSA measure of protection is the Alien Flight Student Program. This program 
began in 2001 with the ATSA. Specific aviation training entities are prohibited from offering flight 
training to aliens and other individuals in the operation of certain aircraft.
The TSA partners with the private sector through various initiatives. For example, the 
Aviation Security Advisory Committee partnered with the TSA to develop General Aviation 
security recommendations titled Security Guidelines for General Aviation Airports (Publication 
A-001). Another initiative is the Airport Watch program, which includes a “hotline” in coordi-
nation with the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA).
The ATSA also mandates improvements in airport perimeter security and access controls. 
Compliance inspections and vulnerability assessments serve as a foundation for funding priori-
ties, planning new technologies, and reducing the security threats of airport employees.
The 9/11 attacks resulted in improvements in physical security inside aircraft. For 
example, commercial airlines contain reinforced cockpit doors that remain locked during 
flight. Directly outside the door, CCTV cameras are installed in some aircraft.

Another concern, specifically against aircraft, is Man-Portable Air Defense Systems 
(MANPADS). These handheld missile systems have been fired by terrorists against commercial 
aircraft in the past. A counter-system faces the establishment of system requirements, the develop-
ment of technology, cost-effectiveness, and funding.
Transportation Sectors          429
TSA Revokes Air Cargo Security Program Approval for Two Shipping 
Businesses
In 2006, the TSA, in its effort to be vigilant in maintaining the integrity of air cargo 
security, revoked the security program approval for Professional Export Services 
(PES) and J.H. World Express, Inc., because these businesses did not meet TSA secu-
rity standards. Among other violations, PSE tendered at least 48 shipments from 
unknown shippers to passenger air carriers and failed to provide cargo security train-
ing to their employees. Passenger air carriers are notified not to accept cargo from 
non–TSA-approved indirect air carriers. Acceptance of cargo from violating carriers 
can result in a civil fine up to $25,000 per violation. Firms that have their air carrier 
certification revoked can apply for recertification in 90 days (Transportation Security 
Administration, 2006).
Self-Defense on Airliners
Self-defense in an aircraft is extremely important for not only crew members, but also 
passengers. As we know from the 9/11 attacks, terrorists may try to deceive passengers 
into thinking that they will not be harmed if they follow terrorist demands. Crew mem-
bers and passengers must consider the option of being creative with available items to 
be used as weapons and using force to survive.
Passenger Rail and Railroads
Trains play an important role in our economy by linking raw materials to manufacturers and 
carrying a wide variety of fuels and finished goods. Over 20 million intercity travelers ride 
the rail system annually, and 45 million passengers ride trains and subways operated by local 
transit authorities. Securing the rail sector is important to ensure the safety of passengers and 
to protect U.S. commerce (White House, 2003a: 56).
The vast U.S. rail system contains numerous entry points. It is complex because 
of differences in design, structure, and purpose. The differences result in disadvantages 
and advantages for security. For example, the size of the rail system makes responding 
to various threat scenarios difficult. At the same time, trains must follow specific routes, 
so if one were hijacked, for example, it could be diverted off a mainline. Similarly, if a 
bridge or tunnel were destroyed, the rail line would suffer disruption; however, national-
level disruptions would be limited. A serious risk in this sector is the transportation of 
hazardous materials, especially through populated areas; therefore, industry and government 
coordination is necessary for decision making. Security and safety of containerized cargo 
are other challenges. Controversy has developed over the markings of containers to indicate 
the type of hazardous materials being transported. Although placards on rail cars provide 
helpful information to first responders during an emergency, the information can also 
assist terrorists planning an attack. Another concern of the rail sector is the cost of security. 
The increased threat environment means expenses for additional security personnel and 
overtime (White House, 2003a: 56).

430          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
Rail mode protection initiatives include the following (White House, 2003a: 57):
• The rail mode has been working with the DOT to assess risk.
• A surface transportation Information Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC) has been 
formed to exchange information related to both cyber and physical threats.
• The DHS and the DOT are coordinating with other federal agencies, state and local 
governments, and industry to improve the security and safety of hazardous materials.
• The DHS and the DOT are working with the rail sector to identify and explore 
technologies and processes to efficiently screen rail passengers and baggage and to 
secure containers and detect threatening content.
• The DHS and the DOT are working with industry to delineate infrastructure 
protection roles and responsibilities for surge requirements during emergencies.
The railroad industry works with all levels of government and maintains police and 
security forces for its individual railroad entities. The Association of American Railroads 
(n.d.) uses a multistage alert system and open lines of communications with DHS and DOD 
officials. This group’s Railroad Security Task Force applied national intelligence community 
“best practices” to develop a security plan consisting of the following strategies:
• A focus on hazardous materials, operations, infrastructure, IT and communications, 
and military movements
• A database on critical assets
• Risk management
• Increased security and random inspections
• Improved protective housings, valves, and fittings to increase security in the 
transportation of hazardous materials and to prevent sabotage
• Protection against signal tampering
Are Rail Cars Containing Toxic Cargo “Sitting Ducks”?
Authorities face an enormous number of potential terrorist targets. Risks must be 
prioritized, since resources are limited. Toxic substances within rail cars that are in 
transit or at a standstill present attractive targets to terrorists and other criminals. 
This is a serious vulnerability. Unfortunately, as public safety agencies are doing their 
best to protect citizens from a variety of threats, inside their jurisdiction or nearby are 
toxic substances, necessary for our everyday lives, that are unprotected. In one case, 
a reporter and photographer gained easy access to an unguarded rail facility close to 
New York City and observed rail cars filled with deadly chlorine, ammonia, and other 
chemicals. They also spotted unlocked switching devices that could be used to cause 
an accident (Kocieniewski, 2006).
Imagine the carnage from a bomb placed on one of these rail cars, or a bomb 
placed on such a rail car sitting near fuel storage tanks or other target to facilitate a 
cascading effect. Although chemical plant security is improving, the shipments linking 
these plants to suppliers and customers must also be improved.
The U.S. Naval Research Lab reports that each year railroads transport 105,000 rail 
cars of toxic chemicals and 1.6 million rail cars of other hazardous materials. They estimate 
that an attack on such a rail car could kill 100,000 people. The TSA is working with rail-
roads to reduce the time such rail cars are sitting unprotected. In early 2007, the TSA began 
monitoring rail cars containing toxic substances. Specifically, the TSA is recording how long 
these rail cars are stopped on tracks or sitting in unprotected storage yards in urban areas. 
Rerouting to reduce the danger to cities is an option; however, this would force transporting 
the toxic substances in trucks, which could be more dangerous (Frank, 2007).

Transportation Sectors          431
Mass Transit Systems
About 9.5 billion trips are made on mass transit systems (e.g., urban subway and rail; buses) 
in the United States each year. Mass transit carries more passengers each day than air or rail 
(i.e., between cities) transportation (White House, 2003a: 61).
Mass transit systems are open and convenient to the public with minimal access controls 
(Figure 16-8). This makes protection difficult, challenging, and expensive.
The DHS, the DOT, and all levels of government seek to improve guidelines and stan-
dards to protect mass transit systems. Initiatives include design and engineering standards for 
rail and bus vehicles, improved screening and training for operators, security standards, and 
emergency and continuity of operations planning.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005f) reports that the numerous stake-
holders involved in securing rail transportation can lead to communication challenges, dupli-
cation of effort, and confusion of roles and responsibilities. Key federal stakeholders include 
the TSA and the Office for Domestic Preparedness (ODP), both within the DHS. The ODP 
provides grants to rail operations and conducts risk assessments for passenger rail agencies. 
Two other federal agencies, both within the DOT, are the Federal Transit Administration 
(FTA) and the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA). The FTA conducts nonregulatory 
safety and security activities, such as training, research, technical assistance, and demonstra-
tion projects. The FRA has regulatory authority over rail safety for commuter rail lines and 
Amtrak; it employs over 400 rail inspectors. Other important stakeholders are state and local 
agencies and rail operators.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005c: 58) notes that whereas the aviation 
system is housed in a closed and controlled system, mass transit systems are open so large 
numbers of people can be moved quickly. Security features that limit access, cause delays, 
increase fares, or result in inconvenience, could make automobiles more attractive. At the 
same time, those mass transit systems located in large urban areas or tourist spots make them 
attractive targets because of the potential for mass casualties and economic damage.
Jenkins (2004: 2) writes: “For those determined to kill in quantity and willing to kill 
indiscriminately, trains, subways and buses are ideal targets. They offer terrorists easy access 
and escape.” He notes that an analysis of nearly 1,000 terrorist attacks on transportation 
found that the percentage of fatalities was much higher than the percentage for terrorist 
attacks in general.
In 2004, following the Madrid rail attacks, the TSA issued directives containing 
required security measures for passenger rail operators and Amtrak. The security measures 
FIGURE 16-8 Mass transit systems maintain limited access controls and are a challenge to protect.

432          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
produced controversy over limited dialogue to ensure industry “best practices” were included 
in the measures. Examples of the TSA security measures are as follows (U.S. Government 
Accountability Office, 2005f: 22):
• Designate coordinators to enhance security-related communication.
• Provide TSA with access to security assessments and plans.
• Reinforce employee watch programs.
• Ask passengers to report unattended property and suspicious behavior.
• Use clear plastic or bomb-resistant containers.
• Use canine explosive detection teams to screen passenger baggage, terminals, and trains.
• Allow TSA canine teams access to rail operations.
• Conduct frequent inspections of facilities and assets.
• Use surveillance systems.
• Ensure appropriate levels of policing and security that correlate with DHS threat levels.
• Lock all doors that allow access to train operators.
• Require Amtrak to request that adult passengers provide ID at the initial point where 
tickets are checked.
Additional measures from a variety of sources are emergency planning and drills, 
quality intelligence systems, visible and undercover patrols, behavioral observation skills of 
police and security, emergency call boxes, research and testing of WMD detection equipment, 
ventilation systems that remove toxic smoke, and windows that blow out to reduce both the 
destructive force of a blast and smoke.
Many security methods applied to trains are also applicable to buses (Figure 16-9). 
Highways, Trucking, and Intercity Busing
Trucking and intercity busing are essential components of the transportation infrastructure 
to move people, goods, and services. Related components include highways and roads. The 
White House (2003a: 57–58) notes that the trucking and intercity busing industries present 
several protection challenges because these industries are heterogeneous in size and operations, 
span numerous government jurisdictions, and operate under many owners.
FIGURE 16-9 Buses are among other mass transit targets attractive to terrorists. Several security methods are 
applicable to all mass transit modes.

Transportation choke points (TCPs) are another challenge. These points include bridges, 
tunnels, highway interchanges, terminals, and border crossings that are crucial to transportation 
routes. TCPs are vulnerabilities in the transportation sector because they connect roads and modes 
of transportation. If subject to attack and destruction, traffic could be blocked at TCPs, and the 
vulnerabilities of people, vehicles, and vehicle contents would be compounded.
Initiatives aimed at improving the protection of highways, trucking, and intercity busing 
include cooperation among the DHS, the DOT, and sector stakeholders on
• Risk management
• Development of criteria for identifying and mitigating TCPs
• Technological solutions for increased protection
• National operator security education and awareness
Additional recommendations can be found through The American Association of State 
Highway and Transportation Officials. The American Trucking Association (ATA) also pro-
motes security issues. For example, with cooperation and funding from the DHS, the ATA 
promotes a “watch” program that seeks to include the millions of drivers of commercial and 
public trucks, buses, and other vehicles to recognize safety and security threats. The ATA sup-
ports the North American Transportation Management Institute’s Certified Cargo Security 
Professional designation.
Maritime
The maritime shipping infrastructure is another vital component of the economy. It consists of 
ports, ships that carry cargo and passengers, waterways, locks, dams, canals, and a network of 
transportation modes, such as railroads and pipelines that connect to ships in port. The 361 sea-
ports in the United States are diverse in size and characteristics. They are owned and operated 
by either private corporations or state and local governments. Ships are primarily owned and 
operated by the private sector. The DOD has designated certain seaports as strategic seaports 
for military purposes (White House, 2003a: 60).
Annually, the U.S. maritime industry manages over 2 billion tons of freight, 3 billion 
tons of oil, more than 134 million ferry passengers, and about 7 million cruise ship travelers. 
Furthermore, about 7,500 foreign ships, operated by 200,000 sailors, enter U.S. ports each 
year (Maxwell and Blanda, 2005: 22).
The delivery and activation of a WMD on a ship near a port, in port, or in transit from 
a port would be a catastrophe. And, knowing the creativity and patience of terrorists, one pos-
sible scenario is the use of a fuel-laden supertanker as a WMD.
As with other transportation systems, maritime shipping faces the huge challenge of access 
controls. The inspection of all vessels and cargo that enter ports is impossible, and security con-
cerns must be balanced with efficient access to ports by passengers and cargo. Compounding the 
need for improved security are international agreements and multinational authorities. The U.S. 
Department of State, the diplomatic arm of the U.S. government, is responsible for the negotia-
tion of maritime rules and practices with other countries.
The International Ship and Port Facility Security Code takes a risk management 
approach and seeks global standardization of security of port facilities and ships. Similar to 
U.S. Coast Guard rules, the code requires minimal requirements, such as port security plans, a 
port security officer, ship security plans, a ship security officer, and training. Failure to comply 
with the code has resulted in ships being detained or denied entry by the U.S. Coast Guard.
Various government agencies work to improve protection in this industry. The DHS and 
the DOT work with other government agencies, the private sector, foreign governments, and 
international organizations to improve maritime security. 
The DOT is working with the CBP to ensure security in the shipping supply chain. 
Those shippers who are unable to comply with rules and regulations are subject to increased 
attention and delay when seeking entrance to U.S. ports.
Besides the CBP, the U.S. Coast Guard is another primary agency involved in port 
security. It was transferred to the DHS intact in 2003. Because the 9/11 attacks hit the U.S. 
Transportation Sectors          433

434          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
mainland, the Coast Guard has had its missions expanded and its capabilities strained. Three 
major priorities of the Coast Guard are (1) implementing a maritime strategy for homeland 
security, (2) enhancing performance, and (3) recapitalizing the Coast Guard. This third 
priority includes the Deepwater Program that replaces or upgrades cutters and aircraft that 
are capable of performing missions far out at sea (U.S. Government Accountability Office, 
2005a). The Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2002 (MTSA) charged the Coast Guard 
with numerous responsibilities, such as assessing port vulnerabilities, ensuring that vessels and 
ports have security plans, and promoting uniform standards of security. Homeland security 
missions also include waterways and coastal security, drug interdiction, migrant interdiction, 
and defense readiness to assist the U.S. Navy. Non-homeland security missions include marine 
safety, search and rescue, aids to navigation (e.g., buoys), marine resources (e.g., fishing trea-
ties), environmental protection, and ice operations (Office of Inspector General, 2004). Critics 
argue that increased security tasks by the Coast Guard hinder their traditional duties such as 
boating safety and rescue.
The MTSA is a major law promoting maritime security. The act mandates a National 
Maritime Transportation Security Plan and contingency plans in response to terrorist attacks; 
an increase in security personnel and screening equipment; a grant program to support secu-
rity upgrades; security regulations to be developed through the DOT, such as access controls 
and identification cards; training and certification; a maritime intelligence system; and the 
establishment of local port security committees to coordinate federal, state, and local law 
enforcement agencies and private security.
In September 2005, the Departments of Homeland Security, Defense, and State collabo-
rated to approve The National Strategy for Maritime Security (U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security, 2005b). This first-ever national maritime security plan, with contributors from over 
20 government agencies and the private sector, contains supporting plans on awareness, intel-
ligence, layered security, threat response, domestic and international outreach, and recovery. 
This national strategy considers threats from WMD, transnational crime and piracy, and 
environmental destruction.
Additional legislation that helps to protect ports and improve supply chain security is 
the Security and Accountability For Every (SAFE) Port Act of 2006. This act establishes a 
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office within the DHS, appropriates funds toward the Coast 
Guard modernization program, and enhances port security training.
International Perspective: Supply Chain Risks and Security
Supply chain refers to a system of businesses, transportation modes, information 
technology, and employees that move a product or service from supplier to customer. 
Business executives planning to seek new markets and operate supply lines from 
around the globe should incorporate security risks and countermeasures in the plan-
ning process. Purtell and Rice (2006: 78–87) write that supply chain risk assessments 
may include the study of the manufacturing region and site, roads, trucking operations, 
freight forwarders, logistic warehouses, seaports, and airports. Corruption and anti-
American or anti-Western sentiments are other factors to consider.
Numerous Web sites offer basic information on conditions in various countries. 
U.S. Department of State Travel Warnings on countries offer a variety of information 
on such topics as crime, security, medical services, roads, and traffic conditions and 
safety. Another source is the Overseas Security Advisory Council (refer to the Chapter 
10 box titled “International Perspective: Overseas Investigations”). Sources of informa-
tion on supply chain security include the U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
Research by Purtell and Rice (2006) produced interesting findings. “For example, 
Russia and Brazil are among two of the highest risk countries in terms of supply chain 
theft. Incidents commonly involve government representatives including police, military, 
and customs officials. However, in terms of C-TPAT, these countries are given a ‘low’ 

Transportation Sectors          435
threat rating because the governments and residents are on amicable terms with the 
United States and are not hostile to Western culture.” They also found that a “cookie-
cutter” approach to security has caused companies to overspend in low-risk countries, 
such as China, and underspend in high-risk countries, such as Malaysia and Indonesia. 
Purtell and Rice note that terrorism is not the only risk. Organized crime and piracy are 
other concerns, depending on the location.
Laden and Rogers (2006: 62–68) offer suggestions for supply chain security:
• Security, supply chain, and logistics practitioners should work together.
• The company should identify supply chain vulnerabilities prior to risk-based 
mitigation.
• The company must know its vendors and suppliers and communicate security 
expectations.
• The company should vet vendors and suppliers. The Internet and software tools 
can assist this process. Once a list and data are generated, the company should 
ensure that firms are not on the government’s restricted lists, as published by 
the Departments of Commerce and Treasury and the U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection.
• Importers should consider restrictive language in orders so that they can control 
the use of subcontractors in manufacturing and shipping products.
• The company should use technology to improve supply chain visibility, 
so managers can see what is in the supply chain at all times. Examples of 
applicable technology are Radio Frequency ID (RFID) and Global Positioning 
Systems (GPS).
Postal and Shipping
The U.S. Postal System (USPS) handles about two-thirds of a billion pieces of mail each 
day as more than 300,000 postal carriers deliver mail to more than 137 million delivery 
addresses nationwide. Total employment in the USPS is about 749,000. The USPS consists of 
a headquarters in Washington, D.C., tens of thousands of postal facilities (Figure 16-10), and 
hundreds of thousands of official drop-boxes. The system is dependent on the transportation 
infrastructure and its trucks, aircraft, railroads, and ships. Annual revenue from the USPS is 
over $60 billion. Private industry mailing and shipping revenues exceed $140 billion (White 
House, 2003a: 67).
The networks of the USPS and private shipping companies present complex protection 
challenges. The Fall 2001 anthrax attacks through the USPS illustrate the impact of a seri-
ous disruption to this system. This attack resulted in five deaths and contamination at postal 
facilities and equipment, other government offices, and businesses.
The USPS has developed six core initiatives in its emergency preparedness plans: 
prevention, protection and health-risk reduction, detection and identification, intervention, 
decontamination, and investigation. The USPS and the DHS seek to work with all levels of 
government for coordinated emergency response, increase stockpiles of equipment and mate-
rials for contamination events, conduct risk analyses of high-risk facilities, and coordinate the 
security of mail transiting U.S. borders with the U.S. Customs Service.
Pipelines
According to The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures 
and Key Assets (White House, 2003a: 58), pipelines are considered part of the transporta-
tion CI sector. The pipeline industry moves a variety of substances such as crude oil, refined 
petroleum products, and natural gas within many hundreds of thousands of miles of pipelines 
that are mostly underground. This industry has a commendable record of safety, contingency 
plans, and the capabilities to repair or bypass localized disruptions. However, protection is an 
important issue because of the volatile nature of the products that pipelines deliver. Pipelines 

436          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
FIGURE 16-10 The U.S. Postal System is dependent on the transportation infrastructure, as are private carriers of 
mail and packages. Attacks of the mail system are extremely challenging for authorities.
Search the Web
Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
American Association of Airport Executives: www.aaae.org
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials: www.
transportation.org
American Bus Association: www.buses.org
American Chemistry Council: www.americanchemistry.com
Airports Council International: www.airports.org
American Public Transportation Association: www.apta.com
ASIS International: www.asisonline.org
American Trucking Associations: www.truckline.com/index
American Water Works Association: www.awwa.org
Association of American Railroads: www.aar.org/
Food Products Association: www.fpa-food.org
Government Web sites on food safety: www.foodsafety.gov
Information Systems Audit Control Association: www.isaca.org
Information Systems Security Association: www.issa.org
IT Governance Institute: www.itgi.org/
International Council of Cruise Lines: www.iccl.org
cross local, state, and international jurisdictions, and numerous businesses and other entities 
depend on a reliable flow of fuel. The problem of cascading is evident with pipelines, as it is 
with other CI sectors. The Departments of Homeland Security, Energy and Transportation; state 
and local governments; and the private sector collaborate to improve protection measures and 
emergency response plans.

Case Problems          437
International Information Systems Security Certifications Consortium: www.isc2.org
International Organization for Standardization (ISO): www.iso.org
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, State of New York: www.mta.nyc.ny.us/
National Infrastructure Protection Plan: www.dhs.gov/nipp
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer Security Resource 
Center: http://csrc.nist.gov/
National Security Agency, Information Assurance Directorate: www.nsa.gov/ia/
NetLingo: www.netlingo.com/
North American Transportation Management Institute: www.natmi.org/index.cfm
Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC): www.osac.gov/
The Infrastructure Security Partnership: www.tisp.org
United Motorcoach Association: www.uma.org
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services: www.uscis.gov
U.S. Coast Guard: www.uscg.mil/USCG.shtm
U.S. Customs and Border Protection: www.cbp.gov
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service: www.fsis.
usda.gov
U.S. Department of Defense: www.defenselink.mil/
U.S. Department of Energy: www.energy.gov
U.S. Department of Homeland Security: www.dhs.gov
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Critical Infrastructure Daily Report: 
dhsdailyadmin@mail.dhs.osis.gov
U.S. Department of Transportation: www.dot.gov
U.S. Department of Transportation, Maritime Administration: www.marad.dot.gov/
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: www.epa.gov
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Food Safety, Defense, and Outreach: www.
cfsan.fda.gov
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement: www.ice.gov
U.S. Transportation Security Administration: www.tsa.gov
Case Problems
16A. Suppose you are a terrorist leader in the U.S. planning to attack the food industry. 
What is your plan?
16B. Suppose you are a disgruntled employee working in the chemical industry at a plant 
that produces chlorine. Your anger at your employer is so intense that you do not 
care about yourself or anyone else. All you can think about is your plan to get back 
at your employer. Besides what you know from your job, you conduct research on 
the Web to find out everything you can about chlorine. What is your plan?
16C. As the Security and Safety Director of a company involved in the food industry, 
how would you prevent the attack planned in 16A? How would you respond if the 
plan were executed?
16D. As the Security and Safety Director of the chlorine plant in 16B, how would you 
prevent the crime(s) planned in 16B? How would you respond if the disgruntled 
employee executed the vindictive plan?
16E. As the Chief Security Officer (CSO) of a manufacturing company with multiple 
plants in the United States, how do you protect the company from the cascade 
effect from all hazards?
16F. As the security director for a city mass transit bus system, what are your top seven 
(prioritized) strategies for protecting passengers, employees, and assets associated 
with this system?

438          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
References
Acohido, B., and Swartz, J. (2006). “Malicious-Software Spreaders Get Sneakier, More 
Prevalent.” USA Today (April 23). http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/computersecurity/
infotheft/2006-04-23-bot-herders_x.htm, retrieved April 24, 2006.
Association of American Railroads. (n.d.). “Freight Railroad Security Plan.” www.aar.org, 
retrieved October 23, 2005.
Billo, C., and Chang, W. (2004). “Cyber Warfare: An Analysis of the Means and Motivations 
of Selected Nations.” http://www.ists.dartmouth.edu/directors-office/cyberwarfare.pdf, 
retrieved January 24, 2007.
Carroll, J. (1996). Computer Security, 3rd ed. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Chalk, P. (2003). “Agroterrorism: What Is the Threat and What Can Be Done about It?” 
Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corp.
Chittister, C., and Haimes, Y. (2006). “Cybersecurity: From Ad Hoc Patching to Lifecycle of 
Software Engineering.” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 3.
Computer Security Institute/FBI. (2006). CSI/FBI Computer Crime and Security Survey. 
www.GoCSI.com, retrieved July 14, 2006.
Congressional Budget Office. (2004). Homeland Security and the Private Sector (December). 
Washington, D.C.: Congress of the United States.
Croy, M. (2005). “Current and Emerging Trends in Business Continuity.” Disaster Recovery 
Journal, 18 (Winter).
Frank, T. (2007). “TSA to Track Rail Shipments with Toxic Cargo.” USA Today (January 
21).
Gewin, V. (2003). “Agriculture Shock.” Nature (January).
Hebert, H. (2005). “Interest Rises in Nuclear Plants for First Time since Disasters.” Associated 
Press (June 12).
Heiser, J. (2001). “Think Securely.” Information Security, 4 (February).
Hoffer, E. (2006). “Cargo at Risk.” Security Technology & Design, 16 (July).
Jenkins, B. (2004). “Terrorism and the Security of Public Surface Transportation” (April). 
Santa Monica, CA: RAND. Testimony presented to the Senate Committee on Judiciary 
on April 8, 2004.
Kiyota, S. (2000). “Planning Makes Perfect.” Information Security, 3 (November).
Kochems, A. (2005). “Who’s on First? A Strategy for Protecting Critical Infrastructure.” 
Backgrounder, 1851 (May 9). www.heritage.org, retrieved June 20, 2005.
Kocieniewski, D. (2006). “Despite 9/11 Effect, Railyards Are Still Vulnerable.” The New York 
Times. www.nytimes.com/2006/03/27/nyregion, retrieved March 28, 2006.
Laden, M., and Rogers, K. (2006). “Visualizing Supply-Chain Security: Why LP Professionals 
Should Get on Board.” Loss Prevention, 5 (May-June).
Landoll, D. (2005). “Does IT Security Myth the Point?” Security Management, 49 
(January).
Maxwell, C., and Blanda, T. (2005). “Terror by Sea: The Unique Challenges of Port Security.” 
FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin, 74 (September).
Mead, P., et al. (1999). “Food-Related Illness and Death in the United States: Reply to Dr. 
Halberg.” Emergency Infectious Diseases, 5 (November-December).
Office of Homeland Security. (2002). National Strategy for Homeland Security (July). www.
whitehouse.gov, retrieved September 14, 2004.
Office of Inspector General. (2004). FY 2003 Mission Performance United States Coast 
Guard (September). Washington, DC: DHS.
Piazza, P. (2007). “Keys to Encryption.” Security Management, 51 (January).
Poland, J. (1988). Understanding Terrorism: Groups, Strategies, and Responses. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Purtell, D., and Rice, J. (2006). “Assessing Cargo Supply Risk.” Security Management, 50 
(November).
Sager, I. (2000). “Cybercrime.” Business Week (February 21).
Savage, M. (2006). “Protect What’s Precious.” Information Security, 9 (December).

Smith, D. (2006). “Encryption, Once for the Few, Now an Option for All.” IT Security, 2 
(October).
Strohm, C. (2007). “Senators Fight Pre-emption of Chemical Security Laws.” GOVEXEC.
COM (January 11). www.govexec.com, retrieved January 17, 2007.
Taylor, R., et al. (2006). Digital Crime and Digital Terrorism. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice Hall.
Thompson, A. (1997). “Smoking Out the Facts on Firewalls.” Security Management 
(January).
Transportation Security Administration. (2006). “TSA Revokes Air Cargo Security Program 
Approval for Minneapolis-Based Professional Export Services” (August 7). www.tsa.gov/
press/releases/2006/press_release_08072006b.shtm, retrieved February 3, 2007.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection. (n.d.). “Combating the Threat of Nuclear Smuggling at 
Home and Abroad.” www.customs.gov, retrieved October 5, 2005.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2007). “Fact Sheet: Securing Our Nation’s Chemical 
Facilities.” www.dhs.gov/xnews/releases/pr_1181745031563.shtm, retrieved June 15, 2007.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection 
Directorate. (2005). Fact Sheet: Protecting America’s Critical Infrastructure—Chemical 
Security (June 15). www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/display?content=4543, retrieved June 20, 2005.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2005a). Interim National Infrastructure Protection 
Plan (February). www.dhs.gov, retrieved February 11, 2005.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2006a). National Infrastructure Protection Plan. 
www.dhs.gov/interweb/assetlibrary/NIPP_Plan.pdf, retrieved June 30, 2006.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2006b). National Infrastructure Protection Plan 
(revised draft). E-mail, January 20, 2006.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2005b). National Strategy for Maritime Security 
(September). www.dhs.gov/interweb/assetlibrary/HSPD13_MaritimeSecurityStrategy.pdf, 
retrieved October 25, 2005.
U.S. Department of Justice. (1995). “Vulnerability Assessment of Federal Facilities.” 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Marshals Service.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Inspector General. (2005). EPA Needs 
to Determine What Barriers Prevent Water Systems from Securing Known Supervisory 
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) Vulnerabilities (January 6). www.epa.gov/oig, 
retrieved January 13, 2005.
U.S. General Accounting Office. (2004). Industrial Security: DOD Cannot Provide Adequate 
Assurances That Its Oversight Ensures the Protection of Classified Information (March). 
www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-332, retrieved July 20, 2005.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005a). Coast Guard: Observations on Agency 
Priorities in Fiscal Year 2006 Budget Request (March 17). www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/
getrpt?GAO-05-364T, retrieved March 18, 2005.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2004). General Aviation Security: Increased Federal 
Oversight Is Needed, but Continued Partnership with the Private Sector Is Critical to 
Long-Term Success (September). www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-144, retrieved 
December 13, 2004.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005b). Homeland Security: Actions Needed to 
Better Protect National Icons and Federal Office Buildings from Terrorism (June). www.
gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-681, retrieved July 12, 2005.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005c). Homeland Security: Agency Plans, 
Implementation, and Challenges Regarding the National Strategy for Homeland Security 
(January). www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-05-213, retrieved February 15, 2005.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2007a). Homeland Security: Applying Risk 
Management Principles to Guide Federal Investments (February 7). http://www.gao.gov/
cgi-bin/getrpt?CAO-07-386T, retrieved February 8, 2007.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2006a). Homeland Security: DHS Is Taking Steps 
to Enhance Security at Chemical Facilities, but Additional Authority Is Needed (January). 
www.gao.gov/new.items/d06150.pdf, retrieved March 1, 2006.
References          439

440          PROTECTING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES, KEY ASSETS, AND BORDERS 
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2007b). Homeland Security: Progress Has Been 
Made to Address the Vulnerabilities Exposed by 9/11, but Continued Federal Action 
Is Needed to Further Mitigate Security Risks (January). http://www.gao.gov/new.items/
d07375.pdf, retrieved January 26, 2007.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005d). Industrial Security: DOD Cannot Ensure 
Its Oversight of Contractors under Foreign Influence Is Sufficient (July). www.gao.gov/cgi-
bin/getrpt?GAO-05-681, retrieved July 18, 2005.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2006b). Information Security: Agencies Need to 
Develop and Implement Adequate Policies for Periodic Testing (October). www.gao.gov/
new.items.d0765.pdf, retrieved November 21, 2006.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005e). Information Security: Emerging Cybersecurity 
Issues Threaten Federal Information Systems (May). www.gao.gov/new.items.do5231.pdf, 
retrieved May 16, 2005.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005f). Passenger Rail Security: Enhanced Federal 
Leadership Needed to Prioritize and Guide Security Efforts (October). www.gao.gov/cgi-
bin/getrpt?GAO-06-181T, retrieved October 21, 2005.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2006c). Nuclear Power Plants: Efforts Made to 
Upgrade Security, but the Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s Design Basis Threat Process 
Should Be Improved (March). www.gao.gov/new.items.d06388.pdf, retrieved April 5, 
2006.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. (2005). “About ICE.” (October 4). www.ice.
gov, retrieved October 5, 2005.
U.S. Transportation Security Administration. (n.d.). “About TSA.” www.tsa.gov/public/
display?theme=7, retrieved September 30, 2005.
Welch, M. (2006). “Seeking a Safer Society: America’s Anxiety in the War on Terror.” Security 
Journal, 19.
White House. (2003a). The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical 
Infrastructures and Key Assets (February). www.whitehouse.gov, retrieved September 14, 
2004.
White House. (2003b). The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace (February). www.white-
house.gov, retrieved July 17, 2003.
Wikipedia. (2007). “Internet bot.” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_bot, retrieved 
January 27, 2007.
Winter, G., and Broad, W. (2001). “Added Security for Dams, Reservoirs and Aqueducts.” 
www.waterindustry.org, retrieved April 25, 2002.
Wulf, W., and Jones, A. (2004). “A Perspective on Cybersecurity Research in the United 
States.” In Terrorism: Reducing Vulnerabilities and Improving Response. Washington, 
D.C.: National Research Council of the National Academies.
Zeller, T. (2006). “Cyberthieves Silently Copy Keystrokes.” News.Com. (February 27). http://
news.com, retrieved February 28, 2006.

KEY TERMS
Loss Prevention at 
Businesses and Institutions
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Discuss the problem of inventory shrinkage in retailing.
2. Outline the crime losses incurred by retail businesses and countermeasures.
3. Discuss the shoplifting problem and countermeasures.
4. Explain robbery and burglary countermeasures for retail businesses.
5. Discuss the threats and hazards facing banks and financial businesses and 
countermeasures.
6. Discuss the threats and hazards facing educational institutions and 
countermeasures. 
7. Discuss the threats and hazards facing healthcare institutions and 
countermeasures.
17
• shrinkage
• shopping service
• checkout counters
• counterfeiting
• kleptomania
• organized retail theft
• Violence Against Women and 
Department of Justice Reauthorization 
Act of 2005
• source tagging
• robbery
• burglary
• substitutability
• U.S. Department of the Treasury
• Bank Protection Act (BPA) of 1968
• Bank Secrecy Act of 1986
• Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988
• The Antiterrorism and Effective Death 
Penalty Act of 1996
• Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999
• USA Patriot Act of 2001
• Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002
• Regulation H, Code of Federal Regulations
• savings and loan (S&L) scandal
• suspicious activity reports
• money laundering
• tear-gas/dye packs
• Global Positioning System (GPS)
• fraud for property
• fraud for profit
• Gun-Free Schools Act of 1994
• zero-tolerance policy
• Gang Resistance Education and Training 
(GREAT)
441

• “hard” targets
• “soft” targets
• Columbine High School massacre
• Beslan Elementary School massacre
• Virginia Tech massacre
• Student-Right-to-Know and Campus 
Security Act of 1990
• Campus Sexual Assault Victim’s Bill of 
Rights
• community policing
• immune buildings
• Emergency Medical Treatment and 
Active Labor Act
• Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)
• National Center for Missing and 
Exploited Children
• Controlled Substances Act of 1970
• Joint Commission on Accreditation 
of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO)
• first receivers
• personal protective equipment (PPE)
• Public Health Security and Bioterrorism 
Preparedness and Response Act of 2002
• Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC)
Introduction
This chapter focuses on security and loss prevention for retail businesses, banks and  financial 
businesses, educational institutions, and healthcare institutions. The National Strategy for 
The Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key Assets (White House, 2003) 
includes banks and financial businesses and healthcare institutions; however, it offers  limited, 
if any, security strategies for retail businesses or educational institutions. The National 
Strategy does refer to commercial centers, as discussed in the following section. With limited 
resources, the federal government must prioritize what it views as “critical infrastructures 
and key assets.” At the same time, retail businesses expend enormous resources on  security 
and loss prevention programs. In addition, federal, state, and local governments and the 
private sector are involved in numerous programs to protect students and educational 
 institutions.
Do you think The National Strategy for The Physical Protection of Critical 
Infrastructures and Key Assets should include retail businesses and/or educational 
institutions? Why or why not? Do you know of other entities, not contained in The 
National Strategy, that should be included in it?
Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses
As mentioned in the preceding chapter, The National Strategy states that commercial 
centers, office buildings, sports stadiums, and theme parks comprise another category of 
key assets. These facilities contain retail businesses where many people conduct business, 
shop, and enjoy restaurants and entertainment. Loss prevention is vital at these locations 
to protect people and assets. Daily protection is the responsibility of private sector propri-
etary and contract security programs. Public safety agencies provide emergency response. 
The federal government, especially the DHS, provides assistance through advisories and 
alerts; efforts to bring groups together to enhance protection; and designation of an event 
(e.g., Superbowl) as a National Security Special Event, resulting in federal law enforcement 
participation and aid (White House, 2003: 78–79).
442          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS

The National Strategy (White House, 2003: 78–79) states that to facilitate the protec-
tion of prominent commercial sites and facilities against terrorist attack, the federal govern-
ment will take action to
Share federal building security standards and practices with the private sector. 
DHS, together with GSA, NIST and other federal departments and agencies will 
develop a program to share federal building protection  standards.
Facilitate efficient dissemination of threat information. DHS, in concert 
with the intelligence and law enforcement communities, will explore processes 
and systems to enable the timely dissemination of threat indications and warning 
information to commercial facility owners and operators.
Implement the Homeland Security Advisory System. DHS will collaborate 
with commercial facility owners and operators to align the Homeland Security 
Advisory System with specific measures and procedures pertinent to commercial 
facility security.
Explore options for incentives for the implementation of enhanced design 
features or security measures. DHS will explore options to facilitate incentives for 
commercial owners and operators who incorporate specific security and safety 
features into their facility design, or who adopt specific processes, procedures, and 
technologies that serve to deter, prevent, or mitigate the consequences of terrorist 
attacks.
Improve building codes for privately owned facilities. NIST will develop 
a comprehensive set of building codes for privately owned facilities designed to 
better assure structural integrity, minimize probability of collapse, and increase 
resistance to high-temperature fires.”
Although terrorism is a serious concern for retail businesses, many other threats and 
hazards face these businesses, and numerous factors can be attributed to business failure. 
Poor management, unwise store location, noncompetitive marketing (selling) techniques, and 
consumer dissatisfaction with merchandise can all hinder profits.
Another important factor that can make or break a retail business is the quality of 
the loss prevention program. With a very small profit margin in many retail businesses, loss 
prevention is a necessity for survival. Vulnerability to employee theft, shoplifting, burglary, 
robbery, fire, and poor safety can cause extensive losses.
Shrinkage
As defined in Chapter 11, shrinkage is the amount of merchandise that has disappeared 
through theft, has become useless because of breakage or spoilage, or is unaccounted for 
because of sloppy recording. It is often expressed as a percentage. In retail businesses, 
guidelines are often in place to hold managers of stores, departments, and loss prevention 
responsible for shrinkage. When shrinkage becomes a measurable objective in annual reviews 
and bonus programs, an increased commitment to loss prevention can be expected (Kelly, 
2000: 37–38). In addition, the reality of retailing is that those who fail to meet shrinkage 
goals are likely to be dismissed (Purpura, 1993: ix). Consequently, shrinkage must be kept 
as low as possible; it is gauged after an inventory, and an accurate inventory is vital (Levy 
and Weitz, 2001: 548).
The University of Florida, noted for its National Retail Security Survey (NRSS), found 
that, in 2005, 156 responding retail chains reported an average shrinkage of 1.59% of total 
annual sales. The rate in 1994 was 1.83%. The 2005 shrinkage translates into about $37.4 
billion annual loss to retailers from a base of $2.334 trillion in annual sales for the retail 
sector as estimated in the 2005 U.S. Department of Commerce Retail Industry Census. 
Consistent with earlier NRSS studies, 2005 showed employee theft to be the single most sig-
nificant source of shrinkage at 47%; shoplifting was reported at 33%, paperwork errors at 
15%, and vendor fraud at 5.2%. The same year showed some of the lowest loss prevention 
Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          443

444          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
budgets as a percent of sales in the history of the survey. Less than one-half of 1% of retail 
sales (0.46%) was budgeted for loss prevention. Hollinger (2006: 94), director of the NRSS, 
noted “With decreasing LP budgets and even less money for high-tech countermeasures, more 
of the day-to-day responsibility for loss prevention is being shifted to overworked managers 
and untrained sales associates, not specially schooled LP personnel.”
Human Resources Problems in Retailing
Because retail loss prevention is highly dependent on the efforts of all employees, it is impor-
tant to discuss the realities of human resources problems in retailing. This includes many part-
time or temporary employees, inexperienced workers, employees dissatisfied with working 
conditions (e.g., low wages and long hours), and high turnover.
Loss can become a by-product of each of these personnel factors. For instance, some 
part-time employees may be working during holiday seasons to make extra money and may 
be stealing to support gift expenses. An inexperienced worker may unknowingly undercharge 
customers for merchandise. A dissatisfied employee may perform a variety of vindictive activi-
ties. A high rate of turnover creates additional training expenses and many inexperienced 
employees. These problems, coupled with poor performance, are especially troublesome to 
retailers because such employees are in direct contact with customers and this can have a 
negative impact on sales and customer loyalty. Research by Langton and Hollinger (2005: 
27), of 103 retail companies, found that low-shrinkage retailers retain a significantly lower 
average percentage of part-time employees, a higher average percentage of full-time employ-
ees, and substantially lower turnover (for managers and sales associates) than high-shrinkage 
retailers.
Losses caused by part-time or temporary employees can be reduced by cost-effective 
screening, adequate socialization, and good methods for accountability of inventory. Another 
possible measure would be to assign part-time and temporary employees to be supervised 
by and work with permanent, experienced employees. Additionally, part-time and tempo-
rary employees could be barred from performing certain tasks and entering specific areas. 
Although the potential exists for losses from part-time and temporary employees, potential 
losses from full-time regular employees must not be  underestimated.
Screening
The quality of job applicant screening is dependent on numerous factors. In a small store, the 
owner may interview the applicant; record pertinent information, such as the address, telephone 
number, and Social Security number; and ask for a few references. In large multistore organiza-
tions, however, employment procedures commonly are more structured and controlled. The 
NRSS (Hollinger and Langton, 2006: 15) found the following pre-employment screening mea-
sures based on 156 responding retail chains: verification of employment history (85%), crimi-
nal conviction checks (85%), multiple interviews (84%), reference checks (70%), drug testing 
(52%), credit history checks (48%),  education verification (37%), and honesty testing (36%).
Socialization
Various training programs can be instituted to assist in adequately socializing an employee 
toward business objectives. Training can reduce employee mistakes, raise productivity, create 
customer satisfaction, and reduce turnover. A loss prevention training program can reinforce 
attitudes that result in decreased losses.
Some retail businesses require employees to sign a statement that they understand 
the loss prevention program. This procedure reinforces loss prevention programming. 
Furthermore, as models of appropriate work attitudes and behavior, executives should set a 
good example and practice what is preached.
The NRSS (Hollinger and Langton, 2006: 19–20) found numerous loss  prevention 
awareness programs among respondents. These programs included anonymous telephone hot 
lines, discussions about shrinkage during new hire orientation, bulletin board notices and post-
ers, employee code of conduct, honesty incentives, and a variety of  training  programs.

Internal Loss Prevention Strategies
Theft is a major factor in internal losses. There are numerous targets for internal theft: mer-
chandise, damaged items, cash, repair service, office supplies and tools, parts, time, samples 
for customers, food and beverages, and personal property.
Although internal theft is a major part of the internal loss problem, there are other cat-
egories of internal losses. Examples are accidents, fire, unproductive employees, unintentional 
and intentional mistakes, and excessive absenteeism and lateness.
Here are strategies used by companies to address the problem of internal loss:
• Motivation, morale, and rewards: Management must attempt to help employees 
feel as if they are an integral part of the business organization. Praise for an 
employee’s accomplishment can go a long way in improving morale. Other methods 
of increasing morale and motivation are clean working conditions, participative 
management, and a company sports team. Contest and reward programs also 
reinforce improved morale and motivation. The employee with the best loss 
prevention idea of the month could be rewarded with $50 and recognition in a 
company newspaper.
• Employee discounts: Employee discounts usually range between 15% and 
25%. These discounts are an obvious benefit to employee morale even though 
employees sometimes abuse this discount by making purchases for relatives and 
friends.
• Shopping service: A shopping service is a business that assists retail loss prevention 
efforts by supplying investigators who pose as customers to test retail associates 
(i.e., cashiers and other retail employees) for honesty, accuracy, and demeanor. One 
common test of associates involves two shoppers who enter a store separately, acting 
as customers. One buys an item, pays for it with the exact amount of money needed, 
and leaves, while the second shopper, pretending to be a customer, observes whether 
the associate rings up the sale or pockets the money. Theft of cash is not the only 
source of loss; revenues are lost because of the curt or even abrasive behavior of some 
sales personnel.
• Undercover investigations: Investigations can be used as a last resort when other 
controls fail. By penetrating employee informal organizations, investigators are able 
to obtain considerable information that may expose collusion and weaknesses in 
controls.
Preventing Losses at Checkout Counters
Checkout counters are also called point-of-sale (POS) areas and point-of-purchase (POP) 
areas (Figure 17-1). These locations in a retail business accommodate customer payments, 
refunds, and service. Although most cashiers are honest, and bar codes and scanning technol-
ogy prevent losses, the following activities hinder profits:
 1. Stealing money from the cash drawer
 2. Failing to key in the sale and then stealing the money (this is especially tempting 
when no customer change is required)
 3.  Failing to key in the sale, leaving the cash drawer open for the customer’s change, 
and then stealing the money
 4.  Overcharging customers, keeping a mental record, and stealing the money at a later 
time
 5. Presenting the customer with the wrong change
 6. Accepting bad checks, bad charge cards, and counterfeit money
 7. Making pricing mistakes
 8. Undercharging for relatives and friends
 9. Failing to notice an altered price tag
10. Failing to notice shoplifted items secreted in legitimate purchases
Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          445

446          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Cashier Socialization of Procedures
The quality of training will have a direct bearing on accountability at checkout counters. 
Procedural training can include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Assign each cashier to a particular cash drawer and register/computer.
2. Have each transaction recorded separately and the cash drawer closed afterward.
3. Establish a system for giving receipts to customers.
4. Train cashiers to count change carefully.
5. Show cashiers how to spot irregularities (e.g., altered price tags or bar codes).
6. Encourage cashiers to seek supervision when appropriate (e.g., to check price of item, 
question about customer credit).
Accountability of Voids
Voids are used to eradicate and record mistakes by cashiers at the checkouts. Theft occurs 
when, for instance, a cashier voids a legitimate no-mistake sale and pockets the money. 
Fraudulent voids can be prevented by limiting void access or keys to supervisors. Specialized 
software and records help to pinpoint irregularities.
Point-of-Sale Accounting Systems
Retailers are increasingly making use of point-of-sale (POS) accounting systems with bar 
code and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technologies to produce vital business 
information. (See Chapter 11 for the applications of RFID technology.) Merchandise contains 
FIGURE 17-1 Checkout counter, CCTV camera domes, and electric article surveillance (EAS) system (portals at 
exit). Courtesy: Sensormatic, Inc.

a bar code that is read by a scanner during inventory or at the checkout counters. This 
stored information provides a perpetual inventory, helpful in ascertaining what is in stock 
and in ordering merchandise. In addition to shrinkage figures, POS systems can also be 
designed to produce a variety of loss prevention reports, exposing cashiers who repeatedly 
have cash shortages, voids, bad checks, and so forth. Ratios are also helpful to spot losses. 
Examples include cash to charge sales and sales to refunds.
Closed-Circuit Television (CCTV)
CCTV can be integrated with POS systems to give a loss prevention practitioner an opportu-
nity to view a cash register total and compare it with the merchandise sold. System capabilities 
enable the total to appear on the TV monitor with the date and time. Furthermore, “excep-
tions” (e.g., voids) noted by the POS system can also trigger CCTV and a recording for later 
reference. Certain retailers are recording every transaction on every register. Today’s technol-
ogy permits the viewing of video images on personal digital assistants and cell phones.
The Internet is enhancing the capabilities of CCTV systems. At one retail store chain, 
the plan is to keep an eye on widely dispersed stores, avoid the expense of a central station, 
and reduce time and travel costs of loss prevention personnel. The installed system permits 
real-time video through the Internet from a PC or laptop. Video is accessed through a secure, 
password-protected Web site. The digital video is archived on a secure server at a remote loca-
tion without the need for loss prevention personnel to maintain files. Optional features helped 
to sell the system to senior executives. Examples are customer traffic counting, time and atten-
dance of employees, and the transmission of in-house commercials to store TV screens. CCTV 
cameras are placed at front and back doors, the POS, and the back hallway. The cameras at 
the doors are linked to contact alarms so that each time a door is opened, loss prevention per-
sonnel receive an e-mail. In one case, a manager was caught improperly opening a back door 
by not following strict procedures. The manager was called on the telephone immediately for 
corrective action. Eventually, this retail chain will have one central data-gathering system for 
security and administrative information (Anderson, 2001: 22–23).
Refunds
The retailer may sustain losses during refunds. Such losses can be attributed to activities of 
employees, customers, or both.
In loosely controlled businesses, employees have an opportunity to retain a customer 
receipt (or hope that the customer leaves one) and use it to substantiate a fraudulent customer 
refund (merchandise supposedly returned for money). With the receipt used to support the 
phony refund slip, the employee is “covered” and can pocket the cash.
Especially bold offenders might enter a store, pick up an item, and then go directly to 
the refund desk and demand a cash refund without a receipt. Offenders may also purchase 
merchandise with a bad check and then seek a refund before the check clears. In such cases, 
wait for the check to clear before issuing a refund. Another ploy is to use a stolen credit card 
to purchase merchandise and then obtain a refund at another branch store. In other instances, 
collusion may take place between employees and customers. Employees simply issue refunds to 
family and friends.
Refund fraud is minimized through well-controlled supervision and accountability. 
Consider requesting photo identification and writing a check for refunds over a certain 
amount. A supervisor should account for returned merchandise before it is returned to the 
sales floor and sign and date the sales receipt after writing refund. Some retailers guarantee 
money (e.g., $5) to customers if the customer does not receive a receipt.
Electronic Payments
Electronic payments, such as the use of credit and debit cards, are more popular than pay-
ments by cash or check. New technologies are assisting retailers as they seek innovations to 
speed payment transactions and save on fees. In addition, as we know, new technologies bring 
vulnerabilities.
Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          447

448          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Credit and debit cards have a magnetic stripe that contains information on the account, 
such as customer name and account number. The customer’s card is “swiped” for electronic 
authorization to ensure that the account is valid and the purchase is within the account limit. 
Then the transaction is completed with the user’s signature. In many locales throughout the 
world, a conversion is occurring from magnetic stripe to the “chip-and-PIN” card to speed 
transactions, especially for low-value payments (e.g., a cup of coffee), and to increase security. 
In the “chip-and-PIN” card, information is stored in a small computer chip. The customer 
places the card near a proximity reader, similar to an access card, and enters a personal 
identification number (PIN) instead of providing a signature. This newer type of card is less 
likely to be copied than the magnetic stripe card (DiLonardo, 2006: 116). A variation of this 
technology is referred to as “contactless payment systems,” and a PIN is not required. Both 
the “chip-and-PIN” and “contactless” methods use a proximity reader to obtain information 
from the RFID computer chip imbedded in the card. Proponents claim that encryption pro-
tects the information. Critics argue that an offender nearby, armed with a specialized reader, 
might capture information on cards held by the customer.
Since U.S. retailers pay finance companies almost $40 billion each year for credit and 
debit card transaction fees, they are interested in technologies to reduce such costs. Retailers 
pay a fixed fee and a percentage of the transaction amount. A new type of technology to 
save retailers money and provide quicker customer payment is known as “pay-by-finger.” 
This biometric fingerprint technology requires customers to place a finger on a scanner to 
register the transaction with their bank account to debit their account without using a card, 
entering a PIN, or writing a check. Customers enroll at a kiosk by providing identification, 
bank information, and a finger scan. The information is encrypted, and store employees do 
not have access to the information. Opponents of this technology claim that retailers should 
consider the operational impact on the business, data center issues, setup costs, and customer 
security (Gaur and Gilliland, 2006).
Card fraud is a huge problem costing billions of dollars. The three major groups 
involved in card usage are card issuers (banks, oil companies, retail businesses, travel, and 
entertainment groups), acceptors (merchants), and users. All of these groups are susceptible to 
losses due to fraud. Lost or stolen cards can cause monetary loss to users. Acceptors who are 
careless may become financially responsible for fraud under certain circumstances and could 
even be placed at a competitive disadvantage if no longer authorized to accept the issuer’s 
card. Card issuers absorb billions of dollars in losses annually. Crime involving cards is var-
ied and compounded because of identity theft. Vulnerabilities include theft of cards from the 
postal system and counterfeiting of cards.
Gift Card Losses
Gift cards, also known as store value cards, generate profits for retailers and the use 
of these cards is increasing. The methods of gift card fraud, committed mostly by 
employees, includes card swapping by cashiers at the POS, “skimming” gift cards to 
produce duplicates, and using fraudulent credit cards to purchase gift cards. Fraudulent 
gift cards are used by employees, traded, or sold to local residents or on-line (Hollinger 
and Langton, 2006: 29–30). Countermeasures focus on inventories of cards, sales data, 
exception reports that show trends and anomalies, employee purchases, and packaging 
of cards that prevents the magnetic bar from being swiped without snapping the pack-
age at the POS (Cogswell, 2006: 63–68).
Checks
Personal checks and a variety of other types of checks continue to be a source of loss for 
retailers. A check is nothing more than a piece of paper until the money is collected. It may 
be worthless. Characteristics of bad checks include an inappropriate date, written figures that 
differ from numeric figures on the same check, and smeared ink. Sources of bad checks are 

Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          449
varied and include customers who write checks with no funds in their checking account. This 
may result from customer negligence in personal bookkeeping, and the customer often cor-
rects the problem. Conversely, offenders write bad checks by using stolen checks or by writing 
checks from a nonexistent account or from one with no funds. Counterfeit checks (e.g., bogus 
personal checks or bogus payroll checks) are another problem growing worse because of com-
puters, desktop publishing, check-writing software, newer color copier machines, scanners, 
and laser printers. Government checks frequently are stolen from mailboxes and signatures 
forged for endorsement.
Various strategies are applied to prevent the problem of bad checks. Retailer policies and 
procedures include carefully examining checks, not accepting checks over a certain amount, 
seeking supervisory approval for checks written over a certain amount, prohibiting checks 
from out of state, and never providing cash for a check. Retail employees should scrutinize 
customer identification for irregularities. Many employees look at identification cards but do 
not see irregularities. Concentration is necessary to match (or not to match) the customer with 
the identification presented. Many retailers require two types of identification before a check 
is accepted. A driver’s license, vehicle registration, or credit card is usually acceptable. Many 
other types of identification (e.g., Social Security cards, birth certificates, and insurance cards) 
are easier to obtain, forge, and hold for a period without detection. Another approach is an 
on-line check-clearing service.
A retailer’s recovery from a bad check depends on the circumstances. Procedures depend 
on the state. Usually, a retailer must send the check writer a registered letter requiring pay-
ment (if the check writer has a legitimate address). If the letter is not effective, the retailer can 
sign a warrant against the person who wrote the bad check.
In one jurisdiction, a “bad-check brigade” was formed. A magistrate coordinates the 
warrants, which are distributed to constables (part-time law enforcers) who are paid for each 
warrant served. Each week the brigade takes numerous offenders to jail. Retailers should 
check with public police about local practices. Some jurisdictions require collection through 
civil procedures. Another strategy, especially for large retailers, is to contract collection work 
to specialized firms.
If a retailer receives a check returned from a bank stating that there is “no account” or 
“account closed,” then fraud may have been perpetuated. The police should be notified. An 
altered or forged U.S. government check should be reported to the U.S. Secret Service.
The Counterfeiting of Bar Codes
As technology improves retail operations, it also presents vulnerabilities. The counter-
feiting of bar codes is a nuisance to retailers. The fraud involves using a computer to 
scan bar codes of inexpensive merchandise, printing copies of the bar codes, and plac-
ing the counterfeit bar codes onto expensive items. In addition, offenders are assisted 
by software available on the Internet. In one case, two married couples used counter-
feit bar codes to purchase merchandise at Wal-Mart and two other retail chains, and 
then they returned the items for full value. Their con included entering stores at peak 
hours when employees were busy. Wal-Mart lost about $1.5 million from the scam. 
In another case, an offender used counterfeit bar codes to purchase Lego sets for a 
fraction of the actual value, and then he sold the sets on a Web site for toy collectors 
(Beaulieu, 2005: 15; Zimmerman, 2006).
E-Business
E-business (using Internet-based technologies), phone-order, and mail order are particularly vul-
nerable to fraud because the customer and the card are not present for the transaction. Offenders 
obtain card numbers from many sources (e.g., discarded receipts, stealing customer information, 
and hacking into a business), establish a mail drop, and then place fraudulent orders.

450          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Bednarz (2006) reports that e-business fraud losses for 2006 are predicted at about 
$3 billion, a 7% increase over 2005. In addition, e-business is predicted to grow by more 
than 20% from 2005 to 2006. Orders from abroad are riskier than orders from the United 
States and Canada. Various tools are available to retailers to control fraud. Examples are IP 
geolocation products that analyze transaction risk based on geographic data, tools that use 
various metrics (e.g., dollar amounts and frequency) to monitor orders, and lists that show 
good customers. Other tools are address and card verification services.
In one case, the owner of a computer parts company in New Jersey became concerned 
when he received a $15,000 order from Bucharest, Romania. The owner tried to contact the 
credit card authorization company and the bank that works with the processing company to 
verify the credit cards. However, they were not able to assist, so the owner telephoned the cus-
tomer and had him fax his Romanian driver’s license and other documents to the owner. The 
owner then shipped the parts via UPS at about the same time the bank became suspicious and 
called the owner to say that all the cards used in the order were fraudulent. The owner was 
lucky when the shipment was intercepted in Bucharest.
Other complaints abound of such fraud and the inability of card issuers to assist. E-busi-
ness owners argue, “there is no financial incentive for the banks and card companies to do 
anything about the problem because it is the merchant who, in virtually all cases, ultimately 
bears the cost of fraudulent Internet purchases.” Disinterest by law enforcement is another 
concern because personnel and resources are limited. In another case, an e-business owner 
in the United States telephoned Canadian police and told them about an individual, living a 
few miles from the police station, who was attempting to commit credit card fraud against 
the e-business owner. The police response was that nothing could be done until the e-business 
owner flew to Canada and posted a $10,000 bond to guarantee a court appearance to testify 
(Brunker, 2001).
Counterfeiting
Counterfeiting is the unlawful duplication of something valuable to deceive. Counterfeit items 
can include money, coupons, credit or debit cards, clothes, and jewelry. Here, the emphasis is 
counterfeit money. The U.S. Secret Service investigates this federal offense.
Persons who recognize that they have counterfeit money will not be reimbursed when 
they give it to the Secret Service. Because of this potential loss, many people knowingly pass 
the bogus money to others. The extended chain of custody from the counterfeiter to authori-
ties causes great difficulty during investigations.
Counterfeiting is a growing problem because of the newer color copier machines, scan-
ners, computers, and laser printers that are in widespread use. The best method to reduce 
this type of loss is through the ability to recognize counterfeit money, and an excellent way 
to do this is to compare a suspect bill with a genuine bill. The U.S. government has countered 
counterfeiting through a variety of security features on bills. One should look for the red and 
blue fibers that are scattered throughout a genuine bill. These fibers are curved, about 1/4 inch 
long, hair thin, and difficult to produce on bogus bills. Other security features on genuine bills 
are a security thread embedded in the bill running vertically to the left of the Federal Reserve 
seal, microprinting on the rim of the portrait, a watermark (hold the bill up to light to see the 
faint image similar to the portrait), and color-shifting ink (tilt the bill repeatedly to see shifting 
ink color).
Watch for $1 bills that have counterfeit higher denomination numbers glued over the 
lower denomination numbers. Also, compare suspect coins with genuine coins.
Another fraud technique that appears to be increasing is the bleaching of a real, lower 
denomination bill (to wash away the ink), followed by placing the blank bill on a printer to 
apply a higher denomination bill design. This method of counterfeiting may defeat the use 
of counterfeit detector pens used by cashiers because the pens react to starch in paper by 
showing a black mark. However, genuine bills are actually cloth and devoid of starch; the 
pen will create a golden mark. Again, hold the suspect bill up to light and compare it to a 
genuine bill.

Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          451
What do you think is the most serious vulnerability at checkout counters? Support your 
answer and include countermeasures.
Shoplifting
Shoplifting cost American retailers about $12 billion in 2005, representing about one-third 
of shrinkage (Hollinger and Langton, 2006: 8). To deal with this serious problem, loss pre-
vention practitioners should have an understanding of the types of shoplifters, motivational 
factors, shoplifting techniques, and countermeasures.
Types of Shoplifters and Motivational Factors
Amateur shoplifters, also referred to as snitches, represents the majority of shoplifters. These 
persons generally steal on impulse while often possessing the money to pay for the item. 
Individuals in this category represent numerous demographic variables (e.g., sex, age, social 
class, ethnicity, and race). The distinguishing difference between the amateur and the profes-
sional thief is that the former shoplifts for personal use, whereas the latter shoplifts to sell the 
goods for a profit.
Generally, juveniles take merchandise that they can use, such as clothing and recre-
ational items. Frequently working in groups, their action is often motivated by peer pressure 
or a search for excitement.
Easy-access shoplifters are neither retail company employees nor customers. Because 
of their work, these persons have easy access to retail merchandise and are familiar with 
basic retail operations and loss prevention programs. Delivery personnel, salespeople, repair 
personnel, and public inspectors make up this category. Even public police and fire personnel 
have been known to represent this group, especially during emergencies. The motivation is 
obvious: to get something for nothing. The extent of this problem is difficult to ascertain, 
but it does contribute to the shoplifting problem.
Fairly easy to detect, drunk or vagrant shoplifters usually shoplift liquor, food, and 
clothing for personal use or shoplift other merchandise to sell for cash. These persons often 
are under the influence of alcohol and have a previous alcohol-related arrest record.
Addict shoplifters are extremely dangerous because of the illegal drug dependence 
problem and accompanying desperation. These persons generally peddle stolen loot to a 
“fence,” who pays less than one-third the value of the merchandise. The addicts may also 
“grab and run.”
Professionals or “boosters” account for a small percentage of those caught shoplifting. 
(This low figure could be the result of the professional’s skill in avoiding apprehension.) The 
motive is profit or resale of shoplifted merchandise. Professionals may utilize a booster box (a 
box that looks wrapped and tied, but really contains a secret entrance), hooks inside clothing, 
or extra long pockets. A criminal record is typical, as are ties to the underworld organization 
(e.g., fences) that will supply bail money and attorney assistance.
Kleptomania is a rare, persistent, neurotic impulse to steal. Kleptomaniacs usually 
shoplift without considering the value or personal use of the item, and seemingly want to be 
caught. This type of shoplifter usually has a criminal record from previous apprehensions and 
may have been caught several times at the same retail store.
Shoplifting Techniques
The following list presents only a few of the many shoplifting techniques:
1. Shoplifters may work alone or in a group.
2. A person may simply shoplift an item and conceal it in his or her clothing.
3. A person may “palm” a small item and conceal it in a glove.

452          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
4. Shoplifters often go into a fitting room with several garments and either conceal an 
item or wear it and leave the store.
5. An offender may ask to see more items than a clerk can control or send the clerk to the 
stockroom for other items; while the counter is unattended, items are stolen.
6. A self-service counter can provide an opportunity for a shoplifter to pull out and 
examine several items while returning only half of them.
7. Merchandise often is taken to a deserted location (e.g., restroom, elevator, stockroom, 
janitor’s supply room, and so on) and then concealed.
8. A shoplifter may simply grab an item and quickly leave the store.
9. A shoplifter may drop an expensive piece of jewelry into a drink or food.
10. Shoplifters arrive at a store early or late to take advantage of any lax situation.
11.  Disguised as a priest (or other professional), the shoplifter may have an advantage 
when stealing.
12.  Some bold offenders have been known to impersonate salespeople while shoplifting 
and even to collect money from customers.
13.  Price tags are often switched to allow merchandise to be bought at a lower price; 
sometimes the desired price will be written on the price tag of a sales item.
14. Shoplifters are aided by large shopping bags, lunch boxes, knitting bags, suitcases, 
flight bags, camera cases, musical instrument cases, and newspapers.
15. Dummy packages, bags, or boxes (“booster boxes”) are used, which appear to be 
sealed and tied but contain false bottoms and openings to conceal items.
16. Shoplifters may use hollowed-out books.
17. Stolen merchandise is often concealed within legitimate purchases.
18. Expensive items are placed in inexpensive containers.
19.  Shoplifters sometimes slide items off counters and into some type of container or 
clothing.
20. Sometimes shoplifters wear fake bandages or false plastic casts.
21.  Professional shoplifters are known to carry store supplies (e.g., bag, box, stapler, or 
colored tape) to assist in stealing.
22. Baby carriages and wheelchairs have been utilized in various ways to steal.
23.  Sometimes items are hidden in a store for subsequent pickup by an accomplice.
24.  Various contrived diversions (e.g., appearing to be drunk, dropping and breaking an 
item, faking a heart attack, fainting, choking, pretending to have an epileptic seizure or 
labor pains, setting a fire or smoke bomb, breaking a glass, or having someone call in a 
bomb threat) have been used to give an accomplice a chance to shoplift.
25.  Teenagers sometimes converge on a particular retail department, cause a disturbance, 
and then shoplift.
26. Adult shoplifters have been known to use children to aid them.
27.  Sometimes “blind” accomplices with “guide” dogs are used to distract and confuse 
sales personnel eager to assist the disadvantaged.
28.  “Crotchwalking” is a method whereby a woman wearing a dress conceals an item 
between her legs and then departs.
Prevention and Reduction of Shoplifting through People
People are the first and primary asset for reducing shoplifting opportunities. The proper 
utilization of people is the test of success or failure in preventing shoplifting. Good training 
is essential.
• Management: Management has the responsibility for planning, implementing, and 
monitoring antishoplifting programs. The quality of leadership and the ability to 
motivate people are of paramount importance. The loss prevention manager and other 
retail executives must cooperate when formulating policies and procedures that do not 
hamper sales.
• Salespeople: An antishoplifting program increases a shoplifter’s anxiety. One method 
to accomplish this is to have salespeople approach all customers and say, for instance, 

“May I help you?” This approach informs the potential shoplifter that he or she has 
been noticed by salespeople and possibly by loss prevention personnel. Obviously, 
the anxiety level will be raised. Sometimes salespeople annoy honest customers by 
hounding them with persistent offers of assistance. This can hinder sales. A moderate 
approach is appropriate. For those who have been store detectives, there are few 
activities as annoying as a salesperson who unknowingly interferes with a potential 
apprehension of a shoplifter. To avoid this problem, the retailer must formulate and 
communicate policies and procedures to appropriate employees. One solution may 
be to have the store detective signal salespeople, for example, by carrying a certain 
colored bag. The colored bag would signify to salespeople that they should ignore the 
potential shoplifter.
• Store detectives or Loss Prevention (LP) professionals: These specialists must have the 
ability to observe without being observed, remember precisely what happened during an 
incident, know criminal law and self-defense, effectively interview, testify in court, and 
recover stolen items. They perform a variety of duties, such as observing the premises 
with a CCTV system, helping to reduce shrinkage, and conducting investigations of 
suspected internal theft and shoplifting. When they are on the sales floor and observing 
a suspect, they should blend in with the shopping crowd and look like shoppers. This 
can be done by dressing like average shoppers, carrying a package or two and even a 
bag of popcorn. The antiquated term floor walkers should be reserved for historical 
discussions; this will help to professionalize this important LP position.
• Uniformed officers: Only a foolish shoplifter would steal in the presence of an officer 
who acts as a deterrent. A well-planned antishoplifting program must not lose sight of 
the systems approach to loss prevention, as described next (Altheide et al., 1978):
The store had four security guards or personnel. These people were also looked 
upon as “jokes.” The security personnel were primarily concerned with catching 
shoplifting customers. Most of their time was spent behind two-way mirrors with 
binoculars observing shoppers. Therefore, in reality while the security personnel 
caught a customer concealing a pair of pants in her purse, an employee was smug-
gling four pairs of Levi’s out the front door. Security was concerned with shoppers 
on the floor while all employee thefts usually occurred in stockrooms.
• Fitting-room personnel: Employees who supervise merchandise passing in and out of 
fitting rooms play a vital role in reducing the shoplifting problem. Many stores place 
a limit on the number of items that can be brought into a fitting room.
Training
Employees must realize the economic impact of shoplifting and other crimes. They must 
understand that, if crime is not prevented, the retail store may go out of business and jobs will 
be lost. Thus, everyone should play a role in reducing the crime problem. On-line training is 
cost-effective, and employees at their convenience can study a host of topics (e.g., shoplifting, 
shrinkage control).
Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          453
Organized Retail Theft and Countermeasures
Organized retail theft (ORT), also known as organized retail crime, refers to gangs of 
offenders who victimize retail businesses by stealing and reselling a variety of retail 
merchandise for illegal profit. Hollinger and Langton (2006: 29), in the NRSS, write 
that the FBI, working with the National Retail Federation, estimates that retailers lose 
between $15 billion and $30 billion each year to ORT. They also write that only 37% 
of retailers responding to their survey are tracking ORT incidents and losses, and only 
10% of loss prevention departments have a dedicated task force focused on ORT.

454          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Prevention and Reduction of Shoplifting through Physical Design and 
Physical Security
Physical design and physical security comprise a second major category of an effective anti-
shoplifting program. In reference to physical security, these systems are only as good as the 
people operating them. A retail company can spend millions of dollars on antishoplifting 
systems; however, money will be wasted if employees are not properly trained and they are 
not knowledgeable of system capabilities and limitations.
Physical Design
Physical design includes architectural design and store layout (e.g., merchandise displays). 
Three objectives of physical design are to create an environment that stimulates sales and, for 
the purposes of this text, to comply with the ADA and to create Crime Prevention Through 
Environmental Design (CPTED), as covered earlier in the text. The ADA requires the removal 
of barriers that hinder the disabled. An example of CPTED is increased visibility of customers 
by retail personnel by designing an employee lounge that is raised above the sales floor and has 
a large glass window. In addition, POS locations that are raised a few inches increase visibility.
A balance between attractiveness and loss prevention is essential. Counters contain-
ing merchandise should be set up to let employees at the POS observe activities down aisles. 
Adequate lighting is essential. Merchandise or other store features that obstruct the view of 
employees will aid shoplifters. Eight-foot paneling on display in the middle of a sales floor, for 
example, would be more appropriate along the store’s inner perimeter walls.
Hayes (2006: 46) writes that a retailer can manipulate variables in a store to  influence 
moods and behavior. As examples, he refers to architecture, number of entrances and exits, 
walkways, flooring, fixture types, aisle width, and employee workstations.
The proper utilization of turnstiles, corrals, and other barriers can limit the  circulation of 
shoplifters and funnel customer traffic to select locations (e.g., toward the POS). Usable exits 
can be limited and restrooms locked so that customers need to ask for the restroom key.
ORT gangs sell stolen merchandise at flea markets and Internet auction sites. 
They may also work with a network of fences and earn up to 25% of the retail value 
of the merchandise. The fence sells the items to local residents or back to legitimate 
retailers. Another type of fence is the e-fence, who sells stolen items on-line to a global 
market. ORT gangs are structured somewhat similar to a terrorist cell, characterized 
by decentralized operations, and when one cell is apprehended, other cells continue 
operations. ORT gangs may be involved in funding terrorist groups. To counter ORT, 
cooperation is essential between retailers and public police,  especially since vehicles 
may be stopped, search warrants executed, and subpoenas obtained for Internet 
records. Other strategies are retail industry–sponsored educational programs for 
police; focusing on the fence, besides the shoplifter; utilizing a variety of investigative 
methods (e.g., informants, undercover operations); forming retailer ORT units; and 
the use of databases (Talamo, 2007: 23–30).
The Violence Against Women and Department of Justice Reauthorization Act of 
2005 contains many anticrime provisions, including Title XI, Section 1105 that seeks 
to reduce ORT. It establishes an FBI task force to counter ORT, an ORT database, and 
training on ORT. The Retail Loss Prevention Intelligence Network (RLPIN), created by 
the National Retail Federation (NRF), was established in anticipation of the act, and the 
NRF has worked with the FBI to ensure the RLPIN meets law enforcement and retailer 
needs. The RLPIN enables the private and public sectors to study crime patterns and 
take action. By logging on to a secure Web site, users can read about incidents from 
across the nation and enter data on incidents.

Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          455
Other methods to hinder theft include locking display cabinets, displaying only one of 
a pair, using dummy displays (e.g., empty cosmetic boxes), arranging displays neatly and in a 
particular pattern to allow for quick recognition of a disruption in their order, having hangers 
pointing in alternate directions on racks to prevent “grab and run”  tactics, and placing small 
items closer to cash registers.
Electronic Article Surveillance
The electronic article surveillance (EAS) system “watches” merchandise instead of  people. 
Generally, electronic tags are placed on merchandise and removed by a salesperson when 
appropriate. If a person leaves a designated area with the tagged merchandise, a sensor at an 
exit activates an alarm.
This device has been on the market since the late 1960s. Because these plastic tags 
tended to be large (about 3 or 4 inches) and difficult to attach to many goods, they were 
used on high-priced merchandise such as coats. However, improved technology has permitted 
manufacturers to develop devices the size of price tags, at a lower cost. The newer device is 
small, with an adhesive back to allow it to stick to merchandise. Several new types include 
low-cost disposable labels and higher-cost ($1 to $2) reusable tags.
The radio frequency (RF) is the most popular type of EAS system, and it contains a tiny 
circuit that can be hidden virtually anywhere on a product or in packaging. If the cashier does 
not remove or deactivate it (which can be done automatically as items are scanned for prices 
at the POS) and the customer walks between a radio transmitter and a sensor, then the circuit 
picks up the signal and an alarm is triggered. Its weaknesses are that shoplifters can cover the 
labels with aluminum foil and that the tags cannot be used on metal objects. At the refund 
desk, a verifier can be used to check for “live” tags that may indicate that an item was not pur-
chased legitimately. A second type, magnetic, which is dominant in Europe, employs a metal 
strip (called an EM strip) that interferes with a magnetic field at an exit. A unique feature of the 
EM strip is that it can be reactivated, which makes this system especially suitable for libraries. 
Another type is the acousto-magnetic system, which is similar to magnetic tags. These tags are 
wider and have superior detection in comparison to magnetic tags. Another type of EAS system 
is microwave, which can be costly and is often applied in clothing stores.
Each company contends that its system is best. None is without problems, nor is any fool-
proof. False alarms or failure of the cashier to deactivate or remove the tag has led to retailers 
being sued for false arrest. Another problem results from employees who carry an EAS tag on their 
person and activate the system as a pretext to stop and search suspicious customers. Training and 
politeness when approaching customers will prevent litigation. Many state that professional shop-
lifters and the bigger problem of employee theft are not alleviated by EAS. Others view the tags as 
too expensive to be justified for low-cost merchandise. Many tag only high-shrinkage items.
Research by Read Hayes and Robert Blackwood (Gips, 2007: 26) showed that retail 
employees routinely ignored EAS alarms; of almost 4,000 alarms studied, employees requested 
receipts for merchandise in only 18% of cases. Prior to applying EAS, Read and Blackwood 
recommended strong evidence that a particular item is being shoplifted chainwide and EAS 
should be made obvious through signs.
Despite the disadvantages of EAS, plus initial costs and maintenance, these systems 
can be cost effective and are popular. In fact, such systems are used in certain industries to 
“watch” inventories. Prisoners and patients also are being monitored with such technology.
Innovations have further enhanced EAS technology. Integrated systems use program-
mable CCTV technology to target an alarm location or “walk a beat.” Another type of tag 
sends out an audible alarm when tampering occurs. Source tagging is growing in popularity 
and involves the manufacturer placing a hidden EAS tag into the product during manufactur-
ing, to be deactivated at the POS. This saves the retailer the labor of tagging and untagging 
merchandise (Palmer, 2006: 45–50).
Alarms
In addition to EAS, various alarm sensors protect merchandise from theft. Loop alarms 
consist of a cable forming a closed electrical circuit that begins and ends at an alarm device. 

456          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
This cable usually is attached through merchandise handles and openings. When the electrical 
circuit is disrupted by someone cutting or breaking it, the alarm sounds. Cable alarms also 
use a cable that runs from the merchandise to an alarm unit. This alarm differs in that a pad 
attached to the end of the cable is placed on the merchandise. Each item has its own cable pad 
setup, which is connected to an alarm unit. Cable alarms are useful when merchandise does 
not have openings or handles. Retailers also use heavy nonalarmed cables that are also woven 
through expensive items such as leather coats. This cable usually has a locking device. Wafer 
alarms are sensing devices that react to negative pressure. This device, about the size of a large 
coin, is placed under the protected item; if a thief removes the item, an alarm sounds.
Additional Measures
Numerous security measures are applicable to retail stores to thwart not only shoplifting but 
also other sources of losses. Figures 17-2 and 17-3 focus on internal space protection and 
point protection. Chapters 7 and 8 explain a variety of security measures.
CCTV is a popular antishoplifting measure. Comprehensive systems allow personnel to 
follow suspects through a store. Close communication between the monitoring station and 
personnel on the sales floor is important to avoid errors in investigations. Modern technology 
permits CCTV monitoring to take place globally on a variety of devices (e.g., computer or cell 
phone), as described in Chapter 7.
Two types of mirrors used to curb the shoplifting problem are see-through mirrors 
and wide-angle convex mirrors. These mirrors are relatively inexpensive and provide per-
sonnel with advantages that aid in the surveillance of shoplifters. See-through mirrors, also 
called two-way mirrors, are different from one-way mirrors. A one-way mirror is a regular 
mirror that reflects light back to the viewer. A see-through mirror enables the observer to 
see through the mirror; light strikes the surface and travels two ways: back to you as you 
see yourself and toward the observer on the other side. To detect this type of mirror, use 
a laser pointer or good flashlight to see the light go through (TwoWayMirrors.net, 2006). 
Observation booths usually are equipped with see-through mirrors; their location is above 
the sales floor at various places within a store. Personnel often use binoculars while watch-
ing customers (and employees) from these vantage points. A good communication system 
is necessary to summon aid because, when the observer leaves the booth, the shoplifter’s 
actions are not being watched. If the shoplifter returns the item before being apprehended, 
the retail store may be faced with a lawsuit. Wide-angle convex mirrors have been placed 
throughout small and large retail stores to facilitate greater visibility and reduce blind spots 
around corners. Convex mirrors and regular mirrors can be located along walls, ceilings, at 
FIGURE 17-2 Internal Space Protection.

Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          457
FIGURE 17-3 Point Protection.
support columns, above merchandise displays, and at any point to create greater visibility 
and thus deter theft.
In one case, a juvenile was shoplifting recorded music items by sliding them into the bot-
tom of a bag that had been stapled closed with a receipt attached. The incident occurred while 
the store was closing, and more than 20 retail personnel attentively watched the shoplifter in 
action from the other side of a 7-foot-high partition that had a convex mirror placed above it. 
The situation was interesting because the music department had been cleared of retail employ-
ees, and the juvenile rushed around the department selecting items while nervously watching for 
people he did not know were watching him via the mirror.
Fake deterrents are debatable loss prevention methods. A dummy camera or a periodic, 
fake loudspeaker statement (e.g., “dispatch security to main floor”) may prevent shoplifting, but 
the level of effectiveness is difficult to measure. Many stores combine fake and real methods.
Salespersons must carefully control store supplies (e.g., boxes, price tags) to prevent 
offenders from using the supplies to commit theft.
Confronting the Suspected Shoplifter
Detection and Apprehension
Most suspected shoplifters exhibit the following activities and characteristics before, during, 
and after a theft: extreme sensitivity to those around them, surveillance of the sales floor, ner-
vousness and anxiety, and walking repeatedly to certain areas. Other characteristics that invite 
suspicion are a group of juveniles or a person wearing excessive clothing on a warm day.
Two prerequisites to an apprehension are making sure to have seen the suspect conceal 
the store’s merchandise and never losing sight of the suspect. The observer must be positive 
that he or she saw the item removed from a rack because the customer could have brought the 
item into the store. If a customer wears a store item out of the store, alters or switches a price 
tag, store personnel must make sure an eyewitness account is available. Some shoplifters panic 
on being observed and “ditch” the concealed merchandise or give it to an accomplice. Some 
people conceal merchandise, return it to the counter unnoticed, and hope to be apprehended 
in order to sue to collect damages. To help prove intent, store personnel should permit the sus-
pect to pass the last cash register and exit the store. If a register is outside (e.g., at a sidewalk 
sale), store personnel need to ensure the suspect passes it to strengthen the case.
Juveniles are handled differently than adults. Police and parents usually are called. A loss 
prevention practitioner should be familiar with local procedures regarding juveniles.
If a retail employee is not certain about a suspect, no apprehension should take place. 
In this situation, some practitioners recommend the “ghosting technique,” which involves an 

458          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
employee carrying a duplicate of the item alleged to have been concealed as he or she walks 
close to the suspect. No words are spoken, but the message is obvious, if a theft has taken 
place. This technique has advantages for prevention, but it may permanently frighten custom-
ers from the store.
When retail personnel positively witness a shoplifting incident, loss prevention person-
nel must be notified for apprehension purposes. The detector (e.g., salesperson) should assist 
as an eyewitness. Additional personnel can stand by in case the subject becomes violent. Only 
a reasonable degree of force can be used to control the subject. It is best to avoid a physi-
cal confrontation because the subject may be armed and the liability potential is significant. 
If the suspect flees, personnel should obtain a description and call police. Immediately on 
approaching the subject, LP personnel should identify themselves by displaying identification 
or a badge. Personnel must never threaten the subject. To reduce the problems associated with 
error, it is wise not to accuse the subject of stealing; the subject can be asked, “Would you 
mind answering a few questions about an item?” The next step is to quickly ask the subject 
to accompany personnel to the loss prevention office. This perhaps is the most crucial point 
of the confrontation. At all times, careful observation of the subject is important because the 
merchandise may be “ditched” or escape may be attempted. If the subject escapes, again, 
personnel should avoid a physical confrontation and call police.
Detention and Arrest
After entering the LP office, the subject usually is asked to produce some type of identification 
as well as the concealed merchandise. If the subject does not comply with these requests, the 
LP officer should call the public police.
After the merchandise is received, a receipt should be requested to reduce the possibil-
ity of error. Usually, a shoplifter will state some type of excuse in an attempt to cover up not 
having a receipt.
Many jurisdictions have adopted the retailer’s privilege of detaining shoplifters. The 
difference between an arrest and detention is that the former requires the arrester to turn the 
suspect over to the public police, whereas the latter does not. Conditions for detention involve 
probable cause (reasonable grounds to justify legal action, such as an eyewitness account) and 
a reasonable time span, for detention, to accomplish questioning and documentation. Many 
shoplifting statutes protect the retailer’s right to detain, provided legal action was conducted 
in a reasonable manner. If an arrest is made, the crime charged by the retailer should be shop-
lifting (not larceny) to retain the right to detain under the shoplifting statute. Probable cause 
is a prerequisite for either detention or arrest. The detention of a person can evolve into an 
arrest. Many attorneys argue that any type of restricted movement placed on the suspect is 
equal to an arrest. The ultimate decision may rest with a jury in a lawsuit.
LP personnel—or any store personnel—should refrain from touching the subject. If 
force is used to exercise legal action, it must be reasonable. When a suspect is controlled 
after a struggle, it would be unreasonable to strike the suspect. Deadly force is restricted to 
life-threatening situations. Unreasonable force can lead to prosecution difficulties, as well as 
criminal and civil action.
Subsequent to proper detention or arrest, shoplifting statutes generally do not stipulate 
how merchandise is to be located and recovered from the suspect. Some states permit a search, 
whereas others forbid it. A shoplifter can be requested to empty his or her pockets and belong-
ings to produce the stolen item(s). Public police should be called for obstinate suspects, and 
the police should conduct the search.
If the subject complies voluntarily, an arrest has not been made unless specified. The LP 
officer should ask the offender to sign a civil release form, which is vital before releasing the 
subject. It provides some protection against civil liability and becomes a record of the incident. 
The form contains, in addition to basic information (e.g., name, date), a voluntary confession 
of the store’s items stolen, the value, and a statement that retail personnel did not use force 
or coercion and that the subject’s cooperation is voluntary. Although a release may state that 
the subject agrees not to sue, the retail personnel still can be sued. The release has psychologi-
cal value in that the subject may believe that a suit is impossible and not seek legal advice, 

although a claim possibly can be made that the subject signed while under duress. If the sub-
ject is obstinate or violent, an arrest is appropriate; handcuffing may be necessary. With this 
situation, the public police must be summoned; they usually will act in an advisory capacity 
and transport the prisoner to jail. A decision to call the police and prosecute makes obtaining 
a signature on the form less important. A criminal conviction perhaps is the best protection 
against civil liability. If the retailer intends to release the subject without calling public police, 
then the civil release form is vital for some protection against litigation.
The courts have yet to require private security personnel to state to a suspect the Miranda 
rights (civil liberties) prior to questioning, as public police are required to do. Courts have held 
that any involuntary confession, gained by public or private police, is inadmissible in court. To 
strengthen their case, many LP practitioners recite the Miranda rights anyway and request that 
subjects sign a waiver-of-rights form if willing to confess.
If an arrest occurs, the stolen merchandise and the eyewitness to the shoplifting incident 
(plus a CCTV video recording, if available) will be the primary evidence that will aid in the 
prosecution. The interviewer must not coerce the subject into a confession by prolonged ques-
tioning or tricky tactics. This forceful approach can easily destroy a case.
Throughout the confrontation, at least two retail employees should be present. One 
employee must be of the same sex as the subject. Problems inevitably develop if an item is 
forcibly removed from the subject. A video recording can prevent charges related to excessive 
force, coercion, a bribe, or sexual assault. Racial profiling is another potential problem that 
can result in a lawsuit by a subject who claims that he or she was targeted for surveillance 
because of racial background. Since recordings of surveillance activities can be taken out of 
context by a plaintiff’s attorney, security personnel should explain to the defense side how 
surveillance is conducted. Examples include monitoring any customer who continuously looks 
around to see who is watching or walks into a high-risk area. Also, it may be an employee 
who is under surveillance rather than the customer (Schmedlen, 2000: 70–73).
Insurance companies write coverage protecting retailers against liability for false arrest, 
malicious prosecution, willful detention or imprisonment, libel, slander, and defamation of 
character. These types of insurance are important for retailers. Research by Gabbidon and 
Patrick (2005: 7) found that in more than two-thirds of shoplifting cases brought to civil court, 
the plaintiffs were to some extent successful, and almost a third were awarded damages.
Prosecution
The deterrent effect of prosecution is debatable. However, retailers may favor the  prosecution 
of all shoplifters, believing that shoplifters will avoid a “tough” store that has a reputation 
for prosecutions.
Retailers should institute policies that are cost effective. Prevention appears to be less 
costly than a strict apprehension program.
When a shoplifter is arrested and about to be prosecuted, the witness or LP practitioner 
probably will be asked to sign a complaint or warrant, the legal document containing the facts 
making up the essential elements of the crime. The LP practitioner should read the legal docu-
ments and safeguard all relevant records and forms. Public police, prosecutors, judges, and juries 
will be interested in facts. In most cases, the defendant pleads guilty in a lower court, pays a fine, 
and a trial is avoided. For serious cases, a preliminary hearing may be necessary to give the judge 
an opportunity to review evidence and to decide on the necessity for a trial. Most defendants 
waive their rights to a hearing and a trial in exchange for a plea-bargaining opportunity. Some 
defendants choose to go to trial and retain an attorney. LP personnel facing a criminal trial must 
have an excellent case; otherwise, an acquittal is likely to lead to a lawsuit.
The testimony of the eyewitness as to the shoplifting incident often is the main evi-
dence in a shoplifting case. CCTV systems provide visual evidence to strengthen cases.
The responsibility for preserving physical evidence for a court appearance is part of the 
LP practitioner’s job. Accurate records are necessary. The evidence should be properly labeled 
and secured in a box or plastic bag. It should be in a locked location with very limited access 
to maintain the chain of custody of evidence (see Chapter 10). Two problems exist related 
to the preservation of physical evidence. First, millions of dollars of confiscated merchandise 
Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          459

460          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
International Perspective: What Deters Shoplifters?
Gill, Bilby, and Turbin (1999: 29–39) interviewed 38 experienced shoplifters in England to 
assess the effectiveness of antishoplifting strategies. Their research is summarized here:
• Retail staff: While 9 out of 38 respondents suggested that retail staff would 
sometimes deter them, 24 answered “never.” They argued that salespeople were 
too busy or uninterested in shoplifting.
• Security personnel: Three-fourths of respondents said that they were able to 
spot plain-clothed store detectives. Only three claimed to be deterred always. 
The majority said that they would be deterred if a store detective actively 
observed them. Respondents claimed that one advantage of being followed by a 
store detective was that it would help an accomplice.
are not returned to the sales floor at hundreds of retail stores. Court congestion and delays 
can extend to months and years until the merchandise is out of date. Second, perishable items 
can deteriorate. A package of eight-month-old chicken breasts would present obvious resale 
problems when released after it was no longer needed as court evidence.
A solution to these problems involves photographing the stolen and recovered merchandise. 
Local requirements will vary concerning this procedure. A witness to the photographs can assist in 
strengthening the case. Color photos that contain a ruler marked with measurements will also 
aid in the effectiveness of this evidence.
If the prosecution of shoplifters becomes expensive and time consuming, if repeat 
offenders are not deterred, if the justice system becomes a “revolving door” (i.e., in for pros-
ecution, out to commit another crime), and if cases are not successful, then antishoplifting 
strategies must be changed.
Civil Recovery
Almost every state has a civil recovery law that holds shoplifters liable for paying damages 
to businesses. Some states even extend these laws to employee theft. Civil recovery laws vary 
and may allow retailers, for example, to request three times the actual damages. These civil 
demand statutes aim to recover attorneys’ fees, court costs, and even the cost of security. 
Essentially, the expense of theft is passed on to thieves.
To recover damages, a retailer sends a shoplifter a demand letter and a copy of the state’s 
civil recovery law. Guidance can be obtained from a state retail association or an attorney. If 
there is no response, a second letter is sent stating that nonpayment may result in civil court 
action. With no response after a second letter, a retailer will have to decide whether to pursue 
the case in small claims court and whether a favorable  judgment for damages can be collected.
LP personnel at some businesses may attempt civil recovery while the accused  subject is 
still in custody because the chance for recovery diminishes once the subject leaves the store. 
The problem with this approach is that the shoplifting case may be based on faulty evidence. 
In addition, in some states, a guilty verdict may be necessary before civil action is sought. 
Other states permit simultaneous criminal and civil actions. In addition to the possibility of 
having a weak case against a suspected shoplifter, civil demand following an apprehension 
may result in legal action against the retailer for false imprisonment, extortion, and inten-
tional or negligent infliction of emotion distress. The law of the respective state should be 
carefully studied as a foundation for store policies (Gips, 1997: 10). Research by Hollinger and 
Langton (2006: 28) shows a trend in less frequent use of civil recovery by retailers. They view 
this trend as possibly resulting from retailer frustration with the justice system.
Retailers have the option of contracting civil recovery with an outside firm that usually 
charges 30% of any money collected. Outsourcing saves the retailer the time and expense of 
operating a civil recovery program.

• Signs: Most of the sample claimed that signs stating “shoplifters will be 
prosecuted” would not deter them, especially because certain retailers do not 
follow what the sign states.
• EAS and inktags: Twenty respondents stated that EAS tags would never deter 
them, and 14 claimed that they would remove the tags in the store, some with 
pliers and one with a bottle opener to pop it off. Some respondents avoided 
EAS tags, which illustrates some deterrent value. Respondents were evenly split 
on the deterrent effect of inktags. Claims were made that, by putting a condom 
over it or freezing it before removal, the merchandise would not be ruined. 
Manufacturers should study shoplifting methods more closely to design systems 
that are more effective.
• CCTV: Thirty-three out of 38 respondents claimed that CCTV would never 
deter them. Picture quality was perceived to be too poor for prosecution. They 
claimed that CCTV helped them if they could see where cameras were aimed 
so they could steal away from the camera’s view. Blind spots were also helpful. 
These research results show the value of dark camera domes so the offender 
cannot see the camera’s direction.
This research demonstrated that offenders make rational choices and that situ-
ational crime prevention (i.e., measures that increase risk for the offender) deters crime, 
but with the respondents in this study who were experienced shoplifters, a minority 
was deterred. A combination of security methods appears to have more of an impact 
than any one method. More research is needed to see how security methods impact 
amateurs.
Research That Examines the Empirical Relationship between LP Strategies 
and Levels of Shrinkage
Research of 103 retail firms by Langton and Hollinger (2005: 27–44) compared 
low- and high-shrinkage retailers within the theoretical framework of routine activi-
ties theory (see Chapters 3 and 8). Their research found that “in terms of blocking 
motivated offenders, there do seem to be significant differences between high- and 
low-shrinkage retailers in the number of pre-employment screening tests used for 
management and non-management, but not in the number of LP awareness pro-
grams implemented.” They suggest that it is better to screen offenders out than try 
to prevent them from stealing once they are hired. Langton and Hollinger also found 
that background checks and drug tests were used, on average, by more low-shrink-
age than high-shrinkage retailers. These researchers noted that they were unable to 
clearly identify which LP strategies are the most effective solutions to shrinkage, and 
many LP departments continue to apply the same strategies each year, using a “shot 
gun” approach, without researching the effectiveness of individual strategies in reduc-
ing shrinkage. Langton and Hollinger conclude that the most important difference 
between low- and high-shrinkage retailers appears to be the employment of capable 
personnel rather than physical security.
If you were a retailer, what strategies would you implement to prevent and reduce the 
shoplifting problem?
Loss Prevention at Retail Businesses          461

462          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Robbery and Burglary
Robbery is the taking of something from an individual by force or threat of force. Burglary is 
unlawful entry into a structure to commit a felony or theft.
LP specialists repeatedly call for retailers to prevent burglary by (1) hardening the tar-
get, (2) creating a time delay, and (3) reducing the loot. Hardening the target pertains to physi-
cal security such as locks and alarm systems. The reasoning behind creation of a time delay 
is to increase the time necessary to commit the crime and, thereby, frustrate the offender. The 
offender may abort the offense, or the delay may provide additional time for police apprehen-
sion. When the loot is reduced, losses are minimized. Some people may mistakenly favor all 
three of these measures for robbery. In Table 17-1, a  robbery/burglary matrix illustrates some 
problems when all three strategies are  incorrectly applied to robbery.
Robbery Countermeasures
According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (2006), in 2005, there were 417,122 rob-
beries in the United States. Of all violent crime in 2005, robberies had the largest increase 
at 3.9%, compared with 2004. Although most robberies occur on streets and highways, it is 
a dangerous and costly crime to retailers. Hollinger and Langton (2006: 30) found in their 
research of retail firms that on average each robbery resulted in a loss of $8,716.41, with an 
average of 0.85 robberies per $100 million in total sales.
Employee Socialization of Procedures
• Opening: The daily opening of a store is often referred to as the “opening routine.” This 
can be a dangerous time because a “routine” can aid a robber who carefully studies a 
target. Therefore, a varied opening procedure reduces the chances for robbery. A typical 
procedure is for one employee to go inside the store while another waits outside; the 
person returns within 5 minutes and signals that the “coast is clear.” If the employee 
does not signal correctly or fails to appear, the police are called. The signal should be 
changed periodically to limit routine. Retailers in urban areas frequently open stores in 
the presence of security people or with a group of three to five employees. Many have 
permits for handguns.
• Closing: Closing procedures should include positioning a trusted store employee either 
inside or outside the store with a cell phone in hand. Various signaling procedures also 
are advisable.
• Cash handling and transportation: The POS should be located at the front of the store 
to enhance visibility to those passing by. A self-locking gate or Dutch door prevents 
access to the register by nonemployees. The cash drawer should require a key or code 
Table 17-1 Robbery/Burglary Matrix
 
Robbery 
Burglary
Harden the target 
Yesa 
Yes
Create time delay 
Nob 
Yes
Reduce loot 
Yes 
Yes
a For instance, a retail business hardened for robbery may include an alarm and hidden cameras; however, 
if the robber becomes trapped because of a metal gate that has blocked the only exit (for example), then 
violence and a hostage situation may develop.
b Once a robbery is in progress, for safety’s sake a time delay can be dangerous. The exception would be 
if there were no threatening situation (unlikely in a robbery); then a time delay might aid in immediate 
apprehension. Police agencies favor robber–police confrontation outside of the crime scene, away from 
innocent bystanders.

for access. Reducing the “loot” available will reduce the loss. When cash and other 
valuables (e.g., checks and credit receipts) accumulate, a pickup system is necessary. 
Usually, retail managers walk to each cash register for collections while performing 
associated accountability procedures. Then the money is taken to the store money 
room. Two retail employees often participate in this operation. After the money is 
accounted for in the money room, a retail employee (or two) takes the money to a 
bank, or an armored car pickup takes place. Procedures vary. Employees must know 
persons handling and transporting cash. If an employee transports money to a bank, 
use of a moneybag is not advisable. It is better to use an innocuous paper bag. Local 
police sometimes are available as escorts to banks.
Whatever procedures are employed to protect people and money, there is always the 
possibility that a present or former employee has provided such information to offenders. 
Many robberies have a connection to current or former employees. Therefore, procedures and 
signals should be changed periodically.
In the event of robbery, employees should have been trained to act in the following ways:
1. Concentrate on safety; do not try to be a hero; accommodate the robber’s requests as 
well as possible.
2. If safety permits, activate alarm and camera; give the robber bait money.
3. Concentrate on details: description of the robber(s); license tag; type of vehicle, if any; 
and direction of travel.
4. After the robber leaves, telephone the police immediately.
Devices and Services
• Alarms: The retail employee activates robbery alarms. A button or foot device signals a 
silent alarm to authorities. Another type of alarm is activated when money is removed 
from a money clip within the cash register drawer. The employee must try to prevent 
the robber from noticing the silent alarm activation by hand or foot movement.
• CCTV: A recording of a robbery is helpful in identifying and prosecuting robbers.
• Safes: A drop safe permits a deposit into the safe without opening it; only 
management can open the safe. Certain sections of a time-delay safe cannot be entered 
until preset times. Dual-key locks on safes require a key from two people, such as a 
retail employee and an armored car officer. Care must be exercised when designing 
safe access because a robber may become impatient and resort to violence; warning 
signs to deter robbers provide some protection.
• Bait money: Bait money, also known as marked money, has had the banks of issue, 
denominations, series years, and serial letters and numbers recorded by the retailer. 
This record should be kept in a safe place. Prosecution of the robber is strengthened if 
he or she is found with this money. Retail employees should carefully include the bait 
money with the loot.
• Security officers: Armed, rather than unarmed, officers should be used to prevent 
robbery at high-risk locations. Another method is to hire off-duty police officers.
• Armored car service: An armored car service can increase safety for retail employees 
while providing security for the transportation of money.
Robbery and Burglary          463
Security Manager Looks Bad
A retail executive from headquarters came to a chain store, displayed a company badge 
on his impressive suit, and systematically collected, with the usual moneybox, more 
than $2,000 from eight cash registers before leaving the store after the unauthorized 
collection. The purpose was to test security.

464          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Burglary Countermeasures
According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (2006), in 2005, there were 2,154,126 
burglaries in the United States. It was the only property crime to increase (by 0.5%) in 2005, 
compared to the previous year. Although most burglaries occurred at residences, the problem 
is costly to retailers. Hollinger and Langton (2006: 30) found in their research of retail firms 
that on average each burglary resulted in a loss of $11,363.69, with an average of 1.68 bur-
glaries per $100 million in total sales.
Employee Socialization
Employee socialization can involve the following:
1. Surveying possible burglar entry points
2. Leaving lights on (inside and outside)
3. Overturning cash register money trays on top of opened cash register drawers, at 
closing
4. Rechecking doors, windows, and alarms at closing
5. Preserving the crime scene to protect any evidence upon discovering a burglary
Physical Security
The burglar’s most frequent method of intrusion is by forcing open a door or window. Earlier 
chapters provide security methods to prevent burglary.
Shopping Mall Strategies
The size of a retail operation has a direct bearing on the extent of its loss  prevention  program. 
A small, one-owner retail store obviously will require a different program than a shopping 
mall. A mall’s loss prevention program would include not only  countermeasures for crime, fire, 
accident, and other hazards, but also methods for numerous merchant needs, crowd control, 
parking lot problems (e.g., traffic, dead batteries, keys locked in autos), and lost people and 
merchandise. The size and complexity of malls compound loss problems.
A shopping mall’s loss prevention program should be centralized and headed by an 
executive who responds to overall needs. Monthly meetings with merchants will facilitate 
cooperation and the sharing of problems, ideas, and resources. These meetings can provide 
an opportunity for a short training program. Special sales and events require further prepara-
tion. For malls experiencing many crime incidents, the establishment of a police substation 
is helpful.
Since the 9/11 attacks, retail shopping malls have been referred to as a “soft target,” as 
have many other locations (e.g., schools, houses of worship). Traditionally, merchant need for 
easy access by customers limits access controls at malls and retail stores. At this time, malls 
in the United States will not be protected like airports, unless malls are attacked as they have 
been in other countries (e.g., Israel). In addition, because of the tight profit margins of retail-
ers, they invest in sales promotion and displays, rather than security. Questions of concern: 
What are the threats and hazards to U.S. malls today? Is it terrorism? Is it an assailant who 
enters a mall and shoots people? Is it internal theft and shoplifting? Is it gangs? A risk analysis 
can help to answer these questions.
Davis et al. (2006) conducted research on the readiness of malls in preventing and 
responding to terrorist attacks. These researchers view malls as receiving too little attention 
as “soft targets.” They found that malls have not made any significant investment in increased 
security since the 9/11 attacks. At the same time, they noted that malls have increased antiter-
rorism training for security personnel, and the majority of mall security directors maintain 
emergency management plans. The researchers recommended the following: risk assessments 
and mitigation of risks; emergency planning and partnering with stakeholders (e.g., retailers 
and first responders); coordination with state homeland security; national guidelines estab-
lished by DHS; and standardized antiterrorism training courses.

Career: Retail Loss Prevention
The most common perception of the general public regarding the function of retail loss 
prevention (LP) departments is that they are primarily involved in the recruitment of 
store detectives or “shoplifter catchers.” While it is true that many retailers hire store 
detectives to prevent and apprehend shoplifters, the responsibilities of LP professionals 
and the role they play in the overall profitability of the company makes this one of the 
most critically important functions within retail organizations. Retail companies are 
plagued by theft and fraud from both internal and external sources. Entry-level retail 
loss prevention positions generally involve undercover shoplifting apprehensions, LP or 
safety auditing, and many other such functions and can lead to rapid advancement into 
more lucrative positions of responsibility. Retail LP positions offer valuable work expe-
rience. Part-time work as a store detective is an excellent job while one is in college. 
Retail LP managers have responsibility for overseeing the store detectives and address-
ing and resolving internal theft concerns. Depending on the size of the stores and the 
company, an LP manager may be responsible for the LP functions within a single store 
or responsible for overseeing LP at a number of locations within a chain.
Entry-level management positions generally require an undergraduate degree 
from an accredited institution as well as three to five years of experience in retail loss 
prevention. Salary range is $25,000 to $38,000, depending on many factors.
Mid-level management positions, requiring expertise in multiple security 
 disciplines, require an undergraduate degree in an appropriate discipline, as well as 
five to eight years of demonstrated success in the field in relevant retail-related LP 
 functions. The Certified Protection Professional (CPP) and Certified Fraud Examiner 
(CFE) are the preferred designations. 
Source: Courtesy of ASIS International. (2005). “Career Opportunities in Security.” www.
asisonline.org.
Banks and Financial Businesses          465
The Loss Prevention Foundation launched the Loss Prevention Qualified (LPQ) designation 
in 2007 for entry-level practitioners and those interested in the profession. The program was 
designed with input from over thirty retail companies. The on-line coursework focuses on the 
retail environment, becoming a successful businessperson, and LP basics and tools (“First LP 
Certification Program Launches June 4th”, 2007).
Banks and Financial Businesses
The following information on the banking and financial services sector is from The National 
Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key Assets (White House, 
2003: 63–64). The banking and financial services sector infrastructure consists of a variety of 
physical structures, such as buildings and financial utilities, as well as human capital. Most 
of the industry’s activities and operations take place in large commercial office buildings. 
Physical structures to be protected house retail or wholesale banking operations, financial 
markets, regulatory institutions, and physical repositories for documents and financial assets. 
Today’s financial utilities, such as payment and clearing and settlement systems, are primar-
ily electronic, although some physical transfer of assets does still occur. The financial utilities 
infrastructure includes such electronic devices as computers, storage devices, and telecommu-
nication networks. In addition to the sector’s key physical components, many financial ser-
vices employees have highly specialized skills and are, therefore, considered essential elements 
of the industry’s critical infrastructure.

466          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
The financial industry also depends on continued public confidence and involvement to 
maintain normal operations. Financial institutions maintain only a small fraction of deposi-
tors’ assets in cash on hand. If depositors and customers were to seek to withdraw their assets 
simultaneously, severe liquidity pressures would be placed on the financial system. With this 
in mind, federal safeguards are in place to prevent liquidity shortfalls. In times of crisis or 
disaster, maintaining public and global confidence demands that financial institutions, finan-
cial markets, and payment systems remain operational or that their operations can be quickly 
restored. Additionally, in times of stress the Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman of the 
Federal Reserve, and the Securities and Exchange Commission proactively address public 
confidence issues, as was done following the September 11 terrorist attacks. The Department 
of the Treasury and federal and state regulatory communities have developed emergency com-
munications plans for the banking and finance sector. With regard to retail financial services, 
physical assets are well distributed geographically throughout the industry. The sector’s retail 
niche is characterized by a high degree of substitutability, which means that one type of pay-
ment mechanism or asset can be easily replaced with another during a short-term crisis. For 
example, in retail markets, consumers can make payments through cash, checks, or credit 
cards. The banking and financial services industry is highly regulated and highly  competitive. 
Industry professionals and government regulators regularly engage in identifying sector vulner-
abilities and take appropriate protective measures, including sanctions for institutions that do 
not consistently meet standards.
Banking and Finance Sector Challenges
Like the other critical sectors, the banking and financial services sector relies on several critical 
infrastructure industries for continuity of operations, including electric power, transportation, 
and public safety services. The sector also specifically relies on computer networks and tele-
communications systems to assure the availability of its services. The potential for disruption 
of these systems is an important concern. For example, the equity securities markets remained 
closed for four business days following September 11, not because any markets or market sys-
tems were inoperable, but because the telecommunications lines in lower Manhattan that con-
nect key market participants were heavily damaged and could not be restored immediately. As 
a mitigation measure, financial institutions have made great strides to build redundancy and 
backup into their systems and operations.
Overlapping federal intelligence authorities involved in publicizing threat informa-
tion can cause confusion and duplication of effort for both industry and government. The 
U.S. Department of the Treasury, the lead agency for this sector, organized the Financial 
and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC) as a standing committee of the 
President’s Critical Infrastructure Protection Board (PCIPB). The FBIIC comprises represen-
tatives from 13 federal and state financial regulatory agencies and works to improve the 
information dissemination and sharing processes.
Banking and Finance Sector Initiatives
The attacks in New York City on September 11 showed that the financial services industry 
is highly resilient. The strong safeguards and backup systems the industry had in place per-
formed well. Since 1998, the sector has been working with the Department of the Treasury 
to organize itself to address the risks of the emerging threat environment, particularly cyber 
intrusions. It was also the first sector to establish an ISAC to share security-related informa-
tion among members of the industry.
Major institutions in this sector continue to perform ongoing assessments of their 
security programs. After the September 11 attacks, the industry and its associations initiated 
lessons-learned reviews to identify corrective actions for the improvement of security and 
response and recovery programs, as well as to provide a forum for sharing best practices 
through their trade associations and other interdisciplinary groups.

The Scope of Threats and Legal Responsibilities of the Banking and 
Finance Sector
The banking and finance sector includes banks, insurance companies, mutual funds, pension 
funds, and other financial entities. The National Strategy cited previously emphasizes the ter-
rorist threat. However, through history, these institutions have faced threats from robbery, 
burglary, larceny, fraud, and embezzlement. Fraud (e.g., credit and loan) has been especially 
problematic for this sector, and this crime results in greater losses while being more difficult to 
detect and solve than other crimes against banks. In addition, money, securities, checks, and 
other liquid assets make this industry attractive to internal and external culprits. Services that 
present particular loss problems are automated teller machines (ATMs), after-hours deposi-
tories (AHDs), and electronic fund transfer systems (EFTSs). Personnel servicing ATMs and 
customers have been victimized by armed robbers. AHDs also present a robbery problem, such 
as when a retailer makes a deposit at the end of the business day. Banks have incurred losses 
from fraud during the transfer of funds.
Today, the threat environment and the legal responsibilities of this critical infrastructure 
(CI) sector are immense. The Bank Protection Act (BPA) of 1968 mandates minimum-security 
measures for protection against robbery, burglary, and larceny, primarily. Besides terrorism and 
traditional crimes, the challenges include cyber crimes, identity theft, and money laundering. A 
host of laws and regulations place considerable responsibilities on this sector. The laws include 
the Bank Secrecy Act of 1986, implemented to establish reporting requirements for transactions 
of money to detect money laundering. The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 amended the Bank 
Secrecy Act and requires banks to report any “suspicious transactions” that may be associated 
with illegal drug trafficking. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 makes 
it a criminal offense for persons in the United States, other than those excepted by the govern-
ment, to engage in financial transactions with countries that condone or encourage terrorism. 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999, which has broad application, requires safeguards on 
the privacy and security of customer information. The USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 contains 
measures against money laundering and the financing of terrorism. The Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) 
Act of 2002, which passed in the wake of major corporate scandals, requires public companies 
to assess internal controls over financial reporting to ensure accuracy.
Regulation H
Regulation H, Code of Federal Regulations, pertains to membership of state banking insti-
tutions in the Federal Reserve System. This regulation combines the former BPA and many 
provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act of 1986 into one document. An increase in crimes against 
banks and the lack of adequate countermeasures led Congress to enact the BPA, which applied 
to a variety of financial institutions.
Even though the BPA was designed to counter losses from outsiders, a significant short-
coming of this legislation was that it did not establish standards for internal protection. For 
example, the savings and loan (S&L) scandal of the 1980s and 1990s, where bank executives 
approved risky loans to friends and relatives (i.e., “the fox was guarding the hen house”), 
cost U.S. taxpayers billions of dollars (much more than embezzlement and bank robberies 
combined). Despite these drawbacks, the BPA was the first legislation reinforcing security for 
a large private commercial enterprise. It is impossible to ascertain the number of crimes that 
have been prevented because of the BPA.
Security under Regulation H
• Security procedures must be adopted to discourage robberies, burglaries, and 
larcenies; assist in the identification and prosecution of persons who commit such 
acts; and maintain records of crimes.
• The institution’s board of directors must ensure that a written security program is 
developed and implemented.
Banks and Financial Businesses          467

468          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
• The board must designate a security officer to administer the security program and 
receive an annual report from that person.
• Program requirements include opening and closing procedures, warning signals, and 
safekeeping of currency and other valuables (e.g., vault controls).
• Policies, procedures, and training manuals must be developed, and initial and periodic 
training must be provided for employees.
• Security devices—alarm systems, tamper-resistant locks, lighting, and safes or vaults—
must be selected, tested, operated, and maintained.
A bank security officer’s duties may include responsibility for Bank Secrecy Act 
requirements under Regulation H. This includes ensuring that suspicious activity reports 
(i.e., suspicious financial transactions over a specified amount) are filed with appropriate 
federal law enforcement agencies and the U.S. Department of the Treasury when violations 
of federal law are suspected. This includes insider abuse or money laundering.
Money laundering is a huge global problem with a conservative estimate of $600 billion 
laundered annually. Essentially, it is an attempt to make “dirty” money (i.e., obtained through 
illegal means, such as the drug trade) appear clean. Offenders often transfer “dirty” money, 
under disguised ownership, from one bank to another, globally, to increase the difficulty of 
tracing it (Schroeder, 2001: 1–9; U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, 2007).
Bank Robbery Countermeasures
A common feature of many financial locations is a warmer, more personal atmosphere gained 
through the elimination of security barriers. Although this may please customers, robbery—a 
crime characterized by a threat and the possible use of violence—becomes a serious danger 
to people. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (2007) reported 6,961 bank robberies in the 
United States in 2006, with a total loss of $69,776,820.
When a robbery does take place at a bank, the teller is often the only one initially 
knowledgeable about the crime. The situation of a lone robber passing a holdup note to the 
teller is typical. In any robbery situation, the danger to life must not be taken lightly. The fol-
lowing suggestions can improve employee reaction:
1. Institute a training program.
2. During a robbery, act cautiously and do not take any chances.
3. Activate an alarm if possible without the robber(s) noticing.
4. Provide the robber with bait money that has the serial numbers recorded. Tear-gas/
dye packs also are important. These devices look like packs of currency and emit tear-
gas and red smoke (which stains clothes and the money) when carried out of a bank. 
A radio transmitter activates the packet.
5. Study characteristics of the bandit, especially scars, shape of eyes, height, body 
structure, voice, speech patterns, and other permanent features.
6. Safely note the means of transportation, license number, and vehicle description.
7. Contact public police.
Uniformed officers can offer comfort to customers and act as credible witnesses; however, 
their use is subject to controversy. They may deter an amateur robber, but not a professional. Tear-
gas/dye packs help to apprehend robbers and recover money. However, robbers have threatened 
violence if they receive one, and detonations have occurred inside banks. Banks are using the 
Global Positioning System (GPS); a transmitting device is planted in the bait money to track the 
device via satellite signal, and tracking can be done by police and security through a secure Web 
site that shows a map on a computer screen. CCTV technology permits remote monitoring, and 
if a robbery, fraud, or other crime occurs, police (with appropriate equipment) can observe the 
crime while responding. Security personnel can e-mail a video record to police. Other protection 
methods include safes and vaults, bullet-resistive bandit barriers, metal detection portals, signage 
that describes security features, and height markers to help estimate robber height. A mantrap is 
another option. It consists of double doors capable of trapping a fleeing robber; however, careful 

planning and construction are essential to promote safety. In addition, the remote teller system 
can be used whereby business is conducted via CCTV and pneumatic tubes.
Automatic Teller Machines
Robbery and fraud have followed ATM self-service banking. The BPA and the Federal 
Electronic Funds Transfer Act focus on security of ATMs and fraudulent transactions, rather 
than the safety of ATM users. Several state and local government bodies have passed ATM 
safety laws. These bills typically require surveillance cameras, adequate lighting, mirrors and 
low hedges to enhance visibility, and crime prevention tips to ATM cardholders. Although 
offenders watch for careless customers who do not protect their identity and PIN numbers, 
family members or friends commit a considerable amount of ATM fraud.
One low-tech crime victimizing ATMs is theft of the entire machine. A truck and chains 
or an inexpensive lift truck are used to pull the ATM from its foundation. Countermeasures 
include placing ATMs at locations busy 24 hours a day and using GPS to deter theft.
Kidnapping and Extortion
The financial executive and his or her family are potential victims of a kidnapper or extor-
tionist. A bank teller is another potential victim. These crimes vary; two scenarios follow. An 
offender kidnaps a bank employee or family member while he or she is driving the family 
car or is at home. The kidnapped person is traded for cash. Another approach occurs when 
an extortionist calls a bank employee at work, claims to be holding a family member, and 
demands cash for the safe return of the kidnapped victim. The extortionist may even con-
front the bank employee personally. In these situations, violence is possible, even after cash 
is delivered.
A precise plan and employee training are essential prior to a confrontation. The follow-
ing procedures should be observed by the person in contact with the kidnappers:
1. Try to remain calm during the ordeal. Contact public police as soon as possible.
2. If a hostage is involved, ask the caller to allow the hostage to come to the telephone to 
speak.
3. Repeat demands to the caller to double-check any directions and procedures.
4. Try to arrange for a person-to-person payoff and transfer of the hostage.
5. If prepared, trace the call.
6. After the call, record as much information as possible (e.g., date, time, words spoken, 
background noises). Management should provide a standard form.
7. If the hostage is brought to the bank or if the offender confronts a bank employee 
personally, notify other employees with a prearranged signal.
8. Include “bait” money in any payoff.
Embezzlement, On-line Risks, and Fraud
Banks have increased their exposure to crime because they are connected internally through 
an intranet and externally through on-line banking services. An employee may commit embez-
zlement by gaining unauthorized access to a bank’s accounts payable system and creating 
fictitious invoices and payments to the employee’s post office box. Other internal crimes are to 
delete all records of a friend’s loan, approve fictitious loans, or tap into dormant accounts.
On-line banking risks are varied and include, for example, the hacking of bank Web 
sites to alter information or to steal customer information. Web spoofing seeks to create a 
look-alike Web site to trick customers into releasing confidential account information that is 
exploited or sold by the hacker. Hackers may be less of a threat for banks than vulnerabilities 
caused by employees—for instance, an employee who leaves the office with a laptop contain-
ing customer information and then the laptop disappears (Friedrick, 2006: 19). However, at 
the same time, financial institutions must balance offering new services to customers with 
secure on-line systems. A highly publicized bank loss or victimized customer could drive 
customers away.
Banks and Financial Businesses          469

470          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Federal regulators are requiring banks to enhance security for on-line banking. 
Measures emphasize “two-factor authentication” that goes beyond a user name and pass-
word. Examples include a customer choosing an image and phrase, or the use of a Universal 
Serial Bus (USB) token that must be plugged into a computer’s USB port to access an on-line 
account. Another strategy is for banks to install software that monitors each on-line transac-
tion for unusual patterns (Swartz, 2006).
Check swindles, which are a common externally perpetrated fraud, may involve the 
forgery of stolen checks or the manufacture of fictitious checks. Computer programs permit 
offenders to create corporate payroll checks that are nearly impossible to distinguish from a 
genuine one.
Credit card fraud is another problem for banks. Losses can result from a fraudulent 
application containing a stolen identity, from a stolen card, or from a businessperson who 
submits fraudulent credit card sales receipts for payment.
Since the 1992 peak of the S&L scandal, the FBI has refocused its resources on other 
high-priority fraud cases. For example, according to the FBI, mortgage fraud is one of the 
fastest growing white-collar crimes in the United States. It consists of fraud for property and 
fraud for profit. The former involves a single loan whereby the borrower makes misrepresen-
tations, such as higher income and lower debt. The latter involves industry professionals who 
seek multiple loans with several financial institutions while making gross misrepresentations. 
In 2005, about 22,000 mortgage fraud suspicious activity reports were filed, and losses were 
over $1 billion (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2005).
Because of the growing crimes of identity theft and fraud, banks have been forced 
to play a greater role in preventing these problems. In reference to privacy, the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act requires financial institutions and insurance companies to disclose to 
customers the policies on what data they collect, with whom they share it, and how they 
share it. This is known as the “Privacy Rule,” and it limits the disclosure (or selling) of 
nonpublic personal information to unaffiliated third parties. In reference to security, the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 
specify security guidelines for the confidentiality, integrity, and proper disposal of customer 
information. The guidelines include threat assessments and the implementation of an IT 
security program.
What do you think is the most serious risk facing banks and financial institutions? 
What are your solutions?
Career: Banking and Financial Services Security
Careers in this field include those associated with banking (including retail banking, 
mortgage, credit/debit cards, Internet banking, commercial and consumer lending), 
stock brokerages, insurance companies, and other financial institutions. As a key com-
ponent to the critical infrastructure of every nation, the financial services industry is 
regulated by various government agencies. Financial institution security directors and 
managers must deal with a wide variety of concerns including theft, fraud, workplace 
violence, information security, investigations, executive protection, business continuity, 
and physical security in order to adequately protect their institution. Security managers 
must be effective leaders within their organization and able to successfully influence 
change.
Because of the increasing complexity of the financial services industry, companies 
continue to seek the best and the brightest from law enforcement agencies, colleges and 
universities, and from within other private sector companies, both within and outside 
the financial services sector.

Educational Institutions          471
Entry-level management positions in financial services generally require a degree 
in business, finance, or criminal justice from an accredited institution as well as three to 
five years experience in either law enforcement or security. The salary range for entry-
level positions is $35,000 to $65,000, depending on many factors.
Mid-level management positions, requiring expertise in multiple security disci-
plines, generally require a bachelor’s degree in an appropriate discipline, as well as three 
to seven years of demonstrated success in the field. Professional certifications such as the 
Certified Protection Professional (CPP) and Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE) are often 
desired as an indicator of professionalism and qualification. The salary range for mid-
level management positions is $40,000 to $100,000.
Source: Courtesy of ASIS International. (2005). “Career Opportunities in Security.” www.
asisonline.org.
Educational Institutions
Two major types of educational systems are emphasized here: school districts and higher 
education campuses. A major difference between school districts and college and  university 
campuses is that, in the former, students normally go home at night and  buildings often are 
empty. On campuses, students often live on the premises in dormitories. Exceptions are com-
munity and technical colleges whose students often commute. School districts and campuses 
both schedule evening and weekend activities such as classes, sports events, and meetings. A 
major factor for those who plan and implement loss prevention programs for these institu-
tions is that the protection measures must cater to the needs and characteristics of the par-
ticular institution (see Figure 17-4).
Threats and Hazards at Educational Institutions
Educational institutions are subject to a host of threats and hazards similar to other segments of 
society. Examples are crimes of violence, bomb threats, property crimes, cybercrimes, and vandal-
ism. Additional concerns are fire, accident, disaster, terrorism, gangs, suicide, date rape, crowd 
control for sports and other events, traffic, parking, student activism, and graffiti.
Countermeasures
The following list describes measures for security and safety of school districts and institutions 
of higher education:
• Establish a security and safety committee and meet at least monthly.
• Ensure that all stakeholders and first responders are involved in security and safety 
planning and programs.
• Conduct risk analyses.
• Apply CPTED methods.
• Typical security measures are access controls, emergency telephones, intrusion alarms, 
patrols, lighting, and CCTV.
• Use vandal-resistant construction materials.
• If graffiti is an issue, photograph it before removing it and show the photos to police.
• Carefully consider the use of unarmed students to supplement police and security 
forces; provide good training.
• Offer counseling services and programs to assist students in crisis.
• Conduct substance abuse education and prevention programs.
• Use an “all-hazards” approach to emergency management (see Chapter 12).

472          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
School Districts
In the 2004–2005 school year, an estimated 54.9 million students were enrolled in 
 prekindergarten through grade 12. Although multiple homicide events at schools have cap-
tured headlines in recent years, the chance of suffering a school-associated violent death is very 
low. Research has shown that students are more likely to be victimized by a violent crime away 
from school than at school. From July 1, 2004 through June 30, 2005, there were 28 school-
associated violent deaths (21 homicides and 7 suicides) of school-age youth (ages 5 to 18) at 
school in the United States. In 2004, students ages 12 to 18 were victims of about 1.4 million 
nonfatal crimes at school, including about 863,000 thefts and 583,000 violent crimes (simple 
assault and serious violent crime)—107,000 of which were serious violent crimes (rape, sexual 
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault). Violence, theft, drugs, and weapons continue to pose 
problems in schools (U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2006).
In an attempt to reduce school violence, Congress enacted the Gun-Free Schools Act 
of 1994, which requires that each state receiving federal funds under the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act must have a state law requiring local educational agencies to expel 
FIGURE 17-4 Protection must cater to the unique needs of institutions. Courtesy: Talk-A–Phone.

Educational Institutions          473
from school for a period of not less than one year a student who is determined to have brought 
a weapon to school. Each state’s law also must allow the chief administering officer of the 
local educational agency to modify the expulsion requirement on a case-by-case basis. This 
law resulted in many schools adopting a zero-tolerance policy for weapons being brought to 
school. In other words, any infraction results in full punishment. This same policy extends to 
alcohol and drugs. Meadows (2007: 170) writes that the intent of such a policy is both pre-
ventive and punitive. He notes the following: “Although zero-tolerance policies have a place 
in school security, there is the threat of overenforcement, which may undermine school-com-
munity relations and label students unfairly.”
Teacher and staff victimization and intimidation in school districts are important topics 
often not given enough attention.
A comprehensive school district loss prevention program must involve the community: 
students, teachers and administrators, parents, public safety agencies, civic groups, and busi-
nesses (Decker, 2000: 3). The program can be divided into four components: special pro-
grams, personnel, physical security, and emergency management.
Special programs include character education to help students distinguish right from wrong, 
conflict resolution, diversity, prevention of bullying, anonymous tip lines, and programs that involve 
parents. Since gangs are a problem in many schools and communities, and they are often linked 
to violence and drugs, school administrators should be proactive to reduce this problem by, for 
example, meeting police gang specialists on a regular basis to exchange information and antigang 
strategies. One popular program is the Gang Resistance Education and Training (GREAT) program 
that provides students with tools to resist the lure and trap of gangs. Modeled after the Drug Abuse 
Resistance Education (DARE) program, the GREAT program introduces students to conflict resolu-
tion skills, cultural sensitivity, and negative aspects of gang life. This program has spread to all 50 
states and several other countries (U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, 2007).
All employees at schools should be trained on early warning signs of inappropriate 
behavior or violence. These signs include feelings of isolation, rejection, and being persecuted, 
plus behaviors indicating anger or violence, such as threats. Intervention and counseling are 
vital in response to such signs.
A combined counseling and education approach might reduce student hostility and fun-
nel student time into constructive activities. Traditional suspension from school often sends 
troublesome students to the streets, where more trouble is likely. On the other hand, if students 
remain at school in an appropriate program, improved results are probable.
Personnel consist of teachers, teacher aids, administrators, counselors, security officers, 
and School Resource Officers. SROs are police officers on duty at schools; they provide vis-
ibility, create rapport with students, and respond to incidents. Parents and volunteers play an 
important role in supplementing employees. All those who perform job duties at schools should 
undergo constant training and clearly understand policies and procedures for day-to-day events, 
such as student discipline problems and how to care for people during emergencies.
Physical security pertains to a variety of systems and devices that help to protect people 
and assets. Examples are access control systems, handheld (Figure 17-5) and walk-through 
metal detectors, and duress alarms. Physical security is a challenge because students must be 
safe without feeling as if they are in a prison. Depending on the needs of a school district, stu-
dents can swipe an ID card when they climb onto a bus and when they arrive and leave school; 
RFID tracks their movements. At the same time, CCTV cameras watch students on buses and 
on school premises. Visitors can be asked for their driver’s license to check against a database 
of sex offenders, while they wait in a mantrap (Toppo, 2006). If school security planners argue 

474          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
FIGURE 17-5 Police using handheld metal detector at school access point. Courtesy: Garrett Metal Detectors.
for more security personnel and hardware to curb school crime, they may be faced with others 
who see broader solutions to the problem. In addition, whatever strategies are implemented, 
they should be subject to research and evaluation to produce the best possible solutions and 
utilization of resources.
Emergency management consists of plans to respond to violence, weapons, hostage 
 situations, bombs/explosions, abused students, aggressive parents who are on the premises, and 
incidents involving parental rights. Many school districts distribute their crisis plans to public safety 
agencies that have a ready reference containing maps and building plans,  utility shutoffs, staff and 
parent telephone numbers, a yearbook to identify people, and a set of keys.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of using unarmed students to supplement 
police and security forces at high schools?

Educational Institutions          475
Are Educational Institutions “Soft” Targets?
Terrorists search for “soft” targets containing limited security to increase the likelihood 
of a successful attack. Examples of “soft” targets are educational institutions, houses 
of worship, shopping malls, and theaters. “Hard” targets include military bases and 
fortified government buildings.
Emergency management plans developed by school districts may concentrate on 
the possibility of a violent and armed person on the premises. However, an  “all-hazards” 
approach to emergency management is best. Schools are subject to a host of threats and 
hazards as covered in this book, plus others not covered, such as bus accidents, food-
borne illnesses, contaminated food recalls, the discharge of toxic substances (e.g., the 
release of pepper spray in a crowded hall), and the release of an animal in a school.
Emergency management became an important priority at many schools following 
the 1999 Columbine High School massacre. During this incident in Jefferson County, 
Colorado, two teenage students, armed with a variety of weapons and bombs, killed 12 
students and a teacher, wounded 24, and then committed suicide. Prior to the attack, one 
of the killers showed warning signs of violence through a Web site on America Online, 
which contained violent threats, information on how to make bombs, and a log of mis-
chief. The massacre fueled debate over gun violence, gun control, and the influence of 
the media on violence. In addition, the event reinforced attention to warning signs to 
prevent violence.
Another, more deadly massacre, tied to terrorism, was the Beslan Elementary 
School massacre in 2004. This attack was part of the Chechen war for independence 
against Russia. Russia has fought an insurgency in the breakaway republic of Chechnya 
since the 1990s, a time when the former Soviet Union collapsed. The three-day hos-
tage standoff at the elementary school in Beslan, where Chechen rebels rigged bombs 
around 1,200 hostages, ended in gunfire, explosions, and 338 deaths, mostly children. 
Each side blamed the other for the battle at the school that caused more controversy 
over Chechen terrorism and Russian responses.
The carnage began when 32 attackers—armed with AK-47s, a machine gun, grenade 
launchers, explosives, and two dogs (to protect against chemical attack)—drove to the 
crowded school and herded children, teachers, and parents into the school gym, which 
was quickly wired with explosives. Male hostages were forced to build barricades at doors 
and windows, and when the work was complete, they were executed and their bodies were 
thrown out of the building. Two female suicide bombers were among the attackers, which 
illustrated the resolve of the attackers and the possible outcome. The attackers demanded 
the release of Chechen rebels, the withdrawal of Russian troops from Chechnya, and 
Chechen independence. The Russian government’s options were very limited, and giving in 
to terrorist demands fuels new hostage events. By the second day, the terrorists continued 
to refuse water, food, and medicine for the hostages. In their desperation, the hostages 
began to drink their own urine. On the third day, the terrorists permitted a crew to collect 
the bodies of 20 male hostages that had been thrown out of the building. At this point, a 
bomb exploded within the gym, supposedly by accident, a fire began, the roof collapsed, 
and as hostages escaped, the terrorists shot them. The terrorists were killed, and two 
that escaped were caught by a mob and lynched. As the disaster unfolded, “finger-point-
ing” began to explain what went wrong. Explanations were that Special Forces were not 
ordered to rescue the hostages and assault the building, no one wanted to take responsibil-
ity to order the rescue and assault, and armed volunteers interfered with the hostage situa-
tion and were not kept back. The disaster shocked the world, and the Russian government 
promised reform of the police and military (Abdullaev, 2004: 28–35).
Although shootings on U.S. college campuses are rare, on April 16, 2007 the 
Virginia Tech massacre became the worst school mass murder incident in U.S. history 
when a mentally disturbed student murdered 32 people and then committed suicide. 
Among the questions that followed the shootings were: Why did it take over two hours 

476          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
to release a notification that a killer was on the loose after two students were found 
shot earlier in another building? Was the police response quick enough to end the threat 
of an “active shooter”? These questions are difficult to answer and many factors must 
be considered. For instance, rushing into a building without a team and a plan is risky. 
Harwood (2007, 55–65) writes of strategies that require refinement: behavioral threat 
assessment teams to identify risky students, mass notification systems, and “active 
shooter” response.
Colleges and Universities
In response to increasing crime on college campuses and the need for more accurate statistics, 
Congress passed the Student-Right-to-Know and Campus Security Act of 1990. This act is 
also known as the “Clery Act,” named after Jeanne Clery, a college student who was raped 
and murdered in her dorm room. This legislation requires crime awareness and prevention 
policies at colleges and an annual report of campus crime to the FBI Uniform Crime Reports 
program, while making these statistics available to students and the general public. Such data, 
available on the Web, enables comparisons among colleges and universities (Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, 2006). However, there is conjecture that some schools omit reporting acts of 
violence to protect recruiting efforts and their reputations (Jaeger, 2001: 6). FBI crime data 
has been criticized over the years because it represents crimes reported to police, and many 
crimes are never reported or recorded, as shown by victimization studies (Purpura, 1997: 
32–36).
In 1992, the Campus Sexual Assault Victim’s Bill of Rights amended the preceding act, 
requiring schools to develop policies to deal with sexual assault on campus. This is an important 
issue, especially in light of Bureau of Justice Statistics research showing 35 incidents of rape per 
academic year on a campus with 1,000 women (U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, 2000). Further amendments in 1998 added two crimes to reporting—arson and negligent 
manslaughter—and required schools to report on crime at property owned by a school but not at 
the main campus. Schools not reporting crime data are subject to a $25,000 fine. In nearly every 
category of crime, college campuses showed lower incidence of crime than comparable data for the 
nation as a whole (Office of Postsecondary Education, 2001).
Research by Fisher and Sloan (1993: 67–77) produced guidelines that should be consid-
ered when evaluating programs designed to reduce campus crime. Some of their major points 
follow:
• A comprehensive evaluation requires identifying the individual departments or groups on 
campus that will be involved and assigning safety and security responsibilities to them.
• A comprehensive approach includes security, faculty members, staff members, 
students, and public law enforcement personnel.
• Campus administrators should conduct surveys of the campus community to understand 
the nature and extent of crime and fear, perceptions of the effectiveness of security, and 
participation in crime prevention programs and whether participants adopted any of the 
preventive measures. Until evaluations become an integral part of responding to campus 
crime, administrators will continue to make poor decisions on security strategies.
• Research has confirmed that crime on campuses is influenced by poor lighting, 
excessive foliage, blocked views, and difficulty of escape by victims. [As we can see, 
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design, or CPTED, as discussed earlier in 
the text, has universal application.]
• Location measures (e.g., proximity to urban areas with high unemployment) are 
predictors of high campus crime rates.
Numerous campuses have implemented the strategy of many public police agencies, 
namely, community policing. It aims to control crime through a partnership of police and 
citizens, and it strives to become a dominant philosophy throughout a police department. 

Rather than police reacting to the same problem repeatedly, a unique, proactive approach is 
employed for problem solving.
High priorities for protection on campuses are programs that focus on crime prevention, 
self-protection, and Neighborhood Watch (so people can look out for one another). Shuttle 
buses and escorts for students also prevent crime and enhance safety. An essential component 
of these programs and services is marketing to stimulate interest and participation. This can 
be accomplished through a brochure, a Web page, and decals with an emergency telephone 
number that can be placed around campus.
One particular group that has advanced the professionalism of campus safety and secu-
rity is the International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators (IACLEA). 
This group began in 1958 with 11 schools, and today it represents 1,000 colleges and uni-
versities in 20 countries. The group holds an annual conference; offers training, professional 
development, and accreditation; and publishes Campus Law Enforcement Journal.
In 2004, a National Summit on Campus Public Safety was held in Baltimore, Maryland. 
It was supported by the U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing 
Services (2005); the IACLEA; the International Association of Chiefs of Police; the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security; and the FBI. Some of the main points from this summit 
are as follows:
• There is a need for a unified approach to campus safety issues; a national agenda on 
campus public safety to guide government, business, and professional associations; 
and a national center for campus safety to support information sharing, policy 
development, model practices, operations, and research.
• National standards, similar to those of the Commission on Accreditation for Law 
Enforcement Agencies, should be developed for campus police and security operations.
• Since the 9/11 attacks, coordination between senior executives and security/police at 
colleges and universities remains weak.
• Many campuses house sensitive materials and information and serve as contractors for 
the Department of Defense, Department of Justice, National Security Agency, other 
government bodies, and corporations.
• Securing chemical, biological, and radiological materials in an accessible environment, 
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, creates security challenges.
• Many campuses have a substantial number of international students who entered 
the country through student visas. In addition, many U.S. educational institutions 
maintain campuses overseas.
• Responses to terrorist threats by U.S. educational institutions are varied and 
fragmented; there is no information exchange or clearinghouse.
• Special events (e.g., sports, graduation, lectures) draw thousands of people to 
campuses and create vulnerabilities.
• U.S. educational institutions should be more closely linked to local and regional 
emergency management plans.
Educational Institutions          477
What do you view as the top three strategies to prevent violence at school districts? 
How would you answer this same question for colleges and universities?
Fire Protection at Educational Institutions
The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (see Chapter 13) offers guidance to protect educational facili-
ties from fire. Examples of fire hazards endangering life in places of public assembly are (1) 
overcrowding; (2) blocking, impairing, or locking exits; (3) storing combustibles in dangerous 

478          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
locations; (4) using an open flame without proper precautions; and (5) using combustible deco-
rations. Furthermore, hazards of educational buildings vary with construction characteristics 
and with the age group of students. Younger students, for example, require protection different 
from that for older students. The NFPA Life Safety Code specifies that kindergarten and first 
grade rooms should be on the floor of exit discharge so that stairs do not endanger these stu-
dents. Because junior and senior high schools contain laboratories, shops, and home economics 
rooms, these facilities should have fire-resistant construction. School kitchens require similar 
protection. A fire alarm system is required for all educational buildings. Most schools conduct 
fire drills for pupils. The Life Safety Code and many good building codes provide numerous 
standards for increasing fire safety.
For colleges and universities, the Life Safety Code is applied depending on building 
characteristics and use. If buildings are windowless, the Life Safety Code requirements for spe-
cial structures are applicable. This includes automatic extinguishing systems, venting systems 
for smoke, and emergency lighting and power. Because many campus buildings are multistory, 
specific safeguards are necessary. Fire drills and training are important for residence halls and 
academic buildings.
Career: Educational Institution Security
The primary objective of an educational institution security program is to educate the cam-
pus community on the potential for crime both on- and off-campus. The central themes 
of a campus crime prevention program are awareness, self-protection, and prevention. 
The level of violence on and around educational institutions has brought about a need for 
security at public and private educational institutions at both the elementary and secondary 
school levels. Many educational institutions operate a commissioned police department, 
which makes police academy training or law enforcement certification a requirement. 
Interested college students can often enter this field by working for campus security depart-
ments on a part-time basis.
Entry-level management positions do not require an academic degree; however, a 
degree, general security experience, specialty-specific experience, and professional certifi-
cation are all desired. The salary range is from the low $40,000s to $50,000.
Mid-level management positions also do not require an academic degree; however, a 
degree, general security experience, specialty-specific experience, and professional cer-
tification are all desired.
Source: Courtesy of ASIS International. (2005). “Career Opportunities in Security.” www.
asisonline.org.
Healthcare Institutions
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is responsible for public health, 
healthcare, and food (other than meat, poultry, and eggs, which is the responsibility of the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture). The following information on healthcare  challenges and initiatives 
is from The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures and Key 
Assets (White House, 2003: 41). The public health sector is vast and diverse. It consists of state 
and local health departments, hospitals, health clinics, mental health facilities, nursing homes, 
blood-supply facilities, laboratories, mortuaries, and pharmaceutical stockpiles. Hospitals, clin-
ics, and public health systems play a critical role in mitigating and recovering from the effects 
of natural disasters or deliberate attacks on the homeland (Figure 17-6). Physical  damage to 
these facilities or disruption of their operations could prevent a full, effective response and 

exacerbate the outcome of an emergency. Even if a hospital or public health facility were not 
the direct target of a terrorist strike, it could be significantly impacted by secondary contami-
nation involving chemical, radiological, or biological agents. In addition to established medi-
cal networks, the United States depends on several highly specialized laboratory facilities and 
assets, especially those related to disease control and vaccine development and storage, such as 
the HHS Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health, and 
the National Strategic Stockpile.
Public Health Sector Challenges
Public health workers are accustomed to placing themselves in harm’s way during an emer-
gency. They may be unlikely, however, to view themselves as potential targets of terrorist acts. 
Most hospitals and clinics are freely accessible facilities that provide the public with an array 
of vital services. This free access, however, also makes it difficult to identify potential threats 
or prevent malicious entry into these facilities. This fact, combined with a lack of means and 
standards to recognize and detect potentially contaminated individuals, can have an impor-
tant impact on facility security and emergency operations.
Another significant challenge is the variation in structural and systems design within 
our hospitals and clinics. On one hand, so-called immune buildings have built-in structural 
design elements that help prevent contamination and the spread of infectious agents to the 
greatest extent possible. Such features include controlled airflow systems, isolation rooms, 
and special surfaces that eliminate infectious agents on contact. At the other extreme are 
buildings with relatively little built-in environmental protection.
Protection of this category of facility presents the greatest challenge. During an epi-
demic, infectious individuals who continue to operate in the community at large may pose a 
significant public health risk. The sector needs to develop comprehensive protocols governing 
the isolation of infectious individuals during a crisis.
Additional public health sector challenges relate to the maintenance, protection, and 
distribution of stockpiles of critical emergency resources. Currently, other than the National 
Strategic Stockpile, there are limited resources for rotating and replenishing supplies of critical 
materials and medicines. Since pharmaceutical companies are taxed on their product  inventories, 
they try to avoid stockpiling finished goods and meet demand through “just-in-time”
manufacturing. 
Healthcare Institutions          479
FIGURE 17-6 Healthcare institutions play a critical role in mitigating and recovering from the effects of natural 
disasters or deliberate attacks on the homeland. Physical damage to these facilities or disruption of their operations 
could prevent a full, effective response and exacerbate the outcome of an emergency.

480          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
The Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act requires hospitals to treat 
patients requiring emergency care regardless of their insurance status. Disaster situations 
involving mass casualties tax the resources of critical facilities in terms of labor, medical 
supplies, and space. As patients are stabilized, it is often necessary to transfer them to other 
hospitals to free up critical resources for newly arriving casualties. With respect to disaster 
victims without insurance, however, once treatment is no longer an emergency, hospitals are 
not bound to treat them. As a result, many second-tier, noncritical hospitals will not or cannot 
accept uninsured patients, thereby requiring the critical hospital by default to continue none-
mergency treatment. Additionally, privacy rules mandated in the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act should be reviewed to determine whether they could prevent the shar-
ing of critical data in the event of an epidemic.
Existing security challenges have focused the public health sector on assessing its ability 
to deliver critical services during a crisis. Many hospitals, however, are faced with operating at 
limited profit margins and, therefore, have difficulty making appropriate security investments. 
Finally, specialized medical and pharmaceutical laboratories merit special attention—particu-
larly those handling highly toxic or infectious agents. These facilities are mission-critical with 
respect to identifying hazardous agents should an attack or outbreak occur. These facilities also 
enable the containment, neutralization, and disposal of such hazardous materials. Overcoming 
the protection challenges associated with securing these specialized assets is a top priority.
Public Health Sector Initiatives
Public health HHS protection initiatives are as follows:
• Work with state and local public health officials to identify, appoint, train, and 
prepare recognized subject matter experts to speak on behalf of the public health 
sector in times of crisis (e.g., pandemic or bioterrorism).
• Review mission-critical operations, establish protection priorities, and ensure adequate 
security and redundancy for critical laboratory facilities and services. In partnership 
with state health departments, HHS and DHS will identify and prioritize national-
level critical hospitals and medical centers, as well as their most important component 
facilities, systems, and services.
• Assist public health sector officials to identify requirements for robust surveillance 
systems and coordinate links between public health monitoring facilities and 
healthcare delivery systems.
• Work with state and local health officials to develop isolation and quarantine 
standards to improve the protection of the unaffected population during a public 
health crisis. HHS will also work with state and local health officials during 
consequence management planning to set priorities for the deployment of vaccination 
and prophylaxis resources in the event of a terrorist incident involving biological or 
chemical weapons.
• HHS and DHS will work with the healthcare sector to enable the protection of 
stockpiles of medical supplies and other critical materials, distribution systems, and 
the critical systems of medical institutions, including basic surveillance capabilities 
necessary for tracking the spread of diseases and toxic agents. Additionally, HHS will 
identify providers of critical resources and ensure a ready stockpile of vital medicines 
for use in an emergency.
• Examine legal and regulatory impediments that could prevent critical health facilities 
from providing critical services during a crisis. HHS will also explore possible 
incentives to encourage increased investment in the physical security of facilities in the 
public health sector.
The Scope of Threats and Legal Responsibilities of Healthcare Institutions
Hospitals, nursing homes, and other healthcare institutions possess specific crime, fire, and 
safety weaknesses that require countermeasures. Violence is a recurring problem. A large 
inventory of consumable items is located within healthcare buildings, including food, medical 

supplies, linens, drugs, and wheelchairs. Thousands of meals and prescriptions are served each 
day in many of these locations. Assorted crimes are a threat (e.g., assault, theft, kickbacks 
to purchasers, fraud). Drugs are susceptible not only to internal theft but also to robbery. 
Expensive medical and office equipment and patient and employee belongings are other 
tempting targets for offenders. Moreover, the safety of people is a high priority. There is a 
never-ending flow of employees (doctors, nurses, assorted specialists, nonprofessional support 
personnel, and volunteers), patients, visitors, salespeople, and repair technicians. A large num-
ber of female employees need protection, especially during nighttime shift changes. Patients are 
particularly vulnerable at all times because of their limited physical capabilities. What makes 
protection difficult is that these institutions remain open 24 hours a day.
Emergency plans and special equipment are necessary in case of fire, explosion, acci-
dent, natural disaster, bomb threat, strike, and other emergencies pertaining to homeland 
security (explained previously). Flammable medical gases and oxygen support combustion, 
which necessitates safety precautions. Accumulations of trash as well as safety in the operat-
ing rooms are additional considerations.
A host of federal and state laws impacts the healthcare industry. Examples are HIPPA, 
SOX, and the NLRA (see Chapter 4). The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (HIPAA) is a law designed to improve healthcare services delivery, lower costs 
by reducing paper records and claims, enhance electronic transmission of documents, secure 
medical data and patient information, prevent errors in the healthcare system, and transfer 
funds more securely.
HIPPA presents a variety of issues for healthcare executives, as explained by Tomes (2005: 
75–78). These issues include how to know when security methods are sufficient under the risk 
analysis and risk management sections of the regulation and how to respond to police demands 
for patient information that the privacy regulation protects. The regulations require that compa-
nies perform a risk analysis to identify risks to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the 
health information they control. Security measures must be documented. They include specific 
technologies (e.g., encryption) or specific procedures. Guidance is sure to follow from litigation.
HIPPA permits companies to release protected health information to a law enforce-
ment agency under certain specified conditions. For example, a hospital must report certain 
types of wounds, such as gunshot wounds. Requested information must be disclosed in 
compliance with a court order, warrant, or judicially or grand-jury-issued subpoena or an 
administrative subpoena or summons. In addition, information must be disclosed for the 
purpose of identifying or locating a suspect, fugitive, material witness, or missing person. 
The HIPPA law preempts federal or state law that is contrary to the statute unless the fed-
eral or state law provides more privacy protection. Examples of such laws include statutes 
covering information on sexually transmitted and communicable diseases, mental health 
confidentiality, and alcohol and drug abuse confidentiality.
Strategies for Healthcare Institutions
Accountability and Inventory Control
Because much of the inventory in healthcare institutions can be used by employees at home 
or sold to others, accountability and inventory control can minimize shrinkage. For expensive 
items (e.g., medical equipment), an asset tracking system (electronic article surveillance) can be 
useful. Imaginative preventive techniques should also be applied where possible. For example, 
Russell L. Colling (2001: 459–460), in Hospital and Healthcare Security, explains that the loss 
of hospital scrub suits, which are a popular garment worn by a variety of people, can be reduced 
by issuing them to individuals, and a soiled suit can be exchanged for a clean one through either 
an issue window or an automatic uniform dispenser. The dispenser, similar to an ATM, credits a 
returned suit and issues a clean one; this is another use of an automated access card. Linen and 
other property permanently imprinted with the name of the institution will also aid shrinkage 
control efforts. Disposable items (e.g., paper towels) are less expensive but also subject to pil-
ferage. Soiled-linen chutes are convenient hiding places for stolen goods. Offenders often wrap 
stolen merchandise in dirty linen for later recovery. Daily inspection of soiled linens and trash 
collection and disposal systems ensures that these theft techniques are impeded.
Healthcare Institutions          481

482          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Auditing
When accounting and other safeguards are checked for deviations, loss prevention programs 
are strengthened. Are patients being properly billed? How accurate are accounts receivable 
and accounts payable records? In the food service operation, how careful are the controls 
over the ordering of foods and food preparation and distribution? The food service area is a 
prime location for theft. Every loss prevention measure should be audited to make sure it is 
functioning as designed.
Healthcare Fraud
The FBI, along with its federal, state, and local law enforcement partners, the Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), and other public and private sector 
groups, work together to address fraud and abuse in healthcare. Fraudulent billings 
to healthcare programs, both public and private, are estimated to be between 3% and 
10% of total healthcare expenditures. The problem is expected to rise as people live 
longer. In 2004, healthcare costs were about $2.1 trillion, which is 15.5% of the Gross 
Domestic Product. By 2012, CMS estimates total healthcare spending to exceed $3.1 
trillion. To combat the fraud, the FBI and the healthcare industry apply data mining 
techniques to identify patterns of fraud and system weaknesses. An example of one 
significant case of fraud occurred with Hospital Corporation of America, Inc., the 
nation’s largest for-profit hospital chain. The corporation pleaded guilty to defraud-
ing government healthcare programs. Whistle-blowers had previously accused the 
corporation of filing false claims for reimbursement from Medicare and Medicaid 
government health insurance programs, as well as paying kickbacks to doctors for 
referrals. After a final settlement announced in 2003, the combination of civil fines 
and criminal penalties resulted in a total of $1.7 billion that the corporation agreed 
to pay the federal government (Federal Bureau of Investigation, Financial Crimes 
Section, 2005: C1–C8).
Applicant Screening
Both professional and nonprofessional staff members cause losses. Equipment and supplies 
may accompany doctors from a hospital to their private practice. Any other type of employee 
(and patients and visitors) may steal. An enormous number of items are unguarded at health-
care facilities. Quality applicant screening prevents the hiring of thieves, quacks, and drug 
and sex offenders.
Access Controls
When entrances to a healthcare facility are limited, unauthorized entry is hindered. Uniformed 
officers should be stationed at each entrance. Of course, emergency exits are a necessity for 
safety; but alarms on these doors will deter usage. Identification badges worn by employees 
assist in recognition by other employees. Outside individuals on the premises (e.g., contractors 
or technicians) should be issued ID badges.
Koverman (2006: 30–35) writes that access controls in hospitals are especially chal-
lenging and require a “tricky balance between appropriate levels of security and appro-
priate levels of accessibility.” The control of visitors must be handled with compassion 
and empathy. Visitors wanting to see an ill family member are often emotionally upset. 
Furthermore, the patient’s recovery can be aided by visits from loved ones. These factors 
must be stressed in healthcare training programs. Many locations issue visitor passes to 
avoid overcrowding in patients’ rooms and to inhibit a variety of problems such as the 
deviant who dresses like a doctor to “examine” female patients.

Healthcare Institutions          483
Patrols, CCTV
Surveillance of interior and exterior areas, with patrols and CCTV, deters crime. Good 
lighting is an integral aspect of this effort. Large medical centers have a command center 
for communications and CCTV observation. More intense vigilance usually is needed at 
night, but assorted crimes are possible at any time. Offenders may break into automobiles 
in parking lots to obtain valuables. Doctors’ automobiles are particularly vulnerable, espe-
cially if medical bags are left behind. Aggressive patrolling and surveillance are required 
during shift changes; women should be escorted to their vehicles to foil attempts at purse 
snatching, assault, or rape. During slow periods when traffic is limited, uniformed officers 
should resume patrolling while checking for safety hazards.
Some locations have chosen sports jackets or blazers for loss prevention personnel to 
create a “nonpolice image.” Nevertheless, most facilities seem to favor uniforms to provide a 
“police image” to reinforce crime deterrence and to signify that the location is protected.
The arming of personnel is controversial. Some medical institutions issue firearms to all 
officers, whereas other locations issue them only to those assigned to external areas.
Emergency Room
At least one officer must be stationed in the emergency room at all times. Depending on the 
crime rate, officers may have to be armed; equipped with bullet-resistant vests; and prepared 
to frisk people, confiscate weapons, and make arrests. Signs prohibiting weapons should be 
posted as well as notices of metal detectors. Disturbances occur regularly in the emergency 
room in busy hospitals. Verbal arguments, assaults, and destruction of property may be 
caused by belligerent patients, visitors who are intoxicated, and rival gangs. Disturbances 
recurrently are the result of long waiting periods before treatment. Medical personnel can 
reduce a portion of disturbances if they adequately explain the reasons for delays. Emergency 
treatment areas should be sealed off if necessary and panic buttons available.
Newborn Nursery
Infant abduction is a particularly disturbing problem for parents, employees, and police. In 
1983, the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC) created a database 
on infant abduction that led to the creation of guidelines for hospitals. The NCMEC Web site 
offers a variety of helpful information for parents, police, and attorneys. Those who abduct 
infants from hospitals often impersonate medical staff and “case” the nursery prior to the 
crime. Countermeasures include taking footprints of infants, requiring photo ID cards of all 
employees and volunteers, restricting visitors, using CCTV, installing an electronic surveil-
lance system that detects infant bracelets, and not releasing birth information. If abduction 
occurs, hospital staff should immediately notify the police, the FBI, and the NCMEC; conduct 
a search; check exit points; and begin a thorough investigation. Such “target hardening” at 
hospitals can displace kidnapping to areas outside the hospital and to the home of the infant. 
Parents should protect the infant by, for example, not placing pretty bows or a sign outside 
the home to signify a birth.
Healthcare Violence and OSHA Guidelines
Certain locations at healthcare facilities have an increased chance of violence. They 
include emergency rooms, children’s hospitals, psychiatric units, and home healthcare. 
To illustrate, a child in a pediatric unit may require protection following abuse or to 
prevent kidnapping. If the child’s parents are estranged, family strife may spill into 
the hospital. Protection methods include providing crisis intervention training for 
healthcare employees, gathering information on the family at the preadmission stage, 
checking court papers showing parental rights or restraining orders, posting photos 

484          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
Pharmacy Protection and Robbery
A small percentage of the population is addicted to drugs and will do anything to obtain them. 
Colling (2001: 443–450) notes that narcotics addiction among doctors and nurses is a much 
more serious problem than recognized, and healthcare facilities are a major source of illegal 
drug traffic involving legal drugs. There have been instances in which medical personnel have 
withheld drugs from a patient for their own use or sale. One technique is to substitute flour 
for medication. Hospital administrators are reluctant to report these acts for fear of lawsuits. 
Another technique is to write a phony prescription or alter an existing one. In one case, a 
hospital pharmacist diverted thousands of dollars of drugs to his retail drugstore.
The Controlled Substances Act of 1970, amended several times, provides the legal foun-
dation for the manufacture, importation, possession, and distribution of certain drugs. The 
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) enforces the act. All states regulate pharmacies.
Pharmacy losses can be prevented through strict accountability and inventory controls. 
For the protection of the pharmacy, cashiering operations, and the business office, the follow-
ing measures will deter burglary, robbery, and other crimes: (1) intrusion and holdup alarms 
integrated with CCTV, (2) bullet-resistant glass, (3) access controls, (4) patrols, and (5) con-
sideration of removing signs identifying the location.
Locker Rooms
Men and women who work in healthcare institutions are accustomed to using separate locker 
rooms before, during, and after shifts. Locker rooms ordinarily are located in the basement or 
remote locations. CCTV and patrols can be applied to areas just outside locker rooms. Panic 
buttons that signal trouble are useful within locker rooms. Loss prevention personnel should 
conduct occasional locker inspections to deter assorted problems.
Mortuary
The mortuary has been the site of morbid crimes. People, including relatives of the deceased, 
have stolen jewelry directly from cadavers. Gold dental work has been extracted with a pocket-
knife. The rare sexual perversion called necrophilia (i.e., sexual activity with a corpse) is a pos-
sibility in the mortuary. In addition, there are cases in which the wrong body was taken away 
for burial. A complete inventory should be conducted of the personal property of the deceased 
soon after death. Witnesses and appropriate paperwork should be a part of this procedure.
Patient Property
A recurring puzzle sometimes accompanies patients prior to discharge: jewelry or other per-
sonal property is missing. In addition to theft, it is possible that the property is nonexistent, 
of persons to be barred from visiting the child, placing a false name on the nameplate 
of the patient’s room, installing a CCTV camera in the hall near the child’s room, and 
increasing patrols and access controls.
Because of violent crime at healthcare facilities, the federal government and 
certain states (e.g., California and New Jersey) have developed safety standards to 
prevent violence in the workplace. On the federal level, the Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration (1996) published Guidelines for Preventing Workplace 
Violence for Health Care and Social Service Workers. According to OSHA, “All 
employers have a general duty to provide their employees with a workplace free from 
recognized hazards likely to cause death or serious physical harm” and “Employers 
can be cited for violating the General Duty Clause if there is a recognized hazard of 
workplace violence in their establishments and they do nothing to prevent or abate 
it.” The OSHA guidelines are advisory in nature and focus on management com-
mitment, worksite analysis, hazard prevention and control (e.g., physical security), 
education and training, recordkeeping, and evaluation.

is at the patient’s home, or has been misplaced. A few prevention measures are cost effective. 
Forms prior to admission can contain a suggestion for the patient to keep valuables at home. 
The admitting form can contain a statement advising the patient to deposit valuables in a 
security envelope. These envelopes have the same serial numbers on both the envelope and 
the receipt. Valuables are inserted and the envelope is sealed in the presence of the patient. 
The patient and the clerk sign and date both the envelope and the receipt. An adequate safe 
is needed for these valuables.
Standards and Professionalism
The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) is a dominant 
force in promoting standards in the healthcare field that affect funding from government. 
JCAHO standard EC 1.4 addresses how hospitals should provide a secure environment for 
patients, staff, and visitors. Specific written plans for security are required for the “environ-
ment of care” (EC) standards. They include maintaining a security management program and 
addressing security concerns regarding protecting people and assets. Other standards focus 
on, for example, training and emergency management.
The professionalism of those who protect healthcare institutions is enhanced through 
the International Association for Healthcare Security and Safety (IAHSS), which was founded 
in 1968. It is a not-for-profit organization for hospital security and safety administrators. 
The IAHSS administers the Certified Healthcare Protection Administrator (CHPA) credential 
and publishes The Journal of Healthcare Protection Management. Two important purposes 
of this group are the development of standards for healthcare security practices and train-
ing/certifications. For the various certifications, students study IAHSS manuals and JCAHO 
security standards.
Fire and Other Disasters
A multitude of fire codes and standards for healthcare institutions emanate from local, state, 
and federal agencies. The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code refers to a “total concept approach” 
to the fire problem, consisting of construction, detection/suppression, and staff presence. 
NFPA 99 Standard for Healthcare Facilities establishes criteria to minimize hazards from fire, 
explosion, and electricity. Almost all states promote safety through minimum standards and 
healthcare licensing requirements. The federal government, for example, adopted the Life 
Safety Code for Medicare and Medicaid regulations in healthcare institutions.
JCAHO has worked closely with the federal government to provide adequate patient 
care and safety. Legislation has stated that hospitals must meet federal requirements for health 
and safety if they are accredited by JCAHO. All healthcare locations are subject to OSHA, 
except those that are federal. At times, overlapping regulations produce confusion between 
JCAHO and OSHA mandates.
A healthcare facility may require approval for life safety from multiple authorities 
having jurisdiction (AHJ), meaning the official office enforcing the code. These authorities 
include the state fire marshal, local building official, fire department, state healthcare licens-
ing agency, JCAHO, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services-Health Care Financing 
Administration, and the facility’s insurance carrier.
Fire protection at healthcare facilities must be a top priority, especially because of 
immobile patients. The early detection and suppression of fire, plus fire-resistive construction, 
will play major roles if patients cannot be moved and must be “defended in place.” Unique 
characteristics of these environments must be considered in planning. For example, there is 
a great deal of disposables, and rubbish must be collected, stored, and eliminated properly; 
fireproof receptacles are useful. Flammable substances require safe storage, use, and disposal. 
Operating and delivery rooms are subject to static electricity, which can spark a fire if close 
to anesthetics. These rooms should be tested for static electricity. A full-time fire marshal, fire 
engineer, or loss prevention manager should be in charge of fire protection. This individual 
coordinates training, evacuation plans, drills, equipment evaluation and purchasing, plus 
other duties; in addition, he or she acts as liaison with local fire agencies.
Healthcare Institutions          485

486          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
If a WMD event should occur, healthcare workers would become first receivers who 
treat incoming victims. OSHA information assists hospitals in protecting healthcare workers 
and creating emergency plans for worst-case scenarios and training. It also offers suggestions 
for personal protective equipment (PPE). Examples are gloves, mask, and protective eyewear, 
or a head-to-toes protective suit and respirator. Besides healthcare workers, security officers at 
hospitals need personal protection and training so they do not become victims themselves. As 
first receivers treat victims, security officers will likely maintain order and control traffic and 
access by victims who may be in a state of panic and need to be decontaminated and quaran-
tined. In addition, it is possible that the facility will become overwhelmed, civil disturbance 
may occur, and the hospital will become a disaster site.
The Public Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Act of 2002 
recognizes emergency room workers as major responders to the problem of terrorism, and it 
promotes a national curriculum of training to respond to biological agents. It also provides 
for a real-time surveillance system among emergency rooms, state public health departments, 
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)—the lead agency, in HHS, if a 
communicable disease outbreak occurs.
What do you think is the most serious risk facing healthcare institutions? What are 
your solutions?
Career: Healthcare Security
Security in the healthcare industry provides opportunities not only in hospitals, but 
also in long-term care facilities, clinics, and nursing homes. The healthcare industry is 
a multifaceted, challenging field, which includes dealing with immobile, unconscious, 
emotionally disturbed, and distraught patients and their families, and providing 
security to gift shops, cafeterias, parking lots, pharmacies, and emergency depart-
ments. Employee investigation plays a substantial role in asset protection. The work 
environment is oriented toward patient protection and service, and may include safety 
and community emergency management. Security opportunities may include being a 
security supervisor, security director, or public relations person in charge of interacting 
with the medical community as well as patients.
Entry-level management positions require a bachelor’s degree in security or a 
related field, or equivalent experience. Two years of security supervisory experience 
are required, and experience in healthcare security or customer service is desired. In 
addition, training and experience in business management and human resources are 
desired. Salary range is $30,000 to $50,000.
Mid-level management positions require a bachelor’s degree in security or a 
related field, or equivalent experience. A master’s degree is desired. Five years as a 
senior supervisor or entry-level manager are required, and experience in healthcare 
security or customer service is desired. In addition, training and experience in business 
management and human resources are desired. The CHPA and the CPP are preferred 
designations.
Source: Courtesy of ASIS International. (2005). “Career Opportunities in Security.” www.
asisonline.org.

Case Problems          487
NFPA 730 Guide for Premises Security contains guidelines for retail businesses, educa-
tional institutions, healthcare institutions, and other facilities.
Search the Web
Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
American Bankers Association: www.aba.com
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: www.cdc.gov
Center for the Prevention of School Violence: www.ncdjjdp.org/cpsv/
International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators: www.
iaclea.org/
International Association for Healthcare Security & Safety: www.iahss.org/
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO): www.
jointcommission.org/
Loss Prevention Research Council: www.lpresearch.org/index.php
National Association of School Resource Officers: www.nasro.org
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children: www.missingkids.com/
National Crime Prevention Council: www.ncpc.org/
National Retail Federation: www.nrf.com
National Shoplifting Prevention Coalition: www.shopliftingprevention.org
School Violence Resource Center: www.svrc.net
The Loss Prevention Foundation: www.losspreventioncertification.com
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: www.hhs.gov
U.S. Department of Homeland Security: www.dhs.gov
U.S. Secret Service: www.secretservice.gov
University of Florida, National Retail Security Survey: www.crim.ufl.edu/research/
srp/NRSS_2001.pdf
Case Problems
17A.  A group of eight merchants who own retail stores at a small shopping center have 
hired you as a loss prevention consultant. These people are interested in reduced 
losses and increased profits. Their loss problems are employee theft, losses at the 
POS, shoplifting, robbery, and burglary. As a loss prevention consultant, what is 
your plan? Do not forget, you must earn your fee, satisfy the merchants to develop 
a good reputation, and produce effective loss prevention measures that will reduce 
losses and increase profits.
17B.  As a regional loss prevention manager for a retail chain, you are growing increasingly 
suspicious of one of the stores in your region. The store manager and employees 
constantly state that the high shrinkage of 4% at the store is due to shoplifters. 
The manager argues that very little shrinkage results from damaged merchandise or 
employee theft. EAS and CCTV systems are functioning at the store, but no security 
personnel are employed; a variety of nonsecurity employees maintain and operate 
these systems. What action do you take?
17C.  As a bank security director you are faced with the challenge of an upsurge of 
customer robberies at automated teller machines and after-hours depositories (when 
retail managers deposit daily sales income). What do you do?

488          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
17D.  You are a school district security director, and it has been brought to your attention 
that students in the high school, in certain classes, routinely bring fast food, cell 
phones, and other electronic devices to their desks and intimidate teachers into 
permitting these items. The school district superintendent has asked you to work on 
a solution to this problem. What do you do?
17E.  You are a hospital security director, and your new challenge is to prevent the 
admittance of recidivist patients who fake illness to secure shelter and food. These 
individuals are often living on the street and use a different identity each time they 
seek admittance to the emergency room. The problem seems to increase during the 
cold winter months. What do you do?
17F.  Of the four types of entities in this chapter, select two and describe why the ones 
you chose are unique in terms of loss problems and prevention strategies.
17G.  Choose two types of entities from this chapter. For each, establish a priority list of 
the five most important measures to counter losses. Explain the reasoning behind 
each ranked list.
17H.  Choose two types of entities from this chapter. (1) Refer to additional sources to 
gather further information, and (2) explain why you would prefer to work in one 
rather than the other. Maintain a bibliography.
17I.  What do you think is the most demanding of the entities discussed in this chapter 
for a loss prevention manager? Justify your answer.
References
Abdullaev, N. (2004). “Beslan, Russia . . . Terror! In The Schoolhouse! Homeland Defense 
Journal, 2 (September).
Anderson, T. (2001). “Up and Running.” Security Management, 45 (January).
Altheide, D., et al. (1978). “The Social Meanings of Employee Theft.” Crime at the Top. New 
York: J. B. Lippincott Co.
Beaulieu, E. (2005). “Theft Operation ‘Disturbs’ Retailers.” Security Director News, 2 (February).
Bednarz, A. (2006). “Online Merchants Will Lose $3 Billion to Fraud in 2006.” NETWORKWORLD 
(November 14). http://www.networkworld.com/news/2006/111406-online-merchants-fraud.
html, retrieved February 12, 2007.
Brunker, M. (2001). “Internet Merchants Fight Back.” MSNBC (May 16). http://www.msnbc.
com/news/377221.asp, retrieved May 16, 2001.
Cogswell, P. (2006). “Store-Value Card Fraud: A House of Cards?” Loss Prevention, 5 
(November-December).
Colling, R. (2001). Hospital and Healthcare Security. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Davis, R. et al. (2006). “An Assessment of the Preparedness of Large Retail Malls to Prevent 
and Respond to Terrorist Attack.” www.asisonline.org/foundation/noframe/mall.pdf, 
retrieved September 26, 2006.
Decker, S. (2000). “Increasing School Safety through Juvenile Accountability Programs.” 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.
DiLonardo, R. (2006). “Industry News.” Loss Prevention, 5 (May-June).
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2006). Crime in the United States 2005. http://www.fbi.
gov/ucr/05cius/data/table_01.html, retrieved October 2, 2006.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2005). “Financial Institution Fraud and Failure Report.” 
http://www.fbi.gov/publications/financial/2005fif/fif05.htm, retrieved October 4, 2006.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2007). “2006 Bank Robbery Statistics Released.” http://
seattle.fbi.gov/pressrel/2007/pr010907.htm, retrieved February 24, 2007.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Financial Crimes Section. (2005). “Financial Crimes 
Report to the Public.” http://www.fbi.gov/publications/financial/fcs_report052005/fcs_
report052005.htm, retrieved March 6, 2007.
“First LP Certification Program Launches June 4th” (2007). Loss Prevention e-Newsletter, 3 
(May 31). newsletter@losspreventionmagazine.com, retrieved June 1, 2007.

References          489
Fisher, B., and Sloan, J. (1993). “University Response to the Campus Security Act of 1990: Evaluating 
Programs Designed to Reduce Campus Crime.” Journal of Security Administration, 16.
Friedrick, J. (2006). “Risk of Fraud, Theft Keeps Security Directors at Banks on Their Toes.” 
Security Director News, 3 (October).
Gabbidon, S., and Patrick, P. (2005). “Characteristics and Outcomes of Shoplifting Cases in 
the U.S. Involving Allegations of False Arrest.” Security Journal, 18.
Gaur, N., and Gilliland, W. (2006). “New Customer Touch Points.” Information Week (June 
1). http://www.informationweek.com/, retrieved February, 13, 2007.
Gill, M., Bilby, C., and Turbin, V. (1999). “Retail Security: Understanding What Deters Shop 
Thieves.” Journal of Security Administration, 22.
Gips, M. (2007). “EAS Not a Silver Bullet.” Security Management, 51 (March).
Gips, M. (1997). “Shoplifter Shakedown?” Security (January).
Harwood, M. (2007). “Preventing the Next Campus Shooting.” Security Management, 51 
(August).
Hayes, R. (2006). “Store Design and LP.” Loss Prevention, 5 (March-April).
Hollinger, R. (2006). “Both Good News and Bad News.” Loss Prevention, 5 (November-
December).
Hollinger, R., and Langton, L. (2006). “2005 National Retail Security Survey, Final Report.” 
www.crim.ufl.edu/research/srp/srp.htm, retrieved February 18, 2007.
Jaeger, S. (2001). “Crime Concerns on Campus.” Security Technology & Design, 12 (March).
Kelly, M. (2000). “Essentials of Retail Loss Prevention.” Security Technology & Design, 10 
(June).
Koverman, R. (2006). “Assessing and Securing the Hospital Environment.” Security 
Technology & Design, 16 (May).
Langton, L., and Hollinger, R. (2005). “Correlates of Crime Losses in the Retail Industry.” 
Security Journal, 18.
Levy, M., and Weitz, B. (2001). Retailing Management, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Meadows, R. (2007). Understanding Violence and Victimization, 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. (1996). Guidelines for Preventing Workplace 
Violence for Health Care and Social Service Workers. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department 
of Labor.
Office of Postsecondary Education. (2001). “The Incidence of Crime on the Campuses 
of U.S. Postsecondary Education Institutions.” http://www.ed.gov/PressReleases/01–
2001/011901m.html, retrieved March 1, 2007.
Palmer, W. (2006). “Considerations for Evaluating EAS Source-Tagging Programs.” Loss 
Prevention, 5 (September-October).
Purpura, P. (1997). Criminal Justice: An Introduction. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Purpura, P. (1993). Retail Security & Shrinkage Protection. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Schmedlen, R. (2000). “A Picture of Profiling.” Security Management, 44 (May).
Schroeder, W. (2001). “Money Laundering.” FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin, 70 (May).
Swartz, J. (2006). “Banks Pull Out the Big Guns to Guard Online Users.” USA Today 
(November 20). http://usatoday, retrieved November 21, 2006.
Talamo, J. (2007). “Organized Retail Crime: Setting the Stage for an ORC Strategy.” Loss 
Prevention, 6 (January-February).
Tomes, J. (2005). “Prescription for Data Protection.” Security Management, 49 (April).
Toppo, G. (2006). “High-Tech School Security Is on the Rise.” USA TODAY (October 10). 
http://www.usatoday.com/news/education/2006-10-09-school-security_x.htm, retrieved 
October 10, 2006.
TwoWayMirrors.net. (2006). “Two Way Mirror FAQ.” http://www.twowaymirrors.net/mir-
rorfaq.htm, retrieved March 8, 2006.
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance. (2007). “Gang Resistance Education 
and Training.” http://www.great-online.org/, retrieved February 27, 2007.
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2006). “Indicators of School Crime and 
Safety: 2006.” http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iscs06.htm, retrieved February 26, 2007.

490          LOSS PREVENTION AT BUSINESSES AND INSTITUTIONS
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2000). “The Sexual Victimization of 
College Women.” http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/182369.pdf, retrieved March 3, 2007.
U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services. (2005). “National 
Summit on Campus Public Safety.” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration. (2007). “Money Laundering.” http://www.dea.gov/
programs/money.htm, retrieved February 24, 2007.
White House. (2003). The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical 
Infrastructures and Key Assets (February). www.whitehouse.gov, retrieved February 23, 
2007.
Zimmerman, A. (2006). “As Shoplifters Use High-Tech Scams, Retail Losses Rise.” The Wall 
Street Journal (October 25). http://online.wsj.com, retrieved October 30, 2006.

18
KEY TERMS
Topics of Concern
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Discuss the problem of violence in the workplace and what can be done about it.
2. List strategies of personnel protection.
3. Describe the problems and remedies associated with substance abuse in the workplace.
4. List the methods by which an adversary might obtain information assets and list 
strategies of information security.
5. Explain the array of communications security.
6. Describe Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM).
• workplace violence
• OSHA’s general duty clause
• workplace violence prevention program
• conflict resolution and nonviolent 
response
• personnel protection
• executive protection
• executive protection (or personnel 
protection) program
• country risk ratings
• creature of habit
• safe room
• substance abuse
• anti-substance abuse program for the 
workplace
• Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988
• specimen validity testing
• trace detection
• alcoholic
• psychological dependence
• addiction
• tolerance
• withdrawal
• information security
• information assets
• espionage
• business espionage
• government espionage
• trade secret
• patent
• trademark
• copyright
• corporate intelligence
• competitive intelligence
• Economic Espionage Act of 1996
• reverse engineering
• “Four Faces of Business Espionage”
• pretext interview
• information security program
• Operations Security (OPSEC)
• communications security
• TEMPEST
• electronic surveillance
• wiretapping
• Technical Surveillance Countermeasures 
(TSCM)
491

Workplace Violence
Two important questions on workplace violence are (1) how should it be defined, and (2) 
how should it be measured? The definition of workplace violence affects not only how it is 
measured but also its cost. As the definition expanded from “one employee attacks another” 
to “any violence that occurs on the job” so, too, did the cost.
ASIS International (2005: 8) published the Workplace Violence Prevention and 
Response Guideline. It states: “Any definition of workplace violence must be broad enough 
to encompass the full range of behaviors that can cause injury, damage property, impede the 
normal course of work, or make workers, managers, and customers fear for their safety.” The 
Guideline defines workplace violence as follows: “Workplace violence refers to a broad range 
of behaviors falling along a spectrum that, due to their nature and/or severity, significantly 
affect the workplace, generate a concern for personal safety, or result in physical injury or 
death.” At the low end of the spectrum is disruptive and emotionally abusive behavior that 
creates anxiety and adversely affects the working environment. Next along the spectrum are 
words or actions that are intimidating, frightening, or threatening and create a concern for 
personal safety. At the high end of the spectrum is violent behavior.
Kenny (2005a: 45–56) emphasizes that while threats may not result in physical injury, 
they can leave victims traumatized and fearful. In addition, threats can harm productivity and 
“serve as the catalyst for progressively more dangerous behaviors.” Kenny adds, “Those who 
ignore, misunderstand or fail to take threats seriously miss an opportunity to identify, diffuse 
or resolve workplace problems.” Research by Kenny (2005b: 55–66) found that women were 
more likely to be victimized.
The University of Iowa (2001), in a report entitled “Workplace Violence: A Report to the 
Nation,” found that 2 million Americans are victims of workplace violence each year. The report 
divided workplace violence into four categories: criminal intent (e.g., robbery), customer/client (e.g., 
health care environment), worker-on-worker, and personal relationship (e.g., domestic violence).
The U.S. Department of Labor (2006) reported 480 homicides in private industry in 2005, 
with 489 in 2004, and 561 in 2003. In 2005, nearly 5% of the 7.1 million private industry business 
establishments in the United States had an incident of workplace violence. About a third of these 
establishments reported that the incident had a negative impact on their workforce. Service provid-
ing industries reported much higher percentages of criminal, customer, and domestic violence than 
goods-producing industries. State government reported higher percentages of all types of workplace 
violence than did local government or private industry. Thirty-two percent of all state government 
workplaces reported some form of workplace violence. The higher reported incidence of violence 
in state and local government workplaces may be attributed to their work environments. These 
workplaces reported much higher percentages of working directly with the public, having a mobile 
workplace, working with unstable or violent persons, working in high crime areas, guarding valu-
able goods or property, and working in community based settings than did private industry.
Workplace violence is costly to businesses. Losses reach into the billions of dollars each 
year and include medical and psychological care, lost wages, property damage, lost company 
goodwill, and impact on employee turnover and hiring (Hughes, 2001: 69).
Obviously, incidents of workplace violence (e.g., homicides, assaults, rapes) occurred 
before increased attention focused on the problem in the early 1990s. What we have witnessed 
is a change in the way the problem is perceived and counted. This is beneficial for gauging 
increases and decreases in the problem and as a foundation for planning protection with scarce 
resources. The United States has been known to maintain good statistics on a number of prob-
lems and freely publicize trends. From an international perspective, others may view the United 
States as the most violent society, when we may simply be the best at gathering data.
Do you think the United States is a violent society, or do we just maintain good data-
gathering systems? Explain your viewpoint.
492          TOPICS OF CONCERN

Legal Guidelines
There is no national law addressing violence in the workplace. OSHA has published volun-
tary guidelines for workers in late-night retail, healthcare, and taxicab businesses, but these 
guidelines are not legal requirements. Various states have enacted laws to curb violent crime 
at work, especially for retail establishments and healthcare settings.
ASIS, International (2005: 12) notes: “Under the federal Occupational Safety and 
Health Act and corresponding state statutes, each employer owes a ‘general duty’ to pro-
tect employees against ‘recognized hazards’ that are likely to cause serious injury or death. 
Workplace violence has been identified as one of those hazards, and both federal and state 
OSHA agencies have issued citations to employers under OSHA’s general duty clause for fail-
ure to protect employees against workplace violence.”
Employers not only have a legal responsibility to prevent harm to people on the prem-
ises, they must ensure that subjects under investigation are afforded legal rights. Employers 
who do not take measures to prevent violence in the workplace face exposure to lawsuits. 
Legal theories at the foundation of such lawsuits include premises liability, negligence, harass-
ment (sexual and other forms), and respondeat superior (see Chapters 4 and 6). Workers’ 
compensation may cover injured employees, but the exposure of employers is much greater.
Contradictions in the law make protection difficult: OSHA requires a safe working 
environment for employees, but the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) can create dif-
ficulties for an employer seeking to control an employee with a mental instability. Employees 
have successfully sued employers for defamation because instability was mentioned. The ADA 
restricts “profiling” of employees through the observation of traits thought to be potentially 
violent (Jaeger, 2001: 74).
Protection Methods
What follows is a list of strategies for a workplace violence prevention program.
1. Establish a committee to assess risks, plan violence prevention, and to respond to such 
incidents. Include specialists in security, human resources, psychology, and law.
2. Consider OSHA and ASIS International guidelines to curb workplace violence.
3. Establish policies (Figure 18-1) and procedures and communicate the problems of 
threats and violence to all employees. Include reporting requirements and procedures.
4. Avoid a strict zero tolerance policy that does not consider mitigating circumstances. 
Legal problems with zero tolerance may arise with cases involving harassment, labor 
contracts, disability, and discriminatory practices (Hershkowitz, 2004: 83–88).
5. Although human behavior cannot be accurately predicted, screen employment 
applicants. The ADA limits certain questions; however, these can be asked: “What 
was the most stressful situation you faced and how did you deal with it?” “What was 
the most serious incident you encountered in your work and how did you respond?”
6. Consider substance abuse testing as a strategy to prevent workplace violence. For 
years, Bureau of Justice Statistics data has shown a relationship between violent crime 
and substance abuse.
7. A history of threatening or violent behavior can help to predict its reoccurrence. The 
worker who becomes violent is usually a white male, between 25 and 50 years old, 
and has a history of interpersonal conflict and pathological blaming. He tends to be 
a loner and may have a mental health history of paranoia and depression. He also 
may have a fascination with weapons (Meadows, 2007: 121).
8. Managers and supervisors should be sensitive to disruptions in the workplace, such as 
terminations. Substance abuse and domestic and financial problems also can affect the 
workplace; and EAP is especially helpful for such problems.
9. Train managers and supervisors to recognize employees with problems and report 
them to the human resources department. Include training in conflict resolution and 
nonviolent response. Train in active listening skills, such as repeating to the subject 
the message he/she is trying to communicate and asking open-ended questions to 
encourage the subject to talk about his/her problems. Listen and show that you 
Workplace Violence          493

494          TOPICS OF CONCERN
are interested in helping to resolve the problem. Do not be pulled into a verbal 
confrontation; do not argue. Acknowledge and validate the anger by showing 
empathy, not sympathy. Speak softly and slowly. Ensure that a witness is present. 
Maintain a safe distance, without being obvious, to provide an extra margin of 
safety. If a threat is made or if a weapon is shown, call the police. Consistently 
enforce policies.
10.  Remember that outsiders (e.g., visitor, estranged spouse, and robber) may be a source 
of violence and protection programs must be comprehensive.
11.  Ensure that a thorough and impartial investigation is conducted following a reported 
incident. Follow legal requirements, such as those pertaining to due process, privacy, 
and labor agreements.
12.  If a violent incident occurs, a previously prepared crisis management plan becomes 
invaluable. Otherwise, a committee should be formed immediately after emergency 
first responders (i.e., police, EMS) complete their duties on the premises and affected 
employees and their families are assisted. At one major corporation, management was 
unprepared when the corporate security manager was shot. A committee was quickly 
formed to improve security and survey corporate plants. In addition to expenditures 
for physical security and training, an emphasis was placed on awareness, access 
controls, and alerts (Purpura, 1993: 150–157).
FIGURE 18-1 Policies are an essential component of a workplace violence prevention program.
“Dozens Sue over Lockheed Shootings”
The following account of workplace violence is from a news article in The Clarion-
Ledger, Jackson, Mississippi (Hudson, 2004: 1A). Forty-seven employees and relatives 
of employees filed a federal lawsuit against Lockheed Martin claiming emotional 
distress following the shooting of 14 people when employees were allegedly forced 

Personnel Protection          495
back inside the plant for a “live head count.” The shooting was the state’s deadliest 
act of workplace violence when plant employee Doug Williams, 48, shot and killed six 
co-workers and wounded eight others prior to committing suicide. Lockheed Martin 
allegedly ordered employees to the canteen for a count and that is when employees 
supposedly walked near victim bodies. The lawsuit also claimed that Lockheed Martin 
failed to protect employees who complained that Williams threatened to shoot black 
co-workers, and that the company denied employee requests for security officers prior 
to the shooting. A Lockheed Martin spokesperson stated: “Lockheed Martin has been 
cleared of responsibility for this incident by state and federal authorities and is confi-
dent that the same conclusion will be reached by the court.”
One plaintiff, Henry Odom, a 35-year employee, stated in a court affidavit that 
he had complained to management about fights and auto thefts at the plant and asked 
for security officers for the premises. The affidavit stated that Williams shot him in his 
left arm twice and the second shot also entered his back and punctured a lung. The 
affidavit noted that the plant now has armed security officers on duty.
The lawsuit claimed that three weeks prior to the shooting, Williams placed a 
work-issued “bootie” on his head that appeared, according to some, to resemble a Ku 
Klux Klan hood. Management allegedly confronted him and he supposedly left the 
plant angry and did not return for about a week. According to the court papers, he 
was permitted to return to work, but required to attend an ethics course with black 
co-workers. He allegedly left a meeting and told workers he was angry and going to 
“take care of this.” He allegedly returned to the meeting, fired on some in the room, 
and then went to the plant floor to shoot others. The lawsuit claimed that Lockheed 
Martin had sufficient time to stop him and warn employees of the imminent danger 
he posed.
Workers’ Comp Insider (Ryan, 2005) reported that a federal appeals court 
upheld workers compensation as the exclusive remedy for the nine surviving victims 
and the families of the six workers who were killed in the Lockheed Martin shooting in 
Meridien. Ryan noted that this would limit damages to about $150,000. Ryan reported 
the following: “Exclusive remedy is a strong concept that holds up under repeated legal 
challenges. Workers comp is no fault by its very nature, a quid pro quo arrangement in 
which employers agree to provide medical and wage replacement to injured workers, 
and in turn, this becomes the sole remedy. In all but the most unusual circumstances, 
employees lose the right to sue their employer for work-related injuries. Sometimes this 
seems unfair to a worker because benefits are paltry when stacked side by side with 
enormous awards from civil litigation. But when legal challenges succeed, they weaken 
the system’s underpinnings. Workers comp is essentially a safety net, a system designed 
to provide the best for the most, not to provide individual redress for every wrong. 
When litigation is successful at piercing the exclusive remedy shield, it often involves 
employer misconduct that is highly egregious.” . . . “Many states require proof of will-
ful intent. It must be demonstrated that the employer had substantial certainty that an 
injury would occur. In this case, the shooting victims and their surviving families sued 
the company on the basis of having been deprived of civil rights, alleging that manage-
ment knew of the threat and ‘. . . knew employee Doug Williams’ racist views had cre-
ated a volatile work environment but did too little to defuse the situation.’ ”
Personnel Protection
At home and abroad, businesses have become the target for kidnappings, extortion, assassina-
tions, bombings, and sabotage. Terrorists use these methods to obtain money for their cause, 
to alter business or government policies, or to change public opinion. Organized crime groups 
also are participants in such criminal acts, but in contrast to terrorists, their objective usually 
is money. It appears that successful criminal techniques employed in one country spread to 

496          TOPICS OF CONCERN
other countries. This is likely to be one reason why companies are reluctant to release details 
of an incident or even to acknowledge it. Coca-Cola, Chase Manhattan, B. F. Goodrich, and 
other companies have been victimized in the past.
Personnel protection is a broad term that focuses on security methods to protect all 
employees and those linked to them. These links include family; customers, visitors, and con-
tractors; and others depending on the business. Executive protection concentrates on security 
methods to protect key management personnel who are high-value targets because of their 
position of power and authority and their value to the business. The following paragraphs 
begin with an emphasis on executive protection methods that are applicable to personnel 
protection.
Planning
A key beginning for an executive protection (or personnel protection) program is to develop 
a crisis management plan and team. The goals are to reduce vulnerabilities and surprises and 
develop contingencies. The crisis management plan can consist of threat assessments, coun-
termeasures, policies, procedures, and lines of authority and responsibility in the event of an 
attack. An interdisciplinary group, if cost effective, can greatly aid the program. The group 
could consist of top executives, the loss prevention manager, former federal agents, counter-
terrorism experts, political analysts, insurance specialists, and an attorney–negotiator.
The early stages of the plan, if not the preplanning stages, would be devoted to convinc-
ing senior management that executive protection is necessary. This objective can be supported 
through a quality research report that focuses on risks, seeks to anticipate (not predict) events, 
and answers the following questions: Which executives are possible targets? Where? When? 
Which individuals or groups may attack? What are their methods? What are the social and 
political conditions in the particular country? What role has the specific government played in 
past incidents? Were the police or military of the foreign country involved in past incidents? 
Such questions require research and intelligence gathering as well as cooperative ties to gov-
ernment agencies of the United States and other countries. (Sources of assistance are found in 
the Chapter 10 box, “International Perspective: Overseas Investigations.”)
Country risk ratings offered by private firms that conduct research have been used by 
international corporations for many years. These ratings help businesses gauge risk, decide 
on travel plans, educate travelers, and for insurers, set premiums. There is inconsistency in 
how these firms reach their conclusions. Consumers should inquire on the methodology used 
to prepare these ratings. Firms often acquire information from analysts located globally and 
from open sources (Elliott, 2006: 36–38).
The U.S. Secret Service completed a study of assassinations of public figures in the United 
States during the second half of the 20th century. The findings showed that threateners do not 
typically make good on their threats by attacking, and attackers do not usually issue threats to 
the target before striking. Although threats should not be ignored, this research showed that 
the most serious threats are unlikely to come from those who communicate threats. So if threats 
are not a major signal of an attack, what are the indicators? The research found that attackers 
planned the attack, spoke with others about the attack, followed the target, approached the 
target in a controlled and secure setting, and attempted repeatedly to contact the target and 
visit the target’s home and a location regularly visited by the target. These latter behaviors 
signal a probing activity to test protection and attack strategies (Bowron, 2001: 93–97).
Education and Training
Depending on the extent of the executive protection program, many people can be brought 
into the education and training phase. Executives, their families, and loss prevention per-
sonnel (i.e., management, bodyguards, and uniformed officers) are top priorities. However, 
chauffeurs, servants, gardeners, and office workers also should be knowledgeable about 
terrorist and other criminal techniques, and countermeasures that include awareness, 
prevention strategies, personal security, recognizing and reporting suspicious occurrences, 
the proper response to bomb threats or postal bombs, and skills such as defensive driving. 

Most in-house loss prevention personnel are not experts in dealing with executive protec-
tion. Therefore, a consultant may have to be recruited.
General Protection Strategies
Gips (2007: 52–60) writes that there are three essential components of executive protection. 
Threat assessments investigate potential harm to a principal and the likelihood of attack. 
Advance procedures focus on visiting the locations where the principal is expected to visit to 
coordinate comprehensive security. Operations involve protecting the principal in the field 
and this entails countersurveillance (i.e., watching if anyone is observing the principal), assist-
ing the principal with basic tasks to reduce exposure, defense, and rescue.
Principals should maintain a low profile and not broadcast their identity, affiliations, posi-
tion, address, telephone number, e-mail address, net worth, or any information useful to enemies. 
Avoidance of publicity about future travel plans or social activities is wise. Those at risk should 
exercise care when communicating with others on the telephone, via e-mail or postal service, or 
in restaurants, and should dispose of sensitive information carefully.
Avoidance of Predictable Patterns
The famous Italian politician Aldo Moro, murdered in 1978, is a classic case of a creature of 
habit. Moro was extremely predictable. He would leave his home in the morning to attend 
mass at a nearby church. Shortly after 9:00 A.M., he was en route to his office. The route 
was the same each morning, even though plans existed for alternatives. Although five armed 
men guarded Moro, he met an unfortunate fate. An attack characterized by military precision 
enabled terrorists to block Moro’s vehicle and a following police car. Then, on the narrow 
street, four gunmen hiding behind a hedge opened fire. Eighty rounds hit the police car. Three 
police officers, Moro’s driver, and a bodyguard were killed. Moro was dragged by his feet 
from the car. Almost two months later Moro was found dead in a car in Rome.
Recognition of Tricks
A terrorist group or a criminal may attempt to gain entry to an executive’s residence or 
office under the pretext of repairing something or checking a utility meter. Repair people and 
government employees can be checked, before being admitted, by telephoning the employer. 
School authorities should be cautioned not to release an executive’s child unless they tele-
phone the executive’s family to verify the caller.
Hiring bodyguards is a growth industry for the private sector. Bodyguards should be 
carefully screened and trained. Other employees (e.g., servants or gardeners) surrounding an 
executive likewise should be screened to hinder employment of those with evil motives.
An executive personnel file should be stored in a secure location at the company’s head-
quarters. If a kidnapping occurs, this data can be valuable to prevent deception by offenders, 
to aid the investigation, and to resolve the situation. Appropriate for the file are vitae for the 
executive, family members, and associated employees; full names, past and present addresses 
and telephone numbers; photographs, fingerprints, voice tapes, and handwriting samples; and 
copies of passports and other important documents.
Protection at Home
A survey of the executive’s home will uncover physical security weaknesses. Deficiencies 
are corrected through investing in access controls, proper illumination, intrusion alarms, 
CCTV, protective dogs, and uniformed officers. Burglary-resistant locks, doors, and win-
dows hinder offenders. Consideration should be given to the response time of reinforce-
ments. For a high-risk family, a safe room is an asset. This is a fortified room in the house 
that contains a strong door and other difficult-to-penetrate features. A first-aid kit, rations, 
and a bathroom are useful amenities. A telephone, two-way radio, and panic button con-
nected to an external monitoring station will assist those seeking help. If weapons are 
stored in the room, proper training for their use is necessary.
Personnel Protection          497

498          TOPICS OF CONCERN
As with security in general, it is best when methods and expenditures for personnel pro-
tection remain secret to avoid providing information to an adversary. However, this may not 
always be possible. The public may have access to protection information. For example, the 
Associated Press (2006) reported that The Charles Schwab Corporation’s proxy filing with 
the Securities and Exchange Commission revealed that $2.68 million was spent over three 
years to protect the CEO, Charles R. Schwab, as part of business operations. The news report 
stated that the firm paid for both a security system at the CEO’s residence (based on recom-
mendations of a consultant) and security prior to the installation of the system. The proxy 
also stated that, in 2005, Schwab earned $4.25 million in salary, bonus, and perquisites.
The following list provides some protection pointers for home and family:
1. Do not put a name on the mailbox or door of the home.
2. Have an unlisted telephone number.
3. Exercise caution when receiving unexpected packages.
4. Do not provide information to strangers.
5. Beware of unknown visitors or individuals loitering outside. Call for assistance.
6. Check windows for possible observation from outside by persons with or without 
binoculars. Install thick curtains.
7. Make sure windows and doors are secure at all times.
8. Educate children and adults about protection.
9. Instruct children not to let strangers in the home or to supply information to 
outsiders.
10.  When children leave the house, be sure to ascertain where they are going and who will 
be with them.
11. Keep a record of the names and addresses of children’s playmates.
12.  Tell children to refuse rides from strangers even if the stranger says that the parents 
know about the pickup.
13. Provide an escort for children if necessary.
14. Teach children how to seek assistance.
Protection at the Office
As with the residential setting, physical security is important at the executive’s office. A survey 
may reveal that modifications will strengthen executive protection. The following list offers 
additional ideas:
1. Office windows should be curtained and contain bullet-resistant materials.
2. Equip the desk in the office with a hidden alarm button.
3. Establish policies and procedures for incoming mail and packages.
4. Beware of access by trickery.
5. Monitor access to the office by several controls.
6. Escort visitors.
7. Access during nonworking hours, by cleaning crew or maintenance people, should be 
monitored by uniformed officers and CCTV.
8. Educate and train employees.
Attacks While Traveling
History has shown that terrorists have a tendency to strike when executives (and politicians) 
are traveling. Loss prevention practitioners should consider the following countermeasures:
1. Avoid using conspicuous limousines.
2. Maintain regular maintenance for vehicles.
3. Keep the gas tank at least half full at all times.
4. Use an armored vehicle and bullet-resistant clothing and vests.
5. Install an alarm that foils intrusion or tampering.
6. A telephone or two-way radio will facilitate communications, especially in an emergency.

7. A remote-controlled electronic car starter will enable starting the car from a distance. 
This will help to activate a bomb, if one has been planted, before the driver and the 
executive come into range.
8. Consider installing a bomb-scan device inside the auto.
9. Headlight delay devices automatically turn headlights off one minute after ignition is 
stopped.
10.  High-intensity lights, mounted on the rear of the vehicle, will inhibit pursuers.
11.  GPS can be used to track the executive’s vehicle and the executive in case of 
kidnapping.
12. Protect auto parking areas with physical security.
13. Avoid using assigned parking spaces.
14. Keep doors, gas cap, hood, and trunk locked.
15. Practice vehicle key control.
16. Avoid a personalized license plate or company logo on vehicle.
17. Inspect outside and inside of vehicle before entering.
18.  The chauffeur should have a duress signal if needed when picking up an executive.
19.  Do not stop for hitchhikers, stranded motorists, accidents, or perhaps “police.” It 
could be a trap. Use a telephone to summon aid, but keep on moving.
20.  Screen and train the chauffeur and bodyguards. Include the executive and the family 
in training.
21. Evasive driver training is vital.
22. Have weapons in auto ready for use.
23. Maintain the secrecy of travel itineraries.
24. Be unpredictable.
25. Know routes thoroughly as well as alternative routes.
26. Use safety belts.
27.  If being followed, use the telephone for assistance, continuously sound the horn or 
alarm, and do not stop.
28.  For air travel, use commercial airlines instead of company aircraft. Unless the 
company institutes numerous security safeguards, the commercial means of air 
transportation may be safer. Use carry-on luggage to avoid lost luggage or having to 
wait for workers to locate luggage.
29.  Request the second or third floor at a hotel to improve chances of escape in case of 
fire or other emergency.
Several executive protection strategies are applicable to salespeople, employees attend-
ing conferences, and others. A company should take steps to protect all employees to prevent 
injuries and death. Otherwise, a lawsuit or workers’ compensation claim may result. Many 
risk managers are unaware that their workers’ compensation policies do not cover employees 
in foreign countries (Atkinson, 2001: 19–22).
Avon Products, Inc., provides a superb illustration of an organization seeking to meet 
the protection needs of its employees. Initiating a global “Women and Security” program, 
Avon conducted extensive research on vulnerabilities of its female employees as they traveled 
the globe and faced greater risks than their male coworkers face. The Avon security team 
found that South Africa, the Philippines, Russia, and Latin America were high-risk areas for 
women. South Africa, for example, has one of the highest levels of sexual assault in the world. 
Latin America is noted for abductions at ATMs. The Avon program focused on brochures, 
self-defense training, and one-on-one evaluations. Brochures are country-specific and include 
tips such as not wearing expensive-looking jewelry because street robbers do not know a 
genuine from fake and avoiding public restrooms, if possible, because rapists sometimes dis-
guise themselves as females. Employees expressed a need for self-defense training, which was 
provided. It aims to help women avoid and deter attack. The one-on-one evaluations consist 
of a security staff member who observes the daily routine of the employee working overseas to 
offer suggestions for improved protection. The “Women and Security” program has resulted 
in increased safety, less anxiety, and higher productivity (Shyman, 2000: 58–62).
Personnel Protection          499

500          TOPICS OF CONCERN
Kidnap Insurance
As businesses increasingly become globalized, the risk of kidnapping also increases. 
Corporations obtain kidnap-ransom insurance policies for protection against the huge ran-
soms that they might be forced to pay in exchange for a kidnapped executive. Each year mil-
lions of dollars in premiums are paid to insurance companies for these policies. Of course, the 
insurance company requires certain protection standards to reduce the premium. Insurance 
companies are reluctant to admit writing these policies because terrorists may be attracted to 
the insured company executive. Moreover, these policies often contain a cancellation clause if 
the insured company discloses the existence of the policy. Insurance should be considered one 
of the last strategies in a long line of defenses. Insurance acts as the “backup” loss prevention 
strategy.
According to the Insurance Information Institute (2007), incidents of kidnapping for 
ransom money are rising. Kidnap and ransom insurance is sold as part of a comprehensive 
business insurance package, as a stand-alone policy for individuals, and from a few insur-
ers as part of their homeowners insurance policy. Corporate policies generally cover most 
kidnapping-related expenses including hostage negotiation fees, lost wages, and the ransom 
amount. Policies for individuals pay for the expenses of dealing with a kidnapping but do not 
reimburse for ransom payments.
Statistics on global kidnapping are difficult to ascertain, especially since ransom payments 
are kept confidential and disclosure of a payment can increase the risk of subsequent kidnap-
pings. In addition, many cases are not reported. One insurer’s brochure, containing statistics 
from Control Risks Group, a consulting firm, offers the following: the problem is increasing; 
more that 14 countries recorded cases of $25 million or more in recent years; and kidnappers 
usually settle for between 10% and 20% of the demand. The outcomes were listed as follows: 
2% escaped; 7% were rescued; 9% resulted in death; 15% were released without payment; and 
67% involved payment. Killings usually occur during abduction rather then during negotiation 
(Petersen International Underwriters, 2003).
Company Pays Terrorists to “Protect” Workers
In early 2007, Apuzzo (2007) reported that Chiquita Brands International revealed 
that it had agreed to a $25 million fine after admitting it paid terrorists to protect its 
workers in a dangerous region of Colombia. The fine was part of a plea-bargaining 
agreement with the U.S. Department of Justice that investigated the company’s pay-
ments to right-wing paramilitaries and leftist rebels the U.S. government classifies as 
terrorist groups. Federal prosecutors said company executives paid about $1.7 million 
between 1997 and 2004 to the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, the National 
Liberation Army, and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. Prosecutors said 
that Chiquita disguised the payments in company accounting records. Colombia main-
tains one of the highest kidnapping rates among countries of the world. Companies are 
known to pay protection money; however, the amount paid is impossible to ascertain. 
Although companies supposedly have extensive security to protect employees, terrorist 
groups have fought intensely in Colombia’s banana growing region.
What is your opinion of Chiquita Brands International paying money to terrorists to 
protect its workers in Colombia?

Personnel Protection          501
If Abduction Occurs
After abduction takes place, the value of planning and training becomes increasingly evident. 
Whoever receives the kidnapper’s telephone call should express a willingness to cooperate. 
The recipient should ask to speak to the victim; this could provide an opportunity to detect 
a ruse. Asking questions about the hostage (e.g., birth date, mother’s maiden name) to either 
the hostage or the kidnapper improves the chances of discovering a trick. Prearranged codes 
are effective. The recipient should notify appropriate authorities after the call. If a package or 
letter is received, the recipient should exercise caution, limit those who touch it, and contact 
authorities.
People who attempt to handle the kidnapping themselves can intensify the already dan-
gerous situation. Loss prevention personnel and public law enforcement authorities (i.e., the 
FBI) are skilled in investigation, intelligence gathering, and negotiating. These professionals 
consider the safety of the hostage first and the capture of the offenders second, although the 
reverse is frequently true in many foreign countries.
After abduction, the company’s policies for action should be instituted. These policies 
ordinarily answer such questions as who is to be notified, who is to inform the victim’s family, 
what are the criteria for payment of the ransom, who will assemble the cash, and who will 
deliver it and how. Policies would further specify not disturbing the kidnapping site, whether 
or not to tap and record future calls, how to ensure absolute secrecy to outsiders, and use of 
a code word with the kidnappers to impede any person or group who might enter the picture 
for profit.
The crisis management team should be authorized to coordinate the company’s response 
to the kidnapping. Because a terrorist act can take place at any time, the team members will 
have to be on call at all times.
Guidelines for the behavior of the hostage are as follows:
1. Do not struggle or become argumentative.
2. Try to remain calm.
3. Occupy your mind with all the incidents taking place.
4. Note direction of travel, length of time, speed, landmarks, noises, and odors.
5. Memorize the characteristics of the abductors (e.g., physical appearance, speech, or 
names).
6. Leave fingerprints, especially on glass.
7. Remember that an effort is being made to rescue you.
8. Do not escape unless the chances of success are in your favor.
Maximize Technology
Here we cover a sample of technologies that assist in the protection of people 
(Simovich, 2004: 73–80; Besse and Whitehead, 2000: 66–72). The Web offers input 
for threat assessments, planning personnel protection, and in helping to convince senior 
management that protection is necessary. It contains a wealth of government informa-
tion that is free. Private sources are also available for a fee. Companies that provide 
information on political violence, terrorism, and so forth, often make the information 
available through telecommunication devices such as GPS systems and satellite phones; 
however, some countries prohibit foreigners from entering with such equipment. The 
Web offers opportunities to check people, businesses, trip routes, and many other sub-
jects of inquiry. The Web also contains information of a negative nature from terrorists, 
activists, and hate groups. “Sucks.com” sites, such as walmartsucks.com and aolsucks.
com, are used to vent at companies. A variety of intelligence can be gathered from such 
sites. (See Chapter 10 for government and private sector resources and Web sites.)
For advance planning, digital cameras can document travel routes, buildings, air-
ports, etc., and images can be transmitted to headquarters for analysis. Portable, wireless

502          TOPICS OF CONCERN
Substance Abuse in the Workplace
Substance abuse refers to human abuse of any substance that can cause harm to oneself, oth-
ers, and organizations. This problem is pervasive. Millions of people abuse substances. An 
employee substance abuser can cause harm in several ways. Examples are abusing legal and 
illegal drugs or other substances (Figure 18-2) and causing production problems or an acci-
dent; selling drugs to others in the workplace; and stealing products or information assets to 
support a drug habit. In addition, drug and alcohol abuse is linked to tardiness, absenteeism, 
turnover, and violence.
Research has shown that 12% of the workforce reported being heavy drinkers and 
that 47% of industrial injuries and 40% of deaths in the workplace was linked to alcohol. 
About 14 million Americans use illegal drugs. As workers, they are 3.6 times more likely 
to be involved in a workplace accident and five times more likely to file a claim for work-
ers’ compensation than nonusers (Elliott and Shelley, 2005). It is estimated that substance 
abuse by employees costs businesses in the United States more than $250 billion annually in 
increased medical costs, lost productivity, and workplace accidents (DeCenzo and Robbins, 
2005: 94).
No occupation is immune to substance abuse. Those afflicted are from the ranks of 
blue-collar workers, white-collar workers, supervisors, managers, and professionals.
Countermeasures
Unenlightened managers ordinarily ignore substance abuse in the workplace. As with so many 
areas of loss prevention, when an unfortunate event occurs (e.g., drug-related crime, produc-
tion decline, or accident due to substance abuse), these managers panic and react emotionally. 
Experienced people may be fired unnecessarily, arrests threatened, and litigation becomes a 
possibility. In contrast, action should begin before the first sign of abuse.
Here is a list of action for an anti-substance abuse program for the workplace:
1. Form a committee of specialists to pool ideas and resources.
2. Seek legal assistance from an employment law specialist.
Who has the advantage when a principal is targeted for attack, the principal and the 
protection team or the adversary? Explain your answer.
alarm and CCTV systems offer protection for hotel rooms, vehicles, airplanes, and 
other locations. Pinhole lens cameras, built into almost anything, serve as a witness to 
an attack and aid in identifying and prosecuting offenders. Thermal imagers, which 
detect heat rather than light, can be used in total darkness to detect intruders or for 
search and rescue. Another portable system is the automatic external defibrillator 
(AED) that delivers electrical shocks to restore normal heart rate for those in cardiac 
arrest. The GPS system found in vehicles uses a network of satellites that transmit data 
to ground receivers to navigate and map routes. In addition, it can track the execu-
tive’s vehicle and monitor speed, direction, and alarms transmitted from the vehicle. 
Cellular technology can be added to permit audio monitoring and remote start or kill 
of the engine. Remote systems are vulnerable to hacking, so defenses should include 
 encryption. Although air bags in vehicles offer safety, if protection specialists ram their 
way out of an attack, or if an attacker backs into the protected vehicle, the activation 
of an air bag can hinder escape. One option for careful consideration is to disconnect 
the air bag on the driver’s side.

Substance Abuse in the Workplace          503
FIGURE 18-2 Abuse of legal and illegal drugs and other substances is a problem in the workplace.
3. Large corporations can afford to hire a substance abuse specialist. Outsourcing is 
another option. Also, contact the local government-supported alcohol and substance 
abuse agency.
4. Prepare policies that include input from a variety of employees. Policies should focus 
on the company’s position on abuse of substances, including alcohol; job performance 
and safety as it relates to substance abuse; drug deterrence such as urinalysis; the 
consequences of testing positive; the responsibility of employees to seek treatment for 
abuse problems; available assistance; and the importance of confidentiality.
5. Education and prevention programs can assist employees in understanding substance 
abuse, policies, and making informed decisions on life choices, health, and happiness. 
Use signs in the workplace and at entrances, and periodically distribute relevant 
educational materials.
6. Ensure that supervisors are properly trained to recognize and report substance abuse.
7. Consider an undercover investigation to ascertain drug usage in the workplace.
Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs)
Employee assistance can be traced to the origin of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), founded in 
1935. AA views alcoholism as a disease requiring long-term treatment. Employee assistance 
programs (EAPs) were first introduced in the 1940s, in U.S. corporations. Thousands of these 
programs exist today in the public and private sectors, where they incorporate a broad-based 
approach to such problems as substance abuse, depression, and marital and financial prob-
lems. These programs are characterized by voluntary participation by employees, referrals for 
serious cases, and confidentiality. The goal of EAPs is to help the employee so he or she can 
be retained, saving hiring and training costs. An organization may establish its own EAP or 
outsource the program. Initial EAP programs were characterized by “constructive confron-
tation” (i.e., correct the problem or leave). Today, the philosophy is that a company has no 
right to interfere in private matters, but it does have a right to impose rules of behavior and 
performance at work (Elliott and Shelley, 2005; Ivancevich, 2001: 464).
Research is needed on the effectiveness of EAPs, what problems it ameliorates, what 
problems it shows limited, if any, success, and how it can be enhanced. For instance, research 
by Elliott and Shelley (2005) found that there were no differences in the accident rates of 
employees prior to and following EAP interventions.

504          TOPICS OF CONCERN
Legal Guidelines
The federal Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 is an attempt to create a drug-free workplace. The 
law requires federal contractors and grantees to prepare and communicate policies banning 
illegal substances in the workplace and to create drug awareness programs and sanctions or 
rehabilitation for employees abusing substances. Federal contracts and grants are subject to 
suspension for noncompliance or excessive workplace drug convictions. Another form of 
regulation includes industries regulated by the U.S. Department of Transportation, such as 
airline, motor carrier, and rail, which are required to institute substance abuse programs, 
including drug testing. Additional mandates that affect substance abuse programs in the 
workplace include Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Americans with Disabilities 
Act of 1990, U.S. Department of Defense regulations, state drug testing laws, and state work-
ers’ compensation laws (U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, 2003).
Drug Testing
Risk managers have seen a dramatic decrease in health insurance and workers’ compensation 
claims following drug testing. In addition, insurance companies are encouraging companies to 
implement drug testing programs to reduce premiums. Furthermore, those companies that do not 
test become a magnet for those who are abusers (Myshko, 2001: 44–46).
Here is a list of items to assist in planning a drug-testing program (Gips, 2006: 50–58; 
Smith, 2004):
• Drug testing must be well planned. Questions include the following: What type of 
test? Who will do the testing? Cost? Who will be tested? What circumstances will 
necessitate a test? What controls will prevent cheating and ensure accuracy? Do the 
laboratory and its personnel comply with state or federal licensing and certification 
requirements? Are all legal issues considered?
• Drug testing focuses on urine, hair, and blood. Of the approximately 55 million drug 
tests performed in the United States annually, 90% are urine tests. Hair analysis is 
more expensive. Blood testing is used rarely, such as when an employee is unconscious 
from an accident and in an emergency room; for a person on dialysis; under a court 
order; or for a deceased person.
• Following legal research, especially of state law on drug testing and privacy, employers 
should consider an offer of employment to applicants contingent upon passing a drug 
test. Include this requirement in employment ads.
• Ensure drug testing is fair and applied equally.
• Randomly drug test, test when an employee shows behavioral or physical indications 
of substance abuse, and test following an accident.
• Because of an industry of products on the Web to adulterate or substitute for urine 
specimens, some companies are using multiple drug tests.
• Drug testing of hair is less likely to be tampered with when compared to urinalysis. 
Hair testing shows evidence of drugs much farther back in time than urinalysis.
• Specimen validity testing is gaining momentum from the federal government to ensure 
specimens are not adulterated or substituted.
• Saliva testing and pupillometry (i.e., measurement of pupils’ reaction to light) are in 
the early stages of development.
• If a company shows that the percentage of drug tests that turn up positive is 
decreasing, caution is advised because employees may be getting better at subverting 
drug tests.
Trace detection should be used with caution. It consists of gathering minute particles of 
drugs in the workplace (e.g., at workstations or rest rooms) by using cloth swabs and then 
analyzing the swabs with a desktop instrument to detect a variety of drugs. This technique 
can possibly gauge the types of drugs in the workplace and serve as an aid to drug education 
and prevention. It presents difficulties if used for investigative and prosecutorial purposes.

Substance Abuse in the Workplace          505
What do you think are the most successful countermeasures against substance abuse in 
society and in the workplace?
Alcoholism
An alcoholic is defined as someone who cannot function on a daily basis without consuming 
an alcoholic beverage. Alcohol is the most abused drug in America. In the United States, there 
are about 15 million adults who have alcohol-related problems (Elliott and Shelley, 2005). 
These figures do not include the millions who are on the fringe of alcoholism. It is often a 
hidden disease, whereby the alcoholic hides the problem from family, friends, physicians, and 
himself or herself. Some major indicators are heartburn, nausea, insomnia, tremor, high blood 
pressure, morning cough, and liver enlargement. The alcoholic often blames factors other than 
alcohol for these conditions.
Today, many businesses are no longer hiding the problem and rely on an EAP. In 
addition, Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), an organization for alcoholics and recovered alco-
holics, run by people who have had a drinking problem, has had more success than most 
organizations.
An employee with a drinking problem affecting the workplace is advised of “helping agen-
cies,” in addition to internal and external policies and procedures and what is expected of him 
or her by the employer regarding steps for recovery. Health insurance benefits and company 
disability income usually are applicable. Unless the employee takes heed in seeking assistance, 
dismissal may occur because of poor job performance. The threat of job loss jolts many alco-
holics into recognizing their serious situation and accepting treatment.
Types of Substances and Abuse
The explanation of four terms can assist the reader in understanding the human impact of 
various substance abuse categories.
• Psychological dependence: Users depend so much on the feeling of well-being from 
a substance that they feel compelled toward continued use. People can become 
psychologically dependent on a host of substances. Restlessness and irritability may 
result from deprivation of the desired substance.
• Addiction: Certain substances lead to physiological (or physical) addiction. This 
happens when the body has become so accustomed to a substance that the drugged 
state becomes “normal” to the body. Extreme physical discomfort results if the 
substance is not in the body.
• Tolerance: After repeated use of certain drugs, the body becomes so accustomed to the 
drug that increasing dosages are needed to reach the feeling of well-being afforded by 
earlier doses.
• Withdrawal: A person goes through physical and psychological upset as the body 
becomes used to the absence of the drug. Addicts ordinarily consume drugs to avoid 
pain, and possible death, from withdrawal. Symptoms vary from person to person 
and from substance to substance. An addict’s life often revolves around obtaining the 
substance, by whatever means, to avoid withdrawal.
Five types of substances—narcotics, depressants, stimulants, hallucinogens, and inhal-
ants—are discussed here. According to Gips (2006), marijuana was found most frequently 
(more than half) in positive drug tests from employees. Cocaine (15%) and amphetamines 
(11%) followed it. Amphetamines include methamphetamine.

506          TOPICS OF CONCERN
Narcotics
Narcotics include opium, its derivatives, and their synthetic equivalents. Drugs in this cat-
egory are heroin, morphine, codeine, and methadone, among others. Such drugs are used to 
relieve pain and induce sleep. The method of consumption is injection, oral, or inhalation. 
Both psychological and physiological dependence is typical, as well as a tolerance potential.
Depressants
Depressants fall into several categories: barbiturates include phenobarbital and secobarbital 
(Seconal); tranquilizers include Valium and Librium; nonbarbiturate hypnotics include meth-
aqualone (Quaalude); and miscellaneous depressant drugs include alcohol and chloroform. 
A depressant affects the central nervous system. Barbiturates ordinarily are prescribed for 
insomnia, whereas tranquilizers calm anxiety. Other depressants are used prior to surgery. 
Abuse of these drugs can lead to psychological and physiological dependence. Withdrawal is 
painful and can be fatal. Depressants have a tolerance potential. These drugs are taken orally or 
injected. They are obtained by a doctor’s prescription or through illegal channels. Symptoms 
of depressant use are similar to that of alcohol use: drowsiness, slurred speech, disorientation, 
constricted pupils, irritability, and slow reflexes.
Stimulants
There are several types of stimulants; caffeine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, and cocaine 
are the most common. These drugs affect the central nervous system and generally cause 
increased alertness soon after consumption, but restlessness and irritability are characteristic 
of long-term usage. There is a tolerance potential plus a susceptibility to dependence.
Caffeine is found in coffee, tea, cola drinks, and No-Doz. Increased alertness may be 
followed by insomnia, gastric irritation, and restlessness.
Amphetamines are widely used stimulants that are swallowed or injected. They are pre-
scribed for narcolepsy (chronic sleepiness). Illegal amphetamines typically originate from legiti-
mate sources. Abuse is characterized by anxiety, talkativeness, irritability, and dilated pupils.
Methamphetamine is chemically related to amphetamine but much more potent, lon-
ger lasting, and more harmful to the central nervous system. It can be made in small, illegal 
laboratories, where its production is dangerous to the people in the labs, neighbors, and 
the environment. It is referred to by many names, such as “speed,” “meth,” and “chalk.” 
Methamphetamine hydrochloride, clear chunky crystals resembling ice, which can be inhaled 
by smoking, is referred to as “ice,” “crystal,” “glass,” and “tina.” The intoxicating effects of 
the drug, whether it is injected or taken in other ways, can alter judgment and inhibition and 
lead people to engage in unsafe behaviors. Most major metropolitan areas in the United States 
reported increases in the amounts and purity of methamphetamine smuggled into the United 
States from Mexico (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2006).
Legally, cocaine is a narcotic, but physiologically it is a stimulant. It is expensive and 
the “high” is short-lived. The history of cocaine is interesting. It used to be an ingredient 
in Coca-Cola. Sigmund Freud experimented with it. The user inhales cocaine into the nose 
or injects it. Symptoms of abuse are similar to those of amphetamines plus damage to nasal 
membranes and the potential for hallucinations and hostile behavior.
Crack is a stimulant drug processed from cocaine hydrochloride by using baking soda 
and water and then heat to remove the hydrochloride. The pebble-sized crystal remaining, 
called crack, is smoked in a variety of devices. Crack is popular because it is less expensive 
than cocaine and when smoked it is more rapidly absorbed than snorted cocaine.
Hallucinogens
Hallucinogens can produce a trance, fright, and irrational behavior. Examples are LSD, PCP, 
mescaline, and psilocybin.
Marijuana is categorized by itself. It is sometimes categorized as a hallucinogen, but its 
actions are different from that of LSD. Both marijuana and its derivative, hashish, are widely 
used. Because of widespread cultivation of hemp to produce rope prior to the Civil War, 

marijuana grows wild in almost every state. Because of so many users today, marijuana use is 
controversial. Many states have decriminalized (i.e., reduced the penalty for) the offense. The 
effects of usage depend on the individual and the potency. It may distort perceptions of time 
and space and reduce concentration, learning, and memory. There is no physiological depen-
dence. Psychological dependence is possible. Research on tolerance is inconclusive. Millions 
of people smoke marijuana occasionally to feel relaxed and carefree.
LSD was popularized in the 1960s by the youth “counterculture.” Use was touted as a 
consciousness-expanding experience. The effects vary greatly. There is no physiological depen-
dence. Bizarre hallucinations, which can be either beautiful or terrifying, result from usage.
Inhalants
Inhaling volatile chemicals can produce intoxication. This can occur by one’s own volition or by 
accident due to poor ventilation. All employees should understand both causative factors.
Two types of volatile chemicals are volatile solvents and anesthetics. Volatile solvents 
include a variety of glues or liquid cements, cleaning fluid, paint thinner, and paint remover. 
Anesthetics are found in medical facilities for surgical purposes. Nitrous oxide (laughing gas) 
and ether are among the anesthetics. 
Those who seek an altered state or “high” gather the substance or gas in a plastic bag 
and place it over the mouth and nose before breathing. Direct breathing from the container 
holding the substance is another method. Physiological dependence is nil, but a tolerance 
and psychological dependence may result. The effects are numerous and varied: intoxication, 
chemical odor on the person, drowsiness, stupor, and hallucinations.
Information Security
Information security protects an organization’s information assets through a broad based, well-
planned, and creative program of strategies that consider the widest possible risks from humans, 
technology, accidents, disasters, or any combination of factors. A balanced information security 
program avoids overemphasizing perimeter security (Figure 18-3) since the greatest threat is 
from within. Information security is an extremely challenging undertaking because an organiza-
tion can expend an enormous amount of resources on the protection of information assets and, 
as examples, one leak by one employee (e.g., on a telephone, in an e-mail, through another type 
Information Security          507
FIGURE 18-3 A balanced information security program avoids overemphasizing perimeter security since the 
greatest threat is from within.

508          TOPICS OF CONCERN
of electronic device, or at a conference) or one intrusion by an outsider (e.g., electronic surveil-
lance or cyber threat), can result in economic loss.
Curtis and McBride (2005: 107–108) write that information security applies numerous 
strategies to ensure the availability, accuracy, authenticity, and confidentiality of information. 
Availability ensures that users can access information and not be blocked by, for example, a 
denial-of-service attack. Accuracy addresses issues of errors (e.g., by an employee) and the 
integrity of information (e.g., a hacker remotely accesses an IT system to manipulate data). 
Authenticity means that information and its sender are genuine. Phishing, for instance, can 
lead to identity theft and loss of sensitive information. Confidentially ensures that only autho-
rized individuals access information.
Information assets contain a combination of economic value, property right, specialized 
knowledge, and competitive advantage that may be written, verbal, electronic, or in another 
form. The information often is extremely valuable (e.g., a secret formula) and may represent 
the lifeblood of an organization. Depending on the source, information assets may be termed 
“sensitive information” or “proprietary information.” ASIS International (2007: 7–8) prepared 
an Information Asset Protection Guideline that offered the following terms and definitions:
Proprietary Information: As defined by the Federal Acquisition Regulation (48 
CFR 27.402 Policy): A property right or other valid economic interest in data 
resulting from private investment. Protection of such data from unauthorized use 
and disclosure is necessary in order to prevent the compromise of such property 
right or economic interest.
Sensitive Information: Information or knowledge that might result in loss of 
an advantage or level of security if disclosed to others.
For simplicity, the term “information assets” is emphasized here. Subsequent pages 
explain corporate intelligence gathering, espionage, and countermeasures. Espionage is the act of 
spying which is a criminal offense. Business espionage seeks a competitor’s information assets 
through illegal means. Government espionage seeks not only a competitor’s information assets, 
but also military and political secrets. Previous sections of this book elaborate on security, fire 
protection, and emergency management for assets, besides people. In addition, we must not 
forget that information pertaining to the privacy of individuals requires protection. This would 
include credit, medical, educational, and other records protected under various laws as covered 
earlier.
Common types of information assets that might be sought by a spy are the following: 
product design, financial reports, engineering data, tax records, secret formulas, marketing 
strategies, cost reduction methods, research data, client or customer information, trade 
secrets, human resources records, patent information, computer programs, oil or mineral 
exploration maps, mergers, and contract information.
A trade secret, supposedly known only to certain individuals, is a secret process used 
to produce a salable product. It may involve a series of steps or special ingredients. A famous 
trade secret is the formula for Coca-Cola. The holder of a trade secret must take steps to 
maintain secrecy from competitors. If an employee were to reveal a trade secret to a competi-
tor, the courts could issue an injunction, prohibiting the competitor from using the secret. 
Money damages might be awarded.
ASIS International (2007: 8) defines trade secret as follows: “All forms and types of 
financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering information, including pat-
terns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas, designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, 
processed, procedures, programs, or codes, whether tangible or intangible, and whether or how 
stored, compiled, or memorialized physically, electronically, graphically, photographically, or in 
writing if (a) the owner thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret; 
and (b) the information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being 
generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, the public.”
A patent provides protection for an invention or design. If a competitor duplicates the 
device, patent laws are likely to be violated and litigation would follow. Competitors often 
engineer around patents.

ASIS International (2007:7) defines patent as follows: “Information that has the govern-
ment grant of a right, privilege, or authority to exclude others from making, using, marketing, 
selling, offering for sale, or importing an invention for a specified period (20 years from the date 
of filing) granted to the inventor if the device or process is novel, useful, and nonobvious.”
A trademark includes words, symbols, logos, designs, or slogans that identify products or 
services as coming from a common source. McDonald’s golden arches serve as an example.
A copyright provides protection for original works in any medium of expression by giv-
ing the creator or publisher exclusive rights to the work. This type of protection covers books, 
magazines, musical scores, movies, art, and computer software programs.
Corporate Intelligence Gathering: Putting It in Perspective
Corporate intelligence involves gathering information about competitors. It ranges from 
the illegal activity of business espionage to the acceptable, universally applied practice of 
utilizing salespeople to monitor public business practices of other companies. Corporate 
intelligence gathering, when done legally, makes good business sense, and this is why com-
panies such as General Electric, Digital Equipment, and Gillette have established formal 
intelligence programs. Because of unethical and illegal behavior by certain people and firms 
when gathering intelligence, the whole specialization has earned a bad reputation. However, 
many avenues for gathering intelligence are legal. Let us first list the reasons for corporate 
intelligence gathering (Laczniak and Murphy, 1993: 1–4):
• Executives should take advantage of information that is publicly available to 
fulfill their fiduciary duty to shareholders. Because the Cordis Corporation, a 
pacemaker manufacturer, for example, was unsure of why its new line did not show 
improved sales, it asked its salespeople to check the tactics of the competition. The 
salespeople found that physicians were being offered cars and boats to stay with the 
competition. When Cordis increased educational support for doctors, added more 
salespeople, and matched the giveaways, sales increased.
• Competitive intelligence is a basis for strategic planning. One intelligence seminar 
director found a competitor using a “dirty trick” by enrolling in his course under an 
assumed name.
• It is necessary, in order to be successful against global competitors. The Japanese have 
“deployed armies of engineers and marketing specialists” to other countries. Likewise, 
U.S.-based firms have set up offices abroad to gather information.
• It can be useful for the introduction of a new product. Coors did extensive chemical 
analysis on Gallo’s wine coolers and found that it could not compete on price.
The Society of Competitive Intelligence Professionals (2007) views its vocation as an 
honorable profession with a code of ethics. The group defines competitive intelligence as 
“the legal and ethical collection and analysis of information regarding the capabilities, vul-
nerabilities, and intentions of business competitors.” Furthermore, the group states
While some decision makers may attempt to sail blindly through the global mar-
ketplace, it is the duty of the trained CI professional to show them alternative 
courses that will avoid potential dangers, and to take advantage of the tactics and 
strategies that lead to bottom-line success.
CI is not spying. It is not necessary to use illegal or unethical methods in CI. 
In fact, doing so is a failure of CI, because almost everything decision makers need 
to know about the competitive environment can be discovered using legal, ethical 
means. The information that can’t be found with research can be deduced with 
good analysis, which is just one of the ways CI adds value to an organization.
The following lists provide guidelines for information gathering. Ethical sources  include
• Published material and public documents from government
• Purchasing access to business information databases (e.g., LexisNexis; Dun and Bradstreet).
Information Security          509

510          TOPICS OF CONCERN
• Disclosures made by competitors
• Market surveys and consultants’ reports
• Financial reports and brokers’ research reports
• Trade fairs, exhibits, and competitors’ brochures
• Analysis of a competitor’s products
• Legitimate employment interviews with people who worked for a competitor
A company wishing to detail prohibited activities in its policy should include the follow-
ing (Horowitz, 2005; Ehrlich, 2002: 11–14):
• Bribery and theft
• Electronic eavesdropping or wiretapping
• Trespassing
• Misrepresenting your identity or that of your company
• Inducing another to violate his duty of confidentiality to his current or former 
employer
• Accepting trade secret or proprietary information through a confidential relationship 
which you then violate
• Accepting trade secret or proprietary information from another knowing it was 
obtained through a violation of law
Economic Espionage Act of 1996
Because intellectual property assets are often more valuable to businesses than tangible 
assets, Congress passed the Economic Espionage Act of 1996. This act makes it a federal 
crime for any person to convert a trade secret to his or her own benefit or the benefit of 
others with the intent or knowledge that the conversion will injure the owner of the trade 
secret. The penalties for any person are up to 10 years of imprisonment and a fine up to 
$250,000. Corporations can be fined up to $5 million. If a foreign government benefits 
from such a crime, the penalties are even greater. The act defines trade secret broadly as 
information that the owner has taken “reasonable measures” to keep secret because of 
the economic value from it. Case law has further defined the act; the greater the protec-
tion and value of the information and the fewer people who know about the information, 
the more likely the courts will recognize its status as a protectable trade secret (Halligan, 
2001: 53–58).
The act raises two major concerns for management:
• Protecting trade secrets: This would include a comprehensive information 
security program.
• Hiring employees from competitors: Employers may violate the act if they hire 
employees from other firms who may bring with them trade secrets.
Prevention includes a thorough interview of applicants, ascertaining whether the 
applicant signed contracts or agreements with others for the protection of sensitive 
information, and use of a company form that signifies that the new employee under-
stands the act’s legal requirements.
The act also links the economic well-being of the nation to national security 
interests. In addition, it allows the FBI to investigate foreign intelligence services bent 
on acquiring sensitive information of U.S. companies.
At some point, a company may have to decide whether to report a violation of 
the act to law enforcement authorities. The disadvantages are lost time and money, 
unwanted publicity, and the fact that the defendant’s attorney may request secrets that 
could then be revealed in court. Although the act offers some protection for information 

Information Security          511
assets, this protection may depend on how a judge or attorneys in the case interpret the 
act. Discovery proceedings may result in information loss greater than the original loss. 
Also, the case may be lost in criminal and civil courts. Therefore, management must care-
fully weigh decisions on legal action. Another point to consider is that the act requires 
businesses to protect themselves from losses, which presents liability issues relevant to 
due diligence (Nolan, 1997: 54–57). Prevention is seen here, as with many other vulner-
abilities, as the key avenue for protection.
Horowitz (1998: 6) wrote of the confusion and uneasiness for competitive intelli-
gence professionals following the passage of the Economic Espionage Act of 1996. These 
specialists, and related contract firms and proprietary departments, were unsure of how 
they should conduct their business of gathering information. Horowitz wrote
Herein lies the confusion. While the EEA makes trade secret law a federal 
criminal matter—this for the first time in U.S. history—the activities it 
criminalizes were prohibited under state law and/or unacceptable under 
SCIP’s Code of Ethics. In other words, the rules are fundamentally the 
same, but the consequences of violating them are different. An activity that 
had always been a violation of state trade secret law can now result in not 
only state civil liability but federal criminal liability as well.
Espionage Techniques and the Vulnerabilities of Technology
The techniques used by adversaries to acquire information assets are so varied that defenders 
must not fall into the trap of emphasizing certain countermeasures while “leaving the back 
door open.” For example, a company may spend hundreds of thousands of dollars defending 
against electronic surveillance and wiretapping while not realizing that most of the losses of 
information assets are from a few employees who are really spies for competitors.
Three patterns of illegally acquiring information assets are internal, external, and a 
conspiracy that combines the two. An internal attack can be perpetrated by an employee who 
sells a secret formula to a competitor, for example. An external attack occurs when an out-
sider gains unauthorized access to the premises and steals product design data. The combined 
conspiracy is seen when an employee “just happens” to leave a secret mailing list on a desk 
and unlocks a rear door to aid an intruder. Furthermore, information assets are lost through 
legal means applied by competitors.
Spies use numerous techniques. A spy might assemble trash from a company and an 
executive’s home to “piece together” information. Spies may claim they are a student con-
ducting a survey, as a “pretext” to acquire information. Several spies may each ask certain 
questions only, and then later, assemble the “big picture.” Another method is tricking a key 
employee into being discovered in a compromising position (e.g., in bed with a prostitute), 
photographing the incident, and then blackmailing the employee to acquire information. 
A spy might attempt to gain employment at a target company. Sometimes, proposals for a 
merger, acquisition, or joint venture are used as a cover to obtain information.
Companies with inadequate information security programs can lose information assets 
in several easy ways, such as through company speeches, publications, trade meetings, dis-
gruntled employees, consultants, and contractors. Information loss can occur at any location 
from conversations or phone calls. A spy might frequent a tavern or conference populated by 
engineers to listen to conversations. Another way in which businesses can lose information 
assets is when an overly eager salesperson supplies excessive information in an attempt to 
impress a customer.
Reverse engineering is a legal avenue to obtain a look at a competitor’s product. The 
competitor simply purchases the product and dismantles it to understand the components. 
Patent applications, which are available to the public, can reveal valuable information. Some 
companies deliberately patent their failures to lead competitors astray.

512          TOPICS OF CONCERN
Various devices are available to the spy. Wiretapping, electronic listening devices, and 
pinhole lens cameras are examples. A handheld document scanner, the size of a large pen, 
can capture numerous pages of text and graphics. A competitor could plant RFID readers to 
report on the movement of products to collect business data.
In our age of technological marvels, numerous devices we use daily can compromise infor-
mation security. Ashley (2006: 84–85) describes such vulnerabilities and offers countermeasures. 
In order to attract customers, communications companies offer a variety of features beyond basic 
service. For instance, a ringtone is a sound file that is downloaded to a cell phone. If a virus has been 
loaded into the file, it infects the phone, so use only the ringtones that are with your phone. Bluetooth 
permits wireless communications over short distances (i.e., 30 feet or less), which facilitates the use of 
a cordless headset with a cell phone. Victimization may occur if the security feature of Bluetooth is 
turned off. An offender may be nearby, use a Bluetooth probe, transfer files into the victim’s phone, 
and receive information from the phone. Bluetooth usage with other devices (e.g., laptop or PDA) 
creates additional vulnerabilities. Cell phones can also be compromised through instant and text 
messages, so avoid such messages from unknown sources. PDA’s are subject to similar attacks.
Piazza (2005: 78–87) further explains the vulnerabilities of Bluetooth technology. This 
trade name is from a 10th century Danish king. It refers to a short-range wireless radio chip 
created in the 1990s that is in numerous devices. Bluetooth enables wireless communications 
in what is called a personal-area network (PAN). Attackers are developing technology that can 
access PANs from greater distances similar to traditional wireless networks. Several types of 
attacks can be applied to Bluetooth technology. One type can make an unauthorized connec-
tion to a cell phone and copy its contents, including the unique numerical identifier that an 
offender needs to clone a phone. In one scenario, Piazza describes how a tech-savvy individual 
was able to access the cell phone of a manager of a chain of coffee shops and retrieved door 
PIN codes, alarm codes, and safe combinations without the manager’s knowledge. Other vul-
nerabilities include taking control of a victim’s cell phone, making calls, sending and reading 
text messages, and performing other tasks. In another scenario, a tech-savvy individual focused 
on a group talking at a table in a bar with the cell phone of the victim sitting on the table. A 
connection was made to the targeted phone, it was signaled to dial the tech-savvy individual’s 
voicemail, and it recorded the conversation without the knowledge of the victims.
Piazza (2007: 48) reports on the threats from USB flash drives. (USB are the initials for 
Universal Serial Bus, a standard that supports data transfer.) These storage devices can hold 
an enormous amount of data that can leave the workplace. In addition, if a certain program 
infects a computer, the program will retrieve data from USB drives or other portable devices 
connected to the compromised computer. Another program takes the data from the USB 
drive and sends it out via an e-mail. Flash drives are capable of running software programs 
and one version allows an employee to circumvent security and visit prohibited Web sites via 
anonymous proxies.
Miller (2007: 22–30) asks us to think about all the ways we move and store data on 
mobile devices. She refers to USB ports that support a variety of portable storage devices, 
such as flash drives, portable hard drives, music and video players, and printers. Miller 
also refers to data storage on CDs and DVDs and the threat from unprotected WiFi and 
Bluetooth. WiFi means wireless fidelity. A WiFi enabled device (e.g., laptop, cell phone, or 
PDA) can access the internet when near an access point called a hotspot. WiFi allows net-
works to be deployed without cabling; however, WiFi networks can be vulnerable to moni-
toring and copying data, unless high-quality encryption is employed.
Although an adversary can travel to a targeted company to conduct surveillance, take 
photographs and video the location, the use of satellite images is increasing. These Internet 
services are free for basic services. More sophisticated services permit zoom, rotation, and 3D 
views of facilities and terrain. This vulnerability is challenging to counter. However, consid-
eration should be given to facility design, landscape architecture, and transportation modes 
that disguise operations.
Mallery (2006: 76) writes of Internet-based methods of removing information assets from 
organizations. An employee can import their client information into a variety of free e-mail 
programs. Another Internet-based tool is online data storage that permits users to upload data 

to a secure site. The data is accessible from anywhere, and when an employee leaves for another 
employer, or selects to share or sell the data, it is readily available. Countermeasures include a 
policy, firewall, and periodic checks of Internet activity.
Mallery (2006: 78) also writes of keystroke capturing hardware. This device is installed 
between a keyboard and a computer; no additional software or power is required for its 
operation. In addition, keyboards are available that contain an embedded keystroke chip. 
The potential loss of information assets through this technology is enormous. It is extremely 
difficult to detect. Although restricted access and CCTV can reduce this threat, installation 
time is not lengthy and a cleaning crew or service technician can be a risk, as with the instal-
lation of other unauthorized devices. At the same time, monitoring software can be installed 
remotely and discreetly e-mail data to a specified address.
A major point from these descriptions of vulnerabilities is that technology is a “bless-
ing and a burden.” Technology makes our lives easier; however, we face a never-ending “cat and 
mouse” cycle of new technology confronted by offenders seeking to exploit and profit from 
it as defenses follow.
Furthermore, a good spy does not get caught, and quite often, the victimized firm does 
not discover that it has been subjected to espionage. If the discovery is made, the company 
typically keeps it secret to avoid adverse publicity.
The Business Espionage Controls and Countermeasures Association (2007) states
The purpose of the association is to research and exchange information about busi-
ness espionage controls and countermeasures; to establish and encourage a code 
of ethics within the profession, and to promote our professional image within the 
business community through a Certified Confidentiality Officer (CCO) program.
We identified four primary areas of risk as one of our first BECCA research 
projects. We called them the “Four Faces of Business Espionage,” a term now widely 
used by controls and countermeasures experts. These risk factors are Pretext Attacks 
[interviews], Computer Abuse, Technical Surveillance, and Undercover Attacks.
Pretext interviews are disguised interviews or “surveys” that can take place in a variety 
of locations (e.g., over the telephone, at trade shows, in chat rooms, in bed). The people gath-
ering information may not know the real reason behind the questions, and the victims may 
not know the identity of the interviewer. Technical surveillance includes planting a listening 
device (e.g., a bug).
BECCA stopped charging annual membership dues as of September 11, 2001 as part of 
their contribution to homeland security. Membership is free to qualified applicants.
Countermeasures
The first step in keeping information assets secure is to identify and classify it according to 
its value. Top-level executives in a business should perform this subjective job. If a company 
has a DOD contract, then strict DOD criteria would apply. Each classification has rules for 
marking, handling, transmitting, storing, and access. The higher the classification the greater 
are the controls. Table 18-1 shows DOD and corporate classifications, explanations, and 
illustrations. ASIS International (2007: 37–39) offers the following classification system: 
unrestricted, internal use, restricted, and highly restricted.
Here is a list of strategies for an information security program:
1. Prevention is a key strategy to protect information assets, which can be stolen without 
anything being physically missing, and information assets often are not covered by 
insurance.
2. Establish formal policies and procedures for such activities as identifying and 
classifying information assets, handling, use, distribution, release of information on 
a “need-to-know” basis, storage, and disposal. Other examples are security over 
passwords and maintaining a “clean desk” policy so important items are not left in 
the open when they should be in a locked container.
Information Security          513

514          TOPICS OF CONCERN
3. Provide training and awareness programs for employees on all aspects of information 
security, including methods used by spies, reporting incidents, investigations, and 
auditing of the program.
4. Reinforce countermeasures through new employee orientation, the employee 
handbook, and performance evaluations.
5. Carefully screen employment applicants.
6. Use employee nondisclosure agreements and employee noncompete agreements.
7. Implement physical security and access controls for people and property entering, 
leaving, and circulating within a facility (Figure 18-4).
8. Secure information assets.
9. Review works written by employees prior to publication and their speeches, ensure 
protection during trade shows, and control media relations.
10. Control destruction of information assets.
11. Maintain state-of-the-art IT security.
12.  Be cautious when logging online in a wireless area. Ensure that your computer is not 
automatically connected to wireless access points that are unsecured.
13.  Mark laptops with company name and telephone number to increase the chances of 
recovery in case of theft.
14. Protect all forms of electronic communication—e-mail, network, fax, telephone, etc.
15.  Establish controls over devices that contain a hard drive (e.g., PDAs, iPods, and MP3 
players), electronic storage capacity, or embedded camera. Data are being stored in 
smaller spaces and so many ordinary items (e.g., pen, knife, watch) can contain a data 
storage device.
16.  Control the variety of office machines (e.g., the combination copy machine, fax, 
scanner, and printer) that contain hard drives.
17.  CDs and DVDs, rather than paper, are increasingly being used to store information. 
If a duplicator makes a copy of a master CD to its hard drive and then burns multiple 
copies, the information is available to people who can access the duplicator, unless the 
data is purged.
Table 18-1 Classification Systems
 
If Unauthorized Disclosure 
Illustrations
Government Classiﬁ cation*
Top Secret 
“Exceptionally grave damage”  
Vital national defense plans,
 
 to national security 
 new weapons, sensitive
 
 
 intelligence operations
Secret 
“Serious damage” to  
Significant military plans
 
 national security 
 or intelligence operations
Confidential 
“Identifiable damage”  
Strength of forces, 
 
 to national security 
 munitions performance
 
 
 characteristics
Corporation Classiﬁ cation
Special Controls 
Survival at stake 
New process or product; 
 
 
 secret formula or recipe
Company Confidential 
Serious damage 
Process, customer lists; 
 
 
 depends on value
 
 
 to business
Private Confidential 
Identifiable damage, or  
Personnel data, price quote
 
 could cause problems 
*Classified by the U.S. Department of Defense in National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual, 
reissued February 28, 2006 (http://www.fas.org/sgp/library/nispom.htm; retrieved July 28, 2007).

18.  Ensure that important data has a backup copy in case data are stolen, a disaster 
strikes, or a hard drive fails.
19. Use technical surveillance countermeasures (TSCM).
20. Use internal and independent security audits to strengthen protection.
Operations Security
Operations Security (OPSEC) is defined by Isaacs (2004: 104) as follows: “OPSEC is a formal 
process for looking at the protection of critical information from the viewpoint of an adver-
sary and then denying that adversary the information it needs.” It is a government-developed 
approach to information security that began during the Vietnam War when it was discovered 
that lives were being lost, not only from espionage, but also from unclassified information that 
was being analyzed by the enemy. OPSEC is a way of thinking, rather than a series of steps. 
The components of OPSEC are analyze the threat, identify critical information, examine vul-
nerabilities, assess risk, and apply countermeasures.
Destruction of Information Assets
Records, documents, computers, hard drives, and other items that contain information 
assets should not simply be thrown into trash bins or discarded when no longer needed, 
because spies and other adversaries may retrieve the information. Total destruction affords 
better information security. Before pollution restrictions against burning, many firms placed 
unwanted records in incinerators. Today, strip-cut shredders (producing long strips of paper 
1/4-inch wide) are used by many organizations. However, security is limited. This became 
painfully evident in 1979, when Iranian militants stormed the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and 
pieced together top-secret documents that had been shredded by a strip-cut shredder. For 
increased security, particle-cut shredders (smaller pieces of paper) are the alternative (Figure 
18-5). Cross-cut shredders offer even higher security. The highest level of security is offered 
by disintegrators. These devices produce confetti particles through the action of a rotor and 
stationary knives. Since the Iranian disaster, the U.S. government requires classified data to be 
destroyed with either a cross-cut shredder or a disintegrator.
Vendors that sell high-security shredders seek to meet government national security stan-
dards. One vendor sells a shredder that delivers a 1 mm × 4 mm particle. An 8 1/2² × 11² piece 
of paper can be reduced to 15,500 particles (Dahle North America, 2007).
Information Security          515
FIGURE 18-4 Sen Trac ID uses radio-frequency identification technology to provide hands-free access control and 
asset management to track people and products within a facility. Courtesy: Sensormatic.

516          TOPICS OF CONCERN
FIGURE 18-5 A determined adversary might take the time to put small pieces of paper together for information.
Many companies outsource shredding to service firms that send a mobile shredding truck to 
the client to shred a variety of items, besides paper. Examples are CDs, DVDs, hard drives, credit 
cards, and uniforms. Security practitioners should exercise due diligence with shredding service 
firms and investigate the chain of custody of the shredded product. The National Association of 
Information Destruction, Inc., promotes professionalism and ethics of its member companies.
Unshredding is a growing specialization. Although unshredding can be done manually, com-
puter technology speeds the process by scanning pieces on both sides and then the computer 
determines how the strips should be joined. In the Enron accounting case, many documents 
were fed through a shredder incorrectly, which made the pieces easier to put together. In ref-
erence to forensic identification, shredders contain device-specific characteristics that can be 
used to determine the specific device that shredded an item.
Shredding has increased in popularity because of privacy laws (e.g., FACTA and HIPPA), 
the problem of identity theft, and the U.S. Supreme Court case, California v. Greenwood, 
which permits police warrantless search and seizure of garbage left on the street for collection 
(Wikipedia, 2007).
Defenders against espionage must not fall into the trap of emphasizing certain counter-
measures while “leaving the back door open.”
Communications Security
Communications security involves defenses against interception. The National Security 
Agency (2000: 10) defines communications security (COMSEC) as follows:
Measures and controls taken to deny unauthorized persons information derived 
from telecommunications and to ensure the authenticity of such telecommuni-
cations. Communications security includes cryptosecurity [i.e., encryption or 
decryption], transmission security, emission security [i.e., intercept and analysis of 
emanations from equipment], and physical security of COMSEC material.

Communications Security          517
In providing a comprehensive approach to protecting information assets, subfields of 
communications security are listed here (Carroll, 1996: 177–277).
• Line security protects communications lines of IT systems, such as a central computer and 
remote terminals. Line security is effective over lines an organization controls; a wiretap 
can occur in many locations of a line. Cryptographic security defeats wiretapping.
• Transmission security involves communications procedures that afford minimal 
advantage to an adversary bent on intercepting data communications from IT systems, 
telephones, radio, and other systems.
• Emanation security prevents undesired signal data emanations (e.g., from computer 
equipment) transmitted without wires (e.g., electromagnetic or acoustic) that could 
be intercepted by an adversary. TEMPEST is the code word used by the National 
Security Agency for the science of eliminating undesired signal data emanations. 
“Shielding,” discussed soon, is one strategy to reduce data emanations.
• Technical security, also called technical surveillance countermeasures, provides 
defenses against the interception of data communications from microphones, 
transmitters, or wiretaps.
The above methods of attack can be used together, which is one reason why communi-
cations security is a highly complex field. What follows here primarily is technical security; 
however, we must not lose sight of the importance of a comprehensive approach to protecting 
information assets.
Electronic Surveillance and Wiretapping
Electronic surveillance utilizes electronic devices to covertly listen to conversations, whereas wire-
tapping pertains to the interception of telephone communications. The prevalence of these often-
illegal activities probably is greater than one would expect. (The legality of such acts is supported 
by court orders.) Because detection is so difficult, the exact extent of electronic surveillance and 
wiretapping and what this theft of information costs businesses is impossible to gauge.
Electronic eavesdropping technology is highly developed to the point where counter-
measures (debugging) have not kept up with the art of bugging. Consequently, only the most 
expertly trained and experienced specialist can counter this threat.
Surveillance equipment is easy to obtain. Transmitters are contained in toys and other 
items found in many homes. Retailers sell FM transmitters or microphones that transmit 
sound, without wires, to an ordinary FM radio after tuning to the correct frequency. These 
FM transmitters are advertised to be used by public speakers who favor wireless microphones 
so they can walk around as they talk without being hindered by wires; the voice is transmitted 
and then broadcast over large speakers. They are also advertised to listen in on a baby from 
another room. An electronically inclined person can simply enter a local electronics store or 
shop on-line and buy all the materials necessary to make a sophisticated bug. Pre-built models 
are available by mail, or certain retailers will sell them if the buyer signs a statement that they 
will not be used for audio surveillance.
Miniaturization has greatly aided spying. With the advance of the microchip, transmit-
ters are apt to be so small that these devices can be enmeshed in thick paper, as in a calendar, 
under a stamp, or within a nail in a wall. Bugs may be planted as a building is under construc-
tion, or a person may receive one hidden in a present or other item. Transmitters are capable 
of being operated by solar power (i.e., daylight) or local radio broadcast.
Bugging techniques are varied. Information from a microphone can be transmitted via a 
“wire run” or a radio transmitter. Bugs are concealed in a variety of objects or carried on a person. 
Transmitting devices can be remotely controlled with a radio signal for turning them on and off. 
This makes detection difficult. A device known as a carrier current transmitter is placed in wall 
plugs, light switches, or other electrically operated components. It obtains its power from the AC 
wire to which it is attached. Sound systems with speakers serve as microphones that help spies.
Many spies use multiple systems. Multiple bugs are placed so they will be found, which in 
many instances satisfies security and management. Other bugs are more cleverly concealed.

518          TOPICS OF CONCERN
Gruber (2006: 280–283) notes that gun microphones are very effective. He writes that 
they can be aimed at a target from a significant distance and they are used with a headset and 
amplifier. Gun microphones can be seen at football games. He illustrates the creativity of spies by 
describing how electrical signals from a microphone can be carried by a clear metallic paint.
Telephones are especially vulnerable. A “tap” occurs when a telephone conversation is 
intercepted. Telephone lines are available in so many places that taps are difficult to detect. 
A tap can be direct or wireless. With a direct tap, a pair of wires is spliced to the telephone 
line and then connected to a recorder. An FM transmitter, similar to a room bug, is employed 
for a wireless tap. The transmitter is connected to the line and then a receiver and recorder 
are concealed nearby. Wireless taps (and room bugs) are spotted by using special equipment. 
Direct taps are difficult to locate. A check of the entire line is necessary.
Because telephone traffic travels over space radio in several modes—for example, cellu-
lar, microwave, and satellite—the spy’s job is made much easier and safer since no on-premises 
tap is required. What is required is the proper equipment for each mode. In one case a Mossad 
agent in Berne, Switzerland, was arrested after he tried to tap the telephone of a Hezbollah 
target. His technical system was a cellular telephone device that would be activated when 
the target telephone was put in use. The device would automatically call a second cellular 
telephone where the target’s telephone would be monitored (Business Espionage Controls and 
Countermeasures Association, 2007).
Another technique transforms the telephone into a listening device whether it is in use or 
not. Variations of the following technique depend on the technology and design of the telephone. 
“Hookswitch bypass” short circuits (by changing wires) the telephone hookswitch (the switch 
that disconnects the microphone in the mouthpiece to the outside when a person hangs up) and 
transforms the ordinary telephone into a bug. This is easy to detect by hanging up the telephone, 
placing a radio nearby (for noise), tapping into the telephone line, and listening for the radio.
When guarding against losses of information assets, consideration must be given to a host 
of methods that may be used by a spy. These include infrared transmitters that use light frequen-
cies below the visible frequency spectrum to transmit information. This can be defeated through 
physical shielding (e.g., closing the drapes). Another method, a laser listening device, “bounces” 
laser off a window to receive audio from the room. Inexpensive noise masking systems can 
defeat this technique (Jones, 2000: 1–17). Kaiser and Stokes (2006: 65) write: “Newer laser 
microphones are created by feeding two hair-thin strands of fiber-optic cable into the room being 
monitored. The microphone operates when a laser beam is sent down one of the fibers, where it 
bumps into a thin aluminum diaphragm and returns on the other fiber with the room conversa-
tion.” A careful search is required to find this and other devices. Computer, e-mail, facsimile, and 
other transmissions are also subject to access by spies. A spy may conceal a recorder or pinhole-
lens camera on the premises, or wear a camera concealed in a jacket or tie. If drawings or designs 
are on walls or in sight through windows, a spy, stationed in another skyscraper a few blocks 
away might use a telescope to obtain secret data, and a lip reader can enhance the information 
gathering. Or, a window washer might appear at a window for surveillance. Another method is a 
spy disguised as a janitor to be assigned to the particular site. All of these methods by no means 
exhaust the skills of spies as covered earlier under “espionage techniques.”
Technical Surveillance Countermeasures
ASIS International (2007: 17) states the following:
Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) refers to the use of services, 
equipment, and techniques designed to locate, identify, and neutralize the effec-
tiveness of technical surveillance activities (electronic eavesdropping, wiretapping, 
bugging, etc.). Technical surveillance countermeasures should be a part of the 
overall protection strategy. Individuals within the organization responsible for 
physical security, facility security, information asset protection, telecommunica-
tions, meeting planning and information technology all have a stake in addressing 
these concerns.

The physical characteristics of a building have a bearing on opportunities for surveil-
lance. Some of these factors are poor access control designs, inadequate soundproofing, com-
mon or shared ducts, and space above false ceilings enabling access. Comprehensive security 
methods will hinder spies. The in-house security team can begin countermeasures by conduct-
ing a physical search for planted devices. If a decision is made to contact a specialist, only the 
most expertly trained and experienced consultant should be recruited.
The Countermeasures Consultant
Organizations often recruit a countermeasures consultant to perform contract work. As a con-
sumer, ask for copies of certificates of TSCM courses completed and a copy of the insurance 
policy for errors and omissions for TSCM services. What equipment is used? What techniques 
are employed for the cost? Are sweeps and meticulous physical inspections conducted for the 
quoted price? Watch for scare tactics. Is the consultant really a vendor trying to sell surveil-
lance detection devices, or a PI claiming to be a TSCM specialist? Will the consultant protect 
confidentiality? The interviewer should request a review of past reports to clients. Were names 
deleted to protect confidentiality? These questions help to avoid hiring an unqualified “expert.” 
One practitioner offered clients debugging services and used an expensive piece of equipment 
to conduct sweeps. After hundreds of sweeps, he decided to have the equipment serviced. A ser-
vice person discovered that the device was not working properly because it had no battery for 
one of its components. The surprised “expert” never realized a battery was required.
For a comprehensive countermeasures program, the competent consultant will be inter-
ested in sensitive information flow, storage, and retrieval. Extra cost will result from such an 
analysis, but it is often cost effective.
The employer should use a public telephone off the premises to contact the consultant 
in order not to alert a spy to impending countermeasures. An alerted spy may remove or turn 
off a bug or tap and the TSCM may be less effective.
Techniques and Equipment
Detection equipment is expensive and certain equipment is subject to puffing, but useless. A 
company should purchase its own equipment only if it retains a well-qualified TSCM techni-
cian, many sweeps are conducted, and the in-house TSCM program is cost-effective.
Equipment includes the nonlinear junction detector (NLJD), costing about $15,000 and 
capable of detecting radio transmitters, microphones, infrared and ultrasonic transmitters, 
recorders, video cameras, cell phones, and other hidden electronic devices, even when they 
are not working. Gruber (2006: 284–285) offers the following on the NLJD. It transmits a 
microwave signal through its antenna and an internal receiver listens for a RF response that 
may mean a device is present. NLJDs are available in various power outputs to the restricted 
government version. The effectiveness of this equipment is poor in an area containing several 
electronic devices; in this case, a physical search is best.
The telephone analyzer is another tool designed for testing a variety of single and multi-
line telephones, answering machines, fax machines, intercom systems. The spectrum analyzer 
is another tool. Basically, it is a radio receiver with a visual display to detect airborne radio 
signals. Other types of specialized equipment are on the market. Buyer beware: the quality 
and cost of equipment varies widely.
Some security personnel or executives plant a bug for the sole purpose of determining if the 
equipment of the detection specialist is effective. This “test” can be construed as a criminal 
offense. An alternative is specially designed test transmitters, commercially available, that has 
no microphone pickup and therefore can be used without liability. Another technique is to 
place a tape recorder with a microphone in a drawer.
A tool kit and standard forms are two additional aids for the countermeasures special-
ist. The tool kit consists of the common tools (e.g., screwdrivers, pliers, electrical tape) used 
by an electrician. Standard forms facilitate good recordkeeping and serve as a checklist. What 
was checked? What tests were performed? What were the readings? Where? When? Who per-
formed the tests? Why were the tests conducted? Over a period, records can be used to make 
comparisons while helping to answer questions.
Communications Security          519

520          TOPICS OF CONCERN
The following list offers topics of consideration for TSCM (Gruber, 2006: 277–304; 
Kaiser and Stokes, 2006: 60–68):
• The first step in TSCM is a physical search for devices beginning from outside the 
building. The physical search, both outside and inside, is very important and time-
consuming. On the outside, focus on items such as utilities, wires, ductwork, and 
openings (e.g., windows). A spy can tap into lines outside the building without 
needing to ever enter the building. A top executive should establish a cover story to 
avoid alerting anyone to the TSCM.
• Inside the building, the TSCM technician should check cabling, inside individual 
office equipment (e.g., telephones, faxes, and computers), and openings. Is there 
anything in the office equipment that appears odd?
• The technician should be knowledgeable about IT systems, computers, internal 
network or Local Area Network (LAN), and a connection to the outside or Wide Area 
Network (WAN). These systems can be bugged or tapped like telephone systems. For 
example, a LAN analyzer connected to a line can read all e-mail that travels through 
the line. The technician should have equipment to check what is attached to lines.
• Besides traditional cable, fiber optic cable can also be tapped. A tap on a fiber 
optic cable can be detected through an Optical Time Domain Reflectometer.
• Since devices may be hidden in walls, the technician can use an ultraviolet light to 
detect plaster repairs to walls. A NLJD or a portable x-ray machine can be used to 
detect devices in walls.
• Items in walls that should be checked are power outlets, phone jacks, and network 
jacks. Tools to check these items and inside walls are a flashlight, dental mirror, 
and a fiber optic camera.
• Plates at light switches, wall outlets, and HVAC vent covers should all be removed 
for the search and prior to the sweep.
• If a bug or tap is found, it should be documented and photographed. The device 
could be booby-trapped. Although police should be contacted for assistance, their 
response and expertise will vary widely. A difficult question surfaces as to whether 
the device should remain and fed false information.
• The TSCM technician often finds nothing unusual. Such results afford protection 
against bugs and taps. However, 100% protection is not possible, because 
information assets can be lost in so many ways, mostly from humans. Security 
practitioners should be creative, think like a spy, and not forget about the 
inexpensive, easy, and obvious methods to steal information assets.
Another strategy to thwart listening devices is “shielding,” also called electronic sound-
proofing. Basically, copper foil or screening and carbon filament are applied throughout a 
room to prevent acoustical or electromagnetic emanations from leaving. Although this method 
is very expensive (costing more than $100,000), several organizations employ it to have at least 
one secure room or to protect information in computers.
Equipment is available on the market that may frustrate telephone taps and listen-
ing devices. Scramblers, attached to telephones, alter the voice as it travels through the line. 
However, no device or system is foolproof. Often, simple countermeasures are useful. For 
instance, an executive can wait until everybody is present for an important meeting, and then 
relocate it to a previously undisclosed location. Conversants can operate a radio at high volume 
during sensitive conversations, and exercise caution during telephone and other conversations.
Many businesses and commercial telephony service providers are moving to Voice over 
Internet Protocol (VoIP) technology because of lower costs and efficiency. Such services may 
not even make contact with the traditional telephone network. One concern of VoIP technol-
ogy relates to its inability to provide traditional location identification (i.e., Enhanced 911) 
for 911 emergency calls made to public safety agencies. Of particular interest for our discus-
sion here is that traditional wiretaps are more difficult to intercept with VoIP infrastructure 
and end-to-end encryption compounds the challenges for those seeking to wiretap (National 
Institute of Justice, 2006).

It must be remembered that information assets can be collected in many different 
ways besides with physical devices. Losses can occur through speeches and publications by 
employees, in company trash, and by unknowingly hiring a spy. Comprehensive, broad-based 
information security is necessary.
Case Problems          521
Who do you think has “the edge,” those who seek information assets or those who 
protect it?
Search the Web
Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
ASIS, International: www.asisonline.org
Business Espionage Controls and Countermeasures Association: www.becca-online.org/
Institute for a Drug-Free Workplace: www.drugfreeworkplace.org/
National Association of Information Destruction, Inc.: www.naidonline.org/
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information: http://ncadi.samhsa.gov/
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH): www.cdc.gov/
niosh/homepage.html
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA): www.osha.gov
OSHA: www.dol.gov/asp/programs/drugs/workingpartners/dfworkplace/dfwp.asp
Society of Competitive Intelligence Professionals: www.scip.org/
U.S. Department of Labor: www.dol.gov/elaws/drugfree.htm
U.S. Department of State: www.state.gov/travelandbusiness/
Case Problems
18A. As a security manager, you just received an internal telephone call from a supervisor 
who complains about a subordinate who became angered by a work assignment and 
told the supervisor that he knows where he lives and where his kids go to school. 
What do you do?
18B. You are a security manager at a plant. One day, a former employee shows up at 
the front gate and demands to see his estranged wife. In addition, he wants to 
talk with the human resources director about benefits. How do you handle this 
situation?
18C. John Smith, an employee who has just lost his job because of corporate 
downsizing, is in the office of the Director of Human Resources holding a pistol 
in the direction of the Director. As the security manager, you were summoned to 
the office earlier, not knowing that the pistol had been drawn. You enter the office 
and you stop upon seeing the pistol. John Smith states: “I’ve given 10 years of my 
life to this place.” “They had no right doing this to me.” “If I can’t work, I can’t 
support my family.” “It’s management’s fault and they are going to pay.” As the 
security manager, what do you say and do? (This case problem was prepared with 
the assistance of Hasselt and Romano, 2004: 12–17).
18D. As the chief security officer for a corporation with plants in the United States and 
Europe, prepare a list of questions to answer as you plan a personnel protection 
program.

522          TOPICS OF CONCERN
18E. As a security manager you hear through the grapevine that several employees 
smoke marijuana during lunch when they go to their vehicles. What do you do?
18F. As the new chief security officer for a corporation, you are reviewing the methods of 
information collection of the in-house competitive intelligence unit. The list includes 
using the Internet, public documents, public documents from government, private 
investigators, subscriptions to news services, purchasing securities to receive annual 
financial reports of competitors, collecting garbage from competitors, attending 
seminars and speeches of competitors, and purchasing competitor products for 
study. Do any of these methods necessitate closer attention? Explain and justify your 
answer.
18G. As the security director for a corporation engaged in research, you see the need for 
an information security consultant to improve protection. What criteria would you 
list to select such a specialist? What questions would you ask applicants during the 
selection process?
18H. Of the major topics in this chapter, which one would you select as a specialization and 
career? Why? How would you develop such a specialization and career?
References
ASIS International. (2007). Information Asset Protection Draft Guideline. www.asisonline.
org, retrieved February 9, 2007.
ASIS International. (2005). Workplace Violence Prevention and Response Guideline. www.
asisonline.org, retrieved March 8, 2007.
Apuzzo, M. (2007). “Chiquita to Pay $25M in Terror Case.” Associated Press (March 14). http://
biz.yahoo.com/ap/070314/terrorism_bananas.html?.v=5, retrieved March 16, 2007.
Ashley, S. (2006). “Cell Phone Vulnerabilities.” Law Officer Magazine, 2 (July).
Associated Press. (2006). “Schwab: $2M for CEO Security.” Security Director News, 3 
(May).
Atkinson, W. (2001). “Safe Travel.” Risk & Insurance, 12 (April 1).
Besse, W., and Whitehead, C. (2000). “New Tools of an Old Trade.” Security Management, 
44 (June).
Bowron, E. (2001). “All the World’s a Staging Ground.” Security Management, 45 (April).
Business Espionage Controls and Countermeasures Association. (2007). “About BECCA.” 
http://www.becca-online.org/, retrieved March 18, 2007.
Business Espionage Controls and Countermeasures Association. (2001). “News of Hostile 
Activity” http://www.espionbusiness.com, retrieved June 6, 2001.
Carroll, J. (1996). Computer Security, 3rd ed. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Curtis, G., and McBride, R. (2005). Proactive Security Administration. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Dahle North America. (2007). http://www.dahle.com/high_security.htm, retrieved March 19, 
2007.
DeCenzo, D., and Robbins, S. (2005). Fundamentals of Human Resource Management, 8th 
ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Pub.
Ehrlich, C. (2002). “Liar, Liar: The Legal Perils of Misrepresentation.” Competitive 
Intelligence Magazine, 5 (March-April).
Elliott, R. (2006). “What’s Behind Country Risk Ratings?” Security Management, 50 
(August).
Elliott, K., and Shelley, K. (2005). “Impact of employee assistance programs on substance 
abusers and workplace safety.” Journal of Employment Counseling, 42 (September).
Gips, M. (2006). “High on the Job.” Security Management, 50 (February).
Gips, M. (2007). “My Short Life as an EP Specialist.” Security Management, 51 (March).
Gruber, R. (2006). Physical and Technical Security: An Introduction. Clifton Park, NY: 
Thomson Delmar Learning.
Halligan, R. (2001). “Do Your Secrets Pass the Test?” Security Management, 45 (March).
Hasselt, V., and Romano, S. (2004). “Role-Playing: A Vital Tool in Crisis Negotiation Skills 
Training.” FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin, 73 (February).

References          523
Hershkowitz, R. (2004). “Zero Tolerance Equals Trouble.” Security Management, 48 
(October).
Horowitz, R. (2005). “A Comment on Drafting Corporate Competitive Intelligence Policies.” 
http://www.rhesq.com/CI/Comment%20on%20CI%20Policies.html, retrieved March 18, 
2007.
Horowitz, R. (1998). “The Economic Espionage Act: The Rules Have Not Changed.” 
Competitive Intelligence Review, 9. http://www.scip.org/pdf/9(3)horowitz.pdf, retrieved 
March 22, 2007.
Hudson, J. (2004). “Dozens Sue over Lockheed Shootings.” The Clarion-Ledger (July 3).
Hughes, S. (2001). “Violence in the Workplace: Identifying Costs and Preventive Solutions.” 
Security Journal, 14.
Insurance Information Institute. (2007). “What does kidnap and ransom insurance cover?” 
http://www.iii.org/individuals/business/optional/kidnapandransom/, retrieved March 11, 
2007.
Isaacs, R. (2004). “How Not to Tell all.” Security Management, 48 (May).
Ivancevich, J. (2001). Human Resource Management, 8th ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Jaeger, S. (2001). “The Age of Rage.” Security Industry & Design, 11 (February).
Jones, T. (2000). Surveillance Countermeasures in the Business World. Cookeville, TN: 
Research Electronics International.
Kaiser, M., and Stokes, R. (2006). “Who’s Listening?” Security Management, 50 (February).
Kenny, J. (2005a). “Threats in the Workplace: The Thunder before the Storm?” Security 
Journal, 18 (3).
Kenny, J. (2005b). “Workplace Violence and the Hidden Land Mines: A Comparison of 
Gender Victimization.” Security Journal, 18 (1).
Laczniak, G., and Murphy, P. (1993). “The Ethics of Corporate Spying.” Ethics Journal 
(Fall).
Mallery, J. (2006). “The Hidden Data Thieves.” Security Technology & Design, 16 
(March).
Meadows, R. (2007). Understanding Violence and Victimization, 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Miller, S. (2007). “Gone in a Flash.” Information Security, 10 (March).
Myshko, D. (2001). “Just Say Yes to Drug Testing.” Risk and Insurance, 12 (April 16).
National Institute of Justice (2006). “Telephony Implications of Voice over Internet Protocol.” 
www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/212976.pdf, retrieved June 18, 2007.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2006). “NIDA InfoFacts: Methamphetamine.” http://
www.nida.nih.gov/Infofacts/methamphetamine.html, retrieved March 9, 2007.
National Security Agency. (2000). “National Information Systems Security (INFOSEC) 
Glossary.” (UNCLASSIFIED). http://security.isu.edu/pdf/4009.pdf, retrieved March 22, 
2007.
Nolan, J. (1997). “Economic Espionage, Proprietary Information Protection: Difficult Times 
Ahead.” Security Technology and Design (January-February).
Petersen International Underwriters. (2003). “A Kidnap and Ransom Insurance Plan” 
(Brochure). http://www.eglobalhealth.com/files/Epic.pdf, retrieved March 12, 2007.
Piazza, P. (2005). “From Bluetooth to RedFang.” Security Management, 49 (March).
Piazza, P. (2007). “The ABCs of USB.” Security Management, 51 (January).
Purpura, P. (1993). “When the Security Manager Gets Shot: A Corporate Response.” Security 
Journal (July).
Ryan, L. (2005). “Exclusive remedy upheld in Lockheed Martin shooting case.” Workers’ 
Comp Insider (July 21). http://www.workerscompinsider.com/archives/2005_07.html, 
retrieved March 10, 2007.
Shyman, R. (2000). “Women at Work.” Security Management, 44 (February).
Simovich, C. (2004). “To Serve and Protect.” Security Management, 48 (October).
Smith, S. (2004). “What every employer should know about drug testing in the workplace.” 
Occupational Hazards, 66 (August).
Society of Competitive Intelligence Professionals. (2007). “About SCIP.” http://www.scip.
org/2_overview.php, retrieved March 18, 2007.

524          TOPICS OF CONCERN
U.S. Department of Labor. (2006). “Injuries, Illnesses, and Fatalities.” http://www.bls.gov/iif/
home.htm, retrieved March 8, 2007.
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration. (2003). “Guidelines for a Drug-Free Workforce.” 
http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/demand/dfmanual/09df.htm, retrieved March 14, 2007.
University of Iowa. (2001). “Workplace Violence: A Report to the Nation.” http://www.pub-
lic-health.uiowa.edu/IPRC/NATION.PDF, retrieved March 8, 2007.
Wikipedia. (2007). “Paper Shredder.” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paper_shredder, retrieved 
March 19, 2007.

19
KEY TERMS
• smart security
• automatic factory
• cycle of protection
• criminal entrepreneurs
• multinational and multicultural 
workforce
• United States Commission on National 
Security/21st Century
• five wars of globalization
• market forces
• decentralized networks
• clinical experience model
• evidence-based model
• DHS Centers of Excellence
• programmed, self-paced instruction
• distance learning online
Your Future in Security 
and Loss Prevention
Objectives
After studying this chapter, the reader will be able to:
1. Discuss security and loss prevention in the future.
2. List at least 10 trends affecting security and loss prevention.
3. Discuss security and loss prevention education, research, and training.
4. Explain how to seek employment opportunities in the security and loss prevention 
profession.
Security and Loss Prevention in the Future
Seeking to accurately predict the future is difficult and risky. However, a professional will con-
sider many variables when making educated guesses to anticipate future events. What follows 
here are possibilities for the future to which the reader can apply critical thinking skills.
Periodically, we hear older, experienced folks speak about how much simpler life was 
years ago. However, this view is subject to debate because technology, for example, has made 
life and work easier in many ways. At the same time, security and loss prevention practitioners 
face numerous problems in their work today, brought about by numerous factors. These fac-
tors include the needs of businesses as they seek to survive and return a profit, globalization, 
an array of threats and hazards, limited security budgets, and government laws and regula-
tions. Our world is likely to continue to be increasingly complicated, and as difficult as it may 
be at times, problems should be perceived as challenges that have solutions and/or present 
opportunities.
525

526          YOUR FUTURE IN SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION 
As we know, technology has enhanced security in many ways. We have “smart cards” and 
“smart cameras,” and we will see many more systems and devices that contain “smart security,” 
which means that never-ending enhanced technology will be built into systems and devices. We will 
see increasingly “smart”—fences, contraband detection systems, WMD sensors, robot guards, and 
cybersecurity. Artificial intelligence will continue to surpass human capabilities. For instance, rather 
than security officers watching numerous CCTV monitors and becoming fatigued, the artificial 
intelligence that we have today will continue to help them to spot events deserving attention and 
response. Facial recognition systems will improve and eventually be capable of identifying offenders 
wherever they may be while they are moving.
Future integrated security systems will perform an array of loss prevention activities 
beyond what is accomplished today. For example, if an intruder enters a building, not only 
will a system pinpoint the entry location, via a series of sensors, and activate CCTV, but also 
simultaneously, it will dispatch a robot to apprehend the intruder and positively identify the 
intruder and his or her background.
Access control systems will no longer use cards. An individual will stand in front of 
sophisticated sensors, and positive identification will be made by the analysis of a number 
of biometric characteristics: bone structure, teeth, and body odor, to name a few. It would be 
especially difficult for an offender to duplicate several of these characteristics. The same sen-
sors could be placed at many locations to monitor personnel, such as parking lots, building 
entrances, elevators, high-security locations, copying machines, lunchrooms, and restrooms. 
Obviously, with such a system, it would be possible to know exactly where all employees 
are at every minute of every workday. If a fire developed or a crime occurred, the recorded 
location of everyone would aid loss prevention personnel. However, will employees welcome 
IT records revealing how many times and for how long they visit the restroom or other loca-
tions? Suppose a system had the capability to record every conversation, every day, within 
a building. This could give management the opportunity to “weed out” employees who are 
counterproductive to organizational goals. In addition, because this system would be capable 
of “recognizing” any conversations pertaining to losses, the loss prevention department could 
review these conversations and investigate vulnerabilities. With these possibilities in mind, one 
realizes the blessing and burden of technology. Are such intense measures worth sacrificing 
privacy? Certainly not. Countermeasures must strike a balance between preventing losses and 
protecting privacy. In the future, as today, the courts will be watching and ruling as techno-
logical innovations and loss prevention strategies are applied.
As we progress in the era of the automatic factory (AF), loss prevention methods will 
change to meet the new technology. The AF operates machines that transform raw materials 
into finished products with limited human input. Robots with self-contained computers are an 
essential part of the AF. Activities such as material handling, assembly, inspection, and qual-
ity control are automated. Human input comes from a computer  control center. Widespread 
use of “just-in-time production” also contributes to manufacturing’s need for fewer workers. 
Production is based on the needs of retailers, which avoids costly inventory holding and pro-
ducing items that do not sell well (U.S. Department of Labor, 2000: 31).
The future use of robots is promising. They operate 24 hours a day without a coffee break 
or vacation. A salary and fringe benefits such as hospitalization and pensions are unnecessary 
for robots. Also, robots are immune to heat, cold, noise, radiation, and other hazards.
Imagine loss prevention for a plant operated by only three managers and six technicians. 
If internal pilfering occurred, the number of suspects would be narrowed to nine, exclud-
ing robots. Parking lots, frequently a source of crime and requiring traffic control, would be 
smaller. Fires and accidents, which are often caused by human error, would be reduced.
Can you describe an example of a clash between technology and civil liberties? What 
were the issues and solutions?

Trends Affecting Security and Loss Prevention
To begin with, the primary drivers of security and loss prevention practitioners, programs, and 
services are the needs and objectives of organizations and the changes within our society and 
world. Protection at a hotel will differ from protection at a nuclear power plant. The loss preven-
tion needs of a retail chain in the United States will differ from the loss prevention needs of a mul-
tinational corporation with business interests in the Middle East. Although the protection needs 
of organizations differ, there are trends that affect all security and loss prevention programs.
The 21st century will continue to see no shortage of threats and hazards facing busi-
nesses and institutions. The list that follows presents trends and challenges that impact protec-
tion programs and the types of specialists required for security and loss prevention and, thus, 
employment opportunities:
• The challenges of crimes, fires, accidents, and disasters will remain but increase in 
complexity.
• Terrorism will become increasingly sinister and surprising because of the proliferation 
of WMD, mass casualties, severe economic harm, and its successes.
• Security and loss prevention metrics (see Chapter 2) will grow in importance to measure 
and enhance the success of protection programs. Campbell (2007: 60) writes: “Metrics 
are a tool used to facilitate influence, to demonstrate, argue, support, and convince.”
• We often hear about security and loss prevention departments “doing more with less.” 
Budget cuts are a fact of life requiring prioritization and creativity. The challenges 
can be enormous. However, “doing more with less” has its limitations, and a variety 
of outcomes is possible. Examples are victimization of people, financial losses, and 
ethical and legal issues.
• Risk analysis will become more challenging. Improved research methodologies for risk 
analyses must be sought for better decisions.
• Research shows that security managers are gaining new duties including risk 
management, safety, background investigations, and travel security. They are also 
harnessing their computers for broader applications such as incident tracking, sharing 
information internally via an intranet, and conducting training (“Security’s Burden 
Increases,” 2001: 18).
• Many security departments are facing either placement under another department 
(e.g., facilities management), outsourcing, or even elimination.
• The market for security services and systems will continue to grow globally (see 
Chapter 2). Although many businesses and institutions will maintain proprietary 
security departments, we will see an increase in the outsourcing of partial and 
entire security departments. Service firms will continue to provide security officers, 
investigations, integrated systems, and cybersecurity, among other services.
• Numerous specializations will grow in importance. Examples are risk management, 
business continuity planning, emergency management, life safety, fire protection, 
homeland security, protection of critical infrastructures and key assets, border security, 
cybersecurity, fraud prevention and investigation, workplace violence prevention, 
personnel protection, and information security.
• The cycle of protection will remain: as new technology is developed, offenders will 
exploit it, and security specialists and offenders will remain in constant competition—
one group striving to protect, the other striving to circumvent defenses. Both sides will 
win “battles,” but neither will win the “war.”
• Cybercrime will increase. The number of cybercrime cases reported to police will 
also increase and require additional resources and training for police, prosecutors, 
and judges. “The largest computer crime problem affecting local law enforcement 
representing the largest number of victims and the largest monetary loss will be 
Internet fraud, including fraud via identity theft.” Virtual crimes will require new 
criminal and civil laws and new methodologies for prevention and investigation. 
Organized crime and terrorist groups will increasingly become involved in cybercrime 
(Taylor et al., 2006: 354–383).
Security and Loss Prevention in the Future          527

528          YOUR FUTURE IN SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION 
• Public police, especially on the local level, will continue to lag behind the technical 
expertise of cybercriminals. Consequently, the private sector will continue to fill the 
void.
• Information security will increase in intensity. Taylor et al., (2006: 374) write: “The 
character of espionage will continue to broaden into the arenas of information 
warfare, economic espionage, and theft of intellectual property.”
• As we become a cashless society, offenders will be ready to gain illegally from system 
weaknesses.
• E-business will increase along with protection needs.
• Senior management in criminal organizations is becoming increasingly well educated 
and trained. Criminals increasingly will have college degrees and experience in IT, 
engineering, money management, investments, accounting, and law. In addition, 
offenders will use just about all the technology available to government and 
businesses.
• Criminal entrepreneurs, who seek illicit profits from a wide variety of enterprises and 
launder the proceeds, are becoming increasingly knowledgeable of the operations of 
financial institutions and related vulnerabilities. They will continue to infiltrate and 
manipulate financial institutions for their own purposes (e.g., money laundering), as 
this target becomes a top priority. Financial security professionals will continue to be 
challenged not only by external offenders but by internal ones as well.
• Counterfeiting will continue to be a huge business for organized criminals, especially 
in designer clothes, software, entertainment items, vehicle parts, and medical supplies. 
Counterfeiters have production facilities and distribution networks ready for new 
product lines.
• Twenty-first century crime groups increasingly will own shares of multinational 
corporations and be involved in management decisions. This will create new 
challenges for security professionals.
• Satellites increasingly will assist security through instantaneous communications 
throughout the world. People and assets will be more easily tracked. Such technology 
will assist in the investigations of kidnappings and hijackings.
• Corporate and institutional changes have had an impact on employee morale. The 
objectives of generating profit and improving quality while downsizing, and other 
workplace issues, have taken a toll on loyalty among workers. Loyalty has been 
an asset to protection programs. Its deterrent value today must be questioned and 
studied. New innovative strategies are required.
• Women, the elderly, and the disadvantaged will make up a greater portion of the 
workforce. Such groups present new challenges for security. Women and the elderly 
require protection not only in the workplace, but also at home and while traveling. 
Cases of domestic violence, sexual harassment, and stalking are likely to occupy 
more of the security professional’s time. Women and the elderly will be involved in 
more workplace crime. If increasing numbers of disadvantaged workers are employed, 
they may bring with them problems of gangs and illegal drugs (“Here Comes the 21st 
Century: What Does It Hold for Security?” 1997: 4–7).
• More research is needed on issues of minority group members and women in security 
positions. The majority of women in one study of women security managers felt they 
experienced relatively high levels of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and on-
the-job stress; they also felt they were not paid the same as men for the same work. 
Despite these issues in this male-dominated vocation, the study showed three-fourths 
of the women surveyed were satisfied with their careers (“Survey Studies Women in 
Security,” 1996: 87–88).
• Security must adapt to a multinational and multicultural workforce. As the workforce 
changes, security professionals must be aware of diversity and use it to the advantage 
of the business. Good communication can improve security and business, and even 
help develop new markets.
• Global markets require security to be aware of each culture and related risks.

• Twenty-first century police will spend most of their resources and time curbing 
violent crimes, while their efforts against property crimes will take a lower priority. 
Consequently, the private sector will fill the void.
• More and more citizens and business people are realizing that the police have limited 
ability and resources to curb crime. Police are primarily “reactive”; that is, they 
respond to calls for service and investigate. They often are under great pressure 
to solve serious cases. Because of limited resources, police are not able to be more 
“proactive.” Again, the private sector will fill the void.
• A panel of law enforcement specialists predicted that, in 2035, private security 
agencies will perform more than 50% of all law enforcement responsibilities (Tafoya, 
1991: 4).
• Ritter (2006: 8) writes: “There’s no question that terrorism, the growth of 
multicultural populations, massive migration, upheavals in age-composition 
demographics, technological developments, and globalization over the next three or 
more decades will affect the world’s criminal justice systems.”
• First responders (i.e., police, firefighters, and EMS) will continue to have limited 
resources. Businesses and institutions must prepare for emergencies.
• As the world’s population increases, competition for natural resources (e.g., oil, 
drinking water) will intensify.
• Three key factors to assist protection professionals today and in the future are a broad-
based education (e.g., business, security, IT), the skill to show that protection strategies 
have a return on investment, and the flexibility to deal with rapid change.
• Trends affecting the security and loss prevention profession point to employment 
opportunities in many organizations (both proprietary and contract), government 
agencies, and in many specialized areas.
The United States Commission on National Security/21st Century (1999: 1–8), com-
monly known as the Hart-Rudman Task Force on Homeland Security, produced a series of 
reports. Phase 1 focused on trends in the future, as outlined in the following list. Phase 2 
explained an American strategy based on U.S. interests and objectives. Phase 3 recommended 
comprehensive institutional and procedural changes throughout the executive and legislative 
branches in order to meet the challenges of 2025.
1. Institutions designed for another age may not be appropriate for the future.
2. Authoritarian regimes will increasingly collapse as they try to insulate their 
populations from free-flowing information and new economic opportunities.
3. An economically strong United States is likely to remain a primary political, military, 
and cultural force in the world through 2025.
4. Weapons of mass destruction and weapons of mass disruption (e.g., information 
warfare) will continue to proliferate.
5. Adversaries will resort to forms and levels of violence shocking to our sensibilities. 
Americans will likely die on American soil, possibly in large numbers.
6. Emerging technologies, such as advances in biotechnology, will create new moral, 
cultural, and economic divisions and an antitechnology backlash.
7. Energy, especially fossil fuel, will continue to have major strategic significance.
8. Minorities will be less likely to tolerate prejudicial government. Consequently, new 
states, international protectorates, and zones of autonomy will be born in violence.
9. Space will become a competitive military environment.
10.  U.S. intelligence will face more challenging adversaries, and even excellent intelligence 
will not prevent all surprises.
The National Intelligence Council, which reports to the Director of National Intelligence 
and serves in a strategic thinking role, reports from its “2020 Project” that the magnitude and 
speed of change from globalization will be a defining feature of the world to 2020.  Other 
trends noted by this group are: new global players of increasing influence will be China and 
Security and Loss Prevention in the Future          529

530          YOUR FUTURE IN SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION 
India; political Islam will have an increasingly significant impact; there will be a sense of inse-
curity, including terrorism; and the U.S. will retain enormous advantages that no other state 
will match, however, more countries will be in a position to make the U.S. pay a heavy price 
for military action. Furthermore, more firms will become global; the world economy is likely to 
continue to grow; large pockets of poverty will persist globally; and governments will struggle 
to keep up with change (Flynn, 2007).
Five Wars of Globalization
As in the past, the private sector, as well as the public sector, will continue in the 
future to contend with what Naim (2003) calls the “five wars of globalization.” 
These are the illegal trade in drugs, arms, intellectual property, people, and money. 
He emphasizes that religious zeal or political goals drive terrorists, whereas profit 
drives the other wars, and all of the wars result in murder, mayhem, and global inse-
curity. According to Naim, governments have been fighting the five wars for centuries 
and losing them. He does not include terrorism in this statement. Naim explains why 
governments cannot win the five wars of globalization:
• Criminal cartels can manipulate weak governments by corrupting politicians 
and police.
• International law, including embargoes, sanctions, and conventions, offer 
criminals opportunities to profit from illegal goods.
• Al-Qaida members are stateless and so are criminal networks involved in 
the five wars. Whereas terrorists and other criminals can seek refuge in and 
take advantage of porous borders, traditional notions of sovereignty frustrate 
governments.
• These wars pit governments against market forces. Thousands of 
independent, stateless organizations are motivated by large profits gained by 
exploiting international price differentials, unsatisfied demand, or the cost 
advantages resulting from theft (i.e., no cost to produce the product).
• These wars pit bureaucracies against networks. The same network that 
smuggles illegal drugs may be involved in counterfeit watches that are sold on 
the streets of Manhattan by illegal immigrants. Highly decentralized networks 
can act swiftly and flexibly, while often lacking a headquarters and central 
leadership to be targeted. Governments often meet the challenge by forming 
task forces or creating new bureaucracies.
Naim claims that governments may never be able to eliminate the international 
trade from the five wars, but they can and should do better. He offers four areas 
capable of producing ideas to meet the challenges from these wars:
• Negotiate more flexible notions of sovereignty. Since stateless networks 
regularly violate laws and cross borders to trade illegally, nations should 
develop agreements to “manage” sovereignty to combat criminal networks.
• Naim calls for stronger multilateral institutions (e.g., multinational police 
efforts such as Interpol). However, nations do not trust each other, some 
assume that criminals have infiltrated the police agencies of other countries, 
and today’s allies may become tomorrow’s enemies.
What trends do you anticipate in the security and loss prevention profession?

Education          531
• The five wars render obsolete many institutions, legal frameworks, military 
doctrines, weapons systems, and law enforcement techniques that have been 
applied for numerous years. Rethinking and adaptation are needed to develop, 
for instance, new concepts of war “fronts” defined by geography and new 
functions for intelligence agents, soldiers, and enforcement officers.
• In all five wars, government agencies battle networks motivated by profits 
created by other government agencies that create an imbalance between demand 
and supply that makes prices rise and profits skyrocket. Since beating market 
forces is next to impossible, reality may force governments, in certain illegal 
markets, to change from repressing the markets to regulating them. In addition, 
creating market incentives may be better than creating bureaucracies to curb 
the excesses of markets. In certain instances, technology can possibly be used to 
replace government policies (e.g., encryption to protect software on CDs).
What can businesses and protection programs do to prevent and reduce losses from the 
“wars of globalization”?
Education
How relevant is a college education to the loss prevention careerist? A college degree will not 
guarantee a job or advancement opportunities. However, with a college degree, a person has 
improved chances of obtaining a favored position. If two, equally experienced people are 
vying for the same professional loss prevention position and person A has a college degree 
while person B does not, person A probably will get the job. Of course, other characteristics 
within a person’s background will improve job opportunities. Education and experience are 
top considerations. Training also is important. Two other characteristics are personality and 
common sense. As used here, personality pertains to one’s ability to get along with others. 
Many consider this factor to be one-half of a person’s job. Common sense is a subjective term 
that is used widely. It refers to an analysis of a situation that produces the “best” solution 
that most people would favor.
Loss Prevention Education: Today and Tomorrow
Although business degree programs are an excellent location for security and loss prevention 
courses, the criminal justice (CRJ) degree programs at hundreds of campuses in the United 
States today are the greatest driving force behind security and loss prevention academic pro-
grams. Many institutions offer criminal justice degrees with an emphasis in security and loss 
prevention. In addition, several institutions maintain distinct departments focusing on security 
and loss prevention degree and certificate programs.
During the late 1960s, many police science degree programs advanced to law enforcement 
and then to CRJ degree programs. As CRJ programs developed, so did the spectrum of course 
offerings: from primarily narrow police science courses, CRJ programs began offering courses 
relating to the entire justice system (i.e., police, courts, corrections). CRJ programs became mul-
tidisciplinary because the answers to complex problems are more forthcoming from a broader 
spectrum of study. Likewise, security and loss prevention academic programs will evolve into 
broader-based, multidisciplinary programs and include the study of business, risk management, 
cybersecurity, terrorism, and homeland security.
Since the 9/11 attacks, hundreds of new academic and training programs have been 
implemented. Universities, four-year colleges, and two-year colleges have increased their 
offerings of degree programs, certificates, and courses in homeland security (HS), emergency 

532          YOUR FUTURE IN SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION 
management (EM), and related disciplines. Other sources of education and training include 
proprietary schools, corporations, government agencies, unions, and associations. Despite an 
increase in education and training programs relevant to HS, there is no consensus of what con-
stitutes a common body of knowledge to establish HS as an academic discipline. Furthermore, 
course content in this field of study varies among institutions and training programs. HS in 
higher education is being developed in a wide variety of academic disciplines and focusing on 
various audiences and needs. Part of the problem is that the DHS is continuously developing 
its mission under changing circumstances and events. In addition, the public and private sectors 
are trying to determine what knowledge and skills are required for HS. Also, perspectives on 
HS differ among specialists.
In reference to academic programs in EM, these programs have a longer history than 
academic programs in HS. Both are evolving at an erratic pace with no uniformity, while 
being influenced by catastrophic events followed by government action.
The many issues of HS were discussed and debated at the 2005 ASIS Academic-Practitioner 
Symposium, whose attendees work to enhance education and research in the discipline of security. 
David Gilmore, a security practitioner and educator who chairs the annual event, expressed the 
sentiment of most participants that the concept of HS is not clearly defined and its meaning varies 
(Davidson, 2005: 74). Dr. Wayne Blanchard, who hopes to make EM a legitimate academic disci-
pline, spoke at the symposium. He noted that most EM academic programs are oriented toward 
the public sector, but the private sector is larger, and perhaps academia should offer more programs 
on preventing and responding to emergencies in the private sector. He was asked how HS differs 
from EM. “Dr. Blanchard observed that since EM covers all hazards, all actors, and all phases, a 
program dealing only with terrorist threats would not be considered an EM program. However, 
such distinctions and definitions change over time. The work done by FEMA used to be called civil 
defense, then emergency management, and perhaps one day might be called homeland security” 
(ASIS International, 2005: 23).
Over several years, an HS body of knowledge and standardization of curricula will 
evolve to strengthen HS as an academic discipline. At the same time, diverse academic depart-
ments will continue to clash as decisions are made as to which department will house HS. EM 
has been going through such an evolutionary process for a longer period, and it will continue. 
Although a major source of direction for HS education and training is the National Strategy 
for Homeland Security, future events, challenges, legislation, and government policy will 
shape curriculum design (Purpura, 2007: 452–454).
Research
The criminal justice profession is one source for research direction for the security and 
loss prevention profession. The following perspectives on criminal justice research are 
verbatim from the National Institute of Justice Journal (Ritter, 2006: 8–11).
David Weisburd [University of Maryland] believes that the nature of criminal justice in 
2040 will depend in large part on the primary research methodology. Is the criminal justice 
community better served by relying on the experiences and opinions of practitioners (the 
clinical experience model) or by research that tests programs and measures outcomes (the 
evidence-based model)?
Currently, the clinical experience model is the research path most frequently followed. 
Policies and technologies are based primarily on reports from practitioners about what they 
have found to work or not work. Sharing approaches and programs that seemed to work in 
one community with another community allows for quick application of successful ideas. The 
downside of this model is that a program may be widely adopted before scientific research 
demonstrates its efficacy in more than one place or application. For example, in one youth pro-
gram aimed at reducing delinquency, counselors and parents believed that the treatments were 
effective, based on initial measures of success. However, subsequent evaluation revealed that 
participation in the program actually increased the risk of delinquency.
In the evidence-based model, a new program undergoes systematic research and evalu-
ation before it is widely adopted. Now dominant in medicine—and becoming more popular 

in other areas such as education—the evidence-based model has been used successfully in 
criminal justice. For example, hot-spot policing (a policy adopted in the early 1990s that 
focuses police resources in high-crime areas) was preceded by studies that demonstrated its 
effectiveness.
But the evidence-based model also has shortcomings. Research requires a large invest-
ment of time and money, and many practitioners understandably would rather spend resources 
implementing an innovation than wait for confirming research. Time—always a precious 
commodity for policymakers and practitioners—can be a particularly frustrating component 
of the evidence-based model. Credible research requires time to adequately test an approach, 
often in more than one jurisdiction, before communities can adopt it on a large scale.
“Policymakers want to improve things while they have the power,” Weisburd says. 
“They are under pressure to make an impact—so there is tension between the slowness of the 
evidence-based process and the pressure to move quickly.”
Weisburd proposes making the evidence-based model “more realistic.” He believes this 
can be done by
• Streamlining the process of developing evidence and conducting evaluations.
• Building an infrastructure to ensure that studies do not reinvent the wheel.
• Devising methods for getting studies off the ground faster, such as encouraging funders to 
help in the development of high-quality randomized experimental studies.
• Reinforcing a culture that emphasizes the exploration of which programs and 
practices do and do not work.
Weisburd also argues that federal investment in the scientific evaluation of new practices and 
programs must be increased. Researchers and practitioners must insist that “if you want us 
to make intelligent policy and not waste money by prematurely innovating in hundreds of 
departments, you must give us more money.”
Research          533
In what ways can the perspectives of Weisburd be applied to research in the security 
and loss prevention profession?
The most practical question for loss prevention researchers to address is as follows: 
What strategies are best to prevent and reduce losses from crimes, fires, accidents, and other 
threats and vulnerabilities? Ongoing evaluative research is instrumental in strengthening suc-
cessful strategies while eliminating those that are less useful.
Additional directions for research include protection against terrorism, WMD, protec-
tion of critical infrastructures, key assets and “soft targets,” IT security, security metrics, 
model training programs, determination of the most appropriate courses for relevant degree 
programs, effective job applicant screening, model statutes for licensing and regulation of the 
security industry, model for regulatory bodies, criteria for the selection of security services and 
systems, evaluation of services and systems, legal issues and liabilities, strategies to improve 
public–private sector cooperation, privatization, private justice system, centralized data bank 
for compiling loss statistics, the feasibility of tax deductions for implementing loss prevention 
strategies by a variety of entities and residential settings, and the use and effect of robots and 
other technological innovations.
As well as college and university criminal justice and loss prevention programs sharing 
these research questions, other curricula are capable of providing valuable input. They include 
business, risk management, insurance, emergency management, safety, fire protection, public 
health and medicine, architecture, landscape architecture, and engineering degree programs. 
A multidisciplinary research effort is most beneficial. Without adequate research, loss preven-
tion practitioners will be hindered in their decision-making roles.

534          YOUR FUTURE IN SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION 
Universities have been actively fulfilling the research needs of homeland security and 
defense. Funding for university research for homeland security and defense is provided by fed-
eral departments (e.g., DHS, DOD) and agencies (e.g., CIA, EPA) and the private sector and 
state governments.
The DHS is involved in numerous research initiatives through its Office of Science and 
Technology. The DHS partners with other government agencies, universities, and industry to find 
and develop innovative ideas. A major area of focus is protection against catastrophic terrorism 
that could result in large-scale loss of life and major economic harm.
Homeland Security Presidential Directive-7 (HSPD-7) calls for a national critical infra-
structure protection research and development (R&D) plan. The National Plan for Research 
and Development in Support of Critical Infrastructure Protection (The Executive Office of 
the President, Office of Science and Technology Policy and The Department of Homeland 
Security Science and Technology Directorate, 2004) is essentially a roadmap for investment 
and protection that integrates cyber, physical, and human elements. This R&D plan was 
developed in coordination with the National Infrastructure Protection Plan.
Through the Homeland Security Act of 2002, Congress mandated the DHS to enhance 
U.S. leadership in science and technology aimed at homeland security issues. This goal is sup-
ported through DHS funding of undergraduate and graduate fellowships and scholarships, and 
establishing DHS Centers of Excellence (HS-Centers). HS-Centers (i.e., universities) are over-
seen by the Office of University Programs within the Science & Technology directorate and are 
designed to create learning and research environments that bring together experts who focus on 
numerous topics including WMD, risk analysis related to the economic consequences of terror-
ism, infrastructure protection, biological threats and diseases, agro-security, and the behavioral 
aspects of terrorism and its consequences.
Larger sources of research on homeland security issues are the over 700 federally funded 
research and development laboratories and centers throughout the United States. These sites 
include federal labs, college and university labs, and private industry labs. Each year billions 
of dollars support homeland security R&D.
What directions for research can you suggest for the security and loss prevention pro-
fession?
Training
The future direction of training largely depends on organizational needs and objectives, threats 
and vulnerabilities, technological innovations, and loss prevention strategies. Practitioners 
will need to know how to operate in an environment of new countermeasures and complex 
systems. But even though loss prevention will change, many key topics taught in the training 
programs of today also will be taught tomorrow. Strategies against crimes, fires, accidents, 
and disasters will still be at the heart of training programs.
State involvement in training proprietary and contract service practitioners probably will 
increase for greater public safety. Uniformity in training will ensure that practitioners receive 
adequate information on basic topics such as laws of arrest, search and seizure, use of force, 
weapons, fire protection, safety, and emergency response. An interdisciplinary group would 
be the best choice to provide input for state-mandated training programs.
The training curriculum of tomorrow will continue to cater to the ever-increasing goal 
of professionalizing loss prevention personnel. The end product will be a thoroughly knowl-
edgeable and skilled practitioner, able to provide a useful service to the community. Greater 
mutual respect will follow as public police and private-sector personnel share similar charac-
teristics in education, training, salary, and professionalism.

Employment          535
Improved training helps to prevent costly liability suits; for example, from excessive 
force used by a uniformed officer. The quality of training, in terms of duration, intensity, and 
topics covered, is a prime consideration in such liability cases.
Programmed, self-paced instruction with the aid of computers will increase. This type 
of instruction is cost-effective, especially when an organization is faced with the challenge of 
turnover. Furthermore, new employees who learn quickly can move through the instructional 
program without having to wait for slower students. A varied training program may include 
not only programmed, self-paced instruction, but also lectures, audiovisual productions, role-
playing, and demonstrations. Distance learning online will increase in popularity as students 
learn from remote locations.
The Concept of the Security Institute
Every state should maintain a security institute, preferably at a college or university. Three 
goals of a security institute are as follows:
1. Develop and conduct college and continuing education courses based on the needs of 
customers.
2. Work with the state government agency that regulates the private security industry to 
develop training programs, conduct research, and professionalize the field.
3. Offer the institute’s service area crime prevention initiatives involving security and 
criminal justice college students who are an unrealized and underutilized national 
resource to control crime.
Employment
Many employment opportunities can be found in the security and loss prevention profes-
sion. Chapter 2 provides information on this industry and career specializations. The related 
profession of criminal justice, which includes police, courts, corrections, probation, and parole, 
plus the growth of privatization, provides opportunities and specialization for employment 
applicants.
Entry-level security officer positions vary widely in pay, benefits, and training. Generally, 
these positions do not pay as well as public police. However, there are many opportunities 
for employment and advancement and many part-time positions; the hours offer some flex-
ibility; and the duties are less risky than public policing. Supervisors in security have mastered 
the tasks of security officers, possess broader skills, and have good human relations quali-
ties. Managers generally have more education, training, experience, and responsibilities than 
supervisors do. They are involved in planning, budgeting, organizing, marketing, recruiting, 
directing, and controlling. Other careers in this profession include sales, self-employment 
(e.g., private investigations, consulting), and government security. The career boxes in previ-
ous chapters, courtesy of ASIS International, offer salary ranges for various positions.
Sources of Employment Information
• Online services: The Internet is a major source of employment information. There 
are several advantages: offerings are broad, time is saved by reviewing opportunities 
open worldwide, it is more up-to-date than most publications, and you can respond 
electronically. Be aware that confidentiality is limited. Look for services that are free.
• Periodicals: Within these sources, trends in employment and employment 
opportunities are common topics.
• Professional associations: Professional organizations serve members through 
educational programs, publications, and a variety of strategies aimed at increasing 
professionalism.
• Trade conferences: People with a common interest attend trade conferences, which 
are advertised in trade publications. By attending these conferences, a loss prevention 

536          YOUR FUTURE IN SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION 
practitioner or student can learn about a variety of topics. The latest technology and 
professional seminars are typical features. Trade conferences provide an opportunity 
to meet practitioners who may be knowledgeable about employment opportunities or 
are actively seeking qualified people.
• Educational institutions: Security and loss prevention and criminal justice degree 
programs are another source of employment information. Usually, these programs 
have bulletin boards, near faculty offices, that contain career opportunities. College or 
university placement services or faculty members are other valuable sources.
• Libraries: A wealth of information for a career search is available at libraries. 
Examples include periodicals, newspapers, telephone books, directories, books on 
career strategies, and online services.
• Government buildings: Public buildings often contain bulletin boards that specify 
employment news, especially near personnel offices. Government agencies frequently 
search for practitioners to maintain security and safety at government buildings and 
installations.
• Newspapers: By looking under “security” in classified sections, one can find listings 
for entry-level positions. In large urban newspapers, more specialized positions are 
listed.
• Public employment agencies: These agency offices operate in conjunction with the U.S. 
Employment Service of the Department of Labor. Personnel will provide employment 
information without cost and actually contact recruiters or employers.
• Networking: An informal network consists of people the applicant knows from past 
educational or employment experiences. It is a good idea for any professional to 
maintain contact, however slight, with peers. When employment-related challenges 
develop and solutions are difficult to obtain, networking may be an avenue for 
answers. Likewise, this mutual assistance is applicable to employment searches.
• Telephone books: The addresses and telephone numbers of both private and public 
entities are abundant in telephone books. By looking up “security,” “guards,” 
“investigators,” and “government offices,” one can develop a list of locations for 
possible employment opportunities.
• Private employment agencies: Almost all urban areas have private employment 
agencies that charge a fee. This source probably will be a last resort, and one should 
carefully study financial stipulations. At times, these agencies have fee-paid jobs, 
which mean that the employer pays the fee.
Career Advice
1. Read at least two current books on searching for employment and careers; both the 
novice and the experienced person will learn or be reminded of many excellent tips 
that will “polish” the career search and instill confidence.
2. Begin your search by first focusing on yourself—your abilities and background, your 
likes and dislikes, and your personality and people skills.
3. If you are new to the security and loss prevention profession, aim to “get your 
foot in the door.” As a college student, look for an intern position, work part-time, 
or do volunteer work. Aim to graduate with experience. As a retired government 
employee, or if you are beginning a new career in security, market and transfer your 
accumulated skills and experience to this profession.
4. Most people will enter new careers several times in their lives.
5. Searching for a career opportunity requires planning, patience, and perseverance. 
Rejections are a typical part of every search. A positive attitude will make or break 
your career.
6. When planning elective courses in college or when training opportunities arise, 
consider that employers want people with skills (e.g., writing, speaking, interviewing, 
information technology).
7. Many students do not realize that a college education and some training programs teach 
the student how to learn. Although many bits of information studied and reproduced 

on examinations are forgotten months after being tested, the skills of how to study 
information, how to read a textbook or article, how to critically think and question, how 
to do research and solve problems, and how to prepare and present a report are skills for 
life that are repeated over and over in one’s professional career. In our quickly changing 
information age, these skills are invaluable.
8. If you are fortunate enough to have a choice among positions, do not let salary be the 
only factor in your decision. Think about career potential and advancement, content 
of the work, free training, benefits, travel, and equipment.
9. Exercise due diligence on potential employers. For example, speak to present 
employees and check the organization’s financial health.
10.  Five key factors influencing an individual’s chances for promotion are education, 
training, professional development and certification, experience, and personality.
11.  Avoid quitting a job before you find another. Cultivate references, even in jobs you 
dislike; such jobs are a learning experience (Purpura, 1997: 366–384).
Case Problems          537
The employment situation in the security and loss prevention profession reflects a 
bright future. Good luck with your career!
Search the Web
Here are Web sites relevant to this chapter:
Academy of Security Educators and Trainers: www.asetcse.org/index.htm
ASIS International: www.asisonline.org
Central Intelligence Agency: www.cia.gov
Department of Homeland Security, Research & Technology: www.dhs.gov
FEMA Emergency Management Institute: http://www.training.fema.gov/emiweb/edu/
LawEnforcementJobs.com: www.lawenforcementjobs.com/content.cfm?ESID
=find&ACTION=&SearchBy=location&SearchWhereClause=AND+S.
StateID=42#joblist
National Academic Consortium for Homeland Security: http://homelandsecurity.osu.
edu/NACHS/index.html
Nation Job Network: www.nationjob.com/security/
The Homeland Security/Defense Education Consortium: www.hsdec.org
U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook: www.bls.gov/oco
U.S. Office of Personnel Management: www.usajobs.gov/homeland.asp
World Future Society: www.wfs.org
Yahoo! Hot Jobs: http://hotjobs.yahoo.com/jobs-Law_Enforcement_Security-all
Case Problems
19A. As a contract security supervisor with a major security service firm, you are faced 
with a major career decision. You have a bachelor’s degree and have been with 
your present employer for a total of 7 years: 2 years part-time while in college, and 
5 years full-time since graduating. These years have been spent at a hospital where 
you would like to advance to site security manager, but you face competition from 
one other supervisor, who also has a bachelor’s degree, the same certifications and 
training that you possess, and about the same years of experience. The present 
contract site security manager is a former detective who wants to retire within 

538          YOUR FUTURE IN SECURITY AND LOSS PREVENTION 
the next year or two. You have repeatedly asked managers from the security 
service firm (i.e., your employer) about advancement opportunities, but nothing is 
available. Recently, you were offered the position of in-house security and safety 
training officer with a nearby, urban school district. The pay is $800 less annually 
than what you are earning now. However, you would receive additional insurance 
and retirement benefits and work only day shifts, Monday through Friday. You 
would be the only college-educated officer on the school district security force, 
which is primarily composed of contract officers. The director of security is the 
only other in-house security officer, a retired police officer with no college degree. 
What career choice do you make?
19B.  As a regional loss prevention manager with a major retailer, you have 12 years of 
retail loss prevention experience. You earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees and a 
CPP. The territory you work covers nearly 100 stores in six southeastern states. You 
are on the road each day responding to challenges and wish you could spend more 
time with your spouse and two children. After 8 years with the same company, 
and no chance for advancement, you decide to consider an offer as loss prevention 
director with a major retailer in the New York City area. The pay is $8,000 more 
than what you are earning now, with similar benefits. You would have additional 
responsibilities, but you would travel much less. Your spouse and children do not 
want to move because of family and friends. What career choice do you make?
References
ASIS International. (2005). “Proceedings of the 2005 Academic/Practitioner Symposium.” 
Alexandria, VA: ASIS International.
Campbell, G. (2007). “Security Metrics in Context.” Security Technology & Design, 17 
(March).
Davidson, M. (2005). “A Matter of Degrees.” Security Management, 49 (December).
Flynn, D. (2007). “Mapping the Global Future: Report of the National Intelligence Council’s 
2020 Project.” Strategic Insights, VI (June).
“Here Comes the 21st Century: What Does It Hold for Security?” (1997). Security 
Management Bulletin (March 25).
Naim, M. (2003). “The Five Wars of Globalization.” Foreign Policy (January/February).
Purpura, P. (1997). Criminal Justice: An Introduction. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Purpura, P. (2007). Terrorism and Homeland Security: An Introduction with Applications. 
Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann.
Ritter, N. (2006). “Preparing for the Future: Criminal Justice in 2040.” NIJ Journal 
(November).
“Security’s Burden Increases.” (2001). Security Management, 45 (May).
“Survey Studies Women in Security.” (1996). Security Management (February).
Tafoya, W. (1991). “The Future of Law Enforcement? A Chronology of Events.” C J 
International, 7 (May–June).
Taylor, R., et al. (2006). Digital Crime and Digital Terrorism. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice Hall.
The Executive Office of the President, Office of Science and Technology Policy and The 
Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate. (2004). The 
National Plan for Research and Development in Support of Critical Infrastructure 
Protection. http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/ST_2004_NCIP_RD_PlanFINALApr05.
pdf, retrieved April 1, 2007.
United States Commission on National Security/21st Century. (1999). New World Coming: 
American Security in the 21st Century (September 15). http://www.fas.org/man/docs/nwc/
nwc.htm, retrieved March 31, 2007.
U.S. Department of Labor. (2000). “Futurework: Trends and Challenges for Work in the 
21st Century.” Occupational Outlook Quarterly (Summer). http://www.bls.gov/opub/
ooq/2000/Summer/art04.pdf, retrieved March 29, 2007.

Index
A
Abduction, 483, 499–501
Access controls
Automatic, 151, 416–154
biometric security systems, 153
card systems, 152–153
cryptography, 151
description of, 148–149
employee identification system, 150–151
employee traffic, 149
fire suppression through, 16–17, 61
future of, 16–17
at healthcare institutions, 582–584
lock-and-key methods. See Keys; Lock(s)
outsourcing considerations, 219
packages and property, 150
in perimeter security, 16, 180, 187
searching of employees, 148, 514
security officers, 16, 151, 315
visitors, 150, 482–483
Accident(s)
causes of, 502
data reporting, 135
definition of, 27
description of, 329
economic costs of, 330
as external metrics, 25
human error as cause of, 319
injuries caused by, 392
prevention of, 445
statistics, 330
Accident investigation, 225, 343
Accident reports, 331f, 335f
Accountability
cashier operations, 252
definition of, 251-252
employee theft prevention through, 250–251
in healthcare institutions, 481
importance of, 252
informal, 251–252
inventory, 481
purchasing department, 252–253
in retailing, 252
Accounting
definition of, 251–252
description of, 250–251
employee theft prevention through, 250
forensic, 257
losses in, 253
Acoustic-magnetic system, 455
Acrylic windows, 187
Active vehicle barriers, 183
Addict shoplifters, 451
Addiction, 484, 505
Adjusters, 276
Administrative agencies, 71, 80–81, 95
Administrative inspections, 81
Administrative law
compliance auditing, 81–82
federal sentencing guidelines, 82
purpose of, 80
recordkeeping, 81
Administrative searches, 81
ADT Security Services, 14
Advanced manifest rule, 424
Affirmative action, 110–113
Afghanistan, 30–31, 354, 358–359, 364, 366, 369, 
371, 374, 376, 406,
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 110, 
1967–111
Agent of socialization, 127
Agriculture systems, 400–401
Air defense, 373, 376, 429
Airborne hazards, 310
Airports, 54, 143, 203, 378, 393, 424, 426–428, 
434, 436, 464, 501–502
AK-47, 365–366, 475
Alarm dog, 205
Alarm systems
automatic telephone dialer systems, 197
central station, 164, 197
description of, 13, 24, 40
design of, 197
false alarms. See False alarms
fiber optic transmission systems, 197
local, 197
monitoring of, 28
robbery, 197
shoplifting, 23
Alcoholic, 503, 505
Alcoholics Anonymous, 503, 505
Alcoholism, 503, 505
Algorithm, 241, 243, 417
Alien flight student program, 428
All-hazards preparedness concept, 24, 
281–282
539

al-Qaida, 353–354, 358–360, 364–365, 369, 374, 
376, 406, 530 See also 9/11
Aluminum doors, 189
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, 
257, 261
American Insurance Association, 12, 290
American National Standards Institute, 61, 66, 
154, 160, 172, 207, 278, 297, 325
American Red Cross, 286, 344, 385
American Society for Testing and Materials, 61, 
66, 81, 154, 172, 207, 325
American Trucking Association, 433, 437
American Water Works Association, 402, 436
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 111, 504
America’s Counter Smuggling Initiative, 424
Amphetamine, 505–506
Analog technology, 166
Anarchists, 352, 361
Ancient Greece, 9
Ancient Rome, 9
Animal barriers, 183, 205
Animal Liberation Front, 362, 386
Annealed glass, 187
Annual loss exposure, 52
Annunciator, 161, 195
Anthrax, 18, 367–368, 381–382, 401–402, 435
Anticrime lights, 200
Anti-Drug Abuse Act, 467, 504
Antiramming walls, 186
Anti-substance abuse program, 502
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 
1996, 374, 467
Appellate courts, 70–72
Appellate jurisdiction, 71
Applicant(s). See also Employee(s)
background investigation of, 225
criminal history of, 277
interviewing of, 231–233
past employment inquiries, 121
testing of, 119
types to avoid, 100
Applicant screening
factors that affect, 179
guidelines for, 116, 121
healthcare institutions, 120
Internet resources, 118
methods of
applications, 117–118
background investigations, 120–121
interview, 118–119
resumes, 117
tests, 119–120
variations in, 120
negligent hiring prevention through, 117
planning for, 124
purpose of, 110
theft prevention through, 141
workplace violence prevention uses of, 94
Arbitration, 118, 276–277
Area protection, 192, 195
Areas of refuge, 297, 309
Armored car service, 463
Arraignment, 86
Arrest, 10, 14, 17–18, 29, 34, 38, 42, 55, 63, 71, 
73–74, 85–88, 90, 103, 116, 118, 121, 
143–144, 197, 226, 274, 321, 362–363, 
407, 414, 451, 455, 458–459
Arrest law, 87–88
Arrest records, 118
Arson. See also Fire
case study of, 313
insurance fraud through, 276
investigation of, 225
Artificial intelligence, 239, 526
ASIS International
Academic-Practitioner Symposium, 532
certifications offered by, 27, 41
definition of, 492
description of, 27, 39–41, 49, 59, 83, 101–103, 
114, 121, 215, 224
research funding by, 83, 224
trade secret as defined by, 508
training guidelines, 39
web site of, 41
workplace diversity conferences by, 114
Assassination threats, 352
Assassins, 351
Assault, 26, 74, 75, 77, 84, 90–91, 115, 177, 179, 
214, 230, 363, 366, 403, 406, 459, 472, 
475–476, 481, 483
Assessment center, 119
Assets
definition of, 22
information, 502, 507–508, 511–515, 517–518, 
521
key, 22, 60, 185, 372, 392–396, 398, 400, 402, 
404–406, 408, 410, 412, 414, 416, 418, 
420–422, 424, 426, 428, 430, 432, 434–436,
442, 465, 478
Association of American Railroads, 430
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners, 16, 137, 
144, 172, 257, 261
Associations, 16, 36, 41, 48–50, 102, 106, 117, 
216, 235, 305, 341, 383, 399, 466, 477, 
532, 535
ASTM. See American Society for Testing and 
Materials
Asymmetrical warfare, 357
ATMs. See Automatic teller machines
Attack(s)
computer, 134, 136
forced entry, 157
on locks, 157–160
on safes, 169, 171
smash and grab, 177, 188
Attack dog, 205
Attest function, 257
Attire, 103, 105
Attorney/client privilege, 229
Auditing
auditors, 256–257
definition of, 257
employee theft prevention through, 250
internal control questionnaire used in, 257–258
540          INDEX

of healthcare institutions, 482
Aum Shinrikyo cult, 368
Aura of security, 177
Authentication, 151, 256, 416–418, 470
Authorization, 38, 61, 89, 121–122, 135, 149, 
151, 229, 258, 374, 448, 450
Autocratic leadership style, 65
Automatic factory, 526
Automatic license plate recognition systems, 202
Automatic sprinklers, 311, 313
Automatic telephone dialer systems, 197
Automatic teller machines, 469
Aviation
elements of, 426–427
Federal Aviation Administration, 426–427
9/11 attack effects on, 373, 426–429
Transportation Security Administration 
programs, 426, 429, 437
Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001, 
423, 426
B
Bacillus anthracis, 367
Background investigations, 37, 42, 117, 225
“Bad checks,” 445, 447–449
Bail bond, 271, 290
Bait money, 463, 468–469
Bakke v. University of California, 112
Balanced capacitance, 193t
Balanced magnetic switch, 161
Bank(s)
challenges for, 466
credit card fraud, 450, 470
description of, 465–466
embezzlement, 467, 469–470
initiatives for, 466
legal responsibilities, 467
regulation H, 467–468
Bank Protection Act of 1968, 467
Bank robberies, 467–468
Bank Secrecy Act of 1986, 467
Banking security, 468
Bar codes
cards using, 152
counterfeiting of, 449
security officer monitoring using, 203
Barbed wire fences, 183
Barriers, 182–184
Battery, 74
Beslan Elementary School massacre, 475
Bhopal, 408
Bias, 5–6
Bill of Rights, 72–74, 81, 85–87, 124, 338, 476
bin Laden, Osama, 358–359, 364, 376
Biological weapons
description of, 367
military assistance in emergency situations 
involving, 287
responding to, 367
Biometric security systems, 153
Bioterrorism, 18, 380–381, 400, 402, 480, 486
Blast curtains, 187
Blast protection, 186
Blast walls, 186
Blended cyber threats, 392, 412–413
Blended cyber-physical attack, 413
Blizzards, 322
Bloodborne pathogens standard, 336
Bluetooth, 512
Bodyguards, 496–497, 499
Bombs, 496, 150, 183, 319, 352, 367–368, 381, 
474–475
Bona fide occupational qualification, 118
Bond
claims, 276–277
fidelity, 271, 277
insurance vs.,  271, 277
invalidating of, 290
surety, 271
Booking, 85
Booster box, 451
Border defense, 373
Border security
description of, 373
government agencies involved in
Citizenship and Immigration Services, 425
Customs and Border Protection, 400, 424, 
434–435
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 425
Transportation Security Administration, 
426, 429
initiatives for improving, 373
Internet resources, 425
Bots, 413–414
Bow Street Runners, 11
Breach of contract, 73, 79, 218, 239, 271
Brink, Washington Perry, 13
“Broken Windows” theory, 179
Bubonic plague, 324
Budgeting, 25, 52, 141, 252, 535
Bugging, 55, 517
Building codes, 59, 80, 187, 284, 301–305, 322, 
443, 478
Building Construction and Safety Code, 301
Building design, 185–186, 297, 301, 322
Building inspections, 304–305
Building protection against terrorism
description of, 443
explosive blast mitigation, 186–187
glazing, 187–188
land-use controls, 184
target-rich environment, 185
window protection, 187–189
Bullet-resistant vests, 33f
Bullet-resistant windows, 187
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 206, 
319, 363
Burglar-resistant windows, 188
Burglary, 25–26, 40, 73, 102, 158, 168–169, 171, 
179, 188, 197, 226, 238, 250, 270–272, 
462–464, 467, 497
Burglary insurance, 158, 271
Burglary-resistive safe, 169
Burns, William, 13
Index          541

542          INDEX
Business, 7, 10–19. See also Organization(s); 
Private industry; Private sector
retail. See Retail business
shopping malls, 76, 464
Business Anti-Smuggling Coalition, 424
Business continuity
definition of, 17–18, 24, 277–278
factors that affect, 279
Internet resources, 292
methodology for, 278–279
planning, 278
Business Continuity Guideline, 278
Business crime
economic costs of, 35
underreporting of, 26
Business espionage, 508–509, 513, 518
Business impact analysis report, 279
Business income insurance, 274
Business interruption, 264, 274, 383
Business recovery plan, 279
Business resumption plan, 279
Busing, 393, 432–433
C
Cable alarms, 456
Caffeine, 506
Campus crime, 476, 478
Campus Sexual Assault Victim’s Bill of Rights, 476
Canadian border, 373, 425
Capacitance sensors, 162, 162f
Carbon dioxide, 314
Carbon monoxide detectors, 312
Card systems, for access control, 152–153
Careers
advice for, 536
description of, 31, 33, 32t
financial security, 528
healthcare security, 486
in investigation, 243
retail business loss prevention, 442–443
security sales, 219
Cargo theft, 16
Carter, Jimmy, 283
Cascade effect, 392
Case law, 72, 149, 199, 230, 510
Cash handling, 462
Caves, 8
CCTV
analog vs. digital technology, 165–166
bank robbery prevention using, 468
charged coupled device, 166
checkout counter surveillance using, 446f
compression of video, 447
cost savings from, 125
description of, 164–167, 198, 447
executive protection uses of, 498
healthcare institution monitoring using, 483
history of, 165, 447
Internet protocol-based network cameras, 147
Internet with, 513
low-light-level cameras, 198
media portrayals of, 102
monitoring uses of, 146
multiplex systems, 167
of parking lots, 200–202, 483, 526
personnel protection uses of, 495–499
shoplifting prevention using, 454, 456, 459
standards for, 447
tailgating concerns, 152
technological advances in, 165
thermal cameras, 198, 502
with unshielded twisted-pair cabling, 165
with video motion detection, 167, 182
wireless video transmission, 166
Cellular model of organization, 364
Center for Food Security & Emergency 
Preparedness, 401
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 324, 
333, 479, 486
Central station alarm systems, 197
Certification standard, 415
Certifications, 27, 37, 41, 49, 215, 240, 426, 471
Certified protection professional, 33, 41, 215, 
465, 471
Certified public accountant, 95, 256–257
Chain of command, 64, 230, 309, 364
Chain of custody of evidence, 230, 459
Chain-link fencing, 183
Chaos theory, 280
“Charge the jury,” 86
Charged coupled device, 166
Check swindles, 470
Checks, 448–449
Chemical industry, 408–409
Chemical weapons, 287, 368
Chernobyl, 405
Chief law enforcement officer, 100
Chief security officer, 7–8, 16
“Chip-and-PIN” card, 448
Christian Identity, 362
Circumstantial evidence, 230
Citation, 85, 338
Citizen arrest powers, 88
Citizen Corps, 385, 398
Citizen volunteers, 385
Citizenship and Immigration Services, 425
City-states, 9
Civil Defense Programs, 264t, 282
Civil disturbances, 321
Civil investigation, 225
Civil justice
government spending on, 33
procedures in, 79–80
Civil law, 71, 73, 73t
Civil Rights Act
of 1964, 109–111, 115
of 1991, 109, 111
Civil War, 10, 12, 264, 287, 353, 506
Claims
crime losses, 275–276
investigation of, 275
notice of loss, 275
Claims management, 263, 275
Clear zones, 175, 180

Index          543
Clearance rates, 226
Clinical experience model, 525, 532
Clinton, Bill, 283
Closed-circuit television. See CCTV
Close-ended questions, 232
Coast Guard, 82, 201, 287, 396, 423, 433
Coastal defense, 373
Cocaine, 505–506
Code(s)
building, 296, 301–303,
definition of, 350
fire, 304–305, 314
Code of ethics, 39, 40, 48
Code of Federal Regulations, 60, 296, 337, 420, 
426, 467
Code war, 59
Cognitive ability tests, 119
Coiled barbed tape fences, 183
Collective embezzlement, 48
College campuses, 475–476
College transcripts, 122
Color rendition, 200–201,
Columbine High School massacre, 475
Combination lock, 159
Combination padlock, 159
Comitatus, 287
Commercial general liability insurance, 274
Commercial package policy, 270
Common law, 72, 79
Common wall, 184
Communications, 498, 512
Communications security
definition of, 516–517
electronic surveillance, 517–518
subfields of, 519
Community crime prevention, 206
Community policing, 36, 206, 476
Community relations, 473
Community-based mitigation, 282
Company adjuster, 276
Competitive bid, 217, 253
Competitive intelligence, 509, 511, 522
Complementary metal oxide semiconductor, 167
Compliance
auditing, 81–82
description of, 260–261
programs for, 82
Compression of video, 241
Computer crimes
attacks, 140
classification of, 411
internal threats, 411
investigations, 413
motivations for, 140
Concertina fences, 183
Conflict resolution, 473, 493
Conscious disregard, 76
Consensus standards, 58–59, 296
Constitution, 18, 71
Consultants, 31, 511
Contact memory buttons, 152
Contact switches
on doors, 161
on windows, 161, 189f
Container security initiative, 424
Contaminated food, 475
Contingency planning, 279
Contraband, 143, 203, 230
Contract, 79
Contract construction bond, 271
Contract investigation, 225
Contract lifecycle management, 219
Contract security
definition of, 22
questions when purchasing, 256–257
security officers, 28
training issues, 39
undercover investigators, 214
Control center, 146, 203, 526
Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology, 415
Control unit, 161, 195, 196f
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 484
Convergence
of enterprise security, 17
of physical security, 16
Convex mirrors, 456
Copyright, 509
Corporate compliance programs, 82–83
Corporate fraud, 259
Corporate intelligence gathering, 508–509
Cost/benefit analysis, 51
Counterfeit checks, 449
Counterfeiting, 23t, 448, 450, 528
Counterterrorism, 496
Country risk ratings, 496
Country Reports on Terrorism, 357, 370
Courts
district, 70
dual system of, 70
federal, 37
general jurisdiction, 70
state, 70
Crack, 506
“Creative accounting,” 259
Credit cards, 152, 154, 237, 516
Crime
computer. See Computer crimes
cybercrime. See Cybercrime
data regarding, 21
insurance claims for, 239
proactive strategies for reduction of, 41
reactive strategies to, 34
theories of, 34
Crime insurance, 270–271
Crime prevention
community, 49
global, 63
market research to improve, 97
Crime prevention through environmental design, 48, 
178, 454. See also Environmental security 
design
Criminal entrepreneurs, 528
Criminal history, of applicants, 121–122

544          INDEX
Criminal justice
arrest law, 87
government spending on, 87
procedures, 88
Criminal justice system, 33
Criminal law, 11, 38, 71, 72t
Crisis management, 494, 496
Critical infrastructure
definition of, 392
description of, 393
government’s role in protecting, 395
information sharing, 399
priorities, 395
Critical infrastructure sectors
agriculture, 399–400
chemical industry, 408–409
cyberspace, 410–413
dams, 482
defense industry base, 418–419
electricity, 403–404
energy, 403
information technology, 410–413, 415–418
key assets, 420–422
natural gas, 404
nuclear power plants, 405–407
oil, 404
telecommunications, 409–410
water, 401
Critical thinkers, 4–5
Critical thinking
definition of, 4–5
reasons for, 6
security planning, 213
strategies for, 5–6
Cross-cut shredders, 515
Cross-examination, 244t–245t
Cross-training, 16, 257
“Crotchwalking,” 452
Crusades, 353
Cryptography, 151
CSO. See Chief security officer
Customs and Border Protection, 400, 424
Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism, 424
Cyber threats, 410–411
Cybercrime
economic costs of, 16
increases in, 527
insurance for, 239
statistics regarding, 17
Cybersecurity, 398, 403, 410–411
Cyberspace, 410–413
Cyberwarfare, 414
Cycle of protection, 527
Cylinders, of locks, 154, 158, 183
D
Dams, 322, 393–394, 401, 403–405
Data mining, 239
Deadbolt lock, 155
Deadly force, 88, 177, 406–407, 458
Death penalty, 11, 374
Debit cards, 290, 447–448, 450, 470
Decentralized cells, 364
Decentralized networks, 530
Decision theory, 280
Decontamination, 379–380, 402, 435
Deductibles, 266–267
Defalcation. See Embezzlement
Defamation, 74, 121, 229–230, 239, 493
Defendant, 42, 71, 74–80, 510
Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction Act 
of 1996, 374
Defense industries, 15, 32t, 123, 418, 419f
Defensible space, 48, 178
Delegation of authority, 64
Delphi approach, 267
Democratic leadership style, 65, 280
Denial-of-service attack, 411, 413, 508
Department of Agriculture, 304, 395, 400
Department of Defense, 15, 30, 154, 282, 373, 
375, 394, 418, 477, 514t
Department of Energy, 394, 403
Department of Health and Human Services
description of, 83, 231
initiatives, 333
Department of Homeland Security. See also 
Homeland security
Centers of Excellence, 534
chemical facility security standards, 409
civilian facility protection, 301
definition of, 23, 37
description of, 60, 135
research initiatives by, 534
responsibilities of, 534
risk management policies, 94
Department of Interior, 421
Department of Justice, 25–29, 33, 35–36, 122, 
145, 178, 213
Department of State, 25, 231, 350, 356, 370
Department of Treasury, 37, 374
Deposition, 243
Depressants, 505–506
Design basis threat, 406
Designated spokesperson, 102
Deterrence, 33, 164, 177, 503
Differential association, 140
Digital cameras, 135, 166–167, 239, 416, 501
Digital certificate systems, 151
Digital control systems, 402
Digital evidence, 239
Digital forensics, 239
Digital investigation, 239–241
Digital locking systems, 160
Digital photographs, 241
Digital signatures, 241
Digital technology, 166
Digital video evidence system, 241
Digital video recorders, 165
Dim lighting, 191
Diploma mills, 117
Diplomacy, 374
Direct evidence, 230
Direct losses, 25, 330
Directed verdict, 80

Index          545
Directive system, 64
Disaster recovery plan, 279
Disc tumbler lock, 159
Disciplinary hearings, 89
Discovery, 80, 511, 513
Discrimination
disparate treatment, 111
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
guidelines for preventing, 112
Disintegrators, 515
Disparate impact, 111
Disparate treatment, 111
Distance learning, 125, 535
District Courts, 71
Diversity in workplace, 113–114
Dogs, 8, 177, 205–208, 497
Domestic terrorism
anarchists, 352, 361
definition of, 360
ecoterrorists, 361
leftist class, 360
National Memorial Institute for the Prevention 
of Terrorism definition of, 371
racial supremacy, 362
religious extremists, 362
state-sponsored, 360
terrorists, 360–362
Door(s)
aluminum, 189
contact switches on, 161, 189–190, 192
fire, 61, 314–315
hollow-core, 189–190
solid-core, 189–190
standards for, 189
Door hinges, 190
Door strike, 155f
Double-cylinder locks, 155, 297
Double-hung windows, 188, 189f
Drop safe, 463
Drug tests and testing, 120, 461, 504–505
Dry-pipe automatic sprinkler system, 314
Dual-key locks, 463
Due diligence, 82, 219, 225, 235, 511, 516
Dumpster diving, 237, 412
Dye packs, 468
E
Earth Liberation Front, 349, 362, 386
Earthquakes, 281, 285, 322, 323, 386
Easy-access shoplifters, 451
Eavesdropping, 187, 241, 510, 517, 518
E-business, 52, 214, 449, 450, 528
Economic crime, 104, 216
Economic Espionage Act of 1996, 510–511
Ecoterrorists, 491, 510, 511
eDiscovery, 241
Education, 5, 12, 19, 26, 496–497, 503, 504, 
508, 509
Educational institutions
college campuses, 471, 475–477
countermeasures for, 177, 207, 441, 464
employment information from, 535–536
fire protection at, 477–478
hazards at, 471–472
Internet resources, 118
school districts. See School districts
security careers at, 470
threats at, 471
EEOC. See Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission
E-fence, 454
Egress, 151, 297–299
8th Amendment, 87
Electricity, 404–405, 408, 485
Electromechanical locks, 134, 154–155
Electronic article surveillance, 146, 455, 481
Electronic field sensor, 190, 134t
Electronic payments, 447
Electronic security, 13, 14, 17, 27, 151
Electronic security glazing, 188
Electronic soundproofing, 54, 520
Electronic surveillance, 18, 491t, 511, 517
E-mail. See also Internet; World Wide Web
employer monitoring of, 77
encryption of, 403
internal communications using, 147
spam, 412
Emanation security, 517
Embezzlement, 48, 73, 120, 135, 137, 142
Emergencies
accidents, 319–320
blizzards, 322
bomb threats, 319
civil disturbances, 321
earthquakes, 322
floods, 322
Internet resources, 320
mitigation strategies for, 277
natural disasters, 321–323
pandemics, 324–325
strikes, 321
technological, 321, 323
weapons of mass destruction. See Weapons of 
mass destruction
windstorms, 321–322
Emergency exit, 308 316f
Emergency management
all-hazards preparedness concept, 21, 24, 
281–282
communications, 284
definition of, 280–281
description of, 278
disciplines, 284, 286
generic, 264t, 282
history of, 282–284
Internet resources, 320
mitigation, 282–284
National Response Plan, 285–287
preparedness, 324
recovery, 284–285
response, 285
in schools, 282
specialized, 264t, 282
state offices of, 282

546          INDEX
Emergency management (Continued)
theories of, 280
transformations in, 280
Emergency medical services, 295, 308, 317
Emergency medical technicians, 318, 325, 377
Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor 
Act, 442t, 480
Emergency Planning and Community 
Right-to-Know Act of 1986, 392t, 408
Emergency room security, 483
Emotional distress, 74, 115, 230, 494
Employee(s). See also Applicant(s); Applicant 
screening
arson by, 313, 360
disgruntled, 401, 411, 437
dishonesty by, 277
feedback, 125
gang education for, 473
involvement programs for, 100
learning methods and principles for, 123, 125
loss prevention orientation, 124
monitoring of, 77, 334
morale of, 103, 201, 224, 330, 445, 528
needs of, 113, 499
orientation of, 123, 124, 514
retail business loss prevention, 442–445
rewards for, 342, 445
rights of, 85
searching of, 149, 536
setting of example by supervisor, 128, 135
shoplifting awareness and training, 451
socialization of
about burglaries, 464
about robberies, 462–463
description of, 123
terrorism awareness by, 476
training of, 330, 398
turnover of, 535
Employee assistance programs, 503
Employee discounts, 445
Employee identification system, 150
Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988, 109, 
123, 144, 233, 234
Employee theft
collusion, 140
countermeasures against
access controls. See Access controls
accountability, 384
accounting, 140
applicant screening, 141
auditing, 140
confrontation with suspect, 143–144
file cabinets, 171
identity management systems, 147
insurance, 143
integrated systems, 146
Internet resources, 118
intrusion detection systems. See Intrusion 
detection systems
investigation, 142
lock-and-key methods. See Keys; Lock(s)
by management, 141
open architecture, 146–147
physical security, 146–156
policy and procedural controls, 142
prosecution, 144
safes. See Safe(s)
signs, 142
undercover investigation, 142
vaults, 159
definition of, 141
description of, 144
economic costs of, 142
indicators of, 146
methods of, 143
property losses, 140
rationalizations for, 141
reasons for, 146–147
reporting of, 140
research regarding, 156
Employee theft formula, 133t, 140
Employer
E-mail monitoring by, 77
OSHA-related responsibilities, 337
workplace violence prevention by, 492–494, 527
Employment, 493–495. See also Careers
Employment law
description of, 110
equal employment opportunities. See Equal 
employment opportunities
federal legislation, 110, 113
U.S. Supreme Court decisions regarding, 71
workplace diversity, 113–114
Encryption, 151, 502, 516, 520
Energy barriers, 182–183
England, 10–11
Enron Corporation, 259
Enterprise risk management, 268–269
Enterprise security, 17–18
Entry
forced, 177
unauthorized, 176–177
Entry-level management positions, 33, 220, 243, 
420, 465, 471, 478, 486
Entry-level security officer positions, 535
Environmental protection, 434
Environmental Protection Agency, 61, 81, 304, 
336, 395
Environmental security design, 175t, 178. See also 
Crime prevention through environmental 
design
Equal employment opportunities
definition of, 112–113
gender-based denial of, 112
women’s access to, 112
Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972, 111
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
description of, 110, 112
discrimination prevention guidelines, 528
lawsuits handled by, 493
legislation enforced by, 467
sexual harassment as defined by, 115

Index          547
Equal Pay Act of 1963, 110
Espionage. See also Spying
description of, 513
Economic Espionage Act of 1996, 510–511
techniques for, 513
Esteem needs, 128
Ethics, 39–40
Evacuation, 308–309
Event risk management, 268
Evidence, 275–276, 330–338
Evidence-based model, 532–533
Exclusionary rule, 87–88
Executive protection
abduction, 499, 501
definition of, 495
education and training in, 496
at home, 495–496
kidnap insurance, 496
at office, 498
planning of, 496
strategies for
avoidance of predictable patterns, 597
description of, 496
recognition of tricks, 497
technology used in, 496
while traveling, 496
Exit devices, 315
Exit safety, 309f
Experimental control group design, 62
External attack, 511
External loss prevention, 101–102
External metrics
accidents as, 31–32
crime data as, 31
definition of, 30
fires as, 31–32
External relations
community, 94
definition of, 95
good, 96
law enforcement, 100
media, 101
peers, 100
public safety agencies, 96
schematic diagram of, 95f
External threat countermeasures
barriers, 155
building protection against terrorism
description of, 303
explosive blast mitigation, 186
glazing, 182
land-use controls, 185
target-rich environment, 186
window protection, 187
case study of, 186
communications, 185
control center, 187
design principles for, 188
doors. See Door(s)
environmental security design, 187
Internet resources, 118
intrusion detection systems. See Intrusion 
detection systems
lighting. See Lighting
parking lot, 186
perimeter security, 189
protective dogs, 188
security officers, 186
vehicle controls, 187
Extinguishers, 312–313
Extortion, 269–272, 469
Extremism, 362
Extroversion, 343
Exxon Valdez, 408
accounting, 419
applicant screening, 444
auditing, 420
confrontation with suspect, 422
file cabinets, 171
identity management systems, 171
insurance, 142
integrated systems, 146
Internet resources, 118
intrusion detection systems. See Intrusion 
detection systems
investigation, 142
lock-and-key methods. See Keys; Lock(s)
by management, 140
open architecture, 146–147
physical security, 145
policy and procedural controls, 140
prosecution, 143
safes. See Safe(s)
signs, 140
undercover investigation, 140
vaults, 145
definition of, 408
description of, 409
economic costs of, 140
indicators of, 142
methods of, 141
property losses, 140
rationalizations for, 147
reasons for, 145–146
reporting of, 140
research regarding, 147–155
Employee theft formula, 140
F
Facility manager, 17
Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003, 
109t, 121, 129, 470
Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1971, 109t, 121, 229
Fallout, 368, 380
False alarms
costs of, 48
description of, 40, 181
incidence of, 40
strategies for reducing, 40
False imprisonment, 69, 74, 115, 460
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, 109t, 111
Fargo, William, 3t, 13

548          INDEX
FBI
crime data, 26, 476
fraud investigations by, 259
integrated automated fingerprint identification 
system, 38
National Crime Information Center, 121
Federal Air Marshal Service, 392t, 428
Federal Aviation Administration, 376, 392t, 426
Federal Bureau of Investigation. See FBI
Federal Civil Defense Administration, 282
Federal courts, 71
Federal crime insurance, 272
Federal Emergency Management Agency
creation of, 283, 386
Hurricane Katrina, 283, 289
publications by, 386
reforms in, 283
Federal Information Security Management 
Act, 410
Federal legislation, 110–111, 113, 133. See also 
specific legislation
Federal Protective Services, 392t, 394, 421
Federal Railroad Administration, 431
Federal sentencing guidelines, 69, 70t, 82, 260
Federal Transit Administration, 431
Feedback, 55, 65, 94, 96–97, 100, 102
Felonies, 69t, 72, 173t
Fence-mounted sensors, 193t, 194t
Fencing, 31, 183
Ferdinand, 352
Feudalism, 3t, 9
Fiber optics
alarm systems, 192–193
description of, 196
intrusion detection systems using, 229, 232
perimeter security uses of, 232
Fidelity bond, 323, 329–330
Fielding, Henry, 12
5th Amendment, 105, 107
File cabinets, 205
Financial institutions. See also Bank(s)
challenges for, 559
description of, 558–559
initiatives for, 559
legal responsibilities, 560
liquidity issues, 558
security careers, 564–565
threats, 560
Financial Modernization Act of 1999, 73t, 83, 84
Financial risk management, 263t, 268
Financial statements, 251t, 260
Fire. See also Arson
data regarding, 31–32
detection of, 306, 311–312
as external metric, 25
fuel for, 307, 436f
in healthcare institutions, 485
high-rise, 299, 303
incidence of, 51
Fire brigade, 295t, 306, 316,
Fire codes, 155, 295, 304, 305, 314, 315, 485
Fire departments
contacting of, 121, 239, 306, 312–313
description of, 458
protection efforts by, 304–305
Fire doors, 61, 314, 315
Fire extinguishers, 137, 138, 312–313
Fire hoses
description of, 61, 314
inspection, testing, and maintenance of, 316
Fire insurance, 12, 264, 273
Fire investigation, 307
Fire prevention strategies
description of, 307
evacuation, 308
hazardous materials, 308
housekeeping, 308
inspection, 307
Internet resources, 118
medical services, 308–310
planning, 307
safety, 307–308
training, 310–311
Fire protection
in ancient Rome, 9–10
at educational institutions, 477–478
at healthcare institutions, 478–479
performance-based design, 316–317
plans for, 316
private organizations involved in, 303
promotion strategies for, 307
Fire suppression strategies
access control, 315
description of, 315
fire brigade, 316
fire detection, 311–312
fire walls and doors, 314
integrated systems, 311
Internet resources, 321
smoke detection, 311–312
sprinklers, 306, 312–314
stairwells, 315
standpipes, 314, 315f,316
Fire triangle, 306f
Firearms training, 38
Fire-resistive buildings, 306, 315
Firewalls, 412–413, 416–417
First party risks, 266, 306
First responders, 22, 202, 284, 296, 385, 494
First wave societies, 3, 15
First-resistive safe, 169
Flame detectors, 311
Flash drives, 512
Floods, 201, 283, 285, 322
Floor wardens, 295, 309, 317
Fluorescent lamps, 200
Food Products Association, 401, 436
Food safety, 400–401, 436–437
Food Safety and Inspection Service, 400–401, 437
Food systems, 400
Foot patrols, 202
Foot-candle, 199
Force, 30, 35–37, 39
Forced entry attacks, 157, 175

Index          549
Ford Motor Company, 15
Forensic accounting, 249, 257
Foreseeability, 75–76, 116–117
Formal organization, 48, 64, 103, 226
14th Amendment, 87, 112
4th Amendment, 87–88
Fragment retention film, 187
Frankpledge system, 3, 10
Fraud
arson, 276
corporate, 258–259
credit card, 360, 448
definition of, 258
description of, 258
e-business, 450
FBI investigations of, 259
healthcare, 482
insurance, 276
for profit, 441, 470
for property, 441, 470
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 49, 70t, 83, 
109t, 120,
Free and Secure Trade initiative, 425
Freedom of Information Law, 223, 235
French Revolution, 349, 351–352
Fresnel lights, 201
Front de Liberation Nationale, 352
Fully thermally tempered glass, 187
Fundamentalism, 354
G
Game theory, 263, 267
Gang Resistance Education and Training program, 
441, 473
GAO. See Government Accountability Office
Gas detectors, 312
Gates, 183, 186
General jurisdiction courts, 69–71
General Services Administration, 80, 187, 207, 
392, 421
Generic emergency management, 264, 282
Geographic information systems, 51
“Ghosting technique,” 457
Gift cards, 448
Gilmore Commission, 375, 377
Glass-breakage sensors, 189
Glazing of windows, 186–188
Global positioning system, 73, 77, 197, 248, 368, 
435, 441, 468
Globalization, 349, 347, 525, 529–531
Globally Harmonized System of Classification and 
Labeling of Chemicals, 329, 334
Governance, 219, 249, 260, 385, 393, 415, 436
Government
definition of, 23, 491
espionage, 491
in homeland security, 377, 383
insurance programs, 270, 482
local. See Local governments
risk management in, 281
security classifications, 513, 514t
state. See State governments
Government Accountability Office
chemical industry security challenges, 409
critical infrastructure priority efforts, 32t
cyber threats, 412–413
design basis threats, 406
insurance company studies, 321
privatization studies by, 36
railroads, 515
risk management support from, 335
transportation security, 506, 509
GPS, 73, 77, 197, 206, 241, 368, 499, 501, 502
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 84, 441, 467, 470
Great Wall of China, 3, 8
Greece, 9
Grid wire sensors, 161
Griggs vs. Duke Power, 109, 111
Guard dog, 205
Guard house, 202
Guerilla warfare, 349, 352
Gun-Free Schools Act of 1994, 441, 472
H
Hackers, 17, 18, 101, 117, 135, 237, 399, 
411–416, 469
Halogen lamps, 200
Halon, 314
Hammurabi, King of Babylon, 3, 9
Harassment, 23, 109, 115–116, 493
Hazard(s)
all-hazards, 21, 24–25, 34, 263, 264, 278, 
281–283, 286, 289, 399, 411, 471, 475
in confined areas, 337
definition of, 23
at educational institutions, 471
railroad transportation of, 514
types of, 24
workplace, 342
Hazard Communication Standard, 329, 334
Hazardous materials, 54, 186, 296, 308, 317, 386, 
393, 400, 429, 430, 480
Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency 
Response standard, 329, 336
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act, 70, 83, 224, 442, 480–481
Healthcare institutions
access controls at, 482, 484
accountability in, 442, 481, 484
applicant screening, 482
auditing of, 482,
CCTV monitoring, 483–484
challenges for, 479–480
description of, 478–481, 483–487
emergency room security, 579
fires in, 485–486
fraud, 482
inventory control in, 481, 484
legal responsibilities of, 480–481
locker rooms, 484
mortuary, 484
newborn nursery security, 483
patient property, 484
patrols at, 483–484

550          INDEX
Healthcare institutions (Continued)
pharmacy protection, 484
professionalism, 485
regulation of, 485
security careers, 486
standards, 479–480
systems designs, 479–481, 487
threats for, 441, 479–480
violence at, 480, 483–484
Hearing, 9, 15, 70–71, 86, 89, 103, 114, 197, 205, 
289, 305, 459
Hearsay evidence, 223, 230
Hedges, 53, 178, 183–184, 469
Hierarchy of human needs, 39, 127–128
High-pressure sodium lamps, 200
High-rise fires, 303
Highways, 432–433, 462
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act
Hiring
affirmative action effects on, 109–113
errors in, 117
negligent, 109, 116–117, 121–122,
quotas, 109, 113
History
ancient Greece, 9
ancient Rome, 9
early America, 11
England, 10
labor unions, 12, 14–15
Middle Ages in Europe, 9
1960s, 15, 178, 282, 332, 333, 353, 360–361, 
422, 455, 507, 531
railroads, 14
reasons for studying, 3
World War I and II, 15
Hollow-core doors, 189
Holmes, Edwin, 3, 13
Home security systems, 13, 258
“Homegrown terrorism.” See Domestic terrorism
Homeland security. See also Department of 
Homeland Security
citizen volunteers, 385
definition of, 369
educational programs in, 384, 386, 399, 
464, 537
Internet resources, 291, 293, 325, 386, 437, 
487, 537
local governments in, 436
mail systems, 381
market for, 383
National Counterterrorism Center, 370, 
377, 386
national security and, 349, 371, 373
National Strategy for Homeland Security, 350, 
371–374, 385, 393–394, 429, 410, 423, 532
Rand Corporation studies, 371, 373
state governments in, 375
terrorism measurements, 349, 369–371, 397
Homeland Security Act of 2002, 319–320, 350, 
372, 375, 394–395, 400, 534
Homeland Security Advisory System, 350, 378, 
398, 443
Homeland security information network-critical 
infrastructure, 37, 391, 399
Homeland Security Presidential Directives, 5, 7, 
12, 177, 342, 478
Homicides, 472, 492
Honesty tests, 119
Hostile working environment, 109, 115
Human barriers, 175, 183
Human relations, 66, 98, 535
Human resources, 21, 22, 24, 30, 55, 103, 333, 
444, 486
Hurricanes
description of, 284
Katrina, 283–284, 289
I
Identification system for employees, 150
Identi-Kit, 239
Identity management systems, 147
Identity theft, 236–227, 508, 516
IFPO. See International Foundation for 
Protection Officers
Illicit drugs, 57, 502, 503, 203, 425, 528, 530
Illuminance, 199–200
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 425, 437
Immune buildings, 479
Implied contract, 79
Improvised explosive device, 359, 367
Incandescent lamps, 200
Independent adjuster, 276
Indirect losses, 25, 52, 100, 330
Industrial Revolution, 10, 11, 15, 330
Infliction of emotional distress, 74, 115, 230
Influenza, 287, 324, 326
Informal organization, 64, 226, 445
Informants, 223, 238, 454
Information assets
destruction of, 514–515
types of, 508
Information security
corporate intelligence gathering, 508
countermeasures for, 513
definition of, 507
espionage. See Espionage
future of, 517
strategies used in, 511
Information sharing, 36, 37
Information sharing and analysis centers, 37, 
384, 399
Information technology
external security and, 508
physical security and, 50
professionals, 135, 147
securities fraud, 527
security, 533
Information technology threats, 134–136, 411
Infrared photo beam sensors, 194t
Infrared photoelectric beam systems, 163f
Infrastructure Security Partnership, 399, 437

Index          551
Infrastructure threats, 135
Inhalants, 505, 507
Injury, 492, 493, 495
Inktags, 552
Insider threats, 162
Inspection warrant, 97
Inspections
building, 364
fire prevention, 366
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
401–404
by private security officers, 106–107
Insurance
bond vs., 322–323
crime, 322–324
cyber, 324
definition of, 321
extortion, 324
fire, 325–326
government, 321
Internet resources, 346
kidnapping, 324, 600
liability, 322, 326
multiple-line, 322
private, 321–322
property, 322, 326
ransom, 600
terrorism, 324
theft protection, 172
types of, 321–322
workers’ compensation, 327
Insurance adjusters, 328–329
Insurance agent, 328
Insurance brokers, 315
Insurance claims. See Claims
Insurance companies
competition among, 321
government regulation of, 321
loss prevention and, 13
research by, 76
Insurance industry
control of, 321
private, 321–322
technical aspects of, 321
Insurance investigation, 270
Insurance rates, 321
Insurrection Act, 343
Integrated automated fingerprint identification 
system, 46
Integrated information security architecture, 495
Integrated systems
fire suppression, 371
physical security
alarm systems. See Alarm systems
CCTV. See CCTV
description of, 146
Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act 
of 2004, 370, 426
Intelligent video systems, 167
Intensive interview, 233
Interagency Security Committee, 421
Interchangeable core locks, 159
Intercity busing, 432–433
Interior sensors, 161
Internal attack, 135, 136, 511
Internal control questionnaire, 257
Internal loss
examples of, 134
prevention of, 134, 137, 445
theft. See Internal theft, 133–142
Internal metrics, 24–25
Internal relations
customer-driven security, 96
definition of, 96
good, 113–114
human relations, 98
intranet, 93, 99, 100, 125
loss prevention meetings, 99
management support, 98
marketing, 96, 106
schematic diagram of, 242
Internal space protection, 456
Internal theft
countermeasures against
access controls. See Access controls, 148–151
accountability, 142, 143, 150
accounting, 140–145
applicant screening, 141
auditing, 142–143
confrontation with suspect, 143
file cabinets, 162, 168
identity management systems, 147
insurance, 171, 188, 202
integrated systems, 146
Internet resources, 135
intrusion detection systems. See Intrusion 
detection systems, 172
investigation, 154
lock-and-key methods. See Keys; Lock(s)
by management, 141
open architecture, 146–147
physical security, 142, 146
policy and procedural controls, 142
prosecution, 144, 146, 165
safes. See Safe(s), 162, 168, 170
signs, 142, 178, 200
undercover investigation, 142
vaults, 168, 192
economic costs of, 141
indicators of, 137
insurance claims for, 171
methods of, 135, 136, 140, 142
property losses, 142
rationalizations for, 140
reasons for, 141
reporting of, 302, 332
research regarding, 141
at retail businesses, 442–448
seriousness of, 233
Internal threats
examples of, 134
information technology, 134

552          INDEX
Internal vulnerability of organizations, 421
International Association of Campus Law 
Enforcement Administrators, 477, 487
International Association of Fire Fighters, 304, 325
International Building Code, 301, 305
International Code Council, 59, 165, 301
International Foundation for Protection 
Officers, 41
International Organization for Standardization,
61–62
International terrorism, 356–357, 370–371, 397
International terrorists, 357, 362
Internet. See also Cybercrime; E-mail; 
World Wide Web
applicant recruitment using, 118
applicant screening resources, 110, 112
border security resources, 425
business continuity resources, 277
CCTV and, 513
educational institutions resources, 471, 475
emergencies resources, 99
emergency management resources, 280
employer monitoring of usage of, 77, 79
employment information from, 535–536
fire prevention resources, 303, 310
fire suppression resources, 16–17, 61
homeland security resources, 384
information from, 339, 360
insurance resources, 270
investigation resources, 142
life safety resources, 295–297
risk management resources, 264
terrorism resources, 460–461
theft prevention resources, 141, 145
transportation sector resources, 426–427
Internet Bots. See Bots
Internet protocol, 147, 166, 520
Internet protocol-based network cameras, 166
Interoperability, 37, 61, 285, 410
INTERPOL, 26, 530
Interrogation, of suspects, 231–233
Interviewing
of applicants, 231–234
of suspects, 243
Intranet, 16, 99, 125, 142, 527
Introversion, 343
Intrusion detection systems
alarm signaling systems, 195, 312
applications of, 312
classification of, 183, 195f
control unit, 195
definition of, 195
description of, 195–196
design of, 196,
energy fields, 161
fiber optics, 163, 192
interior sensors, 161
magnetic field, 152, 192
motion detectors, 162, 190
operational zoning, 164
standards for, 161
types of, 192
vulnerability of, 413
Invasion of privacy, 74, 81, 89, 230
Inventory
control of, in healthcare institutions, 481
definition of, 478–479
shrinkage of, 255, 443, 487
Inventory systems, 255
Investigation
accident, 343–344
applicant background, 117, 225
arson, 276
career in, 243
civil, 225
computer crime, 411–414
considerations regarding, 228
contract, 225
definition of, 225
digital, 226
evidence, 239
fire, 228
identity theft, 236–237
information
accuracy of, 242
improperly obtained, 235
from Internet, 239
legal restrictions when collecting, 235
sources of, 239
insurance, 238
internal theft, 137–139
interviewing and interrogation methods, 231
legal considerations, 226
liability issues, 269
negligence and liability, 225
overseas, 230–231
overt, 226
private, 225–226
proprietary, 225
public, 226
questions to ask in, 224
report writing, 242
safety, 226
steps involved in, 133
testimony, 243
types of, 225
undercover, 226–228
workplace, 233, 240
Investigative leads
computers, 239–240
informants, 238
modus operandi, 238
motive, 238
scene of the loss, 237
software, 239
Victims, 239
witnesses, 238
Involvement programs, 100
Ionization detectors, 311
iPods, 239–240
Iraq, 18, 22, 30
Islam, 315, 353

Index          553
J
“Jamb peeling”, 157
Job analysis, 117, 124
Job reference immunity statutes, 121
Joint Committee on Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations, 485, 487
Journal of Security Administration, 49, 66, 489
Journal of Security Education, 49, 66
Judicial systems, 70–71
Jurisdiction courts, 70
Jury trial, 82, 111
“Just-in-time production”, 526
Juvenile shoplifters, 451, 457
K
Katrina. See Hurricanes, Katrina
Keep out zones, 187
Key(s)
control of, 158, 160–191
duplication of, 159–161
master key systems, 160
Key assets, 372, 391, 393, 395, 396f, 404–405, 
420–422f, 426, 435, 442, 465, 478
Key performance indicators, 214, 219. See also 
Metrics
Key resources, 394f, 395, 420, 422
Key-in-knob locks, 155
Keylogging programs, 412
Keystroke capturing hardware, 513
Khan, Genghis, 8
Kickback, 90, 140, 253, 481, 482
Kidnapping, 23t, 72, 269, 272, 469, 483, 495, 
497, 499–501
Kidnapping insurance, 272, 500
Kleptomania, 451
Korean War, 15
Ku Klux Klan, 352, 495
L
Labor law, 84–85
Labor strike, 321
Labor unions, 14–15
Laminated glass, 187
Lamps, 200–201
Land-use controls, 184
Latches, 155, 156f, 177, 188, 298, 299
Law
administrative. See Administrative law
arrest, 87–88
case, 72, 149, 199, 510
civil, 71, 73t, 527
common, 72, 79, 88, 89
criminal, 71, 72t, 73t, 140, 225, 374, 453
description of, 70
employment. See Employment law
information collection during investigation, 
235–236
in investigations, 229–230
labor, 84–85
legislative, 72
origins of, 72–73, 73t
procedural, 73, 73t
substantive, 73, 73t
tort. See Tort law
Law enforcement agencies, 100
Law enforcement officers. See also Public police
citizens and, ratio between, 34
definition of, 29
public law enforcement by, 100
statistics regarding, 29
Layered security, 177
Leaderless resistance, 364
Leadership style, 65
Legal duty, 75–76
Legislation. See also specific legislation
employment-related, 110–111
private security affected by, 83–84
safety. See Safety legislation
Legislative law, 72
Lever lock, 155, 159
Liability insurance, 270, 273–274
Liability investigation, 225
Libel, 74
Life safety
building design and building codes, 301–303
definition of, 295–296
description of, 422
Internet resources, 325
National Fire Protection Association 101 
Life Safety Code, 297–303,
477–478, 485
standards, regulations, and codes, 296
Lighting
bright, 199, 232, 363
deficiencies of, 198
dim, 199
illumination, 199
information sources on, 198
strategies for, 201
Limited jurisdiction courts, 70–71
Line security, 517
Link analysis, 239
Litigation bond, 271
Local alarm systems, 197
Local area network, 197, 520
Local governments
government buildings protection by, 422
in homeland security, 377–378
Lock(s)
attacks on, 157–160
combination, 159, 170, 170t
combination padlock, 159
cylinder part of, 155, 155f, 158
deadbolt, 155
digital systems, 166
disc tumbler, 159
door structure, 157
dual-key, 463
electromechanical, 154, 155
forced-entry attacks, 157, 158
handicap entrances, 155, 156f
interchangeable core, 159

554          INDEX
Lock(s) (Continued)
key-in-knob, 155
latches, 155, 156f
lever, 159
mechanical, 154, 156f
picking of, 157
pin tumbler, 159
purpose of, 154
“smart” 160
types of, 159–160
warded, 159
wireless systems, 151
Lockout, 336
Logic bomb, 411
Logistics, 287
Loop alarms, 435–436
Loss
accounting, 250
direct, 25, 330
indirect, 25, 330
probability, frequency, and cost of, 51–52
retail business. See Retail business losses
scene of, 237
Loss prevention
careers in, 31–33, 32t
consultant involved in, 32t
definition of, 6
education in, 531, 536
future of, 525–530
history of, 5–6
importance of, 6
insurance industry and, 12
new employee orientation in, 98, 124
peers in, 102–103
planning of. See Planning
research, 532–534
risk management and, 264
security vs., 6
specialists involved in, 32t
survey for, 50–51
theoretical foundations of, 48–49
trends affecting, 527–530
Loss prevention meetings, 99
Loss prevention personnel
attire of, 105–106
challenges for, 19
importance of, 94
training of, 62
Loss prevention programs
agencies that affect, 80–81
customer-driven, 96
evaluation of, 62–65
law enforcement agency relations with, 100
management support for, 98
market segmentation for, 96
media influences on, 102
organization chart of, 65f
Low-pressure sodium lamps, 200
LSD, 506–507
Lumens, 199–200
Lux, 199–200
M
Magna Carta, 10
Magnetic dot cards, 152
Magnetic field intrusion detection systems, 192
Magnetic stripe cards, 152
Mail systems, 381–383
Malicious prosecution, 74, 131, 459
Mall. See Shopping malls
Malware, 412–413
Management
conflict resolution training, 492
employee theft and, 140
entry-level positions, 33, 243
internal theft countermeasures by, 141–145
support from, 98
Management theory, 280
Man-portable air defense systems, 429
Manufacturing security, 31
Marijuana, 104, 505–507
Maritime shipping, 433–434
Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2002, 
408, 434
Marked money, 143, 463
Market segmentation, 96–97
Marketing, 96–97
Marking of property, 143
Marxist theory, 281
Maslow, Abraham, 48, 127
Mass transit systems, 431–432, 431f
Master key systems, 160
Material safety data sheets, 334
McVeigh, Timothy, 355, 363
Mechanical locks, 154, 156f
Media
answering questions from, 102
loss prevention programs affected by, 102
relations with, 102–103
Medical examinations, 119
Medical services, 308–310, 318
Mercenary, 30
Mercury vapor lamps, 200
Metal detectors, 143, 203, 428, 474f, 483
Metal halide lamps, 200
Methamphetamine, 506
Metrics
definition of, 24
description of, 23–24
external, 25–27
growth of, 527
internal, 24–25
methodological problems associated with, 24–25
performance evaluated using, 53
security officer evaluations, 213
security performance determined using, 25
Metropolitan Police Act, 11
Microdots, 143
Microwave motion detectors, 162
Microwave sensors, 193t
Middle Ages in Europe, 9–10
Military
in civilian law enforcement, 287

Index          555
Posse Comitatus Act, 287
resources of, 287
Miranda warnings, 73, 89
Mirrors, 453, 456, 469
Misdemeanors, 73, 73t, 88
Mitigation, 186, 284
Modus operandi, 238
Molotov cocktails, 319
Money laundering, 373–375, 424–425, 467–468
“Monkeywrenching,” 362
Mortuary, 484
Motion detectors, 162, 193
Motions, 79–80, 86
Motor vehicle report, 122
Moving surveillance, 241
Muhammad, 353, 362
Multiple-line insurance, 270
Multiplex CCTV systems, 167
Multiplexing, 198
Murrah Federal Building, 18, 186, 355. See also 
Oklahoma City bombing
Muslims, 353, 358
N
Narcotics, 506
National Advisory Committee on Criminal Justice 
Standards and Goals, 35
National Association of State Boards of 
Accountancy, 257
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, 
27, 330
National Center for Missing and Exploited 
Children, 483, 487
National Counterterrorism Center, 370, 377, 386
National Crime Information Center, 121
National Fire Data Center, 26
National Fire Protection Association
description of, 26, 59–61, 76, 216
NFPA 1600, 278–279
101 Life Safety Code, 297–303, 477–478, 485
National Fugitive Operations Program, 425
National Incident Management System, 285–386
National Incident-Based Reporting System, 26
National Industrial Security Program, 419–420
National Infrastructure Protection Plan
description of, 395
private sector recommendations, 397–399
risk management framework, 396–397
National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, 333
National Intelligence Council, 529
National Intelligence Director, 377
National Labor Relations Act, 84
National Labor Relations Board, 80, 84
National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of 
Terrorism, 371–372
National monuments, 421
National Preparedness Goal, 285, 289
National Response Plan, 285, 400
National Retail Security Survey, 443
National security, 371–373
National Security Strategy of the United States, 372
National Security to Secure Cyberspace, 403, 410
National Strategy for Combating Terrorism, 374
National Strategy for Homeland Security, 
371–372, 374, 395, 423
National Strategy for Maritime Security, 434
National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, 403, 410
National Technology Transfer and Advancement 
Act, 58, 60
National Volunteer Organizations Against 
Disasters, 385
Natural barriers, 182
Natural disasters
blizzards, 322
description of, 18
earthquakes, 322
floods, 322
hurricanes. See Hurricanes
pandemics, 324–326
windstorms, 321–322
Natural gas industry, 404
Natural surveillance, 178
Negligence
definition of, 70, 74, 76
examples of, 76–77
proving of, 76
Negligence investigation, 224
Negligent hiring
background investigations to prevent, 120–122
definition of, 117
Network video recorders, 166
Networking, 536
Newborn nursery security, 483
Newman, Oscar, 48, 178
9/11. See also Terrorism
aviation affected by, 428
banking initiatives after, 465
business interruption after, 383
contract security affected by, 28
description of, 4, 357
homeland security enhancements after, 44
private sector losses and costs, 383–384
privatization increases after, 30
proprietary security affected by, 28
regulations and standards after, 60
security challenges after, 6, 18–19
9/11 Commission Report, 375–377
Nondelegable duty, 79
Nonlinear junction detector, 519
North America, 11
North American Aerospace Defense Command, 376
North American Electric Reliability Council, 
384, 403
Nuclear materials crimes, 287
Nuclear power plants, 405–406
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 398, 406
Nuclear weapons, 368, 407
O
Objectivity, 5
Occupational fraud, 144

556          INDEX
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
accident reports, 331f, 335f
administration of, 330–331
assistance by, 341
criticism and controversy regarding, 340–341
description of, 60
development of, 332–333
employers
assistance with problems, 341
responsibilities of, 337–338
fines by, 339–340
general duty clause, 493
healthcare violence guidelines, 483–484
inspections, 338–339
jurisdiction of, 333
recordkeeping systems, 336–337
regulations of, 296–297
reporting systems, 336–337
staff of, 338
standards of
bloodborne pathogens standard, 336
first aid, 334
Hazard Communication Standard, 334–335
Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency 
Response, 336
lockout, 336
medical services, 334
personal protective equipment, 334
tagout, 336
updating of, 333–334
strategic management plan of, 333
support for, 341
Whistleblower Program, 338
Office of Defense Mobilization, 282
Office of Detention and Removal, 425
Office of Emergency Management, 284
Office of Homeland Defense, 18
Office of Homeland Security, 371, 372, 423
Officers. See Security officers
Oil industry, 404
Oklahoma City bombing, 283, 363, 364f, 421
On-line banking, 469–470
Open architecture, 146–147
Open-ended questions, 232
Operational zoning, 164
Operations of enterprises, 22
Operations security, 515
Organization(s). See also Business
external relations. See External relations
internal relations. See Internal relations
internal vulnerability of, 136
leadership style in, 64–65
terminology associated with, 64–65
Organization chart, 65f
Organizational behavior theory, 280
Organized retail theft, 453–454
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration
Outsourcing, 218–219, 419
Overseas businesses, 269
Overseas investigations, 230–231
Overseas Security Advisory Council, 231, 384
Overt investigation, 226
P
Padlock, 57, 159
Padlock substitution, 57
Palestinian Liberation Organization, 353
Pandemics, 324–325
Parking lot, 201–202
Particle-cut shredders, 515
Pass back, 152
Passenger rail systems, 429–430
Passive audio detectors, 163
Passive infrared intrusion sensors, 163
Passive vehicle barriers, 183
Passwords, 416
Past employment, 121
Patent, 508–509
Patriot Act, 224, 374–375, 392, 423, 467
Patriot movement, 363
Patterns of Global Terrorism, 370
“Pay-by-finger”, 448
Peculation. See Embezzlement
Peel, Sir Robert, 11
Peers
employee theft reported by, 142
relations among, 102–103
Penetration test, 403
Pentagon, 4, 18, 321, 357
Perimeter protection, 192, 196f
Perimeter security
description of, 180–182
fiber optics for, 192
Periodic inventory system, 255
Periodicals, 49, 535
Perpetual inventory system, 255
Personal information, 237
Personal protective equipment, 334, 342, 486
Personal-area network, 512
Personality inventories, 119
Personnel. See Loss prevention personnel; Security 
officers; Security personnel and practitioners
Personnel protection. See also Executive protection
definition of, 495–496
planning of, 493–494
technology used in, 501–502
Pharmacy protection, 484–485
Phishing, 237, 412
Physical ability tests, 119
Physical barriers, 8
Physical security
information technology and, 16–17
integrated systems, 146
open architecture, 146
in schools, 471–472
Physiological needs, 127–128
Picking of lock, 157, 177
Pilferage, 137
Pin tumbler lock, 159
Pinhole cameras and lenses, 172, 241
Pinkerton, Allan, 12, 13f, 15

Index          557
Pipe bombs, 319
Pipelines, 435–436
Plaintiff, 79–80
Planning
critical thinking for, 56–57
factors to consider in, 53–54
purpose of, 52
risk analysis uses in, 53
systems-perspective approach to, 55, 56f
Plate glass, 187
Plea bargaining, 82, 86
Plinth wall, 183
Point protection, 192, 195f, 456, 457f
Point-of-purchase area, 445
Point-of-sale accounting systems, 252, 446–447
Police. See Public police
Policing, 9–12. See also Public police
Polis, 9
Polycarbonate windows, 187
Polygraph, 119–120, 122–123, 233–234
Ported coaxial cable, 194t
Posse Comitatus Act, 10, 287
Postal system, 435, 436f
Potassium iodide, 380
Praetorian Guard, 9
Precedent cases, 72
Prefire planning, 304
Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978, 111
Preliminary hearing, 86
Premises security claims, 75–78
Preparedness, 281
Pressure-sensitive mats, 161
Pretest-posttest design, 62
Pretext interviews, 513
Pretrial conference, 80
Pretrial motions, 86
Price-Anderson Act, 407
Prior similar incidents rule, 76
Privacy
countermeasure considerations, 567
employee monitoring and, 77
identity theft and, 467
invasion of, 74, 89
Private employment agencies, 536
Private industry. See also Business
federal regulation of, 36
regulation of, 37–38
Private investigation, 226–227
Private investigators, 235
Private military and private security companies, 30
Private sector
defense industries, 418
definition of, 22
National Infrastructure Protection Plan 
recommendations, 395–396
9/11 effects on, 383–384
public sector and, relationships between, 
383–384
risk management in, 281
security services and products from, 32t
telework in, 135
Private security
associations dedicated to, 49
companies, 12–14
growth of, 12
labor union effects on, 15
legal authority of, 34
legislation that affects, 83–84
limiting factors on
civil actions, 74
tort law, 73–74
union contracts, 74
railroad expansion effects on, 14–15
20th-century changes in, 6
U.S. demand for, 27
world demand for, 27
World War I and II effects on, 15
Private Security and Police in America: The 
Hallcrest Report, 35, 39
Private Security Officer Employment Authorization 
Act of 2004, 38, 121
Private security officers. See also Security officers
attire of, 105–106
inspections by, 88–89
Miranda warnings by, 89
public police and
cooperation between, 36–38, 89
differences between, 34
search and seizure constraints for, 88
Privatization
definition of, 29
factors influencing, 29
GAO studies of, 30
history of, 29
9/11 effects on, 30
Probable cause, 85–86
Procedural law, 73, 73t
Professionalism, 485
Project BioShield Act of 2004, 400
Property
inventory system for, 143
loss of, countermeasures against, 142–143
marking of, 143
radio frequency identification systems for, 142
Property insurance, 273–274
Proprietary investigation, 225
Proprietary security
description of, 28–29
programs, 64–66
Prosecution
description of, 103–104, 144
of shoplifters, 457–458
Prosecution threshold, 105
Prosecutor, 34, 86
Protection News, 41, 49
Protective dogs, 205–206
Proximate cause, 75–76
Proximity cards, 152, 156f
Psychological dependence, 505, 507
Psychological stress evaluator, 122
Public address system, 204
Public adjuster, 276

558          INDEX
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, 260
Public health sector
challenges for, 479–480
description of, 478
initiatives, 480
Public Health Security and Bioterrorism 
Preparedness and Response Act of 2002, 
400, 402, 486
Public investigation, 226
Public key infrastructure, 417
Public police. See also Law enforcement officers
arrest powers of, 87
budgetary limitations for, 33
conflict of interest for, 229
function of, 317
law enforcement by, 100
legal authority of, 34, 70
performance measures for, 63
private security and
cooperation between, 36–38, 89
differences between, 34
roactive strategies used by, 34, 529
reactive strategies used by, 34, 529
statistics regarding, 29, 318
Public Risk Management Association, 281
Public safety, 317, 474, 477, 520
Public safety agencies, 94, 101, 317–318
Public sector
description of, 22
private sector and, relationships between, 
383–384
Public Switched Telecommunications Network, 
409–410
Public water systems, 401
Pueblo Indians, 8
Purchase order, 253
Purchasing
of security services
consultants used during, 214–215
guidelines for, 213
pitfalls in, 212–213
security officers, 213–214
of security systems, 216–218
Purchasing department, 252–253, 254f
Purchasing requisition, 252
Push/pull latches, 156f
Q
Qualified privilege, 229
Quarantine enforcement, 325
Quartz lamps, 200
Questions
interview, 118
investigation, 224
from media, 102
for suspect, 89
Quid pro quo, 115, 495
Quotas, 113
R
Racial profiling, 459
Racial supremacy, 362
Radio frequency identification systems, 142, 
256, 446
Radiological dispersion device, 369
Radiological weapons, 321, 368–369
Rail systems, 429–430
Railroads, 14–15, 429–430
Rand Corporation, 318, 373
Rand Report, The, 35
Ransom insurance, 500
Rational choice theory, 179, 355
Razor ribbon fences, 183
Reasonable force, 88
Reasonable inquiry, 116
Receiving report, 253
Recommended practices, 60
Recordkeeping, 81
Redundant security, 177
Refunds, 447
Regulation H, 467–468
Regulations
Code of Federal Regulations, 60, 296, 420, 467
definition of, 60, 296
federal, 60
OSHA, 296–297
post-9/11, 60
purpose of, 58
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 111
“Reign of Terror”,351–352
Relative deprivation theory, 356
Religion, 353–355
Religious extremists, 362
Remedies for breach of contract, 79
Remote programming, 197
Remote workforce, 135
Report of the Task Force on Private Security, 28, 
35, 213, 229
Report writing, 242–243
Request for information, 217
Request for proposal, 217
Request for quotation, 217
Research
in-house, 63
insurance company, 63
loss prevention, 531–533
private, 63
university, 63
Research designs, 62
Respondeat superior, 79
Resume, 117–118
Retail business losses
at checkout counter
cashier socialization and training to prevent, 
446
CCTV surveillance, 447
checks, 447
electronic payments, 447–448
point-of-sale accounting systems, 446–447
refunds, 447
types of, 443
voids, 446
counterfeiting, 449
e-business, 449–450

Index          559
by employees, 442
factors that affect, 443
human resources problems and, 442
internal, 445
loss prevention career, 463
shoplifting. See Shoplifting
shrinkage, 255, 443–444, 461
Reverse discrimination, 112, 113
Reverse engineering, 511–512
Risk
definition of, 23, 264, 277
first party, 266
identification of, 51
quantification of, 266
shared, 269
third party, 266
Risk abatement, 267
Risk analysis
definition of, 50
description of, 50–51, 213
future of, 527
loss prevention survey, 50–51
planning uses of, 53
probability, frequency, and cost of losses, 51–52
vulnerabilities, 51
Risk and Insurance Management Society, 274
Risk assessment report, 279
Risk assumption, 267–268, 271
Risk avoidance, 267
Risk communication theory, 265
Risk control, 267
Risk financing, 266
Risk identification, 266
Risk management
deductibles, 266
definition of, 264
description of, 260–261
enterprise, 268–269
event, 268
financial, 268
in government, 281
history of, 264–265
importance of, 264
Internet resources, 290
loss prevention and, 264
in multinational businesses, 269
National Infrastructure Protection Plan 
framework, 395
in private sector, 281
process of, 266–267
purpose of, 277
tools used in, 267–268
top executives briefed about, 265
Risk management department, 94
Risk manager, 265–266
Risk modeling, 267
Risk perception and communication theory, 280
Risk perception theory, 365
Risk spreading, 367
Risk transfer, 267
Robbery
alarm systems for, 462
automatic teller machines, 469
bank, 468–469
countermeasures for, 462
definition of, 462
description of, 271
pharmacy, 482–483
Robots, 526
Rocket propelled grenade, 366, 366f
Rome, 9
Routine activities theory, 48, 179
Ruby Ridge incident, 363
S
SA-7, 365, 367
Safe(s)
attacks on, 169–170
burglary-resistive, 169
description of, 168–169, 463
fire-resistive, 169
Underwriters Laboratories testing of, 
169–171, 170t
Safe room, 497
Safety
definition of, 329
exit, 309f
fire prevention, 307–308
food, 400
incentive programs, 342
life. See Life safety
need for, 128
strategies for, 341–344
Safety and health committee, 342
Safety investigations, 343
Safety legislation
history of, 330–331
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
See Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration
workers’ compensation, 332
Safety performance assessment, 343
Safety posters, 344, 345f
Safety signs, 344, 345f
Salaries, 28
Salvation Army, 385
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 83, 120, 142, 224, 
259, 266, 467
Sarin, 368, 374
Savings and loan scandal, 467, 470
“Sawing the bolt,” 157, 157f
School districts
description of, 471–472
emergency management, 474
loss prevention program, 471–472
physical security, 473–474
as “soft targets,” 475–476
School resource officers, 473
Scientific method, 62–63
Screening of applicants. See Applicant screening
Searches, 88, 149
Second wave societies, 15
Sector-specific agencies, 394
Sector-specific plans, 394

560          INDEX
Securities fraud, 258
Security
aura of, 177
border. See Border security
careers in, 31–33, 32t
communication. See Communications security
contract. See Contract security
country with most influence on, 6
definition of, 6
electronic, 27
enterprise, 17–18
future of, 525–530
history of. See History
homeland. See Homeland security
information. See Information security
information technology, 414–417
layered, 177
loss prevention vs., 6
manufacturing, 31–32
maxims of, 56
models of, 57
9/11 effects on, 6, 18–19
Operations Security, 515
perimeter, 180–182
physical. See Physical security
privatization of, 29–31
proprietary, 28–29, 64–66
redundant, 177
supply chain, 434–435
theoretical foundations of, 48–49
transportation, 422–425
trends affecting, 527–530
Security and Accountability For Every Port Act of 
2006, 434
Security classifications, 513, 514t
Security companies
growth of, 12–14
labor union effects on, 14–15
railroad expansion effects on, 14–15
as strikebreakers, 14
World War I and II effects on, 15
Security industry
challenges of, 35–41
employment opportunities in, 535–537
factors that affect, 22
regulation of, 37–38
statistics regarding, 27
studies of, 35
surveys of, 27–29
Security Industry Association, 61
Security Journal, 49
Security Letter, 39
Security Management, 49
Security manager
description of, 17
duties of, 65–66, 463
Security needs, 128
Security officers. See also Private security officers
access control by, 168
armed vs. unarmed, 204
communications by, 204–205
conflict of interest for, 229
contraband detection by, 203–204
contracting of, 216–217
costs of, 202
external security by, 202–204
monitoring of, 203
purchaser of services of, 212
Security personnel and practitioners
access control by, 153, 168
attire of, 105–106
challenges for, 19
cross-training of, 16
description of, 7
employment opportunities, 535–537
government/industrial, 420
negative stereotype of, 35
titles of, 7
training of, 38–39
Security planning. See Planning
Security posts, 6
Security programs and systems
customer-driven, 96
management support for, 98
market segmentation for, 96
Security research, 532–534
Security sales, 219
Security screens, 188
Security services
definition of, 211
Internet resources, 220
purchasing of
consultants used during, 214–215
guidelines for, 213
pitfalls in, 212–213
security officers, 213–214
surveys used to improve, 97
Security systems
acquisition of, 217
bidding for, 217
definition of, 211–212
Internet resources, 220
outsourcing of, 218–219
purchasing of, 216–217
Seismic sensor cable, 193t
Self-actualization needs, 128
Sensors
exterior, 288
interior, 161–163
intrusion detection uses of, 192, 193t–194t
Sentencing guidelines, 98–99
Sentry dog, 205
September 11, 2001. See 9/11
Sexual harassment, 115–116
Shared risk, 269
Shielding, 54–55
“Shielding,” 517–518
Shiite, 353–354
Shoplifters
apprehension of, 453
arrest of, 457
civil recovery against, 460–461

Index          561
detection of,457–458
deterrence of, 458–459
juvenile, 457
prosecution of, 459–460
types of, 451
Shoplifting
alarm systems for, 455–456
CCTV prevention of, 456
civil recovery for, 460–461
economic costs of, 451
electronic article surveillance, 455
employee awareness and training about, 
453–454
internal space protection, 456, 456f
mirrors used to monitor for, 456
organized retail theft, 453–454
physical security and physical design to prevent, 
454–455
point protection, 556, 457f
prevention of, 454–456
techniques of, 451–452
Shopping malls, 464–465
Shopping service, 445
Shredders, 515–516
Shrinkage, 255, 443–444
Shrubbery, 184
SIA. See Security Industry Association
Sicarii, 350–351
Silence, 278
Single-cylinder locks, 155
Situational crime prevention, 48, 179, 206–207
6th Amendment, 82, 87
Slander, 74
Smart cards, 152–153, 526
“Smart” locks, 160
“Smart security,” 526
Smash and grab attacks, 177
Smoke detection, 311–312
Smoke detectors, 311
Social constructionist theory, 280
Social engineering, 412
Socialization of employees
about burglaries, 464
about robberies, 462–462
description of, 110, 123–128, 140, 444
Societal needs, 128
Sodium lamps, 200–201
“Soft targets,” 464, 475, 533
Software, 239. See also Computer(s)
Solid-core doors, 189–190
Source tagging, 455
Spam, 412
Span of control, 64
Spanish flu, 324
Spanish-American War, 361
Special nuclear materials, 406
Specialized emergency management, 282
Specimen validity testing, 504
Spies, 511, 517
Spoofing, 192, 469
Spot protection, 192
“Springing the door,” 157, 156f
Sprinkler water flow detectors, 312
Sprinklers
description of, 299, 313–314
inspection, testing, and maintenance of, 316
Spying, 508–509. See also Espionage
Spyware, 412–413
Stairwells, 315
Standard of care, 58
Standards
CCTV, 165
competition over, 59–60
consensus, 58–59, 296
doors, 189
federal, 58
intrusion detection systems, 192
litigation and, 58–59
National Technology Transfer and Advancement 
Act, 58
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
See Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, standards of
organizations that create, 61–62
post-9/11, 60
purpose of, 58
types of, 58
Stand-off distance,186
Standpipes
description of, 314, 315f
inspection, testing, and maintenance of, 316
State constitutions, 72
State courts, 70
State governments
government buildings protection by, 421–422
in homeland security, 377–378
State supreme court, 70–71
State terrorism, 352
State-sponsored terrorism, 360
Stationary post, 202
Stationary surveillance, 241
Statute of Westminster, 10
Stimulants, 506
Stinger, 365–366
Store detectives, 453, 465
Strikebreakers, 14
Strikes, 321
Strip-cut shredders, 515
Structural barriers, 183
Student-Right-to-Know and Campus Security Act 
of 1990, 476
Students for a Democratic Society, 360
Submaster key, 160
Substance abuse
alcoholism, 505
countermeasures for, 502–504
definition of, 502
depressants, 506
drug testing for, 504–505
employee assistance programs, 503
examples of, 502
hallucinogens, 506–507

562          INDEX
Substance abuse (Continued)
inhalants, 507
legal guidelines for, 504
narcotics, 506
stimulants, 506
terminology associated with, 503
trace detection testing, 504
Substantive law, 73, 73t
Substitutability, 466
Sunnis, 354
Supervisor
employee theft and, 140
example setting for new employees by, 110, 
126–127
Supervisory control and data acquisition 
systems, 402
Supply chain, 434–435
Supreme court, 70–71
Surety Association of America, 271
Surety bond, 271
Surreptitious entry, 177
Surveillance
description of, 241
electronic, 517–518
natural, 178
Surveys
loss prevention, 50–51
security improvements through, 97
Suspect
confrontation with, 143–144
interviewing and interrogation of, 231–234
questioning of, 89
Suspicious activity reports, 468
Sutherland, Edwin, 140
Systems integrator, 219
Systems perspective, 55, 56f
Systems theory, 280
T
Tagout, 336
Tailgating, 152
Taliban, 364
Target hardening, 177
Target marketing, 96
Target-rich environment, 185
Taut wire, 193t
Tear-gas packs, 468
Technical security, 517
Technical surveillance countermeasures, 517–519
Technological emergencies, 321
Telecommunications, 409–410
Telephone books, 536
Telephone monitoring, 77
Telephone tapping, 517–518
Telework, 135
Terminology standards, 58
Terrorism. See also 9/11
building protection against
description of, 184–186
explosive blast mitigation, 186–187
glazing, 186–187
land-use controls, 184
target-rich environment, 185
window protection, 188–189
business countermeasures against, 385–386
causes of, 355–356
Customs-Trade Partnership Against 
Terrorism, 424
definition of, 350
domestic. See Domestic terrorism
employee awareness of, 384
examples of, 357
history of, 350–352
international, 356–360, 371
Internet resources, 386–387
legislative action against, 374–375
measurement of, 369–370
National Counterterrorism Center, 
370–371, 377
National Memorial Institute for the Prevention 
of Terrorism, 371
organization countermeasures against, 458–459
parking lot design influenced by, 241
psychological causes of, 422–423
railroads, 516
rational choice causes of, 423
relative deprivation theory of, 423
religion and, 420–422
social learning model of, 423
state, 419
strategies against, 445–446
structural causes of, 423–424
U.S. government actions against, 445–446
War on Terrorism, 21
Terrorism hoaxes, 319
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, 272
Terrorists
al-Qaida, 353, 354, 357–360, 364, 369, 
376, 442
bombs used by, 367
cellular model of organization, 364
domestic, 360–362
international, 357–359
methods used by, 364–365
violence by, 365
weapons used by
biological, 367–368
chemical, 368, 379
guns, 335–337
nuclear, 368
radiological, 368–369
Testimony, 243, 244t–245t
Theft
definition of, 271
employee. See Employee theft
identity, 236–237, 468–469
insurance for, 271
internal. See Internal theft
patient property in healthcare institutions, 
484–485
Theft of time, 134
Thermal detectors, 311

Index          563
Third party risks, 266
Third wave societies, 15
Thorny shrubbery, 184
Threats
assassination, 495
assessment of, 497
definition of, 23, 134
external. See External threat countermeasures
internal, 134–136
types of, 23t
Three-Mile Island, 405
Time-delay safe, 463
Tithing, 10
Tolerance, 505–507
Tornadoes, 321–322
Tort law
civil actions under, 73–74
criminal law vs., 72t
definition of, 72t, 73
private security limited by, 73–74
Totality of the circumstances test, 76
Trade conferences, 535–536
Trade secrets, 508, 510–511
Trademark, 509
Traffic calming strategies, 202
Training
accident prevention, 342
ASIS International guidelines, 39
fire prevention, 310–311
future of, 532–533
need for, 38–39
new employee, 98–99, 124–125
technology-based methods for, 125
wasted uses of, 125–126
Transmission security, 517
Transportation choke points, 433
Transportation sectors
aviation. See Aviation
description of, 426
highways, 432–433
intercity busing, 432–433
Internet resources, 436–437
maritime, 433–435
mass transit systems, 431–432
passenger rail systems, 429–430
pipelines, 435–436
postal system, 435
railroads, 429–430
trucking, 432–433
Transportation security, 422–424
Transportation Security Administration
description of, 426, 429
programs of, 428–429
screening programs, 428
Travel warnings, 434
Trespass to land, 74
Trespass to personal property, 74
Triage, 318, 318f
Trial, 79, 80, 86, 112, 459
Trip wire sensors, 161–162
Trojan horse, 411
Trucking, 432–433
Two-way mirrors, 453, 456
U
Ultrasonic motion detectors, 162
Unauthorized entry methods, 176–177
Undercover investigation, 142, 227–228, 445
Undercover investigators, 214
Underwriters Laboratories
bullet-resistant windows, 187
description of, 61
safes tested by, 168–169, 170t
Uniform Crime Report, 26
Union contracts
description of, 74
labor law, 84–85
United Nations, 206–207
United States Commission on National 
Security/21st Century, 529
United States v. Booker, 82
Universal threats, 135
University campuses, 471, 477
University research, 63
U.S. Army Guard Program, Contractors’ Training 
Requirements, 126
U.S. Courts of Appeals, 71
U.S. Fire Administration, 26–27, 304, 308
U.S. Magistrate’s Courts, 71
U.S. Marshals Service, 421
U.S. Northern Command, 342, 444
U.S. Postal System, 18, 435, 436f
U.S. Supreme Court
description of, 71
employment-related decisions by, 111
U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator 
Technology, 423
USA Freedom Corps, 385
USA Patriot Act of 2001. See Patriot Act
USA Patriot Improvement and Reauthorization Act 
of 2005, 83, 375
USB flash drives, 512
V
Value added, 52, 96
Vaults, 171
VCR, 165
Vehicle barriers, 183
Vehicle controls, 201–202
Vehicle patrols, 202
Vendors, 147–149, 187, 212, 418
Verbal directive, 64
Verdict, 79, 80, 86
Vibration sensors, 162, 162f, 188
Vicarious liability, 79
Victimization, 48, 136, 179
Video compression, 166
Video motion detection, 167, 194t
Violence
healthcare, 481
school, 472
workplace. See Workplace violence

564          INDEX
Violence Against Women and Department 
of Justice Reauthorization Act of 
2005, 454
Virginia Tech massacre, 475
Virus, 411, 512
Visitors, 149
Voice over Internet Protocol, 520
Voids, 446
Vulnerabilities, 51
W
Wackenhut, George, 14
Waco incident, 363
Wafer alarms, 456
Walls
description of, 184–186
fire, 314–315, 416
War on Terrorism, 18, 385
Warded lock, 159
Watch and ward, 10
Water sector, 401–402
Weapon(s)
biological, 367–368
chemical, 368, 379
nuclear, 368, 380–381
radiological, 368–369, 380
at school, 471
zero-tolerance policies for, 473
Weapon of mass effect, 367
Weapons of mass destruction
definition of, 369, 379
first responders to, 379–380, 529
maritime delivery of, 433–434
military assistance in emergency situations 
involving, 289
response to, 379–380
Weberian theory, 281
Weigand cards, 152
Wells, Henry, 13
Wet-pipe automatic sprinkler system, 313, 314f
Whistleblower Program, 338
Wide area network, 520
William, Duke of Normandy, 10
William Steiger Occupational Safety and Health 
Act, 333
Window(s)
contact switches for, 188–190, 190f
double-hung, 188, 189f
protection for, 187–189
Window foil, 188
Window grating, 188
Window locks, 118
Windstorms, 321–322
Wireless locking systems, 160
Wire-reinforced glass, 187
Wiretapping, 274, 621–622
Withdrawal, 607
Witnesses, 285
Women
equal employment opportunities for, 112
in workforce, 113, 499, 528
Work breakdown structure, 217
Workers’ compensation insurance, 274
Workers’ compensation laws, 332, 504
Workforce
elderly in, 528
multinational and multicultural, 528
women in, 528
Workplace
diversity in, 113
hazards in, 330
personal electronic devices in, 240
safety in, 330
sexual harassment in, 115–116
substance abuse in. See Substance abuse
Workplace investigation, 225, 230
Workplace violence
applicant screening for prevention of, 482
definition of, 492
economic costs of, 492
employer’s responsibility to prevent, 492
example of, 493
homicides, 492
legal guidelines, 493
protection methods, 493–494
zero-tolerance policy for, 473
World Trade Center, 4, 18, 285, 300–301, 321, 
354f, 359
World War I, 14, 15
World War II, 15, 352, 368
World Wide Web. See also E-mail; Internet
applicant screening resources, 128
ethics-related information on, 40
resources on, 41
WorldCom, 259
Worm, 411
X
X-ray scanners, 203
Z
Zealots, 350–351
Zero-tolerance policy, 570
Zoonotic diseases, 324

