
Security Leader Insights
for Business Continuity

Security Leader Insights
for Business Continuity
Lessons and Strategies from
Leading Security Professionals
Phil Hopkins, Contributing Editor
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO

Elsevier
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, Netherlands
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, UK
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
Copyright r 2015 The Security Executive Council. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangement
with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency,
can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or
medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein.
In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety
of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
ISBN: 978-0-12-800839-3
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
For more publications in the Elsevier Risk Management and Security Collection,
visit our website at store.elsevier.com/SecurityExecutiveCouncil.

INTRODUCTION
Current business continuity practices are heavily influenced by catastrophic
events of recent memory—think the terrorist attacks on September 11,
2001, the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, Hurricanes Katrina
(2005) and Sandy (2012). In the aftermath of these events and others, it
became all the more apparent that not preparing your business for the
worst was a costly—and sometimes irreversible—mistake.
The threats to businesses, of course, don’t begin and end with terror-
ism and natural disaster. To find out what really keeps business continu-
ity professionals up at night, in late 2012 the Business Continuity
Institute conducted a survey in which respondents were asked to rank 29
threats by level of concern.1 The top six threats were identified as:
1. Unplanned IT and telecom outages
2. Data breach
3. Cyber attack
4. Interruption to utility supply
5. Adverse weather
6. Security incident
These threats and others cannot always be predicted. However, it is
possible to prepare for their impact and mitigate their consequences.
There are many good reasons to develop a business continuity or pre-
paredness program, and Ready, a national public service advertising cam-
paign of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), provides
a compelling list of goals that can be achieved with such a program:
• Protect the safety of employees, visitors, contractors, and others at
risk from hazards at the facility. Plan for persons with disabilities
and functional needs.
• Maintain customer service by minimizing interruptions or disrup-
tions of business operations.
• Protect facilities, physical assets, and electronic information.
1Business Continuity Institute, Horizon Scan 2013 Survey Report, accessed July 1, 2014, http://
www.bcifiles.com/BCI_HorizonScan2013.pdf.

• Prevent environmental contamination.
• Protect the organization’s brand, image, and reputation.2
As security professionals, what can we do to ensure all our employ-
ees are protected from the threats mentioned above? How can we pro-
tect the reputation of the company’s brand? There is no easy answer to
either of these two questions. However, we can look to the experiences
of our peers to find shared strategies and possible solutions for the
management of our information.
In Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity, we have tapped
some of the industry’s most distinguished security professionals for
their opinions and expertise.3 This collection of timeless best practices
is a quick and effective way to bring staff and/or contractors up to
speed on topics related to crisis management, business resiliency,
public-private partnerships, brand protection, and more. The short,
straight-to-the-point
chapters
provide
the
reader
with
an
easily
accessible overview of current issues in information protection.
In the event you are forced to make rapid, significant change within
your business or organization, this resource can help guide transforma-
tional change. Instead of re-inventing the wheel when faced with a new
challenge, these proven practices and principles will allow you to
execute with confidence, knowing that your peers have done so with
success.
Phil Hopkins
Vice president of global security,
Western Union Financial Services
2“Program Management,” Ready, accessed July 1, 2014, http://www.ready.gov/program-management.
3Please note that the security practitioners who contributed to these articles may no longer be at
the companies listed at the time this book is published.
x
Introduction

CHAPTER 11
When the Unpredictable Occurs
With insight from Francis D’Addario, former vice president of Partner and Asset
Protection at Starbucks Coffee; Brad Brekke, vice president of Assets Protection
for Target Corporation; and Rad Jones, instructor in the School of Criminal
Justice at Michigan State University and leader of the MSU/Security Executive
Council Business Continuity Alliance
It is seven years since the publication of Nassim Nicholas Taleb’s book
The Black Swan. In the book, Taleb introduces the concept of Black Swan
events, which he characterizes as events that are 1) rare; 2) extremely
impactful; and 3) often endowed by people—after the fact—with elements
of predictability. Taleb argues that uncertainty cannot be tamed, and that
it is foolish to attempt to tame it.
Historically, there has been a perception that security leaders are
less than comfortable with unpredictability. If that’s the case, it’s
understandable. After all, for many of these individuals, part of the job
is knowing the future—preparing for every contingency and knowing
when and how each event is likely to happen. They’re also often penal-
ized by management for not predicting or preparing for everything.
But today, Taleb’s Black Swan concept is integrating itself into more
organizations’ understanding of security, and it’s proving a sensible
and beneficial way to view and manage risk.
“Are we prepared? Not always. Innovative capabilities are required
even when you are planful,” said Francis D’Addario, former VP of
Partner and Asset Protection at Starbucks Coffee, as he introduced a
session of the Security Executive Council’s Next Generation Security
Leader development program. The session was focused on improving
all-hazards preparedness and building public-private partnerships, so
it’s interesting how often presenters encouraged participants to accept
and embrace the fact that no organization can plan for every
possibility.
Yet as Taleb argues, this acceptance is surprisingly crucial to
preparedness.

Brad Brekke, Vice President of Assets Protection for Target
Corporation, shared some of his organization’s methods for preparing
for the unpredictable. “You can’t plan for everything. Instead, we plan
for consequences. What happens if you lose communication, transpor-
tation, energy?” he said. Planning for consequences, as Brekke puts it,
is one way of broadening the organization’s ability to respond to
unlikely events.
Target has achieved resilience success from this planning model,
and Brekke shared one example. On April 27, 2011, tornadoes in four
southern U.S. states claimed the lives of 344 people and resulted in
billions of dollars of property damage. Alabama was declared a federal
disaster area. “We had 20 team members who lost homes and one
killed,” he said. “We lost power and the ability to run eight stores
immediately, and we lost our distribution center in that area.”
The company’s first priority was accounting for the safety of all
employees, and they activated plans to accomplish that through call
centers, radio and newspaper ads, and local contacts. Meanwhile, gen-
erator power quickly got the local stores back online, but they couldn’t
be supplied because the distribution center was off the state’s power
grid. Target had planned carefully for the known risk of tornado
damage, but, said Brekke, “we never anticipated having stores open
and the distribution center closed at same moment.”
Because of the company’s resilience planning efforts, the fact that
they hadn’t specifically planned for this eventuality did not stop them
from dealing with it quickly. The local teams were able to order five
generators to be shipped overnight and the full distribution center ran
off generator power only until local power was restored.
The fully stocked Target stores provided food and water to a com-
munity that desperately needed them as well as relief to public agen-
cies. And, said Brekke, “Because our employees were safe and there
was a plan, they were able to go into the community to volunteer to
help the recovery efforts.”
Another critical element of preparedness for unpredictability is part-
nership. Target’s resilience efforts hinged on a multitude of partner-
ships with public agencies in the local area that the organizations had
built and fostered long before the crisis arose. As Rad Jones, instructor
2
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

in the School of Criminal Justice at Michigan State University and
leader of the MSU/Security Executive Council Business Continuity
Alliance, commented, “When your facility is on fire it’s not the time to
figure out who should do what.” This is true both literally and
figuratively.
If a Black Swan event occurs, both public agencies and private
companies will be better able to handle consequences and continue
operations if strong partnerships are already in place. The health of
the community and the corporation are intertwined, and resilience
improves when they know and can mutually leverage one another’s
strengths and resources. Partnerships like this are built on a foundation
of communication and trust, said Jones. “It’s difficult to accomplish
collaboration without discussion about the interests and concerns of all
the stakeholders,” he continued. If that foundation is laid in advance,
mitigation of incidents can occur without delay because, even if spe-
cific plans don’t account for the event, the communication channels
are there and multiple teams can easily work together to determine the
best course of action based on plans that have been practiced.
Even organizations that invest heavily in intelligence gathering and
analysis cannot predict every event that may impact their business.
Consider planning for consequences and building public-private part-
nerships to help reinforce your resilience efforts when—not if—the
unpredictable occurs.
3
When the Unpredictable Occurs

CHAPTER 22
Building a Resilient Business
By Rob Rolfsen, director of global risk management for Cisco Systems; and Gino
Zucca, senior manager of enterprise risk management for Cisco Systems
Corporations today are subject to a variety of crises that cause more
damage more quickly than ever before. Bigger storms, broader scan-
dals, larger data thefts, and more credible terrorist threats across the
globe have the capacity to take down an unprepared business in
a short time. Despite this, many corporations lack a comprehensive
program to ensure the resiliency of their businesses in the face of a
catastrophic event. Not only does this put them at greater risk in the
event of a crisis, but also it deprives them of the added value of a com-
plete business resiliency program.
Business resiliency is a relatively new term that represents an
enterprise-wide state of readiness—an ability to quickly identify, react
to, and recover from business interruptions of any kind. It incorporates
under its umbrella the more familiar functions of emergency response,
business continuity, crisis management, disaster recovery, and, to some
extent, risk management.
Even when they’re managed separately, these functions should be
intuitively interdependent. But by unifying them under a resiliency
program, a corporation can maximize the use of available resources,
create a greater awareness of risk and continuity issues, and ensure
that each involved group understands its responsibilities and those of
its counterparts.
THE COMPONENTS OF RESILIENCY
Confusion among familiar terms like emergency response, business
continuity, and crisis management often makes it difficult for executives
to understand what programs they actually have in place. Before
exploring how a resiliency program can tighten the bonds among its
component functions, it’s important to nail down some definitions.

Emergency Response
Emergency response provides the initial, on-site assessment of an
incident. What is the situation, how are we impacted, and does this
incident warrant further mitigative or responsive action on the part of
the business? This function includes triage, e.g., emergency medical
teams and first response.
Crisis Management
Crisis management is the process by which a business deals with an event
that has been deemed significant. A situation has developed; now, how
do we react? Crisis management teams (CMTs) respond based on a pre-
determined plan of action that is appropriate to the event. They commu-
nicate with other business units to assess and reassess impacted areas of
the business and determine appropriate responses. This function includes
everything from public relations management to evacuation and physical
infrastructure analysis.
Business Continuity
Business continuity is the ability of the business to continue operations
during and after a crisis situation. This generally involves preparing
and implementing manual workarounds to enable the business to
respond to an interruption. Business continuity often focuses on IT
responsibilities, such as data backups and off-site storage. Many orga-
nizations call this function “disaster recovery.”
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM)
Enterprise risk management is the discipline of holistically approach-
ing risk across all business units and locations in the enterprise.
Security risks are not the only risks considered under an ERM
model. In ERM, risks include everything from currency fluctuation
to geopolitical risks, business model concerns, and basic security
risks. The goal is to help the business make educated decisions on
how to manage risk, both to better protect the enterprise and to
identify opportunities for growth and profit.
PIECING IT TOGETHER
A business resiliency program sets up a framework for all these
elements of incident response that is developed and enforced at the
corporate level. The result is a graduated, orchestrated incident
6
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

response whose components share the goal of protecting employees
and customers while maximizing shareholder value.
Escalation is built into the business resiliency model. As shown in
Figure 2.1, the first group to be contacted in the event of an incident is
the local emergency response team. The ERT assesses the situation
and determines, based on criteria set by the business resiliency plan,
whether the incident warrants alert or activation of the next level of
response: crisis management. If it does, a local or regional crisis man-
agement team is called in to administer the launch of the crisis
management program. All departments, including human resources
(HR), travel, facilities, information technology (IT), public relations,
and sales, may be represented on this team.
If regional crisis management determines that the incident will affect
the corporation as a whole—again judging the incident against pre-set
criteria—it will alert the next level, which is corporate crisis manage-
ment. Business continuity exercises often begin at this level. The corpo-
rate CMT deals with issues such as maintaining the corporate image,
BUSINESS RESILIENCY UMBRELLA
Corporate communications
Facilities
Records management
Government affairs
Corporate security
Corporate safety
Environmental
Information resources
Legal
Risk management
Human resources
Finance
Business unit rep.
Site crisis
management team
Composition of
team appointed
by management
Corporate crisis
management team
Emergency
response
plan
Executive crisis
management team
Board of directors
EMC
Controller
Program office
Audit committee
Corporate
crisis
plan
Business
continuity
plan
IT disaster
recovery
plan
Supplier
business
recovery plan
Business
resumption
plan
PROGRAM COMPONENTS
Process development • Role definition • Approvals • Rollout • Monitor • Validate • 
Train • Exercise • Incident analysis • Debriefing • After action • Lessons learned
POSSIBLE TYPES AND 
COMPOSITIONS OF TEAMS
PLANS THE CORPORATION MAY HAVE IN PLACE
COPYRIGHT 2014 SECURITY EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
Figure 2.1 The corporate contingency planning umbrella. Copyright 2014 The Security Executive Council. All
rights reserved.
7
Building a Resilient Business

aggregating information from the local CMTs, and communicating
updates to individual locations and departments. Technology plays a
crucial role here. A technologically advanced emergency operations
center can greatly assist the corporate and regional CMTs in communi-
cating with one another and with customers and employees, and it can
also help the business track the impact of the incident across locations.
All corporate entities are held accountable for business resiliency,
and crisis management and business continuity are built into every
department’s operational plans.
Enterprise risk management is a partner to business resiliency
instead of a component of it, but its role is important to understand.
Business resiliency, like ERM, deals with more than security—it aims
to pull the business through any interruption, whether physical, eco-
nomic, or otherwise. Only with an enterprise risk program in place can
the company ensure that the business resiliency plan considers all the
security and non-security risks that might impact the business.
WHAT IS THE VALUE?
Given all the crises we’ve seen in the United States over the past
15 years, it’s surprising to discover that some organizations might
not see the value in a business resiliency program. The Council on
Competitiveness, a group of corporate chief executive officers (CEOs),
university presidents, and labor leaders committed to enhanced U.S.
competition in the global economy, has released a number of reports
that show that, while the payoff of a resiliency program is sometimes
difficult to quantify, it is definitely there. (See Box 2.1.)
Effective business resiliency reduces loss due to business interrup-
tion because the corporation has a practiced plan to work through and
recover from the crisis as quickly as possible. The technology used for
emergency operations and situational awareness may, where appropri-
ate, find additional uses within the corporation, allowing it to become
a profit center instead of a static cost.
Many companies are beginning to recognize that when they show-
case their ability to bounce back from interruptions, they are strength-
ening their brand image and value, creating a competitive advantage.
8
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

Box 2.1 The Upside of Security
Debra van Opstal
When many CEOs hear the word security, they tend to think sunk
cost, not strategic opportunity. For these companies, security tends to be
reactive, decentralized, and ad hoc. The Council for Competitiveness has
conducted studies on this topic across five industries—chemical, electric
power and natural gas, financial services, oil, and pharmaceutical. Two
trends emerged during our research.
First, in all of the sectors, the risk landscape is changing—and not for
the better. The globalization of business in a world of technological com-
plexity and interdependencies has vastly complicated the risk manage-
ment picture. This increase in risk has also created opportunities for
security that go beyond just loss avoidance.
Second, the leader companies are transforming the way they think
about—and manage—security and risk. Security is “baked into” every
process and investment decision, not relegated to a back-office function
that is bolted onto the business.
Integrating security into business processes yields some immediate
bottom-line benefits: insight into workflow efficiencies, reduced losses
from fraud or waste, and savings on insurance premiums.
At Georgetown University, for example, investments in housing infra-
structure—the critical component of the tuition revenue stream—led to
reductions in insurance premiums. The savings were used to buy business
interruption insurance, which resulted in a high bond rating and a lower
cost of capital.
Some companies, such as Waste Management, are taking advantage
of the technologies and capabilities developed for security to create whole
new business lines. Waste Management has created a new centralized
security center that not only streamlined costs across 2,000 sites but has
become one of the fastest growing profit centers for the company.
For some companies, the added confidence for the brand, share-
holders, customers, and employees has become an integral part of the
benefits calculation. What CEOs and boards should know is that com-
panies make money by taking risks, but they lose money by failing to
manage them effectively.
Debra van Opstal is senior vice president for programs and policy at
the Council on Competitiveness, a group of corporate CEOs, university
presidents, and labor leaders committed to the future prosperity of all
Americans and enhanced U.S. competition in the global economy.
9
Building a Resilient Business

CHAPTER 33
Leading in Crisis
An interview with Jim Hutton, director of global security for Procter & Gamble
In January 2011, the beginning of the Egyptian Revolution, local and
multi-national organizations were faced with complex decisions on
how to handle operations and security under the potential of escalating
violence and political change. Consumer products giant Procter &
Gamble closed its two plants outside Cairo and one general office in
the city on January 26. (All three facilities reopened in February.)
The Security Executive Council interviewed Jim Hutton, director of
global security for Procter & Gamble, to talk about the experience.
SEC:
Clearly you monitor the political situation in any country where you have a facility.
What methods do you use in normal times to accomplish that?
Hutton:
One of our key focus areas is to improve our external awareness. We need a capability to
watch the world and hopefully protect against or preempt bad things coming our way. So we
have built a Watch Officer Group here at headquarters that has global responsibility to track
political, military, terrorism and crime trends. So as we see things happening, we can alert our
regional resources and bring a coordinated response. I used to be a Watch Officer at the State
Department, so we’ve tried to mimic that approach on a different scale.
SEC:
At what point did you begin to have concerns that the events in January were evolving into a
major uprising?
Hutton:
One of the keys for us was our regional leader, Mark Caldwell. He was formerly with the
Diplomatic Security Service, and he has worked in a number of embassies, so he’s very
experienced in seeing the tripwires in terms of civilian and military behavior—those signs
of escalation or deterioration in the local situation. We quickly engaged with our local
management team to look at a couple of indicators of problems: Is the Internet still available?
What are the fuel shortages like? Things that suggest hoarding or government artificial control
of certain parts of daily life in Cairo.
SEC:
Do you have hard and fast triggers for closure?
Hutton:
We do have triggers. Some of them are clearer than others. At our command center here in
Cincinnati we have embedded in some software many of our key locations around the world,
and we use a vendor called NC4 that tracks the situation around the key sites. If we see things
like transportation or infrastructure impacts, mass movements of people, power outages—
these would be some of our tripwires. A number of P&G people also have reporting
responsibilities to help add context to what’s going on. So it’s a combination of local and
international resources to help paint the picture for our decision makers.

SEC:
Once you saw the signs of a major uprising, how did that change your strategy?
Hutton:
At P&G we have a two-part crisis strategy. First, we decide which function will handle the
response. If it’s a crisis related to our brand or corporate reputation, our External Relations
group handles that. If it’s related to people and assets, that’s Global Security. Once that
decision is made, we employ a crisis management framework that uses a technique called
PACE. This is basically about decision rights, and it can help things move quickly and stay
aligned as we address the myriad facets of a crisis.
The P in PACE stands for the process owner, a single person who’s responsible for managing
the operational aspects of the crisis team. In P&G, that is typically the local HR leader.
The A is the approver, another single person who’s completely accountable. So if it’s a factory,
it could be the plant manager, or it could be the country or general manager if more than
one site is impacted. C means contributors, or people who have a technical knowledge or
expertise to guide the decision makers. These could be people from security, medical, health
environment and safety, supply chain—all the subject matter experts. And the E is executors,
people who take action in their area of expertise, like legal, finance, and quality assurance,
who would give us real-time, high-quality subject matter inputs that would help the process
owners and the approvers to manage the crisis. This is a relatively new model that P&G has
developed over the past two or three years, and it’s really serving us well.
Obviously in Cairo, the P would clearly defer to my regional manager, even though he’s in a C
role. A lot of people have asked why security is not the process owner. Well, there are more
aspects to crisis management than just security, and we need to respect that equity.
SEC:
What specific challenges did your regional team have to overcome?
Hutton:
Mark Caldwell, my regional manager, managed this from Dubai; he wasn’t even on the
ground. He has evacuated thousands of people, including those from several embassies and
private-sector organizations during his career, so he was the perfect person to divide up the
work within his team to help support the folks on the ground in Egypt. At some point we did
have a security contractor engaged on the ground to execute on our behalf, but I think it’s
really interesting how Mark was able to do this remotely. You’d swear he was on the ground
by the timeliness and quality of his inputs.
The team did a great job. The hardest work wasn’t headquarters driven; it was done in the
field. All the processes and systems we spent so much time and training on really came
together well.
SEC:
Do the affected facilities have a mix of Egyptian and non-Egyptian employees?
Hutton:
Yes. Typically we have some expatriates (expats) or third country nationals who might be
doing development assignments, highly technical roles, or general management. And obviously
we have some local Egyptian employees as well as some contractors.
SEC:
What did you do to care for your local and expat employees during the crisis?
Hutton:
We did work with an evacuation provider to get our expats out, because we saw some things
early on that really concerned us regarding that population. We were also deeply concerned
with taking care of our local employees. We have an automated system that broadcasts
messages, so we sent constant updates. We made significant interventions to make sure people
had cash. We even researched the possibility of importing halal-appropriate meals ready to
eat (MREs). We wound up not having to do that. But that’s the level of care for our local
Egyptian family members that we wanted to undertake. So health and welfare checks were
very important for us.
12
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

SEC:
How was the decision made to reopen?
Hutton:
We looked again at the local situation and asked questions like, Are those tripwires
improving? Is the infrastructure in place? Are the roads passable? What’s the status of the
curfew? Is the transport system open as far as the ability to move workers, raw material, and
finished goods? What kind of guidance are we getting from local authorities in terms of
freedom of movement? What is the local crime situation? We needed to look again at those
kinds of tripwires to make sure they were back in a good place.
SEC:
Have you learned anything from this experience that you can translate to future events?
Hutton:
When the government or any entity impacts the communication chain—when the Internet and
phones go down—a lot of the process we rely on goes down as well. We even started using
runners going door to door to stay connected with our employees. So you can’t be overly
reliant on technology even though it provides scale and speed. It can’t be a standalone
solution. And we had a number of workarounds to address that.
One new tool we used successfully: Our command center launched Twitter and Facebook
accounts so that if our employees did manage to get to an open connection they could send us
messages to ask for assistance or simply to get reassurance that there was someone they could
contact if they needed help. That’s a new development in our crisis management toolkit.
13
Leading in Crisis

CHAPTER 44
When Emotions Run High: Dealing with Stress
in Crisis Management
By Dean Correia, CPP former director, corporate security, Walmart, Canada, and
emeritus faculty, Security Executive Council
We often talk about business continuity in practical, pragmatic terms.
But it’s important to remember that when a crisis hits a company, no
matter how well prepared that company is, emotions will run high.
A fire or flood at a company location, a violent incident or a weather
catastrophe that hits multiple stores or facilities across a region—any of
these things will cause damage, injuries, and perhaps deaths. If it’s your
company, the people in danger are your friends and colleagues. If the
disaster extends outside your organization’s walls, your family may be
threatened as well.
So in business continuity planning, consider not just the practical
but also the emotional factors that will impact preparation, response,
and recovery. Here are just a few examples.
LAYERING RESPONSE AND MANAGEMENT TEAMS
This is both a practical and an emotional consideration. I recommend
that companies of any size maintain response teams at different levels
in the organization. Ideally, a company will have a local response
team (LRT) that acts as your eyes and hands at the site of the
emergency; an incident management team (IMT), often at the home
office, that comprises subject matter experts like IT, finance, media
relations, and HR who can provide support to the LRT on site; and a
crisis management team (CMT) made up of the senior leadership of
the organization, who make decisions regarding policy and the finan-
cial aspect of the crisis. (Note: In smaller companies, the IMT and
CMT might be combined.)

This layering is important for a number of reasons. Among them:
1. If you can clearly lay out a set of specific roles and responsibilities
for individuals at multiple levels during a crisis, not only will you
avoid confusion and improve your response, but also you will help
people to concentrate their attention on explicitly defined tasks or
goals, which may make it easier for them to focus in an emotionally
fraught environment.
2. Having an LRT ensures that the rest of the team don’t have to get
their updates from CNN; you have a trusted, inside source who can
answer specific questions about the situation and the well-being of
the people on-site.
3. Intuitively, the team responsible for managing the crisis will be
worried about the welfare of their impacted friends and colleagues
and will want to go to the emergency room to check on them. But
unless they’re from HR, that’s probably not their job during the
crisis. Well-defined and well-designated team responsibilities help
people to focus on accomplishing the critical functions only they
can accomplish with the assurance that there is someone else who is
responsible for taking care of or checking in on the injured.
CHOOSING THE RIGHT TEAM MEMBERS
The vice president (VP) of a function may not always be the right
person to sit on the incident management team. Don’t assume that
someone with a senior title won’t have a very emotional response to a
crisis that will hurt his or her judgment. The individuals on the various
response teams must be able to exercise their subject matter expertise
with clarity and calm under pressure. Sometimes that means choosing
someone farther down the ranks who will be more comfortable per-
forming in a crisis. A high level of comfort under stress can be gained
from participating in mock exercises and roundtables. By observing
participants in these exercises, you can validate the performance of
team members and adjust your plans and teams if necessary.
HAVING IT ALL IN WRITING
Team and company roles, responsibilities, policies, and procedures
must be clearly documented and disseminated to all involved in
response and recovery. When you’re in your first CMT or IMT
16
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

meeting and your team is frustrated, afraid, and anxious about the
events happening around them, it will be easy for them to scatter their
attentions, emotionally and practically, trying to take care of every-
thing at once. You can keep people safe and on point by regularly
referring to a document that says exactly what everyone needs to be
doing in the situation. Someone in that meeting must be courageous
enough to point to that document and remind his or her partners to
stay in their roles when they want to do otherwise.
In addition, a crisis never occurs at a convenient time. You may not
have all of the incident management subject matter experts in the
room during the critical first hours of the incident. Having clear roles,
responsibilities, and meeting tools in writing will facilitate the effective
resolution of an area where someone else has to wear the hat of that
function for a short time. Also, in its truest form, this documentation
will allow for the crisis management function to become sustainable as
a company turns over its talent.
Security directors must be the rock in crisis. It’s normal for people
to need a few moments to step out of a CMT meeting because they’re
feeling emotional. We must respect our colleagues’ emotions in a crisis,
and we must stand behind a strong, defined response and recovery
plan to help them manage their responsibilities and our own.
17
When Emotions Run High: Dealing with Stress in Crisis Management

CHAPTER 55
Improving Crisis Management Through Social
Responsibility
With insight from Francis D’Addario, emeritus faculty member of the Security
Executive Council and former vice president of Partner and Asset Protection for
Starbucks Coffee
“The tragic events of today cannot be remedied with words. Our hearts
go out to the victims and their families. You may be certain that
although no one can predict tragedy, we have invested heavily to pre-
vent or mitigate its consequences.”
Many an unlucky CEO has had to utter a speech similar to this in
the wake of disaster. Questions whirl in the minds of shareholders,
stakeholders, the public, and sometimes regulators: Could this result
have been avoided? Did the company do everything it could? Can
corporate leaders be trusted to invest in remedying any contributing
factors and cleaning up the mess?
They won’t know the answers right away, but they’re already form-
ing biases and opinions based on impressions they developed last week,
last month, last year. Crisis management starts well before disaster
strikes, not just in the sense that the company must have risk assess-
ments done, response plans in place, tabletops conducted, and drills
tested. If the corporation has a history of acting in a socially responsi-
ble way—caring for people and communities around their sites and
those of their supply chain partners—they have a better chance of
bouncing back from disaster quickly and will likely suffer less reputa-
tional damage during and after the incident.
MINIMIZE REPUTATIONAL RISK
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) programs have become a must-
have in recent years. There’s good business sense behind this. “The
ability to mitigate risk even after catastrophic mass casualty events has

fairly been proven by Drs. Knight and Pretty of Oxford Metrica,” says
Francis D’Addario, emeritus faculty member of the Security Executive
Council and former vice president of Partner and Asset Protection
for Starbucks Coffee. “They studied publically traded stock valuations
for ‘winning’ and ‘losing’ companies after catastrophic manmade and
natural events. Their research showed in part that when you are able
to react to business-interrupting crises with the assurance that you
have (consistently) prioritized people, you can preserve your under-
stood stock market value by reacting in a way that is transparent,
truthful, and caring.”
It comes down to this: If the company hasn’t actually been caring
for employees and community members in some tangible way before
the crisis, it will be much harder for stakeholders to believe they care
now. If the CEO comes off looking insincere, the company loses repu-
tational capital. But if the company has been helping local schools,
investing in area infrastructure, or holding health events for the com-
munity, for instance, stakeholders are likely to assume that they did all
they could to protect the community from disaster and that their
response will be driven by genuine concern.
“Brand confidence and loyalty are intrinsically tied to responsibility
before a crisis,” explains D’Addario, who is the author of Influencing
Enterprise Risk Mitigation, a book that deals extensively with how
social responsibility impacts risk management. “Starbucks Coffee’s
C.A.F.E. (Coffee and Farmer Equity) practices were designed with
Scientific Certification Systems to assure sustainable growth and the
economic viability of the supply chain, beginning with the farmer.
“Starbucks is a very people-centric culture,” D’Addario con-
tinues. “People may think Starbucks is only interested in coffee
plants being sustainable, but C.A.F.E. is concerned with the sustain-
ability of people and families, in particular small farm operations, to
allow that those people have the insight for growing their highest
quality coffee, which Starbucks was willing to pay the highest pre-
mium prices for in the world. At the end of the day, the guarantee
or warranty for having great product, which is an automatic antici-
pation of your consumer, is tied up in how you’re caring for your
supply chain and all the people in it. Reputation, barring more for-
midable hazards, can literally get you up the road in many of the
contested regions of the world.”
20
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

He goes on to explain that Starbucks supports relevant infrastruc-
ture investment in the communities surrounding the farms in their
supply chain, putting money into wells, schools, and bridges. This
builds brand and company loyalty in the country and community with
which the company works, he says. “The general orientation of the
corporate culture to do the right thing with relevant programming to
give back to the community pays dividends.”
In addition, it’s possible that a reputation of social responsibility
can actually boost profit. In 2013, a Reputation Institute study found
that “73 percent of the 55,000 consumers surveyed are willing to rec-
ommend companies perceived to be delivering on CSR,” whereas
“only 17 percent of consumers are willing to recommend a company
perceived as poorly delivering on its CSR.”1
IMPROVE LOCAL AND GLOBAL CONTINUITY
Socially responsible decisions before a crisis can enable better business
continuity, both through the global supply chain and locally.
“If you rely on someone else to provide a service that’s part of the
value perception of the organization,” says D’Addario, “you have to
make sure they’re as resilient as the mother ship or they become a
single point of failure.”
As corporations invest in communities and people across the supply
chain, they learn first-hand about the needs of those communities and
their readiness for disaster. “You know who you’re doing business
with, what their capabilities are, and what the contingency planning is
for major lapses,” he says. The company can work to bridge gaps,
help suppliers better ready themselves, and develop realistic contin-
gency plans. This help is likely to be more readily accepted because of
the company’s dedication to community care. Says D’Addario, “This
gives your organization an opportunity to be nimble enough not to be
affected in the extreme by any condition—you have a business continu-
ity plan that is going to rebound within world-class parameters.”
1“2013 CSR RepTraks 100 Study,” Reputation Institute, accessed June 30, 2014, http://www
.reputationinstitute.com/thought-leadership/csr-reptrak-100.
21
Improving Crisis Management Through Social Responsibility

Likewise, socially responsible involvement can improve business
continuity on a local level. Corporate headquarters and other facilities
are dependent on the communities surrounding them. If a natural disas-
ter damages local infrastructure that hasn’t been adequately hardened
or if it brings harm to community members—including employees and
their families, consumers, and clients—the business suffers. But if the
company has become engaged with the community by developing rela-
tionships with local police to assist in investigations or share resources,
investing in stronger or more hardened infrastructure, hosting blood
drives, or offering up its facilities for disaster assistance, the commu-
nity may be stronger through the disaster and more resilient after,
which in turn strengthens the company.
In addition, says D’Addario, “When individual security is assured
by a community, the feelings of safety and belonging may influence
selfless loyalty and the confidence to share resources to overcome
community hazards.”
THE VALUE OF SINCERITY
A company’s investment in social responsibility in the good times,
enabled by strong security and risk management, allows the CEO to
stand in front of the media and the community after a disaster and say
with sincerity that the company cares about the community and is
truly doing all it can to help. There is significant intangible value to
that kind of sincerity.
D’Addario concludes that corporate social responsibility is an
invaluable tool in business-focused risk mitigation: “It builds business
or organizational mission in the best of times, it protects you through
the worst of times, and it gives you the benefit of the doubt while you
are galvanizing your resources to react to any situation.”
22
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

CHAPTER 66
Business Leading Government
By Brit Weber, program director of the Critical Incident Protocol (CIP) Community
Facilitation Program with the School of Criminal Justice at Michigan State
University (MSU)
You may look at the title of this chapter and think, “When does
business tell government what to do?” It does happen, and for very
important reasons. It begins when security executives break down the
invisible walls between them and police, fire, and emergency manage-
ment officials. When that happens, great opportunities can develop.
I can attest to that.
As
program
director
of
Michigan
State
University’s
Critical
Incident Protocol (CIP) Community Facilitation Program since 2005,
I have seen what can be achieved when the public and private sectors
work together. The CIP Program has worked with businesses, govern-
ment agencies, and nonprofit organizations at a city, county, and
regional level to bring them together for crisis management. This feder-
ally funded program, which lost its funding in 2010, led to research,
best practices, and lessons learned as it worked directly at the commu-
nity level to create collaborations. Michigan State University initiated
partnerships with 47 communities in 24 states, with more than 4,200
public- and private-sector executives working side by side in the CIP
Program workshops.
Partnerships like these offer many benefits, particularly in times of
crisis. They make businesses and communities more effective in resuming
normalcy and recovering after an event. They provide opportunities
for resource sharing, enhanced crisis management, and critical infor-
mation sharing, leading to stronger management of crisis events and
minimizing impact and loss for all involved. At their best, they can
also elevate the reputation of the business for its involvement in the
community and public service.
Across the nation there are security executives pushing business-
government collaboration that will benefit both the private and public

sectors. Many times, security directors have asked me and others in
the CIP program about the best ways to approach the first responder
community. From my experiences and those of others, I’ve learned a
few basic tips that will help most aspiring collaborators.
START SMALL
Don’t expect to jump right into joint exercises and shared resources.
The process of building a partnership begins as security executives
reach out to their public-sector peers to discuss projects and programs
and to share concerns.
A while ago, a security executive for an aerospace company shared
with me his experience in developing a relationship with area police, fire,
health, and emergency management officials. Tom, the security director,
had recently joined the corporation. He was familiar with our program
and the concepts we use in building a public-private partnership. He
started by calling the first responder executives. On the telephone,
he introduced himself and shared with them some basic information
about the corporation. Afterward, he followed up by sending a brief note
and a company brochure to the officials. In a few months he invited
area first responder executives to their corporate facility for a 45-minute
“getting to know you” event with some food and refreshments, along
with a presentation on the company’s preparedness and security capabili-
ties. As time went on, Tom and his staff received some invitations from
the public sector asking if they wanted to participate in meetings on
community-wide evacuation planning.
Partnerships are based on trust, and they must be allowed to grow.
Start small, with one of the most important issues—basic information
sharing.
COMMIT
You may find that your willingness to partner is not reciprocated after
a number of attempts. There may be any number of reasons for this.
The important thing is to continue reaching out.
For about three years, two people in Detroit were talking with me
about bringing the CIP program to their city. We were ready, but they
wanted to be sure that people were committed and that the timing was
24
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

right. Different conflicts or issues always seemed to prevent the initia-
tive’s launch. After three years of attempts, we facilitated the public-
private partnership program for downtown Detroit. During those three
years, Michigan and Detroit faced challenging economic issues, and
there is no doubt that these issues can push programs to the side.
If your efforts don’t pan out at first, then the timing is not right.
Try later. If that doesn’t work, try again later. Commitment can make
things happen, just as it did for these individuals.
BE PATIENT
I recently spoke with a shopping mall security manager about the part-
nership program he’d had in place for a couple of years. The mall
security department had a reasonably good relationship with area
police and fire officials. However, the area businesses and first
responder authorities had raised the partnership past the typical level.
They started doing joint training and exercising. Additionally, the area
security executives were invited to participate in government strategic
preparedness planning projects. The security director stressed that it
was a long time before he saw results that directly benefited his depart-
ment and the shopping mall. He said security executives should not
expect a win-win immediately.
The challenges security executives face in developing public-private
partnerships are minor annoyances when weighed against the value of
having such partnerships in place. Those who lead with a clear focus
can easily navigate such problems and take hold of better prepared-
ness, stronger security, and business value.
25
Business Leading Government

CHAPTER 77
Business Continuity and the Data Center
By Marleah Blades, former senior editor for the Security Executive Council
You may have your own server room within your company’s walls, or
you may outsource an off-site data center or commit your data to the
cloud. Regardless of how and where you choose to keep it, your data
is still your responsibility in the eyes of your constituents, customers,
and, in many cases, the U.S. government.
While the phrase data center doesn’t appear in many federal regula-
tions, it’s hiding between the lines in several high-profile rules.
Business continuity is one domain in which such hidden requirements
abound.
For instance, when Sarbanes-Oxley1 section 404 talks about the
adequacy of internal controls, and when Gramm-Leach-Bliley2 says
financial institutions must “protect against any anticipated threats or
hazards to the security or integrity of (customer) records,” data center
security and business continuity are lying right there under the surface.
In laws like the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA), which requires an offsite data backup plan, disaster
recovery emergency plan, and emergency mode operations plans, the
connection is more obvious.
When business continuity and disaster recovery are required, the
data center must be considered. After all, information is king in busi-
ness; if records are compromised or lost or if system failures jeopardize
your ability to serve your customers, the resulting brand and opera-
tional damage can be lasting.
Having an off-site data center could be a boon in a time of disaster
because damage to the facility won’t damage the off-site part of the
1For more information about the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, see https://www.sec.gov/about/
laws.shtml#sox2002.
2The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act is also known as the Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999.
For more information, see http://www.business.ftc.gov/documents/bus53-brief-financial-privacy-
requirements-gramm-leach-bliley-act.

infrastructure. But when you outsource data center operation and
management, you must maintain the same vigilance as you would
with your own internal server room by building security requirements
into your contracts. (This can be more complicated if you engage in
cloud computing, where some say the lack of maturity of the product
is leading to less effective contractual terms and language than out-
sourced data center services.)
Here are some continuity issues to consider, whether you outsource,
maintain your data center in-house, or use the cloud.
• Have a formal business continuity plan that is regularly revisited,
tested, and revised as necessary. This is a requirement of standards
including NIST and ISO 1799.
• Make sure formal and appropriate policies exist for the handling of
emergencies and security events.
• Have data backup off-site so that a disaster in one location will not
result in total information loss.
• Ensure redundancy of systems and power.
• Have a reporting process in place to ensure that the appropriate indi-
viduals are informed of security and continuity status and concerns.
28
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

CHAPTER 88
Planning for Pandemics
By Rad Jones, emeritus faculty, Security Executive Council, and academic
specialist, School of Criminal Justice at Michigan State University
Most of us recall the news coverage and global public concern when in
2009, the H1N1 virus (known as the swine flu) caused a worldwide pan-
demic. While it’s difficult to accurately measure just how many people
were affected and how many perished during that pandemic, some esti-
mates have suggested that between 151,700 and 575,400 deaths occurred
worldwide.1 It’s possible that a similar scenario could repeat; according to
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, “while the H1N1
viruses have continued to circulate since the pandemic, 2014 is the first
season since 2009 that H1N1 has been so predominant in the United
States.”2 Would your business be prepared if a pandemic were to occur
again? Could you sustain your current operations if 20 percent of your
workforce were absent for two weeks or more? How about 30 percent?
As flu season approaches, businesses must prepare for that possibil-
ity. The Department of Health and Human Services says that “employ-
ers play a key role in protecting employees’ health and safety.”3 Many
security practitioners, however, are wondering what their role should be
in this preparation. If your company hasn’t yet developed a plan for
dealing with a widespread pandemic or if you haven’t been brought into
the planning, here are some points to consider.
• If your company already has an established crisis management team
consisting of key company components for critical incident planning
and response, you can build on that framework to develop your
contingency plans for a pandemic. Joint planning creates an
1“First
Global
Estimates
of
2009
H1N1
Pandemic
Mortality
Released
by
CDC-Led
Collaboration,” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, June 25, 2012, http://www.cdc.gov/
flu/spotlights/pandemic-global-estimates.htm.
2“H1N1 (Originally Referred to as Swine Flu),” Department of Health and Human Services,
accessed June 30, 2014, http://www.flu.gov/about_the_flu/h1n1/.
3“Business Planning,” Department of Health and Human Services, accessed June 30, 2014, http://
www.flu.gov/planning-preparedness/business/index.html.

understanding of each department’s area of responsibility; reduces
duplication of effort, confusion, or conflict; and addresses the ongo-
ing situation quickly.
• If your company doesn’t have an established crisis management
team, pull one together now. Identify the key functions of your busi-
ness, find out who is in charge of each, and get them together.
Don’t get hung up on titles; in a small or medium business, you
may not have a director of security, a director of HR, or a head of
operations. But someone is a decision maker in each of those areas,
and that’s the person who needs to be on the team. Discuss with
these business leaders what makes the business run and how they
could make up for it if any one of those crucial elements was handi-
capped by absenteeism. That’s the start of your contingency plan.
• Any pandemic planning and response must also include input from
local and state health departments and information from the
Centers for Disease Control (CDC; www.cdc.gov). Local and state
contacts are important, since the impact of an outbreak will vary
across geographic locations.
• As in any crisis planning, security must be an integral partner with
other company entities (human resources, medical, operations, legal,
etc.) in planning for a possible pandemic. As a part of the planning
team, security can provide advice and guidance on procedures that
will have an impact on the protection of company assets (people,
property, information, and reputation). Security must be involved
in decisions for alternate work environments or locations for
employees, work-from-home strategies, procedures for distancing
at-work employees from the risk of infection, restriction or cancella-
tion of non-essential business travel, and possible disruptions while
traveling overseas. Security must have an understanding of human
resources, legal, and operational concerns prior to implementing
their security procedures.
• Overseas travelers should be provided with information on what to
expect if they are confronted with a suspected pandemic flu situation
while traveling, and plans should be in place for the care of business
travelers infected while they’re away. The company should make
arrangements with their travel department or contract agency on
procedures for conveying important pandemic flu information to
traveling employees or executives.
30
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

It is important to communicate to employees what to expect if the
company and community are impacted by a pandemic. There will be
many issues outside the control of the business that may impact opera-
tions. For example, if schools are closed, what impact will this have on
the workforce? If other businesses in the community close, will this
impact the company’s supplier or customer base, and will employees
want to know why their company is not in sync with the community?
With these external conditions influencing the business, the senior secu-
rity executive should have networking in place with other corporate
security
executives
and
their
counterparts
in
the
public
sector.
Employees must have confidence in the information they are receiving,
and this can only be accomplished with good coordination between
company components and also with outside agencies. Confusion can
be eliminated if company employees have an understanding of com-
pany policies and procedures prior to a pandemic.
Since security needs to maintain its staffing levels and its capability
to protect company assets, consider the impact the pandemic may have
on security personnel. Security personnel should be thoroughly briefed
on company policies, personal protection, and how to respond to sus-
pected cases, and they should be provided with appropriate protective
gear. A good idea is to conduct a tabletop exercise on a pandemic sce-
nario with key members of the team to discuss responding to a pan-
demic. This will help to improve the team’s response and also to
illuminate any deficiencies in the plan.
There are many resources freely available to assist security and the
crisis management team in their preparations. The government website
www.flu.gov contains extensive planning documents, including check-
lists for businesses as well as individual and family planning guides.
Guidance for businesses considering stockpiling antiviral drugs can
be obtained from “Considerations for Antiviral Drug Stockpiling by
Employers in Preparation for an Influenza Pandemic” (http://www.flu
.gov/planning-preparedness/business/antiviral_employer.pdf). Security
can also obtain information from the Overseas Security Advisory
Council (OSAC) http://www.osac.gov/ or the CDC travel website
www.cdc.gov/travel on overseas travel situations.
31
Planning for Pandemics

CHAPTER 99
Preventing Brand Damage from Web-Based
Incidents
With insight from Rad Jones, emeritus faculty, Security Executive Council, and
academic specialist, School of Criminal Justice at Michigan State University;
Kathleen Kotwica, executive vice president and chief knowledge strategist,
Security Executive Council; Francis D’Addario, emeritus faculty member of the
Security Executive Council and former vice president of Partner and Asset
Protection for Starbucks Coffee; and Chuck Eudy, principal at Chuck Eudy
Corporate Communications Inc.
In this chapter, four experienced security professionals respond to the
question, how might I respond to a web-based incident that causes
significant brand damage?
Rad Jones, emeritus faculty, Security Executive Council, and academic
specialist, School of Criminal Justice at Michigan State University
Crisis management helps to protect four types of assets: people, prop-
erty, information, and reputation. When I talk to a company about crisis
response, I emphasize the importance of a crisis management team that
includes key executives from human resources, marketing, legal, opera-
tions, security, and other key functions. The same processes used to pre-
pare for a fire, an explosion, or severe business disruption are also helpful
in preparing for a web-based threat to the company’s reputation. What is
the damage to the product? What is the marketing and sales recovery
strategy? What are the legal options and concerns? Are there proprietary
information issues? What is the financial impact? The crisis management
team process brings everyone to the table to discuss how to respond.
Tabletop exercises prior to an incident will help the team respond during
an event. You don’t have to decide things under fire if you have already
considered critical incidents in a relaxed and thoughtful atmosphere.
Kathleen Kotwica, executive vice president and chief knowledge strate-
gist, Security Executive Council
If there is already significant brand damage, it is too late to ask the
question. The most important activity surrounding brand damage

incidents, whether or not in the web world, is to have a brand reputa-
tion crisis strategy. First, assess the possible risks based on your com-
pany or industry. Based on that exercise, craft a response plan to
include process scenarios, roles, and responsibilities. Brand damage on
the web can happen fast, so the corporate response must be equally
fast and should use the same channels in which the offending informa-
tion surfaced. If a company is not prepared, a quick response could
backfire because it’s not appropriate to the audience’s concerns (e.g.,
corporate double-speak). The keys for this audience are transparency
of corporate reaction and being able to communicate a response
quickly, even if it is only an assurance the company is assessing the
issue and/or that appropriate action is imminent.
Francis D’Addario, emeritus faculty member of the Security Executive
Council and former vice president of Partner and Asset Protection for
Starbucks Coffee
It may be more valuable to ask, “How do I influence the nimble
and relevant response required to preclude or mitigate brand damage
from a web-enhanced incident?” The incidents range from alleged, fic-
titious, or fraudulent claims to true, newsworthy events that shake con-
sumer or investor confidence. Compliance-related threats to public
safety typically broaden stakeholder concerns as government agencies
enter the fray. Depending on the incident allegation, oversight can
include local, state, or federal health or law enforcement agencies.
Brand messaging must be relevantly directed to any engaged audience.
Ensure cross-functional emergency preparedness or crisis teams (com-
munications, operations, quality assurance, legal, security, etc.) are
well advised to anticipate all-hazards risk on a pre-event basis, to draft
priority messaging, to enumerate persuasive mitigations, to transpar-
ently acknowledge the gravity of the allegation, and to demonstrate
conduct that stakeholders expect of a world-class brand. Always keep
audiences informed of developments via web sites, social media, and
other consumer and investor channels.
Chuck Eudy, principal at Chuck Eudy Corporate Communications Inc.
In today’s technology-for-all world, anyone with a $30 smartphone
or an entertaining opinion blog can unintentionally or deliberately
34
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

destroy your sales trajectory. They can say or show things about your
company or its products that are not true and that are vastly different
from the image you have invested scores of years and millions of
dollars to establish. Preparing for such an incident should be mission-
critical for any consumer-dependent business. You should have the
processes and tools in place to identify potential web-based incidents
before they spread and to harness the power of web-based discussion
channels to minimize or prevent damage. Know the menu of social
media and related cyber-arenas available to them and you. Know and
understand Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Digg, media-based blogs,
and the trailing reader commentary. And use them thoughtfully—even
entertainingly, if you have to—to address the misinformation, and do
it on an attitude level consistent with each channel’s users.
35
Preventing Brand Damage from Web-Based Incidents

CHAPTER 10
10
Exploring the Voluntary Private Sector
Preparedness Certification Program
With insight from Don Hubbard, former CSO, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP; Phil
Samson, principal, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Business Continuity Management
Services; and Bill Raisch, director, International Center for Enterprise Preparedness
(InterCEP), New York University.
In this chapter, three experienced security professionals respond to two
questions:
1. Should my company seek business continuity certification under the
Voluntary Private Sector Preparedness Certification Program?
2. What should I be doing to prepare, and how do I show cost benefits
of certification?
Should my company seek business continuity certification under the
Voluntary Private Sector Preparedness Certification Program?
Don Hubbard, former CSO, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
In today’s threat environment, it is imperative that each organi-
zation inculcate the concept of resilience into its culture so that the
enterprise may not only survive but also thrive in the aftermath of an
incident or disaster. I believe one of the best ways to do so is to have
robust business continuity plans that show clear accountabilities and
are exercised frequently. A big part of exercising plans is identifying
gaps. Going through the certification process will help identify gaps
and demonstrate to top management that the organization is as
prepared as possible.
Phil
Samson,
principal,
PricewaterhouseCoopers
LLP
Business
Continuity Management Services
For companies that have invested in their business continuity man-
agement (BCM) program—including a related risk management gover-
nance organization and procedures, periodic testing and update of
critical components, and ongoing evaluation of exposures—certification

will help validate for management and key stakeholders the robustness
of the BCM program. For those organizations that have less (or no)
emphasis on BCM, now would be a good time for individuals with
risk management responsibilities to use the tenets of the certification
program to build an internal business case for a stronger BCM focus.
Early adopters may begin applying for certification within the next
year, and these early adopters may be your customers or key business
partners, who will start asking when your BCM program will undergo
the same certification process.
Bill Raisch, director, International Center for Enterprise Preparedness
(InterCEP), New York University
A company should pursue certification only if it offers potential
business value. The certification will provide (a) an accepted method
to confirm that key elements of organizational resilience are in place,
and (b) the opportunity to use that metric to realize business benefits.
The program is currently in development and optimally will allow you
to measure resilience either on your own, with a related “second party”
(e.g., a customer/supplier relationship), or via unrelated “third party”
certification (outside auditor). A clear metric could be used to more
effectively manage enterprise-wide efforts. We have several hundred
firms involved right now in working groups to advance benefits to
businesses and evaluate the use of certification in assessing supply
chain resilience, minimizing legal liability, and providing companies
with a measure to be shown to insurance companies and rating agen-
cies to potentially realize benefits in insurance and credit ratings
and also in public reporting for both reputational and compliance
advantages—all to more clearly link resilience with bottom-line bene-
fits over time.
What should I be doing to prepare, and how do I show cost benefits of
certification?
Don Hubbard
The first step, in my view, is to identify the key elements of the various
standards which may be adopted into the certification program and then
overlay those elements onto the organization’s existing plans. Standards
specifically mentioned are NFPA 1600, ISO/PAS 22399-2007, and British
Standard (BS) 2599. Some gaps likely will be apparent and remedial steps
38
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

can be taken. While there are currently no concrete financial incentives to
go through the certification process, many believe market forces will
make it a de facto requirement, much as the Payment Card Industry stan-
dards are now virtually mandated by the marketplace. In addition, many
believe the plaintiff’s bar, rating agencies, boards of directors, audit com-
mittees, institutional investors, stockholders, business partners (e.g., verti-
cal supply chain), and other key stakeholders will encourage certification.
Phil Samson
The certification cost-benefit process should start with the results of
your business impact analysis and BCM strategy where key external par-
ties (e.g., customers, vendors, outsourcers, business partners) were identi-
fied. While the certification process can provide senior management with
an indication that your BCM program is achieving the certification pro-
gram’s objectives, a significant benefit of the program is the additional
comfort that your key external parties derive, knowing that you’ve taken
steps to minimize the impact to them of a business interruption. In some
form or fashion, most companies are part of a supply chain, and an inter-
ruption in any part of the supply chain can impact the entire supply
network. We foresee in the near future that this certification program will
be used within the vendor/business partner due diligence process, providing
the companies that are certified a distinct advantage over those that aren’t.
Bill Raisch
The first steps in evaluating the certification might include (1) educat-
ing yourself on the program and potentially joining a working group
(info available at www.nyu.edu/intercep); (2) pursuing internal conversa-
tions with potentially interested parties in supply chain management,
risk management, insurance, compliance, legal, etc.; and (3) an internal
self-assessment to one or more of the standards when they are identified.
39
Exploring the Voluntary Private Sector Preparedness Certification Program

CHAPTER 11
11
Emergency Preparedness: Compliance, Care,
and the Long View
By Francis D’Addario, emeritus faculty member of the Security Executive Council
and former vice president of Partner and Asset Protection for Starbucks Coffee
Our current fluid global risk cannot be read in the carefree faces of chil-
dren at play. They are blissfully unaware of foreboding hazards that
endanger them and their protectors. In fact, the multi-trillion-dollar all-
hazard landscape, most vividly rendered by the World Economic Forum’s
2014 Global Risk Report, remains unknown to many. (The report, which
outlines some of the issues most likely to come to the fore of the global
risks landscape and describes their interconnectedness, can be downloaded
from http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalRisks_Report_2014.pdf).
Those with insight into these risks have a duty to help increase others’
awareness of them and to measure mitigation progress.
If we hope to lead our organizations through this complex global
risk landscape, we must learn what we can from manmade and natural
risk events to improve preparedness and resiliency. Effective risk miti-
gation requires investments of time, money, and mindshare. We must
assess our current capabilities and close the gap on the people, process,
and technology resources we need to ensure a more resilient future.
Clearly, even the most aware and prepared family, institution, com-
munity, and nation state is not immune to catastrophes such as acci-
dents, crime, terror, severe weather, and tectonic events. Yet our
relative individual preparedness and nimble cross-sector response to
imminent threats can mitigate far more serious consequences to our
emotional, physical, and fiscal health.
COMPLIANCE IS A PARTIAL SOLUTION
Those of us who are skeptical about our organizational leadership’s
commitment to all-hazards preparedness may be heartened by evolving
liability and regulatory recommendations. The U.S. Department of

Homeland Security has developed the Voluntary Private Sector
Preparedness Accreditation and Certification Program (PS-Prep).1
Thanks to the 9/11 Commission, this program attempts to improve
private-sector preparedness for disasters and emergencies. The adopted
standards include those of the National Fire Protection Association,
the British Standards Institution, and ASIS International.
Each standard is valuable and merits serious review. Collectively,
they are helpful to those who have not yet undertaken an all-hazards
risk mitigation assessment or plan. Others will find them useful for
formulating gap analyses. But for those who are inclined to think that
preparedness is now the law of the land, I urge caution.
While PS-Prep is a step forward, it is still a voluntary program.
Because of the recent near-collapse of the global financial system, with
its arguable failure of risk oversight and resulting contraction of
resources, security planners and their cross-functional risk mitigation
teams face an uphill struggle. Even organizations that are inclined to
comply with PS-Prep or to advance preparedness in other ways may
be constrained by smaller purses, downsized capacity, and skeptical
program supporters who have witnessed billions of dollars in global
security investment since 2001 with little persuasive return on invest-
ment. Add to those concerns the reality that these voluntary standards
will compete with other government mandates, including state and
federal requirements, around commercial and health care information
protection including PCI data security standards and HIPAA.
Compliance alone is only a partial solution. We must help our orga-
nizational leaders find deeper motivation for improved preparedness
by focusing on stakeholder confidence and shareholder value.
CULTURE OF CARE
Corporate entities, governments, and not-for-profits all depend on
stakeholder confidence. Customers, citizens, donors, employees, inves-
tors, suppliers, and their dependents have increasing expectations of
care. Cared-for and engaged stakeholders are more productive in core
process performance. People-care can also protect brand reputation;
1For more information about PS-Prep, visit https://www.fema.gov/about-ps-preptm.
42
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

• Inventory & products
• Unauthorized access  
• Partnerships/services
Physical/premises
& product
• R&D & manufacturing
• Logistics 
• Environment/safety
• Distribution
• Business continuity
• Outsourcing
• Branding
Business
continuity 
& resiliency
© 2011 Security Executive Council, All Rights Reserved
*Representative list, 
derived from enterprise 
risk assessments research.
• Antitrust violation
• Noncompliance
• Audits
• Accreditation
• Third-party vendors
• Supply chain
• Liability
• Litigation
• Partnerships & 
service providers
• Sales & marketing
• Procurement
Legal
regulation/
compliance
& liability
• Misconduct
• Environmental hazards
• Turnover
• Employee skills 
& performance
• Compensation & benefits
• Labor union issues
• Services
Human
capital
• Information & privacy
• Intellectual property
• Networks
• Applications
• Hardware
• New technologies
Information
• Assets management
• Accounting & reporting
• Market fluctuations
Financial
• Global/international
• Mergers & acquisitions
• Competition
New or emerging
markets for
business
• Customer relationship data
• Community relations
• Corporate governance
Brand reputation 
& ethics
Board-level 
risk categories
Security department
Security program 
Strategies/mitigation 
Business areas 
with security-
related risk 
BOARD-LEVEL RISK 
& SECURITY PROGRAM ELEMENTS*
• Privacy policies & 
compliance 
• Law enforcement liaison
• Regulatory security 
adherence 
• Allegation response
• Intelligence analysis 
& mitigation 
• Country business risk 
assessment 
• Information safeguards
• Due diligence investigations
• Business intelligence 
gathering
• Asset protection 
• Exceptions management
• Violation detection & 
reporting
• Allegations of manipulation 
investigations
• Regulatory inquiries
• Data classification
• Intrusion detection
• Authentication & access 
control
• Physical access controls
• Digital I.D. management
• Background checks
• Awareness & training
• Code of conduct
• Drug testing
• Benefits loss prevention
• Labor disruption planning
• Intellectual property 
protection
• Regulatory controls
• Risk assessment
• Security programs 
certification
• Partner due diligence
• Records retention policy
• Investigations
• Program integrity
• Regulatory compliance
• Vendor contracts/code of 
ethics & regulations
• Information safeguards and 
intellectual property 
protection
• Disruption detection
• Mitigation management
• Emergency response
• Disaster recovery plans
• Warehouse facility 
protection
• Product protection program
• Property protection program 
• Facility access policy
Figure 11.1 Mitigating all-hazards risk arguably begins and ends with people. Brand reputation under “board-level
risk” (top left) is dependent on human capital protections (bottom left to right) that are expected of the brand.
Hazard awareness, preparedness, risk detection, and response are required in a culture of care.
43
Emergency Preparedness: Compliance, Care, and the Long View

when an event does occur, companies that have shown a high standard
of care for their people are more likely to enjoy the “benefit of the
doubt” in the public mind.
Responsible leaders heed these expectations of care, as well as the
increasing relevance of board-level risk, which has been shown through
research and articulated by the Security Executive Council. Some of
their concerns are illustrated in Figure 11.1.
More influential metrics on this issue may persuade leadership toward
a path of sustainable resiliency. Ultimately “the metric” for private sector
stakeholder confidence is market valuation. Company worth before and
after major catastrophic events is instructive. One recent calamity, the BP
oil spill in April 2010, supports the point. In the months that followed the
incident, market valuation of the company dropped dramatically. CNN
Money reported that “Fitch Ratings downgraded BP for a second time
this month [June 2010] to just above junk status, as the news just keeps
getting worse for the oil giant. Fitch said it lowered its senior unsecured
rating to BBB from AA, in response to increasing estimates of spilled oil
in the Gulf of Mexico and increasing pressure on the oil giant to establish
an escrow account to pay for damages.”2 Value metrics like this must be
made clear to organizational leadership. The stakes for emergency pre-
paredness go beyond compliance fines and sanctions. Leadership will be
judged on people-care. In the court of public opinion, the organizational
outcomes for apparent negligence before, during, and after a disaster
bode additional peril, if not doom.
Drs. Rory Knight and Deborah Pretty conducted decade-long
research of 74 firms, following their involvement in aviation disasters,
fires and explosions, seismic catastrophes, and terrorist attacks. While
few will argue that mass casualty situations offer a worst-case risk sce-
nario for shareholder value, their findings are also informative for other
types of disasters as well. Following is a summary of their main findings:
1. Mass casualty events have double the impact on shareholder value. . . .
2. The market makes a rapid judgment on whether it expects reputation to be
damaged or enhanced . . . in the case of mass fatality events . . . it takes . . . ,
on average, 100 trading days to emerge prominently.
2Aaron Smith, “Fitch Downgrades BP . . . Again,” CNN Money, June 15, 2010, http://money.cnn
.com/2010/06/15/news/companies/bp_fitch_rating_downgrade/index.htm.
44
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

3. As with non-fatal reputation crises for firms . . . value recovery relates to the
ability of senior management to demonstrate strong leadership and to com-
municate at all times with honesty and transparency.
4. [T]he sensitivity and compassion with which the chief executive responds to
victim’s families and the logistical care and efficiency with which response
teams carry out their work are paramount.
5. Irrespective of whose responsibility is the cause . . . a sensitive managerial
response is critical to . . . shareholder value.3
Our relative success as asset protection professionals and risk miti-
gators will likely be determined by our organizational leadership per-
formance. We have the opportunity to influence.
TAKING THE LONG VIEW
We know the long view and a diverse data set are required to calculate
catastrophic impacts. Similarly longer views are required for forward-
looking, cross-functional risk mitigation teams. To that end, Bob Hayes,
managing director of the Security Executive Council, recently introduced
an initiative called Security 2020t. He stated, “Board-level risk require-
ments for people, critical process, and asset protection are increasingly
complex and require a new, collaborative, and performance-based
approach with practitioners, manufacturers, and service providers.”4 Our
aim must be to persuasively influence continuous solutions innovation
with return on investment and risk mitigation improvement through the
next decade.
No single entity can own emergency preparedness. Process and
technology convergence guided by organizational mission will enable
intradepartmental strategic plan execution with oversight by executive
risk committees and the board of directors. Business continuity, com-
munications,
compliance,
engineering,
facilities,
finance,
human
resources, IT, operations, procurement, risk management, and others
will fund collaborative projects with return on investment (ROI) per-
formance expectations.
3Rory F. Knight and Deborah J. Pretty, “Protecting Value in the Face of Mass Casualty
Events,” Oxford Metrica, September 29, 2005, page 4, http://oxfordmetrica.com/public/CMS/
Files/601/04RepComKen.pdf.
4“Security
Executive
Council
Eyes
2020
Solutions
and
Leadership,”
Security
Executive
Council press release, June 8, 2010, on the Security Executive Council website, https://www
.securityexecutivecouncil.com/newsroom/details.html?pr526111.
45
Emergency Preparedness: Compliance, Care, and the Long View

COMMUNICATIONS PROMOTE CONFIDENCE
Our ability to execute a cross-functional, operational plan with cost
efficiencies, loss avoidance, and prevention earns both leadership and
stakeholder confidence. Importantly, efforts that produce results will
fund additional programming. Even when prevention or mitigation
efforts fail, we will be given the benefit of the doubt when we have
transparently communicated risk with relevant mitigation resources
before an event and act responsibly thereafter. Ultimately our success
will be measured by our influence for improved preparedness on the
job, at home, and in the community. For cultures that care, and all
their stakeholders, that is something to smile about.
46
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

CHAPTER 12
12
Resilience Requires Intelligent Preparedness1
By Francis D’Addario, emeritus faculty member of the Security Executive Council
and former vice president of Partner and Asset Protection for Starbucks Coffee
Manmade catastrophes and naturally occurring phenomena, from con-
tagion to seismic or severe weather events, have endangered us since
the dawn of civilization. Our anxiety for a range of hazards is palpa-
ble. The so-called “death of distance,” a phrase coined by Frances
Cairncross to describe the globe-shrinking effect of instantaneous com-
munications, reminds us of every prevention or mitigation miss.2
We began this millennium with high anxiety related to the Y2K
time code ambiguity. Many surmised that date-related machine proces-
sing would fail on January 1, 2000. Widespread utility grid and critical
systems issues were anticipated. First responder teams were on alert
throughout the world. Yet relatively little disruption occurred thanks
to the mitigation efforts of program managers and their developers.
It was not until 2001 that the world was shaken by multiple influencing
events. On January 26, 2001, the Gujarat region of India and a portion
of eastern Pakistan were devastated by an estimated 7.61 magnitude
earthquake. Estimated deaths exceeded 20,000. Injuries topped 167,000
with more than a million homes destroyed. Pandemic Threat Posed
by Avian Influenza Viruses was also published.3 The research finding by
Taisuke Horimoto and Yoshihiro Kawaoka warned of similarities
between
H5N1
and
the
Spanish
influenza
H1N1
that
claimed
20,000,000 victims worldwide in 1918 and 1919.
Later in 2001, on September 11, all eyes turned to the United States
when primetime news footage showed the consequences of Osama Bin
1This chapter is an excerpt from Influencing Enterprise Risk Mitigation by Francis D’Addario
(Elsevier, 2013).
2Frances Cairncross, The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution Will Change
Our Lives. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1997.
3Taisuke Horimoto and Yoshihiro Kawaoka, “Pandemic Threat Posed by Avian Influenza
Viruses,” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 14, no. 1 (2001), doi: 10.1128/CMR.14.1.129-149.2001.

Laden’s long-standing threat: 2,974 victims and 19 suicide terrorists
died with the destruction of the twin-tower World Trade Centers of
New York, and the Pentagon sustained heavy damage.
Identity theft and fraud kept pace with network expansion, enabling
subjects of interest (including the 9/11 hijackers) to travel with impu-
nity under alias credentials. Identity theft topped the U.S. Federal
Trade Commission’s consumer complaints in 2001. Enron, the $64
billion energy trading giant, declared bankruptcy. Failed fraud detec-
tion oversight cost the brand and all its stakeholders.
In October 2001, the Amerithrax anthrax attacks reminded the
United States that domestic terrorism can be just as effectively disrup-
tive as any imported variety. That year was also the last time the FDA
visited a Blakely, Georgia, food manufacturing facility that later dis-
tributed Salmonella-laced product to unsuspecting consumers with
fatal results. Harry Markopoulos, a certified fraud examiner, made his
way for the second time to the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) with incontrovertible proof of the largest Ponzi
scheme in history. They did not heed his warning.
LEARNING OUR WAY
The heroic recovery efforts of September 11, 2001, were well docu-
mented. The events of that year influenced crisis response and business
continuity. Multiple sectors reshaped precautionary government and
non-governmental organization advisories to reach diverse global
audiences:
1. Evacuation and shelter-in-place guidelines
2. Procedures for mail handling and identifying or reporting suspicious
packages
3. Security guidelines including facility access control and suspicion
reporting
4. Travel guidelines, restrictions, and tips
5. All-channel risk reporting and status update communications
protocol
The realization that all-hazards protection was required became
obvious as risk-related compliance legislation was passed in every
country around the world. Resulting board-level risk brought the
48
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

protection portfolio into the light. Governments began to understand
that arguably 90 percent of critical infrastructure is in the private-
sector domain. They also learned that response to global catastrophe
required all hands, including non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
THE VALUE OPPORTUNITY
The dots are there for protection professionals and others to connect.
Current and evolving risk resilience requires courageous cross-functional
leadership and systematic methodologies that will transcend any one
group. Brand reputation in any sector will continue to be earned by
those who can take a hit and bounce back. There is much work to do
before, during, and after the next disasters of consequence—and there
are fewer resources.
High-morbidity pandemic is still on the horizon. Networks remain
both the target and the means for multinational organized crime
including theft, fraud, and terror. Criminals, inside and out, continue
to exploit the soft targets around the world. Critical infrastructure,
including intelligence and first responder agencies, are still uncomfort-
ably vulnerable. More than ever, supply chain and critical process
management are required for both proprietary and critical dependency
environments. Threat appreciation, exception detection, and response
preparedness must be improved.
The failures of persuasive risk detection, compliance, and effective
mitigation have left us with unnecessary injury, death, damage, loss,
and deficits worldwide. Confidence has been measured at the all-time
low since the Great Depression. Counterintuitively, the resultant down-
sizing, rightsizing and re-engineering may be a gift—if and when we
re-deploy more intelligent, nimble, cross-functional, and return-on-
investmentcapable protection elements. Good and best practices will
continue to evolve from risk intelligence linked with integrated mitiga-
tion innovation and performance.
The data is in. Brand reputation is performance dependent.
Stakeholders can no longer afford only heroic efforts after the fact.
They expect us to prevent and mitigate while navigating both compli-
ance and emerging risk. Cross-functional talent, tools, and training are
required to prepare for and weather the storm. Mass casualty events of
the recent past inform future stakeholder expectations and valuation.
49
Resilience Requires Intelligent Preparedness

In their 2005 report, Protecting Value in the Face of Mass Fatality
Events, Drs. Rory Knight and Deborah Pretty analyzed shareholder
value impacts for a wide range of firms following mass casualty events
including aviation disasters, fires and explosions, terrorist attacks, and
natural catastrophes. Their research shows that the ability to manage a
mass fatality event (i.e., winners) is even more impressive to investors,
and the inability to manage such an event (i.e., losers) is even more dis-
appointing than in less tragic corporate crises.
Our call to action demands holistic risk management. Our ability to
identify effective prevention and mitigation before the fact will serve us
well in all instances. Protecting people, assets, and critical process
effectively protects brand and ensures community resilience.
50
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

About the Contributing Editor
Phil Hopkins is vice president of global security for Western Union
Financial Services where he has responsibility for crisis management,
executive protection, investigations, law enforcement relations, physical
security, and travel safety.
Mr. Hopkins joined Western Union in July 2006 as vice president
in the Corporate Security Department with responsibility for agent due
diligence, crisis management, employee background checks, executive
protection, and travel safety. In January 2011 Mr. Hopkins took over
responsibility for the entire global security team.
Previously, Mr. Hopkins served as the director of corporate security
for the First Data Corporation where he was responsible for executive
protection and event security.
Prior to his private sector experience, Mr. Hopkins served 20 years
in the United States Secret Service where he completed his career as
the Assistant Special Agent in charge of the Houston Field Office.
During his career he fulfilled assignments in the Charlotte Field Office,
Miami Field Office, Bush Protection Division, Washington, DC,
Headquarters, and the Houston Field Office.
Mr. Hopkins received a Bachelor of Science degree in Criminal
Justice from Auburn University, and in 2011 he completed the
Wharton School ASIS Program for Security Executives. Mr. Hopkins
currently serves on the Advisory Council for the International
Association of Financial Crimes Investigators (IAFCI). He is a mem-
ber of ASIS International, the International Security Management
Association (ISMA), the Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC),
and the Domestic Security Advisory Council (DSAC).

About Elsevier’s Security Executive Council
Risk Management Portfolio
Elsevier’s Security Executive Council Risk Management Portfolio is the
voice of the security leader. It equips executives, practitioners, and edu-
cators with research-based, proven information and practical solutions
for successful security and risk management programs. This portfolio
covers topics in the areas of risk mitigation and assessment, ideation and
implementation, and professional development. It brings trusted opera-
tional research, risk management advice, tactics, and tools to business
professionals. Previously available only to the Security Executive Council
community, this content—covering corporate security, enterprise crisis
management, global IT security, and more—provides real-world solutions
and “how-to” applications. This portfolio enables business and security
executives, security practitioners, and educators to implement new
physical and digital risk management strategies and build successful
security and risk management programs.
Elsevier’s Security Executive Council Risk Management Portfolio is
a key part of the Elsevier Risk Management & Security Collection. The
collection provides a complete portfolio of titles for the business execu-
tive, practitioner, and educator by bringing together the best imprints
in risk management, security leadership, digital forensics, IT security,
physical security, homeland security, and emergency management:
Syngress, which provides cutting-edge computer and information
security material, and Butterworth-Heinemann, the premier security,
risk management, homeland security, and disaster-preparedness pub-
lisher. These imprints, along with the addition of Security Executive
Council content, bring the work of highly regarded authors into one
prestigious, complete collection.
The Security Executive Council (www.securityexecutivecouncil.com)
is a leading problem-solving research and services organization focused
on helping businesses build value while improving their ability to

effectively manage and mitigate risk. Drawing on the collective knowl-
edge of a large community of successful security practitioners, experts,
and strategic alliance partners, the Council develops strategy and
insight and identifies proven practices that cannot be found anywhere
else. Their research, services, and tools are focused on protecting
people, brand, information, physical assets, and the bottom line.
Elsevier (www.elsevier.com) is an international multimedia publish-
ing company that provides world-class information and innovative
solutions tools. It is part of Reed Elsevier, a world-leading provider of
professional information solutions in the science, medical, risk, legal,
and business sectors.
54
Security Leader Insights for Business Continuity

