Securing the
Smart Grid

Securing the
Smart Grid
Next Generation Power
Grid Security
Tony Flick
Justin Morehouse
Technical Editor
Christophe Veltsos
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier

Acquiring Editor: Rachel Roumeliotis
Development Editor: Matthew Cater
Project Manager: Julie Ochs
Designer: Alisa Andreola
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further
information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such
as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our
website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our
understanding, changes in research methods or professional practices, may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating
and using any information or methods described herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful
of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any
liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise,
or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Flick, Tony.
Securing the smart grid : next generation power grid security / Tony Flick, Justin Morehouse ;
technical editor, Christophe Veltsos.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59749-570-7 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Electric power systems–Security measures. I. Morehouse, Justin. II. Veltsos, Christophe. III. Title.
TK1025.F58 2011
333.793'2–dc22
2010029873
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For information on all Syngress publications
visit our website at www.syngress.com
Printed in the United States of America
10 11 12 13 14
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Typeset by: diacriTech, Chennai, India

Acknowledgments (Tony Flick)
I want to thank my parents for pushing me into the computer science field, buying
many computers along the way, and not getting too angry when I would secure their
new computer by breaking it. After all, I was only following in my Dad’s footsteps
after he secured the dustbuster. My dad taught me many things in life and worked
hard to give me a good life. From working midnight shifts to keep the streets safe and
still finding the time to coach the teams I played on, I can only hope to be half the dad
that you were to me someday. Although not the most conventional method, playing
cards (euchre and poker were the best) with your collection of pennies, nickels, and
dimes at the age of three made math classes enjoyable and easy throughout life. The
other parents and teachers often asked me if my parents used flash cards or hired tutors
to improve my math skills. I would just think back to the fun I had playing cards,
while subconsciously learning the fundamentals of math. Mom, I know you were a
little worried when you came home one day and heard me yell, “hit me!” during a
poker game at the age of three. But after all, I did eventually get a degree in math.
Mom, you introduced me to computers when you brought home the computer that
could only display green characters on the monitor. Playing video games and learning
how to initially type with you on that old computer only grew my fascination with
electronics, which drove me to the field of computer science and eventually security.
I also want to thank you for working hard to give me a better life. I know it was not
always easy, but I am eternally grateful for the opportunities you gave me in life.
My brother Matt, thank you for helping significantly with the application
security portions of this book, letting me bounce ideas off of you, and providing a
ton of great ideas that were used in the book. I am thankful that you always took
the time out of your busy schedule to help me with homework and computer-
based projects, and to play hours-upon-hours of video games.
I also want to thank my sister for having the patience to review my reports in
college and teaching me how to write professionally. Even though I was playing video
games with your future husband while you reviewed those reports, I did actually pay
attention to your comments and learned from your gentle editing jokes. Hopefully, you
can read this book to Brooke and Samantha; it is good to teach security at a young age.
Over the past eight months, I locked myself in my office or hotel room on week-
nights and weekends to write this book. I want to thank everyone who supported me
during this time and allowed me to shut the world out in order to finish. I can only
hope to repay the debt I owe to those who brought me food when I was hungry and
convinced me that taking a break to grab a drink, or two, with friends and loved
ones could only improve the book.
Thank you Rachel Roumeliotis and Matthew Cater at Syngress for giving us
the opportunity to write this book and guiding us along this journey. Christophe
Veltsos, thank you for providing advice and suggestions that greatly enhanced the
content of this book. Finally, thank you to my coauthor, Justin Morehouse, for
working late nights and weekends to write this book.
xiii

Acknowledgments
(Justin Morehouse)
I would like to thank my wife, Lisa, the love of my life, for the support, patience,
and understanding she showed me throughout the writing process. Without her,
much of what I have accomplished and the person I have become today simply
would not be. I am grateful to my parents, John and Susan, for always supporting
me in whatever endeavors I pursue and teaching me that I am capable of almost
anything if I put my mind to it.
Thank you to Rinaldi Rampen, Jeff LoSapio, and Mike Volk for recognizing
in me the ability to become someone more than just another consultant and show-
ing me that I could turn my passion into a career. Thank you to Steve Dunkle for
reminding me that there is more in this world than just my career. Thank you to
the Becks, Ryan, Melissa, and the Joels for your enduring support and
understanding.
Thank you to Rachel Roumeliotis, Matthew Cater, and Christophe Veltsos for
the support and vision you provided me with while authoring this book. Thank
you to Matt Flick, Jeff Yestrumskas, Rich Robertson, and Shawn Moyer for pick-
ing up my random calls or responding to my countless e-mails. Finally, thank you
to my coauthor, Tony Flick, for battling through these last couple of months to
see this book to press.
xv

About the Authors
Tony Flick (CISSP) has been working in the information security field for more
than seven years and is currently a principal with FYRM Associates. Tony’s back-
ground is in network and application security, assessments, compliance, and emer-
ging technologies. In the energy industry, Tony has performed network and
application penetration testing, written and reviewed security policies and proce-
dures, and provided guidance for utility companies and related technology ven-
dors. He graduated from the University of Maryland, College Park, with a
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and a Bachelor of Science in Mathe-
matics. Tony has spoken at Black Hat, DEF CON, ShmooCon, ISSA, and
OWASP meetings on Smart Grid and application security concepts. Additionally,
Tony has been recognized as a security subject matter expert and utilized by
numerous media outlets including the Associated Press (AP), SC magazine, Dark
Reading, and eWeek.
Justin Morehouse (CISSP, CISM, MCSE) has been working in the information
security field for over eight years, primarily focusing on the areas of attack and
penetration. He has performed over 200 security assessments for Fortune 1000
companies and Federal government agencies and is currently the assessment lead
at one of the nation’s largest retailers. Justin has developed numerous tools includ-
ing PassiveRecon and GuestStealer, and has spoken at DEF CON, EntNet, ISSA,
ISACA, OWASP and ShmooCon conferences. He graduated with a bachelor’s
degree from The George Washington University and a master’s degree in Informa-
tion Assurance from Norwich University. Justin is currently an adjunct professor
at DeVry University and leads the OWASP Tampa Chapter.
xvii

About the Technical Editor
Dr. Christophe Veltsos (CISSP, CISA, CIPP) is a faculty member in the Depart-
ment of Information Systems & Technology at Minnesota State University,
Mankato, where he regularly teaches Information Security and Information Warfare
classes. Christophe has presented at the local, regional, and national level, including
at major security conferences like RSA.
Beyond the classroom, Christophe is also very active in the security community,
engaging with community groups and business leaders as well as IT and security
professionals. In 2007, he was elected president of the Mankato chapter of the
Information Systems Security Association (ISSA). In 2008, he made numerous
contributions to the SANS NewsBites newsletter as an advisory board member.
In 2009, he joined and has contributed to the work of the privacy subgroup of the
NIST Smart Grid Interoperability Panel Cyber Security Working Group (SGIP-
CSWG), formerly known as the NIST Cyber-Security Coordination Task Group
(NIST-CSCTG).
Christophe holds a PhD from the University of Louisiana at Lafayette and is a
member of many information security and privacy related organizations includ-
ing ISSA, ISACA, (ISC)2, and IAPP. Both faculty and practitioner, Christophe
maintains the DrInfoSec.com blog.
xix

Introduction
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Book Overview and Key Learning Points
•
Book Audience
•
How This Book Is Organized
•
Conclusion
BOOK OVERVIEW AND KEY LEARNING POINTS
This book provides you 14 chapters of content exploring the strengths and weak-
nesses of the smart grid. By examining components of the smart grid in detail,
you will obtain a strong understanding of how the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of these components can be both compromised and secured.
Discussing both the smart grid’s strengths and weaknesses will help you
understand threats and attacks, and hopefully prevent insecure deployments of
smart grid technologies. In this book, you will also learn controls that will allow
consumers, device manufacturers, and utility companies to minimize the risk asso-
ciated with the smart grid. Each chapter aims to provide you with information that
can be used to not only secure current implementations, but future ones as well.
BOOK AUDIENCE
This book will prove to be a valuable resource for anyone who is responsible for
the network or application security of smart grid deployments. It will also provide
value to those who are tasked with auditing smart grid deployments, as well as
consumers utilizing smart grid devices. System engineers, application developers,
and system integrators will find value in learning the strengths and weaknesses of
the smart grid, and utilize this knowledge to secure current and future deployments.
Executive-level management will gain an appreciation for the complex issues
presented by implementing smart grid technologies, as both a provider of these
technologies, as well as a consumer. This book will reinforce the value of funding
and supporting security initiatives that help protect the smart grid deployments
that will soon touch nearly every home, business, and organizations.
HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED
This book is divided into 14 chapters, each diving deep into specific subject matter.
Due to the nature of the subject matter, it is highly recommended that you read
this book starting with Chapter 1, “Smart Grid: What is it?” and finishing with
xxi

Chapter 14, “What’s Next?” Later chapters reference material from previous chapters,
building on the concepts, attacks, threats, and technologies already discussed.
Chapter 1: Smart Grid: What Is It?
In this chapter you will learn about the history of electrical grids, ranging from
Tesla and Edison to automatic meter reading (AMR). This chapter also discusses
the infrastructure that will comprise the smart grid, including automatic metering
infrastructure (AMI). Finally, you will learn about international initiatives and
review why the smart grid needs to be secured.
Chapter 2: Threats and Impacts: Consumers
This chapter explores potential threats and impacts to the smart grid, and in parti-
cular, how they may affect consumers. One of the major goals of the smart grid is
to provide more information to consumers, so that they can make informed deci-
sions regarding their energy consumption. By providing information on the threats
that consumers will face, readers will learn why they should seek to minimize the
risks associated with the smart grid. This chapter furthers the awareness of these
threats so that utility companies, technology vendors, and consumers can try to
avoid devastating impacts of a successful attack.
Chapter 3: Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond
This chapter reviews similar information to Chapter 2, “Threats and Impacts: Consu-
mers,” but applies them specifically to utility companies and other organizations. This
chapter discusses the threats and impact to such organizations, categorized by the
impact to the CIA Triad: Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability. In this chapter,
you will learn how the smart grid will forever change the way that organizations
manage risk and the potential impact of successful attacks. The threats and impacts
discussed in this chapter are based in reality and are often overlooked when discussing
the benefits of the smart grid. This chapter does not aim to spread fear, uncertainty, and
doubt, but rather bring to light the potential impact of smart grid deployments so that
protective measures can be implemented to prevent such attacks before it is too late.
Chapter 4: Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids
Many countries consider the security of their electric grids to be a matter of
national security and as a result, these governments are funding initiatives and
enacting laws to ensure security is considered in smart grids. This chapter explains
to readers the different roles that Federal agencies are performing and discusses
the different smart grid security standards, guidelines, and best practices being
developed by Federal agencies. This chapter also informs the readers of how the
Federal government is planning to help utility companies and technology vendors
secure the smart grid.
xxii
Introduction

Chapter 5: State and Local Security Initiatives
This chapter focuses on the efforts of state and local governments and organiza-
tions. Similar to Chapter 4, “Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids,” this chapter
discusses how government agencies are impacting the security of smart grids.
Additionally, this chapter examines how the judicial system may use the massive
amount of information that is collected in the smart grid. Finally, this chapter dis-
cusses the role that state and local agencies will need to perform to educate consu-
mers on how to securely interact with the smart grid.
Chapter 6: Public and Private Companies
This chapter discusses how public and private companies can help secure the
smart grid. First, this chapter discusses industry plans for self-policing, such as
NERC’s Critical Infrastructure Protection standards. Second, you will learn how
compliance with such regulations does not equate to securing the smart grid.
Finally, this chapter reviews how technology vendors can fill the gaps between
compliance and security.
Chapter 7: Attacking the Utility Companies
This chapter addresses the numerous different attack vectors that utility companies
should be prepared for. Penetration testing and vulnerability assessments are an
integral part of any organization’s security program. However, limiting testing to
only certain attack vectors can give an organization a false sense of security.
Whether you work for a utility company or a third party that performs security
assessments, this chapter will help you perform a comprehensive security assess-
ment of utility companies.
Chapter 8: Securing the Utility Companies
In this chapter, you will learn how to build or mature information security
programs tailored for utility companies. By taking a detailed look at standards and
best practices such as the ISO 27000 series and the ISF’s Standard of Good
Practice, you will understand the components necessary to implement a functional
and effective Information Security program. This chapter also contains the authors’
top 12 technical security practices that should be implemented to help secure smart
grid deployments. If you work for a utility company, then this chapter is for you!
Chapter 9: Third-Party Services
This chapter examines the trust relationship between utility companies and third
parties. In this chapter, you will learn why relaxing security controls for partners
can introduce significant risk to your organization. This chapter explores the roles
that third-party service providers can perform and how they can potentially be
Introduction
xxiii

attacked. Additionally, this chapter discusses the risks that utility companies pose
to third-party service providers. If the company you work for utilizes third parties
or partners with a utility company, then this chapter will help you secure your
organization from getting attacked through a trusted partner.
Chapter 10: Mobile Applications and Devices
In this chapter, the use of mobile applications and devices within the smart grid is
analyzed. You will learn how utility companies intend to utilize mobile devices
and applications to help achieve the goals of the smart grid. This chapter details
attacks against mobile devices and mobile applications designed to allow consu-
mers and utility workers to interact with the smart grid. Finally, this chapter will
describe how to secure mobile devices, as well as mobile applications.
Chapter 11: Social Networking and the Smart Grid
This chapter discusses the integration of smart devices and social networking
sites such as Facebook and Twitter. You will learn the reasons why smart
device manufacturers, as well as consumers, are excited about the merger of
these two technologies. This chapter then discusses the threats associated with
providing energy-consumption data to the masses, as well as includes the
authors’ Smart Grid Social Networking Security Check List. This check list
aims to provide those who plan to utilize social networking sites to capture and
potentially distribute energy-consumption data, with a check list of controls to
help secure their implementations.
Chapter 12: Attacking Smart Meters
In this chapter, you will learn how to systematically attack smart meters using one
of two common security-testing frameworks. First, you will learn how to utilize
ISECOM’s Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM) to
attack smart meters. This chapter includes discussion of the tools used to attack
smart meters, as well as provides resources for you to obtain and utilize the same
tools. Following the OSSTMM review, you will learn how to similarly apply
NIST’s Special Publication 800-42: Guideline on Network Security Testing to
Attacking Smart Meters. This chapter will provide you with the information
necessary to attack smart meters, as well as understand how they may be attacked.
Chapter 13: Attacking Smart Devices
Where Chapter 12, “Attacking Smart Meters,” reviewed the testing methodologies
that can be used when attacking smart meters, this chapter shows you how to
actually attack a smart device. First, this chapter discusses the process of selecting
a target smart device. Then, you will learn how to utilize specific tools to perform
network and application layer attacks against the selected smart device. This
xxiv
Introduction

review is performed utilizing the common security-testing frameworks previously
covered in Chapter 12, “Attacking Smart Meters.” This chapter is technical and
very hands on, so it is recommended that you read Chapter 12, “Attacking Smart
Meters,” before reading this chapter.
Chapter 14: What’s Next?
This chapter wraps up the book by preparing you for what is coming next with
the smart grid. In this chapter, you will learn what to expect as a consumer, tech-
nology vendor, or utility company. This chapter then discusses what to expect if
you are a security professional who works with the smart grid, as well as what
some security professionals predict. Finally, this chapter describes how you can
get involved in the smart grid community and stay current with the latest develop-
ments, as the smart grid becomes a reality.
CONCLUSION
Writing this book has been a rewarding experience for both of us, and we hope
that you will enjoy it. This book reviews current and theoretical threats and
attacks against today’s smart grid and smart devices. As the smart grid evolves,
so with these threats and weaknesses. However, the fundamental controls that we
discuss in this book should transcend and provide you with a solid foundation for
securing today’s and tomorrow’s smart grid deployments.
Introduction
xxv

CHAPTER
1
Smart Grid: What Is It?
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
A Brief History of Electrical Grids
•
What Is Automatic Meter Reading (AMR)?
•
Future Infrastructure
•
What Is a Smart Grid?
•
What Is AMI?
•
International Initiatives
•
Why Do We Need to Secure the Smart Grid?
Over the past several years, the promise of smart grids and their benefits has been
widely publicized. Bringing updated technologies to power generation, transmis-
sion, and consumption, smart grids are touted to revolutionize our economy,
environment, and national security. Corporations large and small foresaw the
emerging markets for smart grid technologies and rushed to be the first to deliver.
More often than not, security has taken a backseat to the rush to implement. This
book will take a look at the potential consequences of designing and implement-
ing smart grid technologies without integrating security. We will also offer recom-
mendations on how to address these consequences so that the promise of smart
grids can be fulfilled … securely.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF ELECTRICAL GRIDS
Technologies related to electric grids have roots dating back to the late nineteenth
century. Thomas Edison’s, as shown in Figure 1.1, direct current (DC) and Nikola
Tesla’s, as shown in Figure 1.2, alternating current (AC) continue to be utilized to
this day. Today, electricity is transmitted using AC, while DC has special applica-
tions, usually within residential and commercial buildings.
What Is an Electric Grid?
Electric grids perform three major functions: power generation, transmission, and
distribution. Power generation is the first step in delivering electricity and is
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00001-7
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1

performed at power station (coal, nuclear, geothermal, hydro, and so on). Power
transmission is the second step in delivering electricity and involves the transfer
of electricity from the power stations to power companies’ distribution systems.
Finally, power distribution completes the electric grids’ functions by delivering
power to consumers. The major difference between power transmission and power
distribution is that power transmission utilizes infrastructure that can handle high
voltage (110+ kV), whereas power distribution utilizes infrastructure that can
handle medium (<50 kV) and low (<1 kV) voltage.
Grid Topologies
In its simplest form, an electric grid is a network. The use of the term “grid” can
refer to a complete infrastructure that encompasses power generation, transmis-
sion, and distribution, or it can refer to a subset of a larger infrastructure.
Distribution networks are less complicated than that of transmission
networks, as transmission networks are often interconnected with other regional
transmission networks to provide greater redundancy. At first glance, this
interconnection appears to provide greater reliability in feeding distribution
networks, but many factors come into play in ensuring continuous power to end
consumers.
Transmission networks must effectively manage both power generation and
consumption as a power failure, or spike in consumption in one area may result
FIGURE 1.1
Thomas Edison.
FIGURE 1.2
Nikola Tesla.
2
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

in adverse affects in another area of the network. The United States established
the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC – www.nerc.com) to
ensure the reliability of the bulk power system in North America. This nonprofit
organization’s area of responsibility includes the contiguous United States,
Canada, and part of the Baja peninsula in Mexico.
There are two primary topologies in use in the United States for power distribu-
tion. The most common topology is the radial grid, as shown in Figure 1.3. In a
radial grid, electricity is distributed from a substation in a pattern that resembles a
tree with many branches and leaves. As the electricity is carried across the power
lines, its strength is reduced until it reaches its final destination. The other primary
topology utilized for power distribution is mesh grid, as shown in Figure 1.4. Mesh
grids provide greater reliability than radial grids because in a radial grid, each
branch and leaf receives power from a single source (the tree), whereas in a mesh
grid, power can be provided through other sources (other branches and leaves).
Radial grids do provide limited redundancy, in that a second substation in close
proximity can feed into the grid, but this assumes that the secondary substation is
not suffering from the same condition as the primary.
Radial
FIGURE 1.3
Radial grid.
A Brief History of Electrical Grids
3

The looped topology, utilized primarily in Europe, is a mix between the radial
and mesh topologies. A looped topology, as shown in Figure 1.5, is much like a
radial topology, except that each branch and leaf has two separate paths from
the substation. Where the radial topology is vulnerable to single points of failure,
the looped topology provides greater reliability. The goal of the looped topology
is to be able to withstand a disruption in the grid, regardless of where it may
occur. Much like the mesh topology, the looped topology is costlier than the
radial topology, as each end of the loop must meet the requirements for power
and voltage drops.
Modernizing the Electric Grids
Currently, the electrical infrastructure in the United States is not up to the task of
powering America’s future. According to Carol Browner, director of the White
House Office of Energy and Climate Change, “We [the United States] have a
very antiquated (electric grid) system in our country…The current system is
Mesh
FIGURE 1.4
Mesh grid.
4
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

outdated, it’s dilapidated.”1 Across all three functions of an electrical grid, signifi-
cant improvements can be made to increase the reliability and efficiency of power
generation, transmission, and distribution.
Deregulation is often touted as a means to modernizing today’s electrical grids.
Deregulation encompasses moving from today’s regulated landscape where often
larger power companies are granted monopoly status and control power genera-
tion, transmission, and distribution for a geographic area to a deregulated land-
scape where the free markets would dictate all three functions of the electrical
grids. In a deregulated landscape, power generation, transmission, and distribution
could be handled by separate companies, all working to provide more efficient,
reliable, and cost-effective solutions.
Many other ideas exist to modernize today’s electrical grids. The most
prominent of which is the smart grid. Recent initiatives championed by the
Obama Administration, including $3.4 billion awarded for projects such as smart
meter implementations, grid infrastructure advancement, and manufacturing smart
appliances2 will soon be a reality.
Loop
FIGURE 1.5
Loop topology.
A Brief History of Electrical Grids
5

WHAT IS AUTOMATIC METER READING (AMR)?
Evolving from Tesla’s design, the automatic meter reading (AMR) infrastructure
introduced automation to the electric grid in 1977 (read more at www.metretekfl.
com). Through a combination of technologies, including wired and wireless net-
works, AMR’s most significant advancement resulted in electric companies being
able to remotely read meters. Once AMR was implemented, the electric compa-
nies could more easily obtain meter readings in near real time, and provide custo-
mers with consumption-based bills. Previously, the electric companies relied on
estimates when billing customers. With better, timelier information, electric com-
panies were able to improve energy production through tighter control during
peak and low demand periods.
AMR Technologies
To support the advancements of the AMR infrastructure, several technologies are
utilized. For data collection, utility employees leverage handhelds and notebook
computers. For data transport, wired and wireless networks are deployed to
remotely read meter data.
Handhelds
Supporting utility employees’ efforts to quickly and efficiently obtain meter read-
ings, handheld devices, much like your common Personal Digital Assistant
(PDA), as shown in Figure 1.6, are utilized. These devices read meter data in one
of two ways. First, the electric worker can utilize “touch” technology to read a
meter by simply touching the meter with a probe. This probe stores the meter data
to the handheld for later retrieval and processing. Second, the handheld device
may instead be fitted with a wireless receiver that reads the data transmitted by
the meter, again with the data stored for later retrieval and processing.
Notebook Computers
Utility employees also utilize traditional mobile computers in meter reading.
Rather than physically visiting each meter, as with the handheld devices, a mobile
computer can be installed inside of an electric worker’s vehicle to wirelessly read
meters. Usually these deployments involve a combination of technologies, includ-
ing a wireless technology, software, and the necessary hardware (GPS, antennas,
and so on).
Wireless Networks
For data transport, a broad range of wireless technologies are utilized by the
electric companies to read meter data. Radio Frequency (RF), Wi-Fi, Bluetooth,
and even cellular technologies are currently in use. A majority of AMR devices
utilize RF wireless technologies, with narrow band, direct-sequence spread spec-
trum (DSSS), and frequency-hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) being the most
6
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

common. Less common technologies such as Zigbee and Wavenis have found their
way into AMR deployments. When wireless communications are utilized, device
makers either license frequencies from government agencies such as the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) or use unlicensed frequencies.
When Wi-Fi is chosen as the technology for remote data transport, tradition-
ally the meters are not themselves Wi-Fi enabled, rather a management station
that they report to (through RF) utilizes Wi-Fi to communicate its aggregated
data to the electric company. This is the deployment model utilized by the city of
Corpus Christi in Texas. In this deployment, the power meters mostly rely on the
use of batteries and thus utilizing Wi-Fi was impractical because of its relatively
high power consumption, when compared with RF. The power consumption
requirements of Wi-Fi technology remain a barrier to its inclusion in AMR
deployments.
Power Line Communication (PLC)
Power line communication (PLC) provides a completely remote solution for
reading meter data. Data from meters is transmitted across the existing power line
infrastructure to the local substation. From the local substation, data is then
transported to the electric companies for processing and analysis. This type of
dedicated infrastructure from the meter to the electric company is commonly
referred to as a “fixed” network.
FIGURE 1.6
A wireless handheld device.
What Is Automatic Meter Reading (AMR)?
7

Hybrid Models
Although some AMR deployments may rely on a single technology for each part
of its deployment, others utilize a hybrid model where multiple technologies
are used. For example, data transport may primarily rely on PLC, but RF may be
utilized if the PLC is unavailable. Other hybrid models may rely on RF to send
data to aggregation points and then utilize PLC or Wi-Fi to transport data to the
electric company.
AMR Network Topologies
Utilizing one or a combination of the aforementioned technologies, electric com-
panies create a network from which meter information is obtained. These
networks take on one of several topologies, including the following:
•
Star network – A star network topology is implemented when meters transmit
data to a central location. This central location can be a repeater, which then
forwards the data to the electric companies, or it can simply act as data
storage. A star network topology can utilize wireless technologies, PLC, or
both.
•
Mesh network – A mesh network topology is implemented when the meters
themselves both transmit and receive data from other meters. Meters act much
like the repeaters in a star network, and eventually data reaches the electric
companies or a data storage device.
What Does It All Mean?
Looking at all of the parts that make up an AMR infrastructure, it is easy to see
that security needs to be included from the design phase. With such a wide range
of technologies possessing the ability to impact the confidentiality, availability,
and integrity of data being transmitted across the AMR infrastructure, it is impera-
tive to evaluate the security posture of each individual technology, as well as its
interactions with other technologies.
FUTURE INFRASTRUCTURE
As described in “A Brief History of Electrical Grids” section of this chapter, the
current electric power infrastructure was designed to utilize existing technology and
handle the requirements defined during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The
increasing demands on an aging infrastructure can only be met by the fine-grain
control and insight into consumer demand that the smart grid promises to deliver.
Justifications for Smart Grids
The proposed smart grids seek to remediate these issues, as well as numerous others.
The major justifications for smart grids tend to fall into three categories: economic,
8
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

environmental, and reliability. The United States Department of Energy (DOE)
defines the goals of a smart grid as3 follows:
•
Ensuring its reliability to degrees never before possible
•
Maintaining its affordability
•
Reinforcing our global competitiveness
•
Fully accommodating renewable and traditional energy sources
•
Potentially reducing our carbon footprint
•
Introducing advancements and efficiencies yet to be envisioned.
Waste
Electricity must be consumed as soon as it is produced and consumers have
grown accustom to the on-demand availability of electricity. Currently, this com-
bination requires utility companies to generate enough supply to meet the electri-
cal demand at any given moment. Because the exact demand is unknown, utility
companies generate more electricity than is needed to compensate for the
unexpected rise in consumption and achieve this level of service. This system of
supply and demand results in waste when demand is overestimated and rolling
blackouts when demand is underestimated.
Reliability
In addition to waste, the reliability of the electric grid can be disrupted by numer-
ous factors. Specifically, a drop in voltage from a power supply can cause brown-
outs, whereas environmental factors ranging from falling trees to thunderstorms
and hurricanes can cause blackouts. Although these reliability problems tend to
occur on a local scale, they can lead to more widespread problems that affect
larger areas. Table 1.1 describes the different categories of power outages.
Renewable Energy Sources
Traditional power generation relies on an inexhaustible supply of energy resources
that has no negative effects on the world. In such a scenario, centralized power
Table 1.1 Power outage categories4
Category
Description
Dropout
A loss of power that has a short duration, on a timescale of seconds, and
is usually fixed quickly.
Brownout
The electrical power supply encounters a partial drop in voltage, or tempor-
ary reduction in electric power. In the case of a three-phase electric power
supply, when a phase is absent, at reduced voltage, or incorrectly phased.
Blackout
An affected area experiences a complete loss of electrical power, ranging
from several hours to several weeks.
Load
shedding
An electric company either reduces or completely shuts off the available
power to sections of the grid. Sometimes referred to as rolling brownouts
and rolling blackouts.
Future Infrastructure
9

generation that relies on an endless supply of the traditional energy resources
would excel. However, limited resources and concerns over environmental impact
are driving the movement for clean and renewable energy sources, such as wind
and solar. Unfortunately, these types of clean, renewable resources have problems
of their own including localization and continuity. For example, a solar power
plant could generate large amounts of electricity if located in Florida; however,
the output would be negligible if located in Antarctica. Additionally, current solar
power plants all but cease to generate power during the night or during severe
weather such as thunderstorms and hurricanes, which would drive the need for
alternate sources of energy to meet demand. As a result, the current electric grid
simply does not properly accommodate renewable energy sources.
WHAT IS A SMART GRID?
A smart grid is not a single device, application, system, network, or even idea.
There is no single, authoritative definition for the question: What is a smart grid?
However, the definitions from the various authoritative organizations, such as
DOE, NERC, and SmartGrids Technology Platform (www.smartgrids.eu/), follow a
common theme: Smart grids utilize communication technology and information to
optimally transmit and distribute electricity from suppliers to consumers. Figure 1.7
illustrates the basic concepts of a smart grid. Additionally, smart grid is not a static
concept. It will continue to evolve as the existing technologies evolve and new
technologies are developed. The type, configuration, and implementation of these
technologies and the access to and transmission and use of relevant information are
of primary concern in securing smart grids and for this book.
Components
To achieve the desired goals of reliable, efficient, and clean energy distribution,
smart grids employ a combination of different technologies. According to DOE,
the following technologies are considered Key Technology Areas3:
•
Integrated two-way communication
•
Advanced components
•
Advanced control methods
•
Sensing and measurement technologies
•
Improved interfaces and decision support
•
Applications of smart grid technology.
Integrated Two-Way Communication
Two-way communication enables operators to monitor and interact with compo-
nents of the smart grid in real time. This type of communication improves the
operator’s ability to manage grid operations. For example, in the current grid,
operators are unaware of blackouts until customers notify them, typically by way of
10
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

Consumer energy
management
Transmission control
Transmission substation
Power generation
Power consumers
Distribution substations
Distribution control
Smart meter
1812 KWh
Home area network
Dishwasher: start 01:00
Washer/Dryer: start 02:00
HVAC: 72°/00:00-07:59,
78°/08:00-16:59,
72°/17:00-23:59
HVAC
Dishwasher
W/D
Pool
TV
FIGURE 1.7
Basic smart grid diagram.
What Is a Smart Grid?
11

telephone calls to a customer support center. In a smart grid, operators are able to
detect and manage the problem without any notification from customers, resulting
in faster problem resolution and decreased operational costs. In order to achieve
this capability, the components of smart grids require two-way communication abil-
ities. Different smart grid implementations will employ different technologies, but
they will all require an underlying network for data transport. Current smart grids
utilize the networking technologies that are also used in AMR deployments, as
previously discussed in the “AMR Network Topologies” section of this chapter.
Advanced Components
Advanced components include the areas of superconductivity, fault tolerance,
excess electricity storage, smart devices, and diagnostics equipment. This technol-
ogy actively determines the electrical behavior of the grid.3 For example, the excess
electricity that is created during the day by solar power plants could be stored in
electrical storage devices and used during the night when the solar power plant is
unable to generate electricity. So-called smart devices can provide useful consump-
tion feedback to both the consumer and the energy providers to enable better energy
management. Although the above-mentioned list may appear to be a dispersed vari-
ety of technological devices, this Key Technology Area involves smart grid compo-
nents that will provide unique advantages over technology of the current grid.
Advanced Control Methods
Utilizing the two-way communication component described in the “Integrated
Two-Way Communication” section of this chapter, the advanced control methods
allow operators (human or machine) to manage the various smart grid components.
Specifically, the advanced control methods enable advanced data collection, as
well as diagnostics and appropriate maintenance. For example, an operator could
identify a problem with a component and apply a patch remotely, thus saving time
and costs associated with sending crews to the location of the problem.
Sensing and Measurement Technologies
New sensing and measurement technologies support smart grid stability, health,
and security functionality. The most common of these technologies is the smart
meter. Figure 1.8 displays a current smart meter. A smart meter monitors usage
statistics and reports the usage details to the utility company, consumers, and
third-party service providers. Depending on the smart meter and supporting infra-
structure, the smart meter can be used for other administrative functions, such as
power outage notification and remotely disabling service.
Improved Interfaces and Decision Support
Humans and machines understand different languages and, as a result, important
information can be lost in translation. Due to its nature, a smart grid will collect
data too complex and immense for a human to comprehend in a short time frame.
The human machine interface (HMI) must be able to simplify the data and
12
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

resulting analysis in an efficient manner to enable operators and managers to make
decisions quickly. HMI can be described as how users interact with a machine.
According to the International Engineering Consortium (IEC – www.iec.org), the
success of a system often relies on how effective the HMI is in gaining the user’s
acceptance of the system.5
Applications of Smart Grid Technology
An informed consumer is an intelligent consumer. This is the theoretical reason
behind the drive to provide consumers with real-time usage data. Applications will
provide consumers with real-time usage statistics and pricing, as well as recommen-
dations for reducing their utility bill, such as running the dishwasher late at night
during nonpeak hours as opposed to the afternoon when residents return from work
or school. The applications seek to provide this information in a ubiquitous manner
ensuring the consumer always knows exactly how much electricity they are using
and how much that electricity costs.
TIP
Security should not be sacrificed for functionality. Utility companies and third-party
application service providers should ensure the confidentiality of this information.
WHAT IS AMI?
Advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) allows utility companies to remotely
measure, collect, and analyze usage statistics from smart meters. AMI is similar
to AMR; however, AMI provides a significant upgrade over AMR: two-way
FIGURE 1.8
Example smart meter.
What Is AMI?
13

communication with the meter. The information gathered by the smart meter
drives the demand-response smart grid and enables the majority of smart grid
applications. The underlying network in an AMI implementation connects the
meters with business systems and ultimately provides this information to customers,
utility companies, and service providers.
WARNING
An easy approach to providing business partners with this information is to grant them
access to a database in your internal network; however, this approach could leave your
environment at risk. The principle of least privilege should always be applied, including with
your “trusted” business partners.
INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES
Although the main focus for smart grid deployments is on the United States, other
areas around the globe are making headway in implementing smart grid techno-
logies. Spanning the globe, countries including Australia, Canada, and China have
established smart grid deployments, projects, and initiatives. Along with the
United States, Europe is leading the march toward smart grid technologies, with
several large deployments and initiatives.
Australia
In 2009, the Australian government promised to reserve $100 million for the
development of smart grid technologies through the Nation Energy Efficiency
Initiative. The goal of Australia’s smart grid is to deliver a more efficient, robust,
and consumer-friendly electric network.6 Coined as the “Smart Grid, Smart City”
initiative, Australia aims to implement a smart grid that utilizes advanced commu-
nications, sensors, and meters with existing transmission and distribution networks
in an attempt to automate, monitor, and regulate the bidirectional flow of power.
The Smart Grid, Smart City initiative will select one proposal and implement
its design into a single community that is serviced by a single power company.
Australia is hoping to showcase not only modernized transmission and distribution
networks in the demonstration community, but also modernized consumer applica-
tions and devices. The project is currently slated for proposal assessment and
announcement in late 2010.
Canada
In 2006, as part of the Energy Conservation Responsibility Act, Ontario’s govern-
ment mandated that all consumers be provided with smart meters by 2010. Hydro
One, a power company owned by the government of Ontario, is currently
14
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

deploying smart meters to 1.3 million consumers within the Province of Ontario.
This deployment is utilizing smart meters from Trilliant (www.trilliantinc.com/), a
Redwood City, California based company and was named the “Best AMR Initia-
tive in North America” by the Utility Planning Network in October of 2007.
China
On May 21, 2009, China publicized its desire to implement smart grid technologies
through the “Strengthened Smart Grid” initiative. This initiative is broken down into
three distinct phases: Planning and Testing, Construction and Development, and
Upgrading. From 2009 through 2010, the Planning and Testing phase of the Strength-
ened Smart Grid will focus on developing plans, technologies, standards, and per-
forming trials. The Construction and Development phase will occur from 2011
through 2015 and will include infrastructure construction, operational framework
development, device manufacturing, and deployment. The final stage, Upgrading,
will occur from 2016 to 2020 and will simply complete the initiative.7
Europe
In 2005, the European Union (EU) created the European Technology Platform for the
Electricity Networks of the Future. Alternatively known as the SmartGrids Platform,
this European Commission was founded by the European Commission Directorate
General for Research and is charged with advancing the EU’s electricity networks.
The SmartGrids Platform developed a shared vision that Europe’s smart grid
technologies of tomorrow will be8
•
Flexible – Address the needs of consumers while adapting to changing
environments.
•
Accessible – Provide universal access to all users to ensure they can utilize
renewable power.
•
Reliable – Assure security and consistency that meet future demands while
withstanding hazards and uncertainty.
•
Economic – Provide value through innovation and efficient energy
management through competition and regulation.
The SmartGrids Platform’s goal for achieving this vision is 2020. A recom-
mended read is the “European SmartGrids Technology Platform: Vision and Strategy
for Europe’s Electricity Networks of the Future,” published in 2006.
WHY DO WE NEED TO SECURE THE SMART GRID?
At this point, smart grids may seem like the panacea for the world’s energy
problems. They promise increased efficiency, reliability, and a more economical
means of distributing and transmitting power. These improvements rely on new
technologies and new levels of interconnectivity built into the electrical grid, as
Why Do We Need to Secure the Smart Grid?
15

well as cooperation among different organizations and analysis of massive
amounts of data. However, with every new technology and with easier access to
energy data and devices come new attack vectors that can be exploited.
Smart Grid versus Security
When most people hear the terms “new technology,” “interconnectivity,” “data
sharing,” and “business partners,” the immediate thought is of new functionality
and benefits. Alternatively, security professionals immediately consider the new
risks that these new functionalities and benefits have introduced to the environment.
Security professionals commonly rely on the principle of least privilege to secure
data and resources, which restricts access. As a result, security departments some-
times conflict with business units and security controls can sometimes conflict with
new functionality; however, properly implemented security controls should not
impede proper functionality. The purpose of a security control is to enable the func-
tionality to operate correctly and protect against abuse and misuse. Ideally, security
professionals would work with business units to ensure the new functionality oper-
ates in a secure manner, while striving to maintain the original intended purpose.
NOTE
The principle of least privilege requires that a user be given no more privileges than
necessary to perform his/her job function.9 By limiting access to only the required users, the
risk introduced is reduced to an acceptable and manageable level.
Completely secure applications, networks, or environments do not exist and
smart grids will not be an exception. Marketing schemes that advertise “Hacker
Proof” systems are simply marketing schemes and have never held up in the real
world. Although each of the identified smart grid components introduces much
needed functional or operational improvements, they also introduce new vulner-
abilities and additional risk into the electrical grid. If not properly managed,
attackers will exploit these vulnerabilities for various, common motives including
curiosity, profit, notoriety, activism, and warfare.
Mapping Smart Grid Goals to Security
One of the often-mentioned goals of smart grids is to increase the security of the
electric grid. This may make security seem like an additional feature; however,
security will need to be integrated into smart grids to be effective. Confidentiality,
integrity, and availability (CIA) are the core principles of information security that
must be applied to ensure the smart grid goals are achieved.
Reliability
As explained in the “Justifications for Smart Grids” section of this chapter,
one of the intended improvements of smart grids over the traditional grid is
16
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

reliability. Reliability can be mapped to the information security principles of
availability and integrity. Security is responsible for preventing all forms of
denial of service (DoS), which includes both human initiated and environmental
attacks. With the proper security controls, smart grids are able to either prevent
or minimize the negative impact of DoS; thus, increasing the reliability of
the grid.
Data analysis will play a major role in smart grids and the accuracy, or integ-
rity, of the data is vital. Appropriate security controls are required to ensure
collected data has not been tampered with. For example, smart meters will be
sending consumption statistics to the utility company for billing and operational
purposes. A security mechanism, such as hashing, could be used in this example
to enable the utility company to validate the consumption data and ensure their
customers are accurately billed.
Affordability
For smart grids to be successful, their benefits can not significantly increase costs
for utility companies, and ultimately consumers. The implementation and opera-
tional costs of smart grids must not affect the affordability. Although the exact
amount is unknown, recent estimates put the cost of electricity theft at $6 billion
per year.10 Meter tampering is one of the largest methods for electricity theft in
the current grid, and similarly, smart meters used in smart grids are expected to
be targeted. Appropriate security controls will be required to ensure the integrity
of smart meters, as well as each component in the smart grid. Although eliminat-
ing fraud and electricity theft is unrealistic, reducing the amount will result in sig-
nificant savings for the utility companies. As a result, allowing utility companies
to charge customers cheaper rates.
Accommodating Renewable Energy Sources
Renewable energy sources are intended to play a major role in the future electric
grid. Electricity theft is a concern that utility companies have faced for decades;
however, a new related concern will be with consumers, fraudulently, selling elec-
tricity to the grid. If a customer installs solar panels on their roof, they will have
the ability to sell excess electricity to the grid; however, utility companies will
need to ensure that they are not paying for spoofed electricity. Similar to the
affordability goal, the integrity of smart grid components will be vital to accom-
modating renewable energy sources in an effective manner.
Reducing Our Carbon Footprint
One proposed method to reduce our carbon footprint is to reduce our energy
consumption. Utilizing the data collected through components of the smart grid,
utility companies and third parties will provide consumers with real-time usage
statistics to help consumers modify their habits to reduce their energy usage. Due
to privacy concerns, the confidentiality of this information must be maintained
through proper security controls, such as encryption.
Why Do We Need to Secure the Smart Grid?
17

SUMMARY
The centuries old debate between Thomas Edison, Nikola Tesla, and George
Westinghouse continues. Both AC and DC are utilized today, and the current
centralized power generation model, George Westinghouse’s vision, has been
called into question. Smart grids will support more distributed power generation
options that utilize localized renewable resources.
Before the 1990s, the majority of software applications were developed for
internal use only and were not prepared for unrestricted access through Internet
connectivity. Similarly, the electric grid was not designed with modern intercon-
nected networks in mind and will encounter significant new risks. Security can
either be viewed as an obstacle to the progress of smart grids or as an enabler to
allow nations to meet their ambitious smart grid goals.
Endnotes
1. CBN.com. Obama pledges $3.4B to upgrade power grid [document on the Internet].
Christian Broadcasting Network; www.cbn.com/cbnnews/politics/2009/October/Obama-
Pledges-34B-to-Upgrade-Power-Grid; 2009 [accessed 15.11.09].
2. M2M Magazine. Smart grid stimulus funds awarded [document on the Internet]. Speci-
alty Publishing Co; www.m2mmag.com/news/articles/article.aspx?ID=8028; 2009
[accessed 06.11.06].
3. The U.S. Department of Energy. Technology providers [document on the Internet].
www.oe.energy.gov/DocumentsandMedia/TechnologyProviders.pdf; 2009.
4. Energy Vortex. Energy dictionary [document on the Internet]. www.energyvortex.com/
energydictionary/blackout__brownout__brown_power__rolling_blackout.html; [accessed
06.11.09].
5. International Engineering Consortium. IEC: on-line education: WPF: the human-
machine interface (HMI) [document on the Internet]. www.iec.org/online/tutorials/hmi/
topic01.asp; 2007 [accessed 17.11.09].
6. National Energy Efficiency Initiative. Smart grid, smart city [document on the Internet].
Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts; www.environment.gov.
au/smartgrid; 2009 [accessed 29.10.2009].
7. Li J. From strong to smart: the Chinese smart grid and its relation with the globe [docu-
ment on the Internet]. www.aepfm.org/ufiles/pdf/Smart%20Grid%20-%20AEPN%
20Sept.pdf; 2009.
8. European smartgrids technology platform: vision and strategy for Europe’s electricity
networks of the future [document on the Internet]. European Commission; http://ec.
europa.eu/research/energy/pdf/smartgrids_en.pdf; 2006.
9. Ferraiolo DF, Cugini JA, Kuhn DR. National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Role-based access control (RBAC): features and motivations [document on the Internet].
http://hissa.nist.gov/rbac/newpaper/rbac.html; 1995.
10. Energy Association of Pennsylvania. How safe is your utility from theft of service?
[document on the Internet]. 2007 [accessed 06.11.09]. www.energypa.org/EEP%20Fall
%2007_Energy%20Theft%20-%20EAPA%20TF%20Presentation%209%2007.pdf.
18
CHAPTER 1 Smart Grid: What Is It?

CHAPTER
2
Threats and Impacts:
Consumers
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Consumer Threats
•
Naturally Occurring Threats
•
Individual and Organizational Threats
•
Impacts on Consumers
•
Impacts on Availability
•
Financial Impacts
•
Likelihood of Attack
Either directly or indirectly, consumers will be affected by the threats to smart grids.
Consumers can be a threat to utility companies; however, they can also be victims.
One of the goals of smart grids discussed in Chapter 1, “Smart Grid: What is it?,”
is providing consumers with more information regarding their energy usage and rates
for the electricity they consume. In order to protect consumers from the threats
discussed in this chapter, consumers will also need to be informed about these threats,
the potential attack vectors, and the protections needed to defend against them.
Responsibility for educating consumers will most likely become a hotly debated
topic, but a combined effort from government, corporate, and consumer advocacy
organizations will most likely develop.
When discussing threats to information technology systems, the easy solution
is to just blame hackers. But hackers only represent a small portion of the threats
that information technology systems, and ultimately smart grids, have faced in the
past and will face in the future. This chapter will describe the different types of
threats that smart grids will encounter from the perspective of the consumer.
CONSUMER THREATS
Consumers facing threats from modern technology is nothing new. Although not
entirely the same, consumers have faced similar threats from using personal computers,
cellular phones, and the current electrical grid. As the dependency on technology
grows, so does the dependency on electricity to power the technology. When you take
away a single piece of technology from a consumer, such as a laptop or cell phone, the
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00002-9
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
19

consumer might get angry but will easily adapt. Consumers can easily replace cell
phones, but when access to electricity is taken away, consumers would find themselves
without access to all of the technology they had grown reliant on. As such, smart grid
threats will impact consumers in a variety of different ways ranging from privacy to
emergency life support situations.
NATURALLY OCCURRING THREATS
According to the NERC Disturbance Analysis Working Group (DAWG), utilities in
the United States and Canada reported 104 disturbances to the bulk electric system
during the first three quarters of 2009.1 As illustrated in Figure 2.1, natural threats,
such as severe weather and natural disasters, caused more than 50 percent of these
disturbances.
Ranging from small storms to natural disasters, smart grids will face natural
threats that can significantly impact consumers. Redundancy can be built into most
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
21
1
9
2
61
Special protection system (SPS)
Equipment failure
Fuel supply
Public appeal
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Weather
Earthquake
Fire
Vegetation
Animals
Human error
Voltage drop
Operatin security limit (OSL) violation
70
FIGURE 2.1
Breakdown of major causes for disturbances in the United States and Canada in the first
three quarters of 2009.1
20
CHAPTER 2 Threats and Impacts: Consumers

areas of smart grids, but there will still be single points of failure for consumers.
Under the current vision, smart grids will be able to route power from a number
of different sources. Power lines will still be required to deliver electricity to the
consumer’s home or office building, but if the single power line connected to the
consumer’s house is disconnected, the number of different routes in the grid will
not matter to that consumer. For example, if a strong wind causes a tree in a consu-
mer’s yard to fall onto the power line, the consumer would lose power.
Weather and Other Natural Disasters
In the example from the previous section regarding a falling tree, a utility company
should be able to fix the power line and restore power to the consumer within a short
amount of time due to the threat being limited to one consumer. However, this will
not always be the case. In 2005, Hurricane Katrina caused power outages, which
lasted for weeks, to more than 1.7 million people.2 Additionally, the number
of tropical cyclones forming in the Atlantic Ocean rose in previous years, as shown in
Figure 2.2. “The average number of named storms since 1995 has been 13, compared
to 8.6 during the preceding 25 years during which time the multi-decadal signal was
Year
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
Number of storms
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1945
0
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
FIGURE 2.2
Number of named storms in the Atlantic Ocean from 1944 through 2005.2
Naturally Occurring Threats
21

in an inactive phase. An average of 7.7 hurricanes and 3.6 major hurricanes since 1995
compares to 5 hurricanes and 1.5 major hurricanes from 1970–1994.”2 The number of
significant storms per year will fluctuate, but for the foreseeable future, storms that
produce strong winds and other damaging effects will remain a threat to electric grids.
Hurricanes will affect consumers who live and work near the coastline, but
every geographical region is under threat to some type of natural disaster or
severe weather. For example, consumers in the state of Iowa may not be affected
by hurricanes, but tornadoes, blizzards, and floods could affect them. Similarly,
consumers in Southern California may not be affected by blizzards, but earth-
quakes and wildfires can greatly impact the distribution of electricity.
NOTE
Completely eliminating the damage from severe weather or natural disasters is simply not
feasible in the near future. Because we cannot stop severe weather from happening,
incident response programs will continue to be critical in responding to destructive natural
phenomenon.
INDIVIDUAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL THREATS
Advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) and other components of smart grids will
allow operators to remotely administer devices in consumer homes. Additionally,
smart devices within consumer’s home area networks (HAN) will allow consu-
mers and potentially utility companies to remotely control electricity usage. For
example, some utility companies will offer a credit to customers in exchange for
the ability to turn off the customer’s air conditioner or heater during peak demand
times. Numerous motives will drive people and organizations to abuse these smart
grid functionalities, as well as much other functionality. From angry neighbors to
terrorist organizations, the possibility of gaining control of AMI components,
HAN devices, and these functionalities will lead to attacks against smart grids and
ultimately the consumers utilizing smart grids for electricity.
Smart Thieves and Stalkers
The vision of the smart grid promises to empower consumers with information
regarding their energy consumption. Consumers will be able to monitor their
energy consumption in quasi-real time, such as hourly, whereas consumers are
currently informed of their usage on a monthly basis. One of the desired results is
to enable consumers to modify their behaviors in order to reduce their electricity
bill. With access to this kind of reconnaissance information, however, others
could use it to enable their malicious acts.
This level of information will greatly aid a thief in burglarizing consumers. For
example, Alice’s utility company uses a social networking site, such as Twitter, to
22
CHAPTER 2 Threats and Impacts: Consumers

provide real-time energy usage statistics to their customers. Bob, a thief, decides
Alice is going to be his next target and begins to monitor Alice’s energy usage
through her utility company’s tweets. Over the course of the first month, Bob notices
that Alice uses about 100 W/h, or 2.4 kW/day. He also notes that she uses signifi-
cantly more electricity between 7:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M., and then notices a significant
drop-off until around 4:00 P.M. Bob uses his powers of deduction to determine that
Alice wakes up and leaves for work sometime between 7:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M., and
does not return home until sometime between 4:00 P.M. and 5:00 P.M. Additionally,
Bob has noticed that Alice’s hourly electricity usage for the last three days has been
significantly lower and has not had the normal peaks of her daily usage. Bob now
deduces that Alice has not been home for the past three days and is most likely tra-
veling away from home. Thus, Bob now has a window of opportunity to burglarize
Alice’s home. Taking this concept one step further, a thief could exploit access to
consumers’ information to identify the best targets, determine daily and weekly activ-
ities, and determine when he/she could use washing machines, driers, dishwashers,
and other noisy devices as a cover for malicious activities.
A stalker could also benefit greatly by accessing a target’s smart grid information.
Suppose Alice typically entertains friends and family with dinner parties at her home
on Saturday evenings, requiring higher energy usage between the hours of 6:00 P.M.
and 10:00 P.M. Recently, Alice’s house has tweeted higher energy usage only between
6:00 P.M. and 7:30 P.M. before dropping back down to a standard level, and then
increasing again during the 11:00 P.M. to midnight hour. Even more interesting is that
now Alice plugs in her electric vehicle to charge during the predawn Sunday morning
hours every nondinner party Saturday. With similar powers of deduction, Stalker
Steve may deduce that Alice has started a romantic relationship and has been driving
to various destinations. If Steve can access more detailed electricity usage informa-
tion, he may be able to calculate exactly how far Alice has been driving by compar-
ing vehicle recharge energy amounts (dinner party Saturdays versus others). Stalker
Steve could then begin to determine Alice’s favorite dining locations, dating habits,
and ultimately map out Alice’s life.
Hackers
The motives for hacking smart grids will cover a broad range. The following list
describes the common motives of hackers that can be applied to any environment:
•
Intellectual challenge
•
Self-expression and peer recognition
•
Testing computer security
•
Mischief or curiosity
•
Monetary gain
•
Power
•
Vengeance and vindictiveness
•
Attacking the “system” or terrorism3
Individual and Organizational Threats
23

These motives will still be relevant with smart grids and can impact consumers
in new ways.
Nonmalicious Motives
Not every hacker has malicious intent when hacking into a system. Some hackers are
driven by the intellectual challenge of bypassing the security of a system and curiosity
of knowing how a device works. To these hackers, the security and operation of
the system is a puzzle to be cracked. Smart grid components, such as smart meters
and smart devices, will extend into consumers homes and may connect to their home
network. Easy physical access to these devices will further entice people to hack com-
ponents of the smart grid. Other motives, such as self-expression and peer recognition,
will drive hackers to use smart grids as a means for obtaining personal gratification or
for egotistical purposes. Although these hackers may not have malicious intentions,
their actions can inadvertently cause negative impacts against consumers.
Testing Computer Security
Robust information security programs include regular security testing to identify
vulnerabilities that could impact the security posture of an environment. The intent
of this testing is to improve the overall security posture, and smart grid security pro-
grams should also include security testing. Professional security testers, or ethical
hackers, take precautions to prevent negative impact during testing; however, risk
does exist in performing this testing. In 2007, the Department of Homeland Security
leaked a video of a security test where security testers were able to hack into a
power plant’s generator. The security testers successfully exploited a vulnerability,
now commonly known as the Aurora vulnerability, using only digital means and
caused the generator to self-destruct in a cloud of black smoke.4 This test was per-
formed in a lab and thus, there was no negative impact to consumers from the dis-
abled power generator. However, if the test was performed in a production
environment, consumers would have most likely experienced a power outage.
TIP
When performing security testing, it is essential to define the rules of engagement to reduce
the risk of performing the test. Both the organization and the security testers before the
execution of testing should agree to and sign the rules of engagement. For more information
and a rules of engagement template, please review Appendix B in NIST Special Publication
800–115: “Technical Guide to Information Security Testing and Assessment,” which can be
found at http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-115/SP800-115.pdf.
Personal Gain – Monetary Gain and Power
Some hackers will attempt to exploit smart grids for both money and power.
Hackers have a wide variety of tools and methods at their disposal to either
directly extort money from or wield power over consumers. One such method
would be to use a specific subset of malware known as ransomware, also known
24
CHAPTER 2 Threats and Impacts: Consumers

as extortive malware. “Malware, also known as malicious code and malicious
software, refers to a program that is inserted into a system, usually covertly, with
the intent of compromising the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the
victim’s data, applications, or operating system (OS) or of otherwise annoying or
disrupting the victim.”5 Malware usually consists of the following categories:
•
Viruses
•
Worms
•
Trojan horses
•
Malicious mobile code
•
Blended attacks (combination of the different types)5
Ransomware refers to the specific type of malware that holds a system or data
hostage in order to extort a ransom from the owner or user. Typically, ransomware
will disable a specific service, lock the user out of the system, prevent access to criti-
cal data, or be a combination of these. For example, the Gpcode virus encrypts user
files and then demands the user to send money to the hacker to decrypt the files.6
Another example would be the RansomSMS-AH virus that blocks Internet access in
order to force users into sending a systems management server (SMS) text message
to a premium rate SMS phone number, which generates revenue for the hacker.7
In order to extort money from consumers, hackers could adapt these techni-
ques to smart grid components. Specifically, hackers could obtain control of the
consumer’s smart meter and disrupt the consumer’s access to power. The hacker
could then send a ransom note through traditional mail to demand a monetary
sum to restore the consumer’s power to normal power levels.
Vengeance and Vindictiveness
Feuds between neighbors and other acquaintances could escalate to smart grid
attacks. For a simple scenario, Alice believes her neighbor Bob turns up the volume
on his television too loudly. Despite asking Bob to turn down the volume several
times, Bob continues to watch television at an annoying level. So, Alice decides to
abuse the remote disconnect feature in the smart meter installed in Bob’s home to
turn off his power, thus lowering the volume completely on his television.
With the current electric grid, the easiest attack vector from personal vendettas is a
physical attack. If Alice is determined to turn off Bob’s power, she could forcefully
disconnect the power line to his house. In a smart grid, this attack would still work;
however, Alice could potentially achieve the same impact without leaving the comfort
of her own home in a smart grid environment. If Alice takes certain precautions, she
could even carry out this attack without leaving physical fingerprints on Bob’s smart
grid equipment or electronic fingerprints on the systems and networks involved.
Terrorism
For various political reasons, the world has had trouble coming to a consensus for
defining the term terrorism. One commonly used reference is a United Nations
Individual and Organizational Threats
25

panel that stated “any action constitutes terrorism if it is intended to cause death or
serious bodily harm to civilians or non-combatants with the purpose of intimidating
a population or compelling a government or an international organization to do or
abstain from doing any act.”8 There are different motives behind terrorism, and
organizations use varying labels that mostly have common themes. An example
terrorism category breakdown includes national separatist, religious fundamentalist,
new religious, and social revolutionary.9 Regardless of motive or category, smart
grids will be considerable targets for terrorists. By attacking electric grids, terrorists
could affect massive amounts of people and, as a result, create massive attention
for their cause. Although digital threats to smart grids will be a primary concern,
violent acts such as bombings will of course remain a viable attack vector.
Digital attacks against smart grids may not be the primary goal of a terrorist
attack, rather a means to some other end. During and immediately following
the September 11, 2001 attacks at the World Trade Center, Pentagon, and rural
Pennsylvania, American citizens had access to information sources on television,
radio, and the Internet. An attack in the future may begin with a broad shutdown of
consumers’ access to electricity and therefore disable access to warnings and updates
about the primary objective, which may include explosives or other physical attacks.
Eco-terrorism
According to the categories described in the Terrorism section, eco-terrorists would
be classified as social revolutionaries. Part of the smart grid vision is to enable the
electric grid to better handle clean, renewable sources of energy; however, tradi-
tional types of energy sources that are considered harmful to the environment will
still be used. In order to further their cause, eco-terrorists could attack smart grids
to either decrease or completely eliminate energy usage by consumers.
Government
Government is both a consumer and a threat to consumers. From traffic lights to
research labs, government agencies consume large amounts of energy and can be
just as susceptible as individuals to the threats described in this chapter. However,
governments may also be a threat to consumers. Warfare and law enforcement
will cause governments to become threats to consumers.
Warfare
Crippling a nation’s critical infrastructure can hinder a nation’s ability to operate
and as such, smart grids will be targets during war. Traditional weapons of war,
such as bombs, will still be effective in disrupting the distribution and transmis-
sion of power to consumers when smart grids are deployed. Although, the risk
from cyberwarfare will most likely increase when smart grids are more common.
The current electric grid is already susceptible to cyber attacks, and the increasing
reliance on technology will only increase the risk in smart grids. When asked
about reports that the current electric grid had been infiltrated by foreign spies,
26
CHAPTER 2 Threats and Impacts: Consumers

U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano stated, “The vulnerability is
something [we] have known about for years,”10 and also stated, “We acknowledge
that... in this world, in an increasingly cyber world, these are increasing risks.”10
Illegal Activity
Electricity has many uses and not all of those uses are considered legal in every
country. For example, the production and use of marijuana is currently illegal in a
majority of the United States, as well as many other countries around the world.
One method for producing marijuana is in so-called grow-ops, which can involve
the indoor cultivation of cannabis. Due to its growth requirements for light, the
power consumption of buildings utilized for indoor grow-ops is significantly
higher than other comparable buildings. As a result, some utility companies will
work with law enforcement agencies to locate potential grow-ops. Because smart
grids will produce significantly more accurate usage data, it will be more easy to
locate and shut down illegal activity through consumer usage statistics. Although
most people will not sympathize with the operators of grow-ops, or other illegal
activity, those operators of illegal activity will consider the smart grid a significant
threat to their activities. Government agencies will be able use data collected from
smart grids to locate and imprison those operators.
Utility Companies
Utility companies, or more precisely agents of utility companies, will be threats to
consumers through intentional or unintentional actions. From accidents to insider
threats, utility company agents may continue to be a cause of power disruptions,
privacy leaks, improper billing, and more.
Accidental Threats
As depicted in Figure 2.1 in the “Naturally Occurring Threats” section of this
chapter, human error caused four disturbances in the United States and Canada in
the first three quarters of 2009. Additionally, human error caused approximately
10 percent of the disturbances during 2006 and 2007.11 Although increased auto-
mation will decrease the number of incidents caused by human error, operators,
and maintenance, employees will be required to interact with the smart grid.
Increased training at regular and frequent intervals should decrease the risk of
accidents; however, accidents will always remain a threat to the operation and
maintenance of smart grids.
Patch Management
Most (if not all) organizations have struggled with patch management and, as
evidenced by the continued threat of worms, viruses, and trojans, many organizations
still do. Deploying patches or upgrades for operating systems, firmware, and applica-
tions to every system in an enterprise does not always go smoothly. Typically, the
patches will not install correctly on at least some of the target systems. This can result
Individual and Organizational Threats
27

in several different outcomes. The most likely scenario is that the system continues to
operate without the patch or upgrade being applied, and will be found later during an
audit or security assessment (or hacker). However, situations can arise where the
unsuccessful application of a patch or upgrade causes the system to cease operating
correctly. For example, an unsuccessful firmware update to a smart meter could
cause the consumer to receive an erroneous bill or shutoff electricity to their house.
With smart meters and other smart devices deployed at consumer facilities and con-
nected to the Internet, patch management poses a threat to electricity consumers
unlike anything experienced with the current electric grid.
Intentional Attacks
Utility company employees intentionally attacking consumers may seem counter-
intuitive, but various situations could arise that lead employees to attack consu-
mers. Angry employees lashing out in the workplace is not a new concept.
Negative performance reviews, inadequate compensation, impending layoffs, and
arguments with management are common reasons for employees to lash out at
their employers, which could indirectly cause negative impact to consumers.
There will also be situations that cause employees to directly attack consumers.
For example, Alice calls the utility company’s support phone line to discuss the
previous month’s bill. Bob, an account support technician, receives the call from
Alice and attempts to explain the bill. However, Alice is angry over the rate
charged during peak usage times and angrily yells at Bob. As a result, Bob
decides to get revenge by remotely disconnecting Alice’s power.
TIP
Implementing the principle of least privilege and potentially separation of duties could have
prevented Bob from disconnecting Alice. If Bob is only responsible for correcting billing
errors, he should not have the ability to disconnect Alice’s power.
Load Shedding
When demand is greater than supply, utility companies may resort to load shed-
ding techniques. As a result, utility companies will either reduce or completely
shut off the availability of power to some consumers. Utility companies will use
load shedding to ensure that priority consumers, such as emergency services, still
have power. However, those consumers who are not prioritized will lose power,
which could negatively impact their lives.
IMPACTS ON CONSUMERS
When speaking to nontechnical management, security professionals cannot just
use vulnerability terms such as buffer overflow to convey why they need addi-
tional money to remediate identified vulnerability. Typically, management is more
28
CHAPTER 2 Threats and Impacts: Consumers

interested in the impact on business operations. For most situations, the impact of
vulnerabilities will vary and can only be estimated. For example, an attacker
could exploit a buffer overflow in a smart meter to obtain complete control of the
smart meter. The attacker may use this vulnerability to shut off electricity to a sin-
gle house, or they could exploit this vulnerability to shut off power to an emer-
gency service, which would have a higher impact. As a result, security
professionals are sometimes criticized for fear mongering when doomsday situa-
tions are described as the impact. Similar to other environments, the impact of a
successful attack against smart grids will range from annoyance to life or death
situations.
Privacy
In AMI implementations, smart meters will autonomously collect massive amounts
of data and transport the data to the utility company, the consumer, and third-
party service providers. The data will include personally identifiable information
(PII) that could compromise the privacy of consumers.
According to a Privacy Impact Analysis (PIA) performed for NIST, “The data
items collected from the Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) and smart meters will
reveal different types of information about residential consumers and activities.”12
Detailed energy usage information will enable persons and organizations to profile
a consumer’s habits. Privacy experts, including the Future of Privacy Forum (FPF –
www.futureofprivacy.org), have voiced concern over the data being collected on
consumers in smart grids. As shown in Figure 2.3, analysts can determine what device
is operating by analyzing the current power load.
Time of day, h
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
0
8
1
0
2
3
4
Refrigerator
Kettle
Peak = 7.18 kW
Mean = 0.49kW
Daily load factor = 0.07kW
Energy consumption = 11.8kWh
Toaster
Washing
machine
Hob heaters
Power, kW
5
6
7
Kettle
Oven preheating
Oven cycling
FIGURE 2.3
Device load signatures.13
Impacts on Consumers
29

WARNING
When using third-party services, such as social networking sites, to provide information to
consumers, the privacy of this information is reliant on that third-party. Even though most
social networking sites have some privacy controls, they should not be trusted to maintain
the privacy of sensitive information. Most privacy controls in social networking sites have
been successfully attacked in the past, and they still remain vulnerable. From a functionality
and marketing standpoint, using popular social networking sites to deliver energy usage
information to consumers appears to be a good idea. However, this process will present
significant risk to the privacy of this information.
Many consumers will not realize the potential impact introduced by collecting
and analyzing this type of information. They will not correlate this information
with a realistic threat. However, threats such as the ones described previously in
the “Smart Thieves and Stalkers” section of this chapter will exploit consumer
personally identifiable information to burglarize, stalk, and perform many other
malicious acts against consumers.
Although hackers will discover numerous ways to utilize the PII for malicious
reasons, companies could also attempt to utilize the PII for more legitimate reasons.
Specifically, advertising companies would highly value this personal information.
Search engines that utilize targeted ads to generate revenue could be considered
an analogous example. For example, when you perform a search on the history of
microwaves, advertisements for stores selling microwaves will show up in your
browser. Similarly, a utility company sells anonymous, or what they believe to be
anonymous, usage information to an advertising company for a particular zip code.
The advertising company analyzes the electricity usage to profile the consumers in
that geographical region. The advertising company could then sell these results to
local businesses who want to do targeted advertising. Although not as dangerous as
smart thieves, this example represents a privacy concern among some consumers.
IMPACTS ON AVAILABILITY
Smart grids will introduce new features and benefits to the electric grid, but the
main purpose of smart grids will remain making power available to consumers. As
such, the majority of the threats described in the “Consumer Threats” sections of
this chapter affect the availability of power. The impact will range from altering the
thermostat on heaters and air conditioners to limiting emergency services.
Personal Availability
There has been debate on whether the utility company or the government would
be able to arbitrarily control consumer power consumption. Ultimately, this will
depend on where you are consuming power. The functionality for a utility com-
pany or governing authority to remotely control consumer energy consumption
30
CHAPTER 2 Threats and Impacts: Consumers

does exist and will be installed in consumers’ homes and businesses, as is the case
in Great Britain.14
Mobility
One of the current technological problems is efficient storage of excess electricity
that can be used during peak demand times. However, the wide-spread adoption
of electric cars could solve this problem. Electric cars will need to be connected
to the power grid to recharge their batteries. If the smart grid experienced a higher
demand than the current power generation could supply, then the utility company
could collect power from the connected electric cars batteries to obtain the extra
electricity. Although this may satisfy the needs of the utility company, the consu-
mers who rely on electric cars could remain immobile for a significant amount of
time to recharge their cars.
Emergency Services
Most critical emergency services, such as life support medical systems, rely on a
stable flow of electricity to operate. Although privacy and temperature control may
not seem critical to some consumers, the functioning status of emergency services
usually do. Hospitals, emergency response teams, police, and firefighters save lives
on a daily basis, and they all rely on electricity to perform their duties. Emergency
services normally have their own generators and other backups in the case of power
outages; however, these backup plans usually have a fairly short operational time.
In the event of a prolonged power outage, the operational abilities of these emer-
gency services will be severely limited. This is especially significant in the case of
hospitals that house critically ill patients who are kept alive by electrically powered
medical devices.
FINANCIAL IMPACTS
The threats described in this chapter could have significant financial impact on
consumers. Corrupt data from smart meters could result in inaccurate billing that
causes consumers to overpay for their electrical consumption. Many consumers
may not notice that they are overpaying; however, some consumers will attempt to
have their electricity bill corrected. If the utility company has detected a malfunc-
tioning smart meter, the utility company will most likely be willing to adjust the
bill. Conversely, the utility company may be overconfident with the touted features
of a smart grid and refuse to believe they are gathering corrupt data; thus, forcing
the consumers to pay their overpriced bill.
The loss of power could also impact businesses’ ability to operate, which could
escalate to crashing stock markets. In August, 2003, parts of the Northeastern and
Midwestern United States, as well as Southeastern Canada experienced a power
Financial Impacts
31

outage. The blackout affected an estimated 50 million people and lasted for up to
four days in the United States and up to one week in Canada. In the United States
and Canada, the estimated financial loss in sales and manufacturing goods was
between $4 billion and $10 billion, respectively.15
LIKELIHOOD OF ATTACK
According to an Idaho National Laboratory (IDL) Critical Infrastructure Protec-
tion/Resilience Center report performed for the U.S. Department of Energy, vul-
nerabilities in smart grid technologies may not currently present significant risk to
the national security risk. However, the reason is that smart grid technologies are
not widely deployed yet.16 Similarly, the current risk presented to consumers is
relatively low because most consumers are not connected to a smart grid. The
vulnerabilities in smart grid technologies are relatively trivial to exploit and have
significant impact to consumers. As the technology becomes more widespread,
the risk to consumers will increase significantly.
SUMMARY
Consumers will continue to rely heavily on the electrical grid to support all facets of
their daily lives. Consumers connected to smart grids will continue to face traditional
threats, such as natural disasters and warfare, to the availability of electricity that con-
sumers depend on. However, the additional network connectivity supporting smart
grids will increase the risk of cyber threats affecting consumers. To prevent or reduce
the negative impact from threats, consumers will almost completely rely on utility
companies and governing authorities for security. However, consumers will be partly
responsible for ensuring their own security through practices, such as choosing strong
passwords and scrutinizing the privacy policies of their utility company.
Endnotes
1. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. 2009 First-third quarter NERC DAWG
number of disturbances by region [document on the Internet]. North American Electric
Reliability Corporation; www.nerc.com/files/NERC_DAWG_Disturbances_2009_Jan-
Sept_Updated.pdf; 2009 [accessed 31.12.09].
2. National Climatic Data Center. Climate of 2005 summary of Hurricane Katrina [document
on the Internet]. www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/research/2005/katrina.html; 2005 [accessed
2.12.2009].
3. Grabosky P, Smith R. Crime in the digital age. Sydney: Federation Press; 1998. p. 52–53.
4. CNN. Staged cyber attack reveals vulnerability in power grid [document on the Internet].
www.cnn.com/2007/US/09/26/power.at.risk/index.html#cnnSTCText; 2007 [accessed
2.12.2009].
32
CHAPTER 2 Threats and Impacts: Consumers

5. Mell P, Kent K, Nusbaum J. National Institute of Standards and Technology. Guide to
Malware incident prevention and handling [document on the Internet]. http://csrc.nist.
gov/publications/nistpubs/800-83/SP800-83.pdf; 2005 [accessed 2.12.2009].
6. Kaspersky Lab. Virus.Win32.Gpcode.ae [document on the Internet]. www.viruslist.com/
en/viruses/encyclopedia?virusid=123334; 2006 [accessed 2.12.2009].
7. Leyden J. The Register. Russian ransomware blocks net access [document on the Internet].
www.theregister.co.uk/2009/12/01/ransomware_turns_off_net_access; 2009 [accessed
4.12.2009].
8. United Nations General Assembly. In larger freedom: towards development, security
and human rights for all [documents on the Internet]. http://daccess-ods.un.org/access.
nsf/Get?Open&DS=A/59/2005&Lang=E; 2005 [accessed 4.12.2009].
9. Hudson RA. Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. The sociology and psychology
of terrorism: who becomes a terrorist and why? [document on the Internet]. www.loc.gov/rr/
frd/pdf-files/Soc_Psych_of_Terrorism.pdf; 1999 [accessed 4.12.2009].
10. Shiels M. Spies ’‘infiltrate US power grid’ [document on the Internet]. BBC; http://
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/7990997.stm; 2009 [accessed 4.12.2009].
11. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Annual Report 2008 [document on the
Internet]. North American Electric Reliability Corporation; www.nerc.com/files/2008-
Annual-Report.pdf; 2009 [accessed 1.1.2009].
12. National Institute of Standards and Technology. Draft smart grid cyber security strategy
and requirements [document on the Internet]. The Cyber Security Coordination Task
Group; http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/nistir-7628/draft-nistir-7628.pdf; 2009
[accessed 1.1.2009].
13. Wood G, Newborough M. Dynamic energy-consumption indicators for domestic appli-
ances: environment, behaviour and design. Energy Buildings 2003;35(8):822.
14. Department of Energy and Climate Change. Towards a smarter future: Government
response to the consultation on electricity and gas smart metering [document on the
Internet]. http://decc.gov.uk/Media/viewfile.ashx?FilePath=Consultations%5CSmart%
20Metering%20for%20Electricity%20and%20Gas%5C1_20091202094543_e_@@_
ResponseElectricityGasConsultation.pdf&filetype=4; 2009 [accessed 4.12.2009].
15. U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force. Final Report on the August 14, 2003
blackout in the United States and Canada: causes and recommendations [document on
the Internet]. https://reports.energy.gov/BlackoutFinal-Web.pdf; 2004 [accessed
4.12.2009].
16. U.S. Department of Energy Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability. Study
of security attributes of smart grid systems – current cyber security issues [document on
the Internet]. INL Critical Infrastructure Protection/Resilience Center; www.inl.gov/
scada/publications/d/securing_the_smart_grid_current_issues.pdf; 2009 [accessed
4.12.2009].
Endnotes
33

CHAPTER
3
Threats and Impacts:
Utility Companies
and Beyond
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Confidentiality
•
Integrity
•
Availability
We discussed the threats and their impact to consumers in the last chapter, but
now let us focus on those that are relevant to utility companies, businesses, and
governments. Some of these threats are similar, some are unique, but attacks
against utility companies, businesses, and governments will have a broader impact
than attacks against consumers.
The threats are broken down into the components of the CIA triad, depicted
in Figure 3.1 below: confidentiality, integrity, and availability. The impact of
these threats is presented in a hypothetical scenario format. However, these
threats and their impact could very easily become reality. In some cases, they
already have.
Availability
Confidentiality
Integrity
FIGURE 3.1
The CIA triad.
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00003-0
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
35

CONFIDENTIALITY
Confidentiality is attained when information is protected from unauthorized disclo-
sure. A loss of confidentiality has the greatest effect on consumers. However, the
aggregation of personal information about consumers by the utility companies
makes them a significantly larger target to hackers.
Consumer Privacy
Utility companies collect and store customer information such as name, address,
social security number, and consumption data; all information you and I expect to
remain confidential. Breaching this confidentiality to access such information is
the goal of many hackers, as highlighted in Verizon Business’ 2009 Data Breach
Investigations Report, “… criminals have had to overhaul their processes and dif-
ferentiate their products in order to maintain profitability. In 2008, this was
accomplished by targeting points of data concentration or aggregation…”1
However, hackers may not be the only ones who want this information. With
the adoption of smart grid technologies, consumers will more frequently interact
with their utility companies through Internet accessible Web applications. These
applications will allow consumers to monitor and control their power consump-
tion, and even control their smart devices. Law enforcement could utilize this
information to support investigations, much like mobile phone data, such as global
positioning satellite (GPS), is used today.
NOTE
Security and Privacy blogger Christopher Soghoian published findings on December 1, 2009
that Sprint, a United States based wireless carrier, provided law enforcement agencies
customer GPS location data between 2008 and 2009. Over a 13-month span, Sprint
provided customer GPS location data more than eight million times to different law
enforcement agencies through a special Web portal.2
PII
As discussed in the previous chapter, smart grids present a host of threats to con-
sumers. While we previously discussed targeted threats and impacts, compromis-
ing the confidentiality of consumer data housed by the utility companies presents
a far greater reward than compromising the confidentiality of single consumer.
Scenario
•
Threat – Hackers are able to compromise consumer databases operated by the
HackMe utility company.
•
Attack vector – A Structured Query Language (SQL) Injection vulnerability
within the HackMe Web site utilized by consumers to manage their accounts,
monitor their usage, and make payments.
36
CHAPTER 3 Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond

•
Impact – Hackers obtain the personally identifiable information (PII) of
500,000 HackMe customers. This information includes customer names,
addresses, birth dates, social security numbers, and account numbers. For
those customers who utilize automatic or online bill payment, Hackers
also obtain customers’ credit card numbers and bank account information.
The hackers sell this information on the black market, and HackMe’s
customers are left to deal with repercussions. Government agencies,
regulatory bodies, and customers become enraged that this information
was compromised and the utility company is fined for not protecting the
information properly.
NOTE
SQL Injection is an attack that consists of inserting a malicious Structured Query Language
(SQL) query into data that is passed from the application client to the backend database
server. Such attacks can allow an attacker to manipulate data within application databases.
Often, these databases include sensitive information such as usernames, passwords, credit
card information, social security numbers, and more. You can learn more about SQL
Injection at www.owasp.org/index.php/SQL_Injection or Justin Clarke’s SQL Injection Attacks
and Defense (ISBN: 978-1-59749-424-3).
Consumption Data
We previously covered, in the “Illegal Activity” section of the previous chapter,
how law enforcement agencies may utilize consumption information to determine
if utility companies’ customers are producing illegal substances. However, alter-
nate uses by law enforcement include using similar information to determine the
location of suspects during crimes.
Scenario
•
Threat – Consumers become disenfranchised with smart grid technologies
after the repeated use of consumption information in the prosecution of
criminals.
•
Attack vector – Law enforcement reviews suspects’ historical consumption
information to determine the likelihood that they were located at their
residence during the time of crime.
•
Impact – Customer backlash at the alleged misuse of consumption information
forces utility companies to modify their smart grid deployments. These
modifications pose a significant financial burden to the utility companies, and
the public backlash slows the adoption of smart grid technologies.
Proprietary Information
Utility companies possess valuable information beyond that of their customers’ PII.
Proprietary information, such as trade secrets, will be targeted by hackers who
Confidentiality
37

believe they can sell the information to competing organizations, governments, or
terrorist groups.
Scenario
•
Threat – A foreign government, frustrated by the sanctions imposed by the
United Nations, utilizes its own hackers to compromise an American utility
company and obtain trade secrets. These trade secrets will allow the foreign
government to significantly increase its power-generating capabilities despite
the imposed sanctions.
•
Attack vector – An exploit is placed on the utility companies’ Web site that
leverages vulnerability in an unpatched version of a popular Web browser.
When a utility company employee visits the Web site, the vulnerability is
exploited, and malware is installed on their system. This malware allows the
foreign government’s hackers to gain access to the utility company’s internal
network and ultimately steal trade secrets on power generation.
•
Impact – The foreign government is able to increase power generation despite
the United Nations imposed sanctions. The utility company losses their
competitive advantage as the trade secrets are eventually made public on the
Internet. The utility company sees its profits drop significantly as their
competitors reduce the gap that was once created by the trade secrets.
INTEGRITY
Integrity is attained when information is protected from unauthorized modification.
A loss of integrity has the greatest effect on the utility companies, which is mani-
fested in fraud and service theft.
Service Fraud
Regardless of the deployment architecture chosen by a particular utility company,
their customers will have access to the smart meters deployed in their homes and
businesses. While tamper-resistant mechanisms should be employed, countermea-
sures will undoubtedly be published on the Internet.
Once information on how to hack smart meters makes its way onto the Inter-
net, the masses, ranging from hackers to curious consumers, will possess the
knowledge on how to defraud their utility company. Some will steal services,
while others will be as bold as to collect money from the utility companies by
fooling the system to believe that the dwelling generated electricity for the grid
instead of consuming it.
Service Theft
The most predictable threat to the utility companies as a result of smart meter
tampering is service theft through under-reporting. Given the current state of the
38
CHAPTER 3 Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond

economy, significantly lower utility bills may sound too attractive to resist to the
average consumer.
Scenario
•
Threat – Consumers hack their smart meters to modify the usage information
being sent to the utility company.
•
Attack vector – A vulnerable network device driver within the customers’
smart meter allows remote code execution when properly exploited. Customers
download and install custom software off of the Internet that exploits the
vulnerability and loads custom firmware onto the smart meter.
•
Impact – Customer is able to under-report their usage to the utility company.
Thus, the customer obtains a lower bill while the utility company unknowingly
subsidizes their customer.
Net Metering
The most profitable threat for consumers as a result of smart meter tampering is
manipulation of net metering data. Net metering allows consumers to provide the
utility companies with power generated by the consumers utilizing technologies,
including wind and solar. In turn, the utility companies either provide the consu-
mer with an account credit, or issue a check for the amount of energy provided
by the consumer to the utility company.
Scenario
•
Threat – Consumers hack their smart meters to modify the power generation
information being sent to the utility company.
•
Attack vector – An easily guessed password on an administrative interface
(Secure Shell [SSH]) of the customer’s smart meter allows complete access to
the device, including the net metering data. The customer modifies the data
using a tool they downloaded from the Internet.
•
Impact – Customer is able to over-report the amount of power being provided
to the utility company. Thus, the customer obtains a larger credit or even a
check from the utility company, while they unknowingly are paying their
customer for nothing.
NOTE
Within Section 1251 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, the U.S. Congress mandated that all
public electric utilities must make net metering available to their customers.3
Sensor Data Manipulation
Smart meters will include sensors that will allow the utility companies to perform
myriad tasks ranging from post mortem forensic analysis to power system
Integrity
39

restoration, to distribution network monitoring, restoration, and self healing.
However, if the integrity of the sensor data is compromised, the result will be
disastrous.
Scenario
•
Threat – Brett, a self-taught hacker, is curious about how the “whole smart
grid thing works.” Being in high school, Brett lives with his parents, whose
house was recently fitted with a smart meter. Brett spends hours upon hours
playing with the smart meter and eventually is able to create a program that
would send false sensor data for his entire neighborhood.
•
Attack vector – The sensor data is sent from the smart meters to the utility
company in an unencrypted format. Brett uses this insecure configuration to
capture, manipulate, and successfully transmit false sensor data to the utility
company. He is also able to capture network traffic for his neighbor’s smart
meters and obtains their Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. Using his custom
written program, Brett sends false sensor information to the utility company,
indicating that Brett’s entire neighborhood is without power.
•
Impact – The utility company, unsure of how a single neighborhood can lose
power, sends a crew out to investigate. Upon arrival at the neighborhood in
question, the crew reports that there is no outage. The utility company
underestimates the criticality of the issue and simply chalks its up to a system
malfunction. Brett, amused by the situation, performs similar attacks over the
next two years, ultimately costing the utility company thousands of dollars in
wasted man hours.
AVAILABILITY
Availability is attained when the service provided by the utility companies is pro-
tected from unauthorized interruption. A loss of availability has a significant
impact on utility companies and those that rely on their services. This includes
consumers, organizations, businesses, and governments.
Consumer Targets
Consumers will be the targets of attacks on the availability of the power to their
houses. These attacks will most likely come from script kiddies or people the vic-
tims know. Despite the relatively innocuous intent of the attackers, the impact of
their exploits will wreak havoc on their victims.
NOTE
Script kiddies is a term for hackers who rely on the tools of others to attack computers and
network devices. It is a derogatory term that generally suggests unskilled adolescent
attackers whose motivation is notoriety.
40
CHAPTER 3 Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond

Scenario
•
Threat – Carla’s ex-boyfriend, Andy, wants revenge for Carla breaking up
with him. Andy is able to attack Carla’s smart meter to create a blackout
localized to Carla’s townhouse.
•
Attack vector – Carla’s default wireless router configuration allows Andy to
easily access her wireless network and connect to the Web front end of her
smart meter. Once access to the smart meter was obtained, Andy changed its
default password, and shutdown power to Carla’s townhouse.
•
Impact – Carla is left without power and is unable to connect to her smart
meter to re-enable power as her wireless network is down and she no longer
knows the password to the unit.
TIP
Ever wondered what the default password was for a device you own? Or a device someone
else owns? Phenoelit-US.org maintains a comprehensive and up-to-date list of default
vendor passwords at www.phenoelit-us.org/dpl/dpl.html.
Organizational Targets
Much like consumers, organizations will be the targets of attacks on the availabil-
ity of the power to their locations. These attacks will come from script kiddies,
professional hackers, or people the organizations know. However, unlike the
attacks on consumers, the intent of the attackers will most certainly be malicious
and may result in extortion.
Utility Companies
The most obvious organization targeted by those attacking the new smart grid is
the utility companies. The utility companies will represent the “holy grail” of tar-
gets to attackers. Script kiddies will try and compromise the utility companies for
notoriety, while professional hackers may be sponsored and have more malicious
drivers. We will cover these drivers shortly.
Scenario
•
Threat – A historical script kiddie, Mike, wants the credibility and notoriety he
thinks he deserves. He contacts one of the largest hacking crews and asks how he
can join. They respond by saying that he must hack one of the country’s largest
utility companies and cause a power outage that makes the evening news.
•
Attack vector – Mike, yearning for membership in the exclusive hacking
crew, studies the smart grid infrastructure and targets his local utility company.
Exploiting the weak physical security of his utility company’s local
management station, Mike is able to plug directly into the management station
and gain access to an internal utility company network. From here, Mike
Availability
41

performs a denial-of-service (DoS) attack against all of the management
stations on the local subnet.
•
Impact – All of the management stations in Mike’s town are impacted by his
DoS attack. As Mike properly planned his attack, the units were down during
the period in which the utility company polls for usage data. Subsequently, the
utility company’s billing process is delayed and an announcement is made
through local media outlets informing customers of the delay. No mention of
the attack is made; however, Mike demonstrates the attack for the hacking
crew and is offered membership.
Other Organizations
Much like consumers, organizations, other than the utility companies, will be the
target of availability attacks. Attackers will most likely be script kiddies or people
the organizations have a relationship with, such as a former employee or a custo-
mer. The motivation behind such attacks will most likely be revenge or extortion.
Scenario
•
Threat – Victor, a former employee of the local gas station, wants revenge for
his recent firing. Victor, who is computer savvy and was formerly responsible
for paying the gas station’s bills, is able to cut off the power to his former
employer.
•
Attack vector – The gas station utilized the local utility company’s online
account management Web application to pay its bills. This Web application
also allows users to close their accounts without any additional verification.
Victor simply logs on to the Web application from his home, using the same
login and password that he used while he was an employee of the gas station,
and requests the account to be closed.
•
Impact – The gas station’s account is closed within a week. As a result, the
power to the local gas station is shutoff on a holiday weekend. The gas station is
forced to operate on its backup system, but quickly drains the system as a result
of the high demand for gas. The utility company cannot send anyone out until the
following Tuesday, as a result of the holiday weekend. The local gas company is
forced to shutdown midday on Sunday, losing sales on one of its busiest days of
the year. Additionally, the utility company will lose revenue from not supplying
the gas station and will need to spend time remediating the situation.
Vertical Targets
In the previous section, we walked through scenarios that attacked specific organi-
zations. These attacks were the result of disgruntled employees or ambitious script
kiddies seeking revenge or notoriety. However, a different class of attackers, with
different motivation will target specific industries in order to achieve their objec-
tives. The impact of these attacks will be significantly greater than those targeting
specific organizations.
42
CHAPTER 3 Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond

Activists
Many organizations are in business despite the best efforts of activists. A typical
example of this is fur coat manufacturers. Animal rights organizations have
historically done everything in their power to prevent these manufacturers from
operating their business. The adoption of smart grid technologies presents an addi-
tional avenue for these activists to attack the manufacturers.
Scenario
•
Threat – Lisa, an animal lover her whole life, is also a computer science major.
During an animal rights protest on her university’s campus, she is recruited by
activists to attack the manufacturing operations of three of the most prolific fur
coat brands during the period leading up to the holiday shopping season.
•
Attack vector – Using a targeted phishing e-mail, Lisa is able to install malware
on the computers of each of the targeted manufacturers. This malware captures
logins and passwords to all sites that are used by the accounting department and
sends them to Lisa. Once Lisa obtains the logins and passwords to the utility
company’s Web applications used by the manufacturers, she simply requests an
account suspension for each manufacturer during the period of peak
manufacturing. Lisa also changes the account information and secret questions
to prevent the manufacturers from easily reactivating their accounts.
•
Impact – The manufacturers experience power outages during their peak
manufacturing periods. They contact the utility companies to inquire about the
outage and learn of the suspension. Despite their documented information, they
cannot successfully authenticate themselves with the utility companies and are
forced to provide supplemental information in order to reactivate service. Once
service is finally restored, the manufacturers have lost a total of three days of
production, which significantly impacts their ability to meet order requests.
Market Manipulation
Financial gain continues to be the single greatest driver behind computer attacks.
With the adoption of smart grid technologies, attackers will exploit weaknesses
for financial gain. Extortion is the easiest example of how attackers can obtain
financial gain: by withholding organizations power service until a ransom is paid.
However, more sophisticated, and potentially more lucrative, attacks are possible.
Financial
Sophisticated movie plots depict hackers as financially motivated individuals who
bring specialized skills to a team that includes nontechnical members. Unfortu-
nately, these plots will not remain bound to the silver screen for much longer.
Hackers, teaming with those who understand financial markets, can easily exploit
the adoption of smart grid technologies to gain significant amounts of money in a
short period of time.
Availability
43

Scenario
•
Threat – Dan, a longtime ethical hacker at a financial institution, is let go
because of corporate downsizing. He is approached by fellow coworkers in the
commodities division about an opportunity to make a lot of fast money.
Without any promising job prospects, Dan agrees to help his former coworker
in exchange for a significant cut of the take.
•
Attack vector – Using a combination of his technical knowledge and the
market knowledge provided by his former colleagues, Dan performs a DoS
attack against several of the country’s largest utility companies during the
peak of winter. Dan utilized a remote file-inclusion vulnerability in a common
software package deployed as part of the utility companies’ Web applications.
This vulnerability allowed Dan to discontinue all power-generating activities at
the utility companies for several hours.
•
Impact – Dan’s former coworkers strategically purchased a significant amount of
heating oil before Dan’s attack on the utility companies. In the panic that ensued
within the commodities market as a result of the DoS attack, the price of heating
oil skyrocketed, increasing by 25 percent. Dan’s coworkers promptly sold their
holdings at the peak of the panic, and made enough money to retire comfortably.
National Security Target
With the announcement in October of 2009 that the United States issued 100
grants, totaling $3.4 billion for smart grid technologies, it is clear that President
Obama sees smart grid technology as a priority.4 As a presidential priority, smart
grid technologies will undoubtedly make their way into America’s next generation
electric infrastructure. Additionally, the high priority given to smart grid technolo-
gies will also increase the scrutiny of its security, by friends and enemies alike.
Domestic
Domestic terrorism is a reality that Americans have learned to live with ever since
they watched the horror of the attacks on the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building
in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, on April 19, 1995. The adoption of smart grid tech-
nologies will provide domestic terrorists with a readily available target.
Scenario
•
Threat – Kyle, a former private in the armed forces, has become disgruntled
with his country’s alleged occupation of a foreign country. During his tenure
in the armed forces, Kyle learned how to attack enemy infrastructure,
including those that support utility companies.
•
Attack vector – Leveraging an outdated version of a Web server running an
Internet facing government Web site, Kyle is able to ultimately gain access to
a sensitive network that controls regional power distribution for the east coast
of the United States. Kyle obtains this access by exploiting the outdated Web
44
CHAPTER 3 Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond

server and weak configurations within the numerous subnets located between
the sensitive network and the Internet facing the Web server.
•
Impact – Kyle is able to shut down power generation to the Northeastern
states of the United States. Panic ensues as federal, state, and local authorities
scramble to identify the cause of the blackout. Riots and looting occur, as the
blackout extends into the evening. All told, the Northeast is without power for
hours, and damages as a result of rioting and looting total into the billions.
WARNING
Before you assess a company or government’s security posture, make sure you are familiar
with all applicable laws. Laws and their subsequent punishments vary by locality. You can
read more about individual state’s laws at www.ncsl.org/default.aspx?tabid=13494.
Similarly, you can review federal laws at http://definitions.uslegal.com/c/computer-hacking/.
International
As much as the images of the Oklahoma City Bombing of 1995, as shown in
Figure 3.2, resonate in the minds of Americans, the world has never been the
same since the attacks of September 11, 2001. Terrorists targeted the world’s
financial center and successfully destroyed the Twin Towers in New York City.
The adoption of smart grid technologies will create a similar center for the United
States’ power distribution. This center will become a target of significance to
international terrorist groups like Al-Qaeda.
Scenario
•
Threat – Thierry, a professional hacker for hire, has been approached by
Al-Qaeda to attack the United States’ power grid. As a professional hacker,
Thierry is financially motivated, and despite his reservations of dealing with a
terrorist organization like Al-Qaeda, he simply cannot resist the money offered.
•
Attack vector – Utilizing social engineering attacks that leverage malicious e-mail
attachments, Thierry is able to create a worm that infects a majority of the United
States’ major utility companies. Thierry’s worm has command and control
capability, which allows him to gain further access into each organization’s internal
infrastructure. By the time Thierry executes his attack, he has administrative access
to 75 percent of the largest utility companies’ distribution networks.
•
Impact – Thierry is ultimately able to shut down power generation at 75 percent
of America’s utility companies simultaneously. Much like the attack previously
conducted by Kyle, the domestic terrorist, panic ensues as federal, state, and
local authorities scramble to identify the cause of the blackout. However, this
time the scope is nationwide. The blackout encompasses 90 percent of the
United States and lasts for three days until the worm can be eradicated. The
damage, both financially and psychologically, is devastating to the United
States and its final toll is incalculable.
Availability
45

FIGURE 3.2
Oklahoma City bombing of 1995.
Source: DefenseImagery.mil 5
46
CHAPTER 3 Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond

Precursor to War
The threats described in the previous sections of this chapter have demonstrated
the potential impact attacks can have on an organization, an industry, and nation.
The impact of these attacks is primarily financial and psychological. These tolls,
while not inconsequential to the longevity of a nation, are minimal in comparison
to the effect similar attacks could have on a nation as a precursor to a military
attack.
Scenario
•
Threat – Country X, tired of the sanction placed on it by the United Nations,
has decided to declare war on the United States. Although Country X does not
possess the technology or arsenal to directly attack the United States, they
have planted sleeper cells within the United States that will carry out suicide
attacks when given the signal. In order to maximize the impact, Country X
has targeted the smart grid technologies deployed by the United States in order
to create confusion and prevent communications with their citizens, first
responders, and government agencies.
•
Attack vector – Leveraging previously unreported vulnerabilities in the
operating systems and network services utilized by the United States’ smart
grid infrastructure, Country X is able to shut down all of America’s power
distribution networks simultaneously. The attacks are easily performed because
of the prevalence of vulnerable systems and devices. Little to nothing was
previously known about the exploited vulnerabilities.
•
Impact – With the nationwide blackout affecting almost all Americans, mass
chaos ensues. Shortly after the blackout, Country X’s sleeper cells execute
their suicide attacks amplifying the chaos and sinking the American people
into a depression. Countless Americans lose their lives as a result of the
attacks, and many more are lost as a result of the chaos that was amplified by
the blackout. Much like the previously mentioned terrorist attack, the damage
is devastating to the United States, and its final toll is incalculable.
SUMMARY
The benefits of smart grid technologies to the utility companies are significant.
However, the risks associated with these technologies, both to the utility companies
themselves, and to those that rely on them, are equally significant. Traditional
threats such as service theft and fraud are likely to become the mainstream. Worse,
such attacks are likely to be quickly documented and disseminated on nefarious
Web sites, thereby allowing others to launch similar attacks in other areas.
Other threats, such as availability attacks, will have an increased impact as dis-
tribution networks become increasingly interconnected. The utility companies will
be looked upon as the first level of defense against these threats. However,
Summary
47

in order to defend such attacks, a coordinated effort between governments, industries,
and consumers must work effectively and efficiently. Otherwise, a “fire sale,” as
depicted in the movie Live Free or Die Hard, could become a reality.
NOTE
A “fire sale” is a term that refers to the complete compromise of a country’s infrastructure,
including power distribution. The compromise is obtained primarily through the use of
computer hacking.
Endnotes
1.
Verizon Business. 2009 Data breach investigations report [document on the Internet].
www.verizonbusiness.com/resources/security/reports/2009_databreach_rp.pdf; 2009
[accessed 8.1.2010].
2.
Soghoian C. 8 Million Reasons for Real Surveillance Oversight [document on the Internet].
http://paranoia.dubfire.net/2009/12/8-million-reasons-for-real-surveillance.html; 2009
[accessed 12.12.2009].
3.
United States Congress. Energy policy act of 2005. [document on the Internet]. www.
epa.gov/oust/fedlaws/publ_109-058.pdf; 2005 [accessed 25.11.2009].
4.
Carey J. Obama’s smart-grid game plan [document on the Internet]. Business Week;
www.businessweek.com/technology/content/oct2009/tc20091027_594339.htm; 2009
[accessed 26.11.2009].
5.
Chasteen, Staff Sgt. Preston. F-3203-SPT-95-000022-XX-0198 [image on the Internet].
DefenseImagery.mil; www.defenseimagery.mil/imagery.html#a=search&s=april%2019%
201995&n=90&guid=0f7e0c201d7cae42d9ebfbfefc5d1984645d12d7; 1995 [accessed
8.1.2010].
48
CHAPTER 3 Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond

CHAPTER
4
Federal Effort to Secure
Smart Grids
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
U.S. Federal Government
•
DOE
•
FERC
•
NIST
•
DHS NIPP
•
Other Applicable Laws
•
Sponsoring Security
•
Bureaucracy and Politics in Smart Grid Security
Securing the electric grid is a matter of national security, and thus, the federal
government will play a significant role in directing the security efforts. Utility
companies and smart grid vendors will be looking to the federal government for
guidance on how to properly secure their smart grid deployments. Fortunately, sev-
eral federal government agencies have developed, and are currently developing
more, security guidelines and best practices. This chapter will discuss the roles of
several of the federal government agencies, as well as their respective initiatives.
U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
The U.S. federal government began actively regulating the energy industries in the
1920s, with the passing of the Federal Power Act of 1920. For the next 50 years,
the energy industry was regulated by a fragmented regulatory framework.1 In 1977,
the Department of Energy Organization Act established the Department of Energy
(DOE) to organize the fragmented regulatory process and create a national energy
plan.1 The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) was also established
in 1977 as an independent regulator within DOE. These agencies will play a critical
role in developing the national policy for the smart grid. Additionally, several
recent laws were passed that directly affect the development of smart grids, includ-
ing the following:
•
Energy and Independence Security Act of 2007
•
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00004-2
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
49

Energy and Independence Security Act of 2007
U.S. Congress passed the Energy and Independence Security Act (EISA) of 2007,
and President Bush signed the act into law on December 19, 2007, which became
Public Law 110–140.2 The text of the law is available from the U.S. Government
and Printing Office at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname
=110_cong_public_laws&docid=f:publ140.110.pdf.
Specifically, Title XIII of EISA of 2007 specified that the federal govern-
ment’s official policy is to support the modernization of the electric grid, or in
other words support a smart grid. Additionally, Title XIII establishes the Smart
Grid Advisory Committee and the Smart Grid Task Force,2 as well as assigned
roles, responsibilities, and accountability to these groups, federal government
agencies, and organizations. The Smart Grid Advisory Committee’s mission state-
ment is to advise federal government officials on the status of smart grid–related
activities.2 The Smart Grid Task Force’s mission statement is to ensure awareness,
coordination and integration of federal government smart grid related activities.2
The Smart Grid Advisory Committee and Smart Grid Task Force will be
represented by several federal government agencies including3:
•
DOE
•
FERC
•
Department of Commerce
•
Environmental Protection Agency
•
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
•
Department of Agriculture
•
Department of Defense (DOD).
The output of the Smart Grid Advisory Committee and Smart Grid Task Force
should be monitored closely as their work will greatly influence the smart grid
policies in this country.
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 was enacted on
February 17, 2009, which became Public Law 111-5.4 The text of the law is avail-
able from the U.S. Government and Printing Office at www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/
PLAW-111publ5/content-detail.html.
At a high level, ARRA was created to stimulate the U.S. economy and con-
tains many provisions that are unrelated to the energy industry. However, ARRA
does specifically set up $32.7 billion in grants for energy-related programs.4 See
Table 4.1 for a complete breakdown of the funding allocation. As can be seen in
Table 4.1, a significant amount of money is designated for smart grid projects.
However, this is not without its own controversy. When $4.5 billion is marked
for smart grid projects, utilities and smart grid vendors take notice and rush to
obtain that funding while it lasts. As a result, developing the technologies and
50
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

Table 4.1 Breakdown of funding in ARRA for energy programs5
Program
Funds ($)
Energy efficiency, renewable energy industry, and transportation industry
16.7 billion
Weatherization Assistance Program
5 billion
State Energy Program
3.1 billion
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grants
2.73 billion
Advanced Battery Manufacturing Grants
2.0 billion
Biomass Program
800 million
Retrofit ramp-ups in energy efficiency
454 million
Geothermal Technologies Program
400 million
Transportation electrification
400 million
Energy-efficient building technologies
346 million
Energy Efficient Appliance Rebates/ENERGY STAR®
300 million
Alternative-Fueled-Vehicles Pilot Grant Program
300 million
Industrial Technologies Program
256 million
Solar Technologies Program
115 million
Vehicle Technologies Program
110 million
National laboratory facilities
104 million
Facility improvements at National Renewable Energy Lab
100 million
Wind energy projects
93 million
Information and communications technology
50 million
Fuel cell markets
41.9 million
Modernizing existing U.S. hydropower infrastructure
32 million
Massachusetts Wind Technology Testing Center
25 million
Community renewable energy deployment
22 million
Small Business Clean Energy Innovation Projects
18 million
Nuclear waste cleanup
6 billion
Hanford River Site Recovery Act Project
1.6 billion
Savannah River Site Recovery Act Project
1.4 billion
Oak Ridge National Lab Recovery Act Project
775 million
Idaho National Lab Recovery Act Project
468 million
Office of River Protection Recovery Act Project
326 million
Los Alamos National Lab Recovery Act Project
212 million
Liquid waste tank infrastructure
200 million
Carlsbad Field Office Recovery Act Project
172 million
Portsmouth Recovery Act Project
118 million
Moab Recovery Act Project
108 million
Argonne National Lab Recovery Act Project
98 million
Paducah Recovery Act Project
79 million
West Valley Recovery Act Project
474 million
Title X Uranium/Thorium Reimbursement Program
69 million
(Continued)
U.S. Federal Government
51

deploying them may be rushed in order to obtain funding from ARRA. When
technology is rushed, mistakes and the risk of security vulnerabilities increase
significantly.
Several other acts have been introduced that may soon become law, such as
the Grid Reliability and Infrastructure Defense Act,6 but the political process
Table 4.1 Breakdown of funding in ARRA for energy programs5—cont’d
Program
Funds ($)
Energy Technology Engineering Center ARRA Project
54 million
Separations Process Research Unit ARRA Project
52 million
Nevada Test Site Recovery Act Project
44 million
Brookhaven National Lab Recovery Act Project
42 million
Mound Operable Unit 1 Recovery Act Project
20 million
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center Recovery Act Project
8 million
Hanford River Site Recovery Act Project
1.6 billion
Electric grid modernization
4.5 billion
Smart Grid Investment Grant Program
3.5 billion
Energy storage demonstration
700 million
Workforce development
100 million
Interconnection transmission planning and analysis
80 million
Enhancing State/Local Governments Energy Assurance
55 million
State assistance on electricity policies
50 million
Program direction
29 million
Interoperability standards and framework
10 million
Carbon capture and sequestration
3.4 billion
Industrial carbon capture and storage applications
1.5 billion
Fossil Energy Research and Development Programs
1 billion
Clean Coal Power Initiative Round III
800 million
Geologic sequestration site characterization
49 million
Geologic sequestration training and research
20 million
Program direction
10 million
Scientific innovation
2.0 billion
Advanced Research (ARPA-E)
400 million
Energy frontier research centers
277 million
Basic energy services
247 million
High energy physics
216 million
Science laboratories infrastructure
198 million
Biological and environmental research
155 million
Advanced scientific computing research
154 million
Nuclear physics
143 million
Energy Sciences Fellowships and Early Career Awards
97 million
Fusion energy sciences
83 million
Small business innovation research
58 million
52
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

usually modifies these acts significantly and there is a chance these acts will
never become law. However, these acts should be monitored in the case they
become law, which could dramatically change your organization’s regulatory
requirements.
DOE
As part of the Smart Grid Investment Grant Program (SGIG), which was funded
by ARRA of 2009, DOE sought proposals to award the roughly $4.5 billion for
smart grid-related projects. There are many requirements spelled out in the Fund-
ing Opportunity Announcement (FOA). For the purposes of this book though, the
FOA specifically includes a section entitled “Cyber Security” that requires appli-
cants to address their technical approach to cyber security, as well as discussing
security throughout the document.7 The application deadline has already passed,
but the cyber security requirements should still be reviewed because it provides a
glimpse into DOE’s policies and processes for smart grid security. There will
most likely be further funding opportunities from DOE that will have similar
cyber security requirements. The FOA can be obtained from www.energy.gov/
media/xDE-FOA-00000.36.pdf.
The final section of Title XIII, Section 1309: DOE Study of Security Attri-
butes of Smart Grid Systems, assigns DOE the responsibility of reporting on how
smart grid deployments will affect the security of the electric grid.2 While many
government agencies will be playing a part in the development of smart grids,
DOE was specifically assigned the responsibility for monitoring and reporting on
the security of smart grids. The report is required to provide recommendations on
the following items:
1. How smart grid systems can help in making the Nation’s electricity system
less vulnerable to disruptions due to intentional acts against the system.
2. How smart grid systems can help in restoring the integrity of the Nation’s
electricity system subsequent to disruptions.
3. How smart grid systems can facilitate nationwide, interoperable emergency
communications and control of the Nation’s electricity system during times of
localized, regional, or nationwide emergency.
4. What risks must be taken into account that smart grid systems may, if not
carefully created and managed, create vulnerability to security threats of any
sort, and how such risks may be mitigated.2
In April 2009, Idaho National Laboratory (INL) created a document titled
Study of Security Attributes of Smart Grid Systems – Current Cyber Security
Issues, which can be obtained from www.inl.gov/scada/publications/d/securing_
the_smart_grid_current_issues.pdf. The purpose of the document was to provide
information for the report to congress required by Section 1309 of Title XIII of
EISA.8 However, the document was not intended to be a comprehensive report
that provided recommendations for each of the four requirements. Instead,
DOE
53

the document was created to support the full report, being prepared by Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), by focusing on the cyber security of the
current electric grid.8
The INL document discusses the security posture of the current electric grid by
discussing the risk in two categories:
•
Legacy electric grid technologies
•
Current smart grid technologies.8
Legacy Electric Grid Technologies
To state the obvious, implementing a smart grid will not happen in one day. Addi-
tionally, it would be too costly and logistically infeasible to build a mirror electric
grid in order to make the switch in one day. Smart grids will be implemented by
continually introducing smart grid technology to the current electric grid. Until
the electric grid has fully converted to a smart grid, the risk presented by legacy
technology will continue to present risk to the electric grid. As examples of legacy
grid technologies, the INL document uses:
•
Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
•
Substations
•
Communication networks.8
SCADA systems are used extensively to remotely control and monitor the
transmission and distribution of power in electric grids.8 These systems are often
directly connected to the Internet and managed remotely. Vulnerabilities in
SCADA systems and protocols have been known and well documented for
many years, in addition to vulnerabilities that have not been disclosed to the
public yet.8
TOOLS
Common vulnerability scanners, such as Nessus and OpenVAS, include checks for some of
the known SCADA vulnerabilities, which can help your organization identify and remediate
these vulnerabilities before they are exploited for malicious purposes.
Grid substations usually house transmission and distribution devices, as well
as automation and communication devices used to monitor and control those
devices. The INL document states that the level of automation in substations is
increasing and more importantly states that the “level of automation is indirectly
related security because increased automation implies increased computer-
controlled electronics and software.”8 Increasing the level of automation will
certainly reduce the number of incidents caused by human errors and mistakes,
but like the INL document implied, the increase in computer-controlled electro-
nics and software increases the potential for security vulnerabilities.
54
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

Utility companies have utilized communication networks for many years to
support their operations. The mediums and protocols used to support these com-
munication networks are commonly used among most industries and include the
following:
•
Frame relay networks
•
Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM)
•
Public switched telephone network (PSTN)
•
Internet
•
Wireless technologies
•
TCP/IP
•
HTTP
•
FTP.8
The vulnerabilities affecting these methods and protocols have been well docu-
mented over the years, and they will be utilized as attack vectors.8 Most of these
mediums and protocols will also be utilized by smart grid technologies, so the
risk presented by these mediums and protocols will still remain.
WARNING
Smart grid technologies will be integrated with legacy technologies and thus, there will be
no logical separation between legacy grid technologies and new smart grid technologies. As
a result, exploiting a vulnerability in a legacy system could lead to the compromise of the
new smart grid technologies.
Current Smart Grid Technologies
In addition to the risk from vulnerabilities in legacy technologies, the electric grids
will face risk stemming from vulnerabilities in the new smart grid technologies.
The INL document specifically describes the current state of security for three
technologies used in smart grids:
•
AMI security
•
Wireless network security
•
NASPI security.8
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) Security
AMI is probably the most commonly known technology in smart grids. Smart
meters and their supporting infrastructure have been discussed widely by the media
and vulnerabilities that have already been identified in these technologies are well
documented. The INL document cited research by Travis Goodspeed and Matthew
Carpenter as evidence of existing vulnerabilities and makes the statement that AMI
security is currently insufficient.8 The repercussions of this diagnosis could be broad
and opens up the question of accountability. Who is responsible for AMI security?
DOE
55

The smart meter technology vendors are an easy target because they are the ones
who developed the insecure devices. However, the utility companies should also
take responsibility for not requiring a higher level of security from their partners.
Chapter 9, “Third-Party Services,” discusses in more detail the security implications
and recommendations for dealing with technology vendors and third parties.
Wireless Network Security
Numerous wireless technologies will be used in smart grid deployments to facilitate
the constant communication between the different smart grid entities. Wireless tech-
nologies have been plagued by security vulnerabilities in the past and this will most
likely continue with wireless technologies used in smart grids. As a result, the INL
document recommends that more research needs to be performed on the particular
wireless networks that will be used in smart grids.8 Chapter 7, “Attacking the
Utility Companies,” and Chapter 12, “Attacking Smart Meters,” contain more
information on the wireless security issues of smart grids.
NASPI Security
Smart grids will utilize phasor measurement units (PMU) to monitor the power grid
for disturbances. The North American SynchroPhasor Initiative (NASPI) seeks to
build a new communications network in order to provide real-time monitoring of
the PMUs.8 Because PMUs have not been widely deployed, the INL document
states that the NASPI network is not yet critical.8 However, this network should
still be viewed as a potential attack vector, and the risk will increase as more PMUs
are deployed. Even though PMUs are not widely deployed yet, planning the cyber
security approach for the supporting communications network should still begin.
Lack of Deployment Equals Lack of Risk
One of the more interesting statements in the INL document states that the current
risk to national security posed by vulnerabilities in smart grid technologies is not
significant. Unfortunately, the reason is not due to the strong security built into
the smart grid technologies. Rather, it is due to the currently small level of smart
grid technologies deployed.8 Until smart grid technology becomes more prevalent,
the risk of an attack is not considered significant.
Overall, the INL document implied that the security of most smart grid tech-
nologies is insufficient. Using the numerous vulnerabilities that have already been
identified and a lack of security standards as reasoning, the INL document clearly
makes the case that more needs to be done to secure the power grid.
FERC
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC – www.ferc.gov) was
founded in 1977, at the same time as DOE, and combined the functions of several
agencies such as the Federal Power Commission.1 FERC is an independent U.S.
56
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

federal agency that regulates the interstate transmission of natural gas, oil, and
electricity, as well as natural gas and hydropower projects.9
Mandatory Reliability Standards
Under the Energy Policy Act of 2005, FERC obtained the authority to mandate
reliability standards and impose penalties for noncompliance. As a result, FERC
designated the North American Reliability Corporation (NERC) as the Electric
Reliability Organization and tasked NERC to create the reliability standards. Addi-
tionally, FERC authorized NERC to enforce these reliability standards through
severe financial penalties. For more information on this topic, and how to avoid the
severe financial penalties, see Chapter 6, “Public and Private Companies,” which
covers NERC and their Critical Infrastructure Protection standards thoroughly.
Smart Grid Policy
On July 16, 2009, FERC issued a new policy statement intended to accelerate the
development of a national smart grid. Although the policy covers a wide range of
topics, the security policy statement focuses on the development of cyber security
standards. The new FERC policy can be viewed at www.ferc.gov/whats-new/
comm-meet/2009/071609/E-3.pdf.
NOTE
Section 1 under the Development of Key Standards section is entitled “System Security.”
This should send another clear signal to the industry that security is a top priority and that
failure to comply with security standards will result in harsh penalties.
NIST
Section 1305 of EISA assigns NIST the responsibility of coordinating the devel-
opment of a smart grid interoperability framework. In response, NIST developed
the following three-phase plan to create the standards:
1. Further engage utilities, equipment suppliers, consumers, standards developers
and other stakeholders to achieve consensus on Smart Grid standards. This
process will include a stakeholders’ summit scheduled for May 19–20, 2009 in
Washington, D.C. By early fall, the process will deliver:
•
the Smart Grid architecture;
•
priorities for interoperability and cybersecurity standards, and an initial set
of standards to support implementation; and
•
plans to meet remaining standards needs.
2. Launch a formal partnership to facilitate development of additional standards
to address remaining gaps and integrate new technologies.
NIST
57

3. Develop a plan for testing and certification to ensure that Smart Grid equipment
and systems conform to standards for security and interoperability.10
NIST SP 1108
The NIST Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability Standards
(NIST SP 1108) is the result of the first phase and can be reviewed at http://nist.
gov/public_affairs/releases/upload/smartgrid_interoperability_final.pdf. Security is
a major component of NIST SP 1108; however, there are several other areas of
focus within this document that are outside the scope of this book. This section of
the chapter will focus on the security aspects of NIST SP 1108, although reading
the entirety of NIST SP 1108 is highly recommended.
In Section 2.3.1, the smart grid architectures are discussed. Defining the architecture
of a smart grid will be critical in determining how to properly integrate security into the
smart grid. However, different areas of the electric grid have diverse requirements that a
single architecture would be unable to handle. As a result, the nation’s smart grid will
utilize multiple architecture designs and will not rely on a single architecture. So instead
of attempting to define a single, unifying smart grid architecture, NIST has defined a list
of desired architecture attributes that every architecture should incorporate:
1. Support a broad range of technology options—both legacy and new.
(Architectures should be flexible enough to incorporate evolving technologies.
They also must support interfacing with legacy applications and devices in a
standard way, avoiding as much additional capital investment and/or
customization as possible.)
2. Employ well-defined interfaces that are useful across industries and include
appropriate security.
3. Are developed with modern system-modeling tools and techniques that are
used to manage the documentation and complexity of the Smart Grid.
4. Architectural elements are appropriate for the applications that reside within
the architecture. (The architectures must support development of massively
scaled, well-managed, and secure networks with life spans appropriate for the
type of associated network, which range from 5 years to 30 years depending
on the type of network.)
5. Support third-party products that are interoperable and can be integrated into
the management and cyber security infrastructures.
6. Achieve appropriate balance between top-down and bottom-up approaches to
system design.
7. Are based on proven enterprise architecture, software, and systems design
methodologies.11
Although important, these seven attributes are fairly generic and do not
provide specific guidance for utility companies or smart grid vendors. Phase
three of NIST’s approach, which is to develop a plan for testing and certifying
smart grid systems and equipment, may fill in some of the details for these
58
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

attributes, such as which enterprise architecture, software, and systems design
methodologies are considered to be “proven.” However, each organization
should be prepared to defend how their particular architecture design incorpo-
rates these seven attributes.
Smart Grid Information Networks
Section 3.3 of NIST SP 1108 discusses the information networks that will support
the national smart grid. The national smart grid will contain numerous networks
that belong to many different organizations and individuals. In order to facilitate
the connectivity required of a national smart grid, each of these networks will
need to adhere to a strict set of interoperability requirements. NIST’s vision of
these networks is depicted in Figure 4.1.
Looking at Figure 4.1, an obvious placement of a firewall might be in between
Network A and Network B. But is that the only location for a firewall? There are
many components in each network, such as operations and markets. Each compo-
nent may be supported by one or many different subnetworks that have multiple
owners. Trust relationships between the different components (and networks) that
reduce security control effectiveness could allow a threat in one component to
spread across components and even networks. Thus, if the entire electric grid
is interconnected, a single vulnerability in one network could affect the security
posture of the entire smart grid. Chapter 9, “Third-Party Services,” discusses trust
relationships in more detail.
Operations
Customer
premise
Customer
premise
Transmission
lines
Transmission
lines
Distribution
substation
Distribution
substation
Generation
plant
Generation
plant
Markets
Network A
Nationwide
Network
Network B
Service
provider
Generation
Generation
Transmission
Transmission
Distribution
Distribution
Customer
Customer
Operations
Markets
Service
provider
FIGURE 4.1
NIST’s depiction of smart grid networks for information exchange.11
Reprinted courtesy of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, Technology Administration,
U.S. Department of Commerce. Not copyrightable in the United States
NIST
59

Included Cyber Security Standards
Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of NIST SP 1108 list 75 existing standards, specifications,
guidelines, and requirements that are relevant to the smart grid. Many functional
areas are covered by these standards and NIST divided them into different categories.
The documents listed in the cyber security sections are listed below in Table 4.2.
Out of the 13 cyber security documents listed in Table 4.2, experienced security
professionals should already be familiar with at least four of these documents:
•
NIST SP 800-53
•
NIST SP 800-82
•
ISO 27000
•
NIST FIPS 140-2.
Table 4.2 Cyber security standards, specifications, guidelines, and requirements11
Document
URL
Security Profile for Advanced
Metering Infrastructure, v1.0
http://osgug.ucaiug.org/utilisec/amisec/Shared%
20Documents/AMI%20Security%20Profile%20
(ASAP-SG)/AMI%20Security%20Profile%20-%
20v1_0.pdf
DHS Catalog of Control Systems
Security: Recommendations for
Standards Developers
www.us-cert.gov/control_systems/pdf/FINAL-
Catalog_of_Recommendations_Rev4_101309.pdf
DHS Cyber Security Procurement
Language for Control Systems
www.us-cert.gov/control_systems/pdf/FINAL-
Procurement_Language_Rev4_100809.pdf
International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC) 62351 Parts 1–8
http://webstore.iec.ch/webstore/webstore.nsf/
artnum/037996!opendocument
IEEE 1686-2007
https://sbwsweb.ieee.org/ecustomercme_enu/
start.swe?SWECmd=GotoView&SWEView=
Catalog+View+(eSales)_Standards_IEEE&mem_
type=Customer&SWEHo=sbwsweb.ieee.
org&SWETS=1192713657
NERC CIP 002-009
www.nerc.com/page.php?cid=2|20
NIST SP 800-53
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-82/
draft_sp800-82-fpd.pdf
NIST SP 800-82
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
53-Rev3/sp800-53-rev3-final-errata.pdf
ISA SP99
www.isa.org/MSTemplate.cfm?
MicrositeID=988&CommitteeID=6821
ISO27000
www.27000.org/
NIST FIPS 140-2
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips140-2/
fips1402.pdf
OASIS WS-Security
www.oasis-open.org/specs/index.php#wssv1.1
OASIS Suite of Security Standards
www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_home.php?
wg_abbrev=wss
60
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

These documents apply to a broad range of industries; however, security
professionals who are new to the energy industry will most likely need to famil-
iarize themselves with the rest of the 13 documents. Additionally, only the NERC
CIP is mandatory for a utility to comply with. The other documents contain
recommendations for security controls that organizations should analyze to deter-
mine whether they apply to their environment.
Priority Action Plans
The documents listed in Section 4 of NIST SP 1108 do not represent a compre-
hensive list of standards, specifications, guidelines, and requirements. There are
gaps in the required standards that need to be addressed and NIST has created
Priority Action Plans (PAP) to address these gaps. Section 5 of NIST SP 1108
details the 15 existing PAPs; however, more PAPs will be created as the smart
grid evolves.11 When new technology is introduced, new standards, specifications,
guidelines, and requirements will need to be created, and a PAP will be issued to
create these documents. Thus, your organization should regularly check NIST’s
smart grid Web site (www.nist.gov/smartgrid) to view any additional PAPs that
result in additional standards, specifications, guidelines, and requirements.
The biggest takeaway from the PAPs is the recognition that the smart grid will
constantly be changing. New technology will be introduced and new threats will
surface. As such, utility companies and smart grid technology vendors must be
able to upgrade their devices and implementations to meet the ever-changing
challenges.
Other Concerns
Section 7.3 of NIST SP 1108 discusses two potential issues that could affect
the availability of the smart grid: electromagnetic disturbances and electromag-
netic interference.11 Electromagnetic disturbances include threats such as elec-
tromagnetic pulses (EMP) and geomagnetically induced currents caused by
solar storms.11 These disturbances could cause DoS conditions in the smart
grid that interrupt the communication networks, as well as the transmission and
distribution of electricity. As a result, the Smart Grid Interoperability Group
(SGIP) will be conducting further analysis of applicable protection standards
and propose revisions to make the standards relevant to smart grid-directed
threats.11
An EMP is a burst of electromagnetic energy or radiation, which has the
potential to produce electrical voltage surges that can damage electronics. EMPs
can be produced by several actions, such as the detonation of nuclear weapons
and other nonnuclear sources such as electromagnetic bombs (E-bombs).12 When
detonated on the ground, these weapons have a relatively small area of exposure;
however, when detonated at high altitudes, the EMP result of these weapons can
have wide-ranging devastating effects. It is estimated that a 1.4 megaton nuclear
bomb detonated 250 miles above Kansas would destroy most of the nonprotected
electronics in the continental United States.12
NIST
61

EPIC FAIL
In 1962, an atmospheric test of a 1.4 megaton nuclear bomb was detonated 250 miles
above Johnston Island. The Hawaiian islands of Oahu and Kauai, which are located 800
miles east of Johnston Island, observed the effects of EMP when their street lights, fuses,
and telephone service were disabled.12 This was a test of a weapon though, so maybe it was
an epic success.
NIST plans further research to study the potential affect of electromagnetic
interference on smart grid communication technologies.11 NIST states that “there
is no intention to mandate the use of specific spectra (licensed or unlicensed) or
the use of specific wireless technologies for Smart Grid equipment.”11 However,
based on the results of their research and if a major electromagnetic incident
occurs, the recommended communications technologies could become mandatory
and massive updates may be recommended to smart grid implementations and
devices. Overall, there may be several new standards to address electromagnetic
threats to the security of the smart grid.
Smart Grid Cyber Security Strategy and Requirements
Section 6: Cyber Security Strategy and Section 7.3.3 of NIST SP 1108 focus on
the Cyber Security Strategy and Privacy Issues in the Smart Grid, but only
summarize the material in another document, NISTIR-7628: Smart Grid Cyber
Security Strategy and Requirements. NISTIR-7628 is currently in its second draft
status and can be obtained from http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/nistir-7628/
draft-nistir-7628_2nd-public-draft.pdf. At the time this book was written, NISTIR-
7628 was still in draft status, so there could be significant changes. However, the
core information in this document will most likely remain.
Initially, the task of creating the Cyber Security Strategy and Requirements
was undertaken by the Cyber Security Coordination Task Group (CSCTG),
which has been renamed under the SGIP as the Cyber Security Working Group
(SGIP-CSWG).11 The SGIP-CSWG developed five high-level tasks to be per-
formed in order to create the strategy, which are illustrated in Figure 4.2. Each
utility company and smart grid technology vendor should perform a similar
approach to develop their own cyber security strategy that is tailored to their
own environment. NISTIR-7628 should be used as a baseline and to provide
guidance to organization’s developing their own cyber security strategy, as
opposed to trying to force the NISTIR-7628 cyber security strategy on their
organization.
Use Cases
As with the rest of NISTIR-7628, the use cases listed in Appendix A of NISTIR-
7628 should be used as the starting point for your organization’s use cases. Many
of these use cases will apply directly to your organization; however, some will
not, so it is important that each organization goes through their own analysis to
62
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

determine relevant use cases. As an example, a smart meter vendor will have a
different set of use cases than a situational sensor device. For obvious reasons, a
smart meter will be used for entirely different purposes than a sensor device.
Risk Assessment
The SGIP-CSWG used the documents listed in Table 4.3 to develop their risk
assessment of the smart grid. Excluding the ISA documents, each of the docu-
ments listed in Table 4.3 are available to download for free. So, there should be
1. Use case
  analysis
Top-down analysis
(inter-component/
domain)
2. Risk assessment
    • Vulnerabilities
    • Threats
    • Impacts
Privacy
assessment
Bottom-up analysis
(vulnerability
classes)
3. High level
security
requirements
4a. Security
architecture
4b. Smart grid
standards
assessment
Existing
standards
(CIP, IEEE
IEC, etc.)
5. Conformity
assessment
FIGURE 4.2
Smart grid cyber security strategy tasks.13
Reprinted courtesy of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, Technology Administration,
U.S. Department of Commerce. Not copyrightable in the United States
NIST
63

no budgetary concerns for organization’s to utilize these documents in performing
risk assessments. In addition to risk assessments, these documents are also useful
throughout the risk-management life cycle. As an example, consider DHS’s NIPP
Risk Management Framework, which is illustrated in Figure 4.3. Additionally,
these are the document used by the SGIP-CSWG to develop their risk assessment,
but that does not mean that every smart grid organization needs to use these
documents. Other standards and guidelines that may be helpful are included in
Table 4.4. The important issue is to be able to justify to auditors that the organiza-
tion’s risk assessment was based on proven, industry regarded standards.
High-Level Security Requirements
Despite having the label requirement, only one set of standards listed in the
high-level security requirements of NISTIR-7628 is required or mandatory.13
The high-level security requirement standards include the standards listed in
Table 4.2, as well as the following additional standards listed in Table 4.5.
Reviewing and becoming an expert on every applicable standard, guideline,
requirements documentation, and framework for the smart grid may seem
like a daunting task. At this point in the chapter, we have listed more than
Table 4.3 Risk-assessment documents13
Document
URL
NIST SP 800-39: DRAFT Managing Risk from
Information Systems: An Organizational
Perspective
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
drafts/800-39/SP800-39-spd-sz.pdf
NIST Federal Information Processing Standard
(FIPS) 200: Minimum Security Requirements for
Federal Information and Information Systems
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/
fips200/FIPS-200-final-march.pdf
NIST FIPS 199: Standards for Security
Categorization of Federal Information and
Information Systems
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/
fips199/FIPS-PUB-199-final.pdf
NERC: Security Guidelines for the Electricity
Sector: Vulnerability and Risk Assessment
www.esisac.com/publicdocs/Guides/
V1-VulnerabilityAssessment.pdf
DHS: The National Infrastructure Protection
Plan (NIPP), Partnering to enhance protection
and resiliency
www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/NIPP_
Plan.pdf
DHS: The IT, telecommunications, and energy
sectors sector-specific plans (SSPs)
www.dhs.gov/files/programs/
gc_1179866197607.shtm
ANSI/ISA-99.00.01-2007, Security for Industrial
Automation and Control Systems: Concepts,
Terminology and Models
www.isa.org/isa9900012007
ANSI/ISA-99.02.01-2009, Security for Industrial
Automation and Control Systems: Establishing
an Industrial Automation and Control Systems
Security Program
www.isa.org/Template.cfm?Section=
Standards2&template=/Ecommerce/
ProductDisplay.cfm&ProductID=
10243
64
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

25 documents for review. The good news is that organizations like SGIP-
CSWG have done a lot of the baseline work for you and provide helpful tools
such as the requirements tables in Chapter 3, “High Level Security Require-
ments,” of NISTIR-7628. Additionally, not every document will be relevant to
your organization or your individual role at the organization. However, a best
effort must be performed to comply with as many of the requirements speci-
fied in the listed documents.
Table 4.4 Additional risk-assessment documents
Document
URL
ISO/IEC Guide 73:2009: Risk Management –
Vocabulary
www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_
tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=44651
ISO/IEC 31000:2009: Risk Management –
Principles and Guidelines
www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?
csnumber=43170
ISO/IEC 31010:2009: Risk management –
Risk assessment techniques
www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?
csnumber=51073
Central Computing and Telecommunica-
tions Agency (CCTA) Risk Analysis and
Management Method (CRAMM)
www.cramm.com/
COBIT
www.isaca.org/Template.cfm?Section=
COBIT6&Template=/TaggedPage/
TaggedPageDisplay.cfm&TPLID=55&
ContentID=31519
Table 4.5 Additional cyber security documents13
Document
URL
UtilityAMI Home Area Network System
Requirements Specification, 2008
www.utilityami.org/docs/UtilityAMI%
20HAN%20SRS%20-%20v1.04%20-%
20080819-1.pdf
ISA SP100 Wireless Standards
www.isa.org/isa100
Physical
Set goals
and
objectives
Identify 
assets,
systems,
and networks
Assess
risks
(consequences,
vulnerabilites,
and threats)
Prioritize
Measure
effectiveness
Feedback
loop
Implement
programs
Cyber
Human
Continuous improvement to enhance protection of CIKR
FIGURE 4.3
DHS NIPP risk-management framework.14
NIST
65

TIP
As opposed to regulatory requirements, industry standards are usually considered to be nice-
to-haves but not absolutely necessary. However, regulatory requirements are usually based
on standards such as those developed by NIST. Thus, smart grid–related organizations can
save themselves time and money by complying with the standards developed by NIST now
instead of waiting for the standards to be included in a regulatory requirement.
Standards and Requirements Assessment
When you compare your organization’s use cases and the results of your organiza-
tion’s risk assessment against the requirements standards specified by NISTIR-
7628, are all the use cases and risks addressed? The answer to this is probably not.
In general, standards are written to apply to as many organizations and situations as
possible, which means that highly specific conditions are usually not covered. The
smart grid is intended to support as many different technologies as possible and as
a result, there will always be unique situations that require additional security
requirements.
If the smart grid becomes compliant with all the relevant security requirements
specified by NISTIR-7628 and NIST SP 1108, will the smart grid be impervious
to a cyber attack? Of course not! The goal of security professionals and security
initiatives, such as the federal initiatives discussed in this chapter, is to manage
the risk associated with the smart grid, not eliminate the risk. Eliminating risk is
simply not possible. The cyber strategy detailed in NISTIR-7628 considers pre-
vention to be the primary goal, but response and recovery to cyber attacks are
considered critical requirements.13 If your role in an organization is to develop the
cyber security strategy, compliance with the security requirements and standards
listed in the NIST documents should be a goal, but not the only goal.
DHS NIPP
As part of the Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7, DHS was instructed to
create a National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) for the nation’s critical
infrastructure and key resources (CIKR).14 Specifically, the stated goal for NIPP
is to “build a safer, more secure, and more resilient America by preventing, deter-
ring, neutralizing, or mitigating the effects of deliberate efforts by terrorists to
destroy, incapacitate, or exploit elements of our Nation’s CIKR and to strengthen
national preparedness, timely response, and rapid recovery of CIKR in the event
of an attack, natural disaster, or other emergency.”14 NIPP is a publicly accessible
document that can be viewed at the URL specified in Table 4.3.
Although EISA of 2007 assigns NIST the responsibility of coordinating the
cyber security efforts of the smart grid, the Homeland Security Act of 2002 assigns
DHS the responsibility of securing the nation’s critical infrastructure, which
includes the smart grid. So, there are some gray areas for which responsibilities
66
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

belong to the two organizations, but so far there has been cooperation in their
efforts. For example, the NISTIR-7628 lists the DHS NIPP as one of the documents
used to perform their risk assessment.
The original NIPP was created in 2006 and was later updated in 2009. One of the
more interesting updates included in the 2009 version is in increasing the importance
of resiliency.14 Protection is still considered the main goal of the NIPP; however, the
2009 version of NIPP attempts to balance out the strategy with resiliency. The ability
to respond and recover from attacks is now considered to be just as important, which
is echoed in the NISTIR-7628 cyber security strategy.
Sector-Specific Plans
The electric grid is not the only entity classified as critical infrastructure, and in
order to address the specific needs of each critical infrastructure, DHS created
Sector-Specific Plans (SSP). Eighteen SSPs were created and can be reviewed at
www.dhs.gov/files/programs/gc_1179866197607.shtm. The redacted Energy SSP
can be downloaded at www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/nipp-ssp-energy-redacted.pdf.
In the development of the Energy SSP, the illustration of the communication
networks shown in Figure 4.4 was created. As shown, most of the communication
goes across private (wired and wireless) networks and leased lines are used in
public networks. Additionally, the illustration does not show any communication
lines between the utility companies and residential, commercial, and industrial
consumers. In the smart grid, there will be two-way communication lines between
the consumers and the utility companies, and these communication lines will uti-
lize multiple network types. Despite this, the document does include valuable
insight and information that can help utility companies and smart grid technology
vendors to secure their environments and products.
OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS
While there are and will be numerous initiatives and laws specifically directed at
the smart grid, several security laws already exist that organizations should be
aware of. This section will discuss the following laws:
•
The Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution Act of 2008
•
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986
•
Breach Notification Laws
•
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA).
The Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution Act of 2008
The Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution Act of 2008 amends existing laws
in order to make it easier to federally prosecute cyber criminals.16 Specifically, the
amendments to identity theft and cyber extortion that have implications with the
Other Applicable Laws
67

smart grid. For example, consider an attacker who compromises a consumer’s smart
meter and shuts off their electricity. Then, the attacker demands the consumer pay
the attacker to turn the electricity back on. The law should allow for federal prose-
cution of the attacker, which may require the utility company to provide network
and device logs as evidence of the attack.
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) of 1986 prevents
unauthorized access by the government to electronic communications that are
stored or while in-transit. Utility companies need to be cautious when respond-
ing to requests by law enforcement for information regarding consumer’s
energy usage information. Although utility companies need to comply with
valid requests that are backed by warrants, voluntarily providing consumer
information to the government could lead to lawsuits filed by their customers.
Chapter 5, “State and Local Security Initiatives,” discusses these privacy issues
in more detail.
Private
microwave
network
Distribution
substation
Residential
loads
Commercial
loads
Industrial
loads
Control
center
Generating
plant
Transmission
substation
Public
networks
Leased lines
Private fiber network
Microwave
Electric power
FIGURE 4.4
DHS SSP overview of the electric power system and control communications.15
68
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

Breach Notification Laws
Several attempts have been made to pass a national law requiring companies to
immediately disclose a data breach to consumers. Most of these have not been passed
into law yet, including the recent Data Accountability and Trust Act. However,
46 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands have all
enacted breach notification laws.17 So, if a breach does occur, the utility company
should be prepared to inform their affected customers.
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act
The United States is not the only country that is implementing a smart grid.
Numerous other countries have their own initiatives and their own data privacy
and security laws. As an example, let’s consider Canada because the United States
is part of the North American electric grid that includes the country of Canada.
One particular Canadian law is the Personal Information Protection and Electronic
Documents Act (PIPEDA), which relates to data privacy. The law requires organi-
zations to comply with several mandates including the following:
•
Obtain consent to use or disclose personal information
•
Explain to individuals why they are collecting information
•
Collect information by lawful means
•
Maintain personal information policies that are clear and understandable
•
Protect the personal information using appropriate security measures
•
Provide individuals with easy access to their information.18
These mandates could materially impact the privacy policies and procedures of
organizations that collect data from the smart grid. Additionally, any American
smart grid–related company that wants to do business in another country needs to
do its research to determine which laws will affect its products or services. Smart
grid devices have the potential to collect massive amounts of data that may fall
under the umbrella of federal laws.
Noncountry Specific Privacy Guidelines
If your organization plans to operate in more than one country, then using privacy
guidelines that are not country specific will be a good approach to ensuring your
organization complies with most, if not all, privacy laws. Specifically, the following
guidelines provide recommendations for privacy that are not tied to specific countries:
•
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Guidelines
on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data – www.
oecd.org/document/18/0,3343,en_2649_34255_1815186_1_1_1_1,00.html
•
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) and the Canadian
Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA) Generally Accepted Privacy
Principles – www.cica.ca/service-and-products/privacy/gen-accepted-privacy-
principles/index.aspx.
Other Applicable Laws
69

SPONSORING SECURITY
The federal government should directly target organizations and consumers with
information regarding security in the smart grid. Although security professionals
recognize the need for proper security controls in the smart grid, some members
of management at utility companies and smart grid technology vendors will still
view cyber security threats as unrealistic. Future legislation is likely to mandate
the adoption of the majority of the resulting security requirements from the federal
security initiatives. As a result, organizations will eventually need to comply with
these security best practices.
BUREAUCRACY AND POLITICS IN SMART GRID SECURITY
To state the obvious, the federal government is a large bureaucracy, which can
affect the outcome of these security initiatives. As an example, consider the priv-
acy impact assessment (PIA) performed and discussed as part of NIST SP 1108
and NISTIR-7628. Rebecca Herold, who leads the PIA effort, posted an entry on
her blog (www.realtime-itcompliance.com/index.html) about the bureaucratic pro-
cess involved with writing up the findings from the PIA in a NIST document.
The initial draft PIA report to be included was 22 pages long; however, only
seven pages were included.19 In her words, “The portion of the PIA that was
included within the first draft is 7 pages long. Much of the heart of the privacy
details and related issues were removed, and I understand why. I blame myself
for not understanding the amount of bureaucracy and need for discussion and
explanation necessary, well in advance of report publication, to make sure that all
of the folks not only within the NIST work group, but also the officials at NIST,
including their lawyers, to make sure all information that (I firmly believe) is
important is included.”19
There may have been perfectly legitimate reasons to remove the other
15 pages from the PIA report. However, the point is that no process, initiative,
standard, guideline, or best practice is perfect, and the federal initiatives should be
interpreted accordingly. There will always be bureaucratic roadblocks and political
influences that affect federal security initiatives, whether in a positive or a nega-
tive way.
SUMMARY
The federal government has made it clear that securing the electric grid is a matter
of national security. As a result, the federal government has launched several secur-
ity initiatives and has allocated billions of dollars to support the effort. Utilities and
technology vendors have been sent a clear message that security is a top priority for
the electric grid.
70
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

Staying up-to-date with all the federal standards, guidelines, requirements, and
initiatives is a challenge to say the least. According to NIST SP 1108, “The Smart
Grid will ultimately require hundreds of standards, specifications, and require-
ments.”11 The current security standards and initiatives by DOE, DHS, FERC,
and NIST are only the beginning of what will need to be a close relationship
between the federal government and the energy industry.
Endnotes
1. Cornell University Law School. Energy law: an overview [document on the Internet].
http://topics.law.cornell.edu/wex/energy; 2010 [accessed 30.04.10].
2. U.S. Energy Information Administration. Energy independence and security act of
2007: summary of provisions [document on the Internet]. www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/
otheranalysis/aeo_2008analysispapers/eisa.html; 2010 [accessed 30.04.10].
3. U.S. Government Printing Office. Public law 111 - 5 - American recovery and reinvestment
act of 2009 [document on the Internet]. www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ5/content-
detail.html; 2010 [accessed 30.04.10].
4. U.S. Department of Energy. Breakdown of funding [document on the Internet]. www.
energy.gov/recovery/breakdown.htm2010 [accessed 30.04.10].
5. U.S. Department of Energy. U.S. Department of energy national energy technology
laboratory recovery act – Smart grid demonstrations funding opportunity number: DE-
FOA-0000036 Announcement Type: AMENDMENT 000001 (FINAL) CFDA Number:
81.122 Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability Research, Development and Analysis
[document on the Internet]. www.energy.gov/media/xDE-FOA-00000.36.pdf; 2009
[accessed 07.05.10].
6. U.S. Department of Energy. Federal smart grid task force [document on the Internet].
www.oe.energy.gov/smartgrid_taskforce.htm; 2010 [accessed 30.04.10].
7. GovTrack. H.R. 5026: Grid act [document on the Internet]. www.govtrack.us/congress/
bill.xpd?bill=h111-5026; 2010 [accessed .04.05.10].
8. U.S. Department of Energy Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability. Study
of security attributes of smart grid systems – current cyber security issues [document on
the Internet]. www.inl.gov/scada/publications/d/securing_the_smart_grid_current_issues.
pdf; 2009 [accessed 01.05.10].
9. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. FERC: about FERC [document on the Internet].
www.ferc.gov/about/about.asp; 2010 [accessed 04.05.10].
10. NIST. NIST announces three-phase plan for smart grid standards, paving way for more
efficient, reliable electricity [document on the Internet]. www.nist.gov/public_affairs/
releases/smartgrid_041309.cfm; 2009 [accessed 14.05.10].
11. National Institute of Standards and Technology. NIST Special publication 1108: NIST
framework and roadmap for smart grid interoperability standards, Release 1.0 [document
on the Internet]. www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/upload/smartgrid_interoperability_
final.pdf; 2010 [accessed 14.05.10].
12. Washington State Department of Health, Division of Environmental Health, Office
of Radiation Protection. Electromagnetic pulse [document on the Internet]. www.
doh.wa.gov/ehp/rp/factsheets/factsheets-htm/fs41elecpuls.htm; 2009 [accessed
18.05.10].
Endnotes
71

13. National Institute of Standards and Technology. Draft NIST IR 7628: smart grid cyber
security strategy and requirements [document on the Internet]. The Smart Grid Intero-
perability Panel – Cyber Security Working Group; http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
drafts/nistir-7628/draft-nistir-7628_2nd-public-draft.pdf; 2010 [accessed 18.05.10].
14. Department of Homeland Security. National infrastructure protection plan [document on
the Internet]. www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/NIPP_Plan.pdf; 2009 [accessed 18.05.10].
15. Department of Homeland Security. Energy critical infrastructure and key resources
sector-specific plan as input to the National Infrastructure Protection Plan (Redacted)
[document on the Internet]. www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/nipp-ssp-energy-redacted.pdf;
2007 [accessed 18.05.10].
16. One Hundred Tenth Congress of the United States of America. Identity theft enforce-
ment and restitution act of 2008 [document on the Internet]. www.govtrack.us/congress/
billtext.xpd?bill=h110-5938; 2008 [accessed 18.05.10].
17. National Conference of State Legislatures. State security breach notification laws [document
on the Internet]. www.ncsl.org/IssuesResearch/TelecommunicationsInformationTechnology/
SecurityBreachNotificationLaws/tabid/13489/Default.aspx; 2010 [accessed 18.05.10].
18. Department of Justice Canada. Personal information protection and electronic documents
act [document on the Internet]. http://laws.justice.gc.ca/eng/P-8.6/page-1.html; 2000
[accessed 18.05.10].
19. Herold R. 10 Smart grid consumer-to-utility privacy concerns; are there more? [document
on the Internet]. www.realtime-itcompliance.com/privacy_and_compliance/2009/09/
10_smart_grid_consumertoutilit.htm; 2009 [accessed 18.05.10].
72
CHAPTER 4 Federal Effort to Secure Smart Grids

CHAPTER
5
State and Local Security
Initiatives
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
State Government
•
State Regulatory Bodies
•
State Courts
•
Promoting Security Education
•
Politics and the Smart Grid
Government agencies are becoming increasingly aware of cyber security threats.
Federal agencies may take the lead on developing smart grid security regulations,
requirements, standards, and best practices; however, utility companies will be
required to adhere to state and local security initiatives as well. Additionally, com-
panies that develop smart grid technologies will be required to support the require-
ments dictated by these government agencies if they want to sell their products to
utility companies.
End users are often the weakest link in the security of a system. User aware-
ness training is utilized by many organizations to mitigate this weakness within
their employment ranks and even with their customers. Similarly, state and local
governments will play critical roles in educating consumers on how to securely
interact with smart grids.
STATE GOVERNMENT
Despite the fact that the North American electric grid regions span multiple states
and international borders, state and local governments will seek to impose addi-
tional rules and regulations to the portions of the grid that operates within their
jurisdiction. Several states, including California and Illinois, have already created
their own smart grid development initiatives.
State Laws
Several states are in the process of creating laws, or launching other types of
initiatives, to further regulate utility companies and promote the implementation of
smart grids. The majority of these laws focus on setting deadlines for designing
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00005-4
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
73

and implementing smart grids. Increased cyber security is usually mentioned as a
goal; however, the majority of these laws do not state specific security require-
ments and rely solely on federal government and industry-based security initia-
tives. Additional states will most likely pass their own statewide laws and model
their laws after the initial state laws. As such, utility and technology companies
should monitor the state legislatures closely to ensure their products are compliant
with new laws that are passed.
California
The state of California recently passed one of the first statewide smart grid laws in
the United States, labeled Senate Bill (SB) 17.1 The bill requires the California
Public Utility Commission (PUC), in conjunction with several other state agen-
cies, to create a smart grid deployment plan that is compliant with state and
federal laws. Additionally, electrical corporations are required to develop and
submit their smart grid deployment plan to the Californian PUC for approval.
SB 17 imposed a deadline of July 1, 2010 for the PUC and July 1, 2011 for electric
corporations, respectively.1
NOTE
California allows electric corporations who meet certain requirements to handle the
requirements listed in SB 17 differently. Electric corporations with less than 100,000
service connections may have the requirements defined in the bill modified or adjusted.1
However, the power to modify or adjust the requirements for these electric corporations is
given to the PUC. Thus, the electric corporation would need to justify the modification.
According to section 8360 of the bill, California policy dictates that the state’s
smart grids meet 10 characterizations of smart grids, which apparently includes
“cost-effective full cyber security.”1 Although there are good intentions in
this statement, this characterization is neither practical nor realistic. “Full cyber
security,” or in other words eliminating the risk from cyber security threats, is
simply not possible. As a result, the goal of cyber security, as well as most other
types of security, is to manage risk, not eliminate risk. Additionally, cost-effective
is a subjective term, which is why budgetary disputes are common. Implementing
cyber security controls to defend against cyber security threats can be costly and
will take a significant investment to achieve a best practice recommended level of
cyber security, let alone full cyber security.
Commendably, the bill does require the California PUC adopt standards by
NIST, the Gridwise Architecture Council (www.gridwiseac.org), the International
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE – www.ieee.org), and NERC and
FERC.1 Mandating the adoption of standards from respected organizations such as
these will assist California in achieving the listed characterizations of smart grids.
The California PUC and Californian electric corporations now have a deadline
for developing a smart grid deployment plan. As a result, smart grid security will
74
CHAPTER 5 State and Local Security Initiatives

now become a priority for security and compliance departments within the
California PUC and electric corporations. The deadline for electric corporations is
one year later than the PUC deadline, which should allow the electric corporations
sufficient time to ensure their plan is compliant with the PUC plan. Failure to
comply with the regulatory bodies could cost the California electric corporations
millions of dollars, which is what happened to a Texas-based utility company that
is discussed later in the “PUC of Texas” section of this chapter.
Illinois
The Illinois Power Agency Act, SB 1592, requires utility companies to reduce peak
demand by 0.1 percent each year for 10 years.2 This requirement prompted smart
grid initiatives by several of the state utility companies, including the deployment of
hundreds of thousands smart meters. Additionally, Illinois has become a member
of the Mid-Atlantic Distributed Resources Initiative (MADRI – http://sites.
energetics.com/madri/). Although smart grid security requirements are not specifically
mentioned in this act, these utility companies will still need to ensure their smart grid
implementations meet the requirements of federal and industry regulations.
Maryland
The Maryland General Assembly passed the EmPOWER Maryland Energy Effi-
ciency Act of 2008 (see Senate Bill 205) to reduce electricity consumption and
peak demand by 15 percent by the end of 2015.3 The law required the Maryland
Public Service Commission (PSC) to determine the effectiveness of smart grids.
Additionally, the law grants the PSC the ability to mandate the implementation of
smart grids. Thus, utility companies in Maryland could be forced to implement
smart grid technologies, although SB 205 does not mention compliance with or
adoption of smart grid security standards.
State Mandates for Security
Currently, most state legislatures have not specifically mandated security in their
smart grid initiative bills. The initiatives focus more on promoting or requiring uti-
lity companies to implement smart grid technologies and setting deadlines to
ensure smart grid technology is deployed in a timely manner. Although the smart
grids operating in their state will still be required to meet requirements defined by
other organizations, such as the federal government and industry regulatory
groups, the state legislatures are missing a critical opportunity to mandate cyber
security controls that are appropriate for their state’s specific implementation.
STATE REGULATORY BODIES
The state initiatives described in the previous section of this chapter, as well as most
other state initiatives, have a common component. They empower or rely on the state
energy regulatory body to produce requirements for smart grid deployments.
State Regulatory Bodies
75

The name of the regulatory body varies between the states, but in general, the regula-
tory body will have one of the following labels:
•
Board of Public Utilities
•
Corporation Commission
•
Commerce Commission
•
PUC
•
PSC
•
Public Utility Control
•
Public Service Board
•
Utilities Board
•
Utility Regulatory Commission (URC).
For a complete listing of the state regulatory bodies and their associated Web
sites, see Table 5.1. Additionally, several countries have national regulatory bodies
that perform similar functions on a national scale, such as the Belize PUC (www.
puc.bz/). Some of these regulatory organizations do not appear to update their
Web sites frequently; however, utility and smart grid technology companies should
monitor these Web sites for information regarding new security requirements and
other local smart grid news.
The purpose of these organizations is to regulate the utility companies that
operate within their respective states. The most visible output of these organiza-
tions is the regulation of rates that utility companies can charge consumers. How-
ever, these organizations have much broader powers and responsibilities. As
described previously in the “California” section of this chapter, the California
PUC will be responsible for creating a deployment plan for smart grids that the
utility companies will be required to comply with. Thus, these organizations have
an incredible opportunity to lead utility companies and smart grid technology
companies toward a more secure electrical grid. Even though smart grids are
already actively being implemented as these organizations develop their own
plans, these regulatory organizations and their regulated utility companies have
sufficient time to ensure security plays an important role in smart grid
implementations.
National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners
The National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC – www.
naruc.org/) is a nonprofit organization whose goal is to improve public utility reg-
ulation. NARUC was founded in 1889, and its membership includes the 50 states,
Washington, D.C., and several U.S. territories. NARUC frequently testifies before
Congress and federal government agencies to advance the interests of state utility
regulatory bodies.
Normally, NARUC holds three annual meetings where new resolutions are
proposed and voted on. The approved resolutions then serve as the basis for
NARUC’s political activities. Thus, NARUC’s Web site should be monitored
76
CHAPTER 5 State and Local Security Initiatives

Table 5.1 United States and District of Columbia utility regulatory bodies
State commission
Web site
Alabama Public Service Commission
www.psc.state.al.us/
Regulatory Commission of Alaska
http://rca.alaska.gov/
Arizona Corporation Commission
www.cc.state.az.us/
Arkansas Public Service Commission
www.arkansas.gov/psc/
California Public Utilities Commission
www.cpuc.ca.gov/puc/
Colorado Public Utilities Commission
www.dora.state.co.us/PUC/
Connecticut Department of Public Utility
Control
www.ct.gov/dpuc/site/default.asp
Delaware Public Service Commission
http://depsc.delaware.gov/
District of Columbia Public Service
Commission
www.dcpsc.org/
Florida Public Service Commission
www.floridapsc.com/
Georgia Public Service Commission
www.psc.state.ga.us/
Hawaii Public Utilities Commission
http://puc.hawaii.gov/
Idaho Public Utilities Commission
www.puc.state.id.us/
Illinois Commerce Commission
www.icc.illinois.gov/
Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission
www.in.gov/iurc/
Iowa Utilities Board
www.iowa.gov/iub/
Kansas Corporation Commission
www.kcc.state.ks.us/
Kentucky Public Service Commission
www.psc.ky.gov/
Louisiana Public Service Commission
www.lpsc.org/
Maine Public Utilities Commission
www.maine.gov/mpuc/
Maryland Public Service Commission
http://webapp.psc.state.md.us/
Massachusetts Department of Public
Utilities
www.mass.gov/dpu
Michigan Public Service Commission
www.michigan.gov/mpsc
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission
www.puc.state.mn.us/
Mississippi Public Service Commission
www.psc.state.ms.us/
Missouri Public Service Commission
www.psc.mo.gov/
Montana Public Service Commission
www.psc.state.mt.us/
Nebraska Public Service Commission
www.psc.state.ne.us/
Nevada Public Utilities Commission
http://pucweb1.state.nv.us/PUCN/
New Hampshire Public Utilities
Commission
www.puc.nh.gov/
New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
www.state.nj.us/bpu/
New Mexico Public Regulation
Commission
www.nmprc.state.nm.us/
New York Public Service Commission
www.dps.state.ny.us/
North Carolina Utilities Commission
www.ncuc.commerce.state.nc.us/
North Dakota Public Service Commission
http://pc6.psc.state.nd.us/
(Continued)
State Regulatory Bodies
77

regularly for new initiatives that will most likely affect state regulations. Addition-
ally, NARUC’s Web site can be used as a valuable resource to observe how other
states or regions are regulating smart grids. Specifically, NARUC’s Web site has
a Web page (www.naruc.org/SmartGrid/) dedicated to smart grid resources for
state commissions.
Colorado PUC
The city of Boulder has become a test case for smart grid technology and will most
likely influence how the rest of the state adopts smart grid technologies. In the mean-
time, the Colorado PUC has recently launched an investigation into the privacy con-
cerns of smart metering.4 Their major concern is the ability of other, nonutility
industries to use consumer electric usage patterns and provide examples of marketing
research firms and law enforcement agencies exploiting this data for their own uses.
In Docket No. 09I-593EG, the commission states that information collected from the
smart grid could have serious implications for consumer privacy.4
The results of the investigation could have a significant impact on smart
grid security in the state of Colorado. The commission could be influenced to
create new, stronger privacy policies to ensure that utility companies take ade-
quate steps to protect the privacy of consumer usage data. In response to the
investigation, the Colorado Office of Consumer Counsel (OCC – www.dora.
state.co.us/occ/) has recommended the Colorado PUC implement new privacy
Table 5.1 United States and District of Columbia utility regulatory bodies—cont’d
State commission
Web site
Public Utilities Commission of Ohio
www.puco.ohio.gov/
Oklahoma Corporation Commission
www.occ.state.ok.us/
Oregon Public Utility Commission
www.oregon.gov/PUC/
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
www.puc.state.pa.us/
Rhode Island Public Utilities Commission
www.ripuc.org/
South Carolina Public Service Commission
www.psc.sc.gov/
South Dakota Public Utilities Commission
http://puc.sd.gov/
Tennessee Regulatory Authority
www.tennessee.gov/tra/
Public Utility Commission of Texas
www.puc.state.tx.us/
Public Service Commission of Utah
www.psc.state.ut.us/
Vermont Public Service Board
http://psb.vermont.gov/
Virginia State Corporation Commission
www.scc.virginia.gov/pue/
Washington Utilities and Transportation
Commission
www.wutc.wa.gov/
West Virginia Public Service Commission
www.psc.state.wv.us/
Wisconsin Public Service Commission
http://psc.wi.gov/
Wyoming Public Service Commission
http://psc.state.wy.us/
78
CHAPTER 5 State and Local Security Initiatives

protection policies and also recommended the implementation of an opt-in/opt-
out service.5 The opt-in/opt-out service would allow consumers to state whether
the utility company would be allowed to disseminate their usage data to third
parties.
The Colorado PUC could use the results of this investigation to create policies
that mandate proper security controls around the transmission and storage of
usage data. The implications could be broad for utility companies. Although this
is not the first time that privacy concerns have been raised over the smart grid,
the Colorado PUC has the authority to regulate how Colorado utility companies
protect usage data. Because smart meters will create and transmit the usage data,
smart meter vendors who hope to sell their products in Colorado will need to fol-
low the results of this investigation to ensure their products are compliant with
any resulting policy that dictates additional privacy and security controls.
PUC of Texas
Austin was one of the first cities in the United States to implement smart grid
technology, and additional areas of Texas are implementing smart grid technology
as well. Texas state law encourages utility companies to adopt smart grid technol-
ogies, which has accelerated the deployment.
Utility companies need to closely monitor all relevant regulatory bodies for
new regulations, standards, and requirements that they will be required to comply
with. Although future requirements may not be possible to predict, utility compa-
nies must be cautious when procuring new technologies to ensure that they meet
all of the requirements. The purchase of insufficient technology could result in the
loss of hundreds of millions of dollars, which is what could happen to a utility
company in Texas.
EPIC FAIL
Several years ago, the state of Texas was facing a power supply deficit and the PUC of Texas
urged utility companies to deploy smart meters to decrease demand. The Oncor utility
company (http://oncor.com/) purchased about 900,000 smart meters for deployment.
However, the PUC of Texas had not yet defined the functional requirements for smart
meters. When the PUC of Texas later defined the operating standards for smart meters,
the previously purchased smart meters were considered out of compliance.6
As a result, Oncor was required to replace the noncompliant smart meters with new
smart meters. Additionally, Oncor requested a rate increase of $253 million to recover the
cost of the smart meter replacement, which would have added about $5 a month to every
customer.7 However, the PUC of Texas only granted $130 million, or around $2.40 a month
from customers.7 The debate over this settlement has not ended and customers are angry
about paying for the old meters, which they consider to be Oncor’s mistake. Regardless of
who is at fault, Oncor now has an angry customer base that could become potential security
threats. As described in Chapter 3, “Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond,”
an angry customer could seek revenge against Oncor to damage the utility company or
(Continued )
State Regulatory Bodies
79

(Continued )
attempt to extract a monetary sum to compensate for the new monthly fees, mental anguish,
or many other reasons.
Oncor has stated that the older meters can still be used for other purposes, such as
streetlights.7 Thus, Oncor will be using at least two different types of smart meters and will be
responsible for securing at least two different models. Although smart grid technology is
considered relatively new technology, Oncor will now have to deal with legacy smart grid systems,
which will increase the complexity of securing their smart grid. Securing legacy systems is a
known problem in the security world that many organizations have struggled to deal with.
Security departments often have to deal with issues such as nonexistent support for
legacy systems and hiring personnel who are experienced with the legacy technology. For
example, when a vulnerability is identified in a third-party system, the third-party vendor can
be contacted to create a patch for the system. However, the vendor may not create the
necessary patch because they no longer provide support for the legacy system. As a result, a
mitigating security control may be required to reduce the risk of continuing to use the legacy
system. The other alternatives would be to either accept the risk of using the legacy system
or upgrade to a new version, which are usually not ideal options.
Planning for the Future
Although the situation in Texas was based on operational standards, a similar situa-
tion could occur because of new security standards pushed out by an authoritative
organization. New security laws, regulations, and requirements are often instituted
because of incidents, and with the electric grid being a big target, utility companies
should expect and plan for changing rules. Utility companies need to be cautious
when procuring new technology to avoid a repeat of the situation that occurred in
Texas. When procuring new technology, a company should ensure that the device
is compliant with all existing requirements, but the device should also meet or
exceed the company’s own set of requirements. Defining more stringent security
requirements will help prevent the technology from becoming obsolete.
A common security problem has been so-called hard coded vulnerabilities,
such as login credentials built into the code of a compiled application and inse-
cure hardware settings that cannot be controlled with software. When procuring
new smart grid technology, a company should investigate the ability to enhance a
product’s security controls and functionality and upgrade to new versions without
requiring new hardware. Vendors should have development plans for future ver-
sions and should be able to provide some assurances for upgrade compatibility.
TIP
These security requirements, as well as functional requirements, should be defined during
the beginning stages of a system development lifecycle (SDLC). When developing any type
of system, including projects that result in the purchase of commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS)
products, an SDLC should be used to ensure the system is developed accurately, efficiently,
and securely. There are dozens of different SDLC models to choose from, but one model
that puts an extra focus on security is the security SDLC (SecSDLC) model. This model
80
CHAPTER 5 State and Local Security Initiatives

considers security before any other factor. Unfortunately, not all SDLC models will work
within your organization, and you will need to determine which models will work within your
particular organization. For more information on integrating security into your organization’s
system development processes, please review NIST SP800-64: “Security Considerations in
the System Development Life Cycle,” which can be found at http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
nistpubs/800-64-Rev2/SP800-64-Revision2.pdf.
STATE COURTS
Utility commissions have the authority to regulate utility companies that operate in
their state; however, the state court systems will also play a critical role in decid-
ing how the utility can operate smart grids. The state court systems will determine
the legality of smart grid–related policies and may participate in data classification
of smart grid produced information. Using history as a guide, one can expect the
privacy policies of energy usage data to be weighed by state, as well as federal,
courts.
Colorado Court of Appeals
In the case of People v. Dunkin, the Colorado Court of Appeals determined that a
customer does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in their energy
consumption records because they do not reveal discrete information about
the customer.8 The Colorado Court of Appeals made this decision in 1994, when
traditional, nondigital meters were utilized. However, the court would have most
likely made the opposite decision if smart meters were in use.8 The results of ana-
lyzing detailed power consumption from smart meters are well documented, and
discussed in Chapter 2, “Threats and Impacts: Consumers,” of this book.
Implications
The People v. Dunkin court case has privacy implications for utility companies
that work with law enforcement agencies. Although the utility company is
obviously expected to provide law enforcement with usage data when presented
with a warrant, should a utility company voluntarily provide law enforcement
with usage data? Additionally, would the utility company compromise their custo-
mer’s right to privacy in doing so? The courts will most likely determine the
legality of providing law enforcement with usage data from smart grids.
Utility companies will need to pay close attention to the federal and state laws,
as well as any decisions made by the courts to ensure they both protect their
customer’s privacy and comply with the law. As described in Chapter 3, “Threats
and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond,” the over disclosure of customer
data to law enforcement could create a backlash against the utility company and
smart grid technologies.
State Courts
81

PROMOTING SECURITY EDUCATION
Even with properly implemented security controls, end-users will help attackers
circumvent security controls through insecure activity. For example, password
complexity controls can force users to choose passwords that meet minimum
requirements such as length, and alphanumeric and special characters. However,
users will find ways to choose easy-to-remember passwords such as using their
dog’s name and their dog’s birth year (pickles@2002), which could be found on
the user’s social networking profile.
WARNING
Security controls that are too restrictive can frustrate users and may cause users to revolt
against the security controls that hinder the usability of a system. Although the users may
complain about the difficulty of using an application, the complaints will be much louder
when they receive an electric bill that is erroneously three times their average bill.
In Chapter 2, “Threats and Impacts: Consumers,” we discussed how the smart
grid will put consumers at risk. Through the smart grid, utility companies will
allow consumers to interact with the electrical grid in many new ways. Electrical
usage information will be made available from anywhere and delivered to consu-
mers through e-mail, SMS, social networking Web sites, and many other new
ways. More concerning, consumers will be able to control their energy usage,
such as controlling thermostats or even HVAC settings, through Web-based gate-
ways that can be accessed by anyone. However, consumers will likely not recog-
nize the critical role they play in securing the smart grid, which is why state and
local government agencies and local regulatory bodies should play an active role
in educating consumers on smart grid security. Programs targeted directly to con-
sumers and indirectly through utility companies will help reduce the security risk
posed by uninformed consumers.
State and local governments should directly target consumers with information
regarding secure practices, such as choosing strong passwords and not publicly
sharing certain information. Although user awareness training for every consumer
is not practical, television, Web, and other types of advertising campaigns can be
used to disseminate this information. These mediums have been utilized in the
past to disseminate information regarding energy efficiency that can reduce consu-
mer electric bills, such as buying energy-efficient devices and turning down your
air conditioner by a few degrees. Because consumers are familiar with these med-
iums, utility companies should utilize them to promote strong security practices
by their customers.
Utility companies could also use their new mediums for disseminating usage
data to promote security. For example, wall-based units that normally display
the current usage data and control smart devices, could cycle through different
security best practices. Similar to the smart grid vision of consumption data being
82
CHAPTER 5 State and Local Security Initiatives

plentiful and omnipresent, utility companies can use the same methods to make
security best practice reminders ubiquitous.
POLITICS AND THE SMART GRID
The initiatives at all levels, including state and local, may provide guidance for
implementing smart grids properly, or more appropriately how that particular
organization perceives the proper way to implement smart grids. Political and
economical interest groups will most likely have some influence on government
smart grid initiatives, which could have significant security implications.
As an example, consider a venture capitalist group that has invested in smart
grid technology companies. The venture capitalist group lobbies state senators to
rush the implementation of a smart grid in their state. As a result, the deadlines
for implementing a smart grid become too aggressive and do not allow enough
time for proper planning and design. Thus, the smart grid deployment is rushed,
and the recommended security controls are not properly implemented.
As another example, consider a smart meter vendor whose product does not
meet the proposed stringent security requirements of an upcoming state bill. The
vendor makes large campaign contributions to several senators, who amend the
bill to remove several critical security requirements. As a result, the smart meter
vendor is now allowed to compete for the state utility companies’ smart meter
contracts with their less secure products.
SUMMARY
Hundreds of regulations, standards, and guidelines have already been created to
define requirements for a recommended level of security and provide instruction
on the best practices in smart grid security. These documents will continually be
reviewed, scrutinized, revised, and improved. Additionally, new documents will
be created to address new smart grid technologies when they are developed. The
majority of these documents provide a tremendous wealth of knowledge in inte-
grating security controls into smart grid components. Thus, smart grid security
professionals must regularly monitor for new requirements and best practices.
Several states already have initiatives to promote, or even require, the deploy-
ment of smart grids. With the amount of federal money available, the remaining
states will most likely create their own initiatives. California state law specifically
states that smart grids should follow the best practices defined in several
standards. By including similar verbiage in their own initiatives, state legislatures
around the country will help create a more secure electrical infrastructure. Compa-
nies take different approaches in handling compliance. Larger companies may
have separate compliance departments, whereas smaller companies may place that
responsibility on the security departments. Whichever department is ultimately
Summary
83

responsible, they will need to closely monitor their state legislature and utility
regulatory body to ensure compliance. Being compliant with the state and local
security regulations, as well as with other levels of regulation, may not guarantee
the security of smart grids. The state and local security requirements will not be
perfect, and companies should only view these requirements as setting a minimum
level. Doing the bare minimum may be the most cost-effective approach upfront;
however, a breach of security or privacy will likely cost significantly more than
implementing appropriate controls.
Most consumers will not be privacy or information security experts and will
need assistance to understand their role, what strong security practices are critical
to the security of the smart grid and their information and electricity, and why.
Endnotes
1.
California State Senate. Senate bill no. 17 [document on the Internet]. Alex Padilla,
Patricia Wiggins; http://info.sen.ca.gov/pub/09-10/bill/sen/sb_0001-0050/sb_17_
bill_20091011_chaptered.pdf; 2009 [accessed 09.01.10].
2.
Illinois General Assembly. SB 1592 [document on the Internet]. http://ilga.gov/legislation/
95/SB/PDF/09500SB1592lv.pdf; 2007 [accessed 09.01.10].
3.
Maryland General Assembly. EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act of 2008
[document on the Internet]. http://mlis.state.md.us/2008rs/chapters_noln/Ch_131_
hb0374E.pdf; 2008 [accessed 09.01.10].
4.
Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado. Docket no. 09I-593EG decision
no. C09-0878 [document on the Internet]. www.dora.state.co.us/puc/DocketsDecisions/
decisions/2009/C09-0878_09I-593EG.doc; 2009 [accessed 11.01.10].
5.
Colorado Office of Consumer Counsel. Initial comments of the Colorado office of con-
sumer counsel pursuant to decision no. C09-0878 [document on the Internet]. https://
www.dora.state.co.us/pls/efi/efi_p2_v2_demo.show_document?p_dms_document_
id=15389; 2009 [accessed 10.01.10].
6.
NBC DFW. Oncor customers to pay for "Smart Meter" mistake [document on the Inter-
net]. Stacy Morrow; www.nbcdfw.com/news/local-beat/Oncor-Customers-To-Pay-for-
Smart-Meter-Mistake-53177347.html; 2009 [accessed 10.01.10].
7.
The Dallas Morning News. Electricity customers may pay for Oncor meters. Elizabeth
Souder; www.dallasnews.com/sharedcontent/dws/bus/stories/DN-oncor_03bus.ART.
State.Edition1.3cf2fb0.html; 2009 [accessed 10.01.10].
8.
Colorado Office of Consumer Counsel. Initial comments of the Colorado office of con-
sumer counsel pursuant to decision no. C09-0878 [document on the Internet]. www.
dora.state.co.us/pls/efi/efi_p2_v2_demo.show_document?p_dms_document_id=15389;
2009 [accessed 10.01.10].
84
CHAPTER 5 State and Local Security Initiatives

CHAPTER
6
Public and Private
Companies
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
•
Compliance Versus Security
•
How Technology Vendors Can Fill the Gaps
•
How Utility Companies Can Fill the Gaps
In this chapter, we will discuss how public and private entities plan to secure the
smart grid. Ranging from industry standards to private certifications, there are many
tools at the disposal of utility companies. We will explore how compliance with
industry standards, while required for many smart grid entities, does not always
equate to security. Finally, we will discuss how both technology vendors and the
utility companies themselves can fill the gaps between compliance and security.
INDUSTRY PLANS FOR SELF-POLICING
The five hundred pound gorilla in industry self-regulation is the NERC Critical
Infrastructure Protection (CIP) standards. As a refresher, NERC is the U.S. Elec-
tric Reliability Organization (ERO), as ordered by FERC on July 20, 2006.1 Prior
to becoming an ERO, NERC collaborated within the industry and developed poli-
cies that power companies voluntarily followed. Once NERC was designated as
an ERO, NERCs policies became required standards for power companies operat-
ing in the United States and parts of Canada. As an ERO, NERC is also charged
with the enforcement of compliance with the CIP standards. Noncompliance with
the CIP standards can result in significant financial penalties for the power compa-
nies ranging from $1,000 to $1,000,000, per day.2
WARNING
If you think that the fines that FERC can impose for violations of NERC standards are empty
threats, think again. In October 2009, FERC and Florida Power and Light Company (FPL)
reached a settlement where FPL paid $25 million as a result of a power loss that affected
millions of consumers in South Florida on February 26, 2008.3 FERCs Director of the
Commission’s Office of Enforcement stated that, “The message to the industry is clear:
Compliance with the standards is critical.”3
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00006-6
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
85

NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection Standards
The NERC CIP standards are comprised of eight primary standards that, for the
purposes of this book, can be classified into two categories as follows:
1. Electronic security
2. Physical and personnel security
To understand the strengths and weaknesses of the CIP standards, the follow-
ing sections will highlight the requirements, how compliance will be assessed, and
the applicable noncompliance levels.4 The terms that you should be familiar with
are as follows:
•
Responsible entity – NERC standard CIP-002 lists the following as
“responsible entities”5;
•
Reliability coordinator
•
Balancing authority
•
Interchange authority
•
Transmission service provider
•
Transmission owner
•
Transmission operator
•
Generator owner
•
Generator operator
•
Load serving entity
•
NERC
•
Regional reliability organizations.
The same standard also excludes the following from being considered “respon-
sible entities”5;
•
Facilities regulated by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission or the
Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission
•
Cyber assets associated with communication networks and data communication
links between discrete electronic security perimeters
•
Electronic security perimeter – A logical boundary that separates a network
housing critical cyber assets.
Electronic Security
The following NERC CIP standards can be grouped in the electronic security
category as follows:
•
CIP-002 – Critical cyber asset identification
•
CIP-003 – Security management controls
•
CIP-005 – Electronic security protection
•
CIP-007 – System security management
•
CIP-008 – Incident reporting and response planning
•
CIP-009 – Disaster recovery.
86
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

We will now go over each of these standards in order to better understand how
they will help protect the smart grid.
CIP-002 – Critical Cyber Asset Identification
NERC standard CIP-002 requires that applicable entities identify and document
their critical cyber assets that are associated with the critical assets that enable the
reliable operation of their bulk electric system. These entities must identify their
critical assets through the use of a risk-based assessment. Documentation of this
assessment is required and must include the methodology used, evaluation criteria,
and associated processes and procedures. Risk-based assessments must be
performed on at least an annual basis.
The risk-based assessment performed by the applicable entities must consider
numerous asset categories, including the following:
•
Primary and backup control centers that can perform critical functions
•
Transmission substations that support the reliable operation of the bulk electric
system5
•
Other general resources that support the reliable operation of the bulk electric
system5
•
Systems and facilities that are critical to system restoration and automatic load
shedding
•
Special protection systems that support the reliable operation of the bulk
electric system5
•
Any other assets that support the reliable operation of the bulk electric system
deemed appropriate by the entities themselves.
The process for identifying critical cyber assets is somewhat easier. Critical
cyber assets are defined by standard CIP-002 as possessing at least one of the
following characteristics:
•
Using a routable protocol to communicate outside the electronic security perimeter
•
Using a routable protocol within a control center
•
Allows access via dial-up capabilities.
WARNING
Interestingly enough, the NERC CIP-002 standard does not apply to cyber assets that are
associated with the data and communication networks between discrete electronic security
perimeters. Under this exemption, communication lines between business partners over a
wide area network (WAN) would be out of scope.
To demonstrate compliance with standard CIP-002, entities must present the
following:
•
Risk-based assessment methodology documentation
•
Their list of critical assets
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
87

•
Their list of critical cyber assets
•
Documentation of the annual approval of the above lists by a senior manager
or their delegate(s).
If an entity is found to be out of compliance, it is classified into one of four
levels for noncompliance. These levels and their criteria are listed in Table 6.1.5
CIP-003 – Security Management Controls
NERC standard CIP-003 requires entities to implement minimum-security
management controls to protect their critical cyber assets (as identified per
standard CIP-002). At the core of the requirements outlined in standard CIP-003
is the entities’ cyber security policy. This policy must address the requirements of
standards CIP-002 through CIP-009, as well as include provisions for emergency
situations.
NOTE
Entities that have met the requirements of standard CIP-002, but have not identified any
critical cyber assets, are exempt from the requirements included within standard CIP-003.
This is the case for a majority of the CIP standards and is noted in each standard’s section.
Expanding on the requirements of entities’ cyber security policy, they must
also ensure it is available to all personnel responsible for, or who have access to,
critical cyber assets. Much like the requirements of standard CIP-002, entities’
cyber security policy must be reviewed and approved by the senior manager on
an annual basis.
Beyond a cyber security policy, standard CIP-003 covers the roles and respon-
sibilities of those involved with critical assets and cyber critical assets. Specifi-
cally, standard CIP-003 requires that a senior manager responsible for the entity’s
implementation of, and adherence to, standards CIP-002 through CIP-009, be
identified by the following:
•
Name
•
Title
•
Business phone
Table 6.1 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-002
Level
Criteria
1
The risk assessment has not been performed annually.
2
The list of critical assets or critical cyber assets exists, but it has not been
approved or reviewed in the last calendar year.
3
The list of critical assets or critical cyber assets does not exist.
4
The lists of critical assets and critical cyber assets do not exist.
88
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

•
Business address
•
Date of designation.
Changes to the designated senior manager must be documented within 30 calendar
days of the effective change. This designated senior manager is responsible for the
authorization and documentation of any exceptions from the requirements of the cyber
security policy mentioned above.
Standard CIP-003 also covers exceptions to the cyber security policy that it
requires. Where entities cannot confirm their cyber security policy, documentation
for these exceptions, as well as documented authorization by the senior manager
or delegate(s), must be in place. The following specific requirements are in place
for exceptions to cyber security policy:
•
Documentation for exceptions must be in place within 30 days of senior
manager or delegate(s) approval.
•
Approved exceptions must include an explanation that includes its necessity as
well as any compensating controls or acceptance of risk.
•
An annual review and acceptance of each exception is required by the senior
manager or delegate(s). This process is also required to be documented.
TIP
Standard CIP-003 allows for the acceptance of risk when dealing with exceptions from
entities’ cyber security policy. As risk acceptance should be the option of last resort,
providing the senior manager or delegate(s) with complete information is essential. When
presenting exceptions, ensure that current and future risks are covered and probe decision
makers to confirm their understanding of what they are accepting.
Moving from policy to implementation, standard CIP-003 requires entities to
establish, document, and maintain program(s) to protect information related to cri-
tical cyber assets. Specifically, standard CIP-003 requires the following for the
protection of related information:
•
At a minimum, protect operation procedures, the lists required by standard
CIP-002, network diagrams, data center floor plans (for those data centers
housing critical cyber assets), equipment layouts of critical cyber assets,
disaster recovery plans, and security configurations.
•
Information that will be protected by the aforementioned program(s) will be
based on the sensitivity of the critical cyber asset information.
•
Entities must perform, at least annually, an assessment to determine if their
established program(s) are being followed. The results of this assessment must
be documented and an action plan must be implemented to remediate any
identified deficiencies.
Standard CIP-003 also requires entities to establish, document, and implement
program(s) to control the access to protected critical cyber asset information.
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
89

Specifically, the following requirements related to access control must be in
place:
•
A list of personnel who are responsible for the authorization of logical or
physical access to protected information must exist. These personnel should
be identified by name, title, business phone, and the list should indicate
the information for which they are responsible for authorizing. Like the
aforementioned lists, this list must be reviewed and verified on an annual basis.
•
Granted access must be reviewed for appropriateness at least annually.
Appropriateness should be determined by the roles and responsibilities of the
authorized personnel.
•
Entities must annually assess and document the process for controlling access
to protected information.
Finally, standard CIP-003 identifies specific requirements for change control
and configuration management related to critical cyber assets. These requirements
include establishing and documenting a change control process and the implementa-
tion of controls for adding, modifying, replacing, or removing critical cyber asset
hardware or software (change management). A process must also exist to identify,
control, and document all entity or vendor-related changes to critical cyber asset
hardware and software components pursuant to the change control process.
To demonstrate compliance with standard CIP-003, entities must possess the
following:
•
Cyber security policy documentation that references its availability
•
Documentation of leadership assignment, including any changes
•
Exception documentation
•
Information protection program documentation
•
Access control documentation
•
Change control and configuration management documentation.
If an entity is found to be out of compliance, it is classified into one of four
levels for noncompliance. These levels and their criteria are listed in Table 6.2.6
CIP-005 – Electronic Security Protection
Standard CIP-005 requires entities to identify and protect the electronic security
perimeter(s) that house critical cyber assets. This includes protecting all access
points on these perimeters. Like standard CIP-003, entities that do not identify
any critical cyber assets are exempt from the requirements of standard CIP-005.
Specifically, standard CIP-005 requires entities to ensure that all critical cyber
assets are housed within an electronic security perimeter. These perimeters, and their
associated access points, must be identified and documented. Included within the
access points to the electronic security perimeters are any external communication
end points, such as dial-up modems, which terminate within the electronic security
perimeter. Noncritical cyber assets that exist within electronic security perimeters are
considered in scope for the requirements of standard CIP-005. Additionally, standard
90
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

CIP-005 notes that cyber assets involved in the access control, such as active direc-
tory domain controllers, and monitoring, such as intrusion detection systems (IDS),
are bound to the applicable controls of the following CIP standards:
•
CIP-003
•
CIP-004
•
CIP-005
•
CIP-006
•
CIP-008
•
CIP-009
Standard CIP-005 requires the implementation and documentation of organi-
zational processes and technical procedures to control the access to electronic
security perimeters. It requires that these technical procedures follow a default
deny model, to require explicit access to cyber assets, both critical and noncritical,
housed in the electronic security perimeter. Expanding on the default deny model,
Table 6.2 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-003
Level
Criteria
1
Changes to the designation of senior manager were not documented within
30 calendar days of the effective date; or,
1
Exceptions from the cyber security policy have not been documented within
30 calendar days of the approval of the exception; or,
1
An information protection program to identify and classify information and the
processes to protect information associated with critical cyber assets has not
been assessed in the previous full calendar year.
2
A cyber security policy exists, but has not been reviewed within the full calendar
year; or,
2
Exceptions to policy are not documented or authorized by the senior manager
or delegate(s); or,
2
Access privileges to information related to critical cyber assets have not been
reviewed within the previous full calendar year; or,
2
The list of designated personnel responsible to authorize access to the information
related to critical cyber assets has not been reviewed within the previous full
calendar year.
3
A senior manager has not been properly identified; or,
3
The list of designated personnel responsible to authorize logical or physical
access to protected information associated with critical cyber assets does
not exist; or,
3
No changes to hardware or software components of critical assets have
been properly documented.
4
No cyber security policy exists; or,
4
No identification and classification program for protecting information associated
with critical cyber assets exists; or,
4
No documented change control and configuration management process exists.
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
91

Standard CIP-005 requires that only the ports and services required for the operation
and monitoring of cyber assets within the electronic security perimeter be enabled.
These required ports and services must be documented, either individually or by
specified groups.
Other requirements covered by standard CIP-005 pertaining to the access controls
protecting the electronic security perimeter include securing dial-up access, requiring
an Appropriate Use Banner, and ensuring the authenticity of those with external inter-
active access to cyber assets within the electronic security perimeter. The technical
controls implemented to ensure this authenticity must be documented and include the
following specific information:
•
The process for requesting access and authorization
•
The authentication methods used
•
The process used to review authorization rights, in accordance with the
requirements of standard CIP-004
•
The controls for securing dial-up access.
Standard CIP-005 also covers the monitoring of electronic access to cyber
assets within the electronic security perimeter. The listed requirements for entities
include the implementation and documentation of electronic or manual processes
for monitoring and logging access on a constant basis for access points to the
electronic security perimeter. Monitoring processes for nonroutable dial-up access
to critical cyber assets is also required; however, the standard notes only where
“technically feasible.”7 Along these lines, standard CIP-005 requires the detection
and alerting of unauthorized access attempts, where technically feasible, to cyber
assets housed within the electronic security perimeter.
NOTE
For cyber assets within the electronic security perimeter where the detection and alerting of
unauthorized access attempts is not technically feasible,7 standard CIP-005 requires that
access logs be reviewed at least every 90 calendar days. The goal of these reviews is to
identify unauthorized attempts, whether successful or not.
Standard CIP-005 also requires that entities perform vulnerability assessments
of their electronic security perimeter(s) at least annually. Beyond simply perform-
ing the vulnerability assessment, entities must document their vulnerability assess-
ment process, include a process for ensuring only the ports and services required
for operations are enabled, discover all points of entry into the electronic security
perimeter(s), and identify default accounts, passwords, and Simple Network Man-
agement Protocol (SNMP) community strings. The results of vulnerability assess-
ments must be documented and an action plan to remediate or mitigate identified
vulnerabilities must be established.
Finally, standard CIP-005 requires that entities review and update the
documentation required by the standard at least annually. This review should
92
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

support compliance with the standard and ensure that documentation reflects the
actual configurations, processes, and procedures in place. It also requires that any
changes to the entities’ network or implemented controls must be documented
within 90 days of the change. A requirement to retain access logs for at least
90 calendar days is included to support incident investigation, which is covered
in standard CIP-008.
To demonstrate compliance with standard CIP-005, entities must possess the
previously discussed documentation for the following:
•
Electronic security perimeter(s)
•
Access controls
•
Logging and monitoring controls
•
Vulnerability assessments
•
Access log reviews
•
Documentation reviews and changes.
If an entity is found to be out of compliance, it is classified into one of four
levels for noncompliance. These levels and their criteria are listed in Table 6.3.7
Table 6.3 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-005
Level
Criteria
1
All document(s) identified in CIP-005 exist, but have not been updated within
90 calendar days of any changes as required; or,
1
Access to less than 15% of electronic security perimeters is not controlled,
monitored, and logged; or,
1
Document(s) exist confirming that only necessary network ports and services
have been enabled, but no record documenting annual reviews exists; or,
1
At least on, but not all, of the electronic security perimeter vulnerability
assessment items has been performed in the last full calendar year.
2
All document(s) identified in CIP-005 exist, but have not been updated or
reviewed in the previous full calendar year as required; or,
2
Access to between 15% and 25% of electronic security perimeters is not
controlled, monitored, and logged; or,
2
Documentation and records of vulnerability assessments of the electronic
security perimeter(s) exist, but a vulnerability assessment has not been
performed in the previous full calendar year.
3
A document defining the electronic security perimeter(s) exists, but there are one
or more critical cyber assets within the defined electronic security perimeter(s); or,
3
One or more identified noncritical cyber assets is within the electronic security
perimeter(s) but not documented; or,
3
Electronic access controls document(s) exist, but one or more access points
have not been identified; or,
3
Electronic access controls document(s) do not identify or describe access
controls for one or more access points; or,
(Continued)
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
93

CIP-007 – Systems Security Management
Standard CIP-007 requires entities to define processes, methods, and procedures in
order to secure critical cyber assets, as well as cyber assets that reside within elec-
tronic security perimeter(s). Entities that do not posses critical cyber assets are
exempt from the requirements included within standard CIP-007.
The first category of requirements published in standard CIP-007 relates to the
testing procedures in place to prevent adverse affects from significant changes to
cyber assets within the electronic security perimeter. A significant change includes
at a minimum: security patches, service packs, updates, and upgrades to operating
systems, applications, database platforms, or other software or firmware.
Specifically, standard CIP-007 requires entities to develop, implement, and main-
tain procedures to test the security of significant changes. Entities must document
testing activities and ensure that they are conducted in a manner that reflects their
own production environments. Finally, the results of such tests must be documented.
As required by standard CIP-005, standard CIP-007 goes one step further and
requires entities to develop and document a process to ensure only required ports
and services, for normal and emergency operations, are enabled. Specifically, it
requires that only the required ports and services be enabled on systems during
normal and emergency operating situations, as well as ensuring that all other ports
and services are disabled on systems prior to their introduction into the electronic
security perimeter. If ports and services not required for normal or emergency
operating situations cannot be disabled, entities are required to document such
cases and indicate any compensating controls implemented to reduce their risk.
As a last resort, unnecessary ports and services that cannot be disabled can be
deemed an acceptable risk.
Table 6.3 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-005—cont’d
Level
Criteria
3
Access to between 26% and 50% of electronic security perimeters is not
controlled, monitored, or logged; or,
3
Access logs exist, but have not been reviewed within the past 90 calendar days, or,
3
Documentation and records of vulnerability assessments of electronic security
perimeter(s) exist, but a vulnerability assessment has not been performed for
more than two full calendar years.
4
No documented electronic security perimeter exists; or,
4
No records of access exist; or,
4
51% or more electronic security perimeters are not controlled, monitored,
and logged; or,
4
Documentation and records of vulnerability assessments of the electronic security
perimeter(s) exist, but a vulnerability assessment has not been performed for
more than three full calendar years; or,
4
No documented vulnerability assessment of the electronic security perimeter
(s) process exists.
94
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

Patch management is also covered in standard CIP-007. It requires entities to
develop and document a security patch management program for the tracking,
evaluation, testing, and installation of security patches for all cyber assets within
the electronic security perimeter. This program can be an independent program or
can be included in the configuration management program required by standard
CIP-003.
Entities are required to document the evaluation of security patches for their
applicability within 30 calendar days of their release. If applicable, security patch
implementation must be documented, and in cases where that patch is not
installed, compensating controls or risk acceptance documentation is required.
Standard CIP-007 includes a category for the prevention of malicious software.
Required controls, where technically feasible, include antivirus software and other
antimalware tools. Specifically, entities are required to document and implement
antivirus and malware prevention tools. If such tools are not installed, entities are
required to document compensating controls or risk acceptance. Updates to anti-
virus and malware prevention signatures must follow a documented process that
also includes the testing and installation of said signatures.
The fifth requirement category contained within standard CIP-007 covers
account management. Entities are required to develop, implement, and document
controls to enforce access authentication of and ensure accountability for all user
activity. The goal of account management controls is to reduce the risk of
unauthorized access to cyber assets.
Account management requirements outlined by standard CIP-007 include imple-
menting the principle of “least privilege” for individual and shared accounts when
granting access permissions. Entities must also develop methods, processes, and
procedures to produce logs that provide historical audit trails of individual user
account access. These logs must be retained for at least 90 days. Entities must also
review user account access at least annually to ensure their access is still required.
Entities must also implement policy that governs administrator, shared, and
generic account privileges (including vendor default accounts). This governance
requires that these types of accounts be modified when possible. Available modifi-
cation methods include removal, disabling, or renaming. If such accounts must be
enabled, entities must change default passwords prior to introducing the systems
into production. Users of shared accounts must be identified, and entities must
include policy verbiage that limits access to only authorized users and provides
for the securing of shared accounts in the case of personnel changes. Finally, enti-
ties must establish and audit trail for the usage of shared accounts.
Requirement 5.3 of standard CIP-007 provides entities with password
complexity requirements, but adds a condition of “technical feasibility.”7 These
requirements are as follows:
•
Six character minimum
•
A combination of alpha, numeric, and special characters
•
Expiration of no longer than annual, but shorter when warranted by risk.
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
95

The sixth requirement covered by standard CIP-007 deals with the monitoring
of devices within the electronic security perimeter. Specifically, entities must
develop and implement procedures and technical mechanisms for monitoring all
cyber assets within electronic security perimeters. This monitoring must alert on,
via automated or manual processes, and log system events related to cyber secur-
ity incidents. Entities are required to review these logs as well as retain them for
at least 90 days. Although no mention of the frequency of review is mentioned,
entities must document their reviewing of system event logs related to cyber
security.
Continuing down the requirements of standard CIP-007, requirement seven
covers the disposal and redeployment of cyber assets within the electronic security
perimeter. Entities are required to securely destroy or erase data storage media
prior to disposal. Similarly, entities must erase data storage media prior to rede-
ployment. Both of these requirements aims to prevent unauthorized retrieval of
the data housed on the storage media. In either case, entities are required to main-
tain records of cyber asset disposal or redeployment.
Standard CIP-007 includes a requirement for Cyber Vulnerability Assessment.
The requirements under this section mirror those covered in standard CIP-005,
except that standard CIP-007 does not require the identification of all access
points into the electronic security perimeter.
The last requirement of standard CIP-007 simply states that the previously
required documentation must be reviewed and updated at least annually. Any
changes that are a result of modifications to systems or controls must be docu-
mented within 90 days of the change.
To demonstrate compliance with standard CIP-007, entities must possess the
previously discussed documentation for the following:
•
Security test procedures
•
Ports and services documentation
•
Security patch management program
•
Malicious software prevention program
•
Account management program
•
Security status monitoring program
•
Disposal or redeployment of cyber assets program
•
Vulnerability assessments
•
Documentation reviews and changes.
If an entity is found to be out of compliance, it is classified into one
of four levels for noncompliance. These levels and their criteria are listed in
Table 6.4.8
CIP-008 – Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Standard CIP-008 requires entities to identify, classify, respond to, and report on
cyber security incidents related to critical cyber assets. The standard only includes
96
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

two requirements and as with most CIP standards, entities without critical cyber
assets are not bound by those requirements.
The first requirement of standard CIP-008 requires entities to develop and
maintain a cyber security incident response plan. This plan is required to include,
at a minimum, the following:
•
Classification procedures to determine which event are reportable cyber
security incidents
•
Actions to properly respond to cyber security incidents. These actions must
include the roles and responsibilities of incident response teams, the
procedures for handling incidents, and plans for communication of incidents.
•
A process for escalating and reporting cyber security incidents to the
Electricity Sector Information Sharing and Analysis Center (ES ISAC)
•
A process to ensure response plans are updated within 90 calendar days of any
changes
Table 6.4 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-007
Level
Criteria
1
System security controls are in place, but fail to document one of the measures
(M1 to M9) of standard CIP-007; or
1
One of the documents required in standard CIP-007 has not been reviewed
in the previous full calendar year as specified by requirement R9; or,
1
One of the documented system security controls has not been updated
within 90 calendar days of a change as specified by requirement R9; or,
1
Any one of:
Authorization rights and access privileges have not been reviewed during the
previous full calendar year; or,
A gap exists in any one log of system events related to cyber security of
greater than seven calendar days; or,
Security patches and upgrades have not been assessed for applicability
within 30 calendar days of availability.
2
System security controls are in place, but fail to document up to two of the
measures (M1 to M9) of standard CIP-007; or,
2
Two occurrences in any combination of those violations enumerated in
noncompliance level 1, 2.1.4 within the same compliance period.
3
System security controls are in place, but fail to document up to three of the
measures (M1 to M9) of standard CIP-007; or,
3
Three occurrences in any combination of those violations enumerated in
noncompliance level 1, 2.1.4 within the same compliance period.
4
System security controls are in place, but fail to document four or more of
the measures (M1 to M9) of standard CIP-007; or,
4
Four occurrences in any combination of those violations enumerated in
noncompliance level 1, 2.1.4 within the same compliance period.
4
No logs exist.
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
97

•
A process to ensure response plans are reviewed at least annually
•
A process to ensure response plans are exercised at least annually.
The second and last requirement of standard CIP-008 simply requires entities
to make available all documentation related to cyber security incidents for at least
three calendar years.
To demonstrate compliance with standard CIP-008, entities must possess the
previously discussed documentation for the following:
•
Incident response plan
•
Cyber security incident documentation for the last three calendar years.
If an entity is found to be out of compliance, it is classified into one of four
levels for noncompliance. These levels and their criteria are listed in Table 6.5.9
CIP-009 – Disaster Recovery
NERC standard CIP-009 requires entities to establish recovery plan(s) for critical
cyber assets, as well as ensure that these plans follow established business conti-
nuity and disaster recovery techniques and practices. Like many of the previous
standards, entities that do not posses critical cyber assets are exempt from the
requirements included within standard CIP-009.
In total, standard CIP-009 includes five requirements, the first of which covers
recovery plans. Specifically, entities must establish and annually review recovery
plans for cyber critical assets that specify the actions required to respond to events
or conditions. These recovery plans must include actions to respond to events or
conditions of varying length and severity. Finally, these plans must include defini-
tions for the roles and responsibilities associated with recovery.
Table 6.5 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-008
Level
Criteria
1
A cyber security incident response plan exists, but has not been updated
within 90 calendar days of changes.
2
A cyber security incident response plan exists, but has not been reviewed in
the previous full calendar year; or,
2
A cyber security incident response plan has not been tested in the previous
full calendar year; or,
2
Records related to reportable cyber security incidents were not retained for
three calendar years.
3
A cyber security incident response plan exists, but does not include required
elements requirements R1.1, R1.2, and R1.3 of standard CIP-008; or,
3
A reportable cyber security incident has occurred but was not reported to the
ES ISAC.
4
A cyber security incident response plan does not exist.
98
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

Standard CIP-009’s second requirement simply states that entities must test their
recovery plans at least annually. Mentioned tests include paper-based exercises, as
well as full operational exercises, and the recovery from an actual incident.
Change control of recovery plans are covered in the third requirement of
standard CIP-009. Specifically, entities should incorporate lessons learned from
the aforementioned exercises into their recovery plans. Any changes must be
communicated to the responsible parties within ninety calendar days.
The fourth requirement of standard CIP-009 discusses the backup and restora-
tion processes and procedures required for entities. Simply stated, this requirement
states that entities must include documentation for the successful backup, storage,
and recovery of information on critical cyber assets.
Finally, standard CIP-009 requires entities to test their backup media at least
annually for information deemed “essential”10 to recovery. These tests can be
performed off site by the entity at an alternative operations center.
To demonstrate compliance with standard CIP-009, entities must possess the
previously discussed documentation for the following:
•
Recovery plans documentation
•
Required exercise documentation
•
Documentation reviews, changes, and communications
•
Backup and storage documentation
•
Backup media testing documentation.
If an entity is found to be out of compliance, it is classified into one of four
levels for noncompliance. These levels and their criteria are listed in Table 6.6.10
Table 6.6 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-009
Level
Criteria
1
Recovery plan(s) exist and are exercised, but do not contain all elements as
specified in requirement R1; or,
1
Recovery plan(s) are not updated and personnel are not notified within 90
calendar days of the change.
2
Recovery plan(s) exist, but have not been reviewed during the previous full
calendar year; or,
2
Documented processes and procedures for the backup and storage of
information required to successfully restore critical cyber assets do not exist.
3
Testing of information stored on backup media to ensure that the information
is available has not been performed at least annually; or,
3
Recovery plan(s) exist, but have not been exercised during the previous full
calendar year.
4
No recovery plan(s) exist; or,
4
Backup of information required to successfully restore critical cyber assets
does not exist.
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
99

Physical and Personnel Security
The following NERC CIP standards can be grouped in the Physical and Personnel
Security category:
•
CIP-004 – Personnel and training
•
CIP-006 – Physical security of critical cyber assets.
Although the Physical and Personnel Security category contains only two
standards, its implications on the security of the smart grid are significant. Let us
review them both in detail to better understand how they will help protect the
smart grid.
CIP-004 – Personnel & Training
NERC standard CIP-004 requires entities ensure that those with physical access to
critical cyber assets possess the appropriate level of personnel risk assessment,
training, and security awareness. Entities without critical cyber assets are not
bound by the requirements of standard CIP-004. Standard CIP-004 includes the
following four specific requirements:
•
Awareness
Entities are required to develop, maintain, and document a security awareness
program for those personnel with access to cyber critical assets. This
awareness program should be ongoing, with at least quarterly updates via
direct or indirect means of communications. Other acceptable updates include
management presentations and meetings.
•
Training
Entities are required to develop, maintain, and document a cyber security
training program for personnel with access to cyber critical assets. Standard
CIP-004 requires this training to occur at least annually and those granted
physical access to cyber critical assets must be trained within 90 calendar
days of being granted said access. Specifically, this training must cover the
policies, access controls, and procedures related to critical cyber assets.
Finally, entities are required to document that training is conducted at least
annually.
•
Personnel risk assessment
Requirement three requires entities to implement and document a personnel risk
assessment program. This program must be in accordance with federal, state,
provincial, and local laws, as well as collective bargaining unit agreements.
Personnel risk assessments must be performed for personnel with physical
access to cyber critical assets within 30 days of said access being granted.
Personnel risk assessments must include, at a minimum, the following:
•
Verification of social security number and a seven-year criminal background
check
•
Reassessment at least every seven years or if for cause
•
Documentation of assessment results.
100
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

•
Access
The final requirement of standard CIP-004 covers physical access. Specifically,
entities must maintain lists of personnel authorized to physically access critical
cyber assets. These lists must be reviewed at least quarterly and be updated
within seven calendar days of any personnel change or change of access rights
for specific personnel. Additionally, physical access must be revoked within
24 hours for terminated personnel and within seven calendar days for
personnel who no longer need physical access.
To demonstrate compliance with standard CIP-004, entities must possess the
previously discussed documentation for the following:
•
Security awareness program
•
Cyber security program
•
Personnel risk assessment program
•
Lists, list reviews and updates, and revocation records.
If an entity is found to be out of compliance, it is classified into one of four
levels for noncompliance. These levels and their criteria are listed in Table 6.7.11
Table 6.7 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-004
Level
Criteria
1
Awareness program exists, but is not conducted within the minimum required
period of quarterly reinforcement; or,
1
Training program exists, but records of training either do not exist or reveal
that personnel who have access to critical cyber assets were not trained as
required; or,
1
Personnel risk assessment program exists, but documentation of that program
does not exist; or,
1
List(s) of personnel with their access rights is available, but has not been
reviewed and updated as required.
1
One personnel risk assessment is not updated at least every 7 years, or for
cause; or,
1
One instance of personnel (employee, contractor, or service provider) change
other than for cause in which access to critical cyber assets was no longer
needed was not revoked within seven calendar days.
2
Awareness program does not exist or is not implemented; or,
2
Training program exists, but does not address the requirements identified in
standard CIP-004; or,
2
Personnel risk assessment program exists, but assessments are not
conducted as required; or,
2
One instance of personnel termination for cause (employee, contractor, or
service provider) in which access to critical cyber assets was not revoked
within 24 hours.
(Continued)
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
101

CIP-006 – Personnel & Training
The final NERC standard within the Physical and Personnel Security category is
standard CIP-006. Specifically, standard CIP-006 requires entities to develop and
implement a physical security program to protect critical cyber assets. The stan-
dard includes six unique requirements, which are detailed below.
The first requirement of standard CIP-006 covers physical security plans. Enti-
ties are required to develop and maintain a physical security plan that addresses
the following:
•
A process and documentation of all cyber assets within the Electronic Cyber
Perimeter are housed within a physical security perimeter. If they are not,
compensating controls must be in place and documented.
•
A process for identifying and controlling access to all access points to physical
security perimeters
•
The ability to monitor physical access to physical security perimeters
•
A procedure for appropriately applying access controls to the physical security
perimeters. Such controls covered include visitor passes and how to respond to
unauthorized access.
•
A process for ensuring access authorization requests and revocations are
reviewed
•
A procedure for escorting unauthorized personnel within the physical security
perimeter
•
Ensuring that updates to the physical security plan are made within 90
calendar days of any changes. Changes include access, monitoring, and
logging control changes.
•
Cyber assets used in controlling access to physical security perimeters
provided the same protections of Cyber Assets specified in other CIP
standards
•
A process for reviewing the physical security plan at least annually.
Table 6.7 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-004—cont’d
Level
Criteria
3
Training program exists, but has not been reviewed and updated at least
annually; or,
3
A personnel risk assessment program exists, but records reveal program
does not meet the requirements of standard CIP-004; or,
3
List(s) of personnel with their access control rights exists, but does not
include service vendors and contractors.
4
No documented training program exists; or,
4
No documented personnel risk assessment program exists; or,
4
No required documentation created pursuant to the training or personnel risk
assessment programs exists.
102
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

The second requirement in standard CIP-006 covers physical access controls. This
requirement specifies that entities must implement controls to manage access to
physical security perimeters on a 24/7 basis. Within this requirement are specifics for
Card Keys, Special Locks, Security Personnel, and Other Authentication Devices.
Standard CIP-006 requires that entities monitor and log physical access to
physical security perimeters in the next two requirements. Alarm systems or
human observation are both acceptable methods of monitoring physical access.
As for logging, computerized, video, or manual logging are acceptable methods
for logging physical access.
The final two requirements of standard CIP-006 cover access log retention and
maintenance and testing. Specifically, entities are required to keep physical access
logs for at least 90 calendar days. For maintenance and testing, entities must test
and maintain all components of their physical security at least every three years
and maintain records of said testing. Finally, outages of access controls, logging,
and monitoring must be retained for at least one calendar year.
To demonstrate compliance with standard CIP-006, entities must possess the
previously discussed documentation for the following:
•
Physical security plan
•
Physical access control documentation
•
Monitoring physical access documentation
•
Logging physical access documentation
•
Access logs
•
Testing and maintenance logs, as well as outage logs.
If an entity is found to be out of compliance, it is classified into one of four
levels for noncompliance. These levels and their criteria are listed in Table 6.8.12
Table 6.8 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-006
Level
Criteria
1
The physical security plan exists, but has not been updated within 90 calendar
days of a modification to the plan or any of its components; or,
1
Access to less than 15% of a responsible entity’s total number of physical
security perimeters is not controlled, monitored, and logged; or,
1
Required documentation exists but has not been updated within 90 calendar
days of a modification; or,
1
Physical access logs are retained for a period shorter than 90 calender
days; or,
1
A maintenance and testing program for the required physical security systems
exists, but not all have been tested within the required cycle; or,
1
One required document does not exist.
2
The physical security plan exists, but has not been updated within six calendar
months of a modification to the plan or any of its components; or,
(Continued)
Industry Plans for Self-Policing
103

COMPLIANCE VERSUS SECURITY
Although entities are required to comply with NERCs CIP standards, compliance
does not equate to security. Compliance demonstrates an organization’s adherence
to documented requirements within an arbitrary time frame, such as an annual
audit. However, compliance requirements are generally vague and are not updated
frequently enough to keep up with the constantly changing information security
threat landscape. Moreover, many organizations treat compliance as an after-
thought until the months leading up to an audit.
Additionally, compliant organizations’ management often possess a false sense
of security. The Payment Card Industry’s (PCI) data security standard (DSS) is
one of the most prevalent industry standards that influence information security.
Although the PCI DSS does provide some of the most specific implementation
requirements to date amongst regulatory mandates, several organizations that were
deemed “PCI compliant” suffered breaches since PCI DSS’ inception. One of
the highest profile breaches came in 2008 when Heartland Payment Systems, a
credit card processor, was breached.13 During the period that the breach occurred,
Heartland was considered “compliant” with PCI DSS requirements.
Heartland’s Chief Executive Officer, Robert Carr, echoed the belief that
compliance does not equate to security in an interview he gave to Computerworld
in June of 2009.14
“Just because you have a certificate of compliance doesn’t mean that you can’t
get breached … I think everyone would agree the PCI standard is necessary,
but it is also the lowest common denominator and the bad guys have figured
out how to get around some of the weaknesses.”
Table 6.8 Levels of noncompliance with NERC CIP-006—cont’d
Level
Criteria
2
Access to between 15% and 25% of a responsible entity’s total number of
physical security perimeters is not controlled, monitored, and logged; or,
2
Required documentation exists but has not been updated within six calendar
months of a modification; or
2
More than one required document does not exist.
3
The physical security plan exists, but has not been updated or reviewed in
the last 12 calendar months of a modification to the physical security plan; or,
3
Access to between 26% and 50% of a responsible entity’s total number of
physical security perimeters is not controlled, monitored, and logged; or,
3
No logs of monitored physical access are retained.
4
No physical security plan exists; or,
4
Access to more than 51% of a responsible entity’s total number of physical
security perimeters is not controlled, monitored, and logged; or,
4
No maintenance or testing program exists.
104
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

NOTE
Heartland Payment Systems is a Princeton (New Jersey)-based bank card payment processor
for merchants in the United States.15 Since being breached in 2008, Heartland has been
developing its own end-to-end encryption solution known as E3. To learn more about E3,
visit www.e3secure.com.
For merchants who do a certain amount of credit card transactions, PCI requires
them to fill out a self-assessment questionnaire (SAQ), as opposed to an on-site
assessment by an approved third party, to determine whether the merchant adheres
to certain security controls. This approach relies on the “honor system” to ensure
that companies are compliant with the PCI DSS. As a result, a company could
potentially report inaccurate security controls in their SAQ. Similarly, a recent ana-
lysis by NERC reported, “many utilities are underreporting their critical cyber
assets, potentially to avoid compliance requirements.”16 These results show that the
utilities should not be trusted to ensure that proper security is implemented.
Simply stated, “security” is not an achievable goal. However, managing risk to
an acceptable level is. Entities involved with the smart grid must distinguish
between compliance and security, understanding that compliance can be a result of
implementing a comprehensive information security program. Building and imple-
menting a comprehensive information security program is covered in Chapter 8,
“Securing the Utility Companies.”
HOW TECHNOLOGY VENDORS CAN FILL THE GAPS
The gap between compliance and security presents significant opportunities for
technology vendors. Existing organizations will position their products to aid in
securing the smart grid using traditional techniques such as intrusion detection
systems (IDS), network encryption, and application firewalls. Cisco has jumped
on the smart grid security wagon by launching smart grid security professional
services offerings that include utility compliance assessments, physical site secur-
ity vulnerability assessments, and networking security design and deployment.17
New organizations will also be created, identifying new techniques and tech-
nologies aimed at filling these gaps. These organizations will undoubtedly position
themselves to provide unique solutions that add value to smart grid initiatives in
order distinguish themselves from established firms like Cisco. The market condi-
tions are ripe for these new organizations and new technologies, as an estimated
$21 billion18 will be spent on smart grid security over the next five years.
As more and more smart grid deployments and products are introduced, it is a
safe assumption that the number of vendor security solutions will also continue to
evolve. What remains to be determined is if these vendor solutions will actually
increase the security of smart grid technologies and deployments, or will they
simply serve as the proverbial security “check box.”
How Technology Vendors Can Fill the Gaps
105

HOW UTILITY COMPANIES CAN FILL THE GAPS
When properly implemented and utilized, vendor technologies can significantly
improve entities’ information security posture. However, in the current economical
climate, it remains to be seen if utility companies will receive the funding to
appropriately secure their smart grid deployments. When technologies cannot be
purchased and implemented, the responsibility for implementing secure smart grid
deployments will fall solely on the abilities of the utility companies.
Although the challenge is daunting, utility companies can secure their smart
grid deployments through strong and comprehensive policies, procedures, and
standards. Utility companies will have to go beyond regulatory mandates and
build their information security programs on industry best practices, such as the
ISO 27000 series. Building such a program is covered in Chapter 8, “Securing the
Utility Companies.”
SUMMARY
Adequately securing the smart grid cannot be accomplished solely by utility
companies; they will need the technologies, knowledge, and tools of the private
sector. Likewise, the private sector cannot solely secure the smart grid as they
will need utility companies to appropriately leverage the private sector’s technolo-
gies, knowledge, and tools as well as implement strong policies, procedures, and
standards.
The current approach toward securing the smart grid relies on the broken
model of self-regulation and misconception that compliance and security are
synonymous. NERC’s own President and Chief Executive Officer, Rick Sergel,
stated in their 2008 Annual Report that, “[NERC is] in a unique position to make
the self-regulatory model work,”19 suggesting that the self-regulation model has
historically failed.
To better secure smart grid deployments and technologies, both the regulatory
bodies and utility companies must recognize their current gaps and appropriately
address them. Unfortunately, as often is the case with information security, it will
most likely take a significant event to change the current approach. Let us hope
this is not the case.
Endnotes
1. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. NERC certified as Electric Reliability Organiza-
tion; Western Region Reliability Advisory Body Accepted [document on the Internet].
www.ferc.gov/news/news-releases/2006/2006-3/07-20-06-E-5.asp; 2006 [accessed
14.01.10].
106
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

2. Control Global. Becoming NERC CIP-Compliant [document on the Internet]. PutnamMedia;
www.controlglobal.com/articles/2007/284.html; 2007 [accessed 14.01.10].
3. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. FERC approves settlement, $25 million fine
for FPL’s 2008 Blackout [document on the Internet]. www.ferc.gov/news/news-releases/
2009/2009-4/10-08-09.asp; 2009 [accessed 14.01.10].
4. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Standards: Reliability Standards [document
on the Internet]. www.nerc.com/page.php?cid=2|20; 2006 [accessed 18.01.10].
5. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Standard CIP–002–1 — Cyber
Security — Critical Cyber Asset Identification [document on the Internet]. www.nerc.
com/files/CIP-002-1.pdf; 2006 [accessed 04.03.10].
6. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Standard CIP–003–1 — Cyber
Security — Security Management Controls [document on the Internet]. www.nerc.
com/files/CIP-003-1.pdf; 2006 [accessed 04.03.10].
7. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Standard CIP–005–1 — Cyber
Security — Electronic Security Perimeter(s) [document on the Internet]. www.nerc.
com/files/CIP-005-1.pdf; 2006 [accessed 04.03.10].
8. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Standard CIP–007–1 — Cyber
Security — Systems Security Management [document on the Internet]. www.nerc.
com/files/CIP-007-1.pdf; 2006 [accessed 04.03.10].
9. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Standard CIP–008–1 — Cyber
Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning [document on the Internet].
www.nerc.com/files/CIP-008-1.pdf; 2006 [accessed 04.03.10].
10. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for
Critical Cyber Assets [document on the Internet]. www.nerc.com/files/CIP-009-1.pdf;
2006 [accessed 04.03.10].
11. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Standard CIP–004–1 — Cyber
Security — Personnel and Training [document on the Internet]. 2006. [cited 2010
Mar 4]. Available from: www.nerc.com/files/CIP-004-1.pdf.
12. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Standard CIP-006-1 — Cyber Security —
Physical Security [document on the Internet]. www.nerc.com/files/CIP-006-1.pdf; 2006
[accessed 04.03.10].
13. USA TODAY. Hackers breach Heartland Payment credit card system [document on the
Internet]. Gannett Co. Inc; www.usatoday.com/money/perfi/credit/2009-01-20-heartland-
credit-card-security-breach_N.htm; 2009 [accessed 20.01.09].
14. Computerworld. Heartland CEO says data breach was ’devastating’ [document on the
Internet]. International Data Group Inc; www.computerworld.com/s/article/9134516/
Heartland_CEO_says_data_breach_was_devastating_?taxonomyId=17&pageNumber=1;
2009 [accessed 04.03.10].
15. NYSE. Heartland Payment Systems, Inc [document on the Internet]. www.nyse.com/
about/listed/hpy.html; 2010 [accessed 20.01.10].
16. United States House of Representatives Committee on Homeland Security Press Center.
Homeland Security Committee Introduces HR 2195, a Bill to Secure the Nation’s Elec-
tric Grid [document on the Internet]. http://homeland.house.gov/press/index.asp?
ID=450; 2009 [accessed 21.01.10].
17. Cisco. Cisco Continues Global Smart Grid Momentum [document on the Inter-
net]. http://newsroom.cisco.com/dlls/2009/prod_091709.html; 2009 [accessed
21.01.10].
Endnotes
107

18. Government Technology. Feds Will Spur Smart Grid Cyber-Security Investment
Growth to $21 Billion by 2015, Report Claims [document on the Internet]. eRepublic,
Inc; www.govtech.com/gt/744630; 2010 [accessed 04.03.10].
19. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Annual Report 2008 [document
on the Internet]. www.nerc.com/files/2008-Annual-Report.pdf; 2009 [accessed
21.01.10].
108
CHAPTER 6 Public and Private Companies

CHAPTER
7
Attacking the Utility
Companies
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Motivation
•
Network Attacks
•
System Attacks
•
Application Attacks
•
Wireless Attacks
•
Social Engineering Attacks
•
Physical Attacks
•
Putting It All Together
A well-coordinated attack against a smart grid will most likely utilize multiple attack
vectors. A combination of application, network, social engineering, and many other
types of attacks may be used to achieve the attacker’s goals. Utility companies will
also have to deal with attacks from attackers with less incentive or resources, includ-
ing curious customers and random script kiddies that will attempt individual attack
vectors.
Understanding the attacks that you will face can help you understand how to
prevent a successful attack. Moreover, running a staged attack against your environ-
ment will help you identify the security gaps in your environment. Thus, performing
a comprehensive vulnerability assessment or penetration test is critical. This chapter
will discuss how attacks may be carried out against current and future smart grids
and, from a similar perspective, discuss how to perform a comprehensive security
assessment against a utility company’s smart grid environment.
MOTIVATION
In Chapter 3, “Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond,” we discussed
several motives for malicious attacks against the utility companies. However, not all
motives are of the malicious kind. Internal vulnerability management programs,
which involve vulnerability assessments and/or penetration testing, are critical in
evaluating an organization’s security posture and identifying areas for improvement
in security controls. Additionally, NERC CIP-005 requires that entities perform
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00007-8
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
109

vulnerability assessments of their Electronic Security Perimeter(s) at least annually.
So in order to be compliant with NERC CIP, utility companies will need to perform
at least a perimeter vulnerability assessment annually.
Vulnerability Assessment versus Penetration Test
The generic term “security assessment” will be used throughout this chapter; how-
ever, a security assessment can have many different meanings. For the purposes
of this chapter, security assessment will refer to vulnerability assessment or pene-
tration test. The goal of a vulnerability assessment is to identify hosts and asso-
ciated vulnerabilities. A penetration test will take a vulnerability assessment one
step further where the identified vulnerabilities, or a few selected vulnerabilities,
are exploited to gain more access networks, systems, and data.
I Want a Pen Test! Are You Sure?
Organizations will often decide they need to perform a penetration test or a vulner-
ability assessment without considering the business drivers for the assessment. If the
goal of performing a security assessment is to discover vulnerabilities for remedia-
tion purposes, is exploitation of the vulnerabilities really necessary? Depending on
various political factors within your organization, the answer very well may be yes.
However, a vulnerability assessment would satisfy the goal of discovering vulner-
abilities, albeit with a higher potential for false positives. Alternatively, if the goal
of the security assessment is to prove to upper management that the threat of electri-
city theft is real, then a penetration test may be the more appropriate choice.
In general, the advantages of performing a vulnerability assessment over a
penetration test are as follows:
•
It takes less time since vulnerabilities will not be exploited.
•
It is cheaper because a vulnerability assessment should take less time.
•
It is less likely to interrupt normal business operations.
Alternatively, the general advantages of performing a penetration test over a
vulnerability assessment are as follows:
•
There are fewer false positives due to the verification of vulnerabilities through
exploitation.
•
The risk assigned to a particular vulnerability or group of vulnerabilities can
be more accurately evaluated.
•
It provides concrete evidence of the impact to skeptics.
NOTE
A false positive refers to a vulnerability identified during a security assessment that does not
actually exist. For example, a vulnerability scanner may have determined that your Web
server is susceptible to a buffer overflow based on the version listed in the Web server’s
banner. However, the banner lists an incorrect version because the applied security patch
110
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

fixed the buffer overflow condition, but did not change the version number in the banner.
Conversely, a false negative refers to a vulnerability that does exist but was not identified
during the assessment.
Other Aspects of a Security Assessment
In addition to deciding whether to perform a vulnerability assessment or a penetra-
tion test, an organization will need to determine other factors of the security
assessment as well. Security assessment conditions include the following:
•
External (perimeter) or internal perspective
•
Level of covertness
•
Authentication.
The internal perspective would more closely resemble an insider attack
scenario, such as an attack by an employee or contractor or by an external
attacker with physical access to internal resources. The internal security assess-
ment would evaluate only the internal security controls. Alternatively, an exter-
nal security assessment would require the test team to breach the perimeter
security controls in order to access internal resources. The focus of an external
security assessment is to evaluate the external security controls. In a perfect
world, the comprehensive security assessment would involve both the external
and internal security assessments; however, budgetary and resource limitations
may prevent this.
Security assessments can be performed at different levels of covertness to
determine how well the organization’s personnel and monitoring devices can
detect an attack. Specifically, a security assessment can be performed as covert,
hybrid-covert, and overt. When a new security device, such as an intrusion pre-
vention system (IPS) or intrusion detection system (IDS), has been installed, a
covert security assessment can be used to evaluate its effectiveness and to tune its
rule set and policies. The drawback in performing a covert test is cost and effi-
ciency. In the IPS/IDS assessment scenario, two of the main methods used to per-
form a covert test are (1) to slow down the network testing and (2) periodically
change your source IP address through an anonymous network, such as Tor
(www.torproject.org/). Both of these methods will significantly slow down the
speed of testing though, thus increasing the cost and time it takes to perform the
assessment. As a compromise, in a hybrid-covert security assessment, the assess-
ment team could perform the test covertly until detected. Then, perform the
remainder of the assessment in an overt manner.
Additionally, a security assessment can be performed in a full-disclosure,
hybrid-disclosure, or nondisclosure manner. This determines the amount of infor-
mation provided to the assessment team and levels of communication between the
utility company’s personnel and the assessment team during the assessment. In a
nondisclosure security assessment, the assessment team is provided with your
Motivation
111

organization’s name and not much else. This type of assessment is designed to
simulate an attack perpetrated by an attacker with no inside knowledge of your
organization. In a hybrid-disclosure assessment, the assessment team may be
provided IP address ranges or some other small amount of information. In a full-
disclosure assessment, there is open communication between the assessment team
and the utility company’s personnel, who may provide network diagrams and other
useful information to the assessment team.
Some would consider it cheating to provide administrative credentials to the
assessment team; however, it shouldn’t be considered cheating if your internal
security assessment team (as opposed to a vendor assessment team) is provided
the credentials. The benefits of an authenticated assessment will reduce both false
positives and false negatives. For example, when you run a vulnerability scanning
tool without credentials against a system, the scan will identify vulnerabilities in
networked services, such as Web servers and FTP servers. However, the tool will
be unable to identify vulnerabilities in client applications, such as Web browsers
and office productivity suites. When you provide the tool with administrative
credentials, the tool should be able to discover vulnerabilities in client tools and
perform checks on operating system configuration settings.
NETWORK ATTACKS
At its core, a smart grid contains an information network that transmits data to
improve the efficiency and availability of the electric grid. Back in Chapter 1,
“Smart Grid: What Is It?,” Figure 1.7 presented a very basic diagram of a smart
grid as an introduction to the reader. However, smart grid implementations will
not be so simple and will contain multiple networks. Figure 7.1 illustrates some
of the information networks in a smart grid implementation.1 As shown in the
diagram, information networks will be connecting each of the different compo-
nents to each other. There will also be multiple information networks within each
of the components. As you can see from Figure 7.1, data will flow between many
different systems, networks, and subnetworks. Thus, attacks could come from
many different locations.
There have been dozens of books dedicated solely to attacking networks and
performing network security assessments, including Hacking Exposed™6:
Network Security Secrets & Solutions and Professional Penetration Testing:
Creating and Operating a Formal Hacking Lab (ISBN: 978-1-59749-425-0,
Syngress). The majority, if not all, of smart grid networks will be IP-based
networks and, as a result, the same techniques discussed in these books will apply
to networks in smart grid implementations. If this is your first time hearing the
phrases vulnerability assessment or penetration test, then reading a book that
is dedicated solely to that topic would be recommended … in addition to this
chapter of course. This section of the chapter will focus on applying the general
principles and standards in these books to smart grid networks.
112
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

Markets
RTO/ISO
Ops
Transmission
Ops
Distribution Ops
Utility
Provider
Third-Party
Provider
Retailer/
Wholesaler
EMS
EMS
DMS
Demand
Response
MDMS
CIS
Billing
Internet/
e-Business
Aggregator
Others
CIS
Billing
Retail
Energy
Provider
Home/Building
Manager
Enterprise
Bus
Metering
System
Distribution
SCADA
Field Area
Networks
Energy
Services
Interface
Electric
Vehicle
Distributed
Generation
Electric
Storage
Appliances
Premises
Networks
Thermostat
NIST Smart Grid Framework 1.0 January 2010
Customer
Meter
Customer
Equipment
Customer
EMS
Asset
Mgmt
WAMS
Enterprise
Bus
Enterprise
Bus
RTO
SCADA
Wide Area
Networks
Data
Collector
Field
Device
Distributed
Generation
Substation
Controller
Electric
Storage
Substation
LANs
Substation
Device
Transmission
SCADA
Internet/
e-Business
Market
Services
Interface
Plant Control
System
Generators
Domain
Information Network
Actor
Domain Gateway Actor
Comms Path
Comms Path Across Owner/Domain
Aggregator
ISO/RTO
Participant
Operations
Service Providers
Bulk Generaton
Transmission
Distribution
Energy
Market
Clearinghouse
FIGURE 7.1
Smart grid information networks.1
Reprinted courtesy of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, Technology Administration,
U.S. Department of Commerce. Not copyrightable in the United States
Network Attacks
113

Methodologies
Whether you are trying to set up an internally managed vulnerability assessment or
evaluating third-party vendors, the methodology is the best place to start. Several
industry regarded methodology standards exist including the following:
•
NIST SP800-53A – Guide for Assessing the Security Controls in Federal
Information Systems
•
Information Design Assurance Red Team (IDART – www.idart.sandia.gov/
methodology/index.html)
•
DOE Electric Power Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment Methodology
(www.esisac.com/publicdocs/assessment_methods/VA.pdf)
•
Information Systems Security Assessment Framework (ISSAF – www.oissg.
org/issaf)
•
Open Source Security Testing Methodology (OSSTMM – www.isecom.org/
osstmm/).
Although every methodology will be slightly different, they will all follow the
same relative approach and should be modeled after the standards. Additionally,
well-coordinated attackers will utilize these methodologies to perform their
attacks. For this section of the chapter, we will use the following phases for the
network security assessment.
•
Reconnaissance
•
Discovery
•
Vulnerability identification
•
Penetration.
Reconnaissance
Passive testing, which involves no direct interaction with the targets, is usually
performed during this stage of the assessment to identify the utility company’s
infrastructure. Many Web sites will provide detailed information regarding any
organization’s perimeter network. While you can visit these online tools manually,
several other tools will automate this process. See Table 7.1 for a listing of just a
few of these tools. During this phase, the following information will be obtained:
•
Perimeter IP address ranges assigned to the target utility company
•
IP addresses and/or host names for at least the following:
•
Web servers
•
DNS servers
•
E-mail servers
•
Routers
•
Gateways
•
Remote access (VPN Concentrators)
•
Service provider Web applications (Example: thermostat controlling Web
application)
•
Incidental information disclosures (Example: organizational charts, network
diagrams, …)
114
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

Undertaking a smart grid implementation is big news and involves big money.
Marketing departments from utility companies, technology vendors, and service
providers want to promote their projects and as a result will disclose details regard-
ing implementation details. For example, consider the city of Miami’s smart grid
initiative. Perform a Google search for “Miami smart grid” and you will discover
the utility company and its partners. Just knowing the partners is not going to give
you instant, unfettered access, but without sending one network packet to your
target utility company, you already know the smart meter and network vendors, as
well as their entire Internet presence, which gives you plenty to start with.
Internally Passive
Performing the aforementioned reconnaissance will work when you are starting off
with an external security assessment. However, if the security assessment is inter-
nal, the best approach will be to run a packet sniffer, such as Wireshark. Running a
packet sniffer will allow you to identify the IP address scheme, as well as identify
active hosts.
TIP
Although uncommon, if you are performing an evasive internal security assessment,
remember to disable your DHCP client while you are capturing network packets. You do not
need an IP address to capture traffic, and a DHCP-assigned address could be used by alert
personnel to find you.
Table 7.1 Network security testing tools – free tools are denoted with a “*”
Category
Name
Link
Reconnaissance
Fierce*
http://ha.ckers.org/fierce/
Maltego
www.paterva.com/web4/index.
php/maltego
PassiveRecon*
https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/
firefox/addon/6196
tcpdump*
www.tcpdump.org/
Wireshark*
www.wireshark.org/
Discovery
Nmap*
http://nmap.org/
UnicornScan*
www.unicornscan.org/
Vulnerability Identification
Nessus
www.tenablesecurity.com/nessus/
NeXpose
www.rapid7.com/
Nipper
www.titania.co.uk/
OpenVAS*
www.openvas.org/
Qualys
www.qualys.com/
SAINT
www.saintcorporation.com/
Exploitation
Core Impact
www.coresecurity.com/
Metasploit*
www.metasploit.com/
Live Linux Distros
BackTrack*
www.backtrack-linux.org/
Network Attacks
115

Discovery
In this phase, we will determine what is available to target and is normally done
using ping sweeps and port scans. Examples of popular discovery tools are
listed in Table 7.1. One of the many benefits to security assessments is identify-
ing rogue systems on the network. In many cases, these rogue systems were
placed on the network for testing purposes and never removed. However, rogue
smart meters, that really are not smart meters at all, may be identified with this
method.
Although identifying hosts is an important part of this phase, discovering
available network routes is just as important. Going back to Figure 7.1, there will
be dozens of networks and domains involved in a smart grid. The utility company
will need to determine how each of these networks and domains can connect with
each other, as well as how to protect itself from an attack that originates from
each of these networks. In a secure implementation, each of these networks will
be properly segmented with strict access control lists (ACL), as well as other
security controls and devices, that restrict the systems and network services that
are allowed to interact with each other. For example, smart devices in the Custo-
mer domain should not be able to communicate with plant control systems in the
Bulk Generation domain.
WARNING
The diagram in Figure 7.1 is an example smart grid diagram and may not reflect your
particular implementation. Outdated network diagrams can lead to confusion and mistakes
in implementing access controls. Maintaining updated network diagrams is critical in
ensuring that the proper security controls are in place to protect your network.
To ensure proper network segmentation, port scanning should be performed
to and from each domain and network. Although this will take a considerable
amount of time, complete port scans (all 65,536 ports TCP and UDP ports)
should be performed to ensure only necessary communication is allowed. In
particular, business partner networks should not be given unrestricted access to
the utility company’s internal networks. Attackers will use these networks as a
way to bypass the perimeter security controls. Read the “Epic Fail” sidebar for
examples of why network segmentation is so critical. Also, Chapter 9, “Third-
Party Services,” will cover how to properly address the security of third-party
services.
EPIC FAIL
Back in 2002, the Slammer worm infiltrated the Davis-Besse nuclear power plant in Ohio,
which crashed a safety monitoring system. The firewall protecting the plant was
configured to block the port Slammer used to spread; however, a T1 line that bridged the
116
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

Davis-Besse corporate network with a Davis-Besse contractor’s network was left open. The
Slammer worm first infected the contractor’s network, and then it used the T1 line to
spread to the Davis-Besse corporate network, bypassing the plant’s firewall. The worm
then spread from the corporate network to the plant network, where it crashed the system
that monitored the coolant systems, core temperature sensors, and external radiation
sensors.2 Thankfully, the power plant had backup analog systems that were used until the
problem was remediated.
But that was six years ago. We have, of course, learned our lesson since then, right?
Near Epic Fail, Redux: In 2009, numerous workstations at an Australian utility company
were infected with the W32.Virut.CF virus. Although details are still scarce, the utility
company stated that the virus was contained within their information technology network.
The control systems for the electric power system were not running Windows, so they were
not at risk to this particular virus. However, the control room operator displays were running
a vulnerable version of Windows and were not segregated from the infected network.
Thankfully, these systems were replaced in time to prevent any major impact.3 The obvious
response is to blame outdated antivirus signatures and patch management. However, the
more concerning problem is the lack of separation between the business systems and the
control systems.
Vulnerability Identification
The goal of the vulnerability identification phase is to create an inventory of
vulnerabilities for the systems and services discovered in the previous phase. See
Table 7.1 for example tools to use during this phase. Although the smart grid
will utilize new technologies, the traditional vulnerability scanners will still work
because these new technologies will rely mostly on traditional networking tech-
nologies and services. However, there will be exceptions to this rule and proprie-
tary protocols and services will be used. More information on how to assess
these services can be found in the “Application Attacks” section later in this
chapter.
In general, network vulnerability scanners identify vulnerabilities by first
identifying the service running on the open port and then interrogating that ser-
vice. Specifically, the vulnerability scanner will inspect the service’s banner,
which will typically include the name and version of the service. Based on the
version information, the vulnerability scanner will determine what security patch-
based vulnerabilities the service is susceptible to. Vulnerability scanners may also
manipulate normal requests by, for example, increasing the length of the value in
a data parameter and then determine susceptibility based on the service’s response.
Additional testing, such as checking for default passwords, will also be performed,
but the majority of vulnerabilities are identified by checking the version number in
the banner.
Penetration
In a vulnerability assessment, the risk assigned to a vulnerability is sometimes
hypothetical. We can say that by exploiting vulnerability, we will be able to
obtain complete control of the vulnerable host. However, we may not know what
Network Attacks
117

exactly can be obtained from that host. Is there sensitive information stored on
that host? Does that host provide a critical service, such as monitoring the tem-
peratures of the nuclear reactor? Alternatively, a penetration test will answer those
questions because we will exploit the vulnerability and obtain complete control of
the vulnerable hosts to determine its purpose, which may include storing sensitive
data or providing critical services.
Exploiting a vulnerability can have numerous outcomes including denial of
service, information disclosure, and remote code execution. Remote code execu-
tion is usually accomplished by spawning a remote command shell that allows the
attacker to execute operating system commands on the target system. The list
below is just one common technique, albeit at a high level, used to gain remote
control of a vulnerable host:
1. Exploit the vulnerability to spawn a remote shell.
2. Use the default utilities in the target operating system to steal the password file.
a. On a Windows system, use a file transfer program (Example: TFTP) to
upload a script, such as fgdump (www.foofus.net/fizzgig/fgdump/), that
will grab the password file and the locally cached network domain
credentials.
b. Run fgdump to grab the password file.
c. Use the same file transfer program to transfer the output of fgdump to the
attackers system.
d. Remove the evidence, including deleting the scripts, output files, and any
relevant audit logs.
3. Use Rainbow tables to crack the local Administrator password hash.
4. Use your new administrator password to log in to systems that were
configured with the same local Administrator password, using Remote
Desktop or Server Message Block (SMB).
5. If the victim system was accessed by a domain user, say for example, a domain
administrator for troubleshooting purposes, the victim system most likely
cached that administrator’s password, and the attacker will be able to crack that
password, given enough time to do so.
6. Use your new domain administrator password to log into any system in that
domain.
Some of you may be thinking that cracking the administrator password will take
too long, especially that 15-character password that contains uppercase and lowercase
letters, numbers, and special characters. The latest techniques, such as Graphics
Processing Unit (GPU) password cracking, botnets,4 and cloud computing will be
able to crack your password efficiently. However, if you are still not convinced, does
the attacker really need to crack your password? PSEXEC, which was originally
released by Sysinternals (http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/bb897553.
aspx), allows you to remotely execute commands on a Windows system by providing
a valid user name and password. The popular exploit framework Metasploit contains
a PSEXEC module that allows you to either enter the password or the password hash
118
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

to remotely execute commands; thus, saving the attacker time to crack that supposedly
strong password of yours. For more information on this method, review the descrip-
tion at www.metasploit.com/modules/exploit/windows/smb/psexec.
SYSTEM ATTACKS
Network attacks are not the only way to attack the utility company. Perimeter
security controls such as firewalls and IPS/IDS made it harder to remotely attack
organizations, so attackers shifted their attacks to other approaches, such as mali-
cious e-mail attachments and Web sites. Vulnerabilities are frequently identified in
local applications such as Web browsers and office productivity suites. Attackers
can and have easily exploited these vulnerabilities to gain control of systems,
which is why performing authenticated vulnerability scans to identify these vul-
nerabilities is critical.
SCADA
Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems are commonly used in
electric grids. SCADA systems were originally thought to be too obscure to have
legitimate threats because they were mostly proprietary systems that used
proprietary protocols. However, SCADA systems have evolved and can now run
on common hardware and software platforms. Now, the same tools discussed
earlier and listed in Table 7.2 can be used to assess SCADA systems.
If you are new to the utility industry, you are likely to encounter new terms
that you are unfamiliar with. With SCADA in particular, you are likely to be pre-
sented with numerous acronyms including PLC, RTU, and HMI, which stand for
programmable logic unit, remote terminal unit, and human machine interface,
respectively. Although you may not be familiar with these SCADA components,
you will be familiar with most of the results of profiling and scanning these
Table 7.2 System security testing tools – free tools are denoted with a “*”
Category
Name
Link
Vulnerability identification
MBSA*
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/
security/cc184924.aspx
Nessus
www.tenablesecurity.com/nessus/
NetChk
www.shavlik.com/
NeXpose
www.rapid7.com/
Nipper
www.titania.co.uk/
OpenVAS*
www.openvas.org/
Qualys
www.qualys.com/
SAINT
www.saintcorporation.com/
System Attacks
119

components. Most SCADA devices will support Web servers, telnet, and FTP
servers for remote access, among other common network services. If you have a
vulnerability scanner at your disposal, take a second to look at the SCADA vul-
nerability checks. The majority of the vulnerability checks will be for default pass-
words to common network services and missing patches for specific SCADA
vendor models. If you do not have a vulnerability scanner at your disposal or
your vulnerability scanner does not include SCADA security checks, take a look
at OpenVAS (www.openvas.org/) for a free open-source vulnerability scanner.
Numerous books that focus solely on SCADA security have been written,
including Techno Security’s Guide to Securing SCADA: A Comprehensive
Handbook On Protecting The Critical Infrastructure (ISBN: 978-1-59749-282-9,
Syngress) and Securing SCADA Systems. Additionally, white papers and stan-
dards for assessing SCADA systems have been written, including Cyber Assess-
ment Methods for SCADA Security (www.oe.energy.gov/DocumentsandMedia/
Cyber_Assessment_Methods_for_SCADA_Security_Mays_ISA_Paper.pdf).
Legacy Systems
Smart grids will not be implemented in one day and older legacy systems will
persist in the electric grid for many years to come. The problem for utility compa-
nies is that support for these systems will end and as a result, security patches
will no longer be created when new vulnerabilities are discovered. However, vul-
nerability scanners will still be able to identify these vulnerabilities and exploits
will still be available.
War Dialing
Many organizations, including utility companies, have phased out the use of dial-
up modems. However, viable alternatives are not always available in rural areas.
Even in high-bandwidth locations, organizations often install dial-up modems as
part of a backup plan in cases of network outages. Dial-up modems provide an
affordable and easy-to-use alternative for remote access to critical systems. War
dialers should be utilized to identify and scan these dial-up modems for vulner-
abilities, such as default passwords. See Table 7.3 for examples of war dialers.
Table 7.3 War dialing testing tools – free tools are denoted with a “*”
Category
Name
Link
Vulnerability identification
PhoneSweep
www.sandstorm.net/products/
phonesweep/
Telesweep*
www.securelogix.com/
THC-SCAN*
http://freeworld.thc.org/thc-tsng/
WarVOX*
www.warvox.org/
120
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

APPLICATION ATTACKS
As in almost every other type of organization, utilities companies are rolling out
Web applications in order to automate traditionally inefficient, manual business
processes and to provide better functionality and accessibility to their customers.
Organizations are also replacing traditional client-server applications – also referred
to as “thick client” or “compiled code” applications – with Web application alterna-
tives. The ongoing explosion of Web browser–based application development is
continuing to push innovation, functionality, and interoperability at a staggering
rate that application security has failed to match … or even come close to matching.
Life-Imitating Art
Watching recent Hollywood movies could make you believe that hacking into traffic
command centers, intelligence agency networks, nuclear missile facilities, and the
current electrical grid can be easily accomplished by randomly pounding away at the
keyboard. Although not impossible, there are some technical roadblocks such as seg-
regated networks for the business and the command and control systems, applica-
tions, and users that may impede even a determined attacker. Pretty graphical user
interfaces with large “Shut down power” buttons may or may not exist either, though
determined attackers are not typically stopped by a lack of pretty interfaces.
The scary (or exciting, depending on your point of view) aspect of smart grid
implementations is the integration of Web servers and custom Web applications.
The entry level to the world of Web application security is much lower than that of
non-Web applications. Although security analysis of compiled code applications
requires deep knowledge of computer architecture and low-level programming
languages and concepts, a simple Web search and a few clicks of the mouse can
enable a novice Web application security person to carry out some of the most
complex and powerful attacks. And not only are there powerful attacks, but there
are many more types of attacks against Web applications, some of which cannot be
detected by traditional security devices, such as intrusion detection systems and
firewalls, or Web application security devices such as Web application firewalls.
WARNING
Don’t believe it is that easy? Visit your favorite Web search provider and submit searches for
the attack terms in this chapter. Adding the phrase “cheat sheet” (with quotes) to any of
these searches will only help to increase the novice’s attack range and firepower. It’s like
having a “how to” guide to have a major impact on daily life in the networked world. For
starters, try the following Web sites:
•
http://search.yahoo.com/search?p="sql+injection"+"cheat+sheet"
•
www.google.com/#q=cross+site+scripting+"cheat+sheet"
One more related comment: The reader will have to look elsewhere for the “how to” on
hiding one’s identity as the source of said major impact.
Application Attacks
121

Attacking Utility Company Web Applications
As explained throughout this book, Web servers – and the Web applications and
Web services they support – are going to be a tremendous player in smart grid
implementations. Because Web browsers are part of any laptop, desktop, cell
phone, and probably many other future user computing devices, in addition to
the so-called smart devices for the home (see Chapter 13, “Home Area Net-
work: Smart Devices and Interfaces”), the Web server will be the bridge that
connects the dots and enables the simple-to-use control that everyone has been
dreaming about. Before drifting off to sleep to dream of remotely changing the
thermostat, consider this: The control and functionality being included in smart
grid implementations is made possible by the same software applications (Web
browsers) that utility company employees and consumers use to tell the world
where they went to eat last night and watch the latest YouTube video. The
same software applications that are used to pay bills online, check e-mail, read
and watch the news, download music and movies and other software, and just
happened to be the first whipping boy of the “Month of Bugs” phenomenon.5
There is more of this tirade to come, but first let’s delve further into the Web
applications.
The security issues related to utility company Web applications can be bro-
ken down into two categories: Web applications that support business operations
and those that support smart grid functionality and accessibility (in other words,
smart grid operations). The purpose for this distinction lies in risk management.
Regardless of title, roles, and responsibilities, most utility company employees
(and contractors) must perform certain tasks, such as submitting timesheets, that
are common among all personnel. The use of such business operations applica-
tions are now commonly implemented as Web applications and present informa-
tion security risks directly to the utility company and indirectly to the
consumer. Web applications used to support smart grid operations present
different information security risks directly to both the utility company and its
consumers.
Web Applications for Corporate Operations
The threat to a utility company’s corporate operations should not be underesti-
mated. Not only could a successful attack against these applications enable an
attacker to compromise the confidentiality of personnel information and custo-
mer billing data, but also such an attack may be leveraged as a jumping point
to the power control and smart grid operations systems. Because many IT sys-
tems require a deep knowledge of the specific technology, many organizations’
IT administrators are organized based on the technology used. For example,
separate groups for Windows and UNIX server administrators, another group
for application administrators, and similarly separate groups of administrators
for databases from different vendors. This type of dedicated staffing organiza-
tion has, in the past, led to the security weakness of common passwords.
122
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

In other words, the administrator account password for the personnel
time-keeping application’s database is the same as that for a smart meter interface
application database. And, unfortunately, because we have not yet learned from
history, this type of security weakness continues to plague IT network
environments.
Even if due diligence has been followed such that the corporate network is
segregated from the control operations network, a successful attack against these
applications could allow for widespread control of personally identifiable and
financial information that could be utilized in a litany of social engineering attacks
or blackmail. With access to a customers’ account information – account number,
current balance, home address – one could likely convince unsuspecting customers
to give up more sensitive data. A more sophisticated attacker could possibly con-
vince other utility company personnel to, for example, shut off power to an exist-
ing customer by impersonating a customer billing representative and flagging the
account(s) for lack of payment.
Alternatively, imagine an attack that enables remote access to the utility com-
pany’s payroll application, which is leveraged to manipulate all paycheck amounts
on a given pay period. The ensuing mild (or possibly severe) chaos could bog
down personnel and allow for service disruptions, poor public relations for the
utility company, and many other undesirable outcomes. It is easy to imagine a
similar outcome if the attack targeted a customer payment application and forced
over- or under-charging of customers en masse.
Regardless of a utility company’s selection of Web applications for business
operations – developed internally, outsourced, or commercial-off-the-shelf
purchase – and regardless of the company’s internal network architecture, the
implementation of and reliance on Web applications for business operations intro-
duce a host of new attack vectors that present increased risk as opposed to manual
processes and/or traditional client-server applications.
Web Applications for Smart Grid Operations
A successful attack against a utility company’s corporate Web applications is a
serious threat, but it has been done before. Not necessarily a successful attack
against every utility company, but organizations are hit by attacks against their
corporate Web applications every day – they just may not know it or admit to it
publicly. Attackers (and talented information security professionals) thrive on
challenges and breaking new ground; smart grid Web applications can at least ful-
fill the latter. With respect to the former, I present to you one utility company’s
“Advanced Web Services Secure Login” Web form in Figure 7.2 that does not
accept the HTTPS protocol; only HTTP is allowed here. One example is not
enough? Okay, here’s another Web application providing access to “the Energy
Conservation Program” (with packet capture goodness and HTML source in
Figures 7.3 and 7.4).
Identifying information has been removed from the screenshots to protect
the identities of the organizations. The main point of including these two
Application Attacks
123

examples is to illustrate that the smart grid industry seems to be starting at
security square one. It is a widely accepted practice to protect Web applications
that handle sensitive data and/or provide access to powerful functionality
against network eavesdropping by implementing transport layer security. This
means anyone with a network sniffer and some free time can travel throughout
a utility company’s service area, connect to open home networks, and capture
their authentication credentials for use in a future widespread attack against
those consumers.
The first generation of smart grid applications simply provide near real-time
access to energy rate and consumption information in the hope of helping consu-
mers reduce their overall energy consumption and to use their energy more effi-
ciently. Some applications are being developed to provide users with the ability to
remotely operate smart devices, such as the thermostat. This functionality is, of
course, being provided by Web applications.
By implementing these Web applications, utility companies may also be
implementing a single point of failure. Attacks that would require exploits of
multiple vulnerabilities to bypass multiple layers of control and a lack of
interoperability among systems in the old dumb power grid may now be sim-
plified to a single attack vector in a smart grid. What used to be difficult or
nearly impossible – turning off lights, cranking up the heat, or shutting off
power entirely to a large area – may now become a competition between
FIGURE 7.2
Advanced web services secure login.
124
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

FIGURE 7.4
Energy conservation program HTTP source.
FIGURE 7.3
Energy conservation program packet capture.
Application Attacks
125

attackers around the world. Who can blackout the most homes? Who can
make the coolest light show? Who can play chopsticks with a row of street
houses.
So how exactly could an attacker carry out such attacks? For this part of the
discussion, we divide Web applications into its two externally accessible compo-
nents: (1) the Web server application and (2) the application user interface.
Attacking Custom Web Application Code
Attacks against Web applications began long before we called them “Web appli-
cations.” As Web server applications and Web application languages and frame-
works became more powerful and flexible, attacks against them also grew in
power and flexibility. So how could an attacker use a relatively simple exploit
against a Web application in order to carry out the attacks described throughout
this book? The answer is, unfortunately, in using one or more of many, many
methods.
Attacks against custom Web applications can be split into two categories based
on the immediate or direct target of the attack: the client (Web browser) or the
application. The same attack objectives may be accomplished by utilizing either
category of attack, which is yet another reason that Web applications are such fun
targets for attackers. Specifically, an attack against certain application users could
result in privileged access to the application itself, thereby gaining access to the
functionality and data necessary to accomplish the attack objectives. One could
easily write an entire book devoted to application vulnerabilities, attacks, and
threats, so we will cover the most relevant parts beginning with an attack
methodology.
NOTE
At the writing of this book, the Web application security industry is changing from what
has traditionally been based on attacks to a more threat-based viewpoint. This transition is
a good sign that the industry is maturing and becoming more in-line with the rest of the
information security industry. From organizations’ perspective, Web application security
goals and objectives can be better aligned to the prevailing, industry-accepted guidelines
such as those purported by the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP – www.
owasp.org/)6 and the Web Application Security Consortium (WASC – www.webappsec.org/).7
The transition to a threat-based approach can be seen by reviewing the OWASP Top Ten
and WASC Threat Classification projects, and then comparing their current state to
previous versions and other information resources that were generally accepted just a
few years ago.
Even though the end result may be the same, Web application attacks that
directly target the application are still commonly considered more severe than
those against the client. This observation is evidence that the transition from
attacks to threats is not complete. If history is any lesson, this transition can be
expected to continue for several years before something better comes along.
126
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

Attack Methodology
A general attack methodology involves three phases: reconnaissance, vulnerability
identification, and exploit creation. An attacker must first know what he is attack-
ing before determining the subsequent correct steps. Reconnaissance will include
analysis of an application’s functionality; data in the form of information stored in
and used by the application as well as input data fields presented to the client;
and design and architectural aspects. The task of identifying vulnerabilities and
weaknesses and then creating a successful exploit becomes easier as more useful
information is obtained.
Identifying vulnerabilities in an application is somewhat systematic as most
exploits involve manipulation of data available to the client. The difficult part is
identifying which data fields can and should be manipulated and how they are
used by the application. The easy part is basically a checklist of configuration set-
tings and algorithms. Applications that have a particular vulnerability will most
likely be vulnerable to a corresponding exploit. For example, applications that fail
to set the “Secure” flag for a cookie that stores the user’s session token may be
vulnerable to session hijacking. Once a set of potential vulnerabilities and weak-
nesses are identified in an application, the attacker can proceed to identify and
validate exploitable vulnerabilities – possibly in tandem – and map out an attack.
A successful attack will often involve repetition of the aforementioned phases.
Rarely will an attacker have access to all of the functionality and data built into
the application; if he did, then the attack pretty much boils down to the unmen-
tioned “How do I get away with it?” phase. Instead, an attacker must first identify
the available functionality and data, then successively gain access to more and
more components of the application by exploiting various vulnerabilities. Because
this is a book on the security of smart grids and not on breaking applications, cer-
tain details are left as an exercise for interested readers. Instead, we will now dis-
cuss some of the most critical Web application attacks that could be used to
accomplish the attack objectives described earlier in the “Motivation” section of
this chapter.
Attacking the Web Application
Probably the most severe type of attack against a Web application is the injection
of executable malicious content. Depending on the platform that receives the
injected input (SQL database, operating system, other application, or service), this
could be an injection of application code, script, commands, or queries. Regard-
less of the platform, the end result of a successful exploit is unauthorized applica-
tion execution. The platform will determine the type of injection possible, which
in turn will help determine the immediate risk associated with a successful injec-
tion. For example, an injection targeting a SQL database (SQL Injection) could be
used to extract sensitive data stored in database tables, insert new values into the
database, or drop some tables for fun. Imagine your shiny new billing Web appli-
cation has suddenly stopped working; all functionality in the application simply
generates more and more error log file content. Then imagine sifting through
Application Attacks
127

those application log files – assuming there are log files to sift through – and
coming across “userid = Owned’; DROP TABLE customers; – ” in the HTTP
request. Hopefully your backup and recovery procedures were more effective than
the application’s input data validation and database querying code.
Injection attacks exploit a lack of proper input data validation and insecure inter-
action between the application and the receiving platform. Improper input data
validation allows a client to submit requests with invalid or unexpected data, which
could include more characters than the expected maximum length or may – in the
case of an injection – include a partial command or set of commands to be executed
as part of a predefined command built into the application code. The injected
command submitting by the attacker is executed just as any normal command as
long as the resulting command (intended + injected command) is in a valid form for
the target platform. If it is invalid, an error is generated and said error message is
often mistakenly sent to the client.
The reason that injection attacks are considered so severe is that the attacker’s
injected command will be executed with the privileges of the executing entity. For
example, a SQL Injection query will be executed with the privileges of the appli-
cation querying the database. Because many applications are configured with
administrator level access to one or more databases, the SQL Injection query will
be associated with administrator level access and thus allow the attacker to per-
form any desired query against any desired database table. Hopefully, this helps
explain the reason Information Security professionals respond with a horrifying
stare when you mention that the application is running with domain administrator
privileges. Depending on the application configuration and other factors, a suc-
cessful injection exploit could result in information disclosure, unauthorized access
(by extracting user credentials), or full system compromise.
Although injection attacks may present the most risk to an application’s security,
there are many more types of attacks that could be used to achieve similar goals. The
authentication component is often the first target in the search for vulnerabilities
because most useful functionality (to an attacker) is inaccessible unless one provides
valid authentication credentials. With most Web applications, pretty much any
authentication attack could be used with almost certain success.
Brute force attacks can be easily automated, especially because most Web
applications still only require user identification and password fields and almost
never implement an account lockout control. If a brute force attack against user
credentials doesn’t work well enough, some Web applications may allow you to
simply reset the accounts’ passwords. CAPTCHAs or other Turing tests8,9 are
implemented to stop automated attacks, but they have been defeated with some
percentage of success. Another common technique is to require users to provide
answers to challenge questions when attempting to reset their password or perform
other account management actions. Presumably, this technique is implemented
because it is believed impossible that an attacker could automate a brute force
attack with 2 or 3 answers to a set of 6 to 12 known questions. Please read that
last sentence again with a very sarcastic tone in mind.
128
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

Additional types of attacks against the Web application include manipulation
of data fields exposed to the client, analysis of encryption algorithms, and many
others. The result of manipulating data fields exposed to the client will vary based
on how the application uses the manipulated data fields. For example, one utility
company’s Web application authentication form includes a hidden parameter that
is used as the target when a user submits the form with valid credentials as shown
in Figure 7.5. This design aspect could be exploited with URL redirection, which
could trick the user into requesting any URL following successful authentication.
This type of attack could exploit browser bugs, install malicious software, or
implement additional attacks against the utility company’s Web application with
the access privileges of the authenticated user.
These attacks exploit a variety of possible vulnerabilities and weaknesses that
can be implemented in a Web application and, as described earlier, can have dis-
astrous results. The point is that there are many types of vulnerabilities and
exploits that attackers could use to carry out the attacks described throughout this
book. And those vulnerabilities are already being implemented in smart grid Web
applications.
Attacking the Web Application User
Attacks against Web application users can cause just as much damage as attacks
against the application directly, depending on the data and functionality available
FIGURE 7.5
URL redirection.
Application Attacks
129

to users. The most common types of user attacks are cross-site scripting (XSS)
and cross-site request forgery (CSRF). Although the details may vary, attacks
against Web application users will typically force the user’s client (Web browser)
to perform some action(s) on the user’s behalf, with the user’s access privileges,
and without the user’s knowledge. To this end, a XSS or CSRF attack could pro-
duce the same result as an injection attack.
Cross-site scripting attacks involve the injection of malicious HTML into a
Web page that is sent from the Web application to a user’s client. The client hap-
pily interprets the malicious (attacker generated) HTML along with the intended
(application generated) HTML because they both appear as simply HTML to the
client. As indicated earlier, a XSS payload can force the user’s client to perform
an unwanted action. This may be accomplished by inserting HTML that instructs
the client to make one or more requests to the application. As long as the attacker
can determine the correct request(s) to make, the proper request order, and appro-
priate input data values to use in the request(s), then the attacker can deliver the
XSS payload as desired.
The simplest and most common method to determine whether a cross-site
scripting attack is possible against a particular Web application is to cause the
receiving Web browser to open an alert popup box. This can often be accom-
plished by setting a data field to “<script>alert(1)</script>” (without quotes) in a
request. Alternatively, it may require much more effort on the part of the attacker
to defeat input filters or other defenses put in place to protect an application.
FIGURE 7.6
Cross-site scripting.
130
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

When it comes to utility company Web applications, it may not be so difficult, as
illustrated in Figure 7.6.
As illustrated in Figure 7.6, the Web form requesting “Customer Billing Infor-
mation” during the user registration process is vulnerable to cross-site scripting
attacks. This test was performed without access to valid user credentials, meaning
that anyone with access to an Internet-accessible computer can use this Web form
to attack unsuspecting victims’ Web browsers without first obtaining authenticated
access to the Web application.
Cross-site request forgery is very similar to the first XSS payload described
earlier and is given away by the name. Essentially, a CSRF payload will include
one or more requests that forge the user’s account signature because the client
will automatically attach the user’s session identification token to the requests.
CSRF exploits are relatively easy to create; the more difficult part is in delivering
the exploit to the users’ clients. From a utility company’s perspective, this could
have disastrous results as users are unwittingly forced to make excessive payments
on bills, reset their passwords, or start their dishwashers at 04:00 P.M. every day.
Because we’re on the subject, there are many payloads available for use in XSS
attacks. An attacker could harvest cookies to obtain session tokens (assuming they
are stored in a cookie) or harvest user credentials by inserting a fake authentication
form into the Web page. An attacker could even gain complete control of the user’s
operating system by using XSS to deliver a browser exploit in the payload. Much
like an injection, an attacker could then execute arbitrary code on the user’s system
with the privileges of the client. Although the owner of the vulnerable Web
application, that was used to deliver the XSS payload, may not consider this as
significant a risk as a successful injection attack, the user’s security and privacy
could be seriously affected. Of course, the public relations situation that could result
from such an attack may work to change the owner’s assessment of risk.
As previously mentioned, it would be impossible to do justice to Web applica-
tion attacks in one section of one chapter. Basically, it comes down to two things:
applying a set of standard tests for security vulnerabilities, and exploiting the
application’s custom (and possibly unique) functionality. The standard tests would
include injection testing, attempting authentication attacks, analyzing the imple-
mentation of encryption algorithms and session management, and many others.
Exploiting custom functionality requires detailed analysis of how the use cases are
intended to function, the types of input data used in those functions, and then
manipulation of the input data in a manner that can produce a desired (malicious
or unintended) result. Whether directly targeting the application or its users,
attackers have many tools and techniques at their disposal and can usually take
more than one route in order to reach their ultimate goal.
Tools of the Trade
One of the ironic aspects of Web application security is that attackers may not need
any special and expensive tools to perform the most powerful attacks. Injections,
brute force authentication attacks, and cross-site scripting attacks can sometimes be
Application Attacks
131

conducted with just the intended client tier of the application. These exploits are
possible using only the client (Web browser) because the code and data values
used by the Web browser can be analyzed and modified by attackers, which is
possible because HTML (and JavaScript) must be interpreted by the Web browser
and is therefore in a human readable state.
Aside from the client itself, the most common type of attack tool is a Web proxy.
Essentially, the proxy can capture all requests and responses sent by the client and
server, respectively, and allow the proxy owner to inspect and manipulate the content
as desired. Additional tools can integrate with a proxy in order to automate common
tasks, such as scanning for unknown Web pages, repeating previous requests,
comparing and contrasting multiple requests or responses, and systematically chan-
ging input data values in subsequent requests. The last example is commonly known
as “fuzzing,” a technique that can effectively assist analysis of an application but can
be very resource intensive.
Probably the most common type of Web application security tool used by infor-
mation security departments and professionals is the automated vulnerability
scanner. Much like their patch and configuration scanning predecessors, the Web
application scanners submit requests to the application and analyze the response(s).
Although largely based on signatures, these tools can help a user map out an appli-
cation and help to identify simple vulnerabilities. When conducting authorized
security testing of a Web application, at least one automated scanner is typically
used to build a map of the application and as an initial search for vulnerabilities.
Luckily for those of us in the application security industry, a significant majority of
the work must be completed by intelligent human minds.
Many Web application security analysis tools offer these and other small
tools into a single suite, thereby allowing the user to transfer data seamlessly
(in theory) from one tool to another. Table 7.4 includes some of these tool suites
Table 7.4 Security testing tools for Web applications
Category
Name
Link
Freeware
Burp Suite
http://portswigger.net/suite/
Paros Proxy
www.parosproxy.org/index.shtml
w3af
http://w3af.sourceforge.net/
Wapiti
http://wapiti.sourceforge.net/
WebScarab
www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:OWASP_
WebScarab_Project
Commercial
AppScan
www.ibm.com/software/awdtools/appscan/
Hailstorm
www.cenzic.com/products/software/overview/
Netsparker
www.mavitunasecurity.com/netsparker/
NTO Spider
www.ntobjectives.com/ntospider/
WebInspect
https://download.spidynamics.com/webinspect/
default.htm
132
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

currently available. There are also many Web browser plug-ins (also referred to as
“add-ons”) and other single purpose tools that can be extremely helpful in identi-
fying vulnerabilities, but are far too numerous to include here. The usefulness of
the tools listed in Table 7.4 is the subject of continued debate within the industry,
but the tools themselves can be considered a good baseline tool set.
Attacking Web Server Software
With all the recent industry hype surrounding Web application security, specifi-
cally some of the things described earlier, it may be easy to overlook the all-too-
common Web server vulnerabilities. Just as the operating system supports Web
servers and other applications, Web servers support the custom Web applications
that will bring the smart grid to consumers’ fingertips. Despite the mature soft-
ware development life cycles in use and many talented developers working on
these applications, there are bugs (just as there are with any software applica-
tions). What this means is that all the attention paid to the Web application code
may overshadow another attack vector that is just as important: exploiting Web
server vulnerabilities.
Apache and Microsoft IIS currently dominate the Web server software market. A
quick scan through the latest security patch releases10,11 is one indication of the type
and number of vulnerabilities that have been publicly reported for these applications.
Of course the word publicly is key here: It is possible that only a few vulnerabilities
have been identified but not disclosed. However, given the size and complexity of
these applications, it is more likely that there are many more unknown – or at least
undisclosed – vulnerabilities waiting to be found and exploited.
There are two significant differences between attacks against Web server software
and those against custom Web application code. The first is related to how vulnerabil-
ities are identified. Whether open source or closed, Web server software is almost
guaranteed to have a much larger code base than even the most complex and feature-
rich Web application. This translates into a lot more tedious work on the part of the
attacker in order to identify a vulnerability and then to craft a working exploit. Closed
source applications, for which the source code is not made available to the public,
must be analyzed using binary analysis techniques, which may involve disassembly,
decompilation, debugging, and fuzzing.
The second difference between attacks against Web server software and Web
application code involves the pool of targets for any given vulnerability exploit.
Whereas a Web application vulnerability may only be applicable to a small num-
ber or group of custom Web applications (dependent on specific code or script
techniques or common frameworks); an exploitable vulnerability in any supported
version of the Apache Web server could affect tens of millions of systems and the
Web applications they support. Put in the scope of smart grid security, a vulner-
ability in one utility company’s Web application may be used to disrupt service to
that company’s consumers, but an Apache vulnerability may be used to disrupt
service to half of all utility companies’ consumers. The latter may just require a
bit more time and resources to pull off.
Application Attacks
133

Attacking Compiled Code Applications
Even though Web applications will likely account for a majority of smart grid appli-
cations, we should not overlook the importance of the compiled code application
attack vector. Actually, we already started this discussion with the Web server soft-
ware earlier, specifically regarding the Apache and IIS Web servers. As mentioned
earlier, identifying vulnerabilities in compiled code applications can be a much more
difficult process that requires more time, perseverance, and skill set … not to mention
a more expensive tool set. However, it is possible that some organizations will con-
tinue using (or possibly even transition back to) compiled code applications for some
functions as Web applications continue to present such an easy attack vector.
The most sought after type of exploit against compiled code is typically the
overflow, as in the buffer, heap, and stack overflows. This type of exploit can often
allow for the execution of arbitrary code on the system with the privileges of the
vulnerable application that failed to properly validate the size and other aspects of
some input data. Basically, overflow exploits can inject new code to be executed
and change the execution flow by the system to allow for this type of unauthorized
and unexpected code execution. The basics of this type of exploit have been avail-
able for a long time.12 More recent advancements in overflow protections and asso-
ciated workarounds and new exploit methods are well beyond the scope of this
book. Your favorite Web search engine and other Internet resources can provide
plenty of details for the interested and technically advanced reader.
Similar to Web applications, compiled code applications may suffer from many
types of security vulnerabilities and weaknesses. Other common problems include
the use of hard-coded passwords, which are simply passwords that are included in
the application during development and placed into production and allow one compo-
nent of the application to gain access to some other component of the application.
Typically, such passwords are included with the client (commonly referred to as a
“thick client” compared with a “thin client” Web browser) with the goal of enabling
the server to require an access password without requiring the user to submit a pass-
word. Hard-coded passwords can be located in the code, in a registry entry (for
Windows applications), or in data files used by the application. Depending on the
location of such a password and the type of storage, gaining unauthorized access
through a hard-coded password may be as simple as reading a flat text file or as diffi-
cult as gaining access to the appropriate registry entry or analyzing a binary file.
Speaking of binary analysis, the ability to identify these types of security issues
(and others) will be greatly aided by the use of some powerful tools mentioned
earlier. First, there are the disassemblers and decompilers that can convert incompre-
hensible-to-humans executable files into a semicomprehensible code form. Although
this conversion cannot produce the exact code files that were created during applica-
tion development and used to build the executable files, it does produce output that
can be much more easily interpreted and analyzed by humans given enough time,
energy, and skill set (and some luck). This conversion produces static files for analy-
sis; another type of analysis tool is the debugger, which allows the user to analyze an
134
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

application as it is being executed. Through debugging, an attacker can pause execu-
tion at any desired execution point in order to analyze the current state of the applica-
tion, including storage locations such as hard drives, memory, and even registers.
Debuggers also allow the attacker to manipulate the data values in these storage
locations in order to alter the current state, which can be extremely useful when trying
to determine, for example, how the application handles input data – to identify poten-
tial overflow attack vectors – and where critical data fields are stored – to identify
potential hard-coded passwords.
Tools of the Trade, Round 2
If attacking non-Web applications sounds appealing, and you are in need of help
building a tool set (and don’t have a friend that can “Google that for you”), Table 7.5
contains some of the tools available to the public. Similar to the previous statement
regarding endorsements, none of the tools mentioned in this book are recommended
over others. Specific tools can only be preferred when specific information on the tar-
get application, goal(s) of the analysis, and large quantities of our favorite drinks are
provided. Please also reconsider the prior warning, but taken to a new extreme: These
tools should only be used by skilled minds. In other words, mind your studies and
research before diving into the deep end of the pool. Alternatively, stick to analyzing
Web applications, which will now be referred to as the “kiddie pool.”
WIRELESS ATTACKS
Back in Chapter 1, “Smart Grid: What Is It?,” we discussed several wireless tech-
nologies that may be used in a smart grid. Although new wireless technologies
Table 7.5 Security testing tools for compiled code applications
Category
Name
Link
Disassembler
IDA Pro
www.hex-rays.com/idapro/
objdump/binutils
www.gnu.org/software/binutils/
OllyDbg
www.ollydbg.de/
Proview/PVDasm
http://pvdasm.reverse-engineering.net/
Debugger
GDB
www.gnu.org/software/gdb/
IDA Pro
www.hex-rays.com/idapro/
Immunity Debugger
www.immunitysec.com/products-immdbg.shtml
OllyDbg
www.ollydbg.de/
Microsoft Windows
Debugging Tools
www.microsoft.com/whdc/devtools/debugging/
default.mspx
Other Tools
ospy
http://code.google.com/p/ospy/
ProcHeapViewer
http://securityxploded.com/ProcHeapViewer.php
Wireless Attacks
135

will be developed and utilized in the future, the current most widely used wireless
technologies include the following:
•
RF with Narrow Band, Direct-sequence spread spectrum (DSSS), and
Frequency-hopping spread spectrum (FHSS)
•
Wi-Fi
•
Bluetooth
•
Cellular.
For detailed information about how to carry out specific wireless attacks, several
books have been written on wireless security assessments and attacks including
WarDriving and Wireless Penetration Testing (ISBN: 978-1-59749-111-2, Syngress),
Hacking Exposed™Wireless: Wireless Security Secrets & Solutions, and Seven
Deadliest Wireless Technologies Attacks (ISBN: 978-1-59749-541-7, Syngress).
Additionally, the following NIST guidelines discuss wireless security and wireless
testing:
•
SP800-48 – Guide to Securing Legacy IEEE 802.11 Wireless Networks
•
SP800-97 – Establishing Wireless Robust Security Networks: A Guide to
IEEE 802.11i
•
SP800-115 – Technical Guide to Information Security Testing and Assessment
•
SP800-120 – Recommendation for EAP Methods Used in Wireless Network
Access Authentication
•
SP800-121 – Guide to Bluetooth Security
•
SP800-127 – Guide to Security for Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave
Access (WiMAX) Technologies.
In this section, we will describe the components of a wireless security assess-
ment at a high-level and provide example attacks tailored to a smart grid. In gen-
eral, a wireless attack will have the following flow:
•
Discovery
•
Device profiling
•
Exploitation.
The initial goal of the attacker or assessment team will be to identify the wire-
less technology in use. A wireless scanning tool, such as Kismet (www.kismet-
wireless.net/), and an RF spectrum analyzer can be used to determine the types
of wireless technologies in use. In addition to the technology used, the different
wireless networks, wireless clients, and access points should be catalogued in
order to identify rogue (unauthorized) wireless networks and clients. In most
cases, the attacker will attempt to attack the utility company’s wireless networks
in order to:
•
Cause a denial of service
•
Obtain sensitive information
•
Bypass perimeter security controls and gain access to the internal networks.
136
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

Table 7.6 lists a few of the many available wireless tools at an attacker’s dis-
posal. The smart grid components that will most likely use wireless technology are
the smart meters and associated AMI/AMR networks. Smart meters will use wire-
less technology to transport the usage data back to the utility company. The data
from smart meters will be used by the utility company to bill their customers, adjust
electrical demand estimates, inform the customer of their usage through third-party
applications, and much more. In other words, wireless networks may be used to
transport data from a customer’s home to the utility company’s internal networks,
as well as their partner networks. However, these wireless networks will most likely
not have direct access into the utility company’s internal networks. From the meter,
the data will go through field networks and up to management stations before it
touches the utility company network. Still, these wireless networks will be a good
starting point for an attacker to gain access into a utility company network.
One of the goals of AMI is to allow remote administration of meters. If the
attacker’s goal is to turn off a victim’s electricity, he or she could break into the
wireless network used by the utility company for remote administration. Once on
the wireless network or once the wireless encryption has been cracked, the
attacker could use a packet sniffer to steal the remote administration credentials
and use them to disable the victim’s electricity.
Wireless Clients
Even if the utility company does not have any wireless networks, attackers can
still perform client-based attacks against employee laptops, handheld devices, and
smart devices. Most laptops, and the majority of any type of computing device
sold today, have some internal wireless radio and unless these radios are disabled,
attackers could target them. One such tool that an attacker can use to target wire-
less clients is Karma (http://trailofbits.com/karma/), which is now part of Metas-
ploit as Karmetasploit.
Table 7.6 Wireless security testing tools
Category
Name
Link
Scanning
Kismet
www.kismetwireless.net/
Netstumbler
www.netstumbler.com/
Packet Sniffer
Tcpdump
www.tcpdump.org/
Wireshark
www.wireshark.org/
Exploit
Aircrack
www.aircrack-ng.org/
Asleap
http://asleap.sourceforge.net/
Metasploit (Karmetasploit)
www.metasploit.com/redmine/
projects/framework/wiki/
Karmetasploit
Live Linux Distros
BackTrack
www.backtrack-linux.org/
Wireless Attacks
137

Karmetasploit turns the attacker’s laptop into a wireless access point in an
attempt to convince wireless clients to associate with it. The tool takes advantage
of the fact that most systems are configured to probe for wireless networks that
they were previously connected to. So when a victim probes for their “preferred”
wireless network, the Karma attacker will respond to the probe as that “preferred”
wireless network. When a victim has associated with the Karma box, any type of
request the victim makes will take them to a malicious service.
Wi-Fi
Due to the widespread availability of Wi-Fi products that follow the 802.11a/b/g/n
standards, these wireless networks may crop up on any of the smart grid domains
depicted in Figure 7.1. Due to the pervasive security problems with Wi-Fi networks,
most organizations have either banned Wi-Fi networks or have strict policies that
require wireless networks to have no access to internal corporate networks. Regard-
less, some organizations do permit Wi-Fi networks to access their internal networks
and attackers will target these wireless networks to bypass perimeter security controls.
Bluetooth
Bluetooth has notoriously been an insecure technology and many attacks have
been developed to exploit weaknesses in the technology. Bluetooth scanning tools
can be used to discover Bluetooth devices, their operating mode, and the strength
of the device’s PIN. Additionally, the Bluetooth 3.0 specification uses Wi-Fi
radios for transferring large amounts of data, so the strengths and weaknesses of
Wi-Fi may apply to these devices as well.
Cellular
Cellular networks were once thought to be relatively secure wireless networks;
however, the encryption scheme for Global System for Communications (GSM)
has recently come under scrutiny. Theoretical weaknesses in GSM have been
known for many years, but practical public exploits did not exist. However, Karsten
Nohl and Sascha Kribler, recently, gave presentations at security conferences on
practical attacks on the encryption scheme used in GSM networks.13 The point to
take away is that every type of wireless network will have some security-related
drawback, which is why additional security controls should be implemented.
SOCIAL ENGINEERING ATTACKS
Social engineering attacks will test the security awareness of utility company
employees. The attack may attempt to trick an employee into revealing informa-
tion, such as their user name and password, or providing the attacker with
138
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

additional access. Common examples of social engineering attacks include the
following:
•
Impersonating an employee to the IT Help Desk to change his or her password
•
Impersonating service vendors (Examples: document shredder service, backup
tape pickup, maintenance workers) to obtain potentially sensitive information
or sabotage equipment
•
Leaving USB key drives at strategic locations, such as the parking lot outside
the headquarters, that contain malicious software that will provide a backdoor
into the IT infrastructure
•
Sending “phishing” e-mails to solicit sensitive information and/or IT
infrastructure information from the clients’ employees.
Selecting Targets
Although incidental disclosure was more common in the 1990s, it still exists
today. With the explosion in popularity of social networking sites, it has never
been easier to identify targets. Most social networking sites will have a space for
the person’s employer and some social networking sites are dedicated to the per-
son’s career. Performing a search for the name of the utility company in these
social networking sites will most likely provide you with numerous employee
names, and their positions. Additionally, automated tools such as Maltego and
Passive Recon, discussed earlier in the “Network Attacks” section of this chapter
will also identify targets for you.
PHYSICAL ATTACKS
Most types of organizations have their physical assets located within the walls of
their offices. Alternatively, utility companies can have thousands of miles of trans-
mission lines and smart meters installed in customers’ homes and businesses. Rea-
listically, there will be little a utility company can do to prevent a motivated
person from cutting down a transmission line or physically tampering with a
smart meter. However, there are physical access attacks that utility companies can
try to prevent including the following:
•
Gaining physical access to location(s) without an access badge
•
Photocopy or take picture of any sensitive information that is in plain sight
•
Shoulder-surfing and eavesdropping
•
Stealing an unattended and unlocked mobile device (Blackberry)
•
Using an unattended, unlocked computer.
Attacking with a Friend
Breaking into physical locations will usually involve social engineering techni-
ques. Granted, sometimes you can just find an unlocked and unmonitored door
Physical Attacks
139

and walk in. However, most doors are usually locked and an attacker will need to
convince an employee to let them in. When performing these types of security
assessments, a more bold goal is to walk through the front door and obtain a
badge from the security guard or receptionist. To achieve this, a favorite attack is
using a cell phone trick and a friend, let’s call him John. The following steps are
usually taken in this attack:
1. Identify an employee of the utility company, let’s call him Bob.
2. In your cell phone address book, change the name of your friend John to the
employee’s name, Bob.
3. Before walking into the lobby, call John whose name should now appear as
Bob on your cell phone’s screen.
4. Tell the receptionist/security guard (Charlie) that you are here to see Bob.
5. When Charlie attempts to call Bob, tell them you already have Bob on the
phone and hand your cell phone to Charlie to verify.
6. Your friend John now convinces Charlie that he can’t escort the visitor
because he is at home with the flu or with some other sad story, but convinces
Charlie to give you a badge and thanks Charlie for helping him.
Now even if you fail to get past the main lobby, there may be plenty of time
when you are just waiting in the lobby. If available, try to choose the seat right next
to the lobby phone, which is hopefully a Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
phone. A lot of VoIP phones have a network switch built into the phone, which is
perfect for connecting a small, travel size wireless access point. Because most orga-
nizations do not separate their voice networks from their data networks, the wireless
access point will allow access to the internal network. So even if Charlie refuses to
let the tester past the main lobby, they can just go back out to the parking lot and
connect to the wireless access point.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
It makes logical sense to break up the chapter into the different types of attacks/
assessments. However, in a real attack, the attacker(s) will not stick to one category
or attack. For example, an attacker sets up a malicious Web site whose URL looks
very similar to the remote operations access Web application. The attacker sends an
e-mail that convinces a utility company employee to visit the site, which exploits a
vulnerability in the employee’s browser. Then, the attacker uses the new employee
workstation (the one that was just exploited) to map out the internal networks, and
is successful because the network is flat. Think flat networks do not exist any
more? Turn back to the “Epic Fail” sidebar in this chapter. Because every system
was configured with the same administrator password, the attacker is able to log
into the customer-billing database and decrease their monthly bill, resulting in a
revenue loss for the utility company. In this example, the attacker utilized social
engineering, application, network, and system attacks to carry out his or her goal.
140
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

This example had many clauses to it, such as an employee visiting a malicious
Web site and proper network segmentation not existing, but this is exactly how an
attack or penetration test may turn out. The attacker/tester finds a vulnerability and
exploits it to escalate his or her access, which leads to finding another vulnerabil-
ity to further increase his or her unauthorized access. This continues until the
attacker has met or exceeded his or her goal.
SUMMARY
Utility companies cannot rely on the obscurity of smart grid technologies to pro-
tect themselves from smart grid attacks. Although some technology components
will be new, smart grids will utilize technology that has existed for decades and
have well-known and well-documented vulnerabilities. With the more connected
nature of smart grids, attackers and security testers will more easily be able to
identify and exploit vulnerabilities in electric grids. Attacks can be initiated from
many different locations, thus utility companies should perform comprehensive
security assessments of their implementation to determine if they are protected
from the many different attack vectors.
Security is a lopsided battle in that defenders must protect against any potential
attack vector; however, an attacker may only need to find one vulnerability to exploit.
Performing regular security assessments will help identify these vulnerabilities in
your smart grid implementation.
Endnotes
1. National Institute of Standards and Technology. NIST Special Publication 1108: NIST
framework and roadmap for smart grid interoperability standards, release 1.0 [document on
the Internet]. www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/upload/smartgrid_interoperability_final.
pdf; 2010 [accessed 8.02.10].
2. Poulsen K. Security Focus. Slammer worm crashed Ohio nuke plant network [document
on the Internet]. www.securityfocus.com/news/6767; 2003 [accessed 8.02.10].
3. Zheng AY. SmartGridNews.com. Australian grid threatened by computer virus. www.
smartgridnews.com/artman/publish/News_Blogs_News/Australian-Grid-Threatened-by-
Computer-Virus-1296.html; 2009 [accessed 8.02.10].
4. Stokes J. ars technica. Russian crackers throw GPU power at passwords [document on
the Internet]. http://arstechnica.com/business/news/2007/10/russian-crackers-throw-gpu-
power-at-passwords.ars; 2007 [accessed 15.02.10].
5. Moore HD. Browser bugs, tricks, and hacks. Browser fun [homepage on the Internet].
[updated 2006 August 17]. http://browserfun.blogspot.com; 2006 [accessed 31.01.10].
6. The Open Web Application Security Project. Category:OWASP Top Ten Project [document
on the Internet]. [updated 2009 December 2]. www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:
OWASP_Top_Ten_Project; 2009 [accessed 31.01.10].
7. The Web Application Security Consortium. The WASC threat classification v2.0. threat
classification [homepage on the Internet]. [updated 2010 January 3]. http://projects.
webappsec.org/Threat-Classification; 2010 [accessed 31.01.10].
Endnotes
141

8. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. Turing Test [document on
the Internet]. [updated 2008 December 14]. www.aaai.org/AITopics/pmwiki/pmwiki.
php/AITopics/TuringTest; 2008 [accessed 31.01.10].
9. World Wide Web Consortium. Inaccessibility of CAPTCHA. Alternatives to visual
turing tests on the web [document on the Internet]. [updated 2005 November 23].
www.w3.org/TR/turingtest; 2005 [accessed 31.01.10].
10. The Apache Software Foundation. Apache HTTP server project. Apache httpd 2.2
vulnerabilities [document on the Internet]. [updated 2009 October 5]. http://httpd.
apache.org/security/vulnerabilities_22.html; 2009 [accessed 31.01.10].
11. Microsoft TechNet. Security bulletin search products technologies KB articles service
packs. Microsoft security bulletin search [homepage on the Internet]. [updated 2010
January 21]. www.microsoft.com/technet/security/current.aspx; 2010 [accessed
31.01.10].
12. Phrack. Smashing the stack for fun and profit. phrack issue 49 [document on the Internet].
Phrack 49 - Volume Seven, Issue Forty-Nine; www.phrack.com/issues.html?issue=49&
id=14#article; 1996 [accessed 31.01.10].
13. Nohl K, Kribler S. Subverting the security base of GSM. https://har2009.org/program/
attachments/119_GSM.A51.Cracking.Nohl.pdf; 2009 [accessed 16.02.10].
142
CHAPTER 7 Attacking the Utility Companies

CHAPTER
8
Securing the Utility
Companies
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Smart Grid Security Program
•
Top 12 Technical Practices to Secure the Smart Grid
We previously discussed the threats to utility companies in Chapter 3, “Threats
and Impacts: Utility Companies & Beyond.” We also reviewed how to attack utility
companies in Chapter 7, “Attacking the Utility Companies.” In this chapter, we will
take a look at how to secure the utility companies. First, we will examine the softer
side of security; how to develop and mature an effective information security
program through the use of standards. Then, we will dive into the technical side of
security; reviewing the technologies that can protect the utility companies’ smart
grid deployments.
SMART GRID SECURITY PROGRAM
Depending upon the maturity of the utility company’s current information security
program, one of two approaches can be taken to further develop it. First, if the
organization has a partially functioning information security program, a gap analy-
sis should be performed. The second approach, for organizations that do not cur-
rently operate a functioning information security program, the complete adaptation
of chosen frameworks should be performed. Regardless of which approach is
taken, a framework for building an information security program must be chosen.
Let us review the more mature options.
TIP
Before choosing a standard on which to build or mature your information security program,
consult upper management to determine if certification of your information security program
is desired. Of the two standards reviewed in this chapter, only the ISO/IEC 27000 series
standards can be certified. To learn more about ISO/IEC 27000 certification, visit the ISO
27001 and ISO 27002 frequently asked question (FAQ) located at www.17799.com.
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00008-X
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
143

ISO/IEC 27000
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO – www.iso.org/iso/home.
html) along with the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC – www.iec.
ch) have developed and published the ISO/IEC 27000 series standards. These
standards are specific to “Information Technology – Security Techniques – Infor-
mation Security Management Systems (ISMS).”1 These standards provide organi-
zations with a set of international best practices for information security that
focuses on risk assessment and control implementation. The standards apply to
most every organization, large or small, for profit or nonprofit.
Currently, the ISO/IEC 2700 series is comprised of six standards, with several
additional standards planned.2 The currently published standards are as follows:
•
ISO/IEC 27000 – Information technology – Security techniques – Information
security management systems – Overview and vocabulary
•
ISO/IEC 27001 – Information technology – Security techniques – Information
security management systems – Requirements
•
ISO/IEC 27002 – Information technology – Security techniques – Code of
practice for information security management
•
ISO/IEC 27003 – Information technology – Security techniques – Information
security management system implementation guidance
•
ISO/IEC 27004 – Information technology – Security techniques – Information
security management – Measurement
•
ISO/IEC 27005 – Information technology – Security techniques – Information
security risk management
•
ISO/IEC 27006 – Information technology – Security techniques – Requirements
for bodies providing audit and certification of information security management
systems
•
ISO/IEC 27011 – Information technology – Security techniques – Information
security management guidelines for telecommunications organizations based
on ISO/IEC 27002.
Despite the breadth of the existing ISO/IEC 27000 series standards, the follow-
ing standards are currently being prepared:
•
ISO/IEC 27007 – Information technology – Security techniques – Guidelines
for information security management systems auditing
•
ISO/IEC 27008 – Information technology – Security techniques – A Guideline
for information systems management auditing
•
ISO/IEC 27013 – Information technology – Security techniques – A Guideline
on the integrated implementation of ISO/IEC 20000-1 and ISO/IEC 27001
•
ISO/IEC 27014 – Information technology – Security techniques – An
information security governance framework
•
ISO/IEC 27015 – Information technology – Security techniques – Information
security management guidelines for the finance and insurance sectors
144
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

•
ISO/IEC 27031 – Information technology – Security techniques – A guideline for
information and communications technology readiness for business continuity
•
ISO/IEC 27032 – Information technology – Security techniques – A guideline
for cyber security
•
ISO/IEC 27033 – Information technology – Security techniques – Information
technology security
•
ISO/IEC 27034 – Information technology – Security techniques – A guideline
for application security.
While a majority of the aforementioned published and future ISO/IEC 27000
series standards would benefit utility companies build or mature their information
security programs, we will focus on ISO/IEC 27002.
ISO/IEC 27002 – Code of Practice for Information Security Management
The second standard in the ISO/IEC 27000 series focuses on providing guidance
on the information security management. This guidance is aimed at those tasked
with developing, implementing, or managing information security management
systems. This guidance is broken down into the following 12 sections3:
1. Risk assessment
2. Security policy
3. Organization of information security
4. Asset management
5. Human resources security
6. Physical and environment security
7. Communications and operations management
8. Access control
9. Information systems acquisition, development, and maintenance
10. Information security incident management
11. Business continuity management
12. Compliance.
Each of the ISO/IEC 27002’s 12 sections contains what are referred to as
information security controls and objectives.3 Each documented Information secur-
ity objective has at least one corresponding information security control. For each
information security control contained within ISO/IEC 27002, implementation gui-
dance is provided. This guidance provides organizations with insights as to how
best apply the associated information security control to support the associated
information security objective.
Organizations utilizing ISO/IEC 27002 to mature or build their information
security programs are not required to implement every identified information secur-
ity control. Every information security control is not required to be implemented
because of the following two reasons:
1. Organizations utilizing ISO/IEC 27002 should perform an information security
risk assessment, which is discussed in the first section of ISO/IEC 27002. This
Smart Grid Security Program
145

information security risk assessment provides organizations with a prioritized
list of information security objectives, which results in a prioritized list of
information security controls to implement.
2. The implementation of every information security control to achieve every
information security objective is impractical for organizations of all sizes. The
ISO/IEC recognizes this by issuing industry-specific implementation guidance
in the form of additional ISO/IEC 27000 series standards. The ISO/IEC 27015
standard on information security management guidelines for the finance and
insurance sectors is an example of such industry-specific implementation
guidance.
In order to best understand how ISO/IEC 27002 can help utility companies
mature or build effective information security programs, we will discuss, at a high
level, each of the 12 sections mentioned above.
Risk Assessment
Utility companies should perform risk assessments, at least annually, to identify,
quantify, and prioritize the risks of their information systems. Once utility compa-
nies have identified, quantified, and prioritized their risks, they can identify the
actions necessary to minimize the identified risks to a level acceptable to their
respective organization. Here, the utility companies must choose one of the four
risk control strategies available:
1. Risk avoidance – The goal of the risk avoidance strategy is to prevent a
vulnerability from being exploited.
2. Risk transference – The goal of the risk transference strategy is to move the
risk to other assets, processes, or organizations.
3. Risk mitigation – The goal of the risk mitigation strategy is to minimize the
impact of a successful exploitation of a vulnerability.
4. Risk acceptance – The risk acceptance strategy is utilized when the utility
companies chose to accept the risk of a vulnerability and the impact of a
successful exploitation.
In the context of using ISO/IEC 27002 to build or mature an information
security program to protect the smart grid, utility companies should first choose to
avoid risks or mitigate them. Most of the time, risk avoidance involves the imple-
mentation of information security controls, many of which are covered in depth in
the 12 sections of ISO/IEC 27002.
Security Policy
Information Security Policies serve as the backbone of any mature information
security program. Utility companies must implement information security policies
that support their organizations’ business objectives while also adhering to indus-
try standards and regulations. Simplified, information security policies must exist
in order to direct and evaluate the information security programs of the utility
companies. Without information security policies, violations or deviations from
146
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

documented information security policies cannot be identified and remediated. As
with most information security initiatives, management must fully support and
participate in the development, distribution, and enforcement of information secur-
ity policies in order for them to be successful.
Organization of Information Security
Much like information security policies, the organization of information security
within the utility companies can be a significant factor in their successful imple-
mentation of a functional information security program. As also mentioned for
information security policies, management must support the information security
functions within the utility companies for them to be effective. This support
should be manifested in the approval of information security policies, the assign-
ment of information security roles, including clearly defined roles and responsibil-
ities, as well as periodic reviews of the information security program.
Asset Management
In order to build an effective information security program, utility companies must
take asset management seriously. Specifically, in order to effectively protect the
organizations’ assets, they must all be associated with a particular owner. These
owners will ultimately be responsible for the system, including any of its required
controls. Utility companies may or may not allow their asset owners to delegate cer-
tain aspects of their duties as asset owners; however, the owners must ultimately be
responsible for their systems. This clear definition of asset owners allows the utility
companies to easily identify who is responsible for particular assets, as well as hold
specific asset owners accountable. Without accountability, utility companies will
find it hard to implement any of their information security controls.
Human Resources Security
Perhaps one of the most important sections of ISO/IEC 27002 highlights the human
aspect in implementing an effective information security program. Utility compa-
nies must disseminate information to their employees, contractors, and third parties
that clearly articulate their roles and responsibilities in regards to information secur-
ity. Vehicles that utility companies could use to disseminate this information
include detailed job roles and responsibilities, terms of employment, and in the case
of contractors or third parties, legal verbiage in contracts. Without ensuring that
those operating within the utility companies, or on their behalf, have a strong under-
standing of their roles and responsibilities for the security of the utility companies,
their information security program’s success will be materially impacted.
Physical and Environmental Security
This section of ISO/IEC 27002 covers topics that utility companies should be
familiar to both. However, topics such as preventing unauthorized access, protect-
ing critical systems, and ensuring provided protections are commensurate with the
associated risks should serve as baseline for utility companies to measure their
Smart Grid Security Program
147

current physical and environmental security against. One area that will most likely
require a significant evaluation of current controls is the smart grid devices that
will be deployed to customers of the utility companies. Here, the topics discussed
by the Physical and Environment Security section of ISO/IEC 27002 should serve
as a starting point. Additional controls should be implemented for smart grid
devices deployed to customers who are commensurate with the identified risks;
such as those covered previously in Chapter 2, “Threats and Impacts: Consumers.”
Without ensuring the physical and environmental security of the smart grid, utility
companies will leave themselves exposed to increased threats from attack vectors
that may have otherwise been protected.
Communications and Operations Management
The previous Asset Management section of ISO/IEC 27002 ensures that utility
companies hold someone responsible and accountable for the organizations’ infor-
mation systems. The Communications and Operations Management section of ISO/
IEC 27002 ensures that utility companies develop processes and procedures for the
development, operation, and ongoing management of the identified information sys-
tems. Additionally, it calls for these processes and procedures to ensure that segre-
gation of duties is implemented. Implementing clear processes and procedures will
allow the utility companies to ensure consistent operation and management of their
information systems while also helping to ensure that information security controls
are being properly implemented and followed. Without implementing clear pro-
cesses and procedures, utility companies will be subject to the shortcomings of
operational chaos. Without implementing proper segregation of duties, information
security controls may easily be circumvented or minimized.
Access Control
Principles such as least privilege are contained within the next section of ISO/IEC
27002, Access Control. Utility companies should utilize the information security
controls within this section to ensure that access to information systems is both
required and authorized. Required access should be evaluated from both a busi-
ness and security aspect, while authorization may follow the proper channels to
ensure that only those who need access to information systems have it. Utility
companies can utilize access controls as a significant contributor to their defense
in depth approach to information security. Without effective access controls prop-
erly implemented, the utility companies will have a significant disadvantage in
combating the inappropriate and unauthorized access to information systems,
including those that support the smart grid.
Information Systems Acquisition, Development, and Maintenance
The Information Systems Acquisition, Development, and Maintenance section
of ISO/IEC 27002 covers what is often referred to as Systems Development
Life Cycle, or SDLC. Utility companies should utilize the controls within the
Information Systems Acquisition, Development, and Maintenance section to
148
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

ensure that during the requirements phase of any project that all information
security requirements are included. A common phrase within the information
security world is that “Security costs less when it is integrated from the start, and
more expensive when it is bolted on.” Utility companies can use the controls
within this section of ISO/IEC 27002 to enforce that security is built-in from the
start and recognize cost savings while also increasing their information systems
security posture. The controls within this section of ISO/IEC 27002 highlight that
security needs to exist on all aspects of information systems, including the operat-
ing systems, network infrastructure, applications, and more. Without integrating
information security requirements into the development phase of utility compa-
nies’ SDLC, they will be forced to take a reactive approach to securing their
information systems. A reactive approach to security will result in additional costs
to the utility companies and leaves them vulnerable to threats that might otherwise
have been avoided.
Information Security Incident Management
A reality for the utility companies is that it is only a matter of when, not if their
smart grid deployments will come under attack. In order to deal with these attacks,
from both an impact minimization and future prevention aspect, the utility compa-
nies must implement mechanisms that allow for the timely identification and con-
tainment of information security incidents. The Information Security Incident
Management section of ISO/IEC 27002 covers information security controls that
will allow the utility companies to respond to attacks in a timely manner, minimize
their impact, and implement corrective actions to prevent their reoccurrence. With-
out implementing such information security controls, the utility companies will be
“asleep behind the wheel” and may not be able to recover from successful attacks.
Business Continuity Management
The Business Continuity Management section of ISO/IEC 27002 should position
utility companies to withstand incidents that threaten the continuity of their opera-
tions, whether these incidents are natural disasters, attacks, or accidents. The uti-
lity companies should utilize the information resulting from the Risk Assessment
activities covered in the first section of ISO/IEC 27002. Critical infrastructure
must be identified, along with their associated risks, and information security con-
trols should be implemented to minimize the impact of disasters, security
breaches, and denials of service. Without thorough Business Continuity Manage-
ment, the utility companies will be hard pressed to withstand a coordinated and
targeted cyber attack.
Compliance
The final section of ISO/IEC 27002 covers compliance with applicable standards
and legal requirements. Utility companies can implement the information security
controls contained within the Compliance section of ISO/IEC 27002 to help
maintain their adherence to applicable laws, regulations, contractual obligations,
Smart Grid Security Program
149

or security requirements, such as NERCs Critical Infrastructure Protection
standards. In implementing these information security controls, the utility compa-
nies should utilize their legal counsel to verify their compliance and provide
advice on integrating all applicable regulations and standards. Compliance audits
should provide the utility companies with an outside perspective on the implemen-
tation of their information security controls as well as a validation of their effec-
tiveness. Without implementing the information security controls contained within
the compliance section of ISO/IEC 27002, the utility companies may leave them-
selves open to legal actions or find themselves operating in a vacuum.
The Information Security Forum’s Standard of Good Practice (SoGP)
The Information Security Forum, or ISF, is an international association that is
comprised of organizations from numerous industries, including the financial ser-
vices, consumer products, manufacturing, and telecommunications.5 In 2007, the
Information Security Forum published the most recent version of their Standard of
Good Practice (www.isfsecuritystandard.com/SOGP07/index.htm). The Informa-
tion Security Forum’s Standard of Good Practice provides organizations with a
documented set of best practices that should be implemented to develop and main-
tain an effective information security program.
NOTE
The Information Security Forum was founded in 1989 as a nonprofit organization aimed to
provide opinion and guidance on information security.4 With over 300 members, the
Information Security Forum strives to address a diverse range of information security
challenges and deliver solutions that are practical. More information about the Information
Security Forum is available on their Web site located at www.securityforum.org.
Unlike the ISO/IEC 27000 series standards, the Information Security Forum’s
Standard of Good Practice is available to all free of charge.4 The Standard of
Good Practice is organized into the following six aspects5:
1. Security management
2. Critical business applications
3. Computer installations
4. Networks
5. Systems development
6. End user environment.
Each of the aspects contained within the Information Security Forum’s Stan-
dard of Good Practice contains areas and sections.5 An area covers a specific
topic within an aspect, while a section is a subset of an area that contains a set of
statements.5 Each area contains a principle and an objective.5 The principles guide
organizations toward complying with the Standard of Good Practice, while the
objective explains why the statements provided within the section are required. In
150
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

terms of comparing the Information Security Forum’s Standard of Good Practice
to the ISO/IEC 27002 standard, you can equate the Standard of Good Practice’s
statements to the 27002’s information security controls. There are a total of 36
areas and 166 sections within the aforementioned six aspects of the Standard of
Good Practice.5
In order to best understand how the Information Security Forum’s Standard of
Good Practice can help utility companies mature or build effective information
security programs, we will discuss, at a high level, each of the six aspects men-
tioned above.
Security Management
The Security Management aspect of the Information Security Forum’s Standard of
Good Practice consists of 7 areas and 36 sections.5 These 7 areas and 36 sections
aim to establish an effective information security management function within the
organization. In order for the utility companies to implement an effective informa-
tion security management function, they must secure upper management’s support,
via both managerial and resource support. Without an effective information secur-
ity management function within the utility companies, they will be left fighting to
implement the necessary processes, procedures, and technologies required to
secure the smart grid.
Critical Business Applications
The next aspect of the Information Security Forum’s Standard of Good Practice,
Critical Business Applications, consists of 6 areas and 25 sections.5 The goal of
this aspect of the Standard of Good Practice is to identify applications that are
critical to the organization and subsequently identify and mange their risks. Utility
companies must implement a risk identification and management process in order
to effectively and efficiently manage their critical infrastructure. Without an effec-
tive and efficient risk identification and management process, the utility compa-
nies will potentially overlook the potential risks to critical business applications
or misappropriate their limited resources to the wrong critical business
applications.
Computer Installations
The Computer Installations aspect of the Information Security Forum’s Standard
of Good Practice contains 6 areas and 31 sections.5 The Computer Installations
aspect aims to ensure that organizations understand that information systems on
which their critical business applications run must also properly secured. Utility
companies must meet the objectives of the Computer Installations aspect of the
Standard of Good Practice in order to accurately identify the requirements of the
information systems that support their critical business applications and subse-
quently implement the appropriate controls to protect them. Without identifying
the information systems requirements of their critical business applications or
Smart Grid Security Program
151

properly implementing controls to protect them, utility companies may expose the
smart grid to additional risk via unnecessary services or misconfigurations.
Networks
The Standard of Good Practice’s fourth aspect pertains to networks and contains
5 areas and 25 sections.5 The Network aspect is very similar to the previously
mentioned Computer Installations aspect of the Standard of Good Practice. Speci-
fically, the Network aspect aims to ensure that organizations understand the net-
work infrastructure that supports their critical business applications. This network
infrastructure must be adequately protected against attacks and disruptions. Utility
companies must meet the objectives of the Networks aspect of the Standard of
Good Practice to address the network design, management, operations, and main-
tenance of the networks that support their critical business applications. Without
meeting the objectives of the Networks aspect, the utility companies will leave the
smart grid vulnerable to preventable disruption and abuse.
Systems Development
The Systems Development aspect of the Information Security Forum’s Standard
of Good Practice consists of 6 areas and 23 sections.5 The Systems Develop-
ment aspect aims to integrate information security requirements and controls
into the SDLC. Utility companies must meet the objectives of the Systems
Development aspect of the Standard of Good Practice in order to both develop
more secure systems and recognize significant cost savings when compared
with implementing information security controls once the systems have been
deployed into production. If the utility companies do not integrate the identifica-
tion of information security requirements or control into their SDLC, they will
leave themselves vulnerable to preventable attacks and increase the cost of
securing the smart grid.
End User Environment
The last aspect of the Information Security Forum’s Standard of Good Practice
covers the end user environment. This aspect contains 6 areas and 26 sections
aimed at ensuring that organizations arrange for the education and awareness of
their end users on the acceptable and secure ways to utilize the organization’s
information systems.5 Utility companies must meet the objectives of the end user
environment aspect of the Standard of Good Practice to ensure that the utility
companies’ employees protect their sensitive information regardless of the applica-
tion they use or the medium in which they access the information. Without imple-
menting the objectives contained within the end user environment aspect, utility
companies will condone the inappropriate access and dissemination of sensitive
information. While ensuring that end users will always act appropriately in
respects to information systems and data access is nearly impossible, the objec-
tives of the end user environment aspect provide utility companies with a strong
approach to minimizing the frequency of abuse.
152
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

TOP 12 TECHNICAL PRACTICES TO SECURE
THE SMART GRID
Now that we have reviewed the softer side of information security and how it can
help the utility companies develop and build an effective information security pro-
gram, let us get a little more technical and discuss the best ways that the utility
companies can secure the smart grid. These technologies apply to both the utility
companies’ corporate environments and smart grid deployments.
The following top 12 technical practices are not listed in the order of their
importance. Rather, the utility companies should review this list and determine
which practices are aligned with their risk management controls for the assets that
the practice would protect. This list is not intended to be all-encompassing nor
will all of the practices discussed apply to all utility companies and smart grid
deployments.
The top 12 technical practices are as follows:
1. Threat modeling
2. Segmentation
3. Default deny firewall rules
4. Code and command signing
5. Honeypots
6. Encryption
7. Vulnerability management
8. Penetration testing
9. Source code review
10. Configuration hardening
11. Strong authentication
12. Logging and monitoring.
Threat Modeling
Threat modeling attempts to have the architects or developers of any solution or
software identify the potential attack vectors against their deployment. Architects
and developers are usually the most knowledgeable of the functionality of the
solution or software, which is why they are usually considered the best to perform
the threat modeling. However, information security professionals must be engaged
to provide the necessary training for the architects and developers. Architects and
developers are usually more focused on the functionality and go through a com-
mon exercise known as developing use cases or user stories. Use cases and user
stories generally define how a valid user would properly use the solution of soft-
ware and are sometimes called functional requirements. However, in threat model-
ing, the focus is on developing how the solution or software can be misused for
malicious intentions. Information security professionals can assist the architects
and developers by training them to think like an attacker and consider the
Top 12 Technical Practices to Secure the Smart Grid
153

malicious use of their solution or software. In order to make the transition to an
evil mind, using similar terminology that the architect and developers are familiar
with will help the process. While developing their use cases or user stories, archi-
tects and developers should be trained to develop abuse cases or evil user stories
in parallel.
Once the attack vectors have been identified, information security controls can
be implemented to mitigate the attacks. The attack vectors can be broken down
into attacks against the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the deploy-
ment. An example of threat modeling against the smart meter software could be
the following:
•
Use case – Utility company maintenance worker remotely authenticates to the
smart meter to update the firmware across the wireless network.
•
Abuse case – Attackers could intercept the credentials being sent from the
smart meter to the utility companies via wireless communications.
Thus, the software developers could utilize encryption to obfuscate the creden-
tials, rendering them useless to the attackers.
WARNING
Use case to abuse case, or user story to evil user story, is not always a one-to-one function.
There can be many abuse cases for a single-use case, and the proper time should be spent
to consider every abuse case for each use case.
Threat modeling has become an integral part of many organizations’ development
life cycle. Microsoft has integrated threat modeling into their Security Development
Life Cycle.6 More information on threat modeling and Microsoft’s specific approach
is available at http://blogs.msdn.com/sdl.
Segmentation
The Payment Card Industry’s Data Security Standards (PCI DSS) strongly encou-
rage those bound by the standards to segment their cardholder data environment
from the rest of their network in order to limit the scope of the standard’s require-
ments.7 This concept should also be applied to the utility companies and the
smart grid. However, the goal of segmentation for the utility companies and the
smart grid should not be to limit the scope of standards requirements. Rather, it
should be to minimize the impact of a successful attack. For example, if the utility
companies were to segment their smart meter deployments by geographic loca-
tions and forbid traffic between the locations, a worm would be contained to only
the geographic location in which it was introduced. Segmentation should be
implemented through the use of stateful firewalls, and not through the use of
switch or router access control lists (ACLs).
154
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

EPIC FAIL
In October 2009, Integral Energy, an Australian power supplier, was hit with a worm that
affected all of the organization’s corporate desktops and propagated to their control room
machines.8 While the worm did not affect the system control and data acquisition (SCADA)
systems that run Integral’s power grid because it targeted machines running Microsoft’s
Windows operating system, it did affect the control room machines that were running the
Windows operating system. The media’s reaction to this incident focused on the fact that
Integral had not updated their antivirus software since February 2009; however, several
Web sites caught on to the fact that the organization had not implemented even basic
segmentation between their corporate and control room systems. Had the organization
implemented segmentation, they would not have had to rely on the Solaris operating
system to prevent a catastrophe. You can read more about Integral’s woes at
www.theinquirer.net/inquirer/news/1556944/linux-saves-aussie-electricity.
Default Deny Firewall Rules
While the practice of implementing default deny firewalls rules is commonplace in
many organizations from an outside in perspective, it continues to elude many orga-
nizations from an inside out perspective. The utility companies should implement
default deny rules on their firewalls for all inbound and outbound access. Outbound
connections should only be allowed from systems that must have direct access
to the Internet. All other systems should be forced through a proxy that provides
protections such as content filtering, SSL termination, and malware detection.
Implementing a proxy server and default deny outbound firewall rules will materi-
ally decrease the probability that a successful compromise of a utility company’s
internal asset is able to communicate with remote command and control servers.
Code and Command Signing
Software developers for smart grid devices such as smart meters must implement
signing of their code as well as critical commands issues to and from the smart
meters. Code signing uses cryptographic hashes to validate software’s authors as
well as the integrity of the code to be executed. Command signing provides the
same validation of authorship and the integrity of the command. Without imple-
menting code and command signing, attackers will be able to run their own arbitrary
code on smart meters and issues commands that will be trusted by the smart grid
infrastructure. Code and command signing could have prevented the successful
worm developed by IOActive’s Mike Davis during his security research of smart
meters.9 Davis noted that “many of the security vulnerabilities we found are pretty
frightening and most smart meters don’t even use encryption or ask for authentica-
tion before carrying out sensitive functions like running software updates and sever-
ing customers from the power grid.” More information on Mike Davis’s research is
available at www.ioactive.com/news-events/DavisSmartGridBlackHatPR.html.
Top 12 Technical Practices to Secure the Smart Grid
155

Honeypots
Honeypots are used to identify and trap attackers by presenting vulnerable systems
that appear to be a production system, but in fact they are a dummy system that is
isolated from the production environment. Honeypots can be used to identify
attackers because they can be configured to alert when they are being attacked or
have been successfully compromised. They can also be used to trap attackers by
presenting them with false information that is also set to trigger alerts when
accessed. Utility companies should set up honeypots throughout their organization
and particularly in their perimeter and smart grid environments. By doing so, they
will be able to understand their current threats as well as the type of probes
attackers are using to find weaknesses in their infrastructure. Finally, they can use
honeypots to enact countermeasures against attackers before they breakout of
the honeypot and into the production environment. The Honeynet Project is a
great resource to learn more about and deploy honeypots. The Honeynet Project’s
Web site is located at www.honeynet.org.
Encryption
Encryption must be implemented by the utility companies in order to safeguard
data from successful compromises or insider threats. Obvious places for encryp-
tion implementations include transport layers that carry sensitive information such
as customer data, but other implementations should include database, whole disk,
and removable media. Sensitive information stored in the utility companies’ data-
bases should be encrypted using strong cryptographic standards such as AES.
This will help prevent unauthorized access to data contained within the utility
companies databases in the case of a successful compromise or insider threat.
Extending encryption to whole disks on workstation and laptop systems as well
as removable media will also aid in preventing unauthorized access to sensitive
Utility Company data in the case of theft or misplacement.
Vulnerability Management
The utility companies must implement controls to ensure that properly manage
the vulnerabilities present in their environments. A vulnerability management pro-
gram will allow the utility companies to determine where their patching and con-
figuration policies, processes, and procedures are effective, and where they are
not. Vulnerability scanning, as part of a vulnerability management program, will
identify weaknesses in the utility companies assets and provide them with valu-
able information that will be utilized in dealing with threats. By knowing where
vulnerabilities exist within their environments, the utility companies will be able
to operate an effective risk-based approach to managing their vulnerabilities.
Without a vulnerability management program the utility companies, and in turn
the smart grid, will have little chance to deal with the constant threats and attacks
they attract.
156
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

Penetration Testing
One of the most commonly misunderstood practices in information security is
penetration testing. Many confuse penetration testing with vulnerability scanning or
vulnerability assessments. However, penetration testing differs from both vulner-
ability scanning and vulnerability assessments by attempting to validate the risk
associated with identified vulnerabilities. Vulnerability scanning and vulnerability
assessments simply identify, quantify, and rank the vulnerabilities within the tested
environment. Penetration testing validates the risks identified by these other two
practices by exploiting the identified weaknesses as well as the other controls in
place. Utility companies should perform regular penetration testing against all of
their environments, and more frequently against environments that contain sensitive
information or critical infrastructure. Many organizations perform penetration test-
ing on an annual basis, but as the threats facing the utility companies and the smart
grid are constantly changing, the authors of this book believe that penetration test-
ing should be performed at least quarterly against the aforementioned environments.
In the ideal situation, utility companies would employ or contract penetration-
testing specialists to constantly evaluate their critical environments.
TOOLS
The Metasploit Framework is an open-source testing tool that can be used to perform
penetration tests against network devices, information systems, and Web applications.
Originally developed by HD Moore and purchased by the vulnerability management firm
Rapid7 in October of 2009, Metasploit provides a free alternative to commercial penetration
testing tools such as Core Security’s (www.coresecurity.com/) Core Impact and
ImmunitySec’s (www.immunitysec.com/) CANVAS.10 In April of 2010, Rapid7 announced a
commercial version of Metasploit, known as Metasploit Express. However, Moore and Rapid7
have consistently maintained that a free version of Metasploit will continue to be offered.11
You can learn more about Metasploit and download the penetration-testing tool from
www.metasploit.com.
Source Code Review
As part of a mature software development life cycle, organizations should perform
reviews of their source code for vulnerabilities. Although vulnerability scanning
attempts to identify vulnerabilities once they are introduced into an environment,
source code reviews aim to identify vulnerabilities in software before the software
is released. Utility companies must implement source code reviews for all of their
software developed internally or by vendors that will be implemented in environ-
ments that will house sensitive information or critical infrastructure. By investing
in source code reviews during the software development phase, the utility compa-
nies will recognize cost savings when compared with fixing vulnerable code once
it is in production, while also being able to prevent vulnerabilities from being
introduced into their environments.
Top 12 Technical Practices to Secure the Smart Grid
157

Configuration Hardening
In a similar fashion, systems should be hardened before they are placed into
production. Where applicable, a hardened system image should be used to build
the systems as opposed to trying to harden systems from their vendor-supplied
base configuration. Vulnerability scanning and penetration testing should be per-
formed regularly on the hardened system images.
Standards have been created to harden common operating systems, and the
majority of systems in a smart grid will be running one of these operating
systems. One resource for these standards is the Center for Internet Security (CIS –
http://cisecurity.org/), which provides benchmarks for numerous devices, applica-
tions, and operating systems. Utility companies should use the standards to ensure
systems are secure as soon as they enter the production environment.
Strong Authentication
Strong authentication requires that in order to authorize access to a specific
resource that at least two of three authentication categories be implemented. These
categories are as follows:
•
Something I know – Example: A password
•
Something I possess – Example: A smart card
•
Something I am – Example: A fingerprint.
Strong authentication aims to prevent unauthorized access to assets when one
of the two authentication categories is compromised. For example, if the utility
companies were to implement strong authentication requiring a password and
smart card for remote access to their corporate networks, their security would
not be compromised if the smart card were lost or the password was obtained
by a malicious user. Utility companies should implement strong authentication
to protect all environments that contain sensitive information and critical infra-
structure. Strong authentication should also be extended to administrative
actions on assets within these environments, rather than simply authenticating
users a single time.
Logging and Monitoring
Logging and monitoring aim to provide information that can be used to iden-
tify attacks, as well as reconstruct events in the case of an incident. For
example, the logging and monitoring of unsuccessful authentication attempts
to a utility company’s Web site can indicate that an attacker is trying to
break into a customer’s account. Likewise, if the attacker were able to suc-
cessfully login into the customer’s account, logging and monitoring can be
utilized to see what actions the attacker performed. Utility companies should
implement logging and monitoring on all devices within environments that
contain sensitive information or critical infrastructure. Logging and monitoring
158
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

should be extended to the application, operating system, and network levels
and include the implementation and use of intrusion detection and intrusion
prevention systems. Without logging and monitoring, the utility companies
will be flying blind during and after attacks on their environments, including
the smart grid.
SUMMARY
Developing and maturing an information security program is fundamental to the
security of the utility companies and the smart grid. The process of developing
and maturing information security programs cannot be performed in an ad-hoc
fashion or be performed in a vacuum. Utilizing internationally recognized standards
such as the ISO/IEC 27000 series standards of the Information Security Forum’s
Standard of Good Practice will ensure that the most critical aspects of an effective
information security program are included.
While a standard-based approach to developing and maturing the utility com-
panies information security program is fundamental, certain technical practices
must also be in place to support them. Without these technical practices, the poli-
cies, procedures, and processes developed by any information security program
will have little impact on the security posture of the utility companies and the
smart grid.
Endnotes
1. International Standard ISO/IEC 27001 – Information technology – Security techniques –
Information security management systems – Requirements. First Edition. ISO/IEC.
2005.
2. About the ISO27k Standards [document on the Internet]. Information 27001 Security;
www.iso27001security.com/html/iso27000.html; 2010 [accessed 30.04.10].
3. International Standard ISO/IEC 27002 – Information technology – Security techniques –
Code of practice for information security management. First edition. ISO/IEC. 2005.
4. About the ISF [document on the Internet]. Information Security Forum; www.security-
forum.org; 2010 [accessed 30.04.10].
5. The standard of good practice for information security. 2007 Edition. London, UK:
Information Security Forum; 2007.
6. Get Started: Threat Modeling Tool [document on the Internet]. Microsoft; www.micro-
soft.com/security/sdl/getstarted/threatmodeling.aspx; 2010 [accessed 1.5.10].
7. Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard – Requirements and Security
Assessment Procedures. Version 1.2.1. PCI Security Standards Council LLC. 2009.
8. Farrell N. Linux saves Aussie electrical grid [document on the Internet]. London, UK:
The Inquirer; www.theinquirer.net/inquirer/news/1556944/linux-saves-aussie-electricity;
2009 [accessed 01.05.10].
Endnotes
159

9. IOActive’s Mike Davis to Unveil Smart Grid Research at Black Hat USA [document
on the Internet]. IOActive www.ioactive.com/news-events/DavisSmartGridBlackHatPR.
html; 2009 [accessed 01.05.10].
10. Rapid7 Acquires Metasploit [document on the Internet]. Rapid7 LLC www.rapid7.com/
metasploit-announcement.jsp; 2009 [accessed 01.05.10].
11. Approaching Metasploit 3.4.0 and Metasploit Express [document on the Internet].
Rapid7 LLC; http://blog.metasploit.com/2010/04/approaching-metasploit-340-and.html;
2010 [accessed 01.05.10].
160
CHAPTER 8 Securing the Utility Companies

CHAPTER
9
Third-Party Services
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Service Providers
•
Attacking Consumers
•
Attacking Service Providers
•
Securing Third-Party Access to the Smart Grid
Utility companies will not play the only role in smart grids. They will rely on
numerous third parties to provide core services and additional services that
increase the effectiveness and functionality of smart grids. However, these third
parties can also introduce new threats and attack vectors to smart grids.
The level of trust applied to third parties will influence the amount of risk they
introduce to other entities within a smart grid. Reducing the number of security
controls between business partners may make it easier to bridge networks and
integrate applications; however, this may also increase your overall risk exposure.
This chapter will describe attacks that abuse the inherent trust relationships
between organizations and how to properly secure the shared connections, applica-
tions, and data with your business partners.
SERVICE PROVIDERS
Cutting costs and increasing functionality are just some of the goals that will
entice utility companies to use third-party services. Although there are many dif-
ferent third-party services available, this chapter will use three examples to illus-
trate the security principles of integrating third-party services:
•
Billing
•
Consumer interfaces
•
Device support.
Billing
The customer billing operations, or portions of it, can be outsourced to an organi-
zation that specializes in billing. The security impact of outsourcing billing will
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00009-1
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
161

be based on how much of the billing operations are outsourced. A common
approach is to use third parties, such as PayPal (www.paypal.com) and BillMatrix
(www.billmatrix.com), to store, transmit, and process payment card data.
Compliance
One potential advantage to using a third-party payment gateway is providing con-
sumers the option of paying with a credit or debit card without having to be
responsible for compliance with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Stan-
dard (PCI DSS).1 PCI DSS is a set of requirements for enhancing the security of
payment account data and was developed by credit card companies including
American Express, Discover Financial Services, MasterCard Worldwide, and Visa
Inc. International.2
WARNING
It may seem like an easy choice to use a third party and wipe your hands of the
responsibility for ensuring consumer payment card security. However, consumers may
ultimately hold the utility company responsible if their payment card information is stolen
from the third-party partner handling the payments. Ensuring the third party is compliant
with the PCI DSS should only be the minimum requirement the third party must meet.
Assessing the third party’s overall security posture will be critical to ensuring your company’s
risk is minimized.
Required Access for Third-Party Payment Processors
In this example, which is illustrated in Figure 9.1, the payment card data is stored,
transmitted, and processed by the third party. As shown by the data flow path in
Figure 9.1, the utility company does not need access to the payment card data, and
it should not need access to the third-party’s internal network. If the utility company
were to access the data, they would then be required to be PCI DSS compliant.
Additionally, the third party should only need limited access to consumer data in
order to ensure the proper account is credited with the payment. The third party does
not need to know consumer energy usage, payment history, or even balance infor-
mation. Most importantly, there is no need for the third party to have access into the
utility company’s internal network. However, this particular example assumes the
third party is only processing consumer payments. If the third party assumes addi-
tional roles, such as accounting, the required level of access may increase.
Consumer Interfaces
In order to provide the promised functionality of smart grids to consumers, utility
companies will be installing new technologies into consumers’ homes and busi-
nesses. Although utility companies could develop and manage their own products,
numerous technology companies that provide these technologies already exist and
present viable solutions.
162
CHAPTER 9 Third-Party Services

Viewing Energy Consumption
Let’s consider energy consumption applications as an example of a third-party
service. Instead of the utility company developing their own Web application,
they could partner with a known service provider such as Google or Microsoft.
Google and Microsoft have developed energy consumption Web applications
called PowerMeter (www.google.com/powermeter/) and Hohm (www.microsoft-
hohm.com/) that allow consumers to monitor their energy consumption and pro-
vide tips for reducing energy usage. These applications collect energy usage data
either directly from utility companies or directly from smart devices and redisplay
the data in a user-friendly format. Figure 9.2 illustrates the data flow in the
scenario where the utility company sends the data to the third party.
Required Access for Energy Consumption Application Service Providers
So the questions then become, What data does Google or Microsoft need access
to, and will they need direct access into the utility company’s network to obtain
the data? Google has released an application programming interface (API) to pro-
vide a convenient method of uploading usage statistics to their PowerMeter appli-
cation3 and in a similar fashion, Microsoft has developed an SDK for Hohm.4 So,
if the utility company has partnered with Google, the utility company could peri-
odically (for example, every 30 minutes) send energy usage data to Google. The
data would be transmitted in the form of an XML file that is sent to Google’s ser-
vers through an encrypted HTTPS POST3 transaction. This process presents
Payment amount
Customer
Use and rate
data
Third party
payment company
Payment
transactions
Utility company
FIGURE 9.1
Example data flow path for third-party payment processor.
Service Providers
163

minimal risk to the utility company due to the fact that Google does not need to
access resources in the utility company’s internal network. Additionally, the data
is encrypted while in transit to Google’s servers. Thus, there is minimal risk to
the data being compromised … at least not yet. Later, in the section “Attacking
Consumers” of this chapter, attacks against Google’s and Microsoft’s services to
compromise usage data will be presented.
From a consumer’s perspective, if their utility company has not yet partnered
with a third party, there are still other options. Companies, such as The Energy
Detective (www.theenergydetective.com), have created devices that directly inter-
face with Google PowerMeter. These devices usually connect to the consumer’s
home or business network and use the consumer’s Internet connection to transmit
the data to Google. So, the utility company is now completely out of the picture
and the risk falls on the consumer, Google (and/or other third parties that provide
similar services), and the company that created the device.
Managing Smart Devices
Managing the risk of reporting energy usage will be a minor task compared with
managing the risk of third-party services that allow consumers to remotely control
their smart devices. Ranging from changing the temperature on thermostats to
turning on/off the gas fireplace, these services will require network access to the
smart devices. The network path that the command controls take will determine
the risk to each entity involved in this scenario.
Utility company
Usage
data
Smart
meter
Customer
Google
Usage data
Usage data
FIGURE 9.2
Example data flow path for third-party energy consumption application service provider.
164
CHAPTER 9 Third-Party Services

Required Access for Smart Device Control
Smart device management interfaces will require a completely different level of
access than third-party payment processors or even energy usage reporting services.
If you work for a utility company and you are asked to assess a third party that pro-
vides this type of solution, an important question to consider is: Will the third party
need to use your operations network to access the smart devices? This scenario is
depicted in Figure 9.3 and shows the increased access into the utility and third-
party networks. Alternatively, does the third party provide consumers with a gate-
way that uses the consumer’s Internet connection to communicate with the third
party directly? From a utility company’s perspective, requiring the third party and
the consumer to communicate directly would appear to present the least risk. How-
ever, this would require the consumers to install another device on their network,
thus increasing their risk, which may or may not sit well with the consumer.
NOTE
Have you caught on to the theme of this chapter yet? Access to data and network resources
should be restricted as much as possible. If a third party does not have a valid business
justification for access to a particular resource, do not allow access to that resource.
Essentially, this means you should apply the Principle of Least Privilege, which is a simple
concept in theory. How you react to a third party that demands a domain administrator
account in order to provide their service is a different matter.
Utility company
Access customer’s
smart devices
through utility
company’s network
Third party vendor
Smart
device
Control
customer’s
smart
devices
commands
Smart device commands
Customer
Smart
device
Smart
meter
FIGURE 9.3
Example data flow path for third-party control of smart devices through utility company
networks.
Service Providers
165

Device Support
When a utility company chooses a vendor from which to purchase devices, such
as smart meters, they will usually be given the option of purchasing maintenance
service as well. Smart meters are generally expected to have a 15 to 20 year life
expectancy; however, the functionality that they are expected to provide will con-
tinually evolve. Additionally, security vulnerabilities will be identified in these
devices and patches, or new firmware, will need to be pushed out to these
devices. Fortunately, from an ease of use perspective at least, most smart meters
provide the ability to remotely update the firmware.
Required Access for Remotely Managing Devices
Applying the patches or new firmware will most likely run through the utility
company’s operations network. Although connecting the smart meter to the consu-
mer’s network and directly communicating to the third-party service provider may
be possible, this approach will most likely be the exception rather than the rule. If
the service provider is responsible for administering the patches or new firmware,
they will need a network path from their network enterprise into the utility com-
pany’s operations network. The service provider will most likely utilize an exist-
ing file transfer protocol, such as file transfer protocol (FTP) or trivial file transfer
protocol (TFTP), to upload the new firmware or patches to the device. Security
professionals can hope for the use of more secure protocols such as secure file
transfer protocol (SFTP) or secure copy protocol (SCP), but the reality is that
unencrypted protocols will most likely be utilized. Depending on the third party,
they may require a patch management system be placed in the operations network.
The patch management system would grab the security patches or new firmware
Consumer’s smart meter
Smart meter vendor’s
update server
Utility company’s
update server
Update pull
Update push
FIGURE 9.4
Example data flow path for remotely managing devices.
166
CHAPTER 9 Third-Party Services

from the third-party’s network, then push the security patches or new firmware to
the devices. Thus, the utility company would need to allow a third-party server on
the utility company’s network and allow the server network access, which is illu-
strated in Figure 9.4.
ATTACKING CONSUMERS
Attacks targeting electricity consumers will become increasingly easier with the
availability and further expansion of third-party services for smart grids. This
should be no surprise considering the most difficult vulnerabilities to remediate
are often the ones that target users. These vulnerabilities also tend to become the
“acceptable risk” issues since the threat to an organization is not as obvious when
discussing attacks against its users.
Functionality Undermines Security
Information security professionals are often accused of interfering with business
operations, warning of unprotected and excessive functionality that may be abused
by unknown malicious individuals; “hackers” as they are known in the media and
general population. The fact of the matter remains, however, that the availability
of useful functionality essentially translates into a higher level of risk to the confi-
dentiality and integrity of the associated systems—electrical devices such as lights,
thermostats, and refrigerators in the case of smart grid devices. Within the smart
grid arena, functionality is expanding and evolving with smart grid devices, utility
company applications and services, and third-party services.
Microsoft Hohm and Google PowerMeter
At the time of writing this book, the most visible third-party services such as
Microsoft’s Hohm and Google’s PowerMeter are limited in functionality in that
they collect and consolidate power usage data but do not offer functionality to
manipulate the supply of power or the devices that use it. This limitation restricts
the types of attacks that may be used against consumers as well as the potential
effect of a successful attack. Specifically, an attacker would have to obtain access
to a user’s data and then devise physical attacks against the user’s property—
think robbery when no one is home. With essentially read-only functionality, an
attacker cannot easily inflict the kind of damaging attacks described in Chapter 3,
“Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies and Beyond,” in a remote, automated,
and widespread manner.
It should be expected that the more dangerous attacks against consumers will
come into play when more useful functionality is made available to consumers.
When users can remotely turn off electrical devices, attackers may be able to exe-
cute denial-of-service attacks by remotely turning off all electrical devices. When
users can remotely manage their home area network (HAN), attackers may be
Attacking Consumers
167

able to remotely leverage HANs for attacks against the utility company or other
targets. The attack possibilities will expand and evolve along with legitimate func-
tionality. The following sections discuss specific aspects of third-party applications
such as Microsoft Hohm and Google PowerMeter.
Single Sign-On
Single sign-on is one of the best examples of a double-edge sword in the informa-
tion security industry. Edge 1: Without single sign-on, users are required to memor-
ize several combinations of account credentials. For the purposes of this argument,
disregard password database applications or at least keep in mind that most normal
users will not be bothered to learn how to use one. The end result is typically one
or a few very predictable or common user IDs and passwords, which will facilitate
brute force authentication attacks. Edge 2: A vulnerability that leads to unauthorized
access in one application enables unauthorized access to all applications. The same
weak password idea may apply here, but one hopes the minimum password require-
ments in a single sign-on environment are configured such that brute force authenti-
cation attacks would result in very few compromises.
In the case of Hohm and PowerMeter, single sign-on means all of those pub-
licly documented and privately exploited vulnerabilities in applications that utilize
Microsoft Live or any other Google application may immediately become an issue
for users. The converse of this statement is also true. That is, vulnerabilities in
Microsoft Hohm and Google PowerMeter may immediately translate into
unauthorized access to users’ e-mail, RSS feeds, investments and other financial
data, and other applications.
Persistent Authentication
Imagine, for a moment, the following common scenario: You get home from work
and boot up your home PC, and open your favorite Web browser that automati-
cally retrieves the latest e-mails. There are no new messages because you have
already viewed them on your mobile phone. The next day at work you get a new
desktop—presumably because the old one was infected with no less than three
distinct viruses delivered from several hundred videos downloaded during lunch
break—and you immediately connect and log in to Microsoft Live and/or Google
accounts to ensure you can get access to e-mail, RSS feeds, stock tickers, and all
the other wonderful tools offered to users. Then you buy a new car with Ford
SYNC, which provides a wireless hotspot for you5 and repeat the same process.
Now any time you are within physical reach of these devices, you can access all
of your data online. And now consider the eventual widespread implementation of
wearable and embedded systems for humans that will offer access without the
need for handheld devices. One thing that can make this scenario possible—in
addition to the obvious hardware and software that is required—is persistent
authentication, and it has some very powerful and attractive aspects. And now
imagine that, in the same capacity, you can remotely manage all the electrical
devices in your house, including the alarm system.
168
CHAPTER 9 Third-Party Services

Persistent authentication in Web applications allows a user to authenticate once
using the account credentials and then provide an authentication token as proof of
identity in future requests. This token will remain valid until it is deleted or
expired, neither of which may happen for a very long time. From an attacker’s
perspective, obtaining this token equates to impersonating the user for the asso-
ciated application. Access to any of the devices storing this token could be
obtained by physical or logical means and would lead to the same result. And to
think you got angry when the company forced a 15-minute inactivity timeout on
all desktops.
Possibly the most significant security issue related to persistent authentication
for Web applications is the fact that many vulnerabilities have been and will be
found that could allow an attacker to compromise the persistent authentication
token with a malicious Web site. By enticing unsuspecting users to visit a mali-
cious Web page, an attacker could obtain this token or utilize it in an automated
attack. Refer to the section “Other Types of Attacks” in this chapter.
With persistent authentication comes ease of access, be it for a legitimate user
or an attacker. The question of whether to implement it boils down to user accep-
tance: Will users still use the application if they have to enter their password just
to turn off a light or reprogram the thermostat (and not complain about it con-
stantly)? If not, then a dedicated attacker may be able to play chopsticks with the
lights in your office building or the houses in your neighborhood. Or worse, of
course.
Other Types of Attacks
Chapter 7, “Attacking the Utility Companies,” described two very powerful
attacks against Web application users, namely cross site scripting (XSS) and
cross site request forgery (CSRF), that could be used by attackers to impact uti-
lity companies by way of their consumers. Although these attacks were dis-
cussed from the utility company’s risk perspective, they may be applicable (of
course) to any Web applications and thus any entity that implements or utilizes
them. For users of third-party services from providers like Microsoft and
Google, the risk lies almost entirely with the user since the provider has almost
nothing to risk other than its reputation and maybe a temporary decline in stock
value.
Smart Devices Gone Wild
The industry for smart devices is developing in a very decentralized manner,
meaning that many different companies are producing products and hoping to
become the standard by way of popularity among users. Though it should not
have to be written again, this means that security controls will take a backseat for
better and easier functionality and accessibility. One can only hope that security
can stay in the car, rather than being stuffed in the trunk to be handled much
further down the road. But one should hope that security is addressed some years
Attacking Consumers
169

down the road. Consequently, the reader should rest assured that security will be
taken seriously and considered a “top priority” by these organizations once a
major attack becomes public knowledge. The security professionals should rest
assured that they will continue to enjoy job security as the smart grid industry
continues to mature.
Consider the smart thermostat as an example. What could possibly go wrong
with enabling users to remotely manage the thermostat settings? Consider the
smart thermostat with knowledge of the attacks described throughout this chapter,
and consider the risk versus the benefits. The benefit of remote thermostat man-
agement is a reduction of power use and increase in associated cost savings. The
risk is unauthorized access and manipulation of the thermostat setting. At first
consideration, this may not seem to pose a particularly significant risk. But what
would happen if an attacker were able to turn off the thermostat at midnight for
households in Wisconsin in the January timeframe? Consider how many people
would become ill and have to call in sick during the following day or week. Hos-
pitals may become overcrowded, consumers unwittingly flood the utility com-
pany’s customer support numbers, and the whole process restarts every week until
someone figures out the real cause of the problem.
A thermostat prank is one thing, but consider the fact that every electrical
device in the home will soon be equipped with “smart” functionality … which of
course simply means programmability and remote access via Web server/applica-
tion. For office buildings and organizations with less-than-stellar remote access
security, attackers may be able to execute similar attacks. If power supplies, alarm
systems, and physical security devices are configured with similar smart function-
ality, the phrase “taking candy from a baby” may make a resurgence in popular-
ity. Without spreading too much fear, uncertainty, and doubt, it suffices to say
that a well-planned attack could actually impact the daily lives of thousands or
millions of people and organizations.
ATTACKING SERVICE PROVIDERS
One of the most over-looked or disregarded risks associated with any organization
is the threat from trusted third parties. Organizations are often left at the mercy of
the third party: either accept the risk of providing remote domain administrator
access or find another vendor to supply the needed service or product. Admittedly,
domain administrator access may be a stretch and not very common, but is rather
an example of the general problem: An organization that utilizes a third-party ser-
vice will either outsource sensitive data for processing or lessen the security
defenses to enable operations … or both in some cases. The overlooked risk
involves both scenarios in that the third party is inherently trusted to protect sensi-
tive data and to not enable or instigate attacks against the purchasing organization.
Security professionals know this, and attackers can exploit it to get to the utility
company through the service provider.
170
CHAPTER 9 Third-Party Services

SECURING THIRD-PARTY ACCESS TO THE SMART GRID
Regardless of the environment, when discussing third-party access to your
resources, the Principle of Least Privilege is the golden rule. Limiting access to
only what is necessary for valid business functionality will minimize the risk. The
first step in this process is evaluating the trust in the relationship.
Trust
Security professionals are stereotypically paranoid. They are kept awake at night
thinking of their organization getting attacked through zero-day vulnerabilities,
massive botnets executing a distributed denial of service (DDoS), and for count-
less other reasons. So when the business units of an organization broker a partner-
ship with a third party that wants access to sensitive resources, the immediate
response from the security department is usually a string of four letter words that
cannot be repeated in this book. However, the security department must walk a
fine line due to the trust placed by other parties in the company. For example,
consider a third party whose CEO (Alice) is a very close friend of the utility com-
pany CEO (Bob). Alice and Bob may have come to an agreement based on their
mutual trust of each other, but Bob did not consult with his security department
before agreeing to use Alice’s Web application for remotely controlling smart
devices. Thus, the security department did not have a chance to tell Bob why
transmitting credentials over HTTP is a bad thing.
The security department screaming expletives at Bob, or even politely criticizing
Alice’s security posture, is probably not the best approach for dealing with this
situation. Taking a combative attitude toward these situations will only drive a rift
between the security department and the rest of the company, which will only make
the security department’s job that much harder. The best approach will most likely
be to work with Alice’s company to address any issues before the integration pro-
cess is complete. Ensuring that Alice’s company has implemented similar security
controls will help the security department deal with the new trust relationship.
When creating the agreement with the third party, usually in the form of a Ser-
vice Level Agreement (SLA) or functional requirements document, explicitly
define all of your security requirements in the agreement. Including the security
requirements in the contract will make the third party contractually obligated to
implement those security requirements.
Daisy-chaining Trust
Another consideration is the third-party’s business partners. So maybe the third
party has a solid security management program, but do you trust their third-party
business partners? For example, at the time of the writing of this book, Microsoft
currently limits access to the Hohm SDK to their partner utility companies. Addi-
tionally, Microsoft lists in their Online Privacy Statement that they do not sell,
rent, or lease their customer lists to third parties,6 which is commendable.
Securing Third-Party Access to the Smart Grid
171

However, they do provide information to other companies that work for Microsoft.6
Understanding the third-party’s privacy policy and specifying how access is granted
in the partnership agreement will largely dictate the trust relationship.
Additionally, the third party will most likely have more than one customer. So,
will your company trust the third party to protect your information from their
other clients? This question will be covered in more detail in the sections “Asses-
sing the Third Party” and “Securing the Third Party.”
Data Access
In the section “Billing” of this chapter, the scenario of using a third party to pro-
cess payment card transactions was discussed. In particular, it was noted that the
utility company has no need to access the payment card data and the third-party
payment processor should not need access to consumer data, such as energy con-
sumption or payment history. Access to sensitive data should be reviewed and
linked to a specific functionality that requires access to the data.
TIP
Third parties will often request more access than what they really need. Sometimes this
happens because they honestly do not know or do not have a complete understanding of
what data they really need access to. Alternatively, they could be asking for access to more
data to help their marketing departments. Sometimes they will ask for more access because
they are anticipating that your company will reject their first request, and then “mitigate the
risk” by granting less access than what was requested. Regardless, your company should
respond to their access requests with the same question: Why? You should force the third
party to provide justification for the requested access.
Data Classification
In order to properly protect access to data, the data needs to be assigned a critical-
ity rating. Unfortunately, this will be a lengthy and difficult process. One of the
first steps will be to define the criticality labels. For example, the following labels
are commonly used:
•
Confidential
•
Proprietary
•
Official use only
•
For public distribution.
The actual label titles matter less than having a clearly defined definition for
each label and educating employees on how to use the classification system.
Classifying certain data, such as payment card data or social security numbers,
will be relatively easy. Everyone knows this is sensitive information and should
be kept confidential. Unfortunately, not all data is so easily classified, especially
when you consider data aggregation and combination. As an overly simplified
172
CHAPTER 9 Third-Party Services

example, consider that by itself, a consumer’s total energy consumption for one
hour could be considered nonsensitive. So, if your company were to disclose that
Tony Flick used two kilowatts from 8:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. today, this would prob-
ably not cause too much concern from Tony. However, if you were to release his
hourly energy consumption for one week, a quick analysis would probably reveal
his daily schedule, such as when he wakes up, leaves for work, returns from
work, and goes to sleep. Thus, allowing people to know the best time to rob him.
In order to properly classify data sensitivity, an evaluation should determine the
risk of disclosing just that particular data, an aggregation of that data over time,
and how attackers could use the data in combination with other data.
Data Segmentation
Data segmentation should be implemented by the third party to prevent their clients
from accessing each other’s data. Third-party service providers will have multiple
clients. These clients will most likely share the same application interfaces, network
gateways, and potentially data storage. If at all possible, storing data on the same
system(s) with other client data should be avoided. Although physical separation
would be ideal, virtualization is used in just about every organization these days.
So, virtual and logical segmentation will be the most likely scenarios.
If data segmentation is not possible, and your organization absolutely must partner
with that third party, your organization should evaluate their authorization security
controls to mitigate the risk. Strong authorization security controls will help prevent
other organizations from accessing your data. Authorization security controls will not
completely eliminate the risk; however, the risk will be more acceptable.
Network Access
Business-to-business (B2B) connections are often accepted for business reasons with-
out considering the security implications. In Chapter 7, “Attacking the Utility Compa-
nies,” the incident at the Davis-Besse nuclear power plant was illustrated. To recap
the incident, the Slammer worm was able to infect internal systems at the power
plant. Although the power plant’s external firewall would have blocked the worm, a
connection between a contractor’s network and the power plant that bypassed the fire-
wall allowed the worm to propagate from the contractor’s network to the power
plant’s internal systems.7 This provides just one example of why network traffic from
third parties should go through the same security controls as any other network traffic.
TIP
B2B connections are usually allowed to bypass external security controls, which results in
an unfiltered connection between the two organizations. As illustrated in the Davis-Besse
nuclear power plant example, a vulnerability in the third-party’s network will affect the
security posture of your organization and potentially vice versa. From an external
perspective, the B2B connection between the two organizations should be restricted by
which ports, protocols, and systems are allowed to communicate.
Securing Third-Party Access to the Smart Grid
173

Some third-party vendors will require domain credentials for their service or
product to operate appropriately. Although providing domain administrator access
will make the implementation easier, the level of risk obviously increases with
this decision. If the service is compromised by an attacker, the attacker will be
able execute commands with the same level of privileges. Thus, if the service is
running under a domain administrator account, the attacker will be able to execute
commands with the permissions of a domain administrator. If a domain account is
required, an account with the least privileges as possible will be ideal. Addition-
ally, this account should be required to adhere to corporate password policies.
Segmentation
In most cases where network access is required, the third party will most likely
not need access to the entire network(s). So, for example, a service provider that
performs patch management for smart meters will not need access to human
resources network subnets or systems. Even if your organization does not use any
third-party services, the network architecture should not be a flat design, which
allows network access to and from any system on the network. Appropriate access
controls should be configured in firewalls and other network devices to restrict
unnecessary access between networks and subnets. Restricting access to specific
network segments will limit your organization’s risk exposure to an attack that
comes through the third party.
Monitoring
If your organization has already implemented a security monitoring solution, such
as an Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) or Intrusion Detection System (IDS), any
third-party traffic should be analyzed by these monitoring systems. A common
request from third parties is to be white-listed on monitoring systems, which
essentially allows any traffic from the third party be allowed to pass through the
monitoring devices without being analyzed first. Of course, this request may also
come from within the prime organization when the personnel responsible for
reviewing the alerts from these monitoring systems keep getting alerts everyday at
2:00 A.M. The network traffic from third parties should be treated as untrusted and
analyzed accordingly.
Secure Transport
Sensitive data should be encrypted at all times, which includes while in transit.
Although this rule is more important when the data is transmitted across untrusted
networks, this rule should still be applied when the data is transmitted across a
trusted network. Common clear-text protocols used to transmit data and their
more secure alternatives are listed in Table 9.1. Replacing clear-text protocols
with more secure alternatives should not come as a shock and may seem like an
easy policy to implement; however, certain devices will pose problems to encrypt-
ing sensitive data in transit. Encryption is computationally expensive and as a
174
CHAPTER 9 Third-Party Services

result, increases the power consumption of the device. This could dramatically
decrease the battery life of the device and the lifetime of the device.
A common approach is to implement a site-to-site virtual private network
(VPN) between the organization’s network and the third-party network. This will
result in all data transmitted between the two networks to be encrypted. However,
there is a catch. Let’s consider as an example, a utility company (FakeUtility)
sending consumer usage data to a third party (FakeAnalysisCompany) for analy-
sis. FakeAnalysisCompany has an anonymous FTP server that allows anyone to
write data to the FTP server, but restricts read access. So, anyone can upload data
to the FTP server, but only the third party can access it once it has been uploaded.
This is a common approach to make it simpler for clients to create scripts to auto-
matically transmit the data. To follow the data path, FakeUtility initially transmits
the data unencrypted across their network via FTP and is encrypted right before it
leaves the network by the VPN. The data is transmitted encrypted to FakeAnalysis-
Company’s network and is unencrypted at their VPN. Once inside FakeAnalysis-
Company’s network, the data is decrypted and transmitted unencrypted to the FTP
server. This approach may be acceptable to your organizations since it mitigates the
risk of transmitting sensitive data unencrypted across untrusted networks. However,
there is still risk while the data is transmitted inside FakeUtility and FakeAnalysis-
Company’s internal networks.
TIP
During audits, systems will be checked for clear-text authentication protocols, such as
Telnet and FTP. Even if the clear-text services are unused, the auditors will still report them
as vulnerabilities. Either remove or disable the clear-text services to prevent port scanners
and network vulnerability scanners from reporting them as vulnerabilities.
Assessing the Third Party
Before agreeing to partner with a third party, your organization should assess their
security posture since their security posture will soon affect your organization’s
Table 9.1 Clear-text protocols and their secure alternatives
Clear-text protocol
Secure alternatives
FTP
Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP)
Secure Copy (SCP)
TFTP
SFTP, SCP
Telnet
Secure Shell (SSH)
Rlogin
SSH
RSH
SSH
HTTP
HTTPS (SSL/TLS)
Securing Third-Party Access to the Smart Grid
175

security posture. As a minimum baseline, the third party should be required to
implement the security controls that your organization has implemented. If your
organization has a policy that explicitly disallows the use of clear-text protocols,
the third party should not allow them either.
If possible, a security assessment of the third party should be performed to
determine the level of risk that they will introduce to your organization. Although
this request is not accepted very often, it never hurts to ask. Assuming your orga-
nization and the third party have executed a Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA),
the third party may be willing to provide the results of their last security assess-
ment. However, keep in mind that the report you receive may be the fifth version
where the vulnerabilities listed in the first version were remediated and subse-
quently removed from the report by the fifth version.
SAS 70
Statement on Auditing Standards No. 70 (SAS 70) is commonly used by third-
party service providers to answer their client’s questions regarding security.
When the third party is asked a security-related question, the third party will
usually refer their clients to their SAS 70, regardless of whether the answer is in
the SAS 70 or not. SAS 70s can provide useful information to reassure your
organization that the third party has implemented at least some security controls.
However, you should keep in mind that SAS 70s are essentially marketing tools
for the third party and they are generally written to convince you of how great
that third party is.
SAS 70 is an audit performed by an independent certified public accountant
(CPA) or firm, where the auditor issues an opinion on the internal controls of a
service organization.8 The important thing to note here is that an SAS 70 report
will only provide analysis on the service organization’s internal controls. A SAS
70 audit does not perform a gap analysis between the service organization’s inter-
nal controls and a set of respected standard controls.8 Thus, it still falls on the ser-
vice organization’s clients to determine whether the controls specified in the SAS
70 report cover all their expected security control requirements.
Securing the Third Party
The majority of the scenarios in this chapter refer to the third-party service provi-
der introducing risk to an organization, usually a utility company. However, the
utility company can provide just as much risk, if not more to the third party if
that third party has not designed a secure enterprise. Third parties should treat
their clients’ networks as untrusted entities as well. Attacks can originate from
their clients and they should be prepared to protect against that threat.
As a third party, you will most likely have more than one client (hopefully)
and have a duty to protect your customers from each other. If a shared environ-
ment exists, which is highly advised against, the proper security controls should
be in place to prevent clients accessing each others’ data or clients gaining access
176
CHAPTER 9 Third-Party Services

to each others’ networks. Specifically, access control, data segmentation, and
authorization security controls must be implemented to ensure your client’s
protection.
SUMMARY
Third-party service providers can play a huge role in assisting utility companies
and consumers achieve their goals with smart grids. In some cases, their services
and products will make smart grids more secure. However, they may also increase
the risk to each entity involved in the smart grid. Although personal relationships
and business justifications may warrant a trusting relationship, the proper security
controls must be in place to protect the utility company, the third party, the consu-
mer, and any other entity involved.
Attackers are aware of third parties and will seek to abuse the trust between
business partners. Companies often include their new relationships on the news
sections of their Web sites, which allows for easy identification. If a determined
attacker has been unsuccessful in obtaining direct access to their target, they will
attempt to use the third parties as alternate routes to get to their original target.
Endnotes
1.
PayPal. Mandatory PCI Compliance: with PayPal, it’s easy [document on the Internet].
https://www.paypal.com/pcicompliance; [accessed 03.04.10].
2.
PCI Security Standards Council, LLC. About the PCI Data Security Standard (PCI
DSS) [document on the Internet]. https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/security_
standards/pci_dss.shtml; [accessed 03.04.10].
3.
Google. Google PowerMeter API [document on the Internet]. http://code.google.com/
apis/powermeter/; [accessed 03.04.10].
4.
Microsoft. Microsoft Hohm Partner SDK Overview [document on the Internet]. http://
msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ee724276.aspx; [accessed 03.04.10].
5.
Ford. FORD SYNC CONNECTS CAR WITH INTERNET: NEW WIFI RECEIVER,
BUILT-IN WEB BROWSER, MOBILE HOTSPOT [document on the Internet]. http://
media.ford.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=31705; [accessed 03.04.10].
6.
Microsoft. Microsoft Online Privacy Statement [document on the Internet]. http://
privacy.microsoft.com/en-us/default.mspx; [accessed 04.04.10].
7.
Security Focus. Slammer worm crashed Ohio nuke plant network [document on the
Internet]. Kevin Poulsen; http://www.securityfocus.com/news/6767; 2003 [accessed
08.02.10].
8.
SAS 70 FAQ’S [document on the Internet]. Scott Coolidge; http://sas70.com/sas70_
faqs.html; [accessed 20.05.10].
Endnotes
177

CHAPTER
10
Mobile Applications
and Devices
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Why Mobile Applications?
•
Platforms
•
Trust
•
Attacks
•
Securing Mobile Devices
•
Secure Mobile Applications
From providing data access to allowing remote control of systems, mobile applications
will play a large role in the smart grid. As mobile devices continue to grow in popular-
ity, consumers and utility personnel alike will integrate mobile devices more with their
daily lives and use them to interact with smart grids. As a result, attackers view mobile
devices as higher value targets.
Mobile devices will access smart grid resources through mobile applications
designed specifically for mobile devices. However, these mobile applications will
be attacked by every type of device capable of accessing the applications. Since
most of the mobile applications will be accessible via the Internet, attackers will
be able to use any type of device to attack these applications. This chapter will
describe the possible attacks against mobile applications and mobile devices, and
then explore how to protect these applications and devices.
WHY MOBILE APPLICATIONS?
Cell phones and other mobile devices have become prevalent in today’s society. At the
end of February 2010, comScore (www.comscore.com) estimated that roughly 234 mil-
lion Americans (aged 13 years or older) were mobile subscribers.1 Thus, mobile devices
provide a convenient platform that utility companies can utilize to distribute energy con-
sumption information to their consumers in a manner that consumers are comfortable
with. Additionally, mobile devices will allow consumers to rapidly adapt to consumption
information by enabling consumers to change their energy consumption from anywhere.
Although smart grid functionality will allow utility companies to remotely diagnose
and fix most problems in electric grids, there will still be situations that require
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00010-8
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
179

employees to physically visit the location of the problem. Mobile devices will enable
these employees to stay connected with their organization’s network and resources
while out in the field diagnosing and fixing issues. Some of these devices will be able
to interact flawlessly with existing applications; however, some devices will require
applications specifically designed to allow access from mobile devices.
PLATFORMS
Mobile application developers seeking to reach the broadest audience will have to
support multiple platforms. The following list contains some of the more common
mobile platforms:
•
Cell phones (smart and regular)
•
Mobile Internet devices (MID)
•
Portable media players (PMPs)
•
Laptops
•
Netbooks
•
Ultra mobile personal computers (UMPC)
•
Tablet PCs
From a functionality standpoint, developing mobile applications for mobile
platforms is traditionally difficult due to how varied the devices are. The application
will need to display correctly on devices ranging from smart phones with three-inch
screens to laptops with 17-inch screens. Similarly, the security requirements for these
platforms will vary depending on the specifications for each supported mobile device.
TRUST
Chapter 9, “Third-Party Services,” discussed the trust relationships between utility
companies and third-party service providers, and this chapter will describe the
trust relationship between the application developers and the consumers. However,
in this case, the consumers will be taking a further leap of faith when using the
mobile applications. For the most part, the consumers will just click the I Agree
button and blindly accept the developer’s terms of service.
EPIC FAIL
Have faith in consumers spending the time to make informed decisions regarding what
applications to install? Consider the Lose/Lose video game (www.stfj.net/art/2009/loselose/),
developed by Zach Gage, as an example. The video game closely resembles Space Invaders,
but with one important difference. For every alien space ship the user destroys, the video
game deletes a file in the user’s home directory.2 On his Web site, Zach clearly warns that
the application will permanently delete files. Additionally, when you start the video game, it
will warn the user that killing the alien ships will permanently delete files on the hard drive.
Yet, on the video game’s Web site, the list of high scorers contains over a thousand players.
180
CHAPTER 10 Mobile Applications and Devices

Trusting Strangers
Would you trust a stranger with your online banking password? If not, why would
you trust an application developed by a stranger with your online banking
password? Without performing a source code review of the application, how
can a consumer be assured their information will not be compromised? The
application could provide a back door that allows the malicious developer to
access the consumer’s mobile device remotely or the application could be
sending data to the developer’s malicious server. From a smart grid perspective,
would you provide a stranger with a key to your house to adjust your thermo-
stat’s setting to reflect changing electric prices? If not, why would you trust an
application developed by a stranger with the password to control smart devices
in your home?
One argument to trust the application is that you trust the parent company to
provide the proper oversight, as well as the dozens of strangers who have posted
reviews. Let’s take Apple’s iTunes (www.apple.com/itunes/) App Store as an
example, although Google’s Android Market (www.android.com/market/) and
BlackBerry’s App World (http://na.blackberry.com/eng/services/appworld/) could
be used in this example as well. Most consumers have grown to trust Apple
through using iTunes to download music, movies, and television shows. With
the tremendous success of their iPhone, iPod Touch, and iPad, developers have
created an overwhelming number of applications for these mobile devices. How-
ever, Apple does not blindly allow any application to be distributed through
their App Store. For example, Apple has prohibited applications that include sex-
ual content and has pretty thoroughly rejected or removed most applications with
sexual content on that basis.3 So how thoroughly has Apple screened the appli-
cations to prevent malicious applications from being distributed in the App
Store? Although consumers can rest assured that any respectable company would
remove malicious applications, finding sexually explicit material in an application
is a lot easier than finding back doors in an application. Performing a thorough
security assessment of each application would be too time consuming and thus
unrealistic. So the question then changes from is there an app for that to is that
app secure, and should you trust the new smart grid mobile applications on your
device?
Code Signing
Code signing is one method the software industry has used to address the issue of
trust with applications downloaded from the Internet. Code signing uses digital
signatures to confirm the authenticity and integrity of the application. Specifically,
the author of the application will digitally sign the executable(s) using their pri-
vate encryption key, or signing key, and any recipients of the executable can use
either the author’s public key or a certificate authority (CA) to validate the
signature. Theoretically, this method would prevent anyone from tampering with
the application, which should instill trust in the user.
Trust
181

NOTE
A digital signature is a cryptographic transformation that allows the verification of origin
authentication, data integrity, and signatory nonrepudiation.4 For more information on digital
signatures, NIST FIPS PUB 186-3 provides a very detailed perspective on how digital
signatures work. If you are unfamiliar with digital signatures, or public key infrastructure
(PKI) in general, a beginner’s guide to PKI can be found at: http://articles.techrepublic.com.
com/5100-10878_11-5839988.html.
Although code signing can help mitigate the risk involved with downloading
applications from the Internet, the risk is not completely eliminated. It is impor-
tant to note that code signing does not prevent the original developer from
inserting malicious code into their application. Additionally, the user needs to
trust that the developer has protected their private encryption key. If a third
party has compromised the developer’s private key, then that third party would
be able to tamper with the application and digitally sign the executable as the
original developer.
As a real-world example of code signing, iPhones require all applications to be
signed by Apple.5 Thus, developers will need to request a signing certificate from
Apple before their application can run on iPhones and be distributed in the App
Store. So in this scenario, Apple acts as the CA, who can issue and revoke signing
certificates. If an application is later determined to be malware, Apple could revoke
the signing certificate for that developer and application to prevent their application
from further spreading. Additionally, Apple could refuse to issue further signing
certificates to that developer, effectively banning that developer from distributing
more malware through the App Store.
Apple’s code signing technique is susceptible to attacks, though. At the 2010
CanSecWest conference, Halvar Flake compromised an iPhone in the Pwn2Own
contest on the first day using an exploit developed by Vincenzo Iozzo and Ralf-
Philipp Weinmann.5 The attack was performed by browsing a malicious Web
site on the iPhone, which forced the iPhone to disclose the contents of its SMS
database.5 The exploit circumvents the code signing security control by using
return-oriented programming techniques, which manipulate the function call
stack to convert valid code into a malicious payload.5
ATTACKS
Mobile applications and devices will be targets in the smart grid. Attackers
generally take the path of least resistance to achieve their goal, and mobile
applications provide an easily accessible target. Attacks against certain mobile
devices, such as cell phones and PMPs, have been limited in the past; however,
this will dramatically change as their integration into society and level of
connectivity continue to increase.
182
CHAPTER 10 Mobile Applications and Devices

Why Attack the Handset?
Mobile devices, such as laptops, netbooks, and tablet PCs, generally run traditional
operating systems, applications, and share the same connection speeds as their
nonmobile variants. Thus, the reasons for attacking these devices should not be a
surprise. Cell phones, MIDs, and PMPs have only recently become major targets
for attackers. Faster Internet connections and the sensitive data now stored on these
types of devices will compel attackers to consider them as better targets.
Cell phones used to store a very small amount of information, including names and
phone numbers, which provided little to attackers. The same can be said for PMPs,
which would traditionally store media files and maybe some personal information
about the owner. However, these devices have been transformed into multipurpose
computers that can perform the same functions as other mobile devices such as
laptops. The following list contains examples of what can be found on mobile devices:
•
VPN keys
•
Corporate e-mail passwords
•
Authentication tokens
•
GPS location
•
Sensitive information cached by applications
Additionally, most cell phones and PMPs will sync with other devices, such as
laptops or desktops. So, if an attacker compromises a cell phone or a PMP, they
could use that compromised device to attack the system it syncs with.6 When the
user plugs in the device or connects it to the host system wirelessly, the device
could compromise the host system’s operating system.6 As a recent example, con-
sider the incident where Vodafone was shipping HTC Magic cell phones with
malware pre-installed.7 Specifically, when a user connected their new phone to
their computer, the phone would attempt to install a Mariposa bot client, as well
as a Confiker and Lineage password stealing program onto their computer.7
SMS
Short Message Service (SMS) messages are often seen as harmless text messages;
however, attacks can be carried out through the SMS messaging systems on cell
phones. For example, Charlie Miller and Collin Mulliner demonstrated at the Black
Hat (www.blackhat.com) USA 2009 conference an attack against iPhones using
malicious SMS messages.8 By sending specially crafted SMS messages, an attacker
could obtain complete control over the iPhone.8 Additionally, further research
showed that other cell phones were also partially vulnerable to this same attack.8
E-mail
If an attack can occur via SMS, then attacks will also occur over e-mail. E-mail
attacks targeting mobile devices may take the same form as the example SMS
Attacks
183

attack; however, they will also take other forms, such as phishing attacks that
attempt to spoof messages from the utility companies in order to get sensitive
information out of their targets.
NOTE
Other variants of phishing attacks include spear phishing and whaling attacks. Spear phishing
refers to phishing attacks that are targeted at certain groups. So, for example, the attacker
would first attempt to identify a group of e-mail addresses for a specific utility company and
then craft an e-mail that spoofs that particular utility company, thus, improving the likelihood
of success in their attack. Whaling attacks are similar to spear phishing except that they
further refine the target list to senior executives or other high-profile targets.
As an example, consider a two-vector attack that targets a business for ransom or
blackmail. The attacker initially compromises the smart meter that controls various
smart devices (such as HVAC, cooling, and of course, power for the company’s
servers) within the company’s data center. The attacker then sends e-mails to each
member of the board of directors for the company, whose e-mail addresses are listed
publicly on the company’s Web site. The e-mails state that if the company does
not pay the attacker $5 million (or some appropriate amount), the attacker will turn
off power to the mission critical systems, increase the temperature to unsafe levels,
and wreak havoc with the HVAC. The company’s backup power generators may
provide temporary support, but will the board want to risk the company’s business
operations on that chance?
Malicious Web Sites
Mobile Web browsers can be attacked just like traditional Web browsers, thus,
following links sent via e-mail on your cell phone does not provide any more
protection than on your desktop. Most attackers will create malicious Web sites that
target the broadest audience, which usually ends up being desktop Web browsers
such as Internet Explorer or Safari. However, an attacker who is determined to
target your mobile device will be able to setup a malicious Web site to compromise
mobile Web browsers.
Physical
When discussing threats to mobile devices, the physical security threat usually
rises to the top of the list. By their very nature, mobile devices will go outside the
protective physical security layers of fences, security guards, and security cameras.
Thus, these mitigating controls will cease to reduce the risk of physical security
threats.
The primary physical security threat to mobile devices will be theft. Mobile
devices are already seen as a target for thieves for their resale potential, but attackers
will also view these devices as methods to bypass perimeter security controls. As an
184
CHAPTER 10 Mobile Applications and Devices

example, consider utility company maintenance workers who spend most of their
days out in the field-fixing issues that cannot be fixed remotely, such as a downed
power line. The maintenance worker carries around a laptop with an internal 3G wire-
less card that provides Internet access over a cellular network. The maintenance
worker connects to the utility company’s network through the corporate VPN to
check their e-mail and check the sensor networks that detect when there is a problem
within the electric grid. When the maintenance worker arrives at the downed power
line, he leaves the laptop in the car. If an attacker can steal the laptop that is still
connected to the VPN, then he has most likely gained initial access to internal
resources in that organization. Hopefully, the organization has compensating controls
that would prevent unrestricted access to the internal network from a VPN connec-
tion, but the attacker would still have gained an access point to that organization.
From a consumer perspective, consider the upcoming Chevy Volt OnStar
mobile application as another example. Mobile phone applications are currently
being developed for the iPhone, BlackBerry, and Android platforms, in addition
to a Web interface.9 These mobile applications will allow Chevy Volt owners to
remotely control the following features:
•
Display charge status
•
Provide flexibility to “Charge Now” or schedule charge timing
•
Display percentage of battery charge level, electric, and total ranges
•
Allow owners to manually set grid-friendly charge mode for off-peak times
when electricity rates are lowest
•
Send text or e-mail notifications for charge reminders, interruptions, and full charge
•
Show miles per gallon, EV miles and miles driven for last trip and lifetime
•
Remotely start the vehicle to precondition the interior temperature
•
Unlock/lock the car doors9
The application integrates nicely into the smart grid goal to reduce consumer
energy consumption during peak times by allowing the owner to set the charging
schedule to off-peak times. If an attacker were able to steal the device, they could
wreak havoc on the owner. Consider the example of a Chevy Volt owner who lives
in a warm place, such as Florida. During the summer, cars that are parked outside
can reach unbearable temperatures that exceed 100 degrees Fahrenheit. So, the
natural elements alone can cause damage to items inside the car. Then, consider if
the attacker were to turn the car on remotely. The car will try to adjust the tempera-
ture to be comfortable, thus causing the battery and gas tank to drain. The attacker
could continue to drain the battery by repeatedly turning on the car until the mobile
application informs the attacker the battery is empty. Alternatively, the attacker
could just use the mobile application’s ability to unlock the doors and steal the car.
Mobile devices are often recycled, resold, or thrown away without properly
removing sensitive information. EBay (www.ebay.com) has made selling these
devices an easy transaction but if the information is not removed properly, the buyer
could become access to the information and resources stored on the mobile device.
According to a recent research survey, 40 percent of hard drives bought on eBay
Attacks
185

contain sensitive information from their previous owners, including corporations
and government agencies.10 In 2009, data for a U.S. missile air defense system were
discovered on a hard drive bought on eBay.11
TIP
The process to securely erase flash memory is different than erasing traditional storage
devices and will most likely require different applications.12 Alternatively, degaussing or
physically destroying the device memory can also achieve the same goal. See Table 10.1 for
a list of several examples of secure deletion tools.
SECURING MOBILE DEVICES
Mobile applications will mainly be developed to support access through two
mediums: a mobile Web site and a client application installed on the mobile
device. In either case, the mobile device will need to be protected to prevent
unauthorized access to the mobile application. Traditional security controls can be
extended to protect many mobile devices; however, new issues that arise from
mobile devices will need to be addressed by additional security controls.
The following best-practice guides and tips have been developed for mobile
device security:
•
US-CERT Cyber Security Tip ST06-007: Defending Cell Phones and PDAs
Against Attack – www.us-cert.gov/cas/tips/ST06-007.html
•
US-CERT Cyber Security Tip ST05-017: Cybersecurity for Electronic Devices –
www.us-cert.gov/cas/tips/ST05-017.html
•
US-CERT Cyber Security Tip ST04-020: Protecting Portable Devices: Data
Security – www.us-cert.gov/cas/tips/ST04-020.html
•
NIST SP 800-124: Guidelines on Cell Phone and PDA Security – http://csrc.
nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-124/SP800-124.pdf
•
NIST SP 800-101: Guidelines on Cell Phone Forensics – http://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/nistpubs/800-101/SP800-101.pdf
Table 10.1 Sample secure deletion resources12
Tool
Device support
License type
Dariks boot and nuke (DBAN – www.dban.org/)
ATA/IDE, SATA
Free
Roadkill’s datawipe (www.roadkil.net/)
ATA/IDE, SATA Flash
Free
Secure erase 4.0 http://cmrr.ucsd.edu/
people/Hughes/SecureErase.shtml)
Solid-state drives (SSD)
Free
Wireless recycling (www.recellular.com/
recycling/data_eraser/)
Cell phones
Free
186
CHAPTER 10 Mobile Applications and Devices

Traditional Security Controls
Most mobile devices can utilize the same controls as nonmobile devices, espe-
cially laptops and tablet PCs. Firewalls, host-based IDS/IPS, antivirus programs,
and patch management programs can be extended to mobile devices to provide
host-based protection; however, not every device will support these traditional
security controls. Thus, additional security controls will need to be implemented
to fill in the gaps where appropriate.
Secure Syncing
Certain portable devices, such as PMPs and cell phones, can be synced to a host
system, which allows the user to manage the device via a management interface. As
discussed earlier in the section “Why Attack the Handset” of this chapter, the
device can be used to attack the host system or conversely, an infected host system
could attack the mobile device. In order to carry out this type of attack, an attacker
would exploit the automatic actions that occur when a user connects their mobile
device to the host system. In Microsoft Windows, these features are called Autorun
and AutoPlay. Autorun starts programs automatically when a device is inserted or
connected to a computer, and AutoPlay can be configured to automatically select a
program to start based on the type of media inserted into a computer.13 Generally
speaking, these features should be disabled in a corporate environment, especially
considering Conficker and other malware have recently exploited this functional-
ity.14 Instructions on how to disable these features are provided in the following
Microsoft Support article: http://support.microsoft.com/kb/967715. Other operating
systems have similar features and should be disabled if at all possible.
Disk Encryption
Sensitive data, such as credit card numbers or social security numbers, should
always be encrypted. It does not matter if the data is sitting on a desktop inside the
utility company’s office building or on a laptop that is taken home by an employee
every night. However, since mobile devices tend to leave the physical security bar-
rier of most office buildings, the need for full disk encryption on mobile devices is
greater. Unfortunately, there is not a full disk encryption solution for every mobile
device. So, mitigating controls such as requiring any sensitive data to be stored
inside an encrypted file container or prohibiting the storage of sensitive data on
mobile devices, such as cell phones, can help mitigate the risk.
TOOLS
TrueCrypt (www.truecrypt.org) is a free, open-source tool that provides support for encrypted
file containers, partitions, and full disk encryption. The full disk encryption is only supported
on Windows; however, the other features are supported on Windows, Mac OS X, and
numerous Linux distributions.
Securing Mobile Devices
187

Screen Lock
Most mobile devices can be configured to require a username/password combination,
PIN, or some other form of authentication credential to be entered before granting
access to the device. From an organization’s perspective, mobile devices should follow
the policy that covers screen locking. Typically, this policy dictates the following:
•
Screen is automatically locked after 5 to 15 minutes of inactivity
•
User will manually lock the screen when leaving the system unattended
•
Authentication is required to unlock the screen
For mobile devices, such as cell phones and handhelds, these settings are
usually configurable; however, the management is more difficult. On Windows
systems, group policy can be set to automatically configure the device to implement
the screen lock policy. Other devices do not support centralized management and
must be configured manually. Additionally, some devices are hard to type on and
will frustrate users who need to type in a complex password. Thus, some users may
choose a password/PIN that is easier to type … and of course easier to guess.
Screen locking on mobile devices can be defeated by attackers in multiple
ways and should not be solely relied upon. For example, some touch screen
mobile devices pose a risk due to finger smudges. Oil from the user’s fingers can
create a fingerprint trail that reveals the characters of the password/PIN. An
attacker could then try the different combinations of the characters to unlock the
device. If the device is configured to use an unlock pattern to unlock the screen,
then it can be even easier for the attacker. For example, Android phones can be
configured to use an unlock screen that displays nine dots on the touch screen,
and the user must draw a pattern with the nine dots to unlock the screen.15 The
pattern can be any series of lines with the following constraints:
•
Between four and nine dots must be used
•
A dot can only be used once
•
A dot cannot be crossed, unless it has already been used
•
A line between dots can be horizontal, vertical, diagonal, or similar to the way
a chess knight piece moves16
Figures 10.1 through 10.4 provide example unlock patterns that comply with these
constraints. Considering users routinely choose poor passwords, the pattern chosen
will most likely be a simple line that has two distinct end points, which is illustrated
in Figures 10.1 and 10.2. For the examples in this chapter, consider an end point to be
a point with only one line connected to it. In Figure 10.1, the points in the upper left
corner and the bottom right corner would be considered end points. If drawing the pat-
tern leaves a smudge trail on the screen, there will only be two possible unlock combi-
nations for Figures 10.1 and 10.2. In this scenario, the attacker simply needs to start at
one end point and traverse the line, or smudge trail, until they have reached the other
end point. If that does not work, the only other possible combination is to follow the
line in reverse. Even if the user chooses a more complex pattern, such as those
188
CHAPTER 10 Mobile Applications and Devices

illustrated in Figures 10.3 and 10.4, the number of distinct end points will not increase
significantly. For example, the pattern in Figure 10.3 has three potential end points
and has only six possible unlock patterns. Thus, drawing the pattern may leave a
smudge trail that has only a few different combinations. The pattern in Figure 10.4 is
a little more complex with 4 potential end points and 24 possible unlock patterns;
however, performing 24 combinations would still not take a very long time.
FIGURE 10.1
Simple android unlock pattern.
FIGURE 10.2
Simple android unlock pattern using all
nine points.
FIGURE 10.3
More complex android unlock pattern with
three potential end points.
FIGURE 10.4
More complex android unlock pattern with
four potential end points.
Securing Mobile Devices
189

Wiping the Device
Mitigating the attacks described in the section “Screen Lock” can be done by
securely erasing all the data on the mobile device after a defined number of
unsuccessful authentication attempts. This number is usually set to be between
five and 10. Setting this number to less than five would be ill advised since users
tend to mistype their password on the smaller keyboards of mobile devices.
Additionally, the ability to remotely wipe the mobile device will help mitigate the
risk of theft. Several commercial solutions exist that will enable administrators to
remotely wipe the mobile device after it has been reported lost or stolen. Additionally,
some of these solutions also provide a phone-home function that attempts to alert the
owners of the device’s location via coordinates provided by a GPS signal.
WARNING
Wiping the device can help mitigate the risk of several attack vectors, but should only be
considered a last resort security control. In the situation where the device is remotely
wiped, the attacker will have time between when they stole the device and when the owner
reports the device stolen to obtain the sensitive information stored on the host. Thus,
wiping the mobile device may only remove that copy of the sensitive information. Each
security control discussed in this chapter should be part of a defense in depth approach to
security.
Recovery
Some attackers may not be interested accessing the sensitive information and only
want to cause damage by taking their anger out on your property. Additionally,
the attacker may be the mobile device owner’s dog that causes the owner to trip
and smash the mobile device. In a more common scenario though, utility com-
pany maintenance workers may need to work during harsh weather storms that
batter the mobile devices with rain and debris.
Regardless of the scenario, there will be instances where the data on the
mobile device becomes inaccessible. Recovering the data may be possible, but if
the organization or consumer was maintaining backups of the mobile devices,
they may not need to go through the often-painstaking process of trying to recover
data from a corrupt storage disk. For cell phones and PMPs, most syncing appli-
cations provide the functionality to backup the mobile device to the host system.
Users who take advantage of this functionality will be grateful when their mobile
device’s data is deleted or becomes inaccessible.
Forensics
Forensics is a difficult process on even nonmobile systems, but one thing that can
help an investigation process is by keeping detailed logs. Access to sensitive data
should be logged to assist the forensics process in the case of an incident.
190
CHAPTER 10 Mobile Applications and Devices

Although not every mobile device will have logging capabilities, those that do
should be enabled. For more information on forensics for mobile devices, please
see NIST SP 800-101: Guidelines on Cell Phone Forensics.
Education
Users are almost always the weakest link in security, which is why educating mobile
device users is so important. Mobile devices are stolen frequently when an owner
leaves them in the car to buy a cup of coffee or go to the bathroom. Thus, regular
training on at least an annual basis should be done to reinforce the importance of
security awareness, which includes the following:
•
Never leave the mobile device out of reach or sight in an untrusted environment
•
Manually lock the screen, logout, or shut down the mobile device
•
Do not visit untrusted Web sites on the mobile device or open messages from
unknown e-mail addresses or phone numbers
•
Backup the device regularly
SECURE MOBILE APPLICATIONS
In most cases, mobile applications are developed to be an interface to the standard
application. The mobile application sits between the standard application and the
mobile client, and it handles communications between the mobile client and the
standard application. There are, of course, exceptions where a mobile application
is developed independently, but the security controls will remain the same.
Mobile Application Security Controls
One of the biggest mistakes that mobile application developers make is assuming that
only mobile devices will interact with the mobile application. Assuming the mobile
application server is network accessible, any system with access to the network will
be able to attack that application server. So, for example, let’s consider the Chevy
Volt OnStar mobile applications again. Users will be able to use an iPhone, Black-
Berry, Droid, or most mobile Web browsers to remotely control certain functions in
their Chevy Volt car from anywhere.9 In order to provide this level of access, the
mobile application server(s) will be Internet accessible. Thus, any system with an
Internet connection will be able to attack that application server.
Mobile applications will need to be able to defend against traditional application
attacks, including those described in Chapter 7, “Attacking the Utility Companies.”
The following resources provide detailed information regarding how to develop
secure applications:
•
Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) – www.owasp.org
•
Web Application Security Consortium (WASC) – www.webappsec.org
Secure Mobile Applications
191

WARNING
The OWASP Top 10 (www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:OWASP_Top_Ten_Project) can be
used as a good starting point to understand the types of attacks that the mobile applications
will face. Many organizations use the OWASP Top 10 as the only criteria for assessing their
application security posture and only concern themselves with the ten items in the list. The
OWASP Top 10 is intended to provide awareness on the top 10 Web application security
flaws,17 thus it is not intended to be a comprehensive list.
Encryption
When developing mobile applications, it is tempting to offload encryption to the
network provider. So, for example, if the developers intend to support only cell
phones, they may make the justification that the cellular network will encrypt the
data in transit, thus implying that SSL will be a waste of resources. However,
Chapter 7, “Attacking the Utility Companies,” discussed attacks against encryption
used in GSM networks. Additionally, a large number of cell phones now include
Wi-Fi radios, so there is no assurance that cell phones will even be using the
cellular networks to communicate with the mobile application server. Making
these types of assumptions can lead to critical vulnerabilities in applications.
SUMMARY
Mobile applications and devices will be used extensively to increase the functionality
and reach of smart grids, which is also why they will introduce greater risk to smart
grids. They provide a conduit for attackers to easily bypass an organization’s physical
and virtual perimeter security controls. Additionally, they will provide attackers with
another attack vector to compromise user’s security.
Due to the extensive variety of platforms, applications, and inherent mobility,
mobile devices are more difficult to manage and oftentimes lack centralized
management capabilities. This leads to a greater reliance on individual users to
implement secure practices, such as screen locking and regularly making backups.
However, the applications will face familiar attacks that organizations should
already be prepared to face. By implementing the security controls discussed in
this chapter, organizations can greatly reduce the risk that mobile applications and
devices present to their security posture.
Endnotes
1. comScore. comScore reports February 2010 U.S. Mobile subscriber market share
[document on the Internet]. www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/2010/4/
comScore_Reports_February_2010_U.S._Mobile_Subscriber_Market_Share; 2010
[accessed 11.04.10].
192
CHAPTER 10 Mobile Applications and Devices

2. Raywood D. Secure Computing Magazine. Online game disguised as space invaders
hits mac users with trojan [document on the Internet]. www.securecomputing.net.au/
News/159811,online-game-disguised-as-space-invaders-hits-mac-users-with-trojan.aspx;
2009 [accessed 19.05.10].
3. VanHemert K. Gizmodo. Apple says no more titillating apps, period [document on the
Internet]. www.gizmodo.com.au/2010/02/apple-says-no-more-titillating-apps-period/;
2010 [accessed 12.04.10].
4. NIST. FIPS PUB 186-3 Digital Signature Standard (DSS) [document on the Internet].
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips186-3/fips_186-3.pdf; 2009 [accessed 20.05.2010].
5. Goodin D. The Register. iPhone, IE, Firefox, Safari get stomped at hacker contest
[document on the Internet]. www.theregister.co.uk/2010/03/25/pwn2own_2010_
day_one/; 2010 [accessed 20.05.10].
6. Garfinkel S. CSO. Attack of the iPods! [document on the Internet]. www.csoonline.
com/article/220868/Attack_of_the_iPods_; 2006 [accessed 12.04.10].
7. Zorz Z. HelpNet Security. Mariposa bot distributed by Vodafone’s infected phone
[document on the Internet]. www.net-security.org/secworld.php?id=8991; 2010
[accessed 20.05.10].
8. Mills E. CNET. Researchers attack my iPhone via SMS [document on the Internet].
http://news.cnet.com/8301-27080_3-10299378-245.html; 2010 [accessed 29.07.10].
9. General Motors. Chevrolet and onstar give volt owners 24/7 connection and control via
wireless smartphone application [document on the Internet]. http://gm-volt.com/p/
OnStar%20Mobile%20release%20CES.pdf; 2010 [accessed 05.04.10].
10. Mearian L. Computerworld. Survey: 40% of hard drives bought on eBay hold personal,
corporate data [document on the Internet]. www.computerworld.com/s/article/9127717/
Survey_40_of_hard_drives_bought_on_eBay_hold_personal_corporate_data; 2009
[accessed 20.05.10].
11. Llewellyn G. The Independent. US missile data found on eBay hard drive [document
on the Internet]. www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-missile-data-found-on-
ebay-hard-drive-1680529.html; 2009 [accessed 20.05.10].
12. Soper M. MaximumPC. Leave No Trace: how to completely erase your hard drives, ssds
and thumb drives [document on the Internet]. www.maximumpc.com/article/howtos/
how_complete_destroy_your_data; 2010 [accessed 12.04.10].
13. Microsoft. How to disable the AutoRun functionality in Windows [document on the
Internet]. http://support.microsoft.com/kb/967715; 2009 [accessed 13.04.10].
14. Microsoft. Autorun changes in Windows 7 [document on the Internet]. http://blogs.
technet.com/srd/archive/2009/04/28/autorun-changes-in-windows-7.aspx; 2009 [accessed
13.04.10].
15. Arrington M. TechCrunch. Android’s Login Is Cool, But Is It Secure? [document on
the Internet]. http://techcrunch.com/2008/10/12/androids-login-is-cool-but-is-it-secure/;
2008 [accessed 13.04.10].
16. Beust C. Otaku, Cedric’s weblog. Android’s Locking Pattern [document on the Internet].
http://beust.com/weblog2/archives/000497.html; 2008 [accessed 20.05.10].
17. OWASP. OWASP Top Ten Project [document on the Internet]. www.owasp.org/index.
php/Category:OWASP_Top_Ten_Project; 2010 [accessed 13.04.10].
Endnotes
193

CHAPTER
11
Social Networking and
the Smart Grid
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
The Smart Grid Gets Social
•
Social Networking Threats
•
Smart Grid Social Networking Security Checklist
With Facebook reaching the level of the second most visited site on the Internet,
it was a foregone conclusion that the smart grid would find a home on social net-
working Web sites.1 Ranging from Twitter.com to Blogger.com, the smart grid is
already leveraging benefits of social networking. In this chapter, we will take a
look at how smart grid technologies have integrated with social networking sites,
as well as discuss any associated security risks.
THE SMART GRID GETS SOCIAL
The push for using social networking in the smart grid comes from several
factors. One of the goals of smart grids is to keep customers constantly informed
of how much energy they are using. With more and more people using social net-
working services, social networking will provide a medium that customers are
comfortable with. There are also business drivers for utilizing popular social net-
working sites. Marketing departments for technology vendors will be able to
advertise broad functionality support and utility companies will be able to adver-
tise their use of social networking.
By far, Twitter and Facebook have become the social networking sites of
choice amongst smart grid technologies. Facebook provides a massive user base
while also allowing for custom application development, while Twitter provides
the perfect platform for micro updates. Let us now evaluate some of the current
uses of both Twitter and Facebook by smart grid technologies.
Twitter
For the three of you reading this book who are unaware of what Twitter is, here is
how it present itself to the world:
Twitter is a real-time information network powered by people all around the
world that lets you share and discover what’s happening now.2
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00011-X
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
195

Twitter is a micro-blogging Web site that allows users to “tweet” messages of
up to 140 characters at a time. Tweets can be made from nearly any type of
device that is connected to the Internet via countless client applications or directly
via Twitter’s Web site. Users of Twitter can follow specific individuals, organiza-
tions, groups, or search for specific terms within tweets. Hash tags (#) are used to
associate tweets with specific events. For example, #syngress is the hash tag for
the publisher of this book.
Part of the reason for Twitter’s success has been the ability for its users to
follow events in real time via the information posted by other users. Such real-
time information sharing makes Twitter a perfect tool for smart grid technologies.
Tweeting Energy Usage
At the time of writing this chapter, a simple Google query of “site: twitter.com
kWh usage” produced over 128 unique results. I am sure that by the time you are
reading this book that number will significantly increase. Let’s take a look at
some of the individuals and businesses who are utilizing Twitter to broadcast their
energy consumption.
Andrew Jones, Managing Director of Alquist Consulting Ltd, has decided to
utilize Twitter to demonstrate his organization’s commitment to reducing their car-
bon footprint. Via their Twitter page, located at http://twitter.com/AlquistARJ,
individuals can monitor Alquist’s buildings’ energy usage. Unlike many others
who post tweets about energy consumption in kWh, Alquist’s Twitter feed pro-
vides usage data based on costs. Alquist’s tweets also take the consumption data
available via the tweets to the next level by providing costs data via graphical
representations posted to TwitPic.com. Figure 11.1 is a sample of Alquist’s gra-
phical representation of their energy consumption data.
FIGURE 11.1
Alquist’s energy consumption data in graph form.
196
CHAPTER 11 Social Networking and the Smart Grid

Andy Stanford-Clark of IBM has utilized Twitter to provide real-time
information on his home’s energy usage. Beyond simply tweeting whether or not
Andy has turned his outside lights on or off, his home posts other energy-related
information such as the current electric meter reading, as shown below in Figure
11.2. But why stop at simply posting information? Andy certainly did not.
Through custom software, Andy can actually turn the lights on or off through
issuing commands online.
Andy’s particular setup is more advanced than other smart grid social network-
ing solutions, but provides a quick glimpse into the future of social networking
and the smart grid. Simpler, more user-friendly solutions are currently available
to the masses that allow them to tweet their energy usage. For more informa-
tion, you can visit Andy’s Web site located at http://stanford-clark.com/andy_
house.html.
FIGURE 11.2
Andy Stanford-Clark’s home Twitter feed.
The Smart Grid Gets Social
197

Tweet-a-Watt
One of these solutions is called the “Tweet-a-Watt,” shown in Figure 11.3.
Although Tweet-a-Watts currently require some hardware hacking, they are rela-
tively simple to build and set up. A Tweet-a-Watt consists of a P3 International
“Kill-a-Watt” device, modified with XBee wireless adapters. The XBee wireless
adapters utilize the Zigbee wireless technology and require the receiver to be
plugged into an Internet-connected device. The XBee transmitter is connected to
the Kill-a-Watt and sends energy usage data, in Kilowatt-hour, to the receiver.
The receiver then uses the Internet-connected device to tweet the energy consump-
tion information to Twitter.
NOTE
You can purchase a Do-It-Yourself Tweet-a-Watt kit from: www.adafruit.com/index.php?
main_page=product_info&cPath=32&products_id=143&zenid=6d1306727167af57a11
c948993e0bedc. Note that a Kill-a-Watt is not included in the kit. Kill-a-Watts can be
found at your local hardware store or online at your favorite electronics store.
Not everyone is keen on the idea of the Tweet-a-Watt. Graham Winfrey of
The Business Insider included the Tweet-a-Watt in his “Ten Dumbest Green
FIGURE 11.3
P3 International’s Kill-a-Watt.
Courtesy of GadgetGrid.com
198
CHAPTER 11 Social Networking and the Smart Grid

Gadgets”3 list in December 2009. Winfrey does not elaborate on why he included
the device in his list, but alludes to the fact that it is simply a way to brag about
your green living. Perhaps he should have mentioned the privacy aspects of tweet-
ing your energy consumption.
Smart Meter and Broadband Integration
In deregulated energy markets, consumers can choose from multiple utility compa-
nies for their energy needs. Usually, customers will choose their energy provider
based on pricing and reliability. However, some companies are trying to use popu-
lar trends to compete in the energy market. One such utility company in Germany,
Yello Strom (www.yellostrom.de/), has developed and sell its own smart meter
that utilizes the consumer’s home broadband connection.4 This has allowed Yello
Strom to develop consumer-centric applications, such as their Twitter application.
Essentially, the application works by creating a Twitter account for the smart
meter. Then on a periodic basis (for example, every 10 minutes), the smart meter
tweets the energy usage via the consumer’s home broadband connection.4 Most
utility companies will send the data to the back office for processing first before
being sent to service providers, which can lead to a significant delay.4 Directly
connecting the smart meter to the consumer’s broadband connection will provide
the information to the consumer much quicker.
Facebook
If only three of you reading this book have not heard of Twitter, then I suppose
two of you do not know about Facebook. For those who do not know, Facebook
is the Internet’s top social networking site, according to Compete.com.5 Since
May 24, 2007, Facebook has allowed third parties to develop applications for its
Web site that allow Facebook users to play games, share information, or even
track energy usage.6
PICOwatt
Tenrehte Technologies, a Rochester, New York-based startup, is one of the first to
develop a Facebook application that will allow users to remotely monitor and con-
trol their energy usage. Tenrehte’s application will utilize their PICOwatt technol-
ogy, which consists of consumer products poised to hit the market before the
utility companies deploy smart meters to the masses.
PICOwatts, shown in Figure 11.4, are Wi-Fi-enabled smart plugs that augment
consumer’s traditional power outlets. These smart plugs are essentially software-
powered devices that provide real-time energy usage monitoring and device con-
trol. Theoretically, consumers will install PICOwatts throughout their homes and
aggregate the data via PICOwatt’s built-in Web server or via Tenrehte’s Facebook
application. PICOwatt users can then determine how much energy devices are
using and decide when to turn devices on and off, in an attempt to lower their
electric bills. At the time of writing this book, Tenrehte plans to release their
PICOwatts in April 2010 at an anticipated price of under $125.7
The Smart Grid Gets Social
199

NOTE
You can get a sneak peak at the monitoring and control capabilities of PICOwatts by
visiting Tenrehte’s demo Web site at http://airlock.tenrehte.com/aps/watt/PICOwatt.cgi?
btnG=PICOstatus. Here, you will be able to view such information at device status, energy
usage, pricing information, as well as interface with the command and control options that
would allow device startups and shutdowns, as well as other potential event operations.
SmartSync
SmartSync, Inc, a Jackson, Mississippi-based smart grid infrastructure company, is
also utilizing social networking to provide energy usage monitoring to the masses.
In a partnership announced on August 27, 2009, SmartSync and the University of
Mississippi will utilize SmartSync’s Smart Meters to “reduce the power consump-
tion of campus buildings while publishing real-time results for the general public
on Facebook, Twitter and RSS feeds.”8
In its press release, SmartSync stated that each building at the University of
Mississippi to be equipped with SmartSync Smart Meters will have its own
Facebook profile page. These profile pages will provide interested parties with
information such as energy consumption, complete with comparative analysis.
The initial deployment of SmartSync’s Smart Meters at the University of
Mississippi included 16 smart meters. Additional deployments are being
considered. Figure 11.5 shows the University of Mississippi’s Lyceum build-
ing’s Facebook profile page, complete with daily energy consumption data and
address.
FIGURE 11.4
Tenrehte Technologies PICOwatt.
200
CHAPTER 11 Social Networking and the Smart Grid

In their press release, SmartSync noted that
Once registered online at www.olemiss.edu/green, students, faculty, building
administrators and others will be able to access UM’s smart meter data and
receive updates on UM’s energy usage …8
As you can see by the screenshot in Figure 11.5, this information is available to
anyone, not just “registered users.” You can view the University of Mississippi’s
Lyceum building’s Facebook profile page yourself by visiting www.facebook.com/
pages/Oxford-MS/Lyceum/117754575778.
The University of Colorado has also jumped on the Facebook bandwagon by
creating a profile page for its Fiske Planetarium. This profile page, located at www.
facebook.com/pages/Boulder-CO/Fiske-Planetarium/138531010808, is very similar
to the University of Mississippi’s Lyceum building’s profile page. Although no
information validating that the Fiske Planetarium utilizes SmartSync’s technologies
was available to the authors of this book, we will let you make your own decision
by comparing a screenshot of the University of Colorado’s Fiske Planetarium’s
Facebook profile page, shown in Figure 11.6, to the University of Mississippi’s
Lyceum building’s Facebook profile page, shown in Figure 11.5.
WattsUp
Other consumer-based Facebook applications exist, including Derek Foster’s
WattsUp. WattsUp allows Facebook users to share their home’s energy usage
FIGURE 11.5
The University of Mississippi’s Lyceum Building’s Facebook profile page.
Source: www.facebook.com/pages/Oxford-MS/Lyceum/117754575778. Shown for educational purposes.
The Smart Grid Gets Social
201

with other WattsUp users. Foster developed the application in order to “raise
awareness of energy consumption in the home which can have a positive impact
on climate change. (The concepts driving creation of WattsUp are) social psychol-
ogy elements such as peer-pressure and normative measurement between
friends.”9
Figure 11.7 is a screenshot of Derek’s WattsUp energy usage. Ironically, it
appears as though Derek is no longer using his WattsUp application to publish his
home’s energy usage.
WattsUp was designed to use DIY KYOTO’s Wattson energy usage monitor-
ing device. Wattson (Figure 11.8) consists of a transmitter and receiver (referred
to by DIY KYOTO as the Display). The transmitter comes with a sensor clip that
is connected to the main cables between your home’s meter box and fuse box.
Energy consumption information is then wirelessly transmitted to the receiver,
which displays the information in both watts and monetary values. The receiver
will change colors depending on your usage; blue for low energy usage, purple
for average energy usage, and red for very high energy usage. Historical informa-
tion, as well as the ability to send usage data to the WattsUp Facebook applica-
tion, is captured via a USB connection to the receiver and DIY KYOTO’s
Holmes software. More information on the Wattson is available from www.
diykyoto.com/uk/wattson/about, while the WattsUp Facebook application is avail-
able at www.facebook.com/apps/application.php?id=50473167243.
FIGURE 11.6
The University of Colorado’s Fiske Planetarium’s Facebook profile page.
Source: www.facebook.com/pages/Boulder-CO/Fiske-Planetarium/138531010808.
Shown for educational purposes.
202
CHAPTER 11 Social Networking and the Smart Grid

SOCIAL NETWORKING THREATS
Now that we have discussed the use of social networking sites by some of the
latest smart grid technologies, let us focus in on their associated threats. Ranging
from simple information disclosure to the complete loss of control of a connected
FIGURE 11.7
Derek Foster’s WattsUp Facebook application.
FIGURE 11.8
DIY KYOTO’s Wattson.
Social Networking Threats
203

device, the use of social networking by smart grid technologies presents a wide
range of threats with an equally large impact variance.
Information Disclosure
As we discussed in Chapter 2, “Threats and Impacts: Consumers,” information
disclosure is one of the largest threats associated with the smart grid. The integra-
tion of social networking sites simply increases this risk, as by their sheer nature,
social networking sites were developed as a way to share information with others.
Several recent social networking blunders have direct implications for smart grid
technologies that utilize social networking.
On February 17, 2010, the Web site www.pleaserobme.com hit the blogo-
sphere, opening the eyes of the masses to what the security community was
already concerned about. Conceptualized and run by the folks at FortheHack.com,
Please Rob Me aggregates Twitter information that suggests when people are not
home. Specifically, the site relies on tweets of users of the Internet phenomena
known as Foursquare (http://foursquare.com). Foursquare allows users to let their
friends know their current location via smart phones that post to Twitter and Face-
book. Figure 11.9 provides a sample of Foursquare users whose information has
been captured by Please Rob Me.
Coincidently, the authors of this Web site had a similar idea to Please Rob
Me, but ours was specifically tailored to people who tweet their energy usage
on Twitter. As an experiment, Tony purchased three Tweet-a-Watt devices for
his apartment, and Justin wrote a couple of perl scripts, utilizing Twitter’s API,
that would capture Tony’s energy usage. The goal of the experiment was for
Justin to be able to accurately determine when Tony was home, and when he
was not, solely based on his energy usage. To determine the outcome of the
experiment, Justin would call Tony when Justin believed that Tony was not
home. Justin would only be able to call Tony five times over the course of one
week. Before proceeding with the experiment, Justin believed that he would
be 100 percent successful, or five correct out of five attempts, in determining
when Tony was home or not. Tony, while believing that 100 percent accuracy
was not unattainable, believed that Justin would be 80 percent successful, or
four correct out of five attempts, in successfully identifying when Tony was
not home. Justin reminded Tony that he could not alter his energy usage in
an attempt to get Justin to wrongly identify when Tony was not home. Tony
begrudgingly agreed.
To accomplish the task, Tony modified his three Tweet-a-Watts to send
information to a local server running at his house. The server would capture the
information from the three Tweet-a-Watts, aggregate them, and then post the
information to Twitter in five-minute intervals. Unlike many of the previously
noted examples of tweeting energy usage, Tony protected his apartment’s
Twitter account so that only Justin’s server account could access the
information.
204
CHAPTER 11 Social Networking and the Smart Grid

TIP
If you plan on jumping on the social networking/smart grid bandwagon, we recommend
creating a separate Twitter account for the dwellings or devices that you utilize. Then, just
like Tony did, protect the account to only allow those accounts you want to be able to
monitor your energy usage to do so. This will eliminate the risks we are highlighting here,
as well as those that gave rise to Please Rob Me.
FIGURE 11.9
PleaseRobMe.com sample screenshot.
Source: www.pleaserobme.com. Shown for educational purposes.
Social Networking Threats
205

Over the period of three weeks, Justin’s perl scripts captured Tony’s tweets, and
massaged the data via several simple MySQL queries. Utilizing the information,
Justin was able to determine profile estimates of Tony’s energy usage. These pro-
files were as follows:
•
Home – Energy usage was clearly above the mean energy usage, suggesting
that Tony was using such high-energy devices as his heater, washer and dryer,
dishwasher, and televisions.
•
Not Home – Energy usage was clearly below the mean energy usage,
suggesting that Tony was not using any high-energy devices as his heater,
washer and dryer, dishwasher, or televisions.
•
Sleeping – Energy usage was below the mean, but above the basement of his
usage. This profile suggested Tony was only using the “bare” essentials of his
house, such as his heater.
•
Unknown – Energy usage was close to or at the mean of Tony’s energy usage.
Simply having a reported energy usage that fell within one of the four aforemen-
tioned energy profiles did not simply mean that Tony was or was not home. Rather,
in developing the experiment, we decided that we should include several additional
criteria that should be met before Justin called Tony for one of his five attempts. The
first additional criteria were that Tony’s energy usage should fall into the same
energy profile for more than 30 minutes. In other words, since Tony’s setup would
tweet his energy usage every five minutes, Justin’s scripts should only alert him after
six sequential tweets that fell within the “Not Home” energy profile. The second
additional criteria would be the “common sense” factor. When Justin’s scripts would
alert him that Tony was potentially not home (meaning that Justin’s server observed
at least six sequential tweets that fell within the “Not Home” energy profile), Justin
would manually review Tony’s energy usage for the past hour or so. This previous
information was reviewed to determine if there were any anomalies in Tony’s energy
usage that would suggest this was a false positive. Justin would also take into account
the time of day and day of the week. During the day on weekdays and during the
night on weeknights, were, for obvious reasons, the most likely times when Tony
would not be home. If an alert was triggered during these times, Justin believed the
likelihood that Tony was not home was high.
As a result of the experiment, Justin was able to successfully identify when
Tony was not home five out of five times, or 100 percent, of the time. Tony
believed that Justin may have chosen the most opportune times, that is, Friday
nights and Sunday mornings, to make his five attempts, but Justin argued that a
malicious person would capitalize on the same opportunities. Justin continued to
argue that monitoring Tony’s energy usage simply provided supplemental infor-
mation that when aggregated with common sense (or the third criteria we
previously covered) would increase the likelihood of success.
So what exactly can be learned from the author’s experiment? Does tweeting
your energy usage make you more vulnerable to robbery or other crimes? The
authors believe that insecurely doing so does indeed make you more vulnerable;
206
CHAPTER 11 Social Networking and the Smart Grid

however, the risk of someone using this information is very low. Although, this
risk could be increased if someone like the folks at Please Rob Me integrate this
type of monitoring. All said, the authors of this book do see the benefits of tweet-
ing your energy usage, but want to reinforce the tip previously mentioned in this
chapter: Make sure you protect your tweets and only allow users who you want
to see this type of information to see it.
WARNING
A simple warning about using Twitter and Facebook. By default, many third-party Twitter
and Facebook applications have you login using an insecure connection, such as HTTP. If
you use any of these third-party applications to connect to Twitter or Facebook, make sure
you are using a secure protocol to transmit login credentials or contact the application’s
author and request this functionality. Additionally, social networking sites are not without
their own vulnerabilities and attackers see these sites as large targets. For more information
on securing third-party services, Chapter 9, “Third-Party Services,” describes how to mitigate
the risk with third-party services.
SMART GRID SOCIAL NETWORKING SECURITY CHECKLIST
In an effort to safeguard end users who will utilize smart grid devices that
integrate with social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter, the authors
of this book have developed a smart grid Social Networking Security Checklist.
This checklist aims to provide end users with a set of basic controls that when
implemented will provide end users with a security baseline. The smart grid
Social Networking Security Checklist will continue to evolve, and the authors
of this book recommend visiting this book’s companion site, located at www.
fyrmassociates.com/securingthesmartgrid, to view the latest version.
Before You Begin
Before you begin your smart grid/Social Networking device implementation, you
must first understand what you attempt to gain from your implementation. Do you
want to simply remotely monitor and control your devices or do you want to
share your information with your friends, colleagues, or everyone. Determining
what you hope to accomplish with your implementation will guide you in imple-
menting the following controls.
Basic Controls
The smart grid Social Networking Security Checklist contains five categories for
implementing basic security controls. These categories are as follows:
1. Identity
2. Authentication
Smart Grid Social Networking Security Checklist
207

3. Information sharing
4. Networking
5. Usage
Identity Controls
The following controls should be implemented to safeguard your smart grid/social
networking device deployment.
•
Account Name – Utilize an account name that does not easily identify you or
your device. For example, if you setup a PICOwatt device, do not name your
device “Justin-BedRoom-PicoWatt.” Choose something less obvious like
“JsPi1.” Although this is a classic example of security through obscurity, it will
prevent you from being identified by simple Google queries looking for smart
grid devices that integrate with social networking sites. Additionally, avoid
using your user e-mail address account ID. For example, if your e-mail address
is jtothemototheho@gmail.com, do not name the device jtothemototheho.
•
Personal Information – Do not post unnecessary information to the account.
In particular, avoid entering location-based information into the account. If a
Facebook page is setup for your smart device, you probably do not need to
enter the city, state, or post a picture of the device.
Authentication Controls
•
Secure Login – When your smart grid device connects to social networking
sites, make sure that it is utilizing a secure protocol, such as HTTPS. A
warning earlier in this chapter called out that some third-party applications
utilize HTTP and not HTTPS to transmit your login credentials. Ensuring that
you are utilizing a secure protocol when providing login credentials to social
networking sites will help protect your device’s social networking account.
Additionally, ensure that the application transmits your session credentials
securely as well. As long as your current login session is valid, your session
credentials, such as a session cookie, are your login credentials.
•
Unique Password – In addition to the standard complexity requirements,
choose a unique password for each of the social networking accounts. Avoid
using passwords that you use for other accounts, such as your e-mail account.
If someone is able to compromise your e-mail account, they would then be
able to access your social networking account.
•
Password Sharing – Although the traditional recommendation of not sharing
your password with other persons still applies, you should also not share your
other account passwords with the social networking site. For example,
Facebook allows you to enter your e-mail address and e-mail account
password to automatically identify friends in your e-mail account’s address
book.
•
Security Questions – Apply the same password security controls to the
security questions. Some social networking sites will utilize security questions,
208
CHAPTER 11 Social Networking and the Smart Grid

such as what is your mother’s maiden name or what is your favorite restaurant,
to provide an additional layer of security or to change your “forgotten”
password. The problem is that this information can usually be obtained by
reading your social networking profile. By choosing complex and unique
answers (that are factually incorrect), you will be able to prevent someone
from intelligently guessing the answer.
Information Sharing Controls
•
Privacy – When you setup your smart grid device’s social networking profile,
make sure that you set it to “private.” This will prevent anyone from viewing
your smart grid devices information updates. Once you have configured the
profile as “private,” allow only the users (or accounts) you want to be able to
view your smart grid device’s information. For Facebook and Twitter, requests
must be sent from the user account that would like to be able to view the
smart grid device’s updates.
•
Third-Party Application Sharing – Avoid using any unnecessary third-party
applications. Social networking sites highly encourage the development of
application add-ons. When you attempt to use these add-ons, the applications
will try to access the information in your profile, which may make your
information accessible to the third party.
Networking
•
Segmentation – When installing your smart grid device on your local area
network, segment it from the rest of your home’s network devices. This can
be done through firewall access control lists or via switch virtual local area
networks with access control lists. Segmenting your smart grid device will
help prevent unauthorized access to the rest of your devices in the case that
smart grid device is compromised.
Usage
•
Browsing – When you are logged into the social networking account, avoid
browsing to other social networking profiles or Web sites. Additionally,
explicitly log out and close the browser before browsing to other Web pages.
Restricting your browsing habits while logged in will help avoid cross-site
request forgery attacks against your device’s social networking profile.
SUMMARY
Social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter have forever changed the way
that we use the Internet. Ubiquitous access to social networking sites has also for-
ever changed the way that we utilize social networking sites. The marriage
between smart grid devices and social networking sites is one that does make
Summary
209

sense. However, precaution and constant monitoring of new and emerging threats
must take precedence to ensure their marriage is a healthy one.
As with using social networking sites for the primary purpose, sharing infor-
mation with other people, maintaining much of privacy and security is dependent
on the end user. Utilizing smart grid devices that integrate with social networking
sites will require additional maintenance and vigilance of end users in order to
limit the risk associated with using these devices and services.
The risks associated with the smart grid and social networking sites are conti-
nually evolving. However, implementing basic controls will provide end users
with a baseline security level. The authors of this book believe that the aforemen-
tioned smart grid Social Networking Security Checklist will enable end users to
implement these basic controls and attain a baseline security level. However, as
new functionality is added to smart grid devices and social networking sites, new
threats and attacks will undoubtedly be introduced. Thus, the end user must
remain vigilant by understanding these new threats and attacks and implementing
the appropriate controls.
Endnotes
1.
Alexa Internet, Inc. Alexa Top 500 Global Sites [document on the Internet], www.
alexa.com/topsites; 2010 [accessed 01.03.10].
2.
Twitter. About Us [document on the Internet], http://twitter.com/about; 2010 [accessed
01.03.10].
3.
Business Insider, Inc. Ten Dumbest Green Gadgets [document on the Internet], www.
businessinsider.com/the-ten-dumbest-green-gadgets-2009-12/wind-n-go-freedom-shaver-
1; 2009 [accessed 01.03.10].
4.
Earth2tech. The World’s Coolest Utility: Yello Strom’s Got Smart Meters That Tweet
[document on the Internet], http://earth2tech.com/2009/07/02/the-worlds-coolest-utility-
yello-stroms-got-smart-meters-that-tweet/; 2009 [accessed 01.03.10].
5.
Compete, Inc. Social Networks: Facebook Takes Over Top Spot, Twitter Climbs [docu-
ment on the Internet], http://blog.compete.com/2009/02/09/facebook-myspace-twitter-
social-network/; 2009 [accessed 01.03.10].
6.
TechCrunch. Facebook Launches Facebook Platform; They are the Anti-MySpace
[document on the Internet], http://techcrunch.com/2007/05/24/facebook-launches-
facebook-platform-they-are-the-anti-myspace/; 2007 [accessed 01.03.10].
7.
CNET. Picowatt does smart grid without smart meter [document on the Internet]. CBS
Interactive, http://ces.cnet.com/8301-31045_1-10429865-269.html; 2010 [accessed
01.03.10].
8.
SmartSync, Inc. SmartSync Partners with the University of Mississippi to Lower Cam-
pus Power Consumption with Smart Meters and Social Networking tools [document on
the Internet], www.smartsynch.com/news/082709.htm; 2009 [accessed 01.03.10].
9.
Windows Developer Center. Facebook Developer Toolkit [document on the Internet].
Microsoft Corporation, http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/ee384421.aspx;
[accessed 01.03.10].
210
CHAPTER 11 Social Networking and the Smart Grid

CHAPTER
12
Attacking Smart Meters
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM)
•
NIST Special Publication 800-42: Guideline on Network Security Testing
One of the strongest arguments made for securing smart meters is that consumers
will have physical, and potentially logical, access to the smart meters. Although
consumers had physical access to previous utility meters, these meters did not
operate using technologies that consumers were familiar with or had ready access
to. Because of the prevalence of these familiar technologies, smart meters can be
treated like any other traditional target when applying security-testing methodo-
logies to it.
In this chapter, we will review two of the most common security-testing
methodologies and discuss how they can be applied to testing smart meters.
OPEN SOURCE SECURITY TESTING METHODOLOGY
MANUAL (OSSTMM)
The first methodology that we will discuss and apply to testing the security of
smart meters is the Institute for Security and Open Methodologies’ (ISECOM)
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM). The Institute for
Security and Open Methodologies was founded in January of 2001 as a nonprofit
organization in the United States and Spain.1 ISECOM aims to provide security
awareness, research, certification, and business integrity solutions that are
practical.1
ISECOM’s Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual provides its
users with a peer-reviewed methodology for performing security testing.2 The
OSSTMM contains six sections that review myriad security aspects including
networks, wireless devices, and physical security. For these security aspects
(networks, wireless devices, and physical security), it is easy to apply OSSTMM
while security testing smart meters. However, other aspects covered by OSSTMM
such as personnel security awareness levels, apply to the utility companies’ overall
security posture, but those will not be covered in this chapter because of their
indirect relationship to smart meter security.
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00012-1
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
211

NOTE
As of the authoring of this chapter, the current version of ISECOM’s OSSTMM is version 2.2.
However, version 3 of the Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual was currently
under development. The authors of this book recommend that you visit ISECOM’s Web site
at www.isecom.org to obtain and review the latest version of the Open Source Security
Testing Methodology Manual before you begin your security testing of smart meters.
The six sections of ISECOM’s Open Source Security Testing Methodology
Manual are as follows3:
1. Information Security
2. Process Security
3. Internet Technology Security
4. Communications Security
5. Wireless Security
6. Physical Security
A majority of the analysis of ISECOM’s OSSTMM will be focused on sections
3, 5, and 6, which are Internet Technology Security, Wireless Security, and
Physical Security, respectively. We will summarize the other sections of OSSTMM,
but encourage you to review them on your own.
In order to perform security testing in accordance with OSSTMM, each module
contained in each section must be tested. However, modules that do not apply can
simply be marked as such. ISECOM has provided an OSSTMM Data Sheet for
performing OSSTMM compliant security testing; however for the purpose of this
book, we will not be utilizing this documentation. This documentation is best used
when performing actual testing against specific targets, rather than discussing the
methodology and how to apply it to attack smart meters.
ISECOM’s OSSTMM discusses the various approaches to perform security
testing. Specifically, OSSTMM lists six common approaches to security testing
ranging from Double Blind, where both the target and attacker are provided with
no information before conducting the testing, to Tandem, where the target and
attacker share information openly about the testing.3 For the purpose of this book,
we will discuss the OSSTMM in the context of a Double Blind approach to secur-
ity testing. The selection of this approach was made, as it is the closest approach
to that of a malicious attacker.
TIP
Although the discussion of ISECOM’s OSSTMM and how it can be applied to attack smart
meters are focused on the Double Blind approach, the authors of this book do not
recommend either the smart meter manufacturers or the utility companies to utilize this
approach when performing security testing of their smart meters. Although the Double Blind
approach closely mimics an attack by an outsider with no or limited knowledge of the
212
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

security controls of the smart devices, it is not the most efficient or effective approach to
security testing. The authors of this book believe that the most efficient and most effective
approach for the smart meter manufacturers or the utility companies to take is that of the
Tandem approach to security testing. The Tandem approach to security testing is more
efficient as information regarding the environment is openly shared between the testers
and the targets, allowing for a better use of time. Similarly, the sharing of information will
aid in the effectiveness of the security testing by allowing the testers to confirm the
completeness of their scope and validate their assumptions. As a result of performing
security testing using the Tandem approach, the smart meter manufacturers or utility
companies will see a more complete and accurate report while, most likely, paying less for
the security testing when compared with the other testing approaches, such as Double
Blind.
To better understand how the Open Source Security Testing Methodology
Manual can be applied to attacking the smart meters, let us review each of the
applicable sections in depth.
Information Security
Within the Information Security section of OSSTMM resides eight modules.
These eight modules are as follows3:
1. Posture assessment
2. Information integrity review
3. Intelligence survey
4. Internet document grinding
5. Human resources review
6. Competitive intelligence scouting
7. Privacy controls review
8. Information controls review
WARNING
When reviewing OSSTMM version 2.2, you may notice that the modules listed for each
section do not match with the modules explained in detail under each section. This is
because version 2.2 of the OSSTMM is meant as a change over from version 2.0 to
version 3.0. Thus, the authors of this book recommend you to follow the applicable
modules described in detail and complete the applicable tasks listed for each applicable
module.
From a high level, the Information Security section of OSSTMM is focused on
information gathering and validation. From the perspective of attacking smart
meters, this would include obtaining and reviewing information about the particu-
lar make and model of smart meter you are targeting. Obvious choices for review
would be the smart meter manufacturer’s Web site, but also the utility company
that installed and utilizes the smart meter.
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM)
213

For example, by simply reviewing Florida Power & Light’s Questions and
Answers section of their Web site, you can learn such information about their
smart meters as,4
[the] technology is Internet Protocol (IP) based RF mesh. The RF capability
means the meters communicate through radio frequency. Each meter is equipped
with a full two-way 900MHz radio transmitter that sends and receives
information to an access point which is also radio-equipped. The access point is
the collection point for the meter information that is sent back into an FPL
system. Each access point, which is typically mounted on a power pole, is the
size of a shoe box and can handle communications to thousands of meters. New
RF mesh technology expands the ability of a meter to communicate to an access
point by allowing the signal to be relayed off of other meters to find a path and
maintain the connection required for communications.
The information gathering, evaluation, and verification that is discussed in the
Information Security section of OSSTMM is fundamental to the success of any
attack, and must be performed to understand and identify the attack vectors that
will be utilized in the following sections.
TIP
Google can be a fantastic resource for obtaining information about any subject, including smart
meters. Security researcher Johnny Long has published two editions of his Google Hacking for
Penetration Testers books. In these books, Johnny discusses the techniques of how to utilize
the power of Google to obtain information vital to any penetration test. Google Hacking for
Penetration Testers, Volume 2 (ISBN: 978-1-59749-176-1, Syngress) is available at: www.
syngress.com/hacking-and-penetration-testing/Google-Hacking-for-Penetration-Testers.
Process Security Testing
The second section of ISECOM’s Open Source Security Testing Methodology
Manual focuses on testing the security of the processes of your target. The Process
Security Testing section of the OSSTMM contains the following five modules4:
1. Posture Review
2. Request Testing
3. Reverse Request Testing
4. Guided Suggestion Testing
5. Trusted Persons Testing
The Process Security Testing section of ISECOM’s OSSTMM covers what is
traditionally known as “social engineering.” Each of the five modules within the
Process Security Testing section aims to obtain information from people through
coercion or deception. In relating social engineering to attacking the smart meters,
potential attacks include impersonating a utility company technician or consumer.
214
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

Valuable information, such as technical specifications or administrative or consumer
credentials, may possibly be obtained through social engineering techniques. The
modules contained within the Process Security Testing section of OSSTMM
can validate the information obtained in the Information Security section, as well
as provide valuable information that will be utilized in the Internet Technology
Security Testing section.
Internet Technology Security Testing
A majority of the applicable modules to testing the security of smart meters are
contained within OSSTMM’s Internet Technology Security Testing section. We
will review how some of the following 14 modules can be utilized to analyze the
security of smart meters. Just as some of the OSSTMM’s six high-level sections do
not apply when testing the security of smart meters, some of the modules contained
within the Internet Technology Security Testing section do not apply. This section
of the OSSTMM contains the following 14 modules4:
1. Network Surveying
2. Port Scanning
3. Services Identification
4. System Identification
5. Vulnerability Research and Verification
6. Internet Application Testing
7. Router Testing
8. Trusted Systems Testing
9. Firewall Testing
10. Intrusion Detection System Testing
11. Containment Measures Testing
12. Password Cracking
13. Denial of Service Testing
14. Security Policy Review
Do not let the name of this section confuse you as to how it can be applied to
attacking smart meters. Although the name suggests that this section may only be
applicable to the Internet, its modules can be applied to internal networks as well.
To better understand which modules of the Internet Technology Security Testing
of OSSTMM apply to attacking the smart meters and how they can be utilized,
let us review the applicable ones in more detail.
Network Surveying
The Network Surveying module of the Internet Technology Security Testing
section focuses on the identification of target systems that are network accessible.
In the case of smart meters, they will most likely be accessible to attackers through
either wireless networks or home area networks. In either case, Network Surveying
consists of obtaining information about the targets. This information gathering
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM)
215

can be performed by one of two ways: passively, by listening to traffic being
transmitted across the network, or actively, by probing IP addresses for a response.
To passively identify targets, the Wireshark tool, as shown in Figure 12.1, can
be utilized. Wireshark captures live traffic that is traversing any network and can
provide deep inspection of hundreds of networking protocols.5 To identify targets
passively through Wireshark, simply create a list of the IP addresses to be
captured by Wireshark. Wireshark is available for free at www.wireshark.org.
Conducting what is known as a ping sweep typically performs active target iden-
tification. Ping sweeps often utilize the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)
protocol to identify whether targets within specified network IP address ranges are
active by analyzing their response. The Nmap security tool is often used to perform
ping sweeps through its “–sP” switch. Nmap is freely available at www.nmap.org,
along with a wealth of usage documentation.
Occasionally, ICMP traffic will be blocked between the attacker’s system and the
targets. In this case, Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) pings are often utilized. TCP
pings are limited port scans that attempt to identify active hosts by seeing if they are
running common services. Nmap is also the tool of choice for performing TCP pings.
Port Scanning
The next module covered in the Internet Technology Security Testing section of
the OSSTMM discussed port scanning. Port Scanning consists of probing a target
for responses on any of the 65,536 TCP and/or User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
FIGURE 12.1
Wireshark network-sniffing tool.
216
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

ports. Responses indicate that services are running on the associated port and may
contain weaknesses that may ultimately allow access to the target.
As previously mentioned, the Nmap tool is the de facto port-scanning tool.
TCP scans can be performed using TCP connect scans, which complete the TCP
handshake, or through TCP SYN scans, which only utilize the SYN and SYN
ACK parts of the TCP handshake.
The OSSTMM suggests that it is up to the discretion of the testing team to
decide which of the 65,536 ports to scan.5 The authors of this book recommend
testing every port whenever possible, especially when dealing with smart devices.
Otherwise, you may not identify services running on the targeted device that may
contain weaknesses.
TIP
Nmap is a very powerful tool and can provide a considerable amount of information to
security testers and attackers alike. However, if improperly configured, Nmap port scans can
have adverse affects on network devices, such as firewalls, or targeted systems. Such
adverse affects may include a temporary denial-of-service condition that is eliminated when
your testing is completed, or a more permanent denial-of-service condition that requires the
affected system to have services restarted or the entire system restarted. To better
understand the details of how to properly use the Nmap tool, the authors of this book
recommend Angela Orebaugh and Becky Pinkard’s Nmap in the Enterprise: Your Guide to
Network Scanning (ISBN: 978-1-59749-241-6, Syngress). It is available at: www.syngress.
com/information-security-and-system-administrators/Nmap-in-the-Enterprise.
Services Identification and System Identification
Services Identification and System Identification are the third and fourth modules,
respectively, listed in the Information Technology Security Testing section of the
OSSTMM. The goal of these two sections is to enumerate the services running on
the TCP or UDP ports that responded in the previous module, as well as to identify
the underlying operating system of the target.
Both of these tasks can be performed utilizing the Nmap port-scanning tool.
Specifically, issuing the –sV switch in your Nmap scan will have Nmap attempt to
determine the version of the service running on the responding port. Figure 12.2
demonstrates the power of Nmap’s version-detection capability. Rather than
simply identifying that TCP port 443 is open on webserver.domain.com, Nmap
has now told us that webserver.domain.com is running the Apache Web server,
specifically version 2.2.8, as well as PHP and OpenSSL, complete with version
information. This information can now be utilized to determine if known
vulnerabilities exist in these versions of the running services.
In the case of the target used in Figure 12.2, webserver.domain.com,
information regarding the operating system was also obtained because it was
included in the version information for the Apache Web service. By adding the –O
switch to your Nmap scan, you can obtain similar information regarding the
operating system of the target. Just as an attacker would use the version information
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM)
217

of the running services to identify vulnerabilities in the services, they would use the
same approach to identify known vulnerabilities in the identified operating system.
Vulnerability Research and Verification
Once an attacker has identified the versions of the running services, as well as the
operating system version of the target, he or she will perform the fifth module of
the OSSTMM; Vulnerability Research and Verification. From a high level, this
module consists of performing vulnerability identification and verification, both
through a combination of automated and manual testing.
Vulnerability scanning consists of identifying known weaknesses in the target
systems, and often performs the previously covered tasks of ping sweeps, port scans,
and service/system identification. However, because we have already performed these
tasks, we can tell our vulnerability-scanning tool what we already know to more
efficiently attack our target.
A commonly used vulnerability-scanning tool is Tenable Network Security’s
Nessus, as shown in Figure 12.3. Nessus is freely available for home or personal
use, but requires a $1,200 USD annual license for commercial use.6 You can
download a copy of Nessus from www.nessus.org.
Although Nessus is great for performing automated scanning to determine such
weaknesses as an outdated version of Apache, manual testing should supplement
automated scanning to identify weaknesses that may have otherwise been
overlooked. An example of such a weakness could be the fact that the Apache Web
server running on webserver.domain.com made its private SSL key available in its
HTML document root through the carelessness of the system administrator. Unless
Nessus contained a specific plug-in that attempted to identify such a weakness, it
would not have identified the presence of the private SSL key.
OSSTMM states that automated vulnerability testing should be performed
by at least two automated vulnerability scanners.6 This is a statement that the
authors of this book highly recommend, as the vulnerability coverage for each
FIGURE 12.2
Nmap version detection output.
218
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

vulnerability-scanning tool varies. In addition to performing multiple, automated
vulnerability scans of the same target, manual vulnerability verification should be
performed. Techniques to perform manual vulnerability verification vary greatly
depending on the vulnerability, but examples of such verification either include
using Telnet to observe the version of a specific service by connecting to it, or
using an FTP client to connect to an anonymous FTP server.
In the process of attacking smart meters, Vulnerability Research and Verification
is a critical step as it provides the potential entry points into the smart meters that will
be exploited in a subsequent module.
NOTE
Like the majority of the tools mentioned in this chapter, Nessus can wreck havoc on
targeted devices when not properly configured. There a number of published books that
detail Nessus installations, deployments, and configurations, and the authors of this book
highly recommend reading one of these books before using Nessus in any production
environments. One such highly recommended book is Syngress’ Nessus Network Auditing,
Second Edition (ISBN: 978-1-59749-208-9) by Russ Rogers. It is available for purchase at
www.syngress.com/special-interests/Nessus-Network-Auditing-Second-Edition.
Internet Application Testing
The previous section, “Vulnerability Research and Verification,” traditionally
identifies and verifies vulnerabilities within the services running on the target or
FIGURE 12.3
Nessus’ Web interface.
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM)
219

smart meter. However, often vulnerability scanners do not include the capability
to perform vulnerability identification and verification against Web applications.
As more and more systems manufacturers are integrating security into their
development life cycle, the number of running services available to an attacker is
decreasing. This has shifted attackers to focus on the Web applications that are
running on the target devices. In the case of smart meters, they may contain a
Web application that allows consumers to view or configure usage information, or
allow a technician to configure the device. The goal of this module is just the
same as the previous module, only with a different scope.
Performing vulnerability identification and verification against Web
applications is significantly more challenging than performing the same testing
against running services. This is a result of the level of customization found
within each Web application. It is rare that any Web application is exactly the
same as another, and even in the case where two identical Web applications were
found running, their backend infrastructure may be different. Because of this, the
traditional approach to identifying vulnerabilities through the use of signature
plug-ins is ineffective.
Although signature-based vulnerability scanning is ineffective on its own, it is
still a component of identifying and verifying vulnerabilities in Web applications.
However, manual testing plays a significantly larger role in the identification and
verification of vulnerabilities in Web applications. In order to perform manually
testing, a plethora of tools and techniques must be used. The Open Web
Application Security Project (OWASP) has developed a Testing Guide for Web
applications. It is available from OWASP at www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:
OWASP_Testing_Project.
TIP
The ability to perform manual testing comes with experience in programming and security
testing. Fortunately, there are many resources available for those interested in learning
about and ultimately performing Web application security testing. The authors of this book
highly recommend Steven Palmer’s Web Application Vulnerabilities: Detect, Exploit, Prevent
(ISBN: 978-1-59749-209-6), available from Syngress at www.syngress.com/hacking-and-
penetration-testing/Web-Application-Vulnerabilities.
Password Cracking
The twelfth module contained within the Internet Technologies Security Testing
section of OSSTMM relates to password cracking. In essence, password cracking
involves attempting to identify valid credentials to a running service or Web applica-
tion. Testing can be performed either by trying a precompiled list of passwords,
known as a dictionary attack, or by trying every possible combination of a certain
criteria (letters, numbers, special characters, and so on) known as brute-forcing.
When performing password cracking, be mindful that many services and Web
applications implement account lockout functionality that either temporarily or
220
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

permanently disables an account if too many invalid password attempts are
recorded during a certain time period.
A common tool to perform password cracking, through both dictionary and
brute-force attacks, is Cain & Abel, shown in Figure 12.4. Cain & Abel is a
Microsoft Windows tool and is freely available from www.oxid.it.
The Openwall Project maintains an extensive collection of wordlists to be used
in dictionary attacks. A reduced version is freely available for download at www.
Openwall.com/passwords/wordlists or a complete version is available through a
variety of delivery options starting at $27.95 USD.7
Password cracking plays a significant role in attacking smart meters when
presented with an authentication prompt. If an attacker can successfully obtain
credentials to a smart meter, he or she may instantly gain complete access of the
device, or may have an additional surface to perform the aforementioned security
tests against.
Denial of Service Testing
The Denial of Service Testing module of the Internet Technologies Security
Testing section of the OSSTMM focuses on identifying the weak points within
the target infrastructure that could affect the availability of the target. In the case
of smart meters, a number of weak points could exist on the device itself or in the
underlying infrastructure. Testing for denial-of-service vulnerabilities in smart
meters could include the use of the previously mentioned Wireshark and Nmap
tools. For example, Wireshark could be used to determine the normal traffic pat-
terns to and from the smart meter. The Nmap tool could then be used to gradually
FIGURE 12.4
Cain & Abel password-cracking tool.
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM)
221

increase the traffic to the smart meter in an attempt to overwhelm the device itself
or its underlying infrastructure.
If the goal of attackers were to simply deny service to a smart meter, it would
be very easy for them to conduct such an attack when compared with attacks that
attempt to compromise the confidentiality or integrity of the smart meter.
Exploit Testing
The modules list at the beginning of the OSSTMM mentions a module called
Exploit Research and Verification under the Internet Technologies Security Testing
section. However, in the detailed description of that section, there is no such
module. Exploit Research and Verification has been rolled into the Vulnerability
Research and Verification and Internet Application Testing modules.
The authors of this book thought it was prudent to call out exploit testing as a
separate section because of its importance when attacking smart meters. All of the
previous modules of the Internet Technologies Security Testing section of the
OSSTMM have laid the groundwork to perform exploit testing. Exploit testing
attempts to use the identified vulnerabilities and weaknesses to compromise the
smart meter. Examples of exploit testing include using code to exploit a buffer
overflow in a running service or using SQL Injection to access a command shell
through an input validation weakness in a Web application.
As previously mentioned in Chapter 8, “Securing the Utility Companies,”
Metasploit is a freely available exploit tool that offers security testers and attack-
ers alike a wealth of vulnerability exploits and payloads. Metasploit, shown in
Figure 12.5, is available from Rapid7 at www.metasploit.com.
For a security tester, the ultimate goal is often the compromise of the target,
whereas for an attacker, the same compromise of the smart meter may only be
another step in their customized methodology to reach their ultimate goal.
FIGURE 12.5
Metasploit vulnerability exploit tool.
222
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

WARNING
Of all of the tools discussed in this chapter, Metasploit has the biggest potential to adversely
impact targeted systems. The authors of this book deem reading David Maynor’s Metasploit
Toolkit for Penetration Testing, Exploit Development, and Vulnerability Research (ISBN: 978-
1-59749-074-0) as a prerequisite to using the Metasploit tool in a production environment. It
is available from Syngress at www.syngress.com/hacking-and-penetration-testing/Metasploit-
Toolkit-for-Penetration-Testing-Exploit-Development-and-Vulnerability-Research.
Communication Security Testing
The fourth section of ISECOM’s OSSTMM covers the security testing of
communications infrastructure. In particular, this section reviews the telephony
network devices of the target through the following eight modules7:
1. Posture Review
2. PBX Review
3. Voicemail Testing
4. Fax Testing
5. Modem Survey
6. Remote Access Control Testing
7. Voice over IP Testing
8. X.25 Packet Switched Networks Testing
These modules, while important to include when evaluating the security of the
Utility Companies, are not applicable to attacking the smart meters. Areas that
may appear to be relevant overlap with those within the previous section, “Internet
Technology Security Testing,” and the next section, “Wireless Security Testing.”
Wireless Security Testing
As wireless technologies are the primary method for communications between the
smart meters and the utility companies, the modules contained within this section
are critical to attacking the smart meters. As with the previous “Internet Technology
Security Testing” section, not all of the following modules will apply to attacking
the smart meters. The following 12 modules are included in the Wireless Security
Testing section of ISECOM’s OSSTMM7:
1. Posture Review
2. Electromagnetic Radiation (EMR) Testing
3. 802.11 Wireless Networks Testing
4. Bluetooth Networks Testing
5. Wireless Input Device Testing
6. Wireless Handheld Testing
7. Cordless Communications Testing
8. Wireless Surveillance Device Testing
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM)
223

9. Wireless Transaction Device Testing
10. Radio-frequency Identification (RFID) Testing
11. Infrared Testing
12. Privacy Review
To better understand which modules of the Wireless Security Testing of the
OSSTMM apply to attacking the smart meters and how they can be utilized, let
us review them in more detail.
802.11 Wireless Networks Testing
The third module of the Wireless Security Testing section of the OSSTMM relates
to testing the security of any 802.11 based networks. Generally speaking, the goal
of this module is to attempt to compromise the confidentiality, integrity, or
availability of the data traversing any wireless networks.
Kismet is a common wireless sniffing tool that can be used to perform testing of
802.11 networks. In much the same way that Wireshark performs sniffing of wired
networks, Kismet performs wireless network identification, including access point
type, network name (SSID), connected clients, and implemented security (if any).
It can also log packets for later review or integration into an encryption-breaking
tool such as AirCrack-ng. Kismet, shown in Figure 12.6, is freely available for
download at www.kismetwireless.net.
When reviewing the 802.11 Wireless Networks Testing module in the context
of smart meters, you may find that the targeted smart meter does not utilize
802.11 wireless networks. Rather, it may utilize an 802.15.4 Wireless Network
Protocol such as ZigBee. The same concepts that are discussed for 802.11
networks can be applied to 802.15.4 wireless networks. However, the hardware
and software utilized for 802.15.4 networks may differ. For more information on
testing the wireless security of 802.15.4, visit Travis Goodspeed’s blog located at
http://travisgoodspeed.blogspot.com. Travis has done a tremendous amount of
work in the ZigBee space and has presented his findings through publications and
FIGURE 12.6
Kismet wireless sniffing tool.
224
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

conference presentations in an attempt to better secure devices utilizing 802.15.4
technologies, such as smart meters.
Bluetooth and RFID Security Testing
The Wireless Security Testing section of the OSSTMM contains two additional
modules that discuss the security testing of Bluetooth and RFID wireless technolo-
gies. Although neither of these wireless technologies is widely used in current
smart meters, the authors of this book suggest performing cursory testing to identify
if either technology is in use on the targeted smart meter.
Kismet recently implemented functionality for discovering Bluetooth devices.
Thus, Kismet could be used to perform discovery testing to determine if the
targeted smart meter utilized Bluetooth technology. Identifying RFID technologies
in use on the targeted smart meter is a bit more difficult. However, details on how
to create your own RFID sniffing kit are available at http://rfid.marcboon.com.
NOTE
If you are interested in learning more about RFID security, the authors of this book recommend
reading Frank Thornton and Paul Sanghera’s How To Cheat At Deploying & Securing RFID
(ISBN: 978-1-59749-230-0, Syngress). The book covers both attack and defense strategies for
RFID technologies. It is available for purchase at www.syngress.com/information-security-and-
system-administrators/How-to-Cheat-at-Deploying-and-Securing-RFID.
Physical Security Testing
The final section of ISECOM’s Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual
covers testing the physical security of the target. With the utility companies aiming
to deploy smart meters at each of their customers’ locations, the physical security
of smart meters is paramount in securing the smart grid. To evaluate the physical
security posture of a target, OSSTMM includes the following seven modules within
the Physical Security Testing section7:
1. Posture Review
2. Access Controls Testing
3. Perimeter Review
4. Monitoring Review
5. Alarm Response Review
6. Location Review
7. Environment Review
Just as certain modules of the Internet Technologies Security Testing and the
Wireless Security Testing sections of the OSSTMM did not apply to attacking
smart meters, the same applies to the aforementioned seven modules contained
within the Physical Security Testing section. The modules contained within this
Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM)
225

section of the OSSTMM are written as if physical access to the target is not
commonly allowed. However, as previously mentioned, this is not the case with
smart meters. However, some parts of the Physical Security Testing modules can
still apply to attacking smart meters.
The Access Control module of the Physical Security Testing section discusses
how to test the access controls of a target. For attacking smart meters, this would
include identifying any mechanisms that would detect the tampering of a smart
meter and institute some type of alarm or trigger. Physical inspection of the
device, as well as data mining on the Internet may be the two most effective way
to evaluate the access controls of targeted smart meters.
In performing a test of the physical security of a smart meter, there may be
monitoring controls in place that may compromise an attack. This module simply
deals with identifying and monitoring solutions that may be observing the target,
and determining how to defeat them. Examples would be a surveillance camera
on a building’s smart meter. Countermeasures to use when attacking the physical
security of smart meter would include rendering the camera inoperable or masking
your identity.
The Location Review module relates to identifying the weaknesses of the tar-
get as a result of its location. In the context of smart meters, this would simply
involve determining if you could obtain physical access to the meter. As most
meters are physically located on the sides of buildings, almost every attacker
should encounter little to no controls preventing access to the smart meter.
NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 800-42: GUIDELINE ON
NETWORK SECURITY TESTING
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) issued Special Publi-
cation 800-42: Guideline on Network Security Testing in October of 2003. Since
then, security testers and attackers alike have utilized its methodology to evaluate
the security of targeted devices. NIST 800-42 contains three high-level sections:
Security Testing and the Systems Development Life Cycle, Security Testing Tech-
niques, and Deployment Strategies for Security Testing.8 For the purpose of
attacking smart meters, we will review the “Security Testing Techniques” section
in detail and discuss how it can be utilized to attack smart meters.
Security Testing Techniques
The Security Testing Techniques chapter, or Chapter 3, of NIST’s Special Publica-
tion 800-42 contains the following sections8:
1. Roles and Responsibilities for Testing
2. Network Scanning
3. Vulnerability Scanning
4. Password Cracking
226
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

5. Log Reviews
6. File Integrity Checkers
7. Virus Detectors
8. War Dialing
9. Wireless LAN Testing (“War Driving”)
10. Penetration Testing
11. Post-Testing Activities
12. General Information Security Principles
13. Summary Comparisons of Network Testing Techniques
Of the 13 sections of NIST 800-42’s Security Testing Techniques chapter, not
all apply when discussing on attacking smart meters. For the sections that do
apply, let us review each of these categories in detail and describe how they relate
to attacking smart meters. Comparisons and references to the previously discussed
ISECOM’s Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual will be included
in the following analysis, so the authors of this book highly recommend reviewing
that section of this chapter before continuing.
Network Scanning
Section 3.2 of NIST 800-42 discusses how ping sweeps and port scans can be
utilized to identify active hosts on targeted networks, as well as the network
services operating on those hosts. Additionally, the section goes on to discuss
operating system fingerprinting, which is equivalent to utilizing the –O switch
when running Nmap.
The Network Scanning section of NIST 800-42 also explains how banner
information can be utilized to identify the type of application that is running on
an open port.8 For example, Figure 12.7 demonstrates that Web servers often dis-
close information in what is known as a banner. Reading this banner information
can help an attacker to determine if they are targeting an Apache Web server or a
Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS) Web server.
FIGURE 12.7
Apache Web server banner.
NIST Special Publication 800-42: Guideline on Network Security Testing
227

When relating the Network Scanning section of NIST 800-42 to attacking
smart meters, it can be used by an attacker to identify targets, and determine their
running services, application versions, and operating systems. This information
can then be used by an attacker to customize their vulnerability-scanning tool(s),
as well as refine their approach toward manual vulnerability identification and
verification.
Vulnerability Scanning
The next section of NIST 800-42’s third chapter covers the topic of vulnerability
scanning. NIST reiterates the fact that vulnerability scanners can perform the pre-
vious steps of ping sweeps, port scans, and fingerprinting (both network service
and operating system) and also discuss the different types of vulnerability scans
(host and network based).8
From an attacker’s point of view, the information valuable in section 3.3 of
NIST 800-42 is the discussion on false-positives, their potential negative impact
on hosts or networks being scanned, and the fact that vulnerability scanners tend
to focus on well-known vulnerabilities and may overlook more obscure ones.
Each of these discussions can be used by an attacker to refine his or her vulner-
ability identification and verification process.
First, to reduce the number of false-positives identified by an attacker’s
vulnerability scans, they can utilize different scanners. This was previously
discussed by the OSSTMM in the Vulnerability Research and Verification section.
Second, an attacker can attempt to minimize the impact of his or her vulnerability
scans against the targets and the associated networks by using the Wireshark tool.
Also previously discussed but this time in the OSSTMM’s Denial of Service Test-
ing section, an attacker can utilize the Wireshark tool to determine a normal traffic
pattern and then throttle his or her vulnerability scans to stay as close as possible
to the normal traffic volume. This may seem like a significant amount of work for
little to no return; however, if the attacker’s target is known to contain counter-
measures that shut the device down when it is being targeted or if it is unstable,
an attacker may only get one attempt to perform vulnerability scans. Finally, an
attacker can perform manual research of the identified network services and oper-
ating system of the target to identify any vulnerability that was potentially missed
by the attacker’s automated vulnerability scans. This will help to reduce the false
negatives that result from automated testing.
NIST 800-42 stresses the importance of vulnerability testing and timely patch
management as a proactive technique to manage risk.8 However, it can also be
used by attackers to identify weaknesses that may result in the compromise of
their targets, such as smart meters.
Password Cracking
Section 3.4 of NIST 800-42 describes the techniques used in cracking passwords.
These techniques are similar to those covered in the Password Cracking section of
228
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

the OSSTMM; however, several additional items are covered. Specifically, these
items include obtaining passwords passively by network sniffing, and using
hybrid-attacks to crack passwords.8
The first additional topic covered by NIST 800-42 related to password
cracking is the use of network-sniffing tools to capture unencrypted passwords
that traverse a network segment. From an attacker’s point of view, they could
utilize the Wireshark network-sniffing tool to capture unencrypted passwords
traversing across the network. Although network sniffing across a switched
network yields a significantly lower number of packets, sniffing wireless
networks provides nearly every packet that traverses the wireless network. As
previously mentioned in the 802.11 Wireless Security Testing section of the
OSSTMM, Kismet can capture wireless packets that can later be viewed in tools such
as Wireshark.
NIST 800-42 also introduces the password-cracking concept known as a
hybrid attack.8 This type of password cracking is based on using a wordlist and
then adding characters to the word in the word list. For example, if a wordlist
contained the word “yellow,” a password-cracking tool that performed hybrid-
attacks would test such passwords as “yellow1,” “!yellow,” and “!yellow@@.”
The previously mentioned Cain and Abel password-cracking tool, as shown in
Figure 12.4, can perform hybrid attacks.
Each of these additional topics covered by NIST 800-42 can yield significant
results for an attacker. Once an attacker has obtained valid credentials for
a network service of, or the operating system running on a smart meter, he or she
stands a significantly higher chance of being able to reach his or her goal,
whatever that may be.
Wireless LAN Testing (“War Driving”)
The ninth section of the third chapter of NIST 800-42 covers Wireless LAN
Testing, with a focus on “war driving.”8 War Driving is the act of driving
around neighborhoods, buildings, and offices looking for open or unencrypted
wireless networks. Although this practice may not have a direct correlation to
attacking a smart meter, it can be used to identify the station or access point
that the smart meters communicate with. Once the base station or access point
has been identified, almost all of the previously covered security testing techni-
ques, from both NIST 800-42 and the OSSTMM, should be performed against
the access point. If an attacker can compromise the device that it communicates
with, the attacker may then be able to gain additional access to the smart
meter.
Although the wireless networking tool, Kismet, has been previously discussed,
NIST 800-42 discusses the use of Network Stumbler. Network Stumbler, shown
in Figure 12.8, is a Microsoft Windows-based tool, much like Kismet, that
performs access point identification. It does not contain all of features of Kismet,
but is suitable for war driving activities.
NIST Special Publication 800-42: Guideline on Network Security Testing
229

NOTE
Frank Thornton, Michael J Schearer, and Brad Haines authored Kismet Hacking (ISBN:
978-1-59749-117-4). This book focuses on performing wireless security testing using the
Kismet tool. It also covers building Kismet drones, and mapping networks using GPS
coordinates. Kismet Hacking is available from Syngress at www.syngress.com/hacking-and-
penetration-testing/Kismet-Hacking.
Penetration Testing
The final section we will discuss in Chapter 3 of NIST 800-42 is section 3.10,
Penetration Testing. From a high level, this section discusses the risks associated
with penetration testing, as well common approaches to penetration testing,8
Section 3.10 also discusses an often overlooked concept of penetration testing
through NIST’s Four Stage Penetration Testing Methodology.8
Read by the eyes of an attacker, the Penetration Testing section of NIST
800-42 can remind them of the importance of testing their exploit code before
attempting to exploit actual smart meters. Much like we previously discussed
during the Vulnerability Scanning section of NIST 800-42, penetration testing can
have a significant impact on the target, and could result in the smart meter
becoming unresponsive. To this end, an attacker must thoroughly test his or her
exploit code on similar systems or devices before attempting it on smart meters.
Otherwise, the attacker may have wasted his or her only opportunity to compromise
the device.
NIST 800-42 presents its readers with two distinct approaches to penetration
testing. The first approach, known as Blue Teaming, conducts penetration testing
with prior knowledge of the target environment, as well as the consent of the
organization responsible for targeted environment. The second approach, known
as Red Teaming, conducts penetration testing without prior knowledge of the
target environment and with limited knowledge (usually only upper management)
of the testing within the targeted organization. Blue Teaming is equitable to
FIGURE 12.8
Network Stumbler wireless tool.
230
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

OSSTMM’s Tandem approach, and Red Teaming is equitable to OSSTMM’s
Blind approach. An attackers approach will almost always most closely align with
OSSTMM’s Double Blind approach.
Finally, the Penetration Testing section of NIST 800-42 describes their Four
Stage Penetration Testing Methodology. These four stages (planning, discovery,
attack, and reporting) are similar to each of the larger methodologies outlined in
this chapter. However, this specific methodology emphasizes that once an attacker
has successfully compromised a vulnerable system, the methodology reverts to the
discovery phase as the attacker determines if they can discover any additional
information or systems that were previously inaccessible.
Attackers will definitely want to ensure that the utility companies or smart
meter manufacturers are unaware of their testing activities. Similarly, attackers’
security testing plan should incorporate additional discovery if and when they
compromise the smart meter, as it may give them access to information and
systems they had not originally thought would be available.
SUMMARY
Security testing can be a proactive practice of mature Information Security Program,
or it can be part of an attackers plan to compromise a smart meter. Either way, both
authorized and unauthorized security testing must follow a well-established methodol-
ogy to be successful. Attackers can easily adopt either of the two methodologies
described in this chapter when developing a plan to compromise smart meters. The
utility companies and smart meter manufactures must follow similar methodologies
in order to fully understand and uncover the threats that will come with providing
each and every utility company customer with a smart meter. Otherwise, the utility
companies will be gravely unprepared for the results of the successful compromise of
their smart meters.
Endnotes
1.
About Us [document on the Internet]. Institute for Security and Open Methodologies,
www.isecom.org/about.shtml; [accessed 07.05.10].
2.
OSSTMM – Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual [document on the
Internet]. Institute for Security and Open Methodologies, www.isecom.org/osstmm/;
[accessed 07.05.10].
3.
Herzog P. OSSTMM 2.2: open-source security testing methodology manual. Institute
for Security and Open Methodologies; 2006.
4.
FPL|AMI|How Advanced Electronic Meters Work [document on the Internet]. Florida
Power & Light Company; www.fpl.com/ami/qa.shtml#2; 2010 [accessed 08.05.10].
5.
About Wireshark [document on the Internet]. The Wireshark Foundation, www.
wireshark.org/about.html; [accessed 08.05.10].
Endnotes
231

6.
Nessus: The Network Vulnerability Scanner [document on the Internet]. Tenable
Network Security; www.nessus.org/nessus; 2010 [accessed 08.05.10].
7.
Wordlists and common passwords for password recovery [document on the Internet].
The Openwall Project, www.openwall.com/passwords/wordlists; [accessed 08.05.10].
8.
Wack J, Tracy M, Souppaya M. NIST Special Publication 800-42: Guidelines on
Network Security Testing. Gaithersburg (MD): National Institute of Standards and
Technology; 2003.
232
CHAPTER 12 Attacking Smart Meters

CHAPTER
13
Attacking Smart Devices
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Selecting a Target Smart Device
•
Attacking a Smart Device
While smart meters are currently being rolled out to consumers, those interested in
attacking smart meters are limited by their physical access to them. However, those
targeting smart devices already have access to a plethora of devices that are only a
click and credit card away. In Chapter 12, “Attacking Smart Meters,” we reviewed
two methodologies that an attacker might use when targeting smart meters. In this
chapter, we will utilize ISECOM’s Open Source Security Testing Methodology
Manual to attack an actual smart device. While we will not disclose any particular
vulnerabilities in the targeted smart device, we will examine, in detail, how to
utilize the tools discussed in the previous chapter. Let the attacking begin.
NOTE
If you have jumped to this chapter hoping to dive right into attacking smart devices, the
authors of this book highly recommend that you first review the previous chapter, “Attacking
Smart Meters.” Throughout this chapter we will be referencing information that was
explained in detail in the previous chapter. However, if you are familiar with ISECOM’s
OSSTMM or NIST’s Special Publication 800-42, then the previous chapter may just be a
high-level review.
SELECTING A TARGET SMART DEVICE
Attackers targeting smart meters will be limited by those that are deployed in
areas that they have ready access to. This is not the case with smart devices, as
an attacker can simply order them off the Internet or pick them up at a local hard-
ware store. In reviewing the available smart devices to target, an attacker has a
wide range of devices to choose from. They can choose something as simple as
Fujitsu’s Smart Power Strip device (Figure 13.1) or as complex as Energy, Inc.’s
Energy Detective 5000 (Figure 13.2).
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00013-3
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
233

Fujitsu’s Smart Power Strip allows consumers to monitor the energy usage of
devices connected to the power strip via a USB wireless transmitter that sends
data across the user’s home network.1 The use of wireless network technology
makes the Fujitsu Smart Power Strip an interesting target for an attacker; however,
there are other devices that offer greater attack surfaces.
One such device is the aforementioned Energy Detective 5000, or TED 5000, by
Energy, Inc., as shown in Figure 13.2. According to the Web site of Energy, Inc.,
the TED 5000 “is a simple, yet extremely accurate, home energy monitor that
allows you to see electricity usage in real-time.”2
FIGURE 13.1
Fujitsu’s Smart Power Strip.
FIGURE 13.2
Energy, Inc.’s TED 5000 smart device.
234
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

From a high level, the TED 5000 is connected to your home’s distribution
panels and then it sends readings via power line communications (PLC) to a gate-
way device. This gateway device runs a Web server that presents the information
for the user to monitor, as well as integrates with Google’s Power Meter. You can
learn more about the TED 5000 at www.theenergydetective.com.
For the purpose of this chapter, the TED 5000 was chosen as the targeted
smart device because of its widespread deployment, availability, ease of installa-
tion, and attack surface (wireless, network services, and Web services).
TIP
While the TED 5000 is relatively simple to install, it requires basic understanding and
familiarity with electrical work. The installation may require additional breakers to be
installed in your home’s electric panel and thus could cause serious injury or death if
installed improperly. If you are not skilled at electrical work, the authors of this book
recommend you hire a licensed electrician to install your TED 5000 for you.
ATTACKING A SMART DEVICE
Now that we have selected the TED 5000 as our targeted device, let us first
review our plan of attack. In the coming sections, we will utilize ISECOM’s
OSSTMM methodology. Specifically, we will focus on the Process Security
Testing section of the OSSTMM, highlighting the following applicable
modules:
•
Network Surveying
•
Port Scanning
•
Services Identification and System Identification
•
Vulnerability Research and Verification
•
Internet Application Testing
•
Password Cracking
•
Denial-of-Service Testing
•
Exploit Testing
For each of the modules listed above, we will utilize open-source tools to
perform the testing. If you want to pause here before continuing to make sure you
have all of the covered tools, we will utilize the following:
•
Wireshark – www.wireshark.org
•
Nmap – www.nmap.org
•
Nessus – www.nessus.org
•
w3af – http://w3af.sourceforge.net
•
Bruter – http://sourceforge.net/projects/worawita/
•
Metasploit – www.metasploit.com
Attacking a Smart Device
235

These tools do not represent the only tools that can be used to perform the
testing described in the OSSTMM modules. There are dozens of alternatives, both
commercial and open source that can be used as replacements.
TOOLS
In developing the content for this chapter, the authors of this book utilized multiple systems
and operating systems, including Apple’s Snow Leopard, Microsoft’s Windows 7, and
Ubuntu 10.04 (Lucid Lynx). While having access to all three of these operating systems is
the recommended approach, there is an easier way to quickly access a majority of the
aforementioned tools – BackTrack. BackTrack is a Linux-based operating system that can
be run completely from a Live DVD, a VMware image, or can be installed like any other
Linux distribution.3 One of the significant advantages of utilizing BackTrack, besides
having a portable penetration testing arsenal in your DVD case, is that included tools
are preconfigured to run within the BackTrack environment. This means little to no
configuration, which is often a deterrent for those who have little experience with Linux.
BackTrack is freely available from www.backtrack-linux.org.
Network Surveying
The Network Surveying module aims to identify targets for further inspection. In
the case of attacking the TED 5000, we simply want to identify its IP address.
This can be accomplished by two ways, as discussed in the previous chapter:
•
Passively – Utilizing the Wireshark tool to capture network traffic and manually
identify the TED 5000
•
Actively – Utilizing Nmap to perform ping sweeps to locate the TED 5000’s
response
First, let us look at how we would identify the IP address of the TED 5000
passively using Wireshark. In order for this passive identification to work, your
testing system must reside on the same network as the targeted device. For
the purpose of this chapter, our testing system was connected to the TED 5000
via a hub. Figure 13.3 shows a packet capture of communications between
192.168.210.1 and 192.168.210.5. Looking at the line that says “Ethernet II, SRC:
CompalIn_ef:14:04 (00:1e:ec:ef:14:04), Dst: Energy_21:2d:65 (00:25:2f:21:
2d:65)” we can learn the following:
•
The TED 5000 has a MAC address of 00:25:2f:21:2d:65.
•
The TED 5000 has an IP address of 192.168.210.5.
We know this because the MAC address in the conversation is registered to
Energy, Inc., as provided by Wireshark, and its associated IP address,
192.168.210.5, is listed as the destination in the line “Internet Protocol, Src:
192.168.210.1 (192.168.210.1), Dst: 192.168.210.5 (192.168.210.5)” as also
shown in Figure 13.3.
236
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

If you are unable to passively capture packets using Wireshark, for example
because you are not on the same network, you can actively identify the TED
5000 using Nmap’s ping sweep capability. Figure 13.4 demonstrates how to
perform a ping sweep using Nmap to identify target systems. By issuing the
-sP switch when using Nmap, you can perform ping sweeps that will return
active target’s IP and MAC addresses. Figure 13.4 shows that a MAC address
registered to Energy (Energy, Inc.) is alive on IP address of 192.168.210.5.
At this point we have completed the objective of the Network Surveying
module. We have identified our target, the TED 5000 Smart Device, with an IP
address of 192.168.210.5 and a MAC address of 00:25:2F:21:2D:65. This infor-
mation will be used throughout the rest of the modules, so it is important to write
it down.
FIGURE 13.3
Screenshot of Wireshark packet capture identifying the TED 5000.
FIGURE 13.4
Screenshot of Nmap ping sweep results identifying the TED 5000.
Attacking a Smart Device
237

Port Scanning
The objective of the Port Scanning module of the Process Security Testing section
of ISECOM’s OSSTMM is to identify the services that are running on the target
(TED 5000). To accomplish this, we will utilize Nmap to perform a port scan of
our targeted smart device. Figure 13.5 shows the syntax used to identify all open
TCP ports on the TED 5000 Smart Device.
The following switches were used when running Nmap to identify the services
running on the TED 5000:
•
-n – This switch tells Nmap not to perform DNS resolution. This was added
simply because there was not a DNS record for the TED 5000 on the network
utilized for testing. Omitting this switch will have Nmap to perform DNS
resolution for active hosts.
•
-sS – This switch tells Nmap to perform what is known as a SYN scan. SYN
scans only perform a partial TCP handshake with the target. SYN scans are often
used to increase the speed of a port scan and lessen the impact on the target.
•
-p- – This switch tells Nmap to identify any responding ports on 65,535 TCP
ports on the target. While performing complete TCP port scans takes
significantly longer than performing TCP port scans against a subset of ports,
for example 1-1024, the authors of this book highly recommend it as it will
provide you with more complete results.
•
-oG – This switch tells Nmap to output its results to a file that is in a
greppable format. Greppable formatted files are useful for searching within
multiple output files. Other common Nmap outputs are Normal (oN) and XML
(oX) formats. To output the results in the three major formats at the same
time, use the –oA flag.
As shown in Figure 13.5 by the highlighted text, the TED 5000 Smart Device
responded on two TCP ports, 80 and 443. These ports are associated with Web
FIGURE 13.5
Screenshot of Nmap TCP port scan of the TED 5000.
238
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

servers, with TCP port 80 commonly used for HTTP and TCP port 443 commonly
used for HTTPS.
TIP
If you identify ports on targeted devices that you are not familiar with, there are a number of
resources on the Internet that list the services commonly associated with TCP and UDP
ports. One of these is Internet Assigned Numbers Authority’s (IANA) Port Numbers located
at www.iana.org/assignments/port-numbers.
By simply switching the -sS switch to -sU, Nmap performs a complete (65,535
ports) UDP port scan against the targeted device. Figure 13.6 shows that the TED
5000 Smart Device did not respond on any UDP port.
Alternatively, the TCP and UDP scans can be combined into one command.
While this scan will take a very long time to complete, it does eliminate the need
to watch for when the TCP scan finishes.
The results shown in Figures 13.5 and 13.6 show that the TED 5000 has a
limited footprint of running services. This limited footprint reduces the potential
attack vectors for the device. Despite this, by simply performing the aforemen-
tioned Nmap TCP and UDP port scans, this module of the Process Security Testing
section of the OSSTMM is complete.
Services Identification and System Identification
The objective of the Services Identification and System Identification module of the
Process Security Testing section of ISECOM’s OSSTMM is to identify the services
that are running on the TCP and UDP ports that responded during the Port Scan-
ning module. For example, in the Port Scanning module we learned that the TED
5000 Smart Device is running services on TCP ports 80 and 443. While these ports
FIGURE 13.6
Screenshot of Nmap UDP port scan of the TED 5000.
Attacking a Smart Device
239

most commonly are associated with a Web server, the Services Identification and
System Identification modules attempt to determine WHAT Web server (i.e. Apache
or Internet Information Services) is running on WHAT operating system (Red Hat
Linux or Microsoft Windows 2008 R2).
Nmap can be used to identify the services and the operating system of the tar-
geted device. Several new switches were used to identify the services and operat-
ing systems. Since only TCP ports responded, assume that we used the -sS switch
not the -sU switch. The new switches used were
•
-sV – This switch tells Nmap to perform version detection of the services
running on the open ports.
•
-p 21-25,80,443 – This switch tells Nmap to scan the TCP ports 21 (FTP), 22
(SSH), 23 (Telnet), 24 (any private mail system), 25 (SMTP), 80 (HTTP), and
443 (HTTPS). While only TCP ports 80 and 443 responded to our initial TCP
port scan in the Port Scanning module, we asked Nmap to look for TCP ports
21 through 25 so that it could identify the closed ports. When performing
identification of operating system, Nmap looks for responses and compares
them to a database of known responses. Both open and closed responses are
used, so by having Nmap evaluate the closed responses for TCP ports 21
through 25, we increased the likelihood that it will identify the target’s
operating system.
•
-O – This switch tells Nmap to attempt to identify the target’s operating
system based on the responses to the aforementioned scanned TCP ports.
Figure 13.7 shows the results of our Nmap version scan. As you can see,
Nmap was unable to identify the services running on either TCP port 80 or TCP
FIGURE 13.7
Screenshot of Nmap service and operating system detection results.
240
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

port 443. This is because it does not have a signature for the TED 5000’s
response in its database.
Likewise, Nmap was unable to identify the operating system running on the
targeted device. While this may seem like a waste of time, it is a valuable part of
enumerating your target. Plus, all is not lost as Nessus, which will be used in the
Vulnerability Research and Verification module, also attempts to identify the
services running and the operating system.
Vulnerability Research and Verification
The Vulnerability Research and Verification module of ISECOM’s OSSTMM’s
Process Security Testing section aims to identify vulnerabilities on the services
running on the TED 5000. This module shares a lot of the same underlying objec-
tives as the Internet Application Testing module, which is discussed next. However,
this module focuses on identifying vulnerabilities in services available via the
network, whereas the Internet Application Testing module focuses on identifying
vulnerabilities in what are traditionally known as Web applications.
The process of identifying vulnerabilities in targeted systems involves both
manual and automated testing. Since the only services running on the TED 5000
were Web services, manual vulnerability research and verification will be covered
in detail in the next module.
To perform vulnerability research and verification, the Nessus Vulnerability
Scanning tool was used. While setting up Nessus takes more time than simply
issuing switches to Nmap, actually running Nessus is fairly simple. If you need
further assistance in installing Nessus, the Nessus documentation provides step-
by-step instructions for installing Nessus and creating a user to log in the Web
interface.
NOTE
For the purpose of this module, Nessus, version 4.2.2 was used. Prior to Nessus, version
4.2, Nessus consisted of a server that performed the vulnerability testing and a client that
connected to the server to issue commands. Since version 4.2, Nessus has implemented a
Web interface that handles what was previously performed via the Nessus client. For those
of you who like the client/server model better, Nessus 4.2.2 still supports the Nessus 4
client. However, we utilized the Web interface of Nessus 4.2.2 for the purpose of this
book.
First, we logged into the Nessus server running on our Ubuntu 10.04 (Lucid
Lynx) system, as shown in Figure 13.8. Figure 13.8 shows that the Professional
Feed for Nessus was used during this experiment. The Nessus Professional Feed
is required when running Nessus for commercial uses, and at the time this chapter
was written, it was available from Tenable for US $1,200. Tenable also provides
a personal-use license that is freely available. You can read more about Nessus’
licensing model at www.nessus.org/products/professional-feed.
Attacking a Smart Device
241

After logging into Nessus, a unique scan policy was created for the target, the
TED 5000. Scan policies are configurations that Nessus uses to run vulnerability
scans. The TED 5000 Smart Device scan policy was created by clicking on the
Policies tab on the top of the screen. Figure 13.9 shows the options selected for
the TED 5000 Smart Device scan policy.
FIGURE 13.8
Nessus Web interface login screen.
FIGURE 13.9
Nessus scan policy configuration.
242
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

Several of the policy settings were changed from the default settings and the
following list describes why. These settings were
•
Name – This setting is simply used for the unique identifier for this scan
policy. You can set this to any value you would like.
•
Description – This is an optional setting for your own use. Remembering
what a specific policy was/is used for can be difficult when you have multiple
scan policies.
•
Save Knowledge Base – This setting saves the information regarding your
scan to the Nessus server. This information can be useful in troubleshooting or
if you encounter any issues during your scan.
•
Log Scan Details to Server – This setting is similar to the Save Knowledge
Base setting as it logs details about your scan to the Nessus log files. This
information can again be useful in troubleshooting any issues or monitoring
the status of your scan (if the new progress bar is not behaving normally).
•
Port Scanners – As the TED 5000 only responded to TCP ports, we
unchecked all the other scanners. The Ping Host setting was left as we wanted
to ensure the host was still alive prior to performing our vulnerability scan.
•
Port Scan Options – We changed this setting from Nessus’ default ports to
only the TCP ports we previously identified using Nmap in the Port Scanning
module. Reducing the number of ports scanned decreases the duration of
vulnerability scans. Only change this setting if you have previously performed
port scans, using Nmap or an alternative port scanner, or change this setting to
0-65535 if you would like to perform complete port scans.
Once the scan policy was created for the TED 5000 Smart Device, the scan
was set up by clicking on the Scan tab at the top. Figure 13.10 shows the settings
used for the Nessus scan of the targeted device.
FIGURE 13.10
Nessus scan settings.
Attacking a Smart Device
243

As you can see by reviewing Figure 13.10, since most of your configuration is
completed in the scan policy, there are few options when configuring a scan.
Below are the settings that were used for this Nessus scan of the TED 5000
Smart Device:
•
Name – This setting is simply used for the unique identifier for this scan. You
can set this to any value you would like. Note that this will be the name of
the report in the Reports tab once the scan has completed.
•
Type – This setting allows you to either run the scan now or schedule the scan
for later. For the purpose of this test, the scan was run immediately.
•
Policy – This setting is the scan policy Nessus will use when performing the scan.
The TED 5000 policy that was previously created in the Policies tab was selected.
•
Scan Targets – This setting is where the IP address of the TED 5000 Smart
Device is entered. Nessus also accepts network ranges, host names, and DNS
names. If you have a precompiled list of targets, you can use the Targets File
setting instead of the Scan Targets setting.
Once the scan was configured, click the Launch Scan button to let Nessus do
its thing. Figure 13.11 shows Nessus’s new progress bar. As Nessus is performing
the vulnerability tests, it updates the status of the scan with the percentage com-
plete, as well as the number of High, Medium, and Low vulnerabilities, along
with the number of open ports. You will notice that Nessus only identified two
open ports on the TED 5000 Smart Device because we configured the TED 5000
scan policy to test only TCP ports 80 and 443.
When Nessus completes a vulnerability scan, it moves the scan from the Scans
tab to the Reports tab. To view the results of the scan, simply click on the
Reports tab and then double-click on the name of the scan you set when creating
FIGURE 13.11
Nessus vulnerability scan progress.
244
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

the scan. Figure 13.12 shows the information Nessus discovered for the service
running on TCP port 80 (HTTP).
After completing the Nessus vulnerability scan of the TED 5000 Smart Device,
the results were reviewed and Nessus was unable to identify any vulnerabilities with a
medium- or high-risk classification. Thus, manual testing or automated Internet Appli-
cation Testing will be necessary to identify an entry point into the targeted device.
Internet Application Testing
Much like the objective of the Vulnerability Research and Verification module,
the objective of the Internet Application Testing module of ISECOM’s OSSTMM
is to identify weaknesses in the Web applications and technologies of the targeted
device. To accomplish this objective, a combination of manual and automated
testing will be used.
To perform manual testing of the targeted Smart Device, a Web browser was
used. The following Web browsers were considered to be part of the toolkit:
•
Microsoft Internet Explorer – Available for only the Microsoft Windows
Operating System from www.microsoft.com/windows/internet-explorer
•
Google Chrome – Available for most operating systems (Microsoft Windows,
Apple OSX, and Linux) from www.google.com/chrome
•
Mozilla Firefox – Available for most operating systems (Microsoft Windows,
Apple OSX, and Linux) from www.getfirefox.com
To start the automated testing portion of the Internet Application Testing module
of the OSSTMM, we simply opened up Google Chrome’s Web browser and entered
the TED 5000 Smart Device’s URL, http://192.168.210.5. Figure 13.13 shows that
when attempting to access the TED 5000’s Web interface, it was password-protected.
FIGURE 13.12
Nessus vulnerability scan results.
Attacking a Smart Device
245

In order to gain access to the TED 5000’s Web interface, we would have to
obtain valid credentials or brute-force the password. We cover both these methods
of obtaining credentials to the TED 5000’s Web interface in the subsequent
Password Cracking module. For the purpose of this module, we will assume that
we have obtained credentials to the TED 5000’s Web interface.
Now that we have access to the TED 5000’s Web interface, we needed to
get an understanding of the technologies it used. Figure 13.14 shows the TED
5000’s main page that provides a majority of the information its users would be
looking for.
At first glance, it would appear that the TED 5000 is utilizing Adobe’s Flash
technology to serve this information, but upon closer inspection, we found that
this was not the case. Using Google Chrome’s Inspect Element feature (right-click
on the element you want to inspect), we determined that the TED 5000 was
presenting information through JavaScript. Figure 13.15 shows that the Real-Time
KW Usage reading of 3.043 kW was presented via a HTML code and not via an
Adobe Flash object as originally thought.
While there are ways to test Adobe Flash Web applications, such as SWF
Scan (https://h30406.www3.hp.com/campaigns/2009/wwcampaign/1-5TUVE/
index.php?key=swf), the fact that the TED 5000 used JavaScript allowed us
to use the more common Web Application Attack and Audit Framework
(w3af) tool.
FIGURE 13.13
TED 5000 password-protected Web interface.
246
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

FIGURE 13.14
TED 5000’s main page.
FIGURE 13.15
Google Chrome’s inspect element feature.
Attacking a Smart Device
247

TOOLS
Andrés Riancho’s Web Application Attack and Audit Framework, or w3af for short, is an
open-source Web application tool that provides a framework for identifying vulnerabilities in
Web applications.4 W3af also provides attack, or penetration testing, capabilities for
discovered vulnerabilities. The tool can be utilized to perform both automated and manual
vulnerability identification and exploitations and comes with a number of preconfigured scan
policies, including one for the Open Web Application Security Project’s (OWASP) Top 10.
You can learn more about w3af and download a copy for yourself from http://w3af.
sourceforge.net.
Now that we have learned the technologies used by the TED 5000’s Web inter-
face, we can utilize w3af to crawl, or spider, the targeted device’s Web server. The
goal of spidering the Web server is to create an index of the available pages on the
Web site and then test them individually for vulnerabilities. Fortunately, w3af contains
a preconfigured scan policy called Sitemap that crawls the target site. Figure 13.16
shows how to have w3af crawl the TED 5000 Smart Device.
FIGURE 13.16
W3af sitemap feature.
248
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

Once we completed a scan of the TED 5000 Smart Device using w3af’s
Sitemap scan policy, we reviewed the results to identify pages to manually
evaluate. Since a majority of the TED 5000’s pages are static in nature, our
manual evaluation of the pages identified by the Sitemap policy scan reviewed
no vulnerabilities.
The next step in performing Internet Application Testing using w3af was to
utilize the tools’ built-in OWASP Top 10 scan policy. If you will remember from
the preceding chapter, we discussed how that the OWASP Top 10 was a great tool
to use when attempting to identify vulnerabilities. Thus, the authors of this book
welcome the inclusion of the OWASP Top 10 built-in scan policy to w3af. You
will notice that Figure 13.17, which shows the plug-ins that are selected for the
OWASP Top 10 scan policy, shows that the Discovery plug-in is checked. This
was the same plug-in that was used for the previous Sitemap scan policy. We
performed the separate Sitemap policy scan because often times the OWASP Top
10 scan can take a significant amount of time to complete. In an effort to be more
efficient, completing the Sitemap policy scan allows you to perform manual inspec-
tion of the identified pages while w3af performs the OWASP Top 10 policy scan.
FIGURE 13.17
W3af OWASP top 10 policy scan.
Attacking a Smart Device
249

As w3af conducts the OWASP Top 10 policy scan, you will see a progress
meter along with log information, as shown in Figure 13.18. W3af will also flag
vulnerabilities as they are identified, both in the Results section, as shown in
Figure 13.19, and in the Log section, as shown in Figure 13.18.
FIGURE 13.18
W3af scan progress.
FIGURE 13.19
W3af scan results.
250
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

Once the scan was completed, we reviewed the results by simply clicking on the
Results tab of w3af. While reviewing the results, we noticed one possibly interesting
result, as highlighted in Figure 13.19. W3af flagged a potential buffer overflow
vulnerability on the TED 5000 Smart Device because the Web server responded to
several requests with a HTTP response code of “414”and the message of “Request-
URI Too Long.” At first glance, this vulnerability appears to be just the type of break
an attacker would be looking for. However, we needed to validate its existence.
In order to validate the potential buffer overflow on the TED 5000 Smart
Device’s Web interface, we researched the 414 Request-URI Too Long Web server
message. As a result of our research, we determined that this was a false positive.
However, this potential vulnerability demonstrated how an attacker may utilize the
Internet Application Testing module of ISECOM’s OSSTMM’s Process Security
Testing section to potentially compromise as smart device.
Password Cracking
The Password Cracking module of ISECOM’s OSSTMM aims to obtain credentials
to password-protected targets. As previously mentioned in the Internet Application
Testing module, the TED 5000 Smart Device’s Web interface was protected by a
log-in and a password. Figure 13.13 shows this protection. In much the same way
that we identified the TED 5000’s IP address, there are passive and active attacks that
can result in obtaining valid credentials to the TED 5000’s Web interface. For the
purpose of this module, we will use the Wireshark sniffing tool for our passive attack
and the Bruter brute-force password tool for our active attack.
Utilizing Wireshark to obtain log-in credentials to a Web site or other network
service can be very effective under the right circumstances. Just like in the Network
Surveying module, for Wireshark to be effective, you must be on the same network
as either the client logging into the target device or the target itself. In switched
network environments, even if you are on the same network, you still may not be
able to view the packets that contain the log-in credentials. However, the ideal
network to be sniffing would be a wireless one, such as those at an airport or a
coffee shop. Likewise, for the passive attack to be effective, the log-in credentials
must be sent as is unencrypted or encrypted with an encryption scheme with known
flaws. As shown in Figure 13.13, the authentication prompt presented to users
attempting to access the TED 5000’s Web interface will be obfuscated in the weak
Base64 encoding used for basic authentication. Let us now look at how we used the
Wireshark tool to obtain the log-in credentials for the TED 5000’s Web interface.
Using Wireshark’s filtering capability, we first filtered our packet capture to
show only the packets sent to or from the TED 5000’s IP address, 192.168.210.5.
This can be accomplished by setting a filter of “ip.addr==192.168.210.5.” Then,
we browsed the packets looking for HTTP protocol packets. You could set an
additional filter for only the HTTP protocol packets sent to or from the TED 5000
Smart Device, but since our packet capture was of limited size, simply using the
sort feature and manually reviewing the HTTP protocol packets worked for us.
Attacking a Smart Device
251

Figure 13.20 shows the packet capture information that includes the Base64
encoded credentials being sent from the client to the TED 5000’s Web interface.
The decoded packet contains “Authorization: Basic YWRtaW46Wj FNYjMz.”
The information panel of Wireshark clearly shows that the packet contained
authorization information, as shown by the highlighted text in Figure 13.20. Now
that we know the Base64 encoded log-in and password, you could utilize your
favorite encoder/decoder to obtain the plain text version of the log-in and
password, as shown in Figure 13.21, Wireshark already did this for us. By simply
clicking on the arrow next to the Authorization information in the information
panel of Wireshark, we now know that credentials for the TED 5000’s Web
interface are admin / Z1gb33.
Now that we obtained the credentials to the TED 5000’s Web interface via a
passive attack, let us review how we used the Bruter password cracking tool to
FIGURE 13.20
Wireshark packet capture.
FIGURE 13.21
Wireshark Base64 decoded credentials.
252
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

obtain the same credentials via an active attack. For Bruter to successfully obtain
valid credentials for the target system, you must successfully identify the log-in
account name and the associated password. Usually, the default log-in account
name can be obtained by viewing the targeted device’s documentation. For the
purpose of this module, we used the log-in account name of the admin.
Bruter allows you to perform both brute-force and dictionary-based attacks
against HTTP Basic Authentication, the scheme used to protect the TED 5000’s
Web interface. In testing, we created a simple dictionary file of common pass-
words to try, as shown in Figure 13.22.
NOTE
For demonstration purposes, and as we were the ones who configured the TED 5000 Smart
Device, we made sure that the actual password was contained in our dictionary file. For
more robust dictionary files, review the Section “Password Cracking” in the preceding
chapter.
To use Bruter, we simply entered the IP address of the TED 5000’s Web interface,
192.168.210.5, the protocol (HTTP Basic), the user (admin); selected the dictionary
option; and browsed to our dictionary text file (ted.txt). Then, we simply clicked the
Start button, and a few seconds later we were presented with the password for the
admin account on the TED 5000’s Web interface. Figure 13.23 shows our results and
the valid credentials to access the targeted device’s Web interface.
Once we obtained valid credentials to the TED 5000’s Web interface, we were
able to perform the aforementioned testing included in the Internet Application
Testing module. Password Cracking, unlike the other modules of ISECOM’s
OSSTMM Process Security Testing section, may need to be performed often and
may be out of order when compared to the other modules.
FIGURE 13.22
Sample dictionary file.
Attacking a Smart Device
253

WARNING
More than likely you will have to use active attacks when trying to obtain valid credentials
for services or applications. Be mindful that the account(s) you are attempting to brute-force
or attack via a dictionary list may have an account lockout threshold for invalid attempts.
You can attempt to throttle your testing via the number of attempts per minute or the total
number of attempts over a period, but if the account(s) you are targeting disable the
account permanently, instead of only for a limited period such as 15 minutes, you will be
unable to continue testing those accounts.
Denial-of-Service Testing
The objective of the Denial-of-Service Testing module of the Process Security Testing
section of ISECOM’s OSSTMM is to identify whether the targeted device is vulner-
able to Denial-of-Service attacks. While a Denial-of-Service attack will most likely
have a greater impact on a smart meter than on a smart device, depending on how the
smart device is utilized by a consumer, a successful Denial-of-Service attack could
have significant implications (think blackout). However, a Denial-of-Service attack
FIGURE 13.23
Bruter results.
254
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

against our targeted smart device, the TED 5000, would simply result in the loss of
power monitoring for the duration of the attack.
Regardless of the impact of a Denial-of-Service attack, vulnerabilities scanners
provide a wealth of plug-ins that check for these types of vulnerabilities. How-
ever, as running these plug-ins may very well result in an unresponsive target,
they must be explicitly enabled. This can be accomplished by unchecking the
Safe Checks setting in your Nessus scan policy, as shown in Figure 13.9.
If you plan on performing Denial-of-Service vulnerability checks against your
targeted smart device, be sure you are aware of the consequences. Otherwise, you may
end up with an inoperable device or lose valuable data. Consider yourself warned.
Exploit Testing
The final module of the Process Security Testing section of ISECOM’s OSSTMM
that we utilized for the purpose of this chapter was the Exploit Testing module.
While Nessus did not identify any vulnerability that could be exploited, and the
one w3af potential vulnerability was a false positive, there was little reason to
attempt to exploit the TED 5000 Smart Device. However, we decided to run all
of the exploits provided in the Metasploit tool against the TED 5000 Smart
Device in an attempt to demonstrate how to perform Exploit Testing. One applic-
able detail from our previous Nessus results indicated that the TED 5000 Smart
Device was running the BSD operating system.
To determine the exploits that Metasploit contains for a certain service, such as
Apache, start the Metasploit console and type “search apache.” Figure 13.24 shows
the available Auxiliary modules, Exploits, and Payloads for the Apache service.
FIGURE 13.24
Metasploit Apache modules.
Attacking a Smart Device
255

In reviewing the resulting modules, we realized that Metasploit only contained
exploits for two Apache vulnerabilities for the UNIX operating system. However,
both these vulnerabilities were for plug-ins not installed or utilized by the TED
5000 Smart Device. At this point, it was apparent that the TED 5000 Smart
Device was not going to be compromised via Exploit Testing. However, Exploit
Testing is the culmination of the OSSTMM, and successfully exploiting vulner-
abilities can allow attackers to perform subsequent attacks until they attain their
ultimate objective.
SUMMARY
In Chapter 12, “Attacking Smart Meters,” we discussed the common methodologies
used to perform security testing. In this chapter, we applied ISECOM’s OSSTMM
methodology to attack smart devices. Much like smart meters, smart devices will be
subject to those with access to them. However, unlike smart meters, the current
availability of smart devices is widespread. While the successful compromise of a
smart device will most likely have significantly less impact than a successful com-
promise of a smart meter, this does not preclude smart device manufacturers from
performing security testing devices. If certain smart devices became ubiquitous,
they will most certainly find themselves in the sights of attackers and curious
consumers alike. If these smart devices had not been previously subjected to
security testing and had their vulnerabilities remediated, smart device users may
find themselves in for unintended consequences.
Endnotes
1.
Lilly P. Fujitsu Develops Smart Power Strip, Monitors Power Use [document on the
Internet], Maximum PC;www.maximumpc.com/article/news/fujitsu_develops_smart_
power_strip_monitors_power_use; 2010 [accessed 19.05.10].
2.
What is Ted? [document on the Internet], Energy, Inc.;www.theenergydetective.com/
about-ted; 2010 [accessed 19.05.10].
3.
BackTrack Linux [document on the Internet], BackTrack Linux; www.backtrack-linux.
org; 2010 [accessed 19.05.10].
4.
w3af – Web Application Attack and Audit Framework [document on the Internet],
Andrés Riancho; http://w3af.sourceforge.net; [accessed 20.05.10].
256
CHAPTER 13 Attacking Smart Devices

CHAPTER
14
What’s Next?
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER
•
Timeline
•
What Should Consumers Expect?
•
What Should Smart Grid Technology Vendors Expect?
•
What Should Utility Companies Expect?
•
What Should Security Professionals Expect and What Do They Predict?
•
Smart Grid Community
Implementing a smart grid will not happen overnight, and once a smart grid is in
use, it will continue to change and be updated to support new technologies and
functionality. This chapter discusses what consumers, technology vendors, and uti-
lity companies should expect to see in the near future. In addition, this chapter
discusses what security professionals are predicting for the smart grid and how to
stay current with the movement to secure the smart grid.
TIMELINE
The deployment of smart grid infrastructure has been accelerated by initiatives
across the world. In particular, projects that deploy smart meters and their support-
ing advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) have increased significantly in the past
few years. The Smart Metering Project Team at the Energy Retail Association
(www.energy-retail.org.uk/smartmeters.html) in the United Kingdom have main-
tained a map of current AMI and automatic meter reading (AMR) projects across
the world, which is displayed in Figure 14.1. For a more detailed look, Figure 14.2
depicts current AMI and AMR projects in North America.
As illustrated in Figures 14.1 and 14.2, there are many smart-grid-related projects,
most of which involve the deployment of smart meters, that are currently planned or
in the process of being implemented. In March 2010, the Edison Foundation
estimated that 60 million smart meters are currently being deployed in the United
States.2 So if you live in the United States, a smart meter may already be installed in
your home.
A Guide to Kernel Exploitation. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-59749-570-7.00014-5
© 2011 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
257

WHAT SHOULD CONSUMERS EXPECT?
Consumers have been promised that the smart grid will bring many improvements
to their daily lives. Smaller electric bills, less frequent and shorter power outages,
and more immediate access to energy usage information are just some of the
promises made to consumers. In order to fulfill these promises, several new tech-
nologies will be invading consumers’ homes and businesses including:
•
Smart devices
•
Smart meters
FIGURE 14.1
SRSM Smart Metering Project and Google maps covering the World.1
FIGURE 14.2
SRSM Smart Metering Project and Google maps covering North America.1
258
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

•
Home area network
•
Electric vehicles
•
Personal power plants
Smart Devices
For consumers, the more visible components of the smart grid will include the
smart devices that reside in people’s kitchens, living rooms, bedrooms, and
offices. Mechanical appliances will now include digital components once reserved
for personal computers and office workstations. Appliances at home and office
now have built-in processing capabilities and communication abilities to improve
energy efficiency and ease of use.
Smart Appliances in Home
In addition to the smart devices discussed in Chapter 13, “Attacking Smart
Devices,” consumers can expect to see their traditional devices, such as refrigera-
tors, dishwashers, heaters, washing machines and dryers, and water heaters
replaced with their smart counterparts. As an example, General Electric’s (GE)
smart water heater is displayed in Figure 14.3. GE’s smart water heater has the
capability to be connected to a smart meter, which could allow either the utility
company or the consumer to change the operating mode to an energy saving
mode in order to decrease the power consumption.3 This is designed to save the
consumers’ money and prevent power outages during peak-demand times.
Other smart consumer appliances, such as dishwashers and air conditioners,
will also have similar network interfaces that allow consumers and utility compa-
nies to manage their energy consumption through either a smart meter or a third-
party interface. It is safe to assume that most new appliances, ranging from power
strips to dishwashers, will be built with some form of communications technology
to remotely control the appliance. With this new level of connectivity, consumers
will be able to manage their home appliances whether they are at home or any-
where in the world.
NOTE
Why is a book about security discussing washing machines and water heaters? New
technologies bring new risk, and in a smart grid world, numerous devices that were once
isolated will be connected to an information network. By adding this new level of
connectivity, the devices will be introduced to the risk of a remote attack. Any node in a
network should be considered a potential attack injection point. As such, even washing
machines and water heaters will need to be secured appropriately in a smart grid.
Smart Appliances in Office
Businesses will also be introduced to new technologies that utilize the functionality
of smart grids. Data centers running hundreds or thousands of computers, switches,
What Should Consumers Expect?
259

routers, and other network devices, along with battery backups and heating,
ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems draw massive amounts of energy.
Thus, energy usage can be a huge component of a company’s budget. With the
detailed energy usage information available in a smart grid, data centers should be
able to identify inefficiencies in electrical usage to reduce energy-related costs. The
Department of Energy is one organization that is currently performing research, as
part of the Energy Smart Data Center project, to improve the efficiency of data
center cooling, power generation, conversion, and distribution.5 More information
on these efforts can be viewed at http://esdc.pnl.gov/.
Facilities management will also be able to take advantage of the remote
management capabilities of smart devices. Now in many buildings, lights are
turned off automatically at a certain time, and air conditioning or heating is turned
off over long holiday weekends when no one is in the building. While this once
FIGURE 14.3
GE smart water heater.4
260
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

may have been a complex operation, smart devices will allow this to be as simple
as clicking a few buttons in a Web application.
Businesses are already trying to save on energy costs through technical initia-
tives, such as virtualization initiatives that reduce the number of physical servers
running in an environment. Additionally, companies such as Hewlett-Packard
(HP – www.hp.com) are starting to sell servers with built-in sensors that can
detect energy waste and compensate to improve energy efficiency.6
Smart Meters
As illustrated in the section “Timeline,” millions of smart meters are being
deployed all across the world and consumers should expect that trend to con-
tinue. From the consumers’ perspective, the new meters will currently provide
real-time energy usage information and limited control over smart devices. In
the near future, as more smart devices become available, smart meters will be
used as the consumers’ control center for most devices within homes and
businesses.
It is thought that viewing how much energy each device consumes will help
consumers choose to purchase more energy efficient devices and turning off
devices when not in use. Unfortunately, just turning off the devices does not com-
pletely eliminate energy waste. Even when most devices are either turned off or
in standby mode, they will still draw power. The energy used by these devices
while turned off or in standby mode is commonly referred to as vampire energy
waste. As an example, the vampire energy waste of an average plasma television
is estimated to cost consumers $165.00 per year.7 For more examples, Table 14.1
lists the estimated energy usage of several common devices while in standby
mode in homes and businesses. The third column in Table 14.1 lists the average
watts (W), which is an energy measurement (joules) that the device draws per
second.8 The fourth column of Table 14.1 lists the average energy consumption in
kilowatt-hours per year if the device is left in standby mode the entire year.8 The
last column lists the average cost of the device’s energy waste if the device were
left in standby mode for the entire year, which is based on the United States’
residential national average electricity cost of 10.72 cents per kilowatt-hour (as of
February 2010).9
The amount of power drawn by these devices in standby mode or when
powered off is significantly lower than when they are turned on, and individually,
the numbers listed in Table 14.1 may not seem significant. However, the average
American home has 40 devices constantly drawing power.11 When the energy
waste for those 40 devices is combined for a single American, the numbers begin
to appear more significant. Considering there are millions of homes in America,
billions of watts of energy per year are wasted when these devices are not even
being used. It is estimated that almost 10 percent of residential electricity use is
vampire energy waste,11 which equates to Americans spending about $4 billion
on wasted electricity each year.7
What Should Consumers Expect?
261

Table 14.1 Vampire energy cost estimates10
Product
Mode
Average
(W)
Annual
average
(kW-h/year)
Average
annual
cost ($)
Air conditioner
Powered off
0.9
0.81
0.09
Central furnace heating
Powered off
4.21
37.89
4.06
Gas range
Ready mode
1.13
10.17
1.09
Garage door opener
Ready mode
4.48
40.32
4.32
Low-voltage landscape
Ready mode
1.13
10.17
1.09
Cordless power tool
Ready mode and
completely charged
8.34
75.06
8.05
Irrigation timer
Powered off
2.75
24.75
2.65
Irrigation timer
Ready mode
2.84
25.56
2.74
Coffeemaker
Powered off
1.14
10.26
1.10
Microwave ovens
Ready mode and
door closed
3.08
27.72
2.97
Microwave ovens
Ready mode and
door open
25.79
232.11
24.88
Surge protector
Powered off
1.05
9.45
1.01
Mobile phone charger
Connected to fully
charged phone
2.24
20.16
2.16
Mobile phone charger
Phone not
connected
0.26
2.34
0.25
CRT computer monitor
Powered off
0.8
7.2
0.77
CRT computer monitor
Sleep mode
12.14
109.26
11.71
LCD computer monitor
Powered off
1.13
10.17
1.09
LCD computer monitor
Sleep mode
1.38
12.42
1.33
Desktop computer
Powered off
2.84
25.56
2.74
Desktop computer
Sleep mode
21.13
190.17
20.39
Notebook computer
Powered off
8.9
80.1
8.59
Notebook computer
Sleep mode
15.77
141.93
15.21
Notebook computer
Power supply only
4.42
39.78
4.26
Computer speakers
Powered on, but
no sound
4.12
37.08
3.97
Computer speakers
Powered off
1.79
16.11
1.73
USB hub
Powered off
1.44
12.96
1.39
DSL modem
Powered off
1.37
12.33
1.32
Cable modem
Powered off
3.84
34.56
3.70
Cable modem
Standby mode
3.85
34.65
3.71
Inkjet printer and fax
Powered off
5.31
47.79
5.12
Laser printer and fax
Ready mode
6.42
57.78
6.19
Inkjet multifunction device
Powered off
5.26
47.34
5.07
(Continued)
262
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

Table 14.1 Vampire energy cost estimates10—cont’d
Product
Mode
Average
(W)
Annual
average
(kW-h/year)
Average
annual
cost ($)
Laser multifunction
device
Powered off
3.12
28.08
3.01
Inkjet printer
Powered off
1.26
11.34
1.22
Laser printer
Powered off
1.58
14.22
1.52
Flatbed scanner
Powered off
2.48
22.32
2.39
Copier
Powered off
1.49
13.41
1.44
DVR set-top box
Powered on, but
not recording
37.64
338.76
36.32
DVR set-top box
Powered off
36.68
330.12
35.39
Digital cable with DVR
set-top box
TV powered off
and DVR not
recording
44.63
401.67
43.06
Digital cable with DVR
set-top box
Powered off by
remote control
43.46
391.14
41.93
Digital cable set-top
box
TV powered off
24.65
221.85
23.78
Digital cable set-top
box
Powered off by
remote control
17.83
160.47
17.20
Digital cable set-top
box
Powered off by
switch
17.5
157.5
16.88
Satellite with DVR
set-top box
TV powered off
and DVR not
recording
28.35
255.15
27.35
Satellite with DVR
set-top box
Powered off by
remote control
27.8
250.2
26.82
Satellite set-top box
TV powered off
15.95
143.55
15.39
Satellite set-top box
Powered off by
remote control
15.66
140.94
15.11
Satellite set-top box
Powered off by
switch
15.47
139.23
14.93
CRT television
Powered off by
remote control
3.06
27.54
2.95
CRT television
Powered off by
switch
2.88
25.92
2.78
Rear projection
television
Powered off by
remote control
6.97
62.73
6.72
Rear projection
television
Powered off by
switch
6.6
59.4
6.37
Television/VCR
Powered off with
remote control
5.15
46.35
4.97
(Continued)
What Should Consumers Expect?
263

TIP
A common joke in the security industry is that a computer is only secure when it is turned
off and burned to small pieces. Many people turn off their computers at the end of the day
because of this advice provided by countless blogs. By going one step further and
unplugging the computers and new smart devices, consumers could significantly reduce the
amount of energy wasted and prevent their electronics from being attacked, for at least a
few hours.
Variable Pricing
Most consumers in the United States currently pay a fixed rate for electricity.
So, a price is set per kilowatt-hour and their bill is calculated using the set rate
Table 14.1 Vampire energy cost estimates10—cont’d
Product
Mode
Average
(W)
Annual
average
(kW-h/year)
Average
annual
cost ($)
Television/VCR
Powered off by
switch
5.99
53.91
5.78
AM/FM Tuner
Powered on, but
not playing
9.48
85.32
9.15
AM/FM Tuner
Powered off
1.12
10.08
1.08
Amplifier
Powered on, but
not playing
33.99
305.91
32.79
Amplifier
Powered off
0.27
2.43
0.26
CD player
Powered on, but
not playing
8.62
77.58
8.32
CD player
Powered off
5.04
45.36
4.86
DVD recorder
Powered off
0.75
6.75
0.72
DVD player
Powered on, but
not playing
7.54
67.86
7.27
DVD player
Powered off
1.55
13.95
1.50
DVD/VCR
Powered on, but
not playing
13.51
121.59
13.03
DVD/VCR
Powered off
5.04
45.36
4.86
Game console
Powered off
1.01
9.09
0.97
Game console
Ready mode
23.34
210.06
22.52
Musical instruments
Powered off
2.82
25.38
2.72
Audio receiver
Powered on, but
not playing
37.61
338.49
36.29
Audio receiver
Powered off
2.92
26.28
2.82
Subwoofer
Powered on, but
not playing
10.7
96.3
10.32
264
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

for every kilowatt-hour used. However, utility companies pay a variable rate for
energy in the wholesale market, where the price is based on the time and
present demand. Smart meters will provide utility companies with the function-
ality to apply this variable rate model, or time-of-use model, to consumers. The
variable pricing model has risen from the issue of peak-demand times, which
are times during the day when power demand from the electric grid is at its
highest level. There are two basic strategies to dealing with the increasing
demand during these peak-demand times. The first option is to build more
power plants to generate more energy to meet the demand during the peak-
demand times. This option is of course costly and creates significant waste
during the nonpeak demand times. Predicting how much energy demand will
exist at a given moment is nearly impossible. As a result, power plants usually
generate a larger energy supply than the existing demand. So when there is less
demand, the excess energy is currently wasted. Storing this excess energy for
future use is currently being researched and may play a large role in the future
smart grid, but until these large-scale batteries are deployed, the energy will be
wasted. Thus, building more power plants will only increase energy waste
during the nonpeak demand times.
The second option is to reduce the demand during the peak-demand times. One
such method is to convince consumers to perform energy intensive operations, such
as running the dishwasher or clothes dryer, during the nonpeak demand times. So,
for example, instead of running the dishwasher at 6:00 P.M., a consumer would
schedule his or her smart dishwasher to start running at 2:00 A.M. when the demand
for power is less. Some people may be convinced to alter their dishwashing sche-
dule for environmental reasons. However, most people will need further motivation
to change their habits, which will most likely be in the form of time-of-use pricing.
If a consumer knows that energy costs twice as much at 6:00 P.M. than at 2:00 A.M.,
then it is thought that the consumer will be more likely to run their dishwasher
at 2:00 A.M.
EPIC FAIL
It would seem that consumers are getting a good deal. They receive more control over their
electricity consumption and the potential for a smaller electric bill. However, not every
consumer has been thrilled with the rollout of the new smart meters. For example, consider
the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E –www.pge.com/) smart meter project in
California where customers have submitted almost 1,000 complaints to regulators.12 The
customer complaints state that the bills are inaccurate and significantly higher than the bills
they received with the previous, traditional meters.12 According to California State Senator
Dean Florez, “This is a revolt. The Tea Party has nothing on smart meters in the Central
Valley.”12
PG&E is not the only utility company with customers complaining about smart meters.
Oncor, which services parts of Texas, has received a similar number of complaints regarding
higher-than-usual electric bills.13 According to Ree Wattner, her electric bill jumped from
about 1,500 kW-h to about 4,400 kW-h after a smart meter was installed in her home.14 In
(Continued )
What Should Consumers Expect?
265

(Continued )
response, Wattner has cofounded the Smart Utility Reform Citizens (www.smarturcitizens.
com) consumers group that blames the higher electric bills on smart meters.
In addition to angry customers forming groups and filing complaints with the local public
utility commissions, some customers have taken to filing lawsuits against the utility
companies. One such lawsuit accuses Oncor of committing fraud, which has turned into a
class action lawsuit, and PG&E has a similar lawsuit pending against them.15 Even if the
utility companies win the lawsuits, some angry customers may seek to damage the utility
companies in other ways that could turn into potential security threats.
PG&E and Oncor have stated that unusual weather and recent rate increases were the
reason for the higher electrical bills, not faulty smart meters.13 However, Oncor did state
that up to 1 percent of smart meters may have been installed incorrectly due to human
error.13 As a result of the installation error, between 3,800 and 7,600 people could receive
inaccurate electric bills that are higher than usual.13 Regardless of the reason, Oncor and
PG&E now have a considerable number of angry customers that may impede the adoption of
the smart grid and who may become security threats.
In addition, some utility companies are offering cycling programs that would
allow the utility company to cycle off certain appliances during peak-demand
times.16 Essentially, the utility company provides the customer with monetary
incentives for the ability to briefly turn off certain appliances, such as air condi-
tioners, during peak-demand times. The utility company performs the cycling
operations by sending a command to either the smart device or smart thermostat.
Hopefully, the smart device or thermostat will also receive the command to turn
back on or have a built-in function to automatically turn back on after a certain
amount of time has passed. Otherwise, a few hot summer days could lead to
customer backlash against these programs.
Many smart grid marketing campaigns have used time-of-use pricing and
cycling programs as the basis for convincing consumers that smart grids will
reduce their electric bill. Of course, this all relies on consumers accepting the new
devices, schedules, and price plans. For those consumers who do accept the new
technologies, the risk posed by cyber threats will continue to increase. As these
consumers begin to rely more on connected appliances, a successful cyber attack
will be even more devastating.
Home Area Network
A communications network will need to be set up in consumers’ homes and
businesses to support the required communication between the smart meters and
the smart devices. This network has been commonly labeled the Home Area
Network (HAN). As standard protocols for the HAN continue to be debated and
refined, the HAN may take many different forms.
Some smart devices and smart meters have been designed to connect to the
consumers’ existing home or business network. These devices rely on the
consumers having a broadband Internet connection to transmit data and commands
between the utility company, third-party service providers, and the smart meter
266
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

and devices. For example, Yello Strom developed and sells smart meters to their
customers that utilize the customers’ existing broadband Internet connection.
While this eliminates the need to set up a wireless network to transmit data
between home and utility substations, there are significant security risks with tak-
ing this approach. Most consumers’ home networks, especially wireless networks,
are still configured insecurely using encryption protocols with known weaknesses
and default passwords.
As an example, consider the Verizon FiOS wireless routers that are config-
ured by default to use Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) encryption. In addition
to the many known weaknesses with WEP, Verizon sometimes uses a program
to calculate the WEP key based on the wireless network service set identifier
(SSID). While this approach seems better than using the same WEP encryption
key on every Verizon FiOS router, it does not really improve the security of
these wireless networks. The algorithm Verizon uses is publicly known and
does not incorporate randomness into the key generation, which is critical to
creating a secure encryption key. As a result, several people have created easy-
to-use Verizon WEP key calculators.17 A description of the key generation algo-
rithm and a JavaScript version of the calculator can be found at http://xkyle.
com/2009/03/03/verizon-fios-wireless-key-calculator/. The calculator only needs
the SSID of the wireless network in order to calculate the default WEP key.
Thus, an attacker would only need to identify the name of the consumer’s wire-
less network and within seconds be able to connect to the consumer’s wireless
network.
WARNING
Consumer-managed networks should not be considered secure, and trust relationships
should not be set up between utility networks and HANs. The Verizon default WEP
calculator should serve as an example for this warning. To state the obvious, most
consumers are not security professionals, and in general, they do not spend time to properly
secure their home networks. Further default security controls, which need no configuration
from users, should be built into the smart devices and applications to ensure the
confidentiality and integrity of data transmitted across the HAN.
So, who is responsible for the HAN? If the smart devices and smart meter rely
on the consumers network and the consumer network is breached, is the breach
also considered to be a breach of the utility company, or third-party service provi-
der? If so, does the breach fall under the numerous breach and privacy laws that
the utility company would need to comply with? The answers to these questions
will likely play out in the judicial systems of countries over the next 20 years.
Electric Vehicles
With high gasoline prices likely to continue, consumers may turn to alternative
fuel vehicles to replace their current gasoline-powered vehicles. Currently, there is
What Should Consumers Expect?
267

not a large selection of electric vehicles available; however, some companies have
either released or are developing plug-in electric vehicles (PEV) including
•
Nissan Leaf – http://nissanusa.com/leaf-electric-car
•
Chevy Volt – www.chevrolet.com/pages/open/default/future/volt.do
•
Tesla Roadster and Model S – www.teslamotors.com/
PEVs could either be the solution to storing excess electricity in the smart grid
or cause massive power outages in the electric grid. PEVs store electricity in a
large battery and use the energy for fuel, as opposed to traditional vehicles that
use gasoline. One potential benefit to a nation using PEVs is the capability of the
smart grid to extract energy from PEVs during peak-demand times.18 The idea is
to charge the PEVs’ batteries during nonpeak demand times, when energy supply
is more than demand. Thus, the excess energy supply would be stored in the
PEVs, which would reduce the energy waste created during nonpeak demand
times.
Unfortunately, that is just the ideal scenario in which PEVs will only need to
recharge during nonpeak demand times. Consider the more likely scenario in
which PEVs do need to recharge during peak-demand times. In 2007, there were
over 254 million registered passenger vehicles in the United States.19 If only a
quarter of 254 million vehicles became PEVs, the burden on the electric grid
could be crippling. Millions of PEVs charging during peak-demand times may
strain the electric grid too much, causing a massive distributed denial of service
(DDoS) against the electric grid.
Personal Power Plant
George Westinghouse’s centralized power generation vision is starting to fade into
a more hybrid approach to power generation. While large power plants still exist
and will likely remain for at least the next century, distributed power generation
technology is starting to become a viable option for many consumers. Relatively
cheap solar panels and wind power generators, coupled with government rebate
incentives, have influenced consumers to begin installing power-generating
capabilities in their own homes.
In the current vision of the smart grid, consumers will also have the ability to
sell excess electricity back to the utility companies. The ability to sell electricity
back to the utility companies will certainly attract some entrepreneurial types;
however, it will also attract the fraudulent types who will seek to manipulate the
data sent back to the utility company.
Privacy
One of the major consumer concerns facing the adoption of the smart grid is privacy.
As discussed in Chapter 2, “Threats and Impacts: Consumers,” smart meters and
smart devices will be collecting massive amounts of data and transmitting this data
268
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

through the smart grid. Concerns for the security of their information may lead some
people to live off the grid, but this will most likely be a small number. Of more, con-
cern are the people who will go great lengths to prevent being connected to the smart
grid. As an example, consider the Bakersfield, California, man who plans to fight the
PG&E installation of a smart meter at his home. Due to privacy concerns, he has
locked up his existing meter and made the following statement to a reporter: “If they
show up they are going to have to go through me to get at it. It will take a court order
and a whole bunch of police officers. PG&E needs to be stopped in their tracks
here.”20 While this represents an extreme position, it may be a signal to utility compa-
nies to protect their workers’ safety when they try to install smart meters in people’s
homes.
While not to the extreme of putting up a physical fight, other consumers and legal
experts have agreed with the position that smart meters could violate the Fourth
Amendment to the United States constitution, which guarantees citizens the right to
privacy. As discussed in Chapter 2, analysis of energy usage data from smart meters
would allow the utility company, or any other organization with access to the data, to
determine what appliances you are using and map out your lifestyle within your
home. Some consumers in California have claimed this to be corporate intrusion and
a violation of rights.20 However, this could also allow government agencies to view
your activities inside your home, which could be unconstitutional. According to
Attorney Lee Tien with the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF –www.eff.org/),
“It’s really very clear, both under the Constitution, the 4th Amendment, the privacy
of the home is really the most important value,”20 and “Inside your home is where
the government isn’t supposed to intrude without some kind of a warrant usually.
And yet when this data is flowing freely outside your home, then the information
gets outside that protected boundary and you start to have a problem.”20 This could
lead to future lawsuits against the utility companies and government agencies if there
are incidents where people believe their privacy is being violated, which could slow
down or even reverse the adoption of smart grid technologies.
WHAT SHOULD SMART GRID TECHNOLOGY VENDORS
EXPECT?
Technology vendors should expect an initial boom for their products and services.
There is a lot of money, excitement, and curiosity in the energy industry, from
both utility companies and consumers. Utility companies will need to purchase
smart meters, network devices, and services from technology vendors. Some early
adopting consumers will immediately replace their existing, inefficient appliances
with new smart appliances, and the remaining consumers will gradually replace
their appliances as the old appliances break down.
Technology service providers will also be met with scepticism though. As
discussed in the section “What Should Consumers Expect,” some consumers are
resisting the new devices from technology providers. Although other technology
What Should Smart Grid Technology Vendors Expect?
269

service providers are being tasked to validate the accuracy of new devices,13 a
backlash may occur against these new devices when security breaches occur and
consumers’ privacy is violated. Technology service providers will need to be able
to defend the security posture of their products to calm the critics.
While some consumers will be initially excited to try out the new devices to
save money on their electric bills, others will be excited to both play with and
hack the new devices. Technology vendors should assume that people will find
vulnerabilities in these devices, and recent history shows it is not a matter of if
but only a matter of when vulnerabilities are exposed in these systems as well.
Rather than viewing these people in an adversarial manner, technology vendors
should actively work with those people to promote responsible disclosure of the
identified vulnerabilities. Otherwise, the technology vendors risk the fate of being
specifically targeted for their adversarial relationship to the security community,
which could turn to malicious attacks.
WHAT SHOULD UTILITY COMPANIES EXPECT?
Utility companies have also been promised that the smart grid will bring many
improvements to their operations. New technology will help utility companies
reduce energy waste, perform more accurate billing, increase the stability of the
electric grid, and reduce operating costs. The question for this book, though, is
will the smart grid bring a more secure electric grid?
Reducing Energy Demand to Reduce Costs and Security
While government incentives will help pay for some of the costs, utility companies
will need to make a major investment up front to achieve the goals of the smart
grid. However, the benefits will be reaped for decades to come. In the section
“Smart Meters,” it was noted that about 10 percent of the residential energy
consumed in the United States is wasted through vampire energy waste. If that
10 percent was eliminated through more efficient appliances and better-informed
consumers, utility companies could potentially shut down and retire multiple aging
power plants without having to replace them in the near future. Retiring the power
plants could save the utility companies money as well as eliminate the need to
secure those power plants. Thus, the number of facilities and systems to secure
would be reduced.
With the introduction of two-way communication between the smart meter and
the utility company, physical visits to consumers’ homes and businesses will
significantly decrease. Physical visits to perform maintenance and other various
tasks will still be required; however, the requirement for utility workers to
physically read the electric meters will be virtually eliminated.
Reducing the number of physical visits will reduce the operational costs for
utility companies. Utility companies currently spend significant amounts of
270
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

money on gas and vehicles for the utility workers to read consumers’ meters,
which is just one reason utility companies are rapidly deploying AMI. Imple-
menting the two-way communication functionality involved in AMI will
certainly introduce risk to the utility company; however, there is one hidden
security benefit. Utility company workers will not need to leave the physical
protective boundary of their offices to read the meters and more importantly,
they will not need to take utility company electronic devices that store sensitive
information outside this physical protective boundary. As a result, the risk of
mobile device theft will decrease.
Reducing the physical visits will also increase the safety for utility workers.
While dogs and other pets have been a nuisance of utility workers for decades,
utility workers have faced serious threats from consumers. As described in the
section “Privacy,” making visits to the consumers’ homes can turn into dangerous
situations for utility company workers. Utility companies do not always make
popular decisions, and some consumers have taken their anger out on utility com-
pany employees, which has resulted in the physical injuries to the employees.21 In
other cases, some consumers have mistaken the employees for robbers and tried
to defend their houses with deadly weapons.21
Diagnosing Problems Faster
Smart grid implementations will most likely include advanced sensor networks
that will report potential problems in the electric grid. One such technology that
could be employed in smart grids are SynchroPhasors in combination with phasor
measurement units (PMUs), which record grid measurements at about 30 observa-
tions per second.22 The North American SynchroPhasor Initiative (NASPI –www.
naspi.org/) is working to advance the deployment of SynchroPhasors and PMUs
in the electric grid, which includes the following:
•
Networked phasor measurement devices
•
Phasor data sharing
•
Applications for
•
Wide-area monitoring
•
Real-time operations
•
Power system planning
•
Forensic analysis of grid disturbances22
Information sharing is critical to utilizing the full potential of a wide-area
sensor network. As a result, the network architecture of a wide-area sensor
network would include multiple utility companies and how they communicate
with each other and the different components in a deployment. SynchroPhasors
and their supporting infrastructure, as well as any other sensor infrastructure,
require a supporting network infrastructure and applications to transmit, analyze,
and present the data in a human readable format. Sensors, devices, supporting
network infrastructure, and applications will all need to be secured or they risk
What Should Utility Companies Expect?
271

becoming potential injection points for attacks. The good news is that securing
networks, applications, and systems should be nothing new. Traditional security
controls will apply to new sensor devices. For example, changing default
passwords, disabling unnecessary services, and implementing a patch management
process to apply firmware updates will all apply to these new devices.
Beyond Electricity
The electric grid is receiving the most attention for transforming into a smart grid;
however, other utilities including natural gas and water are going through their
own transformations. The smart gas and water grids will be very similar to the
smart electric grid and most of the content found in this book applies to all three
smart grid types. Smart meters, metering infrastructure, and applications will be
deployed and enable utilities as well as consumers to intelligently manage their
usage of all utility types. In addition, advanced sensor networks will be deployed
to assist utilities in finding water and gas leaks faster and remotely correct poten-
tial issues before they become problems. Just as with the smart electric grid, each
new device and supporting infrastructure will need to be secured to avoid local or
potential national catastrophes. The security concepts discussed throughout this
book will apply to these utility types as well.
An All Encompassing Smart Grid
Due to how similar the infrastructure is for electricity, gas, and water in smart
grids, some cities are combining the three into one smart grid. As an example, the
city of Tallahassee, FL is creating a smart grid for electric, gas, and water utilities.
All three will operate on the same network that transmits data from consumers to
utility companies and allows consumers to schedule smart devices to operate
during off-peak hours.23
This seems like a logical choice since the utility companies will be able to utilize
the same network, meter, and other devices that will reduce the costs associated with
deploying smart grids. This will also reduce the number of devices that need to be
installed in consumers’ homes and businesses and potentially combine all their usage
data into one location. Thus, instead of requiring consumers to check three different
Web sites for their electricity, gas, and water energy usage information, they could
just check one Web site.
Reese Goad, Tallahassee’s director of utility business and customer service,
describes the approach of a single network and a single smart meter per consumer
as “Having all three systems under one umbrella, we’ll be able to tell them the
total cost of utility services, and view in real time the amount of utility services
they’re using.”23 On the other hand, a security professional may call this a single
point of failure. If an attacker were to successfully execute an attack against this
single network, consumers could be without all utilities. A backup, or redundant
network, would be nice to have in this situation; however, budgetary concerns
272
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

leading to risk acceptance could easily prevail in the design phases for these smart
grids. In addition, combining all three utilities into one smart meter will provide a
single point of attack for potential attackers. With remote shutoff capabilities built
into smart meters, an attacker could potentially turn off electricity, gas, and water
by attacking the single smart meter.
Curiosity Attacks
As with the technology service providers, utility companies should expect an
initial increase in attacks. By installing new devices in homes, some consumers
will be curious to see how the devices work and what they can do with the
devices. Electricity theft has long plagued utility companies, and some consumers
will attempt to use cyber attacks in order to perform electricity theft. Unfortu-
nately, curiosity and minor theft will not be the only causes for attacks. As
discussed in the next section, utility companies will need to be prepared to face
attacks from organized crimes, organized hacking groups, terrorist groups, and
foreign governments.
WHAT SHOULD SECURITY PROFESSIONALS EXPECT AND
WHAT DO THEY PREDICT?
Currently, there is a lot of rhetoric for securing the smart grid. Governments consider
it to be a matter of national security and most marketing material states that a smart
grid will improve the security of the existing electric grid. However, most security
professionals realize there are many threats to smart grid technologies and that old
security vulnerabilities will be present in new technologies. Security professionals, as
well as other government officials, predict that these vulnerabilities will be present
and exploited in smart grids across the world.
Security versus Functionality
As in most situations, security professionals should expect a healthy debate when
arguing for security to not be secondary to functionality. Security has been
mentioned as one of the primary goals for smart grids; however, there will be
situations when security controls directly conflict with the implementation of other
goals for the smart grid. In these situations, management will need to make the
ultimate decision. The security department will be responsible for ensuring that
management understands the risk associated with the new functionality so that
management can make an educated decision. Assuming management decides the
new functionality is worth the risk, the security department will then be responsi-
ble for developing compensating controls that mitigate the risk associated with the
new functionality.
What Should Security Professionals Expect and What Do They Predict?
273

Making the Argument
Speaking in terms of theoretical doomsday scenarios will not sway most execu-
tives. If you are responsible for presenting the risk to management, a quantita-
tive analysis of the real cost of a breach backed by statistics and mandatory
regulations will make the best argument. Most states in the United States have
breach notification laws that require organizations to disclose when personally
identifiable information has been disclosed. Thus, finding statistics and real-
world examples to present to management will not be difficult. As an example,
the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse maintains a list of the publicly disclosed
breaches involving personally identifiable information (PII) since 2005, which
they call the Chronology of Data Breaches. The list can be viewed at www.
privacyrights.org/ar/chrondatabreaches.htm. In addition, the Open Security Foun-
dation maintains a database and has a mailing list for breaches involving PII.
More information on the Open Security Foundation DatalossDB database and
mailing list can be found at http://datalossdb.org/.
In addition to the costs associated with investigations, lawsuits, and
remediating a vulnerability after a breach has occurred, compliance with manda-
tory regulations is a powerful argument to use when discussing risk with manage-
ment. In Chapter 6, “Public and Private Companies,” compliance with NERC CIP
reliability standards is discussed along with the repercussions of noncompliance.
Under Section 215 of the Federal Power Act, NERC has the authority to fine
United States entities up to $1 million per day.24 While NERC CIP compliance
will not help in every situation, it should help security professionals achieve a
minimum baseline of security within their organization.
Risk Acceptance
When an organization has deemed the remediation of a vulnerability to be too
costly, the organization may decide to just accept the risk. Risk acceptance, also
known as risk acknowledgement, and some other similar terms are commonly
used in the compliance world when an audit or risk assessment has identified a
vulnerability. For example, let’s consider a critical business application called
FlicksJavaApp, which was written in the Java programming language. In order to
run a Java application, a user must have a Java Runtime Environment (JRE)
installed on his/her computer. As the Java programming language and its applica-
tion programming interface (API) evolve, legacy objects and functions become
unsupported as newer ones replace them. Thus, if FlicksJavaApp relies on the
legacy functions that are no longer supported by the latest version of the JRE,
then updating the JRE installed on the users’ computers will cause FlicksJavaApp
to stop executing correctly. Since FlicksJavaApp is a critical business application
that is required for the organization to operate, the organization needs to decide to
either spend the resources to recode FlicksJavaApp to use the updated JRE or
accept the risk of running an outdated version of the JRE that is susceptible to
vulnerabilities. While the remediations may be costly, security professionals
should advise their organizations to only accept the risk as a last resort option.
274
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

EPIC FAIL
Accepting risk may seem like an easy solution for managements, as it tends to cut costs
in the current budget. However, worst-case scenarios have happened to organizations that
have accepted risk in the past. Consider the BP (www.bp.com) oil spill in the Gulf of
Mexico, where many risk exceptions were accepted and granted by BP, its partners, and
government regulators. For example, BP engineers decided to use a risky set of pipes and
casings for lining the well in place on the ocean floor that violated BP’s own safety
policies. The decision to go forward with the risk components could only be allowed if BP
management decided to accept the risk.25 In addition, regulators granted an exception
that delayed mandatory testing of a blowout preventer weeks before the rig explosion
occurred.25
BP’s own engineers expressed concern over the safety violations; however, the BP oil
drilling project was under financial stress since a 43-day delay had cost the company more
than $21 million.25 Leasing the oil rig was costing BP $500,000 per day,25 so BP
management was under pressure to get the project back on track. While the risk acceptance
saved the company delays and millions of dollars in the near term, risk acceptance is now
costing BP billions of dollars. As of June 19, 2010, BP stated they have paid out $104
million in claims to residents along the Gulf Coast.26 With motivation following a meeting
with the President of the United States, BP has also set up a $20 billion fund to pay out
additional expected claims.27 As a result of accepting the risk, 11 people lost their lives,
BP will end up paying billions, and from April 19 to June 10, 2010 their stock price has
dropped almost 50 percent.28
Security Devices
While the majority of new smart grid technologies will seek to increase the func-
tionality of the smart grid, devices that are dedicated to securing the smart grid
will most likely follow as well. These security devices may include the following:
•
Antivirus for smart meters and devices
•
Host-based intrusion detection and prevention for smart meters and devices
•
Firewalls for smart meters and devices
•
Encryption for low-power devices
•
Physical tamper prevention
Security professionals will be responsible for determining the extent to which
these products help mitigate risk in their organizations and whether they are worth
the investment.
Visions of Gloom and Doom
Potential threats to the smart grid are discussed in Chapter 2, “Threats and
Impacts: Consumers,” and Chapter 3, “Threats and Impacts: Utility Companies
and Beyond”; however, these were for the most part still hypothetical. In the
next 10 years though, security professionals and national security experts predict
these threats will move from hypothetical to actual.
What Should Security Professionals Expect and What Do They Predict?
275

Mike McConnell, who recently retired as the chief of national intelligence and
oversaw the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA – www.cia.gov), Defense
Intelligence Agency (DIA – www.dia.mil), and National Security Agency (NSA –
www.nsa.gov) did an interview with Steve Kroft of CBS News (www.cbsnews.
com) and discussed the possibility of a cyber attack against the United States’ cri-
tical infrastructure.29 In the interview, McConnell states that if he wanted to inflict
significant damage to the United States, he would attack the electric grid on either
coast and attempt to propagate the attack throughout the country’s electric grid to
cause widespread power outages.29 More importantly though, McConnell believes
that militaries and organized crimes across the world have the ability of perform-
ing this type of an attack against the electric grid.29
A cyber attack that cripples the country is commonly referred to as a Cyber
Pearl Harbor, and McConnell is not the only person who believes that a Cyber
Pearl Harbor attack will involve the electric grid. Many security professionals
have voiced their concern over the security of the smart grid and the inherent risk
with making the electric grid more accessible. Instead of launching missiles and
executing surgical strikes with special operations forces, the next war could be
initiated with a cyber attack to destroy a nation’s critical infrastructure.
SMART GRID COMMUNITY
Whether you are a security professional with 10 years of experience or have no
experience and are just interested in the smart grid security, the smart grid com-
munity has amassed a wealth of information and resources. Information about the
latest developments can be obtained from resources including
•
Conferences
•
Agencies and groups
•
News sites and blogs
Conferences
Smart-grid- and security-related conferences will provide details on the latest threats,
vulnerabilities, and exploits for smart-grid-related technologies. Table 14.2 lists some
of the relevant conferences in which smart grid security is discussed. The conferences
listed in Table 14.2 represent a small sample of the hundreds of smart-grid- and secur-
ity-related conferences that occur throughout the year and across the world. The good
news is that there are most likely conferences that occur within your geographic area.
Agencies and Groups
Numerous government agencies and industry and community groups are perform-
ing research, discussing, and providing information about smart grid security. If
you are looking to get involved, some of these organizations are looking for
276
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

volunteers. For example, the National Institute of Standards and Technology
release draft versions of their publications for public comment. Throughout this
book, many of these organizations have already been mentioned, but for conveni-
ence Table 14.3 lists out a sample of a few relevant agencies and groups. These
should only serve as a starting point to find the organization that best matches
your interest and skill set.
Information Sharing
In the security world, sharing information can be an oxymoron. As a security
professional, your job is to protect your organization’s sensitive information
from being disclosed and is most likely against your organization’s security
policies. However, discussing risk, threats, and successful attacks can help other
organizations prevent the same attack from succeeding in other organizations.
Sharing lessons learned from accomplishments and failures has the potential to
benefit both your organization and the smart grid community alike.
Issuing press releases or openly discussing internal security-related topics with
members of the press is probably not the best approach though. Thankfully, more
discrete resources do exist and some are mentioned in Table 14.3. Specifically,
ES-IAC is a member-only communication channel that promotes the discussion of
security-related topics within the electricity sector. The goal of ES-IAC is to
provide a channel for collaboration between the members of the electricity sector
to better address threats to the security of the electric grid.30
Table 14.2 Smart grid and security conferences
Conference
URL
Applied Security Conferences:
CanSecWest, PacSec, EUSecWest
http://cansecwest.com
http://pacsec.jp
http://eusecwest.com
Black Hat
http://blackhat.com
DEFCON
http://defcon.org
Hackers to Hackers
www.h2hc.com.br/index.php
National Smart Grid Conference
www.nationalsmartgridconference.com
OWASP AppSec Conferences
www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:
OWASP_AppSec_Conference
RSA
www.rsaconference.com
SCADA and Process Control Summit
www.sans.org/scada-security-summit-2010/
SecTor
www.sector.ca/
Shmoocon
www.shmoocon.org
Smart Grid Cyber Security Summit
www.smartgridsecuritysummit.com
Smart Grid Summit
http://smart-grid.tmcnet.com
SOURCE Conferences
www.sourceconference.com/
ToorCon
www.toorcon.org
WiMob
http://conferences.computer.org/wimob2010/
Smart Grid Community
277

Standards Development
The agencies and groups listed in Table 14.3 will continue to develop more
standards for smart grids. Standards will need to be created for every new tech-
nology introduced into smart grids as well as for assessing new technologies.
Global collaboration will be needed in order to create the best possible security
standards that address the unique challenges that different geographic locations
face. Fortunately, some countries have begun to work together already. For
example, Japan and the United States have agreed to explore joint smart grid
projects in Okinawa and Hawaii. These islands share common climates and
dependence on traditional fuel types, which makes the collaboration between
the two countries a logical choice.31 The two countries have agreed to cooperate
over smart grid technology that should improve the electric grid on the two
islands.31 Unfortunately, since the security of electric grids is considered a mat-
ter of national security, multinational collaboration will most likely be limited.
Blogs, News Web Sites, and RSS Feeds
The mainstream news will cover the larger stories regarding smart grid security. For
daily updates and more technical analysis, readers should regularly view blogs and
news Web sites related to smart grid security and technology. If you are reading
Table 14.3 Smart grid oriented agencies and groups
Organization
URL
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI)
www.epri.com/
Electricity Sector – Information Sharing
and Analysis Center (ES-IAC)
www.esisac.com/
GridWise Alliance
www.gridwise.org/
IEEE Smart Grid
http://smartgrid.ieee.org/
National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners (NARUC)
www.naruc.org
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST)
www.nist.gov/smartgrid/
North American Electric Reliability
Corporation (NERC)
www.nerc.com/
Open Web Application Security Project
(OWASP)
www.owasp.org/
Smart Grid Australia Alliance
www.smartgridaustralia.com.au/
Smart Grid Consumer Collaborative
www.smartgridcc.org/
Smart Grids European Union
www.smartgrids.eu/
United States Department of Energy (DOE)
www.oe.energy.gov/smartgrid.htm
United States Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC)
www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/
smart-grid.asp
UtiliSec
http://osgug.ucaiug.org/utilisec/default.aspx
278
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

this book, then there is a good chance that you already have your favorite blogs and
news Web sites, which are already in your RSS feed. However, if you are new to
the industry or security in general, then the Web sites listed in Table 14.4, as well
as the Web sites mentioned in Tables 14.2 and 14.3, provide a gentle approach to
technology and security.
SUMMARY
The future is bright for the electric grid, as well as for other utilities. Upgrading
the infrastructure with new technologies will provide utilities and consumers with
functionality and benefits that Thomas Edison, George Westinghouse, and Nikola
Tesla could have never imagined. However, some security professionals have
sounded the alarm.
Ultimately, it will take a concerted effort between federal governments, state
and local governments, utility companies, technology companies, and vigilant
consumers to achieve a secure smart grid. Each will play a critical role in securing
smart grids all across the world. Without the proper security controls in place, the
threats to the smart grid will be realized, and the vision for the smart grid will
never achieve reality.
Endnotes
1. http://maps.google.com/maps/ms?ie=UTF8&oe=UTF8&msa=0&msid=11551931105836-
7534348.0000011362ac6d7d21187; [accessed 29.05.10].
Table 14.4 Security and technology blogs and news Web sites
Name
URL
CSO Online
www.csoonline.com
The DOD Energy Blog
http://dodenergy.blogspot.com/
earth2tech
http://earth2tech.com/
European Energy Review
www.europeanenergyreview.eu
Engadget
www.engadget.com
Greentech Media
www.greentechmedia.com
NTS Smart Grid Blog
http://smartgrid.testing-blog.com/
Smart Grid News
www.smartgridnews.com
SC Magazine
http://scmagazine.com
The Smart Grid Security Blog
http://smartgridsecurity.blogspot.com/
Transmission and Distribution World
http://tdworld.com/
Unfettered Blog
http://community.controlglobal.com/unfettered
Endnotes
279

2. Wood L. The Edison Foundation Institute for Electric Efficiency. Consumers are the
key to future smart energy management [document on the Internet]. www.edisonfounda-
tion.net/iee/issueBriefs/Wood_SantaFe_March10.pdf; 2010 [accessed 29.05.10].
3. Bryan C. Clarity Digital Group LLC d/b/a Examiner.com. GE adopts Zigbee protocols
for smart appliance products [document on the Internet]. www.examiner.com/x-43343-
Energy-Policy-Examiner~y2010m6d5-GE-adopts-Zigbee-protocols-for-smart-appliance-
products; 2010 [accessed 21.06.10].
4. General Electric Company. Geospring hybrid water heater [document on the Internet].
www.geappliances.com/heat-pump-hot-water-heater/electric-water-heater-features.htm;
2010 [accessed 20.06.10].
5. U.S. Department of Energy Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. PNNL: Energy
Smart Data Center (ESDC): Cooling Supercomputers [document on the Internet]. http://
esdc.pnl.gov/; 2010 [02.06.10].
6. Hewlett-Packard. HP Data Center Smart Grid [document on the Internet]. http://h18000.
www1.hp.com/products/solutions/converged/datacenter-smartgrid.html; 2010 [accessed
02.06.10].
7. Raphael JR. PC World. Unplug for Dollars: Stop ‘Vampire Power’ Waste [document
on the Internet]. www.pcworld.com/article/153245/unplug_for_dollars_stop_vampire_
power_waste.html; 2008 [accessed 03.06.10].
8. U.S. Department of Energy Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Standby power :
FAQs [document on the Internet]. http://standby.lbl.gov/faq.html; 2010 [accessed 03.06.10].
9. U.S. Energy Information Administration. Average retail price of electricity to ultimate
customers by end-use sector, by state [document on the Internet]. www.eia.doe.gov/
electricity/epm/table5_6_b.html; 2010 [accessed 03.06.10].
10. U.S. Department of Energy Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Standby power
summary table [document on the Internet]. http://standby.lbl.gov/summary-table.html;
2010 [accessed 03.06.10].
11. U.S. Department of Energy Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Standby power
[document on the Internet]. http://standby.lbl.gov/; 2010 [03.06.10].
12. Sakamoto K. KRON 4 The Bay Area’s News Station. PG&E Under Fire for ‘Smart
Meter’ Program [document on the Internet]. www.kron.com/News/ArticleView/tabid/
298/smid/1126/ArticleID/5800/reftab/64/t/PGE%20Under%20Fire%20for%20Smart%
20Meter%20Program/Default.aspx; 2010 [accessed 05.06.10].
13. Tweed K. Greentech Media. Oncor Reacts to Smart Meter Anger [document on the
Internet]. www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/oncor-reacts-to-smart-meter-anger/2010
[accessed 05.06.10].
14. Souder E. The Dallas Morning News. Couple sues Oncor over smart meter [document
on the Internet]. http://energyandenvironmentblog.dallasnews.com/archives/2010/03/
couple-sues-oncor-over-smart-m.html; 2010 [05.06.10].
15. Tweed K. Greentech Media. Oncor sued for fraud over smart meters [document on the
Internet]. www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/oncor-sued-for-fraud-over-smart-
meters; 2010 [05.06.10].
16. Baltimore Gas and Electric Company. Save energy and get BGE Bill credits with peak-
rewards [document on the Internet]. http://peakrewards.bgesmartenergy.com/what-is-
peakrewards; 2010 [04.06.10].
17. Anderson K. Verizon FiOS Wireless Key Calculator [document on the Internet]. http://
xkyle.com/2009/03/03/verizon-fios-wireless-key-calculator; 2009 [accessed 24.06.10].
280
CHAPTER 14 What’s Next?

18. National Institute of Standards and Technology. NIST Special Publication 1108: NIST
Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability Standards, Release 1.0 [docu-
ment on the Internet]. www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/upload/smartgrid_interoper-
ability_final.pdf; 2010 [accessed 06.06.10].
19. Research and Innovative Technology Administration Bureau of Transportation Statis-
tics. Table 1-11: Number of U.S. Aircraft, Vehicles, Vessels, and Other Conveyances
[document on the Internet]. www.bts.gov/publications/national_transportation_statistics/
html/table_01_11.html; 2010 [accessed 06.05.10].
20. Werner A. CBS LOCAL. PG&E Smart Meter ‘Rebellion’ Growing [document on the
Internet]. Anna http://cbs5.com/local/pge.smart.meters.2.1555294.html; 2010 [accessed
07.06.10].
21. Ishola B. The Dallas Morning News. Incidents put two Oncor employees in danger
[document on the Internet]. www.dallasnews.com/sharedcontent/dws/news/localnews/
crime/stories/DN-oncor_19met.ART0.State.Edition1.4c13eef.html; 2009 [accessed
14.06.10].
22. North American SynchroPhasor Initiative. North American SynchroPhasor Initiative
(NASPI) Home Page [document on the Internet]. www.naspi.org/; 2010 [16.06.10].
23. Nichols R. Government Technology. Tallahassee Preps Nation’s First Smart Grid That
Fuses Electricity, Gas and Water Utilities [document on the Internet]. www.govtech.
com/gt/751021?topic=290184; 2010 [accessed 15.06.10].
24. Ziegler K. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Press Release NERC,
FERC, FPL Reach Agreement on Reliability Enhancements [document on the Internet].
2009 www.nerc.com/fileUploads/File/PressReleases/PR_100809_FPL.pdf; 2009
[accessed 19.06.10].
25. Urbina I. Cleveland Live, Inc. Conflicts in management, exceptions to safety rules seen
leading up to BP disaster [document on the Internet]. www.cleveland.com/nation/index.
ssf/2010/06/conflicts_in_management_except.html 2010 [accessed 20.06.10].
26. BP p.l.c. BP Claim Payments Exceed $100 Million [document on the Internet]. www.bp.
com/genericarticle.do?categoryId=2012968&contentId=7063000; 2010 [accessed 20.06.10].
27. BP p.l.c. BP Establishes $20 Billion Claims Fund for Deepwater Horizon Spill and
Outlines Dividend Decisions [document on the Internet]. www.bp.com/genericarticle.
do?categoryId=2012968&contentId=7062966; 2010 [accessed 19.06.10].
28. Pepitone J. Cable News Network. BP shares recover after reassurance [document on the
Internet]. http://money.cnn.com/2010/06/10/news/companies/BP_stock/index.htm; 2010
[accessed 10.06.10].
29. Messick G, Kroft S. CBS Interactive Inc. Cyber War: Sabotaging the System [document
on the Internet]. /www.cbsnews.com/stories/2010/06/10/60minutes/main6568387.shtml?
utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed:+CBSNewsInvesti-
gates+(CBS+News+Investigates); 2010 [accessed 10.06.10].
30. North American Electric Reliability Corporation. Information Sharing and Analysis
Center for the Electricity Sector [document on the Internet]. /www.esisac.com; 2010
[24.06.10].
31. Kyodo News. Japan, U.S. to explore smart grid joint project in Okinawa, Hawaii [docu-
ment on the Internet]. www.japantoday.com/category/technology/view/japan-us-to-
explore-smart-grid-joint-project-in-okinawa-hawaii; 2010 [24.06.10].
Endnotes
281

Index
Page numbers in italics indicate figures and tables
A
Access control, 148
Accidental threats, 27–28
Advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), 13–14
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA) of 2009, 50–53
AMR. see Automatic meter reading
Apache Web server, 227, 227
Application attacks
compiled code applications, 134–135
life-imitating art, 121
non-Web applications, 135
Web applications
for corporate operations, 122–123
custom Web application code, 126–131
for smart grid operations, 123–126
trade tools, 131–133, 135
Web server software, 133
ARRA. see American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009
Asset management, 147
Aurora vulnerability, 24
Authentication controls, 208–209
Automatic meter reading (AMR)
data collection technologies
handheld devices, 6
notebook computers, 6
data transport technologies
hybrid models, 8
power line communication, 7
wireless networks, 6–7
network topologies, 8
Availability
consumer targets, 40–41
market manipulation, 43–44
national security targets, 44–47
domestic, 44–45
international, 45
precursor to war, 47
organizational targets, 41–42
vertical targets, 42–43
B
Bluetooth, 138
Breach notification laws, 69
Bruter, 253, 254
Bureaucracy and politics, 70
Business continuity management, 149
C
Cain & Abel password-cracking tool, 221, 221
California Public Utility Commission, 74–75
Carbon footprint, 17
Cellular networks, 138
Clear-text protocols, 175
Code and command signing, 155
Code signing, 181–182
Colorado Court of Appeals, 81
Communication security testing, 223
Communications and operations management, 148
Compiled code applications, 134–135
Compliance, 149–150
vs. security, 104–105
Computer installations, 151–152
Confidentiality
consumer privacy, 36–37
consumption data, 37
PII, 36–37
proprietary information, 37–38
Configuration hardening, 158
Consumer attacks
functionality undermines security, 167
Microsoft Hohm and Google PowerMeter,
167–169
persistent authentication, 168–169
single sign-on, 168
with smart devices, 169–170
Consumer privacy, 36–37
consumption data, 37
personally identifiable information, 36–37
Consumer threats, 19–20
financial impacts, 31–32
intelligent consumers, 13
likelihood of attack, 32
power availability
emergency services, 31
mobility, 31
personal availability, 30–31
privacy impacts, 29–30
vulnerability impacts, 28
see also Individual and organizational
threats; Naturally occuring threats
Critical business applications, 151
283

Critical cyber asset identification–CIP-002, 87–88
Cross-site scripting attacks, 130, 130
Current smart grid technologies
AMI security, 55–56
NASPI security, 56
wireless network security, 56
Custom Web application code, 126–131
Cyber security standards, 60–61
Cyber vulnerability assessment, 96
D
Daisy-chaining trust, 171–172
Data access, 172–173
data classification, 172–173
data segmentation, 173
Data collection technologies
handheld devices, 6
notebook computers, 6
Data transport technologies
hybrid models, 8
power line communication, 7
wireless networks, 6–7
Default deny firewall rules, 155
Denial of service testing, 219–222
Department of Energy (DOE)
current smart grid technologies
AMI security, 55–56
NASPI security, 56
wireless network security, 56
lack of deployment, 56
legacy electric grid technologies, 54–55
recommendations, 53
Deregulation, 4–5
DHS National Infrastructure Protection Plan
(DHS NIPP), 66–67
Digital signature, 182
Disaster recovery–CIP-009, 98–99
Disk encryption, 187
Distribution networks, 2
DOE. see Department of Energy
Domestic terrorism, 44–45
E
ECPA. see Electronic Communications
Privacy Act
800-42 NIST security testing techniques,
226–231
network scanning, 227–228
password cracking, 228–229
penetration testing, 230–231
vulnerability scanning, 228
wireless LAN testing, 229–230
802.11 Wireless network testing, 224–225
Electric grids
definition of, 1–2
deregulation, 4–5
topologies, 2–4
Electric vehicles, 267–268
Electricity theft, 17
Electromagnetic interference, 62
Electromagnetic pulse (EMP), 61, 62
Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA)
of 1986, 68
Electronic security
critical cyber asset identification, 87–88
disaster recovery, 98–99
electronic security protection, 90–93
incident reporting and response planning,
96–98
security management controls, 88–90
system security management, 94–96
Electronic security perimeter, 86
Electronic security protection–CIP-005, 90–93
EISA. see Energy and Independence Security Act
E-mail attacks, 183–184
EMP. see Electromagnetic pulse
Encryption, 156
End user environment, 152
Energy and Independence Security Act (EISA)
of 2007, 50
Energy Conservation Responsibility Act, 14
Energy Policy Act of 2005, Section 1251, 39
Exploit testing, 220–223
Extortion, 43
Extortive malware. see Ransomware
F
Facebook, 199–202
PICOwatts, 199–200
SmartSync, 200–201
WattsUp, 201–202
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)
Mandatory reliability standards, 56–57
Smart grid policy, 57
FlicksJavaApp, 274
FOA. see Funding Opportunity Announcement
Forensics, 190–191
Fujitsu’s Smart Power Strip, 234, 234
Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA), 53
G
General attack methodology, 127
Google Chrome, 245
284
Index

H
Hackers, 23–25
nonmalicious motives, 24
personal gain, 24–25
security testing, 24
vengeance and vindictiveness, 25
HAN. see Home Area Network
Handheld devices, 6
Handset attacks, 183
Heartland Payment Systems, 104, 105
HMI. see Human machine interface
Home Area Network (HAN), 266–267
Honeypots, 156
Human machine interface (HMI), 12
Human resources security, 147
Hurricanes, 21–22
I
Idaho National Laboratory (INL) document
current smart grid technologies
AMI security, 55–56
NASPI security, 56
wireless network security, 56
legacy electric grid technologies, 54–55
Identity controls, 208
Illinois Power Agency Act, SB 1592, 75
Incident reporting and response
planning–CIP-008, 96–98
Individual and organizational threats
government
illegal activity, 27
warfare, 26–27
hackers, 23–25
nonmalicious motives, 24
personal gain, 24–25
security testing, 24
vengeance and vindictiveness, 25
smart thieves and stalkers, 22–23
terrorism, 25–26
eco-terrorism, 26
utility companies
accidental threats, 27–28
intentional attacks, 28
load shedding, 28
Information security, 213–214
Information Security Forum (ISF), 150–151
see also Standard of Good Practice (SoGP)
Information security incident management, 149
Information sharing controls, 209
Information systems acquisition, development, and
maintenance, 148–149
Injection attacks, 128
INL document. see Idaho National Laboratory
document
Integrated two-way communication, 10–12
Integrity
sensor data manipulation, 38–40
service fraud
net metering, 39
service theft, 38–39
Intelligent consumer, 13
Intentional attacks, 28
Internal security assessment, 115–116
International Organization for Standardization/
International Electrotechnical Commission
(ISO/IEC), 144
Internet application testing, 219–220, 245–251
Internet technology security testing
denial of service testing, 221–222
exploit testing, 222–223
Internet application testing, 219–220
network surveying, 215–216
password cracking, 220–221
port scanning, 216–217
services identification and system
identification, 217–218
vulnerability research and verification, 218–219
ISF. see Information Security Forum
ISO/IEC. see International Organization for
Standardization/International
Electrotechnical Commission
ISO/IEC 27000 standards, 144–152
ISO/IEC 27002 standards guidelines
access control, 148
asset management, 147
business continuity management, 149
communications and operations management, 148
compliance, 149–150
human resources security, 147
information security incident management, 149
information systems acquisition, development,
and maintenance, 148–149
organization of information security, 147
physical and environment security, 147–148
risk assessment, 146
security policy, 146–147
K
Karmetasploit, 137–138
Kismet wireless sniffing tool, 224, 224
L
Legacy electric grid technologies, 54–55
Legacy systems, 120
Index
285

Likelihood of attack, 32
Load shedding, 28
Logging and monitoring, 158–159
Looped topology, 4, 5
M
Malicious Web sites, 184
Maryland Public Service Commission, 75
Mechanical appliances, 259
Mesh grid topology, 3, 4
Mesh network AMR topology, 8
Metasploit Framework, open-source testing tool, 157
Metasploit vulnerability exploit tool, 222, 222
Meter tampering, 17
Microsoft Hohm and Google PowerMeter, 167–169
persistent authentication, 168–169
single sign-on, 168
Microsoft Internet Explorer, 245
Mobile applications, 179–180
encryption, 192
security controls, 191–192
Mobile device security
best-practice guides, 186
disk encryption, 187
education, 191
forensics, 190–191
recovery, 190
screen locking, 188–189
secure syncing, 187
traditional security controls, 187
wiping device, 190
Mobile platforms, 180
Motivation
security assessment, 111–112
vulnerability assessment vs. penetration test,
110–111
Mozilla Firefox, 245
N
NASPI security. see North American
SynchroPhasor Initiative security
National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioner (NARUC), 76–78
National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), 226–231
Naturally occurring threats, 20–22
weather and other natural disasters, 21–22
NERC. see North American Reliability Corporation
NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP)
Standards
electronic security
critical cyber asset identification–CIP-002,
87–88
disaster recovery–CIP-009, 98–99
electronic security protection–CIP-005, 90–93
incident reporting and response
planning–CIP-008, 96–98
security management controls–CIP-003, 88–90
system security management–CIP-007, 94–96
physical and personnel security
personnel and training–CIP-004, 100–101
physical security of critical cyber
assets–CIP-006, 102–103
Nessus, 218, 219, 242, 243, 244, 245
Net metering, 39
Network access, 173–174
monitoring, 174
segmentation, 174
Network attacks
methodologies standards, 114
network security assessment
discovery, 116–117
penetration, 117–119
reconnaissance, 114–116
vulnerability identification, 117
Network scanning, 227–228
Network security assessment
discovery, 116–117
penetration, 117–119
reconnaissance, 114–116
vulnerability identification, 117
Network security testing tools, 115
Network stumbler wireless tool, 229, 230
Network surveying, 215–216, 236–237
Network topologies
mesh network AMR topology, 8
star network AMR topology, 8
Networking controls, 209
NIST. see National Institute of Standards and
Technology
NIST SP 1108, 58
cyber security standards, 60–61
cyber security strategy and requirements, 62–66
electromagnetic disturbances, 61
electromagnetic interference, 62
Priority Action Plans (PAPs), 61
smart grid information networks, 59
NISTIR-7628
high-level security requirements, 64–66
risk assessment, 63–64
standards and requirements assessment, 66
Nmap, 240, 240
286
Index

North American Electric Reliability Corporation
(NERC), 57
North American SynchroPhasor Initiative (NASPI)
security, 56
Notebook computers, 6
O
Oklahoma City bombing of 1995, 45, 46
Open Source Security Testing Methodology
Manual (OSSTM), 211–226
communication security testing, 223
information security, 213–214
Internet technology security testing, 215–223
physical security testing, 225–226
process security testing, 214–215
wireless security testing
12 modules, 223
802.11 wireless networks testing, 224–225
Bluetooth and RFID security testing, 225
Open Web Application Security Project
(OWASP), 192
Organization of information security, 147
OSSTM. see Open Source Security Testing
Methodology Manual
OWASP. see Open Web Application
Security Project
P
PAPs. see Priority Action Plans
Passive testing, 114
Password cracking, 220–221, 228–229, 251–254
Patch management, 27–28
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard
(PCI DSS), 104–105, 162
Penetration test, 110
Penetration testing, 157, 230–231
Perimeter security controls, 119
Personal Information Protection and Electronic
Documents Act (PIPEDA), 69
Personal power plant, 268
Personally identifiable information (PII), 29, 36–37
Personnel and training–CIP-004, 100–101
Physical and environment security, 147–148
Physical and personnel security
personnel and training–CIP-004, 100–101
physical security of critical cyber
assets–CIP-006, 102–103
Physical attacks, 139–140, 184–186
Physical security of critical cyber
assets–CIP-006, 102–103
Physical security testing, 225–226
PICOwatts, 199–200
PII. see Personally identifiable information
PIPEDA. see Personal Information Protection and
Electronic Documents Act
PLC. see Power line communication
Politics, 70, 83
Port scanning, 216–217, 238–239
Power line communication (PLC), 7
Priority Action Plans (PAPs), 61
Process security testing, 214–215
Proprietary information, 37–38
PSEXEC module, 118
Public Utility Commission (PUC)
of California, 74–75
of Colorado, 78–79
of Texas, 79–80
R
Radial grid topology, 3, 3
Ransomware, 25
Renewable energy sources, 9–10, 17
Risk acceptance, 274–275
Risk assessment, 146
S
SAS 70. see Statement on Auditing Standards No. 70
SCADA systems. see Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition systems
Script kiddies, 40
SDLC. see System development lifecycle
Sector-Specific Plans (SSP), 67
Security assessments, 111
Security education, 82–83
Security laws
Breach notification laws, 69
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of
1986, 68
The Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution
Act of 2008, 67–68
Personal Information Protection and Electronic
Documents Act, 69
Security management, 151
Security management controls–CIP-003, 88–90
Security policy, 146–147
Security professionals
security devices, 275
security vs. functionality, 273–275
visions of gloom and doom, 275–276
Security testing tools
for compiled code applications, 135
for Web applications, 132
Index
287

Security testing tools (Cont.)
wireless, 137
Segmentation, 154–155
Sensing and measurement technologies, 12
see also Smart meter
Sensor data manipulation, 39–40
Service fraud
net metering, 39
service theft, 38–39
Service theft, 38–39
Services identification and system identification,
217–218, 239–241
Short Message Service (SMS), 183
SGIG Program. see Smart Grid Investment
Grant Program
SGIP-CSWG. see Smart Grid Interoperability
Group-Cyber Security Working Group
Smart consumer appliances
in home, 259
in office, 259–261
“Smart Grid, Smart City” initiative, 14
Smart grid community
agencies and groups, 276–278, 278
information sharing, 277
standards development, 278
conferences, 276, 277
blogs, news Web sites, and RSS feeds,
278–279, 279
Smart grid information networks, 59
Smart Grid Interoperability Group-Cyber Security
Working Group (SGIP-CSWG)
high-level security requirements,
64–66
risk assessment, 63–64
standards and requirements assessment, 66
Smart Grid Investment Grant Program (SGIG), 53
Smart grid Social Networking Security Checklist
authentication controls, 208–209
identity controls, 208
information sharing controls, 209
networking controls, 209
usage controls, 209
before you begin, 207
Smart grid technology vendors, 269–270
Smart grids
basic diagram, 11
components
advanced components, 12
advanced control methods, 12
applications of smart grid technology, 13
improved interfaces and decision
support, 12–13
integrated two-way communication, 10–12
sensing and measurement technologies, 12
definitions, 10
goals of, 8
international initiatives
Australia, 14
Canada, 14–15
China, 15
Europe, 15
reliability justification, 9
renewable energy sources, 9–10
vs. security features, 16
affordability, 17
carbon footprint, 17
reliability, 16–17
renewable energy sources, 17
waste justification, 9
Smart meter, 12, 13, 261–266
SmartGrids Platform, 15
SmartSync, 200–201
SMS. see Short Message Service
Social engineering attacks, 138–139
Social networking sites. see Facebook; Twitter
Social networking threats, 203–207
information disclosure, 204–207
SoGP. see Standard of Good Practice
Source code review, 157
Sponsoring security, 70
SSP. see Sector-Specific Plans
Stalker, 23
Standard of Good Practice (SoGP),
150–151
computer installations, 151–152
critical business applications, 151
end user environment, 152
networks, 152
security management, 151
systems development, 152
Star network AMR topology, 8
State Courts
Colorado Court of Appeals, 81
privacy implications, 81
State laws
California Public Utility Commission,
74–75
Illinois Power Agency Act, SB 1592, 75
mandated security, 75
Maryland Public Service Commission, 75
State regulatory bodies
Colorado PUC, 78–79
future planning, 80–81
NARUC, 76–78
288
Index

PUC of Texas, 79–80
Web sites, 78–77
Statement on Auditing Standards No. 70
(SAS 70), 176
“Strengthened Smart Grid” initiative, 15
Strong authentication, 158
Structured Query Language (SQL) injection, 37
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
(SCADA) systems, 54, 119–120
Syncing, 187
System attacks
legacy systems, 120
SCADA systems, 119–120
System development lifecycle (SDLC), 80
System security management–CIP-007, 94–96
Systems development, 152
T
Technical practices, smart grids
code and command signing, 155
configuration hardening, 158
default deny firewall rules, 155
encryption, 156
honeypots, 156
logging and monitoring, 158–159
penetration testing, 157
segmentation, 154–155
source code review, 157
strong authentication, 158
threat modeling, 153–154
vulnerability management, 156
TED 5000 smart device, 234, 235
Denial of service testing, 219–220
exploit testing, 220–221
Internet application testing, 245–251
network surveying, 236–237
password cracking, 251–254
port scanning, 238–239
services identification and system
identification, 239–241
vulnerability research and verification,
241–245
The Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution
Act of 2008, 67–68
Third-party access security
assessing, 175–176
data access, 172–173
data classification, 172–173
data segmentation, 173
network access, 173–174
monitoring, 174
segmentation, 174
transport security, 174–175
trust, 171–172
Third-party service providers
attacking, 170
billing, 161–162
access for payment processors, 162, 163
compliance, 162
consumer interfaces, 162–165
energy consumption applications,
163–164, 164
smart devices management, 164–165
device support, 166, 166–167
Third-party services, 30
Threat modeling, 153–154
Timeline, 257
Transmission networks, 2
TrueCrypt tool, 187
Trust
application developers and consumers,
180–182
utility companies and third-party service
providers, 171–172
Twitter
definition, 195, 196
smart meter and broadband integration, 199
Tweet-a-Watt, 198–199
tweeting energy usage, 196–197
U
U.S. Federal Government laws
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009, 50–53
Energy and Independence Security Act of
2007, 50
Usage controls, 209
Utility companies
accidental threats, 27–28
availability
consumer targets, 40–41
market manipulation, 43–44
national security target, 44–47
organizational targets, 41–42
vertical targets, 42–43
beyond electricity, 272–273
confidentiality
consumer privacy, 36–37
proprietary information, 37–38
curiosity attacks, 273
faster diagnosis, 271–272
integrity
sensor data manipulation, 39–40
service fraud, 38
Index
289

Utility companies (Cont.)
intentional attacks, 28
load shedding, 28
to reduce costs and security, 270–271
V
Variable pricing, 264–266
Vulnerability assessment, 110
Vulnerability management, 156
Vulnerability research and verification,
218–219, 241–245
Vulnerability scanners, 117
Vulnerability scanning, 218, 228
Vulnerable network device driver, 39
W
w3af, 248, 249, 250
War dialing testing tools, 120
War driving, 229–230
WattsUp, 201–202
Web applications attacks
for corporate operations, 122–123
custom Web application code, 126–131
for smart grid operations, 123–126
trade tools, 131–133, 135
Web server software, 133
Wi-Fi networks, 138
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) encryption, 267
Wireless attacks, 135–138
Bluetooth, 138
cellular networks, 138
Wi-Fi networks, 138
wireless clients, 127
Wireless clients, 127
Wireless LAN testing, 229–230
Wireless networks, 6–7
Wireless security testing
12 modules, 223
802.11 Wireless Network Testing, 224–225
Bluetooth and RFID security testing, 225
Wireshark network-sniffing tool, 216, 216
290
Index

