

Thank you for downloading this
Simon & Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
and see terms and conditions.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and
send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in
your inbox.


To Pierre and Chloe

INTRODUCTION
THE POWER OF RECOGNITION
In June 2020, I talked with the Pulitzer Prize–winning journalist and historian
Nikole Hannah-Jones, just as massive Black Lives Matter protests were spreading
across the United States following the murder of George Floyd. During our
interview, she described how her endeavor, the 1619 Project, took shape and
grew. Originally a special issue of the New York Times Magazine published in
August 2019, this series of essays marked the four hundredth anniversary of the
first enslaved Africans arriving in Jamestown, Virginia. Hannah-Jones’s opening
essay pointedly challenged white readers, starting with its title, “America Wasn’t
a Democracy, Until Black Americans Made It One.” The project provided an
alternative vision of American history, covering the era of slavery, the promise of
equality, and the formation of the American dream. It also exposed the harms
caused by a national narrative that sidelines Black history and suggested that a
better society is possible if we can replace that narrative with a more inclusive
one—a narrative that recognizes the value and dignity of Black people’s
experiences.
In her work as a journalist, Hannah-Jones strives to show what she calls “the
intentional architecture of inequality of American society.” Though she has
often found herself searching for hope, she recognizes that the 1619 Project gave
hope to others. As she puts it, seeing how America’s system of racial domination
was created helps us see “that it can be uncreated.” This optimism explains in
part why the 2019 special magazine issue immediately ran out of print and why
the book that eventually arose from the project became an instant hit, staying at
the top of the New York Times bestsellers list for months on end.
With support from the Pulitzer Foundation, the project was also developed
into a set of history curricula that came to be taught in over 3,500 US classrooms

in 2020 alone. As the project became more prominent, it ignited passionate
debates around the country. That same year, then-president Donald Trump
hastily assembled a “1776 Commission” to write a different version of history
that he felt would better fit within a “patriotic education”—an account that
downplayed the significance of slavery and racism in America’s past and
included no input from professional historians. In several states, conservative
lawmakers attempted to bar teachers from any 1619 Project–based teaching and
worked to ban many other books addressing racism from school libraries and
curricula.
At the heart of all this were deep questions about who matters—not only in
the United States, but also far beyond. And the fight over the 1619 Project is just
one of many intensely polarizing debates that have played out across the US and
around the world in recent years, on topics ranging from Black Lives Matter,
MeToo, and abortion to the minimum wage and the fight for workers’ dignity.
Marginalized groups have always struggled to find acceptance and justice, but in
recent years a new wave of energy and activism has forced an important shift. It
may be that this search for recognition calls for an entirely new frame of
understanding our social world, and for entirely new ways of envisioning a more
equitable society.
For almost forty years, I have studied the impact of culture on inequality with
the goal of deepening our understanding of how the world works. In particular,
I am interested in how groups gain recognition from one another, how they
come to be seen as valuable, and what that recognition does for their quality of
life. To answer these questions, we need to understand how people conceive of
their own worth and how they assess that of others—whether in moral,
economic, professional, or cultural terms. Part of this task, for example, has
involved learning about how people of color experience racism differently in
different countries. Another part has involved understanding some of the factors
driving the growing influence of the far right and white nationalism. Ultimately,
these insights can help us combat narrow and hateful conceptions of who
matters, and find ways of encouraging a more expansive means of understanding
people’s worth.

As we approach this task, we need to understand not only the material
circumstances that drive people’s decisions, but also how they make sense of
their own lives. This is why I feel it is important to share my perspective as a
sociologist. When it comes to understanding how we determine who matters,
other prominent disciplines can have troublesome blind spots. To simplify,
psychologists tend to focus on what is happening inside the minds of
individuals, while economists focus on material circumstances and the
distribution of resources. But there is a more intangible, collective, cultural
dimension of worth that both frequently overlook. This will be our focus in the
chapters ahead. Instead of adding to the growing library of books that tell us
why we’re divided and how we fail, I decided to write a book about people who
make hope possible and accessible, a book that seeks to understand how we can
broaden the circle of people who matter.
In order to take on this task, my research team and I have, since 2019, spoken
with a long list of change agents, ranging from Hollywood creatives to activists
and thinkers, as well as a substantial number of young people from the
American Midwest and the East Coast. Both groups we interviewed have helped
us see how new ideas about worth are taking shape. These interviews, together
with my decades of experience as a sociologist, have led me to an inescapable
conclusion: dignity affects quality of life just as much as material resources do.
When we think about how to improve society, then, we cannot ignore worth any
more than we can poverty or inequality. We need to focus on the extent to which
different groups are “seen” by others, whether they have a seat at the table, and
whether they feel welcomed, valued, and listened to. We know it is possible to do
all this because worth is socially determined. That is to say, it is not handed
down from above based on neutral criteria. Rather, we decide who matters—all
of us, every day, by creating, supporting, and spreading new narratives about the
worth of all groups. This is why worth should be factored in explicitly—in every
social interaction on the street, as well as every legal and policy decision that our
elected officials make.
This is not to say that money and power do not matter. But whether groups
are recognized and afforded dignity is just as important to their flourishing as
human beings, just as vital to their drive to be all they can be. This is a radical
idea, far from accepted in our materialist, individualist, and achievement-
oriented societies. Bolstering this claim, economists recently found that 60
percent of what makes work meaningful to people comes from factors other

p
g
p
p
than money, such as having autonomy, feeling a sense of competence or mastery,
and forming connections with others.
Key to understanding the power of recognition, dignity, and worth are the
narratives we tell ourselves about why and how our world works. Consider, for
instance, the narrative of meritocracy, which explains success as the inevitable
result of hard work and little else. Such a narrative not only encourages people to
blame themselves for their failures and financial hardships, it also conceals the
deeper structural obstacles that have long held back entire groups because of
their race, gender, or sexual orientation. Developing grit (or personal resilience)
is often offered as the path to success by psychologists, governments, and policy
makers without regard for the different types of support to which people have
access. But grit is not determined by individual will; it is facilitated by material
resources and social networks, and by narratives and institutions (such as
schools) that empower people and recognize the value of their identity and
experiences. To counter such misleading and harmful narratives, we need new
ones—narratives that empower people and recognize the value of their
experiences. By allowing people to live their lives with dignity, such narratives
can also help mobilize them to engage in civic life.
Changing the story in this way can have a dramatic effect on all manner of
social problems. Much attention in public life today is devoted to division and
tribalism—that is, to our tendency to identify with people who share our
characteristics and affiliations. But the lines that divide us are not immutable. By
transforming the narratives we tell ourselves about different groups, and
extending recognition and dignity to others, we can erode the lines of division
and create more opportunities for understanding between class and racial
groups. We know this is possible because it has happened frequently throughout
history. In 1973, for instance, 90 percent of Americans disapproved of
homosexual relations, but by 2019 that number had fallen to 21 percent.
Another study showed that, from 2002 to 2019, the percentage of Americans
who believed homosexuality should be accepted by society rose by 21 points,
from 51 percent to 72 percent. Many people contributed to this rising level of
acceptance, especially participants in social movements, as well as journalists,
social scientists, and medical and legal experts. Together, they pushed us as a
society to tell a new story about who matters, and to acknowledge the dignity
and worth of gay people.

Why does this matter? What we stand to gain is a more meaningful, just, and
fair society, for the largest number, and hopefully for our children and our
children’s children. After all, justice and fairness are not only about who gets
what, but also about dignity, respect, and the ability to be valued for who we are,
free from discrimination. This holds not only for the United States but also for
other advanced societies. Adopting diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI)
initiatives has become enormously popular in many countries—and has become
almost a requirement for some organizations. But they are clearly not enough.
I propose that we shift perspectives to make sense of the role that recognition
plays in our lives. When I say “recognition,” I am not talking about mere
identification, as when you recognize someone you know on the street; rather, I
mean “seeing others” and acknowledging people’s existence and positive worth,
actively making them visible and valued, reducing their marginalization, and
openly integrating them into a group. In the aftermath of the 2008 US
presidential election, for instance, many observers noted a building sense of hope
about race relations in America. With the historic election of Barack Obama, the
country’s first Black president, pictures of his family started circulating in the
media. Many white Americans lived in isolated, largely segregated communities,
and understood Black people largely through crude depictions in the media and
racist stereotypes. Seeing images of this Black middle-class family challenged
many preconceptions about African Americans. At the same time, many Black
families reported feeling “seen” for who they really are, at long last. Of course,
there was also racist backlash to this phenomenon, which psychologists came to
call the “Obama effect.”
The term “worth,” too, can be misunderstood. When I use it, I mean
something other than “social status,” or the place of individuals in hierarchies
based on competence, authority, or money. Rather, I am referring to a vast range
of criteria that people use to determine personal and collective value, from
altruism and creativity to professional success. However, worth and social status
can be intimately linked, but the way they are linked often differs based on class.
My past work has shown that professionals and managers (the roughly top 20
percent of the college-educated population whom I will call the upper-middle
class) believe their worth comes mostly from their education and expertise, their
occupational and economic success, and their expensive lifestyles. For them,
worth stems from social status. But this is not necessarily so for the working
class, whose low social status is often in tension with their conception of worth,

p
which is shaped more by their contributions to their family, friends, and
community, and generally their sense of morality and dignity, or what they
believe they deserve in terms of respect. This, they share with many other groups
that face discrimination, including people of color, queer people, and different
religious groups. Recognizing the common struggles of these groups is one of
the most essential steps for fixing our divided world. Having one’s sense of
worth affirmed is not a luxury but a universal need that is central to our identity
as human beings and our quality of life.
Without the validation of social status that elites enjoy, workers and other
marginalized groups must look for other means of bolstering their sense of
worth. Right-wing populists have often successfully addressed the working
class’s need for such validation in campaign speeches and other public fora. In
the last decade, the Republican Party has been more successful than the
Democratic Party at attracting the non–college educated, in particular. Instead
of depicting “everyday Americans” as “deplorables” as Hillary Clinton was
perceived to do in the 2016 presidential campaign, her opponent Donald Trump
affirmed their worth in his various electoral speeches, explaining their loss of
social status as a result of globalization and immigration. Liberals and
progressive professionals must fully understand the ways in which they alienate
many workers and prioritize affirming their worth, recognizing what we can gain
from increasing recognition for all.
Again, I am motivated by hope, because we urgently need new ways to
dissuade people from the appeal of right-wing extremism that is fed by cynicism
and a desire to “buck the system.” However, important as these marginal
ideologies and groups are, they will not be a central focus of this book, given the
plethora of recent studies on them. We will touch briefly, however, upon the
non–college educated and the downwardly mobile middle and working classes,
exploring why they may find populist ideologies attractive. I also ask how we can
change our collective thinking so that we can influence their perceptions and
expectations.
If we aim to truly recognize all groups, we have to question negative portrayals
or stigmas. We also have to change how we evaluate people and stress what is
common, as well as what is different. We have to reconsider how we rank the
sufferings of various groups. This is essential to our collective future, and
particularly urgent after decades of growing inequality, which has worsened
during the pandemic. Better understanding how recognition—“seeing others”—

g
p
g
g
g
works will help us capture where it happens, how it could happen more, and
how we can all contribute to it through the choices we make in our daily lives.
Some have argued that social change should not focus on racial, ethnic, or
gender discrimination, because these identity issues, they say, divert us from
more pressing matters like economic inequality and poverty. This is wrong. If
certain neighborhoods, schools, professions, and social circles are inaccessible for
marginalized groups due to racism, for example, poverty cannot be addressed
without addressing racism as well. For such groups, economic stability can be
nearly impossible to achieve while living under extreme social stigmas. The latter
affect their access to jobs and countless other valued resources. In other words,
when it comes to economics and identity, it is impossible to say which is more
important. Forty years of research and having written several books that touch
on both class and race lead me to firmly believe that we have to consider both!
Before going any further, it is worth saying a bit more about the many inspiring
people who were kind enough to be interviewed for this book and whose words
and perspectives helped guide my analysis. This book will include learnings from
over 180 people on how we can reshape our societies to make them more
equitable by promoting recognition. I call these interviewees change agents, just
as many of them call themselves. They play an important role in shaping how we
see one another. Just like Nikole Hannah-Jones, these change agents give us the
fresh perspective that allows us to see our environment in a new light. The
change agents we interviewed included labor and community organizers,
philanthropists, public policy experts, corporate types who promote a more
equitable economy, LGBTQ+ advocates, Black Lives Matter activists, socialists,
and feminists, as well as artists, thinkers, and seventy-five popular stand-up
comics and Hollywood creatives (see Appendix A for a full list). All are in the
business of producing intentional cultural change, and their works include
cultural touchstones as commonplace as a hit song on the radio, a New York
Times bestseller, or a blockbuster film.
Of course, being a change agent does not imply any specific ideological
leaning. Change agents can shift our perspective in both positive and harmful
ways, and many are nativists, racists, or far-right extremists. Think of popular
commentators such as Tucker Carlson, Joe Rogan, and Ben Shapiro, who so

often use their platforms to deny certain groups recognition and to restrict who
is considered worthy. Although I do not focus on these harmful change agents
here, they do play an important role in our political landscape, and they will
come up from time to time.
I listen to another group of cultural innovators, as well—young people. To
better understand their perspectives, my research team spoke with eighty
middle-class and working-class American college students in the Midwest and on
the East Coast. Although not representative of everyone in their age group (
about 50 percent of Americans their age attend college), these young people do
offer important insight into the obstacles standing in their generation’s way,
their goals, and what motivates them. Like the professional change agents, they,
too, are cultural producers, actively shaping the road ahead even as they begin to
drive upon it themselves. They differ from the change agents in that they are
younger, have yet to fully enter their work lives, and are not involved
professionally in the creation of new narratives. They are often influenced by
change agents when they reflect about the kind of society they would like to live
in.
When discussing young people, the media often use the label “Gen Z,”
referring to those born between 1997 and 2012. I focus specifically on a subset
of that group who were at the start of their adult lives when we conducted our
interviews, college students, or those born between 1997 and 2003. A large part
of my interest in this narrower group is related to the unique circumstances of
their early adulthood. Just as they were setting out to find a partner, a vocation,
or a purpose that would flip the light switch and lend meaning to it all,
navigating adulthood became much more of a challenge, as profound, society-
wide problems emerged, including growing inequality, social polarization, new
threats to American democracy, and a global pandemic. All of this pulled the rug
from under their feet just as they were preparing to start off on their own. Some
among them wonder: What is the point of living with purpose anyway?
We are in the midst of a conflict over where we are heading as a society. And
the stakes are high for today’s young Americans, who belong to one of the first
generations less likely to do better than their grandparents. So many are
frustrated to find that the narrow but well-worn paths to success used by
previous generations now lead to dead ends. They are asking boomers (born
between 1946 and 1964) and Gen Xers (born between 1965 and 1980) to move
aside. They are forging ahead, and some are leading the change “from the

y
g g
g
g
bottom up.” This is why we all have to pay heed. Many are inventing their own
narratives, which often differ from those of their parents. How can we use these
narratives to see the way forward?
Many change agents and young people we talked to have important new ideas
about who matters and what our society should be about. They want the
coming years to be guided by new principles—we should not allow ourselves,
they say, to be silent in the face of inequity, the denigration of marginalized
groups, police violence, and many other glaring societal problems. They develop,
adopt, and diffuse what sociologists call “scripts of self,” or narratives about
what kind of people we should be. While some embrace the traditional narrative
that wealth on its own creates personal worth, many place great importance on
authenticity, sustainability, inclusion, meaning, and connection. And many feel
that our society’s unrelenting focus on success does not move them.
Throughout our history, many groups have been stigmatized and assigned
various negative traits: women (especially older women), people of color, queer
people, undocumented immigrants, Muslims, the Roma, Indigenous people,
incarcerated populations, people with disabilities, those who did not go to
college, and others. Time and again, more privileged and influential groups have
defined these people as inconsequential, unintelligent, invisible, “less than”—in
other words, as deserving of indifference or scorn. And too many of us sit
complacently on the sidelines, buying into the narrative that marginalized
groups “deserve” their stigma. Recognition cuts against this tendency by
celebrating the plurality of our paths, by broadening how we think about worth,
and by valuing people for their identities and differences—not in spite of them.
There are three main avenues for building recognition: through political
activism and the law, through culture and media, and through our own
interpersonal experiences and networks. Of course, these tools are not new, and
they have frequently been deployed simultaneously. Since the 1960s, a new wave
of political activism succeeded in expanding rights for some marginalized groups,
primarily women and Black people. Those shifts were accomplished not only
through political and legal means, but also through changes in the culture and in
ordinary people’s lives; they were about challenging stereotypes, being heard and
seen, and expanding constricting roles.ff

To understand the power of political and legal activism, consider the efforts
to legalize same-sex marriage over the past few decades, which have been
correlated with a rapid decline in the number of attempted suicides among
LGBTQ+ high school students. Even though marriage is often far from high
schoolers’ minds, these laws and court rulings sent a message to LGBTQ+ youth
that they matter and are deserving of the same dignity afforded to everyone else.
Of course, the legalization of same sex marriage did not end homophobia, solve
discrimination, or even stop bigoted politicians from continuing to push antigay
legislation. But these legalization efforts did serve an important function,
broadening the definition of the mainstream and saying, even to young people
uninterested in marriage: “We see you; we value you, and we invite you to take a
seat at the table alongside us.” Importantly, this monumental accomplishment
was made possible not only through political and legal advocacy, but with the
support of massive social movements and the diffusion of new narratives, which
frequently took the form of slogans like “love is love” and “we’re just like you.”
One difficulty with efforts to fight for recognition in political and legal
spheres is that they often come up against a reactionary backlash. We all know
that progress is not linear. This has been perhaps most clearly exemplified in
recent times by the American Supreme Court’s June 2022 decision reversing its
nearly fifty-year-old ruling in Roe v. Wade, which had declared reproductive
rights to be constitutionally protected and which still has the support of a
significant majority of the US population. At the same time, many LGBTQ
rights, and particularly trans rights, have been threatened by conservative
lawmakers. Backlashes like these may slow down social progress, but they have
not stopped the forward march of human rights over the last decades.
Political and legal advocacy are some of the most powerful ways of extending
recognition to a marginalized group and allowing them to gain formal social
acceptance at the national level. But cultural industries and the narratives they
popularize can be just as powerful. Screenwriter Joe Robert Cole described to
me how he saw the film he cowrote, Black Panther, the first Marvel movie with a
predominantly Black cast, and how he understood the blockbuster’s cultural
impact. His film touched so many, he said, because “the audience could feel what
it feels like to be seen, to be viewed as great”—a powerful experience “for people
who are not used to [being] viewed as important.” Many viewers—not only in
the US, but around the globe—celebrated seeing Black superheroes represented
on such a massive scale and in such a mainstream context.

Examples of popular culture’s ability to expand recognition abound. Popular
TV shows such as Glee, Will & Grace, and Modern Family have all contributed
to normalizing gay people. Transparent played a similar role for trans people.
Hollywood creative Joey Soloway explained their intent in the making of this
award-winning show that features a trans woman who transitions later in life.
The story opens as she comes to embrace her new identity and works to redefine
her relationships with her adult children. Soloway explained how the show used
storytelling to make the reality of trans people “more understandable, and less
aberrant” for mainstream audiences.
While recognition plays out collectively in politics and culture, it also
operates on a more intimate, interpersonal level. This happens through face-to-
face relationships, as when those close to us acknowledge and support who we
are, validate our priorities, and support our struggles—regardless of whether our
identities and choices conform to mainstream expectations. This interpersonal
form of recognition also happens when we make decisions about whom to
befriend, what matters to us, and how to lead our lives. As I will show toward
the end of the book, we can all contribute to including more people around the
table. This kind of everyday recognition has an impact not only on our well-
being, but also on social solidarity and inclusion.
As we work to achieve a more equitable society, we need to interrogate how
we evaluate worth in ourselves and in others. Many people are already pushing in
this direction, and the quest for recognition is becoming a powerful movement
of its own. Broadening recognition could very well be an alternative source of
collective hope. By the end of this book, we will understand more deeply how
recognition can redefine the status quo. Once we reduce stigma, celebrate
difference, and embrace the diversity of what humans are and can do, we can
perhaps experience the promises of dignity for all.
Before we dive in, it is worth saying a bit more about how my personal
experiences have shaped my views on worth, recognition, and dignity. These
topics first became important to me when I encountered sexism growing up. It
manifested even in matters as ordinary as the division of chores in my otherwise-
loving family: my older brother mowed the lawn, and I did the dishes. But
mowing the lawn happened only once every three weeks—doing the dishes

happened almost every day. As a feminist—even back then—I would not have it.
Whenever I was silenced, which happened again and again, it only strengthened
my determination to claim my space.
These and other early experiences put me on a path of working to understand
recognition and inequality. I was born and grew up in Canada, which has a long
colonial history of marginalizing the French-speaking, culturally and ethnically
distinct Québécois—my people. I came of age in the seventies, at the apex of the
fight to affirm our cultural distinctiveness and gain our political independence
from English-speaking Canada. Like the American Civil Rights Movement, this
movement involved public displays of cultural pride in the form of songs, plays,
and other creative expressions. These celebrations worked hand in hand with
protests and denunciations of economic exploitation, political subjugation,
linguistic subordination, and social injustice. This cultural revolution, my first
experience of collective mobilization, convinced me that recognition is central to
our societies—and just as necessary as economic equality in our struggle to build
a more just world. It also showed me that those who condemn so-called identity
politics as a narcissistic dead end are missing something essential about what
motivates people.
My geographic location played an important role in this education, as well. I
grew up as a monolingual francophone near the Outaouais (or Ottawa) River,
which separates the provinces of Ontario and Québec and serves as an important
symbolic divide between French-speaking and English-speaking worlds. As I
developed my first friendships with English-Canadian students in college while
discovering Monty Python, I began thinking about how boundaries between
groups take shape, when and how they can be crossed and weakened, and at
what cost. As I grew as a researcher, this concern extended beyond boundaries
between ethnic groups to groups with different cultural and moral orientations,
different social classes, and different intellectual fields.
As a twenty-year-old graduate student in late-seventies Paris, I experienced
the aftermath of the insurgent and often anarchistic student protest movement
of May 1968, which partly succeeded in upturning the traditional social order,
with slogans such as “it is forbidden to forbid” and “all power to the
imagination.” This taught me that profound change is possible. I also found
myself drawn to a growing postcolonial and anti-imperialist sentiment that I
shared with friends who hailed from all corners of the earth—including
Brazilian and Greek militants who had fought the US-backed military

g
y
dictatorships in their countries, as well as Hungarian and Cambodian neighbors
who had escaped repressive regimes.
When I was a postdoctoral researcher at Stanford University in the early
eighties, I witnessed the earliest iteration of Silicon Valley’s privileged elite, just
as yuppie culture and personal computers were taking off. Here was a totally
foreign—and profoundly harmful—new way of determining who matters,
which was a conduit for the growing inequality to come. After four years of
bohemian student life in Paris, I could barely make sense of the Californian orgy
of consumption, especially the taste for insanely expensive ultralight bikes and
fancy cars. At the same time, I became friends with well-supported young
researchers who were professionalized by attentive Stanford faculty—in strong
contrast to the near-total absence of mentoring that prevailed in Parisian
universities.
Even with the advantage of coming from an educated, middle-class family, I
felt and continue to feel like an “outsider” within academia, as a woman in a
male-dominated profession, as an immigrant with an accent, and as someone
who hails from the academic “periphery,” with foreign graduate degrees—
although I recognize many may not think of me that way, given my decades of
teaching in uber-elite universities such as Princeton and Harvard. These
experiences left me curious about how exclusion and inequality are connected to
one another differently across national contexts.
In the late eighties, as my career continued to progress, my interests came to
focus on how and why people make status distinctions between groups of
people differently in different places. This had started from my earliest
observations of divisions based on—to simplify greatly—language in Canada,
culture and religion in France, and race and money in the US. I became
interested in how cultural differences can create social isolation between groups.
Long before the Trump era, when journalists and academics began to pay real
attention to how populist politicians drew on these divisions, I wrote a book
about working people’s efforts to seek respect and affirmation of their dignity.
Soon, these topics came to define my intellectual mission. I became convinced
that they matter deeply, not only for each of us individually, but for our
collective future and that of the next generation, as well.
I am also writing as a woman and the mother of three young adults who are
themselves searching for a future they can embrace. My experience with them as
they became adults motivates this book—not entirely, but in large part. I think

y
y
g p
of my kids, and their friends, having observed so many hours of their living room
hangouts spent sketching out their futures, their ideals, and the impacts they
hope to make in the world. I have also witnessed their periods of hesitation when
facing the future. The experience of attending college during a global pandemic
was unfulfilling and exacerbated the inherent difficulty of finding direction at
that age. Like many of their peers, they have had to navigate uncertainty and a
certain amount of anxiety as they have made sense of abrupt social change.
Beyond my kids and their circles of friends are some eighty graduate students
in their twenties or thirties I have mentored over the last decades. They took on
the academic path for the creativity and (perhaps) security and fulfillment it can
offer. Many are puzzled about the future as well, and study sociology and society
to make sense of it all. Like me, in recent years they have had their share of
mental health challenges and have dealt with painful personal and institutional
crises. And each cohort has grown more and more critical of universities.
Of course, some readers may wonder why they should listen to the message of
a white, middle-aged, female Harvard professor who works in a literal ivory
tower—William James Hall, where my office is located, is, in fact, a tall, white,
tower-like building. They may wonder: Is this going to be another experience in
“boomersplaining”? To the skeptics, I would say that we all have a partial vision
of the world, as well as our own unique blind spots. But we also know that
“non-fish” can sometimes perceive the water better than the fish who live their
lives immersed in it. I bring to the table a great deal of evidence and decades of
research that help me make sense of the strange and the familiar alike—not
perfectly, but with a passionate and unrelenting commitment.
In 1993, the moral philosopher and social critic Cornel West published his
book Race Matters, which went on to sell half a million copies. This series of
eight essays was a powerful call to address racial inequality and the various
obstacles facing African Americans in the contemporary United States. As we
celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of this landmark book, we must continue to
remember the essence of his message—and broaden it to other marginalized
groups. Much progress has already been made. Many negative stereotypes have
been sapped of the destructive power they once had—about women, queer
people, and more. Slowly but surely, the lenses through which stigmatized
groups are perceived have changed. Just maybe, they can change further. And as
you will read next, this change may not be optional, even as we contemplate
backlash in a number of crucial areas. Our work is not done.

CHAPTER 1
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE
THE UPPER-MIDDLE CLASS AND THE
FAILURES OF THE AMERICAN DREAM
In the United States, our hopes have long been shaped by what we call the
“American dream.” More than any other group, those who became adults in the
period immediately after World War II embraced this dream and benefited from
a period of unparalleled economic growth and technological innovation, fed by
faith in the exceptional destiny of the country as a land of riches where hard
work is always rewarded. All this had the effect of solidifying the American ideal
of a prosperous, suburban life with a nuclear family and white picket fence.
However, the decades since the postwar boom have revealed fractures in this
dream. For some, it was clear from the start that certain groups would be
excluded from it. For others, the hollowness of its promises has become evident
only in recent years. Still, the dominant national narrative of equal opportunity
and upward mobility persisted, even in the face of increasing skepticism.
Today, we find ourselves in a new gilded age of extreme wealth concentration
and inequality. Indeed, according to a recent report by the Pew Foundation,
“From 1983 to 2016, the share of aggregate wealth going to upper-income
families increased from 60% to 79%. Meanwhile, the share held by middle-
income families was cut nearly in half, falling from 32% to 17%. Lower-income
families had only 4% of aggregate wealth in 2016, down from 7% in 1983.”
To many, the growing economic inequality has made it clear that their hard
work and personal sacrifices will never be rewarded. The end of upward mobility
in America (and many other Western democracies) has left the middle and lower
classes, the “99 percent,” abandoned with little else on which to pin its hopes.

One result has been a major mental health crisis up and down the social ladder
over the last decade—evident in grim statistics like the US suicide rate, which
increased by 35 percent between 1999 and 2018.
The 2008 Great Recession left many, even those at the top, ever more
depressed and anxious about their finances, and more protective of the levers
available to preserve their standing. The upper-middle class, whose lives were
already fixated on work and competition, became even more fearful of losing
their privileged position. They opened the gates to a winner-take-all economy
that leaves workers and lower-income people feeling exploited, ignored, silenced,
and worthless. At the same time, emerging digital media platforms were
increasingly pushing images of photo-filtered perfection to a fractured world,
creating idealized and unrealistic expectations of economic success, achievement,
and consumption.
Despite the American dream’s inability to deliver for most, its persistence acts
as a balm to political and social unrest. It provided hope for a better future, even
if largely unattainable. But if we are going to build a world where everyone feels
truly valued and included, we have to rethink our dominant measuring sticks, or
the models of ideal self that we use to think about our identities and likely
future, which are offered to us through shared narratives about the perfect life
and who matters in society. Think, for example, of the archetypal corporate
white male worker who is always available for more work. These models shape
who we are, who we think we should be, what we think is possible, what our
objectives are, and how we approach them. These are unrealistic for most
people, and particularly for women, who still often have the prime responsibility
for raising children. But with our traditional models of upward mobility
generally out of reach for most people, what will feed our hopes and dreams?
Where are the new ideals that will inspire us?
These questions matter not only for the United States but for other countries
as well. While many societies have come to define their own values and identity
at least partly in contrast to the United States, especially since the Trump
presidency, many also continue to take inspiration from the US, despite many
indications that the image and quality of life in this country is in steady decline.
Because of these dire economic realities, social movements for equality in the
United States have multiplied in recent years. These movement have also
influenced social progress around the world. For instance, the 2020 Black Lives
Matter (BLM) movements inspired a wave of protests worldwide in support of

p
p
pp
racial justice. And advances for gay rights in the US have also fueled the rapid
spread of support for the LGBTQ+ community in many other parts of the
world— though certainly not all. But country-specific recognition movements
also developed independently in a range of countries, such as the Catalan
independence demonstrations in Spain, the Hong Kong Umbrella and
subsequent movements in favor of greater autonomy from China, and the
Indigeneous protest movements across the Americas, as well as in Aotearoa New
Zealand and Australia.
To understand what future is possible for our societies, we first need to look
at why change is needed. Again, there is a great need for greater economic
equality, but thinking only in terms of economics won’t do: it does not capture
fully what motivates the cynicism toward the American dream.
During the last decades of the nineteenth century, the first Gilded Age was a
period of unequaled opulence and inequality. This era was ruled by the
plutocracy of the Carnegies, Vanderbilts, and Rockefellers, who capitalized on
technical progress to amass fortunes and grow the American economy to new
heights. But it was also a time when millions of workers and new immigrants
lived in squalor in crowded cities, in abject poverty with no social protections.
Today, the “Second Gilded Age” reproduces a familiar pattern of widening
inequality: we now have an exceptional concentration of wealth in the hands of
the top 1 percent of American households. As of 2021, this tiny group holds 32
percent of the national wealth, a higher portion than at any point since at least
1962. This transformation has been massively covered by the media, studied by
social scientists, and discussed by politicians—especially Democrats.
At the same time, it has become far more difficult for Americans of various
classes to move up the social ladder: in 1970, 92 percent of young people born in
1940 were out-earning their parents by age thirty, but by 2014, for those born in
1984, that number had fallen to 50 percent. This occured in the context of
rapidly growing income inequality: In 1965, the ratio of CEO-to-worker
compensation was 21-to-1. By 2020, the ratio had ballooned to 351-to-1.
Moreover, as of 2017, the US had greater income inequality than any of the
other G7 countries (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United
Kingdom) based on the Gini coefficient, a standard measure of country-levelffi

inequality. These divergent fates of Americans have made it increasingly difficult
to believe that a rising tide of economic prosperity will eventually lift all boats.
This rise of inequality has roots in recent history, arriving after decades of
neoliberal policies that first came to prominence under President Ronald
Reagan in the US and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the UK. As these
policies gained momentum globally, they soon came to be seen by many as the
only path to national prosperity. Neoliberal policy makers deregulated markets
and progressively removed barriers to profit-making. Their “market
fundamentalism” implemented austerity policies, rolled back progressive taxes,
erected wealth protections for a chosen elite, and abandoned to the private
sector many functions traditionally performed by the public sector, from
garbage collection to the management of prisons. They encouraged the
maximization of competition, stressing the need to systemically quantify and
measure performance. This accelerated the concentration of wealth, as the
working class’s compensation declined by roughly 43 percent between 1979 and
2017 (adjusted for inflation and the relative increase in productivity).
The effects of inequality show up in every aspect of daily life. For example,
epidemiologists have found that growing inequality is correlated with worsening
health and subjective well-being for all members of a society, including those at
the top.
But if the American dream has proven empty in many ways, why has its
influence endured? For most of the twentieth century, this myth worked as a
powerful cultural engine. The term was first coined by J. T. Adams in his 1931
bestseller The Epic of America, where he described it as a panacea for the
problems of the world, the key to a harmonious and more equal society. It
promised a life “which should be better and richer and fuller for every man, with
opportunity for each according to his ability or achievement.” But more than
material goods, it also promised to remove barriers to personal achievement,
creating what Adams imagined as “a dream of social order in which each man
and each woman shall be able to attain to the fullest stature of which they are
innately capable, and be recognized by others for what they are, regardless of the
fortuitous circumstances of birth or position.”
As a remarkably efficient “hope machine,” the American dream proved
capable of appealing to hearts and mind, and to stimulate business and shape
policy. Indeed, it provided a vocabulary with which to make sense of life for a
great many people and for a great many years. Still today, it continues to feed the

g
y p
p
g
y y
y
aspirations of many, particularly for immigrants coming to the United States. A
close cousin of the notions of “American exceptionalism” and “manifest destiny”
that animate our national myths, the American dream also has a darker side.
Frequently, the dream has obfuscated the fact that the country’s riches were
gained at the expense of Native Americans, enslaved people, underpaid women,
Asian Americans, and other exploited groups—topics now at the center of new
efforts to reconsider American history.
The dream was a work of folklore anchoring a collective identity. It provided
American citizens with a purpose to guide their actions (the goal of building
prosperity), standards to determine who belongs (one’s degree of material
wealth and college education), notions of who deserves our trust (those who are
industrious)—and of which groups deserve to be forsaken (those who are lazy
and not self-reliant). The boundary organized around the American dream is
also the moral boundary that structures the class system.
Many people continue to put their confidence in this version of the American
dream, even as its promised rewards fail to consistently materialize. As many
surveys have shown, at least 60 percent of Americans believe the US is still a
country of opportunity where material success is within reach for all. The vast
majority believe that inequality can be explained by the fact that some don’t
work as hard as others, while one survey revealed that the majority of those
interviewed believe hard work is “the most important reason that people have
gotten ahead.”
For many workers, the dream has often been equated with making a decent
living and passing on money to your kids. It was related to the promise of
consumption and growing earnings which seemed attainable for many—
especially for white men. Still today, many equate realizing the dream with
joining the middle class, which now requires a college degree, which is still out of
reach for the majority. For others, it also means becoming an executive,
professional, or entrepreneur, and reaching the “comfort level” traditionally
available to the top 20 percent of the population. Interviews with working-class
people conducted in 2016 revealed that “most insist that the American dream
exists or that hard work pays off,” even as their own hard work and that of their
friends and families fail to provide them financial security. Tellingly, in 2022, the
final episode of The Simpsons depicted Homer as unable to achieve the
American dream given the decline in income for American workers.fi

In practice, considerable disagreement exists around the specific meaning of
the dream. Is it to raise a family? To contribute to the community? To attain a
certain level of wealth? This fluidity contributes to the popularity of the myth
since it can take on different meanings for different people.
For example, many African Americans—a group often hindered from
enjoying the full fruits of American progress and prosperity—attest to having
their own “American dream” and define it in any number of ways. In fact,
working-class Black people are more likely to believe in the American dream
than the middle-class, perhaps because in many cases, they live in more
segregated neighborhoods and have fewer interactions with white people, and
thus perceive racism less frequently and acutely. Understanding distinctions like
these was one impetus of a 2016 book I wrote with several colleagues called
Getting Respect. We spent years studying how African Americans experience
discrimination differently from groups facing stigmatization and exclusion in
other countries. We found that in 2007–2008, an overwhelming majority of
these interviewees embraced self-reliance and individualism, which are central to
neoliberal models of self. More than a decade later, in 2020, we followed up with
fifteen of them to hear how their views had evolved. A majority—middle class
and working class alike—continued to embrace these values. They said they
believed the American dream was attainable and they emphasized the
importance of hard work as the key to success.
For instance, Geoffrey, an insurance salesman, said the American dream is
“attainable for everybody, but the thing is that you have to work for it, right?
You have to work for these things and unless you work for these things, you’re
not going to get it. And then you can’t complain.” He was not alone in his
views. But a number of them also believed that pursuing the American dream
means placing too much emphasis on materialism. In this, they resemble
younger cohorts who favor less materialistic and more experiential definitions of
the American dream.
Rather than dispose of the dream entirely, many Americans continue to
believe in its value but suggest that more people should have access to it. The
persistence of this American dream may seem puzzling to non-Americans. At
times, it seems as though believing in it acts as proof of citizenship, proof of
belonging. Thus it is perhaps not surprising that the group with the firmest
belief in their access to upward mobility is immigrants. Often, the dream has
inspired them to leave their country, community, and family for a better future.

p
y
y
y
For many, belief in the American dream goes hand in hand with a tendency
to accept the present order of things. The late author and journalist Barbara
Ehrenreich, for example, in her classic 2001 book Nickel and Dimed, wrote
about her experience working poorly paid service jobs in order to learn about the
difficulties facing the working class. While working as a maid, she asks her fellow
workers if they resent the rich people whose mansions they clean. Many say that
they don’t—given that they, too, hope to become rich someday. She doesn’t have
the heart to tell them that given the realities of class in America, they’ll likely
never attain that goal. It comes down to simple math: 100 percent of the
population cannot be squeezed into the top 20 percent of the income
distribution. This fundamental disconnect is what makes the American dream
an impossible dream for most—an unfulfillable promise.
While many continue to believe in the dream, others are becoming
increasingly disillusioned. Between 1998 and 2019, the percentage of Americans
who believe the system is fair shrank by more than half, falling from 68 to 29. As
of 2017, a majority of adults believed that life for the next generation will be
worse, while 78 percent of Americans believed “it will take the next generation
more efforts to advance.” Tellingly, more people have come to perceive the
dream as attainable for themselves, but not for society as a whole.
These surveys suggest that the American dream is increasingly viewed less as a
promise than as a mass deception. Those who feel tricked by a flimsy social
contract may give up on the concept of shared citizenship and just “do their own
thing”—living at the margins of, or in opposition to, mainstream society. This
tendency helps explain why so many people, mostly working class, choose not to
participate in the political process—only 46 percent of low-income, eligible
voters voted in the 2016 presidential election, while 68 percent of higher-income
people did. It can also help explain the appeal of antistate ideologies like the alt-
right and libertarian doctrines. A functional society can’t be maintained when
one of its core principles strains under the weight of suspicion. If we are to
achieve a better future—or even just a manageable one—we will have to offset
this failure with other narratives of hope. Given the political polarization of so
many advanced industrial societies and growing political abstention among
those at the bottom of the labor market, this is now a most urgent task.
Many more privileged Americans aren’t so aware that upward mobility is
becoming unachievable for some groups, in part because they are insulated
within neighborhoods and social circles. However, wealthy people also tend to

g
y p
p
underestimate their place in the economic hierarchy, believing that they are
farther from the top than is really the case—and this is true not only in the US,
but in France, Germany, Russia, and Spain as well. Since the 2008 recession,
middle-class American adults also underestimate their economic situation
despite their middle-class household income: 12 percent fewer self-identify as
middle class and 13 percent more wrongly identify as working class. In 2022, a
total of 53 percent of the middle-income population self-identified correctly as
middle class, down from 65 percent in 2008.
Poor people are also frequently isolated in their neighborhoods and thus less
likely to have access to news, which gives them a poorer understanding of
upward mobility and how unlikely they are to actually achieve it. Paradoxically,
they overestimate their chances of upward mobility to an even greater degree
than more privileged people. But this belief in the American dream may simply
be the expression of a desire to be seen as “belonging,” as having “the right
values.” Above all, it is enormously challenging to keep faith when everyone
around you faces mounting difficulties—including unemployment, precarity,
economic drift, cost of education, family disruption, and health challenges, to
name just a few. Some may feel that their struggles are individual, but it’s clear
from recent studies that many of them are widely shared.
Economists, along with the politicians who rely on them, are often concerned
with finding ways to either “grow the pie” of the economy, or to shift its pieces
around to benefit more people. But this approach can overlook how other
conditions can affect that distribution. While expanding the pool of resources
available to the working class and the poor is important, it is clearly not
sufficient. We also have to reconsider the models of self that come with the
American dream, and how they are obscuring the bigger picture and hindering
progress on redistributing the pie.
The hegemony of the American dream manifests in the emphasis Americans put
on the neoliberal virtues of material success, self-reliance, individualism,
entrepreneurialism, and competitiveness. These criteria of worth have gained
more and more influence as “models of ideal selves,” and encourage many to
internalize blame for the increasing precarity of their lives. This model can also

lead people to seek out a scapegoat group to blame. Of course, neither option is
helpful from the perspective of progressive mobilization.
These neoliberal virtues have also nourished patriotism and support for
America’s dominant position on the world stage. One reason they are especially
effective in doing so is that they extend to downwardly mobile people one of the
few high-status identities available to them: their “winning” status as Americans,
as citizens of the most powerful country in the world. The disparity between this
identity and the punishing, untenable economic position of the downwardly
mobile can drive those of them who are white toward embracing that part of
their identity, too. This nationalism, in turn, can lead some to become attracted
to the white supremacist movement, and to denounce immigrants and Black
Americans as less worthy.
From Ronald Reagan to Donald Trump, neoliberalism has come to be
understood as a precondition for a successful society. Entrepreneurialism,
competitiveness, economic success, and self-reliance are increasingly equated
with deservingness and merit. Generations have felt the need to measure their
self-worth, and the need to judge others, by these limiting ideals. And as they
gain influence, these values have served as indicators of cultural citizenship and
belonging. In the end, they have fed considerable social instability, a mental
health crisis, a decline in trust, and much more.
The group that best demonstrates the neoliberal virtues of material success,
competitiveness, efficacy, entrepreneurialism, and self-reliance is the upper-
middle class: college-educated managers and professionals. This group benefited
enormously as the winners in a “winner-take-all” economy and continued to
solidify its position during the economic changes of recent decades. Compared
to the middle- and lower-income classes, the upper-middle class’s income has
grown significantly for several decades. By 2016, the average income of upper-
middle-class people was 2.4 times higher than that of middle-income people and
7.3 times that of lower-income people.
It’s not hard to understand how inequality generates chronic stress, including
mental and physical wear and tear for those on the lower half of the social ladder.
Typically, working-class families must contend with poverty, powerlessness at
work, bigotry, and other factors. But in recent years, inequality has been stressful

for the upper-middle and middle class as well, especially since 2008: an
intensified “fear of falling” is spreading within these groups, with wide-ranging
ramifications. Mental health problems are increasingly affecting adults in the
middle- and upper-income bracket (defined here as greater than $50,000). While
anxiety among this income group had been lesser than for the lower income
group, it grew at similar rates for all groups from 2008 to 2018. Maintaining
their position requires enduring intense competition, working nonstop,
forgoing personal time, and dealing with status anxiety. The rates of suicide for
those in higher income groups is close to that of those who make less than
$30,000. Concerns about money, job stability, and overwork are cited as the
most common reasons for this change; long work hours are particularly
associated with risk of depression.
This top group has also been challenged in one of the most intimate sectors
of life: family planning. In recent years, fertility has plummeted for the top
quartile of wage earners. The numbers are even more shocking in comparison to
those in the lower rungs. A considerable percentage of people earning between
$50,000 and $100,000 expect to have fewer children than they had hoped
because of their “inability to afford” more children. That sentiment is held by 21
percent of that income group, compared to only 14 percent of those who earn
less than $50,000. Higher-income parents feel pressured to affirm and pass on
the privileges of wealth, and to achieve this the financial costs of parenthood
have increased, through private school tuition, tutors, and expensive sports. And
they feel psychological pressures as well. They cannot resist “helicopter
parenting,” going to great—and, at times, inappropriate—lengths to ensure
their kids’ success. For instance, a growing number are hiring independent
educational consultants to guide their children through college applications.
And yet, many high-income families are blind to the many ways they pass on
class privileges, and to how, in doing so, they block others from climbing as high
as they have. In a 2002 survey that asked students at a competitive high school to
rank factors determining a person’s future, 71.5 percent of respondents ranked
individual effort at the top, ahead of factors like their parents’ background, social
support, and quality of education. A study of privileged students at an elite
boarding school also found a strong belief in hard work as the key to success.
The subjects of intense parental investment, mostly middle and upper-
middle-class youth, face significant pressure to succeed. Lives of hyper-
competition lead to significant struggles with burnout, anxiety, and feelings of

p
gfi
gg
y
g
being overwhelmed. Studies show that these pressures have increased over the
decades; whereas just 18 percent of freshmen, most of whom are middle class,
said they were overwhelmed in 1985, 43 percent were overwhelmed in 2019. In
the words of Katherine, a white student from Massachusetts, “our generation
faces a lot of pressure and competition… a feeling of competition constantly is
just exhausting. You’re competing with everyone over internships, over this, over
that, and you’re worried.” These responses and behaviors are more prevalent
among college students than in the general population, with college students
being 2.5 times more likely to abuse substances than the general population. But
it may be that they are more often diagnosed. Some researchers argue that those
high-income kids are at most risk.
The “wellness” culture has spread considerably among the middle class over
the last decades. Between 2002 and 2019, there has been a 48 percent increase in
the number of adults who received mental health treatment or counseling in the
US, at roughly the same time that psychologists found that “socially prescribed
perfectionism” increased by 32 percent (between 1989 and 2016). Treatment for
mental health has become more available over time, making the rise in the use of
mental health services a period trend, rather than attributable only to an increase
in psychological distress itself.
While Twitter and Instagram humorists may downplay (or even ridicule) the
mental health struggles of the upper-middle class as a “first-world problem,”
such 
issues 
can 
nevertheless 
be 
significant. 
Increasingly, 
expensive
neighborhoods have been stratifying into multiple enclaves, with the most
exclusive areas reserved for the wealthiest of the wealthy. This, in turn, has
pushed the affluent to anxiously compare their station to that of even higher-
income people. Inside this affluent bubble, people can easily lose perspective and
forget the magnitude of the advantages they enjoy.
Still, many upper-middle-class people find comfort in spending time with
and comparing themselves to those who are most like them (what sociologists
call “class homophily”). Many have a poor understanding of the world beyond
their familiar and homogeneous neighborhood, which also leads them to
underestimate the problems facing the poor. Compounding this trend is the
growing spatial segregation between classes. As economic inequality grew over
the last several decades, so too did physical separation between classes in
neighborhoods, workplaces, and schools (see Figure 1). As a result, fewer

Americans today are in contact with people from other income groups than in
1970. The magnitude of the change is staggering!
Figure 1: Income inequality and segregation
The upper-middle class’s values and lifestyle are often given outsized
representation in the media, in advertising, and at colleges and workplaces. And
their patterns of consumption are often presented as a model to be emulated by
everyone, even though the resources needed to do so are available only to a tiny,
shrinking minority. As a result, the upper-middle class has become more
influential and culturally dominant, while also growing ever more physically
distant from other class groups.
One example will resonate with many of us: in 2016, a study of over four
hundred primetime American sitcoms, totaling sixty-eight years of television,
found that 80 percent of the shows’ characters were upper-middle class, while
just 10 percent were working class. In the vast majority of cases, the working-
class men were represented as buffoons or as incompetent, immature, ignorant,
and irresponsible.
In a recent study, the political scientist Eunji Kim compared the effect of
watching rags-to-riches reality TV shows (like Shark Tank, American Idol, and
American Ninja Warrior) with the effect of watching other reality TV shows.
She found that watching stories of upward mobility had a significant effect on
the viewer’s own belief in the American dream, particularly among Republicans
and the “politically optimistic.” Kim’s study established that watching these
shows was just as likely to lead viewers to embrace the American dream as being

the children of immigrants. These shows inspire hope, but it is one-dimensional,
based on socioeconomic success and individual achievement—a conception that
downplays the collective as well as inequality of means. Such shows also fail to
foster any alternative criteria of worth.
If exposure to rags-to-riches reality shows strengthens belief in the American
dream, we may be seeing the social effects now, as the number of these shows has
grown exponentially in recent years. In effect, the entertainment industry is now
functioning as a gigantic publicity machine for upper-middle-class values like
consumerism and neoliberalism. The reality of the working class is largely absent
in entertainment. This can encourage workers to progressively identify
themselves with and normalize the upper-middle-class world they observe. They
also may come to consider their own conditions as lacking—as a shameful
aberration from the acceptable norm.
Beyond just reality shows, contemporary television inundates us with rags-to-
riches stories of people transcending a distant, dark, and shameful past—as well
as stories of people who just happen to already be rich. What we don’t do is
normalize the experiences of working-class people. For instance, the 1980s and
’90s working-class sitcom Roseanne—and its 2018 reboot—portray characters
whom few would identify with. The same is true of Homer in The Simpsons, a
caricature of the bumbling idiot.
In contrast, several recent shows feature wealthy people visiting fancy resorts
or “self-improvement retreats” (White Lotus, Nine Perfect Strangers), or people
living in exclusive neighborhoods—The Real Housewives series being only one
example. But these shows depict a lifestyle unattainable for most viewers. While
these shows explore the ugliness of the wealthy and hardly glorify them, they also
offer “eye candy” for envious consumers.
The effect of these portrayals on Americans’ understanding of themselves
and their support for the American dream can be seen clearly in opinion surveys.
Earlier in this chapter, we noted the strength of Americans’ belief in meritocracy
and hard work—but as rags-to-riches narratives have pervaded the airwaves, that
belief is only growing stronger and stronger. A majority of Americans still
believe that the rich owe their position to hard work. This belief is much
stronger among Republicans (75 percent) than Democrats (38 percent),
according to one 2019 national survey. But the embrace of meritocracy has
increased from 90 percent to 96 percent between 1980 and 2010, and is thus
strong across the political spectrum. This is considerably higher than in many

g
p
p
y
g
y
other places. In France, for example, belief in meritocracy remained stable, at 55
percent, over the same period. This belief in meritocracy goes hand in hand with
the reluctance of some Americans to tax the rich, since some stubbornly still
believe in trickle-down economics, thinking that if the rich get richer, everyone
else will rise with them. (Or that one day they may be rich themselves and
benefit from low taxes.)
This normative world also supports a narrow definition of what the middle-
class ideal should be. The nuclear family with the white picket fence is
envisioned by many as a suburban white family, living a life away from “crime-
ridden” Black and Brown urban neighborhoods where homelessness abounds.
Because this ideal is drawn so narrowly, worth, purity, and goodness are defined
as belonging to fairly comfortable white people, and everyone else is often
presumed undeserving, even as the American dream is increasingly unreachable
for the majority. This world of comfort and security is likely to be threatened by
radical ideas such as “defund the police,” reparation, abolishing prisons, and
even desegregating schools.
As the lifestyle and values of the upper-middle class gained more legitimacy
and influence, a large segment of the population came to perceive itself more
negatively and feel their dignity tumbling, at the same time as some embraced
meritocracy. The transformation of the boundaries in American society has had
a negative effect not only on the top of the social ladder, but also on the less
privileged two-thirds of the population and those who experience growing
exclusion. This is an even bigger part of the problem at hand.

CHAPTER 2
THE VIEW FROM BELOW
THE WORKING CLASS AND THE
MARGINALIZED
Now that we have considered the plight of people at the top, it’s time to turn
our attention to “the bottom half”—and to groups that have found themselves
increasingly excluded.
As we’ve already seen, an array of structural changes in recent decades has
steadily deteriorated workers’ economic standing. Many have seen their income
decline year after year since the 1970s, as the minimum wage has failed to keep
up with inflation. At the same time, workers have also seen their rate of union
membership tumble. From 1954 to 2022, union membership in the US fell
from 34.8 percent to just 11.6 percent. Along with these economic losses, many
workers have also lost social status. This is especially true of male workers, who
once largely defined themselves through their identity as steadfast providers for
their families. When stagnant wages and disappearing jobs began to erode that
identity, some of these men felt shamefully emasculated. At the same time, fewer
got married, had children, or maintained strong networks of friends, and joined
civic and religious organizations. And because of the dominant neoliberal
narrative that attributed economic difficulties to individual failings, a growing
number came to believe that their failures were personal rather than systemic.
This fed their growing isolation, as well as political cynicism and apathy, but also,
in some cases, their radicalization and support for populism in the United States
and beyond.
The situation is even more dire for those living under the poverty line given
the erosion of government programs like public housing, unemploymentfi

benefits, and disability income. Until the US government provided relief for
COVID-19, a growing proportion faced extreme poverty as essential safety net
programs such as food stamps have been cut again and again. In 2020–21,
government relief has improved their situation in the short term and showed
what the US is capable of when political consensus is possible. But for many the
situation remains hopeless.
All these trends stand in sharp contrast to the positive meritocratic message
of “work hard and you’ll rise up.” This dissonance sends a message to those at
the bottom that their difficulties stem from their presumed lack of drive, that
they deserve to be cast aside. In this way, the working class and the poor are
vilified and made to feel “less than”—less competitive, hardworking, intelligent,
disciplined, entrepreneurial, and motivated than professionals and managers.
Essentially, the American dream and its myth of meritocracy draw boundaries
between those who matter and those who don’t. This becomes the basis of the
social hierarchy, protected by an ironclad moralistic justification that has only
gained influence under neoliberalism.
The vicious cycle of our current economic model centered on growth at all
costs has led to a widespread toll on mental health for the population at large,
including increased reports of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation. These
effects were of course accentuated by the 2020 COVID pandemic. According to
one national study published in February 2021, 41 percent of surveyed adult
Americans said they had experienced anxiety and depression symptoms since the
start of the pandemic, and 13 percent reported new or increased substance
abuse.
The opioid crisis provides evidence of the dire situation facing the lower half
of society in particular: The numerous fatalities from the crisis fit into what the
economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton have famously called “deaths of
despair”—or deaths caused by suicide, overdose, or alcohol abuse, largely
concentrated among white, non–college educated people. Case and Deaton
documented a rise in these deaths, which they associated with rising inequality,
the dysfunctional US health care system, and the inadequacy of the social safety
net. After all, growing inequality feeds mistrust and anxiety about social status.
If workers can no longer aspire to middle-class status, what does that mean for
stabilizing middle-class social institutions like work, church, family, and social
clubs? If the majority of people feel a divide between who they think they should

be and what society makes possible, how can they be moved by a shared social
vision of communal life?
In the early 1990s, I interviewed blue-collar and low-status white-collar
workers living near Paris and New York for a book I was writing called The
Dignity of Working Men. At the time, the differences between the two groups of
workers were stark. One was that American workers were far more attracted to
promises of upward mobility than their French counterparts and sought to
emulate the upper-middle class. Unfortunately, they were also more likely to
think of themselves as “losers,” whereas French workers demonstrated more
class solidarity and expressed cynicism about upper-middle-class values,
including its “bourgeois lifestyles.”
To be certain, some American workers were also fairly critical of the “people
above”—or “the Ken and Barbie people,” as one worker put it. These more
critical workers called their upper-middle-class peers “workaholics,” viewed them
as obsessed with material success and professional status, and as domineering
and self-centered, lacking in concern for others. Even so, many admired them.
In contrast to American workers, the French put more weight on being there
for their pals through thick or thin—and less on displays of consumerism. The
French, of course, were drawing on a long history of vilifying the rich and took
inspiration from their country’s long and rich socialist, republican, and Catholic
traditions, which celebrate solidarity, including toward the poor, and condemn
capitalism as exploitative and inhumane. These communal and prosocial values
were, of course, far less present in the US, where individualism dominates.
These interviews took place roughly three decades ago, but given all that’s
taken place since then—the growth in inequality, the declining standards of
living among the non–college educated, and the increasing differentiation
between urban and rural populations—it seems likely that using material success
as a measure of personal worth was even more harmful after 2000 than in the
early nineties, with all but a few left empty-handed. Both in the US and beyond,
these workers are hanging on to the notion of self-reliance while also trying to
cope with growing uncertainty and precarity. They have seen their relative status
deteriorate at great speed. Many analysts suggest that this economic anxiety and
status drop explain their racial resentment toward minority workers, support for
the populist right, xenophobia, and other ills.
The Dignity of Working Men also showed how the American interviewees
drew strong moral boundaries between themselves and those they saw as poor,

g
y
p
contrasting their own discipline with the alleged laziness and helplessness of low-
income people. One remarkable but unsurprising finding was that white
workers had a particularly low opinion of the African American poor. They
were particularly contemptuous of welfare recipients, who take shameful
government-sponsored “handouts.” Rather than see the systemic economic
failures for what they were, many believed that the poor brought about their
condition through moral and ethical failings. At the same time, the 2008
financial crisis made even more workers resentful of the financial elite, as they
felt their status destabilized even further as they lost homes and experienced mass
unemployment, while the federal government saved the banks.
Welfare recipients still face intense stigmatization in America, although more
Americans now express support for progressive taxation. Many Americans—
particularly Republicans—continue to embrace individual and moral
explanations over structural explanations for poverty, blaming the poor for their
plight. In other Western democracies, too, empathy for welfare recipients has
declined in recent years. As a result, here and elsewhere, low-income populations
recede from the national conversation, to the point that their interests become
nearly invisible.
Given the grinding conditions in which they live, impoverished people have
rarely mobilized politically to defend their rights and assert their humanity. But
on occasion they have managed to come together. These rare instances include
the 1968 Poor People’s March on Washington, an effort to gain economic justice
for poor people in the United States led by Martin Luther King. More recently,
the Occupy Movement of 2011 denounced the selfishness of the “one percent,”
but this effort rapidly lost steam. In similar ways, other social problems fed by
inequality and poverty can too easily fall out of sight, including mass
incarceration and student debt.
One of the main contributions of the book is to argue that stigmatization
extends across a number of groups that are often pitted against one another.
This chapter is about all the groups that are experiencing exclusion, not only the
working class.
For religious, ethno-racial, and sexual minority groups, the situation can be
very difficult. Many of these groups experienced an expansion of rights and

recognition in the more than half-century since World War II. Groups who
benefited included religious minorities, people of color, the LGBTQ+
community, and women. Yet during Donald Trump’s presidency, many
observers, both in academia and in the media, documented a stark rise in hate
crimes, particularly against immigrants, Latinx, Muslims, and African
Americans. At the same time, Republican politicians attempted to roll back
LGBTQ+ rights, abortion rights, and protections against discrimination in the
workplace. In all cases, common neoliberal measures of self have been leveraged
in identity politics, pitting those judged self-reliant against other groups. This
often resulted in a hardening of boundaries toward groups typically aligned with
progressive policy gains (with parallel changes occurring in Europe).
The growing stigmatization of poverty is doubly harmful for groups already
facing discrimination—groups like African Americans, Hispanics, and
immigrants, who are often presumed to take advantage of welfare. This was a
persistent theme in the interviews I conducted in the early 1990s for The Dignity
of Working Men, as the workers I talked with denounced “leeches” and
“sponges,” targeting in particular those they perceived as “outsiders” from
immigrant backgrounds.
Whereas for much of the twentieth century we saw more and more inclusion
and tolerance, we are now witnessing a reversal of that trend at some levels.
Stigmatized groups, and especially immigrants, are facing tougher conditions, as
anti-immigrant, right-wing, populist political movements gain momentum in
both the United States and Europe—although different countries have different
stories. The United States saw a growth in warmth toward several immigrant
groups in recent years, but Hispanics continue to be presumed “illegal” and to
take advantage of public resources, such as welfare.
Blatant racism directed at African Americans has also been rekindled,
challenging common narratives of racial progress, while institutional and spatial
segregation has also increased dramatically—especially within schools. Between
1983 and 2004, opinion polling from the American National Election Survey
showed a steady increase in positive feelings toward African Americans among
all groups, but starting in 2005, those numbers started to slightly decline,
especially among Republicans. This can be explained in part by white people’s
insecurity about their own position in society. In 2017, 55 percent of white
Americans believed there “is discrimination against white people today,” while

only 43 percent disagreed with that statement. By 2021, 65 percent of white
Americans thought their group experience some or a lot of discrimination.
For its part, the LGBTQ+ community has seen steadier improvement. This is
not surprising given that the LGBTQ+ community is not clearly associated with
the poor (while poverty is high among the young, those living in “double
income, no kids” middle-class households are not atypical). Thus, some
segments of this population (e.g., professional middle-age gay men) have
encountered less pushback than others (e.g., younger trans people) and are more
regularly featured in the media.
However, the LGBTQ+ community also faces an accelerated cultural war
and risks losing ground as the homophobic agenda of the Christian right and
Republican politicians has rapidly gained political and legal traction, especially
in the South, where gender-affirming health care for trans children has been the
focus of intense battles, and denounced as “child abuse” in Texas and Florida.
Conservative Supreme Court justices, meanwhile, have suggested that they are
open to overturning Obergefell v. Hodges, the decision that legalized same-sex
marriage in all fifty states.
Working-class and low-income women also face great difficulties. The wage
gap between men and women persists, while abortion rights are under attack
across the United States, in Latin America, and elsewhere. The reversal of Roe v.
Wade by the Supreme Court in 2022 affects negatively not only the health and
well-being of women across all classes, but also their sense that they matter and
are perceived as fully independent and competent citizens by their government.
Overall, the boundaries between different groups are hardening, even in the
aftermath of massive demonstrations in support of racial justice across 140
American cities in summer 2020. By 2021, support for the movement had
declined significantly among white people—although the shift was much more
significant among white Republicans than among white Democrats. In all cases,
common neoliberal models of self have strengthened group boundaries and
intensified intergroup competition ( with parallel changes in Europe over recent
decades).

CHAPTER 3
MEETING THE MOMENT
HOW WE FIGHT FOR A MORE INCLUSIVE
WORLD
This has so far been a bleak assessment of modern American society. What I
hope to have shown is that every class and many identity groups are harmed by
the current economic and social changes, except perhaps for a tiny sliver at the
top of the class structure—the wealthiest of the wealthy. Every other group, to
one degree or another, finds itself reeling from an onslaught of difficulties,
disappointments, and anxieties, grasping for dignity and stability.
What are the solutions to this state of affairs? We have already considered how
neoliberal scripts self-promote individual salvation in the form of individual
mobility. For their part, psychologists and public policy experts often embrace
grit (a character trait or individual resource similar to IQ), while the consumerist
media and the therapeutic culture favor narrow, palliative solutions focused on
individual gratification and self-care. But wellness and lifestyle products, and
health and fitness activities like mindfulness, meditation, and yoga, can get us
only so far. They can certainly make a difference on an individual level, but they
fail to address the root problem. In fact, individualist approaches may harm
more than they help, since they pull people’s attention away from potentially
more meaningful efforts. They are part of the problem, not solutions.
Ultimately, if we truly want to address current challenges, we need to focus on
addressing exclusion in our daily lives. We need to ask ourselves hard questions
about how we decide who matters and what we can do to create a more inclusive
society.

Many people who think deeply about these problems favor economic
solutions. The Democratic Party in the US, for example, often raises the
possibility of redistributing resources by enacting more progressive taxation
policies and closing tax loopholes, allowing the poor to get tax relief and obliging
the rich to pay their fair share. There are many other economic policies that
reformers hope will lead to a more egalitarian society, such as mandating gender
wage equality, creating a system of universal basic income, and extending health
care to all. These changes are crucial and do show real promise.
However, political or institutional reforms will never be sufficient to produce
the change we need unless we are also able to change our narratives. The ways
that different groups are made to feel excluded often is not driven primarily or
solely by economic factors. Consider, for example, NIMBY movements: they are
often both about preserving the value of real estate and about keeping distance
from low-income people and people of color, as we see in conflicts about the
construction of affordable housing. Middle-class or rich people are more likely
to evoke “preserving historic architecture” and “quality of life” than their desire
to have few children from non–college educated families in their local schools.
This also holds when it comes to white resentment about affirmative action and
diversity in the workplace—claims about unqualified, undeserving people of
color “taking the place” of more deserving “hardworking” white people. These
common arguments belie a desire to maintain a homogeneous environment and
status, and to hoard resources for the only group that is nationally valued—the
top of the social pyramid, where whites are overrepresented.
Social scientists have documented in detail how Gifted and Talented
programs in public schools, which were in many cases created to appeal to white
middle-class parents, end up exacerbating segregation. Although American
public schools today are largely segregated by class and race, that segregation is
not an official policy, but rather an effect of broader racial and class segregation
between neighborhoods. Some of this stems from exclusionary governmental
and institutional policies like redlining—but clearly, individual white families’
choices about where they live and where they send their kids to school also play
an important role, as shown in the popular NPR podcast Nice White Parents.
For change to last, we need to transform how we think about who matters.
Americans often judge a person’s worth based not only on meritocratic factors
like their dedication to their work, but also on their proximity to whiteness, their
distance from poverty, or how “American” they are perceived to be (in self-

p
y
y
p
presentation, accent, or familiarity with American sports and culture). Only
once we are able to shift our national conversation and adopt a much broader
conception of who “belongs” will we be able to make any progress.
Fostering change is a multidimensional puzzle. Economic and policy changes
and cultural changes are all needed—and each plays a vital role in shaping the
other. Fortunately, we can focus on more than one thing at once: we can push
simultaneously for greater recognition and greater material equality. In my past
work I have argued that moral boundaries feed social boundaries—which is to
say, the moral judgments that each of us make about our peers inform how we
understand the lines between groups based on the resources, networks, and
spaces they access. It’s easier to distance yourself from people who are different if
you believe that their differences are signs of being undeserving because they are
uneducated, vulgar, or phony or because they are lazy, have low moral standards,
or take advantage of others (in my previous books, I found that the first traits are
more often mentioned by the upper-middle class, whereas the latter are
mentioned more by the working class).
We have already seen that different classes and identity groups are growing
more and more physically separated from one another as people increasingly seek
out neighborhoods, workplaces, schools, and social circles composed of people
with similar backgrounds to their own. As shown in Figure 1, there has also been
a decline in marriages and friendships between these groups. If we want to
address inequality, we must confront the stereotypes used to justify this spatial
segregation, the narratives that lead some to (consciously or not) perceive other
groups as less worthy. Without this crucial step, even if we are able to enact
policy changes to encourage integration, those efforts are likely to backfire and
stoke resentment. This is exactly the sort of backlash we see against affirmative
action in college admission decisions and practices designed to encourage more
diversity in workplace hiring. I do not mean to say that we should defer all
meaningful policy action until there is universal agreement that all groups are
equally worthy—but without changing hearts and minds, we will always face an
uphill battle to enact meaningful change through policy.
Most of all, we must resist the temptation of superficial measures. Diversity
and inclusion cannot be treated as mere buzzwords, but must be accompanied
by substantive changes—in our collective values, our social scripts, and our
measures of worth. The dangers of making such shallow commitments without
truly rethinking our lived values are clearly described by the historian Lily

y
g
y
y
y
Geismer in her book Don’t Blame Us: Suburban Liberals and the Transformation
of the Democratic Party. Focusing on the Boston metropolitan area, the book
shows how upper-middle-class neighborhoods have remained racially
homogeneous for decades despite the professed progressivism of those who live
there.
This is the world I have lived in for twenty years, in my own town of
Brookline, Massachusetts, and our family experienced these shifts as my three
kids grew up in Brookline’s public schools, attending a “Title 1” elementary
school with a high proportion of low-income students. There, my children saw
the demographic composition of their peer group become more and more
homogeneous as they got older. In the earlier years, several of their buddies were
Cape Verdeans and Dominicans who lived in the public housing project nearby.
But as they entered high school, they found themselves in more homogeneous
circles, as academic tracking “magically” came to parallel class and ethnic or
racial lines. In such a context, conventional solutions don’t go far enough.
Changing our attitudes and narratives is a prerequisite to meaningful change.
And fortunately, once again, important changes are already happening.
Before going any farther, it is worth pausing to make clear what we’re talking
about when we use the term narrative. Narratives are more than just stories—
they are perspectives about society and social relations that allow people to make
sense of the world. Generally, they are known or shared by group members and
shape their lives, including how they decide who is worthy or unworthy.
Former president Trump, for instance, advanced a narrative in which
immigrants (and especially those from Central America) pose an existential
threat to the United States. When launching his presidential campaign in 2015,
he implied that all Mexican immigrants coming to the US were rapists and drug
dealers, ignoring the reality that US immigrants are far more law-abiding than
average. Narratives can be loud and obvious, as in this case, but they can also be
subtle—they can be ways of seeing that make some visible, while moving others
to the background. In other words, narratives are how we describe reality to
ourselves and to others—and they encompass everything from our identities and
experiences to our social environments and groups.

Of course, we are more likely to buy into narratives when they are already
embraced by our peers. They become more powerful the more popular they are.
And they can shape our views in both positive and negative ways. They can, for
example, help a group imagine a different future, as happened when second-
wave feminists spread new narratives that helped women “see” patriarchy and
claim a greater autonomy. Narratives can also feed our sense of agency, that is,
our capacity to shape the world we live in, as well as our social resilience, our
collective capacity to respond to the challenges we face. This capacity is
grounded in the environment we inhabit, including the narratives we are
exposed to, and the institutions that structure our lives (governments, schools,
church, community associations, etc.).
Of course, narratives change over time. In France, a strong Catholic and
socialist tradition has helped foster national narratives that stress civic
responsibility and solidarity toward the poor. These narratives help explain one
of the conclusions I drew in my book The Dignity of Working Men, which is
that French workers do not feel they are losers as much as their American
counterparts do, despite similar material conditions. American workers have not
always been made to feel this way. In the post–World War II era, when unions
were particularly strong in the United States, US workers could draw on a much
more egalitarian narrative, informed by the same values of solidarity that are
stronger among the French. By the 1990s, when I conducted my research with
workers from New Jersey and New York, unions had lost much of their power,
having suffered major setbacks during the Reagan administration and before. At
that point, while American and French workers were both contending with
difficult economic conditions, American responses were shaped by a more
individualist national narrative, and were thus more likely to feel stigmatized and
devalued, and to have less compassion for people below them and less solidarity
with other workers. They were more likely to seek individualist solutions in
upward mobility, whereas although increasingly individualists, to this day the
French remain more likely to mobilize collectively and take to the streets to have
their demands addressed. Massive demonstrations throughout Paris’s major
avenues have been a regular feature of daily life for decades.
While narratives can shift over time, they can also become another thing for
people to fight over. For example, narratives about the history of marginalized
groups are frequently contested, as seen during the uproar caused in the early
2020s by right-wing activists fighting against what they call Critical Race Theory

y g
gfi
g
g g
y
y
—which they use as a catchall term for any lesson or teaching that acknowledges
the experiences of marginalized racial groups. But ignoring this history creates
another narrative entirely. Consider the many injustices and atrocities that Black
people in the United States have endured over the centuries. Discounting this
long history of slavery and segregation changes how everyone thinks about both
American and African American identity, and ultimately denies Black people
dignity and recognition. Progress toward racial equality will continue to be slow
and sporadic until our narratives can fully incorporate this painful American
history of injustice. This is precisely the objective of Nikole Hannah-Jones’s
1619 Project. Her story illustrates how change agents can produce new
narratives that ensure everyone matters.
Hopefully by now, the power of narratives to shape how we perceive the
world is becoming clear. They stand to determine whether certain groups are
admired or scorned, listened to or ignored, respected or shamed. This brings us
to a crucial point: all of these—narratives, stigmas, stereotypes, and social
hierarchies—are produced by human beings and thus changeable. This means
that conflicts between groups cannot be explained primarily by moral tribalism
(or biology, human nature, and cultural evolutionism). In fact, eugenics was
based entirely on reinforcing existing social and racial hierarchies and had no
relationship to science or reality.
The ability of narratives to produce social change has been documented time
and again by social analysts. This is doubly true of narratives produced and
disseminated through popular culture—which can have a direct effect on
behavior by getting people to relate to members of another group and thus to
narrow recognition gaps. For instance, an important psychological experiment
published in 2012 showed that Latinos who watched a Telemundo soap opera in
which a character helps with the 2010 census were less mistrustful of the US
government and more likely to support participation in the census. In 2014,
another important study found that the TV show 16 and Pregnant ultimately
led to a reduction in teen births in the eighteen months after its premiere. The
authors suggested that the show “accounted for about one-third of the overall
decline in teen births in the United States during that period.”
Acknowledging the importance of narratives and recognition, the
Rockefeller Foundation in 2015 paid for some twenty thousand public school
students in New York City to attend the Broadway musical Hamilton. The
blockbuster musical cast actors of color to play the Founding Fathers and used

p y
g
hip-hop, a musical genre created by people of color, to retell the story of the
nation’s founding. These choices centered people of color in a space where they
have been traditionally excluded—histories of the nation’s founding. The
musical challenged the idea of who built the country, who belongs in America,
and who can be included in a national identity. During performances, crowds
often cheered loudly to the line “Immigrants, we get the job done,” an
important reminder that the US is a nation of immigrants whose contributions
are frequently overlooked.
Similarly, the film Black Panther, featuring primarily African American
actors, was released during Black History Month in 2018. In addition to
expanding many white moviegoers’ conception of what superheroes look like,
the film inspired community activist Frederick Joseph to launch an important
crowdfunding effort “to ensure the Boys & Girls Club of Harlem could all
secure seats to what will likely be a lasting role model in the superhero genre.”
The GoFundMe page for this effort emphasized how the film could contribute
to closing the recognition gap for low-income African American kids: “This
representation is truly fundamental for young people, especially those who are
often underserved, unprivileged, and marginalized both nationally and globally.”
Of course, many different factions have tried to leverage the power of
narratives. In the 1990s, Republicans increased their influence by transforming
the way Americans think of politics. For example, a political action committee
associated with Newt Gingrich, who was then the Republican House minority
whip, circulated a document to the party’s candidates titled “Language: A Key
Mechanism of Control.” It invited them to label Democrats with words like
“decay,” “failure,” “crisis,” “pathetic,” “liberal,” “radical,” “corrupt,” and “taxes,”
while defining Republicans with words like “opportunity,” “moral,” “courage,”
“flag,” “children,” “common sense,” “hard work,” and “freedom.” Gingrich later
told the New York Times his goal was “reshaping the entire nation through the
news media.” Which is exactly what the party did, with the support of talk radio
shows and, later, Fox News and other outlets.
If narratives are so important to explaining our world, why are they
underdiscussed in conversations about inequality? One reason is that
economists play such a dominant role in these discussions and bring to them afi

specific type of expertise and knowledge, which is deeply rooted in
quantification and cost-benefit analysis with direct policy implications.
In her 2010 book Economists and Societies, the sociologist Marion Fourcade
showed that for much of the twentieth century, economists held an enormous
amount of influence over how governments understood social change. This was
especially true in the United States, where economists shaped policy in profound
ways and played an outsized role in evaluating the effectiveness of the very
policies they prescribed. In her book Thinking like an Economist, Elizabeth Popp
Berman took this analysis further, exploring how economics provides a partial
understanding of the world, drawing attention only to certain kinds of problems
while obscuring others, and pushing us only toward a narrow set of solutions.
As Berman shows, quantitative methods took priority over qualitative methods,
which are typically used to study narratives. In this way, economists came to
dominate research on social change, putting much greater emphasis on resource
distribution. For example, when faced with rising inequality, some economists
might argue for lowering tax rates for the rich to incentivize people to make
more money. Others may promote more distributional measures. Yet, a few
prominent economists have become interested in identity and narratives,
decrying how their disciplines have committed “sins of omission.” Others have
attempted to engage more systematically with insights from sociology.
As economists gained influence, we also saw the rise of cognitive psychology
in microeconomics, or the study of economic decision-making. Beginning in the
1980s and ’90s, cognitive psychologists began turning their focus to economics,
and ultimately revolutionized our understanding of decision-making.
Prominent articles and books on the topic appeared, including Steven Pinker’s
How the Mind Works, Richard H. Thaler and Cass Sunstein’s Nudge, and
Daniel Kahneman’s Thinking Fast and Slow. They gave rise to a new and
influential knowledge industry: the science of nudging, or shaping behavior with
subtle cues and other noncoercive means. For example, displaying healthy foods
like fruits and vegetables at eye level in grocery stores would be a nudge to buy
healthy food. In 2015, this area of study assumed a new level of influence, as the
Obama administration established a “social and behavioral science team” tasked
with deploying this approach in governmental policy.
Nevertheless, despite its popularity, this cognitive approach shares some of
the shortcomings that typically constrain the broader field of economics. Both
minimize or ignore the cultural context in which decisions are made, so their

g
solutions are necessarily limited. In my view, our focus should be less on nudging
the individual, or what happens inside our brains, than on how we can create
and disseminate new narratives that will be readily available and help foster social
change. When economists and behavioral scientists overlook narratives, they
miss crucial aspects of our reality. We do not live our lives in the controlled
environment of a laboratory. Therefore, we need broader and more dynamic
frameworks to make sense of the world that surrounds us.
In recent years, many psychologists have also focused their attention on what
they call moral tribalism, an allegedly innate instinct to segregate different
groups and favor one’s own group over others. The concept has been used, for
example, to explain the growing political polarization and sectarianism in the
United States and elsewhere. Its proponents often ground it in utilitarianism,
human nature, and anthropological evolutionism.
But this theory often errs in assuming that the lines between different groups
are set in stone. Not all groups are tribes, since the degree to which groups are
cohesive, or have “groupness,” depends on a range of factors, including the
availability of jobs and the competition for these jobs, the frequency of their
contact with other groups, and the history of their relationship with those
groups. The boundaries (the various types of lines that we draw as we evaluate
people, such as moral or socioeconomic boundaries) are changeable—as we’ve
seen in a widened acceptance for gay people, which may have seemed
unimaginable just a few decades ago. We know boundaries are changeable
because we make them—they are created through a process that we all participate
in. Moreover, perceptions of the social distance and competition between
groups are highly variable across contexts.
Although tribalism is often explained by a generally ill-defined “human
nature,” cultural evolutionism, and vague references to how we are “wired to do
X,” there is nothing natural about “seeing race,” even in babies and toddlers—
like everything else, racial categories have to be taught. These perceptions are
changeable and can be acted upon. We have the ability to reimagine the future
and what kind of society we want to live in. How we go about changing these
boundaries and ensuring that all groups feel valued is at the center of Seeing
Others.

CHAPTER 4
BEING THE CHANGE WE WISH TO SEE
CHANGE AGENTS AND THE QUEST FOR
DIGNITY AND RECOGNITION
When we connected in 2020, Catherine Opie was coming back from a
monthlong RV trip through the American South. A famous artist and a
professor of photography at UCLA, she had been taking pictures of African
American communities to witness the disproportionate impact the COVID-
related economic downturn had on them. Opie also acts as one of the most
influential tastemakers in the world of contemporary art, serving on the board of
the Andy Warhol Foundation, where she has a leading role in shaping her field.
Her work creating representations of queer communities in Los Angeles, San
Francisco, and beyond draws worldwide acclaim.
Through her art, Opie works to make stigmatized groups visible—and to
help them be seen by others as they see themselves. While she portrays LGBTQ+
people in affirmative, humanizing ways, she also aims to persuade potentially
prejudiced audiences to reframe how they view these groups. Opie’s mission was
inspired by her own personal experience. She has a strong memory of coming
out to her father, a realtor, as he discovered her artwork.
Influenced by the German-Swiss sixteenth-century portraitist Hans Holbein
the Younger, in her early work, Opie took portraits of her extended circles of
friends from the leather S&M scene in Los Angeles and San Francisco, whom
she calls her “Noble Family.” These subjects are represented with “obsessive
exactitude” against colorful backgrounds, wearing “aristocratic clothing.” In an
interview published at the time, she spelled out her objectives for the project:
“They think we [in the leather community] are child molesters and everything

that’s attached to that. We have had a bad rap. I decided to do a body of work
that was about being really out, and about being out about my sexuality. Instead
of just showing the tattoos and the piercings and the markings on the body, I
wanted to do a series of portraits of this community that were incredibly noble.”
In another series, she represents domestic scenes of lesbian couples at home,
holding their children and dogs.
Opie wished to save others from the internal struggles she experienced when
she was coming out. Her art recognizes and destigmatizes differences by drawing
attention to the dignity and normalcy of traditionally ostracized groups. Early
on, Opie was inspired by the influential queer philosopher Judith Butler in her
desire to document the performative dimension of queer identity.
Opie embraces the political dimension of her art and underscores how it is
contributing to redefining who “belongs” in American society. She aims to
redraw the boundaries of acceptability, and even of dignity and worthiness, and
to demonstrate the variety of American communities, the range of people who
create bonds between each other. She says she is moved by our shared humanity,
“whatever and whoever [we] are,” and “the fact that we have to coexist on this
finite planet.”
To do this, Opie leverages the power of documentary photography, making
private worlds public. And she is far from the only photographer to embrace
such a mission. Indeed, many artists have been attracted to photography as a
medium for raising the visibility of marginalized communities, including
communities of color. This power of “representation” is at the center of
strategies for broadening recognition to more people.
Deborah Willis is the photography curator at the famed Smithsonian
National Museum for African American History & Culture in Washington,
DC, and she is another prolific contributor to this artistic space. A dynamic
woman in her late sixties, she is also a MacArthur “Genius Grant” award
recipient, and the curator of photographs and prints at the Schomburg Center
for Research in Black Culture in Harlem. Her exhibit, Posing Beauty: African
American Images from the 1890s to the Present (2009), has toured worldwide.
Her work has played a pivotal role in legitimizing and canonizing photography
that serves and represents the Black community.
Her son, Hank Willis Thomas, is a celebrated Black photographer in his own
right, with his own artistic vision. He is famous for his artwork that comments
on icons of American sports and popular culture. For instance, one of his most

p
p p
famous pieces depicts a Nike swish branded on the skull of a Black man, as a
critique of the brand’s commodification of Black culture. The piece also
powerfully refers to the history of branding as part of American slavery.
Thomas’s For Freedom project, inspired by Norman Rockwell’s iconic 1943
paintings Four Freedoms (from want, of speech, of worship, and from fear),
contrasts the originals with a new version representing the racial diversity of
contemporary America. I also spoke to Thomas about another project of his,
Question Bridge: Black Males, a video (available on YouTube) in which 150
Black men from twelve American cities and different walks of life answered the
same question: “What does it mean to be a Black man today?” From their
response, Thomas learned that “Most of what we [Black men] have in common
are the prejudgments that people place upon us.”
When we spoke, Thomas said his goal with this work was to “deconstruct the
whole notion of Black male identity.” He said that today’s stereotype of Black
male identity is a product of European imagination, a cultural cudgel in deep
need of reconsideration. As a cultural engineer of sorts, Thomas aims to
illuminate both our differences and our often-overlooked shared humanity.
Together with Opie and Deborah Willis, he is committed to the notion of
universality as much as to the recognition of African Americans. These artists
aim to denounce injustice and reduce stigma as they reveal the many facets of
groups traditionally devalued in mainstream representations.
Throughout American history, and even today, the media often centered our
attention on the individual as hero (most often a white male), through classics
such as The Great Gatsby (1925), Citizen Kane (1941), and more recent
examples, such as American Psycho (2000), The Wolf of Wall Street (2013), and
Nomadland (2021). To counter these narrow norms, a plethora of
contemporary artists are producing counternarratives, hoping to shape a
different society in which our diversity is in full view. These artists value subjects
based on various dimensions of their identity, including their common
humanity, offering a counterpoint to neoliberal priorities, which isolate people,
and push them to pursue individual success.
When I talked with these artists about their work, they expressed in various
ways a goal of broadening our definitions of “who matters.” Ultimately, each of

them is working to make visible what brings us together as human beings,
despite our outward differences. These creators are what I call “change agents,”
or cultural entrepreneurs who intentionally aim to transform how we perceive
differences in others. Artists can act as important mediators to help us overcome
those divisions. Think, for example, of James Baldwin, the Black writer and
activist who helped Americans understand racism through books such as The
Fire Next Time (1963), or the author Ta-Nehisi Coates, whose 2015 bestseller
Between the World and Me was a kind of response to Baldwin. Such books are
crucial entry points for understanding racism for Blacks and non-Blacks alike.
Change agents are not only preoccupied with recognition. They are also
concerned with stigmatization, the mirror opposite of recognition, which,
instead of calling attention to the value of differences, casts them as a mark of
inferiority. Ultimately, stigmatization serves as a justification for discrimination,
which is to say, denying people resources like education or housing based on
their identity or characteristics. But recognition is so effective in challenging
stigmatization because it works by reframing those very same differences as
positive contributions.
Recognition is conferred in different ways. At the broadest level, it is a matter
of which groups are granted political rights by societal consensus—the right to
vote, to representation, to access public resources (like public education or
medical care), to economic autonomy, and more. It is also a matter of which
groups are granted cultural membership. As society becomes more inclusive and
egalitarian, there will be a growing number of people who are considered worthy
members of the community.
But recognition happens on another, less formal level, as well. And this form
of recognition must take place before recognition becomes a matter of political
rights. The Italian-Scottish political scientist Lorenza Fontana showed as much
in her recent study of Indigenous people in Latin America organizing to gain
access to land and various cultural rights, such as the protection of their
language. As marginalized groups are mobilizing and loudly denouncing the
exploitation, mistreatment, and discrimination they experience, their demands
gain visibility and, in many cases, traction. These contribute to recognition and
form a virtual cycle in which groups can achieve more recognition and rights.
But in so many cases, before any of this can happen, change agents have already
been at work, creating new representations of these groups, of their history, their
experiences, and their collective identity. Because this is such a critical part of the

p
y
p
path we must walk to reach a more just and equitable world, it is worth dwelling
a bit on the process by which ordinary people, participants in social movements,
knowledge workers, and change agents come together to reframe how groups are
perceived.
Today’s cries for recognition are not new. In fact, there is a long history of this
important step on the path toward social equality. This was, in a way, what the
renowned sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois was writing about in an 1897 article for
The Atlantic on what he called “double-consciousness.” In it, he reflected on the
experience of Black Americans who were compelled to assess their own worth
through the dominant matrix of a profoundly racist society.
In this canonical text, Du Bois described the strange “sense of always looking
at one’s self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by the tape of a
world that looks on in amused contempt and pity. One feels his two-ness—an
American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two
warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from
being torn asunder.”
Here, Du Bois acknowledges that while “I know my own worth, I also have
to contend with how others see me, even if the two perspectives are at odds with
one another.” Together, these two aspects define a person’s social identity. When
Du Bois speaks of double-consciousness, he speaks of this gap, and more
specifically, the gap between the humanity a Black person knows she has and the
low status that white people routinely cast upon her. If we are to create a just
society, this gap needs to be closed: white people need to recognize the equal
humanity of Black people. Men need to acknowledge the full humanity of
women and their right to self-determination. Zionist Israelis need to recognize
the plight of Palestinians. This is what recognition is about, and what is captured
so powerfully and simply in the phrase “Black Lives Matter.”
The tension around recognition became especially clear to me in 2008, as
some colleagues and I were starting to listen to over four hundred people of color
about their experiences with racism for what was to become our 2016 book,
Getting Respect. What was most striking to me was that the kinds of experiences
they spoke about most frequently were experiences of being overlooked,
underestimated, ignored, or insulted—rather than experiences of systemic

discrimination in areas like housing or employment. We categorized these
experiences collectively as “assaults on their worth,” in contrast to more
stereotypical kinds of discrimination in access to resources. Many researchers
have understandably focused on the ways that people of color are deprived of
resources, but for the people we interviewed, who lived in different countries
around the world, the most salient experiences of racism were those that came
not only in the form of discrimination and blatant racism or microaggression,
but also in being underestimated, ignored, or “unseen.”
The way we can prevent these experiences is by changing the dominant
narratives about marginal groups. But one thing we need to acknowledge as we
set about this is that different stigmatized groups deal with harmful narratives
differently. For instance, while working on Getting Respect, my colleagues and I
learned about the experiences of Oriental Jews in Israel, called Mizrahim, who
have lower status in the labor market than Jews of European descent. But the
Mizrahim (who originate from North Africa or the Middle East) frequently
downplay experiences of discrimination, even as they struggle to be seen as full
members of Israeli society. This contrasts with the African Americans we
interviewed, who tended to feel that confronting racists is essential, even if it
comes at a personal cost. For their part, some Black Brazilians we talked to were
hesitant to “name racism,” given the prevalence of a state ideology that presents
their society as a heterogenous and tolerant “racial democracy.”
One can’t ignore recognition given how salient it has become in today’s social
mobilizations. Prior social movements, like the fight for women’s suffrage or the
Civil Rights Movement, sought recognition through winning voting rights and
other legal changes. Today’s social movements, however, are more focused on
fighting for recognition itself, rejecting the impulse to assimilate, and pushing
not for tolerance, but to be present and participate with “one’s full self,”
demanding autonomy in self-definition and inclusion. Activists today are still
seeking legal rights and protections (take the continued struggles over abortion
access, for example) and pushing for policy solutions to redress systemic
injustices, but many movements are combining these efforts with a mission of
asserting the basic dignity of marginalized groups, as in the Movement for Black

Lives, the MeToo phenomenon, and transnational mobilizations for women’s
and LGBTQ+ rights.
This is true of social and political movements across the ideological spectrum,
and throughout the world. Antiabortion activists, for instance, argue that they
are fighting for the basic dignity of fetuses, which they understand as unborn
people. And in all manner of social movements—from low-caste farmers in
India, to girls seeking educational access in Afghanistan, Iran, and Iraq, to Jews
and queer people seeking protection from persecution in Hungary—people are
also fighting for basic recognition of their whole selves.
Social movement scholar Erica Chenoweth argued in 2020 that the previous
year had seen the “largest wave of mass, nonviolent antigovernment movements
in recorded history.” To back up this assertion, she examined movements from
1900 to 2019, including those in democratic countries like Brazil, Poland, and
the US, as well as those in authoritarian states like Hong Kong, Iran, Bolivia,
Lebanon, Egypt, and Turkey. Toward the end of this period, between 2010 and
2019, she noticed a dramatic rise in the number of social movements, with a
particularly notable spike in the aftermath of the Women’s March in 2017. In
the United States, not only were the demonstrations larger than ever, but they
were mobilizing a wider range of participants, with white people and people of
color walking together in solidarity.
Many words have been used to describe different facets of the general trend
toward increasing recognition. The term social justice, of course, has long been
used but has seen a notable uptick in usage in recent years. The New York Times
mentioned it on average roughly a hundred times a year from 1980 to 2000, but
in 2020 it used the term more than seven hundred times. Another term that has
become much more common in recent years is woke, which is used to describe
someone who is attentive to subtle forms of discrimination and injustice.
Although African American communities were likely using the term much
earlier, one of its first popular appearances was in the R&B singer Erykah Badu’s
2008 song “Master Teacher,” which included the refrain “I stay woke.” As Badu
explained to NPR, the term referred to “being in touch with the struggle that
[Black] people have gone through… and understanding we’ve been fighting since
the very day we touched down here.” The term first became a subject of
widespread attention from the media in 2014, as the Black Lives Matter
movement began using it more frequently in protests and messaging following
the murder of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri. Although it originally wasfi

g
g
g
y
used to mean keeping one’s eyes open, specifically to racial injustices, the term is
now used more broadly to include awareness of injustices faced by other
marginalized groups, as well—but this is largely because it has, at the same time,
been mockingly appropriated by conservatives who were unaware of or
insensitive to its original meaning, eager to lump together what they felt were
exaggerated claims of discrimination from many different groups.
Across the political spectrum, some moderates have turned against the term,
including those who stand in opposition to its cultural goals. Dubbed “cancel
culture” by conservatives, wokeness also came to be massively criticized by
Republicans for its alleged intolerance and elitism, and for threatening free
speech rights within the First Amendment. In 2021, 80 percent of Republicans
saw “cancel culture” as a “threat to freedom.” In spring 2021, news outlets such
as the Financial Times, the Washington Post, the New York Times, and the New
Yorker reported a large number of highly politicized attacks on woke culture and
defenses of freedom of speech. Thus, gradually, the term became almost
completely unmoored from its original meaning and has been used (both
derisively and not) to mean support for everything from defunding the police to
gender affirmation surgeries.
But despite the push and pull over its exact meaning, “woke culture” has
become a tool for dealing with the harms caused by our dominant culture, by
affirming the distinctiveness of marginalized groups. Many groups are asserting
their right to be recognized—to live authentically, instead of aiming to assimilate
and camouflage who they are. In popular culture, the singer Lizzo used her cover
art and music videos to affirm her pride in her curvy body, in defiance of
dominant beauty standards insisting that women should be thin. In sports,
football player Colin Kaepernick protested police brutality against Black people
by taking a knee during the national anthem, against the official prohibition of
the National Football League.
Finally, the term identity politics has also been used to talk about growing
efforts to extend recognition and dignity to marginalized groups. This, too, has
come to mean many things to many people, but in a most basic sense it refers to
political action of different identity groups, which is to say, groups that are
defined by characteristics like race, ethnicity, or sexual orientation, rather than
by class. In the past, and still today, thinkers across the political spectrum have
dismissed identity politics as irrelevant and a distraction from the other more
serious issues pertaining to class. But class has both a cultural dimension (e.g.,

p
g
g
identity, status, and tastes and the meaning attached to consumption goods) as
well as an economic dimension (e.g., how much people make, their position in
the labor market). Racial groups, too, have both a cultural and an economic
dimension.
Identity and material resources are both important factors, therefore, and
both are needed to properly understand inequality. For one thing, economic
inequality is often deeply rooted in identity-based discrimination and injustice.
A major reason that Black people in the United States have accumulated less
wealth than their white peers, for example, is that they were systemically
excluded from homeownership through redlining, discrimination on the part of
banks, and other explicitly racist practices. But these hurtful actions were always
motivated by cultural beliefs about this group; identity is and has always been a
basis for hateful attacks. If we hope to change people’s minds and reduce stigma,
we need to think deeply about the role that identity plays. The wind is changing,
and many now acknowledge that dignity and respect should not be considered
secondary or a luxury. And no amount of backlash, fatigue, or scolding from
various quarters will change that fact.
Understanding the quest for dignity is essential for making sense of discontent
on both sides of the ideological aisle. In her influential 2016 book Strangers in
Their Own Land, the sociologist Arlie Hochschild argued that the increasing
turn toward populism on the American right was motivated in part by a loss of
dignity. In a separate study, my collaborators and I found that Donald Trump’s
speeches during the 2016 presidential campaign appealed directly to “America’s
forgotten workers” by recognizing their plight and by blaming globalization and
immigration for it. He also gave words to their anger, tied to their feelings of
emasculation, as the masculine role of the provider seemed ever more out of
reach. His supporters were attracted to his slogan “Make American Great
Again” as the proper response to this loss. In this context of economic decline,
many felt “left behind,” “overlooked,” and “underestimated” by coastal elites
and politicians such as Hillary Clinton, and were coaxed into action by a desire
to reclaim American pride.
Then and now, Trump’s supporters tend to see the world as a zero-sum game
and therefore worry a great deal about keeping their place in the traditional

pecking order. For them, extending recognition and dignity to another group
necessarily means losing some of their own. In many cases, they seek to reaffirm
the social dominance of the groups to which they predominantly belong:
straight, white, older, and often Christian men.
As the demographic composition of the United States continues to shift and
the share of the non-white population continues to grow, Trump supporters are
responding with increasing anxiety. This phenomenon has inspired a conspiracy
theory known as “the great replacement,” which holds that liberal politicians are
encouraging illicit immigration in order to “replace” groups that do not support
them. A 2022 poll conducted by the Southern Poverty Law Center revealed that
67 percent of Republicans believe this. A different survey conducted the
previous year found that fewer than half of Republicans believed the increasing
diversity of American society to be a strength. In any case, whether they are
ready for it or not, the change is already under way. In the coming decades,
although immigration has been declining, the United States will be a majority-
minority society, and many states and cities have already passed this benchmark.
One of our nation’s current challenges is to determine how to make white
constituencies understand and respect the views of people of color.
Whether we are talking about the non–college educated or the many different
marginalized groups held back by intolerance and discrimination, one lesson we
can draw is that being denied basic dignity can have a profound effect on
people’s lives. Health researchers have found that recognition, stigmatization,
and discrimination all affect our well-being. When people are devalued by the
larger society, this assault on worth can batter their health. One manifestation of
this trend, as we’ve already discussed, is the opioid epidemic, which has been
driven in part by the declining economic prospects of non–college-educated
white Americans, their perceived loss of social status, and the resulting sense of
despair that they experience. This stigmatization translates into “wear and tear”
on the body (called “allostatic load”), as well as an increase in depression and
other mental health problems. For groups that must contend with racism and
other forms of discrimination, these effects can be even more pernicious. For
some people of color, the experience of constant racism can have a “weathering”
effect, leading to higher overall levels of stress and ultimately, in many cases, to

severe chronic health problems (stress, high blood pressure). All this has led to a
large decline in life expectancy for different stigmatized groups. While the
general trend since 1990 was for life expectancy to increase across the board, for
all groups, since 2010, it has begun to decline for those without a bachelor’s
degree. And, as of 2019, Black and American Indian or Alaska Native (AIAN)
groups experience the lowest life expectancy of all racial-ethnic groups, at
seventy-one and seventy-three years, respectively, in comparison to their white
counterparts at seventy-nine years. Notably, over the past two decades, the
AIAN group has not experienced an increase in life expectancy. Growing
inequality and the bifurcation in outcomes between college educated and the
non–college educated feed into this perfect storm.
There are other reasons why stigmatization matters for our well-being: Many
factors that drive stigmatization and rob different groups of their dignity are not
about material resources—or rather, they shape how material resources are
distributed, not the other way around. For instance, homophobia has led to
precarious outcomes for many queer youth, as many are rejected by their families
at an early age. In this case, stigmatization leads to homelessness. Also, while low-
income people often feel isolated and depressed, their plight is not only due to
poverty, but also to the feeling of worthlessness that comes with stigmatization.
This may lead to the “why try” syndrome, as individuals lose faith in their ability
to change their lives. If stigmatization creates inequality and affects us negatively,
these are more reasons to closely understand it, and work to reduce it.
Having demonstrated the centrality of recognition to well-being, we can turn
to the various pathways through which recognition diffuses.

CHAPTER 5
CHANGING HEARTS AND MINDS
HOW RECOGNITION CHAINS AMPLIFY THE
CULTURAL AGENDA
The video “Quest Bridge,” by photographer Hank Willis Thomas, whom we
met in the previous chapter, features 150 Black men from across the US who all
answer a seemingly simple question: “What does it mean to you to be a Black
man?” The piece cut through stereotypes about Black male identity by showing
the incredible diversity of responses—by showing, in Thomas’s words, “[our]
different shapes, colors, strengths, and weaknesses—our shared tragedy as fallible
human beings.” Recognizing the power of Thomas’s work, a number of
different organizations paid to help distribute “Quest Bridge” throughout the
US. The Campaign for Black Male Achievement (CBMA) screened the video in
museums and high schools across the country, in thirty-five different states, and
distributed teaching materials to facilitate conversations about the complexity
and multiplicity of Black masculinity.
One of the video’s most important accomplishments, of course, was to
extend recognition and dignity to Black men everywhere. CBMA’s efforts
amplified and extended the effects of that accomplishment many times, thanks
in large part to its vast network that brings together 4,800 community leaders
and 3,000 other organizations nationwide. CBMA supports many other
programs, as well, including My Brother’s Keeper Alliance, a widely publicized
initiative of the Obama Foundation launched “to address persistent opportunity
gaps faced by boys and young men of color and ensure that all young people can
reach their full potential.”

In the spring of 2020, I met with CBMA’s president, a serious, middle-aged
African American man named Shawn Dove. When I asked him why his
organization supported Thomas’s work, Dove said, “There’s no cavalry coming
to save the day in our communities as Black folks. We are the iconic leaders that
we have been waiting for and the curators of the change we are seeking to see.”
Hope, he said, is fundamental to that work, adding that after four hundred years
of racial oppression, “My challenge as a leader is managing the paradox of
promise and peril [we] see every day. Focusing on the peril will drain your hope
that change is possible.”
CBMA’s work is largely behind the scenes, yet it makes an enormous
difference in terms of building and expanding new narratives. Dove said he is
seeking “to provide a platform for leaders to tell the stories of their work, and the
stories of the young men that they are engaging with.” He also fosters strategic
partnerships between the private sector, government, philanthropy, the
academic community, and “most of the folks that are at the front lines.” But the
overall goal is to “create a framework of respect—not identifying people first by
their problems and what is wrong with them, with Black people being the face
of poverty and the face of crime.” Concretely, this means that Dove often finds
himself encouraging other nonprofits to see their mission not in terms of a
problem that needs to be addressed, but rather as a matter of seeking out
opportunities to make a difference. CBMA’s work may happen in the
background, but over time it slowly adds up and amplifies the new cultural
agenda.
CBMA is part of what I call a “recognition chain,” which is to say, a network
of change agents and organizations that scales up and disseminates messages of
recognition. In these chains, change agents join forces with foundations and
other organizations to benefit from their infrastructure, and ultimately to see
their recognition work reverberate far beyond their own individual or
institutional reach.
Other kinds of change agents participate in these networks, too, including art
critics, like my Harvard colleague Sarah Lewis, who has written about the power
of art to expand who matters to fully include African Americans. In 2016, she
edited a special issue of the leading photography journal Aperture, whose theme
was “Vision and Justice.” In this celebrated issue, she showed how “The century-
long efforts to craft an image to pay honor to the full humanity of Black life is a
corrective task for which photography and cinema have been central, even

p
g p y
indispensable.” Scholars like her play an important role in bringing attention to
the work of Black photographers, and in making clear how that work is situated
within a deeper tradition of aesthetics, politics, and recognition.
Another important group that takes part in recognition chains is middle- and
upper-middle-class consumers of art. To better understand their motivations
and the contributions they make in expanding recognition, Holyoke College
professor Patricia Banks interviewed upper-middle-class Black people, asking
them about how they decide what art to buy and/or put on their walls. Many
said they felt it was important to see visual representations of people who look
like them. Some remarked on the ways they were affected by the absence of such
representations when they were growing up. Years later, for a different project,
Banks interviewed some of the people and organizations who fund museums
specifically intended to showcase African American art, asking about their
rationale for doing so. Time and again, they emphasized the importance for
African Americans of “being seen” and represented in their full humanity—of
bridging the recognition gap they experience.
Art galleries also play an important part in recognition chains. The Jack
Shainman Gallery in New York City, which represents Hank Willis Thomas and
many other artists of color, is one prominent example. The space has been
“celebrated for its multicultural roster of emerging and established artists and
estates who engage in the social and cultural issues of their time.”
But galleries are just one part of the equation. On a larger scale, recognition
chains function like networks, connecting creators from marginalized
communities to all sorts of helpful parties: the funders whose resources allow
their narratives to flourish at a larger scale; the galleries, museums, and other
institutions that publicize their works; and the audiences or “participants” who
buy, consume, or appreciate them. Together, all these groups help disseminate
new narratives about inclusion and gradually narrow recognition gaps,
ultimately transforming how we understand the world. These chains or
networks became especially important in the aftermath of the 2020 Black Lives
Matter protests, as many institutions began investing more deliberately in works
and artists focused on social justice and social change. While they operate in
mainstream media, they often operate in their own circuits of circulation and
diffusion, oriented specifically toward spreading recognition.

What Shawn Dove described above is a relatively recent and daring reorientation
of how the nonprofit sector approaches its work. Take, for example, the Ford
Foundation, which, with a $16 billion endowment as of 2022, is one of the
world’s largest private philanthropies. Under the leadership of Darren Walker,
the foundation’s president, who is Black and gay, the organization has focused
on fighting inequality by changing narratives, or, by “changing hearts and
minds.” In 2013, when Walker first took the reins, this was a pathbreaking move,
given that many other philanthropies were prioritizing only material needs and
overlooking the place of culture in addressing inequality. Today, other
foundations are following in Ford’s footsteps, focusing on narrative change,
building alliances, and contributing to recognition chains. This has been a sea
change in the field of philanthropy, which was previously more focused on
economic concerns.
Here is an example of how these organizations shape narratives. In
collaboration with the National Domestic Workers Alliance, Ford’s program
Just Films assisted in the production of Alfonso Cuarón’s 2018 film Roma,
which tells the story of two domestic workers employed by an upper-middle-
class family in Mexico City. In popular culture, domestic workers are invisible,
often playing background roles. Their needs are typically subordinated to those
of their employers. Roma helped reframe this group by showing them struggling
with universal moral dilemmas (e.g., whether to get an abortion) and by
bringing their intimate lives to the center of a film. As such, it also enables a
closer identification between the audience and the characters. With the help of
the Ford Foundation, the film reached audiences all over the world and won
three Academy Awards.
Another important way that foundations, philanthropies, and cultural
organizations narrow recognition gaps is by changing their leadership to become
more reflective of the communities they serve. For instance, after the Black Lives
Matter movement of summer 2020, many organizations put people of color in
leadership roles. These included organizations in cultural sectors ranging from
publishing to art museums and art leaders, higher education, and beyond. In
June 2020, the Poetry Foundation, which with its $300 million endowment is
the leading philanthropic organization for poetry, dismissed its former leader
Henry Bienen (a past president of Northwestern University, a white man with
strong Ivy League ties) and replaced him with Michelle T. Boone, a former
commissioner of cultural affairs in the City of Chicago, a grassroots activist, and

y
g
g
a woman of color. This leadership change came in response to a letter signed by
1,800 poets arguing that the foundation’s leadership had been elitist, racist, and
disconnected from the community.
Even if not broadly publicized and still in the process of consolidating, this
new cohort of leaders is having a significant impact at the national level, bringing
their experience and networks to bear on their organizations’ important work of
recognition building. At the same time, other leading foundations have recently
decided to (or been pressured to) take the even more drastic step of significantly
redirecting their funding strategies by supporting more projects that speak to
racial and social justice. These include the Mellon, Luce, Spencer, and
MacArthur foundations. The Gates Foundation has aimed to “change the
conversation” on social mobility by moving the narrative focus from the
individual to the structural factors that contribute to poverty. At the same time,
progressive foundations such as the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation and
the Omidyar Network also have committed themselves to fighting inequality.
Moreover, the booming sector of “social justice philanthropy” provides flexible
funding to a plethora of progressive social movements. To learn more about this,
I spoke to Leah Hunt-Hendrix, an heir to her Texas family’s oil fortune, who has
cofounded three successful social justice organizations, bringing together a
network of mostly millennial progressive donors. The success of movements
such as Black Lives Matter is significantly magnified by the support of
organizations like these, which play a central role in amplifying recognition.
As the philanthropic sector grows, its critics are multiplying. Some have
argued that philanthropic organizations do more harm than good by improving
conditions just enough to undermine calls for radical, systemic change, but not
enough to make a lasting, meaningful difference in people’s lives. For some of
these critics, philanthropic organizations ultimately exist to discipline, control,
and limit the impact of social movements and progressive advocacy—and they
do so by insisting on quantitative evidence of their impact. Others view leading
philanthropists as self-serving elitists who exercise disproportionate influence
due to their social position, education, or social networks. For instance, the
Chan-Zuckerberg Foundation and the Gates Foundation have been accused of
attempting to conceal the misdeeds of their funders through philanthropy, just
as did the Mellons, Carnegies, Rockefellers, and Fords of yesteryear. While these
critiques may have some merit, and it is certainly not true that all philanthropies
and nonprofits are guided by pure intentions, their work is nevertheless havingfffi

pfi
g
y p
g
an important effect: the narrative turn is happening in this organizational field,
complementing in much-needed ways the traditional policy work done by
economists.
Still, it remains to be seen whether these changes will result in a lasting
transformation in funding priorities and agenda setting. For this to happen,
significant changes in board and staff composition will be needed, together with
a fundamental transformation in the relations of power between foundations
and the recipients of their largesse.
Another crucial sector in which recognition chains operate is that of digital
technology platforms. Take, for instance, Jack Conte, one of the founders of the
highly successful digital platform Patreon, which connects content creators like
podcasters, musicians, and stand-up comics to paying audiences. Patreon is one
of the platforms that revolutionized the media industry over the last decade by
making available new and different voices to highly differentiated publics. In our
interview, Conte described at length the cultural impact of Patreon, which
unleashed a flood of bottled-up creative energies across a range of cultural
domains. Its mere existence fosters numerous taste communities independent
from the control of traditional tastemakers who acted as gatekeepers in leading
record companies or movie studios. This represents a significant shift in how
creative work is supported and sustained, and has helped create the conditions
for a more pluralistic cultural ecosystem. Like YouTube, Patreon has helped
many creators of color, queer creators, and others from a variety of different
marginalized groups to find and build their audience even when traditional
media were unreceptive to their work. This includes celebrities such as Issa Rae,
Lilly Singh, Awkwafina, Lil Nas X, and many more.
Another technology platform that has played an even more crucial and more
visible prominent role in this field supporting recognition chains has been
Netflix. To better understand its strategies and motivations, I talked with
Channing Dungey, who at the time was the platform’s executive vice president
for international programming. Together with Selma director Ava DuVernay,
these African American Hollywood powerhouse women are responsible for
producing a massive amount of diverse content for the global market.

Dungey explained to me that the company directly aims to promote
representation and recognition by producing diverse content and supporting
creators of color. For example, Netflix produced Ava DuVernay’s acclaimed 2016
documentary The 13th, which describes contemporary mass incarceration as an
extension of slavery and a direct outcome of the Thirteenth Amendment
adopted in 1865, which allowed involuntary servitude to continue as a
punishment for a crime.
The platform also developed a multi-project deal to pull Shonda Rhimes
away from ABC, where she had been in charge of numerous groundbreaking
shows that did extraordinary work to expand representation, including Grey’s
Anatomy, Scandal, and How to Get Away with Murder. Since joining Netflix,
Rhimes has produced one of the streaming company’s biggest hits, Bridgerton, a
period drama based on a series of books by Julia Quinn. Rhimes cast the show
without regard to race, tapping Black and brown actors to play eighteenth-
century English nobility. This celebrated show promotes recognition by making
race incidental and challenging the association of whiteness with upper
classness. Yet the show has also been criticized for ignoring power imbalances in
interracial romantic relationships and overlooking crucial aspects of women’s
domination.
Women such as Rhimes and DuVernay, and many other power brokers at
Netflix and elsewhere, deserve great credit for expanding the number and type of
roles available to actors of color—and for, in doing so, contributing to the work
of expanding recognition.
Now that we have explored the role that the nonprofit sector and technology
platforms play in recognition chains, we must consider another important, yet
largely invisible player: the so-called narrative industry. This sector consists of
social change organizations such as Purpose, Swayable, and More in Common,
which operate mostly in the fields of strategic communication, binding politics,
social movements, and advocacy to produce social change, including by scaling
up messages of recognition. Drawing on fields such as psychology, marketing,
and brain science, and on experiments, surveys, social media analysis, and AI,
these organizations work to fine-tune messages from groups advocating change
to specific audiences and make them more resonant. This work can have anff

enormous effect, because without resonance, narratives never have the
opportunity to take off in the public sphere and close recognition gaps.
To get a deeper sense of how the narrative industry works, I met with leaders
of some of these narrative industry organizations. One of them, Nick Allardice,
is a top executive at Change.org, an organization that promotes the use of
community petitions worldwide as a tool for social change. Nick describes his
work as “empowering people everywhere” to help create a world where “no one
is powerless.” He aims to provide “a technology solution: free, easy-to-use tools
that allow people to collectively organize.” As of 2019, the organization had 171
staff members, about 329 million users globally, and approximately 41,000 new
campaigns each week.
Allardice is a believer in the power of personal narratives to reframe issues and
motivate action. One of his favorite examples is medical marijuana, which was
legalized in Australia thanks to the efforts of a former nurse named Lucy Haslam
and her husband. As Allardice explained, “Her son had terminal cancer and
cannabis oil happened to be one of the few things that alleviated his symptoms.”
His dad, a former cop, “basically became [a] drug dealer” to help his son. Their
petition campaign on Change.org generated attention for their personal story as
it attracted supporters and eventually went viral. Ultimately, their story helped
shift people’s perspectives and make legalization a reality.
Today, when a petition is launched on the platform, staff automatically run
experiments to determine which message would be the most convincing—what
is “the unique set of variables that are right for it.” In addition to serving as a
platform for petitions, Change.org also allows users to make monetary
contributions toward causes that are important to them, and in turn, to ask
others for contributions. By and large, users tend to give small amounts—the
average contribution is only $10—but collectively, these donations can make a
big difference, and Allardice hopes in the future to direct even more funds into
social impact initiatives. People might use the platform, for example, to lobby
the local government for more green space, to raise funds for installing solar
panels on the roof of a school, or to change an unsafe intersection. One of the
first crowdfunding platforms, it is used for causes that range from the hyperlocal
to the national or international, and anyone can launch a petition.
Allardice’s previous work to destigmatize poverty has played a large part in
shaping his vision for Change.org. He started in Australia, where, as a student,
he volunteered to live on two Australian dollars a day in order to raise funds tofi

y
fight poverty. While collecting pledges, he aimed to raise awareness about the
daily realities of living in poverty. This commitment, as well as a concern with
climate change, was shared by a group of millennial men who were involved in
the Australian student movements with Allardice. Now jokingly calling
themselves the “Australian Mafia,” they were among the first in their country to
engage in digital campaigning and organizing, and are now living in the US,
where they have massively contributed to expanding this field. This and similar
networks that work toward recognition of marginalized groups draw on skills
that differ from those found in traditional cultural fields.
Another member of this Australian mafia is Jeremy Heimans, the cofounder
and CEO of Purpose, a for-profit public-benefit corporation that leverages social
media to support social movements. With the slogan “Purpose Moves People to
Remake the World,” this organization collaborates with all kinds of progressive
organizations, helping them tailor their messaging for targeted audiences,
including those concerned with shifting identities, racial justice, and LGBTQ+
rights. For instance, with their research, the team was able to determine that
campaigns for “quality of air” were more effective in India than messaging about
“climate change.”
But Purpose is just one player in a much larger field of similar organizations
building momentum for progressive causes. While algorithm-assisted research
can leave some with an impression of manipulation and propaganda, these
organizations are quite effective at setting the cultural agenda and slowly
reframing how groups are perceived, one problem at the time, using technology
to disseminate new narratives of recognition. They are creating an underground
revolution by expanding the role that narratives play through the systematic and
technologically assisted production of social change.
Recognition chains work through the media, which shapes how certain
narratives gain traction and influence our views. There are a variety of
approaches to studying and understanding the media. Some focus on the
content that passes through the media—for instance, whether messages about a
group present them as likable or undeserving. Others focus on how messages are
received, such as, for instance, the way that audiences decide which televisionfiff

characters they find most relatable. Yet others focus on the effect of the media on
behavior.
In all cases, networks serve an important function, shaping how people
represent themselves and exchange ideas. In his classic study Imagined
Communities, the historian Benedict Anderson described how representations
of different groups (whether religious, regional, occupational, or otherwise) in
books and periodicals helped give shape to national collective identities in
Europe. In Anderson’s account, literacy was essential to the distribution of
shared identities, since it was mostly through print media that shared group
identities were able to coalesce. Sociologist Heather Haveman also wrote about
the importance of magazines and newspapers in bringing nineteenth-century
Americans together around their specific leisure activities, occupations, ethnic
groups, religious affiliations, or geographic locations.
The same logic applies to many other types of identities. For group identities
to spread and social movements to be popularized, resources are needed. This
has been true across history, from the Protestant Reformation to the
Enlightenment to the spread of socialism.
But while the media have exercised enormous influence over group dynamics
and recognition, new digital media are coming to play perhaps an even bigger
role, as newspapers and other print publications face increasingly dire economic
challenges and new distribution platforms such as Netflix and Patreon expand.
Understanding these structural changes and their impact on how ideas travel
and are adopted is essential to making sense of recognition chains.
Whereas in the past, traditionally dominant groups exercised enormous
influence over the media, today’s new media are more inclusive. This is
happening at the same time that traditional gatekeepers in cultural industries
such as film, music, and radio have lost their monopoly on decision-making and
are now serving more differentiated publics. As such, the growth and
diversification of the media are helping strengthen recognition chains, as we have
seen with Ava DuVernay and Shonda Rhimes. The online space in particular is
democratized to such an extent that it stands to overwhelm us with its noisy and
chaotic swirl of views, a space for broadening horizons but also for echo
chambers and filter bubbles.
But as new digital platforms gain power and popularity, ordinary people are
increasingly turning to these new sources of information, and particularly to
social media and podcasts, which play an important role in recognition chains.

p
p y
p
g
Thus far, however, the most active users of these platforms remain concentrated
among a relatively small group. In 2018, for instance, 22 percent of the
American population used Twitter, which seems significant, but in fact, 80
percent of all US activity on the platform was attributable to a narrow subset,
the most active 10 percent of users. And of course, as many different
commentators and analysts have noted, where people get their information
varies considerably across age groups and level of education. Younger generations
get more of their information on social media; 48 percent of Americans under
thirty consume their political news primarily through social media, and an
additional 21 percent consume their news through other forms of online media,
such as online publications (like Politico or Slate). The more highly educated are
13 percentage points more likely to use social media in general than those who
did not pursue postsecondary education. They are especially attracted to
platforms that facilitate discussion like Twitter and Reddit, as well as
professional platforms like LinkedIn.
Thus it is not surprising that at least for now, television remains the primary
medium for the vast majority in the US. According to The Atlantic, Americans
in 2018 were still watching nearly eight hours of television per household per
day. Nightly local TV news remains an important source of information for the
bulk of the population.
At the same time, other forms of media are in trouble. Print journalism, for
instance, has been in an accelerating crisis for several decades, and its downfall
has dramatically affected our ability to understand and learn more about the
world around us. Of course, many newspapers have shut down in the internet
era as advertising revenue collapsed, but even the strongest of those that have
survived lack anything close to the power and reach of the new online media
platforms. The New York Times, for example, one of the most powerful
remaining print outlets, had 7.6 million subscribers globally at the end of 2021
(including both print and online), with revenue of more than $2 billion for the
full year of 2021. Compare that to Facebook’s annual revenue of $39.3 billion
and its 2.9 billion monthly active users globally; and to Twitter’s $5.07 billion
and 217 million monthly active users. All this means that newspapers are less
able to do their important work of relaying information about current events. In
2020, only 3 percent of Americans cited print newspapers as their favorite source
of information, and only 10 percent of those surveyed said that they access print
publications online often. In February 2022, only 11 percent of American

p
y
y
p
millennials said that newspapers are their most frequent news source, while 44
percent reported that daily news consumption came through social media. As
revenues and readership have fallen, newspapers have had to make painful cuts,
sacrificing costly investigative reporting and other important projects. The crisis
has reached the point that nonprofits like ProPublica and the Center for
Investigative Reporting have had to step in to fill the gap. The crisis is even more
acute in local newspaper coverage—the medium that is the closest to
representing local communities and their interests. Coverage of state legislatures
has declined by 35 percent since 2003.
To appeal to more people, there has been a rush toward Fox News–style
“infotainment,” which harkens back to the yellow journalism of Hearst,
Pulitzer, and others in the late nineteenth century. This has had enormous
consequences for how people experience political life and has helped drive
intolerance and ideological polarization. While opinions about the specific
policies that distinguish Democrats from Republicans have changed little,
members of both parties are more and more inclined to say that they strongly
dislike the other group. Consequently, politics has increasingly become an arena
dominated by identities and emotions, in which reasoned differences of opinion
about policies matter less and less.
Beyond the media, other institutions help shape public life and our views of the
world around us, many of which have seen their influence decline in recent years.
Unions and the labor movement, for example, once played an important part in
cultivating solidarity among workers, but over the last half-century their power
has greatly diminished. As we discussed in an earlier chapter, the United States
has seen its share of unionized workers decline from a high of nearly 35 percent
in the mid-1950s to less than 12 percent today. But labor has recently been
reenergized by the “Fight for $15” movement, unionization drives at major
companies like Starbucks and Amazon, and a massive mobilization around the
working conditions for domestic and restaurant workers during the pandemic.
When I talked with leaders of these two movements, Ai-jen Poo of the National
Domestic Workers Alliance and Saru Jayaraman of the One Fair Wage
Campaign for restaurant workers, they emphasized the potential of this renewal.
Steven Greenhouse, who covered labor for the New York Times for thirty years,

also remarked on this revitalization of the labor movement in our interview. All
three noted that messages about the importance of solidarity and workers’ rights
had gained resonance within the broader culture, at the same time that the ideal
of the American dream had become less influential than ever. Jayaraman in
particular attributed the popularity of the campaign to increase the minimum
wage for restaurant workers to the fact that “not just a sliver but the majority of
people [are] unable to buy a house or pay their college loan… are unable to take
care of themselves, still living at home with their parents.” In her view, “among
millennials, I don’t think anybody even uses this American dream anymore. It’s
so clichéd and has so little resonance.”
Religion is another institution that has been losing steam in recent years, with
the number of Americans who consider religion to be central in their lives
rapidly declining. But there is a notable difference in the sharpness of decline
between political parties. The Public Religion Research Institute found that the
share of religiously affiliated Democrats declined by more than 20 percent
between 2016 and 2006, from 96 percent to 73 percent. The decline was much
less significant among Republicans, dropping from 96 percent to 88 percent
over the same period.
Despite these changes, religious institutions continue to shape narratives
about recognition, dignity, and how we determine worth as a society. To learn
more about this, my research team talked with Reverend Alvin Herring, the
executive director of Faith in Action, an international network that aims to
create “a society free of economic oppression, racism, and discrimination, in
which every person lives in a safe and healthy environment.” His religious
leadership is focused on addressing inequality and reducing the stigmas that
deprive people of the care and safety they deserve. Religious leaders from other
faith traditions share this sense of altruism and concern for universal dignity,
such as Imam Omar Suleiman of Faith Forward Dallas at Thanks-Giving
Square. He explained that the more deeply he becomes committed to his faith as
an Orthodox Muslim, the more committed he becomes to humanity. For him,
lifting up our shared humanity is essential to reducing stigmatization.
Education is another public institution that has increasingly come to shape
our perceptions about society. Curricula in K–12 schools in the US, for
example, have become a major political battleground, particularly when it comes
to the subject of history, which is often pitted against creationism or nationalist
narratives about our past (as we saw with the 1619 Project); many conservative

p
j
y
politicians (e.g., Florida governor Ron DeSantis) are passing legislation
prohibiting teachers from talking about the history of discrimination in
America, the object of critical race theory. But teaching this history is a vital task,
even if it clashes with some of the country’s most important ideals, such as the
myth of American exceptionalism or America’s Manifest Destiny.
For its part, higher education has also gained in cultural importance after
several decades of growing enrollment. Fifty percent of US eighteen-year-olds
today are heading to college, where they learn about the ideals of the
enlightenment, moral tolerance, and democratic inclusion. However, as of 2021,
24 percent of freshmen drop out of college. In general, 40 percent of
undergraduates drop out. At the same time, higher education is making valuable
contributions to the fight against discrimination by bringing people of different
backgrounds together and exposing students to unfamiliar views.
Higher education also provides the space and freedom scholars needed to
write on important topics that contribute to closing recognition gaps. My
Harvard colleague Henry Louis Gates plays a leading role in redefining the
American cultural canon around race, as did English professor Catharine
Stimpson, who contributed to defining the canon of gender studies through her
editorship of the pioneer women studies journal Signs, and as an editor of a
widely used textbook that helped institutionalize the field. For her part,
Kimberlé Crenshaw, a Columbia University law professor who brought
intersectionality into contemporary thinking, equipped us to think about
gender and racial identity together (to become aware of the relative invisibility of
the murder of young Black women by the police, for instance).
Many other types of organizations and advocacy are central to the public
sphere, where our collective narratives take shape. We are in an era of heightened
activism, with many social movements concerned with climate change,
immigration, women’s rights, LGBTQ+ rights, feminism, and antiracism, to
mention only a few. For example, the organization Marshall Plan for Moms aims
to pay women for the care work they provide and proposed a plan for “the world
we want our children to inherit” (albeit with mitigated success). They
contribute to shifting the focus toward collective action, at a time when mothers
are facing significant challenges following the pandemic.

Change agents and recognition chains operate on the right as much as they do
on the left. Throughout history, some change agents have aligned themselves
with immoral causes. There is nothing inherently moral or progressive in their
role.
On the right and the far right, many promote recognition for a white
“manosphere” whose members often feel displaced by demographic and
economic changes. This includes Joe Rogan, an antivax comedian and Spotify
podcaster who criticizes cancel culture and defends gun rights. Internet
influencers such as far-right and white nationalist Nick Fuentes also have a
considerable impact (he hosts the show America First, which was suspended
from YouTube for violating its hate speech policy). Others, such as Tucker
Carlson (star anchor at Fox News), are less niche and have been able to build a
major following and play a central role in amplifying narratives from the right
and far right. These change agents magnify political backlash through their own
recognition chains. They use narratives for feeding different kinds of hope.
Progress is far from linear, and we see plenty of backlash amid competing
versions of what progress means. While I do not make these tensions visible,
conservative change agents also feed the public sphere with notions that slowly
but surely spread and change views.
Such leaders animate various alt-right organizations such as Young Americans
for Freedom, a conservative and libertarian youth organization active on
campuses; and the Groyper Movement, a splinter group from the America First
Political Action Conference, which assembles white nationalist and far-right
activists. These movements tend to promote nihilism and a lack of trust in
governments, and are associated with violence, mixed martial arts, and military
and gaming culture. These are beyond the scope of my study, even if some
supply recognition narratives to downwardly mobile working-class men and
others.
It is difficult to predict the fate of the different institutions that shape
recognition chains, and which of them will gain the most resonance. But as their
narratives multiply and reinforce one another, slowly but surely they will allow
people to imagine different realities for themselves and others. Indeed, such
chains connect producers of new narratives with philanthropists and
foundations, experts in strategic communication, new platforms, and other
cultural institutions to magnify their combined impact. As we will see, they also
involve a public or movement participants. Thus, recognition is far more than

p
p
p
g
the work of a self-serving progressive elite: it requires collaboration between
many people who work toward some form of social change. Together, they can
have real impact on how marginalized groups are perceived, and perceive
themselves, and open the way to new paths of action. To more fully understand
how this happens, we need to take an even closer look at the strategies change
agents say they mobilize for recognition work.

CHAPTER 6
STRATEGIES FOR TRANSFORMATION
THE WORK OF CHANGE AGENTS IN
HOLLYWOOD AND BEYOND
Native American poet Natalie Diaz won a Pulitzer Prize in 2021 for her
collection Postcolonial Love Poem, in which she wrote, “I am doing my best to
not become a museum / of myself. I am doing my best to breathe in and out. / I
am begging: Let me be lonely but not invisible.” When I met with Diaz to discuss
her work, she described the book as a “hymn against erasure.” Similarly but
differently, Desmond Meade, of the Florida Rights Restoration Coalition, ran a
campaign to allow convicted felons to win back their voting rights by amending
the state’s constitution. In his words, these former felons “ran their campaign on
love,” by mobilizing their family and friends to knock on doors and put rights
restoration on the ballot. For her part, Cristina Jiménez, who cofounded United
We Dream, the largest immigrant youth–led organization in the United States,
celebrates the role of narratives in humanizing undocumented immigrants—as
she said, “it is not about immigrants being criminals, but about families and
children, and family separation and detention.” In each of these cases, we can see
individuals waging a fight for recognition on behalf of the groups they are part
of—to be seen, heard, and valued—but we can also see that each has adopted
their own unique strategies for achieving that recognition.
As we continue our exploration of how we decide who matters, it is worth
reflecting on the remarkable diversity of different strategies for shifting the
narrative—and different kinds of change agents who are engaged in that work.
The change agents whom my research team and I spoke with come from all
walks of life and represent a vast number of different professions and skill sets.

Let’s start with comedians and creatives working in Hollywood, many of
whom use their characters, jokes, or narratives to challenge stereotypes about
stigmatized groups. To gain a broader understanding of what happens in this
field, my research team and I talked with seventy-five comedians and Hollywood
creatives whose work has achieved a certain level of prominence and cultural
significance—focusing specifically on those who have garnered awards or
demonstrated an unusual ability to reach younger generations. The Hollywood
creatives include actors, but we focused also on those who work behind the
scenes, including showrunners, producers, directors, and screenwriters—and in
fact most of them have worked in more than one of these roles over the course of
their careers. They include such prominent figures as Joe Robert Cole (Black
Panther), Lee Daniels (The Butler, Empire), Bill Hader (Barry), Dan Fogelman
(This Is Us), Julie Plec (The Vampire Diaries), Michelle and Robert King (The
Good Wife), Michael Schur (Parks and Recreation, The Good Place, The Office),
and John Wells (Shameless, The West Wing). We also spoke with major
comedians including Cristela Alonzo, Neal Brennan, Jim Norton, Iliza
Shlesinger, and Reggie Watts.
Take, for instance, W. Kamau Bell, a popular stand-up comic and host of
CNN’s The United Shades of America. When I spoke to him, Bell, a middle-aged
and middle-class Black father who is married to a white woman, told me that in
his work, he seeks to bridge racial divides by confronting social problems with
humor and honesty. One of his objectives, he said, is to help white viewers
reframe how they perceive African Americans. But this is just one part of the
task. “I believe my job is to talk about what’s going on in the world but use
comedy to help it go down a little bit better,” he explained. “I see myself as
someone who generally is a great connector of people… [who] helps sort of bring
about positive change on some level. [It] does not need to be big. It can be really
small.”
To this end, he plays up his identity as a middle-class family man as a way of
preemptively reassuring white audiences, who might otherwise make
assumptions about him based on his race. At the same time, he is not shy about
denouncing racism. In the first episode of his CNN show in 2016, he traveled to
the South, where he met with leaders of the KKK and got them to talk openly
about their white supremacist views. Several years earlier, in 2013, Bell had been
preparing for his late-night show, FX’s Totally Biased, when he heard the news
that the vigilante George Zimmerman had been acquitted of murder charges for

g
g
q
g
his slaying of seventeen-year-old Trayvon Martin the previous year. Bell then
worked the news into his show to voice his anger and pain at the decision. “I
knew I had to say something, and I didn’t have a joke about it,” he explained.
“But I knew, I was like, ‘If I don’t… I’m not the person I claim to be.’ ”
Bell’s work to address discrimination shares some important qualities with
that of Joey Soloway, the creator of the show Transparent. The show centers on
an older white transgender woman named Maura and her adult children who
are working through accepting her late-in-life transition. Soloway explained that
they created the show in part to address their own internalized shame about their
own gender nonconformity. Soloway was also committed to centering the lives
of the marginalized—it was particularly important to them, for instance, that
the show include a trans protagonist, rather than just a minor character. By
prominently representing this group, Soloway hopes to make clear to everyone,
especially cisgender audiences, that trans people are ordinary and relatable. “We
need to make a world where people focus on love for the other rather than
ridiculing the other,” they explained. “It [can be] done by creating TV shows.”
Compared to the narrow conception of normalcy that dominated American
TV shows as recently as a decade or two ago, recent shows such as Transparent
and Pose offer fuller, more nuanced depictions of the lived reality of LGBTQ+
people, making visible what was once unknown and out of sight for straight and
cis audiences. This is true of many other traditionally marginalized groups, as
well. In fact, TV depictions of these groups, and whether they are extended
recognition and dignity, are determined in part by creatives in the entertainment
industry. At their best, they actively challenge stereotypes by representing
members of these groups as the complex, multidimensional figures that all
humans are. Over time, these more nuanced depictions can gradually shift our
perceptions and destigmatize the traditionally stigmatized.
In our conversations with the many different comedians and Hollywood
creatives we interviewed, we gained valuable insight into the distinct strategies
they use for fighting stigmatization and extending recognition to all groups. One
of these is a strategy we call “reflecting reality,” which means, essentially, telling
stories that avoid reinforcing stereotypes and stay true to the realities of life for
nondominant groups. This is, for instance, what both W. Kamau Bell and Joey

Soloway described. The goal is to change society’s understanding of
marginalized groups by expanding ideas of who they are and what their lives
look like—by describing the world as it really is.
Another popular strategy is “emotional modulation”—appealing to
audiences’ emotions to change their perceptions of a certain group. The hope is
that these emotional connections can generate empathy, which in turn can foster
a deeper understanding of unfamiliar perspectives and experiences. Consider, for
example, Tanya Saracho, the executive producer and showrunner of the TV
series Vida, which tells the story of two Mexican American sisters who become
reconnected after their mother dies and learn that she had been married to a
woman. After this revelation, the sisters get to know their mother’s wife, and
one sister grapples with her own queerness. The characters experience both the
joys of queer life and the brutal homophobia that is still prevalent in so many
corners of our society. For queer audiences who recognize aspects of these highs
and lows from their own lives, such stories can produce a powerful sense of
emotional resonance and validation. But the emotional appeals are also universal
enough to give cisgender and heterosexual people a limited—but still very
powerful—sense of the experiences that queer people face in real life.
One of the less popular strategies we identified is “the Trojan horse,” or the
subtle inclusion of social messages in seemingly neutral entertainment. One
example is Shameless, a Showtime series that tells the story of a family living in
poverty on Chicago’s South Side. The father of the family deals with addiction
and a variety of chronic health issues, and through his story, we are exposed to
the stark realities of the American health care system. The show explores the
many ways poverty affects the Gallagher family, but stories of their heartbreaking
struggles are punctuated and interrupted by absurd and humorous moments.
When my team spoke to the show’s executive producer and showrunner, John
Wells (whose previous shows include ER and The West Wing), he underscored
how this mix of emotion and humor is useful for connecting with audiences on
complex, serious issues.
Another strategy that Hollywood creatives use involves rethinking not just
their artistic choices but the organizational hierarchy of their field, and the way
that opportunities within it are extended to different groups. This is what we
called “see it to be it”—by which we mean efforts to proactively open career
pathways in creative industries for members of marginalized groups. This not
only allows members of marginalized groups to demonstrate their own

y
g
g
p
excellence but also shows them what’s possible when people who look like them
are in those roles. And it gives the broader industry—and the viewing public—
the chance to learn from their life experiences and perspectives. One example is
Cristela Alonzo, the star and creator of a semiautobiographical show called
Cristela. The show follows her character as she works to achieve the American
dream, balances family obligations, and navigates microaggressions in her
workplace. While Alonzo discusses being “the first Latina with a sitcom” or “the
only woman doing stand-up” at a particular club, she is committed to changing
things for new writers and comics. When she entered the field, “the mentorship
that I had was from anybody that I could get.” While she was ultimately able to
find good mentors, the scarcity of Latinx women in the field meant it was
difficult for her to get advice on the challenges she faced. “I think my main
objective right now it to actually make sure that people have more power to be
able to create their own projects,” she said. “I’m really into mentorship… my
friend Dolores [Huerta] tells me… ‘I love teaching people [that] they’re
powerful. I love seeing them run with that power and teaching others that they
have power.’… That’s the same feeling I get.”
By and large, many of the change agents whom my team and I interviewed—
Hollywood creatives and the comedians alike—used these strategies of
“reflecting reality,” “emotional modulation,” “the Trojan horse,” and “see it to
be it.” But if we compare the Hollywood creatives and the comedians, it’s clear
that their working conditions influence how they approach promoting
recognition. By virtue of their medium, creatives in film and television have
access to a wider range of strategies for building recognition than comedians do:
they can, for instance, craft immersive narratives about nondominant groups,
challenge stereotypes through empathetic characters, and increase the visibility
of previously “unseen” stories. But despite these opportunities, Hollywood
creatives must contend with the risk-averse companies that employ them, and
therefore have less autonomy in some ways than comedians, who in many cases
work independently, answering only to themselves. So even though Hollywood
creatives have more artistic possibilities available to them, they are often less free
to pursue those possibilities. And they are also fearful that a reactionary backlash
may restrict their future freedom. They therefore develop strategies to make sure
that change lasts beyond the current moment.
The situation for comedians is different. Because of their independence and
the more limited range of strategies available to them, comedians who work to

g
g
expand recognition largely do so through self-presentation. Those who come
from underrepresented groups, in particular, do so by making themselves visible,
by claiming a rightful spot for themselves in a field that has traditionally been
homogeneous. Of course, plenty of comedians come from overrepresented
groups in the industry—that is, white men. These comedians often work to
expand recognition, too, and use a variety of the different strategies we covered
above. Some, however, are skeptical of that goal, arguing that creating social
change is outside the boundaries of comedy. For instance, comedians my team
spoke to denounced what they called “clapter,” or placing more emphasis on
popular social messages than on humor. One comedian who shared this
skepticism was Jim Norton. “My job is not to educate people,” he explained.
“My job is not to change the way they feel…. My job is not to use a platform to
change. I mean I’m not arrogant enough to think that’s what it is. If someone
changes their opinion because of something I said, fine. But I don’t expect them
to. I don’t deserve credit if they do. And I don’t deserve blame if they change
their opinion to something shitty.”
Celebrities are another important group of change agents. Consider, for
instance, the singer Lizzo, who, in her music and in the way she crafts her public
image, works to expand recognition for people of all body types, particularly
those of heavy Black women. In an interview with BET, Lizzo explained that as a
“big Black woman,” her goal is to help little girls who look like her to see
themselves and “see what is possible… the crowds should feel the love, feel the
self-love, feel the positive vibes.”
Celebrities use their role as change agents to expand recognition for many
different groups, of course. Consider, for instance, the TV moguls Martha
Stewart and Oprah Winfrey. Martha Stewart, with her magazine Martha
Stewart Living and its companion TV show (both established in the early
1990s), modernized the role of the homemaker after feminist gains in the 1970s
and ’80s and new economic pressures had made it something of an
anachronism. Through her TV show in particular, which debuted in 1993, she
taught the American public—often working-class women— how to perform
“middle classness” through homemaking skills, ranging from “cooking and
gardening to ironing, pet-keeping, flower arranging, collecting, and decorating

for Christmas.” In teaching these women to perform domesticity “with
distinction,” Stewart was, in a way, aiming to expand recognition for these
working-class, stay-at-home women, elevating their status, even if also
reinforcing traditional, regressive gender roles. This was achieved as she
“cultivated an entrepreneurial identity via storytelling that resonated profoundly
with millions of consumers in the 1990s.” Oprah Winfrey, too, has worked to
expand recognition of marginalized groups, including African American women
and victims of domestic violence, in part by offering herself as an ambitious
model of material success for others to emulate. Although change agents, both
women have also contributed to some less positive trends, overidealizing
entrepreneurship and disseminating neoliberal “scripts of self” focused on
material success, self-reliance, and individual achievement. So do other
influential cultural producers—influential self-help gurus such as Tony Robbins
and televangelist Creflo Dollar, who preaches prosperity theology or “gospel
capitalism.” Their reckoning of economic inequality is ambiguous at best, as is
the case for many of the change agents discussed in this book. Resisting this
ambiguity can be seen as a tall order in hypermaterialist America, where no other
marker of success makes unanimity as decisively as material success.
Many change agents are, of course, focused more explicitly on social justice and
policy than celebrities tend to be. As participants in the rough-and-tumble world
of civic organizing, these activists create and share new narratives through social
media, traditional news media, entertainment, advertising, and education. And
as pragmatists, they judge the effectiveness of their strategies based on only one
measure: results.
Rashad Robinson is one such activist; he works to recognize and advocate for
the Black community. An energetic Black man in his forties, Robinson exudes
an unshakable faith in our ability to transform the world—a faith that guides his
work as president of the progressive nonprofit organization Color of Change.
With roughly 1.7 million members, the organization’s work centers on, as
Robinson puts it, mobilizing “Black folks and their allies to push decision-
makers to create a more human and less hostile world.” This is accomplished by
“moving systems so that they work better for us,” by talking with the media,
building coalitions, and creating an organization that is “truly Black-led and has

high standards.” Robinson himself is focused on building a strong
“infrastructure” for the movement, scaling it up, and using it to fight for social
change. That often means meeting directly with politicians to inform them
about the challenges that African Americans face and to make clear to them that
Black communities are an important political constituency. The key, Robinson
said, is to make them “nervous about disappointing you.”
Robinson’s work also includes expanding voter access and participation
among people of color. He zeroes in on crucial districts with prominent Black
constituencies and mobilizes local partners to raise awareness and get out the
vote. He wants people of color, and Black people in particular, to have more
weight and “matter more” to our society in the twenty-first century. This
includes supporting progressive candidates running for district attorney and
similar offices and engaging young Black voters. For him, this is how hope is kept
alive, one step at a time. Although his immediate focus is on voting, his ultimate
goals are much broader—working toward empowerment, visibility, and
recognition in the political and public sphere.
Another such activist is Ami McReynolds, a member of the leadership team
at Feeding America, the largest organization fighting hunger in the US. While
this nonprofit has historically framed its action as “charitable giving,”
McReynolds described why it is now shifting the language of its mission to focus
on “equity and social justice.” The “charity frame,” she explained, is an inherent
paternalistic view, since it assumes that low-income people are needy and lacking
in brains, morals, or willpower. She and her coworkers, however, are not afraid
to talk about racism and the structural forces that help perpetuate poverty and
racial inequality. Their work feeds a broader discussion about fighting for social
justice and shifts the narrative toward what humans collectively owe one another
—rather than what pulls them apart.
Examples of inspiring activists fighting to expand recognition abound.
Another is Jee Kim, a New Yorker who led a Ford Foundation–funded
organization called Narrative Initiative for several years, which he explained is
focused on “creating opportunities for hope.” For years, Kim taught young
activists how to create alternative narratives to the American dream, with a focus
on what Americans can accomplish together by promoting solidarity. For
instance, the Narrative Initiative organized a major endeavor to foster social
solidarity in Minnesota by supporting unions and advocating on public
billboards for more solidarity through welfare spending.ff

y
g
p
g
Still another is Phillip Atiba Goff, a Yale social psychologist who researches
and advocates for policing equity. Goff is adamant in his rejection of “false
narratives”—including one that he sees as among the most pernicious, a
narrative that he calls “let’s return the US to what it was.” In recognition of
Goff’s important work, Warner Bros. TV Group hired him to help develop
content to “promote equity, inclusion, and social justice,” praising him as a
“leading voice of moral clarity.” In this new role, Goff uses the network to
deliver messages of recognition at a broader scale.
Political activists, politicians, and the political media are also crucial agents of
change. Increasingly, many are appealing to young people who are critical of the
excesses of capitalism and support a rising movement for democratic socialism.
This movement is significant given that the United States has historically been
inhospitable to socialism, especially when compared to other advanced industrial
societies.
In recent years, support for socialist values rapidly gained in popularity. In
2018 Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (AOC) won the Democratic primary for a seat
in the US House of Representatives, defeating Joseph Crowley, an influential
member of the party establishment in Queens, New York. Since taking office in
2019, she has brought a youthful, social media–savvy energy to DC. Soon, with
several other progressive women of color who were elected that same year, she
formed a group of lawmakers known as “the squad.” Defying decades of socialist
bashing in American politics, she proudly touted her membership in the
Democratic Socialists of America (DSA). US senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont
has also identified as a democratic socialist (though he is not affiliated with DSA)
and has built an enormous following, especially among younger voters by
criticizing the failures of capitalism. Riding this wave of popularity, he came
close to winning the Democratic party’s presidential nomination in 2016, and
again was a serious contender in 2020.
Although the DSA was founded decades ago, in the 1980s, the recent
popularity of these politicians has provided the party with a significant boost in
membership, which rose to nearly one hundred thousand members by July
2021. With members who average thirty-three years of age, this movement’s
radical message and critique of capitalism is central to how a portion of

American youth view a desirable future. According to a Gallup poll, 50 percent
of millennials and Gen Z were supportive of socialism in 2019. At the same
time, capitalism has been rapidly losing popularity with young people—only 51
percent had a positive view of it in 2019, down from 66 percent in 2010.
The 2008 financial crisis, the Occupy movement, and the runaway costs of
housing and higher education have also contributed to this shift. While socialists
have historically been most known for their work fighting against economic
inequality, the DSA has become more deeply attuned to a broad range of social
justice issues which include abortion, immigration, voting rights, racial justice,
and housing discrimination. Leftist publications like Jacobin, The Intercept, and
The Baffler are rising in popularity in part because they adopt a lively and
provocative tone that contrasts with the style of the more serious and older
publications like The New Left Review, Dissent, and The Nation. However, the
line between “old guard” and “new guard” is becoming blurred.
Bhaskar Sunkara is an illustrious representative of this new generation, who is
now the president of The Nation. He started the socialist magazine Jacobin in
2010 in his dorm room when he was still a student at George Washington
University in Washington, DC. He was motivated by his dissatisfaction with
other progressive media outlets. When my team spoke with him, Sunkara
pointed out how online magazines could work around the constraints of the
traditional mainstream media—like printing costs and distribution—to target
niche audiences.
These media express young people’s disconnect from the American dream.
This is the case of Patreon-based socialist podcasts, such as Chapo Trap House
and Red Scare. They are somewhat irreverent and use vivid polemical and often
vulgar language, which add to their popularity with millennials. Chapo was able
to reach half a million people a month at the time of our interview in 2020. My
research team talked with one of its hosts shortly after Bernie Sanders lost the
Democratic primary during his presidential run in 2020. The show’s listeners
had put in over a thousand hours texting and phone banking for Sanders. The
audience, he said, is composed of the “temporarily embarrassed overeducated
professional middle class, and [those] who just can’t find decent entertainment
or political opinions anywhere else.” The show, he continued, “is a safe harbor
for people who have views outside the mainstream, CNN, MSNBC, viewpoints
I get every day.”fl

Cornel West, the influential political philosopher and theologian, has been a
leading figure of the DSA and the American left who has consistently advocated
for the African American community and other groups. In the many speeches
West gave during the pandemic and the Trump presidency, he argued that hope
is essential to action, an act of imagination and moral courage needed to
maintain the momentum to fight back. In past decades, his moral convictions
led him to produce two hip-hop albums in 2001 and 2007 with a variety of
musical collaborators focused on messages about “change, awareness, and
solidarity.” Wanting to scale up his message of moral urgency beyond academia
via hip-hop earned him a rebuke from then Harvard president Lawrence
Summers, who did not understand how a hip-hop album fit with West’s
intellectual agenda of influencing the public sphere.
Beth Huang is one of the local leaders of the DSA in Boston. She is deeply
influenced by the work of my colleague Marshall Ganz, who has been promoting
the use of narratives for social change for decades. Beth’s attraction to
democratic socialism goes back to her days as a student during the 2008 financial
crisis, when the money she and her parents had saved for her to attend college
shrank significantly as the stock market plunged, forcing her to reconsider her
plans and priorities. Ultimately, this experience drew her toward a career focused
on addressing social instability through advocacy and civic participation. Like
many young people, Huang believes that today’s resurgent progressive energy is
most useful at the local level: “My state representative is a DSA member and is
leading the charge on rent control in the Massachusetts State House…. I think
that we have a tremendous opportunity to grow in the next five years, twenty
years. The pandemic really has shown how unsustainable the political and
economic systems are…. By mobilizing narratives, we have used the election as a
vehicle, winning the actual election, but also [for] changing people’s
expectations about how the government’s institution should work for working
people.”
These leftist change agents stand in contrast to others who seek to reform
capitalism in a less confrontational way. Through their advocacy, these agents
hope to make capitalism more inclusive, equitable, and attentive to the needs of
all groups. For instance, the nonprofit lobbyist association Business Roundtable

issued a widely publicized declaration in 2020 that it would focus less exclusively
on delivering returns for business shareholders and more on providing value to
all stakeholders in the community—including workers, consumers, and others.
Additionally, organizations such as the B-Lab and GIIN aim to certify
corporations that are committed to attenuating the negative impacts of
capitalism on equity, sustainability, and governance. Their work is reinforced by
investors such as Geeta Ayier of the Boston Common Asset Management
Company and many others who use their funds to encourage companies to
embrace similar principles.
Business Roundtable’s network includes powerful economists who advocate
for such an approach. One is Heather Boushey, the director of the progressive
think tank Washington Center for Equitable Growth, who has also served on
President Joe Biden’s Council of Economic Advisers. Although in the past,
most progressive economists have been men, including such luminaries as
Amartya Sen, Paul Krugman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Dani Rodrik, the presence of
women economists in these circles is noteworthy. Recently, several progressive
foundations, including the Omidyar Network and the Hewlett Foundation,
have provided major funding to expand the work on renewing capitalism to
make it less about profit-making and more about inclusion and ethics.
All these capitalism-oriented change agents are, of course, focused more on
the politics of distribution than the politics of recognition. In other words, their
primary goal is not to expand recognition but rather to fight inequality within
the framework of capitalism. They consist of businesspeople and entrepreneurs
who advocate for social change both materially and by pushing for institutional
change with new narratives. Some are working on President Biden’s plans to
grow the social infrastructure, for instance, and many are focusing on vigorous
state intervention into the economy. Unlike their socialist counterparts, they
unabashedly embrace capitalism, but with a more inclusive twist.
Hopefully, by now, the enormous diversity of change agents is becoming clear.
From Hollywood creatives and stand-up comics to celebrities, political activists,
democratic socialists, and progressive economists and entrepreneurs, what unites
change agents is their commitment to closing the recognition gap. Across
professions and areas of influence these individuals use a range of strategies toff

convince others that a different world is possible. While their work may be
invisible to the average person, together, slowly but surely, they are forming new
narratives that focus on recognizing and extending dignity to all groups. And
these narratives play a direct role in determining whom we value as a society.

CHAPTER 7
THE NEXT GENERATION
HOW GEN Z FIGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
Carlos, a self-described “small-town guy going places,” is the son of immigrants
from Ecuador. His parents raised him while working in restaurants on the East
Coast and in Chicago. Like many children of immigrants, Carlos embraces the
traditional version of the American dream, focusing on achieving some measure
of professional success. As of 2019, when my research team spoke with him for
the first time before the pandemic, he was in his twenties and working two jobs
to support himself, while also attending a public university in the Chicago
metropolitan area.
Like many students, Carlos believes that, as a society, we should proactively
recognize the experiences, validity, and dignity of all groups. For instance, the
Black Lives Matter protests of 2020, he said, were a long time coming. He
bitterly recalled encounters with classism and racism in his own life as a working-
class, brown-skinned Latino. He explains that he sees himself as an “ally” in the
movement for Black lives: “What’s the point of going on if I’m going to be
treated differently and not be given the same opportunities?”
Managing his time, he said, can be challenging, and juggling so many
commitments leaves little time for relaxing or going out with friends. But in
spite of these challenges, Carlos is committed to the idea that we all need to
support one another. In our second interview conducted in July 2020, he said
that the COVID-19 pandemic “opened my eyes to how we can help each other
and be more careful.” The pandemic also shifted how he thinks about future
success. While he still believes that “if you set yourself up today, you can do well
in the future,” he has become less critical of those who don’t live up to their full

potential. He’s also more sensitive to how people’s circumstances can be outside
their control. “This definitely made me think about how I can still do something
about changing the system and making sure people [around me] have a good
foundation for themselves,” he told us.
Carlos resembles many other young people today, in that he hovers between
two different sets of objectives: achieving upward mobility for himself on the
one hand and, on the other, contributing to the community so that everyone—
across all groups—can make their way through life from a position of acceptance
and dignity. Carlos’s generation, Gen Z, offers particularly valuable insight into
our current problems because they have been forced to wrestle with the different
—and at times, contradictory—philosophies they have encountered during their
upbringing in a profoundly divided society.
I have seen up close how uncertain the road ahead is for young people, through
my three adult children, their friends, and the graduate students I work with.
But to better understand the unique challenges facing this group, and how this
affects their thinking about value and dignity, my research team interviewed
eighty college students (aged eighteen to twenty-three) from the Northeast and
the Midwest regions of the United States.
We talked with them just a few months before the start of the COVID-19
pandemic, mostly in the fall of 2019, and were able to reinterview more than
half of them in the summer of 2020 to capture how that turbulent period may
have influenced their views.
These young people attended thirty-two different institutions of higher
education, ranging from community colleges, Catholic schools, Ivy League
universities, and everything in between. Of course, choosing to interview only
college students meant that our group was not fully representative of this age
group. Only about half of eighteen- to twenty-three-year-olds in the US are
college students—and that half is disproportionately middle class. To partially
correct for this, only half of the people we talked to were middle class (we labeled
them “privileged”). The remainder were working class (we labeled them “less-
privileged”) (see Appendix B for details). Slightly more than half were people of
color, reflecting the fact that this cohort is more racially and ethnically diverse
than previous generations.

I compare the views of these college-educated people with national surveys.
Ideologically, the group leaned toward the liberal/progressive end of the political
spectrum, which is true of Gen Z generally, and may also be a product of their
status as college students, given the well-documented tendency of universities to
feed left-of-center social and political attitudes.
Below, we will hear from young people directly, gaining valuable insight into
their views, the kind of life they want to live, their ideals, and their aspirations.
What are the ideals that Carlos’s generation embraces? As is the case for many
other Americans, young people embrace aspects of the neoliberal measures of
worth, with a focus on work ethic, self-reliance, and the pursuit of professional
success and material wealth. Yet for this group facing growing inequality and
various crises, these values are combined with a focus on personal balance that
dampen the risk of failure and protect their mental health: especially
postpandemic, they also value a more collectivist vision of success, that is,
contributing to the community. In lieu of color-blind uniformity that many
prized in the fifties, they celebrate differences. For these young people, being
non-white, low-income, immigrant, or queer doesn’t push people outside the
circle of belonging. That is to say, they also embrace recognition, the idea that
everyone, just by virtue of their humanity, is worthy of dignity and respect.
“Humans are humans,” they say—regardless of national origin, sexual
orientation, disability, or income. “I see you” and “I feel seen” stand as
emblematic expressions of this generation, adorning T-shirts and coffee cups,
and showing up in a wide variety of memes.
And for Gen Z, these ideas are more than just an abstraction—they are a
motivation for how they lead their daily lives and may engage in political action.
Indeed, this age group has developed an articulated story about who they are as a
group (what sociologists call a “cohort narrative”) and speak as such on social
media. Instead of buying wholesale into the world of boomers and the American
dream, many believe they are envisioning entirely new ways of thinking about
where our society should be going and what we should get out of it. They
defined themselves as aiming to create the kind of world they hope to live in. In
fact, in many cases they make up “their own story” as they work to replace this
American dream with a dream of inclusion.fl

Of course, bold new ideas are bound to create conflict—and Gen Z’s views
and values have certainly sparked intergenerational disagreements about what’s
next. While some may think that they are reinventing the world, they are far
from the first generation to have messianic aspirations. Given their history, baby
boomers and Gen Xers may be skeptical about whether Gen Z’s new vision truly
represents a radical break from what their own generations fought for.
Throughout time and across countries, young people have always been at the
forefront of social movements and social change. They are the least invested in
the status quo, and so are the likeliest to have innovative solutions to address
societal crises. They also understandably feel that they have the most at stake
when it comes to our planetary future.
Who are the Gen Zs, also called zoomers? Originally, the term mostly referred to
the first cohort made of true “tech natives”—those who had never experienced a
world without internet. But today, they are portrayed as those who came of age
under the shadow of a pandemic, which has brought not only isolation and
health worries, but also a host of psychological and economic difficulties,
making it exceedingly difficult for them to gain momentum at the start of their
adult life. At the same time, their futures are darkened by multiple other crises,
including political polarization, growing inequality, threat to democracy, climate
change, social-media-generated peer pressure, and heightened levels of racism
and xenophobia.
In some respects, Gen Zs resemble their elders, the millennials, who entered
the job market under the cloud of the 2008 housing crisis and recession. Many
in this earlier cohort had false starts as they tried to pursue careers or gain
financial stability. They have experienced precarity, and were the first generation
that had to contend with the gig economy as they also faced rising costs for
higher education and housing. These factors have led them to have an
ambivalent relationship with the American dream and to prioritize their private
life. With their situation aggravated by the COVID-19 crisis, they are less likely
to experience upward mobility than their parents or their contemporaries in
many European countries. Unsurprisingly, even in their thirties and forties,
fewer marry and many have found it difficult to buy homes, build equity, and
afford to raise a family. Gen Zs are following in their footsteps given their

uncertainty concerning where they are heading in the future. But they are also
more hopeful than their elders.
While in the past, some experts who study young people often emphasized
how the decline of communities and institutions held them back in the labor
market, I find that many among those we talked to come up with a more positive
scenario about where we are heading. This is in part because they embrace
recognition as their own particular brand of progressivism, which is different
from the demands of feminists and racial justice activists characteristic of the
civil rights era: the latter were concerned with second-wave feminism issues (e.g.,
Equal Rights Amendment [ERA], reproductive rights, and pay equity for
women) and gave no thought to declaring their gender pronouns, fighting for
access to gender-neutral restrooms, and other aspects of intersectionality and
LGBTQ+ politics. Also, today’s youth are demanding respect for a wider range
of groups with historically stigmatized identities. They explicitly connect the
fate of ethno-racial groups with those of Indigenous people, people living with
disabilities, those who have sexual and gender nonconforming identities, and
other forms of marginalization and intersectionalities that were less salient in the
sixties. Beyond inclusion, they also emphasize sustainability and authenticity
(living your “whole” or “best” self)—though the latter was also valued by the
sixties generation (by the beatniks and the hippies in particular).
Recognition is important not only for the subset of young people we
interviewed, but for a broader population of that age group, including some
who are not in college. This is suggested by a 2018 Pew national survey of Gen
Zs where 59 percent (more than the percentage who are college students) said
that administrative forms should offer gender options other than “man” and
“woman.” Even those who identified as Republican were more open to this (and
to fighting racial discrimination in particular) than older Republicans.
Embracing recognition functions as a lever and a buffer against the impact of
economic stagnation on individual lives. It creates the possibility of social
progress in the form of a more inclusive future, even in a period of economic
contraction.
This focus on recognition may account for the fact that a significant number
of the young people we interviewed expressed a renewed sense of hope. Opinion
surveys have also captured this trend. According to one, 56 percent of eighteen-
to twenty-nine-year-olds in the US said they would describe themselves as
hopeful in 2021, compared to 31 percent just four years earlier, in 2017—and,fiffffi

p
p
p
j
y
notably, there was no significant difference based on political party affiliation.
Among Black and Hispanic Americans, the swing was even more dramatic, with
the number of people describing themselves as hopeful increasing from 18
percent to 72 percent and 29 percent to 69 percent, respectively. For white
people, notably, the change was much less significant, with the number of
hopeful people increasing only from 35 percent to 46 percent. These changes are
probably associated with the defeat of President Trump during the 2020
presidential election and the 2020 Black Lives Matter demonstrations, which,
while sparked by deeply troubling instances of police brutality, ultimately
created space for optimistic, forward-looking projects of inclusion and justice.
The heightened levels of hopefulness may prove short-lived as circumstances
change, but the rapid change is notable nevertheless.
How do these young people understand their challenges and find hope in the
future? For them, worth is not measured exclusively by socioeconomic success or
by emulating the lifestyles of professionals and managers. Instead, it is assessed in
several dimensions that allow people to shine under different lights.
We already saw how neoliberal ideas gained influence over the last decades,
celebrating those who are competitive, entrepreneurial, self-reliant, and focused
on social and economic success. Some young people we spoke with still
embraced some of these ideas. This came up in our interviews, as Gen Zs
identified hard work, entrepreneurship, and success as the keys to salvation in
these unsettled times. However, they frame these traits as contributing to their
self-actualization and their trajectory of personal development. One such
interviewee was Louise, a student from Detroit, who said that working hard
allows you to “live your passion,” and that it is available to all. But hard work
cannot solve the problems of our individualist society. As we have seen,
meritocracy too often obscures the privileges and resources that some groups
enjoy while others are left to face steeper and steeper challenges on their own.
The combined effect of growing inequality and the compounded crises they
experience mean that young Americans are also increasingly skeptical of the
American dream. Among those we talked to, three out of four considered it to
be unattainable, too materialistic, or too narrow, given the diversity of American
society. As a distant goal, it has lost its appeal: as my daughter Chloe pointed outfi

to me, it puts us on a “hedonistic treadmill” where we are never satisfied and
always want more. To quote her, “It’s not like you will be okay once you ‘get
there,’ wherever that is.”
Young people are also skeptical of consumerism. Half of those we
interviewed, for instance, said they were “anti-materialists,” largely motivated by
acute environmental concerns. My two daughters also share these views: they
make a point of buying clothes at secondhand shops. Others choose not to own
a car, in an effort to limit their carbon footprints, while still others opt for vegan
or vegetarian diets.
Breaking out of the materialist mindset that defines the American dream,
Ashley, a Black student who attends a public university on the East Coast, said
that while many people see the world in terms of money, “there are so many
other things you can use to gauge or add value. Does that person have talents, or
do they have certain skills that they can offer or share and teach and spread?”
The question of how to imagine an alternative future weighs heavily for this
group, as they experience ambivalence toward ambition and careers, in part due
to their concern with mental health. For Dani, a Black middle-class student from
Massachusetts, ambition creates “a lot of pressure on you because people have
different circumstances and the more you see people your age doing things the
more you’re like, ‘Oh, I should do that…’ You’re trying to measure up to what is
being shown to you by people your age.”
A number of young people are suffering from mental illness at much higher
rates than previous generations, as they come under pressure to engage in
“competitive individualism.” The situation worsened with the pandemic: In
March 2021, a long-standing poll of eighteen- to twenty-nine-year-olds
(conducted by Harvard University) found that more than half had been “feeling
down, depressed, and hopeless” in recent weeks. Shockingly, nearly a third
reported that they had considered self-harm.
In the face of pressures, many reject the focus on competition to develop a
life more in sync with their personal needs. Ryan, a Midwestern white
nonbinary student, critiqued overly narrow definitions of success. Instead, they
said, success “should be about ‘feeling fulfilled in your life.’ The focus of the
American dream is usually on career, and I would like to see it be more [about]
fulfillment and what feeling successful means to you.”
Many say they want to (or have to) prioritize mental health and inner peace
over ambition and the “hedonistic treadmill.” They aspire to be “well-rounded”

y
p
people, a mindset they contrast with that of their workaholic parents and the
blind pursuit of success. Half criticize people who focus narrowly on ambition
at the expense of meaningful relationships, and four out of five describe
relationships as major sources of support. They say that building connections
with others helps them achieve a sense of balance, well-being, and worthiness in
a competitive culture. They support “anything that makes you happy” and
“fulfilled,” inspired by the therapeutic culture, which promotes an ethos
centered on self-care, positive thinking, happiness, self-actualization,
authenticity, and personal balance. This focus is not surprising given that the
therapeutic culture is supported by a multibillion-dollar business sector that
makes well-being an omnipresent expectation, prioritizing an inner self and a
body that can be optimized. The broader social forces that affect well-being (like
poverty, discrimination, food deserts, and segregation) are generally not part of
the picture.
Another alternative narrative to neoliberal values that these college students
came up with was to combine personal professional aspirations with the
promotion of collective well-being. One out of four cited collective advancement
and social impact as crucial components of their future professions. This was
particularly frequent among students we interviewed a second time, during the
pandemic, perhaps because the COVID-19 crisis made our collective
interdependence unmistakable. As Rada, a student of Middle Eastern descent
from Michigan, puts it: “My American dream is less about my own success. I
don’t think that’s unique to me. I want to have an impact and create change.”
Her embrace of personal success fuses with a strong desire to build a better
society.
Thus, while embracing neoliberal goals, many young people are also sensitive
to the ways in which our fate as human beings is connected to that of others.
Some academics call this having “a sense of linked fate.” This way of thinking
emphasizes collective identity, solidarity, empathy, and a sense of belonging. It
means defining one’s worth based on what we can contribute to the community,
in a way that is compatible with professional and material success.
It is remarkable that two-thirds of the young people we talked to believe that
growing inequality is incompatible with their ideals of communal

connectedness, belonging, and greater social solidarity. Making more people
matter may be the only path to improving our society in their eyes, even in the
face of unequal economic resources. This shift helps move us away from
defining success by one’s wealth and class mobility. As Ashley puts it, a person’s
value should be measured in “how much they’re able to contribute their time
and volunteer [and give] in other ways to a community.” This alternative matrix
is compatible with recognition because it “democratizes” worth, making it
available to everyone (unlike measuring a person by how much he or she makes).
This generation also distinguishes itself by its generosity, especially when
compared with their elders: 32 percent donate to causes they believe in, and 50
percent are looking for jobs in nonprofits. During the COVID-19 crisis, 66
percent of Gen Z people and 74 percent of millennials provided financial aid to
nonprofits or other people, in comparison to 53 percent of boomers. Spurred by
an effective grassroots campaign on TikTok and Twitter, many young people
donated from their COVID-19 relief checks to pay for bail bonds for Black Lives
Matter demonstrators arrested during the summer of 2020.
Students from privileged backgrounds in particular often imagine themselves
playing a leadership role in fostering change, which some deride as a “messianic
complex” to improve the lives of the less fortunate. Even if they aspire to
prestigious and lucrative careers, these students often saw their objective as
valuable because they help others. For instance, for Shelby, another white
Midwestern student: “I can use what I’ve been given to give back… to build up
communities…. I feel a sense of purpose from that, that I’m doing something
valuable and important by making a difference in people’s lives.”
Given how Gen Z supplement neoliberal ideals with a focus on recognition and
community betterment, it is not surprising that they also articulate a “cohort
narrative” about the special political and social mission of their generation,
which they contrast with what they perceive as the political complacency of
boomers. This is captured by Neil, a white Chicagoan, when he says, “We are in
the cockpit now.” Expressing the political stance of his generation, Carlos
wonders, “Someone has to do it, so why not me?”
In many instances, members of Gen Z define themselves in contrast to baby
boomers and Gen Xers, whom they view as passive, inept, or complicit in

wrongdoing. For instance, they blame these generations for failing to act earlier
to fight climate change, and for ultimately creating the crisis we are now facing.
They also tend to downplay or ignore how these generations contributed to the
fight for gay rights, women’s rights, and civil rights. Jasmine, a Black woman
from the Northeast, described her generation’s enthusiasm for social change in
contrast to boomers, who she said are “used to just going with the flow of
things.” She adds, “Now we’re finally talking about issues in schools, about the
LGBTQ+, gender, race, what it means to be able-bodied and all this stuff.” As
Enrique, a Latino student from suburban Chicago, put it: “We’re a lot more
open-minded [about] issues like equality… a little more realistic and we’ve
caught flaws whereas other generations didn’t think about them.” Attitudes like
this may be, in part, a way of finding agency in the face of uncertainty. Half of
the young people interviewed mentioned that generational turnover will
facilitate social change.
As is the case for their commitment to recognition, their political activism
can act as a buffer or an alternative to the pressures of competitive individualism
and the pursuit of the American dream. Thus it is not surprising that surveys of
Gen Z have described them as an “activist generation” focused on social justice
and equality. And indeed, the majority of eighteen- to twenty-nine-year-olds
surveyed in 2021 describe themselves as politically active, as do 36 percent of a
group of Gen Zs surveyed the same year. Moreover, the media frequently
describe them as “changemakers” who hold our collective future in their hands
—and became especially fixated on this idea during the global demonstrations in
the summer of 2020.
As you might expect, the level of political engagement is particularly high
among college students. For more than fifty years, a team of researchers at
UCLA has conducted a national survey of first-year college students, asking
about their experiences, preferences, and attitudes on a multitude of different
issues. The 2016 survey reported that students that year were more likely to
participate in a protest than any other cohort since the survey began, including
the radical cohorts of the 1960s, whose activism focused on civil rights and the
Vietnam War. Some are concerned with reparations for slavery, trans issues,
police violence, mass incarceration, immigration reform, and other topics that
were far less salient for 1960s student activists. This priority is reflected in Gen
Z’s explicitly inclusive practices, like their attention to using the correct
pronouns. Signaling this shift, the popular dictionary Merriam-Webster chose

p
g
g
p p
y
the singular pronoun they as 2019’s “word of the year.” For their part, woke and
cisgender were among the “top ten” words in 2021.
Overall, they are more liberal or progressive than conservative: Many young
people we talked to place great importance on efforts to fight climate change and
look to figures like the Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg for hope. Several
of them supported the Democratic Socialists of America, and Senator Bernie
Sanders was one of their most frequently cited sources of inspiration. Only eight
of them (most in the Midwest) self-described as conservative. In this, their
political leanings are not unlike other young Americans’. A January 2020 Pew
Research Center survey found that 61 percent of voters ages eighteen to twenty-
three said they were definitely or probably going to vote for the Democratic
candidate for president in the 2020 election, as compared to less than a quarter
(22 percent) who said they were planning to vote for Trump. Also, the 2019
UCLA freshman survey revealed that “just over two in five (44 percent) students
entering college in 2019 identified as politically middle-of-the-road…. Nearly
one-third (32 percent) identified as liberal and 4 percent as far left.” This
compares to 18 percent who identify as conservative and 2 percent who identify
as far right.
Many young people we talked to are deeply committed to social justice—and
even brought the subject up unprompted. When we reinterviewed some of them
in the wake of the Black Lives Matter protests, they were often critical of those
who do not embrace racial justice, speak up, or use their social media for
activism. Two-thirds spontaneously wanted to discuss “systemic racism.”
Jasmine, a Black student from the East Coast, reported that “white supremacy
[is] the biggest issue that we have.”
These young people value optimism, which they see as a prerequisite to social
change, and eschew negativity, pessimism, and cynicism, which they see as
standing in the way of progress. This is part of their broader commitment to
inclusion and social change. They are critical of “doomers,” by which they mean
their peers who abstain from having children or investing in the future due to
fears of impending global disaster due to global warming. Ian, a white student
from Chicago, explains, “The outlook of ‘doom and gloom’ is not going to help
anyone when you’re trying to achieve a better society.” He believes this attitude
feeds the status quo and that it is better to “continue the fight.”
Many young people are also hyperaware of the downsides of political
activism, which ranges from feeding alleged “political correctness” to being

g
g
g
p
g
sucked into political “bubbles.” This creates serious peer pressure. In the second
round of interviews, college students discussed hyperpoliticization, which
encourages impression management on social media. Dani, a Black student,
describes this as “exhausting,” while Dean, another Black student, says it’s
“traumatizing.” Moral pressures to follow the “woke” party line are rejected by
several of the young people the team spoke to. Some talk about “activism
fatigue.” These pressures were felt particularly keenly by African Americans
during the 2020 Movement for Black Lives, especially given the intensity of
Black Twitter.
Students are often disappointed with how their values are co-opted into
empty slogans by employers and corporations, and with diversity trainings and
other policies that too often turn out to be insufficient and largely symbolic,
intended to protect institutions from complaints or lawsuits more than to
actually help people of color. They can also see that many of their own peers are
superficial in their beliefs. As Elaina puts it, “everyone loves to preach about how
open they are but [most are not as] open as they want everyone to see them…. I
feel like it’s just a lot of talk and no action.” Sofi goes further when she says, “a
lot of people [feel] that they were excused from the movement just because they
did a superficial thing like post the blackout square or put the hashtag of Black
Lives Matter on their bio [on social media].”
This skepticism contributes to the fact that a third of our interviewees do not
participate in the political process. However, in the 2020 presidential election,
50 percent of all eligible Americans between the ages of eighteen and twenty-
nine voted, compared to 67 percent overall. They participated in larger numbers
that year than they had in the past: in the 2016 presidential election, the
participation rate for young people was only 39 percent. For Shelby, a
Midwestern white student, “Disillusionment with the political system is a big
problem… people [feel like we] don’t matter and what we do doesn’t matter.”
Many interviewees, for example, expressed impatience with the incompetent
government response to the pandemic. Being cynical or skeptical about national
electoral politics and the major parties, some prefer to be politically engaged at
the local level, where they believe they can have more impact and where political
change is more likely.

Of course, we need to remember that generations are not monoliths, and Gen Z
in particular exhibits a remarkable diversity of viewpoints and attitudes. There
are numerous differences, for example, between students whose parents are
middle-class professionals and those who come from working-class
backgrounds.
We saw that privileged students often described their future in terms of
playing a leadership role in creating social change. They often ground their
visions of collective life in political projects of inclusion, empathy, and kindness.
Their narratives of change remain largely divorced from structural discussions of
power, although many denounce systemic racism and promote social change.
Working-class (or first gen) students’ college experiences can be radically
different from the middle class’s, busy as many are to support themselves and
help their family pay their bills. This is especially true for the many students
whose friends and families had been disproportionately affected by sickness and
unemployment during the pandemic years. As a student named Dean put it,
“giv[ing] back to my parents” was a priority for him. While they also embrace
creating social change, they must simultaneously attend to other immediate
concerns, which is often incompatible with taking on leadership roles. Middle-
class students seem largely unaware that their emphasis on collective pursuits
may be out of reach to less privileged students. As a consequence, ironically,
their concern with the promotion of hope and social justice may not easily
include those they aim to empower.
There also seems to be some difference in “political styles” across classes.
Working-class youth we talked to are perhaps more attuned to confrontation as
essential to social change, whereas their middle-class counterparts are slightly
more likely to emphasize “being a kind human” as the foundation of greater
tolerance and inclusion. Relying on utopian images of harmonious imagined
futures can detract from the brutal power struggles that have historically fed
social change. History has shown that kindness does not deliver social justice.
Living with racism, precarity, and injustice feeds anger, which may not be
compatible with a genteel emphasis on kindness and empathy expressed largely
by the middle-class students and presented as an alternative to the dog-eat-dog
pursuit of upward mobility.
Since the team interviewed only those in college, a cross-class comparison is
particularly urgent, especially given that younger workers below twenty-five were
particularly hit by the pandemic. These developments are seen as feeding

p
y
y
p
p
g
xenophobic, far-right, and populist attitudes, often attributed to the loss of
status among the white working class. Also, like their parents, many young
workers are not sure of what they think and keep their distance from politics.
They may be less “undecided” than cynical or alienated.
Indeed, working-class students often expressed far less trust in social
institutions, like government, schools, or employers. Surveys show that working-
class youth is more likely than their middle-class peers to become socially
disengaged, which can lead some to embrace political cynicism and extreme
beliefs (including conspiracy theories). This is particularly the case among those
who have dropped out of high school or vocational training and those who feel
hopeless. These include those with mental health difficulties and those who feel
paralyzed by precarity. As fewer and fewer young people can afford health care,
higher education, rent, and other necessities, more and more feel that society’s
problems are intractable. Many young people of color also feel pessimistic,
fearing that the systemic obstacles they face are unlikely ever to change.
Whether these young people feel “seen” or “enabled” by our institutions to
take charge of their lives is crucial to our future and to their capacity to “aspire.”
If they feel recognized, they are more likely to engage with politics, civil society,
religion, the labor market, and more. Schools, politicians, social movements,
employers, and the media need to act as engines of hope for them, too. Rather
than dismissing these voters, it is crucial to better capture what motivates them
and what type of alternative narratives (and humor) could attract and speak to
them. If President Trump’s taped comments on grabbing women “by the pussy”
made him more popular among a certain category of men who appreciate sexist
and vulgar humor, it is urgent to consider what alternatives are available at the
progressive end of the political spectrum.
After having considered how Gen Z embrace some neoliberal ideals—hard work
and success—while combining them with other priorities—recognition, mental
health, community improvement, political mobilization—we have to consider
where these young people find the narratives that inspire them. Who do they
listen to when it comes to imagining alternative futures? Does the work of
change agents I discussed in previous chapters matter to them? Who else do they

listen to? Answering these question helps us understand how exposure to new
narratives inspires recognition and other sources of hope.
The interviews point to three main sources of influence: change agents,
institutions, and peers. Among change agents, activists, politicians, and
entertainers loom large in the world of media-focused Gen Zs. And
unsurprisingly, many of them lean left and feed Gen Z’s passion for inclusion
and social justice.
When asked who inspires them, as we have seen, students most often
spontaneously mentioned the environmental activist Greta Thunberg, whose
influence is bolstered by social media and movements popular among youth—
such as the Sunrise Movement and the Extinction Rebellion. As Neil, a student
from the Midwest, puts it, “When [Greta] canoed from Europe to America, the
actual environmental impact of her doing that is relatively minor… [but] she’s
inspiring people to do the change.” As a hyper-visible link in recognition chains,
Greta is helping young people challenge consumerism, give voice to the needs of
younger generations, and write their own scripts about our future society.
Senator Bernie Sanders was widely seen as a radical generational ally when we
conducted our interviews, and he comes second. Also mentioned are self-
professed democratic socialist congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, and
former First Lady Michelle Obama, who is viewed as an important role model. It
is telling that only one Republican politician is mentioned by the young people
we talked to: former governor of California and media star Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
Entertainers were also a source of inspiration for many. These included
pathbreaking singers Lady Gaga and Billie Eilish, and also mostly non-white
artists and celebrities such as Yara Shahidi, Bruce Lee, Chance the Rapper,
Beyoncé, and Oprah Winfrey. Also salient are sports stars such as football player
Tom Brady and non-white athletes such as Lamar Jackson, boxers Mike Tyson
and Manny Pacquiao, and baseball players David Ortiz and Eric Hammond.
It is striking that while none of the students found businesspeople inspiring,
a few mentioned writers such as the antiracist author Ta-Nehisi Coates and the
Instagram-famous poet Rupi Kaur, who writes about sexual violence. There
were also political commentators ranging from the conservative show host Ben
Shapiro to “The Young Turks” (TYT), a popular group of YouTube
progressives. Overall, the latter far outnumber conservatives, which is consistent

with Gen Z’s embrace of social inclusion and their ambivalence toward
neoliberal values.
Unexpectedly, given their suspicion toward large organizations, institutions
are also mentioned as sources of inspiration and hope. Students value higher
education as an institution that provides knowledge and contributes to
inclusion by broadening worldviews. Some mention their faith in innovation,
science, and technology as sources of progress and resources in shaping our
uncertain future. While some conservatives and liberals may believe that
nonprofits, the US government, and other organizations are working to address
social problems, young progressives are far more critical of their role and
generally pessimistic about the ability of these organizations, and of the United
States, to improve the world.
A small group of our interviewees mentioned religion as a source of
inspiration and reassurance—mostly children of immigrants and the upwardly
mobile. For example, one student, Sidney, said that religion “inspires me because
that’s where I place my hope. Maybe that’s why I don’t feel doomed in life: I
don’t really place my hope even in this world necessarily, but I place it in my
faith.” Religion acts as a buffer against uncertainty, as suggested by Frederica: “I
still do what I can in terms of educating myself, fighting different injustices, and
stuff like that,” she said. “But at the end of the day, I personally feel like a lot of
things are out of my hands.”
In contrast to change agents and institutions, the group most often
mentioned by students as a source of inspiration are people in their everyday
lives: their friends and peers, as well as their family. In fact, more than two-thirds
described their peers as a source of hope. Many said that this support gives them
a sense of agency and blunts the anxiety of facing the unknown. For instance,
Elaine from Rhode Island said: “I’ll talk to my friends about it, and we’ll make it
like, ‘Hey, we can do a protest or we can start cutting out plastic.’ We are coming
up with solutions that can happen right away. Not everything is outside of my
control.” Black students in particular find fortitude in interpersonal support and
understanding, especially when experiencing racism. Their need for solidarity
finds expression in the phenomenon of so-called Black Twitter, where African
American young people support each other at a time when conversations about
racism and Black Lives Matter are omnipresent and often described as
emotionally exhausting.

What kind of world do these young people want to live in? Given their inability
to achieve the traditional American dream that has animated the United States
since World War II, those we talked to propose a number of new and different
visions of how our society should work. They are critical of a life of competition
leading to a predefined path of economic and professional success. They are
combining old values like hard work with a new emphasis on contributions to
the community, recognition, equity, and social change. They embrace the goal of
creating a more pluralistic world grounded in ethical and political choices that
enables a wider range of types of successes and makes more room for personal
well-being. They also favor personal projects that allow people to “do their
thing,” as they seek personal balance and prioritize authenticity and self-
actualization. They self-identify as change makers in their political commitment
to creating a better, sustainable world. They are particularly preoccupied with
lifting up people of color and sexual minorities. Yet not many mention the plight
of the downwardly mobile working class, low-income people, and rural people.
We saw that young people in 2016 were more likely to participate in protests
than any other cohort surveyed over the last fifty years. Commentators are still
assessing whether these protests will be effective in making change. We have
many reasons to believe that the current trend will persist, especially as we turn
increasingly into a “social movement society” in which protest has become a
normal part of politics.
Some have argued that the postmaterialist values expressed by our college
students are characteristic of all middle-class youth who have seen their material
needs satisfied. The landscape in which this generation evolves today is radically
different from the conditions that prevailed when postmaterialist theorists
formulated this approach in the seventies, and when the sixties generation was
protesting. For instance, formal diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) efforts
have become a mainstay of most bureaucratic organizations in the United States
and beyond, and therapy is a constant point of reference in middle-class culture.
Moreover, the meaning of “progressivism” has evolved considerably over time.
Supporting the Civil Rights Movement did not mean supporting trans rights;
questions of identity (ethnicity, immigration, sexuality, gender) are now much
more salient across all generations than a few decades ago.

I wager that the political views of younger people are being shaped by this
new cultural context and by change agents and their peers at least as much as by
their distance from material necessity. Also, whether their progressivism is
entirely due to their youth or to the pandemic is doubtful given the broad moral
features of this cultural context in which they are coming of age. We will have to
assess how their long-term political commitments change in light of the massive
cultural transformation they are experiencing and will experience in the future.
However, there is some evidence that progressive “old boomers” maintained
progressive self-identity and political orientations as they advanced in age. I
would expect that the same will happen with left-of-center Gen Zs, with
political variations within this group considered at large.
How they will put their aspirations into practice (whether they say
“inclusion” while partaking in privilege) remains an open question. The new
values and narratives shaping their expectations may become more and more
influential as their cohort age into positions of greater power in the decades to
come. If, like Carlos, they embrace inclusion and believe that “we have to be our
own futures,” we have yet to see how their ideals of inclusion can resonate more
broadly.

CHAPTER 8
DIFFERENT YET THE SAME
SOLUTIONS FOR BUILDING AN INCLUSIVE
SOCIETY
How else can we promote the social inclusion of those who are often viewed as
second-class citizens in our divided world? Young people, with their novel
insights and energy, give us some degree of hope. So do the change agents who
promote inclusion. But if we are to truly transform the way we think about who
matters, we should consider how all of us can amplify these voices by the choices
we make in who we hang out with, how to live our lives, and how institutions
(such as the government, the law, and schools) can play a role in extending
recognition and dignity to everyone.
I have said this before, but it bears repeating that the gap between the
“winners” and the “losers” of our current system is growing, separating a
minority of college-educated professionals and managers, who have the
credentials needed for upward mobility, from the “people below,” workers
without a college degree who make up a whopping two-thirds of the American
workforce. For this group, life expectancy has declined since 2010, while the
general trend was for life expectancy to increase. Their horizons have drastically
narrowed over the last decades: they have lost their footing in many occupations
where they used to be hired. They were displaced from 7.4 million jobs in the
United States since 2000. Most of these jobs were their way into the middle class,
and many now require a college degree. Occupations such as software developer,
business manager, sales supervisor, administrative assistant, and purchasing
agents didn’t used to require a college degree, but they increasingly do. This
growing class polarization is a dead end. Producing more wealth and

distributing it better are crucial. But equally important is devising new narratives
about more expansive understanding of who matters. This practice needs to be
baked into daily life.
Other researchers have given the topic some thought. In The Sum of Us, racial
justice advocate Heather McGhee focuses on redistributing resources by
mobilizing narratives of solidarity. Duke sociologist Chris Bail works to increase
tolerance across differences, conducting experiments where citizens exchange
their views anonymously on social media to gain greater understanding of
different perspectives. Francesca Polletta, one of the leading experts on the
impact of narratives on social cohesion, analyzes moral norms, civility, emotions,
rituals, and advocacy and their social effects. She concludes that to overcome
divisions and inequality, people need to build relationships over time as they do
activities and projects together. In The Tyranny of Merit, political philosopher
Michael Sandel also denounces societies that worship success and merit too
exclusively. His solution is to celebrate work and togetherness as conditions for
democratic life.
There is much to like about these approaches, and some certainly overlap
with what I propose. However, I go further by pointing to the need to produce
and diffuse more narratives that broaden recognition: How can we multiply the
standards we use to define someone as worthy, to include not only neoliberal
ideals, but also spirituality, morality, altruism, creativity, and civic-mindedness?
How can we more often and better celebrate our shared humanity? The answer
may lie in how we have reduced stigmatization of certain groups in the past. This
is not about individuals learning to become kinder, but about figuring out how
to transform our societies to produce and diffuse different messages about who
matters.
Institutions can play an important role in creating these changes. Employers can
help lift up the too-often-invisible or taken-for-granted care work of (typically
female) parents, friends, community members, educators, spiritual leaders, and
others. Think of human resources policies favoring work/family balance (family
leave, flex time) that implicitly acknowledge both our contributions as
breadwinners and caregivers. These make a difference, as shown in a study of
nursing home employees who were given more autonomy and flexibility in their

time management. The implicit message of these policies is that employers
recognize that their employees’ personal lives are important. This simple fact
resulted in less absenteeism and greater work satisfaction. Such flexibility
remains somewhat rare in the lower rungs of the American labor market, which
offers poor conditions to working mothers, who continue to do most of the
family’s care work. The working conditions for the majority of US mothers are
particularly harsh when compared to those in Italy, Sweden, and France, each of
which provides extensive state-subsidized childcare.
Individuals can also play central roles in achieving these goals. We know this
is possible because we can already see these practices in action. We saw that the
group of Gen Z students we interviewed are already judging worth through a
wide range of social contributions. And many Hollywood creators we
interviewed work to expose audiences to more diverse and complex
representations of different groups. Promoting broader criteria of worth is also
something that we can and should do in our daily lives. Instead of a winner-take-
all contest, we can value traits that are available to all. These would include
spirituality, morality, and altruism—and activities such as creating, educating,
and entertaining—which can be valued without subordinating them to material
production, consumption, and the profit motive.
We can all cultivate a wider range of friends and relationships across class and
racial boundaries, decide to reside in more integrated neighborhoods, and send
our kids to more diverse schools. Broad exposure to a wide range of people
encourages pro-diversity attitudes, including more openness toward immigrants.
Moreover, frequent interactions with people of different racial backgrounds may
help reduce racism. So will frequent exposure to narratives that valorize diversity.
In other words, we can structure our lives so that we are all more exposed to
diversity every day.
For our families, we can also lower pressures to achieve, which makes for less
stressful lives across the social ladder. This can also contribute to sustainability
and equality by lowering consumption, as well as resources and opportunity
hoarding. Instead of pushing children toward instrumental activities, we could
instead encourage them to gain a broad range of life experiences. We can direct
them away from the “excellent sheep” pathway. Viewing such solutions as
unrealistic is certainly a measure of the powerful hold that neoliberal thinking
has on our worldviews. Being able to imagine a different world is only a first step.

It is important to keep in mind what changing our thinking about worth can
and cannot do. New and more expansive standards of worth cannot eliminate
insecurity and suffering. But they can change how people understand their place
in society to help bolster their sense of agency and improve their overall well-
being. Consider that in countries like Denmark and Sweden, which have strong
social safety nets and more protections for workers, lower-income people are less
stigmatized than in the US. Whereas more privileged Americans see their lower-
income peers as lazy and undeserving, Danes and Swedes tend to see those in
need as victims of broader economic pressures. This makes quite a difference in
how low-income people experience their lives in these countries.
Alternative criteria of worth help explain how one’s quality of life can be
experienced strikingly differently across social contexts. Anthropologist
Bhrigupati Singh shows how the dwellers of one of the poorest villages in India
experience hardship less acutely than researchers initially expected. This is
because, in a context of acute deprivation, scarcity is normalized as part of daily
life, which affects social expectations. Also, when people had prior exposure to
crises, they had improved faith in their ability to navigate challenges. This
strengthened social resilience: past experiences of dealing successfully with
change can bolster our belief that we will be able to do so again.
While dignity and alternative standards of worth do not make insecurity,
scarcity, and material constraints go away, they affect how people understand
who they are and their place in society. These alternative standards help bolster
their sense of worth and agency, which are associated with subjective dignity,
which in turn promotes lower levels of depression and higher subjective well-
being.
Moreover, cross-national studies show that happiness is not linearly
correlated with income. The impact of income on happiness plateaus after a
certain level of economic security is reached, which is why happiness and
economic prosperity are often less related than we might think. Developmental
economist and Nobel laureate Amartya Sen has written extensively about this
and has helped the discipline of economics move away from focusing exclusively
on material prosperity and to better consider quality of life, sustainability, and
well-being. Inspired by his work, the United Nations’ annual Human
Development Report defines well-being not only in terms of material wealth,
but also in terms of “capacity to aspire,” which refers to people’s ability to plan,
hope, and dream.

p
In the current context of political polarization, we urgently need to lift up
“ordinary universalism”—which I define by what we all have in common as
people, what makes us similar or compatible. This perspective can influence how
people bridge boundaries with those who are different. This was clear to me in
the early nineties, as I was interviewing a group of immigrant workers from
Morocco and Algeria living in France, studying how they categorize people
either by similarities or by differences. When asked about how they are similar to
and different from the French, they pointed to our physical similarities (“we all
spend nine months in our mother’s womb and have ten fingers”), our shared
human nature (“there are good and bad people in all races”), our shared needs
(“we all get up in the morning to buy our bread at the baker”), our shared
spiritual origin (“we are all children of God”), and our shared cosmological
humility (“we are all insignificant grains of sand in the universe”). Similarities
between different groups need to be more visible if we are to escape our current
cultural impasse of polarization and political sectarianism. But, paradoxically,
this can—and must—be achieved while appreciating the differences that define
various groups.
This idea of “ordinary universalism,” of emphasizing similarities over
differences, is central to the work of many change agents. Take, for instance,
Desmond Meade, the activist in Florida who leads the Florida Rights
Restoration Coalition, where he fights to restore voting rights to formerly
incarcerated people and emphasizes the many ways in which “we are all the
same.” Or consider Sister Barbara Staley, the mother Superior of the Missionary
Sisters of the Sacred Heart, whose religious order promotes human solidarity
through projects around the globe, and who spoke to me about our shared
humanity. Faith-based organizing mobilizes people by making salient all that we
have in common across our differences.
The power of ordinary universalism can be seen all across the world. A recent
study of female janitors working in a Mumbai mall showed how their focus on
commonalities produced a strong sense of solidarity and resilience, which helped
them deal with mistreatment on the job. They showed compassion for
coworkers, visiting them when they were sick and advocating for them when
needed. They also shared food and used terms of kinship (“aunty” and “sister”)
to downplay status differences and forge community.

Similar patterns were found in other settings, including between students
and janitors at a university in Malaysia. Older women janitors were observed
giving advice to students about their health and nutrition, behaving as
“surrogate aunties” rather than as low-status service workers. These women
made salient their role as caring human beings instead of low-status service
workers.
Creating common ground and unity has become more urgent since the
Trump years, as discussions of political polarization, echo chambers, and filter
bubbles are crowding online spaces. Change agents promote different methods
of creating a shared sense of community. Social psychologists Matthew Feinberg
and Robb Willer argue that forcing Republicans and Democrats, or
conservatives and progressives, to converge around a single set of positions or
policies is doomed to failure. When citizens try to agree on policies, the framing
of the conversation encourages opponents to maintain their stance and impose
their views on others. These authors believe it is more productive to engage in
“moral reframing,” by focusing on commonalities and shared sacred values
(“dignity” or “family”) instead of differences.
Ordinary universalism can also be seen increasingly in youth culture. Young
people embrace global popular culture, which often celebrates antiracism,
feminism, and LGBTQ+ rights, along with other more traditional themes, such
as sex and violence. Low-income Parisian youth often distance themselves from
their dead-end jobs and broaden their horizons by embracing hybrid and
multiracial global hip-hop culture. This includes a form of “aesthetic
cosmopolitanism” that mixes hybrid genres (“banlieue rap,” for example, which
includes references to North African musical traditions). For their part, middle-
class Turkish immigrants in Berlin emphasize their cosmopolitan literacy,
including their bilingualism and biculturalism, to contest the stigma they
experience from some of the more provincial and less educated nationalist
German citizens.
Ordinary universalism refers not only to what we all have in common, but
also to embracing ethnic, religious, national, and other differences. Nationalist
populism, Islamophobia, and xenophobia are on the rise in many countries, and
ordinary universalism can be a vital counterweight. It weakens the boundaries
between groups, making them more flexible and crossable. The turn toward
“superdiversity” and a more “cosmopolitan canopy” contribute to this. So does
the use of the category “people of color,” or that of “Latinx,” an umbrella term

g
y p
p
for a “supra-ethnic” category. These changes in terminology are part of a broader
minority rights revolution. Equally important is the (contested) presence of
affirmative action in universities and nonprofits, and the creation of affinity
groups in the corporate sector.
One way that some corporations and other large organizations promote
ordinary universalism is through what are called diversity, equity, and inclusion
(DEI) initiatives. These have been criticized in some circles as “happy talk” or
empty, symbolic gestures, rather than serious attempts to reckon with the
marginalization of certain groups. They are also criticized as a hollow marketing
ploy to increase profit, a corporate sleight of hand to appease workers, and an
additional burden on employees of color who are asked to educate their peers.
But while these criticisms are all valid, thinking seriously about how to
emphasize our similarities and value our differences is worthwhile—small
decisions do create change and can slowly transform broader patterns, one step
at a time.
In fact, while the United States has frequently failed to live up to its ideals,
there is a long American tradition of interpersonal altruism that characterizes
the civic and religious culture and permeates everyday interactions, even while in
tension with a culture of racism. Nevertheless, solidarity appears to be weaker in
the United States than in many other advanced industrial societies, in part
because of high levels of political polarization. Americans have stronger negative
views toward those who don’t share their political views, compared with their
counterparts in other wealthy countries. This dynamic has worsened in recent
years as inequality and unemployment have continued to rise. When groups feel
they are competing with one another for resources, people are more likely to
focus on who gets what, instead of on broadening recognition.
Few acknowledge that there is a common quest for recognition between the
white working class who support right-wing populist candidates and progressive
groups of LGBTQ+ people and antiracist advocates. That these camps often see
recognition as zero-sum certainly hinders this acknowledgment. Many resist the
view that both groups deserve dignity, or that one group’s suffering is
commensurate with the other’s. But by recognizing how their claims overlap, we
may be better able to bridge boundaries and lower polarization. Progressive
finger-wagging can only stoke working-class resentment toward professionals
and managers, just as much as the claims of right-wing populists to represent the

values of America irk progressives. Changing these attitudes may be an
insurmountable challenge, but it is one that we all must contemplate.
The quest for recognition can bring together those at the extreme poles of
American politics. We need to have a collective conversation across various
corners of the public sphere about what it is, how to broaden it, and why it
matters to people across the political spectrum. Many people understand the
need to address economic inequality, but they fail to see why recognition of
dignity is so important.
So what else should we do about broadening recognition? Ordinary people can
work to reduce the stigma of marginalized groups, as well. To see how this works
in practice, let’s consider two different groups that have, to varying degrees,
become less stigmatized in recent decades: those living with HIV or AIDS and
people labeled obese. In each instance, to understand the process of
destigmatization, we must first identify who the main social actors involved in
reducing stigma were, the cultural tools they drew on, and the destigmatizing
actions they are engaged in.
For people living with HIV or AIDS, the main figures driving
destigmatization were experts (doctors, lawyers, and social scientists), journalists,
and activists—all of whom drew on the cultural resources available to them to
reframe how this group was perceived. For example, they used language centered
on equality, human rights, and dignity—and ultimately shifted the narrative
from one of blame and judgment to one about a medical condition that can
affect anyone. They had to counter a dominant narrative that HIV and AIDS
arose from sexually promiscuous, and thus shameful and blameworthy, gay men.
They also used the law to promote human rights and equal protections.
For destigmatization to take place, the knowledge produced by experts had to
be credible and conclusive. Medical researchers were able to show that HIV and
AIDS was an illness that could affect anyone. They demonstrated the potential
for “linked fate” or “common destiny” with members of the stigmatized group.
Prominent agents of change from politicians to celebrities also started to
provide support. For instance, in the nineties, basketball megastar Magic
Johnson revealed that he was HIV-positive. And several years earlier, in 1987,
Lady Diana was photographed shaking hands with an unidentified AIDS

patient without wearing gloves to demonstrate that the disease could not be
transmitted by touch.
In contrast, people labeled obese had fewer of these forms of support. Some
advocates supported the “health at every size” movement, to counter the
arguments that shaming of heavier people was justified as a matter of promoting
health. But medical researchers were not ready to support the view that body
mass index does not matter. Activists working to reduce fat-shaming often
found it difficult to overcome the stereotype that obese people are uneducated,
lazy, self-indulgent, and irresponsible. While there is now more support for body
positivity, destigmatization was much slower than it was for those living with
HIV, and it is still facing enormous resistance.
Comparing these two cases, my colleagues and I concluded that
destigmatization required a recognition chain that included support from
prestigious public figures, a wide broadcast of messaging, and activists
borrowing effective strategies from other successful movements to gain traction.
From these cases we can draw some key insights about how to reduce the
stigmas cast upon all marginalized groups locally, and eventually, beyond
national boundaries. While the groups involved vary from case to case, many of
us can contribute through our own involvement as experts or participants in
social movements. We can all work to change the conversation about who
belongs in our daily lives. The first lesson we should remember is that instead of
simply appealing to individual kindness, empathy, or charity, we need to
promote new narratives to support positive representations of all groups, so that
they become taken for granted and part of our daily lives.
But reducing stigma isn’t easy, given the certainty of backlash. Activists must
overcome a “clash of background assumptions,” where opposing views don’t
often even have a shared language for constructive dialogue. A second lesson,
then, is that recruiting allies is crucial. For members of stigmatized groups,
support from “outsiders” is validating and acts as a buffer against assault.
Recognition chains play an essential role. Consider cultural producers who
operate at a large scale in sectors like advertising, who complement the efforts of
citizens to reduce stigma. By broadening who appears in ads, these producers
can have a positive impact on how certain groups are seen. To better understand
how this works, my team spoke with Molly Kennedy, who works in advertising
and developed some of the beauty brand Dove’s marketing campaigns. She
explained how, for over ten years, Dove has promoted self-esteem and featured

p
y
p
“real women” in their ads. Whereas other similar brands have tended to feature
disproportionately white and skinny women in their ads, Dove has prioritized
including women of color and women with larger and varied body types. Jessica
Weiner, who consults with Dove, explicitly ties these changes to broadening
recognition. Weiner also assisted Mattel in launching Barbie dolls “with diverse
hair, face, and body types” in 2016, and in modeling new Barbie dolls on
inspiring women like the filmmaker and producer Ava DuVernay.
Many observers have dismissed this “branding diversity,” calling it a crass
marketing gimmick. But this approach has been an effective means for diffusing
at scale more inclusive messages about who is worthy. According to Maria
Garrido, a senior executive at Paris-based Vivendi International, and Katie Eng,
from the minority-owned marketing agency PACO Collective, acknowledging
the buying power of minority groups and appealing to them specifically are at
odds with traditional assimilationist approaches to marketing. In the past,
marketers worked to convince minority groups that they needed to become like
the dominant group. While many continue to debate the value of the
assimilationist ideal that animated American society for most of the twentieth
century, the forthcoming demographic shift toward a multiracial minority-
majority society calls for broadening recognition.
As we saw in the previous chapter, young people are working hard to change
perceptions at an individual level—but there is only so much they can
accomplish. Their bottom-up efforts must be supplemented by change agents
and activists who strategize to shift organizations and the law in order to make
structural change at a national scale. If advocates want to increase welfare
resources distributed to the poor, promote the voting rights of the formerly
incarcerated, raise the minimum wage, and improve access to health insurance,
they have to mobilize the power of the law. Top-down and bottom-up strategies
complement one another. It is worth considering these top-down strategies in a
bit more detail.
Governments play an important role in the promotion of cultural policies
and diversity programs that celebrate the culture of various groups and spread
recognition. Sociologist Jeffrey Reitz has argued that governments promote
multiculturalism by rallying popular support for diversity. In Canada, forff

instance, such efforts were vital in transforming the country’s national identity
to include ethnic minorities. In 1971, in response to a movement for Quebec’s
independence, Canadian prime minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau launched an
innovative federal policy that recognized the culture of all immigrant groups. In
1988, the federal government passed the Multiculturalism Act to deal with the
growing diversity of the population and committed substantial funding to
promote the art, culture, and traditions of various ethnic and Indigenous
groups. Many French Canadians were critical of this policy for not
acknowledging their historical place as a founding nation of the Canadian polity
and favored “interculturalism” over multiculturalism. Nevertheless, even today,
many programs exist to facilitate the integration of immigrants into the
Canadian polity. This has led Canadian immigrants to be more involved in
national politics compared to their American counterparts.
Policies can sustain dignity or create stigmatization. The governmental
preference for means-tested policies, such as the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF) program, is viewed by low-income people as feeding
stigmatization. This program funds monthly cash assistance payments to low-
income families with children, as well as a range of services. It was widely
perceived by recipients as a handout, and some feel stigmatized for benefiting
from this program. This is unlike the more universal Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC) through which low- to moderate-income workers and families get a tax
break. The latter “work bonus” program is perceived as a “just reward for work”
and as a path to upward mobility.
The law also plays a significant role in enforcing official privileges, handicaps,
and pecking orders, dictating how resources are distributed among different
groups. In the United States, the law supports the well-to-do with favorable
estate laws and mortgage deductions for primary residences and second homes.
It also legitimizes claims—for instance, when victims of racism use legal
recourse. Or laws can enact segregation, as when Israel enforces laws that
segregate Arab-Palestinian children in K–12 education.
But legal rights are an expression of the relative legitimacy of groups, and they
send messages about which groups are favored. The ongoing battle over
abortion rights in the US, Latin America, and elsewhere is not solely about the
question of when life begins; rather, it is also a matter of whether the law
recognizes women’s agency over their own bodies or whether men should have
the power to dictate standards. In brief, the law and the institutions that enforce

p
it play an important role in either supporting or weakening recognition and
dignity.
Another example comes from the education sector (public or private) where
top-down, organizational level efforts to strengthen recognition can do more
than just help certain groups feel deserving and worthy—they can also shape
their upward trajectories. Sociologist Prudence Carter compared eight schools in
South Africa and the United States, focusing (among other things) on the
schools’ differing policies regarding natural hairstyles. Girls in schools that were
more culturally flexible, where Black girls could wear their hair in natural styles
rather than straighten it to accommodate white beauty standards, had higher
self-esteem and academic placement. By acknowledging these girls’ self-
presentation as acceptable, the schools extended to them the dignity of
recognition, which contributed to their academic success.
If organizations are going to extend recognition to all groups, then policy
experts and lawmakers need to be asked and trained to consider the messaging
power of the changes they want to enact. Each legal decision, whether they
concern abortion, hairstyles, or trans kids, transforms how groups perceive their
position and relative worth in society—whether their dignity is being honored.
This dimension of identity is intrinsic to the political process and policy experts
should be systematically trained to think about the implications of laws and
policies for recognition.
While new narratives are necessary for cultural change, they cannot be successful
on their own. We all have to be carriers, just as change agents, Gen Z, knowledge
workers, social movement participants, and various institutional sectors already
play this role.
The time for considering alternatives is right now. The solutions I have
discussed can be practices at the individual, group, and the national level—
embracing several criteria of worth, ordinary universalism, and stigma reduction,
combined with the use of the law and institutions to promote changes,
including narrative changes. They are an essential complement to the many
efforts of civic action and imagination that already animate many
neighborhoods and communities.ff

While the vision offered here may be too idealist for some, we have to
remember that ideals have moved the world many times before. Much of what
defines our reality today could not be imagined a few decades ago. It is with this
in mind that we must continue to work toward the future we want to foster.
Defining what is possible too narrowly will irremediably reduce our universe of
alternatives. Much will depend on how urgently we perceive the need to develop
new collective orientations.

CONCLUSION
STRENGTHENING OUR CAPACITY TO LIVE BETTER
TOGETHER
In 2004, Massachusetts became the first US state to legalize same-sex marriage—
but it was only eleven years later, in 2015, that the practice became legal
nationwide. This was accomplished through a range of different tactics,
including ballot referenda, laws passed by state legislatures, and court rulings—
including the Supreme Court’s ruling in Obergefell v. Hodges. But none of this
would have happened but for the herculean efforts of countless activists and
ordinary people who joined forces to realize their shared vision of justice and
fairness. These people were fighting to create the type of society they hoped to
live in. In many cases, they were inspired or guided by change agents, who
created the narratives that showed us all that another world was possible. Their
success demonstrates that significant changes are possible, and it also shows the
way for broadening recognition to other marginalized groups.
This book is for people—of all ages—who are wondering what lies ahead,
how to move forward, and what kind of society our children will inherit. It is
written to help all of us think through the last several decades and the current
moment. It is about where to find the glimmers of hope for the road ahead, and
what we can do to feed the type of society we are yearning for. This is
particularly crucial after decades of growing inequality and a pandemic.
While millennials and Gen Z are often dismissive of boomers, they are
walking in the footsteps of a generation that led the Civil Rights Movement and
the second-wave feminist movement, the effects of which are still being felt to
this day. Even if younger generations are dissatisfied with what they perceive as
their elders’ complacency about the destruction of the environment, I can think

of many political points of intergenerational convergence that can be built upon
and expanded further.
Like these young people, I believe that individuals can make a difference, as I
did in my youth. But what I hope I have communicated with this book is the
crucial role of narratives in enabling us to do so. Narratives orient and magnify
the consequences of our actions. They can operate as scaffolding that
strengthens our impact. They are a condition for our social resilience.
Ultimately, they strengthen our capacity to create the world we wish to live in.
Hope has clear implications for social change. Anthropologist Arjun Appadurai
says that hope is tied to our “capacity to aspire,” to project ourselves into the
future as a citizen, creator, professional, parent, partner, worker, earner, and
more. Unlike optimism, hope is not an expression of our temperament, but a
plan for the future. That plan is shaped by narratives, which can help us
overcome challenges in our lives and open new possibilities.
Of course, hopes and dreams are not the same: Dreams (like the American
dream) are typically not anchored in what is possible. In contrast, hope is a
projection from one’s current state, constrained by feasibility. Still, as the
economist Albert Hirschman argued, being too tied to what is probable can
curtail one’s “horizons of possibility.” Because there is so much we cannot
predict, we must work constantly to keep our minds open to unexpected
possibilities.
Hope can animate any number of life-changing decisions. The decision to
migrate, for instance, is motivated in most cases by a hopeful sense of what the
future will hold once one “gets there.” Even the decision to partner with
someone for life is a leap of faith, as is the decision to procreate. One’s basic
notions about agency (are individuals masters of their fate? Or simply lucky or
unlucky?) can also affect our social trajectories and contribute to shaping
experiences of inequality.
The election of Donald Trump in 2016 reminded many of us that the long
“arc of the moral universe” that Martin Luther King Jr. and Barack Obama
spoke of should not be taken for granted. Progress can easily be reversed, and
patterns of backlash can be dramatic. In recent years, we have seen renewed
threats to LGBTQ+ rights, immigrants’ rights, and reproductive rights—

including the stunning overturning of the Supreme Court’s 1973 decision in
Roe v. Wade. Surely, this is not the last time we will face backlashes, but the
future is unwritten and we need to be active in shaping it.
We engineer our world together by mobilizing narratives that expand
recognition about who is worthy. As today’s younger generations teach us, the
choices we make, how we vote with our feet every day, matter. A more inclusive
society is within our reach, but making it a reality means being the change we
envision for our world.
Why is living in more diverse circles going to make a difference? Recent
research has shown that when a privileged student has a college roommate from
a less-privileged background, it has a significant impact on their understanding
of inequality. This exposure can help a privileged person understand the
challenges that come with not having class privilege, and to revise meritocratic
and individualist accounts of success. Befriending someone from a low-income
background makes them less likely to believe that the poor are poor because of
moral failings. More generally, increasing contact between groups of different
backgrounds contributes to a decline of prejudice and discrimination.
This remains one of the most effective approaches to forging connections
between groups that are typically isolated from one another. Inclusion isn’t just
a platitude that powerful people promote to be politically correct, or to feather
their own nest. Affirmative action, corporate employee resource groups, and
related practices can be effective only if integration occurs at a social level. That
requires all of us to take ownership of the problem. This broad embrace has
everything to do with social resilience—instead of celebrating individual grit as a
virtue, let’s create institutions and cultural scripts that can act as support to
normalizing inclusion and fostering solidarity.
For middle-class white people, for instance, this might mean supporting local
school desegregation efforts. White parents can decide to move to more racially
diverse neighborhoods and send their children to schools with more racially
diverse populations, which encourages friendships across racial lines and helps
young people prepare to participate in a more inclusive society.
For the many working-class white people who value “treating people as
people” and extending respect to everyone, this may mean increasing their
exposure to those they perceive as unlike themselves and living up to these
principles more fully—and this holds for middle-class people as well. For

everyone, these collectivist attitudes should be applied not only to those who are
already familiar, but also to those who may be less familiar.
We should remember, too, that it is worth trying to understand even people
we may strongly disagree with. White working-class people who support
populist conservative politicians are also seeking recognition. Liberals,
progressives, and even anti-racists need to consider how to connect with them.
By reframing these groups as people in search of dignity and respect, it may be
possible to develop a constructive dialogue that can contribute to mending our
flailing democracy. While some methods they use to seek dignity are abhorrent,
we can still recognize that their search for a scapegoat stems from struggles with
their loss of a sense of worth and precarity. The Democratic Party could make
significant gains by regaining working-class voters with not only redistributive
policies, but also with messages of solidarity and dignity, as an alternative to the
Republican Party’s populist messages of division and blame. Redirecting
working-class anger toward the one percent is more likely to sustain fruitful
alliances than driving wedges between diverse categories of workers who have so
much in common.
Middle-class white people need to recognize our own role in reproducing
stigmas, not only by keeping low-income people and other marginalized groups
at bay, but also through opportunity hoarding. White people need to develop
understanding and emotional intelligence in order to go beyond conditioned
“white fragility.” Many avoid conversations about race and live in fear of being
accused of racism. This avoidance, euphemistically called “color-blindness,”
perpetuates harms against people of color by ignoring each group’s unique
challenges.
Future generations matter as well: what we tell our kids about the value of
diversity shapes their perceptions of the environment from an early age. We are
responsible for the kind of world we inspire them to work toward. We need to
learn to connect with a wide range of people by desegregating our own social
circles, neighborhoods, schools, workplaces, and more.
Baby boomers and Gen Xers need to cross generational divides. In particular,
they should do more to prioritize environmentalism, as pollution and climate
change are already harming younger people’s hopes for their future. Some
younger people feel they cannot ethically plan to have children when
sustainability remains a low priority for governments, companies, and many

older citizens. Building greater awareness of such issues is essential to bridging
generational tensions.
Expanding worth to stigmatized groups does not require deep
understanding. But it does require a willingness to support other groups when
they seek recognition. Learning to think in these terms may not bring about
rapid or radical change. But I wager that having the language to think about
these options can help us envision a world where more people feel valued. What
do we have to lose?
Some countries, such as Germany, have put in place “civic education” high
school curricula to teach children the art of communal living in a multicultural
environment. In Massachusetts, where I live, civic education is largely focused
on learning about government, voting, local associations, volunteering, and
human rights. American schools can do more to teach multicultural values as
American values—which will mean going beyond efforts that are limited to a
specific time period, like Black History Month or Latinx Heritage Month. We
have to invent other paths for becoming an inclusive society. All our cultural
institutions must take the lead in spreading narratives about linked fates and our
collective responsibilities. Significant efforts are already being made in this
direction.
In the workplace, diversity trainings and supposedly inclusive hiring practices
have often had disappointing results. Research on what helps increase diversity
in organizations tells us that mentoring, teaching by example, providing support
when needed, and making managers responsible for diversifying the workforce
will help much more than one-off or intermittent diversity trainings.
When it comes to solutions, we saw that today’s marketplace of ideas—self-
reliance, personal efficacy, and willpower—are grossly inadequate to meet the
challenges we face. We are told that it is our responsibility, and ours alone, to
look deep within ourselves, into our own psyche, to find “grit”—the internal
strength and resilience needed for individuals to act upon the world through
sheer determination. This goes hand in hand with a fashionable focus on the
trends of mindfulness, positive psychology, and other “quick fixes.” This focus
on individual solutions is at odds with a broader understanding of the dynamics
that drive the problems we aim to address. In contrast, the solutions that Iff

propose generate change by creating and diffusing new narratives—by
organizing our environment differently.
This book’s solutions are also at odds with currently trendy ideas about
“tribalism,” which assume that humans have a permanent and innate tendency
to hoard resources in favor of our ingroup members. But political polarization is
driven by much more than what happens in our heads. It is influenced by
outside factors such as high levels of unemployment, economic competition,
and economic inequality, as well as by electoral rules.
I prefer to think that our sense of community waxes and wanes across
different times and contexts. We may feel differently depending on how much
weight we put on our shared identity as members of a given group, how often
group members interact, and how tight our bonds are. These dimensions
influence how much “groupness” a group experiences, and whether they define
themselves in opposition to other groups. In arguing that humans have an
inherent instinct to protect ingroups, proponents of “tribalism” downplay the
many social factors that drive this groupness. We need a broader approach to
make sense of what is going on and to understand how boundaries between
groups can change.
Some members of dominant groups can view the recognition of subordinate
groups as an indication of their own group’s demise. In response, some redouble
their efforts to ensure that their own group remains dominant. While President
Barack Obama’s election was a prominent victory in African Americans’ fight
for recognition, many white people perceived his presidency as a threat to their
group. Later, many white voters acted on their resentment by electing Donald
Trump.
This has implications for how we go about promoting solidarity and fighting
discrimination. A lot of corporations and universities put their faith in making
people aware of their unconscious or implicit biases, as if awareness would
reduce bias. But biases are developed over a lifetime and don’t easily adapt to
awareness. Instead, we should be reducing stigma, by transforming the lenses
through which groups are perceived.
In order to feed solidarity, advocates need to promote narratives that extend
equal worth to marginalized groups, including by promoting diverse networks.
This makes fostering inclusion less dependent on random acts of kindness and
empathy. Instead, by making narratives of inclusion widely available, advocates

can ensure that diversity is baked into our society’s shared background
assumptions. Cuing can help, but it is a limited solution.
While this book is largely concerned with the United States, understanding the
value of recognition and dignity is equally important around the world. Indeed,
other countries have their own versions of the American dream. For many
people emigrating from the Middle East, Asia, and Africa, the European dream
offers the promise of a better life. Chinese president Xi Jinping, meanwhile, has
promoted a distinctive and popular “China dream,” which emphasizes the
possibilities of economic upward mobility.
Some of the US’s problems are also present in other societies. Many have also
seen skyrocketing income inequality and experienced a decline in upward
mobility. Everywhere, young people have faced setbacks and are mobilizing
politically to fight for their futures. At the same time, unsurprisingly, the suicide
rate in several strongly neoliberal countries (Australia, Canada, the UK, and the
US) has increased, particularly among young people. This may be connected to a
greater feeling of isolation which is fed by individualism.
America’s reckoning for racial justice inspired progressive movements
elsewhere: after the massive Black Lives Matter mobilizations in the summer of
2020, similar movements proliferated in Europe, Asia, and beyond. Countries
such as France, which had been reluctant to deal with domestic anti-Black
racism, are now addressing it like never before. Other groups are now mobilizing
more visibly and intensely, including First Nations in Canada, Indigenous
people in Latin America, the Roma in Europe, and women in Iran. As such
groups gain visibility, others around the world feel more empowered to expand
recognition. For instance, Asians in France launched an anti–Asian hate hashtag
campaign “#jenesuispasunvirus” (“I am not a virus”). Still, many young people
are feeding the base of right-wing movements in Germany, Poland, and other
countries.
Even though circumstances are different in every country and region, some
solutions I have identified still apply. Many wealthy countries face persistent
challenges with xenophobia and racism, and with integrating immigrants and
refugees. Challenges to democracy are also becoming even more threateningfl

around the world, as nationalists are gaining influence on both sides of the
Atlantic.
While many Americans believe they live in the best country, we must
remember that, as of 2020, one is better off living in twenty-eight other
advanced industrial countries than the United States, if one considers personal
safety, health and wellness, environmental quality, personal freedom, and choice.
There is much work to be done. To sustain hope, let’s remember that much has
changed in the last decades and many more changes are ahead.
Reimagining the kind of society we want to live in is necessary, and change
agents and young people we talked to help all of us see what alternative
narratives might look like—what new models and ideas are emerging. They tell
us that a focus on recognition should be at the center of how we think about the
future moving forward.
Fortunately, divisions are not fixed. Much is within our power as we consider
how to organize our daily lives, including deciding where we send our kids to
schools and in which neighborhoods we live. We can all feed or fight social and
spatial segregation, that is, create more opportunities for contacts between
groups as we make decisions about our daily lives.
Again, we must remember that dignity is no luxury. Rather, it has a direct
impact on well-being. This is why recognition needs to be factored explicitly into
lawmakers’ thinking as they advocate on behalf of their communities. This is
also why citizens need to produce a society with stronger bonds of solidarity.
Everyone will win from such a shift. The downwardly mobile working class is in
search of respect just as much as ethno-racial and religious minorities and
LGBTQ+ groups. These common needs must be recognized by all; many can
claim dignity at once, even if their suffering is greater than others’. Bringing
together the struggles of these groups is perhaps the most essential step for
healing our divided world. More change is possible—and indeed necessary—as
attitudes toward marginalized groups have continued to change over the last
decades. The same cannot be said about attitudes toward the working class, who
are often perceived as the losers of the system. Their horizons of possibilities
have drastically narrowed over the last decades, as their wages have declined,
together with their sense of worth. Trump provided an empowering narrative

for these people, but liberals and progressives have largely failed to counter that
narrative. Explicitly acknowledging how workers are penalized by the cultural
dominance of the upper-middle class, instead of indulging in self-congratulatory
smugness and class ethnocentrism, would be a first step.
Over the course of this book, I have sketched various strategies for extending
dignity and recognition to all groups, broadening our definitions of worth,
celebrating our common humanity, and reducing stigma. People must think
about how their own search for recognition will contribute to shaping the life
they want and allow them and those they love to flourish. With this in mind,
perhaps we can all live better together.

APPENDIX A: CHANGE AGENTS
My research team and I conducted interviews with 185 change agents over
roughly eighteen months. We sampled for breadth and diversity, with the goal to
identify a wide range of people who could best inform us on the various facets of
the contemporary public sphere. Only three interviewees requested anonymity
as a condition for participating in the research project.
With the goal of identifying change agents with a relatively high level of
cultural influence, my assistants and I used various networks to gain entry into
some fields. We also asked respondents for referrals. We reached far and deep to
capture various segments of this world that do not overlap with our networks.
But we also asked friends, colleagues, and acquaintances working in various
milieux to help us identify potential interviewees and facilitate contacts. While
political orientation was not a criteria of eligibility for the study, many turned
out to be liberal or progressive. Due to time and resource limitations, the sample
is not comprehensive. For instance, we did not conduct interviews with change
agents working in the fields of fashion or gastronomy.
The overall sample includes seventy-five interviews with individuals working
in comedy and entertainment. In many cases, their content is viewed by millions,
giving them unique influence over public discourse. These interviews were
conducted to gain a more detailed understanding of the recognition strategies
used in these professional fields, which produce particularly rich narratives
concerning the representation of various groups. These respondents include
current showrunners, producers, directors, actors, and staff writers, with the
majority having worked in multiple roles during their careers. For the purposes
of this study, we categorized them based on their primary role in the creation of
the TV series or film of interest (see Appendix A).
The research assistants for this part of the project, Nicole Letourneau and
Derek 
Robey, 
contacted 
the 
entertainers 
through 
public 
relations

representatives, managers, agents, and personal contact information, when
available. As response rates in this group were low, recruitment criteria were
expanded to include comics featured on the Netflix comedy series The Standups.
This portion of the sample consists of popular stand-up comics, comedy writers
(for scripted television, late-night television, or movies), and improvisational
comics. We used snowball sampling to increase the diversity and breadth of our
sample until we reached saturation.
Nicole Letourneau and Derek Robey conducted the bulk of the interviews
with this group and coded the data. We coauthored a few papers which inform
the section of chapter 5 that concern the strategies of destigmatization used by
entertainment workers. They took the lead with these papers.
Data collection took place between March 2020 and March 2021. The
context of the pandemic facilitated reaching out to influential change agents
who may not have given us time under normal circumstances. It also influenced
what we heard since it is quite possible that this common existential and health
trauma made many respondents worry about the quality of our collective life
and where we are heading as a society. But then, most contexts have peculiarities
and it is difficult to speculate about what we would have learned from interviews
conducted under different circumstances.
Interviews were typically conducted via video calls on Zoom or via telephone.
But for one exception, they were audio recorded and transcribed. The interviews
covered topics such as: 1) professional life; 2) social and cultural contributions
and audiences; 3) American society and social change; and 4) identity and
biography. Participants were asked questions pertaining to how they conceive of
their work and its impact, objectives and motivations when creating their work,
achievements and failures, and perceptions of others in their industry. They were
asked about methods through which they reach their audience, social messages
in their work, and changes in their field. They were also asked to reflect on
contemporary American society, the American dream, and its challenges. Finally,
they were asked to reflect on themselves in terms of identity, family background,
and assessment of themselves compared to others. The interview schedule is
available upon request.
Using NVivo, research assistants coded the original interview transcripts after
inductively developing a coding key based on a subset of interviews. These codes
capture the main challenges facing American society; their professional
trajectory; professional goals and contributions; professional challenges, views of

j
y p
g
p
g
the future, and so forth. Ten percent of the interviews have been double-coded
for intercoder reliability. Only minor discrepancies were found. They were
discussed and adjustments were made.
Change Agents Interviews
Category
Interviewee
Organization/Affiliation
Academia
 
 
 
Chignell, Andrew
Princeton University
 
Craig, David
University of Southern California
 
Gates, Henry Louis
Harvard University
 
Lewis, Sarah
Harvard University
 
West, Cornel
Union Theological Seminary
Advertising
 
 
 
Eng, Katie
PACO Collective
 
Garrido, Maria
Havas Group, Vivendi
 
Weiner, Jessica
Talk to Jess
Art and Creation
 
 
 
Diaz, Natalie
Poet
 
Ewing, Eve L.
Poet, University of Chicago,
Marvel
 
Harris, Lyle Ashton
Photographer, New York
University
 
Ludwig, Justine
Creative Time
 
Opie, Catherine
Photographer, UCLA
 
Steinman, Megan
The Underground Museum
 
Willis Thomas, Hank
Photographer
 
Willis, Deborah
Curator and photographer, New
York University
Climate Justice
 
 
 
Blackford, Loren
Sierra Club
 
Eder, Katie
Future Coalition, March For Our
Lives
 
Goldtooth, Dallas
Indigenous Environmental
Network
 
Gunn-Wright, Rhiana
Green New Deal/Roosevelt
Institute

 
McKibben, Bill
365.org
 
Noisecat, Julian Brave
Indigenous movements, Green
New Deal
 
Rabb, Nick
Sunrise Movement
 
Rathor, Skeena
Extinction Rebellion, UK
Community Organizing
 
 
 
Buchman, Ellen
The Opportunity Agenda
 
Ganz, Marshall
Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard University
 
Gomez, Alejandra
LUCHA (Arizona)
 
Han, Hahrie
Democracy Center, Johns
Hopkins
 
Kunreuther, Frances
Building Movement Project
 
Reyes, Arturo
We the People (Michigan)
 
Spillane, Ashley
Rock the Vote
Corporate Sector
 
 
 
Brown, Tim
Allbirds
 
Culmone, Kim
Mattel
 
Dreger, Monica
Mattel
 
Gelobter, Lisa
tEQuitable
 
Jepsen, Mary Lou
Openwater
 
Kennedy, Molly
Dove
 
Price, Mandy
Kanarys
 
Smith, Elise
Praxis Labs VR
Feminism/Gender
 
 
 
Crenshaw, Kimberlé
Columbia Law School
 
Gay, Roxane
Author
 
Sarsour, Linda
Women’s March, Arab American
Association
 
Stimpson, Catharine
New York University
Hollywood
 
 
 
Berk, Bobby
Queer Eye
 
Bloom, Rachel
Crazy Ex-Girlfriend
 
Brown, Karamo
Queer Eye
 
Cappiello, Heather
Madam Secretary
 
Chaiken, Ilene
The L Word

 
Chavkin, Rachel
Hadestown
 
Cole, Joe Robert
Black Panther
 
Cooper, Akela
Luke Cage, The 100
 
Daniels, Lee
Empire
 
Di Nonno, Madeline
Geena Davis Institute
 
Drucker, Zackary
Transparent
 
Dungey, Channing
Netflix, Warner Brothers
 
Evans, Bridgit Antoinette
Pop Culture Collaborative
 
Feldman, Liz
Dead to Me
 
Fogelman, Dan
This Is Us
 
Gamble, Sera
You, The Magicians
 
Hader, Bill
Barry
 
Jefferson, Cord
Watchmen, Succession, The Good
Place
 
Kang, Angela
The Walking Dead
 
Karolinski, Alexa
Unorthodox
 
Calderón Kellett, Gloria
One Day at a Time
 
King, Michelle
The Good Wife
 
King, Robert
The Good Wife
 
Konner, Jenni
Girls
 
Leonard, Franklin
The Black List
 
McDougal Jones, Naomi
writer, producer
 
Messer, Erica
Criminal Minds, Charmed
 
Miller, Bruce
The Handmaid’s Tale
 
Noblezada, Eva
Yellow Rose, Hadestown
 
Nunn, Laurie
Sex Education
 
Plec, Julie
The Vampire Diaries
 
Rodriguez, Dailyn
Queen of the South
 
Saracho, Tanya
Vida
 
Schur, Michael
The Office, Parks and Recreation
 
Soloway, Joey
Transparent
 
Starrbury, Michael
When They See Us
 
Strong, Danny
Empire
 
Swafford, Erika Green
How to Get Away with Murder,
New Amsterdam
 
Tigelaar, Liz
Little Fires Everywhere, Once

Upon a Time
 
Tramble Spellman, Nichelle
Truth Be Told
 
Urman, Jennie Snyder
Jane the Virgin
 
Wells, John
Shameless
 
Anonymous 1
Showrunner
 
Anonymous 2
Showrunner
Hollywood/Comedy
 
 
 
Alonzo, Cristela
Netflix Special: Cristela Alonzo:
Lower Classy
 
Barthwell, Ali
The Second City; Last Week
Tonight with John Oliver
 
Bell, W. Kamau
United Shades of America; Netflix
Special: Private School Negro
 
Brennan, Neal
Netflix Special: Neal Brennan: 3
Mics; Chappelle’s Show
 
Carney, Brittany
Featured on Comedy Central
Stand-Up
 
Cole, Deon
Netflix Special: Deon Cole: Cole
Hearted; Black-ish
 
Das, Vir
Netflix Special: Losing It; Netflix
Special: Abroad Understanding
 
Glass, Todd
Special: Todd Glass Talks About
Stuff
 
Gold, Judy
Comedy Central Presents: Judy
Gold
 
Gulman, Gary
HBO Special: The Great Depresh
 
Jay, Kavin
Netflix Special: Kavin Jay:
Everybody Calm Down!
 
Kroll, Nick
Kroll Show; Big Mouth; Special:
Thank You Very Cool
 
List, Joe
Netflix’s The Standups; Special: I
Hate Myself
 
Lucas, Keith
Netflix Special: Lucas Brothers:
On Drugs
 
Lucas, Kenny
Netflix Special: Lucas Brothers:
On Drugs
 
MacFarland, Kelly
Comedy Album: I Woke Up Today
 
Mahbubani, Vivek
Stand Up, Asia! for Comedy
Central Asia

 
Mittal, Aditi
Netflix Special: Things They
Wouldn’t Let Me Say
 
Morin, Brent
Netflix Special: I’m Brent Morin
 
Nathan, Vijai
Solo Show: Good Girls Don’t, But
Indian Girls Do
 
Nevins, Andrea
Hysterical
 
Norton, Jim
Netflix Special: A Mouthful of
Shame; The Jim Norton Show
 
Pepitone, Eddie
Special: For the Masses
 
Povitsky, Esther
Comedy Central Special: Hot for
My Name; Alone Together
 
Ryan, Katherine
Netflix Special: Katherine Ryan:
Glitter Room
 
Shlesinger, Iliza
Netflix Special: Unveiled; Netflix
Special: Elder Millennial
 
Sosa, Daniel
Netflix Special: Daniel Sosa:
Sosafado
 
Thurston, Baratunde
The Daily Show; The Onion
 
Watts, Reggie
Comedy Bang! Bang!; The Late
Late Show with James Corden;
Comedy Central Special: A Live in
Central Park
 
Anonymous 2
Stand-up comic
Immigration
 
 
 
Jiménez, Cristina
United We Dream
 
Vargas, Jose Antonio
Define American
Journalism/Writing
 
 
 
Filipovic, Jill
Journalist
 
Hannah-Jones, Nikole
The New York Times
 
Legro, Michelle
Gen by Medium
 
Martin, Courtney
Public Speaker
Labor Journalism
 
 
 
Greenhouse, Steven
The New York Times Labor
Journalist
Labor Organizing
 
 
 
Jayaraman, Saru
One Fair Wage
 
Karvelis, Noah
RedforED
 
Miller, Michelle
Coworker.org

 
Poo, Ai-jen
National Domestic Workers
Alliance
LGBTQA Activism
 
 
 
Dunham, Cyrus Grace
Trans activist
 
Fleischer, David
LA LGBT Leadership Lab
 
Vaid-Menon, Alok
Artist
 
Willis, Raquel
Trans activist
New Technology
 
 
 
boyd, danah
Data & Society, New York
University
 
Conte, Jack
Patreon
 
Kong, David
MIT Media Lab’s Community
Biotechnology Initiative
 
Humphreys, Bonnie
Crisis Text Line
 
Lublin, Nancy
Crisis Text Line
 
Roy, Deb
MIT Media Lab
 
Venkatesh, Sudhir
Columbia University, Twitter
 
Zuckerman, Ethan
Center for Civic Media,
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
Philanthropy/Foundation
 
 
 
Briggs, Xavier de Souza
Brookings Institution
 
Hunt-Hendrix, Leah
Solidaire Network, Ways to Win
 
Kleinfeld, Rachel
Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace
 
Pennington, Hilary
Ford Foundation
 
Plough, Alonzo L.
Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation
 
Yang, Chi-hui
Ford Foundation
Poverty
 
 
 
McReynolds, Ami
Feeding America
 
Warren, Dorian
Center for Community Change
Racial/Social Justice
 
 
 
Carruthers, Charlene
Black Youth Project
 
Dove, Shawn
Campaign for Black Male
Achievement
 
Goff, Phillip Atiba
Yale University

 
Meade, Desmond
Florida Rights Restoration
Coalition
 
Robinson, Rashad
Color of Change
Religion
 
 
 
Herring, Rev. Alvin
Faith in Action
 
Morn, Rev. Mary Katherine
Unitarian Universalist Service
Committee
 
Pesner, Jonah
Religious Action Center of
Reform Judaism
 
Suleiman, Imam Omar
Faith Forward Dallas at Thanks-
Giving Square
 
Wilson-Hartgrove, Jonathan
Poor People’s Campaign
Social Impact
 
 
 
Aiyer, Geeta
Boston Common Asset
Management
 
Bouri, Amit
GIIN
 
Kassoy, Andrew
B-Lab
 
Staley, Sister Barbara
Missionary Sisters of the Sacred
Heart
 
Whittaker, Martin
JUST Capital
Social Policy
 
 
 
Boushey, Heather
Washington Center for Equitable
Growth
 
Exley, Zack
New Consensus, Justice
Democrats
 
Greenberg, Leah
Indivisible
 
Levin, Ezra
Indivisible
 
McElwee, Sean
Data for Progress
 
Wong, Felicia
Roosevelt Institute
Socialist Revival
 
 
 
Hsiao, Andrew
Verso Books
 
Huang, Beth
Democratic Socialists of America
(Boston)
 
Robinson, Nathan
Current Affairs Magazine
 
Sunkara, Bhaskar
Jacobin Magazine, The Nation
 
Anonymous
Chapo Trap House
Technology and Narrative
Change
 
 

 
Allardice, Nick
Change.org
 
Collings, Naureen
More in Common
 
Heimans, Jeremy
Purpose
 
Jenkins, Alan
Harvard Law School, The
Opportunity Agenda
 
Kendall-Taylor, Nat
FrameWorks Institute
 
Kim, Jee
Narrative Initiative, Roosevelt
Institute
 
Dixon, Tim
More in Common
 
Pariser, Eli
Civic Signals
 
Slezak, James
Swayable
 
Uhls, Yalda
Center for Scholars &
Storytellers, UCLA
 
Wong, Robert
Google Creative Lab

APPENDIX B: COLLEGE STUDENTS
Chapter 6 draws on original analyses presented in papers coauthored with Mari
Sanchez and Shira Zilberstein, who conducted the interviews with American
college students, together with Derek Robey. Produced in the context of the
broader book project, these papers provide a more detailed analysis of the data,
from which I draw inspiration.
Respondents were recruited using snowball sampling from multiple points of
entry. To create diverse samples, the research assistants mobilized a range of
contacts at public and private colleges and universities in the Midwest and the
Northeast (including elite universities and community colleges). The name and
place of origin of the respondents have been changed to protect confidentiality.
We do not aim to generalize findings to a larger population but to improve
our understanding of the worldviews of our respondents. This is why the use of
theoretical sampling focused on class is justified.
While recruiting interviewees, we did not aim to include an equal proportion
of politically progressive, moderate, and conservative youth. However, our
sample is somewhat politically diverse—particularly in the Midwest, reflecting
the greater political diversity of this region as compared to the Northeast, which
strongly leans Democratic, liberal, or progressive.
The semi-structured interviews were conducted via video calls on Zoom or
via telephone. The questionnaire concerned the collective challenges
respondents and American society face and how they respond to them, how
much they believe they can influence what is happening now, how and where
they find hope and inspiration, and what they view as their pathways for
reaching their goals. We also looked into their perception of their generation and
its challenges, their views on criteria of worth and belonging, and how they
imagine their ideal futures.

We conducted two rounds of in-depth interviews with students, before and
during COVID-19. Forty-seven of our original eighty respondents agreed to be
reinterviewed in June and July 2020. This subset cannot be distinguished from
the other members of the sample on any relevant dimension.
For Round One, conducted between September 2019 and February 2020, we
used vignettes where we asked respondents their views on a range of young
people with different leisure/work profiles (more or less ambitious, career-
oriented, etc.). These averaged ninety minutes and explored respondents’ self-
concept, what they perceive as their expected selves, objectives, and life choices,
how they understand what is possible, the challenges they face, the resources
they have at their disposal, and how they imagine their future, envisage a better
society, and find hope (if relevant).
Round Two interviews averaged around twenty minutes and were conducted
in June and July 2020. They aimed to capture how respondents reacted in
response to the increase in uncertainty generated by COVID-19 and to the
recent Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement against police violence that
followed the killing of George Floyd on May 25, 2020. We explore whether they
frame differently their identity, objectives, perceived challenges, resources,
agency, and future, compared to Round One interviews. We considered
respondents’ subjective resilience, that is, what students tell us they have done to
address challenges and maintain hope. Both interview schedules are available
upon request.
Tables A and B describe our two samples. Participants are between eighteen
and twenty-three years of age. Middle-class and upper-middle-class students
represent half of our interviewees in Wave 1 (forty out of eighty individuals) and
Wave 2 (twenty-three out of forty-seven individuals).
In the Northeast, 54 percent of respondents have parents who are college-
educated professionals, managers, or businesspeople. Twenty-three percent have
semiprofessional parents with some college, and 14 percent have blue-collar/low-
status white-collar parents who are not college educated. In contrast, 44 percent
of the Midwest interviews have college-educated parents who are professionals,
managers, or businesspeople; 13 percent have semiprofessional parents with
some college; and 37 percent have blue-collar/low-status white-collar parents
who are high school graduates. This represents almost three times the number of
less privileged youth than in our Northeastern sample.ff

While we note some class and ethnic differences within the cohort, we do not
conduct a systematic comparison between class or ethnic groups. Fifty-eight
percent belong to racialized groups—mostly Asians and African Americans. The
Midwesterners are more diverse than students from the Northeast, as are the
working-class as compared to the upper-middle-class students.
Using NVivo, we coded the original interviews after inductively developing a
coding key based on a subset of interviews. These codes capture 1) cultural
repertoires individuals draw on to make sense of the future; 2) scripts of self; 3)
views on conditions that foster social resilience as defined above. Coding
involved determining whether their statements about their self-concept,
challenges, and views on the future fit within each category and what repertoires
their statements drew on. Ten percent of the interviews have been double-coded
for intercoder reliability.
TABLE A: Northeast and Midwest College Students by Parent Education and Current
Occupation*
 
 
NORTHEAST
MIDWEST
TOTAL
Privileged
Professionals, managers,
business owners (college-
educated)
30
10
40
Less privileged
Semi-professionals (some
college or college degree)
12
8
20
Low status white-collar workers
and blue-collar workers or
single-parent households (some
college or HS degree)
9
11
20
Total
 
51
29
80
* Twenty-one of the privileged respondents are white (14 from the Northeast and 7 from the Midwest),
while only 13 of the less privileged are white (6 from the Northeast and 7 from the Midwest).
TABLE B: Northeast and Midwest College Students* Aged 18-23 by Gender**, Race/Ethnicity***,
and Type of Higher Education Institution Attended****
 
 
NORTHEAST
MIDWEST
TOTAL
Gender and
Male White
9
7
16

Ethnicity
Female White
11
7
18
Subtotal White
20 (39%)
14 (48%)
34 (43%)
Male Black
8
2
10
Female Black
3
3
6
Male Latinx
2
5
7
Female Latinx
3
1
4
Male Asian
3
0
3
Female Asian
12
4
16
Subtotal POC
31 (61%)
15 (42%)
46 (57%)
Type of Higher
Education
Institution
Ivy-league
9
0
9 (11%)
Private research universities
(including regional institutions)
7
3
10 (13%)
Public research universities
25
9
34 (43%)
Liberal arts colleges and
universities (including regional
institutions)
10
14
24 (30%)
Community College
0
3
3 (4%)
TOTAL
 
51
29
80
* Classified based on region of origin (Northeasterners come primarily from Massachusetts while
Midwesterners come from Illinois, Indiana, Minnesota, and Missouri).
** Two respondents identified as non-binary.
*** Four East Coasters and two Midwesterners self-identified as biracial, but were categorized by the
race/ethnicity they most identified with (Note: POC stands for “person of color”).
**** Categories: 1) Ivy (e.g., Harvard, Cornell, Columbia); 2) Public research (e.g., UMass-Amherst, U of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, U of Wisconsin at Whitewater); 3) Private research (e.g., Boston University,
U of Rochester, DePaul); 4) Liberal arts college (e.g., Union, Elmhurst College, St. Mary’s); 5) Community
colleges (e.g., Oakton, Kankakee, Truman).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I have been studying how people define their worth and that of others for almost
forty years, and I’ve shared my findings in my books Money, Morals, and
Manners, The Dignity of Working Men, How Professors Think, and Getting
Respect (coauthored). As these titles suggest, these academic books are about
what people value, whom they choose to respect, and how they fight for their
own dignity. They also concern how people draw boundaries and contribute to
segregation and inequality. This new book, Seeing Others, is the culmination of
this research agenda. It is an attempt to make sense of it all and to bring my
perspective to a wider audience. I hope the book will prove useful as we all work
to find meaningful paths forward.
Seeing Others would not have become a reality without a generous two-year
fellowship from the Andrew Carnegie Foundation, a yearlong residential
fellowship from the Russell Sage Foundation, and grants from the Harvard
University Faculty of Arts and Science, the Weatherhead Center for
International 
Affairs 
at 
Harvard 
University, 
and 
the
GlobalMentalHealth@Harvard Initiative, a joint effort of the Harvard Medical
School, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, and the Harvard Global
Health Institute. The support of such organizations makes research possible.
Equally crucial were those whose words and thoughts are at the center of this
book, both the “change agents” who agreed to be interviewed for this project, as
well as the American college students who welcomed an invitation to participate
in the study. Words do not suffice to express my gratitude that they agreed to
participate in the study in the midst of the pandemic.
But many other people have accompanied me on the road that has led to this
book, from its early conception, to the conducting and coding of interviews
during the peak of the pandemic, to the challenging process of learning to write
for a wide audience.

In 2014 one of the most seminal contemporary philosophers writing on the
topic of recognition, Axel Honneth, invited me to deliver the annual Adorno
Lectures at Institut für Sozialforschung, in Frankfurt, Germany. This was a first
opportunity to draw connections between my writings on worth, dignity, and
respect to recognition conceived as a cultural process. Although I never
published these three lectures, they led to my 2016 Presidential Address to the
American Sociological Association delivered a few months before the election of
Donald Trump. “Addressing Recognition Gap: Destigmatization and the
Reduction of Inequality” was the first iteration of the argument that is more
fully developed in Seeing Others. It also led to my 2017 Erasmus Prize essay
“Prisms of Inequality: Moral Boundaries, Exclusion, and Academic Evaluation.”
This was followed by another pivotal invitation from the leading British
sociologist of inequality, Mike Savage, who asked me to give the 2018 British
Journal of Sociology (BJS) lecture at the London School of Economics titled
“From Having to Being: Self-Worth and the Current Crisis of American
Society.” This lecture expanded on both the Presidential Address and the
Erasmus essay. I am grateful to Axel and Mike for these invitations, as well as to
the colleagues who published thoughtful essays responding to this BJS lecture,
which inspired its further development: Andrew Cherlin (Johns Hopkins
University), Margaret Frye (University of Michigan), Eva Illouz (Hebrew
University), Giselinde Kuipers (KU Leuven), Adia Wingfield (Washington
University in St. Louis), as well as Mike Savage himself.
While working on this book, I benefited from the research assistance of
several exceptionally capable graduate students and collaborators, particularly
Nicole Letourneau, Derek Robey, Mari Sanchez, and Shira Zilberstein, who
played a crucial role in recruiting respondents and conducting and coding
interviews with change agents and students. This book would not exist without
them. We developed together papers that are the basis for sections on how
change agents and college students produce social change. Other graduate and
undergraduate research assistants who contributed to the data collection and
analysis include Laura Adler, Elena Ayala-Hurtado, Stefan Beljean, Adrienne
Chan, Johnny Cook, Nino Cricco, Maleah Fekete, and Priya Thelapurath. I
thank the Harvard students who contributed terrific comments on the
manuscript: Victoria Ashbury, Elena Ayala-Hurtado, Adrienne Chan, Johnny
Cook, Derek Robey, Mari Sanchez, Priya Thelapurath, and Shira Zilberstein, as
well as former students Laura Adler (Yale University), Nina Gheihman

y
(University of California, Berkeley), and Bo Yun Park (University of
Richmond). Finally, I benefited from exceptional staff and administrative
support from Lisa Albert in the Department of Sociology and Kathleen Hoover
in the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs.
My thinking was also influenced by the members of the program Successful
Societies of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, an organization that
generously supported my work for eighteen years. This band of loyal friends and
colleagues had a big impact on my thinking and influenced the argument
developed here. I thank in particular Gérard Bouchard (Université du Québec a
Chicoutimi), Wendy Espeland (Northwestern University), Peter Gourevitch
(University of California, San Diego), David Grusky (Stanford University), Peter
Hall (Harvard University), Patrick Le Galès (Science Po), Hazel Markus
(Stanford University), Paul Pierson (University of California, Berkeley), Biju
Rao (World Bank), Francesca Polletta (University of California, Irvine), William
Sewell Jr. (University of Chicago), Anne E. Wilson (Wilfrid Laurier University),
as well as other early program members, James Dunn (McMaster University),
Ron Levi (University of Toronto) and Ann Swidler (University of California,
Berkeley). Other program members Irene Bloemraad, Leanne Son Hing, and
Will Kymlicka also influenced my thinking as we coauthored a 2019 Daedalus
paper that shaped chapter 2 of Seeing Others.
My terrific collaborators from the Getting Respect team were also on my mind
as I developed my argument, which is informed in many ways by our shared
understanding of experiences of groupness, stigmatization, and discrimination
in the United States, Brazil, and Israel: Joshua Guetzkow (Hebrew University),
Hannah Herzog and Nissim Mizrachi (Tel Aviv University), Elisa Reis (Federal
University Rio), Graziella Moraes Silva (Graduate Institute for International and
Development Studies), and Jessica Welburn (Rand Corporation).
The following colleagues and friends took time to comment on chapters of
the book or on the book as a whole. I am deeply indebted to them for their
generosity, especially given that they are all way too busy. They include Suzanne
Berger (MIT), Bart Bonikowski (New York University), Clayton Childress
(University of Toronto), Matthew Clair (Stanford University), Frank Dobbin
(Harvard University), Shai Dromi (Harvard University), Jan Willem Duyvendak
(University of Amsterdam), Wendy Espeland (Northwestern University), Lisa
Glazer (Pine Street Inn), Mary Ann Glynn (Boston College), Peter Hall
(Harvard University), James Jasper (CUNY Graduate Center), Paul Lichterman

y
p
(University of Southern California), Cathie Jo Martin (Boston University),
Jonathan Mijs (Boston University), Michelle Nicholasen (Harvard University),
Helga Nowotny (University of Vienna), Francesca Polletta (University of
California, Irvine), Leah Price (Rutgers University), Violaine Roussel
(Université de Paris 8), Abigail Saguy (UCLA), Mike Savage (London School of
Economics), Amelia Thelen, and Natasha Warikoo (Tufts University).
At Harvard, I received inspiration from many friends, colleagues, and
students from the departments of sociology and African and African American
Studies, the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs, and the Center for
European Studies. I benefited from exchanges with colleagues from other
departments such as political scientists Jennifer Hochschild, Michael Sandel,
and Brandon Terry; experts of mental health such as Arthur Kleinman, Laura
Kubzanski, Cindy Liu, and Vikram Patel; education experts such as Anthony
Jacks and Jal Mehta; and many more. But I want to single out members of the
research cluster on Comparative Inequality and Inclusion at the Weatherhead
Center for International Affairs who helped me think about stigma, recognition,
dignity, respect, status, solidarity, unsettled times, and social resilience over the
last few years through their own work on the transformation of boundaries
toward immigrant and refugees, low-income groups, ethnoracial, religious,
national, and sexual minorities, and more—in particular Lorenza Antonucci
(University of Birmingham), Cetin Celik (Koç University), Poulami
Chakrabarti (Queens University), Yuval Feinstein (University of Haifa), Jason
Ferguson (Harvard Society of Fellows and University of California, Los
Angeles), Lorenza Fontana (University of Glasgow), Kobe De Koere (University
of Amsterdam), Matthias Koenig (University of Heidelberg), Ron Levi
(University of Toronto), Arturo Rodriguez Morató (University of Barcelona),
Sandra Portocarrero (Columbia University), Kristina Bakkaer Simonsen
(Arhuus University), Anna Skarpelis (Wissenschaft Zentrum Berlin), Ioana
Sendroiu (University of Hong Kong), Talia Schiff (Tel Aviv University), Cécile
Van de Velde (Université de Montréal), Thijs van Dooremalen (KU Leuven),
Gökce Yurdakul (Humbolt University), Kate Williams (University of
Melbourne), and Elke Winter (University of Ottawa).
Students in my undergraduate course “Culture and Inclusion in a Divided
America,” which I taught at Harvard in the spring of 2022, were a useful
sounding board as I was finishing the book. Their insights and experiences
helped me sharpen arguments and anticipate objections.

p
p
g
p
j
In addition to those mentioned above, a number of friends and colleagues
were useful interlocutors as I developed the book. Some helped me identify and
reach out to interviewees across multiple milieux. At the risk of forgetting
someone, I want to thank Nancy Ammerman (Boston University), Chris Bail
(Duke University), Julie Battilana (Harvard University), Sheri Berman (Barnard
College), Amy Binder (University of California, San Diego), Luc Boltanski
(Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales), danah boyd (New York
University), Robert Boynton (New York University), Xavier de Souza Briggs
(Brookings Institute), Angèle Christin (Stanford), Pedro Conceição (United
Nations Human Development Programme), Shelley Correll (Stanford
University), David Craig (University of Southern California), Dana Fischer
(University of Maryland), Marshall Ganz (Harvard University), Doug
Hartmann (University of Minnesota), Diane Isenberg (Ceniarth), Riva
Kastoryano (Sciences-Po), Shamus Khan (Princeton University), Giselinde
Kuipers (KU Leuven), Nicholas Lemann (Columbia University), Ya-Wen Lei
(Harvard University), Sarah Lewis (Harvard University), Jane Mansbridge
(Harvard University), Reece Peck (College of Staten Island), Walter Powell
(Stanford University), Andrea Press (University of Virginia), Cecilia Ridgeway
(Stanford University), Michael Schudson (Columbia University), Rachel
Sherman (New School), Iddo Tavory (New York University), Dorian Warren
(Center for Community Change), and Andreas Wimmer (Columbia
University).
My desire to communicate to readers beyond the academy became more
urgent during the Trump years. Margo Beth Fleming at the Brockman Agency
persuaded me that I should and could write a trade book and that now was the
time. She encouraged me through thick and thin. Through our regular
exchanges around shared interests ranging from stand-up comics to our intimate
friends, our Peloton coaches, she became a trusted sounding board, for which I
am so grateful.
At Atria/One Signal Publishers, an imprint of Simon & Schuster, Julia
Cheiffetz and early on, Nicholas Ciani, helped me develop my argument and
improve it in most significant ways. I also thank the whole Atria team for their
engagement with the project. I benefited from the uber-competent editorial
work of Connor Guy and Emi Ikkanda.
I also want to acknowledge the crucial support of my siblings Vincent and
Natalie, as well as that of several close friends (near and far) who contributed to

my sanity during the isolation of the pandemic years and/or much needed post-
COVID adventurous and fun trips—Ben Schneider, Kathleenn Thelen,
Michael Pekowski, Lisa Glaser, Diane Isenberg, Cathie Jo Martin, Jim Milkey,
Susan Eckstein, Paul Osterman, James Jasper, Sarah Rosenfield, Bruce
Carruthers, Wendy Espeland, Neil Fligstein, Heather Haverman, Liz Cohen,
Herrick Chapman, Jenny Mansbridge, Sandy Jencks, Riva Kastoryano, as well as
others I stayed connected with via Zoom or other means—you know who you
are.
Last but not least, this book would not exist without the engagement,
entertainment, steady presence, and affection of my terrific family (and our
pandemic 
she-dog 
Youpi/Max/Poupi). 
The 
project 
benefited 
from
conversations with and feedback from my adult children Gabrielle and Pierre, as
well as Chloe who commented on the manuscript. I also want to thank my
partner in crime, husband and sociologist extraordinaire Frank Dobbin, whose
own deadlines, interest, love, and support were crucial in helping me complete
this project.
Finally, the book is dedicated to Pierre and Chloe, because their own life
experiences and hopes made me want to write this book, for them and for their
friends, in celebration of their collective future. And because it is their turn and
because I love them so very much.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
MICHÈLE LAMONT is professor of sociology and of African and African
American Studies and the Robert I. Goldman Professor of European Studies at
Harvard University.
A cultural and comparative sociologist, she is the author or coauthor of a
dozen books and edited volumes and more than one hundred articles on a range
of topics including culture, inequality, racism, stigma, social change, and
qualitative methods.
After directing the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs, Harvard
University (2014–2021), she now leads its research cluster on Comparative
Inequality and Inclusion. Recent honors include a Carnegie Fellowship (2019–
2021), a Russell Sage Foundation fellowship (2019–2020), the 2017 Erasmus
Prize, and honorary doctorates from six countries. She served as the 108th
president of the American Sociological Association in 2016–2017.
SimonandSchuster.com
www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Michele-Lamont
 @OneSignalPub 
 @OneSignalPub

We hope you enjoyed reading
this Simon & Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
and see terms and conditions.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and
send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in
your inbox.

NOTES


INTRODUCTION: The Power of Recognition
Hannah-Jones’s opening essay “The 1619 Project,” New York Times, August 14, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/1619-america-slavery.html; The 1619
Project: A New Origin Story (New York: Random House Publishing Group, 2021).
With support from the Pulitzer Foundation Naomi Schaefer Riley, “ ‘The 1619 Project’ Enters
American Classrooms,” Education Next (blog), May 28, 2020, https://www.educationnext.org/1619-
project-enters-american-classrooms-adding-new-sizzle-slavery-significant-cost/.
That same year, then-president Donald Trump Philip S. Gorski, Samuel L. Perry, and Jemar Tisby,
The Flag and the Cross: White Christian Nationalism and the Threat to American Democracy (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2022). Chap. 2.
conservative lawmakers attempted to bar teachers from any 1619 Project Adam Serwer, “The
Fight Over the 1619 Project Is Not About the Facts,” The Atlantic, December 23, 2019,
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2019/12/historians-clash-1619-project/604093/; Naaz
Modan, “What’s behind the 1619 Project Controversy?,” K-12 Dive, February 12, 2021,
https://www.k12dive.com/news/whats-behind-the-1619-project-controversy/594965/.
Dignity affects quality of life Daniel A. Hojman and Álvaro Miranda, “Agency, Human Dignity, and
Subjective Well-Being,” World Development 101 (2018): 1–15; Matthew A. Andersson and Steven
Hitlin, “Subjective Dignity and Self-Reported Health: Results from the United States before and
during the Covid-19 Pandemic,” SSM - Mental Health, May 7, 2022, 100113.
Bolstering this claim, economists recently found Milena Nikolova and Femke Cnossen, “What Makes
Work Meaningful and Why Economists Should Care about It,” IZA Institute of Labour Economics,
April 2020.
Consider, for instance, the narrative of meritocracy Michael Sandel, The Tyranny of Merit: What’s
Become of the Common Good? (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2020).
structural obstacles that have long held back Melvin Oliver and Thomas M. Shapiro, eds., Black
Wealth / White Wealth: A New Perspective on Racial Inequality (New York: Routledge, 1995).
psychologists, governments, and policy makers Angela Duckworth, Grit: The Power of Passion and
Perseverance (New York: Scribner, 2016); “Strategic National Framework on Community Resilience,”
Community Resilience Programme (London: UK Cabinet Office, March 2011).
But grit is not determined by individual will Peter A. Hall and Michèle Lamont, eds., Social
Resilience in the Neoliberal Era (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
to engage in civic life Eric Klinenberg, Palaces for the People: How Social Infrastructure Can Help Fight
Inequality, Polarization, and the Decline of Civic Life (New York: Crown, 2018).
But the lines that divide us are not immutable Michèle Lamont et al., Getting Respect: Responding to
Stigma and Discrimination in the United States, Brazil, and Israel (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2016), 35–58; Richard Fletcher, Alessio Cornia, and Rasmus Nielsen, “How Polarized Are
Online and Offline News Audiences? A Comparative Analysis of Twelve Countries,” International
Journal of Press/Politics 25, no. 2 (2020): 169–95; Noam Gidron, James Adams, and Will Horne,
“American Affective Polarization in Comparative Perspective,” Elements in American Politics, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108914123.
In 1973, for instance, 90 percent Amy Adamczyk and Yen-Chiao Liao, “Examining Public Opinion
About LGBTQ-Related Issues in the United States and Across Multiple Nations,” Annual Review of

Sociology 45, no. 1 (July 30, 2019): 401–23, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-073018-022332.
Another study showed that Jacob Poushter and Nicholas Kent, “The Global Divide on Homosexuality
Persists,” Pew Research Center’s Global Attitudes Project, June 25, 2020,
https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2020/06/25/global-divide-on-homosexuality-persists/.
(DEI) initiatives has become enormously popular Eunmi Mun and Jiwook Jung, “Change above the
Glass Ceiling: Corporate Social Responsibility and Gender Diversity in Japanese Firms,”
Administrative Science Quarterly 63, no. 2 (June 1, 2018): 409–40; Heidi Gottfried and Laura Reese,
eds., Equity in the Workplace: Gendering Workplace Policy Analysis (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books,
2004).
But they are clearly not enough Frank Dobbin and Alexandra Kalev, Getting to Diversity: Changing
Workplaces for Good (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2022).
When I say “recognition,” “[Recognition is] the affirmation of positive qualities of human subjects and
groups.” Axel Honneth, The I in We: Studies in the Theory of Recognition (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press,
2014). I am referring to a vast range of criteria and contesting dimensions of worth (including whether
and how much socioeconomic status is valued). It also takes into consideration the cultural schemas
that underpin definitions of worth, which are typically overlooked by social psychological approaches to
status. See also Charles Taylor et al., Multiculturalism: Examining the Politics of Recognition, ed. Amy
Gutmann (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994); Nancy Fraser, “Rethinking Recognition,”
New Left Review 3 (2000): 107–20.
which psychologists came to call the “Obama effect” Seth K. Goldman and Diana C. Mutz, “The
Impact of the Obama Campaign on White Racial Attitudes,” in The Obama Effect: How the 2008
Campaign Changed White Racial Attitudes (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2014), 1–14; Luis
M. Rivera and E. Ashby Plant, “The Psychological Legacy of Barack Obama: The Impact of the First
African-American President of the United States on Individuals’ Social Cognition,” Social Cognition
34, no. 6 (December 2016): 495–503.
something other than “social status,” Michael Sauder, Freda B. Lynn, and Joel Podolny, “Status:
Insights from Organizational Sociology,” Annual Review of Sociology 38 (2012): 267–83,
https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-soc-071811-145503; Cecilia L. Ridgeway, “Why
Status Matters for Inequality,” American Sociological Review 79, no. 1 (February 2014): 1–16,
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0003122413515997. People who study interpersonal status
recognize that status often requires respect. Steven L. Blader and Siyu Yu, “Are Status and Respect
Different or Two Sides of the Same Coin?,” Academy of Management Annals 11 (2017): 800–824,
https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2015.0150.
But this is not necessarily so for the working class Michèle Lamont, Money, Morals, and Manners:
The Culture of the French and the American Upper-Middle Class (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992); Michèle Lamont, The Dignity of Working Men: Morality and the Boundaries of Race, Class, and
Immigration (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000); Antony S. R. Manstead, “The
Psychology of Social Class: How Socioeconomic Status Impacts Thought, Feelings, and Behaviour,”
British Journal of Social Psychology 57, no. 2 (April 2018): 267–91, https://doi.org/10.1111/bjso.12251;
Lauren Valentino, “The Heterarchy of Occupational Status: Evidence for Diverse Logics of Prestige in
the United States,” Sociological Forum 36, no. S1 (2021): 1395–1418,
https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12762.
Having one’s sense of worth affirmed. Hojman and Miranda, “Agency, Human Dignity, and Subjective
Well-Being.”

Republican Party has been more successful than the Democratic Party “In Changing U.S.
Electorate, Race and Education Remain Stark Dividing Lines,” Pew Research Center, June 2, 2020,
https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2020/06/02/in-changing-u-s-electorate-race-and-education-
remain-stark-dividing-lines/.
her opponent Donald Trump Michèle Lamont, Bo Yun Park, and Elena Ayala-Hurtado, “Trump’s
Electoral Speeches and His Appeal to the American White Working Class,” British Journal of Sociology
68, no. S1 (2017): S153–80.
the plethora of recent studies on them Cynthia Miller-Idriss, Hate in the Homeland: The New Global
Far Right (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2020); Gorski, Perry, and Tisby, The Flag and the
Cross; Amy J. Binder and Jeffrey L. Kidder, The Channels of Student Activism: How the Left and Right
Are Winning (and Losing) in Campus Politics Today (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2022);
Yuval Feinstein, Rally ’round the Flag: The Search for National Honor and Respect in Times of Crisis
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2022).
worsened during the pandemic Alison Brunier and Carla Drysdale, “COVID-19 Pandemic Triggers
25% Increase in Prevalence of Anxiety and Depression Worldwide,” World Health Organization, March
2, 2022, https://www.who.int/news/item/02-03-2022-covid-19-pandemic-triggers-25-increase-in-
prevalence-of-anxiety-and-depression-worldwide.
divert us from more pressing matters Francis Fukuyama, Identity: The Demand for Dignity and the
Politics of Resentment (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2018); Mark Lilla, The Once and Future
Liberal: After Identity Politics (New York: Harper, 2017).
about 50 percent of Americans their age attend college Erin Duffin, “U.S. Higher Education
Enrollment Rates, by Age Group 1970-2019,” Statista, June 2, 2021,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/236093/higher-education-enrollment-rates-by-age-group-us/.
the media often use the label “Gen Z” Journalists regularly refer to Gen Zs and millennials with
generational labels, with references to the first group peaking in 2019 and those to the second group
peaking in 2014 (according to our LexisNexis analysis). For their part, social scientists note that the label
“Gen Z” was made up by the media as well as by the marketing industry and that it does not designate
an actual demographic group. (Philip N. Cohen, “Generation Labels Mean Nothing. It’s Time to
Retire Them,” Washington Post, July 7, 2021,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/07/07/generation-labels-mean-nothing-retire-
them/.) Throughout the book I refer to cohorts by these labels, especially when I cite surveys that use
the terms, but I do so while recognizing that we cannot distinguish between patterns that are
characteristic of a time period, a cohort, or age group. This is known as the “age-cohort-period” (ACP)
effect. For details, see Ethan Fosse and Christopher Winship, “Analyzing Age-Period-Cohort Data: A
Review and Critique,” Annual Review of Sociology 45, no. 1 (July 30, 2019): 467–92. This debate is
beyond the scope of my book.
those born between 1997 and 2012 Michael Dimock, “Defining Generations: Where Millennials End
and Generation Z Begins,” Pew Research Center, accessed June 2, 2022,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/01/17/where-millennials-end-and-generation-z-begins/.
What is the point of living with purpose Michèle Lamont, “From ‘Having’ to ‘Being’: Self-Worth and
the Current Crisis of American Society,” British Journal of Sociology 70, no. 3 (June 2019): 660–707.
correlated with a rapid decline in the number of attempted suicides Julia Raifman et al.,
“Difference-in-Differences Analysis of the Association between State Same-Sex Marriage Policies and
Adolescent Suicide Attempts,” JAMA Pediatrics 171, no. 4 (2017): 350–56.

the American Supreme Court’s June 2022 decision Nina Totenberg and Sarah McCammon,
“Supreme Court Overturns Roe v. Wade, Ending Right to Abortion Upheld for Decades,” NPR, June
24, 2022, https://www.npr.org/2022/06/24/1102305878/supreme-court-abortion-roe-v-wade-
decision-overturn.
have been threatened by conservative lawmakers “Legislation Affecting LGBTQ Rights Across the
Country,” American Civil Liberties Union, October 7, 2022, https://www.aclu.org/legislation-
affecting-lgbtq-rights-across-country.
Backlashes like these may slow down social progress Yasemin Nuhoglu Soysal, Limits of Citizenship:
Migrants and Postnational Membership in Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994); John
W. Meyer, Patricia Bromley, and Francisco O. Ramirez, “Human Rights in Social Science Textbooks:
Cross-National Analyses, 1970–2008,” Sociology of Education 83, no. 2 (2010): 111–34.
those who condemn so-called identity politics Lilla, The Once and Future Liberal.
feel like an “outsider within” Patricia Hill Collins, “Learning from the Outsider Within: The
Sociological Significance of Black Feminist Thought,” Social Problems 33, no. 6 (1986): s14–32,
https://doi.org/10.2307/800672.
lenses through which stigmatized groups are perceived have changed In 2000, the Netherlands was
the first country to fully recognize same-sex marriage, and as of 2017, twenty-nine countries adopted the
provision. Poushter and Kent, “The Global Divide on Homosexuality Persists.”


Chapter 1: THE VIEW FROM ABOVE: The Upper-Middle Class and the Failures of the American Dream
Lower-income families Juliana M. Horowitz, Ruth Igielnik, and Rakesh Kochhar, “Most Americans Say
There Is Too Much Economic Inequality in the U.S., but Fewer Than Half Call It a Top Priority,” Pew
Research Center, January 9, 2020, https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2020/01/09/most-
americans-say-there-is-too-much-economic-inequality-in-the-u-s-but-fewer-than-half-call-it-a-top-
priority/. Middle-income Americans are adults whose annual household income is two-thirds to double
the national median, after incomes have been adjusted for household size. Lower-income households
have incomes less than 67 percent of the median, and upper-income households have incomes that are
more than double the median.
their hard work and personal sacrifices will never be rewarded Raj Chetty et al., “The Fading
American Dream: Trends in Absolute Income Mobility since 1940,” Science 356, no. 6336 (April 28,
2017): 398–406.
One result has been a major mental health crisis Holly Hedegaard, Sally C. Curtin, and Margaret
Warner, “Suicide Mortality in the United States, 1999-2019,” National Center for Health Statistics,
February 19, 2021, https://doi.org/10.15620/cdc:101761; Catherine K. Ettman et al., “Prevalence of
Depression Symptoms in US Adults Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” JAMA Network
Open 3, no. 9 (2020): e2019686, https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.19686.
The 2008 Great Recession left many Those higher on the income ladder generally fare best in terms of
relative subjective well-being when they compare themselves to others lower in the pecking order. See
Arthur S. Alderson and Tally Katz-Gerro, “Compared to Whom? Inequality, Social Comparison, and
Happiness in the United States,” Social Forces 95, no. 1 (September 1, 2016): 25–54. However, between
2005 and 2015, increases in past-year depression have been particularly high among those in the lowest
and highest annual household income groups in the United States. See Andrea H. Weinberger et al.,
“Trends in Depression Prevalence in the USA from 2005 to 2015: Widening Disparities in Vulnerable
Groups,” Psychological Medicine 48, no. 8 (2018): 1308–15.
They opened the gates to Anne Case and Angus Deaton, “Life Expectancy in Adulthood Is Falling for
Those without a BA Degree, but as Educational Gaps Have Widened, Racial Gaps Have Narrowed,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 11 (March 16, 2021): e2024777118,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2024777118; Robert H. Frank and Philip J. Cook, The Winner-Take-All
Society: Why the Few at the Top Get So Much More Than the Rest of Us (New York: Penguin Books,
1996).
the archetypal corporate white male worker Erin L. Kelly and Phyllis Moen, Overload: How Good Jobs
Went Bad and What We Can Do about It (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2020). See esp.
chap. 3.
upward mobility generally out of reach Xi Song et al., “Long-Term Decline in Intergenerational
Mobility in the United States since the 1850s,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, no.
1 (2020): 251–58.
especially since the Trump presidency Andrei S. Markovits, Uncouth Nation: Why Europe Dislikes
America (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007). See esp. chaps. 3–4.
this country is in steady decline Devon Haynie, “Report: American Quality of Life Declines Over Past
Decade,” US News & World Report, September 11, 2020, //www.usnews.com/news/best-
countries/articles/2020-09-11/a-global-anomaly-the-us-declines-in-annual-quality-of-life-report. Also,
Richard Wike et al., “America’s Image Abroad Rebounds With Transition From Trump to Biden,” Pew

Research Center, June 10, 2021, https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2021/06/10/americas-image-
abroad-rebounds-with-transition-from-trump-to-biden/.
have multiplied in recent years Dana R. Fisher, American Resistance: From the Women’s March to the
Blue Wave (New York: Columbia University Press, 2019).
the 2020 Black Lives Matter (BLM) movements Jen Kirby, “George Floyd Protests Go Global,” Vox,
May 31, 2020, https://www.vox.com/2020/5/31/21276031/george-floyd-protests-london-berlin.
though certainly not all Jason L. Ferguson, “ ‘There Is an Eye on Us’: International Imitation, Popular
Representation, and the Regulation of Homosexuality in Senegal,” American Sociological Review 86,
no. 4 (August 1, 2021): 700–27.
To understand what future is possible This chapter draws on Lamont, “From ‘Having’ to ‘Being.’ ”
this tiny group holds 32 percent of the national wealth David Huyssen, “We Won’t Get out of the
Second Gilded Age the Way We Got out of the First,” Vox, April 1, 2019, https://www.vox.com/first-
person/2019/4/1/18286084/gilded-age-income-inequality-robber-baron; The Federal Reserve,
“Distribution of Household Wealth in the U.S. since 1989,” The Federal Reserve System, June 21,
2021, https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/dataviz/dfa/distribute/chart/index.html.
studied by social scientists Miles Corak, “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and
Intergenerational Mobility,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27, no. 3 (September 2013): 79–102;
Thomas Piketty and Arthur Goldhammer, Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2014); Branko Milanovic, Global Inequality: A New
Approach for the Age of Globalization (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018); Michael
Savage, The Return of Inequality: Social Change and the Weight of the Past (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2021).
move up the social ladder Chetty et al., “The Fading American Dream”; Debraj Ray and Garance
Genicot, “Measuring Upward Mobility,” Working Paper, Working Paper Series (National Bureau of
Economic Research, February 2022), https://doi.org/10.3386/w29796.
By 2020, the ratio had ballooned Lawrence Mishel and Jori Kandra, “CEO Pay Has Skyrocketed
1,322% since 1978: CEOs Were Paid 351 Times as Much as a Typical Worker in 2020,” Economic Policy
Institute, August 10, 2021, https://www.epi.org/publication/ceo-pay-in-2020/.
US had greater income inequality than any of the other G7 countries Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development, “Income Inequality (Indicator),” 2021,
https://doi.org/10.1787/459aa7f1-en.
As these policies gained momentum Peter B. Evans and William H. Sewell, “Neoliberalism: Policy
Regimes, International Regimes, and Social Effects,” in Social Resilience in the Neo-Liberal Era, eds.
Peter A. Hall and Michèle Lamont (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 35–68.
Their “market fundamentalism” implemented austerity policies Fred Block and Margaret R.
Somers, The Power of Market Fundamentalism: Karl Polanyi’s Critique (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2016).
They encouraged the maximization of competition Wendy Nelson Espeland and Michael Sauder,
Engines of Anxiety: Academic Rankings, Reputation, and Accountability (New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 2016).
This accelerated the concentration of wealth Lawrence Mishel and Josh Bivens, “Identifying the Policy
Levers Generating Wage Suppression and Wage Inequality,” Economic Policy Institute, Economic Policy

Institute (blog), May 13, 2021, https://www.epi.org/unequalpower/publications/wage-suppression-
inequality/.
growing inequality is correlated with worsening health Ichiro Kawachi and Lisa F. Berkman, “Social
Ties and Mental Health,” Journal of Urban Health 78, no. 3 (2001): 458–67.
promised to remove barriers to personal achievement James T. Adams, The Epic of America (Boston,
MA: Little, Brown & Co., 1931), 404.
continues to feed the aspirations of many James M. Jasper, Restless Nation: Starting Over in America,
Restless Nation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009). Chap. 1.
that animate our national myths Gérard Bouchard, Les Nations Savent-elles Encore Rêver? L’avenir des
Nations et des Mythes Nationaux à l’ère de la Mondialisation (Montreal, QC: Boréal, unpublished,
2019).
As many surveys have shown “George Washington University Battleground Poll,” George Washington
University, 2018, https://smpa.gwu.edu/about-poll.
The vast majority believe that inequality Leslie McCall, The Undeserving Rich: American Beliefs
about Inequality, Opportunity, and Redistribution (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2013); Bartels finds that more than 85 percent of the respondents to a 2004 national survey (the
Maxwell Poll on Civic Engagement and Inequality) attribute inequality to some people not working as
hard as others. Larry M. Bartels, Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016).
In 2022, the final episode of The Simpsons Paddy Hirsch and Stacey Vanek Smith, “Bart Simpson’s
American Dream,” The Indicator from Planet Money, NPR, May 18, 2022,
https://www.npr.org/2022/05/18/1099882160/bart-simpsons-american-dream.
In this, they resemble younger cohorts Forty-seven percent of millennials, 29 percent of Gen X, and 27
percent of baby boomers view “pursuing your passion” as a key component of the American dream.
Bank of the West, “The 2018 Millennial Study: What We Found Out,” Means and Matters, July 19,
2018, https://meansandmatters.bankofthewest.com/article/uncategorized/the-2018-millennial-study-
what-we-found-out/.
The group with the firmest belief In one 2016 survey, more than three-quarters of Hispanics (77
percent) believed that most people can get ahead with hard work, compared to 62 percent of the US
public. Mark Hugo Lopez, Ana Gonzalea-Barrera, and Jens Manuel Krogstad, “Latinos Are More
Likely to Believe in the American Dream, but Most Say It Is Hard to Achieve.”
they’ll likely never attain that goal Barbara Ehrenreich, Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in
America (New York: Picador USA, 2011), 118.
Americans who believe the system is fair shrank Andrew Dugan and Frank Newport, “In U.S., Fewer
Believe ‘Plenty of Opportunity’ to Get Ahead,” Gallup, 2013,
https://news.gallup.com/poll/165584/fewer-believe-plenty-opportunity-ahead.aspx.
believed that life for the next generation will be worse Pew Research Center, “Pew Research Center
Poll: 2017 Political Typology Survey, June,” dataset (Ithaca, NY: Princeton Survey Research Associates
International; Cornell University, Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, 2017); Bruce Stokes,
“Public Divided on Prospects for the next Generation,” Pew Research Center, June 5, 2017,
https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2017/06/05/2-public-divided-on-prospects-for-the-next-
generation/.

perceive the dream as attainable for themselves Only 37 percent of respondents to the 2018 George
Washington University Battleground Poll agreed that the next generation will be better off economically
than they are now, but 72 percent agreed that they are optimistic about where they will be financially
five years from now. Data compiled by the Enterprise Institute Report, using publicly available data
from the Roper Center (Cornell University), cited by Karlyn Bowman, Jennifer Marsico, and Heather
Sims, “Is the American Dream Alive? Examining Americans’ Attitudes” (Washington, DC: American
Enterprise Institute, 2014).
choose not to participate in the political process Matt Stevens, “Poorer Americans Have Much Lower
Voting Rates in National Elections than the Nonpoor, a Study Finds,” New York Times, August 11,
2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/11/us/politics/poorer-americans-have-much-lower-voting-
rates-in-national-elections-than-the-nonpoor-a-study-finds.html.
explain the appeal of antistate ideologies Miller-Idriss, Hate in the Homeland.
bottom of the labor market Bruno Palier, Martin Seeleib-Kaiser, Patrick Emmenegger, and Silja
Häusermann (eds.), The Age of Dualization: The Changing Face of Inequality in Deindustrializing
Societies (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012); Jane Gingrich and Silja Häusermann, “The
Decline of the Working-Class Vote, the Reconfiguration of the Welfare Support Coalition and
Consequences for the Welfare State,” Journal of European Social Policy 25, no. 1 (February 2015): 50–
75, https://doi.org/10.1177/0958928714556970.
Many more privileged Americans aren’t so aware Ann Owens and Peter Rich, “Neighborhood-
School Structures: A New Approach to the Joint Study of Social Contexts,” Annual Review of
Sociology, forthcoming; Jonathan J. B. Mijs, “The Paradox of Inequality: Income Inequality and Belief
in Meritocracy Go Hand in Hand,” Socio-Economic Review 19, no. 1 (2019): 7–35.
wealthy people also tend to underestimate their place Elisabeth Bublitz, “Misperceptions of Income
Distributions: Cross-Country Evidence from a Randomized Survey Experiment,” Socio-Economic
Review 20, no. 2 (April 1, 2022): 435–62, https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwaa025.
In 2022, a total of 53 percent Jeffrey Jones, “Middle-Class Identification Steady in U.S.,” Gallup, May
19, 2022, sec. Economy, https://news.gallup.com/poll/392708/middle-class-identification-steady.aspx.
Poor people are also frequently isolated Alford A. Young Jr., The Minds of Marginalized Black Men:
Making Sense of Mobility, Opportunity, and Future Life Chances (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2003).
it is enormously challenging to keep faith Elena Ayala-Hurtado, “Narrative Continuity/Rupture:
Projected Professional Futures amid Pervasive Employment Precarity,” Work and Occupations 49, no. 1
(February 1, 2022): 45–78, https://doi.org/10.1177/07308884211028277.
many of them are widely shared Jennifer Silva, We’re Still Here: Pain and Politics in the Heart of
America (New York: Oxford University Press, 2019); Sarah Damaske, The Tolls of Uncertainty: How
Privilege and the Guilt GapShape Unemployment in America (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2021); Aliya Hamid Rao, Crunch Time: How Married Couples Confront Unemployment
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2020); Kathryn Edin, Timothy Nelson, Andrew Cherlin,
and Robert Francis, “The Tenuous Attachments of Working-Class Men,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 33, no. 2 (2019): 211–28.
Economists, along with the politicians Elizabeth Popp Berman, Thinking like an Economist: How
Efficiency Replaced Equality in U.S. Public Policy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2022).

The hegemony of the American dream Ulrich Beck, Scott Lash, and Brian Wynne, Risk Society:
Towards a New Modernity (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 1992); Jim McGuigan, “The
Neoliberal Self,” Culture Unbound 6, no. 1 (2014): 223–40; Emily Martin, “Flexible Bodies: Science and
the New Culture of Health in the US,” in Health, Medicine, and Society, ed. Simon Johnson Williams,
Jonathan Gabe, and Michael Calnan (London: Routledge, 2000); Jennifer M. Silva and Sarah M.
Corse, “Envisioning and Enacting Class Mobility: The Routine Constructions of the Agentic Self,”
American Journal of Cultural Sociology 6, no. 4 (2018): 231–65; Glenn Adams, Sara Estrada-Villalta,
Daniel Sullivan, and Hazel Rose Markus, “The Psychology of Neoliberalism and the Neoliberalism of
Psychology,” Journal of Social Issues 75, no. 1 (2019): 189–216, https://doi.org/10.1111/josi.12305.
indicators of cultural citizenship and belonging Lamont, The Dignity of Working Men.
they have fed considerable social instability Ricardo Fuentes-Nieva and Nicholas Galasso, “Working
for the Few: Political Capture and Economic Inequality” (Oxfam International, January 20, 2014);
James da Costa et al., “How Inequalities Are Driving a Global Youth Mental Health Crisis,” The
OECD Forum Network, June 6, 2019, https://www.oecd-forum.org/posts/49686-how-inequalities-
are-driving-a-global-youth-mental-health-crisis; Leanne S. Son Hing et al., “Failure to Respond to
Rising Income Inequality: Processes That Legitimize Growing Disparities,” Daedalus 148, no. 3 (July
2019): 105–35.
By 2016, the average incomes Pew Research Center, “The American Middle Class Is Losing Ground,”
December 9, 2015, https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2015/12/09/the-american-middle-
class-is-losing-ground/.
an intensified “fear of falling” Barbara Ehrenreich, Fear of Falling: The Inner Life of the Middle Class
(New York: Pantheon Books, 1989).
Mental health problems are increasingly Weinberger et al., “Trends in Depression Prevalence in the
USA from 2005 to 2015”; Ettman et al., “Prevalence of Depression Symptoms in US Adults Before and
During the COVID-19 Pandemic.”
Maintaining their position requires Schieman, Glavin, and Milkie (2009) found that over 70 percent
of working individuals experience stress from work interfering with nonwork life. High-status career
positions are particularly linked to more work-nonwork interference, indicating more prominent work
stressors for educated, upper-middle-class individuals. Scott Schieman, Paul Glavin, and Melissa A.
Milkie, “When Work Interferes with Life: Work-Nonwork Interference and the Influence of Work-
Related Demands and Resources,” American Sociological Review 74, no. 6 (2009): 966–88.
The rates of suicide for those Also, Daly, Wilson, and Johnson (2013) found a suicide rate of about
0.085 in their sample for both those with a family income of more than $75,000 a year and individuals
with an income of $5,000–$10,000. Mary C. Daly, Daniel J. Wilson, and Norman J. Johnson, “Relative
Status and Well-Being: Evidence from U.S. Suicide Deaths,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95, no. 5
(2013): 1480–1500. For a European comparison, see Ka-Yuet Liu, “To Compare Is to Despair? A
Population-Wide Study of Neighborhood Composition and Suicide in Stockholm,” Social Problems 64,
no. 4 (November 1, 2017): 532–57.
Concerns about money, job stability American Psychological Association, “Stress in America: The
Impact of Discrimination” (Stress in America Survey, March 10, 2016); Phyllis Moen et al., “Time
Work by Overworked Professionals: Strategies in Response to the Stress of Higher Status,” Work and
Occupations 40, no. 2 (2013): 79–114; Juliet B. Schor, The Overworked American: The Unexpected
Decline of Leisure (New York: Basic Books, 1993); Takashi Amagasa and Takeo Nakayama,
“Relationship Between Long Working Hours and Depression in Two Working Populations: A

Structural Equation Model Approach,” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 54, no. 7
(2012): 868–74.
their “inability to afford” more children Claire Cain Miller, “Americans Are Having Fewer Babies.
They Told Us Why,” New York Times, July 5, 2018,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/05/upshot/americans-are-having-fewer-babies-they-told-us-
why.html.
They cannot resist “helicopter parenting” Lois Weis, Kristin Cipollone, and Heather Jenkins, “Class,
Race, and College Admissions in a Changing US Context,” in Class Warfare: Class, Race, and College
Admissions in Top-Tier Secondary Schools, eds. Lois Weis, Kristin Cipollone, and Heather Jenkins
(Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2014); Jacques Steinberg, “Before College, Costly Advice Just on
Getting In,” New York Times, July 19, 2009,
https://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/19/education/19counselor.html; Julie Bick, “Navigators for the
College Bound,” New York Times, September 14, 2008,
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/14/jobs/14starts.html.
a growing number are hiring independent educational consultants Independent Educational
Consultants Association, “National Study Shows Dramatic Increase in Hiring Private College
Counselors,” accessed May 4, 2022, https://www.iecaonline.com/quick-links/ieca-news-
center/press/background-information-on-ieca/national-study-shows-dramatic-increase-in-hiring-
private-college-counselors/.
In a 2002 survey that asked students Peter Demerath, Producing Success: The Culture of Personal
Advancement in an American High School (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009), 93.
A study of privileged students Shamus Rahman Khan, Privilege: The Making of an Adolescent Elite at
St. Paul’s School (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012).
Studies show that these pressures have increased Ellen Bara Stolzenberg et al., The American
Freshman: National Norms Fall 2019 (Los Angeles: Higher Education Research Institute, UCLA,
2020), https://www.heri.ucla.edu/monographs/TheAmericanFreshman2019-Expanded.pdf.
These responses and behaviors are more prevalent “Wasting the Best and the Brightest: Substance
Abuse at America’s Colleges and Universities” (New York: The National Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse at Columbia University [Partnership to End Addiction], March 2007); p.1530 in
Suniya S. Luthar, Samuel H. Barkin, and Elizabeth J. Crossman, “ ‘I Can, Therefore I Must’: Fragility in
the Upper-Middle Classes,” Development and Psychopathology 25, no. 4 (2013): 1529–49.
those high-income kids are at most risk Suniya S. Luthar and Karen D’Avanzo, “Contextual Factors in
Substance Use: A Study of Suburban and Inner-City Adolescents,” Development and Psychopathology
11, no. 4 (1999): 845–67.
The “wellness” culture has spread considerably Trisha Greenhalgh and Simon Wessily, “ ‘Health for
Me’: A Sociocultural Analysis of Healthism in the Middle Classes,” British Medical Bulletin 69, no. 1
(2004): 197–213; Eva Illouz, Saving the Modern Soul: Therapy, Emotions, and the Culture of Self-Help
(Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2008).
treatment or counseling in the US John Elflein, “Mental Health Treatment or Counseling among
Adults U.S. 2002-2020,” Statista, May 6, 2022, https://www.statista.com/statistics/794027/mental-
health-treatment-counseling-past-year-us-adults/.
increase in the number of adults who received mental health treatment Treatment for mental
health has become more available over time, making the rise in the use of mental health services a period

trend, rather than attributable only to an increase in psychological distress itself.
increased by 32 percent (between 1989 and 2016) Thomas Curran and Andrew P. Hill,
“Perfectionism Is Increasing Over Time: A Meta-Analysis of Birth Cohort Differences from 1989 to
2016,” Psychological Bulletin 145, no. 4 (2017): 410–29; Stefan Beljean, “The Pressures of Status
Reproduction: Upper-Middle-Class Youth and the Transition to Higher Education in Germany and the
United States” (Unpublished dissertation, Department of Sociology, Harvard University, 2019); on how
capitalism forms the self, see Eva Illouz, Consuming the Romantic Utopia: Love and the Cultural
Contradictions of Capitalism (Orlando, FL: University of California Press, 1997).
Treatment for mental health Amy L. Johnson, “Changes in Mental Health and Treatment, 1997–
2017,” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 62, no. 1 (2021): 53–68.
has pushed the affluent to anxiously compare Daly, Wilson, and Johnson, “Relative Status and Well-
Being.”
Inside this hyperaffluent bubble Adam Thal, “Class Isolation and Affluent Americans’ Perception of
Social Conditions,” Political Behavior 39, no. 2 (2017): 401–24.
underestimate the problems facing the poor Jules Naudet, Stepping into the Elite (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2018).
As a result, fewer Americans Christopher Ingraham, “Three Quarters of Whites Don’t Have Any Non-
White Friends,” Washington Post, August 25, 2014,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/08/25/three-quarters-of-whites-dont-have-
any-non-white-friends/; Douglas S. Massey and Nancy A Denton, American Apartheid: Segregation
and the Making of the Underclass (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998).
Figure 1: Income inequality and segregation Jonathan J. B. Mijs and Elizabeth L. Roe, “Is America
Coming Apart? Socioeconomic Segregation in Neighborhoods, Schools, Workplaces, and Social
Networks, 1970–2020,” Sociology Compass 15, no. 6 (2021): e12884,
https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12884.
And their patterns of consumption Skidger, “Class & How it is Represented on Television: Class
Representation within Sitcoms Since 1950’s,” May 11, 2013,
https://classrepresentationsitcoms.wordpress.com/2013/05/11/class-how-it-is-represented-on-
televisionsocial/.
were upper-middle class Richard Butsch, “Class and Gender through Seven Decades of American
Television Sitcoms,” in Media and Class: TV, Film, and Digital Culture, eds. June Deery and Andrea
Press (New York: Routledge, 2017).
In a recent study, the political scientist Eunji Kim, “Entertaining Beliefs in Economic Mobility,”
American Journal of Political Science, March 2022, https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12702.
In France, for example Jonathan J. B. Mijs, “Why Don’t We Care about Growing Inequality?,” Centre
for Labour and Social Studies, 2018, http://classonline.org.uk/blog/item/why-dont-we-care-about-
growing-inequality.
This belief in meritocracy Frank Newport, “Average American Remains OK With Higher Taxes on
Rich,” Gallup, August 12, 2022, https://news.gallup.com/opinion/polling-matters/396737/average-
american-remains-higher-taxes-rich.aspx; McCall, The Undeserving Rich.


Chapter 2: THE VIEW FROM BELOW: The Working Class and the Marginalized
From 1954 to 2022, union membership in the US fell Drew DeSilver, “American Unions
Membership Declines as Public Support Fluctuates,” Pew Research Center, accessed March 21, 2022,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/02/20/for-american-unions-membership-trails-far-
behind-public-support/; Heidi Shierholz et al., “Latest Data Release on Unionization Is a Wake-up Call
to Lawmakers: We Must Fix Our Broken System of Labor Law,” Economic Policy Institute, January 20,
2022, https://www.epi.org/publication/latest-data-release-on-unionization-is-a-wake-up-call-to-
lawmakers/.
At the same time, fewer joined Edin et al., “The Tenuous Attachments of Working-Class Men.”
This fed their growing isolation Lorenza Antonucci, Laszlo Horvath, Yordan Kutiyski, and André
Krouwel, “The Malaise of the Squeezed Middle: Challenging the Narrative of the ‘Left behind’
Brexiter,” Competition & Change 21, no. 3 (June 1, 2017): 211–29,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1024529417704135; Gingrich and Häusermann, “The Decline of the
Working-Class Vote, the Reconfiguration of the Welfare Support Coalition and Consequences for the
Welfare State”; Stevens, “Poorer Americans Have Much Lower Voting Rates in National Elections than
the Nonpoor, a Study Finds.” However, there was an increase in voting in 2020: “According to the data,
about 65 percent of low-income individuals voted, compared to 88 percent of those in the high-income
category. In recent election cycles, turnout has been up in every income group, but this disparity
between high- and low-income voter turnout persists.” Austin Clemens, Shanteal Lake, and David
Mitchell, “Evidence from the 2020 Election Shows How to Close the Income Voting Divide,”
Equitable Growth, July 8, 2021, https://equitablegrowth.org/evidence-from-the-2020-election-shows-
how-to-close-the-income-voting-divide/.
Until the US government provided relief CBPP Staff, “Robust COVID Relief Achieved Historic
Gains Against Poverty and Hardship, Bolstered Economy” (Washington, DC: Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities, February 24, 2022).
In 2020-21, government relief Jason DeParle, “Pandemic Aid Programs Spur a Record Drop in
Poverty,” New York Times, July 28, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/28/us/politics/covid-
poverty-aid-programs.html.
The vicious cycle of our current economic model A Centers for Disease Control (CDC) 2020 survey
found that 26 percent of young adults had considered suicide in the past month, with higher
percentages for Black and Hispanic respondents. Anxiety and depression among young adults aged
eighteen to twenty-four is 63 percent, which is significantly higher than all other age groups. Perri Klass,
“Young Adults’ Pandemic Mental Health Risks,” New York Times, August 24, 2020,
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/24/well/family/young-adults-mental-health-pandemic.html.
According to one national study Nirmita Panchal, Rabah Kamal, Cynthia Cox, and Rachel Garfield,
“The Implications of COVID-19 for Mental Health and Substance Use—Issue Brief—9440-03,”
February 10, 2021, https://www.kff.org/report-section/the-implications-of-covid-19-for-mental-health-
and-substance-use-issue-brief/.
The opioid crisis, too, provides further evidence Edin et al., “The Tenuous Attachments of Working-
Class Men”; Arjumand Siddiqi et al., “Growing Sense of Social Status Threat and Concomitant Deaths
of Despair among Whites,” SSM - Population Health 9 (2019): 100449.
Case and Deaton documented Deaths of despair among white people aged forty-five to fifty-four
increased from 31 per 100,000 people in 1990 to 92 per 100,000 in 2017. Death rates increased 25
percent for white people without a bachelor’s degree and fell 40 percent for college-educated white

people. Anne Case and Angus Deaton, Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2020), 40, 57.
After all, growing inequality feeds mistrust Nicholas R. Buttrick and Shigehiro Oishi, “The
Psychological Consequences of Income Inequality,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 11, no. 3
(2017): e12304, https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12304.
more likely to think of themselves as “losers” Bartels, Unequal Democracy, 125; Lamont, The Dignity
of Working Men.
These interviews took place Lamont and Duvoux show a convergence in patterns between American
and French workers, as the latter drew stronger boundaries toward poor and Black people after 2000
than they did in the nineties. Michèle Lamont and Nicolas Duvoux, “How Neo-Liberalism Has
Transformed France’s Symbolic Boundaries?,” French Politics, Culture & Society 32, no. 2 (June 1,
2014): 57–75. Stronger boundaries toward the poor have also appeared elsewhere in Western Europe,
simultaneously with the diffusion of neoliberal policies. See Jonathan J. B. Mijs, Elyas Bakhtiari, and
Michèle Lamont, “Neoliberalism and Symbolic Boundaries in Europe: Global Diffusion, Local
Context, Regional Variation,” Socius 2 (2016): 1–8.
workers are hanging on to the notion of self-reliance Kate Pride Brown, “The Prospectus of
Activism: Discerning and Delimiting Imagined Possibility,” Social Movement Studies 15, no. 6
(November 1, 2016): 547–60.
Many analysts suggest that Michael Tesler, “How Racially Resentful Working-Class Whites Fled the
Democratic Party—before Donald Trump,” Washington Post, November 21, 2016,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/11/21/how-racially-resentful-
working-class-whites-fled-the-democratic-party-before-donald-trump/; Noam Gidron and Peter A.
Hall, “The Politics of Social Status: Economic and Cultural Roots of the Populist Right,” British
Journal of Sociology 68, no. S1 (2017): S57–84; Justin Gest, The New Minority: White Working Class
Politics in an Age of Immigration and Inequality (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2016).
They were particularly contemptuous of welfare recipients Gest, Ibid.; Vanessa Williamson, Read
My Lips: Why Americans Are Proud to Pay Taxes (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2017).
the 2008 financial crisis made even more workers resentful Marianne Cooper, Cut Adrift: Families
in Insecure Times (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2014).
Welfare recipients still face intense stigmatization Clem Brooks and Jeff Manza, Why Welfare States
Persist: The Importance of Public Opinion in Democracies (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007).
Many Americans—particularly Republicans A 2016 survey found that close to 60 percent of right-
leaning respondents thought that scaling back the government was a good way to improve unequal
opportunities, while only 20 percent of left-leaning respondents shared that opinion. Alberto Alesina,
Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso, “Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for
Redistribution,” American Economic Review 108, no. 2 (2018): 521–54. In 1996, on average 75.9
percent of American citizens thought that the government should be responsible for providing a decent
standard of living for the poor, whereas only 69 percent of citizens held that belief in 2016. Irene
Bloemraad et al., “Membership without Social Citizenship? Deservingness & Redistribution as
Grounds for Equality,” Daedalus 148, no. 3 (2019): 73–104.
In other Western democracies Evidence remains incomplete, but it does appear that people in many
Western countries are more likely to say that particular groups of low-income people are responsible for
their own fate, and so disavow obligations of solidarity toward them, than before. Bloemraad et al.,

Ibid.; “ISSP Research Group 2018: International Social Survey Programme: Role of Government V -
ISSP 2016” (Cologne: GESIS Data Archive, 2018), https://doi. org/10.4232/1.13052; Mijs, “Why
Don’t We Care about Growing Inequality?”
Groups who benefited Bloemraad et al., Ibid.
attempted to roll back LGBTQ+ rights Asad L. Asad, “Latinos’ Deportation Fears by Citizenship and
Legal Status, 2007 to 2018,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, no. 16 (2020): 8836–
44; Lamont, Park, and Ayala-Hurtado, “Trump’s Electoral Speeches and His Appeal to the American
White Working Class”; “The Discrimination Administration,” National Center for Transgender
Equality, April 20, 2017, https://transequality.org/the-discrimination-administration.
discrimination in the workplace “Trump Administration Civil and Human Rights Rollbacks,” The
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, accessed July 11, 2022,
https://civilrights.org/trump-rollbacks/.
This often resulted in a hardening of boundaries Mijs, Bakhtiari, and Lamont, “Neoliberalism and
Symbolic Boundaries in Europe.”
Hispanics, and immigrants Richard Alba, The Great Demographic Illusion: Majority, Minority, and
the Expanding American (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2020); Andreas Wimmer, Ethnic
Boundary Making: Institutions, Power, Networks (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2013);
Lamont, The Dignity of Working Men, chap. 2.
Stigmatized groups, and especially immigrants Kristina Bakkær Simonsen and Bart Bonikowski, “Is
Civic Nationalism Necessarily Inclusive? Conceptions of Nationhood and Anti-Muslim Attitudes in
Europe,” European Journal of Political Research 59, no. 1 (2020): 114–36; Kristina Bakkær Simonsen
and Bart Bonikowski, “Moralizing Immigration: The Impact of Political Framing on Polarization in the
United States and Denmark,” Comparative Political Studies, 58, no. 8 (2022): 1403–36.
growth in warmth toward several immigrant groups The Pew Research Center found that from
2001 to 2018, the number of Americans who favored increasing legal immigration rose 22 percentage
points (10 percent to 32 percent) and the number of Americans who favored decreasing immigration
fell by 29 percentage points (53 percent to 24 percent). Pew Research Center, “Shifting Public Views on
Legal Immigration Into the U.S,” 2018, https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2018/06/28/shifting-
public-views-on-legal-immigration-into-the-u-s/.
Hispanics continue to be presumed “illegal” René D. Flores and Ariela Schachter, “Who Are the
‘Illegals’? The Social Construction of Illegality in the United States,” American Sociological Review 83,
no. 5 (2018): 839–68; Matthew Clair, Privilege and Punishment: How Race and Class Matter in
Criminal Court (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2020).
the American National Election Survey showed For Republicans the decline was from 66 percent to
59 percent feeling warm between 2004 and 2016; the small decline among Democrats was from 78 to 75
percent between 2011 and 2016.
In 2017, 55 percent of white Americans Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, “Poll Finds a
Majority of White Americans Say Discrimination against Whites Exists in America Today,” Harvard
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 2017, https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/press-releases/poll-
white-americans-discrimination; Andrew Daniller, “Majorities of Americans See at Least Some
Discrimination against Black, Hispanic and Asian People in the U.S.,” Pew Research Center, March 18,
2021, https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/03/18/majorities-of-americans-see-at-least-some-
discrimination-against-black-hispanic-and-asian-people-in-the-u-s/.

the LGBTQ+ community has seen steadier improvement Attitudes are more negative (in decreasing
order) among Republicans, conservatives, people who attend church weekly, men, and people between
fifty and sixty-four years old. Those most supportive of choice are liberals, Democrats, people who
attend church less often, people eighteen to twenty-nine, women, etc. Thus, although symbolic
boundaries toward LGBTQ+ have weakened, this trend varies in intensity across segments of the
population. Justin McCarthy, “Americans Split Over New LGBT Protections, Restroom Policies,”
Gallup, 2017. Note that attitudes toward LGBTQ+ are more mixed when respondents are asked
whether people should use the bathroom of their birth gender or their gender identity.
the LGBTQ+ community is not clearly associated with the poor UCLA School of Law, “LGBT
Poverty in the United States,” Williams Institute, October 2019,
https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/publications/lgbt-poverty-us/; Matthew Clair, Caitlin Daniel,
and Michèle Lamont, “Destigmatization and Health: Cultural Constructions and the Long-Term
Reduction of Stigma,” Social Science & Medicine 165 (2016): 223–32.
more regularly featured in the media Joshua Gamson, Freaks Talk Back: Tabloid Talk Shows and
Sexual Nonconformity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009).
However, the LGBTQ+ community also faces “AG Paxton Declares So-Called Sex-Change Procedures
on Children and Prescription of Puberty Blockers to Be ‘Child Abuse’ Under Texas Law,” Texas
Attorney General, February 21, 2022, https://www.texasattorneygeneral.gov/news/releases/ag-paxton-
declares-so-called-sex-change-procedures-children-and-prescription-puberty-blockers-be.
The wage gap between men and women persists Paula England, “The Gender Revolution: Uneven
and Stalled,” Gender & Society 24, no. 2 (March 19, 2010): 149–66.
By 2021, support for the movement had declined Jennifer Chudy and Hakeem Jefferson, “Support
for Black Lives Matter Surged Last Year. Did It Last?,” New York Times, May 22, 2021,
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/22/opinion/blm-movement-protests-support.html; Deja Thomas
and Juliana Menasce Horowitz, “Support for Black Lives Matter Has Decreased since June but Remains
Strong among Black Americans,” Pew Research Center (blog), September 16, 2020,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/09/16/support-for-black-lives-matter-has-decreased-
since-june-but-remains-strong-among-black-americans/.
with parallel changes in Europe Mijs, Bakhtiari, and Lamont, “Neoliberalism and Symbolic Boundaries
in Europe.”


Chapter 3: MEETING THE MOMENT: How We Fight for a More Inclusive World
For their part, psychologists Jesse Singal, The Quick Fix: Why Fad Psychology Can’t Cure Our Social Ills
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2021).
Social scientists have documented Dania V. Francis and William A. Darity, “Separate and Unequal
Under One Roof: How the Legacy of Racialized Tracking Perpetuates Within-School Segregation,”
RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 7, no. 1 (2021): 187–202.
individual white families’ choices about where they live Terry Gross, “Podcast Examines How ‘Nice
White Parents’ Become Obstacles in Integrated Schools,” Fresh Air, NPR, October 12, 2020,
https://www.npr.org/2020/10/12/922092481/podcast-examines-how-nice-white-parents-become-
obstacles-in-integrated-schools.
Americans often judge a person’s worth Victoria Asbury-Kimmel, “Gradations of Belonging: The
Role of Ascriptive and Acquired Characteristics in White Americans’ Perceptions of Americanness,”
Unpublished MS, 2022, Department of Sociology, Harvard University.
how “American” they are perceived to be (in self-presentation) Peter Francis Harvey, “ ‘Make Sure
You Look Someone in the Eye’: Socialization and Classed Comportment in Two Elementary Schools,”
American Journal of Sociology 125, no. 5 (March 2022): 1417–59.
In my past work I have argued Lamont, Money, Morals, and Manners.
It’s easier to distance yourself from Ibid.; Lamont, The Dignity of Working Men.
whereas the latter are mentioned more Ibid.; Lamont, Money, Morals, and Manners.
The dangers of making such shallow commitments Lily Geismer, Don’t Blame Us: Suburban Liberals
and the Transformation of the Democratic Party (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2014). See
also the New York Times podcast White Nice Parents.
Focusing on the Boston See also Sylvie Tissot, Good Neighbors: Gentrifying Diversity in Boston’s South
End, trans. David Broder and Catherine Romatowski (London; Brooklyn, NY: Verso, 2015).
attending a “Title 1” elementary school “Title I Part A - Federal Grant Programs,” Massachusetts
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, July 28, 2021,
https://www.doe.mass.edu/federalgrants/titlei-a/.
to make sense of the world Ann Swidler, “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies,” American
Sociological Review 51, no. 2 (April 1986): 273–86.
When launching his presidential campaign Amber Phillips, “ ‘They’re Rapists.’ President Trump’s
Campaign Launch Speech Two Years Later, Annotated,” Washington Post, June 16, 2017,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/06/16/theyre-rapists-presidents-trump-
campaign-launch-speech-two-years-later-annotated/.
In other words, narratives are how we describe reality. Strictly speaking, narratives are stories with a
beginning, middle, and end, and are clearly identifiable as a chunk of discourse. Francesca Polletta, It
Was Like a Fever (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2006); Patricia Ewick and Susan Silbey,
“Narrating Social Structure: Stories of Resistance to Legal Authority,” American Journal of Sociology
108, no. 6 (May 2003): 1328–72, https://doi.org/10.1086/378035. “Frame” refers to “an interpretive
[schema] that simplifies and condenses the ‘world out there’ by selectively punctuating and encoding
objects, situations, events, experiences, and sequences of actions within one’s present or past
environment.” David A. Snow and Robert D. Benford, “Master-Frames and Cycles of Protest,”
Frontiers in Social Movement Theory 133 (1992): 137.

second-wave feminists spread Nancy MacLean, The American Women’s Movement, 1945–2000: A
Brief History with Documents (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2008).
This capacity is grounded in the environment we inhabit Hall and Lamont, Social Resilience in the
Neoliberal Era; Mari Sanchez, Michèle Lamont, and Shira Zilberstein, “How American College
Students Understand Social Resilience during Covid-19 and the Movement for Racial Justice: Toward a
Processual Approach,” Social Science & Medicine 301 (2022): 114890,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2022.114890.
The Dignity of Working Men Lamont, The Dignity of Working Men. See esp. chap. 6.
as seen during the uproar caused in the early 2020s Elizabeth A. Harris and Alexandra Alter, “Book
Ban Efforts Spread Across the U.S.,” New York Times, January 30, 2022,
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/01/30/books/book-ban-us-schools.html.
In fact, eugenics was based Evelynn M. Hammonds and Rebecca M. Herzig, eds., The Nature of
Difference: Sciences of Race in the United States from Jefferson to Genomics (Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press, 2009).
For instance, an important psychological experiment Matthew D. Trujillo and Elizabeth Levy
Paluck, “The Devil Knows Best: Experimental Effects of a Televised Soap Opera on Latino Attitudes
Toward Government and Support for the 2010 U.S. Census,” Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy
12, no. 1 (2012): 113–32.
In 2014, another important study found Jacque Wilson, “Study: ‘16 and Pregnant,’ ‘Teen Mom’ Led
to Fewer Teen Births,” CNN, January 13, 2014, https://www.cnn.com/2014/01/13/health/16-
pregnant-teens-childbirth/.
Broadway musicalHamilton Mike Scutari, “Can Pop Culture Drive Social Change? These Foundations
Think So,” Inside Philanthropy, July 22, 2016,
https://www.insidephilanthropy.com/home/2016/7/22/can-pop-culture-drive-social-change-these-
foundations-think.html.
In addition to expanding many Proma Khosla, “ ‘Black Panther’ Ticket GoFundMe More than
Doubles Goal,” Mashable, January 9, 2018, https://mashable.com/article/black-panther-gofundme-
harlem.
The GoFundMe page for this effort John McCarthy, “How Marvel’s Black Panther Marketing
Campaign Married Movie and Movement,” The Drum, February 9, 2018,
https://www.thedrum.com/news/2018/02/09/how-marvels-black-panther-marketing-campaign-
married-movie-and-movement; Julie Hinds, “ ‘Black Panther’ Movie Inspires Crowd-Funding for
Ypsilanti Community High Students,” Detroit Free Press, January 26, 2018,
https://www.freep.com/story/entertainment/2018/01/26/black-panther-movie-charity-
screenings/1064902001/.
Which is exactly what the party did Heather Cox Richardson, “Letters from an American,” Substack,
accessed June 2, 2022, https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.com/; Reece Peck, Fox Populism:
Branding Conservatism as Working Class (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2019).
In her 2010 bookEconomists and Societies Marion Fourcade, Economists and Societies: Discipline and
Profession in the United States, Britain, and France, 1890s to 1990s (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2009).
In her bookThinking like an Economist Berman, Thinking like an Economist; Kevin P. Donovan, “The
Rise of the Randomistas: On the Experimental Turn in International Aid,” Economy and Society 47, no.

1 (January 2, 2018): 27–58, https://doi.org/10.1080/03085147.2018.1432153; Justin Fox, “Why
Economists Took So Long to Focus on Inequality,” Bloomberg.com, January 4, 2016,
https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2016-01-04/why-economists-took-so-long-to-focus-on-
inequality.
Others may promote more Oddný Helgadóttir, “Seeing like a Macroeconomist: Varieties of
Formalisation, Professional Incentives and Academic Ideational Change,” New Political Economy 27,
no. 3 (2022): 426440, https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2021.1967910.
Yet, a few prominent economists have George A. Akerlof and Rachel E. Kranton, Identity Economics:
How Our Identities Shape Our Work, Wages, and Well-Being (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2010); George A. Akerlof and Dennis J. Snower, “Bread and Bullets,” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization 126 (June 1, 2016): 58–71; Robert J. Shiller, Narrative Economics: How
Stories Go Viral and Drive Major Economic Events (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2019);
Dani Rodrik, In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on Economic Growth (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2003).
Others have attempted to engage more systematically Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson,
“Culture, Institutions and Social Equilibria: A Framework,” Working Paper, Working Paper Series
(National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2021), https://doi.org/10.3386/w28832.
Prominent articles and books on the topic Steven Pinker, How the Mind Works (New York: W. W.
Norton, 1997); Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health,
Wealth, and Happiness (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008); Daniel Kahneman, Thinking
Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2013).
They gave rise to a new and influential knowledge industry Thaler and Sunstein, Ibid.
In 2015, this area of study assumed Michèle Lamont et al., “Bridging Cultural Sociology and
Cognitive Psychology in Three Contemporary Research Programmes,” Nature Human Behaviour 1,
no. 12 (2017): 866–72.
In recent years, many psychologists Joshua D. Greene, Moral Tribes: Emotions, Reason, and the Gap
between Us and Them (New York: Penguin Books, 2013); Jonathan Haidt, The Righteous Mind: Why
Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion (New York: Vintage, 2013).
to explain the growing political polarization Amy Chua, Political Tribes: Group Instinct and the Fate
of Nations, First Edition (New York: Penguin Books, 2018); Eli J. Finkel et al., “Political Sectarianism in
America,” Science 370, no. 6516 (October 30, 2020): 533–36.
Its proponents often ground it in utilitarianism Robert Boyd, Peter J. Richerson, and Joseph
Henrich, “The Cultural Niche: Why Social Learning Is Essential for Human Adaptation,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. supplement 2 (June 28, 2011): 10918–25; Cory J. Clark et
al., “Tribalism Is Human Nature,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 28, no. 6 (December 1,
2019): 587–92.
Not all groups are tribes Michèle Lamont et al., Getting Respect; Alba, The Great Demographic Illusion.
We know boundaries are changeable Rogers Brubaker, “Ethnicity without Groups,” European Journal
of Sociology / Archives Européennes de Sociologie / Europäisches Archiv Für Soziologie 43, no. 2 (2002):
163–89; Michèle Lamont and Virág Molnár, “The Study of Boundaries in the Social Sciences,” Annual
Review of Sociology 28, no. 1 (2002): 167–95; Andreas Wimmer, Ethnic Boundary Making.
there is nothing natural about “seeing race” Ellis P. Monk, “Inequality without Groups:
Contemporary Theories of Categories, Intersectional Typicality, and the Disaggregation of Difference,”

Sociological Theory 40, no. 1 (March 1, 2022): 3–27; Dieter Vandebroeck and Maaike Jappens, “Some
Other ‘Primitive Forms of Classification.’ Contribution to the Study of Children’s Collective
Representations,” Poetics, 91 (April 1, 2022): 101667, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2022.101667.
We have the ability to reimagine the future My argument builds on the work of scholars who study
the construction of the future. See, for instance: Iddo Tavory and Nina Eliasoph, “Coordinating
Futures: Toward a Theory of Anticipation,” American Journal of Sociology 118, no. 4 (January 2013):
908–42; Elena Ayala-Hurtado, “Narrative Continuity/Rupture.” Also Jens Beckert, Imagined Futures:
Fictional Expectations and Capitalist Dynamics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016).


Chapter 4: BEING THE CHANGE WE WISH TO SEE: Change Agents and the Quest For Dignity and
Recognition
“portraits of this community that were incredibly noble” The Editors of ARTnews, “L.A. Story:
Catherine Opie on Her Controversial Photographs of Los Angeles Subcultures, in 1998,” ARTnews,
January 22, 2016, https://www.artnews.com/art-news/retrospective/l-a-story-catherine-opie-on-her-
controversial-photographs-of-los-angeles-subcultures-in-1998-5700/.
In another series, she represents Avgi Saketopoulou, “Catherine Opie: American Photographer,
American Pervert,” Studies in Gender and Sexuality 14, no. 3 (July 1, 2013): 245–52.
Her exhibit, Posing Beauty Deborah Willis, Reflections in Black: A History of Black Photographers—
1840 to the Present (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2000); Deborah Willis, “Posing Beauty:
African American Images from the 1890s to the Present - ProQuest,” Network Journal 17, no. 1 (2009):
35; Deborah Willis, Black: A Celebration of a Culture (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2014).
the media often centered our attention J. Emmett Winn, The American Dream and Contemporary
Hollywood Cinema (New York: Continuum, 2013); Will Wright, Sixguns and Society: A Structural
Study of the Western (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1977).
These creators are what I call “change agents” The change agents are also cultural entrepreneurs. For
Lounsbury and Glynn (2001), cultural entrepreneurs produce “entrepreneurial stories [that] facilitate
the crafting of a new venture identity that serves as a touchstone upon which legitimacy may be
conferred by investors, competitors, and consumers, opening up access to new capital and market
opportunities.” Michael Lounsbury and Mary Ann Glynn, “Cultural Entrepreneurship: Stories,
Legitimacy and the Acquisition of Resources,” Strategic Management Journal 22 (June 1, 2001): 545–
64. These are among many other types of cultural intermediaries who contribute to the creation of
organizational fields. On cultural intermediaries, see Gil Eyal and Larissa Buchholz, “From the
Sociology of Intellectuals to the Sociology of Interventions,” Annual Review of Sociology 36 (2010):
117–37. Also on social change more generally, see Julie Battilana and Tiziana Casciaro, Power, for All:
How It Really Works and Why It’s Everyone’s Business (Simon & Schuster, 2022).
They are also concerned with stigmatization Goffman distinguishes between three types of stigma: 1)
stigma on the basis of physical or external attributes/marks (e.g., obesity); 2) stigma on the basis of
internal or personal attributes and character (e.g., mental illness or deviant behavior); and 3) tribal
stigma on the basis of racial, ethnic, or religious attributes. Erving Goffman, Stigma: Notes on the
Management of a Spoiled Identity (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1963). Also Jo C. Phelan,
Bruce G. Link, and John F. Dovidio, “Stigma and Prejudice: One Animal or Two?,” Social Science &
Medicine 67, no. 3 (August 2008): 358–67.
But recognition is so effective While the political philosopher Michael Sandel wrote about how merit
feeds stigmatization, recognition work is more encompassing than he suggests as it targets not only class
advantages, but also stigmas that are not class-based, such as those based on ethnicity or sexual
orientation. See Sandel, The Tyranny of Merit.
Recognition is conferred in different ways There is a well-established philosophical literature on
recognition. See for instance Taylor et al., Multiculturalism and Tariq Modood, “Anti-Essentialism,
Multiculturalism and the ‘Recognition’ of Religious Groups,” The Journal of Political Philosophy 6, no.
4 (1998): 378–399. In recent years, more empirical approaches have emerged—For instance, a sociology
of work perspective on recognition inspired by the scholarship of Arlie Hochschild, such as Allison J.
Pugh, “Emotions and the Systematization of Connective Labor,” Theory, Culture & Society 39, no. 5
(2022): 23–42. From a more experiential perspective in the context of academic life, see Victoria Reyes,

Academic Outsider: Stories of Exclusion and Hope (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2022).
There is also a growing body of knowledge contributing to the sociology of valuation and evaluation:
Michèle Lamont, “Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and Evaluation,” Annual Review of
Sociology 38, no. 1 (2012): 201–21. A classical reference is: Luc Boltanski and Laurent Thévenot, De la
justification: Les économies de la grandeur (Paris: Gallimard, 1991). A related contribution is: Nathalie
Heinich, La valeur des personnes. Preuves et épreuves de la grandeur (Paris: Gallimard, 2022).
At the broadest level Clair, Daniel, and Lamont, “Destigmatization and Health”; Jean Beaman,
“Citizenship as Cultural: Towards a Theory of Cultural Citizenship,” Sociology Compass 10, no. 10
(October 2016): 849–57.
worthy members of the community Lamont, The Dignity of Working Men; Bloemraad et al.,
“Membership without Social Citizenship?”
The Italian-Scottish political scientist Lorenza Fontana, Recognition Politics: Indigenous Rights and
Ethnic Conflict in the Andes (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2023).
One feels his two-ness W. E. B. Du Bois, “Strivings of the Negro People,” The Atlantic, August 1, 1897, p.
194, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1897/08/strivings-of-the-negro-people/305446/.
Together, these two aspects define Richard Jenkins, Social Identity (London: Routledge, 1996).
For their part, some Black Brazilians Lamont et al., Getting Respect. Also, Nissim Mizrachi and
Hanna Herzog, “Participatory Destigmatization Strategies among Palestinian Citizens, Ethiopian Jews
and Mizrahi Jews in Israel,” Ethnic and Racial Studies 35, no. 3 (2012): 418–35,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2011.589530. These differences are explained by the history of race
relations in each country and other factors, though the situation in Brazil is changing rapidly as racial
mobilization and protest are on the rise. Graziella Moraes Silva, “After Affirmative Action: Redrawing
Colour Lines in Brazil,” in A Horizon of (Im)Possibilities, eds. Katerina Hatzikidi and Eduardo Dullo
(University of London Press, 2021).
Activists today are still seeking legal rights and protections Rachel B. Vogelstein and Meighan
Stone, Awakening: #MeToo and the Global Fight for Women’s Rights (New York: PublicAffairs, 2021);
Noa Milman and Folashade Ajayi, “Black Lives Matter in Europe: Transnational Diffusion, Local
Translation and Resonance of Anti-Racist Protest in Germany, Italy, Denmark and Poland,” DeZIM
Research Notes 6, no. 21 (2021): 45. Jasper (1999) distinguishes between citizenship movements
(fighting for formal legal rights) and post-citizenship movements (using legal rights to reach other
objectives). James M. Jasper, The Art of Moral Protest: Culture, Biography, and Creativity in Social
Movements (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
Social movement scholar Erica Chenoweth Erica Chenoweth, “The Future of Nonviolent Resistance,”
Journal of Democracy 31, no. 3 (July 2020): 69–84. See esp. p. 69.
In the United States, not only were Douglas McAdam, “We’ve Never Seen Protests Like These Before,”
Jacobin, June 20, 2020, https://jacobinmag.com/2020/06/george-floyd-protests-black-lives-matter-
riots-demonstrations; Fisher, American Resistance.
As Badu explained to NPR Felix Contreras, “Erykah Badu: Tiny Desk Concert,” NPR, August 15,
2018, https://www.npr.org/2018/08/14/638483063/erykah-badu-tiny-desk-concert; Elijah C. Watson,
“The Origin Of Woke: How Erykah Badu And Georgia Anne Muldrow Sparked The ‘Stay Woke’ Era,”
Okayplayer, February 27, 2018, https://www.okayplayer.com/originals/stay-woke-history-georgia-anne-
muldrow-erykah-badu-master-teacher.html.

some moderates have turned against the term David Brooks, “This Is How Wokeness Ends,” New
York Times, May 13, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/13/opinion/this-is-how-wokeness-
ends.html.
80 percent of Republicans saw “cancel culture” Thomas B. Edsall, “Is Wokeness ‘Kryptonite for
Democrats’?,” New York Times, May 26, 2021,
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/26/opinion/democrats-republicans-wokeness-cancel-culture.html;
Charles M. Blow, “The War on ‘Wokeness,’ ” New York Times, November 11, 2021,
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/10/opinion/wokeness-racism-politics.html.
highly politicized attacks on woke culture Ishaan Tharoor, “The U.S. and British Right Ramp up the
War on ‘Wokeness,’ ” Washington Post, April 9, 2021,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/04/09/woke-wars-united-states-britain/; Keeanga-
Yamahtta Taylor, “ ‘Wokeness’ Is Not the Democrats’ Problem,” New Yorker, November 19, 2021,
https://www.newyorker.com/news/our-columnists/wokeness-is-not-the-problem; Simon Kuper, “Yes,
There Is a Third Way on ‘Wokeness,’ ” Financial Times, November 25, 2021,
https://www.ft.com/content/39b74435-dbe2-42a8-bbb1-78a3db04137e.
In sports, football player Colin Kaepernick Michèle Lamont, “The Big Picture: Social Solidarity,”
Public Books, 2017, https://www.publicbooks.org/big-picture-social-solidarity.
have dismissed identity politics as irrelevant Lilla, The Once and Future Liberal; Sheri Berman, “Why
Identity Politics Benefits the Right More than the Left,” The Guardian, July 14, 2018,
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/jul/14/identity-politics-right-left-trump-racism.
In her 2016 book Strangers in Their Own Land Arlie Russell Hochschild, Strangers in Their Own
Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right (New York: The New Press, 2016).
In a separate study, my collaborators and I found Lamont, Park, and Ayala-Hurtado, “Trump’s
Electoral Speeches and His Appeal to the American White Working Class.”
In this context of economic decline Feinstein, Rally ’round the Flag.
A 2022 poll conducted by the Southern Poverty Law Center Cassie Miller, “SPLC Poll Finds
Substantial Support for ‘Great Replacement’ Theory and Other Hard-Right Ideas,” Southern Poverty
Law Center, June 1, 2022, https://www.splcenter.org/news/2022/06/01/poll-finds-support-great-
replacement-hard-right-ideas.
A different survey conducted PRRI Staff, “Competing Visions of America: An Evolving Identity or a
Culture Under Attack? Findings from the 2021 American Values Survey,” PRRI, November 11, 2022,
https://www.prri.org/research/competing-visions-of-america-an-evolving-identity-or-a-culture-under-
attack/.
the United States will be a majority-minority society Alba, The Great Demographic Illusion.
One manifestation of this trend Siddiqi et al., “Growing Sense of Social Status Threat and
Concomitant Deaths of Despair among Whites.”
the experience of constant racism can have a “weathering” effect Nancy Krieger, “Discrimination
and Health Inequalities,” in Social Epidemiology, eds. Lisa F. Berkman, Ichiro Kawachi, and M. Maria
Glymour, 2nd ed. (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2014), 63–125; David R. Williams and Selina
A. Mohammed, “Racism and Health I: Pathways and Scientific Evidence,” American Behavioral
Scientist 57, no. 8 (2013): 1152–73.

While the general trend since 1990 Dania Nadeem, “U.S. Life Expectancy Falls to Lowest Level in
Almost 20 Years Due to COVID-19 -CDC,” Reuters, July 21, 2021,
https://www.reuters.com/world/us/us-life-expectancy-fell-year-half-2020-due-covid-19-cdc-2021-07-
21/.
Notably, over the past two decades Laura Dwyer-Lindgren et al., “Life Expectancy by County, Race,
and Ethnicity in the USA, 2000–19: A Systematic Analysis of Health Disparities,” The Lancet 400, no.
10345 (July 2022): 25–38, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(22)00876-5.
Growing inequality and the bifurcation in outcomes Deirdre Bloome, Daniel Schrage, and Jane
Furey, “Rising Class Crystallization? Time Trends and Racial/Ethnic Differences in Multidimensional
Social Class Inequality” (Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 2021).
This may lead to the “why try” syndrome Catherine DeCarlo Santiago, Martha E. Wadsworth, and
Jessica Stump, “Socioeconomic Status, Neighborhood Disadvantage, and Poverty-Related Stress:
Prospective Effects on Psychological Syndromes among Diverse Low-Income Families,” Journal of
Economic Psychology 32, no. 2 (2011): 218–30; Adrien Papuchon and Nicolas Duvoux, “Subjective
Poverty As Perceived Lasting Social Insecurity: Lessons From a French Survey on Poverty, Inequality
and the Welfare State (2015–2018),” SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester, NY: Social Science Research
Network, September 1, 2019), https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3465214.


Chapter 5: CHANGING HEARTS AND MINDS: How Recognition Chains Amplify the Cultural Agenda
CBMA’s efforts amplified “Racial Justice and Movement-Building Visionary Shawn Dove Joins New
Profit as a Managing Partner,” New Profit (blog), February 23, 2022,
https://www.newprofit.org/go/racial-justice-and-movement-building-visionary-shawn-dove-joins-new-
profit-as-a-managing-partner/.
CBMA supports many other programs “My Brother’s Keeper,” The White House, accessed September
19, 2021, https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/my-brothers-keeper.
In 2016, she edited a special issue “Recognition chains” involve actors, institutions, and classification
systems involved in the funding, evaluation, and diffusion of recognition. It is similar to the network of
occupations involved in cultural fields. Pierre Bourdieu, The Field of Cultural Production (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1993). I propose this term to refer specifically to actors who are
contributing to the recognition process. For an extension of Bourdieu’s argument to global fields, see
Larissa Buchholz, “What is a Global Field? Theorizing Fields beyond the Nation-State,” Sociological
Review 64, no. 2 suppl (July 1, 2016): 31–60.
The space has been “About Jack Shainman Gallery,” Jack Shainman Gallery, accessed October 11, 2022,
https://jackshainman.com/about.
Under the leadership of Darren Walker Darren Walker, “Inclusion Is Patriotism of the Highest
Order,” Washington Post, July 2, 2021,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/07/02/inclusion-is-patriotism-highest-order/.
focusing on narrative change Sujatha Fernandes, Curated Stories: The Uses and Misuses of Storytelling
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2017).
With the help of the Ford Foundation Brooks Barnes, “Just Who Has Seen ‘Roma’? Netflix Offers
Clues,” New York Times, February 6, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/06/business/media/roma-netflix-viewers.html.
ranging from publishing Lila Shapiro, “Publishing’s New Power Club: A Wave of Hires Is Set to Pick
up Where the Reckoning Left Off,” New York Magazine, February 23, 2021,
https://nymag.com/intelligencer/article/book-publishing-power-club.html; Marcela Valdes, “Inside the
Push to Diversify the Book Business,” New York Times, June 22, 2022,
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/06/22/magazine/inside-the-push-to-diversify-the-book-business.html.
to art museums and art leaders The Association of Art Museum Directors, “Latest Art Museum Staff
Demographic Survey Shows Number of African American Curators and Women in Leadership Roles
Increased,” Press Releases & Statements (blog), January 28, 2019, https://aamd.org/for-the-media/press-
release/latest-art-museum-staff-demographic-survey-shows-number-of-african; Victoria L. Valentine,
“On the Rise: 47 Curators and Arts Leaders Who Took on New Appointments in 2019,” Culture Type
(blog), December 27, 2019, https://www.culturetype.com/2019/12/27/on-the-rise-47-curators-and-
arts-leaders-who-took-on-new-appointments-in-2019/.
higher education, and beyond Jiannbin Lee Shiao, Identifying Talent, Institutionalizing Diversity: Race
and Philanthropy in Post–Civil Rights America (Durham, NC: Duke University Press Books, 2004).
On changes in the number of racialized leaders in philanthropy see: Floyd Mills, “The State of Change:
An Analysis of Women and People of Color in the Philanthropic Sector,” Council on Foundations,
August 2017, https://cof.org/sites/default/files/documents/files/2017-Gender-Diversity-Report.pdf;
Stan Yogi, “The POC Majority: Preparing Your Organization for Demographic Shifts,” Nonprofitfi

Quarterly, July 1, 2020, https://nonprofitquarterly.org/the-poc-majority-preparing-your-organization-
for-demographic-shifts/.
This leadership change came Jennifer Schuessler, “Michelle T. Boone Named President of Poetry
Foundation,” New York Times, April 29, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/29/arts/michelle-t-
boone-president-poetry-foundation.html/.
The Gates Foundation has aimed Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, “Changing the National
Conversation About Poverty and Economic Mobility,” Media Center (blog), June 10, 2020,
https://www.gatesfoundation.org/Media-Center/Press-Releases/2020/06/Changing-the-National-
Conversation-About-Poverty-and-Economic-Mobility.
At the same time, progressive foundations Rachel Sherman, “The Rich Kid Revolutionaries,” New
York Times, April 27, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/27/opinion/sunday/rich-social-
inequality.html; Steve Lohr, “What Can Replace Free Markets? Groups Pledge $41 Million to Find
Out,” New York Times, February 16, 2022,
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/02/16/business/neoliberalism-free-market-research.html.
Some have argued that philanthropic organizations They are inspired by the notions of the “prison
industrial complex” as well as the original “military industrial complex” concept, which was popularized
by President Dwight Eisenhower in his 1961 farewell presidential speech. Sociologist C. Wright Mills
pointed to the phenomenon in the fifties as he described how power is exercised through the
coordination of the military hierarchy, the administrative bureaucracy, and corporate wealth. C. Wright
Mills, The Power Elite (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1956).
For some of these critics HistPhil, “Movement Capture and the Long Arc of the Black Freedom
Struggle,” HistPhil (blog), July 14, 2020, https://histphil.org/2020/07/14/movement-capture-and-the-
long-arc-of-the-black-freedom-struggle; Karen Ferguson, “The Perils of Liberal Philanthropy,” Jacobin,
November 26, 2018, https://jacobinmag.com/2018/11/black-lives-matter-ford-foundation-black-
power-mcgeorge-bundy.
For instance, the Chan-Zuckerberg Foundation Aaron Horvath and Walter W. Powell, “Seeing Like a
Philanthropist,” in The Nonprofit Sector: A Research Handbook, 3rd ed. (Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 2020); Anand Giridharadas, Winners Take All: The Elite Charade of Changing the
World (New York: Knopf, 2018); Powell and Bromley, The Nonprofit Sector: A Research Handbook,
chap. 3.
Still, it remains to be seen Derek Robey, Nicole Letourneau, and Michèle Lamont, “Multicultural
Meritocracy in Hollywood and Comedy,” Department of Sociology, Harvard University, Unpublished.
For this to happen, significant changes Emma Saunders-Hastings, Private Virtues, Public Vices:
Philanthropy and Democratic Equality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2022).
Patreon is one of the platforms Benjamin Cannon et al., “Aaron Rodgers Stops by You Made It Weird
to Talk about UFO Sightings,” The A.V. Club, March 28, 2016, https://www.avclub.com/aaron-
rodgers-stops-by-you-made-it-weird-to-talk-about-1798287872.
Dungey explained to me Ben Smith, “How Netflix Beat Hollywood to a Generation of Black Content,”
New York Times, July 6, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/05/business/media/netflix-
hollywood-black-culture.html.
This celebrated show promotes recognition Salamishah Tillet, “ ‘Bridgerton’ Takes On Race. But Its
Core Is Escapism,” New York Times, January 5, 2021,fl

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/05/arts/television/bridgerton-race-netflix.html; Monk,
“Inequality without Group.”
Women such as Rhimes and DuVernay Yoon, Dasl, and Timothy W. Martin, “Netflix’s ‘Squid Game’
Is the Dystopian Hit No One Wanted—Until Everyone Did,” Wall Street Journal, October 4, 2021,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/netflixs-squid-game-is-the-dystopian-hit-no-one-wanteduntil-everyone-
did-11633183200; Darnell Hunt and Ana-Christina Ramón, “Hollywood Diversity Report 2020: A
Tale of Two Hollywoods, Part 1: Film” (Division of Social Sciences at UCLA, 2020); Robey,
Letourneau, and Lamont, “Multicultural Meritocracy in Hollywood and Comedy.”
As of 2019, the organization had 171 staff “Change.Org Impact Report 2019,” Change.org, 2019,
https://static.change.org/brand-
pages/impact/reports/2020/2020_Impact+Report_Change_EN_final.pdf.
Ultimately, their story helped BBC News, “Medicinal Cannabis: The Family That Changed Australia’s
Debate,” June 30, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-australia-47796044.
This and similar networks that work toward recognition Bourdieu, The Field of Cultural
Production.
Recognition chains work through the media Less is known about long-term effects. Bartosz G.
Żerebecki et al., “Can TV Shows Promote Acceptance of Sexual and Ethnic Minorities? A Literature
Review of Television Effects on Diversity Attitudes,” Sociology Compass, 2021, 1–16.
Some focus on the content Francesca Polletta, Inventing the Ties That Bind: Imagined Relationships in
Moral and Political Life (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2020).
Sociologist Heather Haveman Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin
and Spread of Nationalism (London: Verso, 1983); Heather A. Haveman, Magazines and the Making
of America: Modernization, Community, and Print Culture, 1741–1860 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2020).
This has been true across history Robert Wuthnow, Communities of Discourse: Ideology and Social
Structure in the Reformation, the Enlightenment, and European Socialism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1989). A similar resources-based approach was developed by Charles Tilly et al. in their
study of the diffusion of social movements across a range of countries from 1768 to 2004. See Charles
Tilly et al., Social Movements, 1768–2018 (New York: Routledge, 2019).
Understanding these structural changes Evan Stewart and Douglas Hartmann, “The New Structural
Transformation of the Public Sphere,” Sociological Theory 38, no. 2 (2020): 170–91; Michèle Lamont
and Laurent Thévenot, Rethinking Comparative Cultural Sociology: Repertoires of Evaluation in France
and the United States, Cambridge Cultural Social Studies (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2000). On how ideas travel globally, see Andreas Wimmer, “Domains of Diffusion: How Culture and
Institutions Travel around the World and with What Consequences,” American Journal of Sociology
126, no. 6 (May 2021): 1389–1438. Also Tim Hallett, Orla Stapleton, and Michael Sauder, “Public
Ideas: Their Varieties and Careers,” American Sociological Review 84, no. 3 (2019): 545–76.
are now serving more differentiated publics Stuart Cunningham and David Craig, Social Media
Entertainment: The New Intersection of Hollywood and Silicon Valley (New York: NYU Press, 2019);
Gabriel Rossman, Climbing the Charts: What Radio Airplay Tells Us about the Diffusion of Innovation
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012); Jonas Kaiser et al., “What Happened to the Public
Sphere? The Networked Public Sphere and Public Opinion Formation,” in Handbook of Cyber-
Development, Cyber-Democracy, and Cyber-Defense, eds. Elias G. Carayannis, David F. J. Campbell, and

Marios Panagiotis Efthymiopoulos (Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2018), 433–
59; Yochai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007).
The online space in particular is democratized C. W. Anderson, “Media Ecosystems: Some Notes
Toward a Genealogy of the Term and an Application of It to Journalism Research” (ESF Exploratory
Workshop on Mapping the Digital News Ecosystem, New York, 2013),
https://www.cwanderson.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/EcosystemGenealogy.pdf.
In 2018, for instance, 22 percent Stefan Wojcik and Adam Hughes, “Sizing Up Twitter Users,” Pew
Research Center, April 24, 2019, https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2019/04/24/sizing-up-
twitter-users/.
television remains the primary medium Alexis C. Madrigal, “When Did TV Watching Peak?,” The
Atlantic, May 30, 2018, https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/05/when-did-tv-
watching-peak/561464/.
Nightly local TV news Michael Barthel and Kristen Worden, “Newspapers Fact Sheet,” Pew Research
Center’s Journalism Project (blog), June 29, 2021, https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/fact-
sheet/newspapers/.
Print journalism, for instance On the causes, see Nicholas Lemann, “Can Journalism Be Saved?,” New
York Review, February 27, 2020, https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2020/02/27/can-journalism-be-
saved/; Jill Abramson, Merchants of Truth: The Business of News and the Fight for Facts (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2019).
The New York Times, for example Sara Fischer, “New York Times Surpasses 10 Million
Subscriptions,” Axios, February 2, 2022, https://www.axios.com/2022/02/02/new-york-times-10-
million-subscriptions.
Compare that to Facebook’s Mansoor Iqbal, “Facebook Revenue and Usage Statistics (2022),” Business
of Apps, June 30, 2022, https://www.businessofapps.com/data/facebook-statistics/; S. Dixon, “Twitter -
Statistics & Facts,” Statista, April 27, 2022, https://www.statista.com/topics/737/twitter/.
their favorite source of information Djordjevic Milos, “21 Extraordinary Newspaper Statistics,”
Letter.Ly (blog), February 23, 2021, https://letter.ly/newspaper-statistics/.
access print publications online often Elisa Shearer, “More than Eight-in-Ten Americans Get News
from Digital Devices”(Pew Research Center, January 12, 2021), https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2021/01/12/more-than-eight-in-ten-americans-get-news-from-digital-devices/.
In February 2022, only 11 percent Amy Watson, “Millennials News Consumption Sources in the U.S.
2022,” Statista, March 24, 2022, https://www.statista.com/statistics/1010456/united-states-
millennials-news-consumption/.
Coverage of state legislatures Daniel J. Hopkins, The Increasingly United States: How and Why
American Political Behavior Nationalized (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018).
To appeal to more people Peck, Fox Populism.
This has had enormous consequences Markus Prior, “Media and Political Polarization,” Annual Review
of Political Science 16, no. 1 (2013): 101–27.
Consequently, politics has increasingly Lilliana Mason, Uncivil Agreement: How Politics Became Our
Identity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018).

the United States has seen its share of unionized workers decline DeSilver, “American Unions
Membership Declines as Public Support Fluctuates”; Shierholz et al., “Latest Data Release on
Unionization Is a Wake-up Call to Lawmakers.”
The decline was much less significant among Republicans Simon Greer and Richard D. Kahlenberg,
“How Progressives Can Recapture Seven Deeply Held American Values,” February 26, 2020,
https://tcf.org/content/report/progressives-can-recapture-seven-deeply-held-american-values/; Ryan P.
Burge, The Nones: Where They Came From, Who They Are, and Where They Are Going (Minneapolis:
Fortress Press, 2021).
pitted against creationism Amy Binder, Contentious Curricula: Afrocentrism and Creationism in
American Public Schools (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004).
However, as of 2021, 24 percent of freshmen “College Dropout Rate [2022]: By Year +
Demographics,” Education Data Initiative, November 22, 2021, https://educationdata.org/college-
dropout-rates.
At the same time, higher education Kim Parker, “The Growing Partisan Divide in Views of Higher
Education,” Pew Research Center’s Social & Demographic Trends Project (blog), August 19, 2019,
https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2019/08/19/the-growing-partisan-divide-in-views-of-
higher-education-2/; Neil Gross, Why Are Professors Liberal and Why Do Conservatives Care?
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013).
the American cultural canon around race On Gates’s contributions, see “2021 PEN/Audible Literary
Service Award: Henry Louis Gates Jr.,” PEN America (blog), May 10, 2021, https://pen.org/2021-pen-
america-audible-literary-service-award-henry-louis-gates/.
helped institutionalize the field Catharine R. Stimpson and Gilbert Herdt, eds., Critical Terms for the
Study of Gender (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014).
We are in an era of heightened activism For an overview, see James M. Jasper, Protest: A Cultural
Introduction to Social Movements (Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2014).
the organization Marshall Plan for Moms “Marshall Plan for Moms—About,” Marshall Plan for
Moms, accessed July 12, 2022, https://marshallplanformoms.com/about/.
Change agents and recognition chains operate on the right For instance, Roger Ebert, “Mephisto
Movie Review & Film Summary,” January 1, 1982, https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/mephisto-
1982.
This includes Joe Rogan Glenn Greenwald, “As Joe Rogan’s Platform Grows, So Does the Media and
Liberal Backlash. Why?,” The Intercept, September 22, 2020, https://theintercept.com/2020/09/22/as-
joe-rogans-platform-grows-so-does-the-media-and-liberal-backlash-why/.
far-right and white nationalist Nick Fuentes “Nick Fuentes,” in Wikipedia, January 27, 2022,
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nick_Fuentes&oldid=1068290178.
libertarian youth organization active on campuses Binder and Kidder, The Channels of Student
Activism.
assembles white nationalist and far-right activists “Groyper Army and ‘America First,’ ” Anti-
Defamation League, accessed January 31, 2022,
https://www.adl.org/resources/backgrounders/groyper-army-and-america-first.
These movements tend to promote nihilism “Red Dead Redemption 2,” Rockstar Games, accessed
January 31, 2022, https://www.rockstargames.com/games/reddeadredemption2.


Chapter 6: STRATEGIES FOR TRANSFORMATION: The Work of Change Agents in Hollywood and
Beyond
to challenge stereotypes about stigmatized groups See Naomi McDougall Jones, The Wrong Kind of
Women: Inside Our Revolution to Dismantle the Gods of Hollywood (Boston: Beacon Press, 2020).
Over time, these more nuanced depictions Destigmatization in cultural industries is often overlooked,
as social scientists have been most concerned with shedding light on patterns of stereotyping,
discrimination, and exclusion in their field. But see Jack G. Shaheen, “Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood
Vilifies a People,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 588 (2003): 171–93;
Riva Tukachinsky, Dana Mastro, and Moran Yarchi, “Documenting Portrayals of Race/Ethnicity on
Primetime Television over a 20-Year Span and Their Association with National-Level Racial/Ethnic
Attitudes,” Communication Faculty Articles and Research, January 1, 2015,
https://doi.org/10.1111/josi.12094.
the distinct strategies they use for fighting stigmatization For a full description of strategies used by
these groups, see Robey, Letourneau, and Lamont, “Multicultural Meritocracy in Hollywood and
Comedy.”
The situation for comedians is different. Ibid.
In an interview with BET BETNetworks, The Making Of Lizzo’s “Truth Hurts” Performance at the
BET Awards | Rehearsal 360°, 2019, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1eR25kf4kxQ.
how to perform “middle classness” Lounsbury and Glynn, Cultural Entrepreneurship.
In teaching these women to perform domesticity Ibid.
Oprah Winfrey, too, has worked Eva Illouz, Oprah Winfrey and the Glamour of Misery: An Essay on
Popular Culture (New York: Columbia University Press, 2003).
who preaches prosperity theology or “gospel capitalism” Marla Frederick, Colored Television:
American Religion Gone Global (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2015); Susan Friend
Harding, The Book of Jerry Falwell: Fundamentalist Language and Politics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2001); Micki McGee, Self Help, Inc.: Makeover Culture in American Life (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2007).
As participants in the rough-and-tumble world Paul Lichterman, How Civic Action Works: Fighting
for Housing in Los Angeles (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2020).
For instance, the Narrative Initiative Jacob Swenson-Lengyel, “What We Learned in Minnesota,”
Narrative Initiative (blog), August 2, 2019, https://narrativeinitiative.org/blog/what-we-learned-in-
minnesota/.
In recognition of Goff’s important work Lesley Goldberg, “Warner Bros. TV Inks Creative
Partnership With Center for Policing Equity CEO,” Hollywood Reporter (blog), March 22, 2021,
https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/tv/tv-news/warner-bros-tv-inks-creative-partnership-with-center-
for-policing-equity-ceo-4154027/.
inhospitable to socialism Eric Foner, “Why Is There No Socialism in the United States?,” History
Workshop 17 (1984): 57–80; Werner Sombart, Why Is There No Socialism in the United States?
(London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 1976).
Although the DSA Todd Chretien, “DSA Convention 2021: Big Accomplishments and the Long Road
Ahead,” Pine & Roses, August 7, 2021, https://pineandroses.org/politics/dsa-convention-2021-big-
accomplishments-and-the-long-road-ahead/.

thirty-three years of age Chris Gray and Grace Fors, “Democratic Socialists of America 2021
Convention: What Way for Socialists?,” International Socialist Alternative, August 1, 2021,
https://internationalsocialist.net/en/2021/08/united-states.
At the same time, capitalism has Lydia Saad, “Socialism as Popular as Capitalism Among Young Adults
in U.S.,” Gallup, November 25, 2019, https://news.gallup.com/poll/268766/socialism-popular-
capitalism-among-young-adults.aspx.
They are somewhat irreverent Nellie Bowles, “The Pied Pipers of the Dirtbag Left Want to Lead
Everyone to Bernie Sanders,” New York Times, February 29, 2020,
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/29/us/politics/bernie-sanders-chapo-trap-house.html.
In the many speeches West gave Judith Hertog, “Prisoner of Hope: Cornel West’s Quest for Justice,”
The Sun, September 2018, https://www.thesunmagazine.org/issues/513/prisoner-of-hope.
In past decades, his moral convictions led him Dr. Cornel West, Never Forget: A Journey of Revelations
(Hidden Beach, 2007).
the nonprofit lobbyist association Business Roundtable “Business Roundtable Redefines the Purpose
of a Corporation to Promote ‘An Economy That Serves All Americans,’ ” Business Roundtable, August
19, 2019, https://www.businessroundtable.org/business-roundtable-redefines-the-purpose-of-a-
corporation-to-promote-an-economy-that-serves-all-americans.
Recently, several progressive foundations Lohr, “What Can Replace Free Markets? Groups Pledge $41
Million to Find Out.”
to fight inequality within the framework of capitalism Nancy Fraser, “From Redistribution to
Recognition? Dilemmas of Justice in a ‘Post-Socialist’ Age,” New Left Review, no. I/212 (August 1,
1995): 68–93.
Some are working on President Biden’s plans Ben Zdencanovic, “How Biden Could Save Welfare,”
Boston Review, May 15, 2021, https://bostonreview.net/class-inequality-politics/ben-zdencanovic-how-
biden-could-save-welfare.


Chapter 7: THE NEXT GENERATION: How Gen Z Flights for the Future
Like many children of immigrants Tony Tian-Ren Lin, Prosperity Gospel Latinos and Their American
Dream (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2020).
my research team interviewed eighty college students This analysis draws on a more detailed analysis
of these interviews in Shira Zilberstein, Michèle Lamont, and Mari Sanchez, “Recreating a Plausible
Future: Combining Cultural Repertoires in Unsettled Times,” Sociological Science, forthcoming; and
Sanchez, Lamont, and Zilberstein, “How American College Students Understand Social Resilience
during Covid-19 and the Movement for Racial Justice.”
Only about half of eighteen- to twenty-three-year-olds Duffin, “U.S. Higher Education Enrollment
Rates, by Age Group 1970-2019.”
The remainder were working class For the “less privileged”: A quarter are squarely in the working class,
with parents who are low-status white-collar workers or blue-collar workers, working as laborers,
salespeople, bank clerks, or waitresses. The remaining group have families with lower-middle-class
backgrounds, with jobs as assistant teachers, low-level managers, or technical professionals. Students
from the Northeast who agreed to be interviewed are generally more privileged than those living in the
Midwest.
Slightly more than half were people of color Non-whites make up 57 percent of the group (with 35
percent Black, 23 percent Latino, and 40 percent Asian participants).
Ideologically, the group leaned toward the liberal Alyssa N. Rockenbach et al., “Does College Turn
People into Liberals?,” The Conversation, February 2, 2018, http://theconversation.com/does-college-
turn-people-into-liberals-90905.
a focus on personal balance that dampen the risk of failure Barbara Ehrenreich, Bright-Sided: How
Positive Thinking Is Undermining America (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2009); Greenhalgh and
Wessily, “Health for Me”; Illouz, Saving the Modern Soul.
Originally, the term mostly referred to Kim Parker and Ruth Igielnik, “On the Cusp of Adulthood
and Facing an Uncertain Future: What We Know About Gen Z So Far” (Pew Research Center, May 14,
2020), https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2020/05/14/on-the-cusp-of-adulthood-and-facing-
an-uncertain-future-what-we-know-about-gen-z-so-far-2/.
At the same time, their futures Challenges most frequently mentioned in the interviews are
polarization (mentioned by fifty-two students), growing inequality (forty-eight), social media and peer
pressure (forty-four), interpersonal relationships (thirty-four), financial crisis (thirty-three),
disengagement from politics (twenty-eight), climate change (twenty-four), squandered potential
(twenty-two), financial crisis and student debt (twenty-two), desire for more cohesion (twenty-two).
the millennials, who entered Jill Filipovic, OK Boomer, Let’s Talk: How My Generation Got Left Behind
(New York: Atria/One Signal Publishers, 2020).
They have experienced precarity Jennifer M. Silva, Coming Up Short: Working-Class Adulthood in an
Age of Uncertainty (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013); Christopher Ingraham, “Millennials’
Share of the U.S. Housing Market: Small and Shrinking,” Washington Post, January 20, 2020,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/01/20/millennials-share-us-housing-market-small-
shrinking/; Annie Lowrey, “The Next Recession Will Destroy Millennials,” The Atlantic, August 26,
2019, https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2019/08/millennials-are-screwed-recession/596728/.
they are less likely to experience upward mobility Corak, “Income Inequality, Equality of
Opportunity, and Intergenerational Mobility.”

in their thirties and forties, fewer marry S. Robby Berman, “How Student Loans Stop Americans
from Marrying,” Big Think, October 1, 2018, https://bigthink.com/politics-current-affairs/student-
debt-marriage-rate.
held them back in the labor market Robert D. Putnam, Our Kids: The American Dream in Crisis
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 2016).
Beyond inclusion, they also emphasize Inclusion is mentioned 99 times, authenticity 104 times, and
sustainability 88 times. Some students mentioned these challenges more than once.
This is suggested by a 2018 Pew national survey Parker and Igielnik, “On the Cusp of Adulthood and
Facing an Uncertain Future.”
would describe themselves as hopeful “Spring 2021 Harvard Youth Poll” (Harvard Kennedy School
Institute of Politics, April 23, 2021), https://iop.harvard.edu/youth-poll/spring-2021-harvard-youth-
poll.
We already saw how neoliberal ideas Hall and Lamont, Social Resilience in the Neoliberal Era; Silva,
Coming Up Short; Allison J. Pugh, ed., Beyond the Cubicle: Job Insecurity, Intimacy, and the Flexible Self
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2017). This script has roots in the liberal scripts of self
predominant in the Anglo world for a few centuries. Cathie Jo Martin, “Imagine All the People:
Literature, Society, and Cross-National Variation in Education Systems,” World Politics 70, no. 3 (July
2018): 398–442.
opt for vegan or vegetarian diets Nina Guilbeault, The Good Eater: A Vegan’s Search for the Future of
Food (New York: Bloomsbury USA, forthcoming).
A number of young people are suffering Natasha Warikoo, “Addressing Emotional Health While
Protecting Group Status: Asian American and White Parents in Suburban America,” American Journal
of Sociology 126, no. 3 (2020).
Shockingly, nearly a third reported Harvard Kennedy School Institute of Politics, “Spring 2021
Harvard Youth Poll.”
They support “anything that makes you happy” Edgar Cabanas and Eva Illouz, Manufacturing
Happy Citizens: How the Science and Industry of Happiness Control Our Lives (Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2019); Illouz, Saving the Modern Soul; Michèle Lamont, Jason Kaufman, and Michael
Moody, “The Best of the Brightest: Definitions of the Ideal Self among Prize-Winning Students,”
Sociological Forum 15, no. 2 (2000): 187–224.
a body that can be optimized. Wayne Brekhus, The Sociology of Identity: Authenticity,
Multidimensionality, and Mobility (Medford, MA: Polity Press, 2020); Ori Schwartz, “ ‘Everything Is
Designed to Make an Impression’: The Moralisation of Aesthetic Judgement and the Hedonistic Ethic
of Authenticity,” European Journal of Cultural Studies 22, no. 4 (July 26, 2019): 399–415.
having “a sense of linked fate.” Michael C. Dawson, Behind the Mule: Race and Class in African-
American Politics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995).
32 percent donate Alice Berg, “Gen Z: The Next Generation of Donors,” Classy (blog), December 8,
2017, https://www.classy.org/blog/gen-z-next-generation-donors/.
During the COVID-19 crisis, 66 percent “Consumer Payment Behaviors,” Zelle, 2020,
https://www.zellepay.com/sites/default/files/2020-09/Consumer_Payment_Behaviors.pdf. Eric W.
Dolan, “Study Finds Millennials Tend to Donate More to Charity—but Do It Less Often,” PsyPost,fi

July 16, 2019, https://www.psypost.org/2019/07/study-finds-millennials-tend-to-donate-more-to-
charity-but-do-it-less-often-54055.
Spurred by an effective grassroots campaign Jonah Engel Bromwich, “How a Minnesota Bail Fund
Raised $20 Million,” New York Times, June 1, 2020,
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/01/style/minnesota-freedom-fund-bail-george-floyd-protests.html.
Students from privileged backgrounds Sanchez, Lamont, and Zilberstein, “How American College
Students Understand Social Resilience during Covid-19 and the Movement for Racial Justice.”
special political and social mission of their generation This mission is shared with millennials. See
Ruth Milkman, “A New Political Generation: Millennials and the Post-2008 Wave of Protest,”
American Sociological Review 82, no. 1 (2017): 1–31.
For instance, they blame these generations Filipovic, OK Boomer, Let’s Talk; Kligler-Vilenchik and
Literat, “Distributed Creativity as Political Expression: Youth Responses to the 2016 U.S. Presidential
Election in Online Affinity Networks.”
They also tend to downplay Ibid.
Attitudes like this may Michelle Jackson et al., “Having to Stay Still: Youth and Young Adults in the
Covid-19 Crisis,” Monitoring the Crisis: American Voices Project (Stanford, CA: Stanford Center on
Poverty and Inequality, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, February
2021), https://inequality.stanford.edu/covid/youth-young-adults.
And indeed, the majority of Parker and Igielnik, “On the Cusp of Adulthood and Facing an Uncertain
Future.”
hold our collective future in their hands Lauren Young, “Gen Z Is The Most Progressive—and Least
Partisan—Generation,” Teen Vogue, October 2, 2019, https://www.teenvogue.com/story/how-will-gen-
z-vote; Kligler-Vilenchik and Literat, “Distributed Creativity as Political Expression”; Sarah Jackson,
Moya Bailey, and Brooke Foucault Welles, #HashtagActivism: Networks of Race and Gender Justice
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2020).
The 2016 survey reported that students Courtney Kueppers, “Today’s Freshman Class Is the Most
Likely to Protest in Half a Century,” Chronicle of Higher Education, February 11, 2016,
http://search.proquest.com.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/trade-journals/todays-freshman-class-is-most-
likely-protest-half/docview/1768189179/se-2?accountid=11311.
Some are concerned with reparations For generational comparison see: Christian Smith and Patricia
Snell, Souls in Transition: The Religious Lives of Emerging Adults in America (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2009); Kenneth Keniston, The Uncommitted: Alienated Youth in American Society
(New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1965); Barbara Epstein, Political Protest and Cultural Revolution:
Nonviolent Direct Action in the 1970s and 1980s (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1991).
Signaling this shift “Merriam-Webster’s Words of the Year 2019,” accessed May 12, 2022,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/word-of-the-year-2019-they; Abigail C. Saguy and
Juliet A. Williams, “A Little Word That Means a Lot: A Reassessment of Singular They in a New Era of
Gender Politics,” Gender & Society 36, no. 1 (February 1, 2022): 5–31.
A January 2020 Pew Research Center survey Parker and Igielnik, “On the Cusp of Adulthood and
Facing an Uncertain Future.”
This compares to 18 percent Stolzenberg et al., The American Freshman.

In the second round of interviews On this topic see Rishika Dugyala, “Anti-Trump, but Not Fully for
Biden: Will Gen Z Vote?,” Politico, October 11, 2020,
https://www.politico.com/news/2020/10/11/gen-z-vote-2020-trump-biden-424571; John B. Holbein
and D. Sunshine Hillygus, Making Young Voters: Converting Civic Attitudes into Civic Action
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2020).
the intensity of Black Twitter Jackson, Bailey, and Welles, #HashtagActivism.
more than to actually help people of color Ellen Berrey, The Enigma of Diversity: The Language of
Race and the Limits of Racial Justice (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015); Dobbin and Kalev,
Getting to Diversity.
50 percent of all eligible Americans “Half of Youth Voted in 2020, An 11-Point Increase from 2016,”
Tufts University Center for Information & Research on Civic Learning and Engagement, April 29,
2021, https://circle.tufts.edu/latest-research/half-youth-voted-2020-11-point-increase-2016. Another
national survey conducted by the Institute of Politics at the “Spring 2021 Harvard Youth Poll” found
that 30 percent of respondents did not vote. This survey included 2,513 young Americans ages eighteen
to twenty-nine. Domenico Montanaro, “Poll: Despite Record Turnout, 80 Million Americans Didn’t
Vote. Here’s Why,” NPR, December 15, 2020, https://www.npr.org/2020/12/15/945031391/poll-
despite-record-turnout-80-million-americans-didnt-vote-heres-why.
young people was only 39 percent “Election Week 2020: Young People Increase Turnout, Lead Biden to
Victory,” CIRCLE, Tufts University, accessed June 13, 2022, https://circle.tufts.edu/latest-
research/election-week-2020.
Their narratives of change remain This analysis is elaborated in Sanchez, Lamont, and Zilberstein,
“How American College Students Understand Social Resilience during Covid-19 and the Movement
for Racial Justice.”
Working-class (or first gen) students’ college experiences Anthony Abraham Jack, The Privileged
Poor: How Elite Colleges Are Failing Disadvantaged Students (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2019).
were particularly hit by the pandemic Andreas Kluth, “An Epidemic of Depression and Anxiety
Among Young Adults,” Bloomberg, August 22, 2020.
These developments are seen as feeding xenophobic Gidron and Hall, “The Politics of Social Status.”
Also, like their parents Stephanie Ternullo, “ ‘I’m Not Sure What to Believe’: Media Distrust and
Opinion Formation during the COVID-19 Pandemic,” American Political Science Review 116, no. 3
(August 2022): 1096–1109, https://doi.org/10.1017/S000305542200003X; Elizabeth A. Bennett et al.,
“Disavowing Politics: Civic Engagement in an Era of Political Skepticism,” American Journal of
Sociology 119, no. 2 (September 2013): 518–48, https://doi.org/10.1086/674006.
Surveys show that this group Marco Giugni and Maria Grasso, “Youth and Politics in Times of
Increasing Inequalities,” in Youth and Politics in Times of Increasing Inequalities (Cham, Switzerland:
Springer International Publishing, 2021), 1–26; Kjell Noordzij, Willem de Koster, and Jeroen van der
Waal, “ ‘They Don’t Know What it’s Like to Be at the Bottom’: Exploring the Role of Perceived
Cultural Distance in Less-Educated Citizens’ Discontent with Politicians,” British Journal of Sociology
72, no. 3 (2021): 566–79.
Whether these young people feel “seen” Arjun Appadurai, “The Capacity to Aspire: Culture and the
Terms of Recognition,” in Culture and Public Action, eds. Vijayendra Rao and Michael Walton
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2004), 59–84; Amartya Sen, “Capability and Well-Being,” in

The Quality of Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993). Scholars are aware of the importance of making
cultural scripts and institutional resources available for this capacity to aspire to develop. On this topic,
see Barbara Hobson, ed., Recognition Struggles and Social Movements: Contested Identities, Agency and
Power (Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
who appreciate sexist and vulgar humor Mark Makela, “Transcript: Donald Trump’s Taped
Comments About Women,” New York Times, October 8, 2016,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/08/us/donald-trump-tape-transcript.html. On how humor
contributes to attracting workers in politics, see Peck, Fox Populism, and Giselinde Kuipers, “Humor
and Polarization: How Humor Can Drive People Apart, in Politics and Beyond,” live presentation
presented at the Hot Politics Lab, University of Amsterdam, November 5, 2021.
Students value higher education Education was mentioned forty-eight times as a source of hope in our
interviews. On the role of institutions such as education in diffusing cultural messages, see Frank and
Meyer, The University and the Global Knowledge Society.
acts as a buffer against uncertainty Gowoon Jung and Hyunjoon Park, “Bridging Sociology of
Religion to Transition to Adulthood: The Emerging Role of Religion in Young Adults’ Lives,” Social
Compass 67, no. 3 (September 1, 2020): 428–43.
In contrast to change agents For a recent analysis on the impact of networks on political attitudes, with
a focus on polarization, see Craig M. Rawlings, “Becoming an Ideologue: Social Sorting and the
Microfoundations of Polarization,” Sociological Science 9 (August 1, 2022): 313–45,
https://doi.org/10.15195/v9.a13. For a more elaborate model of diffusion, taking into consideration
communication sources, messages, and channels and how they affect political polarization, see John T.
Jost et al., “Cognitive–Motivational Mechanisms of Political Polarization in Social-Communicative
Contexts,” Nature Reviews Psychology 1, no. 10 (October 2022): 560–76,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44159-022-00093-5.
We saw that young people in 2016 Kueppers, “Today’s Freshman Class Is the Most Likely to Protest in
Half a Century.”
turn increasingly into a “social movement society” David S. Meyer and Sidney Tarrow, The Social
Movement Society: Contentious Politics for a New Century (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1997).
Some have argued that the postmaterialist values Ronald Inglehart, The Silent Revolution: Changing
Values and Political Styles Among Western Publics (Princeton University Press, 1977); Paul R.
Abramson, “Critiques and Counter-Critiques of the Postmaterialism Thesis: Thirty-Four Years of
Debate,” Center for the Study of Democracy, April 20, 2011,
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3f72v9q4.
are now much more salient Matthew Yglesias and Milan Singh, “Democrats Have Changed a Lot since
2012,” Slow Boring (blog), May 11, 2022, https://www.slowboring.com/p/shifting-left.
the broad moral features of this cultural context Of relevance is the work of social scientists studying
the moral aspects of social movements, such as Jeffrey Alexander, Nina Eliasoph, James Jasper, Doug
McAdams, and others.
progressive “old boomers” maintained progressive Gary Alan Fine, Fair Share: Senior Activism, Tiny
Publics, and the Culture of Resistance (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2023); Jack Whalen,
Beyond the Barricades: The Sixties Generation Grows Up, 1st edition (Philadelphia: Temple University
Press, 1989); Susan Krauss Whitbourne and Sherry L. Willis, eds., The Baby Boomers Grow Up:

Contemporary Perspectives on Midlife (Mahwah, NJ: Psychology Press, 2006); Doug McAdam, “The
Biographical Consequences of Activism,” American Sociological Review 54, no. 5 (1989): 744–60.
political variations within this group considered at large Longitudinal panel data for an extended
duration needed for a long-term assessment of generational trends is insufficient (personal
correspondence with Pippa Norris, Harvard University). However, these two articles provide useful
information on the US and UK cases: Patrick Fisher, “Generational Cycles in American Politics, 1952–
2016,” Society 57, no. 1 (2020): 22–29; Maria Teresa Grasso et al., “Socialization and Generational
Political Trajectories: An Age, Period and Cohort Analysis of Political Participation in Britain,” Journal
of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties 29, no. 2 (2019): 199–221.


Chapter 8: DIFFERENT YET THE SAME: Solutions for Building an Inclusive Society
the gap between the “winners” and the “losers” Bloome, Schrage, and Furey, “Rising Class
Crystallization?” (Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, 2021).
For this group, life expectancy has declined Nadeem, “U.S. Life Expectancy Falls to Lowest Level in
Almost 20 Years Due to COVID-19 -CDC.”
Occupations such as software developer Steve Lohr, “Millions Have Lost a Step Into the Middle Class,
Researchers Say,” New York Times, January 14, 2022,
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/01/14/business/middle-class-jobs-study.html.
But equally important is devising new narratives Shiller, Narrative Economics.
This practice needs to This approach to cultural change, which connects individual agency with meso-
level resources, is made explicit in Michèle Lamont and Paul Pierson, “Inequality Generation &
Persistence as Multidimensional Processes: An Interdisciplinary Agenda,” Daedalus: Journal of the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences 148, no. 3 (2019): 5–18.
Other researchers have given A rapidly growing body of knowledge on the political polarization,
populism, and illiberalism from across the social sciences offers a wide array of solutions concerning
how to effect change by transforming the digital environment (reducing fake news, transforming
algorithms), the political environment, and others causal paths. For examples, see Fletcher, et al., “How
Polarized Are Online and Offline News Audiences?”; Jacob S. Hacker and Paul Pierson, “Confronting
Asymmetric Polarization,” in Solutions to Political Polarization in America, ed. Nathaniel Persily
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2015), 59–70; Gordon Pennycook and David G. Rand,
“Who Falls for Fake News? The Roles of Bullshit Receptivity, Overclaiming, Familiarity, and Analytic
Thinking,” Journal of Personality 88, no. 2 (2020): 185–200; Daniel DellaPosta, “Pluralistic Collapse:
The ‘Oil Spill’ Model of Mass Opinion Polarization,” American Sociological Review 85, no. 3 (June 1,
2020): 507–36. Conversely, on the production of national cohesion and nationalism, see Feinstein,
Rally ’round the Flag; Bart Bonikowski, Yuval Feinstein, and Sean Bock, “The Partisan Sorting of
‘America’: How Nationalist Cleavages Shaped the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election,” American Journal of
Sociology 127, no. 2 (September 2021): 492–561; Yascha Mounk, The Great Experiment: Why Diverse
Democracies Fall Apart and How They Can Endure (New York: Penguin Press, 2022).
In The Sum of Us Heather McGhee, The Sum of Us: What Racism Costs Everyone and How We Can
Prosper Together (New York: One World, 2022).
Duke sociologist Chris Bail Christopher Bail, Breaking the Social Media Prism: How to Make Our
Platforms Less Polarizing (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2021).
She concludes that to overcome Polletta, Inventing the Ties That Bind; Bloemraad et al., “Membership
without Social Citizenship?”
His solution is to celebrate work Sandel, The Tyranny of Merit.
how we have reduced stigmatization Clair et al., “Destigmatization and Health”; Michèle Lamont,
“Addressing Recognition Gaps: Destigmatization and the Reduction of Inequality,” American
Sociological Review 83, no. 3 (June 2018): 419–44.
resulted in less absenteeism Erin Kelly et al., “7 Strategies to Improve Your Employees’ Health and Well-
Being,” Harvard Business Review, October 12, 2021, https://hbr.org/2021/10/7-strategies-to-improve-
your-employees-health-and-well-being; Phyllis Moen et al., “Changing Work, Changing Health: Can
Real Work-Time Flexibility Promote Health Behaviors and Well-Being?,” Journal of Health and Social
Behavior 52, no. 4 (2011): 404–29.

working conditions for the majority of US mothers Caitlyn Collins, Making Motherhood Work: How
Women Manage Careers and Caregiving (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2019).
Broad exposure to a wide range of people Jonathan JB Mijs, “Institutions as Inferential Spaces: How
People Learn About Inequality” (Dissertation, Department of Sociology, Harvard University, 2017).
Moreover, frequent interactions with people Diana C. Mutz, Hearing the Other Side: Deliberative
Versus Participatory Democracy (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006); Mijs, “Why Don’t We
Care about Growing Inequality?”
direct them away from the “excellent sheep” pathway William Deresiewicz, Excellent Sheep: The
Miseducation of the American Elite and the Way to a Meaningful Life (New York: Free Press, 2015).
in countries like Denmark and Sweden Christian Albrekt Larsen and Thomas Engel Dejgaard, “The
Institutional Logic of Images of the Poor and Welfare Recipients: A Comparative Study of British,
Swedish and Danish Newspapers,” Journal of European Social Policy 23, no. 3 (July 1, 2013): 287–99.
Whereas more privileged Americans See, for instance, McCall, The Undeserving Rich. On changing
perceptions of the deservingness of the poor over the last decades, see Bloemraad et al., “Membership
without Social Citizenship?”; Silja Häusermann and Hanna Schwander, “Varieties of Dualization?
Labor Market Segmentation and Insider-Outsider Divides across Regimes” (Green Templeton College,
University of Oxford, 2010), https://mwpweb.eu/1/22/resources/publication_418_1.pdf.
Anthropologist Bhrigupati Singh He studies the life of laborers living in extreme poverty in Rajasthan,
India. Bhrigupati Singh, Poverty and the Quest for Life: Spiritual and Material Striving in Rural India
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015).
This strengthened social resilience Ioana Sendroiu, “Among Crises: Making Sense of COVID-19”
(Unpublished, Weatherhead Center for International Affairs, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
2021).
These alternative standards help bolster Hojman and Miranda, “Agency, Human Dignity, and
Subjective Well-Being”; Andersson and Hitlin, “Subjective Dignity and Self-Reported Health.” On how
agency and dignity are connected to hope, see Sanchez, Lamont, and Zilberstein, “How American
College Students Understand Social Resilience during Covid-19 and the Movement for Racial Justice.”
The impact of income on happiness plateaus Cory Stieg, “From the ‘perfect’ Salary to Keeping up
with the Joneses, Here’s How Money Really Affects Your Happiness,” CNBC, May 26, 2020,
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/26/how-your-salary-and-the-way-you-spend-money-affect-your-
happiness.html.
Developmental economist and Nobel laureate Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1999); Joseph E. Stiglitz, Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi, Mismeasuring
Our Lives: Why GDP Doesn’t Add Up (New York: New Press Distributed by Perseus, 2010);
Appadurai, “The Capacity to Aspire.”
the United Nations’ annual Human Development Report Human Development Report
2021/2022. Uncertain Times, Uncertain Lies: Shaping our Future in a Transforming World (New York:
United Nations Development Program). I cochaired the advisory committee to this report, which
incorporates notions of social resilience, uncertainty, and solidarity.
we urgently need to lift up “ordinary universalism” Lamont and Aksartova emphasize the particular
universalisms that are grounded in “the cultural repertoires of universalism that are differentially
available to individuals across race and national context.” Michèle Lamont and Sada Aksartova,

“Ordinary Cosmopolitanisms: Strategies for Bridging Racial Boundaries among Working-class Men,”
Theory, Culture & Society 19, no. 4 (2002): 1–25.
how people bridge boundaries See also Ann Morning and Marcello Maneri, An Ugly Word: Rethinking
“Race” in Italy (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2022). Michèle Lamont, Ann Morning, and
Margarita Mooney, “Particular Universalisms: North African Immigrants Respond to French Racism,”
Ethnic and Racial Studies 25, no. 3 (2002): 390–414. Also Maureen A. Craig and Jennifer A.
Richerson, “Stigma-Based Solidarity: Understanding the Psychological Foundations of Conflict and
Coalition Among Members of Different Stigmatized Groups,” Current Directions in Psychological
Science 25, no. 1 (2016): 21–27.
When asked about how they are similar Lamont, Morning, and Mooney, Ibid. Also Craig and
Richeson, Ibid.
polarization and political sectarianism Alan I. Abramowitz, The Great Alignment: Race, Party
Transformation, and the Rise of Donald Trump (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2018); Finkel et
al., “Political Sectarianism in America.”
A recent study of female janitors Ramaswami Mahalingam and Patturaj Selvaraj, “Ambedkar, Radical
Interdependence and Dignity: A Study of Women Mall Janitors in India,” Journal of Business Ethics
177, no. 4 (2022): 813–28.
Social psychologists Matthew Feinberg Matthew Feinberg and Robb Willer, “From Gulf to Bridge:
When Do Moral Arguments Facilitate Political Influence?,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
41, no. 12 (2015): 1665–81.
This includes a form of “aesthetic cosmopolitanism” Vincenzo Cicchelli et al., “A Tale of Three
Cities: Aesthetico-Cultural Cosmopolitanism as a New Capital among Youth in Paris, São Paulo, and
Seoul,” Journal of Consumer Culture 21, no. 3 (2018): 576–97; Motti Regev, Pop-Rock Music: Aesthetic
Cosmopolitanism in Late Modernity (Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2013).
middle-class Turkish immigrants in Berlin Gökçe Yurdakul and Tunay Altay, “Getting Respect in
Berlin: Turkish Immigrant Parents’ Quest for Privilege in Berlin’s Private Schools.” Workshop on
Practicing Intersectionality in Racism Research: Methods and Analysis, 2021; Gökçe Yurdakul and
Tunay Altay, “Overcoming Stigma: The Boundary Work of Privileged Mothers of Turkish Background
in Berlin’s Private Schools,” Ethnic and Racial Studies, DOI: 10.1080/01419870.2022.2152720; Jürgen
Gerhards, Silke Hans, and Sören Carlson, Social Class and Transnational Human Capital: How Middle
and Upper Class Parents Prepare Their Children for Globalization (Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2017);
Çetin Çelik and Tuğçe Özdemir, “When Downward Mobility Haunts: Reproduction Crisis and
Educational Strategies of Turkish Middle Class under the AK Party Rule,” British Journal of Sociology of
Education 43, no. 2 (February 17, 2022): 260–77.
Nationalist populism, Islamophobia, and xenophobia Erik Bleich and A. Maurits van der Veen,
Covering Muslims: American Newspapers in Comparative Perspective (Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 2021).
It weakens the boundaries between groups Lamont and Molnár, “The Study of Boundaries in the
Social Sciences”; Wimmer, Ethnic Boundary Making; Richard Alba and Victor Nee, Remaking the
American Mainstream: Assimilation and Contemporary Immigration (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2005); Rogers Brubaker, Grounds for Difference (Harvard University Press, 2015).
The turn toward “superdiversity” Steven Vertovec, “Super-Diversity and Its Implications,” Ethnic and
Racial Studies 30, no. 6 (2007): 1024–54; Elijah Anderson, The Cosmopolitan Canopy: Race and

Civility in Everyday Life (New York: W. W. Norton, 2012).
So does the use of the category Cristina Mora, Making Hispanics: How Activists, Bureaucrats, and
Media Constructed a New American (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014); Mari Sanchez. “The
Expansion & Diffusion of the POC Category 1975–1995: A Focus on Sociocultural Processes”
(Unpublished manuscript, Department of Sociology, Harvard University, 2022).
These changes in terminology John Skrentny, The Minority Rights Revolution (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2002); Frank Dobbin, Inventing Equal Opportunity (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2011).
affirmative action in universities and nonprofits Berrey, The Enigma of Diversity; Natasha K.
Warikoo, The Diversity Bargain: And Other Dilemmas ofRace, Admissions, and Meritocracy at Elite
Universities (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016).
affinity groups in the corporate sector Lumumba Babushe Seegars, “Organizing in the Shadows of
White Hegemony: Comparing How Black versus Asian Employees Collectively Contest Racial
Marginalization in the Workplace” (Working Paper, Harvard Business School, 2021).
One way that some corporations Dobbin and Kalev, Getting to Diversity.
“happy talk” or empty, symbolic gestures Joyce M. Bell and Douglas Hartmann, “Diversity in
Everyday Discourse: The Cultural Ambiguities and Consequences of ‘Happy Talk,’ ” American
Sociological Review 72, no. 6 (2007): 895–914.
the marginalization of certain groups Jennifer Lee and Min Zhou, The Asian American Achievement
Paradox (Russell Sage Foundation, 2015).
They are also criticized Adia Wingfield, Flatlining: Race, Work, and Health Care in the New Economy
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2019).
This dynamic has worsened Gidron, Adams, and Horne, American Affective Polarization in
Comparative Perspective.
When groups feel they are competing John T. Jost et al., “Political Conservatism as Motivated Social
Cognition,” Psychological Bulletin 129, no. 3 (2003): 339–75.
Few acknowledge that there is a common quest Rory McVeigh and Kevin Estep, The Politics of Losing:
Trump, the Klan and the Mainstreaming of Resentment (New York: Columbia University Press, 2019).
suffering is commensurate with the other’s See for instance Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, “On the Racial
Fantasies of White Liberals in Trump’s America and Beyond,” American Studies 66, no. 1 (2021): 53–
58.
Progressive finger-wagging can only stoke working-class resentment There are any other factors that
should influence the likelihood that the Democratic Party will be able to attract more working-class
voters moving forward. For a cogent discussion of these conditions and the broader situation, see Jared
Abbott, “A Populism of the Left Can Realign American Politics,” Jacobin, December 5, 2022,
https://jacobin.com/2022/12/a-populism-of-the-left-can-realign-american-politics.
become less stigmatized in recent decades Clair, Daniel, and Lamont, “Destigmatization and Health.”
people labeled as obese Abigail C. Saguy, What’s Wrong with Fat? (Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press, 2012).
For example, they used language Gerald Rosenberg, The Hollow Hope: Can Courts Bring about Social
Change? (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991); Charles R. Epp, The Rights Revolution: Lawyers,

Activists, and SupremeCourts in Comparative Perspective (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).
They also used the law Ibid.
in 1987, Lady Diana was photographed Skrentny, The Minority Rights Revolution, p. 141.
and eventually, beyond national boundaries Kristopher Velasco, “Queering the World Society:
Global Norms, Rival Transnational Networks, and the Contested Case of LGBT Rights,” SocArXiv,
July 25, 2020, https://doi.org/doi:10.31235/osf.io/3rtje; Ferguson, “ ‘There Is an Eye on Us.’ ”
we need to devise and diffuse new narratives On the emotional dimension of engaging in different
strategies for marginalized groups, see James M. Jasper, “Strategic Marginalizations, Emotional
Marginalities: The Dilemma of Stigmatized Identities,” in Surviving Against Odds: The Marginalized
in a Globalizing World, ed. Debal K. SinghaRoy (Delhi, India: Manohar Publishers, 2010), 27–35.
support from “outsiders” is validating Lamont et al., Getting Respect.
By broadening who appears in ads Jordan Foster and David Pettinicchio, “A Model Who Looks like
Me: Communicating and Consuming Representations of Disability,” Journal of Consumer Culture
(2021): 1–19.
Weiner also assisted Mattel in launching Barbie Anna Livsey, “Barbie Comes out in Support of
Same-Sex Marriage,” The Guardian, November 29, 2017,
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/nov/29/barbie-comes-out-in-support-of-same-sex-
marriage.
effective means for diffusing at scale Michèle Lamont and Viràg Molnár, “How Blacks Use
Consumption to Shape Their Collective Identity: Evidence from African-American Marketing
Specialists,” Journal of Consumer Culture 1, no. 1 (2001): 31–45; Mora, Making Hispanics.
In the past, marketers worked to convince Lamont and Molnár, Ibid.
American society for most of the twentieth century Alba, The Great Demographic Illusion; Tomás R.
Jimenez, The Other Side of Assimilation: How Immigrants Are Changing American Life (Oakland, CA:
University of California Press, 2017); Adrian Favell, The Integration Nation: Immigration and Colonial
Power in Liberal Democracies (London: Polity Press, 2022).
Governments play an important role Arturo Rodriguez Morató and Matías Zarlenga, “Analysis of the
Influence of Gender and Rising Diversity in the Configuration of the Values of Culture,”
UNCHARTED: Understanding, Capturing and Fostering the Societal Value of Culture (University of
Barcelona, October 2020).
Sociologist Jeffrey Reitz Jeffrey G. Reitz, “Multiculturalism Policies and Popular Multiculturalism in
the Development of Canadian Immigration,” in The Multiculturalism Question: Debating Identity in
21st Century Canada (Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2014), 107–26.
In Canada, for instance, such efforts Jeffrey G. Reitz, Emily Laxer, and Patrick Simon, “National
Cultural Frames and Muslims’ Economic Incorporation: A Comparison of France and Canada,”
International Migration Review, January 10, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1177/01979183211035725.
In 1971, in response to a movement for independence Elke Winter, “Rethinking Multiculturalism
After Its ‘Retreat’: Lessons From Canada,” American Behavioral Scientist 59, no. 6 (May 1, 2015): 637–
57.
and favored “interculturalism” over multiculturalism Gérard Bouchard, Interculturalism: A View
from Quebec, trans. Howard Scott (University of Toronto Press, 2015). See also Nasar Meer, Tariq

Modood, and Ricard Zapata-Barrero, eds., Multiculturalism and Interculturalism: Debating the
Dividing Lines (Edinburgh University Press, 2016).
This has led Canadian immigrants to be more involved Matthew Wright and Irene Bloemraad, “Is
There a Trade-off between Multiculturalism and Socio-Political Integration? Policy Regimes and
Immigrant Incorporation in Comparative Perspective,” Perspectives on Politics 10, no. 1 (2012): 77–95.
The latter “work bonus” program Jennifer Sykes et al., “Dignity and Dreams: What the Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC) Means to Low-Income Families,” American Sociological Review 80, no. 2 (April 1,
2015): 243–67.
Or laws can enact segregation Lamont et al., Getting Respect.
The ongoing battle over abortion rights Jocelyn Viterna et al., “Governance and the Reversal of
Women’s Rights,” in Towards Gender Equity in Development (Oxford University Press, 2018).
self-presentation as acceptable Prudence L. Carter, Stubborn Roots: Race, Culture, and Inequality in
U.S. and South African Schools (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).
We all have to be carriers Again, these changes cannot be reduced to that of a self-serving liberal new
middle class. There exists an excellent and detailed literature on the politics of this group, such as: Steven
Brint, In an Age of Experts: The Changing Role of Professionals in Politics and Public Life (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994).
many efforts of civic action and imagination Lichterman, How Civic Action Works; Hahrie Han,
How Organizations Develop Activists: Civic Associations and Leadership in the 21st Century (Oxford
University Press, 2014); Gianpaolo Baiocchi et al., Civic Imagination: Making a Difference in American
Political Life (New York: Routledge, 2014); Julien Talpin, Community Organizing (Raisons D’Agir,
2016).


CONCLUSION: Strengthening Our Capacity to Live Better Together
a condition for our social resilience Hall and Lamont, Social Resilience in the Neoliberal Era.
The decision to migrate Noel B. Salazar, “The Power of Imagination in Transnational Mobilities,”
Identities 18, no. 6 (2011): 576–98; Filiz Garip, On the Move: Changing Mechanisms of Mexico-U.S.
Migration (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016).
One’s basic notions about agency Robert H. Frank, Success and Luck: Good Fortune and the Myth of
Meritocracy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016); Helga Nowotny, The Cunning of
Uncertainty (London: Polity Press, 2016); Michael Sauder, “A Sociology of Luck,” Sociological Theory
38, no. 3 (2020): 193–216.
renewed threats to LGBTQ+ rights Lucas Acosta, “A List of Trump’s ‘Unprecedented Steps’ for the
LGBTQ Community,” Human Rights Campaign, June 11, 2020, https://www.hrc.org/news/the-list-
of-trumps-unprecedented-steps-for-the-lgbtq-community.
decision inRoe v. Wade “An Overview of U.S. Refugee Law and Policy” (1331 G Street NW, Suite 200,
Washington, DC, 20005: American Immigration Council, September 20, 2021),
https://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/research/overview-us-refugee-law-and-policy.
Befriending someone from Ben Baumberg Geiger, “Does Diversity Help Students Learn about
Inequality?,” Inequalities Blog (blog), July 2, 2018,
https://inequalitiesblog.wordpress.com/2018/07/02/does-diversity-help-students-learn-about-
inequality/; Mijs, “Why Don’t We Care about Growing Inequality?”
More generally, increasing contact between groups Gordon W. Allport, The Nature of Prejudice
(Basic Books, 1954). Many study the impact of contact on the decline of prejudices and discrimination:
Elizabeth Levy Paluck, Seth A. Green and Donald P. Green, “The Contact Hypothesis Re-Evaluated,”
Behavioral Public Policy 3, no. 2 (2018): 129–58. For example, Salma Mousa, “Building Social Cohesion
between Christians and Muslims Through Soccer in Post-ISIS Iraq,” Science 369 (6505) (2020): 866–
70. Also, Chagai M. Weiss, “Diversity in Health Care Institutions Reduces Israeli Patients’ Prejudice
toward Arabs,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 14 (April 6, 2021).
This remains one of the most effective approaches Alba, The Great Demographic Illusion. On the large
literature on the conditions that lead to the production of porous boundaries, see Lamont and Molnár,
“The Study of Boundaries in the Social Sciences”; Wimmer, Ethnic Boundary Making; and Steven
Vertovec, “The Social Organization of Difference,” Ethnic and Racial Studies 44, no. 8 (2021): 1273–
95.
only if integration occurs at a social level Warikoo, The Diversity Bargain; Mitchell L. Stevens,
Creating a Class: College Admissions and the Education of Elites (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2007).
by regaining working-class voters A detailed discussion of the electoral dynamics of the Democratic
Party and other liberal or progressive parties in relation to the working class is beyond the purpose of
this study. But see Abbott, “A Populism of the Left Can Realign American Politics.” For a recent
analysis in a comparative perspective, see Amory Gethin, Clara Martínez-Toledano, and Thomas
Piketty, eds., Political Cleavages and Social Inequalities: A Study of Fifty Democracies, 1948–2020
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2021).
Middle-class white people need to recognize Geismer, Don’t Blame Us.
Many avoid conversations Robin DiAngelo, White Fragility: Why It’s So Hard for White People to
Talk About Racism (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 2018).

This avoidance, euphemistically called “color-blindness” Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, Racism Without
Racists: Color-blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in the United States (Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2006).
a world where everyone has dignity and respect For a related perspective focused on political
messaging, see Jan G. Voelkel and Robb Willer, “Resolving the Progressive Paradox with Professor
Robert Willer,” https://www.thirdway.org/interview/resolving-the-progressive-paradox-with-professor-
robb-willer. Also Luiza A. Santos, Jan G. Voelkel, Robert Willer, and Jaml Zaki, “Belief in the Utility of
Cross-Partisan Empathy Reduces Partisan Animosity and Facilitates Political Persuasion,” Psychological
Science 33, no. 9 (2022): 1557–73.
Some countries, such as Germany Cynthia Miller-Idriss, The Extreme Gone Mainstream:
Commercialization and Far Right Youth Culture in Germany (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2018).
In Massachusetts, where I live “Civics Project Guidebook: Guidance to Support Implementation of
Chapter 296 of the Acts of 2018, An Act to Promote and Enhance Civic Engagement” (Massachusetts
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, December 2021),
https://www.doe.mass.edu/instruction/hss/civics-project-guidebook/index.html#/; Danielle Allen and
Paul Carrese, “Our Democracy Is Ailing. Civics Education Has to Be Part of the Cure,” Washington
Post, March 2, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/03/02/our-democracy-is-ailing-
civics-education-has-be-part-cure/.
All our cultural institutions American Academy of Arts & Sciences, Investing in Civic Education &
Our Democracy, 2021, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w92zVnL7fas.
Research on what helps increase diversity Alexandra Kalev, Frank Dobbin, and Erin Kelly, “Best
Practices or Best Guesses? Assessing the Efficacy of Corporate Affirmative Action and Diversity
Policies,” American Sociological Review 71, no. 4 (2006): 589–617.
into our own psyche, to find “grit” Duckworth, Grit.
trends of mindfulness, positive psychology, and other “quick fixes” Singal, The Quick Fix.
trendy ideas about “tribalism” For an example, see Nigel Nicholson, “How Hardwired Is Human
Behavior?,” Harvard Business Review, 1998, https://hbr.org/1998/07/how-hardwired-is-human-
behavior; Joseph Henrich, The Secret of Our Success (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2017).
in favor of our ingroup members Greene, Moral Tribes; Ryan D. Enos, The Space between Us: Social
Geography and Politics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2017). Evolutionary psychologists
discuss learning as historical, but largely conditioned by evolution. While space limitation precludes a
full engagement with this topic, I thank Yossi Harpaz for helping me familiarize myself with this
literature.
It is influenced by outside factors Gidron, Adams, and Horne, American Affective Polarization in
Comparative Perspective.
our sense of community waxes and wanes Paul Gilbert and Jaskaran Basran, “The Evolution of
Prosocial and Antisocial Competitive Behavior and the Emergence of Prosocial and Antisocial
Leadership Styles,” Frontiers in Psychology 10 (2019).
We may feel differently Lamont et al., Getting Respect.
how much “groupness” a group experiences Michael A. Hogg et al., “Uncertainty, Entitativity, and
Group Identification,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 43, no. 1 (January 1, 2007): 135–42.ff

In response, some redouble their efforts Charles Tilly, Durable Inequality (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1998).
as if awareness Frank Dobbin and Alexandra Kalev, “Why Diversity Programs Fail,” Harvard Business
Review, August 2016; Calvin K. Lai et al., “Reducing Implicit Racial Preferences: II. Intervention
Effectiveness across Time,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 145, no. 8 (2016): 1001–16.
In order to feed solidarity Claude S. Fischer, Made in America: A Social History of American Culture
and Character (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010); Mario Luis Small, Someone to Talk To
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2017).
by making narratives of inclusion widely available Jan G. Voelkel and Robb Willer, “Resolving the
Progressive Paradox: Conservative Value Framing of Progressive Economic Policies Increases Candidate
Support” (Department of Sociology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, April 22, 2019).
Cuing can help Ibid.
promoted a distinctive and popular “China dream,” Jeffrey Wasserstrom, “Here’s Why Xi Jinping’s
‘Chinese Dream’ Differs Radically from the American Dream,” Time, October 19, 2015.
Some of the US’s problems are also present Phillip Inman, “Social Mobility in Richest Countries ‘Has
Stalled since 1990s,’ ” The Guardian, June 15, 2018,
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2018/jun/15/social-mobility-in-richest-countries-has-stalled-
since-1990s; Bloemraad et al., “Membership without Social Citizenship?”
skyrocketing income inequality Milanovic, Global Inequality; Savage, The Return of Inequality.
Everywhere, young people have faced setbacks and are mobilizing Paul Mason, “How the Covid
Shock Has Radicalised Generation Z,” The Guardian, June 2, 2021,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jun/02/how-the-covid-shock-has-radicalised-generation-z;
Cecile Van de Velde, “What Have You Done to Our World? From the Indignados to the pro-Climate
Movement, the Rise of a Global Generational Voice” (ISA World Forum of Sociology, February 27,
2021).
the suicide rate in several strongly neoliberal countries Prianka Padmanathan et al., “Social Media
Use, Economic Recession and Income Inequality in Relation to Trends in Youth Suicide in High-
Income Countries: A Time Trends Analysis,” Journal of Affective Disorders 275 (October 1, 2020): 58–
65; “Young Americans Increasingly End Their Own Lives,” The Economist, December 9, 2022, sec.
United States, https://www.economist.com/united-states/2022/12/03/young-americans-increasingly-
end-their-own-lives.
America’s reckoning for racial justice inspired progressive movements elsewhere Milman and
Ajayi, “Black Lives Matter in Europe”; Jada Nagumo and Nana Shibata, “#BlackLivesMatter Shines
Light on Racism in Japan and across Asia,” Nikkei Asia, August 11, 2020,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Asia-Insight/BlackLivesMatter-shines-light-on-racism-in-Japan-and-
across-Asia.
Countries such as France Benjamin Dodman, “As George Floyd Outrage Spreads, France Confronts Its
Own Demons,” France 24, June 3, 2020, https://www.france24.com/en/20200603-it-happens-here-
too-as-george-floyd-outrage-spreads-france-confronts-its-own-demons.
others around the world feel more empowered. See the findings of the “world society” school on these
issues. For instance: David John Frank and Elizabeth H. Mceneaney, “The Individualization of Society
and the Liberalization of State Policies on Same-Sex Sexual Relations, 1984–1995,” Social Forces 77, no.

3 (1999): 911–43. On recognition struggles and women’s movements, see Hobson, Recognition
Struggles and Social Movements.
Asians in France launched an anti-Asian hate hashtag Fontana, Recognition Politics; Howard
Ramos, “Opportunity for Whom?: Political Opportunity and Critical Events in Canadian Aboriginal
Mobilization, 1951–2000,” Social Forces 87, no. 2 (2008): 795–823.
different in every country and region “The American-Western European Values Gap” (Pew Research
Center, November 17, 2011), https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2011/11/17/the-american-
western-european-values-gap/.
countries face persistent challenges with xenophobia and racism Adrian Favell, “Immigration,
Integration and Citizenship: Elements of a New Political Demography,” Journal of Ethnic and
Migration Studies 48, no. 1 (January 2, 2022): 3–32.
We can all feed or fight social and spatial segregation On the role of residential segregation based on
class and race in the social reproduction of inequality, see Douglas S. Massey and Jonathan Tannen,
“Suburbanization and Segregation in the United States: 1970-2010,” Ethnic and Racial Studies 41, no.
9 (2018): 1594–1611 and Annette Lareau and Kimberly Goyette, eds., Choosing Homes, Choosing
Schools (New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation, 2014).
Explicitly acknowledging how workers are penalized by the cultural dominance This point is also
made by Bonilla-Silva, “On the Racial Fantasies of White Liberals in Trump’s America and Beyond.”


Appendix B: College Students
Chapter 6 draws on original analyses Sanchez, Lamont, and Zilberstein, “How American College
Students Understand Social Resilience during Covid-19 and the Movement for Racial Justice”;
Zilberstein, Lamont, and Sanchez, “Recreating a Plausible Future.”
the use of theoretical sampling focused on class is justified Mario Luis Small, “ ‘How Many Cases Do
I Need?’: On Science and the Logic of Case Selection in Field-Based Research,” Ethnography 10, no. 1
(March 2009): 5–38.
Indeed, a January 2020 Pew Research Center survey Parker and Igielnik, “On the Cusp of
Adulthood and Facing an Uncertain Future.”


INDEX
A note about the index: The pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print edition.
Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the beginning of that
page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or phrase, use your reading
system’s search function.


A
abortion rights, 66–67, 153
activism, 12–14, 66–67, 93–94, 105–106, 108–111, 136, 178–179
Adams, J. T., 25
aesthetic cosmopolitanism, 146
affinity groups, 146
affirmative action, 48, 146
affordable housing, 48–49
African Americans
American dream, 27–28
art and photography as change agents, 60–62, 75, 77
“being seen,” 78
Black Lives Matter, 23, 68, 79–80, 121, 126
Black Panther (movie), 14, 55
Campaign for Black Male Achievement, 75
as consumers of art, 77
digital media and, 82–83
“double-consciousness,” 64–65
Gen Z and, 121
in leadership roles, 80
life expectancy, 72
lower class, 43
Movement for Black Lives, 66, 129
narratives, 53
Obama effect, 7
photography as change agent, 61–62, 77
Question Bridge: Black Males, 61–62
racism, 45, 69
redlining, 69
reparations, 38
1619 Project, 1–2, 53–54
voter access, 106
wealth of, 69
West on, 19
agents of change. See change agents
AIDS sufferers, 148–149
Allardice, Nick, 84–85
allostatic load, 72
Alonzo, Cristela, 98, 102–103
alt-right organizations, as change agents, 94
Amazon, unionization, 90
America First (show), 93–94
America First Political Action Conference, 94
American dream, 21–31
African Americans and, 27–28
confidence in, 26–27
current status of, 21–23

darker side of, 26
disillusionment with, 29
failure of, 21–22, 25–26
as folklore, 26
Gen Z and, 122–123, 125
immigrants and, 28
influence of, 25
as mass deception, 29
meaning of, 27
post–World War II era, 21
television shows, 36
as unfulfillable promise, 29
American economy
American dream, 21–31
in twentieth century, 24
upward mobility, 24, 30, 36, 38, 116, 163
See also income inequality
American Indian or Alaska Native (AIAN) groups, 72
American Psycho (movie), 62
Anderson, Benedict, 87
antiabortion activists, 66–67
antigovernment movements, 67
anxiety, 41
Appadurai, Arjun, 156
art, as change agent, 59–63, 77–79, 178
“Australian Mafia,” 85
Ayer, Geeta, 112


B
B-Lab (organization), 111
baby boomers, 11, 119, 126, 156, 160
backlash, 13
Badu, Erykah, 67–68
Bail, Chris, 140
Banks, Patricia, 77–78
“banlieue rap,” 146
Barbie dolls, diversity in, 150
“being seen,” 78
Bell, W. Kamau, 98–99, 101
Berman, Elizabeth Popp, 56
Between the World and Me (Coates), 63
biculturalism, 146
Bienen, Henry, 80
bilingualism, 146
birth rate, 33
Black Lives Matter, 23, 68, 79–80, 121, 126
Black Panther (movie), 14, 55
Black Twitter, 129, 135
boomers. See baby boomers
Boone, Michelle T., 80
Boston Common Asset Management Company, 112
boundaries, 38, 58, 142, 146, 148
Boushey, Heather, 112
branding diversity, 150–151
Brennan, Neal, 98
Bridgerton (show), 83
Brown, Michael, 68
Business Roundtable, 111, 112
businesses
branding diversity, 150–151
as change agents, 112, 134
change agents interviewed, 179
DEI initiatives, 6, 137, 146–147, 161
diversity training, 161
human resource policies, 141
Butler, Judith, 60


C
Campaign for Black Male Achievement (CBMA), 75
Canada, 15–16, 152, 163
“cancel culture,” 68, 93
capitalism, 112
Carlson, Tucker, 10, 94
Carter, Prudence, 153
Case, Anne, 41
Chan-Zuckerberg Foundation, 81
change, 5–6, 47–50, 54
change agents, 9–10, 75–95, 112–113
alt-right organizations, 94
art, art consumers, and art galleries, 59–63, 77–79
capitalism-oriented change agents, 112
comedians as, 98, 99, 103–104
defined, 62–63
digital technology platforms as, 82–83, 87, 88
education and, 92
employers as, 141
entertainment industry and, 62, 97–113
Gen Z as, 10–11, 127, 131, 133–135
HIV-positive and AIDS patients as, 148–149
Hollywood creatives as, 97–104, 141–142
human resource policies and, 141
“infotainment” and, 90
interviews with, 175–184
literature and, 63
magazines and newspapers as, 87, 104, 109
movies as, 14, 55, 77, 79
newspapers as, 87, 89
nonprofit sector as, 78–81
obesity and, 149
philanthropic sector as, 78–81, 94
photography as, 61–62, 77
political activists and, 12–14, 66–67, 93–94, 105–106, 108–111
political media as, 108
politicians as, 108–111
religious institutions as, 91, 145
social change organizations as, 83–86
social media as, 88
socialists as, 108–111
stigmatization and, 63
television as, 14, 88, 90, 98–103
Change.org, 84–85
Chapo Trap House (podcast), 110
“charity frame,” 107
Chenoweth, Erica, 67

Christian right, 45
Citizen Kane (movie), 62
civic education, 160–161
class, 69
“class homophily,” 35
Clinton, Hillary, 8, 70
Coates, Ta-Nehisi, 63, 134
cognitive psychology, 57
“cohort narrative,” 118, 126
Cole, Joe Robert, 14, 98
collective identity, Gen Z, 125
college students
interviews with, 185–189
See also Gen Z
Color of Change (organization), 106
comedians, as change agents, 98, 99, 103–104, 180–182
commentators, as change agents, 10
consumerism, 37, 123
Conte, Jack, 82
corporations. See businesses
COVID pandemic, 41, 119, 120
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, 93
Cristela (TV show), 102
critical race theory, 53, 92
Crowley, Joseph, 108
Cuarón, Alfonso, 79
cultural organizations, as change agents, 79–80
cultural outlets, recognition and, 12, 14
cultural rights, recognition and, 63
curriculum, 92, 160–161


D
Daniels, Lee, 98
Deaton, Angus, 41
decision-making, 57
defunding the police, 38
Democratic Socialists of America (DSA), 108–109, 110, 128
Democrats, 48, 55, 91, 128, 159
Denmark, 143
depression, 33, 41
DeSantis, Ron, 92
destigmatization, of marginalized groups, 148–150
Diaz, Natalie, 97
digital technology platforms, 82–83, 87, 88
dignity, 4, 5, 66, 70, 75, 91, 143, 147, 159, 165
The Dignity of Working Men (Lamont), 41–43, 44, 52–53
discrimination
against white people, 45
health and, 71
redlining, 69
See also stigmatization
diversity, 48, 50, 71, 150, 152, 161
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) initiatives, 6, 137, 146–147, 161
documentary photography, 60–61
Dollar, Creflo, 105
“doomers,” 129
“double-consciousness,” 64–65
Dove (beauty brand), diversity in, 150
Dove, Shawn, 76, 78
drug fatalities, 41
Du Bois, W. E. B., 64–65
Dungey, Channing, 82–83
DuVernay, Ava, 82, 83, 88, 150


E
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), 152–153
economic inequality. See income inequality
economics, 57, 144
economists, social change and, 56–57
education
as change agent, 92
civic education, 160–161
critical race theory, 53, 92
curriculum, 92, 160–161
Gifted and Talented programs, 49
higher education, 92, 134
pressure to succeed, 34
recognition and, 153
segregation in schools, 38, 49
versions of history, 2
Ehrenreich, Barbara, 29
“emotional modulation,” 101, 103
employers, as change agents, 141
Eng, Katie, 151
entertainment industry
Black Panther (movie), 14, 55
as change agents, 62, 97–113
Gen Z and, 134
Hamilton (musical), 54–55
“infotainment,” 90
movies as change agents, 14, 55, 77, 79
narratives and social change, 54–55
as publicity for upper-middle class values, 36–37
working class and, 37
See also Hollywood celebrities
entrepreneurs, as change agents, 111–112
environmentalism, 160, 178
The Epic of America (Adams), 25
eugenics, 54
Europe, populism in, 45
Extinction Rebellion, 133


F
Facebook, 89
faith-based organizations, 145
Faith Forward (organization), 91
Faith in Action (organization), 91
family planning, 33
far-right politics, 93, 120, 132, 148
Feeding America (organization), 107
Feinberg, Matthew, 145–146
fertility, 33
financial crisis (2008), 109
The Fire Next Time (Baldwin), 63
Florida Rights Restoration Coalition, 97, 144–145
Fogelman, Dan, 98
Fontana, Lorenza, 63
For Freedom (art project), 61
Ford Foundation, 78–79
foundations, as change agents, 79–80, 94, 183
Fourcade, Marion, 56
France, 38, 41–42, 52, 53, 146, 163
freedom of speech, 68
Fuentes, Nick, 93–94


G
Ganz, Marshall, 110–111
Garrido, Maria, 151
Gates, Henry Louis, 92
Gates Foundation, 80, 81
Geismer, Lily, 50–51
Gen X, 11, 119, 126, 160
Gen Z, 115–137, 156
activism, 136
American dream and, 122–123, 125
baby boomers and, 126, 156
as change agents, 10–11, 127, 131, 133–135
college student interviews, 185–189
consumerism and materialism, 123
COVID pandemic and, 119
entertainers and, 134
generosity, 125–126
hope, 121, 122, 129
ideals and values of, 118–119, 120, 124–127
mental health, 123
middle class and, 130–131
neoliberalism, 122, 125, 133
political activism, 127–128
politics, 128, 130, 131, 137
religion, 135
sense of hope, 121, 122
skepticism, 130
social justice, 128–129, 131
socialism and, 109
sources of inspiration for, 135
working class, 130, 131–132
gender, 121, 179
Germany, 160–161
Getting Respect (Lamont et al.), 28, 65–66
GIIN (organization), 111
Gingrich, Newt, 55–56
Gini coefficient, 24
Goff, Phillip Atiba, 107–108
“gospel capitalism,” 105
government policies
change agents interviewed, 184
stigmatization by, 152–153
The Great Gatsby (Fitzgerald), 62
“great replacement theory,” 71
Greenhouse, Steven, 90
grit (personal resilience), 5, 47, 161
Grouper Movement, 94


H
Hader, Bill, 98
Hamilton (musical), 54–55
Hannah-Jones, Nikole, 1–2, 9, 53
happiness, correlated with income, 143–144
hard work, 34, 37, 40, 133
Haslam, Lucy, 84
hate crimes, 44
Haveman, Heather, 87
health
recognition and, 71–72
See also mental health
Heimans, Jeremy, 85–86
“helicopter parenting,” 33
Herring, Alvin, 91
Hewlett Foundation, 80, 112
higher education, 92, 134, 178
hip-hop culture, 146
Hirschman, Albert, 156–157
Hispanics, 44, 45, 54, 121, 146
history
critical race theory, 53, 92
educational curricula and versions of history, 2
1619 Project, 1–2, 53–54
HIV and AIDS sufferers, 148–149
Hochschild, Arlie, 70
Hollywood creatives
celebrities, 104–105
as change agents, 97–104, 141–142
change agents interviewed, 179–182
comedians, 98, 99, 103–104
“emotional modulation,” 101, 103
Gen Z and, 134
“reflecting reality,” 100–101, 103
“see it to be it,” 102, 103
“Trojan horse,” 101, 103
homeownership, 69
homophobia, 5–6, 13
homosexuality, 5–6, 14. See also LGBTQ+ rights
Hong Kong Umbrella Movement, 23
hope, 30, 36, 121, 122, 129, 156–157
hopelessness, 72, 129
How the Mind Works (Pinker), 57
Huang, Beth, 110–111
human resource policies, 141

hunger, in the US, 107
Hunt-Hendrix, Leah, 80–81
hyper politicization, 129


I
identity politics, 16, 44, 69
Imagined Communities (show), 87
immigrants, 36
American dream and, 28
in Hamilton (musical), 55
hate crimes against, 44
narratives about, 55
ordinary universalism, 144
organizations for, 97
stigmatization of, 44–45
Trump on, 51–52, 70–71
immigration
change agents interviewed, 182
decline of, 71
inclusion, 50, 158–159
income
happiness correlated with, 143–144
of working class, 39
income inequality, 21–22, 69
international, 24, 163
segregation and, 35, 35f
in the US, 24, 32
India, 145
Indigenous people, 23, 63, 120, 163
“infotainment,” 90
institutional reforms, 48, 141
Internet, digital technology platforms, 82–83, 87, 88
interpersonal relationships, as form of recognition, 12, 14–15, 142
Iran, 163
Israel, 65, 66, 153

J
Jacobin (magazine), 109
Jayaraman, Saru, 90, 91
Jiménez, Cristina, 97
Johnson, Magic, 49
Joseph, Frederick, 55

K
Kaepernick, Colin, 69
Kahneman, Daniel, 57
Kaur, Rupi, 134
Kennedy, Molly, 150
Kim, Eunji, 36
Kim, Jee, 107
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 43, 157
King, Michelle and Robert, 98
Krugman, Paul, 112


L
labor movement, 90–91, 182
Latin America, 63, 163
Latinos, 54
Latinx, 146
laws, stigmatization and, 153–154
leftist change agents, 108–111
Letourneau, Nicole, 176
Lewis, Sarah, 77
LGBTQ+ community, 13, 23, 45, 59, 100, 101, 182
LGBTQ+ rights, 44, 66
life expectancy, of marginalized groups, 72
LinkedIn, 88
literacy, 87, 146
literature, as change agent, 63
Lizzo (singer), 69, 104
lower-income families
African Americans, 43
American dream and, 22
birth rate, 33
mental health of, 72–73
parenting, 33
Luce Foundation, 80


M
MacArthur Foundation, 80
magazines, as change agents, 87, 104, 109
“Make America Great Again” (slogan), 70
Malaysia, 145
marginalized groups, 44–46, 144–145
acceptance of, 2
author’s experience with marginalization, 15–19
being “seen,” 6
“cancel culture,” 68, 93
critical race theory, 53, 92
destigmatization of, 148–150
emphasizing similarities over differences, 144
HIV and AIDS sufferers, 148–149
identity politics, 69
Indigenous people, 23, 63, 120
life expectancy, 72
mobilization of, 64
narratives, 53
obese people, 149
ordinary universalism, 144–146
political activism, 12–14, 66–67, 93–94, 105–106, 108–111
recognition of, 12, 14–15
sense of worth, 7–8
Trump on, 51–52, 70–71
See also stigmatization
marketing, branding diversity, 151
Marshall Plan for Moms, 93
Martha Stewart Living (magazine and TV show), 104–105
Martin, Trayvon, 99
“Master Teacher” (song), 67–68
materialism, 123
McGhee, Heather, 140
McReynolds, Ami, 107
Meade, Desmond, 97, 144–145
media
digital technology platforms, 82–83, 87, 88
leftist publications, 109
newspapers, 89
political media as change agents, 108
print media, 89, 109
representation of upper-middle-class, 36
young people and, 109–111
See also entertainment industry; television
Mellon Foundation, 80
mental health, 32–33, 34–35
of Gen Z, 123

income inequality and, 32
of low-income people, 72–73
suicide, 33
“wellness” culture, 34
of working class, 32, 40–41
meritocracy, 5, 37–38, 40
MeToo phenomenon, 66
middle class
affordable housing, 48–49
aggregate wealth, 22
birth rate, 33
as consumers of art, 77
Gen Z, 130–131
ideal world of, 38
inclusion and, 158
life expectancy, 139–140
mental health, 32, 33
multiculturalism, 160
parenting, 33
stigmas reproduced by, 159
understanding place in economic hierarchy, 30
youth of, 34
millennials, 109, 119, 156
Mizrahi Jews, 66
“models of ideal selves,” 31
moral judgments, 49–50
moral tribalism, 54, 57–58
More in Common (organization), 83–84
mothers, working conditions, 141
Movement for Black Lives, 66, 129
movies, as change agent, 77
multiculturalism, 152, 160


N
narrative industry, 83–86
Narrative Initiative (organization), 107
narratives, 48, 50, 51–55
of African Americans, 53
change agents interviewed, 184
“cohort narrative,” 118, 126
defined, 51, 54
inequality and, 56
marginalized groups, 53
national narratives, 52
politics and, 55–56
power of, 54–56
social change and, 43
National Domestic Workers Alliance, 79
national narratives, 52
nationalist populism, 146
neoliberalism, 31–32, 47, 122, 125, 133
Netflix, 82–83, 87
New York Times, 89
newspapers, as change agents, 87, 89
Nice White Parents (podcast), 49
Nickel and Dimed (Ehrenreich), 29
NIMBY movements, 48
Nomadland (movie), 62
nonprofit sector, as change agents, 78–81
Norton, Jim, 98
Nudge (Thaler and Sunstein), 57

O
Obama, Barack, 6–7, 157, 162
Obama, Michelle, 134
Obama effect, 7
Obergefell v. Hodges, 46
obesity, 149
Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria, 108, 134
Occupy Movement (2011), 43, 109
Omidyar Network, 80, 112
Opie, Catherine, 59–61, 62
opioid crisis, 41, 71
ordinary universalism, 144–146


P
Palestinians, 65
parenting, 33, 142
Patreon (digital platform), 87, 109
Pennington, Hilary, 183
“people of color,” 146
personal relationships, as form of recognition, 12, 14–15, 142
philanthropic sector, 78–81, 94, 183
Pinker, Steven, 57
Plec, Julie, 98
Poetry Foundation, 80
political activists
as change agents, 12–14, 66–67, 93–94, 105–106, 108–111
Gen Z, 127
political polarization, 58, 145, 147, 162
political rights, recognition and, 63
politics
abstention of working class, 29–30
backlash, 13, 157
far-right politics, 93
Gen Z, 128, 130, 131, 137
identity politics, 44, 69
“infotainment,” 90
narratives and, 51–52, 55
neoliberalism, 31–32, 47, 122, 125, 133
political polarization, 58, 145, 147, 162
political reform, 48
politicians as change agents, 108–111
populism, 40, 45, 146, 159
recognition and, 147–148
religious affiliation and, 91
right-wing politics, 8, 93, 148
socialism, 108–111, 184
Polletta, Francesca, 140
Poo, Ai-jen, 90
poor people
chances of upward mobility, 30–31
political abstention of, 29
See also lower-income families; poverty
Poor People’s March on Washington (1968), 54
popular culture, as change agent, 14
populism, 40, 45, 146, 159
Pose (show), 99
poverty, 40, 43, 44, 85, 183
print media, 89, 109

prosperity theology, 105
Purpose (organization), 83–84, 85–86

Q
Quest Bridge: Black Males (video), 61–62, 75


R
Race Matters (West), 19
racial justice, 46, 163, 183
racism
African Americans and, 45, 69
author’s personal experiences with, 65
being “unseen,” 65
confronting or downplaying?, 66
different perceptions of, 3
Obama effect, 7
Reagan, Ronald, 25
recognition, 1–15
“being seen,” 78
cultural rights and, 63
defined, 6
Du Bois on, 64
education sector, 153
Gen Z and, 120, 121
health and, 71–72
importance of, 4
interpersonal forms of, 12, 14–15
land and, 63
narratives. See narratives
networks of change agents, 75–95
political activism and, 12–14, 66–67, 93–94, 105–106, 108–111
political backlash against, 13
political rights, 63
political views and, 147–148
reaction to, 162–163
recognition chains, 75–95, 150
solutions for building an inclusive society, 139–165
through culture and media, 12, 14
ways of conferring, 63
“woke” culture, 67–69
recognition chains, 75–95, 150
art, art consumers, and art galleries, 77–79
defined, 77
digital technology platforms, 82–83, 87, 88
education, 92
function of, 78, 86
“infotainment,” 90
narrative industry, 83–86
newspapers, 89
nonprofit sector, 78–81
philanthropic sector, 78–81, 94
political activists, 12–14, 66–67, 93–94, 105–106, 108–111
print media, 89, 198

religious institutions, 91
social change organizations, 83–86
social media, 88
television, 88, 90, 98–103
Red Scare (podcast), 110
Reddit, 88
redlining, 69
“reflecting reality,” 100–101, 103
Reitz, Jeffrey, 151–152
religion, 91, 135, 183
religious institutions, as change agents, 91, 145
reparations, 38
Republicans, 45, 55, 68, 91, 121, 134, 159
restaurant workers, 90, 91
Rhimes, Shonda, 83, 88
right-wing politics, 8, 93, 148
Robbins, Tony, 104
Robey, Derek, 176, 185
Robinson, Rashad, 106–107
Rockefeller Foundation, 54
Rodrik, Dani, 112
Roe v. Wade, 13, 157
Rogan, Joe, 10, 93
Roma (movie), 79
Roseanne (sitcom), 37


S
same-sex marriage, 13, 155
Sanchez, Mari, 185
Sandel, Michael, 140
Sanders, Bernie, 108, 128, 134
Saracho, Tanya, 101
Schur, Michael, 98
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 134
“scripts of self,” 11–12
sectarianism, 58
“see it to be it,” 102, 103
segregation, 35, 35f, 49, 50
Sen, Amartya, 112, 143–144
sense of community, 145
“1776 Commission,” 2
sexism, author’s experience with marginalization, 15–19
sexual orientation. See homosexuality; LGBTQ+ community; LGBTQ+ rights; trans community
Shameless (TV series), 101–102
Shapiro, Ben, 10, 134
shared values, 146
Shlesinger, Iliza, 98
Signs (journal), 92
The Simpsons (TV show), 27, 37
Singh, Bhrigupati, 143
16 and Pregnant (TV show), 54
1619 Project, 1–2, 53–54
social change
about, 9
economists and, 56–57
narratives and, 43
organizations, 83–86
reactionary backlash and, 13
social equality, history of, 64–65
social justice, 67
change agents interviewed, 183
Gen Z and, 128–129, 131
social justice philanthropy, 80
social media, 88, 129
social movements
about, 23, 43, 87, 93
fight for recognition, 66–67
historical perspective, 66, 67
international perspective, 66, 67
for legal changes, 66
social resilience, 52, 143
social status, worth and, 7

socialism, 108–111, 184
solidarity, 147
Soloway, Joey, 14, 99–100, 101
Spain, social movements, 23
Spencer Foundation, 80
The Standups (comedy show), 176
Staley, Sister Barbara, 145
Starbucks, unionization, 90
Stewart, Martha, 104–105
Stiglitz, Joseph, 112
stigmatization
change agents and, 63
government policies and, 152–153
health and, 71–72
of Hispanics, 45
of HIV and AIDS sufferers, 148–149
of immigrants, 44–45
laws and, 153–154
of obese people, 149
of poverty, 44
sense of worth and, 159
See also marginalized groups
Stimpson, Catharine, 92–93
Strangers in Their Own Land (Hochschild), 70
stress, income inequality and, 32
substance abuse, 41
success, 33–34, 133
suicide, 33
Suleiman, Omar, 91–92
The Sum of Us (McGhee), 140
Sunkara, Bhaskar, 109
Sunrise Movement, 133
Sunstein, Cass, 57
sustainability, 160
Swayable (organization), 83–84
Sweden, 143


T
“taking a knee,” 69
taxation policies, 48
technology, change agents interviewed, 182–183, 184
television
as change agent, 14, 88, 90, 98–103
narratives and social change, 54
reality shows, 36
representation of upper-middle class, 36
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program, 152
Thaler, Richard H., 57
Thatcher, Margaret, 25
Thinking Fast and Slow (Kahneman), 57
Thinking like an Economist (Berman), 56
The 13th (video), 83
Thomas, Hank Willis, 61–62, 75, 78
Thunberg, Greta, 128, 133
trans community, 13, 14, 46
Transparent (show), 14, 99–100
tribalism, 54, 57–58, 162
Trudeau, Pierre Elliott, 152
Trump, Donald, 2, 8, 44, 51, 70–71, 121, 128, 133, 145, 157, 162, 165
Twitter, 88
The Tyranny of Merit (Sandel), 140


U
unions, 39, 90–91
The United Shades of America (show), 99
United States
2008 Great Recession, 22
birth rate, 33
“cancel culture,” 68, 93
as country of opportunity, 26
demographics, 71
diversity of, 71
government policies and stigmatization, 152–153
“great replacement theory,” 71
hunger in, 107
income inequality in, 24
legal changes, 152–153
meritocracy, 5, 37–38, 40
moral tribalism, 58
national myths, 26
national narrative, 53
racial justice in, 163
Second Gilded Age, 24
social movements in, 23
wealth inequality in, 21–22, 24–25
“woke” culture, 67–69, 128
See also American economy; politics
United States Supreme Court, 46
United We Dream (organization), 97
upper class
affordable housing, 48–49
birth rate, 33
class privilege, 33–34
parenting, 33
suicide in, 33
television shows depicting, 37
underestimating place in economic hierarchy, 30
youth of, 34
upper-middle-class, 21–46
American dream, 21–31
consumerism, 37
consumers of art, 77
current status of, 21–22
economic inequality, 21–22
entertainment industry and, 36–37
income growth, 32
life expectancy, 139–140
media and, 36

mental health, 32, 33, 34–35
neoliberalism, 32, 37
sense of worth of, 7
understanding poor people, 35
upward mobility, 24, 30, 36, 38, 116, 163

V
Vida (TV series), 101
voter access, 106
voting rights, 97, 145


W
wage gap, 46
Walker, Darren, 79
Watts, Reggie, 98
wealth
of African American Americans, 69
concentration of, 25
See also income inequality
“weathering” effect, 72
Weiner, Jessica, 150
welfare recipients, 43, 44
well-being, 144
“wellness” culture, 34
Wells, John, 102
West, Cornel, 19, 110
white nationalists, 93
“why try” syndrome, 72–73
Willer, Robb, 145–146
Willis, Deborah, 61
Winfrey, Oprah, 104, 105
“woke” culture, 67–69, 128
The Wolf of Wall Street, 62
women
wage gap, 46
women’s rights, 66, 153
working-class and poor, 46
work
factors making it meaningful, 4
workers’ rights, 90–91
working class, 39–44
attitude towards, 143, 165
distrust in social institutions, 132
entertainment industry and, 37
focus on commonalities, 145
Gen Z, 130, 131–132
inclusion and, 158
income of, 39
mental health, 32, 40–41
national narrative, 52–53
political abstention of, 29
populism, 40, 159
poverty line, 40
problems of, 39–40
radicalization of, 40
recognition and, 147

sense of worth, 8
unions, 90–91
women, 46
worth, 7–8, 125, 143, 160

X
Xi Jinping, 163

Y
young people
as change agents, 10–11
in France, 146
pressure to succeed, 34
See also Gen X; Gen Z

Z
Zilberstein, Shira, 185

An Imprint of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2023 by Michèle Lamont All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or
portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information, address Atria Books Subsidiary Rights
Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
First One Signal Publishers/Atria Books hardcover edition September 2023
 and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster,
Inc.
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales
at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to
book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at
www.simonspeakers.com.
Interior design by Timothy Shaner, NightandDayDesign.biz
Jacket design by Laywan Kwan
Author photograph © Nina Subin Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied
for.
ISBN 978-1-9821-5378-6
ISBN 978-1-9821-5380-9 (ebook)

Table of Contents
Cover
Title Page
Dedication
Introduction: The Power of Recognition
Chapter 1: The View from Above: The Upper-Middle Class and the
Failures of the American Dream
Chapter 2: The View from Below: The Working Class and the
Marginalized
Chapter 3: Meeting the Moment: How We Fight for a More Inclusive
World
Chapter 4: Being the Change We Wish to See: Change Agents and the
Quest for Dignity and Recognition
Chapter 5: Changing Hearts and Minds: How Recognition Chains
Amplify the Cultural Agenda
Chapter 6: Strategies for Transformation: The Work of Change Agents
in Hollywood and Beyond
Chapter 7: The Next Generation: How Gen Z Fights for the Future
Chapter 8: Different Yet the Same: Solutions for Building an Inclusive
Society
Conclusion: Strengthening Our Capacity to Live Better Together
Appendix A: Change Agents
Appendix B: College Students
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Notes
Index
Copyright

