
Seeking Security in an 
Insecure World


Seeking Security in an 
Insecure World
Second Edition
Dan Caldwell and Robert E. Williams Jr.
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD PUBLISHERS, INC.
Lanham • Boulder • New York • Toronto • Plymouth, UK

Published by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
http://www.rowmanlittlefield.com
Estover Road, Plymouth PL6 7PY, United Kingdom
Copyright © 2012 by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any 
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, 
without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote 
passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Caldwell, Dan.
 Seeking security in an insecure world / Dan Caldwell and Robert E. Williams Jr. — 
2nd ed.
   p. cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-4422-0803-2 (cloth : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-4422-0804-9 (pbk. : alk. 
paper) — ISBN 978-1-4422-0805-6 (electronic)
 1. Security, International. 2. National security. 3. Internal security. 4. Economic 
security. 5. Security (Psychology) 6. Threat (Psychology) I. Williams, Robert E., 
1959– II. Title.
 JZ5588.C35 2012
 363.1—dc22
2011004560
™ The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American 
National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library 
Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.
Printed in the United States of America

To Father Greg Boyle, SJ, with respect and appreciation.—D.C.
To my parents, Robert (Bob) and Carolyn Williams, with love.—R.E.W. Jr.


vii
Contents
Preface to the Second Edition 
ix
Preface to the First Edition 
xi
 1  The Meaning of Security Today 
1
PART I: TRADITIONAL SOURCES OF INSECURITY
 2  Conventional Weapons and War 
25
 3  Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Arms Control 
47
 4  Chemical and Biological Weapons 
63
 5  The Terrorist Threat 
81
 6  The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
101
PART II: NEW SOURCES OF INSECURITY
 7  Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
119
 8  Transnational Criminal Organizations and Trafficking 
137
 9  Insecurity in Cyberspace 
153
PART III: POLITICAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF 
INSECURITY
10  The State of the State (I): The Transformation of 
National Security 
179

viii 
Contents
11  The State of the State (II): The Rise of Human Security 
195
12 Economics and Security 
213
13  The Environment and Security 
227
14  Seeking Security in an Insecure World 
247
Notes 
263
Selected Bibliography 
295
Index 
303
About the Authors 
317

ix
Preface to the Second Edition
Things change, often rapidly and dramatically. As I write this preface, the 
death of Osama bin Laden is front-page news all over the world. The culmi-
nation of a manhunt that began during the Clinton administration is bound to 
have some impact on the future of religiously inspired terrorism, on American 
policy in the Middle East, or on other matters related to international security, 
but it is not immediately clear what that impact will be. The fundamental 
purpose of a second edition is to take account of the changes—in scholarship 
and in world events—that are germane to the subject matter of a book, know-
ing full well that the quest for understanding and the developments that must 
be understood will never remain static. One can never stay ahead of change; 
fortunately, that is not what is required for a book such as Seeking Security in 
an Insecure World to be considered useful.
What is required is an analytical framework that makes change easier to 
understand when it happens. Comments on the first edition of Seeking Secu-
rity in an Insecure World from colleagues, students, and readers beyond the 
world of academia encouraged us to think that we had produced a useful book 
and that, with some updates and some improvements, might continue to be 
useful. Therefore, we were pleased to be given an opportunity to produce a 
second edition of Seeking Security in an Insecure World.
Because Dan Caldwell was deep into another major research project when 
the opportunity to revise this book arose, I have assumed primary responsi-
bility for the new edition. Dan has, however, read every word, offered many 
helpful suggestions, and provided many forms of support for the project—all 
while writing an important new book on U.S. policy in Afghanistan, Iraq, 
and Pakistan. It is perhaps unusual for an author to acknowledge debts to 
a coauthor, but in this case it seems entirely appropriate, and so I begin by 
thanking Dan for his work in setting us on the right path in the first edition 

x 
Preface to the Second Edition
and for the confidence he demonstrated in turning the book over to me in this 
second edition.
Dan and I owe a great deal to many undergraduates who have read and 
commented on the first edition of the book or, more recently, drafts of the 
new edition. Two of them—Stephen E. Williams and Natalie Gutierrez—
went above and beyond by offering research assistance. I am very grateful 
to both.
Amy Eckert of Metropolitan State College of Denver and Doug Becker of 
the University of Southern California were kind enough to comment on the 
first edition of the book for an “author meets critics” panel at the ISA-West 
annual meeting a few years ago. I thank both of them for the combination 
of encouragement and constructive criticism they offered on that occasion. 
Thanks are also due to Caron Gentry of the University of St. Andrews for 
arranging the panel.
At Rowman & Littlefield, this project has been patiently, graciously, and 
expertly directed by Susan McEachern. Janice Braunstein has very efficiently 
guided the manuscript through the production process. In my own academic 
department, Bob Escudero and Chris Low have provided many technical as-
sists along the way.
The cover photo, of an aid distribution line in Darfur, was taken in 2007 
by Voitek Asztabski for Doctors without Borders. We are grateful for permis-
sion to use the photo, which so perfectly illustrates much of what this book 
is about.
Finally, special thanks go to Sandy Harrison, my wife and best friend, for 
her love and support.
Robert E. Williams Jr.
Malibu, California

xi
Preface to the First Edition
We began thinking about and discussing this book several years after the Ber-
lin Wall fell and the Soviet Union disintegrated. Those of us in the field of se-
curity studies referred regularly to the “post–Cold War world” but it was not 
clear immediately what sort of threats this new world posed to individuals, 
states, or the international system. One especially dramatic threat appeared 
on September 11, 2001, when terrorists attacked the United States and killed 
more Americans than in any single day since the Civil War.
To be sure, terrorism is a clear and present danger to the United States and 
many other countries around the world, but terrorism is not the only threat 
that has emerged in the post–Cold War world. In the decade between the 
collapse of Soviet-style communism and the collapse of the World Trade 
Center, other threats—many of them associated with the shrinking of the 
world through processes associated with globalization—appeared to ensure 
the continuing necessity of seeking security in an insecure world.
This book is about security—both the sources of insecurity and the means 
to greater security—in a time of great change in the world. It offers an in-
troduction to the meaning of security at a time when scholars, reflecting on 
changes in the world, are debating how we should understand the concept. 
We have written the book for interested nonspecialists—citizens who would 
like to gain a better understanding of what contributes to and threatens 
security in the modern world—as well as for students of international rela-
tions, political science, and global studies. Our approach is distinctive, if not 
unique, in that it presents an overview of security rather than focusing on one 
particular threat, such as nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons, environ-
mental degradation, infectious disease, and so on.
In writing books, authors incur many debts along the way. Both authors 
would like to thank Dalton Saunders, who served as a researcher and critic for 

xii 
Preface to the First Edition
drafts of many of the chapters. Bob Escudero provided invaluable technical 
assistance at many different stages in the project.
In addition, the authors would like to thank David Baird and Chris Soper, 
both of whom are strong supporters of scholarship at Pepperdine University 
and, in various ways, have assisted this project. At Rowman & Littlefield, 
we gratefully acknowledge the editorial assistance of Jennifer Knerr, Alden 
Perkins, and Pelham Boyer. We especially thank Renée Legatt for answering 
our many questions throughout the process.
Intellectual debts, although no less real, are often more difficult to pin-
point. We have benefited greatly from our association over the years with a 
group of security studies scholars in the International Studies Association’s 
International Security Studies Section and the American Political Science As-
sociation’s section on International Security and Arms Control. The opportu-
nity to present papers at conferences organized by these groups and to receive 
helpful comments on our work from their members has been indispensable. 
Some measure of what we owe these colleagues can be seen in our citations.
Dan Caldwell would like to thank his former teachers and professors 
who inspired and encouraged him: Beth McGrath, Cree Kofford, Virginia 
Pavelko, Carl Degler, and Alexander George.
Robert Williams would like to acknowledge his students, many of whom 
have read and commented on drafts of various chapters, and all of whom in 
recent semesters have waited a little longer than usual to get back their ex-
ams and papers. He also wishes to thank his sons, Daniel and Stephen, who 
have stepped up to the plate in many ways: checking facts in the library and 
online, making photocopies, and taking on extra household responsibilities 
(including cooking dinner on many occasions). They have also stepped up to 
the plate literally—offering their father escape from writing to watch them 
play baseball.
The work for this book was shared equally by the authors, and the place-
ment of their names on the title page is simply alphabetical; both should share 
equally in any acclaim or criticism of the book.
Robert Williams dedicates the book to his parents, Robert (Bob) and 
Carolyn Williams, whose love and support have provided security at the 
most important level. There would be far less insecurity in the world—at all 
levels—if all parents were like them.
Dan Caldwell dedicates the book to Father Gregory Boyle, SJ, who has 
worked tirelessly to decrease poverty and violence in East Los Angeles; he is 
an inspiration to all who know him.
Dan Caldwell
Robert E. Williams Jr.

1
Chapter One
The Meaning of Security Today
We live in an insecure world. The sinister forces that make the world in-
secure, however, are not immutable. Humankind no longer lives in fear of 
bubonic plague, one of history’s deadliest killers. The prospect of another 
great land war in Europe spurred by French, German, or Russian territorial 
ambitions appears remote. We fear the possibility of a nuclear conflagration 
far less than our parents and grandparents did; in fact, the yellow and black 
signs that directed Americans to fallout shelters during the Cold War have 
almost entirely disappeared from the landscape.
On the other hand, a new and frightening form of mass-casualty terrorism 
appeared on September 11, 2001. Subsequent terrorist attacks in Madrid, 
London, Mumbai, and elsewhere have spread insecurity around the globe. 
Diseases unknown to earlier generations—SARS, avian flu, and, of course, 
HIV/AIDS—have emerged while some old and well-known diseases—TB 
and malaria, for example—have reemerged in drug-resistant forms, raising 
questions about whether modern medicine can provide protection against the 
return of devastating pandemics. In place of the threats once posed by strong, 
well-armed states, the world now confronts a variety of dangers related to 
weak, ungovernable states: piracy on the high seas, transnational crime, ter-
rorism, and humanitarian disasters that demand attention. But two threats that 
are largely invisible may be the most serious: the rapidly developing cyber-
war capabilities of both states and nonstate actors and the slow but steady 
accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from the use of fossil fuels. 
The former threatens to wreak havoc on the industrial processes that create 
wealth while the latter threatens to wreak havoc on the natural processes that 
nurture life.
Insecurity reflects the state of the world, but it is also a state of mind. 
Consequently, the proximity, in both space and time, of a threat can affect 

2 
Chapter One
its ability to produce insecurity. There also seems to be a “dread” factor in 
insecurity. Humans often dread the unknown and the uncontrollable event, 
such as a random bombing, out of all proportion to the actual threat such an 
event poses. The social dimension of insecurity—the creation and spread of 
collective fears—adds another element to our understanding of the subjec-
tive aspect of insecurity. Not only do the conditions that produce insecurity 
change over time, collective understandings do as well. Security—and inse-
curity—are socially constructed.
Much has changed since the Cold War, when tense standoffs between the 
United States and the Soviet Union over Berlin, Cuba, and the Middle East, a 
series of proxy wars, and major conflicts in Korea, Vietnam, and Afghanistan 
took place in the shadow of nuclear weapons. Perhaps even more has changed 
since the early days of the post–Cold War period, when it appeared to many in 
the West that the military establishments created to fight World War II and en-
hanced to prevent the spread of communism would remain relevant only if they 
could be adapted to the demands of peacekeeping and humanitarian interven-
tion in the developing world. The shock of 9/11 and long, taxing wars in Iraq 
and Afghanistan ended whatever complacency about security may have devel-
oped in the aftermath of the Cold War. What it did not do, however, is erase 
the changes in the meaning of security that had developed during the 1990s. 
What we are left with is a quest for security that has become far more salient 
than it seemed to be during the early days of the post–Cold War period while 
also becoming far more complicated than it was during the Cold War itself.
The new security agenda is based in part on the recognition that most of 
the world’s nearly seven billion people are threatened by problems unrelated 
to weapons of mass destruction and terrorist networks. It is also based on the 
recognition that many of these problems ought to be concerns of those in the 
developed world who have generally focused only on threats of a military 
nature. The scope and gravity of the threats on the new security agenda can 
be shown with a few examples.
•  Over thirty million people worldwide are infected with HIV. Since HIV/
AIDS was first diagnosed, twenty-five million people have died of causes 
related to the disease.1
•  Each year, four million children die during their first month of life as a 
result of malnutrition and inadequate health care.2
•  The U.S. State Department estimates that from 600,000 to 800,000 people 
are trafficked across state borders each year. At least three million people, 
the vast majority of them females, have been forced into prostitution.3
•  Civil conflicts and ethnic violence may be the worst of all. In Sudan, 
roughly two million people were killed as a result of civil war between 

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
3
1983 and 2002. Only about 3 percent of the total were battle deaths. In the 
Democratic Republic of Congo, an estimated 2.5 million war deaths, of 
which only 6 percent were battle deaths, occurred between 1998 and 2001. 
Sadly, scores of additional examples of intrastate conflict could be cited. 
Overall, an estimated twenty-five million deaths can be attributed to intra-
state conflict since the end of World War II.4
This very brief introduction to some of the sources of insecurity in the world 
suggests a few questions worth considering as we examine the meaning of 
security today. Major terrorist attacks in Europe, Asia, Africa, and North 
America have demonstrated that no matter where one lives, how much money 
one has, or how powerful one’s country is, there is no such thing as absolute 
security. Nevertheless, although insecurity clearly transcends socioeconomic 
and geographic boundaries, the sources of insecurity differ considerably de-
pending on whether one lives in North America or Western Europe, on the 
one hand, or sub-Saharan Africa or Southeast Asia, on the other. The first 
question may well be, therefore, whose security are we talking about?
Following hard on the heels of that question is one that shifts the focus 
from who to what. While terrorist attacks and civil wars may fit comfort-
ably into our notions of what the study of security is (or should be) all about, 
where do disease and starvation fit in? If threats posed by famine and HIV/
AIDS are the proper subjects of a study of security (and if we have answered 
the “whose security” question in a way that forces those of us who don’t 
miss many meals to think about those who do), then how is the subject to be 
limited? Why is the threat posed by disease (or at least a particular pandemic) 
a fit subject for analysis while the threat posed in some parts of the world by 
wild animals or monsoons or earthquakes is not? These are certainly fair, and 
vexing, questions.
Answering these and similar questions requires that we examine the meaning 
of security with considerable care. Before we undertake that analysis, however, 
consider what a bit of historical perspective adds to our understanding.
Americans today live in the shadow of 9/11 and the wars it spawned in 
Afghanistan and Iraq. National debates—about budget priorities, civil liber-
ties, and, of course, electoral politics—are conducted within the context of a 
shared recognition of the threat that terrorists pose. For a different generation 
of Americans, “the Greatest Generation,” life (or a part of it) was lived in the 
shadow of European fascism and Pearl Harbor. That same generation and 
the baby-boom generation that followed lived in the shadow of the atomic 
bomb as well. For forty years, most of the world lived in some measure of 
fear of nuclear war, a fear fed by recurrent crises, diplomatic saber rattling, 
and even popular culture (including movies like On the Beach and Fail-Safe 

4 
Chapter One
in the 1960s and The Day After in the 1980s). These different experiences 
have shaped different understandings of security. This is perhaps the essential 
point with which to begin a discussion of the meaning of security: Our con-
ception of security changes with the circumstances we face. Each generation 
and, for that matter, each community determines the meaning of security ac-
cording to the threats it confronts in its time and place.
WHOSE SECURITY?
The question concerning whose security is at issue is one that could be answered 
in a number of ways. It is a question that, for students of international relations, 
raises familiar issues concerning levels of analysis. (Some of these issues will 
be addressed in the discussion below of the widening of our understanding of 
security.) It is also, however, a question that, for students of comparative poli-
tics, can prompt discussion of the widely divergent security interests of different 
states. To illustrate the point, Costa Rica, which has no regular military forces 
and spends 0.6 percent of GDP on defense, operates in a security environment 
that is dramatically different from that of Israel, which spends 7.3 percent of 
GDP on defense, or its Middle Eastern neighbor Jordan (8.6 percent).5
We know that happiness has many roots, but none is more important 
than security.
—Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.
Source: Verbatim Record of the Proceedings of the Temporary National 
Economic Committee, vol. 2 (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of National Affairs, 
1939), 12.
Our focus in this book is on security as it is conceived in the developed 
world. We are, in other words, primarily concerned with the meaning of se-
curity for people in advanced market democracies, such as the United States, 
Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and the European Union. Our focus 
is, in part, a simple reflection of the fact that we ourselves live, and are writ-
ing primarily for an audience that lives, in the developed world. We hope, 
however, to avoid being overly parochial. The reasons for avoiding narrow-
ness, although perhaps obvious, are worth stating as a means of articulating 
our principal assumptions about our subject.
First, at the risk of lending support for a strain of Western—and perhaps 
especially American—ethnocentrism that we believe is both unwarranted and 

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
5
unwise, we acknowledge that the security of the West is important not only to 
those who live there but to much of the rest of the world as well. There is no 
better way to demonstrate this point than to examine, briefly, certain aspects 
of the American response to the 9/11 attacks. Since the American sense of 
security was shattered by the terrorist attacks on 9/11, the United States, in 
response, has waged one war in Afghanistan and another in Iraq, ousting two 
regimes in the process; imposed significant costs and restrictions on immi-
gration to the United States; looked the other way with respect to revelations 
concerning Pakistani nuclear technology transfers; imposed on other coun-
tries security requirements for airports and harbors as a condition for sending 
planes and ships to the United States; and underfunded many international aid 
programs as resources shifted into the “war on terrorism” and the reconstruc-
tion of Afghanistan and Iraq. Additionally, the terrorist attacks in Madrid on 
March 11, 2004—the deadliest terrorist attack in Spanish history—and in 
London on July 7, 2005, are widely believed to have been aimed at punishing 
the Spanish and British governments for their support of the American war in 
Iraq. The security of the United States and the methods used to defend it have 
a major impact on the rest of the world. As an old saying familiar to diplomats 
and businessmen everywhere puts it, “When the United States sneezes, the 
rest of the world catches a cold.”
Against the temptation to adopt an insular focus, however, we must affirm 
a contrasting set of beliefs about security. First, security is, in many important 
respects, indivisible. Seeking security in an insecure world for one’s state 
alone is a strategy doomed to failure. This is especially true in light of the 
increasing interconnectedness of the world’s people and their problems, but 
it has been a fact of life throughout history. Bubonic plague, Yersinia pestis, 
originated in China but killed millions of Europeans in the Black Death of the 
fourteenth century. World War II, dramatic enough in its impact on Europe 
and Asia, led to a series of revolutions in Africa that has convulsed that con-
tinent now for generations. These are but two of an almost limitless number 
of examples of security concerns that transcend boundaries.
Those of us in the West—particularly the United States—cannot act in 
the interest of our own security without having an impact on the security of 
others. Likewise, we cannot ignore the security of others without endanger-
ing our own. There is thus a very powerful consequentialist argument for 
thinking in terms of international, or global, security rather than of national 
security alone. To express the point as a paradox, a narrowly self-interested 
security policy cannot be narrowly self-interested.
Our view of security, however, is not grounded solely in utilitarian consid-
erations. We believe that there are principled reasons for taking a broader view 
of security. A commitment to human rights—as well as broader humanitarian 

6 
Chapter One
principles—demands that we give attention to many of the security concerns 
that are products of injustice in the world. We believe, to take but one example, 
that those living in the developed world should be exposed to, and should 
ultimately adopt as a matter of policy, a perspective on security that includes 
human trafficking as a security issue, because for millions of people worldwide 
it constitutes a serious threat to basic rights.
Viewed in this way, the question of “whose security” appears to be closely 
related to the question of what should be included among the things we de-
fine as security issues. This is as it should be. To define the boundaries of 
the contemporary security agenda is to specify what threats to the interests of 
which subjects ought to be given the priority associated with security issues. 
This can be a contentious issue.
Sixty years ago, in the early days of the Cold War, Arnold Wolfers cau-
tioned the realists who had put national security at the center of American 
foreign policy that “national security,” like other commonly discussed terms, 
might mean different things to different people and, in fact, might have no 
precise meaning.6 More recently, John Baylis has observed that the consen-
sus among scholars is that “security is a ‘contested concept.’”7 While the 
concerns now being expressed about how we define security are both more 
widespread and more diverse in origin, it is remarkable how little things have 
changed since the 1950s. Today, as in Wolfers’s day at the outset of the Cold 
War, the concept of security is in search of a definition that can command 
general assent.
What has changed in our understanding of security over the last six de-
cades is this: Security can no longer be defined, if it ever could be, exclu-
sively in terms of the ability of a state to defend its territory and its principal 
values against military threats. An ability to deal with other threats, includ-
ing but not limited to transnational drug trafficking, international terrorism, 
resource scarcities, economic espionage, transboundary pollution, disease, 
climate change, and even computer problems such as viruses or hacking,8 is 
now thought to be essential to the protection of national security.9 The secu-
rity agenda has expanded due both to a growing awareness of the limits of 
the traditional national security focus and to the combined effect of increased 
interdependence and complexity in international relations.10
While expansion of the concept of security seems to have been unavoid-
able, given the limits of the traditional understanding and the challenges 
inherent in rapid globalization, the addition of so many different issues to the 
security agenda threatens to make the concept of security incoherent while 
making the study of international security indistinguishable from the broader 
field of international relations. When one adds to this concern the levels-of-
analysis problem, with its implication that security can be seen in individual, 

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
7
state, and international terms (as well as in categories that lie between these), 
the task of providing a comprehensive account of the quest for security in the 
modern international system appears challenging, if not overwhelming.
DEFINING “SECURITY”
The word “security” is derived from the Latin securitas, which, in turn, 
comes from securus, which means “without a care.” Security is a condition 
or state of being free from the threat of harm. There are both objective and 
subjective aspects of this condition. Security thus involves both material 
circumstances and the psychological state produced by those circumstances.
Security and peace have much in common. Psychologically, we often 
equate security with peace of mind. Politically, the traditional concept of se-
curity is commonly equated with an ability either to remain at peace (without 
having to sacrifice important values to do so) or, failing that, to restore peace 
quickly. Security and peace, in turn, are closely related to order and stability. 
The quest for international order is, fundamentally, nothing more than the 
quest for peace and security.11
The unmodified term “security” covers a broad terrain. It can encompass, 
at one extreme, the individual’s perception of well-being when free of threats 
to his or her welfare and, at the other extreme, that state of order in the in-
ternational system that is supposed to be the principal pursuit of the United 
Nations. No book yet written on the subject of security has even surveyed the 
entire range of meaning. Any book that attempted to do so would no doubt 
be unsatisfactory to both the psychologist, at one end of the spectrum, and the 
student of international relations, at the other. In order to make the concept 
manageable, social scientists have had to circumscribe it so that it conforms 
to what they perceive to be the primary subjects of their discipline. To the stu-
dent of international relations, the subjects of security are generally defined 
in terms of level of analysis. Consequently, it is possible to think in terms of 
individual security, national security, and international security, as well as 
security at other, intermediate levels.
THE PROCESS OF “SECURITIZATION”
Until recently, those who dealt with security issues, both in the academic and 
in the policy realms, could think of the boundaries of their field as fixed and 
self-evident. Invasions by foreign armies, nuclear deterrence, and terrorist 
bombings were security issues; hurricanes, flu outbreaks, and automobile 

8 
Chapter One
accidents (even with fatalities involved) were not. Thinking about “national 
security” meant thinking about war or the threat of war. Military force, the 
means by which wars are waged (or deterred), was thought to be the primary, 
if not the sole, guarantor of the state’s security.
Over time, the question of what should be considered a security issue took 
on a different aspect as more answers were accepted. New issues found places 
on the security agenda. Where once there had been only national security, 
which meant the security of the state against military threats, scholars and 
policy makers began discussing economic security, energy security, food 
security, health security, environmental security, and more. Public health 
experts, development specialists, and agronomists took their places alongside 
soldiers as critical actors in the quest for security. Our understanding of se-
curity had expanded.
But why? Were disease, famine, and resource scarcities new issues? Had 
those who used the new language of economic, food, and environmental 
security (among others) uncovered threats that had previously been unexam-
ined? With a few exceptions, such as the emergence of the HIV/AIDs pan-
demic, the threats were not new, nor were they newly uncovered. What was 
new was the decision, made not by one individual but by many, to designate 
certain problems as threats to security. The process by which this occurs is 
called “securitization.”
According to what is called the Copenhagen School in security studies, 
security is a socially constructed concept. The term has no fixed and self-
evident meaning; instead, its meaning is a product of an intersubjective 
understanding. Essentially, security means what the members of a particular 
society mutually understand it to mean. That meaning is generated by a social 
process in which, from time to time, new understandings of security are pro-
posed. For a problem to come to be regarded as a security issue, two things 
are required: first, someone in a position of authority must characterize the is-
sue as a security concern, that is, as an existential threat. This, in the language 
used by the Copenhagen School, is the “speech act.” Second, society must, 
on the whole, accept the new characterization. For example, if the president 
asserts that drug trafficking or illegal immigration or energy independence is 
a security issue and the assertion is met with general agreement, then the is-
sue actually becomes a security issue as a result of this social process having 
created a new intersubjective understanding.
Securitization would mean very little if nothing more than a label were at 
stake. But to call an issue a matter of national security is to elevate its status 
so that efforts to deal with it typically take precedence over other, nonsecurity 
issues. Problems that have been securitized are generally exempted from the 
process of negotiation that yields the political compromises that are common 

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
9
in the search for solutions to lesser concerns. Thus, framing a problem as a 
security issue can help to ensure that more resources are devoted to solving 
the problem than might otherwise be the case.12
THE TRADITIONAL PARADIGM
Because the state was the focus of concern, at least in the dominant realist 
tradition, most of the attention given the subject of security among scholars 
of international relations during the Cold War centered on national security. 
Indeed, during the Cold War the mention of “security studies” suggested to 
the vast majority of scholars nothing more or less than “national security 
studies.” “National security,” in turn, was generally limited in common usage 
to matters relating to the use of military force. In that usage, “national secu-
rity policy” and “defense policy” were generally regarded as interchangeable 
terms. While some regimes, particularly authoritarian dictatorships in Latin 
America, regarded internal threats as within the scope of national security 
policy,13 advanced industrial democracies generally avoided the use of mili-
tary force to promote internal order, preferring civilian police forces for that 
purpose. Since democracies have also avoided the use of military force in 
wars of aggression, the use of the term “defense policy” as a close substitute 
for “national security policy” is understandable in the context of the tradi-
tional paradigm.
There are, of course, a variety of purposes for which military force can 
be used. Within the state, the military may be used to assert the authority of 
the government over dissident portions of the population. This may include 
suppressing rebellions, harassing opponents of the regime, or fighting crime. 
These, as noted, are functions not normally undertaken by the military in 
most democracies. Looking outward, the military may be used to defend the 
state against attack, to defend other states (or nonstate actors) against attack, 
to perform police functions in other states, to punish other states (or nonstate 
actors) for the violation of international norms, or to attack other states.
The association in the traditional paradigm of security policy with the 
military is due to the nature of the assumptions underlying both the definition 
of security and the perception of corresponding threats. National security is 
fundamentally concerned with the preservation of sovereignty against ex-
ternal threats. It encompasses the state’s efforts to control what happens to 
its territory, its citizens, its resources, and its political system. It is, in large 
measure, concerned with the defense of borders, so that outsiders may play 
a role within the state only on terms acceptable to the state. Historically, the 
most significant threat to the integrity of a state’s borders and its ability to 

10 
Chapter One
determine its own course came from the militaries of hostile states. Only 
armed forces, or so it was thought, could penetrate borders in such a way as 
to threaten seriously the sovereignty of the state. If the threat to sovereignty 
came from within, as in the case of insurrection, the military could be the 
guarantor of security in that instance as well. External threats not susceptible 
to military solutions were, until recently, virtually unknown.14
The traditional assumptions about the link between national security and 
territorial sovereignty, together with the limited types of threats that states ex-
perienced until recently, produced a narrow understanding of the concept of 
security that is still very much with us even though the landscape has changed 
significantly. Under the traditional paradigm, the state was considered the pri-
mary, if not the sole, subject of security studies. The primary threat to security 
was the threat of invasion (or, in some circumstances, blockade) by a hostile 
state and thus was perceived as a military threat. Consequently, preparing for 
war, either by arming itself or by enlisting allies, was the state’s principal 
means of ensuring its own security.
THE NEW PARADIGM
To the extent that territorial states defended by military force remain central 
to human affairs, the traditional security paradigm continues to be service-
able. There are several factors, however, including the often-noted decline 
of the territorial state and the rise of new, nonmilitary threats, that suggest a 
need to think about security in new ways.15 Richard Ullman has argued that 
“defining national security merely in military terms conveys a profoundly 
false image of reality [and] causes states to concentrate on military threats 
and to ignore other and perhaps more harmful dangers.” He suggests that a 
security threat be defined as “an action or sequence of events that (1) threat-
ens drastically and over a relatively brief span of time to degrade the quality 
of life for the inhabitants of a state, or (2) threatens significantly to narrow the 
range of policy choices available to the government of a state or to private, 
non-governmental entities (persons, groups, corporations) within the state.”16
The concept of security has been stretched in two directions: first, with 
respect to the issues to be included on the security agenda, and second, with 
respect to the subject (or what some scholars prefer to call the referent object) 
of security.17 Richard Wyn Jones has suggested that the former move be la-
beled “broadening” and the latter “extending,” in order to avoid the ambigu-
ity of the single term—“widening”—often used to refer to both.18 The effort 
to open up the concept in both directions began in the 1970s as analysts began 
to question both the narrow focus within traditional security studies on Cold 

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
11
War defense issues and the problems associated with efforts to think exclu-
sively in terms of national security. The interplay of military and economic 
issues that first attracted the serious attention of analysts in the 1970s and the 
rise at about the same time of global environmental awareness contributed 
significantly to efforts to challenge the traditional paradigm.19 The end of the 
Cold War gave added impetus to supporters of a new security paradigm by 
diminishing the significance of the issues on the traditional security agenda 
while raising a host of new questions concerning both the proper subjects of 
security and the nature of threats to security.
To refer to a new security paradigm in the singular is, of course, an over-
simplification, since in reality a variety of contenders for such a designation 
has emerged since the 1970s. In many instances, the new conceptions of se-
curity can be identified by their adjectives. From UN-sponsored discussions 
of the need to expand the concept of security have come proposals for a shift 
to comprehensive security (emphasizing the need for broadening) or common 
security (emphasizing the need for extending). The collective response to 
Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990 renewed interest in the Wilsonian concept 
of collective security. In 1993, Australian foreign minister Gareth Evans pro-
posed what he called cooperative security.20 Meanwhile, a move to extend the 
concept of security in the opposite direction (toward the individual rather than 
the international system as subject) came in 1994 when the United Nations 
Development Program put forth the idea of human security.21
These and other challenges to the traditional paradigm share a number of 
characteristics, so that it may be reasonable, at least as a shorthand expression, 
to speak of a new paradigm. This new paradigm is characterized, first of all, by 
a willingness to consider a variety of possible subjects of security. Rather than 
focusing primarily on the state, new conceptions of security consider a wide 
range of possible subjects, from the individual through the international levels. 
Second, while under the traditional paradigm security was conceived primarily 
in terms of defense against military threats (with consideration occasionally 
being given to economic threats), under the new paradigm security involves 
defense against many different threats, including environmental problems, the 
collapse of currencies, human trafficking, and so on. A third difference between 
the paradigms is that the new conception of security is far more open to the 
possibility that the principal threat to the lives of citizens and other core values 
of a state may come from the state itself. In other words, the new paradigm rec-
ognizes the tremendous potential of states to generate insecurity both through 
direct threats against their own citizens and as an indirect consequence of the 
actions they take in the name of national security.
In general, these and other differences between the old and new paradigms 
may be reduced to one central point: The new paradigm expands the concept 

12 
Chapter One
of security by broadening the agenda or extending the subjects. Strong argu-
ments have been advanced for both moves, but important questions concern-
ing the limits of these moves remain. In fact, the difficulties in circumscribing 
the concept of security under the new paradigm have left it, in the words of 
R. B. J. Walker, “embarrassingly limp and overextended.”22
THE QUESTION OF “BROADENING”
How are we to limit the security agenda, given the fact that security, under-
stood as the condition or state of being free from the threat of harm, involves 
so many different possible threats? Without even considering a range of 
threats associated specifically with individual security and international se-
curity (matters to be considered with respect to the question of “extending”), 
we can easily recall circumstances in which states have been concerned with 
threats posed by the military forces of neighboring states, terrorists, indigenous 
revolutionary movements, the possibility of an accidental nuclear launch, the 
collapse of national currencies, the collapse of commodity prices, monsoons, 
earthquakes, the spread of disease, famine, or overpopulation, to mention just 
a small number of threats on a very long list. Some island states even face the 
threat of gradual inundation by rising sea levels, as Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, 
president of the Maldives, noted in his speech at the United Nations Millen-
nium Summit: “Our quest for progress must be sustainable. We have no right 
to destroy the earth. Ecological damage, including global warming, must be 
curbed. All low-lying countries must be saved: when the United Nations meets 
to usher in yet another century, will the Maldives and other low-lying island 
nations still be represented here?”23 The inundation of the Maldives by the 
Indian Ocean tsunami in December 2004 made President Gayoom’s question 
even more urgent than he could have imagined when he spoke in 2000.
Is climate change properly regarded as a threat to the national security of 
the Maldives and the Federated States of Micronesia, or does it belong in 
some other category? What about the threat from tsunamis? Are the virus 
hunters of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta prop-
erly regarded as part of the national security establishment? Was the Greek 
economic crisis a national security concern, either for Greece or for the other 
members of the European Union? Bangladesh suffers more death and de-
struction from natural disasters than from the military activities of its neigh-
bors. Does this mean that protecting against the effects of monsoons should 
be the top national security priority of the Bangladeshi government? How, to 
restate the original question, are we to distinguish between threats that ought 
to be the concerns of a state’s security policies and threats of other types?

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
13
Finding an answer to this question that is at once both direct and gener-
ally acceptable has proved impossible thus far. Scholars and policy makers 
occupy a wide range of positions regarding where the lines around their area 
of concern should be drawn. The best we can do is clarify the issues involved 
and offer some general principles as possible means of delimiting the field of 
security studies. The first step in doing this may well be to consider how we 
understand threats.
Under both the old paradigm and the new, the concept of security can be 
understood only in relation to threats. Indeed, the concept of threat is a nec-
essary part of any intelligible definition of security and insecurity. Threats 
have traditionally been understood as the products of some combination of 
capabilities and intentions. A threat exists where a potential adversary has 
both the capability to do harm and malign intent. In the realist account, the 
potential adversaries are, of course, states, and their capability to do harm 
comes in the form of military power. The understanding that a threat must 
combine capability and intention conforms very well to what we see in the 
world. The United States perceives little or no threat from states with negli-
gible capabilities, regardless of their level of hostility. Likewise, the existence 
of certain well-armed states in Western Europe, for example, poses little or 
no threat because the intent is benign. The value of this simple definition of 
threat is further demonstrated by the fact that it has been the foundation, at 
least implicitly, of two important concepts related to security: the security di-
lemma (in which threats are exacerbated because malign intent is assumed)24 
and the security community (in which threats are diminished because efforts 
have been made to provide assurances of benign intent).25
Consider the relationship of this formula to the security dilemma. Because 
military capabilities are, to some degree, out there for all to see while inten-
tions are both largely unknowable and subject to rapid change, the prudent 
assessor of foreign threats must take what is known about the potential ad-
versary’s capabilities and combine this information with a worst-case reading 
of intentions. As a result of this better-safe-than-sorry approach, threats are 
inflated, measures are taken to counter the inflated threats, and the prudent 
assessor of threats on the other side is given evidence that seems to require a 
similar response. This, more or less, is the problem of security and insecurity 
as seen by the realists. The point here, however, is not to deconstruct realism 
or even the notion of the security dilemma. It is, instead, to consider whether, 
under the new paradigm, we can still work with the understanding that threats 
involve a combination of capabilities and intentions.
First, we should acknowledge that the term “capabilities,” when used in this 
context, may conjure up thoughts of troops, tanks, ships, bombers, and perhaps 
even weapons of mass destruction, for those who remember security studies 

14 
Chapter One
back in the days when life may have been “nasty, brutish, and short” but at 
least there was an easily identifiable enemy. Simply to avoid privileging the 
military view of security, we can substitute the phrase “potential to cause harm” 
for “capabilities” in the threat equation. But what are we to do with intentions?
The new paradigm in security studies appears to regard intentions as an un-
necessary element of threat. Consider the addition of environmental threats or 
the rise of drug-resistant diseases to the list of security threats under the new 
paradigm. Except in cases of environmental warfare or biological warfare, 
where the associated threats are wielded by human agents, what role can in-
tentions play in assessments of these new security threats? It appears that the 
answer is none whatsoever. This might suggest, for those intent on defending 
the traditional paradigm against the broadening that has inevitably made se-
curity studies a much less focused discipline, that human agency might be the 
ticket to a return to coherence. This view would suggest that we should only 
consider as threats to security those possibilities that combine the potential to 
cause harm with an intent—that is, a human desire—to cause harm. Such an 
understanding would allow for the inclusion on the security agenda of some 
nontraditional threats, such as terrorism, the deliberate creation of refugee 
flows (as in Kosovo), and attacks on computer networks, while maintaining 
a familiar look to the field.
However tempting it may be to fight off the wideners on the grounds of 
intent, it is simply not possible without stipulating some counterintuitive lim-
its. If a security threat, properly defined, can only exist where human intent is 
present, then President Gayoom of the Maldives, concerned about the possi-
ble inundation of his island state due to a rise in sea level produced by global 
warming, has a problem but not a security threat. If scientists determine that 
one of the thousands of asteroids in near-Earth orbits is destined to plow into 
our planet three revolutions around the Sun from now, we have a problem 
but not a security threat.26 This, some will no doubt argue, is too restrictive.
There are serious problems with the alternative of simply arguing that 
threat equals capability (or potential to cause harm). Most notably, the list of 
threats would quickly become unmanageable even for advocates of widen-
ing the security agenda. Such a formulation, left unmodified, also fails to 
discriminate between imminent and remote threats. Some of the problems, 
however, can be addressed by allowing for the operation of deterministic phe-
nomena as a substitute for human intent. Threat, using the revised formula, 
becomes a product of potential to cause harm and either intent or determin-
istic natural processes.
It is important to note that it may not always be possible to draw a hard-
and-fast dividing line between human and natural threats. The interaction of 
humans with the environment means that threats to human well-being from 

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
15
such things as global warming, the spread of disease, population growth, and 
famine will generally have some combination of human and natural causes. 
However, the difficulty of drawing a line between human and natural agency 
in some cases does not negate the potential significance of such a distinction 
for our efforts to limit the scope of the security agenda.
Another distinction that needs to be examined in trying to delimit the 
proper concern of security policy is the distinction between threats that arise 
as a result of intentional behaviors and those that result from unintentional 
behaviors. Once again, the distinction is not absolute, as a number of ex-
amples will illustrate, but in assessing the proper concerns of security policy 
it nonetheless appears fitting that we should consider the extent to which 
threats emanate from deliberate actions. The more deliberate a threatening 
action appears to be, the more conclusively it merits consideration as a se-
curity issue. To illustrate, compare two threats to Western Europe emanating 
from the Soviet Union during the 1970s and 1980s, respectively. In 1977, the 
Soviet Union began deploying in Eastern Europe a new intermediate-range 
ballistic missile known as the SS-20. The deployment of SS-20s, aimed at 
targets in Western Europe, provoked antinuclear demonstrations and a coun-
terdeployment by NATO of Pershing II missiles and ground-launched cruise 
missiles beginning in 1979. In 1986, an explosion at the nuclear power plant 
at Chernobyl resulted in the dispersal of radioactive material all over Europe. 
Although the effects of the Chernobyl blast on the well-being of the citizens 
of Western European states were more direct, more immediate, and more 
tangible than the effects of the earlier SS-20 deployment, the missile deploy-
ment was characterized as a security concern while the reactor accident was 
not. It is the absence of intentionality that accounts for this difference. Had 
the Soviet Union deliberately released radioactive material in order to cause 
panic in Western Europe, defense ministries would have been called upon to 
respond along with public health officials.
Some threats produced by human actions have a quasi-intentional char-
acter. The mismanagement both of agricultural policies and of foreign as-
sistance has been a factor in some of Africa’s more devastating famines. It 
is unclear, however, that the production of famine was intentional in most of 
these cases. More troubling from the standpoint of our efforts to distinguish 
threats to national security from more “natural” threats is that category of 
activities involving deliberate actions with unintended consequences. On 
the one hand, there are action-reaction processes (arms races, for example) 
in which the behavior of one party is in some measure determined by the 
behavior of the other party. On the other hand, there are situations, such as 
the collapse of financial markets, in which the cumulative effect of rational 
individual decisions is unintended and sometimes dire.

16 
Chapter One
One possible response to this distinction is to suggest that threats reflecting 
no underlying human intent ordinarily should not be the subjects of security 
policy. This has the effect of excluding all natural disasters (or “acts of God,” 
in the parlance of theologians and insurance underwriters) from consider-
ation. It also has the effect of excluding accidents and cases of mass hysteria 
from our list of security concerns. But is this as it should be? What about the 
classification of military accidents (e.g., accidental nuclear launches) as se-
curity issues? Nuclear accidents have been considered an important concern 
in U.S. national security policy since the late 1950s.27
It may seem that a definition of security that excludes threats that are 
“natural” or “unintentional” is simply a rationalization of the view that se-
curity policy cannot concern itself with threats against which no defense is 
possible. But there are defenses against currency crises, environmental deg-
radation, and even, to some extent, natural disasters. This suggests that the 
effort to distinguish between threats to national security and other types of 
threats (that is, nonsecurity threats) must somehow focus on human agency 
and intentionality.
Those who are most interested in preserving traditional limits on the field 
of security studies often focus on the distinction between political and non-
political threats, arguing that only political threats are the proper concerns of 
government policies. A political threat is one involving not just human intent, 
but human intent of a particular kind. A political threat targets the institutions 
and processes of a government. Using this distinction, cyber-espionage aimed 
at stealing or altering data stored in military computers would constitute a 
security threat requiring a political response while similar actions intended 
to steal the trade secrets of a private corporation would not. While there are 
clearly dangers in giving governments authority to deal with an ever-ex-
panding list of potential threats to security, we believe that complex linkages 
between political and nonpolitical, intentional and unintentional, or human 
and natural threats make it impossible to return to narrower, more traditional 
understandings of security.
THE QUESTION OF “EXTENDING”
Recognition that the national security of any given state cannot be meaning-
fully assessed in isolation from the national security of other states—that one 
state’s quest for security may actually promote insecurity in other states—has 
led to calls for greater attention to international security or global security. 
Even in the quest for national security, such international measures as the 
establishment of international organizations, the progressive development of 

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
17
international law, and the negotiation of multilateral arms control agreements 
have long been regarded as indispensable.
As Barry Buzan has noted, the nature of states and the nature of the in-
ternational system are so closely intertwined that it is impossible to address 
national security without considering international security, and vice versa. 
He writes,
The political connection between states and system is so intimate that one is 
at risk of introducing serious misperception even by speaking of states and the 
international system as if they were distinct entities. Although they are dis-
tinguishable for some analytical purposes, states and the international system 
represent opposite ends of a continuous political phenomenon. The international 
political system is an anarchy, which is to say that its principal defining char-
acteristic is the absence of overarching government. The principal defining fea-
ture of states is their sovereignty, or their refusal to acknowledge any political 
authority higher than themselves. The essential character of states thus defines 
the nature of the international political system, and the essential character of the 
political system reflects the nature of states. If units are sovereign, their system 
of association must be anarchy, and if the system is anarchic, its members must 
reject overarching government.28
Moving in the other direction, the recognition that the state, which is the 
subject of national security, is—or ought to be—merely an instrument for the 
promotion of the well-being of individuals has suggested a need to emphasize 
individual security or human security. The deference shown to states and the 
harm to the lives of individuals that resulted is widely regarded to have been 
one of the great evils of the twentieth century. One need only reflect on the 
terrible human rights abuses perpetrated in the Soviet Union by the KGB—
the Committee for State Security—or the shameful U.S. record of nuclear 
tests involving military personnel to realize that national security has often 
threatened the security of people. As Richard Wyn Jones puts it, “In much of 
the world, states, far from fostering an atmosphere within which stability can 
be attained and prosperity created, are one of the major sources of insecurity 
for their citizens.”29
It is also the case that, just as national security and international security 
are intimately linked, national security and individual security are strongly 
connected. This is true even for those who reject the realist assumption that 
the security of the state guarantees the security of the individual. Robert 
Kaplan’s concerns about the impact of international peace on domestic 
crime rates suggest one form that this interaction may take. A reduction in 
the size of the standing army, together with its gradual transformation into 
a better-educated and more elite force, means that large numbers of young 

18 
Chapter One
males—a notoriously impulsive and violence-prone segment of any nation’s 
population—will be released into society. This, Kaplan argues, portends “an 
increase in gang activity and other forms of violent behavior.”30 Of course, 
one need not range into controversial sociological conjectures to find cir-
cumstances in which national and individual security concerns merge. The 
reverse of Kaplan’s example, namely, the conscription of young men into the 
army rather than their release from it, provides an obvious example.
From a liberal perspective, there are strong arguments for making the in-
dividual the primary subject of security. The state, according to this view, is 
valuable primarily as a means to the end of the well-being of the citizens who 
constitute the state. To concede primacy to the state is to risk making people 
instrumental agents in the service of the state rather than the reverse. The dif-
ference between a liberal state and an authoritarian state often turns on this 
distinction. Instead of providing security for their citizens, authoritarian re-
gimes are often guilty of threatening the security of the individual in the name 
of national security. To state the difference bluntly, in democracies the state 
exists to protect the rights of individuals; in authoritarian states individuals 
exist to serve the state. The suppression of political dissent by Latin American 
dictators operating under the so-called national security doctrine provides an 
example of this. As a result, there appears to be a strong case, at least from 
a liberal perspective, for bypassing the state in favor of the individual as the 
primary subject of security. On the other hand, human rights law, which is 
now well established in the international system, may offer a better means of 
protecting individuals by working with and through states.
What conclusions concerning efforts to broaden and extend the concept 
of security does this analysis suggest? The narrowness of the Cold War 
focus on security as a military matter could not help but provoke a reaction 
toward broadening the security agenda. Unless limits are established, how-
ever, broadening can create more problems than it solves, including, at the 
extreme, undermining the coherence of the discipline. Assessing whether 
threats merit inclusion on the security agenda on the basis of the extent to 
which they result from human agency rather than natural processes and on the 
degree of intentionality they exhibit offers a partial solution to the problem.
Extending the concept of security to include individuals may be useful as 
a corrective to the excessive focus on the state and its needs that character-
ized the Cold War period. It is important, however, to ensure that notions of 
individual security are fully compatible (as the concept of human security is) 
with the well-established system of international human rights. Moving in the 
other direction to make groups of states (or the international system itself) the 
subjects of security appears unavoidable, given the reciprocal effects of states 
and the international system on each other. In fact, significant moves toward 

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
19
the concept of international security were part of the traditional security para-
digm long before serious efforts to widen the scope of security studies began.
As an academic discipline, security studies can exist, and even thrive, 
indefinitely without achieving consensus on the limits of the concept of se-
curity. It is, arguably, very beneficial for a discipline to be populated with at 
least a vocal minority of scholars willing to push the boundaries of their field 
and question central assumptions.31 Doing so can assist in the essential task of 
attempting to envision security threats that lie beyond the horizon.
SEEING BEYOND THE HORIZON
As warfare has evolved from an activity in which the battlefield is small 
and killing occurs at the point of a sword to one in which the battlefield can 
embrace an entire continent or ocean and killing commonly occurs at long 
range, combatants have been forced to extend their range of vision in an 
effort to see threats as they develop at greater and greater distances. In the 
nineteenth century, observers were sometimes sent aloft in hot-air balloons to 
see what enemy forces were doing beyond the ridgeline. The range of aerial 
reconnaissance was dramatically extended in the twentieth century as first 
airplanes and then satellites and drones gave military commanders the ability 
quite literally to see beyond the horizon. Since at least the time of Sun Tzu, it 
has been understood that the defender who knows what is coming is far more 
likely to succeed than the one who fails to anticipate an attack. The analy-
sis of American intelligence failures prior to 9/11 and with regard to Iraqi 
weapons of mass destruction was widely reported in terms of its significance 
for the 2004 presidential campaign, but its more fundamental significance 
was related to the need to address a problem that left the United States inad-
equately equipped to defend itself in a dynamic threat environment.
Thinking tactically about security requires seeing over the horizon. Think-
ing strategically about security, on the other hand, requires seeing over the 
years. Technology cannot help us as much with strategic threat assessment 
as it does with tactical threat assessment. In order to plan for threats over 
the long term—that is, to see beyond the time horizon in the same way that 
soldiers now see beyond the terrestrial horizon—requires qualities that re-
main uniquely human and, consequently, imperfect. Strategic thinking about 
security requires all the knowledge we can assemble—of human nature, of 
history, of politics, of technology, and much more—but it also requires a 
great deal of imagination.
The effort to define security in a way that expands our ability to per-
ceive the threats that are truly worth worrying about while avoiding the 

20 
Chapter One
self-defeating temptation to worry about everything has occupied the time 
and talents of many scholars and policy makers. The outcome of that effort 
remains contested. It is not an idle intellectual exercise, however; decisions 
that are made on the basis of some definition of security about, for example, 
whether to devote more resources to disease prevention and control rather 
than ballistic-missile defense (or vice versa) are decisions that may determine 
someday well beyond the time horizon whether people live or die. This, in 
the final analysis, is what the study of security is all about: who lives, who 
dies, why, and how.
We do not contend that our definition of security is the only one possible. 
It offers, we believe, a necessary correction of the Cold War’s myopic focus 
on states and weapons without lapsing into inability to discriminate between 
common threats, on the one hand, and significant (and thus security-worthy) 
threats, on the other.
We also do not intend to suggest that our method of organizing the subject 
in the pages that follow is the only possible method. Our starting point is 
the assumption that the quest for security must begin with a thorough un-
derstanding of the sources of insecurity; solutions must always be grounded 
in an understanding of the problems. We focus, as a result, on threats. Some 
assessments of threat (especially those informed by the traditional paradigm) 
have focused almost exclusively on the potential to cause harm, suggesting 
that it is enough to know how many weapons of a certain type exist and what 
their capabilities are. The crucial matter of intentions has often been left, un-
derstandably, to foreign-policy or comparative-politics analyses.
As we have noted, the traditional understanding of threats as the product of 
capabilities and intentions is somewhat too simplistic for the new, widened 
security agenda. In order to impose some order on our effort to describe a 
broad range of security threats, we have divided the book into three parts. Part 
I focuses on traditional threats—conventional weapons and war, weapons of 
mass destruction, and proliferation issues. It is, in large measure, a survey 
of technologies—the weapons that, combined with malign intent, threaten 
lives—that advocates of the traditional paradigm should find completely 
comprehensible. Part II addresses new sources of insecurity. To be more pre-
cise, two of the three issues addressed—disease and trafficking—are not new, 
but their inclusion in studies of international security is new. Part III moves 
away from instruments of insecurity toward the conditions that engender 
threats. We examine the state (the traditional focus of security studies) but 
also the role that ethnic conflict, economic conditions, environmental degra-
dation, and the rise of new forms of terrorism play in generating insecurity. 
The division is imperfect, but by the end of the book, we hope, the underlying 
rationale for this approach will appear compelling.

 
The Meaning of Security Today 
21
RECOMMENDED READING
Books and Articles
Brown, Michael E., ed. Grave New World: Security Challenges in the Twenty-first 
Century. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2003.
Buzan, Barry, Ole Waever, and Jaap de Wilde. Security: A New Framework for 
Analysis. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 1998.
Eckert, Amy, and Laura Sjoberg, eds. Rethinking the 21st Century: “New” Problems, 
“Old” Solutions. New York: Zed Books, 2009.
Fierke, K. M. Critical Approaches to International Security. Cambridge: Polity Press, 
2007.
Kolodziej, Edward A. Security and International Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005.
Krause, Keith, and Michael C. Williams, eds. Critical Security Studies: Concepts and 
Cases. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997.
Mathews, Jessica Tuchman. “Redefining Security.” Foreign Affairs 68 (Spring 1989): 
162–77.
Ullman, Richard H. “Redefining Security.” International Security 8 (Summer 1983): 
129–53.
Websites
Foreign Military Studies Office (Fort Leavenworth): http://fmso.leavenworth.army
.mil
GlobalSecurity.org: http://www.globalsecurity.org/index.html
International Crisis Group: http://www.crisisgroup.org
Naval Postgraduate School, Center on Contemporary Conflict: http://www.ccc.nps
.navy.mil


Part One
TRADITIONAL 
SOURCES OF INSECURITY


25
Chapter Two
Conventional Weapons and War
Since the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945, weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD) have received an enormous amount of attention. Efforts 
to restrict access to and prevent the use of nuclear, biological, and chemical 
weapons have been at the top of the agenda for states, intergovernmental or-
ganizations, and many nongovernmental organizations. Given the devastating 
potential of WMD, the concern exhibited is entirely reasonable. Neverthe-
less, what we call “conventional weapons” annually kill over twice as many 
people as died in Hiroshima and Nagasaki combined. Long before the first 
nuclear bomb was tested in the New Mexico desert, long before the British 
and the Germans used chemical weapons against each other in World War I, 
conventional weapons were making warfare a nasty business.
They continue to do so. The deadliest wars of the post–Cold War era, 
most of them intrastate conflicts, have generally been fought with small and 
technologically unsophisticated weapons. And yet such weapons have been 
extraordinarily destructive. Consider what has been done with conventional 
weapons (assisted in many instances by war-related starvation and disease) 
in modern conflicts:
•  A study by the International Rescue Committee published in 2007 reported 
that warfare in the Democratic Republic of Congo has resulted in 5.4 mil-
lion deaths since August 1998, making it the deadliest conflict since World 
War II.1
•  Over 3.7 million Vietnamese were killed in Indochina’s wars between 1954 
and the fall of Saigon in 1975.2 While the number of Americans who died 
in Southeast Asia (58,220)3 pales in comparison, the Vietnam War nonethe-
less ranks as one of the most traumatic events in American history.

26 
Chapter Two
•  During the Korean War (1950–53), between two and three million were 
killed, including over five hundred thousand South Koreans, over one mil-
lion North Koreans, approximately five hundred thousand Chinese, and 
almost thirty-seven thousand Americans.
•  In the course of almost a quarter-century of conflict in Sudan, close to two 
million people have been killed by fighting, famine, and disease.
In each of these cases (and in many others), weapons of mass destruction 
were unnecessary to achieve what amounted to mass destruction. In fact, less 
than 1 percent of the fifteen million deaths in World War I and the fifty mil-
lion deaths in World War II were caused by WMD. In contrast, a significant 
number of the eight hundred thousand people killed during the Rwandan 
genocide of 1994 were hacked to death with machetes. These realities bring 
to mind an observation made by Thomas C. Schelling in an influential book 
on strategy published in 1966. Acknowledging that “it is a grisly thing to talk 
about,” Schelling wrote: “Against defenseless people there is not much that 
nuclear weapons can do that cannot be done with an ice pick.”4 So, however 
reasonable it might be for security experts to worry about the possibility of 
a nuclear device being detonated in a major city, we should remember that 
conventional weapons produce casualty totals year in and year out that are 
comparable to those in our nuclear nightmares.
During the Cold War, security analysts tended to focus on issues related 
to nuclear weapons, including deterrence theory, proliferation, and arms 
control. In the post-9/11 world, many have focused on terrorism and forms 
of warfare involving nonstate actors. Both of these emphases reflect the com-
mon impulse to worry most about threats that are new and unfamiliar. But 
they also reflect an emphasis on the kinds of problems that seem most likely 
to affect the security of those of us living in the developed world. More and 
more, war seems to be a phenomenon confined largely to the developing 
world. Even when the world’s advanced industrialized states go to war, they 
project their military power into the developing world and, typically, suffer 
far fewer casualties than the forces they fight against.
Although war in the twenty-first century, as in the last half of the twentieth 
century, affects the world’s poor far more than it affects the rich, conven-
tional war remains a vitally important concern of the developed world, for 
a number of reasons. First, the militaries of the developed world are often 
involved in conventional wars in the developing world. Indeed, rich states 
are often responsible, whether directly or indirectly, for those conflicts. Even 
where they bear no responsibility, their interests are often affected as a conse-
quence of refugee flows, threats to nationals, or resource supply interruptions. 
And then (although this should by no means be treated as an afterthought), 

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
27
there are humanitarian considerations. We cannot—or at least should not—be 
indifferent to the suffering and the deaths of millions of people, a majority 
of whom are innocents, in warfare, no matter where in the world it occurs.
It would be impossible to cover thoroughly in a single book, much less 
in one chapter of a book, conventional war and conventional weapons. Our 
intent in this chapter is simply to provide some sense of the big, seemingly 
intractable, issues associated with war and weapons, along with a brief look 
at a few of the problems, such as those associated with the use of private mili-
taries and child soldiers, that are especially significant at present. As always, 
our emphasis will be on threats to security and what can be done about them.
WAR AS COERCIVE VIOLENCE
A useful place to begin our consideration of conventional war and weapons 
is with a set of fundamental points concerning the objectives served by the 
use of force. In Arms and Influence, Thomas Schelling began by noting that 
force can be used to take what a country wants or to keep what it has. “Forc-
ibly a country can repel and expel, penetrate and occupy, seize, exterminate, 
disarm and disable, confine, deny access, and directly frustrate intrusion or 
attack.” But there is something else that force can accomplish: “Force can be 
used to hurt. In addition to taking and protecting things of value it can destroy 
value. In addition to weakening an enemy militarily it can cause an enemy 
plain suffering.”5
With this insight Schelling proceeded to explain the evolution of modern 
warfare from a point at which the ability to inflict punishment on an enemy 
depended on the ability to defeat that enemy in war to a point at which pun-
ishment could be inflicted prior to the military defeat of the enemy. Under 
the former circumstances, the conquest of a city or an entire state would 
enable the conqueror to seize economic assets and to enslave or kill the en-
emy’s civilian population. The latter situation, in contrast, is one in which the 
destruction of noncombatants and property occurs in the course of the war. 
The aerial bombardment of cities in World War II offers the classic example.
The understanding that military force can be used to punish as well as to 
seize or defend leads to Schelling’s most important observation: When pun-
ishment can be meted out before the military defeat of the enemy is achieved, 
it can be deliberately employed as a means of coercion. With weapons of 
mass destruction, the mere threat of such punishment can be used to coerce 
an adversary.6
Much of modern warfare has as its object seizing territory, overthrowing 
governments, or merely fending off the attacks of others. Superior military 

28 
Chapter Two
force is necessary to accomplish these ends. There is also, however, a great deal 
of fighting that occurs when one side has no hope of prevailing by brute force. 
Such warfare, far from being irrational, is based on the idea that one’s objec-
tives can often be accomplished merely by inflicting sufficient pain to make the 
adversary yield. It is this—the logic of coercive violence—that explains suicide 
bombers and videotaped beheadings in Iraq. It also explains the difficulty of 
defeating insurgencies in Algeria, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Iraq. 
When a military contest becomes a matter of inflicting pain rather than dem-
onstrating the superiority of one’s weapons, matching the enemy’s ability to 
endure pain is more important than matching the enemy’s military power.
This understanding of coercive violence illuminates many important fea-
tures of modern military strategy—from the desire of a growing number of 
states to acquire weapons of mass destruction (and the desire of others to 
prevent them from doing so) to the widespread use of terrorism and guerrilla 
warfare tactics. It also helps to explain why, in spite of a level of military 
dominance some believe to be unmatched in the history of the world, the 
United States does not enjoy a commensurate level of security at home or a 
commensurate ability to control events abroad. Paradoxically, the vulnerabil-
ity of the United States and other developed countries may be a consequence 
of their military dominance. To see why this is the case, we need to examine 
the concept of asymmetric warfare and its relationship to the “revolution in 
military affairs” (RMA).
ASYMMETRIC WARFARE
During much of the modern period, war has been fought symmetrically—that 
is, contending armies have battled each other with comparable weapons, 
tactics, and organizational modes. The army that has prevailed has gener-
ally been the one with some measure of superiority, whether quantitative or 
qualitative, in these areas. Technological innovations have been decisive, but 
only for as long as it has taken other states to adopt the new weapons. Steam-
powered ships defeated sailing ships on the high seas, armor defeated cavalry 
on land, and so on, but the advantages were fleeting.
On the whole, states have fought wars, if not exactly on equal terms, at 
least in ways that were similar. Japan provides a dramatic example of the 
pressure to conform. Japan’s arrival as a world power, signaled by its victory 
over Russia in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905, came at the point at 
which a military culture dominated by the ideal of the samurai warrior was 
supplanted by Western ways of waging war. But what happens when states 
are unable to win on terms dictated by their adversaries?

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
29
World War II illustrates the tendency of states to move to asymmetric 
modes of waging war when they are unable to prevail in a symmetric war. 
Beginning with the attack on Poland in September 1939, Nazi Germany was 
able to sweep across Europe in large measure due to its blitzkrieg tactics. 
To fight on at all, conquered states were required to adopt guerrilla warfare 
tactics. The French Resistance, in other words, was engaged in asymmetric 
warfare. But the British and the Americans, while certainly not conquered, 
were also obliged to engage in asymmetric warfare initially. With most of 
Western Europe occupied by the Germans and no means available to mount 
a direct assault on German forces, the United Kingdom decided in 1940 to 
initiate a bombing campaign that targeted German cities. The United States 
joined beginning in 1942 and eventually extended the countercity bombing 
strategy to Japan.7 Michael Walzer, who accepts the necessity of the decision 
to bomb cities, nonetheless labels the bombing “Allied terrorism” and notes 
that over half a million civilians were killed by Allied bombs in Germany 
and Japan.8 When the stakes are high enough, the prospect of defeat often 
compels the adoption of asymmetrical tactics.
Today, the United States military is so dominant that, with very few excep-
tions, any state (or nonstate actor) that finds itself at war with the United States 
must wage asymmetric warfare. This is true in part simply because the United 
States has retained a large military force since the end of World War II, but it 
also has much to do with what is called the revolution in military affairs.
The revolution in military affairs is the effect generated by the marriage 
of advanced communications and information-processing systems with state-
of-the-art weapons-delivery systems. When information (including visual 
imagery) is collected from hundreds of sources, including satellites over the 
theater of operations, transmitted instantaneously to decision makers at all 
levels, from the head of state to individual tank drivers on the battlefield, and 
immediately processed by computers into a readily usable form, the effect 
on the ability to wage war is indeed revolutionary. The RMA is, in essence, 
a means of overcoming the confusion and uncertainty—what the Prussian 
military thinker Carl von Clausewitz called “the fog of war”—that has been 
a constant feature of battle throughout history. The location of enemy forces, 
the speed and direction of moving targets, the success or failure of weapons in 
hitting their targets, and even the content of the enemy’s communications can 
be monitored in real time by battlefield commanders, thanks to the existence 
of digital cameras (and other information sensors) and the ability to collect 
the information they provide from locations all over the theater of operations. 
To know and to be able to control what one’s own forces are doing in the 
confusion of combat is a tremendous advantage; the advantage of knowing as 
well what enemy forces are doing is almost invariably decisive.

30 
Chapter Two
The effect of the RMA has been most apparent in the two wars fought by 
the United States in Iraq since 1991. In the first of those conflicts (the Persian 
Gulf War, as it is generally known in the United States), the United States 
and its allies began by “blinding” the Iraqi military. Radar and communica-
tions facilities (pinpointed by prewar satellite surveillance) were destroyed 
with precision-guided munitions, including “smart bombs” dropped from air-
planes and cruise missiles launched from destroyers and submarines located 
hundreds of miles from their targets. The success of the initial strike gave 
coalition forces the advantage throughout the war of owning the skies over 
Iraq. American generals were able to see virtually everything the Iraqis were 
doing, while the Iraqis themselves were, electronically speaking, operating 
in the dark.
The U.S. military’s advantage was also apparent in the way distance fac-
tored in. During the war, the Pentagon frequently released cockpit-camera 
videos from American combat aircraft. Such videos invariably showed pin-
point strikes on targets from great distances. Rather than trying to defeat the 
Iraqi army, which in 1991 was thought to be the fourth largest in the world 
and battle-hardened from a long war with Iran, on the ground using conven-
tional tactics, the United States was able to use air superiority, information 
dominance, and precision-guided weapons to deliver devastating blows from 
positions in the air, at sea, and on the ground that the Iraqis simply could not 
reach in retaliation.
Two of the most significant impacts of these changes in warfare have been 
the dramatic reduction in casualties for military forces fighting at a distance 
and enjoying information dominance and the reduction of time needed to carry 
out large-scale military operations. In the Persian Gulf War, only 148 Ameri-
cans were killed in combat.9 A similar number (139) were killed in Operation 
Iraqi Freedom up to the end of major combat operations in 2003.10 Perhaps 
even more remarkably, during a two-and-a-half-month period in 1999, NATO 
pilots flew over thirty-eight thousand sorties in Kosovo and Serbia suffering 
no fatalities.11 With respect to time, it is worth noting that the Afghan capital 
of Kabul was captured just over five weeks after the beginning of Operation 
Enduring Freedom in 2001 while Baghdad fell to Allied forces within three 
weeks of the beginning of Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003. As retired Maj. 
Gen. Robert Scales put it in one of the official histories of the Iraq War, “A 
fundamental law of Newtonian physics applies also to military maneuver: one 
can achieve overwhelming force by substituting velocity for mass.”12
Being able to fight shorter wars with fewer casualties makes the use of mil-
itary force more tolerable to the citizens of a democracy. Consequently, many 
in the United States have seen the revolution in military affairs as the means 
by which the ghosts of the long and costly war in Vietnam were exorcised. 

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
31
But as the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have become more protracted and 
casualties have mounted, comparisons with the Vietnam War have appeared 
with greater frequency. What were designed to be quick and decisive wars 
have become long and indecisive counterinsurgencies. And when no decisive 
blow can be struck, the winner is the side that outlasts the other. Speaking of 
the Taliban in Afghanistan, Lt. Gen. David Barno said, “Americans have the 
watches, but they have the time.”13
For the United States and its allies in Iraq and Afghanistan, the advantages 
associated with being able to fight at a distance largely disappeared when the 
military task shifted from the overthrow of a government to the occupation 
and stabilization of the defeated state. The need for “boots on the ground” to 
police neighborhoods, hunt down and disarm insurgents, and rebuild critical 
infrastructure meant that soldiers were forced to operate within range of the 
unsophisticated guns and bombs used by those wanting to defeat the occupa-
tions. As a result, casualty rates increased. But when the stakes are life and 
death, military tactics and technology evolve quickly. The dangers associ-
ated with patrolling urban areas and disarming improvised explosive devices 
(IEDs), among other things, have led the United States military to develop 
and deploy robots on a vast scale.
Today, iRobot, the maker of the Roomba robotic vacuum cleaner, supplies 
a robot it calls the PackBot to the U.S. Army. Designed so that a variety of 
modules can be connected to a single platform, the PackBot has been used 
for bomb disposal, reconnaissance, and search and rescue. In fact, the first 
operational use of the PackBot occurred on 9/11 at Ground Zero in New 
York City. A rival manufacturer’s robot, called Talon, has been outfitted 
with weapons, making it the first armed robot (or warbot) to be deployed in 
battle. In its SWORDS (for Special Weapons Observation Reconnaissance 
Detection System) configuration, the Talon adds a .50-caliber machine gun, a 
grenade launcher, or an antitank rocket launcher to the video cameras atop its 
basic platform. A remote operator connected to the warbot by radio or fiber-
optic cable sees what its cameras see and can fire its weapons. With the right 
applications attached, in some cases including a loudspeaker permitting the 
operator to speak to the humans the robot encounters, SWORDS can “man” a 
security checkpoint, search houses, or patrol the perimeter of a base in ways 
that restore the advantages of distance to the soldiers controlling it.14
In the skies over Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq, UAVs—unmanned aerial 
vehicles—are being used to collect intelligence and attack targets. While the 
drones operate out of bases in combat zones, their pilots control them re-
motely from offices at bases in the United States. This means a pilot can fly 
a mission over Afghanistan, perhaps launching a missile at a suspected insur-
gent in the process, then head home in time to have dinner and go to a PTA 

32 
Chapter Two
meeting. It is difficult to imagine how the advantages of distance in warfare 
could be increased beyond this. At the same time, the use of UAVs appears 
to be altering the culture of the Air Force, a service dominated in the past by 
fighter pilots who now realize that unmanned systems have capabilities that 
planes with human pilots do not, while raising fundamental questions about 
what it means to “go to war.”15
Questions about the impact of UAVs on traditional understandings of how 
wars are fought have not translated into hesitation about their deployment 
and use. After early models of the Predator drone were used for surveillance 
in Bosnia and Kosovo in the 1990s, an armed version of the Predator was 
rushed into production after 9/11. The biggest jump in demand for UAVs, 
however, occurred in 2007 after the United States had shifted its tactics in 
Iraq to place greater emphasis on counterinsurgency operations. With troops 
on the ground searching for insurgents while trying to steer clear of IEDs, 
Predators—capable of streaming video images while staying aloft for up to 
twenty-four hours at a time—became very valuable commodities. In 2007 
and 2008 alone, Predators and Reapers, another UAV, flew 10,949 missions 
in Iraq and Afghanistan. On 244 of those missions, missiles were fired from 
the UAV, most often at suspected insurgents.16
There are legal and moral questions that arise from the use of UAVs to 
kill suspected insurgents and terrorists, especially when such killings occur 
in countries that are not at war or under military occupation. American politi-
cal and military leaders have argued that targeted killings in the Waziristan 
region of Pakistan provide the only means of dealing with groups seeking 
to destabilize Afghanistan from the sanctuary of a neighboring country that 
is either unwilling or unable to control such groups. Critics of the policy 
contend that drone attacks outside of Afghanistan and Iraq have undermined 
existing legal restraints on the use of force, opening up the possibility that as 
the use of armed UAVs spreads, many governments may feel legally entitled 
to attack suspected terrorists living in states with whom they are not at war.17 
In addition, missiles launched from drones often kill innocents. According to 
a study based on data gleaned from press reports, drone strikes in Pakistan’s 
tribal regions had killed between 1,372 and 2,125 people between 2004 and 
January 1, 2011. Approximately 25 percent of those killed were noncomba-
tants. Attacks became more frequent after President Obama took office in 
2009. From 2004 to the end of George W. Bush’s second term as president, 
there were forty-five drone strikes reported in the region. From the time 
Barack Obama took office through January 1, 2011, there were 172 drone 
strikes reported.18
New technologies clearly raise important questions about the changing 
nature of warfare even as they open up new possibilities for waging war 

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
33
more quickly and precisely with fewer casualties. They have also opened 
up a tremendous gap between the military capabilities of those states able 
to benefit from satellite guidance systems, precision weapons, real-time 
battlefield imaging, robots, and more, and states (and nonstate actors) unable 
to afford high-tech military systems. Yet there are some respects in which 
even the poorest and least sophisticated military forces are able to use new 
technologies for military purposes. By now the extent to which Al Qaeda 
was able to plan and coordinate a global campaign of terror via the Internet 
is well known. The March 11, 2004, terrorist bombings in Madrid linked 
cheap information technology to old-fashioned explosives with devastating 
effect. Cell phones were wired to explosives, as they still are in the roadside 
bombs in Iraq known to American troops as IEDs, in such a way that an 
incoming call could trigger the bomb. However primitive such devices may 
seem in comparison to laser-guided bombs, the principle is the same: using 
communications and information technologies to make it possible to launch 
devastating attacks from a distance.
Military dominance of the sort the United States has achieved is not with-
out certain problems. We have already noted the possibility that the ability 
to wage short wars with limited casualties may make the resort to war easier 
than it ought to be. There is also the enormous cost of high-tech weaponry 
and the C4I (command, control, communications, computers, and intelli-
gence) that backs it up, a concern that will be examined in the next section. 
But the most vexing problem associated with American military dominance 
is that it forces most states or nonstate actors that might become involved in 
military conflicts with the United States to fight using unconventional means 
only. Twice in Iraq and once in Afghanistan, the futility of fighting the United 
States in a conventional war has been demonstrated, and yet the United States 
has been hurt by Al Qaeda and by insurgents in Iraq fighting asymmetrically. 
As Sun Tzu stated 2,500 years ago in The Art of War, “In war, the way is 
to avoid what is strong and to strike at what is weak.”19 It is a lesson that is 
becoming increasingly familiar to America’s adversaries. To put the point 
directly, the wider the gap in military capabilities between the strong and the 
weak, the more incentive there may be for the weak who feel compelled to 
attack the strong to resort to terrorism or guerrilla warfare.
The situation in the Iraq war before and after the end of major combat op-
erations announced by President Bush on May 1, 2003, is instructive in this 
regard. As noted earlier, the initial phase was a conventional war dominated 
by coalition forces. There were relatively few coalition casualties. Between 
May 1, 2003, and the end of 2010, however, there were 4,269 U.S. military 
personnel killed.20 In the insurgency, coalition forces have been attacked by 
individuals without uniforms who drive ordinary cars (sometimes laden with 

34 
Chapter Two
explosives) and who are capable of blending in with the civilian population. 
In both Afghanistan and Iraq, attacks have come in the form of roadside 
bombs that are triggered remotely when coalition convoys pass. Targets 
on which American precision-guided munitions could be used have largely 
faded into their surroundings, and efforts to locate them have often alienated 
the population. The RMA, in short, has provided few resources suitable for 
fighting insurgencies.
THE QUESTION OF COST
The military dominance made possible by the RMA comes at an enormous 
economic cost. But then, it isn’t cheap to fight a low-tech war either.
In 2009, the world’s states spent over $1.5 trillion dollars for defense. The 
United States accounted for roughly half of the total.21 The enormity of this 
figure can best be seen by comparing it to other global expenditures. For 
example, the total cost of United Nations peacekeeping operations from 1948 
to 2010 is estimated to have been $69 billion. For the fiscal year ending in 
June 2011, $7.26 billion was allocated for UN peacekeeping operations. The 
headquarters budget of the UN for 2010–2011 is $5.16 billion, or just under 
$2.6 billion per year.22 (The peacekeeping budget is separate from the regular 
budget of the UN. Other programs, such as the World Food Program, are 
funded by voluntary contributions from member states.)
In reality, United States spending for national security is significantly 
understated when only the regular budget of the Department of Defense 
(DoD) is cited. The costs of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have been 
paid in large part through special appropriations, or “supplementals,” that 
are not included in the DoD budget. The design, testing, production, and de-
struction of nuclear weapons is paid for through the Department of Energy. 
Benefits paid to military veterans are appropriated through the Department 
of Veterans’ Affairs rather than DoD. Except for those expenditures related 
directly to military intelligence, intelligence gathering by the Central Intel-
ligence Agency, the National Security Agency, and others falls outside the 
DoD budget. The costs of foreign military assistance—arms transfers—are 
generally included in the State Department budget, as are the costs of U.S. 
participation in regional security organizations, such as NATO, and U.S. 
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Finally, expendi-
tures designed to protect the United States from terrorist attacks generally 
fall within the budgets of the Department of Homeland Security and the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Defense budgets topping half a trillion 
dollars are worth pausing to contemplate, but they tell only part of the 
story. As Everett Dirksen, the long-time senator from Illinois, is supposed 

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
35
to have said, “A billion here, a billion there, and pretty soon you’re talking 
real money.”23
Defense spending must be considered in terms of opportunity costs. What 
is spent on the military is unavailable to be spent for other social needs. 
President Eisenhower stated the point eloquently in a speech to the American 
Society of Newspaper Editors in 1953:
Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired, signifies, 
in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are 
cold and are not clothed. This world in arms is not spending money alone. It is 
spending the sweat of its laborers, the genius of its scientists, the hopes of its 
children. . . . We pay for a single fighter plane with a half million bushels of 
wheat. We pay for a single destroyer with new homes that could have housed 
more than 8,000 people.24
The issue associated with opportunity costs has become even more chal-
lenging since Eisenhower’s day. With the cost of the U.S. Air Force’s F-22 
Raptor at $150 million per plane and wheat at roughly seven dollars per 
bushel, a single fighter plane now costs the equivalent of over twenty-one 
million bushels of wheat.
Defense expenditures are even more vexing when one considers that 
money spent on weapons does not generally enhance productivity in other 
areas the way money spent for health care, education, transportation, or many 
other purposes does. Two-thirds of the money spent on research and devel-
opment (R&D) in the United States promotes military purposes. In contrast, 
only 35 percent of the total R&D budget in the United Kingdom goes toward 
the military rather than the civilian sector. To make the point differently, the 
United States spends 0.4 percent of its gross domestic product on military 
R&D, while Japan’s military R&D budget consumes a mere 0.03 of GDP.25
It is important to remember that every defense dollar spent to over-insure 
against a remote or diminishing risk—or, in effect, to “run up the score” 
in a capability where the United States is already dominant—is a dollar 
not available to take care of our people, reset the force, win the wars we 
are in, and improve capabilities in areas where we are underinvested and 
potentially vulnerable.
—Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates
Source: “Defense Budget Recommendation Statement,” U.S. Department 
of Defense, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Af-
fairs), April 6, 2009, available at http://www.defense.gov/speeches/speech
.aspx?speechid=1341.

36 
Chapter Two
The economic drain associated with defense spending is especially appar-
ent in the developing world, where all too often corrupt governments ignore 
pressing social needs in order to spend limited state revenue on military 
forces. In Eritrea, for example, a staggering 23.5 percent of GDP was spent 
on defense from 2000 to 2002, while only 4.8 percent was spent on education 
and 2.8 percent on health.26
Of course, the cost of preparing for war might be regarded as well worth 
whatever price is paid if military preparations were certain to prevent war, 
which has its own enormous costs, or at least to prevent defeat in war. But one 
can never be certain how much “security” is obtained for each dollar spent. 
Nor, for that matter, can one be certain in all circumstances that defense 
spending produces more good than harm.
In fact, the precise relationship between weapons and war has long been 
a matter of debate. Weapons are necessary to wage war, but they are also 
considered essential in order to promote peace and security. As a presidential 
candidate in 1960, John F. Kennedy said, “It is an unfortunate fact that we can 
only secure peace by preparing for war.” Kennedy’s observation, of course, 
was not new. The Romans were fond of the expression, “If you want peace, 
prepare for war.” The opposite perspective was perhaps stated most cogently 
by Sir John Frederick Maurice in 1883: “I went into the British Army believ-
ing that if you want peace you must prepare for war. I now believe that if you 
prepare thoroughly for war you will get it.”27
CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS AND WAR: 
HUMAN SECURITY CONCERNS
The traditional perspective on security pushes us to consider the impact of 
conventional weapons on national security and to ask questions such as those 
we have already noted: Are such weapons necessary to preserve the peace, 
or does their accumulation push states toward war? Are the costs of arma-
ments justifiable, or does defense spending (at least beyond a certain point) 
jeopardize the state’s ability to fulfill other important responsibilities? From 
a human security perspective, however, we must consider the ways that con-
ventional weapons affect the well-being of individual human beings.
The welfare of individuals is, of course, commonly tied to the health of the 
states they inhabit. A country under the domination of another or constantly 
at war is unlikely to be in a position to promote human rights or human 
development to the fullest. Human security and national security are not 
alternatives. Instead, a focus on human security helps to protect against an 
extreme emphasis on national security in which the state and its defense are 

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
37
held, implicitly at least, to justify an indifference toward individuals. All too 
often, states have sacrificed human security for national security.
Here we wish to consider three of the issues related to human security that 
are presented by conventional weapons and war. Each is commonly ignored 
in studies focused solely on national security, yet each is an issue attracting 
increasing attention from nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), interna-
tional organizations, and a few states that perceive themselves to be “humani-
tarian great powers.” The issues are small arms and light weapons (SALW), 
explosive remnants of war (ERW), and child soldiers.
Small Arms and Light Weapons
According to a recent report prepared for the Geneva Declaration, a group of 
states committed to reducing the negative impacts of weapons in the world, 
over 740,000 people die each year as a result of armed violence. This number 
includes violent deaths (over 540,000 per year), most of which are unassoci-
ated with wars, and deaths due to the indirect effects of conflict (200,000 per 
year), such as malnutrition and preventable diseases. Small arms are respon-
sible not only for virtually all of the murders that swell these figures but for 
the majority of combat deaths as well.28 In a speech before the UN Security 
Council Ministerial on Small Arms on September 24, 1999, former Canadian 
foreign minister Lloyd Axworthy called them “small arms of mass destruc-
tion.”29 The impacts of small arms and light weapons are not new, but the end 
of the Cold War prompted an increased awareness of those impacts even as 
it exacerbated the problem in significant ways.
Small arms and light weapons (SALW) have been the primary instruments 
of the intrastate conflicts that have plagued the Balkans, Sudan, Congo, Sri 
Lanka, and other ethnic hotspots since the end of the Cold War. They are 
inexpensive and widely available, which makes it easy for aggrieved groups 
to take up arms against governments or other nonstate actors. These same 
characteristics facilitate illicit trade and make regulation more difficult to 
enforce. Their ease of use and small size make small arms ideal for untrained 
combatants and even child soldiers. Making the problem even worse, the 
end of the Cold War was accompanied by both a loss of superpower control 
over the SALW trade and the creation of a tremendous surplus of weapons. 
Furthermore, the existence of transnational criminal organizations trafficking 
in drugs and persons provided a ready-made network of dealers for the illicit 
weapons trade. In short, a broad convergence of factors brought the issue of 
small arms and light weapons to the fore during the 1990s.30
The issue of small arms and light weapons was added to the agenda of 
the United Nations through a resolution adopted by the General Assembly 

38 
Chapter Two
in 1991.31 Little progress occurred, however, until the 1997 Ottawa Conven-
tion banning antipersonnel land mines was adopted. In an address to the UN 
General Assembly, Lloyd Axworthy pressed for UN action on small arms and 
light weapons just days after the text of the Ottawa Convention had been fi-
nalized at a conference in Oslo. Noting the spread of intrastate conflicts, Ax-
worthy said, “As this type of war increasingly accounts for the great majority 
of all conflicts, the distinctions that once informed the work of international 
diplomacy—between military security concerns and humanitarian or civil 
concerns—break down.” Consequently, Axworthy suggested, the concept 
of human security “takes on a growing relevance” and requires “addressing 
issues that cut across traditional boundaries between areas of concern.” The 
issue of small arms, like the land-mine issue, was, according to Axworthy, 
one such cross-cutting issue.32
NGOs and a few states constituting the Human Security Network pushed 
the small arms issue at the United Nations, and in July 2001 the UN Confer-
ence on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects 
was held. In his speech on behalf of the United States on the opening day 
of the conference, Under Secretary of State John Bolton listed five broad 
areas of disagreement with the draft program of action being discussed at the 
session. Each point, from opposition to measures that would regulate arms 
manufacture and trade to opposition to any international threat to “the Con-
stitutional right to bear arms,” was significant.33 The effect was to place the 
United States in a position of intransigence on the SALW issue rather than 
the more neutral position on the sidelines it had taken during the negotiations 
leading to the Ottawa Convention. U.S. opposition combined with a variety 
of structural and political obstacles (including the enormous profitability of 
the global trade in SALW) meant that no significant progress was made on 
the issue in 2001.
In 2003, a group of Nobel Peace laureates urged the international com-
munity to take action to curb the international trade in conventional arms. 
Since 2006, when the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution 
calling for the preparation of such a treaty, known as the Arms Trade Treaty 
(ATT), this has been the focus of international efforts to deal with the SALW 
problem. The Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) reported its findings 
regarding the proposed treaty to the General Assembly in 2008 but offered 
few concrete suggestions. At present, the ATT is being negotiated in a series 
of preparatory committees with plans for a negotiating conference to be held 
in 2012.34
While its predecessor opposed all efforts toward an agreement regulating 
trade in conventional arms, the Obama administration has expressed support 
for negotiations subject to a rule of decision making by consensus. Such a 

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
39
rule is designed to ensure that all elements of an agreed text are approved by 
every state participating in the negotiations. Typically, negotiation by con-
sensus produces agreements that lack the specificity needed to produce effec-
tive regulation. It is possible that the United States, Russia, and other major 
weapons-producing states will block any agreement that might promise to 
impose real limits on the conventional weapons trade in order to protect what 
is a very lucrative business. In 2009, the legal trade in weapons worldwide 
was worth $57.5 billion. The American share of that trade in 2009 was $22.6 
billion, far ahead of Russia, at $10.4 billion, and France, at $7.4 billion.35
Explosive Remnants of War
An often overlooked aspect of armaments that must be thrown into the equa-
tion when considering the security implications of conventional weapons is 
their persistence. Many weapons are destroyed or expended in war, but not all 
of them. Some weapons are removed from service—and even destroyed—as 
a consequence of disarmament (most commonly when the victor forcibly 
disarms the vanquished). In many instances, however, weapons continue to 
be a factor in security (or insecurity) long after the conflict for which they 
were created and deployed has been resolved. This can be due to the circula-
tion and reuse of weapons, as was noted in the discussion of SALW, but it 
can also be a consequence of the deadly residue that modern warfare often 
leaves behind.
Even weapons from wars far removed in time sometimes pose threats. 
In February 2004, thirty thousand people were evacuated in Sevastopol, a 
Ukrainian port city, when a World War II–era mine weighing over a ton was 
dredged from the Black Sea. The mine was transported through a portion of 
the city (thus the need for evacuations) to an unpopulated location where it 
could be destroyed.36
Land mines have been especially problematic. An estimated hundred mil-
lion land mines have been left over from recent conflicts. In Angola, roughly 
40 percent of the population has experienced amputations due to land-mine 
accidents.37 In Cambodia, where a decade-long civil war following the over-
throw of the genocidal Khmer Rouge regime was concluded in 1991, land 
mines continue to kill and maim people regularly. A World Bank report 
noted that, in 2001, 173 people were killed and 640 people were wounded 
by mines or other forms of unexploded ordnance (UXO) in spite of the fact 
that 313,586 antipersonnel land mines had been removed from the country 
between 1992 and 2001. As the report notes, “Mine and UXO contamination 
restricts access to homes, agricultural land, pastures, water sources, forests, 
schools, dams, canals, markets, business activities, health centers, pagodas, 

40 
Chapter Two
bridges, and neighboring villages. Thus the threat of UXO and mines impedes 
mobility, security, economic activity, and development.”38
As noted above, land mines were the subjects of a 1997 treaty, the Ottawa 
Convention, that bans their use and mandates their removal where they have 
been deployed. The treaty was the product of a remarkable coalition of states 
and NGOs determined to arouse global public interest in the problems posed 
by explosive remnants of war. In fact, American activist Jody Williams and 
the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) shared the 1997 Nobel 
Peace Prize for their efforts to promote the land-mine ban. While over a hun-
dred states have ratified the Ottawa Convention and have made significant 
progress in demining conflict zones, the United States has thus far refused to 
ratify the agreement because of its interest in continuing to use land mines for 
the defense of South Korea.
Many of the same states and NGOs that pushed for the international 
agreement to ban land mines have also promoted multilateral efforts to ad-
dress problems associated with other explosive remnants of war, including 
antivehicle mines, grenades, artillery shells, mortars, and rockets. Cluster 
bombs, once described by William Arkin as “a greater hazard to civilians 
than virtually any other weapon that is legal,”39 have recently been made the 
subject of a new multilateral agreement similar in form and content to the Ot-
tawa Convention. In 2008, the Convention on Cluster Munitions (CCM) was 
concluded in Dublin. As of January 1, 2011, 108 states had signed and forty-
nine states had ratified the agreement, which entered into force on August 1, 
2010. The United States, China, Russia, India, and Israel are among the many 
states that have yet to sign the CCM, which bans the production, stockpiling, 
transfer, and use of cluster bombs.40
Cluster bombs disperse “bomblets,” or “submunitions,” over a broad area 
when dropped from a plane or fired by rockets on the ground. The bomblets 
(202 per device in the cluster bomb used most commonly by the United States 
at the outset of the Afghan campaign) are designed to explode on impact, 
spraying the area with deadly shrapnel and, in some cases, incendiary mate-
rial. For a variety of reasons, including submunitions units malfunctioning or 
landing on soft surfaces, anywhere from 5 percent to 20 percent of the bomb-
lets fail to explode as intended. Bomb canisters can then remain on the ground 
for years before being accidentally detonated, with tragic consequences. 
The use of cluster bombs in Afghanistan in 2001 and 2002 was particularly 
problematic due to the fact that unexploded bomblets were yellow, the same 
color as the packaged meals dropped by the United States to sustain Afghan 
civilians on the ground.
The war in Afghanistan was not the first time that cluster bombs had been 
used extensively by the United States, creating a significant postconflict 

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
41
problem with unexploded ordnance. In fact, cluster munitions have been in 
use for over fifty years. NATO reported in 2000 that 1,392 cluster bombs 
had been dropped during the Kosovo campaign, with a failure rate of 8 to 
12 percent. Within a year of the end of the conflict, forty-seven people (over 
half of them children) had been killed and 101 people had been injured by 
unexploded canisters. It is estimated that in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf 
War (1991), as many as two million unexploded cluster bomblets remained in 
Iraq and Kuwait.41 These weapons are believed to have killed over 2,500 Iraqi 
civilians following the end of that war, far more civilians than were reported 
to have been killed during the war itself.42
Child Soldiers
Children are often the victims of explosive remnants of war, but land mines 
and cluster bombs are not the only war-related problems affecting children. 
Indeed, the impact of modern warfare on children is staggering. During the 
1990s, as a consequence of war, approximately two million children were 
killed, over four million were disabled, over ten million were psychologically 
traumatized, over one million were orphaned, approximately twenty million 
were displaced, and three hundred thousand children were forced to serve in 
armies as soldiers, spies, sex slaves, or other roles.43
Although it is not a new problem, the international community has become 
increasingly sensitive to the problem in recent years. In 1996, Graça Machel, 
Mozambique’s minister of education, prepared a report at the request of UN 
secretary general Boutros Boutros-Ghali entitled Impact of Armed Conflict on 
Children. Much of what we know about the problem comes from this study 
and from subsequent surveys conducted by NGOs in the years since 1996.44
In its most recent international survey, the London-based Coalition to Stop 
the Use of Child Soldiers found that child soldiers were being used in sev-
enteen conflicts ongoing as of the end of 2007. In most cases, paramilitary 
organizations and rebel groups were responsible for employing child soldiers. 
There are, however, a number of governments that recruit and deploy soldiers 
under eighteen years of age. 45
Children serve a variety of functions in armies; not all are, strictly speak-
ing, soldiers. Some carry weapons and engage in combat, but others serve as 
(aside from the capacities mentioned above) couriers, minelayers, cooks, and 
domestic servants. In the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), almost all 
of the girls questioned by surveyors reported having been raped in the army. 
The Lord’s Resistance Army, a rebel organization in northern Uganda that 
has abducted an estimated twenty thousand children, has forced girls both to 
fight and to serve commanders as sex slaves.46

42 
Chapter Two
Child soldiers are ideal because they don’t complain, they don’t expect to 
be paid, and if you tell them to kill, they kill.
—Senior officer in the Chadian National Army (ANT)
Source: Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, “Voices of Child Sol-
diers,” Child Soldiers Global Report 2008, available at http://www.childsol
diersglobalreport.org/content/voices-child-soldiers.
Although some children are taken out of schools and orphanages by 
soldiers, not all of those who end up in armies are abducted. Many enlist 
voluntarily, often to escape poverty or because the lack of educational or em-
ployment opportunities leaves few alternatives. Some see entry into an army 
or rebel force as deliverance from the violence and fear inflicted on civilian 
populations by those same groups. In some instances, governments encourage 
enlistment by requiring military training programs in schools and camps.47
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons, in addition to fueling 
intrastate conflict, has made it easier for children to participate in combat. 
Weapons are so common and inexpensive that armed forces need not worry 
about whether putting a gun in the hands of a child will be a waste of resources. 
As Machel reported, in Uganda in 1996 an AK-47 could be purchased for about 
the cost of a chicken. More important, however, is the fact that small arms are 
so light and simple to operate that ten-year-olds have no difficulty using them. 
The global trade in small arms and light weapons, which the international com-
munity has thus far been unable to address effectively, must be regarded as a 
contributing factor in the tragedy of child soldiers.
On May 25, 2000, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted 
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the 
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, to outlaw military recruitment 
and the use in combat of those under eighteen. The Optional Protocol entered 
into force on February 12, 2002. By the end of 2010, 139 states had ratified 
the agreement. Although not a party to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, the United States is a signatory to that treaty and thus is eligible to 
be a party to the Optional Protocol. The United States ratified the Optional 
Protocol on January 23, 2003.48
PRIVATIZED MILITARY FIRMS
We turn now to an issue that holds the possibility of transforming how wars 
are waged in the twenty-first century: the rise of privatized military firms 

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
43
(PMFs). Over the course of the past two decades, states—both rich and 
poor—have increasingly turned to private companies to provide services that 
were previously considered the responsibility of governments alone.
On March 30, 2004, four employees of Blackwater USA (since renamed 
Xe Services), a private security firm hired to protect the employees of one 
of the Defense Department’s many suppliers in Iraq, were ambushed as they 
drove through the city of Fallujah. They were shot, and their bodies were 
dragged from their vehicle, mutilated, and burned. Two were suspended 
grotesquely from a bridge. Photographs of the grisly scene were published or 
broadcast in less discreet media outlets around the world.
The incident in Fallujah drew attention to an issue that had, up to that point, 
attracted relatively little attention. From the very beginning of the war, priva-
tized military firms were employed in Iraq to perform services traditionally 
considered the responsibility of uniformed military forces. In Iraq at the time 
of the Fallujah killings, at least twenty thousand private military contractors 
were employed to protect diplomats (including the head of the Coalition 
Provisional Authority, Paul Bremer), American and Iraqi businessmen, aid 
workers, and many others.49
While the large number of private security contractors in Iraq may be sur-
prising, the role of privatized military firms has been even more important 
in a number of other conflicts. During the 1990s, the government of Sierra 
Leone halted a bloody civil war and recaptured the country’s diamond mines 
from rebel forces by hiring Executive Outcomes, a PMF based in South Af-
rica. Executive Outcomes used airpower, armored vehicles, and a small but 
highly trained force to accomplish what the government had been unable to 
do in years of fighting.50
Privatized military firms are employed by governments for a variety of 
reasons, some that appear legitimate and some that may not be. First, PMFs 
allow the military to contract out jobs that are temporary, that involve skills 
that are in short supply among the armed forces, or that can be performed 
more efficiently by contractors. Second, when private contractors sustain 
casualties, those casualties are not typically reported in the media and do not 
affect public opinion in democracies the way military casualties do. (The 
Pentagon did not include contractor casualties on its casualty lists in the Iraq 
war.) The use of PMFs, in other words, may serve to conceal the true human 
costs of military operations, but it may also permit defense establishments to 
keep fewer troops under arms, since shortfalls can be handled by calling in 
the private sector.
The rise of privatized military firms also means, however, that defense 
establishments may find themselves competing for the services of military 
professionals. In February 2005, the Department of Defense approved a plan to 

44 
Chapter Two
offer financial incentives (up to $150,000 for a six-year reenlistment) to stem 
the flow of experienced Special Operations Forces personnel to private security 
companies. The bonuses were devised to deal with a situation in which Army 
Green Berets or Navy SEALs with twenty years’ experience and making fifty 
thousand dollars in base pay could leave the military and go to work for a 
private security firm at salaries close to two hundred thousand dollars a year.51
Perhaps more troublesome for the international system is the fact that an 
industry has emerged that gives those who can pay, whether governments 
or corporations—or even rebel organizations and drug traffickers (PMFs are 
reported to have trained drug dealers in Mexico and UNITA rebels in Angola 
in military tactics and the use of advanced weapons)—access to military 
force. In spite of certain advantages associated with contracting out warfare, 
a tremendous potential for abuse exists as well.
In the realm of conventional weapons and war, security can be bought. 
Private contractors are available to supplement military forces and thereby 
reduce the need for large armies. High-tech weapons also play a role in re-
ducing the number of troops needed for many missions; they have the added 
advantage of reducing casualties for the military that is able to attack from 
a distance while enjoying information dominance. But the security that is 
available for purchase is not absolute. Resourceful enemies are always able 
to find and exploit weaknesses. If those weaknesses are not to be found on 
the conventional battlefield, determined adversaries may decide to attack 
nonmilitary targets.
War, as we noted at the outset of this chapter, is a form of coercive vio-
lence. Militarily powerful states, such as the United States, have an incentive 
to contain the use of coercive violence with rules that protect noncombatants, 
exclude children from participation, and limit the kinds of weapons that can 
be used. All of these are laudable rules, but if, in combination with the dis-
tribution of power in the system, these rules preordain the outcome of most 
conflicts, we should not be surprised if some actors in the system decide to 
ignore the rules. This should not be construed as a justification for terrorism, 
the use of weapons of mass destruction, or any other form of unlawful war-
fare. It is, instead, a caution for those who would consider the possession of 
overwhelming military power a panacea for a pluralistic world.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Berkowitz, Bruce. The New Face of War: How War Will Be Fought in the 21st Cen-
tury. New York: Free Press, 2003.

 
Conventional Weapons and War 
45
Caldwell, Dan. Vortex of Conflict: U.S. Policy toward Afghanistan, Pakistan, and 
Iraq. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2011.
Keegan, John. A History of Warfare. New York: Knopf, 1993.
Knox, MacGregor, and Williamson Murray, eds. The Dynamics of Military Revolu-
tion, 1300–2050. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Schelling, Thomas C. Arms and Influence. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 
1966.
Singer, P. W. Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry. 
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2003.
———. Wired for War: The Robotic Revolution and Conflict in the 21st Century. New 
York: Penguin, 2009.
Websites
Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers: http://www.child-soldiers.org/home
International Action Network on Small Arms: http://www.iansa.org
Project on Defense Alternatives: http://www.comw.org/rma
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute: http://www.sipri.org
United States Department of Defense: http://www.defense.gov
U.S. Army Chief of Staff’s Professional Reading List: http://www.history.army.mil/
reading.html


47
Chapter Three
Nuclear Weapons, 
Deterrence, and Arms Control
At 2:45 AM on August 6, 1945, a lone American B-29 bomber named the 
Enola Gay, after the pilot’s mother, took off from the Pacific island of Tinian, 
flew 1,600 miles in five and a half hours to Hiroshima, Japan, and dropped 
the most destructive weapon ever used in warfare to that time—a nuclear 
bomb ten feet long, twenty-eight inches in diameter, and weighing nine 
thousand pounds. Forty-three seconds after it left the Enola Gay, the bomb, 
code-named “Little Boy,” exploded 1,900 feet above ground with a destruc-
tive yield equivalent to 12,500 tons of TNT.1 The explosion lasted about one 
second; the temperature at ground zero, the point directly below the detona-
tion, rose to three to four thousand degrees centigrade, a temperature several 
times that of the surface of the sun. The temperature was so hot and intense 
that birds ignited in midair. One witness said, “It was as if the sun had crashed 
and exploded.”2
The effects on the residents of Hiroshima were horrific; one eyewitness 
later reported, “Men whose whole bodies were covered with blood, and 
women whose skin hung from them like a kimono, plunged shrieking into 
the river. All these become corpses and their bodies are carried by the current 
toward the sea.”3 The official estimate of the number of people killed was 
seventy thousand, although more recent estimates indicate that by the end of 
1945, 140,000 had died.
When he felt the concussion of the bomb hit his plane and saw the mush-
room cloud rising over the city, the copilot of the bomber, Capt. Robert 
Lewis, asked, “My God, what have we done? If I live a hundred years, I’ll 
never quite get these few minutes out of my mind.”4
Even after the bombing of Hiroshima, the Japanese government did not 
surrender; the government was torn between the civilian leaders who wanted 
to sue for peace and the military leaders who preferred death to the disgrace 

48 
Chapter Three
of surrender. Three days after the bombing of Hiroshima, at 3:47 AM, a 
B-29 named Bock’s Car, for the pilot, took off from Tinian with another 
nuclear weapon—code-named “Fat Man”—and flew to Nagasaki. The bomb 
exploded 1,650 feet above the city at 11:02 AM with a destructive force es-
timated to be equivalent to twenty-two thousand tons of TNT. Unlike Hiro-
shima, Nagasaki was surrounded by hills, and these provided some limited 
protection from the effects of the explosion. Still, seventy thousand people 
died in the bombing and its immediate aftermath; counting deaths over time 
from radiation sickness, 140,000 were killed in Nagasaki. The day after the 
bombing of Nagasaki, Emperor Hirohito, speaking on the radio for the first 
time, told the Japanese people that “the enemy has begun to employ a new 
and most cruel bomb, the power of which to do damage is indeed incalcu-
lable, taking the toll of many innocent lives. Should we continue to fight, it 
would not only result in an ultimate collapse and obliteration of the Japanese 
nation, but also it would lead to the total extinction of human civilization.”5 
Despite the continuing opposition of its military leaders, Japan surrendered 
unconditionally, and the most costly war in human history ended. But if the 
development and first use of nuclear weapons ended the war, they raised 
profound questions, questions that have remained to this day like memories 
of the mushroom clouds that rose ominously over Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Nuclear weapons are the most destructive weapons devised, built, and 
used by human beings. Although it would have been possible to kill as many 
Japanese with non-nuclear bombs, guns, or even knives and clubs, nuclear 
weapons made it dramatically easier—both technically and morally—to do 
so. More people were killed in the March 1945 firebombing raids on Tokyo 
and the February 1945 bombing raids on Dresden than were killed in either 
Hiroshima or Nagasaki, but those earlier attacks had involved hundreds of 
planes dropping thousands of bombs.
In the first issue of Time magazine published after the bombings, writer 
James Agee noted:
The greatest and most terrible of wars ended, this week, in the echoes of an 
enormous event—an event so much more enormous that, relative to it, the war 
itself shrank to minor significance. The knowledge of victory was as charged 
with sorrow and doubt as with joy and gratitude. More fearful responsibilities, 
more crucial liabilities rested on the victor even than on the vanquished. With 
the controlled splitting of the atom, humanity, already profoundly perplexed and 
disunified, was brought inescapably into a new age in which all thoughts and 
things were split—and far from controlled.6
Others, like Agee, noted the revolutionary character of nuclear weapons. 
The day after the bombing of Hiroshima, a brilliant, young political science 

 
Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Arms Control 
49
professor at Yale, Bernard Brodie, picked up a copy of the New York Times 
and read the headline: “First Atomic Bomb Dropped on Japan; Missile Is 
Equal to 20,000 Tons of TNT; Truman Warns Foe of a ‘Rain of Ruin.’” 
Brodie had written extensively on naval and military strategy. After reading 
the lead article concerning the bombing of Hiroshima, Brodie told his wife, 
“Everything that I have written is obsolete.”7
Soon after World War II ended, Bernard Brodie assembled a small group 
of civilian strategists to think about the implications of nuclear weapons for 
international politics and security. The group published in 1946 a remarkably 
prescient collection of essays, in which one of the contributors asserted, “To 
speak of it [the nuclear weapon] as just another weapon was highly mislead-
ing. It was a revolutionary development which altered the basic structure 
of war itself.”8 Brodie pointed to the revolutionary implications of nuclear 
weapons. Ever since the time of Carl von Clausewitz, military strategists had 
believed that an attacker should have a superiority of three to one in order 
to ensure success.9 Brodie turned this equation on its head: “If 2,000 bombs 
in the hands of either party is enough to destroy entirely the economy of the 
other, the fact that one side has 6,000 and the other 2,000 will be of relatively 
small significance.”10 Nuclear weapons, according to Brodie, negated the 
teachings of the greatest military strategists.
The unleashed power of the atom has changed everything save our modes 
of thinking, and we thus drift toward unparalleled catastrophe.
—Albert Einstein
Source: Otto Nathan and Heinz Norden, eds., Einstein on Peace (New York: 
Schocken, 1968), 376.
Other policy makers and strategists thought of nuclear weapons as sig-
nificantly more powerful than previous weapons but not radically different. 
Herman Kahn was the strategist who best represented this position.11 In the 
decades following the development and use of nuclear weapons by the United 
States, these two positions, broadly speaking, have characterized the ways of 
thinking about nuclear weapons.12 In specific terms, six different approaches 
to dealing with nuclear weapons have been developed since 1945: (1) nuclear 
pacifists have contended that the use of nuclear weapons is never justified; (2) 
some Americans argued soon after World War II that the only way to reassure 
the Soviets was to give nuclear weapons to them; (3) Soviet and American 
postwar leaders presented several plans for the international control of nuclear 
weapons; (4) when these proposals came to naught, strategists argued that 

50 
Chapter Three
nuclear weapons should be used to deter other states’ use of nuclear weapons 
or conventional weapons; (5) some contended that nuclear weapons should be 
subject to quantitative and qualitative limitations; and (6) others suggested, 
following those who believe nuclear weapons are not fundamentally different 
from previous weapons, that they could be used to fight and win wars. In this 
chapter, these six views will be described.
Before turning to these six approaches, however, it is important to note the 
growth in the number of nuclear weapons from the two that existed in Au-
gust 1945 to the tens of thousands that existed during the Cold War and their 
decline in more recent years. Table 3.1 presents a snapshot of the number of 
nuclear weapons in the world’s arsenals from 1945 to 2010.
NUCLEAR PACIFISM
Absolute pacifists contend that no weapons should ever be used. Others do 
not reject the use of all military force but argue that nuclear weapons are so 
destructive and indiscriminate that they should never be used. This “nuclear 
pacifist” position was that of the eminent diplomat and scholar George Ken-
nan, who argued:
We would have to begin by accepting the validity of two very fundamental ap-
preciations. The first is that there is no issue at stake in our political relations 
with the Soviet Union—no hope, no fear, nothing to which we aspire, nothing 
we would like to avoid—which could conceivably be worth a nuclear war. And 
the second is that there is no way in which nuclear weapons could conceivably 
be employed in combat that would not involve the possibility—and indeed the 
prohibitively high probability—of escalation to a general nuclear disaster.13
Table 3.1. Nuclear Weapons Stockpiles, 1945–2010
Year
U.S.
Russia
U.K.
France
China
Israel
India
Pakistan
TOTAL
1945
2
2
1955
2,422
200
14
2,636
1965
31,139
6,129
436
 32
  5
37,741
1975
27,519
19,055
492
188
180
20
47,454
1985
23,368
39,197
422
360
243
42
63,632
1995
10,904
27,000
422
500
234
63
39,123
2005
8,360
17,000
281
350
235
80
44
38
26,388
2010
5,000
12,000
225
300
240
80
80
70
17,995
Source: Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen, “Global Nuclear Weapons Inventories, 1945–2010,” Bulletin 
of the Atomic Scientists, July/August 2010, 77–83.

 
Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Arms Control 
51
Kennan subscribed to this position at least by 1950 and held to it throughout 
the Cold War.14
On September 24, 2009, at the United Nations Security Council Summit 
on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Nuclear Disarmament, President Barack 
Obama quoted Ronald Reagan: “A nuclear war cannot be won and must never 
be fought.”15 This statement, first uttered by Ronald Reagan and then affirmed 
by Barack Obama, expresses a sentiment that nuclear pacifists would support 
without hesitation. It is worth noting, however, that the United States has never 
been willing to make a “no first use” pledge. Even the most recent Nuclear 
Posture Review does not rule out American use of nuclear weapons.16
NUCLEAR POWER-SHARING
In August 1939, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany signed a nonaggression 
pact that protected Germany’s eastern flank. The following month Germany 
attacked and occupied Poland, the event that launched World War II. Many 
people believed that the Nazi-Soviet Pact had enabled Hitler to begin his 
conquests and therefore blamed the Soviet Union for cooperating with Hitler. 
After Poland, Germany attacked and occupied most of Western Europe, and in 
June 1941, Germany attacked the Soviet Union. The United Kingdom was now 
faced with a dilemma: Should it cooperate with the dictatorial state that had 
enabled Germany to attack Western Europe, or should it go its own way? Win-
ston Churchill provided a characteristically forceful, unambiguous answer: “I 
have only one purpose, the destruction of Hitler, and my life is much simplified 
thereby. If Hitler invaded Hell I would make at least a favourable reference to 
the Devil in the House of Commons.”17 The reference to Stalin as the devil was 
not lost on anyone, least of all Stalin himself, and throughout the war the rela-
tionship among the “Big Three”—Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin—was tense.
From 1942 on, Stalin repeatedly demanded that the United States and 
Britain open a second front so that Germany would have to move some of its 
two hundred divisions on the eastern front to the western front, where it had 
twenty divisions. Roosevelt first promised Stalin to open a second front in 
the western part of Europe in 1942, but this was not done until June 6, 1944. 
This delay was caused by a number of factors, including a shortage of landing 
craft, but irrespective of the reasons, the delay caused deep resentment on the 
part of the Soviets. By the end of the war, distrust and suspicion characterized 
the relationship between the United States and Great Britain, on the one hand, 
and the Soviet Union, on the other.
When the United Sates bombed Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the military 
superiority of the United States was unquestioned, even though Stalin tried 

52 
Chapter Three
to dismiss nuclear weapons as simply “long-range artillery.” What could the 
United States do to reassure the Soviets that nuclear weapons would not be 
used against them?
On September 11, 1945, one month after the bombings of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki, in a memo to President Truman, Secretary of War Henry L. Stim-
son stated:
In handing you today my memorandum about our relations with Russia in re-
spect to the atomic bomb, I am not unmindful of the fact that when in Potsdam 
I talked with you about the question whether we could be safe in sharing the 
atomic bomb with Russia while she was still a police state. I still recognize the 
difficulty and am still convinced of the ultimate importance of a change in Rus-
sian attitude toward individual liberty but I have come to the conclusion that it 
would not be possible to use our possession of the atomic bomb as a direct lever 
to produce the change. I have become more convinced that any demand by us 
for an internal change in Russia as a condition of sharing the atomic weapon 
would be so resented that it would make the objective we have in view less 
probable.18
Stimson went on to argue that “unless the Soviets are voluntarily invited into 
the partnership on a basis of cooperation and trust, we are going to maintain 
the Anglo-Saxon bloc over against the Soviet [and that would result in] a 
secret armament race of a rather desperate character.”19
McGeorge Bundy, who as a young man assisted Stimson in writing his 
memoirs, contended that Stimson was in favor of a three-power agreement 
with the United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom “to control 
and limit the use of the atomic bomb as an instrument of war.”20 He dismissed 
Stimson’s idea of sharing nuclear weapons with the Soviet Union as some-
thing only casually and briefly mentioned to President Truman. Whether or 
not Stimson presented this idea seriously, it nevertheless stands as an alterna-
tive for dealing with nuclear weapons.
Curiously, the proposal to share nuclear weapons with the Soviet Union 
was revisited in modified form three decades later. In March 1983, President 
Ronald Reagan called for the development of a “Strategic Defense Initiative,” 
which journalists, focusing on its space-based components, quickly dubbed 
“Star Wars.” Reagan’s idea was to develop a defensive system that would 
protect the United States and its population from a missile attack from the 
USSR or other countries. Such a system would require some of the most ad-
vanced technology that the United States possessed; one expert described the 
technical problems associated with missile defense as akin to “hitting a bullet 
with a bullet.” Despite the level of technological sophistication, President 
Reagan proposed to give the technology to the Soviets:

 
Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Arms Control 
53
If a defensive system could be found and developed that would reduce the utility 
of these [offensive missiles] or maybe even make them obsolete, then whenever 
that time came, a President of the United States would be able to say, “Now we 
have both the deterrent, the missiles—as we have had in the past, but now this 
other thing that has altered this—” And he could follow any one of a number 
of courses. He could offer to give that same defensive weapon to them to prove 
to them that there was no longer any need for keeping these missiles. Or with 
that defense, he could then say to them, “I am willing to do away with all my 
missiles. You do away with all of yours.”21
The United States did not deploy missile-defense technologies until the early 
twenty-first century, almost twenty years after they were first proposed by 
President Reagan. By that time, the Cold War had ended, the Soviet Union had 
disappeared, and there was no further talk of providing the technology to Russia.
INTERNATIONAL CONTROL: 
THE BARUCH AND GROMYKO PLANS
In December 1945, a committee chaired by Under Secretary of State Dean 
Acheson was appointed to study policies related to nuclear energy, and the 
following month a group of consultants headed by David Lilienthal, then 
head of the Tennessee Valley Authority, was formed. After three months of 
work, the Acheson-Lilienthal Report was released; it called for the creation 
of an international authority to exercise control over all nuclear research and 
development. The proposed International Atomic Development Authority 
would also be granted the power to manage, license, and inspect all nuclear 
facilities. The proposal furthermore called for an agreement banning nuclear 
weapons and for the suspension of U.S. nuclear weapons production and de-
velopment until the international authority was established.
In June 1946, the U.S. representative to the newly established United Na-
tions Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC), Bernard Baruch, presented a 
plan that incorporated the provisions of the Acheson-Lilienthal Report and 
called for the cessation of the manufacture of atomic weapons and the estab-
lishment of an international authority that would have a monopoly on nuclear 
research and development. If violations were charged against a member of the 
UN Security Council, the alleged violator would not be allowed to exercise its 
veto power in the council. In addition, the Security Council would be allowed 
to impose, by majority vote, sanctions on violators.
The Soviet Union opposed the Baruch Plan, for several reasons. First, if 
accepted, the plan would have prohibited the USSR from ever developing 
nuclear weapons; in essence, the Soviet Union would have been frozen in a 

54 
Chapter Three
position of strategic inferiority vis-à-vis the United States. Second, perhaps 
recalling their treatment by their American and British allies in World War II, 
Soviet leaders believed that the international authority would be dominated 
by Western leaders who would be hostile toward the USSR. Last, the Soviets 
believed that the Baruch Plan would open Soviet borders to Western inspec-
tors, some of whom would be spies. The Soviet Union had lost twenty-five 
million citizens in World War II and viewed outsiders with suspicion. As the 
Soviet representative to the UNAEC, Andrei Gromyko, noted years later, 
“The Baruch Plan, so energetically trumpeted by the American side, was 
stillborn, and it could not have been otherwise, given its content and aims.”22
Gromyko presented a Soviet counterproposal that called for the destruc-
tion of all stocks of nuclear weapons within three months of the signing of 
the agreement. Only after the destruction of all nuclear weapons would sanc-
tions for violations of the agreement be established. Such sanctions would be 
administered by the UN Security Council and would be subject to the veto 
of any permanent member. This proposal was as unacceptable to the United 
States as the Baruch Plan had been to the Soviet Union.
The Baruch and Gromyko plans, the first attempts to achieve nuclear disar-
mament, failed for two principal reasons. First, the Soviet Union was unwill-
ing to accept permanent inferiority relative to the United States and, second, 
the two sides had very different approaches concerning the verification of any 
potential agreement. When these negotiations failed, policy makers focused 
on finding means to manage the new, revolutionary weapons of mass destruc-
tion rather than turning them over to international control.
NUCLEAR DETERRENCE
If nuclear weapons could not be eliminated, they would have to be controlled. 
One of the oldest means of controlling weapons, as old as humanity, is to 
deter their use; the Roman maxim, “If you want peace, prepare for war,” is 
the quintessential statement of deterrence. The new weapons made deterrence 
all the more important.23
Thus far the chief purpose of our military establishment has been to win 
wars. From now on its chief purpose must be to prevent them. It can have 
almost no other useful purpose.
—Bernard Brodie
Source: “Implications for Military Policy,” in The Absolute Weapon, ed. Ber-
nard Brodie (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1946), 74.

 
Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Arms Control 
55
Nuclear strategists defined deterrence as the possession of sufficient power 
to inflict unacceptable damage on a potential aggressor. They considered the 
concept to be based on several fundamental assumptions. First, states were 
postulated to be the only important actors in international relations. Second, 
decision makers were presumed to be rational—that is, they would make 
decisions on a cost-benefit basis, seeking to maximize benefits and minimize 
costs. In this sense, all decision makers, whatever their nationality, ideol-
ogy, or ethnicity, would reach the same decisions when confronted with the 
same data. Third—and this is the fundamental assumption of deterrence—if 
a threat is sufficiently large and believable (or “credible,” in the lexicon of 
deterrence theory), resort to war will be rejected. Fourth, deterrence views 
the severity of threats as a function of destructive capability—the greater the 
destructive capability, the greater the threat. According to this assumption, 
the number of nuclear weapons possessed by a state matters.
Over time, strategists (mostly civilian and American) developed theoreti-
cal notions related to deterrence. The mission of deterrence was important; 
it concerned the types of conflict that states sought to deter. When the 
Eisenhower administration announced its policy of “massive retaliation,” by 
which the United States would “retaliate, instantly, by means and at places 
of our own choosing,” many felt that this threat was not believable. Criticism 
came from a number of sources, including the strategic studies community 
(including B. H. Liddell Hart, Henry Kissinger, and William Kaufmann), 
the military (Gen. Maxwell Taylor), and the political realm (Senator John F. 
Kennedy).24 During the 1960 presidential campaign, Senator Kennedy said:
Under every military budget submitted by this [Eisenhower] Administration, we 
have been preparing primarily to fight the one kind of war we least want to fight 
and are least likely to fight. We have been driving ourselves into a corner where 
the only choice is all or nothing at all, world devastation or submission—a 
choice that necessarily causes us to hesitate on the brink and leaves the initiative 
in the hands of our enemies.25
After Kennedy became president in January 1961, his administration an-
nounced a new nuclear deterrence strategy, “flexible response.”
Another important aspect of nuclear deterrence concerned the object of 
threat. In the Kennedy administration, there were debates among those who 
thought that people and cities were the most efficacious objects of threat, a 
targeting policy referred to as “countervalue,” and others who thought that 
military bases and defense plants were the best targets, referred to as “coun-
terforce” doctrine.
The last notion that was debated concerned the number of nuclear weapons 
needed to ensure effective deterrence. Early in his administration, President 

56 
Chapter Three
Kennedy ordered his secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, to determine 
how many nuclear weapons were enough to deter a Soviet attack. McNamara 
had recruited a group of bright, young quantitative analysts, his so-called 
“whiz kids,” and they had concluded that the ability to kill 25 percent of 
the Soviet population while destroying 40 to 50 percent of Soviet industrial 
capacity would provide effective deterrence. McNamara told the president 
that this level of destruction could be accomplished with two hundred inter-
continental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and that to be sure that all two hundred 
targets would be destroyed, two missiles would be assigned to each. The pres-
ident then asked McNamara if he intended to request four hundred missiles 
from the Congress. McNamara responded that he recommended the president 
request a thousand ICBMs; if the president requested a smaller number, the 
administration would be “politically murdered.”26
Throughout the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union had 
their nuclear weapons pointed at one another; they were, to use Robert Op-
penheimer’s analogy, like two scorpions trapped in a bottle. Despite the hor-
rific potential for destruction in the Cold War era, deterrence was relatively 
straightforward. If the United States or the Soviet Union were attacked with 
nuclear weapons, the source of the attack could be identified and a retaliatory 
attack could be ordered.
With the growing importance of nonstate actors in international rela-
tions, deterrence is no longer as simple and straightforward, a fact noted by 
President George W. Bush in his 2002 policy statement, the National Security 
Strategy: “New deadly challenges have emerged from rogue states and ter-
rorists. None of these contemporary threats rival the sheer destructive power 
that was arrayed against us by the Soviet Union. Traditional concepts of 
deterrence will not work against a terrorist enemy whose avowed tactics are 
wanton destruction and the targeting of innocents.”27
The president pointed to the challenges to deterrence theory raised by 
the emergence of terrorism. First, terrorists do not have territory that can 
be attacked. Second, they do not have an identifiable population that can be 
attacked. Third, terrorist leaders may not conform to the rational decision-
making model on which deterrence theory is based.
NUCLEAR ARMS CONTROL
Nuclear weapons dramatically reduced the time required to cause death and 
destruction. Prior to the advent of missiles, it took hours for bombers to go from 
the United States to the USSR or vice versa. In August 1957, the Soviet Union 
tested the first ICBM. Thereafter, it would take thirty minutes for a missile to 

 
Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Arms Control 
57
travel from the Soviet Union to the United States. Suddenly, the United States, 
which had been physically isolated from the destructiveness of Europe’s wars, 
was vulnerable to attack, a fact that was underscored by an influential strate-
gist, Albert Wohlstetter, in a noteworthy article arguing that American bombers 
were vulnerable to a preemptive attack.28 Wohlstetter’s warning struck a raw 
nerve with Americans, who remembered the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor. 
In the new world of intercontinental ballistic missiles, there were a number of 
ways in which nuclear war could start, including a surprise attack, as a result of 
an accident, or escalation from a conventional conflict.
In 1961, several books were published that called for the limitation of nu-
clear weapons.29 These books constituted the foundation of a theory of arms 
control, whose essential feature, according to Thomas Schelling and Morton 
Halperin, was “the recognition of the common interest, of the possibility of 
reciprocation and cooperation even between potential enemies with respect to 
their military establishments.”30
Until the Cuban missile crisis, nuclear war seemed to be a hypothetical 
possibility, the nightmare of nuclear strategists; however, in October 1962 
the United States discovered a clandestine attempt by the Soviet Union to 
install nuclear missiles in Cuba, ninety miles from the shores of the United 
States. In response, President Kennedy demanded that Moscow remove the 
missiles. For a tension-filled thirteen days, the United States and the USSR 
were on the brink of war. The crisis was resolved only when the United States 
made a public pledge not to sponsor an invasion of Cuba and a private pledge 
to remove its intermediate-range ballistic missiles from Italy and Turkey. It 
was as if Kennedy and the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev, had gone to 
a precipice, looked into the abyss of possible nuclear war, and backed away.
In the aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis, the United States and USSR 
signed an agreement calling for the installation of a “hotline” between Wash-
ington, D.C., and Moscow. This provided the superpowers’ leaders the abil-
ity to communicate quickly, reliably, and secretly, a capability that had been 
missing throughout the Cold War until then. A second arms control agree-
ment was negotiated in a three-month period by the three existing nuclear 
powers: the United States, the USSR, and the United Kingdom. That instru-
ment, the Limited Test Ban Treaty, prohibited its signatories from conducting 
nuclear tests in the atmosphere. At a minimum, this was a significant “clean 
air act,”31 although many thought that it was more important as one of the first 
significant arms control agreements in the Cold War.
Other countries became concerned about the threats posed by various types 
of weapons and moved to place limits on them. For example, in the 1960s a 
number of states were concerned about the possible spread of nuclear weap-
ons and negotiated the Non-Proliferation Treaty. In 1969 the United States 

58 
Chapter Three
and the USSR opened negotiations to limit long-range nuclear weapons, the 
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT). The first SALT agreements—the 
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty and an interim agreement on offensive 
arms—were signed in 1972, to be followed by a new round of negotiations 
called SALT II that resulted in an agreement in 1979. This agreement was 
signed, but not ratified, by the United States.32
The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaties, known by the acronym START, 
were two agreements designed to reduce the numbers of long-range nuclear 
weapons in the arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union. In July 
1991, President George H. W. Bush and his Soviet counterpart, Mikhail 
Gorbachev, concluded START I, which called for a one-third reduction in 
the number of nuclear warheads and bombs held by the United States and 
the USSR.
When the Soviet Union disintegrated in December 1991, the status of the 
START I Treaty was called into question, because former Soviet long-range 
nuclear weapons were stationed in what had become four independent states: 
Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan. The three non-Russian states 
agreed to ratify the START I Treaty and either destroy or turn over their 
nuclear weapons to Russia by 1999.
In January 1993, President Bush and President Boris Yeltsin of Russia 
signed the second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START II), which called 
for reductions of 50 percent in the levels of weapons allowed by START I. 
If and when START II is fully implemented, the United States and Russia 
will be left with between 3,000 and 3,500 strategic nuclear weapons. To enter 
into force, START II had to be ratified by the United States and Russia; fur-
ther, Belarus, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan had to ratify START I and the Non-
Proliferation Treaty. The two START treaties called for the most significant 
reductions in long-range nuclear warheads and bombs of any arms control 
agreements ever concluded.
The George W. Bush administration adopted an approach to Russian-Amer-
ican strategic nuclear arms control that was radically different from those of 
previous administrations. Whereas the START I treaty was more than seven 
hundred pages long, the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty (SORT) signed 
in Moscow in May 2002 was only three pages long and contained no provisions 
for verification. It declared that the total number of strategic nuclear weapons 
would not exceed 2,200 as of December 31, 2012. In the absence of verification 
provisions, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed that the verification 
regime created by the 1991 START I treaty would be used to verify SORT. The 
earlier agreement, however, was set to expire at the end of 2009, well before the 
two sides were required to meet the SORT limits.

 
Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Arms Control 
59
The SORT agreement was unusual as, for the most part, nuclear arms 
control efforts ground to a halt under George W. Bush. During his Senate 
confirmation hearings, secretary of state nominee Colin Powell announced 
that the administration would not seek ratification of the Comprehensive Test 
Ban Treaty, which had been rejected by the Senate in 1999. Toward the end 
of his first year in office, President Bush made good on a campaign pledge 
by announcing that the United States would withdraw from the ABM Treaty 
of 1972. The declaration marked the first time since World War II that any 
state had withdrawn from an arms control treaty. (North Korea gave notice 
of its intent to withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1993, 
but suspended that notice as a consequence of negotiations with the United 
States over the future of its nuclear weapons program. In 2003, North Korea 
did actually withdraw from the NPT.)
President Obama entered office in 2009 intent on reviving efforts to 
reduce the world’s stockpiles of nuclear weapons. On April 5, 2009, in 
a speech in Prague, he stated his desire to move toward a world without 
nuclear weapons. Spurred into action by the planned expiration of START 
I on December 5, 2009, and by the desire to show progress toward nuclear 
disarmament prior to the NPT Review Conference scheduled for May 2010, 
the Obama administration negotiated an agreement with Russia called New 
START. Signed in April 2010, and designed to supersede the 2002 Stra-
tegic Offensive Reductions Treaty, the New START Treaty requires that 
Russia and the United States reduce their strategic nuclear arsenals to 1,550 
warheads each within seven years of the agreement’s entry into force. Both 
sides will also be limited to a combined total of no more than 700 deployed 
ICBMs, SLBMs, and nuclear-capable heavy bombers. The treaty includes 
provisions for on-site inspections, data exchanges, and the use of so-called 
national technical means of verification. The United States Senate gave its 
consent to the ratification of the treaty on December 22, 2010.33
During the Cold War, arms control had three principal objectives: (1) to 
reduce the probability of war occurring, (2) if war occurred, to reduce the 
damage caused by war, and (3) to reduce the economic cost of preparing for 
war.34 These objectives informed arms control efforts from the late 1950s to 
the end of the Cold War. To what extent are these objectives relevant in the 
post-9/11 environment?
Arms control remains vitally important, particularly concerning efforts to 
limit the spread of weapons of mass destruction. Russian-American efforts 
to limit their weapons, while not as important as they were during the Cold 
War, remain vital. During the Cold War, nuclear weapons threatened to cause 
a global cataclysm. That threat is no longer as great, although the capability 

60 
Chapter Three
remains. However, the possibility that weapons of mass destruction could be 
used is greater today than during the Cold War.
NUCLEAR WAR FIGHTING
Since the beginning of the nuclear age, some strategists and political leaders 
have argued that nuclear weapons are capable of accomplishing a number of 
different missions and that they should be used in support of U.S. national 
priorities. In the extreme, some have argued that the United States should have 
the capability to fight a nuclear war and prevail. This is referred to as a “nuclear 
war–fighting” strategy. The Reagan administration proposed this strategy and 
sought the capabilities to support it. Advocates of this approach argue that 
nuclear weapons can be used to compel as well as to deter other states; they 
point to the Soviet withdrawal from Iran in 1946 and the Korean armistice of 
1953 as cases in which the threat of nuclear weapons played a role.
The option to use nuclear weapons for political or military purposes requires 
a large number and variety of weapons so that a number of different contin-
gencies can be addressed. Advocates of this approach argue that even though 
nuclear weapons are the most powerful weapons ever invented, they do not 
increase a state’s influence unless they are, in some sense, used. Paradoxically, 
to prepare to use nuclear weapons best ensures their nonuse. If, however, their 
use becomes necessary, the most militarily effective weapons should be used.
Opponents of this approach contend that the very act of envisioning the 
use of nuclear weapons, the most destructive weapons ever devised, makes 
their use more likely. In addition, if states deploy their weapons so that they 
are usable, they must make them usable within a short period of time. This 
“hair-trigger” situation is exceedingly dangerous.
The option of “fighting and winning” a nuclear war characteristic of the 
strategic policy of the Reagan administration was resurrected by the George 
W. Bush administration in its call for a new class of nuclear weapons, 
“bunker busters.” In 2002, the administration called for funds to explore 
the possibility of developing a new earth-penetrating warhead that would be 
used to destroy underground command bunkers and nuclear weapons stor-
age sites. The administration argued that the conventional “bunker buster” 
bombs would not penetrate deeply enough to destroy some targets and that 
new nuclear weapons were needed to accomplish this mission. In 2009, the 
Department of Defense announced plans to deploy a nuclear bunker buster 
called the Massive Ordnance Penetrator (MOP) on B-2 bombers. Many ex-
perts believed the plan was designed to signal Iran that its nuclear program 
could not be protected even in fortified underground facilities.

 
Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Arms Control 
61
LIVING WITH NUCLEAR WEAPONS
John Steinbruner has said, “Even with the potential for a major strategic en-
gagement with nature looming in the background, the pattern of nuclear weap-
ons deployment remains the largest and most imminent physical threat to any 
and all human societies.”35 Because of the awesome potential of these weapons, 
a number of options have been proposed for dealing with them, ranging from 
never using them to employing them in contemporary military operations.
Arms control is an appropriate strategy only for those states whose rela-
tions are a mixture of cooperation and conflict; without cooperation arms 
control is impossible, but without conflict it is unnecessary. It was the genius 
of those responsible for the development of the arms control approach that 
within an extremely conflictual relationship they were able to build a useful 
theory on as narrow a basis for cooperation as the mutual desire to avoid 
nuclear war. The post–Cold War objectives of arms control differ somewhat 
from the objectives associated with the initial arms control approach, because 
the underlying assumptions about the mixture of cooperation and conflict in 
international relations have changed. Where the desire to cooperate extends 
no farther than measures designed to avoid nuclear war, all that can reason-
ably be expected of arms control is assistance in preventing the parties from 
stumbling into a war that neither wants. But once a more cooperative relation-
ship has been developed, the possibilities greatly increase.
U.S. ambassador to NATO Ivo Daalder has drawn upon this distinction 
in suggesting that the future of arms control may lie with “a cooperative 
approach, applicable to states with largely compatible political and security 
interests” rather than “a competitive approach, applicable to states with 
fundamentally different political and security interests.” While “competitive 
arms control” has as its primary objective preventing war, “cooperative arms 
control” seeks to “transform political relations in a manner conducive to cre-
ating a pluralistic security community.”36
Proponents of the arms control approach must also extend their focus be-
yond the nation-state to encompass nonstate actors in a world increasingly 
influenced by such actors. While the principal fear and focus of the Cold 
War concerned the Soviet-American nuclear balance, today the focus is on 
the possibility of nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction falling into 
the hands of terrorists or rogue states. Concepts like deterrence and coercive 
diplomacy developed during the Cold War are only partially applicable to 
a world in which states are no longer the only, or even the major, political 
actors. In this new environment, it is vital to develop new ways of thinking 
about issues of security so that, as strategist Herman Kahn put it many years 
ago, the living will not envy the dead.

62 
Chapter Three
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Brodie, Bernard. Strategy in the Missile Age. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 1959.
Bundy, McGeorge. Danger and Survival: Choices about the Bomb in the First Fifty 
Years. New York: Random House, 1988.
Caldwell, Dan. The Dynamics of Domestic Politics and Arms Control: The SALT II 
Treaty Ratification Debate. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1991.
Cirincione, Joseph. Bomb Scare: The History and Future of Nuclear Weapons. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2007.
Freedman, Lawrence. The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy. 3rd ed. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2003.
Krepon, Michael. Better Safe Than Sorry: The Ironies of Living with the Bomb. Palo 
Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2009.
Larsen, Jeffrey A., and James J. Wirtz, eds. Arms Control and Cooperative Security. 
Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 2009.
Mandelbaum, Michael. The Nuclear Revolution: International Politics before and 
after Hiroshima. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Morgan, Patrick. Deterrence Now. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Rhodes, Richard. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1986.
———. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1996.
Websites
Arms Control Association: http://www.aca.org
Center for Defense Information: http://www.cdi.org
Center for Nonproliferation Studies: http://cns.miis.edu
Defense Threat Reduction Agency: http://www.dtra.mil
National Nuclear Security Administration, Department of Energy: http://nnsa.energy
.gov
Natural Resources Defense Council: http://www.nrdc.org/nuclear/default.asp
Ploughshares Fund: http://www.plougshares.org
Henry L. Stimson Center: http://www.stimson.org
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI): http://www.sipri.org
Union of Concerned Scientists: http://www.ucsusa.org

63
Chapter Four
Chemical and Biological Weapons
Two weeks after 9/11, a letter containing a suspicious white powder arrived 
at NBC News in New York. After the powder was determined to be anthrax, 
over 1,300 NBC employees were tested for exposure and infection. One week 
later, in Boca Raton, Florida, Robert Stevens, a photo editor at American 
Media, entered the hospital with a high fever. Three days later he was dead 
of inhalation anthrax, America’s first anthrax victim in a quarter of a century. 
Tests indicated that the strains of anthrax used in the two incidents had been 
identical.1
On October 14, 2001, a letter containing anthrax was opened in Senator 
Tom Daschle’s office at the Capitol. After testing determined that approxi-
mately thirty congressional staffers had been exposed to anthrax, the House 
and Senate recessed while congressional office buildings were decontami-
nated. Mail addressed to Congress was held up for months as the U.S. Postal 
Service put in place an expensive system to irradiate all letters and packages 
sent to Capitol Hill, the Department of Defense, the CIA, and other govern-
ment offices. Meanwhile, numerous postal workers in New Jersey and in the 
Washington, D.C., area were testing positive for exposure to anthrax. Two 
who worked in the Washington postal facility that handled congressional mail 
died in late October.
Initially, most Americans assumed the anthrax-laced letters, which con-
tained radical Islamist statements, were a new phase in the terrorist attack on 
the United States. In mid-October 2001, Vice President Dick Cheney even 
suggested that the anthrax might be linked to Osama bin Laden. Laboratory 
analysis, however, revealed that the anthrax sent to Senator Daschle’s office 
had come from a strain developed in the United States and that the fineness 
of the particles was such that the sample could have been produced only in a 
highly sophisticated lab.

64 
Chapter Four
As evidence gathered by the FBI increasingly pointed in the direction 
of some disgruntled military lab worker at either the U.S. Army’s Dugway 
Proving Ground in Utah or Fort Detrick in Maryland, the trail seemed to 
grow cold. For months after the U.S. Postal Service was virtually shut down 
along the East Coast due to bioterrorism, no prime suspects were publicly 
identified. Barbara Rosenberg, director of the Federation of American 
Scientists’ biological weapons monitoring program, suggested that the 
problem was not that the FBI knew too little but that it knew too much.2 
She speculated that the investigative trail led in a direction that, if pursued, 
would reveal that the United States had been violating both its international 
commitments under the Biological Weapons Convention and domestic law 
by secretly pursuing biological weapons research. In February 2010, the 
FBI closed its investigation of the case having concluded that the perpetra-
tor was Dr. Bruce Ivins, a biochemist at the U.S. Army Medical Research 
Institute of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick, Maryland. Dr. Ivins had 
committed suicide in 2008.3 While some skeptics were unconvinced by the 
evidence gathered by the FBI, others suggested that the case had merely 
demonstrated the extraordinary difficulty of tracing the origins of a well-
conceived biological weapons attack.
The post-9/11 anthrax cases revealed an extremely potent new source 
of insecurity in a world that, for Americans at least, already seemed more 
threatening than ever before. Many Americans stocked up on Cipro and other 
antibiotics recommended for the treatment of anthrax. Many others rushed 
to doctors to check up on cold and flu symptoms that in previous autumns 
would have been stoically endured at home. Some stopped opening the mail. 
Ultimately, five people died as a direct result of the anthrax attacks. But the 
randomness of the fatalities (which included an elderly woman in Connecti-
cut), the apparent lack of any effective preventive measures, and the failure 
of the FBI to find the perpetrator raised the frightening specter of a future 
in which the most powerful country on earth might be unable to protect its 
citizens from biological warfare.
Chemical and biological weapons (CBW) have a long and disturbing his-
tory. Around 600 BCE, the Athenians used a noxious plant to contaminate 
the water supply of a city under siege. When the defenders became afflicted 
with violent bouts of diarrhea, the Athenians, facing little resistance, entered 
the city and slaughtered its residents. According to Thucydides, the Pelopon-
nesians used sulfur fumes in an effort to take the town of Plataea. “Insect 
bombs” were used on a number of occasions in the ancient world to defend 
walled cities from attackers. Those who attempted to tunnel under walls 
sometimes found themselves confronted with swarms of bees released in the 
tunnels by defenders. In medieval Europe, catapults were sometimes used to 

 
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
65
launch beehives full of bees over the walls of besieged cities or into the ranks 
of opposing armies.4
While ancient peoples often displayed remarkable ingenuity in the devel-
opment of what today would be called CBW, the full potential of chemi-
cal and biological warfare would not be unleashed until modern scientific 
methods had been developed. The world was, in many ways, a very different 
place when chemical weapons first made an impact on modern warfare dur-
ing World War I. Soon after the war began, following the assassination of the 
Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife in Sarajevo, chemical attacks began. 
In August 1914, it was tear gas used by the French against the Germans. Two 
months later, the Germans employed against the French a crude chemical 
compound that caused violent sneezing. These early experiments in chemi-
cal warfare were, however, mere child’s play compared with what was to 
follow. In April 1915, in the Second Battle of Ypres, Germany used chlorine 
gas with devastating effect. Among the ten thousand casualties caused by the 
attack, five thousand died. In September 1915, at Loos, the British attempted 
to retaliate with chlorine gas of their own, but a shift in the wind caused the 
British to suffer as much from the attack as the Germans did.5
Undeterred by similar setbacks on all sides, the combatants escalated the 
use of chemical weapons. Chlorine gas was followed by phosgene, a gas with 
ten times the lethality of chlorine gas. Then came mustard gas, the most aw-
ful chemical agent used in the Great War. Mustard gas caused vomiting and 
serious blisters, both internally and externally. Those exposed to mustard gas 
often died agonizing deaths. Most survivors were seriously incapacitated—
often blinded—for life.
In all, chemical weapons caused almost 1.3 million casualties, including 
close to a hundred thousand deaths, during World War I. It was a horrific 
experience that helped to create a strong taboo among states against the use 
of chemical weapons. But as devastating as man-made gases were during the 
Great War, disease quickly reasserted itself as the more efficient killer. More 
people died of typhus and Spanish influenza in the four years following the 
war than had died of war-related causes during the four years of the war. 
And, in the case of the Spanish influenza pandemic, the geographical spread 
of mortality was far greater than that associated with the war.
What does the use of poison gas in World War I have in common with the 
spread of the Spanish influenza following the war—other than, of course, 
extreme lethality? In a better world, one in which technological advances 
were not linked so often to security threats, perhaps there would be no link. 
Unfortunately, the same motives that led the Germans, French, and British to 
use, collectively, over a hundred thousand tons of gas in World War I would 
lead others to begin using microbes as weapons. After all, there is no need to 

66 
Chapter Four
manufacture gas (not to mention conventional bombs and bullets) if one can 
spread among the enemy population a disease that will be just as effective at 
sowing death and destruction. Some in the world today continue to operate on 
the basis of this proposition—and they know much more about disease than 
anyone knew in 1918.
THINKING ABOUT WMD
The ominous phrase “weapons of mass destruction” (or simply WMD) re-
fers not only to the nuclear weapons discussed in the previous chapter but 
to biological and chemical weapons as well. While it should be emphasized 
that not all weapons in these three categories are intended to produce mass 
destruction—there are, for example, low-yield nuclear weapons with tacti-
cal uses and chemical weapons designed to incapacitate rather than kill—
nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons can threaten our security in ways 
that appear genuinely apocalyptic. There are significant differences between 
nukes on the one hand and bugs and gas on the other. Unfortunately, the 
differences are ones that complicate rather than simplify the job of seeking 
security against WMD.
What nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons (NBC weapons, to de-
fense analysts) have in common is, first, the potential to kill millions of 
people quickly and with disturbing ease. Second, each type of weapon in the 
WMD category is especially difficult (some might say virtually impossible, 
at least when civilian populations are the target) to defend against. Third, 
each of these types of weapons has only limited value to those governments 
and armies that respect the laws of war, with their prohibitions against in-
discriminate killing. In fact, as we saw in the previous chapter, governments 
have regarded nuclear weapons as being useful primarily, if not exclusively, 
for deterrence. However, the indiscriminate and seemingly unlimited lethality 
of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons make them particularly attrac-
tive to those who neither bear the responsibility of protecting a state and its 
citizens nor respect the rules that sometimes keep states from committing 
mass murder. In other words, the very qualities that make weapons of mass 
destruction troublesome for states make them attractive to terrorists desiring 
to kill large numbers of innocents.
Western thinking about WMD and the threat such weapons pose have 
changed dramatically since the end of the Cold War. During the Cold War, 
politicians, soldiers, strategists, and many ordinary citizens worried con-
stantly about the threat posed by WMD, particularly the large numbers of 
strategic nuclear weapons that the Soviet Union and the United States kept 

 
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
67
aimed at each other. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, what had seemed 
to be a permanent nuclear confrontation was brought to a peaceful end; for a 
time, defense budgets decreased and worries about WMD disappeared. Peace 
had arrived.
The post–Cold War sense of security was short-lived; new WMD threats 
quickly emerged. North Korea, one of just a handful of states that had failed 
to respond to the message that communist dictatorships were a thing of the 
past, was in pursuit of nuclear weapons and in possession of ballistic missiles. 
The apparent hostility and irrationality of North Korea’s leadership made its 
possession of nuclear weapons a troublesome prospect, to say the least. Even 
more troubling, however, was Iraq. Where North Korea’s capability and in-
tent with respect to the use of WMD was a matter of speculation, Iraq’s was 
a matter of fact. During the 1980s, Iraq used chemical weapons in its war 
against Iran and against Kurdish rebels in its own territory.6 Iraq’s defeat in 
the Persian Gulf War in 1991 and the subsequent imposition of United Na-
tions weapons inspectors brought to light the extent of Saddam Hussein’s 
WMD programs.
Thanks in large part to North Korea and Iraq, WMD concerns in the 
West during the 1990s focused on the problem of “rogue states.” Fears of 
an apocalyptic nuclear exchange signaling the failure of deterrence between 
the superpowers were replaced with fears of limited nuclear, chemical, or 
biological attacks launched by a state led by an undeterrable dictator. As 
Richard K. Betts of Columbia University put it in a 1998 Foreign Affairs 
article, “There is less danger of complete annihilation, but more danger of 
mass destruction.”7
In the aftermath of 9/11, WMD fears shifted again. Concern since then has 
been focused on the possibility that either a rogue state or terrorists might 
acquire and use WMD. Indeed, the Al Qaeda attacks on the World Trade 
Center and the Pentagon were intended to, and actually did, achieve a mea-
sure of mass destruction unprecedented in the history of terrorist attacks. The 
weapons of mass destruction used, of course, were commercial airliners with 
two hundred thousand pounds of fuel on board. In thinking about WMD, the 
significance of 9/11 was to remove any doubt there might have been that a 
terrorist organization such as Al Qaeda would use nuclear, chemical, or bio-
logical weapons if it had them. In fact, Osama bin Laden told his followers 
that the acquisition of WMD is a “religious duty.”
At this point, it is worth recalling our discussion in chapter 1 of threats as 
products of capabilities and intentions. In spite of dramatic cuts in their ar-
senals, the United States and Russia continue to dwarf all other international 
actors in their WMD capabilities. But because their intentions toward each 
other now appear benign, their WMD capabilities pose very little threat to 

68 
Chapter Four
each other. Rogue states—or, as they have been labeled more recently by the 
U.S. government, “states of concern”—have vastly smaller WMD capabili-
ties than the United States and Russia, but because we cannot always assume 
benign intentions, they constitute a clear threat to our security. Finally, ter-
rorist organizations such as Al Qaeda are almost certainly farther from being 
able to use nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons than most rogue states, 
and yet since 9/11 we have had little doubt about the malevolence of their 
intentions. As a result, the least significant WMD capability at present may 
be the threat we must worry about most. After all, when seeking security, we 
must always ask, “What if?”
CHEMICAL WEAPONS
Among those who worry about chemical and biological weapons (CBW), 
biological weapons are currently thought to be the more serious threat. Con-
sequently, let us begin with chemical weapons in an effort to ease into a topic 
that even the experts—or, perhaps, especially the experts—find sobering.
Poison-tipped arrows, incendiary bombs, smoke (to hide troop move-
ments), and hot oil or sewage dumped onto attackers from castle walls were 
the precursors of modern chemical warfare. Chemical weapons in the modern 
sense, however, had to await the Industrial Age and the development of mod-
ern chemical production processes. The use of tear gas and various poison 
gases during World War I marked the beginning of modern chemical warfare, 
but it almost marked the end as well, because revulsion at the use of the new 
weapons was so widespread. Unfortunately, in spite of remarkable restraint 
by all parties during World War II (although we must not forget the Nazis’ 
use of poison gas in concentration camps and the use of chemical agents by 
the Italian and Japanese armies in their imperial wars), chemical weapons 
have not disappeared as a security threat.
Chemical weapons can be broadly defined as toxic manufactured gases, 
liquids, or powders that are designed to incapacitate or kill humans. There 
are four basic categories of chemical weapons: (1) lung, or choking, agents, 
such as chlorine and phosgene, which damage lung tissue and make breath-
ing impossible; (2) blood agents, such as hydrogen cyanide, which prevent 
the flow of oxygen in the bloodstream; (3) blister agents, such as mustard 
gas, which cause chemical burns on skin and all other contacted body tis-
sue, both internal and external; and (4) nerve agents, such as sarin and VX, 
which disrupt the central nervous system. In addition to these categories of 
potentially lethal chemical agents, there are nonlethal compounds known as 
incapacitating agents, such as tear gas, which causes temporary discomfort, 

 
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
69
and BZ, which causes cognitive disorentiation. Finally, antiplant agents, such 
as the Agent Orange used by the U.S. military as a defoliant in the jungles of 
Vietnam, are also classified as chemical weapons and often have negative, if 
unintended, effects on human health (including cancer in the case of Agent 
Orange). Chemical weapons of all types are generally spread as liquids (es-
pecially in aerosol form) or gases (sometimes as vapors produced by a liquid 
compound).
Because they can cause death in painful and grotesque ways, often without 
warning, chemical weapons may inspire terror among civilians or unprotected 
combat forces. Defense analysts, however, generally do not worry about 
chemical weapons quite as much as they do about biological weapons, for 
several reasons. The effective delivery of chemical weapons depends in large 
part on environmental conditions. Chemical compounds that are delivered as 
aerosols or gases are easily dispersed by wind. In some cases, chemical weap-
ons are rendered less effective, if not completely inert, by hot or cold tem-
peratures. Furthermore (and in part because of these environmental factors), 
large quantities of chemical agents are often necessary to inflict even modest 
death tolls. A study in 1993 by the Congressional Office of Technology As-
sessment found that a ton of sarin might cause three to eight thousand deaths 
if used in ideal conditions in a highly populated area.8 The Aum Shinrikyo 
sarin attack in the Tokyo subway system in 1995 injured or psychologically 
traumatized as many as five thousand people, but only twelve were killed. 
Admittedly, both the technology and the tactics employed in that attack were 
very crude, but it is worth noting that the use of chemical weapons in World 
War I resulted in less than one death per ton of gas.
Therefore, and although many governments have invested heavily in 
chemical weapons over the years, a terrorist organization seeking the maxi-
mum lethal impact would very likely look to other weapons. On the other 
hand, chemical weapons are cheap and easy to produce. Large-scale manu-
facturing can be hidden amid legitimate commercial processes in dual-use 
factories. Raw materials are plentiful and easily obtained. Except when ac-
cidents occur, chemical weapons can be easily transported without detection. 
Furthermore, clouds of gas or unseen vapors that produce painful choking 
deaths, hideous blisters on exposed skin, or muscle twitching followed by 
rapid death are likely to be highly effective if the purpose of an attack is to 
induce terror in a civilian population.
Broadly speaking, there are two basic scenarios in which chemical weap-
ons might be used. The first involves state action, most likely in connection 
with combat operations. The second is a terrorist attack. Actual cases of 
the military use of chemical weapons occurred in World War I, in various 
colonial wars (by the British in Afghanistan and by the Spanish and French 

70 
Chapter Four
in Africa), in Ethiopia (by the Italians during the 1930s), in China (by the 
Japanese during the 1930s), and in the Iran-Iraq War.
Between 1980 and 1988, Iran and Iraq fought a grim war noteworthy 
primarily for the number of casualties and the senselessness of the human 
slaughter that occurred. Altogether, the war caused over a million casualties. 
Perhaps not surprisingly, chemical weapons were used more extensively in 
the Iran-Iraq War than at any time since World War I. Iraq was the chief 
culprit, but Iran almost certainly used chemical weapons as well. Allegations 
concerning Iraqi use of chemical weapons surfaced early in the war, but in-
ternational observers were unable to provide confirmation until 1984, when 
UN personnel determined that the Iraqi military had employed mustard gas 
and a nerve agent called tabun. Many other incidents were reported, but inde-
pendent sources were unable to confirm most of them. Charges of chemical 
weapons use were part of both sides’ propaganda during the war. Neverthe-
less, chemical attacks by Iraq were confirmed on various occasions in 1985, 
in February 1986, and in April 1987. In 1987, investigators found evidence 
of exposure to mustard gas among Iraqi troops, but it was unclear whether the 
exposure had been the result of an Iranian or an Iraqi attack.9
Beginning in April 1987 and continuing on to October 1988, at the same 
time that Saddam Hussein’s Revolutionary Guard was fighting Iran, Baghdad 
conducted a campaign of extermination against ethnic Kurds in northern Iraq. 
Four thousand Kurdish villages were razed, and somewhere between 50,000 
and 180,000 Kurds were killed. Chemical weapons were used as part of the 
genocidal campaign.10
In March 1988, after Kurdish rebels moved into the predominantly Kurd-
ish city of Halabja in northern Iraq, Iraqi planes dropped large numbers of 
chemical bombs over the course of several days. In what was likely an attack 
intended by Saddam Hussein both to push forward the genocidal campaign 
against the Kurds and to test Iraq’s chemical warfare capabilities, a variety 
of chemical weapons, including mustard gas, sarin, tabun, and VX, were 
dropped on the city. An estimated three to five thousand civilians were killed 
in the attack; tens of thousands more were injured. Since the chemical attacks 
on Halabja and sixty other Kurdish towns, abnormally high rates of cancer, 
respiratory disease, birth defects, and infertility have been reported.11
The primary example of the use of a chemical weapon in a terrorist attack 
up until now is the March 1995 Aum Shinrikyo attack on the Tokyo subway 
using the nerve agent sarin. Aum Shinrikyo (Supreme Truth), an apocalyptic 
cult founded in 1984 by Shoko Asahara, prophesied a global Armageddon 
during which the group would take over and govern a Japan devastated by 
a U.S. nuclear attack.12 Around 1990, when cult members were defeated in 
Japanese parliamentary elections and the Japanese government began to in-

 
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
71
vestigate some of the cult’s business deals for possible fraud, the group began 
to pursue weapons of mass destruction.
Through businesses owned by the cult, donations from cult members, and 
almost certainly fraud as well, Aum Shinrikyo amassed assets believed to 
have been in the neighborhood of a billion dollars in 1995. The organiza-
tion used its wealth as well as the scientific expertise of many young, highly 
educated cult members to establish labs for the production of both chemical 
and biological weapons. Biological weapons came first. In the early 1990s 
the group is believed to have produced botulinum toxin, anthrax, and Q fever. 
The effort to produce chemical weapons began in 1993 and, after experiments 
with other nerve agents, focused on sarin.
In early 1994, according to Japanese prosecutors, Aum Shinrikyo began 
building a manufacturing plant designed to produce up to two tons of sarin 
a day. Although equipment failures and police investigations prevented the 
group from reaching its chemical weapons production goal, the demonstrated 
potential was alarming.
Between 1990 and 1995, Aum Shinrikyo members attempted on ten sepa-
rate occasions to disseminate biological agents in Tokyo and the surrounding 
areas, including U.S. Navy bases. For a variety of reasons ranging from a 
failure of nerve on the part of operatives to poor bacterial strains, not a single 
casualty resulted from any of these attacks using biological agents. Conse-
quently, the group began to focus on chemical weapons.
The use of sarin in an assassination attempt in 1993 failed, nearly killing 
the assailant. In June 1994, in the town of Matsumoto, the cult targeted three 
judges who were set to rule in a land fraud case involving Aum Shinrikyo. 
Late at night, for ten minutes, seven cult members sprayed vaporized sarin at 
the judges’ living quarters. Seven people were killed and 144, including all 
three judges, were injured in the attack. The cult’s deadliest and most notori-
ous attack, however, came nine months later.
On March 20, 1995, five cult members carrying eleven doubled plastic 
bags containing a low-grade sarin solution and riding on separate subway 
trains converged on the Tokyo station closest to the Tokyo police headquar-
ters. At the height of the Monday morning rush hour, the cultists punctured 
the bags on the floors of the subway cars in which they were riding and fled 
when their respective trains reached the station. As the sarin solution evapo-
rated, passengers on the trains experienced vomiting, respiratory problems, 
seizures, and other signs of sarin poisoning. Trains containing the deadly 
vapors continued on their way from station to station—one for an hour and a 
half—before the system was closed down and cleanup began.
Twelve people died in the attack. Initial reports indicated that five thou-
sand others were injured in the attack, but according to Japanese officials, 

72 
Chapter Four
three-fourths of the approximately five thousand people examined in hos-
pitals following the attack showed no signs of exposure to sarin. The actual 
number of people with physical injuries appears to have been closer to one 
thousand than to the figure of 3,938 cited by Japanese prosecutors, but the 
larger number of people reporting to hospitals suggests that psychological 
trauma may have affected far more people than were physically affected.
It is possible to view the Aum Shinrikyo attack on the Tokyo subway 
system as evidence that chemical weapons attacks are not as easy to 
mount as is often supposed. In fact, there are significant obstacles to ter-
rorist organizations hoping to use chemical weapons as weapons of mass 
destruction. Most analysts, however, view the Aum Shinrikyo sarin attack 
with alarm, preferring to see it as a wake-up call. The cult, after all, had 
invested considerable resources in developing chemical and biological 
weapons and, over time, learned a number of lessons about what would and 
would not work. Just as those charged with defending society have learned 
a great deal from the March 1995 chemical attack, so too have those who 
are interested in using weapons of mass destruction against free societies. 
One of the lessons that terrorist organizations may have learned from Aum 
Shinrikyo is that biological weapons may have certain advantages over 
chemical weapons.
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
Human beings, as a species, have waged an epic struggle against disease from 
the beginning. (We examine this struggle in chapter 7.) Long before modern 
science began to uncover the role that microbes—viruses and bacteria—play 
in disease, some unscrupulous warriors sought to make disease their ally. 
One of the most notorious cases of primitive biological warfare may have 
been partially responsible for the Black Death that devastated Europe in the 
fourteenth century.
By 1340, traders operating between China and Europe had begun to carry 
the rat-borne fleas by which the bubonic plague from China was transmitted. 
In 1343, some Genoese merchants were attacked by Tartars at the Crimean 
trading post of Kaffa. The merchants saved themselves from the conventional 
Tartar attack by retreating behind the walls of Kaffa, but before the Tartars 
withdrew they catapulted plague-infested corpses over the walls. Some 
merchants subsequently died of the plague on their way home, but others 
survived to transmit the disease to Constantinople, Genoa, and Venice. From 
these commercial hubs the Black Death spread all over Europe, by 1351 kill-
ing at least one-quarter of Europe’s population.13

 
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
73
Some native Americans were victims of a deliberate effort to spread 
disease during the French and Indian Wars. Sir Jeffrey Amherst, the com-
mander of British forces in the war, ordered that smallpox-infested blankets 
be delivered to tribes loyal to the French in the Ohio River Valley. Whether 
the infected blankets were directly responsible is unknown, but smallpox did 
devastate several tribes soon thereafter.14
It was not until 1870 that biologists were able to prove that microorganisms 
cause disease. (Oddly enough, given its current significance as a biowarfare 
agent, the decisive experiment involved injecting anthrax into mice.) From 
that time on, it was possible to contemplate biological warfare in different 
terms, without the need to use corpses or infected materials as carriers of 
disease. Eventually, the disease-causing microbes—pathogens—themselves 
could be isolated and “weaponized.”
Modern biological weapons employ living microorganisms, such as vi-
ruses and bacteria, or toxins produced by living organisms, to incapacitate or 
kill. Bacteria, viruses, and rickettsia are the three categories of microorgan-
isms used as biological agents. Each type of microorganism produces a dis-
tinctive set of diseases. Bacterial diseases, which include anthrax, plague, and 
tularemia (rabbit fever), generally produce flulike symptoms initially and are 
treatable with antibiotics. Anthrax and tularemia are not contagious; plague 
is. Among the rickettsia are Q fever, which is rarely fatal, and typhus. Both 
are treatable with antibiotics. Viruses, which do not respond to antibiotics, 
include smallpox and yellow fever. Following a global campaign of vaccina-
tion coordinated by the World Health Organization, smallpox was declared in 
1980 to have been eradicated, but stocks of the smallpox virus were kept for 
research purposes by the United States and the Soviet Union. The existence 
of these stocks, combined with the fact that the smallpox vaccine is no lon-
ger routinely administered (or even widely available), makes many defense 
and public health officials worried about the reappearance of smallpox as a 
biological weapon.
Unlike microbes, toxins are nonliving substances. They are considered 
to be biological weapons because they are derived from living organisms, 
such as molds and fungi. Because they are not living organisms, toxins do 
not reproduce or spread through contagion the way other biological agents 
do. As a result, toxins have more in common with chemical agents than 
with biological agents. Some biological toxins can even be chemically 
synthesized.
In order to produce mass casualties, the microorganisms or toxins that 
make up biological weapons must be widely dispersed. Contagion—that is, 
the spread of disease from person to person—can play a role, at least in the 
case of a number of pathogens. Smallpox, for example, is highly contagious. 

74 
Chapter Four
In the case of bacteria that do not spread from person to person, or in the case 
of toxins, however, mass casualties can be produced only by using means of 
delivery that cause the biological agent to come in contact with large num-
bers of people. This generally means creating an aerosol spray with a liquid 
containing the biological agent. When prepared properly, such an aerosol is 
likely to be tasteless, odorless, and invisible. As a result, victims of a biologi-
cal weapons attack may not know what has happened until well after symp-
toms have begun to develop.
The time frame for the appearance of symptoms following a biological 
weapons attack depends on the bacteria, rickettsia, or virus used. The incuba-
tion period for smallpox is from ten to fourteen days, and for plague from one 
to six days. Botulism has an incubation period of from twelve to seventy-two 
hours. Q fever, on the other hand, has an incubation period of from two to 
three weeks. Further complicating the ability of defense and public health 
officials to know that a biological weapons attack has occurred is the fact 
that disease symptoms, when they finally appear, are likely to be mistaken 
for symptoms that would accompany naturally occurring illnesses. Conse-
quently, the first people to have evidence that a biological attack had occurred 
might be hospital lab technicians, public health epidemiologists, pharmacists, 
or even funeral directors. This is one reason that the United States govern-
ment after 9/11 attempted to vaccinate all emergency-room workers with the 
smallpox vaccine.
Most microorganisms that might be used as biowarfare agents present 
special problems where “weaponization” is concerned. Some are killed by 
ultraviolet radiation and are therefore not suitable for use outdoors during 
the day. Most require extraordinarily careful handling to avoid the infection 
of lab workers or people living close to labs. In 1979, in Sverdlovsk (now 
Ekaterinburg), anthrax was accidentally released from a Soviet biological 
weapons lab. Sixty-four people died from what Soviet officials originally 
suggested was an anthrax outbreak caused by contaminated meat.
In spite of the tragedy at Sverdlovsk, anthrax is thought to be one of the 
biological agents best suited for use as a weapon. It is extraordinarily hardy, 
capable in nature of surviving in the soil fully exposed to the elements for de-
cades. It can be freeze-dried, which means it can be milled into an extremely 
fine powder that, like the anthrax sent to Capitol Hill in September and Oc-
tober 2001, can be suspended in the air like particles of dust. In this form it 
can easily be inhaled. From the lungs, anthrax enters the bloodstream and is 
often lethal. The previously cited 1993 study by the Office of Technology 
Assessment concluded that an airplane spraying 220 pounds of anthrax spores 
over Washington, D.C., on a calm night would kill between one million and 
three million people.

 
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
75
The globalization of biotechnology industries is spreading expertise and 
capabilities and increasing the accessibility of biological pathogens suit-
able for disruptive attacks.
—National Intelligence Council
Source: Global Trends 2025: A Transformed World, National Intelligence 
Council, November 2008, 70.
The potential for biological warfare using only what nature provides in the 
way of pathogens is bad enough, but genetic engineering offers some truly 
horrifying possibilities. Dr. Ken Alibek, who was first deputy director of the 
Soviet Union’s biological weapons program from 1988 until his defection to 
the United States in 1992, has noted that Moscow’s illegal biowarfare pro-
gram had genetically modified anthrax to make it resistant to treatment using 
antibiotics.15 Recombinant DNA technologies take the threat to another level. 
Imagine, for example, being able to make the deadly Ebola virus spread itself 
from person to person as easily as influenza. The creation of such diabolical 
diseases is no longer simply a sinister fantasy.
Biological weapons pose a particularly significant threat due to certain 
characteristics, some of which are unique and some of which are shared 
with other weapons of mass destruction. First, unlike nuclear weapons, for 
example, biological weapons can be produced without a large supporting in-
dustrial infrastructure. A typical college or even high-school laboratory could 
be used to produce biological weapons. This leads to a second characteristic, 
low production cost. Third, biological weapons are accessible to rogue states 
and terrorist groups, a characteristic related to ease of manufacture, low pro-
duction cost, and the relative ease with which clandestine manufacture and 
shipment can occur. While sophisticated systems like missiles or bombs can 
be used to deliver biological weapons, they are not required. Thus, ease of 
delivery is a fourth threat-enhancing characteristic of biological weapons. 
Fifth, the extraordinary lethality of many types of biological weapons makes 
them especially worrisome. Sixth, these weapons are very small; an anthrax 
spore may be just one to five microns in diameter, which is one fiftieth the 
width of a human hair.
Because biological weapons can be produced without a significant indus-
trial infrastructure, their proliferation is likely to be both cheaper and more 
easily hidden than other kinds of weapons of mass destruction. Dual-use 
technology makes hiding a biological weapons program easier than hiding a 
nuclear weapons program or, in some instances, chemical weapons produc-
tion. For example, fermenters are required to produce biological weapons in 

76 
Chapter Four
large quantities, and one might be tempted to conclude that the presence of 
a fermenter provides evidence that someone is trying to produce biological 
weapons. The problem with this approach is that fermenters are commonly 
used in the biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and even beer-manufacturing 
processes.
The Arms Control Association, an advocacy group headquartered in Wash-
ington, D.C., has recently identified ten states, including the United States, 
alleged either to have biological or chemical weapons programs or stockpiles 
or to be in violation of some aspect of the Biological Weapons Convention 
or the Chemical Weapons Convention. North Korea is suspected of having 
biological weapons capabilities and likely has a large stockpile of chemical 
weapons. Syria is believed to have active biological and chemical weapons 
programs. There have been past allegations regarding both types of weapons 
involving Egypt and Israel. Other states—China, Russia, Taiwan, and the 
United States among them—possess dual-use capabilities. Other states of 
concern are Cuba, Iran, and Sudan. On the other hand, a number of states, in-
cluding Albania, Libya, and South Korea, have completed the destruction of 
chemical weapons stockpiles as required by the Chemical Weapons Conven-
tion.16 Following the U.S. invasion of Iraq, which was justified by the Bush 
administration on the grounds that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruc-
tion, Saddam Hussein’s regime was found not to have any WMD capabilities. 
Beginning in late 2004, Iran was under the scrutiny of the United States and 
the European Union due to suspicions that it was developing nuclear weap-
ons. Meanwhile, North Korea announced in February 2005 that it possessed 
nuclear weapons.
What possible motivation could there be for the use of chemical or biologi-
cal weapons? The incentives—and disincentives—are different for countries 
and for nonstate actors.17 A country contemplating a CBW attack against 
another country must expect, first, retaliation in kind if the victim of the ini-
tial attack has access to weapons of mass destruction. Second, it must expect 
the strong condemnation of the international community for violating well-
established norms against the use of such weapons. For nonstate actors, such 
as terrorist organizations, rebel armies, or individual crackpots, the calculus 
is different. Retaliation in kind may not be possible, particularly if the person 
or organization using the weapon cannot be identified. As we have noted, 
an intentional release of deadly microbes would be followed by an incuba-
tion period of somewhere between a few days and a few weeks before the 
appearance of disease symptoms. Since even the onset of observable signs 
of disease might initially be assumed to have resulted from natural causes, 
individuals or groups employing biological weapons might well have time 
to go deep underground before their attack becomes obvious. The problem 

 
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
77
of deterrence (or, if deterrence fails, retaliation) is made even worse in the 
case of cults or terrorist organizations that have an apocalyptic worldview (as 
Aum Shinrikyo does) or readily accept the possibility of martyrdom (as in the 
case of Al Qaeda). Because deterring the use of WMD by such groups seems 
unlikely, preventing them from acquiring (or maintaining) a WMD capability 
is imperative.
In May 1996, John Deutch, who was then Director of Central Intelligence, 
suggested that “proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons 
and their potential use by states or terrorists is the most urgent challenge 
facing the national security, and therefore the intelligence community, in the 
post–Cold War world.”18
ADDRESSING THE THREAT
The threats described in this chapter indeed present an urgent challenge. For 
the individual citizen, responses to the threat posed by bugs and gas begin 
with simply learning more about the threat and preparing to deal with it. 
Study after study has found that those individuals who are better informed 
about how to respond in a crisis are more likely to survive and escape serious 
injury. For example, studies conducted after the 1994 Northridge quake in 
California found that those who prepared for earthquakes were less likely to 
be injured. Similar results have been found in hurricane-prone areas. Based 
on these findings, it makes sense to understand and prepare for chemical and 
biological terrorist attacks.
Unfortunately, some people in the world have been forced to prepare for 
such attacks. Israel is a small state surrounded by a number of threatening 
neighbors, and in the past there have been fears that Israel would be attacked 
with chemical or biological weapons. In the 1991 Gulf War, many feared that 
Saddam Hussein would use chemical weapons in the Scud missile attacks 
on Israel. To prepare for such attacks, the Israeli government distributed gas 
masks to all Israeli citizens and taught them how to use the masks effec-
tively. Iraq did not use chemical weapons, but the Israelis were nevertheless 
prepared.
The attacks on 9/11 caused the U.S. government to reassess its preparations 
for a follow-on terrorist attack on the United States. One of the items that has 
been added to the homeland security agenda is civil defense preparations for a 
possible weapons of mass destruction attack on the United States. The great-
est fear of most experts on terrorism is a WMD attack on the United States, 
and most favor a robust civil defense program in response. The elements of 
such a program include the stockpiling or distribution of protective masks or 

78 
Chapter Four
clothing; equipment and training for decontamination; vaccinations for dis-
eases used as biological weapons, such as smallpox; stockpiling of antibiotics 
for the treatment of outbreaks of contagions (e.g., stockpiling Cipro to treat 
anthrax); planning and training of emergency personnel for dealing with the 
use of WMD; and public education programs to increase understanding of the 
dangers and possible responses to weapons of mass destruction.
As technology advances, the ability to prevent biological attacks dimin-
ishes. Therefore, as noted in the Commission’s report, in order to deter 
attacks, the United States needs to demonstrate through preparedness 
and public exercises that the nation is capable of blunting the impact 
and thwarting the terrorist’s objectives. The United States must strengthen 
resilience by developing the capability to produce vaccines and therapeu-
tics rapidly and inexpensively.
—Commission on the Prevention of Weapons of 
Mass Destruction Proliferation and Terrorism
Source: The Clock Is Ticking. A Progress Report on America’s Preparedness 
to Prevent Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation and Terrorism, Com-
mission on the Prevention of Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation and 
Terrorism, October 21, 2009, 3.
None of these topics is pleasant to think about, but advance planning could 
literally make the difference between life and death. For example, Israeli 
citizens are taught how to keep one room of their homes airtight in the event 
of a chemical or biological attack by taping plastic over the windows and 
doors. Poison gases and most toxic biological agents dissipate within hours; if 
individuals can avoid exposure during the immediate aftermath of an attack, 
they run a much smaller risk of suffering injury. At present, few Americans 
know this fact, and fewer still have made any preparations for a chemical or 
biological attack.
Beyond the actions of individuals and the U.S. government, the interna-
tional community has addressed these issues and will undoubtedly continue 
to do so in the future. The 1899 Hague Convention prohibited the use in war 
of projectiles containing poison gas. In response to the horrors of chemical 
warfare during World War I, the 1925 Geneva Protocol for the Prohibition 
of the Use of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and Bacteriological 
Methods of Warfare was negotiated at the League of Nations. Although its 
ban on the use of chemical and biological weapons was designed to apply 
only to states that are parties to the protocol, the agreement has become cus-
tomary international law, which means that its provisions now bind all states 

 
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
79
regardless of whether they have accepted it or not.19 The United States and 
Japan failed to ratify the treaty before World War II broke out, but during 
the war, President Roosevelt stated, “Use of such [chemical and biological] 
weapons has been outlawed by the general opinion of civilized mankind. This 
country has not used them, and I hope we never will be compelled to use 
them. I state categorically that we shall under no circumstances resort to the 
use of such weapons unless they are first used by our enemies.”20 Although 
the United States did not use chemical or biological weapons during World 
War II, it did not ratify the 1925 Geneva Protocol until 1975.
In 1969, amid negotiations toward a new agreement prohibiting them, the 
United States and France both renounced biological weapons. A treaty that 
went beyond the 1925 Geneva Protocol’s ban on use to include bans on the 
production and stockpiling of biological weapons as well was adopted in 
1972. To date, this treaty—the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention 
(BWC)—has been ratified by 163 countries, making it a significant statement 
by the international community opposing biological weapons. One of the 
underlying factors helping to bolster the BWC is a taboo against the use of 
diseases as weapons of war. This taboo has been expressed in many ways and 
in many different cultures over the centuries, suggesting that it may represent 
a universal moral norm.21
The most detailed multilateral treaty to date is the 1993 Chemical Weapons 
Convention (CWC), an agreement that prohibits the production and stockpil-
ing of chemical weapons. One hundred eighty-eight countries have ratified 
the CWC, which entered into force in 1997. What makes the CWC superior 
to the BWC in one important respect is its verification system. The CWC cre-
ated a body called the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
(OPCW), headquartered in The Hague, which includes 150–200 inspectors 
authorized by the treaty to conduct site inspections in countries that have 
ratified the agreement.
The United States, which developed a large chemical weapons stockpile 
during the Cold War, stopped manufacturing chemical weapons in 1968. 
Nonetheless, thirty thousand tons of chemical agents remained in the Ameri-
can stockpile at the end of the Cold War. Beginning in 1996, the U.S. Army 
began incinerating chemical weapons in a specially designed facility at 
Tooele, Utah. A decade and a half later, the process of destroying the chemi-
cal weapons stockpile continues at Tooele and other facilities.
While the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin 
Weapons Convention may help to reduce the number of countries running 
chemical and biological weapons programs (and thus the number of weapons 
of mass destruction that could fall into the hands of terrorist organizations), 
neither agreement can guarantee our security against the threats posed by 

80 
Chapter Four
nonstate actors. To ensure our security, therefore, we must continue to think 
creatively not only about limiting the capabilities of those who might wish 
to do us harm but about changing their intentions as well. In the end, peace 
and security require more than defensive responses to the threats we perceive.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books and Articles
Falkenrath, Richard A., Robert D. Newman, and Bradley A. Thayer. America’s 
Achilles Heel: Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Terrorism and Covert Attack. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1998.
Garrett, Laurie. “The Nightmare of Bioterrorism.” Foreign Affairs 80 (January/Febru-
ary 2001): 76–89.
Koblentz, Gregory D. Biological Warfare and International Security. Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Cornell University Press, 2009.
Miller, Judith, Stephen Engelberg, and William Broad. Germs: Biological Weapons 
and America’s Secret War. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001.
Spiers, Edward M. A History of Chemical and Biological Weapons. London: Reak-
tion, 2010.
Tucker, Jonathan. War of Nerves: Chemical Warfare from World War I to Al-Qaeda. 
New York: Anchor, 2007.
Websites
Arms Control Association: http://www.armscontrol.org
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: http://www.cdc.gov
Federation of American Scientists: http://www.fas.org/programs/index.html

81
Chapter Five
The Terrorist Threat
The terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, dramatically altered the global 
security environment. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, a group that had 
been created to counter the Soviet military threat during the Cold War, invoked 
the collective security provision in the founding treaty for the first time ever. 
Within eighteen months of the attacks, the United States and many of its NATO 
allies were at war in Afghanistan and Iraq; regime change was the objective in 
both wars. On the night of the 9/11 attacks, President George W. Bush noted in 
his diary, “The Pearl Harbor of the 21st century took place today.”1
Terrorism was hardly a new phenomenon on 9/11. But what was new, and 
shocking, was the sophistication of the attacks and the enormity of the de-
struction they caused. The attacks killed more Americans than were killed at 
Pearl Harbor, but unlike Pearl Harbor, most of those killed on September 11 
were civilians. As many commentators noted at the time, it was the greatest 
loss of American life resulting from hostilities in a single day since the Civil 
War. British prime minister Tony Blair pointed out that more British citizens 
died in the attack on the World Trade Center than in any other terrorist act 
in British history, in spite of the fact that the Irish Republican Army carried 
out scores of attacks against British targets over the course of the twentieth 
century. What these observations highlight is that 9/11 demonstrated a new 
form of terrorism—one in which the objective was not merely to spread fear 
but to kill as many people as possible.
There is much about the 9/11 attacks that can be explained within the terms 
of our pre-9/11 understanding of terrorism. But clearly something important 
changed when the twin towers of the World Trade Center collapsed. Today 
many analysts speak of the “new terrorism” or of “mass-casualty terrorism.” 
In an effort to explain what has changed and how it affects our understanding 

82 
Chapter Five
of security, we examine terrorism—old and new—and some of the strategies 
that are being used to counter it.
DEFINING—AND FRAMING—TERRORISM
Although the term “terrorism” dates back only to the French Revolution, acts 
that we might today describe as terrorism have occurred throughout human 
history. What has changed—constantly—are the actors employing terrorism 
and the tactics they have used. Around the turn of the twentieth century, for 
example, there was a wave of assassinations by anarchists that were gener-
ally considered acts of terrorism: The president of France was assassinated in 
1894; an Austrian empress and a Spanish prime minister fell in 1897; Italy’s 
king, Umberto I, was killed in 1900; and an American president, William 
McKinley, was assassinated in 1901.2 During the 1960s, airplane hijackings, 
most of which ended without fatalities, became the tactic of choice for many 
terrorist organizations. The imposition of airport security measures and ef-
forts toward greater international cooperation, along with a decrease in the 
media attention given to hijackings, eventually made hijackings rare events. 
More recently, organizations attuned to the changes in the world generally 
lumped together under the heading of “globalization” have evolved new 
forms of terrorism that exploit the greater access to information, finance, 
technology, and transportation that now exists. This section will focus on 
definitions of terrorism and the way states attempt to frame terrorism to suit 
their own interests. In the following section, we take up what some have 
called “the new terrorism,” that is, terrorism in an era of globalization.
A longtime student of terrorism and former RAND analyst, Brian Jenkins, 
has defined terrorism as “the use or threatened use of force designed to bring 
about political change.”3 According to Walter Laqueur, terrorism is “the il-
legitimate use of force to achieve a political objective when innocent people 
are targeted.”4 Jessica Stern defines terrorism as “an act or threat of violence 
against noncombatants with the objective of exacting revenge, intimidating or 
otherwise influencing an audience.”5 Each of these definitions lacks a significant 
element contained in the statutory definition used in the United States, where 
terrorism is defined as “premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated 
against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents, usu-
ally intended to influence an audience.”6 Significantly, in both international and 
domestic law, only acts committed by nonstate actors (“subnational groups”) or 
the “clandestine agents” of governments are considered acts of terrorism. This 
reflects the interest of states in maintaining a monopoly on the legitimate use of 
force. However, both in law and in the definitions of most students of terrorism, 

 
The Terrorist Threat 
83
large-scale attacks carried out by guerrilla groups or other military forces with 
belligerent status are not generally considered acts of terrorism.
The label “terrorist” is often applied as indiscriminately as terrorist attacks 
themselves. States typically seek to delegitimize the methods of those whose 
objectives they oppose while granting more latitude to those whom they wish 
to succeed. Likewise, most terrorists would prefer to wear the mantle of guer-
rillas or “freedom fighters.” In 1982, the United States placed Cuba on its list of 
state sponsors of terrorism because of Cuba’s support for leftist revolutionaries 
in Latin America and Africa. At the same time, the United States was assisting 
groups trying to overthrow the government of Nicaragua. And although the 
legal definition of terrorism in the United States refers to “politically motivated 
violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets,” the media and government 
officials have routinely referred to the use of improvised explosive devices 
against military targets in Iraq and Afghanistan as acts of terrorism.
As many critics of the idea of a “war on terrorism” have pointed out, ter-
rorism is a tactic and not an ideology. Consequently, it has been employed by 
a wide array of groups with very different objectives. Terrorism is, generally, 
a strategy of the weak against the strong or, in other words, a form of asym-
metric warfare. Its users, targets, and methods change over time as different 
political issues emerge and are resolved or as new tactics and technologies 
are developed and countered.
According to data compiled by the National Counterterrorism Center, in 
2009 there were 10,999 terrorist attacks worldwide. In these attacks, 14,971 
people died (even though almost 57 percent of attacks produced no fatalities) 
and 34,057 were injured. While terrorist attacks occurred in eighty-three dif-
ferent countries, over 40 percent of all attacks occurred in Iraq and Afghani-
stan. Altogether, almost three out of every four attacks occurred in the Near 
East or South Asia.7
The three groups responsible for the most attacks in 2009 were the Taliban, 
Al-Shabaab, and Al Qaeda in Iraq. Overall, roughly half of all terrorist attacks 
were carried out by Sunni extremists. Given that over half of all attacks world-
wide occurred in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, it should not be surprising that 
over half of the victims of terrorism in 2009 were Muslims. Fourteen percent of 
all victims were police officers; another 5 percent were government officials.8
Table 5.1 lists a number of the worst terrorist attacks in the last half-
century. Until 9/11, the attacks that caused the greatest loss of life generally 
involved the bombing of an airliner as in the January 1985 bombing of an 
Air India flight over the Irish Sea, which killed all 329 people onboard. The 
9/11 attacks killed more than nine times that number but to this point remain 
an aberration. It is the primary goal of counterterrorism policies, which we 
examine at the end of this chapter, to ensure that there are no more 9/11s.

Table 5.1. Selected Terrorist Incidents, 1961–2011
Date
Incident
Perpetrator
Target
Killed
Wounded
May 1, 1961
First U.S. airline hijacking
Puerto Rican
U.S.
0
0
Feb. 10, 1970
Attack on Munich airport
Palestinians
Israel
1
11
July 21, 1972
“Bloody Friday” bomb attacks, Belfast
Irish Republican Army
U.K. (N. Ireland)
11
130
Sept. 5, 1972
Munich Olympics massacre
Black September
Israel
17
0
Nov. 29, 1979
Grand Mosque seizure
Islamic extremists
Saudi Arabia
~250
~600
Apr. 18, 1983
U.S. Embassy bombing, Beirut
Islamic Jihad
U.S.
63
120
Oct. 23, 1983
U.S. Marine barracks bombing, Beirut
Hezbollah
U.S.
242
60
Oct. 23, 1983
French military barracks bombing, Beirut
Hezbollah
France
58
15
Apr. 12, 1984
Restaurant bombing, Torrejon, Spain
Islamic Jihad (?)
U.S.
18
83
June 5, 1984
Golden Temple seizure, Amritsar
Sikh terrorists
India
~100
unknown
June 23, 1985
Air India bombing
Sikh terrorists
India
329
0
Apr. 5, 1986
Berlin discotheque bombing
Libyan agents
U.S.
2
79
Sept. 14, 1986
Kimpo Airport bombing
North Korean agents
South Korea
5
29
Dec. 21, 1988
Pan Am Airlines bombing
Libyan agents
U.S.
259
0
Sept. 19, 1989
UTA Flight 772 bombing
Libyan agents
France
170
0
Mar. 17, 1992
Israeli Embassy bombing, Buenos Aires
Hezbollah
Israel
29
242
Feb. 26, 1993
World Trade Center bombing, New York
Al Qaeda
U.S.
6
~1,000

Feb. 25, 1994
Hebron massacre
Jewish extremist
Palestinians
29
~150
Mar. 20, 1995
Tokyo subway attack
Aum Shinrikyo
Japan
12
~5,700
Apr. 19, 1995
Federal Building bombing, Oklahoma City
American extremists
U.S.
168
~680
Aug. 21, 1995
Jerusalem bus bombing
Hamas
Israel
6
~100
Nov. 19, 1995
Egyptian Embassy bombing, Islamabad
Islamic extremists
Egypt
16
~60
Jan. 31, 1996
Central Bank bombing, Colombo, Sri Lanka
Tamil Tigers
Sri Lanka
90
~1,400
June 25, 1996
Khobar Towers bombing, Saudi Arabia
Islamic extremists
U.S.
19
515
Aug. 7, 1998
Embassy bombings, Dar es Salaam, Nairobi
Al Qaeda
U.S.
301
~6,000
Aug. 15, 1998
Omagh bombing
Real IRA
U.K. (N. Ireland)
29
~330
Sept. 11, 2001
9/11 attacks, New York, Washington, Pennsylvania
Al Qaeda
U.S.
~3,000
unknown
Oct. 12, 2002
Bali car bombing
Al Qaeda
Australia, U.S.
202
~300
Oct. 23, 2002
Moscow theater hostage crisis
Chechen rebels
Russia
150
unknown
Aug. 19, 2003
UN Headquarters bombing, Baghdad
Al Qaeda affiliate
UN
23
~100
Mar. 11, 2004
Madrid train bombings
Al Qaeda–inspired group
Spain
191
~1,800
July 7, 2005
London transport bombings
Al Qaeda affiliate
U.K.
56
~700
July 11, 2006
Mumbai commuter train bombings
Lashkar-e-Taiba
India
209
~700
Nov. 26, 2008
Mumbai attacks
Lashkar-e-Taiba
India
173
~330
Jan. 1, 2011
Coptic church bombing, Alexandria, Egypt
Al Qaeda in Iraq
Egypt
21
97

86 
Chapter Five
THE “NEW TERRORISM”
Terrorism in the mid-twentieth century was often characterized as a form 
of political theater. This description suggested that most terrorist acts were 
designed primarily to attract an audience through media coverage of a com-
pelling drama. For example, during the 1972 Munich Olympics, an event that 
was already the focus of international attention, a Palestinian group called 
Black September stormed the athletes’ living quarters and took a group of 
Israeli athletes and coaches hostage. The drama was played out on live televi-
sion over the course of almost twenty-four hours before German authorities 
attempted a rescue operation. In the end, seventeen people, including eleven 
of the Israeli hostages, were killed.
Although not all elements of the “new terrorism” appeared at the same 
time, analysts have noted that new groups with new motivations and new tac-
tics began appearing during the 1980s. Among the new terrorist organizations 
were a number of religiously motivated groups, some with an apocalyptic 
worldview, whose appearance seemed to usher in an “age of sacred terror.”9 
Among the new tactics were suicide attacks, often designed to go beyond the-
atricality to the infliction of mass casualties. There were new targets as well. 
The United States, its citizens, and its interests began to be targeted more 
frequently. In an effort to make sense of these changes, we examine the new 
terrorism under three headings: organizations, tactics, and targets.
Organizations
For much of the modern history of terrorism, states have been closely linked 
to terrorist organizations and their activities. Secretly supporting shadowy 
groups with compatible agendas—or actually creating such groups—has 
been regarded as a cost-effective way to harass an enemy that is too powerful 
to engage directly. During the 1980s, the government of Libya sponsored a 
series of terrorist attacks against Americans that culminated in 1988 in the 
bombing of a Pan Am airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland. After investigators 
traced the attack to two Libyan intelligence officers, the United States and the 
international community, acting through the UN Security Council, imposed 
sanctions on Libya. The Libyan government, having suffered under the sanc-
tions for years, eventually turned over the suspects for trial and agreed to 
pay the victims’ families $2.7 billion in compensation. There are many other 
examples, both past and present, of connections between states and terrorist 
organizations. For example, Hezbollah, a Lebanese organization regarded by 
a number of governments as a terrorist group, has been supported financially 
by Iran and Syria for years. Lashkar-e-Taiba, the Pakistani organization 

 
The Terrorist Threat 
87
behind the November 2008 terrorist attack in Mumbai, India, was formed 
with the active assistance of Pakistan’s government during a time when Indo-
Pakistani tensions over Kashmir were at a peak.
Organizations that are characteristic of the new terrorism generally func-
tion without state sponsorship. They can operate this way in part because they 
commonly have independent sources of revenue. While based in Sudan dur-
ing the early 1990s, Al Qaeda was self-sufficient thanks to businesses owned 
and operated by Osama bin Laden, who was in fact a multimillionaire. When 
U.S. pressure on the Sudanese government resulted in Al Qaeda’s departure 
for Afghanistan, the organization began relying more heavily on donations 
funneled through Muslim charities. There has been speculation as well that 
Al Qaeda may have profited from Afghanistan’s lucrative opium trade.10 
Wherever the money came from, it was more than enough to pay for training 
camps, weapons, worldwide travel, and much more, including flight training 
for at least four people involved in the 9/11 plot. And it came with no restric-
tions imposed by state sponsors.
Terrorist groups operating with no attachments to a state pose a significant 
problem for policies based on deterrence. As we noted in chapter 3, deter-
rence is a policy designed to prevent the use of force by threatening the use 
of force as punishment.11 The nuclear deterrent strategy employed by the 
Soviet Union and the United States has been credited with preserving the 
“long peace” of the Cold War.12 It is important to note that deterrence has also 
been effective against rogue states, such as Iraq under Saddam Hussein. At 
the time of the Persian Gulf War (1990–91), the United States was concerned 
that Iraq might use weapons of mass destruction against the American-led 
coalition forces. In his memoirs, James Baker, who served as secretary of 
state at the time, recalled:
In hopes of persuading them [the Iraqis] to consider more soberly the folly 
of war, I purposefully left the impression that the use of chemical or biologi-
cal agents by Iraq could invite tactical nuclear retaliation. (We do not really 
know whether this was the reason there appears to have been no confirmed 
use by Iraq of chemical weapons during the war. My own view is that the 
calculated ambiguity regarding how we might respond has to be part of the 
reason.)13
While deterrence can inject a measure of caution into the policies of states 
that sponsor terrorism (with, it is hoped, corresponding effects on the ter-
rorists being sponsored), there seems to be little hope that deterrence can be 
effective against a terrorist organization like Al Qaeda. Terrorists with no 
state (and no state sponsor) to lose are unlikely to be deterred by the threat 
of retaliation.

88 
Chapter Five
Soon after the 9/11 attacks, the Bush administration noted the significance 
of nonstate actors to the concept of deterrence. In the 2002 edition of the Na-
tional Security Strategy of the United States, the administration argued, “The 
nature of the Cold War threat required the United States—with our allies and 
friends—to emphasize deterrence of the enemy’s use of force, producing a 
grim strategy of mutual assured destruction. With the collapse of the Soviet 
Union and the end of the Cold War, our security environment has undergone 
profound transformation.” The report goes on: “Traditional concepts of de-
terrence will not work against a terrorist enemy whose avowed tactics are 
wanton destruction and the targeting of innocents. The overlap between states 
that sponsor terror and those that pursue WMD compels us to action.”14
The stability of deterrence rested, essentially, on a foundation of fear. Like 
deterrence, terrorism is also based on fear. In the case of terrorism, however, 
the objective is what Thomas C. Schelling labeled “compellence”—that is, 
using fear to compel the other side to take action.15 Osama bin Laden and his 
followers sought in the 9/11 attacks to spread fear among the American pub-
lic in an effort to compel the United States to remove its military bases from 
the Middle East and withdraw its support for the state of Israel. If fear played 
a central role in both the Cold War–era and the new post-9/11 international 
systems, it had very different results. In the Cold War deterrent system, fear 
promoted stability; it was essential if deterrence were to operate successfully. 
During the Cold War, security was increased by a certain measure of insecu-
rity. That is no longer the case.
Another characteristic of groups representing the new terrorism that affects 
both efforts to deter them and their choice of tactics is their religious motiva-
tion coupled, in some cases, with an apocalyptic worldview. While Al Qaeda, 
with its focus on purging apostate Muslim rulers and uniting all Muslim lands 
in a global caliphate, once again offers a perfect example, it would be a mis-
take to think that only Islam has produced terrorism motivated by some form 
of religious fundamentalism. Within the United States, a variety of extremist 
groups based on Christian identity (often infused with anti-Semitic and white 
supremacist views) have amassed weapons and preached war against the 
government for years. On April 19, 1995, the Murrah Federal Building in 
Oklahoma City was destroyed by Timothy McVeigh, a U.S. Army veteran, 
who employed a truck bomb in an attack inspired by the writings of Christian 
extremists.16 In 1984, a plot by an extremist Jewish organization to destroy 
one of Islam’s holiest sites, the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, was foiled 
by Israeli security.17 Finally, Aum Shinrikyo, the cult responsible for the 
sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway system in 1995 (described in chapter 
4) provides another example of religiously motivated terrorism beyond the 
Muslim world.

 
The Terrorist Threat 
89
Al Qaeda has described its campaign of terrorism as jihad, or holy war. In 
public statements, including the 1996 Declaration of War Against America, 
Osama bin Laden pronounced it a religious duty for Muslims everywhere to 
kill Americans. Al Qaeda recruits have been taught that they need not worry 
about killing noncombatants or trying to distinguish between those who are 
guilty and those who are innocent of crimes against Islam because God will 
reward the innocent in heaven and punish the guilty in hell.18
Those who are attracted to Al Qaeda and other groups characteristic of the 
new terrorism often differ from terrorists associated with more traditional ter-
rorist organizations. Historically, most Islamic terrorists were young, single, 
and uneducated. The nineteen perpetrators of the 9/11 attacks were, for the 
most part, older and more mature; several were married and had children; 
some were educated; and most had lived in the United States for several years 
prior to 9/11. Mohamed Atta, the suspected leader, was thirty-three years old 
and had studied urban planning in Germany for seven years. Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammed, who has been called “the principal architect of the 9/11 attacks,” 
earned a degree in mechanical engineering from North Carolina Agricultural 
and Technical State University. Ramzi Yousef, the main plotter of the 1993 
World Trade Center bombing, studied electrical engineering in Wales before 
moving to the United States. While these are isolated—and high-profile—ex-
amples, it has become increasingly likely that those who plot and carry out 
terrorist attacks will have been educated and will have traveled beyond their 
childhood homes.
Tactics
With money, educated supporters, extremist religious beliefs, and few of the 
restraints associated with state sponsorship, modern terrorist groups have 
abandoned the limits that terrorists once observed. Terrorists seeking to ne-
gotiate a political settlement with a state, like the Irish Republican Army or 
the Basque separatist organization Euzkadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), have gen-
erally understood that their use of violence must be carefully calibrated. An 
act of terrorism—or a campaign made up of many such acts—must be violent 
enough to command attention but not so violent that it becomes impossible 
for a government to even consider making concessions. Groups representing 
the new terrorism seem not to be concerned about being too extreme. This, of 
course, makes them far more dangerous than traditional terrorists.
Globalization—and in particular the spread of information and technol-
ogy—makes it possible for terrorists unconstrained by a state sponsor or a 
traditional sense of limits to acquire or devise the means to conduct increas-
ingly violent attacks. Trial testimony by former terrorists has indicated that 

90 
Chapter Five
Al Qaeda invested considerable time and money in reconnaissance missions 
all over the world in a search for gaps in security that they might be able to 
exploit. Terrorists have used the Internet both to gather information about po-
tential targets and to share information about weapons and tactics. The over-
all effect of globalization on terrorism has been to increase the threat it poses 
while making terrorist organizations less hierarchical and more networked.
Nuclear terrorism is one of the most serious threats of our time. Even one 
such attack could inflict mass casualties and create immense suffering 
and unwanted change in the world forever. This prospect should compel 
all of us to act to prevent such a catastrophe.
—UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
Source: Department of Public Information, United Nations, “Secretary-
General Welcomes Swift Entry into Force of Nuclear Terrorism Convention, 
Calls on All States to Ratify without Delay,” June 13, 2007, SG/SM/11040, 
available at http://www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2007/sgsm11040.doc.htm.
The central concern about groups that are characteristic of the new ter-
rorism is their openly expressed desire—and their demonstrated ability—to 
conduct ever more destructive attacks. In August 1998, in the wake of the 
East African embassy bombings, the Clinton administration launched a cruise 
missile attack against sites affiliated with Al Qaeda. One of the sites was a 
chemical plant in Sudan owned by bin Laden. Soil samples from the site had 
indicated that it was likely being used to manufacture VX, a deadly chemical 
weapon. Documents captured from Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan in 2001 
described plans for the production of both biological and chemical weapons. 
And, in 2004, British authorities found ricin, another chemical weapon, in a 
London apartment believed to have been rented by members of Al Qaeda. 
Combined with the “loose nukes” problem described in chapter 6, these and 
other evidence of terrorists’ interest in acquiring and using weapons of mass 
destruction are deeply troubling.
Even in the absence of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, terrorists 
have found ways to turn modern technologies to destructive ends. So-called 
improvised explosive devices (IEDs)—bombs detonated using a dazzling 
array of readily available technologies, including cell phones, garage-door 
openers, and infrared devices—have been used extensively in Iraq and Af-
ghanistan against both military and civilian targets. Although the evidence 
thus far is mixed, many believe that it is only a matter of time until terrorists 
begin to mount attacks in cyberspace.

 
The Terrorist Threat 
91
One of the characteristics of Al Qaeda (and Al Qaeda–inspired) operations 
is the use of closely coordinated attacks on multiple targets. While the 9/11 
attacks represent the epitome of this, the same pattern can be observed in 
subsequent attacks in Madrid, London, and Mumbai. On March 11, 2004, ten 
bombs exploded on commuter trains in Madrid, all within minutes of 8:00 
AM. Almost two hundred people died in the attacks; over 1,800 were injured. 
On July 7, 2005, London’s transportation system was the target of a coor-
dinated attack carried out by four British nationals with no known terrorist 
background. Four bombs were detonated during the morning rush hour, three 
in the Underground and one on a double-decker bus, killing fifty-two and 
injuring 950. In November 2008, the Pakistan-based terrorist organization 
Lashkar-e-Taiba launched a carefully planned attack on multiple locations 
in Mumbai, India. The attack spanned three days, as ten gunmen indiscrimi-
nately killed Indians and foreigners alike in highly populated areas, including 
a hospital, a Jewish center, a café, and two hotels.
Finally, it is important to note the increased incidence of suicide terrorism 
by groups associated with the new terrorism. Throughout history terrorists 
have been known for their willingness to die for a cause. The Assassins, 
members of the Shia sect who regarded the murder of unrighteous leaders as 
a religious duty, carried out their attacks in the expectation that they would 
be captured and executed for their deeds. Modern suicide terrorism, however, 
goes a step beyond the probability of dying to the certainty that a successful 
attack will result in the death of the assailant. We examine this tactic and its 
role in the new terrorism in a separate section below.
Targets
Until the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, terrorism was a second- 
or even third-tier issue within the national security policy of the United States. 
What would, after 9/11, be called “the homeland” had rarely been attacked. 
In most years, more Americans died from lightning strikes or by drowning in 
their bathtubs than were killed in terrorist attacks.19 Airline hijackings, which 
often involved American airlines, had been largely eliminated by the 1980s.
The 1993 attempt to bring down the World Trade Center, a disrupted plot to 
destroy American airliners over the Pacific Ocean, the bombing of two Ameri-
can embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, a disrupted plot to detonate 
bombs at Los Angeles International Airport on New Year’s Eve in 1999, and 
the bombing on October 12, 2000, of the U.S.S. Cole, a destroyer berthed 
in a Yemeni port, all clearly indicated that the United States had become a 
prime target of Al Qaeda. It was not just the pattern of attacks that suggested 
Americans were in the crosshairs. Bin Laden told one interviewer: “You say I 

92 
Chapter Five
am fighting against the American civilians. My enemy is every American man 
who is fighting against me even by paying taxes.”20
SUICIDE TERRORISM
One of the most disturbing trends in terrorism is the increased frequency of 
suicide terrorist attacks. According to Robert A. Pape and James K. Feld-
man, from 1980 to 2003 there were 345 cases of suicide terrorism; between 
2004 and 2009, 2,136 persons carried out 1,833 suicide attacks.21 Contrary to 
popular opinion, suicide terrorism is not motivated solely—or even primar-
ily—by religious fundamentalism. For the 1980–2003 period, less than half 
the suicide terrorists whose affiliations are known were Islamic fundamental-
ists. Forty-five percent of the 524 suicide terrorists in the period, including 
157 members of the antireligious Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) 
in Sri Lanka, were from secular groups. Even a large majority of Lebanese 
Hezbollah suicide attackers were communist or socialist (71 percent) or 
Christian (8 percent).22
The data presented by Pape and Feldman suggest two very important 
questions: First, if Islamic fundamentalism is not the primary motivation of 
suicide terrorists, what is? Second, why have the number of suicide terrorist 
attacks increased so dramatically since 2003? The answers to these questions 
have significant implications for counterterrorism policy.
Suicide terrorism is a tactic adopted by groups seeking to end an occupa-
tion of a territory the group considers to be its homeland. Suicide attacks 
occur as part of a campaign, meaning there are multiple attacks, often car-
ried out over a period of years, directed against the same targets and with 
the same general aim. The targets are almost invariably democracies. Many 
examples could be cited. Hezbollah conducted a series of suicide attacks in 
1983, including a bombing in which 241 U.S. Marines were killed, intended 
to drive the United States and France out of Lebanon. The Tamil Tigers, who 
often employed female suicide bombers, conducted multiple campaigns in 
an effort to force the Sri Lankan government to cede Tamil territories. Since 
1996, Al Qaeda has been engaged in a suicide terrorism campaign intended to 
compel the United States to withdraw its military forces from Saudi Arabia, 
where American bases were established prior to the 1991 Persian Gulf War. 
Hamas has undertaken several campaigns with the objective of forcing Israel 
to withdraw from the Occupied Territories.23
The increase in the number of suicide attacks since 2003 is very closely 
tied to the American military occupation of Iraq and Afghanistan, along with 
the close cooperation between Pakistan and the United States in what was 

 
The Terrorist Threat 
93
once called the “Global War on Terror” (GWOT). Pape and Feldman, in fact, 
note that 92 percent of all suicide attacks in the period from 2004 to 2009 can 
be explained by the pattern of deployment of U.S. military forces. Even what 
appears at first glance to be an exception to the rule, a brief suicide terror-
ism campaign in Uzbekistan in 2004, can be explained by the presence of an 
American air base in the country between 2001 and 2005. No suicide attacks 
have occurred in Uzbekistan since the base was closed in 2005.24
In the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, the war in Afghanistan may have been 
a war of necessity. The Taliban regime had, after all, harbored those respon-
sible for 9/11 and had refused to cooperate with the United States in bringing 
them to justice. The war in Iraq, however, was a war of choice.25 Where sui-
cide terrorism is concerned, the important point is that both wars have likely 
increased the motivation of Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups to carry out 
suicide campaigns against the United States and its allies in the wars. Fur-
thermore, there is considerable evidence that the long-term occupations of 
Afghanistan and Iraq, along with the use of drones against suspected terror-
ists in Pakistan, have helped terrorist groups recruit more suicide bombers.
COUNTERING TERRORISM
Addressing the challenge of terrorism, especially in its modern form where 
the aim is often the infliction of mass casualties, is a complex task for govern-
ments. It is a task complicated by the fact that terrorists constantly adapt their 
tactics in an effort to find and exploit the weaknesses of their targets. They 
also learn from each other, sometimes by way of a “virtual jihad academy” 
comprising training manuals, videos, and other instructional materials posted 
on the Internet. Under the circumstances, governments are also compelled to 
adapt their tactics and to learn from other governments. Where counterter-
rorism efforts are concerned, there are enormous benefits to be gained from 
cooperation among governments, as well as among agencies within govern-
ments.
Combating terrorism requires a range of activities that includes finding and 
either arresting or killing terrorists; disrupting terrorist operations before they 
can be carried out; and coping with the effects of those attacks that cannot 
be disrupted. And because terrorism occurs in a particular political and so-
cial context, combating it also requires addressing the underlying conditions 
that motivate it. Law enforcement agencies, intelligence organizations, and 
military forces have all been called upon to respond to the threat of terrorism. 
But so, too, have finance ministries, development agencies, and public health 
authorities.

94 
Chapter Five
Law Enforcement
Terrorism is a crime under both international and domestic law. Even in the 
absence of treaties and statutes that define and criminalize terrorism, most 
activities of terrorists would still be punishable under laws pertaining to mur-
der and destruction of property. Furthermore, states have an interest in treat-
ing terrorists as criminals. To do otherwise is to risk conferring legitimacy 
on them and their causes. Terrorists seek acknowledgment of a grievance 
or recognition for a political cause. Their aim is to force states to negotiate, 
occasionally openly and directly, but more often tacitly and indirectly using 
what Thomas Schelling called “the diplomacy of violence.”26 Not wanting to 
be blackmailed by groups that resort to indiscriminate violence, governments 
prosecute and punish individual terrorists whenever possible. In the course 
of prosecutorial investigations, they may gather useful information about 
terrorist organizations and their methods. They may also deny terrorists an 
important recruiting tool: the image of a criminal on trial or serving a long 
prison term is far less appealing than the image of a jihadi dying a martyr’s 
death in battle against the infidel.
On February 26, 1993, Al Qaeda made its first attempt to destroy the 
World Trade Center in New York. A large bomb in a rented truck exploded 
in the garage below the towers. Aided by one of the conspirators who tried 
to collect the deposit on the truck, investigators uncovered the terrorist cell 
responsible for the plot. Ramzi Yousef, who planned the attack, slipped out 
of the United States but was captured in Pakistan in 1995. In the course of the 
investigation, a laptop computer was found in the apartment where Yousef 
had lived in the Philippines. The computer’s hard drive contained much of 
the evidence that was used to convict Yousef in 1997 of conspiracy in the 
1993 bombing case.27
The capture of another Al Qaeda operative, Richard Reid, had much less 
to do with good police work than with good luck. Reid, the so-called shoe 
bomber, attempted to bring down an American Airlines flight from Paris to 
Miami on December 22, 2001. A British citizen with a string of convictions 
for petty crimes, Reid converted to Islam and was radicalized by the calls to 
jihad that he heard at the mosque in Brixton. In 1998, Reid traveled to Af-
ghanistan to train at an Al Qaeda camp. He learned how to work with plastic 
explosives and was apparently given wide latitude to plan a suicide attack. 
After paying cash for a one-way ticket from Paris to Miami, Reid aroused the 
suspicion of French authorities and was denied the right to board his flight on 
December 21. After a brief investigation turned up nothing, Reid was allowed 
to fly the following day.
The explosive packed in the sole of one of Reid’s athletic shoes likely 
would have blown a hole in the side of the plane as it crossed the Atlantic 

 
The Terrorist Threat 
95
Ocean. Reid, however, was unable to light the fuse. An alert flight attendant 
confronted Reid, thinking he was trying to light a cigarette. When Reid at-
tacked the attendant, other passengers subdued him. The plane was diverted 
to Boston, where Reid was arrested.28
Because Reid was arrested on American soil rather than on a battlefield in 
Afghanistan or Iraq and because he was a British citizen, he was put on trial 
in a federal court rather than being sent to the military detention center at 
Guantánamo Bay on the island of Cuba. Like the trials of Ramzi Yousef and 
others, Reid’s trial provided an open window onto the structure and opera-
tions of Al Qaeda. Valuable information about recruitment, training, opera-
tional planning, and the people involved at each stage came out in the trial 
and the pretrial investigation. While much of the information Reid revealed 
might have been gathered by other, more secretive methods, Reid’s trial in an 
open court affirmed the values being defended in the conflict with Al Qaeda 
rather than compromising them.
War
A law-enforcement approach to terrorism serves the interest of democracies 
confronted by terrorist violence in affirming their values and denying ter-
rorists recognition as lawful combatants. Terrorism is a crime, and terrorists 
deserve to be treated like criminals. However, an act of terrorism on the scale 
of the 9/11 attacks seems to demand a more forceful response. George W. 
Bush responded by declaring a “global war on terrorism.”
Bush entered office emphasizing the need for the United States to act 
unilaterally in international affairs. Within six months of taking office, Bush 
had signaled his opposition to the Kyoto Protocol, the Anti-Ballistic Missile 
(ABM) Treaty, the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and the International 
Criminal Court. He also refused to participate in a conference to provide 
verification measures for the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention and un-
dermined a United Nations conference designed to control the spread of small 
arms and light weapons.29
Following the 9/11 attacks, however, the administration found that it was 
impossible to fight terrorism effectively without the cooperation of other 
states. The logic of counterterrorism was fundamentally multilateral. The 
administration actively cooperated with both longtime allies such as Britain, 
France, and Germany, former competitors such as Russia, and even several 
hostile states, including Syria.
The American military response to the 9/11 attacks began in October, 
when several hundred Special Forces soldiers working in tandem with Ameri-
can airpower and Northern Alliance forces overthrew the Taliban government 

96 
Chapter Five
and attacked Al Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan. Although a number 
of important objectives were achieved as a result of the attack, Osama bin 
Laden and Mullah Mohammed Omar, the leader of the Taliban, both avoided 
capture.
Following the invasion of Afghanistan, the Bush administration sought to 
develop a strategy for dealing with terrorism. In June 2002, President Bush 
stated in his commencement address at the U.S. Military Academy, “The 
gravest threat to freedom lies at the perilous crossroads of radicalism and 
technology.” He argued that the policies of containment and deterrence were 
not applicable against nonstate actors, such as terrorist groups.30 Several 
months later, the White House released the National Security Strategy of the 
United States, an annual report that typically received little public attention.31 
The eminent Yale historian John Lewis Gaddis contended that this one, how-
ever, was the most significant reconceptualization of American foreign policy 
since George Kennan laid out the doctrine of containment.32 In the place of 
that foundation of U.S. post–World War II foreign policy, President Bush 
proposed that the United States be proactive, postulating that the traditional 
concept of state sovereignty need not be honored, given the threat posed by 
terrorists to the United States.
Preemption of threats, then, was proposed as a necessary element of 
American strategy. As a whole, the president’s new approach came to be 
known as the Bush Doctrine. According to political scientist Robert Jervis, it 
had four elements:
A strong belief in the importance of a state’s domestic regime in determining its 
foreign policy and the related judgment that this is an opportune time to trans-
form international politics; the perception of great threats that can be defeated 
only by new and vigorous policies, most notably preventive war; a willingness 
to act unilaterally when necessary; and, as both a cause and a summary of these 
beliefs, an overriding sense that peace and stability require the United States to 
assert its primacy in world politics.33
Although members of the Bush administration tried to present the central 
pillar of the Bush Doctrine as “preemptive war,” most international relations 
scholars believed that the policy could more accurately be described as one of 
“preventive” war, especially in its application to Iraq. The difference is sig-
nificant. A preemptive war entails military action against an imminent threat, 
whereas a preventive war, according to political theorist Michael Walzer, “is 
designed to respond to a more distant threat.”34
The Bush administration justified the invasion of Iraq in 2003 by arguing 
(1) that it possessed weapons of mass destruction, (2) that the Iraqi regime 
was directly linked to Al Qaeda and the 9/11 attacks, and (3) that the over-

 
The Terrorist Threat 
97
throw of Saddam Hussein would usher in a new democratic movement in 
Iraq and the rest of the Middle East. No weapons of mass destruction were 
found in Iraq, evidence linking Iraq and Al Qaeda has been discredited, and 
the long-term prospects for democracy in Iraq remain uncertain. Although the 
Bush administration continued long after the invasion of Iraq to portray it as 
part of the war on terrorism, considerable evidence suggests that one of its 
outcomes was to boost the recruiting efforts of Al Qaeda and other terrorist 
organizations.
Cooperative Security
Aside from the law-enforcement approach, what alternative is there to com-
bating terrorism through preventive war? Since the disintegration of the So-
viet Union and the end of the Cold War, a number of security analysts have 
focused on the need for and advantages of “cooperative security.”35
A number of the central elements of cooperative security are relevant to the 
war on terrorism. First, proponents of cooperative security argue that strict 
controls and security measures for nuclear weapons, particularly those in the 
former Soviet Union, are urgently needed. We address the measures that have 
been taken to address the “loose nukes” problem in chapter 6. Second, the co-
operative security approach argues for an internationally supported concept of 
effective and legitimate intervention—one that is multilateral in its orientation.
The unilateral approach favored by George W. Bush during his first eight 
months in office gave way to multilateralism when the World Trade Center 
fell, but the international cooperation that was forged in the days following 
9/11 was fractured by the invasion of Iraq. Many of America’s allies, in fact, 
questioned the legality of the invasion. Operating within the boundaries of 
international law (and the just war theory) is important in a struggle against 
terrorism. As just war theorist Michael Walzer has noted, “In a war for ‘hearts 
and minds,’ rather than for land and resources, justice turns out to be a key 
to victory. . . . There are now reasons of state for fighting justly. One might 
almost say that justice has become a military necessity.”36
Cooperative security also calls for new initiatives promoting nonprolif-
eration and security cooperation. Gone are the days when Ronald Reagan, 
as president of the United States, could say that the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons is “other states’ business.” In a world in which terrorists are actively 
seeking weapons of mass destruction, the United States, as the “world’s last 
remaining superpower” and the biggest target of international terrorism, has 
a vital interest in nonproliferation.
Cooperative security was developed as a new way of thinking about 
threats in the post–Cold War era. It argues, fundamentally, for a multilateral 

98 
Chapter Five
approach to issues like those associated with the new terrorism. There are, 
however, some areas in which state sovereignty requires a certain degree of 
unilateralism in security policy. Homeland security is one such area.
HOMELAND SECURITY
Within days of the 9/11 attacks, President Bush announced the formation of 
an office of homeland security within the Executive Office of the President. 
In 2002, Congress created the Department of Homeland Security, a cabinet-
level agency intended to bring under one roof a wide array of existing pro-
grams related to security concerns within the borders of the United States. 
The Immigration and Naturalization Service was moved from the Department 
of Justice and combined with the U.S. Customs Service, formerly in the Trea-
sury Department, to create Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). 
The Transportation Security Administration was brought into Homeland 
Security from the Department of Transportation. Other agencies and pro-
grams—including the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the 
Nuclear Incident Response Team, the Federal Computer Incident Response 
Center, and the Federal Protective Service—were included, all with the aim 
of improving the federal government’s ability to coordinate planning for and 
responses to events like the 9/11 attacks.37
The creation of the Department of Homeland Security was a response to 
the obvious need for better coordination among agencies with responsibili-
ties related to counterterrorism policy and other matters related to security 
within the borders of the United States. But it was also a response to the rec-
ognition that the domestic and international realms are increasingly difficult 
to separate. The ease of trade and travel associated with globalization have 
increased the possibilities that terrorists posing as tourists may be able to slip 
into targeted states or that a shipment of computers manufactured abroad may 
contain a radiological bomb. This means that questions concerning trade-
offs between freedom and security will be a constant feature of a globalized 
world. It also means that we will constantly have to adjust our understand-
ings of where the lines separating police, military, and intelligence functions 
should be drawn.
In its first decade of existence, the Department of Homeland Security has 
come under intense scrutiny for many different shortcomings. One of the 
most serious of these shortcomings may be its way of responding reactively 
rather than proactively to threats. Roger Cressey, who served on the National 
Security Council in the Clinton administration, puts it this way: “I think what 
Homeland Security has done well up to this point is to prepare defenses to 

 
The Terrorist Threat 
99
respond to the last attack.”38 Responses to the 9/11 attacks and subsequent 
efforts to bomb airliners illustrate Cressey’s point well. After 9/11, the 
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) was dramatically enlarged 
and airline passenger screening was enhanced. Regulations requiring the 
cockpit door of all airliners to be reinforced and locked during flight were 
implemented to try to prevent passengers from gaining access to the controls. 
After Richard Reid attempted to blow up an airplane by igniting explosives 
packed in his shoe, the TSA began requiring that passengers include their 
shoes among the personal items to be X-rayed at airport security checkpoints. 
The attempted Christmas Day 2009 bombing of an airliner, which involved 
explosives packed in Omar Farouk Abdulmutallab’s underwear, prompted 
the TSA to implement full-body scans of passengers. It is certainly prudent to 
take the measures needed to ensure that terrorists are unable to use the same 
method of attack more than once, but critics of the Department of Homeland 
Security make an important point when they note how often antiterrorism ef-
forts appear to be a step behind the terrorists.
Fighting terrorism is like being a goalkeeper. You can make a hundred 
brilliant saves but the only shot that people remember is the one that gets 
past you.
—Paul Wilkinson
Source: Robert Andrews, ed., The Columbia Dictionary of Quotations (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1993), 902.
It is worth emphasizing, as we have noted before, that terrorism is a strat-
egy of the weak. As such, it works by finding and exploiting the vulnerabili-
ties of the target state. It is a difficult thing to find and remedy vulnerabilities 
before they can be exploited, but this is an important component of a good 
counterterrorism strategy. Ultimately, however, even greater efforts must be 
devoted to dealing with the root causes of terrorism.
The good news is that history is filled with terrorist organizations and 
particular modes of terrorism that were eliminated or simply disappeared. 
Assassinations, which were common around the turn of the twentieth century, 
and airline hijackings, which were, on average, a weekly occurrence during 
the late 1960s and early 1970s, are uncommon today. Many terrorist groups 
have disappeared or ceased to constitute a threat, sometimes due to the suc-
cess of counterterrorism policies, as with the defeat of the Liberation Tigers 
of Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka and the elimination of the leadership of the Shin-
ing Path in Peru, or sometimes due to policy changes within the organization, 

100 
Chapter Five
as with the Provisional IRA in Northern Ireland. The bad news is that there 
will always be groups willing to resort to terrorism to advance their interests.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Allison, Graham. Nuclear Terrorism: The Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe. New 
York: Times Books, 2004.
Benjamin, Daniel, and Steven Simon. The Age of Sacred Terror. New York: Random 
House, 2002.
———. Next Attack: The Failure of the War on Terror and a Strategy for Getting It 
Right. New York: Henry Holt, 2005.
Hoffman, Bruce. Inside Terrorism. Rev. and exp. ed. New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 2006.
Hoge, James F., Jr., and Gideon Rose, eds. Understanding the War on Terror. New 
York: Council on Foreign Relations and Norton, 2005.
Lesser, Ian O., Bruce Hoffman, John Arquilla, David Ronfeldt, and Michele Zanini. 
Countering the New Terrorism. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND, 1999.
Levi, Michael. On Nuclear Terrorism. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
2007.
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks on the United States. The 9/11 Commis-
sion Report. New York: Norton, 2004.
Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism. Country Reports on Terrorism 2009. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of State, August 5, 2010.
Riedel, Bruce. The Search for Al Qaeda: Its Leadership, Ideology, and Future. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2008.
Sageman, Marc. Leaderless Jihad: Terror Networks in the 21st Century. Philadel-
phia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.
Stern, Jessica. The Ultimate Terrorists. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1999.
Websites
Federal Bureau of Investigation: http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/terrorism
Global Terrorism Database: http://www.start.umd.edu/gtd
International Relations and Security Network (Switzerland): http://www.isn.ethz.ch
RAND Corporation, Terrorism and Homeland Security: http://www.rand.org/
research_areas/terrorism
UN Action to Counter Terrorism: http://www.un.org/terrorism
U.S. Government Accountability Office, Topic Collection: Terrorism: http://www
.gao.gov/docsearch/featured/terrorism.html

101
Chapter Six
The Proliferation of 
Weapons of Mass Destruction
Following the Persian Gulf War of 1991, United Nations inspectors dis-
covered that an Iraqi official had secretly hidden 650,000 pages of material 
concerning biological weapons on a chicken farm outside of Baghdad. After 
examining these materials, the inspectors realized that Iraq had developed 
both a defensive and an offensive biological weapons program, that it had 
weaponized biological agents and had loaded them into 166 bombs and 
twenty-five missile warheads.1
In April 1999, Ayman al-Zawahiri, Osama bin Laden’s deputy and a 
trained medical doctor, wrote a memo to Muhammad Atef, Al Qaeda’s mili-
tary commander, in which he proposed a secret program to develop biological 
and chemical weapons:
The enemy started thinking about these weapons before WWI [World War 
I]. Despite their extreme danger, we only became aware of them when the 
enemy drew our attention to them by repeatedly expressing concerns that 
they can be produced simply with easily available materials. The destructive 
power of these weapons is no less than that of nuclear weapons. A germ at-
tack is often detected days after it occurs, which raises the number of victims. 
Defense against such weapons is very difficult, particularly if large quantities 
are used.2
In 2003, a Russian businessman offered $750,000 to any Russian weapons 
scientist who would provide him with weapons-grade plutonium for a foreign 
client. The businessman was successful in contacting residents of Sarov, a 
city closed to outsiders by the Russian government because it had been the 
home of the Soviet Union’s top nuclear weapons design laboratories. Fortu-
nately, scam artists sold the businessman a canister of mercury rather than 

102 
Chapter Six
plutonium, but the episode raised the possibility of nuclear weapons materials 
being sold to the highest bidder.3
Two Armenian men—one a businessman and the other a physicist—
pleaded guilty in a court in Tbilisi to charges of smuggling highly enriched 
uranium into the Republic of Georgia in 2010. The material, placed in a lead-
lined cigarette box and brought into the country by train, is thought to have 
come from a Russian nuclear fuel plant in Novosibirsk. The two smugglers 
believed they were selling the material to an Islamist organization but were 
dealing instead with an undercover agent of the Georgian government.4
These cases are just a few of the many that could be cited to justify the 
concerns that experts have expressed regarding the spread of weapons of 
mass destruction—and the materials needed to make them—to rogue states 
and terrorist groups. In his comments on the 9/11 Commission’s final report, 
Chairman Thomas Kean noted that every expert with whom the commission 
met had predicted that Al Qaeda would attempt a second major attack. Al-
though the human and economic losses caused by the attacks of September 
11, 2001, were enormous, they could have been much worse had weapons 
of mass destruction been used. Imagine the impact of terrorist use of nuclear 
weapons. According to a Harvard University study, “A bomb with the ex-
plosive power of 10,000 metric tons of TNT (smaller than the Hiroshima 
bomb), if set off in midtown Manhattan on a typical workday, could kill half 
a million people and cause over $1 trillion in direct economic damage.”5 The 
destructiveness of weapons of mass destruction combined with the difficulty 
of defending against their use makes preventing their acquisition by global 
actors with strong incentives to use them one of the highest national security 
priorities of the twenty-first century.
There are two principal means of slowing or reversing the spread of weap-
ons of mass destruction (WMD) to additional states and to nonstate actors: 
nonproliferation and counterproliferation. The Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Treaty, the Chemical Weapons Convention, and the Biological Weapons 
Convention all seek to prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction 
and thus are characteristic of the nonproliferation approach. The other major 
approach, counterproliferation, seeks to destroy or neutralize the threat of 
WMD programs or stockpiles that are already in place. While nonprolifera-
tion strategies generally involve multilateral cooperation, counterprolifera-
tion strategies are often pursued by states acting alone. In this chapter, we 
will review the historical attempts to limit the spread of WMD and the con-
temporary threats posed by these weapons, and suggest what can be done to 
limit the spread of WMD.
As noted in chapters 3 and 4, chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons 
are considered weapons of mass destruction. Nuclear weapons pose the great-

 
The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
103
est potential threat in terms of destruction, but biological weapons are the 
most likely to be used by terrorists.6 Some experts argue that nuclear weapons 
are so much more destructive than chemical or biological weapons that they 
should not be considered in the same category. In this chapter, however, we 
will consider all three types of weapons of mass destruction and what has 
been done to limit their spread.
THE NONPROLIFERATION APPROACH
In 1963, President John F. Kennedy predicted that there would be from 
fifteen to twenty-five states with nuclear weapons by the 1970s.7 Kennedy 
was not alone; many others also recognized the danger to which he drew 
attention. In an effort to prevent the spread of these weapons, a number of 
states negotiated the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (commonly known 
by its acronym, NPT), which was opened for signature in 1968.8 The NPT 
proposed a straightforward quid pro quo: if states that did not possess nuclear 
weapons agreed not to produce them, states that had nuclear weapons would 
assist non–nuclear weapons states with the development of peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, such as nuclear power plants and civilian research reactors. 
The nuclear-weapons states also agreed to work toward the elimination of all 
existing nuclear weapons. This bargain has been attractive to most states; at 
the time of the May 2010 NPT Review Conference, 189 states were parties 
to the NPT.
That is the good news; the bad news is that the small minority of states that 
have not signed the NPT includes Israel, India, and Pakistan, countries that 
are in the most volatile areas of the world. India and Pakistan have a long his-
tory of bitter hostility, focusing primarily on the disputed territory of Kash-
mir. In May 1999, the two states went to war in the Kargil region of Kashmir. 
It was the third armed conflict in Kashmir since 1947, but the first in which 
both sides possessed nuclear weapons. In fact, both India and Pakistan had 
tested nuclear weapons (Pakistan for the first time) in 1998.
Pakistan is a particular concern, for several reasons. Its population of 175 
million includes many Islamic fundamentalists, including some who support 
Al Qaeda and the Taliban. The 9/11 Commission reported that there were 859 
madrassahs (conservative Islamic schools) teaching more than two hundred 
thousand young people in Karachi alone.9 According to former National 
Security Council staff members Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, before 
9/11 Pakistan’s military intelligence agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence 
directorate, was “a kind of terrorist conveyor belt” that transported “young 
radicals from their schools [in Pakistan] to Afghanistan for training in camps 

104 
Chapter Six
run by or affiliated with Al Qaeda. From there, they were taken to the border 
with Indian-controlled Kashmir, where they slipped across to launch their 
attacks.”10
We must ensure that terrorists never acquire a nuclear weapon. This is 
the most immediate and extreme threat to global security. One terrorist 
with one nuclear weapon could unleash massive destruction. Al Qaeda 
has said it seeks a bomb and that it would have no problem with using it. 
And we know that there is unsecured nuclear material across the globe. 
To protect our people, we must act with a sense of purpose without delay.
—President Barack Obama
Source: The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “Remarks by Presi-
dent Barack Obama,” Hradcany Square, Prague, Czech Republic, April 5, 
2009, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/Remarks-By
-President-Barack-Obama-In-Prague-As-Delivered.
Despite the overthrow of the Taliban and the attacks on Al Qaeda, there is 
still support in Pakistan for these groups. An obvious danger is that nuclear 
materials could be turned over to terrorists. Even under former president 
Pervez Musharraf, who supported U.S. operations against terrorists and the 
Taliban, one of Pakistan’s nuclear weapons designers, Abdul Qadeer Khan, 
sold nuclear components to Libya, Iran, and North Korea and headed up 
what the 9/11 Commission termed “the most dangerous nuclear smuggling 
ring ever disclosed.”11 In addition, two of Pakistan’s senior nuclear scientists, 
Sultan Bashiruddin Mahmood and Chaudari Abdul Majeed, are sympathetic 
to Islamic extremists and have met with Osama bin Laden and his deputy, 
Ayman al-Zawahiri, discussing nuclear weapons with bin Laden.12 Bin Laden 
stated that he was seeking weapons of mass destruction and that, for Muslims, 
it was a “religious duty” to develop them.13 Al Qaeda has repeatedly tried to 
buy or steal nuclear weapons, and documents captured from Al Qaeda bases 
in Afghanistan reveal “a significant effort to pursue nuclear weapons.”14 The 
possibility that the Pakistani government might at some point be taken over 
by elements sympathetic to such Islamic terrorist groups as Al Qaeda com-
plicates the picture even further.
Two of the three states to which A. Q. Khan sold nuclear technology, North 
Korea and Iran, continue to present serious proliferation risks. On the other 
hand, Libya gave up its quest for nuclear weapons as part of an effort to get 
out from under economic sanctions that had been imposed soon after the 
bombing of an airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland by agents of the Libyan gov-
ernment in 1988. North Korea tested nuclear weapons in 2006 and 2009 and 

 
The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
105
is believed to have as many as half a dozen weapons in its small stockpile. 
Iran has denied an intent to build nuclear weapons while insisting on its right 
to enrich uranium for research purposes. The effort to stop Iran’s nuclear en-
richment program has included United Nations Security Council resolutions, 
sanctions, and, according to some speculation, a sophisticated cyber-attack 
designed to disrupt computer control technology at Iran’s nuclear facilities.
The development of nuclear power programs was stimulated throughout 
the world by the NPT. Many people believed that nuclear power could help 
solve contemporary problems, whether in medicine, energy, or other civil-
ian issue areas. It was believed that certain uses would be safe and separate 
from weapons use; however, only four kilograms (8.8 pounds) of plutonium 
or twelve kilograms (26.4 pounds) of highly enriched uranium (HEU) are 
needed to make a nuclear bomb. By the late 1990s, there were twenty metric 
tons of highly enriched uranium at 130 operational civilian research facilities 
in more than forty countries.15 Today, there are ten states that each possess 
at least two tons of weapon-usable nuclear material (HEU or plutonium). 
Another seventeen states have enough HEU or plutonium for the fabrication 
of at least one nuclear weapon.16 While most of the world’s weapon-usable 
nuclear materials are in military stockpiles, some is to be found at civilian re-
search facilities, often with inadequate security. In one particularly troubling 
episode, uranium just below the quality of HEU was stolen from a research 
reactor in Congo and wound up in the hands of the Italian mafia.17 Although 
this nuclear material could not have been used to make a nuclear weapon 
without additional processing, it would have been suitable for a radiological 
weapon, or “dirty bomb.” According to the IAEA, there have been eighteen 
documented cases of seizure of highly enriched uranium or plutonium. Other 
losses or thefts not reported to the IAEA are also known to have occurred.18
THE BIOLOGICAL AND 
CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTIONS
Chapter 4 defines and describes biological and chemical weapons. As noted, 
biological weapons derive from living organisms, whereas chemical weapons 
come from synthetic materials.
Biological weapons provoke widespread revulsion because they are weap-
onized versions of infectious diseases such as plague or smallpox. Although 
a number of countries experimented with biological weapons, in November 
1969, President Richard Nixon unilaterally renounced them and also fore-
swore the first use of chemical weapons. It was his view that nuclear weapons 
could be used to deter the use of chemical or biological weapons against the 

106 
Chapter Six
United States. In 1972, Nixon submitted the Biological Weapons Convention 
(BWC) to the U.S. Senate for its advice and consent to ratification, calling the 
agreement “the first international agreement since World War II to provide 
for the actual elimination of an entire class of weapons from the arsenals of 
nations.”19 The agreement called for the prohibition of the development, pro-
duction, stockpiling, and acquisition of biological agents or toxins. Because 
the Soviet Union refused to accept a system of on-site inspections, there were 
no verification provisions in the convention. In spite of Nixon’s hopes that 
his renunciation of biological weapons would prompt Soviet leaders to follow 
suit, secret preparations for biological warfare continued without interruption 
in the Soviet Union. In fact, after the Cold War had ended, President Boris 
Yeltsin of Russia revealed that the outbreak of anthrax in Sverdlovsk in 1979 
had resulted from an escape of anthrax spores from a biological weapons plant 
prohibited by the Biological Weapons Convention. There were other reports 
that certain Soviet labs had illegally retained stocks of biological weapons.20
Chemical agents were used with devastating results in World War I; in 
fact, the deaths and injuries they produced were so appalling that significant 
taboos against the use of chemical and biological weapons existed thereafter. 
Although a declaration condemning the use of poisonous gases was produced 
by the 1907 Hague Conference, the first significant attempt to control bio-
logical and chemical weapons was the Geneva Protocol of 1925, an agree-
ment prohibiting the first use of these types of weapons. During the 1930s, 
the agreement failed to prevent the use of chemical weapons by the Italians 
in Ethiopia or the Japanese in China. Following World War II, the United 
States and the Soviet Union developed large stockpiles of both chemical and 
biological weapons.
Initially facing the opposition of both the Army Chemical Corps and pri-
vate chemical manufacturers, the United States did not sign the Geneva Pro-
tocol until 1975—half a century after it was first opened for signature.21 By 
the 1970s and 1980s, an estimated twenty-five states were developing chemi-
cal weapons, including Iraq, Libya, and other countries “not known for their 
restraint,” as former Arms Control and Disarmament Agency director John 
Holum put it.22 Iraq, in fact, used chemical weapons against Iranian soldiers 
in the Iran-Iraq War (1980–88) and against Kurdish civilians in 1988. Faced 
with these uses of chemical weapons and the threat of their proliferation, 
the international community negotiated the Chemical Weapons Convention 
(CWC), which is both a disarmament and a nonproliferation treaty. Specifi-
cally, the treaty called for banning the acquisition, development, production, 
stockpiling, and transfer of an entire class of weapons of mass destruction. It 
required signatories to destroy all chemical weapons and production facilities 
within ten years of ratification and forbade any military preparations for the 

 
The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
107
use of chemical weapons. Significantly, the CWC called for extensive veri-
fication measures, including short-notice, intrusive, on-site inspections. The 
Chemical Weapons Convention, which entered into force on April 29, 1997, 
now has 188 parties.23
Information gathered from captured documents and interrogations indicated 
that Al Qaeda conducted sophisticated research on topics related to chemical 
and biological weapons, using open, unclassified sources.24 Ayman al-Zawa-
hiri was trained as a doctor in Egypt and had a sophisticated understanding of, 
and interest in, the development of chemical and biological weapons. In addi-
tion, by 2000 at least a dozen countries were suspected of developing biologi-
cal weapons programs, including Iran, Iraq, Israel, North Korea, Syria, Libya, 
Russia, and possibly India, Pakistan, China, Egypt, and Sudan.25
Concerned that the Biological Weapons Convention had no verification or 
enforcement mechanisms, the international community conducted negotia-
tions beginning in 1994 to provide for them. In the summer of 2001, the Bush 
administration announced that the United States was going to withdraw from 
the negotiations to strengthen the BWC on the grounds that the proposed 
protocol’s verification provisions were flawed and threatened American in-
tellectual property rights. This opposition to strong verification provisions for 
this and other arms control agreements confounded many experts who have 
long argued that efforts to limit weapons are only as good as the verification 
methods associated with them. In 2009, the Obama administration reversed 
this aspect of its predecessor’s arms control policy. Because biological weap-
ons may well be the weapons of choice for terrorists, it makes sense for the 
United States to do whatever it can to strengthen the ban against them, includ-
ing pressing for stronger verification measures for the Biological Weapons 
Convention. Increased verification, at a minimum, would better enable the 
international community, including the United States, to identify and isolate 
both states and nonstate actors attempting to develop such weapons.
THE COUNTERPROLIFERATION APPROACH
The nonproliferation approach is only effective given international coopera-
tion. If one state or group of states supplies chemical, biological, or nuclear 
materials to another state or terrorist group, proliferation occurs, and this ap-
proach fails. The NPT was built on the assumption that multilateral coopera-
tion would stop the spread of nuclear weapons, but the optimistic assumption 
of universal cooperation has not always proved to be correct. The question 
concerning proliferation today often appears to be not whether but when cer-
tain states or subnational actors will develop WMD.

108 
Chapter Six
Faced with the potential and actual spread of nuclear, biological, or chemi-
cal weapons, a second approach was developed—counterproliferation—to 
destroy or neutralize the threat of WMD. In contrast to the multilateral nature 
of nonproliferation, counterproliferation is generally a unilateral approach. 
Israel has used military strikes to destroy incipient nuclear programs in the 
Middle East on at least two occasions. In 1981, Israeli planes destroyed an 
Iraqi nuclear reactor in Osiraq. The reactor was designed to produce the fis-
sile material needed to build nuclear weapons. In 2007, Israeli planes struck 
another nuclear facility, this time in Syria. The Syrians had little to say about 
the attack on what, according to evidence offered by the CIA, was a nuclear 
facility being built with the assistance of North Korea.
The United States, which historically has led global nonproliferation ef-
forts, has moved in the direction of counterproliferation in recent years, al-
though that transition may have ended with the change of administrations in 
2009. In the early 1990s, when it appeared that North Korea was developing 
nuclear weapons, the U.S. government seriously considered a preemptive at-
tack on suspected North Korean nuclear weapons sites.26 At the same time it 
was making military contingency plans for attacking North Korea, the United 
States pursued negotiations with Pyongyang to reduce the danger of prolif-
eration diplomatically. In 1994, the United States, Japan, and South Korea 
signed with North Korea an agreed framework that called for the three states 
to provide oil and build two new nuclear reactors to replace two existing 
reactors that produced plutonium suitable for use in nuclear weapons.27 The 
North Korean threat was neutralized—at least for several years—as a result 
of a multilateral, nonproliferation approach.
In August 1991, Iraq attacked and occupied its Arab neighbor to the south, 
Kuwait. In response to Iraq’s aggression and to the threat that Iraq might 
disrupt the world energy markets and develop weapons of mass destruction, 
the United States, joined by more than thirty other countries, forced Iraq to 
withdraw from Kuwait and to accept inspections by United Nations teams. 
Inspections were conducted from 1991 to 1998. More Iraqi weapons were 
destroyed during this period than were destroyed during the war. In 1998, 
Iraq expelled the UN inspectors, and the United States became increasingly 
concerned that Iraq might be developing weapons of mass destruction.
The Clinton administration preferred the nonproliferation approach for 
dealing with the issue of nuclear proliferation, although it considered a 
counterproliferation strategy against North Korea. With regard to Iraq, the 
Clinton administration adopted a nonproliferation approach. In contrast, 
when George W. Bush entered office, U.S. policy shifted toward counterpro-
liferation, a shift solidified by the 9/11 attacks, which significantly increased 
American security concerns. The Bush administration increasingly moved 

 
The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
109
toward a military-oriented policy of preemption, a position that was made 
explicit in several important policy statements.28 President Bush came to 
believe that Saddam Hussein could not be trusted, that Iraq was developing 
weapons of mass destruction, and that the United States had to take forceful 
action—if necessary, by itself—to remove this threat. On March 20, 2003, the 
United States, principally with the support of the United Kingdom, attacked 
Iraq, with four main objectives: (1) to find and destroy Iraqi WMD, (2) to 
overthrow Saddam Hussein, (3) to end Iraq’s suspected cooperation with Al 
Qaeda and other terrorist groups, and (4) to establish a democratic govern-
ment in Iraq, in hopes that democracy would spread throughout the Middle 
East.29 In spite of an extensive search during and after the fall of the Iraqi 
regime, no weapons of mass destruction were ever found. A much-maligned 
nonproliferation approach with inspections by the International Atomic 
Energy Agency as the centerpiece was, in most respects, vindicated by the 
absence of Iraqi WMD.
CONTROLLING ACCESS TO WMD
For almost four decades, the international community has sought to halt, or 
at least slow, the spread of weapons of mass destruction. In 2001, the United 
States moved from a nonproliferation to a unilateral counterproliferation ap-
proach, but the invasion of Iraq for counterproliferation reasons may, ironi-
cally, have convinced other states of the need to acquire WMD as a hedge 
against U.S. intervention. As an Indian general noted after the 1991 Persian 
Gulf War, in which a technologically advanced force led by the United States 
routed Iraq’s large, battle-tested Republican Guard, the principal lesson of the 
war was “never fight the Americans without nuclear weapons.”30
Despite the fact that it is unquestionably the single most powerful country 
in the world, the United States cannot effectively prevent the proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction by itself; it must have the cooperation and 
support of other countries, including those that could supply the dangerous 
ingredients of WMD, and of those (such as Afghanistan under the Taliban) 
that could harbor terrorists intent on developing WMD. Democrats and Re-
publicans, conservatives and liberals, all agree that there is no greater danger 
facing the United States than the specter of terrorists armed with chemical, 
biological, or nuclear weapons. In his 2003 State of the Union address, Presi-
dent George W. Bush declared, “The gravest danger facing America and the 
world, is outlaw regimes that seek and possess nuclear, chemical, and bio-
logical weapons. These regimes could give or sell those weapons to terrorist 
allies, who would use them without the least hesitation.”31 Seven years later, 

110 
Chapter Six
President Obama, speaking to the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, 
said, “It is increasingly clear that the danger of nuclear terrorism is one of the 
greatest threats to global security—to our collective security.”32
Although international agreements—most notably the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty, the Biological Weapons Convention, and the Chemical 
Weapons Convention—have not completely prevented the spread of weapons 
of mass destruction, they have created an international norm opposing WMD 
proliferation. In a world of two hundred states with competing interests, 
priorities, and policies, such a consensus has value; it sends the message 
that most of the world’s states are opposed to the development, production, 
stockpiling, and deployment of weapons of mass destruction. Efforts to 
strengthen the agreements that undergird this consensus, such as the attempts 
to negotiate a verification protocol for the Biological Weapons Convention 
and conclude a fissile material cutoff treaty, are therefore vitally important.
Russia remains the largest potential supplier of weapons of mass destruc-
tion to rogue states and terrorist groups. In 1993, the former Soviet Union 
possessed an estimated thirty-two thousand nuclear weapons and thousands 
of scientists with knowledge of how to build weapons of mass destruction.33 
As of mid-2010, there were still some twelve thousand assembled nuclear 
warheads in Russia, although Russia has been dismantling an average of one 
thousand retired warheads per year.34 The potential for unsecured nuclear 
weapons to fall into the hands of rogue states or terrorists is colloquially 
referred to as the “loose nukes” problem. In 1991, Senator Sam Nunn and 
Senator Richard Lugar introduced legislation to provide funds to increase 
the safety of Russian weapons of mass destruction and to provide for their 
destruction. The Nunn-Lugar initiative, now called the Cooperative Threat 
Reduction Program, also provided funds to provide work for unemployed 
Russian scientists and engineers who had worked on weapons programs prior 
to the disintegration of the Soviet Union.35 This program has accomplished 
a great deal. By the end of 2010, the program had resulted in the deactiva-
tion of 7,599 nuclear warheads and the destruction of 791 ballistic missiles, 
498 missile silos, 155 bombers, 906 nuclear air-to-surface missiles, 651 
submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), 492 SLBM launchers, and 
thirty-two strategic missile submarines. In addition, the program assisted with 
the employment of fifty-eight thousand former Soviet weapons scientists.36
The Group of Eight (G-8) summit in Canada in 2002 took the concept of 
cooperative threat reduction a step further with an agreement to create the 
Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass 
Destruction. Members pledged to spend $20 billion over ten years to help 
Russia eliminate its stockpiles of fissile materials and chemical weapons. 
Like the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program (and in cooperation with it), 

 
The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
111
the Global Partnership worked to dismantle decommissioned Russian subma-
rines, secure loose nukes, dispose of weapon-usable uranium and plutonium, 
and find employment for former Soviet scientists in nondefense industries.37
Despite the success of the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program, much 
remains to be done. Russia still possesses large quantities of fissile material 
and large numbers of nuclear weapons. Not all of them have been adequately 
secured. This is especially problematic because Russia has a serious terror-
ist threat within its borders, represented by Chechen extremists who have 
expressed interest in using nuclear materials in their campaign against the 
Russian government. Reportedly, Chechen terrorists placed a canister of 
radiological material in a Moscow park in 1995, conducted reconnaissance 
on Russian nuclear warhead storage sites and transportation trains on several 
occasions in 2001–2002, and considered attacking and taking over a Mos-
cow nuclear facility having significant supplies of highly enriched uranium. 
In October 2002, forty-one heavily armed Chechen terrorists took over a 
Moscow theater, demonstrating their motivation and capability to use force 
and die for their cause. Reportedly, the terrorists had considered taking over 
the Kurchatov Institute, which had enough HEU to make dozens of nuclear 
weapons.38 Importantly, there are links between Al Qaeda and Chechen ter-
rorists; if, then, the Chechens obtained weapons of mass destruction, it is 
possible that Al Qaeda could gain access to WMD through them.
Obviously, actual weapons of mass destruction pose the greatest danger to 
American security; however, the components of these weapons and the pro-
cesses to produce them also pose a significant threat. Therefore, the United 
States has actively sought international cooperation in tracking the manufac-
ture, import, and export of the components of WMD. One aspect of the effort 
to control access to weapon-usable materials has been the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. Adopted in Vienna, the headquarters 
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, in 1979, the treaty entered into 
force in 1987 and today has 145 parties. The agreement requires states to 
criminalize theft or diversion of nuclear material in their own territories while 
cooperating with other states when diversions occur. Unfortunately, the treaty 
applies only to nuclear material used for peaceful purposes.39
A report by the Carnegie Endowment concludes, “Because the most dif-
ficult part of making a nuclear bomb is acquiring the nuclear material, all 
weapon-usable nuclear materials should be treated as if they were nuclear 
weapons, and the highest standards applied to weapons should become the 
global norm for all such materials regardless of use or location.”40 There are 
four principal ways to prevent additional countries and nonstate actors, such 
as terrorists and transnational criminal organizations, from obtaining nuclear 
weapons. First, all stocks of nuclear weapons and weapon-usable nuclear 

112 
Chapter Six
materials should be secured throughout the world, including the United 
States. Physical protection of nuclear materials involves guards, gates, and 
guns—that is, nuclear materials and weapons should be protected by both 
human and physical means. In cases where it is not possible to ensure the 
security of nuclear materials, they should be relocated or destroyed. In fact, 
the United States has assisted with such measures on several occasions. In 
1994, Kazakhstan shipped six hundred kilograms of highly enriched ura-
nium to Oak Ridge, Tennessee, for secure storage, eliminating what had 
been the largest existing stock of fissile materials outside of Russia. In 1998, 
the United States removed highly enriched uranium from a vulnerable site 
in Tbilisi, Georgia. In addition, the United States has airlifted stockpiles of 
highly enriched uranium from three “dangerously vulnerable” sites in Ro-
mania, Bulgaria, and Libya.41
A second measure to prevent terrorists and criminal groups from ob-
taining nuclear weapons is to convert civilian, research, power, and naval 
reactors that use weapon-usable fuels to alternate fuels. The United States 
has sponsored a number of programs to convert highly enriched uranium 
into fuel for civilian nuclear-power reactors. In fact, as of 2003 half of the 
nuclear-generated electricity in the United States came from highly en-
riched uranium from dismantled Russian nuclear weapons, a quintessential 
“swords into plowshares” program, which some have called “megatons into 
megawatts.”42
A third measure is to eliminate large stockpiles of weapon-usable ma-
terials. By the end of 2003, two hundred tons of highly enriched uranium 
from dismantled Russian nuclear weapons had been blended into low-
enriched uranium in accordance with Russian-American agreements. If 
Russian warheads contain on average twenty-five kilograms of highly 
enriched uranium, the two hundred tons were the equivalent of eight thou-
sand warheads.43 As of 2004, approximately thirty tons of highly enriched 
uranium was being blended down, the equivalent of 1,200 warheads per 
year. That is the good news; the bad news is that the HEU blend-down 
program is scheduled to end in 2013 and there are still over 550 tons of 
HEU left in Russia.
A fourth step to reduce the risk of terrorists’ gaining access to nuclear ma-
terials and weapons is to halt production of all weapon-usable material. As of 
2004, there was enough weapon-usable material in the world to produce more 
than a hundred thousand nuclear weapons. In spite of that fact, a number of 
states continued to produce it. Of the nine states that are known to have or are 
suspected of having nuclear weapons, the United States, Russia, the United 
Kingdom, France, and China have halted the production of HEU and pluto-
nium; it is believed that Israel, India, Pakistan, and North Korea continue to 
produce nuclear materials for weapons.44

 
The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
113
Nuclear security must be seen as the fourth pillar of any nuclear regime, 
alongside nonproliferation, disarmament and the right to peaceful uses of 
nuclear technology.
—British Prime Minister Gordon Brown
Source: The Road to 2010: Addressing the Nuclear Question in the 21st Cen-
tury (London: United Kingdom Cabinet Office, July 2009), 25.
More than fifty years ago, President Eisenhower first proposed halting 
production of fissile material that could be used to make weapons. President 
Clinton, in a speech before the United Nations General Assembly in 1993, 
called for an international agreement to ban the production of fissile material. 
After the General Assembly endorsed President Clinton’s recommendation, 
the UN Conference on Disarmament established a committee to negotiate a 
Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT). At the Nonproliferation Review Con-
ference in 2000, the states party to the NPT called for halting the production of 
fissile material by 2005. As of 2010, negotiations toward an FMCT remained 
stalled. One source of the delay in negotiations was the Bush administration’s 
announcement in July 2004 that the United States would support a treaty only 
without verification provisions.45 Critics of this position noted that the Ameri-
can action would cripple the attempt to stop the production of fissile material. 
Dr. Frank von Hippel, a former White House science advisor, has argued that a 
verifiable FMCT would be “a political challenge, but it is technically feasible to 
establish the means to effectively monitor and verify compliance with the treaty 
in order to detect and deter clandestine nuclear bomb production efforts.”46 
Others have noted that this “trust but not verify” approach was characteristic 
of the Bush administration’s approach to the Strategic Offensive Reductions 
Treaty (or Moscow Treaty), which entered into force in 2003 with no verifica-
tion provisions, and of its refusal to participate in the negotiations to strengthen 
the verifiability of the Biological Weapons Convention. In a major address on 
arms control in Prague on April 5, 2009, President Obama reversed the Bush 
administration’s position on verification provisions in an FMCT, suggesting 
the need for a treaty that “verifiably ends the production of fissile materials 
intended for use in state nuclear weapons.”47 Pakistani opposition now appears 
to be the biggest obstacle to the conclusion of an agreement.
COOPERATION OR CONFRONTATION?
For fifty years, beginning with President Eisenhower’s “Atoms for Peace” 
proposal in 1953, the United States employed an approach to controlling the 

114 
Chapter Six
spread of weapons of mass destruction that placed a premium on international 
cooperation and diplomacy. That approach changed in 2003. The attacks 
on the United States on September 11, 2001, focused attention on the pos-
sibility of terrorist acts employing weapons of mass destruction and, conse-
quently, increased fear that rogue states, including Iraq, might be developing 
and stockpiling WMD. Against this backdrop (and disregarding contrary 
evidence offered by UN weapons inspectors), the United States, the United 
Kingdom, and other allies attacked Iraq with the avowed purpose of finding 
and destroying Iraqi WMD. No such weapons were ever found.
Intelligence indicates that North Korea has several nuclear weapons and 
that Iran is actively working to develop them. In fact, given the evidence con-
cerning North Korea’s nuclear weapons, it would have been more in keeping 
with the logic of the Bush administration’s policy of preemption, as described 
in the National Security Strategy of 2002, to attack North Korea before Iraq. 
That was not done, and now the United States must decide what to do about 
North Korea, Iran, and other potential or actual proliferators, as well as what 
to do about the very real danger of terrorists or criminals obtaining nuclear 
materials or even nuclear weapons.
Iraq was the first application of the Bush administration’s military-based, 
preemptive policy of counterproliferation, and it raised a number of troubling 
questions. The rationale for the invasion was that Iraq possessed weapons of 
mass destruction that posed a clear and present danger to the United States. 
While evidence of old Iraqi WMD research programs was found, nothing to 
justify the prewar security concerns was uncovered. The invasion was under-
taken on the basis of false intelligence assumptions, with enormous costs to 
both the United States and Iraq. Given the prohibitive costs of the policy of 
preemption, what other options exist?
An international, diplomatically based nonproliferation policy is frustrating 
and time consuming, but it was followed by the United States for three and 
a half decades. Perhaps 9/11 changed everything and demanded a dramatic 
revolution in U.S. strategy; that was the position of the Bush administration.48 
Just as difficult cases make bad law, however, it may be that traumatic trag-
edies such as 9/11 result in policies that are not sustainable or effective over 
the long term. A policy that patiently enlists the cooperation and support of 
the entire international community, less a few rogue states, is the best way to 
seek greater security in an insecure world.
In his Prague speech, President Obama called for “a new international ef-
fort to secure all vulnerable nuclear material around the world in four years.” 
The United Nations Security Council added its support for this objective 
in Resolution 1887, adopted on September 24, 2009. Then, in April 2010, 
President Obama hosted forty-seven world leaders at the Nuclear Security 

 
The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction 
115
Summit in Washington to highlight the need for greater cooperation on se-
curing nuclear stockpiles. States represented at the summit also committed 
themselves to securing all nuclear materials within four years. Clearly, the 
pendulum has swung back in the direction of greater reliance on multilateral 
approaches to the problem of proliferation.
There is a solid foundation on which to build multilateral efforts to restrain 
weapons proliferation. The three main treaties discussed in this chapter—the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Chemical Weapons Convention, and 
the Biological Weapons Convention—have been very widely accepted by 
the international community; holdouts are generally regarded as rogues rather 
than models worthy of emulation. Furthermore, while the holdouts (and even 
some signatories) continue to present problems and require close monitoring, 
there have been a number of successes in the effort to curb WMD prolifera-
tion. Rather than uncovering ongoing WMD programs, the Iraq War revealed 
that the international inspection regime imposed after the Persian Gulf War 
had done more than many expected to disarm Saddam Hussein. In spite of 
assistance from Pakistan, Libya failed to acquire the nuclear weapons it had 
long sought and, under the pressure of international sanctions, eventually de-
cided to give up its quest. South Africa, which had clandestinely developed 
nuclear weapons under its apartheid regime, reversed course and eliminated 
its nuclear weapons in the 1980s before its transition to democracy. Demo-
cratic transitions and improved relations between them encouraged Argentina 
and Brazil to give up WMD programs begun during periods of military rule. 
Ukraine and Kazakhstan, two states left with portions of the enormous Soviet 
nuclear arsenal following the breakup of the Soviet Union, opted to eliminate 
those weapons and sign the NPT as non–nuclear weapons states. In short, the 
news on the proliferation front is not all bad, even if there are many reasons 
to keep the issue near the top of the security agenda.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Allison, Graham. Nuclear Terrorism: The Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe. New 
York: Times Books, 2004.
Bunn, Matthew. Securing the Bomb 2010: Securing All Nuclear Materials in Four 
Years. Cambridge, Mass.: Nuclear Threat Initiative and the Project on Managing 
the Atom, Harvard University, April 2010.
Busch, Nathan E., and Daniel H. Joyner, eds. Combating Weapons of Mass Destruc-
tion: The Future of International Nonproliferation Policy. Athens: University of 
Georgia Press, 2009.

116 
Chapter Six
Campbell, Kurt M., Robert Einhorn, and Mitchell Reiss, eds. The Nuclear Tipping 
Point: Why States Reconsider Their Nuclear Choices. Washington, D.C.: Brook-
ings Institution Press, 2004.
Cirincione, Joseph, with Jon B. Wolfsthal and Miriam Rajkumar. Deadly Arsenals: 
Tracking Weapons of Mass Destruction. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace, 2002.
Perkovich, George, Joseph Cirincione, Rose Gottemoeller, Jon B. Wolfsthal, and Jes-
sica T. Mathews. Universal Compliance: A Strategy for Nuclear Security. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2005.
Sagan, Scott D., and Kenneth N. Waltz. The Spread of Nuclear Weapons: A Debate 
Renewed. New York: Norton, 2003.
Websites
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace: http://www.ceip.org
Defense Threat Reduction Agency: http://www.dtra.mil
Federation of American Scientists: http://www.fas.org
International Atomic Energy Agency: http://www.iaea.org
Monterey Institute for International Studies, Center for Nonproliferation Studies: 
http://cns.miis.edu
Nuclear Threat Initiative: http://www.nti.org

Part Two
NEW SOURCES OF INSECURITY


119
Chapter Seven
Infectious Disease and 
Health Insecurity
The traditional approach regards security purely in state-centric military 
terms; however, the threat posed by infectious disease calls this view into 
question. Throughout recorded history (and long before there was an aware-
ness of their existence), microbes have threatened the security of human 
communities, occasionally shaking the foundations of states and empires. In 
his History of the Peloponnesian War, Thucydides wrote not only about the 
military battles between the rival city-states of Athens and Sparta but, in ex-
cruciating detail, about the epidemic that swept Athens in 430–429 BC, killing 
a quarter of its soldiers. A passage describing the breakdown of order due to 
what Thucydides calls simply “the plague” is worth noting:
The bodies of the dying were heaped one on top of the other, and half-dead 
creatures could be seen staggering about in the streets or flocking around the 
fountains in their desire for water. For the catastrophe was so overwhelming 
that men, not knowing what would happen next to them, became indifferent to 
every rule of religion or law. Athens owed to the plague the beginnings of a state 
of unprecedented lawlessness. Seeing how quick and abrupt were the changes 
of fortune . . . people now began openly to venture on acts of self-indulgence 
which before then they used to keep in the dark. . . . No fear of god or law of 
man had a restraining influence. As for the gods, it seemed to be the same thing 
whether one worshipped them or not, when one saw the good and the bad dying 
indiscriminately. As for offences against human law, no one expected to live 
long enough to be brought to trial and punished.1
According to a modern historian of disease, William McNeill, in a relatively 
short period of time the epidemic “inflicted a blow on Athenian society from 
which it never recovered.”2 Thucydides himself implies that the epidemic 
contributed to Sparta’s defeat of Athens. Many scholars consider Thucydides 

120 
Chapter Seven
to be the father of the discipline of international relations, yet his progeny 
have focused narrowly on military aspects of security rather than the broader 
view Thucydides adopted.
Between 1347 and 1351, a catastrophic pandemic ravaged Eurasia and 
Africa north of the Sahara. Estimates of the number of deaths caused by the 
plague are necessarily rough, but scholars have suggested a mortality rate 
for Europe ranging from 25 to 45 percent of the population. In 1351, the 
Vatican put the number of plague deaths in Christian Europe at 23,840,000, 
which was about a third of Europe’s population before bubonic plague struck 
in 1347. According to the medieval historian Froissart, “a third of the world 
died.”3 The significance of the plague may go well beyond the fact that no 
war in human history has killed a larger proportion of the world’s population. 
Some have argued that the frequent recurrence of bubonic plague in Europe 
between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries, always with large-scale suf-
fering and death apparently unrelated to the piety (or impiety) of the victims, 
resulted in the breakdown of respect for the dominant religious institution, the 
Roman Catholic Church. Infectious disease thus created the social conditions 
in which the Protestant Reformation and the religious wars that followed 
could occur. By this account, the European experience with bubonic plague 
led to a fundamental transformation of the international system since the 1648 
Peace of Westphalia, which ended the most destructive of Europe’s religious 
wars, established the modern system of sovereign states.4
Historians often point to the technological superiority of the European 
conquistadors in explaining their impressive defeat of the native meso-
American Indians in the sixteenth century. However, when Spanish explorer 
Cortez and his men reached the New World with their European weapons, 
even more destructive to native peoples was the smallpox virus that the Eu-
ropeans also brought to the Americas. Although smallpox had caused many 
deaths in Europe, the conquistadors and other survivors of periodic European 
smallpox epidemics had built up some immunity to the virus. The Amerindi-
ans of Mexico and Central America had no such protection; the results were 
devastating to the immunologically unprepared peoples of the New World. 
There were an estimated thirty million people in central Mexico when Cortez 
arrived in 1519; fifty years later, the indigenous population was three million, 
a tenth of what it had been. By 1618, the indigenous population had fallen to 
1.6 million, and the primary culprit of this devastating population decline was 
disease.5 The conquistadors’ most effective weapon against the indigenous 
peoples of the Americas was smallpox, not gunpowder.
Disease is not always an ally of the invaders. Typhus, which is sometimes 
called “war fever” because of its common association with wartime conditions, 
was one of the principal causes of the destruction of Napoleon’s Grand Army 

 
Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
121
on its ill-fated march into Russia in 1812. Of the 422,000 French soldiers who 
began that campaign, only ten thousand returned to France. Roughly half of 
the fatalities are believed to have been caused by typhus and other diseases. 
During the Crimean War (1853–56), the British lost ten times more soldiers to 
disease than to combat. Typhus affected both soldiers and civilians during and 
after World War I. In 1915, 150,000 people died of the disease in Serbia alone. 
From 1918 to 1922, it infected as many as thirty million people and claimed as 
many as three million victims in Eastern Europe and Russia.6
As World War I came to an end in 1918, pandemic influenza began circling 
the globe. Known as the Spanish influenza, not because of its place of origin 
(which was China) but because it affected 80 percent of the population of 
Spain, the pandemic quickly killed as many as one hundred million people 
around the world, six times as many as had been killed in all theaters of the 
war.7 The influenza first hit the United States when two sailors reported ill 
in Boston. Spreading rapidly up and down the East Coast, it eventually af-
fected almost a quarter of the U.S. population. Half a million Americans died, 
hospitals were filled to overflowing, and, in Baltimore and Washington, there 
were shortages of coffins.8
The pandemic was by no means confined to the United States or even to 
the Northern Hemisphere. Between September and November 1918, 5 per-
cent of the population of Ghana died of influenza. Almost all of the thirty-
eight thousand people living in Western Samoa got the flu in November and 
December of 1918; 7,500 died of it.9 Spanish influenza took four months to 
circle the globe in 1918 and 1919; in today’s more globalized world, it could 
do so in four days.
These examples demonstrate the dramatic impact that disease has had on 
human history, an impact that many historians have failed to note adequately. 
Disease, in short, has posed significant threats to the security of peoples and 
political structures throughout history, and it continues to pose a substantial 
threat. Indeed, given the emergence of new diseases and the possibility of 
terrorists employing biological weapons, disease may very well be one of 
the greatest, if not the greatest, threat to security in the twenty-first century.
In this chapter, we will describe various infectious diseases and the threats 
that they pose, indicate what has been done to control these threats, and describe 
what else can be done to address the security implications of infectious diseases.
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Major advances in the scientific understanding of infectious diseases have 
occurred only within the past century. Before the twentieth century, with little 

122 
Chapter Seven
understanding of the way infectious diseases attack their victims and spread 
to others, active defenses were impossible. Not even simple bacterial infec-
tions of the kind associated with dirt in an open wound could be treated ef-
fectively prior to the discovery of penicillin. The timely discovery and large-
scale manufacture of penicillin, in fact, made World War II the first conflict 
in history in which those wounded in battle had a better than even chance of 
surviving without the loss of a limb. As the macabre scene of a Confederate 
hospital in Atlanta in the classic movie Gone with the Wind suggests, prior 
to the introduction of penicillin only amputation under relatively antiseptic 
conditions would save the life of a soldier with a spreading infection.
The remarkable advances of modern medicine have achieved only limited 
success in halting the carnage of infectious diseases, and even those limited 
successes are in danger of being reversed. Let us note first the successes and 
then the very real threats.
The most deadly infectious disease in history was smallpox. In the twenti-
eth century alone, smallpox killed somewhere between three and five hundred 
million people worldwide. In the 1930s, approximately fifty thousand people 
per year were infected in the United States alone; the mortality rate among 
victims was 30 percent. While the vaccination first developed by Edward 
Jenner in 1796 provided a proven means of limiting the spread of smallpox, 
the vaccine was not widely distributed enough to eliminate the threat. Not 
surprisingly, the United States and other wealthy countries were the first to 
eradicate smallpox within their territories, a feat accomplished in advanced 
industrial states by the 1950s. Progress was much slower in the developing 
world. In 1967, when the World Health Organization (WHO) created its 
Smallpox Eradication Unit, smallpox was still claiming 1.5 to 2 million lives 
annually. Through a concerted and well-funded effort to carry vaccines to the 
most remote parts of the world, WHO succeeded in eliminating smallpox. 
In 1980, WHO declared its eradication program a success.10 However, both 
the United States and the Soviet Union kept samples of the virus in order to 
prepare defenses against a possible biological attack employing smallpox; the 
deadliest disease in history had not been completely eliminated. Following 
the attacks on 9/11, there was concern that terrorists might obtain samples of 
smallpox and deliberately infect the populations of target states.
Worldwide, infectious diseases kill more people than all other causes com-
bined; in 1998, a total of fifty-four million people died of infectious diseases.11 
By contrast, an estimated total of fifty million people died in World War II, 
which lasted from 1939 to 1945. During the past several decades, thirty previ-
ously unknown diseases have emerged, including HIV/AIDS, Ebola, Marburg 
fever, hepatitis C, SARS, avian flu, the Hanta virus, and a virulent form of 
flesh-eating streptococcus. Unfortunately, there is no end in sight to the emer-

 
Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
123
gence of new diseases. It appears that pestilence is not only the deadliest of the 
four horsemen of the apocalypse but the most adaptable as well.
In addition to newly emerging diseases, several of humanity’s oldest 
and most deadly scourges are staging a comeback, including tuberculosis, 
cholera, and malaria. The world’s deadliest diseases are lower respiratory 
infections, such as pneumonia, which kill over four million people a year; 
HIV/AIDS (two million deaths per year); tuberculosis (one to two million); 
malaria (one million); measles (500,000); and pertussis, or whooping cough 
(200,000 to 300,000).12
Epidemiological studies indicate that approximately twenty well-known 
diseases are reemerging, and this is occurring in developed as well as devel-
oping countries. For example, tuberculosis was supposed to have been eradi-
cated in the United States by 2000, but it is staging a robust return. In 1993, 
WHO identified tuberculosis as a global emergency, with particular areas of 
the world, including Russia, India, Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and 
parts of Latin America, considered particularly vulnerable. The TB bacillus, 
which is spread through the air by coughing and sneezing, infects one-third 
of the world’s population, but only 5 to 10 percent of those with the infection 
ever develop symptoms and become contagious. Nonetheless, in 2008, there 
were 11.1 million sick with TB worldwide; an estimated 1.3 million deaths 
attributable to TB occurred that year. Those infected with HIV are especially 
vulnerable to tuberculosis, and vice versa, as the two diseases work together 
to attack the human body. TB coinfects approximately 30 percent of those 
who are HIV-positive and is the leading identifiable cause of death among 
those with HIV.13
Malaria is another well-known but often misunderstood disease with dev-
astating effects. Caused by parasites injected into humans with the bites of 
certain mosquito species, malaria generally produces fever and chills in its 
victims. In more severe cases, the fever may be followed by anemia, seizures, 
or even heart and lung failure. Some who survive malaria return to full health 
(and may even develop resistance to the disease), but others are left with 
physical or mental disabilities. No vaccines exist at present, but a variety of 
treatments, including quinine and its synthetic relative, chloroquine, have 
been developed over the years. In the absence of a vaccine, prevention efforts 
have been focused on eradicating the mosquitoes that spread malaria, primar-
ily by using insecticides and blocking their access to humans through the use 
of insecticide-treated mosquito nets.14
According to the most recent global report on malaria from the World 
Health Organization, malaria is endemic in 109 countries, over half of the 
countries in the world. Roughly 250 million people worldwide are infected 
with the disease and almost a million die from it each year.15 Ninety percent 

124 
Chapter Seven
of malaria-related deaths occur in sub-Saharan Africa, mostly among chil-
dren. Malaria, like many other diseases, mostly afflicts the poor.
Even in the developed world, disease takes a ghastly toll. In the United States, 
infectious disease remains the third-leading cause of death. Many medical re-
searchers are now worried that the overuse—and the misuse—of antibiotics may 
be stimulating the development of drug-resistant strains of bacteria, thus dimin-
ishing the world’s capacity to overcome many common diseases. This concern 
raises an important and very disturbing aspect of humanity’s battle with disease. 
Just as action-reaction processes sometimes characterize conflicts between or 
among countries, a pattern in which the defensive measures of one side prompt 
the development of countermeasures by the other side, so the human conflict 
with pathogenic microbes involves an unending quest for biological escalation 
dominance. Diseases mutate in ways that, at the risk of making them seem hu-
man, appear fiendishly clever. Thus, the influenza vaccine developed to protect 
the most vulnerable people in society (generally the elderly and the young) from 
the ill effects of one flu season are unlikely to have any effect against the influ-
enza strains that spread through the population a year later.
As we have pointed out with respect to other security issues, actions taken 
to defend against threats often have the unintended effect of becoming threats 
themselves. In the case of antibiotics, drugs developed to defend against 
infection may actually assist pathogens in developing mutations that are not 
affected by the antibiotic. A pertinent example of problematic pathogen evo-
lution is multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB), found in Central Asia 
and Africa. In a sense, the actions taken to defend against the tuberculosis 
threat have helped to produce a new threat.
What some of the world’s emerging diseases lack (so far) in numbers of 
victims they more than make up for in the ghastliness of their effects on hu-
man beings. Whether spread deliberately or not, an outbreak of Ebola in the 
United States would introduce an element of insecurity related as much to 
the disease’s symptoms as to its contagiousness or lethality. A Zairean doc-
tor who in 1976 was among the first to encounter the modern strain of Ebola 
reported his findings in these words:
The affliction is characterized by a high temperature around thirty-nine degrees 
Celsius; frequent vomiting of black, digested blood, but of red blood in a few 
cases; diarrheal emissions initially sprinkled with blood, with only red blood near 
death; epistaxis [nosebleeds] now and then; retrosternal and abdominal pain and 
a state of stupor; prostration with heaviness in the joints; rapid evolution toward 
death after a period of about three days, from a state of general health.16
Based on contemporary descriptions of the effects of Ebola such as this and 
comparing them to the descriptions of the plague in the History of the Pelo-

 
Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
125
ponnesian War, some analysts believe that the plague that devastated Athens 
was actually Ebola.17
In 1967, a hemorrhagic fever closely related to Ebola, called Marburg fever 
(for the German city where it was first seen), briefly made the jump from Af-
rica to Europe when three workers at a pharmaceutical plant fell ill with flu-
like symptoms. They were hospitalized, but their condition rapidly worsened; 
nausea, enlarged spleens, and bloodshot eyes appeared first. Then came red 
rashes, raw throats, and acute diarrhea. In the second week, the entire body 
of those affected became red in color as blood flow was blocked throughout 
the capillaries. This was accompanied by severe pain. Next, the vomiting of 
blood, the peeling of skin, and uncontrollable bleeding appeared. Several 
patients died, and others were left with assorted disabilities. The disease was 
traced to a group of monkeys that had been shipped to European labs from 
Uganda.18 Not only is there no vaccine or cure for the Ebola and Marburg 
hemorrhagic fevers, but both are considered by public health officials to be 
excellent candidates for use as biological weapons.
Unfortunately, Marburg fever and Ebola are not the only diseases to jump 
from an animal species to humans. In 1997, there was an outbreak in Hong 
Kong of avian influenza virus (H5N1) that killed six of eighteen people in-
fected with it.19 Before this outbreak, scientists had thought that it was not 
possible for birds to infect humans. Following the initial outbreaks, millions 
of chickens, ducks, and other birds in Asia were killed in an attempt to de-
stroy the virus. Yet, in 2004, forty-four confirmed human cases of avian flu 
were documented in Thailand and Vietnam. Of those people infected, thirty-
two died. While avian influenza cases remain rare—only 508 cases have been 
recorded since 2003—the disease remains worrisome because it is so often 
fatal to humans.20
In December 2002, a new disease—severe acute respiratory syndrome, or 
SARS—was first identified in southern China. During the next two years, 
nine thousand cases were identified, and nine hundred people died of this new 
disease. Although SARS was mainly present in five Asian countries (China, 
Taiwan, Singapore, Vietnam, and Thailand), it had global implications. For 
example, the outbreak of SARS in Canada caused a downturn in American 
tourist visits there, with significant economic implications for Canada. Fortu-
nately, within two years of the initial outbreak of SARS, a vaccine had been 
developed.
In spite of the brief incursions into the developed world that Marburg fever, 
Ebola, avian flu, SARS, and certain other emerging infectious diseases have 
made, it may be tempting to think of such diseases as someone else’s prob-
lem. After all, most of these newly discovered diseases were native to Africa 
and Asia and, with some rare exceptions, were largely confined to these areas. 

126 
Chapter Seven
Other debilitating diseases, such as cholera and malaria, are primarily found 
in developing countries, and the public health systems of developed countries 
like the United States have, with few exceptions, either beaten back these 
scourges or kept them at bay.
It is unwise, however, to assume that the world’s bacteriological and viral 
problems have always been stopped at the borders or that they will be in the 
future. Globalization has always encouraged a robust exchange of microbes 
along with goods and services. Recall that it was merchants returning from 
Asia to Europe who carried bubonic plague in the fourteenth century. Re-
member, too, that two sailors disembarking in Boston in 1918 brought the 
Spanish influenza to American shores. The approach of both American and 
international public health officials in combating infectious disease has been, 
according to Laurie Garrett, based on two false assumptions: “that microbes 
were biologically stationary targets and that the diseases could be geographi-
cally sequestered.”21 The greater the level of exchange of persons and prod-
ucts in the world—that is, the greater the degree of globalization—the greater 
will be the possibility that deadly pathogens also will travel.
Time is no ally. In 1350 BC the first epidemic of smallpox was identified 
in Egypt. It had spread to China by 49 AD, to Europe after 700, the Western 
Hemisphere by 1520, and Australia by 1789.22 Thus, it took smallpox a little 
over three thousand years to circumnavigate the globe. By contrast, it took 
HIV/AIDS only about thirty years to do so. Globalization collapses time 
needed for the spread of infectious diseases.
Potential for the global spread of infectious diseases is related to the dif-
ferent incubation periods of infectious diseases and has a profound impact on 
public health. Smallpox, for example, has an incubation period from ten to 
fourteen days. Thanks to the ease and efficiency of international air travel, 
an individual who carries the smallpox virus could visit half a dozen or more 
of the world’s major cities in the time between contracting the disease and 
first noticing the symptoms. Add to this disturbing reality the fact that more 
people than ever before are traveling long distances. In 1951, there were 
seven million airline passengers. The number topped five hundred million (or 
1.4 million per day) by 1993, and was projected to be 2.28 billion in 2010. As 
the Nobel Prize–winning geneticist Joshua Lederberg puts it, “The world is 
just one village. Our tolerance of disease in any place is at our own peril.”23
HIV/AIDS
Nowhere is this truth more evident than in the case of the human immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV) and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). 

 
Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
127
HIV/AIDS is recognized as a clear and present danger. Today, 33.3 million 
people worldwide are living with HIV/AIDS; 1.8 million new cases of HIV/
AIDS infection occurred worldwide in 2009.24 Since the disease was first 
identified over thirty years ago, almost 60 million people have been infected. 
Two million people died of the disease in 2008 alone. Over 90 percent of 
those infected with HIV are in the developing world, 22.4 million in sub-
Saharan Africa alone.25
One significant effect of the HIV/AIDS pandemic has been the creation 
of large numbers of “AIDS orphans.” The Joint United Nations Programme 
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) estimates that in 2009 there were 16.6 million 
children under eighteen who had lost one or both parents to AIDS; roughly 
90 percent of these children are in sub-Saharan Africa, including 2.5 million 
in Nigeria.26 AIDS orphans are less likely to remain in school and are more 
vulnerable to exploitation by sex traffickers or warlords. Many fear that the 
“lost orphan generation” created by AIDS deaths will exacerbate the child-
soldier problem. With no parents to provide for and supervise them, orphaned 
children have been recruited by unscrupulous warlords and guerrilla groups 
as soldiers. Sadly, child soldiers existed before the scourge of AIDS, but by 
creating millions of orphans the HIV/AIDS pandemic has made the child-
soldier problem much worse. It is likely to continue to worsen far into the 
future. Clearly, Africa is the epicenter of the AIDS pandemic.
For the nations of sub-Saharan Africa, AIDS is not just a humanitarian cri-
sis. It is a security crisis—because it threatens not just individual citizens, 
but the very institutions that define and defend the character of a society. 
This disease weakens work forces and saps economic strength. AIDS 
strikes at teachers and denies education to their students. It strikes at the 
military, and subverts the forces of order and peacekeeping. AIDS is one 
of the most devastating threats ever to confront the world community. The 
United Nations was created to stop wars. Now we must wage and win a 
great and peaceful war of our time—the war against AIDS.
—Vice President Al Gore
Source: Quoted in Andrew T. Price-Smith, The Health of Nations: Infectious 
Disease, Environmental Change, and Their Effects on National Security and 
Development (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002), 123–24.
AIDS is a crisis for both the developed and the developing worlds. To date, 
more than six hundred thousand people have died with an AIDS diagnosis 
in the United States. This figure is approximately equal to the total number 
of Americans killed in World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War 

128 
Chapter Seven
combined. For this reason, and because of the threat that the HIV/AIDS pan-
demic represents to the political, social, and economic stability of the world, 
in April 2000 President Clinton declared that AIDS represented a “national 
security threat.” The National Intelligence Council, a U.S. government advi-
sory body, issued a national intelligence estimate in 2000 entitled “The Global 
Infectious Disease Threat and Its Implications for the United States.” Currently 
the Central Intelligence Agency actively recruits medical analysts specializing 
in internal medicine, epidemiology, infectious diseases, and public health.27
Concern over HIV/AIDS is not a partisan issue. In his confirmation hear-
ings to become secretary of state, Colin Powell noted that he, like President 
Clinton, viewed HIV/AIDS as a “national security threat.” Former president 
George W. Bush stated that “AIDS is the greatest health crisis of our time.”28 
Underscoring the seriousness and international nature of the issue, in 2001 
both the UN Security Council and the General Assembly met in special ses-
sions devoted to the global threat posed by AIDS.
A collaborative analysis of HIV/AIDS cosponsored by the Milbank Me-
morial Fund and the Council on Foreign Relations concluded, “Global HIV/
AIDS is undoubtedly one of the greatest contemporary threats to mankind.”29 
The former head of the World Bank, James Wolfensohn, has noted, “Many of 
us used to think of AIDS as a health issue. We were wrong; . . . nothing we 
have seen is a greater challenge to the peace and stability of African societies 
than the epidemic of AIDS. . . . We face a major development crisis, and more 
than that, a security crisis.”30
A number of governments, international and nongovernmental organiza-
tions, and individual analysts have focused on AIDS as a security threat. 
P. W. Singer, for example, writing in Survival, the journal of the respected In-
ternational Institute for Strategic Studies, has argued that AIDS poses a direct 
danger to national and international stability and is a threat to the militaries 
of countries.31 In regard to the AIDS threat to military forces, Singer notes 
that studies consistently indicate that the infection rates in African military 
forces are around five times that of civilian populations and that during times 
of war infection rates can be as much as fifty times higher.32 The average rate 
of infection for African militaries is 30 percent, but for some countries it is 
much higher. Estimates indicate that infection rates are as high as 50 percent 
for Congo and Angola, 66 percent for Uganda, 75 percent in Malawi, and 80 
percent in Zimbabwe. The United Nations draws many of its peacekeeping 
forces from the ranks of African militaries. If AIDS infection rates continue 
to grow, many African militaries will be unable to provide forces. Singer con-
cludes, “AIDS is indeed a security threat and should be treated as such, with 
the high-level attention and resources necessary to defend against it. Fighting 
AIDS is not just a matter of altruism, but enlightened self interest.”33

 
Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
129
In an early analysis of the link between AIDS and security, the nongov-
ernmental International Crisis Group argued that AIDS is significant in five 
different senses: as a personal issue, an economic issue, a communal security 
issue, a national security issue, and an international security issue.34 On the 
personal level, AIDS threatens the “lives, health, family structure, and well 
being of individuals and entire communities.”35 In an economic sense, “AIDS 
puts at risk human capital and natural resource development, and business 
investment, which form the foundation of national economies.”36 AIDS not 
only affects a country’s economic performance but its community and social 
cohesion as well. According to the British House of Commons, “Evidence 
suggests that in societies facing economic crisis and lack of clear political 
leadership the presence of AIDS with its associated stigma may cause insta-
bility. The citizens are aware of the increase in illness and death, the stigma 
associated with it; and the lack of leadership leads to blame.”37 AIDS has 
the potential to threaten both individual states’ national security as well as 
broader international security.
Acknowledging the appalling, tragic effects of, and the threat posed by, the 
AIDS pandemic, in his 2003 State of the Union address George W. Bush an-
nounced the establishment of the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 
(PEPFAR), describing it as “a work of mercy beyond all current international 
efforts to help the people of Africa.”38 Bush pledged that the United States 
would provide fifteen billion dollars over a five-year period. The program 
was aimed at preventing seven million new infections and sought to treat two 
million people infected with HIV/AIDS. In addition, the program sought to 
provide care for ten million people. Initially, the Bush administration identi-
fied fourteen countries (twelve of them in sub-Saharan Africa) to which aid 
would be directed: Guyana, Haiti, Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Kenya, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, 
and Zambia. Congress later instructed the president to add a fifteenth country 
outside of the Caribbean or Africa, and Vietnam was accordingly added to 
the list in the summer of 2004.
BIOTERRORISM
The threats posed by naturally occurring diseases are substantial and frighten-
ing enough; however, the potential for terrorist use of diseases as weapons 
amplifies the threats. Bioterrorism was very much on the minds of the top-
level members of the U.S. government even before the traumatic events of 
September 11, 2001. In his State of the Union address of January 2000, Presi-
dent Clinton declared, “I predict to you, when most of us are long gone, but 

130 
Chapter Seven
sometime in the next ten to twenty years, the major security threat this coun-
try will face will come from the enemies of the nation-state: the narco-traf-
fickers and the terrorists and the organized criminals, who will be organized 
together, working together, with increasing access to ever more sophisticated 
chemical and biological weapons.”39 President Clinton’s national security 
advisor, Anthony Lake, introduced his provocative book 6 Nightmares with 
a fictional scenario depicting a biological weapons attack by terrorists on the 
convention center in Washington, D.C.40 Clearly, U.S. leaders were worried 
about pathogens being used as weapons to attack the United States and kill 
many Americans. They had very good reason.
On several occasions, terrorist organizations, fringe groups, and disaf-
fected individuals have attempted to use biological weapons against civil-
ian populations generally or against particular persons. The case of the 
anthrax-laced letters described in chapter 4 is perhaps the most memorable 
case for Americans. But there have been other instances. For example, in 
1984, members of the Rajneesh cult living near The Dalles, Oregon, spread 
salmonella in local restaurants in an effort to sicken large numbers of local 
residents immediately before a local election in which a zoning ordnance 
affecting the cult was to be decided. Seven hundred and fifty-one people 
fell ill.41 In 1998, an American white supremacist obtained plague and an-
thrax cultures and, before his arrest, spoke openly of using crop dusters to 
spread the diseases.42
There are, as we noted in chapter 4, a small number of states (including 
North Korea and Syria) that likely have ongoing biological weapons pro-
grams and others that may be in violation of some aspects of the Biological 
Weapons Convention. The U.S. government has sought to prevent the use of 
biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons through deterrence. In essence, the 
United States has proclaimed that if it were attacked by a state using weap-
ons of mass destruction, it would counterattack in kind and inflict unaccept-
able damage on the attacking state. Such threats have proved to be effective 
against states; however, the question now is whether they will deter terrorist 
groups.
In the case of bioterrorism, history is not reassuring. The problem with 
groups like Aum Shinrikyo is that they have no territory of their own to 
threaten with counterattack. This led Richard Betts to conclude in 1998, “If a 
larger part of the worry about WMD these days is about their use by terrorist 
groups, the odds are higher that sometime, somewhere in the country, some 
of these weapons will go off despite the best efforts to stop them.”43 The U.S. 
National Intelligence Council stated in 2004, “Our greatest concern is that 
terrorists might acquire biological or, less likely, a nuclear device, either of 
which could cause mass casualties.”44

 
Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
131
ADDRESSING THE THREAT OF DISEASE
Clearly much can be done to confront the threats of infectious diseases and 
bioterrorism. The past can be a guide to the future. As we noted earlier, the 
World Health Organization, with the cooperation of member states, was able 
to eradicate endemic smallpox. The way this was accomplished suggests how 
threats in this area might be addressed. The most striking aspect of WHO’s 
effective campaign to eliminate smallpox was the cooperation of states, inter-
national organizations, and nongovernmental organizations. Indeed, coopera-
tion by various types of international actors is key to confronting the threat 
of infectious disease.
The GAVI Alliance (formerly the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Im-
munizations) provides an example of what can be accomplished through a 
broad-based, cooperative approach among global actors including govern-
ments, international organizations, NGOs, and the private sector. Established 
in 2000 with an initial grant of $750 million from the Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation, the GAVI Alliance makes vaccines and immunizations available 
to those in the world’s poorest states. Through the end of 2009, the Alliance 
estimated that its program of immunizations against hepatitis B and pertussis 
(whooping cough), along with its investments in other vaccination efforts in 
the developing world, had prevented the future deaths of 5.4 million people, 
most of them children. A total of 257 million children worldwide received 
vaccinations as a consequence of almost five billion dollars in donations from 
states and nonprofit organizations funneled through the GAVI Alliance dur-
ing its first decade of existence.45
The Gates Foundation, which is the wealthiest foundation in the world, 
has thus far distributed over thirteen billion dollars to improve global health. 
New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman has called Bill Gates a “super-
empowered individual” because of his ability to act as a “game-changer” on 
matters of global concern, including the infectious disease threat. While few 
individuals or nongovernmental organizations can match the resources of 
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, even acting in large coalitions, the 
Gateses’ activities in the area of global health nonetheless provide a reminder 
of the increasing importance of nonstate actors in international relations.46
The response to date to the threat of HIV/AIDS offers both positive and 
negative lessons. On the positive side, the U.S. government and the interna-
tional community have recognized the significance of the threat that HIV/
AIDS represents. There is a general consensus that HIV/AIDS threatens not 
only public health but also security. On the negative side, the response to 
HIV/AIDS has tended to eclipse the threats posed by other infectious dis-
eases. For example, malaria still kills almost a million people each year. The 

132 
Chapter Seven
leading cause of death of AIDS victims is tuberculosis, and an estimated 30 
percent of African AIDS victims are coinfected with HIV and TB. It is impor-
tant that the global response to HIV/AIDS not weaken the response to other 
health issues. As the authors of the 2004 study cosponsored by the Council 
on Foreign Relations and the Milbank Memorial Fund argued:
The concerted campaign to fight malaria in the 1960s and 1970s drew resources 
from the larger health systems and from other vital health problems. For the 
smallpox eradication campaign of the 1970s and 1980s, a separate delivery sys-
tem was developed and then allowed to dissolve, leaving no infrastructure for 
later vaccination campaigns. Fighting HIV/AIDS in the same way would have 
a negative effect on health systems’ capacity to meet other health needs, and it 
would have disastrous consequences for the long-term health and development 
of affected countries.47
What is needed is a comprehensive, integrated approach that focuses on mul-
tiple infectious-disease threats rather than isolating only one or a few.
Resources are vital. The contrasts between health expenditures in devel-
oping and developed states are stark. The World Heath Organization has 
calculated (on the basis of 2004 data) that health spending in the states of the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) averages 
$2,716 per person per year. In contrast, there are sixty-four WHO member 
states in which health spending is under fifty dollars per person per year. 
OECD member states contain 18 percent of the world’s population and spend 
80 percent of the world’s health-care dollars.48
When the first effective treatments for HIV/AIDS were developed in the 
1990s, the cost of treating someone infected with the disease was between 
ten and fifteen thousand dollars per year, putting treatment far beyond the 
reach of almost everyone in the developing world. A combination of devel-
opments between 2000 and 2005 helped to increase access to antiretroviral 
(ARV) drugs. First, the major pharmaceutical companies holding patents on 
the drugs began to negotiate lower prices in an effort to make treatment pro-
grams more affordable to those governments, international organizations, and 
NGOs attempting to slow the spread of HIV/AIDS in the developing world. 
Second, the Clinton administration announced that it would not intervene on 
behalf of drug companies in cases in which African countries decided to vio-
late international patents for ARV therapies. Third, in 2001, an Indian drug 
manufacturer began to produce a generic form of the most popular form of 
combination therapy. This made treatment far more affordable and touched 
off a round of price cutting by companies making patented drugs. Fourth, 
after leaving office, Bill Clinton created the William J. Clinton Foundation, 
which had as one of its global priorities improving access to health care in 

 
Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
133
the developing world. The Clinton Foundation, together with Médecins Sans 
Frontières and other NGOs, entered into negotiations with drug companies 
and governments to secure even lower prices for drugs used in the treatment 
of HIV/AIDS. Finally, in 2004, PEPFAR began operating with the primary 
objective of providing funding for HIV/AIDS treatment in some of the 
world’s poorest, and most seriously affected, countries.49
It is vital that wealthy countries make and maintain their commitment to 
confront the threats posed by infectious diseases. In this regard, the commit-
ment by the United States in the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 
is noteworthy but must be fully funded. The effects of the 2008 economic 
crisis combined with lagging political will have resulted in a failure to fully 
honor financial commitments to improve access to health care in the develop-
ing world.
Another important aspect of addressing the pandemic of HIV/AIDS and 
other infectious diseases concerns female literacy. Studies indicate that the 
number of women infected with HIV/AIDS is growing. This is due to the 
ways in which HIV/AIDS is transmitted. In many cases in the developing 
world, older males who frequent prostitutes or use intravenous drugs marry 
younger women and infect them with HIV/AIDS. Because two-thirds of the 
world’s illiterate people are women, many women are unaware of the dan-
gers of and precautions against HIV/AIDS infection. Increasing women’s 
literacy programs is one way of addressing the problem of AIDS and other 
health issues. For example, women who read are more likely to be able to 
provide for their families and to obtain medical care for their children. In-
creasing women’s literacy is also a means of addressing population control 
and economic development in that, as studies have shown, “for every three 
years of education that you provide a woman, it tends to reduce their own 
individual birth rate by one child.”50 The World Bank has found that “women 
with a post-secondary education are three times more likely than uneducated 
to know that HIV can be transmitted from mother to child.”51 Educating 
women can have salutary economic effects; for example, increasing the level 
of education and resources available to female farmers to the same level as 
male farmers increased crop yields as much as 22 percent.52 In its study of 
the world of 2020, the National Intelligence Council stated, “A growing body 
of empirical literature suggests that gender equality in education promotes 
economic growth and reduces child mortality and malnutrition.”53
Education is also needed in countries that are likely to be targets of bioter-
rorists. Richard Betts has called for extensive civil defense programs to pre-
pare Americans for possible attacks employing weapons of mass destruction. 
In addition, antibiotics to treat victims of bioterrorism could be stockpiled, 
though at substantial cost. In the aftermath of the anthrax attacks in 2001, the 

134 
Chapter Seven
U.S. government ordered nine hundred million dollars’worth of antibiotics, 
but these are only effective for eighteen months. Are the American people 
prepared to spend almost a billion dollars every year and a half to prepare for 
a hypothetical attack? Other measures that could be implemented to prepare 
for bioterrorism include the stockpiling or actual distribution of protective 
masks (as is already done in Israel), the purchase and distribution of decon-
tamination equipment, public education about protection from biological 
weapons, and increased public health resources to deal with an attack. Narita 
Airport in Japan already screens transiting passengers for infectious diseases, 
something that could be done at airports throughout the world.
In December 2004, the U.S. National Intelligence Council noted the 
very real and substantial threat of disease in the report on its 2020 Project. 
The Council concluded that while terrorism could slow globalization, a 
widespread pandemic could stop it altogether.54 Such a development would 
have profound implications for the future of civilization as we know it. For 
this reason, the threat of infectious disease may be the most serious that 
exists.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books and Articles
Betts, Richard K. “The New Threat of Mass Destruction.” Foreign Affairs 77 (Janu-
ary/February 1998): 26–41.
Brower, Jennifer. The Global Threat of New and Reemerging Infectious Diseases: 
Reconciling U.S. National Security and Public Health Policy. Santa Monica, Calif.: 
RAND Corporation, 2003.
Garrett, Laurie. Betrayal of Trust: The Collapse of Global Public Health. New York: 
Hyperion, 2000.
———. “The Lessons of HIV/AIDS.” Foreign Affairs 84 (July/August 2005): 51–65.
———. “The Next Pandemic?” Foreign Affairs 84 (July/August 2005): 3–23.
McNeill, William. Plagues and Peoples. New York: Anchor, 1976.
Milbank Memorial Fund and Council on Foreign Relations. Why Health Is Important 
to U.S. Foreign Policy. New York: Milbank Memorial Fund, 2001.
———. Addressing the HIV/AIDS Pandemic: A U.S. Global AIDS Strategy for the 
Long Term. New York: Milbank Memorial Fund, 2004.
Oldstone, Michael. Viruses, Plagues, and History. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2000.
Price-Smith, Andrew T. The Health of Nations: Infectious Disease, Environmental 
Change, and Their Effects on National Security and Development. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2002.
Singer, P. W. “AIDS and International Security.” Survival 44 (Spring 2002): 145–58.

 
Infectious Disease and Health Insecurity 
135
Tucker, Jonathan B. Scourge: The Once and Future Threat of Smallpox. Boston: 
Atlantic Monthly Press, 2001.
U.S. National Intelligence Council. The Global Infectious Disease Threat and Its 
Implications for the United States. NIE-99-17D. Washington, D.C.: January 2000.
Websites
Centers for Disease Control: http://www.cdc.gov
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS): http://www.unaids.org
National Institutes of Health: http://www.nih.gov
Roll Back Malaria Campaign, World Health Organization: http://www.rbm.who.int
World Health Organization: http://www.who.int


137
Chapter Eight
Transnational Criminal 
Organizations andTrafficking
On December 26, 2004, an earthquake measuring 9.0 on the Richter scale 
shook the ocean floor near the Indonesian island of Sumatra. The earthquake, 
the fifth most powerful recorded since 1900, triggered a massive tsunami that 
rippled outward from the earthquake’s epicenter at a speed of roughly five 
hundred miles per hour, engulfing coastal areas throughout the Indian Ocean 
basin.1 Three weeks after the disaster struck, estimates put the total number of 
people killed or missing at over 270,000, but given the fact that many victims 
were washed out to sea and many villages were completely destroyed, the full 
death toll may never be known.2
Governments around the world responded almost immediately by pledging 
humanitarian assistance. The dollar amounts were modest at first but quickly 
increased as leaders reacted to public criticism of their tightfisted policies. 
Eventually, the governments of the world pledged over four billion dollars in 
grants and loan assistance, with more promised in the form of debt relief for 
countries affected by the tsunami.3
Far more remarkable, however, was the response of private citizens around 
the world and the way the generosity of individuals, shared via the Internet, 
allowed nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to swing into action with 
unprecedented speed. Within a week of the disaster, for example, Doctors 
without Borders (Médecins Sans Frontières) announced on its website that 
the organization had already received as much money from online donations 
as it could spend in the affected region, given the limitations of its infrastruc-
ture and personnel. Private donations were estimated in mid-January 2005 to 
have amounted to approximately three billion dollars.4
The global response to the disaster illustrated many of the most salient 
features of what we commonly call “globalization.” People all over the world 
were able to see immediately, via video images transmitted by satellite and 

138 
Chapter Eight
through the Internet, the impact of the tsunami. They were able to respond 
through a widespread and well-developed network of NGOs (including the 
International Committee of the Red Cross, World Vision, Catholic Relief 
Services, and many others) by making credit card contributions through 
websites. Funds (in the form of electronic data) were sent halfway around 
the world, converted into the local currencies, and made available for the 
purchase of food, water, clothing, medicines, and building material almost 
instantaneously. And, while governments (largely through the military as-
sets they were able to deploy to the region) played an enormously helpful 
role in the distribution of aid, much of the initial outpouring of humanitarian 
assistance bypassed governments completely. In short, the global response 
illustrated all at once the three democratizations of technology, finance, and 
information that Thomas Friedman claims are at the heart of globalization.5
Globalization, however, is a two-edged sword. Just as Friedman’s democra-
tizations have facilitated global humanitarianism, so have they promoted global 
crime. The same basic factors that enable the Red Cross to raise and distribute 
hundreds of millions of dollars in aid in a matter of weeks allow Colombian 
drug lords or Russian arms traffickers to launder similar amounts of money in 
an equally brief period of time. Globalization allows consumers in the advanced 
industrialized states to buy clothing manufactured in Bangladesh, computers as-
sembled in Indonesia, and insurance policies sold by telemarketers in India, but 
it also allows consumers—sometimes the very same consumers—to buy heroin 
manufactured from poppies grown in Afghanistan, antiquities illegally exported 
from Egypt, and even young girls kidnapped and trafficked from Thailand.
TRAFFICKING AND TRANSNATIONAL 
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS (TCOs)
While globalization has created the environment, it is trafficking that raises 
security issues. Trafficking is simply illegal trade. The term refers both to 
commerce involving legal goods (such as cigarettes or computers) traded 
illegally (by, for example, evading taxes or contravening export or import 
restrictions) and to commerce involving illegal goods (such as narcotics or 
human beings) when traded in any manner whatsoever.
Trafficking, although dramatically expanded by it, is not a product of glo-
balization. In fact, both in the form of the illicit trade of legal goods and in 
the form of commerce in illegal goods, trafficking is an ancient activity that 
has involved, at various points in history, the bones of saints, Dutch tulips, 
and literature on birth control.
Although the list of legal and illegal items of trade has changed over time, 
even today a wide variety of commodities is trafficked. The list includes highly 

 
Transnational Criminal Organizations and Trafficking 
139
enriched uranium, endangered species of both plants and animals, stolen art, 
human organs, and illegally copied software, music, and movies (along with 
the commodities—and human lives—we will be focusing on in this chapter). 
Although it is impossible to know exactly how much wealth is generated by 
criminal enterprises, most experts believe that drug trafficking and arms traf-
ficking are the two most lucrative forms of trafficking. In fact, drug trafficking 
is believed to rank behind only the global trade in petroleum as a source of 
wealth. Human trafficking is generally thought to rank third, with the illicit 
trade in cultural property (art, antiquities, etc.) ranking fourth in total value.
Behind most of the trafficking that occurs are transnational criminal orga-
nizations (TCOs). Some of the biggest and most influential TCOs are well 
known—the Italian Mafia, the Colombian drug cartels, the Japanese yakuza, and 
the Russian mobs, for example—but many more operate entirely in the shad-
ows. What is perhaps most remarkable about TCOs is the extent to which their 
power has increased. All operate beyond the sovereignty of any state—that is, 
outside the law—but that has always been true of criminal enterprises. What is 
different now is that TCOs actually challenge the sovereignty of some states in 
areas well beyond the illegal activities that form the core of their identity. To put 
it differently, TCOs have come to control territory, extract rents (i.e., taxes) in 
areas under their control, provide services for local populations, and even wage 
war. All of these are functions that are normally associated with sovereign states.
In a few extreme cases, TCOs have gone beyond performing governmental 
functions and have actually taken over a state. The process may begin with 
bribery or attempts to intimidate public officials. Assassinations—of judges, 
legislators, police officials, and military officers—may follow. Eventually, as in 
Colombia twenty years ago, criminals and representatives of the state may de-
cide some form of accommodation is preferable to continued violence. In 2001, 
a secret pact called the Ralito Agreement was negotiated by a group of Colom-
bian paramilitary leaders, mayors, congressmen, and business leaders. It called 
for nothing less than the reform of the state—along lines favorable to the inter-
ests of the drug cartels. Some believe that Mexico’s criminal syndicates, now 
engaged in a violent struggle with the federal government and with each other, 
are moving toward a strategy of co-opting rather than confronting the state.6
The wealth of some TCOs—especially certain drug cartels—has permitted 
them to arm themselves with sophisticated weaponry and other technologies 
capable in some instances of matching those wielded by states. For example, 
Pablo Escobar of the Medellín cartel is reported to have tried to purchase 
surface-to-air missiles (SAMs).7 Although some improvements are occurring, 
states generally have been ill adapted to addressing the problems that TCOs 
present. As Roy Godson and Phil Williams note, “Governments are equipped 
and experienced in dealing with security threats from other governments. 
They are neither comfortable nor familiar with threats that are nonmilitary in 

140 
Chapter Eight
character, that target society and the economy rather than the state per se, and 
that cannot be dealt with through traditional state-centric policy options.”8
Different forms of trafficking raise different sorts of security issues. Human 
trafficking, for example, presents what is most commonly regarded as a human 
rights issue rather than a security issue. In the United States, responsibility for 
combating human trafficking rests with the Department of State and the De-
partment of Justice, a clear indication that the issue has not been “securitized.” 
Of course, to those trapped in modern forms of slavery, human trafficking is a 
security issue of the highest order. To security analysts, this form of trafficking 
could be said to raise security issues only in the context of the emerging con-
cept of human security, according to which most, if not all, of those matters that 
affect the security of individual human beings (as opposed to those that affect 
the state only) are securitized. It is fair to ask, though, whether enslavement as-
sociated with war (as in Sudan) may move human trafficking toward inclusion 
as a national security issue. There are some indications, including a special 
report on human trafficking published by the director of Central Intelligence in 
1999, that such a move is occurring in the United States.9
Drug trafficking, like human trafficking, generates enormous wealth for 
criminals but tragic consequences for many of the individuals who are caught up 
in drug abuse or the violence commonly associated with it. It too seems to lend 
itself to legal rather than military responses. Unlike human trafficking, however, 
drug trafficking has not only been criminalized (with responsibility for address-
ing drug problems in the United States vested in a variety of law enforcement 
agencies, including the Drug Enforcement Agency [DEA], and in the Office of 
National Drug Control Policy) but securitized as well. Since the late 1980s, the 
U.S. military’s Southern Command has been assigned the task of assisting Co-
lombia’s struggle against drug trafficking and, more broadly, seeking to interdict 
shipments of drugs destined for the United States. The intermixing of drug traf-
ficking and revolutionary violence in Colombia, Afghanistan, and the Golden 
Triangle of Southeast Asia raises security concerns as well.
The nature and fundamental purpose of the commodity being traded makes 
arms trafficking a national security issue. The black market trade in weapons 
has long been implicated as a key factor in promoting and sustaining wars and 
revolutionary violence. It is not necessary, in other words, to be an advocate 
of a broader security agenda in order to view arms trafficking as a bona fide 
security issue. At the same time, certain characteristics of the illegal trade in 
arms (such as its role in facilitating the growth in the number of child soldiers 
worldwide) have made the trade (both legal and illegal) a key concern among 
advocates of human security.
We focus on these three forms of trafficking—human trafficking, drug 
trafficking, and arms trafficking—both because they represent significant 
threats to the well-being of individual human beings across the globe and 

 
Transnational Criminal Organizations and Trafficking 
141
because they help to illustrate different stages in the securitization of political 
issues. Human trafficking represents the entering wedge: a crime and a hu-
man rights concern but not yet, at least outside the realm of human security, a 
fully securitized problem. Drug trafficking has made the transition, so armed 
forces actually stand behind at least a portion of the “war on drugs.” Arms 
trafficking has been a security issue at least since Caribbean gunrunners sup-
plied weapons to the Confederacy during the Civil War, but it nonetheless has 
much in common with other forms of trafficking.
HUMAN TRAFFICKING
The U.S. State Department estimates that six to eight hundred thousand 
people are trafficked internationally each year, although the number may be 
far higher.10 Worldwide, there are an estimated 12.3 million people held in 
some form of forced labor, bonded labor (in which a person is required to 
work until a debt to a trafficker is paid off), or forced prostitution.11 These 
are the basic forms of modern slavery. In some places, such as Sudan, slavery 
exists in a form not all that different from that which existed in the United 
States up to the end of the Civil War. Elsewhere, as in South Asia, invol-
untary servitude is linked to industrialization, as people—often women and 
children—are forced to work in sweatshops making clothes, shoes, sporting 
goods, toys, or other consumer products sold worldwide. In Haiti, as many as 
three hundred thousand children, some as young as four years old, have been 
forced to work in exchange for food, shelter, and an opportunity to attend 
school. The restaveks (from the French reste avec, for “stay with”) are given 
up by parents who are too poor to care for them.12
The victims of modern slavery have many faces. They are men and 
women, adults and children. Yet, all are denied basic human dignity and 
freedom. Victims can be abused in their own countries, or find them-
selves far from home and vulnerable. Whether they are trapped in forced 
sexual or labor exploitation, human trafficking victims cannot walk away, 
but are held in service through force, threats, and fear. All too often suffer-
ing from horrible physical and sexual abuse, it is hard for them to imagine 
that there might be a place of refuge.
—President Barack Obama
Source: The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “National Slavery 
and Human Trafficking Prevention Month, 2010,” January 4, 2010, available 
at http://www.dcf.state.fl.us/initiatives/humantrafficking/docs/2010ObamaHT
PresidentialProclamation.pdf.

142 
Chapter Eight
One of the most disturbing forms of modern slavery is sex slavery. Eighty 
percent of those trafficked into the United States are women and young girls; 
most are victims of sex trafficking.13 In Tel Aviv and Dubai, women lured 
by the prospect of legitimate work as waitresses or sales clerks are trafficked 
from Eastern Europe and Russia and forced into prostitution.14 The phenome-
non is global and generally unidirectional, with sex slaves, like those engaged 
in forced labor, moving from poorer states to richer ones.
Human trafficking, like drug trafficking and arms trafficking, flourishes 
because it is lucrative. The U.S. State Department has estimated profits to be 
$9.5 billion per year worldwide, but other researchers have suggested the real 
figure is much higher. A study prepared for the International Labor Organiza-
tion has estimated that human trafficking generates a profit of $31.6 billion 
per year.15 The same patterns of globalization that have fostered the dramatic 
growth of transnational trade in such legitimate commodities as automobiles 
and consumer electronics have benefited human trafficking. Human traffick-
ing, in other words, represents the underside of globalization.
Traffickers not only treat human beings as commodities to be bought and 
sold but prey on the worst forms of human tragedy. People in crushing pov-
erty are the most vulnerable to the false promises that traffickers use to en-
snare their victims. Likewise, when children are sold to owners of sweatshops 
or brothels, it is often a desperate attempt by parents to sustain themselves 
and their remaining children. Not surprisingly, child labor is most prevalent 
in the world’s least developed countries. For this reason, economic security 
provides the best protection against most forms of human trafficking.
The exploitation of tragedy on the part of human traffickers reached dis-
turbing new lows in the aftermath of the South Asian tsunami disaster. In 
Aceh, Sri Lanka, and elsewhere, human trafficking networks attempted soon 
after the tragedy to sell orphans to prospective adoptive parents and to sweat-
shops. Governments in the region responded by restricting travel by children, 
posting guards at some orphanages, and accelerating efforts to locate rela-
tives of children orphaned by the disaster.16 Following the earthquake that 
devastated Haiti in 2009, officials in both Haiti and neighboring Dominican 
Republic made efforts to prevent orphaned children from being trafficked. A 
recent investigation, however, has found that over 7,300 children have been 
smuggled into the Dominican Republic from Haiti since the disaster.17
As noted earlier, globalization helps to explain certain elements of human 
trafficking. International travel has become (in historical terms) inexpen-
sive and simple. The increasing wealth of many of the world’s people has 
dramatically expanded markets for domestic laborers (especially maids and 
nannies, who, even if not trafficked, are sometimes vulnerable to exploitation 
or enslavement by unscrupulous employers), for consumer goods that are 

 
Transnational Criminal Organizations and Trafficking 
143
sometimes manufactured in sweatshops, and for sex tourism. And yet, at the 
same time, boundaries and other traditional barriers thrown up by sovereignty 
may provide certain protections to traffickers. Phil Williams explains the 
situation this way: “Where market opportunities are lucrative, criminal orga-
nizations, large and small, ignore borders and typically violate or transcend 
national sovereignty; where they need safe havens they hide behind borders 
and exploit sovereignty.”18
There is no question that human trafficking is an egregious abuse of human 
rights and a serious issue in international relations, but is it, in any sense, a 
security issue? The answer, as with many of the issues we consider in this 
book, is twofold. First, as we have noted, to those who lose their freedom 
and, in many cases, their lives as a consequence of trafficking, there can be 
no more serious and immediate threat to their security. Only those of us who 
are completely unaffected by human trafficking would even think to ask the 
question in the first place.
But, as with the issues of environmental and economic security and in the 
case of disease, the determination by governments that an issue constitutes a 
security problem (that is, the securitization of an issue) is often driven more 
by realist, state-centered calculations than by humanitarianism. In these 
terms, human trafficking differs significantly from drug trafficking and arms 
trafficking, although perhaps not as much as is commonly believed.
Drug trafficking and arms trafficking are considered security concerns in 
part because of the connection of each to violence and even warfare. Perhaps 
even more significantly from the standpoint of the traditional understanding 
of security, drug trafficking and arms trafficking have a demonstrated capac-
ity to undermine states and threaten the stability of governments. Drug profits 
have sustained revolutionary and paramilitary organizations, while arms sales 
have altered power balances in both interstate and intrastate conflicts. Human 
trafficking, however tragic its impact on its victims, appears not to destabilize 
governments or to promote large-scale violence. Consequently, traditionalists 
have seen no reason to securitize the issue.
DRUG TRAFFICKING
Worldwide there are two hundred million users of illicit drugs supporting an 
industry that, by some estimates, generates almost as much revenue each year 
as the petroleum industry. (As with all illegal commercial activities, an ac-
curate accounting of drug trafficking revenues is difficult to obtain, but retail 
drug sales are believed to be worth roughly four hundred billion dollars per 
year, making drugs second only to oil in terms of global revenues.19) In the 

144 
Chapter Eight
words of a recent report by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 
“Drugs remain the backbone of transnational organized crime, commanding 
the largest share of revenues and fuelling violence, corruption, conflict, and 
addiction.”20
Demand for illicit drugs is fed by a global network of production and dis-
tribution. It is this network, linked as it is to transnational criminal organiza-
tions (TCOs), corrupt or impotent governments, rebel groups, and sometimes 
terrorists, that makes drug trafficking a major transnational problem. But is 
it a security issue?
One way to answer this question is to note the way the United States has 
approached drug trafficking since 1982, when President Reagan brought to-
gether the heads of eighteen federal agencies in an effort to attach new weight 
to the federal government’s drug-control efforts. National drug policy, which 
is directed by a “drug czar” who heads the Office of National Drug Control 
Policy that was created within the Executive Office of the President in 1989, 
has not only been securitized but militarized as well.
In 1989, the Department of Defense was designated the “single lead 
agency” in America’s war on drugs. With the Cold War winding down, de-
fense dollars began to be shifted into an effort to stem the tide of illegal drugs 
entering the United States. From the beginning, however, drug interdiction 
efforts were focused on a single aspect of drug trafficking, namely, the flow 
of cocaine from South America into the country. Cocaine, at that time, was 
the most visible drug problem facing Americans. By 1989, there were at least 
eight million cocaine addicts in the United States, including a significant 
number of well-known entertainment and sports personalities, so it is not 
surprising that cocaine produced in the Andes should have been the focus of 
the early war on drugs.
Responsibility for the military component of the war on drugs was placed on 
the Miami-based Southern Command (SOUTHCOM), which provided military 
support, primarily in the form of ships and aircraft, to the Joint Interagency 
Task Force (JIATF). This group, in turn, brought together not only the Defense 
Department but the Coast Guard, the Customs Service, the Drug Enforcement 
Agency, and other federal agencies with responsibility for drug control efforts.
Aside from the fact that it largely ignored a wide range of drugs coming 
from other parts of the world (including heroin from South Asia), the war 
on drugs suffered from a number of problems. First, efforts to suppress drug 
production in one area inevitably create incentives for production in another 
area. Even the successes achieved in Colombia in the disruption of the Medel-
lín and Cali cartels merely spurred the creation of scores of smaller cartels. 
Second, the focus on production rather than consumption is problematic in 
and of itself. It means that the United States is widely perceived as treating 

 
Transnational Criminal Organizations and Trafficking 
145
its drug problem by lashing out at poor countries around the world rather than 
by taking responsibility for ending drug use at home. Intervention to destroy 
drug crops or arrest drug traffickers in places such as Colombia or Afghani-
stan can arouse resentment at what appears to be another form of imperialism, 
as powerful countries attempt to solve their drug problem “over there” on the 
supply side rather than at home on the demand side. Furthermore, to destroy 
coca plants or poppies is, generally, to destroy the livelihoods of poor farmers 
without affecting the obscene profits of middlemen.
Declaring war on drugs does not, of course, guarantee that the problem will 
be treated as a security issue or, more to the point, that it should be. Antidrug 
policies necessarily involve efforts to reduce both supply and demand. When 
the demand comes from one’s own citizens, the idea of a war on drugs, even 
if only metaphorical, seems inapt.
Regardless of how one views the American war on drugs, there are plenty 
of reasons to treat drug trafficking as a security issue. First, drug traffickers 
regularly and persistently employ violence to intimidate government of-
ficials, battle with rival traffickers over access to markets and supplies, and 
use force to facilitate business in many other ways. The term “narcoterror-
ism” was, in fact, coined to describe the use of violence by drug syndicates 
against government officials, journalists, and others. In recent years, drug-
related violence along the U.S.-Mexico border, involving both Mexican and 
American nationals, has reached epidemic proportions. A Los Angeles Times 
report on conditions in Reynosa, a border city with a population of 700,000 
where rival drug cartels are fighting for control, states, “This is a city under 
siege. It’s a city where you avert your eyes when men clean their guns in 
the middle of the plazas. Where schoolchildren are put through the paces of 
pecho a tierra drills, literally, ‘chest to the ground’—a duck-and-dive move 
for when the shooting starts.”21
The language used by locals to speak of those who have fled the violence—
calling them “refugees” and “displaced persons”—is the language of war. The 
mayor of Reynosa is among the refugees, having moved across the border into 
Texas in fear for his life. It is a well-founded fear; an estimated 30,000 people 
died in drug-related violence in Mexico between 2006 and 2010.
Concern in the United States about drug violence in Mexico has prompted 
enhanced security cooperation between the two countries. The U.S. Congress 
appropriated $1.6 billion in June 2008 to fund the Mérida Initiative, a plan to 
assist Mexico and the countries of Central America with equipment, training, 
and intelligence for the fight against drug trafficking. The Pentagon spent an 
additional $34 million in 2010 to train the Mexican military in counternar-
cotics operations using lessons learned battling the insurgencies in Iraq and 
Afghanistan.22

146 
Chapter Eight
Beyond the actual use of violence by traffickers and military responses 
to it in places such as Colombia, Afghanistan, and Mexico, drug traffick-
ing presents itself as a security issue for other reasons. Profits from drug 
trafficking are commonly used to purchase weapons. This means not only 
that arms trafficking and drug trafficking are frequently linked but that drug 
cartels and other TCOs are sometimes better armed than the police and even 
the military forces of many states in which they operate. Drug profits sup-
port rebel groups and terrorist organizations as well. In Colombia, FARC 
(the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) funded its long-running 
effort to overthrow the government with drug money—as much as $300 
million a year. The anti-Taliban Northern Alliance in Afghanistan funded 
its operations with heroin profits until the United States stepped in to pro-
vide support after 9/11. In Lebanon’s Bekaa Valley, terrorist training camps 
have long operated side by side with fields cultivated with opium and can-
nabis. Finally, although considerable evidence suggests otherwise, there 
have long been suspicions that Al Qaeda profited from opium sales in the 
months leading up to 9/11.23
It takes very little in the way of drug profits to purchase a sizable arsenal. 
The UNODC reports that on November 16, 2009, Nicaraguan authorities 
seized a shipment of weapons intended for Mexico’s Sinaloa cartel. Included 
were fifty-nine assault rifles, twenty thousand rounds of ammunition, eight 
kilograms of TNT, two grenade launchers, and ten grenades. The estimated 
value of the shipment was less than two hundred thousand dollars. In contrast, 
when the Nicaraguan navy seized 2.4 tons of cocaine three days later, the 
estimated value of the shipment was eighty million dollars.24
In addition to these direct security ramifications, drug trafficking is closely 
tied to many other global problems that raise security concerns. Beginning 
with their effects on consumers and working backwards, we may note first 
that drugs have serious health consequences. Beyond the direct and readily 
observable health impact of illicit drugs like cocaine and heroin, the spread 
of HIV/AIDS has been linked to intravenous drug use. The societies in which 
drug abusers live and work must bear a variety of costs associated with the 
issue. Health-care costs and productivity losses associated with illicit drug 
use in the United States each run into the billions of dollars each year. Crime 
is also closely correlated with the use of illicit drugs.
For Colombia, the problems associated with drug trafficking and the 
revolution it sustains are staggering. Two million Colombians, out of a total 
population of thirty-six million, have been displaced by guerrillas or drug 
traffickers. Only Sudan and the Congo have more internal refugees.25 Al-
though murder and kidnap rates have declined in recent years, Colombia’s 
rates for these crimes remain among the highest in the world.

 
Transnational Criminal Organizations and Trafficking 
147
In spite of the overthrow of the Taliban and the continuing presence of 
American troops in Afghanistan, opium production is booming there. Af-
ghanistan accounted for 79 percent of global opium production in 2009, down 
from 84 percent the previous year. A report by the United Nations argued that 
the drug trade, which accounts for a staggering 60 percent of Afghanistan’s 
gross domestic product, threatens to undermine democracy and strengthen 
terrorist organizations.26
As if the trade in illegal narcotics and wars between drug cartels were not 
bad enough, another form of drug trafficking exists that threatens to under-
mine global progress against infectious diseases. Because the pharmaceutical 
industry is globalized and highly profitable, a very large international trade 
in counterfeit drugs, assisted by the Internet, has arisen over the course of the 
past decade. The total value of counterfeit drug sales in the United States was 
estimated to be twenty-eight million dollars in 2008.27
Not surprisingly, the world’s poor are most seriously affected by the prob-
lems posed by counterfeit and mislabeled pharmaceuticals. Developing coun-
tries, where regulation of prescription drugs is ineffective or even nonexistent 
and where people often cannot afford full-priced medications, are particularly 
susceptible to unscrupulous manufacturers and sellers of fake drugs. In some 
cases, the fakes may be better than nothing, but often counterfeit drugs have 
serious consequences. Mass poisonings resulting in thousands of deaths have 
been traced to the use of diethylene glycol, an industrial solvent often used in 
antifreeze, in place of glycerin, a sweet syrup safe for human consumption, 
in cough and cold medicines. At least one hundred people in Panama died 
after taking liquid cold remedies laced with diethylene glycol.28 Furthermore, 
when antibiotics and anti-malarial drugs are manufactured with inadequate 
levels of the active ingredients, the development of drug-resistant strains of 
malaria and other infectious diseases can be hastened.
ARMS TRAFFICKING
Arms trafficking differs from human trafficking and drug trafficking in some 
ways that are important to note at the outset. First, the illegal trade in weap-
ons is overshadowed by a vast legal—that is, government-sanctioned—trade 
in arms. (The legal global arms trade in 2008 was valued at $55.2 billion.)29 
Selling weapons, unlike selling human beings or nonmedicinal drugs, is not 
illegal in and of itself. Consequently, arms traffickers must either compete 
with states (or legal corporations operating with state sanction and, com-
monly, subsidies) or find niche markets in which legitimate arms merchants 
do not operate. In most instances, this means that traffickers sell to the only 

148 
Chapter Eight
buyers with whom legal dealers will not do business: rebel armies, terrorist 
organizations, drug traffickers, and other actors that threaten states and inter-
national order.
Second, the impact of arms trafficking on security is neither indirect nor 
incidental. While it may be facile to suggest that weapons alone cause wars, 
the widespread availability of weapons is undoubtedly an important factor 
both in making the resort to war feasible and in sustaining conflicts that are 
already under way. In 2008, three-fourths of the world’s legitimate arms 
sales (and, almost certainly, an even higher percentage of illicit sales) were 
directed toward developing states, a fact that both reflects and contributes to 
the war-proneness of the developing world.30 Small arms, which are favor-
ites of traffickers due to their widespread availability, their popularity with 
consumers, and their portability, are believed to be responsible for over half 
a million deaths each year.31
Finally, arms traffickers have the perverse ability to turn conflict resolution 
and disarmament to their advantage as postwar demilitarization in one part of 
the world makes available a supply of weapons for sale elsewhere. The end 
of the Cold War, for example, resulted in the reduction of standing armies 
throughout NATO and the Warsaw Pact. While many weapons were destroyed 
or stockpiled in government arsenals, an unknown (but probably large) number 
of weapons entered into circulation via arms traffickers. As a result, arms traf-
fickers may function as arbitrageurs of war and peace in the world.
One of the most notorious of these arbitrageurs is Viktor Bout, a Russian 
businessman who, in a report by the British government in 2000 was called 
“the Merchant of Death.” (Bout was the inspiration for the Nicolas Cage char-
acter in the movie Lord of War.) Bout is alleged to have sold over seven hun-
dred surface-to-air missiles, military helicopters and airplanes, and thousands 
of guns to FARC, the Colombian paramilitary organization. He has also sold 
weapons in Afghanistan and in various war zones in Africa. At a Bangkok 
hotel in March 2008, Bout offered undercover agents of the U.S. Drug En-
forcement Agency posing as FARC representatives a wide range of weapons, 
including land mines, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and C-4 explosives. 
He was arrested at the conclusion of the meeting, which was taped, and, in 
August 2010, a Thai court ordered his extradition to stand trial in the United 
States. Russian authorities have objected strongly to Bout’s extradition. Some 
speculate that this may be due to fears that Bout will reveal ties to the Russian 
government in the course of his trial.32
Arms traffickers are middlemen; they sell but do not manufacture weap-
ons. Consequently, the arms that are available on the black market almost 
invariably were transferred first in legal transactions. Many such transactions 
were designed to support the security policies of states. This is particularly 

 
Transnational Criminal Organizations and Trafficking 
149
evident in the case of the United States, which accounts for two-thirds of all 
legal arms transfers in the world.33
During the 1980s, billions of dollars’ worth of weapons were channeled 
into Afghanistan in order to aid Afghan rebels (the mujahidin) in their war 
against the Soviet Union. When the Soviet Union withdrew in 1989, vast 
quantities of weaponry disappeared. Much of it wound up on the black mar-
ket. Among the most disturbing aspects of this situation was the disappear-
ance of an unknown number of Stinger missiles onto the market. These shoul-
der-fired surface-to-air missiles, covertly supplied by the United States, had 
been used with devastating effect by the mujahidin against Soviet aircraft. 
Roughly 2,300 Stingers had been delivered to the Afghan rebels; six hundred 
were unaccounted for when Kabul fell to the Taliban. The CIA estimated that 
about one hundred had been purchased by the Iranians. The remainder were 
either in the hands of the Taliban or Afghan warlords or were circulating, via 
the black market, all over the Middle East and Africa.34
Given the threat posed by surface-to-air missiles in the hands of terrorists, 
the CIA in 1996 authorized an effort to buy back the Stingers wherever they 
could be found. In early 1997, a CIA official approached the Taliban with 
an offer to buy the fifty-three Stingers believed to be in the Taliban govern-
ment’s possession. In spite of the generous terms being offered by the CIA, 
the Taliban refused to sell the missiles, insisting that they were being kept 
for use in a future conflict with Iran.35 Soon after, Osama bin Laden began to 
court the Taliban.
Stingers, however, are not the only shoulder-fired antiaircraft missiles 
currently being trafficked. In November 2004, a U.S. government official 
revealed that American intelligence agencies had tripled their formal estimate 
of shoulder-fired surface-to-air missile systems believed to be at large world-
wide. The revision was based on a determination that at least four thousand 
of the weapons in Iraq’s prewar arsenals could not be accounted for. The 
new government estimate indicated that six thousand of the weapons might 
be outside the control of any government, up from a previous estimate of two 
thousand. It is not known how many of the missiles are currently in the hands 
of terrorist organizations, but Al Qaeda, Hezbollah, the Liberation Tigers 
of Tamil Eelam, and the Provisional Irish Republican Army are among the 
dozen or so nonstate actors known to have possessed them. The low price of 
shoulder-fired missiles on the black market, said to be five thousand dollars 
in late 2004, suggests that the black-market supply is plentiful and that these 
weapons are within the reach of almost any organization that might be inter-
ested in purchasing them.36
Many experts believe that the widespread availability of shoulder-fired 
missiles combined with the increasing difficulty of carrying bombs on board 

150 
Chapter Eight
commercial airliners means it is only a matter of time before terrorists at-
tack civil aviation in the United States, perhaps even in a coordinated attack 
involving planes taking off or landing at many different airports. The U.S. 
State Department estimated in 2009 that there had been over forty shoulder-
fired rocket attacks against civilian aviation worldwide, although none in 
North America. These attacks caused at least twenty-eight crashes and over 
eight hundred fatalities.37 At Los Angeles International Airport, the threat has 
prompted the addition of more security fencing and additional patrols in the 
area surrounding the airport, but officials acknowledge that the enormous 
urban area surrounding the airport makes surveillance extremely difficult.38 
Considerable research has also been devoted to adapting antimissile technolo-
gies currently in use on U.S. military aircraft in zones of conflict to civilian 
airliners. While defense contractors have successfully tested systems for use 
in the airline industry, economic struggles have caused the industry to balk at 
the cost—estimated to be one to three million dollars per plane—of equipping 
fleets with antimissile technologies.
In most of the world, trafficking in small arms presents a greater security 
concern than trafficking in relatively high-tech systems. Weapons like the 
American-made M-16 rifle or the Russian-made AK-47 have been the pri-
mary instruments of the many intrastate conflicts that have plagued the globe 
since the end of the Cold War. They are inexpensive and widely available, 
making it easy for aggrieved groups to take up arms against governments or 
other nonstate actors. These same characteristics facilitate illicit trade and 
make regulation more difficult to enforce. Their ease of use and light weight 
make small arms ideal for use by untrained combatants and even child sol-
diers. Making the problem even worse, the end of the Cold War was accom-
panied by both a loss of superpower control over the trade in small arms and 
the creation of a tremendous surplus of weapons. Furthermore, the existence 
of transnational criminal organizations trafficking in drugs and persons pro-
vided a ready-made network of dealers for the illicit weapons trade. In short, 
a broad convergence of factors brought the issue of small arms trafficking to 
the fore during the 1990s.39
As we noted in the discussion of drug trafficking above, arms trafficking is 
commonly fed by the profits generated by other forms of illegal commerce. 
Colombian drug cartels, major purchasers of weapons for many years, have 
been eclipsed since 2006 by Mexican cartels. In Sierra Leone during the 
1990s, a rebel group called the RUF armed itself through the sale of diamonds 
mined and illegally exported from the country. Sierra Leone’s bloody civil 
war, which was characterized by extraordinary levels of gratuitous violence 
that included hacking off the limbs of thousands of noncombatants, was 
sometimes described as a war about nothing, since the rebels often appeared 

 
Transnational Criminal Organizations and Trafficking 
151
unconcerned with political objectives. More important than any political 
objectives, however, was the fundamental economic objective of gaining and 
maintaining control of the country’s diamond mines, since the wealth avail-
able from diamonds was the only means the rebels had of supporting their 
insurgency.
In Sierra Leone, Colombia, Mexico, Afghanistan, Burma, and many other 
places in the world, trafficking in one commodity tends to facilitate, and often 
finance, trafficking in other commodities. Rebel groups, transnational crimi-
nal organizations, and even terrorists understand that the distribution net-
works, methods of transportation, and money laundering systems that make 
drug trafficking possible often work just as well for arms trafficking (and vice 
versa). What this means is that addressing trafficking in all its forms requires 
dealing with networks. But it also requires an understanding of markets.
Trafficking, like legal trade, involves market transactions for which both 
interested buyers and sellers must exist. There is, in other words, both a sup-
ply side and a demand side. As with most unregulated market transactions, 
the terms of trade are adjusted as supply and demand fluctuate. This means 
that a drop in demand brought about, for example, by vigorous enforcement 
of laws that make it illegal to travel abroad to engage in sex with a child or by 
a public education campaign that succeeds in reducing the number of cocaine 
users will, ceteris paribus (all other things being equal, as cautious econo-
mists like to say), cause the price of the commodity in question to decrease. 
Prices will also fall when supply increases faster than demand, as might hap-
pen when thousands of weapons become expendable at the end of a war or 
favorable growing conditions produce a bumper crop of the opium poppies 
from which heroin is derived.
The very existence of trafficking, which we defined at the outset as illegal 
trade, indicates that simply legislating against slavery, drug abuse, or selling 
weapons without an export license is inadequate. Enforcement is necessary 
as well, but not because enforcement, no matter how vigorous, is likely to 
eliminate trafficking. At best, enforcement simply imposes additional costs 
on traffickers. The seizure of a shipment of drugs or weapons reduces (usu-
ally by a very small amount) the total supply available. By the laws of supply 
and demand, prices increase and, in the end, the industry as a whole (if not the 
individual seller) profits just as much as it would have in the absence of the 
seizure. Looked at another way, the costs imposed by law enforcement are, 
for traffickers, just one of the costs of doing business, costs that ultimately 
will be paid by consumers.
Some argue, on the basis of the fundamental economics of trafficking, that 
decriminalization (perhaps in combination with taxation) is the solution. If 
every step taken to stamp out trafficking merely makes it more profitable for 

152 
Chapter Eight
the traffickers who survive (or those who choose to get into the business when 
they see the enormous profits to be made), then antitrafficking efforts are like 
punching a pillow or squeezing a balloon: pressure in one spot creates expan-
sion somewhere else. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that the world is 
divided into two hundred separate sovereign states; some have considerable 
capacity, along with the will, to develop and enforce laws against trafficking, 
and some do not. In the end, our ability to address trafficking may depend 
to a considerable degree on collective action. The international community, 
in this as in so many other respects, is only as strong as its weakest member.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Berdal, Mats, and Monica Serrano, eds. Transnational Organized Crime and Interna-
tional Security: Business as Usual? Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 2002.
Chivers, C. J. The Gun. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2010.
Farer, Tom. Transnational Crime in the Americas. New York: Routledge, 1999.
Glenny, Misha. McMafia: A Journey through the Global Criminal Underworld. New 
York: Vintage, 2008.
Mandel, Robert. Dark Logic: Transnational Criminal Tactics and Global Security. 
Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2010.
Naím, Moíses. Illicit: How Smugglers, Traffickers, and Copycats Are Hijacking the 
Global Economy. New York: Doubleday, 2005.
Richard, Amy O’Neill. International Trafficking in Women to the United States: A 
Contemporary Manifestation of Slavery and Organized Crime. Intelligence Mono-
graph. Washington, D.C.: Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence 
Agency, November 1999.
Trafficking in Persons Report 2010. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of State, 
June 2010.
Williams, Phil, ed. Illegal Immigration and Commercial Sex: The New Slave Trade. 
Portland, Ore.: Frank Cass, 1999.
Websites
Office of National Drug Control Policy: http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov
The Protection Project: http://www.protectionproject.org
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime: http://www.unodc.org/unodc/index.html

153
Chapter Nine
Insecurity in Cyberspace
Those who are most familiar with war as it is waged in the Information 
Age are careful to distinguish between kinetic weapons and cyber-weapons. 
The difference can be illustrated by comparing two methods of disabling an 
enemy’s air defenses before an attack. Launching cruise missiles at radar fa-
cilities and their command posts is the kinetic (or conventional) way of war; 
shutting down the radar network by hacking into the computers that control 
it is the cyber way of war. Cyber-weapons and cyberwar are not just science 
fiction. As a number of recent incidents demonstrate, cyberwar is a reality.
On August 7, 2008, military units of the Republic of Georgia occupied 
South Ossetia, a region of the country then undergoing attacks from rebel 
groups. The following day, the Russian army also moved into South Osse-
tia to begin the kinetic phase of a brief but intense war between Russia and 
Georgia. Cyber-attacks, however, were already under way by the time kinetic 
weapons came into play. Hackers—or, more likely, Russian cyber-warriors—
shut down Georgian government websites using a distributed denial-of-ser-
vice (DDOS) attack. Content on the Georgian president’s website was altered 
to include photos of Adolf Hitler. As the kinetic war intensified, Russian 
cyber-attacks targeted communications and financial systems in Georgia. All 
Internet traffic into and out of the country was blocked, denying Georgians 
access to e-mail and to most sources of news. Banking operations and credit 
card systems were paralyzed throughout the country, as was the mobile phone 
system. Although the Georgian government responded to the cyber-attacks 
by moving some critical Internet sites to servers outside the country and shut-
ting down others, the cyberwar, like the kinetic war, was a rout. The Russian 
government denied responsibility for the cyber-attacks, blaming instead Rus-
sian “hacktivists” (or hackers with a political agenda) who were upset with 
the Georgian government’s response to the aspiration of South Ossetians to 

154 
Chapter Nine
independence, but most experts believe the attacks were too extensive and 
too well coordinated not to have been directed by the Russian government.1
The DDOS attacks on Georgia in 2008 were preceded by similar attacks 
on websites in Estonia, another former Soviet republic, the year before. The 
Russian government’s responsibility for the cyber-attacks on Estonia, how-
ever, is even more difficult to establish. Some contend that those attacks were 
more likely the work of hacktivists using botnets, or networks of remotely 
controlled computers, rented from one or more transnational criminal orga-
nizations.
The conflict began when a decision by Estonian officials in April 2007 to 
move a monument honoring the Soviet Union’s struggle against Nazism in 
World War II provoked a backlash from Russians, both in Estonia, where 
rioting occurred, and in Russia, where access in and out of the Estonian 
embassy was blocked. These visible manifestations of Russian anger were 
accompanied by large-scale DDOS attacks on Estonian government websites. 
Even with the assistance of computer experts from the United States and 
NATO, the Estonian government had difficulty determining the origin of the 
cyber-attacks.2
Shutting down government websites and disrupting communications are 
modest—and nonlethal—forms of warfare, but they are only hints of what is 
possible in the realm of cyberwar. Nation-states are developing impressive 
capabilities to attack both military systems and civilian infrastructure within 
the domain of cyberspace. In addition, networked information systems have 
provided opportunities to transform the way traditional (kinetic) warfare is 
waged and espionage is conducted. But security threats in cyberspace are not 
confined to those generated by states and their security establishments. The 
difficulty of asserting jurisdiction, attributing responsibility, and enforcing 
rules in cyberspace makes it an ideal venue for the activities of terrorists, 
transnational criminal organizations, and individuals eager to make an impact 
on the world, whether for good or ill. In fact, Al Qaeda and other terrorist 
groups have used the Internet extensively to disseminate propaganda, recruit 
members, and communicate within their organizations. Many fear that terror-
ists will turn to cyber-attacks as time goes on. Lending support to this view, 
in November 2002, Omar Bakri Muhammad, one of Britain’s most outspoken 
Islamic clerics, gave an exclusive interview to Computerworld in which he 
said that “in a matter of time you will see attacks on the stock market.” He 
referred specifically to the markets in New York, London, and Tokyo.3
In some respects, cyber-crime may constitute the most serious security 
threat of all cyberspace issues if for no other reason than that it is a very real 
and present danger. Much cyber-crime goes unreported, sometimes because 
victims are unaware of it and sometimes because corporations that have had 

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
155
data stolen prefer to avoid letting their customers and shareholders know. In 
2007, however, a theft of such large proportions occurred that it could not 
be covered up. Cyber-criminals from Ukraine, Belarus, Estonia, China, and 
the United States stole forty-five million credit card records from American 
retailer TJ Maxx. Direct losses alone totaled over $130 million.4
We generally assume that espionage, war, terrorism, and crime can be dis-
tinguished from each other according to who the perpetrator is and what the 
motive for the attack is. But when the identity of those who commit cyber-
attacks is unknown and data that has both economic and strategic value are 
stolen, it may be difficult to discern the exact nature of an attack. So, for 
example, if hackers steal information from the computers of an American 
defense contractor (as, in fact, has happened), it may be impossible to know 
if another state is spying or preparing the cyber-battlefield for war, or if 
criminals are stealing information from which they hope to profit. Collusion 
between governments, transnational criminal organizations, and individual 
hackers complicates the picture even further.
In spite of the difficulties involved in distinguishing the various types of 
cyber threats in the real world, in this chapter we will discuss cyber-crime, 
cyber-espionage, cyberwar, and cyber-terrorism separately. First, however, it 
is important to look briefly at the connection between information and war in 
history. We will then look at some of the invisible vulnerabilities of cyber-
space before examining cyber-threats and some of the means of addressing 
them.
INFORMATION AND WAR
Throughout history, there have been four fundamental sources of power: eco-
nomic wealth, military force, ideas, and information. Almost four centuries 
ago, Francis Bacon wrote, “Knowledge itself is power.”5 Prominent leaders 
in the worlds of commerce, politics, and defense have suggested a shift in 
the contemporary world from the pursuit of military power to what former 
Citibank chairman Walter Wriston has called the “pursuit of information and 
the application of information to the means of production.”6 Former secretary 
of defense William Perry has written, “We live in an age that is driven by 
information. Technological breakthroughs . . . are changing the face of war 
and how we prepare for war.”7
In reality, information has always been an important factor in diplomatic 
and military affairs. Sun Tzu wrote: “What enables the wise sovereign and 
good general to strike and conquer is foreknowledge.”8 But without an abil-
ity to transmit it quickly and accurately, information may be of little use. 

156 
Chapter Nine
Consequently, some of history’s greatest military commanders have stressed 
the importance of timely communications. In the Second Punic War, Hanni-
bal used mirrors to communicate quickly and over long distances.9 Genghis 
Khan relied on riders on horseback with spare horses. When one horse tired, 
it would be exchanged for another. As John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt 
note, “This gave the horsemen, in relative terms, something approximating 
an ability to provide real-time intelligence, almost as from a satellite, on the 
enemy’s order of battle and intentions.”10
When, during World War II, the Allies were able to break German and 
Japanese codes, they gained a measure of the foreknowledge of which Sun 
Tzu had written centuries earlier.11 Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill 
made extensive use of the Axis powers’ decrypted messages—that is, the raw 
data that the Allies intercepted and processed. However, Churchill refused to 
rely on intelligence reports that had been “sifted and digested” and insisted 
on seeing the “authentic documents . . . in their original form.”12 Throughout 
the war, he was able to read through intercepted messages and to base mo-
mentous decisions in part on the information they provided.
Given the enormous volume of communications today, it would be impos-
sible for a leader to review even a small percentage of the raw “unsifted and 
undigested” information received by a country or large corporation in a single 
day. Recalling the crisis in Lebanon in July 1982, Secretary of State George 
Shultz wrote, “I became aware of an acute problem with the State Depart-
ment’s system of crisis management. The pace of events had outstripped the 
traditional methods of receiving cabled messages from overseas and respond-
ing with written instructions to our posts. There simply was not time to draft, 
type, code, transmit, decode, process and read written telegraphic traffic.”13
In the fall of 2001, leaders in the White House were able for the first time 
to watch a live video feed of an ongoing battle as images of an attack on 
Taliban forces were transmitted by an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) from 
Afghanistan. The transmission was sent to Central Command headquarters in 
Florida and then on to Washington, D.C. The president and a wide range of 
military commanders now literally have the ability to see what is happening 
on the battlefield in real time. Any organization confronted with this tidal 
wave of data could easily be overwhelmed, but the United States military has 
equipped itself to collect and process information as an integral part of its 
war-fighting capabilities.
Modern electronics have transformed but not eliminated the information 
problem in security affairs. Greater quantities of information can be gathered, 
processed, stored, and transmitted than ever before in history. In fact, the cost 
of storing, processing, and transmitting a unit of information during the past 
fifty years has declined by a factor of up to a hundred million or more and 

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
157
is projected to continue to decline over the next decade. A 2004 National 
Intelligence Council report noted, “Today individual PC users have more 
capability at their fingertips than NASA had with the computers used in its 
first moon launches.”14
But problems with finding the right pieces of information and using them 
effectively persist. Often there is so much data that national intelligence agen-
cies—even in the most advanced countries—cannot process all of the informa-
tion available in a timely fashion; this was made tragically evident on Septem-
ber 11, 2001. The flood of information sometimes compels leaders to turn to 
the most accessible sources of information: the print and electronic mass media.
In the 1991 Persian Gulf War, information was not only a management 
challenge but a tool (actually, a weapon) that was used by the United States 
in some traditional ways. For example, in the early days of the war, to hinder 
Iraq’s access to information and to limit its leaders’ ability to communicate 
with one another and their military commanders, the United States took down 
Iraq’s electrical power grid. The United States also used disinformation to 
confuse the Iraqis. For example, on the basis of information released by the 
U.S. military, CNN reported that the United States was preparing to invade 
Kuwait amphibiously. As a result, Saddam Hussein prepared his forces for an 
invasion from the sea. This may have been the first war in history in which 
the enemy leaders watched the same, nearly instantaneous reports on the war.
More recently, information has been employed as a central and very effec-
tive tool in the fight against terrorism. The information that several hundred 
Special Forces troops on the ground in Afghanistan provided to air-attack 
planners enabled the United States to decimate Al Qaeda and Taliban bases 
with minimal loss of U.S. forces. In addition, American Special Operations 
Forces in Afghanistan printed thousands of leaflets advertising a reward that 
the United States offered for information related to Osama bin Laden and 
leaders of Al Qaeda. In what could be characterized as a cyberwar operation, 
the United States reportedly has lured some insurgents into traps after infil-
trating Al Qaeda computers and leaving behind disinformation.15
The United States dropped over forty million leaflets over Iraq before Op-
eration Iraqi Freedom began; another forty million were dropped during the 
campaign. Leaflets urged soldiers to surrender and ordinary citizens to ignore 
the directives of the regime. Not all psychological operations (or PSYOPS), 
however, used old-fashioned methods. Coalition forces sent cell phone text 
messages and e-mails to political and military leaders in Iraq in the days 
leading up to the invasion. Messages were intended to detail the costs of 
continued loyalty to Saddam Hussein.16
Around the world, regular military forces, insurgents and terrorists, and 
transnational criminal organizations have become heavily dependent on 

158 
Chapter Nine
networked computers to manage and disseminate information (and disinfor-
mation). This alone would be sufficient to prompt the securitization of cyber-
space, but there is more. Computers are used not just for information storage 
and communication but to control automated systems as well. Advanced 
weaponry, GPS systems, air-defense radar systems, and many other features 
of the modern battlefield are “wired.” But so are banks, stock exchanges, 
airlines, and most other private-sector institutions. Controlling the computers 
that control any of these things would be tempting not just for political foes 
but for criminals as well.
CYBERSPACE: INVISIBLE INSECURITY
What Is Cyberspace?
Historically, human conflicts have taken place on land, at sea, and in the air. 
The organization of most military forces controlled by states into branches 
called the army, navy, and air force reflects this fact. Following President 
Reagan’s announcement in 1983 of the Strategic Defense Initiative (better 
known as the “Star Wars” program) to create a space-based missile defense 
system, the Space Command was formed within the U.S. Air Force. To some 
analysts, this portended the transition of warfare into outer space, a fourth 
domain. More recently, the U.S. Cyber Command was created to direct 
American planning for war in cyberspace, the fifth domain. As we noted at 
the beginning of this chapter, war in cyberspace differs from war in each of 
the other domains in that it is waged digitally, without necessarily produc-
ing kinetic effects (although, as we will show later, digital attacks can be 
designed to blow up things). If, in the Star Wars films, the climactic battles 
had been waged using cyber-weapons rather than kinetic weapons, droids 
would have merely stopped dead in their tracks and attacking fighter craft 
would have been diverted to a different planet. The movie studio could have 
trimmed its special effects budget dramatically—and the crowds would have 
stayed away. Because cyberspace is so different from the domains of conflict 
we ordinarily think about, it may be helpful to describe precisely what it is 
and how cyber-warriors, cyber-spies, and cyber-criminals operate in it.
Cyberspace is the nervous system—the control system of our country.
—President George W. Bush
Source: National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace (Washington, D.C.: White 
House, February 2003), 5.

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
159
Some naively equate cyberspace with the Internet, believing that all cy-
berwars would involve only the kinds of denial-of-service attacks that were 
waged against Estonia and Georgia. According to this conception, being in-
volved in a cyberwar might mean losing access to e-mail—perhaps a blessing 
in disguise—or to Facebook—a real disaster—for a matter of days or weeks. 
But a denial-of-service attack is mere child’s play in terms of cyberwar. What 
makes the potentialities of cyberwar so frightening is the degree to which 
we depend on the Internet—and many other computer networks—to control 
important physical processes. The Greek root of the term “cyberspace,” in 
fact, means “control.” Thus the millions of computers linked to assembly 
lines, municipal power grids, air traffic control systems, stock markets, and 
the Predator drones being flown over Afghanistan and Pakistan are all parts 
of cyberspace. Fighting in cyberspace therefore might be aimed at rendering 
kinetic weapons (or defenses against kinetic weapons) ineffective or shutting 
down essential services in major cities.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Gordon England, in a May 2008 memo-
randum, defined cyberspace as “a global domain within the information 
environment consisting of the interdependent network of information tech-
nology infrastructures, including the Internet, telecommunications networks, 
computer systems, and embedded processors and controllers.”17 The Internet 
is a network of networks, but there are also computer networks that are not 
connected to the Internet. These, too, are a part of cyberspace. While it may 
be harder to hack into computers and control systems that are not connected 
to the Internet, it is not impossible, as the case of the Stuxnet worm, which 
we discuss below, proves.
What Makes Cyberspace Insecure?
Richard A. Clarke, who served as National Coordinator for Security, Infra-
structure Protection, and Counterterrorism, explains why cyberspace is an 
attractive domain for conflict:
In the broadest terms, cyber warriors can get into these networks and control 
or crash them. If they take over a network, cyber warriors could steal all of its 
information or send out instructions that move money, spill oil, vent gas, blow 
up generators, derail trains, crash airplanes, send a platoon into an ambush, or 
cause a missile to detonate in the wrong place. If cyber warriors crash networks, 
wipe out data, and turn computers into doorstops, then a financial system could 
collapse, a supply chain could halt, a satellite could spin out of orbit into space, 
an airline could be grounded. These are not hypotheticals. Things like this have 
already happened, sometimes experimentally, sometimes by mistake, and some-
times as a result of cyber crime or cyber war.18

160 
Chapter Nine
Both cyber criminals and cyber warriors have a variety of weapons in their 
arsenals. To understand these weapons, however, it is necessary to wade into 
a field that is filled with terms that sound as if they were drawn straight from 
science fiction, terms such as “packet sniffers,” “IP spoofing,” “worms,” and 
“viruses.”
Many types of attacks begin with a botnet. A botnet is made up of a large 
number of computers that have been infected with malicious software (or 
malware) that allows them to be controlled remotely via the Internet. The 
individual who controls the botnet is known as the botmaster or bot-herder. In 
most instances, owners of the individual computers in a botnet (called drones) 
are not even aware that their machines are doing someone else’s bidding. On 
receiving a command, computers in the botnet can be made to send simulta-
neous requests to a single website, overwhelming it and making it unavailable 
to other, legitimate users. This is how a distributed denial-of-service (DDOS) 
attack is conducted. Botnets can also be instructed to send spam containing 
viruses or other malware.19
The botmaster controls an asset that can be rented out to spammers for 
advertising purposes or to criminals for phishing, which is the use of mali-
cious code to steal valuable information—such as bank account numbers 
and passwords—from another computer. Botnets can also be rented out to 
governments or to nonstate actors (including terrorist groups) for DDOS or 
other cyber-attacks. Jean Ancheta, who was convicted in 2006 on various 
computer fraud charges, allegedly made over a hundred thousand dollars 
by distributing adware through a botnet made up of 400,000 computers that 
he controlled.20
Most people encounter the work of botnets, whether they realize it or 
not, in the form of spam containing false alerts from banks or network 
security officers, ads for fly-by-night pharmaceutical companies, or offers 
of salacious photos of pop culture icons. One common phishing scheme 
that exploits human gullibility (and greed) involves an appeal from the 
son/daughter/lawyer/banker/business associate of a recently deceased Af-
rican dictator/general/entrepreneur/human rights activist for help in mov-
ing millions of dollars out of Africa into a secure bank account abroad. 
Such schemes are known as “419 scams” for the section of the Nigerian 
criminal code that pertains to fraud. While most know better than to reply 
with bank account numbers or other sensitive financial information, a few 
people who receive the appeals fall for them, just as a few unwisely click 
on links in other forms of spam. If a million e-mails are sent out and a 
mere one one-hundredth of one percent (0.01 percent) result in a reply 
containing information that can be used to perpetrate identity theft or a 
click-through that downloads a virus, then another one hundred successes 

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
161
can be chalked up for criminal enterprises. Of course, sending a million 
e-mails—or even a hundred million—is virtually cost-free once addresses 
have been secured.
Unfortunately, avoiding e-mail scams is no guarantee of safe computing. 
There are many other, and far more sophisticated, threats in cyberspace. To 
get a better sense of how some of these threats are generated, let us take a 
brief look at how information is transmitted and sometimes altered or inter-
cepted.
Messages travel through the Internet in blocks of data called “packets.” 
An e-mail message or Web page might be broken into several packets 
prior to entering the network. Once the packets are received, they can be 
reassembled. A “packet sniffer” makes it possible to intercept packets of 
information as they travel across the Internet. Hackers have used sniff-
ers to intercept user names and passwords, which can then be used for 
entering otherwise protected networks. In July 1995, the FBI identified a 
hacker who was using the Harvard University computer system to break 
into various U.S. Department of Defense systems, including the Naval 
Research Laboratory, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Naval 
Command, Control and Ocean Surveillance Center. To find the offender, 
the FBI used a packet sniffer to scan for messages that came from the 
hacker, who was using the alias “Gritón” (which means “screamer” in 
Spanish). The investigation led to an Argentine university student, Julio 
Cesar Ardita, who pleaded guilty to wiretapping and other charges related 
to computer crimes.21
Every packet of information traveling on the Internet has a source and a 
recipient, indicated by the Internet Protocol (IP) addresses assigned to all 
computers on the Internet. Another offensive use of computer technology is 
called “IP spoofing,” which involves forging the source address of a message 
so that it appears to have originated somewhere else. In a typical IP spoofing 
attack, the false source is trusted by the recipient, thus allowing the sender 
entry into a network.
The most notorious computer attacks in recent years have consisted of 
“worms” and “viruses.” Both of these types of attacks infect computers 
(hence the medical metaphor) and spread over entire networks. Computers 
operate strictly according to the instructions that they receive from human 
operators or from other computers. Such instructions can be changed (“in-
fected”), causing the computer to operate in unexpected or even destructive 
ways. According to Dorothy Denning, “The main difference [between worms 
and viruses] is that a worm is an autonomous agent that spreads entirely on 
its own, whereas a virus attaches itself to other software and spreads with 
that software.”22

162 
Chapter Nine
We are at risk. Increasingly, America depends on computers. . . . Tomor-
row’s terrorist may be able to do more damage with a keyboard than with 
a bomb.
—National Academy of Sciences, 1991
Source: Quoted in Myriam Dunn Cavelty, “Cyber-Terror—Looming Threat or 
Phantom Menace? The Framing of the US Cyber-Threat Debate,” Journal of 
Information Technology & Politics 4 (2007): 19.
Homer tells us that Greek soldiers hid inside a large wooden horse that the 
Trojans brought inside the gates of their city. Once inside Troy, the Greeks 
emerged from the horse and routed the surprised Trojans. In computer terms, 
a “Trojan horse” is a form of malware that is downloaded onto a computer by 
a user who believes it to be something that it is not. Trojan horses may appear 
in the form of malware bundled with a popular media file or other application. 
When downloaded, the malware may copy or delete files on the computer, 
log and transmit keystrokes, or turn the computer into a botnet drone. Among 
the various types of Trojan horses are “logic bombs.” Logic bombs are trig-
gered by a specific event, such as typing a particular series of keystrokes, or 
by the arrival of a particular date or time on the computer’s internal clock.
Those who study information operations define “hacking” as “activities 
conducted online and covertly that seek to reveal, manipulate, or otherwise 
exploit vulnerabilities in computer operating systems and other software.”23 
Hackers generally do not have political agendas; they try to break into 
computer systems for the challenge, for the same reason that climbers scale 
mountain peaks—because they are there. In contrast, “hacktivists” combine 
hacking with political activism. Thus, a number of groups use the Internet in 
support of their causes. For example, the Zapatista National Liberation Army 
(EZLN) has used the Internet to garner support for its guerrilla-like insur-
gency in the Mexican state of Chiapas.24
In figure 9.1, we have categorized various types of hardware and software 
according to whether they are used for offensive or defensive purposes. The 
techniques on the left side of the figure are used for offensive purposes—that 
is, to attack another individual’s, corporation’s, or government’s computer 
system. The techniques on the right-hand side of the figure are used for de-
fensive purposes: to prevent an attack on one’s own computer system. Two 
other dimensions of the figure that are significant are reflected in the vertical 
axis. The techniques at the top of the figure are more expensive than those 
at the bottom. In addition, there are fewer suppliers of the techniques at the 
top of the figure.

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
163
CYBER-CRIME
On May 4, 2000, an e-mail with the subject line “ILOVEYOU” began spread-
ing all over the world. It contained an attachment, labeled “LOVE-LETTER-
FOR-YOU-TXT” that, when opened, replicated and sent itself to everyone 
on the victim’s address list, indicating the victim as the sender. The “Love 
Bug” malware (a Trojan horse), designed to exploit people’s curiosity, was 
created by Onel de Guzman, a former computer programming student in the 
Philippines who had written about the possibility of such a self-replicating 
virus as part of his undergraduate thesis. Although the malware quickly in-
fected 45 million computers worldwide and cost an estimated $10 billion in 
lost productivity and cleanup costs, Guzman was never charged with a crime. 
He did not profit from the prank and, at the time, the Philippines had no laws 
making it a crime to spread malware.25
The Love Bug transformed cyber-crime by demonstrating that malware, 
combined with human gullibility, could make it a very simple matter for 
skilled hackers to gain access to sensitive information stored on millions of 
computers. An incident in 2009–2010 in which hackers exploited some of the 
same unsafe computing practices that helped spread the Love Bug so quickly 
illustrates how lucrative cyber-crime can be.
Figure 9.1. Information Operations and Warfare Typology

164 
Chapter Nine
In the fall of 2010, over one hundred people were arrested in the United 
States, the United Kingdom, and Ukraine in an operation targeting one of the 
largest cyber-crime networks ever uncovered. Network bosses in Eastern Eu-
rope used a virus called Zeus to infect computers, making it possible for them to 
gather passwords for online bank accounts. Money was then transferred from the 
compromised bank accounts to other accounts held by “mules,” or go-betweens, 
in the United States and the United Kingdom. The network stole approximately 
seventy million dollars before the FBI solved the case and began making arrests. 
Given more time, the amount stolen could have been much greater.26
Some cyber-criminals have attempted to eliminate the middleman by hack-
ing directly into the banking system. In one of the most impressive displays 
of coordination in the annals of crime, 2,100 ATMs in 280 cities worldwide 
were hacked, permitting the withdrawal of over nine million dollars in a span 
of less than twelve hours. The FBI broke up this particular operation in 2008, 
but few believe law enforcement is anywhere close to getting ahead of the 
cyber-crime problem.27
The available evidence indicates that cyber-crime has been increasing dra-
matically in recent years and that it will continue to do so. The Internet Crime 
Complaint Center estimates that Americans lost $264.6 million to computer 
fraud in 2008. (This figure does not include corporate losses due to cyber-
crime, which are estimated to be in the billions of dollars annually.) As Steven 
R. Chabinsky, the deputy assistant director of the FBI’s Cyber Division, noted 
in testimony before the Senate Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Se-
curity in 2009, “The number of actors with the ability to utilize computers for 
illegal, harmful and possibly devastating purposes continues to rise.”28
From the spread of Onel de Guzman’s so-called Love Bug in 2000 to the 
bank fraud perpetrated with the Zeus virus in 2010, there is one thing that 
almost all major cyber-crimes have in common: they are transnational in 
character. This creates a host of problems for law enforcement authorities. 
Those who commit cyber-crimes may be protected from prosecution due to 
loopholes in the law of the state where they operate or the indifference or 
ineffectiveness of local police and prosecutors. Law enforcement authorities, 
aware that computer crimes are being committed on their territories, may be 
reluctant to devote scarce resources to investigating and prosecuting those 
crimes as long as most victims are located in other states. While states often 
seek the extradition of their own nationals to stand trial on criminal charges, 
most are not eager to bring criminal suspects of other nationalities to their 
shores. What the wealthiest states—those where most cyber-crimes have 
their biggest effects—generally hope to see is vigorous enforcement of laws 
criminalizing computer crimes in the states where the cyber-criminals oper-
ate. However, even wealthy states have difficulty policing what might be 
considered their portions of cyberspace.

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
165
CYBER-ESPIONAGE
Whether we like it or not, a vast amount of personal information about each 
of us in the developed world can be found somewhere on networked com-
puters—that is, in cyberspace. Financial transactions including purchases 
(whether in online or brick-and-mortar stores), phone records, school tran-
scripts, birth certificates, personal information posted on social networking 
sites, and much, much more is stored in cyberspace, ready to be recovered 
and exploited by those with the skills necessary to breach what are often woe-
fully inadequate security protocols. The same is true for information stored 
by corporations and governments.
Because cyberspace is where most information is stored and most com-
munication occurs today, cyber-espionage has become a major threat to the 
security of states and nonstate actors. It has become a threat in part because 
the cost of entry into the cyber-espionage game is so low. The principal 
investigator of a U.S. General Accounting Office report stated in 1996, 
“Countries today do not have to be military superpowers with large standing 
armies, fleets of battleships or squadrons of fighters to gain a competitive 
edge. Instead, all they really need to steal sensitive data or shut down military 
computers is a two-thousand-dollar computer and modem and a connection to 
the Internet.”29 Of course, the cost of the computer may be much lower today.
Cyber-espionage is, in simple terms, spying in cyberspace. It involves 
gaining unauthorized access to computers, networks, and control systems to 
collect secret or proprietary information or to alter data. Of course, when the 
target of an electronic intrusion is a state’s security apparatus (the defense 
ministry, intelligence agencies, and military forces), the line separating 
cyber-espionage from cyberwar becomes difficult to discern.
According to Anders Fogh Rasmussen, secretary-general of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization, computer systems at NATO headquarters are 
attacked a hundred times a day. Government networks in the United States 
deal with thousands of probes each day.30 Some of the probes of military sys-
tems in the United States have merited their own names (supplied by federal 
investigators), including Solar Sunrise, a cyber-attack on U.S. government 
computers in 1998; Moonlight Maze, a cyber-espionage effort attributed to 
Russia, which began in 1999; and Titan Rain, an attack attributed to China, 
which exfiltrated ten terabytes of data beginning in 2003.31
The Moonlight Maze and Titan Rain incidents both involved the theft 
of information on computers connected to the Internet. Until recently, all 
hacking required either physical access to a computer on the network being 
hacked (for example, the ability to type on its keyboard) or, more commonly, 
an Internet connection so that hackers could find networks containing sensi-
tive information in the same way e-mail finds its intended recipients. This 

166 
Chapter Nine
meant that the networks containing the most sensitive information or the most 
important control functions, such as those used to coordinate nuclear missile 
launches, could be secured from hackers by maintaining an air gap, that is, 
keeping them disconnected from the Internet. This is no longer a fool-proof 
strategy for keeping sensitive networks secure.
The United States military has over one hundred thousand computers con-
nected to SIPRNET, an air-gapped network used to transmit classified infor-
mation and orders among military units. In November 2008, the SIPRNET 
was compromised by spyware that originated in Russia and jumped to air-
gapped computers with a human assist. Using standard hacking procedures, 
the spyware was deposited on computers with dot-mil addresses (indicating 
Department of Defense sites) connected to the Internet. At that point, it 
searched for thumb drives used to transfer data from one computer to another. 
Individuals who plugged infected thumb drives into air-gapped but otherwise 
unprotected SIPRNET computers provided the human assistance needed for 
hackers to get into one of the government’s most secure networks.32
Another serious breach of cyber-security occurred in 2009 when hackers 
gained access to data on the F-35, the U.S. military’s next-generation fighter 
plane currently under development. Several terabytes of information related 
to the design and avionics of the F-35 were stolen. Pentagon officials believe 
the hack came from a computer in China.33
British and American intelligence agencies have publicly identified the 
People’s Republic of China as the source of several cases of cyber-espio-
nage.34 Having solved the attribution problem, however, the problem of how 
to respond arises. Neither a Chinese pledge nor a bilateral agreement to 
refrain from spying in cyberspace would be enforceable. Threats to punish 
China in some fashion might easily escalate with consequences that neither 
side desires. The only viable solution seems to be for government agencies 
and corporations that have been the targets of cyber-espionage to do a better 
job of securing sensitive information. This, however, requires developing—
and maintaining—the capabilities necessary to stay ahead of a determined 
adversary in the cat-and-mouse game of infiltration, detection, and exclusion.
CYBER-TERRORISM
During his tenure as CIA director, George Tenet noted that terrorist groups 
including Hezbollah, Hamas, the Abu Nidal organization, and Al Qaeda were 
using computerized files, e-mail, and encryption to support their operations.35 
The willingness of Al Qaeda, an organization with a decidedly premodern 
worldview, to use modern technology to attack symbols of modern wealth 

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
167
and power seems to suggest that it is only a matter of time before the orga-
nization turns to cyber-terrorism. This, at least, was the conclusion of the 
National Intelligence Council in 2004, which stated, “We expect that ter-
rorists will also try to acquire and develop the capabilities to conduct cyber 
attacks to cause physical damage to computer systems and to disrupt critical 
information networks.”36
Terrorists have used the Internet extensively in recent years, but not to 
conduct cyber-attacks—at least not thus far. Before we examine the possibil-
ity of cyber-terrorism, let us consider what terrorists are doing in cyberspace.
Because terrorism is a form of psychological warfare that seeks to spread 
fear, terrorist organizations have used the Internet to disseminate images cal-
culated to shock viewers. Grotesque videos of the beheadings of American 
and foreign workers captured by insurgents in Iraq and Pakistan were posted 
on the Internet to make them available to audiences worldwide. More gener-
ally, terrorists have gone online to seek publicity and to disseminate propa-
ganda. Virtually all of the world’s major terrorist groups have active websites 
with information related to their organizations and causes. Typically, these 
websites attempt to justify their reliance on violent methods and to recruit 
supporters. One of the websites Al Qaeda used at the time of the 9/11 attacks 
was alneda.com. It presented official statements from leaders of Al Qaeda 
and appears to have been used to transmit secret messages to Al Qaeda op-
eratives around the world.37 In July 2002, an American Internet entrepreneur 
acquired the alneda.com domain name when its registration was deleted in 
preparation for a move to a different server. The new owner left the existing 
content on the site but added tracking software so he could see where mes-
sages posted on the site were coming from. After five days, someone posted 
a message elsewhere on the Internet alerting Al Qaeda’s supporters to the fact 
that alneda.com had been hijacked by an infidel.38
Terrorist organizations have also used the Internet to obtain information on 
potential targets. Dan Verton, the author of Black Ice: The Invisible Threat 
of Cyberterrorism, notes, “Al-Qaeda cells now operate with the assistance 
of large databases containing details of potential targets in the United States. 
They use the Internet to collect intelligence on those targets, especially criti-
cal economic nodes, and modern software enables them to study structural 
weaknesses in facilities as well as predict the cascading failure effect of 
attacking certain systems.”39 When American investigators tracked Ramzi 
Ahmad Yousef, the mastermind behind the 1993 attempt to bring down the 
World Trade Center, to the Philippines two years after the attack, they found 
his laptop computer in the apartment where he had been living. The com-
puter’s hard drive contained much of the evidence that was used to convict 
Yousef in 1997 of conspiracy in the WTC bombing case. It also contained 

168 
Chapter Nine
plans to blow up a dozen U.S. airliners over the Pacific. Included among the 
computer files were flight schedules, details of onboard detonations, and false 
identification documents, including photos of some of the conspirators.40
Like many nonprofit and political organizations, terrorist groups use the 
Internet to raise money. Part of Al Qaeda’s Internet presence has involved 
for-profit businesses and fake charities to provide the organization with 
revenue. According to testimony by Dennis Lormel, the head of the FBI’s 
Terrorist Financial Review Group, “an Al Qaeda terrorist cell in Spain used 
stolen credit cards in fictitious sales scams and for numerous other purchases 
for the cell.”41
Some terrorist groups have gone online to recruit and train new members. 
Websites focusing on matters of concern to Islamic fundamentalists are 
widely available; some contain downloadable videos of fighting in Chechnya, 
Afghanistan, and Iraq, as well as videos of prominent Al Qaeda leaders, such 
as Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri. Islamic jihadi groups have 
also used the Internet to distribute training materials related to bomb making, 
kidnapping, assassination, encryption, and poison. One of the most notorious 
of these training manuals is the Encyclopedia of Jihad, which is more than a 
thousand printed pages in length.
Finally, the Internet provides terrorists with the ability to plan and coor-
dinate actions quickly, cheaply, and securely. Al Qaeda has used a sophisti-
cated form of encryption called steganography, which involves hiding mes-
sages inside graphic files, such as photographs, for some communications 
between cells.
Why have terrorist organizations used the Internet to recruit, raise money, 
plan, communicate, and coordinate but not to attack? Terrorism is a strategy 
that seeks to produce a profound psychological impact in the target society. It 
is, more to the point, about terrorizing large audiences. The theft of personally 
identifiable information from retailers, the spread of a crippling virus through 
cyberspace, or the infiltration of government computers—in other words, the 
more common types of cyber-security breaches—rarely produce real fear in 
a society regardless of how costly or damaging to national security they may 
be. Terrorists hope to create panic, or at least dread, in an audience; cyber-
attacks are generally not suited for that. Thus, while there may be military 
reasons to prefer hacks over kinetic effects in some situations, terrorists in-
variably prefer explosions, in large part because they want to produce images 
suitable for television news broadcasts.42
There are certain types of cyber-attack that might create the kind of dra-
matic effects that terrorists desire. For example, shutting off the supply of 
electricity to a major city or taking down the air traffic control system would 
likely generate fear, especially if such demonstrations of control over critical 

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
169
infrastructures were accompanied by credible threats to conduct additional 
cyber-attacks. Fortunately, terrorist groups probably do not have the ability 
to conduct these kinds of attacks at present. Unlike many of the measures 
that states take in an effort to enhance national security, efforts to secure the 
critical infrastructures from state-based cyber-attacks will provide protec-
tion against cyber-attacks by terrorist organizations as well. This, of course, 
argues for taking measures to secure control systems that are vulnerable to 
cyber-attacks before terrorists develop the capability to wage such attacks 
and before any state finds a reason to use what may be an existing capability.
CYBERWAR
Although the vast nuclear arsenals and the large conventional forces amassed 
by the United States and the Soviet Union were never used against each other 
during the Cold War, there were confrontations that brought the two adver-
saries to the brink of war on numerous occasions. The Berlin crises and the 
Cuban missile crisis were moments of great tension, as was the downing of an 
American U-2 spy plane over the Soviet Union in 1960 and the destruction of 
a Korean Air Lines 747 in Soviet airspace in 1983. But what may have been 
the single most destructive act of one side on the territory of the other hardly 
caused a ripple in the tense relationship between the two superpowers. It was, 
arguably, an act of cyberwar.
In 1981, a Soviet KGB agent, code-named Farewell, was turned and began 
working for the French from his post within the KGB directorate responsible 
for stealing technology from the West. Information provided by Farewell 
that France shared with the United States revealed that the Soviet military 
was heavily dependent on Western technology. The Soviet economy also ap-
peared to be benefiting from Soviet espionage. Although the initial impulse 
within the U.S. national security establishment was to end the spying by ar-
resting two hundred KGB agents identified by Farewell, the CIA devised a 
different plan that was approved by President Reagan.
Knowing the specific technologies the Soviets were trying steal, the CIA 
began working with companies to ensure that what the KGB agents acquired 
was flawed in some crucial way. According to White House official Gus 
Weiss, “Contrived computer chips found their way into Soviet military equip-
ment, flawed turbines were installed on a gas pipeline, and defective plans 
disturbed the output of chemical plants and a tractor factory. The Pentagon 
introduced misleading information pertinent to stealth aircraft, space defense, 
and tactical aircraft.” The most impressive failure of a technology channeled 
to the Soviets was the product of a logic bomb.

170 
Chapter Nine
To bring natural gas from Siberia to Europe, the Soviet Union at the time 
was building one of the world’s longest pipelines. Knowing Soviet needs as 
a result of information supplied by Farewell, the CIA tampered with the pipe-
line control software being acquired by the Soviets from a Canadian com-
pany. At a predetermined time after the software had been installed and gas 
had begun flowing through the pipeline, valve settings and flow rates were 
altered according to the code inserted by the CIA. “The result,” according to 
one American official, “was the most monumental non-nuclear explosion and 
fire ever seen from space.” 43
In July 2010, the industrial giant Siemens notified users of its supervisory 
control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems that a sophisticated worm 
was exploiting the company’s default password in order to spread itself and 
steal industrial secrets. SCADA software, which is used to manage large-
scale industrial processes, is supposed to be less vulnerable to malware 
because the computer systems running it are generally not connected to the 
Internet. However, the Stuxnet virus attacking Siemens’ software was spread 
when flash drives used in computers connected to the Internet were inserted 
into control systems without an Internet connection, just as the malware of 
Russian origin that penetrated one of the Defense Department’s air-gapped 
networks had done in 2008. Malware like the Stuxnet virus could be used to 
disrupt entire industries or even to shut down a regional power grid.44
Some computer security experts came to believe that Stuxnet might have 
been created by the United States or Israel to sabotage Iran’s nuclear pro-
gram. The evidence supporting this theory was entirely circumstantial, but 
often circumstantial evidence is all that investigators have to go on when 
tracing cyber-attacks. The first piece of evidence suggesting that Stuxnet had 
governmental origins was its complexity. Some suggested that it would have 
taken half a dozen or more skilled programmers working for six months to 
produce the malware’s code. Also, while the virus was found on computers 
in a number of countries, including Indonesia and India, a large cluster of 
infected computers were in Iran. Iranian officials themselves suggested that 
Stuxnet was aimed at Iran’s nuclear program but denied that delays in bring-
ing the country’s first nuclear power plant online were related to the worm.45
Whether the use of a logic bomb to destroy a section of pipeline in a remote 
area of Siberia and the use of a worm to attack SCADA software qualify as 
acts of cyberwar may be debated. Cyber-attacks like these would clearly be 
called “cyberwar” if they accompanied kinetic warfare as the cyber-attacks 
on Georgia in 2008 did. But if an attack is unattributed (and perhaps even 
unrecognized as having been an attack rather than an accident), then the label 
“cyber-espionage” may be more appropriate. As we noted in the opening 
chapter, the determination that certain problems qualify as security issues is 

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
171
made by a social process that begins with a “speech act.” The same is true in 
determining what merits the label “war.” In thinking about the relatively new 
problems associated with malicious activities in cyberspace, we should keep 
in mind that calling certain activities “cyberwar” rather than “cyber-espio-
nage” may be intended to heighten concern about threats to cyber-security so 
that more resources will be devoted to remedies.
Whether all of the activities in cyberspace of a so-called cyberwar de-
serve that label or not, clearly the military forces of the United States and 
its NATO allies exhibit certain vulnerabilities to cyber-attack. These vulner-
abilities stem from the extraordinary degree of dependence on computers and 
networked information systems exhibited by these forces. Consider a recent 
description of this dependence by U.S. deputy secretary of defense William 
J. Lynn III:
Information technology enables almost everything the U.S. military does: logis-
tical support and global command and control of forces, real-time provision of 
intelligence, and remote operations. Every one of these functions depends heav-
ily on the military’s global communications backbone, which consists of 15,000 
networks and seven million computing devices across hundreds of installations 
in dozens of countries. More than 90,000 people work full time to maintain it. In 
less than a generation, information technology in the military has evolved from 
an administrative tool for enhancing office productivity into a national strategic 
asset in its own right.46
The U.S. military possesses capabilities that no other military force in the 
world can match, due in large part to its successful marriage of informa-
tion systems to advanced technologies, including precision weapons. But, 
as Gregory Rattray has pointed out, “Information systems now serve as 
both weapons and targets of warfare.”47 A military that depends for its ef-
fectiveness on access to information—including an ability to communicate 
instantaneously using electronic devices—and on the smooth functioning of 
advanced technologies could be crippled by an adversary that hacks into its 
computer networks. This is the concern that, above all others, has motivated 
the U.S. military to try to organize itself more efficiently for cyberwar.
In June 2009, the Department of Defense announced the creation of the 
U.S. Cyber Command within the U.S. Strategic Command. The new com-
mand, headquartered at Fort Meade alongside the National Security Agency, 
began operating in May 2010. Its missions are (1) to secure military networks 
and support traditional military activities with operations in cyberspace; (2) 
to integrate the cyber-resources that currently exist in the different branches 
of the military; and (3) to work with allies, other government agencies, and 
industry to develop common responses to threats in cyberspace.48

172 
Chapter Nine
Organizational changes alone are inadequate to cope with cyberwar threats. 
Because a relatively small number of skilled programmers using inexpensive 
computer systems can generate a wide variety of cyber-attacks, most experts 
believe that cyberspace is a domain in which offenses will have significant 
advantages over defenses at least in the near term. In time, however, it may 
be possible to reconfigure the architecture of the Internet and other computer 
networks to create advantages for those seeking to prevent unauthorized ac-
cess to sensitive information or control systems. The Internet, which was 
originally designed to make it easier for a relatively small group of people—
most of them scientists—to share information openly, is evolving rapidly. At 
least some in the world are pushing that evolution toward enhanced security. 
Meanwhile, it is worth considering what policy prescriptions can be devised 
to make cyberspace more secure.
COPING WITH CYBER-THREATS
Domestic Policy
The instances of cyber-crime, cyber-espionage, and cyberwar described 
in this chapter (along with many others that we have not mentioned) have 
grabbed the attention of governments, industry, and many individuals. In the 
United States, the administration of George W. Bush produced The National 
Strategy to Secure Cyberspace in February 2003 and, in 2008, President Bush 
announced the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) 
designed to establish security standards for government networks. Soon after 
he entered office, Barack Obama announced plans to create an office within 
the White House to coordinate federal efforts to secure cyberspace. The di-
rector of the office, widely referred to as the “cyber czar,” was appointed in 
December 2009.49
Within the government of the United States, the U.S. Cyber Command 
has been given the assignment of protecting military networks (including all 
dot-mil Web addresses) and the Department of Homeland Security has been 
assigned the task of protecting other government networks (including all 
dot-gov addresses). Because the U.S. military has more resources and greater 
expertise in dealing with cyber-attacks, the Obama administration in 2010 
forged an agreement between Homeland Security and the Cyber Command 
under which Defense Department computing capacity could be used to deal 
with nonmilitary cyber-attacks within the United States. While such an agree-
ment has troubling implications for civil liberties, many experts regard it as 
an important step toward getting a handle on a threat that cannot be neatly 
divided between domestic law enforcement and international security.50

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
173
International Cooperation
As we noted in previous chapters, nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons 
have been the subjects of multilateral arms control agreements. Antiper-
sonnel land mines and cluster munitions have been banned by treaties that 
have attracted broad support. While these precedents naturally suggest the 
possibility of developing arms control agreements applicable to cyberspace, 
several factors suggest that the tools of cyberwar may not be as easy to limit 
as weapons that operate in the other domains.
First, cyberwar capabilities are based on dual-use technologies. Nuclear 
warheads, canisters containing nerve agents, and cluster bombs do not have 
legitimate, nonmilitary purposes that complicate efforts to limit or even ban 
them; computers, fiber-optic cables, and Internet protocols that speed packets of 
data to their destinations do. As a consequence, almost any limits that might be 
imposed on either the hardware or the software used in cyberwar would risk lim-
iting the many good and useful things that can be done with computer networks.
Second, from production to storage to actual use, malware is much easier 
to hide than kinetic weapons. Missiles must be launched from ground-based 
silos or pads or from ships, submarines, or airplanes. Consequently, satellite 
reconnaissance, on-site inspections, and other forms of physical inspection 
can be used to find and count missiles. Chemical and biological weapons re-
quire labs for their manufacture and warehouses for storage. Again, physical 
inspection is possible. In contrast, cyber-weapons, which are merely lines of 
software code designed to wreak havoc on an enemy’s computer networks or 
computer-controlled technologies, may be created, stored, and launched from 
the same computers that are used to pay bills, download music, or check foot-
ball scores. Inspectors looking to verify the absence of cyber-weapons might 
have to scan trillions of lines of code scattered across millions of computers. 
Even then, there is no guarantee that cyber-weapons, or malicious software 
codes, would be recognized for what they are. Virus-detecting software looks 
for existing forms of malware or for code that exploits known system vulner-
abilities; innovative methods of attack or ones based on undetected vulner-
abilities are much more difficult to find.
Third, an international agreement designed to limit cyber-weapons would 
likely conflict with the privacy rights of individuals and the intellectual prop-
erty rights of both individuals and corporations. Malware, whether it comes 
from a military unit, a transnational criminal organization, or an individual 
hacker, can be stored on or launched from computers belonging to innocent 
(and unaware) individuals or organizations. Few individuals, universities, 
nonprofit organizations, or businesses would be willing to make all the data 
stored on their computers available for periodic review by inspectors from a 
government or an international organization.

174 
Chapter Nine
These are just a few of the problems associated with agreements intended 
to limit in some way the possession of cyber-weapons. A different approach 
would be to prohibit the use of cyber-weapons rather than their possession. 
But there is a problem with this strategy as well.
International law already prohibits states from launching cyber-attacks, 
or any other forms of attack, except in self-defense. Gary Sharp, referring 
to the United Nations Charter’s provision banning the threat or use of force 
by one state against other states, describes the principle in these terms: 
“Any computer network attack that intentionally causes any destructive 
effect within the sovereign territory of another state is an unlawful use of 
force within the meaning of Article 2(4) that may produce the effects of 
an armed attack prompting the right of self-defense.”51 The application 
of a ban on first use of cyber-weapons, whether based on charter limits 
on the use of force more generally or on a more specific treaty pertaining 
to cyberwar, would run up against the difficulties involved in attributing 
responsibility for sophisticated cyber-attacks. On the other hand, some 
believe that an agreement defining the types of exploits that are to be con-
sidered cyber-attacks under international law might help to dissuade state 
actors from pushing the limits where no shooting war has started while also 
providing a stronger legal basis for retaliation by the victim of proscribed 
cyber-attacks.
In spite of the various barriers to arms control in cyberspace, there are a 
number of aspects of the cyber-security problem that are ripe for international 
cooperation. For example, in 2001, the Council of Europe Convention on 
Cybercrime was concluded. The agreement, which entered into force in 2004, 
attempts to standardize the legal approaches to cyber-crime being adopted by 
individual states and to promote cooperation in detecting and punishing such 
crimes. While the convention is expanding its reach beyond Europe—the 
United States ratified it in 2006, and Canada, Japan, and South Africa have 
signed—one important member of the Council of Europe where cyber-crime 
is common, Russia, has not yet joined.
While the United States began the new millennium with a go-it-alone ap-
proach to cyber-security, that policy is beginning to change. Late in 2009, 
the Obama administration agreed to move forward with talks on cyber-se-
curity in the framework of the United Nations Committee on Disarmament 
and International Security. It is not yet clear what, if anything, will result 
from such talks. Some states that have expressed interest in cyber–arms 
control want to impose limits on information warfare, which they under-
stand to include the spread of subversive ideas, while others, including the 
United States, are interested solely in addressing issues related to the spread 
of malicious code.

 
Insecurity in Cyberspace 
175
The Shape of Things to Come
There is much that is not yet clear about the future of cyberspace. Many 
in the West have enthusiastically embraced the Internet as a tool that over-
comes the barriers of time and distance in ways that promote trade and 
democracy while eroding traditional conceptions of state sovereignty.52 
This vision is based on the belief that the advantages of being connected in 
a wired world are so great that states can hardly choose to disconnect and 
that, once connected, they can scarcely control the flow of ideas across their 
borders. But states have always tried to stop at their borders those thing they 
find threatening, whether armies, contagious diseases, contraband, or sub-
versive ideas. Cyber-threats are no different. The United States, like many 
states around the world, is working to find ways to close its virtual borders 
to cyber-attacks. China has taken extraordinary steps to close its virtual 
borders not only to malware but to what its leaders view as subversive ideas 
as well. Thus the Chinese government employs an estimated forty thousand 
Internet police with the authority to take down websites, delete information, 
and make arrests. This and similar situations in other states has led Chris 
Demchak to suggest that state sovereignty—with the desire to maintain 
meaningful borders that sovereignty implies—will eventually be the norm 
in cyberspace as it is in other domains.53
We may have to wait a few years to see whether cyberspace can be ef-
fectively partitioned and defended or whether cyber–arms control is possible. 
What we know at this point is that the Internet, a remarkable technological 
innovation designed to connect people and facilitate the free flow of ideas, 
has become a domain in which transnational criminal organizations operate 
freely, military and commercial secrets are stolen by unidentifiable hackers, 
and states are already waging cyberwar.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Arquilla, John, and David Ronfeldt, eds. In Athena’s Camp: Preparing for Conflict in 
the Information Age. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 1997.
———. Networks and Netwars: The Future of Terror, Crime and Militancy. Santa 
Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2001.
Clarke, Richard A., and Robert K. Knake. Cyber War: The Next Threat to National 
Security and What to Do about It. New York: Ecco, 2010.
Denning, Dorothy E. Information Warfare and Security. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley, 1999.

176 
Chapter Nine
Kramer, Franklin D., Stuart H. Starr, and Larry K. Wentz, eds. Cyberpower and National 
Security. Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press and Potomac Books, 
2009.
Rattray, Gregory J. Strategic Warfare in Cyberspace. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
2001.
Websites
Computer Emergency Response Team Coordinating Center (CERT/CC): http://www
.cert.org
Department of Homeland Security: http://www.dhs.gov
Institute for National Strategic Studies: http://www.ndu.edu/inss
Institute for Security Technology Studies at Dartmouth College: http://www.ists
.dartmouth.edu
Institute for the Advanced Study of Information Warfare: http://www.psycom.net/
iwar.1.html

Part Three
POLITICAL AND SOCIAL 
CONDITIONS OF INSECURITY


179
Chapter Ten
The State of the State (I)
The Transformation of 
National Security
Immediately after the 9/11 attacks, Richard Perle, then chairman of the Defense 
Policy Board, said, “This could not have been done without help of one or 
more governments. . . . Someone taught these suicide bombers how to fly large 
airplanes. I don’t think that can be done without the assistance of large govern-
ments. You don’t walk in off the street and learn how to fly a Boeing 767.”1
Perle was not alone in mistakenly assuming that there had to be a state 
behind the most destructive attacks on American soil in history. President 
Bush, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, and other high-level ad-
ministration officials sought to link Al Qaeda specifically to Iraq after 9/11. 
Richard Clarke, the National Security Council official in charge of counter-
terrorism efforts, recounts a conversation with President Bush on the evening 
of September 12. The president, having previously been assured by the CIA 
and others that Al Qaeda was solely responsible for the attacks, said to Clarke 
and others in the Situation Room of the White House, “I want you, as soon as 
you can, to go back over everything, everything. See if Saddam did this. See 
if he’s linked in any way.”2 The Bush administration’s search for evidence of 
a direct link between Iraq and Al Qaeda continued right up to the beginning 
of the war with Iraq in March 2003. Evidence of contacts, including a Czech 
report (later discounted) of a meeting between hijacker Mohamed Atta and 
an Iraqi diplomat in Prague, were touted as “ties” or “links.” In fact, on Feb-
ruary 5, 2003, Secretary of State Colin Powell, addressing the United Nations 
Security Council in an effort to gain international support for the American 
war in Iraq, said, “Iraqi officials deny accusations of ties with Al Qaeda. 
These denials are simply not credible.”3
While the Bush administration was clearly attempting to make a cred-
ible case for including military action against Iraq in the “global war on 
terrorism,” key officials also seem to have been trapped in an outmoded 

180 
Chapter Ten
worldview that made it difficult, if not impossible, to envision significant 
threats to the security of the United States emanating from nonstate actors. 
States have long been considered central to what security is all about, both 
as the primary objects of security and as the primary threats to the security 
of other states.
Until recently, most studies of international security focused on the state 
and on the problem of war. During the Cold War, in fact, the term “security 
studies” referred almost exclusively to the study of the military and the use of 
force in international politics. Stephen Walt, for example, said that “security 
studies may be defined as the study of the threat, use, and control of military 
force.”4 Much of security studies, in fact, was devoted even more specifically 
to problems related to nuclear deterrence and arms control. The centrality of 
the state can also be seen in the ubiquity of the term “national security.” (As 
students of international relations will know, the term “national” commonly 
substitutes for the term “state” or “nation-state,” as in “the national interest” 
and “national defense.”) When the United States reformed its defense and 
foreign policy apparatus after World War II, it did so through a legislative 
initiative called the National Security Act of 1947. One of the major creations 
of that act (as amended in 1949) was the National Security Council. In 1952, 
President Truman created the National Security Agency as the focus of activi-
ties related to electronic intelligence.
The same emphasis on the state can be seen in other countries as well. 
The chief intelligence agency of the Soviet Union for most of its history was 
the Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti (KGB), or Committee for State 
Security. Today, the main security agency of the People’s Republic of China 
is the Ministry of State Security. Indeed, this pattern is almost universal. It is 
state (or national) security that preoccupies virtually every government in the 
world.5 This fact alone makes it important to examine the state and the closely 
related phenomenon of war as part of our survey of security.
STATES AND SECURITY: AN AMBIVALENT RELATIONSHIP
For roughly four centuries, states have been the fundamental constituents of 
global society. Peoples seeking to establish political communities in which 
to enshrine their most cherished values have aspired to the creation of states. 
The Wilsonian principle of self-determination, which holds out the promise 
that every nation should be able to incorporate itself in the form of a state, 
has become a part of international human rights law.6 It has also become 
extraordinarily popular, at least if the growth in the number of states (and the 
tremendous human costs incurred to achieve that growth) is any indication.

 
The State of the State (I) 
181
At the beginning of the twentieth century, there were fifty-five independent 
states in the world; today the United Nations has 192 member states.7 The dis-
memberment of colonial empires proceeded so rapidly following World War 
II that the Trusteeship Council, one of the six main organs of the United Na-
tions and a body dedicated to the oversight of dependent territories, was able 
to suspend its operations in 1994. The Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, 
a strategic trust administered by the United States until 1990, was the last to 
appear on the agenda of the Trusteeship Council. Its dissolution yielded three 
new states (the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall 
Islands, and the Republic of Palau), each a member of the United Nations 
in its own right, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas, which 
remains a part of the United States.
States exist, and their number continues to increase, because they have 
proven themselves adept at protecting and promoting certain fundamental 
values. The values that we most commonly look to the state to provide are 
order, rights, collective goods, and security from external threats.
To many theorists, the most important function of the state is to establish 
order or, in the words of the U.S. Constitution, to “insure domestic Tranquil-
ity.” Thomas Hobbes was especially concerned with this point. In a world 
where the use of force or the threat of force is a constant, people must orga-
nize to protect themselves. Beginning in western Europe at the end of the me-
dieval period and gradually spreading across time and territory to encompass 
the entire globe, the effort to organize for mutual protection has produced a 
system of roughly two hundred autonomous states. Over time and in a variety 
of legal instruments, ranging from the Peace of Westphalia of 1648 to the 
United Nations Charter of 1945, the state has been legitimated in its role as 
society’s primary manager of force.
It is important to emphasize that the state’s role is to manage or control 
the use of force, not to eliminate it. Force, after all, may be necessary both 
to secure order within the state and to protect against external threats. States 
may legitimately use force to promote certain additional aims, such as the de-
fense of norms, including respect for human rights and the prohibition against 
aggression, adopted by the society of states. Nor is the state’s role merely 
to arbitrate among those who use force. It does not simply establish rules 
for duels and feuds and insurrections. It seeks to eliminate substate violence 
while preserving the possibility of state violence, if for no other reason than to 
quash substate violence in order to prevent the anarchy that prompted Hobbes 
to argue the need for a leviathan. The problem, of course, is that the state’s 
use of violence on behalf of security is subject to abuses of many kinds, in-
cluding violations of the human rights of the state’s own citizens and aggres-
sion against other states, abuses that are often rationalized by governments as 

182 
Chapter Ten
necessary to deal with security threats. The power of the state can be—and 
often has been—a force for tremendous evil when it has not been subjected to 
adequate checks, when it has been wielded by unscrupulous rulers, and when 
it has been placed in the service of inhumane projects. One need think only 
of the forced collectivization of agriculture in Stalinist Russia, Hitler’s “Final 
Solution,” or Mao’s Cultural Revolution (among many cases) to understand 
the pitfalls of a system in which states possess what approaches a monopoly 
on the legitimate use of force. The dimensions of the problem are illustrated 
by R. J. Rummel’s findings that during the twentieth century more people 
died at the hands of their own governments than were killed in all of the 
century’s wars combined.8
Controlling the state’s use of force within its own borders is primarily a 
matter of constitutional arrangements and personal virtues. Beyond its borders, 
however, the state’s use of force is limited by international law, international or-
ganizations, and, ultimately, the power of other states. In the more serious cases 
of the state’s abuse of power internally, other states, acting under the authority of 
international norms and institutions, may be the only means of control available. 
This, in fact, was the reason NATO intervened in Kosovo in 1999.
To summarize, the state occupies a privileged position with respect to the 
use of force in the contemporary world. As Max Weber noted, “The state is 
human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate 
use of physical force within a given territory.”9 Or, to put it more simply, the 
state may kill; other actors may not. Of course, the state is an institution—a 
legal abstraction even—so to say that the state may kill and others may not 
is to say that only those acting under the authority of the state (soldiers and 
police, for example) may legitimately use violence.
We may say, then, that the fundamental divide in the world, at least from 
the standpoint of security, is between those who have a right to use force (i.e., 
states and their agents) and those who do not. The way the world is organized, 
terrorists, criminal gangs, and disgruntled individuals have no right to employ 
violence. This is what Hobbes had in mind in presenting his leviathan as the 
necessary substitute for the “war of each against all.”
Of course, to suggest that the dividing line between legitimate users of 
force and illegitimate ones is the line that separates the state from all others 
is a bit too simple. It denies the legitimacy of revolutionary violence, includ-
ing the American Revolution, the French Revolution, and many more recent 
revolutions, at least some of which have been democratic in both intent and 
outcome. It leaves individuals and peoples everywhere without effective 
recourse against injustice when that injustice is cloaked with the authority 
of the state. It also grants the state too much authority. Even states, after all, 
cross the line when using force unjustly.

 
The State of the State (I) 
183
Nonetheless, the Hobbesian insight concerning the state and its relation-
ship to the security of individual human beings is an important one for us to 
consider in thinking about states and war. It can help us to understand the 
centrality of the state (and national security) in the traditional paradigm, and 
it can alert us to a number of important ways that the new security agenda 
affects states.
THE CHANGING STATE OF THE STATES SYSTEM
Our concern, however, is not only with the way that new conceptions of 
security affect states. States, and perhaps more importantly the international 
system that states constitute, are changing in ways that impact our under-
standing of security.
Perhaps the most obvious change of the past century is the dramatic 
growth, mentioned earlier, in the number of members of the states system. 
The almost fourfold increase in the number of sovereign states from the 
twentieth century’s beginning to its end was the result first and foremost of 
the fragmentation of multiethnic empires in Europe and Asia (including the 
breakup of the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires after World War I 
and of the Soviet Union at the end of the Cold War) and of successive waves 
of decolonization in Africa, Asia, Oceania, and the Caribbean.
As the number of states has increased, the willingness of states to join 
together in international organizations has also increased. The first intergov-
ernmental organizations (to regulate navigation on the Elbe and Rhine rivers) 
were formed in the first half of the nineteenth century in response to the 
demands of the increased commercial interactions of Europe’s states. Inter-
national trade continues to motivate states to join international organizations 
ranging from those with broad mandates, such as the World Trade Organiza-
tion, to those with narrower competencies, such as the International Coffee 
Organization. But scores of other concerns have prompted states to create 
international governmental organizations (IGOs). Many IGOs, such as the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Comprehensive Test 
Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) focus on security issues.
The increase in the number of intergovernmental organizations has been 
accompanied by a greater willingness of states to join and of IGOs to invite 
them in regardless of their fitness for membership. The League of Nations, 
the first IGO to aspire to universal membership, never counted the United 
States among its members; it rejected Liechtenstein, San Marino, and Mo-
naco as too small to be able to fulfill the obligations of membership; and it 
suffered the withdrawal of sixteen states (including Japan and Germany), as 

184 
Chapter Ten
well as the expulsion of the Soviet Union in 1939. The United Nations, on the 
other hand, has achieved something very close to universal membership, in-
cluding even international pariahs such as Burma, North Korea, and Sudan.10
The delegitimization of colonialism and the concomitant growth of the size 
of the society of states have produced a system in which the gap between 
the strongest and weakest members of the states system, regardless of how 
strength is measured, has become enormous. In 2008, military expenditures 
by the United States comprised 44 percent of the world total and were eight 
times greater than the military expenditures of Russia, the second-leading 
state in this category.11 In economic terms, while annual gross domestic prod-
uct per capita tops thirty-eight thousand dollars in the twenty wealthiest states 
in the world, in over eighty of the world’s states annual GDP per capita mea-
sures six thousand dollars or less.12 The tiny South Pacific state of Tuvalu has 
a GDP of roughly fifteen million dollars, a portion of which is derived from 
a deal negotiated in 2000 to lease the country’s Internet domain name (“.tv”) 
for approximately two million dollars per year.13 Whereas at one time such 
differentials would have invited the absorption of the weak into the empires 
of the strong, today the rules of international society expressly forbid such 
“solutions” to the weak state/strong state divide.
This leads to another important change in the states system: the persistence 
of “failed states.” Because the security implications of failed states are so 
significant today, this issue will be considered separately below.
The increasing democratization of the world’s states is another profound 
change that has significance for our assessment of states and war in the 
twenty-first century. In 1900, monarchs ruled thirty of the world’s sover-
eign states; at the end of the twentieth century, Freedom House classified 
only ten states as monarchies, six of which were either on or adjacent to the 
Arabian Peninsula.14 No country in the world met the criteria for democracy 
in 1900, according to Freedom House, but in 2009 there were 116 electoral 
democracies.15 There are, of course, many complexities that are obscured 
rather than revealed by these statistics, and it is important to recognize, as 
Samuel Huntington notes, that history is not only “messy” but assuredly “not 
unidirectional.”16 Nevertheless, the changes that these numbers document 
are profound, particularly when one considers the concept of the democratic 
peace. According to what many scholars consider the closest thing to an ir-
refutable “law” of international politics, democracies do not wage war among 
themselves. This proposition, grounded in the theories of Immanuel Kant 
and Woodrow Wilson, has been the basis of policies adopted by Bill Clinton, 
George W. Bush, Tony Blair, and the European Union.17
The democratization of states has gone hand in hand with the feminization 
of states. In 1900, only one country in the world (New Zealand) had extended 

 
The State of the State (I) 
185
the right to vote to all of its women. Today, only Saudi Arabia continues to 
deny women the right to vote. (Women are also barred from voting in the 
Holy See, which is the formal name for the Vatican city-state, but the only 
elections held there are those conducted by the all-male College of Cardinals 
for the selection of a new pope.) In 1900, not a single state in the world al-
lowed women to stand for election to national offices. Today, women occupy 
roughly one in five seats in the world’s national legislatures.18 Although 
women occupied the top positions in only eight of the world’s governments 
at the conclusion of the twentieth century, never before had so many women 
served as president or prime minister at one time.19 The representation of 
women in governments around the world is appallingly low and progress has 
been incredibly slow, but the world is nonetheless very different from the way 
it was a century ago. Furthermore, it appears that the presence of women in 
democratic governments, even in small numbers, has had significant effects.
Noting the “pronounced gender gap with regard to foreign policy and na-
tional security issues,” Francis Fukuyama has suggested that there is a con-
nection between the widely observed democratic peace and the feminization 
of politics. While we know that democracies do not fight each other, we do 
not know exactly why this is the case. It may be, Fukuyama suggests, that 
part of the answer lies in the fact that “developed democracies . . . tend to be 
more feminized than authoritarian states, in terms of expansion of franchise 
and participation in political decision making. It should therefore surprise no 
one,” he continues, “that the historically unprecedented shift in the sexual 
basis of politics should lead to a change in international relations.”20
But there are more subtle changes afoot that call into question many of 
our old ideas about security. Robert D. Kaplan, in an essay reflecting on the 
meaning of Fort Leavenworth in the nineteenth century and at present, sug-
gests that the territorial nation-state, which for centuries has been the focus of 
most thinking about security, is on the way out.21 Richard Rosecrance, assess-
ing changes in the nature of the state, also argues that land is becoming less 
significant in international relations. His thesis is that developed countries, 
at least, are rapidly becoming “virtual states” in which private-sector man-
agement and research functions are centralized in the territorial state while 
production is moved overseas to a group of “body nations” (such as China, 
Mexico, and India) that provide manufacturing for the world.22 The economic 
success of a number of small states such as Singapore and Taiwan seems to 
demonstrate the declining significance of territory. It may be that this, too, is 
part of what prompted, over the course of the twentieth century, the delegiti-
mization of wars of conquest and policies of imperialism.
Of course, noting these facts is not to suggest that the territorial state is al-
ready obsolete. Land, particularly in those situations in which oil deposits and 

186 
Chapter Ten
other natural resources lie under it, may continue to be worth fighting over for 
some time to come, but its importance is on the decline for others. Territory 
and population remain the physical base of the state—for the present—so that 
security calculations must continue to take both into consideration.23
A few decades ago, the existence of collective fear had an immediately 
identifiable face—the atomic bomb. While that source is not totally ab-
sent today, one can claim that we have moved beyond the fear of the 
bomb. A nuclear menace is also implicated in the current climate of fear, 
but the atom bomb is only another weapon in its arsenal, the theoreti-
cal do-it-yourself kit that fits into a suitcase and can be assembled in the 
nearest bathroom. What terrifies the world, however, is no longer the 
possibility of over-muscled states unleashing on the world the ultimate 
scenario—the Mutual Assured Destruction (MAD) that once, paradoxi-
cally, also served as its own mutually restraining mechanism. Today the 
fear is one of furtive, invisible power, the power of the quasi-state, that 
entity that lays no claim to any physical boundaries, flies no national flag, 
is unlisted in any international associations, and is every bit as mad as 
the MAD gospel of annihilation that was so calmly annunciated by the 
superpowers.
—Wole Soyinka, Nigerian writer
Source: Climate of Fear: The Quest for Dignity in a Dehumanized World 
(New York: Random House, 2004), 10–11
How have these changes in the states system affected our understanding of 
security? It may be better to ask how these changes ought to affect our un-
derstanding. As we noted at the beginning of this chapter, traditional modes 
of thought about national security are difficult to change.
First, the greatest threat to national security under the traditional paradigm—
interstate war—has declined significantly as a consequence of some of the 
changes in the states system described above. In fact, one of the most striking 
developments in international politics since the end of World War II has been 
the decline in the incidence of large-scale interstate war. Militarized conflicts 
between states have not disappeared entirely by any means—the United States 
alone has fought large land wars in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq (twice), and Af-
ghanistan—but across the globe there have developed large “zones of peace” 
in which interstate war has become extremely unlikely. Europe, where wars 
were a regular feature of continental politics for centuries, has become what 
Karl Deutsch labeled a “pluralistic security community.”24 North and South 
America and Southeast Asia have become stable regions that are generally free 
of interstate war, even though they have not achieved the level of economic and 

 
The State of the State (I) 
187
political integration that European states have experienced within the European 
Union. The almost complete disappearance of war among the world’s major 
powers may be the most noteworthy aspect of the larger story. John Mueller, in 
fact, has argued that great-power wars have become obsolete. He attributes this 
to an emerging consensus, solidified by the experience of two world wars, that 
war in the developed world is immoral and ineffective.25
Second, other changes in the states system noted above have resulted in 
the rise of “zones of turmoil,” which are characterized by persistent and of-
ten seemingly intractable intrastate wars. According to the Uppsala Conflict 
Data Program, an average year over the course of the last two decades has 
seen forty armed conflicts scattered across the globe. The vast majority of 
these conflicts have been intrastate wars (with a few, such as those in Iraq 
and Afghanistan, most accurately characterized as “internationalized” intra-
state conflicts). Only one purely interstate armed conflict, between Djibouti 
and Eritrea, occurred in 2008. Virtually all contemporary wars occur in the 
developing world.26
Data compiled by the Correlates of War Project confirm that intrastate 
war has become the dominant form of armed conflict since World War II. 
Between 1945 and 1997, civil wars outnumbered interstate wars by a ratio of 
more than four to one (108 to 23). Battle deaths in civil wars (11.4 million) 
also dwarfed those in interstate wars (3.3 million).27
In the next two chapters we look more closely at intrastate conflict and 
economic insecurity, two problems that appear to work in tandem. Now, 
however, we turn to problems associated with the failure of states. As we will 
see, the United States and other countries in the developed world now may 
have more to fear from the very weak than from the very strong.
WEAK STATES, FAILED STATES, AND COLLAPSED STATES
One of the problems with the traditional approach to the understanding of 
states and security is that the dramatic differences among states have often 
been underappreciated.28 The false assumption that states are all fundamen-
tally the same, at least with respect to their security interests, was especially 
prevalent during the Cold War, when the overwhelming majority of students 
of security studies focused on the United States, the Soviet Union, and their 
allies. Not surprisingly, given this focus, it appeared that states were princi-
pally concerned with external threats to their territorial and political integrity. 
To put it differently, national security required a capability to deter or defend 
against a military assault or espionage aimed at a coup d’état.
Because states vary widely in size, military might, political stability, and, 
perhaps most importantly, coherence (that is, literally, their ability to stick 

188 
Chapter Ten
together), their security interests diverge in ways that the traditional under-
standing of national security fails to capture. The “ethnocentric obsession with 
external threats to state security” overlooks the fact that weak states are often 
concerned primarily with internal threats that commonly attend the creation 
and development of new states.29 Sir Michael Howard wrote two decades ago 
that “the problems of the twenty-first century will not be those of traditional 
power confrontations. They are more likely to arise out of the integration, or 
disintegration, of states themselves, and affect all actors on the world scene ir-
respective of ideology.”30 He could have said the same of the problems of the 
late twentieth century. Indeed, the historical record since 1945 suggests that 
security threats (understood narrowly as the threat of war and its effects) have 
been particularly significant in the developing world, where war has attended 
the creation and consolidation of new states (as in Pakistan, Vietnam, Algeria, 
and East Timor, to name but a few examples). As we noted above, far more 
fighting occurred in the world of weak states in the last half of the twentieth 
century than in the world of the strong states, and most of that fighting took the 
form of intrastate conflict rather than interstate conflict.
Weak states are problematic for a number of reasons. First, they fail to 
provide the basic security that states are supposed to offer their citizens. They 
fail, in other words, to offer a respite from the “state of nature,” in which, ac-
cording to Hobbes’s famous description, “the life of man [is] solitary, poor, 
nasty, brutish and short.”31 As a consequence, there may be little protection 
against crime (including violent crime), little opportunity for education, little 
economic opportunity, and little access to health care.
Second, by failing to protect their citizens or to offer assistance with basic 
needs, weak states may burden their neighbors with refugees. According to 
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, at the beginning of 
2009 there were 10.4 million refugees in the world. Stateless persons, inter-
nally displaced persons, and asylum seekers brought the total to over 36 mil-
lion “persons of concern,” the highest figure ever recorded by the UNHCR.32
Third, by failing to extend the rule of law over all of their territories, 
weak states may provide safe havens for terrorists, transnational criminal 
organizations, international fugitives, and other actors that are a menace to 
international society. This problem in particular has turned a key assumption 
of national security on its head.
For most of the history of the modern states system, national security has 
required assessing and responding to the threat—defined as a product of ca-
pabilities and intentions to do harm—posed by the strongest states in the sys-
tem. The balance-of-power approach to security assumes that, for their own 
protection, states will arm themselves and form alliances in order to meet the 
threats posed by powerful potential enemies. Since the end of the Cold War, 

 
The State of the State (I) 
189
however, national security has required that strong states deal with passive 
threats posed by the weakest states in the system.
Today, with its Cold War rival Russia in decline and with the People’s Re-
public of China the only potential contender for superpower status, the United 
States stands unchallenged, the world’s only hyperpower. The Persian Gulf 
War of 1991 demonstrated clearly the superiority of the American military 
over what was, at the time, thought to be a formidable Iraqi army. Events 
during the remainder of the 1990s, however, indicated that the U.S. military 
might not be capable of dealing as well with weak states as with strong states.
In country after country during the 1990s, the United States was confronted 
with humanitarian disasters that created pressure (in part as a consequence of 
media coverage and the public opinion it generated) for intervention. A more 
active post–Cold War UN Security Council both encouraged and assisted the 
interventionist impulse, with mixed results, in the former Yugoslavia, Soma-
lia, Rwanda, Haiti, and elsewhere. During his eight years in office, President 
Clinton was alternately criticized for doing too little—for failing to stop 
genocide in Rwanda, for example—and for doing too much—for conducting 
“foreign policy as social work.”33
Each of the opportunities for intervention during the 1990s—those that 
were seized and those that were avoided—had at its core a state in which the 
most basic functions of government—establishing a minimal public order and 
providing basic services—had broken down. The problem for strong states in 
the post–Cold War world had become weak states, not the threat posed by 
other strong states. It was exemplified in one form or another by Afghani-
stan, Cambodia, Haiti, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Libya, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, 
Somalia, Sudan, and Zaire. In fact, the problem arose so often that some felt 
a new taxonomy—dividing cases among the categories of “weak states,” 
“failed states,” and “collapsed states”—was required. It was the phenomenon 
of the failed state and its implications that more than any other transformed 
post–Cold War optimism about the triumph of democracy and the “end of 
history” into pessimism about “the coming anarchy.”34
Robert Kaplan, one of the most influential pessimists, described the 
problem in a bleak account, published originally in 1994, of the situation in 
West Africa. “Even in the quiet zones [of Liberia, Guinea, Ivory Coast, and 
Sierra Leone] none of the governments except the Ivory Coast’s maintains 
the schools, bridges, roads, and police forces in a manner necessary for fun-
damental sovereignty.” It was not just West Africa, though, because Kaplan 
regarded the region as a microcosm of a much broader phenomenon:
West Africa is becoming a symbol of worldwide demographic, environmental, 
and societal stress, in which criminal anarchy emerges as the real “strategic” 

190 
Chapter Ten
danger. Disease, overpopulation, unprovoked crime, scarcity of resources, refu-
gee migrations, the increasing erosion of nation-states and international borders, 
and the empowerment of private armies, security firms, and international drug 
cartels are now most tellingly demonstrated through a West African prism.35
Fortunately, conditions in West Africa have improved since Kaplan wrote these 
words. Liberia’s dictatorship has given way to a democratic government led by 
one of Africa’s first female presidents, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, and Sierra Leone 
is recovering from its decade-long civil war. But the stresses Kaplan observed 
in West Africa can still be observed in many other regions of the world.
For those who live in (or near) failed states, “national security” must seem 
an ironic concept since the state is, whether directly or indirectly, the very 
cause of insecurity. Rather than providing protection against anarchy, failed 
states permit and sometimes even abet society’s slide into the Hobbesian state 
of nature. Wars for control of territory or resources (such as the diamond 
mines of Sierra Leone) or for ethnic advantage or revenge are both common 
and extraordinarily devastating. An estimated eight million people, primarily 
civilians, have been killed in failed-state conflicts since the end of the Cold 
War. Another four million people have been driven from their homes by 
such conflicts. Tens, or perhaps even hundreds, of millions more have been 
affected in other profound ways, especially by the denial of basic needs such 
as food, shelter, and health care.36
For the United States, the security issue related to failed states moved 
from the margins to the center as a consequence of 9/11. Two failed states, 
Sudan and Afghanistan, hosted Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda training fa-
cilities in the years prior to 9/11. The American experience in another failed 
state, Somalia, in the October 1993 battle of Mogadishu (recounted in Mark 
Bowden’s Black Hawk Down and described in chapter 11) was read by bin 
Laden as an example (along with Vietnam, Lebanon, and Afghanistan) of 
the ability of insurgents in a weak state to drive out a superpower.37 In short, 
failed states, once a cause of debates in the United States over the nation’s 
moral responsibilities and the proper configuration of the military, became 
a central concern, due to the platform they provided for the operation of Al 
Qaeda and, potentially, other transnational terrorist organizations. The first 
major operation of the “global war on terrorism,” consequently, was the war 
to overthrow the Taliban regime that had hosted bin Laden in Afghanistan. 
And lest there be any doubt about Afghanistan’s status as a failed state in the 
fall of 2001, Barry Bearak indicated the true situation with this memorable 
line in a New York Times story on the possibility of war there: “If there are 
Americans clamoring to bomb Afghanistan back to the Stone Age, they ought 
to know that this nation does not have so far to go. This is a post-apocalyptic 
place of felled cities, parched land and downtrodden people.”38

 
The State of the State (I) 
191
STATES AND INDIVIDUALS
In law and in fact (at least among those states that are strong enough to con-
form to our understanding of what a state is), one of the most salient charac-
teristics of the modern state has been its monopoly on the legitimate use of 
force. The ability to use force is, in the final analysis, what the state relies 
upon to ensure the social order that is its principal raison d’être. This same 
ability to use force protects the social order not only from internal threats—
the criminal acts of individuals and the acts of rebellion of disaffected 
groups—but from external threats—the aggressive acts of other states—as 
well. Generally, the former was a matter of law enforcement and, for well-
developed states at least, posed less of a threat to the security of the state’s 
citizens than war, because of the inevitably superior firepower of the state in 
comparison with individual criminals or criminal gangs. The latter, on the 
other hand, posed the threat of large-scale death and destruction and the po-
tential loss of most, if not all, of the core values shared by citizens of the state.
Individuals have always possessed some of the instruments of force on 
which the state’s internal order depended and have, therefore, always been able 
to mount a threat to that order. More destructive weapons—battleships, bomb-
ers, missiles, and so on—have generally been outside the reach of individuals. 
Changes in the technology of war and, perhaps more importantly, the spread of 
some of the most destructive technologies threaten now to alter in a very funda-
mental way the relationship between states and individuals with respect to the 
use of force. Put simply, the state’s monopoly on the legitimate use of force has, 
if we drop the term “legitimate,” been lost. “Super-Empowered Angry Men,” to 
use the term coined by Thomas Friedman, can now take on the state, if not on 
equal terms, at least on terms that are far less favorable even to the strongest of 
states. As Stephen P. Cohen notes, terrorists such as Ramzi Yousef and Osama 
bin Laden “used to believe that they had to overthrow their own governments 
and get control of their own states before they could take on America. Now 
they just do it directly on their own as individuals.”39
The 9/11 attacks (which simulated the use of weapons of mass destruction) 
and the anticipated spread of WMD to terrorists represent advances in the 
leveling of state and substate capabilities not seen since the demise of feudal-
ism. Transnational terrorism, however, is not the only activity that exempli-
fies the growing capacity of substate actors to challenge the security of states. 
The sale of illicit drugs generates almost as much revenue each year as the 
petroleum industry. As we noted in chapter 8, profits from drug trafficking 
are commonly used to purchase weapons, sometimes to the extent that drug 
cartels or other transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) come to be bet-
ter armed than the military forces of many states in which they operate. But 

192 
Chapter Ten
drug profits are not only used to buy weapons. They also fund rebel groups 
and terrorists organizations, which then pose a direct challenge to the survival 
of the state. It was, in part, the growing power of drug traffickers relative to 
states, including the United States, that prompted President Bush to militarize 
the effort to suppress international drug trafficking by announcing a “war on 
drugs” in 1989 and ordering the U.S. Southern Command to devote resources 
to the prosecution of that effort.
NATIONAL SECURITY AND TRANSNATIONAL THREATS
Perceptions of national security are changing slowly. At the beginning of 
September 2004, the Washington Post reported that Pentagon officials were 
considering a major shift in strategy, one that, if adopted, would require sig-
nificant changes in American force structure. The shift then being contem-
plated was based on the view that traditional conceptions of national security 
have become outmoded as a consequence of the 9/11 attacks. As the Post 
story put it, “The plan’s working assumption is that the United States faces 
almost no serious conventional threats from traditional, state-based militar-
ies.”40 Worrying about states is out; worrying about substate actors is in. The 
final report of the 9/11 Commission explains the foundations of this shift in 
perspective and is worth quoting at some length:
In the post-9/11 world, threats are defined more by the fault lines within societ-
ies than by the territorial boundaries between them. From terrorism to global 
disease or environmental degradation, the challenges have become transnational 
rather than international. That is the defining quality of world politics in the 
twenty-first century.
National security used to be considered by studying foreign frontiers, weigh-
ing opposing groups of states, and measuring industrial might. To be dangerous, 
an enemy had to muster large armies. Threats emerged slowly, often visibly, 
as weapons were forged, armies conscripted, and units trained and moved into 
place. Because large states were more powerful, they also had more to lose. 
They could be deterred.
Now threats can emerge quickly. An organization like Al Qaeda, headquar-
tered in a country on the other side of the earth, in a region so poor that elec-
tricity or telephones were scarce, could nonetheless scheme to wield weapons 
of unprecedented destructive power in the largest cities of the United States.41
The dramatic rise of transnational threats associated with the increased capa-
bilities of substate actors and their ability to operate out of failed states (or 
ungoverned territories in weak states) is transforming traditional assumptions 
underlying national security. States have long been viewed as the principal 

 
The State of the State (I) 
193
threats to the security of other states, but state-based challenges are increas-
ingly perceived as emanating from the weakness rather than the strength of 
states. When states fail to carry out their fundamental purpose of establishing 
order in society, the security of their own citizens is, as it always has been, 
endangered. But transnational actors are now making state failures a threat to 
citizens in other states as well.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Fukuyama, Francis. State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st Cen-
tury. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2004.
Kaplan, Seth D. Fixing Fragile States: A New Paradigm for Development. Westport, 
Conn.: Praeger Security International, 2008.
Mandelbaum, Michael. The Ideas That Conquered the World: Peace, Democracy, 
and Free Markets in the Twenty-first Century. New York: PublicAffairs, 2004.
Ripsman, Norrin M., and T. V. Paul. Globalization and the National Security State. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Rosecrance, Richard N. The Rise of the Virtual State: Wealth and Power in the Com-
ing Century. New York: Basic Books, 1999.
Rummel, R. J. Death by Government. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1994.
Websites
CIA, The World Factbook: http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world
-factbook/index.html
Freedom House: http://www.freedomhouse.org
Fund for Peace, Failed States Index: http://www.fundforpeace.org/web/index.php
Global Policy Forum: Nations and States: http://www.globalpolicy.org/nations/index
.htm
U.S. Department of State: http://www.state.gov


195
Chapter Eleven
The State of the State (II)
The Rise of Human Security
Since the end of World War II, there have been at least ninety conflicts that 
can be classified as “civil wars.”1 Between 1990 and 2002, there were fifty-
six major armed conflicts in forty-four locations throughout the world; the 
majority were civil wars.2 At the beginning of the twenty-first century there 
were more than twenty major armed conflicts ongoing in the world; again, 
the majority were civil wars. In World War I, roughly 10 percent of the 
casualties were civilians, and 90 percent were military personnel. In World 
War II, about half of the casualties were civilian, and half were military. The 
casualties of contemporary conflicts are the mirror image of World War I: 90 
percent are civilians, and 10 percent are military.
According to the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, of 
the twenty-eight major conflicts between 1991 and 2004, twenty-four were 
civil wars and four were interstate conflicts. The civil wars resulted in two-
thirds of the fatalities (approximately three million), with the interstate wars 
accounting for the remaining third (1.65 million).3 As former UN Secretary 
General Kofi Annan stated, “In the world today intrastate conflict is the face 
of conflict.”4
Intrastate conflict is also one of the faces of poverty. Oxford economist 
Paul Collier notes that of the roughly one billion people living in the world’s 
poorest countries—what he calls “the bottom billion”—73 percent “have 
recently been through a civil war or are still in one.”5 In sub-Saharan Af-
rica since 1990, there have been intrastate conflicts in Angola, Burundi, the 
Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Mali, 
Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Su-
dan, Togo, and Uganda.6

196 
Chapter Eleven
While calling a conflict a civil war suggests that fighting is confined 
to the territory of a single state, civil wars commonly affect neighboring 
states as well. Residents of a country engaged in a civil war often flee to 
neighboring countries, taxing the ability of those countries to provide both 
for their own citizens and for the refugees. (Those who flee their homes but 
remain within the borders of their country are called “internally displaced 
persons”—IDPs—rather than refugees.) Refugees—and IDPs—are often 
placed in camps in crowded conditions, without adequate food, clean water, 
or proper sanitation. These conditions, in turn, encourage the spread of infec-
tious diseases.
Unlike the large-scale wars of the first half of the twentieth century, 
which were based on state interests and involved the mobilization of all sec-
tors of the state in support of a common cause, the intrastate wars that have 
dominated world politics in recent decades are based on identity politics and 
involve the fragmentation of the state. The “identity” at the heart of these con-
flicts may be religious, ethnic, or racial; and while the groups involved may 
seek to seize control of a state or establish a new one, they do not fight out of 
loyalty to an existing state. On the contrary, groups like the Tamil separatists 
in Sri Lanka, the Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda, or the Chechen rebels 
seek to undermine the authority of the existing state.
In the decades to come, the most lethal threats to the United States’ 
safety and security—a city poisoned or reduced to rubble by a terrorist 
attack—are likely to emanate from states that cannot adequately govern 
themselves or secure their own territory. Dealing with such fractured or 
failing states is, in many ways, the main security challenge of our time.
—U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates
Source: Robert M. Gates, “Helping Others Defend Themselves: The Future of 
U.S. Security Assistance,” Foreign Affairs, May/June 2010, 2.
The decline of state sovereignty has to be considered both a cause and a 
consequence of intrastate conflict. As Mary Kaldor notes, “The new identity 
politics arises out of the disintegration or erosion of modern state structures, 
especially centralized, authoritarian states. The collapse of communist states 
after 1989, the loss of legitimacy of post-colonial states in Africa or South 
Asia, or even the decline of welfare states in more advanced industrial coun-
tries provide the environment in which the new forms of identity politics are 
nurtured.”7 Governments have lost what was often almost exclusive control 
of weaponry, capital, and information as power has migrated from the public 

 
The State of the State (II) 
197
to the private sector. In some states, such as Colombia and Mexico, state 
sovereignty has been directly challenged by transnational criminal organiza-
tions. Beyond the erosion of sovereignty, however, what are the causes of 
intrastate conflict?
In an ambitious study entitled The International Dimensions of Internal 
Conflict, Michael E. Brown draws a distinction between underlying and 
proximate causes of intrastate conflict. The former include such factors as 
weak states, elite politics, widespread economic problems, and problematic 
group histories. Proximate causes include factors such as “internal, mass-
level factors (bad domestic problems); mass-level problems (bad neighbor-
hoods); external, elite-level factors (bad neighbors); or internal, elite-level 
factors (bad leaders).”8
Some journalists and popular writers have ascribed intrastate and ethnic 
conflict to “ancient hatreds” between various groups. For example, in his 
book Balkan Ghosts, which reportedly influenced President Clinton’s views 
on Bosnia, writer Robert Kaplan portrayed the root cause of the conflict as the 
mutual antipathy of the major ethnic groups in Bosnia.9 Academic analysts, 
however, tend to discount this explanation of the cause of internal conflict, 
for several reasons.10 First, academic analysts tend to dismiss any monocausal 
explanation; even if “ancient hatreds” play a role in causing internal conflicts, 
they cannot “account for significant variation in the incidence and intensity 
of such conflict.”11 Second, even if ethnic hostility exists, it may not result 
in groups’ killing one another. For example, the three major ethnic groups 
coexisted peacefully for decades in Yugoslavia before they began killing 
one another; something besides “ancient hatred” was clearly at work when 
they finally did. According to David Lake and Donald Rothchild, “By itself, 
ethnicity is not a cause of violent conflict. Most ethnic groups, most of the 
time, pursue their interests peacefully through established political channels. 
But when linked with acute uncertainty and, indeed, fear of what the future 
might bring, ethnicity emerges as one of the major fault lines along which 
societies fracture.”12
Ethnic “fault lines” are very much in evidence. Members of ethnic groups 
identify with one another because of their shared national origin, tribal affili-
ation, social organization, or common language, religion, or race. Demogra-
phers estimate that there are somewhere from three to five thousand ethnic 
groups in the world today.13 One study has identified 233 ethnic groups as 
targets of discrimination or as having organized for political assertiveness; 
this constitutes between 5 and 8 percent of the world’s total number of ethnic 
groups.14 Of the two hundred states that exist today, fewer than twenty—about 
10 percent of the world’s total—are ethnically homogeneous, “in the sense 
that ethnic minorities account for less than five percent of the population.”15 

198 
Chapter Eleven
Some states have disintegrated along ethnic fault lines. Since the end of the 
Cold War, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, and Ethiopia have 
fragmented, giving rise to almost two dozen new states. In a number of other 
states, a significant potential for ethnic conflict exists, as table 11.1 illustrates.
Ethnic groups often have ties to states outside of the countries in which 
they reside. In some cases states provide economic, and sometimes even 
military, aid to ethnic groups in other countries. For example, during the 
Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the government of Saudi Arabia provided 
substantial aid to the Muslim mujahidin who were fighting the Soviets. When 
ethnic groups receive aid from foreign governments, domestic disputes can 
turn into international conflicts.
If “ancient hatreds” between or among ethnic groups do not fully explain 
the causes of internal conflict, what factors do? In an ambitious study, the 
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict identified nine sources 
of conflict.16 These include the irresponsibility of leaders such as Pol Pot 
in Cambodia or Idi Amin in Uganda, repressive, corrupt, or incompetent 
governments, and historical intergroup tensions, as well as a range of eco-
nomic and social factors including economic recessions, widening income 
gaps, population pressures and environmental degradation, and urbanization. 
Where several of these factors are present, the chances of intrastate conflict 
may become very high.
The increased incidence of intrastate conflict, combined with the brutality 
and international repercussions of many civil wars, has led the United Na-
tions to relax its original commitment to nonintervention in “matters that are 
essentially within the internal jurisdiction of any state.” From the founding 
of the UN in 1945 to the end of 2010, there have been sixty-four UN peace-
keeping operations established; forty-six have been established since the 
end of the Cold War. As of October 31, 2010, there were fifteen active UN 
peacekeeping operations, as shown in table 11.2. For the fiscal year that ran 
Table 11.1. Ethnically Based Separatist Movements
Ethnic Group
Seeking Independence from . . .
Kashmiris
India
Sahrawi
Morocco
Tamils
Sri Lanka
Uigurs
China
Tibetans
China
Kurds
Iraq, Turkey, Syria, Iran
Chechens
Russia
Palestinians
Israel
Basques
Spain

 
The State of the State (II) 
199
from July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2011, UN peacekeeping operations cost $7.26 
billion, an amount apportioned among the member states of the UN based 
roughly on their ability to pay.17
Peacekeeping, which was originally conceived as an alternative to the 
more robust strategy of collective security, is intended to create the space in 
which brokered solutions to conflicts can occur while military forces operat-
ing under a UN Security Council mandate keep the opposing sides separated. 
The conflict resolution process may involve conciliation, mediation, or the 
offering of “good offices,” sometimes involving the UN secretary general or 
his personal envoy. Depending on the circumstances, UN peace operations 
may involve the deployment of civilian police forces to assist in maintaining 
Table 11.2. UN Peacekeeping Missions as of October 31, 2010
Acronym
Name
Created
Personnel
Africa
MINURSO
UN Mission for the Referendum in 
Western Sahara
April 1991
   230
UNMIL
UN Mission in Liberia
Sept. 2003
 9,369
UNOCI
UN Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
April 2004
 9,080
UNMIS
UN Mission in the Sudan
Mar. 2005
10,592
UNAMID
African Union-UN Hybrid 
Operation in Darfur
July 2007
22,061
MINURCAT
UN Mission in the Central African 
Republic and Chad
Sept. 2007
 1,456
MONUSCO
UN Organization Stabilization 
Mission in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo
July 2010
19,008
The Americas
MINUSTAH
UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti
June 2004
11,797
Asia and the Pacific
UNMOGIP
UN Military Observer Group in 
India and Pakistan
June 1949
    42
UNMIT
UN Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste
Aug. 2006
 1,513
Europe
UNFICYP
UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
Mar. 1964
   927
UNMIK
UN Interim Administration Mission 
in Kosovo
June 1999
na
Middle East
UNTSO
UN Truce Supervision 
Organization
May 1948
   152
UNDOF
UN Disengagement Observer 
Force
June 1974
 1,119
UNIFIL
UN Interim Force in Lebanon 
Mar. 1978
11,881
Source: United Nations Peacekeeping, available at http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping.
Note: Personnel data includes uniformed personnel (military and police) only.

200 
Chapter Eleven
order or administrators whose function is to help a weak government build its 
capacity to provide essential services to the people of a war-torn state.
Peace enforcement is a more recent notion that the international commu-
nity should act through the UN and other international organizations to end 
conflicts even when the opposing parties do not request assistance. These 
actions are sometimes referred to as “Chapter VII operations,” because that 
section of the UN Charter refers to such actions, authorized by the Secu-
rity Council, as blockade, enforcement of sanctions, forcible disarmament, 
and direct military action. Peace enforcement has at times been the work 
of regional international organizations rather than the UN. For example, in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, a multinational military force of the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) succeeded an existing but largely ineffective 
UN peacekeeping operation.
CASE STUDIES IN PEACE OPERATIONS
Given the frequency of intrastate and ethnic conflict in the post–Cold War 
world, it is likely that the demand for peacekeeping and peace enforcement 
will continue into the foreseeable future. In fact, if the “responsibility to 
protect” (R2P), a principle being advocated by various governments and 
UN officials that would mandate intervention in cases of genocide or other 
serious human rights abuses, gains sufficient backing in the UN Security 
Council, there could be another dramatic increase in the frequency of peace 
operations. While there have been some notable failures in the UN’s efforts 
to maintain international peace and security, some conflicts have been ended 
by the intervention of outside nongovernmental organizations, international 
organizations, and states. What can we learn from recent peace operations? 
In this section, we focus on peace operations in Somalia, Bosnia, Rwanda, 
Kosovo, and Sudan.
Somalia
Somalia, in the Horn of Africa, has had a troubled history since its founding 
in 1960. In 1969, a Marxist government headed by Gen. Mohammed Siyad 
Barre took power and opened Somali ports to the Soviet Union. In 1974, a 
pro-Soviet faction took over in Ethiopia, and the USSR shifted its support 
in the region to this new government. Somalia, in turn, provided support for 
insurgent forces fighting for independence of the Ogaden region of Ethiopia. 
The situation worsened, and in 1977 Ethiopia and Somalia went to war. As-
sisted by Cuban troops, Ethiopia defeated Somalia, and Somalia turned to the 

 
The State of the State (II) 
201
United States for aid. Throughout the 1980s, intermittent conflict between 
Ethiopia and Somalia continued, with disastrous results for the people of So-
malia. Disease and famine were common, and many Somalis left the country. 
Exhausted by more than a decade of fighting, the belligerents signed a peace 
agreement in 1988. In 1991, Siyad Barre was ousted, and the fourteen major 
clans of Somalia began to fight one another for control.
In March 1991, the UN intervened in Somalia in order to assist an esti-
mated two hundred thousand refugees in the capital city of Mogadishu and 
to bring supplies to the more than four million Somalis who were threatened 
with famine. In April 1992, the UN Security Council established the United 
Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM), which consisted of fifty observ-
ers whose mission was to oversee the provision of humanitarian aid and pro-
mote the end of conflict in Somalia. The UNOSOM observers were not able 
to achieve their mission due to continued fighting among the clans. The UN 
secretary general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, requested that the United States as-
sist with the delivery of relief supplies. President George H. W. Bush ordered 
Operation Provide Relief, which during a five-month period (August–De-
cember 1992) airlifted twenty-eight thousand metric tons of critically needed 
relief supplies into Somalia.18
The security situation worsened, and in November 1992 a ship fully laden 
with relief supplies was fired upon and thereby prevented from delivering its 
cargo. Photos of emaciated children accompanied the story about the ship, 
and public pressure to “do something” mounted. In response, the UN estab-
lished a multinational coalition, the “Unified Task Force” (UNITAF), which 
was to be led by the United States. President Bush ordered the initiation of 
Operation Restore Hope, with the dual mission of providing humanitarian 
relief and restoring order to Somalia. Significantly, this was the first time in 
its forty-seven-year history that the UN had dispatched troops with rules of 
engagement that authorized its troops to shoot anyone interfering with the 
relief effort. Eventually, UNITAF involved more than thirty-eight thousand 
troops from twenty-one different countries; of these, twenty-eight thousand 
were Americans.
UNITAF was relatively successful in stabilizing the political situation and 
distributing food to those who most needed it. Plans called for the termina-
tion of UNITAF and the establishment of a permanent peacekeeping force. 
In March 1993, the UN Security Council established UNOSOM II. Signifi-
cantly, this was the first-ever UN peacekeeping operation mandated under the 
Chapter VII peace-enforcement provisions of the UN Charter. The mandate 
of UNOSOM II went well beyond that of UNITAF and called for UN forces 
to engage in “nation building.” The local Somali warlords viewed the new 
UN mandate as threatening to their power, and on June 5, 1993, the forces 

202 
Chapter Eleven
of one of them, Mohammed Farah Aidid, attacked and killed twenty-four 
Pakistani peacekeepers. The next day, the United Nations passed a resolu-
tion calling for the apprehension of those responsible for the killings. Elite 
U.S. Army units—Rangers and the Delta Force—were flown to Mogadishu 
to apprehend General Aidid and other members of his staff. On October 3, 
the U.S. units moved into the city in a daylight raid intended to capture two 
of Aidid’s lieutenants. In the street fighting that followed, eighteen American 
soldiers were killed and seventy-five wounded in the bloodiest battle of any 
UN peacekeeping operation since the 1960 Congo crisis. Pictures of muti-
lated bodies of American soldiers were broadcast around the world, and the 
U.S. public demanded the withdrawal of American forces, which President 
Clinton ordered.19
Somalia is often cited as the first post–Cold War peacekeeping failure, but 
there are problems with this assessment. First, the attack on U.S. forces came 
during UNOSOM II, which was essentially a peace-enforcement operation 
and not a peacekeeping operation. Thus, if anything, Somalia was a nation-
building failure rather than a peacekeeping failure. Second, analysts have 
estimated that UN and U.S. actions in Somalia from 1992 to 1995 saved from 
250,000 to 500,000 lives. In human terms, it is difficult to consider this a fail-
ure. But Somalia affected the way that Americans and the UN viewed peace 
operations, as was to become evident in the Bosnian and Rwandan cases.
Bosnia
Bosnia-Herzegovina, in the Balkans, was at one time part of Yugoslavia. For 
centuries the Balkan region was the battleground of empires; in the fifteenth 
century the Ottoman Empire defeated the Serbs at the battle of Varna, and 
the region fell under control of the Muslim Ottomans. During the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries the Russian and Austro-Hungarian empires made in-
roads into the Balkans and increased their influence. By 1806, Serbia had es-
tablished an independent kingdom. The Treaty of Berlin in 1878 gave control 
of Bosnia-Herzegovina to the Austro-Hungarian Empire; however, Serbians, 
based on ethnic and historical reasons, considered Bosnia-Herzegovina to be 
theirs. So did the Croatians, the second-largest ethnic group in the region. 
Not only conflicting claims concerning Bosnia but religion as well divided 
the Serbs and Croatians; the Serbs were Orthodox and the Croatians were 
Catholic. Complicating the problem was the existence of a large third ethnic 
group in Bosnia—Bosniaks—that is predominantly Muslim.
In 1908, Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia, an action that catalyzed the 
Balkan Wars of 1912–13. The assassination of the heir apparent of the Habs-
burg Empire, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, and his wife by a Serbian national-

 
The State of the State (II) 
203
ist during a visit to Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, in June 1914 lit the fuse 
that ignited World War I. The result of the ensuing four years of war was 
fifteen million dead across Europe and beyond.
At the end of World War I, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes was 
established; it was characterized by competition and hostility among its ethnic 
groups. Throughout the interwar period, the dominant ethnic groups engaged 
in terrorist activities against one another. These activities were reinforced 
rather than interrupted by the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in 1941. Many 
Croats, including the Croatian paramilitary organization, the Ustasha, allied 
themselves with the Nazis. An estimated 500,000 to 700,000 Serbs were killed 
by German Nazis and Croatian Ustasha. In turn, the Serbian paramilitary 
forces, the Cetniks, sought to kill as many Germans and Croats as possible. 
Josip Broz Tito, a Croatian communist, led a group of partisans against the 
occupying Nazis and their local allies. At the end of the war, Tito and his par-
tisans proclaimed the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia and thereafter, 
to sustain it, sought to dampen the nationalistic feelings of the major ethnic 
groups it contained. But these feelings were deep-seated and long-lasting.
Tito ruled Yugoslavia for thirty-five years. He was able to maintain the 
unity of the state by a combination of effective leadership and brute force. 
When he died in 1980, many predicted the death of Yugoslavia, a prediction 
that took a little more than a decade to come true. In April 1987, Muslims, 
who constituted three-quarters of the population of a southern “autonomous 
region” of Serbia—Kosovo—challenged Serbian control. The Yugoslav 
president sent Slobodan Milosevic to Kosovo to quell the ethnic disturbance. 
Instead, Milosevic, a Serb, concluded, as he was to report, “The situation in 
Kosovo was intolerable. . . . They [Muslim Albanians] murdered Serbs; they 
defiled our graves.”20 Following his visit to Kosovo, Milosevic embarked on 
a campaign for a “Greater Serbia,” which he extended to Bosnia, where he 
formed an alliance with the Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Gen-
eral Ratko Mladic. In June 1991, Croatia and Slovenia (Yugoslavia’s richest 
and most westernized republics) declared their independence. The United 
Nations imposed an arms embargo on the former Yugoslav republics. In ret-
rospect, this gave a major advantage to Serbia, which controlled the former 
Yugoslav army; the militaries of Croatia and Bosnia were left at a significant 
disadvantage. In December 1991, Germany extended formal diplomatic rec-
ognition to Croatia and Slovenia.
The first UN peacekeepers were sent to the former Yugoslavia in March 
1992. By then conflict had spread throughout the country, and a new, horrific 
euphemism for genocide had been introduced into the lexicon of politics: 
“ethnic cleansing.” This referred to tactics designed to “expel or frighten peo-
ple from one ethnic group into abandoning territory coveted by another. It can 

204 
Chapter Eleven
include the use of terror tactics, mass rape and summary execution.”21 The 
number of UN troops in the former Yugoslavia was inadequate to prevent the 
mass killing of innocent noncombatants. What had been inconceivable—a 
repetition of the horrors of the Holocaust—had happened again. When UN 
forces proved incapable of stopping the killing, NATO imposed “no fly 
zones” and attacked Serb positions on several occasions. But these actions 
too proved ineffective in stopping the killing.
On the afternoon of July 10, 1995, Bosnian Serb paramilitaries attacked 
Srebrenica, a city that the UN had declared a sanctuary for some forty thou-
sand people seeking refuge from the war. The UN peacekeepers in the city 
were hopelessly outnumbered and had to watch as some six thousand people 
were rounded up and killed. One account of the carnage reported:
The Muslim men were herded by the thousands into trucks, delivered to kill-
ing sites near the Drina River, lined up four by four, and shot. One survivor, 
17-year-old Nezad Avdic, recalled that as he lay wounded among the dead 
Muslims, a Serbian soldier surveyed the stony, moonlit field piled with bodies 
and merrily declared: “That was a good hunt. There were a lot of rabbits here.”22
Following the attack on Srebrenica, Serb forces threatened other “safe” 
areas. In addition, the Serbs shelled the main marketplace in Sarajevo, killing 
more than fifty innocent civilians. In August three American diplomats died 
tragically when their armored personnel carrier went off one of the treacher-
ous roads leading into Sarajevo. These events catalyzed the American and 
European response: the deployment of sixty thousand soldiers to Bosnia to 
implement a new peace agreement negotiated in Dayton, Ohio, by Serbian 
president Milosevic, Croatian president Franjo Tudjman, and Bosnia leader 
Alija Izetbegovic. The provisions of the agreement were implemented in No-
vember 1995. During the four years of the war in Bosnia, an estimated two 
hundred thousand people had been killed and two to three million displaced 
from their homes. Since the signing of the Dayton Accord, there have been 
no significant instances of genocide in Bosnia.23
Rwanda
Rwanda is one of the poorest countries in the world. In 1993, annual per 
capita gross domestic product (GDP) was $290. Fifty percent of Rwanda’s 
total GDP was derived from the agricultural sector, and coffee and tea histori-
cally made up 50 percent of total exports.24 In 1987, the International Coffee 
Agreement collapsed, causing the price of coffee to decline to 50 percent of 
its 1980 value. This precipitous drop in price had a disastrous effect on the 
Rwandan economy and served as the backdrop for subsequent events.

 
The State of the State (II) 
205
For the past four centuries, two tribes—the Tutsi and the Hutu—had jointly 
inhabited the area now known as Rwanda. The Tutsi, primarily cattle herders, 
were wealthier than the more numerous Hutu farmers. The area, comprising 
present-day Rwanda and Burundi, was controlled for a time by Germany and 
then by Belgium from 1916 to 1962. In 1962, Rwanda and Burundi gained 
their independence from Belgium and became separate states. President 
Gregoire Kayibanda, a Hutu, ruled Rwanda autocratically until 1973, when 
Maj. Gen. Juvenal Habyarimana, also Hutu, staged a coup and took over the 
government.
Relations between the Tutsi and Hutu periodically flared into open con-
flict, most notably in 1963, 1966, 1973, and 1990–93. With each episode 
of violence, more Tutsi fled Rwanda for surrounding states. By 1992, ap-
proximately 8 percent of Rwanda’s population of Tutsi was living in exile. 
Some of these exiles formed armed groups that staged sporadic raids into 
Rwanda. In February 1993, the Tutsi militia in exile launched an offensive 
that displaced 650,000 Rwandans. Negotiations were conducted and eventu-
ally resulted in a comprehensive peace agreement, which was signed in Aru-
sha, Tanzania, in August 1993. The Arusha Accords called for the creation 
of a new regime that would incorporate Tutsi in the government and the 
army and would provide for the reintegration of Tutsi refugees into Rwanda. 
Implementation of the accords was slow and problematic; the UN secretary 
general expressed his concern over the “increasingly violent demonstrations, 
roadblocks, assassination of political leaders and assaults on and murders of 
civilians, developments that severely overstretch the resources and capabili-
ties of the national gendarmerie.”25
On April 6, 1994, six days after the secretary general issued his report, 
President Habyarimana of Rwanda and the president of neighboring Burundi 
were killed when two missiles hit their plane as it approached the airfield at 
Kigali, the capital of Rwanda. The missiles had been fired from a military 
base controlled by the Rwandan Presidential Guard, elements of which op-
posed Habyarimana’s negotiation with the Tutsi. The assassination unleashed 
a killing spree not seen since the days of Nazi Germany. In the ensuing three 
months an estimated five hundred thousand to a million people were killed, 
and almost five million people were forced to flee for their lives.26 The Carn-
egie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict noted, “This has been one 
of the most horrifying chapters in human history.”27
What could have been done to stop this carnage? Following the conclusion 
of the Arusha Accords, the UN established a peacekeeping force to support 
implementation of the agreements. This force, which eventually reached a 
strength of 2,500 troops, was commanded by a Canadian, Lieutenant General 
Romeo Dallaire. The force was stretched to the limit by the daily logistical 

206 
Chapter Eleven
demands of sustaining itself and by a series of emergencies, such as a coup in 
Burundi and the resulting refugee crisis.28 General Dallaire sought authority 
for an augmented force operating under Chapter VII (“peace enforcement”) 
of the UN Charter rather than Chapter VI (“peacekeeping”), in order to stop 
the genocide, assist in the return of refugees, and deliver humanitarian aid. 
General Dallaire estimated that with five thousand troops and a mandate 
under Chapter VII, he could have prevented most of the killing.29 Why, then, 
were his requests not approved? General Dallaire’s requests came in the af-
termath of the disastrous Somalia intervention, and both the UN and the U.S. 
government were hesitant to involve themselves in another possible disaster. 
In addition, the UN, the U.S. government, and NATO were trying to figure 
out what to do about the situation in the former Yugoslavia. As a result, 
there was little support for sending more troops to Rwanda.30 Thus Rwanda 
became, according to former assistant secretary of state for African affairs 
Chester Crocker, “the first victim of the post-Somali backlash.”31
Kosovo
Tito established Kosovo as an autonomous province in 1974 in order to de-
crease the power of Serbia. Kosovo is about the size of the state of Connecti-
cut and at the beginning of 1999 had approximately two million residents, 90 
percent of them Albanian Kosovars and 10 percent Serbs. For their part, Serbs 
have long considered Kosovo to be sacred territory because of an important 
battle fought (and lost) against Ottoman Turkish forces in 1389. In addition, 
there are some Orthodox monasteries in Kosovo that the Serbs highly value.
As noted earlier, Slobodan Milosevic went to Kosovo in April 1987 and 
began his campaign for a “Greater Serbia” there. In 1989, he revoked Koso-
vo’s autonomous status and imposed repressive Serbian rule. This situation 
was similar to the system of apartheid that existed in South Africa, except in 
the case of Kosovo, an ethnic-religious rather than racial minority controlled 
the other 90 percent of the population.
Bordering on Kosovo is the poorest country of Europe, Albania, whose 
population is ethnically identical to Kosovo’s. The Albanian economy col-
lapsed in 1990–91. It rebounded modestly in 1993–95, then collapsed again 
in 1997 due to financial pyramid schemes that had swept the country. The 
resulting social unrest led to more than 1,500 deaths, widespread destruction 
of property, and the looting of Albanian army and police weapons-storage 
depots. Military weapons, including powerful combat assault rifles such as 
the AK-47, became available.
Many of these weapons made their way across the Albanian-Kosovar 
border into the hands of Kosovars who wanted independence from Serbia. 
For the first time, members of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) had the 

 
The State of the State (II) 
207
means to challenge their Serbian oppressors, and they increasingly and more 
blatantly attacked the Yugoslav army and Kosovo police, both of which were 
almost exclusively Serbian.
Faced with an increasingly militant and effective resistance and having 
staked out Kosovo as sacred to the Serbs, Milosevic ordered his forces to 
crack down on the KLA and restive Kosovars beginning in early 1998. Milo-
sevic ordered the army into Kosovo that summer; by September these forces 
had destroyed an estimated five hundred villages.
Members of NATO observed Serbia’s actions with increasing alarm. In 
Bosnia, two hundred thousand people had died and two to three million had 
been made homeless; most informed observers believed that the Serbs bore 
primary responsibility for ethnic cleansing in Bosnia. Leaders of both NATO 
and the United Nations were concerned that the Serbs might attempt to ethni-
cally cleanse Kosovo as they had in Bosnia.
In June, NATO threatened air strikes but did not follow through. In Sep-
tember, the United Nations passed a resolution calling for a cease-fire and the 
resettlement of the estimated 270,000 refugees. At the end of September, a 
group of eighteen ethnic Albanian children, women, and elderly people were 
found massacred; the prospect of a repetition of the horrors of Bosnia seemed 
very real.
In October, Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. diplomat who had brokered the 
Dayton Accord, arrived in the area to meet with Serbian and Kosovar leaders. 
As a result of these meetings, Milosevic agreed to a cease-fire with withdrawal 
of Serbian forces from Kosovo and the deployment of two thousand unarmed 
observers from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.32
A new round of talks was convened in February 1999 at Rambouillet, 
France. The Kosovar representative to these talks agreed to a plan that called 
for (1) increased autonomy for Kosovo, which would remain a part of Serbia; 
and (2) the deployment of twenty-eight thousand NATO troops to Kosovo to 
police the agreement. Milosevic refused to sign the agreement, whereupon 
NATO demanded that he sign or face air strikes. Milosevic continued to re-
fuse to sign and, on March 24, 1999, NATO began bombing targets in Serbia, 
Kosovo, and Montenegro. The attacks against Serbia were the largest use of 
military force by NATO in its history.
As NATO attacked, Serbian forces increased their own attacks on the 
Albanian Kosovars, who fled the Serbian onslaught in desperation. Within 
two weeks of the beginning of the bombing campaign, an estimated five 
hundred thousand Kosovars had fled the country. The allied bombing, as had 
bombing during World War II, initially seemed to stiffen resistance. In June, 
however, Serbian forces were withdrawn, and the bombing campaign ended. 
The UN Security Council adopted a resolution creating the United Nations 
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to stabilize the region 

208 
Chapter Eleven
during negotiations that would determine Kosovo’s final statuts. After years 
of inconclusive negotiations, Kosovo declared its independence in 2008, an 
act that Serbia refuses to recognize.
Darfur, Sudan
Sudan, a sub-Saharan country in Africa, is one-quarter the size of the United 
States (2.5 million square kilometers) and has a population of forty-four mil-
lion. The gross domestic product for Sudan in 2010 was approximately $55 
billion and the per capita GDP $2,200. 33 GDP has expanded significantly in 
recent years on the strength of expanding oil production. Nonetheless, most 
of Sudan’s people are among the poorest in the world.
Three provinces in the western part of Sudan make up the Darfur region, of 
approximately 190,000 square miles—or about the size of Spain. There are five 
to six million people in this region; roughly half have been displaced from their 
homes and are living in camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs).
Sudan is Africa’s largest and ethnically most diverse country; more than 
ninety tribes live in Sudan, the three major ones being the Fur, Massaleit, 
and Zaghawa.34 About two-thirds of the population is Muslim, 25 percent are 
animists, and 10 percent are Christian. In the northern part of the country, the 
Muslims predominate; most of the Christians live in the south.
For centuries, Sudan was inhabited by small groups of tribally based king-
doms and principalities until Egypt took over in 1820 and unified the northern 
part. In 1898, the Sudanese sought to gain independence from Egypt, but 
Egyptian and British military forces put down the revolt. After almost sixty 
years of British and Egyptian control, Sudan gained its independence in 1956. 
Since then, Muslims have controlled the government.
In 1969, a group of military officers staged a coup and took over the 
government. Col. Gaafar Muhammad Nimeiri became prime minister and 
abolished parliament and all political parties. In 1983, Nimeiri, a Muslim, 
announced that he would institute traditional punishments based on Islamic 
law (Shari’a), including public lashings, amputations, and beheadings. This 
decision was controversial even among some Muslims and led to a civil war 
between the northern Muslim and southern Christian sections of the country, 
a conflict that continues to the present.
In 1985, Gen. Suwar al-Dahab led a military coup that deposed Nimeiri 
and attempted to broker a peace agreement with the Sudanese People’s Lib-
eration Army, led by Col. John Garang de Mabior. Garang and his followers 
called for the abolition of Islamic law, which the government refused. Con-
flict between northern and southern forces continued. In 1989, a coup brought 
Gen. Omar Hassan al-Bashir to power; he remains in power today.

 
The State of the State (II) 
209
In 1993, the leaders of Eritrea, Ethiopia, Uganda, and Kenya, under the 
auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), a 
jointly sponsored regional organization, launched a peace initiative among 
the parties. This was followed seven years later by a cease-fire proposal 
presented by Egypt and Libya, but this, too, was unsuccessful. In 2001, Presi-
dent George W. Bush appointed former U.S. senator John Danforth to be his 
envoy to explore possibilities of achieving peace in a country that had been 
at war for twenty years.
The cost of war in Sudan has been horrific. Since the north-south civil war 
began in 1983, according to the U.S. State Department, “an estimated 2 mil-
lion persons have been killed in the violence or have died from the effects of 
humanitarian needs; approximately 4 million have been displaced internally 
as a result of fighting between the Government and insurgents in the south. In 
addition, more than 1 million persons have been internally displaced within 
Darfur and 200,000 refugees have fled to Chad.”35 Because displaced Sudanese 
are fleeing to adjacent countries, the problems in Sudan are being exported. The 
situation in Sudan has been described as “Rwanda in slow motion.”36
Traditionally, nomadic tribes from the north would herd their animals from 
the north to the more temperate south during the dry season and then go back 
to the north with the rains. A serious drought caused the nomads to go farther 
and farther to the south in search of water and pasturelands for their animals. 
When the rains did not come, many nomads chose to stay in the south, caus-
ing conflict between the farmers in Darfur and the nomads from the north. 
Exacerbating the conflict was the ethnic difference between the two groups: 
the nomads of the north were Arabs, and the Darfur farmers were African. 
Arabs controlled the Sudanese government and were sympathetic to the 
plight of their nomadic kinsmen.
Facing incursions from the Arab nomads, in 2003 two armed groups in 
Darfur, the Sudan Liberation Movement and the Justice Equality Movement, 
formed a loose alliance and began staging attacks on government posts in 
Darfur. In response, the government implicitly authorized Arab militias 
called janjaweed to attack, rape, and kill in Darfur. A United Nations report 
of February 2004 described the actions of the janjaweed: “In an attack on 27 
February [2004] in the Tawilah area of northern Darfur, thirty villages were 
burned to the ground, over 200 people killed and over 200 girls and women 
raped—some by up to 14 assailants and in front of their fathers who were 
later killed. A further 150 women and 200 children were abducted.”37
The international community, including the United States, responded—
belatedly—to the crisis in Darfur. In June 2004, Secretary of State Powell 
visited Sudan, and the following month UN secretary general Kofi Annan 
traveled there. On July 23, 2004, the U.S. Congress passed a unanimous, 

210 
Chapter Eleven
bipartisan resolution that characterized the actions in Sudan as genocide. A 
number of nongovernmental groups have also called what is happening geno-
cide, including Justice Africa, Physicians for Human Rights, the Committee 
for Refugees, and Africa Action. In November 2004, the U.S. representa-
tive to the United Nations and former special envoy to Sudan, Ambassador 
John Danforth, called a special meeting of the Security Council to meet in 
Nairobi, Kenya, only the fourth time in its history that it had met outside of 
New York. The African Union has deployed seven thousand troops to Darfur 
where, since 2007, they have joined with approximately seventeen thousand 
troops in a UN mission to form UNAMID, the African Union-United Nations 
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
REDUCING INTRASTATE CONFLICT IN THE WORLD
Former UN secretary general Kofi Annan, who had previously headed up the 
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, has argued that conflict prevention 
and disease prevention can be thought of in similar terms. A number of other 
leaders, academics, and researchers agree.38 The Carnegie Commission on 
Preventing Deadly Conflict has argued, “Just as in the practice of good medi-
cine, preventing the outbreak, spread, and recurrence of the disease of deadly 
conflict requires timely interventions with the right mix of political, economic, 
military, and social instruments.”39 In 1994, the Carnegie Corporation of New 
York funded a major review of the causes and potential prevention of deadly 
conflict in the world. A commission of sixteen eminent leaders and scholars 
with long practical and academic experience in dealing with conflict resolution 
and prevention supervised the study, sponsoring research that it felt was needed 
in understudied areas of conflict prevention. An international advisory council 
of more than forty distinguished practitioners and scholars assisted. The an-
nual reports, the final report, and specialized studies of the commission are all 
available to the public at the commission’s website, which is listed among the 
recommended readings at the end of this chapter. Given the importance of the 
commission’s study, this section will summarize its findings.
Three fundamental conclusions constituted the core of the commission’s 
findings. First, “mass violence is not inevitable”; violence does not emerge 
inexorably and inevitably from “ancient hatreds” or human interaction. Intra- 
and interstate conflict result from deliberate political decisions, and these 
decisions can be influenced. Second, “the need to prevent deadly conflict is 
increasingly urgent.” The growth in population, increasing economic interde-
pendence, and the advance of technology, especially in communications and 
weaponry, are an often deadly mix, underscoring the need to prevent conflicts 

 
The State of the State (II) 
211
from turning massively violent. Third, successful preventive action is pos-
sible. “The problem is not that we do not know about incipient and large-scale 
violence; it is that we often do not act.” What is needed is the early, skillful, 
and integrated application of political, diplomatic, economic, and military 
measures. Like Michael Brown in his characterization of the “underlying” 
and “proximate” causes of ethnic conflict, the Carnegie Commission has 
described strategies for preventing violence in two categories, “operational 
prevention” and “structural prevention.” The former includes measures that 
are applicable in the face of an immediate crisis; the latter includes measures 
“to assure that a crisis will not occur in the first place.”40
There are four key elements of operational success in conflict prevention. 
First, there should be a lead actor—an international or regional organization, 
a country, or even a prominent individual—around which preventive efforts 
can be organized. Second, there should be a coherent political-military-eco-
nomic approach designed to stop the violence, provide necessary humanitar-
ian assistance, and integrate all relevant aspects of the solution to the problem 
at hand. Third, adequate resources are needed to support effective preventive 
engagement. Fourth, and particularly relevant to intrastate conflict, a plan to 
restore the host state’s authority and responsibility is required.
Structural prevention—also called peace building—requires the develop-
ment by states of international regimes, which are implicit or explicit agree-
ments, procedures, or organizations to manage the interaction of states in 
various issue areas. In addition, states must work for the security, economic 
well-being, and justice of their citizens. Fairness is a characteristic of stable 
political systems, and the achievement of fairness should be the goal of gov-
ernments, regardless of their form.
Many people assumed that the genocide perpetrated by the Nazis in World 
War II would not be repeated. After all, the Allies had expended millions of lives 
and vast material resources to defeat the Nazi obscenity. Sadly, this belief was 
mistaken; genocide has reappeared in Pol Pot’s Cambodia, Idi Amin’s Uganda, 
and in Bosnia, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Sudan.
On the other hand, an incipient genocide was halted in Kosovo in 1999 (al-
though only because NATO was able to fashion a strategy that put few Ameri-
can and Western European lives at risk). For all of its problems, the NATO air 
campaign launched in response to ethnic cleansing in Kosovo demonstrated 
that military intervention has a role to play in ending intrastate conflict. But 
there were other factors that helped to end the conflict and stabilize Kosovo. 
The author of Serbia’s strategy in Kosovo, Slobodan Milosevic, was indicted 
by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia while the 
conflict raged. He died in 2006 of a heart attack while standing trial in The 
Hague. In an effort to prevent a relapse of violence after Serbia’s withdrawal 

212 
Chapter Eleven
from Kosovo, the UN Security Council authorized a transitional administration 
mission—UNMIK—together with a NATO peacekeeping force.
Of course, not all intrastate conflicts are susceptible to military solutions 
imposed from outside. “New wars” often arise from the chaos of a collapsed 
state rather than from the designs of a strong state with an authoritarian gov-
ernment. Under these circumstances, the strategy of those seeking to end wars 
and prevent genocides must be to build the capacity of the state to govern ef-
fectively. And, as the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have shown, this may be 
a far more challenging task than punishing—or eliminating—an authoritarian 
regime through the use of military force.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books and Articles
Anderson, Scott. “How Did Darfur Happen?” New York Times Magazine, October 
17, 2004, 52ff.
Brown, Michael E., ed. The International Dimensions of Internal Conflict. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996.
Brown, Michael E., and Richard N. Rosecrance, eds. The Costs of Conflict: Preven-
tion and Cure in the Global Arena. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999.
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict. Preventing Deadly Conflict: 
Final Report. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Corporation of New York, 1997.
Crocker, Chester A. “The Lessons of Somalia.” Foreign Affairs 74, no. 3 (May/June 
1995): 2–8.
Dallaire, Romeo. Shake Hands with the Devil: The Failure of Humanity in Rwanda. 
New York: Carroll & Graf, 2004.
Gurr, Ted Robert, and Barbara Harff. Ethnic Conflict in World Politics. Boulder, 
Colo.: Westview, 1994.
Kaldor, Mary. New & Old Wars. 2nd ed. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 
2007.
Lake, David, and Donald Rothchild, eds. The International Spread of Ethnic Conflict: 
Fear Diffusion and Escalation. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998.
Power, Samantha. “Dying in Darfur.” New Yorker, August 20, 2004, 56–63.
Websites
Carnegie Commission for Preventing Deadly Conflict: http://www.wilsoncenter.org/
subsites/ccpdc/index.htm
International Peace Academy: http://www.ipacademy.inter.net
UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations: http://www.un.org/Depts/DPKO
U.S. Department of State: http://www.state.gov
U.S. Institute of Peace: http://www.usip.org

213
Chapter Twelve
Economics and Security
Wealth is closely linked to power. Not only is it expensive to maintain 
military forces and to keep them supplied with technologically sophisticated 
weapons, but other means of exerting influence in international affairs—
maintaining embassies in distant places, providing foreign aid, contributing 
to international organizations, and promoting trade, to name just a few—also 
require significant expenditures. The wealth-power nexus is so strong that 
some analysts regard a state’s gross domestic product (GDP), an indicator 
of total wealth, to be the best single measure of its power. In the traditional 
paradigm, the state’s power, generally measured in terms of its military capa-
bilities and the economic resources that support those capabilities, is closely 
tied to its security.
The new security paradigm emphasizes a different economic linkage. Just 
as wealth, power, and security are linked together, poverty, weakness, and 
insecurity are interrelated. The tendency of wealthy states to spread their 
influence across the globe has been witnessed for centuries. What we have 
recently come to understand more fully is that impoverished states tend 
to spread insecurity. In the first post-9/11 version of the National Security 
Strategy of the United States, the George W. Bush administration noted: 
“Poverty, weak institutions, and corruption can make weak states vulnerable 
to terrorist networks and drug cartels within their borders.”1 This observation 
was echoed by the 9/11 Commission, which in its final report noted, “Terror-
ism is not caused by poverty. Indeed, many terrorists come from relatively 
well-off families. Yet, when people lose hope, when societies break down, 
when countries fragment, the breeding grounds for terrorism are created.”2 
Of course, terrorism is not the only security concern linked to poverty. Since 
World War II, the vast majority of the world’s armed conflicts have occurred 
in the poorest parts of the world. There is, however, a more immediate 

214 
Chapter Twelve
connection between poverty and insecurity because poverty is itself a form of 
insecurity. Many people in the world live under the constant threat of death 
by starvation or preventable disease, threats that are linked to poverty. For 
them, poverty is what Johan Galtung called “structural violence.”3 Consider 
these statistics related to starvation:
•  According to the Food and Agricultural Organization, 925 million people 
were undernourished in 2010—more than the combined populations of the 
United States, Canada, and the European Union.4
•  Each year, 10.9 million children under the age of five die in the developing 
world. Sixty percent of the deaths are related to hunger and malnutrition.5
Judged in terms of economic security, the fundamental divide in the world 
is between developed countries and developing countries. In the developed 
world, obesity has emerged as a major public health issue; in the developing 
world, severe malnutrition and starvation are serious public health issues. 
Debates over the cost of end-of-life health care for the elderly are common 
in the developed world; in the developing world, providing the most basic 
health care, including childhood vaccinations, remains a daunting challenge. 
Citizens in the developed world must confront the possibility that oil reserves 
will begin to decline sometime in the current century; those in the developing 
world are already confronting scarcities in the supply of wood for cooking. 
To put it simply, those who live in developing countries not only have less 
money, but fewer options, some of which involve matters of life and death. 
They face dramatically lower infant survival rates, higher death rates from 
infectious diseases, lower literacy rates, and less access to safe drinking water 
and health care. But are these facts related to security?
Before issues related to economic security can be analyzed, some terms 
need to be defined and clarified. The economically developed countries—
also called “developed states,” “advanced industrial states,” or simply “the 
first world”—include the United States, Canada, the European states, Japan, 
Australia, and New Zealand. During the Cold War, the communist states of 
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe were referred to as the “second world.” 
With the fall of communism in these states, this term is no longer meaningful; 
some of these states are becoming “first-world” states, and others are consid-
ered to be “newly industrializing states.” Russia is often grouped with three 
other large, rapidly developing economies—Brazil, India, and China—in a 
grouping known by its abbreviation, BRIC. “Third-world” countries include 
the developing states of Asia, Africa, Latin America, and much of the Middle 
East. They are sometimes referred to as “less developed countries” (LDC), 
but many consider this a pejorative term and avoid using it. Finally, the poor-

 
Economics and Security 
215
est countries of the world are referred to as “fourth-world” states or the “least 
developed countries.” Oxford economist Paul Collier has coined the term 
“bottom billion” to refer to the poorest of the poor, the roughly one billion 
people living in low-income states where a number of development “traps” 
make even the possibility of significant economic growth appear remote.6
We begin this chapter with an examination of some of the links between 
wealth and security, including a discussion of one of the many foreign policy 
tools—economic sanctions—that is available to the rich but not the poor. We 
then consider economic security from the standpoint of those in the develop-
ing world.
ECONOMIC SECURITY: DEFINING THE ISSUES
There are many economic threats to individuals, states, regions, and even the 
international system itself. First, long-term economic cycles pose a threat to 
the economic well-being of actors at every level of analysis. Second, natural 
disasters pose economic threats. Third, state-initiated policies and actions, 
particularly those of the most powerful members of the system, can pose a 
threat to the economic health of both the individual members of the system 
and the system itself. Fourth, the failure of states can result in economic 
havoc and can create significant economic threats. Fifth, the actions of non-
state actors, such as terrorist groups, can pose economic threats.
National Wealth and Security
For many years, some analysts have focused on the relationship between a 
state’s power and its economy; the classic analysts of this relationship include 
Jacob Viner, Albert O. Hirschman, and Klaus Knorr.7 Hirschman contended 
that political power is gained through economic inequality and that a finan-
cial, trade, or investment relationship that is more significant for a small state 
than a larger one gives the larger country an advantage by making the smaller 
country dependent on the larger country.
Wealth is usually needed to underpin military power, and military power 
is usually needed to acquire and protect wealth.
—Paul Kennedy
Source: The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers (New York: Random House, 
1987), xvi.

216 
Chapter Twelve
Economic nationalists, such as mercantilists, emphasized the necessity 
of increasing a state’s power by promoting exports and obtaining colonial 
holdings. This led to the building of strong militaries, particularly naval 
forces. According to Jacob Viner, mercantilists subscribed to the following 
propositions: (1) wealth is an absolutely essential means to power, whether 
for security or for aggression; (2) power is an important means to the acqui-
sition or retention of wealth; (3) wealth and power are each proper ultimate 
ends of national policy; (4) there is a long-run harmony between these ends, 
although in particular circumstances it may be necessary for a time to make 
economic sacrifices in the interest of military security and therefore also of 
long-run prosperity.8
During the mercantilist period, naval power was the single most important 
measure of power. The drive to obtain colonies led to explorations by the 
developed states of undeveloped areas of the world, and navies became the 
means by which the European powers explored, conquered, and controlled 
colonies throughout the world. The mercantilist system was established by 
the interaction of naval forces, access to resources, and trade. No country 
better illustrated the growth of mercantilist power than the British Empire, 
the needs of which, according to historian Arthur Herman, included “access 
to markets, freedom of trade across international boundaries, an orderly state 
system that prefers peace to war, speedy communication and travel across 
open seas and skies.” Herman adds that these “remain the principal features 
of globalization today.”9 As Sir Walter Raleigh noted, “Whosoever com-
mands the sea, commands the trade; whosoever commands the trade of the 
world commands the riches of the world, and consequently the world itself.”10
In many, if not most, cases this attempt to achieve greater security led to 
the exploitation of developing states by the developed states of Europe. For 
example, Great Britain established trading cities on the coast of China and be-
gan importing opium from India. The opium trade proved to be very lucrative 
for British merchants, if tragic for the Chinese who became addicted to opium. 
This trade influenced Chinese views of the West for years, even to the present 
day. An American naval squadron under Commodore Matthew Perry forced 
Japan to open its ports to trade with the United States. The samurai warriors of 
traditional Japan proved to be no match for the cannons of the American ships. 
Simply put, Western mercantilist states threatened the security of China and 
Japan in the name of the trade demanded by their economic systems.
Over time, a pattern evolved: developing states typically produced primary 
products, such as coffee, tea, and cocoa, whereas developed states produced 
manufactured products, such as textiles and machinery. The classical liberal 
economists Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill noted that 
certain states have an absolute or comparative advantage in producing cer-

 
Economics and Security 
217
tain products and should specialize in them. For example, in the eighteenth 
century, taking advantage of the technology developed during the Industrial 
Revolution, Britain specialized in the manufacture of textiles. Given their 
climate and soil conditions, Spain and Portugal specialized in growing grapes 
and producing port and sherry. The classical economists noted that it would 
be possible for Britain to grow grapes and produce its own port and sherry, 
and for Spain and Portugal to build their own textile factories, but it would 
not be efficient. This became the rationale for free trade.
Although free trade represented the most efficient use of what Karl Marx 
had called the “means of production,” those in developing countries in par-
ticular contended that the pattern that was established by free trade was one of 
dependence and therefore disadvantageous for those in developing countries. 
They argued that this was because the developed states reaped the profits 
from converting primary products into manufactured goods.
The threats posed by the Western countries to the developing states, how-
ever, had an unforeseen consequence: in order to meet the threats, many de-
veloping states in the nineteenth century began to emulate the Western states. 
The first step was industrialization, but along with industrialization came 
urbanization. Factories were established in cities, and people moved from the 
countryside into metropolitan centers. In the mid-1700s, about the time that 
Adam Smith was writing The Wealth of Nations, approximately 3 percent of 
the world’s population lived in cities. That figure had increased to 29 percent 
by the 1950s and to 40 percent by 1995; it is projected to be 60 percent by 
2025. By 1985, the population of Mexico City was seventeen million and Sao 
Paolo, Brazil, fifteen million. The result was that traditional social ties and 
stability began to break down.
The results of industrialization and urbanization led to increased secu-
larization and social problems, including crime, disease, and demand on 
social services. Some developing states, however, were able to industrialize 
successfully and to produce technology that enabled them to compete with 
and even defeat developed states. For example, in 1904–1905, having built 
a modern navy in the space of fifty years, Japan was able to challenge and 
defeat Russia, the first defeat of a Western power by a non-Western power in 
history. In this case, a once-vanquished state was able to defeat its opponents 
by adopting the opponents’ technology. Another technique that states used 
against opposing states was the imposition of economic sanctions.
Economic Sanctions
Economic sanctions have been used throughout history in an effort to achieve 
greater security by influencing the behavior of adversaries. According to 

218 
Chapter Twelve
former State Department official Richard Haass, sanctions may be defined as 
“mostly economic but also political and military penalties introduced to alter 
political and/or military behavior.”11 Actions have taken the form of “arms 
embargoes, foreign assistance reductions and cutoffs, export and import 
limitations, asset freezes, tariff increases, revocation of most favored nation 
(MFN) trade status, negative votes in international financial institutions, 
withdrawal of diplomatic relations, visa denials, cancellation of air links, and 
prohibitions on credit, financing, and investment.”12 Both states and interna-
tional organizations have used sanctions to try to influence the actions and 
policies of states and corporations.
Sanctions are commonly regarded as an alternative to war, which Carl von 
Clausewitz defined as “an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will.”13 
By substituting economic pressure for military force, those who advocate 
the use of sanctions hope to change an adversary’s policies without the costs 
associated with war. Some, however, have argued that sanctions are often so 
costly that they are better understood as acts of war.14 The sanctions imposed 
on Iraq between 1990 and 2003 offer an important, if extreme, example of 
“sanctions of mass destruction.” A survey conducted in Iraq in 1999 on behalf 
of UNICEF found that mortality rates for infants and children in the heavily 
populated southern and central parts of the country had more than doubled 
since the imposition of sanctions at the time of Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 
August 1990.15 The increased mortality rates suggested that half a million 
Iraqi children had died as a consequence of economic sanctions that were 
intended to punish Saddam Hussein’s regime. Two UN officials responsible 
for administering the sanctions resigned in protest over what they regarded as 
a humanitarian catastrophe linked to sanctions.
In spite of their potential to cause great suffering, sanctions have been an 
important tool for the enforcement of international norms since the end of 
World War I. The Covenant of the League of Nations required members of 
the League to sever diplomatic and economic ties with states that waged war 
in violation of their obligations under the covenant. During the 1930s, the 
League imposed sanctions twice: against Japan as punishment for its invasion 
of Manchuria and against Italy following its invasion of Ethiopia. In both 
cases, sanctions failed to alter the behavior of the target states, although they 
may have weakened both.
During the first four decades of its existence, the United Nations imposed 
economic sanctions only against Rhodesia in 1966 and South Africa in 1977. 
Although the dismantling of South Africa’s apartheid regime did not come 
quickly, when it did happen there was a widespread perception that economic 
sanctions had played a significant role. Meanwhile, as it did with peacekeeping, 
the end of the Cold War opened the door to much more frequent use of sanc-

 
Economics and Security 
219
tions. Between 1990 and 2002 the United Nations imposed sanctions against 
Iraq (1990),16 the former Yugoslavia (1992), Libya (1992), Haiti (1994), 
Liberia (1992), Rwanda (1994), Somalia, UNITA forces in Angola (1994), 
Sudan, Sierra Leone, Afghanistan, Eritrea, and Ethiopia.17 More recently, the 
UN Security Council has imposed sanctions on Iran to punish it for its failure 
to accept international safeguards on its nuclear weapons program. At present, 
the United States has its own sanctions in place against Belarus, Burma, Cuba, 
Iran, North Korea, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Zimbabwe. In addition, there 
are prohibitions on trading with Balkans war criminals, Iraqis affiliated with 
Saddam Hussein’s government, and individuals involved in trafficking drugs, 
conflict diamonds, or WMD components. Altogether, the United States has 
nineteen separate sanctions programs in place.18 In a comprehensive description 
and analysis of economic sanctions, Meghan L. O’Sullivan identifies 122 cases 
in which sanctions were imposed by the United States or the United Nations on 
state or nonstate actors from 1990 through 2001.19 It is not difficult to see why 
the 1990s have been called “the sanctions decade.”20
There is substantial controversy over the effectiveness of economic sanc-
tions. In work published in 1985 and updated in 1990, Gary Hufbauer, Jef-
frey Schott, and Karen Ann Elliott studied 115 cases of economic sanctions 
imposed from 1914 to 1990 and concluded that sanctions were successful in 
forty (34 percent) of these instances. This study was criticized by a number of 
analysts as too optimistic concerning the effectiveness of sanctions.21
Several observations concerning the literature on economic sanctions are 
important. First, virtually all of the studies on sanctions focus on interstate 
behavior. Second, almost all focus on the actions of wealthy states toward 
poorer states. In this sense, sanctions are actions of the powerful toward the 
weak. A reversal of this traditional pattern occurred in October 1973 when 
the Arab members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
(OPEC) imposed an embargo on oil shipments to the countries that supported 
Israel in the Arab-Israeli war. Within a matter of weeks, the price of oil went 
from three dollars per barrel to twelve dollars, a 400 percent increase. The 
Arab oil embargo of 1973–74 was an economic sanction imposed by the for-
merly weak against the strong. Thucydides wrote, “The strong do what they 
will, and the weak suffer what they must.” The Arab oil embargo effectively 
turned Thucydides on his head.
THREATS TO THE UNITED STATES FROM FAILED STATES
Due in part to the vestiges of colonialism, developing states at the present 
time face a number of threats so daunting that they can result in collapse. 

220 
Chapter Twelve
Failed states, in turn, can pose a significant threat to the United States. In fact, 
in the 2002 National Security Strategy of the United States, the George W. 
Bush administration argued that for the first time in history, weak states posed 
more of a threat to the United States than strong states.22 The conclusion of 
a study cosponsored by the Association of the U.S. Army and the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies states:
One of the principal lessons of the events of September 11 is that failed states 
matter—not just for humanitarian reasons but also for national security as well. 
If left unattended, such states can become sanctuaries for terrorist networks with 
a global reach, not to mention international organized crime and drug traffickers 
who also exploit the dysfunctional environment. As such, failed states can pose 
a direct threat to the national interests of the United States and to the stability 
of entire regions.23
What causes state failure? First and foremost is poverty and the need for eco-
nomic development. As former State Department advisor Meghan O’Sullivan 
has noted, “Poor socioeconomic conditions are seen not just as being of 
humanitarian concern but also as having security implications that extend 
beyond a single country’s borders.”24
Second, many developing states suffer from an absence of national unity. 
Colonial powers often set boundaries solely on the basis of natural barriers, 
such as rivers and mountain ranges, with little or no consideration of social 
groupings. Thus, Nigeria contains the Muslim Hausas in the north and the 
Christian Ibos in the south; these groups fought a vicious and bloody civil 
war in the 1970s. Similarly, Rwanda was populated principally by two tribes, 
the Hutu and the Tutsi; the killing sprees that resulted have been described in 
chapter 11. This problem is not limited to Africa. Yugoslavia contained three 
main ethnic groups, Croats, Serbs, and Bosniaks. Modern Iraq must contend 
with both ethnic and religious divisions: ethnic Kurds occupy the north, 
Sunni Muslims dominate the central part, and Shi’a Muslims are a majority 
in southern Iraq. The degree to which these three groups can get along will 
be an important factor shaping Iraq’s future.
A third problem of developing states concerns industrialization, urbanization, 
and secularization. As the eminent British historian Sir Michael Howard has 
noted, in developing states “industrialization has led to urbanization, with the re-
sulting breakdown of traditional authority and the destruction of cultures rooted 
in tribal rule and land tenure.”25 The resulting loss of identity and instability can 
have significant effects on a country and the surrounding region. There are also 
the related problems of overpopulation, hunger, and public health.
One of the principal dangers of failed states is that they can become 
sanctuaries for the opponents of international order. United Nations special 

 
Economics and Security 
221
envoy Lakhdar Brahimi has argued that the events of September 11, 2001, 
were “a wakeup call, [that caused many people] to realize that even small 
countries, far away, like Afghanistan cannot be left to sink to the depths to 
which Afghanistan has sunk.”26 Failed states can serve, and have served, as 
bases of operation for terrorist groups; this was the case with both Sudan and 
Afghanistan for Al Qaeda.
The area of the world with the greatest number of actual or potential failed 
states is Africa, and the threat from African failed states is very real. As 
Professor Lisa Cook has observed, “Given the long-established pattern in 
which extremist groups, including Islamic militants, prey on impoverished 
economies and failed states, Africa seems a natural breeding ground for ter-
rorism.”27 The United States and, more broadly, developed Western states can 
respond to this threat in several ways. First, African leaders who assist their 
citizens and the war against terrorism should be supported. Second, efforts to 
reduce poverty and strengthen the economies of African countries should be 
continued and strengthened; the African Growth and Opportunity Act and the 
Millennium Challenge Account are two recent efforts to do this. Third, HIV 
and AIDS are crippling African countries, and efforts must be continued and 
strengthened to address this modern-day plague. In 2009, 1.3 million people 
died of AIDS; 1.8 million new HIV infections occurred in sub-Saharan Af-
rica.28 The dislocations caused by this disease, as well as by malaria, tuber-
culosis, and other infections, contribute to societal instability. Fourth, Africa 
is already unstable; there is a great need to maintain peacekeeping forces in 
a number of conflicts, most notably Burundi, the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, and Sudan.
The 9/11 Commission commented on the importance of failed states: 
“In the twentieth century, strategists focused on the world’s great industrial 
heartlands. In the twenty-first century, the focus is in the opposite direction, 
toward remote regions and failing states.”29
PROSPECTS FOR INCREASING ECONOMIC SECURITY
For decades at least, people in developed states have recognized the need to 
assist developing countries for both altruistic and self-interested reasons. As 
Joseph Nye has argued, “Investments [in economic development] are a clear 
case of coincidence between self-interest and charity.”30 Developing coun-
tries have also recognized their need for development. In 1955, twenty-nine 
Asian and African countries met in Bandung, Indonesia, and declared that 
they were not aligned with either of the Cold War’s two superpowers, the 
United States or the Soviet Union. In 1964, seventy-seven states called for 

222 
Chapter Twelve
the creation of the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 
This development caucus within the UN is still known as the “Group of 77” 
even though its membership has grown to 131 states. Two so-called South 
Summits of the Group of 77 have occurred, the first in 2000 in Havana, Cuba, 
and the second in 2005 in Doha, Qatar. Among the principal objectives of the 
Group of 77 are trade, monetary and institutional reforms, economic mod-
ernization, greater freedom for labor migration, the elimination of economic 
coercion, development aid, and debt relief.
A just peace includes not only civil and political rights—it must encom-
pass economic security and opportunity. For true peace is not just free-
dom from fear, but freedom from want.
—President Barack Obama
Source: The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “Remarks by the 
President at the Acceptance of the Nobel Peace Prize,” Oslo City Hall, Oslo, 
Norway, December 10, 2009, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the
-press-office/remarks-president-acceptance-nobel-peace-prize.
Developed states can attempt in several different ways to prevent develop-
ing states from failing and thereby posing a greater threat. First, developed 
states can invest directly in developing countries. In the 1990s, Western 
banks invested a great deal of money in Latin America, and it was not un-
usual for profits to be in the double digits. Such direct foreign investment 
could also be risky, however. When questions were raised in 1994 about the 
stability of the Mexican economy and government, foreign investors called 
in their loans and withdrew their money. This led to a serious economic 
crisis. The United States and the International Monetary Fund came up with 
a fifty-billion-dollar bailout package (including twenty billion dollars from 
the United States). The Mexican bailout proved to be a great success story; 
Mexico paid the United States back ahead of schedule, and the U.S. Treasury 
made five hundred million dollars in interest. Importantly from the American 
perspective, the government of Mexico did not collapse, an event that would 
have had profound and serious security consequences for the United States 
had it occurred.
A second initiative that the developed world can take to prevent the failure 
of states is economic aid. Such aid can be measured in absolute or relative 
terms. Using the former measure, the United States leads the world as the 
country that grants the most aid in dollars—28.3 billion dollars in 2009. How-
ever, if aid is measured as a percentage of the donor country’s gross national 
product (GNP), the picture changes dramatically. At the Monterrey Financing 

 
Economics and Security 
223
for Development Conference in 2002, the world’s economically developed 
states promised to move toward the goal of donating 0.7 percent of their gross 
national incomes to economic aid. Only five countries in the world have met 
this target: Sweden (1.12 percent), Norway (1.06 percent), Luxembourg (1.01 
percent), Denmark (0.88 percent), and the Netherlands (0.82 percent).31 The 
United States currently devotes 0.2 percent of its gross national income to 
economic aid, one of the lowest percentages of any advanced industrial state. 
The United States has traditionally allocated aid primarily on political rather 
than on humanitarian grounds. In keeping with this political orientation, the 
United States allocated most of its economic aid in the 1960s to South Viet-
nam; after the 1979 Camp David peace accords, more than 50 percent of U.S. 
aid went to Israel and Egypt; most recently, large shares of U.S. development 
assistance have been going to Iraq and Afghanistan.
Joseph Nye has called attention to the self-interested rationale for pro-
viding economic aid to developing countries: “There are many reasons for 
development assistance by wealthy countries, but one is to deprive terrorist 
leaders of such arguments by showing that our policies are aligned with the 
long-term aspirations of the poor.”32
THE PROTECTION OF THE LIBERAL INTERNATIONAL 
ECONOMIC ORDER AS A SECURITY INTEREST
At the end of World War II, Western countries led by the United States cre-
ated a liberal international economic order based on, as Susan Strange de-
scribed it, “an economic structure, a certain pattern of production (labour and 
capital) and of exchange of raw materials, semifinished and finished goods 
and services, and a certain pattern of distribution for consumption.”33 The 
system was based on free trade and the ideas of Adam Smith, David Ricardo, 
and John Stuart Mill. It is not surprising that the advanced industrialized 
states were the primary beneficiaries of the system that they implemented.
Professor Charles Kindleberger has noted the importance of a leading 
power or hegemon to the effective functioning of the international economic 
system.34 Any threat that harms either the United States as the hegemonic 
leader of the contemporary system or the international economic system 
itself poses a threat to the security of the developed states and to a lesser 
extent of the developing countries. When the United States was attacked on 
September 11, 2001, American governmental authorities did what few others 
in the world could do: they declared a self-embargo of the United States. No 
airplanes, ships, trucks, or automobiles were allowed to enter the country for 
several days.

224 
Chapter Twelve
The contemporary international economic system is one based on global-
ization, and a key element, if not the key element, of globalization is inter-
national trade. The developed states in particular are dependent on trade as 
the engine of globalization. Therefore, if terrorists are able to dramatically 
reduce, or even halt, trade, they can harm the advanced industrial states. The 
substantial economic damage that resulted from the September 11 attacks on 
the United States was one of the most significant of their effects.
The post–World War II international economic system was founded 
on principles and institutions that promoted a liberal international sys-
tem of free trade, flexible exchange rates, and a stable monetary system. 
The developed states were the major beneficiaries of this system, but the 
developing and newly industrializing countries have also, to a lesser ex-
tent, benefited from it. Threats to the processes on which this system is 
founded—free trade and globalization—are threats to the security of both 
the members of the system and the system itself. If terrorists were to cripple 
international trade, the world would be far less prosperous. In this sense, 
economic security is second only to the physical security of the homeland 
as a vital national interest.
Economics and security are related, but in a complex manner. Mercantil-
ists, however, viewed the relationship as simple and straightforward: a strong 
navy was needed to explore, conquer, and control colonies, which became 
sources of raw materials that could be used for trade and manufacturing, 
thus contributing to the wealth of the state. The subjugation of colonies was 
the path to wealth and security. Of course, this system created substantial 
resentment, even hatred, in the colonial areas that were exploited; once given 
the opportunity, this resentment manifested itself in violence and in some 
cases revolution. As a result, a system that originally sought greater security 
through economics ultimately threatened the security of the developed states. 
The unintended result is consistent with one of the themes of this book: inse-
curity has often resulted from the search for security.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Baldwin, David. Economic Statecraft. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
1985.
Collier, Paul. The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are Failing and What 
Can Be Done about It. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Haass, Richard N., and Meghan L. O’Sullivan, eds. Honey and Vinegar: Incentives, 
Sanctions, and Foreign Policy. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2000.

 
Economics and Security 
225
Hirschman, Albert O. National Power and the Structure of International Trade. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.
Knorr, Klaus. Power and Wealth. New York: Basic, 1973.
Knorr, Klaus, and Frank Trager, eds. Economic Issues and National Security. Law-
rence: University Press of Kansas, 1977.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. New 
York: Penguin, 2005.
United Nations. Human Development Report. New York: United Nations (annual).
Websites
The Group of 77 at the United Nations: http://www.g77.org
Institute for International Economics: http://www.iie.com
International Monetary Fund: http://www.imf.org
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency World Factbook: http://www.odci.gov
World Bank: http://www.worldbank.org


227
Chapter Thirteen
The Environment and Security
In a provocative essay that first appeared in 1994, Robert D. Kaplan noted the 
widening gap between states enjoying the benefits of globalization and those 
descending into anarchy. He described many sources of insecurity in the 
post–Cold War world, but one attracted special attention. “It is time,” Kaplan 
wrote, “to understand ‘the environment’ for what it is: the national security 
issue of the early twenty-first century.” He continued, listing environmental 
concerns with serious foreign policy implications: “The political and strategic 
impact of surging populations, spreading disease, deforestation and soil ero-
sion, water depletion, air pollution, and, possibly, rising sea levels in critical, 
overcrowded regions like the Nile Delta and Bangladesh—developments 
that will prompt mass migrations and, in turn, incite group conflicts—will 
be the core foreign-policy challenge from which most others will ultimately 
emanate, arousing the public and uniting assorted interests left over from the 
Cold War.”1
The world’s environmental problems are widespread, and they are, in 
many instances, extreme. Consider this sampling:
•  Every year, approximately 50,000 square miles of forest—an area roughly 
the size of Greece—disappears. Because the world’s forests store 289 
billion tons of carbon, deforestation is a significant contributor to global 
warming.2
•  Species extinctions are occurring at somewhere between one hundred and 
one thousand times the natural average of fifteen per year. In fact, scientists 
have labeled the current period the Sixth Great Extinction Event. (The fifth 
occurred 65 million years ago when dinosaurs disappeared.)3
•  On April 20, 2010, BP’s Deepwater Horizon drilling rig exploded in the 
Gulf of Mexico. For three months, oil flowed into the sea at a rate of up 

228 
Chapter Thirteen
to 60,000 barrels per day. In the end, an estimated 4.4 million barrels of 
oil (not including over 800,000 barrels collected from the bottom of the 
sea) entered the marine environment.4 Although the Deepwater Horizon 
spill was the worst to have ever occurred in U.S. waters, a larger spill was 
deliberately caused by the Iraqi military in the Persian Gulf in 1991 during 
the Persian Gulf War.
•  During the 1980s, an average of 5.5 billion tons of carbon dioxide was re-
leased into the Earth’s atmosphere each year through the burning of fossil 
fuels. That amount increased to 7.7 billion tons annually from 2000 to 2008 
and is projected to increase to 11.0 billion tons per year by 2030. The con-
centration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere today is 38 percent higher 
than at the beginning of the Industrial Age.5
Clearly the world faces many environmental challenges, but is there any 
evidence to suggest that these challenges amount to a security threat? Over 
the past quarter-century, more and more analysts who concern themselves 
strictly with national security have begun to acknowledge important links 
between the environment and security. Those who think of security in terms 
of the lives and dignity of individual human beings see not just links between 
environmental problems and national security but direct threats to human 
security. Today, within the new paradigm of security studies, it is essential to 
consider environmental security as it relates to individual humans, to states, 
and to the international system.
Whenever human actions pose threats to the basic rights (and especially 
the right to life) of human beings, a security issue exists. Environmental 
problems have been “securitized” as a consequence of the recognition that 
human alterations of the natural environment do indeed threaten the lives and 
welfare of humans. In some instances, the threats posed by man-made envi-
ronmental disasters are direct and obvious. The explosion at the Chernobyl 
nuclear power plant in 1986 resulted in thirty-one immediate deaths, an in-
crease in the incidence of cancer in exposed populations, and enormous social 
disruption in the vicinity of the disaster. Over two thousand people in Bhopal, 
India, died in 1984 as a direct result of a deadly gas leak from a Union Car-
bide chemical plant; another two hundred thousand were injured.6 London’s 
“Great Smog” tripled the city’s death rate over a four-day period in December 
1952. The smog, produced by a combination of a natural temperature inver-
sion and air fouled by the residues of coal smoke, was responsible for over 
four thousand deaths immediately and perhaps another eight thousand over 
the following months.7
The enormous complexity of ecosystems and the difficulty inherent in trac-
ing anthropogenic (human-caused) effects on the environment make some 

 
The Environment and Security 
229
analysts unwilling to treat environmental problems as security issues. Such 
skeptics argue, for example, that London’s “Great Smog” was as much the 
product of the cold, damp air that enveloped the city as of the large quantity 
of sulfur dioxide and particulate matter in the air, or that the number of cancer 
deaths attributable to the Chernobyl disaster is simply unknowable. Similar 
claims are made regarding global warming. The objections of the skeptics 
can be met very simply and forcefully by noting, first, that the overwhelming 
weight of scientific opinion regarding human-induced environmental change 
sees far less uncertainty than the skeptics claim and, second, that in no other 
area involving human welfare would uncertainty be considered a legitimate 
reason for failure to act.
Originally, environmental issues were added to the security agenda by 
those who noted the environment’s relationship to national security.8 Here, 
with this relatively well-developed part of the new security paradigm, is a 
good place for us to begin our examination of environmental security.
Seen in terms of national security, environmental problems are “securi-
tized” in two broad categories. There are, first, environmental threats that 
relate directly to warfare. This category includes environmental-modification 
techniques used in fighting wars and damage to the environment that occurs 
as a consequence of warfare. The second category includes environmental 
threats not directly related to warfare. These may still be considered matters 
of national security in the case of environmental problems that threaten to 
cause a war. However, environmental problems that, because of their sever-
ity, threaten human lives and welfare even without the intermediate agency of 
war should also be included in this category and considered security issues, 
because of our concern for human security.
WAR-RELATED ENVIRONMENTAL THREATS
Around 2500 BC, what may have been the first use in history of environmen-
tal modification as a means of warfare occurred in the Middle East when 
King Urlama of Lagash ordered the construction of canals to divert water 
from neighboring Umma during a territorial dispute in the boundary region 
between the two kingdoms, which lay between the Tigris and the Euphrates. 
A better-known and far more dramatic instance of environmental warfare oc-
curred around 1200 BC during the great exodus of the people of Israel from 
Egypt. With the pharaoh’s army in pursuit of the fleeing Israelites, Moses 
summoned divine assistance to part the waters of the Red Sea. After the Is-
raelites had passed safely to the other side, Egyptian soldiers were drowned 
when the waters of the Red Sea closed over them.9

230 
Chapter Thirteen
Herodotus describes how Cyrus, in 539 BC, invaded Babylon by diverting 
the waters of the Euphrates in order to allow his troops to march into the city 
on the dry riverbed.10 Over two thousand years later, in 1503, Leonardo da 
Vinci and Niccolo Machiavelli devised a plan (never implemented) to divert 
the waters of the Arno River away from Pisa during a conflict between Flor-
ence and Pisa.11 In the Netherlands, from the seventeenth century all the way 
up to 1940, a defensive network was based on plans to flood large portions of 
the country’s low-lying land.12
The diversion of water is not the only environmental modification tech-
nique that has been used in warfare. Smoke (sometimes in combination with 
naturally occurring fog or dust) has been used to screen the movements of 
armies and ships for centuries. In the exodus from Egypt, smoke was used to 
hide the movement of the Israelites from the Egyptian army pursuing them. In 
1632, the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus used smoke generated by burn-
ing wet straw to cover a river crossing by his army. During the World War I 
battle of Loos in Belgium, British forces used smoke candles in the course of 
preparing for their first gas attack. So effective was the use of smoke to cover 
the British infantry assault at Loos that the British army continued to use 
smoke screens through the remainder of the war.13 Modern navies routinely 
equip their ships with the capability to produce smoke screens.
The most dramatic modern-day instance of environmental warfare oc-
curred in 1991, during the Persian Gulf War. Iraqi forces retreating from 
Kuwait damaged 749 oil wells, setting 650 of them ablaze. Damaged wells 
burned or gushed an estimated six million barrels of oil per day. In all, six 
hundred million barrels of oil—equivalent to three months’ worth of global 
petroleum consumption—was lost.14
Warfare (and preparations for war) can have devastating environmental 
impacts even when environmental resources are not being deliberately used 
as tools of war. The following examples merely illustrate the connection. A 
more comprehensive accounting of war-related environmental damage would 
require a volume of its own.
War sometimes has a devastating effect on other species, even to the point 
of threatening major species with extinction. As many as a hundred of the 
250 lowland gorillas and three hundred of the four hundred forest elephants 
populating Congo’s Kahuzi-Biega National Park are thought to have been 
killed between 1996 and 1999. Poachers using automatic weapons acquired 
from Rwandan soldiers following the 1994 genocide in Rwanda were respon-
sible for many of the killings, but poaching was facilitated by the devastating 
impact of war on both conservation efforts and tourism. Rwandan and Con-
golese rebels using the national park as a base of operations also slaughtered 
animals for food and sold ivory to pay for weapons.15

 
The Environment and Security 
231
War can also leave serious environmental hazards in its wake. Large areas 
of Iraq, Kosovo, and Afghanistan are today littered with low-level radioac-
tive waste as a consequence of the U.S. military’s use of depleted-uranium 
weapons. Depleted uranium is a by-product of the uranium-enrichment pro-
cess used to produce fissile uranium for nuclear weapons or reactors. Because 
depleted uranium, as a metal, is almost twice as dense as lead, it is used by 
the United States for tank armor and armor-piercing shells. Waste, including 
contaminated soil, produced by testing and training with depleted-uranium 
weapons in the United States falls under Department of Energy guidelines for 
the disposal of radioactive waste. Concern over the health and environmental 
impacts of depleted-uranium weapons led the Air Force in 1993 to stop using 
them in training exercises. (The decision was reversed in 2002.)16 Of course, 
there are no environmental regulations that govern the use of such weapons in 
warfare. Consequently, in spite of the existence of hundreds of contamination 
sites in Iraq, Kosovo, and Afghanistan, as well as persistent questions among 
scientists concerning the long-term effects of depleted uranium on plant and 
animal life and groundwater, the United States has taken no steps even to as-
sess the environmental impact of these weapons.
The ultimate, although unrealized, war-related environmental catastrophe 
is perhaps “nuclear winter.” Jonathan Schell, in an apocalyptic best seller that 
described the planet’s possible condition following a general nuclear war, 
said that the United States could become “a republic of insects and grass” 
and that, indeed, the climatic catastrophe produced by a nuclear war might 
very well mean the extinction of human life.17 Such a condition, or something 
approaching it, would be produced by the layer of dust and soot thrown into 
the atmosphere by multiple nuclear detonations.18
It is not combat alone that constitutes a security-related threat to the en-
vironment. A variety of environmental problems have also resulted from 
preparations for war.
In 1991, a Russian environmental group reported that the Soviet Union had 
regularly dumped radioactive waste into the Arctic Ocean during the Cold War. 
After initially denying the charges, the Russian government agreed in 1992 to 
appoint a commission to study the matter. When the report was completed the 
following year, it revealed that a large quantity of nuclear material had in fact 
been dumped. Six nuclear reactors with fuel, ten reactors without fuel, and por-
tions of a nuclear icebreaker containing nuclear fuel had all been deposited in 
the Arctic Ocean. In addition, over seventeen thousand containers of radioac-
tive waste had been dumped between 1959 and 1992. When barrels of nuclear 
materials floated on the surface after dumping, sailors had been ordered to 
shoot them with machine guns, ensuring not only that the barrels would sink 
but that their contents would leak immediately into the ocean.19

232 
Chapter Thirteen
In August 2000, the Kursk, a Russian submarine powered by two nuclear 
reactors, sank in the Barents Sea. Only a complex salvage operation con-
ducted over a year later prevented the Kursk’s reactors from joining those 
deliberately dumped into the Arctic Ocean as sources of long-term ecological 
damage.20
The U.S. Navy’s use of mid-frequency sonar to detect submarines at long 
distances has long been suspected of causing the deaths of marine mammals. 
In 2003, scientists studying the deaths of fourteen whales that beached them-
selves and died in the Canary Islands during nearby naval exercises reported 
evidence of depression sickness, likely caused by the whales’ response to 
sonar.21 In 2004, the Scientific Committee of the International Whaling Com-
mission said that the evidence linking sonar to whale beachings “appears 
overwhelming.”22
INDIRECT ENVIRONMENTAL THREATS
Environmental problems unrelated to warfare often constitute serious threats 
to human welfare and, consequently, raise issues of human security. Defor-
estation and desertification may deprive people of their livelihoods and even 
render subsistence farming impossible. Overfishing of the world’s oceans to 
the point of causing the collapse of certain species of fish risks eliminating 
an important source of nutrition for humankind. Untreated sewage can affect 
supplies of drinking water, causing widespread illness and even death. Pol-
luted air is a factor in respiratory diseases. Depletion of the ozone layer cre-
ates exposure to cancer-causing solar radiation. Global warming, which will 
be considered in greater detail later in this chapter, threatens many serious ef-
fects on humans, including, for some, the inundation of their homes. Even in 
the absence of war, environmental problems can bring death and destruction.
But there is some evidence that environmental damage may also lead to 
war. Thomas Homer-Dixon, a leading expert on the relationship between 
security and the environment, has stated that “scarcities of critical environ-
mental resources—especially of cropland, freshwater, and forests—contrib-
ute to violence in many parts of the world.”23 While interstate violence is not 
a common consequence of environmental strains, violence within countries, 
especially developing states, can sometimes be attributed to environmental 
factors. The implications even for more advanced states are significant, since 
intrastate violence in the developing world can generate refugee flows, pro-
voke humanitarian crises (with attendant pressures for intervention), and, in 
extreme cases, actually cause the collapse of states. (“Failed states” and the 
problems they present are discussed in chapters 10 and 11.)

 
The Environment and Security 
233
In coming decades, changes in our environment and the resulting up-
heavals—from droughts to inundated coastal areas to loss of arable 
land—are likely to become a major driver of war and conflict.
—UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
Source: “Address to the United Nations International School—United Nations 
Conference on ‘Global Warming: Confronting the Challenge,’” March 1, 
2007, available at http://www.un.org/apps/news/infocus/sgspeeches/search_
full.asp?statID=70.
Water is the resource that most commonly causes tensions between states, 
although oil (which is discussed below) seems to generate more intense con-
flicts. Many of the world’s most important rivers—the Nile, Euphrates, Indus, 
Ganges, Danube, and Paraná, to note just a few—are shared by two or more 
states. The construction of dams, such as the Ataturk Dam on the Euphrates 
River in Turkey and the Gabcˇíkovo-Nagymaros Project on the Danube in 
Hungary and Slovakia, have created concerns downstream about environ-
mental consequences of reduced water flows and about potential manipula-
tion of supplies. In 1964, when Syria and Lebanon attempted to divert water 
from the Jordan River before it reached newly constructed irrigation canals 
in Israel, the Israelis used military force to prevent the construction of a dam. 
In parts of the world where fresh water is scarce, access to major rivers and 
lakes is clearly a matter of national security.24
Ultimately, it is human consumption—of water, food, air, and a host of 
other resources—that, together with the waste such consumption produces, 
is responsible for virtually all of the environmental problems we face today. 
That consumption increases with both population growth and with develop-
ment. Our prehistoric ancestors are thought to have consumed 2,500 calories 
of energy each per day, all in the form of food. Today the average human 
uses thirty-one thousand calories of energy per day (Americans consume on 
average six times that amount), with fossil fuels constituting the majority of 
that figure.25 The significance of fossil fuels, and especially petroleum, as a 
cause of insecurity in the world today merits special attention.
OIL AND SECURITY
For much of the past century oil has been “the prize,” the one natural resource 
capable of empowering backward societies and bringing empires to their 
knees. It will have the same importance in international politics for years to 

234 
Chapter Thirteen
come, although exactly how many more years is a contentious and crucial 
question. In the past half-century, some of the poorest states in the world have 
become some of the world’s wealthiest states on the strength of oil revenues 
alone. Conversely, the world’s most advanced states—the industrialized de-
mocracies of North America, Western Europe, and Japan—were temporarily 
crippled by an oil embargo in the 1970s. And Russia, reeling from the effects 
of its transition from communism to capitalism, rebounded economically on 
the strength of oil exports.
Have there been wars for oil? Some scoff at the idea, while others have 
taken to the streets with signs demanding, “No blood for oil.” What is indis-
putable is this: Petroleum has been a vital resource for the world’s industri-
alized states and has played a central role in the modern history of warfare. 
The most destructive war in history, World War II, was propelled in specific 
directions by the necessity of securing access to oil. As the Japanese military 
came to exert greater influence on Tokyo’s foreign policy in the 1930s, a 
serious strategic problem presented itself. Japan possessed no petroleum. Al-
though oil at the time met only about 7 percent of Japan’s total energy needs, 
it supplied most of the Japanese military’s energy demands. Furthermore, 80 
percent of Japan’s petroleum came from the United States, at a time when the 
two Pacific powers appeared to be on a collision course. The thirst for oil ul-
timately drove Japan across East Asia and into a war with the United States.26 
In the European theater, Germany’s decision to push deep into the Soviet 
Union, however ill-fated and unwise it may have appeared in retrospect, was 
considered necessary by the German military in order to gain control over oil 
supplies in the Caucasus.
Since the end of World War II, oil has become more, not less, important 
to the well-being of states. Economies have become more dependent on oil, 
as have military establishments. Indeed, it is difficult to overstate the impor-
tance of oil to modern societies. As important as the high-tech capabilities 
associated with command, control, communications, computers, and intel-
ligence (C4I) have become to American military dominance, oil is still the 
lifeblood of the tanks, trucks, airplanes, and ships that constitute, in turn, the 
backbone—and the muscle—of modern armed forces. Petroleum is equally 
significant in the definition of economic power. It may be possible in the In-
formation Age to order virtually any consumer good from virtually anywhere 
in the world over the Internet, but delivery still requires a FedEx cargo plane 
or a UPS truck, and neither moves without oil. The configuration of human 
habitation, with the relentless urbanization that has accompanied industrial-
ization, is dependent on the means of transportation made possible by internal 
combustion engines burning petroleum-based fuels. Likewise, the agricul-
tural revolution that has made it possible for fewer and fewer farmers to feed 

 
The Environment and Security 
235
more and more city dwellers from the yield of ever smaller plots of land is 
based on petrochemical fertilizers and mechanized agricultural machinery.
The extent of American dependence on oil can best be captured in two key 
numbers. Petroleum accounts for 40 percent of the energy consumed in the 
United States; in the transportation sector, the figure is 97 percent.27 In the 
absence of new technologies, the sudden disappearance of oil would return 
us to the days of horse-drawn carriages, steam-powered locomotives, and 
electric trolleys.
Oil is a security concern not only because of its importance to the func-
tioning of advanced industrialized states and the military forces that protect 
their interests but because of where it is found throughout the world. The vast 
majority of the world’s states have insufficient supplies of petroleum to meet 
their own needs and, consequently, must rely on imported oil. Net importers 
must therefore be concerned about the internal stability of petroleum-export-
ing countries and their continuing willingness to export oil. The security of 
oil pipelines and tankers is also a matter of considerable concern. On top of 
everything else, oil prices raise security concerns, since dramatic increases 
(“price shocks”) have the potential for generating economic recessions in 
oil-dependent economies.
Questions surrounding the dependability of oil-exporting countries (that 
is, the combination of their internal stability and their willingness to supply 
particular customers, including the United States, Japan, and the European 
Union) take on considerable urgency when one looks at who the leading oil 
exporters are. The top ten net petroleum exporters are Saudi Arabia, Russia, 
the United Arab Emirates, Iran, Norway, Kuwait, Venezuela, Nigeria, and 
Angola.28 Only Norway is considered “free,” according to the annual as-
sessment of political liberties and civil rights conducted by Freedom House. 
Saudi Arabia’s monarchy, in contrast, is considered one of the world’s most 
repressive regimes.29 Several countries on the list are also among the world’s 
most corrupt business environments.
The situation is scarcely any better when smaller suppliers and emerging 
producers, such as the former Soviet republics of the Caspian Sea basin, are 
considered. The oil-producing states of the region—Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, 
Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan—are expected to export 4.8 million barrels of 
oil per day by 2020 and 5.7 million by 2030.30 But all are dictatorships with 
corrupt leaders who are former Communist Party bosses from the period of 
Soviet rule. The political situation is even worse in certain other oil-produc-
ing states. Sudan, for example, has petroleum reserves estimated at 6.4 billion 
barrels of oil, and yet civil war and other forms of interethnic violence have 
been endemic since Sudan’s independence in 1956. Al Qaeda operated there 
during the 1990s, and, more recently, mass killings in the Darfur region have 

236 
Chapter Thirteen
prompted the United States to label the situation there genocide (see chapter 
11). To put it simply, petroleum exploration, production, and export often 
require oil-importing states to deal with governments that are repressive, cor-
rupt, and unstable.
The addition of geographical realities to the mix generates additional prob-
lems. To begin with, boundary disputes tend to take on greater significance, 
increasing the risk of armed conflict, where oil is involved. Iraq’s border 
dispute with Kuwait, which provided the pretext for Saddam Hussein’s inva-
sion in 1990, would have hardly merited more than an exchange of diplomatic 
notes had it not been for the vast quantities of petroleum lying beneath the 
desert. Although not currently militarized, one of the world’s most conten-
tious ongoing territorial disputes involves the conflicting claims of the Philip-
pines, Malaysia, Brunei, Vietnam, Taiwan, and China to the Spratly Islands 
in the South China Sea. The expectation that large oil reserves are to be 
found beneath the waters surrounding the islands best explains the competing 
claims and China’s dismissal of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s offer of 
U.S. mediation.31 As polar ice disappears, Russia has begun to assert itself 
militarily in the Arctic Ocean. Part of the reason seems be new prospects for 
oil exploration in a previously inaccessible region.
Along with boundary disputes related to petroleum exploration and pro-
duction, geography can raise concerns in relation to the movement of oil. 
In part due to the locations of the world’s primary petroleum-exporting 
countries, much of the world’s tanker traffic must pass through one or more 
maritime chokepoints en route to the oil-importing states. The most critical of 
these chokepoints is the Strait of Hormuz, separating the Persian Gulf from 
the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea. Roughly 16.5 to 17 million barrels 
of oil per day pass through the Strait of Hormuz on the way to the United 
States, Japan, or (via the Suez Canal, another significant chokepoint) Western 
Europe.32 The other principal means of transporting oil, via pipelines, also 
raises security questions. Pipelines often traverse the territories of war-torn 
or otherwise unstable states and present tempting, and generally undefended, 
targets for saboteurs.
The dilemmas associated with petroleum politics are becoming more, 
not less, difficult to address, because oil consumption continues to increase 
worldwide. The U.S. Department of Energy projects global oil consumption 
to grow from 86.1 million barrels per day in 2007 to 92.1 million barrels 
per day in 2020 and 103.9 million barrels per day in 2030.33 For its part, the 
United States, which used 19.71 million barrels of oil per day in 2001, will be 
consuming 28.30 million barrels per day by 2025.34 Energy use in the trans-
portation sector, which is dominated by petroleum, is projected to increase by 
0.6 percent per year between now and 2035.35

 
The Environment and Security 
237
American consumption may not be the worst aspect of the demand prob-
lem in the future (although it appears unlikely that any state will catch the 
United States in per capita consumption). China and India, both with popula-
tions of over a billion, are experiencing dramatic economic growth. Automo-
bile ownership in China, which was tightly restricted and beyond the reach of 
most Chinese until recently, is expanding rapidly. In 2005, China surpassed 
Germany and Japan to become the world’s second-largest market for new 
cars. At the current rate of growth, there will be 130 million vehicles in use in 
China by 2020, surpassing the number in the United States. By 2030, China is 
expected to have 270 million cars and trucks on its roads.36 Economic growth 
generates greater demand for energy. Growth in the transportation sector 
generates greater demand for energy in the form of oil. A study of global 
trends undertaken for the CIA concluded that simply in order to maintain 
steady economic growth rates, by 2020 China will have to increase its energy 
consumption by 150 percent, while India will require almost twice its current 
level of energy consumption.37 An increase in China’s per capita consumption 
of oil to the U.S. level would require eighty-one million barrels per day.38
In spite of the development of new oil fields in the Caspian Sea basin and 
the South China Sea, there are signs that we may be nearing the upper limit 
of global oil production. In fact, some scientists have suggested the global 
“Hubbert peak”—the point at which petroleum production reaches its highest 
level, after which it declines steadily—could occur in the near future.39 Sim-
ply put, the world is running out of the oil that has already been discovered 
and has few places left to look for undiscovered reserves. In the absence of 
dramatic changes in consumption patterns, the future does not appear to be 
very secure for petroleum-based economies.
Against this background, it is worth noting the degree to which access to 
oil has already become a significant part of the U.S. definition of American 
national security.
In 1991 and again in 2003, the United States went to war against Iraq. On 
both occasions, most supporters and even some opponents of war were quick 
to argue that American forces were fighting in Iraq for reasons larger than 
oil—for Kuwaiti sovereignty or the principle of nonaggression (in 1991) or 
to defeat global terrorism or promote Iraqi human rights (in 2003). And yet 
the interest of the industrialized world in oil from the Persian Gulf states was, 
and is, undeniable. In November 1990, Secretary of State James A. Baker, 
in fact, was quite forthright about that interest when he explicitly linked the 
first American military confrontation with Iraq to jobs in the United States.40
Baker was not the first to connect Persian Gulf oil to U.S. national security. 
A decade earlier, a series of dramatic events had prompted President Carter to 
articulate a new approach to petroleum and national security. In January 1979, 

238 
Chapter Thirteen
the shah of Iran, a faithful ally of the United States, was overthrown in an 
Islamic revolution. The hostility of the new regime to American interests was 
demonstrated in November when the American embassy in Tehran was over-
run. Then, in December, the Soviet Union invaded neighboring Afghanistan.
Carter responded to these developments in his State of the Union address on 
January 23, 1980, with what came to be called the Carter Doctrine. Noting that 
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan threatened a region containing “more than 
two-thirds of the world’s exportable oil,” Carter said, “Let our position be abso-
lutely clear: An attempt by any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf 
region will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States of 
America, and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, includ-
ing military force.”41 To give force to the announcement, a new military com-
mand, the Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force, was formed in Tampa, Florida, 
with responsibility for the Persian Gulf region. Under President Reagan, this 
Rapid Deployment Force would become the Central Command.42
Reagan promoted the securitization of petroleum in other ways as well. In 
1983, he signed National Security Decision Directive 114, which declared 
that “because of the real and psychological impact of a curtailment in the flow 
of oil from the Persian Gulf on the international economic system, we must 
assure our readiness to deal promptly with actions aimed at disrupting that 
traffic.”43 Military action was deemed necessary in 1986 when, as a response 
to threats to petroleum exports during the Iran-Iraq War, Reagan ordered the 
U.S. Navy to escort Kuwaiti oil tankers flying the American flag through 
the Persian Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz. The operation was not without 
significant costs. In 1987, the frigate USS Stark was struck by two Exocet 
missiles fired by an Iraqi fighter plane while operating in the Persian Gulf. 
Thirty-seven Americans on board were killed. Just over a year later, another 
American warship patrolling the gulf, the cruiser USS Vincennes, mistakenly 
fired on a civilian Iranian airliner, killing 290 people and fueling outrage in 
the region against the United States.
Fear that the Soviet Union might be advancing toward the vital oil re-
sources of the Persian Gulf region when it invaded Afghanistan in 1979 was 
a factor in the U.S. government’s decision to support Muslim militants—the 
mujahidin—who were to fight against the Soviets in Afghanistan throughout 
the 1980s. These militants, drawn from all over the Muslim world, included 
Osama bin Laden, who as a twenty-three-year-old traveled from his home in 
Saudi Arabia to Afghanistan to support the war in 1980. At the end of the war 
in 1988, bin Laden decided to transform the anti-Soviet effort into a founda-
tion of future jihad by establishing a network called Al Qaeda.44
Those who bothered to read the annual White House summaries of national 
security strategy could not fail to be impressed by their acknowledgment 

 
The Environment and Security 
239
of the continuing importance of Middle Eastern oil during the 1990s. The 
discussion of American security interests in the Middle East for many years 
contained the following line: “The United States has enduring interests in 
pursuing a just, lasting and comprehensive Middle East peace, ensuring the 
security and well-being of Israel, helping our Arab friends provide for their 
security, and maintaining the free flow of oil at reasonable prices.” (The 
phrase “at reasonable prices” was dropped after the 1998 edition.)45
Among the costs of petroleum production and consumption are those asso-
ciated with military policies aimed at “maintaining the free flow of oil.” Such 
“externalities” (that is, costs that are not fully allocated by the market) are 
significant. In addition to the costs of military deployments to protect friendly 
oil-producing regimes or oil transit routes, there are what may be broadly 
termed social costs. These include the costs associated with human rights 
abuses in authoritarian regimes that are propped up by oil revenues, as well as 
the costs of wars fought for control of oil reserves. On top of these, there are 
a variety of environmental costs, including those associated with the despo-
liation of wilderness areas (such as the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge) in 
the course of oil exploration and production, marine pollution when tankers 
rupture or offshore oil platforms are damaged, air pollution from the burning 
of massive quantities of petroleum products, and climate change. The oil that 
spewed into the Gulf of Mexico following the explosion of BP’s Deepwa-
ter Horizon rig provided a dramatic example of the environmental damage 
that can occur as a consequence of our dependence on oil, but most experts 
believe that the warming of the Earth’s surface due to the accumulation of 
greenhouse gases, while much harder to discern and respond to, presents a far 
more serious threat to human security.
CLIMATE CHANGE
As we noted earlier, oil is not the only natural resource to raise security 
concerns. However, its significance for the economies of the industrialized 
world puts it in a category by itself. In addition, we have chosen to focus on 
petroleum because of the key role its use plays in what is perhaps the most 
important environmental issue of our time—global warming. It is becoming 
increasingly apparent that the world’s dependence on oil (and other fossil 
fuels) bears primary responsibility for the profound and possibly irreversible 
climatic changes we are currently witnessing.
How is the consumption of petroleum related to climate change? Let us 
begin with a gallon of gasoline. When a gallon of gasoline is burned in an in-
ternal combustion engine powering a car, a lawnmower, a piece of construction 

240 
Chapter Thirteen
equipment, or some other machine, five pounds of carbon dioxide (CO2) are 
released into the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is not a pollutant in the normal 
sense of that term. In fact, the release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere 
is a necessary feature of our planet’s vast carbon cycle; it occurs naturally in 
the respiration of animals and the decay of dead plants (among other ways). 
Its presence in the atmosphere makes life possible, by trapping a portion of 
the sun’s radiation and thereby helping to warm the surface of the Earth. 
The problem is that the use of fossil fuels, together with deforestation on a 
massive scale, has introduced carbon dioxide into the atmosphere on a scale 
unprecedented in human history.46 When the Industrial Age began, the con-
centration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere was approximately 280 parts 
per million; today it is about 370 parts per million.47 With that increase comes 
a more pronounced greenhouse effect, as more solar radiation is trapped near 
the surface of the Earth.
Over the course of the twentieth century, the average global temperature 
has increased; the 2000–2009 decade, in fact, was the warmest on record. Sea 
levels have risen an average of 0.6 inches per decade since 1870, but recent 
years have seen an accelerated rise. Arctic sea ice has been disappearing. In 
2009, the portion of the Arctic covered by ice was 24 percent smaller than the 
average coverage from 1979 to 2000.48
The impacts of changes are compounded. The melting of the ice caps, 
along with icebergs and glaciers, causes sea levels to rise. This, in turn, pro-
duces beach erosion, flooding of coastal areas, and, eventually, the complete 
inundation of low-lying lands, including certain islands. Higher atmospheric 
temperatures cause evaporation of surface water to occur more rapidly. This 
means that storms, on average, will become more intense and that rainfall in 
some parts of the globe will increase. Overall, however, more rapid evapora-
tion will result in a widespread drying of soils and a consequent expansion of 
deserts. Patterns of vegetation will also be changed across the world, with, in 
some cases, major impacts on agriculture. In parts of the world where subsis-
tence agriculture is practiced, climate change is likely to produce, and in fact 
appears already to be producing, large numbers of environmental refugees.
Climate change, like virtually every other environmental threat, will affect 
the poor much more than it will the rich. The poor are, in many instances, 
dependent on the very resources and economic activities that are most likely 
to be affected by climate change. Subsistence agriculture, for example, may 
be affected in some regions by prolonged drought and in other regions by 
an increase in the number and severity of violent storms. Either drought or 
flooding can be devastating to communities living close to the margin of 
existence. Flooding, of course, is likely to be a particularly acute problem for 
people living in low-lying coastal areas, among them roughly seventy million 

 
The Environment and Security 
241
Bangladeshis. However problematic and unpalatable many of the solutions 
will be, wealthy states (and wealthy individuals) will be able to purchase a 
measure of security against environmental threats, security that will simply 
be unavailable to many in the world. To put it bluntly but accurately, the rich 
will be able to buy their way out of many aspects of the problem.49
There are, of course, uncertainties inherent in efforts to predict global climate 
change and its effects, uncertainties that are often exploited by corporations 
and political leaders who have an interest in deferring remedial measures. The 
uncertainties are related to causal inferences and predictions, not to existing ob-
servations. There is no question concerning the increases in the Earth’s average 
temperature and in the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. 
The range of informed opinion concerning the likely effects of global warm-
ing—the area where uncertainty exists—runs from the view that those effects 
will be serious to the projection that they will be catastrophic.
Examining the areas of uncertainty is unlikely to provide any reassur-
ance about future impacts, but it can make discussions of climate change 
more intelligible. To begin with, climate-change predictions must deal with 
uncertainties regarding potential changes in the carbon cycle. For example, 
it is possible that increases in atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide 
will stimulate the growth of the very vegetation that removes carbon dioxide 
from the atmosphere. Such an input in the carbon cycle might slow the rate 
at which greenhouse gases collect in the atmosphere.
There are a number of feedback processes that affect our ability to pre-
dict climate change. As snow and ice melt with the progression of global 
warming, highly reflective materials on the surface of the Earth disappear 
and reveal darker, more absorbent, materials, such as soil and water. The 
increased absorption of the sun’s radiation has the potential to amplify global 
warming. Similarly, global warming increases the evaporation of water from 
the surface of the Earth, causing more clouds to form. The increased cloudi-
ness might result in even more heat being trapped near the Earth’s surface or, 
because clouds also reflect solar energy away from the Earth, the net effect 
might be the opposite.
Another factor contributing to uncertainty is the potential for abrupt 
change. Climate changes that have been observed thus far have been incre-
mental; projections typically assume continuing linear change. It is possible, 
however, that a tipping point might be reached, at which dramatic, and pos-
sibly even catastrophic, changes ensue. Among the possibilities are changes 
in ocean currents (and related impacts) of the type described in the Pentagon 
study noted below, or the sudden release—due to thawing—of the vast quan-
tities of methane (another greenhouse gas) that are currently frozen in the 
Arctic tundra.

242 
Chapter Thirteen
Finally, it is worth noting the uncertainties associated with computer mod-
eling of climate change. While significant strides have been made in the con-
struction of climate models, the models are both complex and dependent on 
enormous quantities of data. Minor uncertainties in data inputs can translate 
into more significant uncertainties when run through large and complex mod-
els. We should stress, however, that major climatic impacts are a certainty 
and, in fact, are already occurring.50
With this background in mind, it may be useful to consider what those 
who are responsible for the national security of the United States have to say 
about global warming. Two of the best places to look for such assessments 
are the Pentagon’s Office of Net Assessment and the CIA-affiliated National 
Intelligence Council.
In 1972, Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger brought the Office of Net 
Assessment to the Pentagon to function as an in-house think tank charged with 
envisioning the future of warfare. OSD/NA (for Office of the Secretary of 
Defense/Net Assessment) had been born the previous year as a working group 
within the National Security Council in an effort to address President Nixon’s 
complaints concerning the quality of the intelligence available to him. From 
the beginning, OSD/NA has been headed by Andrew Marshall, a man whose 
career as a professional strategist had begun at the dawn of the Cold War. In 
fact, as a young economist employed by the RAND Corporation in the 1950s, 
Marshall was among the first to advocate a counterforce strategy for the use of 
American nuclear weapons as opposed to the existing countercity strategy.51
In 2003, at Marshall’s direction, the Office of Net Assessment commis-
sioned a report on the possible impact of global climate change on the se-
curity of the United States. The report, entitled An Abrupt Climate Change 
Scenario and Its Implications for United States National Security, considers 
the implications for national security of a change in the major ocean cur-
rents that presently moderate the climate in many of the world’s temperate 
zones.52 Beginning with the standard assumption of gradual global warming, 
the report notes the possibility that the increase in fresh water in the oceans 
due to increased precipitation and the melting of ice in the polar regions 
might abruptly alter the operation of currents. Without the warmth generated 
in northern latitudes by ocean currents, average temperatures in parts of the 
world could drop five to ten degrees Fahrenheit. This, in turn, would change 
precipitation patterns, sharply reduce growing seasons, and increase the fre-
quency of severe storms. The report’s conclusions concerning the impact of 
the climate change described on national security are worth noting in detail:
Violence and disruption stemming from the stresses created by abrupt changes 
in climate pose a different type of threat to national security than we are accus-

 
The Environment and Security 
243
tomed to today. Military confrontation may be triggered by a desperate need for 
natural resources such as energy, food and water rather than by conflicts over 
ideology, religion, or national honor. The shifting motivation for confrontation 
would alter which countries are most vulnerable and the existing warning signs 
for security threats.
There is a long-standing academic debate over the extent to which resource 
constraints and environmental challenges lead to interstate conflict. While some 
believe they alone can lead nations to attack one another, others argue that their 
primary effect is to act as a trigger of conflict among countries that face preex-
isting social, economic, and political tension. Regardless, it seems undeniable 
that severe environmental problems are likely to escalate the degree of global 
conflict.53
The National Intelligence Council’s 2020 Project acknowledges the scientific 
consensus that “the greenhouse effect is real.” It takes a more circumspect view 
of the effects of global warming; nonetheless, the report concludes that the 
United States “is likely to face significant bilateral pressure to change its domes-
tic environmental policies and to be a leader in global environmental efforts.”54
INCREASING SECURITY BY REDUCING CONSUMPTION
Environmental threats and resource issues are, as we have seen, connected 
in many different ways. Not surprisingly, many of the policies that can im-
prove environmental security promise at the same time to ameliorate resource 
scarcities. Because petroleum consumption is central to much of the world’s 
environmental security dilemmas, we begin our discussion of solutions there.
By now, it is widely understood that increasing petroleum production in 
the United States is not a long-term possibility. During the summer of 2005, 
the rotary-rig count in the United States reached an all-time high. At the 
same time, the nominal price of a barrel of oil reached one record high after 
another. In other words, never before had there been as many oil wells being 
drilled, with so little possibility of affecting the world price of oil. The United 
States, once the world’s leading oil producer, is well past its Hubbert peak. 
Much of the oil exploration occurring in the United States today involves 
drilling in fields that were formerly too marginal to be profitable. But even 
Saudi Arabia, with the largest proven oil reserves in the world, may be in es-
sentially the same position.
Michael Klare has argued that the United States needs to separate oil im-
ports from security commitments, reduce its “addiction” to imported oil, and 
move toward a “postpetroleum economy.”55 Undemocratic and even aggressive 
regimes have too often turned oil exports into American military hardware or 

244 
Chapter Thirteen
even security guarantees from the U.S. government. This has been the pattern 
in the Middle East for over half a century; it is currently being duplicated in the 
Caspian Sea basin, a development that could have profound implications for 
future U.S. national security.
Reducing oil consumption in general (and the consumption of imported 
oil in particular) means conservation in the near term and a shift to new 
technologies in the longer term. A shift to alternative sources of energy 
holds some promise for reducing oil dependency and greenhouse gas emis-
sions. Natural gas has the advantage of being a close substitute for oil in 
many applications while producing less CO2 than oil. The problem with 
natural gas is that it is no less finite a resource than oil. It also happens to be 
most abundant in those same troubled parts of the world from which much 
of our oil comes.56
Some alternative sources of energy impose different costs. The construc-
tion of dams for hydroelectric power produces environmental impacts that we 
are only beginning to comprehend. It also carries the possibility of creating 
interstate tensions, as we noted earlier. Nuclear energy raises other security 
issues. Consider the prediction of the Defense Department’s Abrupt Climate 
Change report: “As cooling drives up demand, existing hydrocarbon supplies 
are stretched thin. With a scarcity of energy supply—and a growing need for 
access—nuclear energy will become a critical source of power, and this will 
accelerate nuclear proliferation as countries develop enrichment and repro-
cessing capabilities to ensure their national security.”57
It is, ultimately, conservation that is the key to addressing environmental 
threats, and not only the conservation of petroleum. The first step toward 
environmental security is simply to understand the true costs—in dollars 
and cents, certainly, but also in military commitments, in climate change, in 
polluted air and water, in lost wilderness, and in many other forms—of the 
choices we make as consumers. To ignore these costs is to put at risk both our 
quality of life and our security.
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Diamond, Jared. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: 
Viking, 2005.
Homer-Dixon, Thomas F. Environment, Scarcity, and Violence. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1999.
Klare, Michael T. Blood and Oil: The Dangers and Consequences of America’s 
Growing Dependency on Imported Petroleum. New York: Metropolitan, 2004.

 
The Environment and Security 
245
———. Rising Powers, Shrinking Planet: The New Geopolitics of Energy. New York: 
Metropolitan, 2008.
Maass, Peter. Crude World: The Violent Twilight of Oil. New York: Knopf, 2009.
Pirages, Dennis Clark, and Theresa Manley DeGeest. Ecological Security: An Evolu-
tionary Perspective on Globalization. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004.
Victor, David G. Climate Change: Debating America’s Policy Options. New York: 
Council on Foreign Relations, 2004.
Zedillo, Ernesto. Global Warming: Looking beyond Kyoto. Washington, D.C.: Brook-
ings Institution Press, 2008.
Websites
The Earth Institute, Columbia University: http://www.earth.columbia.edu
Energy Information Administration: http://www.eia.doe.gov
Greenpeace International: http://www.greenpeace.org/international
Natural Resources Defense Council: http://www.nrdc.org


247
Chapter Fourteen
Seeking Security in an Insecure World
In the 1980s, the United States and the Soviet Union were nearing the end of 
a long military and political struggle that had dominated international politics 
for a generation. Reflecting that struggle (and unaware that it was nearing an 
end), security studies focused heavily on deterrence and the threat of nuclear 
war. The journal International Security was publishing articles with titles 
like “The Consequences of ‘Limited’ Nuclear Attacks on the United States,” 
“Controlling Nuclear War,” and “Extending Deterrence with German Nuclear 
Weapons.” Policy debates in the United States centered on the feasibility (and 
advisability) of the “Star Wars” space-based missile defense system and the 
prospects for bilateral nuclear arms control with the Soviet Union. Defense 
planners worried about the vulnerability of America’s intercontinental bal-
listic missiles (ICBMs) to preemptive strikes by Soviet submarine-launched 
ballistic missiles (SLBMs). As had been the case since shortly after World 
War II, the world lived under the threat of nuclear annihilation.
On November 9, 1989, having forced the resignation of their communist 
leaders just two days earlier, crowds of East Germans began tearing down 
the Berlin Wall, the long-standing symbol of the rigid division of the world 
into two implacably hostile camps armed with the most destructive weapons 
ever devised. The dominoes began falling—in reverse—and in a remarkably 
short span of time the Soviet Union collapsed and the Cold War, the central 
political reality of the post–World War II period, was over.
It is instructive for several reasons to look back at the tensions of the mid-
1980s and the euphoria of the early 1990s. First, it cannot help but produce 
humility among those of us who wish to make predictions about the pros-
pects for security in the international system. Second, that period stands as 
an important signpost against which to measure the distance, and perhaps 

248 
Chapter Fourteen
more importantly the direction, in which the world has traveled in the past 
two decades.
It is, of course, not enough to note that change has occurred. While there 
is much about the quest for security that does not change (so that Sun Tzu, 
Thucydides, and Clausewitz continue to reward those who read their observa-
tions on security), at another level change is a constant. Indeed, it would be 
a betrayal of the reader’s trust to have brought him or her to this point only 
to conclude that what was written during the Cold War remains sufficient for 
a clear understanding of international security. While the evidence presented 
to this point concerning the rise of new forms of terrorism, the threatening 
confluence of globalization and disease, or the advent of cyberwar may well 
be enough to make the point about the significance of changes in the security 
environment, part of our purpose here is to highlight the specific changes we 
believe to be most significant.
Surveying the problems of an insecure world, it is apparent that, first, non-
state actors—including ideologically driven individuals, terrorist networks, 
and transnational criminal organizations—have become significant threats to 
both states and individuals since the end of the Cold War. Second, the threats 
we confront are increasingly transnational in character. Third, in large part 
due to the increasing significance of nonstate actors and transnational threats, 
security, now more than ever, is indivisible; we are all connected. Security 
is, fourth, increasingly subject to the law of unintended consequences—that 
is, actions taken to address specific threats often create insecurities in differ-
ent areas. Finally, when we return to the focus of the traditional approach to 
international security, we find that the geographical center of concern has 
shifted dramatically.
THE RISE OF NONSTATE ACTORS
During the Cold War and (with various local and temporary exceptions) for 
centuries before that, seeking security meant taking actions to counter the 
threats posed by states. The Anglo-German naval arms race that preceded 
World War I, the French development of the Maginot Line after World War 
I, and the establishment after World War II of the North Atlantic Treaty Orga-
nization (NATO) in the West and the Warsaw Pact in the East were all mani-
festations of states’ determination to protect themselves from other states.
Within the discipline of international relations, considerable attention has 
always been given to strategies for restraining the aggressive behavior of 
states. Balance-of-power theory and its Wilsonian rival, the theory of col-
lective security, reflect this emphasis on restraining states. International law, 

 
Seeking Security in an Insecure World 
249
international organizations, alliances, and many other features of modern 
international politics place the security of states front and center.
There are certainly good reasons for worrying about the security of states. 
When functioning properly, the state structures the political, economic, and 
social life of the community in such a way that freedom, commerce, and cul-
ture can flourish. But, looking outward from within the state, other states may 
appear threatening. In fact, few social institutions can pose a greater threat to 
the state than other states.
Because states have, for a very long time, been central to the way we un-
derstand international security, it is difficult to shift the focus to threats posed 
by nonstate actors. As Ralph Waldo Emerson said, “People only see what 
they are prepared to see.” There is, however, much to see beyond the state.
Attacks in the United States on 9/11, in Bali on October 12, 2002, in Ma-
drid on March 11, 2004, in London on July 7, 2005, and in Mumbai on No-
vember 26, 2008, have made the threat to security posed by terrorist groups 
readily apparent. But terrorists are not the only nonstate actors to raise serious 
security concerns in recent years. The potential for individuals like A. Q. 
Khan, the Pakistani nuclear scientist who sold nuclear secrets and technology 
for personal gain, to threaten global security is becoming more evident. The 
negative impact that transnational criminal organizations have on security 
through the sale of weapons in conflict-prone regions, through the financ-
ing of revolutionary violence and terrorism via drug trafficking, and through 
their own efforts to subvert states is also more apparent now than ever before. 
These and other examples of the problems caused by nonstate actors make it 
plain that states and the international system itself are no longer threatened 
solely, or even primarily, by other states.
Shifting the focus, even partially, from states to nonstate actors will have a 
significant effect on the way we view security. This is true first and foremost 
for this reason: In a system in which states are considered both the primary 
objects of and threats to security, interstate war must be the primary concern 
of those who think about security. And if war is the primary concern, the 
military will be the primary means of addressing that concern. The response 
to major threats involving nonstate actors bears this out. The threat posed by 
drug trafficking has, at least in the United States, elicited a “war on drugs,” 
with a major role for the Department of Defense. The 9/11 attacks, perpe-
trated by a terrorist network, brought on a “war on terror.” Whether war is the 
appropriate form of response or not, it appears to be what our state-centered 
mode of thinking leads us to whenever we identify a security threat.
The rise of homeland security, as a subject of both academic concern and 
government policy, is worth noting in this context. Homeland security is a 
concept that is clearly a product of a state-centered perspective, even though 

250 
Chapter Fourteen
it arose as a response to threats posed by nonstate actors. To speak of home-
land security is, on the positive side, to acknowledge that security concerns 
do not stop at the borders of the state. This point was brought home (quite 
literally) by the fact that the hijackers of the four airplanes that were brought 
down on 9/11 had lived and trained themselves to fly in the United States. 
On the other hand, the concept of homeland security is based on the idea that 
normal means of law enforcement are inadequate to deal with the new threats 
to security inside the state. It suggests that dealing with terrorism requires 
an internal security agency (the Department of Homeland Security) and an 
external security agency (the Department of Defense).
States continue to be the primary providers of security, but even in this 
realm nonstate actors are making inroads. Increasingly, we are being forced 
to think of security as a commodity that can be treated as either a public good 
or a private good. Like the nobles of the medieval period in Europe who built 
castles as private investments in security, more and more people worldwide 
who can afford to do so are retreating into gated communities or hiring pri-
vate security firms for protection. But the privatization of security (and with 
it the legitimation of nonstate actors with security functions) is not limited to 
the individual level. States too appear to be privatizing more and more aspects 
of security, as was evident in the widespread use of private security firms by 
the United States in Iraq following the March 2003 invasion.
THE RECOGNITION OF TRANSNATIONAL THREATS
One of the most obvious and, we believe, most significant changes in the 
post–Cold War security environment is the rise of transnational, as opposed 
to international, threats. Such threats are not new (as the post–World War I 
Spanish flu pandemic, to take but a single example, illustrates), but a number 
of factors have dramatically increased their significance in recent years. First, 
it must be acknowledged that one of the effects of the ending of the Cold War 
was to create a space in which it was possible for states in the developed world 
at least to begin giving serious attention to nontraditional threats. The demise of 
the Warsaw Pact created a “zone of peace,”1 or a “unipolar moment,”2 in which 
security against traditional threats in the vast majority of the developed world 
seemed assured. It seems reasonable to suggest that the dramatic reduction in 
the traditional state-centered threats that accompanied the end of the Cold War 
might explain the sudden interest of security analysts in nontraditional concerns.
Whether or not students of international security turned from nuclear deter-
rence to, say, epidemic disease as a self-interested means of preserving their 
policy relevance in the aftermath of the Cold War, one thing is certain: In the 

 
Seeking Security in an Insecure World 
251
competition for scholarly attention and defense spending (two matters that are 
often connected), big threats trump small threats. To say that the end of the 
Cold War permitted academics and policy makers to pay more attention to 
small threats (“small” in relation to the threat of nuclear annihilation, that is) 
is by no means equivalent to saying that they invented these smaller, nontra-
ditional threats. Most of those threats were always with us but had to be put 
on the back burner when Berlin was being blockaded, hydrogen bombs were 
being tested, Cuba was becoming a Soviet ally, and proxy wars were being 
fought in Asia and Africa.
Military threats to security have been and are likely to continue to be 
around for a long time to come; however, there are other problems that have 
not received adequate attention. Some should be (and in some cases now 
are) recognized as security threats. For example, smallpox, although no lon-
ger present in human populations, killed an estimated three to five hundred 
million people in the twentieth century alone. During the same period, an 
estimated hundred million people died as a consequence of war. Clearly, 
smallpox posed a greater threat to humans during the twentieth century than 
warfare, yet throughout the century students of international security focused 
on the threat of war rather than that of smallpox.
Transnational threats take a variety of forms, including those associated 
with nonstate actors, but what defines that category is the irrelevance of bor-
ders as devices for stopping the threats. Just as the humanitarian organization 
Doctors without Borders (Médecins Sans Frontières) aspires to do good in the 
world without regard to the artificial barriers represented by the borders of 
sovereign states, so malevolence (in the form of disease, nihilistic ideologies, 
drugs, child prostitution, and many other problems) spreads widely across 
the globe with few obstacles. The problem, at one level, is globalization. 
Globalization in its many guises creates a world increasingly vulnerable to 
computer- and communications-network disruptions, the spread of disease, 
financial instability, and many other problems. At another level, however, 
freedom is responsible. The freedom to travel to virtually any spot on the 
globe carries with it the possibility of transporting disease in the process. 
The freedom to communicate via the Internet offers a medium through which 
scholars can plan a conference or terrorists can plan an attack. The freedom 
to purchase goods manufactured abroad presents the frightening prospect 
that, someday, a container ship bringing cars or computers or clothing from 
Asia may also carry a nuclear device. As Kenneth Waltz noted, “States, like 
people, are insecure in proportion to the extent of their freedom. If freedom 
is wanted, insecurity must be accepted.”3
As we noted in chapter 10, the significance of transnational threats is 
now being acknowledged to some degree. The 9/11 Commission stated 

252 
Chapter Fourteen
that “threats are defined more by the fault lines within societies than by 
the territorial boundaries between them. From terrorism to global disease 
or environmental degradation, the challenges have become transnational 
rather than international.”4 Similarly, President Clinton noted in a May 2000 
commencement address at the Coast Guard Academy that globalization and 
technological developments are “making us more vulnerable to problems that 
arise half a world away: to terror; to ethnic, racial and religious conflicts; to 
weapons of mass destruction, drug trafficking and other organized crime.”5 
These, indeed, are among the very issues that we have examined in this book.
THE INDIVISIBILITY OF SECURITY
Security today is indivisible. As we noted earlier, a narrowly self-interested 
security policy cannot be narrowly self-interested. John Muir, the eminent en-
vironmentalist and founder of the Sierra Club, could have been talking about 
international security rather than nature when he wrote, “When we try to pick 
out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the Universe.”6
Everywhere we look, we see connections between various sources of in-
security. Economic insecurity may lead to slash-and-burn agriculture, with 
deforestation (and environmental insecurity) as a result. The devastation of 
an ecosystem may, in turn, create a refugee crisis that leads to ethnic conflict. 
An intrastate war may generate a market for arms traffickers. Trafficking in 
small arms and light weapons may then open up a network through which 
chemical, biological, or even nuclear materials are traded. The proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction may make it possible for terrorists to acquire 
a nuclear device. And so on.
Consider the beginning of the chain above. Poverty, it should be clear, 
contributes to many other forms of insecurity. Former World Bank president 
James D. Wolfensohn put it this way:
Poverty in itself does not immediately and directly lead to conflict, let alone to 
terrorism. Rather than responding to deprivation by lashing out at others, the 
vast majority of poor people worldwide devote their energy to the day-in, day-
out struggle to secure income, food, and opportunities for their children. And 
yet we know that exclusion can breed violent conflict. Careful research tells us 
that civil wars have often resulted not so much from ethnic diversity—the usual 
scapegoat—as from a mix of factors, of which, it must be recognized, poverty 
is a central ingredient.7
Addressing the issue of global poverty requires, more than anything else, a 
simple recognition on the part of wealthy states that security is indivisible 

 
Seeking Security in an Insecure World 
253
and that their willingness to take action is, in fact, an investment in their own 
security. To some extent, such a recognition is unavoidable. As Dominique 
Moïsi has noted, “In a transparent world the poor are no longer ignorant of 
the world of the rich, and the rich have lost the privilege of denial.”8 To act on 
this recognition, Wolfensohn recommended increasing foreign aid, reducing 
trade barriers, directing development assistance into proven programs, and 
acting multilaterally on global issues.
In September 2000, the United Nations General Assembly unanimously 
adopted the Millennium Development Goals, an ambitious set of plans 
that calls on the international community to eradicate extreme poverty and 
hunger, achieve universal primary education, promote gender equality and 
empower women, reduce child mortality, improve maternal health, combat 
HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases, ensure environmental sustainabil-
ity, and develop a global partnership for development. The achievement 
of these goals would go a long way toward making both the United States 
and the world more secure by addressing a number of the interdependent 
sources of insecurity. Unfortunately, progress toward the achievement of 
the Millennium Development Goals has been slow, in part because of the 
rapid reversion to traditional modes of addressing national security in the 
wake of 9/11.
We have examined many different threats to the well-being—the secu-
rity—of individuals, states, and the international system. These have included 
traditional military threats posed by states, new threats (including the “new 
terrorism”) presented by nonstate actors, and threats posed by infectious 
disease, poverty, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, cyberwar, 
transnational crime, ethnic conflict, and environmental degradation. Even 
the controversial White House document that outlined the Bush administra-
tion’s strategy of preemptive war in September 2002 noted that “poverty, 
weak institutions, and corruption can make weak states vulnerable to terrorist 
networks and drug cartels within their borders.”9 The interconnectedness of 
these threats offers a compelling case, we believe, for the conclusion that 
security is, now more than ever, indivisible.
THE PROBLEM OF UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
We have noted that often the attempt to achieve greater security has the 
unintentional result of threatening security. For example, in chapter 9 we 
pointed out that the U.S. Department of Defense originally developed the 
precursor to the Internet to provide for assured, redundant communications 
among military bases and installations; if one communications node had 

254 
Chapter Fourteen
been destroyed in an attack, the Internet would have provided an alternate 
means of communication. Over time, the Internet became a means by which 
the security of individuals, organizations, and states could be threatened. 
Or consider infectious diseases. The World Health Organization worked 
diligently to eradicate smallpox as a threat to the world’s peoples. In order 
to develop defenses against an enemy employing smallpox as a weapon, the 
defense establishments of both Russia and the United States retained strains 
of smallpox. Now there is concern that these strains could become available 
to terrorists and be used to unleash the deadly disease on an unprotected 
world.
There is no security on this earth; there is only opportunity.
—General Douglas MacArthur
Source: Quoted in Stansfield Turner, Terrorism and Democracy (New York: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1991), 126.
Unintended consequences—or “blowback,” in the phrase used by the 
CIA10—may be most apparent in the military response to the 9/11 attacks. 
The Iraq War generated mistrust and animosity toward the United States 
and provided a training ground for Islamist militants. There is evidence that 
it duplicated the effects of the Soviet Union’s war in Afghanistan during 
the 1980s in terms of providing a stimulus to global terrorism. In fact, the 
well-respected International Institute for Strategic Studies issued a report in 
October 2004 that indicated that the Iraq War had aided Al Qaeda’s recruit-
ment efforts.11
Even American “successes” against Al Qaeda may be making terrorism 
more difficult to address. In response to attacks on its leadership and its 
financing, Al Qaeda transformed itself into an ideology and a decentralized 
movement of jihadists. The loss of its base in Afghanistan resulted in the dis-
persal of militants all over the world and the spread of its ideology.12
While it may be objected that more carefully constructed policies can avoid 
unintended consequences, history offers little encouragement. Providing 
Stinger missiles to the mujahidin in Afghanistan accomplished its primary 
purpose of inflicting serious losses on the Soviet Union, but “loose” Stingers 
now pose a significant threat to civil aviation. The military containment of 
Iraq during the 1990s was a policy success and, it seems, necessary, but the 
required stationing of U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf region thereafter was a 
factor in the decision of Muslim fundamentalists to attack American interests 
both in the region and in the United States itself.

 
Seeking Security in an Insecure World 
255
GEOGRAPHICAL SHIFTS
Even if we were not adopting an expanded view of security, we would be 
forced to note that the geographical focus of security studies has shifted dra-
matically in recent years. The broader view of security, however, provides 
even more reason for looking closely at different parts of the world.
Many of the threats that we have described in this book come together in 
Africa. It is the area hardest hit by HIV/AIDS and malaria; it contains many 
of the world’s poorest countries; it has both harbored terrorists and suffered 
from terrorist attacks; it is an important focus of trafficking of all types; and 
it has suffered more than any other continent from the effects of intrastate 
conflict. East Africa and the Horn, including Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea, 
Kenya, Somalia, Tanzania, and Uganda, is an area of particular concern, 
given the conflicts in the region, the poverty, corruption, and the high in-
cidence of HIV/AIDS. Not surprisingly, Al Qaeda was active in Somalia 
and, according to reports, advised members of Mohammed Aidid’s militia 
on how to use rocket-propelled grenades to shoot down U.S. Black Hawk 
helicopters. In addition, Al Qaeda operated out of Sudan and perpetrated 
the 1998 attacks on the American embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es 
Salaam, Tanzania.
Other areas of Africa are also of concern and importance to American 
security. Africa’s most populous country is Nigeria, with over 150 million 
people (almost half the population of the United States); about half of these 
are Muslims.13 Currently, Nigeria is the fifth leading oil exporter in the 
world and one of nine African states with over one billion barrels of proved 
oil reserves.14 A number of African countries have majority populations 
of Muslims, and there is the possibility that Islamic radicalism will grow 
among them. To address, then, the threats of disease, poverty, intrastate 
conflict, and trafficking of drugs, humans, and diamonds is a matter of 
security. The United States and other wealthy industrial states ignore these 
threats at their peril. As the previously cited study produced by the Milbank 
Memorial Fund and the Council on Foreign Relations noted, “With reduced 
ability to deal with either economic development or security, Africa will 
become increasingly susceptible to conflict and increasingly attractive as 
a haven for terrorists and transnational criminal elements hostile to the 
United States.”15
Other important developments with security implications are occurring 
in Asia as India and China continue to grow more powerful both politically 
and economically. China, in fact, has recently surpassed Japan to become the 
world’s second-largest economy. In its report on global trends to the year 
2020, the National Intelligence Council predicted that “the likely emergence 

256 
Chapter Fourteen
of China and India, as well as others, as new major global players—similar 
to the advent of a united Germany in the nineteenth century and a powerful 
United States in the early twentieth century—will transform the geopolitical 
landscape, with impacts potentially as dramatic as those in the previous two 
centuries.”16 The population of China is currently 1.33 billion; India’s popula-
tion is 1.17 billion. Due to China’s one-child policy, its population will age 
more rapidly than others; by 2020 an estimated four hundred million Chinese 
will be over sixty-five. This will put increased demands on the younger 
members of Chinese society. From a more traditional security perspective, 
the greatest military threats to stability and peace in Asia in the near future 
will concern relations between China and Taiwan on the one hand and the 
two Koreas on the other. Conflicts involving either of these pairings could 
rapidly escalate and draw in the United States.
The combination of geographical shifts in the locus of insecurity and de-
mographic changes with security implications points to what has been called 
the “urbanization of security.”17 A milestone in human history was passed 
in 2008 when, for the first time, over half of the world’s population lived in 
urban areas.18 Urbanization is especially noteworthy in the developing world 
where cities like Dhaka, Kinshasa, and Lagos are rapidly moving into the 
ranks of the world’s largest population centers.
The implications of urbanization for security are mixed. On the one hand, 
no state has ever experienced significant economic development without a 
major shift in population from rural areas to cities. On the other hand, cities 
have often been breeding grounds for disease, crime, and various forms of so-
cial unrest. They are also where modern wars are often fought. During World 
War II, cities were targeted by all sides in strategic bombing campaigns in-
tended to punish the target state and, eventually, compel its surrender. Today, 
the “new terrorism” focuses its attacks on major urban areas. Insurgents have 
learned that fighting from street to street in a city can neutralize some of the 
technological advantages of superior military forces. Civilians can be used 
as human shields, rubble-filled streets can block the movement of armored 
vehicles, and buildings can conceal the movement of insurgents from most 
forms of aerial surveillance. Consequently, from Mogadishu to Sarajevo, 
Grozny, and Fallujah, cities have become the primary battlegrounds of con-
temporary conflicts.
TWO VIEWS OF SECURITY FOR A NEW ERA
As we have noted throughout this book, the traditional view of security cen-
ters on the state. The perspective that puts national security front and center 

 
Seeking Security in an Insecure World 
257
considers the central threats in the international system (and therefore the 
principal concerns of security studies) to be threats to the sovereignty, the 
territorial integrity, and the political and economic systems of the state. It 
is also state centered in that it views states as the primary sources of threats.
Seeking security in the twenty-first century requires attending to national 
security, because state-based threats to states still exist. We have just noted 
the concerns raised by the People’s Republic of China. North Korea poses 
a serious threat to the stability of East Asia due to its economic instability 
coupled with its ongoing nuclear program. Failed states, as we noted in chap-
ters 10 and 11, pose a different kind of state-based problem, but one that is 
nonetheless very serious.
Because the traditional paradigm does not adequately address the various 
security threats that we have examined, it is important to go beyond national 
security. Our conclusions lead us to suggest that human security and coopera-
tive security must be part of any comprehensive approach to security in the 
century ahead.
The concept of human security emerged in the early 1990s to bring to-
gether several distinct efforts to widen the traditional security agenda. Unlike 
national security, human security focuses on the individual human being 
rather than the state. It also includes a range of threats to human welfare 
that go well beyond the traditional focus on defense against aggression. Kofi 
Annan, the former UN secretary general, described human security in these 
terms:
Human security, in its broadest sense, embraces far more than the absence of 
violent conflict. It encompasses human rights, good governance, access to edu-
cation and health care and ensuring that each individual has opportunities and 
choices to fulfill his or her potential. Every step in this direction is also a step 
towards reducing poverty, achieving economic growth and preventing conflict. 
Freedom from want, freedom from fear, and the freedom of future generations 
to inherit a healthy natural environment—these are the interrelated building 
blocks of human—and therefore national security.19
Human security has its conceptual roots in international humanitarian law, 
international human rights, the concept of humanitarian intervention, and the 
dual concepts of economic development and human development. As with 
human rights, the adjective “human” signals a move not only toward think-
ing about the individual but toward concern for humankind as well. Human 
security, in other words, is simultaneously individual security and universal 
security.
The structure of the international system complicates efforts to address 
many of the most serious problems we have discussed in this book. Sov-

258 
Chapter Fourteen
ereignty means that each of the two hundred states in the system is free to 
address (or to ignore) global warming or human trafficking or terrorism, as it 
sees fit. This feature of the international system makes transnational threats 
particularly difficult to address. The failure of one state to reduce HIV/
AIDS infection rates poses a threat to other states. The failure of one state to 
curb greenhouse gas emissions or to stop the destruction of rainforests has a 
negative impact on all states that are attempting to address global warming. 
Furthermore, nonstate actors—terrorists, arms traffickers, nuclear scientists 
willing to sell their services to the highest bidder—exploit differences among 
states and operate in the gaps of the international system.
These facts argue strongly for seeking security through the methods pre-
sented in the cooperative security paradigm. Cooperative security, as we 
noted earlier, seeks to bring states together in ways that address the weak-
nesses of the international system as it is currently constituted. It approaches 
security as something to which all states are entitled and that can only be 
gained by mutual efforts. By treating security as a public good, it establishes 
the understanding that all states have a common interest in promoting a 
shared system of security and that “free riders” must be brought into a coop-
erative framework.
Cooperative security requires a degree of multilateralism that was absent 
from U.S. foreign policy during the administration of George W. Bush. 
President Obama has moved the U.S. toward more cooperative approaches 
in international affairs, but a variety of factors, including domestic political 
pressures and fiscal constraints, have limited the degree to which the U.S. can 
pursue an active multilateral agenda.
THE WAY FORWARD
Ken Booth’s 1979 book entitled Strategy and Ethnocentrism noted the fail-
ure of most security analysts to take adequate account of differences among 
cultures.20 In the Cold War context in which Booth was writing, the Western 
emphasis on rationality as the foundation of nuclear deterrence theory was an 
especially striking example of this problem. Almost a decade later, however, 
scholars were still noting “the pitfalls of ethnocentrism due to American 
dominance of the field.”21 However much Western policy makers and schol-
ars may have become sensitive to the problems posed by the difficulty of 
seeing beyond their own cultural constructs, we suspect that ethnocentrism 
may be an even greater problem today, in the middle of an ongoing struggle 
against mostly Muslim terrorist organizations, than it was during the Cold 
War. If our conclusions to this point have been correct—that seeking security 

 
Seeking Security in an Insecure World 
259
today requires countering threats from nonstate actors, recognizing threats 
that are transnational and, consequently, indivisible in character, dealing 
with the problems of unintended consequences, and operating in parts of the 
world that are especially unfamiliar to most of us in the West—then the abil-
ity to understand and even to empathize with those in other cultures is more 
important than ever before.
What policy makers, analysts, and even entire societies understand by 
“security” varies more than we ordinarily acknowledge, with the variations 
relating to political, social, technological, and other circumstances. The 
meaning of security differs across cultures, but within a culture it is also sub-
ject to change over time. This is so because political and social differences 
affect what societies desire to protect, because technological advances alter 
the types of threats that must be protected against, and, most importantly, be-
cause the very subjectivity of the concept of security ensures that individuals 
in different situations will value social goods and assess threats differently. 
The concept of security, to put it simply, is socially constructed.
To the extent that “security studies” has some common content that tran-
scends political and cultural differences in the world, the influence of the 
privileged elites in the world must be credited. Certainly, the fears of male 
defense intellectuals discussing security at an arms control seminar in Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, in the early 1960s were quite different from the fears 
of Congolese women living through revolution and ethnic conflict in that 
same period. Not surprisingly, security studies in that era paid little attention 
to threats facing women in Africa.
Circumstances, in large measure (but with some input from psychological 
factors), determine what we fear. Many feminists, noting the greater vulnera-
bility of women to acts of sexual violence and physical abuse, have suggested 
that feminine conceptions of security differ from masculine conceptions as 
a consequence.22 Because men are generally free from the fear of sexual 
violence and physical abuse, male-formulated notions of security manifest 
no concern for security as freedom from fear of sexual assault.23 Similarly, 
security as defined by academics and strategists living and working in liberal 
democracies has tended to ignore the possibility that the state may generate 
fear among its own citizens.
As we noted in chapter 11, since World War II, developing states have 
been the scenes of most of the world’s violent conflict. Much of that conflict 
has been intrastate and interethnic. This in itself should alert us to the diver-
gence between our ethnocentric concern with insecurity defined in terms of 
external threats and the form of insecurity that most of the world actually 
experiences. As Mohammed Ayoob has observed, the primary security con-
cerns of weak states are “internal in character” and are characteristic of “the 

260 
Chapter Fourteen
early stages of state making.”24 A sophisticated understanding of security 
must take such considerations into account, particularly if concern for human 
welfare characteristic of human security or concern for complementary strate-
gies characteristic of cooperative security is part of the mix.
Perhaps even more important than our ability to understand the impact of 
different circumstances on the way security is defined is the ability to assess 
our own circumstances accurately. The long litany of threats described in this 
book or in the threat assessments produced by many governments around 
the world may suggest not only that we live in an insecure world but that the 
problems we face are insoluble. In fact, on many fronts there are reasons for 
optimism.
In many parts of the world, including Europe, where the two most de-
structive wars in history occurred within a span of thirty years, war has 
become unthinkable. Conflicts between democracies are routinely resolved 
without resort to force. While intrastate war continues to claim tens of 
thousands of lives each year in the developing world, elsewhere humankind 
seems to have achieved some success in understanding and addressing the 
causes of war.
There are, today, fewer nuclear weapons stockpiled in the world’s arsenals 
than at any time in the last half-century. The United States and Russia con-
tinue to acknowledge a shared responsibility to reduce and, more importantly, 
secure their stockpiles of weapons and fissile material. The vast majority 
of the world’s states have pledged that they will never attempt to acquire 
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons; many are active in efforts to deny 
the troublesome minority of states—and all nonstate actors—the ability to 
acquire weapons of mass destruction.
There has been significant progress in the fight against infectious diseases. 
The spread of HIV/AIDS has slowed. The eradication of malaria appears to 
be a real possibility. States, international governmental organizations, and 
nongovernmental organizations are working together to prevent and treat 
diseases among people who have never witnessed a vaccination program or 
visited a medical clinic.
There is cause for optimism, but not for complacency. Seeking security 
in an insecure world has always been an extraordinary challenge. Threats 
evolve, sometimes very rapidly; measures devised to enhance security will, 
in time, become ineffective. Think of the impact of the invention of gunpow-
der on castles and city walls, or of the appearance of drug-resistant diseases 
on vaccination programs. The nature—and number—of the threats we face 
is part of the challenge, but so is our interdependence. More than ever, the 
security of people all over the world is intertwined. This fact compels us to 
think creatively about security.

 
Seeking Security in an Insecure World 
261
RECOMMENDED READING
Books
Battersby, Paul, and Joseph M. Siracusa. Globalization and Human Security. Lan-
ham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2009.
Beebe, Shannon D., and Mary Kaldor. The Ultimate Weapon Is No Weapon: Human 
Security and the New Rules of War and Peace. New York: PublicAffairs, 2010.
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict. Final Report. Washington, 
D.C.: Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict, 1997.
Haass, Richard N. The Opportunity: America’s Moment to Alter History’s Course. 
New York: PublicAffairs, 2005.
Krepinevich, Andrew F. 7 Deadly Scenarios: A Military Futurist Explores War in the 
Twenty-First Century. New York: Bantam, 2010.
Lipshutz, Ronnie D., ed. On Security. New York: Columbia University Press, 1995.
Shirk, Susan. China: Fragile Superpower. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Steinbruner, John D. Principles of Global Security. Washington, D.C.: Brookings 
Institution Press, 2000.
U.S. National Intelligence Council. Mapping the Global Future. Report on the 2020 
Project. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, December 2004.
Websites
Center for International Security and Cooperation: http://cisac.stanford.edu
Human Security Network: http://www.humansecuritynetwork.org
United Nations Foundation, Global Issues: http://www.unfoundation.org/global
-issues
U.S. Department of Homeland Security: http://www.dhs.gov


263
Notes
CHAPTER ONE: THE MEANING OF SECURITY TODAY
1. UNAIDS, “Global Facts and Figures,” available at http://data.unaids.org/pub/
FactSheet/2009/20091124_fs_global_en.pdf.
2. UNICEF, The State of the World’s Children: Celebrating 20 Years of the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child (New York: United Nations Children’s Fund, 
November 2009), 17.
3. These figures are reported in Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn, Half 
the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide (New York: 
Vintage Books, 2009), 9–10.
4. See Bethany Lacina and Nils Petter Gleditsch, “Monitoring Trends in Global 
Combat: A New Dataset of Battle Deaths,” European Journal of Population 21 
(2005): 159. The figure for total intrastate conflict deaths since World War II is from 
Ann Hironaka, Neverending Wars: The International Community, Weak States, and 
the Perpetuation of Civil War (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2005), 2.
5. All figures are from the CIA World Factbook, available at http://www.cia.gov/
library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2034rank.html.
6. Arnold Wolfers, “National Security as an Ambiguous Symbol,” in Discord 
and Collaboration: Essays on International Politics (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1962), 147–65. This chapter originally appeared in Political Science 
Quarterly in 1952.
7. John Baylis, “International Security in the Post–Cold War Era,” in The Globaliza-
tion of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations, ed. John Baylis and 
Steve Smith (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), 194. K. J. Holsti has written, 
“Probably few concepts employed in statecraft and in the study of international politics 
have as vague referents as do security or national security.” International Politics: A 
Framework for Analysis, 7th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1995), 84.
8. The billions of dollars spent to address potential problems that, it was feared, 
would result from the Y2K bug could easily be regarded as expenditures designed to 

264 
Notes to Pages 6–11
address national security concerns, at least according to most current definitions of 
security.
 9. The shift in emphasis concerning the meaning of security was articulated early 
on in the following works (among others): Richard H. Ullman, “Redefining Security,” 
International Security 8 (Summer 1983): 129–53; and Jessica Tuchman Mathews, 
“Redefining Security,” Foreign Affairs 68 (Spring 1989): 162–77.
10. James N. Rosenau, “New Dimensions of Security: The Interaction of Global-
izing and Localizing Dynamics,” Security Dialogue 25 (September 1994): 255.
11. See Hedley Bull, The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1977), 16–20. Bull defined international 
order as “a pattern or disposition of international activity that sustains those goals of 
the society of states that are elementary, primary, or universal.” These goals, accord-
ing to Bull, include preservation of the system itself, preservation of individual parts 
of the system (states), peace, and the limitation of violence.
12. See K. M. Fierke, Critical Approaches to International Security (Cambridge: 
Polity Press, 2007), 112–18. Two of the leading works outlining the approach of the 
Copenhagen School are Barry Buzan, People, States and Fear: An Agenda for Inter-
national Security Studies in the Post–Cold War Era, 2nd ed. (Boulder, Colo.: Lynne 
Rienner, 1991); and Barry Buzan, Ole Waever, and Jaap de Wilde, Security: A New 
Framework for Analysis (Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 1998).
13. See Lars Schoultz, National Security and United States Policy toward Latin 
America (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1987).
14. It may be objected that the transnational spread of disease, as with the Black 
Death that claimed roughly one-third of Europe’s population in the 1300s, was an 
even greater threat to the security of states (or their medieval precursors) in the 
Middle Ages than it is today. However, the inability to understand pathogenesis in 
a prescientific era prevented any serious efforts—efforts beyond closing city gates 
to strangers—to securitize the problem of contagion. See Barbara W. Tuchman, A 
Distant Mirror: The Calamitous 14th Century (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1978).
15. Richard Rosecrance provides a particularly perceptive discussion of the declin-
ing significance of land for the modern state in The Rise of the Virtual State: Wealth 
and Power in the Coming Century (New York: Basic, 1999), 3–25.
16. Ullman, “Redefining Security,” 129, 133.
17. See, for example, Buzan, Waever, and de Wilde, Security: A New Framework 
for Analysis; and Richard Wyn Jones, Security, Strategy, and Critical Theory (Boul-
der, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 1999).
18. Wyn Jones, Security, Strategy, and Critical Theory, 103. Buzan, Waever, and 
de Wilde use the term “widening” in Security: A New Framework for Analysis.
19. See Buzan, Waever, and de Wilde, Security: A New Framework for Analysis, 
2–5.
20. See Gareth Evans, Cooperating for Peace: The Global Agenda for the 1990s 
(London: Allen & Unwin, 1993); and Gareth Evans, “Cooperative Security and In-
trastate Conflict,” Foreign Policy 96 (Fall 1994): 3–20.
21. See Human Development Report 1994 (New York: United Nations Develop-
ment Program, 1994). The concept of human security has been promoted at the UN 

 
Notes to Pages 12–27 
265
more recently by the joint action of Canada and Norway. See Astri Suhrke, “Human 
Security and the Interests of States,” Security Dialogue 30 (September 1999): 265–76.
22. R. B. J. Walker, “The Subject of Security,” in Critical Security Studies: Con-
cepts and Cases, ed. Keith Krause and Michael C. Williams (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1997), 63.
23. UN Department of Public Information, “Opening Session of Millennium Sum-
mit Hears Statements by 19 Heads of State, 10 Heads of Government, Two Vice-
Presidents,” UN Press Release GA/9750, September 6, 2000.
24. See, for one of the classic discussions of the security dilemma, Robert Jervis, 
Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1976).
25. The first statement of the idea of the security community was Karl Deutsch 
et al., Political Community in the North Atlantic Area (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1957).
26. For a British astronomer’s discussion of this and many other dramatic threats 
to the survival of our planet, see Martin Rees, Our Final Hour (New York: Basic, 
2003).
27. See Scott D. Sagan, The Limits of Safety: Organizations, Accidents, and 
Nuclear Weapons (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1995).
28. Buzan, People, States and Fear, 146.
29. Wyn Jones, Security, Strategy, and Critical Theory, 99.
30. Robert Kaplan, The Coming Anarchy: Shattering the Dreams of the Post–Cold 
War (New York: Random House, 2000), 175–76.
31. For a noteworthy example of this, see Ken Booth, “Security and Self: Reflec-
tions of a Fallen Realist,” in Critical Security Studies, ed. Krause and Williams, 
83–119.
CHAPTER TWO: CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS AND WAR
1. International Rescue Committee, Mortality in the Democratic Republic of 
Congo: An Ongoing Crisis, 16, available at http://www.theirc.org/special-reports/
congo-forgotten-crisis. Mortality estimates in wartime are invariably controversial. 
The IRC’s estimates of war-related excess deaths in the DRC have been disputed. See 
Human Security Report Project, “Shrinking Costs of War,” Part II of Human Security 
Report 2009 (Vancouver: Human Security Report Project, 2010), 36–48, available at 
http://www.hsrgoup.org/human-security-reports/2009/text.aspx.
2. Spencer C. Tucker, “Casualties,” Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, 
Social, and Military History, 3 vols. (Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 1998), I:106.
3. Department of Defense, Statistical Information Analysis Division (SIAD), 
“Vietnam Conflict: Casualty Summary (as of May 16, 2008),” http://siadapp.dmdc
.osd.mil/personnel/CASUALTY/vietnam.pdf.
4. Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University 
Press, 1966), 19.
5. Schelling, Arms and Influence, 1–2.

266 
Notes to Pages 27–34
 6. Schelling, Arms and Influence, 12–34.
 7. The British decision to wage war in this fashion is extensively analyzed in 
Stephen A. Garrett, Ethics and Airpower in World War II: The British Bombing of 
German Cities (New York: St. Martin’s, 1993).
 8. Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument with Historical 
Illustrations, 4th ed. (New York: Basic, 2006), 255.
 9. Department of Defense, Statistical Information Analysis Division (SIAD), 
“Persian Gulf War: Casualty Summary (Desert Shield/Storm as of January 29, 
2010),” http://siadapp.dmdc.osd.mil/personnel/CASUALTY/GWSUM.pdf.
10. Department of Defense, Statistical Information Analysis Division (SIAD), 
“Operation Iraqi Freedom Military Deaths (Through April 30, 2003),” http://siadapp
.dmdc.osd.mil/personnel/CASUALTY/oif-deaths-before.pdf.
11. “NATO’s Role in Kosovo,” NATO, available at http://www.nato.int/kosovo/
kosovo.htm.
12. Quoted in Andrew J. Bacevich, Washington Rules: America’s Path to Perma-
nent War (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2010), 173.
13. Quoted in P. W. Singer, Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict 
in the 21st Century (New York: Penguin, 2009), 221.
14. Singer, Wired for War, 19–32.
15. Singer, Wired for War, 326–37.
16. Christopher Drew, “Drones Are Weapons of Choice in Fighting Qaeda,” 
New York Times, March 17, 2009, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/17/
business/17uav.html.
17. Charlie Savage, “U.N. Report Highly Critical of U.S. Drone Attacks,” 
New York Times, June 2, 2010, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/03/
world/03drones.html.
18. Peter Bergen and Katherine Teidemann, “The Year of the Drone: An Analysis 
of U.S. Drone Strikes in Pakistan, 2004–2010,” New America Foundation, February 
24, 2010, available at http://counterterrorism.newamerica.net/sites/newamerica.net/
files/policydocs/bergentiedemann2.pdf. For updates of the original report, see http://
counterterrorism.newamerica.net/drones. See also Daniel L. Byman, “Do Targeted 
Killings Work?” ForeignPolicy.com, July 14, 2009, available at http://www.brook-
ings.edu/opinions/2009/0714_targeted_killings_byman.aspx.
19. Sun Tzu on the Art of War: The Oldest Military Treatise in the World, trans. 
Lionel Giles (Mountain View, Calif.: Wiretap, n.d.), 45 [e-book].
20. Department of Defense, Statistical Information Analysis Division (SIAD), 
“Operation Iraqi Freedom Military Deaths (Since May 1, 2003),” http://siadapp
.dmdc.osd.mil/personnel/CASUALTY/oif-deaths-after.pdf.
21. Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), “World Military 
Expenditure Increases despite Financial Crisis—Launch of the SIPRI Yearbook 
2010,” June 2, 2010, available at http://www.sipri.org/media/pressreleases/100602y
earbooklaunch.
22. “United Nations Peacekeeping Operations,” Background Notes, June 30, 2010, 
United Nations Department of Public Information, DPI/1634/Rev.110/Corr.1, August 
2010, available at http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/bnote.htm; Patrick Worsnip, 

 
Notes to Pages 35–39 
267
“U.N. 2010–2011 Budget Pushes Past $5 Billion,”AlertNet (Reuters), December 24, 
2009, available at http://www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/N24155917.htm.
23. According to researchers at the Dirksen Center, no record exists of Senator 
Dirksen having actually uttered the famous remark attributed to him. See “A Billion 
Here, a Billion There . . . ,” The Dirksen Center, available at http://www.dirksencenter
.org/print_emd_billionhere.htm.
24. Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years: Mandate for Change, 1953–
1956 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1963), 145.
25. Robert L. Paarlberg, “Knowledge as Power: Science, Military Dominance, and 
U.S. Security,” International Security 29 (Summer 2004): 122–51.
26. SIPRI, “Burden Comparison,” available at http://www.sipri.org/contents/milap/
milex/mex_burden.html.
27. Quoted in Charles W. Kegley, Jr., and Eugene R. Wittkopf, World Politics: 
Trend & Transformation, 9th ed. (Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth, 2004), 450.
28. Global Burden of Armed Violence (Geneva: Geneva Declaration Secretariat, 
September 2008), 2.
29. “Speech by Lloyd Axworthy, Canadian Minister of Foreign Affairs, to U.N. 
Security Council Ministerial on Small Arms, September 24, 1999,” International Ac-
tion Network on Small Arms (IANSA), available at http://www.iansa.org/documents/
un/un_pub/statements/axworthy.htm.
30. See, among a wide variety of sources on the origins and distinctive characteristics 
of the SALW issue, Edward J. Laurance, Light Weapons and Intrastate Conflict: Early 
Warning Factors and Preventive Action, A Report to the Carnegie Commission on 
Preventing Deadly Conflict (New York: Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly 
Conflict, July 1998), 13–19; and Jeffrey Boutwell and Michael T. Klare, eds., Light 
Weapons and Civil Conflict: Controlling the Tools of Violence (Lanham, Md.: Rowman 
& Littlefield for the Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict, 1999), 1–5.
31. Aaron Karp, “Laudable Failure,” SAIS Review 22 (Winter–Spring 2002): 179.
32. “Notes for an Address by the Honourable Lloyd Axworthy, Minister of For-
eign Affairs, to the 52nd Session of the United Nations General Assembly,” Septem-
ber 25, 1997, International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA), available at 
http://www.iansa.org/documents/un/un_pub/statements/axworthy.htm.
33. Statement by John R. Bolton, U.S. Under-Secretary of State for Arms Control 
and International Security Affairs, UN Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms 
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, July 9, 2001, available at http://disarmament
.un.org/cab/smallarms/statements/usE.html.
34. See “Towards an Arms Trade Treaty: Establishing Common International 
Standards for the Import, Export and Transfer of Conventional Arms,” report of the 
Group of Governmental Experts to examine the feasibility, scope, and draft param-
eters for a comprehensive, legally binding instrument establishing common inter-
national standards for the import, export and transfer of conventional arms, United 
Nations General Assembly, A/63/334, August 26, 2008.
35. Thom Shanker, “Bad Economy Drives Down American Arms Sales,” New 
York Times, September 12, 2010, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/13/
world/13weapons.html.

268 
Notes to Pages 39–47
36. “A World War II Mine Forces Mass Evacuation,” International Herald Tri-
bune, February 9, 2004, available at http://www.iht.com/articles/128605.html.
37. Human Rights Watch, Landmines: A Deadly Legacy (Washington, D.C.: Hu-
man Rights Watch, 1993), 148–56.
38. Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy (Herndon, Va.: 
World Bank, 2003), 31.
39. Paul Watson and Lisa Getter, “Silent Peril Lies in Wait for Afghanistan’s 
People,” Los Angeles Times, December 1, 2001, A1.
40. See “The Convention on Cluster Munitions,” available at http://www.cluster
convention.org.
41. Watson and Getter, “Silent Peril,” A1.
42. John Donnelly, “Cluster Bombs Found to Spare Civilian Areas,” Boston 
Globe, February 23, 2002, A1.
43. Carmen Sorger and Eric Hoskins, “Protecting the Most Vulnerable: War-
Affected Children,” in Human Security and the New Diplomacy: Protecting People, 
Promoting Peace, ed. Rob McRae and Don Humbert (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s 
University Press, 2001), 134.
44. Graça Machel, Impact of Armed Conflict on Children, A/51/306 (New York: 
United Nations, August 26, 1996).
45. Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, Child Soldiers Global Report 
2008, Summary, 3, available at http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/12/11/child
-soldiers-global-report-2008.
46. Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, Child Soldiers Global Report 
2004, 17, 21.
47. See Machel, Impact of Armed Conflict on Children, 11–13; Coalition to Stop 
the Use of Child Soldiers, Child Soldiers Global Report 2004, 20–21.
48. For the text of the Optional Protocol and information on signatories, see the 
United Nations Treaty Collection, Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, May 25, 2000, avail-
able at http://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV
-11-b&chapter=4&lang=en.
49. Dana Priest and Mary Pat Flaherty, “Under Fire, Security Firms Form an Alli-
ance,” Washington Post, April 8, 2004, 1.
50. P. W. Singer, Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry 
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2003), 3–4.
51. Thom Shanker, “Pentagon Sets Bonuses to Retain Members of Special Opera-
tions,” New York Times, February 6, 2005, 4.
CHAPTER THREE: NUCLEAR WEAPONS, 
DETERRENCE, AND ARMS CONTROL
1. Richard Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb (New York: Simon & Schus-
ter, 1986), 711.
2. Quoted in Gwynne Dyer, War (New York: Crown, 1985), 96.

 
Notes to Pages 47–55 
269
 3. Quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 725.
 4. Quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 711.
 5. Quoted in Michael Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Question: The United States and 
Nuclear Weapons, 1946–1976 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), 42.
 6. “The Peace: The Bomb,” Time, August 20, 1945, 19.
 7. Quoted by Fred Kaplan, Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon & Schus-
ter, 1983), 9–10.
 8. Frederick S. Dunn, “The Common Problem,” in The Absolute Weapon: Atomic 
Power and World Order, ed. Bernard Brodie (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1946), 4.
 9. Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret 
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976).
10. Quoted in Kaplan, Wizards of Armageddon, 31.
11. Herman Kahn, On Thermonuclear War (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 1960).
12. Jeffrey Porro, “The Policy War: Brodie vs. Kahn,” Bulletin of the Atomic Sci-
entists (June 1982): 16–20.
13. George Kennan, “On Nuclear War,” New York Review of Books, January 21, 
1982, 8.
14. George Kennan, “The Atomic Bomb and the Choices for American Policy” 
(1950), in The Nuclear Delusion: Soviet-American Relations in the Atomic Age (New 
York: Pantheon, 1982), 3–6.
15. Barack Obama, “Remarks by the President at the United Nations Security Coun-
cil Summit on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Nuclear Disarmament,” United Nations 
Headquarters, New York, New York, September 24, 2009, available at http://www
.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/Remarks-By-The-President-At-the-UN-Security
-Council-Summit-On-Nuclear-Non-Proliferation-And-Nuclear-Disarmament.
16. United States Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review Report, April 
2010, ix, available at http://www.defense.gov/npr/docs/2010%20Nuclear%20Posture
%20Review%20Report.pdf.
17. Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War: The Grand Alliance (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1951), 370.
18. Henry L. Stimson and McGeorge Bundy, On Active Service in Peace and War 
(New York: Harper and Brothers, 1948), 642–46.
19. Stimson, quoted in Godfrey Hodgson, The Colonel: The Life and Wars of 
Henry Stimson 1867–1950 (New York: Knopf, 1990), 357.
20. Stimson, quoted in McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival: Choices about the 
Bomb in the First Fifty Years (New York: Random House, 1988), 136.
21. “Transcript of Press Interview with President at White House,” New York 
Times, March 30, 1983, 14.
22. Andrei Gromyko, Memoirs, trans. Harold Shukman (New York: Doubleday, 
1989), 140–41.
23. George Quester, Deterrence before Hiroshima: The Airpower Background of 
Modern Strategy (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1986).
24. See B. H. Liddell Hart, Deterrence or Defense (New York: Praeger, 1960); Wil-
liam W. Kaufman, The McNamara Strategy (New York: Harper & Row, 1964); Henry 

270 
Notes to Pages 55–67
Kissinger, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy (New York: Harper, 1957); Maxwell 
Taylor, The Uncertain Trumpet (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1960).
25. John F. Kennedy in Allan Nevins, ed., The Strategy of Peace (New York: 
Harper, 1960), 184.
26. Gregg Herken, Counsels of War (New York: Knopf, 1985), 155.
27. National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, D.C.: White 
House, September 2002), available at http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/
nsc/nss/2002.
28. Albert Wohlstetter, “The Delicate Balance of Power,” Foreign Affairs 39 
(January 1961): 211–34.
29. Donald Brennan, ed., Arms Control, Disarmament and National Security (New 
York: George Braziller, 1961); Hedley Bull, The Control of the Arms Race (London: 
Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1961); and Thomas Schelling and Morton Halperin, 
Strategy and Arms Control (New York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1961).
30. Schelling and Halperin, Strategy and Arms Control, 2.
31. Elizabeth Young, A Farewell to Arms Control (Baltimore: Penguin, 1972), 86.
32. Dan Caldwell, The Dynamics of Domestic Politics and Arms Control: The SALT 
II Treaty Ratification Debate (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1991).
33. Peter Baker, “Senate Passes Arms Control Treaty with Russia, 71–26,” New 
York Times, December 22, 2010, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/23/
world/europe/23treaty.html.
34. See Bull, The Control of the Arms Race, 3–29, and Bernard Brodie, “On the 
Objectives of Arms Control,” International Security 1 (Summer 1976): 17–36.
35. John D. Steinbruner, Principles of Global Security (Washington, D.C.: Brook-
ings Institution Press, 2000), 23.
36. Ivo Daalder, “The Future of Arms Control,” Survival 34 (Spring 1992): 51–52.
CHAPTER FOUR: CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
1. Andrew C. Revkin, “A Nation Challenged: Tracing the Spores—Testing Links 
Anthrax in Florida and at NBC,” New York Times, October 18, 2001, 5.
2. Barbara Hatch Rosenberg, “Bioterrorism: Anthrax Attacks Pushed Open an 
Ominous Door,” Los Angeles Times, September 22, 2002, M1.
3. Scott Shane, “F.B.I., Laying Out Evidence, Closes Anthrax Case,” New 
York Times, February 19, 2010, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/20/
us/20anthrax.html.
4. Edward M. Spiers, A History of Chemical and Biological Weapons (London: 
Reaktion, 2010), 28.
5. See Donald C. Richter, Chemical Soldiers: British Gas Warfare in World War 
I (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1992).
6. See Timothy V. McCarthy and Jonathan B. Tucker, “Saddam’s Toxic Arsenal: 
Chemical and Biological Weapons in the Gulf Wars,” in Planning the Unthinkable: 
How New Powers Will Use Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Weapons, ed. Peter R. 
Lavoy, Scott D. Sagan, and James J. Wirtz (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 
2000), 47–78.

 
Notes to Pages 67–82 
271
 7. Richard K. Betts, “The New Threat of Mass Destruction,” Foreign Affairs 77 
(January/February 1998): 26.
 8. U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Proliferation of Weapons 
of Mass Destruction: Assessing the Risks (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing 
Office, 1993).
 9. Thomas L. McNaugher, “Ballistic Missiles and Chemical Weapons: The 
Legacy of the Iran-Iraq War,” International Security 15 (Fall 1990): 5–34.
10. See Genocide in Iraq: The Anfal Campaign against the Kurds, a Middle East 
Watch Report (New York: Human Rights Watch, 1993), available at www.hrw.org/
reports/1993/-iraqanfal/ANFAL.htm.
11. Richard A. Falkenrath, Robert D. Newman, and Bradley A. Thayer, America’s 
Achilles Heel: Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Terrorism and Covert Attack 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1998), 226–27.
12. This account is based primarily on Jessica Stern, The Ultimate Terrorists 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999), 60–68.
13. Laurie Garrett, The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out 
of Balance (New York: Penguin, 1994), 237–40.
14. Elizabeth A. Fenn, Pox Americana: The Great Smallpox Epidemic of 1775–82 
(New York: Hill & Wang, 2001), 88–91.
15. See Ken Alibeck, Biohazard (New York: Random House, 1999).
16. “Chemical and Biological Weapons Status at a Glance,” Arms Control Asso-
ciation, available at http://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/cbwprolif.
17. See Falkenrath, Newman, and Thayer, America’s Achilles Heel, 167–215.
18. Quoted in Falkenrath, Newman, and Thayer, America’s Achilles Heel, 168.
19. Julian Perry Robinson, “Chemical and Biological Weapons,” in Combating 
Weapons of Mass Destruction: The Future of International Nonproliferation Policy, 
ed. Nathan E. Busch and Daniel H. Joyner (Athens, Ga.: University of Georgia Press, 
2009), 78.
20. Quoted in Thomas Graham, Jr., and Damien J. LaVera, Cornerstones of Se-
curity: Arms Control Treaties in the Nuclear Era (Seattle: University of Washington 
Press, 2003), 292.
21. On the taboo against the use of diseases as weapons, see Robinson, “Chemical 
and Biological Weapons,” 77.
CHAPTER FIVE: THE TERRORIST THREAT
1. Quoted by Bob Woodward, Plan of Attack (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2004), 24.
2. Walter Laqueur, “Postmodern Terrorism,” in The New Global Terrorism: Char-
acteristics, Causes, Controls, ed. Charles W. Kegley, Jr. (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: 
Prentice Hall, 2003), 151.
3. Brian Jenkins quoted by Jonathan R. White, Terrorism: An Introduction (Pacific 
Grove, Calif.: Brooks/Cole, 1991), 5.
4. Walter Laqueur, The Age of Terrorism (Boston: Little, Brown, 1987), 72.

272 
Notes to Pages 82–95
 5. Jessica Stern, The Ultimate Terrorists (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 2000), 11.
 6. United States Code, Title 22, Section 2656f(d).
 7. Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 
2009 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of State, August 5, 2010), 292–94.
 8. Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, 294–96.
 9. See Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, The Age of Sacred Terror (New 
York: Random House, 2002).
10. Benjamin and Simon, The Age of Sacred Terror, 143–45.
11. There are many analyses of deterrence; two of the best are Patrick M. Morgan, 
Deterrence Now (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), and Alexander L. 
George and Richard Smoke, Deterrence in American Foreign Policy: Theory and 
Practice (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974).
12. John Lewis Gaddis, “The Long Peace: Elements of Stability in the Postwar 
International System,” International Security 10 (Spring 1986): 99–142.
13. James A. Baker III, with Thomas M. DeFrank, The Politics of Diplomacy: 
Revolution, War and Peace, 1989–1992 (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1995), 359.
14. National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, D.C.: White 
House, September 2002), available at http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/
nsc/nss/2002.
15. Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1966), 70–72.
16. Benjamin and Simon, The Age of Sacred Terror, 439–45.
17. Paul Wilkinson, “Why Modern Terrorism? Differentiating Types and Distin-
guishing Ideological Motivations,” in The New Global Terrorism, 122.
18. On the religious foundations of Al Qaeda, see Benjamin and Simon, The Age 
of Sacred Terror, 41–94.
19. Benjamin and Simon, The Age of Sacred Terror, 220.
20. Paul Watson, Tyler Marshall, and Bob Drogin, “On the Trail of the Real 
Osama bin Laden,” Los Angeles Times, September 15, 2001, A16.
21. Robert A. Pape and James K. Feldman, Cutting the Fuse: The Explosion of Global 
Suicide Terrorism and How to Stop It (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), 26.
22. Pape and Feldman, Cutting the Fuse, 22.
23. See Robert A. Pape, Dying to Win: The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism 
(New York: Random House, 2006), 4, 11–16.
24. Pape and Feldman, Cutting the Fuse, 26–42.
25. Richard N. Haass, War of Necessity, War of Choice: A Memoir of Two Iraq 
Wars (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2009).
26. Schelling, Arms and Influence, 1–34.
27. Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Global-
ization, rev. ed. (New York: Anchor, 2000), 403.
28. Philip Bobbitt, Terror and Consent: The Wars for the Twenty-First Century 
(New York: Anchor, 2009), 67–70.
29. Charles Kupchan, “The Rise of Europe, America’s Changing Internationalism, 
and the End of U.S. Primacy,” in American Hegemony, ed. Demetrios James Caraley 
(New York: American Academy of Political Science, 2004), 123.

 
Notes to Pages 96–103 
273
30. George W. Bush, “West Point Commencement Speech,” in Foreign Affairs, 
America and the World: Debating the New Shape of International Politics, ed. James 
F. Hoge, Jr. (New York: Norton, 2002), 364–71.
31. National Security Strategy of the United States, 2002.
32. John Lewis Gaddis, Surprise, Security, and the American Experience (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004).
33. Robert Jervis, “Understanding the Bush Doctrine,” in American Hegemony, 3.
34. Michael Walzer, Arguing about War (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University 
Press, 2004), 146.
35. For the principal works that outline the major elements of the cooperative 
security approach, see Ashton B. Carter, William J. Perry, and John D. Steinbruner, 
A New Concept of Cooperative Security, Brookings Occasional Paper (Washington, 
D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1992); Janne Nolan, ed., Global Engagement: 
Cooperation and Security in the 21st Century (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Insti-
tution Press, 1994); Ashton B. Carter and William J. Perry, Preventive Defense: A 
New Security Strategy for America (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 
1999); and John D. Steinbruner, Principles of Global Security (Washington, D.C.: 
Brookings Institution Press, 2000).
36. Walzer, Arguing about War, 9.
37. On the creation of the Department of Homeland Security, see Donald F. Kettl, 
System under Stress: Homeland Security and American Politics. Washington, D.C.: 
CQ Press, 2007.
38. Quoted in Peter Katel, “Homeland Security,” CQ Researcher, February 13, 
2009, 133.
CHAPTER SIX: THE PROLIFERATION OF 
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
1. Kenneth M. Pollack, The Threatening Storm: The Case for Invading Iraq (New 
York: Random House, 2002), 76–77.
2. Memo from Ayman al-Zawahiri to Muhammad Atef, April 15, 1999, quoted 
by Alan Cullison, “Inside Al Qaeda’s Hard Drive,” Atlantic Monthly 294 (September 
2004): 62.
3. “Plutonium Con Artists Sentenced in Russian Closed City of Sarov,” NIS Ex-
port Control Observer, no. 11 (Monterey, Calif.: Center for Nonproliferation Studies, 
Monterey Institute of International Studies, November 2003).
4. Julian Borger, “Nuclear Bomb Material Found for Sale on Georgia Black Mar-
ket,” The Guardian (London), November 7, 2010, available at http://www.guardian
.co.uk/world/2010/nov/07/nuclear-material-black-market-georgia/print.
5. Matthew Bunn, Anthony Wier, and John P. Holdren, Controlling Nuclear War-
heads and Materials: A Report Card and Action Plan (Cambridge, Mass.: Nuclear 
Threat Initiative and the Project on Managing the Atom, Harvard University, March 
2003).
6. Richard Betts, “The New Threat of Mass Destruction,” Foreign Affairs 77 
(January/February 1998): 26–41.

274 
Notes to Pages 103–109
 7. John F. Kennedy, quoted by Glenn Seaborg, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the 
Test Ban (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981), 198–99.
 8. For the text of the treaty and a listing of the current signatories, see http://
www.state.gov/www/global/arms/treaties.npt1.html.
 9. Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the 
United States, Authorized Edition [hereafter 9/11 Commission Report] (New York: 
Norton, 2004), 367.
10. Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, The Age of Sacred Terror (New York: 
Random House, 2002), 146.
11. Dafna Linzer, “U.S. Shifts Stance on Nuclear Treaty,” Washington Post, July 
31, 2004, A1; 9/11 Commission Report, 368.
12. David Albright and Holly Higgins, “A Bomb for the Ummah,” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 59 (March/April 2003): 53–54.
13. “Interview with Bin Laden: ‘World’s Most Wanted Terrorist,’” ABC News.com.
14. Matthew Bunn and Anthony Wier, Securing the Bomb: An Agenda for Action 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Nuclear Threat Initiative and the Project on Managing the Atom, 
Harvard University, May 2004), 5.
15. Bunn and Wier, Securing the Bomb, 36.
16. Matthew Bunn, Securing the Bomb 2010: Securing All Nuclear Materials in 
Four Years (Cambridge, Mass.: Nuclear Threat Initiative and the Project on Manag-
ing the Atom, Harvard University, April 2010), 26–27.
17. Jeffrey Fleishman, “Sting Unravels Stunning Mafia Plot,” Philadelphia In-
quirer, January 12, 1999.
18. Bunn, Securing the Bomb 2010, 5.
19. Quoted in Arms Control and Disarmament Agreements: Texts and Histories of 
the Negotiations (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, 
1990), 131.
20. David E. Hoffman, The Dead Hand: The Untold Story of the Cold War Arms 
Race and Its Dangerous Legacy (New York: Doubleday, 2009), 123–42.
21. Rodney J. McElroy, “The Geneva Protocol of 1925,” in The Politics of Arms 
Control Treaty Ratification, ed. Michael Krepon and Dan Caldwell (New York: St. 
Martin’s, 1991), 125–66.
22. U.S. Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, “Statement of John Holum, 
Director, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency,” March 22, 1994.
23. For the text of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the current status of 
participation by states, see http://www.opcw.org/chemical-weapons-convention.
24. James B. Petro and David A. Relman, “Understanding Threats to Scientific 
Openness,” Science 302 (December 12, 2003): 1989.
25. Joseph Cirincione, Deadly Arsenals: Tracking Weapons of Mass Destruction 
(Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2002), 49.
26. Leon V. Sigal, Disarming Strangers: Nuclear Diplomacy with North Korea 
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998).
27. Cirincione, Deadly Arsenals, 246–49.
28. See President George W. Bush’s commencement address at West Point and 
the National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, D.C.: White House, 

 
Notes to Pages 109–113 
275
September 2002), available at http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/nsc/
nss/2002.
29. Bob Woodward, Plan of Attack (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004).
30. Quoted in Michael Ignatieff, Virtual War: Kosovo and Beyond (New York: 
Metropolitan Books, 2000), 211.
31. George W. Bush, “State of the Union Address,” New York Times, January 29, 
2003.
32. “Remarks by the President at the Opening Plenary Session of the Nuclear Se-
curity Summit,” Washington Convention Center, Washington, D.C., April 13, 2010, 
available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-opening
-plenary-session-nuclear-security-summit.
33. Robert S. Norris and William M. Arkin, “NRDC Nuclear Notebook: Global 
Nuclear Stockpiles, 1945–2000,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 56 (March/April 
2000): 79.
34. Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen, “Global Nuclear Weapons Inven-
tories, 1945–2010,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 66 (July/August 2010): 77–83.
35. Graham Allison, Ashton B. Carter, Steven E. Miller, and Philip Zelikow, Co-
operative Denuclearization: From Pledges to Deeds (Cambridge, Mass.: Center for 
Science and International Affairs, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard 
University, 1993).
36. For information on the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program, see Defense 
Threat Reduction Agency and US Stratcom Center for Combating WMD, “Co-
operative Threat Reduction Program,” available at http://www.dtra.mil/Missions/
NunLugar/GlobalCooperationInitiative.aspx. See also Richard G. Lugar, “The Nunn-
Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program,” available at http://lugar.senate.gov/
nunnlugar/index.html.
37. See Fissile Materials Working Group, “Setback for WMD Security,” Bul-
letin of the Atomic Scientists, July 2010, available at http://www.thebulletin.org/web
-edition/columnists/fissile-materials-working-group/setback-wmd-security.
38. Matthew Bunn and Anthony Wier, “Preventing a Nuclear 9/11,” Washington 
Post, September 17, 2004, B7.
39. International Atomic Energy Agency, “International Conventions & Agree-
ments: Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material,” available at 
http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Conventions/cppnm.html.
40. Perkovich, George, Joseph Cirinicione, Rose Gottemoeller, Jon B. Wolfsthal, 
and Jessica T. Mathews. Universal Compliance: A Strategy for Nuclear Security. 
Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2005.
41. Bunn and Wier, Securing the Bomb, 3.
42. Bunn and Wier, Securing the Bomb, 3.
43. Bunn and Wier, Securing the Bomb, 79.
44. Perkovich et al., Universal Compliance, 90.
45. Linzer, “U.S. Shifts Stance on Nuclear Treaty,” A1.
46. Quoted in “Arms Control Experts Say Ban on Production of Key Nuclear 
Materials for Weapons Should Be Universal and Verifiable,” Media Advisory, Arms 
Control Association, July 30, 2004.

276 
Notes to Pages 113–123
47. The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “Remarks by President 
Barack Obama, Hradcany Square, Prague, Czech Republic,” April 5, 2009, avail-
able at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/Remarks-By-President-Barack
-Obama-In-Prague-As-Delivered.
48. See National Security Strategy of the United States, 2002.
CHAPTER SEVEN: INFECTIOUS 
DISEASE AND HEALTH INSECURITY
 1. Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, trans. Rex Warner (New York: 
Penguin, 1980), 155.
 2. William McNeill, Plagues and Peoples (New York: Anchor, 1976), 212–13.
 3. Robert S. Gottfried, The Black Death (New York: Free Press, 1985), 77.
 4. See Andrew T. Price-Smith, The Health of Nations: Infectious Disease, Envi-
ronmental Change, and Their Effects on National Security and Development (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002), 11; see also Hans Zinsser, Rats, Lice, and History 
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1934), 132–75.
 5. McNeill, Plagues and Peoples, 120–21; Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and 
Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (New York: Norton, 1997), 210.
 6. See Zinsser, Rats, Lice and History.
 7. Laurie Garrett, “The Next Pandemic?” Foreign Affairs 84 (July/August 2005): 6.
 8. John M. Barry, The Great Influenza: The Epic Story of the Deadliest Plague 
in History (New York: Viking Press, 2004).
 9. Laurie Garrett, The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out 
of Balance (New York: Penguin, 1994), 157.
10. Jeffrey D. Sachs, The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time 
(New York: Penguin, 2005), 260. See also Donald R. Hopkins, The Greatest Killer: 
Smallpox in History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002).
11. Jordan S. Kassalow, Why Health Is Important to U.S. Foreign Policy (New 
York: Council on Foreign Relations and Milbank Memorial Fund, 2001), 6.
12. “Factsheet: Top Killer Diseases in the Developing World,” AlertNet, Thomp-
son Reuters Foundation, available at http://www.alertnet.org/topkillerdiseases.htm.
13. “Tuberculosis,” Fact Sheet No. 104, March 2010, World Health Organization, 
available at http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs104/en/print.html. See also 
Council on Foreign Relations and Milbank Memorial Fund, Addressing the HIV/AIDS 
Pandemic: A U.S. Global AIDS Strategy for the Long Term (New York: Milbank 
Memorial Fund, 2004), 13.
14. For an excellent primer on malaria and the methods being used in an effort to 
reduce its incidence, see Claire Panosian Dunavan, “Tackling Malaria,” in Infectious 
Disease: A Scientific American Reader (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008), 
137–47.
15. World Health Organization, World Malaria Report 2008, WHO/HTM/
GMP/2008.1, vii-x, available at http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2008/
9789241563697_eng.pdf.

 
Notes to Pages 124–129 
277
16. Garrett, The Coming Plague, 104.
17. P. E. Olson et al., “The Thucydides Syndrome: Ebola Déjà Vu (or Ebola Ree-
mergent?),” Emerging Infectious Diseases 2 (April–June 1996): 155–56.
18. Garrett, The Coming Plague, 53–55.
19. Garrett, “The Next Pandemic?”
20. Donald G. McNeil, Jr., “Flu: Bird Flu Falls off the Radar, but Cases Show 
It’s Still a Threat,” New York Times, November 22, 2010, available at http://www
.nytimes.com/2010/11/23/health/23global.html.
21. Laurie Garrett, “The Return of Infectious Disease,” Foreign Affairs 75, no. 1 
(January/February 1996): 66.
22. Nicolo Barquet and Pere Domingo, “Smallpox: The Triumph over the Most 
Terrible of the Ministers of Death,” Annals of Internal Medicine, October 15, 1997, 
636–38, quoted by Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye, Jr., “Introduction,” in 
Governance in a Globalizing World, ed. Joseph S. Nye, Jr., and John D. Donahue 
(Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2000), 3.
23. Joshua Lederberg, quoted by Michael S. Gottlieb, “The Future of an Epi-
demic,” New York Times, June 5, 2001, 23.
24. Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Global Report: 
UNAIDS Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic, 2010 (Geneva: United Nations, 
2010), 7, 19.
25. UNAIDS, “Global Facts and Figures 09,” available at http://data.unaids.org/
pub/FactSheet/2009/20091124_fs_global_en.pdf.
26. UNAIDS, Global Report: UNAIDS Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic, 
2010, 112.
27. See, for example, the recruitment announcement in the Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Association (JAMA) 292, no. 23 (December 15, 2004): 2930.
28. George W. Bush, “President Speaks to the United Nations General Assembly,” 
September 21, 2004, available at http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/
releases/2004/09/20040921-3.html.
29. Council on Foreign Relations and Milbank Memorial Fund, Addressing the 
HIV/AIDS Pandemic, 22.
30. James Wolfensohn, “Impact of AIDS on Peace and Security in Africa,” 
speech delivered to the UN Security Council Special Session, January 10, 2000, 
quoted by P. W. Singer, “AIDS and International Security,” Survival 44 (Spring 
2002): 145.
31. Singer, “AIDS and International Security,” 145–58.
32. UN Programme on HIV/AIDS, “AIDS and the Military,” May 1998, available 
at http://www.unaids.org.
33. Singer, “AIDS and International Security,” 154–55.
34. International Crisis Group, HIV/AIDS as a Security Issue.
35. International Crisis Group, HIV/AIDS as a Security Issue, 4.
36. International Crisis Group, HIV/AIDS as a Security Issue, 9.
37. British House of Commons, Select Committee on International Development, 
“HIV/AIDS: The Impact on Social and Economic Development,” March 29, 2001; 
cited by International Crisis Group, HIV/AIDS as a Security Issue, 15.

278 
Notes to Pages 129–137
38. George W. Bush, “President Delivers ‘State of the Union,’” January 28, 
2003, available at http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/
2003/01/20030128-19.html.
39. William Jefferson Clinton, State of the Union Address, January 2000; cited by 
Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, The Age of Sacred Terror (New York: Random 
House, 2002), 165.
40. Anthony Lake, 6 Nightmares: Real Threats in a Dangerous World and How 
America Can Meet Them (Boston: Little, Brown, 2000).
41. Edward M. Spiers, A History of Chemical and Biological Weapons (London: 
Reaktion, 2010), 131–32.
42. Lynda Gorov, “FBI Arrest Pair, Alleges Biological Warfare Plot,” Boston 
Globe, February 20, 1998, A1.
43. Richard K. Betts, “The New Threat of Mass Destruction,” Foreign Affairs 77 
(January/February 1998): 36–37.
44. U.S. National Intelligence Council, Mapping the Global Future, Report of the 
2020 Project (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, December 2004), 16.
45. See GAVI Alliance, available at http://www.gavialliance.org.
46. See Sam Howe Verhovek, “Philanthropy Inc.,” Los Angeles Times, January 
27, 2005, A18; “Foundation Fact Sheet,” Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, avail-
able at http://www.gatesfoundation.org/about/Pages/foundation-fact-sheet.aspx.
47. Council on Foreign Relations and Milbank Memorial Fund, Addressing the 
HIV/AIDS Pandemic, 11.
48. World Health Organization, “Spending on Health: A Global Overview,” Fact 
Sheet No. 319, March 2007, available at http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs319/en/index.html.
49. See AVERT, “AIDS, Drug Prices and Generic Drugs,” available at http://
www.avert.org/generic.htm.
50. Council on Foreign Relations, “Focus on Women Policy Symposium,” No-
vember 30, 2004, transcript available at http://www.cfr.org.
51. International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, World Bank Atlas, 
35th ed. (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2003), 26.
52. World Bank Atlas, 18.
53. U.S. National Intelligence Council, Mapping the Global Future, Report of the 
2020 Project (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, December 2004), 39.
54. U.S. National Intelligence Council, Mapping the Global Future, 30.
CHAPTER EIGHT: TRANSNATIONAL 
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS AND TRAFFICKING
1. See “Deadly Waves Explained,” Boston Globe, December 28, 2004, A15.
2. Tim Johnson, “Aftermath of a Disaster: Tsunami Death Toll Escalates in Indo-
nesia,” Houston Chronicle, January 13, 2005, A12.
3. “Now Comes the Hard Part,” South China Morning Post, January 15, 2005, 17.

 
Notes to Pages 137–143 
279
 4. David Pallister, “Tsunami Disaster: Urgent Donations on Target, UN Says,” 
The Guardian (London), January 12, 2005, 15.
 5. Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree (New York: Farrar, Straus 
& Giroux, 1999), 39–58.
 6. See Jorge Garay and Eduardo Salcedo-Albarán, “The Worst Is Yet to Come 
in Mexican Drug War,” Poder 360, October 21, 2010, available at http://www
.poder360.com/article_detail_print.php?id_article=4865.
 7. Terry Terriff, Stuart Croft, Lucy James, and Patrick M. Morgan, Security Stud-
ies Today (Cambridge: Polity, 1999), 150–51.
 8. Roy Godson and Phil Williams, “Strengthening Cooperation against Trans-
sovereign Crime: A New Security Imperative,” in Beyond Sovereignty: Issues for a 
Global Agenda, ed. Maryann K. Cusimano (New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2000), 
111.
 9. Amy O’Neill Richard, International Trafficking in Women to the United 
States: A Contemporary Manifestation of Slavery and Organized Crime, An Intel-
ligence Monograph (Washington, D.C.: Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central 
Intelligence Agency, November 1999).
10. See Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn, Half the Sky: Turning Oppres-
sion into Opportunity for Women Worldwide (New York: Vintage, 2010), 10. A 
decade ago the United Nations put the number at four million persons trafficked each 
year. See Amnesty International, Broken Bodies, Shattered Minds: Torture and Ill-
Treatment of Women (London: Amnesty International Publications, 2001), 16.
11. Trafficking in Persons Report 2010 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
State, June 2010), 7. This figure appears to be drawn from an estimate of the Inter-
national Labor Organization. In this area, as with most matters related to transnational 
crime, statistical measures are necessarily uncertain.
12. Mike Thomson, “Haiti: After the Storm,” BBC Today, December 3, 2009, 
available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_8390000/8390444.stm.
13. Kristof and WuDunn, Half the Sky, 10.
14. Misha Glenny, McMafia: A Journey through the Global Criminal Underworld 
(New York: Vintage, 2009), 104–110, 157–59.
15. Trafficking in Persons Report 2004 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of 
State, June 2004), 14. In comparison, see Patrick Belser, Forced Labor and Human 
Trafficking: Estimating the Profits, International Labor Organization, March 1, 2005, 
17, available at http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=10
16&context=forcedlabor.
16. See Jane Perlez and Evelyn Rusli, “Uncounted Costs: Legions of Orphans and 
Broken Hearts,” New York Times, January 7, 2005, A3; John Carvel, “Agencies Warn 
on Adopting Orphans,” The Guardian (London), January 7, 2005, 6.
17. Gerardo Reyes and Jacqueline Charles, “Exclusive Investigation: Guards Cash 
in on Smuggling Haitian Children,” Miami Herald, October 26, 2010, available at 
http://www.miamiherald.com/2010/10/26/1893693/guards-cash-in-on-smuggling.html.
18. “Trafficking in Women and Children: A Market Perspective,” in Illegal Im-
migration and Commercial Sex: The New Slave Trade, ed. Phil Williams (Portland, 
Ore.: Frank Cass, 1999), 146.

280 
Notes to Pages 143–150
19. Fred Halliday, The World at 2000 (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001), 
104–105.
20. The Globalization of Crime: A Transnational Organized Crime Threat Assess-
ment (Vienna: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2010), 276.
21. Tracy Wilkinson, “Caught behind Enemy Lines,” Los Angeles Times, Novem-
ber 7, 2010, A1.
22. Mary Beth Sheridan, “Military Broadens U.S. Push to Help Mexico Battle 
Drug Cartels,” Washington Post, November 10, 2010, available at http://www.wash
ingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/11/09/AR2010110907060.html.
23. See Steve Coll, Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin 
Laden, from the Soviet Invasion to September 10, 2001 (New York: Penguin, 2004), 485.
24. The Globalization of Crime, 129.
25. “Crisis Facing Colombians Is Called Worst in Hemisphere,” New York Times, 
May 11, 2004, A8.
26. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan Opium Survey, 
2009, 7, available at http://www.unodc.org/documents/afghanistan//Opium_Surveys/
Annual_Surveys/2009_Annual_Opium_Survey_full.pdf.
27. Ylan Q. Mui, “Crackdown Targets Counterfeit Drugs,” Washington Post, 
November 20, 2009, A17.
28. Walt Bogdanich and Jake Hooker, “From China to Panama, a Trail of Poi-
soned Medicine,” New York Times, May 6, 2007, 1.
29. Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, “Government and 
Industry Data on National Arms Exports,” available at http://www.sipri.org/
yearbook/2002/08/08A.
30. Richard F. Grimmett, “Conventional Arms Transfers to Developing Nations, 
2001–2008,” Congressional Research Service, September 4, 2009, 3.
31. Small Arms Survey 2002: Counting the Human Cost (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2002), 156–57.
32. See Thomas Fuller, “Arms Suspect Vows to Win Case in U.S. After Extra-
dition Order,” New York Times, August 20, 2010, available at http://www.nytimes
.com/2010/08/21/world/asia/21thai.html; and Pete Yost and Steve Braun, “U.S., 
Russia Face Off over Alleged Arms Trafficker,” Washington Post, August 23, 2010, 
available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/08/22/
AR2010082202841.html.
33. Grimmett, “Conventional Arms Transfers to Developing Nations, 2001–
2008,” 3.
34. Coll, Ghost Wars, 337.
35. Coll, Ghost Wars, 337–40.
36. Douglas Jehl and David E. Sanger, “U.S. Expands List of Lost Missiles,” New 
York Times, November 6, 2004, 1.
37. To Walk the Earth in Safety: The United States’ Commitment to Humanitar-
ian Mine Action and Conventional Weapons Destruction, 8th ed. (Washington, D.C.: 
United States Department of State, Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, 2009), 7.
38. Greg Krikorian, “LAX Guards against Portable Missile Attacks,” Los Angeles 
Times, December 14, 2004, B1.

 
Notes to Pages 150–159 
281
39. See Edward J. Laurance, Light Weapons and Intrastate Conflict: Early Warn-
ing Factors and Preventive Action, A Report to the Carnegie Commission on Prevent-
ing Deadly Conflict, July 1998, 13–19; and Jeffrey Boutwell and Michael T. Klare, 
eds., Light Weapons and Civil Conflict: Controlling the Tools of Violence (Lanham, 
Md.: Rowman & Littlefield for the Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly 
Conflict, 1999), 1–5.
CHAPTER NINE: INSECURITY IN CYBERSPACE
 1. Richard A. Clarke and Robert K. Knake, Cyber War: The Next Threat to Na-
tional Security and What to Do about It (New York: Ecco, 2010), 17–21.
 2. Clay Wilson, “Cyber Crime,” in Cyberpower and National Security, ed. Frank-
lin D. Kramer, Stuart H. Starr, and Larry K. Wentz (Washington, D.C.: Potomac 
Books for National Defense University Press, 2009), 418–19.
 3. Dan Verton, “Exclusive: Bin Laden Associate Warns of Cyberattacks,” 
Computerworld, November 18, 2002, available at http://www.computerworld.com/
securitytopics/security/story/0,10801,76000,00.htm.
 4. Patrick Marshall, “Cybersecurity,” CQ Researcher, February 26, 2010, 172.
 5. Francis Bacon, Religious Meditations, quoted in The Oxford Dictionary of 
Quotations, 3rd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), 28.
 6. Walter B. Wriston, The Twilight of Sovereignty: How the Information Revolu-
tion Is Transforming Our World (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1992), xii.
 7. Quoted by Roger C. Molander, Andrew S. Biddle, and Peter A. Wilson, Strate-
gic Information Warfare: A New Face of War (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND, 1996), xi.
 8. Sun Tzu, The Art of War (New York: Delacorte, 1983), 77.
 9. John Arquilla, “The Strategic Implications of Information Dominance,” Stra-
tegic Review 22 (Summer 1994): 25.
10. John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, In Athena’s Camp: Preparing for Conflict 
in the Information Age (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND, 1997), 36.
11. F. W. Winterbotham, The Ultra Secret (New York: Dell, 1994); Ronald W. 
Clark, The Man Who Broke Purple (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1977).
12. Alvin Toffler, Powershift: Knowledge, Wealth, and Violence at the Edge of the 
21st Century (New York: Bantam, 1990), 270.
13. George P. Shultz, Turmoil and Triumph: My Years as Secretary of State (New 
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1993), 44.
14. U.S. National Intelligence Council, Mapping the Global Future, Report on the 
2020 Project (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, December 2004), 75.
15. David Sanger, John Markoff, and Thom Shanker, “U.S. Plans Attack and 
Defense in Web Warfare,” New York Times, April 28, 2009, available at http://www
.nytimes.com/2009/04/28/us/28cyber.html.
16. Lieutenant-Colonel Steven Collins, “Mind Games,” NATO Review, Summer 
2003, 13–16, available at http://www.nato.int/docu/review/pdf/i2_en_review2003.pdf.
17. Quoted in Daniel T. Kuehl, “From Cyberspace to Cyberpower: Defining the 
Problem,” in Cyberpower and National Security, 27.

282 
Notes to Pages 159–168
18. Clarke and Knake, Cyber War, 70.
19. Wilson, “Cyber Crime,” 421.
20. Wilson, “Cyber Crime,” 421.
21. See “The NCIS Argentine Computer Intrusion Investigation,” FBI Law En-
forcement Bulletin, October 1998, 9.
22. See Dorothy E. Denning, Information Warfare and Security (Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley, 1999), 269.
23. Gabriel Weimann, “Cyberterrorism: How Real Is the Threat?” Special Report 
119 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Institute of Peace, May 2004), 2.
24. David Ronfeldt, John Arquilla, Graham E. Fuller, and Melissa Fuller, The 
Zapatista Social Netwar in Mexico (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND, 1998).
25. Mark Ward, “A Decade on from the ILOVEYOU Bug,” BBC News, May 4, 
2010, available at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10095957.
26. “More than 100 Arrests, as FBI Uncovers Cyber Crime Ring,” BBC News, Oc-
tober 1, 2010, available at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-11457611.
27. Marshall, “Cybersecurity,” 177–78.
28. Marshall, “Cybersecurity,” 172, 177.
29. U.S. General Accounting Office, Information Security: Computer Attacks at 
Department of Defense Pose Increasing Risks, GAO/AIMD-96-84 (Washington, 
D.C.: Government Printing Office, May 1996), 10.
30. Siobhan Gorman, “Cyber Attacks Test Pentagon, Allies and Foes,” Wall Street 
Journal, September 25, 2010, available at http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240
52748703793804575511961264943300.html.
31. Stuart H. Starr, “Toward a Preliminary Theory of Cyberpower,” in Cyber-
power and National Security, 85.
32. Clarke and Knake, Cyber War, 171–72.
33. Clarke and Knake, Cyber War, 233.
34. Irving Lachow, “Cyber Terrorism: Menace or Myth?” in Cyberpower and 
National Security, 440.
35. George J. Tenet, “Global Realities of Our National Security,” Statement before 
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the Worldwide Threat in 2000, March 
21, 2000.
36. U.S. National Intelligence Council, Mapping the Global Future, 95.
37. “Testimony of Federal Bureau of Investigation Director Louis Freeh,” Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence, May 10, 2001, available at http://fbi.gov/congress/
congress01/freeh051001.htm.
38. Patrick Di Justo, “How Al-Qaida Site Was Hijacked,” Wired, August 10, 2002, 
available at http://www.wired.com/print/culture/lifestyle/news/2002/08/54455.
39. Dan Verton, Black Ice: The Invisible Threat of Cyberterrorism (New York: 
McGraw-Hill Osborne Media, 2003), 109.
40. Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Global-
ization, rev. ed. (New York: Anchor, 2000), 403.
41. Dennis Lormel, “Testimony before the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on 
Technology, Terrorism and Government Information,” July 9, 2002, available at 
http://www.fbi.gov/congress.congress02/idtheft.htm.

 
Notes to Pages 168–180 
283
42. Lachow, “Cyber Terrorism,” 450.
43. See David E. Hoffman, The Dead Hand: The Untold Story of the Cold War 
Arms Race and Its Dangerous Legacy (New York: Doubleday, 2009), 34–35.
44. Robert McMillan, “After Worm, Siemens Says Don’t Change Password,” 
Business Week, July 19, 2010, available at http://www.businessweek.com/idg/2010
-07-19/after-worm-siemens-says-don-t-change-passwords.html.
45. Ali Akbar Dareini, “Iran Loads Fuel Rods into 1st Nuclear Power Plant,” 
Washington Post, October 26, 2010, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/content/article/2010/10/26/AR2010102600530.html.
46. William J. Lynn III, “Defending a New Domain: The Pentagon’s Cyberstrat-
egy,” Foreign Affairs 89 (September/October 2010): 98.
47. Gregory J. Rattray, Strategic Warfare in Cyberspace (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 2001), 8.
48. Lynn, “Defending a New Domain,” 102.
49. See Marshall, “Cybersecurity,” 178–86.
50. Thom Shanker, “Pentagon Will Help Homeland Security Department Fight 
Domestic Cyberattacks,” New York Times, October 20, 2010, available at http://www
.nytimes.com/2010/10/21/us/21cyber.html.
51. Walter Gary Sharp, Sr., Cyberspace and the Use of Force (Washington, D.C.: 
Aegis Research Corporation, 1999), 140.
52. For a prominent example, see Thomas L. Friedman, The World Is Flat: A Brief 
History of the Twenty-First Century (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2005).
53. Chris C. Demchak, “Dilemmas of Arms Control and Cybersecurity,” in Arms 
Control: History, Theory, and Policy, 2 vols., ed. Robert E. Williams, Jr., and Paul R. 
Viotti (Santa Barbara, Calif.: Praeger Security International, forthcoming).
CHAPTER TEN: THE STATE OF THE STATE (I)
1. Steve Mufson, “U.S. Urged to Target Nations That Aid Terrorism; N.Y., Pen-
tagon Attacks Are Called Acts of War,” Washington Post, September 12, 2001, A12.
2. Richard A. Clarke, Against All Enemies: Inside America’s War on Terror (New 
York: Free Press, 2004), 32. Later, according to Clarke (232), Wolfowitz argued that 
Osama bin Laden “could not do all these things like the 1993 attack on New York, not 
without a state sponsor.” President Bush disputed the details but not the substance of 
Clarke’s account of the conversation on September 12. See Final Report of the Na-
tional Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, Authorized Edition 
[hereafter 9/11 Commission Report] (New York: Norton, 2004), 334.
3. Secretary Colin L. Powell, “Remarks to the United Nations Security Coun-
cil,” New York City, February 5, 2003, available at http://www.state.gov/secretary/
rm/2003/17300.htm.
4. Stephen M. Walt, “The Renaissance of Security Studies,” International Studies 
Quarterly 35 (1991): 212.
5. A noteworthy exception to this rule is the Human Security Network, a loose af-
filiation of states organized by Canada and Norway in 1999 in order to focus attention 

284 
Notes to Pages 180–185
on the security (defined as freedom from fear and freedom from want) of individuals. 
Of course, attention to human security supplements rather than displaces the normal 
focus on national security. See the website of the Human Security Network at http://
www.humansecuritynetwork.org.
 6. Common Article 1 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights states that 
“all peoples have the right of self-determination.”
 7. In addition to the fifty-five autonomous states extant in 1900, there were 
seventy-five colonial dependencies and protectorates. Freedom House, Democracy’s 
Century: A Survey of Global Political Change in the 20th Century. There are more 
than 192 states in the world today, but exactly how many more depends on who does 
the counting. Recognizing (and therefore counting) states is a highly political matter 
that requires determining, for instance, whether the Republic of China (Taiwan) is 
autonomous, contrary to the claims of the People’s Republic of China, or whether the 
Holy See is truly a state or a political/religious entity that is sui generis.
 8. See R. J. Rummel, Statistics of Democide: Genocide and Mass Murder since 
1900 (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1997); and Death by Government (New 
Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1994).
 9. Max Weber, “Politics as a Vocation,” in Max Weber: Sociological Writings, 
ed. H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills (Abingdon: Routledge, 1991), 78.
10. A. LeRoy Bennett and James K. Oliver, International Organizations: Prin-
ciples and Issues, 7th ed. (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 2002), 81–82.
11. See “U.S. vs. Global Defense Spending,” Center for Arms Control and Non-
Proliferation, May 21, 2010, available at http://www.armscontrolcenter.org/policy/
securityspending/articles/US_vs_Global.
12. CIA World Factbook, available at http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/fact
book; “Country Comparison: GDP—Per Capita,” available at http://www.cia.gov/
library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2004rank.html.
13. CIA World Factbook, “Tuvalu,” available at http://www.cia.gov/library/publi
cations/the-world-factbook/geos/tv.html.
14. Freedom House, Democracy’s Century.
15. Arch Puddington, “Freedom in the World 2010: Erosion of Freedom In-
tensifies,” Freedom House, available at http://www.freedomhouse.org/template
.cfm?page=130&year=2010.
16. Samuel P. Huntington, The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twenti-
eth Century (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991), 15.
17. There is an extensive literature on democratic peace theory. See, for example, 
Bruce Russett, Grasping the Democratic Peace (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1993); James Lee Ray, Democracy and International Conflict (Columbia: 
University of South Carolina Press, 1995); Spencer R. Weart, Never at War (New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1998); and Charles Lipson, Reliable Partners: 
How Democracies Have Made a Separate Peace (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2003).
18. “Women in National Parliaments,” Inter-Parliamentary Union, September 30, 
2010, available at http://www.ipu.org/wmn-e/world.htm.

 
Notes to Pages 185–190 
285
19. Robin Wright, “Mongolian Women Typify a New Global Activism,” Los An-
geles Times, February 22, 2000, A8.
20. Francis Fukuyama, “Women and the Evolution of World Politics,” Foreign 
Affairs 77 (September/October 1998): 33–36.
21. Robert D. Kaplan, An Empire Wilderness: Travels into America’s Future 
(New York: Random House, 1998), 3–20. Part I of this book is entitled “The Last 
Redoubt of the Nation-State.”
22. Richard N. Rosecrance, The Rise of the Virtual State: Wealth and Power in the 
Coming Century (New York: Basic, 1999).
23. Barry Buzan, People, States and Fear: An Agenda for International Security Stud-
ies in the Post–Cold War Era, 2nd ed. (Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 1991), 90–96.
24. Karl W. Deutsch et al., Political Community and the North Atlantic Area: 
International Organization in the Light of Historical Experience (Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1957). The phrases “zones of peace” and “zones of tur-
moil,” which appear below, are borrowed from Max Singer and Aaron Wildavsky, 
The Real World Order: Zones of Peace, Zones of Turmoil (Chatham, N.J.: Chatham 
House, 1993).
25. John Mueller, Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsolescence of Major War (New 
York: Basic, 1989), 217.
26. See Lotta Harborn and Peter Wallensteen, “Armed Conflicts, 1946–2008,” 
Journal of Peace Research 46 (2009): 577–87.
27. T. David Mason, Sustaining the Peace after Civil War (Carlisle, Penn.: Strate-
gic Studies Institute, December 2007), 1.
28. See Inis L. Claude, Jr., “Myths about the State,” in States and the Global Sys-
tem: Politics, Law and Organization (New York: St. Martin’s, 1988), 13–27.
29. Mohammed Ayoob, “Defining Security: A Subaltern Realist Perspective,” in 
Critical Security Studies: Concepts and Cases, ed. Keith Krause and Michael C. Wil-
liams (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997), 121.
30. Michael Howard, The Lessons of History (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University 
Press, 1991), 4.
31. Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. C. B. Macpherson (New York: Penguin 
Books, 1968), chap. 13.
32. UN High Commissioner for Refugees, UNHCR Global Report 2009, available 
at http://www.unhcr.org/gr09/index.html.
33. See Michael Mandelbaum, “Foreign Policy as Social Work,” Foreign Affairs 
75 (January/February 1996): 16–32.
34. Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York: Avon, 
1993); Robert D. Kaplan, The Coming Anarchy: Shattering the Dreams of the Post–
Cold War (New York: Vintage, 2000).
35. Kaplan, The Coming Anarchy, 7–8.
36. Robert I. Rotberg, “Failed States in a World of Terror,” Foreign Affairs 81 
(July/August 2002): 127–40.
37. Clarke, Against All Enemies, 84–89.
38. Barry Bearak, “Taliban Plead for Mercy to the Miserable in a Land of Noth-
ing,” New York Times, September 13, 2001, A18.

286 
Notes to Pages 191–199
39. Quoted in Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding 
Globalization, rev. and exp. ed. (New York: Anchor, 2000), 403.
40. Thomas E. Ricks, “Shift from Traditional War Seen at Pentagon,” Washington 
Post, September 3, 2004, A1.
41. 9/11 Commission Report, 361–62.
CHAPTER ELEVEN: THE STATE OF THE STATE (II)
 1. Charles King, Ending Civil Wars, Adelphi Paper 308 (London: International 
Institute for Strategic Studies, March 1997), 15.
 2. World Bank, World Bank Atlas (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2003), 46.
 3. International Institute for Strategic Studies, The 2004 Chart of Armed Conflict 
(London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2004).
 4. “Remarks by the Honorable Kofi Annan,” Conference on Preventing Deadly 
Conflict among Nations in the 21st Century, University of California at Los Angeles, 
April 22, 1998.
 5. Paul Collier, The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are Failing and 
What Can Be Done about It (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 17.
 6. Norrin M. Ripsman and T. V. Paul, Globalization and the National Security 
State (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 141. Ripsman and Paul base their 
list on the work of the Peace Research Institute of Oslo.
 7. Mary Kaldor, New & Old Wars, 2nd ed. (Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University 
Press, 2007), 81–82.
 8. Michael E. Brown, ed., The International Dimensions of Internal Conflict 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996), 575.
 9. Robert D. Kaplan, Balkan Ghosts: A Journey through History (New York: 
Vintage, 1994).
10. Jack Snyder, “Nationalism and the Crisis of the Post-Soviet State,” Survival 
35, no. 1 (Spring 1993): 5.
11. Snyder, “Nationalism and the Crisis of the Post-Soviet State,” 5.
12. David A. Lake and Donald Rothchild, Ethnic Fears and Global Engagement: The 
International Spread and Management of Ethnic Conflict, Policy Paper 20 (San Diego: 
Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, University of California, January 1996), 8.
13. Seyom Brown, New Forces, Old Forces and the Future of World Politics, 
Post–Cold War ed. (New York: HarperCollins, 1995), 162.
14. Ted Robert Gurr, Minorities at Risk: A Global View of Ethnopolitical Conflict 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Institute of Peace Press, 1993).
15. David Welch, “Domestic Politics and Ethnic Conflict,” Survival 35, no. 1 
(Spring 1993): 65.
16. Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict, Preventing Deadly Con-
flict: Final Report (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Corporation of New York, 1997), 151.
17. For data on peacekeeping operations, including details of past and present 
missions, personnel, and finances, see the website of the UN Department of Peace-
keeping Operations, available at http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping. See especially 

 
Notes to Pages 201–209 
287
“United Nations Peacekeeping Operations,” Background Notes: October 31, 2010, 
available at http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/bnote.htm.
18. Kenneth Allard, Somalia Operations: Lessons Learned (Washington, D.C.: 
National Defense University Press, 1995), 15.
19. The classic account of what is known as the Battle of the Black Sea on October 
3–4, 1993, is found in Mark Bowden, Black Hawk Down: A Story of Modern War 
(New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1999).
20. Yugoslavia: Death of a Nation, Part I: “The Cracks Appear,” Discovery 
Channel, video. This excellent series contains video footage of Milosevic’s visit to 
Kosovo, a chilling record of conflict in the making.
21. Cathal J. Nolan, The Longman Guide to World Affairs (White Plains, N.Y.: 
Longman, 1995), 110.
22. Stephen Engelberg and Tim Weiner, “Srebrenica: The Days of Slaughter,” 
New York Times, October 29, 1995, 1.
23. For a detailed account of the early stages of the Balkan conflict, see Susan L. 
Woodward, Balkan Tragedy: Chaos and Dissolution after the Cold War (Washing-
ton, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1995).
24. U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, World Factbook 1994, CD-ROM version 
(Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wayzata Technology, 1994), “Rwanda.”
25. UN Security Council, Second Progress Report of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda, S/1994/360 (New York: March 30, 
1994), para. 27.
26. J. Matthew Vaccaro, “The Politics of Genocide: Peacekeeping and Disaster 
Relief in Rwanda,” in U.N. Peacekeeping, American Politics, and the Uncivil Wars 
of the 1990s, ed. William J. Durch (New York: St. Martin’s, 1996), 367.
27. Carnegie Commission, Preventing Deadly Conflict, 3.
28. Scott R. Feil, Preventing Genocide: How the Early Use of Force Might Have 
Succeeded in Rwanda (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Commission on Preventing 
Deadly Conflict, April 1998), 5.
29. Romeo A. Dallaire, Shake Hands with the Devil: The Failure of Humanity in 
Rwanda (New York: Carroll & Graf, 2004).
30. Andrew Kohut and Robert C. Toth, “Arms and the People,” Foreign Affairs 
73, no. 6 (November/December 1994): 47–61.
31. Chester A. Crocker, “The Lessons of Somalia,” Foreign Affairs 74, no. 3 
(May/June 1995): 7.
32. Richard Holbrooke, To End a War (New York: Modern Library, 1998).
33. CIA World Factbook, available at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/geos/su.html.
34. Scott Anderson, “How Did Darfur Happen?” New York Times Magazine, Oc-
tober 17, 2004, 56.
35. U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, 
“Sudan: International Religious Freedom Report 2004,” available at http://www.state
.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2004/35384.htm.
36. Anthony Lake and John Pendergast, “Stopping Sudan’s Slow-Motion Geno-
cide,” Boston Globe, May 20, 2004, A19.

288 
Notes to Pages 209–218
37. Quoted by Eric Reeves, “Darfur: Ongoing Genocide,” Dissent (Fall 2004): 20.
38. See, for example, Kevin M. Cahill, ed., Preventive Diplomacy: Stopping Wars 
before They Start (New York: Center for International Health and Cooperation/Basic 
Books, 1995).
39. Carnegie Commission, Preventing Deadly Conflict, 35.
40. Carnegie Commission, Preventing Deadly Conflict, 37.
CHAPTER TWELVE: ECONOMICS AND SECURITY
 1. National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, D.C.: White 
House, September 2002), available at http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/
nsc/nss/2002.
 2. Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United 
States, Authorized Edition [hereafter 9/11 Commission Report] (New York: Norton, 
2004), 378.
 3. Johan Galtung, “Violence, Peace, and Peace Research,” Journal of Peace 
Research 6 (1969): 167–91.
 4. Neil MacFarquhar, “Hungry Population Falls but Remains Large,” New 
York Times, September 14, 2010, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/15/
world/15food.html.
 5. “Hunger Stats,” World Food Programme, available at http://www.wfp.org/
hunger/stats.
 6. Paul Collier, The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are Failing and 
What Can Be Done about It (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007).
 7. Jacob Viner and Albert O. Hirschman, National Power and the Structure of In-
ternational Trade (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980); Klaus Knorr, Power 
and Wealth (New York: Basic, 1973); Klaus Knorr and Frank Trager, eds., Economic 
Issues and National Security (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1977).
 8. Jacob Viner, “Power versus Plenty as Objectives of Foreign Policy in the Sev-
enteenth and Eighteenth Centuries,” World Politics 1 (1948–49): 59.
 9. Arthur Herman, To Rule the Waves: How the British Navy Shaped the Modern 
World (New York: HarperCollins, 2004), xvii.
10. Quoted by William Grimes, “The Rise of the British Empire from Its Navy’s 
Point of View,” New York Times, December 15, 2004, B11.
11. Richard N. Haass, Economic Sanctions: Too Much of a Bad Thing, Policy 
Brief 34 (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, June 1998), available at 
http://www.brookings.edu/comm/policybriefs/pb34.htm.
12. Haass, Economic Sanctions.
13. Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret 
(New York: Knopf, 1993), 83.
14. See John Mueller and Karl Mueller, “Sanctions of Mass Destruction,” Foreign 
Affairs 78 (1999): 43–53; and Laura Sjoberg, “Sanctions as War,” in Rethinking the 
21st Century: “New” Problems, “Old” Solutions, ed. Amy Eckert and Laura Sjoberg 
(New York: Zed, 2009), 173–92.

 
Notes to Pages 218–227 
289
15. UNICEF, “Iraq Survey Shows ‘Humanitarian Emergency,’” Information 
Newsline, August 12, 1999, available at http://www.unicef.org/newsline/99pr29.htm.
16. Gary Clyde Hufbauer, Jeffrey J. Schott, and Kimberly Ann Elliott, Economic 
Sanctions Reconsidered: History and Current Policy, 2nd ed., 2 vols. (Washington, 
D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 1990).
17. James C. Ngobi, “The United Nations Experience with Sanctions,” in Eco-
nomic Sanctions: Panacea or Peacebuilding in a Post–Cold War World? ed. David 
Cortright and George A. Lopez (Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1995), 17–18.
18. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Foreign Assets Control, OFAC Sanc-
tions Programs, available at http://www.ustreas.gov/offices/enforcement/ofac/programs.
19. Meghan L. O’Sullivan, Shrewd Sanctions: Statecraft and State Sponsors of 
Terrorism (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003), 35–44.
20. David Cortright and George A. Lopez, The Sanctions Decade: Assessing UN 
Strategies in the 1990s (Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 2000).
21. Robert A. Pape, “Why Economic Sanctions Do Not Work,” International Se-
curity 22, no. 2 (Fall 1997): 90–136.
22. National Security Strategy of the United States, 2002.
23. John J. Hamre and Gordon R. Sullivan, “Toward Postconflict Reconstruction,” 
Washington Quarterly 25, no. 4 (Autumn 2002): 85.
24. O’Sullivan, Shrewd Sanctions, 3.
25. Sir Michael Howard, “‘9/11’ and After: A British View,” Naval War College 
Review 55, no. 4 (Autumn 2002): 18.
26. “UN Envoy Considering Taliban Meeting,” CNN.com, October 30, 2001.
27. Lisa D. Cook, “The Next Battleground in the Terror War,” Hoover Digest, no. 
1 (2004): 71.
28. “HIV and AIDS in Africa,” Avert, available at http://www.avert.org/hiv-aids
-africa.htm.
29. 9/11 Commission Report, 367.
30. Joseph S. Nye, Jr., “Terrorism,” in Power in the Global Information Age (New 
York: Routledge, 2004), 212.
31. See Anup Shah, “Foreign Aid for Development Assistance,” Global Is-
sues, April 25, 2010, available at http://www.globalissues.org/article/35/foreign-aid
-development-assistance.
32. Nye, “Terrorism,” 213.
33. Susan Strange, “What Is Economic Power and Who Has It?” International 
Journal 30, no. 2 (Spring 1975): 218.
34. Charles P. Kindleberger, The World in Depression (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1973).
CHAPTER THIRTEEN: THE ENVIRONMENT AND SECURITY
1. Robert D. Kaplan, The Coming Anarchy: Shattering the Dreams of the Post–
Cold War (New York: Random House, 2000), 19–20. The essay, entitled “The Com-
ing Anarchy” first appeared in Atlantic Monthly, February 1994, 44–76.

290 
Notes to Pages 227–231
 2. Global Forest Resources Assessment, 2010: Key Findings, Food and Agri-
cultural Organization, 2010, 4, available at http://foris.fao.org/static/data/fra2010/
KeyFindings-en.pdf.
 3. Neil MacFarquhar, “Trying to Lace Together a Consensus on Biodiversity 
across a Global Landscape,” New York Times, September 29, 2010, available at http://
www.nytimes.com/2010/09/30/world/30nations.html.
 4. Timothy J. Crone and Maya Tolstoy, “Magnitude of the 2010 Gulf of Mexico 
Oil Spill,” Science, October 29, 2010, 634.
 5. “Climate Change Primer: Human Impacts,” Woods Hole Research Cen-
ter, available at http://www.whrc.org/resources/primer_human.html; and “Climate 
Change Primer: Climate Change Fundamentals,” Woods Hole Research Center, 
available at http://www.whrc.org/resources/primer_fundamentals.html.
 6. Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer, with Gary Bryner, Environmental Politics: Do-
mestic and Global Dimensions, 2nd ed. (New York: St. Martin’s, 1998), 12.
 7. Eric Nagourney, “A Turning Point in Smog History,” International Herald 
Tribune, August 14, 2003, 9. See also Peter Brimblecombe, The Big Smoke: A His-
tory of Air Pollution in London since Medieval Times (London: Methuen, 1987).
 8. Among the early arguments for the view that environmental issues raise sig-
nificant national security concerns, see Lester R. Brown, Redefining National Secu-
rity, Worldwatch Paper 14, October 1977 (Washington, D.C.: Worldwatch Institute, 
1977); Jessica Tuchman Mathews, “Redefining Security,” Foreign Affairs 68 (Spring 
1989): 162–77; and Thomas F. Homer-Dixon, “On the Threshold: Environmental 
Changes as Causes of Acute Conflict,” International Security 16 (Fall 1991): 76–116.
 9. Peter H. Gleick, “Water, War and Peace in the Middle East,” Environment 36 
(April 1994): 11. The biblical account is found in Exodus 14.
10. Gleick, “Water, War and Peace in the Middle East,” 11.
11. Roger D. Masters, Fortune Is a River: Leonardo Da Vinci and Niccolo Ma-
chiavelli’s Magnificent Dream to Change the Course of Florentine History (New 
York: Diane, 1998).
12. John Childs, “A Short History of the Military Use of Land in Peacetime,” War 
in History 4 (1997): 87.
13. Robert M. Gum and Maurice H. Weeks, “Smoke and Obscurants,” Military 
Review 76 (September/October 1996): 84–90.
14. Matthew L. Wald, “Amid Ceremony and Ingenuity, Kuwait’s Oil Well Fires Are 
Declared Out,” New York Times, November 7, 1991, A3; Frederick Warner, “The En-
vironmental Consequences of the Gulf War,” Environment 33 (June 1991): 6–9, 25–26.
15. Ian Fisher, “In Congo War’s Wake, a Massacre of Wildlife,” New York Times, 
July 28, 1999, A10.
16. “Air Force Resumes Use of Depleted Uranium,” Boston Globe, April 6, 2002, 
A2.
17. Jonathan Schell, The Fate of the Earth (New York: Knopf, 1982).
18. See Carl Sagan, “Nuclear War and Climatic Catastrophe: Some Policy Impli-
cations,” Foreign Affairs 62 (Winter 1983/84): 257–92; Starley L. Thompson and 
Stephen H. Schneider, “Nuclear Winter Reappraised,” Foreign Affairs 64 (Summer 
1986): 981–1005.

 
Notes to Pages 231–237 
291
19. Jennifer Nyman, “The Dirtiness of the Cold War: Russia’s Nuclear Waste in 
the Arctic,” Environmental Policy and Law 32 (2002): 47–52.
20. Sophia Kishkovsky, “In 15 Hours, Submarine Kursk Is Raised from Sea 
Floor,” New York Times, October 9, 2001, A7.
21. Anahad O’Connor, “Adding Weight to Suspicion, Sonar Is Linked to Whale 
Deaths,” New York Times, October 9, 2003, A23.
22. “Whaling Commission’s Science Panel Says Marine Mammals Threatened by 
Man-Made Noise,” Press Release, Natural Resources Defense Council, available at 
http://www.nrdc.org/media/pressreleases/040720.asp.
23. Thomas F. Homer-Dixon, Environment, Scarcity, and Violence (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999), 12.
24. Peter H. Gleick, “Water and Conflict: Fresh Water Resources and International 
Security,” International Security 18 (Summer 1993): 79–112.
25. Bill McKibben, “A Special Moment in History,” Atlantic Monthly 281 (May 
2001): 56–57.
26. Daniel Yergin tells this story well, and in considerable detail, in The Prize: The 
Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992), 305–27.
27. Michael T. Klare, Blood and Oil: The Dangers and Consequences of America’s 
Growing Dependency on Imported Petroleum (New York: Metropolitan, 2004), 7.
28. “Top World Oil Net Exporters, 2008,” Energy Information Administration, 
Department of Energy [hereafter EIA], available at http://www.eia.doe.gov/country/
index.cfm.
29. “Freedom in the World, 2010: Combined Average Ratings—Independent 
Countries,” Freedom House, available at http://www.freedomhouse.org/template
.cfm?page=546&year=2010.
30. Michael T. Klare, Rising Powers, Shrinking Planet: The New Geopolitics of 
Energy (New York: Metropolitan, 2008), 119.
31. Andrew Jacobs, “China Warns U.S. to Stay Out of Islands Dispute,” New 
York Times, July 26, 2010, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/27/world/
asia/27china.html.
32. “World Oil Transit Chokepoints: Strait of Hormuz,” EIA, January 2008, avail-
able at http://www.eia.doe.gov/cabs/world_oil_transit_chokepoints/Hormuz.html.
33. U.S. Department of Energy, International Energy Outlook 2010: Highlights 
(Washington, D.C.: Energy Information Administration, 2010), 2.
34. Klare, Blood and Oil, 17.
35. U.S. Department of Energy, Annual Energy Outlook 2010 (Washington, D.C.: 
Energy Information Administration, April 2010), 56.
36. Klare, Rising Powers, Shrinking Planet, 69.
37. Mapping the Global Future: Report of the National Intelligence Council’s 
2020 Project (Washington, D.C.: National Intelligence Council, December 2004), 62.
38. Jeremy Rifkin, The Hydrogen Economy (New York: Tarcher/Putnam, 2002), 22.
39. David Goodstein, Out of Gas: The End of the Age of Oil (New York: Norton, 
2004), 17.
40. See James A. Baker III, with Thomas M. DeFrank, The Politics of Diplomacy: 
Revolution, War and Peace, 1989–1992 (New York: Putnam, 1995), 336–37.

292 
Notes to Pages 238–250
41. Jimmy Carter, “State of the Union Address 1980,” January 23, 1980, Jimmy 
Carter Library and Museum, available at http://www.jimmycarterlibrary.org/documents/
speeches/su80jec.phtml.
42. Klare, Blood and Oil, 46–47.
43. “U.S. Policy toward the Iran-Iraq War,” National Security Decision Directive 
114, November 26, 1983, available via the National Security Archive, George Wash-
ington University, http://www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB82/iraq26.pdf.
44. Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United 
States, Authorized Edition [hereafter 9/11 Commission Report] (New York: Norton, 
2004), 55–56.
45. White House, A National Security Strategy for a New Century (Washington, 
D.C.: December 1999), 42.
46. McKibben, “A Special Moment in History,” 64.
47. Dennis Clark Pirages and Theresa Manley DeGeest, Ecological Security: An 
Evolutionary Perspective on Globalization (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 
2004), 70.
48. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Climate Change Indicators in the 
United States, Key Findings, 4–7, available at http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/
indicators/pdfs/CI-summary.pdf.
49. Timothy E. Wirth, C. Boyden Gray, and John D. Podesta, “The Future of En-
ergy Policy,” Foreign Affairs 82 (July/August 2003): 138–39.
50. This discussion of uncertainty in climate prediction is drawn from David G. 
Victor, Climate Change: Debating America’s Policy Options (New York: Council on 
Foreign Relations, 2004), 12–16.
51. Marshall’s work at RAND on counterforce targeting is discussed in Gregg 
Herken, Counsels of War (New York: Knopf, 1985), 79–81. For the origins of OSD/
NA and Marshall’s role in it, see Khurram Husain, “Neocons: The Men behind the 
Curtain,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 59 (November/December 2003): 68–70.
52. Peter Schwartz and Doug Randall, An Abrupt Climate Change Scenario and 
Its Implications for United States National Security (Washington, D.C.: Department 
of Defense, Office of Net Assessment, October 2003).
53. Schwartz and Randall, An Abrupt Climate Change Scenario, 14.
54. Mapping the Global Future, 76.
55. Klare, Blood and Oil, 180–202.
56. Rifkin, The Hydrogen Economy, 125.
57. Schwartz and Randall, An Abrupt Climate Change Scenario, 19.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN: 
SEEKING SECURITY IN AN INSECURE WORLD
1. Max Singer and Aaron Wildavsky, The Real World Order: Zones of Peace, 
Zones of Turmoil (Chatham, N.J.: Chatham House, 1993).
2. Charles Krauthammer, “The Unipolar Moment,” Foreign Affairs 70 (America 
and the World 1990/91): 23–33.

 
Notes to Pages 251–257 
293
 3. Kenneth N. Waltz, Theory of International Politics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley, 1979), 112.
 4. Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United 
States, Authorized Edition [hereafter 9/11 Commission Report] (New York: Norton, 
2004), 361.
 5. William J. Clinton, “Remarks by the President at the U.S. Coast Guard Acad-
emy’s 119th Commencement,” U.S. Coast Guard Academy, New London, Con-
necticut, May 17, 2000, available at http://www.clintonfoundation.org/legacy/051700
-speech-by-president-at-us-coast-guard-academy.htm.
 6. John Muir, My First Summer in the Sierra (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1911), 
110.
 7. James D. Wolfensohn, “Fight Terrorism by Ending Poverty,” New Perspec-
tives Quarterly 19 (Spring 2002): 42.
 8. Dominique Moïsi, The Geopolitics of Emotion: How Cultures of Fear, Humili-
ation, and Hope Are Reshaping the World (New York: Anchor, 2009), 13.
 9. National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington, D.C.: White 
House, September 2002), v, available at http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives
.gov/nsc/nss/2002.
10. For a provocative discussion of the problem that popularized the use of the 
term “blowback,” see Chalmers Johnson, Blowback: The Costs and Consequences of 
American Empire (New York: Metropolitan, 2000).
11. Richard Norton-Taylor, “Thinktank: Invasion Aided al-Qaida,” The Guard-
ian (London), October 20, 2004, available at http://www.guardian.co.uk/Iraq/
Story/0,2763,1331362,00.html.
12. Douglas Frantz et al., “The New Face of Al Qaeda,” Los Angeles Times, Sep-
tember 26, 2004, A1.
13. Central Intelligence Agency, The World Factbook, “Africa: Nigeria,” available 
at http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ni.html.
14. Central Intelligence Agency, The World Factbook, “Country Compari-
son: Oil—Exports,” available at http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world
-factbook/rankorder/2176rank.html; and “Country Comparison: Oil—Proved Re-
serves,” available at http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/
rankorder/2178rank.html.
15. Council on Foreign Relations and Milbank Memorial Fund, Addressing the 
HIV/AIDS Pandemic: A U.S. Global AIDS Strategy for the Long Term (New York: 
Milbank Memorial Fund, 2004), 5.
16. U.S. National Intelligence Council, Mapping the Global Future, Report of the 
2020 Project (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, December 2004), 9.
17. See Martin Coward, “Network-Centric Violence, Critical Infrastructure and 
the Urbanization of Security,” Security Dialogue 40 (2009): 399–400.
18. UNFPA, State of World Population 2007: Unleashing the Potential of Urban 
Growth, June 27, 2007, available at http://www.unfpa.org/swp/swpmain.htm.
19. UN Department of Public Information, “Secretary-General Salutes International 
Workshop on Human Security in Mongolia,” Press Release SG/SM/7382, May 8, 2000, 
available at http://www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2000/20000508.sgsm7382.doc.html.

294 
Notes to Pages 258–260
20. Ken Booth, Strategy and Ethnocentrism (New York: Holmes & Meier, 1979).
21. Joseph S. Nye, Jr., and Sean M. Lynn-Jones, “International Security Studies: A 
Report of a Conference on the State of the Field,” International Security 12 (Spring 
1988): 10–11.
22. For a useful overview of feminist perspectives on security, see J. Ann Tickner, 
Gendering World Politics: Issues and Approaches in the Post–Cold War Era (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2001), 36–64.
23. Although her concern relates more to the nature of the state and to issues of ju-
risprudence, this is essentially the point made by Catharine A. MacKinnon in Toward 
a Feminist Theory of the State (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989).
24. Mohammed Ayoob, “Defining Security: A Subaltern Realist Perspective,” in 
Critical Security Studies: Concepts and Cases, ed. Keith Krause and Michael C. Wil-
liams (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997), 121.

295
Selected Bibliography
Allison, Graham. Nuclear Terrorism: The Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe. New 
York: Times Books, 2004.
Arquilla, John, and David Ronfeldt, eds. In Athena’s Camp: Preparing for Conflict in 
the Information Age. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND, 1997.
Art, Robert J., and Kenneth N. Waltz, eds. The Use of Force: Military Power and 
International Politics. 7th ed. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2009.
Bacevich, Andrew J. The New American Militarism: How Americans Are Seduced by 
War. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Baldwin, David. “The Concept of Security.” Review of International Studies 23, no. 
1 (January 1997): 5–26.
Battersby, Paul, and Joseph M. Siracusa. Globalization and Human Security. Lan-
ham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2009.
Beckman, Peter R., Paul W. Crumlish, Michael N. Dobkowski, and Steven P. Lee. 
The Nuclear Predicament: Nuclear Weapons in the Twenty-first Century. 3rd ed. 
Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 2000.
Beebe, Shannon D., and Mary Kaldor. The Ultimate Weapon Is No Weapon: Human 
Security and the New Rules of War and Peace. New York: PublicAffairs, 2010.
Benjamin, Daniel, and Steven Simon. The Age of Sacred Terror. New York: Random 
House, 2002.
———. The Next Attack: The Failure of the War on Terror and a Strategy for Getting 
It Right. New York: Henry Holt, 2005.
Betts, Richard. “Should Strategic Studies Survive?” World Politics 50, no. 1 (October 
1997): 7–33.
———. “The New Threat of Mass Destruction.” Foreign Affairs 77, no. 1 (January/
February 1998): 26–41.
Biddle, Stephen D. Military Power: Explaining Victory and Defeat in Modern Battle. 
Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 2006.
Booth, Ken. “Security and Emancipation.” Review of International Studies 17 (1991): 
313–26.

296 
Selected Bibliography
———. “Human Wrongs and International Relations.” International Affairs 71 (Janu-
ary 1995): 103–26.
———. “Security and Self: Reflections of a Fallen Realist.” In Critical Security 
Studies: Concepts and Cases, edited by Keith Krause and Michael C. Williams, 
83–119. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997.
Booth, Ken, and Moorhead Wright. American Thinking about War and Peace. New 
York: Barnes & Noble, 1978.
Brodie, Bernard, ed. The Absolute Weapon: Atomic Power and World Order. New 
York: Harcourt Brace, 1946.
———. Strategy in the Missile Age. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1959.
———. War and Politics. New York: Macmillan, 1973.
Brown, Michael E., ed. Ethnic Conflict and International Security. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1993.
———. Grave New World: Security Challenges in the 21st Century. Washington, 
D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2003.
Brown, Michael E., and Richard N. Rosecrance, eds. The Costs of Conflict: Preven-
tion and Cure in the Global Arena. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999.
Brown, Seyom. The Causes and Prevention of War. 2nd ed. New York: St. Martin’s, 
1994.
Bull, Hedley. The Control of the Arms Race. 2nd ed. New York: Praeger, 1965.
———. The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics. New York: Co-
lumbia University Press, 1977.
Busch, Nathan E., and Daniel H. Joyner, eds. Combating Weapons of Mass Destruc-
tion: The Future of International Nonproliferation Policy. Athens: University of 
Georgia Press, 2009.
Buzan, Barry, and Eric Herring. The Arms Dynamic in World Politics. Boulder, Colo.: 
Lynne Rienner, 1998.
Buzan, Barry, and Ole Waever. Regions and Powers: The Structure of International 
Security. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Buzan, Barry, Ole Waever, and Jaap de Wilde. Security: A New Framework for 
Analysis. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 1998.
Caldwell, Dan. American-Soviet Relations: From 1947 to the Nixon-Kissinger Grand 
Design. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1981.
———. The Dynamics of Domestic Politics and Arms Control. Columbia: University 
of South Carolina Press, 1991.
———. Vortex of Conflict: U.S. Policy toward Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq. Palo 
Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2011.
Cameron, Maxwell A., Robert J. Lawson, and Brian W. Tomlin, eds. To Walk without 
Fear: The Global Movement to Ban Landmines. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1999.
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict. Preventing Deadly Conflict: 
Final Report. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly 
Conflict, 1997.
Carter, Ashton B., and William J. Perry. Preventive Defense: A New Security Strategy 
for America. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1999.

 
Selected Bibliography 
297
Cerny, Philip G. “The New Security Dilemma: Divisibility, Defection and Disorder in 
the Global Era.” Review of International Studies 26 (2000): 623–46.
Cha, Victor D. “Globalization and the Study of International Security.” Journal of 
Peace Research 37, no. 3 (2000): 391–403.
Chipman, John. “The Future of Strategic Studies: Beyond Grand Strategy.” Survival 
34, no. 1 (Spring 1992): 109–31.
Chivers, C. J. The Gun. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2010.
Cirincione, Joseph. Bomb Scare: The History and Future of Nuclear Weapons. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2007.
Clarke, Richard A., and Robert K. Knake. Cyber War: The Next Threat to National 
Security and What to Do about It. New York: Ecco, 2010.
Clausewitz, Carl von. On War. Edited and translated by Michael Howard, Peter Paret, 
and Bernard Brodie. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976.
Cohen, Eliot. “A Revolution in Warfare.” Foreign Affairs 75, no. 2 (March/April 
1996): 37–54.
Collier, Paul. Wars, Guns, and Votes: Democracy in Dangerous Places. New York: 
Harper, 2009.
Cote, Owen R., Jr., Sean Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. Miller, eds. New Global Dan-
gers: Changing Dimensions of International Security. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 2004.
Croft, Stuart, and Terry Teriff, eds. Critical Reflections on Security and Change. 
Portland, Ore.: Frank Cass, 2000.
Del Rosso, Steven J., Jr. “The Insecure State: Reflections on ‘The State’ and ‘Secu-
rity’ in a Changing World.” Daedalus 124, no. 2 (Spring 1995): 175–207.
Diamond, Jared. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: 
Norton, 1997. 
———. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: Viking, 2005.
Drell, Sidney, and James E. Goodby. The Gravest Danger: Nuclear Weapons. Stan-
ford, Calif.: Hoover Institution, 2003.
Dyson, Freeman. Weapons and Hope. New York: Harper & Row, 1984.
Eberstadt, Nicholas. “Population Change and National Security.” Foreign Affairs 70, 
no. 3 (Summer 1991): 115–31.
Eckert, Amy, and Laura Sjoberg, eds. Rethinking the 21st Century: “New” Problems, 
“Old” Solutions. New York: Zed, 2009.
Erickson, Johan. Threat Politics: New Perspectives on Security, Risk and Crisis Man-
agement. Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate, 2001.
Evans, Gareth. The Responsibility to Protect: Ending Mass Atrocity Crimes Once and 
for All. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2009.
Fierke, K. M. Critical Approaches to International Security. Cambridge: Polity, 
2007.
Flynn, Stephen. America the Vulnerable: How Our Government Is Failing to Protect 
Us from Terrorism. New York: HarperCollins, 2004.
Freedman, Lawrence. “International Security: Changing Targets.” Foreign Policy 110 
(Spring 1998): 48–64. 
———. Evolution of Nuclear Strategy. 3rd ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.

298 
Selected Bibliography
———. The Revolution in Strategic Affairs. Adelphi Paper 318. London: Oxford 
University Press for the International Institute for Strategic Studies, April 1998.
George, Alexander L., and William Simons. The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy. 2nd 
ed. Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1994.
George, Alexander, and Richard Smoke. Deterrence in American Foreign Policy: 
Theory and Practice. New York: Columbia University Press, 1974.
Gray, Colin. “New Directions for Strategic Studies: How Can Theory Help Practice?” 
Security Studies 1, no. 4 (Summer 1992): 610–35.
———. Villains, Victims and Sheriffs: Strategic Studies and Security for an Inter-War 
Period. Hull: University of Hull Press, 1994.
Gurr, Ted Robert. “Peoples against States: Ethnopolitical Conflict and the Changing 
World System.” International Studies Quarterly 38, no. 3 (September 1994): 347–78.
Haftendorn, Helga. “The Security Puzzle: Theory-Building and Discipline Building 
in International Security.” International Studies Quarterly 35, no. 1 (March 1991): 
2–17.
Harff, Barbara, and Ted Robert Gurr. Ethnic Conflict in World Politics. 2nd ed. Boul-
der, Colo.: Westview, 2004.
Herz, John. “Idealist Internationalism and the Security Dilemma.” World Politics 2, 
no. 2 (1950): 157–80.
———. International Politics in the Atomic Age. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1959.
Jervis, Robert. Perception and Misperception in International Politics. Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1976.
———. “Was the Cold War a Security Dilemma?” Journal of Cold War History 3 
(Winter 2001): 36–60.
Job, Brian, ed. The Insecurity Dilemma. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 1992.
Kaldor, Mary. New & Old Wars. 2nd ed. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 
2007.
Katzenstein, Peter J. The Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in World 
Politics. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.
Khalilzad, Zalmay M., and John P. White, eds. The Changing Role of Information in 
Warfare. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND, 1999.
Klare, Michael T. Resource Wars: The New Landscape of Global Conflict. New 
York: Henry Holt, 2001.
———. Rising Powers, Shrinking Planet: The New Geopolitics of Energy. New York: 
Metropolitan, 2008.
Knorr, Klaus. The Power of Nations: The Political Economy of International Rela-
tions. New York: Basic, 1975.
———, ed. Historical Dimensions of National Security. Lawrence: University Press 
of Kansas, 1976.
Knorr, Klaus, and Frank N. Trager, eds. Economic Issues and National Security. 
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1976.
Koblentz, Gregory D. Biological Warfare and International Security. Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Cornell University Press, 2009.

 
Selected Bibliography 
299
Kolodziej, Edward A. “What Is Security and Security Studies? Lessons from the Cold 
War.” Arms Control 13, no. 1 (April 1992): 1–32.
———. “Renaissance in Security Studies? Caveat Lector!” International Studies 
Quarterly 36, no. 4 (December 1992): 421–38.
———. Security and International Relations. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2005.
Kramer, Franklin D., Stuart H. Starr, and Larry K. Wentz, eds. Cyberpower and Na-
tional Security. Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press and Potomac 
Books, 2009.
Krause, Keith, and Michael Williams. “Broadening the Agenda of Security Studies.” 
Mershon International Studies Review 40 (October 1996).
———, eds. Critical Security Studies: Concepts and Cases. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1997.
Krepinevich, Andrew F. 7 Deadly Scenarios: A Military Futurist Explores War in the 
Twenty-first Century. New York: Bantam, 2010.
Krepon, Michael. Better Safe Than Sorry: The Ironies of Living with the Bomb. Palo 
Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2009.
Lake, Anthony. 6 Nightmares: Real Threats in a Dangerous World and How America 
Can Meet Them. Boston: Little, Brown, 2000.
Lake, David A., and Donald Rothchild, eds. The International Spread of Ethnic 
Conflict: Fear, Diffusion, and Escalation. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 1998.
Larsen, Jeffrey A., and James J. Wirtz, eds. Arms Control and Cooperative Security. 
Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner, 2009.
Levi, Michael. On Nuclear Terrorism. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
2007.
Lott, Anthony D. Creating Security: Realism, Constructivism, and U.S. Security 
Policy. Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate, 2004.
Mandel, Robert. Deadly Transfers and the Global Playground: Transnational Secu-
rity Threats in a Disorderly World. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1999. 
———. Security, Strategy and the Quest for Bloodless War. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne 
Rienner, 2004.
———. Dark Logic: Transnational Criminal Tactics and Global Security. Palo Alto, 
Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2010.
Mandelbaum, Michael. The Fate of Nations: The Search for National Security in 
the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1981.
———. The Nuclear Revolution: International Politics before and after Hiroshima. 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Mathews, Jessica Tuchman. “Redefining Security.” Foreign Affairs 68, no. 2 (Spring 
1989): 162–77.
Moran, Theodore H. “International Economics and Security.” Foreign Affairs 69, no. 
5 (Winter 1990/91): 74–90.
Morgan, Patrick M. Deterrence Now. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.

300 
Selected Bibliography
Mueller, John. Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsolescence of Major War. New York: 
Basic, 1989.
Newhouse, John. War and Peace in the Nuclear Age. New York: Knopf, 1989.
Nye, Joseph S., Jr., and Sean M. Lynn-Jones. “International Security Studies: A 
Report of a Conference on the State of the Field.” International Security 12, no. 4 
(Spring 1988): 5–27.
Pape, Robert A., and James K. Feldman. Cutting the Fuse: The Explosion of Global 
Suicide Terrorism and How to Stop It. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Paris, Roland. “Human Security: Paradigm Shift or Hot Air?” International Security 
26, no. 2 (Fall 2001): 87–102.
Paul, T. V., Richard J. Harknett, and James J. Wirtz, eds. The Absolute Weapon Revis-
ited: Nuclear Arms and the Emerging International Order. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press, 1998.
Price-Smith, Andrew T. The Health of Nations: Infectious Disease, Environmental 
Change, and Their Effects on National Security and Development. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2002.
Ralph, Jason G. Beyond the Security Dilemma: Ending America’s Cold War. Burl-
ington, Vt.: Ashgate, 2001.
Ripsman, Norrin M., and T. V. Paul. Globalization and the National Security State. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Rothschild, Emma. “What Is Security?” Daedalus 124, no. 3 (Summer 1995): 53–98.
Sageman, Marc. Leaderless Jihad: Terror Networks in the 21st Century. Philadel-
phia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.
Schelling, Thomas C. Arms and Influence. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 
1966.
Sheehan, Michael. International Security: An Analytical Survey. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne 
Rienner, 2004.
Singer, J. David. Deterrence, Arms Control and Disarmament: Toward a Synthesis in 
National Security Policy. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1962.
Singer, P. W. Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry. Ithaca, 
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2003.
———. Wired for War: The Robotic Revolution and Conflict in the 21st Century. New 
York: Penguin, 2009.
Sjoberg, Laura, ed. Gender and International Security: Feminist Perspectives. New 
York: Routledge, 2010.
Smoke, Richard. Paths to Peace: Exploring the Feasibility of Sustainable Peace. 
Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1987.
———. National Security and the Nuclear Dilemma: An Introduction to the American 
Experience in the Cold War. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993.
Spiers, Edward M. A History of Chemical and Biological Weapons. London: Reak-
tion, 2010.
Steinbruner, John D. Principles of Global Security. Washington, D.C.: Brookings 
Institution Press, 2000.
Stern, Jessica. The Ultimate Terrorists. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1999.

 
Selected Bibliography 
301
Suhrke, Astri. “Human Security and the Interest of States.” Security Dialogue 30, no. 
3 (September 1999): 265–76.
Terriff, Terry, Stuart Croft, Lucy James, and Patrick M. Morgan. Security Studies 
Today. Cambridge: Polity, 1999.
Toffler, Alvin, and Heidi Toffler. War and Anti-War: Survival at the Dawn of the 21st 
Century. Boston: Little, Brown, 1993.
Tucker, Jonathan. War of Nerves: Chemical Warfare from World War I to Al-Qaeda. 
New York: Anchor, 2007.
Ullman, Richard. “Redefining Security.” International Security 8, no. 1 (Summer 
1983): 129–53.
United States. White House. National Security Strategy of the United States 2002. 
Available at http://www.whitehouse.gov.
———. The 9/11 Commission. Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist 
Attacks upon the United States. New York: Norton, 2004.
———. National Intelligence Council. Global Trends 2025: A Transformed World. 
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 2008.
Walt, Stephen M. “The Renaissance of Security Studies.” International Studies Quar-
terly 35, no. 2 (June 1991): 211–40.
Wriston, Walter B. The Twilight of Sovereignty: How the Information Revolution Is 
Transforming Our World. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1992.


303
Index
Abdulmutallab, Omar Farouk 
(“underwear bomber”), 99
An Abrupt Climate Change Scenario 
and Implications for United States 
Security (Office of Net Assessment), 
242–44
Abu Nidal terrorist organization, 166
Aceh, 142
Acheson, Dean, 53
Afghanistan, 28, 30, 32, 69, 81–83, 92, 
93, 103, 138, 148, 151, 157, 159, 
168, 189, 190, 198, 219, 223, 231, 
238, 254; Al Qaeda in, 33, 87, 90, 
94–95, 96, 103–4, 190, 221; costs of 
war in, 34; drug trafficking in, 138, 
140, 145–47; and mujahidin, 149, 
198, 238, 254; sanctions on, 219; 
Taliban in, 83; U.S. aid to, 223; war 
in, 2, 3, 5, 31, 33, 34, 40, 81, 83, 
156, 186, 187, 212
African Growth and Opportunity Act, 221
African Union, 199, 210
Agee, James, 48
Agent Orange (defoliant), 69
Aidid, Mohammed Farah, 202, 255
AIDS. See HIV/AIDS
AK-47 (Kalashnikov assault rifle), 42, 
150, 206
Albania, 76, 206–7
Algeria, 28, 188
Alibek, Ken, 75
Amherst, Sir Jeffrey, 73
Amin, Idi, 198, 211
Ancheta, Jean, 160
Angola, 39, 44, 219, 235
Annan, Kofi, 195, 209, 210, 257
anthrax, 63, 64, 71, 73, 74, 75, 78, 106, 
130, 133
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty, 
58–59, 95
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, 239
Arctic Ocean, 231–32, 236, 240
Ardita, Julio Cesar, 161
Argentina, 115
Arkin, William, 40
Arms and Influence (Schelling), 27
arms control, 56–61, 247
Arms Trade Treaty, 38
arms trafficking, 138–41, 142, 143, 146, 
147–51, 252
Arquilla, John, 156
The Art of War (Sun Tzu), 33
Arusha Accords, 205
Asahara, Shoko, 70
assassination, 65, 71, 82, 99, 139, 168, 
202, 205; Assassins (Shia sect), 91

304 
Index
assault rifles, 42, 150, 206. See also 
AK-47, M-16, and small arms and 
light weapons
asymmetric warfare, 28–34
Atef, Muhammad, 101
Atoms for Peace program, 113
Atta, Mohamed, 89, 179
Aum Shinrikyo, 69–72, 88, 130
Australia, 214
avian influenza virus (H5N1), 125
Axworthy, Lloyd, 37–38
Ayoob, Mohammed, 259–60
Azerbaijan, 235
Bacon, Francis, 155
Baker, James A., 87, 237
balance-of-power approach to security, 
188, 248
Balkan Ghosts (Kaplan), 197
Ban Ki-moon, 90, 233
Bangladesh, 12, 227, 239–40
Barno, David, 31
Baruch Plan, 53–54
al-Bashir, Omar Hassan, 208
Baylis, John, 6
Bearak, Barry, 190
Belarus, 58, 155, 219
Benjamin, Daniel, 103
Betts, Richard, 67, 130, 133
Bhopal, India, 228
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 
131
Bin Laden, Osama, 67, 87, 91–92, 96, 
168, 191, 238; “religious duty” to 
develop WMD, 104
biological weapons, 72–77, 129–30
Biological Weapons Convention (1972), 
64, 76, 95, 102, 106, 110, 113, 115, 
130
bioterrorism, 63–64, 129–30, 131, 133, 
134
Black Death, 5, 72, 264n14
Black Hawk Down (Bowden), 190
Black Ice: The Invisible Threat of 
Cyberterrorism (Verton), 167
Blackwater, USA, 43. See also 
privatized military firms (PMF)
Blair, Tony, 81, 184
blowback, 254
Bock’s Car (bomber), 48
Bolton, John, 38
Booth, Ken, 258
Bosnia, 32, 197, 200, 202–4, 207, 211
Bosniaks, 202, 220
Botswana, 129
botulinum toxin, 71
Bout, Viktor, 148
Boutros-Ghali, Boutros
Bowden, Mark, 190 
BP (formerly British Petroleum), 227, 
239
Brahimi, Lakhdar, 221
Brazil, 115, 214
Bremer, Paul, 43
Brodie, Bernard, 49, 54
Brown, Gordon, 113
Brown, Michael E., 197
Brunei, 236
bubonic plague, 1, 5, 72, 120, 126
Bulgaria, 112
Bull, Hedley, 264n11
Bundy, McGeorge, 52
“bunker buster” bomb, 60
Burma, 151, 184, 219
Burundi, 195, 205, 206, 221
Bush, George H. W., 58
Bush, George W., 33, 56, 58, 60, 81, 
158, 172, 184, 192; approach to 
dealing with proliferation, 108; 
Bush Doctrine, 96; “global war 
on terrorism” (GWOT), 95; HIV/
AIDS, 128; linking Iraq to 9/11, 179; 
PEPFAR, 129; WMD, 109
Buzan, Barry, 17
Cali drug cartel, 144
Cambodia, 39, 189, 198, 211
Canada, 4, 110, 125, 174, 214, 264–
65n21, 283–84n5
carbon dioxide, 1, 227, 228, 240, 241

 
Index 
305
Carnegie Commission on Preventing 
Deadly Conflict, 198, 210–11
Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, 111, 116
Carter, Jimmy, 237–38
casualties: civilian, 29, 41, 70, 81, 190, 
195, 204; conventional weapons and, 
25–26; PMFs and, 43–44; in war, 
25–26, 30–31, 33, 65, 70, 195
Catholic Relief Services, 138
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 12, 80, 135 
Cetniks, 203
Chabinsky, Steven R., 164
Chapter VI (UN Charter), 206
Chapter VII (UN Charter, 206
Chechnya, 28, 111, 168, 196
chemical weapons, 25, 65, 66, 67, 
68–72, 75, 76, 77, 70, 87, 90, 
101, 105, 106, 107, 110. See also 
weapons of mass destruction
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), 
76, 79, 102, 106, 110, 115
Cheney, Dick, 63
Chernobyl nuclear accident, 15, 228
child soldiers, 41–42, 150
China, People’s Republic of, 40, 76, 
107, 112, 175, 185, 214, 237, 255, 
257; cyber-crime, 155, 166; oil 
consumption by, 237; possible 
superpower, 189, 255; SARS in, 125; 
Western trade and, 216
China, Republic of (Taiwan), 76, 125, 
185, 236, 256
chlorine gas, 65, 68 
Churchill, Winston, 51, 156
CIA (Central Intelligence Agency), 
149, 170, 237. See also National 
Intelligence Council
civil defense, 133
civil war, 2, 3, 39, 43, 150, 187, 190, 
195–98, 208, 209, 220, 235, 252
Civil War (U.S.), 81, 141
Clarke, Richard, 159, 179, 283n2
Clausewitz, Carl von, 29, 49, 248
climate change, 239–43
Clinton, Hillary, 236
Clinton, William Jefferson, 108, 113, 
128, 129–30, 184, 252; criticism of, 
189; William J. Clinton Foundation, 
133
cluster munitions, 40–41, 173
CNN (Cable News Network), 157
coercive diplomacy, 61. See also 
compellence
Cohen, Stephen P., 191
Cold War, 2, 18, 26, 66, 180, 183, 248
Cole, USS, 91
collective security, 11
Collier, Paul, 195, 215
Colombia, 139–40, 144–46, 151, 197
colonialism, 184, 216, 219, 220, 224
Commission on the Prevention of 
Weapons of Mass Destruction 
Proliferation and Terrorism, 78
Committee for Refugees, 210
common security, 11
Commonwealth of the North Marianas, 
181
compellence, 88. See also coercive 
diplomacy
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity 
Initiative (CNCI), 172
comprehensive security, 11
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty 
(CTBT), 59, 95
computers. See cyber-threats
containment, strategy of, 96
Convention on Cluster Munitions 
(CCM), 40
Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material, 111
conventional war, 26–27, 33, 153
Cook, Lisa, 221
cooperative security, 11, 97–98, 257–58, 
273n35
Cooperative Threat Reduction Program, 
110, 275n36
Copenhagen School of security studies, 
8

306 
Index
Correlates of War Project, 187
Cortez, Hernando, 120
Costa Rica, 4
Côte d’Ivoire, 129, 189, 195, 199
Council of Europe Convention on 
Cybercrime, 174
Council on Foreign Relations, 128, 132, 
255
counterproliferation, 107–9
Cressey, Roger, 98–99
Croatia, 203
Croats, 202–4
Crocker, Chester, 206
Cuba, 76, 83, 219; Cuban missile crisis, 
57, 169
cyber-crime, 154–55, 163–64
cyber-terrorism, 166–69
cyber-threats, 155, 159–62, 175
cyberwar, 169–72
Cyrus, 230
Czechoslovakia, 198
Daalder, Ivo, 61
al-Dahab, Suwar, 208
Dallaire, Romeo, 205–6
dams, 233, 244
Danforth, John, 209–10
Darfur, Sudan, 208–10
Daschle, Tom, 63
The Day After (film), 4
Dayton Accord (1995), 204
defense expenditures: United States, 
34–35; worldwide, 34
defense policy. See national security
deforestation, 227, 232, 240, 252
Delta Force, 202
democratic peace theory, 184, 284n17
Democratic Republic of Congo, 3, 25, 
37, 41, 105, 195, 211, 221, 265n1
Denmark, 223
Denning, Dorothy, 161
depleted uranium weapons, 231
desertification, 232
deterrence, 54–56, 61, 77, 87
Deutch, John, 77
Deutsch, Karl, 186
developed world, 2, 4, 6, 26, 124, 124, 
165, 187, 214, 222, 250
developing world, 2, 26, 36, 122, 127, 
131–33, 148, 187–88, 214–15, 232, 
256, 260
Dirksen, Everett, 34–35, 267n23
dirty bombs, 105
distributed denial-of-service (DDOS) 
cyber-attack, 153–54, 159–60
Djibouti, 187, 195, 255
Doctors without Borders (Médecins 
Sans Frontières), 133, 137, 251
Dominican Republic, 142
drone aircraft. See unmanned aerial 
vehicle (UAV)
Drug Enforcement Agency, 140, 144, 148 
drug trafficking, 143–47
Dugway Proving Ground, Utah, 64
East Africa, 255
East African embassy bombings (1998), 
85, 90, 91, 255
East Timor, 188, 199
Ebola virus, 75, 124–25
economic sanctions, 217–19
economic security, 8, 142, 143, 213–15, 
215–17, 221–23
education, 35, 36, 78, 127, 133–34, 151, 
188, 253, 257
Egypt, 76, 107, 223, 227, 230
Einstein, Albert, 49
Eisenhower, Dwight David, 35, 113
Elliott, Karen Ann, 219
e-mail, 153, 157, 159, 160–61, 163, 
165, 166
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 249
encryption, 166, 168
Encyclopedia of Jihad (training 
manual), 168
energy, alternative sources of, 244
England, Gordon, 159
Enola Gay (B-29 bomber), 47
environmental threats, 8, 11, 14, 143, 
192, 227–33, 239–44, 252

 
Index 
307
Eritrea, 36, 187, 195, 209, 219, 255
Escobar, Pablo, 139
Estonia, 154, 155
Ethiopia, 70, 106, 195, 198, 200–201, 
209, 219, 255
ethnic conflict, 20, 197, 198, 200, 211, 
252, 253, 259
ethnocentrism, 4–5, 258–59
European Union (EU), 12, 76, 184
Euzkadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), 89
Evans, Gareth, 11
Executive Outcomes, 43
explosive remnants of war (ERW), 37, 
39–41
extinction of species, 227, 230
failed states, 184, 219–21, 257
Fail-Safe (film), 3
Fallujah, 43
FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of 
Colombia), 146
“Farewell” (Soviet KGB agent), 169–70
fear, 1, 2, 3, 42, 61, 67, 77, 81, 88, 141, 
167, 168, 186
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
161, 164
Federation of American Scientists, 64, 
80, 116
Feldman, James K., 92
feminization of politics, 184–85
Ferdinand, Archduke Franz, 65, 202–3
Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT), 
113
Fort Detrick, Maryland, 64
France, 39, 95, 112
Freedom House, 184, 235, 284n7
free trade, 217, 223, 224
French and Indian Wars, 73
French Resistance, 29
Friedman, Thomas, 131, 138, 191
Froissart, Jean, 120
Fukuyama, Francis, 185
Gaddis, John Lewis, 96
Galtung, Johan, 214
Garang de Mabior, John, 208
Garrett, Laurie, 126
Gates, Bill, 131
Gates, Robert, 35, 196
GAVI Alliance (formerly Global 
Alliance for Vaccines and 
Immunizations), 131
Gayoom, Maumoon Abdul, 12, 14
Geneva Protocol (1925), 78–79
genocide, 26, 189, 200, 203, 204, 206, 
210, 211, 212, 230, 236
Georgia, 112, 153–54
Germany, 29, 51, 65, 86, 95, 256
Global Partnership against the Spread 
of Weapons and Materials of Mass 
Destruction, 110
global security. See international 
security
Global War on Terror (GWOT), 93, 95
global warming, 232, 239–40
globalization, 6, 75, 82, 89, 90, 98, 126, 
134, 137, 138, 142, 216, 224, 227, 
248, 251–52
Godson, Roy, 139–40
Golden Triangle, 140
Gone with the Wind (film), 122
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 58
Gordon, Michael, 144, 178, 180, 190
Gore, Al, 127
Greece, 12
Gromyko, Andrei, 54
Group of Eight (G-8), 110
Group of 77. See UN Conference on 
Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
Guinea, 189, 195
Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, 
230
Guyana, 129
Guzman, Onelde, 163–64
Haass, Richard, 218
Habyarimana, Juvenal, 205
hackers, 153–55, 161, 162, 163, 165, 
166, 173, 175
hacktivists, 153, 154, 162

308 
Index
Hague Conference (1907), 106
Hague Convention (1899), 78
Haiti, 141, 142, 189, 219
Halabja, Iraq, 70
Halperin, Morton, 57
Hamas, 166
Hannibal, 156
Herman, Arthur, 216
Herodotus, 230
heroin, 138, 144, 146, 151
Hezbollah, 86, 92, 149, 166
highly enriched uranium (HEU), 105, 112
Hippel, Frank von, 113
Hirohito, Emperor (Japan), 48
Hiroshima, Japan, 25, 47–48, 51
Hirschman, Albert O., 215
History of the Peloponnesian War 
(Thucydides), 119, 124–25
Hitler, Adolf, 182
HIV/AIDS, 2, 8, 122–23, 126–29, 133, 
146, 221, 260
Hobbes, Thomas, 181, 183, 188, 190
Holbrooke, Richard, 207
Holum, John, 106
homeland security, 98–99, 249–50
Homeland Security, Department of, 98, 
172
Homer-Dixon, Thomas, 232
Hong Kong, 125
“hotline” (U.S.-USSR direct 
communications link), 57
Howard, Sir Michael, 188, 220
Hubbert peak, 237, 243
Hufbauer, Gary, 219
Human Development Report (UNDP), 
225
human rights, 4–5, 18, 140
human security, 11, 36–37, 257
Human Security Network, 38, 283n5
human trafficking, 139, 140, 141–43, 
279nn10–11
Hungary, 233
Huntington, Samuel, 184
Hussein, Saddam, 157
Hutu, 205, 220
improvised explosive device (IED), 31, 
33, 83, 90
India, 40, 103, 107, 112, 170, 185, 214, 
216, 237, 249, 255
Indonesia, 137, 170, 249
industrialization, 141, 217, 220, 234
infectious diseases, 64, 105, 119–29, 
131–35, 196, 214, 253, 254, 260 
influenza, 65, 75, 121, 124, , 125, 126
information, 29, 30, 33, 44, 82, 89, 90, 
94, 95, 107, 138, 155–58, 159–62, 
163, 165–66, 167, 168, 169–72, 196
intentions (as component of threats), 
13–14, 20, 67–68, 80, 188
intercontinental ballistic missiles 
(ICBMs), 56, 57, 59, 247
Intergovernmental Authority on 
Development (IGAD), 209
International Atomic Development 
Authority, 53
International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA), 105, 109, 183
International Campaign to Ban 
Landmines (ICBL), 40
International Committee of the Red 
Cross (ICRC), 138
International Criminal Court (ICC), 95
International Crisis Group, 129
The International Dimension of Internal 
Conflict (Brown), 197
International Institute for Strategic 
Studies (IISS), 195, 254
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
222, 225
international security, 6, 7, 12, 16, 17, 
19, 20, 129, 172, 180, 248–52
International Security (journal), 247
International Whaling Commission, 232
Internet, 33, 153–54, 159, 161
Iran, 60, 76, 86, 104, 107; oil exports, 
235; sanctions on, 219; Stuxnet 
computer virus, 170
Iran-Iraq War (1980–1988), 67, 70, 106
Iraq, 28, 30–31, 33, 81–83, 107, 186, 
231, 236; cost of war, 34; ethnic 

 
Index 
309
divisions, 220; linkage to 9/11, 179; 
Persian Gulf War (1990–1991), 30, 
67, 77, 108, 157, 189, 228, 230, 254; 
U.S. aid, 223
Irish Republican Army (IRA), 81, 89, 
149
iRobot, 31
Islamic law, 208
Israel, 4, 40, 76, 103, 107; fissile 
material, 112; Stuxnet computer 
virus, 170; U.S. aid, 223
Italy, 82, 106, 218
Ivins, Bruce, 64
Ivory Coast. See Côte d’Ivoire
Izetbegovic, Alija, 204
janjaweed (Arab militia in Sudan), 209
Japan, 28, 47–48, 106, 174, 217, 218; 
Aum Shinrikyo attacks in, 69–72, 85; 
dependence on oil imports, 234–35
Jenkins, Brian, 82
Jenner, Edward, 122
Jervis, Robert, 96
jihad (holy war), 89, 93, 254
Jordan, 4
Justice Africa, 210
Justice Equality Movement, 209
just-war theory, 97
Kahn, Herman, 49, 61
Kaldor, Mary, 196
Kant, Immanuel, 184
Kaplan, Robert, 17–18, 185, 189–90, 
227
Karadzic, Radovan, 203
Kashmir, 103
Kaufmann, William, 55
Kayibanda, Gregoire, 205
Kazakhstan, 58, 112, 115, 235
Kean, Thomas, 102
Kennan, George, 50–51, 96
Kennedy, John Fitzgerald, 36, 55, 57, 
103
Kennedy, Paul, 215
Kenya, 209, 255
KGB (Komitet Gosudarstvennoy 
Bezopasnosti; trans. Committee on 
State Security), 17, 169, 180
Khan, Abdul Qadeer, 104, 249
Khan, Genghis, 156
Khrushchev, Nikita, 57
Kindleberger, Charles, 223
Kissinger, Henry A., 55
Klare, Michael, 243–44
Knorr, Klaus, 215
Korea, Democratic Republic of (North 
Korea), 59, 67, 76, 104, 107, 108, 
184, 257; production of fissile 
material, 112; sanctions on, 219
Korea, Republic of (South Korea), 40, 76
Korean War, 26, 60, 186
Kosovo, 30, 41, 182, 203, 206–8, 231
Kursk (Russian submarine), 232
Kuwait, 157, 235, 236
Kyoto Protocol, 95
Lake, Anthony, 130
Lake, David, 197
land mines, 38–40, 148
Laqueur, Walter, 82
Lashkar-e-Taiba, 86, 91
League of Nations, 78, 183, 218
least developed countries, 142, 215
Lebanon, 92, 146, 156, 233
Lederberg, Joshua, 126
levels-of-analysis in international 
relations, 4, 6–7
Lewis, Robert, 47
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam 
(LTTE). See Tamil Tigers
Liberia, 189, 190, 195, 199, 219
Libya, 76, 104, 107, 112, 115, 189, 195; 
sanctions on, 219; terrorist attack on 
Pan Am plane (1988), 86
Liddell Hart, Sir Basil H., 55
Lilienthal, David, 53
Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT), 57
logic bomb, 162, 169–70
London, 90, 154, 228. See also London 
terrorist bombing (2005)

310 
Index
London terrorist bombing (2005), 91, 
249
“long peace” of the Cold War, 87
Lord of War (film), 148
Lord’s Resistance Army (Uganda), 41, 
196
Lormel, Dennis, 168
Los Alamos National Laboratory, 161
Los Angeles International Airport, 91, 
150
“Love Bug” computer virus, 163
Lugar, Richard, 110
Luxembourg, 223
Lynn, William J., III, 171
M-16 assault rifle, 150
MacArthur, Douglas, 254
Machel, Graça, 41
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 230
madrassah (Islamic school), 103
Madrid terrorist bombing (2004), 5, 91
Mahmood, Sultan Bashiruddin, 104
Majeed, Chaudari Abdul, 104
malaria, 123–24
Malawi, 128
Maldives, 12
Mao Zedong, 182
Marburg hemorrhagic fever, 125
Marshall, Andrew, 242, 292n51
Marshall Islands, 181
Marx, Karl, 217
Massive Ordnance Penetrator (MOP). 
See “bunker buster” bomb
Maurice, Sir John Frederick, 36
McKinley, William, 82
McNamara, Robert S., 56
McNeill, William, 119
McVeigh, Timothy, 88
Médecins Sans Frontières. See Doctors 
without Borders
Medellín drug cartel, 139, 144
“megatons into megawatts” program, 
112
mercantilism, 216
Mérida Initiative, 145
Mexico, 44, 139, 145, 151, 185, 197; 
Chiapas, 162; economic bailout, 222
Micronesia, Federated States of, 12, 
181
Milbank Memorial Fund, 128, 132, 
255
Mill, John Stuart, 216, 223
Millennium Challenge Account, 221, 
253
Millennium Development Goals, 253
Milosevic, Slobodan, 203–4, 207, 211
Mladic, Ratko, 203
Mohammed, Khalid Sheikh, 89
Moïsi, Dominique, 253
Moonlight Maze cyber-attack, 165
Moscow Treaty. See Strategic Offensive 
Reductions Treaty (SORT)
Moses, 229
Mueller, John, 187
Muhammad, Omar Bakri, 154
Muir, John, 252
mujahidin (“warrior of god”), 149, 198, 
238, 254
Mumbai terrorist attacks (2008), 86–87, 
91
Musharraf, Pervez, 104
mustard gas, 65, 68, 70
Nagasaki, Japan, 25, 48, 51
Namibia, 129
Napoleon, 120
narcoterrorism, 145
nation-building, 201–2
National Academy of Sciences, 162
National Counterterrorism Center, 83
National Intelligence Council (NIC), 75, 
128, 130, 133, 134, 157, 167, 243, 
255–56
national security, 36–37, 256–57
National Security Act (1947), 180
National Security Agency (NSA), 180
National Security Council (NSC), 98, 
103, 179, 180, 242
National Security Decision Directive 
114, 238

 
Index 
311
National Security Strategy (reports), 56, 
88, 96, 114, 213, 219, 238–39, 253
National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace 
(report), 172
native Americans, 73
NATO. See North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization
natural gas, 170, 244
natural resources, 186, 243
Naval Command, Control and Ocean 
Surveillance Center, 161
Naval Research Laboratory, 161
Navy SEALs, 44
Nazi-Soviet Pact, 51
NBC News, 63
Netherlands, 223, 230
New START Treaty, 59
New Zealand, 184, 214
Niger, 195
Nigeria, 220, 235, 255
Nimeiri, Muhammad, 208
9/11 Commission, 103, 192, 213, 221, 
251–52
9/11 terrorist attacks, 1, 5, 19, 81, 114, 
179
Nixon, Richard M., 105–6
nonproliferation, 103–5
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), 57, 59, 
102, 110, 115; Review Conference, 
113
nonstate actors, 1, 9, 26, 29, 33, 37, 56, 
71, 76, 80, 82, 88, 96, 102, 107, 111, 
131, 149, 150, 160, 165, 180, 215, 
219, 248–50, 251, 253, 258, 259, 260
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 15, 30, 41, 81, 182, 248; 
cyber-attacks on, 165; and Kosovo, 
211; peacekeeping operations, 200
North Korea. See Korea, Democratic 
Republic of (North Korea)
Northern Alliance (Afghanistan), 95–96, 
146
Northern Marianas, 181
Norway, 223, 235
NPT. See Non-Proliferation Treaty
nuclear, biological, and chemical (NBC) 
weapons. See weapons of mass 
destruction
nuclear energy, 53, 103, 244
nuclear pacifism, 50–51
Nuclear Security Summit (2010), 110, 
114–15
nuclear war-fighting, 60
nuclear weapons, 2, 26, 34, 47–61, 
66, 67, 75, 76, 97, 101–15, 130, 
219, 231, 242, 247, 160. See also 
weapons of mass destruction
nuclear weapons stockpiles, 1945–2010, 
50
Nunn, Sam, 110
Nunn-Lugar program. See Cooperative 
Threat Reduction Program
Nye, Joseph, 221, 223
Obama, Barack, 32, 51, 59, 104, 107, 
110, 114, 222; on cyberspace, 172; 
reversal of Bush administration’s 
policies, 113, 258; on trafficking, 
141
Office of National Drug Control Policy, 
140, 144, 152
Office of Net Assessment (OSD/NA), 
242
oil and security, 233–39
Omar, Mullah Mohammed, 96
On the Beach (film), 3
Operation Enduring Freedom (2001), 30
Operation Iraqi Freedom (2003), 30
Operation Provide Relief (Somalia), 201
Operation Restore Hope (Somalia), 201
opium, 87, 146, 147, 151, 216
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 56
Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), 207
Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC), 219
Osiraq, Iraq, nuclear reactor, 108
O’Sullivan, Meghan, 219, 220
Ottawa Convention (Mine Ban Treaty), 
38, 40

312 
Index
Ottoman Empire, 183, 202, 206
overfishing, 232
ozone, depletion of, 232
Pakistan, 31–32, 103, 107, 112, 113, 
115, 188
Palau, Republic of, 181
Pape, Robert A., 92
Peace of Westphalia (1648), 120, 181
peacekeeping operations, 34, 198–210, 
286n17
Pearl Harbor, 57, 81
penicillin, 122
People’s Liberation Army (Sudan), 208
PEPFAR. See President’s Emergency 
Plan for AIDS Relief
Perle, Richard, 179
Perry, Commodore Matthew, 216
Perry, William, 155
Persian Gulf War (1991), 30, 41, 67, 87, 
92, 101, 109, 115, 157, 189, 228, 230
phosgene, 65, 68
Physicians for Human Rights, 210
plague, 1, 5, 72, 73, 74, 105, 119, 120, 
124–25, 126, 130
plutonium, 105, 112
PMFs. See privatized military firms
Pol Pot, 198, 211
Poland, 29, 51
Powell, Colin, 59, 128, 179
precision-guided munitions (PGM), 30
Predator, 32, 159. See also unmanned 
aerial vehicle (UAV)
preemption, 96, 108, 114
President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief (PEPFAR), 129, 133
preventive war, 96
privatized military firms (PMFs), 42–44, 
250
prostitution, 2, 141, 142, 251
psychological warfare, 157, 167
Al Qaeda, 33, 77, 83, 87–88, 90, 102, 
235, 254; bases in Afghanistan, 157; 
Chechnya, 111; linkage to 9/11, 179; 
surface-to-air missiles, 149; use of 
the Internet, 154, 166–67
Q fever, 71, 73, 74
Raleigh, Sir Walter, 216
Ralito Agreement, 139
Rangers (U.S. Army), 202
Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force, 
238
Rasmussen, Anders Fogh, 165
Rattray, Gregory, 171
Reagan, Ronald, 51, 52, 53, 144, 169, 
238; nuclear war-fighting strategy, 
60; on proliferation, 97; Strategic 
Defense Initiative, 158
realism, 13
Reaper (MQ-9), 32. See also unmanned 
aerial vehicle (UAV)
Red Cross, 138
Red Sea, 229
refugees, 145, 146, 188, 190, 196, 201, 
205, 206, 207, 209, 232, 240, 252
Reid, Richard (“shoe bomber”), 94–95
“responsibility to protect” (R2P), 200
revolution, 5, 82, 83, 140, 146, 182, 
224, 238, 259
revolution in military affairs (RMA), 
28–30, 34
Rhodesia, 218
Ricardo, David, 216, 223
rickettsia, 73, 74
Romania, 112
Ronfeldt, David, 156
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 51, 79, 156
Rosecrance, Richard, 185
Rosenberg, Barbara, 64
Rothchild, Donald, 197
RUF (Revolutionary United Front), 150 
Rummel, R. J., 183
Russia, 39, 40, 58, 76, 95, 107, 174, 189, 
214, 217, 254; conflict with Georgia, 
153–54; fissile material, 112; “loose 
nukes,” 110; oil exports, 234–35
Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905), 28, 
217

 
Index 
313
Rwanda, 26, 189, 195, 204–6, 211, 220, 
230; Arusha Accords, 205; sanctions 
on, 219
SALW. See small arms and light 
weapons
sanctions, economic, 86, 104, 105, 115, 
200, 215, 217–19
sarin, 68, 69, 70–72, 88
SARS. See severe acute respiratory 
syndrome
Saudi Arabia, 185, 198, 235
Scales, Robert, 30
Schell, Jonathan, 231
Schelling, Thomas C., 26, 57, 88, 94
Schlesinger, James, 242
Schott, Jeffrey, 219
secularization, 217, 220
securitization, 7–9, 140–41, 143, 144, 
158, 228, 229, 238, 265n14
security: broadening of, 10–16; 
definition, 7; extending of, 10; and 
insecurity, 1; paradox of, 5
security dilemma, 13
self-determination, 180
Serbia, 30, 202–4, 206–8, 211
Serbs, 202–4, 206–8, 220
severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS), 125
sex slavery, 41, 142
Shari’a. See Islamic law.
Shining Path (Peru), 99
Shultz, George, 156
Siemens, 170
Sierra Leone, 43, 150, 151, 190, 195, 
219
Simon, Steven, 103
Singapore, 125, 185
Singer, P. W., 128
Sirleaf, Ellen Johnson, 190
6 Nightmares (Lake), 130
Siyad Barre, Mohammed, 200–201
slavery, 140, 141–42, 151. See also sex 
slavery
Slovakia, 233
Slovenia, 203
small arms and light weapons (SALW), 
37–39, 95, 148
smallpox, 73, 120, 122, 126, 251, 254
“smart bombs.” See precision-guided 
munitions (PGM)
Smith, Adam, 216–27, 223
smoke, 68, 228, 230
Solar Sunrise cyber-attack, 165
Somalia, 189, 195, 200–202, 219, 255
sonar, 232
South Africa, 115, 174, 218
South Asia, 83, 141, 142, 144, 196
South Korea. See Republic of Korea
Southern Command (SOUTHCOM), 
140, 144, 192
sovereignty, 9–10, 17, 96, 98, 120, 139, 
143, 174, 175, 189, 196–97, 237, 257
Soviet Union, 15, 17, 51, 53–54, 183, 
198, 238
Soyinka, Wole, 186
Spain, 5, 82, 91, 168, 249
spam (computers), 160
Spanish influenza (1918), 65, 121, 126, 
250
Special Operations Forces, 44, 95–96, 
157
species extinction. See extinction of 
species
Spratly Islands, 236
Srebrenica, 204
Sri Lanka, 37
Stalin, Josef, 51
Stark, USS, 238
START. See Strategic Arms Reduction 
Treaty
“star wars.” See Strategic Defense 
Initiative (SDI)
steganography, 168
Steinbruner, John, 61
Stern, Jessica, 82
Stevens, Robert, 63
Stimson, Henry L., 52
Stinger surface-to-air missile, 149, 254
Strait of Hormuz, 236, 238

314 
Index
Strange, Susan, 223
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks 
(SALT), 58
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty 
(START), 58
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), 52, 
158
Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty 
(SORT), 58–59, 113
Strategy and Ethnocentrism (Booth), 
258
Stuxnet computer virus, 159, 170
Sudan, 2–3, 26, 37, 76, 107, 141, 184, 
190, 195, 211, 221; Darfur, 208–10, 
235–36
Sudan Liberation Movement, 209
Suez Canal, 236
suicide terrorism, 92–93
Sun Tzu, 19, 33, 155–56, 248
surface-to-air missile (SAM), 139, 
149–50. See also Stinger surface-to-
air missile
Sverdlovsk (now Ekaterinburg), 74
sweatshops, 141–43
Sweden, 223
Syria, 86, 95, 107, 108, 219, 233
Taiwan. See China, Republic of
Taliban, 103, 156–57
Tamil Tigers (Liberation Tigers of Tamil 
Eelam, LTTE), 92, 99, 149, 196
Tanzania, 255
Taylor, Maxwell, 55
tear gas, 65, 68
Tenet, George, 166
territory, states and, 6, 9, 27, 174, 182, 
185–86, 190, 196
Thailand, 125
threat assessment, 20
Thucydides, 64, 119–20, 124–25, 219, 
248
Titan Rain cyber-attack, 165
Tito, Josip Broz, 203
transnational criminal organizations 
(TCOs), 139–41
Transportation Security Administration 
(TSA), 99
Treaty of Berlin (1878), 202
“Trojan horse” computer virus, 162. See 
also “Love Bug”
Truman, Harry S, 180
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, 
181
tsunami disaster (2004), 137–38
tuberculosis (TB), 123; multidrug 
resistant, 124
Tudjman, Franjo, 204
Turkey, 233
Turkmenistan, 235
Tutsi, 205, 220
Tuvalu, 184
typhus, 65, 73, 120–21
Uganda, 41, 195, 196, 198, 209, 211, 
255
Ukraine, 58, 115; and cyber-crime, 155, 
164
Ullman, Richard, 10
unilateralism, 98
Union Carbide, 228
UNITA rebels, 44, 219
United Arab Emirates (UAE), 235
United Kingdom, 29, 35, 51, 95, 109, 
114; and cyber-crime, 164; fissile 
material, 112
United Nations (UN), 128, 181; Security 
Council Resolution 1887, 114
United Nations Charter, 174, 181, 200, 
201, 206
United Nations Conference on 
Disarmament, 113
United Nations Conference on the Illicit 
Trade in Small Arms and Light 
Weapons, 38
United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development (UNCTAD), 222
United Nations Development Program 
(UNDP), 11
United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR), 188

 
Index 
315
United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC), 144, 146
United Nations Operation in Somalia 
(UNOSOM), 201–2
United Nations Optional Protocol to 
the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child on the Involvement of 
Children in Armed Conflict, 42
United Nations Trusteeship Council, 
181
Unified Task Force (UNITAF), 201
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), 31–32, 
148, 156, 159, 266n18
Uppsala Conflict Data Program, 187
urbanization, 198, 217, 220, 234, 256
Urlama of Lagash, 229
U.S. Coast Guard, 144
U.S. Coast Guard Academy, 252
U.S. Constitution, 38, 181
U.S. Customs Service, 98, 144
U.S. Cyber Command, 171–72
U.S. Department of Defense, 34, 35, 43, 
45, 60, 63, 144, 161, 166, 170, 171, 
172, 244, 249, 250, 253
U.S. Department of Energy, 34, 231, 
236
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 
34, 98–99, 172, 176, 250, 261
U.S. Department of Justice, 98, 140
U.S. Department of State, 2, 34, 
140,141, 142, 150, 156, 209, 212, 
218, 220
U.S. Navy, 71, 232, 238
Ustasha, 203
Uzbekistan, 93, 235
Venezuela, 235
Verton, Dan, 167
Vietnam, 125, 188, 236; Vietnam War, 
25, 28, 30, 186
Vincennes, USS, 238
Vinci, Leonardo da, 230
Viner, Jacob, 215–16
viruses (computers), 6, 160–61, 163, 
164, 168, 170, 173
viruses (disease), 12, 72–75, 120, 
121–29
Von Hippel, Frank, 113
VX (chemical weapon), 68, 70, 90
Walker, R. B. J., 12
Walt, Stephen, 180
Waltz, Kenneth, 255
Walzer, Michael, 29, 97
Warsaw Pact, 148, 248, 250
Washington Post (newspaper), 192
water, 39, 64, 138, 196, 209, 214, 227, 
229–30, 231, 232, 233, 240–44
weak states, 184, 187–90, 192, 197, 
213, 220, 253, 259
The Wealth of Nations (Smith), 217
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), 
25, 66–68, 102, 114
Weber, Max, 182
Weiss, Gus, 169
West Africa, 189–90
Wilkinson, Paul, 99
Williams, Jody, 40
Williams, Phil, 139–40, 143
Wilson, Woodrow, 180, 184
Wohlstetter, Albert, 57
Wolfensohn, James, 128, 252, 253
Wolfers, Arnold, 6
Wolfowitz, Paul, 179, 283n2
women, 133, 141–42, 184–85, 209, 253, 
259
World Health Organization (WHO), 73, 
122–23, 131, 254
World Trade Center bombing (1993), 
91, 94
World Vision, 138
World War I, 26, 65, 68, 101, 106, 121, 
195, 203, 230
World War II, 26, 69, 79, 156, 211; 
aerial bombardment of cities, 
27, 29, 256; fatalities, 122, 195; 
and oil, 234; second front in 
Europe, 51
worms (computers), 160, 161. See also 
Stuxnet worm

316 
Index
Wriston, Walter, 155
Wyn Jones, Richard, 10, 17
Xe Services. See Blackwater USA
Yeltsin, Boris, 106
Yousef, Ramzi Ahmad, 89, 94, 167, 191
Yugoslavia, 203–4, 219, 220, 287n20
Zaire, 189
Zambia, 129
Zapatista National Liberation Army 
(EZLN), 162
al-Zawahiri, Ayman, 101, 104, 107, 
168
Zeus computer virus, 164
Zimbabwe, 128, 219

317
About the Authors
Dan Caldwell, Distinguished Professor of Political Science at Pepperdine 
University, is the author of five previous books, including Vortex of Conflict: 
U.S. Policy toward Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq, and editor of four others. 
He has published widely in the areas of arms control and U.S. foreign policy.
Robert E. Williams Jr., associate professor of political science at Pep-
perdine, is coeditor of the two-volume Arms Control: History, Theory, and 
Policy. His research focuses on human rights, international security, and the 
intersection of the two.


