

Sandra Swanson
Self-Service Analytics
Making the Most of Data Access

978-1-491-93900-0
[LSI]
Self-Service Analytics
by Sandra Swanson
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Tim McGovern
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
January 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-01-15: First Release
2016-03-23: Second Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Self-Service Ana‐
lytics, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Self-Service Analytics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
To Provide the Right Tools, Watch and Listen                                    1
Data-centric Tools Shift to Line-of-Business Users                            3
Create a Path for More “What If” Exploration                                   4
The Benefits of Metadata                                                                        6
Develop a Culture of Data Literacy                                                      7
Don’t Overlook Data Governance                                                         8
Collaboration with IT                                                                           10
Stay Central and Avoid Silos                                                                10
iii


Self-Service Analytics
More than ever before, organizations are swimming in oceans of
data. But that doesn’t necessarily lead to a surge in business insights.
Companies estimate that they are only analyzing about 12% of their
data, according to Forrester Research. To help build a stronger data-
driven culture, organizations are turning to self-service analytics.
This approach provides data access to more people within the com‐
pany, and allows them to combine disparate sources of data and cre‐
ate their own customized analysis. “It’s an approach to analytics that
enables the person to access and work with data, without the
dependence on someone from the IT department,” says Jean-Michel
Franco, Director of Product Marketing for Talend. “It lets you find
the information you need, so you can be autonomous; it cuts out
waiting for someone not only to create your own reports and dash‐
boards, but also to collect, shape, and connect the datasets that are
needed for your analysis.”
To Provide the Right Tools, Watch and Listen
Tom Schenk, Chief Data Officer for the City of Chicago, has person‐
ally observed the benefits of increased access to data. The city has
33,000 employees spread across 30 departments, from garbage col‐
lection to public-safety services like police and fire departments, to
libraries and building inspectors. “It’s absolutely necessary in a large
organization like ours to allow individual users access to data, to be
able to answer questions for their commissioner or their boss,” he
says. Although not all 33,000 employees access that data, hundreds
of them do. “It enables fundamental things like performance met‐
rics, for departments that use it to drive decision making,” he says.
1

That move to self-service has allowed city employees to be more
responsive to their own departments or divisions, instead of waiting
on someone else to provide the data they need.
Schenk notes that the real power of self-service will come from
multi-variant analytics, allowing users to look at an array of vari‐
ables and tease out correlations. His organization is working toward
providing that capability, particularly in the realm of predictive ana‐
lytics. The City of Chicago already uses predictive analytics to help
identify which restaurants are most likely to have food violations
(based on variables such as the weather and complaints about
garbage in nearby streets). That’s vital, considering there are only
three dozen inspectors and more than 15,000 food establishments.
“Right now, it takes a lot of human intervention and a lot of time to
do these sort of research projects,” says Schenk. It’s becoming possi‐
ble to take a self-service approach instead, with machine learning
and other techniques that do some of the analytical heavy lifting.
“We would like to get to that point, so we won’t have to spend as
many hours getting it done,” he says—noting that almost every city
department has responsibility for doing some sort of inspection. A
self-service approach would significantly improve the efficiency of
those inspections.
For effective self-service, one of the greatest challenges is ensuring
that users have the right tools to facilitate data exploration. “Having
a completeness of toolsets is key in order to allow those individuals
to navigate data and communicate with data,” says Schenk. The best
way to achieve that is not by just offering a variety of tools, but also
offering tools that are actually needed. That requires listening
closely to users, says Schenk. He recommends setting up advisory
groups to get constant feedback from users. “For instance, mapping
is very important for running a city operation, but in other organi‐
zations, that may be superfluous,” he says. Schenk also notes it’s criti‐
cal to try tools out, not just buy-and-deploy after a quick demo. “If
you are looking at a visualization tool that might make sense, don’t
just take one and implement it,” he says. Pilot a handful, and see
what works best for users.
Also, watch for employees who use tools in ways they weren’t
designed for, as a clue for unmet needs. Schenk has seen that happen
several times and notes that it represents a deeper underlying issue.
One Chicago report developer, for example, went to great and
impressive lengths to create a dashboard-like report. This took some
2 
| 
Self-Service Analytics

significant time and talent, but clearly marked where there wasn’t a
sufficient dashboard application—which would have saved time and
let the developer focus on the data—available to them. “It was just
representing that we didn’t have the right toolset for them,” he says.
“We keep an eye out for how we can do a better job to make it easier
for those departments.” End-user service is what’s crucial here, he
says—because without listening to the user, attempts at self-service
analytics will not go well.
Sumeet Singh, Senior Director of Product Management for Cloud
and Big Data Platforms at Yahoo isn’t a fan of the term “self-service,”
because it doesn’t capture an important aspect of democratizing
data. “For widespread use, what matters is how easy it is to use,” he
says. For Yahoo’s data platform, end users range from very savvy,
data-trained engineers to sales and marketing employees who aren’t
as knowledgeable.
To facilitate that ease-of-use, Singh says his organization has become
“tool agnostic,” meaning employees can bring many different types
of BI and analytics tools to the platform. “You can use SAP, Excel,
Tableau, whatever you want.” That’s important, because the learning
curve for each tool can vary greatly. This approach allows employees
to use tools within their comfort zone. “I call this data to desktop—
we will bring data to your desktop in whatever form or fashion you
want to consume that data,” he says.
When Yahoo’s platform wasn’t so easy to use, employees would con‐
tact the company’s central reporting team with their requests.
Depending on the complexity of those requests, it could take six
months to turn around a customized report solution. Now it can
happen in 10 seconds. “There’s a world of difference between a self-
serve environment and one that is custom and request based, where
you have a central team that has knowledge of data and reporting
tools, and is building reports for people across the company,” he
says. “That model just wasn’t viable, and didn’t allow us to move at
the speed which we needed.”
Data-centric Tools Shift to Line-of-Business
Users
As more organizations focus on data-driven decision making, that
has prompted a growing demand for data access. Jean-Michel
Data-centric Tools Shift to Line-of-Business Users 
| 
3

Franco of Talend sees those data-centric tools shifting to line-of-
business users. “If you are a marketing department, you want to
make sure all of your marketing decisions can be challenged with
data,” says Franco. His company provides data integration capabili‐
ties that help organizations make their information ready for users
to consume.
“You need more and more access to data, simply to do your job—
and you can’t be dependent on a third party if it’s part of your daily
job.” Franco compares that with the financial responsibilities of
managers—they need the ability to autonomously manage their P &
L, but must also comply with corporate rules. “The same thing is
happening with data,” he says.
Beyond access and analysis, self-service data preparation is the next
frontier; it’s an emerging but swiftly growing market. Gartner has
predicted that: “By 2017, most business users and analysts in organi‐
zations will have access to self-service tools to prepare data for anal‐
ysis.” This represents a further shift in power from IT to business
units, with the rewards of faster and more customized provisioning
of data.
That shift toward more widespread access to data also reflects
organizations’ efforts to offer customers additional guidance when
needed. Franco notes that one of Talend’s clients is a company that
provides healthcare services, and it needs to provide personalized
healthcare guidance to customers. “The assistants need to be able to
say, According to your health plan, you should go to this hospital—so
those assistants need a lot of data at their fingertips to provide the
best advice, and they need to access it in an agile way.” Customers
now expect more guidance from a number of industries, he says. To
achieve that, organizations require more data and more access for
employees.
Create a Path for More “What If” Exploration
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) is a non-
profit organization that regulates the securities industry; it must bal‐
ance the need for speed and accuracy with massive amounts of data.
It monitors financial markets, looking for fraud and manipulation—
which requires watching nearly 6 billion shares traded daily and
processing approximately 6 terabytes of data daily, bringing in data‐
4 
| 
Self-Service Analytics

sets from different equity exchanges as well as options exchanges
and fixed income markets.
About two years ago, FINRA started to update platforms, and self-
service analytics was part of the overall strategy behind that. The
organization has a couple of main lines of business—market regula‐
tion and member regulation—but they each have different work
groups with very specific focuses, such as insider trading or market
manipulation or compliance. That means some users might look for
activity that took place in half a second, while others will scrutinize
activity during the course of a year. “There is a whole variety and
uniqueness of questions,” says Scott Donaldson, Senior Director for
Market Regulation Technology at FINRA. “We had a legacy plat‐
form where you would bring in the data and create analytic models
up on top of that,” says Donaldson. “By the time you get it built, the
user says, ‘Oh, we want to ask this other question.’ And it’s very, very
time-consuming. All of these information requests basically were lit‐
tle technology projects.”
With the updated platform, FINRA gives employees the ability to
answer their own questions with the right data—and without pick‐
ing up the phone to call IT. To that end, it developed an application
called Diver, which allows users to obtain slices of data from the tril‐
lions of records in FINRA’s data ocean. These chunks of data—
which FINRA calls private data marts—could contain 100 records,
or several billion, depending on the user’s query.
Once users have that dataset, they can probe it and follow a line of
investigation. “Our internal phrase is, users want to have dialogue
with data,” says Donaldson. “When you’re working with it, you want
to be able to interrogate it.” If analysts can quickly obtain the full
picture of what happened to order over time, it helps inform their
decisions as to whether a rule violation occurred. “It gives them
more intuitive exploratory analysis,” says Donaldson. Users now
have the ability to ask more “what if” questions, which is vital when
trying to determine if fraud or manipulation occurred. “Complete‐
ness and accuracy is extremely important,” he continues. “Although
you’re looking at an order in a particular point in time, you need to
view it in context of all the other orders or what’s happening on that
market or other exchanges.” That means users need to be able to
query and build context on multiple levels: what are the various
market conditions at the time, for example, and is there a pattern or
practice from a particular firm that might constitute market manip‐
Create a Path for More “What If” Exploration 
| 
5

ulation? “What we’re doing is lowering the barrier to entry, so users
are able to do more complex analysis at scale.” With self service,
requests that might have taken hours or days for IT to complete can
now be executed by the user in seconds.
The Benefits of Metadata
FINRA tracks the metadata, from ETL to the user’s last interaction
with the data. Ultimately, that improves the user experience, says
Donaldson, because it allows FINRA to learn more about how data
helps employees do their job.
“At the end-user perspective, we’re tracking everything from what
query parameters people included, and tracking what operations
they performed on data—filtered it by this, sorted it by that,” says
Donaldson. “We provide that to them, so if they need to come back
a year from now and reproduce those steps, it’s there.”
Donaldson and his team also observe what users do with data—and
look for patterns that could simplify the user experience. “If people
are always doing an aggregation step or summary, then maybe that’s
something we should summarize for them,” he says. “It’s about agil‐
ity and adapting. We are constantly monitoring and reviewing the
actions of users, trying to see what future feature we want to offer in
the platform, what other data models do we want to do. When you
see 9 out of 10 users doing the same thing, you can say, ‘We could
automate that for you.’ It drives a level of efficiency back into the
platform.”
About three years ago, Yahoo started encouraging users to register
their data in a central metastore. This allows employees to browse
individual clusters to see what datasets are available, and they can
also search for common words they might associate with certain
datasets (such as “audience” for clickstream data).
“Once we have registered all of the company’s data in the central
metastore, we can expose the catalog in a very central fashion,” says
Yahoo’s Singh. The schema, the semantics, all kinds of details about
the data are transparently available to employees. “But I’m not
exposing data,” notes Singh. “I’m just exposing information about
data to people.” If employees find a dataset that could be valuable for
their work, they can request access from the same portal they use to
browse and search datasets.
6 
| 
Self-Service Analytics

The number of employees who use the platform has exploded dur‐
ing the past two years, says Singh, and that wouldn’t have been pos‐
sible without Yahoo’s emphasis on ease of use. “Years ago, I didn’t
ever have a person in marketing or sales using the platform, because
it was considered too techie or too difficult,” says Singh. “But that
has changed. They don’t go to the reporting guy and say, ‘Pull this
report.” They can do it themselves. We even have a senior vice presi‐
dent who runs Hadoop jobs—that’s the power of this thing.”
For Singh, the most valuable part of isn’t the data itself—it’s the abil‐
ity to track what happens to it. When needed, he can monitor indi‐
viduals’ activities on the platform down to the granular level of who
opened a particular file and what that person did with it. Yahoo has
billions of files, 3,000 users, and 600 terabytes of storage space—
which would make the self-service environment a very difficult
problem without the right capability to audit the platform. “Being
able to answer questions like ‘Who accessed this data set in the last
three months?’—and answer it very quickly—is extremely impor‐
tant. It helps us meet a lot of regulatory compliance, for example,
and ad hoc audits for consumer privacy.”
The vast majority of organizations don’t have an easy way to do
those audits quickly, and that’s a big problem, says Singh. “That abil‐
ity to audit is critical as you go more and more into self-service,” he
says. “You are making it extremely easy for people to access and to
work with data, but one of the pitfalls is you expose yourself to
greater risk.” The best way to resolve conflict between security and
access, he says, is audit and monitoring.
Develop a Culture of Data Literacy
To democratize access to data, organizations don’t need to transform
employees into data scientists. But it is important to foster baseline
data literacy, particularly for decision makers, says Carl Anderson,
Director of Data Science at eyewear retailer Warby Parker. The com‐
pany has expanded access to store data, allowing each store manager
to see how foot traffic correlates with sales and number of staff on
hand, for example. “If you have an open service culture, you want
everyone to have skills to use business intelligence tools,” says
Anderson. And that means broad data literacy among decision mak‐
ers. They are the ones taking the analysis and making important
Develop a Culture of Data Literacy 
| 
7

strategic decisions—and many don’t have a data background, notes
Anderson.
There are a few skills that decision makers and managers should
have. He’s created a class to teach those skills to Warby Parker man‐
agers and decision makers, and the company also has an internal
book on experimental design that it uses quite broadly. “The deci‐
sion makers should be data skeptical and at least have a firm
grounding in experimental design. You want them to be able to see if
people stretched interpretation of the data too far.” These classes are
one way Warby Parker enables a common language and broad abil‐
ity to evaluate data analysis.
Don’t Overlook Data Governance
When organizations consider providing increased access to data,
they first need to take a close look at their data governance processes
to ensure data security and quality. Report accuracy can represent a
big problem in self-service environments. Often, it’s only detected in
management meetings when the users realize their self-service BI
data doesn’t match, notes Kurt Schlegel, Research Vice President at
Gartner. He studies how organizations report and analyze data for
performance management and decision support. “The problem
stems from end users creating reports that look correct—because
the SQL statement has returned rows and columns—but conceal
logical flaws. These are most frequently caused by overestimated or
underestimated measures, based on mistakes in joining fact and
dimension tables,” says Schlegel. Because they’re hard to identify,
those problems can persist undetected in flawed reports that drive
important business decisions, he says.
One potential answer: Provide business users with only simple
semantic layers to create reports—single fact tables with basic
dimensions, says Schlegel. Another approach he suggests: Build a
cultural understanding that ad hoc reports and analyses are not
meant to be used as systems-of-record to run the business. “Several
companies have achieved success by enabling users to create their
own reports and even to share them in public folders, but in these
companies it is culturally understood that unless these reports go
through a rigorous validation process (usually carried out by the
central BI team), they should be treated as containing preliminary
8 
| 
Self-Service Analytics

results,” he says. “Only once validated are they put in a system-of-
record folder.”
FINRA’s Donaldson underscores the need for rigorous data gover‐
nance within a self-service environment. “I think there’s a miscon‐
ception sometimes that self-service means, ‘We’ll just point tools at a
bunch of different datasets and the users can bring it all together
and do whatever they want with it,” he says. But that leads to a cou‐
ple big, problematic questions, says Donaldson: How are you gov‐
erning that? And how do you make sure people are interpreting the
data in the same way? “Not everyone is level-set in terms of what is
in the data and the semantics of what the data actually means. So it’s
very important for us to have safeguards and guard rails around
this,” he says. There are nuances in the type of orders within differ‐
ent market systems, and some FINRA users might not be aware of
those subtle differences, so Donaldson’s team has to normalize and
standardize that to treat data in equal fashion. Because FINRA is
charged with identifying violations that could ultimately go to arbi‐
tration or result in legal fines, accuracy is critical. “The semantics of
that data is extremely important, and you have to provide that along
with the self-service analytics, to make sure that it’s all being held in
a consistent manner,” says Donaldson.
People will use the data if they trust the data, he says. That means
organizations have to fit their governance with whatever standards
their industry dictates. “I deal in highly regulated industry—I can’t
do a rounding error,” says Donaldson. “If you’re in marketing, you
can deal with probablistics—if customers buy this shirt, they might
want these shoes. The type of activity you’re looking for defines the
data governance aspect of it.”
Most organizations talk about governance as a pain point. But if
they focused on governance from the outset, they’d recognize it can
be a blessing, says Singh. “If you design your process around gover‐
nance correctly, it can be amazingly helpful.” Some basic steps can
help organizations handle data governance. “One is very simple clas‐
sification—like levels of sensitivity, and what are the implications if
someone gains access,” he says. For example, with certain financial
data, it might be OK for a person to access it, as long as that person
agrees to be treated as an insider who will have blackouts for trading
stock.
Don’t Overlook Data Governance 
| 
9

Collaboration with IT
When organizations consider self-service, they should remember
that it doesn’t eliminate the need for IT (or any other organizations
in charge of delivering the data). Instead, it requires a new way of
collaborating. “Sometimes self-service can look a bit scary, especially
to IT people,” says Talend’s Franco. That can stem from the miscon‐
ception that self-service is a completely do-it-yourself data experi‐
ence that can lead to chaos in terms of control and security. “Self-
service data preparation tools allow analysts to create data invento‐
ries that can include some data delivered by IT as sanctioned sources,
meaning that they are ready for consumption, quality roofed, and
protected against fraudulent usage,” he continues. “Through these
capabilities, the user gets more than the raw material, but rather
value-added datasets that are ready for reuse, while IT can control
what is being done with the data. So I think the distinction between
self-service and do-it-yourself is important, because it introduces
the idea that there’s the need for data governance.”
The self-service environment creates a different role for IT. “It used
to be, if you need info, IT will provide that,” says Franco. With self-
service, IT is there to provide guidance and help the user gain
autonomy. IT acts as a change agent to help users achieve their data
goals, while adhering to rules and standards. “Sometimes self-
service is seen as conflict of, Is it line-of-business, or is it IT? The real
answer is, it should be both,” says Franco.
Stay Central and Avoid Silos
In most companies, data is fragmented and siloed—and it’s a disas‐
ter, says Yahoo’s Singh. That’s something organizations should avoid
when they create a self-service environment. At the outset, compa‐
nies need to ask: “How do we build this platform in a way that maxi‐
mizes value out of every ounce of data we have? Most companies
don’t think about that,” says Singh. It’s paramount to have the com‐
pany’s data in one place. For self-service, that’s the first step toward
providing ease of use around data. “It’s a lot easier to discover in a
single platform than in silos of data, given the complex data organi‐
zations can collect. Some call it a data lake, or enterprise data hub—
but the idea is consolidation, so users have a way to easily discover
data throughout the organization.”
10 
| 
Self-Service Analytics

Singh’s organization is ingrained in Hadoop and open source, but he
realizes that’s not the case for all companies. “As long as you focus
on keeping data centralized when you go about building the plat‐
form, I think organizations will do the right tool selection.”
At his organization, greater access to data has led to more effective
discussions about business decisions. “For some issues that would
have involved 2 hours’ worth of argument, now it takes 10 seconds,”
he says. “You can say, ‘Here’s what happened to engagement when
we released this feature.’ I’m not saying it’s led to success of certain
products, but at least you’re very clear on what works and what
doesn’t. More decisions are now being driven by data, versus intu‐
ition or experience or a hunch. And that’s a huge value to the orga‐
nization.”
Stay Central and Avoid Silos 
| 
11

About the Author
Sandra Swanson jumped out of a plane once, for the sake of jour‐
nalism (it was a skydiving story). Since then, she’s found plenty of
invigorating work that doesn’t require plummeting toward the
ground at 120 mph. As a Chicago-based writer, she’s covered tech‐
nology, science, and business for dozens of publications. She’s also
keen on topics that intersect in unexpected ways. One example:
“Toys That Inspired Scientific Breakthroughs,” a story she wrote for
ScientificAmerican.com. Connect with her on Twitter (@saswanson)
or at www.saswanson.com.

