
Gain essential insights into the changing realms  
of business and leadership from  
O’Reilly authors, editors, and thought leaders.
©2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. O’Reilly is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. D2003
Short. Smart.  
Seriously useful.
Free ebooks and reports from O’Reilly  
at oreil.ly/business

Nick Grossman and Elizabeth Woyke
Serving Workers
in the Gig Economy
Emerging Resources for the
On-Demand Workforce

978-1-491-94329-8
Serving Workers in the Gig Economy
by Nick Grossman and Elizabeth Woyke
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Acquisitions Editor: Susan Conant
Editor: Susan Conant
Production Editor: Melanie Yarbrough
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
October 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-10-21: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Serving Workers
in the Gig Economy, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
1. Serving Workers in the Gig Economy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
The Great Unbundling                                                                        1
The Unbundling of the Job                                                                 2
The Gig Worker’s Dilemma                                                                5
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging
Ecosystem                                                                                        11
Policy Implications                                                                            26
Conclusion: This Is Just the Beginning                                          31
A. Company Profiles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
iii


CHAPTER 1
Serving Workers in the
Gig Economy
TL;DR: Supporting Workers in the Gig Economy
• Macro forces are unbundling the benefits and protections that
have traditionally come from full-time employment.
• This is putting great strain on public policies aimed at protect‐
ing workers, in particular the notion of “worker classification”
(employee vs contractor) as the primary determinant of
responsibility for benefits and protections.
• Meanwhile, new services are emerging to support workers in
the gig economy, providing many of the benefits and protec‐
tions previously attached to employment, but using a model
that understands and fits with the shape of the gig economy.
• Here, we explore the categories of services being developed and
profile a sampling of companies building offerings in the space.
The Great Unbundling
We are in the midst of a great social and economic shift. Global,
mobile connectivity and ubiquitous data are steadily restructuring
not only our interpersonal relationships, but our economic and
industrial systems. This great reshaping has often been referred to as
unbundling—the breaking up of previously understood packages of
1

goods and services into their component parts, eventually to be
rebundled in new ways.
We are familiar with the unbundling of the media and publishing
industries—from triple-play cable packages to Internet + Netflix +
Amazon + AppleTV; from compact discs to MP3 downloads, to
streaming services; from print newspapers and books to blogs and
eBooks—and the same is steadily happening to every other eco‐
nomic and industrial sector. 
It’s even happening in highly regulated sectors such as transporta‐
tion (ride-sharing), housing (home sharing), finance (peer-to-peer
lending, crowdfunding, Bitcoin), and health (telemedicine, personal
sensors, home diagnostics), where the regulations that shaped these
sectors in the 20th century are coming under intense pressure to
adapt.
This great unbundling means that products and services are often
much more accessible, in much smaller pieces, and from a greater
number of providers.
What is true from the consumer’s perspective is also true from the
worker’s perspective: work is now more accessible than ever, but it’s
coming in a different form. Rather than a single job from a single
employer, we now have access to many jobs from many sources, in
many shapes and sizes. As this happens, the very notion of a “job” is
being unbundled into its component parts.
The Unbundling of the Job
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

So, what’s in a job, exactly? What are its component parts? How are
they coming unbundled?
Author Nick Grossman’s colleague from Union Square Ventures,
Albert Wenger, describes it as such:
“Do people need jobs or can we deliver what jobs provide some
other way and in a potentially unbundled fashion? The “jobs of a
job” include income, structure, social connections, meaning, and at
least in the US, access to healthcare.”
In other words, the things we’ve come to think of as the components
of a “job” aren’t inherently bound together. And indeed, the unbun‐
dling of the job means that each of these components, and more, are
becoming available from new places, and are able to be bound
together in new ways.
Later in the report, we’ll look in detail at the following components
of the work bundle:
Job Discovery and Scheduling
How one finds work and manages his/her time
Finance and Administration
Managing money and admin tasks such as paying taxes
Benefits and Insurance
From healthcare, to worker’s comp, to retirement
Identity and Reputation
Both are critical to succeeding in the gig economy
Community and Organizing
Modern versions of the water cooler and union hall
Education and Training
Skills development, just as with work, comes from many sources
Facilities and Equipment
Rethinking what it means to be “in the office”
Much attention has been paid to the first component, which is
essentially income. Independent from the other previously bundled
components of “a job,” it’s easier than ever to find sources of income
online. A major force here is the “platformization” of work, meaning
the emergence of web and mobile job marketplaces and work plat‐
forms such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, the freelancer market‐
The Unbundling of the Job 
| 
3

place Upwork, and on-demand service platforms such as Uber,
Handy, and Doctor on Demand.
Online work platforms build on top of these fundamental trends
and provide two primary services: first, making markets, cultivating
and sustaining both supply and demand; and second, establishing
“trust and safety” systems (such as escrow, reputation, insurance,
and acceptable use policies) that ensure the smooth operation of the
marketplace.
Such platforms are not the underlying cause of the shift, but are
rather an accelerant. There are more fundamental drivers of this
shift:
• The web and mobile connectivity that enables more direct,
person-to-person transactions of all types.
• The age-old push of corporations to lessen their reliance on full-
time workers, and increase the utilization of part-time and con‐
tract workers, for cost-saving reasons.
All told, these forces are drawing more and more people into the
part-time labor force, aka the “gig economy.” According to a recent
study by Freelancers Union and Upwork, in 2015, nearly 54 million
Americans—roughly 34% of the US population—participated in
some form of freelance work, and the trend is accelerating year over
year.
Aside from the income component of the job bundle, which has
seen enormous experimentation and growth in the past decade, we
are now beginning to see the emergence of the other parts of the
bundle. That’s what this report will focus on—the tools and services
that gig workers might begin to rely on to fulfill the set of needs that
was previously fulfilled by a full-time job.
We should note that the “gig economy” is not monolithic. It includes
work that is both low wage/commodity (such as driving and tradi‐
tional hourly shift work), as well as high-end and specialized (such
as graphic design and medical services). It includes work that looks
more like “a job” (such as delivering food) and work that looks more
like a “micro-business” (such as producing and selling craft goods).
“The things that stress out Gig Economy individuals are largely the
same stresses suffered by someone who works at Target or in a
pretty traditional service employment capacity.”
—Quinten Farmer, Even
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

At the same time, many of the same considerations apply through‐
out the “gig economy,” the most fundamental being a less stable
source of reliable income, and less access to traditional benefits and
protections.
The Gig Worker’s Dilemma
“As an independent worker, all this infrastructure and stuff used to
be taken care of by a company and now you have to figure it out on
your own. And it can be impossible to solve.”
—Shelby Clark, Peers
The heart of the challenge of being a gig worker is that you’re on
your own. No single employer is responsible for you or to you.
You’re no one’s responsibility, except your own. This means that it’s
up to you not only to find work and stay busy, but also to manage all
of the overhead that comes with being a worker, “business owner,”
and taxpayer. If we imagine all of the support services that were pre‐
viously bundled with full-time employment—from steady employ‐
ment and income, to navigating the federal and state bureaucracies,
to providing benefits and insurance—all of that now falls on the
worker directly.
Looking at the job bundle outlined above, the job-related compo‐
nents of the social safety net are of critical importance. Traditionally,
much of that safety net—in particular, benefits such as unemploy‐
ment, disability, retirement, and worker’s comp—have come from
employers, based on the assumption that people will have a single
The Gig Worker’s Dilemma 
| 
5

employer with whom they have a long-term, monogamous relation‐
ship.
But as work becomes unbundled, the underlying assumption that
the social safety net can stay bundled to the job is being challenged.
For reference, below is a brief review of the primary benefits and
protections that have traditionally been bundled with employment:
Steady income
The foundational need to have steady, reliable income, to
support basic needs. Traditionally, firms have shouldered
this risk and hired accordingly.
Minimum wage
Price floor for wage labor, intended to ensure a minimum
standard of living.
Overtime pay
Employees are typically entitled to 1.5 times pay for work
exceeding 40 hours per week.a
Antidiscrimination
The Civil Rights Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act
prohibit hiring discrimination on the basis of race, color,
sex, ethnic origin, and disability, respectively.b
Workplace health
and safety
The Occupational Health and Safety Administration
(OSHA), a part of the US Department of Labor, specifies
workplace safety standards and regulations.c
Healthcare
Medical, vision, dental. Employers are required to offer
affordable (<= 9.5% of take-home pay) health plans to
employees working 30 hours per week or more.d
Workers’ compensa-
tion
Wage replacement and medical coverage for on-the-job
injuries; typically offered in exchange for releasing
employer from liability.e
Unemployment
Wage replacement during times of unemployment. Typi-
cally paid for by employer. Independent contractors must
pay into their home state’s unemployment fund.f
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

Disability insurance
Paid sick leave, short-term and long-term disability pay-
ments. Typically paid by employer. Independent contrac-
tors may purchase their own insurance.g
Professional liability
insurance
Protects companies and independent contractors from lia-
bility claims arising from services performed. Also known
as errors and omissions (E&O) insurance.
Retirement savings
Savings plans featuring tax-advantaged contributions and
often featuring employer contributions.
Payroll taxes
Bundle of employer contributions and employee withhold-
ings, contributing to Social Security, Medicare, unemploy-
ment, and other programs; handled by employer at payroll
time.h
Training
Employers often provide employees with training pro-
grams, but are limited in doing so for independent con-
tractors.
The right to organize
Workers have the legal right to organize for negotiating
leverage with employers. Independent contractors may not
do so out of antitrust concerns.
Various other protec-
tions at the state
level
Labor laws vary greatly on a state-by-state basis.
The Gig Worker’s Dilemma 
| 
7

a http://www.dol.gov/dol/topic/wages/overtimepay.htm
b http://www.dol.gov/oasam/programs/history/herman/reports/futurework/confer-
ence/staffing/9.7_discrimination.htm
c https://www.osha.gov/law-regs.html
d This applies to businesses with 50 employees or more. Details here: http://
c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.familyenterpriseusa.org/resource/resmgr/Legislative_Updates/
Health_Care_Reform_-_Employe.pdf
e https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Workers%27_compensation
f https://www.workplacefairness.org/independent-contractors#11
g https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disability_insurance
h https://www.irs.gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-&-Self-Employed/Understanding-
Employment-Taxes
Because these protections have been traditionally bundled with
work and are typically handled seamlessly within a firm, they have
become almost invisible and taken for granted, so many workers
may not even know what they’re missing when they switch away
from traditional employment status.
As more workers shift from traditional employees to gig workers,
the responsibility of reassembling these protections falls to them. In
other words, a gig worker is like a tiny, one-person company,
responsible for creating his or her own personal HR department.
This constitutes both a massive shift in risk, a steep learning curve
on the part of gig workers, and a fundamental restructuring of the
worker support ecosystem. While this initially exposes gig workers
to significant risk, it also opens up the market for a new generation
of worker support services, which is what this report will explore.
Worker Classification: W2 Employee vs 1099 Contractor
Central to the public debate around the gig economy has been the
issue of worker classification.
All labor laws, at the federal and state level, are built around the idea
of a core distinction between employee and independent contractor,
where employees (W2 status) receive all of the benefits outlined in
the previous section, and independent contractors (1099 status)
receive none.
8 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

This distinction made sense in a world where you were either a full-
time, dedicated employee (factory worker or executive), or a real
standalone personal business (plumber or doctor), but becomes
problematic as the gig economy grows.
At the heart of this distinction is the notion of control: how much
control does the labor buyer (employer, client) have over the labor
supplier (employee, contractor)? The more that control is exercised
—in the form of scheduling, behavior specification and training,
rate setting, etc.—the more the law views that as an employer/
employee relationship. The less control that is exercised, the more
the law views the relationship as between an independent contractor
and their client.
The IRS breaks down the question of control into three sections:
Behavioral Control covers facts that show if the business has a right to direct and
control what work is accomplished and how the work is done, through instructions,
training or other means.
Financial Control covers facts that show if the business has a right to direct or control
the financial and business aspects of the worker’s job. This includes:
• The extent to which the worker has unreimbursed business expenses
• The extent of the worker’s investment in the facilities or tools used in performing
services
• The extent to which the worker makes his or her services available to the relevant
market
• How the business pays the worker, and
• The extent to which the worker can realize a profit or incur a loss
Relationship of the Parties covers facts that show the type of relationship the parties
had. This includes:
• Written contracts describing the relationship the parties intended to create
• Whether the business provides the worker with employee-type benefits, such as
insurance, a pension plan, vacation pay, or sick pay
• The permanency of the relationship, and
• The extent to which services performed by the worker are a key aspect of the
regular business of the company
IRS Topic 762 - Independent Contractor versus Employee
The Gig Worker’s Dilemma 
| 
9

As we consider these distinctions in the context of the unbundling
of the job, they become much more fuzzy and much less effective at
protecting workers.
“A good example of a 1099 job would be, build a fence for my com‐
pany. This guy comes, I don’t tell him when to show up, he works
until he’s done and then he leaves. It takes him as long as it’s going
to take. I don’t have any type of management on how the work is
performed. I only have an agreement on what the outcome should
be. Then, on the other end of the spectrum, you have management,
you tell them to show up from 8 am to 5 pm and these are the tasks
you have to do and this is your supervisor. That’s a W2 employee.
There’s no space for, what if I only work three days a week? Most of
our workers work like that.”
—Michele Casertano,
BlueCrew
Today’s regime of labor protections dates back to the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938, part of the New Deal. Ever since then, there
have been disputes about employee classification and the applicabil‐
ity of labor standards. So while this is not a new issue, the rapid
growth of the “platformized” gig economy has accelerated the chal‐
lenges embedded in this system, and brought them further into the
public eye.
There are currently several cases playing out that are testing the
applicability of our existing labor laws to the digitally powered gig
economy. For example, the home cleaning platform Homejoy
recently shuttered its doors under pressure from a number of
employee classification lawsuits. A similar service, Handy, which
also uses a network of 1099 contractors, is currently subject to a
class-action lawsuit contesting worker classification. And the popu‐
lar ride-sharing services Uber and Lyft are both defendants in class
action suits challenging worker classification.
Largely in response to these legal developments, some gig economy
platforms have begun shifting workers over to W2 status. High-
profile examples include the virtual assistant service Zirtual (which
recently went out of business, shortly after switching to a W2
model), the shipping service Shyp, and the office management ser‐
vice Managed by Q.
No matter which way the courts decide today’s and tomorrow’s
cases, it is clear that the unbundling of work has created a conun‐
drum that’s testing our current labor law regime.
10 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

“It’s clear that the system that was set up to provide stability for
workers in the 1935 industrial economy is not the one we need at
the moment right now. This is like a broken system…. I think the
whole system needs a rewire. And the rapid growth of the gig econ‐
omy and the incredible media attention and glamour of this new
thing is just sort of concentrating that situation that was frankly
broken anyway.”
—Michelle Miller,
Coworker.org
Meanwhile, as the courts wrestle with the facts and circumstances of
these worker classification lawsuits, a new ecosystem of services is
rapidly emerging to support workers in the gig economy.
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s
Emerging Ecosystem
“The future of the labor movement has to be more than one thing
and workers need space to invent it.”
—Michelle Miller,
Coworker.org
For this report, we interviewed 12 startups (see Appendix A) that
are approaching aspects of the worker support ecosystem, to try and
understand how they see the landscape evolving, which services they
believe will be the most important and effective, and what kinds of
go-to-market strategies they are exploring.
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging Ecosystem 
| 
11

As of the writing of this report, nearly all of these services are in
their infancy and are in a state of flux, as they respond to the rapid
growth and rate of change in and around the gig economy.
A common theme across these emerging tools and services is that
they recognize that the worker is at the center—whether in a tradi‐
tional employment relationship, or in a contractor relationship.
Many of the companies and organizations we spoke to describe
themselves as “advocates” or “agents” for the workers, clearly siding
with the worker in cases where there could be a conflict or misalign‐
ment of interests.
Another common theme is a desire to retain the flexibility and free‐
dom of gig work, while obtaining the protections and benefits of
traditional full-time work:
“That’s what we hear from our customers all the time, that they like
their flexible lifestyle. Let’s not remove that, but let’s raise the bar in
terms of accessibility and affordability, frankly, for protection.”
—Noah Lang, Stride Health
As we explore the emerging services being offered to gig workers,
the primary question this report intends to address is: can inde‐
pendent workers have their cake and eat it too? Can the market
respond to the shift in the labor landscape to offer new, innovative
tools that re-assemble the social safety net?
Below, we break down the ecosystem of emerging worker support
services into several primary functions (what we called “components
of the work bundle” at the beginning of this report), and look at
what need is addressed, and examine the various approaches being
pursued.
Job Discovery and Scheduling
As jobs get broken into much smaller pieces coming from a much
larger group of sources, the result is a fragmented landscape that can
be difficult and overwhelming to take in from the worker’s perspec‐
tive. And of course, finding work is step one toward getting paid, so
job discovery is perhaps the most critical function in the emerging
gig work market.
Of course, each consumer platform (Handy, Lyft, Postmates, etc.)
also serves as its own job-discovery system, but we are now begin‐
ning to see the emergence of job-discovery platforms that span mul‐
12 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

tiple work providers, and take a more active role in managing gig
workers’ time and optimizing for their experience and earnings.
For example, Dispatcher acts as a “common application” for on-
demand platform jobs. In doing so, Dispatcher signs up on the
worker’s behalf and mediates the relationship between the worker
and the work platform, serving as a virtual “agent” for the worker,
and over time, building a dataset about earnings across the on-
demand economy that can inform the decisions workers make
about where to work and when.
“Our vision in the future is to potentially predict what are the best
jobs based on location and time. So workers can pick and choose,
essentially. If Uber’s paying me $20/hour while Postmates, because
it’s dinner [time], is paying me $30/hour, a worker may decide to do
Postmates rather than Uber. Today, they don’t have that visibility.
The thinking is that, with Dispatcher, when we become the labor
exchange, that visibility will get exposed.”
—Robert Yau, Dispatcher
Note that Dispatcher, and similar services such as Opus for Work
(not interviewed for this report) are essentially betting that the 1099
independent contractor model will prevail, and are looking to opti‐
mize for that environment.
Others, such as BlueCrew and WorkGenius (not profiled for this
report) are taking a different approach. These platforms, rather than
simply brokering workers to independent contractor opportunities,
take a step further and act as full-time employers, offering the full
suite of traditional benefits and protections to their employees.
Then, they surface on-demand jobs for their employees to claim as
they see fit.
BlueCrew and WorkGenius are seeking to solve a problem for both
the job platform and the worker: workers receive the traditional
benefits and protections that come with traditional employment,
and job platforms (regardless of whether they use a W2 or 1099
model) relieved of the HR burden associated with these workers.
These platforms also look to play a role by performing employer-
related activities that on-demand platforms wish they could, such as
providing in-depth training and imposing demanding standards
regarding work performance and on-time arrival. Work platforms
such as Postmates and Handy currently can’t engage in those tasks
for fear of employee misclassification lawsuits.
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging Ecosystem 
| 
13

The founders of both Dispatcher and WorkGenius describe their
role as akin to “supply side platforms” in the online advertising
business, which represent publishers (ad inventory sellers) in auto‐
mated ad exchanges, optimizing for their income. To the extent that
certain forms of on-demand work are relatively commoditized, and
work can take place equally well across many work platforms, this
analogy could hold true.
“We see ourselves, like I said, analogous to the ad system with a
real-time exchange where you have supply-side platforms and
demand-side platforms. We want to be the exchange and the
supply-side platform. Because the demand-side platforms are like
Uber already. They’re very good at aggregating demand and opti‐
mizing experiences for customers who are ordering rides or food.
Very few companies are optimizing the yield—meaning, pay or
earnings—for the supply side.”
—Teck Chia, Dispatcher
A critical part of the vision of being a “supply-side platform” is
bringing price transparency to the marketplace. For on-demand
labor to be a functioning market, akin to stocks, commodities, or
online advertising, real price (wage) discovery across work plat‐
forms will be critical, and worker-side platforms that see data from a
large number of work platforms will be able to discern the true mar‐
ket value for a given worker’s labor at a given time and place.
Adjacent to job discovery is the issue of scheduling. Scheduling has
been a particular challenge for hourly W2 employees, who are often
scheduled by algorithms that optimize for employers’ benefit, at the
same time wreaking havoc on the lives of workers and their families.
Note: this is one area where W2 employees are at a distinct disad‐
vantage relative to 1099 contract workers, as employers can exercise
extensive control over workers’ time, often making it difficult or
impossible for them to work multiple part-time jobs simultaneously.
One company attacking this problem directly is Shift Messenger,
which creates a tailored chat room for hourly workers (for example,
at Starbucks or Home Depot), where it’s easy to post shifts you need
covered and swap with your co-workers. (Competitors to Shift Mes‐
senger include Crew and Coffee Mobile, neither of which was inter‐
viewed for this report.)
14 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

“The biggest piece of feedback is that it makes it much easier for
them to manage their work lives. It was really, really hard if the
schedule just came out and you had to be there and there wasn’t
that much flexibility in whether or not you were going to make it.
And from the manager’s perspective, some of the biggest feedback
is that it saves them a huge amount of time.”
—Austin Vedder,
Shift Messenger
In both gig economy job discovery and scheduling in traditional
hourly work, these platforms are looking to shift power and control
to the workers’ hands, giving them the ability to optimize their most
valuable asset, their working time.
Finance and Administration
Workers’ professional and financial lives are inextricably inter‐
twined, and as work becomes fragmented and unbundled, an indi‐
vidual’s financial and administrative picture becomes more compli‐
cated, not less. As such, we are seeing a tremendous amount of
activity focused on assisting gig workers with their finances and
administrative tasks.
Challenges here are compounded by broader socio-economic forces
that make it expensive to be poor, as, generally speaking, the finan‐
cial services ecosystem is ill-suited to the needs of low-income
workers.
One company addressing this challenge directly is Even, a banking
product that helps hourly workers manage the ups and downs of an
unpredictable work schedule and income stream. Even learns your
earning pattern, and helps turn lumpy hourly or gig-work income
into steady, predictable income. After busy weeks, Even sweeps
some of your earnings into a savings account, and after slow weeks,
Even either passes you money from savings, or offers you a small
interest-free loan that’s based on your historical and expected earn‐
ings. (Even takes a flat, $3/week fee for its services.)
Quinten Farmer, Even’s co-founder notes that the pre-existing finan‐
cial options for low-income hourly workers are quite bad:
“It’s a fairly equal split between payday loans and overdrafts.
Depending on the customer and where they bank, they’re basically
the same thing. If you overdraft your account, even by a small
amount, you get hit with a huge fee: $35, $35 a day or more in some
cases. You’re basically paying to have access to those extra funds.
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging Ecosystem 
| 
15

We certainly see people getting online payday loans, too. And that
typically happens after you get a low paycheck. Before someone
used Even, a low paycheck meant that you had to get funds some‐
where else. And typically those sources of funds are not very con‐
sumer friendly.”
—Quinten Farmer, Even
We can certainly expect more banking-related products to emerge as
the gig economy continues to grow.
Other emerging services focus on administrative functions related
to finances and taxes. Hurdlr, SherpaShare (profiled below) as well
as And Co and Benny and the recently defunct Zen99 provide a
variety of helpful administrative services, largely focused on track‐
ing income and expenses, to both understand one’s true income and
also to prepare for paying taxes.
SherpaShare is specifically focused on the driver market, making it
easy to track mileage (and calculate applicable expenses and deduc‐
tions) and analyze earnings across multiple platforms (currently
integrated with Lyft, Uber, Sidecar, DoorDash, and Postmates).
“Our take on this tax piece is, you can pay $100 to a CPA to file
your taxes for you. The challenging part is the tracking part because
you need to do it everyday and most people are not capable of
doing that. So, that’s the area where SherpaShare wants to help.”
—Jianming Zhou,
SherpaShare
Hurdlr is more general purpose, but also includes tailored experien‐
ces for Uber and Postmates drivers, as well as Airbnb hosts. AndCo,
Benny, and Zen99 are much more broadly targeted at independent
workers and freelancers.
All of these platforms aim to ease the considerable administrative
burden that comes with being a gig worker, in particular calculating
net earnings, setting aside funds for various forms of insurance, and
preparing and paying for taxes.
“From April 2015, we found the majority of the drivers didn’t know
they had tax obligations until they received a 1099. That was a
much bigger thing in 2015 than in 2014 because of that growth in
Uber drivers. So, there was this general awareness growing. A lot of
folks found out what their true income really was [in 2015]. [A job]
might be marketed as $20/hour, but it might be closer to $9-12 after
expenses and taxes.”
—Raj Bhaskar, Hurdlr
16 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

It is particularly interesting to see each of these administrative and
banking tools experiment with approaches that make them dead-
simple to use—because, for example, even the most elegant tool for
tracking expenses won’t work for most people if they have to go
through the effort of entering expenses and categorizing them. For
example, in addition to the approaches discussed above, AndCo
wraps their whole experience in a chat window with your virtual
“chief operator,” attempting to make the experience simple and
human.
Simplicity and ease of use become even more important when wad‐
ing into the complicated and confusing world of benefits, health‐
care, and insurance.
Benefits, Healthcare, and Insurance
After finding work, getting paid, and managing finances, comes the
unsexy but critically important task of acquiring healthcare and
other forms of insurance. This is the area particularly in question
with all of the worker-classification lawsuits discussed above and is
where exists the most major disconnect between labor laws and the
structure of the gig economy.
“There’s no such thing as workers’ comp for independent workers.
Short-term disability is very difficult to find as an independent
worker. So we’re working with insurance carriers on those prod‐
ucts. And I think the most interesting part of it would be this con‐
cept of pro-rated payments. So, as opposed to having these very
binary solutions of employees with all the benefits and independent
workers with none, there’s sort of this middle ground where com‐
panies would make contributions across the benefits on a pro rata
basis.”
—Shelby Clark, Peers
Companies in this space are taking a wide variety of approaches to
providing the traditional slate of benefits and insurance to gig work‐
ers:
As mentioned above, employment platforms for on-demand work‐
ers such as BlueCrew and WorkGenius are offering traditional W2
employment to gig workers, under which they provide worker bene‐
fits and protections.
Other organizations are experimenting with new kinds of insurance
products. For example, Peers is working on a program of benefits
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging Ecosystem 
| 
17

that are (1) portable, staying with the worker regardless of employer,
(2) newly structured to allow for, for example, workers’ compensa‐
tion insurance for work across multiple employers, and (3) a pay‐
ments system that allows for multiple employers to fund an individ‐
ual’s benefits.
Stride Health, another startup in the space, is looking to wrap the
entire experience of managing healthcare in a worker-oriented and
user-friendly package:
“We take the full value to the end individual and say, ‘We are your
advocate, we are going to wrap this entire experience of dealing
with insurance companies, of dealing with the government, of deal‐
ing with your practitioner—who is your doctor—and wrap that
whole experience so you have someone who’s on your side.”
—Noah Lang, Stride Health
For Stride, what started as a simple brokerage model has evolved
into a more comprehensive and sustained engagement model. They
have recently partnered with large work platforms such as Uber,
TaskRabbit, and Postmates so that workers can both obtain coverage
and access healthcare services from directly within the work app.
One of the oldest organizations serving independent workers is the
Freelancers Union. For over 20 years, Freelancer’s Union (and its
original parent organization, Working Today) has provided a variety
of support services for independent workers, including advocacy,
education, community, and several insurance products. Freelancers
Union’s latest insurance product, Freelancers Medical, pairs a tradi‐
tional healthcare plan (provided through a partnership with Empire
Blue Cross/Blue Shield) with specialized primary care centers where
members can access a broad array of urgent care, preventative
health, and wellness services.
Freelancers Union’s Executive Director, Sara Horowitz, is skeptical
that market actors alone will address the profound needs for worker
benefits, and instead urges policymakers to help cultivate a market
for social sector actors like the (non profit) Freelancers Union:
“I think a portable benefits system that’s just about a platform that’s
Silicon Valley and [that] individuals buy from, is not what I would
support. It will be a disaster and it will only be for affluent and
healthy people. But what we need to do is be as creative as both
Roosevelts: Teddy and Franklin. And to envision a way that we cre‐
ate a whole new class of benefit groups that are social sector actors.
18 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

And they can group together around their community and be able
to then help deliver the safety net.”
—Sara Horowitz, Freelancers
Union
One idea is constant across all of the actors addressing the benefits
and insurance space: data will play an increasingly major role in
supporting the assignment and delivery of worker benefits in the gig
economy.
Identity and Reputation
If every individual person in the gig economy is a miniature com‐
pany, then identity and personal reputation are his/her professional
brand and calling card. Further, because so much of the gig econ‐
omy is mediated through digital platforms, a very granular data
stream of work history and performance is being created, which can
be used for many things, including job discovery, benefits, banking,
and more. As such, controlling, or at the very least, having access to,
this data will be central to workers’ control over their professional
lives.
For example, reputation gained on one platform could be used to
bootstrap an income stream on another platform, assuming the
work is transferrable (especially relevant in commodity service areas
such as driving). Such data portability would not only give workers
more flexibility in choosing where and how to work, it would also
apply competitive pressure to work platforms, who could no longer
count on data “lock-in” to bind workers to their service.
At the moment, most data generated during work in the on-demand
economy is treated by default as property of the platform rather than
property of the worker, but many worker-oriented startups are
exploring ways to draw data into the hands of workers.
Since identity and reputation data are so broadly useful, worker-
oriented platforms are approaching the issue of identity and reputa‐
tion data from a number of very different directions, some very
head-on and straightforward, and some less directly.
Taking a head-on approach are reputation platforms Karma and
Traity. Both platforms give users the opportunity to link their vari‐
ous online accounts to generate a reputation score (for instance, as a
good host on Airbnb or RelayRides).
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging Ecosystem 
| 
19

“The biggest problem we saw was that all these platforms were
building their own siloed reputation systems. I built up my profile
on eBay over years. I bought and sold hundreds of things; I’ve got a
bunch of reviews. If I start selling on Etsy, that [reputation] should
be able to port over, but instead I have to start from scratch. Previ‐
ously, there was no way for me to port that data over. That’s the
unique problem that we’re trying to solve with Karma.”
—Zach Schiff-Abrams, Karma
At the moment, each mature platform sees significant value in keep‐
ing their users’ reputation data within their own system, so driving
adoption of a shared reputation system will undoubtedly be a chal‐
lenge. Conversely, new work/sharing platforms would benefit from
users bringing their own reputation data with them, and could help
drive the adoption of such shared reputation systems.
Others in this space are looking for alignment between work plat‐
forms and individual workers, where data sharing may be possible
in the nearer term. For example, identity verification service
Opus.me (not profiled for this report) performs background checks
and professional credential checks at the behest of work platforms,
but then builds a profile that the worker manages and provisions
access to. (Note: other background checking services, such as
Checkr, were not included in this study as they primarily market
their services to work platforms, not workers themselves.)
Others are taking an even less direct path. For example, work dis‐
covery platforms such as Dispatcher, BlueCrew, and WorkGenius,
and financial tools such as Even, SherpaShare, and Hurdlr all use
identity and reputation data in the process of providing their respec‐
tive primary services, and, if they achieve scale, could leverage that
data on behalf of workers in the marketplace.
“If I’m running an on-demand company and I’m hiring some
workers, I should be able to onboard, say, someone who’s done 100
rides with Uber and has a 4.8 rating. I should be able to trust that
this person has some kind of skills or knowledge to pick something
up from Point A and drop it off at Point B, without having to do a
lot of orientation and training. So I think identity and reputation is
really important in matching workers to work.”
—Teck Chia, Dispatcher
As discussed previously in the Job Discovery section, accessible data
not only about prevailing wages and rates, but also about worker
identity and reputation, will be critical for cultivating the most effi‐
20 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

cient and competitive labor market. As things stand today, work
platforms wield a data asymmetry that affords them significant
power over the gig workforce.
Community and Organizing
Decentralized, fragmented gig work has a profound effect on how
worker communities are formed and organized. Whereas before we
had the water cooler and the union hall, we now have Facebook
groups, mobile chat rooms, and online petition campaigns.
An open—and central—question is whether gig workers will be able
to build community and organize despite the fact that they rarely
share the same physical location.
If the emergence of social networking and social media over the past
decade has taught us anything, it’s that web + mobile technologies
have the potential to form strong community bonds across large,
decentralized communities. The shape of those relationships may
look different than what we knew before, but they are powerful in
their own ways. We should expect the same with worker community
building and organizing.
In both the case of shift workers and on-demand workers, new com‐
munity infrastructure is being built out where there was none
before, or where previous communication tools were especially
primitive.
Responding to the question “how can we make tomorrow’s workers
more empowered than today’s workers?”, Shift Messenger co-
founder Austin Vedder replied:
“I’m biased because this is what we focus on, but I think it’s com‐
munication tools that allow them to help one another. If you’re a
server at a restaurant, you don’t actually have to be at work to help
your coworkers. I think that’s a piece of it that we’re focused on.
Maybe they need help with something, they have a question about a
promotion that’s running tomorrow, they have an issue with a cus‐
tomer. Or if they need a shift covered. One thing that every hourly
worker faces is the shift stuff. But then there’s a very long tail of
things that also had to happen in the store or via another ad hoc
communication channel before.”
—Austin Vedder,
Shift Messenger
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging Ecosystem 
| 
21

Austin’s vision of community among shift workers is a network of
workers—at the store or perhaps not—who can answer one
another’s questions, help each other out, and deepen their overall
sense of community.
SherpaShare has also found initial success building a mobile chat
community of on-demand drivers:
“The chat feature is a hit…. The fundamental reason is, drivers are
alone and they have a need to talk to their fellow drivers…. They
also have a social need to talk about their career, how they can
make more money, what other workers are doing and Uber and
Lyft regulations.”
—Jianming Zhou,
SherpaShare
Looking up the ladder of engagement begs the question: can gig
workers effectively organize in the absence of traditional unions?
Coworker.org, a community and organizing platform targeted at
coworkers within large corporations (everything from flight attend‐
ants to baristas to on-demand drivers) is taking a gradual approach
to community building and organizing. Regarding how they refer,
internally, to members of their community, Coworker cofounder
Michelle Miller says:
“We call them subscribers, actually. We think of membership as a
thing you are very intentional about; “I’m going to join this.” What
we’re doing right now is workers’ campaigns led by other workers.
And our job over the next 2–5 years is to really nurture networks
that form around individual issues or workplaces into something
that is a little bit deeper, that sees itself as a functioning network.
We’re not there yet, so we call them subscribers.”
—Michelle Miller,
Coworker.org
Coworker members can self-organize into online petition cam‐
paigns:
“We provide tools for people to engage in self-organizing around
things they care about. Each of those campaigns does what we
think of as two different things: (1) it helps people who have never
organized or advocated for themselves at work before to get the
experience of, this is what it looks like. So, experiential learning,
basically. And then (2) it results in this network of people they’ve
recruited to their cause that we then are working with to start to
22 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

form what we think can be future forms of worker power in com‐
panies that are decentralized, disconnected networks of employees.”
—Michelle Miller,
Coworker.org
Thus far, Coworker-led campaigns have lobbied successfully for pol‐
icy changes at American Airlines and Starbucks, among others, and
have active campaigns on issues such as scheduling, dress code, sick
leave, and more.
Meanwhile, Freelancers Union has developed the closest thing to a
traditional union for independent workers. Beginning in the mid
1990s, with a focus on independent creative workers (writers,
designers, etc.), Freelancers Union has developed a full slate of com‐
munity and organizing activities, including a policy and lobbying
agenda, PR campaigns, and a broad range of educational content
aimed at helping independent workers operate more effectively and
sustainably.
Education and Training
Education and training is a cross-cutting function present in many
of the platforms serving gig workers.
As discussed above in the Finance and Administration section, just
the simple switch from being a W2 employee, where taxes are paid
up front, to a 1099 contractor, where you do that on your own, is a
major shift requiring significant education:
“I personally believe there’s an educational component missing in
this space. It needs to go all the way back to high school, I think.
The numbers are clear that 1/3 of the workforce will have some
form of freelance job or income whether they’re dedicated to that
or whether it’s in addition to W2 income. So there has to be some
basic education about [finances, taxes, 1099s, Schedule C’s]. I’d
argue, for many folks, it’s more valuable than learning Calculus.
Not to discount the value of Calculus.”
—Raj Bhaskar, Hurdlr
A particular challenge in the education and training space is that
work platforms operating on a 1099 model must avoid providing
detailed training and work guidance, lest they expose themselves to
worker misclassification litigation. This presents an opportunity for
worker support platforms to offer training in ways that work plat‐
forms cannot.
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging Ecosystem 
| 
23

For example, WorkGenius, a W2 employer that matches their
employees with jobs on on-demand platforms, puts a particular
focus on the rigor of its training programs, which intend to produce
the highest quality workers available in the on-demand economy.
“WorkGenius is an employee-first company. We help you trans‐
form on-demand jobs into careers by finding and developing the
best gigs. We don’t care where you have worked or where you went
to school. If you commit to the WorkGenius code, we will commit
to you.
The WorkGenius code:
1. We always show up
2. We do what we say we’re going to do
3. We always work to be the best version of ourselves”
—WorkGenius website
As simple as this code sounds, offering this kind of particular behav‐
ioral guidance represents a dangerous line for work platforms oper‐
ating on a 1099 model (remember: control is at the center of the
employee/independent contractor classification), and so is therefore
part of the education and training ecosystem that can be filled in by
third-party services.
Other products and services have education built-in as a core fea‐
ture: for example all of the finance and administration platforms
have a strong education component, and invest in developing edu‐
cational materials for their communities, and the Freelancers Union
has a long history of educating their community as a core service.
Finally, community platforms such as Shift Messenger and Cow‐
orker have the inherent capability to serve as peer-to-peer learning
environments. Even Breeze, a service that provides short-term auto
leases for on-demand drivers, sees itself as a peer-to-peer platform
for education and training:
“We’re looking at a mentor model where we’d have experienced
members mentor and give advice to younger ones.”
—Jeffrey Pang, Breeze
Facilities and Equipment
With gig workers everywhere, the gig workplace is also everywhere,
changing the relationship between workers, their equipment, and
their work facilities.
24 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

1 Actual price varies by location.
2 http://www.yellowcabnyctaxi.com/nyc-taxi/shift-life-cab-driver
This relationship is at the heart of the traditional definition of an
independent contractor—for example, a plumber who shows up
with his own truck and his own tools to fix the sink in your office is
clearly not an employee—the fact that they have invested in their
own equipment is part of what defines them as an independent
small business in the eyes of the law.
But the growth of on-demand and gig work has further stretched
this relationship. It’s possible to participate in the gig economy with
as little as a smartphone and a car, and work can take place far out‐
side the boundaries of the traditional workplace.
Serving the equipment and facilities needs of gig workers essentially
boils down to micro-leasing. This is not a new idea, but is one that is
spreading more broadly into the workforce.
For example, Breeze is a short-term auto-leasing program targeting
on-demand drivers. They offer a fleet of Toyota Prius vehicles that
can be leased on a weekly basis, for a one-time signup fee of $250,
plus roughly $200 per week1 (not including insurance or gas). Of
course, taxi leasing is not new: most traditional taxis are leased to
drivers on a daily or weekly basis, at a cost of roughly $150 per day.2
Beyond the basic function of providing a vehicle, Breeze positions
itself as an advocate for the driver, helping to onboard them into the
gig economy and help them succeed:
“Our differentiation and mission is that we’re really a one-sided
platform, meaning we’re focused on one customer, who is our
driver or who we call our member. Our focus is providing them
with the best experience, helping them maximize their income with
our Success team.”
—Jeffrey Pang, Breeze
Breeze is deeply integrated into the worker’s finances, channeling
their on-demand direct deposit income into a Breeze account, from
which Breeze takes its fees:
Support Services for Gig Workers: Today’s Emerging Ecosystem 
| 
25

“Our members receive their earnings in this bank account and the
weekly fee that we collect comes out of it. This was born out of a
customer request. We set up a payment system that allows folks to
pay with their earnings rather than having to worry about the bal‐
ance on their debit cards or checking accounts. It’s a convenience.”
—Jeffrey Pang, Breeze
While such an arrangement could evoke the bad old days of the
company store, it also solves a very practical problem for workers in
the gig economy, which is a lack of a formal credit rating and access
to traditional forms of credit.
Beyond vehicles, there are several services emerging to serve the
need for physical space. ReCharge, Breather, and CoPass (none of
which were interviewed for this report) all offer variations on a
model of flexible space for independent, on-demand, and mobile
workers.
Of these, ReCharge is both the newest (currently in closed beta) and
the one most directly serving gig workers. Their tagline is “24/7 on-
demand breaks within 30 seconds. Finally, a place in the city to get
back to 100%.” They are clearly responding to the challenge that gig
workers—especially those who are traveling throughout the city—
don’t have access to a traditional “break room.”
Policy Implications
While this report focuses on market actors working on behalf of gig
workers, it naturally intersects with questions of public policy.
A small number of policy questions and ideas stand out to us from
our discussion of worker rights, worker power, and the viability of
the social safety net in the gig economy.
Is the “Gig Economy” Here to Stay, or Is It Just a Fad?
We asked every company and organization whether they believe the
“gig economy” is part of a profound, long-term trend, or is more of
a passing fad. This question is central to policymakers who need to
decide how much attention to pay to this emerging issue. Some of
the notable answers are below:
“I think the market we’re serving has been around since around the
50s. It’s a $160 billion market in the States only, probably growing
to over $200 billion by 2020. It’s 3 million temp workers a week.
26 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

And then there’s an additional market that has come into existence
and that I think is here to stay. [But] I think there’s a scalability
challenge with purely on-demand gigs.”
—Michele Casertano,
BlueCrew
“I think it’s here to stay. I think traditional employment is going to
be increasingly gig-ified. We see even the employee networks that
are growing from traditional employers right now as future gig
workers. Because it’s a pretty convenient model for employers and
for workers, in some ways, to manage systems and pass distribution
through platforms vs through traditional managers and corporate
forums. I think we’ll see this structure be infused in all levels of
employment.”
—Michelle Miller,
Coworker.org
“We could talk about a new unemployment system. We could talk
about a new portable benefits system. We could talk about an end
to wage theft. But I think what is really missing is—to the credit of
the technology community, I think they are starting to understand
that there is this thing called the gig workforce.
I was just at the White House yesterday. President Obama is start‐
ing a White House conversation [about the Gig Economy]. So, what
we’re going to need to do now is start to bring all the players
together. And get elected officials and cities and states and the fed‐
eral government to start to realize that gig workers are not artisanal
yuppies. They sit across the economic spectrum and they cannot be
ignored.”
—Sara Horowitz, Freelancers
Union
“Dependent Contractor” Status: A Viable Third Way?
Front and center is the question of whether the current system of
worker classification is relevant to the gig economy, or needs to be
reworked somehow.
The idea that came through most consistently was that while creat‐
ing a third classification (such as “dependent contractor” status)
could hold promise, it could also lead to further gaming of the clas‐
sification system. And rather, attention should be paid to how we
might attach benefits and protections to workers, regardless of clas‐
sification. Notable comments from the companies profiled here
include:
Policy Implications 
| 
27

“I don’t know if we need a new classification, but we need more
clarification on IRS rules and regulations and how they should be
applied to a labor force that hasn’t been measured in 10 years….
The lines are squiggly right now and we’ve got to figure out where
they are before we can say there should be a reclassification. And
ideally benefits wouldn’t be tied to classification. There are good
benefits that come with classification and that’s what we should deal
with right now: How do you create that protection in this new labor
economy?”
—Noah Lang, Stride Health
“I previously thought that something in the middle, like a depen‐
dent contractor [status], was the way to go. But as I actually sat
down and articulated what that meant, I [realized] still would want
independent contractors to get benefits. So, as opposed to creating
this new classification, I think we would get a lot of mileage out of
updating the independent contractor [status] to allow companies to
contribute to that benefit.”
—Shelby Clark, Peers
“I’m committed to the expansion of employment classification to
make access to the social safety net available to all workers, regard‐
less of classification. I think the 1099 vs W2 argument is an easy
argument to have and an important one to figure out, but just the
beginning of things we need to wrestle with in terms of what work‐
ers are dealing with and trying to navigate power in this system.”
—Michelle Miller,
Coworker.org
“I think what’s really important is that all workers should be treated
the same. We have to get to that point. Right now, the current defi‐
nitions really are not helpful for people. What’s really true is that
work is increasingly flexible. It comes in gigs. We have to start fig‐
uring out how do we make these jobs sustainable.”
—Sara Horowitz, Freelancers
Union
A related notion that was frequently discussed is decoupling benefits
from employment.
Michele Casertano from BlueCrew notes that while the Affordable
Care Act took some good steps to decouple health benefits from
full-time employment, it still doesn’t go far enough to support the
heterogeneous employment model of the gig worker:
“Then there’s the impact of the Affordable Care Act. It’s not very
on-demand friendly. They’re like, this guy works more than this
amount of hours, he’s full-time, so you’ve got to offer him health‐
28 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

care. And I’m like, I’m purely on-demand, so maybe this guy works
full-time for me for 3 weeks, but then he disappears for a month
and then he comes back. I want to be compliant but I don’t want to
get in a situation where someone signs up for a day and gets health‐
care and then disappears. Because I don’t force anyone to work.”
—Michele Casertano, Blue‐
Crew
Access to Data as a 21st-Century Worker’s Right
Data is at the center of the gig economy: powering the “trust and
safety” engine that makes transacting with individual strangers pos‐
sible. It’s also at the center of many regulatory issues outside of labor
concerns, for example impacts on traffic, housing, and food safety.
Data is also central to worker power in the gig economy, including,
but not limited to, the potential ability for workers to take their
identity, reputation, and work history with them from platform to
platform, increasing competition in the market. Some comments on
this idea:
“So what influences the bargaining power in the future that deter‐
mines how these marginal dollars get split? I would suggest that it
is information. To the extent that the marketplaces have a lot of
information and each participant (e.g., driver) has only very limited
information the bargaining will heavily favor the marketplaces.
One might argue that there could be competition between market‐
places, but due to network effects there are likely to only be a cou‐
ple of big ones that matter.
There is a simple and universal regulatory change that would dra‐
matically shift the bargaining power: an individual right to an API
Key. By this I mean a key that would give an end user *full* read/
write access to the system including every action or screen the end
user can take or see on the web site or application. Alternatively
one could think of this as an individual right to be represented by
an algorithm.”
—Albert Wenger: Labor Day:
Right to an API Key (Algo‐
rithmic Organizing)
“One of the issues today is there’s no transparency. As a worker,
because of the silo effect, they actually don’t know if they’re maxi‐
mizing their earnings. Let’s say Postmates pays $10/hour, they can’t
tell whether that’s good or bad, based on demand. Dispatcher, even‐
tually, will give them that visibility in terms of what their labor is
worth at this particular time.”
Policy Implications 
| 
29

—Robert Yau, Dispatcher
Data-Centric Regulatory Reform
Strategically requiring open data can help open up markets. For
example, the stock market wouldn’t function without SEC-
mandated disclosures. Similarly, targeted transparency in the labor
regulations space can cause the labor market to function more effec‐
tively. For example, Noah Lang from Stride Health points out how
requirements for machine readable data about health plans in the
Affordable Care Act made it possible for them to build their health
plan matching system and doctor database:
“The ACA restructured the way data is delivered in this space. So
we had an opportunity to come in with fresh eyes as a new player
and figure out how to take this newly available health plan benefits
data, which before was not machine readable, you know, was free-
form content, and borrow from data that was re-architected in the
HITECH Act. That made it possible to build a really efficient doc‐
tor network database.”
—Noah Lang, Stride Health
Another impact of applying 19th- and 20th-century labor regula‐
tions to digital work platforms is speed and ease of use. To a degree,
work platforms opt toward a 1099 because of the transactional costs
and friction of filing W2-related employment paperwork. Any
efforts to turn burdensome, costly, paper-based or in-person regula‐
tory processes into digital, instant, API-driven processes could
incentivize work platforms to adopt a W2 model and its inherent
protections.
“As a W2 employer, I have to get 100% of my workforce to verify
documents. As a contractor, I don’t. The question is, why can’t I
verify remotely? Is there really an advantage of me seeing you face
to face and you saying, “OK, I authorize this. It’s real”? Why can’t I
do it with pictures to an app? They say, “You can use a network of
notaries.” But, then, every time you verify a document, a notary will
ask you for $75. Can you imagine that? Every time I’m onboarding
someone, he or she has to make an appointment with a notary and
has to pay $75? That seems pretty much unreasonable.”
—Michele Casertano,
BlueCrew
30 
| 
Chapter 1: Serving Workers in the Gig Economy

Conclusion: This Is Just the Beginning
As we can see, the expansion of the gig economy, and the more pro‐
found shift toward the unbundling of the traditional job, has put
pressure on our traditional support systems for workers, and has
even challenged the definition of a job.
The landscape is very much in flux: on the legal side, as various
employee classification lawsuits play out, on the policy side, as law‐
makers wrestle with how to address this shift, and in the market, as
worker-oriented support services continue to launch, grow, and
experiment with a wide variety of approaches.
Perhaps the most interesting area to watch will be places where work
platforms (such as TaskRabbit, Lyft, etc.) find alignments with
worker support platforms that afford them both the protections they
need. For example, job discovery platforms, fully realized, have the
potential to prove that there’s a true “marketplace” at work (support‐
ing the 1099 argument), as opposed to platform-controlled work
services (which look more like W2 services). In their own ways,
many of the worker support platforms profiled here are seeking
such synergies.
For policymakers, the challenge will be to preserve the genuine ben‐
efits of the gig economy (an open market for work, personal control
over time, etc.) with the need to ensure that all workers have access
to the social safety net. This will no doubt take time to figure out.
Fortunately, many people and organizations, including the small
sample profiled here, understand this balance and are working hard
to find solutions that fit.
Conclusion: This Is Just the Beginning 
| 
31


APPENDIX A
Company Profiles
BlueCrew
https://www.bluecrewjobs.com
Palo Alto, CA
Founded: 2015
Job discovery and scheduling
Tagline: Find work that fits you. Build a flexible career with BlueCrew.
Michele Casertano likes to use the phrase “staffing as a platform” to
describe his company BlueCrew. The startup provides workers to
companies on a temporary basis, similar to staffing agencies. But
compared to traditional staffing agencies, BlueCrew uses a more
data- and technology-driven approach. For example, every Blue‐
Crew worker has an online profile, complete with job history, that
employers can view. Workers are also dispatched to jobs automati‐
cally, based on BlueCrew’s proprietary algorithms. As Casertano,
who cofounded BlueCrew and serves as its CEO, explains, “We’re a
technology platform with a staffing marketplace.”
BlueCrew aims to reduce the inefficiencies of traditional staffing
while increasing protections for independent workers by giving
them workers’ compensation insurance and a pathway to health
benefits. “Before BlueCrew, if you wanted to work, to temp and do
purely on-demand work, you went to a staffing agency,” says Case‐
rtano. “And eventually they would call you on the phone if a job was
33

there. But most of the time they disappear.” BlueCrew has expedited
this process so that jobs can be filled in as little as one minute. When
workers’ profiles match with available jobs, they receive alerts on
their phones along with details about the assignment’s duration,
location, and pay rate. If the job interests them, workers accept the
assignment within the BlueCrew app by pressing a button.
Tasks range from warehouse tasks, such as packing boxes and driv‐
ing forklifts to commercial moving, data entry, and customer sup‐
port and are currently based in the Bay Area. Assignments can be as
short as a few hours and as long as two months. Some companies
also hire full-time workers through BlueCrew. Casertano says work‐
ers on the platform number in the “high hundreds.” His goal: to
become “the leading [job discovery] platform for the temporary and
flexible workforce, in general.”
Interestingly, BlueCrew’s model relies on hiring its workers as W2
employees. Casertano says he does this so he can cover his workers
with workers’ compensation insurance. He also believes that his
workers get a “better deal” by being W2 employees because Blue‐
Crew handles their tax withholding, including the Federal Insurance
Contributions Act (FICA) tax, which funds Social Security and
Medicare. BlueCrew doesn’t give its workers health insurance auto‐
matically, but they can qualify for benefits after working more than
30 hours per week for 90 days.
Though Casertano admits that he sometimes worries about his
employees’ “career growth,” he says it’s important to simply give peo‐
ple—particularly people who don’t have ready access to many jobs—
an opportunity to work. “Some people decide this should be their
main source of income,” he adds. “They refer to themselves as Blue‐
Crew workers. They’ve created their own culture of why they’re
temp workers.”
Breeze
https://joinbreeze.com
San Francisco, CA
Founded: 2013
Facilities & Equipment, Job Discovery & Scheduling
Tagline: Get a car. And get paid.
34 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

Ride-sharing and delivery jobs are the most popular gig economy
tasks, but are typically accessible only to drivers who have cars
insured under their own names. As a result, people who struggle to
finance cars may find themselves shut out of platforms such as Uber
and Lyft. Breeze addresses this issue by leasing cars to independent
workers. Members pay Breeze a one-time membership fee
($250) and a weekly leasing fee ($195). In return, members receive a
Toyota Prius they can personally insure and use 24/7 for their gig
economy work.
Breeze is much more than a car-leasing company. It also employs a
“Member Success” team that counsels users in-person and over the
phone about which gig economy jobs best fit their preferences, how
many hours they should work a week at minimum, and how much
they can expect to earn after expenses. Since 80% of Breeze’s new
members are gig economy novices, the guidance prepares members
for the realities of gig work and helps ensure they’ll be able to make
their lease payments. As Breeze cofounder Jeffrey Pang explains, “A
big part of our onboarding is checking all the boxes to make sure
you qualify for these income streams. The last thing we want is for
you to get a car and be like, ‘Wait, what do I do with this thing? I
can’t make any money with it.’”
Breeze attracts two main types of users: people who have poor or no
credit and people who don’t want to commit to a three-year lease or
a five-year loan in order to get a vehicle to earn income. In keeping
with the flexibility of gig economy work, Breeze lets users leave the
program anytime, as long as they have completed at least one month
of payments and give the company two weeks notice. Breeze leases
are also geared toward lots of driving with an annual mileage cap of
30,000, which is two to three times more than what traditional car
leases allow.
Breeze has no formal affiliation with any of the gig economy plat‐
forms. Its members hold an assortment of driving-centric jobs, from
ride-sharing to grocery and meal delivery and home-cleaning serv‐
ices. Pang says Breeze’s “openness” and support for a range of jobs
differentiates it from Uber’s leasing program, Uber Xchange.
Since Breeze makes it possible for more people to take up gig work,
Pang sees the company as an enabler for the broader gig economy.
“We are the financial backbone for a growing percentage of the gig
economy,” he posits. “We’re accelerating and enabling access for our
Company Profiles 
| 
35

members who would otherwise lack the ability to get car ownership
or for whom committing to a term loan didn’t make sense.”
Breeze is currently available in six U.S. cities (Boston, Chicago, Los
Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle, and Washington, D.C.) and will
open soon in San Diego.
Coworker.org
https://www.coworker.org
Washington, D.C.
Founded: 2013
Community & Organizing
Tagline: A digital platform for worker voice.
Gig workers typically lack access to people in positions of power
who can help them improve their work environment. Instead, inde‐
pendent workers seeking to change something in their workplaces
frequently turn to social media to air their grievances and rally sup‐
port.
Michelle Miller, a former Service Employees International Union
(SEIU) employee, cofounded the nonprofit Coworker.org to help
workers organize in a more effective way. The organization is cur‐
rently focused on providing “digital infrastructure” to people so they
can advocate for themselves at work. These tools, most of which are
located on the Coworker.org site, allow workers to create online
petitions, collect signatures and comments, and circulate their cam‐
paigns via social media.
A Starbucks barista recently used the platform to overturn the coffee
chain’s ban on visible tattoos. A Publix Super Markets worker is cur‐
rently trying to do the same for beards. The California App-Based
Drivers Association started a Coworker.org petition to ask Uber to
let consumers add tips to their fares. And a Postmates courier used
Coworker.org to request a way to notify merchants that couriers
who were on their last delivery run couldn’t accept any more jobs
that day.
Since petition signers can contact a campaign’s creator through
email and vice versa, the networks that form around Coworker.org
campaigns can be sustained and leveraged for other campaigns.
36 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

About 25,000 Starbucks baristas have subscribed to updates from
the Coworker.org platform, as have 8,000 Publix employees and
2,000 Uber drivers. Overall, Coworker.org has attracted 250,000
subscribers, 90,000 of whom have participated in a campaign in
their workplace.
Coworker.org wants to foster these worker communities so they
coalesce into “future forms of worker power,” says Miller. “We’ve
been experimenting with ways in which we can start to have these
networks become visible to one another and see themselves as a
powerful community,” she explains. To strengthen ties between bar‐
istas, Coworker.org has started sending curated social content emails
(emails that feature social media content, such as tweets, aggregated
from Starbucks workers) and working conditions surveys within its
Starbucks network.
Coworker.org welcomes all types of workers, but Miller says the
organization has “particular reach” among “disaggregated” freelanc‐
ers and independent workers who use the platform to connect with
likeminded people. Gig workers often fear that if they complain
about workplace issues they will be removed from their work plat‐
form without notice or a means of defending themselves, according
to Miller. “The feeling that you’re managed by an invisible algorithm
or a platform makes it really frustrating and risky to even be able to
bring up a benign complaint about anything,” she adds. Banding
together as a group through services such as Coworker.org helps
reduce this risk while amplifying independent workers’ voices.
Dispatcher
http://dispatcher.com
Palo Alto, CA
Founded: 2015
Job discovery and scheduling
Tagline: Empowering the On-Demand Workforce. Discover the best
on-demand jobs.
Dispatcher is a new app that matches gig workers with jobs. Its
cofounders plan to build it into a real-time labor exchange for the
gig economy, similar to an ad exchange. As Dispatcher CEO Teck
Chia explains, the online ads ecosystem contains ad exchanges,
Company Profiles 
| 
37

demand-side platforms, and supply-side platforms. The exchanges
sit in the middle while the demand and supply-side platforms opti‐
mize yields for the buyers and sellers of ads, respectively. Dispatcher
thinks the labor market will evolve the same way. “On the supply
side, we enable workers to participate in multiple [gig economy]
networks,” says Chia. “And on the demand side, we enable platforms
to scale their networks in step with customer demand with no over-
hiring or under-hiring.”
Dispatcher is focusing its efforts on the supply or workers side of the
gig economy labor exchange. It launched its app in September 2015
with an emphasis on job discovery. Users can fill out a single job
application within the app and quickly apply to dozens of gig econ‐
omy platforms.
The setup is based on Dispatcher research, which found that a num‐
ber of gig workers were active only on one gig economy platform—
either because they weren’t aware of the range of potential employ‐
ers or because applying to multiple platforms was tedious or both.
Typically, these people find gig work on sites such as Craigslist
where big companies like Uber and Lyft dominate the job ads. 
By showing users the breadth of gig employers and making it fast
and easy for them to get on board multiple platforms, Dispatcher
aims to help them earn as much money as possible. On-demand
work usually has downtime, and toggling between platforms can fill
the gaps. “An Uber driver might spend anywhere from 15 minutes to
hours between requests,” says Chia. “Meanwhile, other platforms
might have jobs that the same Uber driver could fulfill during that
idle time. We want users to maximize their earnings by increasing
the utilization of their time and resources, such as their car.” (Most
of Dispatcher’s current users are drivers for ride-sharing and deliv‐
ery platforms, but the company is open to serving all types of gig
workers.)
In the future, Dispatcher’s app will aggregate data that lets users
select assignments that match their preferences while optimizing
their earnings. (SherpaShare, on page 46, has a similar idea.) “Let’s
say I’m a driver,” says Chia. “I may not want to drive more than 10
miles out of my way. I may want a certain base pay or only want to
do certain jobs like pick up food versus pick up passengers. I can
emphasize those criteria and when I get jobs, I can pick the ones I
feel are the best for me.”
38 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

Another way to view Dispatcher is as a super-smart dispatch chan‐
nel—one that gives workers a lot of agency and aims to show them
the best times to work and the best jobs to take.
Even
https://even.me
Oakland, CA
Founded: 2014
Finance & Admin, Education & Training
Tagline: The financial stability app.
Independent workers have unique financial concerns, chief among
them irregular paychecks. Even is a startup that manages workers’
money so they can have steady salaries. As Even cofounder Quinten
Farmer explains, “You can think of Even as stepping in in those
moments when you don’t get enough hours of work or you’re less
busy than you were planning on—and providing additional funds to
tide you over until that time when you get more hours or you are
busier than you expected and you make more than your average
pay.”
Here’s how Even works: Users give the company access to their bank
accounts. After analyzing users’ previous six months of income data,
Even’s mobile app calculates their average paychecks and delivers
that amount to them each payday. If a user earns more money than
usual on a payday, Even saves the surplus in a savings account at one
of its partner banks. When money is tight, Even draws on those sav‐
ings to give the user the same salary as usual. (Even calls this feature
a paycheck “boost.”)
If a user has no savings or insufficient savings, Even makes up the
difference via interest-free advances and reimburses itself the next
time the user has a larger-than-average paycheck. Even also recalcu‐
lates users’ average pay once a month to catch any dramatic swings
in income. Users pay a flat fee of $3 a week for the service.
The startup says it eliminates the stress surrounding “unexpectedly
low” pay that afflicts many independent contractors. It’s also trying
to provide an alternative to risky and expensive forms of short-term
credit, such as payday loans and bank account overdrafts.
Company Profiles 
| 
39

The service, which is still in closed beta, isn’t available to all gig
workers. People who get paid via direct deposit on a regular sched‐
ule, such as Uber drivers, are potential candidates. However, people
with less predictable pay, such as freelance graphic designers, can’t
use the app, at least not yet. Most of Even’s users work in the service
industry, at retailers and in restaurants. Even is talking to employers
in those sectors to see whether they would be willing to offer Even to
their employees as a benefit.
Though Even is primarily a financial service, it also engages in user
education and training. Each Even user is assigned an advisor called
an Evener, who answers questions about the app as well as more
general money queries. Users can chat with their Eveners inside the
app in real-time.
Eveners don’t provide financial advice unrelated to Even, but will
help users calibrate their Even payments to meet goals, such as pay‐
ing off credit card debt or student loans within a set amount of time.
Farmer says the Eveners play a crucial role in increasing customer
satisfaction as well as his company’s sustainability. “If you’re making
positive financial decisions, that means you’re safer for us to serve,”
he notes. “It’s a way to make our customers healthier over the long-
term.”
Freelancers Union
https://www.freelancersunion.org
Brooklyn, NY
Founded: 1995
Cross Function (Benefits, Healthcare & Insurance/Community &
Organizing/Education & Training) 
Tagline: A Federation of the Unaffiliated.
Compared to the other companies and organizations in this report,
Freelancers Union offers a wider array of services for independent
workers: everything from community and organizing resources to
healthcare and insurance products and education and training con‐
tent.
Sara Horowitz, the Union’s Founder and Executive Director, says the
nonprofit has a duty to serve workers in many ways. “We’re not
40 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

going to pick a vertical and be amazing only in that vertical,” she
says. “We have a social sector responsibility to be wider than that.”
The Union is not a traditional labor union, as its members do not
pay dues and it does not negotiate with their employers about work‐
ing conditions. However, the group does organize its members to
protect and promote their common interests, like a conventional
union would. The Union says its more than 275,000 members
include “freelancers, consultants, independent contractors, temps,
part-timers, contingent employees, and the self-employed.”
Episodic income is one issue of concern for this group as is the need
for cost-effective benefits. The Union says 77% of freelancers wrestle
with nonpayment (clients failing to pay them) at some point in their
careers. The organization recently launched an advocacy campaign
dubbed “Freelance isn’t free” to draw attention to the problem and
effect solutions.
For years, the Union was best known for providing benefits to free‐
lancers. From 2009 to 2014, the Union sold health plans to New
York freelancers through its own insurance company. Following
implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act (ACA), the orga‐
nization shuttered that company and now offers members Empire
BlueCross BlueShield medical plans. Freelancers Union says part‐
nering with Empire was the best way for it to offer affordable, com‐
prehensive insurance plans that meet the ACA’s requirements.
Of the 10 available plans, 4 include free, unlimited visits to Freelanc‐
ers Medical, a no co-pay primary care practice that the Union runs
in Brooklyn and Manhattan and plans to expand nationwide. The
Union also sells dental coverage, retirement plans and disability, lia‐
bility, and term life insurance through partners.
Increasing networking opportunities through monthly in-person
events and online forums is another Union initiative. The group’s
Spark program, which brings freelancers face-to-face to discuss
common concerns, is active in 18 cities across the country. Online,
the Union hosts “Hives Groups” forums where freelancers can post
jobs, ask questions, and trade tips. The Union also publishes educa‐
tional resources on its site, including guides to filing taxes and creat‐
ing freelance work contracts.
Ultimately, Horowitz wants the group to become cohesive and active
enough that it influences elected officials and has an impact on pol‐
Company Profiles 
| 
41

icy. “Our job is to really help to bring gig workers together to articu‐
late how the economy needs to be transformed for the good of us
all,” she says.
Hurdlr
http://hurdlr.com
Washington, D.C.
Founded: 2012
Finance & Admin, Education & Training
Tagline: Simple financials for gig workers, rideshare drivers, couriers,
and Airbnb hosts.
“Most people hate accounting,” notes Hurdlr CEO and cofounder,
Raj Bhaskar. “I believe accounting is a major hurdle for most people
and I’m passionate about wanting to make it painless for gig work‐
ers.”
Hurdlr is a finance-tracking app for independent workers that
reduces the “pain” of accounting in several ways. The app’s marquee
feature is an “income tax estimation engine” that incorporates tax
deduction rules and rates to automatically calculate how much tax
users owe. Deductions are based on several factors, including users’
driving mileage, which the app tracks through their smartphones’
GPS, and relevant expenses, such as tolls, which the app securely
accesses from users’ credit card and bank accounts (with permis‐
sion).
These tax estimates are updated in real-time inside Hurdlr’s app and
computed on both the state and federal level. (Hurdlr customizes
the calculations for all 50 states and Washington, D.C.) The idea is
to show users their net income, after expenses and taxes. Hurdlr
calls this figure users’ “Take Home Pay.” “Your Take Home Pay is
arguably more important than your earnings because that’s what you
get to keep after taxes,” says Bhaskar. “So, we show that number
front and center.”
Hurdlr addresses more types of workers than other gig economy
administrative apps do. The most common jobs among Hurdlr users
are driving (for a variety of platforms) and hosting (for services such
42 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

as Airbnb), but couriers, cleaners, and other gig workers can also
use the app.
Bhaskar says all of these workers want similar features in a finance-
tracking 
app: 
something 
that 
is 
designed 
“mobile-
first,” multipurpose, and largely automated. “Most of these folks are
on the go, trying to make a good living,” he explains. “They need
something smart that doesn’t really require manual data entry, that
connects all the dots versus using five separate apps.”
Bhaskar also thinks independent workers need better resources to
learn about finances and taxes. “The majority of Uber drivers didn’t
know they had tax obligations until they received a 1099 from Uber,”
he says. Hurdlr has posted several tax guides for Airbnb hosts and
Uber and other ride-share drivers on its website. “Even if you have a
tax filer, they’ll make you sign papers that say you’re still responsible
for all this stuff,” he points out. “So there’s quite a bit that you need
to know.” (Hurdlr doesn’t actually file people’s taxes for them, but
does format its data so users can export reports to aid with tax filing,
either for themselves or for their accountants.)
Says Bhaskar, “We see ourselves as basically taking care of your
finances until tax time, year-round.”
Karma
https://havekarma.com
Los Angeles, CA
Founded: 2013
Identity & Reputation
Tagline: Your reputation anywhere.
A lot of gig economy work depends on trust, identity, and reputa‐
tion. Whether you want to attract travelers to your Airbnb listing,
take care of someone’s dog on DogVacay, or get paid for your tour
guide services on Vayable, customers need to trust that you are who
you say you are and will do what you’ve said you’ll do.
Amassing trust on a new platform takes time and can impact gig
workers’ earnings. Karma gives independent workers a way to accel‐
erate the process. The startup’s software begins by pulling data from
social media profiles and peer-to-peer website reviews. Karma also
Company Profiles 
| 
43

looks at something called vouching, which is its homegrown recom‐
mendations system. (Karma members can write vouches for up to
six other members. Vouches appear on recipients’ Karma profiles.)
After analyzing a person’s social media, reviews, and vouch data,
Karma calculates a numerical online reputation score and makes the
score available across supported sites through a browser extension.
“Instead of taking several months to build out my profile strong
enough so people can begin to trust me, I can instantaneously build
out my profile from all of my online interactions,” says Zach Schiff-
Abrams, Karma’s CEO and cofounder.
Karma scores are meant to serve the needs of the gig economy in
ways that Klout scores and LinkedIn skill endorsements don’t. As
Schiff-Abrams points out, Klout is more of a social influence score
than a reputation score and LinkedIn endorsements are specific to
LinkedIn. In contrast, Karma scores are designed to function as rep‐
utation ratings across the gig economy.
Karma’s utility hinges on many people having Karma scores, so they
can be compared. Since opening its beta in May, 6,000 people have
registered for the system. Schiff-Abrams expects more people to sign
on when Karma begins working directly with gig economy plat‐
forms. (Right now, the startup uses other sites’ APIs to access their
review data.) Karma has teamed up with Rentable and is interested
in collaborating with other platforms. Potential partners have dis‐
cussed using Karma to quickly populate and augment data in their
users’ profiles.
Other gig economy startups are also targeting this space, but either
focus on identity verification or steer away from computing reputa‐
tion as a single score. Karma doesn’t do actual identity verification.
Instead, it uses social network profiles to validate a user’s identity.
Identity verification is also just one portion of the Karma score. The
startup’s algorithms weigh other factors, such as online reviews,
more heavily than identity in its calculations.
The idea of measuring reputation as a score is something Karma
plans to keep for now though the company may eventually switch to
using traffic light color codes (red, yellow, green) to indicate a per‐
son’s general reputation rating.
“When you’re thinking about renting a power drill or an air mattress
from somebody, you want to know whether that person is reputable
44 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

or not,” says Schiff-Abrams. “Our members see this as a massive,
massive opportunity for their own potential business.”
Peers
http://www.peers.org
San Francisco, CA
Founded: 2013
Benefits, Healthcare & Insurance
Tagline: Making the sharing economy work for the people that power
it.
Though Peers is only two years old, it has already pivoted in terms
of mission and management. It launched in 2013 as an advocacy
group that was closely aligned with sharing economy companies
such as Airbnb. For about a year, Peers used member petitions, ral‐
lies, and op-eds to actively participate in legal and regulatory cam‐
paigns relevant to those companies.
At the time, Peers was a nonprofit organization that owned a benefit
corporation. In 2014, after realizing the principal disputes about the
sharing economy’s legality were being resolved, Peers shifted gears.
The startup hired a new executive director (Shelby Clark), revised
its mission to support independent workers’ needs more directly,
and separated into two entities (a nonprofit foundation and a for-
profit company) to achieve that mission. (Clark is in charge of the
company; the foundation still exists, but is not currently active.)
Clark says the new Peers wants to “recreate the safety net” formerly
administered through employers, but in a way that suits today’s
independent workers. It’s a mission that overlaps with that of the
Freelancers Union (see page 40), but Peers is targeting workers in
the on-demand economy while the Union engages with a broader
range of freelancers. Peers members work for a variety of gig econ‐
omy platforms, the two most common of which are Airbnb and
Uber.
Going forward, Peers plans to focus more specifically on providing
these independent workers with benefits and insurance. Clark says
benefits are where he sees the greatest need among the startup’s
members. Peers already sells a homesharing liability insurance prod‐
Company Profiles 
| 
45

uct through an insurance broker. To broaden its offerings, Peers is
exploring launching a “portable benefits” platform in late 2015. The
idea is to supply people with health, disability, and retirement cover‐
age that isn’t tied to their jobs. In an attempt to “fairly distribute”
costs, Peers will allow contributions from multiple payers—both
workers and their employers.
Like it did with its homesharing liability insurance, Peers is partner‐
ing with carriers to provide these upcoming products and ensure
they are suited for independent workers. For example, Peers plans to
offer short-term disability insurance as an alternative to workers’
compensation. Clark says Peers may eventually become an insur‐
ance carrier if it is able to source insurance products at reasonable
prices from traditional carriers.
“We have this great economic opportunity of people being able to
earn money on their own terms, but this is all happening outside of
traditional safety nets,” Clark points out. “We’re aiming to provide
workers with a basic level of protection and support—if they’re sick,
they’re injured, when they want to retire—so they don’t have to
choose between flexibility and stability.”
SherpaShare
https://www.sherpashare.com
Mountain View, CA
Founded: 2014
Finance & Admin, Community and Organizing
Tagline: Collaborate on and manage your on-demand work.
How do you get tens of thousands of gig economy drivers to use
your software regularly? For SherpaShare, the answer is to package
an assortment of useful and unique tools into a single dashboard.
SherpaShare, which is available in both web and app form, offers
users earnings, expense, and mileage trackers as well as in-app chat
messaging and city “heatmaps” that show where drivers are work‐
ing. (The company’s web and mobile app offerings include most of
the same tools except that the chat and heatmap features are specific
to the app.) Cofounders Jianming Zhou and Ryder Pearce say they
are giving gig workers the data they need to make better decisions
and earn more money.
46 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

Since launching in 2014, SherpaShare has attracted 30,000 users,
mostly in the U.S., but also in Australia, Canada, and Mexico. Sher‐
paShare estimates that 10% of ride-share and delivery drivers in the
U.S. use its dashboard.
Each feature in the SherpaShare dashboard addresses a problem
common to gig economy drivers. (The software, which can be used
by anyone who drives to make money, is particularly popular among
Uber, Lyft, Postmates, and Sidecar workers.)
SherpaShare’s expense and mileage trackers are designed to help
users understand their true earnings and maximize their tax write-
offs, similar to Hurdlr (see page 42). People who work for Uber, Lyft,
Postmates, Sidecar, or DoorDash can automatically export their trip-
level earnings data to the SherpaShare dashboard for greater
insights, such as how much they made per hour of driving during a
particular month.
The app’s chat feature provides drivers, who typically work alone,
with a sense of community. SherpaShare says it’s the only real-time
chat app that caters to gig economy drivers. Drivers use the commu‐
nications channel to solicit advice, trade entertaining stories about
passengers, and debate proposed industry rules.
The city heatmaps show drivers where other drivers are working
and the geographic areas in which they might be able to make more
money. Zhou says this feature is important because gig economy
platforms typically don’t share this type of real-time operational
information. That leaves drivers dependent on alternative data sour‐
ces, such as SherpaShare.
Zhou and Pearce plan to continue augmenting the SherpaShare
dashboard and to eventually expand beyond drivers and couriers to
serve other gig workers. The startup is developing ways to give users
more explicit advice on how to earn more money. That information
could concern which platforms to work for, what types of assign‐
ments to take and the best areas to drive. “Right now, we give drivers
general real-time information via the heatmap and chat, but as we
grow we want drivers to be able to more directly make decisions
based on the information they see,” says Pearce.
The idea sounds similar to what Dispatcher is building—page 37.
Like Dispatcher, SherpaShare views itself as a middleman that links
gig workers with companies. Says Pearce, “We have the supply of
Company Profiles 
| 
47

workers; they are starting to come to us first. And then from there
we can more efficiently connect them to the companies.”
Shift Messenger
http://www.shiftmessenger.com
San Francisco, CA
Founded: 2014
Job Discovery & Scheduling
Tagline: Messaging app for hourly workers.
When hourly workers, such as Starbucks baristas or Home Depot
store associates, can’t work their scheduled shifts, they usually have
to frantically text and call their colleagues looking for a substitute.
Shift Messenger gives these workers a tool purpose-built for swap‐
ping shifts.
Workers can use the messaging app to “post” shifts that they need
covered to their colleagues. Recipients get push notifications on
their phones and can see details about the shift, such as its time and
location, who posted it, and attached comments. If a recipient wants
to take on the posted shift, he or she simply presses a button in the
app that says, “Cover.”
The streamlined process is designed to reduce the inconvenience of
swapping shifts and the time associated with the task. Austin Ved‐
der, Shift Messenger’s cofounder and CEO, says users can post a
shift within 30 seconds and that most shifts get covered within 30
minutes.
Users can cut this response time even further if they “broadcast”
their shifts to large groups. The feature, which is geared toward peo‐
ple who work at chains with multiple locations, publicizes available
shifts to chain employees located within 25 miles. (To give users
control over their broadcasts, the app shows a list of eligible stores
and lets users select which stores to target.) Vedder says the broad‐
casting feature is useful to companies that are phasing out contro‐
versial practices such as “on-call” scheduling, which forces employ‐
ees to be available to work on specific days without actually guaran‐
teeing them work on those days. “Our approach is more volunteer-
driven,” he says.
48 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

Shift Messenger’s app also allows one-to-one messaging between
managers and employees and photo-sharing, which managers often
use to distribute pictures of work schedules to employees. Like shift
postings, these features aim to facilitate communication in workpla‐
ces where people don’t have their own desks, offices, or company
email addresses. “It’s a messaging app that’s designed to solve the
types of problems an hourly worker faces,” says Vedder. “In a lot of
ways, we see ourselves as like Slack or Hipchat, but designed for an
hourly work environment.”
Retail and restaurant employees comprise the bulk of Shift Messen‐
ger users, but the app is suited to any group that works shifts at the
same physical location (or in the same general vicinity), such as
nurses and police officers. Thousands of workplace groups are
active on Shift Messenger, primarily in the U.S., but also in Canada.
Vedder says his overall goal is to help hourly workers manage their
work lives by connecting them to their workplace communities. He
wants to forge these ties while shielding workers’ privacy. Some
hourly workplaces use Facebook groups to trade shifts, but doing so
requires workers to share their Facebook contact information with a
number of people they don’t know well. In contrast, Shift Messenger
is organized around private workplace groups that are vetted by a
group administrator, who is typically the manager of a particular
workplace location. The group members can see each other’s names
but not phone numbers or any other sensitive information.
Stride Health
https://www.stridehealth.com
San Francisco, CA
Founded: 2013
Benefits, Healthcare & Insurance
Tagline: Benefits built for independents. Simple tools to help you save
money and manage your healthcare.
Stride Health initially attracted attention for its health coverage rec‐
ommendation engine, which matches independent workers with
insurance plans, sort of like a Kayak.com for health, but with more
intelligence and greater guidance for users.
Company Profiles 
| 
49

The engine was designed to help consumers in the wake of the
Affordable Care Act, which opened up government healthcare sub‐
sidies to independent workers (based on income) and made it com‐
pulsory to sign up for insurance (or be fined). The law prodded gig
workers to get insurance—or change their insurance—but many
people found the selection and enrollment process frustrating. “[If
you’re a gig worker] it’s very hard to understand what insurance you
actually need, to pair with this independent lifestyle,” says Stride
Health CEO and cofounder Noah Lang. “You have to know, what do
you need for your health status and what do you need for your
income and risk profile?”
Stride Health’s solution was to create a Health Insurance Recom‐
mendation Algorithm that delivers personalized suggestions based
on a customer’s medical conditions, prescription drugs, financial
standing, and favorite doctors, among other factors. Instead of
spending hours wading through healthcare.gov, people can go to
Stride Health’s mobile web app, punch in a few details about their
medical histories, needs, and income, and receive a single recom‐
mended plan within minutes.
If customers don’t like Stride Health’s initial proposal, they can opt
to view all of the company’s applicable plans. The startup earns com‐
missions on purchases, but it makes suggestions without regard to
compensation and will enroll people in whatever plans are the best
fit.
To help people compare plans, Stride Health also shows estimated
annual costs (including out-of-pocket fees and applicable govern‐
ment subsidies), the number of nearby doctors who accept the plan
and the maximum amount a person will have to pay for care in a
year, given a worst-case scenario. After a person enrolls in a plan via
Stride Health, the startup’s “Member Experience” team acts as an on-
call coverage advisor and will help users find care, price their
options for care, and resolve disputes with their insurance compa‐
nies.
Lang likens the level of personalization to the user experience that
consumers enjoy when they book trips online or select movies to
stream from Netflix. The startup has 230 carrier partners in its mar‐
ketplace and separately partners with all the state exchanges and
healthcare.gov. Coverage is currently available in 39 states and will
expand to all 50 states by November 1, 2015.
50 
| 
Appendix A: Company Profiles

Lang views any person who generates independent income as a
potential customer. That includes everyone from freelance “crea‐
tives” to small business owners, but Lang says gig workers represent
a “large portion” of Stride Health’s user-base. The startup has part‐
nerships with Uber, Postmates, and TaskRabbit that give it preferen‐
tial access to their workers. (Uber has embedded access to Stride
Health within its drivers’ app, TaskRabbit includes it in its “Tasker
Perks” program and Postmates promotes it to its couriers via
emails.)
Stride Health’s next phase will protect independent workers’ income
streams as well as their health. Bolstered by $13 million in Series A
funding, the startup is expanding to cover a broader suite of bene‐
fits. In August 2015, it introduced a prescription discount plan and a
doctor search tool, and in September 2015, it launched a “care-
planning” product that pairs members with in-network primary
care practitioners to reduce their out-of-pocket health costs. Several
“income-protection” products are in the works, as well. Says Lang,
“We’re the HR team for people who don’t have one.”
Company Profiles 
| 
51

