		9	
Service 
Virtualization
#*'2714#002#"
-52-',2&#,,-42'-,!#
by Virtualizing Everything
CA Press

For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 

Contents
About the Authors...............................................................................................................vii
About the Technical Reviewer....................................................................................... ix
Acknowledgments................................................................................................................ xi
Prologue: 	
Virtually There at FedEx®.......................................................................... xiii
Chapter 1:	 Introduction...................................................................................................... 1
Chapter 2:	 The Business Imperatives: Innovate or Die................................................ 5
Chapter 3:	 How We Got Here........................................................................................11
Chapter 4:	 Constraints: The Enemy of Agility.............................................................17
Chapter 5:	 What Is Service Virtualization?...................................................................27
Chapter 6:	 Capabilities of Service Virtualization Technology...................................37
Chapter 7:	 Where to Start with Service Virtualization?............................................47
	
Intermission.....................................................................................................57
Chapter 8:	 Best Practice 1: Deliver Faster....................................................................59
Chapter 9:	 Best Practice 2: Reduce Your Infrastructure Footprint.........................67
Chapter 10:	 Best Practice 3: Transform Performance and Scale................................75
Chapter 11:	 Best Practice 4: Data Scenario Management...........................................83
Chapter 12:	 Rolling Out Service Virtualization..............................................................89
Chapter 13:	 Service Virtualization and DevTest Cloud................................................99
Chapter 14:	 Assessing the Value......................................................................................105
Chapter 15:	 Conclusion.....................................................................................................115
Afterword:	 Virtual Confession........................................................................................121
Glossary..................................................................................................................................125
Index.........................................................................................................................................133

P r o l o g u e
Virtually There 
at FedEx®
It’s a Reality Most Businesses Would Want to 
Run Away From
Fifteen years ago, a team at FedEx had to make absolutely, positively certain 
that their deliveries would be supported by a software architecture of around 
200 systems. Today, the number of moving parts and services they must fit 
together easily exceeds several thousand unique IT services and systems. And 
that’s just one key group. Millions of end-customer and partner transactions 
hit FedEx systems from around the globe every day.
Here’s what Russ Wheaton—Director IT, FedEx—had to say about their 
journey:
In keeping with the customer demand and expectation of the times, our 
company was testing a very specific stack of software 15–18 years ago, 
with some of our key systems originally having been built in the ’80s. The 
earliest goal was to certify software functions that were considered 
“revenue-impacting” or “customer-facing” to our business. As time 
progressed and the system reality came closer to business expectation, 
the number, type and scale of the systems falling into this category grew 
quite a bit.
We were facing a challenge: As we continued to roll out and connect 
more services to provide a higher degree of flexibility and service level 
to our customers, many more core systems were playing in the space of 
customer or revenue impacting. As the number of interconnected 
systems rose, the complexity of the “business transaction” increased 

Prologue
xiv
significantly. This, combined with a fast-growing company strategy 
realizing ever-increasing shipping transactions, forced a big think on how 
we would address the end-to-end certification of the core flow, without 
regularly adding resources or budget to make it happen. We needed to 
change our strategy.
Around the same time, a new movement was growing called SOA 
(Service-Oriented Architecture) which promised to simplify the problem 
via a set of principles and methodologies targeting the design of discrete 
but interoperable services. This was great in that it gave us more reuse 
and faster development of common enterprise services, allowing us to 
design, deploy, and decouple at a much more manageable level, eliminating 
many of the “big-system” dependencies and the fall-forward strategy.
But there was a downside that SOA introduced for the large system 
certification processes. When you have a lot of teams or systems 
depending on one another being ready, that dependency has an impact 
on schedules. If the services needed at a specific time in the certification 
process weren’t all sized appropriately, or were not ready to go, or were 
coming together for the first time in end-to-end testing, it just didn’t 
work. It became an exercise in heroics to bring the pieces together 
while staying on schedule.
About seven years ago or so, we introduced interface standardization as 
a core architecture principle that would sit across all our development 
silos. We decided to standardize interface technology on both the 
transport and encoding. Many good things resulted from having well-
defined (even in some cases self-defining) interfaces that helped 
significantly with software design and delivery in a complex heterogeneous 
environment. We had also hoped that we were making an investment in 
our future thinking that someday this would facilitate a more standard, 
repeatable certification process for our very complex applications. 
Ideally we could leverage a “simulation” technology (other industries 
had been leveraging simulators for decades), where we could stand up 
analogs of our well-defined interface and simulate them for functional or 
performance testing purposes in such a way that dependent development 
teams could work independently of one another from a development 
schedule perspective as long as the interface or “contract” between the 
two was well-defined and standardized. 
While that was important for our schedule, we were also highly 
concerned with reliability. How could we certify each of these systems 
independently as a baseline and take a scientific approach, so that if one 
piece of code changed, we could ensure in an automated fashion that 

xv
Prologue
the results we expected were happening? In essence, could we leverage 
this technology to develop a new technique to push quality further up in 
the development lifecycle potentially as far as code and unit test?
For a company our size, the solutions we deploy to certify our revenue-
impacting or customer-facing applications have to be technology-agnostic 
on the back end. We continue to work with the architect community to 
leverage standardized technologies like SOAP, REST, EJBs and integration 
buses, regardless of whether they talk to back-end mainframes, internal 
distributed services, clouds, or even external services. We know nirvana 
for us is to achieve consistent technology and encoding across all core 
enterprise interfaces.
Twenty years ago things were simpler. Business and IT were separated 
by a great divide. IT enabled things like accounting, but very little of the 
business productivity was driven by IT. But the Internet started bringing 
that gap together, and now business strategies are tied at the hip and 
very dependent upon the IT solutions and enabling strategies. 
That puts pressure on our IT systems to look more like business 
solutions. We need IT to drive new capabilities, enable faster turnaround 
times for new services, and create greater agility for the business. We 
have to certify faster to get to market faster. And while IT evolves, 
customer expectations increase, and customer tolerance for system 
failure drops. Over time, in some cases, it has evolved from simply 
irritating the customer to impacting the customer’s very business model. 
We need to keep raising the bar on ourselves. If our systems are not 
fast, secure, and accurate, customers will do business elsewhere.
When John Michelsen was in our office a couple years ago, that was the 
situation I laid out for him: Ever-increasing business complexity and 
demand for new feature development, on time, right the first time, every 
time—while nobody gets any extra time, money, or resources to make 
it happen. We wanted to change the game to get more productivity out 
of the hours and people we had to meet that demand, while maintaining 
a sensible and rewarding work–life balance for our professionals. It is 
forcing us to rethink our environment.
Today, everything has gone virtual, giving us a higher degree of 
repeatability and predictability amongst other things. We have virtualized 
servers; the industry nailed that one years ago. Via Service-Oriented 
Architecture (SOA), commoditized services and data are commonplace 
in today’s enterprise computing environment. With the introduction of 
Service Virtualization technologies, something we internally call 

Prologue
xvi
“Interface Simulation,” we’re now able to stand up hundreds of interfaces 
and virtual back ends without requiring the complex interdependencies 
of the peripheral systems (to the system under test). In one example 
from my team, we simulate 25 back-end services representing about 200 
different servers in a space we traditionally struggled with. Interestingly 
enough, we didn’t even test those services. We just needed them to test 
the higher-end dependent service, yet they took the bulk of the time to 
set up and administer.
Taking away the need to work with real systems has greatly simplified 
our process. For adoption, we had to prove that virtual services worked 
better than the real thing to gain trust. The first time we were able to 
hand a performance manager an extra week of time in his cycle, it was 
like giving him a sack of gold.
But acceptance of any change in mindset across an organization can be 
hard, especially when you are confronted with “the way it’s always 
worked.” So my advice to anyone considering moving to virtualized 
services and interfaces would be this: Pick a spot where you have the 
toughest constraints, focus on it, make it excellent—and people will 
come out of the woodwork to support it.

c h a p t e r
1
Introduction
Whether you realize it or not, you are likely already in the business 
of making software. Service Virtualization is not just a topic for a select 
few IT professionals. If you are in a company that delivers services to customers 
over the Internet or enables sales and service teams through software, this 
book is for you. 
Success is there for the faking. Service Virtualization offers a transformational 
new way to overcome the constraints that inhibit your teams from delivering 
software to production so you can get your company’s products and services 
to market faster, better, and cheaper than your competition.
Service Virtualization Defined
Service Virtualization (SV) is the practice of capturing and simulating the 
behavior, data, and performance characteristics of dependent systems and 
deploying a Virtual Service that represents the dependent system without any 
constraints, thus allowing software to be developed and delivered faster, with 
lower costs and higher reliability. This rather concise definition of SV will be 
elaborated upon and refined in Chapter 5.
Service Virtualization includes a new type of technology and an accompanying 
methodology for “virtualizing everything” in the environment around any 
software-enabled or Internet-based business service or product you are 
developing. Since there are very few companies in business today that do not 
depend on software, the competitive and economic impact of Service 
Virtualization will be profound and far-reaching across many industries.
You Make the Transformation Happen
We will challenge you to understand your own role in advancing the 
transformational practice of Service Virtualization, whether you are an IT 

Chapter 1 | Introduction
2
executive, delivery manager, architect, or in almost any way involved in 
software development. You will gain a basic understanding of how SV 
technology works to alleviate software constraints. More importantly, you 
will learn why, when, where, and how SV practices should be employed for 
maximum success and value to your business.
Practical applications for SV that are in use by enterprises today enable you to
• 
deliver faster
• 
reduce your infrastructure footprint
• 
transform your performance and scale
• 
manage your data scenarios 
These are by no means the limit of what can be done with SV, but provide 
valuable approaches we have seen companies use to drastically reduce new 
feature delivery timelines, infrastructure, and labor costs, while eliminating 
unexpected risks from problematic software projects.
About This Book
This book assumes a basic understanding of how Internet-based business 
software projects are planned, budgeted, developed and delivered. The 
practice of Service Virtualization has profound potential for improving the 
time to market and overall competitiveness of any business strategy with a 
technology component. Organizational buy-in is key to success here, so while 
the core of Service Virtualization practitioners are software development, 
testing, and IT environments teams, we also focus on business-level approaches 
and benefits.
Disclosure: The writers of this book are a co-founder and early employee of the 
software firm ITKO, now a CA Technologies company. In 2007, ITKO invented, 
patented, and released the first Service Virtualization software on the market within 
their CA LISA® product suite. Now Service Virtualization is a growing category of 
software with established service provider offerings and related tools on the market 
from several leading vendors. This book’s purpose is not to make claims about CA 
or LISA software products, but instead focuses on the best practices for enabling 
Service Virtualization practices, no matter what combination of tools you select and 
use in your environment.

3
Service Virtualization
Signposts in the Book
Look for these icons as you read—they’ll highlight some useful 
supplemental information.
Advice: These are tips that can help you smooth adoption of 
Service Virtualization practices for your business.
Alert: These warnings can help you avoid common organizational 
pitfalls or implementation dangers often found to inhibit success.
Geek Out: Engineers will find these details quite interesting, but 
if you are not reading for technical purposes, you may skip over 
these sections.
Remember: Don’t forget these points when embarking on your 
own implementation
Definitions: Terms of art are highlighted at first occurrence in the text with 
bold italics and an asterisk (term*) and are defined in the Glossary.

c h a p t e r
2
The Business 
Imperatives: 
Innovate or Die
Almost all high-level enterprise executives when we first meet will say that 
software development is not really their core business. They’ll say: “We are 
first and foremost driven to be leaders in the [banking-insurance-telco-
utilities-retail-travel-health care] industry. Our core business is helping 
customers, not developing software.” (Unless, of course, they are actually 
working for a software company.)
Well, we’d like to challenge that assumption right now. Any major company 
with an IT delivery component already has a huge software organization 
teeming under its surface, with thousands of developers, performance and 
test engineers, and support and customer representatives all attempting to 
drive technology to deliver on the expectations of the market. I can’t count 
how many CIOs go out of their way to tell me they have more developers on their 
staff than a software company the size of CA Technologies, or even in some cases 
Microsoft!
Your enterprise software organization is likely spread out over multiple 
offices, organizational silos, and partners, and paid for out of multiple 
budgets—but it has a shared motivation: Innovate or die! Your competition 
has the same motivation too. This innovation race is driven by four very 
real business imperatives.

Chapter 2 | The Business Imperatives: Innovate or Die
6
.
Business Demands Agile Software Delivery
let’s take a look at one of the largest banks we have worked with. rather 
than advertise their long history, strong asset base, deep professional 
experience, and many physical locations, they run television ads for things like:
• 
a new “quick pay” web service
• 
a new “scan checks from my phone” app
• 
a better security system for catching online identity theft
none of these above are traditional defining characteristics of a financial 
institution—these are all new software features that had better work as 
advertised when delivered in a web browser or smartphone! it just goes to 
show that the rapid design and development of software applications is now 
a primary way companies require us to go to market and differentiate in 
today’s consumer-driven economy. 

7
Service Virtualization
To top it off, over the last decade most major enterprises have put a huge 
emphasis on cutting IT costs as much as possible, and therefore the IT budgets 
of the old dot-com days aren’t coming back. Do more with less. This is the 
new normal* state of IT economics that we must function in. The very same 
bank mentioned above is expected to take hundreds of millions of dollars out 
of their IT spend over the next few years. That means your business must be 
ready to deliver new software functionality at breakneck speed in an 
increasingly difficult environment, without an increasing budget expenditure 
to match.
Increased Change and Complexity Are Inevitable
In an attempt to make IT more agile in delivering new software features at 
Internet speed, most companies have moved toward composite application 
development approaches. These new service-oriented methodologies espoused 
the idea that new software could be produced more rapidly atop of existing 
systems when broken up into smaller functional units or “services” that were 
more reusable and loosely coupled. 
While this approach did accelerate development on a functional unit basis at 
first, over time it also created a “spaghetti mess” of services architecture with 
highly unpredictable results: many interdependent components, developed 
using heterogeneous technologies, managed and owned by distributed teams, 
with each version changing on its own release cycle (Figure 2-1). Yesteryear’s 
unitary “app” has evolved into a composite of several piece-parts of several 
other applications.
What happens in this type of highly volatile environment? We must account 
for this agile service development by expecting to discover more and more 
software errors occurring owing to the unintended consequences of change. 
Some IT shops are doing more break-fix in production than ever, which is not 
a sustainable model. Others throw more and more budget at each project, 
sometimes increasing their lab infrastructure and QA budgets by 5 or 10 
times in an attempt to ensure the software will function as expected once 
released.
One major insurance payer we know said they routinely “planned for their 
unpredictability” (oh, the irony) in delivering software by automatically adding 
30 percent more hours to the end of every project plan!
Business Software Cannot Sustain  
without Simulation
If we built commercial airplanes the same way we build software today, 
we would never fly!

Chapter 2 | The Business Imperatives: Innovate or Die
8
Figure 2-1. Composite application sprawl happens due to the decoupling of applications into service-based, 
distributed architectures, consisting of multiple interconnected heterogeneous technologies that are 
frequently changed and updated by multiple delivery teams.

9
Service Virtualization
Let’s compare your business software development challenges to the 
manufacturing process for commercial airplanes. If we were the design team 
for a new wing and we performed that task as we build software today, we 
would demand hundreds of actual airplanes full of cargo and a pilot as our 
“lab.” We would then crash hundreds of planes in our horribly inefficient and 
desperate attempt to get our new wing design to fly.
But that is exactly what we commonly see companies do with the critical software 
that runs their operations today! In software, if some component fails in 
production, we just send the release back to development and eat the cost of 
finding and fixing those errors, miss opportunities, and fail in front of 
customers.
You can see that if airplane manufacturers took this “wait and see, then send 
back to dev” approach, they’d go out of business long before we ever had 
viable commercial aircraft.
Today, aircraft design, manufacturing, and flight are the result of a process of 
constant simulation, testing, monitoring, and improvement. Each and every 
part of the plane’s design is developed, then tested independently using 
modeling and simulation, and then tested again as part of an integrated system, 
while being continuously monitored in-flight for any performance issue. Real 
wing-design teams know that they don’t need planes to build a wing: they 
need modeling tools and a wind tunnel.
Simulation tools utilize feedback from this real production data to ensure 
correctly functioning components without waiting until the integration stage 
for verification. Pilots must even spend hours training in flight simulators that 
virtualize the airplane’s behavior in real-world scenarios, without the risk. 
The design of an aircraft presents engineers with an extremely complex 
architecture of thousands of unique and highly interdependent components, 
systems, and sensors. It would be impossible to account for all of the “what-
if” scenarios of introducing a new element to a real aircraft without simulation. 
Think about it: You can’t expect to find every environmental 
condition that our wing will face during a live test flight to see if it 
works—of course not! Instead, we must have complete control 
over the environment—a “wind tunnel” that simulates all the 
environmental conditions we need without the real plane. This 
allows us to fully verify the design much faster. Simulation—it’s just 
science, Einstein!
Today’s software architectures now look more like a complicated aircraft 
design than the previous simplistic client/server* or on-premise systems we 
once knew (Figure 2-2). It is surprising any business software runs at all given 
the woeful lack of robust simulation.

Chapter 2 | The Business Imperatives: Innovate or Die
10
Figure 2-2. An aircraft design process (top) compared with a typical composite application 
architecture view (bottom) (US FAA NAS public network architecture, 2008)
Other 
industries—from 
consumer 
electronics 
to 
automotive 
to 
pharmaceuticals—understand the science of modeling and simulation for 
experimentation purposes in design and development. With so much critical 
functionality on the line, it is now time that the business software industry 
sign up for the same scientific discipline of proving out our hypotheses by 
simulating real-world environments ahead of delivery, for more predictable 
and safe results.

c h a p t e r
3
How We  
Got Here
Let’s go back to the days of running a software shop twenty years ago—
before many of today’s developers had even compiled their first line of code. 
Grizzled techies still talk about it like the Golden Age of software engineering, 
but it was such a simple world compared to today.
Software 
applications 
were 
essentially closed, monolithic 
systems. There was one client 
UI, the software ran on one 
target platform, and we usually 
had a year or more to get the 
project 
done. 
Better 
yet, 
everyone on the project was 
likely co-located in the same 
building and could have lunch 
together.
Yes, we had to homebrew many parts of the system to make it work. But in 
the early ’90s, we had much lower expectations of interactivity or system 
intelligence. We had little or no interconnectivity or reliance on any external 
systems—everything was completely under our control. And we thought it 
was hard back then… 
Things have gotten incredibly difficult since then. We now have an enormous 
distributed staff and many partners, under incredible pressure to deliver new 
business functionality faster, with an ever-increasing amount of complexity 
and change in IT environments. 

Chapter 3 | How We Got Here 
12
From Monolithic to Composite Apps
It’s not like anyone wanted to make applications evolve this way. Customers 
demanded higher levels of service to meet their specific needs. Therefore, 
companies started keeping track of more customer information, as well as 
offering more complex products and services that needed to be accounted 
for by those core mainframes*.
Rather than replace these often irreplaceable systems, in the later ’80s the 
rise of the desktop PC happened, and we naturally learned to “layer” on new 
technology and relational data to try and abstract new software features in 
these clients, thereby working atop the slow-changing nature of core servers. 
To survive, businesses needed to become more flexible and develop new 
software to meet the needs of customers. So each evolution of our 
applications—from the still-often-critical mainframe to client/server and 
n-Tier apps to today’s service-oriented composite apps (Figure 3-1)—was 
simply the next way to respond to ever-faster-changing customer and market 
demands with new software, while carrying forward the core systems the 
business relied upon. We frequently describe our customers’ environments as 
“museums without plaques.”
Figure 3-1. Evolution to composite apps from mainframe and client/server approaches. 
Note that the existing technology investments never go away.
Today’s Complex Service Environments 
Let’s take a look at a simplified reference architecture for a modern composite 
application, which we will reference throughout this book (Figure 3-2). (If you 
are not a developer, don’t worry. You will understand this!) A real enterprise 
software implementation will consist of many, many more boxes, but the 
basic concept is a multi-tiered “layer cake” that looks like this: 

13
Service Virtualization
Figure 3-2. Simplified architecture diagram of a typical modern composite application with 
multiple tiers of technology.
UI Layers:  End users interface with apps through web or device UI layers 
that usually contain very little business logic. These components are usually 
the most dynamic and variable aspects of an application, as any user experience 
may be customized and configured to accept a near-infinite number of possible 
scenarios.
Services: Web and UIs running on app servers call on underlying services 
layers,  which are modular components that contain much of the discrete 
business functionality that development teams are building. These services 
basically process requests when called and pass along data using an appropriate 
message protocol (SOAP, XML, etc.). While there are industry standards 
around these protocols, companies inevitably have customized formats for 
some distributed communication.
Integration: As composite applications become more complex and new 
services and systems are constantly added, the orchestration of many moving 
parts must be addressed. To coordinate these services to meet the needs of 
robust business processes, most enterprises adopted an Enterprise 
Application Integration (EAI)* approach with an integration “backbone” or 
Enterprise Service Bus (ESB)* system as a broker to route and queue up 
messages from the services layer and make calls to the back-end mainframes 
and systems of record when needed. 
Back Ends:  Most requests of the top layer of the application will eventually 
delegate to these systems for execution. These are the core systems of record 
for a company such as SAP and Oracle Financials, as well as legacy applications 
and third-party hosted applications and mainframes. Software development 
teams usually try to minimize changes to these highly utilized environments as 
these layers handle important live tasks and are difficult or costly to change 
or replicate. 

Chapter 3 | How We Got Here 
14
As you can see, each business function supported by a given UI will have many 
downstream steps of business logic, data, and dependencies that must respond 
in order to successfully execute a given business workflow.
Tech Note: While every composite app is unique, they usually 
share common design patterns. As you move outward from the 
core systems toward the surface of an architecture, you will notice 
that underlying back-end systems and data sources are generally 
slow-changing (requiring an “act of God” to make a major shift), 
middle-tiers are updated a little more frequently (new processes 
or integrations added), while new features are implemented most 
frequently and cause the most changes at the services and 
application UI layers.
From Waterfall to Agile Development
Let’s take a look at the evolution of software development now through a 
process lens. Development teams are attempting to answer the need for 
speed as well—by moving away from the exhaustive Waterfall* development 
method of several sequential, gated steps that a team must finish and verify in 
order to complete a release (Figure 3-3). 
Figure 3-3. The Waterfall development process consists of several sequential development 
and test gates over time, building toward a long-term project release.
Instead of taking months or more to deliver a release using the Waterfall 
approach, in the last 15 years we have seen a huge surge in popularity for 
Agile* development methodologies. The Agile approach recommends smaller, 
independent teams to define, test, and develop small units of functionality in 
shorter cycles or scrums* with short-term deliverables or “sprints” toward 
the end goal (Figure 3-4). 
One cool aspect of Agile is that it promotes Test-Driven Development*  
(TDD)—which means developers “Test, then Code.” First, a test is written. 

15
Service Virtualization
Then the developer starts coding. When the developed code passes the test, 
this is a proof point that the code works as intended. These unit tests are 
typically quite simple and test for the “happy path” of what the developer 
expects to deliver, but when developers unit test at a higher frequency, it 
increases the quality of each dev cycle. In this manner, incremental adjustments 
of software to meet a business requirement can be made over the course of 
several iterations, and the productivity (and engagement level) of development 
teams should be increased. 
Agile development also lends itself naturally to service-oriented technology 
approaches, as smaller units of functionality can be built and reused in the 
environment as modular, decoupled components. Agile proved excellent for 
new, clean-slate development projects. For larger enterprises, however, it 
often failed to deliver the expected boost in successful release speed. The 
combination of distributed Agile development with service-based applications, 
atop a raft of existing system and data dependencies, soon created a new set 
of challenges that caused project delays and failures, in the form of constraints.*
Tip on Agile: Tons of great developer-level content has been 
published about Agile. We recommend starting with “The Agile 
Manifesto” site at http://agilemanifesto.org and following up with 
books by some of the leading authors in that space. 
Caveat about Agile: Since most Agile authors largely focus on 
developer-level coding and testing activities, they tend to ignore 
the realities of interconnectedness and complexity inherent in 
enterprise IT. Therefore, at this time, Agile experts seldom 
acknowledge the external constraints and need for simulation that 
we are talking about here. 
Figure 3-4. Agile development process breaks development into smaller, independent teams 
with the responsibility to develop smaller units of functionality in fast iterations or “scrums,”  
with the goal of faster alignment to the delivery requirement than Waterfall approaches.

a p t e r
4
Constraints: 
The Enemy  
of Agility
Constraints are any dependencies that delay the completion of a task in the 
software development lifecycle that are not within the control of the team 
responsible for the task. constraints are the primary reasons why business 
software projects are delivered late, over budget, and with poor quality. 
ask Bob the development Manager why his team missed another delivery 
deadline, and you will never hear Bob say, “It’s because we’re just not smart 
enough . . .” or “My team just isn’t motivated enough . . .” you will instead likely 
hear Bob rationalize the failure thusly:
“We did everything we could do. Sally’s team didn’t finish in time for us.” 
“We spent weeks waiting for mainframe access.”
“We spent more time doing data setup and reset than we did testing.”
constraints kill agility. constraints will keep you up at night. the only thing 
reassuring about constraints is that just about every enterprise it development 
shop has them in spades, so you aren’t alone. your definitions may vary, but 
there are four root constraints we will explore in this chapter:
• 
unavailable systems and limited capacity
• 
conflicting delivery schedules

Chapter 4 | Constraints: The Enemy of Agility 
18
• 
Data Management and Volatility
• 
Third Party Costs and Control
In-Scope vs. Out-of-Scope
Before we talk about constraints, let’s take a minute to understand the nature 
of in-scope vs. out-of-scope systems. In-scope* systems are the focus of a 
development or test activity for a given team. Out-of-scope* systems are needed 
for the in-scope systems to operate, but are not the focus of activity. 
When you are building today’s highly distributed composite apps, you expect 
any environment to encompass both in-scope and out-of-scope elements. 
Every team will have a different composition of what is in or out of scope.
Figure 4-1. In-scope systems increase over time in a software lifecycle. Early component-
level development activities have very few systems in-scope, while most other systems are 
out-of-scope, while each later software project phase of system, integration, and UAT have 
an ever-increasing amount of in-scope responsibility across multiple systems.
Over a full Enterprise Release* lifecycle (Figure 4-1), the status of what is 
in-scope vs. out-of-scope changes:
• 
When we start development, almost everything is out-
of-scope. Only our component, with its own discrete 
requirements, is in-scope. Almost everything else is either an 
external dependency or someone else’s responsibility and 
out-of-scope. 
• 
As we move forward to integration phases, more systems 
become in-scope because our need to directly validate 

19
Service Virtualization
successful handoffs between our component and other 
changed systems. There are still many out-of-scope systems 
involved as it is rare that every system in the whole business 
is taking a change for the given release.
• 
By the time we get to User Acceptance Testing* (UAT) 
project phases, even more systems become in-scope since 
we must validate that everything is safe for go-live. In the end, 
we are left with a live application and almost nothing out-of-
scope.
Unavailable Systems and Limited Capacity
All large companies that rely on IT must deal with the environmental 
constraints of unavailable systems, such as mainframes and incomplete 
components. Teams need to have an appropriate system environment in place 
in order to develop any new functionality and validate that the application is 
working correctly. 
Figure 4-2. Teams building software are inevitably delayed due to limited access windows 
and unavailability of systems they depend on to finish their own application development 
processes.

Chapter 4 | Constraints: The Enemy of Agility 
20
Examples of unavailable systems include the following (Figure 4-2): 
• 
A key mainframe that is used for important customer 
transactions has only one shared test partition made available 
to your development team by IT Ops for only a few hours 
a week.
• 
The test environment for the ERP system is 1/100 of the 
scale and performance of production. You cannot sufficiently 
performance test your application because of the downstream 
capacity limitations.
• 
A critical web service that your app will call on is still under 
development by that team—and not expected to be 
available until just days before your delivery deadline.
• 
A third party–SaaS-based transaction service provider only 
allows 5 test transactions per day on its system before 
they start charging you for every transaction, not nearly 
enough to cover your scenarios. 
What happens when the preceding situations occur? The project stops, and 
teams simply wait. There’s a reason why you often find active foosball or ping-
pong tables in the development areas of a company, but none in customer 
service.
One SVP of Development for a leading property insurance provider estimates 
that across the board, his developers and testers were spending as much as 
40 percent of their total work hours just waiting. He put his situation like 
this: “I can’t do anything until I have everything—and I never have everything!”
Conflicting Delivery Schedules
While lack of availability is the most commonly identified constraint, it is 
certainly not the only reason software projects fail to meet expectations. 
We’ve discussed how Agile attempts to do away with the typical Gantt 
chart* waterfall-type approach by allowing teams to decouple from each 
other and develop their functionality in faster iterations. This is an excellent 
plan, but there is still a catch.
Are developers coding in the blind?
Unless the requirement your team is developing for is incredibly simplistic, 
the app under development is seldom self-contained. The code will eventually 
interact with components that are owned and managed by other teams—

21
Service Virtualization
each of which may be on their own independent develop-test-release timeline. 
Though you may try to split up the functionality so development teams can 
decouple and work in parallel with each other, most business applications 
aren’t so easily compartmentalized. There is usually some need to synchronize 
with the changes of other teams.
Even if early development succeeds at Agile, when we get to the Integration 
phase and beyond in a composite application project, those teams will crash 
together—forcing us back into an “AgileFall”-style sequential release process 
(Figure 4-3). Hurry up and wait. 
Figure 4-3. AgileFall process occurs when multiple teams try to iterate in faster scrum 
cycles, but encounter dependencies on each other’s functionality as well as synchronizing 
needed integration and test lab schedules.
Inefficiencies entrained by the AgileFall process include the following:
• 
The knock-on problem: Teams are hyperaffected by the 
delivery dates of other teams. One team’s delay will have a 
huge cascading effect.
• 
The “every other build” problem: A broken build* in the 
other team halts your team’s progress.
• 
The “logjam” problem: Agile teams experience a “logjam” 
where no system can be adequately tested for even its 
application level functionality until all the development teams 
are ready.
In spite of the interdependency, priority conflicts are endemic in every large 
enterprise, as different development teams are often answerable to entirely 
different business goals. Take for example a large retail chain that has one 
application team building in-store Point-of-Sale (POS) applications for service 
clerks, and a completely separate dev group responsible for the brand’s dot-
com web site. Both teams are compensated for delivering on their own 

Chapter 4 | Constraints: The Enemy of Agility 
22
agendas, but they also depend on shared access to systems such as inventory 
and pricing. At these choke points, friction is bound to occur constantly.
Data Management and Volatility
As software becomes more complex and distributed, and handles more 
customers and transactions over time, it is also generating an exponential 
increase each year in resulting data. Some systems of record have become so 
large and unwieldy (petabytes or zettabytes even), that they can barely even 
be managed. You have dozens of data sources in a wide variety of storage 
containers. And the data problem is only getting worse. The term big data* 
was coined to describe the massive amount of unstructured data being 
captured in consumer and transaction activity online. Data is a big, hairy 
constraint for every enterprise development effort. 
Have your teams ever struggled to set up just the right scenarios across 
multiple systems, only to “burn” them all with a single test cycle? Have you 
seen issues with regulatory or privacy rules about exactly how customer data 
is used within development and testing cycles? Or found it difficult to re-
create scenarios in test systems for those unique types of edge conditions 
that happen in production? 
In the preceding scenario (Figure 4-4), development teams are attempting to 
deliver and test a health care web application. Notice how very little of the 
data is “in-scope” where they can extract it directly—most of the data they 
Figure 4-4. Test Data Management problems create huge manual effort and delays due to 
difficulty setting up complete enough data scenarios from upstream users and out-of-scope 
downstream systems that are resistant to “copying” into a local database.

23
Service Virtualization
need comes from systems that are “out-of-scope” or not under the team’s 
control. 
One company has such a severe data problem that they set up a huge “midnight 
run” requiring 12 other teams to manipulate their own live systems manually, 
all inserting the test data at the same time in order to accommodate one test 
run. That’s a lot of overtime. One health care QA director told me, “We 
spend two hours running a test cycle, then we spend three full days resetting data 
across the systems.”
The most obvious solution is the conventional practice of Test Data 
Management* (TDM): extracting a subset of production data directly from 
all the involved systems into a local TDM database, and then importing that 
data into the nonproduction systems.
Why the traditional approach to TDM isn’t working
• 
Fragile data: Applications change often—requiring frequent, 
precisely-timed extract, manipulate, and setup activities.
• 
“Burned” data: Live transactions often “burn” a carefully 
constructed set of test data upon use (your previously zero-
balance customer now has a balance!), making the data 
unusable for that purpose again and requiring either re-
import or very difficult, manual undoing of the changes made.
• 
Complexity: Heterogeneous sources—SQL, IMS, VSAM, 
Flat Files, XML, third-party service interfaces—vary widely, 
whereas most TDM solutions only deal with a subset of 
possible RDBMS* data sources.  Moreover, Big Data brings 
nonrelational* data sources to the mix.
• 
Security and regulations: Strict laws and industry standards 
govern the protection of private customer data (ID and bank 
account numbers, medical records, etc.) by development and 
test teams, as well as accountability standards for how that 
data is stored and shared.
• 
Labor- and cost-intensive: Many development shops report 
that 60 percent or more of test cycle time is spent exclusively 
on manual data configuration and maintenance activities.
• 
Difficult-to-reproduce scenarios: It’s hard to isolate and re-
create specific input-and-response scenarios. Lack of realism 
limits the success of functional and performance testing.

Chapter 4 | Constraints: The Enemy of Agility 
24
We will need to find new ways to free software development from the burden 
of data management, as this constraint will only become bigger over time.
Third-Party Costs and Control
Not all companies suffer the constraint of data management equally, but 
third-party costs arise as a “do-or-die” aspect of application development as 
IT moves toward ever more composite and cloud-based application 
architectures.
Custom software development and management of applications can be 
incredibly expensive. Therefore, it makes a lot of sense for the enterprise to 
offload systems and functionality, whenever possible, to another company 
that specializes in providing that functionality via a service-based model. This 
third-party provider then charges the company a fee for any access or remote 
use of that SaaS offering, cloud service, or managed system resource.
Let’s look at a major airline with a critical customer ticketing application that 
is under constant development (Figure 4-5). They outsource the reservation 
management aspects of their business to a GDS (Global Distribution Service) 
like Sabre or Galileo, and the payment management to another company’s 
payment gateway, and so on, paying a fee each time their ticketing app submits 
a request to these third-party services. These fees are perfectly acceptable in 
production, where they are justified by the resulting revenue opportunity the 
airline gets from selling the ticket.
Figure 4-5. Example of third-party costs and control issues at an airline developing their 
integration server against downstream applications owned by other companies. Each 
noncustomer transaction or test may incur usage fees or penalties.
4

25
Service Virtualization
But in preproduction, that transaction fee is considered by the business to be 
a cost of development, not a cost of revenue. Think about the number of 
unique customer travel scenarios that must be validated, as well as the peak 
levels of customer traffic the airline must develop and tune their app to 
perform under. 
Four years ago, we heard from an IT manager at an airline who requested a 
10,000-user test prior to an important release, and the airline got hit with an 
unexpected $30,000 bill for service fees—from a single 1-hour performance 
test! Multiply the fees this airline pays across more than 1,500 developers and 
testers pinging the systems, and they ended up paying between $7 to $9 
million annually just on incurred preproduction costs to third-party services.
This story is by no means unique to airlines. We see third-party fees and 
preproduction problems on the rise in all IT-intensive industries, from a 
retailer with excess MIPS charges on the mainframe to a telco getting their 
development budget eaten up by a provisioning gateway. The owner of a 
critical health records mainframe charges the insurance payer penalties and 
even suspends live access when they get hit with too many noncustomer 
transactions by developers. Are these other guys just gouging us with these fees?
Most third-party systems and managed service providers are in the same 
boat. They exist to support real production business use. They too have 
highly constrained system resources and assign first priority and capacity to 
live, revenue-generating customer needs first. They charge fees to your 
development and test teams because, in fact, they would usually rather not 
support preproduction environments at all.
One of our delivery/logistics customers is mainly accessed by their customers via 
their public APIs over the Internet in a SaaS model at no cost to the customer. But 
their cost to maintain an entirety of their systems for nonemployees to access is a 
significant cost. Despite being free, it is still one of the most common criticisms of 
their customers that the test environment provided doesn’t offer the capacity, data, 
or uptime of their production systems. 
The net effect of these fees is they create a disincentive to quality for everyone. 
When continuous integration* and validation become associated with 
unwanted costs, teams are discouraged from thorough testing throughout the 
software lifecycle, and the end user will feel the impact of poor quality and 
performance.
Stubs and Mocks Are Not Enough
How can we possibly address all the constraints considered in this chapter? 
One option would be to spend millions of dollars and undertake a huge 

Chapter 4 | Constraints: The Enemy of Agility 
26
configuration effort to try and replicate a copy of the production hardware 
and software environment with data in a unique physical lab for each team. 
That’s difficult to swallow and solves only the first constraint mentioned—
unavailable systems and limited capacity—without relieving any of the others. 
Therefore, we see developers turn to mocking or stubbing* those 
downstream systems by coding their own versions of the dependencies with 
dummy data. These mocking efforts can range from very simple “echo”-type 
units that always spit back a canned data response to very elaborate collections 
of stubs in a “responder framework” that are constantly being added and 
updated to fit the changing needs of dev and test teams. These stubs are 
usually only effective in development and give no relief to any other phase of 
the software lifecycle.
Developers should be building new functionality and making sure it 
works—not building stubs. Stubs and mocks are costly and time-consuming 
endeavors that are common in most development shops. They don’t provide 
the realism or reusability necessary to carry projects forward with any degree 
of predictability. Stubs set you up for later integration issues, late defect 
discovery, and troublesome scalability blind spots.
Often it will be hard to get teams to give up stubbing, as it is “the only way 
we’ve known” for most developers. But since huge collections of stubs can 
become a constraint in and of themselves, we must further discuss how to 
eliminate them with Service Virtualization.
Business executives often don’t appreciate the severity of the preceding 
software constraints on IT teams—until the constraints create a severe 
impact that makes the headlines: perhaps a needed product misses its 
promised date and the competition gets the upper hand; or the quality of the 
project gets sacrificed for cost or time reasons, resulting in critical failures in 
front of customers. It’s time for a better way to bring software development into 
balance with business.

a p t e r
5
What Is Service 
Virtualization?
.
The other half of Virtualization
it is important to understand the difference between Service Virtualization
and the well-known technologies on the market today that perform Server 
Virtualization*. Both are extremely useful solutions an enterprise can 
leverage to increase efficiency and reduce it costs (Figure 5-1).
server virtualization is sometimes called Hardware, desktop, os or 
application virtualization, and includes a mature class of solutions from 

Chapter 5 | What Is Service Virtualization?
28
vendors such as VMware, Citrix, Microsoft, IBM, CA, and many others, as 
well as some open source software tools. In a nutshell, Server Virtualization 
takes a given system you have access to and copies an image of it—hardware 
specs, operating system, and current applications it is running, as a Virtual 
Machine* (VM).  
Most Intel-based hardware or server resources on a network are being vastly 
under-utilized*. Companies tend to purchase new systems for each project 
and keep more capacity available than they really need. By making VMs and 
hosting them in an environment called a hypervisor*, the IT shop can run 
multiple VM images on just one server, increasing the utilization of each server 
and saving money by reducing the number of Intel boxes that must be 
purchased or housed in a server farm for the in-house computing needs of 
the company.
Conventional server virtualization is cool and creates a quick reduction in 
costs. But what about all the things we can’t grab and image as a VM? Our 
enterprise depends on systems that are extremely over-utilized* and critical 
for supporting the business. The constraints we mentioned earlier (mainframes, 
massive data stores, and third-party systems) are too bulky to be imaged as a 
VM. Moreover, these live environments are usually “locked down” and not 
available for conventional virtualization. It is in these over-utilized environments 
where Service Virtualization delivers a new level of efficiency and value.
Recall also that even if we can have access to a resource, it may still be heavily 
constraining. Data volatility, incomplete new features and functions, shared 
access, and capacity issues are still usually present. 
Figure 5-1. This figure compares Server Virtualization with Service Virtualization, 
contrasting between conventional Server (or Hardware) Virtualization solutions, which 
address under-utilized systems, and Service Virtualization (SV), which simulates over-utilized 
systems.

29
Service Virtualization
Creation of a Virtual Service
Service Virtualization creates an asset known as a Virtual Service* (VS), 
which is a system-generated software object that contains the instructions 
for a plausible “conversation”  between any two systems. 
Warning: It is important that there must be real software 
automation involved in the capture and modeling of the Virtual 
Service. Otherwise we are still talking about the “stubs” developers 
would manually code and maintain on their own.
Let’s say your team is developing an update to a key application that must 
make requests of a downstream mainframe and a cloud-based partner service  
(SaaS). Both of those downstream systems are unavailable for you to use to 
run your regression and performance tests throughout development. So you 
replace them with Virtual Services and get to work. Think of the VS as a 
reliable stand-in for those constrained and costly applications that you don’t 
want to expose to the daily grind and dangers of being set up, used, and reset 
for testing and integration purposes by developers.
We will cover alternate ways to build Virtual Services, but the fundamental 
process works this way (Figure 5-2):
1.  Capture: A “listener” is deployed wherever there is traffic or 
messages flowing between any two systems. Generally, the 
listener records data between the current version of the 
application under development and a downstream system that 
we seek to simulate.
2.  Model: Here the Service Virtualization solution takes the 
captured data and correlates it into a VS, which is a “conversation” 
of appropriate requests and responses that is plausible enough 
for use in development and testing. Sophisticated algorithms are 
employed to do this correctly.
3.  Simulate: The development team can now use the deployed 
Virtual Services on-demand as a stand-in for the downstream 
systems, which will respond to requests with appropriate data 
just as the real thing would, except with more predictable 
behaviors and much lower setup/teardown cost.
Remember: We say that a VS is “simulating” the constrained 
system for purposes of development and test, not “replaying” it in 
terms of a step-by-step sequence, as you would a recorded video. 
Sufficient dynamic logic  must be captured and modeled into a VS 
to allow it to respond with enough intelligence to support the 

Chapter 5 | What Is Service Virtualization?
30
variability of needed usage scenarios. The VS should resemble the 
live system closely enough to make upstream applications and test 
users think that they are interacting with the real thing for most 
needed scenarios.
Figure 5-2. This figure shows the basic process for creating a Virtual Service.
Options for Creating and Maintaining  
Virtual Services
The basic process we have outlined in the preceding three steps is the simplest 
way to describe how a VS is commonly captured and built out of live 
transactions.  However, when dealing with today’s complex IT environments, 
teams quickly discover that they may not be able to get sufficiently robust 
models from live transactions alone.
Virtual Services should offer the ability to develop for the future state of the 
environment as well as the boundary conditions we cannot reproduce simply 
by watching live traffic. For instance, hooking up the next generation 
application to a global sales partner will increase orders two orders of 
magnitude more than we’ve seen and will give us a number of different sales 
scenarios.
Options for creating Virtual Services vary depending upon the solution but 
may include the following (Figure 5-3):
• 
Capture from live traffic: Listen to transactions between 
systems at any available point where calls and responses 
occur between any servers, integration layers, or components. 
These will take the form of protocols such as HTTP, SOAP, 
JMS, JDBC, CICS*, and many more.

31
Service Virtualization
• 
Interpret from document: Take requirements or historical 
data recorded in a file, and parse that into a VS. For a simple 
starting point, take a WSDL definition or even a spreadsheet 
of data, and use it to model a first edition of the VS. Or take 
a day’s history of server logs and feed that data into a VS 
representing that day’s observed scenarios.
• 
Capture from agents: Sometimes you may have server-
side or internal logic that is not accessible for capture on the 
wire, but the application can have an “agent” internal to the 
application or server that pushes relevant events or message 
data out to be re-created as a VS. This advanced option is not 
always available, especially in production or heavily secured 
environments.
• 
Create the conversation manually: Assuming the 
developers already know the message protocol and payload 
being used, they can create the VS from scratch. 
In addition, teams need to maintain VS models to populate them with 
additional data and scenarios that the development project must support, as 
well as account for constant changes. Ideally the SV solution should make this 
process as intuitive and automated as possible. Options include the following:
• 
User modeling: The owner of the VS manages the 
“conversation tree” or behavior by using management tools 
to change logical flows, add or remove request/response 
Figure 5-3. How Virtual Services are created and maintained.

Chapter 5 | What Is Service Virtualization?
32
data, add or change operations not yet observed in the real 
world, and adjust the performance responsiveness to meet 
given scenario requirements.
• 
Self-healing: This capability is especially useful for keeping 
the VS relevant and reusable in fast-changing application 
environments. If an “unknown” type of request is made, the 
VS may pass that request through to the original system, and 
merge that observed response back into the model under 
user control.
There are an infinite number of ways to employ these methods to create and 
manage Virtual Services, some of which we will cover later as best practices 
in Chapters 8–11 of this book.
What Can You Make into a Virtual Service?
Almost any IT asset that your system can trade information with can be 
replaced by a VS. Companies have successfully simulated thousands of unique 
services, data sources, and systems, communicating over hundreds of 
heterogeneous forms of messaging protocols with a high degree of realism. 
Don’t believe me?
The list in Figure 5-4 is just a start of what you can use Service Virtualization 
to simulate. Practically any “conversation” between two systems becomes a 
VS source. You can also generate Virtual Services from system logs or 
requirements documents if a live transaction stream is not available.
Tip: Hey, won’t these guys complain about me virtualizing 
them? It’s important to remember that you aren’t copying any 
actual software code or application runtime assets into a Virtual 
Service. SV is only making a “live-like” simulation for your own 
development and testing purposes, based on observed transactions 
with that system or dependency. 
Remember: Most mainframe, system, and service providers 
welcome Service Virtualization and would rather NOT support 
nonproduction test partitions for your development teams. Even 
when high fees are involved, unique preprod instances are a pain 
for them to maintain too, and they usually represent a net cost to 
both the consumer and producer.

33
Service Virtualization
Virtual Environments Are Better than Real 
Environments for Dev and Test
Once a VS is created, it can be deployed and run in a Virtual Service 
Environment (VSE)*. Think about a VSE as a space for managing a lightweight 
version of everything you have virtualized from your architecture, whether it 
is running locally, in the data center, or housed in a private or public cloud. 
Most companies approach VSEs as team-shared resources within a software 
development group (Figure 5-5). Each VSE contains a catalog of several Virtual 
Services, which at any point in time may be idle or running independently of 
each other. New Virtual Services can be instantly spun up and ready to 
respond when invoked appropriately by any upstream system, and then spun 
down as soon as they are no longer needed.
Figure 5-4. What kinds of things can you simulate with Service Virtualization? This is just a 
representative list of technologies and service dependencies we’ve seen turned into Virtual 
Services by companies. Note that you do not have to “own” or be able to “copy” the whole 
application; you just need to have a system conduct transactions with it, or use a service 
requirements definition to start the process.

Chapter 5 | What Is Service Virtualization?
34
Wait a minute—is this Virtual Service Environment 
replacing the live environment all the way up to 
production?
Actually, we don’t recommend that—as tempting as it seems given the 
efficiencies! Software teams should still perform the “last mile” of User 
Acceptance testing against live applications. Despite great wind tunnels and 
flight simulators, we still perform a series of real test flights prior to delivery 
of a completed aircraft to the public. The value is that we can reach this stage 
much faster and with higher quality.
Until that last mile of the entire Software Development Lifecycle* (SDLC) 
process, using a VSE for development and test is actually much better 
than using the real thing. Unlike a physical environment, which is constrained, 
limited, and highly volatile, a VSE is always ready instantly, 24/7, without 
conflicts from other teams. It is prestocked with stable, reliable data setups 
that provide support for all needed scenarios. It can be ratcheted to perform 
faster or slower. 
Best of all, when development teams use a VSE to test often and early,  
even at component levels, there will be far fewer defects delivered into that 
last mile, which further reduces the burden on your production-ready 
environments.
Figure 5-5. Virtual Service Environments are used by multiple teams within an enterprise 
software development organization. When a team’s system under test makes a downstream 
request, it calls the address of a Virtual Service running in the Virtual Service Environment, 
which responds with valid data and performance based on the scenario needed.

35
Service Virtualization
Tech Note: We elaborate on managing VSEs (including local, 
server, and private and public cloud-based environments) in our 
chapters on “Best Practices” (Chapters 8-11) and “DevTest Cloud”  
(Chapter 13). 


a p t e r
6
Capabilities of 
Service 
Virtualization 
Technology
When I first heard of Service Virtualization, I immediately thought, “It’s magic; 
there’s no way it’s going to work that way.” It’s difficult to explain as it really 
doesn’t seem like the capabilities are truly possible. So I asked my most 
skeptical group from development to use it. To justify the approach, we had to 
prove how many people were being pulled off of value-added projects to build 
testing and training stubs, which are throwaway efforts anyway.
We abstracted over 20 complex services over the course of the first 5 weeks, 
and now SV allows us to separate development and engineering for about 75 
percent of the lifecycle, and do true end-to-end testing only at the end so we 
can have much faster time-to-market.
— sven Gerjets, svP, directv
once the power of virtualizing everything in software development becomes 
understood, it will create ripples throughout the organization.
service virtualization will certainly cause a change in mindset, and raise the 
bar on everyone for delivering faster releases with higher quality. the most 
highly valued teams will thrive by learning new skills, such as identifying and 
replacing external constraints, collaborating with more distributed teams to 

Chapter 6 | Capabilities of Service Virtualization Technology
38
resolve issues and dependencies, and reducing cycle time by leveraging Virtual 
Services for parallel development.
What follows are a number of unique capabilities your organization should 
look for in a Service Virtualization solution. 
“Live-Like” Development Environment
Our enterprise software now lives in a heterogeneous, distributed, and highly 
interdependent world. Just stubbing the next downstream end point with a 
small set of dummy data responses isn’t enough anymore. Development teams 
require far more realism from their virtual environments, and a much wider 
variety of upstream and downstream systems must be realistically simulated 
in their lab environments. 
Service Virtualization should be ready and available in between every layer 
where dependencies exist, to provide an environment that is realistic and 
“live-like” enough for development and testing to go forward. A big part of 
that is the requirement for Stateful* business logic. 
Figure 6-1. Stateless stubs vs.  “live-like” stateful Virtual Services. The most obvious 
distinction between manually coded stubs (shown at top) and realistic Virtual Services 
(shown at bottom) is usually the live-like Virtual Service response pattern of statefulness, 
which maintains the context of key dynamic variables such as customer IDs, session IDs, 
dates, cumulative figures and amounts, and even variable response times where a given 
scenario may wait for a response. 

39
Service Virtualization
Most manually built stubs are stateless*, meaning you can only depend upon 
getting a rote answer back from them, with little awareness of the current 
transaction’s situation within the business workflow (Figure 6-1). This leads to 
invalid results—either “false positives” or “false negatives” that can make the 
effort a waste of time.
When teams work based on real data scenarios and stateful dynamic behaviors 
captured with SV, their productivity levels are higher, as the resulting 
environment responds with dynamic data in the appropriate context, and in a 
more current representation than the collections of stubs that must be 
manually coded and maintained.
However, note that we said SV should be “live-LIKE,” not REAL. Real system 
data is unwieldy to manage, and the responses are highly volatile and 
unpredictable. A needed customer scenario that is available in the real system 
today may be completely invalid and disappear tomorrow, but in our 
development and test environment, we need that scenario to be there 
whenever we ask for it. We need the ability to set our environment to 
represent a specific customer type, in the context of yesterday, or today, or 
tomorrow, whenever we need it to be. SV offers this ability, which is one 
reason it is “better than live” for most of the lifecycle.
Expected Capabilities
• 
Ability to start development despite interface system or 
downstream system unavailability
• 
Support for stateful transactions to maintain the context of 
dynamic elements such as dates/times, session IDs, human 
input points, and variable wait times as they flow across 
multiple systems
• 
Improved code quality due to early access to realistic 
environments, with increased scenario test coverage and 
regression testing ability
• 
Reduced data dependency with fewer access and schedule 
conflicts due to the status of other applications
Automation Eliminates Manual Stubbing  
and Maintenance 
Before SV, if we were developing a web UI and didn’t want to wait around, we 
would build a stub to generate a couple expected responses from the next 
layer down, (i.e., the web service). Then the web service developers might 

Chapter 6 | Capabilities of Service Virtualization Technology
40
stub out their underlying ESB layers, or try to mock up some of the user 
requests from the web UI, and so on.
Realize that even when we see significant effort in a stub or 
mock from the development team, the test team cannot use those 
for themselves because they are ineffective for anything but development’s 
limited set of use cases. This is in fact one of the greatest issues with 
stubbing: it (on purpose) creates an unrealistic environment for the 
development team that is only sorted out when the QA group puts the 
code against the real system behaviors. Only then do we discover how 
unrealistic the stubs were. Practically every customer we know has this 
sense of their projects’ defect discovery being too late. Leveraging SV 
both in development and QA will make it happen faster. 
Unfortunately, this is a manual process that is never sufficient to encapsulate 
the many types of connections and data that exist within enterprise software 
architectures. Just keeping up with the variability and constant changes of 
other systems becomes a never-ending process in itself. In addition, the 
stubbing of those underlying layers may be completely stalled if the UIs or 
downstream systems aren’t yet coded (Figure 6-2).
Figure 6-2. Before-and-after automated capture of Virtual Services is shown here. A Service 
Virtualization solution automatically builds Virtual Services from observed live messages and 
transactions, system logs, and definition documents, allowing development and test to 
proceed without wasting time waiting or building and maintaining inadequate stubs.

41
Service Virtualization
The critical capability here is the automation of VS creation and data 
maintenance. This automation happens first during the process of listening to 
messages and capturing the VS from live traffic, or generating the VS from a 
design document or transaction log. The initial creation should require very 
little intervention and time on the part of developers. As a rule of thumb, the 
resulting services should be on average 90–95 percent complete for the 
scenarios needed by the team—or by definition, the solution is not automated.
Usually letting observation run on a fairly active message stream for a few 
minutes, or around 1,000 transactions, allows patterns to be recognized and 
provides plenty of data to populate a VS. Of course, teams may manually 
model or tweak the VS to add scenarios that couldn’t be gathered in the 
automated capture process—things like very rare edge scenarios and 
nonfunctional use cases.
Virtual Service, Heal Thyself
Automation isn’t just for faster creation. Remember, one of the biggest time 
wastes for developers is the maintenance of complicated and brittle “stub 
libraries” in an attempt to keep up with the many changes that occur in a fast-
changing environment. Ironically, we must both improve our ability to isolate 
our teams from each other and yet also increase their ability to deal with the 
interdependent changes they are all constantly making.
Once a VS exists, the idea of “self-healing”  comes into play, as we attempt 
to expand our testing to cover new use cases, or we discover changes and 
learn new information about the downstream systems that should be reflected 
in the model of the VS.
Let’s say that the VS gets an unknown request that it doesn’t have a plausible 
response for. Rather than just break or return a random default value, the VS 
can be set to “pass through” and ask a live system for a response, then note 
that request and response type for possible inclusion in the model of the VS 
(Figure 6-3).
Figure 6-3. Self-healing of Virtual Services allows the data model to be updated from live 
systems.

Chapter 6 | Capabilities of Service Virtualization Technology
42
Automation allows development teams to achieve realistic virtual lab 
environments with far less effort, even if the user interface is incomplete, 
while spending less time working to create and modify outdated stubs.
Expected Capabilities
• 
Ability to automatically capture, build, and change a simulator 
quickly with minimal cost and effort that supports most of 
the needed requirements of the dependent systems
• 
Natively understands the heterogeneous messaging protocols 
and format requirements of the requesting and responding 
technologies with little adaptation or custom extension 
required
• 
Self-healing from live systems to keep Virtual Services up-to-
date with constantly changing composite applications 
• 
Eliminates manual stubbing, maintenance, and data collection, 
allowing teams to focus on delivering new functionality
• 
Leverages the developers’ task of creating Virtual Services 
not just for their use, but as reusable assets that can be used 
by other teams to respond dynamically throughout later 
integration and validation phases of the software lifecycle as 
well.
Enables Parallel Dev and Test 
When dev and test teams can work simultaneously using SV, the overall 
software lifecycle reaches a whole new level of efficacy and efficiency. New 
solutions can be delivered much faster, at great value to the organization.
In parallel dev and test activities, Virtual Services act as the “go-between” 
assets between the System Under Development (SUD) and the System Under 
Test (SUT) in a symbiotic fashion. In Figure 6-4, the timeline on the bottom is 
a team developing an order management service (OMS), while the team at the 
top is developing and testing an “e-store” web app that constantly interacts 
with the OMS. 
Here’s a rundown of how SV, combined with the parallel development and 
test process, helps these two teams work faster while staying out of each 
other’s way:
1.  A VS (OMS-VS-1) is captured from the current, live OMS system 
as an initial back end for the e-store’s ongoing development. 

43
Service Virtualization
Figure 6-4. Parallel dev and test is shown between two teams using Virtual Services.

Chapter 6 | Capabilities of Service Virtualization Technology
44
2.  Then as the e-store’s development continues, using the VS for 
testing as they go, they can communicate back any unexpected 
or new response requirements as “feedback” to the OMS team 
as a modified VS (VS-1a). 
3.  For the OMS team, that VS-1a from the e-store essentially 
becomes additional customer requirements for their own 
development and testing. 
4.  At any time, the e-store can take another VS (OMS-VS-2) by 
observing the latest actual build of OMS, and use it to update 
and make changes to the model they are working and testing 
against.
5.  Each parallel development and test cycle continues to accel-
erate, as each iteration of VS model updates happens with each 
new build, and feedback happens faster and faster. Both teams 
can move forward toward release with less dependency, while 
being better synched up with changes.
The perfect parallel development solution allows teams to execute against the live 
services at regular intervals when they are available, functionally robust, and data 
synchronized. And in those cases where teams do not yet have services that support 
the component correctly, they can switch immediately back to Virtual Services. 
This capability to “flip a switch” between using a purely virtual downstream 
system through Virtual Services and the latest version of the live system is an 
inherent enabler of parallel development. SV means knowing that you always 
can go back if a new build breaks, or check in changes in a very lightweight 
fashion if a new data scenario is required. 
Is your practice of generating and updating software lab 
environments keeping in touch with reality? In essence, the parallelism 
of SV truly enables the quickness we expected of Agile development for 
complex software environments—by more closely aligning dev and test cycles 
with business release goals in tight iterative releases.
Expected Capabilities
• 
Allows parallel development and collaboration for ever-
increasing speed of development and test cycles
• 
Enables true “agile” responsiveness of Agile iterations, with 
continuous integration and builds aligned around test results 
and business requirements

45
Service Virtualization
• 
Reduces the burden of version control, works with existing 
development and test management tools to make them more 
effective
• 
Increases the rate of issue acceptance and resolution prior to 
production
• 
Delivers function points up to 60 percent faster, with higher 
quality and accuracy to specification due to better alignment 
among teams
Geek Out: Parallelism demands that SV is a “vendor neutral” 
substrate for the tools of choice that teams may have in place, so 
there is less re-training required to reach productivity. SV should 
provide target environments to work alongside existing application 
lifecycle solutions such as Test Management (TM), Defect 
Management/Issue Tracking, and leading Hardware and Test Lab 
Virtualization products that exist in the environment.


a p t e r
7
Where to Start 
with Service 
Virtualization?
at a recent tradeshow, the cio of a leading investment bank came up to me 
after a presentation, talking about the woes of meeting his company’s business 
objectives for new functionality. 
He explained to me that every year, before he submits his strategic development 
plan to the executive management team for review, he would go through and 
reduce the number of projects delivered by 50 percent. and then, going into the 
last quarter of the year, he would reduce the expected success rate on those 
projects by another 50 percent. there was just no way for him to predict when 
projects would get done, and how often his teams would have to go back and 
fix something that went wrong. the horror story of this cio who must keep 
rationing executive expectations on new software features downward by 50 
percent—much like a trapped miner rationing his water—is not unique to 
investment banking. constraints drag down any company with an it delivery 
component, and they will only become worse as software becomes more 
complex.
How can we gain enough velocity to escape from our constraints?
First of all, Service Virtualization is a TRANSFoRMATIoNAl
approach to delivering business technology that begins with 
You, not someone else. If you take nothing else away from 
this book, take this.

Chapter 7 | Where to Start with Service Virtualization?
48
• 
If you are in management, you must manage and incentivize 
SV, or it won’t happen. 
• 
If you are in development, you must flip a switch in your 
mind to realize that using virtual environments is more 
productive than using live systems.
We should accept that we are all paddling this leaky software boat together, 
from developers and testers to IT operations and field teams to our biggest 
SI partners to the VPs and CXOs who manage the programs and budgets. 
There is no value to be gained in pointing fingers at one group for the kinds 
of endemic delays and failures that are happening today. Software constraints 
hinder every aspect of the enterprise’s ability to deliver for customers.
In our engagements, we’ve found certain organizational decisions will 
dramatically impact the value a company receives from SV. Without getting 
into the messy details of an assessment and delivery process, let’s take a look 
at some examples of these.
IT Executives Must Manage and Incentivize SV,  
or It Won’t Happen
Once I ran into a VP of Development at an industry event who started an SV 
project six months prior. He said to me, “I made this investment in SV software, 
and gave it to my developers and IT partners . . . It’s great stuff but how come I’m 
not seeing 30 percent lower costs?” 
To which I replied, “Did you adjust your actual development budget per feature 
down by 30 percent? Does anything happen to your developers if they do or don’t 
reduce cycle time by 30 percent?” 
If you are in the position of considering funding an initiative, I can almost 
guarantee that transformative results WILL NOT happen without a 
transformation in your own expectations. This may sound harsh, but in other 
words—you will not get the results from SV you want if you don’t incent 
and manage to them. 
Who is handling the bulk of your development, testing, and delivery work? If 
you invested in SV for your teams, as management, it is up to you to require 
that they consume it in your projects. SV is not a dessert option on their 
buffet of tools. It is the buffet. 

49
Service Virtualization
A transition may be painful—so how do I break this 
to my teams?
How many times has an IT manager been ordered by the EMT and/or Board, 
seemingly arbitrarily: “YOU must remove $20 million (or $100 million) from the 
software development budget.” or “YOU must lay off 1/3 of the service workforce 
and use this offshore partner.” or “YOU must have this software ready within six 
months or else . . .” Well, you will also have to exercise some level of prerogative 
of your own. 
It’s not like you have to force SV on teams because it is unpleasant or risky—
it offers a much faster and less frustrating development experience in so many 
ways. However, there is a huge amount of inertia to overcome in the existing 
process, as it is the “devil they know.”
We’ve seen that developers and testers and performance teams may be 
resistant. If their paycheck cashes either way, they may use a VS to get past 
one hurdle in a project, then go right back to the way it was—waiting on each 
other or putting together poor workarounds. This means they are not 
focusing on the business need at hand. 
This may not be fun, and it may make you unpopular for a while. But you must 
incent your teams financially and with real goals to make development happen 
better, faster, and cheaper. And you must consistently manage their goals 
publicly, so they share accountability to get it done. Goals like the following:
• 
“You will eliminate the 30 percent 
padding time we used to add at 
the end of each release cycle for 
unexpected lag time.”
• 
“Any defects released to QA will be 
reviewed in the group meeting and 
responsible development teams 
will need to demonstrate how the 
component environment was or 
was not virtualized.”
• 
“We are reducing the development 
budget for the next product release 
by $1.2 million. If you aren’t going 
to make it, I will need to know 
why.”

Chapter 7 | Where to Start with Service Virtualization?
50
The same also holds true for your business partners and vendors who can 
benefit from SV enablement. If you hold those contracts, you need to convey 
your expectations of SV and make partners stick to them.
Let’s say you have a supplier partner who charges you for integrating their 
order systems to your purchasing service. If they can now leverage your VS 
instead of writing their own stubs, you should tell them, “I know we’ve just 
reduced your development cost—so if this doesn’t pass on a cost reduction to my 
company, let’s review the terms!”
Identify Stakeholders (The SV War Council)
So you have located the problems. Now how will you overcome the resistance 
to change that is inevitable in any extended enterprise? 
Even if one individual owns ultimate responsibility for an implementation, we 
have found that the most successful adoptions of SV happen when ownership 
is shared among a small group of leaders grounded in different disciplines. We 
will call this the “SV War Council,” but you can call it a Task Force, Tiger 
Team, Drum Circle . . . whatever works in your culture. The promise of faster 
innovation, fewer customer problems, and lower costs can benefit everyone, 
so look for champions who understand these benefits. This team will open 
doors and provide workarounds, so the project can move forward smoothly.
While the council responsible for carrying out the SV strategy may vary 
depending on the politics and organizational structure of your company, it 
works best when it spans several competencies:
• 
Line-of-Business Executive: Someone responsible for 
delivering current customer-facing projects that depend on 
software.
• 
IT Operations/Environments: Someone responsible for 
provisioning or managing software development environments.
• 
SVP/Development Owner: Someone who owns overall 
software development/delivery functions and who clearly 
understands the scope of the constraints.
• 
Trusted Architect: This is one of the “masterminds” in the 
company who tends to know the current state and future 
plans for the company’s software road map and integration 
infrastructure.
• 
QA and/or Performance Team Lead: One or two leads 
who are experiencing the day-to-day constraints of lack of 
capacity, unavailable systems, and compressed timelines.

51
Service Virtualization
• 
Service Partner Lead: If applicable, the smartest lead 
consultants from your strategic SI partners who are helping 
to carry development or testing projects forward should also 
be eager to participate and provide perspective. (And if your 
partner discourages SV efficiencies because it may reduce 
some billable work hours, you might call that a bad sign . . .)
Secure an executive sponsor responsible for business P&L*, not 
just the IT guys. While successful SV initiatives offer huge efficiency 
benefits to the IT organization, they usually start with executive sponsorship 
and an alignment to real, customer-facing business objectives (read: Revenue). 
Time-to-market benefits usually lead the pack for what motivates this 
executive sponsor—because if a business can depend on delivering a critical 
new product or service to customers 30–50 percent faster, without fail the 
revenue and cost benefits will certainly follow, as will a lasting competitive 
advantage.
Who Should Use Service Virtualization First?
Do we start our journey with the cliché of “low-hanging fruit?” Not this time.
Ever try out a new stain remover? The instructions will say to “test on the 
material in a less noticeable area” first. Well, we think the opposite should 
apply to your earliest SV efforts. 
Advice: Pick a hairy problem  first. Go find the biggest, most 
stubborn goat of a software problem that exists in your 
environment. You know, the one everyone’s complaining about 
that makes delivery run late and over budget. Locate a key software-
enabled initiative with many moving parts, including big mainframe 
availability and data conflicts that are eating untold hours and 
dollars. Tell them you can use SV to decouple those complex 
constraints in days or weeks of modeling, not months or years of 
coding. Nobody will believe this is possible.
Why start with a hairy problem? This group should be ready and willing to try 
something new. When the constraints are already well known, failure is 
certain if something doesn’t change. The potential improvements of eliminating 
the constraints will be massive. Yes, you could pick something easy, but would 
that make believers out of the organization?
Involve experienced resources for starters.
Since the challenges it must solve are complex, SV initiatives happen best 
when accompanied by seasoned people who can lead the rollout strategy. By 
bringing experienced resources to bear, initial rollouts lead to early successes, 

Chapter 7 | Where to Start with Service Virtualization?
52
and participants in the process will become experts who can teach other 
teams. Over time, the practice will become a core competency of the 
organization. 
One typical place to start is with whoever owns development and/or 
performance environments.  These teams are usually over-utilized them-
selves—trying to provision, configure, and maintain an ever-increasing sprawl 
of servers, images, and lab capacity for multiple projects. Replacing much of 
that activity with SV lifts a huge burden, while positively impacting the 
productivity of many others who depend on these environments to do their 
job.
Another good approach we’ve seen is when the rollout team recruits 
developers who are already manually coding and maintaining stubs and 
mocks.  These tireless workers already understand the nature of having to 
code around missing components and constrained mainframes by “faking out” 
those systems. There may be a little resistance to letting go of all of that hard 
work, but it wasn’t wasted effort. Building stubs made these teams understand 
the location and difficulty of constraints.
Chances are that coding and maintaining these “responder frameworks” was 
the least satisfying part of the developers’ jobs, and quite thankless. The assets 
produced early in development were brittle and inadequate for supporting 
later integration and testing cycles. By giving them a way to automate that 
process with SV, they can carry forward a new set of reusable Virtual Services, 
and instead focus on building tighter integrations and killer new functionality 
that will make them look like heroes.
There are other scenarios for initial SV users besides these. Generally the 
ideal first adopters will be groups with a better than average technical grasp 
of your architecture, and first-hand experience with the constraints that 
plague software development and delivery.
Set Real Value Goals for Releases
Set value goals for the first SV project up front. While it is tempting for a team 
to kick off the install ASAP and start virtualizing some annoying constraints, 
don’t skimp on the value. The rest of the organization is watching and will 
often meter their expectations of SV based on the success of that first project. 
Setting a goal and measuring the value from the beginning enables your 
organization to support future projects with confidence.

53
Service Virtualization
How does my company expect to create value  
from Service Virtualization?
Every company has different priorities for value. These priorities are usually 
set at the executive or business operations level, then translated into goals 
that the IT and software development functions can use in their own planning. 
Value goals may be forward-looking—for instance, a company in a growth 
market may state “an obsession with innovation” and value the agile delivery 
of advanced new features above all else. Other companies will care more 
about process metrics like maximizing efficiency and reducing defects. Or, a 
company may only look at hard-dollar benefits and cost savings. 
There is an old maxim in software development of “faster, better, or cheaper: 
you can’t get all three.” While that used to hold true, SV has the power to 
change this equation. So for purposes of this book, we’ll just call the three 
value goals “Faster, Better, Cheaper” (Table 7-1).
Table 7-1. Sample Value Goals for a Service Virtualization Initiative. These are typically 
discrete numbers based on the strategic objectives of the company for the IT/software 
delivery function.
Faster 
Better
Cheaper
Decrease software 
cycle times from 6 
months to 3 months
Reduce defects delivered to 
QA and production by 50%
Lower labor and overtime costs 
for testing and break-fix by 30%
Increase the number of 
function points 
delivered per release by 
20% per year
Bring systems into 
compliance with new 
privacy and data regulations 
by this year
Avoid planned $20M capital 
outlay for new software 
integration and performance 
labs
Successfully get to 
market with a critical 
new service by August 
ahead of competition
Increase customer 
satisfaction survey results to 
average 4.0 and reduce 
complaints by 25%
Eliminate third-party fees and 
capacity charges in nonrevenue 
systems by $7.5M/year or 90%
These are just some example value goals we’ve seen stated before adoption 
in the field. Most companies follow the limitation that they can’t get all three—
and only pick goals for one benefit such as cost reduction over the others. 
With SV, those boundaries on software development will finally become 
obsolete.

Chapter 7 | Where to Start with Service Virtualization?
54
Remember: If the only justification for investing in SV is to “get a 
better TOOL” for a given task, the resulting value will be limited by 
definition. To the company at large, SV will just be a patch that 
helped complete the next step in a project, and therefore progress 
with SV becomes dormant when the project ends. The real value 
of SV is only realized when a genuine transformation is expected, 
one that changes the way applications are developed and tested, 
now and in the future.
Avoid Inappropriate Technologies
As of the publish date of this book, SV is still an emerging solution space in 
the software development industry—so unfortunately you won’t find objective 
views from the usual sources in the press and analyst community on what SV 
vendors have to offer today. In addition, you will find software in the market 
that claims to be SV, when it is actually outside of SV as defined by your 
humble authors (who invented, coined the term, and patented the first SV 
technology).
We’ve already covered how SV is the concept of virtualization, only applied 
to software instead of hardware. Server virtualization solutions such as 
VMware require that you have access and ability to image a resource from 
things like Intel boxes, hardware, and desktop software. Here are some other 
applications that are not representative of a SV solution:
SV does not replace your ALM software 
Most software shops own a set of tools for Application Lifecycle 
Management (or ALM).  This broad and mature technology space covers 
the scheduling, organization, and workflow tasks of software development—
from requirements and test management to source code control to issue 
tracking and release management to other similar project tasks that teams 
need to collaborate on. Whether your firm standardizes on a big vendor like 
HP or IBM or leverages a combination of boutique software and open source, 
these tools are very useful for managing the process, but not the environment. 
ALM benefits greatly from SV, which contributes the environments and VS 
assets to the process, in order to shift that project left for earlier testing and 
delivery. Since different teams select different ALM tools, your SV environments 
should work with any ALM, test, or requirements tool of choice.

55
Service Virtualization
More than a simplistic “record-playback” tool
Another set of solutions on the market automates a very specific task of 
recording a stream of message requests and responses, then in effect “playing 
the session back” in the same order as it was observed. This is the back-end 
equivalent of the old way UI testing tools would record “click stream” activity 
and make that into a procedural sequence that followed the user’s mouse and 
keystrokes around the screen. It may be useful for some tasks such as replaying 
the exact responses of a given scenario, but it doesn’t represent the dynamic 
variability of the application environment needed.
Will not require a specific vendor integration or 
business application platform
Composite enterprise applications are by nature becoming more distributed 
and heterogeneous every day. Therefore, a SV platform should take this into 
account and not require you to “rip and replace” existing integration and 
business applications with the other systems of a specific vendor in order to 
realize the benefits of robust simulation. If you can only successfully virtualize 
one stovepipe of proprietary technology, your teams will still be constrained 
by any systems falling outside of that vendor’s standards.


Intermission
Go ahead and take a break. You now know what Service Virtualization 
technology is, and what it can do to accelerate the software development 
lifecycle. You’ve earned it.
MEDITATIoN EXERCISE:
Based on what you’ve learned so far, meditate for a while on other 
parallels of using simulation to solve real-world problems in other 
industries. Service Virtualization is like . . .
. . . a wind tunnel used in car design, as you can’t test aerodynamics from inside 
the car. SV is a wind tunnel for your apps where you can control the environment 
around it . . .
. . . a stuntman or stand-in on the movie set, to replace expensive actors for 
dangerous stunts or nonproduction scenes when you don’t need a close-up, at 
lower risk and cost . . .
. . . a flight simulator for planning aircraft design and training pilots to fly in 
noncritical simulated settings . . .

58 | Intermission
 . . . the holodeck from Star Trek, only for app dev . . .
 . . . a fake Wild West town, where your app can “shoot it out” with dependencies, 
but the “buildings” and “mountains” are all cheap set pieces . . .
 . . . a test harness from the world of electronics design . . .
 . . . arranging and planning your design layouts with thumbnail images instead of 
full-size ones . . .
 . . . the dreams of software . . .
Next, let’s cover the Four Best Practices of Service Virtualization. These 
are the most successful adoption trends we’ve noticed at some of the largest 
enterprises, facing the biggest challenges. In the “New Virtual” science of 
software development, a strong methodology backed by experienced teams 
that continually learn and adapt is the key to realizing lasting customer success.

c h a p t e r
8
Best Practice 1: 
Deliver Faster
I once worked with a contractor who did a great job on a couple interface design 
projects, but unfortunately, both took him twice as long as he estimated. Though he 
gave me a discount, I still had to pick up much of the work along the way, and his 
excuse was always “I just got too busy.” Of course, about six months later, he wasn’t 
busy at all—and asked me if I had any more work for him. “Sure, next time I have 
a project that doesn’t have a deadline, I’ll call you . . .”
With software, we always want to deliver faster. In composite application 
environments,  Waterfall development approaches slow down results because 
of the constraints of unavailable or unready systems throughout the software 
development lifecycle. By the time software is integrated, fitted with an 
interface, and reaches QA, the defects that surface are much more difficult 
and costly to fix. The component-level code development and integration 
work is already baked into the product.
To answer this, development teams naturally tried Agile development to 
attempt to produce a more frequent rhythm of smaller releases with tighter 
scope. The Agile approach of rapid unit-test-first development, standups, and 
scrums is indeed a faster way for developers to work—if they were building 
stand-alone applications without constraints.
For most of today’s composite applications, when multiple teams’ Agile 
releases hit the integration, performance, and user acceptance phases, they 
stack up and wait to be synchronized for testing. The developers may think 
they are “done and onto the next” bit of coding, when they are often still 
delivering unready components over the wall into QA. 

Chapter 8 | Best Practice 1: Deliver Faster
60
Figure 8-1. Faster Delivery with “shift-left” means testing is enabled far earlier in the SDLC 
by the use of Service Virtualization, as each team can validate and tune their own 
development in parallel at a component level, while also reducing the number of defects that 
must be fixed later in QA or UAT, resulting in overall faster releases.
By eliminating the constraints common in typical software development 
approaches, much of the SDLC becomes parallel again, even with multiple 
teams working in the most complex distributed environments. Much of the 
testing at a component and integration level should “shift-left,”  or be moved 
earlier in the SDLC (Figure 8-1). To shift-left, Service Virtualization is applied 
so each component is tested individually in the context of its real environment, 
instead of waiting for issues to surface later during assembly when they are 
costliest to remediate. 
Shift-Left truly enables the Agile goal of TDD (Test-Driven Development), as 
developers can prove their software with realistic testing and fix issues before 
checking in code, or moving onto the next task and declaring a component 
“ready for integration.” Regression and performance testing happens earlier 
with far more complete coverage, so more defects and potential conflicts are 
caught before integration or user acceptance testing activities. 
Reducing Wait Time 
through Virtual 
Privacy
We’ve discussed how much 
time developers spend waiting 
on each other. Most enterprise 
developers we talk to admit 
spending at least a third of
©iStockphoto.com/Nicole S. Young

61
Service Virtualization
their time waiting on downstream system and data dependencies, even when 
using Agile development approaches. 
With SV, developers can truly be autonomous, leveraging their own private 
environments for developing code. We call this aspect of Shift-Left “Virtual 
Privacy”  because just like putting on headphones or closing the office door 
and holding phone calls, the isolation it grants is ideal for allowing developers 
to concentrate on the task of coding toward business goals with fewer 
distractions.
Imagine this private virtual environment where developers:
• 
Get an on-demand lab that contains very current, known 
aspects of the “as is” or “to be” test harness of the target 
application environment they will deliver their code into
• 
No longer need to call IT Operations to procure and provision 
new servers and software, or beg and borrow capacity and 
time from another team
• 
Never queue up for shared environments during development
• 
Never maintain their own VM images of environments they 
only need as a dependency
• 
Never wait on the bench for other developers to finish their 
new services—they can even start work based on a contract 
or definition of how the service-to-be will function when 
complete
• 
Never again write and maintain libraries of stubs and mocks, 
which are usually too simplistic and brittle for most tasks 
anyway
• 
Perform early and complete validation and regression testing 
of their code for fewer defects per cycle
Since Virtual Services are generally far more lightweight than their real-world 
counterparts, it is easy to store and retrieve them at will with far less system 
overhead. Some developers even keep a small “personal cloud” as a VSE on 
their laptop, which is perfectly suitable for supporting most component 
development tasks. 
Certainly, when you implement SV environments into your project plans, you 
can expect the practice to start shifting toward parallel development, as well 
as individual developer productivity and quality (and job satisfaction, most 
likely). 
i

Chapter 8 | Best Practice 1: Deliver Faster
62
Kill Stubs Now, or Pay Later
After years of manually building unit tests and mocking frameworks alongside 
their code, some developers will be hesitant to change—and will want to 
continue mocking up quick stubs. But unless they are working on very 
simplistic apps, there is so much detail needed by the consuming application 
that calling it “something I can mock up quickly” means they don’t 
understand the true nature of the problem.
Replacing component-level stubs isn’t just a nice-to-have feature for quality 
and time savings. For complex applications, it is mandatory that we replace 
stubs in order to reliably deliver on business requirements.
When developers make stubs early in development, they quickly code them 
for a simplistic or “happy path” view of the responses in the target environment. 
The best they can do with this artifact is make a “round trip” from their 
component software to the stub to prove connectivity to that stub. Once the 
code checks out against the stub, the developers usually move on to the next 
task. 
Unfortunately when carried forward into integration, UAT, and release phases, 
that early developer use of stubs invariably produces unintended consequences. 
The problems that may appear later in the SDLC aren’t just quality issues—
they are often missed requirements. The cost to the business of correcting a 
defect or missed requirement in QA or deployment is astronomical—1,000 
times or much more, in comparison to fixing that issue during early 
development (Figure 8-2).
Figure 8-2. The high cost of developing with stubs. When developers code against very 
simplistic manually built stubs, they get little context into the real environment and then 
move on to other projects once that code is thrown over the wall. Repair and remediation 
costs later in the software lifecycle increase exponentially as a result.
Let me explain: If every customer response for a stub has the exact same profile 
and the exact same address, account balance, etc. all with hard coded values and 

63
Service Virtualization
dates, then that stub only proves ONE needed scenario. But what about customers 
with high account balances? What about old invoices? What about transactions that 
occurred yesterday—and will they work the same tomorrow when that date becomes 
two days ago?
The problem with a stub is that it can never realistically be coded dynamically 
enough to support the increasingly complex variety of scenarios needed for a 
real-world application. Now is the time to stop making assumptions about 
how developed components will work once they are integrated. Regain that 
wasted time spent coding stubs, and have developers Shift-Left to build in 
quality from the start using SV instead. 
Sprint: Putting Shift-Left in Practice
We are trying to avoid what we call “system test gridlock.” App A waits on App 
B, they wait on App C, and everybody delays real-system testing. We looked at 
adopting Service Virtualization as a way to take all of those excuses out of the 
lifecycle for the development teams we depend on. So we started with an 
in-store app as our pilot and built 80 Virtual Services in the first two-week 
project, which enabled us to do system testing for that app in a stand-alone 
way we could never do before. 
Now a year later, we have more than 300 Virtual Services built. The primary 
benefit of SV was our ability to cut down the release cycle time and improve 
the quality of the code much earlier in the lifecycle. In very complex integration 
environments you need this ability. 
We had an incredibly important external integration project coming up. With 
SV, we were able to promote a Virtual Service as a specification of how we 
would expose APIs to our partner. We had that Virtual Service built and 
running within 24 hours of getting those design requirements, and our partners 
were thrilled with that result. SV has enabled us to “Shift-Left” and get our 
most important products to market faster.
— Jamie Williams, IT Director, Sprint-Nextel
Let’s take a slightly more detailed look at Sprint. With more than 300 complex 
enterprise services currently under management or development behind the 
scenes of its customer-facing apps, the development teams were facing serious 
integration and timeline issues in their test environments. The goal was to 
shave time off testing and release cycles so that the projects would come in 
on time for the launch of critical new customer features. 
Sprint was introducing new capabilities to their retail store management 
system, which relies on extensive calls into back-end systems to get customer 
data and provision new handsets. Typically, any meaningful system testing on 

Chapter 8 | Best Practice 1: Deliver Faster
64
Figure 8-3. A Shift-Left pilot project with Service Virtualization at Sprint. Project teams are shown in horizontal “swimlanes” as 
they apply Virtual Services to reduce timelines and increase test coverage levels. (Some proprietary project phase names have 
been removed from these captured project results.)

65
Service Virtualization
code changes in this application was blocked until the shakeout of many back-
end systems and middleware was completed in the end-to-end (ETE) test 
environment.  
By virtualizing the services that the retail store application depended on, 
meaningful system testing was able to occur much earlier in the lifecycle than 
ever before (Figure 8-3). The first pilot project’s System Test phase was 
completed two weeks earlier than before and covered more scope. The 
coverage and quality results of system testing during the pilot were a whole 
lot better as well. Testing during the pilot with Virtual Services allowed system 
test teams to find a lot more defects and ultimately increase defect effectiveness 
rates for system testing by 400 percent from previous releases! In fact, defects 
became so scarce that there were zero significant integration defects found in 
a later integration testing phase. This was a result that was unheard of before 
the use of Virtual Services.
Pleased with their pilot project results, Sprint embarked on an aggressive 
journey to roll out Virtual Services for all key middleware transactions, 
engaging development teams across the company to insulate their applications 
from back-end dependencies during system testing and shift more defect 
discovery to the left into development and system test phases of the lifecycle, 
just as had been seen with the pilot. The IT middleware organization at Sprint 
started a Service Virtualization Center of Excellence (CoE)*, rolling out 
more than 300 Virtual Services in a catalog available to dev and system test 
teams throughout the company. Sprint now enjoys decreased costs for testing 
and defect resolution, along with faster cycle times for project testing and 
deployment. 


a p t e r
9
Best Practice 2: 
Reduce Your 
Infrastructure 
Footprint
solving the problem of available it infrastructure for software development 
doesn’t seem like the sexiest thing service virtualization can do outside its 
ties to “Green it” initiatives for reducing energy consumption. However, the 
potential business value goes way beyond environmental impact, and the roi
it can generate sure is sexy once it is understood by management. 
every large company continuously accumulates additional infrastructure to 
support ongoing business and new service offerings. this includes buying 
more web servers and app servers, additional mainframe partitions, increased 
network capacity, more software licenses, exponentially larger databases, and 
additional transaction space on third-party and shared resources.
When conventional server virtualization emerged on the scene starting 
around the year 2000, businesses jumped on it with haste, and that 
consolidation created an immediate reduction in capital expense (CapEx)* 
by reducing hardware and server room costs. However, if we follow Moore’s 
law*, we also know that these commodities will also become faster, more 
compact, more efficient, and cheaper every month as technology advances. 

Chapter 9 | Best Practice 2: Reduce Your Infrastructure Footprint
68
So while the use of VMs and hypervisors hastened the reduction of “under-
utilized” system resource costs and saved some power in the server room, it 
couldn’t touch the even costlier and faster growing infrastructure availability 
problems of “over-utilized” systems needed to support distributed enterprise 
applications.
Finding Over-Utilized Resources
Businesses that identify infrastructure availability as a growing problem are 
basically complaining about over-utilized system constraints in their software 
environments. These over-utilized resources cannot be easily replicated, 
controlled, or accessed by development teams and partners when needed. 
This results in endemic project delays and failures.
These constraints are very sore spots and should be easy to identify—as you 
will find teams waiting around for access or data setups to happen. As a 
general rule, we recommend prioritizing SV rollout where the most conflict 
and wait time is occurring first by conducting a formal or informal survey of 
development and product managers. Here are some things to look for:
• 
Core business applications that are handling critical daily 
transactions for customers; therefore, they “lock out” 
development teams due to necessity.
• 
Enterprise back-end systems (SAP, Oracle apps, managed 
services, and mainframes) with too few test instances to 
support the number of distributed development and test 
teams that need them.
• 
External SaaS applications or data services that charge per-
use fees for preproduction traffic, have availability problems, 
or impose harsh “caps” and shut off access after a few 
noncustomer requests.
• 
IT Operations and environment groups that are overwhelmed 
with software lab provisioning requests from multiple teams, 
often with little or no budget to improve their situation.
• 
Performance labs that are seemingly stocked with technology, 
but suspiciously sitting idle most of the time due to access 
issues outside the performance lab.
• 
Regulation or IT governance* policies that prevent 
distributed teams, SI partners, and offshore resources from 
accessing the systems and data they need to work with to 
move forward. 

69
Service Virtualization
Make a report card of all the preceding choke points you discover in your 
initial survey, and set a value to solving each of them in your environment. The 
value of eliminating a constraint would include the following:
• 
Number of teams or resources waiting on access to the 
infrastructure constraint and potential wasted hours of labor.
• 
Criticality or lost revenue of projects the constraint is 
delaying or derailing. 
• 
Cost of replicating another copy of the constraint or buying 
more test regions and partitions.
• 
Amount of time spent manually configuring the resource, 
including importing and cleaning up datasets for different 
teams’ testing activities.
• 
Reduced impact of development activities and changes on 
infrastructure that handles live customer transactions.
The preceding list does not need to be a mathematical calculation. Simply rate 
the constraints for starters on an estimated 1–5 scale of severity. One piece 
of infrastructure likely to make your most wanted list for optimization will be 
the mainframe.
Mainframe Development Needs Virtualization Too
Yeah, this part is boring. It’s about old mainframe technology; there’s really not much 
development happening in there. It’s stodgy, monolithic stuff . . .
A confession: At this point in the book, I have to admit, like many 
of my colleagues in the distributed development world, that I have 
improperly characterized the mainframe for much of my professional 
life. We spend so much time obsessed with building new features, 
on richly functional composite applications, new integration buses, 
SaaS, cloud, and so on. We even lumped the mainframe into the 
“Legacy Apps and Back Ends” box in our old diagrams.
Well, we now realize nothing could be farther from the truth. Many enterprise 
IT leads we talk to say they still spend as much as 50–60 percent of their 
development and change integration time within mainframe environments. In fact, 
when you take a closer look at most mainframes you find they are not 
monolithic at all. Mainframes encompass whole landscapes of service-oriented 
apps in and of themselves.
For most enterprises, business rides on the mainframe. In these groups, you 
have all the same constraints in the service-oriented world—different teams 

Chapter 9 | Best Practice 2: Reduce Your Infrastructure Footprint
70
maintaining business logic for interconnected components across different 
CICS regions; data sources like DB2, ADABAS, IMS services; and so on (Figure 
9-1). Mainframe development teams often find themselves constrained for 
access, waiting for critical data scenarios to be set up in other mainframe 
regions, and in conflict over resources. 
IT Operations teams don’t want to rock the boat for real customers by 
allowing developers and testers to play “under the hood,” yet new test region 
environments are extremely difficult and expensive to produce. SV should be 
practiced in a similar fashion within the mainframe, capturing and modeling 
dependencies between components. For instance, simulating the other half of 
CICS-CICS transactions or gathering scenarios from an IMS region as it makes 
calls to the data layer.
In short, don’t leave efficiencies on the table inside the mainframe. We must 
ensure that we get under the hood and liberate mainframe development of 
constraints with SV in addition to the upstream application layers.
Avoiding Big IT Outlays
Enterprises used to have only one alternative for addressing constrained 
infrastructure, besides simply waiting:
Figure 9-1. Mainframe internal architectures also contain components that can be managed 
by separate teams and create dependencies that inhibit the changes developers need to make 
to meet business requirements. 

71
Service Virtualization
Write a huge check.
Without realistic infrastructure, our 
applications won’t successfully get to 
market—but the cost of building more of 
these complex environments through 
conventional means is becoming so high 
that it almost seems like a joke when  
you hear folks tell you what it takes. We 
know that VPs of development and IT 
directors 
are 
delivering 
unwelcome 
purchase requests like these to executives 
all over the world when asked, “What do 
you need to do this right?” 
Try building an environment that is even just 25 percent of the size of 
production. That’s configuring every server and licensing every component—a 
massive effort and cost just to get a version that will still never be an adequate 
simulation of production.
It’s not like companies aspire to attain a big infrastructure—that’s just what 
happens when a company gets big. Take for instance a company like PayPal 
when it was in startup mode in 1998. A small development team probably 
built the first prototype of their app in two to three months. But fast forward 
to PayPal today as part of a huge enterprise inside eBay, and—it functions 
more like a bank now. There are more hooks to other systems and baggage 
to contend with for each successive release they add, more customers relying 
on promised support, bigger databases and more services and systems they 
must talk to, each of which may be owned and managed by different groups. 
The problem with infrastructure costs for development, test, and partner labs 
(Figure 9-2) is that they create a very big hit to CapEx—in the form of big 
purchases and big-bang implementation projects. But that’s not all—each new 
infrastructure buy creates a very large and growing operational expense 
(OpEx)*  for maintaining and upgrading the lab environment constantly in 
order to keep up with configuration changes, increased data, etc. The more 
environment infrastructure you buy, the more that infrastructure becomes a 
job in and of itself, with its own dedicated maintenance and support team.
A leading firm we know wanted to ensure flawless partner integration and 
performance, so management demanded that IT build a certification environment 
representing 100 percent of production. The IT department came back with an 
estimate of $60 million for starters, plus at least $15 million/year 
maintenance to try to keep it current! That was just not going to happen!

Chapter 9 | Best Practice 2: Reduce Your Infrastructure Footprint
72
Many companies don’t count “cost avoidance” as hard value results. But that 
$60 million outlay estimate wasn’t ridiculous given the complexity at hand. 
Whether the firm would have bitten the bullet or not, it was clear they 
couldn’t survive for long without a more complete environment. Using SV 
(Figure 9-3), they were able to replace most of that expected development 
infrastructure outlay with virtual models and virtual data management within 
two quarterly release cycles, at a fraction of the cost.
Figure 9-2. Massive infrastructure costs occur when live and preproduction systems are 
replicated for use by development, performance, and test/QA organizations within and 
outside the company. Changes happen so fast it is nearly impossible to keep up in today’s 
multitier environments.
Figure 9-3. Infrastructure cost savings after Service Virtualization are significant, as the 
groups only request “just what they need” from a simulation of the live app environment, 
which runs with very low overhead. Most of the configuration, data maintenance, and change 
updates of the Virtual Services are automated, saving both CapEx and OpEx. 

73
Service Virtualization
Customer Example: Dodging a Wave
I was visiting the architecture team of one of the world’s largest banks when 
I heard a stunning statistic. This gentleman related to me that the hardware 
asset management system claims there are more servers deployed in the 
bank than there are employees in the bank.
He then explained how his firm’s typical project-based budgeting process 
created the perfect fertile ground for growing huge server farms. Every 
project team would justify the expense of its own development, testing, 
preproduction, and production environment expenditures. Almost every one 
of the 1,000+ applications currently in use at the bank still has at least four 
environments sitting behind it, even if the maintenance or changes on some 
of those applications now only happen annually!
One solution was to attempt a massive consolidation process. It would be a 
huge endeavor to centralize and rationalize all those development and test 
servers, image them as VMs, and then have the responsibility for that process 
roll up to the CIO. The cost would practically be prohibitive and because it 
would be replicating only the systems that could be Server (not Service) 
virtualized, there would still be many dependencies they could not replicate.
This bank is now getting tremendous value from Virtual Service technology. 
Hundreds of pre-production labs fold into a vastly simpler to manage 
infrastructure, with software-based provisioning on an on-demand basis for 
any of the required environments. Projects not currently under change no 
longer consume power, generate heat, or consume floor space—or cost 
millions of dollars and require dedicated staff allocations to support and 
maintain.


c h a p t e r
10
Best Practice 3:  
Transform 
Performance 
and Scale
In most enterprises, the Performance group’s needs are prioritized highly in 
terms of IT budget and hiring expert staff because the stakes are very high. 
Performance teams are usually the last line of defense against delivering a 
losing game in the marketplace.
You need to get a feeling for how critical performance is. The customers we 
are talking about are not just uploading the latest funny picture to a social 
media site—they are running applications that handle critical business. 
Without high performance, your systems cannot sustain over time and will 
not be able to scale to meet increasing customer demands and requirements.
Virtualizing Performance Environments: 
Are You Waiting to Fail? 
Performance will make or break an application. We need to do everything in 
our power to ensure that our software can scale and sustain high performance 
levels over time, even in an environment of constant change and volatile usage 
levels. 

Chapter 10 | Best Practice 3: Transform Performance and Scale 
76
Yet almost everyone, even many very smart people in the software community, 
still think of performance testing as an “after-the-fact” activity. We run a 
finished or near-finished application under a certain amount of load [transaction 
per second (TPS) or a number of “virtual users”] and record the app’s response 
times for each request.
The idea is to confirm the speed of our application, whether that is to meet 
a contractual Service Level Agreement (SLA)* or simply a customer 
satisfaction goal:
• 
“We’ve determined that users leave our site 25 percent more 
frequently when the web site’s response time is greater than 
3.0 seconds, so ensure it never exceeds 2.0 seconds.”
• 
“Our competitor’s Customer Rate Quote time is 2.5 seconds. 
Ours needs to be faster.”
• 
“If maximum response time of the app under test is less than 
500ms with 1,000 TPS load for 1 hour, it passes our clients’ 
SLA agreement.”
If our performance tests and monitors confirm we are consistently meeting 
our goals, that’s great. But what if performance is failing?
Since conventional performance testing happens from an end-user interface 
perspective, it can only tell us that something is wrong somewhere—not 
where the problem is in the composite application or how we can solve it. 
There is only so much you can do to “tune” a web page, perhaps by reducing 
image sizes or changing how the HTML of a page is loaded. Most of the 
business logic is played out in machine-to-machine transactions. The common 
practice of validating and tuning the performance of your applications 
just prior to production is when you have the least ability to actually 
make any improvement in performance.
Developers try to be Agile and do more testing earlier, which catches some 
structural code errors and bugs in functional and unit tests. But when a 
developer checks in some code that will become a performance defect, it is 
often impossible to detect until several months later, when it rears its ugly 
head under real-world integration pressures (Figure 10-1).
Furthermore, the performance lab will often sit idle, waiting on the bench for 
everyone else to finish their software releases and integrate. This end game 
only perpetuates the problem of having to hurry performance testing at the 
end of several serial development cycles.

77
Service Virtualization
Figure 10-1. Performance defects escape development.
 When developers only “unit test” and write mock stubs in 
.
these defects can escape to 
later stages or even cause performance issues in production, where they are the costliest to fix.

Chapter 10 | Best Practice 3: Transform Performance and Scale 
78
Service Virtualization offers a proactive solution to this dilemma, and should 
drastically change your perspective on what it means to do performance 
testing for today’s composite applications.
Component-Level Performance Budgeting
If a performance defect is going to occur, we need to isolate it and find it 
much earlier in component-level testing. That seems impossible, as many 
performance lags are related to interactions between live systems—and won’t 
surface until integration or deployment. Let’s use SV to decouple these 
systems, while still proactively looking at their performance when they come 
together.
A technique we call performance budgeting enables teams to practice 
performance engineering in a manner congruent with the incredibly high 
amount of distributed components and teams making changes to today’s 
composite applications. To tune the aggregate performance of an application, 
fractional response times must be “budgeted” out to each component.
We also call this concept Service Level decomposition. Expected Service 
Levels must be broken down into smaller units, then verified and enforced at 
the component level.
As shown in the example in Figure 10-2 from a leading telco customer, 
performance testing a near-finished solution falls short. In the top line, we see 
the completed Solution (made up of Verify, Lookup and Quote steps) coming 
back with a poor response time of 4.0 seconds, which is way over the 2.1 
second SLA. What happens next? Teams typically throw more hardware at the 
problem, perhaps trying to install more servers, memory, storage, etc. in the 
test lab. But more often than not, this fails to solve the root problem.
Elaboration: The performance test team intends to invest in 
technology to better find the issues’ root causes. The problem is 
that that we basically cover up a needle with a huge haystack, then 
attempt to find the needle. Performance budgeting allows you to 
find the needle in a very small haystack, inline with any other issue 
the development team has to resolve.
Fast forward to the “After” example below the timeline, showing how the 
team decomposed the SLA—giving each piece of the solution its own 
“performance budget” to tune at the component level. SV allows teams to 
isolate each of those components by simulating the surrounding dependencies 
(and the expected or observed response times) of other components in the 
system. 

79
Service Virtualization
Figure 10-2. Performance budgeting using Service Virtualization. Service Level Agreements (SLAs) typically only require an 
aggregate response time (shown at top), so traditional performance testing can only guess about the underlying cause of slow 
performance or recommend more hardware. By decomposing service levels out to individual teams, they can test at a component 
level in context against Virtual Services and fix underperforming components earlier in development.

Chapter 10 | Best Practice 3: Transform Performance and Scale 
80
Using this method, you can determine, for instance, that the pricing app is 
delivering excess time to the overall solution. And because you set a budget 
on the response time, you can individually take corrective steps to tune each 
component in isolation, faster, and at far lower infrastructure cost. 
Informing Performance from Production
In order to keep software projects moving in preproduction, developers and 
testers make guesses about what happens in production. They might try to 
guess what users are most commonly doing with an application that is 
consuming their component’s logic, estimate the web traffic on Black Friday, 
or guess how fast the SAP financials system might respond to a query. The 
industry of software really needs to innovate and become more scientific 
here.
Indictment: App development teams are largely uneducated about 
the actual use and performance of their applications in the product 
context. They often are wrong when making their “educated” 
guesses with regard to common use cases, errors encountered, 
performance profiles, and more. This trend has continued in the 
wrong direction for a variety of reasons.
With SV, we can capture and simulate the performance and response rate of 
the back end, as well as measure a profile of the requests that we would 
typically make of it—the load patterns, scenarios, and types of data we are 
pushing toward the back end. 
When we “shift-left” for quality, we want to do so for performance as well to 
ensure more reliable outcomes at much lower repair and adjustment costs. 
SV creates the environment for performance testing, but its response behavior 
is also informed by system logs and other tools such as load testing and 
Application Performance Monitoring (or APM) tools that can continuously 
export useful data from production for this profiling (Figure 10-3).
This process is called Production Data Mining (or PDM). A great example 
would be from a major electronics retailer who was planning to upgrade the 
Order Management System—from OMS version 2.0 to OMS version 2.1—for 
their many stores’ use for the upcoming holiday season.
Instead of making estimates, let’s use SV to capture the performance profile 
of the underlying systems on an actual business day—the busiest day of the 
year in fact. Then as we build our new OMS 2.1 release, we can be certain 
that we are taking into account a range of possible response times (and 
possibly timeouts) from those systems. 

81
Service Virtualization
In addition, why not also capture the front end of that scenario, using the 
observed load pattern from Customer Service requests on that day and feed 
that data into a load testing solution as a realistic simulation of that front-end 
interaction? Using PDM with SV provides a real “performance sandwich” 
around the System Under Development (OMS) we are working on. We gain 
an early and very efficient way to prove performance of the new system, at a 
fraction of the infrastructure cost of setting up real environments.
Setting Thresholds to Move Performance Even 
Farther Left Than We Ever Imagined
There’s one more interesting wrinkle we can exploit here, as bottlenecks 
don’t just occur in our own System Under Test (SUT). By observing data of 
when and how downstream components break or run out of capacity in 
production, we can set that value in their corresponding VS like a “redline” on 
your engine, where it goes into the danger zone when pushed too hard. With 
this behavior in place, you will already know if your application is likely to push 
a dependency out of its comfort zone and account for it.
Using PDM and SV together to understand performance thresholds allows us 
to become even more proactive about understanding how to improve end-to-
end responsiveness. 
Figure 10-3. Informing Virtual Services from production monitoring allows the performance 
of Virtual Service response times to be throttled by typical response times that occur in the 
real-world systems when under certain load conditions. The front-end load can also be 
similarly captured and profiled for very accurate simulation of traffic for a given time period.

Chapter 10 | Best Practice 3: Transform Performance and Scale 
82
Performance Testing by Design
Performance testing has historically never been very agile—because teams 
could only uncover defects ONE at a time. Basically with each run, performance 
teams uncover the most significant bottleneck first. Then they would send the 
application back to development to debug the source of the lag and fix the 
offending component. Then reset and rerun . . . only to find the next bottleneck 
and start over again.
Conversely, with SV in place, performance testing is no longer a “big step at 
the end” at odds with Agile—it becomes an effective enabler for Agile. Now 
multiple developers and testers as well as the performance lab itself can get 
their own virtual labs, while collaborating to improve performance within the 
context of the end-to-end business application.
When we have to make new features, we make assumptions about their 
performance during design. With component-level performance testing, we 
can finally do the “R” part of R&D and even make design decisions that we 
have tested out before they get committed. 
Case Study: Performance Testing Takes Flight at Design Time 
Take our friends at a federal agency. They didn’t just conduct performance 
tests early in development; they used SV to help make better performance-
related choices in design. 
For instance, one aspect of their next release’s architecture called for a 
software messaging technology (an XML Gateway) that would likely handle a 
lot of traffic. Instead of hoping they could get their vendor’s XML Gateway to 
scale after they invested millions of dollars in and around this critical 
component, they used Service Virtualization to simulate a basic, but high-
capacity environment around it. Then they conducted high volume Non-
Functional Testing (NFT), firing transactions against several different vendors’ 
XML Gateway components. The best performing one was then specified for 
the design—before a single line of code had been written!
The same “performance by design” approach also works with external service 
providers—let’s say you are choosing between two transaction processing 
firms as a SaaS-based back end for your application. You would never have 
been able to conduct nonfunctional testing this way until now. So don’t just 
wait and see how they perform—set an expectation and validate it!

c h a p t e r
11
Best Practice 4: 
Data Scenario 
Management
It is not uncommon for some teams to spend fully 40–60 percent of their 
integration, regression, and performance test cycle times on setting up 
and cleaning out test data. We’ve talked about the mess of data issues and 
the enormous difficulty development and test teams encounter when trying 
to manage their own projects against an ever-increasing amount of volatile 
data within out-of-scope systems that are beyond control. 
If you’ve ever sat on a prerelease conference call with a couple dozen 
developers and testers at midnight, where a system is reset and everyone 
waits for the signal to “GO!” to start entering specific test data scenarios 
into their screen, you already know what we’re talking about!
Software teams need to synchronize realistic data scenarios across all systems 
their apps talk to in the environment to verify business requirements are 
being met. We call this process “aligning the stars.” As our software becomes 
more distributed and changes faster every day, achieving this level of 
synchronization becomes practically impossible, and throwing more people at 
the problem provides little help.
Service Virtualization should be used to bring all of the systems needed into 
a development and test lab environment, including provisioning the data of 
out-of-scope systems and maintaining the context of a scenario as it passes 
between systems in a workflow over time. 

Chapter 11 | Best Practice 4: Data Scenario Management
84
vTDM: Just the Data You Need
Just as Service Virtualization has a counterpart in Server Virtualization, there 
is a mature set of tools for conventional Test Data Management (or TDM) 
that allow you to extract and import data from systems that your teams have 
been given access to. 
But for most development activities in a composite app world, most of the 
data you need exists in systems that are “out-of-scope” and not under your 
control. So rather than try to extract data directly from these sources, you 
should use SV to capture and simulate the behavior of out-of-scope systems 
by responding with just enough appropriate data and dynamic behavior 
to “fool” your system under development into believing it is talking to 
the real thing.
We call this virtual Test Data Management (or vTDM). 
Using vTDM instead of real TDM seems too simple, but this is actually the 
healthiest way for your development teams to get stable, relevant test data 
they can rely on in a lightweight form. SV makes gathering just the data needed 
from downstream systems much easier by automating the capture of relevant 
scenarios, intelligently interpreting the kinds of data seen, and masking and 
manipulating that data as part of a VS.
Virtual Service–based data allows all your teams to always have on-demand 
access to relevant datasets for systems under test, and that data can be 
expanded upon to cover almost infinite valid data scenarios to support high-
volume performance and regression testing needs.
Eliminate Conflicts over Data
The composite nature of today’s business apps lends itself well to dividing 
development and testing tasks across multiple teams, each with responsibility 
for their own discrete functionality. This approach can be highly advantageous, 
if we can apply SV to overcome the scourge of test data conflicts.
Conventional TDM is a very time-consuming process that often concerns 
several teams, as certain scenarios must be loaded and ready with data 
coordinated across multiple systems. Once all of this data is synchronized, it 
can be used to support a given performance or end-to-end test, after which 
it is “burned” and must be rebuilt before it can be used by anyone again. 
Each data setup activity is rather fragile—so if a new release appears in the 
preproduction stack or another team attempts a test that touches one of the 
data sources used in a test, it will immediately corrupt the test data, making 
the results suspect. 

85
Service Virtualization
Using SV, many of the old conflicts of conventional TDM disappear entirely 
(Figure 11-1). You no longer need to align the stars to make data appear 
exactly where you need it, in an appropriate structure and format. 
Figure 11-1. Out-of-Scope test data conflicts are addressed by providing each team 
with all needed scenarios in the form of a Virtual Service that can be launched and 
run independently of other teams or volatile, changing conditions in the architecture.
Unique situations such as edge conditions, negative test scenarios, and error 
handling are easily configured in the behavior of the VS, and are never burned 
since the VS is simply making appropriate behavioral responses. Best of all, 
each team can always launch their own VS that is already configured and 
synchronized.
As new software is built, teams use existing vTDM scenarios of downstream 
systems as the baseline starting point, and then quickly feed in additional 
scenarios for each new requirement. The resulting updated VS provides 
documentation for the business cases the team validated, as well as indicates 
the needed changes for the downstream component. Now when multiple test 
cycles or teams have differing needs for test data, they will no longer collide 
in the test lab.
Data Masking: Trust, but Virtualize
Let’s touch on one more aspect of vTDM that is always mentioned, especially 
as we further segment our software development activities across different 
teams, companies, and even countries: desensitizing*, de-identifying, or 
masking test data.
Many industries have very strict standards about how they handle private 
customer data—how it is stored, accessed, and transmitted; when and where 
it needs to be private; and who can see it. For instance, the health care 

Chapter 11 | Best Practice 4: Data Scenario Management
86
industry in the United States has specific federally mandated controls on how 
patient data is transmitted and used, such as HIPAA. And data issues for the 
U.S. Department of Defense are even more extreme.
Even if not mandated by law, all businesses obviously need high standards for 
data privacy and security to prevent fraud and misuse of that data, or they will 
pay the consequences in the market. This certainly extends to software 
development and testing in today’s distributed world. 
If our company has developers working at our trading partners in Canada and 
Germany and another large team is doing testing in India, those teams do not 
need real test data with actual customer addresses and ID numbers to do 
their job. That only matters during a final customer verification process. They 
only need valid test data that supports the needed scenarios and appears in 
a format that is usable in building their apps and tests. 
When employed properly, SV offers a great solution to this problem. Data 
elements that are captured from live transactions or logs should be recognized, 
but carefully obscured—we’re not talking about “randomizing” responses 
here, as that only reintroduces the kind of data volatility we are trying to 
escape! 
Take for instance a Visa or MC credit card number. It has a certain format you 
expect: 16 numbers, starting with a “4” or “5” and other rules. My development 
teams are fine if the real customer’s number is changed to a “fake card 
number” in this instance, as long as it fits the basic rules and maintains the 
context of that number throughout their test sessions.
Expected Results
In today’s composite apps, the data we need can reside within dozens of 
different locations, each with its own connection protocols and cryptic 
formats. Furthermore, much of the live data needed to verify applications and 
move forward in software projects is sensitive and locked down. 
Data scenario management, and finding a better way to do it, has become a 
really big deal almost everywhere we go. Using vTDM has the potential to 
save thousands of wasted hours. Since SV at heart is simply “having a 
conversation” with other systems, harnessing that dialogue for vTDM is a 
natural fit.
Expected Benefits of virtual Test Data Management:
• 
Improves overall delivered quality due to more thorough and 
stable data scenarios

87
Service Virtualization
• 
eliminates delays due to lack of access or current data from 
out-of-scope systems
• 
Provides on-demand availability and faster spinup of valid data 
scenarios for multiple test and development teams to work in 
parallel
• 
ensures no conflicts over test data or invalidation of other 
teams’ activities by overwriting or changing data in systems
• 
Has little or no impact on data within critical live systems
• 
reduces the time spent on data setups and resets by up to 90 
percent, cutting overall lifecycle times by 40–60 percent 


c h a p t e r
12
Rolling Out 
Service 
Virtualization
For us, Service Virtualization is all about the ability to deliver faster, and with 
higher quality, while reducing our setup time and not having to build new 
architecture. In our organization, collaboration was key on this initiative. We 
didn’t have a Center of Excellence for this practice, so we had to bring in 
stakeholders from capacity planning, development, infrastructure teams, as well 
as functional testing and other groups. It was the first time we really brought 
all these groups together.
—Laura Miller, VP Global Product Development, First Data Corporation
Achieving a successful adoption of Service Virtualization takes more than 
getting a current project across the finish line. The best practices of SV 
become profound change agents when ALL development teams and partners 
responsible for your software leverage virtual infrastructure to eliminate 
constraints. 
The Stakes for Service Virtualization are Huge,  
So Don’t Settle
SV offers a transformational approach to delivering business technology 
without constraints. Therefore, your goal with SV must be to permanently 
and substantially improve your company’s rate of innovation and return 

Chapter 12 | Rolling Out Service Virtualization
90
on technology investments, now and in the future. Settling for anything 
less than this transformation is basically conceding the lead to your competition.
But what about the risk? Won’t this create upheaval 
in my organization?
Any time you hear the word “transformation,”  it sounds risky. But in reality, 
SV causes very little disruption because it overlays the technology and process 
you already have. The actual function of SV is to relieve much of the disruption 
now being caused by change in the software lifecycle. 
The reward of faster innovation at lower cost far outweighs any risk. Let’s 
frame SV change in the context of other major IT shifts your company has 
already made:
• 
When you went from mainframe to distributed 
applications, you had to change your entire architecture. 
You brought in new tools and technologies and reoriented 
your teams from primarily mainframe developers to open and 
distributed system developers. Instead of owning your whole 
infrastructure, you started working with services, some of 
which were managed by other companies. It was an incredibly 
costly effort, and the results weren’t guaranteed. But going 
to composite applications was a risk you had to take to 
get new features to market.
• 
When your company looked at the economics of 
offshoring, you saw the potential of realizing a 30 percent or 
more reduction in labor costs—too compelling a value to 
ignore. Despite the risk in trusting a remote workforce to get 
up to speed and deliver critical services, you shifted a 
significant amount of your labor force from onshore to off.  
You took on an enormous risk of business failure and 
upheaval to obtain this labor efficiency.
With SV, your company can make a bigger impact on its overall 
rate of innovation and cost than either of these earlier 
transformations ever created, without the disruption and without 
the upheaval. Your EXISTING people should be able to deliver 30 percent 
or more faster than they do today, with far less investment and time to value. 
SV is not nearly as hard a pill to swallow, but it can deliver more value at a 
faster rate than either of these transformations did. 

91
Service Virtualization
The risk of making the commitment to SV is far outweighed by the reward. 
Our goal with SV is nothing less than removing more than half the entire 
cost of delivering software, and in so doing, make your company far more 
agile and innovative in capturing new opportunities.
Changes to the Software Development Lifecycle 
Process (SDLC)
Leveraging SV does not require a change to your SDLC. In fact, the effect of 
SV on your overall SDLC is that your processes should execute much closer 
to your intentions than they likely do now, with far less friction (Table 12-1). 
In a traditional SDLC, discontinuous development cycles “crash together” in 
the system test function, followed by an integration test function, then by 
performance and user acceptance testing. 
Honestly, very little real “testing” is actually performed in most enterprise 
SDLCs today. These are more furious shakedown activities, compressed as 
much as possible to meet a deadline. We know this by the lack of functional 
issues discovered in system test and the number of component-specific issues 
found much later in UAT. 
Table 12-1. Sample process changes to the SDLC due to Service Virtualization are 
seldom disruptive, as they tend to ease friction and wait time from each phase.
SDLC 
Phase
Development
System 
Test
Integration
Performance
Changes due 
to Service 
Virtualization
No writing stubs
More component-
level functional 
validation
No hardware 
procurement 
No collision 
over test labs
No 
environment 
setup/config
Automated 
scenario data 
ready
No server test 
region wait
Test at 80–95% 
higher back-end 
capacities
Not changing
Everything else
Everything 
else
Everything 
else
Everything else
Clearly, there are practitioners in your organization who will need to change 
their own personal steps within the SDLC. For instance, they should stop the 
up-front work of writing stubs by hand or standing up huge test environments 
while configuring data at system and integration test time. In that sense, the 

Chapter 12 | Rolling Out Service Virtualization
92
steps change but the top-down view of your development and delivery 
process does not. 
SV provides an isolated yet live-like environment for doing system test. This 
causes more realism and therefore more testing to occur, earlier. We have 
already documented the impact of “shifting quality left” in general and 
specifically at Sprint (Chapter 8). When the System Test phase successfully 
executes as it was intended, the overall SDLC runs more as defined and less 
as a victim of constraints.
Using VSE back ends, better quality is built into each line of code with earlier 
development testing, system testing environments can stand up instantly and 
uncover defects much faster, fewer issues make it through integration and 
UAT testing, and if they do, they are usually far less costly and severe. None 
of these delivery benefits are disruptions to the SDLC—they are, in fact, 
everything we hoped for in an ideal process.
Later we will introduce the notion of how SV affects the Enterprise Release 
paradigm itself (Chapter 15). There, process changes will indeed occur, as we 
test and release ever-larger architectures in ever-smaller increments. But let’s 
not get ahead of ourselves. There is tremendous value in simply executing on 
what you have already documented in terms of process by leveraging SV. 
Build New Skills and Roles in a Virtual IT World
Constraints are a problem in every industry that relies heavily on software to 
function. We talked about simulation in other engineering disciplines, but the 
concept is not entirely without precedent for software. Some financial 
companies have had a large technical staff doing simulation for a long time—
but only for things that are very specific to their industry, such as predictive 
risk analysis and validating banking protocol standards.
In some telcos, there is literally an entire career track for “simulation 
engineers”—thousands of developers writing tons of simulation code for 
system feedback that NEVER sees a customer and NEVER processes a 
business transaction. 
Fast forward to now, and it is particularly interesting to see how companies 
are defining new job titles and sometimes even new departments for tasks 
such as building and managing environments. Adjusting titles and departments 
like this is certainly not a prerequisite of a successful SV initiative, but it does 
provide an interesting “sign of the times” of what is happening in the field. 

93
Service Virtualization
Good Help Is Virtually Always in Demand
SV is rapidly becoming an area of focus and continuous improvement for 
major companies. Therefore, SV is also becoming a highly demanded strategic 
job skill. Right now, the number of available resources with meaningful 
experience applying SV in enterprises falls far behind the demand for these 
developers, architects, and testers. 
Closing this SV “talent gap” is not really a question of aggressive recruiting 
practices. The best adoption of SV grows from within a company. Companies 
that consistently take on an attitude of mentorship will do the best. Here are 
some good pointers we’ve seen for improving SV proficiency:
• 
Take the help: If your software delivery or SI firm can bring 
experts to the table to deliver services such as training, 
release strategy, and initial implementation, by all means 
accept the help! The benefits of a faster rampup and more 
complete adoption will far exceed the cost.
• 
Absorb knowledge: Wherever the most meaningful SV 
project activity is happening, put your best people from other 
groups to “shadow” or work next to that delivery team and 
get them up to speed fastest.
• 
Share often: Skilled SV practitioners who are good at 
modeling and simulation should become resources for the 
rest of the company, for instance by posting examples and 
answering questions in a Wiki, weekly “lunch-and-learns,” or 
informal webinars to discuss current SV work with other 
practitioners.
• 
Have a SV developers’ help desk: Team members may 
feel like they are stepping out onto thin ice when first using 
SV instead of test hardware and stubs. If you assign someone 
that can provide answers or locate good help as they take 
those first few steps, whether on-call or managing an issue 
tracking queue, this will bring up everyone’s confidence level.
• 
Increase everyone’s technical savvy for distributed 
development: Don’t let developers work in silos, as they 
should now be able to consider their component role in a 
larger application context thanks to SV. Developers should 
also raise the tech ability of QA/Test organization team 
members by training them on concepts of service-orientation, 

Chapter 12 | Rolling Out Service Virtualization
94
app development and integration—this will make them better 
understand the needs of component-level testing.
Each of us personally in our own role should help advance SV and think about 
how it can fit in and enable automation and efficiency across our entire 
extended IT organization, including our partners. This includes both “How 
can I make my job easier with SV?” and “How can I leverage the practice of 
SV to better involve everyone to achieve the company’s value goals?”
Should We Centralize or Federate?
One of the questions we get asked most is this: “Should I centralize SV within 
the corporate environment that all teams use, or should we just give out SV to 
everyone so they can do their own thing?” 
Our answer is that you should have an equilibrium or hybrid of the two 
approaches (and in this case, the word “hybrid” is not just a cop-out on 
making a decision). Generally, here’s what we recommend:
• 
Centralize VS Creation and Catalog: We want to 
centralize the administration or ownership of Virtual Services, 
so usually the initial creation of a VS catalog is assigned to 
dedicated teams with a high level of expertise and knowledge 
in this specific skill.
• 
Federate for Maintenance: Here’s where it makes the 
most sense for specific teams of development, test, and 
performance managers to maintain the Virtual Services. They 
have a local environment where the maintenance and 
deployment of their specific vertical or transaction needs 
occurs. 
Often our customers start as centralized and then move to more federated 
approaches as adoption increases. Let’s say we are at a bank that has a central 
SV Center of Excellence that runs a set of VSEs for the company, and they are 
quite efficient at making a library of robust Virtual Services at the request of 
development teams. If this works well enough, why wouldn’t we just stick 
with that centralized format?
The reason you federate VSEs is not just a technical one; rather, it is a part of 
the Agile mindset we should adopt. We want to federate the use of Virtual 
Services because we need developers and component teams to take 
responsibility for clearing their own constraints every time they endeavor 
to deliver a component. To the development team, a centralized VSE is out of 
their control, capacity constrained, and data restricted. It’s great that there is 

95
Service Virtualization
a CoE team leading SV and helping create Virtual Services, but we want 
developers to be empowered with a real sense of control to move forward 
faster. 
Each team needs to rapidly change their own VS without concern for other 
teams; they need to be able to bury the VSE server with transaction requests 
at their own discretion. They also need to be able to completely bring down 
the VSE for their fault recovery testing needs. If shared use is the only option, 
it will eliminate all of these possibilities and make the VS team feel no different 
than any other constrained resource that frustrates teams.
Having the best of both worlds allows SV experts to do the heavy lifting 
centrally, while developers can go forward and customize their environments 
to overcome their own specific dependencies without waiting for shared 
resources.
Cool Alternative Use: Virtual Training 
Environments?
Here’s a very cool new way we have seen both a major telco and a large 
regional bank employ SV that has NOTHING to do with software development, 
but still offers a huge value proposition. Let’s take the telco for instance. 
These guys have thousands of representatives, both domestic and offshore, 
performing different levels of phone, e-mail, and chat-based support functions 
for customers. 
There is a huge amount of accretion or turnover of employees in this function, 
as it is largely an entry-level role. That means training is a nonstop activity. 
Like many firms, the old system of training consisted of flying them all into a 
physical training facility and then giving them a little too much rote instruction 
and manuals. This was followed by a limited amount of time on terminals in a 
very costly training environment, with painstakingly mocked-up services, 
training data, and a training partition on the mainframe—all of which were a 
huge hassle to set up and maintain for each class—while still being a little 
outdated compared to the current live software.
Setting up realistic system environments to support training became a 
nonstop, expensive, back-breaking endeavor. After all, you can’t set trainees 
loose mucking around with real customer data in a live system, but they still 
needed that “live-like” hands-on experience to learn their jobs.
Using SV, the telco now creates on-demand Virtual Training Environments 
(VTEs) that contain all the required “safe customer” data scenarios, with the 
realistic responses and behaviors needed for thorough training (Figure 12-1). 

Chapter 12 | Rolling Out Service Virtualization
96
Figure 12-1. Virtual Training Environments (or VTEs) apply the same principles of virtual labs for test and development, except 
applied to the task of rapidly setting up and provisioning all the back ends and data scenarios needed to support robust employee 
and partner training, for a higher degree of stability and portability at a fraction of the cost of real environments. 

97
Service Virtualization
they can instantly launch 100 or 1,000 vtes behind their educational user 
interfaces, and even conduct that training remotely through a browser.
so with no more per-user setups, no data scrubbing, unlimited 24/7 access, 
and the flexibility to deliver that vte remotely with a high degree of current 
realism, the firm is better equipping employees to work at a small fraction of 
the cost. as far as trainees are concerned, they are entering orders and getting 
appropriate responses from the real back-end systems . . . except maybe 
faster. (they actually slowed down the virtual services a little to make the 
“wait time” more like the real systems!)


c h a p t e r
13
Service 
Virtualization 
and DevTest 
Cloud
“The cloud” may be the most overhyped technology in recent memory. Every 
major software vendor has jumped on the cloud computing bandwagon. 
There are good reasons why it captures our imagination. The promise of 
almost unlimited elastic computing capacity, available in an on-demand, pay-
as-you-go model, with management and security aspects of the applications 
often included for you, is incredibly appealing.
We’ve seen instances of consumer-oriented startups and SaaS-based business 
models having success selling cloud-based offerings—most notably Amazon, 
Salesforce.com, and Apple have gained traction with business models that are 
a natural fit for cloud. New startups also realize the advantage of cloud 
infrastructure, as they can basically take a “blank slate” approach to their 
application design using cloud-based applications, instead of layering on top of 
existing technology.
So why hasn’t cloud caught on for most major enterprise apps? When a 
larger company attempts to “run business in the cloud,” they quickly realize 
that the well-publicized successes of some cloud business models don’t yet 
translate into enterprise development success for many companies. Cloud 

Chapter 13 | Service Virtualization and DevTest Cloud
100
has not yet delivered the miracle of pushing critical business software functions 
to an automatically reusable “app assembly and hosting” environment. 
If anything, leaning on cloud-based components to conduct real business in an 
unplanned fashion will exacerbate development and test constraints and make 
governance harder. Therefore, enterprises should employ cloud where it 
makes the most sense—and the best, first place to leverage cloud is for 
development and test labs. 
Constraints of Cloud Dev and Test 
To do development work in cloud, we will first look for a self-provisioning 
utility kind of way to stand up and tear down dev and test labs for preproduction.
The setup and provisioning of a real production environment is a huge effort. 
We are constantly monitoring, maintaining, and managing it carefully to keep 
it running. Production is so complex and constrained that you are unlikely to 
ever create more instances of these environments. At the same time, you 
can’t afford to have even a little bit of exposure of these production systems 
and data to development teams. So by using cloud for development and test, 
we seek to manipulate that environment more safely in preproduction.
Contrast that big production environment to preproduction use. Dev and 
test teams need to create and provision new labs EVERY TIME there is an 
incremental release. There could be hundreds of labs and thousands of 
conventional VMs of applications that different teams are using (Figure 13-1). 
Preprod use of virtual labs is where the explosion of cloud is really happening.
Figure 13-1. “Wires hanging out” of the cloud due to external dependencies for 
development and test that cannot be imaged or included.

101
Service Virtualization
This is great. So what is the problem? There are still “wires hanging out” 
of your cloud . . .
Let’s paraphrase a customer’s enlightenment on this issue: “I tried to move my 
development and test labs to a cloud to give us that elasticity and let them quickly 
provision an environment in just minutes—and yes, they can do that quite efficiently 
for some of our app components. But what about all the “wires hanging out” of our 
cloud? You can’t replicate things like a huge mainframe, copy a third-party fee-based 
service, or image that huge database in the cloud—yet your development project 
can’t move forward without these elements available. If it takes me three weeks to 
get access to the mainframe, that means it still takes me three weeks to wait and 
provision a cloud lab.” 
No matter how much you improve the speed of provisioning systems 
in cloud, you can still only move as fast as your most constrained 
system allows. Let’s instead use Virtual Services to model and represent the 
off-cloud resources within the same environment (Figure 13-2). No more wires! 
Figure 13-2. No more “wires hanging out of the cloud” with Service Virtualization 
simulating off-cloud dependencies and data.
Service Virtualization makes cloud real for on-demand development and test 
environments. You can leverage Virtual Services (VSs) alongside VMs to 
capture and simulate those “wires hanging out” and manage them in a 
complete DevTest Cloud environment. Preproduction teams can now get 
complete labs that include stable versions of all the mainframes, data scenarios, 
and services they need to truly realize elastic capacity. 
Achieving High-Performance Cloud Environments
Cloud is best used when the volatility of demand varies among a variety of 
uses of a particular infrastructure. Different applications have different capacity 

Chapter 13 | Service Virtualization and DevTest Cloud
102
needs over time. The ability to leverage one common resource pool among 
many teams gives us an appearance of higher capacity on a per-team basis, 
when in fact we are simply leveraging the unused capacity of other teams.
In the utilization graph shown in Figure 13-3, many teams are leveraging shared 
infrastructure. One team might peak its usage during performance tuning or 
a “big bang” release cycle. Other teams are simply doing typical dev and test 
activities, and they are generating no such peak. This works best if each team 
plans its peak performance testing times when other teams don’t need that 
additional capacity. In general, it also means we must invest in or reserve the 
maximum possible capacity.
Using cloud combined with SV allows for a whole new economy in the 
development of high-performance applications. This creates a dramatic 
decrease in the cost structure—one effect you can see from Figure 13-4 is 
that the overall dev and test infrastructure requirements and costs go down 
for shared capacity, including on-premise and off-premise cloud. 
When Virtual Services represent out-of-scope systems, they utilize computing 
resources far more efficiently than a live system does. For example, it might 
take several VMs to represent a 25 percent capacity back-end app, whereas a 
VS will consume only a fraction of the CPU and memory requirements of just 
one of those machines for preproduction. 
In a typical performance test, the entire architecture has to scale to the load 
desired, making the most over-utilized systems become bottlenecks. In the 
Figure 13-3. Volatile utilization of Performance Lab resources requires the company to 
reserve enough capacity to handle peak demands, leaving inefficient valleys of lab utilization.

103
Service Virtualization
virtual environment world of VMs and VSs, only the VMs must scale. An 
almost infinite number of Virtual Services can be instantly launched and 
utilized on-demand, with all the elasticity the cloud can offer. 
If more scale is needed for performance tests, only a fraction of the entire lab 
must be scaled up, while the typically larger and more complex systems 
represented by Virtual Services will scarcely need to scale up at all. When an 
enterprise’s IT management team understands their capacity in this regard, 
they have a greater ability to make sound economic decisions about how to 
leverage cloud-based infrastructure.
Massively Parallel Regression Testing in Cloud
The desire to perform continuous integration or regression tests on a large 
scale is not new. Teams have been looking for ways to reduce the time and 
huge manual effort required for regression testing for years. The use of 
automation for regression testing is, of course, a well-known way to reduce 
this time. 
Figure 13-4. Service Virtualization in cloud reduces capacity and cost for development and 
test performance labs. Peak traffic can be consumed by both private and public cloud capacity 
if needed, thereby reducing overall spend and still meeting capacity needs.

Chapter 13 | Service Virtualization and DevTest Cloud
104
However, once a suite of regression tests starts to get very large, test 
execution again becomes an issue in that the team wants to see the regression 
results in just a few hours, but the test suites must often run for days.
When pressed for time, how many times has IT had to tell the business, “You 
can’t get a baby in 4.5 months by adding another mother!” Well, thanks to SV’s 
lack of capacity constraints, it is time to throw another analogy out the 
window. 
Running a massively parallel test bed requires that your automated testing 
platform be able to monitor its own execution of tests over time, and 
dynamically provision additional capacity as Virtual Services into the test bed 
as needed to reach the time goals provided. 
As the tests are running, monitors discover the resource consumption needed 
to perform the testing and calculate the additional capacity needed to bring 
the test suite execution into the timeframe desired. As more tests are initiated 
and staged, more Virtual Service capacity is dynamically added, with all the 
needed scenarios ready to go.
As you can see in Figure 13-5, the provisioning of SV for massive parallel 
regression testing in cloud is similar to the elastic capabilities of load and 
performance testing in cloud. Simply by leveraging testing technology and SV, 
we can regain the elasticity we expected while taking days off of the average 
development cycle.
Figure 13-5. Business case for Massively Parallel Regression Testing when using Service 
Virtualization in cloud. Note that the resource cost when leveraging cloud infrastructure for 
taking a week to run the test suite and its environment is the same cost for that same test 
bed to run for just an hour. This is because we generally pay for cloud resources on a 
consumption basis; hence, if we need 2,000 hours of CPU time we can either do that as 1 
machine for 2,000 hours, or 200 machines for 10 hours.

c h a p t e r
14
Assessing  
the Value
The days of accepting multi-year ROI statements from technology providers 
are gone. In the “new normal,” the expectations on IT to deliver faster will 
only continue to increase, while the economics of application development 
will remain lean. Therefore, we can’t wait to start uncovering value. 
Service Virtualization technology benefits are clear and present. It is quite 
rare for us to see a customer not reach ROI within a few weeks or months of 
rollout. With full buy-in and mentorship from experts to help make your first 
implementation successful, Service Virtualization should pay for itself 
within a year of your investment.
As we’ve discussed, in order for an SV initiative to deliver the most compelling 
results, value starts with YOU, and your key peers and stakeholders in the 
organization. Whether you are in management or development, YOU must 
shift your mindset, and YOU must take on the responsibility to drive results 
by shifting application development away from depending on physical labs and 
manually built stubs, toward leveraging automated, dynamic VS environments 
across the software lifecycle. 
Beyond that, the short-term and long-term value your company measures 
through SV depends on answering two questions: 
• 
Where did you start as a baseline? 
• 
What results does your company really want most from SV? 
Baselining is a very important activity that must be conducted at the very 
start of your SV initiative, as you want to base your future results on empirically 
measured improvements to the current state of software development. 
h

Chapter 14 | Assessing the Value 
106
Your team must gather a good baseline at the initiation of SV that not only 
contains specific numbers, but focuses on results that match the most 
important IT or software delivery priorities of the company. Without this, 
you will lack the specific goals you need to manage and incent SV across your 
teams—and therefore success will be much harder to demonstrate in your 
next review.
If we revisit some of those earliest preproject value goals, let’s express them 
as a baseline metric, and then fill them in with the results we measured in the 
first six months after the start of a successful project. 
Table 14-1. Sample of Three Baseline Metrics vs. Results Metrics Typical of an SV 
Implementation. There are hundreds of possible goals to baseline and measure results 
from, and monetary values can be assigned to the results depending on the size and 
accounting methods of the company.
SV Implementation
Faster 
Better
Cheaper
Before (Baseline)
Software release 
happening every 
5–6 months
Avg. 5 major, 12 
minor defects 
delivered to QA 
or Prod
Average 2,500 hours 
spent on break-fix 
from Perf team per 
quarter
After (Results after 6 
months)
Software release 
cycle reduced to 
3 months (after 
2 cycles)
Only 1 major 
defect discovered 
in QA, 6 minor 
defects
850 hours total 
spent on break-fix in 
Q3–Q4
Different IT service providers and software vendors (including our own 
company’s service delivery teams) provide wildly varying methodologies for 
measuring value. So rather than get into too much detail for a general guide, 
let’s talk about how companies we’ve seen measure value with SV along the 
simple lines of realizing “Better, Faster, and Cheaper” software development 
lifecycles.
Faster: The Value of Time-to-Market
Winning the innovation race is first and foremost about time-to-market. Ask 
anybody about the most innovative companies in the world and they will 
immediately mention Apple, Google, or maybe even Dyson (the vacuum 
cleaner company)—all companies that are consistently fast at delivering new 
features to market.
Our goals here are to take the air out of the schedule—all that wait time, 
data reset time, and “slush time” that is set aside for unexpected events and 

107
.
Measuring Results: Faster
When we make every hour a productive hour for our teams, labor costs on 
a per-project or per-feature basis come down dramatically. When we stabilize 
the environment with sv, we get started faster, gain more reuse out of our 
work, and automation becomes far more effective. this causes the absolute 
and relative labor cost associated with every phase of the sdlc to come way 
down.
let’s look at some examples of metrics we’ve seen measured by customers in 
the field in the form of a familiar table, structured as a value scorecard for 
Faster delivery (table 14-2):
Table 14-2. value scorecard examples of Faster delivery through service virtualization 
sample metrics are drawn from baseline and progress measurements from service 
virtualization client engagements.
SV Scorecard: Faster
Baseline 
6 Month
12 Month
Improve- 
ment
regression test cycle
92 hours
36 hours
18 hours
80%
data setup and teardown time
4 days avg
5 hours
4 hours
96%
Per-cycle wait between sys/int/
Perf teams
6 weeks
2.5 weeks
3 work days
93%
release cycle time (overall)
8 months 
5 months
3 months
63%
.

Chapter 14 | Assessing the Value 
108
Indirect Value: Moving Faster
Many companies will only consider the hard-dollar savings or direct revenue 
increase in their value assessment for lifecycle acceleration with SV. However, 
there are many indirect value propositions that create very compelling 
statements:
• 
Rate of innovation: If we are able to deliver releases to 
market 30 percent faster, can we devote more time to the 
research and development budget for newer, differentiated 
features?
• 
Revenue uplift: How much additional revenue would we 
generate by having this new product or feature ready in 3 
months vs. 6–8 months from now?
• 
First-mover impact: If we are first to market, how much 
market share can we take from our competition? 
• 
Late-mover compensation: Conversely, if we are late to 
market, over time how much market share will we lose by 
not offering comparable features or services?
• 
Time between phases/releases: Aside from reducing the 
time required for completing specific project phases, can we 
continuously reduce days from the lifecycle when the next 
team expects an early delivery, and is ready to start the next 
one immediately using virtual environments?
Better: The Value of Quality
Quality can be measured in terms of avoiding the negative impact of poor 
quality, as well as realizing the positive benefits of good quality. Delivering 
higher quality to customers is of the utmost importance in a customer-driven 
economy, yet it is seldom valued as highly as it should be in many organizations. 
We know the rate of change and complexity of today’s applications increases 
exponentially every year, making the difficulty and cost of testing and assurance 
increase with it. Yet many companies squeeze quality out of their timeline by 
exclusively incenting faster delivery or cost reduction, thereby making testing 
and performance appear to be a cost center rather than a critical part of the 
revenue engine.
The most successful software organizations will incentivize quality across the 
entire SDLC, including test-driven development, functional testing, and 
performance engineering as highly necessary parts of the software lifecycle 
and a requirement of successfully delivering product to market.

109
Service Virtualization
Results: Better Quality
Many of our customers experience high costs to resolve defects that are 
released into production, and they know they pay a much higher price today 
for problems overlooked months ago. SV allows you to dramatically reduce 
defect counts and capture that savings for more productive uses. 
With the proviso that results vary widely with application and development 
circumstances, let’s look at a “better quality” scorecard of sample value 
measurements (Table 14-3):
Table 14-3. Value Scorecard Examples of Better Quality through Service Virtualization. 
Sample metrics are drawn from baseline and progress measurements from Service 
Virtualization client engagements. 
SV Scorecard: Better
Baseline 
6 Month
12 
Month
Improve-
ment
Defects per KLOC from 
development
300
100
50
83%
Regression test scenarios 
covered
5%
50%
90%
1,700%
Number of defects referred to 
break-fix
30
10
5
83%
Customer support issues 
reported per quarter
2,500
1,500
1,000
60%
Most companies can monetize the hard-dollar value of quality metrics and set 
a baseline by keeping track of their historical information on the average 
number of issues, average hours spent on resolution times, and chargebacks 
for penalties or refunds, both in preproduction and later in production. 
We often see a 60 to 80 percent reduction in the number of high-severity 
defects released to production, as there is more testing being conducted by 
every team, all the way back to early development. This represents a dramatic 
reduction in the cost of support issues and infrastructure around supporting 
break-fix.
Indirect Value: Better
Faster innovation in isolation is only useful for patents and prototypes. If 
quality can’t keep up with the pace of change, innovation actually becomes an 

Chapter 14 | Assessing the Value 
110
unhealthy thing for customers and your business reputation. There are 
hundreds of ways companies can measure quality, and SV can bring more 
predictability to the software lifecycle. Here are a few other considerations 
companies use to measure quality improvements with SV:
• 
Customer satisfaction ratings: Wise companies will 
prioritize this single metric as much as any balance-sheet 
figure, as it has the most long-term impact. If the software 
behind your product or service works flawlessly, customers 
will be far more likely to recommend it to their friends or 
peers, and far less likely to leave. While factors such as 
innovation, price, and service play into customer satisfaction, 
it is very much a quality-driven metric.
• 
Service Level maintenance: Service interruptions or 
system lags can be extremely costly in terms of missed 
revenue, as well as possible penalties for nonperformance if 
SLAs are not met.
• 
Ability to offer guarantees: The converse of SLAs is the 
company’s own ability to predictably offer guarantees of high 
performance and availability.
• 
Partner quality: This is a huge success factor for companies 
with an ecosystem of technology and delivery partners. By 
offering key partners readily available VSEs, they can much 
more easily validate their own software interactions with 
your business on a continuous basis, often at much lower 
cost.
• 
Ensuring compliance: This is a “must-do” priority that 
drives many companies facing government and industry 
regulations. SV is critical for providing a reference system for 
certification of quality levels, while supporting the 
requirements of data masking or privacy, security of critical 
live systems, and more. 
Cheaper: The Value of Cost Savings
The third value of cheaper development is almost always the very first one 
measured by companies concerned with infrastructure savings. With each 
new release, each new partner, and each new technology we introduce into 
our environment, the associated software infrastructure and service costs 
will almost always continue to increase faster over time. We are not only 
building new functionality—we have to verify that it works against all the old 

111
Service Virtualization
systems. Therefore, even if hardware and bandwidth become cheaper to buy, 
infrastructure costs will still rise drastically when left unchecked.
Infrastructure cost savings vary wildly from a drip of reducing incremental 
costs by hundreds of thousands of dollars a month to saving tens of millions 
in one shot. That savings function has more to do with your current investment 
level, your planned investment level, and the amount you leverage SV to 
reduce third-party costs and deliver additional capacity in the performance 
lab.
Results: Cheaper (Lower Costs)
Aside from labor hours saved, reduced infrastructure is the easiest cost 
savings to quantify—as you have very specific ideas of your current spending. 
You likely have already budgeted what you will probably spend on environments, 
plus you can identify how much infrastructure you can more efficiently manage 
or repurpose.
Let’s look at a sample scorecard for “Cheaper” value measurement of 
infrastructure and other cost savings (Table 14-4):
Table 14-4. Value Scorecard Examples of Cheaper Development Infrastructure through 
Service Virtualization. Sample metrics are drawn from baseline and progress measurements 
from SV client engagements.
SV Scorecard: 
Cheaper
Baseline 
6 Month
12 Month
Improve-
ment
Number of test servers in 
preprod environment
60
30
10
83%
Mainframe partitions 
needed
13/max charges
6/
unlimited
4
69%
Licensing and config costs 
for development 
environments
$15M
$10M
$5M
67%
Third-party partner fees 
for preprod service access
$700K/month
$150K
$0K
100%
Even if a conventional dev and test lab strategy only delivers 10 percent of the 
sizing of live environments, this represents a ton of infrastructure, with very 
high licensing, configuration, and capacity charges. Every lab you currently 

Chapter 14 | Assessing the Value 
112
construct today must have a full complement of components, capacity on 
shared services, and manually built stubs and workarounds. 
When you think about all of the plans for new infrastructure on the table, as 
well as the unplanned investments that we can avoid, you will be amazed at 
the hard dollars you can redirect to innovation and more productive activities 
with SV—and the infrastructure footprint of the SV version will be one to 
two orders of magnitude smaller.
In addition to its dramatic infrastructure savings, SV enables performance labs 
to do production-level load at a much higher frequency, with no additional 
MIPS charges.
Indirect Value: Cheaper
There’s an interesting development worth mentioning here, as we are seeing 
many firms concerned about cost structure in addition to cost savings. Especially 
with the infusion of cloud, lots of teams are trying to turn infrastructure 
purchases and even applications into subscriptions. These companies are 
seeking to eliminate any expected CapEx for IT infrastructure and convert 
that cost to OpEx—and thereby pay a recurring fee to another company or 
partner to manage the infrastructure externally. 
While this may appear to be shuffling costs around in a sense, it is more 
desirable for some companies’ accounting practices to be a renter of 
infrastructure, rather than having assets tied up as an owner. However, the 
benefits of this switch are tempered if unexpected lab costs in that “rented” 
infrastructure cause significant problems with preproduction activities. SV can 
provide a great insurance policy against preproduction infrastructure costs 
getting out of control.
For example, a leading transport company we worked with switched to cloud 
infrastructure and managed application vendors wherever possible in its 
production environments, but reduced its vendor spend for test labs and 
partitions—as they could more reliably simulate those environments using SV 
with no fees.
Additional Indirect Values of Cheaper Infrastructure
• 
Major re-architecture cost avoidance: We mentioned 
that many companies won’t count “cost avoidance” as a real 
IT cost savings, but when application projects fall behind and 
problems truly become critical, they must either spend 
heavily to re-architect the development and test environment 
or try another way with SV.

113
Service Virtualization
• 
Better collaboration: The ready availability of virtual 
environments eliminates conflicts over shared and live 
systems in preproduction, as well as aligning all teams and 
partners for more productivity thanks to less finger-pointing 
and dependency. 
• 
Avoid service and VM “sprawl”: Many companies find 
that they attempt to reduce excess Intel boxes in the server 
room, only to find that they are rapidly proliferating a huge 
mass of VMs and preproduction services across teams that 
are even more difficult to manage and govern. By comparison, 
SV provides “easy come, easy go” assets. Though a given VS 
can be highly valid and intelligent, it requires little or no 
upkeep and helps reduce this clutter and cost.
• 
Incentive to test early and often: This feeds back to 
better quality, but since infrastructure for test in preproduction 
is generally seen as a cost and not a revenue generator, this 
discourages teams from testing as early or often as they 
should. If teams can afford that infrastructure at a low cost of 
entry and incremental cost, the impact on delivery efficiency 
and effectiveness will be huge.
Organizational Roadmap: Planning to  
Continually Improve
Do you notice a trend in the preceding value measurements? Just like our 
applications, they are never standalone. They are highly interconnected and 
cumulative—so results in one area will create increasing value in others. 
If you think about it in the broadest 
sense, 
Service 
Virtualization 
basically 
provides 
decision 
support for the IT investments 
of the organization. SV gives 
anyone who needs to build, use, 
or manage software capabilities in 
your business a more meaningful 
way of predicting “what if” results 
for any change in technology direction that happens, so the company can 
become more agile with less risk.
For instance, if I automate with SV and decrease the time spent managing stubs and 
test data, that makes my regression cycle much faster. This also allows teams to 
have ready environments to build and run more test scenarios and increase coverage, 

Chapter 14 | Assessing the Value 
114
which makes the software better quality. That quality also reduces the hours spent 
fixing software as well as buying additional infrastructure in the break-fix lab, so the 
software is far cheaper to build and support. Then I can take that two weeks’ time 
to make design-level R&D choices that could make software faster to deliver for a 
new set of customers and so on, and so on . . . 
Most companies conduct value assessments annually after adoption, with 
reviews at the 6-month, 12-month, 24-month, 36-month mark, and so on. 
Tracking value at a lower frequency often means the company isn’t serious 
about the results, and is still thinking of SV as a “tool” to complete a given 
project.
We can look at the balance sheet of a company that is just 2 percent better 
in a key investment metric like R&D spend vs. Services revenue. Comparing 
these numbers with peers in the industry can speak volumes about the 
priorities of the company. The IT shop may THINK they are efficient by 
looking at some bottom-up successes, but in reality they will not stack up as 
well as they hoped with competition. The corporation has to think about the 
balance sheet from the top-down and use IT investments to reflect long-term 
value.
Will your organizational roadmap encourage success? Or inhibit it? 
An organizational roadmap is a rolling plan that sets the future goals for 
adoption and collaboration, based on the long-term results of SV in terms of 
the bigger picture of the enterprise, its market, and its competition. 
The importance of a strategic approach increases along with the size of the 
enterprise, and its overall opportunity for making gains. If you are building and 
releasing some VS assets on an ad-hoc basis for a product division, you might 
still measure a couple million dollars in value just by reducing hours and 
eliminating some service costs . . . 
But let’s say your goal is to squeeze more than $100 million or $200 million out 
of the entire IT budget over the next year—not unreasonable at all for some 
global companies. 
If your company intends to realize these bigger goals, you had better create 
an organizational roadmap to achieve that level of continuous improvement, 
including everything from training and mentorship to communication plans to 
roles and responsibilities—all the way to execution. Real line items for SV 
activities should be propagated into every upcoming software development 
and integration project.

c h a p t e r
15
Conclusion
Paris. December 28, 1895. An audience 
takes their seats in Le Salon Indien du Grand 
Café, paying a franc each to view the first 
ever publicly projected film, “Train Pulling Into 
a Station.” The pioneering brothers Lumière 
dim the lights, and a moving picture of less 
than a minute in length begins, opening with 
a shot of passengers waiting at Marseilles La
Ciotat Station. As a locomotive began to roll closer in the shot, the audience 
immediately jumps from their seats, scrambling to the exits in fear for their lives.
Scary, huh? It’s kind of funny when you think about this story, but are normally 
reasonable managers and developers committing the same gaffe today with 
Service Virtualization? More than 100 years ago, an audience saw the room 
was empty, and they sat down in front of a screen to witness a new technology. 
While they might have cognitively known it wasn’t real, they still instinctively 
feared the train.
While we find this old tale amusing, we also see it as a parallel of any truly 
disruptive technology—especially one like SV. Even if development and 
performance teams learn about all the advantages of SV, when it comes down 
to the next big project, they instinctively fear moving forward without 
the real systems.
We were recently at a regional SV industry forum where an SVP of 
Development for a large entertainment firm talked about the fact that, based 
upon the cost savings, his office was going to require ALL the firm’s 
development and test teams to use ONLY Virtual Service environments 
instead of real servers and VM images by one year out.

Chapter 15 | Conclusion
116
To which one development director instinctively blurted, “Wait, that’s fine for 
the Services team, but it’s not going to work for us—for our project we still need 
access to the live integration server, and all the data we need to test the scenarios.” 
He was OK with other teams using SV, but afraid to step out of the real world 
on his own—so afraid in fact that he had to contradict his boss right there in 
the meeting!
The SVP didn’t miss a beat after the interjection: “We actually switched your 
team’s environment over to Virtual Service back ends first about six months ago—
you’ve been developing against them ever since. Did you notice anything different?”
Hey, we hear this everywhere we go, and we can understand the guy’s 
trepidation about stepping off the real platform into something virtual, into 
something he’s never known. Just like those folks seeing the train virtually 
bearing down on them in 1895, we should know that SV isn’t scary. But we 
instinctively fear the unknown and worry about what will happen on our next 
big project if we don’t have the real system—when in fact SV is far less scary 
than using the real thing.
SV is inherently far more stable, predictably available, safe, and inexpensive 
than using production-style environments and live data.
The Industrialized Software Supply Chain
As enterprise software developers and managers, we accepted the reality of 
constraints in our work for years as well. And we accepted that we’d forever 
use manual mocks and workarounds just to try and get the job done. 
Therefore, it is completely understandable if the idea of dispensing with them 
entirely seems too good to be true.
Having read this book to this point, you know how SV is the productization 
of the old practice of stubbing and mocking throughout the software 
development and test lifecycle. 
SV lets us industrialize the modern supply chain for software to keep up with 
today’s demand, from simulation in design, through assembly and optimized 
delivery. This should make a huge impact someday . . . 
But then you will return to work on Monday and begin planning for the next 
big, critical software integration and release project—that all-important new 
“wing” on your airplane. And your development teams (or “wing designers”) 
will say, “Great! Where are my 20 real airplanes?”
You aren’t going to win the innovation game if you only 
use SV on your least critical projects. You have to be willing 
to change your thinking before you can change anyone else’s 

117
Service Virtualization
thinking. you have to sign up for the science of simulation, and sign 
up for total predictability throughout your sdlc. nothing less will 
do if you want to outpace your competition. 
there will come a time that you, your team, and your entire organization, will 
say, “We MUST use a Virtual Service instead of a live system—because it 
is the ONLY way we can actually control our environment and predict 
our ability to deliver.”
other industries have achieved great efficiencies through simulation. so why 
haven’t we done so in software development? if you asked an engineer at 
Boeing to build a wing design now without modeling and simulation, they 
would tell you, “No way. I need a wind tunnel and modeling software, not a plane!”
it’s not like we just made up this idea as an invention—we saw that other 
industries and systems already know there is no way to develop complex 
things like this without simulation technology. simulation needs to be 
pervasive, it needs to be easy, and it needs to be par for the course!
so the next time you have a project start, tell your developers, “Sorry, but 
you will NOT use production-style labs, not anymore. Use Service 
Virtualization instead. I know it is scary, but you will find it is far faster 
and more predictable than the real servers.” 
Innovate and Thrive in Good Times and Bad
sv is mandatory in both good 
times and bad. i’m going to use 
our friends down under in 
australia to demonstrate this 
concept, as many of the most 
successful enterprise adoptions 
of sv have happened there.
When times are GOOD, businesses demand faster time-to-market and more 
aggressive software delivery schedules to capitalize on ideal conditions. For 
instance, while the rest of the world was feeling an economic pinch starting 
in 2008, australia had strong resources and a growing economy. therefore, 
they needed unconstrained development to seize on business opportunities 
in asia and the rest of the world.
a small company gets better and bigger by being aggressive with its it
investments in good times. that’s why you began to see virtually every bank 
in australia as well as other it-enabled companies radically accelerating their 

Chapter 15 | Conclusion
118
development shops by adopting VS environments, and even deploying them in 
development clouds in recent years.
But what about bad economic times? We are familiar with a different reality 
for the last few years in North America and Europe. Overall budget slashes 
and IT cost-cutting measures happened across the economy. Yet many 
companies still invested in SV when times were bad. Why?
Increasing IT efficiency in bad times with SV allows companies to keep their 
existing developers making gains in productivity, helps their systems adjust 
more quickly to the impact of meeting new regulations, reduces costly defects, 
retains loyal customers with better services, and reduces the infrastructure 
and operating cost of software.
Companies usually grow in good times, but they grow relative to each other 
even faster during BAD times. The companies that can deliver on their 
promises while maintaining high quality will retain customers, and further, 
those that can innovate through hard times will gain new customers and come 
out ahead when good times return.
Prepare to Revisit Your Enterprise Release Strategy
Let’s look at a story well-known by anyone in e-commerce and retail. Let’s say 
you accept credit cards on your site and connecting to that company’s system 
accounts for a huge portion of your customer transactions. You get a notice 
of an upcoming major upgrade at the credit card company, and soon after, 
access to a “test system” version of the new vendor network release that has 
certain limitations on traffic. You are only 45 DAYS from go-live. Your 
enterprise is now in a mad dash to adjust and test your own apps in less than 
45 days, or your core business is in huge trouble.
But here’s the rub: many of these changes were known months ahead of time by 
the credit card company—they just weren’t implemented yet. Instead of having 
to wait to deliver a finished test environment, their thousands of customers 
could have been given three to four more months to do their critical adjustments 
to their apps, if the credit card provider had only delivered a Virtual Service 
based on all the known requirements and API changes to date. Just like defining 
the “bank in a box” that our “Virtual Poster Child” talks about in the 
Afterword.
This kind of story is not isolated. It happens in every extended enterprise 
. . .
Enterprise-wide coordination was not demanded years ago. Application teams 
were their own islands; they enjoyed mostly independent architectures, and 

119
Service Virtualization
therefore did not have to synchronize changes with other applications. Oh for 
those simpler days . . . 
Today’s organizations aiming for the highest levels of cost avoidance, increased 
agility, and top-line revenue impact have targeted optimizing their entire 
Enterprise Release strategy. You know, the “big bang” release that drives 
everyone into an annual frenzy.
By using SV across organizations and teams, they concurrently run several 
development teams in parallel, then bring those many development teams 
into one integration and test environment for a coordinated release to 
production. 
But wait—Enterprise Releases might be the single most anti-Agile process change 
we could possibly have adopted! How many times will our development teams 
be able to deliver a business-critical change in a few weeks—while the next 
release train won’t be available for many months? Our agility disappears when 
we force coordination among dozens of applications that aren’t even involved 
in the task at hand to get each app change delivered.
In time, even the largest organizations will find that many steps of an Enterprise 
Release can be optimized away with the effective use of Virtual Services. We 
already showed you an example of a compressed Enterprise Release plan in a 
telco case study. The next logical step is to enable many more application 
changes to occur outside the Enterprise Release schedule with pairwise 
integration testing, instead of building out an entire integration/test landscape 
for each team (Figure 15-1). 
Figure 15-1. A high-level view of synchronized continuous release cycles across multiple 
teams contributing to a larger Enterprise Release process with Service Virtualization.
Ultimately, we are convinced that by using SV even wholesale enhancements 
to your applications will be safely delivered to production—without requiring 
massive coordination efforts among applications and teams that shouldn’t 
even need to be involved.

Chapter 15 | Conclusion
120
How many times in your career have you been asked to “get real”? How often 
have real-world boundaries crushed your best ideas? We happen to believe 
that Service Virtualization can indeed reset your expectations of reality, at 
least in the realm of software innovation. 
True, this one book won’t let you escape the world’s business limitations. But 
we hope it has given you a little mental break from reality—the kind of self-
delusion we could all use to fine-tune our capacity for innovation. Success was 
right there for the faking all along. After all, reality is overrated.

Virtual 
Confession
From the Desk of a Service Virtualization 
Poster Child
I guess you could say I was the guy they 
invented Service Virtualization for.
Back in 2007 I was SVP of IT performance 
and resiliency at one of the top banks in 
the world. But I wasn’t on top of the 
world. Like most peers in my position at 
other companies, I had a constant volcano 
brewing on the application surface of a 
business that needed to handle several 
billion transactions a day.
To compete, we needed to keep delivering new features to our customers 
through our website, teller and ATM networks, and mobile devices—and have 
them perform flawlessly. But unfortunately, most of the things we needed to 
ensure that this actually happened were either moving targets or beyond my 
control.
For any new release, we had to verify that the software our teams built would 
work in a production environment against more than 200 back-end systems, 
from mainframes to data stores, as well as systems acquired from other 
companies, and services hosted by other parties for things like credit checks 
and transfers. Simply getting all of these systems aligned could happen maybe 
once a month, and the setup process and fees cost millions of dollars per 
release cycle. Most of these systems were too heavy or out-of-scope for us 
a f t e r w o r d

122 Afterword | Virtual Confession
to possibly virtualize conventionally as a VM. We had a large team of 
consultants trying to code our own “responders” to answer this challenge.
Obviously these stubs weren’t good enough representations of a complex and 
changing environment. Projects often ran 50 percent or more past deadline, 
as critical problems were popping up near the end of each release cycle. We 
were in fact so constrained that I had a $30 million+ infrastructure purchase 
order sitting on my desk to try and build an appropriate scale version of 
production that we could use.
When John Michelsen first showed up in our office and told me about Service 
Virtualization technology I thought “This has got to be a joke! You can’t do 
that!” I had gotten so used to the constraints of system unavailability, and the 
manual effort of mocking up services and data, that it seemed impossible.
But this new type of virtualization worked for real. In two weeks, we were 
able to create a Virtual Services environment for 70 back-end systems and 
complete an integration-level performance test with it, something we couldn’t 
accomplish reliably with 25 people custom coding for two years on our own. 
We avoided cutting that $30 million+ check, and I estimate we have missed at 
least three more of those size infrastructure outlays over the last three years. 
But the biggest impact of SV happened when we spread its use across the 
larger enterprise.
We were able to design a reusable resource we called a “bank in a box”—
which required that any team or partner wanting to deliver a new release into 
our environment actually certified that their code worked at the level 
expected in our “virtual world” before getting released into our QA and 
production environments. This made a huge impact on delivered quality and 
timelines—as well as getting back the nights and weekends we once spent 
putting out fires.
I can’t estimate the value we created with Service Virtualization now in terms 
of revenue uplift due to an average 35 percent faster time-to-market—we 
actually stopped trying to measure ROI after year 1 but it is well over $100 
million. The agility we gained from simulating real-world IT environments, 
24/7, on-demand, for use by hundreds of development, partner and test teams 
had a huge impact on an entire organization’s ability to deliver new features 
for customers. Better, faster and cheaper than our competition.
I invite you to join the discussion, and learn about the practices and technology 
behind Service Virtualization. While it is an emerging discipline, SV is now 
supported by several major consulting and software vendors, and I have had 
the pleasure of growing this practice across many different groups within a 

123
Service Virtualization
global enterprise for more than five years, and now taking it out to other 
companies. 
Every day I hear about new ways customers in other industries are using SV 
to optimize their overall delivery capabilities. You don’t need to be an engineer 
to see the business value of having everything in your IT environment ready 
when you need it.
Virtually Yours, 
An IT Executive


Glossary
Agile methodology. Practice of empowering smaller software development 
teams of requirements owners and developers to define, code, and test 
functionality in smaller increments, rather than in a large, sequential or 
Waterfall (q.v.) approach.
big data. Data sets that have become too complex, unstructured, distributed 
or cumbersomely large in size (often measured in petabytes or exabytes) 
to be managed within conventional relational database systems. As big 
data can be stored across several systems, it often needs to be managed 
and referenced differently, using massively parallel systems and new 
technologies to leverage it.
build. The step of compiling and assembling the code and/or components of 
a given piece of software, prior to testing/validation in pre-production, or 
runtime in production. Usually handled by a tool such as ANT or within 
the software team’s ALM (Application Lifecycle Management) solution of 
choice.
capital expense (CapEx). Accounting term for business spending related to 
increasing capital, or the means for producing goods, including new 
equipment, hiring workers, facility construction, software licenses, etc.
Center of Excellence (CoE). A department or organization within a larger 
enterprise that maintains a centralized embodiment of training, best 
practices, and implementation aids for the larger organization on a 
particular topic.
CICS. A form of transaction management software that runs on the mainframe 
produced by IBM. Many CICS customers’ enterprise software eventually 
has to “talk to CICS” at some point behind the scenes of web applications 
and integration layers for execution.

126 Glossary
client/server. Early definition of any distributed software architecture, 
involving a “client” system that makes requests of a “server” system that 
either retrieves or processes data and makes a response to the client. 
Client/Server came about as a next step in evolution atop mainframe 
computers in the ’80s and ’90s when desktop PCs became popular clients 
for business software.
composite applications. For purposes of this book, we describe “composite 
apps” as the next level of advancement in today’s distributed software 
architecture. While the first defined Client/Server (q.v.) environments may 
have only included two or three layers of system architecture, composite 
applications generally contain three, four, or many more tiers and often 
horizontal integration among applications.
constraints. Anything that hinders progress or completion of a task; a 
hindrance to throughput or limitation of capacity. Specifically in business 
terms, we are referring to constraints as bottlenecks in the supply chain of 
software development and delivery, à la Eli Goldratt’s Theory of Constraints. 
Look that one up when you have more time.
continuous integration (or CI). Software development practice of more 
frequent unit and regression testing, and faster check-in of any changes 
developers make to application code, in order to avoid additional 
integration problems that happen because the other features of the 
application have changed while that developer was working on the source 
code.
desensitizing. Method of obscuring, obfuscating, or otherwise masking 
private data such that it is de-identified from the original private data 
usually for the purpose of development and test environment use of the 
data. This prevents unauthorized viewers from seeing the private data of 
real users (like user passwords, SSNs, and addresses).
Enterprise Application Integration (EAI). A form of distributed architecture 
that involves multiple types of business applications as components, for 
instance a CRM sales application, a financials system, and a pricing/
configuration application. Often these systems are provided by different 
specialized business software vendors.
Enterprise Release. A strategy for implementing large-scale changes to one 
or more composite applications (q.v.) by coordinating the parallel 
development and synchronized testing and promotion to production of 
the usually widespread set of changes implemented.
Enterprise Service Bus (ESB). An integration backbone middleware solution 
that allows disparate software components to be connected by handling 
i

127
.
q

128 Glossary
non-relational. A data source that does not hew to relational database 
standards. This is becoming more common recently as Internet-based 
applications continue to grow in scope and distribution across multiple 
components or locations. In a non-relational data scenario, there is no 
conformity of the data to so-called normalized columns of data types and 
rows of data instances, and multiple data stores may have redundant or 
different local data. The forgoing of these tight relationships is built into 
the expected behavior of the application that leverages such sources (see 
Big Data).
operational expense (OpEx). Business accounting term for any recurring 
expenditures that enable the ongoing operations of the business, often 
including rent, power and other utilities, payroll service, security, network 
fees, etc.
out-of-scope. Any downstream or upstream systems or data that are not 
within the control or authority of a given application development and 
testing team. These may be live systems that are off-limits at times, or 
resources that are managed by other departments or even business 
partners.
over-utilized. When a system is frequently accessed by users such that the 
shared usage impacts the effectiveness of the system for those users.
Profit and Loss (P&L). Business accounting term denoting an individual 
manager or department’s responsibility for achieving certain measured 
fiscal performance goals, i.e., revenue vs. expenses over a given quarter or 
period of time.
Relational Database Management System (RDBMS). Type of database 
that is largely an industry standard today, which stores both data and the 
relationships among that data in tables. Most DB2, Oracle, SQL, and 
JDBC-compliant databases are RDBMS. 
Rich Internet Application (RIA). A web application where much of the 
presentation logic and behavior is presented within the browser, using any 
number of browser plug-ins or presentation technologies (HTML5, Flash/
Flex, Java Swing, etc.) to provide a “richness” of user experience. One 
interesting aspect of RIAs for more complex business functionality. they 
may make dozens or hundreds of individual calls to back end systems in 
order to represent that dynamic app in a browser, making good integration 
quality and performance even more important.
scrum. An Agile (q.v.) software development method for precisely timed 
development and delivery steps, with frequent progress feedback to allow 
projects to remain malleable to business requirements, especially in 

129
Service Virtualization
situations where there is not a lot of central control or authority defining 
specific software requirements up front.
Server Virtualization (aka Hardware Virtualization aka OS Virtualization). 
Technique of creating a software-only image of a given piece of hardware, 
including the processor, hard drive and possibly the OS or programs 
running on that hardware, as a Virtual Machine or VM (q.v.), which is a 
more lightweight asset that can be run with other VM images in an 
environment called a hypervisor (q.v.).
Service Level Agreement (SLA). Contractual requirements with a business 
entity that represents the expected performance and reliability levels of 
any delivered application. Often an SLA is expressed as a certain speed of 
response time, or a guarantee of scalability and availability up to a certain 
predetermined set of circumstances.
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA). A model for building composite 
applications that are highly distributed and componentized into smaller, 
reusable software components that are loosely coupled, with the intent 
of allowing greater flexibility and reuse from these components to more 
quickly adapt to meet business requirements. Often involves Web Services 
(WSDL/SOAP) layers, but SOA can be accomplished using many other 
integration and messaging technologies.
Service Virtualization (SV). Read this book.
Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC). The entire process of designing, 
developing, testing, and releasing any software product or project.
sprint. A short window of time, usually less than a month, in which a small 
gathering of developers focuses on delivering a specific next set of 
functionality for a software application. A tenet of scrum (q.v.) as well as 
overall Agile (q.v.) methodology.
stateful. Data that maintains its context across a software workflow as it 
passes through multiple decision points or steps in a given process. It is 
especially important to have stateful logic in Virtual Services (q.v.) that 
must simulate a complex business transaction with variables such as 
dates/times, cumulative balances, etc. that should remain in lock-step 
with the intended functional or performance use case. For instance, if I 
am making and checking airplane reservations over a 24-hour period 
today and tomorrow, a flight that is available this evening should be 
stateful enough to know it should be expired tomorrow when it receives 
a similar request.
stateless. Data or application behaviors that do not maintain the user’s 
context within the workflow of an application over the course of several 

130 Glossary
transactions. Generally this means a given request will get the same 
response from a stateless stub or service regardless of previous requests 
that the requestor has made.
Test Data Management (TDM). A system that manages the import, 
conditioning, setup and teardown of data within a testing environment, 
usually within databases or systems that are in-scope. Most TDM solutions 
are designed for heavy lifting types of data extraction and porting in the 
final verification stages of testing, rather than simulating very “lightweight 
data” models as seen in virtual services.
Test-Driven Development (TDD). Agile-related software development 
methodology of first defining a unit test for an expected functionality, 
before development of that functionality starts. When the test passes, 
the functionality is then considered complete.
under-utilized. Systems that seldom, if ever, run at capacity. This describes 
most physical infrastructure and servers in an IT shop, but under-utilization 
can usually be easily remedied using conventional Server Virtualization (q.v.) 
and VMs (q.v.), or many other methods.
Uniform Description, Discovery & Integration (UDDI). Proposed standard 
for having a directory of Services that can be located within a distributed 
architecture, and using that UDDI directory to help speed up integration 
of services and components to build an application.
User Acceptance Testing (UAT). Last-mile testing of an application on behalf 
of its intended business users and stakeholders at the end of a project, 
usually conducted exclusively through the application’s UI.
virtualization. The general practice of simulating any IT resource, including 
servers, other applications, networks, devices, and more.
Virtual Machine (VM). A direct image or copy of a given system using 
conventional or Server Virtualization. Multiple VMs can be managed and 
run in a hypervisor (q.v.).
Virtual Service (VS). An executable model of a given system’s behavior 
usually based on automated observations about messages passing from 
and to a system under development or test. Service Virtualization is the 
practice of making Virtual Services, and they are run in VSEs (q.v.).
Virtual Service Environment (VSE). A management platform that can run 
multiple Virtual Service (q.v.) instances for purposes of interacting with 
other software components during development and testing. A VSE is the 
Service Virtualization counterpart to the hypervisor of conventional 
Server Virtualization technology.

131
Service Virtualization
Waterfall development. Traditional serial project approach to software 
development, involving sequential and ordered phases of development 
and testing, requiring completion of each step before commencing the 
next phase. A significant difference in approach from Agile (q.v.) in that it 
attempts to fully pre-define the requirements prior to development 
commencing, so ongoing changes to those requirements during 
development are harder to accommodate.
XP. See Extreme Programming.

The journey toward Service 
Virtualization doesn’t stop here. 
Join the authors, as well as leading enterprise development managers and IT 
executives, in the site dedicated to Service Virtualization. Hear case studies 
and learn more about the best practices and technology that enable SV at 
ServiceVirtualization.com—your community resource for expert insight and 
collaboration in a virtual development world!
http://www.servicevirtualization.com
 

I
Index
A
Agile development, 44
caveat, 15
faster delivery, 59
scrums, 14–15
service-oriented technology, 15
software delivery, 6
TDD, 14
waterfall development method, 14
AgileFall process, 21
Anti-Agile process, 119
Application Lifecycle Management (ALM), 54
Application Performance Monitoring (APM), 
80
automated capture process, 41
B
Business imperatives
agile software delivery, 6
inevitable change and complexity, 7
merciless consumers, 6
software simulation, 7
C
Capital expense (CapEx), 67, 71–72, 112
Center of Excellence (CoE), 94
Complex service environments
back-ends, 13
integration, 13
services layers, 13
tech note, 14
UI layers, 13
component level stubs, 62
Composite apps, 12
Constraints, 48, 52, 92, 94
conflicting delivery schedules, 20
data management and volatility, 22
definition, 17
DevTest cloud, 100
in-scope vs. out-of-scope systems, 18
stubs and mocks, 25
third-party costs and control, 24
unavailable systems and limited capacity, 
19
D
Data scenario management
advantages, 86
conflicts elimination, 84
data masking, 85
out-of-scope system, 83
vTDM, 84
Data volatility, 28
DevTest cloud
“app assembly and hosting” environment, 
100
“blank slate” approach, 99
constraints, 100
consumer-oriented startups, 99
high-performance cloud environments, 
101
massively parallel regression testing, 103
SaaS-based business models, 99
unlimited elastic computing capacity, 99

Index
134
DevTest Cloud, 35
distributed Agile development, 15
E
End-to-end (ETE) test environment, 65
Enterprise service bus (ESB) system, 13
ERP system, 20
F
Faster delivery
agile development, 59
composite application environments, 59
regression and performance testing, 60
shift-left, 60, 63
Sprint, 63
TDD, 60
virtual privacy, 60
waterfall development approach, 59
G
Gantt-chart waterfall approach, 20
Global Distribution Service (GDS), 24
H
High-performance cloud environments, 101
Hypervisor, 28
I, J, K, L
Infrastructure footprint
CapEx, 67
customer example, 73
“Green IT” initiatives, 67
IT outlays
CapEx, 71–72
infrastructure cost savings, 72
massive infrastructure costs, 72
OpEx, 71–72
PayPal, 71
realistic infrastructure, 71
virtual data management, 72
virtual models, 72
Mainframe development, 69
Moore’s Law, 67
over-utilized resources, 68
VMs and hypervisors, 68
In-scope systems, 18
Integration phase, 21
Integration phases, 18
M
Mainframe internal architectures, 70
Message protocol, 13
Monolithic systems, 11
N
Non-Functional Testing (NFT), 82
n-Tier apps, 12
O
OpEx, 71–72, 112
Order management service (OMS), 42, 80
Out-of-Scope systems, 18
Out-of-scope test data conflicts, 85
Over-utilized environments, 28
P, Q
Performance budgeting, 78
Performance defects escape development, 
76–77
Point-of-Sale (POS) applications, 21
Production Data Mining (PDM), 80–81
R
RDBMS data sources, 23
S
SaaS-based transaction service, 20
SaaS model, 25
SDLC, 60
Server Virtualization, 28
Service Level Agreement (SLA), 76

135
Index
Service level decomposition, 78
Service-oriented apps, 69
Service Virtualization (SV)
advantages, 115
automation
manual stubbing process, 40
self-healing, 41
transaction log, 41
web UI, 39
centralization vs. federalization, 94
constraints, 48, 52
definition, 1, 27
development/performance environments, 
52
Enterprise Release strategy, 118
experienced resources, 51
hairy problem, 51
inappropriate technologies
ALM software, 54
business application platform, 55
not for hardware, 54
“record-playback” tool, 55
vendor integration, 55
industrialized software supply chain, 116
innovation and thriving, 117
live-like development environment
expected capabilities, 39
real system data, 39
stateful business logic, 38
upstream and downstream systems, 
38
vs. stateless stubs, 38
management and incent, 48
parallel dev and test
agile development, 44
“E-Store” web app, 42
expected capabilities, 44
OMS, 42
parallel development, 44
software lifecycle efficacy and 
efficiency, 42
vendor neutral substrate, 45
performance and scale
component-level performance 
budgeting, 78
environments, 75
from production, 80
testing by design, 82
practical applications, 2
real value goals, 52
SDLC, 91
skills and roles, 92
stakeholders identification, 50
stubs and mocks, 52
transformation, 1, 90
TRANSFORMATIONAL approach, 47
virtual service. See  Virtual service
virtual service environments, 115
virtual training environments, 95
vs. live-like development environment
stateless stub, 39
vs. server virtualization, 27
Software applications, 11
Software Development Lifecycle Process 
(SDLC), 91, 107–108, 117
Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) 
process, 34
System intelligence, 11
System Under Development (SUD), 42
System Under Test (SUT), 42
T
Test data management (TDM), 22
Test Data Management (TDM), 23, 84–85
Test-Driven Development (TDD), 14, 60
Transaction per second (TPS), 76
U
Under-utilized environment, 28
User acceptance testing (UAT), 19
V
Value assessment
baseline, 105
cost savings, 110
organizational roadmap, 113
quality, 108
ROI statements, 105
time-to-market, 106

Index
136
Virtual Machines (VMs), 101
Virtual Machine  (VM), 28
Virtual privacy, 61
Virtual service environment (VSE), 33–34, 
105, 115, 118
Virtual Services (VSs), 101
Virtual Service (VS)
cloud-based partner service, 29
creation options, 30
downstream mainframe, 29
dynamic logic, 29
environments, 33
fundamental process, 29
live transaction, 32
live transactions, 30
maintenance, 31
messaging protocols, 32
OMS, 42
plausible conversation, 29
self-healing, 41
SUD and SUT, 42
system-generated software object, 29
technologies list, 32–33
virtual Test Data Management (vTDM), 84, 
86
Virtual Training Environments (VTEs), 95
VMware, 54
W
Waterfall development method, 14
X, Y, Z
XML Gateway, 82

service virtualization
reality is overrated
John Michelsen
Jason English
PRESS

Service Virtualization: Reality Is Overrated
Copyright © 2012 by CA. All rights reserved. All trademarks, trade names, service 
marks and logos referenced herein belong to their respective companies. 
The information in this publication could include typographical errors or technical 
inaccuracies, and the authors assume no responsibility for its accuracy or 
completeness. The statements and opinions expressed in this book are those of the 
authors and are not necessarily those of CA, Inc. (“CA”). CA may make modifications 
to any CA product, software program, method or procedure described in this 
publication at any time without notice. 
Any reference in this publication to third-party products and websites is provided for 
convenience only and shall not serve as the authors’ endorsement of such products 
or websites. Your use of such products, websites, any information regarding such 
products or any materials provided with such products or on such websites shall be 
at your own risk.
FedEx® is a registered trademark of Federal Express Corporation.
To the extent permitted by applicable law, the content of this book is provided “AS IS” 
without warranty of any kind, including, without limitation, any implied warranties 
of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. In no event 
will the authors or CA be liable for any loss or damage, direct or indirect, arising from 
or related to the use of this book, including, without limitation, lost profits, lost 
investment, business interruption, goodwill or lost data, even if expressly advised in 
advance of the possibility of such damages. Neither the content of this book nor any 
software product referenced herein serves as a substitute for your compliance with 
any laws (including but not limited to any act, statute, regulation, rule, directive, 
standard, policy, administrative order, executive order, and so on (collectively, “Laws”) 
referenced herein or otherwise. You should consult with competent legal counsel 
regarding any such Laws.
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, 
or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission 
of the copyright owner and the publisher.
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-4675-8
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-4672-5
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we 
use the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of 
the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar 
terms, even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of 
opinion as to whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights.

President and Publisher: Paul Manning
Acquisitions Editor: Robert Hutchinson
Technical Reviewer: Ruston Vickers
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, 
Michelle Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey 
Pepper, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan 
Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh
Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando
Copy Editor: Jennifer Sharpe
Compositor: Bytheway Publishing Services
Indexer: SPi Global
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 233 Spring 
Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax 201-348-4505, 
e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. 
For information on translations, please contact us by e-mail at info@apress.com, or 
visit www.apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or 
promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For 
more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at 
www.apress.com/bulk-sales. To place an order, email your request to support@apress.
com.
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. 
Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the 
author(s) nor Apress shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any 
loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the information 
contained in this work.

About the Authors
John Michelsen, CTO, CA Technologies and Co-
Founder, ITKO
John has lived his career helping enterprise customers 
push the leading edge of IT transformation to deliver on 
business outcomes and is a highly respected technologist 
who moves others to action. As the CTO of CA 
Technologies, John is responsible for technical leadership 
and innovation, as well as aligning CA’s software strategy, 
architecture, and partner relationships to deliver
customer value. With 12 patents awarded or in process and with market-
leading inventions delivered in database, distributed computing, virtual/cloud 
management, multichannel web application portals, Service Virtualization 
(LISA®), and many other areas, John is a factory of innovation.
John is a frequent writer in leading trade publications and has presented at 
technology and business conferences around the world. He joined CA 
Technologies in 2011 through its acquisition of ITKO, a company he co-
founded and drove successfully for 12 years. Prior to ITKO, John’s broad 
technology experience included leading SaaS and e-commerce transformations 
for global enterprises at Trilogy and Agency.com. In his spare time, he enjoys 
vacationing with his family on islands or in the mountains, and he has also 
become an expert at country and Texas swing dancing.
Jason English, CA Technologies Director, Product 
Marketing and ITKO Historian
Jason joined ITKO (now a CA Technologies company) 
in 2004 as employee #3, functioning as the company’s 
“Marketing Department” during many stretches of 
its existence, while handling other tasks from 
software UI design to sales support. 
Before managing marketing for ITKO, Jason was Executive Producer of the 
in2action interactive consulting unit at i2 Technologies, where he was 

viii About the Authors
responsible for web marketing and messaging during a period of extreme 
growth, as well as working directly with major companies of every industry to 
build easy-to-use workflows for complex B2B collaboration systems. Prior to 
that, he served as one of the first information architects, defining customer 
experience for Fortune 500 clients at the pioneering interactive firm Agency.
com. He has also designed, written, and scored soundtracks for internationally 
released computer games in addition to producing advertising and television 
commercials. He continues to compose and play music and remains an active 
brewer.

About the Technical 
Reviewer
Ruston Vickers, CA Technologies VP Research and 
Development and ITKO Co-Founder
As co-founder of ITKO (now a CA Technologies 
company) and leader of R&D efforts, Ruston has been 
instrumental in advancing the company’s product suite 
from its inception. He manages all customer product 
deployments and is the lead developer of CA LISA’s 
integration frameworks, which help clients gain
tremendous extensibility and quality across many technologies within complex 
IT environments.
Prior to ITKO, Ruston designed and built solutions for world-class clients in 
energy, automotive, and travel industries while working at Agency.com and 
EDS. Early in his career, he developed some of the first highly interactive 
online experiences for EDS, General Motors, and Dr. Martens. He also 
worked closely with Netscape and Macromedia during development of new 
technologies for dynamic and streaming content delivery. Ruston is also an 
aficionado of high-end guitar and sound gear, which generally gets him VIP 
access to all entrances. He holds a Bachelor of Science degree from Texas 
Tech University.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank:
Our patient wives, impatient kids, Moms, Dads, and families;
The visionary customers from whom John has learned so much, for your help 
documenting dozens of great SV examples and case studies with Jason over 
the past six years, especially Sven Gerjets, Laura Miller, Russ Wheaton, Jamie 
Williams, and many others for allowing us to recount your stories herein;
All the genius, committed technologists from ITKO’s early days who made 
this incredible new technology happen, especially our cofounder Ruston 
Vickers—you are all the best in the business;
Ken Ahrens and Rajeev Gupta for helping us kill it on a couple of the tougher 
sections on SV process and performance techniques;
Shridhar Mittal, Chris Kraus, Anuj Gulati, and Luther Birdzell for valuable 
input and help;
Robert Humphrey for championing the cause, and Scott King, Paul Neumann, 
Jim Dugger, Justin Vaughan-Brown, and everyone else who stepped up 
while Jason was off noodling on this book;
And finally, all the technologists, executives, and partners who are acting on 
this unique opportunity to make a game-changing new approach real for 
business. We hope this book inspires you to take it even further.

