

Service Science


Service Science
The Foundations of Service
Engineering and Management
Robin G. Qiu
The Pennsylvania State University
USA

Copyright © 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor
author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Qiu, Robin G.
Service science : the foundations of service engineering and management / Robin G. Qiu.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-10823-9 (hardback)
1. Service industries. 2. Service life (Engineering) 3. Industrial engineering. I. Title.
HD9980.5.Q28 2014
658–dc23
2014007302
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To my family.


Contents
Foreword
xiii
James C. Spohrer
Foreword
xv
Richard C. Larson
Preface
xix
Acknowledgments
xxv
1.
Evolving and Holistic View of Service
1
1.1
What Is Service? / 1
1.2
Different Perspectives on Service / 4
1.3
The Lifecycle of Service / 5
1.4
Service Encounters Throughout the Lifecycle of Service / 8
1.5
The Economic Globalization / 14
1.6
The Evolving and Holistic View of Service / 20
1.7
Summary / 29
References / 29
vii

viii
CONTENTS
2.
Definition of Service
32
2.1
From Manufacturing to Service: The Economic Shift / 33
2.2
Total Service Lifecycle: The Service Provider’s Perspective / 44
2.3
A Service Definition for This Book / 52
2.4
Final Remarks / 58
References / 58
3.
The Need for the Science of Service
61
3.1
A Brief Review of the Evolution of Service Research / 62
3.2
Service as a Process of Transformation / 64
3.3
Formation of Service Encounters Networks / 67
3.4
Inherent Nature of Sociotechnical Service Systems / 71
3.5
Digitalization of Service Systems / 74
3.6
An Innovative Approach to Developing Service Science / 79
3.6.1
Service Value Chains in the Service Encounter
Perspective / 79
3.6.2
A Systemic and Lifecycle Approach to Exploring
Service / 83
References / 88
4.
Service Science Fundamentals
92
4.1
The Fundamental Laws of Service: A Systemic Viewpoint / 93
4.1.1
Newton’s Three Laws of Motion / 94
4.1.2
The Three Fundamental Laws of Service: The Newtonian
Approach / 96
4.1.3
A Systemic View of the Fundamental Laws of Service / 99
4.2
The Service Encounter Sociophysics / 104
4.2.1
The Service Encounter Dynamics of a Service System / 105
4.2.2
The Laws of Service for Service Encounters / 108
4.2.3
Service as a Value Cocreation Process: From SMART to
SMARTER / 111
4.3
Service Science: A Promising Interdisciplinary Field / 115

CONTENTS
ix
4.4
Final Remarks / 122
References / 123
5.
Organizational and IT Perspectives of Service Systems
and Networks
127
5.1
Service as an Offering of a Service System / 129
5.1.1
Service Business Strategy and Planning / 132
5.1.2
Service Marketing / 134
5.1.3
Service Design and Engineering / 135
5.1.4
Service Delivery, Operations, and Management / 135
5.2
Putting People First / 137
5.2.1
The Digitalization Approach to Capture People’s Behavioral
Dynamics / 139
5.2.2
Supplementary Approaches to Capture People’s Behavioral
Dynamics / 140
5.2.3
Putting People First / 141
5.3
Controllable and Tractable Service Systems in Pursuit of Smarter
Operations / 142
5.3.1
Overview of Enterprise Service Computing / 143
5.3.2
Service-Oriented Architecture / 145
5.3.3
Component Process Model / 146
5.3.4
Business Process Management / 148
5.4
Competitiveness, Sustainability, and Innovation: Systems
Approaches to Explore the Sociotechnical Natures of Service
Systems and Networks / 149
5.5
Final Remarks / 152
Acknowledgment / 155
References / 155
6.
Computational Thinking of Service Systems and Networks
158
6.1
Monitoring and Capturing People-Centric Service Network Dynamics
in Real Time / 159
6.1.1
Computational Thinking of Service Systems and Networks:
A Necessity in Service Science / 161
6.1.2
Big Data in Support of Computational Thinking of Service
Systems and Networks / 162

x
CONTENTS
6.2
Computational Thinking of Service Systems and Networks / 163
6.3
Modeling of a Configurable and Competitive Service System / 164
6.3.1
The Systemic View of a Service System / 166
6.3.2
The Dynamics of Processes in a Service System / 169
6.3.3
The Dynamics of a Service System / 172
6.4
Service Systems’ Performance: Metrics and Measurements / 178
6.5
PDGroup as an Exploratory Example of Service Systems
Modeling / 182
6.5.1
The Competitiveness of Service Systems: A Systems
Approach / 185
6.5.2
The Competitiveness of Service Systems: A Network
Approach / 187
6.5.3
Market, Discovery, and Strategy / 190
6.5.4
Design and Development / 192
6.5.5
Delivery, Operations, and Monitoring / 194
6.5.6
Optimization and Improvement / 194
6.5.7
Final Remarks on This Exploratory Example / 195
6.6
Conclusions / 196
Acknowledgment / 197
References / 197
7.
Education as a Service and Educational Service Systems
199
7.1
Systems of Schooling: Service Science’s Perspective / 200
7.2
A Quality Control and Management Case Study for Resident
Education: The Systems Perspective / 203
7.2.1
A Typical System-Based Empirical Approach to Explore a
Service System / 204
7.2.2
Questionnaires and Responses / 208
7.2.3
Modeling and Analytics / 210
7.2.4
Analytics and Decision-Making Supports / 213
7.3
Off-Campus Learning: An Example of High School STEM Education
Enhancement / 221
7.3.1
A Transformative Education Service System (TESS) / 225
7.3.2
Systems Performance Analysis / 229
7.3.3
A Goal-Driven Learning System: Optimization and
Improvement / 234

CONTENTS
xi
7.3.4
Continuously Enhancing STEM Education / 237
7.4
A Lifecycle and Real-Time-Based Approach to Service Engineering
and Management / 237
7.5
Summary / 239
Acknowledgment / 240
References / 240
8.
Online Education Service and MOOCs
248
8.1
Introduction / 250
8.2
A Systemic Approach to Analyze Collaborative Learning / 254
8.3
Collaborative Learning Analytics: Part I / 257
8.3.1
Data Collection / 258
8.3.2
Evaluating Learning Effectiveness / 260
8.3.3
Identifying Best Practices / 261
8.3.4
Brief Remarks on Part I of Collaborative Learning
Analytics / 266
8.4
Collaborative Learning Analytics: Part II / 267
8.4.1
Individual’s Profile, Learning Activities, and the Learning
Outcomes / 267
8.4.2
Pedagogical Engagements and Learning Outcomes in the
Network Perspective / 273
8.4.3
Guiding Individual’s Participations in Real Time for Improved
Learning Outcomes / 278
8.4.4
Brief Remarks on Part II of Collaborative Learning
Analytics / 278
8.5
The Significance of This Illustrated Case Study / 281
8.6
Conclusions / 281
References / 283
9.
The Science of Service Systems and Networks
286
9.1
The Science of Service Systems and Networks / 287
9.1.1
Enhancing the Approaches to Explore Service Systems and
Networks / 292
9.1.2
A Pragmatic Approach to Explore Service Systems / 293

xii
CONTENTS
9.2
The Science of Service in the Twenty-First Century / 295
References / 299
Index
301

Foreword
The science of service is emerging. Undoubtedly, a journey of this complexity,
striving to scientifically understand a phenomenon as fundamental and richly diverse
as service phenomenon, must be explored along multiple pathways over multiple
decades. Therefore, it is always a great pleasure for me to recognize and encourage
those embarked on this journey. Truly, we are all students of service, learning from
each other as we go.
In this volume, entitled Service Science: The Foundations of Service Engineering
and Management authored by Robin Qiu, I would like to draw the careful reader’s
attention to three main aspects of this work.
The Pioneers: In Chapter 3, a brief overview of the evolution of service research is
presented. The complexity and diversity of service phenomenon is reflected in part by
the number of academic disciplines whose scholars have written on this topic. Schol-
ars from schools of management, engineering, natural sciences, social sciences, as
well as arts and humanities (service design), not to mention practitioners and policy
makers in government, have all played a role in the exploration. Figure 3.5 entitled
“A sustainable socio-technical process-driven service system” provides an excellent
visualization of five types of capital (natural, human, social, financial, and infrastruc-
tural) and the processes that transform these resources over time. It is worth noting
that each of the major scholarly schools has a primary focus on one of the five major
forms of capital.
Putting People First: In Chapter 5, I especially enjoyed the section on putting peo-
ple first. The book presents novel approaches to the mathematical formalization of
service, without losing sight of this important fact—service is about putting people
and their experiences first. Pay special attention to Figure 5.8 entitled “Service value
diagram corresponding to GE’s change effectiveness model”—for though it is one
of the simpler diagrams in the book, it highlights that increasing value derives from
xiii

xiv
FOREWORD
increasing quality and increasing acceptance, when mutually agreed to and cocre-
ated by providers and customers. Furthermore, with the global rise of smart phones
and social media tools, there has never been such an exciting time in human history
to gather and analyze big data aspects of service encounters. We are in the age of
increasingly powerful tools for value cocreation. This work also makes the important
point that value cocreation is also about cotransformation of providers and customers.
Education as a Service: Chapters 7 and 8 provide an excellent example of applying
the theoretical developments in this book to the challenge of improving education as a
service. Both chapters highlight the value of structural equation modeling techniques
as well. Chapter 9 further distills the theoretical developments into a practical and iter-
ative method for daily improvements to service business offerings. Figure 9.3 entitled
“Engineering and managing competitive services: scientific perspective” conveys a
tremendous amount of methodology quite concisely. Readers familiar with statistical
control theory will find this chapter an especially nice summary of the developments
in the book.
While much work remains to broadly establish a holistic and lifecycle approach
to service systems, this book boldly suggests pathways and approaches to help
researchers mathematically formalize service systems and networks in the age of big
data, without losing sight of the importance of putting people first. In the coming
years, I look forward to reading more along this pathway as the ideas presented are
further tested and refined.
James C. Spohrer
Director, IBM University Programs World-Wide (IBM UP)
IBM Almaden Research Center

Foreword
Services. What do we think of? Taking cash from an ATM machine? Talking on our
cell phones? Surfing the web? Watching TV? Picking up our mail? Yes, all these daily
activities and much more. In fact, we would be hard-pressed to identify significant
parts of our lives that are not service-related. About 150 years ago, over 50% of the
US workforce toiled in agriculture. Today, it is about 2%, and we grow a lot more
food. Agriculture is not a service, but its workforce has plummeted while the sector
has become more productive. In the US post-WWII boom, in the late 1940s, the frac-
tion of the US workforce in manufacturing peaked at about 35%. Today, it is a mere
9%. The percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) associated with manufacturing
parallels these numbers, from being about 30% post-WWII to being about 12% today.
What has filled the void? Answer: The US service sector. It has swelled to about 80%
of the GDP!
What precisely is the service sector? Economists define it by subtraction. The ser-
vice sector is everything in the economy that is NOT agriculture (including forestry
and fishing) OR industry (manufacturing and also mining and construction). That
subtraction leaves us with the majority of the world in which we live! In addition to
the mundane day-to-day services chores, we have the health care system (about 18%
of the economy), education (8–10% of the economy) and much more—government,
transportation, entertainment, utilities, etc. The excellence or nonexcellence of ser-
vices can literally mean the difference between life and death!
We are fortunate that Robin Qiu has written this book at this time. He reports
that we in the United States have had a national obsession with manufacturing and
our international competitiveness in that domain. Yet, it is services that comprise the
largest part of the economy, by far. The service sector creates a net international trade
surplus for the United States. Scores of books have been written about manufacturing,
which is now 12% of the GDP. Far fewer books have been written about services,
xv

xvi
FOREWORD
which constitutes 80% of the GDP. Robin has been a leader in pushing us, not to
ignore manufacturing, but to move it upward to its rightful place focusing on the
services sector. He is the principle founder of the new INFORMS journal, Service
Science. This book represents another major contribution to service sector analysis.
At my home institution, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the graduate
Masters program “Leaders for Manufacturing,” founded in 1988, has recently been
renamed “Leaders for Global Operations,” reflecting the fact that many of today’s
industrial leaders are in services such as retailing and supply chain management and
not manufacturing.
Robin says that a service is provided as part of a complex sociotechnical system.
This broad nontechnocratic view is perfect from my point of view. Services cannot
be meaningfully studied solely through sharply focused discipline-based glasses. To
be effective, service sector analyses cannot be Tayloristic “time and motion” studies.
We require an interdisciplinary approach, where aspects of the social sciences often
dominate traditional narrow engineering-measurable quantities.
My favorite early example of this is the story of queueing at elevators in the 1950s
in New York City. With the post-WWII economic growth, more high rise buildings
were constructed in Manhattan—as office buildings, hotels, and apartments. People
started to complain about delays for elevators in these buildings, especially at morning
and late afternoon rush hours. A narrow engineering-focused queueing analysis might
have concluded that some of these buildings should be destroyed and designed over,
with more elevator shafts, as the current designs could not support peak load traffic.
(I say this only slightly tongue in cheek!) But a colleague of Professor Russell Ackoff
of the University of Pennsylvania was dispatched to study the situation. He indeed
verified the numerous customer complaints about elevator delays. Then, in a moment
of true creative thinking, he redefined the problem. He thought to himself, “What if the
problem is not the magnitude of the delays waiting for the next elevator? What if the
problem is the complaints about those delays?” He postulated that the elevator cus-
tomers needed a distraction while they were waiting. So, in a spurt of lateral thinking,
he purchased and had installed floor-to-ceiling mirrors adjacent to all the elevators
in a test building. Guess what? The complaints about elevator delays plummeted to
near zero, while the statistics of delay remained unchanged! Problem solved, but not
with traditional queueing theory. Here a touch of psychology was needed. And so was
born the psychology of queueing, the same year (1955) that Walt Disney opened his
first amusement park—in Anaheim, CA. Over the years, the Disney Company has
shown itself to be a true master of designing and managing complex sociotechnical
service systems—including its queues. The arts and entertainment services industry
comprises about 4% of the US GDP.
Reading Robin’s book chapters, with its many useful framings of services provi-
sion, I started reflecting on my own personal services experiences and preferences.
He says that trust and reliability are important aspects of services. Here is trust: I
have used the same travel agent for 34 years! And, yes, I am happy to pay more than
what is charged by an anonymous discount Internet-based travel service because I
know it will be done right, changes will be easy, and that she ‘has my back’ if any-
thing goes wrong during travel. Car repair: I have an 8-year-old Subaru WRX STI,

FOREWORD
xvii
a rally racing champion. No one touches it except my dealer (and me)! Eight years,
one place for maintenance and on rare occasions—repair. They have my back on that
car. And I would not trust a random person employed by some discount national auto
repair chain to look after this car—which is an extension of me! Medical services:
You guessed it, over 35 years with the same organization. Maybe I am too fixed in
my ways. But trust in-services are of paramount importance.
Trust goes in the reverse direction as well: One bad service encounter can lead to a
lifetime pledge never to patronize that organization again. The median age of students
in a typical graduate class that I teach at MIT is 25. I ask them, “How many of you
have had such a bad service encounter in your lives that you have pledged to yourself
never ever to go back there again?” These are 25-year-olds, less than 10 years from
living with their parents. And, invariably, over half the class raises their hands! How
many providers of services are aware of this fact? That continual excellent quality
service is required for customer retention. Customer loyalty may go only as far as the
next service encounter. Robin Qiu drills the lesson home in this important book.
Services are nuanced, not readily quantified into various measurement bins. Robin
describes this in many ways. From my life in Lexington, MA, a historical suburb
of Boston with a population of 28,000: We have two Starbucks, one Peet’s Cof-
fee, and seven Dunkin Doughnuts! Plus various convenience stores and quick-stop
shops located at gasoline stations—all serving coffee to go. I guess Lexingtonians
are highly caffeinated! From my home I prefer to drive to the third closest Dunkin
Doughnuts. Why? The coffee and food products and prices are identical to each other.
Answer: Only in this shop do I get greeted each time with sincere friendly smiles, as
if they really want to see me and are happy to have me as a customer. Plus, the place
is a neighborhood hangout with many retired folks just sitting around, enjoying each
other’s company, and passing the time of day—a type of nice ‘bar scene’ in a coffee
shop. The ambience is just right. My minute or two of extra driving is worth it! Again,
how many “time-and-motion” type studies would ferret out these concerns? I do not
think I’m unique in valuing such nuanced aspects of services as important. Robin Qiu
hits the nail on the head. Many others miss it completely.
After reading Robin’s book, we would know that there is only one topic he dis-
cusses for which I have a minor disagreement: Internet-based services. To allude
to an ‘alien’ terminology, he equates these to a type of “Service Encounter of the
First Kind,” that is, rather distant and impersonal. (In the 1977 movie, Close Encoun-
ters of the Third Kind, an encounter of the first kind was an alien encounter beyond
500 ft—implying little closeness, complexity, or subtlety.) I agree with him for many
Internet services, such as those associated with airlines, hotels, and rental cars. But,
there are Internet-based services such as Etsy (https://www.etsy.com) that resemble
personal face-to-face interaction. You might call these “Close Service Encounters
of the Third Kind,” that is, up close and personal, nuanced, and complex. In fact, I
have found web sites such as Etsy better than shopping mall face-to-face interactions
because I am dealing with the proprietor of a small artisanal business and his/her
future success depends 100% on customer satisfaction. The email ‘back-and-forth’
between proprietor and customer often resembles a conversation of an old country

xviii
FOREWORD
general store of the 1800s! Writing reviews online for all to see can show each cus-
tomer’s satisfaction or dissatisfaction. It is difficult for the average customer to have
that type of impact with impersonal national chain stores, with either face-to-face or
Internet-based service encounters. My hunch is that Robin will agree with me and say
that I may have misread the book with relation to all Internet-based services! And I
am sure he would be right!
It is an honor that Robin has asked me to write this foreword. Enjoy the book. See
all the many faceted aspects of services that Robin describes and structures. Also,
reflect back on your own personal experiences with services, and you will see that
Robin hits the mark virtually every time. In addition, if you are in a planning or man-
agerial role in a service firm, you and your company can gain significant competitive
advantage listening to what is said in this book. A service is a complex sociotechnical
system, and those who recognize it as such are bound to prosper.
Richard C. Larson
Engineering Systems Division
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Preface
This book essentially introduces a new perspective of service study. By taking a
holistic view of the service lifecycle, we discuss approaches to explore the real-time
dynamics of service systems and networks. We advocate that a service must be
defined as a value cocreation and transformation process. As such, we can holistically
analyze the performance of service systems that enable and execute complex and
heterogeneous services. By leveraging the advances in computing and network
technologies, social science, management science, and other relevant fields, we
present the concept and principles of putting people first in service and demonstrate
that service networks in light of service encounters can be comprehensively explored
in a closed-loop and real-time manner. The presented framework can be potentially
applied in facilitating service organizations to understand and capture market
trends, design and engineer service products and delivery networks, execute service
operations, and control and manage the service lifecycles for competitive advantage.
Service research is not new. In fact, service research in the field of marketing has an
over 30-year-history. In addition to research and development in service marketing,
academics and practitioners have actively developed a variety of theories, methods,
and tools and then applied them to address service delivery efficiency and effective-
ness issues in service operations and management across the service industry for
decades. Recently, significant attention in the service research is related to a variety
of exploratory studies of service systems, focusing on how to leverage the advances
of management science, systems and network theory, and computing and network
technologies to help service organizations improve the overall performance of their
service systems from both engineering and operational perspectives.
Note that the worldwide economy was dominated by manufacturing during the
last couple of centuries. As a result, both academics and practitioners paid much
xix

xx
PREFACE
attention to the design, development, production, and innovation of physical prod-
ucts. The economic shift from manufacturing to service made us rethink people’s
social, physiological, and psychological roles in the economic activities. However,
inertial thinking is part of sociopsychological norms to the majority of human beings,
resulting in many service organizations offering and delivering their services using
manufacturing mindsets. Consequently, the advances in social science, management
science, computing technologies, and others are not well integrated and thus lever-
aged in support of effective service engineering and management as needed in the
service industry.
Change is the only constant in today’s business world. The effectiveness (E) of a
service as a solution to meet the changing needs of customers is equal to the prod-
uct of the quality (Q) of the technical attributes of the solution and the acceptance
(A) of that solution by the customers, that is, E = Q × A. However, the customers’
acceptance changes rapidly, varying with people, time, places, cultures, and service
contexts. Because people’s acceptance is largely subjective, manufacturing mindsets
with a focus on physical attributes indeed become ineffective when applied in the
field of service engineering and management. Hence, to address the discussed change
acceleration phenomena with scientific rigor, we must rely on people-centric and ser-
vice mindsets. In fact, the introduction of putting employee and customers first in the
1990s radically made a turn in the way how service organizations should develop,
operate, and manage businesses and measure their successes. Indeed, people-centered
service mindsets have afterwards been emerging and receiving more and more atten-
tion in the service industry.
Bearing this discussion in mind, we consider a service as a transformation process
rather than an offered product. Truly, both provider-side and customer-side people
are always involved in an interactive manner in service. Hence, we view a service
as a value cocreation process. For a service, goods are frequently the conduits of
service provision; the physical attributes and technical characteristics that specify the
goods are indispensable to the service. The quality (Q) of the technical attributes in
the service, indeed, mainly defines the quality of the goods. To a service customer,
Q is frequently perceived in service provision as the quality of designated service
functionalities that are defined in a service specification. As indicated in the equation
of E = Q × A, the value of E also depends on the value of A, which is largely related
to sociopsychological perceptions of the customer throughout the service lifecycle.
Although this is well understood conceptually, however, the service industry lacks
methods and tools to explore and measure Q and A in service in a holistic, real-time,
and quantitative manner.
Services are highly heterogeneous. For a given service, a specific customer and
a service provider essentially cocreate the service values that meet the respective
needs of the customer and the service provider. Thus, each service is unique. The
variability of service and the need for measuring sociopsychological perceptions had
made extremely challenging the full exploration of the service lifecycle, spanning
market discovery, engineering, delivery, and sustaining, in an integrated and quanti-
tative manner.

PREFACE
xxi
Indeed, the prior lack of means to monitor and capture people’s dynamics through-
out the service lifecycle has prohibited us from gaining insights into the service
engineering and management in a service organization. Promisingly, we believe that
the combination of the following advances in technologies has made possible the
design and development of the needed means and methods that can help service orga-
nizations overcome the challenges:
• Digitalization
• Networks and telecommunications
• Collaborative methods and tools
• The fast advances in social network media
• Big data technologies and analytics methods and tools
In other words, real-time data on the dynamics of service cocreation processes
from both service providers and customers could be comprehensively captured and
analyzed if needed. (Surely, people’s privacies must never be compromised, which
are beyond the coverage of this book.) When the enabling technologies are appro-
priately implemented, we can create and execute smarter working and consuming
practices so that we can make service cocreation processes not only beneficial but also
enjoyable.
Simply put, enormous opportunities truly lie ahead of us. We quite often ask our-
selves: “Do we have right methods and tools that ensure service systems to perform in
such a way that the respective values for both service providers and customers can be
optimally cocreated, at present and in the long run?” However, the question remains
unanswered, partially or totally. By leveraging both systems methods and networks
analytics, in this book we present one solution to address this unanswered question.
Holistically, a service organization is a service system, essentially consist-
ing of service providers, customers, products, and processes. Different from a
goods-producing system, a service system must be people-centered. Therefore, a
service system surely is socio-technical. On the basis of the earlier discussion, we
understand that it is the transformation process that ties all other system constituents
together and cocreates the respective values for both service providers and customers.
Whether the values can be fully met relies on the efficient, effective, and smart
business operations that are engineered, executed, and managed across the service
system.
Service is people-centric, truly cultural and bilateral. The type and nature of a ser-
vice dictate how a service is performed, which accordingly determines how a series
of service encounters could occur throughout its service lifecycle. The type, order,
frequency, timing, time, efficiency, and effectiveness of the series of service encoun-
ters throughout the service lifecycles determine the quality of services perceived by
customers who purchase and consume the services. Note that the people-centered,
interactive, and behavioral activities in a service system essentially engender a service
cocreation network. Indeed, as the velocity of globalization accelerates, the changes
and influences are more ambient, quick, and substantial, impacting us as providers or

xxii
PREFACE
customers in dynamic and complex ways that have not seen before. The understand-
ing of service networks is essential for service providers to be able to design, offer,
and manage services for competitive advantage in the long run.
Because of the sociotechnical nature of a service system, we use a systems
approach to evaluate the performance of the service system, aimed at capturing both
utilitarian functions and sociopsychological needs that characterize service systems.
However, the true people’s behavioral and attitudinal dynamics of a sociotechnical
system requires conducting real-time, corresponding social network analytics. As
a result, the insights of the service interactions in the formed service networks can
be truly explored and understood, which assist stakeholders to make respective
while cooperative informed decisions at the point of need to improve their service
cocreation processes across the service lifecycles in an optimal manner.
To get a comprehensive understanding of this new perspective of service research,
readers should read chapters sequentially. Brief introductions to all chapters in this
book are provided in the following:
• Chapter 1. Introducing service by briefly reviewing the evolution of service, we
emphasize that the holistic view of service is a must in today and the future’s
world economy.
• Chapter 2. Discussing the concept of cocreation in the service industry. A def-
inition of service for this book is provided, which radically lays the foundation
for the remaining chapters in this book.
• Chapter 3. Exploring cocreation transformation processes. We articulate that
the increasing complexity of service research and development requires the
science of service in a new perspective.
• Chapter 4. Looking into service science fundamentals. By analyzing the
dynamics of service, we define laws of service in general. A holistic and
sociotechnical view of service becomes essential for us to develop service
science.
• Chapter 5. Revealing the digitalization of service systems and networks. We
argue that putting people first should be a mindset. The mindset is what service
organizations must bear when they design and develop their service systems.
Through leveraging process-aware computing systems and sensor-based net-
works, people’s behavioral and sociopsychological data and information can be
well monitored and captured.
• Chapter 6. Showing computational thinking of service systems and networks.
By taking advantage of the digitalization of service systems and networks, we
demonstrate that the system dynamics of service cocreation processes can be
fully modeled, analyzed, and controlled in a closed-loop, real-time, and quan-
titative manner.
• Chapter 7. Using education examples to show how service and service systems
can be explored from a systems perspective. Specifically, we apply structural
equation modeling to investigate mechanisms of improving educational
service systems. By integrating cross-section and longitudinal analyses, we

PREFACE
xxiii
demonstrate the tremendous potential of the applications of the proposed
approach in the general field of service engineering and management.
• Chapter 8. Using an online education example to demonstrate the dynamics of
service networks. The concept and principles of putting people first are illus-
trated in great detail in this chapter. When people-sensing mechanisms are well
implemented in a service system, service networks that are essentially formed
from service interactions within the service system can be fully investigated. We
present effective data, network, and business analytics with a focus on looking
into the insights of the service system in real time. Ultimately, once system
performance modeling and service network analysis are well integrated in a
closed-loop, real-time, and quantitative manner, we can truly help service orga-
nizations perform optimal service engineering and management throughout the
service lifecycle.
• Chapter 9. Concluding the book with some final remarks. We articulate that
innovative approaches to the development of Service Science are truly needed.
However, we advocate that the service research and practice community must
appreciate and continue to develop a variety of methodologies and tools that
can be well derived and evolved from the known theories and principles in sys-
tems theory, operations research, marketing science, organizational behavior
and theory, network theory, social computing, and analytics.
This book does not intend to cover the state of the art in the service research field.
Instead, this book simply provides readers a new perspective of service research and
practice. It could serve as a good reference book for scholars and practitioners in the
contemporary service engineering and management field.
Disclaimer
No product or service mentioned in this book is endorsed by its maker or provider,
nor are any claims of the capabilities of the product or service discussed or men-
tioned. Products and company names mentioned may be the trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners.
Robin G. Qiu, PhD
Professor of Information Science
Pennsylvania State University


Acknowledgments
Since 2004, I have been involved in a variety of research projects related to
the emerging field of service science. The presented concept and principles of
service science in this book are surely derived from those funded studies. The
funded projects include US NSF Grants (DMI-0620340 and DMI-0734149),
Department of Education Grant (08JA630040, China), Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics Endowed Professor Scholarships (1009-905346 and
1009-908332), Chinese NSF Grants (70541007, 70772073, and 70902026), and IBM
Faculty Award (2008–2009, China), and IBM Grants (SYRTHU5, D07009SUR,
JLP201111006-1, NUAA-SUR-2012), Jiangsu Science and Technology Innovation
Award (JSTIA269008, Jiangsu, China), and Penn State COIL RIG Grant (2012-14).
Without their financial supports, I might never have had an opportunity of working
in this emerging and promising field.
Portions of the content of Chapter 5 were previously published as a chapter entitled
“Information Technology as a Service” in Enterprise Service Computing: From Con-
cept to Deployment, which was published by Idea Group Publishing (Hershey, PA)
in 2007, Copyright 2007, IGI Global, www.igi-global.com. Portions of the content
of this book were previously published as chapters entitled “BPM” and “BPM/SOA,
Business Analytics and Intelligence” in Business-Oriented Enterprise Integration for
Organizational Agility, which was published by IGI Global (Hershey, PA) in 2013,
Copyright 2013, IGI Global, www.igi-global.com. Reprinted by permission of the
publisher.
Portions of the content of Chapter 6 were previously published in Service
Science, 1(1), 42–55, entitled “Computational thinking of service systems:
dynamics and adaptiveness modeling” and are used with permission from the
Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS,
https://www.informs.org). INFORMS is not responsible for the errors introduced in
xxv

xxvi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
the translation of the original work. During the period of developing this project,
the author wrote several editorial columns for Service Science. The author made
cross-references between those editorial columns and this book.
The author would like to acknowledge the help of all involved in the collation
and review process of this book, without their supports the project could not have
been satisfactorily completed. Special thanks also go to all the staff at John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., whose contributions throughout the whole process from inception of the
initial idea to final publication have been invaluable. In particular, I am very grateful to
Susanne Steitz-Filler, Senior Editor, who continuously prodded via e-mail for keeping
the project on schedule. I want to thank anonymous reviewers whose insights and
criticisms helped substantially improve the quality of this book.
Robin G. Qiu, PhD

1
Evolving and Holistic
View of Service
1.1
WHAT IS SERVICE?
The word “service” has many connotations, varying with domains and settings. We
must understand and deal with its extant variability in order to decipher and capture its
inherent nature in business (Morris and Johnston, 1987). This is particularly important
for this book because we have to stay in focus to discuss one solution, namely our
unique and innovative approach to address the challenges that we have faced in the
service sector over the years or new challenges that we will confront for the years
to come. Put in a straightforward manner, presenting the “BEST” solution to address
all the challenges confronted by academics and practitioners in the service sector is
surely not our intention as there will never be such a one-size-fits-all solution. Given
that the business world becomes more integrated, complex, and interdependent than
ever before, a systemic view of service is the mindset that we will hold throughout this
book. In other words, by relying on systems thinking and holistic viewpoints (Flood
and Carson, 1993), we will explore and accordingly decipher the inherent nature of
service in the unceasingly changing business world.
Service is frequently defined as an act of beneficial activity. A service that is con-
sidered as an act of beneficial activity actually has a long history. If we retrospect
to the simplest material exchange that occurred in ancient times, such as a bushel of
wheat exchanged for a barrel of oil, we know that a very basic trading service was
performed. No matter what units and containers were used and how the trade was
done in ancient times, the exchange or trade, a performed service, was essentially
an act of helpful and beneficial activity that met the respective needs of the involved
exchangers.
Service Science: The Foundations of Service Engineering and Management, First Edition. Robin G. Qiu.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1

2
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
A food service in a restaurant is another good example of an act of beneficial
activity. Similar to the above-mentioned simple trading service, we can also eas-
ily retrospect to ancient times in the early social and economic development stage
thousands of years ago. A food service in ancient times certainly had no conceptual
difference from a modern food service. Although the catering setting and foods in a
restaurant at that time were limited and simple, a performed service was substantively
involved with a list of necessary service elements, provider, consumer, resource, pro-
cess, and value. The service provider was the owner who owned the restaurant and
offered dishes as service products. A service consumer was a client who ordered and
ate his or her selected foods. A typical service process started from the time the client
entered the restaurant and ended when the client paid for the service and left the
restaurant. The process was involved with a transformation with the support of oper-
ation resources. The client’s order is the process’s input. The value for the client and
the owner is the process’s output. The value could simply be the profit the owner made
and the satisfaction the client had. The client’s hunger stopped; he/she was happy to
some degree. Surely, the service was mutually beneficial. Resources, largely natu-
ral and labor-based, were leveraged in an extremely simple manner throughout the
simple catering process (Figure 1.1). Without question, the corresponding business
operations at that time were radically experience-based.
Figure 1.1 illustrates the conventional classification of resources. By focusing on
resource supply and demand in the social and economic activities, we understand
how resources are leveraged in the transformation of goods and services to meet
human needs and desires. As a result, we traditionally recognize three categories
of resources: natural, human, and manufactured or infrastructural resources. Natu-
ral resources essentially are the source of raw materials. Human resources consist
of human efforts provided in the transformation of products or services. Manufac-
tured or infrastructural resources consists of man-made goods or means of production
Manufactured 
or 
infrastructural
Natural
Human
Transformation
Input
output
FIGURE 1.1
A conventional resource model view of a food service.

WHAT IS SERVICE?
3
Provider
Consumer
Resources
Time
Needs
Value
Benefits
FIGURE 1.2
A service involving certain fundamental elements.
(machinery, buildings, and other infrastructure) used in the transformation of other
goods and services (Samuelson and Nordhaus, 2009; Sullivan et al., 2011).
Regardless of what type of service is provided and consumed, five essential and
core elements characterize a service in a conventional act of helpful and beneficial
activity (Figure 1.2). More specifically, the five elements involved in services are
resource, provider, consumer, benefit, and time, which can be described in an intuitive
way as follows:
• Resource. Resources can be in a physical, soft, or hybrid form. For example,
foods as a physical, transformable, and consumable resource or service product
in a restaurant play a fundamental role in a given food service. Knowledge or
experience in a focused subject area transferred in a training service seems to be
a soft resource or service product. When a haircut service is performed, both bar-
ber’s skills and haircut kits as a hybrid resource must be simultaneously applied
or operated to make the service performed in a satisfactory manner. Essentially,
with the help of resources, the act of performing a transformation task for a
customer who asks for it in exchange for acceptable compensation is termed
as service provision. Apparently, resources are the radical conduits of service
provision to customers (Vargo and Lusch, 2004).
• Provider. A service is purposely performed by a service provider. A service
provider as an entity can be an individual, group, organization, institution, sys-
tem, or governmental agency.
• Consumer. A service consumer is usually a human being who consumes,
acquires, or utilizes a service offered and performed by a service provider.
• Benefits. A performed service surely generates certain benefits. Typically, dif-
ferent benefits are pursued by the service provider and the service consumer as
they have different value propositions in executing the service. The benefit for

4
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
the service provider could be value-based, such as a profit. The benefit for the
service consumer might be need-based, such as desire and satisfaction.
• Time. Small or big, simple or complex, a service certainly takes time to get per-
formed to realize the desired benefits. Interactive activities between the provider
and the consumer could occur in an ad hoc or predefined, unattended, and/or
well-controlled process.
Note that service provider-side employees and customer-side consumers should
also be part of recourses if we strictly follow the resource model as is illustrated in
Figure 1.1. To make the discussion vivid and people-centric, we have to emphasize
the identity of active participants in the service model that will be developed and dis-
cussed throughout this book. Therefore, we will always make an exception from the
general resource model by distinguishing the elements of providers and consumers or
customers from the general human resource concept. The concept of human resource
in Figure 1.1 will be needed only when the whole resource model is the focus in a
related and focused discussion.
Indeed, no matter how small or big, simple or complex a service is, it surely takes
time for its provider to perform and its customer to consume the service. Evidently,
the consumer and the provider of the service shall interact with each other, directly
or indirectly, consecutively or intermittently, physically or virtually, and briefly or
intensively, during the process of performing the service. The interaction time accord-
ingly can be short or long. All of these changing factors that largely characterize
provider–consumer interactions vary with the types of services that are actually per-
formed. Hence, there are a variety of perspectives on service in academia and practice.
1.2
DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES ON SERVICE
Because of the existence of the above-mentioned variations in perception, a con-
sumer’s perception of one kind of service could differ considerably from another.
Different forms of resources applied and operated in executing services and vari-
eties of provider–consumer interactions create many different combinations of con-
sumers’ perceptions of services, which consequently complicate our service studies
in academia and practice. Different consumers’ perceptions of services then give rise
to the existence of numerous definitions of service. As a result, different service indus-
tries have historically adopted different definitions of services to accommodate their
respective needs. For example, service is also quite often defined as the supplying of
utilities or commodities in the modern economic society. From an end user’s point
of view, consuming electricity as a service fits in this definition very well. If we con-
sider the daily consumption of electricity as an example, we will see that there is very
little interaction between its provider and customer. Typically, we as home owners or
apartment tenants in the United States simply call a local office of an electricity ser-
vice provider we choose, and then we inform the electricity service provider of the
date we move in. When we move out, we simply do the same. The needed simple
interaction serves only one purpose, which is basically to ensure that the monthly

THE LIFECYCLE OF SERVICE
5
bill statement will accurately and correctly reflect the usages of electricity when we
legitimately stay in the houses or apartments. Unless there could be a problem with
power lines or a discrepancy in a monthly bill statement, we might not interact with
the electricity service provider at all during our entire stay in the house or apartment.
We as consumers feel that there is a very little interaction with a service provider;
such a service is undoubtedly defined as the supplying of utilities from an end user’s
perspective.
The unceasingly increased online shopping in the twenty-first century presents
another perfect example for a service that is defined as the supplying of commodi-
ties. It is well understood in the retailing industry that this supplying of commodities
as a service includes commodities, related distributions, and retailing. However, to an
end user, such an online shopping service is nothing but the supplying of the needed
commodities. We as online shopping customers place orders from a website pow-
ered by an online retailer (i.e., a service provider). The orders will be delivered to
us regardless of how the orders are fulfilled and how far away the orders have to be
transported. Just like utilizing electricity at home, unless there would be a problem
with the ordered commodities, we might not interact with the online retailer after the
initial online order placement. Obviously, there is surely little physical interaction
between a service provider and a service customer throughout the lifecycle of such a
typical online shopping service.
Other forms of definitions of service include the providing of accommodation
and activities required by the public or the supplying of public communication and
transportation. A variety of services in the modern economic society fit in this cate-
gory of service definition. A list of good examples will be trading, communication,
transportation, tourism, hospitality, and health care services. Nevertheless, services
provided by educational institutions, security and military, and governmental agen-
cies can also be well classified in this category of definition.
As mentioned earlier, different consumers’ perceptions of services have histor-
ically resulted in the existence of numerous definitions of service. At first glance,
different forms of definitions of service seem to define different things. When we
further examine these definitions, it is not difficult for us to find that regardless of
how a service is defined in a given discipline in academia or in a specific service
sector in practice, a service must include the five core elements shown in Figure 1.2.
The differences felt or perceived by customers based on their perceptions of services
come from user’s experiences (Qiu, 2013) acquired from service encounters by the
customers throughout the lifecycle of service executions.
1.3
THE LIFECYCLE OF SERVICE
In both academia and practice, we can find many versions of defined phases that com-
pose the lifecycle of service. Depending on what we expect for a service or largely
perceive during the process of consuming a given service, we might use different
constituting stages to compose a service lifecycle. Quite often, we are subjectively or
objectively impressed by certain phases or stages of the lifecycle of service. Then, we

6
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
tend to ignore other phases that we prejudicially think they are less important. The
information technology infrastructure library (ITIL®) version 3 (ITIL, 2011) is a
nonproprietary and publicly available set of best practices for information technol-
ogy (IT) service management. ITIL v3 defines five phases of service lifecycle, ser-
vice strategy, design, transition, operation, and continual service improvement, and
accordingly provides comprehensive guidelines throughout all the phases for aligning
IT services with the needs of business. We also frequently derive the definitions from
the ones widely applied in the manufacturing sector. As a result, just like service, a
variety of terms or definitions of the lifecycle of service exist.
Regardless of how many versions we can find in the extant literature, all the
described lifecycles of services should always be composed of four essential and
classic phases, “learn,” “develop,” “perform,” and “improve,” from a service
provider point of view. We use these four essential and sequential phases in a
service lifecycle to define the fundamental service diamond relationship in a service
organization, which are illustrated in Figure 1.3. These four phases are briefly
discussed as follows:
• Learn. We have to know what the market need is before the concept of a new
service product gets conceived. Regardless of the type of service, we have to
learn the market to identify the needs of prospective customers through a variety
of approaches. We understand that customer needs keep changing as time goes.
Therefore, we have to learn and capture the changes and accordingly incorporate
the changes into service provision throughout the lifecycle of services.
• Develop. We develop, transform, or leverage resources to serve customers and
meet their needs. Frequently, the resources in service are mainly and para-
doxically perceived as service products. Indeed, as we discussed earlier, the
resources in the service industry can be in a physical, soft, or hybrid form.
Leveraging all natural, human, and infrastructure resources are essential in ser-
vice provision. The operand or operant roles of resources in rendering services
Service 
diamond
Learn
(market needs)
Develop 
(resources capable
 of meeting the 
needs)
Perform 
(deliveries of 
services)
Improve
(improvements 
for 
sustaining)
FIGURE 1.3
The lifecycle of service: a classic service diamond.

THE LIFECYCLE OF SERVICE
7
are significantly more sophisticated than the ones in the manufacturing industry.
As a matter of fact, operant resources in service provision produce the effects
that are largely perceived and truly appreciated by customers (Vargo and Lusch,
2004).
• Perform. This phase is largely highlighted by a process of service provision.
Typically, the performing phase in a service lifecycle is known as the delivery
of the service. For a service designated to a given customer, this is also the phase
that the majority of service encounters occur from the customer’s perspective.
• Improve. As we know that customer needs keep changing as time goes, we must
continuously improve our services to stay cutting-edge in the business. Indeed,
the improvements in all aspects of services are crucial to keep our services com-
petitive (Qiu, 2013).
This classic service diamond relationship in a service organization clearly marks
the four key milestones across the lifecycle of service. When the first version of
services is conceived, developed, and offered by a service organization, clear and
well-specified milestones that are explicitly based on the above-defined sequence
might be created and followed from the operations and management perspectives.
During each phase, the service organization usually has different business objectives
set as the highest priority in management and operations. The diagram in Figure 1.4
shows a normal and classic view of managerial and operational priorities pursued in
the service operations and management of a service firm, in which a milestone prior-
ity shifts along with the emergence of a new phase during service business operations.
These typical four priorities that are logically identified throughout the lifecycle of
service are briefly discussed as follows:
• Innovation. A service is not competitive unless it is creative and innovative.
Service products are just part of a service. First of all, we should focus on
the transformation of resources to innovate services that are aimed at position-
ing our services in the market for competitive advantage. Innovations must be
thoroughly embodied in not only the service products, but the processes of deliv-
ering and improving the services.
• Value Proposition. The execution of a service by a service provider must cre-
ate a value for the service provider. As a service takes time from beginning to
end, we must have the value of a service clearly defined in order to have the
value appropriately measured, monitored, and realized in the process of service
provision.
• Value Creation. The targeted value is usually created in the process of service
delivery. However, it is not uncommon in the service industry that we argue that
the delivery of a service actually starts from its development phase.
• Performance. We know how a service meets the needs of its end user once the
service is delivered. Quite often, we would like to have the deliveries to be mon-
itored, so the real-time performance of our service businesses can be captured
and then weakness can be identified for further improvements.

8
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
Innovation
Value creation
Service 
diamond
(service products)
Value proposition
Performance
Learn
(market needs)
Develop 
(resources capable 
of delivering the 
service needs)
Perform 
(service 
provision)
Improve
(improvements 
for sustaining)
$
Customer Provider
Provider
Provider
$
Customer Provider
$
$
FIGURE 1.4
Priority shifts in service business operations and management.
Similar to the lifecycle of manufactured goods, the relationships defined in
Figure 1.4 are most likely neither strictly linear nor purely sequential. In other
words, the four priorities should not be separately considered during business
operations in a competitive service organization. Frequently, a service organization
will operate all the four phases in parallel as soon as the first batch of services gets
completed. Please keep in mind, the first batch of services could simply be prototype
or trial-based services. Competitive services are the results of both the coordinated
and collaborated business actions taken by all the employees in the service provider,
resulting in that satisfactory consumptions are realized and thus quality services are
perceived by the customers.
1.4
SERVICE ENCOUNTERS THROUGHOUT THE
LIFECYCLE OF SERVICE
Before the emergence of the Internet, a physical context type of interactions between
a service provider and a service customer was radically necessary in the process

SERVICE ENCOUNTERS THROUGHOUT THE LIFECYCLE OF SERVICE
9
of performing a service. We define a service encounter as an act where a customer
interacts with the service the customer wants. Therefore, a service encounter essen-
tially is a social and transactional interaction in which a service provider performs
a service activity beneficial to its corresponding service customer (Czepiel et al.,
1985; Czepiel, 1990; Bitner, 1992). Undoubtedly, each service encounter becomes
a moment of truth. For a given service, we are the service provider and might per-
form “good” or “bad” services by rendering “good” or “bad” user/service experience.
In other words, we have the ability to either satisfy or dissatisfy a customer when we
are engaged in a service encounter. With a previously dissatisfied customer, surely
we can rely on another service encounter to offer a service recovery that will be satis-
fying such a previously dissatisfied customer and potentially making him/her a future
loyal customer (Surprenant and Solomon, 1987; Bitner, 1990; Tax and Brown, 1998).
Product, price, and place consist of the rudimentary marketing mix (Figure 1.5a)
that is crucial when a product is set for sale. Marketers have reconstituted and/or
expanded the mix by including different components to accommodate the differ-
ences derived from different goods and the changing customers’ needs in the market,
aimed at improving sales from time to time. Since the 1960s, product, price, place,
and promotion (or simply called 4 Ps) have been widely and steadily used as the pil-
lar components (Figure 1.5b) in the supply-side marketing management to define or
describe the marketing mix that can be applied for identifying the niche of a physical
product for sale (McCarthy, 1960).
In the business world, the effectiveness of marketing a product or service has tra-
ditionally and largely depended on how 4 Ps would be coordinated in the product or
service marketing and sales process. The fundamental concepts of these components
in marketing goods can be briefly summarized as follows:
• A quality physical product has long been the core in the goods marketing. The
value of a piece of goods lies in its ability to satisfy the needs of a customer,
which is mainly seen in the physical attributes and technical functions of the
provided product.
Physical product
Price
Place
Physical product
Place
Price
(a)
(b)
Promotion
FIGURE 1.5
The rudimentary and popular marketing mix. (a) Rudimentary 3 Ps and
(b) Popular 4 Ps.

10
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
• The price of a product has a lot of impact on its customer’s satisfaction level.
Quite often, right price is the first step to help push products into the marketplace
to get quickly accepted by the customers.
• The price of a product for a designated marketplace should be appropriately set.
Varying with socioeconomic statuses, customers in different places frequently
have different affordability. They might also have quite different preferences to
the physical attributes and technical functions of the provided product because
of their cultural preferences and physiological characteristics.
• Promotion plays a critical role in attracting prospective customers in a given
marketplace. It varies with marketplaces; it might also change with seasons.
This is particularly true when a holiday is approaching. Manufacturers
(or retailers) tend to take advantage of the increased number of shopping days
if the products are primarily for consumers.
As the competition gets intensified over the years, organizations have shifted their
foci to customers, resulting in a customer-focused marketing mix, which is termed as
4 Cs (commodity, cost, channel, and communication) (Tannenbaum and Lauterborn,
1993). The 4 Cs marketing mix model essentially replaces 4 Ps (i.e., product, price,
place, and promotion), providing a customer-centric version alternative to the 4 Ps in
the goods marketing. Commodity promotes the pleasure realized when a product is
used by a customer. Cost considers not only the producing cost but also the use and
social costs applied to the customer over time. Channel focuses on the convenience
provided to the customer when the product is purchased. Communication highlights
the interaction and education to help the customer use the product in an optimal and
satisfactory manner.
The focus shift from supply to customer clearly shows that organizations know the
increasing importance of inclusion of customers in business operations and manage-
ment. This is especially critical in the service sector as service encounters bundled
with additional distinguishing characteristics of service directly impact the corre-
sponding service quality and satisfaction perceived by customers. Over the years,
the academics and practitioners have expanded 4 Ps to 7 Ps in the service marketing
and delivery model by including three more components, people, process, and phys-
ical evidence, to reflect the substantively changed market needs and the evolution of
customer-centric service marketing and delivery (Booms and Bitner, 1981; Bitner,
1990).
• People are crucial in service provision. People are human actors centered at
service encounters, including employees, customers, and other personnel who
are directly or indirectly involved in the service encounters.
• Processes define and govern the procedures, mechanisms, and flow of activi-
ties in service encounters, extremely important for service providers to conduct
effective marketing and deliver quality and satisfactory services.
• Physical evidence refers to the physical surroundings and tangible cues that
could influence the customer’s perception of services. As services quite often
are intangible, customers intuitively rely on certain tangible cues that can assist
them to assess the offered services.

SERVICE ENCOUNTERS THROUGHOUT THE LIFECYCLE OF SERVICE
11
Place
Place
Promotion
Physical
evidence
(a)
Product
Price
Process
People
Promotion
Physical
evidence
(b)
Price
Process
Productivity
and quality 
Product
People
FIGURE 1.6
The 7 and 8 Ps of services marketing and delivery model.
Although we can learn quite a lot from the manufacturing industry, we have
inevitably confronted unprecedented challenges in understanding people’s roles in
rendering services in the service industry. It becomes clear that a service organization
must put people (customers and employees) rather than physical goods in the center
of its organizational structure and operations to keep businesses competitive (Qiu
et al., 2007) (Figure 1.6a). For example, service quality is highly regarded as a
comparison of customers’ expectations with performance perceived in service
provision. Thus, service quality can be extremely subjective. As a result, service
productivity and quality are extremely difficult to monitor and measure as they vary
with circumstances. Lovelock and Wirtz (2007) include productivity and quality in
the service marketing and delivery model, as shown in Figure 1.6b, to warrant that
service productivity and quality are well considered throughout service lifecycles.
To be competitive, service organizations must control and manage the total lifecycle
of service in a cost-effective and efficient manner.
In exploring service encounters in the service industry, the literature has thus
developed a series of concepts and models and applied different combinations of
8 Ps to meet the specific needs under different business circumstances, such as mar-
keting, operations and management, and business strategic planning. As discussed
earlier, when a service is performed, its consumer and provider interact with each
other, directly or indirectly, consecutively or intermittently, physically or virtually,
and briefly or intensively, during the process of performing the service. We illustrate
a series of service encounters in Figure 1.7 to highlight a variety of possible social
and transactional interactions throughout the lifecycle of service.
It is worthy to mention that this book promotes a new look of service encoun-
ters. Instead of focusing on the interacting activities between providers and cus-
tomers during the process of service deliveries, we explore all the interactive activities
between service providers and customers throughout the service lifecycle, from ser-
vice conceiving to service termination. Consecutive service encounters form a service
encounter chain (Svensson, 2004), which can be modeled using an event-based time
series. Furthermore, highly correlated service encounter chains thus create a ser-
vice encounter network. A comprehensive discussion on service encounter networks
across the lifecycle of service is provided in Chapter 3.

12
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
Customer
Provider
Service encounter
time series
Repetition in an integrative 
while evolutionary manner
End
Start
Stage (i)
Stage
(i+1)
Indirect
Direct
Physical
Virtual
$
$
$
FIGURE 1.7
A series of service encounters throughout the lifecycle of service.
At first glance, the concepts that are illustrated in Figures 1.3 and 1.4 seem to have
no difference from any other illustrations of lifecycles of businesses in any indus-
try. Just like a manufacturing firm, the lifecycle phases in a service organization can
be recursive, nested, repetitive, or in parallel during business operations. Indeed, a
moment of truth for a service is an instance wherein a customer and a provider-side
employee interact to execute the service. An instance might be considerably differ-
ent from another as the number of involved Ps would change and the constituents
of the involved Ps and their relationships could also change (Chase, 1978; Booms
and Bitner, 1981; Czepiel et al., 1985; Czepiel, 1990; Bitner, 1990; Bitner, 1992).
As indicated in Figure 1.7, various instances could constitute moments of truth in
completing the total performance of a designated service. As time goes, to an end
consumer, satisfactory services shall evolve with further improved user experiences,
while to the service organization services shall evolve iteratively in rendering further
enriched and pleasing moments of truth to loyal and new customers.
Physical interactions describe interactions in which a service consumer and
a service provider perform service activities to realize the mutual benefits with
certain physical evidences that are directly and real-time related to the service
required by the consumer. Daily service examples that largely depend on physical
interactions include in-person meetings in a physical facility, depositing checks in a
bank branch office, eating food in a restaurant, attending a class at school, shopping
for merchandises in a shopping mall, or seeing a doctor in a clinic office or a
hospital. Without question, physical interactions are radical and key parts of service
encounters.
By contrast, virtual interactions describe interactions in which a service provider
performs actions to serve a service consumer without providing the physical evi-
dences that are directly and real-time related to the service requested by the con-
sumer. The service encounters are essentially telecommunication or cyber based,
such as checking an order status by phone, tracking an order by accessing a website,
e-banking, online shopping, online education, or playing computer games over the

SERVICE ENCOUNTERS THROUGHOUT THE LIFECYCLE OF SERVICE
13
Internet (Bitner et al., 2000). Virtual interactions have unceasingly increased their
roles in service encounters. In particular, self-service systems have received tremen-
dous attentions. On one hand, a service provider can considerably reduce the cost of
service management and operations while maintaining a uniformity of services when
toward uniformity makes more sense in the services. On the other hand, a service
customer can take advantage of the convenience that is entailed by the self-service
systems as this kind of service can be consumed anytime and anywhere. Virtual
interactions essentially are those interacting activities that are mediated by technical
devices (e.g., phones, webs, and social networks).
When interactions occur between a service consumer and a service provider with-
out any help or assistance from a third party, they are essentially direct interactions.
For example, a patient sees his/her family physician; or a customer has his/her lunch in
a fast food restaurant. The services are directly performed between a service provider
and a service customer. By contrast, when services that a service provider promises
to offer to customers are actually delivered by a partner of the service provider, the
incurring service encounters are described by indirect interactions as the customers
indirectly interact with the service provider. A perfect example for an indirect inter-
action in a service encounter will be a service that a customer buys a set of lovely
furniture from a local furniture dealer. Many furniture manufacturers contract many
local dealers to sell their famous brands. A set of furniture will be delivered to a cus-
tomer house only after it has been purchased by a customer. To the customer and
the furniture supplier, the interaction occurs indirectly. Figure 1.8 graphically shows
direct and indirect interactions in service encounters that most likely occur in service
operations from an organizational point of view.
Customers
Indirect
/virtual
Direct/
physical
Indirect/
physical
Direct/
virtual
Customer
Provider
$
$
$
Back end
Front end
Partner(s)
Coordination/
collaboration
Coordination/
collaboration
Outsourcing
FIGURE 1.8
An organizational view of service encounters.

14
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
1.5
THE ECONOMIC GLOBALIZATION
Globalization is the phenomenon that highlights the process of integrating nations.
Essentially, globalization refers to the exchange of world views, products, services,
and cultures around the world (Deardorff and Stern, 2002). The world economy has
indeed made extraordinary improvement since World War II. It has been largely cred-
ited to the fast advancement in science, engineering, and technology, such as material
science, electronics, computers, networks, transportations, and telecommunication
technologies over the past half century or so. In particular, the role and power of IT
has been exceedingly increased, consequently transforming the ways the business
works and people live around the world. Accordingly, people, production systems,
computing resources, and information are effectively linked, resulting in the accel-
erated globalization that has precipitated today’s indispensable interdependence of
economic and cultural activities.
According to Deardorff and Stern (2002), “At the most basic level, globalization
is growth of international trade. But it is also the expansion of much else, including
foreign direct investment (FDI), multinational corporations (MNCs), integration of
world capital markets, and resulting financial capital flows, extraterritorial reach of
government policies, attention by (nongovernmental organizations) NGOs to issues
that span the globe, and the constraints on government policies imposed by interna-
tional institutions.” On the basis of the data published by (the World Trade Orga-
nization) WTO, the fast growth of international trade has indeed occurred since the
1980s. The international trade growth keeps its fast pace in this new millennium.
Figure 1.9 shows the worldwide (gross domestic product) GDP from 2000 to 2011 in
US dollars.
$0
S10,000
S20,000
S30,000
S40,000
S50,000
S60,000
S70,000
S80,000
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Billions
Worldwide GDP in USS (billions)
FIGURE 1.9
World GDP data from 2000 to 2011. (Source: http://www.wto.org).

THE ECONOMIC GLOBALIZATION
15
S0
S5,000
S10,000
S15,000
S20,000
S25,000
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Worldwide trade in USS (Billions)
(merchandise and commercial services)
Billions
FIGURE 1.10
World trade data from 2000 to 2011. (Source: http://www.wto.org).
Although the worldwide GDP dropped in 2009 because of the worldwide finan-
cial crisis, the GDP growth in general is the trend. The worldwide economy in 2011
doubled the size of the economy in 2000, appropriately growing 116% in numbers.
The international trade had been tripled over the same period, growing from 7687
billion US dollars to 22,424 billion US dollars (Figure 1.10). The percentage of the
overall international trade in the worldwide GDP grew at a relatively moderate speed,
appropriately from 25% to 32% that resulted in about 28% growth from 2010 to 2011
(Figure 1.11).
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Percentage of world overall trade in GDP 
Percentage
FIGURE 1.11
The percentage of world overall trade in GDP from 2000 to 2011. (Source:
http://www.wto.org).

16
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
The direct effect of the growing international trade will be surely a more integrated
global market. Regardless of where physical products are made, they are made readily
available for customers around the world. Because of the accelerated globalization, it
is well understood that a typical consumer with an average income in the developing
economies would have the increasing opportunity and affordability of purchasing
products and services that are traded internationally. Figures 1.12 and 1.13 provide
the world merchandise trade in 2011 by region using export value and import value,
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Europe
Asia
North 
America
Middle 
East
CIS
South and 
Central 
America
Africa
Total: USS17,999 billions
Billions S
CIS: Commonwealth of independent states
FIGURE 1.12
2011 world merchandise trade by region: export value. (Source: http://
www.wto.org).
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Europe
Asia
North
America 
South and 
Central 
America
Middle 
East
Africa
CIS
Total: USS 18,000 billions
Billions S
CIS: Commonwealth of Independent States
FIGURE 1.13
2011 world merchandise trade by region: import value.

THE ECONOMIC GLOBALIZATION
17
respectively. Figures 1.14 and 1.15 show the world commercial service trade in 2011
by region using export value and import value, respectively. Overall, people, who live
not only in the developed countries but also in the developing countries, are better off
with international trades than without (Deardorff and Stern, 2002).
On the basis of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States, excluding
the goods-producing industries—agriculture, mining, construction, and manufactur-
ing, the service industry, in general, spans all other areas from travel, transportations,
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Europe
Asia
North 
America
South and 
Central 
America
Middle 
East
CIS
Africa
Total: USS 4150 billions
Billions S
CIS: Commonwealth of Independent States
FIGURE 1.14
2011 world trade in commercial services by region: export value.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Europe
Asia
North 
America
Middle 
East
South and 
Central 
America
Africa
CIS
Total: USS 3865 billions
Billions S
CIS: Commonwealth of Independent States
FIGURE 1.15
2011 world trade in commercial services by region: import value.

18
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
TABLE 1.1
Employment Data of the US Workforce in July 2012
Industries
Employment
(In Millions)
Percentage
(%)
Trade, transportation and utilities
(wholesale trade, retail trade,
transportation and warehousing, utilities)
21.483
18.6
Professional and business services
14.824
12.8
Education and health services
17.828
15.4
Leisure and hospitality
11.996
10.4
Government
21.666
18.7
Financial activities
5.954
5.1
Information
2.134
1.8
Other
4.495
3.9
Services sector
100.38
86.7a
Manufacturing
8.444
7.3
Construction
4.133
3.6
Agriculture
2.200
1.9
Mining
0.630
0.5
Goods sector
15.407
13.3
Total
115.787
100.0
aThe percentage is increased from 82.1% in 2006 to 86.7% in 2012.
Source: http://www.bls.gov/ces/.
logistics, communications, utilities, wholesale and retail, trade, education, finance,
insurance, real estate, health care, postal operations, governmental supports, to many
other public services. Indeed, the service industry has grown to dominate the devel-
oped economies while continuing to develop extremely fast in the developing coun-
tries. As an illustrative example, Table 1.1 provides the employment data of the US
workforce in July 2012.
Table 1.1 clearly shows that it is the service industry that employed the majority of
workforce in the United States in 2012. Indeed, the percentage of service employees
has kept growing over the years. When compared to the growth of GDPs, the US
workforce change is well reflected and matched by the similar change pattern in GDPs
over the years. Figures 1.16 and 1.17 provide the changes and comparisons among
the agriculture, goods, and service industries. At present, the US economy is surely
service-led, so are the other developed countries.
Historically, according to US Department of Commerce (1996), most of the G-7
countries began to see a steady growth in the service industry in the 1960s when the
output growth of goods started to slow down. Consequently, the world economy grad-
ually made its structural change. Since the 1980s, the service industry has grown to
dominate the developed economies. We have also witnessed that the service industry
has been developing extremely fast in the developing countries. Indeed, today’s global
economy essentially becomes service-led instead of goods-dominant. On the basis of
the report published by International Monetary Fund (IMF) (IMF, 2012), the service
sector around the world contributed about 63.4% GDP worldwide in 2011. There-
fore, the world economy surely became service-led. Along with the economic shift

THE ECONOMIC GLOBALIZATION
19
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
90.00
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Agriculture
Goods industry
Services
FIGURE 1.16
US GDP percentage data from 1970 to 2010, where industry includes manu-
facturing and manufacturing services. (Source: http://www.worldbank.org/).
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
90.00
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Agriculture
Manufacturing
Services
FIGURE 1.17
US GDP percentage data from 1970 to 2010, where services include commer-
cial services and manufacturing services. (Source: http://www.worldbank.org/).
from manufacture to service, the changes in business operations and management
are significant. Goods-dominant thinking should be replaced with service-dominant
thinking in service engineering, operations, and management. With great detail in dis-
cussing the shift from manufacturing to service in the developed economy, we will
advocate such a mindset change in practice in Chapter 2.
In summary, the customers worldwide are happily enjoying the exuberant markets
to fulfill their daily life needs with the support of home and abroad goods and services.

20
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
Although the economic globalization is unceasingly accelerated, the world service
trade is currently about a quarter of the world goods trade (Figures 1.12–1.15). The
world service trade must play a quick catchup as the world economy becomes truly
service-led. Therefore, service engineering, operations, and management require new
and creative thinking and approaches that can be well applied in practice to help
service organizations further leverage the cultural strengths and workforce talents
across regions and continents.
1.6
THE EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
At the end of the day, the realized value of delivered products or services lies in their
abilities to satisfy the needs of individuals or businesses. Regardless of what type of
products or services we are manufacturing or offering, we must always take signifi-
cant efforts to ensure that our business operations are cost-effective and efficient and
our quality products or services are delivered on time. A competitive organizational
structure and its corresponding managerial and operational practices should be well
defined and executed. Unless it is a small workshop, a service organization is typi-
cally developed and organized based on different while necessary business domain
functions in pursuit of common business goals and objectives. Although units are
separately operated and managed through their well-defined business domains, they
must be collaboratively coordinated across the organization in support of daily busi-
ness operations to accomplish the defined business objectives (Figure 1.18). For a
given organization, surely its business models, organizational structures, and accord-
ingly adopted business domain functions, operations, and management all vary with
its unique business nature, size, complexity, and regional and global presence.
As illustrated in Figure 1.18, a typical organization would have numerous busi-
ness domains, most likely including sales and marketing, engineering, logistics, pro-
duction, finance and accounting, and human resource, in order to fully function in
delivering the organization’s business promise that has been made to its customers.
Figure 1.19 then shows how a typical manufacturing business successfully gener-
ates a value (e.g., profit) throughout the strategically synchronized organizational
value chain (Porter, 1985; Weske, 2007). The profit margin depends on the efficiency
and cost-effectiveness of underlying business operations and management to produce
quality products, satisfying the needs of its end users that can be individual and/or
business customers.
It is typical that the technical characteristics and physical attributes of manufac-
tured products largely present their brands in the market. As compared to the out-
comes of manufactured goods, the highlights of services are not simply and strictly
seen in the functions of the services and the physical attributes of the associated
products that are included in the services, but the abilities of services to satisfy end
users’ functional and socioemotional needs (Chase and Erikson, 1989; Dietrich and
Harrison, 2006; Chase and Dasu, 2008). The competitiveness of services in the market
thus largely relies on the efficacy and quality of service encounters. In addition, the
focus shift from supply to customer has confirmed that organizations understand the

THE EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
21
Board 
Logistics
Production/operations
Finance/accounting
Human resources
Sales/marketing
Engineering
Executives
FIGURE 1.18
A typical organizational structure.
Organizational infrastructure resource
Human resource management
Engineering/technology management
Finance/accounting management
Inbound 
logistics
Production/
operations
Outbound
logistics
Marketing/
sales
Services
Value
(profit)
Support functions
Primary functions
FIGURE 1.19
The manufacturing organizational value chain (Porter, 1985; Weske, 2007).
increasing importance of inclusion of customers in business management and oper-
ations over the past decade or so. Hence, a service organization cannot well perform
services to satisfy customers if service encounters that directly impact service quality
and satisfaction are not included and considerably integrated in a gradual and spiral
manner on its value chain. Figure 1.20 clearly indicates the substantive change by

22
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
Organizational infrastructure resource
Human resource management
Engineering/technology management
Finance/accounting management
Inbound 
logistics
Production/
operations
Outbound
logistics
Marketing/
sales
Service
provision
Value
Support functions
Primary functions
Service encounters
FIGURE 1.20
The service organizational value chain.
not only including but emphasizing service encounters on the service organizational
value chain. Over the years, the service value chain has essentially evolved from the
manufacturing organizational value chain. Nevertheless, the service value chain must
continue to evolve by bearing total service encounters in mind to meet the needs of the
dynamic marketplaces in the service-led economy (Heskett et al., 1994; Karmarkar,
2004).
The traditional, empirical, or manufacturing-based goods-centric design, develop-
ment, and delivery of services can be surely applied in practice and might continue to
work under certain business circumstances today and in the future. However, we have
witnessed that services have evolved substantially and substantively along with the
fast development of technologies, societies, and the global economy. It becomes nec-
essary for us to understand how the modern services have evolved from ones not too
long ago. Surely, with the comprehensive exploration of service innovation and bet-
ter understanding of people-centric services in today’s information era, we can ensure
that our service provision will spiral into the manifests of user experience excellence
(IBM, 2004; Cambridge, 2007; Chesbrough, 2011).
Without delving into the details, let us briefly look at a list of core services we
rely on at work or primarily in our daily life. Hence, we can capture and abstract the
general characteristics of service encounters (Bitner et al., 1994) that are essential for
the list of rudimentary services.
• Restaurant Food Services. We choose a recipe we like and then go to a
restaurant that serves the recipe. We talk to a waiter/waitress and order dishes
from a menu. We eat and then pay for the service. If the foods are delicious,
the setting is comfortable, and the waiter/waitress is polite and helpful, we will

THE EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
23
eat there again. Typically, catering services are driven by the quality of foods
and customers’ perceived pleasure and service satisfaction. Intuitively, we
consider that the catering services are act-based as direct and physical service
encounters are necessary.
• Car Services. For a regular maintenance, we call a car service shop we choose
and schedule an appropriate mileage-based service recommended by our car
manufacturer. On the scheduled day, we bring the car that is scheduled for its
regular maintenance service to the shop. After we confirm with a receptionist on
the needed maintenances, we drop the car there and leave for work. A mechanics
might call us if there would be something to discuss, such as different problems
found during the service, the need for replacing extra parts, the final charge,
and/or a different time to pick up. We pick up the car after we pay the due.
Again, we intuitively think that car services are generally act-based as direct and
physical service encounters mainly occurs throughout the maintenance service
process.
• Residential Gas or Electricity Services. We call a local office of a gas or an elec-
tricity service provider we choose and inform the service provider of the date we
move in. When we move out, we simply do the same. We pay a bill based on the
monthly usage of gas or electricity. As discussed earlier, unless there would be
a problem with power lines, gas pipes, or a discrepancy in a monthly bill state-
ment, we might not physically interact with the service provider at all. At first
glance, we think the utilities services are supply-based. Indeed, indirect and vir-
tual interaction types of service encounters dominate across the corresponding
service process in the utility industry.
• Resident Education. We register a course that can be a required core course or
a selective one for a degree or diploma. We go to school to attend instructor-led
lectures or lab sessions. We listen to the lectures provided by an instructor. We
frequently discuss with the instructor or classmates on a variety of topics related
to the lessons. We surely complete assignments and take exams or finish projects
in due course. Typically, we think resident instruction-based education services
are act-based as direct and physical service encounters dominate in the whole
educational service process.
• Online Training. We register a training course. No matter where we are, we can
log on whenever we have time and an Internet connection. We read lecture notes
and watch or listen to recorded lectures via a variety of online social media.
We might discuss problems with other trainees who have registered the same
training class. The discussions can be done synchronously or asynchronously.
By leveraging a variety of online supports, we will complete assignments, take
exams, or finish projects as needed. Without question, online training is quite
different from resident instruction-based education. As this particular type of
online training seems that the offered services are delivered using an on-demand
model, it is extremely similar to a utility-type service. Intuitively, we think
online training services are supply-based as indirect and virtual service encoun-
ters dominate in this type of training process.

24
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
• Federal Bureaus or State Agencies. We can use a driver license renewal service
as a typical example of utilizing state-level governmental services. We fill in a
renewal form online. A letter from the Department of Transportation of the state
we live in will arrive in a few days, which informs us of the time and location
to have our driver licenses renewed. We show up at the designated office on the
date indicated in the appointment letter. A staff at the office will assist us in the
whole renewal process. A photo will be taken, a signature is then required, and
accordingly a new driver license will be issued. Service encounters seem to take
a variety of possible social and transactional interactions. We typically perceive
that the services provided by both federal and state agencies consist of a series
of acts of public services.
• Global Project Development. Let us make up a fictional virtual project team
first. A software project development team has six small groups of people, pop-
ulating in six different geographic regions. Each group has certain unique skill
sets of from 5 to 15 talent employees, including a software designer, a group
architect, programmers, quality assurance staff, business analysts, and a group
manager. A top-level management group, managing the entire virtual project
team, consists of one team manager, one team architect, and one team business
analyst. A project draft specification might be brainstormed when the top-level
management group meets with a group of customer representatives. The project
specification might be revised and enriched as time goes. Unless the project
is completed, it is typical that the specification will keep changing to some
extent. Surely each revision will be the outcome of numerous onsite or virtual
meetings. Customer representatives could be directly or indirectly contacted by
group members if necessary. We surely understand that a project requiring a
global virtual team is usually big and complex and its development process is
frequently long and complicated. In general, we perceive that global project
development services surely are act-based, requiring a series of interactions
and coordination, physically and/or virtually. Service encounters throughout the
development cycle of global project development services are collaborative in
nature.
• Health care Service Networks. We use an outpatient, who has a small hand
lump removed through a health care service network, to show how a typical US
health care service is performed. Figure 1.21 illustrates the process and associ-
ated steps that are usually taken by the outpatient to complete his treatment and
get fully cured and recovered. Step 1, the patient has to see his family physician
(Dr. A) first. He is usually referred to an orthopedic or hand specialist. Step 2,
we assume that the patient makes an appointment with the referred orthopedic
specialist (Dr. B) and sees the orthopedic specialist accordingly. Dr. B diagnoses
the hand lump and then schedules an operation for him. In order for Dr. B to do a
hand surgery, Dr. B asks the patient to get his physical examination done by Dr.
A before the scheduled operation. Step 3, the patient has to see Dr. A to get his
physical exam. Step 4, Dr. A informs Dr. B’s office of the result of his physical
exam. Step 5, the patient shows up in the hospital where his hand operation will
take place. Dr. B has the scheduled operation completed. Step 6, the patient gets

THE EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
25
Pharmacy 
Family physician
Hospital
Orthopedic specialist
Hand specialist
Labs
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Patient
FIGURE 1.21
A typical US health care service network.
some prescribed medicines by Dr. B from a pharmacy. Step 7, the removed neo-
plasm is sent to some labs for further diagnosis. Step 8, the lab result that shows
the neoplasm is benign and is delivered to Dr. B’s office. Step 9, Dr. B sends a
final report of the treatment for the patient to Dr. A’s office. Step 10, the patient
sees Dr. B., Dr. B checks how the recovery from the surgery goes. The patient
gets released once Dr. B determines that the neoplasm is completely removed
and patient’s hand gets fully cured and recovered from the surgery. Apparently,
a health care service is act-based, which mainly requires a series of interactions
and coordination, physically and directly. Service encounters throughout the
whole process are indeed collaborative in nature. The involved health care per-
sonnel should be coordinated in a timely and collaborative manner; the patient
must be also well collaborated in order to have the operation service and treat-
ment completed in a quick, successful, and satisfactory manner.
From the above brief discussion on service encounters that were derived from a
list of selected core services at work or in our daily life, we can roughly provide a
comparison table (Table 1.2) to list the key variations of different services by present-
ing what customers’ general perceptions of these services would be and how a series
of service encounters play a pivotal role in the noticeable evolution of the service
organizational value chain (Figure 1.20). Banking, online banking, shopping, online
shopping, tourism, and transportation services that well serve our daily life needs
are also included in Table 1.2. Note that the differences perceived by customers are
derived from their perceptions of services throughout the lifecycles of the consumed
services.
As the perceptions of services are primarily subjective, the corresponding dif-
ferences intuitively come from the differences acquired from service encounters by
customers during the periods when they receive the offered services. We do not try

TABLE 1.2
Rough Comparisons of Customers’ Service Perceptions Across Different Types of Services
Services
Service Encounters
Type
Product
Physical
Versus Virtual
Direct
Versus Indirect
Brief
Versus Intensive
Process
Customers’ General
Perceptions of Services
Restaurant foods
Foods
Physical
Direct
Brief
Short and simple
Catering acts
Car services
Fixing or maintenance
Physical
Direct
Brief
Short and simple
Providing fixing acts
Gas or electricity
Utilities
Virtual
Combined
Brief
Long and simple
Supplying acts
Banking
Saving and checking
accounts
Physical
Direct
Intensive
Long and simple
Supplying acts
Online banking
Saving and checking
accounts
Virtual
Combined
Brief
Long and simple
Supplying acts
Shopping
Merchandises
Physical
Direct
Intensive
Short and simple
Selling acts
Online shopping
Merchandises
Virtual
Combined
Brief
Short and varying
Selling acts
Transportation
Delivery
Physical
Combined
Brief
Short and simple
Supplying acts
Tourism
Tour planning
Varying
Combined
Intensive
Short and complex
Providing tour acts
Health care
Knowledge
Physical
Direct
Intensive
Varying
Providing diagnostic,
care, and treatment
acts
Resident education
Knowledge
Physical
Direct
Intensive
Long and simple
Providing educational
acts
Online Education
Knowledge
Virtual
Combined
Brief
Long and complex
Providing educational
Acts
Federal bureaus or
state agencies
Polices and,
regulations
compliances, or law
enforcements
Varying
Direct
Brief
Short and simple
Providing public
supports acts
Global project
development
Knowledge
Varying
Combined
Varying
Varying
Providing knowledge
acts
26

THE EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
27
to present perfect and comprehensive understandings of service encounters in this
introductory chapter. We use Table 1.2 to simply show a few of examples to provide
some clarifications or explanations of the existence of different service definitions
mentioned earlier while highlighting the pivotal role of service encounters in service.
The readers should also understand that there surely exist other forms of service def-
initions in academia and practice.
From the approximate comparisons provided in Table 1.2, we can further confirm
the three main definitions that have been radically formed from customers’ general
perceptions of services.
• When a service is performed, if its service encounters are largely physical, inten-
sive, and direct from the customer’s perspective, then a social and transactional
performance is perceived as the centerpiece of the service. This entails that ser-
vice is considered as a direct performance of beneficial activities.
• By contrast, when a service is performed, if its service encounters are mainly
virtual, brief, and indirect from the customer’s perspective, then the usage of
a service product or resource is perceived as the centerpiece of the service.
Accordingly, service is quite often considered as the supplying of utilities, com-
modities, or digitalized media.
• In addition, people receive many societal function types of services, such as
societal function services that are provided by governmental agencies. People
easily view the related service encounters to have a public service nature. Ser-
vice is thus essentially considered as a performance of supporting the needs for
the public.
Overall, we can find that it is the “performance” or “act of performing” in service
provision that creates benefits for both service providers and service consumers. As
service providers, in addition to the service delivery-based interactions that are mainly
perceived by customers, we know that the design, development, and preparation of
service encounters must be included and well executed across the service value chain
(Figure 1.20). Customers consume and perceive services through a list of service
encounters that can be delivered, face-to-face or virtually, directly or indirectly. How-
ever, in a systemic perspective, customers are heavily involved in other phases of the
service lifecycle including inputs to service design and feedback on consumed ser-
vices. In other words, the real value of service is the total perceived value of the
outcomes developed and accumulated from a series of service encounters that truly
cross the lifecycle of service.
Furthermore, the increased degree, magnitude, and/or scope of automation,
outsourcing, customization, offshore sourcing, business process transformation,
e-business, and self-services continue to evolve. Service provision thus becomes
more complicated and challenging. Consequently, service organizations demand a
higher efficiency and better cost-effectiveness in service management, engineering,
and operations across their service value chains, focusing on further improving
their competitiveness in the global service-led economy. We fully understand that
the value of service is the total perceived value of the quality outcomes realized
through a series of service encounters across the service lifecycle. Hence, we must

28
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
Place
Promotion
Physical evidence
Price
Process
Product
People
Holistic view of service systems (8 Ps)
Partner
Customers
Indirect
/virtual
Direct/
physical
Indirect/
physical
Direct/
virtual
Customer
Provider
$
$
$
Back end
Front end
Partner(s)
Coordination/
collaboration
Coordination/
collaboration
Outsourcing
FIGURE 1.22
A new perspective of service offering and delivering model.
adopt a new holistic service perspective to study service, aimed at identifying right
approaches to help service organizations learn, develop, perform, and improve
their offered services. The new holistic perspective of services (Figure 1.22) should
simultaneously include the following views:
• Systems or Systemic View. A system, focusing on the interdependence of rela-
tionships created in an organization, is composed of regularly interacting or
interrelating groups of activities within the organization (STWiki, 2012). Thus,
a service organization essentially is a service system that consists of a num-
ber of interacting and collaborative business domains systems (Qiu, 2007). The
systems view is then a perspective of looking at the service organization as a
collection of business domain systems that create a whole, allowing us to under-
stand and orchestrate the interacting activities among these business domains
systems. Simply put, a corresponding systemic study should focus on the rela-
tionships between those systems to determine how they affect the whole on the
trajectory of realizing the business goals and objectives of the service organiza-
tion.
• People-Centric View. Both supply side and customer side should be well
explored.
• Global View. Partnership and cultural aspects should be fully considered. A
new 8 Ps should be applied in the service provision model.

REFERENCES
29
• Lifecycle View. As discussed earlier, the value of service is the total perceived
value of the quality outcomes realized through a series of service encounters
across the service lifecycle. Well-designed service encounters thus must span
services from beginning to end.
1.7
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we looked into the insights of service from different perspectives.
We now understand that customers consume and perceive services through a list of
service encounters that occur in the process of service deliveries and beyond. How-
ever, service encounters, which are interactions between customers and providers,
can occur in different ways, face-to-face or virtually, directly or indirectly. To ser-
vice providers, we know that customer interactions go beyond the service delivery
processes and must include the contacts during the design, development, and prepa-
ration of service encounters. Indeed, customers contribute significantly to the design,
development, and preparation of service encounters in order to carry out competitive
services to prospective customers (Ahlquist and Saagar, 2013). Therefore, the value
of service is the total perceived value of the outcomes cocreated by providers and
customers from a series of service encounters throughout the service lifecycle.
As a service is largely people-centric, truly cultural and bilateral, the type and
nature of a service dictates how a service is performed, which accordingly defines
how a series of service encounters could and should occur throughout its service
lifecycle. The type, order, frequency, timing, time, efficiency, and effectiveness of the
series of service encounters throughout the service lifecycles determine the quality
of services perceived by customers who purchase and consume the services (Bitner;
1992; Chase and Dasu, 2008). It is largely true that the perceived service quality
by customers substantially impacts the satisfaction and loyalty of the customers. We
will fully explore all the aspects of service encounters across the lifecycle of service,
chapter by chapter throughout this book.
We never try to craft our definition of service to be more comprehensive and
precise than those that have been proposed by many pioneers in the global service
research, education, and practice community over the years. However, we do need an
appropriate, holistic, and sound definition to lay out the solid foundation for this book.
Therefore, regardless of how many versions of service definition exist in academia
and practice, one consistent definition is essential for the following chapters of this
book. Identifying such an appropriate and sound definition of service surely becomes
necessary, which naturally becomes the focus of our next chapter.
REFERENCES
Ahlquist, J., & Saagar, K. (2013). Comprehending the complete customer. Analytics—
INFORMS Analytics Magazine, May/June, 36–50.
Bitner, M. J. (1990). Evaluating service encounters: the effects of physical surroundings and
employee responses. Journal of Marketing, 54(2), 69–82.
Bitner, M. J. (1992). Servicescapes: the impact of physical surroundings on customers and
employees. Journal of Marketing, 56(2), 57–71.

30
EVOLVING AND HOLISTIC VIEW OF SERVICE
Bitner, M. J., Booms, B. H., & Mohr, L. A. (1994). Critical service encounters: the employee’s
viewpoint. The Journal of Marketing, 58, 95–106.
Bitner, M. J., Brown, S. W., & Meuter, M. L. (2000). Technology infusion in service encoun-
ters. Journal of the Academy of marketing Science, 28(1), 138–149.
Booms, B. H., & Bitner, M. J. (1981). Marketing strategies and organization structures for
service firms. Marketing of Services, 47–51.
Cambridge. (2007). Succeeding through service innovation. Cambridge Service Science, Man-
agement and Engineering Symposium, July 14–15, 2007.
Chase, R. B. (1978). Where does the customer fit in a service operation? Harvard Business
Review, 56(6), 137–142.
Chase, R. B., & Dasu, S. (2008). Psychology of the experience: the missing link in service
science. Service Science, Management and Engineering Education for the 21st Century,
35–40, ed. by B. Hefley and W. Murphy. US: Springer.
Chase, R. B., & Erikson, W. (1989). The service factory. The Academy of Management Exec-
utive, 2(3), 191–196.
Chesbrough, H. W. (2011). Open Services Innovation: Rethinking Your Business to Grow and
Compete in a New Era. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Czepiel, J. A. (1990). Service encounters and service relationships: implications for research.
Journal of Business Research, 20(1), 13–21.
Czepiel, J. A., Solomon, M. R., & Surprenant, C. F. (1985). The Service Encounter: Managing
Employee/Customer Interaction in Service Business. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Deardorff, A., & Stern, R. (2002). What you should know about globalization and the world
trade organization. Review of International Economics, 10(3), 404–423.
Dietrich, B., & Harrison, T. (2006). Serving the services industry. OR/MS Today, 33(3), 42–49.
Flood, R. L., & Carson, E. R. (1993). Dealing with Complexity: an Introduction to the Theory
and Application of Systems Science, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Springer.
Heskett, J. L., Jones, T. O., Loveman, G. W., Sasser, W. E., & Schlesinger, L. A. (1994). Putting
the service-profit chain to work. Harvard Business Review, 72(2), 164–174.
IBM. (2004). Services Science: A New Academic Discipline? IBM Research.
IMF. (2012). International Monetary Fund. Retrieved Oct. 10, 2012 from http://www.imf.org/.
ITIL. (2011). Information Technology and Infrastructure Library. ITILv3. Retrieved Oct. 10,
2012 from http://www.itil-officialsite.com/AboutITIL/WhatisITIL.aspx.
Karmarkar, U. (2004). Will you survive the services revolution? Harvard Business Review,
82(6), 100–107.
Lovelock, C. H., & Wirtz, J. (2007). Service Marketing: People, Technology, Strategy, 6th ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
McCarthy, J. (1960). Basic Marketing – A Managerial Approach. Homewood, IL: Richard
D. Irwin.
Morris, B., & Johnston, R. (1987). Dealing with inherent variability: the difference between
manufacturing and service? International Journal of Operations & Production Manage-
ment, 7(4), 13–22.
Porter, M. (1985) Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance.
New York: Free Press.

REFERENCES
31
Qiu, R. G. (2007). Enterprise Service Computing: From Concept to Deployment. Chapter 1
in Information Technology as a Service, 1–24, ed. by Robin Qiu. Hershey, PA: Idea Group
Publishing.
Qiu, R. G. (2013). We must rethink service encounters. Service Science, 5(1), 1–3.
Qiu, R. G., Fang, Z., Shen, H., & Yu, M. (2007). Editorial: towards service science, engineering
and practice. International Journal of Services Operations and Informatics, 2(2), 103–113.
Samuelson, P., & Nordhaus, W. (2009). Economics, 19th ed. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Svensson, G. (2004). A customized construct of sequential service quality in service
encounter chains: time, context, and performance threshold. Managing Service Quality,
14(6), 468–475.
STWiki. (2012). Systems Theory. Wikipedia. Retrieved Oct. 10, 2012 from http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Systems_theory.
Sullivan, A., Sheffrin, S., & Perez, S. (2011). Economics: Principles, Applications and Tools,
7th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Surprenant, C., & Solomon, M. (1987). Predictability and personalization in the service
encounter. Journal of Marketing, 51(2), 86–96.
Tannenbaum, S. I., & Lauterborn, R. F. (1993). Integrated Marketing Communications. Lin-
colnwood, IL: NTCBusiness Books.
Tax, S., & Brown, S. (1998). Recovering and learning from service failure. Sloan Management
Review, 40(1), 75–88.
U.S. Department of Commerce. (1996). Service Industries and Economic Performance.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce. Retrieved on Dec. 10, 2012 from
http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/reports/documents/serviceindustries_0.pdf.
Vargo, S., & Lusch, R. F. (2004). Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing. Journal of
Marketing, 68(1), 1–17.
Weske, M. (2007). Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages, Architectures.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

2
Definition of Service
Today’s business environments are characterized with advanced communications,
accelerated economic globalization, and increased automation and open source
innovations. As we have witnessed, the resultant vibrant but also complex service
provision has created higher quality and healthier lives around the world. For
a service organization to stay competitive, however, the unceasingly intensified
competition demands that the organization must keep improving the efficiency and
cost-effectiveness in service management, engineering, and operations across its
service organizational value chain.
Over the years, service is typically considered as an application of specialized
knowledge, skills, and experiences performed for the benefit of another (Vargo and
Lusch, 2004; Spohrer et al., 2007). Quite often, services to customers are regarded
as being perishable, heterogeneous, and intangible, commonly provided for either
individuals or businesses to create desirable values to satisfy their needs (Sampson
and Froehle, 2006; Qiu et al., 2007). Hence, to find an appropriate definition of service
in a broad sense to cover a variety of service areas seems difficult and challenging.
Service as a word in economics is mainly defined as an act of helpful activity,
the supplying of transportation, communication, and utilities or commodities, or the
providing of assistance, accommodation, or leisure activities. Although its meaning
might vary with circumstances, a given service substantively implies performing an
action or a series of actions. Indeed, no matter what a service product is embedded
as part of the offered service, the service is being executed only when the act of a
designated service activity is performed. The value of the service thus largely depends
on when, where, and how the process of relevant service activities gets executed.
From Chapter 1, we understand that a sound, solid, and holistic definition of ser-
vice is essential for this book, regardless of the existence of many versions of service
definition in academia and practice. Therefore, in order to find a sound, solid, and
Service Science: The Foundations of Service Engineering and Management, First Edition. Robin G. Qiu.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
32

FROM MANUFACTURING TO SERVICE: THE ECONOMIC SHIFT
33
holistic definition of service we need, we must revisit and rethink the process of
generating service values by exploring the following aspects of service:
• We must explore how the distinguishing characteristics in service provision dif-
ferentiate a service execution process from one used in manufacturing.
• We must understand how the globalization of economy impacts the evolution
of the service lifecycle.
• We must look into the total service lifecycle, spanning from service concept
conceiving, to service phasing out, aimed at capturing the real insights
of service-oriented business operations and finding scientific methods and
methodologies to help service organizations foster service design, development,
delivery, operations, and improvement in a competitive manner.
2.1
FROM MANUFACTURING TO SERVICE: THE ECONOMIC SHIFT
Not long ago when the worldwide economy was dominated by manufacturing, both
academics and practitioners paid much attention to the design, development, pro-
duction, and innovation of physical products. Except for studies that were radically
focusing on the employee–customer encounter and service quality in the service mar-
keting research and practice, people’s social, physiological, and psychological roles
were largely blurred and barely seen in the manufacturing business operations and
management (Figure 2.1).
Manufacture
diamond
(physical products) 
Value proposition
Innovation
Performance
Value creation
Learn
(market needs)
Design and
manufacture
(products capable of
meeting the needs) 
Distribution and
sales
(Use of
products)  
Improve or recycle
(improvements for
sustaining or
demanufacture)
FIGURE 2.1
Priority shifts in operations and management in manufacturing.

34
DEFINITION OF SERVICE
We can clearly see that Figure 1.4 is directly derived from Figure 2.1. In other
words, the priority shifts along with the changing phases defined in the service dia-
mond relationship (Figure 1.4) are similar to the ones defined in the manufacture
diamond relationship (Figure 2.1). This is surely not a surprise as manufacturing had
played the dominative role in the world economy for over a century or so. Inertial
thinking is normal to the majority of human beings, resulting in that many service
organizations run their services using manufacturing mindsets.
More specifically, as physical products had been essentially the focus over the
last century, manufacture/service organizations had been dominantly considered as
technology- or product-driven entities, paying much attention to their product fea-
tures/functions, applied materials, production/automation means, distribution, and
productivity. Hence, it is the product that determines the value of a business which is
the mindset of an organizations’ executives in business operations and management
(Chesbrough, 2011a, 2011b). The physical product surely is the implicit star in a man-
ufacturing organization. A competitive manufacturing business is thus driven by the
closed innovation paradigm, focusing on technical breakthroughs from its increased
investment in the internal research and development (R&D). Figure 2.2 shows the
typical virtuous circle that has been well recognized and adopted in manufacturing
(Chesbrough, 2003).
The typical virtuous circle in manufacturing relies heavily on the realized
technology breakthroughs in a timely manner to stay competitive (Figure 2.3).
Innovations in manufacturing are goods-oriented. In other words, manufacturing
The virtuous circle
(physical products)
Increased
investment in
research and
development
Technology
breakthrough 
More competitive
products 
Increased sales
and profits 
FIGURE 2.2
The typical virtuous circle well recognized and adopted in manufacturing.

FROM MANUFACTURING TO SERVICE: THE ECONOMIC SHIFT
35
Organizational infrastructure resource
Human resource management
Engineering/technology management
Finance/accounting management
Inbound
logistics 
Production/
Operations
Outbound
logistics 
Marketing/
Sales
Services
Value
(profit)
Support
functions 
Primary functions
Learn and
research
Improve and
study
Design and
manufacture
Distribution
and sales
Product
Technology
breakthrough 
More
competitive
products  
Increased
sales and
profits  
Increased
investment in
R&D   
FIGURE 2.3
Competitive manufacturing driven by goods-oriented innovations.
organizations primarily invest in the following areas to provide competitive products
for mature and emerging markets:
• Product Features/Functions. The organizations rely on technology break-
throughs to add newly discovered features/functions to the products, aimed at
outperforming competitors considerably in terms of the products’ technical
capabilities of meeting the needs of customers.
• Materials. The organizations increase the performance and reliability of the
products using the innovations, resulting in further improved customers’ sat-
isfaction from the purchased goods.
• Production Automation. The organizations improve the quality of the products
and reduce the cost of productions, to improve profit margins and maintain
goods quality brands.
• Supply Chain and Logistics. The organizations further optimize all transporta-
tion, storage, and distribution of raw materials, work-in-process parts, finished
goods, and other resources from the point of origin to the point of consumption,
focusing on improving the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the flow of the
formed organization networks internally and externally. The lead time and cost
of manufactured products in production and on the supply chain thus get cut
further.
Without a second thought, the innovation-based virtuous cycle must center and
indeed has truly centered at physical products in manufacturing organizations.

36
DEFINITION OF SERVICE
In general, the value for an organization is the benefit provided for customers,
employees, partners, and investors. The value recognized as a benefit indeed varies
with the stakeholders and time. At a different time, the benefit for a different
stakeholder might be realized in a different form. In manufacturing, the benefit is
usually realized through product-centric business operations that seek to leverage
prices over costs by means of organization, policies, management, operations,
technology, finance, incentives, and other factors throughout the manufacturing
value chain (Figure 2.3).
As the manufacturing productivity and quality of products have been significantly
improved, the standard of living has been considerably improved. Although the means
that are used in gauging the standard of living vary with political and economic soci-
eties and geographic areas, in the last quarter of the twentieth century, the world
witnessed significant transformations in many aspects of well-being that were mainly
driven by the long-established industrializations and well-improved productivities in
the developed economies. As a result, the global economy gradually shifted its focus
from manufacturing to services, aimed at further improving the quality of lives around
the world. It has been well recognized that the dawn of information era has accelerated
the shift.
The quality of life currently takes into account not only the material standard
of living but other intangible values of living that are service-oriented and largely
subjective. Indeed, people are increasingly demanding supportive, pleasant, and
value-added services. The social and perceptive concepts and measures, including
success, happiness, satisfaction, and the like, are frequently applied and used to
measure the outcomes of performed services. Thus, the measurements used for
gauging consumed services are substantively different from the performance mea-
surements such as physical features and technical functions that have been mainly
used in manufacturing. Without identifying all the characteristics of manufacture and
service, a brief comparison between manufacture and service using the simplified
lifecycle phases in Figures 1.4 and 2.1 is provided in Table 2.1.
Many scholars and practitioners have attempted to differentiate service from goods
on one or more dimensions ultimately arriving at a continuum (Bell, 1981; Bowen,
1990); goods are arrayed at one end and service on the other end. It is typically true
that there is considerable overlap between the two (Solomon et al., 1985). In this book,
we incline to have our main discussions by inclining to the service end. However,
for a service, we must understand that goods are frequently the conduits of service
provision. Therefore, the physical attributes and technical characteristics that specify
the goods are surely indispensable to the service.
Let us look into two excellent examples to see how the discussions are reflected
in real life. One is a typical car repairing service. The other is a purchase of a popular
product, iPad, from the Apple online store.
• Car Repairing Service. When we know there is a problem with a car, we call a
car service shop that we choose and schedule an appointment. On the scheduled
day, we bring the car that is scheduled for a repair service to the shop. After we
confirm with a receptionist on the needed repair service, we drop the car there

TABLE 2.1
Highlights of the Operational and Managerial Priorities in the Service Industry
Lifecycle Phases
General Characteristics
Highlights of the Changes in
Manufacture
Service
Manufacture
Service
Service Operations and Management
Learn
Learn
Market analysis: physical
features and functions
Market analysis: services to meet
the customers’ perceived
values and their daily needs of
service product features and
functions
Customers’ perceptions of
services including service
products
Design and
manufacture
Develop
Physical product
realization: functionality,
quality, automation, and
cost
Resource development: capability
of delivering, quality assurance,
and cost
The capacity of resources and
capability enabled by the
service providers
Distribution and
sales
Deliver
Physical product
distribution efficiency
and price
Satisfactory acts of performing
designated service deliveries
and price
Service encounters
Improve or
Recycle
Improve
New features and
functions
New acts to increase customers’
perceived values and more
capable resources
Enhancements in support of
service encounters
37

38
DEFINITION OF SERVICE
and leave for work. A mechanic might call us if there would be something to
discuss, including the severity of the identified problem, the misunderstanding
or misinterpreting of the stated problem, or other problems found during the
conducted diagnosis process, other necessary maintenances recommended by
the mechanics, the final charge, and/or a different time to pick up. We pick up
the car after we pay the due. Throughout the repair service process, we under-
stand that a series of service encounters must occur. Indeed, the appropriate and
timely occurrence of each interacting activity on the service encounter chain
ensures user experience excellence in an integrative manner, resulting in that
the repair service gets executed in a satisfactory manner.
• iPad Purchase and Delivery Service. As a customer, I was amazed by how Apple
Inc. can deliver millions of products to customers on time. It is nothing special
these days that you can track the delivery process of an ordered product through
the Internet, regardless of your choice of a transport organization. However, to
deliver millions of products made overseas to customers on the promised dates
is exceedingly fascinating. I still remember that the first generation of iPad offi-
cially became available for preorder on March 12, 2010. I ordered one on that
day. The Apple online store provided several handy and optional shipment alert
services that allowed customers to monitor their shipments through Apple’s
contracted delivery firms. I received my ordered iPad on April 3, 2010. April 3,
2010 was the date that Apple promised on March 12, 2010 that the first gener-
ation of iPads would be released and delivered to millions of US customers.
Although I cannot get the order history information that is over 18 months
old, Figures 2.4–2.6 show good examples of highly coordinated and collab-
orated processes of purchasing, manufacturing, customs, and shipments across
countries that are managed in an effective and satisfactory manner. In addi-
tion to calling relevant customer service representatives, we can easily interact
with the Apple online store, UPS, or FedEx websites to change orders, mon-
itor the shipments, change how we want the ordered products to be delivered
to fit into our busy daily schedules. Customer-centric and satisfaction-focused
business operations and management have surely contributed to the success of
Apple’s business. It is the service that helps sell the product! More discussion
on Apple’s customer-centric and innovative approach will be further provided
in later chapters.
Table 2.1 and the above-discussed two examples surely help us to get a better
understanding of how certain priorities have been shifted in business operations and
management in the industry. Service encounters play a fundamental role in service
offerings, clearly indicating that people’s social, physiological, and psychological
traits are critical in services (Solomon et al., 1985; Surprenant and Solomon, 1987;
Chase and Dasu, 2001). However, these traits are extremely challenging to measure,
monitor, and control in service operations and management. Therefore, we under-
stand that, substantively different from traditional manufacturers that have put prod-
ucts in focus, service organizations must put employees and customers at the center

FROM MANUFACTURING TO SERVICE: THE ECONOMIC SHIFT
39
FIGURE 2.4
Online purchase services provided by Apple online store. (Source: Apple.com).
FIGURE 2.5
Product in-transit information provided by UPS. (Source: UPS.com).

40
DEFINITION OF SERVICE
FIGURE 2.6
Product delivery information provided by FedEx (Source: FedEx.com).
of concerns in business operations and management (Heskett et al., 1994; Loveman,
1998; Qiu et al., 2007; Schneider and Bowen, 2010).
Even in manufacturing, for farsighted manufacturers in the developed economy,
although their product features and functions might lose their competitiveness over
time, they recognize that their service components could considerably distinguish
themselves from their competitors. Therefore, enterprises are keen on building
highly profitable service-oriented businesses by taking advantage of their own
unique engineering and service expertise, aimed at shifting gears toward creating
superior outcomes to optimally meet their customer needs in order to stay compet-
itive (Rangaswamy and Pal, 2005). General Electric, IBM, Apple, Oracle, HP, and
many worldwide bellwethers are great examples in repositioning themselves toward
the service-oriented businesses (Qiu et al., 2007).
The economic shift from manufacturing to service makes organizations rethink
their business strategies and revamp their organizational structures and operational
processes to meet the customers’ fluctuating demands on services in a satisfactory
manner. World-class enterprises across the board, in general, are eager for seek-
ing new business opportunities by streamlining their business processes, building

FROM MANUFACTURING TO SERVICE: THE ECONOMIC SHIFT
41
complex and integrated while more efficient IT-enabled systems, and embracing the
worldwide Internet-based marketplace. It is well recognized that business process
automation, outsourcing, customization, offshore sourcing, business process trans-
formation, and self-services by leveraging the ubiquitous and pervasive networks and
wireless communications became another business wave in today’s evolving global
service-led economy.
Indeed, the twenty-first century’s business environment is considerably enabled by
advanced computing, networking, and telecommunications. Business operations are
thus significantly impacted by not only the accelerated business globalization but also
the increased environmental awareness in societies. By taking advantage of the com-
plex while integrative service interactions involving both providers and customers,
emphasis in the service industry has evolved to sources of open innovation, collabo-
ration, integration, and value cocreation, so as to optimally and maximally provide the
value (e.g., satisfaction, success, and profitability) for the stakeholders (Figure 2.7).
The discussions we had so far, including the introduction of service encounters
throughout the service lifecycle in Chapter 1, clearly show the people-centric empha-
sis in phases throughout the lifecycle of service. In other words, we now understand
that the value of service is the total perceived value of the outcomes cocreated from a
series of service encounters by both providers and customers throughout the service
lifecycle. This new round economic wave driven by globalization and services seems
getting more sophisticated and dynamic than ever before; there is a need for higher
efficiency and better cost-effectiveness in business operations and management across
the geographically dispersed value chains.
$
Customer
Provider
Learn
Develop
Improve
Transformation
Perform
Cocreation
Cocreation
Input
Output
Information, globalization
Innovation, collaboration, integration
i+1
i
(benefits)
(resources)
$
$
FIGURE 2.7
Value cocreation in focus in the service industry.

42
DEFINITION OF SERVICE
Place
Promotion
Physical evidence
Price
Process
Partner
People
and
Product
Service encounters
Organizational infrastructure resource
Human resource management
Development/technology management
Finance/accounting management
Support
functions 
Primary functions
Learn
(market needs)
Develop
(Resources to meet
the service needs) 
Perform
(service offering)
Improve
(sustaining)
Increased
investment in
service capability  
Capability for
augmented
service effects  
More competitive
services 
Increased service
deliveries 
Value
(profit)
Customer
royalty 
Customer
satisfaction 
Service
value
Employee
royalty 
Employee
satisfaction 
FIGURE 2.8
Competitive service business driven by service-oriented innovations.
More specifically, the service value (or profit) chain relies on the creation of
lifetime customers’ experience excellence from well-crafted and fostered service
encounters. Figure 2.8 depicts the complex relationships between employee satisfac-
tion, customer retention, and profitability (Heskett et al., 1994; Lovelock and Wirtz,
2007), emphasizing that we must rethink service encounters and find scientific ways
to build and manage people-centric, information-enabled, cocreation-oriented, and
innovative service organizations in the service-led economy.
As shown in Figures 2.7 and 2.8, both service providers and customers who are
value-creating entities on a service value chain are interwoven in the process of
service transformation. The highly correlated value-creating relationships between
service providers and customers truly become the general characteristics of the
modern services, indispensable for the successful completion of the lifecycle of
service. By further examining the operational and managerial priority changes
in response to the economic shift from manufacture and service (Table 2.1), we
understand that the consistent sensing, interaction, and creativity from customers’
feedbacks, participations, or consumptions throughout the lifecycle of service play a
pivotal role in satisfactorily performing services that customers want (Ahlquist and
Saagar, 2013):

FROM MANUFACTURING TO SERVICE: THE ECONOMIC SHIFT
43
• Learn. With the fast development of the Internet and the considerable
improvement of living standards and life qualities, our customers have become
more knowledgeable and demanding than ever before. For instance, social mar-
keting by leveraging Web 2.0 is crucial for service providers to demonstrate the
value of offered services. More importantly, it helps to conceive the concepts
of services, know the market trends, engage the prospective customers, and
understand customers’ changing perceptions in the to-be offered services. In
the service industry, hence, discovering and capturing the real and changing
needs in a timely manner is what this phase really is about.
• Develop. As compared to focusing on the development of main and unique
features and technical functions of physical goods in the traditional manufac-
turing, the development of services in a competitive service organization must
frequently involve customers as the customers might have perceived the needs
differently and/or changed the needs as time goes. Quite often, in addition to the
technical features and functions embodied in services, service providers’ soft
resources (i.e., operant resources) should be well developed in order to deliver
the services successfully. The development of soft resources in the service orga-
nization radically relies on the consistent feedbacks from the customers so that
the right soft resources can be developed and made readily available for service
delivery. In the service industry, thus, developing competitive services cannot
be effectively done if customers are not involved in the development of to-be
offered services. Customers significantly contribute to the development of ser-
vice products. In other words, the value of services is indeed cocreated by both
service providers and customers.
• Deliver. This phase in services is substantively different from the one in
manufacturing. As soon as physical goods are sold, customers utilize the
provided features and functions supported by the physical goods. However,
services are being most likely consumed at the same time when they are being
delivered. Service encounters are the key delivery mechanisms in the service
industry. Successful and satisfactory deliveries of services significantly depend
on efficient and effective service interactions between service providers and
customers. Once again, the benefits of services are consistently cocreated
through collaborative service delivery processes involving both service
providers and customers.
• Improve. As discussed earlier, the quality of services is largely influenced and
determined by the customers’ perceived value, including success, happiness,
satisfaction, and the like. The addition of new features and functions mainly
used in improving the manufacture of physical goods is insufficient in the
service industry. Usually, customers’ social, physiological, and psychological
roles played throughout the service lifecycle must be analyzed, focusing on
the improvement of the resources applied in services and/or the enrichment
of service encounters to meet the needs of the customers with continuously
increased levels of satisfaction.

44
DEFINITION OF SERVICE
2.2
TOTAL SERVICE LIFECYCLE: THE SERVICE
PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE
Let us briefly recap what we have summarized in Chapter 1 on the general customers’
perceptions of services. A service is essentially considered as the “act of performing,”
which is a mutually beneficial activity for its provider and customer. Quite often, a
service evidently manifests itself as a series of service encounters in the marketplace.
The resultant value of service is usually the total perceived value of the outcomes
generated from the performance of the formed service encounters chain throughout
the service lifecycle.
Simply put, this perceived service by customers clearly implies performing
actions. No matter what kind of service product (i.e., in a physical, soft, or hybrid
form) is offered, a service with its involved service product gets completely executed
only after a series of service encounters are successfully conducted. The real value
of the service thus largely depends on when, where, and how the process governing
all the relevant service encounter activities are performed from beginning to end
and particularly how both service providers and customers have participated in the
process execution.
Except for sharing the common concept of service, surely, operating a contempo-
rary and sizable food service business compared to the ancient food service example
discussed in Chapter 1 is quite different and becomes extremely more challenging.
The marketplace is full of competition in many aspects, including a variety of foods,
much leisured and cozier catering settings, knowledgeable clients who have a vari-
ety of socioeconomic, social, and cultural backgrounds, and different and changing
clients’ expectations throughout corresponding catering service processes. Accord-
ingly, the value becomes very challenging to measure as it varies with the service
providers, consumers, and marketplaces. Thus, experience-based service business
operations can hardly survive in the current and competitive marketplace.
Although the understandings of a service from both service providers and service
customers should be the same, we must be aware that the lifecycle of services based
on the general customers’ perceptions of services are substantively different from
one that is conceived, developed, and managed from the service provider’s point of
view. Figure 2.9 schematically compares the perspectives of service lifecycles from
a service provider and a service customer. The lifecycle of service in customers’
perspective essentially is just a service lifespan. We can clearly see that the life of
a given service from a customer point of view is essentially part of the total service
lifecycle operated and managed by the service provider. In a service organization,
from the operational and managerial perspective, the lifecycle of service spans over
all the phases defined in the service diamond relationship. However, as indicated
earlier, frequently a customer’s service life mainly lies in the service delivery and
operations phase.
Let us recap what we just explored. To a typical customer of a service organiza-
tion, the life of a service offered by the service organization starts when the service is
requested and ends when the service is completely performed (Figure 2.9). The corre-
sponding lifespan to the customer is simply a part of the total service lifecycle horizon

TOTAL SERVICE LIFECYCLE: THE SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE
45
Customer
Provider
Service encounter time series
Repetition in an integrative
and evolutionary fashion 
End
Start
Staging 
(i)
Staging 
(i+1)
A service lifespan
The lifecycle of services
$
Customer
Customer
A service lifespan
A service lifespan
One example out of
many services 
Learn
Perform
Develop
Improve
Customer
Customer
Indirect
Direct
Physical
Virtual
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
FIGURE 2.9
Perspectives of services: service providers versus service customers.
covered by the service organization. Theoretically, a start point can be anywhere while
its end point can also be anywhere as long as the corresponding service lifespan is a
positive number. In practice, a start point could be a point after such a point at which
the marketed service product is requested by a customer after it becomes ready to be
offered by the service organization. Then, a corresponding end point will be the time
when the service is completely performed and the specified or default contract period
expires.
To a customer, the encounter of a service or “moment of truth” frequently is
regarded as the service from the customer’s perspective (Bitner et al., 1990; Bitner,
1992). However, a systemic view of service encounters throughout the service life-
cycle is necessary for a service provider, which can be created by incorporating
the organizational view of service encounters (Figure 1.8) into Figure 2.9, which is
illustrated in Figure 2.10. Value cocreation-oriented business processes surely are
people-centric, involving both providers and customers in pursuit of excellent user
experience and high level job satisfaction.
As discussed in Chapter 1, this book promotes a new look of service encounters.
Instead of focusing on the interacting activities between providers and customers dur-
ing the process of service deliveries, we explore all the interactive activities between

46
DEFINITION OF SERVICE
$
Customer
$
$
End
Start
A service lifespan
The lifecycle of service
Learn
Perform
Develop
Improve
Back end
Front end
Partner(s)
Coordination/
collaboration
Outsourcing
Coordination/
collaboration
Service encounter
time series
(physical and/or
virtual) 
A service lifespan
A service lifespan
One example out of
many services 
Indirect
/virtual
Direct/
physical
Indirect/
physical
Direct/
virtual
Provider
$
Customer
$
$
Customer
Customer
Customer
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
FIGURE 2.10
A systemic view of service encounters in the service lifecycle.
providers and customers, including their interactions from the point of service con-
ceiving to the point of service termination. Consecutive service encounters form a
service encounter chain (Svensson, 2004; Qiu, 2013), which can be mathematically
modeled as an event-based time series. In a service encounter chain, a later encounter
is inevitably influenced by the immediately preceding one; employees or customers
could also be influenced by other previous encounters that they may have had before
if those are somewhat functionally or sociopsychologically related. Apparently, as
a series of service encounters entails mutual benefits in a cascading and integrative
manner, we can maximize the benefits only if the cocreation-oriented business pro-
cesses can be totally, cost-effectively, and efficiently executed.
The earlier discussions further confirm that only effective cocreation-oriented
business operations throughout the service lifecycle in service organizations can
deliver competitive services in the long run. In this book, in analog to 8Ps that have
been widely used in the service marketing field, we would like to use 4Ds hereafter,
“Discover,” “Develop,” “Deliver,” and “Do Better,” to describe the fundamental
service diamond relationship, aimed at emphasizing the service-dominant instead

