
This page intentionally left blank

Set Theory, Arithmetic, and Foundations of Mathematics:
Theorems, Philosophies
This collection of papers from various areas of mathematical logic showcases the
remarkable breadth and richness of the ﬁeld. Leading authors reveal how
contemporary technical results touch upon foundational questions about the nature of
mathematics. Highlights of the volume include: a history of Tennenbaum’s theorem in
arithmetic; a number of papers on Tennenbaum phenomena in weak arithmetics as
well as on other aspects of arithmetics, such as interpretability; the transcript of
Gödel’s previously unpublished 1972–1975 conversations with Sue Toledo, along with
an appreciation of the same by Curtis Franks; Hugh Woodin’s paper arguing against
the generic multiverse view; Anne Troelstra’s history of intuitionism through 1991;
and Aki Kanamori’s history of the Suslin problem in set theory.
The book provides a historical and philosophical treatment of particular theorems in
arithmetic and set theory, and is ideal for researchers and graduate students in
mathematical logic and philosophy of mathematics.
JULIETTE KENNEDY is a University Lecturer in the Department of Mathematics
and Statistics at the University of Helsinki.
ROMAN KOSSAK is a Professor of Mathematics in the Graduate Center at the City
University of New York (CUNY).

LECTURE NOTES IN LOGIC
A Publication for The Association for Symbolic Logic
This series serves researchers, teachers, and students in the ﬁeld of symbolic logic, broadly
interpreted. The aim of the series is to bring publications to the logic community with the least
possible delay and to provide rapid dissemination of the latest research. Scientiﬁc quality is the
overriding criterion by which submissions are evaluated.
Editorial Board
H. Dugald Macpherson, Managing Editor
School of Mathematics, University of Leeds
Jeremy Avigad
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
Vladimir Kanovei
Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Moscow
Manuel Lerman
Department of Mathematics, University of Connecticut
Heinrich Wansing
Department of Philosophy, Ruhr-Universität Bochum
Thomas Wilke
Institut für Informatik, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
More information, including a list of the books in the series, can be found at
http://www.aslonline.org/books-lnl.html.

LECTURE NOTES IN LOGIC 36
Set Theory, Arithmetic,
and Foundations of Mathematics:
Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by
JULIETTE KENNEDY
University of Helsinki
ROMAN KOSSAK
City University of New York
association for symbolic logic

C A M B R I D G E U N I V E R S I T Y P R E S S
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town,
Singapore, São Paulo, Delhi, Tokyo, Mexico City
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107008045
Association for Symbolic Logic
Richard Shore, Publisher
Department of Mathematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
http://www.aslonline.org
c⃝Association for Symbolic Logic 2011
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2011
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-107-00804-5 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or
accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to
in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such
websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Afraid! Of whom am I afraid?
Not Death – for who is He?
The Porter of my Father’s Lodge
As much abasheth me!
Of Life? ’Twere odd I fear [a] thing
That comprehendeth me
In one or two existences –
As Deity decree –
Of Resurrection? Is the East
Afraid to trust the Morn
With her fastidious forehead?
As soon impeach my Crown!
—Emily Dickinson


Contents
Introduction
page xi
Historical remarks on Suslin’s problem
Akihiro Kanamori
1
The continuum hypothesis, the generic-multiverse of sets,
and the  conjecture
W. Hugh Woodin
13
ω-models of ﬁnite set theory
Ali Enayat and James H. Schmerl and Albert Visser
43
Tennenbaum’s theorem for models of arithmetic
Richard Kaye
66
Hierarchies of subsystems of weak arithmetic
Shahram Mohsenipour
80
Diophantine correct open induction
Sidney Raffer
93
Tennenbaum’s theorem and recursive reducts
James H. Schmerl
112
History of constructivism in the 20th century
A. S. Troelstra
150
A very short history of ultraﬁnitism
Rose M. Cherubin and Mirco A. Mannucci
180
Sue Toledo’s notes of her conversations with Gödel in 1972–5
Sue Toledo
200
Stanley Tennenbaum’s Socrates
Curtis Franks
208
Tennenbaum’s proof of the irrationality of
√
2
Jouko Väänänen
226
vii


Introduction
§1. Introduction. It is a unique feature of the ﬁeld of mathematical logic, that
almost any technical result from its various subﬁelds: set theory, models of
arithmetic, intuitionism and ultraﬁnitism, to name just a few of these, touches
upon deep foundational and philosophical issues. What is the nature of the
inﬁnite? What is the signiﬁcance of set-theoretic independence, and can it ever
be eliminated? Is the continuum hypothesis a meaningful question? What is
the real reason behind the existence of non-standard models of arithmetic, and
do these models reﬂect our numerical intuitions? Do our numerical intuitions
extend beyond the ﬁnite at all? Is classical logic the right foundation for con-
temporary mathematics, or should our mathematics be built on constructive
systems? Proofs must be correct, but they must also be explanatory. How does
the aesthetic of simplicity play a role in these two ideals of proof, and is there
ever a “simplest” proof of a given theorem?
The papers collected here engage each of these questions through the veil of
particular technical results. For example, the new proof of the irrationality of
the square root of two, given by Stanley Tennenbaum in the 1960s and included
here, brings into relief questions about the role simplicity plays in our grasp
of mathematical proofs. In 1900 Hilbert asked a question which was not given
at the Paris conference but which has been recently found in his notes for the
list: ﬁnd a criterion of simplicity in mathematics.1 The Tennenbaum proof is a
particularly striking example of the phenomenon Hilbert contemplated in his
24th Problem.
This collection of papers aims to review various points along the construc-
tive/classical and ﬁnite/inﬁnite divides, and accordingly, we feature here papers
on ultraﬁnitism, intuitionism, models of arithmetic and set theory. On the side
of foundations directly we include one of the last interviews with Kurt Gödel as
1 See “Hilbert’s 24th Problem” by Rudiger Thiele.
ix

x
Introduction
well as a commentary on the same by Curtis Franks. The perspective of many
of the papers is historical, reﬂecting this shift of emphasis in contemporary
foundations of mathematics.
The inspiration behind this volume is the work and interests of the logician
Stanley Tennenbaum, and through Tennenbaum the work of Kurt Gödel—
a fundamental ﬁgure for Tennenbaum. Both saw mathematical logic as a
unity, and both believed in philosophical analysis of a special kind: rationally
optimistic in nature—not on the grounds of any genuinely abstract principle
perhaps, but with a particular view of the nature of human understanding at its
core.
§2. Contents. In 1959 Tennenbaum published an abstract announcing a the-
orem that became a standard introductory result in every presentation of model
theory of nonstandard arithmetic structures: There are no computable presen-
tations of nonstandard models Peano Arithmetic (PA). On one hand, the result
revealed severe limitations on possible constructions of nonstandard models;
on the other hand, it opened a whole area of study around the problem: Which
formal systems are subject to the Tennenbaum phenomenon? In other words,
can we fully characterize formal systems which do not admit computable non-
standard models? Four papers presented in this volume give an account of how
much we have learned about this problem in the last 50 years.
Richard Kaye looks at the history and discusses the origins Tennenbaum’s
theorem and earlier results of Kreisel, Mostowski, and Putnam, and shows a
connection of to the Gödel-Rosser Incompleteness theorem: There is no con-
sistent extension of PA whose restriction to 1 sentences is computable. He
then presents his own results on the Tennenbaum phenomenon for weak frag-
ments of arithmetic. In particular, he proves that if T is an extension of PA in
which the MRDP theorem is provable, then T has no computable nonstandard
models.
Tennenbaum’s proof shows that if (M, +, ×) is a nonstandard model of
PA, then in fact neither (M, +) nor (M, ×) admit computable presentations.
It follows that many other natural reducts of the structure M expanded by
adding sets deﬁnable using + and ×, do not admit computable presentations.
Schmerl’s 1998 proof that some rich (in the non-technical sense) reducts can
be effectively presented was therefore somewhat surprising. Schmerl’s con-
tribution to this volume provides a detailed analysis of the Tennenbaum phe-
nomenon for reducts. Schmerl deﬁnes the notion of a generalized reduct and
then considers the two cases: rich reducts and their reﬁnements for which Ten-
nebaum Theorem holds. He then analyzes the much less studied case of thin
and n-thin reducts, for which the theorem fails.

Introduction
xi
The whole area of study would not be that attractive without the other,
algebraic, side. In 1964, Shepherdson gave an algebraic characterization of
nonstandard models of Open Induction (OI) and used it to construct a com-
putable nonstandard model of this theory. Shepherdson’s model exhibits some
pathological features. It contains a solution of the equation 2x2 = y2. Efforts
have been made to see how much of the theory of the standard model can be
preserved in extensions of OI which escape the Tennenbaum phenomenon. The
contributions of Mohsenipour and Raffer give all the necessary background
to this area, and present some new results. Raffer is looking at nonstandard
discretetely ordered rings which satisfy OI and are diophantine correct, i.e.
they satisfy all universal sentences true in the standard integers. DOI is the
ﬁrst order theory of such rings. It is not known if DOI admits nonstandard
computable models. Raffer gives numbertheoretic conditions for a ﬁnitely gen-
erated ring of Puiseux polynomials to be diophantine correct. He uses a result
on generalized polynomials to show that a certain class of ordered rings of
Puiseux polynomials contains a model OI iff it contains a model of DOI.
OIn is a version of OI in which the induction schema is restricted to open
formulas in which polynomial terms are of degree at most n. Boughattas
proved that the theories OIn form a hierarchy. Mohsenipour proves analogous
results for theories extending OI. As a corollary he shows that none of the the-
ories of the following classes of structures are ﬁnitely axiomatizable: Z-rings,
normal Z-rings, Z-rings satisfying the GCD axiom, Z-rings with the Bezout
property, and some relativized variants.
It is “common knowledge” that PA is essentially the same as ZF f in which
is ZF with the axiom of inﬁnity replaced by its negation. If M is a model of
PA, then bounded deﬁnable subsets of M form a model of ZF f in, and if V
is a model of ZF f in, then the ordinals of V form a model of PA. However,
Enayat, Schmerl, and Visser prove in their contribution to this volume that PA
and ZF f in are not bi-interpretable. In the process of proving it, the authors
develop a new method for constructing models of ZF f in and prove several
interesting model-theoretic results, for example: every group can be realized
as the automorphism group of a model of ZF f in. They also prove a variant
of Tennenbaum’s theorem. While there are nonstandard (i.e. not isomorphic
to the set of hereditarily ﬁnite sets Vω) computable models of ZF f in, every
such model must be an ω-model (i.e. every set in it has only a (standard) ﬁnite
number of elements).
In set theory, Tennenbaum’s work was centered on the Suslin Hypothesis
(SH), to which, to quote from Aki Kanamori’s contribution to this volume
entitled “Tennenbaum and Set Theory,” Tennenbaum made crucial contribu-
tions. These were to prove the relative consistency of its failure by forcing to

xii
Introduction
add a Suslin tree (1963), and with Solovay to prove its relative consistency, a
result published only in 1971. Kanamori carefully parses the contribution of
the two collaborators to the latter result. He also credits Tennenbaum with the
asking of the question, at a time when Cohen forcing was more focused on car-
dinal arithmetic, collapsing cardinals and the like, than on classical questions
in descriptive set theory.
In a different development in set theory, recent debate in its foundations has
focused on the so-called “generic-multiverse position.” The generic-multiverse
generated by a countable transitive model M of ZFC is deﬁned to be the small-
est set of countable transitive sets containing M and closed under the operations
of generic extension and “generic submodel”;2 the generic-multiverse is the
generic-multiverse generated by V, and the generic-multiverse position holds
that a sentence in the language of set theory is true if it is true in each universe
of the generic-multiverse. Under the generic-multiverse position the Contin-
uum Hypothesis is neither true nor false, as it holds in some universes of the
generic-multiverse, but fails in others. On the other hand the status of Pro-
jective Uniformization, which is also independent of ZFC, is fundamentally
different from that of the continuum problem. This is because Projective Uni-
formization3 is either true in every universe of the generic-multiverse, or it is
true in none of them, granting large cardinals.
The other set theory paper included in this volume, Hugh Woodin’s philo-
sophical “The Continuum Hypothesis, the generic-multiverse of sets, and the
 Conjecture,” gives an accessible argument against the generic-multiverse
position on the basis of the  Conjecture and the existence of large cardinals.
Woodin also argues against formalism in general as well as for the meaning-
fulness of the continuum problem, based on the (rather Gödelian) intuition
that:
It seems incoherent to me to have a conception of the transﬁnite
which reduces to simply a conception of H(δ+
0 ) which in essence
is just the truncation of the universe of sets to the level of the least
Woodin cardinal.
The paper formulates this intuition in exact terms, goes on to argue for it,
and then poses an interesting and clear challenge to those who take a skeptical
view of the meaningfulness of the continuum problem: exhibit a 2 assertion
which is true and which is not true across the generic-multiverse.
2 I.e. if M belongs to the generic-multiverse and generically extends a countable transitive
model N of ZFC, then N belongs to the generic-multiverse.
3 I.e. the statement that for every projective subset of the Cartesian plane there is a projective
choice function.

Introduction
xiii
“A Very Short History of Ultraﬁnitism,” by Rose Cherubin and Mirco Man-
nucci, is an ultraﬁnitist manifesto which ﬁrst traces the various uses of the
terms “ﬁnite” and “inﬁnite” in Homer, respectively murios and apeiron, as well
as in some subsequent classical sources, and then considers the contemporary
history of Ultraﬁnitism in the light of this background. In particular they argue
for a context-based, dynamic notion of feasibility. Cherubin and Mannucci are4
former students of Stanley Tennenbaum (in the informal sense of the term of
course), so it is not surprising that their contribution reﬂects Tennenbaum’s
approach to logic, if not his general intellectual spirit, so faithfully.
Also on the philosophical side we include the notes of the proof theorist
Sue Toledo’s conversations with Kurt Gödel about phenomenology, proof the-
ory, intuitionism, ﬁnitism, and the Euthyphro, conversations which took place
at Tennenbaum’s instigation. They span the period from 1972–1975, making
these just about the last words we have from Gödel. We publish them here with-
out commentary, as that is what Tennenbaum would have wished. The notes,
though fragmentary in a few places, add considerably to the general picture we
have of the late period of Gödel’s life and thought. We are very grateful to Sue
Toledo for giving us permission to publish them.
Curtis Franks’s “Stanley Tennenbaum’s Socrates,” a penetrating and beauti-
ful tribute to these conversations, explores the parallel Plato/Phaedo/Socrates
versus Tennenbaum/Toledo/Gödel. One obvious connection is that the last sus-
tained thoughts of Socrates, as presented by Plato, are to be found in the
Phaedo; and similarly we ﬁnd in the Toledo conversations some of the last
thoughts of Gödel, as presented in some weaker sense by Tennenbaum—where
both presentations are given in the form of conversations. A more subtle con-
nection is that Socrates is reﬂecting on his “career” as a philosopher, in the
Phaedo, in a way strikingly similar to Gödel’s reﬂection on his own intellectual
career here. Franks’s reading of Gödel reveals a unity in the various elements
of Gödel’s thought, which verges on the sublime. But the device of the piece
yields still more: namely, the unmistakable voice of Stanley Tennenbaum,
whose world view comes through here very clearly.
We are privileged to include Anne Troelstra’s history of intuitonism through
1991, reﬂecting Tennenbaum’s long interest in the work of Errett Bishop.
Finally we include Tennenbaum’s entirely geometric proof of the irrational-
ity of the square root of 2. It appears to be a genuinely new proof of that
theorem, as well as the simplest ever found.
The Editors
Juliette Kennedy
Roman Kossak
4 along with Kennedy and Raffer.


HISTORICAL REMARKS ON SUSLIN’S PROBLEM
AKIHIRO KANAMORI
The work of Stanley Tennenbaum in set theory was centered on the inves-
tigation of Suslin’s Hypothesis (SH), to which he made crucial contributions.
In 1963 Tennenbaum established the relative consistency of ¬SH, and in 1965,
together with Robert Solovay, the relative consistency of SH. In the formative
period after Cohen’s 1963 discovery of forcing when set theory was transmut-
ing into a modern, sophisticated ﬁeld of mathematics, this work on SH exhib-
ited the power of forcing for elucidating a classical problem of mathematics
and stimulated the development of new methods and areas of investigation.
§ 1 discusses the historical underpinnings of SH. § 2 then describes Tennen-
baum’s consistency result for ¬SH and related subsequent work. § 3 then turns
to Tennenbaum’s work with Solovay on SH and the succeeding work on iter-
ated forcing and Martin’s Axiom. To cast an amusing sidelight on the life and
the times, I relate the following reminiscence of Gerald Sacks from this period,
no doubt apocryphal: Tennenbaum let it be known that he had come into a
great deal of money, $30,000,000 it was said, and started to borrow money
against it. Gerald convinced himself that Tennenbaum seriously believed this,
but nonetheless asked Simon Kochen about it. Kochen replied, “Well, with
Stan he might be one per-cent right. But then, that’s still $300,000.”
§1. Suslin’s problem. At the end of the ﬁrst volume of Fundamenta Math-
ematicae there appeared a list of problems with one attributed to Mikhail
Suslin [1920], a problem that would come to be known as Suslin’s Problem.
After the reuniﬁcation of Poland in 1918, there was a deliberate decision by its
aspiring mathematicians to focus on set theory and related areas and to bring
out a new journal to promote international research1. This was the origin of
Fundamenta Mathematicae, which became the main conduit of scholarship
in “fundamental mathematics” during the 1920s and 1930s. That ﬁrst list of
problems had to do with possible consequences of the Continuum Hypothesis
This is an expanded version of an invited address given at a memorial conference commemorat-
ing the life and work of Stanley Tennenbaum held at the Graduate Center of the City University
of New York on 7 April 2006.
1See Kuratowski [1980] and Kuzawa [1968].
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
1

2
AKIHIRO KANAMORI
(CH) or issues in the emerging descriptive set theory. These problems would
be solved, but by contrast Suslin’s Problem would grow in signiﬁcance through
its irresolution.
Georg Cantor, the founder of set theory, had famously characterized the
ordertypes of the rationals and reals in the second part [1897] of his Beitr¨age,
his mature presentation of his theory of the transﬁnite. The ordering of the
reals is that unique dense linear ordering with no endpoints which is order-
complete (i.e. every bounded set has a least upper bound2) and separable
(i.e. has a countable dense subset). Suslin’s Problem asks whether this last
condition can be weakened to the countable chain condition (c.c.c.): every
disjoint family of open intervals is countable. Although Suslin himself did
not hypothesize it, the aﬃrmative answer has come to be known as Suslin’s
Hypothesis (SH). For a dense linear order, deleting endpoints and taking the
(Dedekind) completion does not aﬀect the c.c.c. or separability properties.
So, the hypothesis could be simply stated as:
(SH) Every (inﬁnite) dense linear ordering satisfying the c.c.c. is separable.
Suslin’s Problem would be the ﬁrst anticipation of the study of chain con-
ditions in general topology, and as such it displays a remarkable foresight.
Suslin himself was a wunderkind who after ﬁnding a mistake in a paper of
Lebesgue formulated the analytic sets and established [1917] fundamental re-
sults about them: a set of reals is Borel exactly when it and its complement
are analytic, and there is an analytic set which is not Borel. These seminal
results considerably stimulated the Soviet and Polish schools in descriptive
set theory, and some of the problems on that ﬁrst Fundamenta list concerns
analytic sets3. [1917] was to be Suslin’s sole publication4, for he succumbed
to typhus in the 1919 Moscow epidemic at the age of 25. Until the early 1970s
one sees the “Souslin” from Suslin [1920]; this is the French transliteration,
for Fundamenta at ﬁrst adopted French as the lingua franca.
Recapitulating the mathematical experience, it is hard to see how to go
from the rather amorphous countable chain condition to a countable dense
subset. To compare, Cantor had ﬁrst formulated CH as the loose assertion
that there is no strictly intermediate power between that of the natural numbers
and that of the continuum. Canter then developed the transﬁnite numbers
and converted CH to the positive, existence assertion that there is a bijection
between the continuum and the countable ordinals, and thereafter tried to
exploit analogies between increasing convergent sequences of reals and such
2Cantor had every fundamental (Cauchy) sequence being complete, but this has to be mediated
by the Axiom of Choice.
3See Kanamori [1995] for the emergence of descriptive set theory.
4Suslin [1920] is an attribution to Suslin. It should be observed that accompanying Suslin
[1917] was a note by Nikolai Luzin [1917] in which he credited Suslin with having established that
every analytic set has the perfect set property.

HISTORICAL REMARKS ON SUSLIN’S PROBLEM
3
sequences of countable ordinals. With Suslin’s Problem, in the several decades
after its articulation what interest there was in it became focused on ¬SH, a
positive, existence assertion which became characterized in a perspicuous
form that suggested possibilities for establishing it. Both mathematically and
historically, when “Suslin’s Hypothesis” came into use it should thus have
arguably referred to ¬SH.
A tree is a partially ordered set ⟨T, <T ⟩with a minimum element such that for
any x ∈T the set {y ∈T | y <T x} of its <T-predecessors is well-ordered by
<T. The α th level of T consists of those x ∈T whose set of <T -predecessors
has order type α under <T. The height of T is the least α such that the αth
level of T is empty. A chain of T is a linearly ordered subset, and an antichain
of T is a subset consisting of pairwise <T -incomparable elements. A Suslin
tree is a tree of height 1 with no uncountable chains or antichains.
Trees abound in contemporary set theory as basic combinatorial objects5.
The ﬁrst systematic study of trees was carried out in Kurepa’s disserta-
tion [1935] with Fr´echet, where several tree and linear order equivalences
were derived. Kurepa [1936, 127ﬀ] provided the following characterization,
since rediscovered by Edwin Miller [1943] and Wacław Sierpi´nski [1948]:
¬SH iﬀthere is a Suslin tree.
In the forward direction, let ⟨S, <S⟩be a counterexample to SH, i.e. a dense
linear ordering with the c.c.c. but with no countable dense subset. Recursively
construct non-empty open intervals Iα for α < 1 as follows: Let I0 be S.
Given I for  < α, since the set E of all the endpoints of these intervals is
countable, let Iα be an interval disjoint from E. Then {Iα | α < 1} under
reverse inclusion is a Suslin tree.
In the converse direction, let ⟨T, <T ⟩be a Suslin tree. By successively prun-
ing and omitting intermediate nodes, we can assume that: every element has
uncountably many successors; diﬀerent elements at a limit level do not have the
same sets of predecessors; and every element has more than one immediate suc-
cessor. We can further assume, by restricting to the limit levels only, that every
element has inﬁnitely many immediate successors. Now, linearly order each
level as a dense linear order without endpoints. Then let S consist of the max-
imal chains (“branches”) of T, and for c1 ̸= c2 ∈S, deﬁne c1 <S c2 exactly
when at the least level at which they diﬀer, the element in c1 precedes the ele-
ment in c2 in that level’s linear order. Then ⟨S, <S⟩is a counterexample to SH.
This tree characterization of ¬SH eliminated topological considerations
from Suslin’s Problem and reduced it to a problem of combinatorial set the-
ory. Suslin trees and their generalizations have since played important roles
in modern set theory both in providing examples and in promoting the de-
velopment of set-theoretic methods. Even early on, ¬SH led to examples in
5See Todorˇcevi´c [1984] for a magisterial account.

4
AKIHIRO KANAMORI
general topology (cf. Rudin [1955]) and played a role analogous to CH —
an unproved hypothesis from which signiﬁcant conclusions were drawn. This
incidentally, is further reason why “Suslin’s Hypothesis” should be attached
to ¬SH. In any case, ¬SH, like CH, would have to await Cohen’s discovery of
forcing for signiﬁcant elucidation.
§2. Consistency of ¬SH. Making the ﬁrst real breakthrough on Suslin’s
Problem since its articulation, Tennenbaum [1968] in 1963 established the
relative consistency Con(ZFC) implies Con(ZFC + ¬SH). This he did by
devising a notion of forcing for adding a Suslin tree. Proceeding in modern
vein, Tennenbaum’s partial order consists of ﬁnite trees ⟨t, <t⟩, where t ⊆1
and α <t  implies α < , ordered by:
⟨t1, <t1⟩≤⟨t2, <t2⟩iﬀt1 ⊇t2 ∧<t2 = <t1 ∩(t2 × t2).
That this partial order has the countable chain condition6 can be established by
a typical Δ-system argument, and hence forcing with it preserves all cardinals.
For a generic G, deﬁne
T =

{t | ⟨t, <t⟩∈G},
and
< =

{<t | ⟨t, <t⟩∈G},
⟨T, <⟩is a tree, of height 1 by a density argument.
Another Δ-system
argument establishes that this tree has no uncountable antichains. Finally,
this tree cannot have any uncountable chains either, as such a chain would
engender an uncountable antichain consisting of “oﬀshoots”. Hence, ⟨T, <⟩
is a Suslin tree.
To the set theorist of today this consistency result is quite straightforward,
and even Tennenbaum once told me that it was merely an “exercise” in forcing.
However, it is remarkable that, according to a footnote of Tennenbaum [1968],
the work was done in the summer of 1963. Cohen had just come up with
forcing that spring and had established his relative consistency results about the
Continuum Hypothesis and the Axiom of Choice. With Solomon Feferman,
Robert Solovay, and Azriel Levy, Tennenbaum would be among the ﬁrst
after Cohen who established results with forcing. Moreover, Tennenbaum’s
notion of forcing was the ﬁrst to address issues in ZFC other than the sort that
Cohen himself addressed, about powers of cardinals, collapsing cardinals, and
deﬁnability. Tennenbaum expressed gratitude to Georg Kreisel, Anil Nerode,
and Dana Scott for pointing out gaps in previous attempts and to Kurt G¨odel,
who communicated the paper, for simplifying the countable chain condition
argument.
Several years later Thomas Jech [1967] independently established the con-
sistency of ¬SH. Working in Prague, he approached the result through Petr
6This of course is in the well-known sense for a forcing partial order. The c.c.c. deﬁned earlier
will be consistent with this, if we take the open sets of the topology under the partial order of
inclusion.

HISTORICAL REMARKS ON SUSLIN’S PROBLEM
5
Vopˇenka’s ▽-models. Of note, there was earlier Russian–Eastern European
work by Yesenin-Volpin [1954], who had produced a Fraenkel-Mostowski
permutation model of ¬SH with continuum many urelements. Jech’s forcing
conditions, unlike Tennenbaum’s, are countable approximations to a Suslin
tree ordered by end-extension. Cardinals are preserved because of the count-
able closure of the partial order, and that the resulting tree has no uncountable
antichains is established by a Skolem hull argument. On the one hand, this
argument is more involved than its counterpart in Tennenbaum’s proof, but
on the other hand, it is Jech’s proof that would generalize in the later work
on higher cardinality versions of Suslin trees. From the modern perspective
it is more natural to consider initial segments of a possible Suslin tree as con-
ditions, but Tennenbaum presumably worked out his approach because of its
aﬃnity to Cohen’s for violating CH; countable closure of forcing conditions
was not used by Cohen, but he evidently used the countable chain condi-
tion. Also, Tennenbaum’s argument works whether CH or ¬CH holds and
preserves that state of aﬀairs; Jech’s forcing always enforces CH.
The most signiﬁcant result about ¬SH, one that moreover would have the
most potentiality, was the result of Ronald Jensen [1968] that for G¨odel’s
constructible universe L, if V = L, then there is a Suslin tree. Jensen famously
isolated a combinatorial principle ♦that carried what was needed of the
structure of L and showed that ♦itself implies that there is a Suslin tree.
This would not only lead to generalizations to higher cardinals but also begin
Jensen’s broad investigation of pivotal combinatorial principles holding in L,
principles that would achieve autonomous status for establishing a wide range
of propositions of combinatorial set theory.
There is an underlying similarity between Tennenbaum’s argument and
Jensen’s for establishing that the tree has no uncountable antichains. At base
there is a common forcing argument for how levels of the tree are to be
generically extended. Jech’s forcing is actually equivalent to the forcing Q for
adding a Cohen subset of 1 with countable conditions7. Q actually adjoins
♦, and hence by Jensen’s result that there is a Suslin tree.
Tennenbaum’s forcing is rather like the standard forcing for adding ℵ1 reals
(with ﬁnite conditions). Saharon Shelah [1984] eventually established that
adding even one Cohen real adjoins a Suslin tree. This last is a remarkable
result, and provides a structured sense to the assertion that one is always very
close to having a Suslin tree.
§3. Consistency of SH. Making those moves in set theory that would be
the most consequential not only for Suslin’s Problem but for the development
of forcing in general, Tennenbaum began to investigate the possibility of
7And Q is in turn equivalent to the usual forcing for collapsing 2ℵ0 to 1, since every condition
in Q has 2ℵ0 many incompatible extensions.

6
AKIHIRO KANAMORI
establishing the consistency of SH. It had been simple enough to add a Suslin
tree by forcing, and now there was the diﬃcult prospect of getting a model
with no Suslin trees. Tennenbaum saw how “to kill a Suslin tree”: That a
Suslin tree has no uncountable antichains is exactly the property of the partial
order having the countable chain condition, and so forcing with the tree itself
generically adds an uncountable chain.
In fact, it is easy to see that any
uncountable chain actually corresponds to a generic object, and so genericity
was intrinsic to having an uncountable chain. Here for the ﬁrst time was the
recasting of a combinatorial object of classical mathematics as itself a notion
of forcing. But what now? Once a Suslin tree is thus killed it stays dead,
but other Suslin trees might have sprung up, and so they too must be killed
by iterating the process. This is where the collaboration with Robert Solovay
came in.
Robert Solovay above all epitomized this period of great expansion in set
theory, with his mathematical sophistication and his fundamental results with
forcing, in large cardinals, and in descriptive set theory. Following initial
graduate study in diﬀerential topology, Solovay focused his energies on set
theory after attending a lecture of Cohen’s in May 1963. Solovay ﬁrst extended
the independence of CH by characterizing the possibilities for the size of the
continuum, and then generalized Cohen’s forcing to arbitrary partial orders
and dense sets. He next established his famous Lebesgue measurability result
during March-July 1964 (Solovay [1970, 1]).
Then with Tennenbaum he
worked out the iterated forcing proof of the consistency of SH (Solovay and
Tennenbaum [1971, 201]). An email letter of 18 February 2006 from Solovay
to the author describes the interaction with Tennenbaum and the main features
of their proof for Con(ZFC) implies Con(ZFC + SH); the letter is quoted
here with Solovay’s permission, verbatim except for a side remark at the
ﬁrst (b).
Aki,
Sorry to have taken so long to get back to your request re Tennenbaum. I
hope these comments are not too late.
At one crucial point in the following my memory is not clear and I have tried
to reconstruct what happened. I’ve labeled the reconstruction as speculation
in what follows.
I was at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton during the year
1964-65. I think Stan was teaching somewhere in Philadelphia at the time.
At any rate, he would come up regularly to Princeton to talk about set the-
ory and more speciﬁcally his attempt to prove the consistency of Souslin’s
Hypothesis.
At that time, he had already proved the independence of SH via a forcing
argument where the conditions were ﬁnite approximations to the Souslin Tree
that was to be generically added.

HISTORICAL REMARKS ON SUSLIN’S PROBLEM
7
His attempt/plan for the consistency of SH had the following ingredients:
(a) it was to be an iteration in which at each step another Souslin tree would
be killed.
(b) The steps in the iteration were to be forcing with Souslin trees. . . .
(c) Stan knew that forcing with a Souslin tree killed it and that the forcing
was c.c.c.
For much of the year, Stan was trying to prove that the iteration did not
collapse cardinals. And he was considering iterations of lengths 2 and 3. My
role was to passively listen to his proofs and spot the errors in them. With
unjustiﬁed prescience, I kept saying that I was worried about “killing the same
tree twice”. Of course, there now are examples due to Jensen that show that
forcing with the product of a Souslin tree with itself can collapse cardinals.
But these weren’t available then.
At one of those meetings one of us (probably Stan) made progress and
ﬁnally found reasonable conditions under which a two stage iteration did not
collapse cardinals.
Somehow this got me seriously thinking about the problem and by the time
of our next meeting I had a proof of the theorem. This proof had the following
ingredients which were new:
(a) deﬁning a transﬁnite sequence of forcing notions Pα where Pα+1 =
Pα ∗Qα.
This involves: (a1) deﬁning the operation ∗where P ∗Q is deﬁned if Q is a
poset in V P;
(a2) deﬁning what to do at limits.
(b) proving that if the component forcings are c.c.c. then the limit forcing is
c.c.c.;
(c) exploiting the c.c.c.ness to see that if the length of the iteration has
coﬁnality greater than 1 then all subsets of ℵ1 in the ﬁnal model appear
at some proper intermediate stage;
(d) setting up the bookkeeping so that all Souslin trees are killed.
I admit that, with hindsight, all these things look easy now.
I come now to the speculation as to what was discovered that day that set
me to thinking. My guiding principle is that it has to be something which is
not utterly trivial.
I think that Stan was looking at the product of two Souslin trees in the
initial ground and trying to show the product was c.c.c.
Of course, with this level of generality this is not true. I suspect that the
discovery was that if the second tree T2 remained Souslin in V [T1] then the
composed forcing was c.c.c.
When it came time to write the proof up, I was under the spell of Boolean
valued models [which I had just discovered] and asked Stan if I could present

8
AKIHIRO KANAMORI
the proof in terms of them. He agreed, but subsequently had strong reser-
vations, and the paper was almost not published. [He eventually agreed to
its publication with a footnote expressing his reservations about the Boolean
valued approach. The footnote is in the published paper.] Whether I would
have had the stomach to withdraw the paper from the Annals [it had already
been accepted] and rewrite it completely, I don’t know. I’m glad it didn’t come
to that.
I hope these comments are useful to you. As I write them I am keenly aware
of the fallibility of memory after all this time. To use the cliche, these are “my
best recollections”.
–Bob
Speaking to the last substantive paragraph, there seem to be no reservations
about the Boolean-valued approach expressed on behalf of Tennenbaum in
Solovay and Tennenbaum [1971], in footnotes or elsewhere. I was bemused
when once Tennenbaum told me that he did not understand their paper. The
idea of assigning to a formula in the forcing language a value from a complete
Boolean algebra had occurred to Solovay around the time of the collaboration
with Tennenbaum; Solovay conveyed the idea to Scott, and by late 1965 they
had independently come to the idea of starting with Boolean valued sets from
the beginning to do forcing8. Boolean-valued models still held sway when
Solovay wrote up Solovay and Tennenbaum [1971], which was submitted in
late 1969.
The several years between proof and write-up allowed for a signiﬁcant
incorporation. Around 1967 Tony Martin observed that “by the same tech-
niques used by the authors to get a model of SH” (Solovay and Tennen-
baum [1971, 232]) one can establish the consistency of a stronger, focal “ax-
iom”, and Solovay named this axiom and incorporated its consistency into
the write-up. This was the genesis of Martin’s Axiom (MA), independently
suggested by Kenneth Kunen and Frederick Rowbottom. Beyond killing all
the Suslin trees, one can analogously add “generics” to all countable chain
condition forcings if one only has to meet less than continuum many dense
sets. With its consistency in hand Martin and Solovay [1970] showed that MA
has a wide range of consequences, as it allows for constructions analogous
to those from CH. Since then of course, MA has achieved a methodological
prominence as a focal “axiom” for relative consistency results.
Solovay and Tennenbaum [1971] is the beginning of genuine, iterated forcing
in the following sense. Before their work, the major accomplishments with
forcing that had involved the analysis of product forcings had been the work
of William Easton [1964], [1970] on powers of regular cardinals and the work
of Solovay [1965], [1970] on Lebesgue measurability. However, in these cases
8See Bell [1985, xivﬀ].

HISTORICAL REMARKS ON SUSLIN’S PROBLEM
9
the products were taken of ground model notions of forcing. Solovay and
Tennenbaum [1971] was the ﬁrst to work with forcings analyzed as iterating
one notion of forcing followed by a subsequent one which only occurs in
an intermediate generic extension and to show that combinatorial properties
like the countable chain condition are preserved. Iterated forcing is part and
parcel of modern set theory, and it was born that day in 1965.
Considering the further development of set theory, the sophistication of the
algebraic Boolean-valued approach in Solovay and Tennenbaum [1971] had
the eﬀect of obscuring the underlying iteration processes. Soon set theorists
were back to working entirely with partial orders. William Mitchell [1973]
speciﬁcally stated the product lemma for the two-step iteration of partial
orders, and Richard Laver [1976] cast his iterated forcing even through limit
stages in the modern way with sequences of conditions. Around this time I
recall Jack Silver being enthused that the consistency of MA can be done with
partial orders.
On a ﬁnal note, the model of Solovay and Tennenbaum [1971] inherently
satisﬁes ¬CH. In a tour de force of forcing for the time, Jensen (cf. Devlin
and Johnsbr˙aten [1974]) established the joint consistency Con(ZFC) implies
Con(ZFC + CH + SH). This he did by a forcing that adds no new reals,
kills Souslin trees by “specializing” them, and is constructed with special
inverse limits based on his combinatorial principles derived from L. Saharon
Shelah once told me that it was trying to come to grips with Jensen’s argument
that inspired a signiﬁcant part of his early work with his “proper” forcing.
Shelah [1998, V § 6] establishes Jensen’s result systematically in his proper
forcing context.
In an address given at the International Congress of of Logic, Methodology,
and Philosophy of Science held at Bucharest in 1971, Alfred Tarski reserved
particular praise for Solovay’s work on Lebesgue measurability and Solovay
and Tennenbaum’s work on Suslin’s Hypothesis as the most important in set
theory since Cohen’s work9. In a letter to G¨odel of 6 April 1973, Abraham
Robinson wrote: “As the outstanding individual achievements in logic since
1963 I would list (in chronological order): 1) The work of Ax-Kochen on
p-ﬁelds.
2) Solovay on measurable sets, and the Tenenbaum-Solovay on
Souslin’s conjecture. 3) Matiyasevich’s solution of Hilbert’s 10th problem.”
§4. Envoi. My own encounters with Tennenbaum were modest. When I
was an instructor at UC Berkeley, my ﬁrst job, Tennenbaum sauntered into my
oﬃce one day in the spring of 1976, introduced himself, and promptly made
himself comfortable by sitting on the ﬂoor. I of course was aware of his work
on SH, and in my youthful reckoning of people by their recent accomplish-
ments was somewhat taken aback by all this as well as his general disheveled
9This is the recollection of the author, who as a research student attended the conference.

10
AKIHIRO KANAMORI
appearance despite sport-jacket and tie. Anyway, we had a pleasant conversa-
tion about my work and prospects in set theory, from which I mainly recall his
steady probing for connections and meanings. At one point he asked me for
my “pedigree” and I charted my mathematical genealogy on the blackboard:
Kanamori — Mathias — Jensen — Hasenjaeger — Scholz. He had heard of
Mathias and, of course, Jensen. I explained that Hasenjaeger was a German
set theorist who had something to do with the Completeness Theorem, and
that through him I was connected to Heinrich Scholz, a theologian who kept
mathematical logic alive in Germany between the world wars. For some rea-
son, to this day I can still visualize Tennenbaum’s eyes suddenly opening wide
and his hands going up to his chin as he pondered the blackboard.
Years later I was touring Montreal with a young family, and I suddenly
saw Tennenbaum across the street. It was something about his clothes or
the angularity of his walk — he was unmistakable. I was busily shepherding
children en train and decided that I could not possibly cross the street and
go up to him. But peering out of the corner of my eye, I espied him calmly
sauntering up the narrow street, looking this way and that, focusing for a
moment on crocuses in a ﬂowerpot. I had recently seen the ﬁlm Being There,
with Peter Sellers in the main role of Chauncy Gardner, and I was pointedly
reminded of the ﬁnal scene, where Gardner is seemingly walking on water,
enjoying the water lilies.
REFERENCES
J. L. Bell [1985], Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory, second ed.,
Oxford Logic Guides, vol. 12, The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, New York, With a
foreword by Dana Scott.
Georg Cantor [1897], Beitr¨age zur Begr¨undung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre, Mathematische
Annalen, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 207–246.
Georg Cantor [1915], Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transﬁnite Numbers,
with introduction and notes by Philip E.B. Jourdain, Open Court, Chicago, reprinted by Dover,
New York 1965.
Joseph W. Dauben [1995], Abraham Robinson, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
The creation of nonstandard analysis. A personal and mathematical odyssey, With a foreword by
Benoit B. Mandelbrot.
Keith J. Devlin and H˙avard Johnsbr˙aten [1974], The Souslin Problem, Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, vol. 405, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
William B. Easton [1964], Powers of regular cardinals, Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University,
abstracted as: Proper classes of generic sets, Notices of the American Mathematical Society 11
(1964), 205; published in abridged form as [1970] below.
William B. Easton [1970], Powers of regular cardinals, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
vol. 1, pp. 139–178.
Tom´aˇs J. Jech [1967], Non-provability of Souslin’s hypothesis, Commentationes Mathematicae
Universitatis Carolinae, vol. 8, pp. 291–305.
Ronald B. Jensen [1968], Souslin’s hypothesis is incompatible with V = L, Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, vol. 16, p. 935.

HISTORICAL REMARKS ON SUSLIN’S PROBLEM
11
Ronald B. Jensen [1972], The ﬁne structure of the constructible hierarchy, Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, vol. 4, pp. 229–308, With a section by Jack Silver.
Akihiro Kanamori [1995], The emergence of descriptive set theory, From Dedekind to G¨odel
(Boston, MA, 1992) (Jaakko Hintikka, editor), Synthese Library, vol. 251, Kluwer, Dordrecht,
pp. 241–262.
Kazimierz Kuratowski [1980], A Half Century of Polish Mathematics, International Series
in Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 108, Pergamon Press, Elmsford, NY, Remembrances and
reﬂections, Translated from the Polish by Andrzej Kirkor, With a preface by S. Ulam.
Djuro R. Kurepa [1935], Ensembles ordonn´es et ramiﬁ´es, Publications math´ematiques de
l’Universit´e de Belgrade, vol. 4, pp. 1–138.
Djuro R. Kurepa [1936], H’hypoth`ese de ramiﬁcation, Comptes rendues hebdomadaires des
s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, vol. 202, pp. 185–187.
Mary Grace Kuzawa [1968], Modern Mathematics. The Genesis of a School in Poland, Col-
lege & University Press, New Haven.
Richard Laver [1976], On the consistency of Borel’s conjecture, Acta Mathematica, vol. 137,
no. 3-4, pp. 151–169.
Nikolai Luzin [1917], Sur la classiﬁcation de M. Baire, Comptes rendues hebdomadaires des
s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, vol. 164, pp. 91–94.
D. A. Martin and R. M. Solovay [1970], Internal Cohen extensions, Annals of Pure and Ap-
plied Logic, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 143–178.
Edwin W. Miller [1943], A note on Souslin’s problem, American Journal of Mathematics,
vol. 65, pp. 673–678.
William Mitchell [1973], Aronszajn trees and the independence of the transfer property, An-
nals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 5, pp. 21–46.
Mary Ellen Rudin [1955], Countable paracompactness and Souslin’s problem, Canadian Jour-
nal of Mathematics. Journal Canadien de Math´ematiques, vol. 7, pp. 543–547.
Mary Ellen Rudin [1969], Souslin’s conjecture, The American Mathematical Monthly, vol.
76, pp. 1113–1119.
Saharon Shelah [1984], Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away?, Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 1–47.
Saharon Shelah [1998], Proper and Improper Forcing, second ed., Perspectives in Mathemat-
ical Logic, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Waclaw Sierpi´nski [1948], Sur un probl`eme de la th´eorie g´en´erale des ensembles ´equivalent au
probl`eme de Souslin, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 35, pp. 165–174.
R. M. Solovay and S. Tennenbaum [1971], Iterated Cohen extensions and Souslin’s problem,
Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, vol. 94, pp. 201–245.
Robert M. Solovay [1965], The measure problem (abstract), Notices of the American Mathe-
matical Society, vol. 12, p. 217.
Robert M. Solovay [1970], A model of set-theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue mea-
surable, Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, vol. 92, pp. 1–56.
Mikhail Ya. Suslin [1917], Sur une d´eﬁnition des ensembles mesurables b sans nombres trans-
ﬁnis, Comptes rendues hebdomadaires des s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, vol. 164,
pp. 88–91.
Mikhail Ya. Suslin [1920], Probl`eme 3, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 1, p. 223.
Stanley Tennenbaum [1968], Souslin’s problem, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America, vol. 59, pp. 60–63.
S. Todorˇcevi´c [1984], Trees and linearly ordered sets, Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology,
North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 235–293.
Alexander S. Yesenin-Volpin [1954], Nedokazyemost gipotezy suslina bez pomoshchi ak-
siomy vybora v systeme aksiom bernaysa-mostovskogo, Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, vol. 96,
pp. 9–12, translated as [1963] below.

12
AKIHIRO KANAMORI
Alexander S. Yesenin-Volpin [1963], The unprovability of Suslin’s hypothesis without the aid
of the axiom of choice in the Bernays-Mostowski axiom system, American Mathematical Society
Translations, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 83–88.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
BOSTON UNIVERSITY
BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 02215, USA
E-mail: aki@math.bu.edu

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE
OF SETS, AND THE Ω CONJECTURE
W. HUGH WOODIN
§1. A tale of two problems. The formal independence of Cantor’s Con-
tinuum Hypothesis from the axioms of Set Theory (ZFC) is an immediate
corollary of the following two theorems where the statement of the Cohen’s
theorem is recast in the more modern formulation of the Boolean valued
universe.
Theorem 1 (G¨odel, [3]). Assume V = L. Then the Continuum Hypothesis
holds.
Theorem 2 (Cohen, [1]). There exists a complete Boolean algebra, B, such
that
V B ⊨“The Continuum Hypothesis is false”.
Is this really evidence (as is often cited) that the Continuum Hypothesis has
no answer?
Another prominent problem from the early 20th century concerns the pro-
jective sets, [8]; these are the subsets of Rn which are generated from the
closed sets in ﬁnitely many steps taking images by continuous functions,
f : Rn →Rn, and complements. A function, f : R →R, is projective if
the graph of f is a projective subset of R × R. Let Projective Uniformization
be the assertion:
For each projective set A ⊂R × R there exists a projective function,
f : R →R, such that for all x ∈R if there exists y ∈R such that
(x, y) ∈A then (x, f(x)) ∈A.
The two theorems above concerning the Continuum Hypothesis have ver-
sions for Projective Uniformization. Curiously the Boolean algebra for Co-
hen’s theorem is the same in both cases, but in case of the problem of Projective
Uniformization an additional hypothesis on V is necessary. While Cohen did
not explicitly note the failure of Projective Uniformization, it is arguably im-
plicit in his results. On the other hand G¨odel was aware and did note that
Projective Uniformization does hold in L; he calculated that if V = L then
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
13

14
W. HUGH WOODIN
there is a wellordering of the reals which as a binary relation is a projective
subset of the plane.
Theorem 3 (G¨odel, [3]). Assume V = L. Then Projective Uniformization
holds.
Theorem 4 (Cohen, [1]). Assume V = L. There exists a complete Boolean
algebra, B, such that
V B ⊨“Projective Uniformization does not hold”.
Thus one also obtains the formal independence of Projective Uniformiza-
tion from the axioms of Set Theory. But in this case this is not evidence that
the problem of Projective Uniformization has no answer. The reason is that
there is a fundamental diﬀerence in the problem of the Continuum Hypothesis
versus the problem of Projective Uniformization—it was realized fairly soon
after Cohen’s initial results that large cardinal axioms could not be used to
settle the Continuum Hypothesis, [7].
Theorem 5 (Levy, Solovay [7]). There exists a complete Boolean algebra, B,
such that
V B ⊨“The Continuum Hypothesis”.
Assuming the consistency of certain large cardinal axioms, the analogous
theorem for negation of Projective Uniformization is false. The reason is that
large cardinal axioms have been shown to imply that Projective Uniformization
holds. There are several versions of this theorem and the most recent and
essentially optimal version (optimal in its economy of large cardinal axioms)
is given by the seminal theorem of Martin and Steel [9], rephrased here to be
relevant to this discussion.
Theorem 6 (Martin, Steel). Assume there are inﬁnitely many Woodin cardi-
nals. Then Projective Uniformization holds.
Corollary 7. Suppose there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Then for
all complete Boolean algebras, B,
V B ⊨“Projective Uniformization”.
§2. The generic-multiverse of sets. Let the multiverse (of sets) refer to the
collection of possible universes of sets. The truths of the Set Theory are the
sentences which hold in each universe of the multiverse. The multiverse is
the generic-multiverse if it is generated from each universe of the collection by
closing under generic extensions (enlargements) and under generic reﬁnements
(inner models of a universe which the given universe is a generic extension
of). To illustrate the concept of the generic-multiverse, suppose that M is a
countable transitive set with the property that
M ⊨ZFC.

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
15
Let VM be the smallest set of countable transitive sets such that M ∈VM and
such that for all pairs, (M1, M2), of countable transitive sets such that
M1 ⊨ZFC,
and such that M2 is a generic extension of M1, if either M1 ∈VM or M2 ∈VM
then both M1 and M2 are in VM. It is easily veriﬁed that for each N ∈VM,
VN = VM,
where VN is deﬁned using N in place of M. VM is the generic-multiverse
generated in V from M.
The generic-multiverse position is the position that a sentence is true if
and only if it holds in each universe of the generic-multiverse generated by
V .
A priori this conception of truth seems to depend on (and therefore
require) a larger universe within which the generic-multiverse generated by
V is computed, However this conception of truth can actually be formalized
within V without regard to any such larger universe. More precisely, for each
sentence φ there is a sentence φ∗, recursively depending on φ, such that φ is
true in each universe of the generic-multiverse generated by V if and only if
φ∗is true in V . The recursive transformation which sends φ to φ∗is explicit
(we shall actually specify it) and does not depend on V . Thus with M and
VM as above, the following are equivalent.
(1) M ⊨φ∗.
(2) N ⊨φ for all N ∈VM.
(3) N ⊨φ∗for all N ∈VM.
Since this is an important point in favor of the generic-multiverse position,
I give a proof in the appendix. The relevance of this point to the generic-
multiverse position is that it shows that as far as assessing truth, the generic-
multiverse position is not that sensitive to the meta-universe in which the
generic-multiverse is being deﬁned.
The generic-multiverse position has a feature which the multiverse view
given by formalism does not share: the notion of truth is the same as deﬁned
relative to each universe of the multiverse, so from the perspective of evaluating
truth all the universes of the multiverse are equivalent. This seems another
important point in favor of the generic-multiverse position and this point is
reinforced by the reduction indicated above of truth in the generic-multiverse
to truth in each constituent universe.
In fact the multiverse position given by essentially any generalization of ﬁrst
order logic is not the same as deﬁned relative to each universe of the multiverse
(the deﬁnition of the logic is not absolute to each universe of the multiverse).
This only requires that the logic be deﬁnable and a more precise version of this
claim is given in the following lemma the statement of which requires some
notation.

16
W. HUGH WOODIN
Suppose Φ(x) is a formula and deﬁne TΦ to be the set of all sentences 
such that if M ⊨ZFC and if Φ[M] holds then M ⊨. Thus if there is no such
model M, TΦ is simply the set of all sentences. For each model, M ⊨ZFC,
let (TΦ)M be the set of all sentences φ such that
M ⊨“φ ∈TΦ.”
Let ˆΦ be a G¨odel sentence, φ, which expresses: φ /∈TΦ. More precisely,
let ˆΦ be a sentence such that for all models M ⊨ZFC, M ⊨ˆΦ if and only if
ˆΦ /∈(TΦ)M.
The following lemma generalizes G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem.
Lemma 8. Suppose that there exists a model, M ⊨ZFC, such that Φ[M]
holds. Then there exists a model, M ⊨ZFC, such that Φ[M] holds and such
that either:
(1) ˆΦ ∈TΦ and ˆΦ /∈(TΦ)M, or
(2) ˆΦ /∈TΦ and ˆΦ ∈(TΦ)M.
The proof of the lemma is immediate from the deﬁnitions. In general the
conclusion of the lemma best possible. More precisely, assuming there is a
model of ZFC there are examples of Φ for which (1) does not hold with ˆΦ
replaced by any sentence whatsoever and assuming there is an -model of
ZFC (less suﬃces) there are examples of Φ for which (2) does not hold with
ˆΦ replaced by any sentence whatsoever.
Suppose that Φ(x) is trivial, for example suppose that Φ(x) is the formula,
“x = x”. Then ˆΦ ∈TΦ if and only if there are no models
M ⊨ZFC.
Therefore an immediate corollary of the lemma is that if there exists a model,
M ⊨ZFC,
then there exists a model,
N ⊨ZFC,
such that
N ⊨“There is no model of ZFC”.
This of course is the version of G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem for
the theory, ZFC.
The generic-multiverse position, which is suggested by the results of the
previous section, declares that the Continuum Hypothesis is neither true nor
false.
Assuming that in each universe of the generic-multiverse there is a
proper class of Woodin cardinals then the generic-multiverse position declares
Projective Uniformization as true.
Is the generic-multiverse position a reasonable one? The reﬁnements of Co-
hen’s method of forcing in the decades since his initial discovery of the method

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
17
and the resulting plethora of problems shown to be unsolvable, have in a practi-
cal sense almost compelled one to adopt the generic-multiverse position. This
has been reinforced by some rather unexpected consequences of large cardinal
axioms which I shall discuss in the next section. Finally the argument that
Cohen’s method of forcing establishes that the Continuum Hypothesis has no
answer, is implicitly assuming the generic-multiverse conception of truth, a
least for sentences about sets of real numbers.
The purpose of this paper is not to argue against any possible multiverse
position but to more carefully examine the generic-multiverse position within
the context of modern Set Theory. I have formalized the generic-multiverse
conception of truth simply as a vehicle to explore more fully the claim that
Cohen’s method of forcing does establish that the Continuum Hypothesis has
no answer. In brief I shall argue that modulo the Ω Conjecture, the generic-
multiverse position outlined above is not reasonable and a more detailed
discussion is given after a brief review of Ω-logic, in the last two sections
of this paper. The essence of the argument against the generic-multiverse
position is that assuming the Ω Conjecture is true (and that there is a proper
class of Woodin cardinals) then this position is simply a brand of formalism
that denies the transﬁnite by a reducing truth about the universe of sets to truth
about a simple fragment such as the integers or, in this case, the collection
of all subsets of the least Woodin cardinal. The Ω Conjecture is invariant
between V and V B and so the generic-multiverse position must either declare
the Ω Conjecture to be true or declare the Ω Conjecture to be false.
It is a fairly common (informal) claim that the quest for truth about the
universe of sets is analogous to the quest for truth about the physical universe.
However I am claiming an important distinction.
While physicists would
rejoice in the discovery that the conception of the physical universe reduces to
the conception of some simple fragment or model, in my view the set theorist
must reject the analogous possibility for truth about the universe of sets. By
the very nature of its conception, the set of all truths of the transﬁnite universe
(the universe of sets) cannot be reduced to the set of truths of some explicit
fragment of the universe of sets. Taking into account the iterative conception
of sets, the set of all truths of an explicit fragment of the universe of sets
cannot be reduced to the truths of an explicit simpler fragment. The latter is
the basic position on which I shall base my arguments.
An assertion is Π2 if it is of the form,
“ For every inﬁnite ordinal α , Vα ⊨φ ”,
for some sentence, φ. A Π2 assertion is a multiverse truth if the Π2 assertion
holds in each universe of the multiverse.
Let 0 denote the least Woodin cardinal (so I now assume there is a proper
class of Woodin cardinals so that the existence of 0 is invariant across the
generic-mulitverse).
H(+
0 ) denotes the set of all sets X whose transitive

18
W. HUGH WOODIN
closure has cardinality at most 0. The multiverse truths of H(+
0 ) are those
sentences φ which hold in the H(+
0 ) of each universe of the multiverse.
Note that for each sentence φ, it is a Π2 assertion to say that
H(+
0 ) ⊨φ
and it is a Π2 assertion to say that H(+
0 ) ̸⊨φ. Thus in any one universe of
the multiverse, the set of all sentences φ such that
H(+
0 ) ⊨φ,
this is the theory of H(+
0 ) as computed in that in that universe, is recursive
in the set of Π2 sentences (assertions) which hold in that universe. Further
by Tarski’s Theorem on the undeﬁnability of truth the latter set cannot be
recursive in the former set.
Similarly as computed in any one universe of the multiverse, the theory
of any explicit fragment of the universe of sets, such as V+ or even V0
is recursive in the set of Π2 sentences which hold in that universe and not
vice-versa.
These comments suggest the following multiverse laws which I state in
reference to an arbitrary multiverse position though in the context that the
existence of a Woodin cardinal holds across the muliverse. For the case of the
generic-multiverse generated by V , this latter requirement is equivalent to the
requirement that there exist a proper class of Woodin cardinals in V .
First Multiverse Law
The set of Π2 assertions which are multiverse truths is not recursive
in the set of multiverse truths of H(+
0 ).
The motivation for this multiverse law is that if the set of Π2 multiverse truths
is recursive in the set of multiverse truths of H(+
0 ) then as far as evaluating Π2
assertions is concerned, the multiverse is equivalent to the reduced multiverse
of just the fragments H(+
0 ) of the universes of the multiverse. This amounts
to a rejection of the transﬁnite beyond H(+
0 ) and constitutes in eﬀect the
unacceptable brand of formalism alluded to earlier. This claim is reinforced
should the multiverse position also violate a second multiverse law which I
formulate below.
A set Y ⊂V is deﬁnable in H(+
0 ) across the multiverse if the set Y is
deﬁnable in the structure H(+
0 ) of each universe of the multiverse (possibly
by formulas which depend on the parent universe).
The second multiverse law is a variation of the First Multiverse Law.
Second Multiverse Law
The set of Π2 assertions which are multiverse truths, is not deﬁnable
in H(+
0 ) across the multiverse.

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
19
Again, by Tarski’s Theorem on the undeﬁnability of truth, this multiverse
law is obviously a reasonable one if one regards the only possibility for the
multiverse to be the universe of sets so that set of multiverse truths of H(+
0 )
is simply the set of all sentences which are true in H(+
0 ) and the set of Π2
assertions which are multiverse truths is simply the set of Π2 assertions which
are true in V . More generally the Second Multiverse Law would have to hold
if one modiﬁed the law to simply require that the set of Π2 assertions which are
multiverse truths, is not uniformly deﬁnable in H(+
0 ) across the multiverse
(i.e. by a single formula).
Assuming both that Ω Conjecture and the existence of a proper class of
Woodin cardinals hold in each (or one) universe of the generic-multiverse
generated by V , then both the First Multiverse Law and the Second Multi-
verse Law are violated by the generic-multiverse position. This is the basis
for the argument I am giving against the generic-multiverse position in this
paper. In fact the technical details of how the generic-multiverse position
violates these multiverse laws provides an even more compelling argument
against the generic-multiverse position since the analysis shows that in addi-
tion the generic-multiverse position is truly a form of formalism because of
the connections to Ω-logic.
There is a special case which I can present without any additional deﬁnitions
and which is not contingent on any conjectures.
Theorem 9. Suppose that M is a countable transitive set
M ⊨ZFC + “There is a proper class of Woodin cardinals”
and that M ∩Ord is as small as possible. Then VM violates both multiverse
laws.
§3. Ω-logic. A set X is transitive if for all a ∈X, a ⊂X. It is a consequence
of the axioms of Set Theory that every set X is a subset of a transitive set and
among these transitive sets there is a least one under containment; this is the
transitive closure of the set X.
A set X is of hereditary cardinality at most κ if the transitive closure of X
has cardinality at most κ. As I indicated above, I denote by H(+
0 ) the set of
all sets X whose transitive closure has cardinality at most 0 where 0 is the
least Woodin cardinal.
Both the Continuum Hypothesis and Projective Uniformization are ﬁrst
order properties of H(+
0 ) in the sense that there are sentences CH and PU
such that
H(+
0 ) ⊨CH
if and only if the Continuum Hypothesis holds and
H(+
0 ) ⊨PU
if and only if Projective Uniformization holds.

20
W. HUGH WOODIN
Since in the generic-multiverse position, an assertion of the form,
H(+
0 ) ⊨φ,
is true if and only if the assertion holds in all universes of the generic-
multiverse, the generic-multiverse position declares the Continuum Hypoth-
esis to be neither true nor false and declares, granting large cardinals, that
Projective Uniformization is true. I note that for essentially all current large
cardinal axioms, the existence of a proper class of large cardinals holds in V
if and only if it holds in V B for all complete Boolean algebras, B. In other
words, in the generic-multiverse position the existence of a proper class of, say,
Woodin cardinals is either true or false since it either holds in every universe of
the generic-multiverse or it holds in no universe of the generic-multiverse, [5].
I am going to analyze the generic-multiverse position from the perspective
of Ω-logic which I ﬁrst brieﬂy review.
Deﬁnition 10. Suppose that T is a countable theory in the language of Set
Theory, and φ is a sentence. Then
T ⊨Ω φ
if for all complete Boolean algebras, B, for all ordinals, α, if
V B
α ⊨T
then V B
α ⊨φ.
If there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals then the relation T ⊨Ω φ,
is generically absolute.
This fact which arguably was a completely unan-
ticipated consequence of large cardinals, makes Ω-logic interesting from a
meta-mathematical point of view. For example the set
VΩ = {φ | ∅⊨Ω φ}
is generically absolute in the sense that for a given sentence, φ, the question
whether or not φ is logically Ω-valid, i.e. whether or not φ ∈VΩ, is absolute
between V and all of its generic extensions. In particular the method of (set)
forcing cannot be used to show the formal independence of assertions of the
form ∅⊨Ω φ.
Theorem 11. Suppose that T is a countable theory in the language of Set
Theory, and φ is a sentence. Suppose that there exists a proper class of Woodin
cardinals. Then for all complete Boolean algebras, B,
V B ⊨“T ⊨Ω φ”
if and only if T ⊨Ω φ.
There are a variety of technical theorems which show that one cannot hope
to prove the generic invariance of Ω-logic from any large cardinal hypothesis
weaker than the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals—for example

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
21
if V = L then deﬁnition of VΩ is not absolute between V and V B, for any
nontrivial complete Boolean algebra, B, of cardinality c.
It follows easily from the deﬁnition of Ω-logic, that for any Π2-sentence, φ,
∅⊨Ω φ
if and only if for all complete Boolean algebras, B,
V B ⊨φ.
Therefore by the theorem above, assuming there is a proper class of Woodin
cardinals, for each sentence, , the assertion
For all complete Boolean algebras, B, V B ⊨“H(+
0 ) ⊨”
is itself absolute between V and V B for all complete Boolean algebras B.
This remarkable consequence of the existence of a proper class of Woodin
cardinals actually seems to be evidence for the generic-multiverse position. In
particular this shows that the generic-multiverse position, at least for assessing
Π2 assertions, and so for assessing all assertions of the form,
H(+
0 ) ⊨φ,
is equivalent to the position that a Π2 assertion is true if and only if it holds
in V B for all complete Boolean algebras B. Notice that if R ̸⊂L and if V is
a generic extension of L then this equivalence is false. In this situation the Π2
sentence which expresses R ̸⊂L holds in V B for all complete Boolean algebras,
B, but this sentence fails to hold across the generic-multiverse generated by V
(since L belongs to this multiverse).
To summarize, suppose that there exists a proper class of Woodin cardinals
in each universe of the generic-multiverse (or equivalently that there is a proper
class of Woodin cardinals in at least one universe of the generic-multiverse).
Then for each Π2 sentence φ; the following are equivalent:
(1) φ is holds across the generic-multiverse;
(2) “∅⊨Ω φ” holds across the generic-multiverse;
(3) “∅⊨Ω φ” holds in at least one universe of the generic-multiverse.
Therefore to evaluate the generic-multiverse position one must understand
the logical relation, T ⊨Ω φ. In particular a natural question arises: is there a
corresponding proof relation?
§4. The Ω conjecture. I deﬁne the proof relation, T ⊢Ω φ. This requires a
preliminary notion that a set of reals be universally Baire, [2]. In fact I shall
deﬁne T ⊢Ω φ, assuming the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals
and exploiting the fact that there are a number of (equivalent) deﬁnitions.
Without the assumption that there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals, the
deﬁnition is a bit more technical, [12]. Recall that if S is a compact Hausdorﬀ

22
W. HUGH WOODIN
space then a set X ⊆S has the property of Baire in the space S if there exists
an open set O ⊆S such that symmetric diﬀerence,
X△O,
is meager in S (contained in a countable union of closed sets with empty
interior).
Deﬁnition 12. A set A ⊂R is universally Baire if for all compact Hausdorﬀ
spaces, S, and for all continuous functions,
F : S →R,
the preimage of A by F has the property of Baire in the space S.
Suppose that A ⊆R is universally Baire. Suppose that M is a countable
transitive model of ZFC. Then M is strongly A-closed if for all countable
transitive sets N such that N is a generic extension of M,
A ∩N ∈N.
Deﬁnition 13. Suppose there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Sup-
pose that T is a countable theory in the language of Set Theory, and φ is a
sentence. Then T ⊢Ω φ if there exists a set A ⊂R such that:
(1) A is universally Baire,
(2) for all countable transitive models, M, if M is strongly A-closed and
T ∈M, then
M ⊨“T ⊨Ω φ”.
Assuming there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals, the relation, T ⊢Ω φ,
is generically absolute. Moreover Soundness holds as well.
Theorem 14. Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Then for
all (T, φ) and for all complete Boolean algebras, B,
T ⊢Ω φ if and only if
V B ⊨“T ⊢Ω φ”.
Theorem 15 (Soundness). Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardi-
nals. If T ⊢Ω φ then T ⊨Ω φ.
I now come to the Ω Conjecture which in essence is simply the conjecture
that the G¨odel Completeness Theorem holds for Ω-logic; see [12] for a more
detailed discussion.
Deﬁnition 16 (Ω Conjecture). Suppose that there exists a proper class of
Woodin cardinals. Then for all sentences φ, ∅⊨Ω φ if and only if ∅⊢Ω φ.

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
23
§5. The complexity of Ω-logic. Let (as deﬁned on page 20) VΩ be the set of
sentences φ such that
∅⊨Ω φ,
and let VΩ(H(+
0 )) be the set of sentences, φ, such that
ZFC ⊨Ω “H(+
0 ) ⊨φ”.
Assuming there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals then the set of generic-
multiverse truths which are Π2 assertions is of the same Turing complexity as
VΩ (i.e., each set is recursive in the other). Further (assuming there is a proper
class of Woodin cardinals) the set, VΩ(H(+
0 )), is precisely the set of generic-
multiverse truths of H(+
0 ). Thus the requirement that the generic-multiverse
position satisﬁes the First Multiverse Law, as discussed on page 24, reduces
to the requirement that VΩ not be recursive in the set VΩ(H(+
0 )).
The following theorem is a corollary of the basic analysis of Ω-logic in the
context that there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals, in fact one obtains
the stronger conclusion that set VΩ is recursive in the set VΩ(H(2)) (which
is the set of sentences, φ, such that ZFC ⊨Ω “H(2) ⊨φ”).
Theorem 17. Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that the
Ω Conjecture holds. Then the set VΩ is recursive in the set VΩ(H(+
0 )).
Therefore, assuming the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals
and that the Ω Conjecture both hold across the generic-multiverse generated
by V , the generic-multiverse position violates the First Multiverse Law. What
about the Second Multiverse Law (on page 24)? This requires understanding
the complexity of the set VΩ. From the deﬁnition of VΩ it is evident that this
set is deﬁnable in V by a Π2 formula: if V = L then this set is recursively
equivalent to the set of all Π2 sentences which are true in V . However in the
context of large cardinal axioms the complexity of VΩ is more subtle.
Theorem 18. Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that the
Ω Conjecture holds. Then the set VΩ is deﬁnable in H(+
0 ).
Therefore if the Ω Conjecture holds and there is a proper class of Woodin
cardinals then the generic-multiverse position that the only Π2 assertions
which are true are those which are true in each universe of the generic-
multiverse also violates the Second Multiverse Law—for this set of assertions
is itself deﬁnable in H(+
0 ) across the generic-multiverse.
In summary, assuming the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals
and that the Ω Conjecture both hold across the generic-multiverse generated
by V , then both the First Multiverse Law and the Second Multiverse Law are
violated by the generic-multiverse view of truth.
In particular, assuming the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals
and that the Ω Conjecture both hold across the generic-multiverse generated by
V , then as far evaluating truth across the generic-multiverse for Π2 assertions,
the generic-multiverse is equivalent to the reduced multiverse given by the

24
W. HUGH WOODIN
structures H(+
0 ) of the universes in the generic-multiverse. Why not just
adopt formalism where the multiverse is the collection of all possible universes
constrained only by the formal axioms, ZFC, so that truth is reduced to truth
within V (i.e. to truth within the integers)?
As I have indicated, the actual argument against the generic-multiverse po-
sition is a much more compelling one. This is because the reduction of truth
for Π2 assertions to truth about H(+
0 ) is much stronger than is abstractly
indicated by the mere violation of the two multiverse laws. It seems incoher-
ent to me to have a conception of the transﬁnite which reduces to simply a
conception of H(+
0 ) which in essence is just the truncation of the universe of
sets to the level of the least Woodin cardinal.
§6. The weak multiverse laws and H(c+). The standard structure for Third
Order Number Theory is the structure, ⟨P(R), R, ·, +, ∈⟩. This structure is
logically equivalent to H(c+) which is the set of all sets X whose transitive
closure has cardinality at most c = 2ℵ0.
The multiverse truths of H(c+) are those sentences φ which hold in the
H(c+) of each universe of the multiverse.
The following are the natural
formally weaker versions of the two multiverse laws which are obtained by
simply replacing H(+
0 ) by H(c+). For the Second Multiverse Law, this gives
the weakest version which is not provable for the generic-multiverse assuming
the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals; i.e., replacing H(c+) by
H(c) yield a second multiverse law which is provable for the generic-multiverse
assuming the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals.
Weak First Multiverse Law
The set of Π2 assertions which are multiverse truths is not recursive
in the set of multiverse truths of H(c+).
Weak Second Multiverse Law
The set of Π2 assertions which are multiverse truths, is not deﬁnable
in H(c+) across the multiverse.
The following theorem shows that assuming there exist a proper class of
Woodin cardinals and that the Ω Conjecture holds, then the generic-multiverse
position violates the Weak First Multiverse Law.
Theorem 19. Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that the
Ω Conjecture holds. Then the set VΩ is recursive in the set VΩ(H(c+)).
Theorem 9 also holds for the weak multiverse laws.
Theorem 20. Suppose that M is a countable transitive set
M ⊨ZFC + “There is a proper class of Woodin cardinals”

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
25
and that M ∩Ord is as small as possible. Then VM violates both weak multiverse
laws.
The issue of whether the generic-multiverse position violates the Weak
Second Multiverse Law is much more subtle and the issue is whether assuming
the Ω Conjecture one can show that VΩ is deﬁnable in H(c+) across the generic-
multiverse. I originally thought I could prove this but the proof was based on
an implicit restriction regarding the universally Baire sets, see [14] for more
details.
The deﬁnability of VΩ in H(c+) is a consequence of the Ω Conjecture
augmented by the following conjecture. The statement involves both AD+
which is a technical variant of AD, the Axiom of Determinacy, and the notion
that a set A ⊆R be 1-universally Baire. The deﬁnition of AD+ and a brief
survey of some of the basic aspects of the theory of AD+ are given in [14].
Suppose that  is an inﬁnite cardinal. A set A ⊂R is -universally Baire if
for all compact Hausdorﬀspaces Ω and for all continuous functions
	 : Ω →R
if the topology of Ω has a basis of cardinality κ for some κ ≤, then the
preimage of A by 	 has the property of Baire in Ω. Clearly A is universally
Baire if and only if A is -universally Baire for all .
Deﬁnition 21 (AD+ Conjecture). Suppose that L(A, R) and L(B, R) each
satisfy AD+. Suppose that every set
X ∈

L(A, R) ∪L(B, R)) ∩P(R)
is 1-universally Baire. Then either
(Δ∼
2
1)L(A,R) ⊆(Δ∼
2
1)L(B,R)
or
(Δ∼
2
1)L(B,R) ⊆(Δ∼
2
1)L(A,R)
There is a stronger version of this conjecture.
Deﬁnition 22 (strong AD+ conjecture). SupposethatL(A, R)and L(B, R)
each satisfy AD+. Suppose that every set
X ∈

L(A, R) ∪L(B, R)) ∩P(R)
is 1-universally Baire. Then either A ∈L(B, R) or B ∈L(A, R).
Assuming the AD+ Conjecture one obtains a signiﬁcant improvement on
the calculation of the complexity of VΩ and here, as opposed to the previous
theorem, the distinction between H(c+) and H(2) is critical.
Theorem 23 (AD+ Conjecture). Assume there is a proper class of Woodin
cardinals. Then the set
VΩ = {φ | ∅⊨Ω φ}
is deﬁnable in H(c+).

26
W. HUGH WOODIN
Thus assuming the AD+ Conjecture holds across the generic-multiverse
then the generic-multiverse position violates the Weak Second Multiverse
Law assuming of course that both the existence of a proper class of Woodin
cardinals and the Ω Conjecture hold in V . Quite a number of combinatorial
propositions are known to imply the AD+ Conjecture [13], and the results of
[14] oﬀer evidence that the AD+ Conjecture is true.
For my basic argument against the generic-multiverse position (assuming
the Ω Conjecture), arguably the distinction between H(c+) and H(+
0 ) is not
relevant. It is however crucial for arguments such as those given in [11] that
the Continuum Hypothesis is false.
Those arguments are now contingent
on both the Ω Conjecture and the AD+ Conjecture. Nevertheless the results
of [14] strongly suggest that these conjectures are both true. However the
results of [14] also suggest that Continuum Hypothesis is true. This is not
a contradiction. The basic argument against the Continuum Hypothesis in
[11] is based on optimizing the theory of H(2) and this approach cannot
extend to even H(c+). While this approach is perhaps compelling from the
perspective of just H(2), it now seems likely that it will not be so compelling
from the perspective of V .
§7. Conclusions. If the Ω Conjecture is true then one cannot reasonably
claim that the only true Π2 assertions are those which are true across the
generic-multiverse. Of course I am assuming large cardinals exist, in particular
I am assuming that in some (and hence all) universes of the generic-multiverse,
there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals.
For the skeptic who acknowledges this and yet claims that the problem of
the Continuum Hypothesis is meaningless the challenge is the following:
Exhibit a Π2 assertion which is true and which is not true across the
generic-multiverse.
The notion, T ⊢Ω φ, has many features of the classical notion, T ⊢φ.
These features include a reasonable deﬁnition for the length of proof and so
one can construct G¨odel and Rosser sentences within Ω-logic. Moreover if the
Ω Conjecture holds then VΩ is deﬁnable in H(+
0 ). Thus if the Ω Conjecture
holds then meeting the challenge posed above would seem to be entirely
straightforward, being analogous to the challenge of exhibiting a sentence
 for which the assertion
V ⊨
is both true and not provable (in ﬁrst order logic). In fact it would seem one
could do much better and exhibit an assertion of the form
H(+
0 ) ⊨φ
which is true but not true across the generic-multiverse.

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
27
However there is a feature of Ω logic which is not shared by classical logic.
While it is true that if the Ω Conjecture holds then VΩ is deﬁnable in H(+
0 ),
the deﬁnition is not uniform. More precisely the actual deﬁnition of VΩ within
H(+
0 ) depends on the universe V . A strong form of this claim is given by the
following theorem.
Theorem 24. Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that
the Ω Conjecture holds. Then for each formula Ψ(x) there exists a complete
Boolean algebra B such that
V B ⊨“VΩ ̸=

φ | H(+
0 ) ⊨Ψ[φ]

”.
Thus, assuming there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that the
Ω Conjecture holds, one cannot use either G¨odel or Rosser style sentences to
produce an assertion of the form
H(+
0 ) ⊨
which is true and not Ω-valid; where a Π2 assertion is Ω-valid if it holds in V B
for all complete Boolean algebras, B. Any such construction would have to
be based on a speciﬁc choice of the deﬁnition of VΩ within H(+
0 ); and there
is no possible choice which one can make.
A similar argument applies to attempting to meet the challenge stated
above—producing a Π2 assertion which is true but not Ω-valid—because
of the following stronger version of the previous theorem.
Theorem 25. Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that
the Ω Conjecture holds. Then for each Σ2 formula Ψ(x) there exists a complete
Boolean algebra B such that
V B ⊨“VΩ ̸= {φ | Ψ[φ] holds }”.
Of course one could just conclude from all of this that the Ω Conjecture is
false; see [12] for a more detailed discussion of this; declaring the Ω Conjecture
to be meaningless is not an option since the Ω Conjecture is either true in all
the universes of the generic-multiverse or false in all the universes of the
generic-multiverse.
Note that even if the Ω Conjecture is false this does not necessarily resolve
the objections to generic-multiverse position. For this end one would need
something much stronger than the simple failure of the Ω Conjecture; one
would need at the very least either that VΩ is not recursive in VΩ(H(+
0 ))
or that VΩ is not deﬁnable in H(+
0 ) across the generic-multiverse.
If the
Ω Conjecture is false then the problem of trying to understand the complexity
of VΩ looks extremely diﬃcult. For example, is it consistent for there to be
a proper class of Woodin cardinals and for VΩ to be recursively equivalent to
the set of all Π2-sentences which hold in V (as happens if V = L) and so be
as complicated as its natural deﬁnition suggests?

28
W. HUGH WOODIN
The skeptic might try a diﬀerent approach even granting the Ω Conjecture
and that there exists proper class of Woodin cardinals, by proposing that the
generic-multiverse is too small. In particular why should a Π2 assertion which
is Ω-valid in one universe of the multiverse be true in every universe of the
multiverse?
The counter to this approach is simply that, since the Ω Conjecture and
the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals both hold across the
multiverse, if “∅⊨Ω φ” holds in one universe of the multiverse then “∅⊢Ω φ”
holds in that universe. But then “∅⊢Ω φ” must hold across the multiverse and
so by the Soundness Theorem for Ω-logic, the sentence φ must hold in every
universe of the multiverse. The argument that “∅⊢Ω φ” must hold across the
multiverse is made by appealing to the intricate connections between proofs
in Ω-logic and notions of large cardinals; so one is really arguing that however
the multiverse is deﬁned, each universe of the multiverse is as transcendent as
every other universe of the multiverse. Of course the Ω Conjecture is essential
for this argument though interestingly the use of the Ω Conjecture is quite
diﬀerent here.
The Ω Conjecture is consistent (with a proper class of Woodin cardinals),
more precisely if the theory
ZFC + “There is a proper class of Woodin cardinals”
is consistent then so is this theory together with the assertion that the Ω Con-
jecture is true. It is at present not known if the Ω Conjecture is consistently
false.
The Inner Model Program is the attempt to generalize the deﬁnition of
G¨odel’s constructible universe, L, to deﬁne (canonical) transitive inner models
of the universe of sets for large cardinal axioms. Fairly general requirements
on the structure of the inner model imply that the Ω Conjecture must hold
in the inner model, further very recent results indicate that if this program
can succeed at the level of supercompact cardinals then no large cardinal
hypothesis whatsoever can refute the Ω Conjecture. Such an analysis would in
turn strongly suggest that the Ω Conjecture is true; [14]. In summary there is
(at present) a plausible framework for actually proving the Ω Conjecture—of
course evidence is not a proof and this framework could collapse under an
onslaught of theorems which reveal the true nature of sets.
But suppose that the Ω Conjecture is in fact provable (in classical logic, from
the axioms for Set Theory). After all, as indicated above, all the evidence to
date points to this possibility. What would this say about truth within Set
Theory? It certainly would say that there is no evidence for the claim that the
Continuum Hypothesis has no answer.
If the Ω Conjecture holds then there must be a Π2 assertion which is true
and which is not Ω-valid—in fact for essentially the same reasons there must

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
29
be an assertion of the form,
H(+
0 ) ⊨φ
for some sentence φ, which is true but not Ω-valid.
The latter class of Π2 assertions, Φ, have the feature that they can be equiva-
lently formulated as Σ2 assertions—in the sense that there is a Σ2 sentence, Φ′,
with the property that in each universe of the generic-multiverse generated by
V , Φ holds if and only if Φ′ holds. Any such Π2 assertion, Φ, is qualitatively
just like both the Continuum Hypothesis and its negation—assuming there is
a proper class of Woodin cardinals there are complete Boolean algebras, B, in
which the assertion holds as interpreted in V B and there are complete Boolean
algebras, B, in which the assertion fails as interpreted in V B. So if there is
such a sentence Φ which is true then why could this not also be the case for
Continuum Hypothesis (or its negation)?
I just do not see how one can maintain a position that there is any meaning
to a conception of the transﬁnite universe beyond formalism, and yet be
unwilling to acknowledge that there is some statement about H(+
0 ) which is
both true and not Ω-valid (unless the Ω Conjecture is false).
But again the skeptic can reasonably object: OK, even if the Continuum
Hypothesis has an answer, is there any evidence whatsoever that we can or
will ever determine what that answer is? The sympathetic skeptic might soften
the position implicit in this question and simply claim that we are as far
from ﬁnding and understanding the answer to the problem of the Continuum
Hypothesis as the mathematicians studying the projective sets in the early 20th
century were from ﬁnding and understanding the answer to the problem of
Projective Uniformization.
Perhaps the generic-multiverse position can be (non-trivially) resurrected
by adding single sentence to the axioms, ZFC, and still assuming both the
Ω Conjecture and the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals both
hold across the multiverse.
Adding a sentence, Ψ, to the axioms, ZFC,
one would restrict the multiverse to a collection of universes where Ψ holds.
Applying this restriction to the generic-multiverse gives the corresponding
restricted generic-multiverse leading to a revised generic-multiverse position.
This can be formalized within in any universe of the restricted generic-
multiverse; Lemma 33, just as in the case for the generic-multiverse posi-
tion.
Since by adding a Π2 sentence to the axioms one can preserve the
truth of any given Σ2 sentence, preserve essentially all large cardinals, and
force the corresponding restricted generic-multiverse to contain only one uni-
verse, I shall restrict consideration to the case where the additional axiom is a
Σ2 sentence.
Suppose Ψ is a sentence and let VΨ
Ω be the set of sentences, φ, such that
{Ψ} ⊨Ω φ,

30
W. HUGH WOODIN
and let VΨ
Ω (H(+
0 )) be the set of sentences, φ, such that
ZFC ∪{Ψ} ⊨Ω “H(+
0 ) ⊨φ”.
Now if Ψ is a Σ2 sentence then VΨ
Ω is of the same Turing complexity as the
set of Π2 assertions which hold across the restricted generic-multiverse (where
now Ψ is required to hold in each universe of the multiverse) and VΨ
Ω (H(+
0 ))
is the corresponding set of multiverse truths of H(+
0 ).
Clearly VΨ
Ω is recursive in VΩ and so by Theorem 18, the revised generic-
multiverse position will still violate the Second Multiverse Law. What about
the First Multiverse Law?
Theorem 26. Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that the
Ω Conjecture holds. Then for each sentence Ψ, the set VΨ
Ω is recursive in the set
VΨ
Ω (H(+
0 )).
Thus assuming both the Ω Conjecture and the existence of a proper class
of Woodin cardinals both hold across the multiverse then for all enlargements
of ZFC by adding a single Σ2 sentence to the axioms, ZFC, the revised
generic-multiverse position still violates both the First Multiverse Law and
the Second Multiverse Law. Assuming in addition that the AD+ Conjecture
holds across the generic-multiverse this violation extends to both the Weak
First Multiverse Law and the Weak Second Multiverse Law. Though here as
above, the distinction between H(2) and H(c+) is critical.
I am an optimist, perhaps even a transﬁnitist. There is in my view no reason
at all, beyond a lack of faith, for believing that there is no extension of the
axioms ZFC, by one axiom, a posteriori true, which settles all instances of
the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis and more generally which yields a
theory of the universe of sets which is as “complete” as the theory of G¨odel’s
constructible universe, L, which is given by the axioms ZFC. (Or as complete
as the theory of the integers that is given by the axioms for that structure.)
The new axiom of any such extension cannot be Ω-valid since in particular it
must settle the Continuum Hypothesis.
Rephrasing my position slightly, there is in my view no credible evidence at
present refuting the existence of a single additional axiom to ZFC which is
consistent with large cardinal axioms and which in a practical sense provides
a complete description of H(+
0 ) or even of Vκ where κ is any cardinal which
is deﬁnable within the universe of sets as the least cardinal with a Σ2-property;
where the gold standard for practical completeness is the theory of L as given
by the ZFC axioms.
Until recently I have always viewed such a possibility as very implausible at
best. The change in my view is motivated by the results of [14] which provide
some evidence for the existence of such an axiom. This is not to say that in
the ﬁnal analysis I will not revert.

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
31
Why not the axiom “V = L”? The diﬃculty is that this is a limiting axiom
for it refutes large cardinal axioms. The results of [14] suggest the possibility
that if there is a supercompact cardinal then there is a generalization of L
which is both close to V and which inherits large cardinals from V exactly as
L inherits large cardinals from V if 0# does not exist. Should this turn out
to be true, it would be remarkable. The axiom that V is such an inner model
would have all the advantages of the axiom “V = L” without limiting V as
far as large cardinals are concerned. In particular the often cited arguments
against the axiom “V = L” would not apply to this new axiom.
A far stronger view than that outlined above and which I also currently hold
because of the suggestive results of [14], is that there must be such an axiom
and in understanding it we will understand why it is essentially unique and
therefore true. Further this new axiom will in a transparent fashion both settle
the classical questions of combinatorial set theory where to date independence
has been the rule and explain the large cardinal hierarchy. There is already
a speciﬁc candidate for this axiom [14] though it is not only too early to
argue that this axiom is true, it is too early to be sure that this axiom is even
consistent with all large cardinal axioms. The issue at present is that there are
actually two families of enlargements of L and it is not yet clear whether both
can be transcendent relative to large cardinal axioms, [14].
Even if this does happen (we ﬁnd and understand this missing axiom),
the specter of independence remains—it is just that now the vulnerability of
Set Theory to the occurrence of independence becomes the same as that of
Number Theory. In other words, we would have come to a conception of the
transﬁnite universe which is as clear and unambiguous as our conception of
the fragment V, the universe of the ﬁnite integers. To me this a noteworthy
goal to aspire to.
§8. Appendix. The purpose of this appendix is to show how the generic-
multiverse position can be formalized within V . In particular I shall prove that
for each sentence φ there is a sentence φ∗, recursively depending on φ, such
that for each countable transitive set M such that M ⊨ZFC, the following
are equivalent:
(1) M ⊨φ∗;
(2) For each N ∈VM, N ⊨φ;
where as deﬁned on page 15, VM is the generic-multiverse generated (in V )
by M. In fact this is a straightforward corollary of Lemma 27 and Lemma 28
below noting that to verify that N ⊨φ for each N ∈VM one need only verify
N ⊨φ for each transitive set N such that N can be generated from M in only
3 steps (actually 2 steps as noted by Hamkins) of taking generic enlargements
or generic reﬁnements (as opposed to ﬁnitely many steps). However the proof
I shall give easily adapts to prove the corresponding result for any restricted

32
W. HUGH WOODIN
generic-multiverse position obtained by limiting the generic extensions to
those given by a deﬁnable class of partial orders, Lemma 33. In this general
case, the reduction to models generated in only 3 steps (or any ﬁxed ﬁnite
number of steps) from the initial model M is not always possible.
Let ZC(VN) denote the axioms ZC together with the axiom which asserts
that for all ordinals α, Vα exists.
I ﬁx some notation generalizing the deﬁnition of VM to the case that M is
a countable transitive set such that
M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement.
Note that
V+ ⊨ZC(VN),
but for all (ordinals) 
 > ,
V
 ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
if and only if |V
| = 
.
Let VM be the generic-multiverse generated by M. This is the smallest
collection of transitive sets such that M ∈VM and such that for all pairs,
(M1, M2), of countable transitive sets if
(1) M1 ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
(2) M2 is a generic extension of M1,
(3) either M1 ∈VM or M2 ∈VM,
then both M1 and M2 are in VM.
The only change here from the deﬁnition of VM on page 15, is that here I
am not requiring that M ⊨ZFC; but just that M be a model of the weaker
set of axioms,
ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement.
The following lemma has an interesting corollary. Suppose M is a transitive
set, M ⊨ZFC, and that M[G] is a generic extension of M.
Then M is
deﬁnable in M[G] from parameters. This in turn implies that the property
of being a generic extension is ﬁrst-order. The lemma is motivated by [4]
and both a version of this lemma and the application indicated above are due
independently to Laver, [6]; also see Reitz [10] for further developments.
Lemma 27. Suppose that M, M ′ are transitive sets,
P ∈M ∩M ′
and G ⊂P. Suppose:
(i) M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement;
(ii) M ′ ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement;
(iii) P(P) ∩M = P(P) ∩M ′;

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
33
(iv) G is M-generic for P;
(v) M[G] = M ′[G].
Then M = M ′.
Proof. Suppose toward a contradiction that M ̸= M ′. Then since
M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
it follows that M ∩P(Ord) ̸= M ′ ∩P(Ord).
Let  ∈Ord ∩M be least such that
P() ∩M ̸= P() ∩M ′.
Clearly  is a cardinal in both M and M ′. Let κ = |P|M. Thus (κ+)M is a
cardinal in M[G] and since,
P(P) ∩M = P(P) ∩M ′,
it follows that  > κ. By interchanging M and M ′ if necessary we can suppose
that there exists a set
A ∈P() ∩M ′\M.
Thus by choice of , for all α < , A ∩α ∈M. Further since A ∈M[G], it
follows that
(cof())M ≤κ.
Therefore  is not a regular cardinal in M and so  > (κ+)M. Let
 = (κ+)M = (κ+)M ′ = (κ+)M[G].
The key point is that in M[G] the following hold.
(1.1) P() ∩M ′ is closed in under strictly increasing unions of length .
(1.2) For every set a ⊂ with |a|M[G] ≤, there exists b ⊂ such that
a ⊆b, |b|M[G] ≤, and such that b ∈P() ∩M ′.
(1.3) For each  < , P() ∩M ′ = P() ∩M.
(1.4) A ∈P() ∩M ′\M.
Let  ∈M be a term for P() ∩M ′. Let p ∈G be a condition which forces
that (1.1)–(1.3) hold for IG(), where IG() is the interpretation of  in M[G].
Let  ∈M be a term for A. By shrinking p if necessary we can suppose that
p forces both IG() ∈IG() and that IG() /∈M.
We now work in M. Let
X = {Z ⊂ | κ ⊂Z, |Z| ≤}
and let S be the set of all Z ∈X, such that p forces Z ∈IG(). Since p forces
that (1.1)–(1.2) hold for IG(), it follows that S is stationary as a subset of
{Z ⊂ | |Z| ≤}. To see this let
H : < →.
We must ﬁnd Z ∈S such that H[Z<] ⊂Z. Let
⟨(Zα, α) : α < ⟩

34
W. HUGH WOODIN
be a sequence such that for all α <  < ,
(2.1) p ⊩α ∈,
(2.2) p ⊩α ⊆Z,
(2.3) p ⊩Zα ⊆,
(2.4) |Zα| ≤ and H[Z<
α ] ⊂Zα.
Such a sequence is easily constructed by induction. Notice that for all α < ,
p ⊩α ⊆. Thus
p ⊩∪{α | α < } ∈.
But letting Z = ∪{Zα | α < },
p ⊩∪{α | α < } = Z,
and so Z ∈S. Clearly H[Z<] ⊂Z and this shows that S is stationary.
For each Z ∈S, there exist pZ ≤p and AZ ⊆Z such that pZ forces that
IG() ∩Z = AZ.
This is because p forces that (1.3)–(1.4) holds for IG(). But |P|M = κ and
κ ⊂Z for each Z ∈S. Therefore there exists q ≤p such that
Sq = {Z ∈S | pZ = q}
is stationary as a subset of {Z ⊂ | |Z| ≤}. For each Z1, Z2 ∈Sq, it follows
that
AZ1 ∩Z1 ∩Z2 = AZ2 ∩Z1 ∩Z2.
Thus there exists a set Aq ⊂ such that for all Z ∈Sq, Aq ∩Z = AZ. But
then q forces IG() = Aq which contradicts the choice of  and p.
Therefore M ∩P(Ord) = M ′ ∩P(Ord) and so M = M ′.
⊣
The next lemma is a corollary of Lemma 27.
Lemma 28. Suppose that N is transitive, the set

 ∈N ∩Ord | N ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement

,
is coﬁnal in N ∩Ord, α ∈N ∩Ord, and that Nα ≺Σ2 N.
Suppose that M ∈N is a transitive set and:
(i) M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement;
(ii) P ∈M, G ⊆P, and G is M-generic for P;
(iii) G ∈N;
(iv) M[G] = N ∩Vα.
Then there exists a transitive set M ∗⊂N such that
(1) M ∗⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
(2) M ∗∩Vα = M,
(3) N = M ∗[G].

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
35
Proof. Let I be the set of  ∈N ∩Ord such that
N ∩V ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement
and such that P ∈N ∩V.
Thus α ∈I and both the hypothesis on N,
(1.1) I ∩α is coﬁnal in α,
(1.2) I is coﬁnal in N ∩Ord.
Let I ′ be the set of  ∈I such that there exists a transitive set M ′ ∈N such
that
(2.1) M ′ ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
(2.2) P ∈M ′,
(2.3) P(P) ∩M ′ = P(P) ∩M,
(2.4) N ∩V = M ′[G].
Clearly α ∈I ′ and I ∩α ⊂I ′. Therefore since
N ∩Vα ≺Σ2 N,
it follows I ⊂I ′. Thus I = I ′.
For each  ∈I let M ∈N be such that
(3.1) M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
(3.2) P ∈M,
(3.3) P(P) ∩M = P(P) ∩M,
(3.4) N ∩V = M[G].
By Lemma 27, for each 1 < 2 in I ,
M1 = M2 ∩V1.
Let M ∗= ∪{M |  ∈I }. Thus
(4.1) M = M ∗∩Vα,
(4.2) N = M ∗[G],
(4.3) for each  ∈I , M ∗∩V ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement.
Finally by (4.3),
M ∗⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
since I is coﬁnal in M ∗∩Ord.
⊣
Lemma 29. Suppose that M ⊂N are transitive sets,
P ∈M
and G ⊂P satisfy:
(i) M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement;
(ii) N ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement;
(iii) G is M-generic;
(iv) N = M[G].

36
W. HUGH WOODIN
Suppose k ≥1,  ∈N ∩Ord, P ∈N ∩V, and that the set
{ ∈N ∩Ord | N ∩V ≺Σk N}
is coﬁnal in N ∩Ord.
Then
M ∩V ≺Σk M
if and only if N ∩V ≺Σk N.
Proof. The case k = 1 is immediate since for  > ,
N ∩V ≺Σ1 N
if and only if |N ∩V|N =  and
M ∩V ≺Σ1 M
if and only if |M ∩V|M = .
We now suppose that k > 1. If
M ∩V ≺Σk M
then it follows easily that
N ∩V ≺Σk N.
This is because N = M[G] and P ∈M ∩V.
Finally suppose that
N ∩V ≺Σk N.
Let I M
1
be the set of  ∈M ∩Ord such that
M ∩V ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement
and such that P ∈M ∩V. Clearly
I M
1
= { ∈M ∩Ord | M ∩V ≺Σ1 M} ∩{ ∈M ∩Ord | P ∈M ∩V} ,
and I M
1
is also the set of  ∈N ∩Ord such that
N ∩V ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement
and such that P ∈N ∩V.
By Lemma 27 and Lemma 28, it follows that the set

(, M ∩V) |  ∈I M
1

is Π1-deﬁnable in N from the parameter,
(P, G, P(P) ∩M).
Since
M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
for each  ∈I M
1 , M ∩V ≺Σ1 M.
For each 1 ≤n ≤k let I M
n
be the set of  ∈I M
1
such that
M ∩V ≺Σn M.

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
37
We prove by induction on n:
(1.1) I M
n
=

 ∈I M
1
| N ∩V ≺Σn N

;
(1.2)

(, M ∩V) |  ∈I M
n

is Πn-deﬁnable in N from the parameter,
(P, G, P(P) ∩M).
We have just proved (1.1)–(1.2) for n = 1, so we suppose that 1 < n < k
and (1.1)–(1.2) hold for n. We ﬁrst prove (1.1) holds for n + 1 and for this it
suﬃces to simply show that
{ ∈I | N ∩V ≺Σn+1 N} ⊆I M
n+1.
Suppose that  ∈I M
1
and
N ∩V ≺Σn+1 N.
We must prove that M ∩V ≺Σn+1 M. Since n < k we have that
{ ∈N ∩Ord | N ∩V ≺Σn N}
is coﬁnal in N ∩Ord. Therefore by the induction hypothesis,
M ∩V ≺Σn+1 M
if and only if

M ∩V,

M ∩V′ | ′ ∈I M
n
∩

≺Σ1

M,

M ∩V′ | ′ ∈I M
n

.
Since (1.2) holds for n and since
N ∩V ≺Σn+1 N,
it follows that

N ∩V,

M ∩V′ | ′ ∈I M
n
∩

≺Σ1

N,

M ∩V′ | ′ ∈I M
n

,
and so M ∩V ≺Σn+1 M.
Finally we prove that (1.2) holds for n + 1. Note that M ∩V ≺Σn+1 M if
and only if for all a ∈M ∩V and for all formulas φ(x) if

(′, M ∩V′) | ′ ∈I M
n
and M ∩V′ ⊨φ[a]

̸= ∅
then

(′, M ∩V′) | ′ ∈I M
n
and M ∩V′ ⊨φ[a]

∩V ̸= ∅.
This implies that (1.2) holds for n + 1 since (1.2) holds for n.
Thus (1.1) and (1.2) hold for all n ≤k and in particular (1.1) holds for
n = k. Therefore
M ∩V ≺Σk M,
and this completes the proof of the lemma.
⊣

38
W. HUGH WOODIN
Lemma 30. Suppose that N1 is a countable transitive set,
N1 ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
and that k ≥1. Let
I = { ∈N1 ∩Ord | N1 ∩V ≺Σk N1}
and suppose that I is coﬁnal in N1 ∩Ord.
(1) Suppose  ∈I . Then for each N ∈VN1∩V there exists N ∗∈VN1 such
that N = N ∗∩V and
N ≺Σk N ∗.
(2) Suppose that N ∈VN1. Then there exists  ∈N1 ∩Ord such that for all
 ∈I \,
N ∩V ∈VN∩V
and N ∩V ≺Σk N.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove (1). Fix  ∈I , let N2 = N1 ∩V and ﬁx N ∈VN2.
Then there exists a ﬁnite sequence,
⟨(Pi, Gi, Mi) : i ≤m⟩
such that
(1.1) M0 = N2 and Mm = N,
(1.2) for all i < m, Mi ∈VN2,
(1.3) for all i + 1 ≤m either
a) Pi ∈Mi, Gi ⊂Pi is Mi-generic and Mi+1 = Mi[Gi], or
b) Pi ∈Mi+1, Gi ⊂Pi is Mi+1-generic and Mi = Mi+1[Gi].
We prove by induction on i ≤m that there exists M ∗
i ∈VN1 such that
(2.1) M ∗
i ∩V = Mi,
(2.2) Mi ≺Σk M ∗
i .
If i = 0 then M ∗
0 = N1 and (2.1)–(2.2) are immediate.
Suppose M ∗
i exists satisfying (2.1)–(2.2) and that i + 1 ≤m. There are two
cases. The ﬁrst case is that Mi+1 = Mi[Gi]. Then set M ∗
i+1 = M ∗
i [Gi]. Thus
M ∗
i+1 ∈VN1 since M ∗
i ∈VN1 and by Lemma 29
Mi+1 ≺Σk M ∗
i+1.
The second case is that Mi = Mi+1[Gi]. By Lemma 28 there exists M ∗
i+1 such
that M ∗
i = M ∗
i+1[Gi] and such that Mi+1 = M ∗
i+1 ∩V. By Lemma 29 and
the induction hypothesis,
Mi+1 ≺Σk M ∗
i+1.
This proves that for all i ≤m, M ∗
i exists satisfying (2.1)–(2.2). Set N ∗= M ∗
m.
This proves (1). The proof of (2) is similar.
⊣

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
39
Lemma 31. Suppose M is a countable transitive set,
M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
 ∈M ∩Ord and that
M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement.
Suppose G ⊂Coll(, ) is M-generic. Then for each sentence φ the following
are equivalent.
(1) For all N ∈VM∩V, N ⊨φ.
(2) M[G] ⊨“For all N ∈VM∩V, N ⊨φ”.
Proof. By absoluteness,
M[G] ∩V+1 ≺Σ1 V+1
and
VM∩V ∩M[G] =

VM∩V
M[G] .
The lemma follows.
⊣
Suppose that φ is a sentence and let n be the length of φ. Let φ∗be a
sentence which expresses:
Suppose  is an ordinal such that
V ≺Σn+1 V
and that X ≺V is a countable elementary substructure. Let MX be
the transitive collapse of X. Then
N ⊨φ
for each N ∈VMX .
The next lemma shows that φ∗is as required.
Lemma 32. Suppose that M is a countable transitive set such that
M ⊨ZFC.
Then the following are equivalent.
(1) M ⊨φ∗.
(2) For each N ∈VM, N ⊨φ.
Proof. Let  be an ordinal of M such that
M ∩V ≺Σn+1 M
and let
I = { ∈M ∩Ord | M ∩V ≺Σn M} .
We ﬁrst show that (1) implies (2). Suppose  ∈I ∩. We claim that for all
N ∈VM∩V, N ⊨φ. To see this let
X ≺M ∩V

40
W. HUGH WOODIN
be an elementary substructure such that  ∈X, X ∈M, and such that
|X|M = . Let MX be the transitive collapse of X and let X be the image of
 under the collapsing map. Thus
MX ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
and MX ∩VX ≺Σn MX .
By (1), M ⊨φ∗. Therefore by absoluteness and since
(VMX )M = VMX ∩M,
for all N ∈VMX , N ⊨φ. Therefore if G ⊂Coll(, ) is MX -generic then
for all N ∈VMX ∩MX [G], N ⊨φ. Since X ≺M ∩V it follows that if
G ⊂Coll(, ) is M-generic then for all N ∈VM∩V ∩M[G], N ⊨φ and so
by Lemma 31, for all N ∈VM∩V, N ⊨φ.
In summary we have proved that for each  ∈I ∩, for all N ∈VM∩V,
N ⊨φ. By induction on k it follows that for each k ≥1, the
{M ∩V | M ∩V ≺Σk M}
is Πk-deﬁnable in M. Therefore by Lemma 31, and since
M ≺Σn+1 M,
it follows that for each  ∈I , for all N ∈VM∩V, N ⊨φ.
Finally suppose that N ∈VM. Then by Lemma 30, there exists  ∈I such
that N ∩V ∈VM∩V and such that
N ∩V ≺Σn N.
Since φ has length at most n, N ⊨φ if and only if
N ∩V ⊨φ.
Therefore N ⊨φ. This proves (2).
We now suppose (2) holds and prove (1). Let
X ≺M ∩V
be an elementary substructure such that X ∈M and such that |X|M = . Let
MX be the transitive collapse of X. We must show that for all N ∈VMX ∩M,
N ⊨φ.
Let
IX = { ∈MX ∩Ord | MX ∩V ≺Σn MX } .
Thus IX is the image of I ∩X under the collapsing map.
By (2) and Lemma 30(1), for each  ∈I , for each N ∈VM∩V, N ⊨φ.
Therefore by Lemma 31, for each  ∈IX , for each N ∈VMX ∩V, N ⊨φ.
Suppose N ∈VMX ∩M. Then by Lemma 30(2), there exists 0 ∈IX such
that N ∩V0 ∈VMX ∩V0 and such that
N ∩V0 ≺Σn N.

THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS, THE GENERIC-MULTIVERSE OF SETS . . .
41
Since N ∩V0 ∈VMX ∩V0 , N ∩V0 ⊨φ and therefore since N ∩V0 ≺Σn N,
N ⊨φ.
Therefore , for all N ∈VMX ∩M, N ⊨φ. This proves (1).
⊣
I ﬁnish by discussing the generalization of Lemma 32 to any restricted
generic-multiverse of the following form.
Suppose (x) is a formula in the language of set theory and that M is a
countable transitive set such that
M ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement.
Let V()
M ⊆VM be the be smallest set such that such that M ∈V()
M and such
that for all pairs, (M1, M2), of countable transitive sets if
(1) M1 ⊨ZC(VN) + Σ1-Replacement,
(2) M2 = M1[G] for some set G such that G is M1-generic for some partial
order P such that M1 ⊨[P],
(3) either M1 ∈V()
M or M2 ∈V()
M ,
then both M1 and M2 are in V()
M .
For example one can choose  such that
V()
M =

N ∈VM | (1)M = (1)N
or such that
V()
M =

N ∈VM | (cardinals)M = (cardinals)N
.
Suppose that φ is a sentence and let n = length(φ) + length(). Let φ()
be a sentence which expresses:
Suppose  is an ordinal such that
V ≺Σn+1 V
and that X ≺V is a countable elementary substructure. Let MX be
the transitive collapse of X. Then
N ⊨φ
for each N ∈V()
MX .
The proof of Lemma 32 easily adapts to prove the following generalization.
Lemma 33. Suppose that M is a countable transitive set such that
M ⊨ZFC.
Then the following are equivalent.
(1) M ⊨φ().
(2) For each N ∈V()
M , N ⊨φ.

42
W. HUGH WOODIN
REFERENCES
[1] P. J. Cohen, Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis, W. A. Benjamin, New York-
Amsterdam, 1966.
[2] Qi Feng, Menachem Magidor, and Hugh Woodin, Universally Baire sets of reals, Set
Theory of the Continuum (Berkeley, CA, 1989), Publications of the Research Institute for Math-
ematical Sciences, vol. 26, Springer, New York, 1992, pp. 203–242.
[3] Kurt G¨odel, The Consistency of the Continuum Hypothesis, Annals of Mathematics
Studies, vol. 3, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1940.
[4] Joel David Hamkins, Extensions with the approximation and cover properties have no new
large cardinals, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 180 (2003), no. 3, pp. 257–277.
[5] Joel David Hamkins and W. Hugh Woodin, Small forcing creates neither strong nor
Woodin cardinals, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 128 (2000), no. 10,
pp. 3025–3029.
[6] Richard Laver, Certain very large cardinals are not created in small forcing extensions,
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 149 (2007), no. 1-3, pp. 1–6.
[7] A. L´evy and R. M. Solovay, Measurable cardinals and the continuum hypothesis, Israel
Journal of Mathematics, vol. 5 (1967), pp. 234–248.
[8] N. Luzin, Sur le probl`eme de M. J., Hadamard d’uniformisation des ensembles. Paris,
vol. 190 (1930), pp. 349–351.
[9] Donald A. Martin and John R. Steel, A proof of projective determinacy, Journal of the
American Mathematical Society, vol. 2 (1989), no. 1, pp. 71–125.
[10] Jonas Reitz, The ground axiom, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 72 (2007), no. 4,
pp. 1299–1317.
[11] W. Hugh Woodin, The continuum hypothesis. II, Notices of the American Mathematical
Society, vol. 48 (2001), no. 7, pp. 681–690.
[12]
, Set theory after Russell: the journey back to Eden, One Hundred Years of Russell’s
Paradox, de Gruyter Series in Logic and its Applications, vol. 6, de Gruyter, Berlin, 2004, pp. 29–
47.
[13]
, AD +, In Preparation.
[14]
, Suitable Extender Models, Preprint (submitted for publication): 562 pages, July
2010.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT BERKELEY
970 EVANS HALL
BERKELEY, CA 94720-3840, USA
E-mail: woodin@math.berkeley.edu

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
Abstract. Finite set theory, here denoted ZFﬁn, is the theory obtained by replacing the axiom
of inﬁnity by its negation in the usual axiomatization of ZF (Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory). An
-model of ZFﬁn is a model in which every set has at most ﬁnitely many elements (as viewed ex-
ternally). Mancini and Zambella (2001) employed the Bernays-Rieger method of permutations to
construct a recursive -model of ZFﬁn that is nonstandard (i.e., not isomorphic to the hereditarily
ﬁnite sets V). In this paper we initiate the metamathematical investigation of -models of ZFﬁn.
In particular, we present a new method for building -models of ZFﬁn that leads to a perspicuous
construction of recursive nonstandard -models of ZFﬁn without the use of permutations. Fur-
thermore, we show that every recursive model of ZFﬁn is an -model. The central theorem of the
paper is the following:
Theorem A. For every graph (A, F ), where F is a set of unordered pairs of A, there is an -model
M of ZFﬁn whose universe contains A and which satisﬁes the following conditions:
(1) (A, F ) is deﬁnable in M;
(2) Every element of M is deﬁnable in (M, a)a∈A;
(3) If (A, F ) is pointwise deﬁnable, then so is M;
(4) Aut(M) ∼
= Aut(A, F ).
Theorem A enables us to build a variety of -models with special features, in particular:
Corollary 1. Every group can be realized as the automorphism group of an -model of ZFﬁn.
Corollary 2. For each inﬁnite cardinal κ there are 2κ rigid nonisomorphic -models of ZFﬁn of
cardinality κ.
Corollary 3. There are continuum-many nonisomorphic pointwise deﬁnable -models of ZFﬁn.
We also establish that PA (Peano arithmetic) and ZFﬁn are not bi-interpretable by showing that
they diﬀer even for a much coarser notion of equivalence, to wit sentential equivalence.
§1. Introduction. In 1953, Kreisel [Kr] and Mostowski [Mos] indepen-
dently showed that certain ﬁnitely axiomatizable systems of set theory formu-
lated in an expansion of the usual language {∈} of set theory do not possess
any recursive models. This result was improved in 1958 by Rabin [Ra] who
found a “familiar” ﬁnitely axiomatizable ﬁrst order theory that has no recur-
sive model: G¨odel-Bernays1 set theory GB without the axiom of inﬁnity (note
1We have followed Mostowski’s lead in our adoption of the appellation GB, but some set theory
texts refer to this theory as BG. To make matters more confusing, the same theory is also known
in the literature as VNB (von Neumann-Bernays) and NBG (von Neumann-Bernays-G¨odel).
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
43

44
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
that GB can be formulated in the language {∈} with no extra symbols). These
discoveries were overshadowed by Tennenbaum’s celebrated 1959 theorem
that characterizes the standard model of PA (Peano arithmetic) as the only
recursive model of PA up to isomorphism, thereby shifting the focus of the
investigation of the complexity of models from set theory to arithmetic. We
have come a long way since Tennenbaum’s pioneering work in understanding
the contours of the “Tennenbaum boundary” that separates those fragments
of PA that have a recursive nonstandard model (such as I Open) from those
which do not (such as I ∃1), but the study of the complexity of models of arith-
metic and its fragments remains a vibrant research area with many intriguing
open questions.2
The point of departure for the work presented here is Mancini and Zam-
bella’s 2001 paper [MZ] that focuses on Tennenbaum phenomena in set the-
ory. Mancini and Zambella introduced a weak fragment (dubbed KPΣ13) of
Kripke-Platek set theory KP, and showed that the only recursive model of
KPΣ1 up to isomorphism is the standard one, i.e., (V, ∈), where V is the set
of hereditarily ﬁnite sets. In contrast, they used the Bernays-Rieger4 permuta-
tion method to show that the theory ZFﬁn obtained by replacing the axiom of
inﬁnity by its negation in the usual axiomatization of ZF (Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory) has a recursive nonstandard model. The Mancini-Zambella recur-
sive nonstandard model also has the curious feature of being an -model in
the sense that every element of the model, as viewed externally, has at most
ﬁnitely many members, a feature that caught our imagination and prompted
us to initiate the systematic investigation of the metamathematics of -models
of ZFﬁn.
The plan of the paper is as follows. Preliminaries are dealt with in Section 2,
in which we review key deﬁnitions, establish notation, and discuss a host of
background results. In Section 3 we present a simple robust construction of
-models of ZFﬁn (Theorem 3.4), a construction that, among other things,
leads to a perspicuous proof of the existence of -models of ZFﬁn in every
inﬁnite cardinality (Corollary 3.7), and the existence of inﬁnitely many non-
isomorphic recursive nonstandard -models of ZFﬁn without the use of per-
mutations (Corollary 3.9, Remark 3.10(b)). In the same section, we also show
2See,
e.g.,
the
papers
by
Kaye
[Ka]
and
Schmerl
[Sch-2]
in
this
volume,
and
Mohsenipour’s [Moh].
3The axioms of KPΣ1 consist of Extensionalty, Pairs, Union, Foundation, Δ0-Comprehension,
Δ0-Collection, and the scheme of ∈-Induction (deﬁned in part (f) of Remark 2.2) only for Σ1
formulas. Note that KPΣ1 does not include the axiom of inﬁnity.
4In [MZ] this method is incorrectly referred to as the Fraenkel-Mostowski permutation method,
but this method was invented by Bernays (announced in [Be-1, p. 9], and presented in [Be-2])
and ﬁne-tuned by Rieger [Ri] in order to build models of set theory that violate the regularity
(foundation) axiom, e.g., by containing sets x such that x = {x}. In contrast, the Fraenkel-
Mostowski method is used to construct models of set theory with atoms in which the axiom of
choice fails.

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
45
that ZFﬁn is not completely immune to Tennenbaum phenomena by demon-
strating that every recursive model of ZFﬁn is an -model (Theorem 3.11).
In Section 4 we ﬁne-tune the method of Section 3 to show the existence of a
wealth of nonisomorphic -models of ZFﬁn with special features. The central
theorem of Section 4 is Theorem 4.2 which shows that every graph can be
canonically coded into an -model of ZFﬁn. Coupled with classical results in
graph theory, this result yields many corollaries. For example, every group (of
any cardinality) can be realized as the automorphism group of an -model of
ZFﬁn (Corollary 4.4), and there are continuum-many nonisomorphic point-
wise deﬁnable -models of ZFﬁn (Corollary 4.7). In Section 5 we establish that
PA (Peano arithmetic) and ZFﬁn are not bi-interpretable by showing that they
diﬀer even for a much coarser notion of equivalence, to wit sentential equiv-
alence (Theorem 5.1). This complements the work of Kaye-Wong5 [KW] on
the deﬁnitional equivalence (or synonymy) of PA and ZFﬁn+“every set has a
transitive closure”. We close the paper with Section 6, in which we present
open questions and concluding remarks.
We also wish to take this opportunity to thank the anonymous referee for
helpful comments and corrections, and Robert Solovay for catching a blooper
in an earlier draft of this paper.
§2. Preliminaries. In this section we recall some key deﬁnitions, establish
notation, and review known results.
Deﬁnitions/Observations 2.1. (a) Models of set theory are directed
graphs6 (hereafter: digraphs), i.e., structures of the form M = (M, E), where
E is a binary relation on M that interprets ∈.
We often write xEy as a
shorthand for ⟨x, y⟩∈E. For c ∈M, cE is the set of “elements” of c, i.e.,
cE := {m ∈M : mEc}.
M is nonstandard if E is not well-founded, i.e., if there is a sequence ⟨cn : n ∈
⟩of elements of M such that cn+1Ecn for all n ∈.
(b) We adopt the terminology of Baratella and Ferro [BF] of using EST
(elementary set theory) to refer to the following theory of sets
EST := Extensionality + Empty Set + Pairs + Union + Replacement.
(c) The theory ZFﬁn is obtained by replacing the axiom of inﬁnity by its
negation in the usual axiomatization of ZF (Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory).
More explicitly:
ZFﬁn := EST + Power set + Regularity7 + ¬Inﬁnity.
5See Remark 2.2(f) for more detail concerning the Kaye-Wong paper.
6We will also have ample occasion to deal with (undirected) graphs, i.e., structures of the form
(A, F ), where F is a set of unordered pairs from A.

46
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
Here Inﬁnity is the usual axiom of inﬁnity, i.e.,
Inﬁnity := ∃x

∅∈x ∧∀y (y ∈x →y+ ∈x)

,
where y+ := y ∪{y}.
(d) Tran(x) is the ﬁrst order formula that expresses the statement “x is
transitive”, i.e.,
Tran(x) := ∀y∀z (z ∈y ∈x →z ∈x).
(e) TC(x) is the ﬁrst order formula that expresses the statement “the tran-
sitive closure of x is a set”, i.e.,
TC(x) := ∃y (x ⊆y ∧Tran(y)).
Overtly, the above formula just says that some superset of x is transitive, but
it is easy to see that TC(x) is equivalent within EST to the following statement
expressing “there is a smallest transitive set that contains x”
∃y (x ⊆y ∧Tran(y) ∧∀z ((x ⊆z ∧Tran(z)) →y ⊆z)).
(f) TC denotes the transitive closure axiom
TC := ∀x TC(x).
Let V be the set of hereditarily ﬁnite sets. It is easy to see that ZFﬁn + TC
holds in V. However, it has long been known8 that ZFﬁn ⊬TC.
(g) N(x) [read as “x is a natural number”] is the formula
Ord(x) ∧∀y ∈x+ (y ̸= ∅→∃z (Ord(z) ∧y = z+)),
where Ord(x) expresses “x is a (von Neumann) ordinal”, i.e., “x is a transitive
set that is well-ordered by ∈”. It is well-known that with this interpretation,
the full induction scheme IndN, consisting of the universal closure of formulas
of the following form is provable within EST:

(0) ∧∀x

N(x) ∧(x) →(x+)

→∀x

N(x) →(x)) .
Note that  is allowed to have suppressed parameters, and these parameters are
not required to lie in N. Coupled with the fact that ZFﬁn is a sequential theory9,
this shows that for each positive integer n, there is a formula Trn(x) such that,
provably in ZFﬁn, Trn(x) is a truth-predicate for the class of formulas Qn with
7The regularity axiom is also known as the foundation axiom, stating that every nonempty set
has an ∈-minimal element.
8H´ajek-Vop˘enka [HV] showed that TC is not provable in the theory GBﬁn, which is obtained
from GB (G¨odel-Bernays theory of classes) by replacing the axiom of inﬁnity by its negation.
Later Hauschild [Ha] gave a direct construction of a model of ZFﬁn + ¬TC.
9Sequential theories are those that are equipped with a “-function” for coding sequences.
More speciﬁcally, using ⟨x, y⟩for the usual Kuratowski ordered pair of x and y, the function
(x, y) deﬁned via (x, y) = z iﬀ⟨x, z⟩∈y, conveniently serves in EST as a -function (when
y is restricted to “functional” sets, i.e., y should contain at most one ordered pair ⟨x, z⟩for a
given x).

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
47
at most n alternations of quantiﬁers. Coupled with the fact that any formula
in Qn that is provable in predicate logic has a proof all of whose components
lie in Qn (which follows from Herbrand’s Theorem [HP, Thm. 3.30, Ch. III]),
this shows that ZFﬁn is essentially reﬂexive, i.e., any consistent extension of
ZFﬁn proves the consistency of each of its ﬁnite subtheories. Therefore ZFﬁn
is not ﬁnitely axiomatizable.
(h) For a model M ⊨EST, and x ∈M, we say that x is N-ﬁnite if there is a
bijection in M between x and some element of NM. Let:
(V)M := {m ∈M : M ⊨“TC(m) and m is N-ﬁnite”}
It is easy to see that
(V)M ⊨ZFﬁn + TC.
This provides an interpretation of the theory ZFﬁn + TC within EST. On the
other hand, the existence of recursive nonstandard models of ZFﬁn shows that,
conversely, ZFﬁn + ¬TC is also interpretable in EST. One can show that the
above interpretation of ZFﬁn+TC within EST is faithful (i.e., the sentences that
are provably true in the interpretation are precisely the logical consequences
of ZFﬁn + TC), but that the Mancini-Zambella interpretation [MZ, Theorem
3.1] of ZFﬁn + ¬TC within EST, is not faithful10.
(i) (n, x) is the term expressing “the n-th approximation to the transitive
closure of {x} (where n is a natural number)”. Informally speaking,
• (0, x) = {x};
• (n + 1, x) = (n, x) ∪{y : ∃z ( y ∈z ∈(n, x))}.
Thanks to the coding apparatus of EST for dealing with ﬁnite sequences, and
the provability of IndN within EST (both mentioned earlier in part (g)), the
above informal recursion can be formalized within EST to show that
EST ⊢∀n∀x (N(n) →∃!y ((n, x) = y)).
This leads to the following important observation:
(j) Even though the transitive closure of a set need not form a set in EST
(or even in ZFﬁn), for an -model M the transitive closure (c) of {c} is ﬁrst
order deﬁnable via:
M(c) := {m ∈M : M ⊨∃n (N(n) ∧m ∈(n, c))}.
This shows that, in the worst case scenario, transitive closures behave like
proper classes in -models of M. Note that if the set NM of natural numbers
10Because the interpretation provably satisﬁes the sentence “the universe can be built from the
transitive closure of an element whose transitive closure forms an ∗-chain”, a sentence that is
not a theorem of ZFﬁn + ¬TC.

48
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
of M contains nonstandard elements, then the external transitive closure

n∈
M(n, c)
might be a proper subset of the M-transitive closure M(c). However, if M is
an -model, then the M-transitive closure of {c} coincides with the external
transitive closure of {c}.
Remark 2.2. (a) Vop˘enka [Vo-2] has shown that ZFﬁn\ {Regularity} is prov-
able from the fragment (dubbed VF in [BF]) of AST (Alternative Set Theory),
whose axioms consist of Extensionality, Empty set, Adjunction (given sets x
and y, we have that x ∪{y} exists), and the schema of Set-induction, con-
sisting of the universal closure of formulas of the form ( is allowed to have
suppressed parameters)

(0) ∧∀x∀y

(x) →(x ∪{y}))

→∀x (x).
(b) Besides ¬Inﬁnity there are at least two other noteworthy ﬁrst order
statements that can be used to express “every set is ﬁnite”:
• FinN :Every set is N-ﬁnite.
• FinD :Every set is Dedekind-ﬁnite, i.e., no set is equinumerous to a proper
subset of itself.
It is easy to see that EST proves FinN →FinD →¬ Inﬁnity. By a theorem of
Vop˘enka [Vo-1], Power set and the well-ordering theorem (and therefore the
axiom of choice) are provable within EST + FinN (see [BF, Theorem 5] for an
exposition).
(c) Kunen [BF, Sec. 7] has shown the consistency of the theory EST +
¬Inﬁnity + ¬FinN using the Fraenkel-Mostowski permutations method.
(d) In contrast with Kunen’s aforementioned result, FinN is provable within
ZFﬁn\ {Regularity} (i.e., within EST + Powerset + ¬ Inﬁnity). To see this, work
in ZFﬁn\ {Regularity} and suppose to the contrary that there is an element x
that is not N-ﬁnite. By an easy induction, we ﬁnd that for every natural number
n there is a subset y of x that is equinumerous with n. Now we deﬁne the
function F on the powerset of x by:
F (y) := n, if n is a natural number that is equinumerous with y;
otherwise F (y) = 0.
It is easy to see that the range of F is . Hence by Replacement,  is a set.
Quod non.
(e) As mentioned earlier in part (a), VF ⊢ZFﬁn\ {Regularity}. The prov-
ability of both FinN and IndN in ZFﬁn can be used to show that VF + Regularity
and EST + FinN + Regularity axiomatize the same ﬁrst order theory as ZFﬁn.
(f) As observed by Kaye and Wong [KW, Prop. 12] within EST, the principle
TC is equivalent to the scheme of ∈-Induction consisting of statements of the

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
49
following form ( is allowed to have suppressed parameters)
∀y

∀x ∈y  (x) →(y)) →∀z (z).
In the same paper Kaye and Wong showed the following strong form of bi-
interpretability11 between PA and ZFﬁn+TC, known as deﬁnitional equivalence
(or synonymity, in the sense of [Vi-2, Sec. 4.8.2]) by showing that:
(1) TC holds in the Ackermann interpretation Ack of ZFﬁn within PA, i.e.,
Ack : ZFﬁn + TC →PA; and
(2) There is an interpretation B : PA →ZFﬁn + TC such that Ack ◦B = idPA
and B ◦Ack = idZFﬁn+TC.
The above result suggests that, contrary to a popular misconception, PA
might not be bi-interpretable with ZFﬁn alone. Indeed, we shall establish a
strong form of the failure of the bi-interpretability between PA and ZFﬁn in
Theorem 5.1. Note that, in contrast, by a very general result12 in interpretabil-
ity theory, PA and ZFﬁn are mutually faithfully interpretable.
§3. Building -models.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Suppose M is a model of EST. M is an -model if |xE| is
ﬁnite for every x ∈M satisfying M ⊨“x is N-ﬁnite”.
It is easy to see that M is an -model iﬀ(N, ∈)M is isomorphic to the
standard natural numbers.13 This observation can be used to show that -
models of ZFﬁn are precisely the models of the second order theory ZF2
ﬁn
obtained from ZFﬁn by replacing the replacement scheme by its second order
analogue.
The following proposition provides a useful graph-theoretic characterization
of -models of ZFﬁn. Note that even though ZFﬁn is not ﬁnitely axiomatiz-
able,14 the equivalence of (a) and (b) of Proposition 3.2 shows that there is
a single sentence in the language of set theory whose -models are precisely
-models of ZFﬁn.
• Recall that a vertex x of a digraph G := (X, E) has ﬁnite in-degree if xE is
ﬁnite; andG isacyclic if there is no ﬁnite sequencex1 E x2 · · · E xn−1 E xn
in G with x1 = xn.
11See the paragraph preceding Theorem 3.12 for more detail on bi-interpretability.
12See [Vi-1, Lemma 5.4] for the precise formulation of this result in a general setting, which
shows that any Σ0
1-sound theory can be faithfully interpreted in a suﬃciently strong theory.
Visser’s result extends earlier work of Lindstr¨om [Li, Ch. 6, Sec. 2, Thm. 13] which dealt with a
similar phenomenon in the speciﬁc conﬁnes of theories extending PA.
13Note that there are really two salient notions of -model, to wit the notion we deﬁned here
could be called N-model, and the notion deﬁned using ‘Dedekind-ﬁnite’ instead of ‘N-ﬁnite’
may be called D-model. For our study of ZFﬁn the choice is immaterial, since ZFﬁn proves that
every set is N-ﬁnite (see part (d) of Remark 2.2).
14See 2.1(g)

50
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
Proposition 3.2. The following three conditions are equivalent for a digraph
G := (X, E):
(a) G is an -model of ZFﬁn.
(b) G is an -model of Extensionality, Empty set, Regularity, Adjunction and
¬ Inﬁnity.
(c) G satisﬁes the following four conditions:
(i) E is extensional;
(ii) Every vertex of G has ﬁnite in-degree;
(iii) G is acyclic; and
(iv) G has an element of in-degree 0, and for all positive n ∈,
(X, E) ⊨∀x1 · · · ∀xn ∃y ∀z
	
zEy ↔
n
i=1
z = xi

.
Proof. (a) ⇒(b): Trivial.
(b) ⇒(c): Assuming (b), (i) and (ii) are trivially true. (iv) is an easy
consequence of Empty set and n-applications of Adjunction. To verify (iii),
suppose to the contrary that x1 E x2 · · · Exn−1 E xn is a cycle in G with
x1 = xn. By (iv), there is an element y ∈X with yE = {xi : 1 ≤i ≤n}. This
contradicts Regularity since such a y has no minimal “element”.
(c) ⇒(a): Routine, but we brieﬂy comment on the veriﬁcation of Regularity,
which is accomplished by contradiction: if x is a nonempty set with no
minimal element, then there exists an external inﬁnite sequence ⟨xn : n ∈⟩
of elements of c such that xn+1 E xn for all n ∈. Invoking statement (ii) of
(c), this shows that there are xm and xn with m < n such that xm = xn, which
contradicts condition (iii) of (c).
⊣
The following list of deﬁnitions prepares the way for the ﬁrst key theorem of
this section (Theorem 3.4), which will enable us to build plenty of -models
of ZFﬁn.
Deﬁnition 3.3. Suppose G := (X, E) is an extensional, acyclic digraph, all
of whose vertices have ﬁnite in-degree.
(a) A subset S of X is said to be coded in G if there is some x ∈X such
that S = xE.
(b) D(G) := {S ⊆X : S is ﬁnite and S is not coded in G}. We shall refer
to D(G) as the deﬁciency set of G.
(c) The inﬁnite sequence of digraphs
⟨Vn(G) : n ∈⟩,
where Vn(G) := (Vn(G), En(G)), is built recursively using the following

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
51
clauses15:
• V0(G) := X; E0(G) := E;
• Vn+1(G) := Vn(G) ∪D(Vn(G));
• En+1(G) := En(G) ∪{⟨x, S⟩∈Vn(G) × D(Vn(G)) : x ∈S}.
(d) V(G) := (V(G), E(G)), where
V(G) :=

n∈
Vn(G),
E(G) :=

n∈
En(G).
Theorem 3.4. If G := (X, E) is an extensional, acyclic digraph, all of whose
vertices have ﬁnite in-degree, then V(G) is an -model of ZFﬁn.
Proof. We shall show that V(G) satisﬁes the four conditions of (c) of
Proposition 3.2. Before doing so, let us make an observation that is helpful
for the proof, whose veriﬁcation is left to the reader (footnote 15 comes
handy here).
Observation 3.4.1. For each n ∈, Vn+1(G) “end extends” Vn(G), i.e., if
aEn+1 b and b ∈Vn(G), then a ∈Vn(G).
It is easy to see that extensionality is preserved in the passage from Vn(G) to
Vn+1(G). By the above observation, at no point in the construction of V(G)
a new member is added to an old member, which shows that extensionality
is preserved in the limit. It is also easy to see that every vertex of V(G) has
ﬁnite in-degree. To verify that V(G) is acyclic it suﬃces to check that each
ﬁnite approximation Vn(G) is acyclic, so we shall verify that it is impossible for
Vn+1(G) to have a cycle and for Vn(G) to be acyclic. So suppose there is a cycle
⟨si : 1 ≤i ≤k⟩in Vn+1(G), and Vn(G) is acyclic. Then by Observation 3.4.1,
for some i,
si ∈Vn+1(G) \ Vn(G).
This implies that si is a member of the deﬁciency set of Vn(G), and so si ⊆
Vn(G). But for j = i + 1 (mod k), we have si En+1 sj. This contradicts the
deﬁnition of En+1, thereby completing our veriﬁcation that G is acyclic.
⊣
Remark 3.5. (a) The proof of Theorem 3.4 makes it clear that G is end
extended by V(G); and every element of V(G) is ﬁrst order deﬁnable in the
structure (V(G), c)c∈X .
(b) Recall from part (i) of Deﬁnition 2.1 that (n, c) denotes the n-th
approximation to the transitive closure (c) of {c}. For any c ∈V(G), a tail
of (n, c) lies in G, i.e., (c)\(n, c) ⊆G for suﬃciently large n.
15Since we want the elements of X to behave like urelements, something could go wrong with
this deﬁnition if some vertex happens to be a ﬁnite set of vertices, or a ﬁnite set of ﬁnite sets of
vertices, etc. A simple way to get the desired eﬀect is to replace X with X ∗= {{{x}, X} : x ∈X}.
Then X ∗∩D(Vn(G)) = ∅holds for all n ∈, and all digraphs G with vertex-set X ∗.

52
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
Example 3.6. (a) For every transitive S ⊆V, V(S, ∈) ∼= (V, ∈).
(b) Let G := (, {⟨n + 1, n⟩: n ∈}).
V(G) is our ﬁrst concrete
example of a nonstandard -model of ZFﬁn.
Corollary 3.7. ZFﬁn has -models in every inﬁnite cardinality.
Proof. For any (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) set I , and any digraph G = (X, E), let
I × G := (I × X, F ), where
⟨i, x⟩F ⟨j, y⟩⇔i = j ∧xEy.
Note that I × G is the disjoint union of |I | copies of G. It is easy to see that if
G is an extensional, acyclic digraph, all of whose vertices have ﬁnite in-degree,
and G has no vertex v with vE = ∅, then I × G shares the same features.
Therefore if G is as in Example 3.6(b), and I is inﬁnite, then V(I × G) is
an -model of ZFﬁn of the same cardinality as I .
⊣
Remark 3.8. Corollary 3.7 shows that in contrast with ZFﬁn + TC, within
ZFﬁn there is no deﬁnable bijection between the universe and the set of natural
numbers.
Furthermore, since V({0, 1} × G) has an automorphism of
order 2, there is not even a deﬁnable linear ordering of the universe available
in ZFﬁn.
We need to introduce a key deﬁnition before stating the next result:
• A digraph G = (, E) is said to be highly recursive if (1) for each n ∈,
nE is ﬁnite; (2) The map n →c(nE) is recursive, where c is a canonical
code16 for nE; and (3) {c(nE) : n ∈} is recursive.
Corollary 3.9. ZFﬁn has nonstandard highly recursive -models.
Proof. The constructive nature of the proof of Theorem 3.4 makes it ev-
ident that if G = (, E) is highly recursive digraph, then there is highly
recursive R ⊆2 such that (, R) ∼= V(G). Since the digraph G of Exam-
ple 3.6(b) is easily seen to be highly recursive, we may conclude that there is a
highly recursive F ⊆2 such that (, F ) ∼= V(G).
⊣
Remark 3.10. (a) Generally speaking, if M is a highly recursive -model
of ZFﬁn, then the set of natural numbers NM is also recursive. However, it
is easy to construct a recursive -model of ZFﬁn in which the set of natural
numbers NM is not recursive. With more eﬀort, one can even build a recursive
-model of ZFﬁn that is not isomorphic to a recursive model with a recursive
set of natural numbers.
(b) A minor modiﬁcation of the proof of Corollary 3.9 shows that there
are inﬁnitely many pairwise elementarily inequivalent highly recursive models
of ZFﬁn. This is based on the observation that each digraph in the family
{I × G : |I | ∈} has a highly recursive copy, and for each positive n ∈
16For example, c can be deﬁned via c(X) = 
n∈X
2n.

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
53
the sentence
∃x1 · · · ∃xn


1≤i≤n
“(xi) is inﬁnite” ∧

1≤i<j≤n
(xi) ∩(xj) = ∅

holds in V(I × G) iﬀ|I | ≥n. In particular, this shows that in contrast to
PA and ZFﬁn + TC, ZFﬁn + ¬TC has inﬁnitely many nonisomorphic recursive
models. However, as shown by the next theorem, ZFﬁn does not entirely escape
the reach of Tennenbaum phenomena.17
Theorem 3.11. Every recursive model of ZFﬁn is an -model.
Proof. The theory ZFﬁn is existentially rich (see [Sch-2, Deﬁnition 1.1])
as is shown by the recursive sequence ⟨n(x) : n ∈⟩, where n(x) is the
existential formula
∃x0, x1, . . . , xn+2, y0, y1, . . . , yn+2


i<j≤n+2
xi ̸= xj
∧

i≤n+2
(xi ∈yi ∧xi+1 ∈yi ∈x)

.
Here, we understand xn+3 to be x0. To see that the n(x) are existentially rich,
let i0, i1, i2, · · · be suﬃciently fast growing (letting in = n2+5n
2
is good enough)
and then let
En = {{i, i + 1} : in ≤i < in + n −1} ∪{in + n −1, in}.
If I is a ﬁnite subset of  and a = 
n∈I
En, then
ZFﬁn ⊢n(a) if n ∈I , and ZFﬁn ⊢¬n(a) if n /∈I .
Moreover, thanks to the coding apparatus available in ZFﬁn, there is a binary
formula (n, x) such that for each n ∈,
ZFﬁn ⊢∀x((n, x) ↔n(x)).
(*)
Suppose M is a non -model of ZFﬁn, and let A, B be two disjoint, recur-
sively inseparable, recursively enumerable sets. Since M satisﬁes IndN, we can
use Overspill to arrange a deﬁnable subset S of M such that A ⊆S and B is
disjoint from S. If S(x) is a deﬁning formula for S in M, then for each n ∈,
there is c in M such that
M |= ∀i < n(i(c) ↔S(i)).
We can use Overspill again and (∗) to obtain a nonstandard H ∈NM and
some d in M such that
M |= ∀i < H ((i, d) ↔i ∈d).
17The proof of Theorem 3.11 indeed shows that every recursive model of EST is an -model.

54
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
This shows that for all i ∈, M |= (i(d) ↔i ∈d).
Therefore if M
is recursive, then so is the set of standard numbers in d, contradicting the
recursive inseparability of A, B.
⊣
Before presenting the next result, let us observe that the ﬁrst order theory
of a digraph G does not, in general, determine the ﬁrst order theory of V(G).
To see this, let 2 × G be the disjoint sum of two copies of the digraph G of
Example 3.6(b). Then G and 2×G are elementarily equivalent, but V(G)
and V(2 × G) are not elementarily equivalent, indeed, both V(G) and
V(2 × G) are the unique -models of their own ﬁrst order theories up to
isomorphism. However, Theorem 3.12 shows that the L∞-theory of V(G)
is determined by the L∞-theory of G.
Recall that the inﬁnitary logic L∞ is the extension of ﬁrst logic that allows
the formation of disjunctions and conjunctions of arbitrary cardinality, but
which only uses ﬁnite strings of quantiﬁers. By a classical theorem of Karp [Ba,
Ch. VII, Thm. 5.3], two structures A and B are L∞ equivalent iﬀA and B
are partially isomorphic, i.e., there is a collection I of partial isomorphisms
between A and B with the back-and-forth-property (written I : A ∼=p B).
More speciﬁcally, I : A ∼=p B if each f ∈I is an isomorphism between some
substructure Af of A and some substructure Bf of B; and for every f ∈I
and every a ∈A (or b ∈B) there is a g ∈I with f ⊆g and a ∈dom(g) (or
b ∈ran(g), respectively).
Theorem 3.12. Suppose G and G′ are digraphs with G ≡∞ G′.
Then
V(G) ≡∞ V(G′).
Proof. By Karp’s Theorem, it suﬃces to show that if G ∼=p G′, then
V(G) ∼=p V(G′).18 Let I : G ∼=p G′ and consider the sequence {In : n ∈
}, with I0 := I and In+1 = {f : f ∈In}, where
f := f ∪{⟨S, f(S)⟩: S ∈D(Vn(G)) ∩dom(f)} .
We claim that for each n ∈, In : Vn(G) ∼=p Vn(G′).
Observe that if
f ∈In : Vn(G) ∼=p Vn(G), and S ∈D(Vn(G1)), then f(S) ∈D(Vn(G′)).
Using this observation it is easy to show that each member of In is a partial
isomorphism between a substructure of Vn(G) and a substructure of Vn(G′).
The back-and-forth property of In is established by induction. Since the
base case is true by our choice of I0, and G and G′ play a symmetric role in
the proof, it suﬃces to verify the “forth” portion of the inductive clause by
showing that the forth-property is preserved in the passage from In to In+1.
So suppose that f ∈In+1 (where f ∈In), and a ∈Vn+1(G). We need to ﬁnd
18Advanced methods in set theory provide a succinct proof of this fact. If G ∼
=p G′, then there
is a Boolean extension VB of the universe of set theory wherein G ∼
= G′, which in turn implies
that V[G] ∼
= V[G′] in VB. But since V[G] is absolute in the passage to a Boolean extension
for every G, and L∞-equivalence is a Π1-notion, V[G] ≡∞ V[G′] in the real world.

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
55
g ∈In such that g extends f and a ∈dom(g). We distinguish two cases:
• Case 1: a ∈Vn(G).
• Case 2: a ∈Vn+1(G)\Vn(G).
If Case 1 holds, then the desired g exists by the forth-property of In. On the
other hand, if Case 2 holds, then a is one of the deﬁciency sets of Vn(G), and
a = {c1, · · · , ck} ⊆Vn(G).
Therefore by k-applications of the “forth” property of In, we can ﬁnd an
extension g of f with {c1, · · · , ck} ⊆dom(g). This will ensure that g extends
f and a ∈dom(g). Having constructed the desired {In : n ∈}, we let
I := 
n∈
In. Clearly
I : V(G) ∼=p V(G′).
⊣
Example 3.13. Suppose I and J are inﬁnite sets and G is a digraph. Then
I × G ∼=p J × G. To see this, we can choose the corresponding I to consist
of (full) isomorphisms between structures of the form X × G and Y × G,
where X and Y are ﬁnite subsets of I and J (respectively) of the same ﬁnite
cardinality. In particular, for any digraph G
V(I × G) ≡∞ V(J × G).
Remark 3.14. (a) Let G be the category whose objects are extensional
acyclic digraphs all of whose vertices have ﬁnite in-degree, and whose mor-
phisms are end embeddings, i.e., embeddings f : G →G′ with the property
that f(G) ⊆e G′; and let GZFﬁn be the subcategory of G whose objects are
-models of ZFﬁn. Then there is a functor
Φ : G →GZFﬁn.
Moreover, Φ is a retraction (i.e., if G ∈GZFﬁn, then Φ(G) ∼= G), and the
following diagram commutes (in the diagram  is the inclusion map)
G
f
−→
G′
↓
↓
V(G)
Φ(f)
−→
V(G′)
Φ is deﬁned in an obvious manner: Φ(G) := V(G); and for each end
embedding f : G →G′, Φ(f) is recursively constructed by Φ(f)(x) = f(x)
for all x ∈G, and for S ∈Vn+1(G)\Vn(G), Φ(f)(S) = the unique element v
of V(G′) such that vF = {f(x) : x ∈S}, where F is the membership relation
of V(G′). Note that Φ(f) is the unique extension of f to a morphism whose
domain is V(G). Indeed, it is not hard to see that Φ is the left adjoint of the
functor e that identically embeds GZFﬁn into G. Since each functor has at most
one left adjoint up to natural isomorphism [Mac, Cor. 1, Ch. IV], this shows

56
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
that Φ is a closure operation that can be characterized in an “implementation-
free” manner.
(b) It is easy to see that for each morphism f : G →G′ of G, Φ(f) is
surjective if f is surjective. Therefore, Φ(f) is an automorphism of V(G)
if f is an automorphism of G.
Indeed, for any ﬁxed G ∈G, the map
f →Φ(f) deﬁnes a group embedding from Aut(G) into Aut(V(G)). Note
that Φ(f) is the only automorphism of V(G) that extends f, since if g is
any automorphism of V(G), then for each S ∈V(G)\G, by Extensionality,
g(S) = {g(x) : x ∈S}.
In general, Aut(G) need not be isomorphic to
Aut(V(G)), e.g., G of Example 3.6(b) is a rigid digraph, but Aut(V(G))
is an inﬁnite cyclic group.
However, Theorem 4.2 shows that Aut(G) ∼=
Aut(V(G)) for a wide class of digraphs G.
§4. Models with special properties. In this section we reﬁne the method
introduced in the proof of Theorem 3.4 in order to construct various large
families of -models of ZFﬁn with a variety of additional structural features,
e.g., having a prescribed automorphism group, or being pointwise deﬁnable.
The central result of this section is Theorem 4.2 below which shows that one
can canonically code any prescribed graph (A, F ), where F is a set of 2-element
subsets of A, into a model of ZFﬁn, thereby yielding a great deal of control
over the resulting -models of ZFﬁn.
Deﬁnition 4.1. In what follows, every digraph G = (X, E) we consider
will be such that  ⊆X; and for n ∈, nE = {0, 1, . . . , n −1}. In particular,
0E = ∅.
(a) Let ϕ1(x) be the formula in the language of set theory that expresses
“there is a sequence ⟨xn : n < ⟩with x = x0 such that xn = {n, xn+1} for all
n ∈”.
At ﬁrst sight, this seems to require an existential quantiﬁer over inﬁnite se-
quences (which is not possible in ZFﬁn), but this problem can be circumvented
by writing ϕ1(x) as the sentence that expresses the equivalent statement
“for every positive n ∈, there is a sequence sn = ⟨xi : i < n⟩with x0 = x
such that for all i < n −1, xi = {i, xi+1}”.
(b) Using the above circumlocution, let (x, y, e) be the formula in the
language of set theory that expresses
“x ̸= y ∧ϕ1(x) ∧ϕ1(y), with corresponding sequences ⟨xn : n ∈⟩and
⟨yn : n ∈⟩, and there is a sequence ⟨en : n ∈⟩with e = e0 such that
en = {en+1, xn, yn} for all n ∈.”
Then let ϕ2(x, y) := ∃e (x, y, e).

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
57
0
x0
e0
y0
0
1
x1
e1
y1
1
2
x2
e2
y2
2
Figure 1. Representation of an Edge.
Theorem 4.2. For every graph (A, F ) there is an -model M of ZFﬁn whose
universe contains A and which satisﬁes the following conditions:
(a) (A, F ) is deﬁnable in M;
(b) Every element of M is deﬁnable in (M, x)x∈A;
(c) If (A, F ) is pointwise deﬁnable, then so is M;
(d) Aut(M) ∼= Aut(A, F ).
Proof. Let
X =  ∪

(A ∪F ) × 

.
For elements of X\, we write zn instead of ⟨z, n⟩. This notation should be
suggestive of how these elements are used in the deﬁnitions of ϕ1(x, y) and
(x, y, e). Let
E = {⟨m, n⟩: m < n ∈} ∪
{⟨n, xn⟩: n ∈, x ∈A} ∪
{⟨xn+1, xn⟩: n ∈, x ∈A} ∪
{⟨en+1, en⟩: n ∈, e ∈F } ∪
{⟨xn, en⟩: n ∈, x ∈e ∈F } .
Moreover, in order to arrange A ⊆X we can identify elements of the form
⟨x, 0⟩with x when x ∈A. This gives G = (X, E), which is an extensional,
acyclic digraph all of whose vertices have ﬁnite in-degree. Let M := V(G).
By Theorem 3.4, M is an -model of ZFﬁn. Note that if n ∈, x ∈A, and e =
{x, y} ∈F , then M satisﬁes both “xn = {xn+1, n´}” and “en = {xn, yn, en+1}”,
as shown in Figure 1.

58
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
It is clear that if {x, y} ∈F , then M |= ϕ2(x, y). In order to establish
(a) it suﬃces to check that if M |= ϕ1(x), then x ∈A, i.e., we need to
verify that V(G) \ X does not contain an element that satisﬁes ϕ1. Suppose
M |= ϕ1(c) for some c ∈V(G) \ X. Then there is a sequence ⟨cn : n < ⟩
with c = c0 such that cn = {n, cn+1} for all n ∈. On the other hand,
by Remark 3.5(b), we may choose n0 > 0 as the ﬁrst n ∈ for which
(c)\(n, c) ⊆G. It is easy to see that this allows us to ﬁnd some x ∈A
such that (c)\(n, c) = (x)\(n, x). Since n0 > 0 this in turn shows that
{n0, cn0+1} = {n0, xn0+1} which implies that (c)\(n0 −1, c) ⊆G, thereby
contradicting the minimality of n0. This concludes the proof of (a).
In light of Remark 3.5(a), in order to establish (b) it suﬃces to show that
every vertex of G is deﬁnable in (M, x)x∈A. Since it is clear that each element of
 is deﬁnable in M, we shall focus on the deﬁnability of elements of (A∪F )×.
Each xn is deﬁnable in (M, x0) since M satisﬁes “xn = {n, xn+1}”. Similarly,
since M satisﬁes “en = {en+1, xn, yn}” the deﬁnability of each en follows from
the deﬁnability of e0 in (M, x)x∈A. To verify this, suppose e = {x, y}. Let 
be as in Deﬁnition 4.1. Then (x, y, z) deﬁnes e0 in (M, x, y).
(c) is an immediate consequence of (a) and (b) since if (A, F ) is pointwise
deﬁnable, then by (a), every element of A is deﬁnable in M.
To prove (d), we ﬁrst establish Aut(G) ∼= Aut(M), where G is the digraph
(X, E). We already commented in Remark 3.14(b) that (1) there is an embed-
ding Φ from Aut(G) into Aut(M), and (2) every automorphism of G has a
unique extension to an automorphism of M. Therefore, in order to show that
Φ is surjective, it suﬃces to show that X is deﬁnable in M since the deﬁnability
of X in M would imply that g ↾X ∈Aut(G) for every g ∈Aut(M). Recall
that ϕ1 deﬁnes {x0 : x ∈A} in M. On the other hand,
ϕ3(z) := ∃x∃y (x, y, z)
deﬁnes {e0 : e ∈F } in M. So X is deﬁnable in M by the formula
ϕ4(u) := N(u) ∨∃v

u ∈(v) ∧

ϕ1(v) ∨ϕ3(v))

.
This concludes the proof of Aut(G) ∼= Aut(M). Therefore to establish (c)
it suﬃces to verify that Aut(A, F ) ∼= Aut(G). Suppose f ∈Aut(A, F ). We
shall build f ∈Aut(G) such that f →f describes an isomorphism between
Aut(A, F ) and Aut(G). f is deﬁned by cases:
• f(n) = n for n ∈.
• f is deﬁned recursively on {xn : x ∈A, n ∈} by: f(x0) = f(x0) and
f(xn+1) = the unique element v ∈G for which

f(xn))E = {n, v}.
• f is deﬁned recursively on {en : e ∈F, n ∈} by: for e = {x, y},
f(e0) = e′
0, where e′ = {f(x), f(y)}, and f(en+1) = the unique element
v ∈G for which

f(en)

E = {f(xn), f(yn), v}.

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
59
Moreover, it is easy to see that if g ∈Aut(G), then g is uniquely determined
by g ↾A. Therefore in order to verify that the map f →f is surjective, it
suﬃces to observe that A is deﬁnable in G by the formula (x) that expresses
“0 ∈x ∧|x| = 2 ∧x ̸= {0, 1}”. This shows that Aut(A, F ) ∼= Aut(G) and
completes the proof of (d).
⊣
Remark 4.3. (a) Let GZFﬁn be the category deﬁned in Remark 3.14, and
consider the category F whose objects are graphs (A, F ), and whose morphisms
are embeddings f : (A, F ) →(A′, F ′). The proof of Theorem 4.2 shows that
there is a functor Ψ from F into GZFﬁn such that for every object A = (A, F )
of F, the set of vertices of Ψ(A) includes A; every automorphism of A has a
unique extension to an automorphism of Ψ(A); and every automorphism of
an object in GZFﬁn of the form Ψ(A) is uniquely determined by its restriction
to A.
(b) Let ϕ1 and  be as in Deﬁnition 4.1, and let (z) be the formula in the
language of set theory that expresses:
“z is of the form {X, E}, where ϕ1(x) holds for each x ∈X, and for each
e ∈E, there are x and y in X such that (x, y, e)”,
and let  := ∀t∃z(t ∈(z) ∧(z)). Then the class of -models of ZFﬁn + 
are precisely those objects in F that lie in the range of the functor Ψ deﬁned
in (a) above. Note that (V, ∈) |=  since ({∅}) vacuously holds in (V, ∈).
Corollary 4.4. Every group can be realized as the automorphism group of
an -model of ZFﬁn.19
Proof. A classical theorem of Frucht [Fr] shows that every group can be
realized as the automorphism group of a graph.20
⊣
Corollary 4.5. For every inﬁnite cardinal κ there are 2κ nonisomorphic rigid
-models of ZFﬁn of cardinality κ.
Proof. It is well-known that there are 2κ nonisomorphic rigid graphs of
cardinality κ. One way to see this is to ﬁrst show that there are 2κ noniso-
morphic rigid linear orders of cardinality κ by the following construction:
start with the well-ordering (κ, ∈), and for each S ⊆κ let LS be the linear
order obtained by inserting a copy of ∗(the order-type of negative integers)
between α and α +1 for each α ∈S. Since LS and LS′ are nonisomorphic for
S ̸= S′ this completes the argument since every linear order can be coded into
a graph with the same automorphism group: given a linear order (L, <L), let
[L]2 be the set of all 2-element subsets of L, and for each s ∈[L]2, introduce
19In contrast, the class of groups that arise as automorphism groups of models of ZFﬁn + TC
are precisely the right-orderable groups. This is a consequence of coupling the bi-interpretability
of ZFﬁn + TC and PA with a key result [KS, Theorem 5.4.4] about automorphisms of models
of PA.
20See [Lo] for an exposition of Frucht’s theorem and its generalizations.

60
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
distinct vertices {as, bs}, and consider the graph (A, F ), where
A = L ∪{as : s ∈S} ∪{bs : s ∈S},
and
F = {{x, as} : x ∈s ∈[L]2} ∪
{{as, bs} : s ∈[L]2} ∪
{{x, bs} : s = {x, y}, and x <L y}.
⊣
Corollary 4.6. For every inﬁnite cardinal κ there is afamily M of cardinality
2κ of -models of ZFﬁn of cardinality κ such that for any distinct M1 and M2
in M, there is no elementary embedding from M1 into M2.
Proof. It is well-known that there is a family G of power 2κ of simple graphs
of cardinality κ such that for distinct G1 and G2 in G, there is no embedding
from G1 into G2.21
⊣
The next corollary is motivated by the following observations: (1) (V, ∈)
is a pointwise deﬁnable model, and (2) The G¨odel-Rosser incompleteness
theorem is powerless in giving any information on the number of complete
extensions of ZFﬁn that possess an -model.22
Corollary 4.7. There are 2ℵ0 pointwise deﬁnable -models of ZFﬁn. Con-
sequently there are 2ℵ0 complete extensions of ZFﬁn that possess -models.
Proof. This is an immediate consequence of Theorem 4.2(c) and the well-
known fact that there are 2ℵ0 nonisomorphic pointwise deﬁnable graphs. One
way to establish the latter fact is as follows: for each S ⊆ ﬁrst build a graph
AS with the property that no two vertices have the same degree, each vertex
has ﬁnite degree, and if n < , then n ∈S iﬀthere is a vertex having degree n.
Clearly AS is pointwise deﬁnable, and distinct S’s yield nonisomorphic AS
(incidentally, if 0 /∈S, then AS can be arranged to be connected. Also, if S is
r.e., then a highly recursive AS can be constructed).
⊣
The next corollary is an immediate consequence of coupling Theorem 4.2
with a classical construction [Ho, Theorem 5.5.1] that implies that for every
structure A in a ﬁnite signature there is a graph GA that is bi-interpretable
with an isomorphic copy of A. It is easy to see (but a bit cumbersome to
write out the details of the proof) that if two structures A and B are bi-
interpretable, then (1) their automorphism groups Aut(A) and Aut(B) are
21Indeed, by a theorem of Ne˘set˘ril and Pultr [NP] one can stengthen this result by replacing
“embedding” to “homomorphism”. We should also point out that by a result of Perminov [P] for
each inﬁnite cardinal κ, there are 2κ nonisomorphic rigid graphs none of which can be embedded
in to any of the others. This shows that Corollaries 4.6 and 4.7 can be dovetailed.
22The G¨odel-Rosser theorem can be ﬁne-tuned to show the essential undeciability of consistent
ﬁrst order theories that interpret Robinson’s Q [HP, Thm. 2.10, Chap. III], thereby showing that
such theories have continuum-many consistent completions (indeed, the result continues to hold
with Q replaced by the weaker system R).

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
61
isomorphic [Ho, Exercise 8, Sec. 5.4], and (2) A is pointwise deﬁnable iﬀB
is pointwise deﬁnable. We could have used this approach to provide succinct
indirect proofs of the above corollaries, but in the interest of perspicuity, we
opted for more direct proofs.
Corollary 4.8. For every structure A in a ﬁnite signature there is an -model
M of ZFﬁn such that M interprets an isomorphic copy of A, and Aut(A) ∼=
Aut(B). Furthermore, if A is pointwise deﬁnable, then so is M.
To motivate the last result of this section, let us recall that V is the only
-model of ZFﬁn + TC up to isomorphism.
As shown by Corollary 4.8
below, there are many other “categorical” ﬁnite extensions of ZFﬁn. One can
also show that there are continuum-many completions of ZFﬁn that possess a
unique -model up to isomorphism.
Corollary 4.9. Thereareinﬁnitelymanycountablenonisomorphic -models
of ZFﬁn each of which is the unique -model of some ﬁnite extension of ZFﬁn.
Proof. For 0 < r ∈, let r(x) be the following variant of ϕ1(x) of
Deﬁnition 4.1:
“there is a sequence ⟨xn : n < ⟩with x = x0 such that xn = {n, xn+1} if
r | n; and xn = {xn+1} otherwise.”
Next, let r be the sentence that expresses
“∃x (V = V((x), ∈)) and r(x)”.
Clearly ZFﬁn + r has a unique -model up to isomorphism, and for r ̸= s,
no -model of ZFﬁn satisﬁes both r and s.
⊣
Remark 4.10. The theories ZFﬁn + r of the proof of Corollary 4.9 provide
examples of extensions of ZFﬁn + ¬TC that are bi-interpretable with PA.
Furthermore, for every positive r, every model of PA has a unique extension
to a model of ZFﬁn + r, i.e., if M and N are models of ZFﬁn + r such that
there is an isomorphism f between (N, +, ×)M and (N, +, ×)N, then f has a
(unique) extension to an isomorphism between M and N.
§5. ZFﬁn and PA are not bi-interpretable. In this section we wish to carry
out the promise made at the end of Remark 2.2(f) by establishing the strong
failure of bi-interpretability of ZFﬁn and PA. Recall that two theories U and
V are said to be bi-interpretable if there are interpretations I : U →V and
J : V →U, a binary U-formula F , and a binary V -formula G, such that F
is, U-veriﬁably, an isomorphism between idU and J ◦I, and G is, V -veriﬁably,
an isomorphism between idV and I ◦J . This notion is entirely syntactic, but
has several model theoretic ramiﬁcations. In particular, given models A |= U
and B |= V , the interpretations I and J give rise to (1) models J A |= V and
IB |= U, and (2) isomorphisms F A and GB with
F A : A −→(J ◦I)A = I(J A) and GB : B
∼
=
−→(I ◦J )B = J (IB).

62
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
A much weaker notion, dubbed sentential equivalence23 in [Vi-2], is obtained
by replacing the demand on the existence of deﬁnable isomorphisms with the
requirement that the relevant models be elementarily equivalent, i.e., for any
A |= U and B |= V ,
A ≡(J ◦I)A and B ≡(I ◦J )B.
Theorem 5.1. ZFﬁn and PA are not sententially equivalent.
Proof. Suppose to the contrary that the interpretations
I : ZFﬁn →PA, and J : PA →ZFﬁn
witness the sentential equivalence of ZFﬁn and PA. In light of the fact that there
are at least two elementarily inequivalent recursive models of ZFﬁn, in order to
reach a contradiction it is suﬃcient to demonstrate that the hypothesis about
I and J can be used to show that any two arithmetical -models of ZFﬁn are
elementarily equivalent. To this end, suppose M is an arithmetical -model
of ZFﬁn. We claim that
J M ∼= (, +, ×).
The following classical theorem of Scott24 plays a key role in the veriﬁcation of
our claim. In what follows, an arithmetical model of PA refers to a structure
of the form (, ⊕, ⊗), where there are ﬁrst order formulas ϕ(x, y, z) and
(x, y, z) that respectively deﬁne the graphs of the binary operations ⊕and
⊗in the model (, +, ×).
Theorem (Scott [Sco]). No arithmetical nonstandard model of PA is elemen-
tarily equivalent to (, +, ×).
Let M′ ≡(J ◦I)M. By assumption, M′ ≡M, which implies that
(N, +, ×)M ≡(N, +, ×)M′
.
This shows that (N, +, ×)M′ is elementarily equivalent to (, +, ×) since M
is an -model. Coupled with the fact that (N, +, ×)M′ is an arithmetical
model (since it is arithmetically interpretable in an arithmetical model), Scott’s
aforementioned theorem can be invoked to show that M′ must be an -
model. But since no nonstandard model of PA can interpret an isomorphic
copy of (, <) this shows that for any arithmetical -model M of ZFﬁn,
J M ∼= (, +, ×). Therefore, the assumption of sentential equivalence of ZFﬁn
and PA implies that any two arithmetical -models of ZFﬁn are elementarily
equivalent, which is the contradiction we were aiming to arrive at.
⊣
23It is easy to see (using the completeness theorem for ﬁrst order logic) that sentential equiva-
lence can also be syntactically formulated.
24In order to make the proof self-contained, we sketch an outline of the proof of Scott’s
theorem. If a nonstandard model A is elementarily equivalent to (, +, ·), then the standard
system SSy(A) of A has to include all arithmetical sets. If, in addition, A were to be arithmetical,
then every member of SSy(A), and therefore every arithmetical set, would have to be of bounded
quantiﬁer complexity, contradiction. Scott’s result has recently been revisited in [IT, Sec. 3].

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
63
Remark 5.2. (a) The proof of Theorem 5.1 only invoked one of the two
elementary equivalences stipulated by the deﬁnition of sentential equivalence,
namely that M ≡(J ◦I)M for every M |= ZFﬁn. In the terminology of [Vi-2],
this shows that ZFﬁn is not a retract of PA in the appropriate category in which
deﬁnitional equivalence is isomorphism.
(b) As mentioned in Remark 3.10(b), there are inﬁnitely many elementarily
inequivalent recursive -models of ZFﬁn + ¬TC. Using the proof of Theo-
rem 5.1 this fact can be used to show that the theories ZFﬁn + ¬TC and PA are
not sententially equivalent either. However, as pointed out in Remark 4.10,
there are ﬁnite extensions of ZFﬁn + ¬TC that are bi-interpretable with PA.
§6. Concluding remarks and open questions. Let A ≡Levy
n
B abbreviate the
assertion that A and B satisfy the same ΣLevy
n
formulas in the usual Levy
hierarchy of formulas of set theory (in which only unbounded quantiﬁcation
is signiﬁcant).
Theorem 6.1. If A and B are -models of ZFﬁn, then A ≡Levy
1
B.
Proof. We use a variant of the Ehrenfeucht-Fra¨ıss´e game adapted to this
context, in which once the ﬁrst player (spoiler) and second player (duplica-
tor) have made their ﬁrst moves by choosing elements from each of the two
structures, the players are obliged to select only members of elements that have
been chosen already (by either party). We wish to show that for any particular
length n of the play (n > 0), the duplicator has a winning strategy. Assume,
without loss of generality, that the spoiler chooses a1 ∈A. The duplicator
responds by choosing b1 ∈B with the key property that there is function f
such that
f :

(n, a), ∈)
A
∼
=
−→

(n, b), ∈)
B .
(it is easy to see, using the fact that A and B are -models of ZFﬁn, that the
duplicator can always do this). From that point on, once the spoiler picks any
element c from either structure the duplicator responds with f(c) or f−1(c)
depending on whether c is in the domain or co-domain of f.
⊣
Note that TC is ΠLevy
2
(since TC(x) is ΣLevy
1
) relative to ZFﬁn, so in the
conclusion of Theorem 6.1, ≡Levy
1
cannot be replaced by ≡Levy
2
since A can
be chosen to be (V, ∈) and B can be chosen to be a nonstandard -model
of ZFﬁn. These considerations motivate the next question.
Question 6.2. Is it true that for each n ≥1 there are -models A and B of
ZFﬁn that are ≡Levy
n
equivalent but not ≡Levy
n+1 equivalent?
Question 6.3. For inﬁnite cardinals κ and 
, let M(κ, 
) be the class of
models M of ZFﬁn such that the cardinality of M is κ, and the cardinality of NM
is 
.

64
ALI ENAYAT, JAMES H. SCHMERL, AND ALBERT VISSER
(a) Is there a ﬁrst order scheme Γ1 in the language of set theory such that
Th(M(1, )) = ZFﬁn + Γ1?
(b) Is there a ﬁrst order scheme Γ2 in the language of set theory such that
Th(M(ℶ, )) = ZFﬁn + Γ2?
Question 6.3 is motivated by two classical two-cardinal theorems of Model
Theory25 due to Vaught, which show that the answers to both parts of Ques-
tion 6.3 are positive if “ﬁrst order scheme” is weakened to “recursively enumer-
able set of ﬁrst order sentences”. The aforementioned two-cardinal theorems
also show that (1) for κ > 
 ≥, Th(M(κ, 
)) ⊇Th(M(1, )), and (2) for
all κ ≥ℶ, Th(M(κ, )) ⊆Th(M(ℶ, )).
REFERENCES
[BF] S. Baratella and R. Ferro, A theory of sets with the negation of the axiom of inﬁnity,
Mathematical Logic Quarterly, vol. 39 (1993), no. 3, pp. 338–352.
[Ba] J. Barwise, Admissible Sets and Structures, Perspectives in Mathematical Logic, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Be-1] P. Bernays, A system of axiomatic set theory. Part II, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 6 (1941), pp. 1–17.
[Be-2]
, A system of axiomatic set theory. Part VII, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 19 (1954), pp. 81–96.
[CK] C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler, Model Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1973.
[Fr] R. Frucht, Herstellung von Graphen mit vorgegebener abstrakter Gruppe, Compositio
Mathematica, vol. 6 (1939), pp. 239–250.
[HP] P. H´ajek and P. Pudl´ak, Metamathematics of First-Order Arithmetic, Perspectives in
Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1998.
[HV] P. H´ajek and P. Vopˇenka, ¨Uber die G¨ultigkeit des Fundierungsaxioms in speziellen Sys-
temen der Mengentheorie, Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik,
vol. 9 (1963), pp. 235–241.
[Ha] K. Hauschild, Bemerkungen, das Fundierungsaxiom betreﬀend, Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathe-
matische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, vol. 12 (1966), pp. 51–56.
[Ho] W. Hodges, Model Theory, Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 42,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993.
[IT] K Ikeda and A. Tsuboi, Nonstandard models that are deﬁnable in models of Peano arith-
metic, Mathematical Logic Quarterly, vol. 53 (2007), no. 1, pp. 27–37.
[Ka] R. Kaye, Tennenbaum’s theorem for models of arithmetic, this volume.
[KW] R. Kaye and T. Wong, On interpretations of arithmetic and set theory, Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, vol. 48 (2007), no. 4, pp. 497–510.
[KS] R. Kossak and J. H. Schmerl, The Structure of Models of Peano Arithmetic, Oxford
Logic Guides, vol. 50, The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006, Oxford
Science Publications.
[Kr] G. Kreisel, Note on arithmetic models for consistent formulae of the predicate calculus.
II, Actes du XI`eme Congr`es International de Philosophie, Bruxelles, 20–26 Aoˆut 1953, vol. XIV,
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1953, pp. 39–49.
[Li] P. Lindstr¨om, Aspects of Incompleteness, second ed., Lecture Notes in Logic, vol. 10,
Association for Symbolic Logic, Urbana, IL, 2003.
25See [CK, Theorems 3.2.12 and 7.2.2], and [Sch-1].

-MODELS OF FINITE SET THEORY
65
[Lo] L. Lov´asz, Combinatorial Problems and Exercises, AMS Chelsea Publishing, Providence,
RI, 2007, Corrected reprint of the 1993 second edition.
[Mac] S. Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, second ed., Graduate Texts
in Mathematics, vol. 5, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998.
[MZ] A. Mancini and D. Zambella, A note on recursive models of set theories, Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, vol. 42 (2001), no. 2, pp. 109–115.
[Moh] S. Mohsenipour, A recursive nonstandard model for open induction with GCD property
and coﬁnal primes, Logic in Tehran, Lecture Notes in Logic, vol. 26, ASL, La Jolla, CA, 2006,
pp. 227–238.
[Mos] A. Mostowski, On a system of axioms which has no recursively enumerable arithmetic
model, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 40 (1953), pp. 56–61.
[NP] J. Neˇsetˇril and A. Pultr, A note on homomorphism-independent families, Combinatorics
(Prague, 1998), Discrete Mathematics, vol. 235 (2001), no. 1-3, pp. 327–334.
[P] E. A. Perminov, The number of rigid graphs that are mutually nonimbeddable into one
another, Izvestiya Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zavedeni˘ı. Matematika, (1985), no. 8, pp. 77–78, 86.
[Ra] M. Rabin, On recursively enumerable and arithmetic models of set theory, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 23 (1958), pp. 408–416.
[Ri] L. Rieger, A contribution to G¨odel’s axiomatic set theory, Czechoslovak Mathematical
Journal, vol. 7 (1957), pp. 323–357.
[Sch-1] J. H. Schmerl, An axiomatization for a class of two-cardinal models, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 42 (1977), no. 2, pp. 174–178.
[Sch-2]
, Tennenbaum’s theorem and recursive reducts, this volume.
[Sco] D. Scott, On a theorem of Rabin, Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 63 = Indag.
Math., vol. 22 (1960), pp. 481–484.
[Vi-1] A. Visser, Faith & Falsity, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 131 (2005), no. 1-3,
pp. 103–131.
[Vi-2]
, Categories of theories and interpretations, Logic in Tehran, Lecture Notes in
Logic, vol. 26, ASL, La Jolla, CA, 2006, pp. 284–341.
[Vo-1] P. Vopˇenka, Axiome der Theorie endlicher Mengen, ˇCeskoslovensk´a Akademie Vˇed.
ˇCasopis Pro Pˇestov´an´ı Matematiky, vol. 89 (1964), pp. 312–317.
[Vo-2]
, Mathematics in the Alternative Set Theory, Teubner-Verlag, Leipzig, 1979.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS
AMERICAN UNIVERSITY
4400 MASS. AVE. NW
WASHINGTON, DC 20016-8050, USA
E-mail: enayat@american.edu
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT
STORRS, CT 06269-3009, USA
E-mail: schmerl@math.uconn.edu
DEPARTMENT OF PHILOSOPHY
BESTUURSGEBOUW, HEIDELBERGLAAN 6
3584 CS UTRECHT, THE NETHERLANDS
E-mail: albert.visser@phil.uu.nl

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM FOR MODELS OF ARITHMETIC
RICHARD KAYE
Abstract. This paper discusses Tennenbaum’s Theorem in its original context of models of
arithmetic, which states that there are no recursive nonstandard models of Peano Arithmetic. We
focus on three separate areas: the historical background to the theorem; an understanding of the
theorem and its relationship with the G¨odel–Rosser Theorem; and extensions of Tennenbaum’s
theorem to diophantine problems in models of arthmetic, especially problems concerning which
diophantine equations have roots in some model of a given theory of arithmetic.
§1. Some historical background. The theorem known as “Tennenbaum’s
Theorem” was given by Stanley Tennenbaum in a paper at the April meeting
in Monterey, California, 1959, and published as a one-page abstract in the
Notices of the American Mathematical Society [28].
It is easily stated as
saying that there is no nonstandard recursive model of Peano Arithmetic, and
is an attractive and rightly often-quoted result.
This paper celebrates Tennenbaum’s Theorem; we state the result fully and
give a proof of it and other related results later. This introduction is in the
main historical. The goals of the latter parts of this paper are: to set out the
connections between Tennenbaum’s Theorem for models of arithmetic and
the G¨odel–Rosser Theorem and recursively inseparable sets; and to investigate
stronger versions of Tennenbaum’s Theorem and their relationship to some
diophantine problems in systems of arithmetic.
Tennenbaum’s theorem was discovered in a period of foundational studies,
associated particularly with Mostowski, where it still seemed conceivable that
useful independence results for arithmetic could be achieved by a “hands-
on” approach to building nonstandard models of arithmetic. Mostowski’s
own aspirations for the programme are clearly set out in his address to the
8th Congress of Polish mathematicians in September 1953 [16]. Mostowski
called for an axiomatic treatment of arithmetic and its models, and cites
Ryll-Nardzewski [22] and Rosser and Wang [21] as early proponents of the
theory of models of arithmetic. Mostowski places problems of induction and
inductive deﬁnitions at the forefront of studies in arithmetic, but lists several
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
66

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM FOR MODELS OF ARITHMETIC
67
“secondary but nevertheless important and interesting problems connected
with the axioms of arithmetic of natural numbers”:
What kind of structure have the models of Peano’s arithmetic diﬀering
from a model composed of natural numbers; in particular, what is
their ordinal [i.e. order] type like? After Rosser and Wang [21] we
term such models non-standard. Some initial results on these lines
have been published by Kemeny [10].
To ﬁnd out whether by using non-standard models it would be
possible to obtain proofs for the independence of classical number-
theoretical problems of the system of arithmetical axioms.
To prove the incompleteness of axiomatic arithmetic without ap-
plying the method of arithmetization by giving suitable models show-
ing the consistency and independence of an appropriately chosen
number-theoretical axiom.
Mostowski’s questions are good ones. Although the order-type of a count-
able model of PA is easy to determine, it seems that even to this day almost
nothing is known about order-types of uncountable models. Nor have any
of the classical number-theoretical problems yielded to logical methods of
proving independence. Only the last problem, independence results without
arithmetization, has yielded results.
Skolem had, of course, already built nonstandard models of arithmetic by
an ultrapower-like construction. His 1955 paper [27] is the most accessible and
widely quoted, and was written for the proceedings of a symposium in Amster-
dam in 1954, but is essentially just a translation of an earlier (1934) paper [26].
Skolem had raised the question of recursiveness of nonstandard models, and
Mostowski answered his question, using recursively inseparable r.e. sets to
show that no nonstandard model of primitive recursive arithmetic with predi-
cates for all primitive recursive functions can be recursive [17]. Kreisel’s review
[Mathematical Reviews, MR0093483] of this paper is illuminating:
The proof [of Mostowki’s main theorem] shows that there is no re-
cursive non-standard model in which all theorems of (quantiﬁer-free)
primitive recursive arithmetic are valid. In other words, recursive
models are useless for independence problems in full primitive re-
cursive arithmetic.
This answers a question raised by Skolem at
Amsterdam in 1954 [ . . . ]. It is not known if elementary arithmetic
with addition and multiplication as the sole non-logical constants has
a recursive non-standard model.
Mostowski’s theorem was not an isolated event, but followed from a number
of earlier papers constructing theories with no recursive models [14, 15], and
Kreisel [12] and Putnam [20] had independently obtained similar results to
Mostowski’s.

68
RICHARD KAYE
As for independence results, Kemeny did produce a model that addressed
some questions of independence in 1958 [11]. As one in hindsight would
expect, Kemeny’s model was shown soon afterwards to fail to satisfy any
particularly interesting induction axioms for arithmetic (Gandy [5]). To my
mind, the highlight of this period of building recursive models for the purposes
of independence results was the results of the early 1960s by Shepherdson,
who, using algebraic methods, produced beautiful nonstandard models of
quantiﬁer-free arithmetic in which he showed number theoretic results such
as the inﬁnitude of primes and Fermat’s Last Theorem (in fact, for exponent
3) are false [25]. By this time Tennenbaum’s theorem was already well known,
and Shepherdson and others were certainly aware of the limitations of this
approach.
Further results along the same lines as Tennenbaum’s appeared soon af-
terwards. Feferman [3] presented a detailed examination of arithmetization,
including the result quoted by Tennenbaum in his abstract that no nonstan-
dard model of full arithmetic can be arithmetically deﬁned. Dana Scott [23]
also investigated constructions of models of arithmetic, including an elegant
algebraic construction and a proof of Tennenbaum’s theorem.
In the following sections, we shall go into more detail, stating and proving
Tennenbaum’s theorem, and then discussing what theory of arithmetic is
actually needed in the model for it to hold. This will bring us on to more
recent questions connected with diophantine problems and the solution to
Hilbert’s 10th problem.
§2. Tennenbaum’s theorem. I will give a presentation of Tennenbaum’s the-
orem and some variations on it here.
All models considered here will be
countable models of at least PA−, the theory of the nonnegative part of dis-
cretely ordered rings. Except where explicitly stated otherwise, we will regard
the standard model N as an initial segment of each nonstandard model of
arithmetic M.
We shall assume some basic theory from models of arith-
metic, such as coding techniques, etc., and to allow us to switch views from
recursion theory on N and recursive sets of formulas we identify a formula
with its G¨odel-number via some natural G¨odel-numbering. All notation not
explained here is as in Models of Peano Arithmetic [7].
A structure M = (M, +, ·, 0, 1, <) is recursive if there is a 1–1 correspon-
dence f : N →M such that, identifying N with the domain of M via f,
the functions +, · and relation < on M are recursive on N. Note that these
functions and relation do not need to correspond to the usual ones on N.
The structure M is non-recursive if there is no such 1–1 correspondence. The
standard model (N, +, ·, 0, 1, <) with the usual addition, multiplication and
order is recursive, via the identity map N →N. Tennenbaum showed that this
is the only such recursive model of arithmetic.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM FOR MODELS OF ARITHMETIC
69
Theorem 2.1 (Tennenbaum, 1959). Let M = (M, +, ·, 0, 1, <) be a count-
able model of PA, and not isomorphic to the standard model (N, +, ·, 0, 1, <).
Then M is not recursive.
It turns out that the choice of theory here is rather inessential. Indeed
Tennenbaum doesn’t bother to state which theory is taken here, simply writing
in his abstract “provable”, which presumably meant “provable in PA”. The
theory PA may be replaced by much weaker sub-theories, including some
ﬁnitely axiomatized sub-theories. How far one can go in this direction is an
interesting question that will be discussed later.
Tennenbaum’s theorem improved on Mostowski’s attempts at proving sim-
ilar results. The key technique was a suitable choice of coding mechanism in
arithmetic.
I will present a proof of Tennenbaum’s theorem shortly. Before I do so,
I would like to indicate at least one aspect of what it says: in some precise
sense Tennenbaum’s theorem is a model-theoretic version of the G¨odel–Rosser
incompleteness theorem.
Deﬁnition 2.2. For a theory T in the language of arithmetic, denote
by Π1 −Th (T) the set of Π1 consequences of T, i.e. the set of sentences
{ ∈Π1 : T ⊢}. Similarly Πn −Th (T), Σn −Th (T), etc.
Theorem 2.3 (Rosser). There is no consistent extension T of PA for which
Π1 −Th (T) is recursive.
Proof. I shall sketch a proof assuming Tennenbaum’s theorem as stated
earlier but for the set of Π2-consequences of PA, rather than PA itself.
First, assume that T ⊇PA is consistent and Π1 −Th (T) is recursive. We
make a model in the usual Henkin-style using model-theoretic forcing with
Δ0 conditions. That is, at stage k of the construction we have a Δ0 condition,
i.e. a Δ0 formula 
k (w0, . . . , wnk) in special “witnessing” constants wi which
is a conjunction of several Δ0 formulas that we want to make true (including
all previous conditions in the construction) such that T + 
k (w0, . . . , wnk) is
consistent. The resulting model M will be formed from the wi, and by usual
techniques we can ensure that M is a Σ1-elementary submodel of a model N
of T together with all the 
k (w0, . . . , wnk), so in particular M ⊨Π2 −Th (T).
The assumption that Π1 −Th (T) is recursive allows us to ensure that the
whole construction can be carried out recursively. This is because during the
construction, we need only decide questions such as, given 
k (w0, . . . wnk) and
a new Δ0 formula  (w, x), is T +
k (w0, . . . , wnk)+ (w, x) consistent? This
amounts to asking if
T ⊢∀w0, . . . , wnk, x (
k (w0, . . . , wnk) →¬ (w, x)) ,
a question that can be eﬀectively decided by looking at Π1 −Th (T). Thus the
construction is recursive, and indeed the sequence of conditions produced by

70
RICHARD KAYE
the construction is also a recursive sequence of Δ0 formulas in the witnessing
constants.
This means that the resulting model M is recursive, since it is built from
an enumerated set of witnesses wi modulo the recursive equivalence relation
wi ∼wj when wi = wj is a conjunct of some condition in the construction.
The truth of any Σ1 sentence ∃x (x) can also be determined: on the one
hand by seeing if  (wi) is a conjunct of a condition for some wi; and on the
other hand by seeing if some other condition 
k (w0, . . . , wnk) together with
T implies ∀x¬ (x). Thus the model M is nonstandard because the truth of
Σ1 sentences in the standard model N is well-known not to be decidable.
We conclude that if T ⊇PA is consistent and Π1 −Th (T) is recursive there
is a recursive nonstandard model of Π2 −Th (T), and as T extends PA this
contradicts Tennenbaum’s theorem for Π2 −Th (PA).
⊣
The G¨odel–Rosser Theorem is well-known to be related to the following
classical result of recursion theory, which we will use to prove Theorem 2.1.
Theorem 2.4. There exist r.e. sets A, B ⊆N which are recursively inseparable,
i.e. there is no recursive set C ⊆N such that A ⊆C and B ∩C = ∅.
To prove Theorem 2.1, we will follow Tennenbaum and separate the problem
into two subproblems: ﬁrstly of saying something about which sets A ⊆N are
coded in a model M, and secondly on the consequences of having nonrecursive
sets coded.
Deﬁnition 2.5. Let M be a nonstandard model of arithmetic. We deﬁne
SSy (M), the standard system of sets coded in M, to be the set of all A ⊆N
such that
A = {n ∈N : M ⊨ (n, a)}
for some formula  and some a ∈M.
In most cases, we may ﬁx a particular formula  appropriately and all sets
in the standard system appear for this  and a suitable choice of parameters a.
By the induction axioms, this will work in PA for any  for which the following
statement is provable for all pairs of ﬁnite disjoint sets A, B ⊆N:
∃x
⎛
⎝
i∈A
 (i, x) ∧

j∈B
¬ (j, x)
⎞
⎠
This happens in the particular case when  (n, x) is a ﬁrst-order formula in the
language of PA equivalent to ∃y (pn · y = x), where p0 = 2, p1 = 3, p2 = 5,
and so on, enumerating the standard primes. Thus, for nonstandard models
M of PA, we have
SSy (M) = {A ⊆N : ∃a ∈M A = {n ∈N : M ⊨ (n, a)}} .

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM FOR MODELS OF ARITHMETIC
71
This formulation of SSy (M) is particularly useful when studying the com-
plexity of addition in a model.
The following lemma is a straightforward application of induction.
Lemma 2.6 (Robinson’s overspill lemma). Let M be a nonstandard model
of Peano arithmetic, and suppose a ∈M and  (x, y) is a formula such that
M ⊨ (n, a) for each n ∈N. Then there is a nonstandard x ∈M such that
M ⊨ (n, a).
The traditional approach to Tennenbaum’s theorem now splits into two
parts.
Theorem 2.7. Let M be a nonstandard model of Peano arithmetic. Then
SSy (M) contains a nonrecursive set.
Proof. Let A, B ⊆N be r.e. recursively inseparable sets, given by Theo-
rem 2.4. Then these sets are deﬁned (in N) by Σ1 formulas ∃y α (x, y) and
∃z  (x, z), respectively, where α and  are Δ0. We regard the standard model
N as an initial segment of M and note that Σ1 formulas are preserved upwards
from initial segments to the larger model. So, by this and the disjointness of
A, B we have, for each k ∈N,
M ⊨∀x, y, z < k ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z)) .
So by the overspill lemma there is some nonstandard  ∈M with
M ⊨∀x, y, z <  ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z)) .
Now let C ⊆N be the set C = {n ∈N : M ⊨∃y <  α (n, y)}. By preser-
vation of Σ1 formulas and the nonstandardness of , we see immediately that
C ⊇A, and the above property of  also shows that C ∩B = ∅. So by our
choice of A and B, C is nonrecursive, as required.
⊣
Theorem 2.8. Let M be a model of Peano arithmetic for which SSy (M)
contains a nonrecursive set. Then (M, +) is not recursive.
Proof. Let C ∈SSy (M) be nonrecursive. Then by remarks made earlier
there is a ∈M such that
C = {n ∈N : M ⊨ (n, a)}
for the formula  (n, x) which is ∃y (pny = x). Then if + in M were recursive
so would C be, since on input n ∈N we may compute pn (which is the nth
prime in M just as it is in N by preservation between M and N) and search for
y ∈M and r < pn such that (y + y + · · · + y) + r = a (pn ys). This search
is guaranteed to terminate and both y and r are uniquely determined by n
and a, by Euclidean division in PA. If r = 0 we conclude n ∈C, and n /∈C
otherwise.
⊣
It is natural to ask how far this argument can be pushed, replacing the
theory PA by weaker theories. In the form that I have just given it, overspill is

72
RICHARD KAYE
only required for Δ0 relations, and the subtheory I Δ0 consisting of some base
axioms and induction on Δ0 formulas is strong enough to prove enough facts
about Euclidean division, primes (including a formula for the nth prime for
all standard and suﬃciently small nonstandard n, though it is still not known
if this theory proves the inﬁnitude of primes) for the above argument to go
through. This was observed by Cegielski et al. [2] and is essentially the proof
given in my Models of Peano Arithmetic [7]. Note too that the subtheory
mentioned earlier, Π2 −Th (PA) of the Π2 consequences of PA, contains I Δ0.
Indeed all axioms of I Δ0 are Π1 and also axioms of PA; in fact I Δ0 is very
much weaker than Π2 −Th (PA).
A much sharper result using essentially the same ideas was achieved by
Wilmers [29] who showed the same result for the subtheory IE1 of I Δ0 where
induction axioms are only allowed for bounded existential formulas, i.e. for-
mulas of the form ∃y < p (x) q (x, y) = r (x, y) where p, q, r are polynomials
with nonnegative integer coeﬁcients. Wilmers achieved some improvements
on the above argument, ﬁrstly by taking A, B to be disjoint r.e. recursively
inseparable sets of primes, but more particularly by using the MRDP theorem
on the diophantine representation of r.e. sets [13]. Interestingly, Wilmers did
not ever need to use the provability of the MRDP theorem, just its truth for
the standard model N, to get the required sets represented and to achieve the
necessary overspill arguments in IE1.
Two other methods for showing SSy (M) contains non-recursive sets come
to mind. The ﬁrst is to use a formalization of a (necessarily partial) truth def-
inition in the model M. For example, there is a Π1 formula Tr1 (x) expressing
“x is the G¨odel-number of a true Π1 sentence”. This formula behaves as
expected, and in particular is “correct” on standard formulas, in all models
of PA. Then in such a model M the set C = { ∈Π1 : M ⊨Tr1 ()} of
true standard Π1 sentences is coded, consistent, and (by the G¨odel–Rosser
theorem) therefore non-recursive. This method is straightforward and uses
well-known results, but because as it relies on a formalization inside the theory
of arithmetic, it is not applicable to weaker systems. No such truth deﬁnition
is known for I Δ0, for instance.
The second method goes back to Scott [24], and uses overspill again. By an
overspill argument, SSy (M) has the property that it is a boolean subalgebra
of P (N) closed under relative recursion and K¨onig’s lemma. (In modern
terminology, it is a Scott set.) It follows that every ﬁrst-order theory (such
as PA itself) coded in M (i.e. in SSy (M)) has a coded complete extension,
and of course such sets will not themselves be recursive. (Details are given in
Models of Peano Arithmetic [7].) This argument works very well in contexts
where overspill is available, and Wilmers [29] shows that SSy (M) is a Scott
set whenever M ⊨IE1 is nonstandard. For weaker theories we still seem to
need alternative arguments.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM FOR MODELS OF ARITHMETIC
73
In closing this section, I should mention two other strengthenings of Ten-
nenbaum’s theorem that have been considered. The ﬁrst is to start with a
nonstandard model M of some weak theory of arithmetic T and ﬁnd a non-
standard initial segment I of M satisfying PA. Then Tennenbaum’s theorem
for the initial segment readily implies Tennenbaum’s theorem for the original
model M by the absoluteness of Euclidean division. For T = I Δ0 a result
of this kind was discovered by Cegielski et al. [2] and for T = IE1 nonstan-
dard initial segments satisfying PA were discovered by Paris [19]. The other
strengthening is to consider the reduct of the model M to addition alone. For
M ⊨PA, this reduct is a model of Presburger arithmetic and is recursively satu-
rated. Such models are necessarily nonrecursive by similar reasons: Euclidean
division gives a notion of standard system, which (by recursive saturation) is a
Scott set and therefore contains nonrecursive sets. The same result also holds
for nonstandard M ⊨I Δ0 (Cegielski et al. [2]) and for nonstandard M ⊨IE1
(Wilmers [29]).
§3. Diophantine problems. In the last section, we saw Tennenbaum’s theo-
rem, its relationship with the incompleteness theorems and some subsequent
reﬁnements of it down to the theory of bounded existential induction, IE1.
Some minor improvements were found by the present author by considering
the parameter-free induction scheme for bounded existential formulas [6], but
the theory IE1 represents the approximate limit of results of this kind to date.
On the other hand Shepherdson [25] found nonstandard recursive models
for quantiﬁer-free induction, and Berarducci and Otero have improved this
slightly to the case of normal open induction [1]. Between the theories IE1
and normal open induction there remains substantial work to be done.
These considerations already put us in the realm of studying diophan-
tine sets, diophantine induction and diophantine deﬁnitions, and the issues
relating to Hilbert’s 10th problem.
Wilmers used the MRDP theorem to
prove his results about IE1. It seems that further progress in the direction of
Tennenbaum-type results will require new proofs or at least a more detailed
analysis of existing proofs of the the MRDP theorem.
Deﬁnition 3.1. We say that a theory T of arithmetic proves the MRDP
theorem (T ⊢MRDP) if for every Σ1 formula of the language of arithmetic
ϕ (x) there is an ∃1 formula  (x) in the same free variables such that
T ⊢∀x (ϕ (x) ↔ (x)) .
The deﬁnition just given does not make any predetermined choices of equiv-
alent formulas. (In this sense it is not about any ﬁrst order axiom scheme being
provable.) The theory I Δ0 + exp does prove MRDP (Gaifman and Dimitra-
copoulos [4]). On the other hand I Δ0 ⊢MRDP is an important open problem
related to questions in complexity theory.

74
RICHARD KAYE
Theorem 3.2 (Kaye). Suppose T is a theory of arithmetic extending PA−
and T ⊢MRDP. Then every nonstandard model of T is nonrecursive.
Proof. Let A={n ∈N : N ⊨∃yα (n, y)} and B ={n ∈N : N ⊨∃z  (n, y)}
be r.e. recursively inseparable sets, where α,  are Δ0. We consider the formula
 (w) which is
∀x, y, z < w ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z)) .
The formula  (w) is Δ0 and true for all w ∈N.
If there is some nonstandard c ∈M such that M ⊨ (c) then
C = {n ∈N : M ⊨∃y < c α (n, y)}
would be Δ0 deﬁnable, contains A (since c > N) and disjoint from B. So C
would be nonrecursive, but, by considering both the formula deﬁning C and
its negation and MRDP in M, it is both ∃1- and ∀1-deﬁnable in M, hence is
recursive in the operations +, ·, < of M. We conclude that at least one of these
operations must be nonrecursive.
If on the other hand, the standard cut is deﬁned in M by  (w), i.e. N =
{n ∈N : M ⊨ (n)}, we take any nonstandard c ∈M. Then a Σ1 predicate
over naturals ∃x (n, x) is true for n ∈N iﬀM ⊨∃x < c ( (x) ∧ (n, x)).
This is a Δ0 formula, so by MRDP in M it is both ∃1 and ∀1 deﬁnable in M
so we have shown that every Σ1 predicate is recursive in the operations +, ·, <
of M, and hence at least one of these operations must be nonrecursive.
⊣
The above result and its proof (which appeared ﬁrst in Kaye [9]) are inter-
esting, not so much in the result they prove, but in the way that they show
that Tennenbaum-type theorems can be proved by means other than overspill,
especially by reducing the problem in hand to questions about the standard
model. These arguments seem to split into cases: one case mirrors the over-
spill argument, but if overspill fails then the standard cut is deﬁnable in the
model in some way which also leads to the required conclusion. Other similar
examples will be given shortly.
An old question that has been open since the 1950s (originally raised by
Kreisel, I believe) is whether there is an algorithm for deciding provability in
the system of arithmetic formulated in the logic without quantiﬁers. Shep-
herdson reformulated this question in terms of open induction, and it remains
one of the most interesting questions about open induction.
Question 3.3. Is the set ∀1 −Th (IOpen) of universal consequences of open
induction recursive?
Another way of stating such a question is to ask if there is an eﬀective
method to decide, given a diophantine equation p (x) = q (x) where p, q
are polynomials with nonnegative integer coeﬃcients, whether there is some
model of IOpen containing at least one solution of the equation.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM FOR MODELS OF ARITHMETIC
75
Questions of this type are related to Tennenbaum phenomena, for if T is
a theory extending PA−and ∀1 −Th (T) is recursive then by forcing with
quantiﬁer-free conditions (as in the proof of Theorem 2.3 above) we may
build a recursive model of ∀2 −Th (T). This model is nonstandard because
the set of ∃1 sentences true in the model can be read oﬀrecursively from the
construction, but the ∃1 theory of the standard model N is not decidable by
the MRDP theorem in N. So Tennenbaum’s theorem for ∀2 −Th (T) would
imply the undecidability of ∀1 −Th (T).
Now, although it is in fact true that IOpen = ∀2−Th (IOpen), the argument
in the last paragraph doesn’t seem to help us, as Tennenbaum’s theorem fails
for IOpen, by Shepherdson’s work. In fact, this isn’t quite the end of the story
as we shall see in a moment, but let us for the moment set our sights a little
lower and prove some weaker theorems of the same type. The following result
has not previously been published.
Theorem 3.4. The set ∀∃< −Th

PA−
of consequences of PA−of the form
∀x∃y < p (x)  (x, y) with  (x, y) quantiﬁer-free is not recursive.
Proof. This is a model theoretic forcing argument with ∀< conditions,
i.e. conditions of the form ∀y < p (x)  (x, y) with  quantiﬁer-free. (Note
that up to logical equivalence such formulas are closed under conjunctions.)
Our assumption that ∀∃< −Th

PA−
is recursive means that we build a
recursive model M of PA−with a recursive sequence of conditions. For any
tuple w ∈M of the constructed model, the set of formulas ∃∀< −tp (w) of all
∃∀< formulas true of the tuple w is recursive since given such a formula ∃x∀y <
p (x)  (w, x, y) we may decide its truth in M by searching simultaenously
either for a conjunct of a condition of the form ∀y < p (x)  (w, u, y) or for
a proof that
PA−⊢∀u, v, w (
 (u, w) →¬∀y < p (v)  (w, v, y))
for some condition 
 (u, w). In particular, the model M is nonstandard as the
set of formulas ∃∀< −tp (0) for the standard model N is non-recursive.
Now take A, B r.e. and recursively inseparable. By the MRDP theorem in
N we may assume A = {n ∈N : ∃y α (n, y)} and B = {n ∈N : ∃z  (n, z)}
where α,  are quantiﬁer-free. Now consider
∀x, y, z < c ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z)) .
If there is no nonstandard c ∈M satisfying this, then the standard cut N is
∀<-deﬁnable in M and any r.e. set X ⊆N would be recursive, since, by MRDP
in N, X is {n ∈N : ∃w  (n, w)} for some quantiﬁer-free , and hence
X =

n ∈N : ∃w

i (wi) ∧ (n, w)

where  (x) is the ∀< formula deﬁning N in M. The truth of this can be read
oﬀ∃∀< −tp (0).

76
RICHARD KAYE
On the other hand, if there is some nonstandard c ∈M such that
∀x, y, z < c ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z)) .
we consider C = {n ∈N : ∃y < c α (n, y)} which contains A and is disjoint
from B by choice of C, and is also recursive since the truth of ∃y < c α (n, y)
can be read oﬀ∃∀< −tp (c) for any particular n.
⊣
We also have (Kaye [8]),
Theorem 3.5. The set ∀1−Th (IE1) of ∀1 consequences of IE1 is not recursive.
As will be clear from the proof of Theorem 3.4, there is still scope for
stronger results here. I have given complex conditions by which induction
axioms in a theory T may be omitted but nevertheless ∀1 −Th (T) be proved
nonrecursive by the methods discussed here [8]. Now I shall describe simpler
conditions on the theory T for the same result to hold; one still strong enough
to prove Theorem 3.5.
To motivate the ideas, connsider ﬁrst a model M ⊨I Δ0. The theory I Δ0 is
strong enough to deﬁne exponentiation in a reasonably clean way but cannot
prove the statement of the totality of exponentiation, exp: ∀x∃y y = 2x. As
already mentioned, I Δ0+exp proves the MRDP theorem. The key application
of MRDP in the arguments here is to the formula
∀x, y, z < w ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z))
where α,  are quantiﬁer-free. Let 2x
0 = x and 2x
k+1 = 22x
k. By the provability
of MRDP in I Δ0 + exp there is some k ∈N (depending possibly on α, ) and
quantiﬁer-free  (u) such that I Δ0 proves
∀w (∃v (v = 2w
k ) →((∀x, y, z < w ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z))) ↔∃u  (u, w))) .
This is by a result for I Δ0 + exp similar to the well-known theorem of
Parikh [18] for I Δ0.
Parikh’s theorem says that if I Δ0 ⊢∀x ∃y  (x, y)
where  (x, y) is Δ0 then the y may be bounded by a polynomial in x,
I Δ0 ⊢∀x ∃y < t (x)  (x, y). The same holds for I Δ0 + exp except the
term t (x) must be a term involving exponentiation, and in fact the axiom
exp can be omitted in the conclusion. (This is proved by a model-theoretic
argument similar to the one for Parikh’s Theorem given for example in Models
of Peano Arithmetic, Exercise 6.5 [9].) The particular sentence of interest in
our case is
∀w (∀x, y, z < w ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z)) →∃u  (u, w))
which is provable in I Δ0+exp, showing the u can be bounded by an exponential
term in w.
The idea then is to consider the subset L of M consisting of all w for which
M ⊨∃v

v = 2w
k

. In the case of a nonstandard model of I Δ0, this L will be
a nonstandard initial segment, but the important feature is that, by replacing

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM FOR MODELS OF ARITHMETIC
77
∃v

v = 2w
k

by an appropriate Pell equation, we may take L to be deﬁnable
by an existential formula.
Deﬁnition 3.6. Let T be a theory in the usual language for arithmetic.
We say that T virtually proves MRDP if whenever ϕ (w) is ∀< then there are
 (v, w) and  (u, w), both quantiﬁer-free, such that T ⊢∃v  (v, n) for each
n ∈N and
T ⊢∀w (∃v  (v, w) →(ϕ (w) ↔∃u  (u, w))) .
Theorem 3.7.
(a) if T is consistent and virtually proves MRDP then ∀1 −
Th (T) is nonrecursive.
(b) IE1 virtually proves MRDP.
Proof. (a) Let A, B be r.e. and recursively inseparable and deﬁned by A =
{n ∈N : ∃y α (n, y)} and B = {n ∈N : ∃z  (n, z)} as before, and let ϕ (w)
be ∀x, y, z < w ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z)). Take  (v, w) and  (u, w) as in the
deﬁnition and build a recursive model M of ∀2−Th (T) in which all ∃1−tp (c)
are resursive, as before. Now choose a nonstandard c ∈M such that
M ⊨∃u, v ( (v, c) ∧ (u, c)) .
Observe that each c ∈N satisﬁes the above formula, by properties of  and 
in the deﬁnition, so if there were no nonstandard c ∈M as above we would
conclude that N is ∃1-deﬁnable in M and so ∃1 −Th (N) can be read oﬀ
∃1 −tp (0), which is impossible.
Thus M ⊨∀x, y, z < c ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z)) and the set
C = {n ∈N : ∃y < c α (x, y)}
is recursive and separates A, B.
(b) A Pell equation can be used in place of y = 2x to prove an analogous
result to
∀w (∃v (v = 2w
k ) →((∀x, y, z < w ¬ (α (x, y) ∧ (x, z))) ↔(∃u  (u, w)))) .
for IE1 in place of I Δ0. See Kaye [6] for details.
⊣
REFERENCES
[1] Alessandro Berarducci and Margarita Otero, A recursive nonstandard model of normal
open induction, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 61 (1996), no. 4, pp. 1228–1241.
[2] Patrick Cegielski, Kenneth McAloon, and George Wilmers, Mod`eles recursivement
satur´es de l’addition et de la multiplication des entiers naturels, Logic Colloquium ’80 (Prague,
1980), Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 108, North-Holland, Amster-
dam, 1982, pp. 57–68.
[3] Solomon Feferman, Arithmetization of metamathematics in a general setting, Polska
Akademia Nauk. Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 49 (1960/1961), pp. 35–92.

78
RICHARD KAYE
[4] Haim Gaifman and Constantine Dimitracopoulos, Fragments of Peano’s arithmetic
and the MRDP theorem, Logic and Algorithmic (Zurich, 1980), L’Enseignement math´ematique.
Monograph, vol. 30, Universit´e de Gen`eve, Geneva, 1982, pp. 187–206.
[5] Robin O. Gandy, Note on a paper of Kemeny’s, Mathematische Annalen, vol. 136 (1958),
p. 466.
[6] Richard Kaye, Diophantine induction, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 46 (1990),
no. 1, pp. 1–40.
[7]
, Models of Peano Arithmetic, Oxford Logic Guides, vol. 15, The Clarendon Press
Oxford University Press, New York, 1991, Oxford Science Publications.
[8]
, Hilbert’s tenth problem for weak theories of arithmetic, Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, vol. 61 (1993), no. 1-2, pp. 63–73, Provability, Interpretability and Arithmetic Symposium
(Utrecht, 1991).
[9]
, Open induction, Tennenbaum phenomena, and complexity theory, Arithmetic, Proof
Theory, and Computational Complexity (Prague, 1991), Oxford Logic Guides, vol. 23, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1993, pp. 222–237.
[10] John G. Kemeny, Models of logical systems, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 13
(1948), pp. 16–30.
[11]
, Undecidable problems of elementary number theory, Mathematische Annalen,
vol. 135 (1958), pp. 160–169.
[12] Georg Kreisel, Note on arithmetic models for consistent formulae of the predicate calculus.
II, Actes du XI`eme Congr`es International de Philosophie, Bruxelles, 20–26 Aoˆut 1953, vol. XIV,
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1953, pp. 39–49.
[13] Yuri V. Matijaseviˇc, The Diophantineness of enumerable sets, Doklady Akademii Nauk
SSSR, vol. 191 (1970), pp. 279–282.
[14] Andrzej Mostowski, On a system of axioms which has no recursively enumerable arith-
metic model, Polska Akademia Nauk. Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 40 (1953), pp. 56–61.
[15]
, A formula with no recursively enumerable model, Polska Akademia Nauk. Funda-
menta Mathematicae, vol. 42 (1955), pp. 125–140.
[16]
, The present state of investigations on the foundations of mathematics, Rozprawy
Matematyczne, vol. 9 (1955), p. 48, in collaboration with A. Grzegorczyk, S. Ja´skowski, J. Ło´s,
S. Mazur, H. Rasiowa, and R. Sikorski.
[17]
, On recursive models of formalised arithmetic, Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des
Sciences. S´erie III, vol. 5 (1957), pp. 705–710, LXII.
[18] Rohit Parikh, Existence and feasibility in arithmetic, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 36 (1971), pp. 494–508.
[19] JeﬀB. Paris, On the structure of models of bounded E1-induction, ˇCeskoslovensk´a
Akademie Vˇed. ˇCasopis Pro Pˇestov´an´ı Matematiky, vol. 109 (1984), no. 4, pp. 372–379.
[20] Hilary Putnam, Arithmetic models for consistent formulae of quantiﬁcation theory, The
Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 22 (1957), pp. 110–111.
[21] J. Barkley Rosser and Hao Wang, Non-standard models for formal logics, The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, vol. 15 (1950), pp. 113–129.
[22] Czeslaw Ryll-Nardzewski, The role of the axiom of induction in elementary arithmetic,
Polska Akademia Nauk. Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 39 (1952), pp. 239–263 (1953).
[23] Dana Scott, On constructing models for arithmetic, Inﬁnitistic Methods (Proc. Sympos.
Foundations of Math., Warsaw, 1959), Pergamon, Oxford, 1961, pp. 235–255.
[24]
, Algebras of sets binumerable in complete extensions of arithmetic, Proc. Sympos.
Pure Mathematics, Vol. V, American Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 1962,
pp. 117–121.
[25] John C. Shepherdson, A non-standard model for a free variable fragment of number theory,
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences. S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques
et Physiques, vol. 12 (1964), pp. 79–86.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM FOR MODELS OF ARITHMETIC
79
[26] Thoralf A. Skolem, ¨Uber die Nichtcharakterisierbarkeit der Zalenreihe mittels endlich
oder abz¨ahlbar unendlich vielen Assagen mit asschliesslich Zahlvariablen, Polska Akademia Nauk.
Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 23 (1934), pp. 150–161, English version published in 1955 [27].
[27]
, Peano’s axioms and models of arithmetic, Mathematical Interpretation of Formal
Systems, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1955, pp. 1–14.
[28] Stanley Tennenbaum, Non-archimedian models for arithmetic, Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, vol. 270 (1959), p. 270.
[29] George Wilmers, Bounded existential induction, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 50
(1985), no. 1, pp. 72–90.
SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS
THE UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM
EDGBASTON, BIRMINGHAM, B15 2TT, UK
E-mail: R.W.Kaye@bham.ac.uk

HIERARCHIES OF SUBSYSTEMS OF WEAK ARITHMETIC
SHAHRAM MOHSENIPOUR
Abstract. We completely characterize the logical hierarchy of various subsystems of weak
arithmetic, namely: ZR, ZR + N, ZR + GCD, ZR + Bez, OI + N, OI + GCD, OI + Bez.
§1. Introduction. In 1964 Shepherdson [6] introduced a weak system of
arithmetic, Open Induction (OI), in which the Tennenbaum phenomenon
does not hold. More precisely, if we restrict induction just to open formulas
(with parameters), then we have a recursive nonstandard model. Since then
several authors have studied Open Induction and its related fragments of
arithmetic. For instance, since Open Induction is too weak to prove many true
statements of number theory (It cannot even prove the irrationality of √2),
a number of algebraic ﬁrst order properties have been suggested to be added
to OI in order to obtain closer systems to number theory. These properties
include: Normality [9] (abbreviated by N), having the GCD property [8],
being a Bezout domain [3, 8] (abbreviated by Bez), and so on. We mention
that GCD is stronger than N, Bez is stronger than GCD and Bez is weaker
than IE1 (IE1 is the fragment of arithmetic based on the induction scheme for
bounded existential formulas and by a result of Wilmers [11], does not have
a recursive nonstandard model). Boughattas in [1, 2] studied the non-ﬁnite
axiomatizability problem and established several new results, including: (1)
OI is not ﬁnitely axiomatizable, (2) OI + N is not ﬁnitely axiomatizable. To
show that, he deﬁned and considered the subsystems (OI)p of (OI) and (N)n
of N (1 ≤p, n < ) (See the next section for the deﬁnitions) and proved:
Theorem 1.1 (Boughattas [1]).
(1) (OI )p is ﬁnitely axiomatizable,
(2) Suppose (p!, p
′) = 1, then (OI )p ⊬(OI )p′ .
Theorem 1.2 (Boughattas [2], Theorem 2).
Suppose (p!, p
′)
=
1 and
(n!, n
′) = 1,
2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 03F30, 03H15.
Key words and phrases. open induction, subsystem, logical hierarchy.
This research was done while the author was Postdoctoral Research Associate at the School
of Mathematics, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM).
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
80

HIERARCHIES OF SUBSYSTEMS OF WEAK ARITHMETIC
81
(1) N + (OI )p ⊬(OI )p′ ,
(2) (N)n + (OI ) ⊬(N)n′ ,
(3) (OI )p + ¬(OI )p′ + (N)n + ¬(N)n′ is consistent.
In [4] we strengthened Theorem 1.1 (2) to completely characterize the logical
hierarchy of OI, by showing that (OI )p ⊬(OI )p+1 iﬀp ̸= 3. In this paper
by modifying Boughattas’ original proofs, we also strengthen Theorem 1.2 in
two directions and completely characterize the logical hierarchy of OI + N,
OI + GCD, OI + Bez:
Theorem C. Bez + (OI )p ⊬(OI )p+1, when p ̸= 3.
Theorem D. (OI )p+¬(OI )p+1+(N)n+¬(N)n+1 is consistent, when p ̸= 3.
So we will have the following immediate consequences:
Corollary E.
(1) N + (OI )p ⊬(OI )p+1, when p ̸= 3.
(2) GCD + (OI )p ⊬(OI )p+1, when p ̸= 3.
(3) All of the following subsystems of arithmetic are non-ﬁnite axiomatizable:
OI, OI + N, OI + GCD, OI + Bez, (OI )p + N, OI + (N)n.
In Theorems A and B of this paper, we consider the ZR versions of the above
theorems. ZR is a subsystem of arithmetic that allows Euclidean division over
each non-zero natural number n ∈N. ZR is introduced by Wilkie [10] in which
he proved that ZR and OI have the same ∀1-consequences. Later developments
showed that ZR had very important role in constructing models of OI (See
Macintyre-Marker [3], Smith [8]). ZR + N has also been studied in [5]. In
Theorem A, we study natural subsystems (ZR)S of (ZR), for a nonempty
subset S of the set of prime numbers P (see the next section for deﬁnition)
and show that:
Theorem A. Suppose S is a nonempty subset of P and q is a prime number
such that q /∈S, then (ZR)S + Bez ⊬(ZR)q.
Boughattas in ([2], Lemma 5) proved that DOR + N and ZR + N are not
ﬁnitely axiomatizable. More precisely he showed that:
Theorem 1.3 (Boughattas [2], Lemma 5). Suppose (n!, n
′) = 1. ThenZR+
(N)n ⊬(N)n′ .
We modify Boughattas’ proof and strengthen the above theorem in Theo-
rem B:
Theorem B. Suppose S is a nonempty subset of P and q is a prime number
such that q /∈S, then (ZR)S + (N)n + ¬(ZR)q + ¬(N)n+1 is consistent.
Therefore we will have the following immediate implications:
Corollary F. Suppose S is a nonempty subset of P and q is prime number
such that q /∈S, then
(1) (ZR)S + N ⊬(ZR)q.
(2) (ZR)S + GCD ⊬(ZR)q.

82
SHAHRAM MOHSENIPOUR
(3) All of the following subsystems of arithmetic are non-ﬁnite axiomatizable:
ZR, ZR + N, ZR + GCD, ZR + Bez, (ZR)S + N, ZR + (N)n, when S
is an inﬁnite subset of the set of prime numbers.
§2. Preliminaries. Let L be the language of ordered rings based on the
symbols +, −, ·, 0, 1, ≤. We write N∗for N \ {0}. We will work with the
following set of axioms in L:
DOR: discretely ordered rings, i.e., axioms for ordered rings and
∀x¬(0 < x < 1).
ZR: discretely ordered Z-rings, i.e., DOR and for every n ∈N∗
∀x∃q, r

x = nq + r

0 ⩽r < n

.
We denote the sentence “DOR + ∀x∃q, r(x = nq + r  0 ⩽r < n)” by
(ZR)n. Suppose P denote the set of prime numbers of N. Let S be a nonempty
subset of P. We deﬁne the subsystem (ZR)S of ZR as the below:
ZRS: DOR + for every p ∈S
∀x∃q, r

x = qp + r

0 ⩽r < p

.
If S = {pi1, . . . , pin} is a ﬁnite subset of P, we write (ZR)pi1,...,pin instead of
(ZR){pi1,...,pin }. This is consistent with the above notation (ZR)n.
OI: open induction, i.e., DOR and for every open L-formula ( ¯x, y)
∀¯x

( ¯x, 0)

∀y ⩾0(( ¯x, y) →( ¯x, y + 1)) →∀y ⩾0( ¯x, y)

.
By considering the fact that in discretely ordered rings an open L-formula
ϕ( ¯x, y) can be written as a Boolean combination of polynomial equalities
and inequalities with the variable y and the parameters ¯x, there exist natural
numbers m, n such that:
ϕ( ¯x, y) =

i≤m

j≤n
pij( ¯x, y) ≤qij( ¯x, y),
we can deﬁne the degree of ϕ( ¯x, y) relative to y by
deg ϕ( ¯x, y) = max{degy pij( ¯x, y), degy qij( ¯x, y)|i ≤m, j ≤n}.
(OI)p: open induction up to degree p (i.e., DOR and for every open L-
formula ( ¯x, y) with deg ( ¯x, y) ≤p
∀¯x

( ¯x, 0)

∀y ⩾0(( ¯x, y) →( ¯x, y + 1)) →∀y ⩾0( ¯x, y)
 
.

HIERARCHIES OF SUBSYSTEMS OF WEAK ARITHMETIC
83
N: normality (i.e., being domain and integrally closed in its fraction ﬁeld,
namely for every n ∈N∗, ∀x, y, z1, . . . , zn

y ̸= 0 ∧xn + z1xn−1y + · · · + zn−1xyn−1 + znyn = 0 −→∃z(yz = x)

.
(N)n: normality up to degree n ∈N∗(i.e., being domain and for every
m ∈N∗, m ≤n, ∀x, y, z1, . . . , zm

y ̸= 0 ∧xm+z1xm−1y+· · · + zm−1xym−1+zmym = 0 −→∃z(yz = x)

.
It is clear that any domain satisﬁes (N)1.
GCD: having greatest common divisor (i.e., the usual axioms for being a
domain plus
∀x, y(x = y = 0 ∨∃z(z|x ∧z|y ∧(∀t((t|x ∧t|y) →t|z)))),
where x|y is an abbreviation for ∃t(t · x = y)).
Bez: the usual axioms for being a domain plus the Bezout property:
∀x, y∃z, t((xz + yt)|x ∧(xz + yt)|y),
namely, every ﬁnitely generated ideal is principal.
It is known that Bez ⊢GCD ⊢N, and OI ⊬OI + N ⊬OI + GCD ⊬OI +
Bez (Smith [7], Lemmas 1.9 and 1.10).
Also we will need another algebraic property, though it is not ﬁrst-order
expressible:
DCC: let M be a domain. M has the divisor chain condition (DCC) if M
contains no inﬁnite sequence of elements a0, a1, a2, . . . such that each ai+1 is
a proper divisor of ai (i.e., ai/ai+1 is a nonunit).
Let M be an ordered domain (resp. a domain), then RC(M) (resp. AC(M))
will denote the real closure (resp. the algebraic closure) of its fraction ﬁeld.
It is well known that AC(M) = RC(M)[
√
−1]. Let p ∈N∗and F be an
ordered ﬁeld (resp. a ﬁeld), we deﬁne the p-real closure (resp. the p-algebraic
closure) of F , denoted by RCp(F ) (resp. ACp(F )), to be the smallest subﬁeld
of RC(F ) (resp. AC(F )) containing F such that every polynomial of degree
≤p with coeﬃcients in RCp(M) (resp. ACp(F )) which has a root in RC(F )
(resp. AC(F )) also has a root in RCp(F ) (resp. ACp(F )). Similarly if M
be an ordered domain (resp. a domain), then RCp(M) (resp. ACp(M)) will
denote the p-real closure (resp. the p-algebraic closure) of its fraction ﬁeld.

84
SHAHRAM MOHSENIPOUR
It can be shown that ACp(M) = RCp(M)[
√
−1]. Similar to real closed ﬁelds
and algebraic closed ﬁelds, it is also easily seen that:
(1) If P(x) is a polynomial of degree ≤p with the coeﬃcients in RCp(F ) and
P(a) < 0 < P(b), for some a < b in RCp(F ), then there exists a c ∈RCp(F ),
such that a < c < b and P(c) = 0.
(2) If P(x) is a polynomial of degree ≤p with the coeﬃcients in ACp(F ),
then P(x) can be represented as a product of linear factors with coeﬃcients in
ACp(F ).
Properties (1) and (2) can deﬁne and axiomatize the notions of p-real closed
ﬁeld and p-algebraic closed ﬁeld, denoted by (RCF)p and (ACF)p, respectively.
Given two ordered domains I ⊂K we say that I is an integer part of K if
I is discrete and for every element α ∈K, there exists an element a ∈I such
that 0 ≤α −a < 1. We call a, the integer part of α, and sometimes denote
it by [α]I . Shepherdson and Boughattas characterized models of (OI)p, in
terms of p-real closed ﬁelds (1 ≤p ≤):
Theorem 2.1 (Shepherdson [6]). Let M be an ordered domain. M is a model
of OI iﬀM is an integer part of RC(M).
Theorem 2.2 (Boughattas [1, 2]). Let M be an ordered domain.
M is a
model of (OI )p iﬀM is an integer part of RCp(M).
We also need a fact from Puisseux series:
Deﬁnition 2.3. Let K be a ﬁeld. The following is the ﬁeld of Puisseux
series in descending powers of x with coeﬃcients in K:
K((x1/N)) =
⎧
⎨
⎩

k≤m
akxk/r : m ∈Z, r ∈N∗, ak ∈K
⎫
⎬
⎭.
Theorem 2.4 (Boughattas [1]). (1 ≤p ≤) K is a p-real (resp. p-
algebraically) closed ﬁeld iﬀK((x1/N)) is a p-real (resp. p-algebraically) closed
ﬁeld.
§3. The main results.
3.1. Proof of Theorem A. Suppose S is a subset of the set of prime num-
bers P. We present here a relative to S version of some theorems of (Smith [8])
that is needed for proving theorem A. Interestingly, all proofs of (Smith [8])
remain valid, if we make routine changes which will be explained. We men-
tion that when S = P, we get the original deﬁnitions and theorems.
We
ﬁrst deﬁne ZS = 
p∈S Zp, where Zp is the ring of p-adic integers, and
⟨S⟩= {pα1
1 · · · pαn
n ; n ∈N∗, αi ∈N and pi ∈S}. It is clear that there is the
canonical embedding of ⟨S⟩in ZS.

HIERARCHIES OF SUBSYSTEMS OF WEAK ARITHMETIC
85
Let M be a model of (ZR)S, by relativizing to S, we get a (unique) S −
remainder homomorphism Rem: M −→ZS given by the projective limit of
the canonical homomorphism
n : M −→M/nM ∼= Z/nZ
for n ∈⟨S⟩. See (Macintyre-Marker [3], Lemma 1.3).
Now we give the S-relativization of the so called Z-construction.
Let
M be a discretely ordered ring with ϕ : M −→ZS a homomorphism and
assume that all standard primes remain prime in M. We form a new ring
Mϕ,S = {a/n; a ∈M, n ∈⟨S⟩and n|ϕ(a) in ZS}. We extend ϕ to Mϕ,S in the
obvious way. We say that Mϕ,S is obtained from M by the ZS −construction.
By relativizing the proof of (Macintyre-Marker [3], Lemma 3.1) we get:
Lemma 3.1. Mϕ,S |= (ZR)S.
Parsimony of homomorphisms plays a very important role in Smith’s con-
structions. Therefore we have the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 3.2. Let M be a discretely ordered ring with ϕ : M −→ZS
a homomorphism, where ϕ is the projective limit of the homomorphism
n : M −→Z/nZ for n ∈⟨S⟩. We say that ϕ is S-parsimonious if for each
nonzero a ∈M there are only ﬁnitely many n ∈⟨S⟩such that n(a) = 0.
The following lemma asserts that the ZS-construction preserves parsimony.
Lemma 3.3. If ϕ : M −→ZS is S-parsimonious, then the extension of ϕ to
Mϕ,S is S-parsimonious.
Proof. The proof is the S-relativization of Smith’s proof of Lemma 5.1.
in [8]. Let 0 ̸= a/n ∈Mϕ,S, where a ∈M, n ∈⟨S⟩. Suppose k(a/n) = 0,
for a k ∈⟨S⟩. Since Mϕ,S is a model of (ZR)S, we have k|a/n in Mϕ,S,
so in particular k|a in Mϕ,S. Thus k(a) = 0. Since ϕ : M −→ZS is
S-parsimonious, there are only ﬁnitely many possibilities for k ∈⟨S⟩.
⊣
The following theorem says that in the presence of having a S-parsimonious
map the ZS-construction preserves GCD and DCC.
Theorem 3.4. Let M be a discretely ordered ring with the GCD (DCC). Let
ϕ : M −→ZS be S-parsimonious and in the DCC case the standard primes
remain prime in M. Then Mϕ,S has the GCD (DCC).
Proof. We leave the proof to the reader as an easy and instructive exercise to
adopt Smith’s proofs of Theorems 5.3. and 5.5. in [8]. Just replace everywhere
in the proof, Z-ring by a model of (ZR)S, ϕ : M −→Z by ϕ : M −→ZS,
parsimonious by S-parsimonious, Mϕ by Mϕ,S, and check that the arguments
remain valid!
⊣
Transcendental extensions preserve GCD and DCC.

86
SHAHRAM MOHSENIPOUR
Theorem 3.5 (Smith [8], Theorems 6.8. and 6.10).
Let M be a GCD
(DCC) domain and suppose x is transcendental over M. Then M[x] is a GCD
(DCC) domain.
By the same adaptation of Theorem 6.12.
of (Smith [8]), we see that
S-parsimonious maps can be extended to transcendental extensions. More
precisely:
Theorem 3.6. Let M be a countable model of (ZR)S and suppose the remain-
der homomorphisms ϕ : M −→ZS is S-parsimonious. Let x be transcendental
over M and suppose M[x] is discretely ordered (and this ordering restricts to
the original ordering on M). Then ϕ can be extended to a S-parsimonious
ϕ : M[x] −→ZS, such that ϕ(x) is a unit of ZS.
We will need in this paper to consider the property of factoriality (a factorial
domain has the property that any nonunit has a factorization into irreducible
elements, and this factorization is unique up to units). We will use the follow-
ing theorem:
Theorem 3.7 (Smith [8], Theorem 1.5). M is factorial iﬀM has both of the
GCD property and DCC.
In order to gain a Bezout domain the F-construction in Macintyre-Marker
paper [3] has a crucial role.
By combining Theorems 8.5 and 8.7 from
(Smith [8]), Lemma 3.26 of (Macintyre-Marker [3]) and its proof, we have:
Theorem 3.8. Let M be a discretely ordered domain with DCC (GCD) and
suppose v, w ∈M are primes and x is larger than any element of M. Let
M ∗= M[x, 1−xv
w ]. Then M ∗is a discretely ordered domain with DCC (GCD).
In the following theorem we see that S-parsimony can be extended in F-
constructions:
Theorem 3.9. Let M be a countable model of (ZR)S and the remainder
homomorphism ϕ : M −→ZS is S-parsimonious. Let v, w ∈M be primes of
M and w is nonstandard. Suppose x is transcendental over M, and the discrete
ordering of M extends to discrete ordering on M ∗= M[x, 1−xv
w ]. Then ϕ can
be extended to S-parsimonious ϕ : M ∗−→ZS, such that ϕ(x) is a unit of ZS.
Proof. See the proof of Theorem 8.9. of (Smith [8]).
⊣
The next theorem guarantees the preservation of the GCD property and
DCC in chains constructed by alternative applications of the F-construction
and the ZS-construction via parsimonious maps. We express the theorems in
a more restricted and more suitable form which is adequate for us:
Theorem 3.10. Suppose M0 is a (GCD) DCC countable model of (ZR)S
and there is S-parsimonious ϕ : M0 −→ZS. Let {Mi : i ∈N} be a chain
of discretely ordered domains such that M2i+1 is constructed from M2i by the
ZS-construction, and M2i+2 is constructed from M2i+1 by the F-construction. In
addition we suppose that in the DCC case, in the whole process of extending rings

HIERARCHIES OF SUBSYSTEMS OF WEAK ARITHMETIC
87
at most ﬁnitely many irreducibles have been killed (this means that only ﬁnitely
many irreducibles will become reducible in later stages). Then M = 
i∈N Mi is
a model of (GCD) DCC.
Proof. See Theorems 9.4. and 9.8. in (Smith [8]).
⊣
By the following series of easy lemmas, we will not worry about DCC in
our chain of models in the proof of Theorem A:
Lemma 3.11 (Smith [8], Lemma 3.8). Let M be a GCD domain. Then p ∈
M is irreducible iﬀit is prime.
Of course the following lemma needs an easy S-adaptation of Lemma 3.2
in (Macintyre-Marker [3]):
Lemma 3.12. Let M |= DOR and ϕ : M −→ZS be a ring homomorphism
and assume that all standard primes remain prime in M. If q ∈M is irreducible
and ϕ(q) is unit in ZS, then q is irreducible in Mϕ,S
Lemma 3.13 (Macintyre-Marker [3], Lemma 3.27). If q is irreducible in M,
then q is irreducible in M ∗, constructed in Theorem 3.8 (by the F-construction).
Now we have gathered all preliminaries to prove Theorem A:
Theorem A. Suppose S is a nonempty subset of P and q is prime number such
that q /∈S, then (ZR)S + Bez ⊬(ZR)q.
Proof. We do a suitable and modiﬁed version of Smith’s process to con-
struct a Bezout model of open induction (Smith [8] Theorem 10.7). We shall
inductively construct an -chain of models Mi such that 
i Mi = M will
be a model of (ZR)S + Bez + ¬(ZR)q. We work inside the ordered ﬁeld
Q(x1, . . . , xi, . . . ) so that for each i ∈, xi+1 is larger than any element of
Q(x1, . . . , xi) and x1 is inﬁnitely large. We will do the F-construction at odd
stages and the ZS-construction at even stages.
Take M0 = Z together the natural remainder S-parsimonious homomor-
phism ϕ : M0 −→ZS. Let us show what we do at stages 2k + 1. Suppose
M2k and a S-parsimonious map ϕ : M2k −→ZS, have been constructed. At
this stage we consider a pair of distinct primes v and w belonging to M2k
such that w is nonstandard. (Of course we do this in such a way that every
such pair of primes in M will have been considered at some stage 2k + 1).
Thus (v, w) = 1 in M2k. We deﬁne M2k+1 = M2k[xk, 1−xkv
w
] according to
Theorem 3.8. Suppose yk = 1−xkv
w
, then we have xkv + ykw = 1 in M2k+1.
So (v, w)B = 1 in M2k+1. ((v, w)B is the Bezout greatest common divisor of v
and w, it means that (v, w)B|v and (v, w)B|w and there exist r and s in M2k+1
such that rv + su = 1). We refer to (Smith [8], Section 3) for the basic related
deﬁnitions and theorems. By Theorem 3.9 ϕ is extended to a S-parsimonious
map ϕ : M2k+1 −→ZS. At stage 2k + 2, we employ Lemma 3.1 and deﬁne

88
SHAHRAM MOHSENIPOUR
M2k+2 = (M2k+1)ϕ,S which is a model of (ZR)S. Lemma 3.3 gives us the de-
sired parsimonious extensions ϕ : M2k+2 −→ZS. Since (ZR)S is a ∀∃-theory,
then it is preserved in chains, therefore M |= (ZR)S.
Now we show that M is a Bezout domain.
The proof is similar to
(Smith [8], Theorem 10.7) with a minor change. By Theorems 3.4 and 3.8, each
Mi has the GCD and DCC, so by Theorem 3.10 M has both the GCD and
DCC (by Lemmas 3.11, 3.12 and 3.13 we know that no irreducible is killed)
and from Theorem 3.7 we conclude that M is a factorial domain. In order
to show that M is a Bezout domain, by considering the fact that M has the
GCD property, it suﬃces to prove that any two elements of M has the Bezout
greatest common divisor. Let a, b ∈M and let c = (a, b) in M. We can
assume a, b > 1. Let a = a
′c, b = b
′c in M. So (a
′, b
′) = 1 in M. Since
M is factorial, we can write a
′ = mP1
e1 . . . Pk
ek and b
′ = nQ1
f1 . . . Ql
fl ,
where m, n ∈N are nonzero, k, l ≥0 and the Pi, Qj are nonstandard primes
such that Pi ̸= Qj for all i, j. We will show that (a
′, b
′)B = 1. Clearly
(m, n)B = 1. Suppose m = g1v1 . . . grvr and n = h1
w1 . . . hs
ws are the prime
factorizations of m, n in N. By the F-construction every one of (Pi, gj)B = 1,
(Qi, hj)B = 1 and (Pi, Qj)B = 1, occur at some odd stage of our construction.
Therefore by iterated applications of (Smith [8], Lemma 3.4), we conclude that
(a
′, b
′)B = 1. By (Smith [8], Lemma 3.4), we have c = (a, b)B at some odd
stage and then using (Smith [8], Lemma 3.7) we ensure that c = (a, b)B in
M. This completes the proof of the Bezoutness of M.
Note that in the original proof of Smith ([8], Theorem 10.7) he just considers
pairs of nonstandard primes and doesn’t need to consider pairs of primes such
that one is standard and the other is nonstandard. Since his chain of domains
are ZR-rings, this gives automatically the Bezout greatest common divisor for
such pairs. But as we want ZR to fail in our model, we are forced to consider
pairs of standard and nonstandard primes in the F-construction, as well.
Now we show that (ZR)q fails in M. We ﬁrst observe that in the ﬁrst
step of our construction, namely, when passing from M0 = Z to M1, there
is no nonstandard prime in M0. So M1 is just Z[x1] and we have no y1. On
the other hand from the construction it is evident that elements of M are
of the form f(x1, x2, y2, . . . , xk, yk), for some k, where f is a polynomial
with the coeﬃcients in the set Z⟨S⟩= {a/k; a ∈Z and k ∈⟨S⟩}. Now for
a contradiction, suppose M is a model of (ZR)q. Then there is a b ∈M
such that x1 = bq + r with 0 ≤r < q. Take b = f(x1, x2, y2, . . . , xk, yk), so
we have x1 = f(x1, x2, y2, . . . , xk, yk)q + r. Observe that x2, y2, . . . , xk, yk
are transcendental over Q(x1), then f does not depend on them, so we can
assume x1 = f(x1)q + r. Since x1 is also transcendental over Q, it follow
that the degree of f must be one. Thus f(x1) = ax1 and a ∈Z⟨S⟩. So
x1 = ax1q + r and then x1(1 −aq) = r, which implies that a = 1/q and this
is in contradiction with a ∈Z⟨S⟩, since q /∈⟨S⟩.
⊣

HIERARCHIES OF SUBSYSTEMS OF WEAK ARITHMETIC
89
3.2. Proof of Theorem B.
Theorem B. Suppose S is a nonempty subset of P and q is a prime number
such that q /∈S, then (ZR)S + (N)n + ¬(ZR)q + ¬(N)n+1 is consistent.
Proof. In [4] we proved that if n ̸= 3, there is a 
 which is real algebraic
of degree n + 1 over Q and doesn’t belong to RCn(Q). Now suppose x is
an inﬁnitely large element. For n ̸= 3, ﬁx 
 as above. For n = 3 we choose

 as a root of an irreducible polynomial of degree 4 such that 
 /∈RC2(Q).
Let A be the ring of integers of the algebraic number ﬁeld Q(
).
Form
A⟨S⟩= {a/k; a ∈A and k ∈⟨S⟩}. It is an elementary fact from algebraic
number theory that A is a normal ring. Since A⟨S⟩is a localization of A relative
to a multiplicative set, then it is also normal. Let M = Z[rx; r ∈A⟨S⟩]. We
claim that M witnesses Theorem B. It is obvious that M ⊨(ZR)S. By an
argument similar to the last paragraph of the proof of theorem A, it is easily
shown that M ⊨¬(ZR)q.
Now we prove M ⊨¬(N)n+1. Let v ∈N be such that v
 is an algebraic
integer. Suppose P(t) ∈Z is its minimal polynomial of degree n + 1 which is
monic. Obviously v
x ∈M. But we have P(v
x/x) = 0, while v
 /∈M. So
M is not a model of (N)n+1.
It remains to show that M ⊨(N)n. Let u, v be nonzero elements of M such
that
(u/v)s + z1(u/v)s−1 + · · · + zs = 0
(z1, . . . , zs ∈M, s ⩽n).
We will show that u/v ∈M. Notice that elements of M are those elements of
A⟨S⟩[x] with integer constant coeﬃcient. A⟨S⟩is normal, so is A⟨S⟩[x]. Thus
u/v ∈A⟨S⟩[x]. On the other hand, since Q(
)[x] is a factorial ring, u/v can
be written as:
u/v = 
 
i∈I
Pi
 
j∈J
Qj,
in which  ∈Q(
), the Pi’s are irreducible in Q(
)[x], without constant
coeﬃcient and Qj’s are irreducible in Q(
)[x] with the constant coeﬃcient
one. If I is nonempty, then  
i∈I Pi

j∈J Qj has no constant coeﬃcient
and thus u/v ∈M. Now suppose I = ∅. Put x = 0 in u, v, z1, . . . , zs.
Therefore  is an algebraic integer with the degree, equal or less than n over Z.
We show it is one.
If n = 1 there is nothing to prove.
If not, we have
[Q(
) : Q()] < n + 1. But
[Q(
) : Q()][Q() : Q] = [Q(
) : Q] = n + 1.
Then [Q(
) : Q()] divides [Q(
) : Q] = n + 1.
So we have a chain of
ﬁeld extensions, Q ⊂Q() ⊂Q(
) such that [Q(
) : Q()] ≤n −1 and
[Q() : Q] ≤n −1. This implies that 
 ∈RCn−1(Q) which is in contradiction
with the choice of 
. Hence  is an algebraic integer of degree one. So  ∈Z

90
SHAHRAM MOHSENIPOUR
and this implies that u/v ∈M, which means that M is model of (N)n. This
completes the proof of Theorem B.
⊣
3.3. Proofs of Theorems C and D. In order to demonstrate Theorem C,
we need a generalization of a theorem of Boughattas. In ([2], Theorem V.1.)
Boughattas proved that every saturated ordered ﬁeld admits a normal integer
part. But we show that:
Lemma 3.14. Every 1-saturated ordered ﬁeld admits a Bezout integer part.
Proof. (Sketch) Suppose K is an 1-saturated ordered ﬁeld. Boughattas [2]
in a series of three Lemmas: Pricipal, Integer Part and Construction, showed
that we can build an 1-chain of countable discretely ordered rings Mi, i < 1
such that M = 
i<1 Mi is an integer part of K. Furthermore he considers
an arbitrary subset Λ ⊂K of real algebraic elements which plays a role in
the construction of the Mi’s. Varying Λ gives us various kinds of integer
parts. When Λ = ∅, we obtain a normal integer part and it is implicit in
the paper that in this case, the Mi’s are obtained by alternative applications
of the Wilkie-construction and the Z-construction. But it must be noticed
that even in this case the procedure of doing the Z-construction is diﬀerent
from the original one, because it is no longer assumed that the ground ﬁeld
is dense in its real closure. To gain a Bezout integer part, we observe that
we can do the procedure of the Theorems 10.7 and 10.8 of Smith [8] inside
K. In this procedure we need the extra F-construction. Since any Mi, i < 1
is countable and K is 1-saturated, then there is always an element bi in
K which is larger than any element of Mi. By Lemma 3.26 of (Macintyre-
Marker [3]) we are sure that we can do the F-construction. To obtain an
integer part of K, suppose (bα, α < 1) be an enumeration of elements
of K. Let Mi has been constructed and at step i +1 we want to do the Wilkie-
construction. We seek the least ordinal αi, such that bαi has not an integer part
in Mi. Then by combining the Integer Part Lemma of Boughattas [2] with
the Z-construction, we obtain Mi+1 with its parsimonious homomorphism
extension to Z, such that bαi has an integer part in Mi+1. Also suppose Mj
has been constructed and at stage j + 1 we want to do the F-construction.
We seek the least ordinal αj, such that bαj is larger than any element of Mj.
Then the F-construction can be done at this step. At limit stages we take
union. Moreover, Lemma 9.1, Theorem 9.4 and Theorem 9.8 of (Smith [8])
will guarantee preserving parsimony of homomorphisms and factoriality at
limit stages of length ≤1. Now there is no obstacle for M = 
i<1 Mi to be
a Bezout integer part of K.
⊣
Theorem C. Bez + (OI )p ⊬(OI )p+1, when p ̸= 3.
Proof of Theorem C. In [4], we showed that if p ̸= 3, there is an irreducible
polynomial P(t) of degree p+1 over Q such that P(t) has no root in RCp(Q).
For p ≥4, P(t) was a polynomial with Galois group Ap+1. It is well known

HIERARCHIES OF SUBSYSTEMS OF WEAK ARITHMETIC
91
that we can take P(t) as a monic polynomial with integer coeﬃcients such
that P(0) < 0. Let T be the following theory in the language of ordered ﬁeld
with the additional constant symbol a:
T ≡(RCF )p + {a > k; k ∈N} + ∀y¬(Q(y) ≤0 < Q(y + 1)),
where Q(y) = ap+1P(y/a). We show that the ﬁeld of Puisseux power series
RCp(Q)((x1/N)) is a model of T, when interpreting a by x.
Clearly by
Theorem 2.4, RCp(Q)((x1/N)) is a p-real closed ﬁeld. Also on the contrary
suppose that there exists y ∈RCp(Q)((x1/N)) such that (Q(y) ≤0 < Q(y +
1)). Therefore P(y/x) ≤0 < P((y + 1)/x). It is easily seen that degx(y/x)
must be zero. So let y/x = 
 + !
−∞<i<0 cixi/q in RCp(Q)((x1/N)). This
leads to P(
) = 0, but 
 ∈RCp(Q), which is in contradiction to the choice of
P(t). So RCp(Q)((x1/N)) ⊨T.
Now that T is consistent, let K be an 1-saturated model of T.
By
Lemma 3.14 K has a Bezout integer part. Call it M. Since K ⊨(RCF )p,
then M ⊨(OI )p.
On the other hand there is n ∈N such that M ⊨
Q(0) < 0 < Q(n[a]M), where [a]M is the integer part of a in M.
But
K ⊨∀y¬(Q(y) ≤0 < Q(y + 1)), then M ⊨∀y¬(Q(y) ≤0 < Q(y + 1)), so
by (Boughattas [1], Proposition A.I), M ⊨¬(OI )p+1. This ends the proof of
Bez + (OI )p ⊬(OI )p+1.
⊣
Proof of Theorem D goes the same way with the exception that we must
replace Lemma 3.14 by the following Construction Lemma of Boughattas:
Theorem 3.15 (Boughattas [2]). Suppose K is a saturated ordered ﬁeld. Let
Λ be an arbitrary subset of real algebraic elements in K. Then there exists
X ⊂K such that X is algebraic independent and Z[{rx; r ∈Q[Λ] and x ∈X}]
is an integer part of K.
Theorem D. (OI )p+¬(OI )p+1+(N)n+¬(N)n+1 is consistent, when p ̸= 3.
Proof of Theorem D. We work with the same theory T and its saturated
model K as in the proof of Theorem C. Choose Λ = {
} and ﬁx 
 as in
the proof of Theorem B, namely, if n ̸= 3, 
 ∈RCn+1(Q), 
 /∈RCn(Q)
and if n = 3 choose 
 as a root of an irreducible polynomial of degree 4
such that 
 /∈RC2(Q). Then by Theorem 3.15, there exists X ⊂K such
that K has the integer part M = Z[{rx; r ∈Q(
) and x ∈X}]. To show
M |= (N)n + ¬(N)n+1, we can repeat the proof of Theorem B, just replace
x by X and replace A⟨S⟩by Q(
). Q(
)[X] remains factorial and normal, so
the proof works. By the last paragraph of the proof of the Theorem C, it is
obvious that M |= (OI )p + ¬(OI )p+1
⊣
Acknowledgment. I would like to thank Professor Roman Kossak for his
patience and kindness during the preparation of this paper.

92
SHAHRAM MOHSENIPOUR
REFERENCES
[1] Sedki Boughattas, L’arithm´etique ouverte et ses mod`eles non-standards, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 56 (1991), no. 2, pp. 700–714.
[2]
, L’induction ouverte dans les anneaux discrets ordonn´es et normaux n’est pas ﬁniment
axiomatisable, Journal of the London Mathematical Society. Second Series, vol. 53 (1996), no. 3,
pp. 455–463.
[3] Angus Macintyre and David Marker, Primes and their residue rings in models of open
induction, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 43 (1989), no. 1, pp. 57–77.
[4] Shahram Mohsenipour, A note on subsystems of open induction, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 72 (2007), no. 4, pp. 1318–1322.
[5] Margarita Otero, Generic models of the theory of normal Z-rings, Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic, vol. 33 (1992), no. 3, pp. 322–331.
[6] J. C. Shepherdson, A non-standard model for a free variable fragment of number theory,
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences. S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques
et Physiques, vol. 12 (1964), pp. 79–86.
[7] S. Smith, Prime numbers and factorization in IE1 and weaker systems, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 57 (1992), no. 3, pp. 1057–1085.
[8]
, Building discretely ordered Bezout domains and GCD domains, Journal of Algebra,
vol. 159 (1993), no. 1, pp. 191–239.
[9] Lou van den Dries, Some model theory and number theory for models of weak systems
of arithmetic, Model Theory of Algebra and Arithmetic, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 834,
Springer, Berlin, 1980, pp. 346–362.
[10] A. J. Wilkie, Some results and problems on weak systems of arithmetic, Logic Colloquium
’77, Stud. Logic Foundations Math., vol. 96, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1978, pp. 285–296.
[11] George Wilmers, Bounded existential induction, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 50
(1985), no. 1, pp. 72–90.
INSTITUTE FOR RESEARCH IN
FUNDAMENTAL SCIENCES (IPM)
NIAVARAN BLDG., NIAVARAN SQUARE
P.O. BOX 19395-5746, TEHRAN, IRAN
E-mail: mohseni@ipm.ir

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
SIDNEY RAFFER
Abstract. We give an induction-free axiom system for diophantine correct open induction. We
reduce the problem of whether a ﬁnitely generated ring of Puiseux polynomials is diophantine
correct to a problem about the value-distribution of a tuple of semialgebraic functions with integer
arguments. We use this result, and a theorem of Bergelson and Leibman on generalized polyno-
mials, to identify a class of diophantine correct subrings of the ﬁeld of descending Puiseux series
with real coeﬃcients.
Introduction.
Background. A model of open induction is a discretely ordered ring whose
semiring of non-negative elements satisﬁes the induction axioms for open1
formulas.
Equivalently, a model of open induction is a discretely ordered ring R, with
real closure F , such that every element of F lies at a ﬁnite distance from some
element of R.2
The surprising equivalence between these two notions was discovered by
Shepherdson [7]. This equivalence enabled him to identify naturally occurring
models of open induction made from Puiseux polynomials. Let F be the ﬁeld
of descending3 Puiseux series with coeﬃcients in some ﬁxed real closed subﬁeld
of R.
Puiseux’s theorem implies that F is real closed.
There is a unique
ordering on F , in which the positive elements are the series with positive
leading coeﬃcients. Deﬁne an “integer part” function on F as follows:
"
i<M
aiti/D
#
= ⌊a0⌋+

i>0
aiti/D
where ⌊a0⌋is the usual integer part of the real number a0.
I am grateful to my advisor Attila M´at´e, and to Roman Kossak for his kind assistance
over many years. The material presented here is based in part on my dissertation Diophantine
Properties of Ordered Polynomial Rings, submitted to the City University of New York, June 2000.
1A formula is “open” if it is quantiﬁer-free.
2Consequently, the inequality r ≤x < r + 1 deﬁnes a function r = ⌊x⌋from F onto R. This
function is the natural counterpart of the usual integer part operator from R onto Z.
3A descending Puiseux series with real coeﬃcients has the form 
i<M aiti/D, where M is an
integer, D is a positive integer, and the ai are real.
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
93

94
SIDNEY RAFFER
The image of ⌊· ⌋is the subring R of F consisting of all Puiseux polynomials
with constant terms in Z. Since every Puiseux series is a ﬁnite distance from
its leading Puiseux polynomial, it is immediate that every element of F is a
ﬁnite distance from some element of R. The discreteness of the ordering on R
is a consequence of the polynomials in R having integer constant terms. By
Shepherdson’s equivalence, R is a model of open induction.
There has been some eﬀort to ﬁnd other models of open induction in the
ﬁeld of real Puiseux series F , satisfying additional properties of the ordered
ring of integers. Perhaps the most extreme possibility in this regard is that F
contains a model of open induction that is diophantine correct. We shall say
that an ordered ring is diophantine correct if it satisﬁes every universal sentence
true in the ordered ring of integers. We refer to the theory of diophantine
correct models of open induction as DOI .
To make this notion precise,
we shall assume that ordered rings have signature ( + −· ≤0 1 ).
All
formulas will assumed to be of this type. Diophantine correctness amounts
to the requirement that an ordered ring not satisfy any system of polynomial
equations and inequalities that has no solution in the ring of integers.
Shepherdson’s models are not diophantine correct.4 However, there are
other models of open induction in the ﬁeld of real Puiseux series, notably the
rings constructed by Berarducci and Otero [1], which are not obviously not
diophantine correct. More generally, it seems to be unknown whether the
ﬁeld of real Puiseux series has a diophantine correct integer part.
Problem. Let F be the ﬁeld of Puiseux series with coeﬃcients in a real closed
subﬁeld E of R of positive transcendence degree over the rationals. Must (Can)
F contain a model of DOI other than Z?
We prove in Section 2 that the ﬁeld E must have positive transcendence
degree, otherwise the only model of DOI contained in F is Z.
Wilkie’s theorems and the models of Berarducci and Otero. Wilkie [10] gave
necessary and suﬃcient conditions for an ordinary (unordered) ring R to have
an expansion to an ordered ring that extends to a model of open induction.
These conditions are
(1) For each prime p, there must be a homomorphism hp : R →Zp, where
Zp is the ring of p-adic integers.5
(2) It must be possible to discretely order the ring R.
4For example, there are positive solutions of the equation x2 = 2y2 via the Puiseux polynomials
x =
√
2t and y = t.
5This is equivalent to the condition that for every positive integer n and every prime p there is
a homomorphism from R onto the ring Z/pnZ.

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
95
These conditions are independent. For example, the ring R = Z[t, (t2 + 1)/3]
is discretely ordered by making t inﬁnite.6 But the equation 1 + x2 = 3y is
solvable in R but not in Z3, so there is no homomorphism from R into Z3.
Conversely, let g(t) be the polynomial (t2 −13)(t2 −17)(t2 −221). The
ring R = Z[t, t + 1/(1 + g(t)2)] can be mapped homomorphically to Zp for
every p,7 but cannot be discretely ordered: The second generator minus the
ﬁrst is between two integers if t is not.
Wilkie [10] gave conditions under which an ordered ring can be extended so
as to preserve these two conditions (using a single ordering.) We paraphrase
his results.
Theorem (Wilkie’s Extension Theorem). Let R be discretely ordered ring.
Suppose that for every prime p there is a homomorphism hp : R →Zp. Let F
be a real closed ﬁeld containing R and let s ∈F . Then
(1) If s is not a ﬁnite distance from any element of R[Q], and s is not inﬁnitely
close to any element of the real closure of R in F , then R[s] is discretely
ordered as a subring of F , and the homomorphisms hp can be extended to
R[s] by assigning p-adic values to s arbitrarily.
(2) If s ∈R[Q], then choose n ∈Z so that ns ∈R. Choose m ∈Z so that n
divides hp(ns) −m in Zp, for every prime p. Put r = (ns −m)/n. Then
R[r] is discretely ordered, and the homomorphisms hp extend to R[r] via
hp(r) = (hp(ns) −m)/n.
The choice of m in Case (2) is always possible because n will be a unit in Zp
for all p prime to n. Suppose n has prime decomposition  pei
i . For each of
the prime divisors pi of n, choose mi ∈Z so close8 to hpi(ns) that mi ≡hpi(ns)
mod pei
i . Then use the Chinese remainder theorem to get m ≡mi mod pei.
The point is that starting with an ordered ring R and homomorphisms hp as
above, one can extend R to a model of open induction by repeatedly adjoining
missing integer parts of elements of a real closure of R. We give an example
of how this is done. Let R = Z[t], and let F be the ﬁeld of real Puiseux series.
Let hp : R →Zp be the homomorphism given by the rule9
hp(f(t)) = f

1 + p + p2 + . . .

.
Think of the polynomial s = t2/36 as an element of some ﬁxed real closure of
R. Then s has no integer part in R. We shall adjoin an integer part via Case (2).
6To prove discreteness, ﬁrst show that R/3R is a nine-element ﬁeld. If H is a polynomial
with integer coeﬃcients and if r = H(t, (t2 + 1)/3) is ﬁnite but not an integer, then r has the
form a/3n, where 3 ̸ | a and n > 0. Map the equation 3nH(t, (t2 + 1)/3) = a to R/3R to get a
contradiction.
7To ﬁnd a homomorphism h from R into Zp, use the fact that the polynomial g(x) has p-adic
zeros for all p. See [3]. Set hp(x) = r, where r is a p-adic zero of g, and set hp(x + 1/(1 + g2)) =
r + 1, and show that hp extends to a homomorphism from R into Zp.
8In the sense of the p-adic metric.
9hp is the unique homomorphism from R into Zp taking t to 1/(1 −p) = 1 + p + p2 + . . . .

96
SIDNEY RAFFER
Since 36s ∈R, we must ﬁnd m ∈Z so close to hp(36s) = 1 + 2p + 3p2 + . . .
that 36 will divide hp(36s) −m. This is only an issue for p = 2, 3, since
otherwise 36 is a unit. It is enough to solve the congruences
m ≡1 + 2 · 21
mod 22
m ≡1 + 2 · 31
mod 32.
Here m = 25 does the job. Thus we adjoin (36s −25)/36 = (t2 −25)/36 to R.
To continue, the element
√
2t is not within a ﬁnite distance of any element of
the ring R1 = Z[t, (t2−25)/36]. We can ﬁx that via Case (1) by adjoining
√
2t+
r, where r is any transcendental real number. The fact that r is transcendental
insures that
√
2t + r is not inﬁnitely close to any element of the real closure
of R1. We can extend the maps hp to R1 by assigning p-adic values to
√
2t + r
arbitrarily.
The models of open induction in [1] are constructed, with some careful
bookkeeping, by iterating the procedure just described. Up to isomorphism,
the result is a polynomial ring R over Z in inﬁnitely many variables that
becomes a model of open induction by adjoining elements r/n (r ∈R, n ∈Z)
in accordance with Case (2) of Wilkie’s extension theorem. We suspect that
all of these rings are diophantine correct. As we shall see, the question turns
on how subtle are the polynomial identities that can hold on the integer points
of a certain class of semialgebraic sets.
The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 1 we give a simpliﬁed ax-
iom system for DOI . In Section 2 we give number-theoretic conditions for
a ﬁnitely generated ring of Puiseux polynomials to be diophantine correct:
We show how the diophantine correctness of such a ring is a problem about
the distributions of the values at integer points of certain tuples of general-
ized polynomials.10 In Section 3 we give some recent results on generalized
polynomials, and in Section 4 we use these results to give a class of ordered
rings of Puiseux polynomials for which consistency with the axioms of open
induction and diophantine correctness are equivalent.
§1. Axioms for DOI . In this section we prove that DOI is equivalent to
all true (in Z) sentences ∀¯x∃yφ, with φ an open formula. The underlying
reason for this fact is that compositions of the integer part operator with
semialgebraic functions suﬃce to witness the existential quantiﬁer in every
true ∀¯x∃y sentence.
Theorem 1.1. DOI is axiomatized by the set of all sentences true in the
ordered ring of integers of the form ∀x1∀x2 . . . ∀xn∃yφ, with φ an open formula.
10A generalized polynomial is an expression made from arbitrary compositions of real poly-
nomials with the integer part operator. See [2].

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
97
The proof requires two lemmas. The ﬁrst is a parametric version of the fact
that deﬁnable subsets in real closed ﬁelds are ﬁnite unions of intervals.
Let F be a real closed ﬁeld and φ(x, ¯y) a formula. For each ¯r ∈F , the subset
of F deﬁned by φ(x, ¯r) can be expressed as a ﬁnite union I1,¯r ∪· · ·∪In,¯r, where
the Ii,¯r are either singletons or open intervals with endpoints in F ∪{±∞}.
We shall require the fact that for each φ there are formulas i(x, ¯y) such that
for every ¯r, the i(x, ¯r) deﬁne such intervals Ii,¯r.
Lemma 1.2. Let φ(x, ¯y) be a formula in the language of ordered rings. Then
there is a ﬁnite list of open formulas i(x, ¯y) such that the theory of real closed
ﬁelds proves the following sentences:
(1) ∀x, ¯y (φ(x, ¯y) ↔$
i i(x, ¯y))
(2) 
i ∀¯y ((¬∃x i(x, ¯y)) ∨
(∃!x i(x, ¯y)) ∨
(∃z∀x(i(x, ¯y) ↔x < z)) ∨
(∃z∀x(i(x, ¯y) ↔x > z)) ∨
(∃z, w ∀x (i(x, ¯y) ↔z < x < w)))
Formula (1) asserts that for any tuple ¯r in a real closed ﬁeld, the set deﬁned
by φ(x, ¯r) is the union of the sets deﬁned by the i(x, ¯r). Formula (2) asserts
that each set deﬁned by i(x, ¯r) is either empty, or a singleton, or an open
interval.
Proof. This is a well-known consequence of Thom’s Lemma. See [8].
⊣
The next Lemma shows that in models of OI , a one-quantiﬁer universal
formula is equivalent to an existential formula.
Lemma 1.3. For every formula ∀x φ(x, y) with φ open, there are open formu-
las i(xi, y) such that
OI ⊢∀y

(∀xφ(x, y)) ↔

i ∃xii(xi, y)

.
The idea of the proof is as follows: If the formula ∀xφ(x, r) holds in some
model R of open induction, with ¯r ∈R, then the formula φ(x, r) must hold
for all elements x of the real closure of R, except for ﬁnitely many intervals Ui
of length at most 1. The existential formula ∃xii(xi, y) says that for some
ei ∈R, the set Ui is included in the open interval (ei, ei + 1).
Proof of Lemma 1.3. Let i be the formulas given by the statement of
Lemma 1.2, using ¬φ in place of φ. Thus Formula (1) of Lemma 1.2 now
reads
∀x, ¯y

¬φ(x, ¯y) ↔

i i(x, ¯y)

.
(∗)
By Tarski’s Theorem, choose quantiﬁer free formulas αi(z, ¯y) and i(z, ¯y)
such that the theory of real closed ﬁelds proves
∀z, ¯y (αi(z, ¯y) ↔∀w (i(w, ¯y) →z < w))

98
SIDNEY RAFFER
and
∀z, ¯y (i(z, ¯y) ↔∀w (i(w, ¯y) →w < z)).
If F is a real closed ﬁeld, and if ¯r ∈F , then αi(xi, ¯r) deﬁnes all elements
xi of F such that xi is less than any element of the set deﬁned by i(x, ¯r).
Similarly, i(xi, ¯r) deﬁnes all elements xi of F such that xi is greater than any
element of the set deﬁned by i(x, ¯r).
Deﬁne the formula i(xi, y) required by the conclusion of the Lemma to
be
αi(xi, ¯y) ∧i(xi + 1, ¯y).
We must prove that the equivalence
∀¯y

(∀xφ(x, ¯y)) ↔

i ∃xii(xi, ¯y)

holds in every model of open induction R.
For the left-to-right direction, let ¯r be a tuple from R, and suppose that R
satisﬁes ∀x φ(x, ¯r). For each i we must ﬁnd g in R such that
R |= αi(g, ¯r) ∧i(g + 1, ¯r).
(∗∗)
Let F be a real closure of R. Let Ii,¯r be the open interval of F deﬁned by
the formula i(x, ¯r).
The interval Ii,¯r cannot be unbounded: It must have both endpoints in F .
Otherwise Ii,¯r would meet R.11
If Ii,¯r did meet R, then the universal sen-
tence (∗), would give an element e ∈R for which ¬φ(e, ¯r) holds, contrary
to our assumption that R |= ∀x φ(x, ¯r). Therefore Ii,¯r is a bounded open
interval.
If the interval Ii,¯r is empty, then every g ∈R will trivially satisfy condi-
tion (∗∗), and the proof will be complete. Therefore, we can assume that Ii,¯r
is nonempty. Formula (∗) then implies that the half-open intervals deﬁned by
the formulas αi(xi, ¯r) and i(xi + 1, ¯y) will each have an endpoint in F , i.e.,
they will not be of the form (−∞, ∞).
The least number principle for open induction12 implies that there is a
greatest element g ∈R such that R |= αi(g, ¯r). The maximality of g implies
that R |= ¬αi(g + 1, r). Hence g + 1 is at least as large as some element of
Ii,¯r. Since Ii,¯r is disjoint from R, it follows that g + 1 is greater than every
element of Ii,¯r. Therefore i(g + 1, ¯r) holds in R. We have found g satisfying
the required condition (∗∗).
11If R is an ordered ring and F is a real closure of R, then R is coﬁnal in F . [4].
12In a model of open induction R, if a non-empty set S ⊆R is deﬁned, possibly with
parameters, by an open formula, and if S is bounded below, say by b, then S has a least element.
The reason is that otherwise if s ∈S then the set of non-negative x ∈R such that x + b ≤s is
inductive.

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
99
For the right-to-left direction of the equivalence, assume that for every i,
we have elements bi ∈R such that
R |= αi(bi, ¯a) ∧i(bi + 1, ¯a).
This same formula will hold in F , hence for each i,
F |= ∀w (i(w, ¯a) →bi < w) ∧∀w (i(w, ¯a) →w < bi + 1).
The last displayed statement asserts that every element b of F satisfying i(b, ¯a)
lies between bi and bi + 1. But no element of R lies between bi and bi + 1.
Therefore for every b ∈R,
R |= ¬

i
i (b, ¯a) .
This assertion, together with (∗), gives the conclusion R |= ∀x φ(x, ¯a).
⊣
Proof of Theorem 1.1. Let T be the theory of all sentences true in Z of the
form ∀x1∀x2 . . . ∀xn∃yφ, with φ an open formula. We prove the equivalence
T ⇔DOI .
T ⇒DOI :
It is immediate that T ⇒DOR+∀1(Z). It remains to verify that T proves all
instances of the induction scheme for open formulas. For each open formula
φ, the induction axiom
∀x ((φ(x, 0) ∧∀y ≥0 (φ(x, y) →φ(x, y + 1))) →∀z ≥0 φ(x, z))
is logically equivalent to
∀x ∀z ∃y (z ≥0→(y ≥0 ∧φ(x, 0) ∧((φ(x, y)→φ(x, y + 1) )→φ(x, z)))).
The latter belongs to T.
DOI ⇒T :
Suppose that R |= DOI . Let φ(x, y) be an open formula such that
Z |= ∀x ∃y φ(x, y).
We prove that R |= ∀x ∃y φ(x, y).
By Lemma 1.3, there are open formulas i such that OI proves the equiv-
alence
∀x
	
(∃y φ(x, y)) ←→

i
∀zi(x, zi)

.
The last two displayed assertions imply that Z |= ∀¯x($
i ∀zi(x, zi)). But R
is diophantine correct, therefore R |= ∀¯x($
i ∀zi(x, zi)). Since R is a model
of OI , the above equivalence holds in R. Therefore R |= ∀¯x ∃y φ( ¯x, y).
⊣

100
SIDNEY RAFFER
§2. Diophantine correct rings of Puiseux polynomials. Let P denote the
ring of Puiseux polynomials with real coeﬃcients. We will think of Puiseux
polynomials interchangeably as formal objects and as functions from the
positive reals to the reals. The following theorem describes the conditions for
a ﬁnitely generated subring of P to be diophantine correct, in terms of the
coeﬃcients of a list of generating polynomials. We shall use this theorem to
investigate the diophantine correct subrings of P. To simplify notation we
temporarily assume that not all the coeﬃcients of the generating polynomials
are algebraic numbers.
Theorem 2.1. Let f1 . . . fn ∈P. Assume that the fi are non-constant, and
that the ﬁeld F generated by the coeﬃcients of the fi has transcendence degree
at least 1 over Q. Let ¯r = r1 . . . rl be a transcendence basis for F over Q. Then
(1) There is an open formula (x1 . . . xl, y1 . . . yn) such that (¯r, ¯y) holds in
R at ¯y if and only if for some real t ≥1, 
i yi = fi(t).
(2) Choose  as in (1). The ring Z[ ¯f] is diophantine correct if and only if for
every open neighborhood U ⊆Rl of ¯r and for every positive integer M,
there are points ¯s ∈U and integers ¯m such that mini |mi| > M and
R |= (¯s, ¯m).
We give two examples to show how Theorem 2.1 can be used to determine
whether a given subring of P is diophantine correct.
Example 2.2. Let R = Z[t, f(t) −r1], where r1 is a real transcendental
and f is a polynomial with algebraic coeﬃcients. The formula (r1, y1, y2)
expresses the condition
∃t ≥1 (y1 = t ∧y2 = f(y1) −r1).
Eliminating the quantiﬁer we obtain13
(r1, y1, y2) : y1 ≥1 ∧f(y1) −y2 = r1.
It follows that the ring R is diophantine correct if and only if there are
positive integers ¯y making f(y1) −y2 arbitrarily close to r1.
It is known14 that the values of f(y1) −y2 are either dense in the real line,
if f has an irrational coeﬃcient other than its constant term, or otherwise
discrete.
In the former case R is diophantine correct.
In the latter case
f(y1) −y2 could only approach r1 by being equal to r1, which is impossible
since r1 is transcendental.
Example 2.3. Let R = Z[t,
√
2t −r, 2
√
2rt −s], with r and s algebraically
independent. Then R is diophantine correct if and only if the point
√
2y1 −y2, 2
√
2y1
√
2 −y2

y1 −y3

(∗)
13For the sake of clarity we neglect the translation into the language of ordered rings.
14This is a consequence of Weyl’s Theorem on uniform distribution. See [5], p. 71.

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
101
can be made arbitrarily close to (r, s). This is a non-linear approximation
problem, and there is no well-developed theory of such problems. In this case
the identity
√
2y1 −y2
2 =

2
√
2y1
√
2 −y2

y1 −y3

−

2x2 −y2 −y3

implies that the point (∗) cannot tend to the pair (r, s) unless r2 −s is an
integer. Hence the requirement that r and s be algebraically independent
cannot be met.
The most general case of Theorem 2.1 cannot be written down explicitly,
because the algebraic relations between coeﬃcients can be arbitrarily com-
plex. But, following the notation of Theorem 2.1, the fact that the ri are
algebraically independent implies that in the relation ( ¯x, ¯y), if ¯x is restricted
to a small enough neighborhood of ¯r then each xi is a semialgebraic function
of ¯y.15 Therefore the problem of whether a ﬁnitely generated ring of Puiseux
polynomials is diophantine correct always has the form: “Are there tuples of
integers ¯y such that the points (1( ¯y), . . . , n( ¯y)) tend to the point ¯r?” where
the i are semialgebraic functions.
This general type of problem is undecidable, since it contains Hilbert’s
tenth problem.16
But the rings that we actually want to use to construct
models of open induction have a special form, which leads to a restricted class
of problems that may well be decidable. (See Section 3.)
We return to Theorem 2.1, and the conditions for Z[ ¯f] to be diophantine
correct. The idea of the proof is to think of the polynomials fi(t) as functions
of both t and ¯r. If φ is an open formula, then the statement that φ( ¯f) holds
in Z[ ¯f] can be expressed as another open formula (¯r). The latter must hold
on an entire neighborhood of ¯r, since the ri are algebraically independent. If
Z[ ¯f] |= φ( ¯f) then we can try to perturb the ri a tiny bit for very large t so as
to make the values fi(¯r, t) into integers. The formula  expresses the relation
between the perturbed values of ¯r and the resulting integer values of ¯f.
We hope that this explanation motivates the use of following three Lemmas.
We omit the straightforward proofs.
Lemma 2.4. Let f1, f2 . . . fn ∈P. Let φ( ¯x) be an open formula. Then
Z[ ¯f] |= φ( ¯f) if and only if for all suﬃciently positive t ∈R, the formula φ( ¯x)
holds in R at the tuple of real numbers ¯f(t).
⊣
Lemma 2.5. Let ¯f = f1(t) . . . fn(t) ∈P. The ordered ring Z[ ¯f] is diophan-
tine correct if and only if for every open formula φ( ¯x) such that Z[ ¯f] |= φ( ¯f),
there exists ¯m ∈Z such that Z |= φ( ¯m).
⊣
15See [8], p. 32, Lemma 1.3.
16For example, f(y1, . . . , yn−2)2 + (
√
2yn−1 −yn)2 can be made arbitrarily close to a given
number r between 0 and 1 if and only if f has an integer zero.

102
SIDNEY RAFFER
Lemma 2.6. Suppose that φ( ¯x) is a formula and ¯r ∈Rn is a tuple of alge-
braically independent real numbers.17 If R |= φ(¯r), then there is a neighborhood
U of ¯r such that for every ¯u ∈U, R |= φ( ¯u).
⊣
Proof of Theorem 2.1. To prove Part (1), let fi(t) = gi(¯c, t), where gi is
a polynomial with integer coeﬃcients, and the ci are algebraic over the ﬁeld
Q(¯r). Then ci can be deﬁned from the ri, say by a formula i(¯r, ¯c). Eliminate
quantiﬁers from the formula
∃t ≥1 ∃¯w

yi = gi( ¯w, t) ∧i( ¯w, ¯x))
to obtain an open formula i( ¯x, yi), and let  be the conjunction of the i.
To prove the left-to-right direction of Part (2), assume that Z[ ¯f] is diophan-
tine correct, and let ¯r and  be as in Part (1). Let U ⊆Rl be an open set
containing ¯r, and ﬁx a positive integer M. We must ﬁnd ¯s ∈U and ¯m ∈Zn,
with |mi| > M, such that (¯s, ¯m) holds in R.
Since U is open, there is a formula ( ¯x) which holds at ¯r, and which deﬁnes
an open set included in U. By Tarski’s theorem, there is an open formula
1( ¯y) such that
RCF ⊢1( ¯y) ↔∃¯x
		
i
|yi| > M

∧( ¯x) ∧( ¯x, ¯y)

.
The formula 1(f1(t), . . . , fn(t)) must hold in R for all suﬃciently large
t, since the functions |fi(t)| tend to inﬁnity with t, and since moreover we
can witness the above existential quantiﬁer with ¯r. Therefore, by Lemma 2.4,
Z[ ¯f] |= 1( ¯f).
Since Z[ ¯f] is diophantine correct, it follows that there are integers ¯m ∈Zn
satisfying 1( ¯y). Substituting ¯m for ¯y in the above equivalence, the right hand
side gives a tuple ¯s ∈R such that
R |=
		
i
|mi| > M

∧(¯s) ∧(¯s, ¯m)

.
Since ( ¯x) deﬁnes a subset of U, the displayed statement conﬁrms that ¯s
and ¯m are the tuples required.
To prove the right-to-left direction of Part (2), let φ be an open formula such
that R[ ¯f] |= φ( ¯f). We prove that there are integers ¯m such that φ( ¯m) holds
in Z. It will follow immediately from Lemma 2.5 that Z[ ¯f] is diophantine
correct.
Since φ is open and since φ( ¯f) holds in Z[ ¯f], it follows from Lemma 2.4
that φ(f1(t), . . . , fn(t)) holds in R for all suﬃciently positive t. Choose k > 1
such that φ(f1(t), . . . , fn(t)) holds in R for t > k.
17Algebraically independent over Q.

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
103
The set of points (f1(t), . . . , fn(t)) with 1 ≤t ≤k is bounded. Therefore
we can choose M ∈Z so large that if t ≥1 and if mini |fi(t)| > M, then
t > k. For this choice of M, the formula ( ¯x) will hold in R at ¯r, where ( ¯x)
is the formula
∀¯y
		
( ¯x, ¯y) ∧
	
i
|yi| > M

→φ( ¯y)

.
By Lemma 2.6, the subset of Rl deﬁned by ( ¯x) must include a neighborhood
U of ¯r. By hypothesis, we can choose ¯s ∈U and ¯m ∈Zn so that
R |= (¯s, ¯m) ∧

i
|mi| > M.
Instantiating the universal quantiﬁer in (¯s) with ¯m, we conclude that φ( ¯m)
holds in Z.
⊣
Remark 2.7. If the fi have algebraic coeﬃcients, then R[ ¯f] is diophantine
correct if and only if there is a sequence of real numbers ui tending to inﬁnity
such that ¯f(ui) ∈Zn. To prove this, one takes the transcendence basis ¯r to
empty in the proof of Theorem 2.1 and one follows the proof, making all the
necessary changes. This case is not important for our purposes because of the
following fact.
Proposition 2.8. There are no models of DOI of transcendence degree one.
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that R is a model of DOI of
transcendence degree 1. Let a be a non-standard element of R. Let b ∈R
be an integer part of
3√
2a. Then there is a nonzero polynomial p with integer
coeﬃcients such that p(a, b) = 0. We can assume that p is irreducible over
the rationals. Since R is diophantine correct, the equation p(x, y) = 0 must
have inﬁnitely many standard solutions. We shall prove that this is impossible.
Write p = p0 + · · · + pn, where pi is homogeneous of degree i, and pn ̸= 0.
Then p(a, b) has the form !n
i=0 pi(1, b/a)ai.
Observe that b/a is ﬁnite, in fact inﬁnitely close to
3√
2, hence all the values
pi(1, b/a) are ﬁnite. It follows that for p(a, b) to be zero, pn(1, b/a) must
be inﬁnitesimal; otherwise pn(1, b/a)an would dominate all the other terms
pi(1, b/a)ai, and then p(a, b) could not even be ﬁnite.
Since b/a is inﬁnitely close to
3√
2, it follows that pn(1,
3√
2) = 0. Since pn
has integer coeﬃcients, the polynomial y3 −2 must divide pn(1, y). It follows
that y3 −2x3 divides pn.
But if f(x, y) is any polynomial with integer coeﬃcients irreducible over
the rationals, and if f has inﬁnitely many integer zeros, then the leading
homogeneous part of f must be a constant multiple of a power of a linear or
quadratic form.18 This is not the case for pn, thanks to the factor y3 −2x3.
18See [6], p. 266.

104
SIDNEY RAFFER
Therefore p cannot have inﬁnitely many integer solutions. This is the required
contradiction.
⊣
§3. Generalized polynomials.
Special sequences of polynomials. We now focus on a restricted class of rings,
which arise by adjoining sequences of integer parts using Wilkie’s extension
theorem (given in the Introduction.)
A similar but more general type of
sequence was deﬁned in [1] to construct normal models of open induction.
Deﬁnition 3.1. A sequence of polynomials is special if it has the form
f0(t), f1(t) −r1, . . . , fn(t) −rn,
where
(1) f0(t) = t, and the coeﬃcients of f1(t) are algebraic.
(2) The ri are algebraically independent real numbers.
(3) For i > 1, the polynomial fi has the form gi(t, r1 . . . ri−1) where gi is a
polynomial with algebraic coeﬃcients.
Note that a ring Z[ ¯f] generated by a special sequence contains the polyno-
mial t. As a consequence, a polynomial is algebraic over Z[ ¯f] if and only if its
coeﬃcients are algebraic over the ﬁeld generated by the coeﬃcients of the fi.
Example 3.2. The sequence of polynomials t,
√
2t −r2, rt −s, where r, s
are algebraically independent real numbers, is not a special sequence because
rt is not a polynomial in r2 and t. The sequence t, 2t −r, (r2 + s)t −s is not
a special sequence because (r2 + s)t is not a polynomial in r and t.
The conditions for a ring generated by a special sequence to be diophantine
correct can be written out explicitly.
Proposition 3.3. Suppose that f0(t), f1(t) −r1, . . . , fn(t) −rn is a special
sequence, with 0 < ri < 1. Let R = Z[ ¯f]. Choose polynomials gi(t, ¯r) as in
Item (3) of Deﬁnition 3.1.
Deﬁne the polynomials i inductively as follows. Let 1(y0) = f1(y0). For
i > 1, let
i(y0 . . . yi−1) = gi(y0, 1(y0) −y1, . . . , i−1(y0 . . . yi−2) −yi−1).
Then
(1) R is diophantine correct if and only if the system of inequalities
|1(y0) −y1 −r1| < 
|2(y0, y1) −y2 −r2| < 
. . . . . .
|n(y0, y1 . . . yn−1) −yn −rn| < 
has integer solutions yi for every positive .

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
105
(2) For all suﬃciently small positive , if ¯y is a solution to the inequalities (1)
then yi = ⌊i(y0 . . . yi−1)⌋.
Proof. Item (1) simply spells out Theorem 2.1 for rings generated by special
sequences. Item (2) follows from the assumption that the ri are in the interval
(0, 1), hence so are the values i(y0 . . . yi−1) −yi if  is small enough.
⊣
There is another way to think of the inequalities in Proposition 3.3. Since
the equation yi = ⌊i(y0 . . . yi−1)⌋, holds for all small enough , it follows
that
i(y0 . . . yi−1) −yi = {i(y0 . . . yi−1)},
where { · } is the fractional part operator, deﬁned by {x} = x−⌊x⌋. Replacing
y1 with ⌊1(y0)⌋in the right hand side of the above equation and continuing
in this fashion, we eventually obtain an expression for {i(y0 . . . yi−1)} as a
function of y0 alone, where the expression is build from constants and the
ring operations and the fractional and integer part operators. Following [2],
we will call such expressions bounded generalized polynomials. The reason for
performing this transformation is to relate our questions about diophantine
correct rings to a substantial body of results about the distribution of the
values of generalized polynomials.
Proposition 3.4. Assume 0 < ri < 1. For each system of polynomial in-
equalities
|1(y0) −y1 −r1| < 
|2(y0, y1) −y2 −r2| < 
. . . . . .
|n(y0, y1 . . . yn−1) −yn −rn| < 
there is an associated system of bounded generalized polynomial inequalities
n
i=1
|i(y0) −ri| < 
where the i are deﬁned by
i(y0) = i(y0 . . . yi−1) −yi,
and the yi for i > 0 are deﬁned recursively by
yi = ⌊i(y0 . . . yi−1)⌋.

106
SIDNEY RAFFER
Speciﬁcally,
1(y0) = {1(y0)}
2(y0) = {2(y0, ⌊1(y0)⌋)}
3(y0) = {3(y0, ⌊1(y0)⌋, ⌊2(y0, ⌊1(y0)⌋)⌋)}
. . . . . .
For all suﬃciently small  > 0 an integer y0 satisﬁes the associated system
if and only if there are integers y1 . . . yn such that y0 . . . yn satisﬁes the original
system.
Since open induction is essentially the theory of abstract integer parts, there
is an obvious connection between open induction and generalized polynomi-
als, yet a systematic study of generalized polynomials v´ıs a v´ıs open induction
remains to be done.
There are generalized polynomial identities, that hold for all integers, such
as
√
2x
2 =

2
√
2x
√
2x

.
Observe that this phenomenon can be explained by the fact that the ring
Z
%
t,
√
2t −r, 2
√
2rt −s
&
,
where r and s are algebraically independent real numbers, does not extend to
a model of open induction. Indeed, we have the identity
H

t,
√
2t −r, 2
√
2rt −s

= s −r2,
where H(x, y, z) = 2x2 −y2 −z; so the ring is not discretely ordered. Sub-
stituting {
√
2x} for r and {2
√
2x{
√
2x}} for s one immediately deduces the
generalized polynomial identity mentioned above.
Do all generalized polynomial identities arise in this way from ordered rings
that violate open induction?
Theorems on generalized polynomials. The study of systems of polynomial
inequalities of type
|1(y0) −y1| < 
|2(y0, y1) −y2| < 
(∗)
. . . . . .
|n(y0, y1 . . . yn−1) −yn| < 
goes back at least to Van der Corput. He proved
Theorem 3.5 (Van der Corput [9]). If a system of polynomial inequalities of
type (∗) has a solution in integers then it has inﬁnitely many integer solutions.

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
107
Moreover, the set S ⊆Z of integers y0 for which there is a solution y0 . . . yn is
syndetic.19
As far we know no one has given an algorithm for the solvability of arbitrary
systems of type (∗). We believe that if a system of type (∗) with real algebraic
coeﬃcients has no integer solutions, then this fact is provable from the axioms
of open induction.
By far the most far-reaching results on generalized polynomials are to be
found in Bergelson and Leibman [2]. We paraphrase an important result from
this paper, for use in Section 4.
Theorem 3.6 (Bergelson and Leibman [2]). Let g : Z →Rn be a map whose
components are bounded generalized polynomials. Then there is a subset S of
Z of density20 zero such that the closure of the set of values of g on the integers
not in S is a semialgebraic set C. (I.e. C is deﬁnable by a formula with real
parameters in the language of ordered rings.) If the coeﬃcients of g are algebraic
then C is deﬁnable without parameters.
§4. A Class of Diophantine correct ordered rings. The next theorem identi-
ﬁes a class of diophantine correct ordered rings made from special sequences
of polynomials.
Theorem 4.1. For i = 1 . . . n let gi(t, x1, . . . , xi−1) be polynomials with al-
gebraic coeﬃcients. For each n-tuple of algebraically independent real numbers
¯r such that 0 < ri < 1, let R¯r be the ring
Z[t, g1(t) −r1, g2(t, r1) −r2, . . . gn(t, r1, . . . , rn−1) −rn]
Then
(1) If the ring R¯r extends to a model of open induction for one algebraically
independent n-tuple ¯r then it does so for all such n-tuples ¯r.
(2) If the rings R¯r extend to models of open induction, then there is an open
subset S of the unit box [0, 1]n such that for all algebraically independent
¯r ∈S, the ring R¯r is diophantine correct.
Proof of (1). Let ¯r be an n-tuple of real numbers with algebraically inde-
pendent coordinates. Since the ring R¯r is generated by algebraically indepen-
dent polynomials, R¯r will extend to a model of open induction if and only if
it is discretely ordered. (See the section on Wilkie’s theorems in the Introduc-
tion.) If R¯r is not discretely ordered, then there is an identity of polynomials
19A subset S of Z is syndetic if there are ﬁnitely many integers vi ∈Z such that the union of
translates 
i S +vi is equal to Z. Equivalently, the gaps between the elements of S have bounded
lengths.
20Density means here Folner density, deﬁned as follows. A Folner sequence (in Z) is a sequence
of ﬁnite subsets si of Z such that for every n ∈Z, limm→∞|(sm + n)Δsm|/|sm| = 0. Here Δ
means symmetric diﬀerence, and sm + n = {x + n : x ∈sm}. A set of integers S has Folner
density zero if limn→∞|S ∩sn|/|sn| = 0 for every Folner sequence sn.

108
SIDNEY RAFFER
in t of the form
H(t, g1(t) −r1, . . . , gn(t, r1 . . . rn−1) −rn) = K(¯r),
where H and K are polynomials and H has integer coeﬃcients. If such an
identity holds for one tuple ¯r with algebraically independent coordinates, then
it holds for them all.
⊣
Proof of (2). The case n = 1 is done in Example 2.2. We show there that
one can take S to be the interval (0, 1).
Assume n > 1, and assume that the rings R¯r extend to models of open
induction. The proof will proceed by induction on n.
Copying Proposition 3.3, we construct a sequence of polynomials i induc-
tively as follows: Let 1(y0) = f1(y0). For i > 1, let
i(y0 . . . yi−1) = gi(y0, 1(y0) −y1, . . . , i−1(y0 . . . yi−2) −yi−1).
Then the ring R¯r is diophantine correct if and only if for all positive  the
inequalities
|1(y0) −y1 −r1| < 
|2(y0, y1) −y2 −r2| < 
. . . . . .
(∗)
|n(y0, y1 . . . yn−1) −yn −rn| < 
have integer solutions yi. As in Proposition 3.4, we deﬁne the generalized
polynomials
i(y0) = i(y0 . . . yi−1) −yi,
where yi is deﬁned inductively by
yi = ⌊i(y0 . . . yi−1)⌋.
Then for small enough  the inequalities |i(y0) −ri| <  hold for y0 if and
only if the inequalities (∗) hold for y0 and some choice of integers y1 . . . yn.
By Theorem 3.5, there is a subset B of Z of Folner density 0 such that the
closure of the points ¯(x) for x ̸∈B is a semialgebraic set C deﬁned over Q.
If the cell decomposition of C has an n-dimensional cell,21 then C contains
an open subset of [0, 1]n and the theorem is proved. Otherwise, there is a
non-zero polynomial h with integer coeﬃcients such that
h(1(x) . . . n(x)) = 0
for all integers x not in B.22
Our goal is to prove that this is impossible, by showing that if such an
equation held, then R¯r would not be discretely ordered.
21See [8] Chapter 3.
22Semialgebraic sets of codimension at least one satisfy nontrivial polynomial equations. [8]

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
109
By the induction hypothesis there is an open set S ⊆[0, 1]n−1 such that for
all points ¯s ∈S with algebraically independent coordinates, the rings R¯s are
diophantine correct.
Fix a point ¯s ∈S with algebraically independent coordinates. We shall need
to know that there are integers m ̸∈B for which the point (1(m) . . . n−1(m))
comes arbitrarily close to ¯s.
Let  > 0. Since R¯s is diophantine correct, Proposition 3.3 Part (1) and
Proposition 3.4 imply that there is an integer m such that
|(1(m) . . . n−1(m)) −¯s| < .
(∗∗)
By Theorem 3.5 the solutions to (∗∗) are syndetic. But no syndetic set has
Folner density zero.23 Therefore, for each  > 0 there is an integer m ̸∈B
satisfying (∗∗).
Fix a sequence of integers mi ̸∈B such that the point (1(mi) . . . n−1(mi))
tends to ¯s.
Deﬁne V ⊆Zn+1 to be the set of all points

mi, ⌊g1(mi)⌋, ⌊g2(mi, 1(mi))⌋, . . . ⌊gn(mi, 1(mi) . . . n−1(mi))⌋)
for i = 1, 2 . . . .
The equation h(1(mi) . . . n(mi)) = 0 holds for all i. Therefore, the equa-
tion
h(1(y0) −y1 . . . n(y0 . . . yn−1) −yn) = 0
holds for all points (y0 . . . yn) ∈V . Let H( ¯y) denote the polynomial on the
left of the above expression, so H( ¯y) has algebraic coeﬃcients and vanishes
on V .
We claim that H must have a non-constant factor with rational coeﬃcients.
We shall prove this by arguing that the Zariski closure of V over the complex
numbers includes a hypersurface in Cn+1. The vanishing ideal of that hyper-
surface will be principal, and deﬁned over Q, hence generated by a rational
polynomial. That rational polynomial will be a divisor of H.
To proceed, choose an inﬁnite subset V0 of V such that the Zariski closure
Z of V0 is an irreducible component of the Zariski closure of V . We will
show that Z is a hypersurface in Cn+1 by arguing that no non-zero complex
polynomial k(y0 . . . yn−1) vanishes on V0.
Just suppose that k(y0 . . . yn−1) did vanish on V0. Since V0 ⊂Rn+1, we can
assume that k has real coeﬃcients. Since the coordinates of ¯s are algebraically
independent, it follows that k(t, g1(t) −s1, . . . , gn−1(t, s1 . . . sn−2) −sn−1) is
23Let si be the set of integers between −i and i.
Then si is a Folner sequence.
If D is
any syndetic set of integers, then choose M so that D meets every interval of length M. Then
lim infi→∞|D ∩si|/|si| will be at least 1/M, so D cannot have density 0.

110
SIDNEY RAFFER
not the zero polynomial. Write
k(t, g1(t) −s1, . . . , gn−1(t, s1 . . . sn−2) −sn−1) =
L

i=1
ki(¯s)ti
with kL(¯s) ̸= 0. Choose a neighborhood U of ¯s on which kL( ¯x) is bounded
away from zero. Then we can choose M so large that for t > M and for
¯x ∈U, it holds that
k(t, g1(t) −x1, . . . , gn−1(t, x1 . . . xn−2) −xn−1) ̸= 0.
(∗∗∗)
Now choose i so that
(1) mi > M.
(2) (1(mi) . . . n−1(mi)) ∈U.
(3) (mi, ⌊g1(mi)⌋, ⌊g2(mi, 1(mi))⌋, . . . ⌊gn(mi, 1(mi) . . . n−1(mi))⌋)∈V0.
Substituting 1(mi) . . . n−1(mi) for x1 . . . xn−1 and also mi for t in (∗∗∗) we
obtain
k(mi, g1(mi) −1(mi), . . . , gn−1(mi, 1(mi), . . . , n−2(mi)) −n−1(mi)) ̸= 0.
Looking at the deﬁnition of the i, we see that the above inequation is equiv-
alent to
k(mi, ⌊g1(mi)⌋, ⌊g2(mi, 1(mi))⌋, . . . , ⌊gn(mi, 1(mi), . . . , n−1(mi))⌋) ̸= 0.
But this is a contradiction, because the point
(mi, ⌊g1(mi)⌋, ⌊g2(mi, 1(mi))⌋, . . . , ⌊gn(mi, 1(mi), . . . , n−1(mi))⌋)
is an element of V0, hence k vanishes at this point. We conclude that Z, which
is the Zariski closure of V0, is a hypersurface in Cn+1.
The vanishing ideal I ⊆C[ ¯y] of Z is principal. Since Z is the Zariski
closure of a set of points with integer coordinates, I has a generator Q in
Q[ ¯y]. The polynomial Q is the divisor of H that we were after.
To complete the proof, suppose H factors as Q·P. Then the coeﬃcients of P
are real algebraic numbers, and we have the following equality of polynomials:
Q( ¯y) · P( ¯y) = h(1(y0) −y1 . . . n(y0 . . . yn−1) −yn)
Substituting gi(t, ¯s) −ri for yi (i = 1 . . . n) in the last equation, we obtain
A · B = h(r1 . . . rn),
where
A = Q(t, g1(t) −r1, . . . , gn(t, r1 . . . rn−1) −rn)
and
B = P(t, g1(t) −r1, . . . , gn(t, r1 . . . rn−1) −rn).

DIOPHANTINE CORRECT OPEN INDUCTION
111
Working in the ordered ring
Q[t, g1(t) −r1, g2(t, r1) −r2, . . . gn(t, r1, . . . , rn−1) −rn],
we have that A·B is ﬁnite, and neither is inﬁnitesimal, therefore both are ﬁnite.
But A has the form A1/n, where A1 is a polynomial with integer coeﬃcients.
Thus A1 is a ﬁnite transcendental element of R¯r. But then R¯r is not discretely
ordered, contrary to our assumption that R¯r extends to a model of open
induction.
⊣
Remark 4.2. Theorem 4.1 is almost certainly not giving the whole truth.
We believe that a ring R¯r generated by a special sequence is diophantine correct
if and only it extends to a model of open induction, with no restrictions on the
tuple ¯r beyond algebraic independence. We also believe that a theorem like
Theorem 4.1 holds for the more general sequences of Puiseux polynomials
used to construct models of open induction in [1]. To prove this, one must
extend the results of [2] to an appropriate class of “generalized” semialgebraic
functions, that is, compositions of semialgebraic functions with the integer
part operator.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Berarducci and M. Otero, A recursive nonstandard model of normal open induction,
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 61 (1996), no. 4, pp. 1228–1241.
[2] V. Bergelson and A. Leibman, Distribution of values of bounded generalized polynomials,
Acta Mathematica, vol. 198 (2007), no. 2, pp. 155–230.
[3] A. I. Borevich and I. R. Shafarevich, Number Theory, Academic Press, New York, 1966.
[4] G. Brumﬁel, Partially Ordered Rings and Semi-Algebraic Geometry, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1979.
[5] J. W. S. Cassels, Diophantine Approximation, Cambridge University Press, New York,
1957.
[6] L. J. Mordell, Diophantine Equations, Academic Press, London, 1969.
[7] J. C. Shepherdson, A non-standard model for a free variable fragment of number theory,
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences. S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques
et Physiques, vol. 12 (1964), pp. 79–86.
[8] L. van den Dries, Tame Topology and O-Minimal Structures, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1998.
[9] J. G. van der Corput, Diophantische Ungleichungen, Acta Mathematica, vol. 59 (1932),
no. 1, pp. 209–328.
[10] A. J. Wilkie, Some results and problems on weak systems of arithmetic, Logic Colloquium
’77 (A. Macintyre et al., editors), North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1978, pp. 285–296.
PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA
E-mail: sraﬀer@gmail.com

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
JAMES H. SCHMERL
To honor and celebrate the memory of Stanley Tennenbaum
Stanley Tennenbaum’s inﬂuential 1959 theorem asserts that there are no
recursive nonstandard models of Peano Arithmetic (PA). This theorem ﬁrst
appeared in his abstract [42]; he never published a complete proof. Tennen-
baum’s Theorem has been a source of inspiration for much additional work
on nonrecursive models. Most of this eﬀort has gone into generalizing and
strengthening this theorem by trying to ﬁnd the extent to which PA can be
weakened to a subtheory and still have no recursive nonstandard models.
Kaye’s contribution [12] to this volume has more to say about this direction.
This paper is concerned with another line of investigation motivated by
two reﬁnements of Tennenbaum’s theorem in which not just the model is
nonrecursive, but its additive and multiplicative reducts are each nonrecursive.
For the following stronger form of Tennenbaum’s Theorem credit should also
be given to Kreisel [5] for the additive reduct and to McAloon [26] for the
multiplicative reduct.
Tennenbaum’s Theorem. If M = (M, +, ·, 0, 1, ≤) is a nonstandard model
of PA, then neither its additive reduct (M, +) nor its multiplicative reduct (M, ·)
is recursive.
What happens with other reducts? The behavior of the order reduct, as
is well known, is quite diﬀerent from that of the additive and multiplicative
reducts. The order type of every countable nonstandard model is  + (∗+
)·, where  and  are the order types of the nonnegative integers N and the
rationals Q, respectively. It is immediate from the deﬁnition of this order type
that there is a recursive linearly ordered set having this order type. Thus, any
attempt to adapt Tennenbaum’s Theorem to order reducts is doomed. This
essentially exhausts all the reducts, so in order to investigate further possible
generalizations of Tennenbaum’s Theorem, we will generalize the notion of a
reduct.
Consider a tuple ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) of formulas in the language
of PA, where ϕi(x) is an ni-ary formula. Given a model M |= PA, we deﬁne
the generalized reduct M↾[ϕ] to be the structure (M, R0, R1, . . . , Rk), where
Ri is the ni-ary relation deﬁned by ϕi(x). Thus, the additive reduct (M, +) is
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
112

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
113
M↾[x = y+z] and the multiplicative reduct (M, ·) is M↾[x = y·z]. Let Th[ϕ]
be the theory of the class of all generalized reducts M↾[ϕ], where M ranges
over all models of PA. Then, Presburger Arithmetic (Pr) is Th[x = y +z] and
Skolem Arithmetic (Sk) is Th[x = y · z]1.
For various speciﬁc tuples ϕ, the question of whether or not all generalized
reducts M↾[ϕ], where M is a nonstandard model, are nonrecursive can be
(and has been) asked. Two closely related generalized reducts were considered
in [37]. Let | be the partial ordering of divisibility; that is, if a, b are elements of
the nonstandard model M, then a|b iﬀa divides b. Then (M, |) is the divisibil-
ity poset, being the generalized reduct M↾[∃z(y = x · z)]. The divisibility lat-
tice is the generalized reduct (M, ∧, ∨) = M↾[z = gcd(x, y), z = lcm(x, y)].
(We are ignoring the annoyance caused by 0.) Let DP = Th[∃z(y = x · z)]
and DL = Th[z = gcd(x, y), z = lcm(x, y)].
I proved in [37] that there are recursively saturated (hence, nonstandard)
models M of PA whose generalized reducts (M, |) and (M, ∧, ∨) are recur-
sive, despite the fact that both DP and DL are rich theories. (See Deﬁni-
tion 1.1.) The proof of this will be presented in §4. It was noted in [37] that
if M is a nonstandard model of True Arithmetic (TA), then its divisibility
poset is not recursive; moreover, the same conclusion holds if M is 1-correct.
(See Corollary 1.5.) These results are indicative of the theme of this paper.
Given a tuple ϕ, we ask if there are (recursively saturated) models M of PA
for which M[ϕ] is recursive, and, if so, how close to TA can we get Th(M)
to be.
Following the preliminary §0 in which some of the notational and termino-
logical conventions used in this paper are given, §1 presents the generalization
of Tennebaum’s Theorem for generalized reducts. The key notions here are
that of a rich theory and its hierarchal reﬁnements, n-rich theories. Most
of this paper is concerned with generalized reducts for which Tennenbaum’s
Theorem fails. The notions of a thin theory and its hierarchal reﬁnements,
n-thin theories, introduced in §2, capture the key ideas in showing this failure.
The rest of this paper discusses various thin and n-thin theories. It is shown
in §3 that the n-thin hierarchy does not collapse. Using well-quaisi-ordered
classes of ﬁnite structure, we show in §4 that there are many 1-thin theories,
such as the theory of trees. The theory of linearly ordered sets is shown in §5
to be 2-thin. Finally, in §6, the results of §4 are used to show that a previously
studied theory of tournaments is 1-thin.
The books [13] and [18] together provide a comprehensive treatment of
models of Peano Arithmetic. I have been inﬂuenced by two classic papers on
1These two theories, which were ﬁrst identiﬁed by Presburger [23] and Skolem [39], are usually
deﬁned as Pr = Th(, +) and Sk = Th(, ·). It requires proof that Pr = Th[x = y + z] and
Sk = Th[x = y · z]. For Pr, this is a consequence of the quantiﬁer-elimination result in [23]. For
Sk it had been apparently overlooked, until proved by Nadel [29] and by Ciegelski [3], that this
required proof.

114
JAMES H. SCHMERL
Peano Arithmetic. Jensen and Ehrenfeucht [10] even today is an invaluable
resource, and Smory´nski [41] has much of interest concerning Tennenbaum’s
Theorem and some of its pre-1980’s history. The paper [8] is a good source of
information about recursive model theory.
§0. Conventions. We will typically use gothic letters such as A, A1, B to
denote arbitrary structures. It is always to be understood that the universes of
A, A1, B, . . . are A, A1, B, . . . . However, for models of PA, we will use script
letters such as M, N having universes M, N.
Although the usual formulation of PA is for the language LPA ={+, ·, ≤, 0, 1}
that includes the two function symbols + and ·, we will adopt the convention
that languages contain no function symbols, and that any symbol that appears
to be a function symbol should be construed as a relation symbol in the most
natural way. In particular + and · are 3-ary relation symbols. This convention
has no substantive eﬀect, but it will be convenient to have at several places in
this paper. Note that constant symbols are allowed.
In the literature, there are various ways that the notion of a (ﬁrst-order)
theory is formally deﬁned, and for the most part it makes little or no diﬀerence
which one is used. For us, it will be important to be deﬁnitive; we deﬁne a
theory to be a consistent set of sentences. Thus, for example, PA is a recursive
theory. If L is a language and all sentences in the theory T are L-sentences,
then we will say that T is an L-theory. An L-theory is decidable if its deductive
closure (that is, the smallest deductively closed L-theory extending T) is
recursive. When we say that an L-theory T is complete, we mean that for any
L-sentence , either  ∈T or ¬ ∈T.
There are two hierarchies of formulas that are used here. If n < , then
a formula in an arbitrary language is an ∃n formula if it is in prenex form
with n blocks of quantiﬁers beginning with a block of existential quantiﬁers.
Deﬁne ∀n analogously. Thus, ∃0 = ∀0 are the quantiﬁer-free formulas. We
sometimes write ∃and ∀for ∃1 and ∀1, respectively. Existential formulas are
the same as ∃formulas, and universal formulas the same as ∀formulas. A
literal is a sentence that is either an atomic sentence or the negation of an
atomic sentence. We let ∇be the set of literals.
In the case of the language LPA, we use the usual Σn, Πn, Δn to denote
certain sets of formulas, but we restrict their use to n ≥1 since we are using
+ and · as relation symbols. It is to be noted that by the MRDP Theorem
(see [13]), if n ≥1 and (x) is a Σn formula in the language of PA, then there
is an ∃n formula ϕ(x) such that PA ⊢∀x

ϕ(x) ↔(x)

. An interesting
sidebar is the theorem of Kaye [14] (also in [12]) that any recursive discretely
ordered semiring satisfying some version of MRDP must be isomorphic to
the standard model of PA.
We generally adhere to the convention that languages are ﬁnite, but we
do make an exception in two situations in which inﬁnitely many constant

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
115
symbols are allowed. One exception is that when constructing models using a
Henkin construction, we allow for the introduction of inﬁnitely many constant
symbols. The second is a closely related situation. If A is a structure, then
D(A) is the complete (or elementary) diagram of A; that is,
D(A) = Th

(A, a)a∈A

.
Thus, as long as A is inﬁnite, then D(A) is a theory for an inﬁnite language.
The diagram of A is ∇∩D

A

.
The structure A is decidable if D(A) is
recursive, and it is recursive if its diagram is recursive. We will sometimes
identify a structure with its diagram. For example, when we say that A is
recursive in X, then we mean that its diagram is recursive in X.
Notationally, we distinguish between Σn, Πn, Δn and Σ0
n, Π0
n, Δ0
n. As just
mentioned, we use Σn, Πn, Δn to denote certain sets of formulas in the language
of PA, and then we use (for example) Σ0
n for the set of those subsets of  that
are deﬁnable in the standard model by a formula in Σn or, possibly, for the set
of those subsets of some tacitly understood set with a Σ0
n set of G¨odel numbers.
If T is a theory, we sometimes say that T is recursively axiomatizable to mean
that T is Σ0
1.
§1. Rich theories. In discussing Tennenbaum’s Theorem, Macintyre [24]
points out “the conﬂict between recursive and recursive saturation” and credits
Tennenbaum with being the ﬁrst to call attention to this. I have taken this very
suggestive phrase as the slogan for this section’s presentation of a hierarchal
generalization of Tennenbaum’s Theorem for generalized reducts. The proof
is not much more than a routine generalization of what is most likely the
original proof (as, say, presented in [12]) of Tennenbaum’s Theorem.
The notion of a rich theory plays a key role, either implicitly or explicitly, in
many presentations of Tennenbaum’s Theorem. To the best of my knowledge,
the notion of a rich theory was ﬁrst isolated and named in [10]. The term
eﬀectively perfect is used in [25] for an equivalent property. The following
deﬁnition includes a hierarchal reﬁnement of this notion.
Deﬁnition 1.1. A theory T is rich if there are r <  and a recursive
sequence ⟨i(x) : i < ⟩of r-ary formulas such that whenever I, J ⊆ are
disjoint ﬁnite sets, then the sentence
∃x
' 
i∈I
i(x) ∧

j∈J
¬j(x)
(
is a consequence of T. If, in addition, each i(x) is an existential formula, then
T is existentially rich. For a reﬁnement of the notions of rich and existentially
rich theories, if n < , then T is n-rich if T is a rich theory and each i(x) in
a sequence demonstrating that T is rich is in ∃n.

116
JAMES H. SCHMERL
Recall that we have conventionally assumed that languages are ﬁnite with
no function symbols, so it follows that no theory is 0-rich.
The theory Pr is easily shown to be existentially rich by the sequence of
formulas the i-th one of which asserts: x is a multiple of the i-th prime pi
(where p0 = 2). For example, if i = 2 (so pi = 5), then the i-th formula is
∃y(y + y + y + y + y = x). Similarly, Sk is shown to be existentially rich by
a sequence whose i-th formula asserts: x is a pi-th power.
Recall from the introduction that DP is the theory of the divisibility poset.
The proof in [37] that DP is rich actually shows that it is 2-rich (although
only 3-richness was claimed in [37]). The i-th formula i(x) in the sequence
demonstrating this is:
∃y0, y1, . . . , yi, yi+1
' 
j≤i

yj|yj+1 ∧yj ̸= yj+1

∧yi|x ∧yi+1 ∤x
∧∀z
	
z|yi+1 →

j≤i+1
z = yj
(
.
This sentence asserts: there is a prime y such that yi|x and yi+1 ∤x.
The reader is reminded that if M is nonstandard, then its standard system
SSy(M) is the set of all X ⊆ that are coded in M.
Theorem 1.2. Suppose that ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) is a tuple of for-
mulas and Th[ϕ] is (n +1)-rich. If M is nonstandard and ∅(n) ∈SSy(M), then
M↾[ϕ] is not recursive.
The proof of this theorem will be broken up into two lemmas, each involving
recursive saturation. Although this notion has a hazy history2, it is clear that
its ﬁrst explicit appearance in the model theory of PA was in [1]. A thorough
introduction to recursive saturation can be found in [13].
An L-structure
A is recursively saturated if whenever a recursive set Φ(x, y) of (m + k)-ary
L-formulas φ(x, y) and a k-tuple a from A are such that Φ(x, a) is ﬁnitely
satisﬁable in A, then Φ(x, a) is satisﬁable in A. We give two generalizations of
recursive saturation.
For the ﬁrst one, if n <  and Φ(x, y) is restricted to being a set of formulas
in ∃n ∪∀n, then A is n-restricted recursively saturated. If A is n-restricted
recursively saturated for all n < , then A is restricted recursively saturated.
It is a fundamental fact that all nonstandard models of PA are restricted
recursively saturated implying that all generalized reducts of a nonstandard
model are restricted recursively saturated.
The second generalization of recursive saturation relativizes it to an arbi-
trary Turing ideal X ⊆P() (meaning: whenever X1, X2, . . . , Xk ∈X and
2Check the historical remarks in [2, §3] and the somewhat idiosyncratic historical remarks in
[40].

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
117
X0 is Turing reducible to X1 × X2 × · · · × Xk, then X0 ∈X). If n < , then
Δ0
n+1 is a Turing ideal. If X is a Turing ideal, then ∅(n) ∈X iﬀΔ0
n+1 ⊆X. In
particular, every Turing ideal has Δ0
1 as a subset. Another example of a Turing
ideal is important for us: if M is nonstandard, then SSy(M) is a Turing ideal.
More generally, if X ⊆P(), then an L-structure A is X-recursively saturated3
if whenever Φ(x, y) is a set of (m+k)-ary L-formulas that is recursive in some
X ∈X, a is a k-tuple from A, and Φ(x, a) is ﬁnitely satisﬁable in A, then
Φ(x, a) is satisﬁable in A. In particular, recursive saturation is the same as Δ0
1-
recursive saturation. Also, Σ0
n-recursive saturation is the same as Δ0
n-recursive
saturation, which is also the same as {∅(n−1)}-recursive saturation.
A basic fact is that every recursively saturated model M of PA is SSy(M)-
recursively saturated.
These two generalizations of recursive saturation can easily be amalgamated
into one: A is n-restricted X-recursively saturated if whenever Φ(x, y) ∈X is a
set of (m + k)-ary L-formulas in ∃n ∪∀n, a is a k-tuple from A, and Φ(x, a) is
ﬁnitely satisﬁable in A, then Φ(x, a) is satisﬁable in A. If A is n-restricted X-
recursively saturated for all n < , then A is restricted X-recursively saturated.
It is easy to see that every nonstandard M is restricted SSy(M)-recursively
saturated. From this, the following is an immediate consequence.
Lemma 1.3. If ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) is a tuple of formulas and M is
nonstandard, then M↾[ϕ] is restricted SSy(M)-recursively saturated.
Proof. Let L = {R0, R1, . . . , Rk} be the language of M↾[ϕ], and let n < 
be such that each ϕi(x) is in ∃n. It suﬃces to observe that by substituting
ϕi for Ri, we can get a recursive function (y) →∗(y) mapping an L-
formula (y) in ∃m to an LPA-formula ∗(y) in ∃m+n such that for any a,
M↾[ϕ] |= (a) ⇐⇒M |= ∗(a).
⊣
Lemma 1.4. Let n < . Suppose that T is an (n + 1)-rich theory and that
A |= T is (n +1)-restricted Δ0
n+1-recursively saturated. Then, A is not recursive.
Proof. Assume, for a contradiction, that A is recursive.
Let ⟨i(x) : i < ⟩be a sequence of r-ary formulas demonstrating that T
is (n + 1)-rich. Let X, Y ⊆ be disjoint Σ0
n+1 sets that are Δ0
n+1-inseparable;
that is, there is no Z ∈Δ0
n+1 such that X ⊆Z and Y ∩Z = ∅. Let Φ(x, y)
be the set
{i(x) : i ∈X} ∪{j(y) : j ∈Y} ∪{i(x) ↔¬i(y) : i < }.
Clearly, Φ is a ﬁnitely satisﬁable Σ0
n+1 set of formulas each of which is a
conjunction of formulas in ∃n+1 ∪∀n+1. Thus, there are c, d in A such that
A |= Φ(c, d). Now let Z = {i <  : A |= i(c)} = {i <  : A |= ¬i(d)}.
3I would have preferred to use the simpler term X-saturated, but that already has an established
meaning (as in [18]). I also considered using X-ly saturated, but was gently dissuaded from doing
so.

118
JAMES H. SCHMERL
Clearly, X ⊆Z and Y ∩Z = ∅.
Since A is recursive, then Z is Δ0
n+1,
contradicting that X, Y are Δ0
n+1-inseparable.
⊣
Theorem 1.2 now follows. For, under its hypotheses, M↾[ϕ] is restricted
Δ0
n+1-recursively saturated by Lemma 1.3, and then it is not recursive by
Lemma 1.4.
Tennenbaum’s theorem as stated in the introduction is a consequence of
this theorem, as is the next corollary.
Corollary 1.5. If M is nonstandard and has a recursive divisibility poset,
then ∅′ ̸∈SSy(M).
⊣
Theorem 1.2 can easily be relativized.
Corollary 1.6. Suppose ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) is a tuple of formulas
and Th[ϕ] is (n+1)-rich. If M is nonstandard and X (n) ∈SSy(M), then M↾[ϕ]
is not recursive in X.
⊣
Notice that the concluding sentence of the previous corollary is equivalent
to: M↾[ϕ](n) ̸∈SSy(M). The next theorem, whose easy proof is an adaptation
of the proof of Theorem 1.2, will be omitted.
Theorem 1.7. Suppose ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) is a tuple of formulas
and Th[ϕ] is rich. If M is nonstandard and M↾[ϕ] is recursively saturated, then
M↾[ϕ] ̸∈SSy(M).
In the previous theorem, it is required that M↾[ϕ] be recursively saturated.
There are two ways this may come about. First, if M is recursively saturated,
then so is M↾[ϕ]. In fact, in parallel with Lemma 1.3, if M is recursively
saturated, then M ↾[ϕ] is SSy(M)-recursively saturated. The second way
is that it might happen that M ↾[ϕ] is recursively saturated whenever M is
nonstandard. This is the case for the additive and multiplicative reducts and,
hence, also for the divisibility posets.
Let TA be True Arithmetic, the theory of the standard model of PA. If M is a
nonstandard model of TA, then M is n-correct for all n < , so all arithmetic
sets are in SSy(M. Thus, the following is a consequence of Theorem 1.7.
Corollary 1.8. Suppose ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) is a tuple of formulas
and Th[ϕ] is rich. If M is a recursively saturated model of TA, then M↾[ϕ] is
not arithmetic.
⊣
A special case of both Corollary 1.6 and of Theorem 1.7 is: If M is a nonstan-
dard model of TA, then neither its additive reduct (M, +) nor its multiplicative
reduct (M, ·) is arithmetic. With the weaker conclusion that M is not arith-
metic, this a theorem of Feferman [7] that predates Tennenbaum’s Theorem.
§2. Thin theories. The generalizations of Tennenbaum’s Theorem that were
presented in the previous section required, at the least, that Th[ϕ] be rich. If
Th[ϕ] is not rich, then there may be a nonstandard model M such that M[ϕ]
is recursive. How do we ﬁnd such a model? One almost trivial approach,

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
119
presented in Proposition 2.1, is to show that Th[ϕ] has a recursive, recursively
saturated model. This leads naturally to the notion of a thin theory and then
to its hierarchal reﬁnements. These reﬁnements are our real interest here,
although the deﬁnition of a thin theory is also included in Deﬁnition 2.2.
Proposition 2.1. Suppose that ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) is a tuple of
formulas, and suppose that Th[ϕ] has a recursive, recursively saturated model.
Then there is a recursively saturated (and, hence, nonstandard ) model M |= PA
such that M↾[ϕ] is recursive.
For the reader who knows about resplendent models, this proof is an easy
one-liner. The following remarks are for the beneﬁt of those who are not famil-
iar with resplendent models. A more complete discussion can be found in [13].
An L-structure A is resplendent if, whenever a0, a1, . . . , an−1 ∈A, L′ ⊇L is
a ﬁnite language, Φ(x) is a recursive set of n-ary L′-formulas, and B ≻A has
an expansion B′ such that (B′, a) |= Φ(a), then there is an expansion A′ of
A such that (A′, a) |= Φ(a). The crucial fact is that a countable structure is
resplendent iﬀit is recursively saturated. Moreover, every countable resplen-
dent structure A is chronically resplendent, which means that the expansion
A′ in the deﬁnition of resplendency can itself be resplendent.
Proof. Let A |= Th[ϕ] be a recursive, recursively saturated model. By the
chronic resplendency of A, it can be expanded to a recursively saturated model
M |= PA such that M↾[ϕ] = A.
⊣
The proof of the previous proposition does not give much additional in-
formation about the model M. The model is recursively saturated, but very
little can be inferred about its theory Th(M) or its standard system SSy(M).
(Recall that a countable, recursively saturated model M is determined up to
isomorphism by Th(M) and SSy(M).) Certainly, there is no reason to expect
that ∅′ ∈SSy(M) as would be the case if M were 1-correct. In fact, examples
in §3 show that there are cases in which it must be that ∅′ ̸∈SSy(M).
Proposition 2.1 suggests the following deﬁnitions of a thin theory and of a
1-thin theory. The hierarchal reﬁnements are obvious generalizations.
Deﬁnition 2.2. Let T be an L-theory. We say that T is thin if whenever
L′ ⊇L is a ﬁnite language and T ′ ⊇T is an L′-theory, then T ′ has a model
A′ whose reduct A = A′↾L is recursive. If 1 ≤n < , then we say that T is
n-thin if whenever L′ ⊇L is a ﬁnite language, T ′ is a Σ0
n set of L′-sentences
such that T ∪T ′ is consistent, then T ′ has a model A′ whose reduct A = A′↾L
is recursive. We conventionally assume that T is 0-thin.
In the case of 1-thinness, a trick of Kleene4 can be used to simplify the
deﬁnition: an L-theory T is 1-thin iﬀwhenever L′ ⊇L is a language and 
4Kleene [16] observed that if T is a recursively axiomatizable L-theory, then there are sentence
 for a language possibly larger than L such that, for any inﬁnite L-structure A, A |= T iﬀA has
an expansion to some A′ |= . Also, see [13, Theorem 15.11]. The earliest reference I have found
in which this is called “a trick of Kleene” is [34].

120
JAMES H. SCHMERL
an L′-sentence such that T ∪{} is consistent, then T ∪{} has a model A′
whose reduct A′↾L is recursive.
An even more general deﬁnition can be made. If X ⊆, then say that an
L-theory T is X-thin if whenever L′ ⊇L is a ﬁnite language, T ′ is a set of L′-
sentences such that T ′ is recursive enumerable in X and T ∪T ′ is consistent,
then T ∪T ′ has a model A′ whose reduct A′ ↾L is recursive. (Notice that it
would have made no diﬀerence if we had required that T ′ be recursive, rather
than recursively enumerable, in X.) Thus, if 1 ≤n < , then T is n-thin iﬀ
it is ∅(n−1)-thin. We will not make any use of the more general notion of an
X-thin theory except in making the proof of Corollary 2.4(1) a little quicker.
The next lemma implies that Deﬁnition 2.2 yields, as a bonus, that A (and
even A′) can be recursively saturated. But even a little more is true. Recall the
notion of X-recursive saturation from the previous section.
Lemma 2.3. Let 1 ≤n < , and let T be an n-thin L-theory. If L′ ⊇L is a
ﬁnite language and T ′ is a Σ0
n set of L′-sentences such that T ∪T ′ is consistent,
then T ∪T ′ has a Δ0
n-recursively saturated model A′ such that A = A′ ↾L is
recursive.
Proof. Without any more trouble, we will suppose that X ⊆ and that T
is an X-thin theory, and then prove:
If L′ ⊇L is a ﬁnite language and T is a set of L′-sentences such that T ′ is
recursive in X and T ∪T ′ is consistent, then T ∪T ′ has an {X}-recursively
saturated model A′ such that A = A′↾L is recursive.
There are many ways one can prove this. We will give a rather sketchy one
involving models of PA. With the aid of [13] if needed, the reader should be
able to ﬁll in details.
Let L′′ = L′ ∪LPA ∪{c, U, S}, where LPA = {+, ·, 0, 1, ≤}, c is a constant
symbol, U is a unary relation symbol, and S a 2-ary relation symbol. Let T ′′
be a set of L′′-sentences such that T ′′ ⊇T ′ and whenever A′′ is an L′′-structure
and M = A′′↾LPA, then A′′ |= T ′′ iﬀthe following hold:
(1) M |= PA;
(2) S is a partial nonstandard inductive satisfaction class for M;
(3) c codes the set X ∈SSy(M);
(4) each R ∈L′ denotes a Δ2-deﬁnable subset of M;
(5) U denotes a Δ2-deﬁnable subset of M that deﬁnes in M the complete
diagram of the L′-structure A′′↾L′.
Refer to [13, §15.1] for an explanation of (2), to [13, p. 13] for (3), and to
[13, §13.2] for (5).
Clearly, there is such a T ′′ that is recursive in X. By the Arithmeticized
Completeness Theorem [13, §13.2] and the existence of models having satis-
faction classes [13, Proposition 15.1], T ∪T ′ ∪T ′′ is consistent. Therefore,

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
121
since T is X-thin, T ∪T ′ ∪T ′′ has a model A′′ whose reduct A′′↾L is recursive.
Clearly, A′ = A′′↾L′ is a model of T ′. Let M = A′′↾LPA. By [13, Proposi-
tion15.4], it follows from (2) that M is recursively saturated, and then from
(3) that it is {X}-recursively saturated. It then follows from (5) that A′ is also
{X}-recursively saturated.
⊣
Perhaps the following characterizations of thinness and n-thinness are more
attractive than Deﬁnition 2.2.
Corollary 2.4. Let T be an L-theory.
(1) T is thin iﬀevery completion of T has a recursive, ℵ0-saturated model.
(2) If 1 ≤n < , then T is n-thin iﬀfor every Σ0
n set of L-sentences such
that T ∪T ′ is consistent, T ∪T ′ has a recursive, Δ0
n-recursively saturated
model.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove the following stronger version of (2):
Suppose X ⊆ and T is an L-theory. Then, T is X-thin iﬀfor every L-theory
T ′ such that T ′ is recursive in X and T ∪T ′ is consistent, T ∪T ′ has a recursive,
{X}-recursively saturated model.
If T is X-thin, then the proof of Lemma 2.3 yields the conclusion. For the
converse, let L′ ⊇L be ﬁnite, and let T ′ be a set of L′-sentences such that T ′ is
recursive in X and T ∪T ′ is consistent. Let T ′′ be the set of L-sentences that
are consequences of T ′. Then T ′′ is Σ0
1 relative to X and T ∪T ′′ is consistent.
Therefore, T ∪T ′′ has a recursive, {X}-recursively saturated model A. Then,
A can be expanded to a model A′ of T ′. (Here, we are invoking the basic
fact ([13, Theorem 15.8], for example) that countable, recursively saturated
models are resplendent. Actually, we are using the obvious relativization of
this fact; the proof as given in [13] easily relativizes.)
Now we prove (1). The theory T is thin iﬀit is X-thin for every X ⊆.
Notice that a structure is ℵ0-saturated iﬀit is P()-recursively saturated.
Thus, if every completion of T has a recursive, ℵ0-saturated model, then the
proof of Lemma 2.3 implies that T is X-thin for each X ⊆ and, therefore,
is thin.
For the converse, suppose that T is thin. Every complete n-type containing
T is realized in a recursive model.
Since there are only countably many
recursive models, there are only countably many complete n-types. Let X ⊆
be such that every complete n-type is recursive in X. Let T ′ be a completion
of T and then let A be a recursive, {X}-recursively saturated model of T ′.
Then, A is -homogeneous (by [13, Corollary 15.16]) and realizes all types,
so it is ℵ0-saturated.
⊣
A statement very closely related to the particular instance of the following
lemma when n = 2 has been previously considered (see [15, p. 180]) in an
entirely diﬀerent context.
Lemma 2.5. If T is n-rich, then T is not n-thin.

122
JAMES H. SCHMERL
Proof. Let T be an L-theory. The case when n = 0 is vacuously true, so
let n ≥1. Suppose T is n-rich and n-thin. Let ⟨i(x) : i < ⟩be a sequence
of r-ary ∃n formulas demonstrating that T is n-rich. Let X, Y ⊆ be disjoint
Σ0
n sets that are Δ0
n-inseparable. Get L′ by adjoining to L the 2r new constant
symbols c0, c1, . . . , cr−1, d0, d1, . . . , dr−1, and then let
T ′ =

i(c) : i ∈X

∪

j(d) : j ∈Y

∪

i(c) ↔¬i(d) : i < 

,
which is Σn. Then T ∪T ′ is a theory. Since T is n-thin, we can let A′ |= T ∪T ′
be such that A = A′↾L is recursive. Then
Z =

i <  : A |= i(c)

=

i <  : A |= ¬i(d)

is Δ0
n. Since X ⊆Z and Y ∩Z = ∅, this contradicts the Δ0
n-inseparability,
and the lemma is proved.
⊣
The next corollary indicates why the notion of n-thinness is useful when
studying generalizations of Tennenbaum’s Theorem.
Corollary 2.6. Suppose ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) is a tuple of formulas
and Th[ϕ] is (n + 1)-thin. Then there is a Δ0
n+1-recursively saturated, n-correct
model M |= PA such that M↾[ϕ] is recursive.
Proof. Let T = Th[ϕ], L′ = L ∪{+, ·, 0, 1, ≤}, and let
T ′ = (TA ∩Σn+1) ∪

∀x[Ri(x) ↔ϕi(x)] : i ≤k

.
Apply Lemma 2.3.
⊣
In general, the converse to the previous corollary is false. For a counterex-
ample, let ϕ(x, y, z) be the formula x + y = z →Con(PA). If M = (M, . . . )
is a nonstandard model of PA and M is a recursive subset of , then M↾[ϕ]
is recursive iﬀM |= Con(PA). Thus, Th ↾[ϕ] has a recursive, recursively
saturated model even though it is not 1-thin.
There are various relativizations of Corollary 2.6 that are true. We mention
one possibility here. If ϕ is a tuple of formulas and T ⊇PA is a theory, then
let ThT[ϕ] be the theory of the class of all generalized reducts M↾[ϕ], where
M ranges over models of T. The proof of the following corollary is just like
the proof of Corollary 2.6.
Corollary 2.7. Suppose ϕ = ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), . . . , ϕk(x) is a tuple of formu-
las, T ⊇PA is a Σ0
n+1 extension of PA, and ThT [ϕ] is (n + 1)-thin. Then there
is a Δ0
n+1-recursively saturated model M |= T such that M↾[ϕ] is recursive.
⊣
§3. Examples. We saw in Lemma 2.5 that being (n + 1)-rich and being
(n + 1)-thin are incompatible. This section contains examples showing that
there are no further restrictions.
Theorem 3.1. If n < , then there is a formula ϕ(x) such that the theory
Tn = Th[ϕ] is (n + 1)-rich, n-thin, complete and decidable.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
123
To prove this theorem, we will make use of a construction from [22]. Con-
sider a ﬁnite relational language L. By consolidating all the relation symbols
into just one, we can assume that L consists of just one relation symbol R. We
make a further simpliﬁcation, for expository purposes only, by assuming that
R is a binary relation symbol.
Let L∗= {U, E, S}, where U is a new unary relation symbol, E a new
binary relation symbol, and S is a new 4-ary relation symbol. Given an L-
structure A, we will deﬁne an L∗-structure A∗. Then, if T is an L-theory, we
let T ∗= Th({A∗: A |= T}).
Suppose that A = (A, R). For each pair ⟨a, b⟩∈A2, let (Qab, <ab) be a
countable, dense linearly ordered set such that:
• (Qab, <ab) has a ﬁrst element iﬀA |= R(a, b), and
• (Qab, <ab) has a last element iﬀA |= ¬R(a, b).
Thus, (Qab, <ab) has either a ﬁrst or last element, but not both. Assume
further that the Qab’s are pairwise disjoint and that each is disjoint from A.
Now let
A∗= A ∪

{Qab : a, b ∈A}.
To get the structure A∗= (A∗, U, E, S), we deﬁne the three relations as follows:
• U = A,
• E is an equivalence relation for which A and each of Qab are equivalence
classes,
• if a, b, x, y ∈A∗, then ⟨a, b, x, y⟩∈S iﬀa, b ∈A, x, y ∈Qab and
x ≤ab y.
[Note: In general, if R is k-ary rather than binary, then S will be (k + 2)-ary.]
The proof of the next lemma is left to the reader. Any number of various
standard methods can be used to prove part (1).
Lemma 3.1.1.
(1) If T is complete, then T ∗is complete.
(2) If T is decidable, then T ∗is decidable.
(3) If T = Th[ϕ], then there is a  such that T ∗= Th[].
⊣
The next lemma is a “stepping-up” lemma for the notion of richness.
Lemma 3.1.2. If n <  and T is (n + 1)-rich, then T ∗is (n + 2)-rich.
Proof. Suppose (x) is any ∃n+1 L-formula. Construct the L∗-formula
∗(x) by doing the following. First, replace (x) by (x)∧ U(xi), where the
conjunction is over all free variables of (x). Second, replace each quantiﬁer
∃w or ∀w by ∃w ∈U or ∀w ∈U. Third and last, replace each occurrence of
R(x, y) by either
∃u∀v
%
S(x, y, u, u) ∧

E(u, v) →S(x, y, u, v)
&
or
∀u∃v
%
S(x, y, u, u) →

u ̸= v ∧S(x, y, u, v)
&
,

124
JAMES H. SCHMERL
whichever will result in a ∃n+2 formula. (For example, if n is even and the
occurrence of R(x, y) is positive, use the ﬁrst formula.) Roughly, the ﬁrst
formula asserts that Qxy has a ﬁrst element, and the second formula that Qxy
does not have a last element. It is routine to check that if a is an appropriate
tuple from A, then
A |= (a) ⇐⇒A∗|= ∗(a).
Thus, if we let ⟨i(x) : i < ⟩demonstrate that T is (n + 1)-rich, then
⟨∗
i (x) : i < ⟩will demonstrate that T ∗is (n + 2)-rich.
⊣
Lemma 3.1.3. Suppose m <  and B is a Δ0
m+2 model of T. Then there is A
such that A is Δ0
m+1 and A ∼= B∗.
Proof. We will prove the lemma only in the case that m = 0. It is easily
seen that the proof relativizes to any ∅(m) (or even to any subset of ).
Thus, let B be a Δ0
2 model of T. Clearly, we can assume that B is recursive.
Now consider B∗= (B∗, B, E, S). We can also assume that B∗=  and that
E and {⟨a, b, x⟩∈3 : ⟨a, b, x, x⟩∈R} are recursive. For each ⟨a, b⟩∈B,
let Qab = {x ∈ : ⟨a, b, x, x⟩∈R} and let <ab be the linear ordering of Qab,
where x <ab y iﬀ⟨a, b, x, y⟩∈S. Our goal is to construct a recursive S′ ⊆4
such that there is a permutation f of  such that f : B∗−→(, B, E, S′) is
an isomorphism that is the identity on B. To get S′ we will uniformly obtain
recursive <′
ab that linearly order Qab such that (Qab, <′
ab) ∼= (Qab, <ab), and
then let R′ be such that ⟨a, b, x, y⟩∈R′ iﬀx <′
ab y.
Since R is Δ0
2, we can let g : 3 −→{0, 1} be such that if a, b ∈B, then
⟨a, b⟩∈R iﬀlimw g(a, b, w) = 1. For s < , let Qs
ab consist of the ﬁrst
2s elements in Qab. We deﬁne inductively linear orders <s
ab of Qs
ab so that
(Qs
ab, <s
ab) ⊆(Qs+1
ab , <s+1
ab ). Suppose we have <s
ab so that q0, q1, q2, . . . , q2s−1
are the elements of Qs
ab in <s
ab-increasing order, and let p0, p1, . . . , p2s−1 be
the elements of Qs+1
ab \Qs
ab in <-increasing order. Deﬁne <s+1
ab on Qs+1
ab
so that:
• if g(a, b, s) = 0, then the elements of Qs+1
ab
in <s+1
ab -increasing order are
p0, q0, p1, q1, . . . , p2s−1, q2s−1,
• if g(a, b, s) = 1, then the elements of Qs+1
ab
in <s+1
ab -increasing order are
q0, p0, q1, p1, . . . , q2s−1, p2s−1.
It should be clear that (Qab, <′
ab) = 
s(Qs
ab, <s
ab) is as needed.
⊣
We would like a “stepping-up” lemma for the notion of thinness analogous
to Lemma 3.1.2. It seems that to get one we need a strengthening of this notion.
Deﬁnition 3.1.4. Let 1 ≤n < , and let T be an L-theory. We say that T
is uniformly n-thin if the following hold:
(1) L is a ﬁnite language, and T is a recursively axiomatizable theory;
(2) whenever m < , L′ ⊇L is a ﬁnite language and T ′ ⊇T is a Σ0
n+m
L′-theory, then T ′ has a model A′ such that A = A′↾L is Δ0
1+m.
We say that T is uniformly 0-thin if (1) holds.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
125
Lemma 3.1.5. If n <  and T is uniformly n-thin, then T ∗is uniformly
(n + 1)-thin.
Proof. Suppose that m < , that L′ ⊇L∗is a ﬁnite language, and that
T ′ ⊇T ∗is a Σ0
n+1+m L′-theory. Our aim is to show that T ′ has a model A′
such that A′↾L∗is Δ0
1+m.
Given a countable model A |= T ∗, we can get in a natural way an L-model
A−|= T that is deﬁnable in A such that (A−)∗∼= A.
Since T is uniformly n-thin, we can let B be a model of T ′ such that
(B↾L∗)−is Δ0
2+m. (Notice that n = 0 causes no problem.) By Lemma 3.1.3,
there is Δ0
1+m A |= T ∗such that A ∼= B↾L∗. Let A′ be an expansion A such
that A′ ∼= B. Clearly, A′ is as required.
⊣
Proof of Theorem 3.1. Let T0 = Pr, and then inductively let Tn+1 = T ∗
n .
We know that T0 is 1-rich and uniformly 0-thin and that T0 = Pr = Th[x =
y+z], which is a complete, decidable theory. By Lemmas 3.1.2, 3.1.5 and 3.1.1,
each Tn is (n + 1)-rich, uniformly n-thin, complete and decidable, and Tn =
Th[ϕ] for some formula ϕ(x).
⊣
Corollary 3.2. If n < , then there is a formula ϕ(x) such that:
(1) if M |= PA is nonstandard and ∅(n+1) ∈SSy(M), then M ↾[ϕ] is not
recursive;
(2) there is a recursively saturated, n-correct model M |= PA such that M↾[ϕ]
is recursive.
Proof. This follows from Theorems 3.1, 1.2 and Corollary 2.6.
⊣
Let LLO = {<} be the language appropriate for linearly ordered sets. Con-
sider the ordinal , and then let T = Th((, <)).
It is known (see
Theorem 13.46 of [33]) that T is a decidable LLO-theory and also that T
is the theory of the linearly ordered “set” consisting of all ordinals. Now let
ϕ(x, y) be a natural Δ0
1 formula ϕ(x, y) that deﬁnes, in the standard model,
a linear order of order type . [For example, let ϕ(x, y) be the formula
asserting: If X, Y are the “ﬁnite” sets canonically coded by x, y respectively,
then either |X| < |Y| or else |X| = |Y| and there is a ∈X\Y such that
[0, a) ∩X = [0, a) ∩Y).] Then PA will prove that this formula deﬁnes an
ordering of order type  in the sense that all the sentences used in deﬁning
 by recursion are consequences of PA. This formula is unique in the sense
that any other formula with the same property deﬁnes an ordering that is
deﬁnably isomorphic to the one deﬁned by ϕ(x, y). It can be shown that
T = Th[ϕ].
Theorem 3.3. The theory T is complete, decidable, rich and n-thin for each
n < .
Proof. That T is complete and decidable has already been commented on.
We show that T is rich. Let 0(x) be the formula x = x. Inductively, let
i+1(x) assert that the largest a ≤x for which i(a) is a limit of points b such

126
JAMES H. SCHMERL
that i(b). In the case of “the standard model” (, <) a typical element α
(that is, α < ) is such that α = ncn + n−1cn−1 + · · · + c1 + c0, where
each ci <  and if n > 0, then cn > 0. Then, α satisﬁes i+1(x) iﬀci = 0 and
n ≥i + 1. Clearly, this sequence shows that T is rich.
What remains to be proved is that T is n-thin for each n < . We will
actually prove that T is uniformly n-thin for each n < . But before doing
so, we make a little digression to discuss a construction analogous to the one
used in proving Theorem 3.1.
We review some well known properties of linearly ordered sets. An excellent
reference is [33]. It is well known that Th((, <)) is ﬁnitely axiomatizable and,
therefore, decidable. If (A, <) is any linearly ordered set, then (A, <) ≡(, <)
iﬀthere is a possibly empty order type  such that (A, <) has order type
 + (∗+ ) · . If (A, <) ≡(, <) is countable and recursively saturated,
then (A, <) has order type  + (∗+ ) · , which is the order type of every
countable nonstandard model of PA. (Recall that  is the order type of the
rationals.)
If (A, <) has order type  and (B, <) is obtained from (A, <) by replacing
each point of A with a copy of , then (B, <) has order type  · . If (C, <)
is obtained from (A, <) by replacing each point a ∈A with a set having order
type  + (∗+ ) · a (where a is some order type depending on a), then
(C, <) ≡(B, <). In particular, if (B, <) and (C, <) have order types  ·α and
( + (∗+ ) · ) · α respectively, then (B, <) ≡(C, <).
The following lemma is easily proved.
Lemma 3.3.1. Suppose that (A, <) is a Δ0
2 linearly ordered set having order
type α. Then there is a recursive (B, <) having order type ( +(∗+)·)·α.
Observe that this lemma relativizes: if X ⊆ and (A, <) is recursive in
X ′ (instead of being Δ0
2), then we get (B, <) that is recursive in X (instead of
being recursive). In particular, if we suppose that (A, <) is Δ0
n+2, then we can
get (B, <) to be Δ0
n+1. This lemma is undoubtedly not optimal; see the closely
related discussion in [4, §5].
If T is any theory of linearly ordered sets, then let T ∗be the theory of all
linearly order sets (A∗, <) such that there is (A, <) |= T having order type α
and (A∗, <) has order type  · α.
Lemma 3.3.2. If T is a uniformly n-thin theory of linearly ordered sets, then
T ∗is uniformly (n + 1)-thin.
Proof. Suppose T is a uniformly n-thin LLO-theory all of whose models
are linearly ordered sets. Let L0 ⊇LLO be ﬁnite, and let T ∗
0 ⊇T ∗be a
Σ0
n+m L0-theory, where n + m ≥1. Our goal is to show that there is a model
A∗
0 |= T ∗
0 such that A∗
0↾LLO is Δ0
1+m+1.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
127
Let L1 = L0 ∪{U, S, +, ·}, where U is a unary relation symbol, + and · are
binary function symbols, and S is a unary function symbol. Get the theory
T ∗
1 by adding to T ∗
0 sentences asserting:
• S is the successor function;
• U is the set of limit points;
• if x, y ∈U and [x, y) = {z : x ≤z < y} is such that [x, y) ∩U = {x},
then ([x, y), +, ·, ≤, x, S(x)) is a model of PA.
Clearly, T ∗
1 is a Σ0
n+m-theory, so it has a recursively saturated model A∗
1 such
that (A∗
1|U)↾LLO is Δ0
1+m. Let α be the order type of (A∗
1|U)↾LLO. Each of
the models of PA that T ∗
1 claims to exist has order  + (∗+ ) · , so the
order type of A∗
0 ↾LLO is ( + (∗+ ) · ) · α. By the relativized version of
Lemma 3.3.1, we can arrange that A∗
0↾LLO is Δ0
1+m+1.
⊣
Completing the proof of Theorem 3.3. First, T is uniformly 0-thin. Clearly,
 ·  = 1+ = , so that T = (T)∗. Thus, repeated applications of
Lemma 3.3.2 yield that T is uniformly n-thin for each n < .
⊣
Corollary 3.4. Let ϕ(x, y) be a formula such that T = Th[ϕ]. Then:
(1) if M |= TA and M is recursively saturated, then M↾[ϕ] is not arithmetic;
(2) for each n < , there is a recursively saturated, n-correct model M |= PA
such that M↾[ϕ] is recursive.
Proof. This follows from Theorems 3.3, 1.2 and Corollary 2.6.
⊣
Corollary 3.4 leaves unanswered the following question concerning the for-
mula ϕ(x, y).
Question 3.5. Is there a nonstandard model M |= TA such that M↾[ϕ]
is recursive?
By a tree we mean a partially ordered set (A, <) in which the set of prede-
cessors of any element is linearly ordered. In Corollary 4.2 in the next section,
we will see that the theory of trees is 1-thin. The next proposition implies that
the theory of trees is not 2-thin. Incidentally, an example was given in [22] of
a complete Δ0
2 theory of trees that has no recursive model.
Proposition 3.6. There is a formula ϕ(x, y) such that:
(a) Th[ϕ] is a complete, decidable 2-rich theory of trees;
(b) if M is nonstandard and ∅′ ∈SSy(M), then M↾[ϕ] is not recursive.
Proof. Clearly, Theorem 1.2 implies that (b) follows from (a).
To prove (a), we ﬁrst deﬁne a complete, decidable 2-rich theory T of trees.
For each i < , let i(x) be the ∃2 formula
∃x0, x1, . . . , xi
)
x < x0 < x1 < · · · < xi ∧
∀y

(y > x0 ∨x < y ≤x0) →y ∈{x0, x1, . . . , xi}
*
.

128
JAMES H. SCHMERL
Let T ′ be the theory of trees consisting of all sentences
∃x
' 
i∈I
i(x) ∧

i∈J
¬i(x)
(
,
where I, J ⊆ are disjoint ﬁnite sets. Clearly, T ′ is a 2-rich theory of trees.
Now let T be the theory of trees consisting of the recursive set of sentences
asserting:
(1) there is a unique root;
(2) the root has inﬁnitely many immediate successors (called atoms);
(3) each atom has inﬁnitely many immediate successors (called btoms);
(4) for any x that is not an atom, a btom or the root, there are an atom a
and a btom b such that a < b < x;
(5) for any btom b, the set {x : x ≥b} is linearly ordered with ﬁrst and
last elements such that every element but the ﬁrst has an immediate
predecessor and every element but the last has an immediate successor.
(6) for each n < , if a is an atom and b, b′ > a are distinct btoms such that
|{x : x > b}| = n, then |{x : x > b′}| ̸= n.
(7) if I, J ⊆ are disjoint ﬁnite sets, then there is an atom a such that if
N = {|x : x > b| : b > a is a btom}, then I ⊆N and J ∩N = ∅.
Clearly, T is a consistent theory of trees. Various standard ways can be
used to show that T is complete, so it is decidable. Also, from (7) it is clear
that T ⊢T ′, so that T is 2-rich.
It is straightforward to come up with ϕ(x, y) that encodes all of T, and
then showing that T = Th[ϕ].
⊣
We will see in Corollary 5.2 that the theory of linearly ordered sets is 2-thin.
The next proposition shows that this theory is not 3-thin. Incidentally, an
example was given in [22] of a complete Δ0
3 theory of linearly ordered sets that
has no recursive model.
Proposition 3.7. There is a formula ϕ(x, y) such that:
(a) Th[ϕ] is a complete, decidable 3-rich theory of linearly ordered sets;
(b) if M is nonstandard and ∅(2) ∈SSy(M), then M↾[ϕ] is not recursive.
Proof. For i < , let i(u, v) be the ∃3 formula asserting that u < v, u
has no immediate predecessor, v has no immediate successor, and there are
exactly i elements between u and v. Let i(x, y) be the ∃3 formula
∃uv
%
x < u < v < y ∧i(u, v)
&
.
Using these formulas, we can deﬁne the 3-rich theory T ′ much as in the proof
of Proposition 3.6. It is left to the reader to complete this proof in the manner
of the proof of Proposition 3.6.
⊣

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
129
§4. Some 1-thin theories. In this section, we exhibit some 1-thin theories.
We will be considering classes of structures in this section.
Whenever
we refer to a class K of structures, it is to be understood that there is some
language L (that, according to our conventions, contains no function symbols
and, unless speciﬁed otherwise, is ﬁnite) such that K is a class of L-structures
closed under isomorphism. We say that the class K is hereditary if whenever
B ⊆A ∈K, then B ∈K.
Now suppose K is a class of ﬁnite structures. We let K∞be the class of
structures A such that if X ⊆A is ﬁnite, then there is B ∈K such that X ⊆B
and B ⊆A. Clearly, K is the class of those ﬁnite structures in K∞. We let
TK = Th(K∞). If K is hereditary, then ∀∩Th(K) is an axiomatization for TK,
and K∞is the class of models of TK. For example, if K is the class of ﬁnite
trees, then K is hereditary, K∞is the class of all trees, and TK is the theory of
trees.
A class K is well-quasi-ordered (abbreviation: wqo) if whenever A0, A1,
A2, . . . is an inﬁnite sequence of structures in K, then there are i < j < 
such that Ai is embeddable in Aj. We will be interested in wqo only for those
classes K consisting of ﬁnite structures. A class K of ﬁnite structures is wqo iﬀ
whenever A0, A1, A2, . . . is an inﬁnite sequence of structures in K, then there
are distinct i, j <  such that Ai is embeddable in Aj.
The notion of wqo has wider applicability. First, (Q, ) is a quasi-order if
 is a reﬂexive and transitive relation on Q. Thus, any class K of structures
is quasi-ordered by embeddability. A quasi-order (Q, ) is wqo iﬀwhenever
a0, a1, a2, . . . , ai, · · · ∈Q, then there are i < j <  such that ai aj. A funda-
mental theorem of Higman [9] is that if (Q, ) is wqo, then so is Q<, the set
of ﬁnite sequences from Q ordered by: (a0, a1, . . . , am−1)  (b0, b1, . . . , bn−1)
iﬀthere are 0 ≤k0 < k1 < · · · < km−1 < n such that ai  bki for all i < m.
A class of ﬁnite structures that is obviously wqo is the class S of all structures
(A, <, S) such that for some k < , A = {a0, a1, . . . , ak−1} and <, S are
binary relations on A such that ai < aj ⇐⇒i < j and aiSaj =⇒j = i + 1.
It follows by Higman’s Theorem that the class of all substructures of structures
in S, is also wqo.
If K is a class and n < , then K(n) is the class consisting of all expansions
(A, a0, a1, . . . , an−1), where A ∈K and a0, a1, . . . , an−1 ∈A. We say that K is
strongly wqo if K(n) is wqo for each n < . The class S (from the previous
paragraph), while being wqo, is not strongly wqo. In fact, S(2) is not wqo as
can be seen by considering (An, c0, c1), where An = {a0, a1, . . . , an} such that
c0 = a0Sa1Sa2 . . . an−1San = c1.
There is a notion stronger than strongly wqo. We say that the class K is very
wqo if, for each n < , the class of structures (A, U0, U1, . . . , Un−1), where
A ∈K and U0, U1, . . . , Un−1 ⊆A, is wqo. Clearly, if K is very wqo, then it is
strongly wqo.

130
JAMES H. SCHMERL
If K is a class of ﬁnite structures and we say that K is ﬁnite, recursive, etc.,
then we mean that the set (of canonical codes) of the isomorphism types of
structures in K is ﬁnite, recursive, etc. Clearly, if K is a recursive, hereditary
class of ﬁnite structures, then TK is recursively axiomatizable. A theorem of
Pouzet [32] says that if K is a very wqo class of ﬁnite structures, then TK
is ﬁnitely axiomatizable. (More about Pouzet’s theorem appears right after
Lemma 4.7.) The class of cycle-free ﬁnite graphs shows that this is not always
the case.
We introduce some terminology and notation that will be useful in the
proof of Theorem 4.1 and elsewhere in this and the next section. Suppose
we are considering a class K of ﬁnite L-structures. Let c0, c1, c2, . . . be an
inﬁnite supply of new and distinct constant symbols to be used in a Henkin
construction. If N ⊆, then let LN = L ∪{cn : n ∈N}. In particular, if
s < , then Ls = L ∪{c0, c1, . . . , cs−1}, and also L = 
s Ls. Recall from §0
that ∇is the set of literals. If s < , then by a (K, Ls)-diagram we will mean a
(necessarily ﬁnite) set D ⊆∇of Ls-sentences such that: (1) if α is an atomic
Ls-sentence, then either α ∈D or ¬α ∈D; (2) the sentence ci = cj is in D iﬀ
i = j < s; (3) if c ∈L is a constant symbol, then the sentence ci = c is in D
for some i < s; and (4) the Ls-structure whose diagram is D is an expansion
of a structure in K.
The following theorem is essentially that of Ershov [6] but with a slightly
stronger conclusion.
Theorem 4.1. Suppose that K is a recursive, strongly wqo, hereditary class of
ﬁnite structures. Then TK is 1-thin.
Proof. Let L be the language for K and assume, without loss of generality,
that there are no constant symbols in L. As already noted, TK is recursively
axiomatized by ∀∩Th(K). Let L′ ⊇L be a ﬁnite language, and let T ′ ⊇TK
be a recursively axiomatizable L′-theory. Our goal is to construct a model
A′ |= T ′ such that A = A′ ↾L is recursive. Clearly, we can let A′ be a ﬁnite
model of T ′ if there is one; therefore, we assume that T ′ has no ﬁnite models.
Let K′ be the subclass of K consisting of all A ∈K that are substructures
of L-reducts of models of T ′. Clearly, K is strongly wqo and hereditary. It
is also recursive. For, let F be the class of those A ∈K\K′ that are minimal
in the sense that if B is embeddable in A and is not isomorphic to A, then
B ∈K′. Since K is wqo, F is ﬁnite. Then, since K′ consists of those structures
in K having no substructures in F, K′ is recursive.
We have just seen that K′ is a recursive, strongly wqo, hereditary class of
ﬁnite structures, so without loss of generality, we will assume that K = K′.
The model A will be constructed by a Henkin construction using new
constant symbols c0, c1, c2, . . . . Let L′
s = L′ ∪{c0, c1, . . . , cs−1} and L′
 =

s L′
s. Our goal is to construct a complete, Henkin L′
-theory T ′′ ⊇T ′ such
that T ′′ ∩∇is recursive.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
131
A short excursus: Let T ′′ be a set of L′
-sentences. The reader is reminded
that T ′′ is Henkin iﬀfor every L′
-formula ϕ(x), there is i <  such that ci
is a Henkin witness for ϕ(x), that is, the sentence ∃xϕ(x) →ϕ(ci) is in T ′′.
If T ′′ is a complete Henkin theory, then its Henkin model is a model of T ′′.
Notice that if T ′′ is a Henkin theory and each sentence ci ̸= c0 is in T for
i > 0, then T ′′ is complete. For, consider an L′
-sentence , and then let ϕ(x)
be the formula  ↔x = c0. Since T ′′ is Henkin, let ci be a Henkin witness for
ϕ(x). Then T ′′ ⊢ iﬀi = 0 and T ′′ ⊢¬ iﬀi ̸= 0. We will be constructing
a Henkin theory T ′′ such that {ci ̸= cj : i < j < } ⊆T ′′, so that T ′′ will
necessarily be complete.
Returningto the proof, let 0, 1, 2, . . . bearecursivelistofall L′
-sentences
that can be logically deduced from T ′, where each i is an L′
i-sentence. If Γ
is a set of L′
-sentences, then we say that Γ is s-consistent if no contradiction
can be derived from Γ ∪{0, 1, . . . , s−1} in s steps.
Since K is recursive, it follows that the set
E =

D : D is a (K, Ls)-diagram for some s < 

is recursive. If D =
i Dri, where r0 <r1 <r2 <· · ·<, Dr0 ⊆Dr1 ⊆Dr2 ⊆· · ·
and each Dri is a (K, Lri)-diagram, then we say that D is a (K, L)-diagram.
Let ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), ϕ2(x), . . . be a recursive list of all L′
-formulas having x as
the only free variable such that each ϕi(x) is an L′
i-formula. For convenience,
let ϕ0(x) be the formula x = x. Given I ⊆ and h : I −→, we let
H(h) =

∃xϕi(x) →ϕi(ch(i)) : i ∈I

.
With this notation, our goal is to get a function h :  −→ and a recursive
(K, L)-diagram D such that if T ′′ = D ∪H(h) ∪T ′, then T ′′ is consistent.
We will construct h and D by constructing ﬁnite approximations to them.
At stage s, we will deﬁne Ns ≤s, a function hs : Ns −→s, and a (K, Ls)-
diagram Ds in such a way that, for each s < , the following hold:
(0) Ds ∪T ′ is consistent;
(1) Ds ∪H(hs) is s-consistent.
We begin by letting N0 = 0 and h0 = D0 = ∅.
At the onset of stage s + 1, we have a function hs : Ns −→s and a (K, Ls)-
diagram Ds such that (0) and (1) hold. Let t ≤Ns be the largest for which
there are an Ls+1-diagram Ds+1 ⊇Ds and a function hs+1 : t + 1 −→s + 1
such that Ds+1 ∪T ′ is consistent, hs+1 ↾t = hs ↾t and Ds+1 ∪H(hs+1) is
(s + 1)-consistent.
Observe that t is well deﬁned. For, since (0) holds and T ′ has no ﬁnite
models, we can let Ds+1 ⊇Ds be any (K, Ls+1)-diagram. Then, letting t = 0
and hs+1 = {⟨0, 0⟩}, we have that Ds+1∪{∃xϕ0(x) →ϕ0(c0)}∪T ′ is consistent
and, therefore, Ds+1 ∪H(hs+1) is (s + 1)-consistent.

132
JAMES H. SCHMERL
Having t, let Ns+1 = t +1, and then choose hs+1 and Ds+1 in some eﬀective
manner. For each s < , the following hold:
(2) Ds ⊆Ds+1;
(3) 1 ≤Ns+1 ≤Ns + 1 and hs+1↾(Ns+1 −1) ⊆hs.
The crucial fact needed to complete the proof is the following claim.
Claim. lims Ns = ∞.
For, having this claim, we let h = lims hs, which by (3), is now well deﬁned
and h :  −→. Let D = 
s Ds and T ′′ = D ∪H(h) ∪T ′. It follows
from (1) that T ′′ is s-consistent for all s <  and, therefore, T ′′ is consistent.
Clearly, D is recursive by (2).
It remains to prove the claim. Suppose the claim is false. By (3), Ns > 0 if
s > 0, so we can let m = lim infs Ns −1. Let r <  be such that Nr = m + 1
and Ns ≥m + 1 for all s ≥r. By (3), hs ↾m = hr ↾m for all s ≥r. Then
let r < s0 < s1 < s2 < · · · be such that Nsi = m + 1 for all i < . Let Ai
be the L-structure whose diagram is Dsi−1. Let ak = chr(k) for k < m, and
bi = chsi −1(m). Then, let A∗
i = (Ai, a0, a1, . . . , am−1, bi) ∈K(m+1).
Since K(m+1) is wqo, there are i < j such that A∗
i is embeddable in A∗
j.
Moreover, there are i0 < i1 < i2 < · · · such that each A∗
ik is embeddable
in A∗
ik+1. We then might as well assume that A∗
i is embeddable in A∗
i+1. By
composing these embeddings, we get embeddings ei : A∗
0 −→A∗
i for each
i < . Hence, Ds0−1 ∪H(hs0−1 ↾(m + 1)) is (si −1)-consistent for each
i < , and, therefore, Ds0−1 ∪H(hs0−1 ↾(m + 1)) ∪T ′ is consistent. But
then, there must be an Ls0-diagram D′ ⊇D0 and h′ : m + 2 −→s0 such that
h′↾(m + 1) = hs0−1↾(m + 1) and D′ ∪H(h′) ∪T ′ is consistent. Therefore,
Ns0 ≥m + 2, a contradiction that proves the claim and the theorem.
⊣
Remark. In the previous proof, the model A′ we constructed has the addi-
tional feature that D(A′) is Δ0
2.
A famous example of a class K satisfying the conditions of Theorem 4.1 is
the class of ﬁnite trees. It is trivial that K is recursive and hereditary. That K
is strongly (even very) wqo is a standard consequence of Kruskal’s Theorem
[19]. (See Theorem 6.2 for a still stronger result.) For this class K, TK is the
theory of trees.
Corollary 4.2. The theory of trees is 1-thin.
⊣
Thus, it follows that every recursively axiomatizable theory of trees has
a recursive, recursively saturated model. This slightly strengthens Ershov’s
theorem [6] for trees by adding the requirement that the model should be
recursively saturated. We can now conclude: if ϕ(x, y) is a formula such
that M ↾[ϕ] is a tree for every model M |= PA, then Th[ϕ] is 1-thin and
then, by Corollary 2.6, there is a recursively saturated model M |= PA for

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
133
which M↾[ϕ] is a recursive tree. This can be improved using Corollary 2.7 by
requiring that there be just some model M for which M↾[ϕ] is a tree.
Corollary 4.3. Suppose ϕ(x, y) is a formula such that there is a model
M |= PA for which M↾[ϕ] is a tree. Then there is a recursively saturated model
M |= PA for which M↾[ϕ] is a recursive tree.
Proof. Let T be the theory PA +“ϕ(x, y) deﬁnes a tree”. Then T is a
consistent, recursively axiomatizable extension of PA and ThT [ϕ] is 1-thin.
By Corollary 2.7 there is a recursively saturated model M |= T for which
M↾[ϕ] is recursive. Since M |= T, then M↾[ϕ] is a tree.
⊣
A consequence of Corollary 4.2 is that, not only is the theory of trees 1-
thin, but every recursively axiomatizable theory of trees is 1-thin. Thus, by
Lemma 2.5, no recursively axiomatizable theory of trees is 1-rich. But then,
no theory of trees is 1-rich. For, suppose that T is a 1-rich theory of trees and
that ⟨i(x) : i < ⟩demonstrates the 1-richness of T. Then, the tree axioms
together with all sentences,
∃x
' 
i∈I
i(x) ∧

j∈J
¬j(x)
(
,
where I, J are disjoint ﬁnite subsets of , would be a recursively axiomatizable
1-rich theory of trees.
Suppose the conclusion of Corollary 4.3 is replaced with: Then there is a
nonstandard model M |= PA that is not recursively saturated such that M↾[ϕ]
is a recursive tree. I do not know if this modiﬁcation of the corollary is true.
There is even a stronger possible conclusion that I do not know to be false:
Then there is a prime nonstandard model M |= PA for which M ↾[ϕ] is a
recursive tree. The same problems exist when the hypothesis is strengthened to
requiring that M↾[ϕ] is a tree for every M. It might be interesting to resolve
these modiﬁcations of Corollary 4.3.
Recall from the introduction that DP = Th[∃z(y = x · z)] is the theory
of divisibility posets, and also that DL is the theory of divisibility lattices.
Theorem 4.1 is inadequate for proving that the theory DP is 1-thin. For, if
M |= PA and K is the class of all ﬁnite posets that are embeddable in the
divisibility poset of M, then K is the class of all ﬁnite posets so that TK = PO,
the theory of posets. It is rather easy to see that PO is not 1-thin. Incidentally,
there is a single sentence in the language of posets having some poset as
a model but none that is recursive5. However, Theorem 4.5, which is stronger
than Theorem 4.1, is not only adequate for proving that DP is 1-thin, but is
also for proving DL is 1-thin.
5It seems that the ﬁrst example of a consistent sentence having no recursive model was given
by Mostowski [28]. I thank Valentina Harizanov for bringing this reference to my attention.

134
JAMES H. SCHMERL
If K is a class of ﬁnite L-structures, then a function f :  −→ is a bound
for algebraic closure (abbreviation: bac) for K if, whenever A ∈K and X ⊆A
is such that |X| ≤n, then there is B ∈K such that X ⊆B, B ⊆A and
|B| ≤f(n). For example, the function n →n is a bac for K iﬀK is hereditary
and L has no constant symbols. For another example, n →22n−1 is a bac for
the class of ﬁnite distributive lattices.
Proposition 4.4. If K is a strongly wqo class of ﬁnite structures, then K has
a bac.
Proof. Suppose that K has no bac and that n <  is the least for which
there is a problem. Thus, for each i <  there are Ai ∈K and Xi ⊆Ai
such that |Xi| = n, |Ai| ≥i and there is no B ∈K such that B ⊆Ai
and Xi ⊆B ̸= Ai.
We can arrange that |Ai+1| > |Ai| for each i < .
Let A∗
i = (Ai, ai0, ai1, . . . , ain−1) ∈K(n) be an expansion of Ai such that
Xi = {ai0, ai1, . . . , ain−1}. Since K(n) is wqo, there are i < j <  such that A∗
i
is embeddable in A∗
j. Without loss of generality, assume A∗
i ⊆A∗
j. But then,
Ai ⊆Aj and Xj = Xi ⊆Ai ̸= Aj, which is a contradiction.
⊣
Suppose K is a class of ﬁnite structures. If K has a bac, then ∀2 ∩Th(K∞)
is an axiomatization for TK, and K∞is the class of models of TK. (There is
a converse to this: if K∞is the class of models of TK, then K has a bac.) If
f is a bac for K, then there a natural set of ∀2 sentences that axiomatize TK:
the n-th sentence in this axiomatization is the one asserting that every set of at
most n elements is in some substructure in K having cardinality at most f(n).
Clearly, if both K and f are recursive, then this axiomatization is a recursive
axiomatization.
The next theorem improves Theorem 4.1; in fact, with the addition of the
hypothesis that K is hereditary, it becomes Theorem 4.1.
Theorem 4.5. Suppose that K is a recursive, strongly wqo class of ﬁnite
structures with a recursive bac. Then TK is 1-thin.
Proof. We indicate what modiﬁcations to the proof of Theorem 4.1 are
needed.
Let f :  −→ be a recursive bac for K, and then let b0 < b1 < b2 < · · ·
be the sequence deﬁned by b0 = 0 and bi+1 = f(bi + 1).
As in the proof of Theorem 4.1, we construct sequences ⟨Ns : s < ⟩,
⟨Ds : s < ⟩, and ⟨hs : s < ⟩. The only diﬀerence is that here we require
that Ds be a (K, Lr)-diagram for some r such that bs < r ≤bs+1.
With these modiﬁcations, the proof of Theorem 4.1 can easily be successfully
adapted to prove this theorem.
⊣
The remark following Theorem 4.1 also applies to Theorem 4.5.
Remark. In the previous proof, the model A′ we constructed has the addi-
tional feature that D(A′) is Δ0
2.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
135
When considering lattices with meet ∧and join ∨, we will think of both ∧
and ∨as ternary relations. Every lattice (L, ∧, ∨) has a partial ordering ≤
deﬁned by x ≤y ⇐⇒x ∧y = x ⇐⇒x ∨y = y. If this ordering is a linear
ordering, then (L, ∧, ∨) is a chain. Every chain is a distributive lattice. We
deﬁne a box to be a ﬁnite lattice that is the product of chains. Let B be the
class of all boxes. It follows from Higman’s Theorem that B is strongly wqo.
(However, B is not very wqo.) It is easy to see that B is recursive and has a
recursive bac; in fact, the function n →nn is a bac for B. We call a lattice in B∞
a boxed lattice, and we let BL be the theory of boxed lattices; thus, BL = TB.
By identifying chains and linearly ordered sets, we can think of every linearly
ordered set as being a model of BL. Clearly, BL is recursively axiomatizable
(since B is recursive and has a recursive bac). Thus, by Theorem 4.5, BL is
1-thin. Since DL is essentially a consequence of the complete theory Sk, it
follows that DL is a decidable completion of BL and, therefore, that DL is
1-thin. Thus, by Corollary 2.6, we get the theorem from [37] that there are
models of PA having recursive divisibility lattices, and we can even require
that they be recursively saturated.
Corollary 4.6. There is a recursively saturated model of PA having a recur-
sive divisibility poset.
We will end this section with a proof of Corollary 4.10, a result slightly
weaker than Theorem 4.5. This proof will be useful in the next section.
The Hilbert-Bernays reﬁnement of the Completeness Theorem says, essen-
tially, that every recursively axiomatizable theory has a model A such that
D(A) is Δ0
2 [17]. Most any proof of the Completeness Theorem, if carefully
carried out, yields this result.
It is easy to improve this by requiring, in
addition, that A be recursively saturated. An application of the Low Basis
Theorem [11] yields a further improvement. Recall that a set X ⊆ is low if
its jump X ′ is Δ0
2.
Lemma 4.7. If T is recursively axiomatizable, then T has a recursively satu-
rated model A such that D(A) is low.
Let K be a hereditary class of ﬁnite L-structures. An L-structure B is a
bound for K if B ̸∈K, B is ﬁnite, and every proper substructure of B is in K.
Notice that TK has a ﬁnite axiomatization iﬀK has only ﬁnitely many bounds.
The theorem of Pouzet [32], mentioned near the beginning of this section, can
be restated as: if K is a very wqo class of ﬁnite structures, then K has only
ﬁnitely many bounds. There is a stronger conclusion that can be made here,
namely: if n < , then K(n) has only ﬁnitely many bounds. We next discuss a
closely related idea.
Let A be an L-structure, and let a0, a1, . . . , ak−1 be a k-tuple of elements
of A. Then, a ∀-basis for a is a universal k-ary L-formula ϕ(x) such that for
any universal k-ary formula (x), A |= (a) iﬀ⊢ϕ(a) →(a). A function

136
JAMES H. SCHMERL
a →ϕa(x) is a ∀-basis selector for A if ϕa(x) is a ∀-basis whenever a is a tuple
from A.
Many structures have ∀-basis selectors. For example, if K is a very wqo,
herditary class of ﬁnite structures and A ∈K∞, then A has a ∀-basis selector.
To see this, consider a0, a1, . . . , an−1 ∈A, and then consider the class L of all
ﬁnite structures embeddable in (A, a0, a1, . . . , an−1). Clearly, L is a very wqo,
hereditary class of ﬁnite structures, so there is a universal sentence ϕ(a) that
axiomatizes TL. But then, ϕ(x) is a ∀-basis for a.
There is an immediate improvement to the discussion of the previous para-
graph: if K is a very wqo (not necessarily herditary) class of ﬁnite structures
and A ∈K∞, then A has a ∀-basis selector. For, if we let K′ be the smallest
hereditary class containing K, then K′ is a very wqo, herditary class of ﬁnite
structures, and A ∈K′
∞.
The proof of the next lemma is completely straightforward.
Lemma 4.8. If A has a ∀-basis selector and ∃∩D(A) is low, then A has a Δ0
2
∀-basis selector.
⊣
Lemma 4.9. Suppose that K is a recursive, strongly wqo class of ﬁnite struc-
tures with a recursive bac, and let A |= TK. If A is recursively saturated and has
a Δ0
2 ∀-basis selector, then there is a recursive B ∼= A.
Proof. Actually, we can get by with a property weaker than recursive satu-
ration, which could be called recursive existential saturation, by just requiring
that A realize all recursive consistent sets of existential formulas. That is, if
a is a k-tuple from A and Φ(x, y) is a recursive set of (k + 1)-ary existential
formulas such that D(A) ∪Φ(a, y) is consistent, then there is b ∈A such that
A |= Φ(a, b).
Now let A |= TK be recursively existentially saturated. We assume that A is
inﬁnite, as otherwise the conclusion is trivial. Let a →ϕa(x) be a Δ0
2 ∀-basis
selector. Notice that ϕ∅is an axiomatization for ∀∩Th(A), so that ∃∩Th(A)
is recursive. Thus, without loss of generality, we can assume that K is the class
of ﬁnite substructures embeddable in A, and we still have that K is a recursive,
strongly wqo class of ﬁnite structures with a recursive bac.
Since K is recursive and strongly wqo, we have that each K(n) is recursive
and wqo. We next make two observations about maximal ﬁlters in recursive
wqo sets in general.
Suppose (Q, ) is a quasi order. A subset F ⊆Q is a ﬁlter if (1) whenever
x  y ∈F , then x ∈F , and (2) whenever x, y ∈F , there is z ∈F such that
x, y  z. A ﬁlter F ⊆Q is maximal if there is no ﬁlter G ⊆Q of which F is a
proper subset. The ﬁrst observation is:
A wqo (Q, ) has only ﬁnitely many maximal ﬁlters.
For, suppose that F0, F1, F2, . . . are inﬁnitely many distinct maximal ﬁlters.
Then, for each n < , Fn\ 
i<n Fi ̸= ∅. To get bn ∈Fn\ 
i<n Fi, let ai ∈
F \Fi, for i < n and then let a ∈Fn be such that a0, a1, . . . , an−1  bn.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
137
By applying Ramsey’s Theorem and taking a subsequence if needed, we can
assume that b0b1b2· · · . For each n < , choose cn such that bncn ∈Fn
and cn, bn+1 are incompatible, that is there is no x ∈Q such that cn, bn+1  x.
Clearly, c0, c1, c2, . . . is an inﬁnite antichain, which is impossible in a wqo.
The second observation is:
If (Q, ) is a recursive wqo, then every maximal ﬁlter is recursively
enumerable.
To see this, let F0, F1, . . . , Fn be the ﬁnitely many distinct maximal ﬁlters.
Then choose ai ∈Fi, for i ≤n, so that a0, a1, . . . , an are pairwise incompati-
ble. Then, Fi is the set of x ∈Q that are compatible with ai.
Now consider a k-tuple a from A. Let Fa ⊆K(k) be the class of those
structures in K(k) that are embeddable in (A, a). Then F is a ﬁlter. Since A is
recursively existentially saturated, the second of the prior observations implies
that if F ⊆K(k) is a maximal ﬁlter, then there is a k-tuple a from A such that
F = Fa. It then easily follows that:
(♠) Suppose a is a k-tuple from A. Then there are ﬁnitely many b0, b1, . . . , bn ∈
A such that for any c ∈A, there is i ≤n such that ⊢ϕac(x) →ϕabi(x).
Recall that we are assuming that A is inﬁnite, so we assume, without loss of
generality, that A = . If N ⊆, then let [N]< be the set of all increasing,
ﬁnite sequences from N. Then there is a recursive, doubly-indexed set ⟨ϕs
a(x) :
s < , a ∈[]<⟩of universal formulas such that lims ϕs
a(x) = ϕa(x). For
convenience, we assume that ϕs
⟨0⟩(x) = ϕ⟨0⟩(x) for all s < . If s < ,
h : N −→ and a = ⟨a0, a1, . . . , ak−1⟩∈[N]<, then let
s
a,h = ϕs
a

ch(a0), ch(a1), . . . , ch(ak−1)

,
and let
T(h, s) =

s
a,h : a ∈[N]<
.
Let b0 < b1 < b2 < · · · be a sequence as in the proof of Theorem 4.5.
That is, let p :  −→ be a recursive bac for K and then let b0 = 0 and
bi+1 = p(bi + 1). Also, recall what is meant by a (K, Lr)-diagram D.
We will eﬀectively construct sequences ⟨Ds : s < ⟩, ⟨ℓs : s < ⟩, ⟨fs :
s < ⟩and ⟨gs : s < ⟩where Ds is a (K, Lr)-diagram for some r such
that bs < r ≤bs+1, ℓs ≤s, fs : {n : 2n < ℓs} −→s is a one-to-one
function, gs : {n : 2n + 1 < ℓs} −→s is a one-to-one function, and fs and
gs are partial inverses of each other. (By this we mean that fs(gs(n)) = n
whenever gs(n), fs(gs(n)) are deﬁned, and that gs(fs(n)) = n whenever
fs(n), gs(fs(n)) are deﬁned. Alternatively, we could say that fs and gs are
partial inverses of each other if fs ∪g−1
s
is a one-to-one function.)
Furthermore, the following will hold for each s < :
(0) Ds ∪{ϕ⟨0⟩(c0)} is consistent;
(1) Ds ⊆Ds+1;

138
JAMES H. SCHMERL
(2) hs
=
fs ∪g−1
s
is a one-to-one function, and Ds ∪T(hs, s) is
consistent.
We begin by letting ℓ0 = 0, f0 = g0 = ∅, and D0 be some (K, Lr)-diagram
where 0 = b0 < r ≤b1.
At the onset of stage s, we have Ds, ℓs, fs and gs satisfying (0)–(2). Let
ℓ≤ℓs be the largest such that there are r such that bs+1 < r ≤bs+2,
a (K, Lr)-diagram D ⊇Ds, functions f : {n : 2n ≤ℓ} −→s + 1 and
g : {n : 2n + 1 ≤ℓ} −→s + 1 such that:
(2′) h = f ∪g−1 is a one-to-one function and D ∪T(h, s + 1) is consistent.
(3′) if 2n < ℓ, then f(n) = fs(n); and if 2n + 1 < ℓ, then g(n) = gs(n);
(4′) if N = {n : 2n ≤ℓ} ∪{g(n) : 2n + 1 ≤ℓ} and a ∈[N]<, then
ϕs+1
a
(x) = ϕs
a(x);
First, observe that there is such an ℓbecause we can let ℓ= 0, f = {⟨0, 0⟩},
and g = ∅, and then let D ⊇Ds be any (K, Lr)-diagram consistent with
ϕ⟨0⟩(c0) such that bs+1 < r ≤bs+2. Trivially, (2′) – (4′) hold. Next, observe
that ℓis eﬀectively deﬁned, and that f, g, D can also be eﬀectively deﬁned.
We will be more explicit about the choice of f and g: if ℓ= 2n, then we let
f(n) be as small as possible; and if ℓ= 2n + 1, then we let g(n) be as small
as possible. Having deﬁned ℓ, f, g, D, let Ds+1 = D, ℓs+1 = ℓ+ 1, fs+1 = f,
and gs+1 = g.
Thus, we have eﬀectively constructed the sequences ⟨Ds : s < ⟩, ⟨ℓs : s <
⟩, ⟨fs : s < ⟩and ⟨gs : s < ⟩such that, for each s < , (0) – (5) hold,
where:
(3) if 2n + 1 < ℓs, then fs+1(n) = fs(n); and if 2n + 2 < ℓs, then gs+1(n) =
gs(n);
(4) if N = {n : 2n < ℓs+1} ∪{gs+1(n) : 2n + 1 < ℓs+1} and a ∈[N]<, then
ϕs+1
a
(x) = ϕs
a(x);
(5) 1 ≤ℓs+1 ≤ℓs + 1.
For each s < , let hs = fs ∪g−1
s
, Ns = dom hs = {n : 2n < ℓs} ∪{gs(n) :
2n + 1 < ℓs} and Ms = ran hs = {hs(n) : n ∈Ns}.
Let D = 
s Ds, and let B be the structure whose diagram is D. Clearly, B
is recursive. It remains to show that B ∼= A, which we will show by obtaining a
permutation f :  −→ such that the function i →cf(i) is an isomorphism
from A to B. The key fact that is needed here is the following claim.
Claim. lims ℓs = ∞.
For, having this claim, we let f = lims fs and g = lims gs which, by (3), are
well deﬁned functions f :  −→ and g :  −→, and by (2) are inverses
of each other. Hence, f :  −→ is a permutation. It then follows from (2)
that i →cf(i) is an isomorphism from A to B.
To prove the claim, suppose it is false. Let m <  be the least such that
{s <  : ℓs = m} is inﬁnite. Then m > 0 by (5). There are two cases to
consider, depending on the parity of m.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
139
The odd case: m = 2n + 1. Let t <  be such that ℓt = m and ℓs ≥m
whenever t ≤s < . Moreover, using (♠), we can assume that t is large
enough so that
(♣) whenever a ∈[Ms]< and c ∈A, then there is b < t such that ⊢
ϕac(x) →ϕab(x).
Let s > t be such that ℓs = m and
(♦) whenever a ∈[{0, 1, 2, . . . , t −1}]< and r ≥s, then ϕr
a(x) = ϕa(x).
Let b = fs(n). Since, in the construction, fs(n) was chosen to be minimal,
(♣) implies that b < t. Then (♦) implies that T(hs, s) = T(hs, r) for all r > s,
so that fr(n) = b for all r > s. But then ℓr > m for all r > s, a contradiction.
The even case: m = 2n + 2. Let t <  be such that ℓt = m and ℓs ≥m
whenever t ≤s < . Let s > t be such that ℓs+1 = m and
(♥) whenever a ∈[Ms ∪{n}]< and r ≥s, then ϕr
a(x) = ϕa(x).
Then (♥) implies that T(hs, s) = T(hs, r) for all r > s, so that gr(n) = gs(n)
for all r > s. But then ℓr > m for all r > s, a contradiction.
⊣
As a corollary, we get a weaker version of Theorem 4.5. But the proof yields
an additional feature that will be useful in the next section.
Corollary 4.10. Suppose that K is a recursive, very wqo class with a recursive
bac. Then TK is 1-thin.
Proof. Let L be the language for K, and let T ⊇TK be a recursively
axiomatizable L-theory. By Lemma 4.7, let A |= T be recursively saturated
such that D(A) is low. The conditions on K imply that A has a ∀-basis selector,
so Lemma 4.8 implies that A has one that is Δ0
2. Then, by Lemma 4.9, there
is a recursive B ∼= A, which, by Corollary 2.4(2), shows that TK is 1-thin.
⊣
Remark. A feature of this proof of Corollary 4.10 is that, not only is the
constructed model A recursive and recursively saturated, but also its theory
Th(A) is low. By the remarks following the proofs of Theorems 4.1 and 4.5,
we can, instead, get D(A) to be Δ0
2. This suggests the following question.
Question 4.11. In proving Theorem 4.5, is it possible to get a recursive,
recursively saturated model A such that D(A) is low?
§5. More about LO. Peretyatkin [31] proved that every recursively axiom-
atizable theory of linearly ordered sets has a recursive model. This result has
been improved in two diﬀerent ways: to trees (Ershov [6]) and to Σ0
2 theories
(Lerman and Schmerl [22]). As already noted, a consequence of Theorem 4.1
is that the theory of trees is 1-thin, slightly improving Ershov’s theorem. An-
other improvement, coming from the discussion prior to Corollary 4.6, is that
BL is 1-thin. In this section, we make an improvement in another direction
by proving that the theory LO is 2-thin, slightly improving the result in [22].
There is undoubtedly a proof of this latter fact along the lines of the proof

140
JAMES H. SCHMERL
in [22]. However, the proof we give for LO is a diﬀerent proof that is simpler
than the one in [22] as it does not require an inﬁnite-injury priority argument.
In order to get the 2-thinness of LO, we will ﬁrst improve upon the 1-thinness
of LO in another way by obtaining models having recursive ∀-basis selectors.
In general, if A has a recursive ∀-basis selector, then not only is A recursive, but
also ∀∩D(A) is recursive. In general, the converse is not true. For example,
one can rather easily construct a linear order B = (B, <) having order type
 + (∗+ ) ·  (which is the order type of every countable, nonstandard
model of PA) in which the order and successor relations are recursive but the
binary relation that holds between x, y ∈B iﬀthere are only ﬁnitely many
points between them is not recursive. Such a B does not have a recursive
∀-basis selector despite its being a decidable, saturated linearly ordered set.
Theorem 5.1. Suppose that T ⊇LO is a recursively axiomatizable {<}-
theory.
Then T has a recursively saturated model with a recursive ∀-basis
selector.
Proof. Let L = {<}.
An alternate and equivalent formulation of this
theorem (cf. Corollary 2.4(2) with n = 1) is:
Suppose L′ ⊇L is ﬁnite and T ′ ⊇LO is a recursively axiomatizable
L′-theory. Then T ′ has a model A = (A, <, . . . ) such that (A, <)
has a recursive ∀-basis selector.
We will prove this alternate formulation. Its proof is modeled after the proof
of Theorem 4.1. We assume that T ′ has no ﬁnite models, as otherwise we can
let A be a ﬁnite model. Without loss of generality, we assume that every model
of T ′ has a ﬁrst and a last element.
Let E0, E1 be new unary relation symbols, and let S∞, S0, S1, S2, . . . be new
binaryrelationsymbols. For r <, let L(r)={<, E0, E1, S∞,S0, S1, . . . , Sr−1}
and let L() = 
r< L(r). (We are making an exception here of our conven-
tion that languages are ﬁnite.) Let K(r) be the class of ﬁnite L(r)-structures
(A, <, E0, E1, S∞, S0, S1, . . . , Sr−1) such that (A, <) is a ﬁnite linearly ordered
set with at least two elements and for a, b, c ∈A, the following hold:
(1) a ∈E0 iﬀa is the ﬁrst element;
(2) b ∈E1 iﬀb is the last element;
(3) if a ∈E0 and b ∈E1, then aS∞b;
(4) if aSib for some i < r or aS∞b, then a < b;
(5) if a < b, then either aS∞b or there is a unique i < r such that aSib;
(6) if either a < bS∞c or aS∞b < c, then aS∞c;
(7) if i, j < r and aSibSjc, then i + j + 1 < r and aSi+j+1c;
(8) if aS∞b, then aSib for no i < r.
[The intuition here is that if i < k and aSib then there is a potential that
|{x : a < x < b}| = i.]

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
141
If n < , then K(n)(r) is the class of all expansions (A, a0, a1, . . . , an−1),
where A ∈K(r).
Let K(n)() = 
r< K(n)(r).
Given A∗= (A, a0, a1,
. . . , an−1) and B∗= (B, b0, b1, . . . , bn−1) in K(n)(), we say that e : A∗−→
B∗is an enlarging if A ∈K(r), B ∈K(s), where r ≤s, e is an embedding of
(A↾L0, a0, a1, . . . , an−1) into (B↾L0, b0, b1, . . . , bn−1) and whenever x, y ∈A,
i, j ≤∞, A |= xSiy and B |= e(x)Sje(y), then i ≤j. If there is an enlarging
e : A∗−→B∗, then A∗is enlargeable in B∗.
We consider K(n)() to be quasi-ordered by enlargeability (that is, the exis-
tence of an enlarging). The following is a consequence of Higman’s Theorem.
Proposition 5.1.1. If n < , then K(n)() is wqo by enlargeability.
We ﬁrst prove this proposition for n = 0. Let Q = {0, 1, 2, . . . , ∞} be
well-ordered by 0  1  2  · · ·  ∞, so by Higman’s Theorem, Q< is wqo.
If A = (A, <, E0, E1, S∞, S0, S1, S2, . . . ) ∈K() has the n + 1 elements a0 <
a1 < · · · < an, then associate with it the n-tuple t(A) = ⟨t0, t1, . . . , tn−1⟩∈Qn,
where A |= aiStiai+1. Let A0, A1, A2, . . . be an inﬁnite sequence of structures
in K(). Since Q< is wqo, there are i < j < , such that t(Ai)  t(Aj).
Clearly, then, Ai is enlargeable in Aj, so that K() is wqo.
Now consider n > 0. If A∗= (A, a1, a2, . . . , an) ∈K(n)(), where we are
assuming without loss of generality that a0, an+1 are its ﬁrst and last element
and that a0 < a1 < · · · < an < an+1, then associate with A the (n + 1)- tuple
⟨A0, A1, . . . , An⟩of substructures of A, where the universe of Ai is the interval
[ai, ai+1]. With this association, since K() is wqo, Higman’s Theorem implies
that K(n)() is wqo. This proves the proposition.
As we have done before, we let c0, c1, c2, . . . be a supply of new and distinct
constant symbols. If r ≤ and s < , then Ls(r) = L(r)∪{c0, c1, . . . , cs−1}.
If r, s < , then by an s-diagram we will mean what we referred to in §4 as a
(K(s), Ls+2(s))-diagram.
As in the proof of Theorem 4.1, let L′
s = L′∪{c0, c1, . . . , cs−1}, and let L′
 =

s< L′
s. Let ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x), ϕ2(x), . . . be a recursive list of all L′
-formulas
having x as the only free variable such that each ϕi(x) is an L′
i-formula, and
let ϕ0(x) = E0(x) and ϕ1(x) = E1(x). If I ⊆ and h : I −→, then H(h)
is just as in the proof of Theorem 4.1. Let 0, 1, 2, . . . be a recursive list
of all L′
-sentences that can be logically deduced from T ′, where each i is
an L′
i-sentence. If Γ is a set of L′
-sentences, then we say that Γ is s-consistent
if no contradiction can be derived from Γ ∪{0, 1, . . . , s−1} in s steps.
Suppose D ⊆D′, where D is an s-diagram and D′ is an (s + 1)-diagram.
Then there are uniquely determined i, j ≤s + 1 such if k ≤s + 2, then
{ci < ck, ck < cj} ⊆D′ iﬀk = s + 2. Let us say that D′ is a (p, q)-cover of
D if {ciSpcs+2, cs+2Sqcj} ⊆D′, where p, q ∈{0, 1, 2, . . . , s} ∪{∞}.
Let k(x, y) be the formula asserting that x < y and that there are at least
k points between x and y; thus,
k(x, y) = ∃x0, x1, . . . , xk−1[x < x0 < x1 < · · · < xk−1 < y].

142
JAMES H. SCHMERL
Given an s-diagram D, for each i, j ≤s +1, let Uij(D) be the set of sentences
such that:
• if ci < cj is not in D, then Uij(D) = ∅;
• if k < s and ciSkcj is in D, then Uij(D) = {k(ci, cj), ¬k+1(ci, cj)};
• if ciS∞cj is in D, then Uij(D) = {k(ci, cj) : k < }.
Then let U(D) = D ∪{∀x[E0(x) ↔x = c0], ∀x[E1(x) ↔x = c1], ∀x[c0 ≤
x ≤c1]} {Uij(D) : i, j ≤s + 1}. For s < , let U s(D) be the set of those
sentences in U(D) having no more than s + 1 quantiﬁers.
We will construct recursive sequences ⟨Ns : s < ⟩, ⟨hs : s < ⟩and
⟨Ds : s < ⟩by stages. At stage s, we will deﬁne Ns ≤s + 2, a function
hs : Ns −→s + 3 and an s-diagram Ds so that:
(0) T ′ ∪U(Ds) is consistent;
(1) H(hs) ∪U s(Ds) is s-consistent.
We begin by letting N0 = 2, h0 : 2 −→3 be the identity function and D0 be
the 0-diagram such that D0 ⊇{E0(c0), E1(c1), c0 < c1, c0S∞c1}.
At the onset of stage s + 1, we have Ns ≤s + 3, hs : Ns −→s + 2 and an s-
diagram Ds suchthat(0)and(1)hold. Lett ≤Ns bethelargestforwhichthere
are an (s + 1)-diagram Ds+1 ⊇Ds and a function hs+1 : t + 1 −→s + 4 such
that hs+1↾t = hs ↾t, T ′ ∪U(Ds+1) is consistent, and H(hs+1) ∪U s+1(Ds+1)
is (s + 1)-consistent.
Observe that t is well deﬁned and t ≥2. For, since (0) holds, we can
let Ds+1 ⊇Ds be any (s + 1)-diagram such that U(Ds+1) is consistent with
T ′. (This can be done by letting Ds+1 be an (∞, ∞)-cover of Ds such that
ciS∞cj is in Ds, and ci < ck < cj is in Ds+1 iﬀk = s + 2.) Then, letting
t = 2 and hs+1 : 3 −→s + 4 be the identity function, we clearly have
H(hs+1) ∪U s+1(Ds+1) is (s + 1)-consistent.
Notice that if t < Ns, then
hs+1(t) ̸= hs(t) as otherwise the maximality of t would be contradicted by
using the function hs+1 ∪{⟨t + 1, cs+4⟩}.
Having t, let Ns+1 = t + 1, and then choose hs+1 and Ds+1 so that:
• if it is possible that Ds+1 is an (∞, ∞)-cover of Ds, then Ds+1 is an
(∞, ∞)-cover of Ds;
• if it is not possible that Ds+1 is an (∞, ∞)-cover of Ds, but it is possible
that Ds+1 is an (∞, q)-cover of Ds, then Ds+1 is an (∞, q)-cover of Ds,
where q is as large as possible;
• if it is not possible that Ds+1 is an (∞, q)-cover of Ds, but it is possible
that Ds+1 is a (p, ∞)-cover of Ds, then Ds+1 is a (p, ∞)-cover of Ds,
where p is as large as possible.
For each s < , the following hold:
(2) Ds+1 ⊇Ds;
(3) 3 ≤Ns+1 ≤Ns + 1, hs+1 ↾(Ns+1 −1) ⊆hs, and hs+1(Ns+1 −1) ̸=
hs(Ns+1 −1) if Ns+1 ≤Ns.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
143
The crucial fact needed to complete the proof is the following claim.
Claim. lims Ns = ∞.
For, having this claim, we let h = lims hs, which by (3), is now well deﬁned
and h :  −→. Let D =  Ds and T ′′ = D ∪H(h) ∪T ′. It follows
from (1) that T ′′ is s-consistent for all s <  and, therefore, T ′′ is consistent.
Clearly, D is recursive by (2). Let A′ be the Henkin model of T ′′. Then its
reduct A = A↾L is a recursive linearly ordered set that has a recursive ∀-basis
selector. It is enough to get a ∀-basis selector just for pairs of elements in A,
and whenever a, b ∈A and a < b, then the unique i ≤∞such that aSib ∈D
determines the ∀-baiss of ⟨a, b⟩.
It remains to prove the claim. Suppose the claim is false. By (3), Ns ≥3 if
s > 0, so we can let m = lim infs Ns −1. Let r <  be such that Nr = m + 1
and Ns ≥m + 1 for all s ≥r. By (3), hs ↾m = hr ↾m whenever r ≤s < ;
in particular, hs(0) = h0(0) = 0 and hs(1) = h0(1) = 1 for all s < . Then
let r < s0 < s1 < s2 < · · · be such that Nsi = m + 1 for all i < . Let Ai be
the L(si −1)-structure whose diagram is Dsi−1. Let ak = chr(k) for k < m,
and bi = chsi −1(m). Then, let A∗
i = (Ai, a0, a1, . . . , am−1, bi) ∈K(m+1)(si −1).
[This deﬁnition of A∗
i needs that hsi−1(m) ∈Ai, so we assume this to be the
case for inﬁnitely many i. If not, that is if hsi−1(m) = si + 2 for all but ﬁnitely
many i, then there is a very similar argument that works.]
Since K(m+1)() is wqo, there are i < j such that A∗
i is enlargeable in A∗
j.
Moreover, there are i0 < i1 < i2 < · · · such that each A∗
ik is enlargeable
in A∗
ik+1. We then might as well assume that A∗
i is enlargeable in A∗
i+1. By
composing these enlargings, we get enlargings ei : A∗
0 −→A∗
i for each i < .
Hence, Ds0−1 ∪H(hs0−1↾(m + 1)) is (si −1)-consistent for each i < , and,
therefore, Ds0−1∪H(hs0−1↾(m+1))∪T ′ is consistent. But then, there must be
an Ls0-diagram D′ and h′ : m+2 −→s0 such that h′↾(m+1) = hs0−1↾(m+1)
and D′ ∪H(h′) ∪T ′ is consistent. Therefore, Ns0 ≥m + 2, a contradiction
that proves the claim and the theorem.
⊣
The given proof of Theorem 5.1 is easily adapted to prove a relativized
version.
In particular: If T ⊇LO is a Σ0
n {<}-theory, then T has a Δ0
n-
recursively saturated model with a Δ0
n ∀-basis selector.
Corollary 5.2. The theory of linearly ordered sets is 2-thin.
Proof. This corollary follows from Lemma 4.9 and the appropriate (letting
n = 2) relativized version of Theorem 5.1. Let T ⊇LO be a Σ0
2 {<}-theory.
Then, T has a Δ0
2-recursively saturated model A with a Δ0
2 ∀-basis selector. By
Lemma 4.9, there is a recursive B ∼= A. Thus, B is a recursive, Δ0
2-recursively
saturated model of T. Corollary 2.4(2) then shows that LO is 2-thin.
⊣
Corollary 5.3. Every recursively axiomatizable theory of linear order has a
recursive, Δ0
2-recursively saturated model.
⊣

144
JAMES H. SCHMERL
This section ends with a problem. According to Ershov [6], an L-theory T
is ∀-ﬁnite if whenever T ′ ⊇T is a (deductively closed) L-theory, then T ′ ∩∀
is ﬁnitely axiomatizable. Furthermore, T is strongly ∀-ﬁnite if it is ∀-ﬁnite
as an (L ∪{c0, c1, . . . , ck−1})-theory, where c0, c1, . . . , ck−1 are new constant
symbols. Then it is proved in [6] that every recursively axiomatizable, strongly
∀-ﬁnite theory has a recursive model. The proof of Theorem 4.5 can be used
to show that every recursively axiomatizable, strongly ∀-ﬁnite theory is 1-thin.
Corollary 5.2 suggests that there might be an appropriate deﬁnition for a
strongly ∀2-theory so that: every recursively axiomatizable, strongly ∀2-ﬁnite
theory is 2-thin.
Problem 5.4. Find an appropriate deﬁnition for a strongly ∀n-theory, and
then prove: If 1 ≤n < , then every recursively axiomatizable, strongly
∀n-ﬁnite theory is n-thin.
§6. Some more 1-thin theories. In this section we show how to get some
additional classes K satisfying the hypotheses of Theorem 4.1, thereby yielding
additional 1-thin theories.
Let L be a ﬁnite, binary relational language; that is L = {R0, R1, R2,
. . . , Rk−1}, where each Ri is a binary relation symbol. Say that an L-structure
A = (A, R0, R1, R2, . . . , Rk−1) is irreﬂexive if each Ri is irreﬂexive – that is,
for no a ∈A is ⟨a, a⟩∈Ri. For example, all posets, graphs and tournaments
are irreﬂexive with k = 1. If A = (A, R0, R1, R2, . . . , Rk−1) is irreﬂexive,
then a subset I ⊆A is an interval if whenever x, y ∈I , z ∈A\I and i < k,
then xRiz ⇔yRiz and zRix ⇔zRiy. Obviously, A, ∅and all singletons
are intervals; these are the trivial intervals, all others being nontrivial. A ﬁnite
irreﬂexive L-structure A is indecomposable if |A| > 1 and A has no nontrivial
intervals. For example, every 2-element A is indecomposable; these are the
trivially indecomposable structures.
There are no nontrivial indecomposable trees; in fact, the 4-element N-poset
v
v
v
v
SS 

is a subposet of every nontrivially indecomposable poset. (See [38] for this
and much more on indecomposable structures.) For any class K of ﬁnite,
irreﬂexive L-structures, we let I(K) be the class of all nontrivially indecom-
posable structures in K. A poset is series-parallel if it does not embed the
N-poset. Thus, if K is the class of ﬁnite series-parallel posets, then I(K) = ∅.
If A, B are ﬁnite, irreﬂexive L-structures, then a function f : A −→B is a
homomorphism if whenever R ∈L and a, b ∈A are such that f(a) ̸= f(b),
then A |= R(a, b) iﬀB |= R(f(a), f(b)). If B ⊆A and f : A −→B is a
homomorphism such that f(x) = x for all x ∈B, then f is a retraction and
B is a retract of A.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
145
Lemma 6.1. Suppose A is a ﬁnite, irreﬂexive L-structure having at least 2
elements. Then A has an indecomposable retract B.
Proof. The proof is by induction on the cardinality of A. If A has exactly
2 elements, then A is an indecomposable retract of itself. Now suppose A has
more than 2 elements. If A is indecomposable, then A is an indecomposable
retract of itself, so suppose that A is not indecomposable. Let I ⊆A be
a nontrivial interval, and let b ∈I . Then let A′ ⊆A be such that A′ =
{b} ∪(A\I ), and let f′ : A −→A′ be such that f′(x) = b if x ∈I and
f(x) = x otherwise. Notice that 2 ≤|A′| < |A|. Then f′ : A −→A′ is
a retraction onto A′. If A′ is indecomposable, then let B = A′ and we are
done. Otherwise, by the inductive hypothesis, let g : A′ −→B be a retraction
onto an indecomposable B ⊆A′. Then f = gf′ is a retraction of A onto the
retract B.
⊣
We will make use of a notion even stronger than very wqo. Fix a class
K of structures. Suppose that (Q, ) is a wqo set. A Q-labeled structure
is a pair (A, 
), where A ∈K and 
 : A −→Q. If (A1, 
1), (A2, 
2) are Q-
labeled structures, then an embedding of (A1, 
1) into (A2, 
2) is an embedding
f : A1 −→A2 such that a  f(a) for all a ∈A1. The class of Q-labeled
structures will be considered to be quasi-ordered by embeddability. Then, we
say that K is wqo with labels if, for each wqo (Q, ), the class of Q-labeled
structures is wqo.
If K is wqo with labels, then clearly it is very wqo. It is easy to see that if
K is ﬁnite, then it is wqo with labels. In the following theorem, we consider K
for which I(K) is wqo with labels. Thus, this is the case if I(K) is ﬁnite. The
proof of the following theorem is an extension of the proof in [35] of its special
case where K is the class of ﬁnite series-parallel posets. It is closely patterned
after Nash-Williams’ elegant proof [30] of Kruskal’s Theorem. See [27] for a
good exposition.
Theorem 6.2. Suppose that K is a hereditary class of ﬁnite irreﬂexive, binary
relational structures. If I(K) is wqo with labels, then K is wqo with labels.
Proof. This proof uses the method of minimal bad sequences, which Nash-
Williams [30] originated.
Let (Q, ) be a wqo set. Let K′ be the class of Q-labeled structures in
K quasi-ordered by embeddability.
Suppose that K′ is not wqo, and let
(A0, 
0), (A1, 
1), (A2, 
2), . . . be a minimal bad sequence from K′.
(Ex-
planation: this sequence is bad if whenever i < j < , then (Ai, 
i) is
not embeddable in (Aj, 
j), and this bad sequence is minimal if, whenever
(B0, 0), (B1, 1), (B2, 2), . . . is another bad sequence from K′ and i <  is
the least such that |Ai| ̸= |Bi|, then |Ai| < |Bi|.)
Using Lemma 6.1, for each i < , let fi : Ai −→Bi ⊆Ai be a retraction
onto Bi such that whenever |Ai| ≥2, then Bi is indecomposable. If i < 

146
JAMES H. SCHMERL
and x ∈Bi, let A′
i,x be the Q-labeled structure (Ai|f−1
i
(x), 
i ↾f−1
i
(x)). Let
L = {Aix : i < , x ∈Bi} ⊆K′.
Claim. L is wqo.
For, suppose L is not wqo. Then there are i0 < i1 < i2 < · · · and xj ∈Bij
for each j <  such that |Bij| ≥2 and A′
ij,xj is not embeddable in A′
ik,xk
whenever j < k < . Then the sequence
(A0, 
0), (A1, 
1), . . . , (Ai0−1, 
i0−1), A′
i0,x0, A′
i1,x1, A′
i2,x2, . . .
is bad and contradicts the minimality of (A0, 
0), (A1, 
1), (A2, 
2), . . . .
For i < , let i be the L-labeling of Bi where i(x) = A′
i,x. Since I(K)
is wqo with labels, there are i < j <  such that (Bi, i) is embeddable in
(Bj, j). Clearly, this implies that (Ai, 
i) is embeddable in (Aj, 
j), which is
a contradiction.
⊣
One consequence of Theorem 6.2 is that Corollary 4.3 would remain true if
both occurrences of the word “tree” were replaced with “series-parallel poset”.
I have a favorite application of Theorem 6.2. A nontrivially indecomposable
L-structure A is deﬁned in [38] to be critically indecomposable if |A| > 2 and
it has no indecomposable substructure B ⊆A such that |B| = |A| −1. It can
be seen from [38] that if K is any class of ﬁnite irreﬂexive, binary relational
structures, then the subclass of all critically indecomposable structures in K is
wqo, and with the help of Higman’s Theorem, it can be seen to be wqo with
labels. This is so despite the fact that if K is the class of all ﬁnite graphs,
posets or tournaments, then there are inﬁnitely many pairwise nonisomorphic
critically indecomposable structures in K.
Let us say that an indecomposable structure that is not critically indecom-
posable is noncritically indecomposable, and then let I0(K) be the class of
those nonncritically indecomposable structures in I(K).
Corollary 6.3. Let L be a ﬁnite, binary relational language, and let K be
a hereditary class of ﬁnite, irreﬂexive L-structures. If I0(K) is ﬁnite, then K is
wqo with labels.
⊣
Suppose that I is a class of ﬁnite, nontrivially indecomposable L-structures.
Then, let K be the class of ﬁnite, irreﬂexive L structures A all of whose
nontrivially indecomposable substructures are in I. In other words, K is the
largest hereditary class of ﬁnite, irreﬂexive L-structures such that I(K) =
I. If I has only ﬁnitely many noncritically indecomposable structures, then
Corollary 6.3 applies to K. Such classes K seem to be especially well behaved.
Many of the results and proofs from [36] can extended to the theory T =
TK = ∀∩Th(K). For one example, T is decidable; in fact, the monadic
second-order theory of its countable models is decidable. Another example:
every ℵ0-completion of T is decidable.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
147
As part of a program [20] of studying wqo classes of tournaments, Latka [21]
has considered a class of ﬁnite tournaments to which Corollary 6.3 applies.
Let N5 be the tournament on the set {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} in which i →j iﬀj −i ≥2
or i −j = 1. We say that a tournament is N5-free if it does not embed N5.
If K is the class of ﬁnite N5-free tournaments, then Latka [21] proves that
there are exactly two tournaments in I0(K) (even though I(K) is inﬁnite) and,
therefore, that this class is wqo. In fact, it is wqo with labels, thereby implying
the following corollary whose proof is just like the proof of Corollary 4.3.
Corollary 6.4. Suppose ϕ(x, y) is a formula such that there is a model
M |= PA for which M ↾[ϕ] is an N5-free tournament. Then there is a re-
cursively saturated model M |= PA for which M ↾[ϕ] is a recursive N5-free
tournament.
⊣
Letting T5 be the theory of the class of N5-free tournaments, we see from
Theorem 4.1 that T5 is 1-thin and, therefore, is not 1-rich by Lemma 2.5. This
suggests the problem of determining exactly how thin T5 is and how much it
fails to be rich.
Question 6.5.
(a) Is T5 2-rich?
(b) 2-thin?
(c) Is there a Δ0
2 completion of T5 that has no recursive model?
REFERENCES
[1] Jon Barwise and John Schlipf, On recursively saturated models of arithmetic, Model
Theory and Algebra (A Memorial Tribute to Abraham Robinson), Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
vol. 498, Springer, Berlin, 1975, pp. 42–55.
[2]
, An introduction to recursively saturated and resplendent models, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 41 (1976), no. 2, pp. 531–536.
[3] Patrick Cegielski, Th´eorie ´el´ementaire de la multiplication des entiers naturels, Model
Theory and Arithmetic (Paris, 1979–1980), Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 890, Springer,
Berlin, 1981, pp. 44–89.
[4] R. G. Downey, Computability theory and linear orderings, Handbook of Recursive Mathe-
matics, Vol. 2, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 139, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1998, pp. 823–976.
[5] A. Ehrenfeucht and G. Kreisel, Strong models of arithmetic, Bulletin de l’Acad´emie
Polonaise des Sciences. S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques, vol. 14
(1966), pp. 107–110.
[6] Yu. L. Ershov, Skolem functions and constructible models, Algebra i Logika, vol. 12 (1973),
pp. 644–654, [Translation: Algebra and Logic, vol. 12 (1973), pp. 368–373].
[7] S. Feferman, Abstract of “Arithmetically deﬁnable models of formalized arithmetic”, Notices
of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 5 (1958), pp. 679–680.
[8] Valentina S. Harizanov, Pure computable model theory, Handbook of recursive mathe-
matics, Vol. 1, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 138, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1998, pp. 3–114.
[9] G. H. Higman, Ordering by divisibility in abstract algebras, Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society. Third Series, vol. 2 (1952), pp. 326–336.
[10] D. Jensen and A. Ehrenfeucht, Some problem in elementary arithmetics, Polska
Akademia Nauk. Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 92 (1976), no. 3, pp. 223–245.

148
JAMES H. SCHMERL
[11] Carl G. Jockusch, Jr. and Robert I. Soare, Π0
1 classes and degrees of theories, Trans-
actions of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 173 (1972), pp. 33–56.
[12] Richard Kaye, Tennenbaum’s theorem for models of arithmetic, this volume.
[13]
, Models of Peano Arithmetic, Oxford Logic Guides, vol. 15, The Clarendon Press
Oxford University Press, New York, 1991, Oxford Science Publications.
[14]
, Open induction, Tennenbaum phenomena, and complexity theory, Arithmetic,
Proof Theory, and Computational Complexity (Prague, 1991), Oxford Logic Guides, vol. 23,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1993, pp. 222–237.
[15] Ralph Keyes, The Quote Veriﬁer, St. Martin’s Griﬃn, New York, 2006.
[16] S. C. Kleene, Finite axiomatizability of theories in the predicate calculus using additional
predicate symbols. Two papers on the predicate calculus, Memoirs of the American Mathematical
Society, vol. 1952 (1952), no. 10, pp. 27–68.
[17]
, Introduction to Metamathematics, D. Van Nostrand, New York, 1952.
[18] Roman Kossak and James H. Schmerl, The Structure of Models of Peano Arithmetic,
Oxford Logic Guides, vol. 50, The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006.
[19] J. B. Kruskal, Well-quasi-ordering, the Tree Theorem, and Vazsonyi’s conjecture, Trans-
actions of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 95 (1960), pp. 210–225.
[20] Brenda J. Latka, Finitely constrained classes of homogeneous directed graphs, The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, vol. 59 (1994), no. 1, pp. 124–139.
[21]
, Structure theorem for tournaments omitting N5, Journal of Graph Theory, vol. 42
(2003), no. 3, pp. 165–192.
[22] Manuel Lerman and James H. Schmerl, Theories with recursive models, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 44 (1979), no. 1, pp. 59–76.
[23] Presburger M., ¨Uber die vollst¨andigkeit eines gewissen systems der arithmetik ganzer
zahlen, in welchem die addition als einzige operation hervortritt, Comptes Rendus du Ier congr`es des
Math´ematiciens des Pays Slaves, Warszawa, (1929), pp. 92–101.
[24] Angus Macintyre, The complexity of types in ﬁeld theory, Logic Year 1979–80 (Proc.
Seminars and Conf. Math. Logic, Univ. Connecticut, Storrs, Conn., 1979/80), Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, vol. 859, Springer, Berlin, 1981, pp. 143–156.
[25] Angus Macintyre and David Marker, Degrees of recursively saturated models, Trans-
actions of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 282 (1984), no. 2, pp. 539–554.
[26] Kenneth McAloon, On the complexity of models of arithmetic, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 47 (1982), no. 2, pp. 403–415.
[27] E. C. Milner, Basic wqo- and bqo-theory, Graphs and Order (Banﬀ, Alta., 1984), NATO
Advanced Science Institutes Series C: Mathematical and Physical Sciences, vol. 147, Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1985, pp. 487–502.
[28] A. Mostowski, A formula with no recursively enumerable model, Polska Akademia Nauk.
Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 42 (1955), pp. 125–140.
[29] Mark E. Nadel, The completeness of Peano multiplication, Israel Journal of Mathematics,
vol. 39 (1981), no. 3, pp. 225–233.
[30] C. S. J. Nash-Williams, On well-quasi-ordering ﬁnite trees, Mathematical Proceedings of
the Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 59 (1963), pp. 833–835.
[31] M. G. Peretyatkin, Every recursively enumerable extension of a theory of linear order has
a constructive model, Algebra i Logika, vol. 12 (1973), pp. 211–219, [Translation: Algebra and
Logic, vol. 12 (1973), 120–124.].
[32] Maurice Pouzet, Un bel ordre d’abritement et ses rapports avec les bornes d’une multirela-
tion, Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences - Series A-B, vol. 274 (1972), pp. A1677–A1680.
[33] Joseph G. Rosenstein, Linear Orderings, Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 98, Aca-
demic Press [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers], New York, 1982.
[34] John Stewart Schlipf, Toward model theory through recursive saturation, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 43 (1978), no. 2, pp. 183–206.

TENNENBAUM’S THEOREM AND RECURSIVE REDUCTS
149
[35] James H. Schmerl, Arborescent structures. I. Recursive models, Aspects of Eﬀective Alge-
bra (Clayton, 1979), Upside Down A Book Co. Yarra Glen, Victoria, 1981, pp. 226–231.
[36]
, Arborescent structures. II. Interpretability in the theory of trees, Transactions of
the American Mathematical Society, vol. 266 (1981), no. 2, pp. 629–643.
[37]
, Recursive models and the divisibility poset, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
vol. 39 (1998), no. 1, pp. 140–148.
[38] James H. Schmerl and William T. Trotter, Critically indecomposable partially ordered
sets, graphs, tournaments and other binary relational structures, Discrete Mathematics, vol. 113
(1993), no. 1-3, pp. 191–205.
[39] T. Skolem, ¨uber gewisse satzfunktionen in der arithmetik, Skrifter utgitt av Det Norske
videnskaps-akademi i Oslo, vol. 7 (1930), pp. 1–28.
[40] C. Smory´nski, Recursively saturated nonstandard models of arithmetic, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 46 (1981), no. 2, pp. 259–286.
[41]
, Lectures on nonstandard models of arithmetic, Logic Colloquium ’82 (Florence,
1982), Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 112, North-Holland, Amster-
dam, 1984, pp. 1–70.
[42] S. Tennenbaum, Abstract of “Non-Archimedean models for arithmetic”, Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, vol. 6 (1959), p. 270.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT
STORRS, CT 06269-3009, USA
E-mail: james.schmerl@uconn.edu

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
A. S. TROELSTRA
§1. Introduction. In this survey of the history of constructivism,1 more
space has been devoted to early developments (up till ca. 1965) than to the
work of the later decades. Not only because most of the concepts and general
insights have emerged before 1965, but also for practical reasons: much of the
work since 1965 is of a too technical and complicated nature to be described
adequately within the limits of this article.
Constructivism is a point of view (or an attitude) concerning the methods
and objects of mathematics which is normative: not only does it interpret ex-
isting mathematics according to certain principles, but it also rejects methods
and results not conforming to such principles as unfounded or speculative
(the rejection is not always absolute, but sometimes only a matter of degree: a
decided preference for constructive concepts and methods). In this sense the
various forms of constructivism are all ‘ideological’ in character.
Constructivism as a speciﬁc viewpoint emerges in the ﬁnal quarter of the
19th century, and may be regarded as a reaction to the rapidly increasing use
of highly abstract concepts and methods of proof in mathematics, a trend
exempliﬁed by the works of R. Dedekind and G. Cantor.
The mathematics before the last quarter of the 19th century is, from the
viewpoint of today, in the main constructive, with the notable exception of
geometry, where proof by contradiction was commonly accepted and widely
employed.
Characteristic for the constructivist trend is the insistence that mathemat-
ical objects are to be constructed (mental constructions) or computed; thus
theorems asserting the existence of certain objects should by their proofs give
us the means of constructing objects whose existence is being asserted.
1This paper appeared as preprint History of Constructivism in the Twentieth Century in 1991
in the ITLI Prepublication Series ML-91-05. Although it was intended that the paper should be
translated and appear in an Italian encyclopedia, it appeared only in 2006 in a severely curtailed
and mutilated form, as a short chapter ‘L’ntuizionismo di Brouwer’ in volume 8 (Storia della
Scienza), pp. 121–124, of La Seconda Revoluzione Scientiﬁca, published by the Istituto della
Enciclopedia Italiana, Roma. The original version describes the history of constructivism in
mathematics for the period 1900–1990, from the viewpoint of 1991.
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
150

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
151
L. Kronecker may be described as the ﬁrst conscious constructivist. For
Kronecker, only the natural numbers were ‘God-given’; all other mathematical
objects ought to be explained in terms of natural numbers (at least in alge-
bra). Assertions of existence should be backed up by constructions, and the
properties of numbers deﬁned in mathematics should be decidable in ﬁnitely
many steps. This is in the spirit of ﬁnitism (see the next section). Kronecker
strongly opposed Cantor’s set theory, but in his publications he demonstrated
his attitude more by example than by an explicit discussion of his tenets.
The principal constructivistic trends in this century are ﬁnitism already
mentioned (Section 2), semi-intuitionism and predicativism (Section 3), intu-
itionism (Section 4), Markov’s constructivism (Section 7) and Bishop’s con-
structivism (Section 8).
Constructivism, in particular intuitionism, has given rise to a considerable
amount of metamathematical research (Sections 5, 6).
Notations. We use N, Q, R for the set of natural, rational, and real numbers
respectively.
For logical symbols we use ¬ (not), ⊥(falsehood), →(implication), ∧
(conjunction, and), ∨(disjunction, or), ∀(for all), ∃(there exists). A, B, C
are arbitrary propositions or formulas of the language under discussion.
Usually n, m, k are elements of N, α,  number-theoretic functions (inﬁnite
sequences of natural numbers); ¯αn ≡⟨α0, α1, . . . , α(n −1)⟩is the initial
segment of α of length n; ⟨⟩is the empty sequence. n ∗m is the concatenation
of n and m.
IPC, IQC, HA are systems of intuitionistic propositional logic, predicate
logic, and arithmetic respectively. In arithmetic, S is the sucessor function (i.e.
Sx = x+1). These intuitionistic systems diﬀer from standard axiomatizations
of the corresponding classical systems only by the absence of the principle PEM
of the excluded middle
PEM
A ∨¬A,
or the principle of double negation ¬¬A →A.
§2. Finitism.
2.1. Finitist mathematics. Finitism may be characterized as based on the
concept of natural number (or ﬁnite, concretely representable structure),
which is taken to entail the acceptance of proof by induction and deﬁnition
by recursion.
Abstract notions, such as ‘constructive proof’, ‘arbitrary number-theoretic
function’ are rejected. Statements involving quantiﬁers are ﬁnitistically inter-
preted in terms of quantiﬁer-free statements. Thus an existential statement

152
A. S. TROELSTRA
∃x Ax is regarded as a partial communication, to be supplemented by provid-
ing an x which satisﬁes A. Establishing ¬∀xAx ﬁnitistically means: providing
a particular x such that Ax is false.
In this century, T. Skolem was the ﬁrst to contribute substantially to ﬁnitist
mathematics; he showed that a fair part of arithmetic could be developed in
a calculus without bound variables, and with induction over quantiﬁer-free
expressions only. Introduction of functions by primitive recursion is freely
allowed.2 Skolem does not present his results in a formal context, nor does he
try to delimit precisely the extent of ﬁnitist reasoning.
Since the idea of ﬁnitist reasoning was an essential ingredient in giving a pre-
cise formulation of Hilbert’s programme (the consistency proof for mathemat-
ics should use intuitively justiﬁed means, namely ﬁnitist reasoning), Skolem’s
work is extensively reported by D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Hilbert also at-
tempted to circumscribe the extent of ﬁnitist methods in a global way; the
ﬁnal result is found in ‘Die Grundlagen der Mathematik’.3
In 1941 H. B. Curry and R. L. Goodstein independently formulated a purely
equational calculus PRA for primitive recursive arithmetic in which Skolem’s
arguments could be formalized, and showed that the addition of classical
propositional logic to PRA is conservative (i.e. no new equations become
provable). PRA contains symbols for all primitive recursive functions, with
their deﬁning equations, and an induction rule of the form: if t[0] = t′[0], and
t[Sx] = s[x, t[x]], t′[Sx] = s[x, t′[x]] has been derived, then we may conclude
t[x] = t′[x].
Goodstein carried the development of ﬁnitist arithmetic beyond Skolem’s
results, and also showed how to treat parts of analysis by ﬁnitist means.4
W. W. Tait in [Tait 1981] attempts to delimit the scope of ﬁnitist reasoning.
He defends the thesis that PRA is indeed the limit of ﬁnitist reasoning. Any
ﬁnitely axiomatized part of PRA can be recognized as ﬁnitist, but never all of
PRA, since this would require us to accept the general notion of a primitive
recursive function, which is not ﬁnitist.
In subsequent years there has been a lot of metamathematical work showing
that large parts of mathematics have an indirect ﬁnitist justiﬁcation, namely
by results of the form: a weak system S in a language with strong expressive
power is shown to be consistent by methods formalizable in PRA, from which
it may be concluded that S is conservative over PRA. A survey of such results
is given in S. Simpson’s [Simpson 1988].
2.2. Actualism. A remark made in various forms by many authors, from
G. Mannoury in 1909 onwards, is the observation that already the natural
2See [Skolem 1923].
3[Hilbert and Bernays 1934], chapter 2.
4[Goodstein 1957, 1959].

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
153
number concept involves a strong idealization of the idea of ‘concretely repre-
sentable’ or ‘visualizable’. Such an idealization is implicit in the assumption
that all natural numbers are constructions of the same kind, whether we talk
about very small numbers such as 3 or 5, or extremely large ones such as 999.
In reality, we cannot handle 999 without some understanding of the general
concept of exponentiation. The objection to ﬁnitism, that it is not restricted
to objects which can be actually realized (physically, or in our imagination)
one might call the ‘actualist critique’, and a programme taking the actual-
ist critique into account, actualism (sometimes called ‘ultra-intuitionism’, or
‘ultra-ﬁnitism’).
The ﬁrst author to defend an actualist programme, was A. S. Esenin-Vol’pin
in 1957. He intended to give a consistency proof for ZF using only ‘ultra-
intuitionist’ means. Up till now the development of ‘actualist’ mathematics has
not made much progress — there appear to be inherent diﬃculties associated
with an actualist programme.
However, mention should be made of Parikh’s [Parikh 1971], motivated by
the actualist criticism of ﬁnitism, where is indicated, by technical results, the
considerable diﬀerence in character between addition and multiplication on
the one hand and exponentiation on the other hand. Together with work
in complexity theory, this paper stimulated the research on polynomially
bounded arithmetic, as an example of which may be quoted S. Buss’s mono-
graph Bounded Arithmetic.5
§3. Predicativism and semi-intuitionism.
3.1. Poincar´e. The French mathematician H. Poincar´e wrote many essays
on the philosophy of mathematics and the sciences, collected in [Poincar´e 1902,
1905, 1908, 1913]; his ideas played an important role in the debate on the
foundations of mathematics in the early part of this century. One cannot
extract a uniﬁed and coherent point of view from Poincar´e’s writings. On
the one hand he is a forerunner of the (semi-) intuitionists and predicativists,
on the other hand he sometimes expresses formalist views, namely where he
states that existence in mathematics can never mean anything but freedom
from contradiction.
For the history of constructivism, Poincar´e is important for two reasons:
(1) Explicit discussion and emphasis on the role of intuition in mathematics,
more especially ‘the intuition of pure number’. This intuition gives us the
principle of induction for the natural numbers, characterized by Poincar´e as a
‘synthetic judgment a priori’. That is to say, the principle is neither tautological
(i.e. justiﬁed by pure logic), nor is it derived from experience; instead, it is a
consequence of our intuitive understanding of the notion of number. In this
respect, Poincar´e agrees with the semi-intuitionists and Brouwer.
5[Buss 1986].

154
A. S. TROELSTRA
(2) According to Poincar´e, the set-theoretic paradoxes are due to a vicious
circle, namely the admission of impredicative deﬁnitions: deﬁning an object
N by referring to a totality E (in particular by quantiﬁying over E), while N
itself belongs to E.
Poincar´e’s standard example is J. Richard’s paradox:6 let E be the totality
of all real numbers given by inﬁnite decimal fractions, deﬁnable in ﬁnitely
many words. E is clearly countable, so by a wellknown Cantor style diagonal
argument we can deﬁne a real N not in E.
But N has been deﬁned in
ﬁnitely many words!
However, Poincar´e, adopting Richard’s conclusion,
points out that the deﬁnition of N as element of E refers to E itself and is
therefore impredicative. For a detailed discussion of Poincar´e’s philosophy of
mathematics, see [Mooij 1966].
3.2. The semi-intuitionists. The term ‘semi-intuitionists’ or ‘empirists’
refers to a group of French mathematicians, in particular E. Borel,
H. Lebesgue, R. Baire, and the Russian mathematician N. N. Luzin. Their
discussions of foundational problems are always in direct connection with spe-
ciﬁc mathematical developments, and thus have an ‘ad hoc’, local, character;
also the views within the group diﬀer.
What the semi-intuitionists have in common is the idea that, even if mathe-
matical objects exist independently of the human mind, mathematics can only
deal with such objects if we can also attain them by mentally constructing
them, i.e. have access to them by our intuition; in practice, this means that
they should be explicitly deﬁnable. In addition, pragmatic considerations oc-
cur: one is not interested in arbitrary objects of a certain kind, but only in the
ones which play an important role in mathematics (which ‘occur in nature’ in
a manner of speaking).
We shall illustrate semi-intuitionism by a summary of the views of Borel, the
most explicit and outspoken of the semi-intuitionists. According to Borel, one
can assert the existence of an object only if one can deﬁne it unambiguously
in ﬁnitely many words. In this concern with deﬁnability there is a link with
predicativism (as described below in 3.4); on the other hand, there is in Borel’s
writings no explicit concern with impredicativity and the vicious circle princi-
ple, as in the writings of Poincar´e and H. Weyl. (The Borel sets, introduced
by Borel in the development of measure theory, are a ‘continuous’ analogue
of the hyperarithmetic sets, which may be regarded as a ﬁrst approximation
to the general notion of a predicative subset of the natural numbers, but this
was not known to Borel.)
With respect to the reality of the countably inﬁnite, Borel takes a somewhat
pragmatic attitude: while conceding the strength of the position of the strict
ﬁnitist, he observes that the countably inﬁnite plays a very essential role in
6[Richard 1905].

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
155
mathematics, and mathematicians have in practice always agreed on the correct
use of the notion:
The notion of the countably inﬁnite appears therefore [ . . . ] as a
limit possibility conceived by our imagination, just like the ideal
line or the perfect circle.7
In other words, the natural numbers and the principle of complete induction
are intuitively clear.
Borel explains the Richard paradox, not by referring to the impredicative
character of the deﬁnition of N, but by the observation that N has not
been unambiguously deﬁned; the collection E is countable, but not eﬀectively
enumerable and hence the construction of N cannot be carried out.8 This
distinction would later obtain a precise formulation in recursion theory.
Borel explicitly introduced the notion of a calculable real number; a function
f is calculable if f(x) is calculable for each calculable x, and he observes that
a calculable function must necessarily be continuous, at least for calculable ar-
guments9 This foreshadows Brouwer’s well-known theorem on the continuity
of all real functions10.
3.3. Borel and the continuum. Borel rejected the general notion of an un-
countable set, as an essentially negative notion. According to Borel, Cantor’s
diagonal argument only shows that the continuum cannot be exhausted by a
countable set. Obviously, on this view the continuum presents a problem. On
the one hand it is the basic concept in analysis, on the other hand it cannot be
described as ‘the set of its (deﬁnable) elements’ since it is uncountable. Thus
Borel remarks in 1908:
[ . . . ] the notion of the continuum, which is the only well-known
example of a non-denumerable set, that is to say a set of which
the mathematicians have a clear idea in common (or believe to
have in common, which in practice amounts to the same thing). I
regard that notion as acquired from the geometric intuition of the
continuum; it is well-known that the complete arithmetical notion
of the continuum requires that one admits the legitimacy of an
inﬁnity of countably many successive arbitrary choices.11
(The term ‘arithmetic theory of the continuum’, or ‘arithmetization of the
continuum’, frequently appears in discussions of constructivism in the early
part of this century. By this is meant the characterization of the continuum
as a set of reals, where the real numbers are obtained as equivalence classes of
fundamental sequences of rationals, or as Dedekind cuts. Since the rationals
7[Borel 1914], p. 179.
8[Borel 1914], p. 165.
9[Borel 1914], p. 223.
10Cf. Section 6.1.
11[Borel 1914], p. 162.

156
A. S. TROELSTRA
can be enumerated, this achieves a reduction of the theory of the continuum
to number-theoretical or ‘arithmetical’ functions.)
In 1912 Borel remarks that one can reason about certain classes of objects,
such as the reals, since the class is deﬁned in ﬁnitely many words, even if not
all elements of the class are ﬁnitely deﬁnable. Therefore Borel had to accept
the continuum as a primitive concept, not reducible to an arithmetical theory
of the continuum.
Although the fact is not mentioned by Borel, the idea of a continuum
consisting of only countably many deﬁnable reals suggests a ‘measure-theoretic
paradox’, for if the reals in [0, 1] are countable, one can give a covering by
a sequence of intervals I0, I1, I2, . . . with !∞
n=0 |In| < 1, where |In| is the
length of In. (Such coverings are called singular.) The paradox is repeatedly
mentioned in Brouwer’s publications (e.g. [Brouwer 1930]), as a proof of the
superiority of his theory of the continuum.
3.4. Weyl. Motivated by his rejection of the platonistic view of mathematics
prevalent in Cantorian set theory and Dedekind’s foundation of the natural
number concept, Weyl, in his short monograph ‘Das Kontinuum’12 formulated
a programme for predicative mathematics; it appears that Weyl had arrived
at his position independently of Poincar´e and B. Russell. Predicativism may
be characterized as ‘constructivism’ with respect to deﬁnitions of sets (but
not with respect to the use of logic): sets are constructed from below, not
characterized by singling them out among the members of a totality conceived
as previously existing.
Weyl accepted classical logic and the set of natural numbers with induction
and deﬁnition by recursion as unproblematic. Since the totality of natural
numbers is accepted, all arithmetical predicates make sense as sets and we
can quantify over them. The arithmetically deﬁnable sets are the sets of rank
1, the ﬁrst level of a predicative hierarchy of ranked sets; sets of higher rank
are obtained by permitting quantiﬁcation over sets of lower rank in their
deﬁnition.
Weyl intended to keep the developments simple by restricting
attention to sets of rank 1.
On the basis of these principles Weyl was able to show for example: Cauchy
sequences of real numbers have a limit; every bounded monotone sequence
of reals has a limit; every countable covering by open intervals of a bounded
closed interval has a ﬁnite subcovering; the intermediate value theorem holds
(i.e. a function changing sign on an interval has a zero in the interval); a
continuous function on a bounded closed interval has a maximum and a
minimum.
After his monograph appeared, Weyl became for a short period converted
to Brouwer’s intuitionism. Later he took a more detached view, refusing the
exclusive adoption of either a constructive or an abstract axiomatic approach.
12[Weyl 1918].

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
157
Although Weyl retained a lifelong interest in the foundations of mathematics,
he did not inﬂuence the developments after 1918. For an excellent summary
of Weyl’s development, as well as a technical analysis of ‘Das Kontinuum’ see
S. Feferman’s ‘Weyl Vindicated’.13
3.5. Predicativism after ‘das Kontinuum’. After Weyl’s monograph pred-
icativism rested until the late ﬁfties, when interest revived in the work of
M. Kondˆo, A. Grzegorczyk and G. Kreisel. Kreisel showed that the so-called
hyperarithmetic sets known from recursion theory constituted an upper bound
for the notion ‘predicatively deﬁnable set of natural numbers’. Feferman and
K. Sch¨utte addressed the question of the precise extent of predicative analysis;
they managed to give a characterization of its proof theoretic ordinal. Type
free formalizations for predicative analysis with sets of all (predicative) ranks
were developed. In recent years also many formalisms have been shown to be
indirectly reducible to predicative systems, cf. [Feferman 1988a].
P. Lorenzen’s [1955, 1965] may be regarded as a direct continuation of Weyl’s
programme.
§4. Brouwerian intuitionism.
4.1. Early period. In his thesis ‘Over de Grondslagen der Wiskunde’14 the
Dutch mathematician L. E. J. Brouwer defended, more radically and more
consistently than the semi-intuitionists, an intuitionist conception of math-
ematics.
Brouwer’s philosophy of mathematics is embedded in a general
philosophy, the essentials of which are found already in [Brouwer 1905]. To
these philosophical views Brouwer adhered all his life; a late statement may be
found in [Brouwer 1949]. With respect to mathematics, Brouwer’s main ideas
are:
1. Mathematics is not formal; the objects of mathematics are mental con-
structions in the mind of the (ideal) mathematician. Only the thought
constructions of the (idealized) mathematician are exact.
2. Mathematics is independent of experience in the outside world, and
mathematics is in principle also independent of language. Communica-
tion by language may serve to suggest similar thought constructions to
others, but there is no guarantee that these other constructions are the
same. (This is a solipsistic element in Brouwer’s philosophy.)
3. Mathematics does not depend on logic; on the contrary, logic is part of
mathematics.
These principles led to a programme of reconstruction of mathematics on
intuitionistic principles (‘Brouwer’s programme’ or ‘BP’ for short). During
the early period, from say 1907 until 1913, Brouwer did the major part of his
13[Feferman 1988b].
14[Brouwer 1907].

158
A. S. TROELSTRA
work in (classical) topology and contributed little to BP. In these years his
view of the continuum and of countable sets is quite similar to Borel’s position
on these matters. Thus he writes:
The continuum as a whole was intuitively given to us; a construction
of the continuum, an act which would create “all” its parts as
individualized by the mathematical intuition is unthinkable and
impossible. The mathematical intuition is not capable of creating
other than countable quantities in an individualized way.15
On the other hand, already in this early period there are also clear diﬀer-
ences; thus Brouwer did not follow Borel in his pragmatic intersubjectivism,
and tries to explain the natural numbers and the continuum as two aspects of
a single intuition (‘the primeval intuition’).
Another important diﬀerence with Borel c.s. is, that Brouwer soon after
ﬁnishing his thesis realized that classical logic did not apply to his mathematics
(see the next section). Nevertheless, until circa 1913 Brouwer held some of
the views of the semi-intuitionists and did not publicly dissociate himself
from them.
4.2. Weak counterexamples and the creative subject. Already in [Brouwer
1908] a typically intuitionistic kind of counterexample to certain statements
A of classical mathematics was introduced, not counterexamples in the strict
sense of deriving a contradiction from the statement A, but examples showing
that, assuming that we can prove A intuitionistically, it would follow that we
had a solution to a problem known to be as yet unsolved. Undue attention
given to these examples often created for outsiders the erroneous impres-
sion that intuitionism was mainly a negative activity of criticizing classical
mathematics.
For example, consider the set X ≡{x : x = 1∨(x = 2∧F )} where F is any
as yet undecided mathematical statement, such as the Riemann hypothesis.
X is a subset of the ﬁnite set {1, 2}, but we cannot prove X to be ﬁnite, since
this would require us to decide whether X has only one, or two elements, and
for this we would have to decide F . (Intuitionistically, a set is ﬁnite if it can
be brought into a constructively speciﬁed 1-1 correspondence with an initial
part of the natural numbers.) So we have found a weak counterexample to
the statement ‘a subset of a ﬁnite set is ﬁnite’.
By choosing our undecided problems suitably, it is also possible to give a
weak counterexample to: ‘for all reals x, x < 0 or x = 0 or x > 0’, or to
‘for all reals x, x ≤0 or x ≥0’. Brouwer used these examples to show the
need for an intuitionistic revision of certain parts of the classical theory, and
to demonstrate how classically equivalent deﬁnitions corresponded to distinct
intuitionistic notions.
15[Brouwer 1907], p. 62, cf. also p. 10.

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
159
G. F. C. Griss, in a number of publications between 1944 and 1955, advo-
cated a form of intuitionistic mathematics without negation, since one cannot
have a clear conception of what it means to give proof of a proposition which
turns out to be contradictory (cf. the interpretation of intuitionistic implica-
tion and negation in Subsection 5.2).
In reaction to Griss, Brouwer published in 1948 an example of a statement
in the form of a negation which could not be replaced by a positive statement.
Brouwer’s example involved a real number deﬁned by explicit reference to
stages in the activity of the ideal mathematician trying to prove an as yet
undecided statement A.
An essential ingredient of Brouwer’s argument is
that if the ideal mathematician (creative subject in Brouwer’s terminology) is
certain that at no future stage of his mathematical activity he will ﬁnd A to
be true, it means that he knows that ¬A (Brouwer seems to have used such
examples in lectures since 1927).
The argument illustrates the extreme solipsistic consequences of Brouwer’s
intuitionism. Because of their philosophical impact, these examples generated
a good deal of discussion and inspired some metamathematical research, but
their impact on BP was very limited, in fact almost nil.
4.3. Brouwer’s programme. After 1912, the year in which he obtained a
professorship at the University of Amsterdam, Brouwer started in earnest
on his programme, and soon discovered that for a fruitful reconstruction of
analysis his ideas on the continuum needed revision. Around 1913 he must
have realized that the notion of choice sequence (appearing in a rather diﬀer-
ent setting in Borel’s discussion of the axiom of choice) could be legitimized
from his viewpoint and oﬀered all the advantages of an ‘arithmetical’ the-
ory of the continuum. The ﬁrst paper where the notion is actually used is
Brouwer’s [Brouwer 1919].
In the period up to 1928 he reconstructed parts of the theory of pointsets,
some function theory, developed a theory of countable well-orderings and,
together with his student B. de Loor, gave an intuitionistic proof of the fun-
damental theorem of algebra.
Brouwer’s ideas became more widely known only after 1920, when he lec-
tured on them at many places, especially in Germany.
After 1928, Brouwer displayed very little mathematical activity, presumably
as a result of a conﬂict in the board of editors of the ‘Mathematische An-
nalen’16. From 1923 onwards, M. J. Belinfante and A. Heyting, and later also
Heyting’s students continued BP. Belinfante investigated intuitionistic com-
plex function theory in the thirties. Heyting dealt with intuitionistic projective
geometry and algebra (in particular linear algebra and elimination theory). In
the period 1952–1967, six of Heyting’s Ph.D students wrote theses on subjects
such as intuitionistic topology, measure theory, theory of Hilbert spaces, the
16See [Van Dalen 1990].

160
A. S. TROELSTRA
Radon integral, intuitionistic aﬃne geometry. After 1974, interesting con-
tributions were made by W. Veldman, who studied the intuitionistic analytic
hierarchy.
The discovery of a precise notion of algorithm in the thirties (the notion of
a (general) recursive function) as a result of the work of A. Church, K. G¨odel,
J. Herbrand, A. M. Turing and S. C. Kleene, did not aﬀect intuitionism. This
is not really surprising: most of these characterizations describe algorithms
by specifying a narrow language in which they can be expressed, which is
utterly alien to Brouwer’s view of mathematics as the languageless activity of
the ideal mathematician. Turing’s analysis is not tied to a speciﬁc formalism.
Nevertheless he bases his informal arguments for the generality of his notion of
algorithm on the manipulation of symbols and appeals to physical limitations
on computing; and such ideas do not ﬁt into Brouwer’s ideas on mathematics
as a ‘free creation’.
Without Heyting’s sustained eﬀorts to explain Brouwer’s ideas and to make
them more widely known, interest in intuitionism might well have died out
in the thirties.
However, most of the interest in intuitionism concerned
its metamathematics, not BP, contrary to Heyting’s intentions.
Heyting’s
monograph [Heyting 1956] was instrumental in generating a wider interest in
intuitionism.
The next two sections will be devoted to the codiﬁcation of intuitionis-
tic logic and the gradual emergence of the metamathematics of constructive
theories.
§5. Intuitionistic logic and arithmetic.
5.1. L. E. J. Brouwer and intuitionistic logic. The fact that Brouwer’s ap-
proach to mathematics also required a revision of the principles of classical
logic was not yet clearly realized by him while writing his thesis, but in 1908
Brouwer explicitly noted that intuitionism required a diﬀerent logic. In partic-
ular, he noted that the principle of the excluded middle A∨¬A is not intuition-
istically valid. Implicitly, of course, the meaning of the logical operators had
been adapted to the intuitionistic context, that is the intuitionistic meaning of
a statement A ∨¬A is diﬀerent from the classical one. From [Brouwer 1908]:
is it allowed, in purely mathematical constructions and transforma-
tions, to neglect for some time the idea of the mathematical system
under construction and to operate in the corresponding linguistic
structure, following the principles of [ . . . ] and can we have conﬁ-
dence that each part of the argument can be justiﬁed by recalling
to the mind the corresponding mathematical construction?
A ﬁrst important technical contribution to intuitionistic logic is made in
([Brouwer 1924b], Zerlegung), namely the observation that ¬¬¬A ↔¬A is
an intuitionistic logical law.

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
161
5.2. The Brouwer-Heyting-Kolmogorov interpretation. The standard infor-
mal interpretation of logical operators in intuitionistic logic is the so-called
proof-interpretation or Brouwer-Heyting-Kolmogorov interpretation (BHK-
interpretation for short). The formalization of intuitionistic logic started be-
fore this interpretation was actually formulated, but it is preferable to discuss
the BHK-interpretation ﬁrst since it facilitates the understanding of the more
technical results. On the BHK-interpretation, the meaning of a statement A is
given by explaining what constitutes a proof of A, and proof of A for logically
compound A is explained in terms of what it means to give a proof of its
constituents. Thus, for propositional logic:
1. A proof of A ∧B is given by presenting a proof of A and a proof of B.
2. A proof of A ∨B is given by presenting either a proof of A or a proof
of B.
3. A proof of A →B is a construction which transforms any proof of A
into a proof of B.
4. Absurdity ⊥(‘the contradiction’) has no proof; a proof of ¬A is a
construction which transforms any supposed proof of A into a proof
of ⊥.
Such an interpretation is implicit in Brouwer’s writings, e.g. [Brouwer 1908,
1924b, Zerlegung] and has been made explicit by Heyting for predicate logic
in [Heyting 1934], and by A. N. Kolmogorov in [Kolmogorov 1932] for propo-
sitional logic.
Kolmogorov formulated what is essentially the same interpretation in dif-
ferent terms: he regarded propositions as problems, and logically compound
assertions as problems explained in terms of simpler problems, e.g. A →B
represents the problem of reducing the solution of B to the solution of A.
Initially Heyting and Kolmogorov regarded their respective interpretations
as distinct; Kolmogorov stressed that his interpretation also makes sense in
a classical setting. Later Heyting realized that, at least in an intuitionistic
setting, both interpretations are practically the same.
5.3. Formal intuitionistic logic and arithmetic through 1940. Kolmogorov’s
paper from 1925, written in Russian, is the earliest published formalization of
a fragment of intuitionistic logic, and represents a remarkable achievement,
but had very little eﬀect on the developments (in 1933 still unknown to G¨odel,
and not seen by Heyting in 1934).
Kolmogorov does not assume the ‘ex
falso sequitur quodlibet’ P →(¬P →Q) which is justiﬁable on the basis of
the BHK-interpretation. The system of intuitionistic logic with the ‘ex falso’
deleted became known as minimal logic and is of some interest in connection
with completeness problems.
V. I. Glivenko presented in 1928 a (not complete) formalization of intu-
itionistic propositional logic and derives from this informally ¬¬(¬P ∨P),
¬¬¬P →¬P, (¬P ∨P →¬Q) →¬Q, and uses these theorems to show that

162
A. S. TROELSTRA
the interpretation of [Barzin and Errera 1927] of Brouwer’s logic, according
to which a proposition intuitionistically is either true, or false, or ‘tierce’, is
untenable; a nice example of the use of formalization to settle a philosophical
debate.
Heyting wrote a prize essay on the formalization of intuitionistic mathe-
matics which was crowned by the Dutch Mathematical Association in 1928;
the essay appeared in revised form in 1930. The ﬁrst of the three papers [Heyt-
ing 1930] contains a formalization of intuitionistic propositional logic in its
present extent. The second paper deals with predicate logic and arithmetic.
Predicate logic does not yet appear in its ﬁnal form, due to a defective treatment
of substitution, and the (not quite consistent) germs of a theory permitting
non-denoting terms. Arithmetic as presented in the second paper is a frag-
ment of Heyting arithmetic as it is understood today, since there are axioms
for addition (in the guise of a deﬁnition) but not for multiplication. The third
paper deals with analysis. The system is very weak due to a lack of existence
axioms for sets and functions.
In 1929 Glivenko formulated and proved as a result of his correspondence
with Heyting the ‘Glivenko theorem’: in propositional logic ¬¬A is intuition-
istically provable if and only if A is classically provable.
Kolmogorov in his paper from 1925 describes an embedding of classical
propositional logic into (his fragment of) intuitionistic propositional logic,
thereby anticipating the work of G¨odel in 1933 and G. Gentzen (also dat-
ing from 1933, but published only in 1965), and argues that this embedding
is capable of generalization to stronger systems. G¨odel’s embedding is for-
mulated for arithmetic, but can be adapted in an obvious way to predicate
logic. In Gentzen’s version prime formulas P are ﬁrst replaced by ¬¬P, and
the operators · · · ∨. . . , ∃x . . . by ¬(¬ · · · ∧¬ . . . ), ¬∀x¬ . . . respectively. In
Kolmogorov’s version ¬¬ is inserted simultaneously in front of every subfor-
mula. The various embeddings are logically equivalent. If ∗is one of these
embeddings, then A∗↔A classically, and A∗is provable intuitionistically if
and only if A is provable classically.
G¨odel’s embedding made it clear that intuitionistic methods went beyond
ﬁnitism, precisely because abstract notions were allowed. This is clear e.g. from
the clause explaining intuitionistic implication in the BHK-interpretation,
since there the abstract notion of constructive proof and construction are
used as primitives. This fact had not been realized by the Hilbert school until
then; Bernays was the ﬁrst one to grasp the implications of G¨odel’s result.
Quite important for the proof theory of intuitionistic logic was the formula-
tion in Gentzen’s [Gentzen 1935] of the sequent calculi LK and LJ. Using his
cut elimination theorem, Gentzen showed that for IQC the disjunction prop-
erty DP holds: if ⊢A ∨B, then ⊢A or ⊢B. Exactly the same method yields
the explicit deﬁnability or existence property ED: if ⊢∃x A(x) then ⊢A(t)

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
163
for some term t. These properties present a striking contrast with classical
logic, and have been extensively investigated and established for all the usual
intuitionistic formal systems.
The earliest semantics for IPC, due to the work of S. Jaskowski, M. H. Stone,
A. Tarski, G. Birkhof, T. Ogasawara in the years 1936–1940 was algebraic se-
mantics, with topological semantics as an important special case. In algebraic
semantics, the truth values for propositions are elements of a Heyting algebra
(also known as Brouwerian lattice, pseudo-complemented lattice, pseudo-
Boolean algebra, or residuated lattice with bottom). A Heyting algebra is a
lattice with top and bottom, and an extra operation →such that a ∧b ≤c
iﬀa ≤b →c, for all elements a, b, c of the lattice. An important special
case of a Heyting algebra is the collection of open sets of a topological space
T ordered under inclusion, where U →V := Interior(V ∪(T \ U)). The
logical operations ∧, ∨, →, ¬ correspond to the lattice operations ∧, ∨, →and
the deﬁned operation ¬a := a →0, where 0 is the bottom of the lattice.
(A boolean algebra is a special case of a Heyting algebra.)
5.4. Metamathematics of intuitionistic logic and arithmetic after 1940. In
the early 1940s Kleene devised an interpretation which established a connec-
tion between the notion of computable (= recursive) function and intuition-
istic logic, namely the realizability interpretation.17
The essence of the interpretation is that it so to speak hereditarily codes
information on the explicit realization of disjunctions and existential quanti-
ﬁers, recursively in numerical parameters. The deﬁnition is by induction on
the number of logical symbols of sentences (= formulas without free vari-
ables): with every formula A one associates a predicate ‘x realizes A’, where
x is a natural number. Typical clauses are
1. n realizes t = s iﬀt = s is true.
2. n realizes A →B iﬀfor all m realizing A, n • m realizes B;
3. n realizes ∃mB(m) iﬀn is a pair (m, k), and k realizes B(m).
Here • is the operation of application between a number and the code of a
partial recursive function. Kleene established the correctness of this interpre-
tation: if HA ⊢A, then for some number n, n realizes A.
The interest of the interpretation is that it makes more true than just what
is coded in the formalism HA. In particular, the following version of Church’s
thesis may be shown to be realizable:
CT0
∀n∃mA(n, m) →∃k∀nA(n, k • m)
a principle which is easily seen to be incompatible with classical logic. Real-
izability and its many variants have become a powerful tool in the study of
metamathematics of constructive systems.
17[Kleene 1945].

164
A. S. TROELSTRA
We now turn to the further development of truth-value semantics. Alge-
braic semantics was extended to predicate logic, and A. Mostowski in 1949
was the ﬁrst one to apply topological models to obtain underivability results
for IQC.
This development culminated in Rasiowa and Sikorski’s mono-
graph [Rasiowa and Sikorski 1963]. Although algebraic semantics has proved
to be technically useful in metamathematical research, it is so to speak only
the algebraic version of the syntax, as witnessed by the fact that IPC itself
can be made into a Heyting algebra (the Lindenbaum algebra of IPC). More
important from a conceptual point of view are two other semantics, Beth
models, due to E. W. Beth18 and Kripke models, due to S. Kripke.19
Both these semantics are based on partially ordered sets. We call the ele-
ments k, k′, k′′ . . . of a partially ordered set (K, ≤) nodes. In Kripke models
the partial order is arbitrary, in Beth models as deﬁned by Beth it is a ﬁnitely
branching tree. The interest of these models resides in the intuitive interpre-
tation of the partial order: for Beth models, each node represents a state of
information in time, and a higher node represents a possible state of informa-
tion at a later point in time. The branching of the tree reﬂects the fact that
there are diﬀerent possibilities for the extension of our knowledge in the future.
In the Kripke models, it is more natural to think of the nodes as representing
possible stages of knowledge; a higher node in the ordering corresponds to an
extension of our knowledge. (That is to say, passing to a later period in time
does not force us to move upwards in a Kripke model, only extension of our
knowledge does.) In these models one has a notion of ‘A is true at k’, or ‘k
forces A’. Falsehood ⊥is nowhere forced. It is possible to interpret Beth and
Kripke models as topological models for special spaces.
An important aspect of Beth models is the connection with intuitive in-
tuitionistic validity; a formula A(R1, . . . , Rn) of IQC, containing predicate
letters R1, . . . , Rn is intuitionistically valid if for all domains D and all relations
R∗
i of the appropriate arity (i.e. the appropriate number of argument places),
AD(R∗
1, . . . , R∗
n) holds intuitionistically; here AD(R∗
1, . . . R∗
n) is obtained from
A by restricting quantiﬁers to D, and replacing Ri by R∗
i .
From observations by G. Kreisel in 1958 it follows that, for propositional
logic, validity in a Beth model is equivalent to intuitive validity for a collection
of propositions Pα
1 , Pα
2 , . . . , Pα
n depending on a lawless parameter α (for the
explanation of ‘lawless’ see the next section).
Beth and Kripke proved completeness for their respective kinds of semantics
by classical methods. (Beth originally believed to have also an intuitionistic
completeness proof for his semantics.) Veldman was able to show that if one
extends the notion of Beth model to fallible Beth models, where it is permitted
that in certain nodes falsehood is forced, it is possible to obtain an intuitionistic
18[Beth 1956, 1959].
19[Kripke 1965].

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
165
completeness proof for Kripke semantics. The idea was transferred to Kripke
semantics by H. de Swart. For the fragment of intuitionistic logic without
falsehood and negation, fallible models are just ordinary models. For minimal
logic, where ⊥is regarded as an arbitrary unprovable proposition letter, one
has intuitionistic completeness relative to ordinary Beth models. The best
subsequent results in this direction were obtained from work by H. Friedman
from ca. 1976.20
C. A. Smory´nski in [Smory´nski 1973] used Kripke models with great virtu-
osity in the study of the metamathematics of intuitionistic arithmetic.
5.5. Formulas-as-types. In essence, the ‘formulas-as-types’ idea (maybe
‘propositions-as-types’ would have been better terminology) consists in the
identiﬁcation of a proposition with the set of its (intuitionistic) proofs. Or
stated in another form: in a calculus of typed objects, the types play the role
of propositions, and the objects of a type A correspond to the proofs of the
proposition A.
Thus, since on the BHK-interpretation a proof of an implication A →B is
an operation transforming proofs of A into proofs of B, the proofs of A →B
are a set of functions from (the proofs of) A to (the proofs of) B. Similarly,
(the set of proofs of) A ∧B is the set of pairs of proofs, with ﬁrst component
a proof of A, and second component a proof of B. So A ∧B corresponds to
a cartesian product.
A clear expression of this idea was given in the late 1960s (circa 1968–1969),
by W. A. Howard, and by N. G. de Bruijn; H. L¨auchli around the same time
used the idea for a completeness proof for IQC for a kind of realizability
semantics.
The analogy goes deeper: one can use terms of a typed lambda calculus
to denote natural deduction proofs, and then normalization of proofs corre-
sponds to normalization in the lambda calculus. So pure typed lambda calcu-
lus is in a sense the same as IPC in natural deduction formulation; similarly,
second-order lambda calculus (polymorphic lambda calculus) is intuitionistic
logic with propositional quantiﬁers.
The formulas-as-types idea became a guiding principle in much subsequent
research in type theory on the borderline of logic and theoretical computer
science. It is used in the type theories developed by P. Martin-L¨of to reduce
logic to type theory; thus proof by induction and deﬁnition by recursion are
subsumed under a single rule in these theories. Formulas-as-types plays a key
role in the proof-checking language AUTOMATH devised by de Bruijn and
collaborators since the late 1960s.
The formulas-as-types idea has a parallel in category theory, where propo-
sitions correspond to objects, and arrows to (equivalence classes of) proofs.
20See [Troelstra and van Dalen 1988], 2, chapter 13.

166
A. S. TROELSTRA
J. Lambek investigated this parallel for IPC in [Lambek 1972] and later work,
culminating in the monograph [Lambek and Scott 1986].
§6. Intuitionistic analysis and stronger theories.
6.1. Choice sequences in Brouwer’s writings. As already remarked, the con-
tinuum presented a problem to the semi-intuitionists; they were forced to
introduce it as a primitive notion, while Brouwer in his thesis tried to ex-
plain the continuum and the natural numbers as emanating both from a single
‘primeval intuition’.
However, when Brouwer started (circa 1913) with his intuitionistic recon-
struction of the theory of the continuum and the theory of point sets, he found
that the notion of choice sequence, appearing in Borel’s discussion of the ax-
iom of choice (as the opposite, so to speak, of a sequence deﬁned in ﬁnitely
many words, and therefore in Borel’s view of a dubious character) could be
regarded as a legitimate intuitionistic notion, and as a means of retaining the
advantages of an arithmetic theory of the continuum.
In Brouwer’s intuitionistic set theory the dominating concept is that of a
spread (in German: ‘Menge’). Slightly simplifying Brouwer’s original deﬁni-
tion, we say that a spread consists essentially of a tree of ﬁnite sequences of
natural numbers, such that every sequence has at least one successor, plus a
law L assigning objects of a previously constructed domain to the nodes of
the tree. Choice sequences within a given spread correspond to the inﬁnite
branches of the tree. Brouwer calls a sequence L( ¯α1), L( ¯α2), L( ¯α3), . . . ,
(α an inﬁnite branch) an element of the spread. Below we shall use ‘spread’
only for trees of ﬁnite sequences of natural numbers without ﬁnite branches,
corresponding to the trivial L satisfying L( ¯α(n + 1)) = αn. Since it is not the
deﬁnition of a spread, but the way the choice sequences are given to us, which
determines the properties of the continuum, we shall henceforth concentrate
on the choice sequences.
The notion of spread is supplemented by the notion of species, much closer
to the classical concept of set; one may think of a species as a set of elements
singled out from a previously constructed totality by a property (as in the
separation axiom of classical set theory).
The admissibility of impredicative deﬁnitions is not explicitly discussed in
Brouwer’s writings, though it is unlikely that he would have accepted impred-
icative deﬁnitions without restrictions. On the other hand, his methods allow
more than just predicative sets over N: Brouwer’s introduction of ordinals
in intuitionistic mathematics is an example of a set introduced by a so-called
generalized inductive deﬁnition, which cannot be obtained as a set deﬁned
predicatively relative to N.
A choice sequence α of natural numbers may be viewed as an unﬁnished,
ongoing process of choosing values α0, α1, α2, . . . by the ideal mathematician

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
167
(IM); at any stage of his activity the IM has determined only ﬁnitely many
values plus, possibly, some restrictions on future choices (the restrictions may
vary from ‘no restrictions’ to ‘choices henceforth completely determined by a
law’). For sequences completely determined by a law or recipe we shall use
lawlike; other mathematical objects not depending on choice parameters are
also called lawlike. An important principle concerning choice sequences is the
Continuity principle or continuity axiom. If to every choice sequence
α of a spread a number n(α) is assigned, n(α) depends on an
initial segment ¯αm = α0, α1, . . . , α(m −1) only, that is to say for
all choice sequences  starting with the same initial segment ¯αm,
n() = n(α).
This principle is not specially singled out by Brouwer, but used in proofs
(for the ﬁrst time in course notes from 1916-17), more particularly in proofs
of what later became known as the bar theorem.
From the bar theorem
(explained below) Brouwer obtained an important corollary for the ﬁnitary
spreads, the
Fan Theorem. If to every choice sequence α of a ﬁnitely branching
spread (fan) a number n(α) is assigned, there is a number m, such
that for all α, n(α) may be determined from the ﬁrst m values of α
(i.e. an initial segment of length m).
The fan theorem may be seen as a combination of the compactness of ﬁnite
trees with the continuity axiom; Brouwer uses the fan theorem in particular
to derive:
The Uniform continuity theorem. Every function from a bounded
closed interval into R is uniformly continuous.
The essence of the bar theorem is best expressed in a formulation which
appears in a footnote in [Brouwer 1927], and was afterwards used by Kleene
as an axiom in his formalization of intuitionistic analysis.
Bar theorem. If the ‘universal spread’ (i.e. the tree of all sequences
of natural numbers) contains a decidable set A of nodes such that
each choice sequence α has an initial segment in A, then for the set
of nodes generated by (i) X ⊂A, (ii) if all successors of a node n
are in X, then n ∈X, it follows that the empty sequence is in X.
Originally, in [Brouwer 1919], the fan theorem is assumed without proof.
In 1923 Brouwer presents an unsatisfactory proof of the uniform continuity
theorem, in 1924 ([Brouwer 1924a], Beweis) he proves this theorem via the fan
theorem which in its turn is obtained from the bar theorem; his 1924 proof of
the bar theorem is repeated in many later publications with slight variations.
Brouwer’s proof of the bar theorem has often been regarded as obscure, but
has also been acclaimed as containing an idea of considerable interest. For

168
A. S. TROELSTRA
in this proof Brouwer analyzes the possible forms of a constructive proof of a
statement of the form ∀α∃nA( ¯αn) for decidable A.
More precisely, the claim made by Brouwer, in his proof of the bar theorem,
amounts to the following. Let Sec(n) (‘n is secured’) mean ‘All α through the
node n pass through A’, Now Brouwer assumes that a ‘fully analyzed proof’
of the statement ⟨⟩∈Sec or Sec(⟨⟩) (i.e. all α pass through A), can consist
of three kinds of steps only:
(i) n ∈A, hence Sec(n);
(ii) if for all i Sec(n ∗⟨i⟩), then Sec(n);
(iii) if Sec(n), then Sec(n ∗⟨i⟩).
Brouwer then shows that steps of the form (iii) may be eliminated, from which
one readily obtains the bar theorem in the form given above.
Nowadays the proof is regarded not so much obscure as well as unsatis-
factory. As Kleene in [Kleene and Vesley 1965]21 rightly observes, Brouwer’s
assumption concerning the form of ‘fully analyzed proofs’ is not more ev-
ident than the bar theorem itself. On the other hand, the notion of ‘fully
analyzed’ proof or ‘canonical’ proof was used later by M. A. E. Dummett
in [Dummett 1977] in his attempts to give a more satisfactory version of the
BHK-interpretation of intuitionistic logic.
6.2. Axiomatization of intuitionistic analysis. In Heyting’s third formaliza-
tion paper from 1930 we ﬁnd for the ﬁrst time a formal statement of the
continuity principle. For a long time nothing happened till Kleene in 1950
started working on the axiomatization of intuitionistic analysis; his work cul-
minated in the monograph [Kleene and Vesley 1965]. Kleene based his system
on a language with variables for numbers and choice sequences; to arithmeti-
cal axioms he added an axiom of countable choice, the axiom of bar induction
(equivalent to the bar theorem as formulated above) and a continuity axiom, a
strengthening of the continuity principle as stated above (‘Brouwer’s principle
for functions’).
The continuity axiom was the only non-classical principle, and Kleene
established its consistency relative to the other axioms using a realizability
interpretation (function-realizability). He also showed, by means of another
realizability notion, that Markov’s principle (see 7.2) was not derivable in
his system.
In 1963 Kreisel developed an axiomatization based on a language with
number variables and two kinds of function variables, for lawlike sequences
and for choice sequences. He sketched a proof of the conservativity of the
axioms for choice sequences relative to the lawlike part of the system, by
means of a translation of an arbitrary sentence into the lawlike part of the
21p. 51.

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
169
theory (the ‘elimination translation’). This work ﬁnally resulted in [Kreisel
and Troelstra 1970].
J. Myhill in 1967 introduced an axiom intended to express the consequences
in the language of analysis of Brouwer’s solipsistic theory of the creative subject
(as reported above in 4.2), called by him Kripke’s scheme (KS) since Kripke
was the ﬁrst to formulate this principle. KS is
∃α((∃x(αx ̸= 0) →A) ∧(∀x(αx = 0) →¬A))
for arbitrary A.
KS conﬂicts with Brouwer’s principle for functions.
(Brouwer’s reasoning seems to justify in fact the even stronger ∃α(∃x(αx ̸=
0) ↔A)). Myhill’s conceptual analysis of the notion of choice sequence is
considerably more reﬁned than earlier attempts.
There is an obvious connection between Kripke’s scheme and the theory of
the creative subject mentioned in Subsection 4.2. For any proposition A, the
α in KS may be interpreted as: αn ̸= 0 if and only if the creative subject has
found evidence for the truth of A at stage n of his activity.
Brouwer appears to have vacillated with respect to the precise form which
restrictions on choice sequences could take, but in his published writings he
does not explicitly consider subdomains of the universe of choice sequences
which are characterized by the class of restrictions allowed, except for the
trivial example of the lawlike sequences.
In 1958 Kreisel considered ‘absolutely free’ (nowadays lawless) sequences
ranging over a ﬁnitely branching tree, where at any stage in the construction of
the sequence no restriction on future choices is allowed; later this was extended
to an axiomatization LS of the theory of lawless sequences ranging over the
universal tree22 Lawless sequences are of interest because of their conceptual
simplicity (when compared to other concepts of choice sequence), as a tool
for studying other notions of choice sequence,23 and because they provide a
link between Beth-validity and intuitive intuitionistic validity (cf. 5.4).
As a result of work of Kreisel, Myhill and A. S. Troelstra, mainly over
the period 1963–1980, it became clear that many diﬀerent notions of choice
sequence may be distinguished, with diﬀerent properties.24
The publication of [Bishop 1967] led to several proposals for an axiomatic
framework for Bishop’s constructive mathematics, in particular a type-free
theory of operators and classes,25 and versions of intuitionistic set theory.26
Martin-L¨of’s type theories have also been considered in this connection.27
22See [Kreisel 1968].
23See e.g. [Troelstra 1983].
24For a survey of this topic and its history see [Troelstra 1977], Appendix C; 1983.
25[Feferman 1975, 1979].
26[Friedman 1977].

170
A. S. TROELSTRA
As was shown by Aczel in 1978, one can interpret a constructive set theory
CZF in a suitable version of Martin-L¨of’s type theory. (CZF does not have
a powerset axiom; instead there are suitable collection axioms which permit
to derive the existence of the set of all functions from x to y for any two sets
x and y; moreover, the foundation axiom has been replaced by an axiom of
∈-induction). Much of this work is reported in the monograph [Beeson 1985];
Beeson himself made substantial contributions in this area.
6.3. The model theory of intuitionistic analysis. Topological models and
Beth models turned out to be very fruitful for the metamathematical study of
intuitionistic analysis, type theory and set theory. D. S. Scott was the ﬁrst to
give a topological model for intuitionistic analysis, in two papers from 1968
and 1970. In this model the real numbers are represented by the continuous
functions over the topological space T underlying the model. For suitable T,
all real-valued functions are continuous in Scott’s model.
This later developed into the so-called sheaf models for intuitionistic analy-
sis, type theory and set theory, with a peak of activity in the period 1977-1984.
The inspiration for this development not only came from Scott’s models just
mentioned, but also from category theory, where W. Lawvere in his [Law-
vere 1971] developed the notion of elementary topos — a category with extra
structure, in which set theory and type theory based on intuitionistic logic
can be interpreted. The notion of elementary topos generalized the notion
of Grothendieck topos known from algebraic geometry, and is in a sense
‘equivalent’ to the notion of an intuitionistic type theory.
Even Kleene’s realizability interpretation can be extended to type theory
and be recast as an interpretation of type theory in a special topos.28
Some of the models studied are mathematically interesting in their own
right, and draw attention to possibilities not envisaged in the constructivist
tradition (e.g. analysis without an axiom of countable choice, where the reals
deﬁned by Dedekind cuts are not isomorphic to the reals deﬁned via funda-
mental sequences of rationals).
§7. Constructive recursive mathematics.
7.1. Classical recursive mathematics. Before we can discuss Markov’s ver-
sion of constructive mathematics, it is necessary to say a few words on classical
recursive mathematics (RM for short).
In RM, recursive versions of classical notions are investigated, against a
background of classical logic. The diﬀerence with a more strictly constructive
approach is illustrated by the following example:
27Martin-L¨of 1975, 1984.
28See [Hyland 1982].

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
171
(0, −1)
(1, 0)
(2, 0)
(3, 1)
f0










The function fa(x) given by fa(x) = f0(x)+a, where f0 is as in the picture,
cannot be constructively proved to have a zero as long as we do not know
whether a ≤0 or a ≥0. But even classically we can show that fa does not
have a zero recursively in the parameter a – and this is typically a result of RM.
Where in constructive recursive mathematics the recursivity in parameters
is built into the constructive reading of the logical operators, in RM the
recursiveness has to be made explicit.
RM is almost as old as recursion theory itself, since already Turing intro-
duced “computable numbers” in his [Turing 1937], and it is still expanding
today. We mention a few examples.
E. Specker was the ﬁrst to construct an example of a recursive bounded
monotone sequence of rationals without a recursive limit.29 Such sequences
are now known as Specker sequences.
Kreisel and D. Lacombe constructed singular coverings of the interval in
1957; Kreisel, Lacombe and J. Shoenﬁeld showed, also in 1957, that every
eﬀective operation of type 2 is continuous (an eﬀective operation of type 2
is a partial recursive operation with code u say, acting on codes x, y of total
recursive functions such that ∀z(x • z = y • z) →u • x = u • y; continuity of
u means that u • x depends on ﬁnitely many values only of the function coded
by x).
A. I. Maltsev and Y. L. Ershov developed (mainly in the period 1961-1974)
the ‘theory of numerations’ as a systematic method to lift the notion of recur-
siveness from N to arbitrary countable structures.30 In 1974 G. Metakides and
A. Nerode gave the ﬁrst applications of the powerful priority method from re-
cursion theory to problems in algebra.31 As an example of a striking result we
29[Specker 1949].
30[Ershov 1972].
31See [Metakides and Nerode 1979].

172
A. S. TROELSTRA
mention the construction of a recursive ordinary diﬀerential equation without
recursive solutions, obtained by M. B. Pour-El and J. I. Richards in 1979.32
7.2. Constructive recursive mathematics. A. A. Markov formulated in 1948-
49 the basic ideas of constructive recursive mathematics (CRM for short).
They may be summarized as follows.
1. objects of constructive mathematics are constructive objects, concretely:
words in various alphabets.
2. the abstraction of potential existence is admissible but the abstraction
of actual inﬁnity is not allowed. Potential realizability means e.g. that
we may regard plus as a well-deﬁned operation for all natural numbers,
since we know how to complete it for arbitrarily large numbers.
3. a precise notion of algorithm is taken as a basis (Markov chose for this
his own notion of ‘Markov-algorithm’).
4. logically compound statements have to be interpreted so as to take the
preceding points into account.
Not surprisingly, many results of RM can be bodily lifted to CRM and vice
versa. Sometimes parallel results were discovered almost simultaneously and
independently in RM and CRM respectively. Thus the theorem by Kreisel,
Lacombe and Shoenﬁeld mentioned above is in the setting of CRM a special
case of a theorem proved by Tsejtin in 1959: every function from a complete
separable metric space into a separable metric space is continuous.
N. A. Shanin33 formulated a “deciphering algorithm which makes the con-
structive content of mathematical statements explicit. By this reinterpretation
an arbitrary statement in the language of arithmetic is reformulated as a for-
mula ∃x1 . . . xiA where A is normal, i.e. does not contain ∨, ∃and the string of
existential quantiﬁers may be interpreted in the usual way. Shanin’s method is
essentially equivalent to Kleene’s realizability, but has been formulated in such
a way that normal formulas are unchanged by the interpretation (Kleene’s re-
alizability produces a diﬀerent although intuitionistically equivalent formula
when applied to a normal formula).
The deciphering method systematically produces a constructive reading for
notions deﬁned in the language of arithmetic; classically equivalent deﬁni-
tions may obtain distinct interpretations by this method. But not all notions
considered in CRM are obtained by applying the method to a deﬁnition in
arithmetic (example: the ‘FR-numbers’ are the reals corresponding to the
intuitionistic reals and are given by a code α for a fundamental sequence of
rationals, together with a code  for a modulus of convergence, i.e. relative
to a standard enumeration of the rationals ⟨rn⟩n the sequence is ⟨rαn⟩n, and
∀mm′(|rn+m −rn+m′| < 2−k). An F-sequence is an FR-sequence with the 
32See [Pour-El and Richards 1989].
33[Shanin 1958].

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
173
omitted. The notion of an F-sequence does not arise as an application of the
deciphering algorithm.)
Markov accepted one principle not accepted in either intuitionism or
Bishop’s constructivism: if it is impossible that computation by an algorithm
does not terminate, then it does terminate. Logically this amounts to what is
usually called Markov’s principle:
MP
¬¬∃x(fx = 0) →∃x(fx = 0) (f : N →N recursive.)
The theorem by Tsejtin, mentioned above, needs MP for its proof.
The measure-theoretic paradox (cf. 3.3) is resolved in CRM in a satisfactory
way: singular coverings of [0, 1] do exist, but the sequence of partial sums
!k
n=0 |In| does not converge, but is a Specker sequence; and if the sequence
does converge, the limit is ≥1, as shown by Tsejtin and I. D. Zaslavski˘i in 1962.
After about 1985 the number of contributions to CRM considerably de-
creased. Many researchers in CRM then turned to more computer-science
oriented topics.
§8. Bishop’s constructivism.
8.1. Bishop’s constructive mathematics. In his book ‘Foundations of con-
structive mathematics’ the American mathematician E. Bishop launched his
programme for constructive mathematics. Bishop’s attitude is both ideologi-
cal and pragmatic: ideological, inasmuch he insists that we should strive for
a type of mathematics in which every statement has empirical content, and
pragmatic in the actual road he takes towards his goal.
In Bishop’s view, Brouwer successfully criticized classical mathematics, but
had gone astray in carrying out his programme, by introducing dubious con-
cepts such as choice sequences, and wasting much time over the splitting of
classical concepts into many non-equivalent ones, instead of concentrating on
the mathematically relevant versions of these concepts. In carrying out his
programme, Bishop is guided by three principles:
1. avoid concepts deﬁned in a negative way;
2. avoid deﬁning irrelevant concepts — that is to say, among the many
possible classically equivalent, but constructively distinct deﬁnitions of
a concept, choose the one or two which are mathematically fruitful ones,
and disregard the others;
3. avoid pseudo-generality, that is to say, do not hesitate to introduce an
extra assumption if it facilitates the theory and the examples one is
interested in satisfy the assumption.
Statements of Bishop’s constructive mathematics (BCM for short) may be
read intuitionistically without distortion; sequences are then to be regarded

174
A. S. TROELSTRA
as given by a law, and accordingly, no continuity axioms nor bar induction
are assumed.
Statements of BCM may also be read by a Markov-constructivist without
essential distortion; the algorithms are left implicit, and no use is made of a
precise deﬁnition of algorithm.
Thus BCM appears as a part of classical mathematics, and the situation
may be illustrated graphically in the diagram below, where ‘INT’ stands for
intuitionistic mathematics, and ‘CLASS’ for classical mathematics.
'
&
$
%
'
&
$
%
'
&
$
%
INT
CRM
CLASS
BCM




However, it should not be forgotten that this picture is not to be taken at
face value, since the mathematical statements have diﬀerent interpretations in
the various forms of constructivism.
In the actual implementation of his programme, Bishop not only applied
the three principles above, but also avoided negative results (only rarely did
he present a weak counterexample), and concentrated almost exclusively on
positive results.
A steady stream of publications contributing to Bishop’s programme since
1967 ensued; among these, two of the most proliﬁc contributors are F. Rich-
man and D. E. Bridges.
The topics treated cover large parts of analysis,
including the theory of Banach spaces and measure theory, parts of algebra
(e.g. abelian groups, Noetherian groups) and topology (e.g. dimension theory,
the Jordan curve theorem).
8.2. The relation of BCM to INT and CRM. The success of Bishop’s pro-
gramme has left little scope for traditional intuitionistic mathematics; to some
extent this is also true of CRM. For all of BCM may at the same time be
regarded as a contribution to INT; moreover, in many instances where in INT
a routine appeal would be made to a typical intuitionistic result, such as the
uniform continuity theorem for functions deﬁned on a closed bounded inter-
val, the corresponding treatment in BCM would simply add an assumption of

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
175
uniform continuity for the relevant function, without essential loss in math-
ematical content. Thus to ﬁnd scope for speciﬁcally intuitionistic reasoning,
one has to look for instances where the use of typically intuitionistic axioms
such as the continuity axiom or the fan theorem results in a signiﬁcantly better
or more elegant result, and such cases appear to be comparatively rare.
To some extent the above, mutatis mutandis, also applies to constructive
recursive mathematics.
Thus, for example, the usefulness of the beautiful
Kreisel-Lacombe-Shoenﬁeld-Tsejtin theorem is limited by two factors: (1) an
appeal to the theorem can often be replaced by an assumption of continuity in
the statement of the result to be proved; (2) in many cases, continuity without
uniform continuity is not enough, as witnessed e.g. by Kushner’s example of
a continuous function on [0, 1] which is not integrable.
In the literature contributing to Brouwer’s and Markov’s programme, a
comparatively large place is taken by counterexamples and splitting of clas-
sical notions.
This may be compared with periods in the development of
classical analysis and topology in which there was also considerable attention
given to ‘pathologies’. In this comparison, BCM exempliﬁes a later stage in
constructivism.
Finally, let us note that in classical mathematics there arise questions of
constructivity of a type which has not been considered in the constructivistic
tradition For example, one may attempt to ﬁnd a bound on the number of
solutions to a number-theoretic problem, without having a bound for the size
of the solutions.34
§9. Concluding remarks. In the foundational debate in the early part of
this century, constructivism played an important role. Nevertheless, at any
time only a handful of mathematicians have been actively contributing to
constructive mathematics (in the sense discussed here).
In the course of time, the focus of activity in constructive mathematics
has shifted from intuitionism to Markov’s constructivism, then to Bishop’s
constructivism. In addition there has been a steady ﬂow of contributions to
classical recursive mathematics, a subject which is still ﬂourishing.
Much more research has been devoted to intuitionistic logic and the meta-
mathematics of constructive systems. In this area the work has recently some-
what ebbed, but its concepts and techniques play a signiﬁcant role elsewhere,
e.g. in theoretical computer science and artiﬁcial intelligence, and its potential
is by no means exhausted (example: the notion of ‘formulas-as-types’ and
Martin-L¨of-style type theories).
New areas of application lead to reﬁnement and modiﬁcation of concepts
developed in another context. Thus a development such as Girard’s linear
34See [Luckhardt 1989].

176
A. S. TROELSTRA
logic35 may be seen as a reﬁnement of intuitionistic logic, obtained by pursuing
the idea of a ‘bookkeeping of resources’ seriously.
A very extensive bibliography of constructivism is [M¨uller 1987], especially
under F50–65.
REFERENCES
M. Barzin and A. Errera [1927], Sur la logique de M. Brouwer, des Lettres et des Beaux Arts
de Belgique. Bulletin de la Classe des Sciences, Cinqui`eme S´erie, vol. 13, Academie Royale des
Sciences, pp. 56–71.
M. J. Beeson [1985], Foundations of Constructive Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
E. W. Beth [1956], Semantic construction of intuitionistic logic, Koninklijke Nederlandse
Akademie van Wetenschappen. Afdeling Letterkunde: Mededelingen. Nieuwe Reeks, vol. 19.
E. W. Beth [1959, 19652], The Foundations of Mathematics, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
E. Bishop [1967], Foundations of Constructive Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York.
E. Borel [19142, 19283, 19594], Lec¸ons sur la Th´eorie des Fonctions, Gauthier-Villars, Paris.
L. E. J. Brouwer [1905], Leven, Kunst, Mystiek (Life, Art and Mysticism), Waltman, Delft,
(Dutch).
L. E. J. Brouwer [1907], Over de Grondslagen der Wiskunde (on the Foundations of Mathe-
matics), Maas en van Suchtelen, Amsterdam, (Dutch).
L. E. J. Brouwer [1908], Over de onbetrouwbaarheid der logische principes (on the unreliability
of the principles of logic), Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte, vol. 2, pp. 152–158, (Dutch) English
translation: (Brouwer 1975, pp. 107–111).
L. E. J. Brouwer [1919], Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre unabh¨angig vom logischen Satz vom
ausgeschlossenen Dritten II: Theorie der Punktmengen, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse
Akademie van Wetenschappen. Tweede Reeks. Afdeling Natuurkunde, vol. 12/7. (Also [Brouwer
1975], pp. 191–221.)
L. E. J. Brouwer [1924a], Beweis dass jede volle Funktion gleichm¨assig stetig ist, Koninklijke
Akademie van Wetenschappen. Proceedings of the Section of Sciences, vol. 27, pp. 189–193. (Also
[Brouwer 1975], pp. 274–280.)
L. E. J. Brouwer [1924b], Intuitionistische Zerlegung mathematischer Grundbegriﬀe, Jahres-
bericht der Deutsche Mathematiker-Vereinigung, vol. 33, pp. 241–256. (Also [Brouwer 1975],
pp. 429–440.)
L. E. J. Brouwer [1927], ¨Uber Deﬁnitionsbereiche von Funktionen, Mathematische Annalen,
vol. 97, pp. 60–75. (Also [Brouwer 1975], pp. 390–405.)
L. E. J. Brouwer [1930], Die Struktur des Kontinuums, Gistel, Wien. (Also [Brouwer 1975],
pp. 429–440.)
L. E. J. Brouwer [1949], Consciousness, philosophy and mathematics, Proceedings of the Tenth
International Congress in Philosophy, August 1948, Vol. 1 (E. W. Beth, H. J. Pos, and H. J. A.
Hollak, editors), North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 1235–1249. (Also [Brouwer 1975], pp. 480–
494.)
L. E. J. Brouwer [1975], Collected Works, Vol. 1, North-Holland, Amsterdam, edited by A.
Heyting.
S. Buss [1986], Bounded Arithmetic, Studies in Proof Theory. Lecture Notes, vol. 3, Bibliopo-
lis, Naples.
M. A. E. Dummett [1977], Elements of Intuitionism, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
35[Girard 1987].

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
177
Y. L. Ershov [1972], La th´eorie des ´enum´erations, Actes du Congr`es International des
Math´ematiciens 1970, Vol. 1 (M. Berger, J. Dieudonn´e, J. Leroy, J.-L. Lions, and M. P. Malliavin,
editors), Gauthier-Villars, Paris, pp. 223–227.
S. Feferman [1975], A language and axioms for explicit mathematics, Algebra and Logic,
Springer, Berlin, pp. 87–139.
S. Feferman [1979], Constructive theories of functions and classes, Logic Colloquium ’78
(M. Boﬀa, D. van Dalen, and K. McAloon, editors), North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 159–
224.
S. Feferman [1988a], Hilbert’s program relativized: proof-theoretical and foundational reduc-
tions, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 364–384.
S. Feferman [1988b], Weyl vindicated: ‘Das Kontinuum’ 70 years later, Temi e Prospettive della
Logica e della Filosoﬁa Contemporanee I, Cooperativa Libraria Universitaria Editrice Bologna,
Bologna, pp. 59–93.
H. Friedman [1977], Set-theoretic foundations for constructive analysis, Annals of Mathemat-
ics, vol. 105, pp. 1–28.
G. Gentzen [1935], Untersuchungen
¨uber
das
logische
Schließen.
II,
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 405–431.
J.-Y. Girard [1987], Linear logic, Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 50, no. 1, p. 101.
R. L. Goodstein [1957], Recursive Number Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
R. L. Goodstein [1959], Recursive Analysis, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
A. Heyting [1930], Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik, Sitzungsberichte der
Preussischen Akademie von Wissenschaften, Physikalisch Mathematische Klasse, Die formalen
Regeln der intuitionistischen Mathematik, Ibidem pp.57–71, 158–169, pp. 158–169.
A. Heyting [1934], Mathematische
Grundlagenforschung,
Intuitionismus,
Beweistheorie,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
A. Heyting [1956, 19662, 19713], Intuitionism. An introduction, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
D. Hilbert and P. Bernays [1934, 19682], Grundlagen der Mathematik. I, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
J. M. E. Hyland [1982], The eﬀective topos, The L.E.J. Brouwer Centenary Symposium (A. S.
Troelstra and D. van Dalen, editors), North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 165–216.
S. C. Kleene [1945], On the interpretation of intuitionistic number theory, The Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, vol. 10, pp. 109–124.
S. C. Kleene and R. E. Vesley [1965], The Foundations of Intuitionistic Mathematics, Espe-
cially in Relation to Recursive Functions, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
A. N. Kolmogorov [1932], Zur
deutung
der
intuitionistischen
Logik,
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, vol. 35, pp. 58–65.
G. Kreisel [1968], Lawless sequences of natural numbers, Compositio Mathematica, vol. 20,
pp. 222–248 (1968).
G. Kreisel and A. S. Troelstra [1970], Formal systems for some branches of intuitionistic
analysis, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 1, pp. 229–387.
S. Kripke [1965], Semantical analysis of intuitionistic logic, Formal Systems and Recursive
Functions (J. Crossley and M. A. E. Dummett, editors), North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 92–
130.
J. Lambeck [1972], Deductive systems and categories III, Toposes, Algebraic Geometry and
Logic (F. W. Lawvere, editor), Springer, Berlin, pp. 57–82.
J. Lambek and P. J. Scott [1986], Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic, Cambridge
Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 7, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
F. W. Lawvere [1971], Quantiﬁers and Sheaves, Proceedings of the International Congress of
Mathematicians, Nice 1971, Gauthier-Villars, Paris, pp. 1506–1511.
P. Lorenzen [1955], Einf¨uhrung in die operative Logik und Mathematik, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.

178
A. S. TROELSTRA
P. Lorenzen [1965], Diﬀerential und Integral. Eine konstruktive Einf¨uhrung in die klassische
Analysis, Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, Wiesbaden.
H. Luckhardt [1989], Herbrand-Analysen zweier Beweise des Satzes von Roth: Polynomiale
Anzahlschranken, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 234–263.
G. Metakides and A. Nerode [1979], Eﬀective content of ﬁeld theory, Annals of Mathemati-
cal Logic, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 289–320.
J. J. A. Mooij [1966], La Philosophie des Math´ematiques de Henri Poincar´e, Gauthier-Villars,
Paris.
G. H. M¨uller [1987], Ω-Bibliography of Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, edited
by G. H. M¨uller in collaboration with W. Lenski, Volume VI. Proof theory, Constructive Mathe-
matics, edited by J. E. Kister, D. van Dalen, and A. S. Troelstra.
R. J. Parikh [1971], Existence and feasibility in arithmetic, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 36, pp. 494–508.
H. Poincar´e [1902], Science et Hypoth`ese, Flammarion, Paris.
H. Poincar´e [1905], La Valeur de la Science, Flammarion, Paris.
H. Poincar´e [1908], Science et M´ethode, Flammarion, Paris.
H. Poincar´e [1913], Derni`eres Pens´ees, Flammarion, Paris.
M. B. Pour-El and J. I. Richards [1989], Computability in Analysis and Physics, Perspec-
tives in Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
H. Rasiowa and R. Sikorski [1963], The Mathematics of Metamathematics, Pa´nstwowe
Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw.
J. Richard [1905], Les principes des math´ematiques et le probl`eme des ensembles, Revue
g´en´enerale des sciences pures et appliqu´ees, vol. 16, p. 541, Also in Acta Mathematica 30, 1906,
pp. 295–296.
N. A. Shanin [1958], O konstruktiviom ponimanii matematicheskikh suzhdenij (on the construc-
tive interpretation of mathematical judgments), Trudy Ordena Lenina Matematicheskogo Instituta
imeni V.A. Steklova, Akademiya Nauk SSSR 52, (Russian) Translation: American Mathematical
Society Translations, Series 2, 23, pp.108–189, pp. 226–311.
S. Simpson [1988], Partial realizations of Hilbert’s Program, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 349–363.
Th. Skolem [1923], Begr¨undung der elementaren Arithmetik durch die rekurrirende Denkweise
ohne Anwendung scheinbarer Ver¨anderlichen mit unendlichen Ausdehnungsbereich, Videnskaps-
selskapets Skrifter, I.Matematisk-naturvidenskabelig klasse, vol. 6, pp. 1–38, Translation (van
Heijenoort 1967, pp.302–333).
C. A. Smory´nski [1973], Applications of Kripke models, Metamathematical Investigation of
Intuitionistic Arithmetic and Analysis (A. S. Troelstra, editor), Springer, Berlin, pp. 324–391.
E. Specker [1949], Nicht konstruktiv beweisbare S¨atze der Analysis, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 14, pp. 145–158.
W. W. Tait [1981], Finitism, The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 78, pp. 524–546.
A. S. Troelstra [1977], Choice Sequences, Clarendon Press, Oxford, A Chapter of Intuition-
istic Mathematics.
A. S. Troelstra [1983], Analyzing choice sequences, The Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol.
12, pp. 197–260.
A. S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen [1988], Constructivism in Mathematics. Vol. II, North-
Holland, Amsterdam, An introduction.
A. M. Turing [1937], On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsprob-
lem, Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, vol. 42, pp. 230–265, Corrections, Ibidem
43, pp. 544–546.
D. van Dalen [1990], The war of the frogs and the mice, or the crisis of the Mathematische
Annalen, The Mathematical Intelligencer, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 17–31.
J. van Heijenoort [1967], From Frege to G¨odel, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

HISTORY OF CONSTRUCTIVISM IN THE 20TH CENTURY
179
H. Weyl [1918], Das Kontinuum. Kritische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Analysis,
Veit, Leipzig.
PIETER DE HOOGHLAAN 4
1399GA MUIDERBERG, NETHERLANDS
E-mail: a.s.troelstra@uva.nl

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
To the memory of our unforgettable friend Stanley Tennenbaum (1927-2005),
Mathematician, Educator, Free Spirit.
In this ﬁrst of a series of papers on ultraﬁnitistic themes, we oﬀer a short
history and a conceptual pre-history of ultraﬁnistism.
While the ancient
Greeks did not have a theory of the ultraﬁnite, they did have two words, murios
and apeiron, that express an awareness of crucial and often underemphasized
features of the ultraﬁnite, viz. feasibility, and transcendence of limits within a
context. We trace the ﬂowering of these insights in the work of Van Dantzig,
Parikh, Nelson and others, concluding with a summary of requirements which
we think a satisfactory general theory of the ultraﬁnite should satisfy.
First papers often tend to take on the character of manifestos, road maps,
or both, and this one is no exception. It is the revised version of an invited
conference talk, and was aimed at a general audience of philosophers, logi-
cians, computer scientists, and mathematicians. It is therefore not meant to be
a detailed investigation. Rather, some proposals are advanced, and questions
raised, which will be explored in subsequent works of the series.
Our chief hope is that readers will ﬁnd the overall ﬂavor somewhat “Ten-
nenbaumian”.
§1. Introduction: The radical Wing of constructivism. In their Construc-
tivism in Mathematics1, A. Troelstra and D. Van Dalen dedicate only a small
section to Ultraﬁnitism (UF in the following). This is no accident: as they
themselves explain therein, there is no consistent model theory for ultraﬁni-
tistic mathematics. It is well-known that there is a plethora of models for
intuitionist logic and mathematics: realizability models, Kripke models and
their generalizations based on category theory, for example. Thus, a skepti-
cal mathematician who does not feel moved to embrace the intuitionist faith
(and most do not), can still understand and enjoy the intuitionist’s viewpoint
while remaining all along within the conﬁnes of classical mathematics. Model
theory creates, as it were, the bridge between quite diﬀerent worlds.
1[27].
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
180

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
181
It is hoped that something similar were available for the more radical posi-
tions that go under the common banner of Ultraﬁnitism. To be sure, in the
ﬁfteen years since the publication of the above-cited book, some proposals
have emerged to ﬁll the void. It is our opinion, though, that nothing com-
parable to the sturdy structure of model theory for intuitionism is available
thus far. This article is the ﬁrst in a series which aims at proposing several
independent but related frameworks for UF.
Before embarking on this task, though, an obvious question has to be ad-
dressed ﬁrst: what is Ultraﬁnitism, really? As it turns out, a satisfactory
answer has proved to be somewhat elusive. A simple answer: all positions in
foundations of mathematics that are more radical than traditional construc-
tivism (in its various ﬂavors). But this begs the question. So, what is it that
makes a foundational program that radical?
There is at least one common denominator for ultraﬁnitists, namely the
deep-seated mistrust of the inﬁnite, both actual and potential. Having said
that, it would be tempting to conclude that UF is quite simply the rejection of
inﬁnity in favor of the study of ﬁnite structures (ﬁnite sets, ﬁnite categories),
a program that has been partly carried out in some quarters2.
Luckily (or unluckily, depending on reader’s taste), things are not that
straightforward, for two substantive reasons:
• First, the rejection of inﬁnitary methods, even the ones based on the
so-called potential inﬁnite, must be applied at all levels, including that
of the meta-mathematics and that of the logical rules.
Both syntax
and semantics must ﬁt the ultraﬁnitistic paradigm. Approaches such as
Finite Model Theory are simply not radical enough for the task at hand,
as they are still grounded in a semantics and syntax that are saturated
with inﬁnite concepts3.
• Second, barring one term in the dichotomy ﬁnite-inﬁnite, is, paradox-
ically, an admission of guilt: the denier implicitly agrees that the di-
chotomy itself is valid. But is it? Perhaps what is here black and white
should be replaced with various shades of grey.
These two points must be addressed by a convincing model theory of Ul-
traﬁnitism. This means that such a model theory, assuming that anything
like it can be produced, must be able to generate classical (or intuitionistic)
structures, let us call them ultraﬁnitistic universes, in which an ultraﬁnitist
mathematician can happily live. What this has to mean in practice, if one
takes a moment to think about it, is that denizens of those universes should be
allowed to treat some ﬁnite objects as, de facto, inﬁnite. And, indeed, logicians
are quite used to the “inside versus outside” pattern of thought; regarding the
2See, for instance, [28].
3For example, Trakhtenbrot’s Theorem states that ﬁrst order validity for ﬁnite models is not
even recursively enumerable. On the other hand the theory of ﬁnite ﬁelds is decidable.

182
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
minimal model of ZF , for example, inside of it countable ordinals look and
feel like enormous cardinals. One way of stating our ultimate goal is this: if
we could somehow “squeeze” the minimal model below ℵ0, we could get what
we are looking for.
Only one major obstacle stands in the way: the apparently absolute character
of the natural number series.
But it is now time for a bit of history . . .
§2. Short history and prehistory of ultraﬁnitism.
—The trouble with eternity is that
one never knows when it will end.
Tom Stoppard, Rosenkrantz and
Guildenstern Are Dead.
Ultraﬁnitism has, ironically, a very long prehistory, encroaching even upon
the domains of cultural anthropology and child cognitive psychology. For
instance we know that some “primitive” cultures, and also children of a certain
age, do not seem to have a notion of arbitrarily large numbers. To them,
the natural number series looks a bit like: One, two, three, . . . many! An
exploration of these alluring territories would bring us too far aﬁeld, so we
shall restrict our tale to the traditional beginning of Western culture, the
Greeks.
Ancient Greek mathematics does not explicitly treat the ultraﬁnite. It is
therefore all the more interesting to note that early Greek poetry, philosophy,
and historical writing incorporate two notions that are quite relevant for the
study of the ultraﬁnite.
These notions are epitomized by the two words:
murios (´o) and apeir¯on ( `α	´).
2.1. Murios. The word murios, root of the English “myriad”, has two basic
senses in ancient Greek writing.
These senses are “very many” or “a lot
of”; and “ten thousand”. The ﬁrst sense denotes an aggregate or quantity
whose exact number is either not known or not relevant; the second denotes
a precise number. With some exceptions, to be given below, the syntax and
context make clear which sense is intended in each case. It is part of the aim
of this paper to draw attention to the importance of contextualized usage in
understanding the ultraﬁnite.
The earliest occurrences of the term murios appear in the oldest extant
Greek writing, viz., Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey. In Homer, all 32 instances
of forms of murios have the sense “very many” or “a lot of”. Translations
often render the word as “numberless”, “countless”, or “without measure”.
But what exactly does this mean? Does murios refer to an indeﬁnite number
or quantity, to an inﬁnite number or quantity, to a number or quantity that is

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
183
ﬁnite and well-deﬁned but that is not feasibly countable for some reason, or to
a number or quantity that the speaker deems large but unnecessary to count?
Our investigation reveals that Homer tends to use the term in the last two
ways, that is, to refer to numbers or quantities for which a count or measure
would be unfeasible, unnecessary, or not to the point. In general, Homer uses
the word in situations where it is not important to know the exact number of
things in a large group, or the exact quantity of some large mass.
Some representative examples of Homer’s usages of murios:
(a) At Iliad 2.4684, the Achaeans who take up a position on the banks of the
Scamander are murioi (plural adjective), “such as grow the leaves and
ﬂowers in season”. The leaves and ﬂowers are certainly not inﬁnite in
number, nor are they indeﬁnite in number, but they are not practicably
countable, and there is no reason to do so—it is enough to know that
there are very many all over.
(b) In the previous example, the Achaeans must have numbered at least in
the thousands. Murios can, however, be used to refer to much smaller
groups.
At Iliad 4.434, the clamoring noise made by the Trojans is
compared to the noise made by muriai ewes who are being milked in the
courtyard of a very wealthy man (the ewes are bleating for their lambs).
The number of ewes owned by a man of much property would certainly
be many more than the number owned by someone of more moderate
means, but that rich man’s ewes—especially if they all ﬁt in a courtyard—
must number at most in the low hundreds. This suggests that the ewes
are said to be muriai in number because there is a comparatively large
number of them; because there is no need to count them (a man who
had 120 ewes and was considered very wealthy would not cease to be
considered very wealthy if he lost one or even ten of them); and possibly
because it might not be practicable to count them (they might be moving
around, and they all look rather like one another).
Similarly, at Odyssey 17.422 Odysseus says he had murioi slaves at his home
in Ithaca before he left for the Trojan war. The word for “slaves” in this case
is dm¯oes, indicating that these are prisoners of war. Given what we know of
archaic Greek social and economic structures, the number of slaves of this
type a man in his position could have held must have been in the dozens at
most. The key to Odysseus’ use of the term is the context. The sentence as
a whole reads: “And I had murioi slaves indeed, and the many other things
through which one lives well and is called wealthy”. That is, the quantities of
slaves and of other resources that he commanded were large enough to enable
4All translations from the Greek are due to Cherubin. Following the standard form of reference
in humanities publishing Iliad 2.468 refers to verse 468 of Book Two of the Iliad; Odyssey 17.422
refers to verse 422 of Book 17 of the Odyssey, etc.

184
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
him to be considered wealthy. The exact number of slaves might have been
countable, but it would have been beside the point to count them.
(c) Murios can also refer to quantities that are not such as to be counted. At
Odyssey 15.452, a kidnapped son of a king is projected to fetch a murios
price as a slave. Here murios must mean “very large”, “vast”. This is by
no means to say that the price will be inﬁnite or indeﬁnite, for a price
could not be thus. Rather, the situation is that the exact price cannot yet
be estimated, and the characters have no need to estimate it (i.e., they
are not trying to raise a speciﬁc amount of money).
There are also instances of murios in Homer that refer to kinds of things
that do not seem to be measurable or calculable. At Iliad 18.88, Achilles
says that his mother Thetis will suﬀer murios grief (penthos) at the death of
Achilles, which is imminent. At 20.282, murios distress comes over the eyes
of Aeneas as he battles Achilles.
The usual translation of murios here is
“measureless”. This translation may be somewhat misleading if it is taken
literally, as there is no evidence that the Greeks thought that smaller amounts
of grief and distress were necessarily such as to be measurable or measured.
A more appropriate translation might be “vast” or “overwhelming”. It is
possible that Achilles means that Thetis will suﬀer grief so vast that she will
never exhaust it nor plumb its depths even though she is immortal; but it is
also possible that Homer did not consider whether grief or distress could be
unending and inﬁnite or indeﬁnite in scope.
The epic poet Hesiod (8th-7th BCE) and the historian Herodotus (5th BCE)
sometimes use murios in the senses in which Homer does, but they also use
it to mean ten thousand. With a very few exceptions, the syntax and context
make clear in each instance which meaning is present. At Works and Days
252, Hesiod says that Zeus has tris murioi immortals (i.e. divinities of various
kinds) who keep watch over mortals, marking the crooked and unjust humans
for punishment. Tris means three times or thrice, and there is no parallel in
Greek for understanding tris murioi as “three times many” or “three times a
lot”. There are parallels for understanding tris with an expression of quantity
as three times a speciﬁc number; and the speciﬁc number associated with
murios is ten thousand. Therefore tris murios should indicate thirty thousand.
Some instances of murios in Herodotus clearly refer to quantities of ten
thousand; some clearly refer to large amounts whose exact quantities are
unspeciﬁed; and a few are ambiguous but do not suggest any meaning other
than these two.
(d) At 1.192.3, Herodotus says that the satrap Tritantaechmes had so much
income from his subjects that he was able to maintain not only warhorses
but eight hundred (oktakosioi) other breeding stallions and hexakischil-
iai kai muriai mares. Hexakischiliai means six times one thousand, so
that the whole expression should read six thousand plus muriai. The

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
185
next line tells us that there are twenty (eikosi) mares for every stallion,
so that the total number of mares must be sixteen thousand, and muriai
must mean ten thousand (it is a plural adjective to agree with the noun).
The case is similar at 2.142.2-3. Here Herodotus says that three hundred
(tri¯ekosiai) generations of men come to muriai years since three gener-
ations come to one hundred (hekaton) years. Clearly, muriai means ten
thousand here.
(e) In some places, Herodotus cannot be using murios to mean ten thou-
sand, and it is the context that shows this.
At 2.37.3, for example,
describing the activities of Egyptian priests, he says that they fulﬁll
muriai religious rituals, h¯os eipein log¯oi.
He may in fact mean that
they fulﬁll muriai rituals each day, since the rest of the sentence speaks
of their daily bathing routines.
Herodotus does not give any details
about the rituals or their number, and h¯os eipein log¯oi means “so to
speak”. Thus Herodotus seems to be signalling that he is not giving an
exact ﬁgure, and muriai must simply mean “a great many”. At 2.148.6,
Herodotus reports that the upper chambers of the Egyptian Labyrinth
th¯oma murion pareichonto, furnished much wonder, so remarkably were
they built and decorated. Certainly no particular amount of wonder is
being speciﬁed here.
(f) Some occurrences of murios are ambiguous in a way that is of interest
for the study of the ultraﬁnite.
At 1.126.5, Cyrus sets the Persians
the enormous task of clearing an area of eighteen or twenty stadia (2
1/4 or 2 1/2 miles) on each side in one day, and orders a feast for
them the next.
He tells them that if they obey him, they will have
feasts and muria other good things without toil or slavery, but that
if they do not obey him, they will have anarithm¯etoi toils like that of
the previous day. That is, Cyrus is contrasting muria good things with
anarithm¯etoi bad ones. Is he asking the Persians to consider this a choice
between comparable large quantities? If so, a murios amount would be
anarithm¯etos, which can mean either “unnumbered” or “innumerable”,
“numberless”. It is also possible that murios is supposed to mean ten
thousand, so that the magnitude of the undesirable consequences of
defying Cyrus is greater than the great magnitude of the advantages of
obeying him. If that is the meaning, Herodotus may be using murios in a
somewhat ﬁgurative sense, as when one says that one has “ten thousand
things to do today”.
Murios, then, referred in the earliest recorded Greek thought to large numbers
or amounts. When it did not refer to an exact ﬁgure of ten thousand, it referred
to numbers or amounts for which the speaker did not have an exact count or
measurement. Our analysis indicates that the speaker might lack such a count
or measurement either because the mass or aggregate in question could not

186
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
practicably be counted or measured under the circumstances, or because an
exact count or measurement would not add anything to the point the speaker
was making. In most cases it is clear that the numbers and amounts referred to
as murios were determinate and ﬁnite, and could with appropriate technology
be counted or measured. In instances where it is not clear whether that which
is referred to as murios is supposed to be such as to admit of measuring or
counting (Thetis’ grief, for example; and Cyrus’ murios good things if they are
comparable to the anarithm¯etos), there is no evidence as to whether the murios
thing or things are supposed to be inﬁnite or indeﬁnite in scope. Indeed, there
is no evidence that these early writers thought about this point.
(This is
perhaps why anarithm¯etos can mean both “unnumbered” and “innumerable”,
and why it is often diﬃcult to tell which might be meant and whether a writer
has in mind any distinction between them.)
When murios does not mean “ten thousand”, context determines the order
of quantity to which it refers. Any number or amount that is considered to be
“a lot” or “many” with respect to the circumstances in which it is found can
be called murios. Leaves and ﬂowers in summer near the Scamander number
many more than those of other seasons, perhaps in the millions; but the rich
man’s ewes are muriai too, even if they number perhaps a hundred. They are
several times more than the average farmer has, and they may ﬁll the courtyard
so much that they cannot easily be counted.
In this way groups and extents that would be acknowledged to be ﬁnite
and perhaps eﬀectively measurable or countable under some circumstances
would be called murios when actual circumstances or purposes made counting
or measuring impossible, impractical, or unnecessary. This step would be
equivalent to treating ﬁnite things as de facto inﬁnite. This freedom, we hold,
is precisely what a convincing model theory of Ultraﬁnitism should allow us
to do.
2.2. Apeir¯on. Since murios seems to refer overwhelmingly to determinate
and ﬁnite quantities, it is useful to note that Greek had ways of referring
to quantities that were indeterminate, unlimited, indeﬁnite, or inﬁnite. The
most signiﬁcant of these, for our purposes, was the word apeiros or apeir¯on
(m., f.)/apeiron (n.).
The etymology of this word is generally understood to be peirar or peras,
“limit” or “boundary”, plus alpha privative, signifying negation: literally,
“not limited” or “lacking boundary”5. Etymology alone does not tell us the
range of uses of the term or the ways in which it was understood, so we must
again consider its occurrences in the earliest sources. The term appears as
early as Homer, in whose poems it generally refers to things that are vast in
extent, depth, or intensity.
5For an excellent review, see [21, pages 67-70]. See also [14, pages 231-239].

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
187
Homer uses apeiros most frequently of expanses of land or sea. In each case,
the apeiros/apeir¯on thing is vast in breadth or depth; whether its limits are
determinable is not clear from the context, but limits do seem to be implied in
these cases. Some instances may imply a surpassing of some sort of boundaries
or borders (though not necessarily of all boundaries or borders). At Iliad
24.342 and Odyssey 1.98 and 5.46, a god swiftly crosses the apeir¯on earth.
Within the context, it is clear that the poet means that the divinity covers a vast
distance quickly. There may be a further implication that the gods transcend
or traverse boundaries (be these natural features or human institutions) with
ease, so that the world has no internal borders for them. Similarly, in Odyssey
17.418, the expression kat’ apeirona gaian, often translated as “through[out]
the boundless earth”, is used to suggest that something is spread over the
whole earth. What is spread covers a vast expanse, and it also crosses all
boundaries on the earth.
Two other Homeric examples are of interest. At Odyssey 7.286, a sleep
is described as apeir¯on, meaning either that it is very deep, or unbroken, or
both. At Odyssey 8.340, strong bonds are apeir¯on, surpassing limits of a god’s
strength, and so unbreakable.
Hesiod also uses apeir¯on to describe things that extend all over the earth,
but also uses the word once in reference to a number. In Shield of Heracles
472, the word refers to a large number of people from a great city involved
in the funeral of a leader; the sense seems to be that there were uncountably
many, and possibly that the leader’s dominion had been vast.
Herodotus (5th century BCE) uses apeir¯on in two cases where its meaning
clearly derives from the privative of peirar6. In 5.9 he uses it to refer to a
wilderness beyond Thracian settlements. In 1.204 a plain is apeiron, perhaps
hugely or indeterminately vast.
In both cases, Herodotus knows that the
lands are ﬁnite in extent (he identiﬁes the peoples who live beyond them). The
contexts suggest that he means that these lands are vast and that their exact
boundaries are not known. He may also have in mind that they cannot be
easily, if at all, traversed by humans.
The ﬁrst and perhaps best-known philosophical use of apeiron is in the
reports about the work of Anaximander’s in the sixth century BCE. Anax-
imander is reported to have held that the source of all familiar things, the
fundamental generative stuﬀof the cosmos, was something apeiron.
The
testimonia report that the apeiron was eternal in duration, unlimited or inde-
terminate in extent, and qualitatively indeterminate.
All of the familiar cosmos, for Anaximander, arose from the apeiron.
In his [14], Kahn holds that Anaximanders apeiron is “primarily a huge,
inexhaustible mass, stretching away endlessly in every direction”. The apeiron
6Herodotus also uses a homophone word that is derived from another root, so we have only
included instances where context clearly indicates that the word is the one derived from peirar.

188
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
surely must be at least that, but there is no reason to think that it is primarily
that. As McKirahan [19] notes, the discussions of Anaximander in Aristotle
and the Peripatetics make clear that the apeiron must also be a stuﬀof indeﬁnite
kind or quality. It must be this because it is supposed to be able to give rise to
every kind of thing, and because (according to Aristotle in Physics Gamma 3)
(see [3]) if any one kind of thing, e.g. ﬁre, was apeiron it would overcome
and destroy everything else. Clearly that has not happened. The question
would then seem to arise as to why the indeﬁnite stuﬀof unlimited extent
does not overwhelm all speciﬁc stuﬀs, and result in a universe that is wholly
indeﬁnite, and so not a cosmos, i.e. an ordered universe. The answer to this
question may perhaps be found in Anaximander’s contention that the apeiron
is fundamentally unstable. It is indeterminate even in its state. According
to the ancient reports, the apeiron was supposed to be always in motion.
Through this, somehow, “opposites” (hot and cold, wet and dry, light and
dark, perhaps others) separate oﬀand interact to form the world of familiar
things. Eventually, according to the only apparent quotation we have from
Anaximander, the things or opposites “pay penalty and restitution to one
another for their injustice, according to the arrangement of time”, and perish
back into the apeiron, whence the cycle begins anew. (What the “injustice”
is remains a subject of much speculation; the word used suggests that it may
be some sort of imbalance or encroachment.)
It is worth noting that for
Anaximander the whole cosmos may be at the same stage in the cycle at any
given time, but that is not the only possibility. It is also possible that diﬀerent
parts of the cosmos are at diﬀerent stages in the cycle, so that qualitative and
quantitative indeterminacy are present in some regions and not in others, and
the whole therefore remains apeiron in some respects.
We may note that so far no instance of apeir¯on clearly meant “inﬁnite”. Only
one, Anaximander’s, could possibly involve an inﬁnite extent, and even in that
case it is not clear that the extent is inﬁnite; it may be indeﬁnite or inexhaustible
without being inﬁnite. Anaximander’s stuﬀis eternal, i.e. always in existence,
but it is not at all clear that a sixth century Greek would have taken “always”
to mean an inﬁnite amount of time. Whether any Greek of the 8th to 5th
centuries BCE conceived of quantities or magnitudes in a way that denoted
what we would call inﬁnity is not certain.
It is sometimes thought that Zeno of Elea (5th century BCE) spoke of the
inﬁnite, but there is good evidence that he had quite a diﬀerent focus. It is
only in the arguments concerning plurality that are preserved by Simplicius
that we ﬁnd what may be quotations from Zeno’s work (regarding his argu-
ments concerning motion and place we have only reports and paraphrases or
interpretations)7. In fragments DK29 B1 and B2, Zeno argued “from saying
7It is possible that some of Zeno’s paradoxes of motion dealt with inﬁnitely long sequences
of steps. Aristotle suggests that they did. Aristotle used the word apeiron to describe these

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
189
that multiple (polla, many) things are, saying opposite things follows”. In
particular, if we say that multiple things are, then we must conclude that “the
same things must be so large as to be apeira (neuter plural) and so small as
to lack magnitude (megethos)”. Zeno was evidently interested in the claim
that there are multiple things with spatial magnitude, and it appears from the
fragments that he thought that the possibilities for analyzing the components
of spatial magnitude were that a thing that has spatial magnitude must be
composed of parts with positive spatial magnitude, parts of no magnitude,
or some combination of these. If a thing had no magnitude, Zeno argued, it
would not increase (in magnitude) anything to which it was added, nor de-
crease anything from which it was removed. Therefore it could not “be” at all
(at least, it could not “be” as the spatial thing it was said to be). Nothing with
magnitude could be composed entirely of such things. However, if we assume
that the components of a spatial thing have positive magnitude, another prob-
lem arises. In measuring such a thing, we would try to ascertain the end of its
projecting part, (i.e. the outermost part of the thing). Each such projecting
part would always have its own projecting part, so that the thing would have
no ultimate “extreme” (eschaton). That is, the outer edge of something always
has some thickness, as do the lines on any ruler we might use to measure it;
and this thickness itself can always be divided. Thus the magnitude of a spa-
tial thing, and thus its exact limits, will not be determinable. There is nothing
in this to suggest that Zeno thought that the claim that there are multiple
spatial things led to the conclusion that such things must be inﬁnitely large.
Rather, his description suggests that the things would be indeterminable, and
indeterminate or indeﬁnite, in size. They would also be apeira, indeterminate
or indeﬁnite, in number.
What of Zeno’s paradoxes of motion?
Modern interpretations of them
generally present them as dealing with inﬁnite sequences of steps, or with
distances or times that seem to be inﬁnite. Unfortunately, our evidence con-
cerning the paradoxes of motion does not include any quotations from Zeno,
but only reports that are at best second-hand. We cannot tell whether Zeno
used the term apeiron in any of them, much less whether he used the term
to refer to the inﬁnite. Still, Aristotle’s discussion of these paradoxes in the
Physics, our earliest report, is replete with information that is germane to our
purposes here.
In Physics Book Zeta Chapter 2, Aristotle says that “Zeno’s argument is
false in taking the position that it is not possible to traverse apeira things or to
touch each of (a collection of) apeira things in a peperasmenos time”8. Apeir¯on
sequences, but it is not known whether Zeno did. See Aristotle, Physics Z2 [3]. See [26] for
Simplicius’s quotations from Zeno; some translations appear in [19].
8The grammar suggests that Aristotle means that according to Zeno it is not possible to
traverse any group of things that is apeiron, not necessarily a group of things each of which is
apeiron.

190
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
here is usually translated as “inﬁnite”, but Aristotle sometimes uses the term
to mean “unlimited” or “indeﬁnite” or “indeterminate”, and he may intend
those senses here. Similarly, peperasmenon is often translated as “ﬁnite”, but
it may equally well mean “limited”, “deﬁnite”, or “determinate”. Aristotle’s
response to the position he attributes to Zeno is to note that “both [linear]
length and time, and anything continuous, are said (spoken of) in two ways:
with respect to division and with respect to extremities. Therefore while it
is not possible in a peperasmenos time to touch things that are apeiron with
respect to quantity, it is possible to do so if they are apeiron with respect to
division, for time (or: a time, an interval of time) is itself apeiros in this way . . .
things that are apeiron are touched not by a peperasmenos time but by apeiros
time” (233a22-35).
It will immediately be seen that Aristotle’s argument works equally well
whether apeiron and peperasmenon mean respectively “unlimited” and “lim-
ited”, “inﬁnite” and “ﬁnite”, or “indeterminate” and “determinate”. In Aris-
totle’s attempt to ﬁnd a coherent account of the motions and changes of
distinct things, inﬁnity, indeterminacy, and unlimitedness each pose chal-
lenges. The one perhaps most familiar to us is that of the possibility that it
would take an inﬁnite number of steps or stages, and so conceivably an inﬁnite
stretch of time, to traverse a distance of ﬁnite length. Other problems would
arise for the prospects of coherence and explanation if it turned out that an
indeﬁnite number of steps would be needed to cross a deﬁnite distance, or if a
determinate distance were to turn out to be composed of an unlimited number
of smaller intervals (of possibly indeterminate length). For if it would take an
indeﬁnite or unlimited number of steps, and hence an indeﬁnite or unlimited
number of time intervals, to cross a deﬁned distance, how could we tell when,
and therefore if, we had completed the crossing? And if the presumed deﬁnite
distance turned out to be composed of an indeﬁnite number of intervals of
positive magnitude, how could we determine where, and hence if, it began and
ended? Moreover, if we could not identify exactly where objects and intervals
of spatial magnitude began or ended, could we say with consistency that there
are the multiple, distinct objects that are necessary (for the Greeks at least) to
an account of motion?
When Aristotle returns to Zeno in Chapter 9 of Book Zeta, he describes in
brief terms the four paradoxes known to us as the Dichotomy, the Achilles,
the Arrow, and the Stadium or Moving Rows. Aristotle indicates that he
has already discussed the Dichotomy, and his description of it matches the
challenge of Zeno’s that he had discussed in Chapter 2. In his descriptions
of the remaining three paradoxes, the word peperasmenon appears only in the
Achilles, and apeiron does not appear at all, though the concept is implicit in
the discussion. The problem of the Achilles has to do with how a slower runner
with a head start will be overtaken by a swifter runner, if the swifter runner

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
191
must ﬁrst reach each point that the slower one had reached (239b15-30).
Aristotle argues that as long as the pursued runner must traverse a limited
or ﬁnite (peperasmen¯en) distance, the faster pursuer can overtake him. The
defect with Zeno’s alleged claim that the pursuer will not overtake the pursued,
Aristotle says, is the way in which Zeno divides the magnitude (distance)
between the runners. Aristotle seems to have in mind that Zeno is taking
the distance between the runners as always further divisible rather than as
composed of pieces of deﬁnite size that can be matched by steps of deﬁnite
size. Here too, peperasmen¯en could refer either to ﬁnitude or to limitedness,
determinacy, of the distance.
Let us not lose sight, however, of Aristotle’s careful locution from Chapter
2: continuous things are spoken of in two ways. With respect to division,
continuous things of deﬁnite length are nonetheless apeira. Aristotle thus
speaks of things as apeiron or peperasmenon within a certain context or in a
certain respect or for a certain purpose. Where Aristotle may well have been at
odds with Zeno, as we see from the remark about how Zeno looked at distance
in the Achilles, was precisely over context or purpose. That is, they seem to
have had diﬀerent projects in mind: for Aristotle, providing an account of the
things we say move and change; for Zeno, understanding whether we could
have a coherent account of what is if we say that that includes discrete things
of positive magnitude. It may be as well that the two philosophers diﬀered
over the question of the contexts we need to invoke in order to understand
what is. One of the most important points, then, to take from the discussions
of Zeno in Aristotle’s Physics is Aristotle’s care in distinguishing the aspects
of a thing that are apeiron and those that are peperasmenon under each set of
conditions or in each context.
The view we have presented of Zeno’s concerns ﬁnds additional support
in his extant fragments. In the fragments on multiplicity mentioned earlier
(DK29 B1 and B2), we have seen that Zeno argued that if multiple spatial
things are, they must be both so large as to be apeira and so small as to
have no magnitude. We have already discussed why a spatial (as opposed to
geometrical) object composed of parts that have no magnitude would pose
problems. We have seen why Zeno might ﬁnd diﬃculties with the prospect
of spatial things that each had apeiron magnitude: one would not be able to
establish or support the claim that there were distinct spatial things at all. It
remains to be seen, then, why Zeno would say speciﬁcally that if we say that
there are things with spatial magnitude, those things will turn out to have both
no magnitude and apeiron magnitude.
Recall that on Zeno’s analysis, it appeared that only if a thing had no
magnitude could it have limited or ﬁnite magnitude.
The only way for it
to have positive magnitude, it seemed, was for it to have parts of apeiron
magnitude. Someone might then respond that perhaps there was a way for

192
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
things to have limited positive magnitude: perhaps the inner regions of such
a thing would have positive and thus apeiron magnitude, and the surfaces or
ends or edges would have no magnitude, and serve as the limits. Zeno would
not accept such a solution. First, he would say, the outer parts would add no
magnitude, so that the wholes of things would still have apeiron magnitude.
Second, the two kinds of components of things would be impossible as deﬁnite
spatial objects and as parts thereof.
There are two more fragments that make Zeno’s concerns clearer, and that
we can now see show somewhat more of an emphasis on limit, determinacy,
and their opposites than on what we would term ﬁnitude and inﬁnity. DK29
B3 supports the hypothesis that Zeno was concerned about the coherence of
an account of what is that invoked distinctness. In this fragment Zeno argued
that if many things are, they must be both peperasmenon in number, for they
are as many as they are; and also apeiron, because something must be between
any two, else those two would not be separate. That would imply that we
cannot tell how many things are present in any area at any time, nor can we
tell where (or thus if) any of them begins or ends.
We have no evidence that Zeno concluded from this that only one thing is.
Simplicius, our main source for his fragments, claims that Zeno concluded
that only one thing is, but does not furnish any quotations in which Zeno says
such a thing. Moreover, in DK29 A16, Eudemus reports that Zeno said that
if anyone could show him what the one is, he will be able to tell the things that
are. In other words, Zeno did not think that to say that one thing is would be
any more coherent or understandable than to say that many things are9.
A more extensive discussion of these matters in Zeno is beyond the scope
of the present paper, and is available in [10] and [9].
In the philosophy of the fourth century BCE, and arguably as early as
Zeno, an apeir¯on quantity could not be calculated exactly, at least as long
as it was regarded from the perspective according to which it was apeir¯on.
In fact, Aristotle’s argument that a continuous magnitude bounded at both
ends could be traversed in a ﬁnite amount of time—despite the fact that
it contains,so to speak, an apeir¯on number of points, and despite Zeno’s
Dichotomy argument—rests precisely on the notions that the magnitude is not
composed of the apeir¯on number of points, and that from one perspective it is
bounded. Aristotle does not refute Zeno’s argument, but merely argues that
within the framework of his physics, the question Zeno addresses can be put
diﬀerently. Thus where murios did not clearly refer to ten thousand, a murios
quantity was generally recognized as deﬁnite but was not calculated exactly.
An apeir¯on thing or quantity in Homer or Herodotus might be deﬁnite or not,
and in later thinkers, especially in philosophy, the term came to emphasize that
aspect of the thing or group or quantity that was indeﬁnite, indeterminate, or
9A more complete account can be found in [9].

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
193
unlimited. Thus we ﬁnd the indeterminacy, indeﬁniteness, or unlimitedness
applying with respect to some context or conditions (practical or conceptual).
This concludes our remarks on ultraﬁnitistic themes in Greek thought. Our
subsequent reﬂections on the ultraﬁnite will orbit, for the most part, around
the murios-apeir¯on pair, as if around a double star.
We now skip over two thousand years of mathematical and philosophical
thought—where ultraﬁnitistic themes do crop up from time to time—picking
up the thread once again well into the twentieth century.
§3. Recent history of UF. The passage from the prehistory to the history of
UF is diﬃcult to trace. Perhaps a bit arbitrarily, we shall say that it begins with
the criticism of Brouwer’s Intutionist Programme by Van Dantzig in 195010.
According to this view, an inﬁnite number is a number that surpasses any
number a person can cite.
One is here reminded of a game inadvertently
invented by the Greek mathematician Archimedes in his Sand Reckoner11. A
game that is still played to this day, it is as follows: two players, A and B,
try to outdo each other at naming large numbers. The contestant who is
able to construct what is essentially, in contemporary jargon, a faster growing
primitive recursive function, wins the game. The winner is the (temporary)
owner of the so-called inﬁnite numbers12.
A second major character in this story is the Russian logician Yessenin-
Volpin. In a series of papers13 he presents his views on UF. Unfortunately,
in spite of their appeal, his presentation can be at times obscure14. In any
case, one of the fundamental ideas put forth by Volpin is that there is no
uniquely deﬁned natural number series. Volpin’s attack attempts to unmask
the circularity behind the induction scheme, and leaves us with various non-
isomorphic ﬁnite natural number series. He also argues for the idea that there
is a sense in which even small ﬁnite numbers can be considered inﬁnite.
A few years later, one morning in fall the autumn of 1976 to be precise, the
Princeton mathematician Ed Nelson had what might be described as an ultra-
ﬁnitistic epiphany15, losing his “pythagorean faith” in the natural numbers.
What was left was nothing more than ﬁnite arithmetic terms, and the rules to
manipulate them. Nelson’s Predicative Arithmetic (see [23]) was the result.
10See [11]. Van Dantzig himself points out that some of his ideas were anticipated by the Dutch
philosopher Mannoury, and by the French mathematician Emil Borel (see [7]). For example,
Borel observed that large ﬁnite numbers (les nombres inaccessibles) present the same diﬃculties
as the inﬁnite.
11For a good translation see [2].
12See on this also [4].
13See for instance his 1970 manifesto [32].
14Though David Isles has made a serious and quite successful attempt to clarify some of
Volpin’s tenets in [13].
15See his [22].

194
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
That text, the product of his epiphany and an essential step toward the
re-thinking of mathematics along strictly ﬁnitist lines, seems to us however to
fall short of Nelson’s amazing vision. For example, why stop at induction over
bounded formulae? If the inﬁnite number series is no more, and arithmetic
is just a concrete manipulation of symbols (a position that could be aptly
called ultra-formalist), “models” of arithmetics are conceivable, where even
the successor operation is not total, and all induction is either restricted or
banished altogether.
The next milestone we take note of is Rohit Parikh’s 1971 “Existence and
Feasibility in Arithmetics”, [24]. This paper introduces a version of Peano
Arithmetic enriched with a unary predicate F , where the intended meaning
of the statement F (x) is that x is feasible. Mathematical induction does not
apply to formulas containing the new predicate symbol F . Moreover, a new
axiom is added to Peano Arithmetic expressing that a very large number is not
feasible. More precisely, the axiom says that the number 21000, where 20 = 1
and 2k+1 = 22k, is not feasible. Parikh proves that the theory PA + ¬F (21000)
is feasibly consistent: though inconsistent from the classical standpoint, all
proofs of the inconsistency of this theory are unfeasible, in the sense that the
length of any such proof is a number n ≥21000.
From the point of view of these reﬂections, Parikh achieves at least two
goals: ﬁrst, he transforms some ultraﬁnitistic claims into concrete theorems.
And secondly, he indicates the way toward an ultraﬁnitistic proof theory.
Parikh’s approach has been improved upon by several authors. Quite re-
cently, Vladimir Sazonov in his [25] has made a serious contribution toward
making explicit the structure of Ultraﬁnitistic Proof Theory.
In the cited
paper the absolute character of being a feasible number is asserted, on phys-
icalistic grounds16. For our part, though, physicalistic explanations are less
than convincing. As we have pointed out elsewhere in this paper, we believe
that maintaining the notion of contextual feasibility is important. After all,
who really knows what is the nature of the universe? Perhaps new advances
in physics will show that the estimated upper bound of particles in the uni-
verse was too small. But whereas logic should be able to account for physical
limitations, it should not be enslaved by them17.
Parikh’s 1971 paper, groundbreaking as it was, still leaves us with a desire
for more: knowing that PA + ¬F (21000) is feasibly consistent, there ought
to be some way of saying that it has a model. In other words, the suspicion
arises that, were a genuine semantics for ultraﬁnitistic theories available, then
G¨odel’s completeness theorem (or a ﬁnitist version thereof) should hold true
16Sazonov’s articulated position on this issue is more subtle, as can be seen from his recent
FOM postings.
17For further work on Parikh’s approach see also [8], in which Alessandra Carbone and
Stephen Semmes have investigated the consistency of PA + ¬F (21000) and similar theories from
a novel proof theoretical standpoint, involving the combinatorial complexity of proofs.

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
195
in some form. But where to look for such a semantics? Models are structured
sets, or, alternatively, objects in some category with structure. We must thus
turn from proof theory to set theory and category theory.
On the set-theoretical side, there are at least two major contributions. The
ﬁrst one is Vopenka’s proposal to reform, so to speak, Cantorian set theory,
known as Alternative Set Theory, or AST (see [31]). AST has been developed
for more than three decades, so even a brief exposition of it is not possible
here. In broad outline, AST is a phenomenological theory of ﬁnite sets. Some
sets can have subclasses that are not themselves sets, and such sets are inﬁnite
in Vopenka’s sense. This calls to mind one of the senses of the word apeiron,
as previously described: some sets are (or appear) inﬁnite because they live
outside of our perceptual horizon.
It should be pointed out that AST is
not, per se, a UF framework. However, Vopenka envisioned the possibility
of “witnessed universes”, i.e. universes where inﬁnite (in his sense) semisets
contained in ﬁnite sets do exist. Such witnessed universes would turn AST
into a universe of discourse for ultraﬁnitism.
To our knowledge, though,
witnessed AST has not been developed beyond its initial stage.
Other variants of set theory with some ﬁnitist ﬂavor have been suggested.
Andreev and Gordon in their [1], for example, describe a theory of Hyper-
ﬁnite Sets (THS) which, unlike Vopenka’s, is not incompatible with classical
set theory.
Interestingly, both AST and THS produce as a by-product a
natural model of non-standard analysis18, a result which should be of interest
to mainstream mathematicians.
The second set-theoretical approach of which we are aware, is that described
in Shaughan Lavine’s [15]. Here, a ﬁnitistic variant of Zermelo-Frankel set
theory is introduced, where the existence of a large number, the Zillion, is
posited. The reader may recall an idea which we hope is, by now, a familiar
one, namely that of of murios. Here the number Zillion replaces the missing ℵ0.
We move ﬁnally, to category theory. From our point of view this is, with
one notable exception, an uncharted, but very promising, area. The single
exception is the work of the late Jon M. Beck, involving the use of simplicial
and homotopic methods to model ﬁnite, concrete analysis (see for instance
[5, 6]). As we understand it, Beck’s core idea is to use the simplicial category
△, truncated at a certain level △[n], to replace the role of the natural number
series—or, because we are here in a categorical framework, the so-called natu-
ral number object that several topoi possess. The truncated simplicial category
has enough structure to serve as a framework for some ﬁnitistic version of re-
cursion; moreover, its homotopy theory provides new tools to model ﬁnite
ﬂow diagrams. As has been pointed out by Michael Barr, addition for the
18The very large and the very small are indeed intimately related: if one has a consistent
notion of large, unfeasible number n, one automatically gets the inﬁnitesimal 1
n , via the usual
construction of the ﬁeld of fractions Q.

196
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
ﬁnite calculator is not an associative operation. But homotopy repairs the lack
of associativity by providing associativity up to homotopy via coherence rules.
As is well known, topoi have an internal logic which is intuitionistic. One
hopes that by isolating feasible objects in the realizability topos via a suitable
notion of feasible realizability, a categorical universe of discourse for UF could
be, as it were, carved out.
In conclusion:
• First, the notion of feasibility should be contextual. An object such as a
term, a number, or a set is feasible only within a speciﬁc context, namely
one which speciﬁes the type of resources available (functions, memory,
time, etc). Thus a full-blown model theory of UF should provide the
framework for a dynamic notion of feasibility.
• As the context changes, so does the notion of feasibility.
What was
unfeasible before, may become feasible now.
Perhaps our notion of
potential inﬁnity came as the realization, or belief, that any contest can
be transcended.
• Degrees of feasibility, so to speak, are not necessarily linearly ordered.
One can imagine contexts in which what is feasible for A is not feasible
for B, and vice versa.
• Last, but not least, as to the murios-apeiron pair: Every convincing
approach to UF should be broad enough to encompass both terms. We
saw above that any number or amount termed “many” with respect to the
circumstances in which it is found, is murios. Pseudo-ﬁnite model theory,
namely the restriction of ﬁrst-order logic to models with the property
that every ﬁrst-order sentence true in the model is true in a ﬁnite model19,
captures one aspect of this idea. With pseudo-ﬁnite models particular
properties or artifacts of the structure, such as its cardinality, are “divided
out”, so to speak.
This means then that the pseudo-ﬁnite structure
instantiates a general notion of ﬁniteness, somewhat similar to uses of
the word murios in Homer as cited above: the unspeciﬁed or indeﬁnite
(but ﬁnite) “many”. The notion of pseudo-ﬁnite structure is far from
what is aimed at here, as pseudo-ﬁnite structures are structures which are
elementarily equivalent to ultraproducts of ﬁnite structures. They are, in
a sense, too “sharp” for what is at stake here. However, they do point in
the right direction, in that they show that even in classical logic the very
notion of ﬁniteness is to some extent blurred, if one suitably restricts the
underlying logic. This hint, as we shall show in a future work, is indeed
a pivotal one.
We hope that our reﬂections on the murios/apeiron pair go some way to-
ward shedding some light on these issues. Our belief is that every convincing
19See for example [29].

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
197
approach to Ultraﬁnitism should include the notions of contextual uncount-
ability, of indeﬁniteness, and of traversing limits.
Even better, any such
approach should unify these two streams of thought into a single, ﬂexible
framework.
This concludes our Very Short History. In our next paper, we shall oﬀer a
proposal which strives to take all the mentioned points into account.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank our common friend
Juliette Kennedy together with the other organizers Arthur Apter, David Joel
Hamkins and Roman Kossak for inviting us to present a talk based on this
paper at the Tennenbaum Memorial Meeting on April 6th 2006, held at The
Graduate School of CUNY under the umbrella of MAMLS (Mid-Atlantic
Mathematical Logic Seminar). Juliette Kennedy has provided an enormous
help to both of us, editing the original manuscript, adding countless sugges-
tions, observations, comments, criticisms and hints, as well as prompting us
in shaping it up. This article would not have seen the light of day without her:
Thanks Juliette! Two brief, white-hot discussions with Domenico Napoletani
(while sipping his fabulous teas after a strenuous practice of standing qigong),
were greatly beneﬁcial in clarifying the overarching goals of our project. Some
of his interesting comments will ﬁnd their way into our future work. In recent
months, the ﬁrst author has posted on the topic of UF and related issues on the
FOM list (see for instance [16, 17]). Several FOM subscribers including, but
not limited to, Vladimir Sazonov, David Isles, Stephen Simpson, and Karlis
Podnieks replied, publicly or privately, with valuable comments, criticisms,
suggestions, and diﬀerent viewpoints. To all of them goes our gratitude. Last
and foremost, our eternal gratitude goes to the late Stanley Tennenbaum: his
iconoclastic attitude and insistence on keeping a child’s eyes, even in the midst
of the most abstruse and seemingly diﬃcult topics, was, and is, the real driving
force behind this project.
REFERENCES
[1] P. V. Andreev and E. I. Gordon, A theory of hyperﬁnite sets, Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, vol. 143 (2006), no. 1-3, pp. 3–19.
[2] Archimedes,
The Sand Reckoner,
available at http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/
navigation/ideas/reckoner.shtml.
[3] Aristotle, Physica, edited by W.D. Ross. Oxford Classical Texts, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1950.
[4] Scott Aronson, Who Can Name the Bigger Number?, available at http://www.
scottaaronson.com/writings/bignumbers.html.
[5] Jon M. Beck, Simplicial sets and the foundations of analysis, Applications of Sheaves (Proc.
Res. Sympos. Appl. Sheaf Theory to Logic, Algebra and Anal., Univ. Durham, Durham, 1977),
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 753, Springer, Berlin, 1979, pp. 113–124.
[6]
, On the relationship between algebra and analysis, Journal of Pure and Applied
Algebra, vol. 19 (1980), pp. 43–60.
[7] Emil Borel, Les Nombres Inaccesibles, avec une note de M. Daniel Dugu´e, Gauthier-
Villars, Paris, 1952.

198
ROSE M. CHERUBIN AND MIRCO A. MANNUCCI
[8] A. Carbone and S. Semmes, Looking from the inside and from the outside, Synthese. An
International Journal for Epistemology, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, vol. 125 (2000),
no. 3, pp. 385–416.
[9] Rose Cherubin, Inquiry and what is: Eleatics and monisms, Epoch´é, vol. 8 (2003), no. 1,
pp. 1–26.
[10]
, Why matter? aristotle, the eleatics, and the possibility of explanation, Graduate
Faculty Philosophy Journal, vol. 26 (2005), no. 2, pp. 1–29.
[11] Van Dantzig, Is 101010 a natural number, Dialectica, vol. 9 (1956), pp. 273–277.
[12] Jean-Yves Girard, Les Fondements des Math´ematiques, 2003, available at http://iml.
univ-mrs.fr/~girard/Articles.html.
[13] David Isles, Remarks on the notion of standard nonisomorphic natural number series,
Constructive Mathematics (Las Cruces, N.M., 1980) (F. Richman, editor), Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, vol. 873, Springer, Berlin, 1981, pp. 111–134.
[14] Charles H. Kahn, Anaximander and the Origins of Greek Cosmology, Columbia Uni-
versity Press, Columbia, 1960, corrected edition, Centrum Press, 1985; reprint Hackett, 1994.
[15] Shaughan Lavine, Understanding the Inﬁnite, second ed., Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1998.
[16] Mirco A. Mannucci, Feasible and Utterable Numbers, FOM posting, at http://cs.
nyu.edu/pipermail/fom/2006-July/010657.html.
[17]
, Feasible Consistency-Truth Transfer Policy, 2003, FOM posting, at http://
www.cs.nyu.edu/pipermail/fom/2006-October/011016.html.
[18] Per Martin-L¨of, On the meanings of the logical constants and the justiﬁcations of the
logical laws, Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol. 1 (1996), no. 1, pp. 11–60 (electronic),
Lecture notes to a short course at Università degli Studi di Siena, April 1983.
[19] Richard D. McKirahan, Jr., Philosophy Before Socrates, Hackett, Indianapolis, IN,
1994.
[20] Jan Mycielski, Analysis without actual inﬁnity, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 46
(1981), no. 3, pp. 625–633.
[21] Gerard Naddaf, The Greek Concept of Nature, Suny Series in Greek Philosophy, SUNY
Press, Albany, NY, 2007.
[22] Ed Nelson, Faith and Mathematics, available at http://www.math.princeton.edu/
~nelson/papers/s.pdf.
[23]
, Predicative Arithmetics, available at http://www.math.princeton.edu/
~nelson/books/pa.pdf.
[24] Rohit Parikh, Existence and feasibility in arithmetic, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 36 (1971), no. 3, pp. 494–508.
[25] Vladimir Sazonov, On feasible numbers, Logic and Computational Complexity (Indi-
anapolis, IN, 1994), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 960, Springer, Berlin, 1995, pp. 30–
51.
[26] Simplicius, In Aristotelis Physicorum. Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca IX, edited by
Hermann Diels, Reimer, Berlin, 1882.
[27] Anne S. Troelstra and Dirk van Dalen, Constructivism in Mathematics. Vols. I & II,
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 123, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1988.
[28] Jouko V¨a¨an¨anen, A Short Course on Finite Model Theory, available at http://www.
math.helsinki.fi/logic/people/jouko.vaananen/jvaaftp.html.
[29]
, Pseudo-ﬁnite model theory, Matem´atica Contemporˆanea, vol. 24 (2003), pp.
169–183, 8th Workshop on Logic, Language, Informations and Computation—WoLLIC’2001
(Bras´ılia).
[30] Jean Paul Van Bendegem, Classical arithmetic is quite unnatural, Logic and Logical
Philosophy, (2003), no. 11-12, pp. 231–249, Flemish-Polish Workshops II–IV and varia.

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF ULTRAFINITISM
199
[31] Petr Vopˇenka, Mathematics in the Alternative Set Theory, BSB B. G. Teubner Verlagsge-
sellschaft, Leipzig, 1979, Teubner-Texte zur Mathematik. [Teubner Texts in Mathematics], With
German, French and Russian summaries.
[32] A. S. Yessenin-Volpin, The ultra-intuitionistic criticism and the antitraditional program
for foundations of mathematics, Intuitionism and Proof Theory (Proc. Conf., Buﬀalo, NY, 1968),
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1970, pp. 3–45.
DEPARTMENT OF PHILOSOPHY
GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY
4400 UNIVERSITY DRIVE, 3F1
FAIRFAX, VA 22030-4444, USA
E-mail: rcherubi@gmu.edu
6425 BRASS BUTTON CT
CENTREVILLE VA 20121, USA
E-mail: mircom@cox.net

SUE TOLEDO’S NOTES OF HER CONVERSATIONS
WITH G ¨ODEL IN 1972-5†
SUE TOLEDO
Husserl.
Conversation March 3, 1972. Husserl’s philosophy is very diﬀerent before
1909 from what it is after 1909. At this point he made a fundamental philo-
sophical discovery, which changed his whole philosophical outlook and is
even reﬂected in his style of writing. He describes this as a time of crisis in his
life, both intellectual and personal. Both were resolved by his discovery. At
this time he was working on phenomenological investigation of time.
There is a certain moment in the life of any real philosopher where he for the
ﬁrst time grasps directly the system of primitive terms and their relationships.
This is what had happened to Husserl. Descartes, Schelling, Plato discuss it.
Leibniz described it (the understanding or the system?) as being like the big
dipper — it leads the ships. It was called understanding the absolute.
The analytic philosophers try to make concepts clear by deﬁning them in
terms of primitive terms. But they don’t attempt to make the primitive terms
clear. Moreover, they take the wrong primitive terms, such as “red”, etc., while
the correct primitive terms would be “object”, “relation”, “well”, “good”, etc.
The understanding of the system of primitive terms and their relationships
cannot be transferred from one person to another. The purpose of reading
Husserl should be to use his experience to get to this understanding more
quickly. (“Philosophy As Rigorous Science” is the ﬁrst paper Husserl wrote
after his discovery.)
Perhaps the best way would be to repeat his investigation of time. At one
point there existed a 500-page manuscript on the investigation (mentioned in
letters to Ingarden, with whom he wished to publish the manuscript). This
manuscript has apparently been lost, perhaps when Husserl’s works were taken
to Louvain in 1940. It is possible that this and other works were removed.1
†Typed and edited by Juliette Kennedy, from a xerox copy of Toledo’s hand-written notes.
No additions or deletions were made to these notes except for the addition of punctuation, as
indicated.
1We take the liberty of making one exception to our policy of not annotating these notes, as
follows: As to Husserl’s lost manuscript on time, G¨odel made similar remarks, at various times,
about manuscripts disappearing (e.g. some of Leibniz’s). And though such remarks were usually
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
200

SUE TOLEDO’S NOTES OF HER CONVERSATIONS WITH G ¨ODEL IN 1972-5
201
In particular there are almost no examples of fully worked out phenomeno-
logical investigations from after 1909, the works of Husserl that have been
published being basically a discussion of what to do, a little about how to do
it, etc. Even the book on time is almost completely from before 1909, and
perhaps even taken from Heidegger’s lecture notes.
The concept of “world”, (the idea of “object”, “existence”), or rather of
“objective existence” are the central ones.
There are probably diﬀerent ways to ﬁnd these primitive terms. The method
of phenomenology is not to investigate the terms themselves, but rather to
investigate how we handle them. (Husserl never mentions that his goal for
phenomenology is ﬁnally to come to an understanding of the primitive terms
themselves.)
Another thing he doesn’t mention is that when we investigate our way of
handling these concepts, there is no reason to assume that we always handle
them correctly. If one considers the early age at which we start, it would not
be surprising that would make many wrong combinations of the primitive
terms. (That is why critical philosophy as called critical philosophy—note
that Husserl was a follower of Kant in his second period but not in his ﬁrst.)
As an example of criticism of our concepts, Kant says we have a wrong idea
of time, that it is really a form of our intuition, while we conceive it as being
in the world, in things. (Actually there is a kind of double talk in Kant. He
says that space and time don’t exist objectively, but that our thoughts about
them are empirically true. He means that we have a wrong idea about time
& space—actually partially correct and partially incorrect, but that we apply
greeted with skepticism, in this case at least, G¨odel was completely correct. The following is a
statement of Husserl’s former student Roman Ingarden from 1962:
Thus in 1927 Husserl proposes to me also that I should adjust a great bundle
of manuscripts (consisting probably of 600–700 sheets of paper) on the original
constitution of time, which he had written in Bernau in 1917-1918. He gave me
a completely free hand with the editing of the text, his only condition being that
the work should be published under our two names. I could not, however, accept
his proposition, ﬁrst of all because I was convinced that Husserl would have done
the work much better himself at the time.
To tell the truth, I now regret my
decision. Judging by what he told me on the context of his study, it was certainly
his most profound and perhaps most important work [ . . . ] As it happened, the
work has not been edited at all, and what is worse nobody seems to know where the
manuscript is. [R. Ingarden, Edith Stein on her activity as an assistant of Edmund
Husserl, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, vol. 23 (1962), pp. 155–175,
p. 157n.4]
Apparently unbeknown to Ingarden, after his declining Husserl’s proposition, the task was
accepted by Husserl’s assistant Eugen Fink. However, Fink hardly worked on it and in 1969 he
gave the manuscript to the Husserl Archive in Leuven. It was published only in 2001 [Husserl, Die
Bernauer Manuskripte ¨uber das Zeitbewusstsein, Husserliana, vol. XXXIII, Kluwer, Dordrecht,
2001]. See footnote 51 of On the philosophical development of Kurt G¨odel, Mark van Atten and
Juliette Kennedy, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic Volume 9, Number 4, Dec. 2003 (ed.).

202
SUE TOLEDO
these wrong concepts consistently.) Time is any order, but the question is
what kind of order.
A child begins to form his ideas about time around 4, but only begins to
reason between 10 and 12. It’s thus not surprising criticism would be needed.
Husserl’s epoch´e on the other hand is essentially an exclusion of criticism, of
any concern about truth and falsehood. He even seems to say that everything
is true. His analyses of the objective world (e.g. p. 212 of “From Formal to
Transcendental Logic”) is in actuality universal subjectivism, and is not the
right analysis of objective existence. It is rather an analysis of the natural way
of thinking about objective existence.
Following Husserl’s program with diligence could lead one ﬁnally to a
grasping of the system of primitive terms (although there are other ways
and perhaps quicker ways).
“Die Krisis der europ¨aischen Wissenschaften
und die transzendentale Ph¨anomenologie” (translated into English) is a work
in which Husserl gives indications as to which order one should go about
doing phenomenology in. There are also some detailed phenomenological
analyses in the Logical Investigations, which were made, however, before 1909.
There is an investigations of Objects in Space in one of the latest volumes of
Husserliana.
– Husserl’s complicated writing style seems to be designed to force you to
focus on a certain thing.
Krisis. Aim:2 p. 213 & 14 epoch´e a new dimension.
137 p. 140 epoch´e with a religious conversion.
In other sciences, math learn certain facts (conceptual or not).
Phen. completely diﬀerent.
Aims at insight.
– Whole world appears in a diﬀerent light.
– Schelling
Plato — Really understand concept of good transcendental insight.
120 p. 121 — wants to lead readers same way he was going.
Really understand every word; complicated sentences to slow you down.
p. 240 analogous to psychoanalysis.
p. 155ﬀorder on self-analyses of own cognition.
Read H from time to time directs your attention to certain thing.
Become very clever wrt to one’s experiences.
Almost physiological eﬀect.
Epoch´e is middle between existence & non-existence of outer world.
Proof Phil.& Phen.Res of []3 of vol 23 1962 p155 manusc on time.
2From this point on the notes have paragraphs that start with a lower case letter and end
without a period. The editor has capitalized the ﬁrst letter of each paragraph and added a period
at the end for easier reading (ed.).
3Unclear word (ed.).

SUE TOLEDO’S NOTES OF HER CONVERSATIONS WITH G ¨ODEL IN 1972-5
203
Also “theorems” in Husserl: no. is small compared to amount he writes.
They’re not important.
An adequate proof-theoretic characterization of an idealized intuitive evi-
dence (this conception being obtained by giving up this restriction to things
we can understand) will comprise inferences that are not intuitive for us &
which certainly allow a reduction of the induction inferences to an essentially
smaller ordinal.
Kreisel
Elmar
Bishop
What is “same thing” that holds.
Very little connection between way science develops.
He wants something much deeper.
To see what the real reasons for your beliefs are.
As a child, you had these reasons before you; only interested in the conse-
quences you could draw about the new world.
More like an observational science.
Conversation June 13, 1974. Read Hilbert’s papers of 1928 — see Church’s
bibliography.
What is fundamental in ﬁnitism is that things must be able to be given, not
that ﬁnite collections are being dealt with. The restriction to ﬁnite collections
follows from the fundamental one, for inﬁnite sets cannot be given.
Use the word “ﬁnitary”, not “ﬁnite” for the kind of reasoning.
Hilbert’s program was completely refuted, but not by G¨odel’s results alone.
That Hilbert’s goal was impossible became clear after Gentzen’s method of
extending ﬁnitary mathematics to its utmost limits.
Left out any comments on footnote 2, p. 281 of Dialectica. One could
consider an idealized ﬁnitarymathematician, one who could surveycompletely
any ﬁnitary process, no matter how complicated. In this case one might be
able to obtain an adequate characterization of ﬁnitary mathematics. (This
is unsolved at the present.)
This of course would not help with Hilbert’s
program, where we have to use the means at our disposal.
In 2nd Hilbert paper, for instance, the problem that number theory is
complete is stated—of course this is completely refuted by G¨odel 1931.
Plato paper. Orthodox authority the question rather than experts.
E. a friend of S., says he is the heart of the state.
Both are enemies of orthodox authority. M. is a representative of orthodoxy.
E’s father & S. cannot be the same because E’s father did do something
wrong, S. did not.
What is god is what is pleasing to authorities = orthodox church.
E. is half-hearted in his opposition to the orthodoxy, thus no real danger.

204
SUE TOLEDO
Meaning of the dialogue:
Why the friends of S. didn’t prevent his execution — they were half-hearted,
didn’t take a ﬁrm stand against the authorities for S.
– Their shortcomings expressed in the dialogue.
– Joking hint of E. at S’s trial.
E’s wishy-washy position, never thinking anything through is the cause of
him remaining in what is really an authoritarian position.
His running oﬀ& not carrying through his case is example of his half-
heartedness.
Dialogue about the opposition of orthodox & rational religion.
E. prosecuting his father, who had done a criminally negligent thing part of
rational religion; orthodox religion emphasized family ties.
Conversation July 26, 1974. Mention that Hilbert had posed the problem
of the decidability of number theory.
Re comment about Gentzen last time:
The only method of extending ﬁnitism is by admitting more recursions. But
if we look at the proof of induction up to 0, we see it is the proof of it. And it
is an impredicative proof. Even the new proof by Bernays in the new edition
of Hilbert & Bernays, which looks ﬁnitary, uses Heyting implications, even
applied to statements which already contain the implication.
It is said the formalists have interpolated “constructive” means between
Brouwer & the ﬁnitists. This seems to be true, and that this something is non-
ﬁnitary. But still impredicative. It might be possible to reformulate Gentzen’s
work so that it ﬁt into this category.
We can try to see how far we can get ﬁnitistically in “seeing” transﬁnite
induction. Certainly we can get to 2, perhaps even to . This may diﬀer
from individual to individual, or depend on training. But Hilbert wanted a
proof for everyone, not just for those with special training.
We would like to know about the idealized case. 0 might be ﬁnitistic in
this case.
(Notice that the following are examples of abstract concepts that would
have to be avoided for ﬁnitary proofs: implication, demonstration, the class
of ordinals for which we can apply induction constructively.)
To see (the idealized case?)
we must introduce abstract concepts.
—
Concrete objects in space, concrete relations among them.
(Why do we know the only way of extending ﬁnitism is with higher recur-
sions?)
– This is the only way we know for proving general concepts. We can’t
exclude someone coming up with a new way until we have a complete theory
of the mind, but that is a long way oﬀ.
Conversation August 21, 1974. Corrections to Hilbert paper.

SUE TOLEDO’S NOTES OF HER CONVERSATIONS WITH G ¨ODEL IN 1972-5
205
Question: Did Gentzen, in his second paper, still consider it an undecided
question as to whether there was a ﬁnitary consistency proof for ﬁrst order
arithmetic.
For Hilbert, at , induction would still be ﬁnitary.
Mathematically, ordinal logics present the math fundamental problems of
proof theory.
Turing showed that at a very small ordinal one can decide every mathemat-
ical question.
Want to take recursive ordinals given by some canonical deﬁnition (cf.
Feferman’s work; Sch¨utte continued—beyond previously known; deﬁnition
wouldn’t be constructive (would be assigning to each recursive ordinal a deﬁ-
nite well-ordering of the integers as has been done for the small ones)
Question then is can you solve every mathematical question in the logics of
these ordinals
This is a counterpart of the incompleteness question.
On measuring proof-theoretic strength by the ordinal of its consistency
proof: if you allowed your well-ordering to be suﬃciently wild, 2 could be
used for any system.
Myhill showed it isn’t possible to assign ordinals to recursive functions to
measure their complexity.
If admit arbitrary well-orderings.
Small ones, 0 etc. are.
To ﬁnd comment on Brouwer look his name up in the name index of
Hilbert’s collected works.
An unanswered question is: What is really completely convincing in math-
ematics. And, can mathematics be reduced to something completely convinc-
ing.
0 is just as convincing as ﬁnitism.
A neg. answer to this can’t be given. Although G¨odel thinks not, so far
there is no convincing proof.
Would be worthwhile to translate Hilbert-Bernays.
Conversation Phone Nov 1. Turing-Feferman result nonsense. Have to be
able to reach the logic in some way.
Turing himself looked at it as a negative result.
Feferman has tried to consider properties the canonical representations
would have.
Ordinal logics same as adjoining to number theory axioms that these dis-
tinguished well-orderings are well-orderings.
G¨odel feels can get completeness for ordinal logics with canonical well-
orderings.

206
SUE TOLEDO
Conversation July 22, 1975. Material of Vol XI of Husserliana (passive
constitution) should have been interesting but doesn’t appear to be so.
Work published during Husserl’s lifetime appears more interesting.
About ordinal logics: completeness result cannot be constructive.
Rationality of universe
⇓
Every set is ordinal deﬁnable.4
Set, fn, relation, structure.
This concept when formed in generality runs into diﬃculties.
Things other than ordinals which are regular?
Argument of G¨odel.
Unreasonable things can make sets ordinal deﬁnable.
G¨odel on Intuitionism. Important to get right idealization to get ideal of
ﬁnite proof.
Yes — induction principle because not very complex.
May be similar (ﬁnitarily valid) principles that we can’t recognize because
too complicated.
Couldn’t recognize them [arrow to “complicated” in previous line] by ﬁni-
tary means but might use more abstract means to show that they are actually
ﬁnitary recipes.
E.g. double induction.
Use abstract notion of fn. in its formulation.
Intuitionism perfectly meaningful.
In class. math hunt for axioms using extra-mathematical ideas.
But axioms are about mathematical objects.
In intuitionism isn’t. Statements involve extra-math. element. Namely, the
mind of the mathematician & his ego.
|
|
ratl
limits
Statement[s] of int[uitionism] are psychol. statements, but not of empirical
psy[chology], — essential a priori psychology/not formal
Formal [vs] other.
|
math, logic
Restricted kind of evidence: arises from ﬁniteness of ego.
Meaning must be completely within the ego.
4A note in the left margin at the implication reads “G¨odel →” (ed.).

SUE TOLEDO’S NOTES OF HER CONVERSATIONS WITH G ¨ODEL IN 1972-5
207
Conventionalism is an attempt to reduce to the ego alone & to arbitrary
decisions of the ego.
Everything is true by (my) convention.
Properties of ink was.
Properties of combining symbols.
It can’t reduce arrangement to physical objects.
Problem in intuitions — where classical math. seems to have found its
primitive elements. In intuitionist math working with ideas that haven’t been
analysed (eg concept of proof).
Problems of paradoxes not really important for sets but rather for concepts,
truth.
Correspondence address: Juliette Kennedy, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, P.O.
Box 68 (Gustaf H¨allstr¨omin katu 2b), FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
CURTIS FRANKS
Plato was not present on the day that Socrates drank hemlock in the jail
at Athens and died. Phædo, who was, later related that day’s conversation
to Echecrates in the presence of a gathering of Pythagorean philosophers at
Phlius. Once again, Plato was not around to hear what was said. Yet he wrote
a dialog, “Phædo,” dramatizing Phædo’s retelling of the occasion of Socrates’
ﬁnal words and death. In it, Plato presents to us Phædo and Echecrates’
conversation, though what these two actually said he didn’t hear. In Plato’s
account of that conversation, Phædo describes to Echecrates Socrates’ conver-
sation with the Thebian Pythagoreans, Simmias and Cebes, though by his own
account he only witnessed that conversation and refrained from contributing
to it. Plato even has Phædo explain his absence: “Plato,” he tells Echecrates,
“I believe, was ill.”
We look to Socrates’ death from a distance. Not only by time, but by this
doubly embedded narrative, we feel removed from the event. But this same
distance draws us close to Socrates’ thought. Neither Simmias nor Cebes
understood Socrates’ words as well as Phædo did by the time he was asked to
repeat them. Even Phædo failed to notice crucial details that Plato points out.
Had we overheard Socrates’ conversation, we would not have understood it.
We look to Socrates’ death from a distance, but to understand Socrates, we
don’t need to access him—we need Plato.
At Stanley Tennenbaum’s instigation, Kurt G¨odel and Sue Toledo held a
series of conversations between March of 1972 and July of 1975. G¨odel retired
from his permanent position at the Princeton Institute of Advanced Studies
the following year and died shortly afterwards.
These conversations were
among G¨odel’s last. Toledo’s notes of them are fragmented, often cryptic.
Rarely are matters pursued at length. Occasionally, Toledo records merely
that a theme or a theorem came up and not what was said about it.
One is struck initially by the wide range of topics one ﬁnds in these brief
notes, from recent results in mathematical logic to the meaning of ancient
texts and the subtleties of modern philosophical thought. But more striking
is the way that G¨odel’s discussions of these disparate topics elide into and
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
208

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
209
support one another, even spanning breaks of several months. Tennenbaum
called himself a “disciple” of G¨odel. He saw mathematics as a testament to
the dignity of the human mind, and he saw in philosophy a way to reﬂect on
the proper cultivation of that dignity, mathematically and otherwise. Both of
these visions, he claimed, he acquired from G¨odel. They are vivid still, here,
in a form we owe to Tennenbaum, among G¨odel’s ﬁnal sustained thoughts.
“Phædo”’s classical readers referred to it by the alternate title, “On the
Soul.”
Phædo appears only in the framing narrative.
He is silent while
Simmias and Cebes ask Socrates what he means when he says that the poet,
Evenus, if he is wise, should follow him as soon as possible in death. He only
listens as Socrates explains that his imminent death is not an evil and argues
that the soul continues to exist after the body dies. Socrates is discussing the
soul. Phædo is in the background.
It is not surprising that Socrates’ reasoning is unconvincing to contempo-
rary readers (among the several unpalatable ideas on display is the infamous
doctrine that all knowledge is recollection of what was forgotten at birth).
The strange thing about the dialog is that Socrates has an unusually hard
time persuading his own friends. Plato devotes roughly twenty-ﬁve pages to
Socrates’ attempt to demonstrate the immortality of the soul. The progression
is repetitive, cyclic. Simmias and Cebes object continuously. When one of
them accepts one of Socrates’ points, the other typically does not. Socrates
changes his argument a few times. Usually he tries to demonstrate that the
soul is immortal by its nature. Occasionally (80e, 81b, 82c) he argues for
the seemingly contrary claim that only the souls of philosophers outlive their
bodies, because immortality is conditional on one’s conduct in this life. When
neither of these tactics proves fully convincing, he rehashes some of the images
and analogies from the beginning of the discussion in a slightly diﬀerent or-
der. The result is particularly elegant, but ultimately unpersuasive: Simmias
ﬁnds more compelling the notion that the soul depends on the body because
it is properly understood as a harmonious arrangement of the bodily; Cebes
disagrees with Simmias on this point but ﬁnds Socrates’ metaphor about the
cyclic relationship between life and death untenable.
At this point in the dialog, Phædo interrupts the ﬂashback and says to
Echecrates:
When we heard what they said, we were all quite depressed, as
we told each other afterwards. We had been quite convinced by
[Socrates’] previous argument, and [Simmias and Cebes] seemed
to confuse us again, and to drive us to doubt not only what had
already been said but also what was going to be said, lest we be
worthless as critics or the subject itself admitted of no certainty.
(88c)

210
CURTIS FRANKS
Echecrates replies that even hearing of the discussion after the fact, he feels
that he shares in their despair. Socrates’ argument, he says, “was extremely
convincing” but has “fallen into discredit.”
He pleads that Phædo relate
Socrates’ response precisely, as he is interested both in what new argument
Socrates devised at this point and in whether he remained composed in the
face of these objections. Phædo says:
I have certainly often admired Socrates, Echecrates, but never more
than on this occasion. That he had a reply was perhaps not strange.
What I wondered at most in him was the pleasant, kind, and admir-
ing way he received the young men’s argument, and how sharply he
was aware of the eﬀect the discussion had on us . . . (88e–89a)
What did Socrates say that impressed Phædo more than any clever argument
he had ever presented? Setting aside Simmias and Cebes’ objections, he says,
“ﬁrst there is a certain experience we must be careful to avoid” (89c). Only
here does Phædo enter into conversation with Socrates. “What is that?” he
asks. “That we should not become misologues,” Socrates replies, “as people
become misanthropes. There is no greater evil one can suﬀer than to hate
reasonable discourse” (89d). He elaborates:
You know how those in particular who spend their time studying
contradiction in the end believe themselves to have become very
wise and that they alone have understood that there is no soundness
or reliability in any object or in any argument, but that all that exists
simply ﬂuctuates up and down as if it were in the Euripus and does
not remain in the same place for any time at all. . . . it would be
pitiable . . . if a man who dealt with such arguments as appear at
one time true, at another time untrue, should not blame himself or
his own lack of skill but, because of his distress, in the end gladly
shift the blame away from himself to the arguments, and spend the
rest of his life hating and reviling reasoned discussion . . . . (90b–d)
Socrates eventually proceeds with his investigation of the immortality of the
soul. Around 107a–b, the discussion winds down. Socrates has introduced
a few novelties in the argument. Largely, though, he preserves substantial
patches of what he said earlier. Cebes announces that he is convinced. Simmias
is more cautious: “I myself have no remaining grounds for doubt after what has
been said; nevertheless, in view of the importance of our subject and my low
opinion of human weakness, I am bound still to have some private misgivings
about what we have said.” Astonishingly, Socrates endorses Simmias’ subtle
reservation:
You are not only right to say this, Simmias, . . . but our ﬁrst hy-
potheses require clearer examination, even though we ﬁnd them
convincing. And if you analyze them adequately, you will, I think,

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
211
follow the argument as far as man can, and if the conclusion is
clear, you will look no further.
Thus unfolds Plato’s treatise on the soul. Socrates’ proof falls just short, but
he proceeds to hypothesize about the nature of the existence of disembodied
souls and adds that
[n]o sensible man would insist that these things are as I have de-
scribed them, but I think it is ﬁtting for a man to risk the belief—for
the risk is a noble one—that this, or something like this, is true
about our souls and their dwelling places, since the soul is evidently
immortal, and a man should repeat this to himself as if it were an
incantation, which is why I have been prolonging my tale. (114d)
Still speaking, he takes the cup of poison, “and then drain[s] it calmly and
easily” (117c). Crito weeps, but Socrates speaks on and everyone gains their
composure in time to witness his death.
Socrates’ friends managed to reconcile themselves to his passing. His death
was not a bad thing. Socrates’ ﬁnal words brought them to this understanding,
but the conclusion he emphasized was not that the soul is immortal. When
Phædo recounted this episode to Echecrates, he said that Socrates’ intense
insistence that reasoned discourse is noble even when not entirely satisfying
was his greatest teaching. It allowed them not to succumb to doubt “about
what was going to be said” as they had come to doubt “what had already
been said.” Socrates even was eager to point out explicitly that his argument
was in some respects weak, that although they had taken it as far as possible
under the conditions, it would beneﬁt still if its initial hypotheses were further
clariﬁed at a later time. Socrates’ proof that the soul is eternal convinced
nearly everyone; his admission that he was not entirely satisﬁed with it ﬁxed
the soul’s immortality in his friends’ minds like an incantation.
The ﬁrst block of Toledo/G¨odel notes is dated March 3, 1972. The conver-
sation from that day is idiosyncratic in that its only topic, Edmund Husserl—
his thought but also his person—does not recur on any later date1. And yet
the centrality of Husserl in G¨odel’s thinking is unmistakable here. G¨odel and
Toledo don’t talk about anything else, and in none of the later conversations
do they discuss anything with so much care.
Many readers will be surprised to ﬁnd that G¨odel says essentially nothing
about that part of Husserl’s work most often associated with formal logic, his
early writings on logical form and content including Logical Investigations. He
is interested in a properly phenomenological subject, Husserl’s emphasis on
epoch´e following a transformative philosophical “discovery” in 1909. In fact,
1There is one exception: The notes from July 22, 1975 begin with the observation that the
content of some of Husserl’s unpublished manuscripts, which had recently been made available,
was uninteresting compared with his published work.

212
CURTIS FRANKS
the discoveryitself, its nature, interests G¨odelevenmorethanthephilosophical
mode that Husserl adopted in its wake. He calls it the moment of “grasping the
system of primitive terms and their relationships.” This moment is not unique
to phenomenology—G¨odel identiﬁes the same transformation in Descartes,
Schelling, Leibniz, and Plato. He calls it the deﬁnitive moment in the “life”
of every “real philosopher.” Whatever it amounts to, it deﬁnes a thinker’s
life, and not only his or her thought. Husserl, G¨odel notes, underwent “both
intellectual and personal” crises in 1909, and his transformative discovery
resolved both.
Toledo and G¨odel discuss Husserl attentively. They are interested in the
nuance of how his thought progressed more than the content of what he says
on any particular occasion. They see Husserl inviting us to come along with
him, showing us how to transform ourselves in the most fundamental ways.
After 1909, Husserl stopped producing “fully worked out phenomenological
investigations.” He introduced the stylistic convention of deliberately compli-
cated language that forces us to think about each of his words. He wanted us
to “use his experience to get to” where he was. Husserl had attained a kind
of understanding that “cannot be transferred from one person to another,” so
his writing is not an attempt to explain anything to us. G¨odel calls it both the
understanding of the primitive terms and the understanding of “the absolute.”
We are blind to this absolute. We are not aware of how we are working with
our primitive terms, so we are bound to distort any image of the absolute
that Husserl could present. Husserl must force us to notice our own primitive
terms, to diagnose our own ways understanding, “to see what the real reasons
for [our] beliefs are.” The transformation that accompanies this self-awareness
is not conceptual. To emphasize the impossibility of conveying it, G¨odel com-
pares it to religious conversion and calls it “almost physiological”—reports
that suggest that G¨odel believes he himself has experienced it.
G¨odel focuses on this philosophical strategy.
It sounds like a ﬁrst step
in a larger program: after completing what G¨odel calls our “self-analysis
of [our] own cognition,” we expect to move on to the adoption of the right
conceptual grid, to take oﬀthe glasses that have distorted everything and try
on the new set that Husserl is oﬀering. But if Husserl was interested in this
second phase, G¨odel is not. The self-analysis, what G¨odel says is analogous
to psychoanalysis, is the crucial move. We are not aiming at the acquisition of
any new facts, not even of “conceptual” facts (There are very few “theorems”
in Husserl’s writing, G¨odel says). We want to see the “whole world . . . in
a diﬀerent light”—what G¨odel calls “insight.” To do this, we don’t need to
adopt new primitive terms, we only need to recognize the ones that we are
working with and to become aware of how we are working with them. G¨odel
doesn’t seem committed even to the possibility of changing our primitive terms.
We want simply to ﬁnd them, to make them clear. This means that we should

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
213
become aware of how it is that we use them, how we in fact handle them as
opposed to how we ought to do so.
This is the key to understanding a potentially disorienting part of Toledo’s
notes. G¨odel says that after 1909 Husserl’s thinking was Kantian, that his
philosophical method was “critical” in the sense associated with Kant’s tran-
scendental idealism. The signiﬁcance of this is that our primitive terms could
be anomalous, out of sync with the noumenal world, moreover that we might
not “handle them correctly” in any case. Indeed, it is highly unlikely that our
primitive terms are “the right ones” in any deep sense and practically certain
that our handling of them is ﬂawed from a transcendental point of view (“it’s
not surprising criticism would be needed,” G¨odel says, given the fact that
we form our ideas in childhood well before the way we work with them can
meaningfully be called thinking). The term “kritik” is supposed to suggest
this: our basic ways of thinking are subject to criticism. But in a statement
that is somewhat jarring, G¨odel says that he admires the fact that Husserl does
not supply the criticism that is doubtless warranted. “There is no reason to
assume that we always handle [these concepts] correctly,” but notice, G¨odel
says, that Husserl didn’t mention this. His epoch´e “is essentially an exclusion
of criticism, of any concern about truth and falsehood.” We are not supposed
to understand the quest for primitives as a quest for the fundamental features
of reality, but “rather as an analysis of the natural way of thinking about” that
reality. We don’t want to evaluate that way of thinking—and epoch´e ensures
that we can’t—but to become aware of it because we can’t gain insight about
our world or our activities without awareness of how it is that we think about
the world. Prior to Husserl’s transformation, he might still have considered
the possibility that our deployment of primitive terms tracks the form of the
world, or at least that it could be made to do so. After his transformation, he
realized that assumptions of this sort are careless. But he went even further
by insisting that insight is to be attained not by correcting this “problem” but
by ignoring it and learning to be concerned about something else.
G¨odel criticizes “analytic” philosophy for its insensitivity to this sort of
insight.
Its practitioners “try to make concepts clear by deﬁning them in
terms of primitive terms,” but, G¨odel says, they don’t bother “to make the
primitive terms clear,” by which he means that they don’t bother to ﬁrst get
clear about how we handle those primitive terms. “Moreover,” G¨odel says,
“they take the wrong primitive terms.” What kind of criticism is this? It
might seem that G¨odel is pointing out that analytic philosophers look at the
world from the wrong angle, that this is their shortcoming. But this is not
what G¨odel is saying. He thinks they err by deceiving themselves about how
they in fact look at the world. What they take to be primitive terms, the
terms in which they try to deﬁne all of our concepts, are not actually the
fundamental components of our thinking. Perhaps they ought to be, but they

214
CURTIS FRANKS
are not. Husserl’s understanding of the absolute came with the realization that
dissecting concepts according to how they ought to be seen is a distraction
from the sort of insight that can transform our thinking and resolve our
personal crises. Analytic philosophers err by working with a false self-image,
or by thinking that self-understanding is irrelevant to conceptual analysis. So
they analyze everything in terms of concepts that are not fundamental for us
and are left with no insight into our concepts.
So far I have said very little about the argument in “Phædo” itself, but one
detail is pertinent. This is the hypothesis of opposites, a crucial instance of
which incited Cebes’ initial objections. Socrates poses it thus:
[F]or all things which come to be, let us see whether they come to
be in this way, that is, from their opposites if they have such, as
the beautiful is the opposite of the ugly and the just of the unjust
and a thousand other things of the kind. Let us examine whether
those that have an opposite must necessarily come to be from their
opposite and from nowhere else, as for example, when something
comes to be larger it must necessarily become larger from having
been smaller before. (70e)
The hypothesis is revived against Cebes’ objections and takes on a central (if
occasionally cryptic) role in Socrates’ discussion throughout the dialog. But
where did it come from?
Phædo’s account of Socrates’ last day begins early in the morning. The
Athenian jail guard doesn’t let Socrates’ friends in initially. When eventually
they do enter, Socrates has recently been released from his shackles. Still lying
in bed, Socrates addresses Crito. Then he sits upright, “ben[ds] his leg, and
rub[s] it with his hand,” saying as he does:
What a strange thing that which men call pleasure seems to be, and
how astonishing the relation it has with what is thought to be its
opposite, namely pain! A man cannot have both at the same time.
Yet if he pursues and catches the one, he is almost always bound
to catch the other also, like two creatures with one head. I think
that if Æsop had noted this he would have composed a fable that
a god wished to reconcile their opposition but could not do so, so
he joined their heads together, and therefore when a man has the
one, the other follows later. This seems to be happening to me.
My bonds caused pain in my leg, and now pleasure seems to be
following. (60b-c)
We learn immediately after this passage that Socrates has spent his time writ-
ing poetry—speciﬁcally transposing Æsop into verse—since his incarceration.
This activity apparently has played into his current observation, or at least
into its preliminary formulation as a principle. When Socrates later turns to

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
215
discuss the immortality of the soul, he reaches for this principle—presumably
not because it is evidently connected with the statement he is trying to prove,
but for the plain reason that it has recently been on his mind. He has discussed
the soul’s immortally in the past, but no one present can recall the arguments
from those occasions (73a, 76b, 88c). The “theorem,” as G¨odel would call it,
is known to Socrates, but he hasn’t yet found the memorable proof. He has
been reading Æsop. He recently saw a familiar experience in a new light. He
tries another angle.
There is no record of a conversation between Toledo and G¨odel for two
years following the Husserl discussion. The next set of notes, dated June
13, 1974, is split between one discussion of David Hilbert’s papers from 1928
and another one of Plato’s dialog, “Euthyphro.” The two discussions are
not evidently related. The comments on Hilbert’s foundational program are
briefer, but thematically connected with the material in the four conversations
to follow. The slightly more extended discussion of “Euthyphro,” by contrast,
seems initially out of place in the broader context.
Surely the most striking remark recorded here is that Hilbert’s program
“was completely refuted,” though by Gerhard Gentzen’s work and not by
G¨odel’s own results. This is exactly opposite the customary appraisal of these
matters. G¨odel’s results from 1931 are widely recognized as a refutation of
Hilbert’s project, for they show that the consistency of certain precisely delim-
ited mathematical theories cannot be proved using only those same theories’
means, whereas Hilbert had sought “ﬁnitary” proofs of the reliability of ab-
stract, inﬁnitary mathematical techniques. Notoriously, in his 1931 paper,
G¨odel cautioned against drawing this conclusion. Maybe there are perfectly
concrete principles of inference, he suggested, of the sort that Hilbert would
countenance, that surpass the techniques present in any formal system and
that suﬃce to prove any such system’s consistency.
In 1936, Gentzen presented his work on arithmetical consistency in this
light: he had shown how to supplement manifestly “ﬁnitary” techniques with
principles of transﬁnite induction so that these combined resources suﬃce
to prove the consistency of formal arithmetical theories.
One need only
take induction principles through suﬃciently high ordinals according to the
complexity of the theory one is investigating. Can’t such consistency proofs
be counted as ﬁnitary? “We might be inclined to doubt the ﬁnitist character
of the ‘transﬁnite’ induction [through 0 used in his proof of the consistency
of Peano Arithmetic (pa)],” he wrote in Gentzen 1938,
even if only because of its suspect name. In its defense it should here
merely be pointed out that most somehow constructively oriented
authors place special emphasis on building up constructively . . .
an initial segment of the transﬁnite number sequence . . . . And

216
CURTIS FRANKS
in the consistency proof, and in possible future extensions of it [to
theories stronger than pa], we are dealing only with an initial part,
a “segment” of the second number class . . . . I fail to see . . . at
what “point” that which is constructively indisputable is supposed
to end, and where a further extension of transﬁnite induction is
therefore thought to become disputable. I think, rather, that the
reliability of the transﬁnite numbers required for the consistency
proof compares with that of the ﬁrst initial segments, say up to
2, in the same way as the reliability of a numerical calculation
extending over a hundred pages with that of a calculation of a few
ﬁnes: it is merely a considerably vaster undertaking to convince
oneself of this certainty . . . . (p. 286)
Yet G¨odel suggests just the opposite, that—far from being a way around the
implications of his incompleteness theorems—Gentzen’s work fully refuted
Hilbert’s program. Why?
In the notes from July 6 of the same year, G¨odel says: “We can try to see how
far we can get ﬁnitistically in ‘seeing’ transﬁnite induction. Certainly we can
get to 2, perhaps even to . This may diﬀer from individual to individual,
or depending on training. But Hilbert wanted a proof for everyone, not just for
those with special training.” This is a novel idea in the evaluation of Hilbert’s
program2. Gentzen had said that it is not evident at what point principles of
transﬁnite induction lose their constructive nature. G¨odel replies that this is
irrelevant. “One could consider an idealized ﬁnitary mathematician, one who
could consider completely any ﬁnitary process, no matter how complicated. In
this case, one might be able to obtain an adequate characterization of ﬁnitary
mathematics,” he says. “We would like to know about this idealized case.
0 might be ﬁnitistic in this case.” But for us even to see the idealized case,
“we must introduce abstract concepts.” Thus “this is no help for Hilbert’s
program,” he says, “where we have to use the means at our disposal.”
The notes from August 21, 1974 show G¨odel approaching the same issue
from a diﬀerent angle. In place of the question “Where in the progression of
transﬁnite ordinals do things lose their ﬁnitary nature?” G¨odel considers the
question of the naturalness of primitive recursive well-orders used to deﬁne
elementary order-types and notes that “if you allowed your well-ordering to be
suﬃciently wild, 2 could be used for any system” (The force of this observa-
tion is compounded by G¨odel’s claim that, “for Hilbert, at  induction would
still be ﬁnitary.”). G¨odel here is referring to the appeal to meta-mathematical
notions in deﬁnitions of small order-types. A concrete example will illustrate
the point (the example is due to Kreisel): First deﬁne a primitive recursive
predicate P(x) ↔∃y ≤xPrf PA(⌜⊥⌝, y). Then deﬁne a binary relation ⪯
2In chapter 2 of Franks 2009 a case is made that Hilbert ought to be understood in this way,
as insisting on a “proof for everyone.”

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
217
as follows:
2n ⪯2m
iﬀ
n ≤m
2n ⪯2k + 1
iﬀ
¬P(n) ∧P(k)
2k + 1 ⪯2m
iﬀ
P(k) ∧P(m)
2k + 1 ⪯2l + 1
iﬀ
P(k) ∧P(l) ∧l ≤k
Observe that ⪯has order-type  if pa is consistent and contains a ﬁnite
sequence bounded by a strictly decreasing inﬁnite sequence otherwise.
It
is fairly straightforward3 to prove the consistency of pa by an elementary
induction on ⪯, hence, since pa is consistent, on a recursive well-order of type
. However, this well-order is unnatural (G¨odel calls it “wild”)—we would
never be able to deﬁne  in this way without appealing to our intuition that
pa is consistent.
So how ought we distinguish natural deﬁnitions from unnatural ones? Not,
G¨odel thinks, by an analysis of the distinction between meta-mathematics and
ordinary mathematics or any other such distinction, but by self-analysis, by
getting clear about our own ﬁnitary constructions rather than investigating
the ideal case. Thanks to the juxtaposition of these remarks with those from
two years earlier, the inﬂuence of Husserl on G¨odel’s evaluation of Hilbert’s
program is unmistakable.
The essential link appears in the course of the
discussion of kritik from March 3, 1972:
An adequate proof-theoretic characterization of an idealized in-
tuitive evidence (this conception being obtained by giving up this
restriction to things we can understand) will comprise inferences
that are not intuitive for us & which certainly allow a reduction of
the inductive inferences to an essentially smaller ordinal.
In the remarks from August 21, 1974, G¨odel asks whether “Gentzen, in his
second paper, still considered it an undecided question as to whether there
was a ﬁnitary consistency proof for ﬁrst order arithmetic.” G¨odel is referring
to Gentzen 1938, the crucial passage of which is quoted above. (In Gentzen’s
“ﬁrst paper” Gentzen 1936, he argued more forcefully for the claim that his
consistency proof was ﬁnitarily acceptable. In this “second paper” Gentzen
expresses dissatisfaction with that argument, but still clearly suggests that
the question is open.) G¨odel’s question seems inexcusably cautious until it is
understood in this way: Gentzen clearly considered this question undecided in
1938, but he was referring to proofs that were “essentially” ﬁnitary as opposed
to proofs that were ﬁnitary for us. This is what G¨odel means in the passage
from June 13, 1974, when he says, “what is fundamental in ﬁnitism is that
things must be able to be given, not that ﬁnite collections are being dealt with.”
G¨odel wonders whether Gentzen could seriously understand foundational
programs in terms of such an idealized grounding of mathematical activity,
3One may consult §7.1.9 of Girard 1987 for the proof and a general discussion.

218
CURTIS FRANKS
as opposed to a more anthropomorphic grounding in our actual primitive
terms. As for the latter conception of mathematical foundations, G¨odel sees
Gentzen’s work, rather ironically, as being quite decisive. In the notes from
July 26 of that year, Toledo wrote: “[I]f we look at [Gentzen’s] proof of
induction up to 0, we see that it is the proof of it. And it is an impredicative
proof . . . , which [perhaps from some angle] looks ﬁnitary,” but implicitly
appeals to abstract notions. G¨odel means that once we understand this proof,
we recognize both that it is the natural proof and that it exceeds our actual
ability to work with things given to us in intuition.
“That Hilbert’s goal
was impossible became clear after Gentzen’s method of extending ﬁnitary
mathematics to its utmost limits,” he proceeds to say, because this method
made evident that the natural proof of pa’s consistency exceeded those limits.
In the dialog “Euthyphro,” Plato dramatizes a possibly ﬁctitious encounter
between Socrates and a priest named Euthyphro.
The two meet outside
the king-archon’s court, where alleged aﬀronts to the Olympian gods are
adjudicated.
It is clear that Euthyphro and Socrates know one another,
though their exact relationship is left vague.
Euthyphro is surprised to ﬁnd Socrates here, given his habit of remaining
aloof from civil matters. Socrates explains that he is not here on his own
initiative but has been charged by a man named Meletus with harming Athens
by spreading heretical ideas. (These are the charges on which Socrates will
soon be convicted, imprisoned, and eventually executed.) He has come to
the court for the preliminary stages of his hearing.
Euthyphro is aghast.
Socrates, he says, far from posing a danger to the state, is “the very heart of
the city” (3a).
Euthyphro’s presence outside the court is, by contrast, unremarkable: his
religious station makes his testimony relevant to court procedures. All the
same, Socrates asks him about his current court business. Euthyphro explains
that he is pressing charges of murder on his father because of an episode
of negligence that resulted in the death of a former house servant. When
Socrates points out that it is considered scandalous for a son to prosecute his
own father, Euthyphro replies that he is conﬁdent that public opinion is wrong
on this point, that he is suﬃciently “advanced in wisdom” to see past societal
conventions to the fact that justice demands equitable treatment of relatives
and strangers (4b).
Socrates’ interest is piqued. In an ironic plea that Euthyphro takes seriously,
he says that because Euthyphro is such an expert in divine aﬀairs he would like
to enlist under his tutelage so that the charges being brought against him might
be deﬂected to his new oﬃcial adviser in spiritual matters. Euthyphro agrees
to this arrangement without hesitation. Socrates insists that they begin right
away and asks Euthyphro to explain to him the nature of hosion (ὅσιον = piety,
holiness, sacred matters).

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
219
Euthyphro ﬁrst tries to illustrate hosion by pointing to his own plan to
prosecute his father as an example: “You want to know about piety? I’ll show
you piety. Watch what I’m doing, these circumstances. Learn piety by seeing
a pious person in action!” Socrates says that this isn’t how he expects to learn
things and demands instead a “formal” deﬁnition.
Euthyphro, seemingly
reluctantly, agrees to try this out: “If that is how you want it, Socrates, that
is how I will tell you” (7e). He ﬁrst tries to deﬁne hosion as “what is loved
by the gods.” Socrates ﬁnds a problem with that deﬁnition, in that the gods
of the day had competing loves. So Euthyphro amends his deﬁnition slightly
by saying that hosion is what all the gods agree to love. This leads into the
famous causal dilemma: Does the gods’ mutual love of a thing make it pious,
or does the piety of a thing earn the gods’ love?
This dilemma is easily associated with Plato’s alleged ontological doctrine
that an abstract phenomenon’s nature is uninﬂuenced by an agents’ knowledge
of or decisions about it. Euthyphro’s attempt to deﬁne hosion in terms of the
gods’ love doesn’t do justice to its alleged eternal “form.” If whatever the gods
agree upon as pleasant thereby becomes holy, then indeed holiness does not
have an eternal form. It must rather be, Socrates argues, that a thing’s holiness
attracts the gods’ love of it. If so, then deﬁning hosion as “what the gods love”
is like deﬁning it as “what you and I are talking about right now”—one has
identiﬁed merely an “aﬀect or quality” of holiness, not its essence (11a).
Not equipped to navigate the causal dilemma satisfactorily, Euthyphro
proposes a third deﬁnition, namely, that hosion is part of justice. Socrates
presses Euthyphro into specifying which part of justice it is, and Euthyphro
says that it is a kind of trading relationship with the gods. We receive from the
gods, so we return this favor with certain behaviors. Socrates asks what the
gods receive from us through these behaviors, and Euthyphro begins to speak
eloquently about the cosmic harmony brought about by a ritually meticulous
and duly reverent society at prayer (14b). But Socrates will have none of this
kind of talk and cuts him oﬀ, insisting again on a “formal” deﬁnition. “What
beneﬁt,” he asks, “do the gods receive from our pious behavior?” Euthyphro
replies rhetorically, “Do you suppose, Socrates, that the gods are beneﬁted by
what they receive from us?” (15a). Socrates accepts this and then asks what
piety’s purpose is, if not beneﬁt. How is it repayment for the good that we
receive from the gods? Euthyphro says that the display of honor and reverence
is pleasing to the gods. Socrates then points out that this claim, understood
formally, is just a repetition of their earlier failed attempt to deﬁne piety: piety
is what pleases the gods. They have covered no ground.
After each of Euthyphro’s failures to suﬃciently explain hosion, Socrates
has urged him to collect himself and to try again so that he can become
Euthyphro’s pupil and absolve himself of the charges he faces. Until now,
Euthyphro has been a relatively good sport, trying out new angles despite

220
CURTIS FRANKS
Socrates’ commanding refutation of all his ideas. But this time Euthyphro
runs oﬀ, somewhat impatient.
One who would decipher this dialog faces a strange amalgam of earnestness
and irony. The charges brought against Socrates are grave, and in “Apology”
and “Phædo” it becomes clear that they are not just idle threats. Socrates’
reaction to them is befuddling. He says that he would like to deﬂect the charges
onto Euthyphro. Is there really any possibility of doing this? If not, then
shockingly, Socrates would appear to be joking at the least appropriate time.
On the other hand, if this strategy is viable, then it is equally odd that Socrates
would make the arrangement conditional on Euthyphro’s demonstration of
expertise. Shouldn’t the priest’s reputation suﬃce? Moreover, if these terrible
charges can so easily be deﬂected, then it is puzzling why Euthyphro, who
evidently is not equipped to deﬁne piety in a way that holds up to scrutiny,
would agree to the arrangement so unhesitantly. It’s fairly clear that Euthyphro
didn’t take the exercise seriously to begin with and that Socrates never expected
Euthyphro to deﬁne anything satisfactorily.
What, then, does Socrates hope to accomplish with these antics as his fateful
trial draws near? At 5d and again at 6e Socrates asks Euthyphro whether he
agrees that hosion “presents us with one form.” Both times Euthyphro agrees.
In the bulk of the dialog that follows, we see how ill-equipped Euthyphro is
at specifying that “form.” Socrates expects this display of ineptitude. His
purpose is to expose the ignorance behind Euthyphro’s pretension to wisdom.
What seems like a curious preoccupation on the eve of one’s heresy trial is
itself, for Socrates, pious behavior—to “go around seeking out anyone, citizen
or stranger, whom I think wise . . . [and] if I do not think he is [to] come to
the assistance of the god and show him that he is not wise” (“Apology” 23b).
Euthyphro’s reception of this treatment is noteworthy. After stumbling over
the causal dilemma the ﬁrst time, he says, “I have no way of telling you what I
have in mind, for whatever proposition we put forward goes around and refuses
to stay put where we establish it.” Socrates replies, “ . . . [i]f I were stating
them and putting them forward, you would perhaps be making fun of me and
say that because of my kinship with [Dædalus] my conclusions in discussion
run away and will not stay where one puts them. As these propositions are
yours, however, we need some other jest, for they will not stay put for you, as
you say yourself.” To this Euthyphro says, “I think the same same jest will do
for our discussion . . . for I am not the one who makes them go around and
not remain in the same place . . . ; for as far as I am concerned they would
remain as they were” (11c–d). When, at the end of the dialog, Socrates points
out that their discussion has cycled back to the same conundrum, Euthyphro
throws up his hands and leaves. Socrates takes note. When the “form” he
seeks to disclose proves elusive, Euthyphro seemingly concludes “that there is
no soundness or reliability in any object or in any argument, but that all that

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
221
exists simply ﬂuctuates up and down as if it were in the Euripus and does not
remain in the same place for any time at all.” He doesn’t “blame himself or
his own lack of skill but, because of his distress, in the end gladly shift[s] the
blame away from himself to the arguments.”
It is well known that G¨odel defended a sort of “Platonism” about math-
ematical truth, a thesis that meaningful mathematical talk is explicable only
by there being a mathematical reality whose details don’t depend on our abil-
ity to determine them. In G¨odel 1964, G¨odel considered the possibility that
“Cantor’s conjecture” (that the continuum has the least possible cardinality
greater than the cardinality of the set of integers) might be independent of the
standard set-theoretical axioms and remarked that
a proof of the undecidability of Cantor’s conjecture from the ac-
cepted axioms of set theory . . . would by no means solve the prob-
lem. For if the meanings of the primitive terms of set theory . . . are
accepted as sound, it follows that the set-theoretical concepts and
theorems describe some well-determined reality, in which Cantor’s
conjecture must be either true or false. Hence its undecidability
from the axioms being assumed today can only mean that these ax-
ioms do not contain a complete description of that reality. (p.260)
In his “Gibbs lecture” he reaﬃrmed his belief in a mathematical reality inde-
pendent of human conventions and behaviors: “the objects and theorems of
mathematics are as objective and independent of our own free choice and our
own creative acts as is the physical world” (G¨odel 1951, p. 312).
It is thus remarkable that in G¨odel’s probing discussion of “Euthyphro” in
1974, he says nothing about the dialog’s ontological implications. Instead,
G¨odel reads “Euthyphro” as a call to wrestle religiosity and moral conviction
from the dictates of authority. He associates the idea that the gods not only
command us to do what is right but that their commands actually determine
what is right with “orthodox religion.” Orthodoxy, G¨odel suggests, confuses
expertise with authority.
We look to experts for answers and advice with
good reason, but institutions take advantage of our tendency to trust experts:
they transform our reasonable habit of turning to experts as our source for
facts into the scandalous idea that their opinions are the source of truth.
Orthodox religion arises in the wake of this transformation and thus struggles
to conceive of a deity other than on this authoritarian model, i.e., as investing
particular behaviors with moral worth by commanding their performance.
The usual grounds for objecting to this theology is that such gods’ commands
can defy reason, and we are therefore expected to defy ourselves insofar as
we are expected to heed those commands. Better, a theology where the gods’
commands direct us to patterns of living and thinking that we can rationally
appreciate. This is what G¨odel calls “rational religion.” He reads the causal

222
CURTIS FRANKS
dilemma about the relationship between what pleases the gods and hosion as
fundamentally an argument between rational and orthodox religious thought.
G¨odel sees this very same dilemma appearing a second time in the dialog,
this time concerning our duty to the state instead of our duty to the gods. The
orthodox view is that whatever the civil authorities deem is de facto what you
are obligated to do for the state. The rational view is that the civil authorities
are beholden to some “exterior” facts about what sort of behavior among its
citizens would be good for the state, and are thereby obligated to enforce this,
rather than just whatever they please.
According to G¨odel, the dialog between Socrates and Euthyphro is about
how to break away from the authoritarian view of morality. Both speakers
agree that the break is needed. Athenian society has established an implicit
taboo on prosecuting one’s own father. Socrates reminds Euthyphro (iron-
ically) of this fact when he hears of his purpose in court, trying to elicit a
reaction to the apparently common view that such societal conventions are
constitutive of right behavior. Euthyphro passes this test and also another:
when he learns that Meletus, the representative of “orthodox authority” has
brought charges against Socrates, Euthyphro has a chance to add his voice to
that charge but instead accuses Meletus of harming the state.
But Euthyphro and Socrates agree only this far, and G¨odel sees the dialog’s
signiﬁcance as coming a step after its characters’ mutual rejection of author-
itarian ethics. When one recognizes that important truths are not true by
convention—not by our individual whims, nor by communal consensus, nor
even the dictates of recognized authority—the obvious task one sets oneself
to is devising a method to discover these truths. The Socratic proposal is to
resort to reasoned discussion. But how ought one react when our conversation
falls obviously short of its target? For G¨odel, everything depends on how we
answer this second question. Euthyphro reacts with frustration. “I was right,”
he might say, if he weren’t too impatient to stick around any longer, “to doubt
that this would be an eﬀective way to learn anything about piety. Do you hon-
estly think it will be worthwhile to approach this problem again?” Euthyphro
can see pretty clearly that a satisfactory deﬁnition is beyond their reach. Their
initial attempts to produce one have only made the impossibility of the task
more evident. Socrates’ willingness to press further appears quixotic. But for
Socrates, the realization that an eternal truth is beyond one’s understanding
is the beginning of inquiry. New, more delicate questions emerge: “What can
I learn about my own assumptions from this discovery?” “How can I avoid
succumbing to authority at this point?” “What must I do to keep conversation
on this topic meaningful, now that I cannot sincerely hope to learn what I was
originally interested in?”
How can Euthyphro so glibly agree to Socrates’ request that he stand trial
in his stead? G¨odel sees this reaction as an act of betrayal, for it makes evi-
dent the fact that Euthyphro doesn’t expect his discussion with Socrates to be

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
223
suﬃciently conclusive for the arrangement to materialize. What Euthyphro
fails to realize is that Socrates is not testing him for expertise. The condition
Socrates places on entering a cooperative with Euthyphro isn’t that the priest
ﬁrst deﬁne piety but that, despite his inability to do so, he remain committed in
his stand against authoritarianism. G¨odel calls it half-heartedness, the com-
mitment to “ontological Platonism” without an accompanying commitment
to what one might call “moral Platonism.” He faults Euthyphro with letting
the fact that the nature of piety deﬁes rationalization keep him from defending
Socrates, and reason, in court. Authoritarianism reigns not only when every-
one is convinced by it, but also when we despair of standing whole-heartedly
against it simply because we realize that we can’t conclusively explain what
the authorities dishonestly claim they control. Had Euthyphro not backed
down and had Socrates’ friends joined in the stand against authority instead
of trying to devise schemes for Socrates’ escape, then, G¨odel claims, Socrates’
execution would have been prevented.
Thus the signiﬁcance of G¨odel’s belief in a “well-determined” mathematical
“reality” is not the plain fact that he held this view nor, ultimately, the reasons
he gave to support it.
What is crucial is that he stressed his ontological
Platonism even in the face of systematic incompleteness, and that he was in
turn prompted by his moral Platonism to devise new ways to attain a synoptic
view of the collective body of mathematical facts rather than to despair of
any possibility of doing so. In the conversation of August 21, 1974, he asks
whether all mathematical questions can be solved in the logics of transﬁnite
ordinals. Later that year, in the conversation from November 1, he expresses
his belief that a sort of completeness result can be obtained for ordinal logics.
His own discoveries from half a century earlier could easily dissuade one from
pursuing this sort of problem any further, yet in G¨odel’s hands they seem only
to have led to a richer view of the sort of questions that can be asked.
In the last section of the notes from July 22, 1975, G¨odel discusses math-
ematical intuitionism. He claims that mathematics “seems to have found its
primitive elements” in intuitions, and he contrasts the classical and the intu-
itionistic reactions to this discovery. Each school runs blindly with one of the
two tenets of Husserl’s thought that G¨odel appreciates. The classical mathe-
matician “hunts for axioms” using ideas from outside of mathematics. “But,”
G¨odel says, the “axioms” that result “are about mathematical objects.” The
classical mathematician, then, retains the possibility of “criticizing” his or her
methods, of recognizing that they aren’t adequate to their subject matter. By
contrast, every statement of intuitionism involves reference to “the mind of the
mathematician & his ego.” The meaning of such a statement “must” therefore
“be completely within the ego.” Thus intuitionism, by disallowing criticism,
will more readily accommodate a self-analysis, leading to clarity about our
actual intuitions. One must seemingly choose between assuming the critical
stance and clarifying our intuitions.

224
CURTIS FRANKS
But G¨odel advocates the simultaneous cultivation of insight and critical
awareness in mathematics. One should neither rest content with “working
with ideas that haven’t been fully analysed” nor risk ﬂirting with convention-
alism. Both mistakes are carelessly myopic, but G¨odel’s distaste for the latter
peril is also vividly moral. In the notes from August 21, 1974, we read, “an
unanswered question is: What is really convincing in mathematics. And, can
mathematics be reduced to something completely convincing? . . . Although
G¨odel thinks not, so far there is no convincing proof.” In its least critical
form, intuitionism is such an attempt at reduction: “Conventionalism is an
attempt to reduce to the ego alone & to arbitrary decisions of the ego,” he
says the following year. What makes this reduction unconvincing, though, is
its moral failing. Toledo writes, “everything is true by (my) convention.” The
idea conveyed parenthetically seems to be that a little pressure on such con-
ventionalist lines brings their latent authoritarian connotations to the surface.
What makes our primitive terms worth scrutiny, G¨odel thought, is not that
they are constitutive of anything and therefore beyond reproach, but simply
that they are what we have to work with and that we work with them much
better when we know something about them. The nobility of the human mind
lies not in its role as arbiter in crucial matters, but in its ability somehow to
tap into matters that transcend it.
When Phædo arrives in Phlius, Echecrates immediately asks him if he was
present at Socrates’ death, as he is anxious to hear about the event. Phædo lets
him know that he was there and that he has plenty of time to talk. Echecrates
asks for every detail. Phædo prepares to relate the meandering discussion and
the dramatic scene. He will start with Socrates’ observation about pleasure
and pain, that “a man cannot have both at the same time.” But even before
that he wants simply to convey the feeling of the moment:
I certainly found being there an astonishing experience. Although
I was witnessing the death of one who was my friend, I had no
feeling of pity, for the man appeared happy in both manner and
words as he died nobly and without fear . . . . That is why I had
no feeling of pity, such as would seem natural in my sorrow, nor
indeed of pleasure, as we engaged in philosophical discussion as we
were accustomed to do—for our arguments were of that sort—but
I had a strange feeling, an unaccustomed mixture of pleasure and
pain at the same time as I reﬂected that he was just about to die. All
of us present were aﬀected in much the same way . . . . (58e–59a)
Thus at the crucial moment when Socrates’ words must be eﬀective, just as
he is about to die, his friends share a feeling that undermines his argument.
Though it led them that day to see their teacher’s death not as a bad thing,
the hypothesis of opposites is false. But they don’t notice. Had they noticed,

STANLEY TENNENBAUM’S SOCRATES
225
it would not have mattered. They would not turn to misology. They saw the
theorem well enough and already knew that the principles that it rested on
needed further attention. They don’t notice, but Plato does.
REFERENCES
C. Franks [2009], The Autonomy of Mathematical Knowledge: Hilbert’s Program Revisited,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
G. Gentzen [1936], Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie, Mathematische An-
nalen, vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 493–565, Translated as “The consistency of elementary number theory”
in Szabo 1969, 132–213.
G. Gentzen [1938], Neue Fassung des Widerspruchefreiheitsbeweises f¨ur die reine Zahlentheo-
rie, Forschungen zur logik und zur Grundlegung der exackten Wissenschaften, New Series, vol. 4,
pp. 19–44, Translated as “New version of the consistency proof for elementary number theory”
in Szabo 1969, 252–86.
J. Y. Girard [1987], Proof Theory and Logical Complexity, Studies in Proof Theory. Mono-
graphs, vol. 1, Bibliopolis, Naples.
K. G¨odel [1931], ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und ver-
wandter Systeme I, Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 173–198.
K. G¨odel [1947], What is Cantor’s continuum problem?, The American Mathematical Monthly,
vol. 54, pp. 515–525.
K. G¨odel [1995], Some basic theorems on the foundations of mathematics and their implica-
tions, Collected Works, Vol. III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures (S. Feferman et al., editors),
Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 304–323.
G. M. A. Grube [2002], Plato: Five Dialogs, second revised edition, Hackett, Indianapolis.
M. E. Szabo (editor) [1969], The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen, Studies in Logic and
the Foundations of Mathematics, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
S. Toledo [2010], Sue Toledo’s Notes of her Conversations with G¨odel in 1972–5, edited by J.
Kennedy. This volume, pp. 199–206.
100 MALLOY HALL
DEPARTMENT OF PHILOSOPHY
THE UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME
NOTRE DAME, IN 46554, USA
E-mail: cfranks@nd.edu

TENNENBAUM’S PROOF OF THE IRRATIONALITY OF
√
2
JOUKO V ¨A ¨AN ¨ANEN
The proof of the irrationality of
√
2 involves proving that there cannot be
positive integers n and m such that n2 = 2m2. This can be proved with a
simple number-theoretic argument: First we note that n must be even, whence
m must also be even, and hence both are divisible by 2. Then we observe
that this is a contradiction if we assume that n is chosen minimally. There
is also a geometric proof known already to Euclid, but the proof given by
Tennenbaum seems to be entirely new. It is as follows: In Picture 1 we have
on the left hand side two squares superimposed, one solid and one dashed.
Let us assume that the area of the solid square is twice the area of the dashed
square. Let us also assume that the side of each square is an integer and
moreover the side of the solid square is as small an integer as possible. In the
right hand side of Picture 1 we have added another copy of the dashed square
to the lower left corner of the solid square, thereby giving rise to a new square
in the middle and two small squares in the corners. The combined area of the
two copies of the original dashed square is the same as the area of the original
big solid square. In the superimposed picture the middle square gets covered
by a dashed square twice while the small corner squares are not covered by
the dashed squares at all. Hence the area of the middle square must equal
the combined area of the two corner squares. But clearly all the squares have
Figure 1. A proof of the irrationality of
√
2.
Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems, Philosophies
Edited by Juliette Kennedy and Roman Kossak
Lecture Notes in Logic, 36
c⃝2011, Association for Symbolic Logic
226

TENNENBAUM’S PROOF OF THE IRRATIONALITY OF
√
2
227
integer sides, so we get a contradiction with the minimality of the side of the
solid square. If the picture is not convincing enough, this can be easily veriﬁed
by a two-line calculation.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS
GUSTAF H ¨ALLSTR ¨OMIN KATU 2B, P.O. BOX 68
FIN-00014 UNIVERSITY OF HELSINKI, FINLAND

