
 SEXUAL HEALTH 

 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s 
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES 
 Series 
 American Families in Crisis,  Jeffrey S. Turner
 Animal Rights,  Clifford J. Sherry
 Campaign and Election Reform,  Glenn H. Utter and 
Ruth Ann Strickland 
 Climate Change,  David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and 
Catherine Vaughan
 Corporate Crime,  Richard D. Hartley
 DNA Technology,  David E. Newton
 Domestic Violence,  Margi Laird McCue 
 Education in Crisis,  Judith A. Gouwens
 Emergency Management,  Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
 Environmental Justice,  David E. Newton
 Gangs,  Karen L. Kinnear 
Gay and Lesbian Rights,  David E. Newton
 Globalization,  Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith 
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
 Lobbying in America,  Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan 
 Modern Sports Ethics,  Angela Lumpkin
 Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation,  Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz 
 Obesity,  Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
 Policing in America,  Leonard A. Steverson
 Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources,  Zachary A. Smith and 
Katrina D. Taylor
 Rich and Poor in America,  Geoffrey Gilbert
 Sentencing,  Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
 U.S. National Security,  Cynthia A. Watson 
 U.S. Social Security,  Steven G. Livingston
 U.S. Trade Issues,   Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
 Waste Management,  Jacqueline Vaughn
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other 
primary-source material, a directory of organizations and 
agencies, annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, 
and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding of 
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing 
the world today. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 SEXUAL HEALTH 
 A Reference Handbook 
 David E. Newton 
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES 
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

 Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Newton, David E.
 Sexual health : a reference handbook / David E. Newton.
  p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-366-8 (alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-367-5 (ebook) 
 1. Hygiene, Sexual. 2. Sex—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title.
 RA788.N49 2010
 613.9'5—dc22   2009037221 
 14 13 12 11 10 1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper.  
Manufactured in the United States of America.

 For Gary Sikkema, worthy student, fellow traveler on the 
road of life, good friend! 

This page intentionally left blank 

ix
 Contents 
 List of Tables, xv
 Preface, xvii  
 1 
Background and History, 1
Introduction, 1
Sexually Transmitted Infections, 2
An Ancient Issue, 2
Types of Infections, 3
Symptoms, Prognosis, and Treatment, 5
Chlamydia, 5
Syphilis, 6
Gonorrhea, 8
Herpes, 9
Hepatitis, 10
HIV/AIDS, 12
Pregnancy and Contraception, 14
Barrier Methods, 15
Hormonal Methods, 17
Intrauterine Devices, 19
Fertility Awareness and Abstinence, 19
Sterilization, 20
A Concluding Observation, 21
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity, 21
Terminology, 22
Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender, and Questioning 
Youth Issues, 24
Options for GLBTQ Youth, 26
Progress: A Mixed Blessing?, 28 
References, 28

x Contents
 2 
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
Introduction, 31
Sex Education: Yes or No?, 33
Public Opinion on Sex Education, 34
The Content of Sex Education Courses, 36
Abstinence-Only Education, 36
Condom Instruction, 42
Homosexuality, 44
Abortion, 50
What Should Schools Teach about Sex?, 52
Issues That Transcend School Programs, 53
Access to Contraceptive Devices, 53
Access to Contraceptives outside of Schools, 57
The Controversy over Plan B, 58
Pharmacist Choice in Filling Contraceptive Prescriptions, 59
Human Papillomavirus (HPV), 62
In Conclusion, 65 
References, 66
 3 
Worldwide Perspective, 75
Sex Education, 76
Europe, 76
Asia and Australasia, 81
The Muslim World, 84
Latin America, 85
Africa, 87
New Issues of Concern in Human  Sexuality, 87
The HIV/AIDS Pandemic, 88
Other Sexually Transmitted Infections, 94
Contraception and Family Planning, 96
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity, 98 
References, 101
 4 
Chronology , 107
 5 
Biographical Sketches , 127
 Mary Steichen Calderone , 127
 Min-Chueh Chang , 129
 Anthony Comstock , 130
 Paul Ehrlich , 131
 Kevin Jennings , 132
 Alfred Kinsey , 133

Contents xi
 Charles Knowlton , 135
 Beverly LaHaye , 136
 Hideyo Noguchi , 137
 Elise Ottesen-Jensen , 138
 Robert Parlin , 139
 Paul VI , 140
 Gregory Goodwin Pincus , 141
 John Rock , 142
 John D. Rockefeller III , 143
 Margaret Sanger , 145
 Matthew Shepard , 146
 Marie Stopes , 148
 Brandon Teena , 149
 Karolina Olivia Widerström , 150
 Harald zur Hausen , 151
References, 152
 6 
Data and Documents , 153
Documents, 153
Texas Sex Education Law (1995), 153
Separate Program for Abstinence Education (1996), 154
Memorandum for the Administrator of the United 
States Agency for International Development (2001), 
156
South Dakota House Bill 1215 (2006), 157
Responsible Education About Life Act (2007), 159
Mandatory HPV Vaccination (2007), 161
Access to Birth Control Act (2007), 163
Mexico City Policy (2009), 167
Court Cases, 168
Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) , 168
Roe v. Wade (1973) , 170
Curtis v. School Committee of Falmouth (1995) , 171
Parker v. Hurley , 474 F. Supp. 2d 261 (2007) , 174
Gonzalez v. School Board of Okeechobee County (2008) , 177
 Reports , 180
 The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Promote 
Sexual Health and Responsible Sexual Behavior 
(2001) , 180
 The Content of Federally Funded Abstinence-only 
Education Programs (2004) , 182
 Data , 184

xii Contents
 Cases of Sexually Transmitted Diseases Reported by 
State Health Departments and Rates per 100,000 
Population: United States, 1941–2007 , 184
 Estimated Number of Cases of Other Sexually 
Transmitted Infections in the 
United States, 1966–2007 , 184
 Characteristics of Women Who Obtained Legal 
Abortions—United States, 1973–2005 , 188
 Pregnancy and Live Birthrates for Females 
15–19 Years of Age, by Age, Race, 
and Hispanic Origin: United States, 
Selected Years, 1980–2000 , 192
 Percentage of High School Students Who Were 
Currently Sexually Active, Who Used a Condom 
during or Birth Control Pills before Last Sexual 
Intercourse, by Sex, Race/Ethnicity, and 
Grade, 2003 , 193
 Worldwide Data on HIV/AIDS, 2008 , 194
 Estimated Number of Orphans Due to AIDS, 2008 , 194
 7 
Directory of Organizations, Associations, 
and Agencies , 197
 Governmental Agencies , 197
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) , 197
 Division of STD Prevention (DSTDP) Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention , 198
 The Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and 
Reproduction , 198
 National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
(NIAID) , 199
 Office of Population Affairs (OPA), Office of 
Public Health and Science, U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services , 200
 United Nations Population Fund (UNPF) , 200
 World Health Organization (WHO) , 201
 Nongovernmental Agencies , 202
 Abortion Access Project (AAP) , 202
 Abstinence the Better Choice (ABC) , 202
 Advocates for Youth , 203
 American Association of Sex Educators, 
Counselors and Therapists (AASECT) , 203

Contents xiii
 American Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
Association (ASTDA) , 204
 American Social Health Association (ASHA) , 204
 Association of Reproductive Health 
Professionals (ARHP) , 205
AVERT, 205
 Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health , 206
 BOMA-USA , 206
 Catholics for Choice (CFC) , 207
 Center for Reproductive Rights (CRC) , 207
 Centre for Development and Population 
Activities (CEDPA) , 208
 Concerned Women for America (CWA) , 209
 Contraceptive Research and Development 
Program (CONRAD) , 209
 Couple to Couple League (CCL) , 210
 EngenderHealth , 211
 Family Health International (FHI) , 211
 Family Research Council (FRC) , 212
 Focus on the Family , 212
 Guttmacher Institute (GI) , 213
 International Consortium on Emergency Contraception 
(ICEC) , 213
 International Society for Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases Research (ISSTDR) , 214
 International Union against Sexually Transmitted 
Infections (IUSTI) , 214
 Ipas , 215
 Kaiser Family Foundation , 215
 NARAL—Pro-Choice America , 216
 National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned 
Pregnancy , 216
 National Right to Life (NRL) , 217
 National Women’s Health Resource Center (NWHRC) , 218
 Pharmacy Access Partnership , 218
 Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA) , 219
 Population Action International (PAI) , 219
 Population Council (PC) , 220
 Pro-Choice Public Education Project (PEP) , 221
 Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice (RCRC) , 221
 Reproductive Health Technologies Project (RHTP) , 222

xiv Contents
 Sexuality Information and Education Council of the 
United States (SIECUS) , 223
 United States Conference of Bishops , 223
 Young People’s Sexual Health (YPSH) , 224
 Gay and Lesbian Youth Group , 224
 Gay and Lesbian Community Center of the Ozarks 
(GLCCO) , 225
 Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network (GLSEN) , 225
 Human Rights Campaign (HRC) , 225
 Matthew Shepard Foundation (MSF) , 226
 Parents, Families & Friends of Lesbians & Gays (PFLAG) , 
226
 Sexual Minority Youth Assistance League (SMYAL) , 227
 Utah Pride Center , 227
 Youth Guardian Services (YGS) , 228
 Youth Pride , 228
 8 
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources , 231
General, 231
Books, 231
Articles, 233
Reports, 236
Web Sites, 239
Sexually Transmitted Infections, 241
Books, 241
Articles, 243
Reports, 245
Web Sites, 248
Contraception and Abortion, 250
Books, 250
Articles, 252
Reports, 254
Web Sites, 256
Sexual Identity and Sexual Orientation, 260
Books, 260
Articles, 262
Reports, 264
Web Sites, 267
 Glossary , 269
 Index , 277
 About the Author , 291

xv
 List of Tables 
 1.1 
Cases of Certain STIs in the United States, 2007 , 5
 1.2 
Effectiveness of Various Contraceptive Methods , 16
 3.1 
Youth Education on Sexual Orientation in 16 European 
Countries , 100
 6.1 
Cases of Sexually Transmitted Diseases Reported by State 
Health Departments and Rates Per 100,000 Population: 
United States, 1941–2007 , 185
 6.2 
Estimated Number of Cases of Other Sexually Transmitted 
Infections in the United States, 1966–2007 , 189
 6.3 
Characteristics of Women Who Obtained Legal Abortions—
United States, 1973–2005 , 190
 6.4 
Pregnancy and Live Birthrates for Females 15–19 Years 
of Age, by Age, Race, and Hispanic Origin: United States, 
Selected Years, 1980–2000 , 193
 6.5 
Percentage of High School Students Who Were Currently 
Sexually Active, Who Used a Condom During or Birth 
Control Pills before Last Sexual Intercourse, by Sex, Race/
Ethnicity, and Grade, 2003 , 194
 6.6 
Worldwide Data on HIV/AIDS, 2008 , 195
 6.7 
Estimated Number of Orphans due to AIDS, 2008 , 196

This page intentionally left blank 

xvii
 Preface 
 A
dolescence is a period of great turmoil in a person’s life. A 
flood of hormones changes the body of a girl into that of a 
woman, the body of a boy into that of a man, often at a rapid 
pace. The relative calm and peacefulness of childhood is replaced 
by a rush of new biological sensations, emotional feelings, social 
challenges and interpersonal questions with which one has never 
had to deal before. For the first time, a person has to think about 
relating with other individuals of the same and opposite sex in 
new ways, ways that involve the possibility of sexual contact and 
intercourse. 
 But sexuality, for all the joys and physical pleasures it brings, 
is a risky human behavior. When two bodies come into contact, a 
host of possibilities arise. Some of these possibilities are glorious, 
the chance of bringing new life into the world. But some possi-
bilities are less than wonderful. In the first place, the chance of 
bringing new life into the world may not be the best possible out-
come for two 16-year-olds who have just been introduced to the 
experience of sexual activity. They may have too much of their 
adolescence left before them to contemplate starting a family 
of their own. How do teenagers feeling the power of hormonal 
drives develop control over their emotional feelings and physical 
desires to make sure they do not find themselves in an impos-
sible family situation? It is thus that family planning can become 
an issue of serious consequence for young people who are barely 
beyond the stage of childhood themselves. Society must find a 
way to provide information and guidance for teenagers faced 
with such problems. Some people argue that the family is the best 
or only place for such discussions to occur. Other people see that 
education in human sexuality is a reasonable and desirable func-
tion of the school also. Still other people look to other agencies—

xviii Preface
religious groups, health centers, nongovernmental organizations, 
and the like—to provide these services. 
 Sexual contact between two people can also have profound 
health consequences. Sometimes, diseases can be spread that are 
irritating and inconvenient, but hardly life threatening. Still, they 
are conditions with which a person has to deal. In other cases, 
sexually transmitted infections can, indeed, be among the most 
serious diseases a person can contract, even resulting in death. 
The HIV/AIDS pandemic has made the modern world more 
aware of that fact than any disease in modern history. Teenag-
ers need information as to how they can avoid such infections. 
Again, adults differ as to the best way to achieve this objective, 
with some arguing for sexual abstinence until marriage as the 
only way to avoid the risk of pregnancy as well as that of sexu-
ally transmitted infections. Others say that the human sex drive is 
so strong that expecting adolescents to be abstinent is unrealistic, 
and society must find ways to teach teenagers about the ways of 
avoiding not only pregnancy, but also diseases that can be spread 
through sexual contact. 
 Finally, adolescence is also a period when many boys and 
girls begin to question their own sexual orientation and gender 
identity, questions that they almost certainly have never thought 
about before. Almost-men find themselves physically and emo-
tionally attracted to other males, and almost-women find them-
selves drawn to other females. And on another level entirely, 
some males may begin to question the concordance (or lack of it) 
between their biological gender (male or female) and how they 
feel in the depths of their hearts about their own gender. 
 The sex drive so deeply ingrained in human beings is, thus, 
the source of countless issues and controversies as one grows 
through adolescence. And given the depth of feeling that most 
people have about sexual issues, it is hardly surprising that some 
of these issues and controversies are at the center of the greatest 
social and political debates in progress in the United States and 
around the world. This books attempts to provide an introduc-
tion to those issues and to resources available for analyzing them 
further. The first chapter of the book provides some broad gen-
eral background about the process of conception and the methods 
by which it can be controlled; an introduction to the subject of 
sexually transmitted infections; and a discussion of the develop-
ment of sexual orientation and gender identity. Chapter 2 of the 
book discusses some of the issues surrounding pregnancy and 

Preface xix
 contraception, sexually transmitted infections, and sexual ori-
entation and gender identity. It attempts to present an unbiased 
review of arguments for and against a number of specific issues 
with which society is now dealing, questions such as the type of 
sex education children and adolescents should have, the role of 
educational institutions in providing contraceptive information 
and materials, and the extent to which schools should become in-
volved in discussions of same-sex relationships. 
 Chapter 3 looks to the status of many of these same issues in 
countries around the world. Given varying cultural, social, and 
religious attitudes toward human sexuality, it is hardly surprising 
that almost every philosophy and set of practices about the edu-
cation of young people about sexuality can be found somewhere 
in the world. This chapter reviews some of those philosophies 
and practices. Chapters 4 through 8 provide resource materials 
intended for those readers who would like to learn more about 
these topics. Chapter 4 provides a chronology of important events 
related to the issues discussed in this book, while Chapter 5 pro-
vides biographical sketches of some important individuals in the 
history of human sexuality. 
 Chapter 6 contains excerpts from some important documents 
dealing with issues related to human sexuality: laws, regulations, 
policy statements, court decisions, and statistics and data. Chap-
ter 7 lists a number of print and electronic resources to which the 
reader can turn for more detailed information on any of the topics 
discussed in the book, while Chapter 8 lists organizations inter-
ested in issues of sexual health to whom one can turn for further 
information. Finally, a glossary provides definitions of some basic 
terms used in the book. 

This page intentionally left blank 

1
 1 
 Background and History 
 Introduction 
 Aaron was stunned. He had never expected to get a telephone 
call like this one. The public health nurse wanted him to come 
in . . . to be tested for syphilis! His friend, Dale, had just been to 
the clinic and tested positive for syphilis. Dale had named Aaron 
as a sexual contact. Now Aaron had to be tested too. 
 Aaron knew that syphilis was a dangerous disease. He had 
heard that people went blind and even died from the disease. 
What had he done wrong? Should he have been more careful? 
Dale was a good friend. Why had Dale not told him about the 
possible risks of their having sex together? Could the infection 
be cured? Maybe he could find something in the drug store to 
take against the disease. Aaron was so embarrassed! How could 
he ever face Dale again? Or any of his friends? Or his family? 
 Many people experience medical problems associated with 
their reproductive systems at least once in their lives. Such prob-
lems are usually—but not always—the result of contact with an-
other person, as with Aaron and Dale. They may be a question 
of disease, as in cases involving syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, 
HIV/AIDS, or a number of other conditions. Or they may in-
volve issues of contraception, in the case of a sexual contact that 
may have resulted in pregnancy. Or they may involve emotional 
rather than physical issues, centering on questions about a per-
son’s sexual identity or sexual orientation. This chapter provides 
background on these three large areas of sexual health: sexually 
transmitted infections, contraception and pregnancy, and sexual 
identity and sexual orientation. 

2 Background and History
 Sexually Transmitted Infections 
 The issue with which Aaron has to deal involves a group of dis-
eases known collectively as sexually transmitted infections (STIs). 
At one time (and still among many individuals), the diseases 
were known as sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) or vene-
real disease s  (VDs). Diseases that fall into this category include 
amebiasis, bacterial vaginosis, campylobacter fetus, candidiasis, 
chancroid, chlamydia, condyloma acuminata, cytomegalovirus, 
enteric infections, genital mycoplasmas, genital warts, giardiasis, 
gonorrhea, granuloma inguinale, hepatitis, herpes, HIV disease, 
lymphogranuloma venereum, molluscum contagiosum, pedicu-
losis pubis, salmonella, scabies, shingellosis, syphilis, trichomo-
niasis, yeast infections, and vaginitis. 
 Some of these diseases are rare and unfamiliar to most people; 
others are very common and a problem for many people. Some 
diseases are mild and pose little threat to a person who develops 
the condition; others are life-threatening. In any case, all STIs are 
medical problems, that is, they are caused by specific microorgan-
isms, such as bacteria or viruses; they can be recognized by certain 
characteristic signs and symptoms; they may have both short- and 
long-term consequences for one’s overall health; and they usually 
can be treated and, in many cases, cured. 
 But, like many medical issues, sexually transmitted infec-
tions have nonmedical consequences in one’s life: social, moral, 
ethical, legal, and emotional, for example. Even the possibility of 
having syphilis for Aaron means more than simply having to go 
to the hospital, being tested, and being treated. It also means the 
possibility of assessing one’s own sexual practices, talking with 
close friends and family, and reconsidering what one knows and 
believes about himself or herself as a person. These issues come 
wrapped not only in the experience of dealing with STIs, but in 
dealing with any issue related to one’s sexual health, including 
pregnancy and contraception, and one’s sexual identity and sex-
ual orientation. Medical issues that almost anyone can deal with 
in a relatively emotion-free state become especially troubling 
when they have to do with one’s reproductive system. 
 An Ancient Issue 
 Venereal diseases have been a major medical problem in the world 
for at least five centuries, and probably much longer than that. 

Types of Infections 3
Part of the problem in unraveling the history of these diseases 
in history is that ancient records do not offer unambiguous clini-
cal symptoms that allow a modern reader to determine precisely 
what disease a person has. Thus, some scholars find passages in 
the Bible itself that appear to refer to syphilis, such as references 
that might indicate that Abraham’s wife, Sarah, may have had the 
disease (Cohen 1991, 166). Considerable debate among experts 
has developed over attempts to decide the sexually transmitted 
diseases to which ancient writers from the time of ancient China 
and the Egyptians may have alluded (see, for example, Goldman 
1971; Heymann 2006; Rothschild 2005; Willcox 1949). 
 What seems to be clear is that the first mention of sexually 
transmitted infections in Western Europe dates to about 1495, 
when a disease called the great pox (to distinguish it from small-
pox) broke out among French troops besieging Naples (McAllister 
2000). As was to become a common pattern, the French blamed the 
disease on their enemies and called it the Italian disease. Later, the 
Italians themselves called the disease the French disease; the Dutch 
called it the Spanish disease; the Russians called it the Polish dis-
ease; the Turks called it the Christian disease; and much later, the 
Tahitians called it the British disease. These names reflected the fact 
that the disease commonly showed up in port cities, where it was 
presumably introduced by sailors arriving from another country. 
 In any case, the epidemiology and symptomology of syphilis 
were poorly known until at least the end of the 18th century. It 
was not until 1767 that syphilis and gonorrhea were even recog-
nized as separate diseases. In that year, Scottish physician John 
Hunter infected himself with pus from a patient with gonorrhea, 
only to discover that he later developed symptoms not only of 
that disease, but also of syphilis. He was able to track the devel-
opment of the latter disease, describing in careful detail for the 
first time the stages through which the disease developed until, in 
1793, it caused an aneurysm responsible for his death (Androut-
sos, Magiorkinis, and Diamantis 2008). 
 Types of Infections 
 As noted previously, sexually transmitted infections can range 
from harmless, but annoying diseases to serious and poten-
tially fatal conditions. An example of the former is the condition 
known as Pediculosis pubis . The term  pediculosis  refers to a group 

4 Background and History
of  infections caused by a group of insects that belong to the order 
Phthiraptera. These are tiny insects that live off blood and typi-
cally attach themselves to the base of a hair, from which they feed 
off their host. Perhaps the best-known example of the pest is  Pe-
diculosis capitis , the common head louse. Its close cousin,  Pedicu-
losis pubis , occurs most commonly in the pubic region, although 
it may also be found in other hairy areas, such as the eyelashes 
or in underarm hair. The most common symptom of an infection 
by this insect is itchiness, which becomes more severe over time. 
The only long-term problem is that scratching of infected areas 
may produce sores, which themselves may lead to more serious 
infections. The disease is readily treated with a variety of over-
the-counter medications which, although not necessarily 100 per-
cent effective, will eventually cure the problem. 
 Most STIs are of considerably more concern than  Pediculosis
pubis . The American Social Health Association has assembled a 
number of important statistics about these diseases. First, more 
than half of all Americans will contract a sexually transmitted in-
fection at some point during their lifetime. Second, about 65 mil-
lion Americans are currently living with some type of STI, and 
about 19 million new cases are reported every year. Third, about 
half of all new cases of STI occur among men and women age 15 
to 24. Fourth, each year in the United States, about one in four 
teenagers contract one type of STI. Fifth, fewer than a third of all 
U.S. physicians routinely screen for STIs. Sixth, about one half of 
all sexually active men and women will contract at least one STI 
before the age of 25 (American Social Health Association 2009). 
 The most common sexually transmitted infection in the 
United States is chlamydia. In 2007, 1,108,374 cases of chlamydia 
were reported to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC) in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Experts 
believe that the true number of cases is probably much larger, 
perhaps as many as 2,291,000, because many women do not real-
ize that they have the infection. Such is the case with other STIs, 
which always raises questions about the accuracy of STI statistics. 
Not only are people sometime unaware or unwilling to report an 
STI, but also figures for various diseases are difficult to compare 
because some public health departments may be required by law 
to report the number of cases for some diseases, but not for oth-
ers. In any case, the number of cases of the most important sexu-
ally transmitted diseases for 2007 (the last year for which data are 
available) is shown in Table 1.1. 

Types of Infections 5
 Symptoms, Prognosis, and Treatment 
 For each specific sexually transmitted infection, a set of basic in-
formation is useful. The first is the signs and symptoms of the 
disease, the physical conditions associated with the disease, con-
ditions such as fever, nausea, blurred vision, and achy muscles. 
The second set of information concerns prognosis, the likely 
course of the disease. The third set of information relates to treat-
ments that are available, both for relief of symptoms and possible 
cure, as well as for prevention of the disease in the first place. This 
outline serves as the basis for the discussion of the following sexu-
ally transmitted infections. 
 Chlamydia 
 Chlamydia is the most common sexually transmitted infection in 
the United States. It is caused by the bacterium Chlamydia tracho-
matis,  which is transmitted most commonly by any type of sexual 
activity in which body parts come into contact with each other. 
The disease can also be transmitted from a woman to a newborn 
baby during childbirth. The disease occurs most commonly among 
TABLE 1.1
Cases of Certain STIs in the United States, 2007
Disease
Number of Cases
Chlamydia
1,108,374
Gonorrhea
355,991
Genital herpes
317,000
Genital warts
312,000
Vaginal trichomoniasis
205,000
Pelvic inflammatory disease
146,000
Syphilis
40,920
HIV/AIDS
35,962
Hepatitis1
8,347
Chancroid
23
Sources: Division of STD Prevention, Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance 2007 (Washington, D.C.: Department 
of Health And Human Services. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention. Division of STD Prevention, December 2008), table 1, p. 100; Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, “Basic Statistics,” http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/basic.htm#aidscases; 
“Surveillance for Acute Viral Hepatitis—United States, 2007,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 58 (SS-3; 
May 22, 2009), table 2, p. 11.
1 Hepatitis A: 2,979; hepatitis B: 4,519; hepatitis C: 849

6 Background and History
women, causing abnormal vaginal discharge, discomfort during 
urination, and some itchiness. Men who have chlamydia may 
experience an unusual discharge from the penis and some pain 
and burning during urination. Perhaps the most important point 
about chlamydia, however, is that no symptoms may appear, and 
a person may be unaware that he or she has the infection. This fact 
is troublesome because in women the infection may spread from 
its initial site in the vagina into the urethra and cervix, where it 
can cause long-term reproductive problems, such as sterility. The 
most serious consequence of untreated chlamydial infection is 
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), which can cause permanent 
damage to the fallopian tubes and other parts of the reproductive 
system. Experts estimate that 40 percent of all untreated chlamyd-
ial infections eventually result in a PID infection. The most serious 
health consequence of PID is an ectopic pregnancy (a pregnancy 
that occurs outside the uterus), which can result in death. 
 As with many STIs, the more serious consequences of chla-
mydia can be avoided by early detection and treatment. The 
Chlamydia trachomatis  bacterium is easily killed with antibiotics, 
azithromycin or doxycycline being the drugs of choice. The best 
way to avoid a chlamydial infection is abstinence, not having 
sexual contact with another person, but that option is difficult 
or impossible for most people. Alternatively, one should be open 
with a sexual partner about her or his health status in order to 
avoid contact with someone who is or may be infected. The CDC 
also recommends annual tests for chlamydia for all sexually ac-
tive women under the age of 25 and for older women who have 
risk factors for the disease, such as a number of sexual partners or 
many new partners. 
 Syphilis 
 Historically the most feared of all STIs, syphilis has gradually 
come under control in the United States and most other parts of 
the world. In the United States, the number of syphilis cases has 
fallen from more than 485,000 in 1941 to a low of less than 32,000 
in 2000. It has since increased moderately to just over 40,000 in 
2007 (Division of STD Prevention 2008, 100). 
 Syphilis is caused by the microorganism  Treponema pallidum , 
belonging to the Spirochaetaceae family, which gets its name from 
the spiral-shaped appearance of its members. The microorgan-
ism survives reasonably well in the warm, moist environment of 

Types of Infections 7
the mucous membranes that line the mouth, vagina, rectum, and 
other parts of the human body, but it dies quickly in almost any 
other environment. It is transmitted from one person to another 
during any act in which two individuals come into close contact, 
such as during oral, anal, or vaginal sexual contact. Because the 
organism is fragile, however, contact between an infected and 
uninfected person does not guarantee that the second individual 
will develop the disease. 
 If transmission does occur, symptoms do not appear until the 
organism has become established and started to multiply. This pe-
riod of incubation may range anywhere from about 9 to 90 days, 
with an average of about three weeks, during which time a person 
is asymptomatic (does not shown signs of infection). At this point, 
an ugly sore, or chancre, may appear at the site of contact. The 
chancre is a symptom of the  primary stage  of syphilis. The chancre 
may develop on the penis, vagina, rectum, or mouth and, in some 
cases, may appear to be no more than a simple pimple that is easy 
to ignore. In other cases, it is larger and may break open, forming 
an ugly, hard-to-ignore open sore. In any case, if left untreated, 
the chancre or sore heals within two to four weeks. An individual 
may easily conclude that the disease has disappeared and requires 
no further attention. 
 Such is not the case, however, as the spirochetes that cause 
the disease remain in the body, growing and multiplying within 
the bloodstream. At some point—at any time between one and 
six months, with an average of six to eight weeks—a new set of 
symptoms will appear. These symptoms include a skin rash that 
covers all or part of the body, most characteristically on the palms 
of the hands or soles of the feet, where rashes normally do not 
occur. In about a quarter of all cases, an individual will also expe-
rience flu-like symptoms, including headache, sore throat, runny 
nose, nausea, and constipation. Other symptoms include fever 
and weight loss and, in some cases, loss of hair. A person is most 
contagious during this stage of the disease. 
 If untreated, these symptoms may also disappear, again 
prompting a person to conclude that the disease has disappeared. 
Again, this conclusion is erroneous because the spirochete re-
mains in the body, although it has now stopped growing and 
multiplying. No further symptoms may appear for a very long 
time—known as the latent period—before reappearing months 
or years after the initial infection. At that point, the most serious 
stage of syphilis—known as late or tertiary syphilis—develops. 

8 Background and History
This stage of the disease is characterized by a number of very seri-
ous disorders affecting the muscular, cardiovascular, and nervous 
systems that disable and damage a person’s body. The disease 
may eventually end in death. 
 Shortly after the first cases of syphilis had been reported on 
the Italian peninsula in about 1495, a method for treating the dis-
ease had been developed—the use of mercury salts which had 
previously been used to treat leprosy and other diseases of the 
skin. In fact, for more than 500 years, mercury compounds re-
mained the drugs of choice for dealing with the disease, in spite 
of the fact that such compounds are themselves poisonous. Thus, 
in many cases, the cure was worse than the disease, prompting 
the famous saying, “Spend one night with Venus [the goddess of 
love]; spend the rest of your life with Mercury (Candida Marti-
nelli’s Italophile Site 2009). That situation finally changed in 1910, 
when German bacteriologist Paul Ehrlich (1854–1915) discovered 
a chemical called arsphenamine that was effective in killing the 
syphilis spirochete. Arsphenamine was marketed under the name 
of Salvarsan, or 606, the latter name reflecting the fact that it was 
the 606th drug that Ehrlich had tried in his effort to find a treat-
ment for syphilis. 
 Today, syphilis is easily treated in its early stages. A single 
dose of penicillin given during the primary stage will kill the spi-
rochetes that cause the disease. For individuals who are in more 
advanced stages of the disease, a series of inoculations are neces-
sary, and for anyone allergic to penicillin, alternative antibiotics 
are available. Thus, the disease that once was the scourge of most 
of the world can be cured more easily than the common cold. 
 Gonorrhea 
 Gonorrhea is caused by the bacterium  Neisseria gonorrhoeae , which 
like the causative agent of all STIs, grows in any moist, warm re-
gion of the body, ranging from the reproductive tract to the anus 
to the mouth and eyes. Women are often asymptomatic for gonor-
rhea, or symptoms may be so mild as to be mistaken for a simple 
bladder or vaginal infection. Men may also be asymptomatic, al-
though they more commonly experience a burning sensation or 
pain during urination and/or a discharge from the penis. These 
symptoms appear anywhere from 1 to 30 days after exposure, 
with an average of 3 to 5 days. As with syphilis, untreated cases of 
gonorrhea eventually go into remission and symptoms disappear. 
But also as with syphilis, disease organisms have not disappeared 

Types of Infections 9
from the body and may cause more serious problems at a later 
date. For men, these problems may include urethritis, prostatitis, 
and epididymitis, which can result in sterility. For women, the 
most serious complication from untreated gonorrheal infection is 
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), which can range from mild to 
severe. About a million American women develop PID each year, 
with gonorrheal infections being an important cause. In the most 
serious cases, PID can be very painful, causing damage to the fal-
lopian tubes and increasing the chance of an ectopic pregnancy. 
 Although the  Neisseria gonorrhoeae  bacterium is killed by a 
number of antibiotics, treatment of the disease has become more 
difficult in recent years because of the evolution of drug-resistant 
strains of the microorganism. In 2007, the CDC issued new recom-
mendations for the treatment of these drug-resistant forms of the 
disease which make use of the antibiotics ceftriaxone, cefixime, 
or spectinomycin (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
2009b).
 Herpes 
 The term  herpes  refers to a large number of diseases in humans 
and other animals caused by one of more than a dozen different 
viruses. Eight of those diseases affecting humans are caused by 
viruses classified as human herpesvirus 1 through 8, which are 
responsible for diseases such as chicken pox and shingles (human 
herpesvirus 4), infectious mononucleosis (human herpesvirus 5), 
and Kaposi’s sarcoma (human herpesvirus 8). The two sexually 
transmitted forms of the disease are caused by human herpesvi-
rus 1 and 2, better known as herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 
2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2). HSV-1 and HSV-2 are very similar to each 
other, sharing about 50 percent of their DNA. The most impor-
tant difference between the two types is their preferred sites in the 
body. HSV-1 most commonly resides in nerve cells near the ear, 
while HSV-2 tends to become established in nerve tissue at the 
base of the spine. When HSV-1 becomes active, it most commonly 
causes the painful but relatively harmless condition known as 
cold sores or fever blisters. When HSV-2 becomes active, it is re-
sponsible for the development of the condition known as genital 
herpes, a painful infection of the genital area. Either form of the 
virus can cause an infection in either part of the body, although 
the distribution described here tends to be most common. 
 As with all STIs, herpes infections are spread by intimate con-
tact between an infected person and an uninfected person. The 

10 Background and History
first signs of the disease include blister-like sores that may be very 
painful and may be accompanied by fever and flu-like symptoms. 
In many cases, symptoms do not appear, and a person may not be 
aware that she or he has been infected with the virus. According to 
some estimates, more than one in five American adults have been 
infected with HSV-2 at some time in their lives, most of whom are 
not aware of that fact (Herpes.com 2009). The incubation period 
for the disease is about two weeks, and any sores that appear tend 
to disappear another two to four weeks later. As with other STIs, 
the disappearance of symptoms is not an indication that the dis-
ease has been cured, however. Instead, the viruses responsible for 
the disease remain embedded in nerve tissue and may become 
activated again at a future date. The number and severity of ad-
ditional outbreaks vary significantly from person to person and 
appear to be dependent on three major factors: (1) the severity of 
the first outbreak (that is, the ability of a person’s immune system 
to combat the first appearance of the virus); (2) the length of time 
a person has been infected (the number and severity of infections 
tend to decrease over time); and (3) the variety of virus causing 
the infection (HSV-1–caused genital herpes tends to be less severe 
than HSV-2–caused genital herpes). 
 Genital herpes tends to receive bad press from the general 
public, largely because people are embarrassed to have sexual 
partners or others find out about their condition. From a medi-
cal standpoint, however, the disease is usually no more serious 
(although just as uncomfortable and inconvenient) as a cold sore 
(Herpes.com 2009). Somewhat uncommonly, genital herpes may 
progress to more serious conditions, and, perhaps, may be associ-
ated with increased risk for other viral infections, especially HIV/
AIDS. The most serious consequence of genital herpes is potential 
infection of a newborn child during birth to a woman with the 
infection, a condition that is potentially fatal for the child. 
 There is currently no cure for genital herpes, although medi-
cations are available to relieve its symptoms. Three commonly 
recommended drugs are the antivirals famciclovir, acyclovir, and 
valacyclovir. 
 Hepatitis 
 Hepatitis is an inflammation of tissues in the liver. The disease can 
be caused by a number of factors, including alcohol abuse. Hepa-
titis can be either acute, in which case the disease lasts less than 

Types of Infections 11
about six months, or chronic, in which case it continues for an 
extended period of time. Most cases of acute hepatitis are caused 
by a group of viruses designated as hepatitis virus A, hepatitis 
virus B, hepatitis virus C, hepatitis virus D, and hepatitis virus 
E. Other possible hepatitis viruses have been hypothesized, but 
not yet confirmed. The diseases caused by these viruses have the 
same names as the viruses themselves: hepatitis A, hepatitis B, 
hepatitis C (originally called non-A, non-B), hepatitis D, and hep-
atitis E. The first two of these forms are the most common sexually 
transmitted forms of hepatitis. 
Hepatitis A  was formerly called infectious hepatitis. It is trans-
mitted through contaminated food or water and by means of oral-
anal sex. In oral sex, one person places his or her mouth on the anus 
of a second person, often coming into contact with contaminated 
fecal matter in the process. That fecal matter, as well as contami-
nated food or water, may contain the hepatitis virus A responsible 
for the disease. Symptoms of the disease normally appear about 
two to six weeks after exposure and mimic flu symptoms: fever, 
nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, fatigue, and loss of appetite. 
One of the clearest symptoms, as it is for all forms of hepatitis, is 
jaundice, a yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes. The 
disease usually runs its course in about two to six months, after 
which most people recover completely. The disease does not recur 
because the immune system has developed antibodies to the virus, 
and long-term serious effects are rare, and generally due to other 
infections that may be present at the same time. No treatment is 
available for a hepatitis A infection, although a vaccine is available. 
The CDC recommends that travelers expecting to visit countries 
with less than optimal food and water supplies be vaccinated for 
hepatitis A. People who plan to engage in oral-anal sex should also 
be aware of the possible health issues involved in this activity. 
Hepatitis B  was formerly called serum hepatitis because it can 
be transmitted through contaminated blood and blood products. 
It is one of the most common diseases in the world, with an esti-
mated two billion individuals having been exposed to the hepati-
tis B virus. The most important means of transmission are blood 
transfusions that involve contaminated blood, unprotected sexual 
activities, sharing of contaminated needles, and transmission from 
a woman to her child during childbirth. The symptoms associated 
with hepatitis B are similar to those for hepatitis A but include the 
appearance of clay-colored bowel movements, a very distinctive 
symptom of the infection. Symptoms may appear anywhere from 

12 Background and History
six weeks to six months, but most commonly about 90 days, after 
exposure. In the vast majority of cases, symptoms clear (disap-
pear) after a few weeks or months, and reoccurrence of the dis-
ease is unlikely. In a small number of cases, the disease becomes 
chronic, with the virus remaining in a person’s bloodstream for 
many years. In the most serious cases, the infection may eventu-
ally lead to cirrhosis of the liver (in which normal liver tissue is 
replaced by scar tissue), liver cancer, and even death. Seven drugs 
are currently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for the treatment of hepatitis B infections: lamivudine, ad-
efovir, tenofovir, telbivudine, entecavir, interferon alpha-2a, and 
pegylated interferon alfa-2a. The decision as to whether to begin 
treatment for a hepatitis B infection and which drug to use should 
be made on a case-by-case basis discussion between a patient and 
her or his physician. A vaccine for hepatitis B is also available and 
is recommended for travelers who plan to visit areas in which the 
risk for infection is high and for other individuals at risk for infec-
tion in their daily lives, including those who are sexually active 
with a number of different partners. 
 HIV/AIDS 
 The acronym HIV stands for  human immunodeficiency virus , the 
agent responsible for acquired immune deficiency syndrome 
(AIDS). The first cases of HIV/AIDS were seen in the United 
States in the early 1980s. HIV spread rapidly through the gay 
community, among intravenous drug users and Haitians, among 
hemophiliacs, and finally to the heterosexual community, both in 
the United States and throughout the world. Today the disease is 
regarded as a worldwide pandemic, meaning an epidemic that 
has spread over a wide geographical area. In its latest report, the 
CDC estimated that there were 1,056,400–1,156,400 people in the 
United States living with AIDS, of whom 21 percent were undiag-
nosed. An additional 56,300 new cases of the disease were reported 
in 2006, the last year for which data are available. The CDC also 
estimated that 583,298 people had died of AIDS since it was first 
reported in the 1980s, 14,561 of those deaths having occurred in 
2006 (Department of Health And Human Services. Public Health 
Service. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2008, 14, 20; 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2009b). 
 The term  HIV/AIDS  is often used to describe an infection 
that has a very long incubation period. A person who has become 

Types of Infections 13
 infected may not show symptoms of the disease for many months 
or years. The average time between infection and so-called full-
blown AIDS has been estimated at about 10 years. During this 
period, an individual is usually not aware that he or she has been 
infected. Only a blood test can detect the presence of the AIDS 
virus, and that test may not show results for at least six months 
after infection. 
 During the incubation period, the AIDS virus slowly attacks 
and disables the immune system, exposing an infected individual 
to ever greater risk from a number of diseases against which the 
body is usually able to protect itself. HIV/AIDS is, thus, a progres-
sive disease in which a person’s health gradually worsens. The 
CDC now defines the transition of an HIV infection to full-blown 
AIDS as the point at which a person has a CD4 T-cell count of less 
than 200 or has had one or more opportunistic infections. CD4 
cells are a critical component of the immune system. When they 
decrease sufficiently in number, the body is no longer able to com-
bat diseases very effectively. The term  opportunistic infection refers 
to a number of conditions that are usually relatively harmless be-
cause the immune system is able to combat them effectively. Some 
typical opportunistic infections are a form of pneumonia called 
Pneumocystis jirovecii  (formerly  Pneumocystis carinii ); a rare type 
of cancer, Kaposi’s sarcoma; a type of streptococcus caused by the 
bacterium Streptococcus pyogenes;  and a yeast infection caused by 
the fungus Candida albicans . 
 For the first decade of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, no treat-
ment was available for the disease and death rates were very 
high, generally over 95 percent. Today, a number of medica-
tions have been developed for treating the infection. The most 
effective therapy involves the use of a combination of at least 
three drugs to destroy or inactivate the virus. The availability of 
this cocktail has dramatically reduced the death rate from HIV/
AIDS. Efforts have been made to develop a vaccine against the 
virus, but without success thus far. One problem is that the virus 
tends to evolve rapidly so that a vaccine developed against one 
strain of the virus may not be effective very long. By far the most 
important approach to dealing with the HIV/AIDS epidemic is 
education. The more individuals know about the disease and the 
better they understand the value of and methods for practicing 
safer sex, the better their chances of avoiding becoming infected 
with HIV. The term  safer sex  refers to all those practices that one 
can employ during sexual acts that are likely to reduce the risk 

14 Background and History
of contracting HIV/AIDS or, for that matter, any other sexual 
infection. 
 Pregnancy and Contraception 
 Pregnancy has long been considered one of the preeminent 
events in a woman’s life, the opportunity to bring new life into 
the world. At the same time, pregnancy has been the source of 
anxiety and fear for many women throughout history. One rea-
son for such concern has been the challenge of raising larger and 
larger families. While children have been an economic asset to 
families throughout much of human history (since they provide 
additional labor), they can also be a burden because of the cost of 
rearing and caring for them. Of equal concern to women has been 
the medical risk they face during childbirth. Until recently, bring-
ing a new life into the world could be a medically dangerous ven-
ture. While no valid and reliable statistics are available for most of 
history, most specialists believe that women have always faced a 
relatively high risk of death as a result of childbirth. According to 
a recent study by the World Health Organization (WHO), the pri-
mary causes of maternal death during childbirth are severe bleed-
ing and hemorrhaging, infections, unsafe abortions, eclampsia 
(convulsions associated with the birth process), obstructed labor, 
and the presence of infections and other diseases, such as malaria, 
anemia, and cardiovascular disorders (Department of Reproduc-
tive Health and Research 2004, 45). 
 It should hardly be surprising, then, that women have been 
searching for ways to avoid becoming pregnant or to abort a 
pregnancy as far back as records exist. For thousands of years, of 
course, humans had no understanding of the process by which a 
woman becomes pregnant, so nothing resembling scientific meth-
odology was available for the design of contraceptive methods. 
One approach was to use a variety of substances, applied to the 
vaginal region, to avoid pregnancy. Those substances included 
olive oil, tobacco juice, ginger, beeswax, honey, crocodile dung, 
and lemon juice. Vaginal suppositories made of these materials—
called pessaries—were often used during or just following inter-
course. Oral contraceptives were also employed. They included 
foam from a camel’s mouth, concoctions made of metallic ores, 
alcoholic drinks, and a variety of herbal teas. Physical acts were 
also thought to be helpful. One of the most commonly cited of 

Pregnancy and Contraception 15
these acts was one recommended by the Greek physician Soranus 
of Ephesus (fl. first–second centuries CE ), who suggested that 
women jump backward seven times in order to dislodge sperm in 
their uterus (“A Brief History of Contraceptives” 2009; Herodotus 
Wept 2009). 
 As an understanding of the mechanisms by which concep-
tion occurs developed over the centuries, so did the sophistication 
of technologies designed to prevent conception. Today, a number 
of options are available to a woman who chooses to be sexually 
active, while avoiding pregnancy. Most of those options can be 
classified under one of five categories: barrier methods, such as 
condoms and diaphragms; hormonal methods, such as “The Pill” 
and “The Patch”; emergency methods, such as Plan B; behavioral 
techniques, such as coitus interruptus and abstinence; and abor-
tion. Only the last of these options is not discussed in this book. 
The topic of abortion is so complex and so controversial that it 
cannot be discussed in a general overview like the one presented 
here. The bibliography in Chapter 8, however, lists a number of 
references dealing with the topic. 
 Barrier Methods 
 Any contraceptive technology designed to prevent sperm from 
reaching a woman’s uterus or the eggs it contains is called a bar-
rier method. Many of the oldest methods of contraception, includ-
ing the whole range of pessaries, were barrier methods. The most 
common barrier methods used today are condoms, diaphragms, 
cervical caps, and spermicides. 
Condoms  are made for either male or female use. A male con-
dom is a thin sheath of latex rubber or polyurethane plastic worn 
over a man’s erect penis. It captures semen produced during ejacula-
tion that occurs during an orgasm, along with the sperm contained 
with the semen. The effectiveness of the male condom is 85–98 per-
cent (see Table 1.2), which can be increased if combined with some 
other conceptive method, such as a spermicide. The female condom 
is used when a man chooses not to use a male condom. It is a plastic 
pouch inserted into the vagina that captures semen produced dur-
ing ejaculation. Like the male condom, it is available without pre-
scription in most pharmacies and is more effective when combined 
with another contraceptive, such as a spermicide. 
Spermicides  are chemicals that kill sperm or make them suf-
ficiently inactive that they are unable to reach and fertilize an egg 

16 Background and History
in a woman’s uterus. The active ingredient in most spermicides 
is an organic chemical by the name of nonoxynol-9. Spermicides 
are available without prescription in most pharmacies and come 
in a variety of forms, including jellies, foams, creams, supposi-
tories, tablets, and vaginal films. Vaginal films and tablets must 
be inserted into the vagina at least 10 minutes, and no more than 
an hour, before intercourse, and they must be left in place for six 
to eight hours after intercourse. They must be reapplied prior to 
each act of sexual intercourse, and they work most efficiently in 
combination with some other type of contraception, such as a con-
dom or diaphragm. 
TABLE 1.2
Effectiveness of Various Contraceptive Methods
Method
Effectiveness (%)
Barrier methods
Cervical cap1
 Has experienced childbirth
70
 Has not experienced childbirth
85
Condom2
 Male
85–98
 Female
79–95
Diaphragm2
84–94
Spermicides2
71–82
Hormonal methods2
Oral contraceptives
 The Pill
92–99
 The mini-pill
92–99
 Vaginal ring
92–99
 Injection
97–99
 Implant
99
 Skin patch
92–99
 Emergency contraception
at least 75
Fertility awareness and abstinence2
Abstinence
100
Fertility awareness
75–99
Sterilization2
Male/female
99
Sources: 1American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, “Contraception,” http://www.acog.org/publications/
patient_education/bp022.cfm. Accessed on June 8, 2009.
2 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Unintended Pregnancy Prevention: Contraception,” http://www.cdc.
gov/ReproductiveHealth/UnintendedPregnancy/Contraception.htm. Accessed on June 8, 2009.

Pregnancy and Contraception 17
Diaphragms and cervical caps  are thin rubber or plastic cups 
that fit inside the vagina and cover the cervix, preventing sperm 
from reaching the uterus and egg. They come in various sizes 
and are available only by prescription. Cervical caps come in four 
sizes, while diaphragms are sized according to the diameter of the 
device, as determined by a medical professional. The prescription 
for a diaphragm or cervical cap may change depending on a num-
ber of factors, including weight changes, urinary tract infections, 
births or abortions, pelvic surgery, or discomfort for a woman 
or her partner during intercourse. Both devices should be used 
only with spermicides, which are applied on the surface of the 
diaphragm or cervical cap prior to intercourse. A woman should 
consult with her health professional about the proper method for 
inserting a diaphragm or cervical cap. 
 Hormonal Methods 
 Another category of contraceptive methods involves the intro-
duction of hormones into a woman’s body to reduce the probabil-
ity of pregnancy occurring. The hormones involved are estrogen 
or progestin or a combination of the two. These hormones have 
three major effects on the reproductive system: they prevent ovu-
lation, reduce the probability of implantation of a fertilized egg in 
the uterine wall, and/or increase the viscosity of cervical mucus, 
making it more difficult for a sperm to reach an egg. 
 Today, at least 30 different products based on the use of hor-
mones are commercially available in the United States. They can 
be classified as oral contraceptives, injections, implants, patches, 
or vaginal rings. 
Oral contraceptives are among the best known of all methods of 
contraception currently available. The first such product, Enovid, 
was approved for use in the United States by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration in June 1957. It and later versions became 
widely known simply as The Pill. The more than 30 versions of 
The Pill are all alike in that they contain two different hormones, 
one derived from estrogen and one from progestin (related to pro-
gesterone found naturally in the human body). For this reason, 
they are sometimes referred to as  combination oral contraceptives . 
Combination oral contraceptives differ from one another in two 
ways. First they may contain different versions of the two hor-
mones. The most common estrogen derivative is ethinyl estradiol, 
while the progestin component may be any one of a number of 

18 Background and History
compounds, including norethindrone, norgestrel, norgestimate, 
or desogestrol. Second, the concentration of components within 
pills may be constant throughout a complete cycle of the product 
(a monophasic design), or it may vary for pills taken at various 
times throughout the cycle (biphasic or triphasic designs). Oral 
contraceptives are available only by prescription, and the proper 
product and regime should be determined in consultation be-
tween a woman and her physician. A different form of The Pill, 
sometimes known as The Mini Pill, contains a progestin deriva-
tive only. It is recommended for women who are breast-feeding or 
are allergic to estrogen derivatives. 
 The hormones needed to prevent pregnancy can also be ad-
ministered by other methods: 
Injections are used to deliver a single progestin-derivative 
hormone called depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA, 
or Depo-Provera) once every three months (four times a 
year). The primary advantage of injections is that they are 
more convenient (four times a year) than oral contraceptives 
(365 times a year), and they may provide protection against 
some medical problems, such as uterine cancer, pelvic 
inflammatory disease, and ectopic pregnancies. 
Patches are small Band-Aid-like devices worn on the 
buttocks or back. They contain a combination of an estrogen 
derivative and a progestin derivative that is released slowly 
over time from the patch and that is absorbed by the skin 
into the bloodstream. A new patch is worn once a week for 
three weeks, and then no patch is worn on the fourth week. 
It addition to the benefit of convenience, patches may also 
provide protection against some forms of cancer, reduce risk 
of pelvic inflammatory disease, and reduce cramping. 
Vaginal rings are flexible plastic rings inserted into the 
upper vagina at the opening to the cervix. They contain a 
combination of estrogen and progestin derivatives that is 
released slowly into the bloodstream during the three weeks 
they are in place. They are removed during the fourth week, 
and then reinserted to begin another cycle of use. Vaginal 
rings have essentially the same advantages and benefits as 
do patches. 
Implants are thin, rodlike devices made of flexible plastic 
inserted under the skin in a woman’s upper arm. They 
contain a progestin derivative that prevents ovulation for 

Pregnancy and Contraception 19
up to three years. Insertion and removal of the rods are 
simple procedures that are performed in a physician’s office. 
A number of side effects, most of them mild, are related to 
use of implants, including headaches, increased bleeding, 
vaginitis, and weight gain. 
Emergency contraception is another form of hormonal birth 
control that is similar to oral contraception because it 
is taken by mouth, but different because it is not taken 
on a regular basis to prevent fertilization. Emergency 
contraception is sometimes referred to as the “morning-
after” pill because it is taken after sexual intercourse has 
occurred, in an attempt to prevent a pregnancy from 
developing. The only emergency contraception currently 
licensed for use in the United States is known as Plan B, 
which contains the hormone levonorgestrel, a derivative 
of progestin. The precise mechanism by which Plan B and 
other emergency contraceptives prevent pregnancies is 
somewhat complicated, depending in large part on the point 
in a woman’s cycle during which she takes the drug. 
 Intrauterine Devices 
 As their name suggests, intrauterine devices (IUDs) are devices 
that are inserted into a woman’s uterus and then act to prevent 
fertilization of an egg by sperm. Two devices are currently avail-
able, one that contains hormones and one made of copper. Both 
devices are T-shaped and inserted into the uterus by a trained 
medical professional. The Mirena intrauterine system (IUS) con-
tains a small amount of a progestin derivative that, when released 
into the uterus, prevents ovulation and implantation and thickens 
cervical mucus, thus reducing the ability of sperm to reach an egg. 
The copper T IUD has a shape similar to the IUS, but is made of 
copper, which deteriorates slowly releasing particles of the ele-
ment to the uterus, with a similar effect. Both forms of the IUD 
come with short strings attached that allow access to the device 
after it is implanted. The IUS can remain in the uterus for up to 5 
years, and the copper T IUD, for up to 10 years. 
 Fertility Awareness and Abstinence 
 The preceding contraceptive methods all make use of some mate-
rial or object to reduce the risk of pregnancy. Two other popular 

20 Background and History
approaches to birth control use neither. Abstinence is one. The 
term refers to a person’s decision to refrain entirely from sexual in-
tercourse that could result in a woman’s becoming pregnant. This 
method is the only contraceptive technique for which effective-
ness is 100 percent. If one does not have intercourse, pregnancy 
cannot result. The issue (discussed in more detail in Chapter 2) 
is the extent to which most people can remain abstinent for ex-
tended periods of time in order to achieve this objective. 
 Another approach to contraception relies on a woman’s be-
coming familiar with her own reproductive cycle and determining 
the times at which she is more or less likely to become pregnant. 
This approach is sometimes called natural family planning (NFP) 
because it does not depend on any artificial devices such as pills, 
patches, injections, or barriers. One form of NFP is called the cer-
vical mucus method, in which a woman regularly examines the 
mucal discharge from her cervix. Prior to ovulation, this mucus 
tends to become thinner and more watery, making it easier for 
sperm to travel through the uterus to an egg. With practice, a 
woman can recognize changes in the consistency of her cervical 
mucus and refrain from sexual intercourse until it has returned to 
its more normal state. A second NFP method is called the sympto-
thermal method because it relies on a woman’s becoming familiar 
with changes in body temperature that take place throughout her 
menstrual cycle. As ovulation begins, body temperature also starts 
to rise by small amounts. By taking her temperature on a daily 
basis, a woman can estimate the point where she is in her cycle 
and refrain from intercourse during ovulation. In most cases, both 
cervical mucus properties and body temperature are taken as an 
indication of the times at which to avoid sexual intercourse. 
 Sterilization 
 The contraceptive methods discussed thus far are all reversible. 
That is, a man or woman can choose to stop using a particular 
method at almost any time, and conception can occur (almost) the 
next time there is intercourse. More drastic methods of contracep-
tion involve surgical techniques to prevent ovulation or release 
of sperm. In men, such procedures are called vasectomies, and in 
women, tubal ligation or, colloquially, “having one’s tubes tied.” In 
a vasectomy, the tube leading from the testes to the penis (the vas 
deferens) is blocked, preventing release of sperm into the semen. 
The procedure does not inhibit a man from having an erection and 

Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 21
ejaculation, but it does prevent sperm from being released during 
ejaculation. Tubal ligation involves the cutting, tying, banding, or 
otherwise blocking of a woman’s fallopian tubes, preventing the 
release of an egg into the uterus. The procedure does not affect a 
woman’s menstrual cycle or her ability to engage in sexual inter-
course.
 Both vasectomies and tubal ligations are sometimes thought 
of as permanent forms of contraception. In fact, both procedures 
are reversible, although the success rate for pregnancies after a 
reversible procedure tend to be low to moderate. In both cases, 
the success rate depends on a number of factors, especially the 
patient’s age. For both procedures, the rate of conception after re-
versal surgery has been estimated at between 30 and 75 percent 
(University of Florida Health System 2009; VasectomyMedical.
com 2009). 
 A Concluding Observation 
 The information provided in this section should be regarded only 
as a general overview to the topic of contraception. The decision 
as to whether or not to use a contraceptive, the method to use, and 
the specific procedures to follow vary significantly from person to 
person. They depend on a person’s age, gender, personal values, 
philosophy of life, religious beliefs, and a host of other factors. In 
any case, the decision made by a young woman or young man 
almost always benefits from a discussion of the options available 
with a parent, adult trusted counselor, and/or medical profes-
sional.
 Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 
 Childhood is usually a pretty simple time in a person’s life. Boys 
are boys, and girls are girls. Adults sometimes help kids keep the 
distinctions clear by dressing boys and girls differently, by treat-
ing them in different ways, and by making sure they know that 
they are expected to act in different ways. Also, boys tend to hang 
out with boys, and to regard girls as “icky” or unappealing in 
other ways. Girls prefer to hang out with other girls, regarding 
boys as “gross” or not people one wants to spend time with. 
 But, at about age 10 or so, things change. Hormones become 
active in both male and female bodies and childhood standards 

22 Background and History
and norms no longer hold true. Boys, at least most of them, begin 
to feel that maybe girls are not so bad after all. It may be all right 
to spend some time with them . . . actually, to spend a lot of time 
with them in more intimate ways than they had ever imagined 
before. And most girls are willing to give boys a second chance . . . 
and even a third and fourth chance, to see if there might not be 
more to the male sex than they had ever imagined. 
 But some boys continue to like hanging out with other boys, 
and even begin to feel that they would like to do more than just 
play baseball and smoke cigarettes behind the barn with them. 
Even though they have received the message thousands of times 
that it’s time to start going out with girls, somehow a date with a 
boy seems more appealing and more natural. And some girls feel 
the same way about other girls. And yet other boys and girls just 
are not sure to whom they are most strongly attracted, boys or 
girls . . . or both! 
 Finally, some boys and girls are no longer entirely sure they 
are really male or female at all. The hormones that begin to flow in 
a male’s body may suddenly carry a strange and terrifying mes-
sage: “Did you know that you are really a girl, and not a boy?” Or, 
on the other hand, “You have been brought up as a girl, but now 
is the time to admit that you feel more like a boy.” 
 It is no wonder that adolescence has often been called the pe-
riod of Sturm und Drang, “storm and stress,” as almost-men and 
almost-women for the first time in their lives begin to assess their 
own sexual nature. 
 Terminology 
 No discussion of sexual orientation and gender identity can pro-
ceed without a clear understanding of the meaning of a number of 
essential terms. To begin with these two terms themselves,  sexual
orientation means the sex to which a person is primarily attracted 
physically, emotionally, and sexually. To say that one is  heterosexu-
ally oriented means that one is attracted primarily to someone of the 
opposite sex; someone who is homosexually orientated  is attracted 
primarily to someone of the same sex. The terms homosexual and 
heterosexual  are not very good as nouns, because they tend to de-
fine a person exclusively or primarily in terms of her or his sexual 
orientation. “That woman is a homosexual” suggests that her sex-
ual orientation is the most important defining characteristic one 
can assign to her, which typically is not the case. Some people are 

Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 23
attracted to both sexes, perhaps equally, but usually to some ex-
tent or another. They are said to have a bisexual orientation. 
 The issue of one’s sexual orientation has long been a matter 
of considerable controversy in the United States and many other 
(but not all) parts of the world. As a result, a very large vocabulary 
of pejorative terms have grown up to talk about anyone whose 
sexual orientation is outside the usual heterosexual norm recog-
nized by society. Gay, lesbian, faggot, fairy, queer, and dyke are 
only a few of those terms, none of which is especially helpful in 
discussing the issues of sexual orientation in this book. 
 The term  gender identity  means something very different from 
sexual orientation. Gender identity refers to the perception that 
one has of his or her own sexual status. A man may have been 
born with male genitalia and still feel deep down in his heart and 
soul that he is somehow a woman. Someone born with the repro-
ductive system of a woman might still feel that she is a man in a 
woman’s body. Although these feelings are not typical of most 
men and women, they are not uncommon, and they are the basis 
of profound psychological and emotional struggles for people 
who experience them. Such individuals sometimes decide that 
they can no longer live a lie, and commit to a series of medical pro-
cedures through which they change their physical gender, from 
male to female or male to female. Such individuals are known as 
transgendered individuals. 
 Gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgendered individu-
als all experience a common reaction from general society, often a 
feeling of not belonging. It is small wonder, then, that a number 
of social and political organizations have grown up to deal with 
issues common to those who belong to one of these categories. 
These groups often define themselves as gay, lesbian, bisexual, 
and transgendered (GLBT) groups and, in some cases, throw in the 
word  queer  (as in gay, lesbian, bisexual, queer, and transgendered) 
as an in-your-face political statement to the general community. 
Groups interested in issues of sexual orientation and gender iden-
tity may also add yet another term to their name: questioning , re-
sulting in organizations that call themselves gay, lesbian, bisexual, 
transgendered, and questioning (GLBTQ). The term  questioning
refers to and emphasizes the fact that many adolescents are at a 
stage in their lives when they really do not know the category 
to which they belong, that is, whether they are more attracted to 
someone of the same sex, of the opposite sex, or to both sexes, or 
even how they feel about their own sexual identity. 

24 Background and History
 A final category of individuals to be mentioned includes trans-
vestites, sometimes the least understood of all nontypical groups. 
Transvestites are individuals who take pleasure in dressing and 
acting as members of the opposite sex: men dress as women, and 
women dress as men. Such individuals are almost without ex-
ception heterosexual. The term almost always applies to the for-
mer case—men who dress as women—because that condition is 
regarded as somehow abnormal or unnatural. On the contrary, 
many women dress and act in a manner not unlike that of men 
in everyday society, so the practice is generally not regarded as 
abnormal or unnatural. Instead, it is more likely to be regarded 
as a statement of status in (at least) American society. That is, it 
is permissible for a woman to want to move up in the world by 
dressing like her superior, a man, while it is largely unthinkable 
that a man would want to move down in the world by dressing 
like a woman. But that analysis is for another time. 
 Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender, 
and Questioning Youth Issues 
 One reason that adolescence is such a difficult time in a person’s 
life is that so many questions have to be answered in the transi-
tion from being a child to being an adult. Does one want to sim-
ply adopt and accept the attitudes, beliefs, and lifestyle of one’s 
parents, or should one break away and form a new and indepen-
dent life? Should one be a Democrat, Orthodox Jew, and attorney 
because those are the choices one’s parents made or want their 
children to make? Or does one’s conscience push one toward the 
Republican party, atheism, and a career as a concert pianist? 
 The matters of sexual orientation and gender identity are 
not so much matters of choice—evidence now suggests that both 
characteristics have strong genetic roots—but deciding how to act 
on one’s innermost convictions about these issues is  a decision 
one has to make. In a society in which homosexual behavior and 
transgenderism are still the subject of considerable disapproval, 
acknowledging to oneself and one’s family and friends that one 
may be lesbian, gay, or a potentially transgendered individual 
can be far more difficult than announcing that one is no longer a 
Democrat or an Orthodox Jew. 
 Public opinion polls suggest that attitudes about homo-
sexual behavior in the United States have undergone signifi-
cant changes in the past few decades. In its most recent poll on 

Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 25
the question (June 2008), the Gallup Poll organization found 
that the nation was evenly split on the question of whether or 
not homosexual relations are “morally acceptable” or “morally 
wrong,” with 48 percent of respondents agreeing with each po-
sition. But that result represents a significant shift in less than a 
decade. When the same question was asked in 2001, the majority 
of respondents—53  percent—agreed that homosexual relations 
were “morally wrong,” while only 40 percent thought they were 
“morally acceptable” (Gallup 2009). This trend is more apparent 
when viewed over a longer time span. In 1983, Gallup asked re-
spondents whether they thought homosexuality was “an accept-
able alternative lifestyle or not”: 51 percent of respondents said 
no, while 34 percent said yes. Twenty-five years later, when Gal-
lup asked the same question, these positions had been reversed: 
57 percent of respondents agreed that homosexuality “was ac-
ceptable,” while 40 percent said that it was not (Gallup 2009). 
 These data send mixed messages to adolescents in the United 
States who are questioning their sexual orientation and gender 
identity. For one thing, they indicate that at least 4 out of 10 Amer-
icans still regard homosexual behavior as morally unacceptable. 
That means that something like 4 out of 10 parents, school teach-
ers and counselors, religious leaders, neighbors, family friends, 
and others with whom one comes into contact on a daily basis 
regards “you,” the questioning teenager, as morally repugnant. 
Many of the resources on which adolescents depend for support 
and guidance in dealing with difficult personal questions—such 
as one’s religious beliefs, political commitments, sexual orienta-
tion, and gender identity—may not, therefore, be available in 
dealing with this issue. 
 The problems faced by adolescents dealing with issues of 
sexual orientation and gender identity have been documented in 
a number of surveys and studies. In 2001, for example, the Mas-
sachusetts Department of Public Health reported on a study it 
conducted of suicides and suicide attempts among high school 
students in the state. It found that about 40 gay, lesbian, and bi-
sexual students had attempted suicide at least once, compared to 
a rate of 10 percent among heterosexual students (Healy 2001). 
Similar results have been reported in a number of other studies on 
suicide rates among teenagers (2005 Youth Risk Behavior Survey 
2007, 50; Trevor Project 2009). 
 In one of the most comprehensive (if somewhat dated) stud-
ies of the issues faced by GLBTQ students, more than 40 percent 

26 Background and History
of respondents reported not feeling safe in school because of their 
sexual orientation or gender identity; more than 90 percent heard 
homophobic remarks from fellow students; 30 percent heard 
similar remarks from faculty and administrators; and 69 percent 
reported having experienced some form of verbal or physical ha-
rassment. Even among those respondents who said they felt safe 
at their schools, 46 percent reported verbal harassment, 36 percent 
reported sexual harassment, 12 percent reported physical harass-
ment, and 6 percent reported some type of physical assault (The 
Body 2001). 
 One consequence of the problems GLBTQ students face is 
their tendency to turn to alcohol and illegal drugs as a form of 
relief and compensation. A study by researchers at the University 
of Pittsburgh in 2008 found that the rate of alcohol and substance 
abuse among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students is about 190 per-
cent that of heterosexual students and, among some subgroups 
of GLB students, the rate may reach 400 percent that of their het-
erosexual counterparts. Lead researcher Michael P. Marshal ex-
plained that 
 homophobia, discrimination and victimization are 
largely what are responsible for these substance use 
disparities in young gay people. . . . History shows that 
when marginalized groups are oppressed and do not 
have equal opportunities and equal rights, they suffer. 
Our results show that gay youth are clearly no excep-
tion. (Addiction 2008) 
 Options for GLBTQ Youth 
 Some adolescents are fortunate in that they can turn to trusted re-
sources—parents, teachers, religious leaders, friends, neighbors, 
and relatives—when they have questions about their sexual ori-
entation or gender identity. Somewhat strangely enough, the one 
group of individuals whom they may not be able to turn are older 
gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgendered individuals. The 
problem has traditionally been that older GLBT individuals are 
hesitant to offer their help to younger men and women and boys 
and girls for fear of being labeled as predators. The connection 
between child molestation and homosexual behavior has been 
emphasized for so long that concerns about one’s legal safety 
may prompt many older GLBT individuals from associating with 

Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 27
younger questioning youth under almost any circumstances. The 
abundance of evidence that refutes this connection has made this 
problem only slightly less of an issue (see, for example, Newton 
1978).
 In any case, a number of resources have been developed over 
the past two decades to which GLBTQ youth can turn for assis-
tance in dealing with their own questions about sexual orienta-
tion and gender identity. Without much doubt, the availability 
of the Internet has been a key factor in increasing the number of 
these resources to which young people can turn. For example, 
Youth Resource is a project of Advocates for Youth that provides 
information on a range of topics of interest and concern to GLBTQ 
youth. It provides a link to dozens of local organizations, such 
as school and campus groups, to which one can turn for direct 
advice and assistance. A search for the state of Alabama, for ex-
ample, returns the names of 4 youth groups that deal with sexual 
orientation and gender identity issues among teenagers, 1 campus 
organization, and 13 peer- education groups. Another online re-
source is the National Youth Advocacy Coalition, whose primary 
objective is to “strengthen the role of young people in the LGBTQ 
rights movement” (National Youth Advocacy Coalition). 
 A number of nonelectronic resources are also available for 
GLBTQ youth. Perhaps the best known of these resources is the 
Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network (GLSEN), founded 
in 1990 to work to “to assure that each member of every school 
community is valued and respected regardless of sexual orien-
tation or gender identity/expression” and “to develop school 
climates where difference is valued for the positive contribution 
it makes in creating a more vibrant and diverse community” 
(GLSEN 2009). 
 Resources are also available for adults who want to learn 
more about ways in which they can act as a resource for GLBTQ 
youth. Probably the oldest and most widely respected of these 
organizations is Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays 
(PFLAG). PFLAG was founded in 1972 by Jeanne Manford after 
her son was beaten in a gay pride parade in New York City. 
Manford’s goal was to provide a safe haven for parents of gays 
and lesbians and to provide information and support for moth-
ers and fathers who were unsure how to deal with news that 
a son or daughter was gay or lesbian. Today PFLAG has more 
than 200,000 members in over 500 chapters in all 50 states and 
the District of Columbia. In addition to working with individual 

28 Background and History
parents, the organization works on a local and national basis for 
equal rights for all individuals regardless of sexual orientation or 
gender identity. 
 Progress: A Mixed Blessing? 
 In some ways, dealing with issues of sexual orientation and gen-
der identity are easier for young men and women today than it 
was a half century ago. In the 1950s, many GLBTQ youth prob-
ably knew little or nothing about homosexuality. One of the most 
common themes in the biographies of gay men and lesbians of the 
times was that “I thought I was the only person in the world like 
me.” Today, stories of gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgen-
dered individuals appear everywhere in the public media. One 
consequence of this change has been that the age at which young 
men and women acknowledge being gay, lesbian, or bisexual has 
become younger and younger (Elias 2007). In that context, per-
haps “coming out of the closet” (acknowledging one’s sexual ori-
entation) may be easier for teenagers in the 21st century than it 
ever was in the United States. 
 On the other hand, “being out” means that young men and 
women often have to deal with difficult issues at an earlier age 
than ever before. As with issues of sexually transmitted infections 
and contraception, questions about sexual orientation and gender 
identity are increasingly problems about which adolescents need 
more accurate information and guidance from adults. 
 References 
 Addiction. 2008. “Gay Youth Report Higher Rates of Drug and Alcohol 
Use.” http://www.addictionjournal.org/viewpressrelease.asp?pr=74. 
Accessed on June 10, 2009. 
 American Social Health Association. 2009. “STD/STI Statistics > Fast 
Facts.” http://www.ashastd.org/learn/learn_statistics.cfm. Accessed on 
June 5, 2009. 
 Androutsos G., E. Magiorkinis, and A. Diamantis. 2008. “John Hunter 
(1728–1793): Father of Modern Urology.”  Balkan Military Medical Review
11: 52–55. 
 The Body. 2001. “Fact Sheet: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender 
Youth Issues.” http://www.thebody.com/content/whatis/art2449.html. 
Accessed on June 10, 2009. 

References 29
 “A Brief History of Contraceptives.” 2009. http://home.snu.
edu/~dwilliam/f97projects/contraception/history.htm. Accessed on 
June 8, 2009. 
 “Candida Martinelli’s Italophile Site.” 2009. http://italophiles.com/
carnevale.htm. Accessed on June 7, 2009. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2009a.  MMWR Weekly . 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5739a2.htm. 
Accessed on June 8, 2009. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2009b. “Updated 
Recommended Treatment Regimens for Gonococcal Infections and 
Associated Conditions—United States, April 2007.” http://www.cdc.
gov/std/treatment/2006/updated-regimens.htm. Accessed on June 7, 
2009.
 Cohen, Mark Nathan. 1991.  Health and the Rise of Civilization. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1991. 
 Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. December 2008.  HIV/
AIDS Surveillance Report . Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. 
 Department of Reproductive Health and Research. World Health 
Organization. 2004.  Maternal Mortality in 2000 . Geneva: World Health 
Organization. 
 Division of STD Prevention. December 2008.  Sexually Transmitted Disease 
Surveillance 2007 . Washington, D.C.: Department of Health And Human 
Services. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center 
for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention. Division of 
STD Prevention. 
 Elias, Marilyn. 2007. “Gay Teens Coming Out Earlier to Peers and 
Family.”  USA Today, February 7. http://www.usatoday.com/news/
nation/2007-02-07-gay-teens-cover_x.htm. Accessed on June 10, 2009. 
 Gallup. 2009. “Americans Evenly Divided on Morality of 
Homosexuality.” http://www.gallup.com/poll/108115/americans-
evenly-divided-morality-homosexuality.aspx. Accessed on June 10, 
2009.
 GLSEN. 2009. “Our Mission.” http://www.glsen.org/cgi-bin/iowa/all/
about/history/index.html. Accessed on June 10, 2009. 
 Goldman, Leon. 1971. “Syphilis in the Bible.”  Archives of Dermatology 103 
(5; May): 535–36. 
 Healy, Patrick. 2001. “Massachusetts Study Shows High Suicide Rate 
for Gay Students.” http://www.glsen.org/cgi-bin/iowa/all/news/
record/399.html. Accessed on June 10, 2009. 

30 Background and History
 Herodotus Wept. 2009. “Early Contraceptives.” http://herodotuswept.
wordpress.com/2007/11/14/early-contraceptives/. Accessed on June 8, 
2009.
 Herpes.com. 2009. “The Truth about HSV-1 and HSV-2.” http://www.
herpes.com/hsv1-2.html. Accessed on June 7, 2009. 
 Heymann, Warren R. 2006. “The History of Syphilis.”  Journal of the 
American Academy of Dermatology 54 (2; February): 322–23. 
 Marshal, Michael P. et al. 2008. “Sexual Orientation and Adolescent 
Substance Use: A Meta-analysis and Methodological Review.”  Addiction
103 (4; April): 546–56. 
 McAllister, Marie E. 2000. “Stories of the Origin of Syphilis in 
Eighteenth-Century England: Science, Myth, and Prejudice.”  Eighteenth-
Century Life 24 (1; Winter): 22–44. 
 National Youth Advocacy Program. 2009. http://www.nyacyouth.org/
about/index.php. Accessed on June 10, 2009. 
 Newton, David E. 1978. “Homosexual Behavior and Child Molestation: 
A Review of the Evidence.”  Adolescence 13 (49; Spring): 29–43. 
 Rothschild, Bruce M. 2005. “History of Syphilis.”  Clinical Infectious 
Diseases 40 (10; May): 1454–63. 
 The Trevor Project. 2009. “Suicidal Signs.” http://www.thetrevorproject.
org/info.aspx. Accessed on June 10, 2009. 
2005 Youth Risk Behavior Survey . December 2007. Boston: Massachusetts 
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. 
 University of Florida Health System. 2009. “Tubal Reversal.” http://
www.obgyn.ufl.edu/ENDO/PatientHandouts/Tubal%20Reversal.pdf. 
Accessed on June 9, 2009. 
 VasectomyMedical.com. 2009. “Vasectomy Reversal.” http://www.
vasectomymedical.com/vasectomy-reversal-success-rates.html. 
Accessed on June 9, 2009. 
 Willcox, R. R. 1949. “Venereal Disease in the Bible.”  British Journal of 
Venereal Diseases 25: 28–33. 

31
 2 
 Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions 
 Introduction 
 The factual information that young men and women need in order 
to understand and deal with issues of sexual health is available 
from a number of sources: parents, medical professionals, teach-
ers and counselors, and (sometimes) church leaders, neighbors, 
other adults, and friends. For more than a century in the United 
States, some people have been advocating sex education classes in 
schools as the best means for providing this information. The age 
at which sex education should begin, the topics to be included, 
the composition of sex education classes, and a number of other 
issues are still being debated. 
 School-based sex education in the United States is usually 
said to have begun in 1913, when Ella Flagg Young, then super-
intendent of schools in Chicago, initiated the so-called Chicago 
Experiment, a series of lectures on sexual hygiene for separate 
groups of boys and girls in the city’s high schools. Young’s deci-
sion reflected a growing concern that was sweeping the country at 
the time about the appalling increase in the rate of sexually trans-
mitted infections. Many observers thought that this medical prob-
lem was caused by a deteriorating moral atmosphere, caused in 
part by the urbanization of American society and the flood of im-
migrants reaching the nation’s shores. Proponents of an expanded 
program of sex education, for both adults and adolescents, saw 
their effort as having both a medical and a moral component. 
Solving the problem of increased rates of sexually transmitted 
infections required not only better information about the human 

32 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
reproductive system, but also stronger moral training for young 
people experiencing sexual urges for the first time. Indeed, some 
proponents of sex education for the young specifically argued 
that instruction of this kind would encourage young people to 
avoid sexual activities entirely until marriage. As one historian 
has observed, “Many of the proponents of sex purity saw sex edu-
cation as a way to desexualize society, except in the marriage bed” 
(Tyack and Hansot 1990, 222; see also Fass 2004; Jensen 2007). 
 After a vigorous debate within the school board and the com-
munity at large, Flagg received approval for her program, which 
was eventually to reach more than 20,000 students in three lec-
tures on the topics: “personal sexual hygiene,” “problems of sex 
instincts,” and “a few of the hygienic and social facts regarding 
venereal disease” (Moran 1996, 501). The Chicago Experiment sur-
vived only one year, however. Objections from within the school 
system itself and the community in general continued through-
out the year. The most common objection was that a delicate mat-
ter such as human sexuality had no place in public schools. This 
view was reflected in a letter to the  Chicago Tribune  that appeared 
on page 1 of the December 11, 1913, issue of the newspaper. “I 
honestly fear,” the governor wrote, “that if sex hygiene be taught 
in the schools and young boys and girls in the open class room 
are made aware of things which may be taught in the line of sex 
hygiene, it may create, and probably will create, in their young 
minds a prurient curiosity which will induce, rather than sup-
press, immorality and unchastity” (as cited in Jensen 2007, 230). A 
parent who objected to the program was perhaps somewhat more 
blunt in her feelings: 
 If any person attempted to “instruct” my innocent chil-
dren in subjects that modesty tells us to ignore, I would 
horsewhip the “educator,” and thus give him or her a 
needed lesson in respecting the rights of parents to bring 
up their little ones in innocence of the terrible evils of 
life. (as cited in Jensen 2007, 230–31) 
 Criticisms such as these carried the day in Chicago, and Flagg’s 
program was not renewed for 1914. In fact, Flagg herself lasted 
only another two years as superintendent, resigning in 1915 over 
an issue unrelated to the sex education controversy. 
 Perhaps the most significant point about the Chicago Experi-
ment is that it raised fundamental questions about the role (if any) 

Sex Education: Yes or No? 33
that the education of young men and women in topics related to 
human sexuality should have in public schools. That debate con-
tinues today within the context of a number of specific issues, 
such as whether sex education even belongs in the public schools, 
the age at which children should be taught about sexuality, the 
topics that should be included in a class on sexuality, and the role 
of parents and other adults outside the school system. The rest of 
this chapter is devoted to a review of some of these issues, their 
current status in the United States, public attitudes about the is-
sues, and laws and regulations related to the issues. 
 Sex Education: Yes or No? 
 Probably the most fundamental question related to the issue of sex 
education for adolescents in the United States is simply whether 
or not such instruction should be available to students in public 
schools, a question first posed with regard to Ella Flagg Young’s 
Chicago Experiment. The debate over this question continues in 
the first decade of the 21st century, with many of the same argu-
ments offered as were presented in 1913. On the pro side of the de-
bate, the case is made that adolescents need instruction in issues 
of sexually transmitted infections, pregnancy and contraception, 
sexual orientation and gender identity, and other issues in order 
to make better and more informed decisions about their own sex-
ual behaviors. Opponents of sex education in the public schools 
agree that this goal is desirable, but argue that such instruction 
should take place in the home, not in schools. This disagreement 
is not one that can be resolved by turning to research for answers. 
The choice is fundamentally one of a person’s personal philoso-
phy and outlook on life. 
 A second issue is, however, more amenable to scientific anal-
ysis: are school-based sex education programs effective? That is, 
do such programs actually change the behavior of young men and 
women who sit through sex education classes in schools? During 
the 1980s and 1990s, a number of studies were conducted on this 
question. Most of these studies produced little or no support for 
the hypothesis that sex education classes change the sexual be-
havior of adolescents. As an example, a study reported in 1986 
that “data reveal no significant relationship between exposure 
to sex education and the risk of premarital pregnancy among 
sexually active adolescents” (Dawson 1986, 162). Another study 

34 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
showed that young women who have had a sex education course 
are neither more nor less likely to use contraception than are those 
who had no such instruction (Zelnick and Kim 1982, 117; also see 
Marsiglio and Mott 1986 and Furstenberg, Moore, and Peterson 
1986).
 Since the turn of the century, very few or no national stud-
ies have been conducted to assess the effectiveness of sex educa-
tion programs (Mueller, Gavin, and Kulkarni 2008). That situation 
changed in 2008, however, with the release of a comprehensive 
study on the association between sex education classes and pat-
terns of sexual behavior among adolescents. That study was 
based on data collected from a sample of 2,019 males and females 
between the ages of 15 and 19 who had never been married, as re-
ported in the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth, conducted 
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The authors 
of the study pointed out that two important changes had taken 
place since the last national studies at the end of the 20th cen-
tury. First, a significantly larger number of teenagers have been 
exposed to sex education programs in elementary and secondary 
schools. Second, the age at which students first receive sex edu-
cation instruction has decreased significantly. These factors, the 
authors suggest, may help explain the quite different results they 
obtained, in comparison with earlier studies. 
 The most significant of those findings was that 71 percent of 
teenage boys and 59 percent of teenage girls who had attended 
sex education classes in school were less likely to have sexual in-
tercourse before the age of 15 that those who had not had such in-
struction. In addition, males who had been in sex education classes 
were almost three times (2.77 times) as likely to use some form 
of contraception as those who had not attended such classes. For 
some subgroups, these results were even more striking. Among 
African American females, the likelihood of engaging in sexual 
intercourse before the age of 15 was reduced by 91 percent among 
those who had attended sex education courses in school (Mueller, 
Gavin, and Kulkarni 2008, 89; Science Daily 2007). 
 Public Opinion on Sex Education 
 In some respects, the battle over the teaching of sexuality in Amer-
ican schools is over. A number of public opinion polls indicate 
that the vast majority of Americans now support some form of sex 

Public Opinion on Sex Education 35
education in schools. In 2004, for example, National Public Radio, 
the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, and the John F. Kennedy 
School of Government at Harvard University (NPR/KFF/JFK) 
sponsored a poll of the general public and of public school prin-
cipals about the role of sex education in American schools. The 
results of that poll were conclusive, with only 7 percent of respon-
dents in the general poll expressing the view that sex education 
should not be taught in schools. Almost three quarters of princi-
pals (74%) said that sex education was simply not an issue in their 
schools, with there being no complaints, discussions, or comments 
from parent groups, religious and community leaders, or elected 
officials about the teaching of sexuality in schools (NPR/Kaiser/
Kennedy School Poll 2004a; NPR 2004). Indeed, the issue is no 
longer whether  sex education should be taught in schools, but  what
topics should be included. 
 One of the interesting findings of the NPR/KFF/JFK poll was 
that the general public appears to be relatively satisfied with the 
topics that most experts believe should be included in sex educa-
tion courses. Of a list of 18 topics read to respondents, 11 received 
more than a 90 percent approval rating from respondents, includ-
ing topics such as sexually transmitted infections (99%), HIV/
AIDS (98%), and contraception (94%). Three additional topics re-
ceived more than 80 percent approval, including abortion, how 
to use and where to get contraceptives, and how to use a con-
dom. Only four topics received a lower rating, but still more than 
70 percent approval: masturbation, homosexuality, oral sex, and 
oral contraceptives without parental knowledge and/or approval 
(NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll 2004a; NPR 2004). 
 The NPR/KFF/JFK poll also pursued the question of how the 
views of evangelical Christians differ from nonevangelicals on is-
sues of sex education. Not surprisingly, the survey discovered that 
the former group tends to be somewhat more leery about the role 
of sex education in the school curriculum. Twelve percent of evan-
gelicals said that sex education should not be provided in schools 
under any circumstances, three times the rate for nonevangelicals. 
Evangelicals were also significantly more likely to disapprove of 
certain specific topics in sex education than were nonevangelicals: 
twice as many disapproved of mentioning oral sex in classes (41% 
to 20%), discussions about homosexuality (37% to 18%), informa-
tion about obtaining contraceptives without parental approval 
(42% to 20%), and discussions about masturbation (27% to 13%); 
and three times as many objected to instructions about the use of 

36 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
a condom (26% to 9%) and the use of contraceptives (21% to 7%) 
(NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll 2004; NPR 2004a). Overall, 
the most significant conclusion to be drawn from this poll appears 
to be that a large majority of Americans appear to favor the inclu-
sion of sex education in schools and approve of the topics most 
commonly recommended by professional sex educators. 
 The Content of Sex Education Courses 
 A large majority of Americans appear to favor the inclusion of 
sex education in schools and approve of at least some of the top-
ics most commonly recommended by professional sex educators. 
Americans still differ significantly as to whether topics such as the 
use of condoms, the availability of contraceptives, and sexual ori-
entation and gender identity should be included in sex education 
courses, whether all students should be required to attend classes 
on such topics, and how they should be presented. The sections 
that follow review some of the specific issues about sex education 
in schools that are still the subject of debate among Americans. 
 Abstinence-Only Education 
 Perhaps the single most controversial issue concerning sex edu-
cation in American schools today relates to so-called abstinence-
only programs. Abstinence-only sex education programs focus on 
the principle that refraining from sexual intercourse is the only 
certain way to avoid conception and sexually transmitted infec-
tions. Such programs teach about abstinence exclusively, with 
(usually) no mention of other methods of contraception or avoid-
ing STIs. By contrast, sex education programs that teach a wider 
array of subjects are generally known as comprehensive sex edu-
cation programs. 
 History 
 Abstinence-only sex education programs first became popular in 
the late 1990s as the result of an amendment to a welfare-reform 
bill sponsored by Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA) and Senator 
Lauch Faircloth (R-NC) in 1996. That amendment established a 
program for special grants to states for abstinence-only-until-
marriage programs in schools. The bill was approved by the U.S. 
Congress, signed by President George W. Bush, and became part 
of the Social Security Act (chapter 42 of the United States Code). 

The Content of Sex Education Courses 37
The program is now commonly known as Title VI. In order to 
qualify for grant money, a program has to meet a number of con-
ditions. It must have “as its exclusive purpose, teaching the social, 
psychological, and health gains to be realized by abstaining from 
sexual activity.” In addition, the program must teach 
 [that] abstinence from sexual activity outside marriage 
•
[is] the expected standard for all school age children; 
 that abstinence from sexual activity is the only certain 
•
way to avoid out-of-wedlock pregnancy, sexually 
transmitted diseases, and other associated health 
problems; 
 that a mutually faithful monogamous relationship in 
•
[the] context of marriage is the expected standard of 
human sexual activity; 
 that sexual activity outside of the context of marriage 
•
is likely to have harmful psychological and physical 
effects; 
 that bearing children out-of-wedlock is likely to have 
•
harmful consequences for the child, the child’s parents, 
and society. 
 It also must teach 
 young people how to reject sexual advances and how 
•
alcohol and drug use increases vulnerability to sexual 
advances and 
 the importance of attaining self-sufficiency before 
•
engaging in sexual activity (United States Code Title 42. 
Chapter 7. Subchapter V §710). 
 Abstinence-only sex education programs are also funded in two 
other ways by the federal government. The Adolescent Family 
Life Act (AFLA) is the older of these two programs. It was in-
cluded as Title XX of the Public Health Service Act of 1981 “to 
promote abstinence from sexual activity among adolescents and 
to provide comprehensive health care, education and social ser-
vices to pregnant and parenting adolescents” (U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. Office of Public Health and Science. 
Office of Population Affairs 2009). More recently, the U.S. Con-
gress established a program known as Special Projects of Regional 
and National Significance–Community-Based Abstinence Educa-
tion (SPRANS–CBAE) (U.S. Department of Health and Human 

38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Services. Health Resources and Services Administration 2000). As 
of mid-2009, the U.S. government had provided more than $1.5 
billion dollars for abstinence-only education through these three 
programs (Sexuality Information and Education Council of the 
United States 2008). 
 Arguments in Favor of Abstinence-Only Sex Education 
 The argument for abstinence-only programs is implicit in the leg-
islation on which their funding is based, especially the Title VI 
legislation of Senators Santorum and Faircloth. That argument 
was restated most recently in a number of letters written by pro-
abstinence-education organizations and individuals as the U.S. 
Congress and President Barack Obama have considered the pos-
sibility of cutting back on federal funding of such programs. For 
example, the National Abstinence Education Association wrote to 
Senators Tom Harkin and Arlen Specter, chair and ranking mem-
ber of the Senate Subcommittee on Labor, Health, and Human 
Services that 
 the recent statistics by the CDC, which revealed that 1 
in 4 adolescent girls have at least one STD, certainly un-
derscores the need for a strong commitment to the risk 
elimination message of abstinence-centered programs. 
 Two of the four STDs tracked in the recent CDC 
study can easily be spread by skin to skin contact which 
means that transmission can take place without inter-
course and in spite of the use of a condom. Only absti-
nence will adequately stem this epidemic among teens. 
 Abstinence education is taught to some 2.5 million 
youth across the country. Preserving intact funding for 
this approach is the only way we assure that teens re-
ceive the information and skills needed to prevent the 
physical and emotional consequences of sexual activity. 
Parents overwhelmingly support the currently funded 
approach. Teens are also increasingly choosing to be 
abstinent, so this is a message that resonates with both 
teens and their parents. 
 There is also a growing body of research that shows 
that abstinence education is a good investment and is 
showing empirical success. A number of studies show that 
students who participate in abstinence programs delay 
sexual onset, reduce partners when sexually  active and 

The Content of Sex Education Courses 39
even discontinue sexual activity if previously  sexually 
experienced. They are also no less likely to use a condom 
than their peers, if they do become sexually active. (Na-
tional Abstinence Education Association 2008) 
 Research on Abstinence-Only Sex Education 
 Opponents of abstinence-only have a somewhat different view 
of these programs than those expressed in this letter. They point 
to a number of research studies which suggest that abstinence-
only programs have little or no effect on attitudes or behaviors of 
students who have completed abstinence-only courses. In April 
2007, for example, Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., reported on 
a study of four federally funded Title V programs in Miami, Flor-
ida; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Powhatan, Virginia; and Clarksdale, 
Mississippi. Researchers found that “youth in the program group 
were no more likely than control group youth to have abstained 
from sex and, among those who reported having had sex, they 
had similar numbers of sexual partners and had initiated sex at 
the same mean age” (Trenholm et al. 2007, xvii). Researchers con-
cluded that these programs had “no overall impact on teen sexual 
activity, no differences in rates of unprotected sex, and some im-
pacts on knowledge of STDs and perceived effectiveness of con-
doms and birth control pills (Trenholm et al. 2007, 59). 
 Researchers have also examined some specific aspects of 
 abstinence-only education programs. For example, Janet E. Rosen-
baum at the Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health re-
ported in January 2009 on a study of the so-called virginity pledge, 
sometimes taken as a measure of the success of  abstinence-only 
programs. In this pledge, men and women promise to remain 
virgins until they are married. In her longitudinal study of 3,440 
students who had taken a virginity pledge in 1995, Rosenbaum 
found that, five years later, 82 percent of the sample denied ever 
having taken the pledge. More significantly, she found that stu-
dents who had attended an abstinence-only program did not dif-
fer significantly from a matched cohort of students who did not 
attend such a program on issues related to premarital sex, sexu-
ally transmitted infections, and anal and oral sex variables. The 
only differences found between experimental and control groups 
were that those who attended abstinence-only programs were less 
likely to use condoms or other birth control devices either during 
their first sexual experience or their last (prior to the survey) ex-
perience (Rosenbaum 2009, 110). 

40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 In a 2007 study, researchers explored the effect of abstinence-
only programs on a single topic in sex education: HIV/AIDS in-
fections. They found that among the 15,940 participants in their 
study
 overall, the trials did not indicate that abstinence-only 
programs can reduce HIV risk as indicated by behavioral 
outcomes (e.g., unprotected vaginal sex) or biological 
outcomes (e.g., sexually transmitted infection). Instead, 
the programs consistently had no effect on participants’ 
incidence of unprotected vaginal sex, frequency of vagi-
nal sex, number of sex partners, sexual initiation, or con-
dom use. (Underhill, Operario , and Montgomery 2007) 
 One of the troublesome objections sometimes made about 
 abstinence-only programs is that they not only omit discussions of 
any topic on sexuality other than abstinence, but also that the infor-
mation they provide is sometimes inaccurate. In order to examine 
this issue, the Special Investigations Division of the Minority Staff of 
the Committee on Government Reform conducted a study in 2004 
of a number of abstinence-only programs funded under the Special 
Programs of Regional and National Significance  Community-Based 
Abstinence Education. Researchers concluded that “over 80% of 
the abstinence-only curricula, used by over two-thirds of SPRANS 
grantees in 2003, contain false, misleading, or distorted informa-
tion about reproductive health” (Special Investigations Division. 
Minority Staff of the Committee on Government Reform 2004, i). 
The types of errors found in these programs included incorrect in-
formation about the effectiveness of contraceptives and the risks 
of abortion, a blurring of the line between scientific information 
and religious doctrine, a presentation of stereotypes about boys 
and girls as factual information, and a number of straightforward 
scientific errors (Special Investigations Division. Minority Staff of 
the Committee on Government Reform 2004, i–ii). 
 Another issue that concerns opponents of abstinence-only 
programs is the emphasis given such programs by the federal 
government, which annually gives about $170 million for the 
support of abstinence-only sex education. Critics claim that this 
emphasis puts the federal government “out of step not only with 
research, but also with public opinion” (“Few Americans Favor 
Abstinence-only Sex Ed” 2006). Public opinion surveys appear to 
confirm the latter half of this complaint. For example, a study of 

The Content of Sex Education Courses 41
1,096 adult Americans in late 2005 and early 2006 asked whether 
respondents favored abstinence-only sex education programs or 
comprehensive programs (that included both abstinence and other 
approaches to sex education), as well as their attitudes about vari-
ous aspects of sex education programs. Researchers found that 82 
percent of respondents favored a comprehensive approach to the 
teaching of sexuality, and 68 percent approved instruction on the 
proper use of condoms. Thirty-six percent of respondents favored 
an abstinence-only approach to sex education (Bleakley, Hen-
nessy, and Fishbein 2006, 1151). 
 The Future of Abstinence-Only Sex Education 
 A significant change in federal policy about abstinence-only pro-
grams was announced by White House domestic policy coordina-
tor Melody Barnes in May 2009. The 2010 federal budget would 
drastically reduce funding for such programs, she said, with most 
of the money saved being earmarked for teen pregnancy preven-
tion programs. The shift in policy came, Barnes said, in response 
to research findings that abstinence-only programs simply do not 
achieve the goals for which they are designed. “In any area where 
Americans want to confront a problem, they want solutions they 
know will work,” Barnes said, “as opposed to programming they 
know hasn’t proven to be successful” (Jayson 2009). 
 Proponents of abstinence-only education strongly disagreed 
with President Obama’s decision to withdraw funding from such 
programs. In a press release on the topic, the National Abstinence 
Education Association said that 
 the president’s budget ignores research that documents 
a 50% decrease in sexual onset among teens that are en-
rolled in abstinence programs. . . . 
 At a time when teens are subjected to an increasingly 
sexualized culture, it is essential that common-sense leg-
islators from both sides of the aisle reject this extreme at-
tempt to defund the only approach that removes all risk. 
Members of Congress would be well advised to listen to 
youth and parents in their districts who overwhelmingly 
support these valuable programs. (National Abstinence 
Education Association 2009) 
 This statement suggests that a number of individuals still 
strongly support the principle of abstinence-only sex education 

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
in  American schools and that the debate over the content of sex 
education is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. 
 Condom Instruction 
 One of the most controversial topics in school sex education 
programs involves instruction in the use of condoms. Most sex 
educators believe that condom use is an important component 
in conducting a safe sexual life since condoms are an effective 
method of preventing many sexually transmitted infections and 
pregnancy. No one argues that condoms are a perfect solution 
for these problems, although they are among the most effective 
anti-infective and contraceptive devices readily available to teen-
agers and adults. In fact, evidence suggests that a large majority 
of adults favor the inclusion of instruction about condom use in 
any effective school program of sex education (NPR/Kaiser/Ken-
nedy School Poll 2004b, 11). The point at which condoms often 
become an issue in schools is the decision by some schools and 
some school systems to provide free condoms for students who 
request them. According to the most recent data available (from 
1996), 2.2 percent of all schools in the United States and 0.3 per-
cent of all school systems made condoms available to students at 
no cost (Kirby and Brown 1996). A somewhat more recent survey 
for the state of Massachusetts found somewhat larger numbers: 
15 percent of all high schools in the state, enrolling 21 percent 
of the state’s high school students, had free condom programs 
(Blake 2003). These numbers are small, but the announcement of a 
free condom program often stirs up a reaction among parents and 
other citizens in a community (see, for example, Ramos 1996). 
 Perhaps the most common objection to the practice of dis-
tributing condoms to students is that it violates religious beliefs 
of many citizens in the community. In March 2009, for example, 
Stonehill College in suburban Boston banned the distribution of 
condoms on campus. A spokesperson for the college said that the 
college’s policy follows church teachings, and those teachings 
prohibit the use of contraceptive devices (Schworm 2009). Mem-
bers of religious groups are also citizens of the community, and 
their beliefs and value systems should also be respected. Offering 
free condoms to teenagers is an affront to those beliefs and value 
systems and should not be permitted. 
 Opponents to this view point out that the United States is a 
nation where the interests of church and state are kept separate. It 

The Content of Sex Education Courses 43
may be true that the distribution of condoms is offensive to some 
individuals, but if the practice contributes to good public health 
(by way of reduced rates of unwanted pregnancy and sexually 
transmitted infections), then it should be instituted for the general 
well-being of society. 
 Critics of free condom distribution also argue that a program 
of this kind only makes the problems it attempts to solve worse 
because it encourages adolescents to become more sexually ac-
tive. If you teach a boy or girl how to use a condom, they say, that 
person will be more likely to become engaged in sexual activities, 
with a potential increase in the rate of sexually transmitted in-
fections and unplanned pregnancies (Focus on the Family 2009a; 
also see Limbaugh 2007). 
 Proponents of condom distribution point out that numer-
ous studies have now been conducted on the correlation (if 
any) between condom distribution and extent of sexual activity. 
In studies of such programs in two large cities—New York and 
Philadelphia—researchers found that students from schools with 
free condom-distribution programs were no more sexually active 
than students in comparable schools. In the New York case, the 
percentage of students who were sexually active in New York 
City, which has a distribution program, and Chicago, which does 
not, was essentially the same, about 60 percent. In Philadelphia, 
the rate of sexually active teenagers was slightly less in schools 
with distribution programs (56%) than in schools without such 
programs (Guttmacher et al. 1997; Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr., et al. 
1997; also see Schuster et al. 1998; Zabin et al. 1986; Rabb 1998). 
 An additional argument against condom distribution pro-
grams has recently been developed by those opposed to such 
programs, namely that condoms are unreliable devices for pro-
tecting against unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted 
infections. Critics often quote failure rates of up to 20 percent or 
more, indicating that knowledge of how to use a condom does 
not in and of itself guarantee protection against sexually transmit-
ted infections or unwanted pregnancies. A position paper on this 
topic from Focus on the Family, an evangelical Christian organiza-
tion, claims that 
 studies have found condom failure rates in protecting 
against pregnancies for teens to be as high as 22.5 per-
cent. As for protecting against STDs, in 2001 several gov-
ernment health agencies together released a report on 

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
condom effectiveness. The report found evidence that 
condoms are about 85 percent effective in preventing the 
spread of HIV/AIDS. (Is 85 percent good enough in pro-
tecting your child against a deadly and incurable virus?) 
The report also found condoms to be somewhat effective 
in protecting men (but not women) from gonorrhea. But 
the prominent scientists who prepared the report found 
no conclusive evidence that condoms protect against any 
other STD, including HPV, the primary cause of cervical 
cancer, which kills more women than AIDS does. (Focus 
on the Family 2009a; also see Limbaugh 2007; Christian 
Contraception 2009) 
 Proponents of condom distribution respond to this argument by 
explaining that condoms are safe anywhere from 85 to 99 percent 
of the time, depending on a number of factors, including the qual-
ity and age of the condom and the skill with which it is used. They 
base these arguments on information provided by the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention and the American College of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology (American College of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology 2009; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
2009a). Clearly, each side of this argument has a legitimate posi-
tion in that the effectiveness of condoms depends very much on a 
number of factors, such as quality of product and skill in use, and 
ultimately the decision to use one depends on the risk one is will-
ing to take in avoiding infection and pregnancy given the stated 
rates of failure. 
 Homosexuality 
 Another topic that generally receives widespread support for in-
clusion in sex education programs, but among the lowest level 
of support of all topics, is homosexuality. In its 2004 survey of 
public attitudes about sex education, for example, the National 
Public Radio/Kaiser Family Foundation/John F. Kennedy School 
of Government Poll found that 73 percent of respondents found 
it appropriate for sex educators to talk about homosexuality and 
sexual orientation at either the junior high (80% approval) or se-
nior high (73% approval) level, with 25 percent saying the topic 
was not appropriate for either age group (NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy 
School Poll 2004b, 13). While this level of support appears to be 
significant, the topic of homosexuality ranks 16th out of 18  topics 

The Content of Sex Education Courses 45
in the NPR/KFF/JFK poll, followed only by oral sex (72% ap-
proval) and obtaining of contraceptives by girls without paren-
tal consent (71% approval) (NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll 
2004a). These nationwide results have been confirmed in a num-
ber of local polls on the same topic, the appropriateness of vari-
ous topics for sex education classes. In Alabama, for example, a 
state in which respondents might be expected to take a somewhat 
less supportive view of the subject, respondents to a recent poll 
expressed approval for the inclusion of homosexuality in sex edu-
cation courses by almost the same margin as in the NPR/KFF/
JFK poll. In the Alabama poll, 72 percent of respondents approved 
discussions of issues about homosexuality, provided they were 
presented in a neutral and unbiased manner (Center for Govern-
mental Services at Auburn University 2005, 1). A similar study of 
a much smaller population produced very similar results. That 
study, conducted by the University of North Florida, asked re-
spondents about topics they deemed appropriate for sex educa-
tion classes in both middle and high schools. Researchers found 
that 75.8 percent of respondents thought the topic was suitable for 
middle school (8%), high school (23.5%), or both levels (44.3%), 
while 21.5 percent thought the subject was not appropriate for 
either level (Public Opinion Research Laboratory. University of 
North Florida 2006, 24). 
 In spite of the apparently widespread support for discussions 
of issues related to homosexuality in sex education courses, that 
topic has been the focus of a significant number of complaints in 
schools throughout the nation. One of the concerns of some indi-
viduals is that mention of same-sex relationships in a sex educa-
tion class is, in fact, an excuse for promoting homosexuality and 
encouraging more students to become interested in and, perhaps, 
involved in homosexual relationships. Such programs are, these 
individuals say, a way of recruiting boys and girls to the homo-
sexual movement. For example, Louis Sheldon, chairman of the 
Traditional Values Coalition, has written a special report on pro-
grams for the recruitment of children by public schools. In this 
report, Sheldon argues that “[Gay and lesbian] activists use issues 
of ‘safety,’ ‘tolerance,’ and ‘homophobia’ as tactics to promote 
homosexuality in our nation’s schools.” He goes on to say that 
these “militants” are “pushing for aggressive recruitment pro-
grams in public schools. If you want children, what better place to 
find them than in the public schools? After all, since homosexual 
couples can’t reproduce, they will simply go after your children 

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
for seduction and conversion to homosexuality” (Sheldon [n.d.], 
1). One of the most articulate spokespersons for this position has 
been Judith A. Reisman, president of the Institute for Media Edu-
cation. In 2002, she wrote a long article describing, among other 
points, how she believes that gay and lesbian activists are using 
schools to promote homosexuality and to recruit boys and girls 
to becoming gay and lesbian. She concludes that “it has taken or-
ganizational commitment, planning, and effort to cultivate and 
initiate the current crop of bisexual and homosexual youth. How-
ever, on the other hand, homosexuality (bisexuality and transgen-
dered sexuality) is the only extant sexuality cult receiving both tax 
dollars and direct access to school children, with laws protecting 
PROJECT 10 type teachers. The advisor, guide, teacher, or ‘help-
ing hand’ aids recruitment and limits potential escapees during 
all stages of initiation of children into homosexuality” (Reisman 
2002, 327; also see MissionAmerica.com 2007). 
 A second reason for concern about the inclusion of topics 
dealing with same-sex relationships in schools is similar to that for 
the topic of condoms, namely that many individuals have strong 
religious or personal objections to homosexual practices and do 
not believe that schools should present views in opposition to 
their beliefs. This kind of issue has traditionally been a difficult 
one for public schools. The American public undoubtedly has a 
wide range of views on almost any topic taught in public schools. 
Some people, for example, do not believe in the biological theory 
of evolution and, instead, accept the view of life on Earth offered 
under the rubric of “intelligent design.” Such individuals object 
to having their children taught about evolution, unless alternative 
views (such as intelligent design) are taught concurrently. Other 
people may not believe that the Holocaust ever occurred or may 
not subscribe to explanations as to how the Civil War began or 
accept explanations of the fall of Communism presented in his-
tory textbooks. The objections that could be raised to a variety 
of school subjects because they offend the personal beliefs of one 
parent or one group of parents are almost endless. As judges in 
one of the cases involving the issue of homosexuality in sex edu-
cation classes have written, “Public schools often walk a tightrope 
between the many competing constitutional demands made by 
parents, students, teachers, and the schools’ other constituents,” 
after which they enumerated some of those “competing demands” 
(United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit 2007). 

The Content of Sex Education Courses 47
 Perhaps the most common expression of parents’ wishes to 
protect their children from unacceptable ideas has traditionally 
been efforts to have objectionable books removed from school 
libraries or the school curriculum. Among the books most com-
monly challenged over the past half century are works generally 
classified as classics, such as The Great Gatsby, Catcher in the Rye , 
The Grapes of Wrath ,  To Kill a Mockingbird ,  1984 ,  Of Mice and Men , 
Brave New World ,  As I Lay Dying ,  A Farewell to Arms ,  Gone with the 
Wind ,  One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest ,  All the King’s Men , and  Rab-
bit Run (American Library Association 2009). 
 Schools are faced with the challenge of accommodating the 
wishes of individual parents or groups of parents, even though 
those individuals and groups represent only a small minority of 
residents of a district. One of the most common methods for han-
dling this issue is by offering a so-called opt-out option to parents. 
This provision allows parents to choose to have students  not at-
tend certain classes, read certain books, or participate in certain 
school activities that they see as antithetical to their own views. Of 
course, opt-out provisions are generally not made available across 
the board in most systems because of the chaos they might pro-
duce if individual students were to decide which topics they were 
going to study in school and which they were going to ignore 
with an opt-out letter from their parents. 
 Because of the fundamentally controversial aspect of many 
topics in sex education, opt-out options are probably more com-
mon in this field than in any other part of the public school curric-
ulum. The most recent survey of state policies on sex education, 
for example, found that 20 states and the District of Columbia re-
quire the teaching of sex education at some level of instruction. 
Most other states have no such requirement, but do have specific 
policies about the manner in which contraception and abstinence 
are taught. A much larger number of states—35 states and the 
District of Columbia—require that some form of education about 
HIV/AIDS be included in the curriculum. The issue of parental in-
volvement in sex education is the subject of legislation in 38 states 
and the District of Columbia. In three of those states—Arizona, 
Nevada, and Utah—written consent from parents is required in 
order for students to attend a sex education class. In 36 states and 
the District of Columbia, students are allowed to opt out of sex 
education instruction by presenting a letter from parents (Arizona 
has both of these provisions) (Guttmacher Institute 2009). 

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 The question of whether teachers may discuss issues related 
to homosexuality both in formal sex education classes and in 
any other kind of instructional setting has now been reviewed 
by U.S. courts at a number of levels and with regard to a variety 
of specific complaints. Although court decisions have varied, the 
general trend appears to be that exposure of students to topics 
dealing with homosexuality is not unconstitutional (Walsh 1996). 
As an example, the case of Brown v. Hot, Sexy, and Safer Productions
(68 F.3D 525) in 1995 raised the question of whether an assembly 
dealing with HIV/AIDS, which included some graphic presenta-
tions, invaded the privacy rights of students and subjected them 
to sexual harassment because they were required to attend the 
assembly. The suit by students was dismissed by the district court 
on March 5, 1995, a decision that was upheld by the U.S. Court 
of Appeals for the First District on October 23, 1995. The appeals 
court concluded that 
 the facts alleged here are insufficient to state a claim for 
sexual harassment under a hostile environment theory. 
The plaintiffs’ allegations are weak on every one of the 
Harris factors, and when considered in sum, are clearly 
insufficient to establish the existence of an objectively 
hostile or abusive environment. (United States Court of 
Appeals for the First Circuit 1995) 
 Two other cases dealt with the more informal mention of homo-
sexuality in schools. In Godkin v. San Leandro School District , par-
ents complained that their constitutional rights had been violated 
because a teacher made pro-gay statements in a class. In  Berrill v. 
Houde , parents argued that one of the complainant’s children had 
been subjected to “gay recruiting” because the teacher had pro-
hibited the use of derogatory language about gays and lesbians in 
her classroom. California district courts rejected both arguments 
(Stewart 2001, 242–43). 
 One of the most recent cases involving a discussion of ho-
mosexuality in schools is Parker v. Hurley , in which two sets of 
parents sued a number of employees of the Lexington (Massachu-
setts) school district (including superintendent William Hurley) 
for exposing their first- grade children to stories about same-sex 
relationships without having notified parents in advance of this 
activity. The parents argued that their religious tradition found 
that homosexual relationships were repugnant and immoral, and 

The Content of Sex Education Courses 49
that the school’s actions were, therefore, an affront to their reli-
gious beliefs. The parents’ suit was dismissed by the district court 
and then again by the court of appeals. The latter court ruled that 
 public schools are not obliged to shield individual 
students from ideas which potentially are religiously 
offensive, particularly when the school imposes no re-
quirement that the student agree with or affirm those 
ideas, or even participate in discussions about them. 
. . . On the facts, there is no viable claim of “indoctri-
nation” here. Without suggesting that such showings 
would suffice to establish a claim of indoctrination, we 
note the plaintiffs’ children were not forced to read the 
books on pain of suspension. Nor were they subject to a 
constant stream of like materials. There is no allegation 
here of a formalized curriculum requiring students to 
read many books affirming gay marriage. . . . The read-
ing by a teacher of one book, or even three, and even if 
to a young and impressionable child, does not constitute 
“indoctrination.” (United States Court of Appeals for the 
First Circuit 2007) 
 The status of the discussion of homosexuality in sex education 
classes in public schools cannot be considered a matter of settled 
case law at this point. Still, for parents who object to having their 
children exposed to this topic, an opt-out option, in which they 
can have their children excused from such classes, generally ap-
pears to be the most prudent way of avoiding having to deal with 
this issue in the courts. 
 A topic increasingly mentioned in connection with same-sex 
relationships is the issue of gender identity. Over the past decade, 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual groups have more frequently been in-
cluding transgendered individuals and issues in their work. Con-
current with that change has been the effort to include instruction 
about transgender issues in school sex education programs. 
 Thus far, relatively little progress has been made in this ef-
fort, at least partly because of the dominance of abstinence-only 
education in many of the nation’s schools. In the NPR/KFF/JFK 
survey discussed above, no mention was made of transgender is-
sues, so no information is available from that source about the 
occurrence of transgender issues in schools or how the general 
public feels about including this topic in sex education programs. 

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Some data are available from another source, however, the 2008 
GENIUS Index (Gender Equality National Index for Universities 
and Schools), conducted by the Gender Public Advocacy Coali-
tion (GenderPAC). According to that study, seven states have en-
acted policies to protect students from bullying and harassment 
on the basis of gender identity. Overall, the study found that 
more than 4,250,000 students in 1,115 high schools, 1,142 middle 
schools, 3,131 elementary schools, and 320 preschools are covered 
by antiharassment policies established by states or local school 
systems. Included among these policies are antiharassment pro-
tections adopted by 8 of the nation’s 25 largest school systems: 
New York City Public Schools, Houston Independent School 
District, Hillsborough County School District, Philadelphia City 
Schools, Detroit City School District, Montgomery County Pub-
lic Schools, Prince George’s County Public Schools, and Memphis 
City School District (2008 GENIUS Index). This studies provides 
no information about the inclusion of gender identity in sex edu-
cation courses, data which apparently does not currently exist. 
 Abortion 
 There is probably no issue related to human sexuality—and prob-
ably no issue in modern American society—more controversial 
than abortion. That topic deserves far more extensive and detailed 
attention than can be provided in this book (but see McBride 2007). 
The question can be asked, however, how the topic of abortion is 
integrated into programs of sex education and how parents, teach-
ers, students, and the general community feel about this allotment 
of time and attention to such a controversial subject. Surprisingly, 
relatively little information is available on any of these ques-
tions, especially in view of the extensive research that has been 
done about other possible topics for sex education classes, such 
as sexually transmitted infections, contraception and pregnancy, 
and sexual orientation and gender identity. One study provides a 
hint as to the reason for this situation. In 2000, researchers at the 
Guttmacher Institute reported on changes that had taken place in 
sex education programs in the United States between 1988 and 
1999. One of the trends they found was that some controversial 
issues in sexuality were receiving significantly less attention at the 
end of that period than at the beginning. Discussion of topics such 
as abortion, condom use, and sexual orientation had decreased 
by anywhere from 14 to 20 percent between 1988 and 1999. Even 

The Content of Sex Education Courses 51
though significant majorities of sex education teachers thought 
these topics were important (89%, 81%, and 78%, respectively), 
they were less like to be included in sex education classes at the 
end of the study period than at the beginning. The actual percent-
age of classes in which each of the three topics was covered was 
62 percent, 52 percent, and 50 percent, respectively, representing 
a difference of 27 percent, 29 percent, and 28 percent, respectively, 
in the attention teachers thought  they should give a subject from 
the amount they did  give to the subject (Dailard 2001). An im-
portant factor in this trend appears to be fears among teachers 
of community reaction against the inclusion of such topics in sex 
education courses. According to the Guttmacher study, more than 
a third of all teachers interviewed expressed such concerns (Dai-
lard 2001). Interestingly enough, these fears may not reflect the 
interests and concerns of most community members, as expressed 
in studies such as the NPR/KFF/JFK survey discussed earlier. In 
the single question about abortion asked in that survey, 85 per-
cent of respondents said that they thought that abortion topics 
are a legitimate subject for inclusion in sex education programs at 
 either the middle school or high school level, or both. By contrast, 
13 percent of respondents felt that abortion was not a suitable 
topic in sex education courses for students at either level (NPR/
Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll 2004b, 12). 
 An even more powerful influence in the decreased attention 
paid to abortion and other controversial topics may have been the 
increasing emphasis on abstinence-only education that developed 
during the period covered by the Guttmacher study. That study 
found that the fraction of teachers who offered abstinence-only 
courses increased from 2 percent in 1988 to 23 percent in 1999 
(Darroch, Landry, and Singh 2000, 204). Such courses may be less 
likely than comprehensive sex education programs to mention 
abortion.
 Of even greater concern, perhaps, is the finding produced by 
one important study that abortion information that is provided 
by abstinence-only education programs may be biased or incor-
rect. In its 2004 study of 13 widely used abstinence-only education 
programs, for example, the Special Investigations Division (SID) 
of the House Committee on Government Reform noted that most 
abstinence-only programs are explicitly antiabortion and, per-
haps for that reason, subject to providing erroneous information. 
The SID listed a number of statements and assertions provided in 
abstinence-only programs and pointed out how these statements 

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
and assertions differ from generally accepted scientific informa-
tion (Special Investigations Division 2004, i, 13–14). 
 In any case, specialists in the field of sex education have 
given considerable thought to the presentation of abortion topics 
in school classes and have devised a number of suggestions for 
such curricula. One of the most detailed of these studies is one 
conducted by the Sexuality Information and Education Council 
of the United States (SIECUS). In its 2004 publication, Guidelines
for Comprehensive Sexuality Education,  SIECUS suggests two dozen 
concepts about abortion that can be presented at any one of four 
development levels: middle childhood (ages 5 through 8), preado-
lescence (ages 9 through 12), early adolescence (ages 12 through 
15), and adolescence (ages 15 through 18). These concepts cover 
not only factual information about abortion, but also legal, ethical, 
social, and psychological issues related to the procedure (National 
Guidelines Task Force 2004, 61–62). 
 What Should Schools Teach about Sex? 
 The question of what schools should teach about human sexuality 
appears to be one that concerns citizens in almost every part of the 
United States. A recent survey of Web sites devoted to discussions 
about sex education curricula in public schools on Google found 
many descriptions of debates taking place on the content of pro-
grams in a variety of districts, including Winston-Salem/Forsyth 
County, North Carolina; Montgomery County, Maryland; Palm 
Beach County, Florida; Guilford County, North Carolina; Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; El Paso, Texas; Sangamon 
County, Illinois; and St. Lucie County, Florida. In virtually all cases, 
parents and other interested stakeholders were arguing about the 
appropriate place of instruction on abortion, same-sex relationships, 
condom use, and other topics discussed earlier in this chapter. 
 Some national organizations have attempted to develop 
model curricula that can be adopted in whole or that can be ad-
opted to fit local school situations. One of the best known of these 
recommendations can be found in  Guidelines for Comprehensive 
Sexuality Education,  a report published by the Sexuality Informa-
tion and Education Council of the United States (SIECUS). This 
publication was developed by a panel of experts from a num-
ber of organizations with an interest in sex education, including 
the American Medical Association, March of Dimes Birth Defect 
 Association, National Education Association, National School 

Issues That Transcend School Programs 53
Boards  Association, Planned Parenthood, and SIECUS itself, along 
with representatives of secondary schools and colleges and uni-
versities. The third edition of the guidelines was issued in 2004. 
 The  Guidelines  publication itself focuses on general princi-
ples, rather than providing specific lesson plans for sex educa-
tion classes. The publication begins with a discussion of certain 
desirable behaviors of a “sexually healthy adult,” including items 
such as “appreciate one’s own body,” “avoid exploitative and 
manipulative relationships,” “take responsibility for one’s own 
behavior,” and “develop critical-thinking skills.” The publication 
then moves on to list six key concepts that should drive an effec-
tive curriculum in sex education: human development, relation-
ships, personal skills, sexual behavior, sexual health, and society 
and culture. Each of these key concepts is, in turn, subdivided into 
smaller subconcepts, such as reproductive and sexual anatomy 
and physiology, puberty, sexual orientation, marriage and life-
time commitments, raising children, assertiveness, negotiation, 
masturbation, sexual abstinence, contraception, abortion, sexual 
abuse, sexual assault, gender roles, and sexuality and religion 
(National Guidelines Task Force 2004, 18). 
 Although the  Guidelines  publication does not itself include 
specific recommendations for curricula, SIECUS does provide ac-
cess on its SexEdLibrary Web site to more than 100 lesson plans, 
some of which it has developed itself, and some of which have 
been adopted from other sources, suitable for instruction in the 39 
topics listed in the Guidelines (SexEdLibrary.org 2009). 
 Issues That Transcend School Programs 
 A number of issues with which young men and women have to 
deal transcend the formal school experience, although they may 
appear at some point within formal school sex education pro-
grams also. Two examples of such issues have to do with access 
to contraceptive materials and devices by adolescent girls, and 
vaccination against the human papillomavirus (HPV) for prepu-
bescent girls. 
 Access to Contraceptive Devices 
 A number of schools and school systems have considered whether 
they should provide contraceptives to all students who ask for 

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
them. This issue is an expanded version of the question consid-
ered earlier with regard to the dispensing of free condoms to 
male students who request them. The two issues are not identi-
cal, at least partly, apparently, because the general public may 
have somewhat differing views about sexually active males 
(who might request condoms) and sexually active females (who 
might request oral contraceptives or other birth control materi-
als and devices). According to recent polls, most Americans seem 
to approve of schools’ providing contraceptive devices to young 
women. In a 2007 poll conducted by Ipsos Public Affairs, about a 
third of all respondents approved providing birth control devices 
to all students who ask for them (30%), another third approved 
the practice only if students have parental approval (37%), and 
another third do not approve of having schools dispense contra-
ceptives under any circumstances (PollingReport.com 2009). On 
the question of how the availability of contraceptives might affect 
the sexual activity of teenagers, respondents were evenly split. 
Forty-nine percent of respondents said they did not believe that 
the availability of contraceptives would encourage adolescents to 
be more sexually active, while 46 percent had the opposite view, 
believing that access to birth control would make adolescents 
more likely to be sexually active. Finally, a significant majority of 
respondents felt that the availability of contraceptives would con-
tribute to a reduction in the number of teenage pregnancies (62%), 
while smaller numbers thought that it would have no effect (22%) 
or would actually result in an increase in the number of pregnan-
cies (13%) (PollingReport.com 2009). 
 The question of whether schools should dispense birth con-
trol devices became national news in October 2007, when school 
officials at King Middle School in Portland, Maine, announced a 
new policy of providing contraceptives to children of high school 
age who were still enrolled in middle school. The decision was 
apparently one of very few instances in the United States in 
which contraceptive-dispensing programs were available at the 
middle school level. School officials pointed out that only 5 of the 
school’s 510 pupils would qualify for the program because of its 
age restrictions. They said that one motivating factor in providing 
the program was that there had been seven pregnancies among 
middle school students in Portland’s three middle schools in the 
preceding five years. On the basis of reports by many students 
that they were, indeed, sexually active, the school had been hand-
ing out free condoms since 2000, but they had not had, and had 

Issues That Transcend School Programs 55
not requested, the authority to issue oral contraceptives also (CBS 
News 2007). 
 A number of parents approved of the school’s decision. One 
mother and school board member said that “as a parent, I would 
hope that my child would come to me first. But if she doesn’t feel 
comfortable, then I know that there’s somebody there, and a sup-
port system in place for them to be able to talk to somebody.” 
Another parent said that she was elated with the school’s deci-
sion, and that critics of the new program should “just get over it.” 
A number of parents and other interested observers had a some-
what different reaction. The nine people who spoke against the 
proposal at the school board meeting had two major concerns. 
First, they thought that making birth control devices available to 
students would encourage them to become more sexually active. 
Second, they were troubled that parents would not be notified 
if students requested contraceptive devices and/or if the school 
provided such devices (Bouchard 2007). In any case, the school 
refused to retract its decision to offer contraceptives to King stu-
dents, and six months later, only one student had taken advantage 
of the new program (Sharp 2008). 
 The administration of contraceptive-dispensing programs 
is most commonly the responsibility of school-based health cen-
ters, in-school programs most commonly operated by hospitals, 
medical schools, local health departments, or community health 
centers. In 2009, there were about 1,700 of these centers, represent-
ing about 6 percent of all schools in the United States (National 
Assembly on School-Based Health Care 2009; National Center for 
Education Statistics 2009, table 5). Of this number, about a third 
offered birth control devices to students (“Others Not Likely to 
Follow School’s Contraception Move” 2007). In this respect, then, 
the number of students in the United States who have access to 
birth control devices through schools is very small, roughly 2 per-
cent of all students in the nation, almost all of them high school 
students.
 The question of whether or not schools should be permitted 
(or required) to distribute contraceptive devices has become a 
common topic on the Internet. Dozens of blogs debate the pros and 
cons of the issue, generally with the same arguments being made 
for and against the practice. Among the 17 respondents writing in 
favor of school distribution programs on the Helium Web site, the 
most common position was that teenagers are going to be sexu-
ally active in any case, so helping them to protect against sexually 

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
transmitted infections and pregnancy is an important challenge 
for schools. One blogger expressed her view as follows: 
 Birth control should be available in schools because young 
people are not going to stop experimenting. Along with 
the birth control, should be expert advice on how to use 
it, and what the consequences are if they don’t. . . . The 
sex drive is high on the list of human needs. In the teens, 
boys particularly are keen to try it out and not every girl 
will be able to refuse. While generally girls are blamed 
for getting pregnant, she is usually unfortunate and has 
possibly been pressured into having sex by the powerful 
urges of her contemporary males. (Redfern 2009) 
 A number of bloggers also emphasized the use of contraceptives 
as a way that teenagers can protect themselves against disease 
and pregnancy, especially when they have not been properly edu-
cated about sexual topics in their own homes or at school. In the 
Helium poll, Kerah Pierce writes that 
 I don’t think it is encouraging teenagers to have sex but 
to learn more about it. If high schoolers know how to 
protect themselves instead of doing what they think is 
right they would be better off. Many teenagers that ex-
periment do not know the risks or the proper way to pro-
tect themselves from disease or possible pregnancy. . . . 
Parents who are shy about the topic have kids that learn 
about it from school and friends. Normally when a teen 
learns about this subject from friends it is not accurate 
statements. Teens need to learn the importance of pro-
tection but to be abstinent also. It is better that a teen use 
protection rather than nothing at all. (Pierceall 2009) 
 A common argument against allowing schools to distribute con-
traceptives is that the practice will provide legitimacy for teenag-
ers to be more sexually active. As one Helium blogger expressed 
the view: 
 If you start doing that at your school, your [ sic ] send-
ing the wrong message to kids that it is okay to be hav-
ing sex. I mean after all, schools do have sex education 
courses for this type of thing. Do we not stress enough 

Issues That Transcend School Programs 57
about teenage girls becoming pregnant to begin with? . . . 
If you start firing away with birth control, kids will just 
think it’s really cool to have sex whenever they want. 
 So if a young person wants to get birth control, then 
they need to get their own, and experience life their own 
way. If you give them the birth control, your [ sic ] giving 
them a gun that will take their life away. (Burton 2009) 
 A number of bloggers in the Helium poll acknowledged concerns 
about the transmission of sexual infections and the possibility of 
unplanned pregnancies. They simply did not believe that solv-
ing these problems was the business of schools. As one blogger 
writes:
 It is my very deeply held conviction that public schools 
should never dispense birth control materials to teenag-
ers. Never. 
 It is not the school’s business to invade the private 
lives of its students. The responsibility of the school is to 
teach, and nothing more. It is not the responsibility of the 
school to act as a surrogate parent. . . . 
 The use of birth control is a personal, family matter, 
and decisions concerning its use should be made only by 
a family, not by outsiders. (Parsons 2009) 
 Among the more than 500 adults and teenagers who participated 
in the Helium poll, the majority (56%) opposed the practice of 
schools handing out contraceptives. The poll was not, of course, 
conducted scientifically and represented the views of only those 
individuals who chose to participate (Helium 2009). 
 Access to Contraceptives outside of Schools 
 The issue of access to contraceptive devices transcends debates 
about the role of schools. Such devices are, of course, also available 
at pharmacies, family planning centers, and other facilities that 
have nothing to do with the educational establishment. Generally 
speaking the opportunity for buying male contraceptive devices, 
such as condoms and spermicides, is somewhat easier than it is 
for buying female contraceptives since the former are generally 
available to boys and men of any age without a prescription. Fe-
male contraceptive devices, however, are generally available only 

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
by prescription. One question, then, is whether and under what 
circumstances a medical professional might be prompted to write 
a prescription for a contraceptive device for an underage girl. In 
fact, such instances are probably rare and occur in most cases not 
for the purpose of providing contraception but to deal with other 
reproductive problems, such as irregular or difficult menstrual 
periods (Van Hooffet al. 1998). It has also been reported that one 
can order female contraceptive devices through the Internet from 
sources outside the United States (see, for example, 111DrugStore.
com 2009). 
 The Controversy over Plan B 
 One of the most contentious issues about contraceptives for 
women in the past decade has been with regard to the approval 
of a form of emergency contraception (EC) known as Plan B. 
Plan B consists of two pills, each containing 0.75 milligrams of 
the hormone levonorgestrel to be taken within 72 hours of sexual 
intercourse. The pills prevent the release of a fertilized egg from 
the ovaries, thus interrupting the earliest stages of pregnancy. 
Plan B was approved as a prescription drug by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) in May 1999. In April 2003, the 
drug manufacturers submitted a petition to the FDA to have the 
drug’s status changed from a prescription product to an over-the-
counter (OTC) drug. Eight months later, an FDA advisory com-
mittee voted 23 to 4 to approve the petition, but the FDA itself 
declined to accept that recommendation and kept Plan B on its 
prescription-only list. 
 Over the next 32 months, the FDA declined to change its posi-
tion on the availability of Plan B, a period of time characterized 
by intense political lobbying by both proponents and opponents 
of changing the drug’s status to OTC from prescription only. To-
ward the end of this period, the controversy became further com-
plicated as the U.S. Congress declined to move forward on the 
nomination of Andrew von Eschenbach as commissioner of the 
FDA until the agency agreed to change its position on Plan B. Fi-
nally, on August 24, 2006, the FDA did just that, approving the use 
of Plan B for purchase by women and their male partners over the 
age of 18 (The Emergency Contraception Website 2009). 
 The FDA’s decision did not end the controversy over Plan 
B, however, as proponents of the drug insisted that it should be 
available without prescription for women 17 and older, not 18 and 

Issues That Transcend School Programs 59
older. Opponents argued that 17 is simply too young for a girl 
to be able to purchase contraceptive devices without the advice 
and approval of a physician and/or her parents. They also cited 
the slippery-slope argument, that dropping the age from 18 to 17 
made it easier to drop the age even further—or perhaps eliminate 
the age provision entirely—at some time in the future (Galanos 
2009).
 For another 30 months, the FDA declined to change its posi-
tion on the 17-year-old versus 18-year-old controversy. Finally, in 
March 2009, Judge Edward R. Korman, of the U.S. District Court 
for the Eastern District of New York, ordered the FDA to adopt 
the younger age standard and allow 17-year-old women and 
their male partners over the age of 17 to purchase Plan B over 
the counter (United States District Court. Eastern District of New 
York 2009). A month later, the FDA acted on that order and made 
the contraceptive available to women 17 and older (U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration 2009). 
 Pharmacist Choice in Filling Contraceptive Prescriptions 
 Yet another issue involving the furnishing of contraceptives to 
women has arisen in the past decade. That issue concerns the 
right of pharmacists who disagree with the use of contraceptives 
to decline to fill legally written prescriptions for such pharma-
cists. As an example: In January 2005, a mother of six children 
visited a Walgreens pharmacy in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to have a 
prescription filled for emergency contraception because her hus-
band’s condom failed during an act of intercourse. The Walgreen 
pharmacist refused to fill the prescription, telling the woman that 
“You’re a murderer. I will not help you kill this baby. I will not have 
the blood on my hands” (Chandrasekhar 2006). The  woman’s re-
sponse that she was requesting emergency contraception, which 
does not produce an abortion, was rejected by the pharmacist. 
 The “freedom of choice for pharmacists” movement is based 
on the belief that an individual pharmacist who objects to abor-
tion or the use of contraceptives because of his or her religious, 
moral, or ethical beliefs is justified in refusing to fill a prescription 
for a contraceptive. The public record is now replete with many 
examples of cases of this kind in almost every state of the union, 
ranging from local family-owned pharmacies to giants like those 
operated in Target, Walgreens, Winn Dixie, and Wal-Mart stores 
(Coyne 2005; also see Planned Parenthood Affiliates of New  Jersey 

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
2009). A representative of the Christian Legal Society’s Center for 
Law and Religious Freedom, which defends pharmacists who 
take this position, has said that “more and more pharmacists are 
becoming aware of their right to conscientiously refuse to pass 
objectionable medications across the counter. We are on the very 
front edge of a wave that’s going to break not too far down the 
line” (News Journal 2005). 
 The American Pharmaceutical Association (APhA) has taken 
a stance in support of the right of pharmacists to refuse to fill pre-
scriptions that violate their personal beliefs. The APhA’s official 
position is that 
 APhA recognizes the individual pharmacist’s right to 
exercise conscientious refusal and supports the estab-
lishment of systems to ensure patient’s access to legally 
prescribed therapy without compromising the pharma-
cist’s right of conscientious refusal. When this policy is 
implemented correctly, and proactively, it is seamless to 
the patient, and the patient is not aware that the pharma-
cist is stepping away from the situation. In sum, APhA 
supports the ability of the pharmacist to step away, not 
in the way, and supports the establishment of an alterna-
tive system for delivery of patient care. 
 APhA policy does not support lecturing a patient or 
taking any action to obstruct patient access to clinically 
appropriate, legally prescribed therapy. APhA policy 
does not interject the pharmacist between the patient 
and the physician. (American Pharmacists Association 
2008)
 Not all medical professionals agree with the APhA. The Ameri-
can Medical Association (AMA), for example, has taken the posi-
tion that pharmacists should not come between patients and the 
medical advice provided by their physicians. The association ex-
pressed concern about the actions of pharmacists who object to 
filling a prescription and then refuse to return the prescription to a 
patient, increasing the difficulty in having the prescription filled. 
The AMA House of Delegates passed a resolution at its 2005 meet-
ing supporting the action of states and the federal government to 
ensure that patients are able to have legally written prescriptions 
filled whether or not a specific pharmacist has individual objec-
tions to the material required by a prescription (Adams 2005). 

Issues That Transcend School Programs 61
 Both the state and federal government have begun to take 
legal action on the question of whether pharmacists have the right 
to refuse to fill prescriptions that offend their personal religious, 
ethical, or moral beliefs. The first regulation of this kind was ad-
opted in Illinois in April 2005, when Governor Rod Blagojevich 
issued an emergency rule stating that pharmacies in the state that 
sell contraceptives are not allowed to refuse to fill prescriptions 
because of personal beliefs about contraception and abortion 
 (Illinois Government News Network 2005). Since that action, just 
under a hundred bills have been filed in state legislatures regard-
ing the rights of a pharmacist to refuse to fill prescriptions for 
contraceptives. Those bills fall into two general categories, those 
allowing pharmacists to take such actions with fear of reprisals 
for their decisions, and those prohibiting pharmacists from refus-
ing to fill such prescriptions. As of May 2009, 11 bills had been 
enacted in California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maine, 
Mississippi, South Dakota, Tennessee, and Washington State. 
Eight of those laws reaffirm the right of a pharmacist to fill a pre-
scription with which he or she does not agree, for whatever rea-
son. Only the California, Illinois, and Washington legislation has 
the opposite force, requiring a pharmacist to fill any legally writ-
ten prescription for a contraceptive (National Conference of State 
Legislatures 2009). 
 In June 2007, U.S. Representative Carolyn B. Maloney 
(D-NY) and Senator Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ) introduced a 
bill, H.R. 2596/S. 1075, to establish federal policy on the fill-
ing of prescriptions for contraceptives by pharmacists. The bill, 
known as the Access to Birth Control Act, had two major provi-
sions. First, a pharmacist was not permitted to refuse to fill a 
legally written prescription on the basis of his or her personal 
objections to the use of contraceptives. If the prescribed medica-
tion was not available, a pharmacist would be required to take 
one of a number of possible actions to see that the prescription 
would be properly filled. Second, a pharmacist would not be 
allowed to “intimidate, threaten, harass customers,” “interfere 
or obstruct” with filling of a prescription, “intentionally mis-
represent or deceive customers” about a prescription, “breach 
medical confidentiality” in filling a prescription,” or “refuse 
to return” a valid prescription (U.S. House of Representatives 
2007). 
 Opponents of birth control and contraceptives argued that 
the bill imposed on their own religious and ethical beliefs. For 

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
example, an article in a newsletter published by the Concerned 
Women for America of Kansas argued that 
 historically, the right to refuse to do something that vio-
lates one’s conscience has been honored by civilized so-
ciety. Only in the realm of despots are people forced to 
do something that is inherently wrong for them, particu-
larly when it involves taking a life. . . . 
 The FDA has been known to make mistakes in ap-
proving drugs, and doctors have made mistakes in 
prescribing. Pharmacists provide a line of defense to 
ensure that patients’ lives and health are protected and 
can make patients aware of ethical concerns. Yet this bill 
would punish pharmacists up to $500,000 for acting on 
their ethical duty. (Concerned Women for America of 
Kansas 2007) 
 In any case, the debate over the Access to Birth Control Act of 
2007 has become moot since the bill was never considered by the 
House committee to which it was referred, and it died at the end 
of the 100th Congress. The issue of pharmacists’ right to fill or not 
refill prescriptions, however, is almost certainly not dead, and it 
may well appear in some future congressional debate. 
 Human Papillomavirus (HPV) 
 The term  human papillomavirus  refers to a group of viruses that 
cause warts and certain types of cancer. Some HPV viruses cause 
no symptoms whatsoever, and an individual with these viruses is 
unaware that she or he has been infected. More than 130 variet-
ies of the human papillomavirus have been identified, about 40 
of which can be transmitted by intimate or sexual contact. Sexu-
ally transmitted HPV viruses are classified as low-risk or high-
risk. Low-risk viruses are responsible for an infection known as 
genital warts, which are soft, moist, pinkish warts that appear on 
the vagina, cervix, penis, or anus. They are uncomfortable and 
sometimes painful, but they represent no serious long-term medi-
cal threat to an individual. They can be removed by a physician, 
although the virus remains in the body and the warts may return 
at a later date. High-risk viruses can lead to cancer of the vulva, 
vagina, and anus in women and cancer of the anus and penis in 
men.

Issues That Transcend School Programs 63
 Genital HPV infections are currently the most common sexu-
ally transmitted infection in the United States. The Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that about 20 
million Americans are currently infected with one strain or an-
other of HPV, and 6.2 million new infections occur every year. The 
CDC estimates that about 1 percent of all sexually active Ameri-
cans have genital warts at any one time (Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention 2009b). 
 By far the most serious issue with regard to HPV infections is 
the risk of cancer that some strains of the virus pose. The Ameri-
can Cancer Society has estimated that there will be 11,270 new 
cases of cervical cancer diagnosed in the United States in 2009 and 
4,070 deaths from the disease during the same period. Compa-
rable figures for other forms of HPV-related cancers are 3,580 new 
cases of vulvar cancer and 900 deaths; 2,160 new cases of vaginal 
cancer and 770 deaths; 1,290 new cases of penile cancer and 300 
deaths; 5,290 new cases of anal cancer and 710 deaths (American 
Cancer Society 2009). 
 The treatments for HPV-related cancer are similar to those for 
other types of cancer, primarily chemotherapy and radiation. As 
with most medical problems, the best approach is to adopt behav-
iors that reduce the risk of contracting cancer. In the case of HPV 
infections, the most effective method of prevention is abstinence 
and/or restricting one’s sexual activity to well-established long-
term relationships with a person whose sexual history is known. 
Condoms also provide some measure of protection against HPV 
infections, although that protection is limited because condoms 
do not necessarily cover all regions of the body through which 
infection may spread. 
 In June 2006, the FDA gave its approval for the marketing of 
a new vaccine against four strains of HPV: HPV 6, HPV 11, HPV 
16, and HPV 18. The first two of these strains are responsible for 
about 90 percent of all cases of genital warts, while the latter two 
are responsible for about 70 percent of all cases of cervical cancer, 
as well as some cases of anal cancer. The vaccine, called Gardasil, 
made by Merck & Company, is administered in a series of three 
injections over a period of six months. It is recommended for girls 
between the ages of 11 and 12, although it can be given as early as 
age 9 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2007). 
 One might expect the availability of a vaccine against four 
dangerous strains of HPV to be enthusiastically supported by 
anyone interest in sexual health. And, in fact, most such groups 

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
are pleased that this new option for sexual health care is avail-
able. However, controversy has developed over some possible 
applications of the new vaccine. For example, in July 2008, the 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services announced that 
women between the ages of 11 and 26 applying to immigrate 
to the United States would henceforth be required to be vacci-
nated against HPV (U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 
2008). The agency’s decision was met with objections from a 
number of women’s groups, who argued that required vaccina-
tions infringe on a woman’s right to make important decisions 
about her own reproductive health. For example, the National 
Organization for Women (NOW) issued a press release saying 
that 
 the new requirement violates a woman’s basic right to 
self-determination, creates additional barriers for immi-
grant families seeking adjustment of status, and unfairly 
forces immigrant women to subject their bodies to a new 
treatment with known side effects. . . . 
 The HPV vaccination requirement is essentially a 
surcharge applied only to young immigrant women that 
will effectively block them from immigrating to the U.S. 
or becoming U.S. citizens. Gardasil is the most expensive 
vaccine on the market, costing a person nearly $500. . . . 
This is and can be a lot of money for women seeking ad-
justment of immigration status. (National Organization 
for Women 2008) 
 Another area in which debate has developed over the use of the 
new HPV vaccine is the public school system. Some advocates for 
the vaccine have argued that its use is really a public health issue, 
similar to the use of vaccination to prevent other kinds of infec-
tious disease. They recommend that vaccination of young girls be 
required as a condition of school entry, as is the case with vacci-
nations for diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, 
polio, varicella, measles, mumps, rubella, and some other conta-
gious diseases (although requirements differ by state). If society is 
able to prevent cervical cancer, anal cancer, and other devastating 
diseases, should it not do so, they ask? 
 Perhaps the strongest representation of this position occurred 
in 2007, when Governor Rick Perry of Texas issued an executive 
order requiring all girls to be vaccinated for HPV as a condition 

In Conclusion 65
for entry into sixth grade in the state’s schools. In announcing his 
order, Perry said: 
 Never before have we had an opportunity to prevent 
cancer with a simple vaccine. While I understand the 
concerns expressed by some, I stand firmly on the side of 
protecting life. The HPV vaccine does not promote sex, it 
protects women’s health. In the past, young women who 
have abstained from sex until marriage have contracted 
HPV from their husbands and faced the difficult task of 
defeating cervical cancer. This vaccine prevents that from 
happening. (Office of the Governor Rick Perry 2007) 
 Perry’s executive order angered almost every group in the state, 
from women’s rights activists to right-to-life supporters to mem-
bers of both parties in the state legislature. Perry’s own lieutenant 
governor, for example, noted that “I think while the HPV vac-
cine can play a very important role in preventing cervical cancer, I 
don’t think government should ever presume to know better than 
the parents” (MacLaggan 2007). Two months after Perry issued 
his executive order, the Texas legislature voted overwhelmingly 
to overturn that order. It passed a bill (135 to 2 in the house and 
30 to 1 in the senate) delaying the implementation of an HPV vac-
cination plan until at least 2011 (Blumenthal 2007). 
 The Texas debate over HPV vaccinations raised some more 
general questions about efforts by the drug’s manufacturer, Merck, 
in trying to convince state governments to make such vaccina-
tions mandatory for school children. Questions were raised about 
Merck’s own role in Perry’s decision and about its involvement in 
other states’ consideration about the inclusion of HPV vaccination 
in state immunization programs. The company finally decided to 
issue a public statement that it would no longer pursue its efforts 
to convince states of the value of requiring HPV vaccinations for 
elementary school girls (Childs 2007). 
 In Conclusion 
 In some ways, the American public appears to have reached con-
sensus on some fundamental issues relating to sexual health. 
There appears, first of all, to be widespread support for the princi-
ple that adolescents should receive some type of education about 

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
human sexuality in public schools. Furthermore, there is a sig-
nificant consensus on the topics that ought to be included in such 
sex education programs, with general approval for a number of 
topics, especially those related to sexually transmitted infections 
and pregnancy and contraception. Other topics about which there 
has traditionally been some disagreement, such as sexual orienta-
tion and certain types of sexual behaviors, receive less enthusias-
tic support, but are still approved by about three quarters of the 
general population. 
 Some issues related to sexual health are still very controver-
sial, however, and attempts to include them in public school pro-
grams tend to create sometimes fiery debate. The distribution of 
condoms and other contraceptive devices and the discussion of 
same-sex relationships are just two such topics. History suggests 
that reasoned discussion among those on all sides of an issue may 
eventually result in curriculum decisions that will help students 
have access to important information that they can use in building 
their own philosophy of human sexuality. 
 References 
 Adams, Damon. 2005. “AMA to Protect Patient Access to Medications.” 
AMNews, July 11. http://www.ama-assn.org/amednews/2005/07/11/
prsd0711.htm. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 American Cancer Society. 2009. “What Are the Key Statistics about 
Anal Cancer/Penile Cancer/Vaginal Cancer/Vulvar Cancer?” http://
www.cancer.org/docroot/CRI/content/CRI_2_4_1X_What_are_
the_key_statistics_for_Anal_Cancer_47.asp; http://www.cancer.org/
docroot/CRI/content/CRI_2_4_1X_What_are_the_key_statistics_for_
Penile_Cancer_47.asp; http://www.cancer.org/docroot/CRI/content/
CRI_2_4_1X_What_are_the_key_statistics_for_Vaginal_Cancer_47.asp; 
http://www.cancer.org/docroot/CRI/content/CRI_2_4_1X_What_are_
the_key_statistics_for_Vulvar_Cancer_47.asp. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. “Contraception.” 
Online brochure. http://www.acog.org/publications/patient_
education/bp022.cfm. Accessed on June 8, 2009. 
 American Library Association. 2009. “Banned and/or Challenged 
Books from the Radcliffe Publishing Course Top 100 Novels of the 
20th Century.” http://www.ala.org/ala/issuesadvocacy/banned/
frequentlychallenged/challengedclassics/reasonsbanned.cfm. Accessed 
on June 14, 2009. 

References 67
 American Pharmacists Association. 2008. “Issue Brief: Pharmacist 
Conscience Clause.” http://www.pharmacist.com/AM/Template.
cfm?Section=Home2&TEMPLATE=/CM/ContentDisplay.
cfm&CONTENTID=15688. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Blake, Susan M. et al. 2003. “Condom Availability Programs in 
Massachusetts High Schools: Relationships With Condom Use and 
Sexual Behavior.”  American Journal of Public Health 93 (6): 955–61. 
 Bleakley, Amy, Michael Hennessy, and Martin Fishbein. 2006. “Public 
Opinion on Sex Education in U.S. Schools.” Archives of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine 160 (11; November): 1151–56. 
 Blumenthal, Ralph. 2007. “Texas Legislators Block Shots for Girls 
Against Cancer Virus.”  New York Times, April 26. http://www.nytimes.
com/2007/04/26/us/26texas.html?_r=2&oref=slogin. Accessed on June 
16, 2009. 
 Bouchard, Kelley. 2007. “Middle School Adds Birth Control Options.” 
Portland Press Herald/Maine Sunday Telegram, October 18. http://
pressherald.mainetoday.com/story.php?id=141436&ac=PHnws. 
Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Burton, Ryan. 2009. “Should Schools Give Teens Birth Control?” http://
www.helium.com/debates/161091-should-schools-give-teens-birth-
control/side_by_side?page=4. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 CBS News. 2007. “Birth Control for Maine Middleschoolers.” http://
www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/10/18/national/main3379737.shtml. 
Accessed on June 15, 2009 
 The Center for Governmental Services at Auburn University. 2005. “Sex 
Education in Public Schools: What Alabama Thinks.”  Ask Alabama 2 (9; 
June): 1–3. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007. “HPV (Human 
Papillomavirus): What You Need to Know.” http://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/pubs/vis/downloads/vis-hpv.pdf. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2009a. “Genital HPV 
Infection—CDC Fact Sheet.” http://www.cdc.gov/STD/HPV/STDFact-
HPV.htm#common. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2009b. “Unintended 
Pregnancy Prevention: Contraception.” http://www.cdc.gov/
ReproductiveHealth/UnintendedPregnancy/Contraception.htm. 
Accessed on June 8, 2009. 
 Chandrasekhar, Cahru A. 2006. “Rx for Drugstore Discrimination: 
Challenging Pharmacy Refusals to Dispense Prescription Contraceptives 
under State Public Accommodations Laws.”  Albany Law Review 70 (1; 
Winter): 55–115. 

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Childs, Dan. 2007. “Political Intrigue in Merck’s HPV Vaccine Push.”
 ABCNews Health. http://abcnews.go.com/Health/story?id=2890402
&page=1. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 Christian Contraception. 2009. “Male Condoms.” http://www.
christiancontraception.com/condoms.php. Accessed on June 13, 2009. 
 Concerned Women for America of Kansas. 2007. “Bridging the Gap.” 
http://www.cwfa.org/images/content/fc2007-06-21.pdf. Accessed on 
June 15, 2009. 
 Coyne, Brenda. 2005. “More Pharmacists Refusing to Fill Emergency 
Contraception Orders.”  New Standard . http://newstandardnews.net/
content/index.cfm/items/2522. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Dailard, Cynthia. 2001. “Sex Education: Politicians, Parents, Teachers 
and Teens.” http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/tgr/04/1/gr040109.
html. Accessed on June 14, 2009. 
 Darroch, Jacqueline E., David J. Landry, and Susheela Singh. 2000. 
“Changing Emphases in Sexuality Education in U.S. Public Secondary 
Schools, 1988–1999.” Family Planning Perspectives 32 (5; September–
October): 204–11, 265. 
 Dawson, Deborah Anne. 1986. “The Effects of Sex Education on 
Adolescent Behavior.”  Family Planning Perspectives 18 (5; September–
October): 162–70. 
 The Emergency Contraception Website. 2009. “Plan B and the Bush 
Administration.” http://ec.princeton.edu/pills/planbhistory.html. 
Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Fass, Paula S., ed. 2004.  Encyclopedia of Children and Childhood: In History 
and Society . New York: Macmillan Reference. http://www.faqs.org/
childhood/Re-So/Sex-Education.html. Accessed on June 11, 2009. 
 “Few Americans Favor Abstinence-only Sex Ed.” 2006. http://www.
msnbc.msn.com/id/15603764. Accessed on June 13, 2009. 
 Focus on the Family. 2009a. “Condoms and Abstinence: Separating 
Truth From Myth.” http://www.citizenlink.org/FOSI/abstinence/
A000002137.cfm. Accessed on June 13, 2009. 
 Focus on the Family. 2009b. “Is Sex Ever Really ‘Safe’?” http://www.
troubledwith.com/ParentingTeens/A000000529.cfm?topic=parenting%20
teens%3A%20sexual%20activity. Accessed on June 13, 2009. 
 Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr., et al. 1997. “Does Condom Availability Make a 
Difference? An Evaluation of Philadelphia’s Health Resource Centers.” 
Family Planning Perspectives 29 (3; May–June): 123–27. 
 Furstenberg Frank F., Kristin Moore, and James L. Peterson. 1986. “Sex 
Education and Sexual Experience among Adolescents.”  American Journal 
of Public Health 75 (11):1331–32. 

References 69
 Galanos, Mike. 2009. “Commentary: Plan B Risky for 17 Year-old Girls.” 
CNNHealth.com. http://www.cnn.com/2009/HEALTH/04/30/
galanos.plan.b/index.html. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Guttmacher, Sally et al. 1997. “Condom Availability in New York 
City Public High Schools: Relationships to Condom Use and Sexual 
Behavior,”  American Journal of Public Health. 87 (9; September): 1427–33. 
 Guttmacher Institute. 2009. “State Policies in Brief as of June 1, 2009: Sex 
and STI/HIV Education.” http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/
spibs/spib_SE.pdf. Accessed on June 14, 2009. 
 Helium. 2009. “Should Schools Give Teens Birth Control?” http://www.
helium.com/debates/161091-should-schools-give-teens-birth-control. 
Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Illinois Government News Network. 2005. “Gov. Blagojevich Takes 
Emergency Action to Protect Women’s Access to Contraceptives.” 
http://www.illinois.gov/PressReleases/ShowPressRelease.
cfm?SubjectID=3&RecNum=3805. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Jayson, Sharon. 2009. “Obama Budget Cuts Funds for Abstinence-
only Sex Education.” USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/news/
health/2009-05-11-abstinence-only_N.htm. Accessed on June 13, 2009. 
 Jensen, Robin E. 2007. “Using Science to Argue for Sexual Education 
in U.S. Public Schools: Dr. Ella Flagg Young and the 1913 ‘Chicago 
Experiment.’” Science Communication 29 (2): 217–41. 
 Kirby, Douglas B., and Nancy L. Brown. 1996. “Condom Availability 
Programs in U.S. Schools.”  Family Planning Perspectives 28 (5; 
September–October): 196–202. 
 Limbaugh, Rush. 2007. “Condoms: The New Diploma.” In  Current 
Issues and Enduring Questions: A Guide to Critical Thinking and Argument, 
with Readings, ed. Sylvan Barnet and Hugo Bedau, 426–30. New York: 
Bedford/St. Martin’s. 
 MacLaggan, Corrie. 2007. “Perry’s HPV Vaccine Order Draws Backlash 
from GOP,” February 6,. http://www.statesman.com/news/content/
region/legislature/stories/02/06/6hpv.html. Accessed on June 16, 
2009.
 Marsiglio William, and Frank L. Mott. 1986. “The Impact of Sex Education 
on Sexual Activity, Contraceptive Use and Premarital Pregnancy among 
American Teenagers.”  Family Planning Perspectives 18 (4): 151–61. 
 McBride, Dorothy E. 2007.  Abortion in the United States: A Reference 
Handbook . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 
 MissionAmerica.com. 2007. “The Dirty Dozen Checklist: Does Your 
School Promote Homosexuality?” http://www.missionamerica.com/
agenda.php?articlenum=67. Accessed on June 14, 2009. 

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Moran, J. P. 1996. “‘Modernism Gone Mad’: Sex Education Comes to 
Chicago, 1913.” Journal of American History 83 (2): 481–513. 
 Mueller, Trisha E., Lorrie E. Gavin, and Aniket Kulkarni. 2008. “The 
Association between Sex Education and Youth’s Engagement in Sexual 
Intercourse, Age at First Intercourse, and Birth Control Use at First Sex.” 
Journal of Adolescent Health 42 (1; January): 89–96. 
 National Abstinence Education Association. 2008. http://www.
abstinenceassociation.org/docs/action_alerts/2008_Letter_to_Harkin_
Specter.pdf. Accessed on June 12, 2009. 
 National Abstinence Education Association. 2009. “President’s Budget 
Eliminates Funding for Effective Abstinence Education Programs.” 
http://www.abstinenceassociation.org/newsroom/pr_051109_
presidents_budget_eliminates_funding.html. Accessed on June 13, 
2009.
 National Assembly on School-Based Health Care. 2009. http://www.
nasbhc.org/site/c.jsJPKWPFJrH/b.2561543/k.C944/advocacy.htm. 
Accessed on June 14, 2009. 
 National Center for Education Statistics. 2009. “Digest of Education 
Statistics.” Table 5. http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d08/tables/
dt08_005.asp. Accessed on June 14, 2009. 
 National Conference of State Legislatures. 2009. “Pharmacist Conscience 
Clauses: Laws and Legislation. Updated May 2009.” http://www.ncsl.
org/default.aspx?tabid=14380. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 National Guidelines Task Force. 2004.  Guidelines for Comprehensive 
Sexuality Education , 3rd edition. New York: Sexuality Information and 
Education Council of the United States. 
 National Organization for Women. 2008. “National Coalition for 
Immigrant Women’s Rights Statement: HPV Vaccination Requirement 
Discriminates Against Immigrant Women,” September 29. http://www.
now.org/issues/diverse/nciwr/100108immigrationhpv.html. Accessed 
on June 16, 2009. 
 News Journal. 2005. “Pharmacists War over Contraceptives.” 
http://news.dcealumni.com/461/280305-pharmacists-war-over-
contraceptives/. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 NPR. 2004. “Sex Education in America.” http://www.npr.org/
templates/story/story.php?storyId=1622610. Accessed on June 12, 2009. 
 NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll. 2004a. “Sex Education in America.” 
http://www.kff.org/newsmedia/upload/Sex-Education-in-America-
Summary.pdf. Accessed on June 12, 2009. 
 NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll. 2004b. “Sex Education in America: 
General Public/Parents Survey.” http://www.kff.org/newsmedia/

References 71
upload/Sex-Education-in-America-General-Public-Parents-Survey-
Toplines.pdf. Accessed on June 12, 2009. 
 Office of the Governor Rick Perry. 2007. “Statement of Gov. Rick Perry 
on HPV Vaccine Executive Order,” February 5. http://governor.state.
tx.us/news/press-release/2291/. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 111DrugStore.com. 2009. “Buy Female Hormones, Contraceptives 
Online Without Prescription.” http://www.111drugstore.com/
topselling.php?catnum=10. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 “Others Not Likely to Follow School’s Contraception Move.” 2007.  USA 
Today . http://www.usatoday.com/news/health/2007-10-17-middle-
school-birth-control_N.htm. Accessed on June 14, 2009. 
 Parsons, Tom. 2009. “Should Schools Give Teens Birth Control?” http://
www.helium.com/debates/161091-should-schools-give-teens-birth-
control/side_by_side?page=13. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Pierceall, Kerah. 2009. “Should Schools Give Teens Birth Control?” 
http://www.helium.com/items/1021068-should-schools-give-teens-
birth-control. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Planned Parenthood Affiliates of New Jersey. 2009. “Refused at the 
Counter: Personal Stories.” http://www.plannedparenthoodnj.org/
library/topic/pharmacy_refusal/refused_at_the_counter. Accessed on 
June 15, 2009. 
 PollingReport.com. 2009. “Abortion and Birth Control.” http://www.
pollingreport.com/abortion.htm. Accessed on June 14, 2009. 
 Public Opinion Research Laboratory. University of North Florida. 2006. 
“Sex Education Survey. Kids Connected by Design. St. Lucie County, 
Florida.” http://www.stluciecountyhealth.com/hiv_aids/sex_ed_
report.pdf. 
 Rabb, Marian. 1998. “Condom Availability in High School Does Not 
Increase Teenage Sexual Activity but Does Increase Condom Use.” 
Family Planning Perspectives 30 (1; January–February): 48–49. 
 Ramos, Pilar S. 1996. “The Condom Controversy in the Public Schools: 
Respecting a Minor’s Right of Privacy.”  University of Pennsylvania Law 
Review 145 (1; November): 149–92. 
 Redfern, Rosemary. 2009. “Should Schools Give Teens Birth Control?” 
http://www.helium.com/debates/161091-should-schools-give-teens-
birth-control/side_by_side?page=4. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Reisman, Judith A. 2002. “Crafting Bi/homosexual Youth.”  Regent
University Law Review 14 (2; Spring): 283–342. 
 Rosenbaum, Janet Elise. 2009. “Patient Teenagers? A Comparison of 
the Sexual Behavior of Virginity Pledgers and Matched Nonpledgers.” 
Pediatrics 123 (1; January): e110–20. 

72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Schuster Mark A. et al. 1998. “Impact of a High School Condom 
Availability Program on Sexual Activities and Behaviors.”  Family
Planning Perspectives 30 (2; March–April): 67–72, 88. 
 Schworm, Peter. 2009. “Catholic College Bars Student’s Free Condoms.” 
Boston Globe, March 5. http://www.boston.com/news/local/
massachusetts/articles/2009/03/05/catholic_college_bars_students_
free_condoms/. Accessed on June 13, 2009. 
 Science Daily. 2007. “Sex Education Linked to Delayed Teen 
Intercourse, New Study Says.” http://www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2007/12/071220231428.htm. Accessed on June 11, 2009. 
 SexEdLibrary.org. 2009. “Over One Hundred Lesson Plans in One 
Place.” http://www.sexedlibrary.org/. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States. 2008. 
“No More Money: Funding Chart.” http://www.nomoremoney.org/
index.cfm?fuseaction=page.viewpage&pageid=1004. Accessed on June 
12, 2009. 
 Sharp, David. 2008. “AP Exclusive: 6 Months Later, 1 Student Got 
Contraceptives,” April 18. http://www.boston.com/news/local/
maine/articles/2008/04/18/ap_exclusive_6_months_later_1_student_
got_contraceptives/. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Sheldon, Louis P. [n.d.] “Homosexuals Recruit Public School Children.” 
Traditional Values 18 (11): 1–8. 
 Special Investigations Division. December 2004. Minority Staff of the 
Committee on Government Reform. The Content of Federally Funded 
Abstinence-only Education Programs. [n.p.]. 
 Stewart, Chuck. 2001.  Homosexuality and the Law . Santa Barbara, CA: 
ABC-CLIO.
 Trenholm, Christopher et al. April 2007.  Impacts of Four Title V, Section 
510 Abstinence Education Programs . Princeton, NJ: Mathematic Policy 
Research. 
 2008 GENIUS Index. “Gender Equality National Index for Colleges and 
Schools.” http://74.125.95.132/search?q=cache:lYDSnjkFTSEJ:www.
gpac.org/genius/2008.pdf+2008+genius+index&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk
&gl=us. Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Tyack, David, and Elisabeth Hansot. 1990.  Learning Together: A History of 
Coeducation in American Public Schools. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press. 
 Underhill Kristen, Don Operario, and Paul Montgomery. 2007. 
“Abstinence-only Programs for HIV Infection Prevention in High-
income Countries.” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. http://
www.google.com/search?hl=en&q=underhill+operario&aq=f&oq=&
aqi=. Accessed on June 13, 2009. 

References 73
 United States Code. 2009. http://www.gpoaccess.gov/uscode/index.
html. Accessed on June 12, 2009. 
 United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. 1995.  Ronald C. 
Brown, et al., Plaintiffs—Appellants, v. Hot, Sexy and Safer Productions, Inc., 
et al., Defendants—Appellees. http://www.ca1.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/
getopn.pl?OPINION=95-1275.01A. Accessed on June 14, 2009. 
 United States Court of Appeals For The First Circuit. 2007.  Parker v. 
Hurley. 474 F. Supp. 2d 261 (D. Mass 2007), 37–43. http://caselaw.lp.
findlaw.com/cgi-bin/getcase.pl?court=1st&navby=docket&no=071528. 
Accessed on August 28, 2009. 
 United States District Court. Eastern District of New York. 2009.  Annie
Tummino et Al.,—Against—Frank M. Torti. http://www.nyed.uscourts.
gov/pub/rulings/cv/2005/05cv366mofinal.pdf. Accessed on June 15, 
2009.
 U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. 2008. “USCIS Changes 
Vaccination Requirements to Adjust Status to Legal Permanent 
Resident.” http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/menuitem.
5af9bb95919f35e66f614176543f6d1a/?vgnextoid=902252b10f45b110Vgn
VCM1000004718190aRCRD&vgnextchannel=1958b0aaa86fa010VgnVC
M10000045f3d6a1RCRD. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health Resources 
and Services Administration. 2000. “Maternal and Child Health 
Federal Set-Aside Program; Special Projects of Regional and National 
Significance; Community-Based Abstinence Education Project Grants.” 
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=2000_
register&docid=00-29425-filed.pdf. Accessed on June 12, 2009. 
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Public Health 
and Science. Office of Population Affairs. 2009. “Adolescent Family 
Life.” http://www.hhs.gov/opa/familylife/. Accessed on June 12, 
2009.
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2009. “Updated FDA Action on 
Plan B (levonorgestrel) Tablets.” http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/
Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm149568.htm. Accessed on June 
15, 2009. 
 U.S. House of Representatives. 2007. “A Bill to Establish Certain Duties 
for Pharmacies to Ensure Provision of Food and Drug Administration-
approved Contraception, and for Other Purposes.” http://maloney.
house.gov/documents/reproductivechoice/alpha/041707ABCbill.pdf. 
Accessed on June 15, 2009. 
 Van Hooff, Marcel H. A. et al. 1998. “The Use of Oral Contraception by 
Adolescents for Contraception, Menstrual Cycle Problems or Acne.” 
Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica 77 (9): 898–904. 

74 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Walsh, Mark. 1996. “Parent-Rights Cases Against Schools Fail 
to Make Inroads.”  Education Week, April 10. http://www.
edweek.org/login.html?source=http://www.edweek.org/ew/
articles/1996/04/10/29rights.h15.html&destination=http://www.
edweek.org/ew/articles/1996/04/10/29rights.h15.html&levelId=1000. 
Accessed on June 14, 2009. 
 Zabin, Laurie S. et al. 1986. “Evaluation of a Pregnancy Prevention 
Program for Urban Teenagers.”  Family Planning Perspectives 18 (3; 
May–June): 119–26. 
 Zelnick, M., and Y. J. Kim. 1982. “Sex Education and Its Association with 
Teenage Sexual Activity, Pregnancy and Contraceptive Use.”  Family
Planning Perspectives 14 (3; May–June): 117–19, 123–26. 

75
 3 
 Worldwide Perspective 
 G
eneralizing about the status of the sexual health of adolescents 
in various countries around the world is a challenging task. 
Life in Great Britain is so different from life in Saudi Arabia, or 
Japan, or Honduras, or Fiji that it is difficult to describe the knowl-
edge that young people have about issues in sexuality, the sexual 
issues they face in their everyday lives, the sources and kinds of 
information available to them about sexuality, and the ways and 
extent to which they are able to make use of such information. 
 There is no doubt that pregnancy and contraception have 
always been and still are issues of extreme importance to most 
women—and, probably, many men—in nations around the world. 
In many countries, women still face the dilemma of how they 
will deal with the birth of a sixth, seventh, or eighth child, just 
as their ancestors have done for hundreds or thousands of years. 
Throughout most of time, they and their male partners have had 
to rely on folk remedies, such as the array of pessaries described 
in Chapter 1 of this book. 
 But new issues have begun to arise over the past century also. 
One factor in the changing face of human sexuality has been a 
demographic change. As more people move from rural to urban 
settings, they often lose contact with traditional sources of infor-
mation about human biology, such as direct contact with farm 
animals and instruction by parents and other close relatives. 
Although the information gained from these traditional sources 
may not always be accurate or helpful, it may sometimes be better 
than no information at all. In addition, access to information from 
outside one’s home neighborhood, state, or homeland through 
sources such as films, radio, television, and the Internet have 

76 Worldwide Perspective
 exposed young people in almost every part of the world to ideas 
and images about which they would have known next to nothing 
in the past. Finally, the terrible pandemic of the HIV/AIDS crisis 
may have been the single most powerful force in driving nations 
to increase their attention to sex education than any single event 
in the past. The overall consequence of factors such as these is that 
countries in every part of the world have begun to think more 
seriously about the kind of instruction in human sexuality that 
young people need. The answer to that question differs, of course, 
depending on a host of factors, including dominant religious val-
ues, traditional ethical systems, community attitudes and beliefs, 
specific needs within a community or nation, and resource avail-
ability. This chapter reviews some of the issues with which indi-
viduals, families, neighborhoods, and nations are dealing in the 
area of human sexuality. 
 Sex Education 
 With almost 200 separate and distinct nations in the world, it is 
clearly impossible to make generalizations about any aspect of 
sex education. Arguably the single best source for information on 
this subject—and on almost any other topic in the area of human 
sexuality—is a publication, The Continuum Complete International 
Encyclopedia of Sexuality , which has detailed descriptions of the 
status of many sexuality-related topics in 62 countries of the 
world (Francoeur and Noonan 2004). Readers are referred to this 
invaluable source for far more detailed information than can be 
provided here. 
 Europe 
 The term  sex education  can refer to any number of situations, rang-
ing from personal “birds and bees” talks between parents and 
children to formal classes in schools devoted solely to this topic. 
Every conceivable variation on these methods can be found some-
where in the world. Probably the most formal approaches to sex 
education are to be found in the most developed nations of the 
world: Europe, the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. In 
these nations, educators and sexologists have been thinking for 
almost a century about formal methods by which students can 
be taught about essential topics in the area of human sexuality. 

Sex Education 77
Today, in most of those nations, sex education is either required as 
part of the standard school curriculum, or sex education courses 
are a normal part of that curriculum. Some examples of this situ-
ation are as follows. 
Denmark:  Sex education has been part of Danish schools 
since the early 1900s, but it became a required subject in 1970. 
Rather than existing as a separate course, the subject is typically 
integrated into other subjects, so that students can raise a ques-
tion about sexuality in any class at any time. While this arrange-
ment may have some advantages, it has also proved to be one of 
the weak spots in instruction about human sexuality. The major 
problem is that many teachers do not feel competent to deal with 
questions about human sexuality, so they avoid discussing them 
in their classes. In a survey conducted in 2005, the Danish Family 
Planning Association (Dansk familieplanlægning forening) found 
that instruction in sexuality was “simply too uneven and random 
as regards hours spent on the subject and teachers’ knowledge” 
(Sex and Samfund 2009). In an effort to deal with that issue, the 
association has been attempting to increase the amount of atten-
tion paid to sex education for future teachers during their college 
training. As a result of these efforts, the Danish government made 
it mandatory as of January 2007 for all teachers colleges to offer 
a course in sex education, although students are not required to 
attend those courses (Wellings and Parker 2006, 38). The deficien-
cies in the Danish model appear to be apparent when students are 
asked about their experiences in schools. Fewer than half thought 
that their instruction in sexual issues was both “relevant and suf-
ficient” (Francoeur and Noonan 2004, Denmark). 
Netherlands: The approach to sex education in the Neth-
erlands has been called a model for the rest of the world. That 
praise comes at least in part because the Dutch have the lowest 
pregnancy rate among teenagers of any developed country in 
the world (Valk 2000). Although sex education is not required by 
the national  government, it is offered in almost every school in the 
country, usually as a part of a biology class. Given the nation’s 
long  tradition of local autonomy in education, it is not surpris-
ing that instruction in sexuality varies significantly from school 
to school and from teacher to teacher. As might be expected, top-
ics that are taught and the approaches used in teaching them 
tend to reflect a particular teacher’s own expertise and biases. 
The topics most commonly included in the Dutch curriculum in-
clude physical and emotional development; human  reproduction; 

78 Worldwide Perspective
 relationships; sexual behavior; masturbation; sexual problems; 
safer sex, and sex, culture, and religion (Wellings and Parker 2006, 
67). Overall, almost no data exist describing the status of sex ed-
ucation programs in the country (Francoeur and Noonan 2004, 
Netherlands).
Poland:  The situation in Poland is significantly different from 
that in Denmark and the Netherlands. Under Communist rule in 
the 1970s, the Polish government introduced an approach to sex 
education called Preparation for the Life in the Socialist Family, 
which included some mention of topics traditionally covered in 
sex education courses. With the fall of Communism, the Roman 
Catholic Church reasserted its authority in a number of fields, in-
cluding education, and all types of sex education were banished 
from schools. Sex education is now an independent part of the 
curriculum in Poland under the rubric of Education for Family 
Life (EFL), which represents exclusively the Roman Catholic view 
of human sexuality. All schools are required to offer Education 
for Family Life programs, but students are not required to attend 
such classes. In fact, parents must sign a letter of agreement au-
thorizing a child to attend an EFL class, an agreement that he or 
she may abrogate at any time in the future for any specific lesson 
(Wellings and Parker, 71–72). 
Spain:  The character of sex education in Spain is strongly in-
fluenced by the nature of the national government, which shares 
power with 17 autonomous communities and 2 autonomous cit-
ies. The country’s approach to sex education is made somewhat 
more confusing by the fact that, although Spain is traditionally a 
strongly Roman Catholic nation, it has recently adopted a number 
of liberal social policies with regard to human sexuality, including 
a recognition of same-sex marriage and the loosening of regula-
tions on abortion. The national government has no formal policy 
or regulation on sex education, and instructional policies devel-
oped by local communities range from across the board instruc-
tion in schools to stand-alone lessons outside the formal school 
setting run by independent agencies and organizations. Overall, 
one report has concluded that 
 sexuality education in Spain is said to be inadequate 
and almost non-existent, particularly in rural areas, 
and its provision needs to be better evaluated. Atti-
tudes of young people are conditioned by stereotypes, 
myths and erroneous beliefs about sexuality, although 

Sex Education 79
 recently some observers have noted an increase in the 
official commitment to sexuality education. (Wellings 
and Parker 2006, 78) 
 United Kingdom 
 As is the case in most countries around the world, the status of 
sex education in the United Kingdom has undergone a significant 
evolution over the past few decades. The guiding principle today 
is provided under a rubric known as Personal, Social, Health, and 
Economic Education (PSHE), which originated in the 1990 Na-
tional Curriculum statement as Personal Social Education (PSE). 
The fundamental components of PSE, as outlined in the 1990 doc-
ument, were economic and industrial understanding, career edu-
cation and guidance, health education, education for citizenship, 
and environmental education (Macdonald 2009, 10). In 2000, the 
government adopted a modified form of PSE in a new national 
framework described as “Preparing Young People for Adult Life: 
Personal, Social and Health Education (PSHE).” The framework 
was a recommendation to local school districts, but was not made 
a statutory requirement. 
 In September 2008, PSHE was again modified, this time with 
the addition of two additional topics, personal well-being, and 
economic well-being and financial capability. The new guidelines 
kept their former acronym of PSHE, which now stood for Per-
sonal, Social, Health, and Economic Education. A month later, 
the government announced plans to make PSHE compulsory in 
all public schools in the country, and asked Alasdair Macdonald, 
headmaster of the Morpeth school in East London, to conduct a 
review of these plans. Macdonald announced the results of his 
review in April 2009, which included 20 recommendations for 
the implementation of the government’s new policy. The first rec-
ommendation was that the government should, indeed, proceed 
with its plans to make PSHE mandatory in all primary and sec-
ondary schools, for students age 5 through 16. Macdonald also 
recommended that individual schools be permitted to determine 
how best to implement the government’s general guidelines in 
their own specific situations. In what was to become the most 
controversial of the recommendations, Macdonald also suggested 
that religious schools be allowed to include topics in addition to 
those in the national curriculum, such as the evils of same-sex be-
havior and the importance of abstinence as the sole acceptable 
method of contraception (Macdonald 2009, 7–9; Curtis 2009). As 

80 Worldwide Perspective
had  previously been the case, parents were also to be given the 
right to have their children opt out of any sex education classes 
with which they disagreed. 
 Although received favorably by many parts of British soci-
ety, a number of questions were raised about the government’s 
new approach to sex education. Christian groups in particular 
were especially disturbed about requirements that schools teach 
subjects of which they disapproved, such as contraception and 
same-sex relationships. For example, Norman Wells of the Family 
Education Trust said that “Making PSHE a statutory part of the 
national curriculum could be used as a vehicle to promote posi-
tive images of homosexual relationships. It is difficult to see how 
teaching children as young as 11 about same-sex relationships 
and civil partnerships fits in with a study of personal wellbeing, 
and many parents will be very concerned about the prospect of 
such lessons being imposed over their heads.” A similar view was 
expressed by Simon Calvert, of the Christian Institute, who said 
that “pressing the virtues of homosexuality” could lead to more 
experimentation, which could be “harmful” to children. “What 
we don’t want to see,” he continued, “is vulnerable young peo-
ple being exploited by outside groups which want to normalise 
 homosexuality” (The Christian Institute 2009). 
 By contrast, other observers found other problems with 
the Macdonald report. A number of gay and lesbian organiza-
tions, for example, objected to the fact that the report apparently 
legitimized the stigmatization of young gay men and lesbians 
by religious schools. George Broadhead of the Pink Triangle 
Trust, for example, wrote to the schools secretary Ed Balls that 
“it is surely unacceptable that a large proportion of our schools 
should be allowed to tell pupils (in line with the teaching in their 
holy books) that homosexual relationships are morally wrong, 
with the inevitable consequence that anti-gay bullying will in-
crease.” That theme was echoed by David Christmas, secretary 
of the Gay and Lesbian Humanist Association. “If the govern-
ment wants a generation of young gay people to grow up who 
feel isolated, embittered, and alienated from the rest of society,” 
he said, “then they are going the right way about it. Ideally, state 
funding of religious schools should be phased out. Failing this, 
the least that we as taxpayers should expect is that schools be 
required to offer relevant education and support to all of their 
pupils, including those who are, or may be, gay and lesbian” 
(Geen 2009). 

Sex Education 81
 Asia and Australasia 
 Sex education policies and practices in other countries around the 
world mirror the diversity seen in European nations. Some ex-
amples from Asia and Australasia include the following: 
Japan:  Japan is a very centralized nation, with many national 
policies and practices set, sometimes in great detail, by the na-
tional government. In education, those policies and practices are 
set out in the Course of Study , which is revised about once every 
10 years. The Course of Study  does not provide for any specific 
course in sex education, but, instead, indicates that topics in 
human sexuality are to be covered in relevant courses, such as 
 biology, health, domestic science, and sociology. Recommenda-
tions for ways of achieving this goal are provided in a publication, 
Sex Education Guidelines , developed by the Japanese Association 
for Sex Education. In recent years, a number of factors have led to 
reconsideration of the approach to sex education in Japan. Among 
these factors are the spread of HIV/AIDS around the world and 
in Japan, a continued increase in the rates of sexually transmitted 
infections and unplanned pregnancies, a greater demand for abor-
tions among unmarried young women, and a significant decrease 
in the age of first menses (by about two years) among Japanese 
girls (The Body 2004). 
China:  Traditionally, human sexuality has been a taboo sub-
ject in China. As recently as 2002, for example, a survey of 1,500 
families in Beijing found that 74 percent of all parents provided 
no sex education at all to their children, two-thirds of whom 
said they were simply too embarrassed to raise the subject. Only 
3 percent of respondents said that they provided complete and 
detailed information about sexuality to their children (Francoeur 
and Noonan 2004, China). Yet, for some time, Chinese educators 
have experienced significant pressure to offer some kind of in-
struction about sexuality. A number of factors have been respon-
sible for this change, including the growing Chinese population, 
demanding better information about contraception; increases 
in the rate of unplanned teenage pregnancy and sexually trans-
mitted infections; an increase in problems of sexual dysfunction 
among adults; and demands for greater sexual freedom as a result 
of exposure to Western ideas and practices with regard to sexu-
ality. As a result of these pressures, a number of school districts 
in China have begun to develop new educational textbooks and 
other materials on human sexuality for use within and outside of 

82 Worldwide Perspective
schools. A lead organization in the new approach to sex education 
is the China Family Planning Association, which is developing 
sex education curricula that focus on “sex in the context of per-
sonal relationships” (China Development Brief 2005). 
India:  Plans to expand formal sex education programs in 
 India’s school have recently experienced a reversal in fortunes. 
Although the country has traditionally had little or no instruction 
about human sexuality in schools, that situation appeared to be 
about to change in 2004 when a group of governmental agencies 
jointly developed a new program called the Adolescence Educa-
tion Program (AEP), with the objective of teaching Indian chil-
dren fundamental facts about sexually transmitted infections, 
pregnancy and contraception, and related topics. At least one fac-
tor in the decision to establish the program was the fact that India 
currently has the largest number of HIV/AIDS cases of any Asian 
nation.
 Plans to implement the AEP program ran into a roadblock, 
however, in May 2007, when a petition was filed with the Indian 
parliament’s Committee on Petitions, requesting a review of the 
AEP program. Petitioners claimed that the proposed program 
would “corrupt Indian youth and lead to a collapse of the educa-
tion system, transform student-teacher relations into that of a man 
and woman, lead to the creation of immoral society and growth in 
single-parent families.” It would, they continued, “promote pro-
miscuity of the worst kind” (Rajalakshmi 2009; also see Vishnoi 
and Thacker 2009). 
 After an extended review of the petition, the Committee on 
Petitions announced its decision in April 2009. It agreed with pe-
titioners that there was no place in Indian schools for a discussion 
of human sexuality. The only place topics of this nature might be 
mentioned, the committee said, was in biology classes for stu-
dents who are not going to continue their education after high 
school graduation. Committee members made their case strongly. 
They said that: 
 a message should be given to schoolchildren that there 
should be no sex before marriage, which is immoral, 
unethical and unhealthy 
 the new curriculum should include appropriate material on 
the lives and teachings of our great saints, spiritual leaders, 
freedom fighters and national heroes so as to inculcate 
in children our national ideals and values, which would 

Sex Education 83
neutralise the impact of cultural invasion from various 
sources 
 school syllabi should cater to the needs and requirement of 
our society and culture 
 our country’s social and culture ethos are such that sex 
education has absolutely no place in it. 
 The committee concluded that the AEP was “a cleverly used eu-
phemism whose real objective was to impart sex education to 
schoolchildren and promote promiscuity” (Rajalakshmi 2009). 
Finally, the committee scolded the governmental agencies that 
had developed the curriculum in the first place, saying that it was 
shocking to note how so many agencies of the government could 
come
 together, conceptualise a syllabus, provide all kinds 
of justification to it, spend substantial amount [ sic ] of 
money in the printing of the material and then circulate 
it throughout the country with the avowed aim of pro-
viding scientific information and knowledge to the ado-
lescents whereas the reality was that the AEP volumes 
were highly objectionable and bound to be rejected lock, 
stock and barrel. (Rajalakshmi 2009) 
 The Committee on Petitions’ decision is only a recommendation 
to government agencies, but as an expression of parliamentary at-
titudes, it may well have significant influence on the direction of 
sex education (if it is to exist at all) in India over the near future. 
Australia:  The Australian government has traditionally taken 
a laissez-faire attitude toward sex education. There are essentially 
no national guidelines or requirements, and individual schools 
decide whether or not to teach about human sexuality and, if so, 
what topics to include in courses. Currently, most teenagers get 
information about sexual topics from friends, on the Internet, 
through the media, from pornographic materials or Web sites, or 
from special groups organized to provide accurate information on 
the subject (Milburne 2009). That situation may be changing. One 
force for greater emphasis on sexuality education in the schools is 
a growing body of research providing a clearer understanding of 
the status of adolescent sexuality in Australia. One of the most re-
cent studies found that about a third of Australian teenagers had 

84 Worldwide Perspective
become sexually active at the age of 14 or younger, but less than 
half felt that they could talk about sexual issues with their parents. 
More than 90 percent of teenagers reported having had some form 
of sex education in schools, but more than two-thirds (69%) of 
those respondents thought that that experience had been only av-
erage or below average in quality. More than half (56%) of parents 
interviewed expressed a similar view. In addition, teens gener-
ally reported not having instruction in a number of topics that sex 
educators regard as essential elements in any good sex education 
program, such as sexual decision-making and dealing with non-
consensual sex. Overall, 66 percent of teenagers and 75 percent 
of adults expressed a desire for mandatory sex education classes 
in their schools (Quantum Market Research and Marie Stopes In-
ternational 2008, 3). Although some discussion in the Australian 
parliament has occurred about developing some form of manda-
tory sex education program for the country, no action has as yet 
been taken. 
 The Muslim World 
 This section will be short. Sex education outside the home is not 
permitted by the Islamic tradition. No evidence exists that sex 
education in schools is available anywhere in the Muslim world. 
In fact, leaders of the faith speak clearly about the necessity of 
keeping instruction about sexual issues strictly within the home 
environment. In his book,  Sex Education: An Islamic Perspective , 
Shahid Athar, Clinical Associate Professor of Internal Medicine 
and Endocrinology at the Indiana University School of Medicine 
in Indianapolis, writes that 
 Islamic sex ed should be taught at home starting at an 
early age. Before giving education about anatomy and 
physiology, the belief in the Creator should be well estab-
lished. As Dostoevsky put it, “Without God, everything 
is possible,” meaning that the lack of belief or awareness 
of God gives an OK for wrongdoing. 
 A father should teach his son and a mother should 
teach her daughter. In the absence of a willing parent, 
the next best choice should be a Muslim male teacher 
(preferably a physician) for boys and a Muslim female 
teacher (preferably a physician) for a girl at the Islamic 
Sunday school. 

Sex Education 85
 The curriculum should be tailored according to age 
of the child and classes be held separately. Only pertinent 
answers to a question should be given. By this I mean 
that if a five year old asks how he or she got into mom-
mie’s stomach, there is no need to describe the whole 
act of intercourse. Similarly it is not necessary to tell a 
fourteen year old how to put on condoms. This might be 
taught in premarital class just before his or her marriage. 
(Athar 2009) 
 Surveys of sex education programs around the world tend to con-
firm this view. Entries for Islamic countries reviewed in the  Con-
tinuum Complete International Encyclopedia of Sexuality,  for example, 
report that any sex education that takes place occurs exclusively 
within the home or under the instruction of a religious leader (Fran-
coeur and Noonan 2004; see Bahrain, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, and 
Morocco, as examples). Deviations from this theme are rare and 
apparently of minimal impact. For example, Turkey now has a long 
history as a secularized Islamic nation, which is more amenable 
to Western-style sex education programs (Francoeur and  Noonan 
2004, Turkey). But even here, formal sex education programs ap-
pear to be rare, especially in less urban regions where religious 
influences are still strong (“Degree Project Studies Sex Education 
in Iranian and Turkish Schools” 2006). Nigeria has the potential 
to be another exception. The pressures of population growth and 
a skyrocketing rate of sexually transmitted infections and deaths 
from abortions have prompted the nation to consider making sex 
education more generally available through formal means, such as 
primary and secondary schools. Even here, however, the problem 
is made more difficult for religious reasons because, as one writer 
has noted, “Both Christianity and Islam do not see the need for 
sexuality education in Nigeria” (Adepoju 2005, 11). 
 Latin America 
 The situation for sex education in Latin America and the Carib-
bean is similar to, but a mirror image of, sex education in Muslim 
nations. In this case, it is the Roman Catholic Church that provides 
the greatest force preventing schools from teaching about human 
sexuality. In its reviews of the status of sex education in Argentina, 
Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, and Mexico, the  Continuum Complete 
International Encyclopedia of Sexuality  consistently reflects the view 

86 Worldwide Perspective
that national governments may develop broad guidelines for 
instruction in human sexuality, but those guidelines are almost 
never expressed in actual programs in primary and secondary 
schools (Francoeur and Noonan 2004). In 2003, the United Na-
tions Population Fund conducted a study of the status of sex edu-
cation programs in Latin America and the Caribbean, and found 
that viable programs existed in only four countries: Brazil, Colom-
bia, Cuba, and Mexico (although research by this author does not 
confirm these results as of 2009; Cevallos 2006). An indication of 
the opposition of the Catholic Church to sex education in schools 
was expressed in 2006 by José Guadalupe Martín, president of the 
Mexican bishops’ conference, in response to an effort by the Mexi-
can senate to expand sex education programs in the nation. “It 
is a misguided concept,” Bishop Martín said, “that the state can 
decide what should or should not be done in the field of sex edu-
cation, as if the state had begot those children” (Cevallos 2006). 
Cuba:  The one country that stands out in Latin America and 
the Caribbean with regard to sex education is Cuba, probably be-
cause it is the most free of Roman Catholic influences traditional 
in the rest of the region. Since 1959, the nation has emphasized 
sex education programs on both a formal and informal level for 
all children and adults. Some elements of Cuba’s sex education 
program in recent years include 
 48 television programs on various aspects of human 
sexuality developed by the National Center of Sexual 
Education (CENESEX), the Young Communist Union (UJC), 
and the Cuban Radio and Television Institute 
 more than 30 community intervention programs on human 
sexuality topics for people of all ages, such as “The Family, 
a Place for Human Development,” “Growing During 
Adolescence,” “Discovering Roads,” “Values and Sexuality,” 
“Comprehensive Adolescent Care,” and “Responsible 
Motherhood and Fatherhood” 
 a Program for a Responsible Sexual Behavior, developed by 
the Ministry of Education, in collaboration with CENESEX 
and the United Nations Population Fund, used by an 
estimated 12,000 educational institutions and over 2 million 
people, including children, adolescents, mothers, fathers, 
and teachers (Francoeur and Noonan 2004, Cuba; also see 
Olson and Dickey 2002; Feinberg 2007) 

New Issues of Concern in Human  Sexuality  87
 Africa 
 The available evidence suggests that sex education is essentially 
absent from formal education programs in most of Africa. Reli-
gious proscriptions, by both Islamic and Christian faiths, ap-
pear to be a strong factor banning the mention of topics related 
to human sexuality in schools across the continent. One observer 
has described the situation in Ghana, which may well represent 
the overall status of sex education throughout Africa: 
 Theoretically, sex education should be covered, but in 
practice few schools have a comprehensive program 
on family life education. Policymakers, perhaps for the 
fear of arousing religious opposition, are ambivalent on 
issues concerning sex education. On the one hand, sex 
education is part of the school curricula in order to ac-
knowledge official interest, yet on the other hand, most 
officials feel unconcerned that it is not effectively taught, 
thus pacifying the moral and religious critics. (Francoeur 
and Noonan 2004, Ghana) 
 (A 2003 update on this article suggests that, despite efforts by 
health and sex educators from Ghana and the United Nations, this 
situation has changed very little, if at all.) 
 Sex education in most parts of Africa appears to be largely the 
same as it has been for centuries, with whatever instruction that is 
available coming from parents, other adults, or nonscientific pro-
cedures. In Tanzania, for example, the primary means by which 
boys gain knowledge about their sexuality is probably the initia-
tion rites through which many (although not all) boys must pass 
as they become men (Francoeur and Noonan 2004, Tanzania). 
 The situation for Africa has, it must be said, undergone a 
fairly significant change over the past two decades, primarily be-
cause of the spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, a point that will 
be discussed later in this chapter. 
 New Issues of Concern in 
Human  Sexuality 
 Education about human sexuality has undergone some signifi-
cant changes in the past two decades for three major reasons. 

88 Worldwide Perspective
First, the HIV/AIDS pandemic has made it essential for govern-
ments in some nations to develop some form of education about 
sexually transmitted diseases in order to deal with the appalling 
rates of the disease in their countries. Second, the availability of 
new contraceptive devices has made it possible, for the first time 
in history, for women to have access to safe, reliable methods of 
contraception. Third, the increased visibility of alternative sexual 
lifestyles has forced societies to at least consider how they will 
deal with such lifestyles and what message they will send young 
people. The rest of this chapter will explore the ways in which na-
tions around the world are dealing with these new challenges. 
 The HIV/AIDS Pandemic 
 The HIV/AIDS pandemic has become one of the great health is-
sues in the history of the world. Not all nations have been equally 
affected by the disease, but few countries have been spared the 
scourge. Today, the region most seriously affected by the disease 
is Africa, especially sub-Saharan Africa. According to the best es-
timates available, 22 million people were living with HIV/AIDS 
in sub-Saharan Africa at the end of 2007, the last year for which 
data are available. An additional 1.9 million people were diag-
nosed with the disease during that year. An estimated 1.5 million 
people had already died of the disease, leaving behind more than 
11 million orphans (Avert 2009a). Even in sub-Saharan Africa, 
some nations apparently have been largely spared by the disease. 
Infection rates are less than 1 percent in Senegal and Somalia, but 
greater than 20 percent in other nations, such as Botswana (23.9%), 
 Lesotho (23.2%) and Swaziland (26.1% ). 
 Dismissal and Denial 
 Some nations have chosen to ignore the threat posed by HIV/
AIDS to their people. The South African government has famously 
declined to accept current medical explanations for the disease 
and refused to adopt modern technology for dealing with it. For 
many years, then-president Thabo Mbeki consistently refused to 
admit that HIV/AIDS is caused by a virus. In an interview with 
the South African edition of  Time  magazine in 2000, for example, 
he said that 
 a whole variety of things can cause the immune system 
to collapse. Now it is perfectly possible that among those 

New Issues of Concern in Human  Sexuality  89
things is a particular virus. But the notion that immune 
deficiency is only acquired from a single virus cannot be 
substained [ sic ]. Once you say immune deficiency is ac-
quired from that virus your response will be antiretrovi-
ral drugs. But if you accept that there can be a variety of 
reasons, including poverty and the many diseases that 
afflict Africans, then you can have a more comprehen-
sive treatment response. (Transaction Campaign News, 
September 8, 2000) 
 Mbeki was supported in his view of HIV/AIDS by his minister 
of health, Dr. Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, whose recommended 
treatment for the disease was a mixture of garlic, lemon, and beet-
root (Blandy 2006). 
 As a result of Mbeki’s policies, very few people with HIV/
AIDS received the retroviral drugs that could have helped them. 
According to one estimate, only 4 percent of those individuals 
with HIV/AIDS received retrovirals in 2004, with that rate in-
creasing slowly to 15 percent in 2005, 21 percent in 2006, and 28 
percent in 2007 (UNAIDS 2008, 271). In retrospect, the failure of 
the South African government to use modern drugs for the treat-
ment of HIV/AIDS, may have been responsible for as many as 
300,000 deaths in the country (Boseley 2008). 
 South Africa is by no means the only nation to have hesitated 
in developing programs to deal with the HIV/AIDS pandemic. A 
similar situation obtains in Swaziland, the nation with the largest 
percentage of infected adults in the world. According to a coun-
selor quoted in one report on the status of AIDS education in the 
country, “Sex education for young people in Swaziland is very 
shallow. Young people have never been exposed to sex education 
resulting in young people having problems when they have to 
take decisions pertaining to sex.” Another observer was quoted 
as saying that “AIDS education clubs in most schools in the com-
munity have died a natural death, even though they used to exist 
in the past. Teachers do not seem to be motivated to assist pupils 
to form and sustain these activities” (United Nations Population 
Fund 2009b, Swaziland). According to another report, the govern-
ment has spent about a quarter of 1 percent of its annual budget 
on HIV/AIDS prevention programs and has admitted a “lack of 
seriousness” in dealing with the crisis (Avert 2009b). 
 An even more extreme reaction to the HIV/AIDS crisis than 
that found in South Africa and Swaziland, where at least the 

90 Worldwide Perspective
 pandemic is acknowledged, can be found in some countries that 
deny the disease even exists in their nation. For many years, China 
was the classic example of this situation. Until the early 2000s, 
the Chinese government denied that HIV/AIDS was present in 
the country and that stories to the contrary were a fabrication of 
Western media. Officials claimed that the disease was caused by 
“capitalist decadence,” so that citizens of their own Communist 
country were safe from the disease. Only in the first years of the 
21st century did the Chinese government begin to acknowledge 
that the disease was, in fact, present in the country and to ask 
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for assistance 
in dealing with the problem (“Continuing Denial Helps AIDS 
Spread” 2001; also see Rosenthal 2000). As of the end of 2007, of-
ficials estimate that there are 700,000 people living with AIDS in 
China, of whom 39,000 died in that year (Avert 2009c). 
 China’s next-door neighbor, Myanmar, has long taken a simi-
lar stance. In 2001, health minister Major General Ket Sein told a 
meeting of the World Health Organization that his nation had no 
cases of HIV/AIDS because the people in Myanmar do not misbe-
have sexually, so there is no way for the disease to spread. Preven-
tion programs in any case would have limited value since the sale 
and distribution of condoms is illegal in the country (“Continuing 
Denial Helps AIDS Spread” 2001). 
 Programs of Prevention and Treatment 
 Far more common throughout the world than nations that deny 
the existence of the HIV/AIDS pandemic or that dismiss its im-
portance as a public health issue are countries that have pro-
actively and aggressively developed programs for educating 
children, adolescents, and adults about the diseases and about 
methods by which it can be prevented. In many cases, these pro-
grams have been incorporated into existing sex education classes 
in public and, sometimes, private, schools. In the United States, 
for example, teaching about HIV/AIDS ranks very high among 
priorities of parents and other adults for inclusion in sex educa-
tion classes. The 2004 NPR/Kaiser Family Foundation/JFK School 
of Government poll found that 98 percent of all respondents felt 
that the topic was an essential part of sex education classes, with 
78 percent saying it should be taught at both the high school and 
middle school levels (NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll 2004). 
In countries where sex education classes do not exist or are not 
common, governments, international agencies, nongovernmental 

New Issues of Concern in Human  Sexuality  91
 organizations, and other groups have developed programs that 
can be incorporated on a stand-alone basis in schools, as part of 
the school curriculum, or in settings outside formal educational 
institutions. Some examples of these programs are as follows: 
Tanzania:  The African Medical and Research Foundation 
(AMREF) has developed a program called MEMA Kwa Vijana, 
which means “good things for young people” in the native lan-
guage of Kiswahili. The program is aimed at increasing the un-
derstanding among young people between the ages of 12 and 
19 of sexually transmitted infections, contraception, and related 
issues. In the period between January 2004 and December 2007, 
the program trained 630 teachers in the fundamentals of sexual 
health, trained 227 health care workers in methods for providing 
assistance to young people in the fields of sexually transmitted 
infections and contraception, and worked to raise awareness of 
local government officials about issues related to adolescent sex-
ual health (AMREF 2009). 
Dominican Republic:  Education about human sexuality in 
public schools has largely been absent in rural areas of the Do-
minican Republic because parents have traditionally believed that 
such topics should be taught in the home. The problem is that few 
parents have the knowledge or skills to teach very much beyond 
the basic fundamentals of human biology (if that), and they are al-
most certainly unqualified to teach about HIV/AIDS and its pre-
vention. In 1998, Mujeres en Desarrollo Domiciano (MUDE), an 
organization concerned with women’s health and development, 
initiated a program in which they sought the active participation 
of parents and teachers in the development of materials for mak-
ing available information about HIV/AIDS to high school stu-
dents in rural areas. By enrolling adults during the earliest stages 
of the project, it eventually received the “enthusiastic support” of 
adults who conceived the effort as their own as much as that of 
MUDE (Alvarez 1998). 
Cambodia:  Cambodia has had a very successful sex education 
program that emphasizes HIV/AIDS prevention at the secondary 
level for many years. In May 2009, the government announced 
that it would be extending that program to the primary level. It 
pointed out that many Cambodian children leave school after 
primary school, so do not have access to instruction offered at 
the secondary level. The primary program will mirror that of the 
secondary program and include the same topics as those taught 
at the higher level, including “knowledge about HIV/AIDS and 

92 Worldwide Perspective
life skills, such as negotiation skills, how to say ‘no,’ goal setting, 
and how to provide care and support to people living with HIV/
AIDS” (Kunthear 2009). 
India:  In a nation where the government has essentially re-
fused to deal with the HIV/AIDS pandemic, the only source of 
information about the disease can be nongovernmental groups of 
one kind or another. In 2001, the Church of North India, a collabo-
ration of six Protestant and Anglican denominations, announced 
that it was expanding a trial program of HIV/AIDS education 
for adolescents in all 26 of its dioceses, which cover two-thirds of 
the nation. Surveys had shown that up to 60 percent of women 
interviewed in the nation were unfamiliar with the disease, sug-
gesting that some form of instruction of young people had be-
come urgent. Administrators of the program pointed out that 
they were being approached not only by churches within the de-
nomination, but also by public school educators whose students 
had no other access to information about the diseases (Akkara 
2001). 
Argentina:  Argentina is typical of some Latin American coun-
tries in that sexuality is a prominent feature of the media and 
many public events, but sex education in schools and other formal 
settings is strongly discouraged. The government has no policy 
or program for sex education in the schools. Recognizing the de-
ficiency of information for teenagers about many sexual issues, 
a number of nongovernmental organizations have been working 
for well over a decade to find other ways of providing crucial 
information about human sexuality to Argentina’s adolescents. 
One approach has been to develop programs of peer education, 
in which teenagers are trained to teach each other about human 
sexuality, including issues such as HIV/AIDS prevention. In 1999, 
these efforts led to the formation of Nacional de Adolescentes en 
Salud Sexual y Reproductiva (National Network of Adolescents 
for Sexual and Reproductive Health) by the most dedicated ado-
lescent participants in earlier programs. The Network has since 
provided a mechanism by which concerned teenagers can inter-
act and exchange ideas and techniques for teaching about human 
sexuality. One of the network’s first projects was a daylong event 
held at Parque Avellaneda, in Buenos Aires, a popular hangout 
for local adolescents. The theme for the event was HIV/AIDS pre-
vention and included information about condom use and other 
topics related to sexuality, HIV/AIDS, and reproduction (Correra 
2000).

New Issues of Concern in Human  Sexuality  93
 Evaluation 
 These examples illustrate the vast array of approaches the nations 
and nongovernmental groups are taking to HIV/AIDS education. 
One question that has been of interest to researchers is how effec-
tive such programs are and which programs and which elements 
are more effective than others. A considerable amount of research 
has been devoted to answering this question. One of the most ex-
haustive of these studies was conducted by the UNAIDS Inter-
agency Task Team on Young People in 2006. Researchers carefully 
examined all published reports on the effectiveness of HIV/AIDS 
education program and selected 22 that met a number of crite-
ria for accuracy, reliability, validity, and other criteria. They then 
measured the effectiveness of these 22 studies on their effective-
ness in measuring 55 sexual behaviors. 
 The review found that, overall, the 22 programs significantly 
improved a total of 21 of the 55 sexual behaviors measured. Of 
these programs, 16 significantly improved 5 of the behaviors most 
essential to HIV/AIDS prevention: a delay in the age of first sexual 
intercourse, reduction in the frequency of sexual activity, decrease 
in the number of sexual partners, increase in the use of condoms 
or contraceptives, and reduction in the incidence of unprotected 
sex. Of all programs studied, only one (a peer-run program) re-
sulted in an increase in sexual behavior, frequency of sexual activ-
ity. On the basis of this study, researchers developed a system for 
recommending or not recommending certain types of programs 
for HIV/AIDS that they classified as “Steady, Ready, Go,” ranging 
from programs that did not meet criteria for success (“Steady”), 
to those that met some criteria, but not others (“Ready”), to those 
that met all criteria (“Go”). Of the top four programs that met 
researchers’ “Go” criteria, one was a school-based program, one 
a health-agency-based program, and two were media programs 
(Ross, Dick, and Ferguson 2006, 103–50). 
 A similar study on the effectiveness of HIV/AIDS education 
programs was conducted in 2008 by ETR Associates for the In-
teragency Youth Working Group of Family Health International. 
This study was somewhat broader than the 2006 WHO study in 
that it considered 83 programs, of which only 18 were from de-
veloping nations. The study found that, in the majority of cases, 
educational programs had no measurable effect on any of the 10 
behaviors measured. Those measures included delay of initiation 
of sex, reduced frequency of sex, reduced number of partners, 
increased condom use, increased use of other contraceptives, 

94 Worldwide Perspective
reduced sexual risk-taking, reduced pregnancy (self-report and 
laboratory tests), and reduced rate of sexually transmitted infec-
tions (self-report and laboratory tests). The areas in which pro-
grams were most effective were reduced risk-taking (14 positive 
[i.e., successful] programs; 14 not significant; 0 negative [increase 
in negative behavior]); increased condom use (26 positive; 28 not 
significant; 0 negative); and increased use of other contraceptives 
(6 positive; 8 not significant; 1 negative) (Kirby, Laris, and Rolleri 
2005, 17). 
 Perhaps the most useful part of this study was the identifi-
cation of 17 characteristics that seemed to make for an effective 
curriculum in HIV/AIDS education. Among those characteristics 
were the involvement of individuals with a wide range of back-
grounds in the development of the curriculum; the provision of a 
safe environment in which young people could participate in the 
program; a focus on clear and specific goals related to sexually 
transmitted infections and HIV/AIDS; the use of methods and 
messages that are appropriate to a participant’s cultural back-
ground, sexual maturity, and developmental age; and the obtain-
ing of at least minimal support from relevant educational and 
other agencies (Kirby, Laris, and Rolleri 2005, 27). 
 Other Sexually Transmitted Infections 
 Although it is undoubtedly the most serious of all sexually trans-
mitted infections, HIV/AIDS is certainly not the only such dis-
ease with which world health agencies are concerned. Of those 
diseases, chlamydia is the most common treatable bacterial infec-
tion, affecting about 92 million people worldwide in 1999. (World 
statistics on sexually transmitted infections are currently being 
updated, but 1999 is presently the latest year for which compre-
hensive data are available.) The rate of infection varies widely 
around the world with one of the highest rates occurring in Cape 
Verde, where 13 percent of all pregnant women are infected with 
chlamydia. The highest infection rate regionally is in sub-Saharan 
Africa, where the rate is about 119 per 1,000 adults. The lowest 
rate is in East Asia and the Pacific, with a rate of about 7 adults 
per 1,000 (Avert 2009d). 
 Gonorrhea and syphilis are two other STIs for which world-
wide data are available. There were an estimated 62.35 million 
cases of gonorrhea worldwide in 1999, and an estimated 12.22 mil-
lion cases of syphilis. Studies for individual countries have found 

New Issues of Concern in Human  Sexuality  95
the rate of gonorrheal infection ranging from a low of 0.02 percent 
among pregnant women in Gabon to a high of 7.8 percent in South 
Africa. For syphilis, the highest rate of infection among pregnant 
women has been found in Cameroon (17.4%) and South Africa 
(8.4%), with much lower rates in Morocco (3%) and Sudan (2.4%). 
Although the infection rates among adults for both gonorrhea and 
syphilis have been declining significantly in most developed na-
tions, the one exception has been in the newly independent states 
of the former Soviet Union, where infection rates for syphilis have 
increased from about 5 to 15 cases per 100,000 in 1990 to 120 to 170 
cases per 100,000 in 1996 (Avert 2009d). 
 Sexually transmitted infections worldwide are a matter of 
increasing concern to international health agencies. In 2000, the 
World Health Assembly asked the director general of the World 
Health Organization (WHO) to develop a worldwide strategy for 
dealing with the spread of HIV/AIDS and other sexually trans-
mitted infections. As a result of that directive, WHO’s Department 
of Reproductive Health and Research (RHR) spent a number of 
years developing such a strategy, which was released in late 2006. 
That document, Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of 
Sexually Transmitted Infections: 2006–2015 , outlined an overall phi-
losophy for the prevention and treatment of STIs, along with a 
number of specific actions that WHO/RHR hoped to initiate in 
an effort to combat the spread of STIs. Among those actions were 
the following: 
 promotion of safer sexual behaviors 
 inclusion of STI diagnosis and treatment in all basic health 
services
 development of special services for high-risk populations, 
such as long-distance truck drivers, military personnel, 
adolescents, and military personnel 
 improved access to quality condoms at affordable prices 
 promotion of early recourse to health services for people 
with STIs and their partners 
 screening of asymptomatic patients 
 involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the development 
and execution of programs for the prevention and treatment 
of STIs (World Health Organization 2006, chapter 3) 

96 Worldwide Perspective
 Contraception and Family Planning 
 One of the most troublesome pieces of data about the world situ-
ation in the 21st century is its continued increase in population. 
As recently as 1960, the world population was only just over three 
billion people. It took 14 years for the world to add another bil-
lion people, 11 years to add the next billion, and 12 years to add 
one more billion. Experts predict that world population will reach 
seven billion in 2012, eight billion in 2025, and nine billion in 2040. 
Although the rate of population growth has now been decreasing 
every year since 1970, it is still close to 1 percent annually, guar-
anteeing a growth in population for the foreseeable future (U.S. 
Census Bureau 2009). 
 National and international governmental and nongovern-
mental agencies have been concerned about the world’s burgeon-
ing population for at least three decades. A number of regional 
and international conferences have been held to assess popula-
tion trends and to consider national and international policies to 
deal with apparently endless growth. One of the earliest of these 
conferences, the World Population Conference, was held in Bu-
charest, Romania, in 1974. Representatives to that conference pro-
duced a document, the World Population Plan of Action (WWPA), 
that stressed the importance of development, rather than family 
planning, as a way for countries to deal with their growing popu-
lations. Partly in respect of the many newly independent nations 
in Africa, the document also acknowledged that population con-
trol was essentially a national concern about which outside forces 
should not be concerned (Department of Economic and Social 
 Affairs. Population Division 2002, 128). 
 The Bucharest conference was followed by two more major 
conferences on world population at 10-year intervals, one in 
Mexico City in 1984 and one in Cairo in 1994. At each of these 
worldwide conferences and at a number of regional conferences, 
a major shift of emphasis in population control began to appear, 
with greater emphasis on the need for family planning as a way of 
bringing population growth under control. The final Programme 
of Action approved by attendees at the Cairo conference not only 
made a stronger statement for the use of contraceptive technol-
ogy in reducing births, but also took a much broader view of 
this topic, introducing a discussion of sex and sexuality (words 
that were not mentioned in the Bucharest or Mexico City docu-
ments); women’s rights; gender-based disparities of income and 

New Issues of Concern in Human  Sexuality  97
social status; rape; pornography; and female genital mutilation 
(Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Population Division 
2002, 129). In the decade following adoption of the Programme 
of Action, many nations had begun to take a more aggressive, 
 contraception-focused approach to their population problems. 
For example, Gabon, Nigeria, South Africa, and Tanzania had 
all developed educational campaigns to inform the public of the 
threat posed by overpopulation. Côte d’Ivoire and Lesotho had 
established counseling services for women most at risk for un-
wanted pregnancies. And Mali had introduced a new program 
promoting the status of women (Department of Economic and So-
cial Affairs. Population Division 2002, 129; the original document 
from which this information comes is available at http://www.
uneca.org/search.htm: United Nations Economic Commission 
for Africa.  Report of the Fourth Meeting of the Follow-up Committee 
on the Implementation of the Dakar/Ngor Declaration (DND) and the 
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and 
Development (ICPD-PA), Yaounde, Cameroon, January 18–31 ). 
 Research suggests that many nations are making progress in 
the development of family planning programs as a way of dealing 
with growing population issues (J. Ross 2002). However, a great 
deal more needs to be done. In 2009, the United Nations Popula-
tion Fund estimated that there were at least 200 million women 
worldwide who wanted to use safe and effective contraceptives 
in order to manage their pregnancies, but were unable to do so 
because of lack of access either to the necessary information or 
to contraceptives themselves. The UNFPA predicted that this 
“unmet need” would grow by at least 40 percent over the next 15 
years (United Nations Population Fund 2009a). 
 The question of how nations around the world will deal with 
their own population problems has been an important political 
issue in the United States for over 20 years. At the Mexico City 
conference in 1984, the United States delegation announced that 
the administration of President Ronald Reagan had adopted a 
new policy, one that would no longer permit the funding of non-
governmental family planning programs “which perform or ac-
tively promote abortion as a method of family planning” (Policy 
Statement of the United States of America at the United Nations 
International Conference on Population (Second Session) Mexico, 
D.F. August 16–13, 1984, [5]). Family planning organizations both 
within the United States and around the world were outraged at 
this decision, arguing that it dramatically inhibited the access of 

98 Worldwide Perspective
women around the world—especially in developing nations—to 
the contraceptive information and devices they so badly needed to 
control their own fertility. The policy remained in effect, however, 
until January 22, 1993, when newly elected President Bill Clin-
ton rescinded the policy (White House. Office of the Press Secre-
tary 1993). The election of George W. Bush as President in 2000 
restored the Reagan philosophy on family planning to the White 
House, and on his first day in office, Bush restored the  Mexico 
City policy (USAID 2001). Finally, with the election of Barack 
Obama as the nation’s 44th President, the nation’s policy on the 
funding of family planning programs in other nations reversed 
course yet again when Obama signed yet another memorandum 
to USAID, instructing them to “immediately waive such condi-
tions” as were contained in the 1984 and 2001 policy statements 
(White House 2009). A last-ditch effort by the Republican party 
to restore the Mexico City policy came five days after President 
Obama’s memorandum when Senator Mel Martinez (R-FL) in-
troduced an amendment to an unrelated children’s health insur-
ance bill requiring reinstatement of the policy. The amendment 
failed by a vote of 37 to 60, apparently resolving the issue for at 
least as long as the Democratic party maintains its majority in 
both houses of Congress. (The debate over the Martinez amend-
ment can be found in the Congressional Record  for January 28, 2009, 
pages S955–60.) 
 Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 
 As discussed in Chapter 2, teenagers in the United States who 
know that they are gay, lesbian, or bisexual or who question their 
sexual orientation or gender identity often face difficult chal-
lenges in coming to terms with that realization and working out 
their relationships with parents, other adults, and peers. Those 
problems tend to be, however, somewhat less serious than those 
faced by teenagers in many other parts of the world where same-
sex relationships are regarded much more negatively than they 
are in the United States. In many countries, those teenagers face 
physical or emotional abuse, or even death, usually as a result of 
state-sponsored and legal prohibitions or because of religious or 
cultural beliefs and traditions. As of 2009, homosexual acts at any 
age are illegal in 80 nations (and legal in 115 countries), and are 
punishable by death in five Muslim countries: Iran, Mauritania, 
Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Yemen, and in Muslim regions of Nigeria 

New Issues of Concern in Human  Sexuality  99
and Somalia. Four countries—Belize, Lesotho, Swaziland, and 
Trinidad and Tobago—ban the entry of gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
individuals into their nations. In almost all nations of the world, 
discrimination in employment, housing, and other areas of life on 
the basis of sexual orientation are legal, with only 10 nations in the 
world having specific prohibitions against such forms of discrimi-
nation (Ottosson 2009, 48–54; see also Sanders 2005). 
 The risks faced by young GLBTQ men and women is any-
thing but theoretical. In February 2006, for example, a 19-year-old 
South African lesbian, Zoliswa Nkonyana, was reportedly beaten 
with golf clubs and stoned to death by a group of teenagers be-
cause of her sexual orientation (Davis 2006). In addition to assaults 
and murders by individual criminals, state-sponsored executions 
of gay men and lesbians because of their sexual orientation have 
also been reported recently in a number of countries, such as Iraq, 
Nigeria, and Saudi Arabia (Gay Nigerian Sentenced to Death by 
Stoning 2001; Grew 2008; “Member of Iraqi Gay Group Pleads for 
Help ‘Before It’s Too Late’ ” 2009; “Saudi Arabia: Young Man Sen-
tenced to Death for Being Gay” 2009). 
 In many countries with a less negative view about same-sex 
relationships, school authorities, public health officials, and others 
often struggle with the question of whether they should provide 
information for young women and men about such relation-
ships. The debates over this issue often follow the same pattern 
as those that have occurred in the United States (see Chapter 2), 
with opponents arguing that the mention of same-sex relation-
ships in classrooms ipso facto will increase students’ interest in 
and participation in such activities. Proponents of the inclusion 
of discussions about same-sex relationships respond that simply 
talking about the subject will not make young people more likely 
to become gays or lesbians, and that information about all kinds 
of sexual topics is important in today’s world. 
 Specific information about the inclusion of sexual orientation 
and gender identity in school and out-of-school programs in most 
nations of the world is very thin. One useful source of this infor-
mation is a series of papers collected in preparation for a confer-
ence on Youth Sex Education in a Multicultural Europe held in 
Cologne, Germany, in November 2006. Sixteen nations prepared 
overview reports describing their efforts to provide teenagers with 
information about various aspects human sexuality. As expected, 
the treatment of instruction about sexual orientation and gen-
der identity varied significantly from nation to nation. Table 3.1 

100 Worldwide Perspective
 summarizes the services available in each of these 16 countries on 
sexual orientation from a variety of possible sources. 
 Some of the specific comments made about educational ef-
forts in various countries is instructive. The report from the Kyrgyz 
Republic, for example, says that no mention of sexual orientation 
is made in formal school settings “because homosexuality is not 
widely accepted considering national and cultural traditions in the 
Kyrgyz Republic.” Instead, some instruction is provided through 
other resources, such as health clinics, HIV/AIDS counseling ser-
vices, and religious organizations. The Kyrgyz report concludes 
TABLE 3.1
Youth Education on Sexual Orientation in 16 European Countries
Country
Schools 
Health 
Services
General 
Counseling
HIV/AIDS 
Counseling
Other
Austria
Y
Y
Y
Y
— 
Belgium
Y
Y
N
N
Y1
France
Y
N
Y
N
Y2
Germany
Y
— 
— 
Y
Y3
Hungary
N
N
N
N
N
Kyrgyz Republic
N
Y
— 
Y
Y4
Latvia
Y
N
N
N
Y5
Netherlands
Y
Y
N
N
N
Portugal
N
N
N
N
Y6
Russia
N
Y
N
N
Y7
Sweden
Y
Y
— 
Y
Y8
Switzerland
Y*
Y
Y
Y
Y9
Turkey
N
N
Y
Y
Y10
Ukraine
Y
Y
N
Y
N 
United Kingdom
N
N
— 
Y
Y11
Uzbekistan
Y
Y
N
N
Y12
Source: Country Papers, Youth Sex Education in a Multicultural Europe, 2006, http://english.forschung.
sexualaufklaerung.de/3051.0.html#. Accessed on June 21, 2009.
— = No response for this category.
 1 Youth advice and family planning centers
 2 Youth and family planning services
 3 Pregnancy and family counseling
 4 Social services; religious organizations
 5 Universities and vocational training institutions
 6 Web sites and help line
 7 Social counseling centers
 8 RFSL (Swedish Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Rights) centers
 9 Sex education services
10 Universities; community and informal services
11 Youth services; social services; community services
12 Social services

References 101
that “[t]here is a great need to develop public programmes in this 
area” (Country Papers. Kyrgyz Republic 2006). Other nations, 
however, have developed a variety of ways of bringing to teen-
agers information about sexual orientation, using either formal or 
informal means. For example, sexual orientation is not specifically 
mentioned under national curriculum guidelines in France, but a 
number of nongovernmental organizations, most of them gay and 
lesbian organizations, have developed programs for helping teach-
ers deal with the subject in their own classrooms (Country Papers. 
France 2006). Similar approaches are used in Germany, where assis-
tance is provided by Lambda, a network of gay and lesbian organi-
zations and in Sweden, where the group primarily involved is the 
Swedish Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender 
Rights (RFSL). In Belgium, sexual orientation is actually part of the 
national curriculum for sex education in schools, published under 
the rubric of “Good Lovers” (Country Papers. Germany 2006; 
Country Papers. Sweden 2006; Country Papers. Belgium 2006). 
 Although progress in the treatment of sexual orientation and 
gender identity in some developed nations of the world has ob-
viously taken place, most teenagers around the world in Africa, 
Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America still have little or no 
access to information about these topics. 
 References 
 Adepoju, Adunola. 2005. “Sexuality Education in Nigeria: Evolution, 
Challenges and Prospects.” Lagos, Nigeria: Understanding Human 
Sexuality Seminar Series 3, March. http://www.arsrc.org/downloads/
uhsss/adepoju_sexed.pdf. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 Akkara, Anto. 2001. “Indian Church Steps Up Education Programs 
to Deal with Threat of AIDS.”  Christianity Today, August 1. http://
www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2001/augustweb-only/8-13-54.0.html. 
Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 Alvarez, R. R. 1998. “Introducing Participatory AIDS and Sexuality 
Education into a Reproductive Rural Health Project for Adolescents 
and Youths.” http://gateway.nlm.nih.gov/MeetingAbstracts/
ma?f=102227945.html. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 AMREF. 2009. “MEMA Kwa Vijana (“Good Things for Young People”), 
Mwanza, Tanzania.” http://uk.amref.org/what-we-do/mema-kwa-
vijana-good-things-for-young-people-mwanza-tanzania/. Accessed on 
June 19, 2009. 

102 Worldwide Perspective
 Athar, Shahid. 2009. “Sex Education: An Islamic Perspective.”  Islam for 
Today . http://www.islamfortoday.com/athar19.htm. Accessed on June 17,
2009.
 Avert. 2009a. “HIV and AIDS in Africa.” http://www.avert.org/aafrica.
htm. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 Avert. 2009b. “HIV and AIDS in Swaziland.” http://www.avert.org/
aids-swaziland.htm. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 Avert. 2009c. “South East Asian HIV & AIDS Statistics.” http://www.
avert.org/aidssoutheastasia.htm. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 Avert. 2009d. “STD Statistics Worldwide.” http://www.avert.org/
stdstatisticsworldwide.htm. Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 Blandy, Fran. 2006. “ ‘Dr Beetroot’ Hits Back at Media over AIDS 
Exhibition.” Mail & Guardian Online, August 16. http://www.mg.co.za/
article/2006-08-16-dr-beetroot-hits-back-at-media-over-aids-exhibition. 
Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 The Body. 2004. “Japan: A New Spin on Sex Education for a Sexier New 
Generation.” http://www.thebody.com/content/world/art26583.html. 
Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 Boseley, Sarah. 2008. “Mbeki AIDS Denial ‘Caused 300,000 Deaths.’ ”  
Guardian . http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/nov/26/aids-
south-africa. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 Cevallos, Diego. 2006. “Education-Latin America: Let’s (Not) Talk 
About Sex.” Inter Press Service, April 18. http://ipsnews.net/news.
asp?idnews=32929. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 China Development Brief. 2005. “Sex Education Begins to Break 
Taboos.” http://www.chinadevelopmentbrief.com/node/57. Accessed 
on June 16, 2009. 
 The Christian Institute. 2009. “Gay Lessons Obligatory for England’s 
Schools.” http://www.christian.org.uk/news/20090429/gay-lessons-
obligatory-for-englands-schools/. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 “Continuing Denial Helps AIDS Spread.” 2001.  Bangkok Post . http://
www.aegis.com/news/bp/2001/BP010807.html. Accessed on June 19, 
2009.
 Correra, Ceclia. 2000. “Argentina’s National Network of Adolescents 
Towards Free and Formed Sexual and Reproductive Lives.” http://
www.accessmylibrary.com/coms2/summary_0286-28774107_ITM. 
Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 Country Papers. Belgium. 2006. “Youth Sex Education in a Multicultural 
Europe.” http://english.forschung.sexualaufklaerung.de/fileadmin/
fileadmin-forschung/pdf/country_papers_belgium.pdf. Accessed on 
June 21, 2009. 

References 103
 Country Papers. France. 2006. “Youth Sex Education in a Multicultural 
Europe.” http://english.forschung.sexualaufklaerung.de/fileadmin/file
admin-forschung/pdf/country_papers_france.pdf. Accessed on June 21, 
2009.
 Country Papers. Germany. Republic. 2006. “Youth Sex Education in a 
Multicultural Europe.” http://english.forschung.sexualaufklaerung.
de/fileadmin/fileadmin-forschung/pdf/country_papers_germany.pdf. 
Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 Country Papers. Kyrgyz Republic. 2006. “Youth Sex Education in a 
Multicultural Europe.” http://english.forschung.sexualaufklaerung.de/
fileadmin/fileadmin-forschung/pdf/country_papers_kyrgyz_republic.
pdf. Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 Country Papers. Sweden. 2006. “Youth Sex Education in a Multicultural 
Europe.” http://english.forschung.sexualaufklaerung.de/fileadmin/
fileadmin-forschung/pdf/country_papers_sweden.pdf. Accessed on 
June 21, 2009. 
 Curtis, Polly. 2009. “Sex Education for Five-year-olds to Be Made 
Compulsory in Schools.” Guardian . April 27. http://www.guardian.
co.uk/education/2009/apr/27/sex-education-contraception-schools.
Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 Davis, Andrew. 2006. “South African Lesbian Murdered.”  Windy City 
Times, April 1. http://www.windycitymediagroup.com/gay/lesbian/
news/ARTICLE.php?AID=11154. Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 “Degree Project Studies Sex Education in Iranian and Turkish Schools.” 
2006. http://www.mah.se/templates/ExternalNews____35690.aspx. 
Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Population Division. 2002. 
Levels and Trends of Contraceptive Use as Assessed in 2002 . New York: 
United Nations. 
 Feinberg, Leslie. 2007. “Sex Education Campaign Battled Old 
Prejudices.”  Workers World, May 11. http://www.workers.org/2007/
world/lavender-red-97/. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 Francoeur, Robert T., and Raymond J. Noonan, eds. 2004.  The Continuum 
Complete International Encyclopedia of Sexuality. New York and London: 
The Continuum International Publishing Group. 
 “Gay Nigerian Sentenced to Death by Stoning.” 2001. Sodomy Laws. 
http://www.glapn.org/sodomylaws/world/nigeria/ninews003.htm. 
Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 Geen, Jessica. 2009. “Gay Charities Express Concern over Faith School 
Sex Education Proposals.”  Pinknews . http://www.pinknews.co.uk/
news/articles/2005-12243.html. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 

104 Worldwide Perspective
 Grew, Tony. 2008. “55 Arrested During Raid on ‘Gay Party’ in Saudi 
Arabia.” Pinknews . http://www.pinknews.co.uk/news/articles/2005-
8544.html. Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 Kirby, Douglas, B. A. Laris, and Lori Rolleri. 2005.  Impact of Sex and 
HIV Education Programs on Sexual Behaviors of Youth in Developing and 
Developed Countries. Youth Research Working Paper No. 2. Research 
Triangle Park, NC: Family Health International. 
 Kunthear, Mom. 2009. “Govt Begins HIV Training for Teachers.” 
Phnom Penh Post, May 19. http://www.phnompenhpost.com/index.
php/2009051925925/National-news/Govt-begins-HIV-training-for-
teachers.html. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 Macdonald, Alasdair. 2009. “Independent Review of the Proposal 
to Make Personal, Social, Health and Economic (PSHE) Education 
Statutory.” [n.p] [April 24]. 
 “Member of Iraqi Gay Group Pleads for Help ‘Before It’s Too Late.’ ” 
2009. UK Gay News . http://www.ukgaynews.org.uk/Archive/09/
Apr/0601.htm. Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 Milburne, Caroline. 2009. “Think Sex.”  The Age . http://www.theage.
com.au/news/education-news/think-sex/2006/05/28/1148754861223.
html. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll. 2004. “Sex Education in America.” 
http://www.kff.org/newsmedia/upload/Sex-Education-in-America-
Summary.pdf. Accessed on June 12, 2009. 
 Olson, Beatriz R., and Richard A. Dickey. 2002. “Mass Health Education 
on Sex and Sexuality and Its Impact on Cuba: An Interview-Based 
Medical Report on the Development, Evolution, and Current Status 
of This Educational Program in Cuba, with Emphasis on Women’s 
Health.” Journal of Women’s Health 11 (9; November): 767–71. 
 Ottosson, Daniel. 2009.  State-sponsored Homophobia: A World Survey of 
Laws Prohibiting Same Sex Activity Between Consenting Adults . [Brussels]: 
International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans, and Intersex Association. 
 “Policy Statement of the United States of America at the United 
Nations International Conference on Population (Second Session) 
Mexico, D.F. August 16–13 [ sic ], 1984. http://www.populationaction.
org/Publications/Reports/Global_Gag_Rule_Restrictions/
MexicoCityPolicy1984.pdf. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 Quantum Market Research and Marie Stopes International. 2008. 
Sex—Telling It Like It Is. Melbourne: Marie Stopes International. 
 Rajalakshmi, T. K. 2009. “Rajya Sabha Committee sees ‘Indian Culture’ 
Threatened by Sex Education.” Communalism Watch. http://
communalism.blogspot.com/2009/05/rajya-sabha-committee-sees-
indian.html. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 

References 105
 Rosenthal, Elisabeth. 2000. “In Rural China, a Steep Price of Poverty: 
Dying of AIDS.”  New York Times, October 28. http://www.nytimes.
com/2000/10/28/world/in-rural-china-a-steep-price-of-poverty-dying-
of-aids.html?pagewanted=all. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 Ross, David A., Bruce Dick, and Jane Ferguson. 2006.  Preventing HIV/
AIDS in Young People: A Systematic Review of the Evidence from Developing 
Countries . UNAIDS Inter-agency Task Team on Young People. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization. WHO Technical Report Series 
No. 938. 
 Ross, John A. 2002. “Effort Measures for Family Planning Action 
Programs: Past Trends and Future Prospects.” http://www.un.org/esa/
population/publications/completingfertility/RevisedRosspaper.PDF. 
Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 Sanders, Douglas. 2005. “Human Rights and Sexual Orientation in 
International Law.” http://www.ilga.org/news_results.asp?LanguageI
D=1&FileCategory=44&FileID=577. Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 “Saudi Arabia: Young Man Sentenced to Death for Being Gay.” 2009. 
Hudson New York (with link to original story in Arabic). http://www.
hudsonny.org/2009/04/saudia-arabia-young-man-sentenced-to-death-
for-being-gay.php. Accessed on June 21, 2009. 
 Sex and Samfund. 2009. “Sex Education.” http://www.sexogsamfund.
dk/Default.aspx?ID = 1605. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 Smith, Anthony et al. 2007. “Sex in Australia: A Guide for Readers.” 
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health 27 (2; September): 
103–5.
 Transaction Campaign News, September 8, 2000. http://www.tac.org.
za/newsletter/2000/ns000908.txt. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 UNAIDS. 2008. “Country Progress Indicators.”  2008 Report on the Global 
AIDS Epidemic . http://data.unaids.org/pub/GlobalReport/2008/
jc1510_2008_global_report_pp235_324_en.pdf. Accessed on June 17, 
2009.
 United Nations Population Fund. 2009a. “Ensuring That Every 
Pregnancy Is Wanted.” http://www.unfpa.org/rh/planning.htm. 
Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 United Nations Population Fund . 2009b. “Report Card: HIV Prevention 
for Girls and Young Women. Swaziland.” http://www.unfpa.org/hiv/
docs/report-cards/swaziland.pdf. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 USAID. 2001. “Memorandum for the Administrator of the United States 
Agency for International Development.” http://www.usaid.gov/
whmemo.html. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 U.S. Census Bureau. 2009. “International Data Base.” http://www.
census.gov/ipc/www/idb/worldpop.html. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 

106 Worldwide Perspective
 Valk, Guss. 2000. “The Dutch Model.” http://www.unesco.org/
courier/2000_07/uk/apprend2.htm. Accessed on June 16, 2009. 
 Vishnoi, Anubhuti, and Teena Thacker. 2009. “No Sex Education in 
Schools, Leads to Promiscuity: House Panel.”  Express India, April 18. 
http://www.expressindia.com/latest-news/No-sex-education-in-schools-
leads-to-promiscuity-House-panel/448353/. Accessed on June 17, 2009. 
 Wellings, Kay, and Rachel Parker. 2006.  Sexuality Education in Europe: 
A Reference Guide to Policies and Practices . Brussels: IPPF European 
Network.
 White House. 2009. “Memorandum for the Secretary of State; 
the Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
Development.” http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/
MexicoCityPolicy-VoluntaryPopulationPlanning/. Accessed on June 19, 
2009.
 White House. Office of the Press Secretary. 1993. “Memorandum for the 
Acting Administrator of the Agency for International Development.” 
http://clinton6.nara.gov/1993/01/1993-01-22-aid-family-planning-
grants-mexico-city-policy.html. Accessed on June 19, 2009. 
 World Health Organization. 2006.  Global Strategy for the Prevention and 
Control of Sexually Transmitted Infections: 2006–2015: Breaking the Chain 
of Transmission . Geneva: World Health Organization. Also available 
online at http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/
rtis/9789241563475/en/index.html.
 “Youth and HIV/AIDS: Can We Avoid Catastrophe?” 2001.  Population
Reports 29 (3; Fall; Series L, No. 12): 1–39. 

107
 4 
 Chronology 
 H
umans have struggled with issues related to sexual health for 
centuries at least, and probably as long as the race has ex-
isted. This chapter summarizes some of the important events 
in the history of sexually transmitted infections, contraception 
and family planning, the development of sexual orientation, and 
sexual identity. 
ca.
3000 BCE
Egyptian temple drawings from this period sug-
gest the availability of condoms, although the use 
to which they were put (ceremonial, to protect from 
sexually transmitted diseases, or as a contraceptive) 
or the materials of which they were made are un-
clear.
ca.
1850 BCE
Evidence suggests that women begin to use the pes-
sary, a contraceptive device inserted into the vagina, to 
prevent pregnancy. A wide variety of materials were 
apparently used for the purpose, including honey, 
hot oil, wine, sodium carbonate, and even crocodile 
dung.
 Seventh
Century
BCE
Explorers discover the first oral contraceptive, a plant 
known as silphion, near the city of Celene in North Af-
rica, in the region that is now Libya. Once its contra-
ceptive properties are recognized, the plant is in great 
demand among Greek women, such that it was har-
vested to extinction by about 100 CE .

108 Chronology
Sixth
Century
BCE
Chinese women are said to use mercury as an aborti-
facient.
Fourth
Century
BCE
The Greek natural philosopher Aristotle (384–322) is 
credited with being the first person to recommend a 
variety of substances for use as a spermicide. He sug-
gests that women spread oil of cedar, frankincense, 
olive oil, or other substances on their vaginas in order 
to avoid pregnancy.
Second
Century
CE
The Greek physician Soranus (98–138) writes a work 
that is regarded as the first medical text on birth control 
in the ancient world, a book entitled  Gynaecology. He 
recommends a number of ways of preventing sperm 
from entering the womb, such as sneezing, standing 
up, or jumping backward seven times, or the use of a 
pessary by the woman.
ca. 1640
A collection of condoms made from the intestines of 
animals are discarded near an outhouse associated 
with Dudley Castle in England. Prior to that time, con-
doms had been made out of a wide array of materials, 
including linen fabric soaked in saline solution, silk 
paper, leather, and even tortoise shell (!).
ca. 1750
The Venetian adventurer and author, Giacomo Casa-
nova, describes contraceptive methods he used in his 
numerous seductions of women, including condoms 
made of lamb intestine or linen for himself and a half 
lemon rind as a primitive cervical cap. Casanova and 
other men and women of the time were probably at 
least as concerned about the prevention of sexually 
transmitted infections as they were of preventing preg-
nancy with such devices.
ca. 1850
Massachusetts physician Charles Knowlton becomes 
the first person in the United States to be sentenced to 
prison for  providing information about and advocating 
birth control. In 1832 he published a pamphlet of con-
traceptive advice entitled  Fruits of Philosophy.  He also 
recommended douching with a solution of salt, vinegar, 

Chronology 109
 and zinc sulfite or aluminum potassium sulfite after 
sexual intercourse as the most effective means of birth 
control, a contraceptive technique that became widely 
popular for almost half a century. 
 1495 
The first well-documented outbreak of syphilis occurs 
during the Italian War of 1494–1498. By the end of the 
war, the disease had become pandemic throughout Eu-
rope and begun to spread to India and China. 
 1610 
The Virginia colony passes the first antisodomy law in 
the United States, requiring the death penalty for any-
one convicted under the laws. Women are not included 
in the law’s provisions. 
 1641 
The Massachusetts Bay Colony enacts a new penal 
code that includes sodomy as a capital crime. The defi-
nition of sodomy is taken directly from Leviticus 20:13. 
By the end of the century, nearly all colonies had ad-
opted similar laws against sodomy, requiring the death 
penalty for those convicted of the crime. 
 1786 
Pennsylvania adopts a number of fundamental legal 
reforms, removing the death penalty for crimes such 
as burglary, robbery, sodomy, and buggery (sexual in-
tercourse with animals). By the end of the century, a 
number of other states had followed suit and reduced 
the penalty for sodomy to loss of property, assignment 
to servitude, or some other punishment. 
 1838 
A German gynecologist, Friedrich Wilde, invents the 
cervical cap, which he offers to his patients as a means 
of birth control. He first takes a wax impression of a 
woman’s cervix, and then fashions a cup-shaped cap 
of uncured rubber. The cap becomes very popular in 
Europe, but not in the United States. 
 1844 
American inventor Charles Goodyear patents a pro-
cess for vulcanizing rubber, providing an ideal mate-
rial from which to make condoms and giving them 
their  perhaps most common slang name of “rub-
bers.” 

110 Chronology
 1870s 
The Voluntary Motherhood movement emphasizes 
the naturalness and beauty of women’s sexuality and 
rejects the use of contraceptives as unnatural and de-
meaning to women. The movement stresses instead 
the use of periodic or permanent abstinence as the pri-
mary means of birth control. 
 1873  
The U.S. Congress passes the Comstock Act, a law 
prohibiting the transmission of “obscene, lewd, and/
or lascivious” materials through the U.S. mails. The 
legislation included any and all contraceptive devices 
or information. Twenty-four states eventually passed 
similar legislation restricting the distribution of such 
materials and information within the states. These 
laws are collectively known as the Comstock laws. 
 1879  
German physician Albert Ludwig Neisser discov-
ers the bacterium that causes gonorrhea, a bacterium 
named in his honor as Neisseria gonorrhoeae . 
 Late  
A German gynecologist by the name of Wilhelm Peter 
1870s
Johann Mensinga, writing under the pseudonym of 
Karl Hasse, describes the first “diaphragm pessary,” a 
hollow hemispherical device made out of rubber that 
fits into the vagina. The device soon becomes very 
popular under the name of the Mensinga diaphragm 
or, more simply, the diaphragm. 
 1884–  
The simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) found in 
1924
monkeys is thought to have transmuted to a form 
transmissible to humans that eventually evolves to 
become human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which 
causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). 
 1889  
Cecil Reddie, headmaster at the Abbotsholme School 
in England, is said to be the first person to offer a sex 
education course in a school setting. Reddie is quoted 
as saying that he hoped to “prevent mental illusions 
due to false ideas from within” and to “prevent false 
teaching from other fellows.” 
 1898  
At its first national convention, a year after being 
formed, the National Congress of Parent and Teachers 

Chronology 111
Association (PTA) includes a session on sex education 
in which the importance of training in the subject prior 
to puberty is emphasized. 
 1905  
The German microbiologist Fritz Schaudinn (1871–
1906) and the German dermatologist Erich Hoffmann 
(1868–1959) first describe the bacterium, Treponema pal-
lidum , that causes syphilis. 
 1906  
German bacteriologist August von Wassermann 
(1866–1925) develops a test for the diagnosis of syphi-
lis, making it possible not only for early treatment of 
the disease, but also for prevention of its spread. 
 1909  
German bacteriologist Paul Ehrlich (1854–1919) and his 
student, Sahachiro Hata (1873–1938), discover a cure 
for syphilis, the chemical compound arsphenamine, 
later marketed as Salvarsan and 606 (because it was 
compound number 606 in a long series of compounds 
being tested in their laboratory). 
German gynecologist Richard Richter invents what is 
probably the world’s first intrauterine device. 
 1912  
The National Education Association (NEA) recom-
mends that public school teachers be trained in the 
teaching of sex education topics. 
A Special Committee on the Matter and Methods of Sex 
Education of the American Federation for Sex Hygiene 
presents a report before the 15th International Con-
gress on Hygiene and Demography on the content and 
methodology of sex education classes for high school 
and college students. 
 1913  
Japanese bacteriologist Hideyo Noguchi (1876–1928) 
demonstrates that syphilis is caused by the spirochete 
Treponema  pallidum . 
Superintendent of Chicago schools Ella Flagg Young 
institutes the first sex education program in the United 
States by requiring high school students to attend a 
series of lectures on sexual hygiene. The so-called 

112 Chronology
 Chicago Experiment lasts only a year when members 
of the board of education decide the subject is too con-
troversial to continue. 
 1915  
A group of women in New York City found the Na-
tional Birth Control League, later to become the Inter-
national Planned Parenthood Federation. 
 1916  
Margaret Sanger establishes the first birth control clinic 
in the United States, in the Brownsville section of Brook-
lyn, New York. Nine days later, New York police officers 
close down the clinic. Sanger and her colleagues are ar-
rested and found guilty of “maintaining a public nui-
sance,” and Sanger is sentenced to 30 days in prison. 
 1918  
The U.S. Public Health Service launches a national sex 
education campaign to educate all Americans about 
the risks of venereal diseases (sexually transmitted 
 infections). 
 1921  
Sanger founds the American Birth Control League, 
later to become the Planned Parenthood Federation of 
America.
 1922  
The U.S. Public Health Service publishes a book, High
Schools and Sex Education , with suggestions for help-
ing students develop “the proper information and at-
titudes about the place of sex in the life of a normal 
adult” through the usual courses offered in high school, 
such as biology, general science, home economics, so-
cial studies, and English. 
 1924;   
Japanese gynecologist Kyusaku Ogino (1882–1975) and 
1927
Austrian gynecologist Hermann Knaus (1892–1970) 
independently devise the rhythm method of birth con-
trol, in which women refrain from intercourse during 
the fertile phase of their menstrual cycles. 
 1924  
Bavarian immigrant Henry Gerber and a group of friends 
found the Society for Human Rights, the first gay rights 
group in the United States. The society  survives only a 
brief time and is disbanded when the wife of one of its 
1913
(cont.)

Chronology 113
directors reports the group’s existence to the police. The 
organization publishes the first magazine for gay men 
in the United States, Friendship and Freedom.
 1928  
German gynecologist Ernst Gräfenberg introduces one 
of the world’s first commercially available intrauterine 
devices, a flexible ring made of silk that, in a later for-
mulation, was wrapped in silver wire. The device was 
popular in Germany for about a decade before being 
replaced by other contraceptive devices. 
 1929  
The German Reichstag (parliament) removes Para-
graph 175, the section criminalizing same-sex sexual 
acts, from the German Constitution. The law had first 
been adopted in 1871, and its repeal never took effect 
because of the rise of the Nazi party in Germany in the 
early 1930s. Instead, the Nazi-controlled parliament 
actually extended the provisions of Paragraph 175 in 
1934 to include as criminal acts “a kiss, an embrace, 
even homosexual fantasies.” 
In his encyclical Divini Illius Magistri , issued on De-
cember 31, 1929, Pope Pius XI declares that sex educa-
tion outside the home or the church is false and cannot 
be countenanced by practicing Roman Catholics. On 
March 21, 1931, the Holy See issued a decree (Educ. 
306) clarifying the responsibility of Catholics to abide 
by the Pope’s ruling on sex education, which remains 
in effect today. 
 1930  
In an encyclical titled Casti Canubi  (Of Chaste Marriage), 
Pope Pius XI declares that all artificial forms of contracep-
tion are a sin in the eyes of the Roman Catholic Church. 
 1933  
Swedish sex educator and journalist Elise Ottesen-
Jensen forms what was probably the world’s first as-
sociation to promote sex education in schools, the 
National League for Sex Education. 
 1936  
In the case United States v. One Package of Japanese Pes-
saries , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit 
overturns the federal Comstock Act (see 1873). 

114 Chronology
 1940  
The U.S. Public Health Service once again argues for 
increased attention to sex education in schools, claim-
ing that such instruction is an “urgent need.” 
 1948  
Alfred Kinsey, researcher at Indiana University, pub-
lishes Sexual Behavior in the Human Male , still considered 
by many authorities the best available data on sexual 
attitudes, feelings, and behaviors in American men. 
The United Nations establishes the World Health Or-
ganization (WHO), an agency that has since been the 
primary organization responsible for public health 
issues such as sexually transmitted infections, preg-
nancy, and contraception worldwide. 
 1951  
Three gay men, Henry Hay, Bob Hull, and Chuck Row-
land, found the Mattachine Society in Los Angeles. The 
society is created to provide aid and comfort to gay 
men and lesbians and to educate the general public on 
gay issues. 
 1952  
With the financial support and encouragement of John 
D. Rockefeller III, a group of scientists found the Pop-
ulation Council to assist countries around the world 
in attacking their own unique population problems in 
whatever manner they agree is best for them. 
 1953  
The German government begins the rearrest of gay 
concentration camp survivors as “repeat offenders” 
when they refuse to renounce their intention of con-
tinuing to take part in homosexual acts. 
Alfred Kinsey publishes  Sexual Behavior in the Human 
Female , a companion volume to his 1948 book dealing 
with male sexuality. 
The American School Health Association develops a 
national program of family life education for the na-
tion’s public schools, which includes a discussion of 
sex education topics. 
 1955  
A joint committee of the American Medical Association 
and the National Education Association publishes five 

Chronology 115
pamphlets on sex education for use in the  nation’s schools. 
The topics of the pamphlets are  Parents’ Privilege  and  A
Story about You  for upper elementary students,  Finding 
Yourself  for middle school students,  Learning about Love
for high schoolers, and Facts Aren’t Enough for adults. 
 1959  
The American Law Institute proposes a model penal 
code for state laws dealing with abortion. The code 
would legalize abortion for reasons of physical or 
mental health of the mother, pregnancy due to rape 
and incest, and fetal deformity. 
The Cuban government decides that courses in human 
sexuality are to be a part of the nation’s formal educa-
tional program. That decision has remained in effect ever 
since, with the government providing sex education both 
in primary and secondary schools, but also in a number 
of other settings, including health clinics and the media. 
 1960  
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approves the 
use of Enovid as the first oral contraceptive. 
 1961  
Illinois becomes the first state to decriminalize homo-
sexual acts between consenting adults in private. 
 1964  
Mary Calderone and colleagues found the Sexuality In-
formation and Education Council of the United States 
(SIECUS) to serve as an advocate for sex education, sex-
ual health issues, and sexual rights in the United States. 
 1965  
InGriswold v. Connecticut , the U.S. Supreme Court strikes 
down the state of Connecticut Comstock Act prohibiting 
the use of contraceptives as a violation of the petition-
ers’ constitutional right to privacy. The court’s decision 
applies only to married couples (also see 1972). 
 1969  
The Canadian parliament decriminalizes homosexual 
acts between consenting adults in private. 
The Stonewall riots of June 27 and 28 in New York 
City mark the symbolic beginning of the gay rights 
 movement in the United States. Triggered by a police 
raid on the Stonewall, a popular gay bar in Greenwich 

116 Chronology
Village, the riots begin in and around the bar and soon 
spread throughout lower Manhattan. 
A group of individuals working for the repeal of state 
abortion laws and legitimizing a woman’s right to 
choose with regard to pregnancy forms the National 
Association for the Repeal of Abortion Laws (NARAL), 
now known as NARAL: Pro-Choice America. 
 1971  
In its decision in the case of United States v. Vuitch, the 
U.S. Supreme Court upholds a District of Columbia law 
that permits abortions only for the purpose of saving a 
woman’s life or health, which the court acknowledges 
as referring to both her physical and mental health. The 
decision is taken by some to mean that the court re-
gards abortion as permissible for virtually any reason. 
 1972  
In Eisenstadt v. Baird , the U.S. Supreme Court extends 
its Griswold v. Connecticut  decision (1965) to void the 
ban on the use of contraceptive materials among un-
married couples. 
Outraged by seeing her son being beaten at a gay pride 
parade in New York City, Jeanne Manford organizes 
Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays, the first 
group to provide support for parents and to advocate 
for gay and lesbian civil rights. 
 1973  
In the case of Roe v. Wade , the U.S. Supreme Court an-
nounces a decision that has been the law of the land 
ever since, essentially banning any prohibition on 
abortion during the first trimester of pregnancy, but al-
lowing states to impose restrictions on abortions in the 
second and third trimesters. 
Largely in response to the Supreme Court’s decision in 
Roe v. Wade , a number of pro-life groups meet in Detroit 
to establish the National Right to Life Committee. 
 1974  
The United Nations sponsors the first international con-
ference on world  population issues, held in Bucharest, 
Romania. The conference issues the World  Population 
Plan of Action, which emphasizes development as the 
1969
(cont.)

Chronology 117
primary solution to population problems faced by (pri-
marily) developing nations. 
 1976  
The FDA approves the first intrauterine device for sale 
in the United States. The device is a T-shaped object 
that must be inserted by a doctor and that can be left in 
place for up to 10 years. 
 1978  
California’s Proposition 6 (the “Briggs Initiative”) pro-
vides for the firing of all gay and lesbian teachers and 
all teachers who allude to homosexual behavior posi-
tively in the classroom. The initiative is eventually de-
feated, to some extent because of the strong objections 
from Governor Ronald Reagan. 
 1980  
In Providence, Rhode Island, gay teenager Aaron Fricke 
sues his high school to allow him to bring a male date 
to the senior prom. He wins his suit and is accompa-
nied by Paul Guilbert to the school dance. Fricke later 
writes of these events in a popular book, Reflections of a 
Rock Lobster.
Georgetown University, run by Jesuits of the Roman 
Catholic Church, expels its gay student group from 
campus, forbidding it to use any university facilities. 
The student group takes the university to court and 
wins its case eight years later. 
New Jersey becomes the first state to mandate sex edu-
cation in all public schools at all grade levels. 
 1981  
The Council of Europe adopts a resolution supporting 
gay rights legislation in member nations. Three years 
later, the European Parliament adopts a similar resolu-
tion, 114 to 45. 
Wisconsin becomes the first state to pass a law prohib-
iting discrimination against gay men and lesbians in 
employment, housing, and public accommodations. 
The U.S. Congress passes the Adolescent Family Life 
Act, Title XX of the Public Health Service Act. The act is 
designed to encourage adolescents to postpone  sexual 

118 Chronology
activity until marriage and to emphasize chastity and 
self-discipline in their sexual lives. The act also pro-
vides support for pregnant or parenting teens and their 
families.
The first cases of HIV infection and AIDS are reported 
among gay men and, later, intravenous drug users in 
California and New York. 
 1982  
HIV and AIDS cases are first reported among Haitians 
and hemophiliacs. 
 1983  
Linda Conway, a West Virginia kindergarten teacher, 
is fired from her job because her superiors think she 
looks like a lesbian, in spite of Conway’s insistence that 
she is not a lesbian. Three years later, the state supreme 
court confirms the school board’s right to dismiss Con-
way because of her appearance. 
HIV and AIDS cases are first reported among women, 
children, and hetero sexuals. 
German virologist Harald zur Hausen (1936– ) dis-
covers a link between the human papillomavirus and 
cervical cancer, an accomplishment for which he was 
awarded a share of the 2008 Nobel Prize in Physiology 
of Medicine. 
 1984  
French virologist Luc Antoine Montagnier (1932– ) 
and American virologist Robert Gallo (1937– ) inde-
pendently discovery that HIV infection is caused by 
the human immunodeficiency virus, which gives the 
disease its name. Priority for the discovery becomes a 
matter of contention over the next decade, with many 
authorities now giving Montagnier credit for discov-
ery of the virus and Gallo for demonstrating its being 
the causative agent in the disease. 
President Ronald Reagan announces that it shall be 
the policy of the United States not to provide funding 
for any nongovernmental organization that performs 
or promotes abortion as a part of its family planning 
1981
(cont.)

Chronology 119
 program. The policy becomes known as the Mexico 
City Policy because it was announced at the 1984 
United Nations International Conference on Popula-
tion held in that city. 
 1986  
Pope John Paul II issues a papal letter declaring that 
homosexuality is “intrinsically disordered” and calling 
for all Catholics to oppose civil rights legislation for 
lesbians and gay men. 
 1987  
Researchers at the Burroughs Wellcome company 
and the U.S. National Cancer Institute discover that 
the drug zidovudine, also known as azidothymidine 
(AZT) or Retrovir, is effective in the treatment of HIV 
infections.
 1989  
In the case of Webster v. Reproductive Health Services , 
the U.S. Supreme Court rules that governmental 
agencies are not required to allow the use of public 
facilities to provide abortion services. Some observ-
ers see the ruling as the court’s first step back from 
its more expansive view of abortion as expressed in 
Roe v. Wade . 
 1990  
Seventy gay and lesbian educators found the Gay 
and Lesbian Independent School Teachers Network 
(GLSTN), later to be renamed the Gay, Lesbian, and 
Straight Education Network (GLSEN). 
Experts estimate that about eight million people world-
wide are living with AIDS. 
 1991  
A superior court judge in Los Angeles rules that the 
Boy Scouts of America may legally prohibit an Eagle 
Scout from  becoming a scoutmaster because of his sex-
ual  orientation. 
 1992  
In Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. 
Casey , the U.S. Supreme Court issues a complex and 
very divided opinion on abortion rights, essentially af-
firming its 1973 ruling in  Roe v. Wade , but modifying 
some fundamental aspects of that ruling. 

120 Chronology
 1993  
The FDA approves the injectable drug Depo Provera 
as an extended contraceptive for use over three month 
periods.
President Bill Clinton rescinds the Mexico City Policy 
on family planning originally announced in 1984 by 
President Ronald Reagan. 
Twenty-one-year-old Brandon Teena is raped and 
murdered in Lincoln, Nebraska, by two friends who 
have learned that she/he is a transgendered person. 
The case becomes the subject of an Academy Award 
winning film, Boys Don’t Cry.
 1994  
The United Nations sponsors the third international 
conference on worldwide population issues, held in 
Cairo, Egypt. The Programme of Action adopted by 
the conference emphasizes for the first time the im-
portance of contraceptive technology in dealing with 
problems of overpopulation throughout the world, but 
especially in developing nations. 
 1995  
Penny Culliton, a teacher in New Ipswich, New 
Hampshire, is fired for listing as voluntary reading 
two gay-themed books, Maurice , by E. M. Forster, and 
The Education of Harriet Hatfield , by May Sarton. 
The United Nations establishes the Joint United Nations 
Programme on AIDS (UNAIDS) as the lead UN agency 
for dealing with the HIV epidemic around the world. 
 1996  
South Africa becomes the first nation in the world to 
prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orienta-
tion as part of its national constitution. 
In the case of Nabozny v. Podlesny  heard before the Sev-
enth Circuit Court of Appeals, a jury awards Jamie 
Nabozny $962,000 because administrators at his Wis-
consin high school failed to protect him from antigay 
harassment. The case is important because of the pre-
cedence it establishes in similar cases of antigay ha-
rassment in schools throughout the nation. 

Chronology 121
The U.S. Congress passes the Welfare Reform Act, Title 
V of the Welfare Reform Act of 1996, which provides 
funding for abstinence-only sex education programs 
that meet certain specific criteria (eventually known as 
the A–H criteria). 
Medical researchers begin to make use of a combina-
tion antiretroviral treatment, consisting of three differ-
ent drugs, for the treatment of HIV infections. 
 1998  
In one of the most famous hate crimes of modern 
times, college student Matthew Shepard is murdered 
near Laramie,  Wyoming. 
The FDA approves the first emergency contraceptive 
product, PREVEN Emergency Contraceptive Kit, made 
by the Gynétics corporation in Belle Mead, New Jersey. 
 1999  
The Queer Youth Alliance (now the Queer Youth Net-
work) is founded in Great Britain as the world’s first 
gay-rights organization for gay and lesbian youth. 
The state of California passes three gay-rights bills, one 
providing for a domestic partnership registry, one out-
lawing harassment of gay youth in schools, and one 
banning discrimination in housing, employment, and 
public accommodation. 
The FDA approves production and sale of the first 
 single-hormone emergency  contraceptive product, 
Plan B, made by the Women’s Capital Corporation of 
Bellevue, Washington. 
 2000  
The FDA approves two new contraceptive devices. The 
first is a monthly injectable contraceptive, Lunelle, which 
contains a combination of estrogen- and progestin-re-
lated hormonal products. In October 2004, Pharmacia 
Corporation announced a recall of the product citing 
questions as to its efficacy in preventing pregnancies. 
The drug is currently not available in the United States. 
The second approved product is Mirena, a T-shaped in-
trauterine device effective for up to five years. 

122 Chronology
In amending Title XI of the Social Security Act, 
the U.S. Congress establishes a competitive grant 
 program for abstinence-only sex education  programs, 
the Special Projects of Regional and National 
Significance– Community-Based Abstinence Education 
(SPRANS–CBAE), which expands upon similar legis-
lation adopted in 1981 and 1996. 
 2001  
The FDA approves applications for two new contracep-
tive technologies. The first is the birth control patch Ortho 
Evra, a product that delivers two hormones, estrogen 
and progestin, transdermally during three of each four-
week cycle of use. The second device is called NuvaRing, 
a vaginal contraceptive ring that also delivers two forms 
of estrogen and progestin on a monthly basis. 
President George W. Bush reinstates the Mexico City 
Policy on family planning originally announced by 
President Ronald Reagan in 1984 and rescinded by 
President Bill Clinton in 1993. 
Myanmar health minister Ket Sein tells a meeting of 
the World Health Organization that his nation has no 
cases of HIV/AIDS because the people in Myanmar do 
not misbehave sexually, so there is no way for the dis-
ease to spread. 
Attahiru Umar, a gay Nigerian man, is sentenced to 
death by stoning by a Nigerian court because of his 
sexuality (gay). 
 2002  
On January 1, Saudi Arabia beheads three men found 
guilty of “engaging in the extreme obscenity and ugly 
acts of homosexuality.” 
 2003  
The FDA approves Seasonale, a birth control pill that al-
ters a woman’s menstrual cycle so that she has only four 
periods per year, but still provides the same pregnancy 
protection as a conventional oral contraceptive pill. 
 2004  
A study conducted by the Special Investigations Di-
vision of the Minority Staff of the Committee on 
 Government Reform of abstinence-only sex edu-
2000
(cont.)

Chronology 123
cation programs finds that four in five national 
 abstinence-only programs contain “false, misleading, 
or distorted information about reproductive health.” 
 2005  
New Zealand becomes the first country in the world to 
outlaw hate crime and discrimination on the basis of 
gender identity. 
Illinois governor Rod Blagojevich issues an order pro-
hibiting pharmacies in the state from refusing to fill 
prescriptions for contraceptives because of a pharma-
cist’s personal ethical or religious beliefs. 
 2006  
The FDA approves Gardasil, a prophylactic vac-
cine against the human papillomavirus. The vaccine 
 appears to be effective against types 16 and 18 of the 
virus, which together account for about 70 percent of 
all cases of cervical cancer, and against types 6 and 11, 
which cause 90 percent of all cases of genital warts. 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
 recommends that all females between the ages of 11 
and 26 be vaccinated with the product. 
Nineteen-year-old Zoliswa Nkonyana is beaten with 
golf clubs and stoned to death by a group of teenagers 
because of her sexual orientation (as a lesbian). The act 
is only one of a number of violent attacks on lesbians 
and gay men in South Africa during the first decade of 
the 21st century. 
 2007  
Experts estimate that about 33 million people world-
wide are living with AIDS. 
Senator Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ) introduces the Re-
sponsible Education about Life Act, outlining a com-
prehensive approach to sex education in U.S. schools 
that departs significantly from the abstinence-only 
philosophy of sex education supported by the federal 
government over the preceding decade. The act did 
not pass. 
Governor Rick Perry (R-Texas) issues an executive order 
requiring all girls to be vaccinated for the HPV virus 

124 Chronology
for admission to the sixth grade. Two months later, the 
state legislature overturns the executive order. 
Representative Carolyn B. Maloney (D-NY) introduces 
legislation to make it illegal for pharmacists to fill pre-
scriptions with which they disagree. The legislation is 
necessitated by the decisions of some pharmacists not 
to fill prescriptions for emergency contraceptives for 
women and minor girls. Maloney’s bill is never con-
sidered by committee and dies at the end of the 110th 
session of the Congress. 
The Portland (Maine) public school system makes na-
tional news when it announces that free contraceptives 
will be provided to students at the King Middle School 
who are legally old enough to engage in sexual inter-
course.
 2008  
The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services issues 
a new directive requiring that all women between 
the ages of 11 and 26 entering the United States be 
 vaccinated against the human papillomavirus. Some 
 women’s groups object to the new ruling claiming that 
it takes essential decisions about a woman’s reproduc-
tive health out of the hands of individuals. 
 2009  
President Barack Obama rescinds the Mexico City Pol-
icy on family planning introduced by President Ron-
ald Reagan in 1984, rescinded by President Bill Clinton 
in 1993, and reinstated by President George W. Bush in 
2001.
President Obama announces a drastic cutback in fund-
ing of abstinence-only education programs in his 2010 
federal budget. He says that funds previously used for 
abstinence education would be going instead to teen 
pregnancy prevention programs. 
Representative Barbara Lee (D-CA) reintroduces the 
Responsible Education about Life Act (see 2007). 
Judge Edward R. Korman orders the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) to reconsider its rule 
2007
(cont.)

Chronology 125
limiting Plan B emergency contraception to men and 
women 18 and older. He orders that the agency reduce 
the age limitation to 17 and older. The FDA complies 
with the ruling. 
The English government announces plans to make sex 
education mandatory in all public and private schools 
at both primary and secondary level. Religious schools 
are to be allowed to add topics that reflect their own 
theological biases about sexual issues in addition to 
those included in the national curriculum. 
The Committee on Petitions of the Indian parliament 
releases a report saying that instruction in human sex-
uality has no place in Indian schools. The only excep-
tion is for discussions of the topic in biology classes 
designed for students who do not continue with their 
education beyond secondary level. 
Swaziland member of parliament Timothy Myeni sug-
gests compulsory HIV testing for every person in the 
country, to be followed by tattooing everyone who 
tests positive on his or her buttocks. 
Reports say that more than 200 men in Iran are sen-
tenced to death for a variety of reasons, one of them 
being their sexuality (gay). 

This page intentionally left blank 

127
 5 
 Biographical Sketches 
 O
ver the centuries, many women and men have contributed 
to the development of modern methods of contraception and 
family planning, to the conquest of sexually transmitted in-
fections, and to the education of adults and young people about 
issues surrounding sexual orientation and gender identity. These 
individuals represent a wide range of professions, from the sci-
ences to politics to advocacy in one’s daily life. The sketches in 
this chapter provide a review of the lives and contributions of 
only some of these individuals. 
 Mary Steichen Calderone (1904–1998) 
 Calderone was an outspoken advocate for the teaching of sexual-
ity in schools. She served for many years as medical director of the 
Planned Parenthood Federation and founded and served as presi-
dent and executive director of the Sex Information and Education 
Council of the United States. 
 Mary Calderone was born as Mary Steichen on July 1, 1904, in 
New York City to Edward Steichen, a photographer and painter, 
and Clara (Smith) Steichen. The Steichen family spent many years 
in France, returning to the United States just after the onset of 
World War I. Mary graduated from the Brearley School in New 
York City in 1921 and then enrolled in a premedical curriculum 
at Vassar College. She soon became disillusioned with this field, 
however, and changed her concentration to theater arts, music, 
and English. Her bachelor’s degree, awarded in 1925, was, how-
ever, in chemistry. Still, after leaving Vassar, she decided to give 

128 Biographical Sketches
the theater a try, and spent three years in New York City working 
to gain roles on the stage. At the end of that time, she abandoned 
her plans and settle in with her marriage to actor Lon Martin. Cal-
derone reached the nadir of her life in 1933 when her husband and 
eldest daughter died. After a period of counseling and testing, she 
decided to return to school to work for her M.D. She entered the 
Rochester University School of Medicine in 1934, at the age of 30, 
and received her M.D. five years later. After completing her in-
ternship at Bellevue Hospital in New York, Calderone enrolled 
at the Columbia University School of Public Health, where she 
earned her master’s degree in public health in 1942. At Columbia, 
she met and married her second husband, Frank Calderone, with 
whom she was to have two children. During the early years of 
her marriage, she worked part-time as a family physician in Great 
Neck, New York. 
 In 1953, Calderone was offered a position as medical director 
at the Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA). During 
her 11-year tenure with PPFA, Calderone revolutionized the or-
ganization’s approach to contraception and family planning edu-
cation, expanding its mission to include a broad range of issues 
related to human sexuality. In 1964, Calderone left PPFA to found 
the Sex (later, Sexuality) Information and Education Council of the 
United States (SIECUS) because she had become convinced that 
“handing out condoms was not enough.” She served as executive 
director of SIECUS from 1964 to 1975 and as president from 1975 
to 1982. During this period, she arguably had more influence on 
the character and direction of sex education in the United States 
than any person in the field. She made SIECUS into an umbrella 
organization that included sex educators, school administrators, 
physicians, social activists, and parents interested in developing 
programs of sex education in which human sexuality was pre-
sented as a positive force in one’s life. 
 In 1982, Calderone retired from SIECUS and took a position 
as adjunct professor of human sexuality at New York University, a 
post she held until 1988. Faced with the onset of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, she then retired to a Quaker community in Kennett Square, 
Pennsylvania, where she died on October 24, 1998. Calderone was 
a prolific writer, whose best known works included  Abortion in the 
United States, Release from Sexual Tensions ,  Manual of Family Plan-
ning and Contraceptive Practices, Sexual Health and Family Planning , 
Sexuality and Human Values, Questions and Answers about Love and 
Sex, The Family Book about Sexuality  (with Eric Johnson), and  Talking 

Biographical Sketches 129
with Your Child about Sex . She received many awards and honors, 
including honorary doctorates from Woman’s Medical College of 
Pennsylvania, Newark State College, Adelphi University, Ken-
yon College, Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, 
Brandeis University, Harvard University, Hofstra University, and 
Dickinson College. 
 Min-Chueh Chang (1908–1991) 
 Chang was part of a research team, that included John Rock and 
Gregory Pincus, responsible for the development of the first oral 
contraceptive, a product sometimes known simply as The Pill. He 
was also a prolific and highly respected researcher in the field of 
reproductive biology with 347 scholarly papers to his credit, 112 
of which he authored by himself, and 38 more of which he was 
the senior author. 
 Min-Chueh Chang (sometimes known as M. C. Chang) was 
born in the village of Dunhòu, Shanxi province, China, on Octo-
ber 10, 1908. He attended Tsing Hua University in Peking, from 
which he received his bachelor’s degree in animal psychology in 
1933. He then stayed on at Tsing Hua as a teacher of psychology 
until 1938, when he entered a national competition for a few high-
prestige foreign scholarships. He was successful in that competi-
tion and chose to continue his studies in agricultural science at 
the University of Edinburgh, in Scotland. By this time, Chang’s 
scholarly interests had begun to evolve, and he had become more 
interested in the subject of animal reproductive biology than ani-
mal psychology. At the conclusion of his year at Edinburgh, he 
accepted an offer to continue his studies at Cambridge University, 
where he earned a Ph.D. in animal breeding in 1941. 
 At the conclusion of World War II, Chang was faced with 
the decision of where he would continue his research: in Great 
Britain, back at home, or in some other location. He eventually 
decided to accept an offer to spend a year with Gregory Pincus 
at the newly established Worcester Foundation for Experimental 
Biology. He had not been there long when he realized that he and 
Pincus were kindred spirits with a passion for hard work and a 
common interest in learning more about the reproductive biology 
of animals, with the rabbit as their organism of choice for study. 
When Margaret Sanger and Katherine McCormick approached 
Pincus in 1953 with a proposal for the development of an oral 

130 Biographical Sketches
 contraceptive pill, Chang was an obvious choice to join the re-
search team since his specialty at the time was the study of the 
effect of various orally administered hormones on reproductive 
patterns in the rabbit. Along with Pincus and John Rock, Chang is 
given credit for having developed what may well have been the 
most significant medical breakthrough in the control of reproduc-
tion in women in history. 
 Chang remained at Worcester for the rest of his academic ca-
reer. After development of the pill, he turned his attention to in 
vitro fertilization and accomplished the first artificial reproduc-
tion of a rabbit by this means in 1959 and of a rodent five years 
later. Chang died of heart failure in Worcester on June 5, 1991. 
Among his many honors and awards were the Albert Lasker 
Award, Ortho Medal and Award of the American Fertility Society, 
Hartman Award by the Society for the Study of Fertility, Frances 
Amory Prize by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and 
Wippman Scientific Research Award by the Planned Parenthood 
Federation of America. In 1990, he was elected to membership in 
the National Academy of Sciences. 
 Anthony Comstock (1844–1915) 
 Comstock was a strong opponent of all forms of behavior that he 
regarded as immoral. As secretary of the New York Society for 
the Suppression of Vice, he worked for the passage of federal and 
state laws prohibiting the distribution of obscene materials which 
at the time were given a very broad interpretation. These laws 
eventually became known as Comstock laws and have been en-
forced throughout most of the 20th century and, in some cases, 
into the 21st century. 
 Anthony Comstock was born in New Canaan, Connecticut, 
on March 7, 1844, to Polly and Thomas Anthony Comstock, a well-
to-do family who had 10 children, 7 of whom survived childhood. 
Young Anthony enlisted in the army and served in the Ameri-
can Civil War from 1863 to 1865. After the war he opened a dry 
goods store in New York City, but soon became more interested 
in issues of morality. He was strongly opposed to the distribution 
of lewd, obscene, immoral, and indecent material which, at the 
time, might describe a very wide array of artistic, live, and written 
productions. In 1873, Comstock founded the New York Society 
for the Suppression of Vice (NYSSV) and convinced the Young 

Biographical Sketches 131
Men’s Christian Association (YMCA), where he was employed, 
to finance the new organization. As secretary of the NYSSV, Com-
stock began to lobby the U.S. Congress to pass new legislation 
strengthening an earlier antiobscenity act passed in 1864. When 
the new law was passed in 1873, Comstock was appointed Special 
Agent of the Post Office with the authority to carry out the act’s 
provisions. He has been said to have confiscated “194,000 obscene 
pictures and photographs, 134,000 pounds of books, 14,200 stere-
opticon plates, 60,300 rubber articles, 5,500 sets of playing cards, 
and 31,500 boxes of aphrodisiacs” during the first six months in 
his new office and to have boasted later in life that “he had been 
responsible for the criminal conviction of enough people to fill a 
61-coach passenger train—over 3,600 people” and to have been 
responsible for “at least 15 suicides” (A. Bates 1995, 159). A vast 
amount of the material seized by Comstock as obscene included 
contraceptive and family planning information which today is 
regularly available to the general public through any number and 
variety of outlets. 
 Comstock remained active in the campaign against obscenity 
for the rest of his life. He died on September 21, 1915 in New York 
City. 
 Paul Ehrlich (1854–1915) 
 Ehrlich was a German bacteriologist who was awarded a share of 
the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his research 
on autoimmunity, the process by which a body develops immune 
responses against its own tissues, cells, or other components. In 
the area of sexual health, he is best known for his discovery of the 
first safe and effective treatment for syphilis, one of the most ter-
rible diseases in human history. 
 Paul Ehrlich was born in Strehlen, Silesia, then a part of Prus-
sia, a city now known as Strzelin, in modern Poland. He completed 
his secondary education at the Breslau Gymnasium (high school), 
and then studied medicine at the universities of Breslau, Stras-
bourg, Freiburg, and Leipzig, from which he received his medical 
degree in 1877. His doctoral dissertation dealt with the staining of 
cells, a topic that was to remain a centerpiece of his research for 
the rest of his life. In 1878, Ehrlich accepted an appointment as a 
researcher at the Berlin Medical Clinic, where he later had an op-
portunity to work with the famous Robert Koch on the tubercle 

132 Biographical Sketches
bacillus responsible for tuberculosis. During this research, Ehrlich 
caught a mild case of the disease and traveled to Egypt for two 
years in order to live and work in a more amenable climate. Some 
biographers have surmised that this experience was a seminal fac-
tor in the development of Ehrlich’s overall view to the search for 
methods of treating disease. He envisioned finding a magic bullet, 
some compound that would attack disease-causing microorgan-
isms only, without affecting beneficial organisms or an animal’s 
body. His work on staining suggested that some compounds must 
exist, compounds that recognize and attach themselves only to 
specific microorganisms. His goal was to find compounds that 
were effective in bonding to bacteria and other disease-causing 
microorganisms and then attach to the stain a poison that would 
kill the organism. 
 Over the years, Ehrlich methodically worked his way though 
hundreds of potential stains that might be used as a magic bul-
let. In 1909, one of his assistants, Sachahiro Hata, returned to a 
compound that had already been tested and rejected, called 
compound 606 because it was the 606th compound to have been 
tested. (At this point, Ehrlich was already working on compounds 
900+.) Hata found that the compound was very effective in killing 
the spirochete that causes syphilis,  Treponema pallidum . In 1910 the 
compound was made generally available to physicians under the 
name of salvarsan. It, along with a related drug called neosalva-
rsan, were the only safe and effective drugs for the treatment of 
syphilis until penicillin became generally available for this pur-
pose in the 1940s. 
 Kevin Jennings (Dates unavailable) 
 In May 2009, Jennings was appointed Assistant Deputy Secretary 
in the Office of Safe and Drug Free Schools in the U.S. Department 
of Education. He is a founder of the Gay, Lesbian, and Straight 
Education Network (GLSEN) and has worked for many years to 
make schools safe environments for gay, lesbian, bisexual, trans-
gender, and questioning (GLBTQ) youth. 
 Kevin Jennings was born in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, 
and graduated from Harvard College in 1985, where he gave the 
Harvard Oration at his graduation ceremonies. His first teach-
ing position was in the history department at the Moses Brown 
School in Providence, Rhode Island, after which he took a job as 

Biographical Sketches 133
teacher and chair of the history department at the Concord Acad-
emy in Concord, Massachusetts. In 1988, he became faculty ad-
viser to the school’s first Gay-Straight Alliance. Two years later, he 
was a founding member of GLSEN, a volunteer group of parents, 
teachers, and other adults concerned with issues faced by GLBTQ 
youth in the Boston area. The organization has since grown to a 
staff of 40 members who support the efforts of more than 10,000 
students engaged in more than 4,300 gay-straight alliance groups 
around the nation. 
 In 1992, Jennings was appointed co-chair of the Education 
Committee of the Governor’s Commission on Gay & Lesbian 
Youth by Massachusetts Governor William Weld. He was prin-
cipal author of the commission’s final report, “Making Schools 
Safe for Gay & Lesbian Youth.” In 1993, he left the Boston area to 
become Joseph Kingenstein Fellow at Columbia University, from 
which he received his master’s degree in 1994. He then became 
executive director of GLSEN, a post he held until October 2008. 
In 1999, he also earned his M.B.A. from the New York University 
Stern School of Business. Jennings is the author of six books, in-
cluding Telling Tales Out of School and  Mama’s Boy, Preacher’s Son . 
 Alfred Kinsey (1894–1956) 
 Kinsey was perhaps the most influential sex researcher in the 
world during his lifetime. He published two classic research stud-
ies on the nature of human sexuality,  Sexual Behavior in the Human 
Male  and  Sexual Behavior in the Human Female , and also founded 
the Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction (now 
the Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduc-
tion) at Indiana University. 
 Alfred Charles Kinsey was born in Hoboken, New Jersey, on 
June 23, 1894, to Alfred Seguine Kinsey, a professor of engineer-
ing at Stevens Institute of Technology, and Sarah Ann (Charles) 
Kinsey. After graduating from Columbia High School in Hobo-
ken, Kinsey enrolled at Stevens to study engineering, primarily 
because of his father’s insistence. At the end of two years, he real-
ized that engineering was not a field for which he was suited, and, 
with his father’s acquiescence, he transferred to Bowdoin College, 
in Brunswick, Maine, where he majored in biology. After earning 
his B.S. in biology and psychology in 1916, Kinsey enrolled in a 
doctoral program in zoology at Harvard University. He received 

134 Biographical Sketches
his Sc.D. from Harvard in 1919, and then took a position in the 
department of zoology at Indiana University, where he remained 
for the rest of his life. 
 By the mid-1930s, Kinsey had already achieved a reputation 
in his specialized field of entomology, the study of gall wasps, a 
subject about which he was regarded as the leading authority in 
the world. At the same time, he was increasingly interested in a 
topic that had concerned him for many years, education in sexual-
ity. An opportunity to act on this interest occurred in 1938 when 
the Indiana student newspaper,  Daily Student,  published an edi-
torial demanding that the university provide better information 
about and testing for venereal diseases, a health problem then 
sweeping the nation. Kinsey took this call as an opportunity to 
request permission to teach a noncredit course on marriage, in 
which a number of issues related to sexuality would be presented. 
The course was well received the first year it was offered, with 
98 students enrolling, even though the university administration 
had stipulated that the course could not be announced or adver-
tised publicly. 
 Before long, Kinsey had largely abandoned his research 
on gall wasps and focused his attention on human sexuality. In 
1942, he received funding from the Rockefeller Foundation and 
the National Research Council for the creation of the Institute 
for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction at Indiana. It was 
through the institute that Kinsey conducted the interviews (5,300 
white males and 5,940 white women and girls) on which he based 
his classic books. The book on male sexuality was published in 
1948 and eventually sold more than a half million copies, while 
the female version was released five years later with significantly 
smaller sales numbers (because the text was then available from a 
number of other sources). 
 Kinsey’s work essentially came to an end after the publica-
tion of Sexual Behavior in the Human Female . His work had out-
raged large segments of the American population and efforts 
were made at all levels to ensure that he would write no more 
about the topic. Under pressure from the U.S. Congress, Dean 
Rusk, then president of the Rockefeller Foundation, ended the 
fund’s support of the institute. Kinsey was unable to find funding 
from other sources, and he gradually withdrew from active par-
ticipation in sexuality research. The institute eventually survived 
and continues to thrive as an independent organization within the 
purview of Indiana University. Kinsey died on August 25, 1956, 

Biographical Sketches 135
as the  result of an embolism caused by bruising his leg in a fall a 
few days earlier. 
 Charles Knowlton (1800–1850) 
 Knowlton is perhaps best known for being the first person in the 
history of the birth control movement in the United States to be 
imprisoned for his efforts on behalf of contraception. He was sen-
tenced to three months of hard labor in Cambridge in 1833 be-
cause of a book he had written called The Fruits of Philosophy, or the 
Private Companion of Young Married People by a Physician . 
 Charles Knowlton was born on May 10, 1800, in Templeton, 
Massachusetts, to Stephen and Comfort (White) Knowlton. He 
attended local schools in Worcester County and the New Salem 
Academy, about 40 miles west of the city of Worcester. Knowlton’s 
biographers note that, as a young man, Knowlton was somewhat 
mystified by and very concerned about the “wet dreams” that are 
a normal part of male adolescence. He apparently worried enough 
that his health was affected, and he even went to the extreme of 
submitting to electric shocks as a cure for his disorder. When he 
fell in love with and married the daughter of the man who ad-
ministered the shocks, he was (not surprisingly today) completed 
cured of his malady. 
 Perhaps because of this early problem, Knowlton became in-
terested in medical matters as a young man and enrolled for a 
series of lectures at Dartmouth Medical College, from which he 
received his M.D. in 1824. He then opened a medical practice in 
Hawley, Massachusetts, where he decided to supplement his med-
ical knowledge by digging up recently buried corpses for dissec-
tion and study. When he was discovered pursuing these studies, 
he was arrested and sentenced to two months in jail. While serv-
ing his time in the Worcester County jail, Knowlton developed his 
general philosophy of life, a materialistic and atheistic view of the 
world, which he outlined in a book called Modern Materialism . Al-
though he believed that the book would sell widely and bring him 
fame, he sold almost no copies. He eventually gave up on the book 
and returned to medical practice in Ashfield, Massachusetts. 
 At about this time, Knowlton had also become increasingly 
interested in issues of family planning. He had become con-
vinced that the pattern of uncontrolled pregnancies among young 
women common at the time was both economically and  medically 

136 Biographical Sketches
 harmful to families, especially to women. He began providing 
contraceptive advice to his patients, eventually setting down this 
advice in his book, The Fruits of Philosophy, or the Private Companion 
of Young Married People by a Physician . When word got out about 
the book, he was fined in 1832 and imprisoned for three months in 
1833. The government’s attempt to silence Knowlton actually had 
the reverse effect, arousing instead in the public an interest in the 
book and its subject. It eventually sold more than 10,000 copies 
and became widely popular throughout the United States, where 
the last edition was published in 1877. 
 Knowlton remained active as a traveling physician covering 
about 30 towns in western Massachusetts until his death on Feb-
ruary 20, 1850, in Winchendon, Massachusetts. 
 Beverly LaHaye (1929– ) 
 LaHaye founded Concerned Women of America in 1979 to pro-
mote Christian values in development of national policy in six 
major areas: sanctity of life, definition of the family, the fight 
against pornography, education, religious liberty, and national 
sovereignty. 
 Beverly LaHaye was born Beverly Jean Ratcliffe on April 30, 
1929. She attended Bob Jones University, where she met her future 
husband, Tim LaHaye, later to become a well-known and influ-
ential evangelical minister and author of the Left Behind series of 
apocalyptic fiction novels. When the couple was married in 1947, 
Beverly left Bob Jones to become a full-time housewife and mother. 
The couple eventually had four children. LaHaye dates her inter-
est in political issues to the day in 1979 when she saw Barbara 
Walters interviewing feminist Betty Friedan. LaHaye realized, she 
later said, that the ideas Friedan was expressing did not represent 
her or any of the women she knew (S. Bates 1993, 102). As a result, 
she decided to form a new organization, Concerned Women of 
America (CWA), that  did  more closely reflect her own views on a 
number of important social issues. LaHaye has remained as chair-
man of the CWA ever since. 
 LaHaye is a popular guest on a number of radio and televi-
sion programs, including  CBS Evening News ,  NBC Nightly News , 
ABC’s World News Tonight , and  Nightline. In 1990 she started her 
own radio program,  Beverly LaHaye Live , which was later renamed 
Concerned Women Today.  The program ceased production in 2004. 

Biographical Sketches 137
LaHaye is perhaps best known for the 16 books she has authored 
and coauthored, including  The New Spirit Controlled Woman ,  The
Act of Marriage ,  Spiritual Power for the Family ,  and A Woman’s Path 
to True Significance  (with Janice Crouse). LaHaye has received a 
number of awards and honors for her work, including the Chris-
tian Woman of the Year award (1984), given by the association of 
the same name; Religious Freedom Award (1991) of the Southern 
Baptist Convention, Thomas Jefferson Award (2001) of the Coun-
cil for National Policy; American Association of Christian Coun-
selors’ Caregiver Award (2003), and Extraordinary Woman of the 
Year Award (2006) from the Extraordinary Women ministry. In 
1992, she was awarded an honorary doctorate of humanities by 
Liberty University. 
 Hideyo Noguchi (1876–1928) 
 In 1911, Noguchi discovered the agent that causes syphilis, the 
spirochete bacterium called  Treponema pallidum . 
 Noguchi was born Seisaku Noguchi on November 24, 1876, 
in Inawashiro, Fukushima prefecture, Japan. At the age of one and 
a half years, he fell into a fireplace, badly burning his left hand. 
The injury was to have significance on a number of occasions later 
in life. For example, when the damage to his burned fingers was 
finally repaired, he was so deeply impressed that he decided to 
become a physician himself. He apprenticed himself to the doctor 
who had repaired his hand and eventually passed the medical 
examination which earned him his M.D. in 1897. A year later, he 
changed his name from Seisaku to Hideyo because of a novel he 
had read about a physician with less than desirable qualities who 
had the same name as his own birth name. 
 In 1900, Noguchi took a research position at the University of 
Pennsylvania, reportedly because prospective employers in Japan 
were concerned about patient reactions to a doctor with such a 
badly damaged hand. Noguchi found research a very satisfying 
career, and later moved from Pennsylvania to a similar position 
at the Rockefeller Institute in New York City. It was at Rockefeller 
that Noguchi found the T. pallidum  bacterium in the brain of a 
patient with late-term syphilis, providing the evidence that the 
bacterium was responsible for the disease. For his work in this 
area, Noguchi was nominated for a Nobel prize on nine occasions, 
although he was never given the award. 

138 Biographical Sketches
 Beginning in 1918, Noguchi developed a growing interest 
in yellow fever, and he traveled extensively in South and Cen-
tral America to test his hypothesis that the disease is caused by 
a spirochaete bacteria like  T. pallidum  rather than by a virus, as 
most researchers thought (Noguchi was wrong in this hypoth-
esis). While working in Accra, Gold Coast, (now Ghana) in 1928, 
he fell ill with the disease he was studying, and died there on 
May 21, 1928. He received a number of honors during his lifetime, 
including the Order of Dannebrog (Denmark), Order of Isabella 
the Catholic (Spain), Order of the Polar Star (Sweden), and Order 
of the Rising Sun, 4th class (Japan); as well as honorary doctorates 
from the University of Quito, University of Guayaquil, and Yale 
University. In July 2006, the Japanese government established the 
Hideyo Noguchi Africa Prize for outstanding research on infec-
tious diseases in Africa. 
 Elise Ottesen-Jensen (1886–1973) 
 Ottesen-Jensen was a politically active journalist and sex educa-
tor who was one of the founding members of the Riksförbundet 
för Sexuell Upplysning (RFSU; Swedish Association for Sexuality 
Education), one of the first organization’s of its kind in the world. 
She was also an outspoken advocate for the rights of women 
and an active member of Sveriges Arbetares Centralorganisation 
(Central Organization of the Workers of Sweden), a far left politi-
cal group. 
 Ottesen-Jensen was born Elise Ottesen in Høyland (now part 
of Sandnes) in Rogaland county, Norway, on January 2, 1886. She 
was the 17th of 18 children. Her life was strongly influenced when 
she learned at an early age that her younger sister had been sent 
to Denmark to bear a child so that she would be forced to give 
up the child for adoption. Ottesen adopted her hyphenated last 
name when she married a political organizer, Albert Jensen, al-
though she was almost universally known by her nickname of 
Ottar. She had planned to become a dentist, but lost two fingers to 
an accident in her high school chemistry class, making that career 
impossible. Instead, she chose to become a journalist and political 
organizer. One of the first things she learned when she started to 
organize women was that they seemed to have more questions 
about sexuality than they did about politics. After she and her 

Biographical Sketches 139
husband left Norway for Sweden (because of his political activi-
ties), she was introduced to the diaphragm by a doctor friend, and 
was soon traveling across the country teaching women about its 
use. She also agitated for more and better education about sexual 
health, advocated for abortion rights for women, and worked 
for civil rights for gay men and lesbians. In 1953, Ottesen-Jensen 
was one of the founders of the International Planned Parenthood 
Foundation. In her honor, the RFSU has named its newsletter 
Ottar . She died in Stockholm on September 4, 1973. 
 Robert Parlin (1963– ) 
 Parlin was cofounder of the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education 
Network (GLSEN) and established the first public school Gay/
Straight Alliance at Newton South High School, in Newton, Mas-
sachusetts, in 1989. He continues to be adviser to that group. 
 Robert Parlin was born in Grafton, Massachusetts, on August 1, 
1963. He attended Harvard College, from which he received his 
B.A. in history and literature in 1985. He then continued his stud-
ies at the Harvard Graduate School of Education (HGSE), from 
which he received his M.Ed. in 1987. After graduating from HGSE, 
he accepted a job teaching history at Newton South, where he has 
remained ever since. In 1989, he was cofounder of the Gay and Les-
bian School Teacher Network (GLSTN), which was later renamed 
the Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network (GLSEN). In 
addition to his regular teaching assignments at Newton South, 
Parlin helped write the ninth grade sexuality and health curricu-
lum for the Newton school system. He has also been a trainer on 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) issues in the New 
England region and has worked for the Massachusetts Depart-
ment of Education’s Safe Schools Program for Gay and Lesbian 
Students.
 Parlin was elected to the HGSE Alumni Council in 2004 and 
was appointed to the Cambridge (Massachusetts) GLBT Commis-
sion in 2005. In 2007, Parlin created and taught a course on the 
history of gay/straight alliances at Wheelock College in Boston 
through the Stonewall Center for Lifelong Learning. In 1998, Par-
lin and his partner, Bren Bataclan, had the first gay commitment 
ceremony ever held at Harvard University’s historic Memorial 
Church. In 2004, they were legally married in Cambridge. 

140 Biographical Sketches
 Paul VI (1897–1978) 
 As the person acknowledged to be the representative of God on 
Earth, the head of the Roman Catholic Church espouses views on 
all matters of morality that members of the church are expected to 
understand and follow. Pope Paul VI clarified the church’s posi-
tion on a number of sexual issues, including birth control, in vari-
ous of his writings, one of the most important of which was the 
encyclical Humanae vitae  (Of human life), issued on July 25, 1968. 
In that encyclical, the pope confirmed a long-held position that all 
forms of artificial birth control are to be “absolutely excluded.” 
 Paul VI was born Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria 
Montini on September 26, 1897, in the village of Concesio, in Lom-
bardy, Italy. His mother was Giudetta (Alghisi) Montini, and his 
father, Giorgio Montini, was a nonpracticing lawyer, journalist, 
and member of the Italian parliament. He attended a Jesuit-run 
elementary school, Cesare Arici, and a state-operated secondary 
school, Arnaldo da Brescia, from which he received his diploma in 
1916. He then entered the seminary to study to become a Roman 
Catholic priest, and was ordained in that office on May 29, 1920. 
After his ordination, Montini was sent to Rome to study at the 
Gregorian University, the University of Rome, and the Accademia 
dei Nobili Ecclesiastici. He was then assigned as attaché to the 
papal nunciate in Warsaw for one year. After returning to Rome in 
1924, he held a number of posts in the Vatican hierarchy, including 
chaplain to the Federation of Italian Catholic University Students 
and substitute for ordinary affairs under Cardinals Pacelli and 
Maglione, secretaries of state, and, eventually, directly under the 
pope himself. In this office, Montini was responsible for organiz-
ing relief work and care of political refugees during World War II. 
 In 1954, Montini was named archbishop of Milan, the most 
senior post outside the Vatican. His work in revitalizing the dio-
cese brought him worldwide attention and he was widely rec-
ognized as “the archbishop of the workers.” Upon the death of 
Pope John XXIII on June 21, 1963, Montini was elected to become 
the new leader of the church, whereupon he took the name of 
Paul VI. Early in his papacy, Paul decided to issue encyclicals 
on two controversial topics, celibacy in the priesthood ( Sacerdo-
talis caelibatus ; June 24, 1967) and birth control ( Humanae vitae ; 
July 25, 1968). These encyclicals evoked widespread controversy 
from  individuals both within and outside of the church. That 

Biographical Sketches 141
 controversy eventually overshadowed many aspects of the rest 
of Paul’s work in the church, but never deterred Paul from his be-
liefs. Ten years after issuing  Humanae vitae , he again reiterated his 
strong stand against the use of birth control devices by the faith-
ful, a position that remains official doctrine today for Catholics. 
He died on August 6, 1978, at Castel Gandolfo, in Rome. 
 Gregory Goodwin Pincus (1903–1967) 
 Pincus is one of the three individuals responsible for the devel-
opment of the first oral contraceptive to be approved for use in 
the United States, often referred to simply as The Pill. Late in his 
life, he also worked on the production of a morning-after pill that 
could be taken some hours or days after sexual intercourse. 
 Gregory Goodwin Pincus was born on April 9, 1903, in Wood-
bine, New Jersey, to Joseph and Elizabeth (Lipman) Pincus. Later 
in life, he credited his father and uncle, both agricultural scientists, 
with his own early interest in scientific research. Pincus attended 
Cornell University, from which he received his B.S. in agriculture 
in 1924. He then remained at Cornell to complete his master’s 
and doctoral degrees in zoology in 1927. He did his postdoctoral 
studies in reproductive biology at Cambridge from 1927 to 1930 
before accepting a post as instructor in biology at Harvard Univer-
sity, where he remained until 1937. At Harvard, Pincus’s research 
dealt with hormonal systems in animals, especially the rabbit. He 
achieved a remarkable breakthrough in 1934 when he was able 
to achieve reproduction in a rabbit using in vitro fertilization. Al-
though that accomplishment was scientifically significant, it came 
at a time when the general public was becoming increasingly con-
cerned about scientific efforts to create life artificially, and Pincus 
was labeled as a “Frankenstein” by some members of the general 
public. Instead of confirming his scientific status, his rabbit exper-
iment is said to have prevented his receiving tenure at Harvard. 
 In 1937, Pincus returned once more to Cambridge for a year 
before accepting an offer to become professor of experimental zo-
ology at Clark University, in Worcester, Massachusetts. Although 
prominent in some fields, Clark was not then widely recognized as 
a scientific research institution of the first rank. Pincus struggled 
there to continue his research on animal hormones on a very lim-
ited budget. Over time, Pincus built up the research program at 
Clark and, in 1944, was able to establish the Worcester  Foundation 

142 Biographical Sketches
for Experimental Biology, for many years a center of research on 
animal (including human) endocrinology. 
 In 1953, Margaret Sanger and Katharine McCormick ap-
proached Pincus with a proposal that he begin research on the de-
velopment of an oral contraceptive pill for women. Working with 
a colleague, Min-Chueh Chang, Pincus began to explore the use of 
progesterone to prevent ovulation. Pincus and Chang later found 
that a combination of progesterone and estrogen was even more 
effective than progesterone alone in preventing ovulation with the 
least risk to users. In 1956, joined by Harvard researcher John Rock, 
Pincus and Chang began testing their oral contraceptive in Puerto 
Rico. Based on the results of those tests, the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration approved the new drug’s use for certain menstrual 
disorders and miscarriages and in 1960 as an oral contraceptive. 
 After The Pill had been approved, Pincus and Chang turned 
their attention to research on a so-called morning after pill that 
could be taken as a contraceptive a few days after sexual inter-
course. This research was interrupted, however, when Pincus 
died on August 22, 1967, in Boston, of bone cancer. The disease 
is thought to have been caused by Pincus’s long-term exposure 
to carcinogenic substances during his work in the laboratory. 
Among the awards Pincus received are the Albert D. Lasker 
Award in Planned Parenthood, the Modern Medicine Award for 
Distinguished Achievement, and the American Medical Associa-
tion Scientific Achievement Award. 
 John Rock (1890–1984) 
 Rock, along with colleague Gregory Pincus, developed the tech-
nology used in the first contraceptive pill approved for use by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 1960. 
 John Rock was born in Marlborough, Massachusetts, on 
March 24, 1890. He attended the High School of Commerce in 
Boston, from which he graduated in 1909, with the goal of hav-
ing a career in business. His first job was as an accountant on a 
banana plantation in Guatemala, after which he took a similar 
position with an engineering firm in Woonsocket, Rhode Island. 
These experiences made him realize that he was not really suited 
to a career in business, and he applied for admission to Harvard 
College, from which he received his bachelor’s degree in 1915. 
He then continued his studies at the Harvard Medical School, 

Biographical Sketches 143
 earning his M.D. in 1918. He was originally interested in special-
izing in diseases of the nervous system, but eventually changed 
his mind and decided to concentrate on gynecology and obstet-
rics. He completed his internship at the Massachusetts General 
Hospital in 1919 and his residency at the Boston Lying-In Hospital 
a year later. He then began a private practice, but abandoned that 
occupation a year later to accept an appointment as assistant in 
obstetrics at the Harvard Medical School. 
 Although himself a devout Roman Catholic, Rock was also 
a fervent advocate for greater availability of contraceptive de-
vices and methods for married women. He included a discus-
sion of birth control in the classes he taught at Harvard (virtually 
unheard of in medical schools at the time) and, in 1931, joined a 
campaign (the only Catholic to do so) for the overturn of the Mas-
sachusetts law banning the sale of contraceptives. In 1939, when 
the Vatican approved the use of the so-called rhythm method of 
birth control, Rock opened the first clinic in the United States to 
teach the method to women. 
 In 1952, Rock was asked by a colleague, Gregory Pincus, to 
work with him on the development of an oral hormonal-based 
contraceptive pill. Both men had been working on ovulation and 
conception for many years, Pincus in rabbits and Rock in humans, 
and the collaboration appeared to be a natural one, especially 
since Pincus was not licensed as a physician and could not, there-
fore, conduct human trials with the new product. After almost a 
decade of development and testing, the new product, to become 
widely known as simply The Pill, was approved for use in the 
United States by the Food and Drug Administration in 1960. After 
this momentous step, Rock spent many years trying to convince 
the Vatican that The Pill represented a form of natural birth con-
trol and that the pope should approve its use as a contraceptive 
tool for women. In that effort, of course, he ultimately failed. 
 In 1969, Rock retired from active work and moved to a farm 
in Templeton, New Hampshire. He died in nearby Peterborough 
on December 4, 1984. 
 John D. Rockefeller III (1906–1978) 
 One of the wealthiest men in the world, Rockefeller became 
very interested in issues of population during the 1950s, when 
 population growth appeared to be perhaps the single most 

144 Biographical Sketches
 important issue facing nations around the world. In 1952, he pro-
vided $100,000 for the founding of the Population Council for the 
purpose of conducting research on population issues and devel-
oping programs for bringing a halt to the seemingly out-of-control 
population growth then under way. 
 John D. Rockefeller III was born in New York City on April 21, 
1906, the grandson of oil magnate John D. Rockefeller and the son 
of John D. Rockefeller, Jr. He was educated at the Loomis Insti-
tute, in Windsor, Connecticut, and at Princeton University, from 
which he received his B.S. in industrial relations in 1929. As an 
heir to one of the world’s great fortunes, Rockefeller spent his life 
in a variety of philanthropic activities, serving as a trustee of the 
Rockefeller Foundation from 1931 to 1970. 
 As is the case with many young men and women born to 
wealth, Rockefeller was exposed at an early age to a number of 
organizations and individuals with a variety of social and politi-
cal special interests. In 1928, for example, he was appointed to the 
board of directors of the Bureau of Social Hygiene, a research in-
stitute created by the Rockefeller Foundation in 1911 for the study 
of the causes and control of crime. Four years later, he was ap-
pointed chairman of the Delinquency Committee of the Boys Bu-
reau of New York City. In posts such as these, he began to develop 
an intimate knowledge of the difficult problems of everyday life 
faced by ordinary citizens with whom he might not otherwise 
have ever had contact. 
 By the early 1950s, Rockefeller had become especially inter-
ested in issues of population control. Evidence was beginning to 
accumulate that run-away population growth, especially in Asia, 
was likely to result in economic, social, and political problems of 
unprecedented significance. Rockefeller attempted to interest his 
fellows trustees in making population issues an important focus 
of the Rockefeller Institute’s work, but failed. Instead, he made a 
grant from his own sources to make possible the founding of the 
Population Council as an instrument for research on the world’s 
population problems, as well as those of the United States. (The 
council continues to exist today with an interest in a variety of 
population-related issues.) The council rapidly became an impor-
tant force in the study of population issues worldwide and in the 
development of programs to bring population growth under con-
trol. In 1954, it helped to fund the United Nation’s first World Pop-
ulation Conference in Rome. During the early 1960s, the  council 
also supported research on an implantable intrauterine device 

Biographical Sketches 145
that could be distributed to and easily used by women around the 
world as a primary means of family planning and birth control. 
 In 1970, Rockefeller was appointed chairman of the Commis-
sion on Population Growth and the American Future by President 
Richard M. Nixon. In its report, that commission recommended 
universal access to reproductive information and universal cover-
age for all patient costs related to maternity, abortion, and volun-
tary sterilization. Rockefeller was killed in an automobile accident 
in Mt. Pleasant, New York, on July 10, 1978. 
 Margaret Sanger (1879–1966) 
 Sanger was a nurse and birth control activist who worked relent-
lessly for the right of women to have control over their own sexu-
ality. She founded the American Birth Control League, which later 
became the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, along 
with a number of other birth control and family planning organi-
zations. She also wrote a number of books, pamphlets, brochures, 
and other materials with information about contraception and 
other aspects of women’s sexual lives. 
 Sanger was born Margaret Higgins in Corning, New York, 
on September 14, 1879. Her mother was a devout Roman Catholic 
who experienced 18 pregnancies and 11 live births, of which Mar-
garet was the sixth. Her father was a stonemason and an advocate 
for equal rights for women and socialistic principles. Margaret at-
tended Claverack College and the Hudson River Institute, but left 
after two years to care for her ailing mother, who died in 1899. 
She was then able to resume her schooling, enrolling in a nurs-
ing program at the White Plains Hospital. Toward the end of that 
program, she spent some time interning at the Manhattan Eye and 
Ear Clinic in 1902, during which she met her husband-to-be Wil-
liam Sanger. They were married on August 18, 1902, after having 
known each other for six months. 
 When Margaret developed tuberculosis, the Sangers moved 
to Saranac, New York, where they lived until 1912. When they 
returned to New York City, she began working with poor women 
on the Lower East Side who commonly experienced multiple 
pregnancies and who, to avoid that fate, often attempted to abort 
themselves when they found that they were pregnant once again. 
Sanger was very troubled by what she saw and determined to do 
whatever she could to relieve the condition in which these women 

146 Biographical Sketches
found themselves. In 1914, for example, she began to produce a 
monthly newsletter providing information about contraception 
and encouraging women to take responsibility for their own 
sexual health. The publication prompted the U.S. Postal Service 
to put out a warrant for Sanger’s arrest on the grounds that she 
had violated the Comstock law against the distribution of obscene 
literature (the birth control information). Sanger fled the United 
States to avoid prosecution, but returned in 1915 emboldened to 
continue her efforts in aiding women, assisted by a vast amount 
of new information about contraception garnered during her stay 
in Europe. 
 On October 16, 1916, Sanger opened a family planning clinic 
at 46 Amboy Street in Brooklyn, the first facility of its kind in the 
United States. Nine days later, New York City police officers raided 
the clinic; Sanger was tried for operating a “public nuisance,” and 
she was sentenced to 30 days in prison. Her experience did not 
deter her from her goal of educating women about contracep-
tion, and she spent the rest of her life in that task. In 1921, for 
example, she cofounded the American Birth Control League, not 
only to continue educating women and the general public about 
family planning, but also to conduct research and to be an ad-
vocate for legislation that would allow women greater reproduc-
tive freedom. In 1923, she opened the Clinical Research Bureau 
which, despite its name, was primarily the first legal birth control 
clinic in the United States. In the same year, she also founded the 
National Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth Control. She 
continued as an active advocate for birth control and family plan-
ning for the remaining 40 years of her life, organizing committees, 
chairing organizations, speaking at meetings, writing pamphlets, 
and attending national and international conferences. She was the 
author of a number of important books and pamphlets, including 
Family Limitations, The Case for Birth Control: A Supplementary Brief 
and Statement of Facts, Woman and the New Race, What Every Girl 
Should Know, What Every Mother Should Know, The Pivot of Civiliza-
tion,  “The Case for Birth Control,” and  My Fight for Birth Control.
Sanger died in Tucson, Arizona, on September 6, 1966. 
 Matthew Shepard (1976–1998) 
 Shepard was a 21-year-old gay man who died of severe head in-
juries on October 12, 1998, after being attacked and assaulted a 

Biographical Sketches 147
few nights earlier by two young men near Laramie, Wyoming. He 
has become an icon for individuals and organizations working 
to extend hate crime legislation in the United States to gay men, 
lesbians, bisexuals, and transgendered individuals. 
 Matthew Shepard was born in Casper, Wyoming, on Decem-
ber 1, 1976, the son of Judy and Dennis Shepard. He attended 
Crest Hill Elementary School, Dean Morgan Junior High School, 
and Natrona County High School for his freshman and sopho-
more years. He completed his secondary education at the Ameri-
can School in Switzerland, from which he graduated in 1995. 
He then returned to the United States where he briefly attended 
Catawba College, in North Carolina, and Casper College, in Wyo-
ming, before moving to Laramie and enrolling at the University of 
Wyoming as a political science major. 
 On the evening of October 7, 1998, Shepard was offered a 
ride home from a Laramie bar by 21-year-old Russell Arthur 
Henderson and 22-year-old Aaron James McKinney. Instead 
of taking Shepard home, the two men drove him to a deserted 
field, tied him to a fence, pistol-whipped him, and left him for 
dead. Shepard was found alive, but in a coma, 18 hours later. 
He lived five more days before dying of his injuries. Henderson 
and McKinney offered a number of defenses during their trial, 
claiming at first a “gay panic” response to their contact with 
Shepard, during which they were temporarily insane, and later, 
that they had only intended to rob him, and not to do him seri-
ous physcial harm. They were eventually found guilty of felony 
murder and kidnapping charges, and both are currently serving 
two consecutive life sentences. Shepard’s death has inspired a 
variety of responses, ranging from the writing and production 
of a play about the murder,  The Laramie Project , which is often 
the source of controversy in communities where it is performed, 
to at least four films about Shepard’s life and death, to any num-
ber of poems and songs about the episode. The latest effort to 
include gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgendered indi-
viduals in the federal hate crimes law, which has yet to pass the 
U.S. Congress, is commonly known as the Matthew Shepard 
Act. (Wyoming also has no hate crimes legislation.) In December 
1998, Judy and Dennis Shepard founded the Matthew Shepard 
Foundation to commemorate Matthew’s life and to support di-
versity in education and to work to pass hate crimes legislation 
that includes lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, and transgendered 
people. 

148 Biographical Sketches
 Marie Stopes (1880–1958) 
 Stopes was trained as a paleobotanist, but spent much of her life 
working for women’s causes and for the promotion of family 
planning. She opened the first birth control clinic in Great Britain 
in 1921. 
 Marie Stopes was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, on October 15, 
1880, the daughter of Charlotte Stopes, an active participant in the 
suffragette and women’s rights movements, and Henry Stopes, a 
brewer with an amateur interest in archaeology. Although women 
had not yet been given the right to attend university classes, Char-
lotte Stopes had been awarded a certificate (essentially equivalent 
to a degree) by passing her final examinations at university level. 
Although she had no formal education herself until the age of 12, 
Marie Stopes proved to be an apt student and earned a scholarship 
to University College, London, at the age of 19. There she majored 
in botany and geology and earned her bachelor of science degree 
with first class honors in 1902. She then traveled to the Univer-
sity of Munich for further study, earning her Ph.D. in paleobotany 
in 1904. She then returned to University College and earned her 
D.Sc., making her the youngest person in history to have done so. 
After completing her studies, she spent a year doing research in 
Japan, was fellow and lecturer at University College, and lectured 
in paleobotany at the University of Manchester, where she was 
the first woman on the faculty. 
 After a series of unhappy relationships, Stopes married a fel-
low scientist, Reginald Ruggles Gates, in 1911. The couple had 
sexual problems from the outset (which turned out to be the result 
of Gate’s impotence), and three years later they were divorced. 
During the marriage, Stopes spent many hours at the British Li-
brary, attempting to pinpoint the reason for the couple’s sexual 
problems. After the divorce, she wrote a book summarizing her 
research,  Married Love: A New Contribution to the Solution of the Sex 
Difficulties,  a work for which she was to become famous. The theme 
of her book was that it was possible to combine a happy marriage 
with a fulfilling sexual life, while avoiding pregnancies. 
 In 1918, Stopes married H. V. Roe, a wealthy manufacturer 
and aviator, an event that made it possible for her to pursue what 
had become her primary passion in life: the establishment of birth 
control clinics at which women could be taught methods of contra-
ception and ways of avoiding sexually transmitted  infections. She 

Biographical Sketches 149
opened the first of these clinics, the Mother’s Clinic for Construc-
tive Birth Control, in Holloway, North London, in 1921, and staffed 
the facility with female nurses, believing that they would be less 
threatening to patients than would male doctors. The clinic moved 
to central London four years later, and remains there today. 
 Stopes spent the rest of her life working to promote safe con-
traceptive technology for women. Much of her time was devoted 
to writing for and editing her clinic’s newsletter,  Birth Control 
News. She also wrote a second book,  Wise Parenthood, which drew 
the wrath of church leaders from most denominations. Later in 
life, she devoted much of her time to writing novels and poetry. 
She died in Dorking, Surrey, on October 2, 1958, from breast can-
cer. Today, her name and work are memorialized in the Marie 
Stopes International (MSI) organization, which operates more 
than 560 family planning clinics in more than 40 nations. 
 Brandon Teena (1972–1993) 
 Teena was a biological female who early on in life identified her-
self as a male and lived as a male for most of her/his life. Teena 
was raped and murdered by two male friends on December 31, 
1993. Her/his story has been memorialized in the 1999 film Boys
Don’t Cry , for which Hillary Swank, who played the role of Teena, 
received an Academy Award for Best Actress. 
 Teena was born in Lincoln, Nebraska, on December 12, 1972. 
Her parents described her as a “tomboy,” and she began thinking 
of herself as a “man trapped in a woman’s body” early in life. In 
high school, she dressed as a boy and dated girls. In 1993, Teena 
moved from Lincoln to Falls City, Nebraska, where she lived ex-
clusively as a man. He dated a friend of the family with whom he 
was living at the time, Lana Tisdel, and became close friends with 
two ex-convicts, John Lotter and Marvin “Tom” Nissen. Tisdel 
eventually found out that Teena was a biological female, but the 
couple continued dating. 
 At a New Year’s Eve party on December 31, 1993, Lotter and 
Nissen forced Teena to expose himself to Tisdel and then took him 
to a deserted factory, where they beat and raped Teena. Later in 
the evening, they broke into Teena’s home and murdered Teena 
and two other occupants of the house. Lotter and Nissen were 
eventually found guilty of murder and sentenced to death, but 
both cases are still on appeal. 

150 Biographical Sketches
 The 1999 film about this case brought to public attention 
an issue with which most Americans are probably unaware, the 
travails of young men and women who identify as being of the 
opposite sex. Since the Teena murder, a number of organizations 
interested in issues of sexuality have made a greater effort to in-
clude transgender issues in their work and, in many cases, to in-
clude the term transgender in their publications and publicity. 
 Karolina Olivia Widerström 
(1856–1949) 
 Widerström was a Swedish doctor who advocated for programs 
of sex education, especially for young women, as a way of helping 
people better understand their own anatomy and physiology and 
to learn how to deal with sexual health issues in their own lives. 
 Widerström was born in Helsingbord, Sweden, on December 
10, 1856, to Otto Fredrik Widerström and Olivia Erika Dillén, a 
gymnastics teacher and a veterinarian. After completing her sec-
ondary education, she studied at the Gymnastic Central Institute 
in Stockholm from 1873 to 1875. She then served as assistant to 
professor Lars Gabriel Branting, a pioneer in the field of medical 
gymnastics. She then completed her undergraduate studies at the 
Walinska Skolan in Stockholm in 1879 and at the University of 
Uppsala in 1880 before earning her medical degree at the Karolin-
ska Institute in Stockholm in 1884. In 1888 she received her medi-
cal license and established a private practice in Hufvudstaden. 
 Early on in her practice, Widerström was appalled to learn 
that her women clients often knew next to nothing about female 
anatomy and physiology or about sexually transmitted infections, 
pregnancy, and contraception. She set out to do all she could to 
change that situation and to provide education for both women 
and men about issues in sexual health. She gave a number of lec-
tures and wrote a book,  Kvinnohygien ( Women’s Hygiene ), which 
was first published in 1899 and eventually went through seven 
editions until 1932. She argued strongly that men should be tested 
for sexually transmitted infections before marriage at a time when 
far greater emphasis was being placed on the testing of prosti-
tutes. Widerström was also active politically, elected to the Stock-
holm city council in 1910, the first year in which public office was 
available to women. She also held leadership positions in the 

Biographical Sketches 151
Landsföreningen för kvinnans politiska rösträtt (National Union 
for Women’s Political Suffrage), an organization through which 
she worked to obtain suffrage for women, a goal achieved in 1921. 
She died in Stockholm on March 4, 1949. 
 Harald zur Hausen (1936– ) 
 Harald zur Hausen is a German virologist who was awarded the 
2008 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discovery 
of the role of the human papillomavirus (HPV) in cancer of the 
cervix. His work made possible the eventual development of a 
vaccine that protects women against HPV and, thus, significantly 
decreases their risk for both cervical cancer and genital warts. 
 Harald zur Hausen was born in Gelsenkirchen, Germany, 
on March 11, 1936. He attended high school in Vechta and then 
studied medicine at the universities of Bonn, Hamburg, and Düs-
seldorf, from which he received his M.D. in 1960. After serving for 
two years as a medical assistant at Düsseldorf, zur Hausen took a 
position as a laboratory researcher at the Institute for Microbiol-
ogy at Düsseldorf. In 1966 he emigrated to the United States to 
work at the Virus Laboratories of the University of Pennsylvania’s 
Children’s Hospital with the famous expatriate German virolo-
gists, Werner and Gertrude Henle. In 1969, zur Hausen returned 
to Germany, where he served successively as professor of virol-
ogy at the University of Würzburg (1969–1972), the University of 
Erlangen-Nuremberg (1972–1977), and the University of Freiburg 
(1977–1983). In 1983, he was appointed director of the German 
Cancer Research Center (Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum) in 
Heidelberg and professor of medicine at the University of Heidel-
berg. 
 Zur Hausen became interested in the role of viruses in the 
development of cancer early in his career. At the time, scientists 
had found that viruses are responsible for cancer in some ani-
mals, but their role in any form of cancer in humans was still un-
clear. In 1983, zur Hausen discovered the presence of one form 
of the human papillomavirus, called HPV 16, in cervical cancer 
tumors. A year later, he discovered a second type of HPV, HPV 18, 
in similar cervical tumors. He became convinced that HPV was 
the causative agent in at least some types of cervical cancer. Zur 
Hausen’s discovery was greeted with serious doubt by most can-
cer researchers since the predominant theory at the time was that 

152 Biographical Sketches
a different type of virus, the one responsible for herpes simplex, 
was the causative agent in cervical cancer. Evidence for zur Haus-
en’s hypothesis accumulated over the years, however, and there is 
now no doubt as to the role of HPV viruses in causing both cervi-
cal cancer and genital warts. In addition to his Nobel Prize, zur 
Hausen has received a number of other important awards, includ-
ing the Robert Koch Prize, Charles S. Mott Prize, Paul-Ehrlich-
und-Ludwig-Darmstaedter-Preis, Virchow Medal, San Marino 
Prize for Medicine, Great Cross of Merit of the Federal Republic 
of Germany, William B. Coley Award, and Gairdner Foundation 
International Award. 
 References 
 Bates, Anna. 1995.  Weeder in the Garden of the Lord: Anthony Comstock’s 
Life and Career . Lanham, MD: University Press of America. 
 Bates, Stephen. 1993.  Battleground: One Mother’s Crusade, the Religious 
Right, and the Struggle for Control of Our Classrooms . New York: Simon & 
Schuster Adult Publishing Group. 

153
 6 
 Data and Documents 
 Documents 
 Texas Sex Education Law (1995) 
 The U.S. Congress has adopted no legislation specifically requiring or 
recommending the content of sex education programs in U.S. schools. 
A number of states, however, have struggled with this issue and have 
considered and/or adopted such legislation. As to be expected, the stance 
taken in various states differs significantly. At one extreme, a law ad-
opted by the 74th session of the Texas legislature in 1995 emphasized 
an almost exclusive “abstinence-only” approach to sex education in the 
state. In light of later studies that suggested that abstinence-only sex 
education was not particularly effective in reducing teen pregnancies 
and the spread of sexually transmitted infections, some Texas legisla-
tors have called for changing the 1995 act. As of 2009, however, that 
act remained on the books. Its essential features are contained in section 
28.004, “Local School Health Advisory Council and Health Education 
Instruction,” of the state education code. The relevant sections are as 
follows:
 (e) Any course materials and instruction relating to human 
sexuality, sexually transmitted diseases, or human 
immunodeficiency virus or acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome shall be selected by the board of trustees with the 
advice of the local school health advisory council and must: 
 (1) present abstinence from sexual activity as the preferred 
choice of behavior in relationship to all sexual activity for 
unmarried persons of school age; 

154 Data and Documents
 (2) devote more attention to abstinence from sexual activity 
than to any other behavior; 
 (3) emphasize that abstinence from sexual activity, if used 
consistently and correctly, is the only method that is 100 
percent effective in preventing pregnancy, sexually trans-
mitted diseases, infection with human immunodeficiency 
virus or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and the 
emotional trauma associated with adolescent sexual activ-
ity;
 (4) direct adolescents to a standard of behavior in which 
abstinence from sexual activity before marriage is the most 
effective way to prevent pregnancy, sexually transmitted 
diseases, and infection with human immunodeficiency 
virus or acquired immune deficiency syndrome; and 
 (5) teach contraception and condom use in terms of human 
use reality rates instead of theoretical laboratory rates, if 
instruction on contraception and condoms is included in 
curriculum content. 
 (f)  A school district may not distribute condoms in connection 
with instruction relating to human sexuality. 
 (g)  A school district that provides human sexuality instruction may 
separate students according to sex for instructional purposes. 
 (h)  The board of trustees shall determine the specific content of the 
district’s instruction in human sexuality, in accordance with 
Subsections (e), (f), and (g). 
 (i)  A school district shall notify a parent of each student enrolled 
in the district of: 
 (1) the basic content of the district’s human sexuality instruc-
tion to be provided to the student; and 
 (2) the parent’s right to remove the student from any part of 
the district’s human sexuality instruction. 
 (j) 
 A school district shall make all curriculum materials used 
in the district’s human sexuality instruction available for 
reasonable public inspection. 
Source: Education Code. Title 2. Public Education. Subtitle F. 
Curriculum, Programs, and Services. Chapter 28. Courses of Study; 
Advancement. Subchapter A. Essential Knowledge and Skills; 
Curriculum, 9–10. Available at http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/
SOTWDocs/ED/pdf/ED.28.pdf.
 Separate Program for Abstinence Education (1996) 
 On September 8, 1995, Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA) and Senator 
Lauch Faircloth (R-NC) introduced a provision to the welfare reform bill 
then being considered by the U.S. Congress to provide funding for sex 

Documents 155
education programs that taught about abstinence only, with no mention 
of any other form of contraception or family planning. That provision was 
included in the final version of the act that was passed by both houses of 
Congress and signed by President Bill Clinton on August 22, 1996. The 
program was later reauthorized a number of times, although opponents 
have constantly tried to demonstrate that it is not effective in the goals it 
attempts to achieve. The provisions of the original program are included 
below, now enshrined as section 710 of Title 42 of the U.S. Code. 
 § 710. Separate program for abstinence education 
 (a) In general
 
For the purpose described in subsection (b) of this section, the 
Secretary shall, for fiscal year 1998 and each subsequent fiscal 
year, allot to each State which has transmitted an application 
for the fiscal year under section 705 (a) of this title an amount 
equal to the product of— 
 (1) the amount appropriated in subsection (d) of this section 
for the fiscal year; and 
 (2) the percentage determined for the State under section 702 
(c)(1)(B)(ii) of this title. 
 (b) Purpose of allotment
 (1) The purpose of an allotment under subsection (a) of this 
section to a State is to enable the State to provide absti-
nence education, and at the option of the State, where 
appropriate, mentoring, counseling, and adult supervision 
to promote abstinence from sexual activity, with a focus 
on those groups which are most likely to bear children 
out-of-wedlock.
 (2) For purposes of this section, the term “abstinence edu-
cation” means an educational or motivational program 
which—
 (A) has as its exclusive purpose, teaching the social, 
psychological, and health gains to be realized by 
abstaining from sexual activity; 
 (B) teaches abstinence from sexual activity outside 
marriage as the expected standard for all school age 
children; 
 (C) teaches that abstinence from sexual activity is the 
only certain way to avoid out-of-wedlock pregnancy, 
sexually transmitted diseases, and other associated 
health problems; 
 (D) teaches that a mutually faithful monogamous 
relationship in context of marriage is the expected 
standard of human sexual activity; 

156 Data and Documents
 (E) teaches that sexual activity outside of the context of 
marriage is likely to have harmful psychological and 
physical effects; 
 (F) teaches that bearing children out-of-wedlock is likely 
to have harmful consequences for the child, the 
child’s parents, and society; 
 (G) teaches young people how to reject sexual advances 
and how alcohol and drug use increases vulnerability 
to sexual advances; and 
 (H) teaches the importance of attaining self-sufficiency 
before engaging in sexual activity. 
 (c)
Applicability of sections 703, 707, and 708
 (1) Sections 703, 707, and 708 of this title apply to allotments 
under subsection (a) of this section to the same extent and 
in the same manner as such sections apply to allotments 
under section 702 (c) of this title. 
 (2) Sections 705 and 706 of this title apply to allotments under 
subsection (a) of this section to the extent determined by 
the Secretary to be appropriate. 
(d) Appropriations 
 
For the purpose of allotments under subsection (a) of this section, 
there is appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, an additional $50,000,000 for each of 
the fiscal years 1998 through 2003. The appropriation under the 
preceding sentence for a fiscal year is made on October 1 of the 
fiscal year. 
Source: U.S. Code. Title 42. Chapter 7. Subchapter V §710. 
 Memorandum for the Administrator of the United States 
Agency for International Development (2001) 
 At the United Nations International Conference on Population held in 
Mexico City in 1984, the administration of President Ronald Reagan 
announced a new policy for the funding of family planning programs 
around the world funded by the U.S. Agency for International Devel-
opment (USAID). According to that policy, which became known as 
the Mexico City Policy, any nongovernmental organization receiving 
USAID funding was required to refrain from offering or promoting 
abortion services as part of its family planning program. That policy was 
later revoked by President Bill Clinton on January 22, 1993, and rein-
stated by President George W. Bush on January 22, 2001. It was revoked 
once more after the election of President Barack Obama on January 23, 

Documents 157
2009 (see below). President Bush’s memorandum reinstating the policy 
in 2001 is given here. 
 MEMORANDUM FOR THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE UNITED 
STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
 SUBJECT: Restoration of the Mexico City Policy 
 The Mexico City Policy announced by President Reagan in 1984 re-
quired nongovernmental organizations to agree as a condition of their re-
ceipt of Federal funds that such organizations would neither perform nor 
actively promote abortion as a method of family planning in other na-
tions. This policy was in effect until it was rescinded on January 22, 1993. 
 It is my conviction that taxpayer funds should not be used to pay 
for abortions or advocate or actively promote abortion, either here or 
abroad. It is therefore my belief that the Mexico City Policy should be 
restored. Accordingly, I hereby rescind the “Memorandum for the Act-
ing Administrator for the Agency for International Development, Sub-
ject: AID Family Planning Grants/Mexico City Policy,” dated January 
22, 1993, and I direct the Administrator of the United States Agency for 
International Development to reinstate in full all of the requirements of 
the Mexico City Policy in effect on January 19, 1993. 
 George W. Bush 
Source: USAID. “Memorandum From the White House to USAID.” 
Available at http://www.usaid.gov/whmemo.html. 
 South Dakota House Bill 1215 (2006) 
 The U.S. Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade (1973) established 
a national standard for abortion law in the United States that has re-
mained in force for more than three decades. A number of people disagree 
with that decision, however, and have continued to work for a reversal or 
reconsideration of the 1973 decision. One of the most forceful efforts in 
that direction was the passage of a bill in the South Dakota state legisla-
ture in 2006 which essentially banned abortions for any and all reasons. 
The bill was later rejected by a statewide vote in November 2006. 
 An Act 
 ENTITLED, An Act to establish certain legislative findings, to reinstate 
the prohibition against certain acts causing the termination of an unborn 
human life, to prescribe a penalty therefor, and to provide for the imple-
mentation of such provisions under certain circumstances. 
 Be IT Enacted By The Legislature of The State of South Dakota: 
 Section 1. The Legislature accepts and concurs with the conclusion 
of the South Dakota Task Force to Study Abortion, based upon written 
materials, scientific studies, and testimony of witnesses presented to 
the task force, that life begins at the time of conception, a conclusion 

158 Data and Documents
confirmed by scientific advances since the 1973 decision of Roe v. Wade, 
including the fact that each human being is totally unique immediately 
at fertilization. Moreover, the Legislature finds, based upon the conclu-
sions of the South Dakota Task Force to Study Abortion, and in recogni-
tion of the technological advances and medical experience and body of 
knowledge about abortions produced and made available since the 1973 
decision of Roe v. Wade, that to fully protect the rights, interests, and 
health of the pregnant mother, the rights, interest, and life of her unborn 
child, and the mother’s fundamental natural intrinsic right to a relation-
ship with her child, abortions in South Dakota should be prohibited. 
Moreover, the Legislature finds that the guarantee of due process of law 
under the Constitution of South Dakota applies equally to born and 
unborn human beings, and that under the Constitution of South Dakota, 
a pregnant mother and her unborn child, each possess a natural and in-
alienable right to life. 
 Section 2. That chapter 22-17 be amended by adding thereto a NEW 
SECTION to read as follows: 
 No person may knowingly administer to, prescribe for, or procure 
for, or sell to any pregnant woman any medicine, drug, or other sub-
stance with the specific intent of causing or abetting the termination of 
the life of an unborn human being. No person may knowingly use or 
employ any instrument or procedure upon a pregnant woman with the 
specific intent of causing or abetting the termination of the life of an un-
born human being. 
 Any violation of this section is a Class 5 felony. 
 Section 3. That chapter 22-17 be amended by adding thereto a NEW 
SECTION to read as follows: 
 Nothing in section 2 of this Act may be construed to prohibit the 
sale, use, prescription, or administration of a contraceptive measure, 
drug or chemical, if it is administered prior to the time when a preg-
nancy could be determined through conventional medical testing and if 
the contraceptive measure is sold, used, prescribed, or administered in 
accordance with manufacturer instructions. 
 Section 4. That chapter 22-17 be amended by adding thereto a NEW 
SECTION to read as follows: 
 No licensed physician who performs a medical procedure de-
signed or intended to prevent the death of a pregnant mother is guilty 
of violating section 2 of this Act. However, the physician shall make 
reasonable medical efforts under the circumstances to preserve both 
the life of the mother and the life of her unborn child in a manner con-
sistent with conventional medical practice. 
 Medical treatment provided to the mother by a licensed physician 
which results in the accidental or unintentional injury or death to the 
unborn child is not a violation of this statute. 
 Nothing in this Act may be construed to subject the pregnant 
mother upon whom any abortion is performed or attempted to any 
criminal conviction and penalty. 

Documents 159
 [ The remaining sections of this act deal with definitions and “house-
keeping” issues in its implementation .] 
Source: South Dakota Legislature HB 1215. Available at http://legis.
state.sd.us/sessions/2006/bills/HB1215enr.htm. 
 Responsible Education About Life Act (2007) 
 In recent years, a number of states have considered or adopted legislation 
that would provide required sex education courses with specific features 
(see “Texas Sex Education Law” above). The federal government has, 
however, refrained from adopting specific legislation dealing with the ex-
istence or content of sex education classes. Some efforts have been made 
to change that situation, however. In 2007, for example, Senator Frank 
Lautenberg (D-NJ) introduced legislation outlining a recommended ap-
proach to sex education in American schools. His bill, S. 972, was called 
the Responsible Education About Life (REAL) Act. The bill was never 
acted on in committee, as has been the fate for all previous federal legisla-
tion in this area. It does outline, however, one philosophy about the type 
of sex education that might be encouraged in U.S. schools. Footnotes and 
citations have been omitted from this excerpt. 
 A Bill 
 To provide for the reduction of adolescent pregnancy, HIV rates, and 
other sexually transmitted diseases, and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United 
States of America in Congress assembled,
 Section 1. Short Title. 
 This Act may be cited as the ‘Responsible Education About Life Act.’ 
 Sec. 2. Findings. 
 [ This section has 15 sub-sections that review research findings and rec-
ommendations from professional groups about the status of sexual issues 
among adolescents in the United States. ] 
 Sec. 3. Assistance to Reduce Teen Pregnancy, HIV/Aids, and other  
Sexually Transmitted Diseases and to Support Healthy Adolescent Development. 
 (a) In General- Each eligible State shall be entitled to receive 
from the Secretary of Health and Human Services, for each 
of the fiscal years 2008 through 2012, a grant to conduct 
programs of family life education, including education 
on both abstinence and contraception for the prevention 

160 Data and Documents
of teenage pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases, 
including HIV/AIDS. 
 (b) Requirements for Family Life Programs- For purposes of this 
Act, a program of family life education is a program that— 
 (1) is age-appropriate and medically accurate; 
 (2) does not teach or promote religion; 
 (3) teaches that abstinence is the only sure way to avoid preg-
nancy or sexually transmitted diseases; 
 (4) stresses the value of abstinence while not ignoring those 
young people who have had or are having sexual inter-
course;
 (5) provides information about the health benefits and side 
effects of all contraceptives and barrier methods as a 
means to prevent pregnancy; 
 (6) provides information about the health benefits and side 
effects of all contraceptives and barrier methods as a 
means to reduce the risk of contracting sexually transmit-
ted diseases, including HIV/AIDS; 
 (7) encourages family communication about sexuality 
between parent and child; 
 (8) teaches young people the skills to make responsible deci-
sions about sexuality, including how to avoid unwanted 
verbal, physical, and sexual advances and how not to 
make unwanted verbal, physical, and sexual advances; 
and
 (9) teaches young people how alcohol and drug use can effect 
[sic ] responsible decisionmaking. 
 (c) Additional Activities- In carrying out a program of family life 
education, a State may expend a grant under subsection (a) 
to carry out educational and motivational activities that help 
young people— 
 (1) gain knowledge about the physical, emotional, biological, 
and hormonal changes of adolescence and subsequent 
stages of human maturation; 
 (2) develop the knowledge and skills necessary to ensure 
and protect their sexual and reproductive health from 
unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted disease, 
including HIV/AIDS throughout their lifespan; 
 (3) gain knowledge about the specific involvement of and 
male responsibility in sexual decisionmaking; 
 (4) develop healthy attitudes and values about adolescent 
growth and development, body image, gender roles, racial 
and ethnic diversity, sexual orientation, and other subjects; 
 (5) develop and practice healthy life skills including goal-
setting, decisionmaking, negotiation, communication, and 
stress management; 

Documents 161
 (6) promote self-esteem and positive interpersonal skills 
focusing on relationship dynamics, including, but not 
limited to, friendships, dating, romantic involvement, 
marriage and family interactions; and 
 (7) prepare for the adult world by focusing on educational 
and career success, including developing skills for 
employment preparation, job seeking, independent living, 
financial self-sufficiency, and workplace productivity. 
 Sec. 4. Sense of Congress. 
 It is the sense of Congress that while States are not required to provide 
matching funds, they are encouraged to do so. 
 Sec. 5. Evaluation of Programs. 
 [ This section requires that an evaluation of all sex education programs 
receiving federal funding be evaluated on both a national and state level. 
The criteria to be evaluated at both levels are as follows: ] 
 (A) the effectiveness of such programs in helping to delay the 
initiation of sexual intercourse and other high-risk behaviors; 
 (B) the effectiveness of such programs in preventing adolescent 
pregnancy; 
 (C) the effectiveness of such programs in preventing sexually 
transmitted disease, including HIV/AIDS; 
 (D) the effectiveness of such programs in increasing contraceptive 
knowledge and contraceptive behaviors when sexual 
intercourse occurs; and 
 (E) a list of best practices based upon essential programmatic 
components of evaluated programs that have led to success in 
subparagraphs (A) through (D). 
 Sec. 6. Definitions. 
 [ This section defines a number of terms used in the bill. ] 
 Sec. 7. Appropriations. 
 [ This section outlines the funding provisions for carrying out this act. ] 
Source: “S 972 IS.” [Senate bill 972] Available at http://thomas.loc.gov/
cgi-bin/query/z?c110:s972: 
 Mandatory HPV Vaccination (2007) 
 In June 2006, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended that all 
girls between the ages of 11 and 12 be vaccinated for the human pap-
illomavirus (HPV), which causes virtually all cases of genital warts 

162 Data and Documents
and cervical cancer. In response to that recommendation more than 40 
states have considered some form of legislation to meet this recommen-
dation, usually to provide funding or education about the vaccine, but 
in some cases, requiring vaccination for HPV as a condition for attend-
ing school. As of 2009, only one state actually adopted a requirement 
provision, Texas, where Governor Rick Perry issued executive order RP 
65 on February 2, 2007, requiring HPV vaccination for admission to 
the sixth grade. Perry’s executive order was overturned by action of the 
state legislature, but his executive order still outlines the kind of provi-
sion that other states have considered in the past and, in some cases, are 
still considering. 
 By The Governor of The State of Texas 
 Executive Department 
 Austin, Texas 
 February 2, 2007 
WHEREAS, immunization from vaccine-preventable diseases such 
as Human Papillomavirus (HPV) protects individuals who receive the 
vaccine; and 
WHEREAS, HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infec-
tion-causing cancer in females in the United States; and 
WHEREAS, the United States Food and Drug Administration es-
timates there are 9,710 new cases of cervical cancer, many of which are 
caused by HPV, and 3,700 deaths from cervical cancer each year in the 
United States; and 
WHEREAS, the Texas Cancer Registry estimates there were 1,169 
new cases and 391 deaths from cervical cancer in Texas in 2006; and 
WHEREAS, research has shown that the HPV vaccine is highly 
effective in preventing the infections that are the cause of many of the 
cervical cancers; and 
WHEREAS, HPV vaccine is only effective if administered before 
infection occurs; and 
WHEREAS, the newly approved HPV vaccine is a great advance in 
the protection of women’s health; and 
WHEREAS, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend the HPV 
vaccine for females who are nine years through 26 years of age; 
NOW THEREFORE, I, RICK PERRY, Governor of Texas, by virtue 
of the power and authority vested in me by the Constitution and laws 
of the State of Texas as the Chief Executive Officer, do hereby order the 
following:
Vaccine. The Department of State Health Services shall make the 
HPV vaccine available through the Texas Vaccines for Children 

Documents 163
program for eligible young females up to age 18, and the Health 
and Human Services Commission shall make the vaccine available 
to Medicaid-eligible young females from age 19 to 21. 
Rules. The Health and Human Services Executive Commissioner 
shall adopt rules that mandate the age appropriate vaccination of 
all female children for HPV prior to admission to the sixth grade. 
Availability . The Department of State Health Services and the Health 
and Human Services Commission will move expeditiously to make 
the vaccine available as soon as possible. 
Public Information . The Department of State Health Services will 
implement a public awareness campaign to educate the public of 
the importance of vaccination, the availability of the vaccine, and 
the subsequent requirements under the rules that will be adopted. 
Parents’ Rights . The Department of State Health Services will, in 
order to protect the right of parents to be the final authority on their 
children’s health care, modify the current process in order to allow 
parents to submit a request for a conscientious objection affidavit 
form via the Internet while maintaining privacy safeguards under 
current law. 
 This executive order supersedes all previous orders on this matter that 
are in conflict or inconsistent with its terms and this order shall remain 
in effect and in full force until modified, amended, rescinded, or super-
seded by me or by a succeeding governor. 
 Given under my hand this the 2nd day of February, 2007. 
 RICK PERRY(Signature) 
 Governor 
Source: Office of the Governor Rick Perry. “RP65—Relating to the 
Immunization of Young Women from the Cancer-causing Human 
Papillomavirus.” Available at http://governor.state.tx.us/news/
executive-order/3455. 
 Access to Birth Control Act (2007) 
 In the first decade of the 21st century, a new trend developed among 
some pharmacists in the United States who defined themselves as “pro-
life pharmacists” who operated “pro-life pharmacies.” These pharmacists 
decided that their moral conscience did not allow them to fill prescrip-
tions for birth control and emergency contraceptives, such as the so-
called morning-after pill. In many cases, these pharmacists also declined 
to refer their customers to other establishments where the prescriptions 
could be filled. In response to this trend, a number of states considered 

164 Data and Documents
legislation making such  actions illegal, requiring that all licensed phar-
macists fill legitimately written prescriptions. In 2007, Representative 
Carolyn B. Maloney (D-NY) filed legislation in the U.S. House of Rep-
resentatives making the practice of refusing to fill a prescription a federal 
crime. The earliest version of that bill is as follows. (Line numbering in 
the bill has been omitted.) 
 A Bill 
 To establish certain duties for pharmacies to ensure provision of Food 
and Drug Administration-approved contraception, and for other pur-
poses.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled, 
 Section 1. Short Title. 
 This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Access to Birth Control Act”. 
 Sec. 2. Findings. 
 The Congress finds as follows: 
 (1) Family planning is basic health care for women. Access to 
contraception helps women prevent unintended pregnancy 
and control the timing and spacing of planned births. 
 (2) Although the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
included family planning in its published list of the Ten 
Great Public Health Achievements in the 20th Century, the 
United States still has one of the highest rates of unintended 
pregnancies among industrialized nations. 
 (3) Each year, 3,000,000 pregnancies, nearly half of all pregnancies, 
in the United States are unintended, and nearly half of 
unintended pregnancies end in abortion. 
 (4) Women rely on prescription contraceptives for a range 
of medical purposes in addition to birth control, such as 
regulation of cycles and endometriosis. 
 (5) The Food and Drug Administration has declared emergency 
contraception to be safe and effective in preventing unintended 
pregnancy and has approved over-the-counter access to the 
emergency contraceptive Plan B for adults. 
 (6) If taken soon after unprotected sex or primary contraceptive 
failure, emergency contraception can significantly reduce a 
woman’s chance of unintended pregnancy and, therefore, the 
need for abortion. 
 (7) Emergency contraception works like other hormonal birth 
control. It does not harm or terminate an already-established 
pregnancy. 

Documents 165
 (8) Access to legal contraception is a protected fundamental 
right in the United States and should not be impeded by an 
individual’s personal beliefs. 
 (9) Reports of pharmacists refusing to fill prescriptions for 
contraceptives, including emergency contraceptives, have 
surfaced in States across the Nation, including Arizona, 
California, Georgia, Illinois, Louisiana, Massachusetts, 
Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New York, North 
Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Texas, 
Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. Since emergency 
contraception has become available without a prescription 
for individuals 18 and over, reports of refusals to provide 
non-prescription emergency contraception have also been 
reported. 
 Sec. 3. Duties of Pharmacies to Ensure Provision of FDA-approved 
Contraception. 
 Part B of title II of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 238 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following: 
 ‘‘Sec. 249. Duties of Pharmacies to Ensure Provision of FDA-approved 
Contraception. 
 ‘‘(a) IN GENERAL.—Subject to subsection (b), a pharmacy that 
receives Food and Drug Administration approved drugs or 
devices in interstate commerce shall maintain compliance 
with the following: 
 ‘‘(1) If a customer requests a contraceptive that is in stock, 
the pharmacy shall ensure that the contraceptive is 
provided to the customer without delay. 
 ‘‘(2) If a customer requests a contraceptive that is not in 
stock and the pharmacy in the normal course of busi-
ness stocks contraception, the pharmacy shall imme-
diately inform the customer that the contraceptive is 
not in stock and without delay offer the customer the 
following options: 
 ‘‘(A) If the customer prefers to obtain the 
contraceptive through a referral or transfer, the 
pharmacy shall— 
 ‘‘(i) 
locate a pharmacy of the customer’s choice 
or the closest pharmacy confirmed to have 
the contraceptive in stock; and 
 ‘‘(ii)  refer the customer or transfer the 
prescription to that pharmacy. 
 ‘‘(B) If the customer prefers for the pharmacy to 
order the contraceptive, the pharmacy shall 

166 Data and Documents
obtain the contraceptive under the pharmacy’s 
standard procedure for expedited ordering of 
medication and notify the customer when the 
contraceptive arrives. 
 ‘‘(3) The pharmacy shall ensure that its employees do 
not— 
 ‘‘(A) intimidate, threaten, or harass customers in 
the delivery of services relating to a request for 
contraception;
 ‘‘(B) interfere with or obstruct the delivery of services 
relating to a request for contraception; 
 ‘‘(C) intentionally misrepresent or deceive customers 
about the availability of contraception or its 
mechanism of action; 
 ‘‘(D) breach medical confidentiality with respect to a 
request for contraception or threaten to breach such 
confidentiality; or 
 ‘‘(E) refuse to return a valid, lawful prescription for 
contraception upon customer request. 
 ‘‘(b) REFUSALS PURSUANT TO STANDARD PHARMACY 
PRACTICE.—This section does not prohibit a pharmacy 
from refusing to provide a contraceptive to a customer in 
accordance with any of the following: 
 ‘‘(1) If it is unlawful to dispense the contraceptive to the cus-
tomer without a valid, lawful prescription and no such 
prescription is presented. 
 ‘‘(2) If the customer is unable to pay for the contraceptive. 
 ‘‘(3) If the employee of the pharmacy refuses to provide 
the contraceptive on the basis of a professional clinical 
judgment.
 ‘‘(c) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in this section shall 
be construed to alter any standard under title 18 VII of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
 ‘‘(d) PREEMPTION.—This section does not preempt any provision 
of State law or any professional obligation made applicable 
by a State board or other entity responsible for licensing or 
discipline of pharmacies or pharmacists, to the extent that 
such State law or professional obligation provides protections 
for customers that are greater than the protections provided 
by this section. 
 [ The final two sections of the act deal with enforcement provisions 
and definitions of terms used in the bill. ”] 
Source: U.S. House of Representatives. Available at http://maloney.
house.gov/documents/reproductivechoice/alpha/041707ABCbill.pdf 

Documents 167
 Mexico City Policy (2009) 
 The so-called Mexico City Policy has determined U.S. policy about 
abortion in family planning programs around the world since 1984. 
See “Memorandum for the Administrator of the United States 
Agency for International Development (2001)” above for details of 
that history. The Mexico City Policy has, during its lifetime, been 
invoked or not depending on the political party to which the presi-
dent belongs at the time. In 2009, with the election of Democrat 
Barack Obama to the White House, the policy was once again re-
voked. Obama’s reasoning in making this decision is outlined in the 
memorandum below. 
 MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE; 
 THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
 SUBJECT: Mexico City Policy and Assistance for Voluntary Popula-
tion Planning 
 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151b(f)(1)), prohibits 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) that receive Federal funds from 
using those funds “to pay for the performance of abortions as a method 
of family planning, or to motivate or coerce any person to practice abor-
tions.” The August 1984 announcement by President Reagan of what 
has become known as the “Mexico City Policy” directed the United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID) to expand this 
limitation and withhold USAID funds from NGOs that use non-USAID 
funds to engage in a wide range of activities, including providing 
advice, counseling, or information regarding abortion, or lobbying a 
foreign government to legalize or make abortion available. The Mexico 
City Policy was in effect from 1985 until 1993, when it was rescinded 
by President Clinton. President George W. Bush reinstated the policy in 
2001, implementing it through conditions in USAID grant awards, and 
subsequently extended the policy to “voluntary population planning” 
assistance provided by the Department of State. 
 These excessively broad conditions on grants and assistance awards 
are unwarranted. Moreover, they have undermined efforts to promote 
safe and effective voluntary family planning programs in foreign na-
tions. Accordingly, I hereby revoke the Presidential memorandum of 
January 22, 2001, for the Administrator of USAID (Restoration of the 
Mexico City Policy), the Presidential memorandum of March 28, 2001, 
for the Administrator of USAID (Restoration of the Mexico City Policy), 
and the Presidential memorandum of August 29, 2003, for the Secretary 
of State (Assistance for Voluntary Population Planning). In addition, I 
direct the Secretary of State and the Administrator of USAID to take the 
following actions with respect to conditions in voluntary population 

168 Data and Documents
planning assistance and USAID grants that were imposed pursuant 
to either the 2001 or 2003 memoranda and that are not required by the 
Foreign Assistance Act or any other law: (1) immediately waive such 
conditions in any current grants, and (2) notify current grantees, as soon 
as possible, that these conditions have been waived. I further direct that 
the Department of State and USAID immediately cease imposing these 
conditions in any future grants. 
 This memorandum is not intended to, and does not, create any 
right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in eq-
uity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or 
entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person. 
 The Secretary of State is authorized and directed to publish this 
memorandum in the Federal Register. 
 BARACK OBAMA 
 THE WHITE HOUSE, January 23, 2009. 
Source: The White House. “Memorandum.” Available at http://
www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/MexicoCityPolicy-
VoluntaryPopulationPlanning/. 
 Court Cases 
 Griswold v. Connecticut  (1965) 
 Most people in the United States probably take the availability of con-
traceptive materials and techniques for granted today, whether they 
approve and/or use them or not. Yet, as recently as the mid-1960s, con-
traceptive use was illegal in the United States. That situation changed in 
1965 when the U.S. Supreme Court issued its ruling in the case of Gris-
wold v. Connecticut. The excerpt below briefly reviews the background 
of the case, the court’s decision, and the rationale behind that decision. 
Although Griswold v. Connecticut applied only to married couples, the 
court expanded its decision to include nonmarried individuals in Eisen-
stadt v. Baird in 1972. 
 Appellant Griswold is Executive Director of the Planned Parenthood 
League of Connecticut. Appellant Buxton is a licensed physician and a 
professor at the Yale Medical School who served as Medical Director for 
the League at its Center in New Haven—a center open and operating 
from November 1 to November 10, 1961, when appellants were arrested. 
 They gave information, instruction, and medical advice to married 
persons as to the means of preventing conception. They examined the 
wife and prescribed the best contraceptive device or material for her 
use. Fees were usually charged, although some couples were serviced 
free. 

Court Cases 169
 The statutes whose constitutionality is involved in this appeal are 
§§ 53-32 and 54-196 of the General Statutes of Connecticut (1958 rev.). 
The former provides: 
 “Any person who uses any drug, medicinal article or instrument 
for the purpose of preventing conception shall be fined not less than 
fifty dollars or imprisoned not less than sixty days nor more than one 
year or be both fined and imprisoned.” 
 Section 54-196 provides: 
 “Any person who assists, abets, counsels, causes, hires or com-
mands another to commit any offense may be prosecuted and punished 
as if he were the principal offender.” 
 The appellants were found guilty as accessories and fined $100 
each, against the claim that the accessory statute, as so applied, violated 
the Fourteenth Amendment. The Appellate Division of the Circuit Court 
affirmed. The Supreme Court of Errors affirmed that judgment. 151 
Conn. 544, 200 A.2d 479. We noted probable jurisdiction. 379 U.S. 926. 
 [ The court then considers portions of the Bill of Rights which would ap-
pear to guarantee a “right of privacy” and conclude that that “right of privacy” 
is violated by the Connecticut law. Certain footnotes and references are omitted 
(as indicated by ellipses) from the following excerpt. ] 
 The foregoing cases suggest that specific guarantees in the Bill of 
Rights have penumbras, formed by emanations from those guarantees 
that help give them life and substance. . . . Various guarantees create zones 
of privacy. The right of association contained in the penumbra of the First 
Amendment is one, as we have seen. The Third Amendment, in its pro-
hibition against the quartering of soldiers “in any house” in time of peace 
without the consent of the owner, is another facet of that privacy. The 
Fourth Amendment explicitly affirms the “right of the people to be secure 
in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches 
and seizures.” The Fifth Amendment, in its Self-Incrimination Clause, 
enables the citizen to create a zone of privacy which government may not 
force him to surrender to his detriment. The Ninth Amendment provides: 
“The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be con-
strued to deny or disparage others retained by the people.” 
 The Fourth and Fifth Amendments were described in Boyd v. 
United States, . . . as protection against all governmental invasions “of 
the sanctity of a man’s home and the privacies of life.” . . . to the Fourth 
Amendment as creating a “right to privacy, no less important than any 
other right carefully an particularly reserved to the people.” . . . 
 We have had many controversies over these penumbral rights of 
“privacy and repose.” . . . These cases bear witness that the right of pri-
vacy which presses for recognition here is a legitimate one. 
 The present case, then, concerns a relationship lying within 
the zone of privacy created by several fundamental constitutional 
guarantees. And it concerns a law which, in forbidding the use of 
 contraceptives, rather than regulating their manufacture or sale, seeks 

170 Data and Documents
to achieve its goals by means having a maximum destructive impact 
upon that relationship. Such a law cannot stand in light of the familiar 
principle, so often applied by this Court, that a “governmental purpose 
to control or prevent activities constitutionally subject to state regulation 
may not be achieved by means which sweep unnecessarily broadly and 
thereby invade the area of protected freedoms.” 
 . . . Would we allow the police to search the sacred precincts of 
marital bedrooms for telltale signs of the use of contraceptives? The 
very idea is repulsive to the notions of privacy surrounding the mar-
riage relationship. 
 We deal with a right of privacy older than the Bill of Rights—older 
than our political parties, older than our school system. Marriage is a 
coming together for better or for worse, hopefully enduring, and inti-
mate to the degree of being sacred. It is an association that promotes a 
way of life, not causes; a harmony in living, not political faiths; a bilat-
eral loyalty, not commercial or social projects. Yet it is an association for 
as noble a purpose as any involved in our prior decisions. 
 Reversed. 
Source: Griswold v. Connecticut , 381 U.S. 479 (1965), 480, 484, 486. 
Available at http://supreme.justia.com/us/381/479/case.html 
 Roe v. Wade  (1973) 
 One of the most important judicial cases in the last century was argued 
before the U.S. Supreme Court on December 13, 1971, and again on Oc-
tober 11, 1972. The question at hand was whether a Texas law criminal-
izing abortion except when a woman’s life was at risk was constitutional 
or not. In announcing its decision on January 22, 1973, the Supreme 
Court established a national standard for abortion that remains today. 
The excerpt below from the Court’s very long decision provides the es-
sence of the Court’s position on the issue. 
 In view of all this, we do not agree that, by adopting one theory of 
life, Texas may override the rights of the pregnant woman that are at 
stake. We repeat, however, that the State does have an important and 
legitimate interest in preserving and protecting the health of the preg-
nant woman, whether she be a resident of the State or a nonresident 
who seeks medical consultation and treatment there, and that it has still 
another important and legitimate interest in protecting the potential-
ity of human life. These interests are separate and distinct. Each grows 
in substantiality as the woman approaches term and, at a point during 
pregnancy, each becomes “compelling.” 
 With respect to the State’s important and legitimate interest in the 
health of the mother, the “compelling” point, in the light of present 
medical knowledge, is at approximately the end of the first trimester. 
This is so because of the now-established medical fact, referred to above 

Court Cases 171
at 410 U.S. 149, that, until the end of the first trimester mortality in abor-
tion may be less than mortality in normal childbirth. It follows that, 
from and after this point, a State may regulate the abortion procedure to 
the extent that the regulation reasonably relates to the preservation and 
protection of maternal health. Examples of permissible state regulation 
in this area are requirements as to the qualifications of the person who is 
to perform the abortion; as to the licensure of that person; as to the facil-
ity in which the procedure is to be performed, that is, whether it must 
be a hospital or may be a clinic or some other place of less-than-hospital 
status; as to the licensing of the facility; and the like. 
 This means, on the other hand, that, for the period of pregnancy 
prior to this “compelling” point, the attending physician, in consulta-
tion with his patient, is free to determine, without regulation by the 
State, that, in his medical judgment, the patient’s pregnancy should be 
terminated. If that decision is reached, the judgment may be effectuated 
by an abortion free of interference by the State. 
 [ The Court summarizes its guidelines for legal abortions twice in 
its decision, as follows: ] 
 To summarize and to repeat: 
 1. A state criminal abortion statute of the current Texas type, that 
excepts from criminality only a lifesaving procedure on behalf 
of the mother, without regard to pregnancy stage and without 
recognition of the other interests involved, is violative of the 
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
 (a) For the stage prior to approximately the end of the first 
trimester, the abortion decision and its effectuation must 
be left to the medical judgment of the pregnant woman’s 
attending physician. 
 (b) For the stage subsequent to approximately the end of 
the first trimester, the State, in promoting its interest in 
the health of the mother, may, if it chooses, regulate the 
abortion procedure in ways that are reasonably related to 
maternal health. 
 (c) For the stage subsequent to viability, the State in promot-
ing its interest in the potentiality of human life may, if it 
chooses, regulate, and even proscribe, abortion except 
where it is necessary, in appropriate medical judgment, for 
the preservation of the life or health of the mother. 
Source: U.S. Supreme Court.  Roe v. Wade , 410 U.S. 113 (1973), 162–65. 
Available at http://supreme.justia.com/us/410/113/case.html#163. 
 Curtis v. School Committee of Falmouth  (1995) 
 Many schools in the United States (and other countries) have instituted 
condom distribution programs for the purposes of reducing teen pregnancies 

172 Data and Documents
and helping to prevent sexually transmitted infections. Parents sometimes 
object to such programs on a number of grounds, and schools may respond 
to these objections by providing for “opt-out” provisions in which parents 
are notified if their children express a wish to participate in them. A num-
ber of court cases have been filed over condom distribution programs, with 
mixed results. The case below is an example of these cases. The case cited was 
heard by the Massachusetts Supreme Court in March 1995 on an appeal 
from a lower court. Citations are omitted from the following excerpt. 
 [Falmouth High School offered a condom distribution program in 
which students could receive condoms at no cost from the school nurse, 
or they could purchase condoms from a vending machine for 75 cents 
each. Counseling and information materials were also available to all 
students who requested either or both. A group of 10 parents sued the 
Falmouth School Committee claiming that the condom distribution 
program was an unconstitutional intrusion on the right to raise their 
children as they saw fit. The court responded to each of the plaintiffs’ 
arguments as follows:] 
 The plaintiffs argue that the condom-availability program vio-
lates their substantive due process rights, protected by the Fourteenth 
Amendment, to direct and control the education and the upbringing of 
their children. In the same vein, they argue that the program invades 
the constitutionally protected “zone of privacy” which surrounds the 
family. Further, they claim the program intrudes on these rights because 
it allows their minor children unrestricted access to contraceptives 
without parental input and within the compulsory setting of the public 
schools. They claim that in these circumstances parents have the right to 
intervene and prohibit their children from obtaining the condoms (by an 
opt-out provision in the program), and that they have a right to parental 
notification if their child requests and obtains a condom. 
 . . . 
 We discern no coercive burden on the plaintiffs’ parental liber-
ties in this case. No classroom participation is required of students. 
Condoms are available to students who request them and, in the high 
school, may be obtained from vending machines. The students are not 
required to seek out and accept the condoms, read the literature accom-
panying them, or participate in counseling regarding their use. In other 
words, the students are free to decline to participate in the program. No 
penalty or disciplinary action ensues if a student does not participate 
in the program. For their part, the plaintiff parents are free to instruct 
their children not to participate. The program does not supplant the 
parents’ role as advisor in the moral and religious development of their 
children. Although exposure to condom vending machines and to the 
program itself may offend the moral and religious sensibilities of the 
plaintiffs, mere exposure to programs offered at school does not amount 

Court Cases 173
to  unconstitutional interference with parental liberties without the exis-
tence of some compulsory aspect to the program. 
 . . . 
 The plaintiffs argue that the condom-availability program is coer-
cive because, although participation is voluntary, the program has been 
implemented in the compulsory setting of the public schools. 
 . . . 
 Because we conclude the program lacks any degree of coercion 
or compulsion in violation of the plaintiffs’ parental liberties, or their 
familial privacy, we conclude also that neither an opt-out provision nor 
parental notification is required by the Federal Constitution. 
 . . . 
 Next, the plaintiffs argue that the condom-availability program 
violates their Federal constitutional rights to the free exercise of religion. 
Religious freedom is guaranteed by the free exercise clause of the First 
Amendment, which provides that “Congress shall make no law respect-
ing an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. 
. . . ” 
 . . . 
 The preliminary inquiry in a free exercise analysis is whether the 
challenged governmental action creates a burden on the exercise of a 
plaintiff’s religion. . . . Only if a burden is established must the analy-
sis move to the next step: a consideration of the nature of the burden, 
the significance of the governmental interest at stake, and the degree 
to which that interest would be impaired by an accommodation of the 
religious practice. . . . The degree of interference with free exercise nec-
essary to trigger further analysis of the State’s justification for the action 
in question, must at least rise to the level of a “substantial burden.” The 
Supreme Court has indicated that, just as in the context of a parental 
liberties claim, a “substantial burden” is one that is coercive or com-
pulsory in nature. . . . The free exercise clause “categorically prohibits 
government from regulating, prohibiting, or rewarding religious beliefs 
as such,” either directly or indirectly. . . . In our view the plaintiffs are 
unable to demonstrate sufficient facts to support their argument that the 
condom policy substantially burdens their rights to freely exercise their 
religion to any degree approaching constitutional dimensions. 
 . . . 
 The plaintiffs argue that the condom-availability program burdens 
their right freely to exercise their religion by creating a conflict between 
the religious teaching of parents as to the issue of premarital sexual 
intercourse, and the view, allegedly endorsed by the school committee, 
that sexual activity before marriage is not only permissible but also can 
be made safe. The plaintiffs contend further, as noted in the previous 

174 Data and Documents
section, that the program is coercive in nature, because it exists in the 
public schools, to which parents are compelled to send their children, 
and because it lacks an opt-out provision by which parents could choose 
to prohibit their children from obtaining condoms at school. The plain-
tiffs also argue that peer pressure may add to the coercive effect of the 
program. 
 . . . 
 We conclude that the program in issue which does not violate the 
plaintiffs’ parental liberties or privacy rights also does not violate their 
rights freely to exercise their religion. There is no requirement that any 
student participate in the program. The plaintiffs argument that the 
well-known existence of peer pressure in secondary schools adds to 
the alleged burden on their free exercise rights simply does not rise to 
the level of constitutional infringement. . . . The condom-availability 
program in Falmouth does not penalize students or parents for their 
religious beliefs or condition the receipt of benefits on a certain belief. 
Although the program may offend the religious sensibilities of the 
plaintiffs, mere exposure at public schools to offensive programs does 
not amount to a violation of free exercise. Parents have no right to tailor 
public school programs to meet their individual religious or moral pref-
erences. 
Source: Elizabeth G. Curtis & others vs. School Committee of Falmouth & 
Others. 420 Mass. 749. Available at http://masscases.com/cases/
sjc/420/420mass749.html#foot1.
 Parker v. Hurley , 474 F. Supp. 2d 261 (2007) 
 School districts in the United States take a very wide range of positions 
on the teaching of human sexuality. Some districts are relatively open 
on the subject, willing to offer instruction in the use of condoms, the 
validity of homosexual feelings and acts, the importance of instruction 
about sexually transmitted infections, and related issues. Other districts 
prefer to limit sex instruction to lessons on abstinence and fidelity and, 
in some cases, to exclude sex education from classrooms. No matter the 
choice a school district may make, individual parents may disagree with 
the implementation of any specific policy. Conservative parents may ob-
ject to lessons about same-sex marriages, and liberal parents may dis-
agree with a decision to teach about abstinence exclusively in lessons on 
sexually transmitted infections. Courts at all levels have been asked to 
arbitrate about these differences of opinion. The case cited below is just 
one example. In this case, two sets of parents in Lexington, Massachu-
setts, objected to having their first-grade children (Jacob, Joshua, and 
Joseph [“Joey”]) exposed to books that discuss same-sex relationships. 

Court Cases 175
They argued that they should have been notified about the use of these 
materials by school authorities so that they could have withdrawn the 
children from instruction they found “religiously repugnant” (as cited 
in the case). When their case was dismissed by the U.S. District Court, 
the parents appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. 
On January 31, 2008, that court affirmed the lower court’s decision. The 
decision in this case involves some abstruse legal reasoning, and only 
the court’s final reasoning is cited here. Citations are omitted from this 
excerpt, as indicated by ellipses. 
 In the present case, the plaintiffs claim that the exposure of their 
children, at these young ages and in this setting, to ways of life contrary 
to the parents’ religious beliefs violates their ability to direct the reli-
gious upbringing of their children. We try to identify the categories of 
harms alleged. The parents do not allege coercion in the form of a direct 
interference with their religious beliefs, nor of compulsion in the form 
of punishment for their beliefs, as in Yoder. [ Yoder is a case concerning a 
state requirement that Amish children attend public schools. ] Nor do they al-
lege the denial of benefits. Further, plaintiffs do not allege that the mere 
listening to a book being read violated any religious duty on the part of 
the child. There is no claim that as a condition of attendance at 
the public schools, the defendants have forced plaintiffs—either the par-
ents or the children—to violate their religious beliefs. In sum there is no 
claim of direct coercion. 
 The heart of the plaintiffs’ free exercise claim is a claim of “indoctri-
nation”: that the state has put pressure on their children to endorse an 
affirmative view of gay marriage and has thus undercut the parents’ ef-
forts to inculcate their children with their own opposing religious views. 
The Supreme Court, we believe, has never utilized an indoctrination test 
under the Free Exercise Clause, much less in the public school context. 
The closest it has come is Barnette,  a free speech case that implicated free 
exercise interests and which  Smith included in its hybrid case discus-
sion. [ Smith was a case in which two Native Americans claimed that they had 
a right to ingest peyotte, an illegal drug, because it was part of their religious 
tradition. ] In  Barnette, the Court held that the state could not coerce acqui-
escence through compelled statements of belief, such as the mandatory 
recital of the pledge of allegiance in public schools. . . . It did not hold 
that the state could not attempt to inculcate values by instruction, and in 
fact carefully distinguished the two approaches. . . . We do not address 
whether or not an indoctrination theory under the Free Exercise Clause 
is sound. Plaintiffs’ pleadings do not establish a viable case of indoctrina-
tion, even assuming that extreme indoctrination can be a form of coer-
cion.
 First, as to the parents’ free exercise rights, the mere fact that a child 
is exposed on occasion in public school to a concept offensive to a par-
ent’s religious belief does not inhibit the parent from instructing the 

176 Data and Documents
child differently. A parent whose “child is exposed to sensitive topics or 
information [at school] remains free to discuss these matters and to place 
them in the family’s moral or religious context, or to supplement the in-
formation with more appropriate materials.” . . . (noting that the school’s 
requirement that Newdow’s daughter recite the pledge of allegiance 
every day did not “impair[] Newdow’s right to instruct his daughter in 
his religious views”). The parents here did in fact have notice, if not prior 
notice, of the books and of the school’s overall intent to promote tolera-
tion of same-sex marriage, and they retained their ability to discuss the 
material and subject matter with their children. Our outcome does not 
turn, however, on whether the parents had notice. 
 Turning to the children’s free exercise rights, we cannot see how 
Jacob’s free exercise right was burdened at all: two books were made 
available to him, but he was never required to read them or have them 
read to him. Further, these books do not endorse gay marriage or ho-
mosexuality, or even address these topics explicitly, but merely describe 
how other children might come from families that look different from 
one’s own. There is no free exercise right to be free from any reference in 
public elementary schools to the existence of families in which the par-
ents are of different gender combinations. 
 Joey has a more significant claim, both because he was required to sit 
through a classroom reading of  King and King and because that book affir-
matively endorses homosexuality and gay marriage. It is a fair inference 
that the reading of  King and King was precisely  intended to influence the 
listening children toward tolerance of gay marriage. That was the point of 
why that book was chosen and used. Even assuming there is a continuum 
along which an intent to influence could become an attempt to indoctri-
nate, however, this case is firmly on the influence-toward-tolerance end. 
There is no evidence of systemic indoctrination. There is no allegation 
that Joey was asked to affirm gay marriage. Requiring a student to read a 
particular book is generally not coercive of free exercise rights. 
 Public schools are not obliged to shield individual students from 
ideas which potentially are religiously offensive, particularly when the 
school imposes no requirement that the student agree with or affirm 
those ideas, or even participate in discussions about them. . . . (“[P]ublic 
schools are not required to delete from the curriculum all materials that 
may offend any religious sensibility.”) The reading of  King and King was 
not instruction in religion or religious beliefs. . . . (distinguishing be-
tween compelling students to declare a belief through mandatory recital 
of the pledge of allegiance, which violates free exercise, and “merely . . . 
acquaint[ing students] with the flag salute so that they may be informed 
as to what it is or even what it means”). 
 On the facts, there is no viable claim of “indoctrination” here. With-
out suggesting that such showings would suffice to establish a claim of 
indoctrination, we note the plaintiffs’ children were not forced to read 
the books on pain of suspension. Nor were they subject to a constant 

Court Cases 177
stream of like materials. There is no allegation here of a formalized cur-
riculum requiring students to read many books affirming gay marriage. 
. . . (concluding that such facts could constitute a burden on free exercise, 
although such a burden would be constitutionally permissible in the 
public school context if parents still retained other educational options). 
The reading by a teacher of one book, or even three, and even if to a 
young and impressionable child, does not constitute “indoctrination.” 
 Because plaintiffs do not allege facts that give rise to claims 
of constitutional magnitude, the district court did not err in granting de-
fendants’ motion to dismiss the claims under the U.S. Constitution. 
 III. 
 Public schools often walk a tightrope between the many competing 
constitutional demands made by parents, students, teachers, and the 
schools’ other constituents. . . . The balance the school struck here does 
not offend the Free Exercise or Due Process Clauses of the U.S. Constitu-
tion.
 We do not suggest that the school’s choice of books for young stu-
dents has not deeply offended the plaintiffs’ sincerely held religious 
beliefs. If the school system has been insufficiently sensitive to such 
religious beliefs, the plaintiffs may seek recourse to the normal political 
processes for change in the town and state. . . . They are not entitled to a 
federal judicial remedy under the U.S. Constitution. 
 We affirm the district court’s dismissal with prejudice of plaintiffs’ 
federal claims and its dismissal without prejudice of the state claims so 
that they may be reinstated, should plaintiffs choose, in state court. 
Source: Parker v. Hurley.  474 F. Supp. 2d 261 (D. Mass 2007), 37–43. Available 
at http://www.ca1.uscourts.gov/pdf.opinions/07-1528-01A.pdf. 
 Gonzalez v. School Board of Okeechobee County  (2008) 
 A gay-straight alliance (GSA) is a high school club that brings to-
gether gay, lesbian, nongay, and nonlesbian students to discuss issues 
of mutual interest and concern. As of 2009, more than 1,000 such 
clubs had been formed in almost every state of the union. In many 
cases, school administrators are ambivalent about sanctioning such 
organizations and, in the most extreme cases, have forbidden their 
presence on school campuses. A number of legal challenges have been 
filed against efforts to ban gay-straight clubs. One of the most recent 
and most significant of those cases was argued before the U.S. District 
Court for the Southern District of Florida in May 2008. In that case, 
the plaintiff, Yasmin Gonzalez, argued that her high school’s refusal 
to allow a gay-straight club on campus was a violation of the federal 
Equal Access Act (EAA), which requires schools to provide space for 

178 Data and Documents
all noncurricular clubs if they provide space for any noncurricular 
club. The Okeechobee School Board (OSB) responded that banning 
the club was necessary for four reasons: (1) to maintain the integ-
rity of the school’s abstinence only program, (2) to avoid unhealthy 
premature sexual development of students, (3) to protect GSA mem-
bers from the risk of contact with potentially dangerous outside adult 
influences, and (4) to ensure that GSA members do not have access 
to adult-only materials. Judge K. Michael Moore rejected all four of 
these arguments in his decision below, and ordered the school to make 
provisions for hosting the gay-straight alliance on its campus. Certain 
citations are omitted in this excerpt. 
 b. Inconsistency of the Abstinence Only Program with the GSA’s 
Mission
 SBOC has failed to demonstrate that the GSA’s mission to pro-
mote tolerance towards individuals of non-heterosexual identity is 
inherently inconsistent with the abstinence only message SBOC has 
adopted. SBOC has not clarified how dialogue promoting tolerance 
towards nonheterosexual individuals is antithetical to principles of 
abstinence. However, the crux of such a proposition appears to be that 
because the topic of tolerance relating to sexual identity is a subset of 
the topic of sexuality generally, the dialogue required to discuss toler-
ance towards nonheterosexuals is impossible to convey without doing 
violence to the principle of abstinence. This conclusion, however, relies 
on the premise that discussing the subject of sexuality undermines 
the advocation of abstinence. Yet, if such a premise were indeed true, 
then virtually any topic touching on sexual issues, including those 
already part of SBOC’s curriculum such as pregnancy and sexually 
transmitted disease, would also undermine an abstinence only policy. 
SBOC has pointed to no special factor pertaining to tolerance towards 
non-heterosexuals that distinguishes that topic from other matters 
concerning  sexuality generally. Accordingly, this Court dismisses the 
unsupported assertion that curriculum based discussions of sexually 
related topics related to heterosexual activity may occur without vio-
lating the abstinence only program but that such a violation would 
occur in the case of noncurricular based discussions of tolerance to-
wards nonheterosexuals. 
 . . . 
 [ Judge Moore next cites data about the sexual development of American 
adolescents before concluding that :] 
 While the precise accuracy of such figures are [ sic ] uncertain, 
these statistics merely illustrate the point that premature sexualiza-
tion of secondary school students is a legitimate concern and a matter 
of national importance. Nevertheless, this Court is unable to discern 
how a club whose stated purpose is to promote tolerance towards 

Court Cases 179
 non-heterosexuals within the student body promotes the premature 
sexualization of students, either in absolute terms or relative to any 
other already existing curriculum based instruction which touches on 
topics of a sexual nature. SBOC’s argument that discussions of tolerance 
towards non-heterosexuals will promote premature sexualization of 
students is speculative at best and clearly without evidentiary support 
in the record. 
 . . . 
 [ With regard to the school board’s third point, Judge Moore observes that: ] 
 SBOC also contends that recognizing the GSA as a noncurricular 
student group would place its student members at risk by facilitating 
access to students by adults who may pose a danger to the students. The 
simple and obvious solution to this dilemma is to require all noncur-
ricular student groups to seek permission from the principal or a des-
ignee in order for any adult who is not a faculty member to attend the 
meeting of any noncurricular student group or to contribute to its orga-
nization or operation. While a host of other measures would be suited to 
resolve this concern, SBOC may address this concern as it sees fit. 
 [ With regard to the school board’s final point, Judge Moore writes that: ] 
 As already stated, once a secondary school has established itself as 
a limited open forum, the EAA provides that “[n]othing in this subchap-
ter shall be construed to limit the authority of the school . . . to maintain 
order and discipline . . . [or] to protect the well-being of students and 
faculty.” It is self-evident that this language is intended to protect the 
well-being of all students,  heterosexual and non-heterosexual. Accord-
ingly, SBOC is obligated to take into account the well-being of its non-
heterosexual students in assessing whether acknowledging the GSA as a 
 noncurricular student group inures to the well-being of students. SBOC 
has failed to demonstrate that recognition of the GSA, a noncurricular 
student group promoting tolerance towards nonheterosexual students, 
would jeopardize the well-being of students. Additionally, SBOC has 
failed to show that permitting non-heterosexual students to establish a 
venue promoting unity and collective action is likely to detract from the 
maintenance of order and discipline. 
 [ Judge Moore concluded his opinion with the following observation :] 
 For the reasons stated above in the analysis pertaining to the EAA, 
this Court finds that the GSA’s tolerance based message would not ma-
terially or substantially interfere with discipline in the operation of the 
school. In order for SBOC to justify its refusals to recognize the GSA as a 
student organization, “it must be able to show that its action was caused 
by something more than a mere desire to avoid the discomfort and un-
pleasantness that always accompany an unpopular viewpoint.” This is 
precisely what SBOC has failed to do. The reasons presented by Defen-
dant for denying the GSA equal access and recognition sound in a desire 
to avoid the discomfort and unpleasantness of tolerating a minority of 

180 Data and Documents
students whose sexual identity is distinct from the majority of  students 
and discordant to SBOC’s abstinence only program. Ensuring that this 
minority of students are afforded meaningful expression secures the 
precept of freedom from external dominion over thought and expres-
sion exalted by the founders and safeguarded by the First Amendment. 
(citations omitted) 
Source: In the United States District Court for the Southern District of 
Florida. Case No. 06-1 4320-CIV-Moore/Lynch. Available at http://
www.aclufl.org/pdfs/GSA_MSJ.pdf. 
 Reports 
 The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Promote Sexual 
Health and Responsible Sexual Behavior (2001) 
 On July 9, 2001, Surgeon General David Satcher released a report on 
public health issues related to the sexual health of the nation’s citizens. 
The purpose of the report was to review the current status of a number 
of sexual issues and to propose a forum by which communities could 
initiate discussion of and necessary actions on these issues. The report 
included a section on a Vision for the Future, which summarized infor-
mation and challenges presented in the study. 
 VI. Vision for the Future 
 Strategies that cover three fundamental areas—increasing awareness, 
implementing and strengthening interventions, and expanding the 
research base–could help provide a foundation for promoting sexual 
health and responsible sexual behavior in a manner that is consistent 
with the best available science. 
 1. Increasing Public Awareness of Issues Relating to Sexual Health 
and Responsible Sexual Behavior 
 Begin a national dialogue on sexual health and responsible 
•
sexual behavior that is honest, mature and respectful, and 
has the ultimate goal of developing a national strategy that 
recognizes the need for common ground. 
 Encourage opinion leaders to address issues related to 
•
sexual health and responsible sexual behavior in ways that 
are informed by the best available science and that respect 
diversity. 

Reports 181
 Provide access to education about sexual health and 
•
responsible sexual behavior that is thorough, wide-ranging, 
begins early, and continues throughout the lifespan. Such 
education should: 
 –  recognize the special place that sexuality has in our lives; 
 – stress the value and benefits of remaining abstinent 
until involved in a committed, enduring, and 
mutually monogamous relationship; but 
 – assure awareness of optimal protection from sexually 
transmitted diseases and unintended pregnancy, for those 
who are sexually active, while also stressing that there 
are no infallible methods of protection, except abstinence, 
and that condoms cannot protect against some forms of 
STDs. 
 Recognize that sexuality education can be provided in a 
•
number of venues–homes, schools, churches, other community 
settings–but must always be developmentally and culturally 
appropriate. 
 Recognize that parents are the child’s first educators and 
•
should help guide other sexuality education efforts so that they 
are consistent with their values and beliefs. 
 Recognize, also, that families differ in their level of knowledge, 
•
as well as their emotional capability to discuss sexuality 
issues. In moving toward equity of access to information for 
promoting sexual health and responsible sexual behavior, 
school sexuality education is a vital component of community 
responsibility. 
 2. Providing the Health and Social Interventions Necessary to Promote and Enhance 
Sexual Health and Responsible Sexual Behavior 
 Eliminate disparities in sexual health status that arise from 
•
social and economic disadvantage, diminished access to 
information and health care services, and stereotyping and 
discrimination.
 Target interventions to the most socioeconomically vulnerable 
•
communities where community members have less access to 
health education and services and are, thus, likely to suffer 
most from sexual health problems. 
 Improve access to sexual health and reproductive health care 
•
services for all persons in all communities. 
 Provide adequate training in sexual health to all professionals 
•
who deal with sexual issues in their work, encourage them 
to use this training, and ensure that they are reflective of the 
populations they serve. 

182 Data and Documents
 Encourage the implementation of health and social 
•
interventions to improve sexual health that have been 
adequately evaluated and shown to be effective. 
 Ensure the availability of programs that promote both 
•
awareness and prevention of sexual abuse and coercion. 
 Strengthen families, whatever their structure, by encouraging 
•
stable, committed, and enduring adult relationships, 
particularly marriage. Recognize, though, that there are times 
when the health interests of adults and children can be hurt 
within relationships with sexual health problems, and that 
sexual health problems within a family can be a concern in and 
of themselves. 
 3. Investing in Research Related to Sexual Health 
and Disseminating Findings Widely 
 Promote basic research in human sexual development, 
•
sexual health, and reproductive health, as well as social and 
behavioral research on risk and protective factors for sexual 
health.
 Expand the research base to cover the entire human life 
•
span–children, adolescents, young adults, middle age adults, 
and the elderly. 
 Research, develop, disseminate, and evaluate educational 
•
materials and guidelines for sexuality education, covering 
the full continuum of human sexual development, for use by 
parents, clergy, teachers, and other community leaders. 
 Expand evaluation efforts for community, school and 
•
clinic based interventions that address sexual health and 
responsibility. 
Source: The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Promote Sexual Health 
and Responsible Sexual Behavior . [Washington, D.C.: Department of 
Health and Human Services, 2001], 13–15. Available at http://www.
surgeongeneral.gov/library/sexualhealth/call.pdf 
 The Content of Federally Funded Abstinence-only 
Education Programs (2004) 
 Since 1998, the U.S. government has been providing funding for so-
called abstinence-only sex education programs, in which abstinence 
is taught as the only or best acceptable method of birth control and 
for preventing sexually transmitted infections. For most of that time, 

Reports 183
critics have asked how effective such programs are in providing stu-
dents with information of sexual issues and how effective they are 
in achieving their stated objectives. In December 2004, the Special 
Investigations Division of the Minority Staff of the Committee on 
Government Reform issued a report to Representative Henry Wax-
man (D-CA) on the first part of this question, with special regard 
to the largest federal initiative in this area, the Special Programs of 
Regional and National Significance Community-Based Abstinence 
Education (SPRANS) program. The major findings of that report are 
as follows: 
 The report finds that over 80% of the abstinence-only curricula, 
used by over two-thirds of SPRANS grantees in 2003, contain false, mis-
leading, or distorted information about reproductive health. Specifically, 
the report finds: 
•
Abstinence-Only Curricula Contain False Information 
about the Effectiveness of Contraceptives. Many of the 
curricula misrepresent the effectiveness of condoms in 
preventing sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy. One 
curriculum says that “the popular claim that ‘condoms help 
prevent the spread of STDs,’ is not supported by the data”; 
another states that “[i]n heterosexual sex, condoms fail to 
prevent HIV approximately 31% of the time”; and another 
teaches that a pregnancy occurs one out of every seven times 
that couples use condoms. These erroneous statements are 
presented as proven scientific facts. 
•
Abstinence-Only Curricula Contain False Information about 
the Risks of Abortion. One curriculum states that 5% to 10% 
of women who have legal abortions will become sterile; that 
“[p]remature birth, a major cause of mental retardation, is 
increased following the abortion of a first pregnancy”; and 
that “[t]ubal and cervical pregnancies are increased following 
abortions.” In fact, these risks do not rise after the procedure 
used in most abortions in the United States. 
•
Abstinence-Only Curricula Blur Religion and Science. Many 
of the curricula present as scientific fact the religious view 
that life begins at conception. For example, one lesson states: 
“Conception, also known as fertilization, occurs when one 
sperm unites with one egg in the upper third of the fallopian 
tube. This is when life begins.” Another curriculum calls a 43-
day-old fetus a “thinking person.” 
•
Abstinence-Only Curricula Treat Stereotypes about Girls and 
Boys as Scientific Fact. One curriculum teaches that women 
need “financial support,” while men need “admiration.” 
Another instructs: “Women gauge their happiness and judge 

184 Data and Documents
their success on their relationships. Men’s happiness and 
success hinge on their accomplishments.” 
•
Abstinence-Only Curricula Contain Scientific Errors.
In numerous instances, the abstinence-only curricula 
teach erroneous scientific information. One curriculum 
incorrectly lists exposure to sweat and tears as risk factors 
for HIV transmission. Another curriculum states that 
“twenty-four chromosomes from the mother and twenty-
four chromosomes from the father join to create this new 
individual”; the correct number is 23. 
 The report finds numerous examples of these errors. Serious and per-
vasive problems with the accuracy of abstinence-only curricula may 
help explain why these programs have not been shown to protect ado-
lescents from sexually transmitted diseases and why youth who pledge 
abstinence are significantly less likely to make informed choices about 
precautions when they do have sex. 
Source: Special Investigations Division. Minority Staff of the Committee 
on Government Reform. The Content of Federally Funded Abstinence-only 
Education Programs . [n.p.], December 2004, i–ii. 
 Data 
 Cases of Sexually Transmitted Diseases Reported by 
State Health Departments and Rates per 100,000 
Population: United States, 1941–2007 
 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has 
tracked the incidence of three sexually transmitted infections—
syphilis, gonorrhea, and chancroid—for more than 60 years, and 
the incidence of one other infection, chlamydia, for about 20 years. 
These data are collected from required reports from state health 
departments. A summary of these data from 1941 to 2007, the lat-
est year available, is reported in the center’s annual surveillance 
report for STIs, reproduced in Table 6.1. 
 Estimated Number of Cases of Other Sexually 
Transmitted Infections in the United States, 
1966–2007 
 In addition to the four “classic” sexually transmitted infections 
tabulated in Table 6.1, other such infections are also kept under 

TABLE 6.1
Cases of Sexually Transmitted Diseases Reported by State Health Departments and 
Rates per 100,000 Population: United States, 1941–2007
Syphilis
All Stages
Primary & 
Secondary
Early Latent
Late and Late 
Latent
Congenital
Year
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
1941
485,560
368.2
68,231
51.7
109,018
82.6
202,984
153.9
17,600
651.1
1942
479.601
363.4
75,312
57.0
116,245
88.0
202,064
153.1
16,918
566.0
1943
575.593
447.0
82,204
63.8
149,390
116.0
251,958
195.7
16,164
520.7
1944
467,755
367.9
78,443
61.6
123,038
96.7
202,848
159.6
13,578
462.0
1945
359,114
282.3
77,007
60.5
101,719
79.9
142,187
111.8
12,339
431.7
1946
363,647
271.7
94,957
70.9
107,924
80.6
125,248
93.6
12,106
354.9
1947
355,592
252.3
93,545
66.4
104,124
73.9
122,089
86.6
12,200
319.6
1948
314,313
218.2
68,174
47.3
90,598
62.9
123,312
85.6
13,931
383.0
1949
256,463
175.3
42,942
28.7
75,045
51.3
116,397
79.5
13,952
382.4
1950
217,558
146.0
23,939
16.7
59,256
39.7
113,569
70.2
13,377
368.3
1951
174,924
116.1
14,485
9.6
43,316
28.7
98,311
65.2
11,094
290.4
1952
167,762
110.2
10,449
6.9
36,454
24.0
105,238
69.1
8,553
218.8
1953
148,573
95.9
8,637
5.6
28,295
18.3
98,870
63.8
6,675
193.0
1954
130,687
82.9
7,147
4.5
23,861
15.2
89,123
56.5
6,676
164.0
1955
122,392
76.2
6,454
4.0
20,054
12.5
86,526
53.8
5,354
130.7
1956
130,201
78.7
6,392
3.9
19,783
12.0
95,096
56.5
5,491
130.4
1957
123,758
73.5
6,576
3.9
17,796
10.6
91,309
54.2
5,288
123.0
1958
113,884
66.4
7,176
4.2
16,556
9.7
83,027
48.4
4,866
114.6
1959
120,824
69.2
9,799
5.6
17,025
9.8
86,740
49.7
5,130
119.7
1960
122,538
68.8
16,145
9.1
18,017
10.1
81,798
45.9
4,416
103.7
1961
124,658
68.8
19,851
11.0
19,486
10.8
79,304
43.8
4,163
97.5
1962
126,245
68.7
21,067
11.5
19,585
10.7
79,533
43.3
4,070
97.7
1963
124,137
66.5
22,251
11.9
18,235
9.8
78,076
41.8
4,031
98.4
1964
114,325
60.4
22,969
12.1
17,781
9.4
68,629
36.3
3,516
87.3
1965
112,842
58.9
23,338
12.2
17,458
9.2
67,317
35.1
3,564
94.8
1966
105,159
54.2
21,414
11.0
15,950
8.2
63,541
32.7
3,170
87.9
1967
102,581
52.2
21,053
10.7
15,554
7.9
61,975
31.5
2,894
82.2
1968
96,271
48.4
19,019
9.6
15,150
7.5
58,564
29.4
2,381
68.0
1969
92,162
45.7
19,130
9.5
15,402
7.6
54,587
27.1
2,074
57.6
1970
91,382
44.8
21,982
10.8
16,311
8.0
50,348
24.7
1,953
52.3
1971
95,997
46.4
23,783
11.5
19,417
9.4
49,993
24.2
2,052
57.7
1972
91,149
43.6
24,429
11.7
20,784
9.9
43,456
20.8
1,758
54.0
1973
87,469
41.4
24,825
11.7
23,548
11.2
37,054
17.5
1,527
48.7
1974
83,771
39.3
25,385
11.9
24,124
11.8
31,854
14.9
1,138
36.0
1975
80,356
37.3
25,561
11.9
26,569
12.3
27,096
12.6
916
29.1
1976
71,761
33.0
23,731
10.9
25,363
11.7
21,905
10.1
625
19.8
1977
64,621
29.4
20,399
9.3
21,329
9.7
22,313
210.2
463
13.9
1978
64,875
29.2
21,656
9.8
19,628
8.8
23,038
10.4
434
13.0
1979
67,049
29.9
24,874
11.1
20,459
9.1
21,031
9.5
332
9.5
1980
68,832
30.3
27,204
12.0
20,297
8.9
20,979
9.2
277
7.7
(Continued )

TABLE 6.1
Cases of Sexually Transmitted Diseases Reported by State Health Departments and 
Rates per 100,000 Population: United States, 1941–2007 (Continued )
Syphilis
All Stages
Primary & 
Secondary
Early Latent
Late and Late 
Latent
Congenital
Year
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
1981
72,799
31.7
31,266
13.6
21,033
9.2
20,168
8.8
287
7.9
1982
75,579
32.6
33.613
14.5
21,894
9.5
19,799
8.5
259
7.0
1983
74,637
31.9
32,698
14.0
23,783
10.2
17,896
7.7
239
6.6
1984
69,872
29.6
28,607
12.1
23,131
9.8
17,829
7.6
305
8.3
1985
67,563
28.4
27,131
11.4
21,689
9.1
18,414
7.7
329
8.7
1986
67,779
28.2
27,667
11.5
21,656
9.0
18,046
7.5
410
10.9
1987
87,286
36.0
35,585
14.7
28,233
11.7
22,988
9.5
480
12.6
1988
104,546
42.8
40,474
16.6
35,968
14.7
27,363
11.2
741
19.0
1989
115,089
46.6
45,826
18.4
45,394
18.4
22,032
8.9
1,837
45.5
1990
135,590
54.3
50,578
20.3
55,397
22.2
25,750
10.3
3,865
92.9
1991
128,719
50.9
42,950
17.0
53,855
21.3
27,490
10.9
4,424
107.6
1992
114,730
44.7
34,009
13.3
49,929
19.5
26,725
10.4
4,067
100.0
1993
102,612
39.5
26,527
10.2
41,919
16.1
30,746
11.8
3,420
85.5
1994
82,713
31.4
20,641
7.8
32,017
12.2
27,604
10.5
2,452
62.0
1995
69,359
26.0
16,543
6.2
26,657
10.0
24,296
9.1
1,863
47.8
1996
53,240
19.8
11,405
4.2
20,187
7.5
20,366
7.6
1,282
32.9
1997
46,715
17.1
8,556
3.1
16,631
6.1
20,447
7.5
1,081
27.9
1998
38,289
13.9
7,007
2.5
12,696
4.6
17,743
6.4
843
21.4
1999
35,385
12.7
6,617
2.4
11,534
4.1
16,655
6.0
579
14.6
2000
31,618
11.2
5,979
2.1
9,465
3.4
15,594
5.5
580
14.3
2001
32,284
11.3
6,103
2.1
8,701
3.0
16,976
5.9
504
12.5
2002
32,919
11.4
6,862
2.4
8,429
2.9
17,168
6.0
460
11.4
2003
34,289
11.8
7,177
2.5
8,361
2.9
18,319
6.3
432
10.6
2004
33,423
11.4
7,980
2.7
7,768
2.6
17,300
5.9
375
9.1
2005
33,288
11.2
8,724
2.9
8,176
2.8
16,049
5.4
339
8.2
2006
36,959
12.3
9,756
3.3
9,186
3.1
17,644
5.9
373
9.1
2007
40,920
13.7
11,466
3.8
10,768
3.6
18,256
6.1
430
10.5
Chlamydia
Gonorrhea
Chancroid
Year
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
1941
Data first collected in 1983
193,468 
146.7
3,384 
2.5
1942
212,403 
160.9
5,477
4.1
1943
275,070 
213.6
8,354 
6.4
1944
300,676 
236.5
7,878
6.1
1945
287,181 
225.8
5,515
4.3
1946
368,020 
275.0
7,091
5.2
1947
380,666 
270.0
9,515
6.7
(Continued )

TABLE 6.1
Cases of Sexually Transmitted Diseases Reported by State Health Departments and 
Rates per 100,000 Population: United States, 1941–2007 (Continued )
Chlamydia
Gonorrhea
Chancroid
Year
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
1948
345,501 
239.8
  7,661
5.3
1949
317,950 
217.3
  6,707
4.6
1950
286,746 
192.5
  4,977
3.3
1951
254,470 
168.9
  4,233
2.8
1952
244,957 
160.8
  3,738
2.5
1953
238,340 
153.9
3,338
2.2
1954
242,050 
153.5
3,003
1.9
1955
236,197 
147.0
2,649
1.7
1956
224,346 
135.7
2,135
1.3
1957
214,496 
127.4
1,637
1.0
1958
232,386 
135.6
1,595
0.9
1959
240,254 
137.6
1,537
0.9
1960
258,933 
145.4
1,680
0.9
1961
264,158 
145.8
 1,438
0.8
1962
263,714 
143.6
1,344
0.7
1963
278,289 
149.0
1,220
0.7
1964
300,666 
158.9
1,247
0.7
1965
324,925 
169.5
 982 
0.5
1966
351,738 
181.2
 838
0.4
1967
404,836 
205.9
 784
0.4
1968
464,543 
233.4
 845
0.4
1969
534,872 
265.4
1,104
0.5
1970
600,072 
294.2
1,416
0.7
1971
670,268 
324.1
1,320
0.6
1972
767,215 
366.6
1,414
0.7
1973
842,621 
398.7
1,165
0.6
1974
906,121 
424.7
 945
0.4
1975
999,937 
464.1
 700
0.3
1976
1,001,994 
460.6
 628
0.3
1977
1,002,219 
456.0
 455
0.2
1978
1,013,436 
456.3
 521
0.2
1979
1,004,058 
447.1
 840
0.4
1980
1,004,029 
442.1
 788
0.3
1981
990,864 
431.8
 850
0.4
1982
960,633 
414.7
1,392
0.6
1983
900,435 
385.1
 847
0.4
1984
 7,594
  6.5
878,556 
372.5
 665
0.3
1985
 25,848 
 17.4 
911,419 
383.0
2,067
0.9
1986
 58,001 
 35.2 
892,229 
371.5
3,045
1.3
1987
 91,913 
 50.8 
787,532 
325.0
4,986
2.1
1988
157,854 
 87.1 
738,160 
301.9
4,891
2.0
1989
200,904 
102.5 
733,294 
297.1
4,697
1.9
(Continued )

188 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.1
Cases of Sexually Transmitted Diseases Reported by State Health Departments and 
Rates per 100,000 Population: United States, 1941–2007 (Continued )
Chlamydia
Gonorrhea
Chancroid
Year
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
Cases
Rate
1990
323,663 
160.2 
690,042 
276.4
4,212
1.7
1991
381,228 
179.7 
621,918 
245.8
3,476
1.4
1992
409,694 
182.3 
502,858 
196.0
1,906
 0.7
1993
405,332
178.0
444,649
171.1
1,292
0.5
1994
451,785 
192.5 
419,602 
163.9
782
0.3
1995
478,577 
187.8 
392,651 
147.5
607
0.2
1996
492,631 
190.6 
328,169 
121.8
386
0.1
1997
537,904 
205.5 
327,665 
120.2
246
0.1
1998
614,250 
231.8 
356,492 
129.2
189
0.1
1999
662,647 
247.2 
360,813 
129.3
110
0.0
2000
709,452 
251.4 
363,136 
128.7
78
0.0
2001
783,242 
274.5 
361,705 
126.8
38
0.0
2002
834,555 
289.4 
351,852 
122.0
48
0.0
2003
877,478 
301.7 
335,104 
115.2
54
0.0
2004
929,462 
316.5 
330,132 
112.4
30
0.0
2005
976,445 
329.4 
339,593 
114.6
17
0.0
2006
1,030,911
344.3 
358,366 
119.7
19
0.0
2007
1,108,374 
370.2 
355,991 
118.9
23
0.0
Source: Division of STD Prevention, Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance 2007 (Atlanta, GA: Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, December 2008), 99–100.
surveillance, although by a less precise method than that used for 
syphilis, gonorrhea, chancroid, and chlamydia. Table 6.2 below 
provides estimates for some of these other conditions, based on 
reported initial visits to physicians’ offices for each infection. The 
range of possible error for these estimates, unlike that for the dis-
eases listed in Table 6.1, is very large, ranging from 9 to 13 percent 
for estimates greater than a million to 20 to 30 percent for esti-
mates between 100,000 and 300,000. 
 Characteristics of Women Who Obtained Legal 
Abortions—United States, 1973–2005 
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention collects data on 
the number of legal abortions performed in the United States each 
year and the characteristics of women who have those abortions. 
Table 6.3 summarizes some of the most recent information on 
these characteristics. 

TABLE 6.2
Estimated Number of Cases of Other Sexually Transmitted Infections 
in the United States, 1966–2007
Year
Genital Herpes
Genital Warts
Vaginal 
Trichomoniasis
Other Vaginitis
Pelvic Inflammatory 
Disease
1966
19,000
56,000
579,000
1,155,000
Data not available 
1967
15,000
72,000
515,000
1,277,000
1968
16,000
87,000
463,000
1,460,000
1969
15,000
61,000
421,000
1,390,000
1970
17,000
119,000
529,000
1,500,000
1971
49,000
128,000
484,000
1,281,000
1972
26,000
165,000
574,000
1,810,000
1973
51,000
198,000
466,000
1,868,000
1974
75,000
202,000
427,000
1,907,000
1975
36,000
181,000
500,000
1,919,000
1976
57,000
217,000
473,000
1,690,000
1977
116,000
221,000
324,000
1,713,000
1978
76,000
269,000
329,000
2,149,000
1979
83,000
200,000
363,000
1,662,000
1980
57,000
218,000
358,000
1,670,000
423,000
1981
133,000
191,000
369,000
1,742,000
283,000
1982
134,000
256,000
268,000
1,859,000
374,000
1983
106,000
203,000
424,000
1,932,000
424,000
1984
157,000
224,000
381,000
2,450,000
381,000
1985
124,000
263,000
291,000
2,728,000
425,000
1986
136,000
275,000
338,000
3,118,000
457,000
1987
102,000
351,000
293,000
3,087,000
403,000
1988
163,000
290,000
191,000
3,583,000
431,000
1989
148,000
220,000
165,000
3,374,000
413,000
1990
172,000
275,000
213,000
4,474,000
358,000
1991
235,000
282,000
198,000
3,822,000
377,000
1992
139,000
218,000
182,000
3,428,000
335,000
1993
172,000
167,000
207,000
3,755,000
407,000
1994
142,000
239,000
199,000
4,123,000
332,000
1995
160,000
253,000
141,000
3,927,000
262,000
1996
208,000
191,000
245,000
3,472,000
386,000
1997
176,000
145,000
176,000
3,100,000
260,000
1998
188,000
211,000
164,000
3,200,000
233,000
1999
224,000
240,000
171,000
3,077,000
250,000
2000
179,000
220,000
222,000
3,470,000
254,000
2001
157,000
233,000
210,000
3,365,000
244,000
2002
216,000
266,000
150,000
3,315,000
197,000
2003
203,000
264,000
179,000
3,516,000
123,000
2004
269,000
316,000
221,000
3,602,000
132,000
2005
266,000
357,000
165,000
4,071,000
176,000
2006
371,000
422,000
200,000
3,891,000
106,000
2007
317,000
312,000
205,000
3,723,000
146,000
Source: Division of STD Prevention, Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance 2007 (Atlanta, GA: Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, December 2008), 146.

TABLE 6.3
Characteristics of Women Who Obtained Legal Abortions—United States, 1973–2005 
Year
Total Number of Legal Abortions
1973
615,831
1974
763,476
1975
854,853
1976
988,267
1977
1,079,430
1978
1,157,776
1979
1,251,92
1980
1,297,606
1981
1,300,760
1982
1,303,980
1983
1,268,987
1984
1,333,521
1985
1,328,570
1986
1,328,112
1987
1,353,671
1988
1,371,285
1989
1,396,658
1990
1,429,247
1991
1,388,037
1992
1,359,146
1993
1,330,414
1994
1,267,415
1995
1,210,883
1996
1,225,937
1997
1,186,039
1998
884,273
1999
861,789
2000
857,475
2001
853,485
2002
854,122
2003
848,163
2004
839,226
2005
820,151
Characteristic
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
Age
≤19
32.7
32.6
33.1
32.1
30.8
30.0
30.0
29.2
28.0
27.1
20–24
32.0
31.8
31.9
33.3
34.5
35.0
35.4
35.5
35.3
35.1
≥25
35.3
35.6
35.0
34.6
34.7
35.0
34.6
35.3
36.7
37.8
Race
White
72.5
69.7
67.8
66.6
66.4
67.0
68.9
69.9
69.9
68.5
Black
27.5
30.3
32.2
33.4
33.6
33.0
31.1
30.1
30.1
31.5
Other
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
(Continued )

Characteristic
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Age
≤19
20.0
20.2
20.1
20.3
20.1
19.8
19.2
18.8
18.1
17.5
20–24
34.4
33.5
32.5
31.8
31.7
31.8
32.2
32.8
33.4
33.4
≥25
45.6
46.3
47.4
47.9
48.2
48.4
48.6
48.4
48.5
49.1
Race
White
60.9
60.9
59.6
59.1
58.4
58.7
56.2
56.6
55.4
55.5
Black
34.9
 3.47
35.0
35.3
35.9
35.4
37.3
36.3
36.6
36.6
Other
 4.2
 4.7
 5.4
 5.6
 5.7
 5.9
 6.5
 7.1
 8.0
 7.9
TABLE 6.3
Characteristics of Women Who Obtained Legal Abortions—
United States, 1973–2005 (Continued )
Characteristic
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
Marital status
Married
27.4
27.4
26.1
24.6
24.3
26.4
24.7
23.1
22.1
22.0
Unmarried
72.6
72.6
73.9
75.4
75.7
73.6
75.3
76.9
77.9
78.0
Weeks of gestation
<8
36.1
42.6
44.6
47.0
51.1
52.2
52.1
51.7
51.2
50.6
9–10
29.4
28.7
28.4
28.1
27.2
26.9
26.9
26.2
26.8
26.7
11–12
17.9
15.4
14.9
14.4
13.1
12.3
12.5
12.2
12.1
12.4
>12
16.6
13.3
12.1
10.5
 8.6
 8.6
 8.5
 9.9
 9.9
10.3
Characteristic 1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
Age
≤19
27.1
26.4
26.3
25.3
25.8
25.3
24.2
22.4
21.0
20.1
20–24
34.7
35.3
34.7
34.0
33.4
32.8
32.6
33.2
34.4
34.5
≥25
38.2
38.3
39.0
40.7
40.8
41.9
43.2
44.4
44.6
45.4
Race
White
67.6
67.4
66.7
67.0
66.4
64.4
64.2
64.8
63.9
61.6
Black
32.4
32.6
29.8
28.7
29.3
31.1
31.2
31.9
32.5
33.9
Other
–
–
 3.5
 4.3
 4.3
 4.5
 4.6
 3.3
 3.6
 4.5
Marital status
Married
21.4
20.5
19.3
20.2
20.8
20.3
20.1
21.7
21.4
20.8
Unmarried
78.6
19.5
80.7
79.8
79.2
79.7
79.9
78.3
78.6
79.2
Weeks of 
gestation
<8
49.7
50.5
50.3
51.0
50.4
48.7
49.8
51.6
52.4
52.1
9–10
26.8
26.4
26.6
25.8
26.0
26.4
25.8
25.3
25.1
24.2
11–12
12.8
12.6
12.5
12.2
12.4
12.7
12.6
11.7
11.5
12.1
>12
10.7
10.5
10.6
11.0
11.2
12.2
11.8
11.4
11.0
11.6
(Continued )

192 Data and Documents
Characteristic
2003
2004
2005
Age
≤19
17.4
17.4
17.1
20–24
33.5
32.8
32.8
≥25
49.1
49.8
50.1
Race
White
55.0
54.1
55.1
Black
37.1
38.2
36.9
Other
 7.9
 7.7
 8.0
Marital status
Married
17.9
17.2
16.9
Unmarried
82.1
82.8
83.1
Weeks of gestations
<8
60.5
61.4
62.1
9–10
18.0
17.6
17.1
11–12
 9.7
 9.3
 9.3
>12
11.8
11.7
11.5
Source: Sonya B. Gamble et al., “Abortion Surveillance—United States, 2005,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report 57 (SS-13; November 28, 2008): 13–15.
TABLE 6.3
Characteristics of Women Who Obtained Legal Abortions—
United States, 1973–2005 (Continued )
Characteristic
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Marital status
Married
20.4
19.9
19.7
19.6
19.0
18.9
19.2
18.7
18.4
18.1
Unmarried
79.6
80.1
80.3
80.4
81.0
81.1
80.8
81.3
81.6
81.9
Weeks of gestation
<8
52.3
53.7
54.0
54.6
55.4
55.7
57.6
58.1
59.1
60.5
9–10
24.4
23.5
23.1
22.6
22.0
21.5
20.2
19.8
19.0
18.4
11–22
11.6
10.9
10.9
11.0
10.7
10.9
10.2
10.2
10.0
 9.6
>12
11.7
11.9
12.0
11.8
11.9
11.9
12.0
11.9
11.9
11.5
 Pregnancy and Live Birthrates for Females 15–19 Years 
of Age, by Age, Race, and Hispanic Origin: United States, 
Selected Years, 1980–2000 
 A number of federal agencies conduct ongoing studies of the sex-
ual behavior of children, adolescents, and adults in the United 
States. Table 6.4 below summarizes data from some of these sur-
veys on the sexual behavior of adolescent girls with regard to 

Data 193
TABLE 6.4
Pregnancy and Live Birthrates for Females 15–19 Years of Age, by Age, Race, and 
Hispanic Origin: United States, Selected Years, 1980–2000
Pregnancies
Live Births
15–19 
15–17 
18–19 
15–19 
15–17 
18–19
All women
1980
110.0
 73.2
162.2
 53.0
32.5
 82.1
1985
106.9
 71.1
158.3
 51.0
31.0
 79.6
1988
109.9
 74.1
158.7
 53.0
33.6
 79.9
1990
116.3
 80.3
162.4
 59.9
37.5
 88.6
1991
116.0
 79.5
166.5
 61.8
38.5
 94.0
1995
101.1
 70.7
148.2
 56.0
35.5
 87.7
2000
 84.5
 53.5
129.9
 47.7
26.9
 78.1
Hispanic
1990
155.8
101.0
231.4
100.2
65.8
147.6
1995
151.4
103.0
223.3
 99.3
68.3
145.4
2000
132.0
 83.1
201.7
 87.3
55.5
201.7
Non-Hispanic black
1990
221.3
165.0
295.3
116.2
84.9
157.5
1995
180.1
133.6
253.1
 97.2
70.4
139.2
2000
151.0
100.7
224.5
 79.2
50.1
121.9
Non-Hispanic white
1990
 87.7
 56.5
126.8 
 42.6
23.3
 66.9
1995
 71.8
 46.8
110.8 
 39.3
22.0
 65.2
2000
 56.9
 32.5
 92.8 
 32.6
15.8
 57.5
Source: J. C. Abma, G. M. Martinez, W. D. Mosher, and B. S. Dawson, “Teenagers in the United States: Sexual 
Activity, Contraceptive Use, and Childbearing, 2002,” National Center for Health Statistics, Vital Health Statistics 23 
(24; 2004): 3.
pregnancy and childbearing. Although somewhat dated, these 
are the most recent data available from the federal government on 
these topics. 
 Percentage of High School Students Who Were Currently 
Sexually Active, Who Used a Condom during or Birth 
Control Pills before Last Sexual Intercourse, by Sex, 
Race/Ethnicity, and Grade, 2003 
 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention conducts the 
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), which monitors 
six categories of health-risk behaviors among adolescents, behaviors 

194 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.5
Percentage of High School Students Who Were Currently Sexually Active, Who 
Used a Condom During or Birth Control Pills before Last Sexual Intercourse, by Sex, 
Race/Ethnicity, and Grade, 2003
Currently Sexually Active
Condom Use
Birth Control Pill Use
Category
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Race/ethnicity
White
33.1
28.5
30.8
56.5
69.0
62.5
26.5
17.3
22.3
Black
44.2
54.0
49.0
63.6
81.2
72.8
11.7
 4.4
 7.9
Hispanic
35.8
38.5
37.1
52.3
62.5
57.4
12.1
10.3
11.2
Grade
 9
18.3
24.0
21.2
66.1
71.2
69.0
11.6
6.6
 8.7
10
31.2
30.0
30.6
66.4
71.8
69.0
13.5
11.8
12.7
11
42.9
39.2
41.1
55.5
66.7
60.8
24.1
14.8
19.6
12
51.0
46.5
48.9
48.5
67.0
57.4
27.2
17.5
22.6
Total
34.6
33.8
34.3
57.4
68.8
63.0
20.6
13.1
17.0
Source: Jo Anne Grunbaum et al., “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2003,” MMWR 53 
(SS02; May 21, 2004): table 44.
that contribute to unintentional injuries and violence. One of these 
behaviors is sexual activity. The report on data collected in 2003 pro-
vides information on patterns of sexual behavior, condom use, and 
birth control use among males and females in grades 9 through 12. 
The major findings of that study are shown in Table 6.5. 
 Worldwide Data on HIV/AIDS, 2008 
 In 2008, UNAIDS, the United Nations agency responsible for is-
sues related to the HIV/AIDS epidemic published the most re-
cent statistics on the disease in all countries around the world. 
Table 6.6 below summarizes a small portion of that data, dealing 
with the number of adults and children living with the disease in 
various regions and countries of the world. 
 Estimated Number of Orphans Due to AIDS, 2008 
 One of the great tragedies of the HIV/AIDS epidemic is the num-
ber of children orphaned when both parents die of the disease. 
This problem is especially severe in Africa, for which the follow-
ing data in Table 6.7 are reported. Similar data for other parts of 
the world are generally not available because numbers are rela-
tively small compared to this from Africa. 

TABLE 6.6
Worldwide Data on HIV/AIDS, 2008
Estimated Number of People Living with HIV
Region/country
Adults and Children 2007
Adults and Children 2001
Global
30,000,000–36,700,000 
27,000,000–33,700,000
Sub-Saharan Africa
20,500,000–23,600,000
19,200,000–23,200,000
South Africa
4,900,000–6,600,000
4,000,000–5,500,000
Nigeria
2,000,000–3,200,000
1,700,000–4,200,000
Mozambique
1,300,000–1,700,000
880,000–1,200,000
Tanzania
1,300,000–1,500,000
1,300,000–1,500,000
Zimbabwe
1,200,000–1,400,000
1,800,000–2,000,000
Zambia
1,000,000–1,200,000
870,000–1,000,000
East Asia
480,000–1,100,000
330,000–750,000
China
450,000–1,000,000
320,000–730,000
Oceania
66,000–93,000
19,000–41,000
South and Southeast Asia
3,500,000–5,300,000
3,100,000–5,500,000
India
1,800,000–3,200,000
1,700,000–3,800,000
Thailand
410,000–880,000
490,000–850,000
Vietnam
180,000–470,000
97,000–250,000
Eastern Europe and Central Asia
1,100,000–1,900,000
510,000–1,100,000
Russia
630,000–1,300,000
260,000–860,000
Ukraine
340,000–540,000
180,000–260,000
Western and Central Europe
580,000–1,000,000
490,000–810,000
North Africa and Middle East
280,000–510,000
210,000–400,000
North America
760,000–2,000,000
670,000–1,700,000
United States
690,000–1,900,000
620,000–1,600,000
Caribbean
210,000–270,000
180,000–240,000
Latin America
1,500,000–2,100,000
1,200,000–1,900,000
Brazil
600,000–890,000
520,000–810,000
Mexico
150,000–310,000
130,000–260,000
Colombia
110,000–230,000
96,000–190,000
Children (0–14) 2007
Children (0–14) 2001
Global
1,900,000–2,300,000
1,400,000–2,100,000
Sub–Saharan Africa
1,700,000–2,000,000
1,300,000–1,900,000
South Africa
230,000–320,000
120,000–190,000
Nigeria
170,000–370,000
83,000–580,000
Mozambique
87,000–120,000
41,000–81,000
Tanzania
130,000–150,000
100,000–130,000
Zimbabwe
110,000–140,000
120,000–140,000
Zambia
86,000–110,000
71,000–91,000
East Asia
5,300–11,000
2,500–5,100
Oceania
1,200
<500
South and Southeast Asia
110,000–180,000
50,000–150,000
Thailand
12,000–17,000
7,500–14,000
Eastern Europe and Central Asia
9,100–15,000
2,200–4,800
Western and Central Europe
<1,000–1,800
1,600–3,000
(Continued )

TABLE 6.6
Worldwide data on HIV/AIDS, 2008 (Continued )
Estimated Number of People Living with HIV
Region/country
Children (0–14) 2007
Children (0–14) 2001
North Africa and Middle East
18,000–34,000
8,800–34,000
North America
2,600–7,300
3,400–8,900
Caribbean
9,400–12,000
6,800–10,000
Latin America
37,000–58,000
29,000–56,000
Honduras
1,000–3,000
<1,000–4,000
Source: 2008 Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic (Geneva: UNAIDS, 2008), Annex 1, 214–233. Available at 
http://www.unaids.org/en/KnowledgeCentre/HIVData/GlobalReport/2008/2008_Global_report.asp. Used with 
permission.
TABLE 6.7
Estimated Number of Orphans due to AIDS, 2008
Number of Orphans, Age 0–17
Country
2007
2001
South Africa
1,100,000–1,800,000
260,000–590,000
Nigeria
640,000–4,100,000
110,000–3,400,000
Uganda
1,100,000–1,400,000
910,000–1,300,000
Zimbabwe
920,000–1,100,000
610,000–830,000
Tanzania
850,000–1,100,000
500,000–740,000
Ethiopia
540,000–780,000
220,000–430,000
Zambia
530,000–660,000
290,000–490,000
Malawi
470,000–640,000
150,000–340,000
Côte d’Ivoire
320,000–530,000
100,000–370,000
Mozambique
280,000–590,000
53,000–350,000
Sub–Saharan Africa total
10,600,000–15,300,000
5,600,000–10,000,000
Global total
13,000,000–19,000,000
6,900,000–12,000,000
Source: 2008 Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic (Geneva: UNAIDS, 2008), Annex 1, 218. Available at http://
www.unaids.org/en/KnowledgeCentre/HIVData/GlobalReport/2008/2008_Global_report.asp. Used with 
permission.

197
 7 
 Directory of Organizations, 
 Associations, and Agencies 
 A 
number of governmental and nongovernmental organiza-
tions are interested in one or another of the issues discussed 
in this book: sexually transmitted infections, pregnancy and 
contraception, and/or sexual orientation and gender identity. The 
organizations listed in this chapter are classified in two general 
groups: governmental agencies and nongovernmental agencies. 
For each group, a Web site is provided with a brief discussion of 
the mission and activities of the group. 
 Governmental Agencies 
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
 Web site: http://www.ahrq.gov/ 
 The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality was created 
in December 1989 as the Agency for Health Care Policy and Re-
search, and was renamed the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality in December 1999. The purpose of the agency is to sup-
port research designed to improve the quality, safety, efficiency, 
and effectiveness of health care for all Americans. A subsidiary 
of the agency, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) 
was first convened by the U.S. Public Health Service in 1984 to 
conduct assessments of scientific evidence for the effectiveness of 
various forms of prevention for medical problems. USPSTF was 
incorporated into AHRQ in 1998. In 2008, the task force issued a 
recommendation statement on behavioral counseling to prevent 
sexually transmitted infections. 

198 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 Publications:  USPSTF:  Recommendation statements on a 
number of health issues, including cancer; heart and vascular dis-
eases; infectious diseases; injury and violence; mental health con-
ditions and substance abuse; metabolic, nutritional, and endocrine 
conditions; musculoskeletal disorders; obstetric and gynecologic 
conditions; pediatric disorders; vision and hearing disorders. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
See  Division of STD Prevention
 Division of STD Prevention (DSTDP) Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 
 Web site: http://www.cdc.gov/nchstp/dstd/aboutdiv.htm 
 The Division of STD Prevention has seven goals: to prevent 
STD-related infertility, STD-related adverse outcomes of preg-
nancy, STI-related cancers, and STI-related HIV transmission; 
to strengthen the capacity and infrastructure elements of STD-
 prevention programs; to reduce STD health disparities across and 
within communities and populations; and to address the social 
and economic effects of STDs among specific populations. On 
October 1, 2008, the center published a five-year plan outlining 
its goals and programs for the prevention of sexually transmitted 
diseases in the United States. 
 Publications:  Division of STD Prevention Strategic Plan 2008–
2013 (strategic plan): many fact sheets on specific diseases; many 
brochures on specific diseases; “CDCynergy,” an interactive CD-
ROM program; data and statistics publications; “Sexually Trans-
mitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines 2006” (guidelines). 
 The Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and 
 Reproduction 
 Web site: http://www.kinseyinstitute.org/ 
 The origins of the Kinsey Institute can be traced to 1938 when 
a group of female students at Indiana University asked the uni-
versity to provide a course on marriage. Alfred Kinsey, then pro-
fessor of zoology, was hired to teach that course. Over the years, 
Kinsey expanded his work in the field of human sexuality. Then 
in 1947, he was appointed director of the newly created Institute 
for Sex Research at Indiana. A year later, under the auspices of the 

Governmental Agencies 199
 institute, Kinsey published his now famous book,  Sexual Behavior in 
the Human Male,  followed five years later by his companion work, 
Sexual Behavior in the Human Female . Today, the institute exists in 
two parts, a research-oriented division of Indiana University, and 
a nonprofit Indiana corporation that owns and administers mate-
rials from the institute’s archives. In addition to having research 
functions, the institute is an ongoing source of information about 
a range of issues related to human sexuality, providing a variety 
of educational events in that area. 
 Publications: A number of books, including  The Psychophysi-
ology of Sex, Feminine Persuasion: Art and Essays on Sexuality, Sex 
and Humor: Selections from The Kinsey Institute, Sexual Development 
in Childhood, Researching Sexual Behavior: Methodological Issues;
monographs, such as Kinsey Institute Monograph Series ,  The Kinsey 
Institute Studies in Sex and Society.
 National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) 
 Web site: http://www3.niaid.nih.gov/ 
 The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases began as 
a single laboratory at the Marine Hospital on Staten Island, New 
York, in 1887. It achieved its current status in 1948, when the Na-
tional Institute of Health was redefined as the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH), and NIAID was established as one of the indi-
vidual health institutes within NIH. Today, NIAID conducts and 
supports basic research on the causes, spread, treatment, and cure 
of infectious, immunologic, and allergic diseases. Over the years, 
NIAID research programs have led to a number of new diagnos-
tic tests, vaccines, therapies, and other technologies. The agency’s 
research on sexually transmitted infections focuses on basic re-
search, research on diagnostic methodologies and techniques, the 
development of vaccines and treatment procedures, and addi-
tional studies on prevention programs. 
 Publications: A number of research reports and educational 
materials, such as Topical Microbicides—Preventing Sexually Trans-
mitted Diseases  and  Women’s Health in the U.S.—Research on Health 
Issues Affecting Women ; a large number of news releases on top-
ics such as genomic sequencing of causative agents, adult male 
circumcision in Kenya and Uganda, research on an HIV vaccine, 
initial trials on a herpes vaccine for women, and new diagnostic 
tests for specific STIs. 

200 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 Office of Population Affairs (OPA), Office of Public Health 
and Science, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
 Web site: http://www.hhs.gov/opa/ 
 The Office of Population Affairs is responsible for two programs 
established by the U.S. Congress, the family planning program 
created by Title X of the Public Health Service Act of 1946, as 
amended (Title 42 of the U.S. Code) and the Adolescent Family 
Life program authorized by Title XX of the same act. At the pres-
ent time, OPA is supporting three initiatives in the area of family 
planning and population affairs: (1) Parents Speak Up National 
Campaign, which includes television, radio, print, and outdoor 
advertising, as well as community events encouraging parents to 
talk to their children about delaying sexual activity until they are 
married; (2) HIV Prevention and Integration in Family Planning, 
which provides financial support to clinics for educational, test-
ing, counseling, and other services designed to reduce HIV infec-
tion; and (3) Male Services in Family Planning, whose goal is to 
significantly increase the involvement of males in family planning 
issues.
 Publications: Many free pamphlets and brochures on topics 
such as “What Is Abstinence?” “Parents, Speak Up!” “Teen Chat,” 
and “The Adoption Option”; many reports such as  Healthy People 
2010 ,  Family Planning Annual Report ,  Youth Development Approaches 
in Adolescent Family Life Demonstration Projects , and  Collaborative
Evaluation of Strategies to Encourage Couples-Focused Health Service 
Delivery . 
 United Nations Population Fund (UNPF) 
 Web site: http://www.unfpa.org/public/ 
 The United Nations Population Fund is a subsidiary agency of 
the United Nations (UN) General Assembly. It was established 
as a trust fund (the UN Fund for Population Activities) within 
the UN in 1967 and received its current administrative status in 
1972 and its current name in 1987. The work of UNPF is guided 
by a set of goals established at the 1994 International Conference 
on  Population and Development (ICPD) held in Cairo, Egypt: 
(1) universal access to reproductive health services by 2015; (2) uni-
versal primary education and closing the gender gap in education
by 2015; (3) reducing maternal mortality by 75 percent by 2015; 
(4) reducing infant mortality; (5) increasing life expectancy; 

Governmental Agencies 201
(6)  reducing HIV infection rates. In 2007, UNPF spent just over 
$600 million on hundreds of national and regional projects in 
every developing nation in the world. 
 Publications: Many books, booklets, reports, and other print 
materials on a variety of topics, such as “Three Ones” in Action: 
Where We Are and Where We Go From Here ;  2004 Campaign to End 
Fistula Annual Report ;  24 Tips for Culturally Sensitive Programming: 
Guide to Working from Within ;  A Holistic Approach to the Abandon-
ment of Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting ;  Financing Healthier Lives: 
Empowering Women Through Integration of Microfinance and Health 
Education ;  Contraception: An Investment in Lives, Health and Devel-
opment ;  Sexual & Reproductive Health and HIV Linkages: Evidence Re-
view & Recommendations ;  Addressing Gender-Based Violence: UNFPA 
Strategy and Framework for Action . 
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
See  Office of Population Affairs
 World Health Organization (WHO) 
 Web site: http://www.who.int/ 
 The World Health Organization is the lead health agency for the 
United Nations. It is responsible for setting norms and standards 
for health policies and practices around the world, for providing 
leadership on global health issues, for fashioning the agenda for 
research on health problems, for collecting data and statistics and 
assessing health trends, and for providing technical support to 
nations on health issues. WHO’s primary programmatic focus 
in the area of sexually transmitted infections is its program for 
controlling sexually transmitted and reproductive tract infections. 
Two major emphases of this program are the elimination of con-
genital syphilis and the general improvement of the reproduc-
tive health of men and women around the world. The outlines of 
this program are set out in a report adopted by the World Health 
Assembly between 2002 and 2006, Strategy for the Prevention and 
Control of Sexually Transmitted Infections . In addition to providing 
a host of publications, WHO offers technical information on the 
prevention of sexually transmitted infections, on the care of STIs, 
and on other related topics. 
 Publications: “Sexually Transmitted Infections” (fact sheet); 
“Effectiveness of Male Latex Condoms” (fact sheet); a number of 
books, including Training Modules for the Syndromic Management of 

202 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
Sexually Transmitted Infections ;  Comprehensive Cervical Cancer Con-
trol: A Guide to Essential Practice ;  The Interagency List of Essential 
Medicines for Reproductive Health ;  Sexually Transmitted and Other 
Reproductive Tract Infections—A Guide to Essential Practice ;  Inte-
grated Management of Adolescent and Adult Illness , and  Sexual and 
Reproductive Health of Women Living with HIV/AIDS.
 Nongovernmental Agencies 
 Abortion Access Project (AAP) 
 Web site: http://www.abortionaccess.org/ 
 The Abortion Access Project was founded in 1992 by a group of 
physicians and social justice advocates who were concerned about 
the increasingly violent activities of antiabortion activists attempt-
ing to reduce women’s access to abortion services. While the orga-
nization continues to pursue its traditional goal of ensuring that all 
women have access to abortion services, it has also expanded its 
mission to finding common ground among a wide range of orga-
nizations and individuals with very different stances on the legiti-
macy of abortion. The five major initiatives currently supported 
by AAP are the Rural Abortion Provider Initiative, which attempts 
to make abortion services more readily available for women in 
rural settings; the Least Access States Initiative, which focuses on a 
handful of states in which abortion services are least readily avail-
able; the Low Income Access Initiative, which attempts to improve 
health care services for low-income pregnant women; the Abor-
tion Education and Training Initiative, which attempts to expand 
the number of professional training programs in which abortion 
services are taught; and the Advanced Practice Clinicians pro-
gram, which works to train a group of health care workers known 
as advanced practice clinicians to perform abortion services. 
 Publications: Fact sheets; Web site links to a number of ar-
ticles, reports, news releases, and other publications on abortion 
topics.
 Abstinence the Better Choice (ABC) 
 Web site: http://www.abstinencebetterchoice.com/ 
 Abstinence the Better Choice is located in Akron, Ohio, where 
it operates two abstinence programs, Responsible Social Values 

Nongovernmental Agencies 203
Program (RSVP) and Concerned About Teen Sexuality (C.A.T.S.), 
which are used in the four-county area around Akron. In addition 
to supplying these two curricula, the organization offers training 
sessions for teachers who use the programs in their schools. 
 Publications:  Responsible Social Values Program; Concerned 
About Teen Sexuality (both curricula). 
 Advocates for Youth 
 Web site: http://www.advocatesforyouth.org/ 
 Advocates for Youth was established in 1980 as the Center for 
Population Options. Its objective was to help young people make 
informed and responsible decisions about their reproductive and 
sexual health. The organization frames its activities within a con-
cept known as the 3Rs, for rights, respect, and responsibilities. In 
its three-decade history, the organization has achieved a number 
of successes, including cosponsoring the First Inter-Africa Confer-
ence on Adolescent Reproductive Health in 1992; working with 
the entertainment industry to promote positive and accurate im-
ages about adolescent reproductive and sexual health on televi-
sion programs; establishing the International Clearinghouse on 
Adolescent Fertility in 1980; creating an innovative sex education 
program, Life Planning Education, in 1983 that puts sexual issues 
into a youth development context; and attempting to deal with 
issues of consistently high rates of teen pregnancy, HIV/AIDS, 
and other sexually transmitted infections among Latino popula-
tions by way of a program called the Spanish Language Media 
Initiative.
 Publications:  Programs That Work  (report); lesson plans for 
elementary, middle school, and high school students; pamphlets 
for young people; policy briefs; posters and poster cards; many re-
ports, manuals, and monographs; The Facts  (a series of more than 
60 fact sheets); From Research to Practice  (27 short essays on a vari-
ety of topics); Issues at a Glance  (39 essays on a variety of topics). 
Many publications are available in Spanish and French. 
 American Association of Sex Educators, Counselors and 
Therapists (AASECT) 
 Web site: http://www.aasect.org/ 
 The American Association of Sex Educators, Counselors, and Ther-
apists is a professional organization of sex educators, counselors 

204 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
and therapists; physicians and nurses; social workers; psycholo-
gists; allied health professionals; clergy members; lawyers; soci-
ologists; marriage and family counselors and therapists; family 
planning specialists and researchers; and students of these and re-
lated professional disciplines. One major focus of the organization’s 
work is providing services to its membership, such as continuing 
education courses in various topics in human sexuality, as well as 
online tests for professional credit. AASECT also helps to connect 
professionals in the field with potential clients, and vice versa. The 
organization holds an annual conference for all  members. 
 Publications: On its Web site, the organization provides a list 
of articles and books by members that are available through third-
party sources. 
 American Sexually Transmitted Diseases Association (ASTDA) 
 Web site: http://depts.washington.edu/astda/ 
 The American Sexually Transmitted Diseases Association is an 
organization focused on research on sexually transmitted infec-
tions with the goal of reducing and eventually eradicating these 
diseases and disseminating information about STIs. ASTDA also 
recognizes the work of researchers in the field of STIs with three 
annual awards: the Thomas A. Parran Award, the Achievement 
Award, and the Young Investigator Award. 
 Publications:  Sexually Transmitted Diseases (journal) 
 American Social Health Association (ASHA) 
 Web site: http://www.ashastd.org/ 
 The American Social Health Association was founded in 1914 to 
provide patients, health care providers, policymakers, and the 
general public with accurate and reliable information on sexu-
ally transmitted diseases. The organization provides two special 
web sites with information on STDs for teenagers, one in Eng-
lish and one in Spanish. The former is called IwannaKnow.org, at 
http://www.iwannaknow.org/, and the latter is Quierosaber.org, 
at http://www.quierosaber.org/. The ASHA Web site also has a 
special page devoted to information for parents who want to talk 
with their children about sexually transmitted diseases. Two spe-
cial sections of the organization’s Web page also have informa-
tion and resources on two specific infections, the Herpes Resource 
Center and the HPV Resource Center. 

Nongovernmental Agencies 205
 Publications:  State of the Nation Report 2005: Challenges Fac-
ing STD Prevention in Youth  (report);  “STI Fact Sheets”; many 
pamphlets, such as “What You Need to Know about STIs,” “Get 
Tested,” “Gonorrhea: Common Disease, Simple Cure,” and “Hep-
atitis: Knowing the Differences Between A, B, and C”; and books 
such as Managing Herpes: Living & Loving with HSV  and  Hooking
Up: A Girl’s All-out Guide to Sex and Sexuality.
 Association of Reproductive Health Professionals (ARHP) 
 Web site: http://www.arhp.org/ 
 The Association of Reproductive Health Professionals was 
founded in 1963 as the education arm of the Planned Parenthood 
Federation of America. It was incorporated as an independent 
organization in 1972. Its primary goal has always been and still 
is education, developing information on reproductive health is-
sues that is soundly based in scientific data. The organization 
carries out its objectives by providing speakers on a variety of 
topics, such as “Breaking the Contraceptive Barrier: Techniques 
for Effective Contraceptive Consultations,” “A Case-Based Ap-
proach for Addressing Hormonal Contraception,” “Choosing a 
Birth Control Method,” “A Clinical Update on Intrauterine Con-
traception,” “Environmental Impacts on Reproductive Health,” 
“Evidence-Based Diagnoses and Treatment of Fibromyalgia,” and 
“Managing HPV: A New Era in Patient Care.” It also offers ongo-
ing educational programs for the training and updating of profes-
sionals in reproductive health care; works to develop and expand 
curricula in the field of reproductive health care; and conducts an 
annual convention for professionals in the field. 
 Publications:  Clinical Proceedings  (monograph series);  Contra-
ception: An International Reproductive Health Journal ;  Quick Reference 
Guide for Clinicians  (guides on a variety of topics, such as “Manag-
ing HPV: A New Era in Patient Care,” “Managing Premenstrual 
Symptoms,” “Manual Vacuum Aspiration,” and “Non-Hormonal 
Contraceptive Methods’; clinical fact sheets; Clinical Practice Tools
(forms, charts, tool kits, etc.); studies and surveys; brochures for 
patients (“Facts about Emergency Contraception,” “Understand-
ing the HPV Vaccine,” “How a Woman’s Reproductive System 
Works,” etc.) 
 AVERT 
 Web site: http://www.avert.org/ 

206 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 AVERT was founded in 1986 in the United Kingdom, where its 
main offices are still based, as the AIDS Education and Research 
Trust. Its goal is to reduce the rate of HIV infection and AIDS 
diseases throughout the world, but especially in nations with 
very high rates of HIV/AIDS disease. It currently is operating a 
number of projects in India, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, 
Uganda, and Zambia. The organization is funded by public dona-
tions and from an endowment established by Annabel Kanabus, 
daughter of the founder of the J. Sainsbury supermarket chain. 
AVERT’s Web page has an extensive amount of information on 
sexual issues, especially with relationship to adolescents. 
 Publications: None 
 Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health 
 Web site: http://bixbycenter.ucsf.edu/ 
 The Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health was founded 
in 1999 to address the health, social, and economic consequences 
of sex and reproduction through research and training in con-
traception, family planning, and sexually transmitted infections. 
Goals of the organization are to increase the range of choices in 
contraception, abortion, maternal health, and treatment of sexu-
ally transmitted infections through the use of new reproductive 
technologies; improve the understanding of the factors that lead 
to unwanted adolescent pregnancies and STIs with the objec-
tive of improving adolescent reproductive health; develop and 
evaluate new technologies that will lead to a decrease in mater-
nal mortality associated with childbirth and pregnancy; evalu-
ate national policies to find ways of improving access for men 
and women to reproductive health care information and tech-
nology; train practitioners, researchers, and decision-makers in 
the United States and other countries of the world on issues of 
reproductive health care; and provide information and techni-
cal assistance to stakeholders on reproductive health care issues. 
The Bixby Center is a division of the Department of Obstetrics, 
Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences at the University of Cali-
fornia, San Francisco. 
 Publications: Briefs, fact sheets, monographs, visual presen-
tations.
 BOMA-USA 
 Web site: http://www.boma-usa.org/ 

Nongovernmental Agencies 207
 BOMA is an acronym for Billings Ovulation Method Association, 
an organization formed to promote a method of natural birth con-
trol developed by Australian physicians Lyn and John Billings in 
the 1950s. The method is based on a woman’s ability to detect and 
act on certain natural signs of her reproductive state, allowing 
her to be sexually active or inactive, depending on whether she 
wishes to become pregnant or not. The organization offers train-
ing sessions in the Billings method and provides access to a list of 
instructors in all 50 states through its Web site. 
 Publications: None 
 Catholics for Choice (CFC) 
 Web site: http://www.catholicsforchoice.org/ 
 Catholics for Choice was formed in 1973 to provide a voice for 
members of the Roman Catholic Church who believe that women 
have the right to follow their own conscience in matters of repro-
ductive health and pregnancy, whether that decision corresponds 
to the teachings of the church or not. Much of the organization’s 
work is categorized into the fields of abortion, contraception, 
Catholic health care, sexuality, Catholicism, public policy, and 
international affairs. The organization currently sponsors four 
major campaigns: “Condoms4Life,” “Catholics in Public Life,” 
“Prevention Not Prohibition,” and “The See Change Campaign.” 
An Action Center on the organization’s Web site provides a vari-
ety of ways in which interested individuals can become active in 
the work of Catholics for Choice. 
 Publications:  Conscience  (magazine);  Opinion Polls (topics 
covered include sexual behavior and reproductive health, contra-
ception, prevention of HIV and AIDS, and the Catholic vote in 
2004); Conservative Catholic Influence in Europe  series; fact sheets 
and brochures. 
 Center for Reproductive Rights (CRC) 
 Web site: http://reproductiverights.org/ 
 The Center for Reproductive Rights was established in 1992 to use 
the law to ensure that governments around the world recognize 
that reproductive freedom is a fundamental human right. The or-
ganization’s work is currently focused on seven core issues: abor-
tion, the rights of young people, censorship, contraception, safe 
and healthy pregnancy, HIV/AIDS, and funding for  reproductive 

208 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
health care. CRC advances its causes in appearances before vari-
ous groups affiliated with the United Nations, as advocates in 
court cases, and in meetings with public policymakers. It also 
provides training sessions for attorneys in special issues related 
to reproductive rights. Through its Law School Initiative, the CRC 
attempts to educate and motivate attorneys to the special issues 
raised around the topic of reproductive rights. 
 Publications: Books and reports such as  Maternal Mortality in 
India: Using International and Constitutional Law to Promote Account-
ability and Change ,  Federal Policy Agenda ,  At Risk: Rights Violations 
of HIV-Positive Women in Kenyan Health Facilities ,  Gender-Based
Violence Laws in Sub-Saharan Africa ,  Imposing Misery: The Impact of 
Manila’s Contraception Ban on Women and Families, What If Roe Fell?
and Beyond the Law: Justice and Gender in Latin America ; briefing 
papers; fact sheets; shadow letters and reports (letters and reports 
that follow up on official reports). 
 Centre for Development and Population Activities (CEDPA) 
 Web site: http://www.cedpa.org/ 
 The Centre for Development and Population Activities was 
founded in 1975 for the purpose of improving the lives of women 
and girls in developing countries around the world. The three 
major goals of CEDPA are to improve educational opportunities 
for women and girls; to ensure access to information about repro-
ductive health and the HIV/AIDS epidemic; and to strengthen 
the role of women in leadership positions in developing nations. 
Three recent projects designed to meet the second of these goals 
have been the USAID/Positive Living project, designed to im-
prove the quality of living of people living with AIDS in Nigeria; 
the Indefinite Quantity Contracts project, which helps provide 
funding and support for region-specific health-related problems, 
improving access to neonatal, maternal, and women’s health clin-
ics and the development of technical assistance resource centers; 
and the USAID/Health Policy Initiative, aimed at improving 
health care services for women across the developing world. 
 Publications: Research reports such as  Adolescent Girls in India 
Choose a Better Future: An Impact Assessment  and  Adolescent Sex-
ual and Reproductive Health Behavior in Dodowa, Ghana ; briefs and 
fact sheets such as “Advocacy for Girls’ Education (Egypt)” and 
“CEDPA in India: Program Highlights”; press releases; CEDPA 
e-News.

Nongovernmental Agencies 209
 Concerned Women for America (CWA) 
 Web site: http://cwfa.org/main.asp 
 Concerned Women for America was founded in 1978 by Beverly 
LaHaye in response to her concerns about issues raised by spokes-
persons for the feminist movement, such as Betty Friedan. One 
of the group’s earliest campaigns was in opposition to the Equal 
Rights Amendment, which would have provided legal protection 
for the rights of all Americans, regardless of their gender. The or-
ganization’s mission is to bring biblical principles to bear on all 
aspects of public policy in the United States. The six core issues 
that form the focus of CWA activities at the present time are op-
position to same-sex marriage, opposition to most forms of con-
traception and all forms of abortion, returning authority for the 
education of children to their parents from public schools, bring-
ing about a ban on all pornography and obscenity, removal of any 
federal restrictions on the practice of religion in public life, and 
preventing the United Nations or any other international agency 
from having sovereignty over American citizens and activities. In 
recent campaigns, CWA has advocated against the extension of 
hate crimes legislation to individuals on the basis of sexual orien-
tation, the expansion of stem cell research funding, and the Free-
dom of Choice Act dealing with abortion. 
 Publications: Books by Beverly LaHaye and Tim LaHaye 
and coauthors, such as The New Spirit-Controlled Woman ,  Season
of Blessing ,  Seasons under Heaven , and  Showers in Season ; brochures 
(“What Your Teacher Didn’t Tell You About Abstinence,” “How 
to Lobby From Your Home,” “Pro-Life Action Guide,” “A Pain-
ful Choice: Abortion’s Link to Breast Cancer,” “High-Tech ‘Birth 
Control’: Health Care or Health Risk?” “Why Children Need Fa-
thers: Five Critical Trends,” etc.); fact cards (“2009 Issues Alert,” 
“Freedom of Choice Act,” “Freedom of Conscience,” “‘Gays’ in 
the Military,” etc.). 
 Contraceptive Research and Development 
Program (CONRAD) 
 Web site: http://www.conrad.org/ 
 The Contraceptive Research and Development Program was es-
tablished in 1986 at Eastern Virginia Medical School with funding 
from the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). 
CONRAD also receives funding from the National Institute of 

210 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
Child Health and Human Development, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, the National Institute of Allergy and In-
fectious Diseases, and private foundations. CONRAD’s mission 
is to develop safe, acceptable, and affordable contraceptive prod-
ucts that also prevent the spread of sexually transmitted infec-
tions, such as HIV/AIDS. The agency is engaged at every stage of 
the development of these products, from initial research to clinical 
testing to commercial development and distribution of products 
to training of workers needed to make best use of these products. 
In 1995, CONRAD established the Consortium for Industrial 
Collaboration in Contraceptive Research “to help revitalize the 
pharmaceutical industry’s commitment to developing new con-
traceptives.” The consortium focuses on research and develop-
ment in three priority areas: male methods, monthly methods for 
women, and vaginal methods that prevent pregnancy and sexu-
ally transmitted infections (STIs). 
 Publications: Biennial reports;  Manual for the Standardization 
of Colposcopy for the Evaluation of Vaginal Products: Update 2004 ; re-
ports on a number of workshops on topics such as “Vaginal Mi-
crobicide Formulations”; “Pharmacology, Biology, and  Clinical 
Applications of Androgens: Current Status and Future Pros-
pects”; “Contraceptive Research and Development: Looking to 
the Future”; “Barrier Contraceptives: Current Status and Future 
Prospects”; and “Heterosexual Transmission of AIDS.” 
 Couple to Couple League (CCL) 
 Web site: http://ccli.org/ 
 The Couple to Couple League is an international nonprofit Roman 
Catholic organization created to promote the use of natural family 
planning techniques as an alternative to the use of contraceptive 
technologies and abortion. The organization was founded in 1971 
in response to a suggestion by Pope Paul VI that married couples 
help other married couples to learn about and make use of natural 
family planning methods. CCL’s three objectives are to provide 
a nationwide and organized method for delivering natural fam-
ily planning technologies; to provide scientific, technical, moral, 
and religious instruction in the use of these technologies; and to 
train volunteer married couples as counselors and teachers of the 
technologies.
 Publications: Press releases, podcasts, reports of past conven-
tions, media kit, Family Foundations (magazine). 

Nongovernmental Agencies 211
 EngenderHealth 
 Web site: http://www.engenderhealth.org/ 
 EngenderHealth was founded in 1943 for the purpose of expand-
ing access to sterilization procedures—vasectomies and tubal li-
gations, primarily—for men and women in the United States. In 
1962, the initial voluntary organization was formally constituted 
as the Association for Voluntary Sterilization. In 1984, it changed 
its name again to the Association for Voluntary Surgical Contra-
ception, and in 2001, to its present name of EngenderHealth. In 
1966, the organization first initiated efforts to expand its services 
to nations outside the United States, a program that has since 
become a major focus of its work. Over the past few decades, 
EngenderHealth has significantly expanded its program to in-
clude helping women give birth to healthy babies, preventing the 
spread of HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections, 
and working with stakeholders to expand the variety of repro-
ductive options available to women. 
 Publications:  EngenderHealth Update  (quarterly newsletter); 
a variety of training curricula, clinical guidelines, instructional 
videos, brochures, working papers, and articles on topics such as 
family planning; HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections; 
maternal health; counseling, informed choice, and informed con-
sent; improving clinical quality; and promoting gender equity. 
 Family Health International (FHI) 
 Web site: http://www.fhi.org/ 
 Family Health International is a research organization whose goal is 
to increase access to high quality, affordable reproductive health care 
for people around the world; to prevent sexually transmitted infec-
tions, including HIV/AIDS; to stop the spread of malaria, tubercu-
losis, and similar infectious diseases; and to promote the health and 
well-being of youth. The organization had its start as a contracep-
tive research project at the University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill in 1971 and, with a grant from the U.S. Agency for International 
Development, became an independent nonprofit organization, the 
International Fertility Research Program (IFRP), in 1975. In 1982, 
it changed its name to Family Health International. FHI currently 
operates research program in areas of its interests in 40 countries. 
Examples of its projects include the Aastha Project, an HIV/AIDS 
program in Maharashtra, India; The Tomorrow Project, a  worldwide 

212 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
project designed to strengthen and improve family life; and TBCTA, 
an international program for the control of tuberculosis. 
 Publications:  Family Health Research  (newsletter);  The Guyana 
HIV/AIDS Reduction and Prevention Project (GHARP) 2004-2009
(report);  Guidance for Nurse Prescription and Management of Antiret-
roviral Therapy  (booklet);  Network  (quarterly bulletin); many books 
and reports, such as  Partnering for Care in HIV Prevention Trials—A 
How-To Manual ,  Strategy for the Integration of Family Planning and 
HIV Voluntary Counselling and Testing Services,  and  Health Out-
comes Research: How Can It Assist Decision-Making for the Prevention 
of Cervical Cancer and Other HPV Disease in Asia and the Pacific?
 Family Research Council (FRC) 
 URL: http://www.frc.org/ 
 The Family Research Council was founded in 1983 to promote the 
traditional family and traditional marriage. It pursues its work 
through a number of venues, including books, pamphlets, and 
other kinds of publications; testimony before a variety of legisla-
tive bodies; analysis and review of legal and policy documents 
with the potential for impacting marriage and the family; and ap-
pearances in public debates and discussions. Among the topics 
that FRC lists as of special concern are “Human Sexuality,” with 
specific emphasis on abstinence and sexual health and homosexu-
ality, and “Human Life,” which includes abortion and women’s 
health.
 Publications: Press releases, op-eds, and blog available online 
at Web site. 
 Focus on the Family 
 URL: http://www.focusonthefamily.com/ 
 Focus on the Family is a Christian organization that attempts to 
follow biblical principles in nurturing and defending the (hetero-
sexual) family. It generally tends to oppose any definition of the 
family other than one consisting of one man, one woman, and 
one or more children. The guiding principles under which the 
organization operates is the preeminence of an evangelical inter-
pretation of the Bible, the importance of a permanent marriage be-
tween one man and one woman, the value of children to a family, 
the sanctity of human life, the importance of social responsibility, 
and the confirmation of clearly defined male and female roles in 

Nongovernmental Agencies 213
a family. Among the topics in which the organization is interested 
are premarital sexual relationships, sex and intimacy, child devel-
opment, abstinence, and sexual identity. Articles about all of these 
topics are available on the organization’s Web site. 
 Publications:  Citizen  magazine; the organization’s primary 
news and issue analysis outlet is the Web site CitizenLink at 
http://www.citizenlink.org/citizenmag/. 
 Guttmacher Institute (GI) 
 Web site: http://www.guttmacher.org/ 
 The Guttmacher Institute was founded in 1968 as a semiautono-
mous division of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, 
at least partly in response to a growing national and international 
concern about the growth of unplanned and unwanted pregnan-
cies in the United States and around the world. The mission of the 
organization was “to provide a factual basis for the development 
of sound governmental policies and for public consideration of the 
sensitive issues involved in the promotion of reproductive health 
and rights,” a mission it retains to this day. The institute provides 
reports, policy reviews and analyses, and other resources on top-
ics such as abortion, adolescence, pregnancy, sexually transmitted 
infections, sex and relationships, and technology and bioethics. 
Much of its work now falls into four major programmatic areas: 
Protecting the Next Generation: Adolescent Sexual and Repro-
ductive Health; Adding it Up: Sexual and Reproductive Health 
Services and Financing; Rights and Responsibilities: Healthy 
Pregnancies, Contraception and Abortion ; and Healthy Sexual-
ity: Relationships. 
 Publications:  Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health
(periodical); International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive 
Health  (periodical);  Guttmacher Policy Review  (periodical); media 
kits; fact sheets; State Policies in Brief (reviews of state policies on 
issues related to sexuality and reproductive rights);  In Brief (brief-
ing papers); reports; statistical reviews; slide shows. 
 International Consortium on Emergency Contraception (ICEC) 
 Web site: http://www.cecinfo.org/ 
 The International Consortium on Emergency Contraception was 
formed in 1995 as a way of better informing women around the 
world about postcoital methods of contraception. The original 

214 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
members of the consortium were the Concept Foundation, In-
ternational Planned Parenthood Federation, Pacific Institute for 
Women’s Health, Pathfinder International, Program for Appropri-
ate Technology in Health, Population Council, and World Health 
Organization Special Programme of Research, Development, and 
Research Training in Human Reproduction. Today, a total of 42 
nongovernmental organizations are members of the consortium. 
The five major areas of interest to the organization today are emer-
gency contraception and youth, legal issues related to emergency 
contraception, products and access, science and technical infor-
mation, and the use of emergency contraceptives in times of crisis 
(as in wars and civil unrest). The ICEC Web site provides access 
to a large number of articles about emergency contraception, to 
information about the status and availability of emergency con-
traceptive technologies, and to publications of the organization. 
 Publications: Policy statements; advocacy materials;  The Emer-
gency Contraception Newsletter  (online newsletter); programmatic 
resources (e.g.,  Medical and Service Delivery Guidelines ,  Framework
for Introducing EC, Adapting Resource Materials for Local Use ). 
 International Society for Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases Research (ISSTDR) 
 Web site: http://www.isstdr.org/ 
 http://www.congrexnetwork.com/dbs/isstdr/cndbz.cfm. 
 The purpose of the International Society for Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases Research is to promote research on sexually transmitted 
infections. The organization’s primary activity is a biennial con-
ference on STIs, held alternately in Europe and North America. 
Among the topics discussed at these meetings are HIV infections 
and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; microbiology; 
virology; immunobiology; pathogenesis; clinical sciences; social 
and behavioral sciences; epidemiology; prevention; and research 
in health services, public health, and prevention policy. 
 Publications: None 
 International Union against Sexually Transmitted 
Infections (IUSTI) 
 Web site: http://www.iusti.org/ 
 The International Union against Sexually Transmitted Infec-
tions is the oldest international organization working to foster 

Nongovernmental Agencies 215
 international cooperation in controlling the spread of sexually 
transmitted infections. Membership in IUSTI is open to individu-
als on a full or associate basis and to organizations and commer-
cial sponsors. The organization sponsors annual international 
conferences, as well as regional and international conferences and 
other meetings on specific topics such as HIV/AIDS, the papillo-
mavirus, neisseria vaccines, and clinical microbiology and infec-
tious diseases. 
 Publications:  International Journal of STD & AIDS ;  Sexual
Health—The Official Journal of IUSTI—Asia-Pacific . 
 Ipas 
 Web site: http://www.ipas.org/ 
 Ipas was formed in 1973 as the International Pregnancy Advisory 
Services to help in establishing family planning and abortion 
clinics in 11 developing countries. In the early 1980s, the orga-
nization expanded its mission to include women’s health care 
issues in general. Today, the organization continues to work to 
expand the availability of abortion and reproductive health care 
services for women around the world, but also takes a broader 
approach to such issues by carrying out and sponsoring research, 
educating women about healthcare issues and options, advocat-
ing for a greater role of women in determining their own health 
options, working with youth on adolescent and health care is-
sues, and working against sexual violence. The basic principle 
behind the organization’s work is that “no woman should have 
to risk her life or health because she lacks safe reproductive 
health choices.” 
 Publications: A large collection of publications, available by 
language and by region of the world, is listed on the organiza-
tion’s Web site at http://www.ipas.org/Publications/Index.aspx. 
 Kaiser Family Foundation 
 Web site: http://www.kff.org/ 
 The Kaiser Family Foundation was established in 1948 by indus-
trialist Henry J. Kaiser and his wife, Bess, with the goal of meeting 
“the unmet health care needs of the citizenry.” The foundation 
currently has an endowment of about a half billion dollars and 
an annual operating budget of about $40 million. Its primary pro-
grammatic areas are health reform, Medicaid and the Children’s 

216 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
Health Insurance Program, Medicare, medical and insurance costs, 
insurance coverage and the uninsured, state policies, prescription 
drugs, HIV/AIDS, U.S. global health policy, minority health is-
sues, women’s health policy, and media and health issues. 
 Publications: Charts and data; fact sheets; issue briefs; news 
releases; reports and studies (e.g.,  2009 National ADAP Monitoring 
Project Annual Report ,  Health Care and Medicaid—Weathering the Re-
cession ,  New, Updated Resources on Community Health Centers ,  How
Is The Primary Care Safety Net Faring in Massachusetts? Community 
Health Centers In The Midst of Health Reform ,  The Future of Health 
Care Journalism ,  Women and Health Care—A National Profile ,  Sex on 
TV: TV Sex is Getting Safer ); surveys; testimonies; video and audio 
productions. 
 NARAL—Pro-Choice America 
 Web site: http://www.prochoiceamerica.org/ 
 NARAL was founded in 1969 as the National Association for the 
Repeal of Abortion Laws. Four years later it changed its name to 
the National Abortion Rights Action League, and in 2003, it as-
sumed its present name of NARAL Pro-Choice America. The or-
ganization describes itself as “the leading national advocate for 
personal privacy and a woman’s right to choose.” NARAL’s cur-
rent efforts are organized around four main issues: abortion, birth 
control, sex education, and women of color. Under the rubric of 
abortions, the organization works for access to abortions, an end 
to abortion bans, and access to the drug RU486. The birth control 
program focuses on emergency contraception, family planning 
services, access to prescription birth control materials, and in-
surance coverage for such materials. The sex education program 
pushes for greater access to sex education for all children, and the 
women of color program addresses the special health problems 
confronting this section of the population. 
 Publications:  Choice and Change  (electronic newsletter); many 
press releases, all available online. 
 National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy 
 Web site: http://www.thenationalcampaign.org/ 
 The National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Preg-
nancy was founded in 1996 with the goal of reducing such 
pregnancies by one-third during the decade from 1996 to 2005. 

Nongovernmental Agencies 217
Having (probably) met that goal, the organization has set its 
next objective as reducing teen and unwanted pregnancies by 
an additional third over the next decade, from 2006 to 2015. 
Among the organization’s activities in pursuit of this goal are 
developing, producing, and disseminating a wide range of edu-
cational and informational materials; cooperating with policy-
makers, members of the news media, governmental officials, 
and other individuals and organizations to change the way the 
public thinks about teen and unwanted pregnancies; promot-
ing responsible and healthy relationships among individuals 
and their attitudes toward family planning; offering personal 
visits, technical assistance, conference presentations, and other 
efforts to assist state and community groups working on teen 
and unwanted pregnancies; working with parents to help them 
understand their role in reducing teen pregnancies; and partner-
ing with a variety of entertainment media to ensure that preven-
tion messages are included in their work. The organization also 
works directly with teenagers, more than three million of whom 
have taken part in the group’s online National Day to Prevent 
Teen Pregnancy. 
 Publications: Many fact sheets on topics such as abstinence, 
contraception, effective programs, foster care, males and father-
hood, parents and families, public policy, race and ethnicity, teen 
birthrates, teen pregnancy rates, teen sexual behavior and activity, 
and unplanned pregnancy; many reports on topics such as ado-
lescent behavior, the African American community, boys/young 
men, effective program research, faith and religion, girls/young 
women, marriage and healthy relationships, sexual abuse, and 
teen pregnancy costs and connections to other issues. 
 National Right to Life (NRL) 
 Web site: http://www.nrlc.org/ 
 The National Right to Life Committee was founded in 1973, a few 
months after the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in  Roe v. Wade.
Today, the organization has grown to more than 3,000 chapters 
in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In addition to its 
primary campaign in opposition to abortion, NRL is also inter-
ested in other issues, such as medical ethics, euthanasia, health 
care reform, Medicare, and human cloning. An important aspect 
of NRL’s work is an effort to influence federal legislation on abor-
tion and related issues. Its Web page on “Federal Legislation” 

218 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
provides an ongoing record of its work in this field. The organiza-
tion also sponsors the summer National Right to Life Academy, 
designed to train young people to continue the battle against the 
legalization of abortion. 
 Publications:  National Right to Life News  (newsletter);  Today’s 
News and Views  (daily online news update);  NRL Communications 
Blog ;  Pro-Life Perspective  (online news and commentary); press 
 releases. 
 National Women’s Health Resource Center (NWHRC) 
 Web site: http://www.healthywomen.org/ 
 The National Women’s Health Resource Center was founded 
by Dr. Violet Bowen-Hugh in 1986 for the purpose of providing 
women with up-to-date and accurate information about health 
issues of interest and concern to them. Its current online library 
contains information on more than 100 such topics, including 
bacterial vaginosis, birth control pills, chlamydia, genital herpes, 
human papillomavirus, infertility, pregnancy, sexual dysfunction, 
trichomoniasis, and urinary tract infections. The organization’s 
Web site is divided into a number of “health centers” on top-
ics such as diabetes, midlife health, reproductive health, sexual 
health, pelvic health, heart health, living well and aging well, 
breast health, and pregnancy and parenting. 
 Publications: Fast Facts, two-page information sheets on 
dozens of health topics; Women’s Health Updates, short book-
lets on a variety of topics; Guides, booklet-size publications on 
a variety of topics; Healthy Women Take 10  (newsletter);  National 
Women’s Health Report  (irregular newsletter on health topics of 
current interest);  Questions to Ask  (one-page information sheets 
on health topics); miscellaneous publications on a variety of 
health topics. 
 Pharmacy Access Partnership 
 Web site: http://www.pharmacyaccess.org/ 
 Pharmacy Access Partnership was founded in California in 1999 
to expand consumer access to contraceptive materials and de-
vices and reproductive health services at local pharmacies. It has 
a four-fold mission in this regard, namely to (1) develop and put 
into practice new policies; (2) advance new practices in pharma-
cies and clinics; (3) create more educational opportunities for 

Nongovernmental Agencies 219
 consumers in pharmacies; and (4) promote greater public aware-
ness of reproductive health practices and opportunities. Currently, 
the organization provides access to emergency contraceptives for 
consumers in more than 90 percent of the state’s 58 counties and 
information about reproductive health practices in 11 languages. 
Pharmacy Access Partnership also sponsors the Youth-Friendly 
Pharmacy Initiative (YFPI), a program designed to make the in-
formation and materials available at local pharmacies more acces-
sible to young women and men. 
 Publications:  National Survey on Attitudes and Interest for Phar-
macy Access for Hormonal Contraception Among Women at Risk for 
Unintended Pregnancy  (report); scholarly articles in peer-reviewed 
journals; news releases. 
 Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA) 
 Web site: http://www.plannedparenthood.org/ 
 Planned Parenthood was founded in 1916 when Margaret Sanger, 
her sister, and a friend opened the nation’s first birth control 
clinic in Brooklyn, New York. Today, the organization provides a 
very wide array of services in the fields of abortion, birth control, 
emergency contraception, family planning, men’s sexual health, 
pregnancy, sexual identity and sexual orientation, teenage sexual 
health issues, and women’s sexual health. Some areas in which 
Planned Parenthood is currently working are political activism on 
behalf of sexual and women’s issues, birth control, abortion, fam-
ily planning, health care reform, medical privacy, international 
health issues, and sex education issues. The organization pro-
vides health and educational services and advocates on a number 
of issues related to human sexuality. It carries out much of its mis-
sion through 97 affiliated organizations in the United States and 
around the world. 
 Publications: A series of podcasts on topics such as “Hang-
ing Out with Herpes,” “The Anal Sex Show,” “Benefits of Sex,” 
and “Tales of Dating”; research reports on topics such as “The 
Health Benefits of Sexual Expression,” “A History of Birth Control 
Methods,” and “Masturbation—From Stigma to Sexual Health”; 
a variety of teaching materials that include curricula, classroom 
materials, and evaluation materials. 
 Population Action International (PAI) 
 Web site: http://www.populationaction.org/ 

220 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 Population Action International was founded in 1965 as an inter-
national nonprofit organization seeking to provide information 
about and access to sexual and reproductive health with the long-
term goal of reducing the number of people in the world who 
are living in poverty. The three major aspects of PAI’s work are 
research, advocacy, and communication. The six primary issues 
on which PAI is currently focusing are international advocacy, 
institutions and partnerships; comparative funding and finances; 
reproductive health supplies; development and security; popula-
tion and climate change; and population and the environment. 
 Publications: Reports; working papers; fact sheets; documen-
taries; interactive databases, such as “How Do Recent Population 
Trends Matter to Climate Change?” (working paper); “Condoms 
and CFLs: Environmental Behavior Change Lessons from Public 
Health” (commentary); “The Silent Partner: HIV in Marriage” (fact 
sheet); “Population, Fertility and Family Planning in  Pakistan: A 
Program in Stagnation” (commentary); “A Measure of Survival—
Calculating Women’s Sexual and Reproductive Risk” (research 
report). 
 Population Council (PC) 
 Web site: http://www.popcouncil.org/ 
 The Population Council was formed in 1952 as the result of a meet-
ing held in Williamsburg, Virginia, sponsored by John D. Rock-
efeller III and the National Academy of Sciences in response to a 
growing concern about the rapid pace of increase in the world’s 
population. The guiding principle under which the council has 
already operated is that it has no desire to impose a single popula-
tion policy on any nation, but prefers to fund efforts by individ-
ual countries to research their own population status and needs 
and to develop population policies appropriate to that status and 
those needs. In addition to its programs in more than 60 nations 
today, PC also supports three research initiatives, the Center for 
Biomedical Research, which conducts (1) basic research in repro-
ductive biology and immunology and (2) applied research for 
product development; Frontiers in Reproductive Health, which 
carries out operational research with individual countries to im-
prove delivery of health services; and (3) Horizons: Global Op-
eration Research on HIV/AIDS/STI Prevention and Care, which 
conducts operational research to find ways of reducing the spread 
of HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections. 

Nongovernmental Agencies 221
 Publications:  Population and Development Reviews (journal); 
Studies in Family Planning  (journal);  Population Briefs (newsletter); 
Momentum  (biannual newsletter);  Frontiers in Reproductive Health
(journal); Policy Research Division Working Papers ;  Poverty, Gender, 
and Youth Working Papers ; many books, articles, and reports in-
dexed by subject on the PC Web site. 
 Pro-Choice Public Education Project (PEP) 
 Web site: http://www.protectchoice.org/ 
 The Pro-Choice Public Education Project is affiliated with the 
Women’s Leadership Council, which directs PEP’s research and 
programmatic activities. The organization seeks to bridge the gap 
between young women as individuals and the organizations that 
have been created to serve and help them. The organization’s 
activities fall into four major categories: research with young 
women that can be used for the development of tools and mes-
sages for other young women, development and production of 
those tools and messages, development of leaders who can take a 
role in bringing about change in their communities, and develop-
ing strategic partnerships among organizations with similar goals 
and objectives. PEP’s Technical Assistance Project was launched 
in the spring of 2007 to help grassroots organizations incorporate 
the principles of reproductive justice into their own specific poli-
cies and programs. 
 Publications: Online newsletter;  On Our Terms  (report); post-
ers, ads, and campus handouts, available online. 
 Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice (RCRC) 
 Web site: http://www.rcrc.org/ 
 The Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice was formed in 
New York City in 1973 in response to an announcement made 
by the Roman Catholic Church that it planned to work for the 
overthrow of the U.S. Supreme Court’s recent decision in  Roe v. 
Wade.  Two years later, the organization had grown to include 24 
religious organizations in eight states. These groups represent a 
wide array of religious and theological positions, ranging from 
conservative, reconstructionist, and reform Judaism to the Episco-
pal, Presbyterian, and Methodist churches to the American Ethical 
Union National Service Conference and the Unitarian Universal-
ist Association. In addition to its core issue of abortion, RCRC is 

222 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 concerned with a number of related issues, including contracep-
tion, sex education, health care, bioethics, environment and health, 
and children. RCRC works for its objectives through a number of 
programs, such as Call to Justice, a response by clergy to efforts by 
the religious right to overthrow the Supreme Court’s  Roe v. Wade
decision; Clergy for Choice, a national registry of clergy of all 
faiths who support the RCRC position on abortion; Black Church 
Initiative, a program to assist African American clergy and laity in 
addressing problems of special concern, including teen  pregnancy, 
sex education, unintended and unwanted pregnancies, and other 
reproductive health issues; Spiritual Youth for Reproductive 
Freedom (SYRF), an interfaith, multicultural program by and for 
young adults ages 16–30; and La Iniciativa Latina, a program to 
assist Latino communities in addressing issues related to human 
sexuality from a faith-informed perspective. 
 Publications:  Between a Woman and Her God: Clergy and Women 
Tell Their Stories  (booklet);  Hospital Merger Guide ;  Prayerfully Pro-
Choice: Resources for Worship  (collection of sermons, prayers, ritu-
als, statements, etc.); Speak Out for Choice Activist Kit ;  Educational
Series Kit . 
 Reproductive Health Technologies Project (RHTP) 
 Web site: http://www.rhtp.org/ 
 The Reproductive Health Technologies Project was founded in 
1988 with the specific objective of providing information about 
the newly developed French abortifacient, RU486. Since its 
founding RHTP has expanded its agenda to include programs to 
expand women’s access to over-the-counter emergency contra-
ceptives, push for greater integrity in the development of federal 
reproductive health policy, work for greater cooperation among 
members of the reproductive health and rights community for 
the implementation and availability of new genetic technologies, 
improve communication among reproductive care advocates and 
pharmaceutical and medical devices companies to increase the 
availability of reproductive choices for women, and build con-
sensus on the use of the drug misoprostol for reproductive health 
indications.
 Publications: Fact sheets, brochures, and reports on topics 
such as Instructions for Use: Misoprostol for Incomplete Pregnancy and 
Miscarriage; Instructions for Use: Misoprostol for Pregnancy Termina-
tion ;  Understanding What the Public Thinks About Abortion: Moving 

Nongovernmental Agencies 223
From Judgment to Empathy. A Report on Findings from Dial Groups; 
Facts About Fertility ;  Nonoxynol 9 Facts; The Unfinished Revolution in 
Contraception: Convenience, Consumer Access, and Choice ;  The Quina-
crine Debate and Beyond.
 Sexuality Information and Education Council of 
the United States (SIECUS) 
 Web site: http://www.siecus.org/index.cfm 
 The Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United 
States was founded in 1964 by Mary S. Calderone, who had pre-
viously served as medical director of Planned Parenthood, and 
her colleagues, Wallace Fulton, William Genne, Lester Kirkend-
all, Harold Lief, and Clark Vincent. The organization was created 
to serve as an advocate for sex education, sexual health issues, 
and sexual rights. Today, SIECUS provides information and ser-
vices to the general public on a wide variety of topics, including 
educational programs in human sexuality, abstinence only until 
marriage programs, adolescent sexuality, teen pregnancy, sexu-
ally transmitted diseases, sexual orientation, and sexual and re-
productive health. Through a variety of reports and fact sheets, 
the organization also monitors and disseminates information on 
a number of topics related to human sexuality and sex education, 
including Title V “abstinence-only-until-marriage programs,” 
statistics on comprehensive sex education programs, emergency 
contraception, and the so-called virginity pledges. 
 Publications: annual reports (available online); position state-
ments on a variety of issues (available online); Guidelines for Com-
prehensive Sexuality Education: Kindergarten–12th Grade ;  Developing
Guidelines for Comprehensive Sexuality Education  (handbook);  Fill-
ing the Gaps: Hard-to-Teach Topics in Sexuality Education (teacher’s 
manual); On the Right Track? (guide for youth organizations); 
Right from the Start: Guidelines for Sexuality Issues, Birth to Five Years
(guidelines); Talk About Sex? (booklet). 
 United States Conference of Bishops 
 Web site: http://www.usccb.org/index.shtml 
 The United States Conference of Bishops is an assembly of the 
hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church in the United States 
whose purpose is to “promote the greater good which the Church 
offers humankind, especially through forms and programs of 

224 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
the  apostolate fittingly adapted to the circumstances of time 
and place.” The conference is very interested in and has taken 
strong stands on a number of issues related to human sexuality, 
including abortion, contraception, marriage and family, natural 
family planning, and women’s issues. The organization’s Web 
site contains an extensive amount of documents and informa-
tion on each of these topics, generally arranged under the cat-
egories of church documents and teachings, basic information, 
articles and  publications, columns and commentaries, specific 
aspects of each given issue, testimony and letters, news releases 
and statements, and additional resources. This Web site is by far 
the most complete resource available on the official position of 
the Roman Catholic Church on essentially every issue related to 
human sexuality. 
 Publications: Hundreds of books, booklets, pamphlets, prayer 
cards, prayer books, liturgical documents, posters, and other print 
materials on every aspect of human sexuality and other social and 
religious issues. 
 Young People’s Sexual Health (YPSH) 
 Web site: http://www.ypsh.net/ 
 Young People’s Sexual Health is an organization located in Ips-
wich, England, with a superb Web site containing a host of valu-
able information on many sexual health issues for young people. 
It provides information on contraception, sexually transmitted 
infections, services and clinics, special information for men and 
boys, and support groups. A special section of the organization’s 
Web site is designed for professionals, who can obtain informa-
tion and advice on topics in sexual health by joining the service 
for free online. 
 Publications: None 
 Gay and Lesbian Youth Groups 
 A key resource for gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and ques-
tioning (GLBTQ) youth is local groups who provide information 
and support for young women and men in a specific geographic 
area. Dozens of such organizations currently exist. The listings 
below provide a modest sense of the diversity of those organi-
zations. An extensive list of nearly 350 nonprofit organizations 

Gay and Lesbian Youth Groups 225
that provide services to GLBTQ youth is available at GuideStar 
(http://www2.guidestar.org/). Also see the Wikipedia Web site 
at 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_LGBT-related_organi
zations.
 Gay and Lesbian Community Center of the Ozarks (GLCCO) 
 Web site: http://www.glocenter.org/ 
 The Gay and Lesbian Community Center of the Ozarks was 
founded in 1996 to provide a safe haven for lesbians, gay men, 
bisexuals, and transgendered persons in southwest Missouri. The 
organization provides counseling services, AA meetings, religious 
services, social nights, and special youth activities. 
 Publications: None 
 Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network (GLSEN) 
 Web site: http://www.glsen.org/cgi-bin/iowa/all/home/
index.html
 The mission of the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Net-
work is to work for safe schools regardless of a person’s sex-
ual orientation. The organization was founded by 70 gay and 
lesbian educators in 1990 as the Gay and Lesbian Independent 
School Teachers Network (GLSTN). At that point in history, 
there were two gay-straight alliances in the United States, and 
only one state with a policy for the protection of lesbian, gay, bi-
sexual, and transgender (LGBT) students. There were also very 
few opportunities for students to discuss issues of sexual orien-
tation and sexual identity in a formal school setting. The goal 
of GLSEN has been to change that situation by promoting the 
creation of gay-straight alliance groups throughout the nation 
(there are now about 1,300 such clubs) and sponsoring a variety 
of other activities, such as the promotion of antibullying cam-
paigns and no-name-calling weeks and training of educators in 
sensitivity issues. 
 Publications:  The 2007 National School Climate Survey (report); 
The Principal’s Perspective  (report);  Involved, Invisible, Ignored: The 
Experiences of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Parents and 
Their Children in Our Nation’s K-12 Schools (report). 
 Human Rights Campaign (HRC) 
 Web Site: http://www.hrc.org/ 

226 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 The Human Rights Campaign was founded in 1980 to work for the 
civil rights of all gay men and lesbians in the United States. The 
organization currently claims 700,000 members and calls itself the 
largest organization of its kind in the country. The organization’s 
Center for the Study of Equality works to improve the general un-
derstanding of gay and lesbian issues. HRC has published a number 
of reports on various aspects of the gay and lesbian rights move-
ment, such as “Transgender Inclusion in the Workplace,” “Family 
Matters,” “Equality from State to State: Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and 
Transgender Americans and State Legislation,” and “Small Busi-
ness Basics.” One of the organization’s areas of special concern is 
Youth and Campus Activism. HRC’s Web page for this issue offers 
articles and news reports, information about state laws on GLBT 
youth, pending legislation at both federal and state levels, a fre-
quently asked questions section, a place for personal stories from 
GLBT youth, and a list of HRC resources and publications. 
 Publications:  GenEQ Newsletter  (for youth) ; Resource Guide 
to Coming Out ;  A Straight Guide to GLBT Americans ;  Coming Out 
for African Americans ;  Guía de Recursos Para Salir del Clóset ;  Coming
Out As Transgender ;  Living Openly in Your Place of Worship ;  Buying
for Equality 2008 ;  Corporate Equality Index 2008 ;  Healthcare Equality 
Index 2008.
 Matthew Shepard Foundation (MSF) 
 Web Site: http://www.matthewshepard.org/ 
 The Matthew Shepard Foundation was founded in 1998 by Den-
nis and Judy Shepard in memory and honor of their son, Mat-
thew, who was murdered by Russell Arthur Henderson and 
Aaron James McKinney near Laramie, Wyoming. The foundation 
has three major goals: to eliminate the kind of hate in our society 
that resulted in Matthew’s murder; to work for equal rights for 
all lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered person (LGBT); and 
to educate and provide for the needs of young men and women, 
especially LGBT individuals. In 2007, the foundation launched an 
online Youth Lounge, providing an opportunity for young people 
to interact on issues of concern to them. 
 Publications: Press releases, news announcements, and media 
resources online. 
 Parents, Families & Friends of Lesbians & Gays (PFLAG) 
 Web Site: http://community.pflag.org/ 

Gay and Lesbian Youth Groups 227
 Parents, Families & Friends of Lesbians & Gays is a nonprofit or-
ganization of more than 200,000 members and supporters with 
over 500 chapters in the United States. It operates out of a national 
office in Washington, D.C., and 13 regional offices. PFLAG has 
six strategic goals that focus on building an organization strong 
enough to carry out its objectives; creating a world in which young 
people can grow up without fear of violence or discrimination; 
ending the isolation of gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgen-
dered people; working for the inclusion of people of all gender 
orientations in all religious faiths; eliminating prejudice and dis-
crimination in the workplace; and achieving full civil rights and 
equality for all gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgendered 
persons.
 Publications: The PFLAG Web site lists a number of press 
releases, “tools for journalists,” “hot topics,” and articles about 
PFLAG in the news. 
 Sexual Minority Youth Assistance League (SMYAL) 
 Web site: http://www.smyal.org/ 
 The Sexual Minority Youth Assistance League is a Washington, 
D.C.-based organization founded in 1984 to provide assistance 
and information to gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgendered, and 
questioning (GLBTQ) young men and women. The organization 
provides a variety of events and activities for GLBTQ youth in the 
metro D.C. area, including counseling and group support; a youth 
planning group; youth advocacy internships; HIV testing, coun-
seling, and referrals; discussion meetings and speeches (“Chat 
It Up!” events); Brotherhood University (HIV/AIDS prevention 
program); and recreational nights. 
 Publications:  2006 Annual Report ;  Confronting the Crisis
 (report);  SMYAL Literature Review: Risk Factors for LGBTQ Youth
(report). 
 Utah Pride Center 
 Web site: http://www.glbtccu.org/ 
 The Utah Pride Center was founded in 1992 as the Utah Stonewall 
Center to provide a safe space for lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, 
and transgendered individuals. It was reconstituted in 1997 as 
the GLBT Community Center of Utah before adopting its current 
name in 2006 to better express the wider range of its goals and 

228 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 activities. In addition to a very wide range of activities that in-
clude support groups, social programs, affinity groups, health and 
wellness programs, education and training, the center has a very 
 active youth program that includes Tolerant Intelligent Network 
of Teens (TINT), which provides social and support groups for 
adolescents of all racial and ethnic backgrounds; Cultural Com-
petency Training for Professionals, for the education and sup-
port of teachers, counselors, and other professionals who work 
with GLBT youth; Resources for Youth, which provides suicide 
counseling, assistance with housing, and other practical issues for 
GLBT youth; and Resources for Parents of GLBT Youth, which 
provides assistance for parents of GLBT youth. 
 Publications: Annual reports 
 Youth Guardian Services (YGS) 
 Web site: http://www.youth-guard.org/ 
 Youth Guardian Services was founded in 1996 by 19-year-old Jason 
Hungerford, 16-year-old James Miller, and 19-year-old Katherine 
Lund, some of whom were gay, and others of whom were not, as 
an online forum through which gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgen-
der, and questioning young women and men could exchange in-
formation and questions about their lives and their sexuality. The 
organization was officially incorporated by the Commonwealth 
of Virginia on November 5, 1997, as a nonprofit organization. 
It operates today entirely with private donations. YGS is an en-
tirely online service, providing four major services: the SCHOOLS 
e-mail list provides a forum aimed at making schools in the 
United States more GLBTQ friendly; the STR8 email list is aimed 
at nongay men and nonlesbian women under the age of 25 with 
interests in and questions about GLBTQ issues; the GLBSO e-mail 
list provides a means of communication among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual student organizations; ELIGHT is an international Web 
site providing GLBTQ youth with an opportunity to share emo-
tions and feelings about their lives. 
 Publications: None 
 Youth Pride 
 Web site: http://www.youthpride.org/ 
 YouthPride is an Atlanta, Georgia-based 501(c)3 nonprofit or-
ganization with the mission of creating positive change in the 

Gay and Lesbian Youth Groups 229
lives of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgendered, and questioning 
youth through education, outreach, support services, community 
 activities, and advocacy. The organization sponsors Safe Zone, 
a daily after-school program that offers support groups, discus-
sion groups, a print library, Internet resources, HIV testing, movie 
nights, suicide prevention and counseling, social gatherings, 
monthly dances, career counseling, job referrals, CITY Academy 
(a leadership training and empowerment program), and other 
services for GLBTQ youth. 
 Publications: None 

This page intentionally left blank 

231
 8 
 Selected Print and 
Nonprint Resources 
 T
he literature on various aspects of sexual health is extensive, 
including many books, articles, reports, brochures, fact sheets, 
Web sites, and other resources. The items listed in this chap-
ter provide a sampling of those resources. The chapter is divided 
into four major sections: General Resources, Sexually Transmitted 
Infections, Contraception and Abortion, and Sexual Identity and 
Sexual Orientation. Each of these sections is divided, in turn, into 
listings of books, articles, reports, and Web sites. In some cases, 
there may be overlaps, with a particular item with information 
on more than one topic. Brief annotations are provided for each 
item.
 General 
 Books 
 Basso, Michael J.  The Underground Guide to Teenage Sexuality,
2nd ed. Minneapolis, MN: Fairview Press, 2003. 
 This book provides a good, comprehensive discussion of the es-
sential issues that adolescents face with regard to sexuality, with 
chapters on contraception, abortion, sexually transmitted infec-
tions, sexual orientation, date rape, and inappropriate sexual be-
havior with adults. 
 Bekaert, Sarah.  Adolescents And Sex: The Handbook for Profes-
sionals Working with Young People.  Abingdon, UK: Radcliffe 
Publishing, 2004. 

232 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 The author provides a comprehensive review of major sexual 
health issues with which adolescents have to deal, the role of pro-
fessionals in educating and assisting them in dealing with these 
issues, and legal and ethical issues that arise within this practice. 
The book is written from a British perspective, but provides excel-
lent background information for adolescents and workers of any 
national background. 
 Danoff, Dudley Seth.  The Hard Facts: What Every Man (and 
Woman!) Should Know About Male Sexual Health.  Los Angeles: 
Volt Press, 2009. 
 The author discusses a wide variety of information about male 
sexual health which, he suggests, many men avoid discussing 
with health care professionals, but about which they should be 
well informed. 
 Francoeur, Robert T., and Raymond J. Noonan, eds.  The Con-
tinuum Complete International Encyclopedia of Sexuality. New 
York and London: The Continuum International Publishing 
Group, 2004. 
 An enormously valuable resource that deals with issues of human 
sexuality in 63 nations around the world. Although somewhat 
out-of-date in some respects, the publication has attempted to 
stay current with special “update” sections on some topics for 
some countries. 
 French, Kathy, ed.  Sexual Health. New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009. 
 This book considers a variety of sexual health issues especially 
for nurses, with chapters on not only the most common sexually 
transmitted infections, but also clinical issues such as consent and 
confidentiality and sexual assault and abuse. 
 Henderson, Elisabeth, and Nancy Armstrong.  100 Questions 
You’d Never Ask Your Parents . Richmond, VA: Uppman Publish-
ing, 2007. 
 The authors provide a selection of specific and down-to-earth 
questions about sexuality, such as whether virgins can contract 
sexually transmitted infections, how to use a condom, and what 
a morning-after pill is. The answers are as direct and straightfor-
ward as the questions. 

General 233
 Levine, Judith.  Harmful to Minors: The Perils of Protecting Chil-
dren from Sex.  Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 
2002.
 The author takes a somewhat difficult position in arguing that 
sexual relationships between young adults should be viewed as 
positive experiences that should be treated rationally and with-
out fearmongering. She reviews some approaches to adolescent 
sexuality that she views as harmful and counterproductive, such 
as the “panic” over pedophilia, the problem of “no-sex” sex edu-
cation (abstinence), “compulsory motherhood” (because of the 
lack of abortion services), and the “expurgation of pleasure.” The 
second part of the book is devoted to the argument that sexual 
relationships can have enriching and satisfying benefits for young 
adults.
 Murray, Thomas R.  Sex and the American Teenager: Seeing 
Through the Myths and Confronting the Issues.  Lanham, MD: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 2009. 
 The author provides a general overview of the development of 
adolescent sexuality with special attention to some specific issues 
with which teenagers have to deal, including sexual abuse, preg-
nancy, sexually transmitted infections, and gender confusion. He 
also reviews the status of sex education programs and their effects 
on adolescent sexual behaviors. 
 Tepper, Mitchell, and Annette Fuglsang Owens, eds.  Sexual
Health . Westport, CT: Praeger, 2007. 
 This four-volume collection of essays covers a very broad range of 
topics in the area of sexual health, ranging from health problems 
to emotional difficulties to positive aspects of sexuality. 
 Articles 
 Bleakley, Amy, Michael Hennessy, and Martin Fishbein. “Public 
Opinion on Sex Education in US Schools.” Archives of Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine 160 (11; November 2006): 1151–56. 
 The authors summarize some of the best information currently 
available on how the American public views the legitimacy of 
various topics in sexual health for public school instruction. 

234 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 Blum, R. W. et al. “The Effects of Race/Ethnicity, Income, and 
Family Structure on Adolescent Risk Behaviors.” American
Journal of Public Health 90 (12; 2004): 1879–84. 
 This article is based on the results of the National Longitudinal 
Study of Adolescent Health (AddHealth), the largest and most 
comprehensive survey of adolescent health characteristics and 
trends in the United States. It was initiated in 1994 and contin-
ues to the present day as researchers follow up on original par-
ticipants, who are now in their twenties. This study reviews a 
number of adolescent risk-behavior characteristics, including cig-
arette smoking, alcohol use, involvement with violence, suicidal 
thoughts or attempts, and sexual intercourse. 
 Chandrasekhar, Cahru A. “Rx for Drugstore Discrimination: 
Challenging Pharmacy Refusals to Dispense Prescription Con-
traceptives under State Public Accommodations Laws.” Albany
Law Review 70 (1; Winter 2006): 55–115. 
 This article considers in great depth one of the most serious issues 
involving the distribution of contraceptive devices in the United 
States, namely the reluctance or unwillingness of some pharma-
cists to fill prescriptions for such materials because they offend 
their religious or ethical beliefs. 
International Journal of Sexual Health. ISSN: 1931-7611 (paper); 
1931-762X (electronic). 
 This publication is the official journal of the World Association for 
Sexual Health. It is intended primarily for specialists in the field 
of human sexuality and carries articles on a wide range of issues 
within the field. 
 Jones, Rachel K., Jacqueline E. Darroch, and Susheela Singh. 
“Religious Differentials in the Sexual and Reproductive Behav-
iors of Young Women in the United States.”  Journal of Adoles-
cent Health 36 (4; 2005): 279–88. 
 The authors used data from the 1995 National Survey of Family 
Growth to determine the effects of religious background on the 
levels of sexual risk to which young women are exposed. Their 
primary finding was that strong religious affiliations tend to 
delay the age at which young women begin to engage in sexual 
 behavior, but it has little or no further effects once sexual inter-
course has been initiated. 

General 235
 Kennedy, Kristy. “Frankly Speaking: How to Talk to Teens about 
Sexuality, Abstinence, Appropriate Contraceptive Use and Pro-
tection from Sexually Transmitted Infections.”  AAP News 28 
(11; November 2007): 1–9. 
 The author discusses a wide range of issues related to sexual 
health faced by adolescents, with special attention to a recent pol-
icy statement released by the American Academy of Pediatrics in 
November 2007. 
 “Sexual and Reproductive Health of Adolescents.”  Progress in 
Reproductive Health Research 58 (2002): 1–8. 
 This article reviews some basic issues in adolescent sexual health 
care around the world, with special features on adolescent boys 
and unsafe sex in Kenya, sexual coercion among young Nigeri-
ans, and sexual behavior and contraceptive use among female 
migrant workers in China. 
 Tolman, Deborah L. et al. “Sowing the Seeds of Violence in Het-
erosexual Relationships: Early Adolescent Narrate Compulsory 
Heterosexuality.”  Journal of Social Issues 59 (1; January 2003): 
159–78.
 The authors describe how elements of violence become a part of 
their earliest romantic relationships because of certain, often un-
stated but clearly understood, societal expectations, including the 
role of males as sexual predators. 
 Tripp, John, and Russell Viner. “Sexual Health, Contracep-
tion, and Teenage Pregnancy.”  BMJ  330 (7499; March 12, 2005): 
590–93.
 The authors provide a very general introduction to important as-
pects of adolescent sexual health with long-term data on preg-
nancies, births, and sexually transmitted infections in the United 
Kingdom.
 Tucker, Carolyn et al. “Smart Teens Don’t Have Sex (or Kiss 
Much Either).” Journal of Adolescent Health  26 (3; March 2000): 
213–25.
 The authors make use of data from the National Longitudinal 
Study of Adolescent Health from approximately 12,000 adolescents 
enrolled in the 7th to 12th grades to determine the  relationship, if 

236 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
any, between intelligence and sexual activity. They find that, when 
other factors are controlled, adolescents who score higher on in-
telligence measures tend to be less sexually active than those who 
score lower on such tests. They conclude that intelligence acts as a 
“protective factor” against early sexual activity. 
 Reports 
 Albert, Bill, Sarah Brown, and Christine M. Flanigan, eds.  14
and Under: The Sexual Behavior of Young Adolescents. Washing-
ton, DC: The National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy, 
2003.
 This report contains seven papers presented on the subject of sex-
ual activity among young adolescents, specifically, those under 
the age of 14. A number of interesting trends are noted, such as 
that nearly one in five adolescents has had sex before her or his 
15th birthday; the use of contraceptive devices among young 
adolescents is low, partly explaining the fact that one in seven 
sexually active 14-year old girls becomes pregnant; and young 
adolescents who engage in sexual behavior tend also to be en-
gaged in other forms of risky behavior. A summary of this report 
is available at http://www.thenationalcampaign.org/resources/
pdf/pubs/14summary.pdf, while the full report is available at 
http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_
storage_01/0000019b/80/1b/29/51.pdf.
 [Alford, Sue et al.].  Science And Success: Sex Education and Other 
Programs That Work to Prevent Teen Pregnancy, HIV & Sexually 
Transmitted Infections, 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Advocates for 
Youth, 2008. 
 This report reviews a number of sex education programs across 
the United States that it deems to have been a success in dealing 
with teen pregnancy and/or sexually transmitted infections based 
on their having been published in peer-review journals, using a 
well-recognized method of evaluation, and having included at 
least 100 participants. The successful programs are classified in 
the report as school-based, community-based, or clinic-based pro-
grams. The publication contains an impressive amount of very 
practical information for anyone working with the sexual issues 
of adolescents. 

General 237
 Grunbaum, Jo Anne et al. “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—
United States, 2003.” MMWR [ Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report ] 53 (SS02; May 21, 2004): 1–96. 
 This report reviews data collected in the Youth Risk Behavior Sur-
veillance System (YRBSS), which monitors six categories of health-
risk behaviors among adolescents, behaviors that contribute to 
unintentional injuries and violence. These behaviors include to-
bacco use; alcohol and other drug use; sexual behaviors that con-
tribute to unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases 
(STDs), including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection; 
unhealthy dietary behaviors; and physical inactivity and over-
weight. Examples of data collected on sexual behaviors include the 
rate of sexual intercourse before the age of 13, the number of cases 
of four or more sexual partners, the use of condoms during inter-
course, the use of birth control devices, and rate of pregnancy. 
 Kaiser Family Foundation.  Sexual Health of Adolescents and 
Young Adults in the United States . Washington, DC: Kaiser 
 Family Foundation, September 2008. 
 This publication summarizes the latest statistics on the sexual be-
havior of adolescents and young adults in a number of areas, in-
cluding sexually transmitted infections, abortion, pregnancy, use 
of contraceptives, and sexual activity. 
 National Guidelines Task Force.  Guidelines for Comprehensive 
Sexuality Education , 3rd ed. New York: Sexuality Information 
and Education Council of the United States. 
 The Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United 
States has produced a set of guidelines that can be used in the 
development of sex education programs at any age in primary 
and secondary schools. The report is accompanied by a Web site 
that lists more than a hundred lesson plans for implementing the 
general principles expressed in these guidelines. That Web site is 
at http://www.sexedlibrary.org/. 
 NBC/People Topline Report.  National Survey of Young Teens 
Sexual Attitudes and Behaviors.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton Re-
search Associates, January 2005. 
 This survey consists of a number of similar questions asked of 
both parents and their children about patterns of teen sexual 

238 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 behavior for NBC News and  People magazine. One of the inter-
esting findings in the survey is that teenagers tend to talk most 
often (62%) with friends and parents (41%) about sexual matters, 
and least often with teachers or the school nurse or with religious 
leaders (12% in both cases). 
 NPR/Kaiser/Kennedy School Poll.  Sex Education in America: 
General Public/Parents Survey. http://www.kff.org/newsmedia/
upload/Sex-Education-in-America-General-Public-Parents-
 Survey-Toplines.pdf. 
 This poll, completed in 2004, provides probably the most com-
prehensive review of the attitudes of the American public on the 
teaching of sex education in American schools, with questions 
ranging over virtually every aspect of human sexuality. 
The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Promote Sexual Health 
and Responsible Sexual Behavior.  [Washington, DC: U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services], July 9, 2001. 
 This report was prepared by the office of the U.S. Surgeon General 
as a device for encouraging a discussion of the present status of 
sexual health in the United States, some important problems faced 
by the nation, and some possible solutions for those problems. 
 Wellings, Kay, and Rachel Parker.  Sexuality Education in Eu-
rope: A Reference Guide to Policies and Practices . Brussels: IPPF 
European Network, 2006. 
 An excellent overview of the status of policies and practices about 
sex education in member nations of the European Union. 
 World Health Organization.  Defining Sexual Health: Report of 
a Technical Consultation on Sexual Health 28–31 January 2002,
Geneva. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2006. 
 In January 2002, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the 
World Association of Sexology held a joint conference in Geneva 
to discuss the state of sexual health in various countries around 
the world and to determine ways in which WHO could provide 
guidance to national health managers, policymakers, and care 
providers to improve the status of sexual health in their countries. 
This volume summarizes the results of that conference and lists a 
number of conclusions (recommendations) for future action. 

General 239
 Web Sites 
 Advocates for Youth. “Adolescent Sexual Behavior.” Available 
at http://www.advocatesforyouth.org/index.php?option=com_
content&task=view&id=30&Itemid=59.
 This Web site provides one of the most complete and most clearly 
presented discussions of a host of issues related to adolescent 
sexual health. It offers dozens of essays on specific topics under 
three general categories: General Facts about Adolescent Sexual 
Behavior; Adolescent Sexual Behavior and Youth in Low- and 
Middle-Income Countries; and Redressing Reproductive and 
Sexual Health Disparities Among Young People. Examples of spe-
cific topics within these categories include Adolescent Pregnancy 
and Protective Behaviors, Adolescent Protective Behaviors: Absti-
nence and Contraceptive Use, Adolescent Sexual Behavior: De-
mographics and Sociopsychological Factors, Facts by State, Facts 
by Global Region, the Sexual and Reproductive Health of Youth: a 
Global Snapshot, Giving Up Harmful Practices, Not Culture (Re-
nunciar a Las Prácticas Nocivas, No a La Cultura; Abandonner 
Les Pratiques Nuisibles et non La Culture), Youth and the Global 
HIV/AIDS Pandemic (Los Jóvenes Y La Pandemia Global De 
VIH/SIDA), Youth of Color—at Disproportionate Risk of Nega-
tive Sexual Health Outcomes, and GLBTQ Youth. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Sexual Health.” 
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/sexualhealth/. 
 This Web site provides extensive and reliable information on a 
number of topics in sexual health, including sexually transmitted 
infections, HIV/AIDS prevention and testing, pregnancy and sex-
ual health issues, sexual violence prevention, reproductive health, 
and preconception health care. 
 Coalition for Positive Sexuality. “Positive.org.” Available at 
http://www.positive.org/Home/index.html. 
 This Web site is based on the premise that sexuality is a positive 
characteristic, but that young people need the best available in-
formation to make good judgments about their own sexual be-
haviors. It contains answers to or thoughts about a number of 
fundamental questions, such as “Should I have sex?” “What’s 
safe sex and condoms?” “What about birth control?” “What if 
I’m gay?” “Could I be pregnant?” “What about abortion?” and 

240 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
“Could I have a disease (“STDs”)?” The Web site also provides an 
interactive section through which individuals can talk with each 
other online. 
 Columbia University. Health Promotion Programs. “Go Ask 
Alice!” Available at http://www.goaskalice.columbia.edu/Cat7.
html.
 This interactive Web site allows readers to review or pose ques-
tions on any aspect of sexual health, including topics such as safer 
sex, reproduction, contraception, pregnancy options, sexually 
transmitted infections, men’s sexual health, and women’s sexual 
health.
 Country Papers. “Youth Sex Education in a Multicultural 
 Europe.” http://english.forschung.sexualaufklaerung.de/filead
min/fileadmin-forschung/pdf/country_papers_XXX.pdf.
 In preparation for a conference on Youth Sex Education in a Mul-
ticultural Europe, 16 nations presented reports about the status 
of various topics in the sex education programs offered in their 
countries. The Web address above provides access to all these pa-
pers, where “XXX” is the name of the country. 
 Music Television. “It’s Your Sex Life.” Available at http://www.
itsyoursexlife.com/iysl.
 This Web site offers four videos dealing with being in control of 
one’s own sexual choices, talking with one’s partners about sexual 
choices, protecting oneself from sexually transmitted infections 
and unwanted pregnancy, and getting tested for STIs. 
 Pardini, Priscilla. “The History of Sexuality Education.” Avail-
able at http://www.rethinkingschools.org/sex/sexhisto.shtml. 
 The author provides a brief review of the history of sex education 
in the United States within a broader context of articles dealing 
with the history of and controversy about abstinence education. 
 Scarleteen. “Sex Ed for the Real World.” Available at http://
www.scarleteen.com/. 
 This Web site is a very down-to-earth resource with informa-
tion about sexual issues for teenagers. Some topics included are 

Sexually Transmitted Infections 241
 “Boyfriend,” “Sexual Politics,” “Gaydar,” “Sexpert Advice,” “Skin 
Deep,” and “Crisis Hotline.” 
 “Sexual Health InfoCenter.” Available at http://www.sexhealth.
org/main.shtml.
 The Sexual Health InfoCenter was created in June 1997 by two 
students at McGill University in Montreál as a way of providing 
accurate information about sexual topics to users of the Internet. 
The Web site contains a number of articles on topics such as safer 
sex, birth control, sexually transmitted infections, sexual prob-
lems, and sex and aging. 
 Teens Health. “Sexual Health.” Available at http://kidshealth.
org/teen/sexual_health/.
 An excellent page from the Web site of the Nemours company 
that provides information on a range of issues related to sexual 
health, including “Your Changing Body,” “For Girls,” “For Boys,” 
“STDs and Other Infections,” and “Birth Control.” A free weekly 
newsletter is also available through the Web site. 
 World Health Organization. “RHL The WHO Reproductive 
Health Library.” Available at http://apps.who.int/rhl/en/. 
 This Web site contains an extensive array of technical articles re-
viewing scientific evidence on the safety and efficacy of products 
for adolescent sexual and reproductive health; fertility regula-
tion; gynecology, infertility, and related cancers; HIV/AIDS; new-
born health; pregnancy and childbirth; and sexually transmitted 
 infections. 
 Sexually Transmitted Infections 
 Books 
 Adler, Michael W.  ABC of Sexually Transmitted Infections, 5th 
ed. New York: BMJ Books, 2004. 
 This book provides a collection of articles on all sexually transmit-
ted infections for professionals in the field, along with additional 
chapters on procedural and technical issues. 

242 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 Clutterbuck, Dan.  Specialist Training in Sexually Transmitted 
Infections and HIV . Edinburgh and New York: Elsevier Mosby, 
2004.
 This book is written at a level above that for the general public, 
but at less than that of a medical professional, especially designed 
for specialists working in the field of sexually transmitted infec-
tions. It includes a number of full-color photographs and useful 
charts and tables, with a list of references. 
 Holmes, King et al.  Sexually Transmitted Diseases,  4th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill Professional, 2007. 
 This textbook on sexually transmitted infections has been de-
scribed by one reviewer as “the ultimate reference in this area.” 
 Marr, Lisa.  Sexually Transmitted Diseases: A Physician Tells You 
What You Need to Know.  Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press, 
2007.
 Part 1 of this book includes chapters on some general topics, such 
as genital anatomy, keys to symptoms, and what to expect from 
an STI examination. Part 2 is an encyclopedic presentation of the 
major sexually transmitted infections. The book also contains a 
glossary and a list of useful references. 
 World Health Organization.  Guidelines for the Management of 
Sexually Transmitted Infections.  Geneva: World Health Organi-
zation, 2003. 
 This book may be the most complete resource for all aspects of the 
medical treatment for sexually transmitted infections. Individual 
chapters deal with topics such as Treatment of STI-Associated 
Syndromes; Treatment of Specific Infections; Key Considerations 
Underlying Treatments; Practical Considerations in STI Case 
Management; and Children, Adolescents, and Sexually Transmit-
ted Infections. The information in the book evolved out of two 
meetings sponsored by the World Health Organization on sexu-
ally transmitted infections in 1999 and 2001. 
 World Health Organization.  Sexually Transmitted Infections: 
Briefing Kit for Teachers . Manila: World Health Organization, 
Regional Office for the Western Pacific, 2001. 

Sexually Transmitted Infections 243
 This publication is a superb guide to educating young people 
about sexually transmitted infections. Individual sections deal 
with topics such as Understanding Sexually Transmitted Infec-
tions, STI Education, Understanding Young People’s Behavior, 
and Teaching STI Prevention. The annex to the publication con-
tains references to a number of other educational resources from 
WHO and other sources. 
 Yancey, Diane.  STDs: What You Don’t Know Can Hurt You . Min-
neapolis, MN: Twenty-First Century Books, 2002. 
 This book provides a straightforward presentation of factual in-
formation about the major sexually transmitted infections for 
adolescents.
 Articles 
 Bearman, Peter S., James Moody, and Katherine Stovel. “Chains 
of Affection: The Structure of Adolescent Romantic and Sexual 
Networks.” American Journal of Sociology 110 (1; 2004): 44–91. 
 This very interesting paper traces the structure of sexual networks 
among 800 adolescents in a mid-size city in the Midwest United 
States in an effort to better understand how sexually transmitted 
infections are spread within such a network. 
 Brückner, Hannah, and Peter Bearman. “After the Promise: The 
STD Consequences of Adolescent Virginity Pledges.”  Journal
of Adolescent Health 36 (2005): 271–78. 
 The authors discover that young adults who take virginity pledges 
as teenagers tend to marry later, have fewer sex partners, and 
start having sex later, but have about the same rate of infections 
from sexually transmitted diseases as do their counterparts who 
have not taken the pledge. The authors attempt to explain this 
unexpected phenomenon. This article later became the focus of a 
number of attacks by pro-abstinence groups and individuals who 
found a number of methodological problems with the Brückner-
Bearman research. See, for example, Robert Rector and Kirk A. 
Johnson, “Adolescent Virginity Pledges and Risky Sexual Behav-
iors,” online at http://www.heritage.org/research/abstinence/
whitepaper06142005-2.cfm.

244 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 Halpern, Carolyn Tucker et al. “Implications of Racial and Gen-
der Differences in Patterns of Adolescent Risk Behavior for 
HIV and Other Sexually Transmitted Diseases.”  Perspectives on 
Sexual and Reproductive Health 36 (6; 2004): 239–47. 
 The authors of this study use data from the National Longitudinal 
Study of Adolescent Health to group 13,998 non-Hispanic black 
and white participants into categories with the highest degree of 
risk for sexually transmitted infections. They found that 47 per-
cent of their sample was classified in the lowest risk group, con-
sisting of those who were abstinent and did not use illegal drugs. 
One interesting finding was that black females tended to be in 
the lowest risk groups, but reported the highest rate of sexually 
transmitted infections. 
 Low, Nicola et al. “Global Control of Sexually Transmitted In-
fections.” Lancet 368 (9551; December 2, 2006): 2001–06. 
 The authors note that sexually transmitted infections are a serious 
global health problem, but that they tend to receive relatively little 
attention from public health officials. They explore the reasons for 
this failing and suggest a number of steps that can be taken to 
make prevention of and treatment for STIs more readily available 
to a much wider range of the world’s population. 
 Rothschild, Bruce M. “History of Syphilis.”  Clinical Infectious 
Diseases 40 (10; May 2005): 1454–63. 
 Until the rise of the AIDS pandemic in the 1980s, syphilis was 
probably the most feared of all sexually transmitted infections. 
This paper provides an excellent review of the history of the dis-
ease in Western civilization. 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases , journal of the American Sexu-
ally Transmitted Diseases Association. http://www.stdjournal.
com/pt/re/std/home.htm;jsessionid=J7JQFGL3h0mTpZxsGhXJ
JyLbh3tGyQvR1xNT2j12wgn7hN7wC9rn!928310026!181195629
!8091!-1.
 Sinding, Steven W. “Does ‘CNN’ (Condoms, Needles and Nego-
tiation) Work Better than ‘ABC’ (Abstinence, Being Faithful and 
Condom Use) in Attacking the AIDS Epidemic?” International
Family Planning Perspectives 31 (1; March 2005): 38–40. 

Sexually Transmitted Infections 245
 The author assesses the relative merits of two approaches to deal-
ing with the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Africa, and concludes that 
both approaches have their values and should probably be used 
in conjunction with each other. 
 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. “Behavioral Counseling to 
Prevent Sexually Transmitted Infections: U.S. Preventive Ser-
vices Task Force Recommendation Statement.”  Annals of Inter-
nal Medicine 149 (7; October 7, 2008): 491–96, W95. 
 The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force is an agency of the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality of the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, whose purpose is to assess the scien-
tific information available on a variety of health care issues. This 
report discusses the need for and effectiveness of counseling for 
adolescents and adults about the risks posed by sexual behaviors 
that lead to sexually transmitted infections. The main recommen-
dation made by the task force is that programs of counseling for 
such purposes should be readily available to the public in general 
and, in particular, to adolescents. 
 Reports 
 Dehne, Karl L., and Gabriele Riedner.  Sexually Transmitted 
Infections among Adolescents: The Need for Adequate Health 
Services . Geneva: Department of Child and Adolescent Health 
Development. World Health Organization, 2005. 
 This report examined the status of sexually transmitted infec-
tion services for adolescents around the world. It discusses 
barriers to providing young adults with the information and 
services needed for dealing with STIs, some programs that have 
been developed to deal with these problems, and some ways of 
measuring the success of such programs. The specific questions 
addressed in the review were: “What characterizes adolescent 
sexuality and risk for STIs?” “What data exist on the risk and 
prevalence of STIs in adolescents?” “What kinds of adolescent 
sexual and reproductive health services are available gener-
ally and, in particular, for treatment of STIs?” “What evidence 
is there that current programmes and programme approaches 
for delivering STI services are successful in reaching adolescents 
who need those services?” and “To what extent is an adoles-
cent-specific approach to STI services warranted, and to what 

246 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
extent is an STI-specific approach to adolescent health services 
warranted?” The authors make a number of recommendations 
for improving the accessibility of STI services for young adults 
throughout the world. 
 Division of STD Prevention.  Sexually Transmitted Disease Sur-
veillance 2007 . Atlanta, GA: Department of Health And Human 
Services. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National 
Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention. 
Division of STD Prevention, December 2008. 
 This annual publication provides probably the most exhaustive 
and detailed selection of statistics dealing with sexually transmit-
ted infections in the United States. It focuses on the three tradi-
tional STIs of interest, chlamydia, syphilis, and gonorrhea, as well 
as a number of other infections, such as herpes, hepatitis, and pel-
vic inflammatory disease. 
 [Hawkes, Sarah].  Prevention and Treatment of HIV and Other 
Sexually Transmitted Infections among Men Who Have Sex with 
Men and Transgender Populations.  Geneva: World Health Orga-
nization, 2009. 
 This report summarizes the findings of a technical consultation 
held in Geneva on September 15–17, 2008, on the role that health 
agencies can play in dealing with the growing public health prob-
lem of the transmission of HIV among men who have sex with 
other men and transgendered individuals, with special attention 
to means by which such transmissions can be prevented. 
 Kirby, Douglas, B. A. Laris, and Lori Rolleri.  Impact of Sex and HIV 
Education Programs on Sexual Behaviors of Youth in Developing 
and Developed Countries.  Youth Research Working Paper No. 2. 
Research Triangle Park, NC: Family Health International, 2005. 
 This report provides a superb overview of the effectiveness of 
various types of sex education programs on behaviors of students 
who have been enrolled in those programs. 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases and Substance Use . Washington, 
DC: Office of Applied Studies. Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration. U.S. Department of Health & 
Human Services, March 30, 2007. 

Sexually Transmitted Infections 247
 This report summarizes the most recent information collected 
in the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, with special 
 attention to the relationship of STDs and drug use. The study 
found that STDs are more common among adolescents who use 
alcohol or illegal drugs. 
Sexually Transmitted Infection—The Silent Menace.  New York: 
Datamonitor, November 2005. 
 This publication offers a general overview to the status of sexually 
transmitted infections and then devotes a separate chapter each to 
gonorrhea, syphilis, chlamydia, genital herpes, and genital warts. 
In each case, the presentation includes information about the eti-
ology and epidemiology of the disease, diagnosis, disease man-
agement, and new methods available for treatment. 
2008 Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic.  Geneva: UNAIDS, 
2008.
 This report provides the most recent data available on the status 
of the worldwide HIV/AIDS epidemic with charts and tables on 
almost every conceivable aspect of the disease. 
 UNAIDS. “Country Progress Indicators.”  2008 Report on the Global 
AIDS Epidemic. http://data.unaids.org/pub/GlobalReport/2008/
jc1510_2008_global_report_pp235_324_en.pdf.
 The United Nations agency primarily responsible for issues re-
lated to the HIV/AIDS pandemic, UNAIDS, provides in this re-
port updated information on the status of the disease in almost 
every nation of the world. 
 Workowski, Kimberly A., and Stuart M. Berman. “Sexually 
Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines, 2006.”  MMWR
[Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report ] 51 (RR06; May 10, 
2006): 1–80. 
 This article summarizes the best information currently available 
on the treatment of all common sexually transmitted infections, 
with recommendations for prevention, follow-up and treatment 
of partners, and management of each condition. This publica-
tion is generally considered to be the authoritative resource in the 
United States for current procedures in the treatment and man-
agement of STIs. 

248 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 Web Sites 
 About.com. “Sexually Transmitted Diseases STDs.” Available 
at http://parentingteens.about.com/cs/stds/a/stdsfact.htm. 
 A very comprehensive Web site that contains detailed information 
on most common sexually transmitted infections. Also included 
are articles on teenage sexuality, statistics on STIs, body image, 
parenting classes on building self-esteem, and screening quizzes 
for parents. 
 American Social Health Association. “STD/STI Statistics > Fast 
Facts.” Available at http://www.ashastd.org/learn/learn_statis-
tics.cfm.
 An excellent summary of some fundamental factual information 
about sexually transmitted infections, with a number of valuable 
resources from which the data are taken. 
 Centers for Disease Control. “National Prevention Information 
Network.” Available at http://www.cdcnpin.org/. 
 This Web site is the Centers for Disease Control’s central source 
of information on all aspects of sexually transmitted infections, 
tuberculosis, and related conditions and issues. The Web site con-
tains information on organizations, materials, news, conferences, 
funding, HIV testing sites, statistics, campaigns and initiatives, 
electronic mailing lists, and links to related sites. 
 Condyloma.org. “Complete Disease Information Site.” Avail-
able at http://www.condyloma.org/main.html. 
 Condyloma is a wart-like growth in the genital area caused by 
the human papillomavirus (HPV). This Web site provides an ex-
tensive array of information on all aspects of genital and venereal 
warts caused by the HPV. It provides images of various manifes-
tations of the condition, news of recent developments, and infor-
mation on research and treatments for the condition. 
 eMedTV. “About STD.” Available at http://std.emedtv.com/. 
 This Web site provides basic scientific information on common 
sexually transmitted infections, including chlamydia, gonorrhea, 
syphilis, HIV/AIDS, and HPV infections. It also reviews a num-
ber of medications used in the treatment of these conditions. Other 

Sexually Transmitted Infections 249
portions of the Web site discuss a host of other issues related to 
sexual health, including contraception and general sexual health. 
 FamilyDoctor.org. “STIs: Common Symptoms & Tips on Pre-
vention.” Available at http://familydoctor.org/online/famdocen/
home/common/sexinfections/sti/165.html.
 This Web site provides a good general introduction to the sub-
ject of sexually transmitted infections, with sections on signs and 
symptoms, risk factors, diagnosis, prevention, and additional re-
sources on STIs. 
 Guttmacher Institute. “State Policies in Brief as of June 1, 2009: 
Sex and STI/HIV Education.” Available at http://www.gutt
macher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_SE.pdf. 
 The Guttmacher Institute provides a thorough review of state pol-
icies on educational programs for sexually transmitted infections, 
current as of June 1, 2009. 
 Patient UK. “Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD).” Available at 
http://www.patient.co.uk/showdoc/40000397/. 
 This Web page is intended for physicians and other health care 
professionals involved in the treatment of sexually transmitted 
infections, but its language is clear and understandable for the 
layperson. The information is exhaustive and complete with an 
excellent and extensive list of links and other resources on the 
topic.
 Teens Health. “About Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs).” 
Available at http://kidshealth.org/teen/sexual_health/stds/std.
html#.
 In addition to a general overview of the subject of sexually trans-
mitted diseases, this Web site provides detailed and easily under-
standable information on specific conditions: chlamydia, genital 
herpes, genital warts, gonorrhea, hepatitis B, HIV and AIDS, pelvic 
inflammatory disease, pubic lice (crabs), syphilis, and trichomo-
niasis, The Web site is also available in Spanish. 
 womenshealth.gov. “Sexually Transmitted Diseases. Overview.” 
Available 
at 
http://www.womenshealth.gov/FAQ/ sexually-
transmitted-infections.cfm.

250 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 This Web site is maintained by the National Women’s Health In-
formation Center of the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services to provide health information of special interest to 
women. In addition to providing information about 10 sexually 
transmitted infections, the Web site contains sections on statistics, 
means of transmission, symptoms, testing, health problems re-
lated to STDs, treatment, pregnancy and STDs, breastfeeding and 
STDs, and further information on the topic. 
 Contraception and Abortion 
 Books 
 Connell, Elizabeth B.  The Contraception Sourcebook . Chicago, 
IL: Contemporary Books, 2002. 
 This book provides an exhaustive review of the topic of contracep-
tion, with sections on the history of contraceptive technologies, 
oral contraceptives, contraceptive implants, injectable contracep-
tives, intrauterine devices, female barrier devices, periodic absti-
nence, lactational amenorrhea, male contraception, the current 
status of contraception, and future prospects in contraceptive 
technology. A superb overview of the topic. 
 Gordon, Linda.  The Moral Property of Women: A History of 
Birth Control Politics in America,  3rd ed. Urbana and Chicago, 
IL: University of Illinois Press, 2002. 
 The author points out that, while birth control technology has 
a very long history, it has become an issue of women’s rights 
only in the recent past. She discusses the role of contraception 
in the development of the women’s movement in the United 
States. 
 Guillebaud, John.  Contraception: Your Questions Answered.
 Edinburgh and New York: Churchill Livingstone, 2008. 
 This book makes use of an interesting format, with questions 
posed by general practitioners and answered by specialists in the 
field of contraception. In spite of this specialist approach, the text 
should be understandable to most readers with some scientific 
background. 

Contraception and Abortion 251
 Hatcher, Robert A. et al.  Contraceptive Technology,  19th ed. 
Montvale, NJ: Thomson Reuters, 2008. 
 This book, designed for specialists in the field, has long been a 
standard work and is now in its 19th edition. The authors cover 
almost every conceivable issue related to contraceptive technol-
ogy, providing the most up-to-date information available on each 
topic.
 Jütte, Robert.  Contraception: A History . Cambridge, UK, and 
Malden, MA: Polity Press, 2008. 
 The author provides a very interesting and very readable account 
of the use of contraceptives from the earliest days of human civili-
zation, along with a brief consideration of the future of contracep-
tive technology. 
 Kubba, Ali.  Contraception . London: Mosby, 2005. 
 This book is part of Elsevier’s Rapid Reference series that makes 
general information about a topic readily available to practitio-
ners or anyone else interested in a topic. It includes basic informa-
tion about epidemiology, management, and therapy, along with 
useful ancillary information, such as drug listings, clinical trials, 
possible future developments, patient organizations, and Web site 
listing. A list of frequently asked questions is also available. 
 Senanayake, I. Pramilla, and Malcolm Potts.  Atlas of Contracep-
tion, 2nd ed. London: Informa Healthcare, 2008. 
 This book makes use of about 150 full-color photographs and 
sketches to illustrate a number of topics related to contraception, 
including contraceptive methods, family planning and practice 
methods, contraceptive counseling, reproductive health issues, 
and preventative medicines. 
 United States Agency for International Development. Office of 
Population and Reproductive Health; World Health Organiza-
tion. Reproductive Health and Research; INFO Project. Family
Planning: A Global Handbook for Providers . Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University. Bloomberg School of Public Health. 
Center for Communication Programs. INFO Project; [Geneva]: 
World Health Organization. Department of Reproductive 
Health and Research, 2007. 

252 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 This book is the definitive guideline for clinic-based health care 
providers around the world who are responsible for dispensing 
contraceptive information and materials. 
 Articles 
Contraception  is an international journal that carries technical ar-
ticles on the topic and is published monthly. Its ISSN is 0010-7824. 
Population Reports  is a group of journals published by the Popu-
lation Information Program at Johns Hopkins University. The 10 
journals in the series deal with oral contraceptives (Series A; ISSN: 
0097-9074), intrauterine devices (Series B; ISSN: 0092-9344), fe-
male sterilization (Series C; ISSN: 0891-0030), pregnancy termina-
tion (Series D; ISSN: 0091-9284), barrier methods (Series H; ISSN: 
0093-4496), maximizing access and quality (Series Q: ISSN: 0887-
0241), family planning programs (Series J; ISSN: 0091-925X), in-
jectables and implants (Series K; ISSN: 0097-9104), issues in world 
health (Series L; ISSN: 0887-0241), and special topics (Series M; 
ISSN: 0733-9135). 
 Blythe, Margaret J., and Angela Diaz. “Contraception and Ado-
lescents.” Pediatrics 120 (5; November 2007): 1135–48. 
 This article presents the position of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics Committee on Adolescence with regard to the use of 
contraceptives by adolescents. The authors note that abstinence 
is always the first choice in dealing with sexual behavior, but 
that, realistically, the vast majority of adolescents do not re-
main abstinent until they become adults or are married. As a 
consequence, the committee recommends that pediatricians and 
other professional health care workers become familiar with the 
best information on contraceptive technology and the counsel-
ing methods available for making this information accessible to 
adolescents. 
 Espey, Eve, and William F. Rayburn, eds. “Contraception.”  Ob-
stetrics and Gynecology Clinics of North America  34 (1; 2007): 
1–172.
 The whole issue of this journal is devoted to a discussion of a 
variety of contraceptive devices that have been developed in re-
cent years, such as the contraceptive patch and ring, hormonal 
implants, and hormonal intrauterine systems. Nonmedical issues, 

Contraception and Abortion 253
such as current legislation, regulations, and funding options re-
lated to the use of contraceptives are also discussed. 
 Ramos, Pilar S. “The Condom Controversy in the Public Schools: 
Respecting a Minor’s Right of Privacy.”  University of Pennsyl-
vania Law Review 145 (1; November): 149–92. 
 This law article examines in great detail the legal and ethical issues 
involved in school programs for the distribution of condoms. 
 Reddy, Diane M., Raymond Fleming, and Carolyne Swain. “Ef-
fect of Mandatory Parental Notification on Adolescent Girls’ 
Use of Sexual Health Care Services” JAMA  288 (6; August 14, 
2002): 710–14. 
 The authors report on a survey of 950 teenage girls at 33 Planned 
Parenthood clinics in Wisconsin to determine the possible effects of 
a law requiring parents to be notified that their daughters sought 
sexual health services. Fifty-nine percent of respondents said that 
they would not make use of at least one or more of such services, 
and an additional 11 percent indicated that they would delay or 
discontinue testing for sexually transmitted infections. The authors 
conclude that “mandatory parental notification for prescribed con-
traceptives would impede girls’ use of sexual health care services, 
potentially increasing teen pregnancies and the spread of STDs.” 
 Santelli, John et al. “Abstinence and Abstinence-only Educa-
tion: a Review of U.S. Policies and Programs.” Journal of Ado-
lescent Health 38 (2006): 72–81. 
 The authors agree that abstinence is a desirable behavioral objec-
tive for adolescents, but that few people remain abstinent until 
they are married. The recent emphasis by the U.S. government on 
abstinence programs has undermined more comprehensive sex 
education programs and, for that reason, threatens “fundamental 
human rights to health, information, and life.” 
 Society for Adolescent Medicine. “Position Paper on Absti-
nence-only Education Policies and Programs: A Position Paper 
of the Society of Adolescent Medicine.” Journal of Adolescent 
Health 38 (2006): 83–87. 
 The Society of Adolescent Medicine commends the intent of 
 abstinence-only education, but points out that a well-rounded 

254 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
program in sex education should also provide information on 
other forms of contraception. 
 Reports 
 Abma, J. C., G. M. Martinez, W. D. Mosher, and B. S. Dawson. 
Teenagers in the United States: Sexual Activity, Contraceptive 
Use, and Childbearing, 2002.  National Center for Health Statis-
tics. Vital Health Statistics 23 (24; 2004). 
 This report summarizes and discusses national data on sexual 
activity, contraceptive use, and births among males and females 
15–19 years of age in the United States in 2002 collected in the Na-
tional Survey of Family Growth (NSFG). Data are also presented 
from the 1988 and 1995 NSFGs, and from the 1988 and 1995 Na-
tional Survey of Adolescent Males (NSAM). The report contains a 
vast amount of information on nearly every aspect of these issues 
and is an invaluable resource on the subject. 
 Guttmacher Institute.  U.S. Teenage Pregnancy Statistics Na-
tional and State Trends and Trends by Race and Ethnicity. New 
York: Guttmacher Institute, 2006. 
 This report provides some of the best, most complete information 
on nearly every aspect of teenage pregnancy, including national 
and state trends for teenage abortions, births, and pregnancies by 
age, race, and ethnicity. 
 Nass, Sharyl J., and Jerome F. Strauss III, eds.  New Frontiers in 
Contraceptive Research: A Blueprint for Action. Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press, 2004. 
 This report reviews recent events in research on and development 
of contraceptive technologies. The four major chapters deal with 
target discovery and validation, product identification and devel-
opment, improving accessibility to and use of contraceptives, and 
capitalizing on recent scientific achievements. Of particular inter-
est is Appendix A, which discusses progress and impediments in 
research and development of new contraceptive technologies. 
 Pro-Choice Public Education Project.  She Speaks: African Amer-
ican and Latino Young Women on Reproductive Health and 
Rights: Focus Group Research Commissioned by the Pro-Choice 

Contraception and Abortion 255
Public Education Project.  New York: Pro-Choice Public Educa-
tion Project, 2004. 
 Between January and June 2004, researchers for Pro-Choice Public 
Education Project met with eight focus groups of African Ameri-
can and Latino women ages 16–25 in New Orleans, Louisiana; 
Los Angeles, California; West Palm Beach, Florida; and New 
York, New York, to listen to their “thoughts, opinions, feelings, 
struggles, and experiences” about issues of their reproductive 
health. This report summarizes the results of those interviews and 
is available online at http://www.protectchoice.org/downloads/
She%20Speaks%20Report%20Full.pdf.
 Ross, David A., Bruce Dick, and Jane Ferguson.  Preventing HIV/
AIDS in Young People. A Systematic Review of the Evidence from 
Developing Countries . UNAIDS Inter-agency Task Team on 
Young People. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organiza-
tion. WHO Technical Report Series No. 938, 2006. 
 This report summarizes research on methods that have been de-
veloped to reduce the rate of HIV/AIDS infection among young 
people in a number of countries around the world and the effec-
tiveness of those programs. 
 Special Investigations Division. Minority Staff of the Commit-
tee on Government Reform. The Content of Federally Funded 
Abstinence-only Education Programs . [n.p.], December 2004. 
 At the request of Representative Henry Waxman (D-CA), the Spe-
cial Investigations Division of the Minority Staff of the U.S. House 
of Representatives Committee on Government Reform assessed 
the accuracy of information of sexual health provided by a num-
ber of abstinence-only sex education programs funded by the U.S. 
government.
 World Health Organization.  Selected Practice Recommendations 
for Contraceptive Use,  2nd ed. Geneva: World Health Organiza-
tion, 2005. 
 The recommendations in this reported were developed at a meet-
ing of experts on contraceptive technology held in Geneva on April 
13–16, 2004. It covers a variety of issues, including family planning 
methods: combined oral contraceptives, combined injectable con-
traceptives, progestogen-only pills, depot  medroxyprogesterone 

256 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
acetate, norethisterone enanthate, levonorgestrel implants, emer-
gency contraceptive pills, copper-bearing intrauterine devices, 
levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine devices, fertility awareness-
based methods, and sterilization. The report is intended for use 
by policymakers, program managers, and the scientific commu-
nity for the purpose of preparing service delivery guidelines for 
women in specific countries. 
 Web Sites 
 AVERT. “Birth Control and Contraception for Teenagers.” Avail-
able at http://www.avert.org/birth-control-contraception.htm. 
 AVERT is an international organization working to reduce rates 
of HIV infection and AIDS cases worldwide. Its Web site pro-
vides information on a variety of issues related to sexual health, 
including this page on pregnancy and contraception. The infor-
mation provided here is up-to-date and clearly written, easily un-
derstandable by the target audience of sexually active or curious 
teenagers.
 Barnack, Jessica L. “Improving Access to Emergency Contra-
ception for Female Adolescents.” Available at http://www.
prochoiceforum.org.uk/psy_research8.asp.
 This article appears on the “Psychological Issues” section of the 
Pro-Choice Forum Web site of Psychology and Reproductive 
Choice. The author reviews the scientific evidence about the 
safety and efficacy of emergency contraception and finds that it 
does not lead to increased sexual activity by minor females nor 
does it affect the use of conventional contraceptives by members 
of that group. She also discusses the current legal and regulatory 
status of emergency contraceptives in the United States. 
 Bovo, Mary Jane. “Contraceptive Guide.” Available at http://
www.mjbovo.com/Contracept/. 
 This Web site provides a very exhaustive review of many types 
of contraceptive devices and methods, including topics such as 
abstinence, the cervical cap, condoms, the diaphragm, emergency 
contraception, implants, injections, intrauterine devices, The Pill, 
natural family planning, safer sex, sexually transmitted infections, 
spermicides, the sponge, sterilization, and what doesn’t work. 

Contraception and Abortion 257
The topics are very well illustrated with helpful line drawings 
and written at a level readily accessible to most adolescents. 
 Center for Reproductive Rights. “Adolescents’ Access to Repro -
ductive Health Services and Information.” Available at http://
reproductiverights.org/en/project/adolescents-access-to-
 reproductive-health-services-and-information. 
 The Center for Reproductive Rights provides information on ob-
stacles faced by adolescent boys and girls in obtaining information 
about and services in the area of reproduction. The primary focus in 
this article is on legislation and laws requiring parental notification 
before a female minor can have an abortion. Links to two important 
court cases on this issue are available from the main Web site. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Unintended Preg-
nancy Prevention: Contraception.” Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/ReproductiveHealth/UnintendedPregnancy/Contracep-
tion.htm.
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides here 
one of the most complete and dependable sources of information 
about all forms of contraception. 
 The Emergency Contraception Web site. “Plan B and the Bush Ad-
ministration.” http://ec.princeton.edu/pills/planbhistory.html. 
 This Web site provides a good review of the history of the devel-
opment and certification of Plan B emergency contraceptive by 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and the issues raised by 
the decision of the Bush administration to become involved in this 
decision.
 Helium. “Should Schools Give Teens Birth Control?” http://
www.helium.com/debates/161091-should-schools-give-teens-
birth-control.
 This blog provides an opportunity for teenagers and adults to ex-
press their views about the distribution of contraceptive devices 
by schools. The statements are generally well thought out and ex-
pressed. 
 Mayo Clinic Staff. “Birth Control Guide.” Available at http://
www.mayoclinic.com/health/birth-control/BI99999. 

258 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 This very useful and complete review of birth control techniques 
is divided into sections dealing with condoms and other barrier 
methods, The Pill and other hormonal contraceptives, intrauterine 
devices, natural family planning, sterilization, withdrawal, emer-
gency contraceptive techniques, and emergency methods. This 
Web site also has links to more than 50 related sexual health issues 
on the Mayo site, including birth control pill FAQs, benefits, risks 
and choices; women’s sexual health: how to reach sexual fulfill-
ment; emergency birth control; Viagra for women: why doesn’t it 
exist?; sex after years of abstinence: OK to resume?; vaginal ring; 
withdrawal birth control method; essure; standard days birth con-
trol method; lactational amenorrhea birth control method; emerg-
ing birth control methods; and skin patch for birth control. 
 National Women’s Health Resource Center. “Contraception.” 
Available at http://www.healthywomen.org/healthtopics/con
traception.
 This Web site provides one of the most exhaustive discussions of 
a variety of contraceptive technologies on the Internet, with de-
tailed discussions of benefits, risks, possible side effects, and ad-
ditional information on the most widely used methods of birth 
control. A valuable chart of the rate of effectiveness for each tech-
nique is also supplied. 
 nelsmiley. “Abstinence Only Sex Education.” Available at http://
nelsmiley.deviantart.com/art/Abstinence-Only-Sex-Education-
71481378.
 An excellent overview and review of the legislative and adminis-
trative history for federal funding of abstinence-only sex educa-
tion in the United States. 
New York Times.  “Birth Control and Family Planning.” Avail-
able at http://health.nytimes.com/health/guides/specialtopic/
birth-control-and-family-planning/in-depth-report.html.
 This Web page is part of the  New York Times  Health Guide, which 
provides detailed, reliable information on dozens of health topics. 
This site discusses a number of contraceptive options, including 
implant contraception, injected contraception, intrauterine de-
vices, fertility awareness methods, spermicidal and barrier con-
traception, emergency contraception, and female sterilization. A 
number of up-to-date print references are also provided. 

Contraception and Abortion 259
 “No Room for Contraception.” Available at http://www.noroom-
forcontraception.com/.
 The purpose of this Web site is “to expose the potential harms 
that contraception, birth control and sterilization bring to mar-
riage and society.” It provides information from its point of view 
about pregnancy, abstinence, abortion, and contraception, with 
special commentaries on the role of religion and issues faced by 
adolescents with regard to these topics. The Web site is updated 
on a regular basis with new information, testimonies, and news 
reports. A brochure,  Pregnancy, Contraception, and Abortion: Fre-
quently Asked Questions , is available online. 
 Office of Population Research. Princeton University. “The Emer-
gency Contraception Website.” Available at http://ec.princeton.
edu/.
 The purpose of the Emergency Contraception Website is to provide 
women with accurate scientific information about emergency con-
traception, to provide a database of service providers for individu-
als seeking access to emergency contraceptive materials, to provide 
a database of existing emergency contraceptive materials, and to 
serve as a resource for clinicians, pharmacists, researchers, mem-
bers of the media, policymakers, and others seeking up-to-date sci-
entifically based information about emergency contraception. 
 Samra-Latif, Omnia M., and Ellen Wood. “Contraception.” 
Available at http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/258507-over
view. 
 This page is part of the WebMD Web site emedicine, which provides 
detailed, expert information on a very large number of medical 
 topics. This article deals with a number of topics, ranging from co-
itus interruptus and mechanical barriers to sterilization and emer-
gency postcoital contraception. For each topic, the authors discuss 
the  efficacy, advantages, and disadvantages of each technique. 
 “Should Schools Give Teens Birth Control?” Available at http://
www.helium.com/debates/161091-should-schools-give-teens-
birth-control/side_by_side?page=4.
 This blog does an unusually good job of presenting pro and 
con arguments with respect to the distribution of birth control 
 information and devices in schools. Each argument in favor or 

260 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
opposed to the practice is matched with a contrary view. Most of 
the opinions are well reasoned and well written. 
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “Birth Control Guide.” 
Available at http://www.fda.gov/Fdac/features/1997/babytabl.
html.
 This Web site was originally published in  FDA Consumer magazine 
in April 1997, but it has been revised and updated since that time, 
most recently in December 2003. The page lists all methods of birth 
control that have been approved by the FDA, their failure rate, asso-
ciated risks, convenience, availability with or without prescription, 
and their effectiveness against sexually transmitted infections. 
 Sexual Identity and Sexual Orientation 
 Books 
 Girshick, Lori B.  Transgender Voices: Beyond Women and Men.
Lebanon, NH: UPNE, 2009. 
 This book draws on interviews with more than 150 sex- and gen-
der-variant individuals in the United States. Those interviews 
provide some of the greatest dramatic and emotional impact for 
the book. With the information gained from these interviews, the 
author attempts a reconsideration of gender theory and suggests 
that new approaches be developed for working with youth who 
are experiencing nontraditional sexual awakenings. 
 Huegel, Kelly.  GLBTQ: The Survival Guide for Queer and Ques-
tioning Teens. Minneapolis, MN: Free Spirit Publishing, 2003. 
 This book begins with a review of some basic issues, such as the 
meaning of terms like gay, lesbian, queer,  and  questioning,  and ste-
reotypes about GLBTQ youth; homophobia, the process of com-
ing out; life at school; dating and relationships; sex, sexuality, and 
sexual health; religion and culture; and transgender teens. The 
author attempts to answer questions about these topics both for 
GLBTQ themselves as well as for young adults who classify them-
selves as heterosexual. 
 Jennings, Kevin, and Pat Shapiro.  Always My Child: A Par-
ent’s Guide to Understanding Your Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, 

Sexual Identity and Sexual Orientation 261
 Transgendered or Questioning Son or Daughter.  New York: Simon 
& Schuster, 2003. 
 This book provides a comprehensive and valuable resource for 
parents with gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, or questioning 
teenagers. It provides fundamental information about the devel-
opment of sexual orientation, the social and family issues with 
which adolescents have to deal, and the ways in which parents 
can support their children. Later chapters deal with transgen-
dered and questioning teens, and with teens of color who may be 
GLBTQ.
 Just the Facts Coalition.  Just the Facts about Sexual Orientation 
and Youth: A Primer for Principals, Educators, and School Per-
sonnel.  Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 
2008.
 This publication is endorsed by 12 groups, the American Acad-
emy of Pediatrics, American Association of School Administra-
tors, American Counseling Association, American Federation of 
Teachers, American Psychological Association, American School 
Counselor Association, American School Health Association, In-
terfaith Alliance Foundation, National Association of School Psy-
chologists, National Association of Secondary School Principals, 
National Association of Social Workers, National Education As-
sociation, and School Social Work Association of America. It deals 
with the development of sexual orientation, efforts to change 
sexual orientation through therapy and religious ministries, and 
legal principles relevant to the subject. The book concludes with 
a description of the 12 members of the Just the Facts Coalition, 
along with the resources they have to offer in dealing with this 
topic.
 Levithan, David, and Billy Merrell.  The Full Spectrum: A New 
Generation of Writing About Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgen-
der, Questioning, and Other Identities.  New York: Knopf Books 
for Young Readers, 2006. 
 This book consists of 40 selections written by young women and 
men under the age of 23 in conjunction with the Gay, Lesbian, 
and Straight Network describing their own experiences growing 
up as nonstraight youth. The selections include autobiographical 
sketches, poems, and written and photographic essays. 

262 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 Marcus, Eric.  Is It a Choice? Answers to the Most Frequently 
Asked Questions about Gay & Lesbian People,  3rd rev. ed. San 
Francisco: HarperOne Publishing, 2005. 
 In spite of what the title may suggest, the development of sexual 
orientation is only one of many questions answered by the au-
thor in this book. Other questions deal with families, dating and 
relationships, sexual behaviors, religion, work and the military, 
education, sports, the media, politics and activism, and aging. 
 Ryan, Caitlin, and Donna Futterman.  Lesbian & Gay Youth : Care 
& Counseling . New York: Columbia University Press, 1998. 
 This book grew out of a conference on the primary health care 
and prevention needs of lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth spon-
sored by the Health Resources and Services Administration of the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. It deals with the 
special physical and mental health challenges faced by lesbian, 
gay, and bisexual youth; the HIV/AIDS epidemic and its effects 
on young people; transgendered youth and other special popula-
tions; and the development of gender identity. 
 Savin-Williams, Ritch C.  The New Gay Teenager. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2006. 
 Based on interviews with numerous adolescents, the author con-
cludes that young people today have a very different view about 
same-sex relationships than do their parents or grandparents. 
They tend to be much more at ease with a variety of sexual issues, 
sexual orientation among them. The author devotes considerable 
attention to methodological problems that were developed more 
than a generation ago in studying gay and lesbian adolescents 
and recommends some changes in the way professionals view 
these individuals. 
 Articles 
 Barber, Heather, and Vikki Krane. “Creating a Positive Climate 
for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Youths.”  JOPERD:
Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance  78 (7; Sep-
tember 2007): 6–8. 
 The authors point out that a number of athletes notable in their 
own fields of sports have recently come out to the general public. 

Sexual Identity and Sexual Orientation 263
They argue that adult teachers, leaders, and others responsible for 
sports activities for adolescents need to be more open and more 
welcoming to young men and women who classify themselves as 
nontraditionally sexually oriented. 
 Graham, Chad. “Milwaukee’s Finest: One Lesbian Teacher’s Vi-
sion of a Safe Place for LGBT High School Students Is a Reality 
for 107 Kids in Wisconsin—for Now at Least.”  The Advocate 965 
(June 20, 2006): 62. 
 In response to the harassment experienced by GLBT students in 
many schools, some efforts have been made to establish schools 
intended solely for this population. This article describes the de-
velopment of such a school in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and some 
of the problems it has experienced in trying to stay in business. 
 Lehoczky, Etelka. “Young, Gay, and OK: Cultural Shifts and 
Supportive Parents Are Leading Gay Youths to Come out Ear-
lier, Some Before Their Teens.”  The Advocate  931 (February 1, 
2005): 24–31. 
 The author points out that young people who consider themselves 
to be gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgender are now coming out at 
an earlier age than ever before, largely but not entirely because 
of a more welcoming and positive attitude by parents, teachers, 
other gay men and lesbians, and the society at large. 
 Rienzo, Barbara A. “The Politics of Sexual Orientation Issues in 
American Schools.” Journal of School Health 76 (3; March 2006): 
93–97.
 The authors point out that schools in the United States are under 
greater pressure at a local level to recognize and meet the spe-
cial needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth, but 
the national mood in the first years of the 21st century has made 
programs with this objective politically sensitive. They report 
on a study of public school districts across the United States to 
see how well they are managing these conflicting demands and 
make recommendations as to how this issue can be handled in 
the future. 
 Rosario, Vernon A. “Transgenderism Comes of Age.”  Gay & 
Lesbian Review Worldwide 7 (4): 31–33. 

264 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 The author briefly discusses the rise of what is perhaps the most 
extreme form of nonheterosexual identification among some 
school-age youth, transgenderism, and attempts to provide a the-
oretical introduction to the topic. 
 Stone, Carolyn B. “Counselors as Advocates for Gay, Lesbian, 
and Bisexual Youth: A Call for Equity and Action.”  Journal of 
Multicultural Counseling and Development 31 (2; April 2003): 
143–55.
 The author points out that the U.S. Supreme Court has validated 
the role of school counselors in advocating for gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual youth in public schools and suggests a number of ways 
in which school counselors can carry out this aspect of their jobs. 
 Van Wormer, Katherine, and Robin McKinney. “What Schools 
Can Do to Help Gay/lesbian/bisexual Youth: a Harm Reduction 
Approach.” Adolescence 38 (151; Fall 2003): 409–20. 
 The authors point out the very strong heterosexist atmosphere 
that prevails in U.S. schools and argue that, if not countered by 
the actions of school officials, can lead to a host of emotional and 
psychological problems for lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth. They 
offer some suggestions as to policies and actions that can support 
nonheterosexual young people in schools. 
 Reports 
 Cianciotto, Jason, and Sean Cahill.  Youth in the Crosshairs: The 
Third Wave of Ex-Gay Activism . Washington, DC: National Gay 
and Lesbian Task Force, 2006. 
 This report explores the status of religious-based programs that 
purport to be able to convert young men and women with same-
sex feelings to a “normal” heterosexual lifestyle. It found that not 
only is so-called conversion therapy largely unsuccessful, but it 
also has a tendency to result in social, psychological, and interper-
sonal harm to those who experience the treatment. The report also 
considers a number of ethical issues involved in the use of conver-
sion therapy to change sexual attitudes and behaviors. 
 Greytak, Emily A., Joseph G. Kosciw, and Elizabeth M. Diaz. 
The Experiences of Transgender Youth in Our Nation’s Schools.
New York: GLSEN, 2009. 

Sexual Identity and Sexual Orientation 265
 This report provides the findings of a study of the school experi-
ences of 295 students between the ages of 13 and 20 who iden-
tified themselves as transgender. Researchers found that these 
students experienced a significantly higher amount of bullying 
and harassment than did students self-identified or perceived as 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual, resulting in poorer school attendance, 
lower grades, and decreased educational aspirations. 
 Kosciw, Joseph G., Elizabeth M. Diaz, and Emily A. Greytak. 
The 2007 National School Climate Survey: The Experiences of 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Youth in Our Nation’s 
Schools. New York: GLSEN, 2008. 
 In 2007, researchers for the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education 
Network conducted a survey of 6,209 LGBT students from all 
50 states and the District of Columbia, between the ages of 13 
and 21 in grades K through 12. About two-thirds of the sample 
(64.4%) was white, over half (57.7%) was female, and over half 
identified as gay or lesbian (53.6%). The survey collected infor-
mation on a wide variety of topics and issues, including biased 
language, overall safety in schools, verbal and physical harass-
ment and assault, racial and ethnic factors in GLBT issues, and 
availability and utility of school resources and support systems. 
The report includes more than 90 tables and figures summariz-
ing its findings. 
 Markow, Dana, and Jill Dancewicz.  Perspective: School Safety, 
Bullying And Harassment: A Survey of Public School Principals.
New York: Harris Interactive, 2008. 
 From June 15 through August 3, 2007, Harris Interactive con-
ducted a survey for the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Net-
work and the National Association of Secondary School Principals 
on the attitudes of 1,580 K–12 principals about the school climate 
in their institution for gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender stu-
dents. About half of all respondents said that bullying and harass-
ment based on perceived or actual sexual identity and/or sexual 
orientation was a serious problem in their schools. About a third 
said that gay, lesbian, and bisexual students would feel safe in 
their institutions, and about a quarter said that transgender stu-
dents would feel safe. In general, principals appear to feel that 
they would receive the greatest support for improving the envi-
ronment for GLBT students from other administrators,  somewhat 

266 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
less support from teachers, and significantly less support from 
parents and members of the community at large. 
 Markow, Dana, and Jordan Fein.  From Teasing to Torment: 
School Climate in America: A Survey of Students and Teachers.
New York: Harris Interactive, 2005. 
 This study was commission by the Gay, Lesbian and Straight 
Education Network (GLSEN) to better understand the nature of 
bullying and harassment of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and other non-
traditional sexually identified youth in a wide variety of schools 
in the United States. Findings suggest that perceived or actual 
sexual orientation and/or sexual identification are the second 
most common cause of bullying and harassment after physical 
characteristics, such as skin color. The study also found that most 
teachers and counselors are supportive of efforts to deal with this 
issue and believe that stronger school policies, regulations, and 
activities would help reduce the problem for youth affected by 
bullying and harassment. 
 Ottosson, Daniel.  State-sponsored Homophobia: A World Sur-
vey of Laws Prohibiting Same Sex Activity Between Consenting 
Adults . [Brussels]: International Lesbian, Gay. Bisexual, Trans, 
and Intersex Association, 2009. 
 This report is a remarkable piece of research that provides up-to-
date information on the legal status of same-sex relationships in 
every country in the world with an extensive bibliography that 
contains links to legal documents in almost every country. 
 Ray, Nicholas.  Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual And Transgender Youth: an 
Epidemic of Homelessness.  Washington, DC: National Gay and 
Lesbian Task Force, 2006. 
 The research leading to this report was inspired by evidence that 
20 to 40 percent of all homeless youth identify as gay, lesbian, bi-
sexual, or transgender, compared to an estimated 3 to 5 percent of 
the general population. Researchers reviewed professional litera-
ture, academic research, government programs, and other avail-
able evidence to determine reasons for this disturbing statistic. 
The report also contains five detailed descriptions of local pro-
grams that have been developed to deal with the problem of GLBT 
homelessness and concludes with a number of recommendations 
for action at the federal, state, local, and practitioner levels. 

Sexual Identity and Sexual Orientation 267
 Web Sites 
 Advocates for Youth. “ambienteJoven.org.” Available at http://
www.ambientejoven.org/. 
 This Spanish-language Web site is aimed at young Spanish-
 speaking men and women, with information about issues in sex-
ual health and other topics of concern to adolescents. 
 Advocates for Youth. “YouthResource.” Available at http://www.
youthresource.com/.
 This Web site is designed for gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgendered, 
and young people who are questioning their own sexual iden-
tity and/or sexual orientation (GLBTQ). It provides information 
on sexual issues of special interests to such individuals, suggests 
ways of becoming involved in community activities, provides 
news updates on topics of interest to GLBTQ individuals, and 
provides online contacts with other GLBTQ individuals. 
 American Academy of Pediatrics. “Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual 
Teens: Facts for Teens and Their Parents.” Available at http://
www.pomonapeds.com/download/gay_teen.pdf?PHPSESSID=
500c54f8a4ed98c83f791f66ba60bb27.
 This brochure, developed by the American Academy of Pediat-
rics, presents fundamental information about sexual orientation 
and provides guidance for parents and health care professionals 
about working with lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth. 
 American Psychological Association. “Answers to Your Questions: 
For a Better Understanding of Sexual Orientation & Homosexual-
ity.” Available at http://www.apa.org/topics/sorientation.pdf. 
 This six-page brochure provides answers to many common ques-
tions about sexual orientation, such as “What is sexual orienta-
tion?” “How do people know if they are gay, lesbian, or bisexual?” 
“What causes a person to have a particular sexual orientation?” 
“Is homosexuality a mental disorder?” “At what age should les-
bian, gay, or bisexual youths come out?” and “Can lesbians and 
gay men be good parents?” 
 The Body. “Fact Sheet: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender 
Youth Issues.” Available at http://www.thebody.com/content/
whatis/art2449.html.

268 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 This Web site provides an excellent summary of some important 
issues faced by gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender youth, 
along with a short discussion of each issue. 
 Mental Health America. “What Does Gay Mean?” Available at 
http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/go/what-does-gay-mean. 
 This booklet was prepared to help parents, teachers, counselors, 
and other interested professionals in helping young people to bet-
ter understand the nature of sexual orientation and issues that 
surround the topic. Sections of the booklet are designed specifi-
cally for children and young adults of varying age groups. 
 OutProud.org. “I Think I Might Be Gay . . . Now What Do I Do? 
A Brochure for Young Men.” Available at http://www.outproud.
org/brochure_think_gay.html. 
 Outproud.org. “I Think I Might Be a Lesbian . . . Now What Do 
I Do? A Brochure for Young Women.” Available at http://www.
outproud.org/brochure_think_lesbian.html.
 These two comparable brochures discuss the ways in which young 
men and young women may experience and learn how to deal 
with homosexual feelings. They discuss questions such as how 
does one know that he/she is gay/lesbian? who should one tell 
about these feelings? how does one meet other gay men/lesbians? 
and what unique health problems might one have to think about? 
 PFLAG. “Be Yourself: Questions and Answers for Gay, Lesbian 
and Bisexual Youth.” Available at http://www.pflag.org/filead
min/user_upload/Publications/Be_Yourself.pdf. 
 This booklet has been prepared by Parents and Friends of Lesbi-
ans and Gays (Pflag) to answer most of the basic questions that 
young people have about sexual orientation in general, and their 
own sexual orientation in particular. 
 Sanders, Douglas. “Human Rights and Sexual Orientation in 
International Law.” http://www.ilga.org/news_results.asp?Lang
uageID=1&FileCategory=44&FileID=577, 2005. 
 The author provides an excellent review of the history of efforts to 
expand tolerance of same-sex relationships in a variety of regional 
and international law reports and pronouncements. 

269
 Glossary 
 This chapter contains definitions for a number of terms commonly 
used in the fields of sexually transmitted infections, contracep-
tion, sexual orientation and sexual identity, and related fields of 
sexual health. 
 abstinence In general, the practice of abstaining from particular behav-
ior, such as eating certain types of food. In the field of sexual health, ab-
stinence means abstaining from (usually) sexual intercourse, although it 
may also refer to abstaining from all forms of sexual behavior. 
  acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)  The late stage of an in-
fection, often but not necessarily transmitted by sexual contact, caused by 
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
 acute In describing a medical condition, symptoms or diseases that last 
for relatively short periods of time before becoming better or developing 
into long-term conditions, known as chronic conditions. 
 AIDS See acquired immunodeficiency syndrome .
 antiretroviral Any drug that is effective in stopping the action of a 
virus. 
 asymptomatic Not displaying any symptoms. 
 bacterial vaginosis A bacterial infection of the vagina that occurs 
 commonly among women of childbearing age, characterized by a  watery 
discharge and a fishy-smelling odor. Previously called nonspecific 
 vaginitis. 
  basal body temperature method  A method of birth control in which a 
woman monitors her body temperature to determine the times at which 
she is fecund, and when she is not. 
 benign Not cancerous. 
 bisexual A term that refers to acts, fantasies, or feelings that involve 
individuals of either sex. People who call themselves bisexual experience 

270 Glossary
an erotic interest in both men and women, although not necessarily to an 
equal extent. 
 candida A genus of yeast-like fungi responsible for the infection known 
as candidiasis. 
 candidiasis A fungal infection caused by any one of the members of 
the Candida family of fungi. Such infections occur most commonly in the 
mucous membranes of the throat and lungs, esophagus, and vagina. 
 cervical cap A contraceptive device consisting of a small thimble-
shaped cup that is placed over the cervix to prevent sperm from entering 
the uterus. 
 chancroid A highly contagious sexually transmitted infection caused 
by the Hemophilus ducreyi bacterium. 
 chlamydia A very common sexually transmitted infection caused by 
any one of a number of bacteria belonging to the genus of the same 
name.
 chronic In referring to medical conditions, symptoms or diseases that 
persist for long periods of time, usually many years. Also see acute .
 coitus interruptus A birth control method that involves a male with-
drawing his penis before ejaculating. 
 colposcopy A medical procedure by which the surface of the vagina 
and cervix are examined with a special type of microscope called a col-
poscope.
 combination oral contraceptive A form of “The Pill” that contains two 
hormones, forms of progesterone and estrogen. 
 condom A flexible sleeve made of latex rubber or some other material 
placed over a man’s penis during intercourse to prevent release of sperm 
into a woman’s uterus and to help protect against sexually transmitted 
infections. Also see female condom .
 consensual sexual act Any sexual act to which both (or all) parties 
agree. 
 contraceptive patch A piece of material containing progesterone and 
estrogen placed on the skin which releases these hormones through the 
skin into the bloodstream over a period of time. 
 contraceptive sponge A small sponge containing a spermicide that is 
inserted into the vagina prior to sexual intercourse. 
 cryosurgery A medical procedure by which a section of tissue is frozen, 
usually with liquid nitrogen, and then removed. 
 D and C See dilation and curettage .
 Depo provera A progesterone-like hormone (medroxyprogesterone 
acetate [DMPA]) contraceptive administered by injection, usually over 
three-month periods. 

Glossary 271
 diaphragm A flexible, dome-shape cup covered with a spermicide and 
fitted over the uterine cervix to prevent entry of sperm. 
  dilation and curettage (D and C)  A medical procedure in which the 
cervix is dilated, allowing the surface of the uterus and cervical canal to 
be scraped. 
 douching Cleaning of the cervix and vagina with water or an aqueous 
solution.
 dyspareunia Painful or difficult sexual intercourse, most commonly ex-
perienced by women. 
 dysuria Painful or difficult urination, often associated with a sexually 
transmitted infection. 
 emergency contraceptive Any type of contraceptive method that can 
be administered within a few days of sexual intercourse. 
 Essure A sterilization procedure developed by the Conceptus corpora-
tion that involves the insertion of a spiral device into a woman’s fallopian 
tubes to prevent implantation of an embryo. 
 fecund Capable of producing offspring. 
 female condom A tubular pouch that fits into a woman’s vagina to pre-
vent sperm from entering the uterus during sexual intercourse. 
 fertility awareness Any birth control method used that depends on a 
woman’s being aware of the times each month during which she is and 
is not fecund. 
 gay A term that has come to be associated with individuals, organiza-
tions, acts, events, or other phenomena involving two individuals of the 
same gender, most commonly, two men. 
 gay bashing Any activity in which individuals—most commonly, 
young men—beat up gay men, lesbians, or other individuals whom they 
judge to be of a sexual orientation to which they object, usually without 
any apparent rational basis, often “just for the fun of it.” 
 gender A term that refers to a person’s social identity as a man or a 
woman. The concept of gender includes not only one’s biological sex 
(male or female), but also the social constructs created by a culture that 
tend to be associated with one or the other sex. 
 gender identity The perception that a person has as to whether he or 
she is a man or a woman. Gender identity and gender or gender identity 
and sex are not always the same. Some individuals who are biologically 
male and who may assume all the characteristics of a man may feel that 
he is actually “a woman trapped in a man’s body.” 
 granuloma inguinale A sexually transmitted infection caused by the 
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis bacterium. 

272 Glossary
 hate crime Any criminal act that is based solely or primarily on preju-
dice against some group of individuals, such as women, blacks, Hispan-
ics, or gay men and lesbians. 
 hepatitis An inflammation of the liver caused by microorganisms or 
chemicals. About a half dozen forms of the disease are known, the most 
common of which are characterized as hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepa-
titis C. 
 herpes The name given to a group of diseases and the viruses that 
cause them, characterized by painful blisters on the skin or mucous mem-
branes.
 HIV See human immunodeficiency virus .
 homosexual A term that should probably best be used as an adjective, 
referring to any feeling, fantasy, or act that involves two people of the 
same sex. Historically, the word has also been used to refer to an individ-
ual or group of individuals. It is less successful in that context because it 
tends to define individuals and groups of individuals solely on the basis 
of their erotic interests. 
 HPV See human papillomavirus .
 human immunodeficiency virus The virus that causes acquired immu-
nodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). 
 human papillomavirus (HPV) Any one of a large number of viruses 
that cause infections of the skin and mucous membrane, the best known 
of which are genital warts, which are associated with the onset of cervical 
cancer. 
 informed consent A legal principle that means a person understands 
and agrees to participate in some type of research or treatment. 
 intrauterine device (IUD) A thin piece of plastic or metal inserted 
through the vagina into the uterus to prevent a pregnancy from 
 developing. 
 in vitro From the Latin meaning “in glass,” referring to any procedure 
carried out in laboratory equipment, and not in a living organism. 
 in vivo From the Latin meaning “in life,” referring to any procedure 
carried out in connection with a living organism. 
 IUD See intrauterine device .
 lactational amenorrhea method A method of birth control that makes 
use of a woman’s natural tendency to stop ovulating while she is breast-
feeding. In the absence of any synthetic form of contraception, lactational 
amenorrhea can be considered a form of natural birth control. 
 latency In medicine, that period of time that elapses after a person has 
been infected with a disease before signs or symptoms of that disease 
develop.

Glossary 273
 menarche The time in a young woman’s life when her menstrual peri-
ods first begin. 
 morning after pill A form of emergency contraception that can be 
taken any time up to about five days after sexual intercourse to prevent a 
pregnancy from developing. 
 natural family planning Any method of birth control that does not 
make use of synthetic chemicals or devices to prevent pregnancy.  Also see
fertility awareness .
 nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) Inflammation of the urethra that is 
not caused by a gonococcal bacterium. 
 nonspecific vaginitis See bacterial vaginitis .
 Norplant A form of birth control developed by the Population Council 
in which small capsules containing hormones are inserted beneath the 
skin of the upper arm. 
 off-label Use of a drug for a purpose other than that for which it has 
been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
 opportunistic infection An infection that develops as a consequence of 
a person’s having a weakened immune system. 
 oral contraceptive Any contraceptive formulation that is designed to 
be taken by mouth. 
 over-the-counter contraceptive Any substance or device that prevents 
pregnancy that can be purchased without a prescription. 
 pap smear See pap test .
 pap test A test in which cells are collected from the lining of the cervix 
and vagina to determine the presence or absence of an inflammation in 
those tissues. 
 patch  See contraceptive patch .
 pedophilia The condition of being erotically attracted to children. 
 Although pedophilia is sometimes associated with homosexuality, most 
studies suggest that the vast majority of pedophiliacs are heterosexual 
men, or men with a troubled heterosexual orientation who are attracted 
to young girls or to all young children of either sex. 
  pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)  An infection, usually transmitted 
by sexual activity, which spreads upward from the vagina to the upper 
parts of the reproductive tract. 
 permanent birth control Any procedure that causes a man or woman 
to become permanently infertile. Also see sterilization; vasectomy .

274 Glossary
 PID See pelvic inflammatory disease .
 The Pill A common name given to any contraceptive taken orally, usu-
ally, but not necessarily, containing a combination of progesterone- and 
estrogen-like hormones. 
 Plan B A form of oral contraceptive that contains a form of the hormone 
progestin and can be used to prevent a pregnancy from developing for 
up to 72 hours after sexual intercourse. 
 postcoital contraception See emergency contraception .
 prenatal transmission  The transmission of an infection from mother to 
child during the birth process. 
 prodrome A sign or symptom or set of signs or symptoms taken as a 
warning sign of a disease that will develop later. 
 prognosis A prediction of the likely course or outcome of a disease. 
 prophylactic See condom .
 prophylaxis Any treatment intended to prevent the onset of a disease. 
 queer A once-derogatory word used to describe gay men and lesbians. 
The term has now been adopted by many gay men and lesbians as an 
act of defiance against those who would use the term in a disparaging 
manner. 
 recurrence The return of signs, symptoms, or a disease itself after a pe-
riod of apparent recovery. 
 remission The disappearance of the signs and symptoms of a disease, 
which may indicate that the disease has disappeared permanently or 
temporarily. 
 risk factor Any substance or situation increasing a person’s chance of 
contracting a disease. 
 seroconversion The process by which the status of a person’s blood 
tests changes from negative to positive for some particular disease, such 
as AIDS. 
 sexual orientation The tendency of a person to be erotically attracted to 
someone of the same gender, the opposite gender, or both genders. The 
term orientation  usually suggests that this tendency is not consciously cho-
sen by a person, but is determined by some genetic or biological factor. 
 spermicide Any substance that kills sperm. 
 sponge See contraceptive sponge .
 sterilization Any method for making a male or female infertile. Also see
tubal ligation; vasectomy .
 systemic Any condition that affects the body as a whole rather than 
some specific part of the body. 

Glossary 275
 toxoplasmosis A disease caused by the protozoan  Toxoplasma gondii . 
 transgendered person A person who has undergone one or more steps 
in the process of changing one’s sex, from male to female or from female 
to male. 
 transsexual A person who identifies as belonging to a gender other 
than the one to which he or she was assigned at birth. 
 transvestite A person (almost always a man) who enjoys dressing in 
the clothing of someone of the opposite sex and, often, takes on the social 
characteristics of that sex. A man who enjoys dressing as a woman and 
then going shopping in that attire is a transvestite. The great majority of 
transvestites are heterosexual males. 
 trichomoniasis An infection caused by the protozoan  Trichomonas vagi-
nalis, responsible for vaginitis in women and urethritis in men. 
 tubal ligation Any procedure that involves the blocking of a woman’s 
fallopian tubes (by cutting and/or tying them off) to prevent sperm from 
reaching an egg. 
 vasectomy A surgical procedure in which the vas deferens are cut, pre-
venting sperm from traveling from the testes to the prostate gland. 
 withdrawal A natural method of birth control in which a man with-
draws his penis from a woman’s vagina before he ejaculates. 

This page intentionally left blank 

277
Index
 Abortion Access Project (AAP), 
202 – 203 
Abortion in the United States
(Calderone), 128 
 Abortion issues 
 Abortion Access Project, 
202 – 203 
 characteristics of women 
obtaining, 188– 192 
 Freedom of Choice Act, 209 
Roe v. Wade,  157 – 159, 170 – 171 
 sex education, 50 – 52 
 Abstinence/fertility awareness, 
19 – 20 
 Abstinence-only education, 36 – 42. 
See also Content of Federally 
Funded Abstinence-only 
Education Programs;  Gonzales
v. School Board of Okeechobee 
County; Separate Program 
for Abstinence Education; 
SPRANS-CBAE
 arguments in favor of, 38 – 39 
 books out of favor, 47 
 future of, 41 – 42 
 Guttmacher Institute study, 
50, 51 
 historical background, 36 – 38 
 Obama’s funding withdrawal, 
41
 research on, 39 – 41 
 Abstinence the Better Choice 
(ABC), 202 
 Access to Birth Control Act (2007), 
61, 62, 163 – 166 
The Act of Marriage (LaHaye), 137 
 Adolescence Education Program 
(AEP) (India), 82 
 Adolescent Family Life Act 
(AFLA), 37 
 Adolescents 
 GLBT groups, 23 
 GLBTQ youth, 24 – 26 
 Plan B age controversy, 58 – 59 
 sexual activity, NYC, 43 
 sexual behavior patterns, 34 
 sexual identity issues, 21 – 28 
 suicides/suicide attempts, 25, 
228
 virginity pledge taken by, 39 
 Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices of the 
Centers for Disease Control, 
161 – 163 
 Advocates for Youth, 27, 203 
 Africa 
 HIV/AIDS epidemic, 88 
 HIV/AIDS programs, 91 
 sex education in, 87 
 African Medical and Research 
Foundation (AMREF), 91 
 Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality (AHRQ), 
197 – 198 
 AIDS Education and Research 
Trust, 206 

278 Index
 Alcohol use, by GLBTQ students, 
26
 American Association of Sex 
Educators, Counselors, 
and Therapists (AASECT), 
203 – 204 
 American Birth Control League, 
145, 146 
 American Ethical Union National 
Service Conference, 221 
 American Medical Association 
(AMA), 60 
 American Pharmaceutical 
Association (APhA), 60 
 American Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases Association 
(ASTDA), 204 
 American Social Health 
Association (ASHA), 4, 
204 – 205 
 Anal cancer, 63, 64 
 Antibiotic treatments, 6, 8 
 Antiharassment (in schools) 
protection, 50 
 Argentina 
 HIV/AIDS programs, 92 
 sex education in, 85 – 86 
 Association of Reproductive 
Health Professionals (ARHP), 
205
 Athar, Shahid, 84 
 Australia, sex education in, 83 – 84 
 AVERT program, 205 – 206 
 Barnes, Melody, 41 
 Barrier methods of contraception, 
15 – 17 
 Bataclan, Bren, 139 
Berrill v. Houde, 48 
 Bill of Rights (U.S. Constitution), 
168 – 169 
 Billings, Lyn and John, 207 
 Birth control.  See also
Contraceptive devices; 
Contraceptive issues; 
Knowlton, Charles 
 abstinence method, 19 – 20, 
182 – 184 
 Access to Birth Control Act, 61, 
62, 163 – 166 
 barrier methods, 15 – 17 
 devices, 54, 140 – 141 
 hormonal control, 19 
 opposition to, 61 – 62 
 oral contraceptives, 14, 17 – 18, 
39, 54, 141 
 Pope Paul VI position on, 
140– 141 
 Rock’s Harvard discussions of, 
142 – 143 
 Sanger’s activism for, 145 – 146 
 school dispensing issues, 54 – 57 
 Stopes’ Great Britain clinics, 
148 – 149 
 use by sexually active high 
school students, by sex, race, 
ethnicity, 193 – 194 
Birth Control News (Stopes), 149 
 Bisexual individuals, 23 
 Bixby Center for Global 
Reproductive Health, 206 
 Black Church Initiative, 222 
 Blagojevich, Rod, 61 
 BOMA-USA (Billings Ovulation 
Method Association), 206 – 207 
 Bowen-Hugh, Violet, 218 
Boyd v. United States, 169 
Boys Don’t Cry movie, 149 
 Brazil, sex education in, 85 – 86 
 Broadhead, George, 80 
 Brotherhood University (SMYAL), 
227
Brown v. Hot, Sexy, and Safer 
Productions, 48 
 Bucharest World Population 
Conference, 96 – 97 
 Bush, George W., 36, 98, 156 – 157 
 Calderone, Frank, 128 
 Calderone, Mary Steichen, 
127 – 129, 223 
 Calvert, Simon, 80 

Index 279
 Cambodia, HIV/AIDS programs, 
91 – 92 
 Cameroon, syphilis data, 95 
 Caribbean, sex education in, 86 
The Case for Birth Control (Sanger), 
146
 Catholic Church, 78, 86 
 Catholics for Choice (CFC), 207 
 Catholics in Public Life campaign, 
207
 Center for Development and 
Population Activities 
(CEDPA), 208 
 Center for Population Options, 
203
 Center for Reproductive Rights 
(CRC), 207 – 208 
 Center for the Study of Equality, 
226
 Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC)(U.S.), 9, 
34, 44 
 Advisory Committee on the 
Immunization Practices, 
161 – 163 
 characteristics of women 
obtaining legal abortions, 
188 – 192 
 chlamydia data (U.S.), 4, 6 
 Division of STD Prevention, 
198
 gonorrhea recommendations, 9 
 hepatitis recommendations, 11 
 HIV/AIDS data, 12, 13 
 Youth Risk Behavior 
Surveillance System, 193 – 194 
 Cervical cancer, 63, 64 
 Cervical caps, 17 
 Chang, Min-Chueh, 129 – 130 
 Chat It Up! events (SMYAL), 227 
 Chicago Experiment, 31 – 33 
 Chicken pox (human herpesvirus 
4), 9 
 China 
 HIV/AIDS epidemic, 90 
 sex education in, 81 – 82 
 China Family Planning 
Association, 82 
 Chlamydia, 5 – 6 
 Christian Institute, 80 
 Christian Legal Society’s Center 
for Law and Religions 
Freedom, 60 
 Christian viewpoint on sex 
education, 35 
 Christmas, David, 80 
 Clinton, Bill, 98, 155, 156 
 Coitus interruptus, 15 
Collaborative Evaluation of Strategies 
to Encourage Couples-Focused 
Health Service Delivery, 200 
 Colombia, sex education in, 
85 – 86 
 Committee on Petitions (India), 82 
 Comprehensive Adolescent Care 
program (Cuba), 86 
 Comstock, Anthony, 130 – 131 
 Concerned About Teen Sexuality 
(C.A.T.S.) program, 203 
 Concerned Women for America 
(CWA), 62, 136, 209 
 Condoms, 15, 39 
 opposition to distribution, 43, 
171 – 174 
 usage instruction, 42 – 44 
 Condoms4Life campaign (CFC), 
207
 Consortium for Industrial 
Collaboration in 
Contraceptive Research, 210 
 Content of Federally Funded 
Abstinence-only Education 
Programs, 182 – 184 
The Continuum Complete Interna-
tional Encyclopedia of Sexuality,
76, 85 – 86 
 Contraceptive devices.  See also
Birth control 
 access to, 53 – 57 
 Internet access to, 58 
 Ipsos Public Affairs poll, 54 
 male vs. female access, 57 

280 Index
 Contraceptive issues 
 access outside of schools, 53 – 57 
Curtis v. School Committee of 
Falmouth,  171 – 174 
Griswold v. Connecticut,  168 – 170 
 school provisions controversy, 
53 – 57 
 SPRANS-CBAE report, 183 
 worldwide perspective, 96 – 98 
 Contraceptive Research and 
Development Program 
(CONRAD), 209 – 210 
 Copper T IUD, 19 
 Costa Rica, sex education in, 
85 – 86 
 Côte d’Ivoire, women’s counseling 
services, 97 
 Couple to Couple League (CCL), 
210
Course of Study sex education 
(Japan), 81 
 Court cases, 168 – 180 
Berrill v. Houde, 48 
Boyd v. United States, 169 
Brown v. Hot, Sexy, and Safer 
Productions, 48 
Curtis v. School Committee of 
Falmouth,  171 – 174 
Godkin v. San Leandro School 
District, 48 
Gonzales v. School Board of 
Okeechobee County, 177– 180 
Griswold v. Connecticut,  168 – 170 
Parker v. Hurley,  174 – 177 
Roe v. Wade,  157 – 158, 170 – 171, 
217
 Cuba, sex education in, 86 
 Cultural Competency Training for 
Professionals, 228 
Curtis v. School Committee of 
Falmouth (1995), 171 – 174 
 Danish Family Planning 
Association, 77 
 Denmark, mandatory sex 
education in, 77 
 Department of Health and Human 
Services (U.S.), 200 
 Diaphragms, 17 
 Discovering Roads program 
(Cuba), 86 
 Division of STD Prevention 
(DSTDP)(CDC), 198 
Division of STD Prevention Strategic 
Plan 2008–2013, 198 
 Dominican Republic, HIV/AIDS 
programs, 91 
 Due Process Clause (Fourteenth 
Amendment, U.S. 
Constitution), 171, 177 
 Ectopic pregnancy, 9 
 Education.  See Abstinence-only 
education; Gay, Lesbian, 
and Straight Education 
Network (GLSEN); Sex 
education
 Education for Family Life (EFL) 
program (Poland), 78 
 Ehrlich, Paul, 8, 131– 132 
 ELIGHT Web site (for GLBTQ 
youth), 228 
 Emergency contraception (EC). 
See Plan B (emergency 
contraception)
 EngenderHealth, 211 
 Enovid (oral contraceptive), 17 
 Equal Rights Amendment, 209 
 Estrogen derived oral contracep-
tives, 17 – 18 
 Europe, sex education perspective, 
76 – 80 
 Faircloth, Lauch, 36, 38, 154 – 156 
 The Family, a Place for Human 
Development program 
(Cuba), 86 
The Family Book about Sexuality
(Calderone and Johnson), 128 
 Family Education Trust (UK), 80 
 Family Health International (FHI), 
211 – 212 

Index 281
Family Limitations (Sanger), 146 
 Family planning, worldwide 
perspective, 96 – 98 
Family Planning Annual Report,
200
 Family Research Council (FRC), 
212
 Female condoms, 15 
 Fertility awareness and 
abstinence, 19 – 20 
 Fifth Amendment (U.S. Constitu-
tion), 169 
 First Amendment (U.S. Constitu-
tion), 169, 173, 180 
 First Inter-Africa Conference on 
Adolescent Reproductive 
Health (1992), 203 
 Flagg, Ella, 31 – 33 
 Focus on the Family (Christian 
organization), 43 – 44, 
212 – 213 
 Food and Drug Administration 
(U.S. FDA), 17, 58 – 59 
 Fourteenth Amendment (U.S. 
Constitution), 169, 171, 172 
 Fourth Amendment (U.S. 
Constitution), 169 
 Free Exercise Clause (First 
Amendment, U.S. Constitu-
tion), 173, 175 
 Freedom of Choice Act, 209 
 Friedan, Betty, 136, 209 
 Frontiers in Reproductive Health, 
220
The Fruits of Philosophy, or the 
Private Companion of Young 
Married People by a Physician
(Knowlton), 135 – 136 
 Fulton, Wallace, 223 
 Gabon (country) 
 education campaigns, 97 
 gonorrhea data, 96 
 Gallup Poll on homosexuality, 
24 – 25 
 Gardasil HPV vaccine, 63 
 Gay, Lesbian, and Straight 
Education Network (GLSEN), 
27, 132 – 133, 139, 225.  See
also Jennings, Kevin; Parlin, 
Robert
 Gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgendered (GLBT) 
groups, 23 
 Gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender 
and questioning (GLBTQ) 
youth, 24 – 28 
 Gay and Lesbian Community 
Center of the Ozarks 
(GLCCO), 225 
 Gay and Lesbian Humanist 
Association (UK), 80 
 Gay and Lesbian School Teacher 
Network (GLSTN), 139 
 Gay marriage, 49, 174 – 177.  See also 
Parker v. Hurley
 Gay-straight alliance (GSA) high 
school club, 177 – 178 
 Gender identity, 21 – 28 
 Gender Public Advocacy Coalition 
(GenderPAC), 50 
 Genital herpes, 9 – 10 
 GENIUS Index (2008)(Gender 
Equality National Index for 
Universities and Schools), 50 
 Genne, William, 223 
 Ghana, sex education in, 87 
 GLBSO e-mail list, 228 
Global Strategy for the Prevention 
and Control of Sexually 
Transmitted Infections: 
2006–2015 (WHO RHR 
Department), 95 
Godkin v. San Leandro School 
District, 48 
 Gonorrhea, 8 – 9, 94 – 95 
Gonzales v. School Board of Okeechobee 
County (2008), 177 – 180 
Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), 
168 – 170 
 Growing During Adolescence 
program (Cuba), 86 

282 Index
Guidelines for Comprehensive 
Sexuality Education (SIECUS), 
52 – 53 
 Guttmacher Institute (GI), 50, 51, 
213
 Harkin, Tom, 38 
 Harvard University, 35 
 Health Policy Initiative (CEDPA), 
208
 Helium poll on STDs, 57 
 Helium Web site 
 STD poll, 57 
 teenage sexuality blog, 55 – 57 
 Henry J. Kaiser Family 
Foundation, 35 – 36, 215.  See
also NPR/KFF/JFK poll on 
sex education 
 Hepatitis (A/B), 10 – 12 
 Herpes infections, 9 – 10 
 Herpes Resource Center, 204 
 Heterosexually oriented (sexual 
orientation), 22 
 Hispanic females, 15–19 years of 
age, pregnancy/live birth-
rates (1980–2000), 192 – 193 
 HIV/AIDS, 12 – 14 
 Aastha Project (India), 211 
 abstinence-only programs and, 
40
 Advocates for Youth program, 
203
 African epidemic, 87 
 AIDS Education and Research 
Trust, 206 
 Brotherhood University 
prevention programs, 227 
 CDC data estimates, 12 
 curricular educational inclusion, 
47
 dismissal/denial, 88 – 90 
 evaluation, 93 – 94 
 Focus on the Family claims, 
43 – 44 
 in Indian sex ed, 82 
 infection description, 12 – 13 
 in Japanese sex ed, 81 
 orphans due to (2008), 194, 198 
 REAL Act, 159 
 treatment/prevention 
programs, 13 – 14, 90 – 92 
 worldwide data (2008), 194 – 196 
 Homosexuality (in sex education), 
44 – 50 
 bias studies on, 45 
 lawsuits about, 48 – 49 
 NPR/KFF/JFK poll on, 44 – 45 
 Homosexually oriented (sexual 
orientation), 22 
 Horizons: Global Operation 
Research on HIV/AIDS/STI 
Prevention and Care, 220 
 Hormonal methods (of 
pregnancy/birth control), 
17 – 19 
 implants, 18 – 19 
 injections, 18 
 oral contraceptives, 14, 17 – 18, 
39, 54, 143 
 patches, 18 
 Plan B (emergency 
contraception), 19 
 vaginal rings, 18 
 HPV Resource Center, 204 
 Human papillomavirus (HPV), 
62 – 65 
 description/varieties, 62 
 immigrants to U.S./
vaccinations, 64 
 Mandatory HPV Vaccination 
executive order, 161 – 163 
 treatment modalities, 63 
 vaccination for, 63 – 65 
 Human Rights Campaign (HRC), 
225 – 226 
 Human sexuality, issues of 
concern, 87 – 101 
 contraception/family planning, 
96 – 101 
 evaluations, 93 – 94 

Index 283
 HIV/AIDS pandemic, 88 – 94 
Parker v. Hurley (2007), 48, 
174 – 177 
 sexual orientation/gender 
identity, 98 – 101 
 sexually transmitted infections, 
94 – 95 
 Implants, hormonal, 18 – 19 
 Indefinite Quantity Contracts 
project (CEDPA), 208 
 India 
 Aastha Project, 211 
 HIV/AIDS programs, 82, 92 
 sex education in, 82 – 83 
 La Iniciativa Latina program, 222 
 Injections, of hormones, 18 
 Institute for Media Education, 46 
 International Clearinghouse on 
Adolescent Fertility, 203 
 International Conference on 
Population and Development 
(ICPD), 200 
 International Consortium on 
Emergency Contraception 
(ICEC), 213 – 214 
 International Fertility Research 
Program (IFRP), 211 
 International Planned Parenthood 
Federation, 214 
 International Pregnancy Advisory 
Services, 215 
 International Society for Sexually 
Transmitted Diseases 
Research (ISSTDR), 214 
 International Union against 
Sexually Transmitted 
Infections (IUSTI), 214 – 215 
 Intrauterine devices (IUDs), 19 
 Ipsos Public Affairs poll, 54 
 IwannaKnow.org, 204 
 Japan, sex education in, 81 
 Jennings, Kevin, 132 – 133 
 Jensen, Albert, 138 
 John F. Kennedy School of 
Government (Harvard 
University), 35 – 36.  See also
NPR/KFF/JFK poll on sex 
education
 John XXIII (Pope), 140 
 Johns Hopkins University School 
of Public Health, 39 
 Johnson, Eric, 128 
 Kaiser Family Foundation, 35 – 36, 
215 – 216 
 Kanabus, Annabel, 206 
 Kaposi’s sarcoma (human 
herpesvirus 8), 9 
 Kinsey, Alfred, 133 – 135, 198 
 Kinsey Institute for Research 
in Sex, Gender, and 
Reproduction, 198 – 199 
 Kirkendall, Lester, 223 
 Knowlton, Charles, 135 – 136 
 Koch, Robert, 131 – 132 
 Korman, Edward R., 59 
 La Iniciativa Latina program, 
222
 LaHaye, Beverly, 136 – 137, 209 
The Laramie Project, 147 
 Latin America 
 HIV/AIDS programs, 91 – 92 
 sex education in, 85 – 86 
 Lautenberg, Frank, 61, 159 
 Lawsuits about teaching of 
homosexuality, 48 – 49 
Left Behind novels (LaHaye), 136 
 Lesbians, 23 
 Lesotho, women’s counseling 
services, 97 
 Lief, Harold, 223 
 Life Planning Education, 203 
 Lotter, John, 149 
 “Making Schools Safe for Gay & 
Lesbian Youth” (Jennings), 133 
 Mali, women’s status promotion, 97 

284 Index
 Maloney, Carolyn B., 61, 164 – 166 
Mama’s Boy (Jennings), 133 
 Mandatory HPV Vaccination 
(2007), 161 – 163 
 Manford, Jeanne, 27 
Manual of Family Planning and 
Contraceptive Practices
(Calderone), 128 
Married Love: A New Contribution 
to the Solution of the Sex 
Difficulties (Stopes), 148 
 Marshal, Michael P., 26 
 Martin, Lon, 128 
 Martinez, Mel, 98 
 Massachusetts 
Curtis v. School Committee of 
Falmouth,  171 – 174 
 Department of Public Health, 25 
 free condom programs, 42 
 Maternal deaths during childbirth, 
14
 Mathematica Policy Research, 
Inc., 39 
 Matthew Shepard Foundation 
(MSF), 226 
 Mbeki, Thabo, 88 – 89 
 McCormick, Katherine, 129 – 130, 
142
 Memorandum for the 
Administrator of the 
United States Agency for 
International Development 
(2001), 156 – 157 
 Men 
 chlamydia-specific symptoms, 6 
 gonorrhea symptoms, 8 – 9 
 Mexico, sex education in, 85 – 86 
 Mexico City Policy (2009), 157, 
167 – 168.  See also Memoran-
dum for the Administrator of 
the United States Agency for 
International Development 
 Mirena intrauterine system (IUS), 
19 
Modern Materialism (Knowlton), 
135
 Mononucleosis, infectious (human 
herpesvirus 5), 9 
 Morning-after pill (Plan B), 19 
 Morocco, sexually transmitted 
diseases, 95 
 Mujeres en Desarrollo 
Dominciano (MUDE) 
organization (Dominican 
Republic), 91 
 Muslim World, sex education in, 
84 – 85 
My Fight for Birth Control (Sanger), 
146
 Myanmar, absence of HIV/AIDS 
in, 90 
 NARAL Pro Choice America, 216 
 National Abstinence Education 
Association, 38, 41 
 National Campaign to Prevent 
Teen and Unplanned 
Pregnancy, 216– 217 
 National Center of Sexual 
Education (CENESEX) 
(Cuba), 86 
 National Committee on Federal 
Legislation for Birth Control, 
146
 National Day to Prevent Teen and 
Unplanned Pregnancy, 217 
 National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), 
199 – 200 
 National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, 
209 – 210
 National Network of Adolescents 
for Sexual and Reproductive 
Health (Argentina), 92 
 National Organization for Women 
(NOW), 64 
 National Public Radio (NPR), 
35 – 36.  See also NPR/KFF/JFK 
poll on sex education 
 National Right to Life (NRL), 
217 – 218 

Index 285
 National Survey of Family 
Growth, 34 
 National Union for Women’s 
Political Suffrage, 151 
 National Women’s Health Resource 
Center (NWHRC), 218 
 National Youth Advocacy 
Coalition, 27 
 Natural family planning (NFP) 
methods, 20 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae,  8 – 9 
 Netherlands 
 pregnancy rate data, 77 
 sex education in, 77 – 78 
The New Spirit Controlled Woman
(LaHaye), 137 
 New York Society for the 
Suppression of Vice (NYSSV), 
130 – 131 
 Nigeria, education campaigns, 97 
 Ninth Amendment (U.S. 
Constitution), 169 
 Nissen, Marvin “Tom,” 149 
 Nixon, Richard M., 145 
 Noguchi, Hideyo, 137 – 138 
 Nonoxynol-9 spermicide, 16 
 NPR/KFF/JFK poll on sex 
education, 35 – 36, 49 – 50, 90 
 Obama, Barack, 38, 41 
 family funding policy reversals, 
98 
 Mexico City Policy revocation, 
157, 167 – 168 
 Office of Population Affairs 
(OPA), 200 
 Office of Public Health and 
Science, 200 
 Oral contraception, 14, 17 – 18, 39, 
54, 143 
 Orphans due to AIDS (estimates), 
194 , 198 
 Ottesen-Jensen, Elise, 138 – 139 
 Pacific institute for Women’s 
Health, 214 
 Parents, Families and Friends of 
Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG), 
27 – 28, 226 – 227 
Parker v. Hurley (2007), 48, 174 – 178 
 Parlin, Robert, 139 
 Patches, of hormones, 18 
 Pathfinder International, 214 
 Paul VI (Pope), 140 
Pediculosis capitis (head louse), 4 
Pediculosis pubis infections, 3 – 4 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) 
 from chlamydia, 6 
 from gonorrhea, 9 
 Penile cancer, 63 
 Perry, Rick, 64 – 65, 125, 162 – 163. 
See also Mandatory HPV 
Vaccination 
 Personal, Social, Health, and 
Economic Education (PSHE) 
rubric (United Kingdom), 79 
 Pharmacists and Plan B 
controversy, 59 – 62 
 AMA position, 60 
 APhA position, 60 
 Christian group position, 60 
 Concerned Women for America 
action, 62 
 federal/state regulation 
attempts, 61 
 Walgreen pharmacy example, 59 
 Pharmacy Access Partnership, 
218 – 219 
 The Pill.  See Oral contraception 
 Pincus, Gregory Goodwin, 129, 
141 – 142 
 Pink Triangle Trust, 80 
The Pivot of Civilization (Sanger), 
146
 Plan B (emergency contraception), 
19
 age/availability controversy, 
58 – 59 
 pharmacist dispensing 
controversy, 59 – 62 
 prescription vs. over-the-
counter, 58 

286 Index
 Planned Parenthood Federation of 
America (PPFA), 128, 219 
 Poland, sex education in, 78 
 Population Action International 
(PAI), 219– 220 
 Population Council (PC), 144, 
220 – 221 
 Positive Living Project (USAID), 
208
Preacher’s Son (Jennings), 133 
 Pregnancy and contraception, 
14 – 21 
 abstinence/fertility awareness, 
19 – 20 
 barrier methods, 15 – 17 
 historical background, 14 – 15 
 hormonal methods, 15, 17 – 19 
 intrauterine devices, 19 
 sterilization, 20 – 21 
 Pregnancy/live birthrates for 
females 15–19 years of age, 
by age, race. Hispanic origin 
(1980–2000), 192 – 193 
 Premarital pregnancy, 33 
 Preparing Young People for Adult 
Life: Personal, Social, Health, 
and Economic Education 
(PSHE) (UK), 79 
 Prevention Not Prohibition 
campaign (CFC), 207 
 Prevention programs, for HIV/
AIDS, 13 – 14, 90 – 92 
 in Argentina, 92 
 in Cambodia, 91 – 92 
 in the Dominican Republic, 91 
 in India, 92 
 in Tanzania, 91 
 Pro-Choice Public Education 
Project (PEP), 221 
 Program for Appropriate 
Technology in Health, 214 
 Programme of Action (World 
Population Plan of Action), 
96 – 97 
 PROJECT 10 teachers, 46 
 PSHE rubric. See Personal, Social, 
Health, and Economic 
Education (PSHE) rubric 
 Public Health Service Act (1981)
(Title XX), 37, 200 
 Public opinion polls 
 on homosexuality, 24 – 25 
 on sex education, 34 – 36 
 Public sexual health issues, 
180 – 182 
Questions and Answers about Love 
and Sex (Calderone), 128 
 Quierosaber.org, 204 
 Reagan, Ronald, 98, 156.  See also
Mexico City Policy 
 Reisman, Judith A., 46 
Release from Sexual Tensions
(Calderone), 128 
 Religious Coalition for Repro-
ductive Choice (RCRC), 
221 – 222 
 Religious freedom rights 
(First Amendment, U.S. 
Constitution), 173 
Report of the Fourth Meeting of the 
Follow-Up Committee on the 
Implementation of the Dakar/
Ngor Declaration (DND) and 
the Programme of Action of the 
International Conference on 
Population and Development 
(ICPD-PA), 97 
 Reproductive Health and 
Research (RHR) Department 
(WHO), 95 
 Reproductive Health Technologies 
(RHTP), 222 – 223 
 Research on abstinence-only 
education, 39 – 41 
 Resources for Parents of GLBT 
Youth, 228 
 Resources for Youth suicide 
counseling, 228 

Index 287
 Responsible Education About Life 
(REAL) Act (2007), 159 – 161 
 Responsible Social Values 
Programs (RSVP), 203 
 Riksförbundet för Sexuell 
Upplysning (Swedish 
Association for Sexuality 
Education), 138 
 Rock, John, 142 – 143 
 Rockefeller, John D., III, 143 – 145 
Roe v. Wade (1973), 157 – 158, 
170 – 171, 217 
 Roman Catholic Church, 78, 85 
 Romania World Population 
Conference, 96 – 97 
 Rosenbaum, Janet E., 39 
 Rusk, Dean, 134 
 Safe Schools Program for Gay 
and Lesbian Students 
(Massachusetts), 139 
 Sainsbury, J., 206 
 Sanger, Margaret, 129, 142, 
145 – 146, 219.  See also Planned 
Parenthood Federation of 
America
 Santorum, Rick, 36, 38, 154 – 156 
 Satcher, David, 180 – 182 
 School programs, issues 
transcending, 31, 33, 53 – 65 
 contraceptive access, 57 – 58 
 contraceptive devices access, 
53 – 57 
 contraceptives, pharmacist 
prescriptions, 59 – 62 
 human papillomavirus, 62 – 65 
 Plan B controversy, 58 – 59 
 Search and Seizure (Fourth) 
Amendment (U.S. 
Constitution), 169 
 The See Change Campaign (CFC), 
207
 Self-Incrimination Clause 
(Fifth Amendment, U.S. 
Constitution), 169 
 Separate Program for Abstinence 
Education (1996), 154 – 156 
 Sex education, 33 – 53.  See also
Abstinence-only education 
 abortion, 50 – 52 
 in Africa, 87 
 in Australia, 83 – 84 
 Chicago Experiment, 31 – 33 
 in China, 81 – 82 
 condom instruction, 42 – 44 
 course content, 36 – 42 
 decisions about teaching, 52 – 53 
 in Denmark, 77 
 homosexuality, 44 – 50 
 in India, 82 – 83 
 in Japan, 81 
 in Latin America, 85 – 86 
 in the Muslim World, 84 – 85 
 in the Netherlands, 77 – 78 
 NPR/KFF/JFK poll on, 35 – 36, 
49 – 50 
 opposition to, 33 
Parker v. Hurley, 48, 174 – 177 
 in Poland, 78 
 public opinion on, 34 – 36 
 school-based, 31, 33 
 in Spain, 78 – 79 
 in the United Kingdom, 79 – 80 
 Vision for the Future, 180– 182 
Sex Education: An Islamic 
Perspective (Athar), 84 
Sex Education Guidelines  (Japan), 81 
Sexual Behavior in the Human 
Female (Kinsey), 133, 134, 199 
Sexual Behavior in the Human Male
(Kinsey), 133, 199 
Sexual Health and Family Planning
(Calderone), 128 
 Sexual Minority Youth Assistance 
League (SMYAL), 227 
 Sexual orientation and gender 
identity, 21 – 28 
 GLBTQ youth issues, 24 – 28 
 hormonal basis, 21 – 22 
 public opinion polls, 24 – 25 

288 Index
 terminology, 22 – 24 
 worldwide perspectives, 98 – 101 
Sexuality and Human Values
(Calderone), 128 
 Sexuality Information and 
Education Council (SIEC)
(U.S.), 223 
 Sexually active high school 
students using condoms or 
birth control pills by sex, race, 
ethnicity (2003), 193 – 194 
 Sexually Information and 
Education Council (SIECUS), 
51, 128 
 Sexually transmitted diseases 
(STDs), 38 – 39, 44, 94 – 95 
 American Social Health 
Association, 4, 204 – 205 
 cases, in U.S. (2007), 5 
 Helium poll, 56 – 57 
 historical background, 2 – 3 
 symptoms, prognosis, 
treatment, 5 – 14 
 types of, 3 – 5 
 Vision for the Future, 180 
 WHO focus on, 95, 201 – 202 
 Sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs). See Sexually 
transmitted diseases 
 Sexually transmitted infections 
(U.S., 1966–2007), 184 – 188 
 Sheldon, Louis, 45 
 Shepard, Matthew, 146 – 147, 226 
 Shingles (human herpesvirus 4), 9 
 Social Security Act, Title VI, 36, 38 
 Soranus of Ephesus (Greek 
physician), 15 
 South Africa 
 education campaigns, 97 
 gonorrhea data, 96 
 HIV/AIDS epidemic, 88 – 89 
 South Dakota House Bill 1215 
(2006), 157 – 159 
 South Dakota Task Force to Study 
Abortion, 157 
 Spain, sex education in, 78 – 79 
 Spanish Language Media 
Initiative, 203 
 Special Investigations Division 
(SID) of the House Committee 
on Government Reform, 51 
 Special Programme of Research, 
Development, and Research 
Training in Human 
Reproduction (WHO), 214 
 Special Programs of Regional 
and National Significance-
Community-Based
Abstinence Education 
(SPRANS-CBAE), 37 – 38, 40, 
183
 Specter, Arlen, 38 
 Spermicides, 15 – 16 
Spiritual Power for the Family
(LaHaye), 137 
 Spiritual Youth for Reproductive 
Freedom (SYRF), 222 
 SPRANS-CBAE. See Special 
Programs of Regional and 
National Significance-
Community-Based
Abstinence Education 
 Steichen, Edward, 127 
 Sterilization, 20 – 21 
 Stonehill College, 42 
 Stopes, Marie, 148 – 149 
 Sudan, syphilis data, 95 
 Suicides/suicide attempts, 25, 229 
A Supplementary Brief and 
Statement of Facts (Sanger), 
146
 Surgeon General’s Call to Action 
to Promote Sexual Health and 
Responsible Sexual Behavior, 
180 – 182 
 Swank, Hillary, 149 
 Swaziland, HIV/AIDS epidemic, 
89
 Symptoms, prognosis, treatment 
of STIs, 5 – 14 
 chlamydia, 5 – 6 
 gonorrhea, 8 – 9 

Index 289
 hepatitis, 10 – 12 
 herpes, 9 – 10 
 HIV/AIDS, 12 – 14 
 syphilis, 6 – 8, 94 – 95 
 Syphilis, 6 – 8, 94 – 95 
Talking with Your Child about Sex
(Calderone), 128 – 129 
 Tanzania 
 education campaigns, 97 
 HIV/AIDS programs, 91 
 TBCTA tuberculosis control 
program, 212 
 Teena, Brandon, 149 – 150 
Telling Tales Out of School
(Jennings), 133 
 Texas 
 Mandatory HVP Vaccination, 
161 – 163 
Roe v. Wade,  157 – 158, 170 – 171, 
217
 Sex Education law, 153 – 154 
 Tisdel, Lana, 149 
 Tolerant Intelligent Network of 
Teens (TINT), 228 
 Tomorrow Project, 211 
 Traditional Values Coalition, 45 
 Transgendered individuals, 23 
 Treatment/prevention programs, 
for HIV/AIDS, 13 – 14, 90 – 92 
 in Argentina, 92 
 in Cambodia, 91 – 92 
 in the Dominican Republic, 91 
 in India, 92 
 in Tanzania, 91 
Treponema pallidum,  6 – 7 
 Tubal ligation, 20 – 21 
 Unitarian Universalist 
Association, 221 
 United Kingdom 
 Family Education Trust, 80 
 Gay and Lesbian Humanist 
Association, 80 
 gay/lesbian organizations, 80 
 Pink Triangle Trust, 80 
 PSHE rubric, 79 
 sex education in, 79 – 80 
 United Nations Economic 
Commission for Africa, 97 
 United Nations International 
Conference on Population 
(Mexico), 97 – 98, 156 – 157 
 United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA), 97, 200 – 201 
 United States Conference of 
Bishops, 223 – 224 
 U.S. Agency for International 
Development (USAID), 
156 – 157, 167 – 168, 208 
 U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, 200 
 U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF), 197 
 Utah Pride Center, 227 – 228 
 Vaccinations 
 for hepatitis A, 11 
 for hepatitis B, 12 
 for human papillomavirus, 
63 – 65 
 Vaginal film (barrier method), 16 
 Vaginal rings, 16, 18 
 Values and Sexuality program 
(Cuba), 86 
 Vasectomies, 20 – 21 
 Vincent, Clark, 223 
 Virginity pledge, 39 
 Vision for the Future section (from 
Surgeon General’s report), 
180 – 182 
 Vulvar cancer, 63 
 Walters, Barbara, 136 
 Wells, Norman, 80 
What Every Girl Should Know
(Sanger), 146 
What Every Mother Should Know
(Sanger), 146 
 Widerström, Karolina Olivia, 
150 – 151 
Wise Parenthood (Stopes), 149 

290 Index
Woman and the New Race (Sanger), 
146
A Woman’s Path to True Significance
(LaHaye), 137 
 Women 
 chlamydia cases/consequences, 
4
 gonorrhea symptoms, 8 
 obtaining legal abortions, 
characteristics of, 188 – 192 
 Women’s counseling services, 97 
 Worcester Foundation for 
Experimental Biology, 129 
 World Health Assembly, 95 
 World Health Organization 
(WHO), 201 – 202 
 on maternal deaths during 
childbirth, 14 
 on sexually transmitted 
infections, 95, 201 – 202 
 Special Programme of 
Research, Development, and 
Research Training in Human 
Reproduction, 214 
 World Population Conference, 96, 
144
 World Population Plan of Action 
(WWPA), 96 
 Young Communist Union (UJC) 
(Cuba), 86 
 Young People’s Sexual Health 
(YPSH), 224 
 Youth and Campus Activism 
program, 226 
Youth Development Approaches 
in Adolescent Family Life 
Demonstration Projects, 200 
 Youth Guardian Services (YGS), 
228 
 Youth Lounge (online), 226 
 Youth Pride, 228 – 229 
 Youth Resource (Advocates for 
Youth), 27 
 Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance 
System (YRBSS), 193 – 194 
 Zur Hausen, Harald, 151– 152 

 About the Author 
 David E. Newton holds an associate’s degree in science from 
Grand Rapids (Michigan) Junior College, a B.A. in chemistry 
(with high distinction) and an M.A. in education from the Univer-
sity of Michigan, and an Ed.D. in science education from Harvard 
 University. He is the author of more than 400 textbooks, encyclo-
pedias, resource books, research manuals, laboratory manuals, 
trade books, and other educational materials. He taught math-
ematics, chemistry, and physical science in Grand Rapids, Michi-
gan, for 13 years; was professor of chemistry and physics at Salem 
State College in Massachusetts for 15 years; and was adjunct 
professor in the College of Professional Studies at the University 
of San Francisco for 10 years. Previous books for ABC-CLIO in-
clude Global Warming: A Reference Handbook  (1993),  Gay and Lesbian 
Rights: A Reference Handbook  (1994, 2010),  The Ozone Dilemma: A 
Reference Handbook  (1995),  Violence and the Mass Media: A Reference 
Handbook  (1996),  Encyclopedia of Cryptology  (1997), and  Social Is-
sues in Science and Technology: An Encyclopedia  (1999), and  DNA 
 Technology (2010). 

