
 SEXUAL CRIME 

 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
 American Families in Crisis,  Jeffrey S. Turner 
 Campaign and Election Reform,  Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann 
Strickland
 Chemical and Biological Warfare,  Al Mauroni 
 Childhood Sexual Abuse,  Karen L. Kinnear 
 Climate Change,  David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine 
Vaughan
 Corporate Crime,  Richard D. Hartley
 Domestic Violence,  Margi Laird McCue 
 Education in Crisis,  Judith A. Gouwens 
 Emergency Management,  Jeffrey B. Bumgarner 
 Energy Use Worldwide,  Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith 
 Environmental Justice,  David E. Newton 
 Food Safety,  Nina E. Redman 
 Gangs,  Karen L. Kinnear 
 Globalization,  Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith 
 Lobbying in America,  Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan 
 Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy,  Glenn H. Utter 
 Mental Health in America,   Donna R. Kemp 
 Modern Sports Ethics,   Angela Lumpkin 
 Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation,  Sarah J. Diehl and James 
Clay Moltz 
 Obesity,  Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks  
 Policing in America,  Leonard A. Steverson 
 Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources,  Zachary A. Smith and 
Katrina D. Taylor 
Rich and Poor in America,  Geoffrey Gilbert 
 Sentencing, Dean  John Champion 
 U.S. National Security,  Cynthia A. Watson 
 U.S. Social Security,  Steven G. Livingston 
 Waste Management,  Jacqueline Vaughn 
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit  
www.abc-clio.com. 

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding of 
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing 
the world today. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 SEXUAL CRIME 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Caryn E. Neumann 
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES 
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

 Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Neumann, Caryn E., 1965-
 Sexual crime : a reference handbook / Caryn E. Neumann.
  p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-177-0 (print : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-178-7 
(ebook : alk. paper) 1. Sex crimes. I. Title.
 HV6556.N48 2009
 364.15'3—dc22   2009043177 
 14 13 12 11 10  1 2 3 4 5
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
 This book is printed on acid-free paper  
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

vii
 Contents 
 Preface,  xvii
 1 
Background and History,  1
 History of Sexual Assault , 2
 Sexual Assault in the 17th Century , 2
 Sexual Assault in the 18th Century , 3
 Sexual Assault in the 19th Century , 7
 Sexual Assault in the 20th Century , 10
 Sexual Assault Myths , 13
 Sexual Crime Categories , 16
 Campus Rape , 16
 Child Rape , 17
 Date Rape/Acquaintance Rape , 17
 Forcible Rape , 18
 Foreign-Object Rape , 18
 Gang Rape , 19
 Homosexual Rape , 19
 Incest , 21
 Interracial Rape , 22
 Marital Rape , 22
 Prison Rape , 23
 Secondary Rape , 23
 Serial Rape and Serial Rapists , 24
 Statutory Rape , 26
 Conclusion , 27
 Further Reading , 27
 2 
Issues, Controversies, and Problems , 29
 Victims , 29
 Rape Myth Acceptance , 29

viii Contents
 Who is Likely to Be Raped? , 31
 Male Victims , 33
 Victims of Same-Sex Rape , 34
 Attackers , 35
 Rape Myth Acceptance , 35
 Student Athletes , 37
 Fraternities , 39
 Clergy , 40
 Stranger Rape , 40
 Female Sex Offenders , 41
 After the Attack , 43
 Providing Rape Services to Victims , 43
 Providing Help for Raped and Battered Wives , 45
 Mental Health , 46
 Treating Male Victims of Sexual Assault , 48
 Law Enforcement , 49
 Arrests for Rape , 49
 Mistrust of Law Enforcement , 50
 Police Sexual Misconduct , 52
 Rape Kits , 53
 Judicial System , 55
 Rape Shield Laws , 55
 Prosecution Challenges , 56
 Prohibiting Rape , 58
 Correctional System , 58
 Prison Rape , 58
 Sex Offender Residency Laws , 59
 Sex Offender Registration , 61
 Stopping Repeat Sexual Offenders , 63
 Medical Treatment of Offenders , 65
 Conclusion , 68
 Further Reading , 68
 3 
Worldwide Perspectives , 73
 Africa , 74
 Rape,  74
 Rape as a War Crime , 76
 Child Sexual Abuse , 77
 Wife Rape , 78
 Femicide , 78
 Asia , 79
 Rape , 79

Contents ix
 Wife Rape , 80
 Gang Rape , 80
 Rape as a War Crime , 80
 Child Sexual Abuse , 82
 Sex Trafficking , 84
 Europe , 88
 Rape , 88
 Sex Trafficking , 90
 Gang Rape , 91
 Latin America , 92
 Rape , 92
 Wife Rape , 94
 Religion and Sexual Assault , 95
 Rape as a War Crime , 96
 Rape as a Hate Crime , 97
 Sex Trafficking , 98
 Conclusion , 98
 Further Reading , 99
 4 
Chronology , 101
 5 
Biographies , 123
 Paul Martin Andrews , 123
 Joanne Archambault , 124
 Barbara Blaine , 125
 Yosef Blau , 126
 Carol Bohmer , 127
 Stephen Donaldson , 127
 Mark Dratch , 129
 Susan Estrich , 130
 Bakira Hasecic,  131
 Mukhtar Mai , 132
 Betty Makoni , 133
 Somaly Mam , 134
 Trisha Meili , 136
 Florence Mumba , 137
 Victoria Polin , 138
 Kathy Redmond , 139
 Jill Saward , 140
 Russell Dan Smith , 142
 Sandyawan Sumardi , 143
 John Walsh , 144

x Contents
 Laura X , 145
 Further Reading , 146
 6 
Data and Documents , 149
 Historical Data , 149
 19th-Century Data , 149
 Record for the Year 1892 , 150
 Wartime Rapes , 150
 Current U.S. Military Policy on Rape , 151
 Prostitution , 154
 Child Prostitution , 154
 Male Prostitution , 155
 Violent Sexual Criminals , 156
 Sex Offender Data , 156
 Victim Data , 157
 Relationship Between Victim and Attacker , 158
 Violent Sexual Crimes Against Persons Age 65 
or Older, 1993–2002 , 159
 Sexual Crime on Campus,  159
 Jeanne Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy 
and Campus Crime Statistics , 161
 Prison Rape , 167
 Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 , 167
 Sexual Victimization of Prisoners in Local Jails 
Reported by Inmates, 2007 , 188
 Rates of Forcible Rape Nationwide , 188
 Further Reading , 202
 7 
Directory of Organizations , 203
 Abused Deaf Women’s Advocacy Services 
(ADWAS) , 203
 AdvocateWeb , 203
 Association for Women’s Self-Defense Advancement 
(AWSDA),  204
 Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers , 204
 American Civil Liberties Union , 205
 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
(ACOG) , 205
 American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children 
(APSAC) , 206
 Campus Outreach Services , 206
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , 206

Contents xi
 Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM) , 207
 Childhelp USA , 207
 Clan Star, Inc. , 208
 Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking (CAST) , 208
 Community United Against Violence , 208
 Coordinadora Paz para la Mujer, Inc. 
[Coordinating Peace for the Woman] , 209
 COYOTE and St. James Infirmary , 209
 Faith Trust Institute , 210
 Federal Bureau of Investigation , 210
 Feminist Majority Foundation , 210
 Gift From Within , 211
 Hamilton Fish Institute on School 
and Community Violence , 211
 Higher Education Center for Alcohol and Other 
Drug Abuse and Violence Prevention , 211
 Human Rights Watch , 212
 IAFN Sexual Assault Forensic Examination Technical 
Assistance (SAFE TA) , 212
 Illusion Theatre , 212
 IMPACT International , 213
 Incite! Women of Color Against Violence , 213
 International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) , 214
 International Association of Forensic Nurses (IAFN) , 214
 Legal Momentum , 214
 Male Survivor (formerly National Organization 
on Male Sexual Victimization) , 215
 Men Can Stop Rape , 215
 Mending the Sacred Hoop , 215
 Miles Foundation, Inc. , 215
 National Alliance to End Sexual Violence , 216
 National Association of Counsel for Children , 216
 National Black Women’s Health Imperative , 216
 National Center for Higher Education Risk 
Management (NCHERM) , 217
 National Center for Injury Prevention and Control , 217
 National Center for Missing & Exploited Children , 217
 National Center for Prosecution of Child Abuse , 218
 National Center for Victims of Crime , 218
 National Center for Women & Policing , 218
 National Center on Elder Abuse , 218
 National Children’s Alliance , 219

xii Contents
 National Children’s Advocacy Center , 219
 National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse & Neglect 
Information , 220
 National Clearinghouse on Marital and Date Rape , 220
 National Coalition Against Domestic Violence,  220
 National Coalition of Anti-Violence Projects , 220
 National Coalition for the Protection of Children & 
Families (NCPCF) , 221
 National Committee for the Prevention of 
Elder Abuse , 221
 National Council on Child Abuse and Family Violence 
(NCCAFV) , 221
 National Crime Victim Law Institute , 221
 National Crime Victims Research & Treatment Center , 222
 National Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA) , 222
 National Institute on Drug Abuse , 222
 National Organization for Victim Assistance , 223
 National Organization of Sisters of Color Ending 
Sexual Assault (SCESA) , 223
 National Sexual Assault Coalition Resource 
Sharing Project , 223
 National Sexual Violence Resource Center , 224
 National Women’s Law Center , 224
 Office for Victims of Crime , 224
 Office of Juvenile Justice & Delinquency Prevention , 225
 Office of Minority Health Resource Center , 225
 Office on Violence Against Women , 225
 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Alliance , 226
 Prevent Child Abuse America , 226
 Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network (RAINN) , 226
 Sacred Circle: National Resource Center to End 
Violence Against Native Women , 226
 Security on Campus, Inc. , 227
 SESAME. (Stop Educator Sexual Abuse, Misconduct 
and Exploitation) , 227
 Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner/Sexual Assault 
Response Team Website , 227
 Sexual Assault Report (SAR) , 228
 Sexual Assault Training & Investigations (SATI) , 228
 Sexual Information and Education Council of the 
United States , 228
 Sidran Traumatic Stress Institute , 228

Contents xiii
 SNAP—Survivors Network of those Abused 
by Priests , 229
 Speaking Out About Rape , 229
 Stalking Resource Center , 229
 Stop it Now! , 230
 Stop Prisoner Rape , 230
 Survivors Take Action Against Abuse by Military 
Personnel (STAMP) , 230
 Take Back the Night , 231
 Urban Institute , 231
 V-Day , 231
 Victims’ Assistance Legal Association (VALOR) , 231
 Victim Rights Law Center , 232
 Voices in Action , 232
 Wellesley Centers for Women , 232
 World Health Organization , 233
 YWCA of the U.S.A. , 233
 State and Territorial Organizations , 233
 Alabama Coalition Against Rape , 233
 Alaska Network on Domestic Violence 
and Sexual Assault , 234
 American Samoa Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence , 234
 Arizona Sexual Assault Network , 234
 Arkansas Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 234
 California Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 234
 Colorado Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 235
 Connecticut Sexual Assault Crisis Services, Inc. , 235
 ContactLifeline, Inc. (Delaware) , 235
 Day One—Sexual Assault & Trauma Resource 
Center of Rhode Island , 235
 DC Rape Crisis Center , 236
 Domestic Violence Sexual Assault Council of the 
Virgin Islands , 236
 Florida Council Against Sexual Violence , 236
 Georgia Network to End Sexual Assault , 236
 Hawaii Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 236
 Healing Hearts Crisis Center (Guam) , 237
 Idaho Coalition Against Sexual and Domestic Violence , 237
 Illinois Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 237
 Indiana Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 237
 Iowa Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 237

xiv Contents
 Jane Doe Inc. (Boston, Massachusetts) , 238
 Kansas Coalition Against Sexual and 
Domestic Violence , 238
 Kentucky Association of Sexual Assault Programs , 238
 Louisiana Foundation Against Sexual Assault , 238
 Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 238
 Maryland Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 239
 Michigan Coalition Against Domestic and 
Sexual Violence , 239
 Minnesota Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 239
 Mississippi Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 239
 Missouri Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence , 239
 Montana Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence , 240
 Nebraska Domestic Violence Sexual Assault Coalition , 240
 Nevada Coalition Against Sexual Violence , 240
 New Hampshire Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence , 240
 New Jersey Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 240
 New Mexico Coalition of Sexual Assault Programs , 241
 New York State Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 241
 North Carolina Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 241
 North Dakota Council on Abused Women’s Services , 241
 Oklahoma Coalition Against Domestic Violence 
and Sexual Assault , 242
 Oregon Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence , 242
 Pennsylvania Coalition Against Rape , 242
 South Carolina Coalition Against Domestic 
Violence and Sexual Assault , 242
 South Dakota Coalition Against Domestic 
Violence and Sexual Violence , 242
 South Dakota Network Against Family Violence 
and Sexual Assault , 243
 Tennessee Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence , 243
 Texas Association Against Sexual Assault , 243
 Utah Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 243
 Vermont Network Against Domestic Violence 
and Sexual Assault , 243
 Virginia Sexual and Domestic Violence Action Alliance , 244

Contents xv
 Washington Coalition of Sexual Assault Programs , 244
 West Virginia Foundation for Rape Information 
and Services , 244
 Wisconsin Coalition Against Sexual Assault , 244
 8 
Resources , 245
 Print Resources , 245
 Child Sexual Abuse , 245
 Date or Acquaintance Rape , 249
 Domestic Violence , 250
 History of Sexual Assault , 251
 Prison Rape , 255
 Prostitution , 255
 Runaway Sexual Abuse , 258
 Sexual Abuse—General , 259
 War-Related Rape , 276
 Multimedia Sources , 277
 Date or Acquaintance Rape , 277
 History of Sexual Assault , 278
 Prison Rape , 280
 Prostitution , 280
 Rape in Popular Films , 281
 Rape Prevention , 284
 Rape Recovery , 284
 Sexual Orientation Issues , 285
 World History , 285
 Glossary , 287
 Index , 291
 About the Author, 313

This page intentionally left blank 

xvii
 Preface 
 R
ape is a problem as old as humanity. It is referenced in ancient 
art and in the Bible. Yet it is also paradoxically a topic that 
remained off the public agenda until the rise of the women’s 
movement in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Everyone knew that 
rape existed but no one wanted to acknowledge it. The silence 
aided rapists and furthered the suffering of victims. Myths 
about rape were allowed to flourish because everyone knew 
that they were true while no one investigated them to see if they 
were indeed true. 
 The attitudes toward sexual crime have changed dramati-
cally in just the past few decades. As this book went to press, rep-
resentatives of the Catholic Church in Ireland publicly apologized 
for the sexual and other types of abuse that boys and girls under 
its care suffered from the 1930s to the 1990s. The Commission to 
Inquire into Child Abuse, created by the government of Ireland, 
made the abuse public. In earlier eras, the sexual abuse would 
have remained a forbidden topic allowed by silence to continue, 
as it clearly did for at least 60 years in Ireland. Sexual crime is no 
longer a taboo subject. 
 Rapists are no longer excused for their actions.  Saturday Night 
Fever  is a landmark 1977 movie that made John Travolta into a star 
while popularizing disco. Everyone of a certain age remembers 
Travolta’s white suit, his moves on the dance floor, and the Bee 
Gees soundtrack. Few recall that Travolta’s Tony Manero charac-
ter tried to rape his dance partner or that two of Manero’s friends 
gang-raped a young woman. The boys were just being boys and the 
girl got what she had asked for. The sexual attacks were simply not 
 important enough to most viewers to be remembered. It is doubtful 
that filmgoers of the 21st century would have the same dismissive 
reaction. We know enough about rape today to condemn it. 

xviii Preface
 Sexual crime victims are no longer shamed into silence. The 
media traditionally has not reported the names of rape victims 
to protect the victims from public embarrassment. Victims were 
once thought to be so ruined by a rape that their lives would be 
destroyed if the fact of the rape became public knowledge. In-
creasingly, however, rape victims are coming forward to tell their 
stories and they ask the media to use their real names. These in-
dividuals, such as child victim Paul Martin Andrews and prison 
rape victim Stephen Donaldson, are angry at the fact that they 
were attacked by sexual predators. They typically speak out to 
encourage other victims to come forward or to make certain that 
the criminal pays for his crimes. They also seek to draw attention 
to types of rapes that have received comparatively little attention, 
such as sex trafficking. Several high-profile victims of rape, such 
as legal scholar Susan Estrich and Cambodian antiprostitution ac-
tivist Somaly Mam, have done much to reform the treatment of 
rape victims. It is clear that many rape victims believe that shame 
should attach to the rapist and not to his or her victim. 
 Yet major issues clearly remain. Movies and television shows 
teach women that rapists are strangers, but most rapists are known 
to their victims. The abuse of alcohol makes someone more likely 
to be a victim and more likely to be an attacker. Native American 
women are three-and-a-half times more likely to suffer sexual as-
sault than white, black, Latina, or Asian women, partly because of 
the high rate of alcohol abuse in Indian country. However, com-
paratively little antirape activism has focused on substance abuse. 
Meanwhile, everyone knows that real men cannot be raped. So, 
rape centers cater explicitly or implicitly to women, leaving male 
victims of rape shut out and further victimized. Victimization 
is more than just physical, though these injuries can be severe. 
Victims can suffer psychologically, socially, intellectually, and fi-
nancially long after physical wounds have healed. These other 
wounds have received comparatively little attention because they 
are less obvious. 
 This book is an objective introduction to contemporary issues 
surrounding sexual crime. It is designed to provide a broad range 
of information about an issue that may touch the lives of many 
Americans. Interest in the study of sexual crime has grown tre-
mendously in the last few decades. The identification of date or 
acquaintance rape as a social problem, in particular, has prompted 
high schools and colleges to implement rape education or aware-
ness programs. Self-defense classes for women have become 

Preface xix
common. Yet no comprehensive reference handbook on sexual 
crime has existed to help educators, activists, or students. The best 
defense against sexual crime is knowledge. 
 This book is divided into eight chapters. The first chapter 
covers the history of sexual crime and discusses the various rape 
myths that have persisted over the years. It identifies the vari-
ous types of rapists. This chapter provides historical context for 
students to understand the current issues relating to sexual crime. 
The second chapter is split into sections on victims, attackers, 
after the attack, law enforcement, and the judicial system. It pro-
vides the latest findings as well as a discussion of controversies 
and problems in the reporting and prosecution of sexual crime. 
The third chapter focuses on sexual crime in Africa, Asia, Eu-
rope, and Latin America. It provides information about the key 
issues relating to sexual crime in these regions, such as rape as a 
war crime and forced prostitution. A chronology of events relat-
ing to sex crime is provided in the fourth chapter. The fifth chap-
ter includes over 20 short biographies of antirape activists and 
policymakers around the world, including Andrews, Donaldson, 
Estrich, and Mam. Important statistics and data about sex crimes 
can be found in chapter six. The last two chapters are devoted to 
resources. Chapter seven is a directory of selected public and pri-
vate organizations that address sex crime. Chapter eight contains 
an annotated bibliography of print and film resources, including 
popular films and documentaries. 
 I have many people to thank for their help in this project. 
Sandra Carrigg, Pam Hipple, Dr. Susan Cratty, and Dr. Sara Jane 
Rowland provided research assistance. The librarians of Miami 
University of Ohio at Middletown kindly thanked me for boost-
ing their circulation numbers. I appreciate their good humor. I 
am quite delighted to be part of the Miami of Ohio family. I am 
also grateful to be a graduate of The Ohio State University and 
to have worked under the guidance of Dr. Susan M. Hartmann. 
Holly Heinzer of ABC-CLIO suggested that I write this book. Lau-
ren Thomas and Kim Kennedy White, both at ABC-CLIO, were 
 patient and enormously helpful. Any errors, of course, remain my 
responsibility. 
 This book is dedicated to all victims of sexual violence and to 
the people who fight against this violence. 

This page intentionally left blank 

1
 1 
 Background and History 
 S
exual crimes historically have not been as easy to classify as 
other offenses. Both the definition of the crime and the vic-
tim of the crime have changed over the years. The act that one 
person views as a violation may be seen by another as something 
natural and certainly permissible. The physical reality of rape has 
not changed over time: the penetration of a vagina or other orifice 
by a penis or other object without the consent of the man, woman, 
or child being penetrated. Definitions of rape, ideas, perceptions, 
and applicable laws have all shifted over the years. 
 Legal perceptions of rape are shaped by time and place. For 
much of history, women have been regarded as the property of 
men. Wulfstan, the Archbishop of York, relates in the  Lupi sermo 
ad Anglos  in 1014 the plight of an Anglo-Saxon who is shamed 
by the gang rape of his wife by Vikings. Wulfstan focuses only 
on the man’s shame, ignoring the woman’s pain. Medieval law 
in Burgundy,  Lex Gundobada,  states that a woman who rejects 
the man to whom she is married shall be put to death in mud 
( Taylor, 2002, p. 161). While rape within marriage is probably the 
most typical age-old example of a sexual attack permitted by 
legal authorities, rape has not always been regarded as a criminal 
act. Historically, slaves have been used for sexual purposes. The 
 Arabic word  jariyah  means slave girl or concubine, while the word 
for slave boy,  ghulam , has homosexual connotations ( Taylor, 2002, 
p. 87). 
 Since women were essentially the property of men, the rape 
of a woman became a crime committed against her father or 
husband. His authority as head of household was undermined 
whether or not prosecution proved successful. An acquittal of an 

2 Background and History
accused rapist pointed to a man’s inability to control his wife’s or 
daughter’s sexuality, while a conviction would show that another 
man had successfully overcome his ability to protect the members 
of his household. Men, expected to be strong enough to defend 
themselves as well as to be sexual aggressors, were simply not 
considered as rape victims, particularly in eras when homosexual 
activities were taboo. Modern laws in the United States recognize 
that both men and women can be raped. 
 History of Sexual Assault 
 Sexual Assault in the 17th Century 
 Seventeenth-century colonial America consisted of a long strip 
of sparsely populated land along the Atlantic seaboard of North 
America. The separate colonies had legal institutions that were 
shaped by both their historic relationships to Europe and their 
own particular ethnic mixes. In addition to Native Americans, 
the population consisted of Europeans, some free and some in-
dentured servants, and Africans, some free and some in bondage. 
Together these factors make discussion of rape in 17th- century 
America a complicated one. 
 Befitting their close ties with Mother England, British colo-
nies adopted English law with respect to rape. The legal statutes 
of Virginia are typical. Convicted rapists faced the death pen-
alty since rape was a capital offense. Accordingly, the evidence 
against the accused first had to be heard by a grand jury. Juries 
were all-white and all-male. If the grand jury concluded that the 
prosecutor had sufficient evidence to secure a conviction, the 
case was tried by a petit jury, or trial jury, in the Virginia General 
Court. The jurors had to reach a unanimous verdict for convic-
tion. Conviction required two witnesses to the fact of penetra-
tion, an almost insurmountable barrier to successful prosecution. 
Further, if the victim was not a minor, independent proof of force 
was usually required to back up the victim’s claim that she had 
not consented. A woman’s word counted for little. To make mat-
ters even more difficult, force was defined as physical brutality, 
not economic or emotional power. 
 The paucity of sources makes it difficult to provide an ex-
ample of a rape from the 17th century. However, Martha Ballard, 
a midwife who kept a diary, reported an attack that may well be 

History of Sexual Assault 3
typical of earlier rapes on the frontier. Ballard lived in the late 
18th century in a sparsely settled area of Massachusetts. She pro-
vided medical care to a woman who claimed that she had been 
sexually assaulted in her home by a prominent man in the com-
munity while her husband was away. The victim did not press 
charges but Ballard clearly found her to be credible. Consider-
ing the isolation of many colonial homes, the vulnerability of 
women, and the prevalence of acquaintance rapes in the modern 
era, it is reasonable to suspect that rapes were not unknown in 
the 17th century. 
 In the absence of legal protections, few women were willing 
to charge rape. The surviving Virginia General Court records re-
veal no such cases prior to 1670, and only one has been found at 
the county level (Smith, 2004, p. 177 ). Women who charged rape 
risked the loss of their reputations and the destruction of their 
marriages if their husbands did not believe in their innocence. 
The results could be personally and financially devastating, as 
divorced women lost the custody of their children along with 
their major source of income. Additionally, many women were 
indentured servants. A servant who became pregnant could 
 legally have years added to her term of servitude as pun-
ishment. Well-off white southerners also believed that poorer 
women, especially those without husbands, were innately 
 depraved. There is also evidence that southern magistrates 
simply did not believe women’s accusations, unless they were 
against black or Native American men. Taken together, such 
factors and fears provided a decidedly cold climate for women 
who wanted to charge men with rape or attempted rape. 
 Rape, according to legal statutes, happened to women or 
girls only. A 1699 Massachusetts legal statute defined rape as 
sexual intercourse committed by a man on a woman against 
her will or sexual intercourse committed by a man against a girl 
under the age of 10 (Block, 2006, p. 56). There was no provision 
for same-sex rape, although men who engaged in sodomy could 
be prosecuted. 
 Sexual Assault in the 18th Century 
 Eighteenth-century Americans understood rape as always in-
cluding sexual intercourse between a man and a woman. Sex-
ual intercourse between men, or sodomy, whether forced or 
consensual, was always a sexual crime. Sexual intercourse with 

4 Background and History
girls under 10 years of age was considered to be rape regard-
less of their degree of consent. Marital rape simply could not 
occur—married women gave their perpetual consent to sex 
with their wedding vows. For most of the 18th century, as in the 
17th century, rape was a capital crime, punishable by execution. 
Only after the American Revolution did some states begin to 
eliminate the death penalty for rape. 
 However, early American courts only rarely executed rap-
ists. Courts were especially hesitant to execute upstanding white 
men for rape. Slaves brought before the courts in general were 
dealt with more harshly than the white population and slaves 
accused of rape were no exception. The majority of cases brought 
before the Massachusetts Superior Court involved defendants 
of low social standing, including Native Americans and  African 
Americans. In such cases, rape was an assault upon the dignity of 
higher-ranking men who should be able to protect their women 
against harm by servants, transients, and laborers. Rape attacked 
the authority of patriarchs. Most rape prosecutions were struc-
tured along racial lines. Cases involving white women were 
much more likely to be prosecuted than those involving women 
of color. Conversely, nonwhite males, especially African Amer-
ican men, were far more common targets of rape prosecutions 
than were white men. These distorted prosecutions contributed 
to the still common myth that black men were more likely to rape 
white women. 
 The American colonists of European descent stereotyped 
black men as animal-like beings who were oversexed, brutal, 
and especially dangerous to white women. Colonial and early 
American rape law mandated either castration or death for blacks
convicted of sexually assaulting or attempting to sexually as-
sault white women. (Castration did not necessarily have sexual 
connotations. Slaveholders and local officials typically utilized 
castration as a means to control difficult slaves. As one exam-
ple, in South Carolina, slaves who ran away for a fourth time 
could be castrated.) The 1738 case of Jemmy is representative. 
Jemmy, a slave owned by James Holman of Goochland County, 
Virginia, died by hanging for raping Elizabeth Weaver (Clinton & 
Gillespie, 1997, p. 79). In some cases, mere execution did not seem 
to be enough of a deterrent to would-be black rapists. In 1702, a 
Virginia slave hanged for the rape of a married woman suffered 
the additional punishment of having his head cut off and placed 
on a pole as a warning to deter other slaves from committing a 

History of Sexual Assault 5
similar crime. In 1777, the body of Titus, a North Carolina slave, 
was burned after he was hanged for committing a rape (Clinton & 
Gillespie, 1997, p. 80). 
 However, the courts apparently preferred castration or a 
lesser punishment than execution because the government would 
not have to compensate the slave owner for his loss of property. 
In an attempt to reduce the huge sums paid in compensation for 
executed slaves, the North Carolina legislature in 1758 passed a 
law that substituted castration for execution in all but cases of 
murder and rape. Historian Diane Miller Sommerville reports 
that 16 slaves were castrated during the five years in which the 
law remained on the books. When the financial strains created 
by the French and Indian War ended, the North Carolina assem-
bly repealed the law and resumed executing slaves (Clinton & 
Gillespie, 1997, p. 78). Lynching a black man accused of rape did 
not become as popular as it was in the latter part of the 19th cen-
tury partly because slave owners did not received compensation 
for lynched slaves. 
 Many men had concerns about the propriety of castration 
as an acceptable form of slave control. A North Carolina physi-
cian in the 1790s was pressured by a slave owner into castrating 
a slave who repeatedly made sexual attacks upon female slaves. 
The physician refused to accept payment because of his unease 
over the procedure (Clinton & Gillespie, 1997, p. 79). In 1724, a Vir-
ginia court convicted Caesar, a slave owned by Gawen Corbin of 
Spotsylvania Country, for the attempted rape of a four-year-old 
white girl. Caesar received 21 lashes, a half-hour standing in the 
pillory, and both ears severely cropped. A person who stood in a 
pillory faced verbal abuse and thrown objects from the citizenry, 
but such treatment, although brutal, is still quite far from being 
hanged. In 1742, a Virginia slave named Jack went on trial for 
raping a white woman. Convicted of simple assault, he received 
39 lashes. A Maryland slave owner in the 1750s successfully re-
ceived a pardon for his slave, who had been convicted for break-
ing and entering, stealing, and attempting to rape a white woman. 
The master received a pardon with the provision that his slave 
leave Maryland within 10 days (Clinton & Gillespie, 1997, p. 80). 
It is probable that the slave owner acted to save his money rather 
than out of any humanitarian concern for the slave. 
 It is a misconception that black males were the only ones to 
face castration for rape. Pennsylvania law permitted the castra-
tion of white male rapists, though there is no evidence that the 

6 Background and History
sentence was ever carried out on whites. Georgia, Maryland, and 
North Carolina were the colonies that treated black and white 
rapists differently with respect to legally mandated punishment 
(Clinton & Gillespie, 1997, p. 79). 
 Black men had much in common with black women. Both 
received harsher treatment from the legal system. All women in 
18th-century American might fall victim to a sexual assault, but 
some women enjoyed far better protection than others. African 
American women had the least legal and social protection from 
rape. Slaves did not legally own their bodies; their masters did. 
Male slaves could be ordered by their masters to impregnate 
 female slaves to improve the stock. Female slaves also lacked the 
power to refuse sexual relations. As a result, the sexual assaults of 
slave women by masters, sons of the masters, and friends of the 
masters were simply not regarded as criminal acts. William Byrd 
(1674 –1744), the Virginia planter and diarist, wrote of engaging in 
sexual relations with slaves, though he personally disliked the in-
stitution of slavery. Thomas Thistlewood (1721–1786), a Jamaican 
slave-owner, boasted in his diary of his numerous rapes of slave 
women. Thistlewood habitually raped slave women because a 
white man could do so without fear of any consequences and be-
cause he needed to demonstrate his domination of slaves. Byrd 
and Thistlewood were unique only in that they recorded their 
sexual activities. 
 Legally, a white man could be prosecuted for raping a slave 
woman. However, many colonies passed laws that prevented 
slaves from testifying against whites in court. Since a victim’s tes-
timony was usually crucial to a successful prosecution, few slaves 
could win a rape prosecution against any white man. Even free 
African American women could rarely bring a rape prosecution 
against white men because early Americans believed that black 
women were naturally promiscuous and thus unlikely to resist a 
rape. Accordingly, there is no known conviction of a white man 
for raping a slave or free black woman in the 18th century, even 
though it is known that many white men forced slaves to have 
sexual relations. 
 Although white women had more legal protection after a 
rape, reporting and prosecuting a sexual assault was never easy. 
A victim had to convince her guardian—husband or father—to 
take her to court to complain about the attack, then had to tell a 
magistrate what had happened, and then had to repeat her story 
to courtroom lawyers, jury members, and judges. Many legal 

History of Sexual Assault 7
 officials believed that women often lied about rape, so would try 
to disprove women’s stories whenever possible. A 1739 English 
news item, widely reprinted in the colonies, depicted a woman 
who had complained to her town’s justice of the peace in the 
middle of the night that her husband had abused her. The jus-
tice, reluctant to lose sleep, told the woman that her husband 
would immediately be castrated. Confronted with this possibil-
ity, the woman abandoned her case. The news item portrayed 
sexual assault within marriage as properly a private matter—
and women who thought otherwise as foolish. Since respectable 
women were supposed to resist sexual relations with men that 
they had not married, legal officials also believed that women 
would charge men with rape to preserve their reputation when 
they regretted having illicit sexual relations. However, there 
is little evidence of false rape charges in early American court 
 records ( Foster, 2006, p. 6). 
 Eighteenth century people expected men to engage in 
 moderate behavior. Men who took sexual advantage of those 
under their care, such as servants, jeopardized their professional 
standing. Public knowledge that a man could not control himself 
could be emasculating and socially unbearable. In 1781, newly-
wed Elizabeth Bemis of Lexington, Massachusetts received a 
 divorce on the grounds of cruelty because her violently abusive 
husband had sexually assaulted her and given her a sexually 
transmitted disease. Samuel Bemis had violated his position as 
husband, to the disgust of his neighbors who testified against 
him ( Foster, 2006, p. 102). 
 Men accused of rape in the 18th century typically simply 
 denied the charge. Given the difficulty of proving rape in the ab-
sence of force, most men apparently did not feel the need to resort 
to the strategy of openly denying the victim’s charges by claiming 
that she had invented the attack or had invited sexual relations. 
A simple denial depended on the popular image of a woman as 
untrustworthy and unreliable. 
 Sexual Assault in the 19th Century 
 Attitudes toward rape changed little between the 17th and 19th 
centuries. Legal codes continued to define rape as the unlawful 
carnal knowledge of a woman by a man forcibly and against her 
will. The prosecution of sexual criminals remained as difficult as 
it had been in the previous centuries. The major change that took 

8 Background and History
place occurred after the Civil War when women and girls of color 
obtained the legal right to charge a man with rape. 
 Men continued to be highly suspicious of women who 
brought a rape charge. Nineteenth-century legal and medical writ-
ers frequently invoked the advice of Sir Matthew Hale, a British 
judge of the 17th century, who warned that women tended to 
charge rape out of spite or embarrassment. Some legal authori-
ties insisted that women accused men of rape to blackmail them 
into marriage, to obtain money, or to exact revenge. They feared 
that a woman might claim rape as a sort of buyer’s remorse when 
she had merely been seduced by a man. The possibility of false 
accusations concerned many legal officials, because if jurors—
and only men served on juries in the 19th century—allowed their 
emotions to govern their intellects, they would convict innocent 
men of rape. For this reason, judges created exceptional rules of 
law, intended to protect defendants in rape cases while modifying 
generally accepted legal doctrines to make it difficult for a woman 
to prove that she had been raped. Essentially, women were pre-
sumed to be liars until they demonstrated otherwise. However, 
no one provided any proof that women were in the habit of falsely 
charging rape. 
 Not surprisingly, rape convictions were difficult, though not 
impossible, to achieve in the 19th century. Two key elements of 
the crime of rape were force and resistance. To meet the legal defi-
nition of rape, the courts required proof that the defendant had 
used physical force and that he had penetrated the woman with a 
penis. Penetrating a woman with an object other than a penis did 
not qualify as rape. Merely threatening a woman with a knife or 
a gun did not suffice as the kind of force that the law demanded 
for a rape conviction. Threatening loss of income did not qualify 
as force. To qualify as force, the man had to physically wound 
the woman. To qualify as resistance, a woman had to fend off her 
attacker successfully, unless she could show that an extenuating 
circumstance had prevented her from so doing. In essence, the 
law required an unarmed woman to battle a man with a gun or 
a knife to prove that she was a virtuous woman worthy of being 
believed.
 If a woman submitted to a rapist for fear of being maimed, 
judges and jurors regarded consummation as consent. Judges 
 devised the “half consent” and the “ultimate consent” doctrines 
for cases where women claimed they had resisted to the utmost 
of their abilities, yet the man still managed to complete the sexual 

History of Sexual Assault 9
act. Under the half consent doctrine, defendants argued that if 
the woman’s resistance was equivocal, it amounted to a partial 
consent, which was as good as a whole consent. Defendants used 
the ultimate consent rule to assert that even though their accusers 
initially resisted their efforts at seduction, they eventually surren-
dered and ultimately consented. 
 Race is linked to sexual crime in the 19th century in a range of 
ways. After Emancipation, black females were no longer property 
to be used at will by white men. The change meant that white men 
began to use rape as an instrument of terror in the Reconstruction 
South to intimidate both black women and their families. In 1866, 
officials of the Freedmen’s Bureau reported that Ku Klux Klan 
( KKK ) members robbed, assaulted, and shot a black preacher from 
Bath County, Kentucky before raping his wife. Hannah  Tutson, a 
middle-aged black woman living in Clay County, Florida, became 
the target of whites who wanted to force her off land that she had 
purchased. One night in 1866, the KKK invaded Tutson’s home, 
carried her about a quarter-mile away, whipped her repeatedly, 
and then raped her. The injuries left Tutson barely able to walk. 
After raping a black woman in Georgia, white attackers vowed 
revenge against family members of those who had served in the 
Union Army. In 1871 Governor Rufus B. Bullock of Georgia of-
fered a $5000 reward for information about the band of nearly 
40 men who stormed the plantation of a Colonel Waltemire, who 
had fought for the Union army during the Civil War. The attack-
ers whipped and beat two black servants and raped three young 
black girls. Federal records contain numerous cases of African 
American females who were sexually attacked during Recon-
struction (Sommerville, 2004, p. 148–149). The attacks reasserted 
the sexual and racial power of whites over blacks while taking 
away the manhood of black men. 
 Race continued to be a factor in convictions and punish-
ments for rape both before and after Emancipation. Whites and 
blacks received different punishments for statutory rape. Rape 
law defined sex with female children under a specified age of 
consent, usually 10 or 12, as rape even in the absence of force 
or resistance. While today such an act is referred to as statutory 
rape, in 19th-century legal terms such a crime was known as 
the carnal knowledge and abuse of an infant female. Slaves in 
 Arkansas, Mississippi, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia who were 
found guilty of having sexual intercourse with white female chil-
dren could receive the death penalty. White men, by contrast, 

10 Background and History
 received prison sentences of 5 to 21 years. Missouri punished 
white  offenders with a minimum prison sentence of five years 
while slaves were to be castrated. North and South Carolina did 
not make racial distinctions. White and black men who had carnal 
knowledge of white girls would be condemned to death (Clinton & 
Gillespie, 1997, p. 77). 
 The allegation that black males were prone to rape white 
 females is a rape myth that originated after emancipation of the 
slaves in the mid-19th century. Following emancipation and until 
about 1960, black men were subject to extralegal murders called 
lynchings, allegedly for the rape of white women, but often 
without formal rape charges and always without a court convic-
tion. Determined to end these brutal killings, African American 
investigative journalist Ida B. Wells combed through newspa-
per accounts, visited death sites, and interviewed witnesses to 
determine that most lynchings could be credited to economic 
competition and racial control rather than a defense of southern 
white womanhood. In 1892, she published an editorial that re-
vealed that most “rapes” were in fact often consensual liaisons 
between black men and white women. In that same year, she 
published Southern Horrors , with the pamphlet’s title mocking 
Southern honor as the commonly cited justification for lynching. 
Wells documented that only a third of the 728 lynching victims 
between 1884 and 1892 were even accused of rape. 
 Sexual Assault in the 20th Century 
 The 20th century brought tremendous changes in every aspect of 
the laws concerning rape, but these improvements came largely 
in the last third of the century. The law gradually became more 
respectful toward women, making it somewhat easier for women 
to charge rape, to appear in court, and to obtain a conviction. A 
scientific approach to the collection of evidence, especially the in-
troduction of rape kits and the use of DNA, resulted in higher 
rates of conviction for rapists. The public eventually condemned 
marital rape, acknowledged the existence of acquaintance rape, 
accepted that not all force involved a gun or knife, and generally 
displayed more kindness towards the victims of rape. 
 In the first half of the 20th century, rape continued to be seen 
from the perspective of the perpetrator rather than the victim. 
Psychology developed as a field only in the 20th century but it 
had a great impact upon criminology. The view of the pioneering 

History of Sexual Assault 11
Austrian psychologist Sigmund Freud heavily influenced legal 
and public attitudes toward rape. Freud and his followers defined 
rape as the action of a mentally ill individual with uncontrolla-
ble sexual drives. Rapists were sick men who needed sympathy 
along with psychological treatment. The victims of rapists were 
essentially forgotten. 
 However, this sympathetic view of rapists extended only to 
white attackers. With respect to race, the myth of the black rap-
ist continued to thrive as it was fed by some notorious media 
portrayals such as D. W. Griffith’s blockbuster silent film  Birth of 
a Nation  in 1915. The case of the Scottsboro Boys illustrates the 
continuing challenges faced by black men with respect to rape. 
In 1931, two young white women charged with rape a group of 
nine African American youths traveling illegally on a train. The 
youths, who ranged in age from 12 to 20, were arrested in Scotts-
boro, Alabama, and 8 were subsequently convicted. The youngest 
boy received a mistrial because of his age. The other boys received 
death sentences. The case became a cause célèbre as northern 
newspapers and activists described it as a legal lynching. The U.S. 
Supreme Court overturned the convictions in 1932. A year later, 
one of the women recanted her testimony, claiming that she and 
her friend had fabricated the charges in an effort to escape being 
arrested for vagrancy. After a series of trials, the state of Alabama 
dropped charges against the four youngest defendants—Leroy 
Wright, Montgomery, Roberson, and Williams. The others re-
ceived prison sentences of varying lengths, with the last released 
in 1950. In 1976, Alabama Governor George Wallace pardoned all 
of the Scottsboro Boys. 
 Until legal reforms of the 1970s, most states had laws that 
 required corroboration, or independent evidence, of rape claims 
before a case could be tried. As the Scottsboro Boys case illus-
trates, this burden did not always apply to white women charg-
ing black men but it did apply to the majority of rape cases. Many 
state laws required judges to instruct juries that rape charges 
were easy to make and hard to prove, no matter how innocent the 
accused. All states exempted husbands from rape charges and, in 
practice, this exemption was extended to the boyfriends of sex-
ual assault victims. Women who brought rape complaints found 
their own sex lives scrutinized for signs that they had been sexu-
ally active prior to the rape; those who had not remained pure 
could not expect prosecutors to move forward with rape charges 
or juries to convict. Even if such cases went to trial, victims could 

12 Background and History
expect defense attorneys to present evidence of their previous 
sexual experiences, creating the impression that a woman who 
has said “yes” to sex would never say “no” again. Rape trials 
typically focused more attention on the victim than the alleged 
assailant.
 Changes in the perception of rape were fueled by social 
and cultural changes. In 1964, while 38 witnesses ignored her 
screams for help, Kitty Genovese was raped and stabbed to death 
in New York City by Winston Moseley, a married business-machine 
 operator with no criminal record. The case became symbolic of the 
refusal of Americans to get involved. It also reflected the increas-
ing fears of Americans about crime. Genovese’s neighbors were 
afraid of being attacked by the thug, but the public condemned 
them because anyone could have been Genovese. As the crime 
rate skyrocketed in the 1960s and 1970s, criminals received less 
and less sympathy. Audiences who watched Charles Bronson in 
the 1974 film Death Wish  cheered as his vigilante character shot 
muggers and rapists. Meanwhile, women influenced by the rise 
of feminist movement began to speak out about their experiences 
with rape. 
 The antirape movement of the 1970s challenged common 
knowledge about rape. The movement grew out of the feminist 
mobilization of the 1960s that challenged sexism and discrimina-
tion against women in all aspects of society. Based on the testi-
monies of victims themselves instead of psychological research 
or racist stereotypes, the antirape movement redefined the crime 
from the victim’s point of view . In rape speakouts and Take Back 
the Night marches, victims dispelled many of the myths that had 
surrounded rape. Women did not ask for rape by the way that 
they dressed or behaved. No one sought to become the victim of 
a violent crime. 
 Rape, as the feminists of the 1960s and 1970s stressed, is not 
a crime of sexuality and passion but one of violence and control. 
Antirape activists, such as author Susan Brownmiller, lobbied 
to enact such reforms as the rape shield law, which limited the 
evidence of a victim’s sexual past that could be admitted at trial. 
The movement also sought to remove the marital exemption 
for rape, to develop a degree structure for rape, and to remove 
evidentiary roadblocks to prosecution such as corroboration 
requirements. All of these initiatives were an attempt to create 
victim-friendly rape laws that would force the legal system to 
take sexual assault seriously. As a result of these efforts, all of the 

Sexual Assault Myths 13
50 states have  reformed their laws pertaining to sexual crime. 
The federal government has even enacted legislation to protect 
victims of rape, such as the 1996 Drug-Induced Rape Prevention 
and Punishment Act that makes a certain type of rape into a fed-
eral crime worthy of 20 years imprisonment. 
 Sexual Assault Myths 
 Despite the successes of the antirape movement, common myths 
about sexual assault still abound. These myths punish the vic-
tims for being victims and permit sexual criminals to continue 
their activities. Such myths make victims reluctant to seek treat-
ment, to prosecute, and to take other steps to recover. These 
myths, most of which are age-old, are not as powerful as they 
were only a few decades ago but they still remain in the public 
consciousness. 
Myth: Sexual assault results from uncontrollable sexual 
desire. 
Fact: Rape is a crime of power. It is an act of aggression that 
uses sexuality as a weapon to unleash anger, to control, 
degrade, humiliate, and otherwise harm the victim. Sex is 
not the primary desire in a sexual assault. 
Myth: Rape usually involves an attack by a black male upon 
a white victim. 
Fact: Most crimes occur within racial boundaries with 
whites preying upon whites and blacks playing upon 
blacks. Black men usually rape black women, Latino men 
rape Latina women, and white men rape white women. 
Myth: Most rapes occur at night in deserted areas such as 
parking garages, dark alleys, and parks. 
Fact: Most rapes are acquaintance or date rapes. These 
attacks occur in the home of the victim, with homes of 
friends of the victim and cars as other popular locations for 
sexual assaults. 
Myth: If a man spends a lot of money on a woman or a 
woman changes her mind after beginning foreplay, the man 
has the right to some form of sexual intercourse. 

14 Background and History
Fact: A man cannot buy a woman’s sexual services without 
her consent. Most women are not prostitutes. Sexual 
relations without consent constitute a crime. The woman 
has the right to say “no.” 
Myth: If no semen is present, no sexual assault took place. 
Fact: Sexual assaults may involve inanimate objects, such 
as bottles. Studies of convicted rapists have also found 
that many experience sexual dysfunction in the form of 
impotence, premature ejaculation, or retarded ejaculation, 
thus accounting for a lack of semen on the victims. In cases 
where an assault was disrupted by external factors or victim 
resistance prior to ejaculation by the rapist, semen is not 
present. 
Myth: Most rapes are committed by strangers. 
Fact: Most victims know their assailant. The most common 
estimate is that about 80 percent of all sexual assailants are 
known to the victim. 
Myth: A husband cannot be found guilty of raping his wife. 
Fact: By 1993, all 50 states had removed the “spousal 
exemption” from their legal statutes on rape and sexual 
assault. A husband can be convicted of sexually assaulting 
his wife. 
Myth: Rapists do not look like normal people. 
Fact: As the scandal about sexually abusive priests in the 
Catholic Church demonstrates, sexual criminals can appear 
to be respectable citizens. Rapists come from all walks of 
life, including firefighters, police officers, teachers, nurses, 
and ministers. Rapists are also all ages, from 10-year-old 
boys to elderly males. 
Myth: A rapist is starved for sex. 
Fact: Sexual assault is not a crime of passion. The majority 
of convicted rapists have had regular sexual outlets, in 
the form of spouse, girlfriend, or significant other. They 
attacked for the emotional gratification of committing an act 
of violence. 
Myth: A rapist cannot control his sexual desires. 

Sexual Assault Myths 15
Fact: Rape is most often a premeditated crime. It is an act of 
aggression and sexual violence, not an expression of sexual 
desire. 
Myth: No woman can be raped against her will. It is 
physically impossible to rape a woman against her will. 
Fact: Rape is a physical assault. Anyone can be physically 
assaulted. Any person, male or female, can be intimidated 
into submission by a weapon or a threat. 
Myth: Rape only happens to young, sexually attractive 
women who put themselves in dangerous situations. 
Fact: Infants, nuns, and elderly women have been sexually 
assaulted. Victims of sexual attacks come from all ages, 
races, classes, ethnic groups, sexual orientations, and 
religious persuasions. Rape victims are of all physical 
descriptions. Victims are chosen for their vulnerability. 
Myth: Women who are sexually assaulted asked for it by 
dressing provocatively or walking on the street without a 
male protector. 
Fact: Victims of muggings and other types of assault are 
generally not accused of asking for it. Victims of sexual 
assaults are no different. No one asks to suffer an attack that 
can leave lifelong psychological and physical injuries. Such 
an assumption removes responsibility from the criminal 
who planned and carried out an attack. 
Myth: A male cannot be raped. 
Fact: Men can be raped but they are even more reluctant 
than women to report such attacks. While it is estimated 
that between 50 and 90 percent of female rapes are never 
reported, there is no estimate for attacks upon males. 
Numerous studies have indicated that between one in five 
and one in seven males have been sexually abused by their 
18th birthday. 
Myth: A woman cannot become pregnant from a rape unless 
she enjoys it. 
Fact: In the female body, an orgasm is not required for 
conception to occur. Additionally, while orgasms by 
victims during sexual attacks are rare, such responses 

16 Background and History
are physiological events rather than an expression of 
pleasure. Direct stimulation of the genital area can 
produce a physical response. There have also been cases of 
heterosexual males who had an unwanted orgasm as the 
result of the assailant masturbating them. There have also 
been cases of male children who got and maintained an 
erection as the result of adrenaline during the stress and 
fear of a sexual attack. 
 Sexual Crime Categories 
 There are as many different categories of sexual assault as there 
are types of victims and types of perpetrators. Some of the catego-
ries overlap, with serial rapists, as one example, known to have 
preyed near college campuses. 
 Campus Rape 
 Campus rape is a sexual assault that is associated in some way 
with a college or university. The victim or perpetrator is usually 
a student, with the attack occurring on or near campus. Accurate 
statistics about campus rape are hard to obtain, because many 
women and men do not report such assaults. Campus rape is un-
derreported for several reasons. Many victims appear to believe 
that they are at fault for the attack, perhaps because they were 
consuming alcohol. Many women do not report their assaults for 
fear that they will be subjected to further pain and humiliation 
at the hands of the college authorities or police. They fear that 
authorities will not take their assault seriously or will consider 
them to be responsible for the attack. Additionally, some stu-
dents do not report rapes because they do not want their parents 
to know, while others do not even realize that a lack of consent 
 always constitutes rape. 
 Colleges and universities have used a variety of strategies 
to address and prevent campus rape. Many schools have created 
clear policies about unacceptable sexual behavior that include 
strict penalties. All members of the campus community, includ-
ing faculty and staff, have been educated about the policies. 
Acknowledging that most campus rapes are not stranger rapes, 
many students receive acquaintance rape education both at first-
year orientation and throughout their college careers. Men are 

Sexual Crime Categories 17
educated about what constitutes rape and the importance of 
 verbal consent. 
 Child Rape 
 Children have traditionally been viewed as innocent beings in 
need of special protection. One way in which societies have tried 
to protect young girls is through laws that designate a statutory 
age of consent. Such laws prohibit men from having sexual con-
tact with females under a specified age on the legal theory that 
they are too young and immature to make informed decisions 
and, therefore, are incapable of giving a legal consent. Historically, 
the age of consent was set somewhere between 10 and 13 years, 
depending on the era and the culture, and tending to coincide
with female puberty. In the modern United States, the age of con-
sent ranges from 14 to 18 years with 16 years as the standard. Child 
rape laws punished men who had sexual relations with females 
younger than the designated age of consent on par with the crime 
of rape, even if the girl consented and the man used no force. 
 Historically, male youths have been seen as far less likely to 
need protection as girls. However, sodomy laws were often used 
to punish the adult participant in homosexual activities while not 
holding the male minor criminally liable. 
 Date Rape/Acquaintance Rape 
 Acquaintance rape is most broadly defined as any situation in 
which the requisite elements of the crime of rape are satisfied and 
the victim and attacker know each other. This prior relationship 
between the parties—which can range in degree of familiarity 
from fellow classmates who have never spoken to one another to 
a couple involved in a long-term relationship—is the only differ-
ence between acquaintance rape and stranger rape. 
 Date rape is a form of acquaintance rape, though the two 
phrases are often used interchangeably. Date rape refers to a rape 
scenario in which there is some sort of romantic relationship 
 between the two parties. Date rape is a particular problem on col-
lege campuses, where it frequently occurs in situations involving 
alcohol or date rape drugs, such as ketamine or “Special K” and 
gammahydroxybutyrate or GHB. 
 Acquaintance rapes are rarely reported to the authorities. If 
victims do report these assaults, rape is most likely to be charged 

18 Background and History
and tried only when the following conditions are met: a prompt 
report to the police, the existence of witnesses who can testify 
to similar crimes committed by the suspect, physical injury to 
the survivor, and corroboration of the individual’s story. This dif-
ferential treatment of survivors of acquaintance rape has been 
documented by a number of researchers studying different as-
pects of the criminal justice system. The thoroughness of a police 
investigation, the choice of whether or not to prosecute a charge, 
the likelihood that the defendant will be convicted, and the likeli-
hood of incarceration have all been shown to vary significantly 
along acquaintance rape/stranger rape lines. 
 Forcible Rape 
 Forcible rape is the sexual knowledge of a male or female against 
his or her will. The question of force is problematic because the 
threat of harm is strong enough to frighten the victim into acced-
ing without physical resistance. The definitions of “force” and 
“without consent” are fuzzy because legal statutes vary. Force can 
be used at any stage in a rape, from a logistical advantage such as 
ambush to overt aggression if a perpetrator does not obtain verbal 
consent.
 Foreign-Object Rape 
 Foreign-object rape refers to the placement of an object into the 
vaginal, rectal, oral or other orifice of an individual. The object 
appears to represent a virile penis for the perpetrator who would 
otherwise be impotent. Raping with objects further humiliates the 
victim while amplifying the power of the attacker. The choice of 
object could be opportunistic or symbolic. If the rape is followed 
by murder, the object, as part of the crime scene, can provide 
 information about the perpetrator. 
 A variety of legal definitions abound in the United States 
with regard to foreign-object rape. In New York State, digital 
rape (using a finger) is included in the foreign-object category. 
In Pennsylvania, foreign-object rape is considered deviate sex-
ual intercourse. In Georgia, foreign-object rape is classified as 
“ aggravated sexual battery” (Smith, 2004, p. 79). 
 Statistics about foreign-object rape are difficult to obtain. In 
one study done on 30 men classified as sexual sadists, foreign-
object penetration was the least common sexual activity of the 

Sexual Crime Categories 19
four studied (anal, forced fellatio, vaginal, and foreign-object). 
However, the majority of the men subjected their victims to three 
of the four acts (Smith, 2004, p. 80). The decision a victim makes 
to report a rape with a foreign object is difficult to make, just as 
reporting other types of rape varies with the victim’s motivation 
to undergo the stresses involved in the legal process. 
 Gang Rape 
 Gang rape involves two or more assailants. Gang rapes are a 
frequent occurrence in wars and with gangs. They are used as 
a method of punishment, social control, bonding, and as rite of 
passage. They also increase the ties among the assailants. Gang 
rapists do not necessarily always commit an assault with any of 
these consequences in mind, and it is important to distinguish 
the act of violence and the conscious goals from the resultant 
 effect for all involved. The intentions of each individual rapist 
may vary. In some cases, the attack is the result of a group deci-
sion. In other cases, the assault is initiated by the leader or small 
group of those involved. Sometimes, it is crime of opportunity, 
while in other cases the victim has been sought out. Some vic-
tims, particularly those involved with gangs, participate will-
ingly while others are coerced. 
 Gang rapes are even more difficult to prosecute than rapes 
involving only one assailant, but successful prosecutions will 
usually result in a harsher punishment. Assailants may provide 
alibis for each other or offer differing versions of events, making it 
hard for the authorities. Victims of such attacks are often reluctant 
to report it because they fear reprisal from more than one person. 
When gang rape is a form of initiation for either an assailant or 
victim, silence is the price of inclusion. 
 Homosexual Rape 
 Homosexual rape refers to coerced, nonconsensual sex between 
members of the same sex. This term has been used mistakenly 
to describe the sexual orientation of either the perpetrator or the 
victim. This is particularly the case for male rape, when a male 
attacker is labeled homosexual because of the homosexual na-
ture of the act. Studies have shown that heterosexual men, not 
homosexual men, generally rape men. Rape is not a sexual crime 
but a crime designed to diminish the victim. 

20 Background and History
 One of the reasons that homosexual rape has been harder 
to study and understand is that traditional definitions of rape 
do not easily lend themselves to same-sex situations. By defin-
ing rape as a sexual act between people without freely given 
consent, legal systems can better address the range of sexual ex-
periences that mark individual lives. Research into the causes, 
occurrence, and consequences of homosexual rape is minimal, 
but early findings have raised critical questions about the com-
plex relationship between power, violence, gender roles, and 
sexuality. 
 Woman-to-woman sexual assault among strangers is still 
largely undocumented. That women can and do rape each other 
has been hard for many to believe. In a heterocentric, phallocen-
tric society, even defining what constitutes sexual relations be-
tween two women has been widely misunderstood outside of the 
lesbian community. The homosexual rape between women that 
is documented often occurs within a lesbian relationship. Ho-
mophobia, misinformation about lesbian sex, and disbelief that 
women hurt other women in relationships all contribute to the 
general silence that characterizes this issue. Domestic violence 
and rape crisis centers rarely provide the support and informa-
tion needed by female survivors of homosexual rape, perpetrat-
ing their isolation and confusion. 
 Stranger rape among men is more common and better docu-
mented. Throughout American history, forced sex between men 
has been characterized as sodomy but not rape. Early studies 
of male-on-male rape employed a similar model of analysis as 
that developed by feminists studying rape of women by men: 
Rape is about exerting power, not about sexual desire. Following 
this, it was held that rape between men was predominantly by 
heterosexual men against homosexual men. Gay men who cruise 
public places looking for casual sex partners are more suscep-
tible to these kinds of attacks. One reason for the predominance 
of stranger rape over acquaintance rape between men was the 
focus of early studies—prisons, military settings, and other 
single-sexed but not explicitly gay situations. More recent stud-
ies which focused on men in the gay community reveal a higher 
rate of rape between gay men than was previously thought. Male 
rape is dramatically underreported, by gay and straight men 
alike. Gay men often expect that they will be blamed for being 
raped, or worse yet, accused of enjoying it. Studies confirm that 
when the victim of male rape is homosexual, he is more likely to 

Sexual Crime Categories 21
be blamed for the encounter than a heterosexual man in the same 
situation. 
 Incest 
 Incest is the sexual abuse and rape of a child by a family mem-
ber. While many forms of incest undoubtedly exist, by far the 
most common is the assault of a daughter by a father. Although 
 incest has probably existed since ancient times, the definition of 
incest and the social reactions to it have changed markedly over 
time. Many historians believe that the modern definition of incest 
only emerged in the 19th century, as conceptions of childhood and 
adolescence changed and as the government increasingly inter-
vened in family life. 
 Incestuous activities were rarely pursued by early American 
authorities because of reluctance to interfere with paternal au-
thority. Cases came to the attention of authorities because the vic-
tims had become pregnant by their fathers, stepfathers, or uncles. 
Once in court, the law was not on the victim’s side. Judges did 
not comprehend the helplessness of the incest victim, who was 
caught between devotion to a parent or guardian and the blatant 
disregard for the child’s well-being. Preindustrial science claimed 
that a female could only become pregnant after achieving orgasm, 
and thus pregnancy was for the judges a sign of consensual sex. 
A failure to immediately report the incident also was received 
skeptically by the judges. Sentences for those men convicted were 
generally light. 
 Most historians note a dramatic shift in society’s reaction 
to incest between 1880 and 1920, during the Progressive Era. 
Although scholars cannot measure changes in incest activity 
 itself, they argue that a more concerted effort was underway to 
protect children from sexual crimes. American culture began to 
emphasize the innocence of childhood, with many Americans 
working to protect children from social evils. Governments be-
came concerned about future generations of citizens. Reform-
ers, such as the New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Children, lobbied governments for child protection laws and 
established networks of inspectors and caseworkers alongside 
the police force. Reformers sought, above all, to protect the 
 morality of young girls, believing that social problems resulted 
from crimes committed against girls that ruined their sexual 
virtue. 

22 Background and History
 In the last three decades of the 20th century, awareness of 
incest increased dramatically. Feminist groups spoke out against 
family violence while a number of television shows and novels 
broached the subject. As a result, incest accusations climbed as-
tronomically among all socioeconomic levels and ethnic groups. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that some of the increase can be 
attributed to divorcing parents lobbying charges in the midst 
of ugly child custody battles. Since the 1990s, psychiatrists and 
psychologists have helped victims recall earlier crimes commit-
ted against them that they had expunged from their memories 
because of the trauma involved. Such remembered memories, 
however, have been hotly disputed in the courts as being inac-
curate and the result of suggestion. 
 Interracial Rape 
 The term “interracial rape” refers to cases of rape that involve 
perpetrators and victims of different racial or ethnic descent. 
While interracial rape is statistically known to be the excep-
tion, not the rule, the term clearly underscores that discussion 
of  sexual crime is highly racialized. The predominant view of 
the rapist as black or ethnic “other” who attacks white women 
has not only tended to draw attention away from cases of sexual 
assault involving white middle- and upper-class perpetrators. 
It has also pushed African American female rape victims out of 
public view. Black-on-black sexual violence is the most common 
form of sexual attack for black rapists. 
 Marital Rape 
 In the United States, wives were long viewed as the property of 
their husbands under the concept of coverture, meaning that a 
woman was legally “covered” by her husband when she married. 
Thereafter, she ceased to have a separate legal existence. Since a 
wife was owned by her husband, he had inherent rights to her 
body. In most states, a husband could beat his wife with impunity. 
He also had the right to forced sexual relations. 
 In 1975, John Rideout became the first man to be charged 
with raping his wife while he was still living with her. According 
to his wife Greta, Rideout was addicted to violent sex, which he 
frequently demanded several times a day. In October 1975, Greta 
Rideout fled from her abusive husband, but John followed her. 

Sexual Crime Categories 23
He locked her in their apartment and beat her until she agreed 
to have sex with him. After Rideout was acquitted of the rape 
charge, the couple reconciled but later divorced. Much criticism 
was directed at Greta Rideout throughout the trial, with observ-
ers frequently arguing that she could not have returned to the 
marriage if she had truly been raped. Studies on marital rape 
show that most wives who are raped are also battered, as was 
the case with Greta Rideout. 
 By 1993, all 50 states and the federal government defined 
marital rape as a crime punishable by law. In most states, married 
women who are raped by their husbands also have the right to 
bring civil suit and may recover medical and legal expenses, as 
well as damages for pain and suffering. 
 Prison Rape 
 While incarcerated in detention facilities, men, women, and youths 
can be subjected to sexual harassment, sexual brutality, and rape. 
Rape within a prison setting can happen through multiple com-
binations of circumstances and perpetrators. Prison rapes can be 
prisoner-on-prisoner, in which either a single individual or a gang 
of individuals is responsible for the rape of another inmate. In 
addition, prison staff may sexually abuse individuals under their 
control. 
 Although anyone can become a victim of sexual abuse, pris-
oners with mental disabilities or small size or male prisoners with 
characteristics perceived as feminine are major targets for sexual 
violence in prison. Among male and female prisoners, often 
the newest inmates who may have yet to form the protection of 
gangs, who are younger or who are lacking other resources for 
defense, become those prisoners facing the most potential risk for 
sexual victimization. 
 Secondary Rape 
 “Secondary rape” is the term used to describe the process of 
investigation that agencies, institutions, or individuals perform 
when questioning a rape victim. It is considered secondary rape 
because the experience has the same characteristics of the primary 
or original rape: it exerts power, it is invasive, it is destructive of 
privacy, and it denies the victim of a sexual crime control over 
his or her own body. For these reasons, some women also use the 

24 Background and History
term secondary rape to describe being forced to give birth after 
conceiving from a rape. 
 An example of secondary rape occurs when police question 
the victim in a way that treats him or her as a perpetrator rather 
than a person who was injured. Officers might use language that 
casts doubt on the victim’s complaint, is accusatory, or insinu-
ates that the victim did something to instigate and cause the rape. 
Women of color, poor women, or women viewed as promiscuous 
are often not believed. 
 During the processing of the sexual crime, the victim goes 
through many stages of secondary rape. She or he is questioned 
and subjected to inspection and photography of the body parts 
that were penetrated, touched, injured, or covered with semen 
or other body fluids. The bright lights and awkward positions 
put the victim in the same vulnerable circumstances from a psy-
chological point of view as the original rape, or more so. Once 
again the privacy and integrity of the individual is compromised 
and invaded. Getting evidence in a rape case results in a second-
ary rape for many individuals because it contains many of the 
 elements of the primary rape. 
 After law enforcement and medical personnel question and 
obtain evidence from the victim, a period of time elapses while 
the legal system arranges for identification of the perpetrator and 
for a court hearing. During this time, the victim is urged to seek 
professional help in dealing with the trauma. As the event fades 
from the present, healing begins to take place. However, since the 
law requires the victim to testify against his or her attacker, the 
shock of going to court and reliving the crime may reawaken 
the profound psychological distress. The victim is forced to un-
dergo the rape again, this time in public. 
 Serial Rape and Serial Rapists 
 Serial rape, a type of criminal offense that only became recognized 
by the general public in the 1970s, involves sexual attacks upon 
10 or more stranger victims. The reluctance of victims to report 
rapes and the absence of effective police procedures may mean 
that this type of rape is an old phenomenon only recently identi-
fied. Stylized verbal scripts demanded from the stranger victim, 
sadistic or violent behavior, the rapist’s inability to penetrate his 
victim or to climax, and the collection of souvenirs, are all marks 
of serial attacks. 

Sexual Crime Categories 25
 The few studies conducted upon serial rapists show that 
these men, particularly the most violent ones, are usually white 
males of European ancestry who target white females. Black 
 serial rapists, by contrast, are known to cross color lines. The 
 majority of offenders enjoy stable employment, live with some-
one, and have been married at least once. Significant numbers of 
these men experienced troubled childhoods, with many report-
ing juvenile alcohol abuse, cruelty to animals, fire setting, steal-
ing, and assaults against adults. A majority of rapists, 68 percent, 
began their sexual predation as voyeurs. (Smith, 2004, p. 221). 
 The Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) has used inter-
views with serial rapists to group this type of offender into four 
camps: power-reassurance, power-assertive, anger-retaliatory, 
and anger-excitation. All of the men in the categories share a 
psychosexual trait that drives them to repeatedly attack. Unable 
to match reality to their sexual fantasies, the men feel the need 
to try again, thereby creating a process that results in serial sex 
crime. The pattern of behavior of serial rapists is similar to that of 
 serial killers, since many murderers begin their criminal careers 
as rapists and often intersperse murders with non-lethal sexual 
assaults ( Rossmo, 2000, p. 54). 
 The power-reassurance attacker is the most common type of 
serial rapist. Often referred to as the gentleman rapist, he bolsters 
his masculinity through the exercise of power over women. Vic-
tims are preselected through surveillance or peeping activities, 
surprised, and usually attacked in the evening or early morning. 
The rapist may have several potential victims, all in the same 
vicinity, lined up. If one potential assault is foiled, the rapist will 
often seek another victim nearby on the same night. He will take 
souvenirs from his victims and keep a record of his crimes. 
 The power-assertive rapist, the second most common type 
of serial rapist, uses his attacks to express his natural dominance 
over women. Unlike the power-reassurance rapist, this rapist is 
regarded as a selfish offender who is unconcerned over the wel-
fare of his victim. He will often use a con approach and then force 
the victim to engage in repeated sexual assaults. The victim is 
often left in a state of partial nudity at the assault location, which 
will be a place of convenience and safety for the offender. 
 The anger-retaliatory rapist is motivated by feelings of rage 
and retaliation: he wants to get even with women. The victims 
are symbols of someone else, often exhibiting certain appearance, 
dress, or occupational similarities. Sex is used to punish and 

26 Background and History
 degrade and the attacks are typically frenzied with excessive lev-
els of force. Since the attacks occur as the result of an emotional 
outburst, they lack premeditation. There is little planning or ad-
vance victim selection. The attacks are sporadic and can occur at 
any time of the day or night. 
 The anger-excitation rapist, the least common type, 
achieves sexual excitement from observing the victim’s reaction 
to physical or psychological pain. The rapes, characterized by 
fear and brutality, may involve torture. The offender uses a con 
approach, attacks and binds the victim, and then takes her to a 
preselected location that offers privacy. He will usually keep her 
for a period of time and may make a visual or audio record of 
his activities. 
 Contrary to public perception, most serial rapes occur in the 
homes of the victims. According to FBI researchers, only six per-
cent of rapes occur in streets or alleys, with another six percent of 
victims attacked in parking lots or on highways. Serial rapists are 
more likely to attack in the summer in neighborhoods character-
ized by ethnic diversity, high population turnover, and multiple 
unit dwellings. 
 The study of serial rape is still in its infancy. Difficulty in rec-
ognizing the presence of a serial rapist and difficulty in capturing 
such an attacker have resulted in a lack of knowledge about such 
predators. 
 Statutory Rape 
 Statutory rape is sexual intercourse with an unmarried individual 
who is under the age of consent. As the crime rests solely on the 
age of the victim, force is not required. The laws are supposed to 
protect youths from engaging in potentially coercive sex, which 
may not be recognized as meeting a legal definition or popular 
perception of forcible rape, before they are physically or emotion-
ally ready. As such, these laws are often used to prosecute the 
sexual abuse of young children and teenagers. The wording of 
the legislation also allows the prosecution of consensual sexual 
relationships between any underage person and any other person 
if they are not married to each other. 
 The implementation of statutory rape laws sometimes under-
cuts their stated purpose of protecting the young and vulnerable. 
If someone underage is married, his or her sexual activity is not 
illegal regardless of the character of the relationship. Furthermore, 

Further Reading 27
some states still retain the “mistake of age” defense, so that young 
people who appear older or who try to act older are outside the 
law’s protection. Additionally, some states still allow the prosecu-
tion of a perpetrator, always a male, who is the same age as or 
younger than the victim. An underage participant cannot stop a 
prosecution by claiming that the he or she regarded the activity 
as consensual. Males in committed relationships with underage 
females may have to register as sex offenders and thus be barred 
from seeing their partners, approaching places where their own 
children gather, and living in certain areas. 
 Conclusion 
 The difficulties in halting sexual crime are rooted in historical 
views of sexuality and complicated by enduring myths about 
sexual assault. Until the public is better educated about sexual 
crimes, such attacks will continue to be common and victims will 
continue to be victimized. 
 Further Reading 
 Bevacqua, Maria.  Rape on the Public Agenda: Feminism and the Politics of 
Sexual Assault. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 2000. 
 Block, Sharon.  Rape and Sexual Power in Early America. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 2006. 
 Brownmiller, Susan.  Against Our Will: Men, Women, and Rape. New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1975. 
 Carter, Dan T.  Scottsboro: A Tragedy of the American South . Baton Rouge: 
Louisiana State University Press, 1979. 
 Clinton, Catherine, and Michele Gillespie, eds.  The Devil’s Lane: Sex and 
Race in the Early South. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997. 
 Estrich, Susan.  Real Rape: How the Legal System Victimizes Women Who Say 
No. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987. 
 Foster, Thomas A.  Sex and the Eighteenth-Century Man: Massachusetts and 
the History of Sexuality in America. Boston: Beacon Press, 2006. 
 Godbeer, Richard.  Sexual Revolution in Early America. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2002. 
 Herrup, Cynthia B.  A House in Gross Disorder: Sex, Law and the Second 
Earl of Castlehaven. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. 

28 Background and History
 Koehler, Lyle.  A Search for Power: The Weaker Sex in Seventeenth-Century 
New England. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1980. 
 Lockridge, Kenneth A.  The Diary, and Life, of William Byrd II of Virginia, 
1674 –1744. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987. 
 McMullen, Richie J.  Male Rape: Breaking the Silence on the Last Taboo.
Boston: Gay Men’s Press, 1990. 
 Parrot, Andrea, and Laurie Bechhofer, eds.  Acquaintance Rape: The 
Hidden Crime. New York: John Wiley, 1991. 
 Rosenthal, A. M.  Thirty-Eight Witnesses: The Kitty Genovese Case . 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999. 
 Rossmo, D. Kim.  Geographic Profiling. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2000. 
 Smith, Merril D., ed.  Encyclopedia of Rape. Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Press, 2004. 
 Somerville, Diane.  Rape and Race in the Nineteenth-Century South. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004. 
 Taylor, Timothy.  The Buried Soul: How Humans Invented Death. Boston: 
Beacon Press, 2002. 
 Ulrich, Laurel Thatcher.  A Midwife’s Tale: The Life of Martha Ballard, Based 
on Her Diary, 1785–1812. New York: Vintage, 1991. 
 Wells, Ida B.  Southern Horrors and Other Writings: The Anti-Lynching 
Campaign of Ida B. Wells, 1892–1900. Edited by Jacqueline Jones Royster. 
Boston: Bedford Books, 1997. 

29
 2 
 Issues, Controversies, and Problems 
 T
he U.S. Department of Justice estimates that more than 270,000 
men, women, and children are the victims of sex crimes each 
year. Many victims do not report the crimes. Many attackers 
do not believe that they have committed crimes. The response 
of the criminal justice system to sex crimes has historically been 
poor. Every step in a sexual attack and the responses to the attack 
trigger debate. This chapter examines issues, controversies, and 
problems that surround victims, attackers, the period after the 
attack, law enforcement, the judicial system, and the correctional 
system.
 Victims 
 At the most basic level, confusion exists over rape. Contrary 
to the popular belief that many women are eager to embrace 
the identity of rape victim for the sympathy that it purportedly 
brings, many rape victims do not label their experience as a 
rape. The phenomenon, known as unacknowledged rape, has 
clear ramifications in the underreporting of sexual attacks and 
the resulting inability to deter attackers from repeating their 
 behavior. 
 Rape Myth Acceptance 
 Common rape myths can be found in chapter one. Many women 
do not report rapes for the main reason that they believe these 
myths about rape. Zoë D. Peterson and C. L. Muehlenhard (2004), 

30 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
writing in the journal Sex Roles , report that many women believe 
that rape must involve fighting back and that rape can only 
involve the insertion of a penis into a vagina. If nonconsensual 
behavior does not include these two events, then it is not rape. 
Barrie Bondurant (2001) reached the same conclusion as Peterson. 
She found that college women were more likely to acknowledge 
rape if the incident involved violence, a blitz attack rather than 
an acquaintance assault. Women did not blame themselves for 
inviting the attack. Rather, they displayed a very low amount of 
self-blame.
 Women do seem to have abandoned the once-popular myths 
that women invite rape by dressing provocatively, flirting, or 
behaving in some inappropriate manner with a man. The attitude 
of women may reflect decades of feminist lobbying that a woman 
should not be blamed for being a victim of rape any more than a 
man should be blamed for being the victim of an armed robbery. 
Robin Warshaw (1988) spoke with a middle-aged woman for her 
book, I Never Called It Rape: The Ms. Report on Recognizing, Fighting, 
and Surviving Date and Acquaintance Rape,  who had once accepted 
rape myths and paid dearly for her mistake. Ruth married the 
man who raped her on their second date after she had passed 
out from too much drinking. She related to Warshaw, “In my na-
ivete, I thought that he truly did care for me and I blamed myself 
for what happened. I wish I had known about date rape then; 
maybe I wouldn’t have felt like I was such a tramp, that it was 
my fault . . . We were married for 10 years. I found out after the 
divorce that he had tried this [getting a woman drunk and then 
trying to rape her] on both of my sisters too” (Warshaw, 1988, 
p. 44). Date rape only became the focus on considerable public 
attention in the 1980s, long after such knowledge would have 
benefited Ruth. 
 The woman who is most likely to be raped is not the woman 
who dresses suggestively or flirts. The most likely rape victim is 
the woman who drinks. According to the research, such women 
commonly underestimate their risk of being sexually assaulted. 
They view themselves as more competent to resist rape than 
they are in reality. In a 1991 interview with the  Washington Post,
Sybil R. Todd, who worked with victims of date rape in her capac-
ity as the associate dean of students at the University of Virginia, 
stated that alcohol has been involved “in every instance” of date 
rape on campus. “I don’t know of any [date rapes] that involved 
 hallucinogens,” she added. 

Victims 31
 The fact that alcohol is a legal drug may mask its dangers. 
People who know that methamphetamine or cocaine use is 
dangerous may not fully realize that alcohol use can also sig-
nificantly damage their lives. In fact, according to the Injury Pre-
vention Network Newsletter in 1992, alcohol is associated with 
almost every cause of serious injury, including “fires, drown-
ings, falls, shootings, homicide, suicide, child abuse, rape and 
battery.” A 1994 study by the Columbia University Center on 
Addiction and Substance Abuse concluded that that 90 percent 
of all reported campus rapes occurred when alcohol had been 
used by either the assailant, the victim, or both. In addition, 
60 percent of college women with sexually transmitted diseases, 
like herpes or AIDS, were drunk at the time of infection. 
 As many women as men are reported to be problem drink-
ers, who drink to get drunk. Psychologists Jenna McCauley and 
Karen S. Calhoun (2008), who examined the effects of binge drink-
ing upon college women in a 2008 essay for the journal Addictive 
Behaviors , suggest that women should be made explicitly aware 
of alcohol’s impact on their rape resistance ability. Pepper spray 
and mace are not as effective in preventing rape as remaining 
sober. 
 Who Is Likely to Be Raped? 
 The likelihood of becoming a victim of sexual assault is greater for 
nonwhites than whites. According to the 2000 National Violence 
Against Women Survey, 34 percent of Native American women 
reported being raped in their lifetimes versus 18 percent of white 
women. Amnesty International reported on the incidence of rape 
and sexual violence among American Indian and Native Alaskan 
women in 2007. In Anchorage, Alaska, such women were 10 times 
more likely to be attacked than women of other races. Alaska has 
the highest per capita rate of rape. Overall, Amnesty International 
found that American Indian women are three-and-a-half times 
more likely to suffer sexual assault than white, black, Latina, or 
Asian women. 
 Why are American Indians more likely to be raped? Nicole 
P. Yuan (2006) and three colleagues investigated this ques-
tion. In an essay for the 2006 issue of the Journal of Interpersonal 
Violence , Yuan reported that predictors of sexual assault among 
women were marital status, childhood maltreatment, and life-
time alcohol dependence. Separated or divorced women were 

32 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
more likely to be raped. The second predictor is not uncommon 
among victims of rape. Sexual revictimization occurs when a 
survivor of childhood sexual abuse or rape is victimized again 
in adulthood. 
 Alcoholism or problem drinking determines victims across 
all racial lines. The vast majority of Indian country crime has his-
torically been the product of alcohol abuse. Nationally, substance 
abuse is closely linked with domestic violence, including marital 
rape. Shira Rutman and several colleagues surveyed risky behav-
ior in urban American Indian youth from 1997 to 2003. Native 
Americans were twice as likely as white youths to engage in such 
behaviors as illegal drug use and alcohol consumption. Probably 
as a direct result, American Indian youths were also twice as likely 
to experience rape and other forms of sexual crime. Native Ameri-
can girls and women seem to be suffering from a trifecta of woes 
that, together, make them more vulnerable to sexual assault 
 Other personal characteristics contribute to a higher likeli-
hood of being sexually assaulted. Ronet Bachman and Linda 
Saltzman (1994), in their book Violence Against Women, reported 
that women between the ages of 19 and 29 are the most likely 
to become victims of a sexual attack by an acquaintance or rela-
tive. Widowed women over the age of 65 are least likely to be 
victimized. Such attacks are not unknown though. The Phila-
delphia Assault Victim Study, which spanned the years 1973 to 
1975, included an 84-year-old rape victim. The Center for Rape 
Concern at Philadelphia General Hospital assisted a 97-year-old 
rape victim in 1976. 
 While elderly women are least likely to be victimized, they 
may have the most difficulty in responding to an attack. Older 
women may have trouble talking about sex. They find even the 
exam needed to collect evidence of the crime “very degrading,” 
as Tammy Taylor informed a reporter for the  St. Petersburg Times in 
2004. Taylor works as an outreach clinical supervisor and sexual 
assault counselor for Sunrise of Pasco, an agency that works with 
victims of sexual abuse. “They are from a generation that typi-
cally doesn’t discuss sexual issues at all, so they feel a heightened 
sense of shame and embarrassment over being raped,” Nancy Bell, 
a research psychologist explained to the  Times  reporter ( St. Peters-
burg Times,  May 17, 2004, p. 1B). As a result of their difficulties dis-
cussing sexual matters, elderly victims are also less likely to report 
the crime or to seek counseling. A rape can also take away that 
sense of independence that most elderly women prize dearly. 

Victims 33
 Marital status, race, and money also indicate likely victim-
ization. Poor women are more vulnerable to sexual assault than 
middle class or wealthy women. Divorced or separated women 
are more likely than married or single women to be attacked, 
presumably by their estranged or former spouses. In her book 
Rape in Marriage Diana Russell (1990) declared that an estimated 
14 percent to 25 percent of women experience forced sex at least 
once during their marriages. In the Philadelphia Assault Victim 
Study, three times as many African American women as white 
women reported being raped. Children in low-income, single-
mother homes are more likely to be sexually assaulted and by 
people that they know. In Philadelphia, adolescents were typi-
cally raped outside the home, unlike younger and older victims. 
 Individuals who suffered childhood sexual abuse are more 
likely to be raped as adults, as psychologists Terri L. Messman-
Moore (2009) and her colleagues related in their 2009 article in 
the Journal of Interpersonal Violence.  Women with a childhood his-
tory of sexual abuse are 4.7 times more likely to be subsequently 
raped, according to a 1997 Naval Health Research Center report. 
The reasons for this increased risk of attack are not clear but 
appear to be linked to substance abuse and posttraumatic stress. 
People with developmental disabilities also have an increased 
vulnerability to sexual assault, probably because they are seen as 
easy marks. 
 Male Victims 
 Male rape seems to be the last taboo. Most studies of sexual 
assault pay no attention to male victims. Until fairly recently, 
many people even doubted that a male could be raped. While 
men are more likely than women to be victims of violent crimes, 
rape and domestic violence are two of the few exceptions to this 
likelihood. 
 Yet male rape is a topic that deserves greater attention than 
it has so far received. Studies estimate that 5 to 10 percent of 
reported rapes involve males, as Michael Scarce (1997) noted in 
his book Male on Male Rape: The Hidden Toll of Stigma and Shame . 
Many men do not report, however, making it impossible to 
determine accurate numbers of male rape victims. 
 Men and boys who are sexually assaulted are usually too 
ashamed to speak out, though society is not inclined to listen to 
them anyway. Male victims face skepticism, criticism, and  disbelief,

34 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
as well as a near total absence of support services. Rape cen-
ters very rarely cater to men and often show a reluctance to let 
them in the door since men are more often the abusers than the 
abused. 
 A case of male rape in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, in 1995 
illustrates the problem of male rape. Police arrested a 58-year-
old apartment complex security guard for raping an 18-year-old 
man after offering him a ride home from a local laundry. Instead, 
the guard drove the young man to parking lot and raped him at 
knifepoint. A police officer publicly commended the rape victim 
for stepping forward and reporting the crime, since male rape is 
probably the most underreported violent crime. 
 The perception that real men cannot be raped remains very 
strong, despite some portrayals of normal male rape victims in 
popular culture, such as the blockbuster movie of the early 1970s, 
Deliverance.  Sandy White and Niwako Yamawaki examined the 
effects of homophobia on the perception of male rape victims in a 
2009 essay that appeared in the  Journal of Applied Social Psychology.
Victims were assigned more blame in acquaintance rape than in 
stranger rape, with gay men blamed more for their sexual victim-
ization than heterosexual victims. Gay men, apparently reflecting 
internalized homophobia, also tended to blame themselves for 
being attacked at a greater rate than heterosexual victims. 
 Male victims of rape tend to be in their late teens to late 20s. 
More African Americans than members of any other racial group 
report being sexually assaulted. Gay men seem to be raped in 
higher numbers than straight men, but there is a chance that gay 
men are more likely to report. As in cases of women raped by 
men, sexual attraction appears to have little to do with rape. It is a 
crime of violence. Rapists of men tend to identify as heterosexual. 
Virtually every study indicates that men rape other men out of 
anger or an attempt to overpower, humiliate, and degrade their 
victims. The stigma and shame associated with male rape shows 
that rapists often succeed in their goal. 
 Victims of Same-Sex Rape 
 Men rape men and women rape women. Such violence may take 
the form of date or marital rape. Gay, lesbian, bisexual, and trans-
gendered (GLBT) victims of same-sex domestic violence often feel 
very isolated because of a lack of support from both the wider com-
munity and the GLBT community. Many gay, lesbian, bisexual, 

Attackers 35
and transgendered people believe that if domestic violence exists 
within the GLBT community, it takes the form of mutual fighting 
and does not reflect the same power and control as heterosexual 
domestic abuse. Just like many straight men, many gay men be-
lieve that men are supposed to be able to defend themselves from 
other men’s violence. Men are not supposed to be victims. Har-
kening back to a distant past when many people believed that two 
women could not have sex with each other because no penis was 
present, some people believe that one woman lacks the ability to 
rape another. 
 Sexual violence within same-sex relationships has been par-
ticularly difficult to acknowledge. Gay culture often holds that 
men are supposed to want and enjoy sex pretty much whenever 
it is available from someone that they are attracted to. Patrick 
Letellier, a rape survivor, related his story in  Same-Sex Domestic 
Violence: Strategies for Change.  “I called it rough sex,” he wrote 
before adding, “Forcing himself on me. Being selfish and incon-
siderate, a beast, a monster. He called it getting what he wanted. 
What he was entitled to . . . [I] occasionally tell a sexual partner 
that sex can be difficult for me because I was . . . raped. They 
almost always furrow their eyebrows. Gay men don’t use that 
word when they talk about themselves” (Leventhal, 1999, p. 74). 
 Among women, attitudes toward butch/femme roles can 
lead to unintended support for the attackers. Batterers can play 
on the misassumption—both within and outside of the lesbian 
community—that butch is the same as male. A femme can abuse 
her butch partner by forcing sexual activity that her partner does 
not want. The abuser can deflect responsibility by claiming that 
the victim is just not butch enough. A butch woman may have her 
bad behavior excused as being just a part of being butch. 
 Attackers 
 Rape Myth Acceptance 
 The United States has a rape culture, as some antirape activists 
have argued, because of the wide acceptance of rape myths. Beliefs 
about rape allow some individuals to justify engaging in sexually 
aggressive behavior, including rape. Research on date rapists and 
“real” rapists show that the belief systems of these men foster 
rape. There is no significant difference between the two groups. 

36 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
Both believe that women are complicit in rape and that rapists are 
entitled to attack. 
 Some attackers believe that since they do not fit the rape 
myths, then they are not participating in a real rape. Martha R. 
Burt, in a 1980 article in the Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology , offered that adversarial sexual beliefs are tied to rape 
myth acceptance. Such beliefs hold that sexual relationships are 
fundamentally exploitative and that each party is too manipu-
lative to be trusted. Fourteen years later, Kimberly A. Lonsway 
and Louise F. Fitzgerald (1994) concluded in a  Psychology of 
Women Quarterly  essay that negative and stereotypical attitudes 
toward women have been found to be associated with rape myth 
acceptance. 
 Many of the most persistent rape myths address marital rape. 
Men, as a whole, are more likely to minimize the seriousness of 
all forms of rape. Individuals of both sexes tend to minimize 
the seriousness of a rape perpetrated by a husband versus one 
committed by a stranger. Margaret Gordon and Stephanie Riger, 
in their 1989 book The Female Fear,  reported that 64 percent of men 
and 63 percent of women surveyed did not characterize unwanted 
sexual assault between a husband and wife as rape. In a 1987 
study for License to Rape: Sexual Abuse of Wives,  David Finkelhor 
and Kersti Yllo asked people to rank the severity of 140 crimes. 
“Forcible rape of a former spouse” ranked at number 62, below 
selling marijuana and stealing $25. Abused wives have reported 
that their husbands thought that they could do anything to their 
wives—cut them, beat them, and rape them—because of the 
marital relationship. 
 In her book  Wife Rape,  Raquel Kennedy Bergen (1996) quoted 
two women who made the point that rape is rape, no matter who 
commits it. Karen said, “It was very clear to me. He ripped off my 
pajamas, he beat me up. I mean some scumbag down the street 
would do that to me. So to me it wasn’t any different because I 
was married to him. It was rape—real clear what it was. . . . I guess 
I can’t say I would have been more fearful with a stranger because 
I didn’t know when he was going to stop or if he was going to kill 
me.” Wanda, another victim of wife rape, stated, “This is a crime, 
no matter if your husband does this or not. Nobody has the right 
to drag me by my hair into the room and do that. There’s such 
embarrassment and degradation you go through because you’re a 
wife and some stranger didn’t do” (p. 36). Researchers have tried 
to determine why people think the way that they do about rape. 

Attackers 37
 By identifying the roots of rape myths, researchers Shelly 
Schaefer Hinck and Richard W. Thomas hoped to reduce the 
prevalence of myths such as the ones that excuse marital rape 
and reduce the overall rate of rapes. In 1999, Hinck and Thomas 
asked 158 male and female college students whether they agreed 
with various statements about rape. The statements included: 
“you cannot be raped by someone you know,” “it would do 
some women some good to get raped,” “many people secretly 
desired to be raped,” “rape of a woman by a man she knows can 
be defined as ‘a woman who changed her mind afterward,’ ” “the 
degree of a woman’s resistance should be the major factor in de-
termining if a rape has occurred,” “rape only really occurs when 
a rapist has a weapon,” and “if a woman says ‘no’ to having sex, 
she means ‘maybe’ or even ‘yes.’” The results, published in the 
journal Sex Roles , indicated that specific factors such as victim 
blame, sex role expectation, misinformation, and communication 
skills all contributed to an individual’s rape-supportive attitudes. 
Hinck and Thomas concluded that attendance at a rape preven-
tion workshop might reduce the risk of rape by making potential 
rapists aware of their faulty thinking. 
 Student Athletes 
 Some subcultures seem to justify violence against women through 
group activities, language, practices, and rituals. These groups, 
which include the military, college fraternities, and male athletic 
teams, may foster violence against women through narrowly 
defined notions of masculinity that include dominance, aggres-
sion, and competitiveness. Athletes have come under particular 
focus by rape researchers. 
 There is a debate over whether an athlete is more likely to 
commit an act of violence than an ordinary man or whether an 
athlete is more likely to be reported for his bad behavior because 
of his celebrity status. Some studies have found that there is no 
difference in violent tendencies between athletes and nonathletes. 
Other studies, however, have found that male athletes are over-
represented among rapists on college campuses. 
 Such men also accept rape myths at a higher rate. Scot B. 
Boeringer found, in a 1999 essay for the journal Violence Against 
Women , that male college athletes responded positively to rape-
supportive statements 56 percent of the time, while a control group 
of male students believed rape myths at only an 8 percent rate. 

38 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
 To explore the meaning and role of rape myths, Sarah McMa-
hon spoke with 48 male and female student athletes. All played at 
a Division I school, a large public university in the Northeast. The 
athletes played football, soccer, lacrosse, wrestling, and volley-
ball as well as track. They tended to believe that female athletes 
were invulnerable to rape and that some women provoke rape. 
They misunderstood consent while believing that “accidental” 
rape could be falsely charged rape. The young men claimed that 
some women fabricated rape because of feeling vengeful or regret-
ful in the morning. In McMahon’s 2007 Affilia  essay, “Understand-
ing Community-Specific Rape Myths: Exploring Student Athlete 
Culture,” she quoted one athlete: “As long as they’re [women] 
conscious, it doesn’t matter how drunk they are. . . . Unless they’re 
drugged and unconscious, they’re capable of saying ‘no.’ And if 
they don’t, it’s a mistake.” The same young man also tried to get 
women drunk so that they would have sex with him. The female 
athletes believed that some women invite rape by their style of 
dress. One commented, “When we go out to parties and I see girls 
and the way they dress and the way they act and then how close 
the guys come up to them, and just the way they are under influ-
ence . . . I honestly always think it’s their fault” (McMahon, 2007, 
p. 360, 367). 
 Such beliefs by the athletes justify rape and help explain why 
many women do not report rape. The ideas that “she was ask-
ing for it” and “she could have said no” remain strong in some 
subcultures. There is clearly a need for rape prevention groups 
to focus their educational efforts upon student athletes of both 
genders.
 Several universities have already taken steps to reduce the 
potential for rape among student athletes. At the University of 
Arkansas, this has meant setting up workshops on date rape and 
making attendance mandatory for athletes. St. John’s University 
has mandatory seminars on sexual ethics and drug and alcohol 
abuse for athletes and all fraternity and sorority pledges. The 
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), which gov-
erns college sports, has no programs addressing sexual assault, 
preferring leaving it up to individual institutions. 
 Tom Jackson, the director of the program at Arkansas, told 
a reporter for the  St. Petersburg Times  in 1992 that his research 
did not indicate that athletes commit a disproportionate num-
ber of sexual assaults. Jackson established the date rape pro-
gram at his university because the lifestyle for many athletes 

Attackers 39
does have potential for sexual abuse problems. The idolatry 
heaped on athletes and their isolation from other students on 
campus poses particular problems. “My goal has been to help 
athletes understand their special circumstances,” Jackson said. 
“I believe there are more opportunities for male athletes to 
engage in various types of interaction with women, and they 
must be aware of the basic causes of date rape” ( St. Petersburg 
Times, June 28, 1992). 
 Fraternities 
 Men in campus fraternities may not be among the individuals 
in need of rape education, contrary to popular belief. Fraternity 
men—at least the ones who remain sober—may simply be victims 
of erroneous assumptions. 
 There is considerable literature, especially in popular culture, 
suggesting that fraternity men are particularly likely to victim-
ize women on college campuses. Fraternities have historically 
 occupied a privileged place in campus social life. The isolation of 
fraternities may enhance their sense of entitlement that spills over 
into interpersonal violence against female party guests. The list 
of schools that have had highly publicized instances of fraternity 
gang rape include the University of Pennsylvania, Notre Dame, 
Morehead State University, and the University of Tennessee at 
Chattanooga.
 However, Martin D. Schwartz and Carol A. Nogrady have 
challenged the idea that fraternity men are more likely to rape. In 
a 1996 essay for the journal Violence Against Women,  they did not 
find evidence that fraternity men differed from their male peers 
in their support of rape myths. They discovered that men who 
drink heavily are more likely to victimize women. Schwartz and 
Nogrady advised that antirape efforts include alcohol education. 
Some studies have shown that more than half of convicted rapists 
were drinking at the time of their crime 
 Anthropologist Peggy Reeves Sanday (2007), a longtime anti-
rape activist and author of Fraternity Gang Rape , offers  additional 
support for the need for alcohol education, albeit unintention-
ally. Most of the cases that she profiles in her book involve excess 
consumption of alcohol by men who then behave badly. Sanday, 
who seeks to change the fraternity subculture, argues that status 
among the brothers depends on how many girls that a frater-
nity member has bedded. She also states that most of the attacks 

40 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
involve party settings with men plying women with drinks. It 
appears that drunken men rape drunken women and that rape 
myths excuse such behavior. Fraternity membership may be 
 incidental to the crime. 
 Clergy 
 The notion that a man of the cloth would sexually molest a 
woman or child once seemed patently ridiculous. Survivors of 
such abuse have related tales of being punished by their par-
ents for supposedly lying about what the priest had done. In 
2002, the widespread abuse of boys by Catholic priests sud-
denly became public knowledge as two priests, John Geoghan 
and Paul Shanley, faced charges of molesting great numbers of 
boys. In subsequent years, the Catholic Church would deal with 
many more sex abuse scandals, as would every other major 
 denomination. 
 Contrary to public perceptions, most victims of clergy abuse 
are grown women and not boys. A United Methodist Church sur-
vey found that 1 in 15 women reported to church officials that 
they were being abused by a clergy member. Women simply do 
not get media attention, with newspapers and television shows 
preferring to focus on the more dramatic and terrifying stories of 
pedophile priests. 
 The effect of clergy abuse on victims can be deeply traumatic. 
Kathryn A. Flynn related in her 2003 book,  The Sexual Abuse of 
Women by Members of the Clergy , that the 25 women she inter-
viewed were disbelieved, discredited, blamed, and ostracized 
by the very group that they expected to minister to them spiritu-
ally: their clergy members and congregation. As with the Roman 
Catholic Church before its problems became very public, all of the 
churches covered up the abuse. 
 Stranger Rape 
 The stereotypical image of a rapist is of some mysterious stranger 
who lurks in the shadows waiting to pounce on a vulnerable 
woman who walks by. The stereotype does not match reality. 
Nicole P. Yuan, who heads the Rape Prevention and Education 
Program (RPEP) in Arizona, also considered perpetrators of sex-
ual crime in her essay for the Journal of Interpersonal Violence . Her 
team found that most Native American female victims of sexual 

Attackers 41
assault were attacked by male relatives or romantic partners. For 
American Indian men who were victimized, the most common 
attackers were male relatives followed by strangers. 
 Other researchers have come to the same conclusions, albeit 
with other populations of people. Keith Bletzer and Mary P. Koss, 
in their 2006 article “After-Rape Among Three Populations in the 
Southwest,” in Violence Against Women,  asked low-income South-
western Native American, Latina, and white women about their 
experiences of rape. Most of the women were assaulted by men 
that they knew, often long-term acquaintances, such as classmates, 
boyfriends, and cousins. 
 Female Sex Offenders 
 American society has been very reluctant to acknowledge that 
women can commit sex crimes. A small but significant percent-
age of sexual violence involves female perpetrators. In 1988, 
the National Center for Juvenile Justice estimated that women 
were responsible for eight percent of the total number of sexual 
offenses committed against boys and girls. In 2000, the Bureau 
of Justice Statistic estimated that about two percent of violent 
sex offenses were committed by women. These sex criminals 
can be the mothers, older sisters, aunts, or other relatives of the 
victim. 
 Female sex offenders exhibit several similarities when com-
pared with male offenders. Common characteristics include se-
crecy, deception, manipulation of the victim, gradual escalation 
of sexually abusive behavior, abuse of power, social isolation, 
distorted thinking to justify the behavior, and the likelihood of 
reoffending. Female offenders may groom teenage male targets 
in ways that make their sexual conduct appear normal. Subtle 
but escalating forms of direct physical contact and of improper 
sexual exposure are common. The grooming process may begin 
with inappropriate hugs and kisses, peeping, and apparently 
accidental rubbing against the boy’s genitals. The female sex 
criminal progresses to erotic talk, undressing in front of the boy, 
showing pornography, masturbation, and intercourse. A com-
mon tactic is for abusive women to engaging in provocative acts 
with the hope that the boy will make the first move. If the boy 
approaches the woman, she can claim that he started the affair. 
Such an argument convinces the boy that he is responsible for 
what happens next. 

42 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
 Women who prey upon young male victims challenge con-
ventional thinking about gender norms. Victims of incest typically
receive sympathy. Boys who engage in sexual conduct with their 
older stepsisters or stepmothers are not necessarily seen in a 
sympathetic light. Even if many people recognize that sexual 
molestation of boys can involve female perpetrators, this same 
behavior is rarely defined as abusive once these males enter 
puberty. Adolescent males who are having sexual relationships 
with an older female are not seen in an especially sympathetic 
light. Many people believe that there is no harm in such a rela-
tionship, which emphasizes the heterosexuality of the boy. The 
boys are not victims, they are lucky. 
 Such behavior is abusive because it fulfills the needs of the 
female perpetrator and not the boy victim. The power differential 
between the two people is also not the same. To be manipulated 
and used as a sexual object by a more powerful person is the very 
definition of abusive behavior. 
 Mother-daughter incest is not unknown but little has been 
written about it. It seems to distress people even more than 
 attacks by pedophiles on little boys. The bond between mother 
and child, especially a daughter, is supposed to be sacred. When a 
mother sexually abuses her daughter, the relationship is a severe 
violation of trust. 
 Beverly A. Ogilvie interviewed 62 adult female survivors 
of mother-daughter incest for her 2004 book,  Mother-Daughter
 Incest: A Guide for Helping Professionals.  The survivors ranged in 
age from 19 to 56 and experienced anywhere from 1 to 40 years of 
sexual abuse. The average length of abuse was 11.5 years. Ogilvie 
reported that the mothers who committed incest provided their 
daughters with no nurturance or sense of safety. Many of the per-
petrators felt that their own mothers hated them. The daughters 
described them as lonely, miserable, isolated, cold, insecure, inad-
equate, unstable, unempathetic, unable to keep friends, mean, 
and vindictive. Others in the community, however, viewed the 
mothers as good parents who kept their daughter clean and well-
dressed. These mothers seemed to feel that they had to display 
and protect their maternal image. They also made their daughters 
responsible for their happiness, often turning the daughters into 
caregivers. 
 Although Ogilvie never says so, she gives the impression 
that she regards mother-daughter incest as the very worst form 
of sexual abuse and the one that is most difficult to treat. The 

After the Attack 43
daughter is robbed of an essential part of her identity and is left 
very vulnerable. 
 After the Attack 
 Providing Rape Services 
to Victims 
 Most rape victims do not obtain help for their injuries. Only about 
25 percent of women who are raped seek out medical treatment, 
according to a study published in 2000 in the  American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine.  The numbers are undoubtedly lower for male 
victims because of the stigma of such assaults. The College of 
Emergency Physicians recommends that rape victims obtain 
medical treatment immediately and within five days at the lat-
est. Delays can result to further harm to the victim as well as 
complicate any prosecution of the assailant. 
 It is no easy matter to report a sexual assault. The time fol-
lowing a sexual attack has been deemed the second rape because 
it can be nearly as traumatic as the rape. Insensitive medical per-
sonnel and police may blame the victim for the attack. The victim 
may not receive the services that will help him or her to heal both 
physically and psychologically. The United States is better than 
most countries in its provision of care but there is significant room 
for improvement. Several studies have illustrated the problems 
with institutional responses to rape. 
 In the wake of a rape, victims must be carefully examined to 
provide evidence that may result in the conviction of the attacker. 
Just as crucially, victims need treatment for physical and psycho-
logical injuries as well as protection against pregnancy and sexu-
ally transmitted infections such as HIV, gonorrhea, chlamydia, 
and syphilis. Some medical providers focus on the forensic 
examination to the exclusion of the health services that are 
needed. The forensic examination has largely been standard-
ized in the form of a rape kit, making it easier to deliver this part 
of postassault treatment. While the Department of Justice and sev-
eral medical societies have issued rough guidelines about medical 
treatment, hospitals have the leeway to develop their own proce-
dures that are influenced by concerns about time and money. 
 In 2001, Rebecca Campbell led a study about the experi-
ences of rape survivors with service providers. The findings of 

44 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
the Campbell group, as reported in the  Journal of Interpersonal 
Violence  in 2001, indicate that a majority of rape survivors did 
not receive necessary services from police and hospital person-
nel. However, they did benefit from contact with the mental 
health system, rape crisis centers, and religious organizations. 
Campbell concluded that the trauma of rape extended far be-
yond the assault, since rape victims were further distressed by 
the immediate responders. 
 Researchers at the John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital in Chicago 
identified 10 critical services that should be provided to rape 
victims after an attack. In a study published in June 2008 in the 
journal Contraception , the researchers discovered that fewer than 
1 in 10 hospitals in Illinois provided such help as rape crisis coun-
seling and preventive treatment of sexually transmitted diseases. 
The Stroger group found that all emergency rooms provided 
medical care but only two-thirds offered rape crisis counseling. 
Only 40 percent of emergency rooms provided emergency con-
traception, specifically the Plan B morning-after pill. This medica-
tion is a hormone, levonorgestral, which can reduce the chance of 
pregnancy when taken as directed up to 72 hours after unprotected 
sex. The hospitals did better with treating sexually transmitted dis-
eases, with two-thirds testing for such infections. However, less 
than one-third provided precautionary HIV treatment. 
 The Stroger findings reinforced conclusions reached in ear-
lier studies. A study published in 2007 in the  American Journal 
of Health–System Pharmacy  reviewed the treatment provided 
to almost 180,000 victims of sexual attacks across the nation. 
Fewer than 10 percent of patients received the antibiotics that 
are necessary to protect against sexually transmitted infections. 
(Antibiotics have been used to treat both gonorrhea and syphilis 
since penicillin became widely available in 1943). A 2004 study 
of Pennsylvania emergency rooms, published in the  Interna-
tional Journal of Fertility and Women’s Medicine , revealed that less 
than half of hospitals routinely offered emergency contraception 
counseling. New Mexico enacted a law in 2003 requiring that 
hospital emergency departments offer emergency contraception 
to survivors of sexual assault. However, a subsequent study of 
New Mexico hospitals revealed that most were not fully comply-
ing with the law and that some medical personnel had not even 
heard of the law. 
 The reluctance to offer emergency contraception may be 
tied to ethical concerns. Plan B, which has been available in the 

After the Attack 45
United States since 2006, works by preventing a fertilized egg 
from implanting in the uterus. Some people liken this process to 
abortion. Hospitals, especially Catholic ones, may not offer Plan B 
because of religious objections to both abortion and artificial 
means of birth control. In New Mexico, some physicians are re-
portedly reluctant to offer Plan B to minors without the consent of 
parents, although the law does not require such consent. The phy-
sicians may be confusing one law with another since New Mexico 
abortion law requires parental consent for a minor seeking to end 
a pregnancy. 
 Providing Help for Raped 
and Battered Wives 
 Women who are raped by their husbands have long had trouble 
obtaining assistance from battered women’s shelters. Many, if 
not most, of the frontline workers at shelters make a distinction 
 between rape and battering that does not exist in the lives of these 
women. Victims of marital rape are sometimes attacked after 
being beaten, as their husbands try to use forced sex to apolo-
gize for the beating. Other women are raped during the course of 
being battered. 
 Yet Raquel Kennedy Bergen in  Wife Rape  quotes a number 
of workers at battered women’s shelters who do not believe that 
their shelters should treated raped wives. One worker saw wife 
rape to be a qualitatively different type of problem than wife 
abuse. She stated that, “I think they should go to a rape crisis 
center. Let them deal with it—they have counselors.” Another 
agreed: “I feel [that] a woman who has been raped has different 
needs; she needs a rape kit and to get some counseling, and there 
are a series of things I’m sure that should be provided for them 
that we may not be able to provide here because we deal with 
victims of domestic violence.” Bergen quotes a woman named 
Wanda who felt neglected because she had been raped but not 
physically battered by her husband prior to coming to a women’s 
shelter. Wanda recalled, “I don’t know if they looked at me as if 
my problems weren’t as significant as some women who come in 
beat up. Maybe they thought my problem wasn’t serious because 
I didn’t come in with bruises all over me. Now [the director] said 
to me, ‘We look at abuse as abuse,’ but the rest of the staff I didn’t 
know about.” Cory told Bergen that she felt less comfortable shar-
ing her experiences of sexual abuse with the staff because “it’s 

46 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
easier to talk about the physical because it’s more accepted and 
they [the staff] understand that” (Bergen, 1996, p. 84). 
 Mental Health 
 The mental health aspects of a rape are often overlooked but they 
can have as much of an effect upon a survivor as more visible 
wounds. In 1974, Ann Burgess and Larry Holmstrom   coined the 
term “rape trauma syndrome” to describe a type of posttraumatic 
stress disorder that affected female survivors of sexual assault. 
The syndrome is divided into acute and long-term stages. In the 
acute period, a rape victim suffers extreme disorganization, skel-
etal muscle tension, gastrointestinal irritability, disturbances in 
the urinary tract, and a wide range of emotional reactions. The 
long-term phase consists of efforts by survivors to rearrange their 
lives. The reactions noted in this stage are increased motor activity, 
such as changing residences or traveling for support; disturbing 
dreams and nightmares, and “traumatophobia.” This last ailment 
includes fear of the indoors if the victim was raped in her bed, fear 
of the outdoors if the victim was attacked outside, fear of being 
alone, fear of crowds, fear of people walking behind her, and/or 
a fear of engaging in consensual sexual activity. (There has been 
some criticism of characterizing the reactions of women who have 
been raped as a syndrome, or an aberration. Such a designation 
allegedly shifts the focus from the prevalence of violence against 
women to women’s reactions to it while simultaneously implying 
that such fears are somehow irrational.) 
 The stigma that some women feel after being sexually 
 attacked influences how they heal from a rape. Bletzer and Koss, 
in their 2006 Violence Against Women  article on after-rape, found 
that few of the low-income Southwestern American Indian, Mexi-
can American, and Anglo women that they interviewed reported 
receiving mental health services. Several of the women had never 
told anyone about being attacked before the researchers asked 
them. Some had told a friend rather than a family member within 
a few hours of the incident. Some had waited years, occasionally 
after the end of adolescence, before they notified family members. 
Several victims from all three groups sought to hide the rape from 
their family, particularly if they were teenagers and still living at 
home. Some of the women were ingenious in hiding soiled clothes 
or washing them on returning home, participating in routine 
 activities of family life (such as watching television), or making 

After the Attack 47
an excuse to stay in their room. They described parental reactions 
on arriving home, particularly mothers, whom they avoided. 
This was difficult when they came home disheveled, bruised, and 
bleeding.
 Cultural factors clearly have an impact on how women re-
spond to a rape. The Mexican American women interviewed by 
Bletzer and Koss had all been born in Mexico and spent many 
years of their lives south of the border. They may not have been 
representative of all Latina women. In 2007, Heather Littleton, 
Carmen Radecki Breitkopf, and Abbey B. Berenson spoke with 
393 low-income European American and Latina women regard-
ing their ideas about a typical rape. The Latinas said that they 
would feel less stigma than the Anglo women expected that 
they would experience. The difference in findings emphasize 
that more research is needed into cultural effects upon the re-
sponses of rape victims. It also needs to be highlighted that less 
stigma does not necessarily mean less trauma. 
 Television shows frequently portray rape victims who are 
so traumatized by a stranger rape that they have double-bolt 
locks lining their front doors. Apart from their emphasis on 
middle-class, young, white women to the near-total neglect of 
minority women, these television programs significantly depart 
from reality with respect to posttraumatic stress. 
 Locks on the door do little to make women feel safer from 
rape since the danger comes from inside the home. The women 
who suffer the most trauma from rapes are the ones who are 
attacked by their partners. In a 2007  Violence Against Women
essay, “Differing Effects of Partner and Nonpartner Sexual As-
sault on Women’s Mental Health,” Jeff R. Temple and a team of 
researchers found that sexual assault by a current partner was 
the strongest predictor of posttraumatic stress disorder, stress, 
and dissociation. Non-intimate partner sexual assault was only a 
significant predictor of posttraumatic stress disorder for African 
American women. When considering the impact of sexual as-
sault upon a victim, it is critically important to take into account 
the perpetrator of the crime. 
 Failure to do so can mightily contribute to the misery of the 
victim, who is more likely to abuse alcohol or attempt suicide, as 
Judith McFarlane discovered. McFarlane led a team of nurses who 
spoke with 148 African American, Anglo and Latina women who 
had been abused. In the November 2005 journal of Issue in Men-
tal Health Nursing , the nurses revealed that women who  reported 

48 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
more than one sexual assault were 3.5 times more likely to report 
beginning or increasing substance use compared to women who 
reported only one sexual assault. Sexually assaulted women re-
ported significantly more risk factors for suicide compared to 
women who experienced only physical abuse. Women reporting 
sexual assault were 5.3 times more likely to report threatening or 
attempted suicide within a 90-day period as compared to women 
who were only physically abused. 
 The women who experience the worst levels of trauma are 
the ones who had some mental health issues before the attack. 
Libby O. Ruch and Joseph J. Leon, in a 1983 essay for the journal 
Women and Health , found that the severity of preexisting emotional 
problems significantly predicted the level of trauma experienced 
by rape survivors. Women with depression are likely to become 
more depressed or attempt suicide while those with drinking 
problems are likely to consume greater amounts of alcohol. 
 Despite the clear need for mental health services, less than 
half of female rape victims reportedly accept mental health help. 
It is not enough to treat only the physical injuries of a rape vic-
tim. Health providers must consider the mental health situation 
of victims and emphasize the importance of treatment to those in 
need.
 Treating Male Victims 
of Sexual Assault 
 Men experience rape as an aggressive attack on their sexuality as 
well as a violation of their physical and psychological bound-
aries. Like most women, most men cope with a rape without 
 developing major psychological problems. However, the expe-
rience shatters basic assumptions about personal vulnerability 
as well as the popular idea that disasters happen only to other 
people. While women are taught from childhood to guard against 
rape, most men are not. The outright surprise and shock of being 
raped is likely far higher for men than women. 
 Rape treatment plans have generally been developed under 
the notion that men were aggressors and never victims. This 
major gap in service provision is likely to reinforce the sense of 
isolation and stigmatization experienced by many men who have 
been the victims of sexual assault. Men have also, by and large, 
internalized the idea that they should be the aggressive leaders in 
sexual matters. 

Law Enforcement 49
 Some men never even consider going to rape crisis centers 
 because such places are women-only spaces. In his book  Male on 
Male Rape: The Hidden Toll of Stigma and Shame,  Michael Scarce re-
lates the case of Marcus, a rape survivor who happened to be 
friends with a rape counselor but who never even considered the 
local rape crisis center. Upon reflection, Marcus concluded that 
he never picked up the phone because the center was called Bay 
Area Women Against Rape. 
 As a result of male socialization, men also are less likely than 
women to accept that they need help, with the result that many 
rape victims are reluctant to receive psychological aid. Rape treat-
ment programs report high rates of male drop out. Personnel 
throughout the entire medical and legal system need to be trained 
to respond sensitively to incidents of male rape .
 Law Enforcement 
 Arrests for Rape 
 The violent crime rate, including the numbers of forcible rapes, 
has decreased significantly over the last few decades, for reasons 
that remain murky. It is clear, however, that law enforcement 
agencies are still struggling to formulate effective responses to 
rape. A person who reports a rape has a 50 percent chance that 
an arrest will be made in the attack, according to a 1999 report by 
the National Center for Policy Analysis. However, only 16.3 per-
cent of rapists went to prison for their crimes at the turn of the 
century. Many organizations, including the National Center for 
Policy Analysis, have blamed poor law enforcement procedures 
for the discrepancy between the arrests and the imprisonment 
of rapists. 
 Human Rights Watch recommends that police departments 
take several steps to combat rape. They recommend the creation 
of formal system to send rape kits to crime labs for testing as well 
as the establishment of a police unit tasked with investigating all 
sex crimes. The differences between a police department that does 
not follow these recommendations and one that is viewed as a 
model of sex crimes policing can be seen in two of the largest cities 
in the United States: Los Angeles and New York City. 
 Partly because of issues with rape kits, a person who reports 
to the Los Angeles Police Department that she has been raped 

50 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
has about a one in four chance of seeing someone arrested for 
the crime, as Human Rights Watch notes in its 2009 report. In 
1999, Los Angeles had a rape arrest rate of 30 percent. New York 
City also had a backlog of rape kits but it solved this problem in 
2003. New York City crime labs now process rape kits within 30 to 
60 days with the results provided to a special team of investiga-
tors who focus on rape kit DNA matches. New York City has seen 
an increase in arrests and prosecutions for rape since it changed 
its procedures. 
 Mistrust of Law Enforcement 
 Rape law reforms, along with improvements in the treatment of 
victims of sexual assault, are widely credited with elevating re-
ports of rapes in the decades since the 1960s. Stripping gender 
from the law ended the requirement that victims be female and 
perpetrators male. The kinds of people subject to and protected 
by the law dramatically increased. 
 The police officers of the 21st century are not the same men 
who once were chosen for their jobs because of their willingness 
to crack heads. The modern police force is filled with men with 
degrees in criminology who spend much of their time acting as 
social workers. Jack, a police officer for 25 years and a sex crime 
investigator for 6 years, spoke with Timothy Beneke in an inter-
view that appeared in Patricia Searles’s and Ronald J. Berger’s 
Rape and Society: Readings on the Problem of Sexual Assault. Jack 
said that, “Most rape victims are very honest and frightened. . . . I 
have one now that I’m working with who can’t understand why 
the rapist isn’t instantly caught. . . . Generally speaking, I believe 
something happened. I believe what the lady is saying happened 
to her. But I’m also aware that someone else looking at the inci-
dent may see it a little differently, and that’s what the jury’s going 
to be doing—examining the whole picture”(Searles and Berger, 
1995, p. 53). 
 Law enforcement reforms have made it easier to report rapes. 
Yet legal reforms have not been followed by significant increases 
in either the reporting of rape cases or the likelihood of arrests and 
convictions for rape. The reasons are puzzling. 
 In some cultures, low reporting seems to be linked to mis-
trust of law enforcement. Native Americans, like other racial 
minority groups, have had a complicated relationship with law 
enforcement. In recent years, American Indian women have 

Law Enforcement 51
begun to loudly express their rage at their disproportionate vic-
timization in crimes of sexual assault, most often committed by 
non-Indians. Much of this anger is directed at law enforcement 
agencies. 
 A Cherokee woman, Jami Rozell, is one of the women 
complaining. Raped by a non-Indian, first-grade teacher Ro-
zell could not go to the tribal court since it is only permitted 
to handle crimes against Indians in Indian country. After five 
months of worrying about testifying in front of her family and 
the people that she had grown up with, Rozell spoke at a pre-
liminary hearing in Tahlequah, Oklahoma, in 2005. Then Rozell 
received the news that the police had cleaned up the evidence 
room by throwing away her rape kit and, with it, all chance of 
prosecution. Kendra Hunter, another American Indian woman 
from Oklahoma, told the  New York Times  that she had been 
raped by three white men who held her captive for three days 
in 2001. Hunter said that she did report the gang rape, but that 
the police officers dismissed her. They claimed that, despite the 
cigarette burns on her body, the sex had been consensual and 
the three men would testify to that point. It is perhaps not sur-
prising that Rozell and Hunter now have negative opinions of 
the police. 
 Sherry Hamby, in an essay for the 2008  Journal of Preven-
tion and Intervention in the Community,  addressed perceptions 
of law enforcement among Native American victims of sexual 
assault. American Indian women are sexually victimized at a 
much greater rate than women from U.S. racial groups, but 
they often receive very limited police services. Hamby’s analy-
sis of National Violence Against Women Survey data led her to 
conclude that Native American women did not report rape be-
cause of their suspicion of law enforcement. American Indian 
women, compared to women from other racial groups, more 
often said law enforcement would not believe or would blame 
them. 
 American Indians are also more likely to deal directly with 
the perpetrator, as the Indian women in Hamby’s study acknowl-
edged. Hamby identified other barriers that prevent American 
Indian women from seeking help, including prejudice, conflict 
between Western and native values, language barriers, and pov-
erty. American Indians, fearing humiliation, are often reluctant to 
press a rape complaint. Some see the rape as a test of faith and 
prefer to let God handle the perpetrator. 

52 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
 Tribal police departments are the predominant means of pro-
viding public safety on most Indian reservations outside of Alaska 
and California. The quality and size of tribal law enforcement 
agencies varies widely. The largest police department, with over 
300 officers, is operated by the Navajo Nation. Much smaller tribes 
may have 10 or fewer officers to cover vast tracts of territory. While 
some tribal police departments may be well-equipped, others may 
struggle to provide even minimal levels of service. Accordingly, 
Larry Cox of Amnesty International has identified another rea-
son why Native American women are less likely to report rape. 
American Indian women who report rape may not get a police 
response for hours or days, especially in rural areas. It is possible 
that many Indian women simply do not trust the police to show 
up in a timely manner. 
 Police Sexual Misconduct 
 Some of the mistrust toward police can probably be linked to 
widely reported cases of sexual misconduct by police officers. The 
New York Times  identified one particular case in 2009. Two New 
York City police officers were accused of raping an intoxicated 
woman after helping her to her home. The officers attacked the 
woman as she lay physically helpless upon her bed. The woman 
had already vomited several times, an indication that she was far 
too intoxicated to consent to sexual intercourse. Manhattan dis-
trict attorney Robert M. Morgenthau charged the men with rape 
and official misconduct. 
 Such conduct as rape is apparently rare, though, with most 
cases of sexual misconduct involving lesser offenses. Timothy 
Maher looked at the views of police chiefs on police sexual 
misconduct in 2008 for the journal Police Practice & Research.
Twenty police chiefs in a major metropolitan area were inter-
viewed about their perceptions of the nature, extent, and causes 
of sexual misconduct by police. Maher’s results suggested that 
chiefs believe that police sexual misconduct is a problem. The 
chiefs generally report that the serious/criminal forms of sexual 
misconduct (e.g., rape, sexual assault, and sex with a juvenile) 
are rare. They believe that the less serious, noncriminal inci-
dents (e.g., flirting on duty, consensual sex on duty, and pulling 
over a driver to get a closer look) are more common. Maher con-
cluded that four factors influence this behavior: lack of knowl-
edge about police sexual misconduct, police  departments’ 

Law Enforcement 53
complaint systems, opportunity for sexual misconduct, and the 
police  culture. 
 Rape Kits 
 A rape kit, also known as a sexual assault evidence kit (SAEK), 
is a collection of biological evidence taken from a rape or sexual 
abuse victim after an assault. Marty Goddard, an antirape activist 
in Chicago, invented the kit in the 1970s to aid in the prosecutions 
of rapists. The kit, which varies by state and situation, contains the 
forensic evidence necessary to obtain an arrest and conviction. It 
should be collected within 72 hours of the attack, with retrieval 
often taking up to four hours. The victim’s informal consent is nec-
essary for a rape kit to be used. Ideally, rape kits are completed 
by a Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE), a registered nurse 
who has received specific training to care for sexual assault 
victims, competently collect evidence, and provide effective 
courtroom  testimony. 
 Processing a rape kit cost about $1,500 in 2009. This heavy ex-
pense is one that many cities and states struggled to pay, especially 
during economic downturns. To solve their financial headaches,
some local and state governments decided to pass along the 
costs of rape kits to the victims. Most people were unaware of this 
policy change until 2008 when it became public knowledge that 
Republican Vice Presidential candidate Sarah Palin had supported 
such billings when she served as a mayor of Wasilla, Alaska. The 
charges created a small scandal as Palin faced condemnation for 
seeking to charge rape victims for processing evidence to prove 
their truthfulness. The fees seemed to be fundamentally unfair. 
 The Federal Violence Against Women Act prohibits states 
from charging victims for processing rape kits or risk losing fed-
eral funding. While all states have complied with the legislation, 
some have found creative ways to sidestep some of the costs. 
When a kit is collected, the rape victim may receive the hospi-
tal bill and then have to pursue payment from the government. 
In Oklahoma, legislators capped the compensation for rape vic-
tims at $450. Maine proved slightly more generous by enacting a 
$500 cap, still only one-third of the costs of processing a rape kit. 
Texas pays $700 and then forces the victim to apply to the victim 
compensation fund for the remainder of the bill. North Dakota, 
Oregon, and the District of Columbia pay all costs but only after 
the rape victim has paid the bill and sought compensation. Rape 

54 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
victims in Montana receive money from the crime victims’ com-
pensation fund as long as they cooperate with the prosecution of 
the attacker. 
 Not all rape victims are informed that they can seek compen-
sation from the state or a crime victims’ fund. Since low-income 
women are more likely to be raped than high-income women, 
such fees may be outside the financial wherewithal of victims. 
The result could be rapists who remain free to prey again. 
 There is one fee for collecting a rape kit and another expense 
for testing the material in the kit. In 2009, Human Rights Watch 
reported that Los Angeles County allowed 12,669 rape kits to col-
lect dust in police storage rooms. Nearly 500 of the kits had been 
ignored for at least 10 years while the California statute of limi-
tations expired. At least 1,218 kits were from unsolved cases in 
which the attacker was a stranger. Human Rights Watch claimed 
that thousands of rape kits had been destroyed without being 
tested. Sarah Tofte, the author of the report, “Testing Justice: The 
Rape Kit Backlog in Los Angeles City and County” (2009), empha-
sized that completing a rape kit is an ordeal for a victim and 
the failure to process the kits had denied justice to the victims. 
The county government claimed that it had lacked the funds to 
hire the personnel to test the kits. After a few weeks of very bad 
publicity, Los Angeles County found the money to hire up to 
26 additional employees. The county also planned to outsource 
a number of kits to private labs, a step that it presumably could 
have taken some years earlier. 
 Human Rights Watch identified several disturbing results of 
the failure of Los Angeles to process the rape kits. A sexual assault 
nurse examiner treated a child who had been kidnapped near a 
bus stop and raped. She recalled the case of another child who 
had been taken from the same bus stop and raped. The details 
of both attacks seemed to match, leading the nurse to suspect 
that the same man had committed both crimes. The nurse con-
tacted the police officer in charge of the case to inquire about the 
first child’s rape kit. She was told that the kit had not yet been 
processed and that it might remain unprocessed for another six 
months. Meanwhile, the rapist presumably remained on the loose 
where he could commit further crimes against children. In an-
other case, a Los Angeles detective was dissuaded by crime lab 
personnel from submitting a rape kit for testing. Told that test-
ing could take eight months or more, the detective tried to solve 
the crime by other means. He failed and a man who attacked a 

Judicial System 55
woman following a party remains unknown. In a third case, a 
woman named Catherine was attacked at home while her young 
son slept. The police officer who investigated the crime had a 
hunch that the man was a repeat offender. Informed by Los Ange-
les crime lab personnel that testing could take up to eight months, 
the detective personally delivered the rape kit to a state lab in the 
hopes of faster results. He still had to wait eight months before the 
state linked DNA from Catherine’s rapist to a man in the offender 
database. The rapist had used the extra time to rape two more 
people, including a child. 
 Judicial System 
 Rape Shield Laws 
 Legal scholars typically underscore the failures of law reforms 
by stressing that there is a difference between making laws in a 
sterile chamber and practicing the law in messy reality. Feminist 
critics of the criminal justice system have long argued that women 
who file rape complaints with the police are often discredited by 
prosecutors and in court if they fail to conform to the stereotype 
of a “real rape” victim. The perfect victim resembles a nun. She 
is morally and sexually virtuous as well as cautious, unassertive, 
and consistent. 
 Rape shield laws limit the introduction of the victim’s sexual 
history in trials. These laws came about after defense attorneys 
would use a victim’s past to suggest that she wanted to have sex 
with her alleged rapist. Women with extensive sexual histories 
were thought to more frequently fabricate allegations of rape than 
other women. They were thought to have asked for it. 
 In 2007, three researchers tested this theory. Heather D. 
Flowe, Ebbe B. Ebbesen, and Anila Putcha-Bhagavatula inter-
viewed female college students, topless dancers, prostitutes, and 
women living in a drug and rehabilitation center. In an essay 
subsequently published in the journal Law and Human Behavior,
women were less likely to say that they would take legal action 
in response to a rape if they had extensive sexual histories or if 
they had consented to an extensive amount of foreplay before the 
rape. In cases of consensual sexual activity, women with exten-
sive sexual records were not more likely to say that they would 
report rape, even when provided with a motive for seeking 

56 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
 revenge against their partner. In essence, women who are sup-
posedly likely to ask for it are not likely to go to court to complain 
when they get it. 
 It is possible that these women in this study were unaware 
of rape shield laws. They might hesitate to report a rape because 
they thought that they would not be believed. Despite rape shield 
laws, women still hesitate to go to court for fear that their sexual 
histories will be made public and they will be prosecuted instead 
of the defendant. Several highly publicized cases reportedly made 
women less likely to come forward. 
 Rape shields do not work in highly publicized cases. In 
the Kobe Bryant case in 2004, the accuser’s name became pub-
lic and she received death threats from the professional basket-
ball player’s fans before the case even went to court. The rape 
shield applied to the victim but her name quickly spread across 
the Internet as media outlets around the globe were eager to give 
every detail of the case to the public. (It should be noted that rape 
shield laws do little for the defendant, who has a legal presump-
tion of innocence. Bryant claimed that the sex was consensual. 
The rape shield law denied him access to evidence that might 
have indicated that the woman had a tendency to sleep with ce-
lebrity athletes.) In the Mike Tyson case, the name of the former 
Miss Black Rhode Island who accused the boxer of rape in 1991 
can now be found on Wikipedia. “Iron Mike” had such notoriety 
by the time of the accusation that the media could not resist dig-
ging up every bit of information about his accuser, including her 
name. 
 Prosecution Challenges 
 Case screening is the gateway to the criminal court system. Pros-
ecutors, acting as gatekeepers, decide which cases of alleged 
victimization will be passed on to be judged in court. A 1990 
Department of Justice study suggested that a significant per-
centage of felony cases, including rape, never get beyond this 
point. Prosecutors prefer to prosecute cases that are solid or 
convictable, partly because they are judged at election time upon 
their conviction rates. 
 District attorneys do not like to prosecute rapes. Such cases 
are viewed as murky and ambiguous. Many, like the Kobe Bry-
ant case, seem to come down to he said/she said. A number of 
studies on sexual assault have found that victim credibility is 

Judicial System 57
crucial in persuading a prosecutor to pursue a case. Prosecutors 
prefer victims who are virginal. When sex workers are the vic-
tims of assaults, prosecutors worry about the reaction of a jury to 
the victims. They typically simply refuse to prosecute such cases 
as a waste of time and resources. Lisa Frohmann, in her study 
of prosecutorial accounts of case rejections, concluded that when 
in doubt, prosecutors reject a case. The behavior of prosecutors 
is  attuned more to avoiding the error of filing cases that are not 
likely to result in conviction than to avoiding the error of rejecting 
cases that will probably end in conviction. 
 Native Americans, who feature far more prominently as 
victims of rapes than they should as a percentage of the pop-
ulation, also have trouble getting rapes prosecuted. The link 
 between victimization and inability to prosecute is probably not 
coincidental. 
 The roots of the difficulty date back several decades. In 1978, 
the U.S. Supreme Court removed the ability of Indian tribes to 
prosecute non-Indians for crimes committed on Indian reserva-
tions. The Court ruled in  Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe that 
such prosecution violated the tribe’s status as a “domestic depen-
dent nation.” The result is that tribal courts cannot try non-Indians 
charged with raping Native American women. Federal or state 
prosecutors must fill the jurisdictional void but law enforcement 
in such cases is haphazard at best. 
 The Department of Justice’s own records show that in 2006, 
prosecutors filed only 606 criminal cases in all of Indian coun-
try. There are about four million American Indians and Alaska 
 Natives. With more than 560 federally recognized tribes, this fil-
ing rate works out to a little more than one criminal prosecution 
for each tribe. Common sense indicates that something is peculiar 
in Indian country. In 2007, Amnesty International called upon Con-
gress to extend tribal authority to all offenders on Indian land, 
not just Indians, and to expand federal spending on Indian law 
enforcement. 
 In 2007, Renee Brewer, a child welfare and family violence 
counselor at the Potawatomi Nation and a member of the Creek 
Muskogee tribe, spoke to the New York Times about American 
Indian concerns about rape prosecution. Brewer said she recently 
had four agencies arguing over jurisdiction after a woman from 
the Absentee Shawnee Nation had called 911 to say she had been 
raped. The victim eventually left Oklahoma while the accused 
rapist walked away scot-free. 

58 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
 Governments typically possess the authority to prosecute 
crimes committed within their borders. Tribal governments 
should be no exception. Many tribes have reported an increase 
in crimes committed by non-Indians against Indians, as the per-
petrators know that the possibility of federal prosecution is slim. 
Even if outside prosecutors were willing to devote the time and 
resources necessary to handle crimes on Indian land more effi-
ciently, it would still make better sense for tribal governments to 
have jurisdiction over all reservation-based crimes. Not every 
American Indian speaks English and does so fluently. European 
American cultural norms are not the norms that are found upon 
an Indian reservation. Distinct differences exist between tribal 
governments and U.S. governments. Tribal courts, as Native 
American activists like N. Bruce Duthu have argued, are simply 
in the best position to quickly and respectfully help victims of 
sexual assaults ( New York Times, August 11, 2008). 
 Prohibiting Rape 
 Sexual offender laws were passed in two waves. The first batch, 
known as the sexual psychopath laws, passed between the late 
1930s and the mid 1970s. They aimed to punish sexual offenders. 
A Minnesota law that allowed indefinite confinement for likely 
repeat offenders is typical. The states did not require treatment. 
The second batch, which became law after 1990, sought to man-
age sexual offenders through treatment as well as confinement. 
Both laws have had some significant implications for the correc-
tional system. The idea of “lock ’em up and throw away the key” 
particularly appeals to a public frustrated by sexual offenders 
who seem resistant to cures. 
 Correctional System 
 Prison Rape 
 Prison rape has been well-known for many, many years. Many 
Americans have some difficulty summoning up sympathy for 
prisoners, so the issue has not received that much publicity. 
However, individuals who leave prison with psychological 
 issues resulting from being the victims of rape are, perhaps, not 
the ideal sort of people to be walking around loose. They may 

Correctional System 59
victimize others out of anger. Most simply, rape is a crime. The 
law does not provide exemptions for people who supposedly 
deserve extra pain and misery. The United States has an obliga-
tion to protect the people that it locks up. 
 T. J. Parsell is a typical victim of prison rape. In 1978, as a 
17-year-old, he robbed a store clerk with a toy gun on a lark. 
He received $50 and a sentence to be served in an adult jail. On 
his first night in prison, an older inmate spiked his drink with 
Thorazine and sexually abused and raped him. Other inmates 
then attacked him. As Parsell related to a Congressional com-
mittee considering legislation against prison rape, “While my 
friends prepared for our high school prom, I was being gang 
raped.” He added, “What they took from me went beyond sex. 
They’d stolen my manhood, my identity and part of my soul.” 
Parsell, as the New York Times  reported, emerged from prison to 
become a successful New York City software executive. 
 As conditions in prison deteriorated from overcrowding, 
staff shortages and budget cuts, prison rape became more com-
mon. According to the National Prison Project of the American 
Civil Liberties Union, prison assaults rose 26 percent from 2000 to 
2004. In 2003, Congress passed the Prison Rape Elimination Act 
(PREA) to try to address the issue. 
 Aviva N. Moster and Elizabeth L. Jeglic investigated the suc-
cess of PREA in their essay, “Prison Warden Attitudes Toward 
Prison Rape and Sexual Assault: Findings Since the Prison Rape 
Elimination Act (PREA)” for the  Prison Journal  in 2009. PREA 
mandates a zero-tolerance policy for sexual assaults within cor-
rectional facilities and requires the collection of data on prison 
rape. Prison wardens play a key role in the implementation and 
enforcement of prison policies. For the most part, wardens were 
not impressed with PREA. Moster and Jeglic found that a major-
ity of the wardens surveyed reported that their prison rape and 
sexual assault policies were considerably less effective than staff 
training and increased inmate supervision. 
 Sex Offender Residency Laws 
 No one wants to live next door to a sex offender. A spate of highly 
publicized sex crimes against children by individuals with past 
convictions for sexual crimes has badly frightened parents. In 
response to public demand, states and cities have forced sex of-
fenders to register. A substantial number have also prohibited 

60 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
registered sex offenders from living within a number of feet from 
a school, day care center, or other place where children are likely 
to congregate. Some cities have tried to ban sex offenders from 
residing within city limits. Residency laws that prohibit sex 
offenders from residing in certain areas are clearly extremely 
popular with the general public and, therefore, politically risky 
for legislators to amend. 
 The effectiveness of such legislation, however, is not readily 
apparent. It is obviously difficult to measure the number of times 
that a crime does not occur, but much of the hysteria surround-
ing sex crimes against children seems to have been stirred up 
by the media. “There is no evidence that sexual molestation of 
children and incest is escalating,” said Will Alexander, a research 
analyst for the Minnesota Department of Corrections, who stud-
ied the issue nationwide. Alexander spoke to the  New York Times
in 1996, as the first of the residency laws were being put into 
effect. Alexander added, “Over the past 20 years, there has been 
a large increase by newspapers [in reporting] these kinds of 
offenses. But the number of such offenses themselves have re-
mained steady. In the case of rape and other violent sex offenses, 
trends are down.” 
 Residency laws are based on the notion that sex offenders are 
likely to commit crimes where they live. In a 2003 study, the Min-
nesota Department of Corrections found that sex offenders seek-
ing victims were likely to go a neighborhood where they would 
not be recognized. The neighborhood where they would not be 
recognized is obviously not the one in which they reside. 
 Children are not necessarily safer because sex offenders are 
not permitted to live where children play and go to school. Colo-
rado’s Department of Public Safety released a report in 2004 that 
concluded that convicted molesters who reoffended lived no 
closer to schools or child care centers than those molesters who 
did not commit additional crimes. Additionally, the Jacob Wet-
terling Foundation, which fights child exploitation, warns that 
residency laws provide a false sense of security, since the vast 
majority of sexually abused children are molested by people 
that they know. Problems with the various restrictions on sex 
offenders have become abundantly clear. 
 The residency laws have come under attack by everyone 
from civil libertarians to police officers. Oklahoma state legis-
lator Lucky Lamons, retired from 22 years as a police officer, 
supported a revision of Oklahoma’s laws that banned registered 

Correctional System 61
sex offenders from living within 2,000 feet of a school or day 
care center. Lamons, a Tulsa Democrat, argued that the legisla-
tion forced sex offenders to live in rural areas where they were 
difficult to monitor. Oklahoma law also did not differentiate 
 between abusers of children and men who urinated in public, a 
sex offense in the state. Sergeant Gary Stansill, head of the Tulsa 
Police Department’s sex crimes unit, complained to USA Today
in 2007 that he spent far too much of time investigating cases 
of sex offenders who did not register. He stated that he inves-
tigated as many cases of sex offenders not registering as he did 
rape reports. Stansill considered less than 10 percent of Okla-
homa’s 8,000 convicted sex offenders to be high-risk. Both Stan-
sill and Lamons support legislation that focuses more tightly on 
 high-risk offenders. 
 Other states have also begun to consider revisions to sex 
offender residency laws for varying reasons. Some sex offend-
ers, who complain that they are having trouble finding a place 
to legally live, stop registering with the police. They go under-
ground, where they cannot be monitored. Additionally, laws 
that prevent sex offenders from living near schools do not pre-
vent them from loitering in the area. John Walsh, who lost his 
son to murderous sex offender, argues that residency laws are 
worthwhile if they can be enforced. Walsh estimates that tens of 
thousands of nation’s 600,000 sex offenders are giving false ad-
dresses to the police. Walsh persuaded Congress in 2006 to pass 
the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act, named after 
his son, which makes it a felony for serious sex offenders such 
as rapists to fail to register. 
 Sex Offender Registration 
 The Adam Walsh Act is particularly notable in that it has taken 
account of the high rate of sex crimes within Native American 
communities. It allows tribal governments to decide whether to 
establish and maintain registries of convicted sex offenders who 
reside, go to school, or are employed within their jurisdictions. 
Tribal sex offender registries must meet the same standards as 
state registries. The vast majority of eligible tribes have opted to 
run their own sex offender registries. 
 One of the problems with registering sex offenders is that 
teenagers are being punished for having consensual sex. Matthew 
Shettles had to register until Oregon legislators passed a bill in 

62 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
2007 that ended registration for teenagers convicted of sex with 
someone underage if the younger person is at least 13 and the 
two teenagers are less than 5 years apart in age. Shettles had sex 
with his girlfriend on the night he graduated from high school. 
The girl, a few weeks shy of 15, told an adult, who reported the 
offense. Shettles, convicted of a misdemeanor, received probation 
and a fine plus community service. As a convicted sex offender, 
he had to register for life every time that he moved, got a new 
job, or made other life changes. Shettles could not find an apart-
ment, while his college instructors were notified that they had a 
sex offender in class. The specifics of his crime were not identified 
on the register, leading some people to suspect the worst of the 
young man. 
 The case of Genarlow Wilson, a 17-year-old Georgia teen 
who received 10 years in jail for receiving oral sex at a party from 
his 15-year-old girlfriend, has also garnered considerable notori-
ety. The state termed such activity to be a felony, aggravated child 
molestation, and mandated a minimum 10-year sentence for the 
crime. The girl stated that she had consented, but the age of con-
sent in Georgia is 16. The Georgia legislature eventually bowed 
to public pressure and changed the law to make such cases mis-
demeanors when they involved teenagers close in age. Wilson 
spent two years in prison before being released in 2007. As a sex 
offender, he must register for life. He is attempting to have his 
conviction overturned. 
 To stop sex offenders from reoffending, criminologists have 
recommended several steps other than residency and registration. 
David Finkelhor of the Crimes Against Children Research Cen-
ter at the University of New Hampshire supports more checks by 
probation officers. Kim English of Colorado’s Division of Crimi-
nal Justice advises psychological therapy in group residential 
 centers for offenders. In the absence of further research, it is not 
clear whether these steps will be effective in stopping sex offenders 
from reoffending. 
 The case of David S. Kelley suggests that means other than 
residency restrictions and sex offender registration might be 
helpful in combating pedophiles. Kelley, a Boston area man, 
had twice committed sexual offenses against children. Kelley’s 
Northborough neighbors knew where he lived and what he 
had done because he was in Massachusetts’ registry of sexual 
offenders. The police had warned the neighbors about Kel-
ley, as mandated by state law. Still, Kelley managed to rape a 

Correctional System 63
 four-year-old boy in 1999. The boy was attacked at the home of 
a caregiver. 
 Stopping Repeat Sexual 
Offenders 
 Several states have created sexually violent predator laws to 
put these particular offenders in a mental health facility for an 
interdeterminate period of time. The laws require mental health 
professionals to evaluate sexual offenders who are in prison to 
determine whether they should be let loose or subjected to further 
confinement. The people who are locked up are those who are 
most likely to reoffend. 
 The U.S. Supreme Court declared such laws to be constitu-
tional in Kansas v. Hendricks  (1997), in which the Kansas Attorney 
General asked the Court to consider whether due process applied 
to the state’s sexually violent predator law. The Court ruled that it 
is perfectly legal to confine those “who are unable to control their 
dangerousness” for as long as necessary. Freedom from bodily 
restraint does not always extend to those who have been con-
victed of committed sex crimes, even when they have completed 
their prison sentences. 
 Mitchell Gaff, a Washington state man, is one of the nu-
merous sex offenders who remain jailed despite the expiration 
of their sentences. Not the most sympathetic of characters, Gaff 
completed a 10-year sentence in 1994 for brutally raping teenage 
sisters at knifepoint. Expecting to be released, he was surprised to 
discover that Washington prison officials had labeled him as too 
dangerous to be released. Gaff was transferred to indefinite con-
finement at a maximum-security prison used for pedophiles and 
rapists who are presumed to be likely to commit further crimes. 
“I was stunned,” Gaff said to a reporter for the  New York Times
in 1995. He said, “I feel like I was being judged on who I used to 
be, not on who I’ve become” ( New York Times,  February 27, 1995). 
Since state legislatures establish maximum sentences for crimes, it 
is problematic for prison officials to effectively ignore the lawfully 
imposed sentences and impose indefinite ones. 
 Not all sex offenders go on to commit new crimes and those 
who do rarely announce their intentions to do so. Experts have 
had a notoriously difficult time in predicting sexual recidivism. 
Psychologists R. Karl Hanson and Monique T. Bussière have es-
timated that the accuracy of expert opinion in predicting sexual 

64 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
recidivism is only slightly above chance levels. Part of the prob-
lem lies in the fact that the factors that predict the likelihood that 
all convicted criminals will repeat their offenses are not the same 
factors that predict whether a sexual offender will repeat his 
crime.
 Knowing that someone has committed a sexual offense does 
not provide evidence that the individual will commit another sex 
crime. Contrary to common opinion, the recidivism rate of sexual 
offenders is relatively low when compared with all offenders. In 
a 1993 article for the Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 
Hanson, Richard A. Steffy, and René Gauthier looked at the likeli-
hood that child molesters would commit additional crimes after 
being released from prison. They concluded that sex offense recid-
ivism rates can range as high as 30 to 40 percent within 20 years 
of the initial crime. This rate is less than the rate for nonsexual 
criminals.
 Some assessment procedures may have the potential to pro-
vide reasonably good risk assessments of potential reoffenders. 
The strongest predictors of sexual offense recidivism are related 
to sexual deviancy, such as deviant sexual preferences, antisocial 
personality disorder, prior sexual offenses, early onset of criminal 
behavior, and committing a range of sex crimes. Sexual criminals 
who repeat all seem to have difficulties in forming long-term ro-
mantic relationships and poor social networks. They also tend to 
believe rape myths. Many have unstable lifestyles marked by fre-
quent moves, unemployment, and substance abuse. Hanson and 
Bussière, in a 1998 essay on “Predicting Relapse: A Meta-Analysis 
of Sexual Offender Recidivism Studies” for the  Journal of Consult-
ing and Clinical Psychology  reported that the criminals most likely 
to repeat were those with a sexual interest in children. The two 
psychologists used phallometric assessment to measure interest. 
This type of assessment involves the monitoring of changes in 
penile response when a man is presented with various types of 
erotic stimuli. 
 To predict the risk for sexual recidivism, psychologists may 
rely upon the Sex Offender Risk Appraisal Guide (SORAG), a 
variation of the Violence Risk Appraisal Guide (VRAG) that is 
among the most accurate means of predicting the likelihood 
that violent offenders will repeat. SORAG is moderately good 
at predicting recidivism but far from totally accurate. The Min-
nesota Sex Offender Screening Tool (MnSOST) tries to assess 
the risk of sexual recidivism among child molesters who do 

Correctional System 65
not target relatives. Like SORAG, MnSOST has had moderate 
 success. 
 There is a debate among those who deal with sexual offend-
ers as to the extent that treatment reduces recidivism rates. Not 
surprisingly, offenders who drop out of treatment are at higher 
risk for reoffending than offenders who complete their treatment 
programs. 
 Medical Treatment of Offenders 
 There is no magic pill to stop a sex criminal from doing it again. Over 
the years, authorities have employed various legal approaches to 
deal with the vexing problem of sexually violent offenders. Indef-
inite commitment to a mental health center, psychotherapy, and 
behavioral treatment have all been tried. No method has proven 
to be especially effective in stopping recidivism in sex criminals. 
These failures prompted some legal authorities to advise that sex 
offenders be given medications that reduce the intensity of sexual 
drives by lowering testosterone levels. This is apparently as close 
to a magic pill as those who seek to protect women and children 
believe that they can get. 
 The procedure is typically termed “chemical castration.” This 
is actually a misnomer, since no castration in fact occurs when a 
drug is used. The drug most often employed, an Upjohn prod-
uct called Depo-Provera, lowers the testosterone level in men and 
thus reduces sex drive. When use of the drug stops, the sex drive 
returns to a normal level. 
 The procedure has a fairly long history, though it only be-
came widespread in the 1990s. R. M. Foote first administrated 
progesterone hormonal compounds to men in 1944 to reduce 
testosterone levels. The procedure stayed largely forgotten until 
John Money decided to try it with sex offenders in the late 1960s. 
Both Foote and Money had clinical goals in mind, not the con-
trol of criminals. The drug, medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), 
that Money used is not approved for rendering men impotent. 
It is supposed to be used to reduce abnormal levels of sex drive, 
to return sexual fantasies to normal levels, to permit patients to 
control their socially prohibited urges, and to allow them relief 
from the intrusive ideas and urges that they have great difficulty 
controlling. 
 The brand name Depo-Provera applies to depot medroxy-
progesterone acetate (DMPA). It is a birth control drug that is 

66 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
normally prescribed to women. Depo-Provera gained national 
attention in 1983 when a Texas jury sentenced convicted rapist 
Joseph Frank Smith to 10 years of probation instead of prison after 
he volunteered to undergo Depo-Provera therapy. Smith, known 
as the “ski mask rapist,” had been convicted for raping the same 
woman twice. Smith moved to the Richmond, Virginia, area after 
his conviction. He appeared on the television news magazine show 
60 Minutes  as an example of the success of chemical castration. 
However, while on Depo-Provera and while promoting himself 
as the poster child for sex offender rehabilitation, Smith continued 
his career as rapist. In 1998, he pled guilty to committing two sex 
crimes. Virginia authorities suspected that he really committed 
75. Smith received a 40-year sentence for breaking and entering, 
aggravated sexual battery, and two counts of attempted oral and 
anal sodomy in a June 1993 attack on a five-year-old girl. 
 Despite the heavily publicized Smith debacle, a number of 
states proceeded to pursue chemical castration. In 1996, California 
became the first state to mandate the procedure. The California 
legislature required any pedophile who had been convicted twice 
to be periodically injected, after release from prison, with a drug 
that inhibits sex drive. The particulars of drug delivery indicate 
that the legislators had the injectable Depo-Provera in mind. Sex 
offenders who voluntarily submitted to surgical castration were 
exempt. A first-time child molester convicted of a particularly 
heinous crime would have to undergo the same treatment. The 
bill’s sponsor, Bill Hoge of Pasadena, defended the legislation to 
the New York Times  by asking, “So why not give these people a 
shot to calm them down and bring them under control?” Hoges 
emphasized that U.S. law does permit the government to force in-
dividuals to take medicine. He said, “If you have smallpox in this 
country or some other kind of life-threatening epidemic disease, 
the law is clear on the fact that you can’t refuse treatment.” 
 Despite the wording that designates surgical castration as an 
equal to chemical castration, it is not nearly as popular because 
of the irreversible effect. Surgical castration, or orchiectomy, is 
the removal of the testes. It has a history in the United States 
dating to the period when proponents of eugenics in the early 
20th century attempted to ensure that only the better sort of 
people would reproduce by sterilizing the mentally retarded 
and other “defectives.” The laws at the time did not target 
sexual offenders because there was little scientific evidence that 
there was a genetic component to sexual behavior. 

Correctional System 67
 The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) objected to the 
California law as well as subsequent state ones that mandated 
castration for several reasons. As Valerie Small Navarro, an at-
torney with the American Civil Liberties Union, explained to 
a reporter for the  New York Times  in 1996, “This measure raises 
some very, very serious constitutional questions, not to men-
tion medical questions.” She elaborated, “There are problems 
regarding the right to privacy, the right to procreate, the right 
to control over one’s body. There are questions about drug side 
effects and whether treatment will work in every case, especially 
if it isn’t voluntary and isn’t accompanied by therapy, which the 
bill doesn’t mandate” ( New York Times, August 27, 1996) . The 
Eighth Amendment prohibits cruel and unusual punishment, 
which may cover the side effects of chemical castration drugs. 
The drugs have been linked to high blood pressure, shrinkage of 
the testicles, diabetes, heart problems, and irregular gallbladder 
functioning. 
 There is a debate among the medical profession as to 
whether chemical castration requirements have changed the 
physician from healer to agent of social control or agent of the 
state. As some medical professionals have complained, the duty 
to treat has apparently been changed to a duty to punish, or 
at best, control criminals. In 1998, the American Psychiatric 
Association decided to support the use of sex-drive reducing 
medications, but only after a thorough clinical evaluation and 
as part of a comprehensive medical plan. The Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) has not approved chemical castration 
drugs, but for reasons that relate only to financial concerns. The 
drug companies, fearful of a lawsuit if a sex criminal on a chem-
ical castration drug commits another sex crime, have not sought 
FDA approval for such drugs. Without FDA approval, physicians 
follow informal guidelines when prescribing chemical castration 
drugs. 
 Sex crimes result from many factors, including sexual urges. 
As the differences between the California state legislature and 
the ACLU indicate, there are strong differences of opinion over 
whether sexual predation is driven by sex urges or other causes. 
Some medical experts say a major drawback of castration, whether 
chemical or surgical, is that not all child molesters are driven solely 
by a sex urge. Other factors, like a violent nature or exhibitionism, 
can also be at work, and require psychiatric treatment. Addition-
ally, some drugs simply do not work in some people. Drugs can 

68 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
have serious side effects and can be countered by other drugs. A 
sex offender might obtain steroids to increase his testosterone to 
counteract the Depo-Provera. 
 Conclusion 
 Sex crimes are not black-and-white issues despite the very human 
desire to simplify them into easily fixable parts. “There’s no easy 
answer here,” said Fred Berlin, the founder of the Sexual Disorders 
Clinic at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. Berlin, speaking 
to the Times  of London in 1996 elaborated, “There are things that 
you can’t punish away or legislate away. It’s not enough just to 
say, ‘Let’s lock ’em up and castrate the bastards,’ however hor-
rible their misdeeds. Some people you just lock up. Some people 
you lock up and treat. Some people you treat. It’s complicated” 
(Whittell, 1996, n.p.). The best method of treatment may include 
drugs and counseling, though further research is needed on this 
particular point. 
 Further Reading 
 Bachman, Ronet, and Lind Saltzman.  Violence Against Women.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 1994. 
 Bondurant, Barrie. “University Women’s Acknowledgement of Rape: 
Individual, Situational, and Social Factors.” Violence Against Women 7, 
no. 3 (March 2001): 294 –331. 
 Boeringer, Scot B. “Associations of Rape-Supportive Attitudes With 
Fraternal and Athletic Participation.”  Violence Against Women 5, no. 1 
( January 1999): 81–115. 
 Bergen, Raquel Kennedy.  Wife Rape: Understanding the Response of 
Survivors and Service Providers. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996. 
 Bletzer, Keith V., and Mary P. Koss. “After-Rape Among Three 
Populations in the Southwest.” Violence Against Women 12, no. 1 
( January 2006): 5–29. 
Burgess, Ann, and Larry Holmstrom. “Rape Trauma Syndrome.” 
American Journal of Psychiatry 131 (1974): 981–987.
 Burt, Martha R. “Cultural Myths and Supports for Rape.”  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 38 (1980): 217–230. 

Further Reading 69
 Campbell, Rebecca, and Sharon M. Wasco. “Understanding Rape and 
Sexual Assault: 20 Years of Progress and Future Directions”  Journal of 
Interpersonal Violence 20 (2005): 127–131. 
 Finkelhor, David, and Kersti Yllo.  License to Rape: Sexual Abuse of Wives.
New York: Free Press, 1987. 
 Flowe, Heather D., Ebbe B. Ebbesen, and Anila Putcha-Bhagavatula. 
“Rape Shield Laws and Sexual Behavior Evidence: Effects of Consent 
Level and Women’s Sexual History on Rape Allegations.”  Law of Human 
Behavior, 31, no. 2 (April 2007): 159–175. 
 Flynn, Kathryn A.  Sexual Abuse of Women by Members of the Clergy. New 
York: McFarland, 2003. 
 Frohmann, Lisa. “Discrediting Victims’ Allegations of Sexual Assault: 
Prosecutorial Accounts of Case Rejections.” In Karen J. Maschke, ed.  The
Legal Response to Violence Against Women. New York: Taylor and Francis, 
1997.
 Gordon, Margaret T., and Stephanie Riger.  The Female Fear. New York: 
Free Press, 1989. 
 Hamby, Sherry. “The Path of Helpseeking: Perceptions of Law 
Enforcement Among American Indian Victims of Sexual Assault.  Journal
of Prevention & Intervention in the Community 36, no. 1/2 ( July 2008): 
89–104.
 Hanson, Richard, A. Steffy, and Rene Gauthier. “Long-term Recidivism 
of Child Molesters.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 61 
(1993): 646–652. 
 Hinck, Shelly Schaefer, and Richard W. Thomas. “Rape Myth 
Acceptance in College Students: How Far Have We Come?”  Sex Roles 40, 
no. 9/10 (May 1999), 815–832. 
 Leventhal, Beth, and Sandra E. Lundy, eds.  Same-Sex Domestic Violence: 
Strategies for Change. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1999. 
 Littleton, Heather, Carmen Radecki Breitkopf, and Abbey B. Berenson. 
“Rape Scripts of Low-Income European American and Latina Women.” 
Sex Roles 56, no. 7/8 (April 2007): 509–516. 
 Lonsway, Kimberly A., and Louise F. Fitzgerald. “Rape Myths.” 
Psychology of Women Quarterly 18, no. 2 ( June 1994): 133–157. 
 Maher, Timothy. “Police Chiefs’ Views on Police Sexual Misconduct.” 
Police Practice & Research 9, no. 3 ( July 2008): 239–250. 
 McCauley, Jenna L., and Karen S. Calhoun. “Faulty Perceptions?: The 
Impact of Binge Drinking History on College Women’s Perceived Rape 
Resistance Efficacy.”  Addictive Behaviors 33, no. 12 (December 2008): 
1540–1545.

70 Issues, Controversies, and Problems
 McMahon, Sarah. “Understanding Community-Specific Rape Myths.” 
Affilia: Journal of Women & Social Work 22, no. 4 (December 2007): 357–370. 
 Messman-Moore, Terri L., Rose Marie Ward, and Amy L. Brown. 
“Substance Use and PTSD Symptoms Impact the Likelihood of Rape 
and Revictimization in College Women.”  Journal of Interpersonal Violence
24, no. 3 (March 2009): 499–521. 
 Moster, Aviva N., and Elizabeth L. Jeglic. “Prison Warden Attitudes 
Toward Prison Rape and Sexual Assault: Findings Since the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act (PREA).”  Prison Journal  89, no. 1 (March 2009): 
65–78.
 Odem, Mary E., and Jody Clay-Warner, eds.  Confronting Rape and Sexual 
Assault. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 1998. 
 Ogilvie, Beverly A.  Mother-Daughter Incest: A Guide for Helping 
Professionals. New York: Routledge, 2004. 
 Peterson, Zoë D., and C. L. Muehlenhard. “Was it Rape? The Function 
of Women’s Rape Myth Acceptance and Definitions of Sex in Labeling 
Their Own Experiences.” Sex Roles 51, no. 3/4 (2004): 129–144. 
Ruch, Libby O., and Joseph J. Leon. “Sexual Assault Trauma and 
Trauma Change.” Women and Health 8, no. 4 (December 1983): 5–21.
 Russell, Diana.  Rape in Marriage. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1990.
 Rutman, Shira et al. “Urban American Indian and Alaska Native Youth: 
Youth Risk Behavior Survey 1997–2003.”  Maternal and Child Health 
Journal, 12, no. 1 ( July 2008) 76–81. 
 Sanday, Peggy Reeves.  Fraternity Gang Rape: Sex, Brotherhood, and 
Privilege on Campus. New York: New York University Press, 2007. 
 Scarce, Michael.  Male on Male Rape: The Hidden Toll of Stigma and Shame.
Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing, 1997. 
 Schwartz, Martin D., and Carol A. Nogrady. “Fraternity Membership, 
Rape Myths, and Sexual Aggression on a College Campus.”  Violence 
Against Women 2, no. 2 ( June 1996): 148–174. 
 Searles, Patricia, and Ronald J. Berger, eds.  Rape and Society: Readings on 
the Problem of Sexual Assault. Boulder: Westview Press, 1995. 
 Temple, Jeff R. et al. “Differing Effects of Partner and Nonpartner Sexual 
Assault on Women’s Mental Health.”  Violence Against Women 13, no. 2 
(March 2007): 285–297. 
 Tofte, Sarah.  Testing Justice: The Rape Kit Backlog in Los Angeles City and 
County . New York: Human Rights Watch, 2009. 
 Warshaw, Robin.  I Never Called It Rape: The Ms. Report of Recognizing, 
Fighting, and Surviving Date and Acquaintance Rape. New York: Harper 
and Row, 1988. 

Further Reading 71
 White, Sandy, and Niwako Yamawaki. “The Moderating Influence of 
Homophobia and Gender-Role Traditionality on Perceptions of Male 
Rape Victims.”  Journal of Applied Social Psychology 39, no. 5 (May 2009): 
1116–1136. 
 Whittell, Giles. “Persistent Abusers May Face Statutory Castration.” 
Times [London], August 28, 1996. 
 Yuan, Nicole P., Mary P. Koss, Mona Polacca, and David Goldman. 
“Risk Factors for Physical Assault and Rape Among Six Native 
American Tribes.”  Journal of Interpersonal Violence 21, no. 12 (December 
2006): 1566–1590. 

This page intentionally left blank 

73
 3 
 Worldwide Perspectives 
 O
ne in five women around the world experience rape or an at-
tempted rape. Sexual crime in Africa, Asia, Europe, and Latin 
America is not that much different from sexual crime in the 
United States. Rapists target women who ask for it. Women are 
too ashamed or frightened to report attacks. Laws often seem too 
lenient and many people, especially those in power, do not take 
such crimes seriously enough. 
 There are some notable differences among the continents, 
though. The low status of women in many cultures excuses the 
sexual abuse of females. Child sexual abuse is a major problem 
in some Asian countries, partly because of a tradition of sell-
ing daughters as prostitutes. Families who are struggling eco-
nomically will sell their girls to earn income. Trafficking girls and 
women for sexual purposes has become a major source of income 
for criminals from Eastern Europe and Asia, with most of the larg-
est criminal syndicates involved. Many of the trafficked women 
have been kidnapped and forced into sexual slavery. Rape as a 
part of war has bedeviled every country that has experienced 
political instability, with Africa suffering some of the most notori-
ous atrocities. 
 The information that follows is not an exhaustive study of 
sexual crime around the world. The topic is far too large to be 
covered in a chapter. The material below is offered as an introduc-
tion to the problem. 

74 Worldwide Perspectives
 Africa 
 Rape 
 Africa is widely reported to have the worst sexual violence in the 
world. Political instability in the region has combined with pov-
erty and a lack of respect for women to create a crisis of staggering 
proportions. The AIDS virus that is ravaging the continent is exac-
erbating the problem as infected men spread the disease to their 
victims. A few countries have taken steps to reduce the incidence 
of sexual assaults, but such activism has come fairly late. 
 The United Nations labels the Democratic Republic of Congo 
as the place where a woman is most likely to be raped. It is the rape 
capital of the world. Tens of thousands of women, possibly hun-
dreds of thousands, have been raped since the millennium. In the 
worst-hit region of South Kivu in the eastern part of the Congo, 
there were 4,066 reported cases of rape in the first three months of 
2008. The Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund estimated that 
70 percent of women in the Shabunda district of South Kivu had 
been raped. Victims ranged in age from 3 to 80 years old. 
 Many of the rapes were marked by a level of brutality that 
is shocking even in a place accustomed to violent warlords and 
drug-addled child soldiers. Guns and branches are sometimes 
shoved into women. About a fifth of victims are left with damage 
to their internal organs, sometimes leaving them unable to bear 
children, and many are left infected with the AIDS virus. Worse, 
a lot of women do not receive medical attention because there are 
only two hospitals in the eastern region with the ability to repair 
traumatic rape injuries. 
 Rapists in the Congo could long count on going free because 
of both official denial of the problem and reluctance by victims to 
endure the shame of coming forward. After horrendous world-
wide publicity, the government of the Congo took a series of 
steps to stop rapes in 2008. It took this action partly in response 
to pressure brought to bear by international human rights orga-
nizations as well as such home-grown groups as the Network 
of Women for the Defense of Rights and Peace. The Women of 
Compassion Worldwide, as one example, publicly announced that 
it had recorded 1,128 cases of rape in the Nigerian state of Delta 
between January and July of 2008. News of the report prompted the 
Ministry of Women Affairs, Community, and Social Development 
to form a committee to lead a campaign against rape. Congolese 

Africa 75
state governments also decided to intensify efforts to enlighten 
their citizens about the dangers of rape. Dozens of activists trav-
eled to villages to communicate the message that rape is wrong 
while women donned t-shirts reading in Kiswahili: “I refuse to be 
raped. What about you?” 
 Meanwhile, European aid agencies had already helped build 
courthouses and prisons across eastern Congo, in part to punish 
rapists who were notoriously active in this area of the country. 
Congolese crime scene investigators traveled to Europe to learn 
advanced forensic techniques. The American Bar Association 
opened a legal clinic in January 2008 specifically to help rape vic-
tims bring their cases to court. Mobile courts held rape trials in 
villages that were so remote that they reportedly had not seen a 
judge since the Belgians ruled the Congo. 
 The results of the government-supported antirape campaign 
were dramatic, for a brief moment. In the town of Bunia, rape 
prosecutions jumped 600 percent between 2003 and 2008. Yet the 
Congo penal code still does not penalize rapists who use a gun 
or an object instead of a penis as a means of penetration. Anti-
rape activists complain that those in power still regard rape as 
a woman’s problem, with low priority. A renewal of fighting in 
2008 is jeopardizing the small gains made against rape. In 2009, 
human rights activists estimated that 1,500 were dying daily of 
war-related causes, including rape. All sides in the conflict are 
using rape as an instrument of war. 
 Other countries in Africa have taken various steps to address 
rape. At the behest of the Uganda Women Parliamentarians Associ-
ation, Uganda increased the sentence for rape to include the death 
penalty. As of 2009, no rapists had been executed. Liberia, under 
the presidency of Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, sped up the prosecution 
of rape cases in 2008 by sending such cases to a special criminal 
court. It may not be coincidental that a woman understood the 
importance of such legislation. 
 In the Ivory Coast (Côte d’Ivoire), an education program may 
have led to more women reporting rape. It might also be possible 
that the number of rapes in the country has increased. Rapists 
in the Ivory Coast are rarely prosecuted, so the government is 
essentially encouraging such attacks by ignoring the problem. 
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said as much in 
a 2008 report, “The low level of prosecution . . . has heightened 
the pervading sense of impunity in the country” (IRIN, 2008, on-
line). The International Rescue Committee has been informed by 

76 Worldwide Perspectives
Ivorians that government authorities harassed or ignored women 
who reported rape and, if a case is pursued, the attacker is gener-
ally released after a brief detainment. It is rare that an Ivory Coast 
man will be jailed for rape. To protect themselves, some commu-
nities have formed vigilante groups, but attitudes are difficult to 
change. Many Ivorians reportedly see rape as a sexual act rather 
than a crime. 
 Rape as a War Crime 
 As the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo indicates, 
rape is often used as a tool of war in Africa to break up resistance 
and instill fear in the civilian population. The tactic is so common 
among warring groups that the Congolese have coined a new 
word:  reviolé or “re-raped.” 
 Mass rapes began in the Congo with the 1996 civil war, which 
spread to engulf neighboring countries. Mathilde Muhindo, head 
of one of Congo’s oldest women’s organization, Centre Olame, 
has categorized the systematic, collective rapes as a war within 
a war. Every single armed group in the country participated in 
mass rapes. Each group had its own signature style: some raped 
women with guns and fired the weapons as a finale while some 
forced sons to rape mothers. When a semi-peace descended on the 
Congo in 2003, the mineral-rich eastern area of the country con-
tinued to house 23 armed groups. The trouble in the east flared 
up in 2008 and brought a resurgence of rape. 
 Denis Mukwege, the only gynecologist at the Panzi Hospital 
in Congo, reported that he had treated 21,000 rape victims in a 
12-year-span. He suspects that he is the world’s leading expert on 
repairing injuries related to rape. The injured, who often arrive 
bleeding, typically leak feces and urine from torn vaginas. Many 
of the victims had been seen more than once. The Panzi medical 
staff had been demoralized by their inability to save women from 
repeated abuse. 
 In Zimbabwe, another African country torn by political con-
flict, rape is being used to intimidate political opponents. AIDS—
Free World reported 53 cases of rape as a political weapon during 
contested elections in 2008. Betty Makoni, director of Girl Child 
Network, reported that youth militias raped about 800 girls on 
military bases. Other rape victims include female family mem-
bers of opposing candidates as well as teachers, ward leaders, and 
clergy members. The attackers placed pesticides, sticks, and other 

Africa 77
objects in the vaginas of their victims. Makoni related that some 
women were raped in front of loved ones while some men were 
forced to rape their mothers-in-law. The victims were often forced 
to say that they would never support the opposition. Adding to 
the trauma, doctors at government hospitals refused treatment, 
even HIV drugs, to rape victims, for fear of reprisal from military 
forces. 
 Child Sexual Abuse 
 The United Nations (U.N) sends peacekeepers around the world to 
prevent violence. Accordingly, one might expect that peacekeepers 
would not participate in violence against women and girls. How-
ever, sexual abuses in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by U.N.
forces became such a scandal that U.N. Secretary-General Kofi 
Annan banned all sexual contact between peacekeepers and local 
people in 2005. The peacekeepers would trade food and money for 
sex or just attack. Congo’s Minister of Defense Jean Pierre Onde-
kane reportedly had complained that the U.N. peacekeepers 
would only be remembered “for running after little girls” (Clay-
ton, 2004, p. 9) The U.N. Security Council subsequently formally 
condemned acts of sexual exploitation by its troops 
 Thousands of U.N. peacekeepers had been sent to the Congo 
to help quell the various conflicts that were ripping the country 
apart and threatened to engulf the entire region. U.N. peacekeep-
ers from Morocco who were based in Kisangani become notorious
for impregnating 82 local girls and women. Uruguayan U.N. staff-
ers impregnated another 59 girls in Kisangani. Meanwhile, two 
Russian pilots in Congo gave young girls mayonnaise and jam to 
have sex with them while a French logistics experts made videos 
of his sexual abuse of young girls. A French mechanic, later sen-
tenced to nine years in prison by a French court, raped at least 
20 African teenagers while posted in the Congo and the Central 
African Republic. Many other pornographic videos and photo-
graphs made by U.N. staffers were available for sale in Congo. 
 The steps taken by the U.N. in 2005 did not stop the problem. 
In 2007, Save the Children conducted a study in three countries 
with a strong U.N. presence—southern Sudan, Haiti, and Côte 
d’Ivoire. The charity found widespread sexual abuse of children, 
some as young as six, by peacekeepers. Many children are afraid 
to report such abuse because of intimidation. The U.N. has said 
that, with so many peacekeeping troops spread so widely, it is 

78 Worldwide Perspectives
very difficult to police their actions. The peacekeepers reflect the 
values of their home countries. 
 Wife Rape 
 Domestic violence is a serious problem in Africa. The subordinate 
position of women is deeply entrenched in traditional, legal, social, 
and religious structures. Men are taught that women must sub-
mit to their demands, including demands for sex. Women are 
taught that violence in the home is normal. Women who com-
plain about such matters as sexual violence within the home are 
blamed for “airing the family’s dirty linen in public.” Women who 
seek help from outside the family become outcasts, risk increased 
abuse, and suffer condemnation from their own relatives. 
 In Zimbabwe, family violence is not recognized as being as 
serious as stranger violence. There is no law preventing a husband 
from raping his wife. Additionally, HIV infection in Zimbabwe has 
reached endemic proportions, with infection estimates ranging 
from 25 to 33 percent. A woman who cannot say “no” to sex can-
not refuse sex with her HIV-infected husband. The World Alliance 
of YMCAs has reported that 73 percent of Zimbabwean women 
report being forced to have sex with their partners with 69 percent 
of these women engaging in sexual relations with a man that they 
knew to be infected with a sexually transmitted disease. 
 Femicide 
 Femicide is the killing of a woman or a girl because of her gender. 
Examples of it can be found in war crimes when soldiers shoot 
women that they have just raped, but other examples are, unfortu-
nately, common. In his memoir,  The Dressing Station , South African 
surgeon Jonathan Kaplan recalled the horror that he felt when he 
saw a beautiful young black woman on an autopsy table during 
the days of apartheid. She had bled to death after being gang 
raped when her attackers kicked a bottle up her vagina and shat-
tered the glass, slashing her pelvic arteries. 
 The violence against women in South Africa has accelerated
since the end of apartheid, with about 150 women attacked daily 
and 33 percent of women reporting that they were raped within 
the past 12 months. Femicide is part of this epidemic. The human 
rights organization Action Aid has reported that gangs of South Af-
rican men who rape lesbians to cure them of their sexual orientation

Asia 79
have become common. This form of attack has been termed “cor-
rective rape.” The 2008 rape and murder of South African soccer 
player Eudy Simelane, a prominent lesbian activist, illuminated 
homophobic violence, particularly toward women. Simelane, 
one of only a few openly out lesbians in her home town of Kwa-
Thema, was attacked by four men who then dumped her body 
in a KwaThema creek. One man pled guilty and the others were 
brought to trial. In most of South Africa, homosexuality is taboo 
and violence against lesbians is considered to be acceptable de-
spite national laws offering protection to gays. 
 Asia 
 Rape 
 In Asia, as in much of the rest of the world, women are blamed for 
being raped if they dress provocatively. In the Islamic world, con-
trol is often seen as something imposed from the outside rather 
than an internal response. Instead of exercising self-control, many 
Muslims expect temptations to be unavailable. Debates about the 
freedoms accorded Muslim women often involve the women 
making themselves available to sexual assault. In northern Malaysia, 
a largely Muslim nation, a city council banned women in 2007 from 
wearing high heels or brightly colored lipstick with the aim of 
helping them preserve their dignity and avoid rape. 
 In 2007, Sheik Taj Din al-Hilali, the most senior Muslim cleric 
in Australia, delivered an infamous Ramadan sermon in which he 
likened women who did not wear the veil to uncovered meat that 
attracted predators. In the same speech, he said that women were 
weapons sent by Satan to entice men by swaying suggestively 
and wearing makeup. Other Australian Muslims were quick to 
condemn the cleric’s speech, including Islamic Council of Victoria 
spokesman Waleed Ali who objected to comparing Muslim men 
to wild animals. However, the Sheik had also referenced a notori-
ous gang rape and appeared to show sympathy for the attackers. 
 Australia had been rocked in 2000 by four brutal gang rapes 
of non-Muslim women by up to 14 Muslim Lebanese immigrant 
men led by Bilal Skaf. The attackers saw their teenage victims as 
asking for it because they did not cover themselves from head 
to toe and act like traditional Muslim women. During the hours-
long attacks, the women were called “sluts” and “Aussie pigs.” At 

80 Worldwide Perspectives
the trial, the accused men smirked at testimony while their fami-
lies threatened the victims and defense attorneys suggested that 
the women had enjoyed being raped. Skaf, who has never shown 
any remorse, spent some of his time in court drawing pictures 
of his ex-fiancé being gang-raped and murdered. (She had ended 
the relationship after his conviction, which he unsuccessfully ap-
pealed.) In the wake of the rapes, many Muslim leaders in Australia 
disavowed the rapists as disgraces to the Muslim community. Yet 
the idea that the victim is to blame remains common. 
 Wife Rape 
 Most countries in the world do not recognize rape within mar-
riage as a crime. Two of the most prominent examples of countries 
that permit husbands to rape their wives with impunity are India 
and Malaysia. Thailand is one of the more progressive nations in 
this matter. 
 In 2007, the National Legislative Assembly of Thailand out-
lawed marital rape by amending its criminal laws. Under the 
legislation, a Thai who rapes a spouse could face up to 20 years in 
prison. The previous law defined a rapist as a person who raped 
a woman who was not his wife, meaning that a man could attack 
his wife with impunity. The new law contains the same penalties 
for anyone—male or female—who rapes. 
 Gang Rape 
 Many countries do not have specific legislation addressing gang 
rapes. Such attacks are prosecuted as routine sexual assaults 
despite the fact that victims suffer exponentially more trauma. 
Japan is an exception, however, having made gang rape into a 
specific crime in 2005. The legislation came in response to a series 
of gang rapes by 14 men who belonged to the Super Free social 
club at Waseda University. This attack followed a notorious 2003 
gang rape by 15 football players at the elite Kokushikan Univer-
sity in Tokyo who attacked a 15-year-old girl at an apartment for 
seven hours. 
 Rape as a War Crime 
 In 2002, government soldiers from Myanmar, formerly known as 
Burma, were charged with raping at least 625 women and girls 

Asia 81
who belonged to the rebel Shan tribe. The Shans are one of seven 
main ethnic groups in Myanmar. They have been fighting for 
independence for decades. The Shan Human Rights Foundation 
charged that the military regime of Myanmar, which has a history 
of human rights abuses, was allowing its troops to systematically 
commit rape with impunity on a widespread scale in order to 
terrorize and subjugate the people of Shan State. 
 The 173 attacks were generally committed by commissioned 
officers in army camps in central Shan. In this region, over 300,000 
villagers have been forcibly relocated since 1996. Many of the vic-
tims were detained while looking for food outside the relocation 
areas. Some were forced into becoming porters by the military 
and were raped while resting at army checkpoints. In one case, 
two students were arrested after they asked a politically sensitive 
question in class. They were detained for four days and raped 
repeatedly by soldiers. Many of the victims were tortured and 
killed. Since the bodies were dumped in the open, human rights 
activists suspect that the rapists had government approval for 
their actions. The activists also believe that many women have 
kept silent out of fear of reprisal and out of shame. 
 While it might be a bit of a stretch to categorize as war crimes 
the spate of rapes in the Japanese island of Okinawa by U.S. ser-
vicemen, the attacks do have a clear military connection. The U.S. 
occupied Okinawa as World War II wound to a close. U.S. military 
bases remained on the island after the end of hostilities because 
of its strategic location. With the end of the Cold War, there have 
been increasing demands by the Japanese to remove the 40,000 
U.S. troops stationed on the island. Criminal acts by Americans, 
especially rapes of schoolgirls, have further fueled these calls for 
an end to the U.S. occupation. 
 As the Okinawa situation indicates, sexual crime can have 
serious diplomatic results. Major protests occurred on Okinawa in 
1995 when three American soldiers were accused of gang-raping 
a 12-year-old girl. The men were court-martialed and convicted. 
The numbers of U.S. soldiers housed on the island were then 
reduced by a few thousand at the request of the Japanese. In the 
next few years, U.S. soldiers committed 14 more rapes, with the 
Japanese complaining because U.S. often took days to turn over 
suspects to Japanese police. In 2008, a staff sergeant faced charges 
that he had raped a 14-year-old girl, reigniting the protests. In the 
wake of this attack, the Okinawa legislature adopted a resolution 
urging the U.S. military to improve ethical training for its forces, 

82 Worldwide Perspectives
while the U.S. ambassador flew to the island to express sorrow 
over the incident. Meanwhile, many Okinawans insisted that 
they would not feel safe until all U.S. troops had been withdrawn, 
since resolutions had little effect in the past. 
 Child Sexual Abuse 
 The numbers of sexual crimes against children are increasing 
throughout Asia for reasons that are not clear. In South Korea, the 
government estimated that 5,460 youths were the victims of sex 
crimes in 2007. Most attacks went unreported. Rape counted for 
the highest percentage of the 965 reported sex crimes against chil-
dren in that year. With respect to child molestation, more than 70 
percent of victims were under 13. The age of victims of moles-
tation is dropping. The younger the victim, the more likely that 
the attack was committed by an acquaintance. Most offenders 
are men in their 30s who attack in the afternoon when schools 
have ended classes. Motels were commonly used for rapes while 
public bathhouses, or jjimjilbang , were used for molestation. The 
bathhouses, which are gender-segregated and feature saunas, 
are extremely popular among Koreans. To combat child sexual 
abuse, the Korean government posted information about sex 
offenders online in 2008. 
 In Cambodia, many men believe that raping a virgin will be 
keep you strong and imbue you with fresh strength. It is also held 
that raping a virgin will also cure you of AIDS. The AIDS epi-
demic arrived in Cambodia about 1994 and the county now has 
among the highest rates of infection in Asia. The brothels sell vir-
gins, often aged five or six so that the man can be sure that she is 
truly a virgin, for a week. After the week is over, the brothel owners
sew up the girl’s internal injuries—without an anesthetic—and 
quickly sell her again. A virgin is supposed to scream and bleed 
and the girl will scream and bleed again and again. The girl is 
sold three or four times. 
 Selling women into prostitution apparently has a long his-
tory in Cambodia. By working in a brothel where a moneylender 
has an arrangement, a daughter acts as collateral and repays the 
loan. In other cases, the parents sell the daughter outright to the 
brothel. A 12-year-old girl might bring in $50 or $100, depending 
on the lightness of her skin. The brothel has the right to sell her to 
another establishment. The family goes to the brothel every month 
to pick up her earnings. Daughters have a duty to obey their parents

Asia 83
and provide for them, so the arrangement is not challenged by 
the child. Somaly Mam, founder of a Cambodian organization 
against sex slavery, suggests that parents do not view their daugh-
ters emotionally but rather as a type of domestic livestock. 
 In 2005, the Future Group, a Canadian non-governmental 
organization, declared that at least 1 in 40 girls born in Cambodia 
will be sold into sex slavery. It estimates that the lowest number 
of prostitutes and sex slaves in Cambodia is between 40,000 and 
50,000. Somaly Mam notes that there are virgins for sale in every 
large town in Cambodia. 
 There are two distinct modes of sexual trafficking in India: co-
ercive trafficking and family-based trafficking. The latter form is 
done in collusion with parents or caregivers who may have been 
deceived into letting the child go or who may have knowledge of 
where the child is being taken. Practices that involve dedicating 
a daughter to a life of traditionally sanctioned prostitution as a 
devadasi  continue in India despite the enactment of laws banning 
the custom. Victims of this practice are estimated to account for 
20 percent of the children in prostitution. 
 Some families send daughters into prostitution as a matter of 
economic survival. The growth of slums in India has contributed 
to the rise in prostitution. The development of large dams, mines, 
and power projects has led to the eviction of large numbers of 
people from areas that they have traditionally farmed. Forced to 
move to find a new means of survival, these displaced people 
migrate to slums in the cities where the whole family must work 
to survive. Migrant child labor is treated as another commodity 
that can be bought and sold. 
 A government-sponsored survey in India in 1992 found that 
40 percent of the sex workers stated that they had entered the sex 
trade when they were under the age of 18. Another study esti-
mated that 300,000 to 400,000 children in India are victims of sex 
trafficking. About 60 percent of the children are believed to be 
from the lower castes. These castes are at the bottom of the eco-
nomic ladder. Additionally, Nepali girls are being trafficked into 
India, with the Human Rights Watch—Asia reporting in 1995 that 
the average age of the girls dropped from 14–16 years to 10–14 
years. Of the 200,000 or so Nepalese sex workers in India, children 
constitute 20 percent. The girls are trafficked from economically 
depressed areas to the major prostitution centers of Delhi, Mumbai,
and Calcutta. Laws introduced to stop trafficking have had little 
noticeable effect. 

84 Worldwide Perspectives
 The process of initiating children into prostitution, whether in 
India, Cambodia, or Thailand, is typically brutal. Various research-
ers have reported that new girls are subjected to torture in the form 
of electric shocks, cigarette burns, and beatings to break them in. 
Children are often drugged into submission and starved to destroy 
their wills and ensure their cooperation. Newly kidnapped girls, 
who can be difficult to control, are told stories about the plight 
of the maimed children to frighten them into submitting. Psycho-
logical abuse, threats, and intimidation are used with girls who are 
purchased as virgins and can therefore be sold for higher prices if 
their training does not include rape. The child may be told that she 
is dirty by one member of the staff while another staffer tries to 
befriend her and convince her that she is among family. 
 The vast majority of literature on prostitution focuses on girls 
but boys also participate in this practice. In India, young male 
prostitutes can be found in the major cities. The boys are often 
street children who have run away from home and need a source 
of income. In Bangalore, boys have been reported to hang around 
railroad stations to trade sexual services for gifts, food, money, 
and drugs. While the boys apparently enter into prostitution vol-
untarily, minors cannot legally give sexual consent so the practice 
is viewed as the sexual abuse of children. 
 Sex Trafficking 
 The subject of trafficking women and girls for purposes of prosti-
tution is getting an increasing amount of attention. Such activity 
can often result in multimillion dollar profits for organized crime 
groups, with the money untaxed. In 1999, an international sympo-
sium on migration prompted representatives from the following 
countries to issue the Bangkok Declaration on Irregular Migration: 
Australia, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, 
Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, 
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Sri 
Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam, as well as Hong Kong. The declara-
tion expresses grave concern over the increasing trafficking activities
by organized crime syndicates. The signatory countries agree to 
cooperate in the prosecution and punishment of anyone who sold 
human beings for any purpose, including sexual slavery. 
 As the Bangkok Declaration indicates, increased globaliza-
tion has a dark side. Australia has seen a rise in women trafficked 
into the country, while Malaysian authorities believe that ethnic 

Asia 85
Chinese crime syndicates are behind most of the trafficking in 
their country. Trafficked women and girls are usually fed into 
an extensive system of Chinese-owned lounges, nightclubs, and 
brothels that exist throughout most of Asia. 
 Many, if not most, of these girls and women are unwilling par-
ticipants in prostitution. In China, criminal organizations are known 
as Triads. The Triads have been abducting and selling women and 
girls within Chinese borders. As one example, the Song clan group 
set up a business to hire people to go to Shanghai to purchase 
apparel or to Anhui to purchase traditional Chinese medicines. 
Lured under false pretenses, the young women who applied for 
the jobs were then kidnapped and delivered to buyers. 
 In Japan, the Yakuza are involved in trafficking women. The 
Yakuza are members of traditional organized crime syndicates. 
They are relative newcomers to the trafficking line of work. When 
the Japanese economy collapsed in 1992, the Yakuza had to find 
new sources of income. They found forced prostitution. Local bro-
kers approach women in their home countries, mostly in Asia, 
Latin America, or Russia. These are the women who are the most 
vulnerable, often from areas that have suffered a disaster such as 
a typhoon. The Yakuza have also been known to traffic American 
women to Japan. The brokers promise well-paying jobs in legiti-
mate professions in Japan. For their efforts, they are paid $6,000 to 
$10,000 per woman. 
 Once in Japan, the women are funneled to brothels by interme-
diaries, primarily Yakuza, who have purchased the rights to these 
women from the brokers. All of the women’s earnings go to the traf-
fickers. The Yakuza protect their financial investment by hiring a 
bodyguard for each woman, to prevent her escape. If a woman es-
capes, the Yakuza will post her picture and encourage members or 
affiliates to turn her in if spotted. The Japanese police are reportedly 
often the ones who turn in escapees to the Yakuza. Some Filipinas 
who tried to escape were reportedly put to death while shelters that 
house escapees have been severely vandalized. 
 In Thailand, there are at least seven crime families in Bangkok 
that recruit, sell, and smuggle Asian women throughout the world,
including the United States, to serve as prostitutes. These families 
obtain travel documents for the women, arrange travel itineraries, 
and then sell the women to agents representing brothels. Escorts, 
known as jockeys, transport the women to their destinations. The 
women are charged $40,000 for the smuggling services. They pay 
back this debt through prostitution. Until the money is paid, the 

86 Worldwide Perspectives
prostitute is under the control of her handler. She is frequently 
sold, exchanged, and battered. Meanwhile, the false passports 
that the women used to illegally enter a country are sent back to 
Thailand and recycled with other prostitutes. 
 The issue of forced prostitution has worldwide implications. 
Researchers estimated in 1999 that 40,000 to 50,000 women were 
trafficked into the United States each year by crime rings. Most 
of these women come from Asia and Mexico, with the majority 
apparently trafficked for sexual purposes. Few of the cases come 
to court because of the difficulties in identifying women who have 
been trafficked. Many victims fear testifying against individuals 
that have terrorized them and/or threatened their families. Sev-
eral brutal Asian-American gangs, including the Flying Dragons, 
the Black Dragons, and the Koolboyz, are known to provide pro-
tection to brothels where trafficking is thought to have occurred. 
In China, major Asian organized crime syndicates, such as the Sun 
Yee On, 14 K, Big Circle Boys, and Wo on Lok, have all repeatedly 
been linked to smuggling illegal immigrants and to prostitution. 
 Legal authorities expect that trafficking has continued to in-
crease but it is impossible to get an accurate count of victims of 
trafficking. The poor economic situation in many countries has 
forced women to look abroad for jobs. Improved international 
transportation has made it much easier and cheaper for people to 
move around the world. If women are lured into forced prostitu-
tion, it is very challenging for authorities to prosecute the respon-
sible individuals. The enormous profit potential of prostitution has 
attracted the criminal syndicates with their long and wide reach. 
 Nevertheless, there have been several notable legal cases 
involving women who were trafficked from Asia to the United 
States and forced to serve as prostitutes. The cases are represen-
tative of sexual trafficking in that the women were tricked into 
prostitution, held captive, and forced to work as prostitutes until 
the costs of their transportation, housing, and other essentials 
were repaid. There have been no reports of women ever being 
freed after repaying what they allegedly owed. Women are kept 
in perpetual debt. 
 The  U.S. v. Kwon  (1998) is typical of the cases that have been 
prosecuted. The defendants recruited and transported Chinese-
Korean women from China to the Northern Mariana Islands in 
the North Pacific from June 1995 to January 1998 for sexual pur-
poses. (The Mariana Islands are a U.S. possession, thus giving the 
U.S. legal jurisdiction.) The women, who were promised legitimate 

Asia 87
jobs as waitresses, were forced to work at a karaoke club and to 
provide sexual services to customers. Some of the women also al-
leged that they suffered physical and sexual abuse at the hands of 
their employers. The defendants, who housed the women in bar-
racks, took their passports, visas, and airline tickets, thereby block-
ing them from fleeing. The women could only leave the barracks 
with permission. They were threatened with violence, including 
death, if they left without permission. In November, 1998, the 
traffickers were indicted for conspiracy against rights, involun-
tary servitude, extortion, transportation for illegal sexual activity, 
and the use of a firearm in the commission of a crime of violence. 
The defendants pled guilty to conspiracy to violate the Thirteenth 
Amendment, which bans slavery throughout the United States, as 
well as to several other charges. They received sentences of two 
to eight years. The women who had been forced into prostitution 
moved to Guam, another island in the Mariana chain, and worked 
at jobs that the U.S. Department of Justice helped them to acquire. 
 The case of  U.S. v. Wattanasiri  (1995) shows how sex traffick-
ing in Thailand has created a crime problem within the United 
States. Ludwig Janak, a German citizen worked in conjunc-
tion with Thai traffickers to recruit Thai women to come to the 
United States to work at legitimate jobs in restaurants. Once in 
the United States, the traffickers joined with a Korean madam to 
force the women into prostitution. As is typical, the women were 
held against their will in a brothel and forced to work until their 
smuggling debt—about $35,000—had been paid. The traffickers 
estimated that each woman would need to have sex with 400 to 
500 customers to pay off the debt. The brothel had bars on its win-
dows to keep the women captive as well as 24-hour surveillance. 
The U.S. government charged 18 defendants with kidnapping, alien 
smuggling, extortion, and white slavery. Twelve defendants were 
convicted and given sentences of four to nine years. Of the six defen-
dants who fled to Thailand, two were extradited and jailed for sev-
eral years. The remaining traffickers are still being sought by police. 
 The U.S. State Department has argued that it is probably 
impossible to stop trafficking. However, the practice might be 
reduced by improving prevention in the source countries. Mi-
crocredit, or assistance to small businesses that are operated by 
women, has the potential to reduce the economic incentive to look 
for work in other nations. The State Department also advises that 
the United States should strengthen the penalties against traffick-
ing while providing more assistance and protection for the victims. 

88 Worldwide Perspectives
Anecdotal evidence suggests that some victims do not go to the 
police for fear of being deported back to the country that they 
were so desperate to leave. 
 Prostitution is also linked to AIDS, with Asia hit especially 
hard by the virus. In 1991, the infection rate of women in the sex 
industry began to explode, with the infection crossing national 
boundaries. AIDS in Myanmar seems to be spreading because of 
the high number of local women who return infected after work-
ing in Thai sex establishments. When the United Nations sent 
peacekeepers to monitor national elections in Cambodia in 1993, 
young men with money and little safe-sex knowledge arrived in a 
desperately poor country with little knowledge of AIDS. Infections 
by HIV virus that leads to AIDS suddenly jumped in Cambodia.
HIV has since been spread by the clients of sex workers to wives 
and children. Sex tourism has also spread a version of HIV, known 
as subtype E, which is not common to the West. Tourists take 
subtype E back to their home countries. 
 To combat HIV, Asian governments have taken various steps. 
The drug cocktails to treat AIDS are not an option in most Asian 
countries because of the cost. A prostitute in Myanmar might have 
to serve more than 20 customers just to pay for two AZT pills. 
Accordingly, governments have focused on prevention rather than 
treatment. Myanmar, which had outlawed condoms until 1993, le-
galized them, but condoms remain too expensive for most people 
to afford. The Thai government began a national safe-sex campaign, 
“No condom, no service, no refund.” It also distributed free con-
doms to prostitutes. However, girls and women who have been 
forced into prostitution are essentially being serially raped. Ask-
ing them to learn how to apply a condom to a client is essentially 
forcing them to confront something nightmarish. While many Thai 
men have been convinced by the same-sex campaign to request 
condoms, Thai sex workers operating near the Malaysian border 
report that Malaysian men do not want to use condoms. Malaysia 
has focused on abstinence rather than sex-safe to combat AIDS. 
 Europe 
 Rape 
 The prosecution of sexual crimes in Europe has been affected 
by age-old attitudes about women who “ask for it” as well as 

Europe 89
intimidation, physical violence, and psychological abuse. In Ire-
land, the Dublin Rape Crisis Center reported in 2008 that only 1 
rape victim in 10 reported the crime to police. Scotland, with a 
2.9 conviction rate in 2008, has one of the lowest rape conviction 
rates in Europe. Only 1 in 14 reported rapes in Scotland is even 
brought to court. 
 The Dublin antirape activists believe that women are afraid 
that they will not get justice since they have no advocates within 
the judicial system. They also do not have many advocates 
among the general public. A 2008 survey found that almost 
40 percent of Irish adults believed that rape victims themselves 
bore some responsibility for being attacked. Such responsibil-
ity could include flirting or wearing sexy clothing. The antirape 
activists are calling for an amendment to the Constitution to es-
tablish strict liability for rape, so that rapists will not be able to 
evade punishment. 
 Italian antirape activists have had some of the same problems 
facing their Irish counterparts, namely a refusal by government 
authorities and the public to regard rape as a serious matter. In a 
notorious 1999 decision that directly influenced countless pros-
ecutions, judges quashed the conviction of an Italian man who 
was accused of raping a young woman during a driving lesson. 
He argued that he could not have committed the rape since the 
victim wore jeans that were too tight for him to get into by himself.
The accused rapist claimed that the sex had been consensual. The 
appellate judges found the man’s argument convincing and re-
leased him. Other accused rapists then successfully used the same 
defense. After nearly a decade of protests by feminists, judges at 
the Italian Court of Cassation in 2008 reversed the ruling. 
 People in power in other parts of Europe displayed similar 
troubling attitudes toward rape. In 2008, a Polish legislator pro-
posed legislation that would outlaw miniskirts and other entice-
ments as a way of stopping rape. Sir Ken Macdonald, who as the 
Director of Public Prosecutions headed the Crown Prosecution 
Service and supervised all criminal prosecutions in the United 
Kingdom from 2003 to 2008, blamed young women for encourag-
ing rape through promiscuity and heavy drinking. Donald Find-
lay, a prominent defense attorney in Scotland, has argued that his 
brethren should be able to refer in court to how an alleged vic-
tim was dressed. Perhaps not surprisingly, Rape Crisis—Scotland 
used funding from the government to launch a campaign in 2008 
to challenge the notion that women are somehow to blame for 

90 Worldwide Perspectives
being raped if they have been drinking, wearing revealing cloth-
ing, or have been sexually active. 
 Sex Trafficking 
 The end of the Cold War in 1989 had many unintended conse-
quences, including a dramatic rise in the trafficking of women. 
The collapse of the Iron Curtain made it easier to cross international 
boundaries, while the collapse of Eastern European economies cre-
ated a pool of women who were desperate for work and a group 
of people who were willing to sell others for cash. Interpol has 
collected data since the early 1990s that shows most sex-trafficked 
women in Europe come from Central Europe (39 percent), Eastern 
Europe (22 percent) and the Balkans (17 percent). The remainder 
of trafficking victims come from Asia and Africa. 
 The situation in Moldova is typical. Moldova, formerly a 
part of the Soviet Union, is now the poorest nation in Europe. In 
Moldova, it is not uncommon for an acquaintance, close friend, 
or relative to sell a woman or girl into prostitution. The girls, 
typically unaware of the scheme and under the belief that they 
will be working legitimate jobs, are taken to a destination such as 
Italy, Germany, or the United Kingdom. The traffickers confiscate 
passports and force the young women to work to repay the debt. 
Although they are supposed to be freed after repayment, traffick-
ers typically sell them to other pimps. 
 Each Natasha—the nickname given to Eastern European 
prostitutes and one that is hated by sex-trafficked women—
can generate considerable amounts of money for a network of 
pimps. There are no benefits for the victims, who receive none of 
the money that they make. The women are beaten and a major-
ity contract sexually transmitted diseases, including hepatitis and 
AIDS. Many become addicted to the drugs and alcohol provided 
by pimps or psychologically impaired from repeated trauma from 
beatings and rapes. The International Organization of Migration, 
which operates a shelter in Moldova for trafficked women who 
have returned home, reports that many of the former prostitutes 
have contracted such trauma-caused ailments disorders as 
advanced schizophrenia and dissociative identity disorder. 
 The International Organization of Migration and the Global 
Survival Network both report that Russian organized crime groups 
control the European prostitution industry. Israel’s Women’s Net-
work discovered that Russian organized crime controls the sex 

Europe 91
industry throughout Israel. These Russian organized crime syn-
dicates include the Izmailovskaya, Dagestantsy, Kazanskaya, and 
Solntsenskaya, which are involved in the prostitution industry 
throughout the United States. 
 The Russian syndicates have moved Russian, Ukrainian, 
Georgian, and Chechen women throughout the world. One route 
goes through Bulgaria to Turkey, Greece, and elsewhere in West-
ern Europe. The Mogilevich criminal syndicate owns nightclubs 
in Prague, Riga, and Kiev, where it traffics women for forced 
prostitution. Prostitutes in the United Arab Emirates are women 
imported by the Russian gangs and forced into sexual slavery. 
Russian organized crime has imported prostitutes to Canada. In 
one example, a Russian gang brought 11 women from the former 
Soviet Union to Canada in 1991. The women came to work as 
models but they were compelled to turn over their travel docu-
ments and work as stripper/prostitutes. They turned over their 
earnings to their Russian handlers after their loved ones back in 
Europe were threatened with bodily harm and death. 
 Given the way these gangs operate overseas and the brutality 
of their organizations, it is likely their prostitution operations in 
the United States routinely include trafficking in women through 
the use of deception, threats, and violence.  U.S. v. Milan Lejhanec 
and Ladislav Ruc  (1998) may be typical. In this case, the defendants 
recruited Czech women to work in legitimate jobs in the United 
States Upon arriving in the United States, the women found out 
that the legitimate jobs did not exist. They were forced to work in 
New York City strip clubs where customers fondled them for a 
fee. The defendants, who had taken the passports of the women, 
did not permit the women to leave until they had paid off the 
costs of smuggling them into the country. Both of the defendants 
received five years in jail for trafficking women for purposes of 
prostitution. Two other men were charged with witness tamper-
ing for trying to intimidate the Czech victims. 
 Gang Rape 
 In France, gang rape has been on the rise among teenagers since 
the millennium. Such crimes represent 10 to 20 percent of all seri-
ous cases in French juvenile courts. In a 2001 case in Versailles, 
seven youths were charged with gang-raping a 15-year-old girl 
repeatedly over a period of eight weeks. Fearful of reprisals 
against her family, she hesitated to tell police. A French antirape 

92 Worldwide Perspectives
activist reported that the girl is typically seen as more  bourgeois , 
or more materialistic, than the norm or better-educated. The gang 
who attacks her believes since she is supposedly having sex with 
her boyfriend, then she is fair game. The light penalties routinely 
given to attackers, including 11 young men who ganged raped a 
girl and received suspended sentences in 2001, do little to deter 
such crime. 
 Latin America 
 Rape 
 In Latin America, the land of  machismo,  many cultures have an-
tiquated views of rape that block prosecution of sex criminals. 
Many Latin America societies teach men to believe that they are 
superior to and own women, with the act of deflowering regarded 
as proof of manhood. Although one of the most common violent 
crimes, rape is one of the least denounced, prosecuted, or pun-
ished. Rape and other sexual crimes are still not treated as serious 
matters. A few observers have even argued that rape has become 
virtually an institution in societies where bosses, landlords, union 
leaders, doctors, shopkeepers, and even teachers routinely solicit 
sex for favors. 
 Statistics from several countries show the prevalence of rape 
in Latin America as well as the difficulties of prosecution. Mexico 
is suspected to have the highest rate for rape in the region, with 
one Mexican woman raped every nine minutes. Women’s groups 
estimate that only about one percent of rapes in Mexico are ever 
punished. The number is lower in rural areas. A United Nations 
study found that 9 out of 10 sexual assaults are not reported while 
18 percent of Mexican victims do not even realize that rape is a 
crime. In many parts of Mexico, the penalty for stealing a cow 
is harsher than the punishment for rape. In Bogota, Colombia, 
women’s rights advocates estimate that 10 rapes occur daily. In 
Costa Rica, the smallest Latin American country, antirape activists 
have concluded that for every 100 rapes reported there are 14 suc-
cessful prosecutions. In Peru, those accused of rape are acquitted 
in 99 percent of the cases that make it to trial. 
 Prosecuting a crime in most of Latin America remains a very 
time-consuming process, with the result of deterring a victim 
from pursuing the matter. Peruvian rape victims have asserted

Latin America 93
that authorities in their country greet allegations of rape with 
indifference or ridicule. There is little interest in making the 
process easier for victims. A woman who has been sexually as-
saulted must make endless visits to police stations, followed by a 
long series of preliminary court hearings stretching over months. 
Since most rape victims are poor, often working jobs that pay 
by the hour, time away from the workplace is costly and could 
result in being fired. The decision to prosecute is wrapped up in 
economics.
 A Mexican woman who seeks to file criminal charges must 
submit to a medical exam by a physician that is conducted in the 
prosecutor’s office. There is typically little privacy or sensitivity, 
doubly victimizing the woman. The doctor looks for evidence of 
copulation, even though a bottle may have been used as the instru-
ment of assault. Investigators sometimes ask women to prove 
that they were virgins before the attack. Once in court, women 
are often asked if they enjoyed the rape. Rapists’ families and 
friends threaten victims who try to prosecute. Judges are more 
sympathetic to a woman who has suffered injury. A woman who 
complied without a struggle, perhaps because she was threatened 
with a gun, has difficulty proving her case. After the case has 
become public knowledge, victims face harassment from other 
men who think that because they have already lost their virginity, 
they have nothing left to lose. 
 The case of two deaf sisters, Antonia and Isabel Francisco 
Melendez, is representative of attitudes toward rape in Mexico. 
The Melendez girls, aged 13 and 16, were attacked in their cen-
tral Mexican hometown of Reyeshogpan in 2001. Both became 
pregnant as a result of the rapes. Neither girl named her at-
tacker. The girls’ mother refused to pursue the matter because 
she did not want any trouble. Police have not investigated the 
crimes. 
 As the Melendez case indicates, although Mexican states 
punish rape with up to 20 years in prison, few people are con-
victed because few rapes are investigated. Official complaints of 
rape by women in poor urban barrios or isolated rural communi-
ties are virtually unknown. For girls such as the Melendez sisters, 
rape is just another of the many burdens of life that they have to 
bear. The few rape victims who go to the police are nearly always 
from the middle or upper classes. 
 Mexico’s criminal code, most of which was written in 1931, 
offers little protection to women who are the victims of violence. 

94 Worldwide Perspectives
Women who charge rape have the burden of proving their inno-
cence rather than the assailant’s guilt. The criminal code specifics 
protection only for women who are honest and  casta,  or “of qual-
ity.” In many of Mexico’s 31 states, a minor child who accuses an 
adult man of statutory rape must first prove that she is “chaste 
and pure.” Nineteen of the states require that statutory rape 
charges be dropped if the rapist agrees to marry his victim. 
 Marriage is seen as a way to restore honor to the victim and 
her family. There is also a common belief that a raped woman has 
been so soiled that no other man would want her. In 1997, Peru’s 
Congress raised the issue of excusing rapists who married their 
victims. The Peruvian penal code, written in 1924, exonerated a 
rapist if he offered to marry his victim and she accepted. The 1996 
case of a young woman named Maria Elena illustrates the work-
ings of this pardon. Maria Elena, a 17-year-old who lived in the 
crime-ridden Villa El Salvador district of Lima, was gang-raped 
by a group of drunken men in their 20s while she walked home 
from work. Maria Elena’s father and brother tracked down the 
rapists, who lived in the neighborhood. One of the men offered to 
marry Maria Elena. She declined the offer but the other two attack-
ers threatened to slash her face. Meanwhile, her family pressured 
her to accept the proposal. Maria Elena, who had wanted to press 
charges, married her attacker under duress. Three months after 
the wedding, he abandoned her. 
 The Peruvian Congress removed the offer of marriage ex-
emption in 1997. However, many other Latin American countries
still exonerate rapists who marry victims. The list includes Argentina, 
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicara-
gua, Panama, Paraguay, the Dominican Republic, and Venezuela. 
In Costa Rica, a rapist is freed if he expresses an intention to marry 
his victim, even if she does not accept. 
 Wife Rape 
 If a rapist marries his wife, in most Latin American countries he 
is free to rape her again under the shield of marriage. Antirape 
activists have had comparatively little impact in Latin America. 
Mexico has seen the most improvement but with considerable 
room left for bettering the lives of rape victims. 
 In 1988, the first rape center opened in Mexico. The Center 
for Orientation and Support of Rape Victims in Mexico City may 
also have been the first rape center in Latin America. The center 

Latin America 95
opened with significant financial support from the ruling Insti-
tutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), which dominated Mexican 
politics for most of the 20th century. The ability of feminists to 
obtain political support reflected growing political clout as well 
as a slow shift in attitudes toward rape. A subsequent landmark 
court decision showed that some men in government were hear-
ing women’s voices. 
 In 2005, the Mexican Supreme Court unanimously ruled 
that rape within marriage is a crime. The decision overturned a 
1994 ruling by the Court that found forced sexual relations by a 
spouse did not constitute rape because the purpose of marriage 
is procreation. The 1994 opinion stated that marital rape was “an 
undue exercise of conjugal rights.” In the 11 years between the 
rulings, Mexican women made many strides for equal rights. In 
1997, Congress passed a law criminalizing wife rape. The Court 
decision reflected a gradually changing attitude toward women. 
In written comments, Justice Jose de Jesus Gudino Pelayo defined 
marriage as a relationship of equality in which the woman does 
not lose her sexual freedom. 
 However, Mexican women’s rights organizations expected 
that few women would charge their husbands with rape. They 
advised that long-standing attitudes about the subservient 
place of women and machismo would make it difficult for 
women to go to the police. As the Melendez case indicates, it 
is also doubtful that the police would regard rape as a serious 
matter. 
 Religion and Sexual Assault 
 Roman Catholicism is the dominant faith throughout Latin 
America. The Roman Catholic Church holds that abortion is a 
sin. This viewpoint has clashed with the interests of rape victims 
who become pregnant as the result of an assault. 
 Mexico is one of the largest Catholic countries in the world. 
Its federal laws ban abortion on demand except in cases of rape, 
serious medical problems, and potential birth defects. However, 
states have objected to the federal policy and have established 
their own regulations regarding abortion. In 2000, the state of 
Guanajuato proposed to jail rape victims who had abortions. The 
legislation set off a firestorm of debate, with Bishop Juan San-
doval Iniguez of Guadalajara blaming rape victims for encourag-
ing sexual attacks by dressing provocatively. Surveys of ordinary 

96 Worldwide Perspectives
Mexicans, however, have consistently shown that most favor al-
lowing abortion in rape cases despite the teachings of the church. 
 Rape as a War Crime 
 Rape as a form of torture has commonly been used on Latin 
American political prisoners, especially during the days of the 
dictators in Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay. During a period of 
intense repression in 1979, rape or the threat of it was also used 
on political detainees in Colombia. An incident that occurred in 
Peru during its long war in the 1990s against the Shining Path 
guerillas is representative. Although Peru’s security forces offi-
cially prohibited rape, in practice sexual attacks were common 
and sanctioned. In 1993, in the jungle town of Aucayacu, soldiers 
broke into nine homes and, in each home, raped a woman or girl. 
Americas Watch, a human rights group that publicized 40 similar 
attacks, reported that it was aware of no case in which an active 
member of Peru’s security forces was ever punished for rape. The 
group suggested that for some security personnel in remote rural 
areas, the violence of rape served as a part of routine interroga-
tion of suspected rebel troops. Robin Kirk, an Americas Watch 
researcher, speculated that women who serve as rebel guerillas 
break gender stereotypes, thus triggering intense fear and anger 
among government soldiers. Rape is the result. 
 Amnesty International has suggested another reason for the 
number of rapes by soldiers. In rural areas, many soldiers appar-
ently see rape and pillage as informal compensation for loneliness 
and the low salaries of military life. Rape is essentially a bonus. 
 Many researchers have long held that the stigma that sur-
rounds victims of rape has the side effect of removing rapes 
by soldiers from the historical record. Some recent research in 
Guatemala challenges that belief. Julie A. Hastings, author of a 
2002 article “Silencing State-Sponsored Rape in and Beyond a 
Transnational Guatemalan Community” in the journal  Violence 
Against Women,  argues that such rape is underreported because 
of collusion between national and international forces to depo-
liticize rape and silence rape victims. 
 Guatemala has the unpleasant distinction of having one of 
the longest civil wars on record, from 1960 to 1996. As rape often 
accompanies political unrest, it not surprising that many Guate-
malan women were attacked by soldiers. Although rapes occurred 
frequently, the accounts of rape survivors were excluded from 

Latin America 97
public testimonials about the violence in Guatemala. The women 
were willing to speak out but the government refused to hear 
them.
 Rape as a Hate Crime 
 Rape rarely receives much attention in the press. Yet a series of 
killings and rapes in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, proved so disturbing 
that media outlets around the world picked up the story. More 
than 400 women and girls were murdered in the Chihuahua city 
between 1993 and 2009. Approximately one in three of the killings 
involved some form of sexual attack. The victims were all young, 
slim, pretty, and with long dark hair. Human rights groups catego-
rized the abductions as rapes, and murders as “feminicide” or hate 
crimes. They suggested that the women were being killed because
they were female and poor. Very few perpetrators were held to 
account, and for several years there was a lack of commitment by 
both federal and state authorities to investigate the crimes. 
 Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, sits on the other side of the Rio 
Grande River from El Paso, Texas. It is Mexico’s fourth largest 
city and an industrial center that draws thousands of poor people 
from all around Mexico who take assembly-line jobs in factories, 
known as maquiladoras. Most of the maquiladora workers are 
women, some as young as 13 or 14. While some young women go 
missing or are found dead, more young women are always pour-
ing into the city. 
 Human rights groups have charged that the police of Ciudad 
Juárez do not value the lives of the poor women who work in 
the maquiladoras. The factories, which are linked to such mul-
tinational corporations as General Electric and Alcoa, have not 
provided security for their workers even though some bodies 
have literally turned up at their doors. The killings led to the 
formation of women’s rights groups, many of which counted 
the female family members of the victims among their ranks. In 
2004, pressure from these groups forced the federal government 
to appoint a special federal prosecutor. The prosecutor, who had 
no power to order fresh investigations, charged 103 officials with 
negligence for failing to conduct proper investigation before she 
was replaced by Mexico’s President Vicente Fox. In 2005, an Inte-
rior Ministry official argued that, since 97 percent of murders in 
Mexico went unpunished, the situation in Ciudad Juárez quali-
fied as normal and did not warrant special attention. 

98 Worldwide Perspectives
 Sex Trafficking 
 The trafficking of women for sexual purposes in Latin America 
is essentially the same as trafficking in women in Europe or Asia. 
The victims are desperate for employment and tricked into trust-
ing members of criminal syndicates. These criminals force the 
women and girls into prostitution. Many of the victims wind up 
in American brothels, as the case described below indicates. 
 In  U.S. v. Cadena  (1998), about 25 to 40 Mexican women and 
girls were trafficked between February 1996 and March 1998 from 
the state of Veracruz in Mexico to Florida and the Carolinas. The 
victims thought that they had obtained legitimate jobs, albeit as 
illegal immigrants, in waitressing, housekeeping, landscaping, 
childcare, and elder care. Upon their arrival, the women and girls 
were informed that they had to work as prostitutes in brothels 
that catered to migrant workers or they would be harmed. The 
women who attempted to escape were beaten, with one locked in 
closet for 15 days as punishment for trying to flee. Guards used 
force to keep them in the brothels in order that they pay off their 
smuggling debts that ranged from $2,000 to $3,000. Women who 
became pregnant suffered forced abortions. 
 In March 1998, 16 men were indicted in Florida for enslav-
ing the Mexicans. They were charged with importing aliens for 
immoral purposes, transporting women and minors for prostitu-
tion, involuntary servitude, visa fraud, conspiracy, and violation 
of civil rights. The defendants received sentences of 2 to 6 years 
with a ringleader getting 15 years behind bars. Several of the other 
ringleaders escaped to Mexico, where they are still being sought. 
The judge ordered the criminal syndicate behind the trafficking 
to pay $1 million in restitution to the victims. The government 
seized the assets of the traffickers and used the money to assist the 
victims, who currently reside in Florida. 
 Conclusion 
 As the accounts above indicate, sexual crime involves so many 
aspects that it is enormously difficult to combat. Human rights 
groups are working to bring soldiers who rape to justice while 
women’s rights groups focus on persuading government officials 
to take rape seriously. Western countries, including the United 
States, are clearly more enlightened about sexual assault than less 

Further Reading 99
developed nations. However, there is room for considerable 
improvement in every country. 
 Further Reading 
 Batstone, David.  Not for Sale: The Return of the Global Slave Trade—and 
How We Can Fight It. New York: HarperOne, 2007. 
 Burns, Catherine.  Sexual Violence and the Law in Japan. London: 
Routledge Curzon, 2005. 
 Clayton, Jonathan, and James Bone. “UN Officials in Sex Scandal.”  The
Australian. December 24, 2004, p. 9. 
 Curran, Bronwyn.  Into the Mirror: The Untold Story of Mukhtar Mai. New 
Delhi, India: UBS, 2008. 
 Farr, Kathryn.  Sex Trafficking: The Global Market in Women and Children.
New York: Worth, 2004. 
 Frederick, Sharon, and The Aware Committee on Rape.  Rape: Weapon of 
Terror. River Edge, NJ: Global Publishing, 2001. 
 Hastings, Julie A. “State-Sponsored Rape: In and Beyond a 
Transnational Guatemalan Community.”  Violence Against Women 8, 
no. 10 (October 2002): 1153–1174. 
 Human Rights Watch.  The War Within the War: Sexual Violence Against 
Women and Girls in Eastern Congo. New York: Human Rights Watch, 2002. 
 IRIN. “Cote d’Ivoire: Rapes Are Encouraged.” October 21, 2008. http://
www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?ReportId=81038. 
 Jordan, Mary. “Machismo’s Dark Side: Rape Often Goes Unpunished in 
Mexico.” Washington Post. July 6, 2002, p. B3. 
 Kaplan, Jonathan.  The Dressing Station: A Surgeon’s Chronicle of War and 
Medicine. New York: Grove Press, 2003. 
 King, Gilbert.  Woman, Child for Sale: The New Slave Trade in the 21st 
Century. New York: Chamberlain Bros., 2004. 
 Malarek, Victor.  The Natashas: Inside the New Global Sex Trade. New York: 
Arcade, 2005. 
 Mam, Somaly.  The Road of Lost Innocence. London: Virago, 2007. 
 Parrot, Andrea, and Nina Cummings.  Sexual Enslavement of Girls and 
Women Worldwide. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2008. 
 Stiglmayer, Alexandra, ed.  Mass Rape: The War Against Women in Bosnia-
Herzegovina. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1994. 
 Williams, Phil, ed.  Illegal Immigration and Commercial Sex: The New Slave 
Trade. London: Frank Cass, 1999. 

This page intentionally left blank 

101
 4 
 Chronology 
 c. 2000  B.C.E.
 The Babylonian Code of Hammurabi declares 
that a man is to be seized and slain if he kills 
a betrothed virgin, with the victim considered 
blameless. A married woman who is raped is 
considered to be guilty of adultery. She and her 
attacker are bound and thrown into the river. 
 c. 1600  B.C.E.
 The Hittite Code of the Nesilim is written. It 
declares that a woman who is raped within her 
own home could be executed. 
 c. 1000 B.C.E.
 The Assyrian Code of Assura is written. It per-
mits a husband to kill or punish his wife if she 
is raped. 
 c. 1000  B.C.E.
 Ancient Hebrews mandate that a married 
woman who is raped shall be stoned to death 
along with her attacker at the gates to the city. 
If a man rapes a virgin within the walls of the 
city, both victim and attacker are stoned under 
the reasoning that the girl would have been 
heard had she screamed. For an act of rape that 
takes place outside of the city where neigh-
bors might not hear an assault, the rapist must 
pay the fifty silver shekels to the girl’s father 
to compensate him for her bride price. If the 
girl is engaged to be married, the rapist shall 
be stoned to death. 

102 Chronology
 429  B.C.E.
 The Hippocratic Oath, which establishes ethical 
principles for physicians, bans sexual encounters 
within the doctor-patient relationship. 
 c. 930  C.E.
 During the reign of King Athelstan of England, a 
man who attempts to rape a virgin forfeits all of 
his possessions while the successful rapist of a vir-
gin loses his life as well as his possessions. A raped 
virgin is permitted to save her attacker’s life by 
marrying him. 
 c. 1066 
 William the Conqueror of England punishes rapists 
of virgins by castrating and blinding them. The trial 
of a rapist is by combat, with the virgins defended 
by their kinsmen. It is unclear how many cases went 
to trial. 
 c. 1154 
 King Henry II of England ends trial by combat in 
favor of trial by jury. While raped virgins can go to 
court, there is apparently no provision for married 
women to do so. A virgin must make a complaint 
immediately following the attack and must show 
blood and torn garments. 
 c. 1300 
 In the Statutes of Westminster, King Edward I of 
England establishes the principle of statutory rape 
as the state begins to take an interest in the pro-
tection of children. The statutes made no distinc-
tion between the rape of a married or unmarried 
woman. The option of redeeming a rapist through 
marriage to the victim is eliminated. If a raped 
woman or her kin fails to begin prosecution within 
40 days, the right to prosecute automatically passes 
to the state, thereby defining rape as an issue of 
public safety and government interest. 
 1385 
 In one of the earliest surviving Articles of War, 
Richard I of England decrees that none of his sol-
diers shall rape a woman on pain of death. 
 1736 
 In a posthumously published work, Sir Matthew 
Hale, Lord Chief Justice of England, argues in 

Chronology 103
History of the Pleas of the Crown  that while rape is 
a detestable crime that is rightly punished with 
death, it is also an accusation that is easily made, 
hard to be proved, and harder to be defended. 
Hale’s thinking dominates courtrooms for the 
next 250 years, as the man in a sexual assault 
case is viewed as a potential victim of a vengeful 
woman. 
 1736 
In the same work, Hale comments on the impossi-
bility of marital rape when he declares that a wife 
has agreed to sex by agreeing to marriage. For 
almost the next 250 years, men who attack their 
wives argue successfully that the marriage con-
tract gave them the right to rape. 
 1746 
When English forces put down a rebellion by Scot-
tish Highlanders at the Battle of Culloden, the 
English then proceed to rape and sexually muti-
late Scottish women throughout the Highlands in 
an effort to humiliate the Scottish men. 
 1765–1769 
 In his landmark,  Commentaries on the Laws of En-
gland,  legal scholar William Blackstone writes that 
“by marriage the husband and wife are one person 
in law; that is, the very being or legal existence of the 
woman is suspended in marriage.” Since the wife 
has no legal existence, she also has no legal remedy 
against a sexual assault by her husband, who cannot 
be charged with essentially attacking himself. 
 1780 
 Revolutionary War soldier Thomas Brown of the 
Seventh Pennsylvania Regiment is sentenced to 
death for a rape at Paramus, New Jersey, while serv-
ing with George Washington’s forces. The offense is 
Brown’s second conviction. 
 1838 
 In  People v. Abbott  in New York State, a married 
minister is acquitted of rape because his accuser 
did not meet the conditions required for a charge. 
She had to be of good reputation, show evidence of 
physical resistance, and try to call for help. 

104 Chronology
 1854 
 In  People v. Morrison in New York State, the court 
declares that a rape did not occur if a woman did 
not resist using all of her natural abilities. 
 1892 
 African American journalist Ida B. Wells challenges 
the notion that black men are lynched primarily 
to avenge southern white women from rape. Her 
pamphlet Southern Horrors, titled to play on the jus-
tification of southern honor, argues that black men 
are lynched as a means to intimidate the entire 
African American community. She reports that only 
a third of the 728 lynching victims between 1884 
and 1892 were even accused of rape. Earlier in 1892, 
Wells had published an editorial that revealed that 
most “rapes” were in fact often consensual liaisons 
between black men and white women. In response 
to the article, an angry mob of whites demolished 
Wells’s newspaper office and she fled Memphis, 
Tennessee for good. She published  Southern Horrors
in the North. 
 1915 
 D. W. Griffith’s silent film,  Birth of a Nation, becomes 
a blockbuster hit. It depicts an animal-like black 
man intent on raping a white heroine, who leaps to 
her death rather than succumb. The film contributes 
to the myth of the black rapist and sparks the 
creation of the Second Ku Klux Klan. 
 1931 
 In a celebrated case, Thalia Fortescue Massie, the 
troubled wife of a Navy lieutenant, claims that a 
group of Hawaiian men raped her at Ala Moana, 
a lonely beach road leading from Waikiki to Hono-
lulu, Hawaii. Five young men of Asian ancestry 
(two Hawaiian, two Japanese, and one Chinese) 
are arrested for the sexual assault. After evidence 
is presented at trial showing that none of the de-
fendants had the opportunity to commit the crime, 
the jury deadlocks and all of the men are released 
on bail. Outraged white sailors beat one defendant 
so badly that he almost dies. Another defendant, 
native Hawaiian Joseph Kahahawai is found dead 
as the apparent victim of an honor slaying in the 

Chronology 105
back seat of Massie’s mother’s car. Grace Fortescue 
had been deeply disturbed by the refusal of the jury 
to convict her daughter’s alleged attackers. She is 
eventually tried and convicted of manslaughter but 
her sentence is commuted by the governor to one 
hour. Native Hawaiians view the case as an exam-
ple of a miscarriage of justice and extreme racism. 
 1931 
 The trial of the Scottsboro Boys begins in Tennes-
see. Nine black young men aged between 13 and 
20 years are arrested and charged with the rape of 
white women. They narrowly miss being lynched. 
At the trial, the judge does not accept evidence 
indicating that the white women were prostitutes 
who had semen in their bodies as a result of their 
line of work. The boys deny knowing the prosti-
tutes. (DNA tests were not in existence in 1931 so 
the ownership of the semen could be proved.) The 
boys are convicted, with some sentenced to death 
and others given long terms in prison. The case 
gains notoriety around the world as racially based 
miscarriage of justice. Appeals block the executions 
and the last Scottsboro boy leaves prison in 1944. 
 1937 
 In the Rape of Nanking, Japan invades China’s 
capital city and Japanese soldiers engage in the 
mass rapes of civilians. The Nanking International 
Relief Committee estimated that there were hun-
dreds of rapes each night. 
 1938 
 The  Kristallnacht  attacks by Nazis against Jews 
in Germany include the rapes of Jewish girls and 
women by German soldiers although sexual inter-
course between such individuals was prohibited 
by the Nuremberg race laws of 1935 as “race de-
filement.” 
 1942 
 Papal envoy Archbishop Giuseppe Burzio in Brat-
islava, Czechoslovakia, informs Pope Pius XII 
that Germany is forcing young Jewish women to 
become prostitutes for German soldiers on the 
eastern front. 

106 Chronology
 1942 
 The Soviet Union complains to Allied countries 
during World War II that German soldiers are con-
ducting mass rapes of girls and women in occupied 
areas of the U.S.S.R. 
 1944 
 In a surprise raid on the village of St. Donat, a cen-
ter for the French resistance, German soldiers rape 
54 women ranging from ages 13 to 50. 
 1945 
 Russian soldiers who participate in the fall of Ber-
lin rape masses of German women. The front-line 
soldiers are disciplined and well-behaved but the 
second wave of troops take revenge for World War II 
on the women of Berlin. 
 1945 
 Helene Deutsch’s  Psychology of Women  is published. 
Deutsch argues that women are masochists who 
fantasize about being raped. 
 1946 
 Captured German documents presented at the 
Nuremberg war crimes tribunal indicate that 
Germany used rape as a weapon of terror during 
World War II. 
 1957 
 In what is apparently the first study of date rape, 
Eugene J. Kanin of Purdue University in West 
Lafayette, Indiana, shows that 30 percent of women 
surveyed had suffered an attempted or completed 
rape while on a high school date. 
 1962 
 The American Law Institute approves a Model 
Penal Code (MPI) for rape that prompts several 
states to revise their statutes to give more credence 
to women alleging rape. The common law defini-
tion of rape required that the woman prove that she 
had not consented to sexual intercourse, usually in 
the form of evidence that she had resisted such as 
bruises. While the common law definition gradu-
ally abandoned the standard of resistance to allow 
prosecutors to use evidence of force, such as a gun, 
many jurisdictions still required corroboration of a 
victim’s testimony to prove that a crime had indeed 

Chronology 107
been committed. A woman’s word was not consid-
ered proof enough. Evidence of a victim’s previous 
sexual history was admitted in the belief that if she 
had said “yes” in the past that she would always say 
“yes” to anyone. The MPI classifies the crime of rape 
as a felony in the first degree if the victim is a stranger 
to the attacker or if serious bodily harm in inflicted. 
Second degree rape occurs if a no such injury is in-
flicted or if the perpetrator was known, such as in 
date rape. The MPC, reflecting the thinking of 1962, 
maintains an exemption for marital rape, a corrobo-
ration requirement, a requirement that a complaint 
be made promptly, and a cautionary-instruction 
(from judge to jury) requirement. The revisions 
are not pro-victim but also do not overwhelmingly 
favor criminal defendants. 
 1967 
 Albert DeSalvo, the Boston Strangler, goes to prison. 
He confesses to 11 of 13 rape-murders that took 
place in the Boston area between June 14, 1962 and 
January 4, 1964. Most of the victims fall between the 
ages of 55 and 87, with the youngest aged 19. De-
Salvo also admits to being the Green Man, respon-
sible for raping women in four states while wearing 
green work pants. 
 1967 
 Eugene J. Kanin of Purdue University in West 
Lafayette, Indiana completes a study in which more 
than 25 percent of male college students admit 
having attempted to force sexual intercourse on a 
woman to the point where she cried or fought back. 
 1968 
 In the notorious My Lai massacre during the Viet-
nam War, men under the command of Lieutenant 
William L. Calley engage in rape, attempted rape, 
and rape with murder. Although the Army confirms 
that systematic rapes had taken place, the charges 
against the accused men are dropped. 
 1971 
 Rape had been viewed as a shameful secret before 
the women’s movement. Conventional wisdom 
argued that women had “asked for it.” As the

108 Chronology
movement begins to form, women begin to analyze 
and politicize the physical aspects of being female. Ac-
cordingly, feminists begin to focus upon rape reform 
as part of consciousness-raising about the various 
issues affecting women. To publicize the high inci-
dence of rape, New York Radical Feminists (NYRF), 
a short-lived organization of young women, holds 
the first speak-out on rape at St. Clement’s Episcopal 
Church in New York City to raise awareness about 
the issue. About 300 hundred women attend and 40 
give rape testimonies. The event emphasizes that 
rape is not uncommon but that few women report it. 
 1971 
 Feminist Susan Griffin writes a pathbreaking arti-
cle. “Rape—The All-American Crime” for  Ramparts
magazine in which she declares that she has never 
been free of the fear of rape. She is the first to make 
clear that only one rapist could keep women off the 
streets at night, frighten them away from taking 
night classes, and prevent them from taking night 
jobs. Griffin argues that power, not lust, is at the 
heart of rape. 
 1972 
 The first rape crisis hot line is established in Wash-
ington, D.C., in 1972 and rape centers began to 
spread across the country. Many are operated by 
women’s liberation groups such as the National 
Organization for Women. 
 1973 
 New York City forms the first police Rape Investiga-
tion Unit, led by Lieutenant Julia Tucker. 
 1973 
 Senator Charles Mathias of Maryland proposes 
the formation of the National Center for the Pre-
vention of Rape within the National Institute of 
Mental Health. Congress approves the bill but 
President Gerald Ford vetoes it. The bill subse-
quently passes in 1975 and creates the National 
Center for the Prevention and Control of Rape. 
 1973 
The Women’s Anti-Rape Coalition (WARC) 
forms in New York City to seek the repeal of the 
1971
(contd.)

Chronology 109
corroboration requirement in legal statutes and to 
raise public awareness of rape issues. It declares 
August to be Rape Prevention Month. 
 1974 
 New York becomes the first state to repeal the 
corroboration requirement. 
 1974 
 Inez Garcia, a 30-year-old fruit picker, is raped by 
two men in Soledad, California. Married at 15, Gar-
cia had lived in Miami until her husband was sent 
to a California prison. She lived near the prison with 
her 11-year-old son. Garcia responded to the rape by 
grabbing a rifle and searching for her attackers. She 
found them. When one drew a knife, she shot him 
dead. He had been the attacker who held her down 
during the rape. Charged with homicide, Garcia 
became a cause célèbre among feminists and politi-
cal radicals. Observers debated whether a woman 
had a right to self-defense hours after being sexually 
assaulted. Garcia’s attorney argued that she had a 
right to protect her integrity when violated. The jury 
convicted Garcia but she won an appeal and her 
release from prison two years later. 
 1974 
 Pop singer Connie Francis, famous for such 1950s 
and 1960s hits as “Who’s Sorry Now” and “Where 
the Boys Are,” is raped in a motel room at a New 
York Howard Johnson’s after performing at the 
Westbury Music Fair. The rapist, who has never 
been caught, entered the room because the motel 
management did not repair a broken lock and torn 
screen. Francis becomes the first prominent woman 
to come forward as a rape victim when she sued the 
motel chain and subsequently won a substantial set-
tlement. Francis does not perform again for seven 
years because of trauma from the attack. 
 1975 
 The National Organization for Women begins to 
hold nationwide events to reclaim the night from 
sexual predators. The event eventually turns into 
Take Back the Night, an annual event that aims to 
make public streets safer for women. 

110 Chronology
 1975 
 Joanne Little, an African American prisoner in a 
Beaufort, North Carolina jail, stabs white county 
guard Clarence Alligood to death. Little claims 
that Alligood had attempted to rape her. The trial 
becomes another cause célèbre. Both feminists and 
black activists argue that white men had always and 
would always be acquitted for raping black women. 
A jury of six blacks and six whites takes 78 minutes 
to acquit Little. 
 1975 
 Susan Brownmiller publishes  Against Our Will, which 
reveals the universality of rape upon men, women, 
and children in every era and in every place. Her 
pathbreaking book puts rape onto the political 
agenda. Partly as a result of Brownmiller’s book, 
rape victims are viewed by police, legal authorities, 
and medical personnel as traumatized and innocent 
victims of a crime instead of sinners with a case of 
regret. The changes encourage more women to 
report rapes. 
 1975 
 In  Cox Broadcasting Corporation v. Cohn,  the U.S. 
Supreme Court nullifies a Georgia statute that 
banned news organizations from publishing the 
names of rape victims. The Court rules that such 
a prohibition violates the First and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the Constitution. 
 1976 
 Nebraska becomes the first state to expand rape law 
to prohibit rapes within marriage. 
 1977 
 Judge Archie Simonson is recalled from the bench 
for excusing a rapist. Simonson, from Madison, 
Wisconsin, justified the actions of a 15-year-old 
boy convicted of rape by blaming his actions upon 
women’s revealing clothing and a “normal” reac-
tion to relaxed cultural attitudes about sex. A female 
judge replaces him. 
 1977 
 In his final study on date rape, Professor Eugene 
J. Kanin of Purdue University finds that 26 percent 
of surveyed men had tried to force intercourse on 

Chronology 111
a woman while 25 percent of surveyed women 
reported experiencing an attempted or completed 
rape.
 1977 
 Film director Roman Polanski flees the country 
after admitting to having sexual intercourse with a 
13-year-old girl at the home of actor Jack Nicholson. 
Polanski faced up to 50 years in prison for statutory 
rape.
 1977 
 The U.S. Supreme Court bans the death penalty for 
rape cases on grounds that it is unconstitutional in 
Coker v. Georgia.  The decision has been credited with 
increasing both reporting of rapes and successful 
prosecutions of rapists. 
 1978 
 Sandra Butler publishes  The Conspiracy of Silence: 
The Trauma of Incest. The book helps force a public 
discussion of incest by bringing it into the open. 
Few Americans had realized how many relatives 
sexually violated young girls. (Young male victims 
of incest remain hidden.) 
 1978 
 Congress passes the federal Privacy Protection for 
Rape Victims Act, which prohibits the sexual history 
of a rape victim from being brought out in court. 
Many rape victims had refused to prosecute for fear 
of being cross-examined over their sexual history. 
 1978 
 A jury in Salem, Oregon, acquits John Rideout of 
beating and raping his wife, Greta. The trial received 
considerable national attention. For the first, many 
Americans learn about marital rape in a context that 
criminalizes it. At the time, Oregon is one of three 
states that classify marital rape as a crime. Many 
Americans begin to debate whether a wife can le-
gally withhold sex from her husband. 
 1979 
 The first article on marital rape to gain nationwide 
attention is titled “Legal Rape” and appears in Fam-
ily Circle,  a magazine sold in supermarkets and 
aimed at housewives. 

112 Chronology
 1979 
 Laura X organizes the National Clearinghouse on 
Marital Rape in Berkeley, California. After learn-
ing that several foreign countries had outlawed the 
marital exemption for rape, Laura X pushes for the 
United States to also ban marriage as a justification 
for sexual assault. She spends the next two decades 
speaking at college campuses and at professional 
associations while lobbying state legislatures to 
reclassify marital rape as a crime. 
 1981 
 The New Jersey Supreme Court reinstates the rape 
conviction of a legally separated husband. 
 1981 
 The U.S. Supreme Court upholds California’s statu-
tory rape law, which applies only to male offenders 
in Michael M. v. Superior Court.
 1981 
 Congress passes the Sexual Abuse Act, which mod-
ernizes federal rape legislation. The bill defines sex 
crimes in gender-neutral terms, focuses the trial on 
the conduct of the accused rather than the conduct 
of the victim, ends spousal immunity, and expands 
federal jurisdiction to include all federal prisons. 
 1982 
 Auburn University psychology professor and 
acquaintance rape specialist Barry R. Burkhart finds 
that 61 percent of surveyed men admit to sexually 
touching a woman against her will. 
 1982 
 Professor Mary P. Koss of Kent State University in 
Ohio completes a scientific survey of sexual aggres-
sion and victimization. The subsequent report in a 
national magazine, Ms.,  brings widespread notice of 
the date rape problem. 
 1982 
 The New York State legislature eliminates the 
requirement that rape victim prove physical resis-
tance.
 1982 
 The Kansas Supreme Court rules that the existence 
of Rape Trauma Syndrome is relevant and admis-
sible as evidence of rape. 

Chronology 113
 1983 
 Reports of a gang rape that took place in a barroom in 
New Bedford, Massachusetts, appear in the national 
media. A 21-year-old woman, new to the neighbor-
hood, stopped at Big Dan’s Tavern for cigarettes and 
a drink on a Sunday evening. Three hours later, she 
emerged battered, partially nude, and screaming for 
help. She said that a group of men had hoisted her 
on to the bar’s pool table and raped her repeatedly 
while the rest of the men in the bar watched and 
taunted her while occasionally cheering the attack-
ers. The rapists were ultimately convicted when the 
jury refused to consider the victim’s past sexual 
history as a justification for her rape. 
 1983 
 About 4,500 men and women, some carrying plac-
ards stating “Rape is Not a Spectator Sport,” march 
outside of New Bedford city hall eight days after 
the Big Dan’s Tavern attack. The protest receives 
extensive national coverage. 
 1984 
 A 12-year-old boy who watched the Big Dan’s Tav-
ern trial on television reportedly throws a 10-year-
old girl onto a pool table in his home and sexually 
assaults her as other children watch. The incident 
becomes part of the testimony about the impact of 
“rape publicity” before a Senate Hearing Commit-
tee. The hearing examined the impact of the Big 
Dan’s rape case as well as the effect of such highly 
publicized trials on rape victims and the right of the 
press to have access to rape trials. 
 1984 
 In a random sample of 930 women in the San 
Francisco area, researcher Diana Russell finds that 
44 percent of the women surveyed had been victims 
of rape or attempted rape and that 88 percent of the 
rape victims knew their attackers. 
 1984 
 In  Weishaupt v. Commonwealth, Virginia ends the 
spousal rape exemption. The couple in question 
had been separated for about a year but had not 
filed the paperwork either to legally separate or to 
divorce. The husband is convicted and sentenced 

114 Chronology
to two years on the grounds that the couple had 
intended to divorce so the spousal exemption does 
not apply. 
 1984 
 In  People v. Liberta,  the New York Court of Appeals 
rules that the marital exemption for rape does not 
apply when a defendant is under a court order to 
stay away from his wife, and also abolishes the 
marital exemption for rape. 
 1985 
 The  Ms.  Magazine Campus Project on Sexual 
Assault, funded by the Center for Antisocial and 
Violent Behavior of the National Institute of Mental 
Health is completed. It famously finds that one in 
four college women reports having been the subject 
of an attempted or completed rape. 
 1985 
 Paul Price teaches at a North Carolina Bureau of 
Indian Affairs school from 1971 to 1985 despite 
complaints from parents. He is arrested for sexually 
assaulting boys under his care. 
 1986 
 The Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
releases a study showing that two-thirds of the 
rapes reported to rape crisis centers were commit-
ted by acquaintances. 
 1986 
 Jill Saward, also known as the Ealing Vicarage Rape 
Victim, is brutally gang-raped in the vicarage by 
two men who have broken into her home. She 
becomes one of the first rape victims in Great Brit-
ain to talk publicly about her experience. 
 1987 
 The FBI finds that John Boone, a teacher at a Bureau 
of Indian Affairs Hopi day school in Arizona, had 
sexually abused at least 142 boys but the school’s 
principal had never investigated any allegations of 
abuse.
 1987 
 The Bureau of Indian Affairs issues a policy re-
quiring sexual abuse at boarding schools to be 
reported. 
1984
(contd.)

Chronology 115
 1987 
 Law professor Susan Estrich introduces the terms 
“date rape” and “acquaintance rape” in her book 
Real Rape.  The book prompts colleges all over the 
country to hold debates on date rape to teach young 
women to be clear about their intentions and young 
men to seek consent. 
 1987 
 North Dakota becomes the first state to pass a date 
rape bill. Prior to this passage, a man who raped 
a female acquaintance could escape being charged 
with a felony if the victim was a “voluntary com-
panion” or if the couple had a previous sexual 
relationship. 
 1989 
 The Wisconsin state legislature passes a bill re-
quiring the University of Wisconsin system to 
include information on sexual assault and sexual 
harassment in student orientation programs. The 
act also requires the dean of students of each 
campus to compile statistics on such incidents on 
campus and to publicly release those statistics. 
The legislation helps inspire the Clery Act. 
 1989 
 The U.S. Supreme Court upholds the right of the 
media to repeat public information, including the 
names of rape victims, in Florida Star v. B.J.F. Nev-
ertheless, most news organizations refuse to name 
victims without their express consent. 
 1989 
 The Central Park jogger case makes national head-
lines when a female jogger is raped and nearly 
beaten to death. Some observers blame the woman 
for being out in a public park by herself but most 
Americans are deeply shocked by the attack. 
 1989 
 The Glen Ridge rape case raises questions about the 
“boys will be boys” attitude and the leniency shown 
toward popular athletes who sexually misbehave. 
The case begins when a mentally challenged 17-year-
old girl in Glen Ridge, New Jersey, is sexually 
assaulted in a gang rape by a group of high school 
baseball players at the home of two of the players. 

116 Chronology
Fifteen of the boys had gathered in the basement 
but six left when they realized that a sexual assault 
was in process. Of the remaining seven boys, sev-
eral watched while the others sexually assaulted 
the girl by fondling her breasts, coercing acts of 
oral sex, and penetrating her vagina with a broom 
and baseball bat. The victim, described as hav-
ing the intellectual and emotional maturity of a 
second-grader, told no one about the encounter, as 
she had been instructed. She had hoped to become 
part of the popular crowd by associating with the 
popular athletes who had attacked her. However, 
some of the boys bragged and planned a repeat 
attack to be videotaped. News of the assault soon 
spread and became a national story. Four boys 
ultimately faced trial for first-degree rape. The 
heavily publicized six-month trial in 1992 led to 
four convictions. Bryant Grober received proba-
tion and community service. Christopher Archer 
and twins Kevin and Kyle Scherzer received sen-
tences of up to 15 years. The boys appealed but lost 
and finally entered jail in 1997. All the young men 
were free by 2002. 
 1990 
 Washington becomes the first state to require pub-
lic notification when violent sexual offenders are 
released into a community. 
 1990 
 The Student Right to Know and Campus Security 
Act, also known as the Clery Act after rape victim 
Jeanne Clery, is passed. 
 1990 
 The Indian Child Protection Act is passed by Con-
gress. It creates a registry for sexual offenders in 
Indian country, mandates a reporting system, pro-
vides the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Indian 
Health Services with guidelines for doing back-
ground checks on prospective employees, and 
provides education to parents, school officials, and 
law enforcement personnel on how to recognize 
sexual abuse. Native Americans argue that the law 
is not sufficiently funded and, as a result, child 
1989
(contd.)

Chronology 117
sexual abuse rates have been dramatically increas-
ing in Indian country. 
 1991 
 The Navy’s Tailhook scandal shines a light on the 
sexual abuse of women, including female officers, 
by male naval personnel. 
 1991 
 The U.S. Supreme Court upholds the rape shield 
laws of states in Michigan v. Lucas.  A rape shield law 
prevents a victim’s sexual history from being used 
in court in an attempt to discredit her testimony. 
 1991 
 William Kennedy Smith, nephew of President John 
F. Kennedy and Massachusetts Senator Edward 
Kennedy, is charged with rape in Palm Beach, Flor-
ida. The case, which ends with Smith’s acquittal, 
becomes a media circus. 
 1992 
 Antioch College adopts a sexual assault policy 
requiring students to obtain their partner’s consent 
at every stage of a sexual encounter. The policy is 
aimed at stopping date rape. The college, in Yellow 
Springs, Ohio, has long been known as a bastion 
of liberal activism and the new policy is heavily 
mocked, especially by political conservatives. 
Many of the students, however, support it and 
regard it as seductive. 
 1992 
 Heavyweight boxer Mike Tyson is accused of date 
rape. Tyson is sent to prison for three years before 
being paroled. 
 1992 
 In a celebrated South Carolina court case, Trish 
Crawford claimed that her husband, Dale, tied her 
to her bed, terrorized her with a knife, and raped 
her. Dale Crawford had videotaped the event. He 
is acquitted by a jury who apparently believed that 
his wife enjoyed sadomasochistic sex, a conclusion 
supported by the testimony of Trish Crawford’s first 
husband. Police reports in which Dale Crawford’s 
first wife charged physical and sexual abuse are not 
admitted into court by the judge. Both Trish and 

118 Chronology
Dale Crawford discuss the case on national televi-
sion programs. 
 1992–1995 
 Bosnian women are gang raped by Serbian soldiers 
during the Bosnian War in the former Yugoslavia. 
The victims number in the thousands. 
 1993 
 The Spur Posse scandal in Lakewood, California, 
attracts national attention. A group of high school 
boys, many of whom were popular athletes, used a 
point system to compare their sexual activities with 
underage girls. The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s 
Department arrests a number of the players for vari-
ous sexual offenses. Prosecutors later drop most of 
the charges on the grounds that they were consen-
sual. Some of the Spur Posse members then go on a 
number of television talk shows to brag about and 
defend their exploits. 
 1993 
 Katie Roiphe publishes  The Morning After: Sex, Fear, 
and Feminism on Campus.  A graduate student at 
Princeton University, Roiphe attacks “rape cri-
sis feminism,” arguing that she and her Princeton 
classmates had never felt in danger of being raped. 
Roiphe blames women who charge date rape with 
failing to accept responsibility for their own choices. 
 1994 
 New Jersey passed the first Megan’s Law, requir-
ing the registration of sexually violent predators. 
The law comes in response to the kidnap, rape, 
and murder of seven-year-old Megan Kanka by her 
neighbor, Jesse Timmendequas, in the state. 
 1994 
 The Sexual Offender Act, also known as the Jacob 
Wetterling Law, is passed by Congress. A result of 
public furor over the Megan Kanka case, the law 
requires that individuals convicted of sexual crimes 
against children register their places of residence 
and employment with local law enforcement. 
 1994 
 The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement 
Act, an outgrowth of Megan’s Law, requires states 
1992
(contd.)

Chronology 119
to register sexually violent predators for 10 years 
after their release from prison and establish criminal 
penalties for those individuals who fail to register. It 
also allows victims of sex crimes tried at the federal 
level to speak at the sentencing of their attackers 
and strengthens the requirements for sexual offend-
ers to pay restitution to their victims. 
 1995 
 The Beijing [China] World Conference on Women 
passes a resolution recognizing marital rape as a 
violation of women’s rights. 
 1996 
 Mass rapes begin during the civil war in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo in Africa. 
 1995 
 Three American soldiers are accused of gang-raping 
a 12-year-old Japanese girl in Okinawa, Japan. The 
men are subsequently convicted. 
 1996 
 Congress passes the Drug-Induced Rape Preven-
tion and Punishment Act, which provides up to 
20 years imprisonment for any person who uses a 
date rape drug, such as Rohypnol, to commit a 
violent crime. 
 1997 
 Army Staff Sergeant Delmar Simpson is sentenced 
to 25 years in prison for raping female trainees. 
 1997 
United States v. Lanier involves a case in which a 
state judge is accused of sexually abusing five 
women who appeared in his court. The U.S. Su-
preme Court rules that the defendant had violated 
the right to liberty provisions of the Fourteenth 
Amendment, which includes the right to be free 
from sexually motivated physical assaults and 
coerced sexual battery. 
 1997 
 Mary Kay Le Tourneau, a 35-year-old school teacher 
and married mother, is convicted of child rape after 
engaging in sexual relations with a 13-year-old 
student. After being released from prison on pro-
bation, Le Tourneau promptly violates parole by 

120 Chronology
resuming a sexual relationship with the boy and is 
returned to prison. The couple produce two chil-
dren. 
 1998 
 In a trial of Rwandan authorities accused of war 
crimes, a United Nations tribunal declares rape to 
be a crime of genocide. The declaration is the first to 
make such a designation. 
 1998 
 Playwright Eve Ensler’s  The Vagina Monologues
opens. The play, which is an effort at consciousness-
raising, features interviews with a variety of women 
about the experiences of having a vagina. Rape is 
part of this experience. The play becomes an enor-
mous hit, playing to massive sold-out crowds for 
the next few years. 
 2000 
 Muslim Lebanese immigrant men under the lead-
ership of Bilal Skaf brutally gang rape four non-
Muslim women in Australia. Skaf and the other 
men are convicted and jailed for long terms. The 
rapes inflame tensions between Muslims and 
non-Muslims. 
 2002 
 Government soldiers from Myanmar, formerly 
known as Burma, are charged by human rights 
workers with raping at least 625 women and girls 
who belong to the rebel Shan tribe 
 2002 
 The Catholic Church is rocked by several sexual 
scandals involving priests who abused boys under 
their care. In many of the cases, the abuse continued 
for years, with the Church hierarchy protecting the 
offenders. 
 2002 
 Mukhtar Mai is gang raped in her Pakistan home-
town on the orders of the village council. The 
episode becomes an international cause célèbre. 
 2003 
 The Prison Rape Elimination Act becomes law. It 
protects federal, state, and local prisoners from 
sexual assault. The problem of male rape in prisons 
1997
(contd.)

Chronology 121
had previously been treated as a joke with remarks 
about “don’t drop the soap” often eliciting general 
merriment. The legislation helped change the 
perception of prison rape from a joke to a human 
rights concern. 
 2003 
 In  Lawrence v. Texas,  the U.S. Supreme Court rules 
that sodomy between consenting adults is not a 
criminal act. In Bowers v. Hardwick  in 1986, the Court 
had found that states could prohibit sodomy on 
the grounds that there was no constitutional right 
to sexual privacy. The decision decriminalizes sex 
between gay men. 
 2003 
 University of North Dakota student Dru Sjodin 
is kidnapped, raped, and murdered by registered 
sex offender Alfonso Rodriquez, Jr. Six months 
earlier, Rodriquez had been released from prison 
after serving 23 years for attempting to kidnap 
and stabbing a woman. He is also a convicted rap-
ist. Since Sjodin’s body was found in Minnesota, 
Rodriquez crossed state lines. He is convicted of 
federal rape charges and sentenced to death. 
 2006 
 The Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act, 
named after a murdered Florida boy, requires the 
Justice Department to establish a national sex 
offender database, subsequently named the Dru 
Sjodin National Sex Offender Public Website, 
that allows users to specify a search radius across 
state lines. The website includes data about all 50 
states, the District of Columbia, and Guam. The 
Walsh Act also strengthens federal penalties for 
sex crimes against children and provides funding 
to combat the sexual exploitation of minors on the 
internet. 
 2007 
 Sheik Taj Din al-Hilali, the most senior Muslim 
cleric in Australia, delivers an infamous Rama-
dan sermon in which he likens women who do 
not wear the veil to uncovered meat that attracts 
predators. 

This page intentionally left blank 

123
 5 
 Biographies 
 T
he rate of burnout among people who deal with the worst as-
pects of humanity is quite high. Activists who address sexual 
crimes are not an exception to this rule. The individuals listed 
below have played significant roles in the fight against sexual 
crime. A few have an international focus, while others are active 
only in their home countries. Some of the individuals are still 
working to stop sex crimes while others have moved on to other 
issues or have died. 
 Paul Martin Andrews (1960– ) 
 Paul Martin Andrews, who was kidnapped and repeatedly 
raped as a 13-year-old by a man who had twice been convicted of 
sexual crimes against children, led Virginia’s campaign to keep 
child molesters in prison past their scheduled release dates. In 
January 1973, Richard Alvin Ausley kidnapped Andrews in Vir-
ginia. Eight days later, when Ausley went for groceries, Andrews 
screamed for help. Hunters found the boy buried in a plywood 
box four feet underground in remote Nansemond County. The 
box was four feet wide, four feet deep, and eight feet long. An-
drews, who had partially forced the box open to yell for help, had 
a broken nose and two black eyes. He was attached to the box by 
a chain around his ankle. Andrews had been raped two and three 
times a day for the eight days. 
 Ausley had an extensive criminal record that dated to at least 
1961, when he was convicted of abduction and kidnapping in 
Suffolk Circuit Court. According to court records, Ausley went to 

124 Biographies
a recreation center one afternoon and asked a 10-year-old boy to 
help him fix his car. Ausley drove the boy to a secluded area and 
sodomized him. For the attack on Andrews, Ausley received 
48 years in prison. 
 Ausley had spent 30 years behind bars when he was sched-
uled to be released on parole in 2003. Andrews found out about 
the scheduled release two months before Ausley would sup-
posedly see freedom. Andrews, a computer technician in North 
Miami, Florida, immediately began campaigning to keep Ausley 
in prison. Most of Andrews’s friends knew nothing about this 
part of his past and he broke his secrecy somewhat reluctantly. 
He acted to persuade the Virginia legislature to provide the 
money to enforce the Sexually Violent Predators Act passed in 
1999. This legislation, intended to keep violent sexual predators 
in civil custody at a treatment center past their parole date or 
prison sentence if medical and correctional officials believed that 
they presented a danger to others, had not been carried out be-
cause of a lack of money to provide the necessary housing and 
treatment. 
 Andrews’s persistent lobbying persuaded lawmakers to fund 
the program. He also persuaded a man who had been molested 
by Ausley as a teenager in 1972 to come forward. In August, 2003, 
Ausley was convicted of molesting this victim and received an 
additional five years in prison. In January 2004, Ausley died at 
the age of 64 after being strangled and beaten in Sussex I Prison 
in Waverly, Virginia. Andrews admitted to being very conflicted 
about Ausley’s death but added that nobody deserved to be 
murdered. 
 Joanne Archambault (n.d.) 
 Joanne Archambault, a retired San Diego police sergeant 
who headed the city’s sexual assault unit for 17 years, is the 
founder of SATI (Sexual Abuse Training and Investigations) 
and a lecturer on sexual assault. Archambault focuses on pro-
viding victim-centered, multidisciplinary training, and expert 
consultation about sexual assault. She particularly seeks to 
raise awareness about rape that does not fit the image of “real 
rape.” 

Barbara Blaine 125
 Archambault has warned that even authorities with the best 
of intentions and best training still struggle to formulate effective 
policy to stop sexual assaults. The problem of sex crime is mul-
tifaceted, making it very challenging to address effectively. She 
advises individuals to take steps to protect themselves. While 
speaking at the International Domestic Violence and Sexual As-
sault Conference in Australia in 2003, Archambault reminded 
the audience that women who got drunk or took drugs were more 
likely to be attacked. Women who fear drink-spiking with date 
rape drugs do not realize that this is relatively uncommon. 
Archambault argues that hysteria about drink-spiking could 
help perpetuate beliefs that women were only raped or sexu-
ally assaulted by strangers. 
 Barbara Blaine (n.d.) 
 Barbara Blaine founded Survivors Network of those Abused by 
Priests (SNAP) in 1988 to advocate for people sexually abused by 
Catholic clergy. Blaine, a native of Toledo, Ohio, experienced re-
peated sexual abuse at the hands of her parish priest as a child. 
Overcome by guilt and shame, Blaine did not tell anyone about 
the abuse for several years, until the statute of limitations had 
passed. Meanwhile, the priest found other victims. Once made 
aware of the situation, church officials declined to take any action 
against the priest. 
 The entire experience left Blaine with a strong interest in 
advocating for children. She earned a BA from St. Louis Univer-
sity and an MS in social work from Washington University in St. 
Louis. She spent some time as a schoolteacher in Jamaica and 
working with homeless youths in Chicago. Blaine then received 
a divinity degree from Catholic Theological Seminary in Chicago 
and a law degree from DePaul University School of Law. As an at-
torney, Blaine specialized in children’s rights as a public guardian 
for Cook County, Illinois. 
 SNAP is the oldest organization for victims of clergy sexual 
abuse. At the time that Blaine created it, few people were even 
aware of clergy sexual abuse. She formed the group because of 
the refusal of the Catholic Church to admit clergy abuse and the 
attempts by high-ranking clergy to cover up examples of such 

126 Biographies
abuse. Blaine saw SNAP as a means of helping herself confront 
and heal the pain that she had suffered because of the actions of 
Catholic officials. 
 The first SNAP meetings were held in south Chicago in a 
Catholic Worker homeless shelter that Blaine had operated for 
10 years. The organization gradually grew by word-of-mouth 
and small advertisements. Yet by 2002, it still remained quite 
small. In January of that year, the sexual abuse scandal began 
to shake the Catholic Church. SNAP suddenly received a lot of 
attention and its membership jumped. By 2009, it had more than 
8,000 members and 60 chapters throughout the United States, 
Canada, and Mexico. 
 Nearly half of SNAP’s members are women, yet males have 
received the vast amount of attention as victims of clergy abuse. 
It is likely that female victims have been undercounted. Blaine 
and SNAP have lobbied Roman Catholic leaders in the United 
States to request that state legislatures remove the statutes of 
limitations that often block the prosecution of abusive priests. 
Removal of the limitation on prosecution would likely prompt 
more victims, including women, to come forward. SNAP also 
seeks national legislation that would require clergy members 
to notify civil authorities when abuse has occurred. In 2002,  Ms.
magazine chose Blaine as one of its “women of the year” for her 
work on clergy sexual abuse. 
 Yosef Blau (n.d.) 
 Yosef Blau, an Orthodox Jewish rabbi, is the most prominent 
member of the Jewish religious community to speak out against 
sexual abuse by clergy members. Blau received a BA in 1959 from 
Yeshiva University, the largest and best-known school of higher 
education for Orthodox Jews, in New York City. He earned an MS 
from Yeshiva in 1960 before being ordained at Yeshiva’s Rabbi 
Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary (RIETS) in 1961. Blau spent 
several years working with children as an assistant principal 
and principal before returning to Yeshiva in 1977. He serves as 
the mashgiach ruchai , or spiritual guidance counselor, at the uni-
versity. Very active in the Jewish religious community, Blau has 
served as national president of Yavneh, the National Religious 
Jewish Students Association, and as officer in the National Con-
ference of Yeshiva Principals. 

Stephen Donaldson 127
 Blau, a member of the Rabbinical Council of America 
(RCA) who has lectured internationally on the meaning of the 
Torah, has also served on the Orthodox Caucus. The latter is a 
coalition of rabbis, professionals, and lay leaders who devise 
responses within Jewish law to challenges facing contempo-
rary Orthodox Jews. In this capacity, Blau has addressed the 
sexual abuse of Orthodox girls by rabbis. The Jewish com-
munity has had the same problem as the Catholics and other 
religious groups with sexually abusive clergy. In 2002, the 
RCA passed a resolution to provide therapeutic support to 
misbehaving rabbis and to aid rabbis who are falsely accused 
of sexual abuse. Blau publicly commended the resolution 
and stated that, in some situations, one accusation would be 
enough to expel a rabbi from the RCA. Blau has also spoken 
for the Orthodox Jewish community in the cases of Baruch 
Lanner, Mordechai Gafni, Matis Weinberg, and Mordecai 
Tendler. All four men were rabbis who molested female stu-
dents. 
 Carol Bohmer (n.d.) 
 Carol Bohmer is an academic who has brought considerable 
attention to the problem of sexual assault on campuses. A na-
tive of New Zealand, Bohmer earned a BA in 1965 from Victoria 
University in Wellington, New Zealand. After receiving a LLM 
from Victoria, she earned a diploma in criminology from Cam-
bridge University in 1968 before picking up a PhD in sociology 
from the University of Pennsylvania in 1975. 
 Currently a Visiting Associate Professor at Dartmouth Uni-
versity, Bohmer teaches about the law and public policy as well 
as gender and the law. She coauthored  Sexual Assault on Campus: 
The Problem and the Solution  with Andrea Parrot in 1993. The book 
became a classic. After publishing on sexual exploitation by pro-
fessionals, Bohmer shifted focus in 2004 to address the problems 
of would-be immigrants seeking asylum. 
 Stephen Donaldson (1946–1996) 
 Stephen Donaldson worked to stop prison rape. Born Robert A. 
Martin, Jr., he served in the U.S. Navy during the Vietnam War. 

128 Biographies
Soon after receiving his discharge and newly converted to the 
pacific Quaker faith, Donaldson took part in a Quaker pray-in on 
the White House lawn in August 1973 to protest the bombing of 
Cambodia. Arrested for trespassing, he refused on principle to 
post $10 in bail. Donaldson was sent to a Washington, DC jail for 
two days. 
 Placed in overcrowded wing of the jail with hardened crimi-
nals, Donaldson later described himself as “fresh meat.” During 
the two days that he was jailed, the 26-year-old Donaldson was 
gang raped approximately 60 times. He stopped counted after 50. 
By that point, he was being sold to other convicts for a pack of 
cigarettes a time. He received no medical treatment, not even an 
aspirin from jail authorities. When he left the jail, he spent a week 
in the hospital and required surgery. Donaldson described the 
ordeal at a press conference and provided testimony before the 
DC Council. 
 Donaldson formed Stop Prison Rape in 1973. Nicknamed 
“Donny the Punk,” Donaldson became the foremost spokes-
person against prison rape. (In prison jargon, which comes 
from baseball, the aggressor in a rape is the Pitcher, and the 
victim is the Catcher, or the Punk.) A skilled writer as well 
as speaker, he appeared in the  New York Times, USA Today, 
Los Angeles Times, Boston Globe,  and the TV news magazine 
60 Minutes.
 In 1994, he merged Stop Prison Rape into the newly 
founded Just Detention International (JDI). The organization 
helped prison rape survivors file lawsuits for damages, locate 
expert testimony, and participate in class action suits against 
negligent institutions. In that same year, Donaldson also coor-
dinated JDI’s friend of the court brief for the 1994 Supreme Court 
case on prisoner rape , Farmer v. Brennan.  In this case, the Court 
ruled that prison officials could be held liable for failing to pro-
tect a prisoner from violence when they knew that there was a 
substantial risk of harm. In 1996, Donaldson became involved 
in a lawsuit against the Communications Decency Act (CDA). 
The legislation, created to ban pornography on the Internet, 
restricted access to the sometimes explicit accounts of rape 
posted on the JDI website. Donaldson used such accounts to 
garner empathy for prison rape victims and to illustrate the ter-
rors of rape. He also used an audio tape of a prison rape as part 
of a JDI education and training package for prison administra-
tors. The Supreme Court ruled the CDA to be unconstitutional 

Mark Dratch 129
in 1997. Donaldson had died a year earlier in New York City of 
AIDS at the age of 49. 
 Mark Dratch (1958– ) 
 Rabbi Mark Dratch is the founder of JSAFE, the Jewish Institute 
Supporting an Abuse-Free Environment. Dratch, born in 1958, 
earned a BA from Yeshiva University. He then received an MS 
in Jewish Education from Yeshiva before being ordained in 1982 
at the university’s Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary. 
Dratch spent 22 years serving congregations in New York City, 
Boca Raton, Toronto, and Stamford, Connecticut. He left his last 
post at Stamford’s Congregation Agudath Sholom, the largest 
Orthodox Jewish synagogue in New England, to lead JSAFE. 
 Dratch, a member of the Clergy Task Force on Abuse of Jew-
ish Women International and chair of the Rabbinical Council of 
America’s (RCA) Task Force on Rabbinic Improprieties, has a long 
history of acting to stop the abuse of women. While in Brooklyn in 
the late 1980s, Dratch had a conversation with a pediatrician who 
discussed her difficulties in helping victims of child abuse with 
the Orthodox community as well as the obstacles being placed in 
her way by rabbis. Dratch, angered by the response of the religious 
community, began trying to shift attitudes about child abuse and 
domestic violence. In 1990, Dratch wrote an article on child abuse 
for the RCA. In response to the essay, he faced condemnation for 
airing dirty laundry in public and for hillul Hashem , or desecrating 
God’s name. He gradually moved into the area of sexual abuse. 
 Dratch, who felt that it was an affront to God not to address 
the issue, had to wait years for acceptance by the RCA. Most Jew-
ish leaders denied that there was a problem until several scandals 
made the issue unavoidable. In 2002, Dratch developed a resolu-
tion on sexual abuse for the RCA that helped set guidelines for 
how the organization would respond to rabbis accused of sexual 
abuse. Jews are barred from  mesirah , or informing on other Jews to 
outsiders, but the resolution written by Dratch stated that protect-
ing someone from abuse does not qualify as  mesirah.  Dratch has 
no formal training in the topic of preventing abuse. His knowl-
edge comes from reading, discussions with professionals, and 
from counseling women who were victims of abuse. 
 Dratch worked with The Awareness Center until a dispute 
with Vicki Polin over publicizing accusations of sexual abuse 

130 Biographies
sparked his exit. With JSAFE, Dratch aims to create a national 
certification program that would train principals, teachers, and 
administrators to recognize signs of abuse in schools and syna-
gogues. He aims to maintain the integrity of Judaic law while 
stopping sexual abuse within the Orthodox Jewish community. 
 Susan Estrich (1952– ) 
 Susan Estrich is a professor of law, a political commentator, and 
a rape survivor who authored the classic book,  Real Rape.  Born in 
1952 in Lynn, Massachusetts, Estrich grew up outside of Boston in 
Swampscott, Massachusetts. Her father had a one-man law prac-
tice in a nearby town while her mother worked as an assistant in 
a doctor’s office. In 1974, she graduated from Wellesley College 
with a BA. While attending Harvard University Law School with 
the help of loans and scholarship money, Estrich became the first 
woman president of the prestigious  Harvard Law Review.
 Upon receiving her magna cum laude degree in 1977, she 
gained some fame as a clerk for Supreme Court Justice John Paul 
Stevens by wearing blue jeans to work. In 1984, Rep. Geraldine 
Ferraro appointed Estrich to serve as executive director of the 
Democratic National Platform Committee, where she got high 
marks for the skill she showed in juggling the competing inter-
ests of three campaigns and 200 committee members. When Vice 
President Walter Mondale became the Democratic nominee, 
Estrich became a senior policy adviser. In 1988, she became the 
first woman to serve as a national campaign manager with the 
Dukakis-Bentsen campaign. When Dukakis lost, Estrich returned 
to her tenured post at Harvard Law School and found a sideline 
as a political commentator for newspapers and television shows. 
Estrich is currently Robert Kingsley Professor of Law and Politi-
cal Science at the University of Southern California. 
 During her senior year at Wellesley, Estrich was raped by an 
unknown assailant. She was attacked in an alley behind her apart-
ment building in Boston as she was struggling out of a car carrying 
two bags of groceries. The man held an ice pick to her throat and 
threatened to kill her. It took Estrich a long time to recover. In 1986, 
she wrote about the attack in the  Yale Law Journal , using it as an in-
troduction to an article that called for reform of the criminal justice 
system’s handling of rape, particularly so-called date rape. The 
article was the final piece in her bid for tenure at Harvard, and it 

Bakira Hasecic 131
was considered a risky choice because no one discussed rape. The 
article eventually became the book, Real Rape.  Estrich has made a 
career out of rape in part because in law school she recalled spend-
ing a lot of time talking about larceny and assault but not rape. 
When she began teaching in 1981, she taught about rape. 
 Bakira Hasecic (n.d.) 
 Bakira Hasecic, a Bosnian victim of rape, is president of Women 
Victims of War. The Bosnian War of 1992–1995 grew out of the 
breakup of the former Yugoslavia. When the multiethnic Yugo-
slavian province of Bosnia-Hercegovina sought independence, 
some Bosnian Serbs objected. Ostensibly to protect the Bosnia 
Serb minority, Serbia sent them guns and the civil war began. 
Thousands of Bosnian women, including Hasecic, were raped 
as part of the war. Hasecic suffered rape in 1992 in her eastern 
Bosnian hometown of Vilina Vlas, Visegrad, by Bosnian Serb 
soldiers. 
 Hasecic responded to the attack by fighting back through 
Women Victims of War. For Hasecic, the Bosnia War is not over 
as long as the individuals who committed war crimes are still at 
large. She has publicly called for victims, witnesses, and families 
of victims to refuse to forgive and forget. She argues that the sur-
vival of Bosnia-Hercegovina requires fighting to have the truth of 
the civil war made known. The Association of Women Victims of 
War does not believe that Serbs and Croats should receive equal 
victim status with Bosnians, chiefly because Bosnians were the 
targets of an attempted genocide. 
 Hasecic and her group have clashed frequently with authori-
ties in Bosnia-Hercegovina. When the War Crimes Department of 
Bosnia-Hercegovina Court sentenced Serbian Nedjo Samardzic 
to 12 years in prison for war crimes against humanity in 2006, 
Hasecic objected to the short sentence. Samardzic, the first indi-
vidual to be sentenced for war crimes by the Bosnia-Hercegovina 
Court, was convicted of committing multiple rapes and holding 
women in sexual slavery. Hasecic declared that she no longer 
trusted the Bosnia-Hercegovina Court to try war crime suspects, 
while the Association of Women Victims of War demanded that 
the crime of rape be removed from the jurisdiction of the Bosnia-
Hercegovina Court. The effort did not succeed. 

132 Biographies
 In 2007, Women Victims of War joined the Bosnia-Hercegovina 
Association of Former POW Camp Inmates and the Movement 
of Mothers of the Srebrenica and Zepa Enclaves to file lawsuits 
against Serbia and Croatia for the abuse of women, the torture of 
prisoners, and the loss of loved ones. The case is still unresolved 
as of 2009. Meanwhile, in 2009, Hasecic and her organization were 
fined for placing a memorial on a bridge in Visegrad to the 3,000 
citizens killed in the city during the war. Women Victims of War 
objected to the fines on the grounds that the Visegrad Municipal 
Court had never sentenced the perpetrators of crimes, but only 
the victims. The organization also suggested that the government 
was attempting to rewrite history to remove war crimes. 
 Mukhtar Mai (1972– ) 
 Mukhtar Mai is the survivor of a gang rape in Pakistan who 
publicly demanded the prosecution of her attackers and, in the 
process, created an international scandal about Pakistan’s treat-
ment of women. Mai was born in 1972 in the village of Meer-
wala in the southern Punjab section of Pakistan. The province is 
known for being especially poor and rural. 
 On June 22, 2002, Salma Mastoi, a 20-year-old Meerwala 
girl from the Mastoi Baloch clan, encountered Mai’s 15-year-old 
brother, Shakoor, a member of the Tatla Gujjar clan, in a field. It 
is not clear what happened between the two but Mastoi claimed 
rape. At nightfall, the Tatla clan delivered Shakoor’s oldest sister, 
Mai, to the Mastoi men to atone for her brother’s “disrespect.” 
There are conflicting versions of Mai’s role at this point. She was 
either brought to beg pardon for her brother or her family had 
agreed to give her away in marriage to Salma’s brother to com-
pensate for the rape. The practice, known as vani,  of giving away 
a girl as a drudge bride to compensate for the crime of a male 
relative is aimed to save the relative from jail or a death sentence. 
Salma’s relatives claim that they did not go to the police about the 
rape because the matter had been handled through  vani. Mai was 
then sexually assaulted by at least one man in revenge. The attack 
had been authorized by a tribal council to restore the honor of the 
Mastoi clan. 
 Mai pursued charges against 14 men accused of cooperating 
in her sexual assault. On July 1, 2002, a local journalist reported 
that a woman had been gang-raped on the orders of an informal 

Betty Makoni 133
tribal court, as atonement for her teenage brother’s behavior. The 
story initially met with disbelief from Western journalists but it 
also fit their perceptions that brutality against women was ram-
pant in rural Pakistan. Facing international castigation, Pakistani 
President Musharraf took the unprecedented step of giving Mai 
500,000 rupees (US$8,300) in compensation within three days 
of the first press report. The amount is more than 160 times the 
average monthly wage. The men accused of attacking Mai and 
abetting the crime were convicted and sent to death row in 2002. 
However, in 2005, Pakistan’s High Court acquitted most of the 
men on appeal. They returned to a festive homecoming in the 
village where Mai still lives. 
 By this time, Mai had come under heavy attack in Pakistan. 
Critics condemned her for being a divorcee and, therefore, not 
sexually pure. She faced accusations that she had talked too much 
about something that should remain secret, that she had tarnished 
Pakistan’s image, and that she had allowed herself to be used by 
people who were just seeking money. Doubts about Mai’s truth-
fulness have become widespread in Pakistan. She has received 
death threats, and, at one point, was banned from leaving the 
country. Undeterred by the attacks and determined to save the 
next generation of girls, Mai has used her notoriety to raise funds 
to set up schools for girls and health clinics for women. 
 Betty Makoni (n.d.) 
 Betty Makoni is the founder of the Zimbabwe Rape Survivors 
Association and the Girl Child Network. As a six-year-old in 
1977, Betty Hazviperi Makoni sold tomatoes and candles in Chi-
tungwiza, near Zimbabwe’s capital. One night, a neighbor lured 
her and three other girls, ages 10, 12 and 14, into his shop and 
raped them. The man held to the folk belief that if you take the 
blood of virgins and smear it over the walls of your business, 
then your fortunes will multiply. Zimbabwe, then known as 
Rhodesia, was under white rule and blacks like Makoni had no 
access to the police. 
 After attending college, Makoni returned to Chitungwiza to 
teach at a high school. One day, a 13-year-old girl told her she 
had been raped by her mother’s boyfriend. Soon, other girls 
came forward, and Makoni started a club to counsel the group 
of 10. The next week, 50 girls showed up. There are now 35,000 

134 Biographies
Zimbabwean girls in such clubs, part of the Girl Child Network 
that Makoni founded in 1999. She aims to create a culture that 
prevents sexual abuse and to better the place of women in the 
world. As a result of the efforts of the Girl Child Network, Zim-
babwean boys behave more cautiously, refraining from taunting 
girls at their first signs of puberty for fear of disciplinary action 
at school. Her efforts have also helped jail men for abuses. 
 The rapidly deteriorating economic and political condi-
tions in Zimbabwe have affected Makoni’s activism. In 2007, 
she was arrested for smuggling in foreigners to cover the coun-
try’s crisis without accreditation. In reality, Makoni had helped 
two Americans to film a documentary on the Girl Child Net-
work. A few months after this incident, Makoni won the World 
Children’s Prize for the Rights of the Child. 
 Meanwhile, an increasing number of Zimbabwean women 
were being raped as a penalty for supporting the opposition po-
litical party in a hotly contested presidential election. In 2008, 
Makoni responded to these attacks by creating the Zimbabwe 
Rape Survivors Association (ZRPS). The organization records 
women’s politically motivated rape cases, lobbies for legal 
justice, and rehabilitates rape survivors at a safe house in neigh-
boring Botswana, as many women, out of fear of retribution, are 
too scared to testify in Zimbabwe. ZRPS works with a team of 
lawyers from the U.S.-based AIDS-Free World to gather evidence 
and seek legal recourse through international or regional courts. 
ZRPS does not trust the Zimbabwean courts because the country 
has no history of trying cases of human rights violations in a 
transparent manner. ZRPS has assisted some 150 rape survivors 
with 20 women providing affidavits against men, mostly army 
officers. No cases have come to court as of 2009. As another way 
of helping rape victims, Makoni has lobbied for passage of the 
International Violence Against Women Act, which aims to inte-
grate U.S. efforts to end gender-based violence into U.S. foreign 
assistance programs. 
 Somaly Mam 
(b. 1970 or 1971– ) 
 Somaly Mam, a Cambodian sold into prostitution as a young 
girl, co-founded Acting for Women in Distressing Situations 

Somaly Mam 135
(AFESIP) in 1997 to combat sexual slavery. Born about 1970 
or 1971 in the village of Bou Sra in the Mondulkiri province 
of northeastern Cambodia near the Vietnam border, Mam 
has no memories of her parents, who left her with her mater-
nal grandmother. Her father was Khmer but her mother was 
Phnong and lineage is determined through the mother. Mam 
is Phnong, part of a group of dark-skinned mountain people 
who are commonly viewed as ugly savages by the dominant 
Khmer of Cambodia. The stereotype made Mam into a target 
for physical and emotional abuse through the first part of her 
life. 
 Given a home by a village couple, the husband either gave 
or sold Mam at the age of about 10 to an older Cambodian man 
visiting the area. He took her to Thloc Chhroy to work as his do-
mestic servant. He frequently beat Mam, who realized that she 
could expect no help from anyone. When she was just entering 
puberty, he sold her virginity to a Chinese merchant in exchange 
for the forgiveness of a debt. Mam never told anyone about the 
rape because, as she later explained, Cambodian people do not 
discuss such things. When she was about fourteen, her grandfa-
ther gave her to another man, to whom he owed money, in an 
arranged marriage. Mam’s husband beat her frequently and then 
disappeared. In 1986, Mam’s grandfather then sold her to a brothel 
in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital. Two girls in the brothel 
were killed by the owners for failing to obey. Others, including 
Mam, were tortured by electrodes hooked up to a battery, and 
frequently beaten. Mam, who had already learned to go numb, 
shut off all feeling. 
 About 1991, Mam managed to escape the brothel. Most girls 
do not. She lived with a French national, Pierre Legros, whom 
she married in 1993. The couple briefly lived in Paris where 
Mam worked as a house cleaner before returning to Cambodia. 
The couple worked in a Doctors Without Borders clinic where 
Mam worked as an assistant to the team that treated sexually 
transmitted diseases. She began distributing condoms to prosti-
tutes to help stem the spread of diseases. Most of the girls were 
debt slaves, who had been sold by their parents to brothels to 
pay back a loan. The first girl that Mam rescued was a 16-year-
old who had worked as a prostitute for a year. Mam took her to 
a tailor who had agreed to train girls as seamstresses. 
 Realizing that girls seeking to leave prostitution needed hous-
ing, Mam created Acting for Women in Distressing Situations in 

136 Biographies
1996. She picked a name that had no obvious connection with 
prostitution to avoid attracting attention. With funds from 
Save the Children UK, she opened a home for girls. As pimps 
threatened her life, Mam received increasing international no-
tice as well as money from the United Nations and European 
Union. AFESIP expanded into Vietnam in 2002. While the or-
ganization is well-established, it still struggles mightily for 
funding, especially since the demand is so great. Cambodia is 
estimated by Mam to have at least 40,000 child prostitutes. In 
2007, she founded the Somaly Mam Foundation to help raise 
funds for AFESIP. Mam, who is very active in the Asian wom-
en’s movement, has received numerous international honors 
such as the World Children Award and being named as a CNN 
Hero. 
 Trisha Meili (1960– ) 
 Trisha Meili went for a jog one night in 1989 and wound up as 
the poster child for random, violent sexual assault. Patricia Meili 
was born and raised in Paramus, New Jersey, and Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania. She attended Wellesley College in Massachusetts 
as an economics major. She then earned both an MBA. and an 
MA. from Yale University. Meili went to work as an associate at 
the Wall Street investment bank of Salomon Brothers. Her golden 
life nearly ended when she decided to run through Central Park 
in New York City after 9  P.M. on April 19, 1989. 
 About the same time that Meili began her jog, a group of 
40 young black males had entered the park with the intent of 
mugging, robbing, scaring, and beating anyone who crossed 
their paths. Police records show that the men attacked and 
robbed a homeless man, accosted a couple on a tandem bicycle, 
and assaulted two male joggers. The attacks were so extensive 
and so vicious that the term “wilding” was coined to explain 
the behavior. Meili was found in the early morning hours, 
gagged, comatose, suffering from exposure, with her left eye 
torn from its socket and with 75 percent blood loss as well as 
severe brain damage. She was only identified by a distinctive 
ring that she wore. Doctors at Metropolitan Hospital believed 
that Meili would die. The story grabbed headlines around the 
world as people contemplated what the savagery of the attack 
said about American society. 

Florence Mumba 137
 The young men were blamed for the attacks. Police arrested 
five teenagers, all either black or Latino, and charged them with 
the attack. Four of the youths confessed on videotape, providing 
graphic descriptions of their actions. The Central Park Five served 
from 7 to 11 years in prison. In December 2002, serial rapist Matias 
Rayes confessed to the crime and DNA evidence connected him 
to the attack. The cases against Kharey Wise, Kevin Richardson, 
Antron McCray, Yusef Salaam, and Raymond Santana were over-
turned. The New York Police Department continues to maintain 
that the youths were involved in the attack in some way but 
prosecutors believe that Rayes acted alone. 
 Meili remained in coma for 14 days. She has since made a 
successful recovery, although she is unable to multitask, has con-
tinuing problems with balance and coordination, and has per-
manently lost her sense of smell. She still has no memory of the 
attack. In 1995, she ran in the New York City Marathon. She has 
returned to work and tours frequently as a motivational speaker. 
 Florence Mumba (1948– ) 
 Florence Mumba, a judge from Zambia, became the first jurist 
to declare that rape qualified as a war crime. Florence Ndepele 
Mwachande Mumba was born on December 17, 1948, at Mufulira, 
Zambia. She worked as a trial attorney in Zambia before becom-
ing the director of the Department of Legal Aid in 1978. Mumba 
became a trial court judge in 1980. In 1997, she joined the Supreme 
Court of Zambia. Meanwhile, she married Nevers Mumba, who 
became vice president of Zambia in 2003. 
 Mumba has had a long interest in the human rights, partic-
ularly the rights of women. She represented Zambia in 1985 at 
the Conference on Women in Nairobi and in 1994 at the African 
Regional Conference on Women. A member of the International 
Commission of Jurists since 1993, Mumba worked with other 
legal experts on the establishment of an African Court on Human 
Rights. She represented Zambia on the United Nations Commis-
sion on the Status of Women from 1992 to 1995. 
 Mumba won election as judge of the International Crimi-
nal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in 1997. In this capac-
ity, Mumba heard testimony relating to war crimes committed 
during the Bosnia War of 1992–1995. In 2001, Mumba spoke for 
the tribunal when three Bosnian Serbs were convicted of rape 

138 Biographies
and sexual enslavement. Mumba dismissed the excuse that the 
soldiers were only following orders. Calling the men “lawless op-
portunists,” she advised them that they could expect no mercy, 
whatever their place in the chain of command. Mumba added, 
“In time of peace as much as in time of war, men of substance 
do not abuse women.” For the first time, a war crimes tribunal 
ruled that rape was a crime against humanity and that rape did 
not have to be ordered from above to rise to that highest level of 
atrocity. Such an international judgment is significant because it 
has the potential to make it easier to prosecute soldiers accused 
of rape and it may make commanders less likely to approve of 
rape as an instrument of war. 
 Victoria Polin (n.d.) 
 Vicki Polin is the founder and executive director of The Awareness 
Center, a Baltimore, Maryland-based organization that addresses 
childhood sexual abuse in Jewish communities worldwide. 
An Illinois native, Polin earned a BA in Women’s Studies from 
Roosevelt University in Chicago and then received an MA from 
the University of Illinois at Chicago. She completed her education 
at the Neve Yerushalayim School of General Jewish Studies in Je-
rusalem, Israel, and the Etz Chaim Center for Jewish Learning in 
Baltimore. She is a board certified art therapist as well as licensed 
clinical professional counselor. 
 Polin specializes in treating victims, both adults and chil-
dren, of sexual violence through creative therapies. She also has 
worked with Holocaust survivors and their children as well as 
individuals, families, and groups that have survived political 
torture and violent crimes. She has presented seminars to com-
munity and educational groups about childhood sexual abuse 
and neglect. Polin has also qualified as expert witness and pro-
vided testimony in juvenile court. With respect to volunteerism, 
Polin has served as a rape victim advocate in Chicago and a vol-
unteer speaker with a rape crisis center. She is a board member 
of Alternative Behavior Treatment Centers for juvenile sex of-
fenders. 
 Polin came up with the idea for The Awareness Center in 2001 
before incorporating the organization in Maryland in 2003. The 
center focuses on providing education and information to anyone 
concerned about sexual abuse in the Jewish community. It helps 

Kathy Redmond 139
victims of such abuse network with each other to help the healing 
process. Much of its information is available online. 
 Kathy Redmond (n.d.) 
 Kathy Redmond, the victim of an acquaintance rape by a Uni-
versity of Nebraska football player, founded the National Coali-
tion Against Violent Athletes (NCAVA) in 1998. In 1991, Katherine 
Redmond graduated from Columbine High School in Colorado. 
A Nebraska native, she became part of the fourth generation of 
her family to attend the University of Nebraska. It was the only 
college to which she had applied. She knew many of the athletic 
trainers from years of attending games and alumni events. Her 
great uncle wrote the Nebraska fight song, and her grandmoth-
er’s Russian meat-and-cabbage sandwiches were sold in the foot-
ball stadium. Redmond’s parents had founded the alumni group, 
Coloradans for Nebraska, and helped endow an annual $10,000 
scholarship.
 Within two weeks of arriving on the Lincoln campus, the 
18-year-old Redmond was raped by Christian Peter, a Nebraska 
football star now with the Giants. The 5-foot-2-inch, 120-pound 
Redmond had met the 6-foot-2-inch, 265-pound Peter, a nose 
tackle on the football team on campus. She says Peter, who could 
bench-press 450 pounds, lured her to his room and raped her. She 
recalls saying, “No.” The next day, she says, Peter pushed his way 
past dorm security and into her room, where he raped her again, 
this time with two of his teammates keeping watch. She again 
said, “No.” 
 The attack took away Redmond’s bubbly personality. She 
focused on schoolwork and worked out her anger playing club 
lacrosse. It took two years before she could form a relationship 
with a man. She eventually told her sisters, who told her mother, 
who kept it from her father for months. Bill Redmond, who had 
played baseball for Nebraska and proudly boasted of being an 
alumnus, stopped wearing his varsity ring. The attack left the 
Redmond family reeling and feeling betrayed by an institution 
that it had cherished. 
 Redmond did not report the rapes for two years, until other 
women had come forward with accusations against Peter. Red-
mond reportedly did not go to the police until after she had 

140 Biographies
met with Coach Tom Osborne, whom she knew, and had found 
him unresponsive. She later reported that she had feared that 
Nebraskans would turn her into the villain and that she would 
lose her home away from home. To an extent, her fears came 
true. Redmond received death threats and prank phone calls—
with the callers playing the Nebraska fight song. Her car was 
vandalized. Peter was never charged with assaulting Redmond, 
but he was convicted of assaulting other women and received 
18 months probation. He also picked up eight arrests with four 
convictions while at Nebraska. He was suspended for one game, 
a spring exhibition. Peter wound up playing six NFL seasons 
with the Giants, Colts, and Bears. 
 Redmond earned a BA in Journalism from Nebraska in only 
three years and found work in public relations in Denver. In July 
1995, angered by the university’s inaction and the assaults on 
other women, Redmond filed a federal Title IX sex discrimina-
tion lawsuit against the University of Nebraska. Her lawsuit 
was the first to specifically charge an institution with sexual 
discrimination caused by indifference. It sent shock waves 
through college administrations nationwide because it claimed 
they could be held financially liable for not protecting women 
on campus. Redmond received a $50,000 out-of-court settlement 
from Nebraska, along with an undisclosed settlement—but not 
an apology—from Peter. Redmond created NCAVA after the sui-
cide of a 22-year-old woman who said she was assaulted by New 
York Giants defensive back Tito Wooten. She has since become a 
frequent media commentator on athlete violence. 
 Jill Saward (1965– ) 
 Jill Saward, also known as the Ealing Vicarage Rape Victim, became 
one of the first rape victims in Great Britain to talk publicly about 
her experience. At lunchtime on a gray afternoon in March 1986, 
21-year-old Saward was watching TV in her home, in west Lon-
don, with her boyfriend, David Kerr. Meanwhile, her father, the 
Reverend Michael Saward, Vicar of Ealing, worked on a sermon in 
the study. Three armed men, high on vodka and Valium, broke into 
the vicarage looking for the cash box. They forced Saward and Kerr 
into the study with the vicar. When they discovered that the cash-
box was empty, the men forced Saward upstairs. The ringleader of 
the break-in tried to protect Saward, but the two other men took 

Jill Saward 141
turns raping her anally, vaginally, and orally. She was also sexually 
assaulted with the handle of a knife. During the attack, Saward 
could hear her father and boyfriend being beaten with cricket bats. 
She cut off emotionally and focused on detail to be able to identify 
the criminals later. Eventually, the rapists tied Saward up with a 
jump rope and dumped her on the bedroom floor. The vicar and 
Kerr were left near death with fractured skulls. 
 Since the attack took place in the Ealing Vicarage, the incident 
led to an international media storm of attention. It took three days 
for the attackers to be captured, further adding to the hysteria 
around the crime. As a rape victim, Saward had the legal right to 
remain anonymous. However, she knew that the notoriety of the 
attack would not make anonymity truly possible. Four days after 
the attack, a national newspaper named Saward. Encouraged by 
a female police officer to speak up on behalf of other rape victims, 
she went public. 
 When Saward’s attackers went to trial a year later, the judge 
proclaimed that her ordeal had been “no great trauma.” The rap-
ists received the same sentence for the rape as they did for the 
burglary—three and five years, whereas the ringleader, had who 
tried to prevent the rape, was given 14 years. As Saward later 
stated, the judge’s remark reflected enormous ignorance about 
the reality of rape and what she had gone through. She was 
angry because she expected a man with his authority to be bet-
ter informed. (Upon his retirement some years later, the judge 
apologized for his blunder.) 
 Saward, who later described herself as “rather wishy-washy” 
and without a career focus, quickly developed laser-like focus. 
Saward’s anger prompted her to become Britain’s best known 
antirape activist. She appeared in a BBC documentary about 
rape, becoming the first rape victim to talk about her experiences. 
In 1990, Saward coauthored a book with Wendy Green about her 
experiences, Rape: My Story.  Saward has spent much of her life 
demanding better treatment for rape victims and stronger deter-
rents for would-be perpetrators. She has helped to set up better 
training for police officers on issues of sexual violence, supported 
around 3,000 victims of domestic and sexual assault, and sat on 
various government bodies on rape and sexual assault. Some of 
Saward’s views are a bit controversial. She has said that women 
who dress scantily should not be surprised if they are attacked. 
 In 2008, Saward narrowly lost a race to serve in Britain’s 
Parliament. Saward ran against former Home Secretary David 

142 Biographies
Davis because he objected to a national DNA database, a tool that 
Saward regards as essential to the fight against crime, especially 
rape. As part of her campaign, dubbed “True Liberty,” Saward 
called for the justice system to take more account of the needs of 
victims than the needs of wrongdoers. Saward, who now remem-
bers the essence of the rape but not the specifics of it, married 
Gavin Drake in 1993 and lives in Liverpool with her husband and 
children. 
 Russell Dan Smith (1950– ) 
 Smith, a former federal prisoner, founded the first organization 
dedicated to protecting prisoners from sexual abuse, People 
Organized to Stop the Rape of Imprisoned Persons (POSRIP). 
Little is known about Smith’s life. Born in 1950, he was convicted 
of a juvenile offense and sent at the age of 13 to the Stonewall 
Jackson Training School in Concord, North Carolina, for two 
years. Upon his release, he promptly stole a car and was sent 
to a state prison in North Carolina. As a teenage inmate, Smith 
became prey for older and larger inmates. He suffered repeated 
rapes and became a sex slave for other prisoners. By 1973, Smith 
had moved up to federal prisons, where he found conditions to 
be worse than in the state prisons. 
 While in the U.S. Penitentiary in Terre Haute, Indiana, Smith 
began to advocate against prison rape. Perhaps not surprisingly 
considering his background, Smith advised a violent response. 
Smith founded the National Gay Prisoners Coalition while at 
Terre Haute. Sent to the federal prison at Marion, Illinois, in 1974, 
Smith was sent to the Control Unit, or long-term segregation from 
the rest of the prisoner population. Smith, who believed that ad-
ministrators sent him to the Control Unit because of his efforts 
to organize prisoners, found allies among the other men in the 
unit. Upon his release from the unit in 1976, Smith returned to 
the general prisoner population and suffered yet another rape. 
He responded violently, as he had advised others to do, but 
prison officials charged him with assault. Prisoner advocates 
then formed the International Committee to Free Russell Smith 
(ICFRS) to aid his defense. Smith left prison in 1980. 
 Smith had spent most of his life in prison. Like other long-
term prisoners, he struggled to live independently. He also 
suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder as a result of the 

Sandyawan Sumardi 143
repeated sexual assaults. Smith donated his personal papers to 
the University of Michigan and then disappeared. Other pris-
oner activists presume that he died sometime in the 1980s. 
 Shortly after his release, Smith founded POSRIP in 1980 to 
address the problems of rape, sexual assault, non-consensual 
sexual slavery, and forced prostitution within prisons in the 
United States. The group eventually merged into Stop Prisoner 
Rape, which changed its name in 2008 when it became part of 
Just Detention International. 
 Sandyawan Sumardi (1958– ) 
 Father Sandyawan Sumardi, a Jesuit priest in Indonesia, is an 
antirape activist with Volunteers for Humanity and the operator 
of the Jakarta Social Institute for the urban poor. Born in 1958 as 
the youngest son of a police chief and nurse, Sumardi grew up in 
Janeponto, South Sulawesi, in middle-class comfort. He shared 
the view of many indigenous Indonesians that they were the vic-
tims of an economic system dominated by Chinese immigrants. 
After attending seminary school in Yogyakarta, Sumardi was 
ordained as a priest in 1988. He devoted himself to alleviating 
poverty, mostly on behalf of indigenous Indonesians. 
 Sumardi organized Volunteers for Humanity in 1996 when 
he was charged with hiding prodemocracy demonstrators. He set 
up an information gathering system, to keep track of those killed, 
missing, or injured in their attempts to bring political reform under 
the former dictator Suharto. When President Suharto resigned 
from office on May 21, 1998, as the result of a tumbling economy 
and increasing political opposition, violence broke out against 
Indonesia’s ethnic Chinese minority. During the riots, ethnic Chi-
nese showed up at Sumardi’s Jakarta Social Institute office seeking 
help. Sumardi turned from seeing the Chinese as oppressors to 
seeing them as the victims of terrorism. Many of the Chinese were 
women and girls who had been raped in a systematic manner. 
 In 1998, Sumardi led a Volunteers for Humanity investigation 
that reported to the National Commission on Human Rights that 
they had 182 documented cases of gang rape committed by plain-
clothes Indonesian soldiers as part of the terror campaign against 
the ethnic Chinese. The Indonesian army and government tried to 
discredit and intimidate Sumardi. Three weeks after the riots, he 
found a live grenade in front of his office. In July 1999, a military 

144 Biographies
minivan rammed into the back of his car. Sumardi persisted, and 
eventually the Indonesia government formed a Joint Fact-Finding 
Team in 1999. However, rape victims and their families were 
harassed to the point that very few were willing to testify. Sumardi 
reported to the press that even gynecologists were being targeted 
for intimidation. Many rape victims spoke only under condition 
of anonymity, throwing doubt upon their claims. Only one vic-
tim appeared in a 1999 closed session at a United Nations sub-
commission alongside Sumardi. She did not return home because 
her family had been harassed. None of the assailants were ever 
brought to justice. Despite the difficulties in prosecuting military 
rapists, Sumardi has persisted in his humanitarian efforts. 
 John Walsh (1945– ) 
 John Walsh, who lost his son Adam to a serial killer, has played a 
pivotal role in protecting children from abduction and sexual 
assault by founding the National Center for Missing and Ex-
ploited Children. Born in 1945 in Auburn, New York, and edu-
cated at the University of Buffalo, Walsh moved to Florida with 
his wife, Revé. The couple had a son, Adam, and Walsh worked 
as a developer of luxury hotels. On July 27, 1981, Revé left Adam 
playing in the toy department at a Sears at a Hollywood, Florida, 
mall, but could not find him when she returned. Two hours after 
the disappearance, police were called. Two weeks later, Adam’s 
head was found. His body remains missing. Serial killer and 
drifter Ottis Toole eventually became the prime suspect. The po-
lice closed the case in December 2008 after Toole’s death while in 
prison for other crimes. 
 In the wake of Adam’s death, Walsh and his wife agreed 
that a lack of information and a lack of coordination among law 
enforcement agencies contributed to the difficulty in finding 
missing children. They decided that leadership on behalf of chil-
dren was urgently needed. Accordingly, they lobbied Congress 
to pass the Missing Children’s Act. Signed into law in 1982, it 
required the FBI to enter data about missing children into a 
national crime database. Prior to the passage of this legislation, 
the FBI had databases on stolen cars and stolen guns but not 
stolen children. 
 Walsh’s experiences taught him that the nation was in des-
perate need of leadership in the fight to protect children. Along 

Laura X 145
with his wife, he decided to create something positive out of per-
sonal tragedy. From the ad hoc organization they put together 
to help with the search for Adam, John and Revé established the 
Adam Walsh Child Resource Center, which eventually merged 
with the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children 
(NCMEC), which they cofounded in 1984. The NCMEC, which is 
one of the most highly rated charities in the United States because 
it spends more than 90 cents of every dollar raised on program-
ming, provides resources to parents, children, and law enforce-
ment in the United States and internationally. Meanwhile, Walsh 
became the host of the TV show,  America’s Most Wanted , which 
profiles missing criminals. 
 It is largely due to Walsh’s efforts that missing children now 
appear on milk cartons and flyers. He also played an instrumen-
tal role in persuading parents nationwide to fingerprint their chil-
dren. Walsh also spurred the creation of missing persons units at 
every large police department. In 1990, police recovered 62 per-
cent of missing kids, with the number jumping to about 96 percent 
nearly 20 years later. In 2006, on the 25th anniversary of Adam 
Walsh’s kidnapping, Congress passed the Adam Walsh Child 
Protection and Safety Act, which expanded the national registry 
of sex offenders and stiffened penalties against such abusers. 
 While Walsh’s work is generally lauded, he has also been 
criticized for creating a climate of fear. The Department of Justice 
estimates that 115 children are kidnapped annually in what are 
labeled “stereotypical” kidnappings—a stranger taking a child 
with intent to keep or harm or kill. Fewer than half of those cases 
end in deaths. By raising awareness of the threat to children in 
a somewhat hysterical way, Walsh has been faulted for creating 
enormous and perhaps unwarranted anxiety among parents and 
taking childhood away from children. 
 Laura X (n.d.) 
 Laura X, who uses this particular surname to protest the legal 
ownership of women that supports marital rape, is the director of 
the National Clearinghouse on Marital and Date Rape (NCMDR) 
in Berkeley, California. Born and raised in St. Louis, Missouri, 
Laura Murra graduated from Vassar College. She is one of the 
many women of her generation who moved from civil rights ac-
tivism to support for women’s rights, though she had long been 

146 Biographies
uneasy with the place of women in society. At age 12, Laura re-
called making a connection between her cousin being handed off 
in marriage and slave children being auctioned off. As a college 
student, Laura served as a Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) 
picket captain during the civil rights protests in Alabama in 1963. 
After arriving at the University of California at Berkeley to pursue 
a graduate degree, she participated in the famed Berkeley Free 
Speech Movement. 
 In 1968, Laura founded the Women’s History Research Cen-
ter in Berkeley, California. At the time, few recognized women’s 
history as a subject worthy of study. The connection between the 
center and the women’s liberation movement that had sparked 
its development led battered women and rape victims to the 
center’s door. No other shelter or help for such women existed. 
Meanwhile, the library published the first interviews with rape 
survivors in its journal, SPAZM.  In 1969, Laura officially adopted 
the pen name of Laura X. 
 In conversations with author Diana Russell, Laura became 
conscious of the problem of marital rape. She discovered that 
while marital rape was a crime in several other countries, the 
United States had never criminalized it. Laura, who identifies 
as a human rights activist rather than a women’s rights activ-
ist and strongly dislikes being known as single issue advocate, 
argues that marital rape is connected with all other civil and 
human rights issues. Antirape activism became a logical exten-
sion of her other activism. She began work to criminalize the 
rape of a wife by her husband. In 1980, in the wake of the suc-
cessful California campaign to criminalize marital rape, Laura 
founded the NCMDR. She then traveled across the United 
States to promote antirape legislation. When the last state 
criminalized marital rape in 1994, Laura shifted her attentions 
to the international effort to combat wife rape. She is also try-
ing to improve U.S. legislation. Some states that have crimi-
nalized marital rape have included exemptions for husbands 
who rape their unconscious or intoxicated wives. Laura X and 
NCMDR oppose these exemptions. 
 Further Reading 
 Bohmer, Carol, and Andrea Parrot.  Sexual Assault on Campus: The 
Problem and the Solution. New York: Lexington Books, 1993. 

Further Reading 147
 Curran, Bronwyn.  Into the Mirror: The Untold Story of Mukhtar Mai. New 
Delhi, India: UBS, 2008. 
 Estrich, Susan.  Real Rape: How the Legal System Victimizes Women Who Say 
No. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987. 
 Mam, Somaly.  The Road of Lost Innocence. London: Virago, 2007. 
 Walsh, John.  Tears of Rage. New York: Pocket Books, 2008. 

This page intentionally left blank 

149
 6 
 Data and Documents 
 S
exual crime has generally been a private concern through the 
ages, with government officials doing little to halt it. Only in 
the latter decades of the 20th century did it become such a 
great topic of public concern that several federal agencies, rang-
ing from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to the Centers 
for Disease Control, now study the problem. The information that 
they have gathered covers sexual crime as matter of public health 
as well as a legal offense. 
 Historical Data 
 Many women have refused to report sexual crimes out of doubt 
that they would be believed and for fear of further victimization 
by authorities. As a result, historical data about sexual crime is 
both hard to find and of questionable accuracy. 
 19th-Century Data 
 Ida B. Wells, an African American journalist who dedicated much 
of her life to stopping the lynching of blacks, published A Red 
Record: Tabulated Statistics and Alleged Causes of Lynchings in the 
United States, 1892–1894 (Chicago: Donohue & Henneberry, 1895). 
This 1894 booklet served as Wells’s attempt to recast lynching in 
the public eye so that it was no longer perceived as an under-
standable yet unpleasant response to criminal behavior but as a 
crime against American values. Wells pointed out that, contrary to 

150 Data and Documents
widespread belief, most lynchings were not in response to rapes 
of white women by black men. 
 Record for the Year 1892 
 In 1892 there were 241 persons lynched. The entire number is 
 divided among the following states: 
 Alabama, 22; Arkansas, 25; California, 3; Florida, 11; Georgia, 17; 
Idaho, 8; Illinois, 1; Kansas, 3; Kentucky, 9; Louisiana, 29; Maryland, 1; 
Mississippi, 16; Missouri, 6; Montana, 4; New York, 1; North Carolina, 
5; North Dakota, 1; Ohio, 3; South Carolina, 5; Tennessee, 28; Texas, 15; 
Virginia, 7; West Virginia, 5; Wyoming, 9; Arizona Territory, 3; Okla-
homa, 2. 
 Of this number 160 were of Negro descent. Four of them were 
lynched in New York, Ohio, and Kansas. The rest were murdered in the 
South. Five of this number were females. The charges for which they 
were lynched cover a wide range. They are as follows: 
 Rape, 46; murder, 58; rioting, 3; race prejudice, 6; no cause given, 
4; incendiarism, 6; robbery, 6; assault and battery, 1; attempted rape, 11; 
suspected robbery, 4; larceny, 1; self defense, 1; insulting women, 2; des-
peradoes, 6; fraud, 1; attempted murder, 2; no offense stated, boy and 
girl, 2. 
 Wartime Rapes 
 Rape has long been a part of warfare. It is a way to punish the 
enemy without much fear of retribution as well as a method of 
celebrating the power of the victor. Susan Brownmiller broke 
a long public silence about rape by publishing the history of 
the crime in her best-selling Against Our Will: Men, Women, and 
Rape in 1975. Brownmiller devoted a chapter of the book to rape 
in wartime. She included official U.S. government figures from 
the office of the Judge Advocate General but warned that cases 
of rape often were reduced to lesser charges before trial. The 
Army Judiciary provided no statistics on the number of convic-
tions for these lesser charges, or the number of reported rapes, 
arrests, and rape cases brought to trial to compare with the 
number of convictions. Brownmiller noted that more than two-
thirds of the convictions took place in occupied areas. When the 
fighting had ceased and military officials were seeking coopera-
tion with enemy civilians, military judges were more likely to 
convene over a case of a soldier raping an enemy woman. The 

Historical Data 151
Clerk of the Court speculated that the increase in convictions 
represented an increase in overall troop strength while the in-
crease in rapes indicated that soldiers had more time on their 
hands. Rape is a capital offense under military jurisprudence 
(Brownmiller, p. 76–77). 
 Brownmiller also obtained statistics relating to the conduct 
of U.S. Army and Air Force personnel during the Vietnam War. 
Court-martial statistics for the Navy and Marine Corps were 
not available. In Vietnam, the number of military convictions 
for rape by Army personnel was 58 percent of the number of 
cases tried, slightly higher than the civilian conviction rate at 
the time. American soldiers tended to participate more in gang 
rapes than individual rapes, perhaps as the result of being 
warned against the security dangers of individual fraternizing 
on operations. The overall personal conduct of the American 
troops proved far better than the other occupiers of French 
Indo-China: the French, their mercenaries, or the Japanese 
(Brownmiller, p. 101–103). 
 Current U.S. Military 
Policy on Rape 
 The Department of Defense has been formally investigating 
sexual harassment within the military since 1988, but it did not 
regard sexual assault as a major area of concern. In 1994, the Secre-
tary of Defense ordered the development of a sexual harassment 
policy action plan. As part of the plan, military personnel were 
surveyed in 1995 about sexual harassment and the results were 
compared to the survey findings from 1988. Although men and 
women reported less sexual harassment, fewer sexually sugges-
tive gestures, and less pressure for sexual favors, the  1995 Sexual 
Harassment Survey  found that the percentage of women  reporting 
an attempted or actual rape remained statistically steady (see 
Table 6.1).  
 In 1998, Congress required the Department of Defense to im-
prove the conduct of sex crime investigations. Members of Con-
gress and members of the military both agreed that sex crimes 
occurred in the Armed Forces with unacceptable frequency. In 
1997, the military conducted criminal investigations into over 
3,700 attacks. Accordingly, in 1999, the Panel on Military Inves-
tigative Practices recommended in  Adapting Military Sex Crime 
Investigations to Changing Times  that changes be made to improve 

152 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.1
Any Type of Unwanted Sexual Attention
Percent
Men
Women
1988
1995
1988
1995
Service
 Army
21
14
68
61
 Navy
18
16
66
53
 Marine Corps
14
15
75
64
 Air Force
14
12
57
49
 Coast Guard
16
13
62
59
 Unwanted sexual attention
Behavior
 Rape/assault, including attempts
—
—
5
4
 Pressure for Sexual favors
2
1
15
11
 Touching, cornering, pinching
9
6
38
29
 Suggestive looks, gestures
10
7
44
37
 Letters, telephone calls
3
2
14
12
 Pressure for dates
3
2
26
22
 Sexual teasing, jokes
13
10
52
44
 Whistles, calls
5
3
38
23
 Attempted sexual activities
2
2
7
7
 Other
1
1
5
5
Source: U.S. Department of Defense 1995 Sexual Harassment Survey.
sex crime investigations and to better assist the victims of such 
crimes. The panel advised that 
•  more female and minority investigators be hired to help 
military criminal investigative organizations (MCIOs) to 
better reflect the population that they serve 
 •  MCIOs develop on-call regional specialists who can 
provide expert advice on sex crime investigations and 
assistance on medical, psychological, and forensic issues 
 •  each MCIO develop a center to monitor investigations and 
assist investigators 
 •  sex crime and domestic violence units be developed which 
are familiar with family and psychological counseling as 
well as social services 
 •  opportunities for civilian investigators be increased, 
especially in specialist positions, so that military agents are 
not pigeon-holed to the detriment of their careers 

Historical Data 153
 •  the Secretary of Defense strengthen and vigorously enforce 
prohibitions against commanding officers interfering with 
investigations
 •  MCIOs continue to ban using wiretaps, electronic mon-
itoring, and polygraphing 
 •  MCIOs be given the authority to arrest civilians on military 
installations because of the increasing number of civilian 
employees on bases 
 In response to reports that victims of sexual crimes at U.S. 
military service academies were afraid to report such attacks 
because of possible retaliation or damage to their careers, Con-
gress in 2003 mandated an investigation. In the defense budget 
bill, the Secretary of Defense was required to establish a Defense 
Task Force on Sexual Harassment and Violence at the Military 
Service Academies. Of the 12 members of the committee, 6 were 
senior military personnel while the remainder came from the 
private sector and the Department of Justice. The commit-
tee assessed the efforts and effectiveness of the academies at 
preventing and responding to sexual harassment and sexual 
violence on their campuses. The first report became public on 
September 22, 2004, and it is issued annually. According to the 
2006–2007 report: 
 • 40 sexual assaults were reported by students 
 •  7 rapes were reported at the U.S. Air Force Academy in 
Colorado Springs, Colorado 
 •  7 rapes were reported at the U.S. Military Academy at West 
Point, New York 
 •  4 rapes were reported at the U.S. Naval Academy at 
Annapolis, Maryland 
 •  Half of the 40 complaints were filed under a system that 
allows military personnel to report confidentially and to 
obtain care without triggering an official investigation or 
becoming involved in the criminal justice system 
 •  Most students reported that they understood the definition 
of a sexual assault 
 •  Most students regarded sexual assault as a serious matter 
 •  Many had difficulty defining a “universally accepted 
definition” of appropriate sexual behavior 
 •  Some female students said that they would not report 
assaults for fear of career repercussions. 

154 Data and Documents
 Prostitution 
 Prostitution is often categorized as a victimless crime because it is 
assumed that no one is damaged by it. Although the definition of 
prostitution ranges from state to state, it is generally described in 
legal codes as: performing, offering, or agreeing to perform any 
act of sexual intercourse as defined by state statute or any touch-
ing of the sexual organs of one person by another person for any 
money, property, token, object, or article or anything of value, for 
the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification. 
 Accurate figures on prostitution have been difficult to obtain 
because of the often hidden aspect of the crime and definitional 
problems. The National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
dren warns that there are no reliable estimates of the number of 
prostitutes because no one has defined the concept of prostitution 
in measurable terms. 
 Sexual services offered by prostitutes include every conceiv-
able sexual act. However, most streetwalkers prefer to engage in 
fellatio or oral sex. Such an act is a favorite among customers, 
most practical for performing in a car, and quick, thereby enabling 
easier escape if police arrive on the scene. 
 Prostitution is the only sexual crime in which more female 
than male offenders are arrested. Most arrested prostitutes are 
women, with only 20 percent of prostitution arrests involving 
male prostitutes and 10 percent involving clients or “johns.” 
A disproportionate number of arrested prostitutes are women 
of color, and women of color more often receive jail sentences. 
Streetwalkers are more visible than other types of prostitutes so it 
is no surprise that 85 to 90 percent of those arrested work on the 
streets, though street work is estimated to account for only about 
20 percent of prostitution (Flowers,  Sex Crimes, 2006, p. 158, 181). 
 Child Prostitution 
 It is impossible to get an accurate count of the number of child 
prostitutes. However, in 1996, according to the Department of 
Health and Human Services, there were as many as 300,000 pros-
titutes under the age of 18 in the United States. Estimates are that 
at least one in five streetwalkers is a teenage girl. 
 The median age of juvenile prostitutes has been estimated 
at between 15.5 years and 16.9 years. Most are white, with 

Prostitution 155
studies estimating that from 60 to 80 percent of prostitutes are 
white. African American girls make up the next biggest group, 
with Native Americans and Latinas representing less than 10 
percent of prostitutes. Researchers disagree on the class back-
ground of prostitutes, with research involving larger groups 
of prostitutes indicating that most come from the middle and 
upper classes. 
 Many of these girls are homeless, missing, or runaway 
youths who have turned to prostitution as a means of survival 
in a type of prostitution known as survival sex. They have no 
other marketable skills. The National Center for Missing and 
Exploited Children estimates that up to 77 percent of youths 
involved in prostitution report running away from home at 
least once. One study indicated that more than half of youths 
involved with prostitution still lived at home while about 30 per-
cent lived in shelters or on the streets. The remainder lived with 
friends or pimps. 
 Many juvenile prostitutes have come from unstable, dysfunc-
tional homes in which they were subject to physical and sexual 
abuse as well as neglect. In studies, two out of every three female 
prostitutes reported being victims of childhood physical abuse. 
Anastasia Volkonsky, an expert on child sexual abuse, reported in 
1996 that most runaway girls turned prostitutes have experienced 
a major childhood trauma such as incest, domestic violence, or 
rape prior to entering prostitution. Most have drug or alcohol 
problems. In one study, over 80 percent of teenage prostitutes 
reported that they were already using alcohol or drugs prior to 
joining the sex trade. Some prostitutes trade sex for drugs, such 
as methamphetamine or crack cocaine (Flowers, Runaway, 2001, 
p. 53–54) 
 The vast majority of prostitutes have been introduced to 
the sex trade by a pimp and work under the supervision of one. 
About 20 percent of juvenile prostitutes enter the trade through 
their acquaintance with other streetwalkers while about 10 per-
cent became prostitutes through direct propositions by clients. 
 Male Prostitution 
 Most of the attention on prostitution has focused on women and 
girls who sell sexual favors. Females are more likely than males 
to be arrested for prostitution, but this may only reflect differ-
ences in law enforcement strategies and visibility. There may be as 

156 Data and Documents
many as 500,000 male prostitutes in the country, but the numbers 
of such boys and men are impossible to determine accurately. 
 It is known that young male prostitutes match the demo-
graphic profile of teenage girl prostitutes. They are runaways or 
throwaways, victims of physical or sexual abuse, substance abus-
ers, predominantly white, and from middle class backgrounds. 
Larger cities are more likely to have a higher proportion of boys 
involved in prostitution. 
 Male prostitutes are generally divided into categories. Hus-
tlers find male customers on the streets or in bars. They may be 
heterosexual or bisexual. Drag queen hustlers are transgendered 
individuals who dress as women and specialize in oral sex. Call 
boys obtain clients from a call book and have a more upscale clien-
tele, who are often regulars. Male escorts find customers through 
local advertising. 
 Violent Sexual Criminals 
 Sexual violence occurs when consent to sexual activity is not 
obtained or freely given. There are many types of sexual violence 
and just as many types of sexual offenders. 
 Sex Offender Data 
 Violent sexual criminals are overwhelmingly males who attack 
females. The Centers for Disease Control have determined that 
individuals who commit sexual violence are more likely to have 
sexually aggressive friends, abuse drugs or alcohol, experienced 
or witnessed violence as a child, and live in an environment that 
supports sexual violence. 
 The Bureau of Justice Statistics compiles data about crime 
and victimization. The Bureau, a branch of the Department of Jus-
tice, has gathered information about imprisoned sexual offenders. 
Many of its reports, like the one excerpted below, are only issued 
periodically. 
 Convicted Sex Offenders 
 •  Over 234,000 convicted sex criminals were in some form 
of custody in 1994. The majority of these offenders were 
under conditional supervision in their communities. 

Victim Data 157
 •  The victims of convicted sexual criminals are typically 
young. Victims of all sexual crimes averaged less than 
13 years old, while rape victims averaged 22 years. 
 •  Many sexual criminals are repeat offenders. About 24 
percent of those imprisoned for rape and 19 percent of 
those imprisoned for sexual assault were been on probation 
or parole at the time that they committed the sexual crime 
for which they were jailed. 
 •  Of the 9,691 male sex offenders released from prisons in 
15 selected states in 1994, 5.3 percent were arrested for 
committing another sex crime within three years of release. 
 •  Of released sex offenders who were convicted of committing 
another sexual crime, 40 percent attacked within a year or 
less from the date of their prison discharge. 
 Child Molesters 
 •  Criminals who target children have the same recidivism 
rate as those who target adults. About 3.3 percent of child 
molesters were rearrested for another sex crime against a 
child within 3 years of release from prison. 
 •  It is estimated that 16 percent of rape victims are under 
age 12. This is a conservative estimate, based only upon 
rapes reported to law enforcement officials. Many rapes are 
not reported, meaning that the number may be far higher. 
 •  Most child molesters are relatives of their victims, with 
46 percent of victims and 70 percent of convicted child 
rapists related in some manner to their victims. 
 •  About 1 in 5 victims under age 12 is raped by his or her 
father. 
 •  60 percent of child molesters released from prison in 1994 had 
been jailed for molesting a child 13 years old or younger. 
 •  Child molesters tend to be older than the rapists who target 
adults. Nearly 25 percent of child molesters were age 40 
or older, but about 10 percent of the inmates with adult 
victims fell in that age range. 
 Victim Data 
 Sexual violence affects public health because of both the emo-
tional and physical effects of the crime. Victims of sexual assault 

158 Data and Documents
may have sexually transmitted diseases and long-lasting physi-
cal problems. They may suffer from depression, anxiety, and an 
inability to trust others. As a result of these emotional problems, 
victims may develop eating disorders, abuse drugs or alcohol, 
 engage in risky sex, and contemplate suicide. 
 Two Federal statistical programs provide national measures 
of rape incidence: the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) pro-
gram, which records rapes reported to law enforcement agencies, 
and the Bureau of Justice Statistics’s National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS), which records reported and unreported rapes 
based on Census Bureau interviews with the American public 
ages 12 years and older. 
 Relationship Between Victim 
and Attacker 
 Interviews conducted with rape victims and rapists in Alabama, 
South Carolina, and North Dakota in 1991 by Richard Florence of 
the Justice Research and Statistics Association give information 
about the age of victims and their relationship to their rapists. 
While there is some discrepancy among the data reported, the re-
spondents generally agreed about the ages of victims. As shown 
in Table 6.2, all of the victims were female and all of the attackers 
were male.  
 Almost half of attackers of women over age 18 said that 
they picked targets who were strangers, according to this same 
study. However, 33 percent of victims over 18 years said their 
attackers were strangers. There may be definitional differ-
ences over the word “stranger” as well as a hesitance to report 
rapes. 
TABLE 6.2
Percent of Female Rape Victims
Total
Under 12
12–17
18 or Older
Victims
100%
14%
29%
57%
Imprisoned rapists
100
14
24
62
Source: Child rape victims, 1992. Crime Data Brief. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, June 1994. Available from http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/crv92.pdf.

Sexual Crime on Campus 159
 Violent Sexual Crimes Against 
Persons Age 65 or Older, 
1993–2002 
 The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) and the 
Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) provide data that allow the 
comparison of rape/sexual assault crimes committed against 
individuals aged 65 or older against persons in younger age 
groups. Americans over the age of 65 are less likely to become 
the victims of violent crime than younger individuals. Between 
1993 and 2002, the elderly experienced nonfatal violent crime 
at a rate 1/20th that of persons between the ages of 12 and 24 
(4 per 1,000 age 65 or older versus 82 victimizations per 1,000 
persons age 12–24). Violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, 
robbery, and aggravated and simple assaults. 
 Although the elderly are less likely to be victims of violent 
crime when compared to younger persons, persons age 65 or 
older were: 
 •  equally likely to face offenders with weapons (30% versus 
26%)
 •  more likely to offer no resistance (45% versus 29%) 
 •  equally likely to receive serious injuries (3% for both 
groups) 
 •  somewhat more likely to face offenders who were 
strangers to them (53% versus 46%) 
 •  more likely to face offenders age 30 or older (48% versus 
30%)
 •  equally likely to face male offenders (about 79% versus 
76%)
 • less likely to be attacked at night (25% versus 50%) 
 • more likely to make a report to the police (53% versus 44%) 
 Sexual Crime on Campus 
 One of the earliest surveys of date rape began in 1978 as a survey 
of sexual aggression and victimization among 4,000 students at 
Kent State University in Ohio. The researcher, Dr. Mary P. Koss, 
used the words “hidden rape” to describe her project since the 
term date rape had not yet been invented nor was there any 

160 Data and Documents
convincing evidence that “normal” people would rape. Koss 
 reported her results in 1982 and the study became the topic of 
a Ms.  magazine article on date rape.  Ms. , a feminist publication 
that has since folded, became the first national magazine to re-
port about date rape. The magazine obtained funding from the 
National Institute for Mental Health to fund a national study to 
determine the extent of the problem. 
 The  Ms.  Project on Campus Sexual Assault is the report 
that famously declared that 25 percent of American women had 
been sexually assaulted in their lifetimes. It aimed to (1) learn 
how much sexual aggression and victimization, including acts 
of rape, were occurring among college students; (2) gather de-
tails about actual incidents; (3) study women who had been 
victimized; (4) identify characteristics of men who commit sexu-
ally aggressive acts; and (5) measure the psychological difficul-
ties, if any, that result from sexual victimization. Men were not 
viewed as potential victims of sexual attacks and women were 
not considered as perpetrators of sexual crimes. The survey gath-
ered 6,159 responses that included 3,187 women and 2,972 men. 
The average age of the female respondents was 21.4 with 85 per-
cent single, 11 percent married, and 4 percent divorced. Of these 
women, 86 percent were white, 7 percent were black, 3 percent 
were Latina, 3 percent were Asian, and 1 percent were Native 
American. The characteristics of the male students were nearly 
identical (Warshaw, p. 197–209). 
 The  Ms.  Project on Campus Sexual Assault found that one 
in four college women had experienced rape or attempted rape 
(of the 3,187 women surveyed, 15 percent had been raped) and 
that 84 percent of the raped women knew their attacker. Fifty-
seven percent of the rapes took place on dates. In one year, these 
3,187 women reported suffering: 328 rapes (as defined by law), 
534  attempted rapes (as defined by law), 837 episodes of sexual 
coercion (sexual intercourse obtained through the aggressor’s 
continual arguments or pressure), 2,024 experiences of unwanted 
sexual contact (fondling, kissing, or petting committed against the 
woman’s will). Of the male students surveyed, 1 in 12 admitted 
committing acts that met the legal definition of rape or  attempted 
rape. For both men and women, the average age when a rape 
 incident occurred (either as perpetrator or victim) was 18 ½ years 
old. Only 27 percent of the women whose sexual assault met the 
legal definition of rape thought of themselves as rape victims 
(Warshaw, p. 197–209). 

Sexual Crime on Campus 161
 Jeanne Clery Disclosure of 
Campus Security Policy and 
Campus Crime Statistics 
 The Clery Act, named after Lehigh University student Jeanne Clery, 
mandates that colleges and universities report crimes occurring on campus. 
Clery died at the age of 20 in 1986 in her Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, dorm 
room after being beaten, raped, sodomized, and strangled by a stranger 
who was also a fellow student. The crime was attributed to a lack of infor-
mation about crime and breaches of security on campus. Despite this hor-
rifying crime, campuses remain among the safest places in the nation. 
 Clery’s parents aimed to make campuses even safer and they lobbied 
to pass a bill in tribute to their daughter. The 1990 Jeanne Clery Disclosure of 
Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act requires institu-
tions of higher education that participate in federal financial aid to keep and 
disclose information about crime on and near campus. The full text follows: 
 (1)  Each eligible institution participating in any program under 
this subchapter and part C of subchapter I of chapter 34 of 
Title 42 shall on August 1, 1991, begin to collect the following 
 information with respect to campus crime statistics and campus 
security policies of that institution, and beginning September 1, 
1992, and each year thereafter, prepare, publish, and distribute, 
through appropriate publications or mailings, to all current 
students and employees, and to any applicant for enrollment or 
employment upon request, an annual security report containing 
at least the following information with respect to the campus 
security policies and campus crime statistics of that institution: 
 (A)   A statement of current campus policies regarding proce-
dures and facilities for students and others to report criminal 
actions or other emergencies occurring on campus and poli-
cies concerning the institution’s response to such reports. 
 (B)  A statement of current policies concerning security and 
 access to campus facilities, including campus residences, 
and security considerations used in the maintenance of 
 campus facilities. 
 (C)  A statement of current policies concerning campus law 
 enforcement, including— 
 (i)  the enforcement authority of security personnel, 
 including their working relationship with State and 
local police agencies; and 
 (ii)  policies which encourage accurate and prompt reporting 
of all crimes to the campus police and the appropriate 
police agencies. 

162 Data and Documents
 (D)  A description of the type and frequency of programs 
 designed to inform students and employees about cam-
pus security procedures and practices and to encourage 
 students and employees to be responsible for their own 
security and the security of others. 
 (E)  A description of programs designed to inform students and 
employees about the prevention of crimes. 
 (F)  Statistics concerning the occurrence on campus, in or on 
noncampus buildings or property, and on public property 
during the most recent calendar year, and during the 2 pre-
ceding calendar years for which data are available— 
 (i)  of the following criminal offenses reported to campus 
security authorities or local police agencies: 
 (I) murder; 
 (II)  sex offenses, forcible or nonforcible; 
 (III) robbery; 
 (IV) aggravated assault; 
 (V) burglary; 
 (VI) motor vehicle theft; 
  (VII) manslaughter; 
 (VIII) arson; and 
 (IX)  arrests or persons referred for campus disciplinary 
action for liquor law violations, drug-related vio-
lations, and weapons possession; and 
 (ii)  of the crimes described in subclauses (I) through (VIII) 
of clause (i), and other crimes involving bodily injury to 
any person in which the victim is intentionally selected 
because of the actual or perceived race, gender, religion, 
sexual orientation, ethnicity, or disability of the victim 
that are reported to campus security authorities or 
local police agencies, which data shall be collected and 
 reported according to category of prejudice. 
 (G)  A statement of policy concerning the monitoring and 
 recording through local police agencies of criminal activity 
at off-campus student organizations which are recognized 
by the institution and that are engaged in by students 
 attending the institution, including those student organiza-
tions with off-campus housing facilities. 
 (H)  A statement of policy regarding the possession, use, and 
sale of alcoholic beverages and enforcement of State un-
derage drinking laws and a statement of policy regarding 
the possession, use, and sale of illegal drugs and enforce-
ment of Federal and State drug laws and a description of 
any drug or alcohol abuse education programs as required 
under section 1011i of this title. 

Sexual Crime on Campus 163
 (I)   A statement advising the campus community where law 
 enforcement agency information provided by a State under 
section 14071(j) of Title 42, concerning registered sex of-
fenders may be obtained, such as the law enforcement 
office of the institution, a local law enforcement agency 
with jurisdiction for the campus, or a computer network 
address. 
 (2)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the 
Secretary to require particular policies, procedures, or practices 
by institutions of higher education with respect to campus 
crimes or campus security. 
 (3)  Each institution participating in any program under this sub-
chapter and part C of subchapter I of chapter 34 of Title 42 
shall make timely reports to the campus community on crimes 
considered to be a threat to other students and employees de-
scribed in paragraph (1)(F) that are reported to campus security 
or local law police agencies. Such reports shall be provided to 
students and employees in a manner that is timely and that will 
aid in the prevention of similar occurrences. 
 (4)(A)  Each institution participating in any program under this 
subchapter [20 U.S.C. § 1070 et seq.] and part C of subchap-
ter I of chapter 34 of Title 42 [42 U.S.C. § 2751 et seq.] that 
maintains a police or security department of any kind shall 
make, keep, and maintain a daily log, written in a form that 
can be easily understood, recording all crimes reported to 
such police or  security department, including— 
 (i)  the nature, date, time, and general location of each 
crime; and 
 (ii) the disposition of the complaint, if known. 
 (B) (i)  All entries that are required pursuant to this paragraph 
shall, except where disclosure of such information is 
prohibited by law or such disclosure would jeopardize 
the confidentiality of the victim, be open to public in-
spection within two business days of the initial report 
being made to the department or a campus security 
authority. 
 (ii)  If new information about an entry into a log becomes 
available to a police or security department, then the 
new information shall be recorded in the log not later 
than two business days after the information becomes 
available to the police or security department. 
  (iii)  If there is clear and convincing evidence that the  release 
of such information would jeopardize an ongoing crimi-
nal investigation or the safety of an individual, cause 
a suspect to flee or evade detection, or result in the 

164 Data and Documents
 destruction of evidence, such information may be with-
held until that damage is no longer likely to occur from 
the release of such information. 
 (5)  On an annual basis, each institution participating in any 
program under this subchapter and part C of subchapter I of 
chapter 34 of Title 42 [42 U.S.C. § 2751 et seq.] shall submit to 
the Secretary a copy of the statistics required to be made avail-
able under paragraph (1)(F). The Secretary shall— 
 (A)  review such statistics and report to the Committee on Edu-
cation and the Workforce of the House of Representatives 
and the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the 
Senate on campus crime statistics by September 1, 2000; 
 (B)  make copies of the statistics submitted to the Secretary 
available to the public; and 
 (C)  in coordination with representatives of institutions of 
higher education, identify exemplary campus security poli-
cies, procedures, and practices and disseminate information 
concerning those policies, procedures, and practices that 
have proven effective in the reduction of campus crime. 
 (6)(A) In this subsection: 
 (i) The term “campus” means— 
 (I)  any building or property owned or controlled 
by an institution of higher education within the 
same reasonably contiguous geographic area of 
the institution and used by the institution in direct 
support of, or in a manner related to, the institu-
tion’s educational purposes, including residence 
halls; and 
 (II)  property within the same reasonably contiguous 
geographic area of the institution that is owned by 
the institution but controlled by another person, is 
used by students, and supports institutional pur-
poses (such as a food or other retail vendor). 
 (ii) The term “noncampus building or property” means— 
  (I)   any building or property owned or controlled by a stu-
dent organization recognized by the institution; and 
 (II)  any building or property (other than a branch cam-
pus) owned or controlled by an institution of higher 
education that is used in direct support of, or in 
relation to, the institution’s educational purposes, is 
used by students, and is not within the same reason-
ably contiguous geographic area of the institution. 
 (iii)  The term “public property” means all public property 
that is within the same reasonably contiguous geographic 

Sexual Crime on Campus 165
area of the institution, such as a sidewalk, a street, other 
thoroughfare, or parking facility, and is adjacent to a facil-
ity owned or controlled by the institution if the facility is 
used by the institution in direct support of, or in a man-
ner related to the institution’s educational purposes. 
 (B)  In cases where branch campuses of an institution of higher 
education, schools within an institution of higher education, 
or administrative divisions within an institution are not 
within a reasonably contiguous geographic area, such enti-
ties shall be considered separate campuses for purposes of 
the reporting requirements of this section. 
 (7)  The statistics described in paragraph (1)(F) shall be compiled 
in accordance with the definitions used in the uniform crime 
reporting system of the Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, and the modifications in such definitions as imple-
mented pursuant to the Hate Crime Statistics Act. Such statistics 
shall not identify victims of crimes or persons accused of crimes. 
 (8)(A)  Each institution of higher education participating in any 
program under this subchapter and part C of subchapter I of 
chapter 34 of Title 42 shall develop and distribute as part of 
the report described in paragraph (1) a statement of policy 
regarding— 
 (i)  such institution’s campus sexual assault programs, 
which shall be aimed at prevention of sex offenses; and 
 (ii)  the procedures followed once a sex offense has occurred. 
 (B)  The policy described in subparagraph (A) shall address the 
following areas: 
 (i)  Education programs to promote the awareness of rape, 
acquaintance rape, and other sex offenses. 
 (ii)  Possible sanctions to be imposed following the final 
 determination of an on-campus disciplinary proce-
dure regarding rape, acquaintance rape, or other sex 
 offenses, forcible or nonforcible. 
 (iii)  Procedures students should follow if a sex offense 
 occurs, including who should be contacted, the impor-
tance of preserving evidence as may be necessary to 
the proof of criminal sexual assault, and to whom the 
alleged offense should be reported. 
 (iv)  Procedures for on-campus disciplinary action in cases 
of alleged sexual assault, which shall include a clear 
statement that— 
 (I)  the accuser and the accused are entitled to the same 
opportunities to have others present during a campus 
disciplinary proceeding; and 

166 Data and Documents
 (II)  both the accuser and the accused shall be informed 
of the outcome of any campus disciplinary pro-
ceeding brought alleging a sexual assault. 
 (v)   Informing students of their options to notify proper 
law enforcement authorities, including on-campus and 
local police, and the option to be assisted by campus 
authorities in notifying such authorities, if the student 
so chooses. 
 (vi)  Notification of students of existing counseling, mental 
health or student services for victims of sexual assault, 
both on campus and in the community. 
 (vii)  Notification of students of options for, and available as-
sistance in, changing academic and living situations after 
an alleged sexual assault incident, if so requested by the 
victim and if such changes are reasonably available. 
 (C)  Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to confer a 
private right of action upon any person to enforce the pro-
visions of this paragraph. 
 (9)  The Secretary shall provide technical assistance in complying 
with the provisions of this section to an institution of higher 
education who requests such assistance. 
 (10)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the report-
ing or disclosure of privileged information. 
 (11)  The Secretary shall report to the appropriate committees of 
Congress each institution of higher education that the Sec-
retary determines is not in compliance with the reporting 
 requirements of this subsection. 
 (12)  For purposes of reporting the statistics with respect to crimes 
described in paragraph (1)(F), an institution of higher educa-
tion shall distinguish, by means of separate categories, any 
criminal offenses that occur— 
 (A) on campus; 
 (B) in or on a noncampus building or property; 
 (C) on public property; and 
 (D)  in dormitories or other residential facilities for students on 
campus.
 (13)  Upon a determination pursuant to section 1094(c)(3)(B) of this 
title that an institution of higher education has substantially 
misrepresented the number, location, or nature of the crimes 
required to be reported under this subsection, the Secretary 
shall impose a civil penalty upon the institution in the same 
amount and pursuant to the same procedures as a civil penalty 
is imposed under section 1094(c)(3)(B) of this title. 
 (14)(A) Nothing in this subsection may be construed to— 

Prison Rape 167
 (i)  create a cause of action against any institution of higher 
education or any employee of such an institution for 
any civil liability; or 
 (ii) establish any standard of care. 
 (B)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, evidence 
 regarding compliance or noncompliance with this subsec-
tion shall not be admissible as evidence in any proceeding 
of any court, agency, board, or other entity, except with 
 respect to an action to enforce this subsection. 
 (15)  This subsection may be cited as the “Jeanne Clery Disclosure of 
Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act”. 
 Prison Rape 
 The sexual assault of prisoners by other prisoners has long been 
a problem. Estimates of the numbers of prisoners who are the 
victims of sexual crimes range from 10 to 25 percent. Prisoners 
have been attacked by other prisoners, male or female, and they 
have also been assaulted by prison staff. However, the problem 
attracted little public attention partly out of the belief that crimi-
nals deserved whatever they got. Convicted criminals simply do 
not tug at the heart strings of the public. 
 The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA) passed 
Congress as the result of lobbying by the families and friends of 
prisoners as well as concerns about the public health impact of as-
saults upon prisoners who would eventually join the wider world. 
Human rights groups also joined in the effort to pass the legislation. 
PREA requires correctional systems at the federal, state, and local 
levels to implement a zero-tolerance policy against prison rape in 
all confinement facilities. It also established a National Prison Rape 
Commission to investigate the problem and propose solutions. 
 The text of the law follows: 
 Prison Rape Elimination 
Act of 2003 
 Sec. 2. Findings 
 Congress makes the following findings: 
 (1)  2,100,146 persons were incarcerated in the United States at 
the end of 2001: 1,324,465 in Federal and State prisons and 

168 Data and Documents
631,240 in county and local jails. In 1999, there were more than 
10,000,000 separate admissions to and discharges from prisons 
and jails. 
 (2)  Insufficient research has been conducted and insufficient data 
reported on the extent of prison rape. However, experts have 
conservatively estimated that at least 13 percent of the inmates 
in the United States have been sexually assaulted in prison. 
Many inmates have suffered repeated assaults. Under this 
 estimate, nearly 200,000 inmates now incarcerated have been or 
will be the victims of prison rape. The total number of inmates 
who have been sexually assaulted in the past 20 years likely 
exceeds 1,000,000. 
 (3)  Inmates with mental illness are at increased risk of sexual vic-
timization. America’s jails and prisons house more mentally 
ill individuals than all of the Nation’s psychiatric hospitals 
combined. As many as 16 percent of inmates in State prisons 
and jails, and 7 percent of Federal inmates, suffer from mental 
illness.
 (4)  Young first-time offenders are at increased risk of sexual vic-
timization. Juveniles are 5 times more likely to be sexually 
 assaulted in adult rather than juvenile facilities—often within 
the first 48 hours of incarceration. 
 (5)  Most prison staff are not adequately trained or prepared to 
 prevent, report, or treat inmate sexual assaults. 
 (6)  Prison rape often goes unreported, and inmate victims often 
receive inadequate treatment for the severe physical and 
 psychological effects of sexual assault—if they receive treat-
ment at all. 
 (7)  HIV and AIDS are major public health problems within Amer-
ica’s correctional facilities. In 2000, 25,088 inmates in Federal 
and State prisons were known to be infected with HIV/AIDS. 
In 2000, HIV/AIDS accounted for more than 6 percent of all 
deaths in Federal and State prisons. Infection rates for other 
sexually transmitted diseases, tuberculosis, and hepatitis B and 
C are also far greater for prisoners than for the American popu-
lation as a whole. Prison rape undermines the public health by 
contributing to the spread of these diseases, and often giving a 
potential death sentence to its victims. 
 (8)  Prison rape endangers the public safety by making brutal-
ized inmates more likely to commit crimes when they are 
released—as 600,000 inmates are each year. 
 (9)  The frequently interracial character of prison sexual assaults 
significantly exacerbates interracial tensions, both within prison 
and, upon release of perpetrators and victims from prison, in 
the community at large. 

Prison Rape 169
 (10)  Prison rape increases the level of homicides and other violence 
against inmates and staff, and the risk of insurrections and 
riots.
 (11)  Victims of prison rape suffer severe physical and psychological 
effects that hinder their ability to integrate into the commu-
nity and maintain stable employment upon their release from 
prison. They are thus more likely to become homeless and/or 
require government assistance. 
 (12)  Members of the public and government officials are largely 
unaware of the epidemic character of prison rape and the day-
to-day horror experienced by victimized inmates. 
 (13)  The high incidence of sexual assault within prisons involves 
actual and potential violations of the United States Constitu-
tion. In Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825 (1994), the Supreme 
Court ruled that deliberate indifference to the substantial risk 
of sexual assault violates prisoners’ rights under the Cruel 
and Unusual Punishments Clause of the Eighth Amendment. 
The Eighth Amendment rights of State and local prisoners are 
protected through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment. Pursuant to the power of Congress under Section 
Five of the Fourteenth Amendment, Congress may take action 
to enforce those rights in States where officials have demon-
strated such indifference. States that do not take basic steps to 
abate prison rape by adopting standards that do not generate 
significant additional expenditures demonstrate such indiffer-
ence. Therefore, such States are not entitled to the same level of 
Federal benefits as other States. 
 (14)  The high incidence of prison rape undermines the effective-
ness and efficiency of United States Government expenditures 
through grant programs such as those dealing with health 
care; mental health care; disease prevention; crime prevention, 
investigation, and prosecution; prison construction, mainte-
nance, and operation; race relations; poverty; unemployment 
and homelessness. The effectiveness and efficiency of these 
federally funded grant programs are compromised by the 
failure of State officials to adopt policies and procedures that 
reduce the incidence of prison rape in that the high incidence 
of prison rape— 
 (A)  increases the costs incurred by Federal, State, and local ju-
risdictions to administer their prison systems; 
 (B)  increases the levels of violence, directed at inmates and at 
staff, within prisons; 
 (C)  increases health care expenditures, both inside and out-
side of prison systems, and reduces the effectiveness of 
disease prevention programs by substantially increasing 

170 Data and Documents
the incidence and spread of HIV, AIDS, tuberculosis, 
hepatitis B and C, and other diseases; 
 (D)  increases mental health care expenditures, both inside and 
outside of prison systems, by substantially increasing the 
rate of post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, suicide, 
and the exacerbation of existing mental illnesses among 
current and former inmates; 
 (E)  increases the risks of recidivism, civil strife, and violent 
crime by individuals who have been brutalized by prison 
rape; and 
 (F)  increases the level of interracial tensions and strife within 
prisons and, upon release of perpetrators and victims, in 
the community at large. 
 (15)  The high incidence of prison rape has a significant effect on 
interstate commerce because it increases substantially— 
 (A)  the costs incurred by Federal, State, and local jurisdictions 
to administer their prison systems; 
 (B)  the incidence and spread of HIV, AIDS, tuberculosis, hepa-
titis B and C, and other diseases, contributing to increased 
health and medical expenditures throughout the Nation; 
 (C)  the rate of post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, sui-
cide, and the exacerbation of existing mental illnesses among 
current and former inmates, contributing to  increased health 
and medical expenditures throughout the Nation; and 
 (D)  the risk of recidivism, civil strife, and violent crime by 
 individuals who have been brutalized by prison rape. 
 Sec. 3. Purposes 
 The purposes of this Act are to— 
 (1)  establish a zero-tolerance standard for the incidence of prison 
rape in prisons in the United States; 
 (2)  make the prevention of prison rape a top priority in each prison 
system;
 (3)  develop and implement national standards for the detection, 
prevention, reduction, and punishment of prison rape; 
 (4)  increase the available data and information on the incidence 
of prison rape, consequently improving the management and 
 administration of correctional facilities; 
 (5)  standardize the definitions used for collecting data on the inci-
dence of prison rape; 
 (6)  increase the accountability of prison officials who fail to detect, 
prevent, reduce, and punish prison rape; 
 (7)  protect the Eighth Amendment rights of Federal, State, and 
local prisoners; 

Prison Rape 171
 (8)  increase the efficiency and effectiveness of Federal expendi-
tures through grant programs such as those dealing with health 
care; mental health care; disease prevention; crime prevention, 
 investigation, and prosecution; prison construction, mainte-
nance, and operation; race relations; poverty; unemployment; 
and homelessness; and 
 (9)  reduce the costs that prison rape imposes on interstate 
 commerce. 
 Sec. 4. National Prison RAPE Statistics, Data, and Research 
 (a) ANNUAL COMPREHENSIVE STATISTICAL REVIEW- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the Depart-
ment of Justice (in this section referred to as the ‘Bureau’) 
shall carry out, for each calendar year, a comprehensive 
statistical review and analysis of the incidence and effects 
of prison rape. The statistical review and analysis shall 
 include, but not be limited to the identification of the com-
mon characteristics of— 
 (A) both victims and perpetrators of prison rape; and 
 (B)  prisons and prison systems with a high incidence of 
prison rape. 
 (2)  CONSIDERATIONS- In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
Bureau shall consider— 
 (A)  how rape should be defined for the purposes of the 
statistical review and analysis; 
 (B)  how the Bureau should collect information about 
staff-on-inmate sexual assault; 
 (C)  how the Bureau should collect information beyond 
inmate self-reports of prison rape; 
 (D)  how the Bureau should adjust the data in order to 
account for differences among prisons as required by 
subsection (c)(3); 
 (E)  the categorization of prisons as required by subsection 
(c)(4); and 
 (F)  whether a preliminary study of prison rape should be 
conducted to inform the methodology of the compre-
hensive statistical review. 
 (3)  SOLICITATION OF VIEWS- The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
shall solicit views from representatives of the following: State 
departments of correction; county and municipal jails; juve-
nile correctional facilities; former inmates; victim advocates; 
researchers; and other experts in the area of sexual assault. 
 (4)  SAMPLING TECHNIQUES- The review and analysis under 
paragraph (1) shall be based on a random sample, or other 

172 Data and Documents
 scientifically appropriate sample, of not less than 10 percent 
of all Federal, State, and county prisons, and a representative 
sample of municipal prisons. The selection shall include at least 
one prison from each State. The selection of facilities for sam-
pling shall be made at the latest practicable date prior to con-
ducting the surveys and shall not be disclosed to any facility 
or prison system official prior to the time period studied in the 
survey. Selection of a facility for sampling during any year shall 
not preclude its selection for sampling in any subsequent year. 
 (5)  SURVEYS- In carrying out the review and analysis under para-
graph (1), the Bureau shall, in addition to such other methods 
as the Bureau considers appropriate, use surveys and other 
statistical studies of current and former inmates from a sample 
of Federal, State, county, and municipal prisons. The Bureau 
shall ensure the confidentiality of each survey participant. 
 (6)  PARTICIPATION IN SURVEY- Federal, State, or local of-
ficials or facility administrators that receive a request from 
the Bureau under subsection (a)(4) or (5) will be required to 
participate in the national survey and provide access to any 
inmates under their legal custody. 
 (b) REVIEW PANEL ON PRISON RAPE- 
 (1)  ESTABLISHMENT- To assist the Bureau in carrying out the 
review and analysis under subsection (a), there is estab-
lished, within the Department of Justice, the Review Panel 
on Prison Rape (in this section referred to as the ‘Panel’). 
 (2) MEMBERSHIP- 
 (A)  COMPOSITION- The Panel shall be composed of 3 
members, each of whom shall be appointed by the 
 Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services. 
 (B)  QUALIFICATIONS- Members of the Panel shall be 
selected from among individuals with knowledge or 
 expertise in matters to be studied by the Panel. 
 (3) PUBLIC HEARINGS- 
 (A)  IN GENERAL- The duty of the Panel shall be to carry 
out, for each calendar year, public hearings concern-
ing the operation of the three prisons with the highest 
incidence of prison rape and the two prisons with 
the lowest incidence of prison rape in each category 
of facilities identified under subsection (c)(4). The 
Panel shall hold a separate hearing regarding the three 
Federal or State prisons with the highest incidence 
of prison rape. The purpose of these hearings shall 
be to collect evidence to aid in the identification of 

Prison Rape 173
common characteristics of both victims and perpetra-
tors of prison rape, and the identification of common 
characteristics of prisons and prison systems with a 
high incidence of prison rape, and the identification 
of common characteristics of prisons and prison sys-
tems that appear to have been successful in deterring 
prison rape. 
 (B) TESTIMONY AT HEARINGS- 
 (i)  PUBLIC OFFICIALS- In carrying out the hearings 
required under subparagraph (A), the Panel shall 
request the public testimony of Federal, State, and 
local officials (and organizations that represent such 
officials), including the warden or director of each 
prison, who bears responsibility for the prevention, 
detection, and punishment of prison rape at each 
entity, and the head of the prison system encom-
passing such prison. 
 (ii)  VICTIMS- The Panel may request the testimony of 
prison rape victims, organizations representing such 
victims, and other appropriate individuals and or-
ganizations.
 (C) SUBPOENAS- 
 (i)  ISSUANCE- The Panel may issue subpoenas for the 
attendance of witnesses and the production of writ-
ten or other matter. 
 (ii)  ENFORCEMENT- In the case of contumacy or 
 refusal to obey a subpoena, the Attorney General 
may in a Federal court of appropriate jurisdiction 
 obtain an appropriate order to enforce the subpoena. 
 (c) REPORTS- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- Not later than June 30 of each year, the 
 Attorney General shall submit a report on the activities of 
the Bureau and the Review Panel, with respect to prison 
rape, for the preceding calendar year to— 
 (A) Congress; and 
 (B) the Secretary of Health and Human Services. 
 (2)  CONTENTS- The report required under paragraph (1) shall 
include—
 (A)  with respect to the effects of prison rape, statistical, 
 sociological, and psychological data; 
 (B)  with respect to the incidence of prison rape— 
 (i)  statistical data aggregated at the Federal, State, 
prison system, and prison levels; 
 (ii)  a listing of those institutions in the representative 
sample, separated into each category identified 

174 Data and Documents
under subsection (c)(4) and ranked according to the 
incidence of prison rape in each institution; and 
 (iii)  an identification of those institutions in the repre-
sentative sample that appear to have been successful 
in deterring prison rape; and 
 (C)  a listing of any prisons in the representative sample that 
did not cooperate with the survey conducted pursuant 
to section 4. 
 (3)  DATA ADJUSTMENTS- In preparing the information 
specified in paragraph (2), the Attorney General shall use 
established statistical methods to adjust the data as neces-
sary to account for differences among institutions in the rep-
resentative sample, which are not related to the detection, 
prevention, reduction and punishment of prison rape, or 
which are outside the control of the State, prison, or prison 
system, in order to provide an accurate comparison among 
prisons. Such differences may include the mission, security 
level, size, and jurisdiction under which the prison operates. 
For each such adjustment made, the Attorney General shall 
identify and explain such adjustment in the report. 
 (4)  CATEGORIZATION OF PRISONS- The report shall divide 
the prisons surveyed into three categories. One category 
shall be composed of all Federal and State prisons. The other 
two categories shall be defined by the Attorney General in 
order to compare similar institutions. 
 (d)  CONTRACTS AND GRANTS- In carrying out its duties under 
this section, the Attorney General may— 
 (1)  provide grants for research through the National Institute of 
Justice; and 
 (2)  contract with or provide grants to any other entity the Attor-
ney General deems appropriate. 
 (e)  AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are autho-
rized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 
through 2010 to carry out this section. 
 Sec. 5. Prison Rape Prevention and Prosecution 
 (a) INFORMATION AND ASSISTANCE- 
 (1)  NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE- There is established within 
the National Institute of Corrections a national clearinghouse 
for the provision of information and assistance to Federal, 
State, and local authorities responsible for the prevention, 
 investigation, and punishment of instances of prison rape. 
 (b) REPORTS- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- Not later than September 30 of each year, 
the National Institute of Corrections shall submit a report to 

Prison Rape 175
Congress and the Secretary of Health and Human Services. 
This report shall be available to the Director of the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics. 
 (2)  CONTENTS- The report required under paragraph (1) shall 
summarize the activities of the Department of Justice  regarding 
prison rape abatement for the preceding calendar year. 
 (c)  AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are autho-
rized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 
through 2010 to carry out this section. 
 Sec. 6. Grants to Protect Inmates and Safeguard Communities 
 (a)  GRANTS AUTHORIZED- From amounts made available for 
grants under this section, the Attorney General shall make grants 
to States to assist those States in ensuring that budgetary circum-
stances (such as reduced State and local spending on prisons) 
do not compromise efforts to protect inmates  (particularly from 
prison rape) and to safeguard the communities to which inmates 
return. The purpose of grants under this section shall be to pro-
vide funds for personnel, training, technical assistance, data col-
lection, and equipment to prevent and prosecute prisoner rape. 
 (b)  USE OF GRANT AMOUNTS- Amounts received by a grantee 
under this section may be used by the grantee, directly or through 
subgrants, only for one or more of the following activities: 
 (1) PROTECTING INMATES- Protecting inmates by— 
 (A)  undertaking efforts to more effectively prevent prison rape; 
 (B) investigating incidents of prison rape; or 
 (C) prosecuting incidents of prison rape. 
 (2)  SAFEGUARDING COMMUNITIES- Safeguarding commu-
nities by— 
 (A)  making available, to officials of State and local gov-
ernments who are considering reductions to prison 
budgets, training and technical assistance in successful 
methods for moderating the growth of prison popula-
tions without compromising public safety, including 
successful methods used by other jurisdictions; 
 (B)  developing and utilizing analyses of prison populations 
and risk assessment instruments that will improve State and 
local governments’ understanding of risks to the community 
regarding release of inmates in the prison population; 
 (C)  preparing maps demonstrating the concentration, on a 
community-by-community basis, of inmates who have 
been released, to facilitate the efficient and effective— 
 (i)  deployment of law enforcement resources (includ-
ing probation and parole resources); and 

176 Data and Documents
 (ii)  delivery of services (such as job training and sub-
stance abuse treatment) to those released inmates; 
 (D)  promoting collaborative efforts, among officials of State 
and local governments and leaders of appropriate com-
munities, to understand and address the effects on a 
community of the presence of a disproportionate num-
ber of released inmates in that community; or 
 (E)  developing policies and programs that reduce spending 
on prisons by effectively reducing rates of parole and pro-
bation revocation without compromising public safety. 
 (c) GRANT REQUIREMENTS- 
 (1)  PERIOD- A grant under this section shall be made for a 
period of not more than 2 years. 
 (2)  MAXIMUM- The amount of a grant under this section may 
not exceed $1,000,000. 
 (3)  MATCHING- The Federal share of a grant under this sec-
tion may not exceed 50 percent of the total costs of the project 
 described in the application submitted under subsection (d) for 
the fiscal year for which the grant was made under this section. 
 (d) APPLICATIONS- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- To request a grant under this section, the chief 
executive of a State shall submit an application to the Attor-
ney General at such time, in such manner, and accompanied 
by such information as the Attorney General may require. 
 (2)  CONTENTS- Each application required by paragraph 
(1) shall— 
 (A)  include the certification of the chief executive that the 
State receiving such grant— 
 (i)  has adopted all national prison rape standards that, 
as of the date on which the application was submit-
ted, have been promulgated under this Act; and 
 (ii)  will consider adopting all national prison rape standards 
that are promulgated under this Act after such date; 
 (B)  specify with particularity the preventative, prosecuto-
rial, or administrative activities to be undertaken by the 
State with the amounts received under the grant; and 
 (C)  in the case of an application for a grant for one or more 
activities specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (b)— 
 (i)  review the extent of the budgetary circumstances 
 affecting the State generally and describe how those 
circumstances relate to the State’s prisons; 
 (ii)  describe the rate of growth of the State’s prison 
population over the preceding 10 years and explain 

Prison Rape 177
why the State may have difficulty sustaining that 
rate of growth; and 
 (iii)  explain the extent to which officials (including 
law enforcement officials) of State and local gov-
ernments and victims of crime will be consulted 
 regarding decisions whether, or how, to moderate 
the growth of the State’s prison population. 
 (e) REPORTS BY GRANTEE- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- The Attorney General shall require each 
grantee to submit, not later than 90 days after the end of the 
period for which the grant was made under this section, 
a report on the activities carried out under the grant. The 
report shall identify and describe those activities and shall 
contain an evaluation of the effect of those activities on— 
 (A)  the number of incidents of prison rape, and the grant-
ee’s response to such incidents; and 
 (B)  the safety of the prisons, and the safety of the communi-
ties in which released inmates are present. 
 (2)  DISSEMINATION- The Attorney General shall ensure that 
each report submitted under paragraph (1) is made available 
under the national clearinghouse established under section 5. 
 (f)  STATE DEFINED- In this section, the term ‘State’ includes the 
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and 
any other territory or possession of the United States. 
 (g) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated for 
grants under this section $40,000,000 for each of fiscal years 
2004 through 2010. 
 (2)  LIMITATION- Of amounts made available for grants under 
this section, not less than 50 percent shall be available only 
for activities specified in paragraph (1) of subsection (b). 
 Sec. 7. National Prison Rape Reduction Commission 
 (a)  ESTABLISHMENT- There is established a commission to be 
known as the National Prison Rape Reduction Commission 
(in this section referred to as the ‘Commission’). 
 (b) MEMBERS- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- The Commission shall be composed of 
9 members, of whom— 
 (A) 3 shall be appointed by the President; 
 (B)  2 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives, unless the Speaker is of the same party 
as the President, in which case 1 shall be appointed by 

178 Data and Documents
the Speaker of the House of Representatives and 1 shall 
be appointed by the minority leader of the House of 
Representatives; 
 (C)  1 shall be appointed by the minority leader of the 
House of Representatives (in addition to any appoint-
ment made under subparagraph (B)); 
 (D)  2 shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Sen-
ate, unless the majority leader is of the same party as 
the President, in which case 1 shall be appointed by the 
majority leader of the Senate and 1 shall be appointed 
by the minority leader of the Senate; and 
 (E)  1 member appointed by the minority leader of the Sen-
ate (in addition to any appointment made under sub-
paragraph (D)). 
 (2)  PERSONS ELIGIBLE- Each member of the Commission 
shall be an individual who has knowledge or expertise in 
matters to be studied by the Commission. 
 (3)  CONSULTATION REQUIRED- The President, the Speaker 
and minority leader of the House of Representatives, and the 
majority leader and minority leader of the Senate shall consult 
with one another prior to the appointment of the members of 
the Commission to achieve, to the maximum extent possible, 
fair and equitable representation of various points of view 
with respect to the matters to be studied by the Commission. 
 (4)  TERM- Each member shall be appointed for the life of the 
Commission.
 (5)  TIME FOR INITIAL APPOINTMENTS- The appointment of 
the members shall be made not later than 60 days after the 
date of enactment of this Act. 
 (6)  VACANCIES- A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled 
in the manner in which the original appointment was made, 
and shall be made not later than 60 days after the date on 
which the vacancy occurred. 
 (c) OPERATION- 
 (1)  CHAIRPERSON- Not later than 15 days after appointments 
of all the members are made, the President shall appoint a 
chairperson for the Commission from among its members. 
 (2)  MEETINGS- The Commission shall meet at the call of the 
chairperson. The initial meeting of the Commission shall 
take place not later than 30 days after the initial appoint-
ment of the members is completed. 
 (3)  QUORUM- A majority of the members of the Commis-
sion shall constitute a quorum to conduct business, but the 
Commission may establish a lesser quorum for conducting 
hearings scheduled by the Commission. 

Prison Rape 179
 (4)  RULES- The Commission may establish by majority vote 
any other rules for the conduct of Commission business, if 
such rules are not inconsistent with this Act or other appli-
cable law. 
 (d)  COMPREHENSIVE STUDY OF THE IMPACTS 
OF PRISON RAPE- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- The Commission shall carry out a compre-
hensive legal and factual study of the penalogical, physical, 
mental, medical, social, and economic impacts of prison 
rape in the United States on— 
 (A) Federal, State, and local governments; and 
 (B)  communities and social institutions generally, including 
individuals, families, and businesses within such com-
munities and social institutions. 
 (2)  MATTERS INCLUDED- The study under paragraph 
(1) shall include— 
 (A)  a review of existing Federal, State, and local government 
policies and practices with respect to the prevention, 
 detection, and punishment of prison rape; 
 (B)  an assessment of the relationship between prison rape 
and prison conditions, and of existing monitoring, regu-
latory, and enforcement practices that are intended to 
address any such relationship; 
 (C)  an assessment of pathological or social causes of prison 
rape;
 (D)  an assessment of the extent to which the incidence of 
prison rape contributes to the spread of sexually trans-
mitted diseases and to the transmission of HIV; 
 (E)  an assessment of the characteristics of inmates most 
likely to commit prison rape and the effectiveness of 
various types of treatment or programs to reduce such 
likelihood;
 (F)  an assessment of the characteristics of inmates most 
likely to be victims of prison rape and the effectiveness 
of various types of treatment or programs to reduce 
such likelihood; 
 (G)  an assessment of the impacts of prison rape on individ-
uals, families, social institutions and the economy gen-
erally, including an assessment of the extent to which 
the incidence of prison rape contributes to recidivism 
and to increased incidence of sexual  assault; 
 (H)  an examination of the feasibility and cost of conducting 
surveillance, undercover activities, or both, to reduce 
the incidence of prison rape; 

180 Data and Documents
 (I)  an assessment of the safety and security of prison facili-
ties and the relationship of prison facility construction 
and design to the incidence of prison rape; 
 (J)  an assessment of the feasibility and cost of any particu-
lar proposals for prison reform; 
 (K)  an identification of the need for additional scientific 
and social science research on the prevalence of prison 
rape in Federal, State, and local prisons; 
 (L)  an assessment of the general relationship between 
prison rape and prison violence; 
 (M)  an assessment of the relationship between prison rape 
and levels of training, supervision, and discipline of 
prison staff; and 
 (N)  an assessment of existing Federal and State systems for 
reporting incidents of prison rape, including an assess-
ment of whether existing systems provide an adequate 
assurance of confidentiality, impartiality and the ab-
sence of reprisal. 
 (3) REPORT- 
 (A)  DISTRIBUTION- Not later than 2 years after the date of 
the initial meeting of the Commission, the Commission 
shall submit a report on the study carried out under 
this subsection to— 
 (i) the President; 
 (ii) the Congress; 
 (iii) the Attorney General; 
 (iv) the Secretary of Health and Human Services; 
 (v) the Director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons; 
 (vi) the chief executive of each State; and 
 (vii)  the head of the department of corrections of each 
State. 
 (B)  CONTENTS- The report under subparagraph (A) shall 
include—
 (i) the findings and conclusions of the Commission; 
 (ii)  recommended national standards for reducing 
prison rape; 
 (iii)  recommended protocols for preserving evidence 
and treating victims of prison rape; and 
 (iv)  a summary of the materials relied on by the Com-
mission in the preparation of the report. 
 (e) RECOMMENDATIONS- 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- In conjunction with the report submitted under 
subsection (d)(3), the Commission shall provide the Attorney 

Prison Rape 181
General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services with 
recommended national standards for enhancing the detection, 
prevention, reduction, and punishment of prison rape. 
 (2)  MATTERS INCLUDED- The information provided under 
paragraph (1) shall include recommended national stan-
dards relating to— 
 (A)  the classification and assignment of prisoners, using 
proven standardized instruments and protocols, in a 
manner that limits the occurrence of prison rape; 
 (B)  the investigation and resolution of rape complaints by 
responsible prison authorities, local and State police, 
and Federal and State prosecution authorities; 
 (C)  the preservation of physical and testimonial evidence 
for use in an investigation of the circumstances relating 
to the rape; 
 (D)  acute-term trauma care for rape victims, including stan-
dards relating to— 
 (i)  the manner and extent of physical examination and 
treatment to be provided to any rape victim; and 
 (ii)  the manner and extent of any psychological 
 examination, psychiatric care, medication, and mental 
health counseling to be provided to any rape  victim; 
 (E)  referrals for long-term continuity of care for rape victims; 
 (F)  educational and medical testing measures for reducing 
the incidence of HIV transmission due to prison rape; 
 (G)  post-rape prophylactic medical measures for reducing 
the incidence of transmission of sexual diseases; 
 (H)  the training of correctional staff sufficient to ensure 
that they understand and appreciate the significance of 
prison rape and the necessity of its eradication; 
 (I)  the timely and comprehensive investigation of staff sex-
ual misconduct involving rape or other sexual  assault 
on inmates; 
 (J)  ensuring the confidentiality of prison rape complaints and 
protecting inmates who make complaints of prison rape; 
 (K)  creating a system for reporting incidents of prison 
rape that will ensure the confidentiality of prison rape 
complaints, protect inmates who make prison rape com-
plaints from retaliation, and assure the impartial resolu-
tion of prison rape complaints; 
 (L) data collection and reporting of— 
 (i) prison rape; 
 (ii)  prison staff sexual misconduct; and 
 (iii)  the resolution of prison rape complaints by prison 
officials and Federal, State, and local investigation 
and prosecution authorities; and 

182 Data and Documents
 (M)  such other matters as may reasonably be related to the 
detection, prevention, reduction, and punishment of 
prison rape. 
 (3)  LIMITATION- The Commission shall not propose a recom-
mended standard that would impose substantial additional 
costs compared to the costs presently expended by Federal, 
State, and local prison authorities. 
 (f)  CONSULTATION WITH ACCREDITATION ORGANIZATIONS- 
In developing recommended national standards for enhancing 
the detection, prevention, reduction, and punishment of prison 
rape, the Commission shall consider any standards that have 
already been developed, or are being developed simultaneously 
to the deliberations of the Commission. The Commission shall 
consult with accreditation organizations responsible for the ac-
creditation of Federal, State, local or private prisons, that have 
developed or are currently developing standards related to prison 
rape. The Commission will also consult with national associations 
representing the corrections profession that have developed or are 
currently developing standards related to prison rape. 
 (1)  IN GENERAL- The Commission shall hold public hearings. 
The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such 
times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evi-
dence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out 
its duties under this section. 
 (2)  WITNESS EXPENSES- Witnesses requested to appear before 
the Commission shall be paid the same fees as are paid to 
witnesses under section 1821 of title 28, United States Code. 
The per diem and mileage allowances for witnesses shall be 
paid from funds appropriated to the Commission. 
 (h)  INFORMATION FROM FEDERAL OR STATE AGENCIES- The 
Commission may secure directly from any Federal department 
or agency such information as the Commission considers nec-
essary to carry out its duties under this section. The Commis-
sion may request the head of any State or local department or 
agency to furnish such information to the Commission. 
 (i) PERSONNEL MATTERS- 
 (1)  TRAVEL EXPENSES- The members of the Commission shall 
be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
Code, while away from their homes or regular places of 
business in the performance of service for the Commission. 
 (2)  DETAIL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES- With the affirmative 
vote of 2/3 of the Commission, any Federal Government 

Prison Rape 183
employee, with the approval of the head of the appropriate 
Federal agency, may be detailed to the Commission without 
reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interrup-
tion or loss of civil service status, benefits, or privileges. 
 (3)  PROCUREMENT OF TEMPORARY AND INTERMITTENT 
SERVICES- Upon the request of the Commission, the Attor-
ney General shall provide reasonable and appropriate office 
space, supplies, and administrative assistance. 
 (j) CONTRACTS FOR RESEARCH- 
 (1)  NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE- With a 2/3 affirmative 
vote, the Commission may select nongovernmental research-
ers and experts to assist the Commission in carrying out its 
duties under this Act. The National Institute of Justice shall 
contract with the researchers and experts selected by the Com-
mission to provide funding in exchange for their services. 
 (2)  OTHER ORGANIZATIONS- Nothing in this subsection 
shall be construed to limit the ability of the Commission to 
enter into contracts with other entities or organizations for 
research necessary to carry out the duties of the Commis-
sion under this section. 
 (k) SUBPOENAS- 
 (1)  ISSUANCE- The Commission may issue subpoenas for the 
attendance of witnesses and the production of written or 
other matter. 
 (2)  ENFORCEMENT- In the case of contumacy or refusal to 
obey a subpoena, the Attorney General may in a Federal 
court of appropriate jurisdiction obtain an appropriate 
order to enforce the subpoena. 
 (3)  CONFIDENTIALITY OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE- 
 Documents provided to the Commission pursuant to a 
subpoena issued under this subsection shall not be released 
publicly without the affirmative vote of 2/3 of the Commission. 
 (l)  AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are autho-
rized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to 
carry out this section. 
 (m)  TERMINATION- The Commission shall terminate on the date 
that is 60 days after the date on which the Commission submits 
the reports required by this section. 
 (n)  EXEMPTION- The Commission shall be exempt from the Fed-
eral Advisory Committee Act. 
 Sec. 8. Adoption and Effect of National Standards 
 (a) PUBLICATION OF PROPOSED STANDARDS- 
 (1)  FINAL RULE- Not later than 1 year after receiving the report 
specified in section 7(d)(3), the Attorney General shall 

184 Data and Documents
publish a final rule adopting national standards for the detec-
tion, prevention, reduction, and punishment of prison rape. 
 (2)  INDEPENDENT JUDGMENT- The standards referred to in 
paragraph (1) shall be based upon the independent judg-
ment of the Attorney General, after giving due consider-
ation to the recommended national standards provided by 
the Commission under section 7(e), and being informed by 
such data, opinions, and proposals that the Attorney Gen-
eral determines to be appropriate to consider. 
 (3)  LIMITATION- The Attorney General shall not establish a 
national standard under this section that would impose 
substantial additional costs compared to the costs presently 
expended by Federal, State, and local prison authorities. The 
Attorney General may, however, provide a list of improve-
ments for consideration by correctional facilities. 
 (4)  TRANSMISSION TO STATES- Within 90 days of publish-
ing the final rule under paragraph (1), the Attorney General 
shall transmit the national standards adopted under such 
paragraph to the chief executive of each State, the head of 
the department of corrections of each State, and to the ap-
propriate authorities in those units of local government who 
oversee operations in one or more prisons. 
 (b)  APPLICABILITY TO FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS- The 
national standards referred to in subsection (a) shall apply to 
the Federal Bureau of Prisons immediately upon adoption of 
the final rule under subsection (a)(4). 
 (c) ELIGIBILITY FOR FEDERAL FUNDS- 
 (1) COVERED PROGRAMS- 
 (A)  IN GENERAL- For purposes of this subsection, a grant 
program is covered by this subsection if, and only if— 
 (i)  the program is carried out by or under the authority 
of the Attorney General; and 
 (ii)  the program may provide amounts to States for 
prison purposes. 
 (B)  LIST- For each fiscal year, the Attorney General shall pre-
pare a list identifying each program that meets the criteria 
of subparagraph (A) and provide that list to each State. 
 (2)  ADOPTION OF NATIONAL STANDARDS- For each fiscal 
year, any amount that a State would otherwise receive for 
prison purposes for that fiscal year under a grant program 
covered by this subsection shall be reduced by 5 percent, 
 unless the chief executive of the State submits to the Attor-
ney General— 

Prison Rape 185
 (A)  a certification that the State has adopted, and is in full 
compliance with, the national standards described in 
section 8(a); or 
 (B)  an assurance that not less than 5 percent of such amount 
shall be used only for the purpose of enabling the State 
to adopt, and achieve full compliance with, those na-
tional standards, so as to ensure that a certification under 
subparagraph (A) may be submitted in future years. 
 (3)  REPORT ON NONCOMPLIANCE- Not later than Septem-
ber 30 of each year, the Attorney General shall publish a 
report listing each grantee that is not in compliance with the 
national standards adopted pursuant to section 8(a). 
 (4)  COOPERATION WITH SURVEY- For each fiscal year, any 
amount that a State receives for that fiscal year under a grant 
program covered by this subsection shall not be used for 
prison purposes (and shall be returned to the grant program 
if no other authorized use is available), unless the chief ex-
ecutive of the State submits to the Attorney General a certifi-
cation that neither the State, nor any political subdivision or 
unit of local government within the State, is listed in a report 
issued by the Attorney General pursuant to  section 4(c)(2)(C). 
 (5)  REDISTRIBUTION OF AMOUNTS- Amounts under a 
grant program not granted by reason of a reduction under 
paragraph (2), or returned by reason of the prohibition in 
paragraph (4), shall be granted to one or more entities not 
subject to such reduction or such prohibition, subject to 
the other laws governing that program. 
 (6)  IMPLEMENTATION- The Attorney General shall establish 
procedures to implement this subsection, including proce-
dures for effectively applying this subsection to discretion-
ary grant programs. 
 (7) EFFECTIVE DATE- 
 (A)  REQUIREMENT OF ADOPTION OF STANDARDS- The 
first grants to which paragraph (2) applies are grants for 
the second fiscal year beginning after the date on which 
the national standards under section 8(a) are finalized. 
 (B)  REQUIREMENT FOR COOPERATION- The first grants 
to which paragraph (4) applies are grants for the fiscal 
year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act. 
 Sec. 9. Requirement that Accreditation Organizations Adopt 
 Accreditation Standards 
 (a)  ELIGIBILITY FOR FEDERAL GRANTS- Notwithstanding any 
other provision of law, an organization responsible for the 

186 Data and Documents
 accreditation of Federal, State, local, or private prisons, jails, or 
other penal facilities may not receive any new Federal grants 
during any period in which such organization fails to meet any 
of the requirements of subsection (b). 
 (b)  REQUIREMENTS- To be eligible to receive Federal grants, an 
accreditation organization referred to in subsection (a) must 
meet the following requirements: 
 (1)  At all times after 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the organization shall have in effect, for each facility that it is 
responsible for accrediting, accreditation standards for the de-
tection, prevention, reduction, and punishment of prison rape. 
 (2)  At all times after 1 year after the date of the adoption of the 
final rule under section 8(a)(4), the organization shall, in 
 addition to any other such standards that it may promulgate 
relevant to the detection, prevention, reduction, and punish-
ment of prison rape, adopt accreditation standards consis-
tent with the national standards adopted pursuant to such 
final rule. 
 Sec. 10. Definitions 
 In this Act, the following definitions shall apply: 
 (1)  CARNAL KNOWLEDGE- The term ‘carnal knowledge’ means 
contact between the penis and the vulva or the penis and the 
anus, including penetration of any sort, however slight. 
 (2)  INMATE- The term ‘inmate’ means any person incarcerated or 
detained in any facility who is accused of, convicted of, sen-
tenced for, or adjudicated delinquent for, violations of criminal 
law or the terms and conditions of parole, probation, pretrial 
release, or diversionary program. 
 (3)  JAIL- The term ‘jail’ means a confinement facility of a Federal, 
State, or local law enforcement agency to hold— 
 (A) persons pending adjudication of criminal charges; or 
 (B)  persons committed to confinement after adjudication of 
criminal charges for sentences of 1 year or less. 
 (4)  HIV- The term ‘HIV’ means the human immunodeficiency 
virus. 
 (5)  ORAL SODOMY- The term ‘oral sodomy’ means contact be-
tween the mouth and the penis, the mouth and the vulva, or the 
mouth and the anus. 
 (6)  POLICE LOCKUP- The term ‘police lockup’ means a temporary 
holding facility of a Federal, State, or local law enforcement 
agency to hold— 
 (A) inmates pending bail or transport to jail; 
 (B) inebriates until ready for release; or 
 (C) juveniles pending parental custody or shelter placement. 

Prison Rape 187
 (7)  PRISON- The term ‘prison’ means any confinement facility of 
a Federal, State, or local government, whether administered by 
such government or by a private organization on behalf of such 
government, and includes— 
 (A) any local jail or police lockup; and 
 (B)  any juvenile facility used for the custody or care of juvenile 
inmates.
 (8)  PRISON RAPE- The term ‘prison rape’ includes the rape of an 
inmate in the actual or constructive control of prison officials. 
 (9)  RAPE- The term ‘rape’ means— 
 (A)  the carnal knowledge, oral sodomy, sexual assault with an 
object, or sexual fondling of a person, forcibly or against 
that person’s will; 
 (B)  the carnal knowledge, oral sodomy, sexual assault with an 
object, or sexual fondling of a person not forcibly or against 
the person’s will, where the victim is incapable of giving 
consent because of his or her youth or his or her temporary 
or permanent mental or physical  incapacity; or 
 (C)  the carnal knowledge, oral sodomy, sexual assault with 
an object, or sexual fondling of a person achieved through 
the exploitation of the fear or threat of physical violence or 
bodily injury. 
 (10)  SEXUAL ASSAULT WITH AN OBJECT- The term ‘sexual 
 assault with an object’ means the use of any hand, finger, 
 object, or other instrument to penetrate, however slightly, the 
genital or anal opening of the body of another person. 
 (11)  SEXUAL FONDLING- The term ‘sexual fondling’ means the 
touching of the private body parts of another person (includ-
ing the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or buttocks) 
for the purpose of sexual gratification. 
 (12)  EXCLUSIONS- The terms and conditions described in para-
graphs (9) and (10) shall not apply to— 
 (A)  custodial or medical personnel gathering physical evi-
dence, or engaged in other legitimate medical treatment, 
in the course of investigating prison rape; 
 (B)  the use of a health care provider’s hands or fingers or the 
use of medical devices in the course of appropriate medi-
cal treatment unrelated to prison rape; or 
 (C)  the use of a health care provider’s hands or fingers and 
the use of instruments to perform body cavity searches 
in order to maintain security and safety within the 
prison or detention facility, provided that the search is 
conducted in a manner consistent with constitutional 
requirements. 

188 Data and Documents
 Sexual Victimization of 
Prisoners in Local Jails 
Reported by Inmates, 2007 
 As a requirement of PREA, prisoners were asked about their 
experiences with sexual crime behind bars. The 2007 National 
Inmate Survey (NIS), conducted by the Bureau of Justice Sta-
tistics, involved a sample of 40,419 prisoners in 282 local jails. 
The survey only gathered allegations of attacks made within the 
prior six months. Weights were applied to the samples to create 
nationwide estimates. The study found: 
 •  About 1.6 percent of inmates (12,100 nationwide) reported 
sexual victimization of a prisoner by another prisoner while 
2.0 percent (15,200) reported an attack by a staff member. 
 • Inmates are most likely to be attacked in their own cells 
(56%) by other prisoners while staff-on-inmate victimization 
occurred in a closet, office, or other locked room (47%). 
 • Women are more likely than men to be sexually attacked 
(5%), largely as the result of attacks by other inmates. 
 • In total, 0.6 percent of all jail inmates reported an injury 
related to sexual crime. These injuries included bruises, 
scratches, anal tearing, stab wounds, broken bones and 
concussions but most were not reported to authorities as 
the results of sexual victimization. 
 • Most injured victims (85%) reported that they had suffered 
a serious injury. 
 Rates of Forcible Rape Nationwide 
 The Federal Bureau of Investigation has published a Uniform 
Crime Report each year since 1930. The report, which aims to 
provide reliable crime statistics, collects data submitted by nearly 
17,000 law enforcement agencies across the United States. The FBI 
tries to ensure uniformity of reporting by providing law enforce-
ment agencies with a handbook that explains how to classify and 
score offenses according to standardized definitions of offenses. 
Since definitions of criminal offenses may vary according to state 
or local law, the FBI sets its own definitions of crime for agencies 
to follow. The numbers in Table 6.3 below are part of a 1.4 percent 
decrease in violent crime between 2006 and 2007.  

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Alabama
Birmingham
2006
220
2007
227,686
229
Huntsville
2006
100
2007
169,391
96
Mobile3
2006
50
2007
253,842
23
Montgomery
2006
74
2007
202,062
54
Alaska
Anchorage
2006
248
2007
284,142
257
Arizona
Chandler 
2006
56
2007
250,868
51
Gilbert
2006
37
2007
206,681
23
Glendale
2006
75
2007
250,444
58
Mesa 
2006
203
2007
454,576
175
Peoria
2006
41
2007
147,223
41
Phoenix 
2006
550
2007
1,541,698
509
Scottsdale
2006
65
2007
235,243
41
Tempe 
2006
71
2007
171,320
63
Tucson4
2006
294
2007
523,299
277
Arkansas
Little Rock
2006
151
2007
184,594
123
California
Anaheim
2006
107
2007
335,133
96
Antioch
2006
35
2007
101,973
27
Bakersfield
2006
43
2007
318,743
41
Berkeley
2006
22
2007
101,343
24
Burbank
2006
10
2007
104,871
14
Chula Vista
2006
70
2007
218,718
57
(Continued )

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Concord
2006
20
2007
122,202
13
Corona 
2006
31
2007
153,518
28
Costa mesa 
2006
30
2007
109,835
39
Daly city 
2006
18
2007
100,632
15
Downey
2006
21
2007
109,642
17
Elk Grove5
2006
2007
138,103
23
El Monte
2006
25
2007
124,182
25
Escondido 
2006
33
2007
133,429
28
Fairfield
2006
36
2007
106,098
36
Fontana 
2006
40
2007
176,490
43
Fremont 
2006
29
2007
201,318
35
Fresno
2006
133
2007
472,170
99
Fullerton
2006
47
2007
133,855
41
Garden Grove
2006
29
2007
166,414
35
Glendale
2006
14
2007
200,049
12
Hayward
2006
33
2007
140,603
48
Huntington Beach
2006
31
2007
195,067
29
Inglewood 
2006
36
2007
115,223
19
Irvine
2006
17
2007
201,872
19
Lancaster
2006
56
2007
144,210
59
Long Beach 
2006
134
2007
473,959
138

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Los Angeles
2006
1,059
2007
3,870,487
1,004
Modesto 
2006
73
2007
208,067
65
Moreno Valley
2006
61
2007
190,248
66
Norwalk 
2006
21
2007
105,330
14
Oakland
2006
306
2007
396,541
277
Oceanside
2006
48
2007
166,424
51
Ontario
2006
74
2007
175,537
46
Orange
2006
13
2007
135,818
8
Oxnard 
2006
34
2007
186,367
33
Palmdale
2006
58
2007
142,122
34
Pasadena
2006
19
2007
145,553
33
Pomona
2006
17
2007
155,161
32
Rancho 
Cucamonga 
2006
25
2007
177,683
19
Rialto
2006
30
2007
100,451
25
Richmond
2006
41
2007
102,471
31
Riverside
2006
83
2007
299,312
91
Roseville
2006
24
2007
111,497
31
Sacramento
2006
196
2007
460,546
194
Salinas
2006
45
2007
145,251
51
San Bernardino 
2006
50
2007
200,810
74
(Continued )

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
San Diego
2006
348
2007
1,261,196
296
San Francisco
2006
154
2007
733,799
125
San Jose 
2006
217
2007
934,553
217
Santa Ana
2006
73
2007
340,223
65
Santa Clara
2006
16
2007
109,420
32
Santa Clarita
2006
26
2007
170,429
22
Santa Rosa
2006
75
2007
154,953
65
Simi Valley
2006
21
2007
122,677
20
South Gate
2006
14
2007
98,701
17
Stockton
2006
102
2007
297,170
105
Sunnyvale
2006
21
2007
130,326
15
Thousand Oaks
2006
13
2007
125,196
19
Torrance
2006
18
2007
142,970
21
Vallejo
2006
31
2007
116,763
26
Ventura
2006
24
2007
104,523
27
Victorville
2006
26
2007
104,872
30
Visalia
2006
50
2007
116,766
38
West Covina
2006
13
2007
108,097
21
Colorado
Arvada
2006
31
2007
105,197
29
Aurora 
2006
217
2007
307,621
191
Centennial
2006
25
2007
97,746
34

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Colorado Springs
2006
250
2007
374,112
286
Denver
2006
342
2007
573,387
296
Fort Collins
2006
76
2007
130,935
70
Lakewood
2006
101
2007
139,407
81
Pueblo 
2006
49
2007
103,958
43
Thornton
2006
75
2007
113,289
72
Westminster
2006
39
2007
106,383
22
Connecticut
Bridgeport
2006
69
2007
137,655
77
Hartford
2006
47
2007
124,558
58
Stamford
2006
28
2007
119,510
31
Waterbury
2006
39
2007
107,241
18
Florida
Cape Coral
2006
52
2007
159,936
40
Clearwater
2006
44
2007
107,501
34
Coral Springs
2006
2
2007
131,307
7
Fort Lauderdale
2006
83
2007
187,995
56
Gainesville
2006
96
2007
108,289
93
Hialeah
2006
26
2007
215,853
42
Hollywood 
2006
58
2007
146,673
62
Jacksonville
2006
218
2007
797,350
249
Miami
2006
101
2007
410,252
57
(Continued )

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Miramar
2006
45
2007
114,029
26
Orlando
2006
163
2007
224,417
162
Pembroke Pines 
2006
15
2007
151,817
16
Pompano Beach
2006
54
2007
104,989
63
Port St. Lucie
2006
36
2007
154,036
60
St. Petersburg
2006
112
2007
248,069
103
Tallahassee 
2006
155
2007
159,943
136
Tampa 
2006
133
2007
337,220
80
Georgia
Athens-Clarke 
County
2006
53
2007
113,389
43
Atlanta
2006
171
2007
497,290
148
Columbus
2006
19
2007
188,944
57
Savannah-
Chatham 
Metropolitan
2006
65
2007
208,116
78
Hawaii
Honolulu
2006
229
2007
905,903
226
Idaho
Boise 
2006
135
2007
199,104
122
Illinois6
Aurora
2006
2007
174,724
Chicago
2006
2007
2,824,434
Joliet
2006
2007
148,484
Naperville
2006
2007
144,933
Peoria
2006
2007
113,137
Rockford7
2006
135
2007
155,713
107
Springfield
2006
2007
117,185

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Indiana
Evansville
2006
61
2007
114,985
56
Fort Wayne8
2006
80
2007
248,423
85
Gary
2006
61
2007
97,048
57
Indianapolis
2006
549
2007
797,268
505
South Bend
2006
67
2007
104,437
67
Iowa
Cedar Rapids
2006
41
2007
124,730
34
Des Moines4
2006
2007
192,948
185
Kansas
Kansas City
2006
91
2007
143,371
91
Overland Park
2006
48
2007
169,224
35
Topeka
2006
57
2007
121,885
47
Wichita 
2006
245
2007
358,294
266
Kentucky
Lexington
2006
128
2007
272,815
111
Louisville Metro
2006
175
2007
624,030
191
Louisiana
Baton Rouge
2006
93
2007
228,446
72
Lafayette
2006
73
2007
114,212
68
New Orleans
2006
87
2007
220,614
115
Shreveport
2006
140
2007
199,811
112
Maryland
Baltimore
2006
138
2007
624,237
146
Massachusetts
Boston
2006
275
2007
591,855
263
Cambridge7
2006
11
2007
101,161
12
(Continued )

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Springfield
2006
115
2007
151,074
91
Worcester
2006
126
2007
175,825
93
Michigan
Ann Arbor
2006
34
2007
113,011
29
Detroit
2006
592
2007
860,971
344
Flint
2006
143
2007
116,024
113
Grand Rapids
2006
66
2007
192,376
69
Lansing
2006
116
2007
113,643
91
Sterling Heights
2006
17
2007
128,555
21
Warren4
2006
75
2007
134,081
71
Minnesota
Minneapolis
2006
453
2007
371,240
452
St. Paul
2006
197
2007
271,662
173
Mississippi
Jackson
2006
160
2007
175,525
141
Missouri
Independence
2006
61
2007
108,879
45
Springfield
2006
82
2007
150,488
72
St. Louis
2006
337
2007
348,197
255
Montana
Billings
2006
28
2007
101,342
23
Nebraska
Lincoln
2006
100
2007
243,243
113
Omaha
2006
187
2007
431,810
189
Nevada
Henderson
2006
63
2007
251,270
66
Las Vegas 
Metropolitan Police 
Department 
2006
718
2007
1,341,156
723
North Las Vegas
2006
57
2007
211,419
53

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Reno
2006
100
2007
214,197
95
New Jersey
Edison Township
2006
15
2007
99,082
0
Elizabeth
2006
35
2007
125,621
25
Jersey city
2006
60
2007
240,718
47
Newark
2006
87
2007
280,158
60
Paterson
2006
37
2007
148,049
26
Woodbridge 
Township
2006
17
2007
98,769
14
New Mexico
Albuquerque
2006
286
2007
513,124
307
New York
Amherst Town
2006
11
2007
111,622
8
Buffalo
2006
174
2007
273,832
164
New York
2006
1,071
2007
8,220,196
875
Rochester
2006
92
2007
206,686
124
Syracuse
2006
66
2007
139,880
67
Yonkers
2006
31
2007
198,071
44
North Carolina
Cary
2006
14
2007
114,221
11
Charlotte-
Mecklenburg
2006
346
2007
733,291
282
Fayetteville
2006
61
2007
167,157
56
Greensboro
2006
86
2007
238,122
94
Raleigh
2006
97
2007
367,120
99
Ohio
Akron
2006
163
2007
208,701
174
(Continued )

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible rape
Cincinnati
2006
296
2007
332,388
313
Cleveland
2006
455
2007
439,888
374
Columbus
2006
598
2007
735,981
661
Dayton
2006
125
2007
155,526
114
Toledo
2006
169
2007
296,403
151
Oklahoma
Norman
2006
38
2007
103,721
35
Oklahoma City
2006
327
2007
542,199
326
Tulsa
2006
289
2007
381,469
299
Oregon
Eugene
2006
44
2007
147,458
55
Portland
2006
293
2007
538,133
280
Salem
2006
74
2007
154,484
58
Pennsylvania
Allentown
2006
42
2007
107,397
20
Erie
2006
69
2007
101,812
75
Philadelphia
2006
960
2007
1,435,533
956
Pittsburgh
2006
102
2007
312,179
129
Rhode Island
Providence7
2006
52
2007
173,719
43
South Carolina
Charleston
2006
45
2007
109,382
55
Columbia
2006
56
2007
121,674
67
South Dakota
Sioux Falls
2006
120
2007
144,985
95
Tennessee
Chattanooga
2006
121
2007
155,043
102
Clarksville
2006
50
2007
114,582
64

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible rape
Knoxville
2006
91
2007
183,319
109
Memphis
2006
434
2007
669,264
451
Nashville
2006
320
2007
564,169
290
Texas
Abilene
2006
67
2007
114,644
89
Amarillo
2006
97
2007
187,234
127
Arlington
2006
192
2007
372,073
156
Austin
2006
319
2007
716,817
328
Beaumont
2006
75
2007
109,345
71
Brownsville4
2006
2007
177,090
21
Carrollton
2006
6
2007
123,324
3
Corpus Christi 
2006
167
2007
286,428
238
Dallas
2006
665
2007
1,239,104
511
Denton
2006
66
2007
113,936
76
El Paso7
2006
300
2007
616,029
258
Fort Worth
2006
251
2007
670,693
333
Garland
2006
50
2007
218,236
52
Grand Prairie
2006
69
2007
157,913
74
Houston
2006
854
2007
2,169,544
694
Irving
2006
48
2007
196,676
30
Killeen
2006
81
2007
104,188
82
(Continued )

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Laredo
2006
96
2007
221,253
81
Lubbock
2006
98
2007
213,988
101
McAllen
2006
28
2007
129,455
27
McKinney
2006
50
2007
118,113
45
Mesquite
2006
10
2007
132,399
8
Midland
2006
58
2007
103,118
57
Pasadena
2006
49
2007
145,235
75
Plano
2006
41
2007
259,771
52
Richardson
2006
12
2007
100,933
22
San Antonio
2006
514
2007
1,316,882
635
Waco
2006
72
2007
122,514
95
Wichita Falls
2006
27
2007
98,717
31
Utah
Provo
2006
49
2007
115,264
28
Salt Lake City
2006
95
2007
178,449
116
West Valley
2006
74
2007
121,447
90
Virginia
Alexandria
2006
27
2007
137,812
18
Chesapeake
2006
60
2007
223,093
78
Hampton
2006
53
2007
144,490
52
Newport News
2006
114
2007
177,550
91
Norfolk
2006
105
2007
227,903
97
Portsmouth
2006
38
2007
101,284
36

TABLE 6.3
Annual Uniform Crime Report, January-December 2007 (Continued )
Offenses reported to law enforcement
by state and by city 100,000 and over in population
State
City
Population1
Forcible Rape
Richmond
2006
78
2007
191,785
53
Virginia Beach
2006
116
2007
435,943
88
Washington
Bellevue
2006
42
2007
118,984
29
Seattle
2006
129
2007
585,118
90
Spokane
2006
91
2007
198,272
88
Tacoma7
2006
142
2007
196,909
138
Vancouver
2006
103
2007
161,092
118
Wisconsin
Green Bay
2006
50
2007
100,010
67
Madison
2006
64
2007
225,370
57
Milwaukee
2006
220
2007
572,938
236
Source: Crime in the United States. Preliminary Annual Uniform Crime Report. Department of Justice. Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, 2007. Available from http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/2007prelim/table4al_ca.htm.
1The 2007 population figures are FBI estimates based on provisional data from the U.S. Census Bureau.
2The FBI does not publish arson data unless it receives 12 months data from either the agency or the state for 2006 
and/or 2007.
3The population for the city of Mobile, Alabama, includes 61,856 inhabitants from the jurisdiction of the Mobile 
County Sheriff’s Department.
4The FBI determined that the agency did not follow national Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program guidelines for 
reporting an offense. Consequently, this figure is not included in this table and has been excluded from all Report 
tabulations.
5Elk Grove, California, became an incorporated city in July 2006. Therefore, complete January through December 
data for 2006 are not available.
6The data collection methodology for the offense of forcible rape used by the Illinois (with the exception of Rockford, IL) 
state Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program does not comply with national UCR guidelines. Consequently, their figures 
for forcible rape and violent crime (of which forcible rape is a part) are not published in this Report.
7Because of changes in the agency’s reporting practices, figures are not comparable to previous years’ data.
8Due to an annexation, population and figures may not be comparable to previous years’ data.

202 Data and Documents
 Further Reading 
 Brownmiller, Susan.  Against Our Will: Men, Women, and Rape. New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1975. 
 Flowers, R. Barri.  Runaway Kids and Teenage Prostitution: America ’ s Lost, 
Abandoned, and Sexually Exploited Children. New York: Praeger, 2001. 
 Flowers, R. Barri.  Sex Crimes: Perpetrators, Predators, Prostitutes, and 
Victims. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 2006. 
 Koss, Mary P. “Hidden Rape: Incidence, Prevalence, and Descriptive 
Characteristics of Sexual Aggression Reported by a National Sample of 
Postsecondary Students.” In A. W. Burgess, ed.  Sexual Assault, vol. 2, 
New York: Garland, 1988. 
 Warshaw, Robin.  I Never Called It Rape: The Ms.  Report on Recognizing, 
Fighting, and Surviving Date and Acquaintance Rape. New York: Harper 
Perennial, 1994. 

203
 7 
 Directory of Organizations 
 Abused Deaf Women’s Advocacy Services (ADWAS) 
 8623 Roosevelt Way NE 
 Seattle WA 98115 
 TTY: 206-726–0093 TTY: 1–800–787–3224 
 Sexual Assault Crisis Line: TTY: 1–888–236–1355 
24 hours —7 days a week 
 Domestic Violence Crisis Line: TTY: 1–888–236–1355 
24 hours —7 days a week 
 E-mail: adwas@ndvh.org 
 URL: http://www.adwas.org 
 Abused Deaf Women’s Advocacy Services (ADWAS) is the first 
organization to provide services to deaf victims of crime. It began 
in 1986 as a support agency for deaf, deaf-blind, and hard-of-
hearing victims of sexual assault and domestic violence. ADWAS 
has since established the nation’s first transitional housing 
program for deaf victims of abuse, “A Place of Our Own.” It 
has branches in 14 cities across the United States. In addition to 
the crisis lines, services include support groups for both female 
and male victims of physical, sexual, or emotional abuse and 
educational programs on date rape and teen battering that are 
presented to high schools with deaf populations. 
 AdvocateWeb 
 P.O. Box 202961 
 Austin, TX 78720 
 Phone: 512–249–1217 
 E-mail: hope@advocateweb.org 
 http://www.advocateweb.org 

204 Directory of Organizations
 AdvocateWeb, a Web-only organization in existence since 1998, 
provides free public information on the Web about sexual abuse or 
exploitation by someone in a position of trust, such as a teacher, 
physician, or member of the clergy. The organization serves as 
a resource for victim/survivors, their families and friends, the 
general public, and for victim advocates and professionals. 
 Association for Women’s Self-Defense Advancement 
(AWSDA) 
 556 Route 17 North, Suite 7–209 
 Paramus, NJ 07652 
 Phone: 1–888-STOP RAPE or 201–794 –2153. 
Fax: 201–791– 6005. 
 E-mail: info@awsda.org 
 URL: http://www.awsda.org/ 
 When a serial rapist is active, many communities respond by 
promoting women’s self-defense courses. The Association for 
Women’s Self-Defense Advancement (AWSDA) is dedicated to 
year-round promotion of the best self-defense techniques. It began 
in 1990 to provide women with practical self-defense training 
and information about legal rights in regard to self-defense. 
Members, who are generally in law enforcement or antirape 
work, are expected to promote women’s self-defense in their 
local communities by making use of the organization’s newsletter 
advice and its annual training seminar. 
 Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers 
 4900 S.W. Griffith Drive, Suite 274 
 Beaverton, Oregon U.S.A. 97005 
 Phone: 503–643–1023 
 Fax: 503–643–5084 
 E-mail: atsa@atsa.com 
 URL: http://www.atsa.com 
 The challenging problem of what to do with sex offenders has 
bedeviled communities across the country. The Association 
for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers (ATSA) is a professional 
association that focuses on sexual offender identification and 
treatment. It grew out of a series of conferences in the late 1970s. 
ATSA helps with the effective management of sex offenders by 
providing the latest research on current issues. ATSA has issued 
several policy statements, on civil commitment of sexually violent 
offenders and chemical castration among others, to provide state 

Directory of Organizations 205
and local government bodies with formulating public policy on 
sex offenders. 
 American Civil Liberties Union 
 733 15th Street NW, Suite 620 
 Washington, DC 20005 
 Phone: 202–393 – 4930 
 Fax: 202– 393–  4931 
 URL: http://www.aclu.org 
 The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) established two 
projects in 1972 that address sexual crime as part of their broader 
missions. The National Prison Project seeks to protect prisoners 
from rape, while the Women’s Rights Project seeks to empower 
female victims of sexual abuse. The National Prison Project, the only 
national litigation program on behalf of prisoners, seeks to create 
constitutional conditions of confinement and strengthen prisoners’ 
rights through class action litigation and public education. The 
Project also publishes a semi-annual journal, coordinates a 
nationwide network of litigators, conducts training and public 
education conferences, and provides expert advice and technical 
assistance to local community groups and lawyers throughout the 
country. The Women’s Rights Project uses litigation, community 
outreach, advocacy and public education to advance battered 
women’s civil rights and challenge the housing and employment 
discrimination experienced by so many battered women, especially 
low-income and women of color. 
 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
(ACOG)
 409 12th Street SW 
 Washington, DC 20024 
 Phone: 202–638–5577 
 Fax: 202–  484 –3917 
 URL: http://www.acog.org 
 The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
(ACOG), founded in 1951, is the nation’s leading group of 
professionals providing health care for women. To promote 
quality health care for women and increase awareness about 
women’s health care, ACOG produces publications on violence 
against women (intimate partner violence, sexual assault, 
adolescent dating violence) and materials for patient education 
in English and Spanish. 

206 Directory of Organizations
 American Professional Society on the Abuse 
of Children (APSAC) 
 350 Poplar Avenue 
 Elmhurst, IL 60126 
 Phone: 630 –941–1235, Toll Free: 1–877–  402–7722 
 Fax: 630–359–  4274 
 E-mail: apsac@apsac.org 
 URL: http://www.apsac.org 
 The American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children 
(APSAC), founded in 1987, is a multidisciplinary society of 
professionals working in the fields of child abuse research, 
prevention, treatment, investigation, litigation, and policy. It 
aims to prevent child abuse by eliminating recurrence of child 
maltreatment, promoting research, educating the public, and 
connecting professionals to help formulate policy and guidelines. 
 Campus Outreach Services 
 109 Summer Hill Lane 
 St. Davids, PA 19087 
 Phone: 610–989–0651 
 Fax: 610–989–0652 
 E-mail: info@campusoutreachservices.com 
 URL: http://www.campusoutreachservices.com/contact.html 
 Campus Outreach Services is the creation of Katie Koestner, who 
was sexually assaulted by a fellow college student. The organization 
focuses on the prevention of date rape and other sexual crimes 
by offering speakers and programs on sexual violence, providing 
research aid, lobbying for sexual assault related legislation, and 
collaborating with the association with the National Center for 
Higher Education Risk Management (http://www.ncherm.org). 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
 National Center for Injury Prevention and Control (NCIPC) 
 4770 Buford Hwy, NE 
 MS F-63 
 Atlanta, GA 30341–3717 
 Phone: 1–800-CDC-INFO (232– 4636) 
 TTY: 1–888-232– 6348 
 Fax: 770– 488 – 4760 
 E-mail: cdcinfo@cdc.gov 
 URL: http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/dvp/SV/default.htm 

Directory of Organizations 207
 The U.S. Surgeon General identified violent behavior as a public 
health concern in 1979. In the following year, the Centers for 
Disease Control (CDC) began studying patterns of violence. 
These early activities grew into a national program to reduce 
the death and disability associated with injuries outside the 
workplace. In 1992, the CDC established the National Center 
for Injury Prevention and Control ( NCIPC ) as the lead federal 
organization for violence prevention. The Division of Violence 
Prevention ( DVP), one of three divisions within NCIPC, aims 
to stop violence before it begins. The CDC also tracks violence 
against women, develops antiviolence prevention programs, and 
promotes research into violent behaviors directed at women. 
 Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM) 
 c/o Center for Effective Public Policy 
 8403 Colesville Road, Suite 720 
 Silver Spring, MD 20910 
 Phone: 301–589–9383 
 Fax: 301–589–3505 
 E-mail: cartermm@cepp.com 
 URL: http://www.csom.org 
 The Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM), part of the 
U.S. Department of Justice, began in 1997 to manage sex offenders 
in the community. CSOM provides an information exchange about 
effective procedures for managing sex offenders and training to 
those responsible for such individuals. 
 Childhelp USA 
 15757 North 78th Street 
 Scottsdale, AZ 85260 
 Phone: 480 –922– 8212 
 TTD: 1– 800 –222– 4453 
 National Child Abuse Hotline, 
1– 800 – 4-A-CHILD 
 URL: http://www.childhelpusa.org 
 Childhelp USA was started in 1959 by Sara O’Meara and Yvonne 
Fedderson to combat child abuse. The organization seeks to 
prevent child abuse and promote healing through residential 
treatment centers, foster care, and group homes. It sponsors the 
National Day of Hope in April, which is National Child Abuse 
Prevention Month. 

208 Directory of Organizations
 Clan Star, Inc. 
 P.O. Box 2410 
 Cherokee, NC 28719 
 Phone: 828 – 497–5507, Toll-Free: 1– 888-636 – 4748 
 Fax: 828– 497–5688 
 URL: http://www.clanstar.org/ 
 Clan Star has begun to strengthen Native American justice 
systems. It is based on the Indian way of life, which recognizes the 
unique role of and respect for all living things. Abuse of women 
and children is not traditional and not acceptable. Clan Star focuses 
on gender-based crimes such as domestic violence, sexual assault, 
and stalking. 
 Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking (CAST)
 042 Wilshire Blvd., #586 
 Los Angeles CA 90036 
 Phone: 213–365 –1906 
 Fax: 213 –365 –5257 
 E-mail: info@castla.org 
 URL: http://www.castla.org 
 The sexual trafficking of women has increased dramatically since 
the end of the Cold War, yet the issue has attracted comparatively 
little attention. The Coalition to Abolish Slavery & Trafficking 
(CAST), established in 1998, helps women who are trafficked for 
sexual and other purposes by providing legal aid, social services, 
and police training. CAST opened the first shelter for trafficked 
women in the United States. 
 Community United Against Violence 
 170A Capp Street 
 San Francisco, CA 94110 
 Phone: 415 –777–5500 
 Fax: 415 –777–5565 
 24-hour Crisis Line: 415 –333-HELP (4357) 
 E-mail: info@cuav.org 
 URL: http://www.cuav.org/contact 
 Founded in 1979 in the wake of the antigay murders of two San 
Francisco government officials, Community United Against Violence
(CUAV) is a multicultural, antioppression organization working 
to end violence against and within the lesbian, gay, bisexual,

Directory of Organizations 209
transgender, queer, and questioning (LGBTQQ) communities. It 
focuses on hate violence as well as domestic violence. CUAV was 
one of the first agencies in the country to realize the gravity of 
domestic violence in our LGBTQQ communities. 
 Coordinadora Paz para la Mujer, Inc. [Coordinating 
Peace for the Woman] 
 Apartado 193008 
 San Juan, Puerto Rico 00919– 3008 
 Phone: 787–281–7579 
 Fax: 787–767– 6843 
 E-mail: pazmujer@prtc.net 
 URL: http://www.pazparalamujer.org/contacto.html 
 Coordinadora Paz para la Mujer [Coordinating Peace for the 
Woman], founded in 1989, is a feminist Latina organization that 
works to stop violence against women and provide services to 
female victims of domestic violence and their children. It is the first 
group to specifically serve the Latina community in the United 
States. It grew out of Law 54, legislation passed by Puerto Rico 
in 1989 to combat domestic violence that has served as model for 
domestic violence legislation throughout Latin America and the 
Caribbean.
 COYOTE and St. James Infirmary 
 St. James Infirmary 
 1372 Mission Street 
 San Francisco, CA 94103 
 Phone: 415–554 – 8494 
 Fax: 415 –554 – 8444 
 URL: http://www.stjamesinfirmary.org/ 
 Call Off Your Old Tired Ethics, better known as COYOTE, was 
formed in 1973 to work for the legalization of prostitution laws 
and an end to the stigma associated with sex work. Margo St. 
James, who spent five years as a prostitute in the 1960s, began 
the group in San Francisco, California. Part of the feminist 
movement, COYOTE is the best known of the groups in the 
prostitution rights movement. In 1999, St. James and COYOTE 
founded St. James Infirmary, a free occupational health and 
safety clinic for current, former, and transitioning sex workers 
in San Francisco. The infirmary offers primary medical care, 
harm-reduction help, such as testing for sexually transmitted 

210 Directory of Organizations
diseases and mental health counseling, as well as a pretrial 
diversion program for those charged with prostitution-related 
crimes. 
 Faith Trust Institute 
 2400 N. 45th Street, Suite 10 
 Seattle, WA 98103 
 Phone: 206 – 634 –1903 ext. 10 
 E-mail info@faithtrustinstitute.org 
 URL: http://www.faithtrustinstitute.org/ 
 Faith Trust Institute, founded in 1977 by the Reverend Marie M. 
Fortune, is an ecumenical organization that focuses on education, 
clergy training, and pastoral care of sexual assault victims. It 
serves as a bridge between religious and secular communities 
with an emphasis on education and prevention. Accordingly, it has 
developed education and prevention programs, including a clergy 
ethics program, for Buddhist, Jewish, Protestant, and Roman 
Catholic communities. 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation 
 Various branch offices 
 URL: http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cid/cac/crimesmain.htm 
 The Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) is the investigative 
arm of the U.S. Department of Justice. The FBI has the mission of 
preventing and investigating crimes that cross state boundaries. 
Like several other federal agencies, it addresses sexual crime. The 
FBI’s Crimes Against Children (CAC) program seeks to improve 
the abilities of state and local law enforcement to respond quickly 
and effectively to child sexual exploitation. CAC offers investigative 
assistance and training programs. 
 Feminist Majority Foundation 
 1600 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 801 
 Arlington, VA 22209 
 Phone: 703–522–2214 
 URL: http://www.feminist.org 
 The Feminist Majority Foundation ( FMF ), founded in 1987, seeks 
to empower women economically, socially, and politically. It has 
programs related to women and policing, domestic violence, sexual 
assault, and women’s health. 

Directory of Organizations 211
 Gift From Within 
 16 Cobb Hill Rd. 
 Camden, ME 04843 
 Phone: 207–236–8858 
 Fax: 207–236–2818 
 URL: http://www.giftfromwithin.org/ 
 Gift from Within, founded by Frank M. Ochberg in 1993, is 
dedicated to those who suffer posttraumatic stress disorder 
( PTSD), those at risk for developing the ailment, and caregivers. 
It provides educational materials. 
 Hamilton Fish Institute on School 
and Community Violence 
 2121 K Street NW, Suite 200 
 Washington, DC 20037 
 Phone: 202– 496–2200 
 Fax: 202– 496–6244 
 URL: http://www.hamfish.org 
 The Hamilton Fish Institute on School and Community is a 
national clearinghouse for K-12 school violence prevention 
programs. The Institute, administered by George Washington 
University since its founding in 1997, focuses upon adolescent 
violence, criminology, law enforcement, substance abuse, juvenile 
justice, public health, education, behavior disorders, and social 
skills development as well as prevention programs. 
 Higher Education Center for Alcohol and Other 
Drug Abuse and Violence Prevention 
 55 Chapel Street 
 Newton, MA 02458 
 Phone: 800–676–1730 
 Fax: 617–928–1537 
 URL: http://www.edc.org/hec 
 The U.S. Department of Education established the Center in 1993 
to serve as the national resource center for institutions of higher 
education concerned with reducing alcohol, other drug use, 
and violence. The Center provides training and publications to 
help colleges universities to develop, implement, and evaluate 
prevention programs and policies. Date and fraternity rape is 
often linked to the consumption of alcohol. 

212 Directory of Organizations
 Human Rights Watch 
 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th floor 
 New York, NY 10118–10118 
 Phone: 212–290– 4700 
 E-mail: hrwnyc@hrw.org 
 URL: http://www.hrw.org/ 
 Much of the information about rape around the world is 
provided by Human Rights Watch, an international human rights 
organization. Human Rights Watch also sponsors a film festival 
that has included films about sexual crime. 
 IAFN Sexual Assault Forensic Examination 
Technical Assistance (SAFE TA) 
 1517 Ritchie Hwy, Ste 208 
 Arnold, MD 21012–21012 
 Phone: 410–626–7805 
 Fax: 410–626–7804 
 Helpline: 877–819–7278 
 E-mail: info@safeta.org 
 URL: http://www.safeta.org/ 
 SAFETA is the main organization for Sexual Assault Nurse 
Examiners and Sexual Assault Response Team members. Funded 
by the federal Office on Violence Against Women, it provides a 
helpline and Website for further information about the National 
Protocol for Sexual Assault Medical Forensic Examinations. 
 Illusion Theatre 
 528 Hennepin Avenue, Suite 704 
 Minneapolis, MN 55403 
 Phone: (612)339– 4944 
 E-mail: info@illusiontheater.org 
 URL: http://www.illusiontheater.org/ 
 Illusion Theater uses drama to teach children about the difficult 
topic of sexual abuse. The theater’s nationally acclaimed sexual 
abuse prevention play, TOUCH, was created in 1978 by Michel 
Robins and Bonnie Morris in collaboration with the Child Sexual 
Abuse Prevention Project of the Hennepin County Attorney’s 
Office to teach young people about personal body safety. TOUCH 
pioneered the concept of education/prevention plays. Through its 
Peer Education Program, the theater allows other groups to perform 

Directory of Organizations 213
all of its plays. A discussion led by a moderator concludes every 
performance, allowing children to further explore challenging 
ideas. 
 IMPACT International 
 Various sites 
 1–800–345-KICK 
 URL: http://www.wammselfdefense.org/wamm_resources/
other_chapters.htm
 IMPACT, also known as model mugging, offers self-defense 
to women and children. Created by law enforcement officers, 
psychologists, and martial arts experts, it is based on the fact 
that individuals who appear strong are less likely to be attacked 
and women who fight back have a significantly better chance 
of avoiding being raped and murdered. Developed in 1971, 
IMPACT simulates realistic scenarios to help participants 
develop the skills necessary to address threats. Participants 
practice verbal as well as full-contact physical skills on a padded 
assailant. Maximum retention and muscle memory is obtained 
when the course is spread out over several weeks, rather than an 
intensive weekend. Clients learn how to perceive and analyze 
dangerous situations, use verbal and other interventions for 
de-escalation and conflict resolution, develop confidence in 
their ability to avoid or mitigate danger, and deploy physical 
intervention skills for defense against single or multiple 
assailants. There are specialized curricula to train adults, teens, 
children and special needs individuals who are blind or otherwise 
physically challenged. The IMPACT for Kids program, as one 
example, offers practical safety skills in a fun, age-appropriate 
environment for 7–10 year-old girls and boys. Children learn 
to use their voices for protection and draw attention to an 
unsafe situation, use physical skills to get away from someone 
threatening them, remember the details of an altercation, and tell 
a safe adult what happened. 
 Incite! Women of Color Against Violence 
 P.O. Box 226 
 Redmond, WA 98073 
 Phone: 484–932–3166 
 E-mail: incite_national-at-yahoo.com 
 URL: http://www.incite-national.org/ 

214 Directory of Organizations
 Incite! formed in 2000 as an outgrowth of a conference on 
violence against women. The organization argues that women of 
color and their allies are hungry for a new approach toward ending 
violence. Incite! has grown into grassroots chapters and affiliates 
across the country; launched political projects mobilizing women 
of color against violence; held conferences; and sparked critical 
dialogue through two anthologies, posters, and other media. 
 International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) 
 515 North Washington Street 
 Alexandria, VA 22314 
 Phone: 703–836– 4718 
 Fax: 703–836– 4718, Toll Free: 800– 843– 4227 
 URL: http://www.theiacp.org/ 
 The International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) Victim 
Services Committee aims to improve victim awareness training for 
law enforcement personnel. IACP also lobbies to obtain funding 
for victim awareness program 
 International Association of Forensic Nurses (IAFN) 
 1517 Ritchie Hwy, Suite 208 
 Arnold, MD 21012 
 Phone: 410–626–7805 
 Fax: 410–626–7804 
 E-mail: info@iafn.org. 
 URL: http://www.iafn.org/ 
 IAFN is the only international association of registered nurses that 
focuses on forensic nursing. Forensic nursing is the application of 
nursing science to public or legal proceedings; the application 
of the forensic aspects of health care are combined with the 
biopsychosocial education of the registered nurse in the scientific 
investigation and treatment of trauma and/or death of victims 
and perpetrators of abuse, violence, criminal activity, and 
traumatic accidents. 
 Legal Momentum 
 395 Hudson Street, 5th Floor 
 New York, NY 10014 
 Phone: 212–925–6635 
 Fax: 212–226–1066 
 URL: http://www.nowldef.org/ 

Directory of Organizations 215
 Legal Momentum (formerly National Organization for Women 
Legal Defense & Education Fund) provides legal advocacy for 
female victims of sexual crime. It also offers free, confidential legal 
information, as well as referrals and legal resource kits. 
 Male Survivor (formerly National Organization 
on Male Sexual Victimization) 
 PMB 103 5505 Connecticut Avenue, NW 
 Washington, DC 20015–20015 
 Phone: 800–738–4181 
 URL: http://www.malesurvivor.org 
 Male Survivor addresses the sexual victimization of men and 
boys. It formed in 1995 as an outgrowth of several professional 
conferences on male sexual victimization. The organization 
focuses on public education, advocating treatment for victims 
and perpetrators, and offering voice and experience to those 
developing prevention programs 
 Men Can Stop Rape 
 P.O. Box 57144 
 Washington, DC 20037 
 Phone: 202–265–6530 
 Fax: 202–285–4362 
 URL: http://www.mencanstoprape.org/ 
 Men Can Stop Rape focuses on changing male attitudes that 
permit sexual violence against women. It focuses on education and 
community organizing. 
 Mending the Sacred Hoop 
 202 East Superior Street 
 Duluth, MN 55802 
 Phone: 218–722–2781, Toll Free: 1–888–305–1650 
 Fax: 218–722–5775 
 URL: http://www.msh-ta.org 
 This organization focuses on stopping domestic violence and 
sexual assault within Native American communities through 
training, technical assistance, and resource development. 
 Miles Foundation, Inc. 
 P.O. Box 423 
 Newtown, CT 06470–06470 

216 Directory of Organizations
 Phone: 203–270–7861 
 Advocacy Helpline: 877–570–0688 
 E-mail: Milesfdn@aol.com or milesfd@yahoo.com 
 URL: http://www.vva.org/Committees/WomenVeterans/
MilesFoundationSAMM.htm
 Targeting sexual harassment and sexual assault within the 
military, this is a private organization that provides education and 
training. It also serves as a resource center for the military and 
civilian communities. 
 National Alliance to End Sexual Violence 
 1101 Vermont Street, N.W., Suite 400 
 Washington, DC 20005 
 E-mail: info@naesv.org 
 URL: http://www.naesv.org 
 The National Alliance to End Sexual Violence, which began in 
September of 1995, is an organization that focuses on public policy 
and public education to end sexual violence. 
 National Association of Counsel for Children 
 1825 Marion Street, Suite 340 
 Denver, CO 80218 
 Phone: 888–828–6222 
 Fax: 303–864–5351 
 URL: http://www.naccchildlaw.org/ 
 The National Association of Counsel for Children ( NACC) 
began in 1977 to improve the condition of America’s children 
involved with the legal system. It aims to provide high quality legal 
representation for children. 
 National Black Women’s Health Imperative 
 1420 K Street, N.W., Suite 1000 
 Washington, D.C. 20005 
 Phone: 202–548–4000 
 E-mail: info@BlackWomensHealth.ORG 
 URL: http://www.blackwomenshealth.org/ 
 The National Black Women’s Health Imperative, formerly known 
as the National Black Women’s Health Project, is a black feminist 
group that addresses sexual violence among other health 
concerns. It began in 1983 under founder Byllye Y. Avery. When 
the group became the Imperative in 2002, it instituted aggressive 

Directory of Organizations 217
national programs in health policy, education, research, knowledge 
and leadership development and communications to save and 
extend the lives of black women. 
 National Center for Higher Education 
Risk Management (NCHERM) 
 20 Callery Way 
 Malvern, PA 19355 
 Phone: 610–964–9836 
 Fax: 610–989–0652 
 URL: http://www.ncherm.org/ 
 The National Center for Higher Education Risk Management 
( NCHERM) helps colleges and universities to create safe 
learning environments by providing services and publications. 
NCHERM typically aids student affairs administrators. 
 National Center for Injury Prevention and Control 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
 Mailstop K65 
 4770 Buford Highway NE 
 Atlanta, GA 30341–30341 
 Phone: 770– 488–1506 
 Fax: 770– 488–1667 
 URL: http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc 
 Operated by the Centers for Disease Control, the National Center 
for Injury Prevention and Control (NCIPC) aims to reduce 
intentional and unintentional injuries in the United States. As part 
of its mission, it seeks to stop crime, including intimate partner 
violence, sexual violence, child maltreatment and other violent acts 
and preventable injuries. 
 National Center for Missing & Exploited Children 
 Chas B. Wang International Children’s Bldg. 
 699 Prince Street 
 Alexandria, VA 22314–22314 
 Phone: 703–274–3900 
 Fax: 703–274–2200 
 24-Hour Hotline: 800–843–5678 
 URL: http://www.missingkids.com/ 
 The National Center for Missing & Exploited Children (NCMEC) 
raises public awareness about ways to help prevent child 
abduction, molestation, and sexual exploitation. It is the best 

218 Directory of Organizations
known organization dedicated to helping missing and exploited 
children. 
 National Center for Prosecution of Child Abuse 
 American Prosecutors Research Institute 
 99 Canal Center Plaza, Suite 510 
 Alexandria, VA 22314 
 Phone: 703–519–1678 
 Fax: 703–549–6259 
 URL: http://www.ndaa-apri.org/ 
 Created to improve the prosecution of child abusers, the National 
Center for Prosecution of Child Abuse is a program of the 
American Prosecutors Research Institute. It provides training and 
legal assistance to prosecutors and investigators. 
 National Center for Victims of Crime 
 2000 M Street NW, Suite 480 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 Phone: 202– 467–8700 
 Fax: 202– 467–8701 
 Helpline: 800–394–2255 Monday through Friday, 
8:30 A.M.—8:30 P.M. EST 
 URL: http://www.ncvc.org/ 
 The National Center for Victims of Crime (NCVC) helps victims 
recover. The organization operates a toll-free helpline for victims 
and their advocates. 
 National Center for Women & Policing 
 433 South Beverly Drive 
 Beverly Hills, CA 90212 
 Phone: 310–556–2526 
 Fax: 310–556–2509 
 URL: http://www.feminist.org/police 
 A division of the Feminist Majority Foundation, the National 
Center for Women & Policing (NCWP), aims to increase the 
numbers of women at all ranks of law enforcement to help 
improve police responses to violence against women. 
 National Center on Elder Abuse 
 University of Delaware 297 Graham Hall 

Directory of Organizations 219
 Newark, DE 19716 USA 
 Phone: 302–831–3525 
 Fax: 302–831– 4225 
 E-mail: ncea-info@aoa.hhs.gov 
 URL: http://www.ncea.aoa.gov 
 The National Center on Elder Abuse aims to stop crimes that 
are rarely reported by providing information, training, and 
research. 
 National Children’s Alliance 
 516 C Street, NE 
 Washington, DC 20002 
 Phone: 800-239– 9950 or 202–548–0090 
 Fax: 202–548–0099 
 E-mail: info@nca-online.org 
 URL: http://www.nca-online.org 
 The National Children’s Alliance (formerly the National Network 
of Children’s Advocacy Centers) is a not-for profit organization 
that provides training, technical assistance, and networking 
opportunities to communities that are developing programs to 
help child victims of crime. 
 National Children’s Advocacy Center 
 210 Pratt Avenue, NE 
 Huntsville, AL 35801 
 Phone: 256–327–3785 
 Fax: 256–327–3864 
 URL: http://www.nationalcac.org 
 The National Children’s Advocacy Center (NCAC) is the 
leading organization in the country for training child abuse 
professionals. Founded in 1985 by Robert E. Cramer, NCAC 
sponsors the annual National Symposium on Child; the 
National Training Center to provide seminars for child abuse 
professionals; Academy Online, free weeklong classes; and the 
National Conference on Child Sexual Abuse Prevention. It also 
sponsors the Southern Regional Children’s Advocacy Center 
(SRCAC). The SRCAC, operating in 17 southern states, provides 
information, consultation and training and technical assistance, 
helping to establish child-focused programs that facilitate and 
support coordination among agencies responding to child abuse. 

220 Directory of Organizations
 National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse & Neglect Information 
 330 C Street SW 
 Washington, DC 20447 
 Phone: 703–385–7565, Toll Free: 800–394–3366 
 Fax: 703–385–3206 
 URL: http://nccanch.acf.hhs.gov/ 
 The National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect 
Information was established by the Child Abuse Prevention and 
Treatment Act of 1974. The Clearinghouse helps professionals 
locate information related to child abuse, neglect, and related 
child welfare issues. 
 National Clearinghouse on Marital and Date Rape 
 URL: http://members.aol.com/ncmdr/index.html 
 This organization became defunct in 2004 but it has maintained a 
Webpage for historical purposes. The clearinghouse is best known 
for a campaign to make marital/cohabitant/date rape a crime, at 
least where force is used, in all fifty states. All the governments in 
the U.N. voted in Beijing in 1995 to abolish the marital privilege to 
sex on demand from wives. The clearinghouse viewed this vote as 
testimony to its world-wide strength. 
 National Coalition Against Domestic Violence 
 1633 Q Street NW, Suite 210 
 Washington, DC 20009 
 Phone: 202–745–1211 
 Fax: 202–745–0088 
 TTY: 202–745–2042 
 URL: http://www.ncadv.org/ 
 The National Coalition Against Domestic Violence (NCADV) does 
not provide direct services but instead focuses on public policy 
and legislative issues. 
 National Coalition of Anti-Violence Projects 
 240 West 35th Street 
 Suite 200 
 New York, NY 10001 
 Phone: 212–714–1184 
 Fax: 212–714–2627 
 E-mail: info@ncavp.org 
 URL: http://www.ncavp.org 

Directory of Organizations 221
 The National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs (NCAVP) 
targets violence directed at and within the lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender (LGBT), and HIV-affected communities. 
 National Coalition for the Protection of Children & 
Families ( NCPCF ) 
 800 Compton Road, Suite 9224 
 Cincinnati, OH 45231 
 Phone: 513–521–6227 
 Fax: 513–521–6337 
 Helpline: 800–583–2964 
 URL: http://www.nationalcoalition.org/ 
 The National Coalition for the Protection of Children & Families 
(NCPCF), formerly the National Coalition Against Pornography, 
seeks to protect children and families from the dangers posed by 
pornography. 
 National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse 
 1612 K Street, NW, Suite 400 
 Washington, DC 20006 
 Phone: 202–682–4140 
 Fax: 202–682–3984 
 URL: http://www.preventelderabuse.org/ 
 The National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse 
publishes the Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect and  NEXUS.
 National Council on Child Abuse and Family 
Violence (NCCAFV) 
 1025 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 1012 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 Phone: 202–429–6695 
 Fax: 831–655–3930 
 URL: http://www.nccafv.org 
 The National Council on Child Abuse and Family Violence 
( NCCAFV ) seeks to stop intergenerational violence. It provides 
public awareness and educational materials. 
 National Crime Victim Law Institute 
 10015 SW Terwilliger Boulevard 
 Portland, OR 97219–97219 
 Phone: 503–768–6819 

222 Directory of Organizations
 Fax: 503–768–6671 
 URL: http://www.ncvli.org/ 
 The National Crime Victim Law Institute (NCVLI), established 
in 2000, is a non-profit research and educational organization at 
Lewis & Clark Law School, Portland, Oregon. It promotes the 
rights of victims within the judicial system. 
 National Crime Victims Research & Treatment Center 
 Medical University of South Carolina 
 165 Cannon Street 
 Charleston, SC 29425 
 Phone: 843–792–2945 
 Fax: 843–792–3388 
 URL: http://www.musc.edu/cvc 
 The National Crime Victims Research & Treatment Center 
provides mental health services to crime victims and their 
families. It also provides educational materials and training 
about trauma-related topics. 
 National Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA) 
 5100 SW Macadam Avenue, Suite 300 
 Portland, OR 97201 
 Phone: 503–222–4044 
 Fax: 503–222–4007 
 URL: http://www.nicwa.org/ 
 The National Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA) provides 
information, training, and advocacy to benefit Native American 
child welfare. 
 National Institute on Drug Abuse 
 6001 Executive Boulevard 
 Bethesda, MD 20892–20892 
 Phone: 301– 443–1124 
 Fax: 301– 443–7397 
 URL: http://www.clubdrugs.org/ 
 The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), part of the 
National Institutes of Health, supports research on drug abuse 
and addiction. It particularly focuses on club drugs such as 
“Ecstasy,” that have also been implicated in date rapes. NIDA’s 
Web site provides scientific information about club drugs. 

Directory of Organizations 223
 National Organization for Victim Assistance 
 510 King Street, Suite 424 
 Alexandria, VA 22314 
 Phone: 202–232–6682 
 24-Hour Information and Referral: 800–879–6682 
 URL: http://www.try-nova.org/ 
 The National Organization for Victim Assistance ( NOVA) is a 
nonprofit organization of former victims and those who work 
with victims. It provides lobbying, direct victim assistance, and 
continuing education for social workers and the like. NOVA 
coordinates the National Crisis Response Team and the National 
Crime Victim Information and Referral Hotline. 
 National Organization of Sisters of Color 
Ending Sexual Assault (SCESA) 
 P.O. Box 625 
 Canton, CT 06019 
 Phone: 860–693–2031 
 URL: http://www.sisterslead.org 
 Women of color are more likely to be the victims of sexual 
attacks than white women. The National Organization of Sisters 
of Color Ending Sexual Assault (SCESA) attempts to guarantee 
that policymakers consider the point of view of minority women 
when sexual assault initiatives are created and implemented. 
The organization also provides training in communities of 
color. 
 National Sexual Assault Coalition Resource 
Sharing Project 
 c/o Iowa Coalition Against Sexual Assault 515 
28th Street, Suite 107 
 Des Moines, IA 50312 
 Phone: 515–244–7424, Toll Free: 800–284–7821 
 Fax: 515–244–7417 
 E-mail: rsp@iowacasa.org 
 URL: http://www.resourcesharingproject.org/ 
 The National Sexual Assault Coalition Resource Sharing Project 
(RSP) seeks to guarantee that antirape organizations take full 
advantage of available resources. Many of these groups are 
grassroots organizations with limited staffing. The RSP provides 

224 Directory of Organizations
technical assistance and professional development help. The RSP 
is funded by the U.S. Department of Justice, Office on Violence 
Against Women. 
 National Sexual Violence Resource Center 
 123 North Enola Drive, Enola, PA 17025 
 Phone: 717–909–0710 
 Fax: 717–909–0714, Toll Free: 877–739–3895 
 TTY: 717–909–0715 
 E-mail: resources@nsvrc.org 
 URL: http://www.nsvrc.org/contact.aspx 
 The National Sexual Violence Resource Center (NSVRC), funded 
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Division 
of Violence Prevention, opened in July 2000 as an information 
clearinghouse on all aspects of sexual violence. The Center uses the 
information to assist groups that combat rape and help survivors 
of sexual attacks. It does not provide services directly to the public 
but it advise direct callers about the locations and contact numbers 
for their state antirape coalitions. 
 National Women’s Law Center 
 11 Dupont Circle NW, Suite 800 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 Phone: 202–588–5180 
 Fax: 202–588–5185 
 URL: http://www.nwlc.org/ 
 The National Women’s Law Center began in 1972 as a means of 
using the law to assist women and girls in every aspect of their 
lives. Although sexual crime is not the major focus of the Center, it 
does focus upon health and education as well as sexual harassment. 
The Center does not provide legal services to individuals but 
instead provides information to help formulate public policy. It 
monitors legal issues relating to women and seeks to educate the 
public about such issues. 
 Office for Victims of Crime 
 U.S. Department of Justice 810 7th Street, NW 
 Washington, DC 20531 
 Phone: 202–307–5983 
 Fax: 202–514–6383 
 Resource Center: 800–627–6872 
 URL: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/ovc 

Directory of Organizations 225
 The Office for Victims of Crime (OVC) is the federal effort to 
recognize the particular issues of crime victims. It also administers 
the Crime Victims Fund created by the Victims of Crime Act. These 
Fund supports victim assistance and victim compensation grants, 
training and technical assistance to victim service and criminal 
justice system professionals, and services for federal crime victims 
and Native American organizations. 
 Office of Juvenile Justice & Delinquency Prevention 
 810 7th Street, NW 
 Washington, DC 20531 
 Phone: 202–307–5911, Toll Free: 800–638–8736 
 Fax: 202–307–2093 
 URL: http://www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ 
 The Office of Juvenile Justice & Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) 
seeks to prevent juvenile delinquency through intervention 
programs and rehabilitation. It supports state and local 
community efforts. 
 Office of Minority Health Resource Center 
 P.O. Box 37337 
 Washington, DC 20013 
 Phone: 800–444–6472 
 Fax: 301–230–7198 
 TTY: 301–230–7199 
 URL: http://www.omhrc.gov/ 
 The Office of Minority Health Resource Center (OMHRC) is an 
information clearinghouse and referral center. Operated since 
1987 by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
OMHRC collects and distributes information on a range of health 
topics, including sexual violence. 
 Office on Violence Against Women 
 810 7th Street NW 
 Washington, DC 20531 
 Phone: 202–307–6026 
 Fax: 202–305–2589 
 TTY: 202–307–2277 
 URL: http://www.usdoj.gov/ovw/ 
 The Office on Violence Against Women (OVW), a federal agency, 
works to improve the ability of state, local, tribal, and nonprofit 
organizations to provide services to victims of sex crime. 

226 Directory of Organizations
 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Alliance 
 No street address 
 Phone: 877–507–7873 
 Fax: 410–337–0747 
 URL: http://www.ptsdalliance.org 
 The Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Alliance ( PTSD Alliance) 
provides educational assistance to healthcare professionals and 
those individuals suffering from PTSD. It consists of the American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Anxiety Disorders 
Association of America, the International Society for Traumatic 
Stress Studies, and the Sidran Traumatic Stress Institute. 
 Prevent Child Abuse America 
 200 S. Michigan Avenue 17th Floor 
 Chicago, IL 60604–60604 
 Phone: 312–663–3520 
 Fax: 312–939–8962 
 URL: http://www.preventchildabuse.org 
 Founded in 1972, Prevent Child Abuse America is one of the 
oldest organizations fighting to end child abuse. Headquartered in 
Chicago, it focuses on public awareness and prevention programs. 
 Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network (RAINN) 
 2000 L Street, NW, Suite 406 
 Washington, GA 20036 
 Phone: 202–544–1034 
 Fax: 202–544–3556 
 24 Hour Hotline: 800–656-HOPE (4673) 
 URL: http://www.rainn.org/ 
 The Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network ( RAINN ) is the 
nation’s largest organization against sexual assault. RAINN 
operates the National Sexual Assault Hotline and the National 
Sexual Assault Online Hotline at rainn.org. It publicizes the 
hotline’s free, confidential services; educates the public about 
sexual assault; and leads national efforts to prevent sexual assault, 
improve services to victims and ensure that rapists are brought to 
justice.
 Sacred Circle: National Resource Center to 
End Violence Against Native Women 
 722 St. Joseph Street 

Directory of Organizations 227
 Rapid City, SD 57701 
 Phone: 877–733–7623 
 Fax: 605–341–2472 
 Sacred Circle targets violence against Native American women by 
working with tribes and tribal organizations, especially tribal law 
enforcement personnel. Unlike organizations that are centered upon 
whites, Sacred Circle considers the unique historical, jurisdictional, 
and cultural issues that Native Americans face. It provides 
culturally appropriate information, training, and materials. 
 Security on Campus, Inc. 
 133 Ivy Lane, Suite 200 
 King of Prussia, PA 19406 
 Phone: 610–768–9330 
 Fax: 610–768–0646 
 Toll Free Hotline : 888–251–7959 
 URL: http://www.campussafety.org/ 
 Security On Campus addresses safety on college and university 
campuses. Besides educating parents and students about campus 
crime, Security on Campus helps victims of such crime and 
supports programs that reduce alcohol and drug abuse. 
 SESAME. (Stop Educator Sexual Abuse, 
Misconduct and Exploitation) 
 P.O. Box 94601 
 Las Vegas, NV 89193 
 Phone: 775–727–5428 
 URL: http://www.sesamenet.org/ 
 SESAME (Stop Educator Sexual Abuse, Misconduct and 
Exploitation) addresses sexual abuse at the K-12 level. It seeks 
to increase public awareness of sexual abuse by teachers and to 
develop policies that halt such crimes. 
 Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner/Sexual Assault 
Response Team Website 
 Sexual Assault Resource Service 
 525 Portland Avenue South, #712 
 Minneapolis, MN 55434 
 Phone: 612–347–2434 
 Fax: 612–347–8751 
 URL: http://www.sane-sart.com/ 

228 Directory of Organizations
 A Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE) is specially trained 
to collect evidence from rape victims at hospitals. This Web site, 
funded by the Office for Victims of Crime, contains a national 
database of sexual assault victim information as well as guides to 
program planning and development. 
 Sexual Assault Report (SAR) 
 3097 Ordway Street NW 
 Washington, DC 20008–3255 
 Phone: 202–362–3715 
 Fax: 413–513–8582 
 URL: http://www.civicresearchinstitute.com 
 The  Sexual Assault Report  is a newsletter about sexual crime that 
aims to keep healthcare and law enforcement personnel current 
on legal developments and medical research. 
 Sexual Assault Training & Investigations (SATI) 
 15769 Creek Hills Road 
 El Cajon, CA 92021–92021 
 Phone: 619–561–3845 
 URL: http://www.mysati.com 
 Sexual Assault Training & Investigations (SATI) offers multi-
disciplinary training for Sexual Assault Response Teams to 
encourage the reporting and successful prosecution of sex 
criminals. 
 Sexual Information and Education Council 
of the United States 
 130 W. 42nd Street, Suite 350 
 New York, NY 10036–10036 
 Phone: 212–819–9770 
 Fax: 212–819 –9776 
 URL: http://www.siecus.org 
 The Sexual Information and Education Council of the United States 
(SIECUS) is an information clearinghouse that focuses on healthy 
sexual development. It provides sex education and advocates for 
individuals to make responsible sexual choices. 
 Sidran Traumatic Stress Institute 
 200 E. Joppa Road, Suite 207 

Directory of Organizations 229
 Towson, MD 21286 
 Phone: 410–825–8888 
 Fax: 410–337–0747 
 URL: http://www.sidran.org/ 
 Sidran Traumatic Stress Institute is one of the major American 
organizations that addresses posttraumatic stress, a common 
ailment among victims of sexual crime. Sidran develops books 
and multimedia materials, assessment and teaching tools, and 
educational programs that help health care professionals and 
victims to effectively combat traumatic stress. 
 SNAP—Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests 
 P.O. Box 6416 
 Chicago, IL 60680 
 Phone: 312–409–2720 
 Fax: 314–645–2017 
 URL: http://www.snapnetwork.org/ 
 Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (SNAP) is one of 
the more prominent organizations that addresses sexual abuse by 
Catholic clergy. It is a self-help organization of victims of clergy 
abuse that includes an online support group with members from 
around the world. 
 Speaking Out About Rape 
 817 Virginia Drive, #A 
 Orlando, FL 32803 
 Phone: 407–836–9692 
 Fax: 407–836–9693 
 URL: http://soar99.org/ 
 Speaking Out About Rape (SOAR) provides the rape victim’s 
perspective to the general public. The members offer 
presentations that discuss all aspects of sexual crime. 
 Stalking Resource Center 
 2000 M Street, Suite 480 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 Phone: 202– 467–8700 
 Fax: 202– 467–8701 
 E-mail: SRC@ncvc.org 
 URL: http://www.ncvc.org/src 

230 Directory of Organizations
 The Stalking Resource Center, part of the National Center for 
Victims of Crime, provides information, training, and technical 
assistance to those who work with victims of stalking. 
 Stop it Now! 
 351 Pleasant Street, Suite B, #319 
 Northampton, MA 01060 
 Phone: 413–587–3500 
 Fax: 413–587–3505 
 Helpline: 888–773–8368 
 E-mail: info@stopitnow.org 
 URL: http://www.stopitnow.org/ 
 STOP IT NOW!, founded in 1992, offers public education 
programs that emphasize adult and community responsibility to 
prevent sex crimes against children. 
 Stop Prisoner Rape 
 325 Wilshire Blvd., Ste. 340 
 Los Angeles, CA 90010 
 Phone: 213-384–1400 
 Fax: 213–384–1411 
 E-mail: info@spr.org 
 URL: http://www.spr.org/ 
 Stop Prisoner Rape (SPR) was begun in 1980 by Russell Dan 
Smith, a survivor of rape behind bars. Originally known as People 
Organized to Stop the Rape of Imprisoned Persons (POSRIP), 
the group addresses the problems of rape, sexual assault, un-
consensual sexual slavery, and forced prostitution in the prison 
context.
 Survivors Take Action Against Abuse 
by Military Personnel (STAMP) 
 Survivors Take Action Against Abuse by Military Personnel 
 500 Greene Tree Place 
 Fairborn, OH 45324 
 Hotline: 1–866–879–2568 
 URL: http://www.militarywoman.org/stamp.htm 
 STAMP, Survivors Take Action Against Abuse by Military 
Personnel, is a grassroots organization dedicated to stopping 
abusive behavior, including sexual crimes. In partnership with 

Directory of Organizations 231
the G.I. Rights Network, STAMP connects active-duty personnel 
with information, legal representation, and support. It also connects 
domestic violence survivors with outside, civilian advocates who 
understand the unique situation of military spouses. Once out of 
the military, some STAMP members are suing their perpetrators 
in federal court; still more are marshaling for class action. 
 Take Back the Night 
 URL: http://www.takebackthenight.org/ 
 Take Back the Night is a grassroots, somewhat informal, organization 
of women and male allies who march to protest violence against 
women. It began in the United States in 1978 when protestors in 
San Francisco invoked the slogan following an antipornography 
conference. Today, it is generally antirape activism. Common 
components of Take Back the Night rallies include candlelight 
vigils, empowerment marches, and survivor testimonials. 
 Urban Institute 
 2100 M Street NW 
 Washington, DC 20037 
 Phone: 202–833–7200 
 Fax: 202–728–0232 
 URL: http://www.urban.org/ 
 The Urban Institute is a nonpartisan economic and social policy 
research organization. The scope of the institute includes housing, 
retirement, and employment issues but it also focuses upon crime, 
healthcare, and poverty. 
 V-Day 
 URL: http://www.vday.org/ 
 V-Day grew out of playwright Eve Ensler’s much-produced work 
The Vagina Monologues.  It is a global movement to stop violence 
against women and girls. V-Day promotes creative events, including 
productions of  The Vagina Monologues  to increase awareness of 
sexual abuse directed against women and girls. The organization 
also raises money for existing antirape organizations. 
 Victims’ Assistance Legal Association (VALOR) 
 8180 Greensboro Drive, Suite 1070 
 McLean, VA 22102–3823 

232 Directory of Organizations
 Phone: 703–748–0811 
 Fax: 703–356–5085 
 URL: http://www.valor-national.org 
 The Victims’ Assistance Legal Organization (VALOR), begun in 
1979 by victim advocate Frank G. Carrington, advances the legal 
rights of crime victims in the civil, criminal, and juvenile justice 
systems. It provides legal counsel to victims’ organizations and 
has filed U.S. Supreme Court briefs on behalf of victims. It also 
created the National Victim Assistance Academy. 
 Victim Rights Law Center 
 18 Tremont Street, Suite 220 
 Boston, MA 02144 
 Phone: 617–399–6720 
 Fax: 617–399–6722 
 URL: http://www.victimrights.org 
 The Victim Rights Law Center is the first law center in the United 
States to focus exclusively on the needs of victims. It provides 
sexual assault victims with free and confidential legal help. 
 Voices in Action 
 8041 Hosbrook Road, Suite 236 
 Cincinnati, OH 45236 
 Phone: 800–786–4238 
 Fax: 513–625–1194 
 URL: http://www.voices-action.org 
 VOICES in Action is a national organization for survivors of incest 
and child sexual abuse as well as family and friends of survivors. 
It offers a free referral service, a newsletter, an annual conference, 
and networking. 
 Wellesley Centers for Women 
 106 Central Street 
 Wellesley, MA 02481 
 Phone: 781–283–2500 
 Fax: 781–283–2504 
 URL: http://www.wcwonline.org 
 Wellesley Centers for Women covers a range of issues that affect 
women, including education, childcare, and gender violence. It 
has sponsored research on adult memories of childhood sexual 

State and Territorial Organizations 233
abuse, dating violence prevention programs in public schools, 
and decriminalizing consensual sex between teenagers. 
 World Health Organization 
 URL: http://www.who.int/en/ 
 The World Health Organization (WHO) is a branch of the United 
Nations and it addresses sex work as a part of its effort to address 
problems with sexually transmitted diseases. When AIDS was 
identified as a significant threat to public health in the 1980s, 
WHO formed a department, the Global Program on AIDS (GPA). 
This department has developed guidelines on how to organize 
HIV prevention programs in the context of sex work. It is GPA’s 
position that the people most affected by the epidemic have a 
crucial role to play in developing an effective response. GPA’s 
approach to prostitution uses a labor perspective by which HIV 
is addressed as a workplace issue for sex workers. This program 
later became UNAIDS. 
 YWCA of the U.S.A. 
 22 West 26th Street 9-H 
 New York, NY 10010 
 Phone: 212–273–7800 
 Fax: 212–273–7939 
 URL: http://www.ywca.org/ 
 The YWCA of the U.S.A. is a long-established, national women’s 
organization that aims to empower women and girls. Local 
YWCAs offer a range of services that may include help for victims 
of domestic violence and rape, emergency and long term housing, 
child care and youth development programs, employment 
training, women’s health programs, resource and referral services 
and advocacy. 
 State and Territorial Organizations 
 Alabama Coalition Against Rape 
 P.O. Box 4091 
 Montgomery, AL 36102 
 Phone: 334–264–0123 
 Toll-free: 888–656–4673 
 Hotline: 888–725–7273 

234 Directory of Organizations
 Fax: 334–264–0128 
 E-mail: acar@acar.org 
 URL: http://www.acar.org 
 Alaska Network on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault 
 130 Seward Street 
 Suite 214 
 Juneau, AK 99801 
 Phone: 907–586–3650 
 Toll-free: 800–520–2666 
 Fax: 907– 463–4493 
 E-mail: info@andvsa.org 
 URL: http://www.andvsa.org 
 American Samoa Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence 
 P.O. Box 1353 
 Pago Pago, AS 96799 
 Phone: 684–633–2696 
 E-mail: aluifea@yahoo.com 
 Arizona Sexual Assault Network 
 1949 East Calle De Arcos 
 Tempe, AZ 85284 
 Phone: 480–831–1986 
 Fax: 602–266–1958 
 E-mail: info@azsan.org 
 URL: http://www.ArizonaSexualAssaultNetwork.org 
 Arkansas Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 215 North East Avenue 
 Fayetteville, AR 72701 
 Phone: 479–527–0900 
 Toll-free: 866–632–2272 
 Fax: 479–527–0902 
 E-mail: acasa@sbcglobal.net 
 URL: http://www.acasa.ws/ 
 California Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 1215 K Street 
 Suite 1100 
 Sacramento, CA 95814 

State and Territorial Organizations 235
 Phone: 916–446–2520 
 Fax: 916–446–8166 
 E-mail: info@calcasa.org 
 URL: http://www.calcasa.org 
 Colorado Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 P.O. Box 300398 
 Denver, CO 80203 
 Phone: 303–861–7033 
 Toll-free: 877–372–2272 
 Fax: 303–832–7067 
 E-mail: info@ccasa.org 
 URL: http://www.ccasa.org 
 Connecticut Sexual Assault Crisis Services, Inc. 
 96 Pitkin Street 
 East Hartford, CT 06108 
 Phone: 860–282–9881 
 Toll-free: 888–999–5545 
 Hotline: 888–999–5545 
 Fax: 860–291–9335 
 E-mail: info@connsacs.org 
 URL: http://www.connacs.org 
 CONTACTLifeline, Inc. (Delaware) 
 P.O. Box 9525 
 Wilmington, DE 19809 
 Phone: 302–472–1841 
 Toll-free: 800–262– 9800 
 Fax: 302–761– 4280 
 URL: http://www.contactlifeline.org 
 Day One—Sexual Assault & Trauma Resource 
Center of Rhode Island 
 100 Medway Street 
 Providence, RI 02906 
 Phone: 401– 421–4100 
 Toll-free: 800– 494–8100 
 Hotline: 800– 494–8100 
 Fax: 401– 454–5565 
 E-mail: info@DayOneRI.org 
 URL: http://www.dayoneri.org/ 

236 Directory of Organizations
 DC Rape Crisis Center 
 P.O. Box 34125 
 Washington, DC 20043 
 Phone: 202–232–0789 
 Hotline: 202–333–7273 
 Fax: 202–387–3812 
 E-mail: dcrcc@dcrcc.org 
 URL: http://www.dcrcc.org/ 
 Domestic Violence Sexual Assault Council 
of the Virgin Islands 
 RR #1 Box 10550 
 Kingshill, VI 00850 
 Phone: 340–719–0144 
 Fax: 340–719–5521 
 E-mail: dvsac@viaccess.net 
 URL: http://www.dvsac.net 
 Florida Council Against Sexual Violence 
 1311 North Paul Russell Road 
 Suite A 204 
 Tallahassee, FL 32301 
 Phone: 850–297–2000 
 Toll-free: 888–956–7273 
 Fax: 850–297–2002 
 E-mail: information@fcasv.org 
 URL: http://www.fcasv.org 
 Georgia Network to End Sexual Assault 
 131 Ponce De Leon Avenue, Suite 131 
 Atlanta, GA 30308 
 Phone: 404–815–5261 
 Toll-free: 866–354–3672 
 Fax: 404–815–5265 
 E-mail: gnesa@mindspring.com 
 URL: http://www.gnesa.com 
 Hawaii Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 P.O. Box 10596 
 Honolulu, HI 96816 
 Phone: 808–533–1637 
 Fax: 808–733–9032 

State and Territorial Organizations 237
 Healing Hearts Crisis Center (Guam) 
 790 Governor Carlos G. Camacho Road 
 Tamuning, GU 96913 
 Phone: 671–647–5351 
 Fax: 671–647–5414 
 URL: http://www.pmcguam.com 
 Idaho Coalition Against Sexual and Domestic Violence 
 300 East Mallard Drive 
 Suite 130 
 Boise, ID 83706 
 Phone: 208–384–0419 
 Toll-free: 888–293–6118 
 Fax: 208–331–0687 
 E-mail: ahrensa@idvsa.org 
 URL: http://www.idvsa.org 
 Illinois Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 100 North 16th Street 
 Springfield, IL 62703 
 Phone: 217–753–4117 
 Fax: 217–753–8229 
 E-mail: sblack@icasa.org 
 URL: http://www.icasa.org 
 Indiana Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 55 Monument Circle Suite 1224 
 Indianapolis, IN 46204 
 Phone: 317– 423–0233 
 Toll-free: 800– 691–2272 
 Fax: 317– 423– 0237 
 E-mail: incasa@incasa.org 
 URL: http://www.incasa.org 
 Iowa Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 515 28th Street, Suite 107 
 Des Moines, IA 50312 
 Phone: 515–244–7424 
 Toll-free: 800–284–7821 
 Hotline: 800–284–7821 
 Fax: 515–244–7417 
 URL: http://www.iowacasa.org 

238 Directory of Organizations
 Jane Doe Inc. 
 14 Beacon Street, Suite 507 
 Boston, MA 02108 
 Phone: 617–248–0922 
 Toll-free: 877–785–2020 
 Hotline: 877–785–2020 
 Fax: 617–248–0902 
 Org. E-mail: info@janedoe.org 
 URL: http://www.janedoe.org 
 Kansas Coalition Against Sexual 
and Domestic Violence 
 634 SW Harrison 
 Topeka, KS 66603 
 Phone: 785–232–9784 
 Fax: 785–266–1874 
 E-mail: coalition@kcsdv.org 
 URL: http://www.kcsdv.org 
 Kentucky Association of Sexual Assault Programs 
 P.O. Box 4028 
 83 C. Michael Davenport Boulevard 
 Frankfort, KY 40604 
 Phone: 502–226–2704 
 Toll-free: 866–375–2727 
 Fax: 502–226–2725 
 URL: http://www.kasap.org 
 Louisiana Foundation Against Sexual Assault 
 1250 SW Railroad Avenue, Suite 170 
 Hammond, LA 70403 
 Phone: 985–345–5995 
 Toll-free: 888–995–7273 
 Fax: 985–345–5592 
 E-mail: resource@lafasa.org 
 URL: http://www.lafasa.org 
 Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 83 Western Avenue, Suite 2 
 Augusta, ME 04330 
 Phone: 207–626–0034 
 Toll-free: 800–871–7741 

State and Territorial Organizations 239
 Hotline: 800–871–7741 
 Fax: 207–626–5503 
 E-mail: info@mecasa.org 
 URL: http://www.mecasa.org 
 Maryland Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 1517 Governor Ritchie Highway, Suite 207 
 Arnold, MD 21012 
 Phone: 410–974–4507 
 Toll-free: 800–983–7273 
 Fax: 410–757–4770 
 E-mail: info@mcasa.org 
 URL: http://www.mcasa.org 
 Michigan Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence 
 3893 Okemos Road, Suite B2 
 Okemos, MI 48864 
 Phone: 517–347–7000 
 Fax: 517–347–1377 
 E-mail: general@mcadsv.org 
 URL: http://www.mcadsv.org 
 Minnesota Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 161 St. Anthony Avenue, Suite 1001 
 St. Paul, MN 55103 
 Phone: 651–209–9993 
 Toll-free: 800–964–8847 
 Fax: 651–209–0899 
 URL: http://www.mncasa.org 
 Mississippi Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 P.O. Box 4172 
 Jackson, MS 39296 
 Phone: 601–948–0555 
 Toll-free: 888–987–9011 
 Fax: 601–948–0525 
 URL: http://www.mscasa.org 
 Missouri Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence 
 217 Oscar Drive, Suite A 

240 Directory of Organizations
 Jefferson City, MO 65101 
 Phone: 573–634–4161 
 Fax: 573–636–3728 
 E-mail: mocadsv@mocadsv.org 
 URL: http://www.mocadv.org 
 Montana Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence 
 P.O. Box 818 
 Helena, MT 59624 
 Phone: 406– 443–7794 
 Toll-free: 888– 404–7794 
 Hotline: 888– 404–7794 
 Fax: 406– 443–7818 
 E-mail: mcadsv@mt.net 
 URL: http://www.mcadsv.com 
 Nebraska Domestic Violence Sexual Assault Coalition 
 1000 O Street, Suite 102 
 Lincoln, NE 68508 
 Phone: 402– 476–6256 
 Fax: 402– 476–6806 
 E-mail: info@ndvsac.org 
 URL: http://www.ndvsac.org 
 Nevada Coalition Against Sexual Violence 
 P.O. Box 620716 
 Las Vegas, NV 89162 
 Phone: 775–828–1115 
 URL: http://www.ncasv.org 
 New Hampshire Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence 
 P.O. Box 353 
 Concord, NH 03302 
 Phone: 603–224–8893 
 Toll-free: 800–277–5570 
 Fax: 603–228–6096 
 URL: http://www.nhcadsv.org 
 New Jersey Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 2333 Whitehorse Mercerville Road Suite J 

State and Territorial Organizations 241
 Trenton, NJ 08619 
 Phone: 609–631–4450 
 Toll-free: 800–601–7200 
 Fax: 609–631–4453 
 E-mail: mail@njcasa.org 
 URL: http://www.njcasa.org 
 New Mexico Coalition of Sexual Assault Programs 
 3909 Juan Tabo Boulevard, NE, Suite 6 
 Alburquerque, NM 87111 
 Phone: 505–883–8020 
 Toll-free: 888–883–8020 
 Fax: 505–883–7530 
 E-mail: nmcaas@swcp.com 
 URL: http://www.swcp.com/nmcsaas/ 
 New York State Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 28 Essex Street 
 Albany, NY 12206 
 Phone: 518– 482– 4222 
 Fax: 518– 482– 4248 
 E-mail: info@nyscasa.org 
 URL: http://www.nyscasa.org 
 North Carolina Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 183 Windchime Court 
 Suite 100 
 Raleigh, NC 27615 
 Phone: 919–870–8881 
 Toll-free: 888–737–2272 
 Fax: 919–870–8828 
 E-mail: nccasa@nccasa.org 
 URL: http://www.nccasa.org 
 North Dakota Council on Abused Women’s Services 
 418 East Rosser Avenue, # 320 
 Bismarck, ND 58501 
 Phone: 701–255–6240 
 Toll-free: 888–255–1904 
 Hotline: 888–255–1904 
 Fax: 701–255–1904 
 URL: http://www.ndcaws.org 

242 Directory of Organizations
 Oklahoma Coalition Against Domestic 
Violence and Sexual Assault 
 3815 North Santa Fe Avenue, Suite 124 
 Oklahoma City, OK 73118 
 Phone: 405–524–0700 
 Fax: 405–524–0711 
 E-mail: info@ocadvsa.org 
 URL: http://www.ocadvsa.org 
 Oregon Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence 
 380 SE Spokane Street, Suite 100 
 Portland, OR 97202 
 Phone: 503–230–1951 
 Toll-free: 800–622–3782 
 Fax: 503–230–1973 
 URL: http://www.ocadsv.com 
 Pennsylvania Coalition Against Rape 
 125 North Enola Drive 
 Enola, PA 17025 
 Phone: 717–728–9740 
 Toll-free: 800–692–7445 
 Hotline: 888–772–7227 
 Fax: 717–728–9781 
 URL: http://www.pcar.org 
 South Carolina Coalition Against Domestic 
Violence and Sexual Assault 
 P.O. Box 7776 
 Columbia, SC 29202 
 Phone: 803–256–2900 
 Toll-free: 800–260–9293 
 Hotline: 800–260–9293 
 Fax: 803–256–1030 
 URL: http://www.sccadvasa.org 
 South Dakota Coalition Against Domestic 
Violence and Sexual Violence 
 P.O. Box 141 
 Pierre, SD 57501 
 Phone: 605–945–0869 
 Toll-free: 800–572–9196 

State and Territorial Organizations 243
 Fax: 605–945–0870 
 URL: http://www.southdakotacoalition.org 
 South Dakota Network Against Family 
Violence and Sexual Assault 
 P.O. Box 90453 
 Sioux Falls, SD 57106 
 Phone: 605–731–0041 
 Toll-free: 800–670–3989 
 Fax: 605–977–4742 
 URL: http://www.sdnafvsa.com 
 Tennessee Coalition Against Domestic 
and Sexual Violence 
 2 International Plaza Drive, Suite 425 
 Nashville, TN 37217 
 Phone: 615–386–9406 
 Fax: 615–383–2967 
 E-mail: tcadsv@tcadsv.org 
 URL: http://www.tcadsv.org 
 Texas Association Against Sexual Assault 
 6200 La Calma Drive, Suite 110 
 Austin, TX 78752 
 Phone: 512–474–7190 
 Toll-free: 888–918–2272 
 Fax: 512–474–6490 
 E-mail: taasa@taasa.org 
 URL: http://www.taasa.org 
 Utah Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 284 West 400 North 
 Salt Lake City, UT 84103 
 Phone: 801–746–0404 
 Hotline: 888–421–1100 
 Fax: 801–746–2929 
 E-mail: info@ucasa.org 
 URL: http://www.ucasa.org 
 Vermont Network Against Domestic Violence 
and Sexual Assault 
 P.O. Box 405 
 Montpelier, VT 05601 

244 Directory of Organizations
 Phone: 802–223–1302 
 Hotline: 800–489–7273 
 Fax: 802–223–6943 
 E-mail: vtnetwork@vnetwork.org 
 URL: http://www.vtnetwork.org 
 Virginia Sexual and Domestic Violence 
Action Alliance 
 5008 Monument Avenue, Suite A 
 Richmond, VA 23230 
 Phone: 804–377–0335 
 Toll-free: 800–838–8238 
 Hotline: 800–838–8238 
 Fax: 804–377–0339 
 E-mail: info@vsdvalliance.org 
 URL: http://www.vsdvalliance.org 
 Washington Coalition of Sexual Assault Programs 
 4317 6th Avenue SE, Suite 102 
 Olympia, WA 98503 
 Phone: 360–754–7583 
 Toll-free: 800–775–8013 
 Fax: 360–786–8707 
 E-mail: wcsap@wcsap.org 
 URL: http://www.wcsap.org 
 West Virginia Foundation for Rape 
Information and Services 
 112 Braddock Street 
 Fairmont, WV 26554 
 Phone: 304–366–9500 
 Fax: 304–366–9501 
 E-mail: fris@labs.net 
 URL: http://www.fris.org 
 Wisconsin Coalition Against Sexual Assault 
 600 Williamson Street, Suite N-2 
 Madison, WI 53703 
 Phone: 608–257–1516 
 Fax: 608–257–2150 
 E-mail: wcasa@wcasa.org 
 URL: http://www.wcasa.org 

245
 8 
 Resources 
 T
he following is a list of print and video resources compiled 
with the intention of providing the reader with a guide for fur-
ther research. 
 Print Sources 
 Child Sexual Abuse 
Ainscough, Carolyn, and Kay Toon. Surviving Childhood Sexual 
Abuse: Practical Self-Help for Adults Who Were Sexually Abused As 
Children. Boulder, CO: Da Capo Press, 2000. 
 The authors are clinical psychologists who provide suggestions 
and techniques for coping with and overcoming sexual abuse. 
 Aptheker, Bettina F. Intimate Politics: How I Grew Up Red, Fought for 
Free Speech, and Became a Feminist Rebel. San Francisco: Seal Press, 
2006.
 The daughter of famed Communist Party member and history 
professor Herbert Aptheker, Bettina Aptheker repressed memo-
ries of being sexually abused by her father. She recounts her 
abuse in this memoir, which also covers her political activism 
in the 1960s. 
 Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis. The Courage to Heal 4e: A Guide for 
Women Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse 20th Anniversary Edition.
New York: Collins Living, 2008.

246 Resources
 This is the classic guide to overcoming sexual abuse. It uses first-
person narratives to illustrate healing while describing the effects 
of abuse, the stages that survivors pass through, and warnings 
about self-defeating behaviors. 
 Brady, Katherine. Father’s Days: A True Story of Incest. New York: 
Seaview Books, 1979.
 Brady tried to maintain the façade of a happy family as a model 
student while struggling privately with her father’s sexual abuse 
and the associated stresses. She underwent years of depression 
and therapy before finding happiness. 
Burgess, Ann Wolbert, and Christine A. Grant. Children Trauma-
tized in Sex Rings. Philadelphia: National Center for Missing & 
Exploited Children, 1988. 
 After providing an overview of child sexual abuse, the authors 
discuss the response patterns of traumatized children and 
treatment issues. 
 Butler, Sandra. Conspiracy of Silence: The Trauma of Incest. San Fran-
cisco: New Glide, 1978. 
 Butler attributes incestuous relationships to the socialization of 
men and women. Socialized to believe that power is a man’s 
natural right, men who become aggressors are despotic and 
tyrannical at home while powerless in the outside world. 
 Cossins, Anne. Masculinities, Sexualities, and Child Sexual Abuse.
The Hague, Netherlands: Kluwer Law International, 2000. 
 This book focuses on the motivations of men who abuse children. 
It covers the criminalization of incest in Australia and England, 
the characteristics of child sex offenders, and the role of power in 
such abuse. 
 Davis, Laura. Allies in Healing: When the Person You Love Was 
Sexually Abused as a Child. New York: Harper, 1991. 
 Still readily available in print almost two decades after its 
publication, this remains as the standard guide for spouses, 
lovers, girlfriends, and boyfriends who are trying to help their 
partners overcome sexual abuse. Davis covers intimacy and 

Print Sources 247
communication, sex, and family issues through a number of 
stories from partners. 
 Echols, Mike. I Know My First Name is Steven: The True Story of the 
Steven Stayner Abduction Case. New York: Pinnacle, 1999. 
 Kenneth Parnell, a convicted child kidnapper and rapist, kid-
napped seven-year-old Steven and held him prisoner as a sex 
slave for seven years. Stayner managed to obtain help when 
Parnell brought home a second young boy to abuse. 
 Finkelhor, David. Sexually Victimized Children. New York: The Free 
Press, 1979.
 Finkelhor argues that child abuse is fundamentally different from 
the rape of an adult because of the victim’s youth, naivete, and 
relationship to the older person. 
 Gillham, Bill. The Facts About Child Sexual Abuse. London: Cassell 
Educational, 1991. 
 This book provides a general introduction to child sexual abuse 
with a section dedicated to protecting children from such 
abuse. 
 Gilmartin, Pat. Rape, Incest, and Child Sexual Abuse: Consequences 
and Recovery. New York: Garland, 1994. 
 The author discusses the immediate and long-term consequences 
of sexual victimization along with treatment issues. 
 Grevatt, Marge, et al. We Can Break the Cycle: A Mother’s Hand-
book for Sexual Abuse Survivors. Cleveland: Orange Blossom Press, 
1999.
 This pamphlet is aimed at survivors of childhood sexual abuse 
who are mothers. It is written by survivors/mothers who are 
aware that that carry-over symptoms of abuse, such as depres-
sion, can negatively impact the parenting skills of sexual abuse 
victims.
 Human Rights Watch. Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against 
Girls in South African Schools. New York: Human Rights Watch, 
2001.

248 Resources
 This report examines sexual abuse of students by teachers and 
various forms of sexual violence committed by students against 
other students in South Africa. 
 Justice, Blair, and Rita Justice. The Broken Taboo: Sex in the Family.
New York: Human Sciences Press, 1979.
 This book is based on a survey by the authors of 112 families in 
which incest had occurred. It is, therefore, one of the very few 
sources of direct information about incest. 
 May, John P., and Khalid R. Pitts, eds. Building Violence: How Amer-
ica’s Rush to Incarcerate Creates More Violence. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications, 2000.
 In this collection of essays, Randy Blackburn provides a per-
sonal account of his experiences after being accused of sexually 
assaulting a nine-year-old girl. 
 Meiselman, Karin. Incest: A Psychological Study of Causes and Effects 
with Treatment Recommendations. S an Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1979. 
 Meiselman summarizes anthropological and sociological views 
about the origin and maintenance of the incest taboo. She also dis-
cusses various strategies for researching incest before focusing on 
the psychological causes and long-term effects of father-daughter, 
mother-son, and sibling incest. 
 Salter, Anna C. Transforming Trauma: A Guide to Understanding and 
Treating Adult Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, 1995.
 While geared towards treating victims, this book is also helpful for 
treating attackers. It covers the different thought patterns of sadis-
tic and nonsadistic offenders along with the resulting effects upon 
the victims. Salter discusses how trauma affects the world views of 
survivors and advises on the best treatment plans for survivors. 
Turner, Jonathan H., and Alexandra Maryanski. Incest: Origins of 
the Taboo. Boulder, CO: Paradigm, 2005. 
 The authors, defining incest as sexual relations between family 
members such as brother and sister, review anthropological and 
evolutionary explanations for the origins of the taboo. 

Print Sources 249
 Walsh, John. Tears of Rage. New York: Pocket Books, 2008.
 Walsh, the founder of the National Center for Missing and 
Exploited Children and host of  America’s Most Wanted , lost his 
six-year-old son, Adam, to a killer in 1981. In this autobiography, 
Walsh traces the steps that took him from being a grieving father 
to an activist for children. 
 Date or Acquaintance Rape 
 Fisher, Bonnie S., and John J. Sloan, III. Campus Crime: Legal, So-
cial, and Policy Perspectives. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 
2008.
 Chapters address the implications of the Jeanne Clery Act, inti-
mate partner abuse of female college students, and the evolution 
of campus policing. 
 Levy, Barrie, ed. Dating Violence: Young Women In Danger. New
York: Seal Press, 1998. 
 Levy provides first-person accounts from abused teens as well as 
essays on the social context of dating violence. The focus is not 
exclusively on rape. 
 Lindquist, Scott. The Date Rape Prevention Book: The Essential Guide 
for Girls and Women. Napierville, Il: Sourcebooks, 2000. 
 This book contains the usual advice on techniques to avoid 
becoming a victim of date rape. It also contains a chapter advising 
men to take responsibility to stop the violence 
 McGregor, Joan. Is It Rape?: On Acquaintance Rape and Taking Wom-
en’s Consent Seriously. Burlington, Vermont: Ashgate, 2005.
 McGregor examines the ethical and legal problems that arise in 
connection with acquaintance rape. She argues that rape laws 
need to be remodeled to recognize that victims do not always 
resist and perpetrators do not always use physical violence. 
 Parrot, Andrea, and Laurie Bechofer, eds. Acquaintance Rape: The 
Hidden Crime. New York: Wiley, 1991.
 This is an overview for educators, psychologists, and law enforce-
ment professionals on acquaintance and date rape. 

250 Resources
 Sanday, Peggy Reeves. Fraternity Gang Rape: Sex, Brotherhood, 
and Privilege on Campus. New York: New York University Press, 
2007.
 The author explores the ways in which all-male organizations on 
college campuses, such as fraternities and athletic teams, promote 
the exploitation and sexual degradation of women. 
 Warshaw, Robin. I Never Called It Rape: The Ms. Report of Recogniz-
ing, Fighting, and Surviving Date and Acquaintance Rape (Harper, 
1988).
 This is the first major study on date and acquaintance rape. 
 Wiehe, Vernon R., and Ann L. Richards. Intimate Betrayal: Under-
standing and Responding to the Trauma of Acquaintance Rape. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995. 
 After defining the nature and scope of acquaintance rape, the 
authors cover the impact of the assault on the survivor and the 
recovery process. A chapter by Patricia Lynn Peacock covers 
marital rape. 
 Williams, Mary E., ed. Date Rape. San Diego: Greenhaven, 1998. 
 The book contains a series of essays by such authors as Katie 
Roiphe and Camille Paglia that debate the risk of rape and 
whether antirape policies are effective. 
 Domestic Violence 
 Bergen, Raquel Kennedy. Wife Rape: Understanding the Response of 
Survivors and Service Providers. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996. 
 Bergen provides a brief legal history of wife rape, addresses 
women’s experiences of wife rape, and discusses how to end this 
form of sexual violence. 
 Finkelhor, David, and Kersti Yllo. License to Rape: Sexual Abuse of 
Wives. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1985. 
 This book contains the results of a child sexual abuse question-
naire distributed in 1980s Boston to over 300 women who had had 
a child between 6 and 14 living with them, as well as interviews 
conducted with 50 Boston-area women. The authors aim to show 

Print Sources 251
the prevalence of marital rape and the fact that it has been tradi-
tionally minimized. 
 Frieze, Irene Hanson. Hurting the One You Love: Violence in 
Relationships. Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth., 2005. 
 This book addresses how pornography teaches youths that 
violence against women is acceptable. The author largely focuses 
on biological factors in aggression and reactions to victimization. 
 Knopp, Fay Honey. When Your Wife Says No: Forced Sex in Marriage.
Brandon, VT: Safer Society Press, 1994. 
 A good study of marital rape that helped persuade legislators to 
take this issue seriously. 
 Leventhal, Beth, and Sandra E. Lundy, eds. Same-Sex Domestic Vio-
lence: Strategies for Change. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1999.
 Many of these essays address sexual abuse. The survivor stories 
and the essays that contrast same-sex domestic violence with 
heterosexual battering are especially powerful. 
 Roberts, Albert R., ed. Battered Women and Their Families: Inter-
vention Strategies and Treatment Programs. New York: Springer, 
2007. 
 Sexual abuse is often part of domestic violence, as several of the 
essays in this collection acknowledge. Nicky Ali Jackson’s essay 
on same-sex domestic violence is one of the few works to address 
same-sex rape. 
 Russell, Diana. Rape in Marriage. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1990. 
 This landmark book on marital rape helped persuade several 
states to criminalize sexual assaults by husbands. Russell found 
that one in seven women had been raped within marriage. 
 History of Sexual Assault 
 Cameron, Deborah, and Elizabeth Frazer. The Lust to Kill: A Femi-
nist Investigation of Sexual Murder. Cambridge, England: Polity 
Press, 1987. 

252 Resources
 The authors examine the history and philosophy of sexually 
motivated murder. The book is wide-ranging, with chapters 
devoted to the literary works of the Marquis de Sade and the 
murders committed by Britons Myra Hindley and Dennis 
Nilsen. 
 Carter, Dan T. Scottsboro: A Tragedy of the American South. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1979. 
 The Scottsboro Boys were African American teenagers falsely 
accused of rape in 1931 in Alabama. This is arguably the best book 
on the rape case by one of the leading historians of the American 
South.
 Carter, John Marshall. Rape in Medieval England: An Historical and 
Sociological Study. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 
1985.
 Carter covers rape from 1208 to 1321 and provides one of the very 
few studies of medieval sexual assault. 
Clinton, Catherine, and Michele Gillespie, eds. The Devil’s Lane: 
Sex and Race in the Early South. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1997. 
 The contributors to this book examine sex in the colonial and 
early U.S. South. A chapter by Diane Miller Sommerville covers 
rape and castration in slave law while Jane Landers looks at rape 
in Spanish-held St. Augustine. 
 Dolan, Frances E. Marriage and Violence: The Early Modern Legacy.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.
 Dolan argues that present-day marriage so often leads to violence 
because of the lingering impact of 16th- and 17th-century English 
theories about marriage. 
 Dorr, Lisa Lindquist. White Women, Rape, and the Power of Race in 
Virginia, 1900–1960. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 2004. 
 The charge of rape made by a white woman has resulted in the 
lynching of many a black man in the South. This book examines 
the history of black-on-white rape in Virginia as well as the issue 

Print Sources 253
of consent, the problem of false accusations, and African Ameri-
can strategies of resistance. 
 Drzazga, John. Sex Crimes. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 
1960.
 This book, written by a police officer, provides a look into 
mid-century American thought about prohibited sexual conduct. 
 Dusky, Lorraine. Still Unequal: The Shameful Truth About Women 
and Justice in America. New York: Crown, 1996. 
 This book focuses on the challenges that women have faced 
while pursuing legal careers. The chapter on sexual assault cov-
ers the historical tradition of failing to believe women claiming 
rape, the prejudices of judges against rape victims, and the 
ineffectiveness of rape shield laws. 
 Goodman, James. Stories of Scottsboro. New York: Pantheon Books, 
1994.
 Good account of the Scottsboro Boys rape case. 
 Langbein, John H. Prosecuting Crime in the Renaissance: England, 
Germany, France. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974. 
 Langbein covers the prosecution of sex crimes. 
 Lefowitz, Bernard. Our Guys: The Glen Ridge Rape Case and the Se-
cret of the Perfect Suburb. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1997.
 This book examines the connection between sports and violence 
against women. 
 Marquart, James W., Sheldon Ekland-Olson, and Jonathan R. 
Sorensen. The Rope, the Chair, and the Needle: Capital Punishment in 
Texas, 1923–1990. Austin: University of Texas, 1998. 
 The authors argue that black men convicted of raping white 
women were more likely to be sentenced to death than white men 
charged with a similar crime. 
 National Institute of Mental Health. Victims of Rape. Washington, 
DC: Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 1976. 

254 Resources
 This slim book contains the conclusions of the 27-month Philadel-
phia Assault Victim Study conducted from 1973–1975. 
 Norris, Clarence, and Sybil D. Washington. The Last of the Scotts-
boro Boys. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1979. 
 Norris, one of the accused rapists and the last survivor among the 
boys, tells his life story. 
 Ohio Youth Services Network. Sexual Offenses by Adolescents in 
Ohio. Columbus, OH: Ohio Youth Services Network, 1989. 
 Ohio became one of the first states to compile data on juvenile 
sexual offenders and to recommend policy changes such as 
increased funding for specific programs for adolescent sexual 
offenders. 
 Read, Jacinta. The New Avengers: Feminism, Femininity and the Rape-
Revenge Cycle. Manchester, England: Manchester University Press, 
2000.
 This is a fascinating study of rape in films from the silent era to 
the present. It would be a useful accompaniment to a class that 
examined portrayals of women in film. 
 Royster, Jacqueline Jones, ed. Southern Horrors and Other Writ-
ings: The Anti-Lynching Campaign of Ida B. Wells, 1892–1900.
Boston: Bedford Books, 1997. 
 Wells, an investigative journalist and African American, exploded 
the popular notion that lynchings only happened to black men 
who were accused of raping white women. 
 Sanday, Peggy Reeves. A Woman Scorned: Acquaintance Rape on 
Trial. New York: Doubleday, 1996. 
 The author examines British and American landmark rape cases 
to argue that, with the exception of the Colonial era, rape victims 
have always been placed on trial as gold diggers, false accusers, 
or scorned women. 
 Sielke, Sabine. Reading Rape: The Rhetoric of Sexual Violence in 
American Literature and Culture, 1790–1990. Princeton, NJ: Princ-
eton University Press, 2002. 

Print Sources 255
 This book examines discussion of rape in such works as Thomas 
Dixon’s The Clansmen , Frances E. W. Harper’s  Iola Leroy, and 
Upton Sinclair’s  The Jungle.
 Sommerville, Diane Miller. Rape and Race in the Nineteenth-
Century South. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
2004. 
 This is one of the few books to address slave rape and, quite 
possibly, the only book to examine the sexual assault of 
white children in the antebellum South. The breadth of the 
book is impressive as it covers the South through the entire 
19th century 
 Soothill, Keith, and Sylvia Walby. Sex Crime in the News. London:
Routledge, 1991. 
 This study of 5,000 newspapers spanning 40 years finds that 
while the number of sex crimes reported to the police has risen 
dramatically, the media ignore the wider issues related to sexual 
assault in favor of focusing on a few unusual cases. 
 Prison Rape 
 May, John P., and Khalid R. Pitts, eds. Building Violence: How Amer-
ica’s Rush to Incarcerate Creates More Violence. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications, 2000. 
 While the focus is generally on violence behind bars, two chap-
ters address prison rape. Joanne Mariner covers the trauma 
of prison rape and JoAnne Page explains how male victims of 
prison rape are shunned by other prisoners for being weak. 
 Pinar, William F. The Gender of Racial Politics and Violence in Amer-
ica: Lynching, Prison Rape, and Violence in America. New York: 
Peter Lang, 2001. 
 Pinar argues that racial subjugation can be seen in prison rape. 
 Prostitution 
 Batstone, David. Not for Sale: The Return of the Global Slave 
Trade—and How We Can Fight It. New York: HarperOne, 2007. 

256 Resources
 Journalist Batstone reports on the efforts of human rights ac-
tivists to stop forced prostitution. He includes accounts from 
victims and activists. 
 Bullough, Vern, and Bonnie Bullough. Women and Prostitution: A 
Social History. New York: Prometheus Books, 1987. 
 Vern and Bonnie Bullough pioneered the field of the history 
of sexuality. This book is a study of prostitution over the cen-
turies and around the world. It is the best general history of 
prostitution. 
 Delacoste, Frederique, and Priscilla Alexander, eds. Sex Work: 
Writings by Women in the Sex Industry. New York: Cleis Press, 
1998.
 First published in 1987, this is a pioneering collection of essays by 
street prostitutes, pornography actors, and other sex workers. The 
1998 edition includes legal and health surveys as well as a listing 
of resources. 
 Farr, Kathryn. Sex Trafficking: The Global Market in Women and 
Children. New York: Worth, 2004.
 A thorough examination of the women and children who are 
trafficked into the sex industry as well as the organized crimi-
nals who promote the sex trade and the economic conditions that 
foster it. 
 Flowers, R. Barri. Runaway Kids and Teenage Prostitution: America’s 
Lost, Abandoned, and Sexually Exploited Children. Westport, CT: 
Greenwood, 2001. 
 Uses a criminological, sociological, and psychological approach 
to examine prostitution among runaway girls and boys. It cov-
ers child sexual abuse and child pornography as well as teenage 
prostitution across the globe. 
 Hennig, Jana, et al. Trafficking in Human Beings and the 2006 
World Cup in Germany. Geneva, Switzerland: International 
Organization for Migration, 2007. 
 Many individuals suggest that major sporting events contrib-
ute mightily to a rise in prostitution. This report found that the 

Print Sources 257
number of victims of human trafficking for sexual exploitation 
did not increase during the major international soccer event of 
2006. 
 Kempadoo, Kamala, and Jo Doezema, eds. Global Sex Work-
ers: Rights, Resistance, and Redefinition. New York: Routledge, 
1998. 
 This collection of essays by scholars and activists examines male 
and female sex workers in Third World countries. It is especially 
useful for presenting a full portrait of prostitution, including 
discussions of the effect of AIDS and the major organizational 
efforts of sex workers. 
 Kempadoo, Kamala, ed. Trafficking and Prostitution Reconsid-
ered: New Perspectives On Migration, Sex Work, And Human 
Rights. St. Paul, MN: Paradigm, 2005. 
 A collection of scholarly essays that link trafficking to a lack of 
employment opportunities, a lack of freedom of movement, and 
globalization. The focus of this book is on Asia. 
 King, Gilbert. Woman, Child for Sale: The New Slave Trade in the 
21st Century. New York: Chamberlain Bros., 2004.
 This book includes case studies in modern slavery, global traf-
ficking hotspots, and profiles of slave traders. 
 Malarek, Victor. The Natashas: Inside the New Global Sex Trade. New
York: Arcade, 2005. 
 Malarek, a Canadian journalist reports, on the rise of sex traf-
ficking from Eastern and Central Europe in the years since the 
1991 collapse of the Soviet Union. Just under a million young 
women have been tricked by organized criminals with promises 
of legitimate jobs into working in massage parlors or brothels in 
Asia, the Middle East, or Europe. Malarek uses first-person 
accounts from the women. 
Mam, Somaly. The Road of Lost Innocence. London: Virago, 2007. 
 This is the autobiography of a Cambodian woman who was 
sold into prostitution at 15 years of age. After years of abuse, 
she escaped and founded Acting for Women in Distressing 

258 Resources
Situations (AFESIP) in 1996 to combat sexual slavery. This 
French edition of this book won the Le Cannet Truth Prize in 
2005. 
 Parrot, Andrea, and Nina Cummings. Sexual Enslavement of Girls 
and Women Worldwide. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2008. 
 This should become the standard reference on sexual slavery. 
The authors put the situation in context, discuss types of sexual 
slavery, and examine attempts to combat it. 
 Ringdal, Nils Johan. Love For Sale: A World History of Prostitution.
New York: Grove Press, 2005.
 Traces prostitution across the globe from ancient times to the 
present. Ringdal argues that different cultures have different 
definitions for what constitutes prostitution. 
Van den Anker, Christien L., and Jeroen Doomernik, eds.  Traffick-
ing and Women ’ s Rights. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2006.
 The authors examine female sexual slavery in Europe. 
 Williams, Phil, ed. Illegal Immigration and Commercial Sex: The New 
Slave Trade. London: Frank Cass, 1999. 
 This is a good general account of the global trafficking in women 
and children. 
 Yadav, C. P. Encyclopedia on Women and Children Problems: Sexual 
Abuse and Commercial Sex Exploitation. New Delhi, India: Anmol, 
2008.
 This reference examines the causes of sexual trafficking of 
women and girls as well as preventive measures. It is one of 
the few readily available works to examine trafficking from the 
perspective of India, a nation with a very high percentage of 
victims. 
 Runaway Sexual Abuse 
 Schaffner, Laurie. Teenage Runaways: Broken Hearts and “Bad At-
titudes”. New York: Routledge, 1999. 

Print Sources 259
 Based on a study of 26 New England runaways, this book 
examines the why these children left home, often to escape sexual 
abuse.
 Slesnick, Natasha. Our Runaway and Homeless Youth: A Guide to 
Understanding. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2004. 
 Summarizes the current research on runaway and homeless 
children, including factors common to these children and their 
lives after leaving home. The author interviews three runaways 
and the parent of a runaway. 
 Sexual Abuse—General 
 Ageton, Suzanne S. Sexual Assault Among Adolescents. Lexington,
MA: Lexington Books, 1983. 
 One of the first books to address juvenile sexual offenders, this 
book is still often cited in the literature. Very little empirical 
research had been completed on juvenile sexual offenders by 
1983. 
Barbaree, Howard E., Stephen M. Hudson, and William L. 
Marshall, eds. The Juvenile Sex Offender. New York: Guilford 
Press, 1993. 
 This book is widely acknowledged as the best source on juveniles 
who commit sex crimes. The authors summarize the current the-
oretical and clinical knowledge about juvenile offenders while 
suggesting directions for future research. 
Allison, Julie A., and Lawrence S. Wrightsman. Rape: The Misun-
derstood Crime. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1993. 
 The authors provide a general discussion of rape from stranger 
rape to the treatment of victims. 
Bart, Pauline, and Eileen Geil Moran, eds. Violence Against 
Women: The Bloody Footprints. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 
1992. 
 Originally published as a special issue of  Gender & Society , this 
book focuses on policy. It is aimed at undergraduate and graduate 
readers. 

260 Resources
 Benedict, Helen. Recovery: How to Survive Sexual Assault for 
Women, Men, Teenagers, and Their Friends and Families. New York: 
Doubleday, 1985. 
 Benedict provides a practical guide for victims seeking to help 
themselves and those nonprofessionals seeking to help victims. 
She includes a focus on the gay and lesbian subjects of sexual 
assault. 
 Bessmer, Sue. The Laws of Rape. New York: Praeger, 1984. 
 Despite its age, this remains the best study of the history of rape 
laws. It covers the double standard between rape victims, the 
resistance requirement, and the admissibility of chastity. 
 Bevacqua, Maria. Rape on the Public Agenda: Feminism and the 
Politics of Sexual Assault. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 
2000.
 Bevacqua provides a superb survey of the feminist efforts to make 
rape into a matter of public policy concern. The appendices in the 
book are usually strong, including a time line of antirape events 
and the bylaws of a Washington, D.C., rape crisis center. 
 Bode, Janet. Rape: Preventing It, Coping With the Legal, Medical, and 
Emotional Aftermath. New York: Franklin Watts, 1979. 
 Bodes uses case histories and interviews to discuss the myths 
surrounding rape and the challenges faced by rape victims. 
 Bohmer, Carol, and Andrea Parrot. Sexual Assault on Campus: The 
Problem and the Solution. New York: Lexington Books, 1993. 
 This handbook examines how colleges have handled sexual as-
sault cases, with a focus on the errors that college administrators 
have made. The authors suggest specific steps that administrators 
can take to avoid creating a hostile climate for those who report 
rape.
 Bourke, Joanna. Rape: Sex, Violence, History. London: Shoe-
maker & Hoard, 2007. 
 This book focuses on the rapist to determine why some people 
sexually attack others. Bourke discusses how military culture 
influences sexual assault, with coverage of the sexual humiliation 

Print Sources 261
of prisoners at the Abu Ghraib prison during the Second Gulf 
War. The author’s discussion of the legal and cultural differ-
ences between indecent exposure and exhibitionism is  especially 
interesting. 
 Braen, G. Richard. The Rape Examination. North Chicago, IL: Abbott 
Laboratories, 1976. 
 Braen uses nonspecialist language to describe the steps involved 
in the medical treatment of a victim of rape. 
 Braswell, Linda. Quest for Respect: A Healing Guide for Survivors of 
Rape. Oxnard, CA: Pathfinder, 1992. 
 A popular guide to recovery for victims of rape and incest as well 
as the families and friends of sexual assault victims. 
 Brownmiller, Susan. Against Our Will: Men, Women, and Rape. New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1975. 
 Arguably the most significant book ever written about rape, 
this classic work opened a public discussion about sexual as-
sault. Brownmiller traces the history of rape through the ages, 
including sexual assaults by military personnel. Some of the 
language reflects the feminist movement of the 1970s, including 
Brownmiller’s claim that rape is a conscious effort by all men to 
keep all women in a state of fear. 
Buchwald, Emilie, Pamela R. Fletcher, and Martha Roth, eds. 
Transforming a Rape Culture. Minneapolis, MN: Milkweed, 2005. 
 The essays in this collection discuss the refusal of society to recog-
nize the violence inherent in rape, the weak response of the insti-
tutional church to rape, sexual attacks by soldiers, sexual violence 
in Latino marriages, and establishing rape as a war crime. 
 Budrionis, Rita, and Arthur E. Jongsma, Jr. The Sexual Abuse Victim 
and Sexual Offender Treatment Planner.
 The authors provide assistance to professional therapists who 
need to develop formal treatment plans for offender issues 
such as anger management, empathy deficits, and deviant sex-
ual arousal, as well as victim issues such as eating disorders, 
self-blame, and social withdrawal. 

262 Resources
 Burgess-Jackson, Keith, ed. A Most Detestable Crime: New Philo-
sophical Essays on Rape. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1999.
 Philosophers discuss definitions of rape, the persistence of rape, 
responsibility for rape, and why the legal system continues to fail 
rape victims. 
 Burns, Catherine. Sexual Violence and the Law in Japan. London:
Routledge Curzon, 2005. 
 The author examines how Japanese judges consider cases of 
sexual violence. 
 Cahill, Ann J. Rethinking Rape. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 2001. 
 This book takes a feminist theoretical approach to rape by ad-
dressing such topics as feminist theories of the body and feminist 
theories of rape. 
 Campbell, Terence W. Assessing Sex Offenders: Problems and 
Pitfalls. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 2004. 
 This book reviews the scientific evidence about the likelihood that 
a sex offender will reoffend. It includes guided clinical risk assess-
ments and actuarial instruments for assessing recidivism risk. 
 Chaka-Makhooane, Lisebo, et al. Sexual Violence in Lesotho: The 
Realities of Justice for Women. Morija, Lesotho: Women and Law in 
Southern Africa Research and Education Trust, 2002. 
 This report finds that rape is not viewed as a serious crime by 
authorities in Lesotho, with the result that judicial structures do 
not respond appropriately to women’s problems and needs. In 
this country, there is a heightened risk that rape may be linked 
with the transmission of HIV/AIDS. 
 Chappell, Duncan, Robley Geis, and Gilbert Geis, eds. Forcible 
Rape: The Crime, the Victim, and the Offender. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1977. 
 This collection of essays is now useful chiefly as a historical source 
about attitudes and laws regarding rape in the dark ages of the 
1970s.

Print Sources 263
 Curran, Bronwyn. Into the Mirror: The Untold Story of Mukhtar Mai.
New Delhi, India: UBS, 2008.
 Mai, a Pakistani woman, became the victim of a gang rape in 2002 
on the orders of an informal village tribal council because of a 
crime allegedly committed by her teenage brother. The incident 
brought worldwide condemnation of Pakistan’s treatment of 
women.
Daka, Joseph. Sexual Offenses in Zambia and How the Police Deal 
with Them. Lusaka, Zambia: Joseph Daka, 2004. 
 This is the only book to address sexual crime in Zambia and one 
of the few to examine how an African nation attempts to protect 
victims of rape and incest. In this exceptional work, the author 
not only acknowledges the existence of male rape but argues that 
Zambian law needs to take measures to protect boys from sexual 
abuse.
 Durham, Andrew. Young Men Who Have Sexually Abused: A Case 
Study Guide. Chichester, England: John Wiley, 2006. 
 Durham covers the theories relating to abusers before discussing 
the cases of adolescent males who engaged in sexually inappro-
priate behaviors. 
 Estrich, Susan. Real Rape: How the Legal System Victimizes 
Women Who Say No. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1987. 
 Estrich argues that the legal system has not fully recognized 
acquaintance or date rape as an actual sexual assault, with pros-
ecutors reluctant to prosecute such attacks. The book contains 
a wealth of historical information about how judges and juries 
have required victims to use as much physical force as possible 
to demonstrate that a “real rape” took place. 
 Fairstein, Linda. Sexual Violence: Our War Against Rape. New York: 
William Morrow, 1993. 
 Fairstein, the longtime director of the Sex Crimes Prosecution 
Unit for New York County, argues that legal changes have 
ended the era when women charging rape were victimized a 
second time by the legal system. The book is a good historical 

264 Resources
source for the difficulties faced by victims who had to prove 
“earnest resistance,” reveal their sexual histories, and endure 
harsh interrogations. 
 Ferguson, Robert, and Jeanine Ferguson. A Guide to Rape Aware-
ness and Prevention: Educating Yourself, Your Family, and Those in 
Need. Hartford, CT: Turtle Press, 1994.
 This basic guide covers safety while traveling, while on the street, 
and while on campus. 
 Fischer, Linda A. Ultimate Power: Enemy Within the Ranks N.P.: 
Linda A. Fischer, 1999. 
 Written by a U.S. Army veteran who experienced sexual ha-
rassment while in uniform, this book is a useful study of sexual 
trauma from the victim’s perspective. 
 Flora, Rudy. How to Work with Sex Offenders: A Handbook for Crim-
inal Justice, Human Service, and Mental Health Professionals. New 
York: Haworth Clinical Practice Press, 2001. 
 This manual provides techniques for interviewing sex offend-
ers and outlines treatment options, such as family therapy, 
group therapy, and pharmacology. It includes sections on 
female sexual offenders and developmentally disabled sexual 
offenders. 
 Foubert, John D. The Men’s Program: A Peer Education Guide to Rape 
Prevention. New York: Taylor & Francis, 2005. 
 This is the most popular guide for training men to be antirape 
peer educators. It covers recruitment, training, advice from men 
who are peer educators, and sample documents. 
 Flowers, R. Barri. Sex Crimes: Perpetrators, Predators, Prostitutes, 
and Victims. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 2006.
 This textbook covers every aspect of sex crimes, including 
homicides, rape, incest, child molestation, sex trafficking, and 
theories about sexual criminality. 
 Francisco, Patricia Weaver. Telling: A Memoir of Rape and Recovery.
New York: Harper, 2000. 

Print Sources 265
 The memoir of the victim of a 1981 stranger rape. Francisco 
underwent counseling and had the support of her husband but 
still struggled mightily to recover from the trauma. 
 Funk, Rus Ervin. Stopping Rape: A Challenge for Men. Philadelphia:
New Society, 1993. 
 The author uses a conversational style to persuade men to exam-
ine their personal beliefs about sexual violence and to confront 
sexism in other men. It is most useful for advice about establishing 
and maintaining men’s groups, responding to sexual assault survi-
vors, and specific exercises for consciousness-raising workshops. 
 Gavey, Nicola. Just Sex?: The Cultural Scaffolding of Rape. New
York: Routledge, 2005. 
 Gavey examines the psychosocial context of rape to argue that 
the blurred line between rape and “just sex” does not mean 
that coercive sex should be tolerated as simply part and parcel 
of the natural dynamics of sexual relations. 
 Graney, Dawn J., and Bruce A. Arrigo. The Power Serial Rapist: A 
Criminology-Victimology Typology of Female Victim Selection. Spring-
field, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 2002. 
 This book helps readers understand how a serial rapist chooses 
his victims by focusing on the case of Gilbert Escobedo, the Ski 
Mask Rapist. 
 Groth, A. Nicholas, and H. Jean Birnbaum. Men Who Rape: The 
Psychology of the Offender. New York: Plenum Press, 1979.
 Based on 15 years’ experience with over 500 sexual offenders, 
the authors examine the factors that predispose a man to react 
to situational and life events with sexual violence. The book 
covers the selection of victims, determination of the sexual act, 
the offender’s reaction during the assault, the role of alcohol, and 
sexual dysfunction. 
 Geen, Russell G. Human Aggression. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/
Cole, 1990. 
 Geen, a professor of psychology, reviews the major theories 
and research on human aggression. He discusses the increased 

266 Resources
aggression by men against women that is fostered by the rape 
myth, the idea promoted by violent pornography that women 
secretly like to be sexually abused and assaulted by men. 
 Gerdes, Louise I., ed. Sexual Violence. Detroit: Greenhaven Press, 
2008.
 Part of the  Opposing Viewpoints  series, this book consists of 
essays on whether sexual violence is exaggerated or a serious 
problem. 
 Hickey, Eric W., ed. Sex Crimes and Paraphilia. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Education, 2006. 
 The collection of essays covers a full range of forms of sexually 
unhealthy behavior from voyeurism to pedophilia to rape. 
 Hodgson, James, and Debra S. Kelley, eds. Sexual Violence: Poli-
cies, Practices, and Challenges in the United States and Canada.
Westport, CT: Praeger, 2002. 
 This collection of essays addresses such topics as cyber rape, 
chemical castration, and prison rape. 
 Holmes, Stephen T., and Ronald M. Holmes. Sex Crimes: Patterns 
and Behavior. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002. 
 This is a textbook that provides a broad overview of sexual 
deviance. 
 Holmes, Ronald M., and Stephen T. Holmes, eds. Current Per-
spectives on Sex Crimes. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002.
 This wide-ranging anthology, a companion to  Sex Crimes: Patterns 
and Behavior , offers excepts from book and journal articles. 
 Johnson, Jerry L., and George Grant, Jr., eds. Sexual Abuse. Bos-
ton: Pearson, 2007. 
 This textbook uses case studies to study the work of experienced 
social workers as they practice in various settings with sexually 
abused clients and their families. 
 Katz, Jackson. The Macho Paradox: Why Some Men Hurt Women and 
How All Men Can Help. Napierville, IL: Sourcebooks, 2006. 

Print Sources 267
 In this engaging book, Katz looks at the cultural factors that lead 
men to be tolerant of sexual abuse directed at women. 
 Katz, Judith H. No Fairy Godmothers, No Magic Wands: The Healing 
Process After Rape. Saratoga, CA: R & E Publishers, 1993.
 The author addresses recovery from rape, the impact of rape upon 
significant others, and the decision to testify in court. 
 Katz, Sedelle, and Mary Ann Mazur. Understanding the Rape Vic-
tim: A Synthesis of Research Findings. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1979.
 Despite the age of this work, it remains a good scientific study of 
the risk of rape, family and social background of the victim and 
attacker, the situation surrounding the attack, and the effects of 
rape on the victim. 
 Kilmartin, Christopher, and Alan D. Berkowitz. Sexual Assault in 
Context: Teaching College Men About Gender. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, 2005. 
 This small guide offers strategies for delivering information 
about sexual assault to men and ideas about involving men in 
antiviolence work. 
 Koch, Patricia Barthalow, and David L. Weis, eds. Sexuality in 
America: Understanding Our Sexual Values and Behavior. New York: 
Continuum, 1999. 
 This survey of sexuality sets the topic of sex crimes in biological, 
psychological, social, and spiritual perspective. 
 Koss, Mary P., and Mary R. Harvey. The Rape Victim: Clinical and 
Community Interventions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1991. 
 This especially informative book covers the National Crime 
Survey techniques that undermine rape disclosure, the personal 
characteristics that affect rape response, and group treatment 
for survivors. 
 Krivacska, James J., and John Money, ed. The Handbook of Forensic 
Sexology: Biomedical and Criminological Perspectives. Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus, 1994. 

268 Resources
 This book addresses the link between the study of sexuality 
and criminology in chapters that address sadomasochism and 
rape, voyeurism, the manufacture of sexual abuse memories, 
and the alleged link between pornography and violence against 
women. 
 Lalumiere, Martin L., et al. The Causes of Rape: Understanding 
Individual Differences in Male Propensity for Sexual Aggression.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2005. 
 Aimed at a professional audience, this is an excellent survey of 
current thinking on rape in the animal kingdom, psychological 
characteristics of rapists, and clinical treatment of rapists. 
 Lauer, Teresa M. The Truth About Rape. N.P.: RapeRecovery.com, 
2002.
 The author discusses surviving rape though a 40-question and 
answer format. 
 LeBeau, Marc A., and Ashraf Mozayani, eds. Drug-Facilitated
Sexual Assault: A Forensic Handbook. San Diego: Academic Press, 
2001.
 This book covers everything relating to date rape drugs from the 
modus operandi of the perpetrators to the drugs to collection of 
evidence.
 Macdonald, John M. Rape Controversial Issues: Criminal Pro-
files, Date Rape, False Reports, and False Memories. Springfield, IL: 
Charles C. Thomas, 1995. 
 The author includes an account by a victim of rape and attempted 
murder before covering interviews with over 200 rape offenders, 
including 10 who killed their victims. This is one of the few books 
to include accounts of women who rape men and women who 
rape women. 
 Martin, Patricia Yancey. Rape Work: Victims, Gender, and Emotions 
in Organization and Community Context. New York: Routledge, 
2005.
 This book describes organizations and jobs that deal with rape, 
showing how some organizations, such as hospitals, orient their 

Print Sources 269
workers to provide unresponsive treatment even when the work-
ers feel empathetic and are inclined to be helpful. In essence, the 
author analyzes practices that produce a second assault of rape 
victims
 Martinez, Manuela, ed. Prevention and Control of Aggression and the 
Impact on Its Victims. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Pub-
lishers, 2001. 
 This book contains the proceedings of the World Meeting of the 
International Society for Research on Aggression: Prevention and 
Control of Aggression and the Impact on Its Victims, held in 2000. 
Scientists from backgrounds as varied as genetics and human 
relations discuss ways to prevent violence through such means as 
pharmacology and the promotion of respect. 
 Matsakis, Aphrodite. The Rape Recovery Handbook: Step-By-Step 
Help for Survivors of Sexual Assault. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger, 
2003.
 Matsakis is a psychotherapist specializing in Posttraumatic Stress 
Disorder (PTSD). Rape victims are second only to survivors of war 
in suffering from PTSD. Matsakis focuses on helping survivors 
develop a safety plan, develop supportive networks, and diffuse 
the emotional impact of the sexual assault to regain power. 
 McEvoy, Alan W., and Jeff B. Brookings. If She is Raped: A Book for 
Husbands. Homes Beach, FL: Learning Publications, 1984. 
 This book provides information for the friends and family 
members of rape victims—male or female—to help them as-
sist with the victim’s recovery. The authors identify common 
reactions, suggest appropriate responses, and emphasize good 
communication. 
 Mezey, Gillian C., and Michael B. King, eds. Male Victims of Sexual 
Assault. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 2000.
 This is one of the very few books to examine male rape. Chapters 
address prison rape, sexual torture, child victims, and historical 
aspects of male sexual assault. 
 Mills, Patrick, ed. Rape Intervention Resource Manual. Springfield,
IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1977. 

270 Resources
 This guide helps activists assess the need for a rape crisis cen-
ter, establish a center, and create a training program for center 
workers. 
 Morneau, Robert H., Jr., and Robert R. Rockwell. Sex, Motiva-
tion, and the Criminal Offender. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 
1980.
 The authors cover types of sex crimes commonly encountered by 
police.
 Nelson, Terri. For Love of Country: Confronting Rape and Sexual 
Harassment in the U.S. Military. New York: Routledge, 2002. 
 Military personnel discuss their experiences with sexual crimes 
while in uniform, blaming the problem on a failure of leader-
ship and a breakdown in values. The author, a psychotherapist 
and U.S. Army veteran, includes responses from military and 
legislative leaders as well as Pentagon data. 
 Odem, Mary E., and Jody Clay-Warner, eds. Confronting Rape 
and Sexual Assault. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources Books, 
1998. 
 This book provides general coverage of the major issues surround-
ing rape, including the effects of sexual assault upon men, why 
rape happens, and the effects of resistance strategies upon rape. 
 O’Toole, Laura L., and Jessica R. Schiffman, eds. Gender Violence: 
Interdisciplinary Perspectives. New York: New York University 
Press, 1997. 
 This collection includes essays on sexual coercion in American 
life, sexual terrorism, cross-cultural views about rape, and the 
global health burden of rape. 
 Owen, David. Criminal Minds: The Science and Psychology of Profil-
ing. New York: Barnes & Noble Books, 2004. 
 Owen describes the different types of criminals whose work is 
studied by profilers, including anger-excitation rapists, com-
pensatory rapists, power-assertive rapists, power-reassurance 
rapists, pseudo-unselfish rapists, sadistic rapists, selfish rapists, 
regressed child molesters, and those who kill their victims. 

Print Sources 271
 Palermo, George B., and Mary Ann Farkas. The Dilemma of the Sex-
ual Offender. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 2001. 
 This book synthesizes clinical research on sexual offenders. It 
addresses the conceptualization of sexual offenders, the manage-
ment and control of sexual offenders, and legal policies related to 
sexual offenders. 
 Paludi, Michele Antoinette, ed. The Psychology of Sexual Victimiza-
tion: A Handbook. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999. 
 This general history covers incest, stranger rape, and the responses 
of the U.S. Congress to sexual victimization. 
 Prentky, Robert Alan, and Ann Wolbert Burgess. Forensic Manage-
ment of Sexual Offenders. New York: Kluwer Academic, 2000. 
 This scientific study focuses on the best known methods of legal 
disposition and management of sex offenders. 
 Rathus, Jill H., and Eva L. Feindler. Assessment of Partner Violence: 
A Handbook for Researchers and Practitioners. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association, 2004. 
 This book is useful for its Rape Myths Acceptance Scale (RMA), 
which is a 20-minute self-quiz that measures victim-blaming 
attitudes. 
 Raine, Nancy Venable. After Silence: Rape & My Journey Back. Pitts-
burgh: Three Rivers Press, 1999. 
 The victim of a 1985 stranger rape, Raine describes the steps that 
she took to recover from the assault. 
RAINN Speaker’s Bureau. Yes, You Do Know One of Us: Stories of 
Everyday Heroes. New York: Authorhouse, 2009. 
 This is a collection of personal accounts and poems that has been 
compiled by the largest organization against sexual assault in the 
United States. 
Roesch, Ronald, Donald G. Dutton, and Vincent F. Sacco, eds. Fam-
ily Violence: Perspectives on Treatment, Research, and Policy. Burnaby, 
British Columbia, Canada: British Columbia Institute on Family 
Violence, 1990. 

272 Resources
 Chapters in this edited collection cover the impact of childhood 
sexual abuse on adult mental health and the prevalence of the 
sexual abuse of female children and adolescents. 
 Rosenberg, Jean. Fuel on the Fire: An Inquiry into “Pornography” and 
Sexual Aggression in a Free Society. Orwell, VT: Safer Society Press, 
1989.
 Examines the link between sexually explicit material and sexual 
assault. Rosenberg reviews the major theories of antipornogra-
phy activists and collects the findings of 20 major sex offender 
treatment specialists. The title of this book reflects the general 
consensus that pornography does not cause sexual violence but 
may prompt already disturbed individuals to attack, thereby 
adding “fuel to the fire.” 
 Russell, Diana, ed. Making Violence Sexy: Feminist Views on Pornog-
raphy. New York: Taylor and Francis, 1993.
 Russell addresses the connection between pornography and rape. 
 Ryan, Gail, and Sandy Ryan, eds. Juvenile Sexual Offending: Causes, 
Consequences, and Correction. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1997. 
 This textbook defines sexually abusive youth, discusses the theo-
ries of juvenile sexual offending, and addresses the treatment of 
juvenile criminals. 
 Saward, Jill, and Wendy Green. Rape: My Story. London: Blooms-
bury, 1990. 
 Saward, the Ealing Vicarage Rape Victim, experienced a highly 
publicized attack at her home in London, England. She has since 
become one of Great Britain’s best known antirape activists. 
 Scarce, Michael. Male on Male Rape: The Hidden Toll of Stigma and 
Shame. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing, 1997. 
 This comprehensive survey of male rape is a landmark book. It 
covers every aspect of male-male sexual assault from medical 
sensitivity to sexual identity and policing issues. 
 Schultz, Leroy G., ed. Rape Victimology. Springfield, IL: Charles C. 
Thomas, 1975. 

Print Sources 273
 The book examines social and legal aspects of rape victimiza-
tion. It includes autobiographical essays by three female rape 
victims. 
 Schwartz, Martin D., ed. Researching Sexual Violence Against 
Women: Methodological and Personal Perspectives. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage, 1997. 
 In this collection, writers examine the role that emotion plays in 
research about sex crimes .
 Scott, Kay. Sexual Assault: Will I Ever Feel Okay Again? Ada, MI: 
Bethany House, 1993. 
 The author, raped while working in a Christian ministry, takes a 
Christian-focused approach to healing. 
 Scully, Diana. Understanding Sexual Violence: A Study of Convicted 
Rapists. New York: Unwin Hyman, 1990. 
 Scully published this work before the FBI released its profile of 
serial rapists. 
 Searles, Patricia, and Ronald J. Berger, eds. Rape and Society: Read-
ings on the Problem of Sexual Assault. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 
1995.
 This collection of essays is especially useful for interviews with a 
police officer who investigated sex crimes, a public defender who 
has defended rapists, a rapist, and the victims of rapes, including 
a male survivor. 
 Smith, Merril D. Encyclopedia of Rape. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 
2004.
 This reference covers the history of rape and the issues related to 
sexual assault. 
 Smith, Susan E. Fear or Freedom: A Woman’s Options in Social Sur-
vival and Physical Defense. Racine, WI: Mother Courage Press, 
1986. 
 Smith, a martial artist who has created the White Lotus system 
of self-defense, has written a self-defense manual for women. By 

274 Resources
combining self-defense tips with attack deterrents and attacker 
habits, Smith has created a guide that remains an exceptionally 
useful book despite its age. 
 Spencer, Alec. Working with Sex Offenders in Prisons and Through 
Release to the Community: A Handbook. London: Jessica Kingsley, 
1999. 
 The author discusses his experiences in creating a multiagency 
sex offender treatment program in England. 
 Stevens, Dennis J. Inside the Mind of a Serial Rapist. San Jose, CA: 
Authors Choice Press, 2000. 
 After seeing a sign that said, “All men are potential rapists, 
beware!,” the author decided to try to shift discussion of rape 
from a political focus to a criminological one. This book is based 
on interviews with 61 men who participated in at least 400 sexual 
assaults.
 Stout, Karen, and Beverly McPhail, eds. Confronting Sexism and 
Violence Against Women: A Challenge for Social Work (Longman,
1998).
 This collection of essays is aimed at social work professionals. 
 Swindle, Howard. Trespasses: Portrait of a Serial Killer. New York: 
Penguin, 1997. 
 The author, a  Dallas Morning News  reporter, provides a biography 
of Gilbert Escobedo, the Ski Mask Rapist. Escobedo confessed to 
48 rapes in Dallas between 1985 and 1990, though he is suspected 
of committing twice that number. 
 Thornhill, Randy, and Craig T. Palmer. A Natural History of Rape: 
Biological Bases of Sexual Coercion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2000.
 The authors, both evolutionary psychologists, controversially 
argue that men rape for reasons related to the evolution of 
the human species. They suggest that many rape prevention 
strategies will fail because they rely more on assumptions 
about human behavior than scientific research about human 
nature. 

Print Sources 275
 Trumpe, Pauline. Doctors Who Rape. Wakefield, NH: Longwood 
Academic, 1991. 
 The author is an attorney who specializes in the sexual abuse of 
patients, overwhelmingly female, by physicians. 
 United States Government. 21st Century Veterans Health: Military 
Sexual Trauma (MST), Assault and Harassment, Intimate Partner 
Violence, Rape, Veterans Administration Independent Study Course . 
New York: Progressive Management, 2007. 
 Reproduces the 2004 Veterans Administration Independent Study 
Course on sexual crimes. It is aimed at helping military veterans 
who are suffering from mental and physical injuries sustained 
during military service. It includes a discussion of compensation 
issues associated with Military Sexual Trauma (MST). 
 Ward, Tony, Devon Polaschek, and Anthony R. Beech. Theories of 
Sexual Offending. New York: John Wiley, 2005. 
 This is a comprehensive examination of the key theories about 
sexual crime. It focuses on putting theories into practice. 
 Weinrott, Mark R. Juvenile Sexual Aggression: A Critical Review.
Boulder, CO: Center for the Study and Prevention of Violence, 
1996.
 This pamphlet describes what is known about juvenile sex of-
fenders, what remains unknown, and what appears to be the best 
means of treating such offenders. 
 Winick, Bruce J., and John Q. LaFond, eds. Protecting Society 
from Sexually Dangerous Offenders: Law, Justice, and Therapy.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2003. 
 In this collection of essays, the authors discuss sexually violent 
predator laws, when a sexual offender should still be regarded as 
dangerous, and alternative strategies for protecting the community 
such as chemical castration. 
 Wolfthal, Diane. Images of Rape: The “Heroic” Tradition and Its Al-
ternatives. London: Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 This is the first in-depth exploration of rape in Western art but it 
does not include a discussion of rape on film and in music. 

276 Resources
 Zorza, Joan, ed. Violence Against Women: Victims and Abusers, Legal 
Issues, Interventions and Treatment. Kingston, NJ: Civic Research 
Institute, 2006. 
 This book contains almost all of the articles that appeared from 
January 2003 to December 2004 in Sexual Assault Report.  It cov-
ers mother-daughter incest, sexual abuse of women by clergy, 
cultural differences in reporting sexual abuse, and military 
rape cases. 
 War-Related Rape 
Amnesty International and CODESRIA. Monitoring and Investigat-
ing Sexual Violence. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Amnesty Inter-
national, 2000. 
 This slim volume is a companion to  UKWELI: Monitoring and 
Documenting Human Rights Violations in Africa. It discusses when 
sexual violence is a crime under international human rights law, 
how to monitor sexual violence, and how to assess evidence. 
 Barstow, Anne Llewellyn, ed. War’s Dirty Secret: Rape, Prostitution, 
and Other Crimes Against Women. Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 
2000.
 This book covers the modern history of sex crimes during war 
from the rape of Nanking in the 1930s to the Korean comfort 
women of World War II, to Nicaragua in the 1980s, and Yugoslavia 
in the 1990s. 
 Frederick, Sharon, and The Aware Committee on Rape. Rape:
Weapon of Terror. River Edge, NJ: Global Publishing, 2001. 
 The Association of Women for Action and Research (AWARE) 
produced this general history of rape as an instrument of terror 
in situations of war and civil conflict. The book covers both World 
Wars, as well as conflicts in Haiti, Bosnia, Rwanda, Afghanistan, 
Myanmar, and Indonesia. 
 Human Rights Watch. The War Within the War: Sexual Violence 
Against Women and Girls in Eastern Congo. New York: Human 
Rights Watch, 2002. 
 Examines the frequent and systemic use of violence by Rwandan, 
Congolese, Mai Mai, and Burundian soldiers in the war in the 

Multimedia Sources 277
Democratic Republic of Congo. The war has proceeded intermit-
tently since 1996. 
 Stiglmayer, Alexandra, ed. Mass Rape: The War Against Women in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1994. 
 In the civil war in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, rape became 
an instrument of war. 
 Multimedia Sources 
 Date or Acquaintance Rape 
20/20: The Toughest Call. ABC News, 2008. DVD. 
 This episode of the 20/20 news magazine discusses the case of 
Kimberly Scott, who struggled to tell her husband that she had 
become pregnant as the result of an acquaintance rape. 
Date Rape: The Ultimate Violation of Trust. Educational Video Net-
work, 2002. DVD and VHS. 
 This is a 23-minute introduction to date rape that focuses on a 
failure to communicate effectively as the major cause of such 
assaults. 
Date Rape: No Means No! Phoenix Learning Group, 2008. DVD. 
 This short video emphasizes to students that girls who say “no” 
mean it. 
Heart on a Chain: The Truth About Date Violence. Phoenix Learning 
Group, 2008. DVD. 
 Short film that introduces high school students to the issue of 
domestic violence, including date rape. 
Real Life Teens: The Dark Side of Dating. TMW Media Group, 2008. 
DVD.
 This 20-minute video discusses sexual pressure during a date and 
how girls should make their desires clear. 
Scoring: A Story About Date Rape. Phoenix Learning Group, 2008. 

278 Resources
 Aimed at students, this 19-minute video is an introduction to the 
issues surrounding date rape. 
 History of Sexual Assault 
60 Minutes – Innocent. CBS News, 2007. 
 This 19-minute segment on the Duke University lacrosse rape 
case originally aired on April 15, 2007. Three white Duke lacrosse 
players were charged with raping an African American stripper 
hired to perform at a party. The men were declared innocent and 
the case dismissed, with the prosecutor, Michael Nifong, ulti-
mately being disbarred for abusing the rights of the men. The 
lacrosse players discuss the impact of false rape charges on their 
lives.
The Accused. Paramount, 1988. DVD and VHS. 
 Probably the best known film about a gang rape, this is a fiction-
alized account of the real-life attack that took place at Big Dan’s 
Tavern in New Bedford Falls, Massachusetts, in 1983. The victim, 
played by Jodie Foster, came to the bar to have a drink. When she 
attempted to leave, a group of men raped her on a pool table while 
other men cheered the rapists. No one, including the bartender, 
notified the police. The case quickly drew national attention as 
one of the crimes of the century. Meanwhile, the community of 
New Bedford Falls divided over the prosecution of the alleged 
rapists. Protesters charged that the prosecutor displayed anti-
Portuguese prejudice since the attackers were Portuguese by heri-
tage. Other protestors waved placards proclaiming that “rape is 
not a spectator sport.” Four men were ultimately convicted. This 
film shows the difficulties of prosecuting rape and the character 
assassination faced by victims in the 1980s. Foster won an Oscar 
for her portrayal. 
Girl 27. Westlake, 2006. DVD. 
 The documentary focuses on the history of sexual assault. In 
1937, the movie studio Metro Goldwyn Mayer tricked 120 un-
derage girls into attending a stag party for visiting salesmen. 
One of the girls, dancer Patricia Douglas, was beaten and raped 
when she attempted to leave the gathering. She sued MGM and 
the studio embarked on a cover-up that involved the district 

Multimedia Sources 279
attorney and the media. Director David Stenn interviews the 
now-elderly Douglas as well as legal analysts and victims of 
Hollywood sexual harassment. 
The Massie Affair. PBS, 2005.
 Part of the  American Experience  series, this documentary explores 
the 1931 case of a troubled white woman who charged that a 
group of Hawaiian men had raped her. The case inflamed race 
relations in Hawaii for decades to follow. 
No!: Confronting Sexual Assault in Our Community. California News-
reel, 2006. DVD. 
 This superb film focuses on sexual assaults upon women of color. 
It includes segments on “gay-baiting” in the civil rights and black 
power movements as well as efforts by men to stop violence 
against women. 
Rape in Connecticut: The Alex Kelly Story. A & E, 1999. VHS. 
 Alex Kelly committed two rapes in Darien, Connecticut, in 1986. 
While awaiting trial in 1987, he fled to Europe and spent the next 
seven years on the run. After surrendering in Switzerland, Kelly 
was convicted on one count of rape and pleaded no contest to 
another count. He left prison in 2007. 
Rape Prevention – He Loves Me Not and Rape Prevention – It’s Not 
Always Somebody Else. National Archives and Records Adminis-
tration, 2008. 2 DVD. 
 These films were created by the U.S. Army in the 1970s to train 
military personnel and their dependents about the advantages of 
immediately reporting rape and the dangers that all women face 
from rape. The National Archives has released the films because 
of their historical significance. 
Roman Polanski: Wanted and Desired. Velocity/Thinkfilm, 2008.
 This is a documentary about the film director who was arrested in 
1977 for unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor. Polanski then 
fled the United States and has yet to return. The film, which never 
received Polanski’s cooperation, raises considerable doubt about 
the director’s guilt. 

280 Resources
Scottsboro: An American Tragedy. PBS, 2000. DVD. 
 The Scottsboro Boys were a group of nine African American 
youths who became an international cause célèbre when they 
were charged with raping two white women in Alabama in 1931. 
On the basis of extremely flimsy evidence, most of the defen-
dants received death sentences. The scheduled executions were 
overturned but the young men served prison terms for a crime 
that likely never took place. 
Searching for Angela Shelton. Hillhopper Productions, 2004. DVD. 
 This film demonstrates the prevalence of sexual assault. Film-
maker Angela Shelton travels throughout the United States to 
meet other women with her same name to survey a cross-section 
of American women. She discovers that 25 out of 40 Angela 
Sheltons have been raped, beaten, or sexually molested. One 
Shelton tracks sexual predators. 
V-Day—Until the Violence Stops. New Video Group, 2003. 
 Playwright Eve Ensler, creator of  The Vagina Monologues , estab-
lished V-Day as an international grassroots movement to stop 
violence against women. This documentary traces the birth of the 
movement and includes celebrity women speaking about their 
personal experiences of abuse. 
 Prison Rape 
Turned Out: Sexual Assault Behind Bars. Interlock Media, 2003. 
DVD and VHS. 
 This documentary on prison rape focuses on the stories of five 
men imprisoned in Alabama. They report that “turning out” or 
sodomizing prisoners is common. Prison administrators ignore 
such assaults, with some claiming that it helps to create a more 
peaceful and thus more manageable prison environment. 
 Prostitution 
ABC News Primetime: Sex Trafficking in America. ABC News, 
2006 DVD. 
 Examines the cases of two American teenagers who were forced 
into prostitution. 

Multimedia Sources 281
American Justice – Prostitution: Sex and the Law. DVD.
 A & E Television Networks, 2008. Examines prostitution in the 
age of AIDS as well as the new emphasis on prosecuting the 
clients 
History’s Mysteries: History of Prostitution: Sex in the City. A & E 
Home Video, 2000. DVD. 
 Entertaining look at the history of prostitution that does not fully 
examine the dark side of the profession. 
Prostitution: Beyond the Myths. Twin Cities Public Television, 2007. 
DVD.
 This 30-minute documentary looks at the lives of three women 
who left prostitution. It also includes the views of pimps, law 
enforcement personnel, and social workers. The documentary is 
especially useful for its coverage of a recovery program that has 
helped women to get out of sex work. 
Storyville: The Naked Dance. Shanachie, 1997. DVD and VHS. 
 Storyville is the famous section of New Orleans where pros-
titution was legalized from 1898 until 1917. The history of 
Storyville began with an effort to combat prostitution by re-
stricting it to a 16-block area. However, about 2000 prostitutes 
subsequently found work everywhere from elaborate bordel-
los to the streets of the neighborhood. This film is for mature 
audiences because it includes turn-of-the-century erotica and 
period photographs. 
 Rape in Popular Films 
Birth of a Nation. Alpha Video, 1915. DVD. 
 D. W. Griffith’s blockbuster silent film contains two scenes of 
attempted rapes. One potential rapist is a black man while the 
other is a mixed-race man. The black man is based on the myth 
of the black male rapist. He is shown chasing—on all fours and 
virtually foaming at the mouth—a young white girl. The film, 
widely regarded as one of the most significant in American his-
tory, helped lead to the revival of the Ku Klux Klan in large part 
because of the rape scenes. 

282 Resources
Broken Blossoms. Kino Video, 1919. DVD. 
 In this D. W. Griffith film, Lucy, played by Lillian Gish, is murdered 
by her father, Battling Burrows, for having a sexual relationship 
with the Yellow Man, a Chinese immigrant. The incestuous rape 
is symbolic but film scholars argue that this is the only way that 
the codes of silent film and melodrama would allow the depiction 
of a sexual assault. Standards of decency of the early 20th century 
limited the extent to which rape could be fully represented. 
Death Wish. Paramount, 1974. DVD.
 The vigilante hero, played by Charles Bronson, embarks on a 
murderous rampage after his wife and daughter are raped. When 
the movie was shown in theaters, audiences famously cheered 
when street thugs were killed. 
Deliverance. Warner Home Video, 1972. DVD. 
 This movie, about four businessmen from Atlanta who take a 
camping trip into the wilderness, is one of the key films of the 
1970s. It famously features a male rape scene. It stars Ned Beatty, 
Burt Reynolds, and Jon Voight. 
Extremities. MGM, 1986. DVD and VHS. 
 Marjorie, played by Farrah Fawcett, narrowly escapes being 
raped but is left in fear that her attacker knows her address. Soon 
enough, the would-be rapist begins to terrorize Marjorie. When 
he invades her home, she disarms him and plots her revenge. 
The film received much critical acclaim, especially for Fawcett’s 
performance.
Eye for an Eye Paramount, 1996. DVD. 
 When a rapist-killer is released on a technicality, the grieving 
mother, played by Sally Field, seeks revenge. This is a good thriller 
but it does not venture into a particularly nuanced discussion of 
the effects of rape upon the family. 
Handgun. Starz/Anchor Bay, 1983. DVD. 
 When a young Dallas woman is raped, she seeks revenge with 
a handgun. This low-budget film is more of a discussion about 
gun control than sexual assault. 

Multimedia Sources 283
I Spit on Your Grave. Elite Entertainment, 1977. DVD. 
 This low-budget yet still enormously popular horror film, di-
rected by Meir Zarchi, is part of the rape-revenge genre. The 
heroine tracks down and executes the four men who gang-raped 
her. The film is extremely graphic. While some reviewers have 
categorized it as exploitative, others view it as a examination of 
the psychology of violence. 
Johnny Belinda. Warner Home Video, 1948. DVD and VHS. 
 Jean Negulesco’s movie focuses on a deaf and mute woman who 
is rejected by her family. She is helped by a male physician to 
make the transformation from a dirty and disheveled girl into a 
beautiful woman. As a consequence of this transformation, she 
is raped by a local workman. Belinda responds by rejecting the 
symbols of heterosexual femininity. 
Outrage 1950. This is a significant American movie that is cur-
rently not available on DVD or VHS. 
 It is a rape-revenge film by one of the few women directors, Ida 
Lupino, who worked in the mid-20th century. Typical of Lupi-
no’s film work, the movie is a melodrama that focuses on a social 
problem and possesses elements of film noir. 
Positive ID. Starz/Anchor Bay, 1986. DVD. 
 A suburban housewife, played by Stephanie Rascoe, struggles to 
cope as a survivor of a sexual assault. The film appeared on many 
top 10 lists when it came out. 
She Said No. Allumination, 1990. DVD. 
 In this John Patterson film, the victim of a date rape unsuccess-
fully prosecutes her attacker and then turns her gun on herself. 
Thelma and Louise. MGM. 1991. DVD and VHS. 
 This classic female-buddy film involves two women who flee 
when one of them shoots a man attempting to date rape her 
friend. The film, starring Geena Davis and Susan Sarandon, 
became one of most popular films in history among women 
largely because it portrayed two women who fought against 
gender stereotypes. 

284 Resources
A Time to Kill. Warner Home Video, 1996. DVD and VHS. 
 In Joel Schumacher’s film, a young lawyer defends a black man 
who is accused of killing the men who raped his daughter. 
 Rape Prevention 
Fight Like a Girl: The Rape Escape Method. CustomFlix, 2006. 
3 DVD. 
 Teaches methods of self-defense for women, including fend-
ing off an attacker from a prone position, stopping date rape 
or acquaintance rape, and effectively using pepper spray. The 
instructor is Brad Parker, an experienced martial artist with a 
law enforcement background who serves as the executive direc-
tor of the Women’s Self-Defense Institute and is the president 
of Defend University, an online school focused on self-defense, 
security, and defensive tactics. 
Rape Awareness and Prevention For Women. Black Belt Communica-
tions, 2005. DVD. 
 Provides a basic introduction to sexual assault prevention. 
Rape Prevention. Educational Video Network, 2004. DVD. 
 This 27-minute film is an introduction to rape prevention and 
rape reporting. 
SMART Self-Defense for Women. Greg Mosley’s Self-Defense and 
Wellness, 2008. 
 This 30-minute video introduces the Simple Martial Arts Reality 
Training (SMART) developed by Kenpo black belt Greg Mosley 
to help women fight off attackers. It is marketed as a cheap and 
quick way of learning self-defense. 
 Rape Recovery 
Nightline: Men and Rape. ABC News, 2007. DVD. 
 This episode of the news program,  Nightline,  looks at couples 
who are coping with the sexual assault of the woman. It focuses 
on the difficulties of husbands and boyfriends in handling the 
aftermath of a rape. 

Multimedia Sources 285
ABC News Primetime: Rape Survivor: Bridget Kelly. ABC News, 
2007. DVD. 
 A 12-minute report of a rape survivor who decided to go public 
about being the victim of a sexual assault. 
Speak. Showtime Entertainment, 2003. DVD. 
 This is fictional film based on the novel by Laurie Halse Ander-
son. It focuses on a high school freshman who becomes silent 
after being raped at a party. She recovers through the help of 
a teacher who uses art therapy. The film stars Kristen Stewart, 
Elizabeth Perkins, and Michael Angarano. 
Surviving Rape: A Journey Through Grief. AIMS Multimedia, 
1992. VHS. 
 This program covers the five stages of the grieving process that 
rape victims encounter: denial, anger, depression, bargaining, and 
acceptance.
 Sexual Orientation Issues 
She Stole My Voice: A Documentary About Lesbian Rape.
 The American Academy for Film and Gender Studies, 2007. DVD. 
Many people think that women cannot be rapists. Filmmakers 
Justine Chang and Armand Kaye are gay rights activists who 
have created this film to bring attention to a topic that is typi-
cally ignored by both the lesbian community and law enforce-
ment. The documentary blends expert commentary with graphic 
 reenactments to show the prevalence of this type of sexual assault.
 World History 
60 Minutes—The War Against Women. CBS News, 2008. DVD. 
 This 13-minute film addresses the use of rape as a weapon of war 
in the African Congo. 
Bangkok Girl: A Documentary About Thailand’s Night Life. High
Banks Entertainment, 2005. DVD. 
 This film addresses sex tourism through a biography of a 
19-year-old bar girl who has worked since age 13 but still 

286 Resources
makes the somewhat dubious claim that she has never par-
ticipated in prostitution. 
Darfur Diaries: Message From Home. Cinema Libre, 2004. DVD and 
VHS.
 Examines the human rights tragedy in the Darfur region of 
Africa. The Sudanese government has encouraged the Janjaweed 
militias to rape women of all ages while looting and murdering. 
The film allows victims to give their stories. This documentary 
has been used by Amnesty International to educate its members 
about the Darfur crisis villages 
Rape Recovery Video Program. TeresaLauer.com, 2008. DVD. 
 This set of 35 short videos is designed to help rape victims 
address issues resulting from sexual assault such as eating 
disorders, self-injury, substance abuse, flashbacks, anxiety, de-
pression, intrusive thoughts, nightmares, denial, numbness, 
and avoidance. It suggests steps to take to get support from 
family members and a therapist. This documentary is one of 
the very few films on rape to address expressive therapies, 
such as art, dance, drama, and music therapy. 

287
 Acquaintance Rape When a victim is raped by a person known to him 
or her. Most rapes are acquaintance rapes. 
 Brothel  A building devoted to prostitution in which a madam has 
control over a group of prostitutes. There are numerous slang terms for 
brothel including cathouse. Brothels are legal in some areas, notably parts 
of Nevada. 
 Capital Offense  A criminal act punishable by the death sentence. Rape 
was a capital offense in the United States for many, many years. Dropping 
the death penalty is thought to have increased prosecutions for rape, as 
women were more likely to pursue prosecution and prosecutors more 
willing to accept the cases. 
 Chaste  Morally pure. A chaste woman does not engage in sexual activi-
ties with anyone except her husband. 
 Chemical Castration  The use of prescribed drugs to reduce levels of 
testosterone in a convicted rapist. The drug usually given has the brand 
name Depo-Provera. It is depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA), 
which is a birth control drug that is prescribed to women under normal 
circumstances. 
 Chlamydia  A bacterial infection that is spread by sexual contact. Chla-
mydia can be found in the cervix and urethra as well as the throat and 
rectum. Women who have recently been infected typically have no 
symptoms so the infection may go untreated. Chlamydia destroys the 
fallopian tubes, causing infertility. It is major cause of pelvic inflamma-
tory disease and has been linked to an increased risk of cervical cancer. 
The infection can be passed from mother to child during birth. 
 Concubine  A woman who lives with and has sexual relations with a 
man but who is not married to him. Historically, many concubines have 
been sex slaves. 
 Corroboration Requirements  Independent proof, generally a witness, 
that a woman has been raped. Such requirements imply that women 
Glossary

288 Glossary
cannot be trusted, especially since victims of armed robberies or other 
violent crimes are not required to provide proof of their victimization. 
American law no longer contains corroboration requirements. 
 Date Rape  A form of acquaintance rape in which a romantic relation-
ship leads to an attack. 
 Femicide  When a girl or woman is murdered because of her gender. 
When a man rapes a woman and then kills her, it is femicide. Such a 
killing is often part of rape as a war crime. 
 Gang Rape  When two or more individuals commit sexual assaults. 
Rape as a war crime is typically a form of gang rape. 
 Gonorrhea  An infection caused by bacterium  Neisseria gonorrhea  that is 
spread by sexual contact. The gonorrhea bacterium can only survive in 
moist areas of the body, such as the vagina, urethra, and rectum. More 
than half of women have no symptoms in the early stages of gonorrheal 
infection. Those with symptoms may suffer burning urination, frequent 
urination, yellowish vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, and genital red-
ness or swelling. Gonorrhea can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease, a 
major cause of infertility in women, as well as heart problems and arthri-
tis. Gonorrhea and chlamydia are often found in the same person. 
 Grand Jury A collection of at least 12 people who determine in private 
whether a prosecutor has sufficient evidence against a person or persons 
to proceed to trial. A rapist is indicted by a grand jury before his or her 
guilt is determined by a petit jury. 
Hallucinogens  These are drugs that create a false or distorted impres-
sion of objects or events. It is a myth that many rapes involve subduing a 
victim with hallucinogenic drugs. 
 Indentured Servants  Individuals who agreed to work for a set amount 
of time, usually four to seven years, in exchange for passage to British 
America. Agreeing to an indenture provided poor English men and 
women with a chance at a better future. They did not have such a chance 
in England. Indentured servants became less common after Bacon’s 
Rebellion in 1676, in which the poor colonists of Virginia fought the rich 
colonists.
Lynching  An execution that is not approved by the legal system. Prior 
to the civil rights legislation of the 1960s, black men accused of rape in the 
South were commonly lynched, usually by hanging, before their guilt or 
innocence could be determined in a court of law. 
Madam A woman who manages a house of prostitution .
Natasha
 The nickname for a prostitute of Eastern European origin. The 
prostitutes, who are typically girls or women who have been forced into 
prostitution, notoriously dislike the nickname. 
Pedophilia Sexual abuse of a child .

Glossary 289
 Petit Jury  Also called a trial jury, such a jury determines the guilt or 
innocence of a suspect. Most criminal prosecutions never go to a jury 
because of plea bargaining and guilty pleas. 
Recidivism  When a person convicted of a crime commits another crime 
after being released from prison. The rate of recidivism among sexual 
criminals, especially pedophiles, is notoriously high. 
 Sexual Coercion  Using the threat of punishment or the promise of a 
reward to force someone to engage in sexual activity. Not all force used 
in a rape is necessarily physical. 
 Sexual Harassment  Unwanted sexual advances, requests for sexual 
favors, and other verbal, physical, or any other conduct of a sexual 
nature. 
 Sexual Revictimization  When a survivor of childhood sexual abuse or 
rape is sexually attacked again in adulthood. Sexual revictimization is 
not uncommon. 
 Slave Codes  Laws that regulated the lives of slaves. Such codes made 
slave women into the property of their masters, who could legally use 
their property for sexual purposes. The codes made slave masters legally 
exempt for raping their slaves, though they still could be charged with 
damaging the property of other masters. 
 Sodomy  Anal intercourse. The term is usually used to designate sexual 
intercourse between men. Until late in the 20th century, sodomy in the 
United States was criminalized because of its connection with homosexu-
ality. It remains criminalized in many other countries. 
Speakout
 A public protest that involves many people speaking pub-
licly. The term, common in the 1960s and 1970s, dates to the first efforts of 
American feminists to campaign against rape. 
 Statutory Rape  Sexual intercourse with a person who is not old enough 
to legally consent to having sex. The age of consent varies from state to 
state and country to country. Statutory rape is different from other types 
of rape in that force and lack of consent are not necessary for conviction. 
The relationship is presumed to be abusive because of the age discrepancy. 
Syphilis  A sexually transmitted disease in which  Treponema pallidum , 
a microscopic organism burrows into the moist areas of the mouth or 
genitals. The first symptom is a nonpainful ulcer known as a chancre. 
Contact with the ulcer spreads the organism. The second stage of syphilis 
may include headaches, rash, fever, and hair loss. In the third stage, the 
only step that is not highly infectious, the disease destroys the major 
organs and the brain. In pregnant women, syphilis, if untreated, is passed 
on to the baby who will not live long. 
 Trafficking  The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring, or 
receipt of people, by means of coercion or payment for the purpose of 

290 Glossary
sexual exploitation. Trafficking is a particular problem in economically 
depressed regions, such as parts of Asia and Eastern Europe. 
Victim  A person who been hurt physically, psychologically, socially, 
intellectually, and/or financially. 
Voyeur  A person who receives sexual gratification from observing the 
sexual activities of others. 
White Slavery  Forcing women of European ancestry into prostitu-
tion. The term is generally viewed as archaic since it implies a differ-
ence between enslaving whites and enslaving people of other races. 

291
Index
 Abused Deaf Women’s Advocacy 
Services (ADWAS), 203 
 Academy Online, 219 
 ACLU.  See American Civil 
Liberties Union 
 ACOG.  See American College 
of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists
 acquaintance rape, 13 
 defining, 17, 287 
 introduction of term, 115 
 myth acceptance and, 30 
 reporting of, 17 – 18 
 resources for, 249 – 250, 
277 – 278 
 Acting for Women in Distressing 
Situations (AFESIP), 134 – 136 
 Action Aid, 78 
 Adam Walsh Child Protection 
and Safety Act, 61, 121, 145 
 Adam Walsh Child Resource 
Center, 145 
Addictive Behaviors ( journal), 31 
 AdvocateWeb, 203 – 204 
 ADWAS.  See Abused Deaf 
Women’s Advocacy Services 
 AFESIP.  See  Acting for Women in 
Distressing Situations 
Affilia , 38 
 Africa 
 child sexual abuse in, 77 – 78 
 femicide in, 78 – 79 
 marital rape in, 78 
 rape as war crime in, 76 – 77 
 rape in, 74 – 76 
 violence against lesbians in, 
78 – 79 
 African Court on Human Rights, 
137
 African Regional Conference on 
Women, 137 
 “After-Rape Among Three 
Populations in the South-
west” (Bletzer and Koss), 
41
Against Our Will (Brownmiller), 
110, 150 – 151 
 age of consent, 9 
 aggravated sexual battery, 18 
 AIDS, 31, 74, 82, 88, 90, 129, 233 
 AIDS-Free World, 76, 134 
 Alabama Coalition Against Rape, 
233 – 234 
 Alaska Network on Domestic 
Violence and Sexual Assault, 
234
 Alcoa, 97 
 alcohol, 30 – 31, 211 
 alcoholism, 32 
 Alexander, Will, 60 
 Alligood, Clarence, 110 
 Alternative Behavior Treatment 
Centers, 138 
 American Bar Association, 75 

292 Index
 American Civil Liberties Union 
(ACLU), 59, 67, 205 
 American College of Obstetri-
cians and Gynecologists 
(ACOG), 205, 226 
American Journal of Health-System 
Pharmacy , 44 
American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine , 43 
 American Law Institute, 106 
 American Professional Society 
on the Abuse of Children 
(APSAC), 206 
 American Prosecutors Research 
Institute, 218 
 American Psychiatric Associa-
tion, 67 
 American Revolution, 4 
 American Samoa Coalition 
Against Domestic and Sexual 
Violence, 234 
America’s Most Wanted , 145 
 Americas Watch, 96 
 Amnesty International, 31, 52, 
96
 Andrews, Paul Martin, 123 – 124 
 Annan, Kofi, 77 
 antirape movement 
 in Britain, 141 – 142 
 civil rights movement and, 
145 – 146 
 in Congo, 74 – 75 
 in France, 91 – 92 
 history of, 12 – 13, 107 – 108 
 in Indonesia, 143 – 144 
 in Ireland, 89 
 in Italy, 89 
 rape kits and, 53 
 Anxiety Disorders Association of 
America, 226 
 apartheid, 78 
 APSAC.  See American 
Professional Society on the 
Abuse of Children 
 Archambault, Joanne, 124 – 125 
 Archer, Christopher, 116 
 Arizona Sexual Assault Network, 
234
 Arkansas Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 234 
 arrest rates, 49 – 50 
 Asia 
 child sexual abuse in, 82 – 84 
 gang rape in, 80 
 marital rape in, 80 
 rape as war crime in, 80 – 82 
 rape in, 79 – 80 
 sex trafficking in, 84 – 88 
 Association for the Treatment 
of Sexual Abusers (ATSA), 
204 – 205 
 Association for Women’s Self-
Defense Advancement 
(AWSDA), 204 
 Association of Women Victims 
of War.  See Women Victims 
of War 
 Athelstan (King), 102 
 ATSA.  See Association for the 
Treatment of Sexual Abusers 
 attackers 
 arrest rates for, 49 – 50 
 clergy and, 40 
 data on, 156 – 157 
 female, 41 – 43 
 fraternities and, 39 – 40 
 rape myth acceptance by, 
35 – 37 
 repeat, 63 – 65 
 strangers as, 40 – 41 
 student athletes and, 37 – 39, 
115 – 116, 118 
 treatment of, 58, 65 – 68 
 victim’s relationship with, 158 
 Ausley, Richard Alvin, 123 – 124 
 Avery, Byllye, 216 
 The Awareness Center, 129, 
138 – 139 
 AWSDA.  See Association for 
Women’s Self-Defense 
Advancement
 AZT, 88 

Index 293
 Bachman, Ronet, 32 
 Bacon’s Rebellion, 288 
 Ballard, Martha, 2 – 3 
 Ban Ki-moon, 75 
 Bangkok Declaration on Irregular 
Migration, 84 
 Battle of Culloden, 103 
 Beijing World Conference on 
Women, 119 
 Bell, Nancy, 32 
 Bemis, Elizabeth, 7 
 Bemis, Samuel, 7 
 Beneke, Timothy, 50 
 Berenson, Abbey, 47 
 Bergen, Raquel Kennedy, 36, 45 
 Berger, Ronald, 50 
 Berlin, Fred, 68 
 Big Dan’s Tavern incident, 113 
Birth of a Nation (film), 11, 104 
 Blackstone, William, 103 
 Blaine, Barbara, 125 – 126 
 Blau, Yosef, 126 – 127 
 Bletzer, Keith, 41, 46 – 47 
 Boeringer, Scot, 37 
 Bohmer, Carol, 127 
 Bondurant, Barrie, 30 
 Boone, John, 114 
 Bosnia-Hercegovina Association 
of Former POW Camp 
Inmates, 132 
 Bosnian War, 118, 131, 137 
 Boston Strangler.  See DeSalvo, 
Albert
Bowers v. Hardwick , 121 
 Breitkopf, Carmen Radecki, 47 
 Brewer, Renee, 57 
 British antirape movement, 
141 – 142 
 Bronson, Charles, 12 
 brothel, 287 
 Brown, Thomas, 103 
 Brownmiller, Susan, 12, 110, 
150 – 151 
 Bryant, Kobe, 56 
 Bullock, Rufus, 9 
 Bureau of Indian Affairs, 114, 116 
 Bureau of Justice Statistics, 41, 
156, 158, 188 
 Burgess, Ann, 46 
 Burkhart, Barry, 112 
 Burt, Martha, 36 
 Burzio, Giuseppe (Archbishop), 
105
 Bussière, Monique, 63 – 64 
 Butler, Sandra, 111 
 Byrd, William, 6 
 CAC.  See Crimes Against 
Children 
 Caesar, 5 
 Calhoun, Karen, 31 
 California Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 234 – 235 
 Call Off Your Old Tired Ethics 
(COYOTE), 209 – 210 
 Calley, William, 107 
 Cambodia, 82 – 84 
 Campbell, Rebecca, 43 – 44 
 Campus Outreach Services, 206 
 campus rape, 16 – 17, 30 – 31, 
159 – 160 
 capital offense, 287 
 rape as, 2 
 Carrington, Frank, 232 
 CAST.  See Coalition to Abolish 
Slavery and Trafficking 
 castration 
 chemical, 65 – 66, 287 
 punitary, 5 – 6, 65 – 68, 102 
 surgical, 66 
 Catholic Church, 40, 95 – 96, 120, 
125 – 126 
 Catholic International Aid Fund, 
74
 Catholic Worker, 126 
 CDA.  See Communications 
Decency Act 
 CDC.  See Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 
 Census Bureau, 158 
 Center for Antisocial and Violent 
Behavior, 114 

294 Index
 Center for Orientation and 
Support of Rape Victims, 
94 – 95 
 Center for Rape Concern, 32 
 Center for Sex Offender 
Management (CSOM), 207 
 Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), 149, 156, 
206 – 207, 217, 224 
 Central Park Five, 137 
 Central Park jogger case, 115 
 Centre Olame, 76 
 chancre, 289 
 chaste, 287 
 chemical castration, 65 – 66, 287 
 Child Abuse Prevention and 
Treatment Act, 220 
 child prostitution, 154 – 155 
 child rape, 17 
 child sexual abuse, 73 
 in Africa, 77 – 78 
 in Asia, 82 – 84 
 resources on, 245 – 249 
 Child Sexual Abuse Prevention 
Project, 212 
 Childhelp USA, 207 
 China, 85, 86 
 chlamydia, 43, 287 
 Civil War, 8 
 Clan Star, 208 
 clergy, 40 
 Clergy Task Force on Abuse of 
Jewish Women International, 
129
 Clery, Jeanne, 116, 161 
 Clery Act.  See Jeanne Clery 
Disclosure of Campus 
Security Policy and Campus 
Crime Statistics Act; Student 
Right to Know and Campus 
Security Act 
 Coalition to Abolish Slavery and 
Trafficking (CAST), 208 
 cocaine, 31, 155 
 Code of Assura, 101 
 Code of Hammurabi, 101 
 Code of the Nesilim, 101 
Coker v. Georgia , 111 
 College of Emergency Physicians, 
43
 Colombia, 92 
 Colorado Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 235 
 Columbia University Center on 
Addiction and Substance 
Abuse, 31 
Commentaries on the Laws of 
England (Blackstone), 103 
 Communications Decency Act 
(CDA), 128 
 Community United Against 
Violence (CUAV), 208 – 209 
 concubine, 1, 287 
 Conference on Women, 137 
 Congo.  See Democratic Republic 
of Congo 
 Congress of Racial Equality 
(CORE), 146 
 Connecticut Sexual Assault Crisis 
Services, 235 
The Conspiracy of Silence: The 
Trauma of Incest (Butler), 111 
 CONTACTLifeline, 235 
 contraception, emergency, 44 – 45 
Contraception ( journal), 44 
 Coordinadora Paz para la Mujer 
(Coordinating Peace for the 
Woman), 209 
 Coordinating Peace for the 
Woman.  See Coordinadora 
Paz para la Mujer 
 Corbin, Gawen, 5 
 CORE.  See Congress of Racial 
Equality
 corroboration requirements, 11, 
109, 287 – 288 
 Costa Rica, 92 
 Côte d’Ivoire.  See Ivory Coast 
 coverture, 22 
 Cox, Larry, 52 
Cox Broadcasting Corporation v. 
Cohn , 110 

Index 295
 COYOTE.  See Call Off Your Old 
Tired Ethics 
 Cramer, Robert, 219 
 Crawford, Dale, 117 – 118 
 Crawford, Trish, 117 – 118 
 Crime Victims Fund, 225 
 Crimes Against Children (CAC), 
210
 Crimes Against Children 
Research Center, 62 
 CSOM.  See Center for Sex 
Offender Management 
 CUAV.  See Community United 
Against Violence 
 date rape, 13, 118, 130, 145 – 146, 
220
 alcohol and, 211 
 data on, 159 – 160 
 defining, 17, 288 
 drug-induced, 119 
 introduction of term, 115 
 laws against, 115 
 myth acceptance and, 30, 35 
 reporting of, 17 – 18 
 resources for, 249 – 250, 
277 – 278 
 studies of, 106, 112 
 date rape drugs, 125 
 Davis, David, 141 – 142 
 Day One – Sexual Assault & 
Trauma Resource Center of 
Rhode Island, 235 
 DC Rape Crisis Center, 236 
 deaf victims, 203 
 death sentence, 287 
 elimination of, 4 
 for rape, 2, 4 
Death Wish (film), 12 
Deliverance (film), 34 
 Democratic National Platform 
Committee, 130 
 Democratic Republic of Congo, 
74 – 76 
 Department of Education (U.S.), 
211 
 Department of Health and 
Human Services (U.S.), 155, 
225
 Department of Justice (U.S.), 
29, 43, 56, 121, 145, 156, 207, 
224
 Depo-Provera, 65 – 66, 68, 287 
 depot medroxyprogesterone 
acetate (Depo-Provera/
DMPA), 65, 287 
 DeSalvo, Albert (Boston 
Strangler), 107 
 Deutsch, Helene, 106 
 Differing Effects of Partner and 
Nonpartner Sexual Assault 
on Women’s Mental Health” 
(Temple), 47 
 digital rape, 18 
 divorce, consequences of, 3 
 DMPA.  See depot medroxy-
progesterone acetate 
 DNA evidence, 10, 142 
 domestic violence, 250 – 251 
 Domestic Violence Sexual Assault 
Council of the Virgin Islands, 
236
 Donaldson, Stephen, 127 – 129 
 Drake, Gavin, 142 
 Dratch, Mark, 129 – 130 
The Dressing Station (Kaplan), 78 
 drink-spiking, 125 
 Dru Sjodin National Sex Offender 
Public Website, 121 
 drug use, 32, 222 
 Drug-Induced Rape Prevention 
and Punishment Act, 13, 119 
 Dublin Rape Crisis Center, 89 
 Ealing Vicarage Rape case, 114, 
140 – 142 
 Ebbesen, Ebbe, 55 
 Ecstasy, 222 
 Edward I (King), 102 
 elderly, 159 
 Elena, Maria, 94 
 Emancipation, 9 

296 Index
 emergency contraception, 44 – 45 
 English, Kim, 62 
 Ensler, Eve, 120, 231 
 Estrich, Susan, 115, 130 – 131 
 eugenics, 66 
 Europe 
 gang rape in, 91 – 92 
 rape in, 88 – 90 
 sex trafficking in, 90 – 91 
 evidence, scientific approach to, 
10
 Faith Trust Institute, 210 
Family Circle (magazine), 111 
Farmer v. Brennan , 128 
 FBI.  See Federal Bureau of 
Investigation
 FDA.  See Food and Drug Admin-
istration
 Fedderson, Yvonne, 207 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI), 25, 149, 188, 210 
 Federal Violence Against Women 
Act, 53 
The Female Fear (Gordon and 
Riger), 36 
 femicide, 78 – 79, 288 
 feminicide, 97 
 feminism, 108 
 antirape movement and, 12 
 criminal justice criticism from, 
55
 criticism of, 118 
 incest/family violence opposed 
by, 22 
 in Mexico, 94 – 95 
 political support for, 95 
 power theory in, 20 
 rape myths and, 30 
 Feminist Majority Foundation 
(FMF), 210 
 feminist movement, 12 
 Ferraro, Geraldine, 130 
 Findlay, Donald, 89 
 Finkelhor, David, 36, 62 
 Fitzgerald, Louise, 36 
 Florida Council Against Sexual 
Violence, 236 
Florida Star v. B.J.F. , 115 
 Flowe, Heather, 55 
 Flynn, Kathryn, 40 
 FMF.  See Feminist Majority 
Foundation
 Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 67 
 Foote, R. M., 65 
 force, legal definitions of, 8, 18 
 forcible rape, 18 
 Ford, Gerald, 108 
 foreign-object rape, 18 – 19 
 Fortescue, Grace, 105 
 Fortune, Marie (Reverend), 210 
 Fox, Vicente, 97 
 France, 91 – 92 
 Francis, Connie, 109 
 fraternities, 39 – 40, 211 
Fraternity Gang Rape (Sanday), 39 
 Freedmen’s Bureau, 9 
 French and Indian War, 5 
 Freud, Sigmund, 11 
 Frohmann, Lisa, 57 
 Future Group, 83 
 Gaff, Mitchell, 63 
 Gafni, Mordechai, 127 
 gammahydroxybutyrate (GHB), 
17
 gang rape 
 in Asia, 80 
 Big Dan’s Tavern incident, 113 
 Bilal Skaf incident, 120 
 defining, 19, 288 
 in Europe, 91 – 92 
 femicide and, 78 
 Glen Ridge incident, 115 – 116 
 Indonesian terror campaign 
and, 143 
 Mukhtar Mai incident, 132 – 133 
 Okinawa incident, 119 
 reporting of, 19 
 Garcia, Inez, 109 
 Gauthier, René, 64 

Index 297
 gay, lesbian, bisexual and trans-
gendered (GLBT), 34 – 35 
 General Electric, 97 
 genocide, 120 
 Genovese, Kitty, 12 
 Geoghan, John, 40 
 Georgia Network to End Sexual 
Assault, 236 
 GHB.  See gammahydroxybutyrate 
 G.I. Rights Network, 231 
 Gift From Within, 211 
 Girl Child Network, 76, 134 
 GLBT.  See gay, lesbian, bisexual 
and transgendered 
 Glen Ridge rape case, 115 – 116 
 Global Program on AIDS (GPA), 
233
 Global Survival Network, 90 
 Goddard, Marty, 53 
 gonorrhea, 43, 288 
 Gordon, Margaret, 36 
 GPA.  See Global Program on 
AIDS
 grand jury, 2, 288 
 Green, Wendy, 141 
 Green Man.  See DeSalvo, Albert 
 Griffin, Susan, 108 
 Griffith, D. W., 11, 104 
 Grober, Bryant, 116 
 Guatemala, 96 – 97 
 Hale, Matthew, 8, 102 – 103 
 half consent doctrine, 8 – 9 
 hallucinogens, 30, 288 
 Hamby, Sherry, 51 
 Hamilton Fish Institute on School 
and Community Violence, 
211 
 Hanson, R. Karl, 63 – 64 
 Hasecic, Bakira, 131 – 132 
 Hastings, Julie, 96 
 hate crime, 97 
 Hawaii Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault, 236 
 Healing Hearts Crisis Center, 237 
 Henry II (King), 102 
 hepatitis, 90 
 herpes, 31 
 Higher Education Center for 
Alcohol and Other Drug 
Abuse and Violence 
Prevention, 211 
 al-Hilali, Taj Din (Sheik), 79, 121 
 Hinck, Shelly Schaefer, 37 
 Hippocratic Oath, 102 
History of the Pleas of the Crown
(Hale), 103 
 HIV, 43, 44, 78, 88, 221, 233 
 Hoge, Bill, 66 
 Holmstrom, Larry, 46 
 Holocaust survivors, 138 
 Homan, James, 4 
 homophobia, 20, 34 
 homosexual rape, 19 – 21 
 homosexuality 
 sodomy laws punishing, 17, 
289
 as taboo, 2, 79 
 violence against, 79 
 Human Rights Watch, 49 – 50, 54, 
212
 Hunter, Kendra, 51 
I Never Called It Rape: The Ms. 
Report on Recognizing, 
Fighting, and Surviving 
Date and Acquaintance Rape
(Warshaw), 30 
 IACP.  See International 
Association of Chiefs of 
Police
 IAFN.  See International 
Association of Forensic 
Nurses
 IAFN Sexual Assault Forensic 
Examination Technical 
Assistance (SAFETA), 212 
 ICFRS.  See International 
Committee to Free Russell 
Smith
 Idaho Coalition Against Sexual 
and Domestic Violence, 237 

298 Index
 Illinois Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault, 237 
 Illusion Theatre, 212 – 213 
 IMPACT for Kids, 213 
 IMPACT International, 213 
 incest, 226, 232 
 boys in, 42 
 defining, 21 
 history of, 21 – 22, 111 
 prostitutes and, 155 
 sex offender residency laws 
and, 60 
 Incite! Women of Color Against 
Violence, 213 – 214 
 indentured servants, 288 
 India, 83 – 84 
 Indian Child Protection Act, 116 
 Indian Health Services, 116 
 Indiana Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault, 237 
 Indonesia, 143 – 144 
 Iniguez, Juan Sandoval (Bishop), 
95
 Injury Prevention Network 
Newsletter, 31 
 International Association of 
Chiefs of Police (IACP), 214 
 International Association of 
Forensic Nurses (IAFN), 214 
 International Commission of 
Jurists, 137 
 International Committee to Free 
Russell Smith (ICFRS), 
142
 International Criminal Tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia, 
137
 International Domestic Violence 
and Sexual Assault 
Conference, 125 
International Journal of Fertility and 
Women’s Medicine , 44 
 International Organization of 
Migration, 90 
 International Rescue Committee, 
75
 International Society for 
Traumatic Stress Studies, 226 
 International Violence Against 
Women Act, 134 
 Interpol, 90 
 interracial rape, 22 
 Iowa Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault, 223, 237 
 Ireland, 89 
Issues in Mental Health Nursing
( journal), 47 
 Italy, 89 
 Ivory Coast (Côte d’Ivoire), 
75 – 76 
 Jack, 5 
 Jackson, Tom, 38 – 39 
 Jacob Wetterling Foundation, 60 
 Jacob Wetterling Law.  See Sexual 
Offender Act 
 Jakarta Social Institute, 143 
 Janak, Ludwig, 87 
 Jane Doe, 238 
 Japan, 85 
 JDI.  See Just Detention Inter-
national
 Jeanne Clery Disclosure of 
Campus Security Policy and 
Campus Crime Statistics Act, 
161 – 167 
 Jeglic, Elizabeth, 59 
 Jemmy, 4 
 Jewish Institute Supporting an 
Abuse-Free Environment 
( JSAFE), 129 – 130 
 John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital, 44 
 Joint Fact-Finding Team 
(Indonesia), 144 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 
34 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology , 64 
Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect , 
221
Journal of Interpersonal Violence , 31, 
33, 40, 44 

Index 299
Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology , 36 
Journal of Prevention and Inter-
vention in the Community , 
51
 JSAFE.  See Jewish Institute 
Supporting an Abuse-Free 
Environment 
 jury 
 grand, 2, 288 
 petit, 288, 289 
 trial by, 102 
 Just Detention International ( JDI), 
128, 143 
 Kahahawai, Joseph, 104 
 Kanin, Eugene, 106, 107, 110 – 111 
 Kanka, megan, 118 
 Kansas Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault and Domestic 
Violence, 238 
Kansas v. Hendricks , 63 
 Kaplan, Jonathan, 78 
 Kelley, David, 62 
 Kennedy, Edward, 117 
 Kentucky Association of Sexual 
Assault Programs, 238 
 Kerr, David, 140 – 141 
 ketamine, 17 
 kidnapping, 144 – 145 
 Kingsley, Robert, 130 
 Kirk, Robin, 96 
 KKK.  See Ku Klux Klan 
 Koestner, Katie, 206 
 Koss, Mary, 41, 46 – 47, 112, 
159 – 160 
Kristallnacht attacks, 105 
 Ku Klux Klan (KKK), 9, 104 
 Lamons, Lucky, 60 – 61 
 Lanner, Baruch, 127 
 Latin America 
 marital rape in, 94 – 95 
 rape as war crime in, 96 – 97 
 rape in, 92 – 94 
 sex trafficking in, 97 
Law and Human Behavior  ( journal), 
55
 law enforcement 
 arrests by, 49 – 50 
 mistrust of, 50 – 52 
 sexual misconduct by, 
52 – 53 
Lawrence v. Texas , 121 
 Le Tourneau, Mary Kay, 
119 – 120 
 Legal Momentum, 214 – 215 
 “Legal Rape,” 111 
 Legros, Pierre, 135 
 Leon, Joseph, 48 
 lesbian, gay, bisexual, trangender, 
queer, and questioning 
(LGBTQQ), 208 – 209 
See also gay, lesbian, bisexual 
and transgendered 
 lesbian, gay, bisexual, trangender 
(LGBT), 221 
 violence against, 79 
 Letellier, Patrick, 35 
Lex Gundobada , 1 
 LGBT.  See lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
trangender
 LGBTQQ.  See lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, trangender, queer, 
and questioning 
License to Rape: Sexual Abuse of 
Wives , 36 
 Little, Joanne, 110 
 Littleton, Heather, 47 
 Lonsway, Kimberly, 36 
 Louisiana Foundation Against 
Sexual Assault, 238 
Lupi sermo ad Anglos (Wulfstan), 1 
 lynching, 5, 288 
 Macdonald, Ken, 89 
 madam, 288 
 Maher, Timothy, 52 
 Mai, Mukhtar, 120, 132 – 133 
 Mai, Shakoor, 132 
 Maine Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault, 238 – 239 

300 Index
 Makoni, Betty, 76 – 77, 133 – 134 
Male on Male Rape: The Hidden Toll 
of Stigma and Shame (Scarce), 
33, 49 
 Male Survivor, 215 
 Mam, Somaly, 83, 134 – 136 
 maquiladoras, 97 
 marital rape, 145 – 146, 220 
 in Africa, 78 
 articles on, 111 
 in Asia, 80 
 history of, 1, 7, 103, 110 
 in Latin America, 94 – 95 
 laws banning, 95, 110, 112, 
113 – 114, 119 
 in Mexico, 95 
 in Model Penal Code, 107 
 myth acceptance and, 36 – 37 
 post-attack services for, 45 – 46 
 rape myths and, 14 
 resources for, 250 – 251 
 in Thailand, 80 
 in United States, 4, 22 – 23 
 marriage 
 honor and, 94 
 as perpetual consent, 4 
 woman’s legal existence in, 22 
 Martin, Robert.  See Donaldson, 
Stephen
 Maryland Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 239 
 Massachusetts 
 rape laws in, 3 
 rape prosecutions in, 4 
 Massie, Thalia Fortescue, 104 – 105 
 Mastoi, Salma, 132 
 Mathias, Charles, 108 
 McCauley, Jenna, 31 
 McCray, Antron, 137 
 McFarlane, Judith, 47 
 McMahon, Sarah, 38 
 medroxyprogesterone acetate 
(MPA), 65 
 Megan’s Law, 118 
 Meili, Trisha, 136 – 137 
 Melendez, Antonia, 93 
 Melendez, Isabel Francisco, 93 
 men 
 gay, 34 
 prostitution by, 155 – 156 
 as rape victims, 2, 15, 33 – 34, 
48 – 49 
 treating, 48 – 49 
 Men Can Stop Rape, 215 
 Mending the Sacred Hoop, 215 
 mental health services, 46 – 48 
 cultural factors for, 47 
 for offenders, 63 
 Messman-Moore, Terri, 33 
 methamphetamine, 31, 155 
 Meuhlenhard, C. L., 29 
 Mexico 
 hate crimes in, 97 
 marital rape in, 94 – 95 
 rape in, 92 – 94 
 sex trafficking in, 98 
Michael M. v. Superior Court , 112 
 Michigan Against Domestic and 
Sexual Violence, 239 
Michigan v. Lucas , 117 
 Miles Foundation, 215 – 216 
 Minnesota Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 239 
 Minnesota Sex Offender 
Screening Tool (MnSOST), 64 
 Missing Children’s Act, 144 
 Mississippi Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 239 
 Missouri Coalition Against 
Domestic and Sexual 
Violence, 239 – 240 
 MnSOST.  See Minnesota Sex 
Offender Screening Tool 
 model mugging, 213 
 Model Penal Code (MPI), 106, 
107
 Moldova, 90 
 Mondale, Walter, 130 
 Money, John, 65 
 Montana Coalition Against 
Domestic and Sexual 
Violence, 240 

Index 301
 Morgenthau, Robert, 52 
The Morning After: Sex, Fear, 
and Feminism on Campus
(Roiphe), 118 
 Morris, Bonnie, 212 
 Moseley, Winston, 12 
 Moster, Aviva, 59 
 mother-daughter incest, 42 
Mother-Daughter Incest: A Guide 
for Helping Professionals
(Ogilvie), 42 
 Movement of Mothers of the 
Srebrenica and Zepa 
Enclaves, 132 
 MPA.  See medroxyprogesterone 
acetate
 MPI.  See Model Penal Code 
Ms. (magazine), 112, 114, 
126, 160 
Ms. Magazine Campus Project on 
Sexual Assault, 114, 160 
 Muhindo, Mathilde, 76 
 Mukwege, Denis, 76 
 Mumba, Florence, 137 – 138 
 Mumba, Nevers, 137 
 Murra, Laura.  See X, Laura 
 My Lai massacre, 107 
 Myanmar, 80 – 81, 84, 88, 120, 276 
 NACC.  See National Association 
of Counsel for Children 
 Nanking International Relief 
Committee, 105 
 Natasha, 90, 288 
 National Alliance to End Sexual 
Violence, 216 
 National Association of Counsel 
for Children (NACC), 216 
 National Black Women’s Health 
Imperative, 216 
 National Black Women’s Health 
Project.  See National Black 
Women’s Health Imperative 
 National Center for Higher 
Education Risk Management 
(NCHERM), 206, 217 
 National Center for Injury 
Prevention and Control 
(NCIPC), 206 – 207, 217 
 National Center for Juvenile 
Justice, 41 
 National Center for Missing 
& Exploited Children 
(NCMEC), 144 – 145, 154, 155, 
217 – 218 
 National Center for Policy Anal-
ysis, 49 
 National Center for Prosecution 
of Child Abuse, 218 
 National Center for the Preven-
tion and Control of Rape, 
108
 National Center for the Preven-
tion of Rape, 108 
 National Center for Victims of 
Crime (NCVC), 218, 230 
 National Center for Women & 
Policing (NCWP), 218 
 National Center on Elder Abuse, 
218 – 219 
 National Child Abuse Prevention 
Month, 207 
 National Children’s Advocacy 
Center (NCAC), 219 
 National Children’s Alliance, 219 
 National Clearinghouse on 
Child Abuse & Neglect 
Information, 220 
 National Clearinghouse on 
Marital and Date Rape 
(NCMDR), 112, 145 – 146, 
220
 National Coalition Against 
Domestic Violence (NCADV), 
220 
 National Coalition Against 
Pornography.  See National 
Coalition for the Protection 
of Children & Families 
 National Coalition Against 
Violent Athletes (NCAVA), 
139 – 140 

302 Index
 National Coalition for the 
Protection of Children & 
Families (NCPCF), 221 
 National Coalition of Anti-
Violence Projects, 220 – 221 
 National Collegiate Athletic 
Association (NCAA), 38 
 National Commission on Human 
Rights (Indonesia), 143 
 National Committee for the 
Prevention of Elder Abuse, 
221
 National Conference of Yeshiva 
Principals, 126 
 National Conference on Child 
Sexual Abuse Prevention, 219 
 National Council on Child 
Abuse and Family Violence 
(NCCAFV), 221 
 National Crime Victim 
Information and Referral 
Hotline, 223 
 National Crime Victim Law 
Institute (NCVLI), 221 – 222 
 National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS), 158, 159 
 National Crime Victims Research 
& Treatment Center, 222 
 National Crisis Response Team, 
223
 National Day of Hope, 207 
 National Gay Prisoners Coalition, 
142
 National Indian Child Welfare 
Association (NICWA), 222 
 National Inmate Survey (NIS), 188 
 National Institute of Mental 
Health, 108, 114 
 National Institute on Drug Abuse 
(NIDA), 222 
 National Institutes of Health, 222 
 National Network of Children’s 
Advocacy Centers. See
National Children’s Alliance 
 National Organization for Victim 
Assistance (NOVA), 223 
 National Organization for 
Women, 108, 109 
 National Organization for 
Women Legal Defense and 
Education Fund. See Legal 
Momentum
 National Organization of Sisters 
of Color Ending Sexual 
Assault (SCESA), 223 
 National Organization on Male 
Sexual Victimization.  See
Male Survivor 
 National Prison Project, 59, 205 
 National Protocol for Sexual 
Assault Forensic 
Examinations, 212 
 National Sexual Assault Coalition 
Resource Sharing Project 
(RSP), 223 – 224 
 National Sexual Assault Hotline, 
226
 National Sexual Assault Online 
Hotline, 226 
 National Sexual Violence Resource 
Center (NSVRC), 224 
 National Symposium on Child, 
219
 National Victim Assistance 
Academy, 232 
 National Violence Against 
Women Survey, 31 
 National Women’s Law Center, 
224
 Native Americans, 2, 208, 215, 
222, 225, 227 
 child sexual abuse and, 116 – 117 
 law enforcement relations with, 
50 – 52 
 prostitution and, 155 
 rape incidence among, 31, 
40 – 41, 57 
 rape prosecutions and, 3 – 4, 51, 
57 – 58 
 sex offender registration and, 61 
 Naval Health Research Center, 33 
 Navarro, Valerie Small, 67 

Index 303
 Nazis, 105 
 NCAA, National Collegiate 
Athletic Association 
 NCAC.  See National Children’s 
Advocacy Center 
 NCADV.  See National Coalition 
Against Domestic Violence 
 NCAVA.  See National Coalition 
Against Violent Athletes 
 NCCAFV.  See National Council 
on Child Abuse and Family 
Violence 
 NCHERM.  See National Center 
for Higher Education Risk 
Management
 NCIPC.  See National Center 
for Injury Prevention and 
Control 
 NCMDR.  See National 
Clearinghouse on Marital 
and Date Rape 
 NCMEC.  See National Center 
for Missing & Exploited 
Children 
 NCPCF.  See National Coalition 
for the Protection of Children 
& Families 
 NCVC.  See National Center for 
Victims of Crime 
 NCVLI.  See National Crime 
Victim Law Institute 
 NCVS.  See National Crime 
Victimization Survey 
 NCWP.  See National Center for 
Women & Policing 
 Nebraska Domestic Violence 
Sexual Assault Coalition, 240 
Neisseria gonorrhea , 288 
 Network of Women for the 
Defense of Rights and Peace, 
74
 Nevada Coalition Against Sexual 
Violence, 240 
 New Hampshire Coalition 
Against Domestic Sexual 
Violence, 240 
 New Jersey Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 240 – 241 
 New Mexico Coalition of Sexual 
Assault Programs, 241 
 New York Radical Feminists 
(NYRF), 108 
 New York Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to 
Children, 21 
 New York State Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 241 
New York Times , 51, 52, 57, 59, 63, 
66, 67 
NEXUS ( journal), 221 
 Nicholson, Jack, 111 
 NICWA.  See National Indian 
Child Welfare Association 
 NIDA.  See National Institute on 
Drug Abuse 
 NIS.  See National Inmate Survey 
 Nogrady, Carol, 39 
 North Carolina Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 241 
 North Dakota Council on Abused 
Women’s Services, 241 
 NOVA.  See  National Organization 
for Victim Assistance 
 NSVRC.  See National Sexual 
Violence Resource Center 
 Nuremberg race laws, 105 
 NYRF.  See New York Radical 
Feminists
 Ochberg, Frank, 211 
 Office for Victims of Crime 
(OVC), 224 – 225, 228 
 Office of Juvenile Justice & 
Delinquency Prevention 
(OJJDP), 225 
 Office of Minority Health 
Resource Center (OMHRC), 
225
 Office on Violence Against 
Women (OVW), 212, 224, 
225
 Ogilvie, Beverly, 42 

304 Index
 OJJDP.  See Office of Juvenile 
Justice & Delinquency 
Prevention 
 Okinawa, 81 – 82, 119 
 Oklahoma Coalition Against 
Domestic Violence and 
Sexual Assault, 242 
Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe , 
57
 O’Meara, Sara, 207 
 OMHRC.  See Office of Minority 
Health Resource Center 
 Ondekane, Jean Pierre, 77 
 orchiectomy, 66 
 Oregon Coalition Against 
Domestic and Sexual 
Violence, 242 
 organized crime, 85 – 86, 90 – 91 
 Osborne, Tom, 140 
 OVC.  See Office for Victims of 
Crime
 OVW.  See Office on Violence 
Against Women 
 Palin, Sarah, 53 
 Parrot, Andrea, 127 
 Parsell, T. J., 59 
 patriarchs 
 authority of, 4 
 rape as offense to, 1 – 2, 4 
 pedophilia, 42, 62, 288 
 Pennsylvania Coalition Against 
Rape, 242 
 People Organized to Stop the 
Rape of Imprisoned Persons 
(POSRIP). See Stop Prisoner 
Rape
People v. Abbott , 103 
People v. Liberta , 114 
People v. Morrison , 104 
 perpetual consent, 4 
 Peru, 92 – 94, 96 
 Peter, Christian, 139 – 140 
 Peterson, Zoë, 29 – 30 
 petit jury, 288, 289 
 Philadelphia Assault Victim 
Study, 32 – 33 
 physical assault, rape as, 15 
 Pius XII (Pope), 105 
 A Place of Our Own, 203 
 Plan B, 44 – 45 
 Polanski, Roman, 111 
Police Practice & Research
( journal), 52 
 police sexual misconduct, 52 – 53 
 Polin, Vicki, 129, 138 – 139 
 POSRIP.  See Stop Prisoner Rape 
 post-attack services 
 for male victims, 48 – 49 
 mental health services, 46 – 48 
 providing rape services, 43 – 45 
 for raped/battered wives, 
45 – 46 
 posttraumatic stress, 33, 229 
 posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), 46, 142, 211, 226 
 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
Alliance (PTSD Alliance), 226 
 PREA (Prison Rape Elimination 
Act), 59, 120 – 121, 167 – 187 
 “Predicting Relapse: A Meta-
Analysis of Sexual Offender 
Recidivism Studies” (Hanson 
and Bussière), 64 
 Prevent Child Abuse America, 226 
 Price, Paul, 114 
Prison Journal , 59 
 prison rape, 127 – 128, 142, 230 
 data on, 167, 188 
 defining, 23 
 incidence of, 59 
 laws concerning, 59, 120 – 121, 
167 – 187 
 psychological issues from, 
58 – 59 
 resources for, 255, 280 
 Prison Rape Elimination Act 
(PREA), 59, 120 – 121, 167 – 187 
 “Prison Warden Attitudes 
Toward Prison Rape and 

Index 305
Sexual Assault: Findings 
Since the Prison Rape 
Elimination Act (PREA)” 
(Moster and Jeglic), 59 
 Privacy Protection for Rape 
Victims Act, 111 
 prostitution, 73 
 AIDS and, 88 
 in Cambodia, 82 – 84 
 child, 154 – 155 
 data on, 154 – 156 
 forced, 84 – 88 
 in India, 83 – 84 
 male, 155 – 156 
 resources for, 255 – 258, 280 – 281 
 trafficking and, 84 – 88, 90 – 91, 
98
 psychology, development of, 
10 – 11 
Psychology of Women (Deutsch), 
106
Psychology of Women Quarterly , 36 
 psychotherapy, 65 
 PTSD.  See posttraumatic stress 
disorder 
 Putcha-Bhagavatula, Anila, 55 
 Rabbinical Council of America, 
127, 129 
 racism 
 rape and, 3 – 6, 9, 10, 13, 104 
 sentences and, 5 – 6 
 statutory rape and, 9 – 10 
 RAINN.  See Rape, Abuse & Incest 
National Network 
Ramparts (magazine), 108 
 rape 
 acquaintance, 13, 17 – 18, 30, 
113, 115, 249 – 250, 277 – 278, 
287
 in Africa, 74 – 77 
 alcohol and, 30 – 31 
 arrests for, 49 – 50 
 in Asia, 79 – 80 
 campus, 16 – 17, 30 – 31, 159 – 160 
 as capital offense, 2 
 child, 17 
 correctional system and, 58 – 68 
 corroboration of, 11, 109 
 date, 13, 17 – 18, 30, 35, 106, 112, 
115, 118, 119, 130, 145 – 146, 
159 – 160, 211, 220, 249 – 250, 
277 – 278, 288 
 definitions of, 1, 8, 106 – 107 
 digital, 18 
 drug-induced, 119 
 in Europe, 88 – 90 
 forcible, 18 
 foreign-object, 18 – 19 
 gang, 19, 78, 91 – 92, 113, 
115 – 116, 119, 120, 132 – 133, 
143, 288 
 as genocide, 120 
 as hate crime, 97 
 homosexual, 19 – 21 
 incidence data for, 158 
 interracial, 22 
 investigation of, 23 – 24 
 judicial system and, 55 – 58 
 in Latin America, 92 – 94 
 male, 2, 15, 33 – 34 
 marital, 1, 4, 7, 14, 22, 36 – 37, 
45 – 46, 78, 80, 94 – 95, 103, 107, 
110, 113 – 114, 119, 145 – 146, 
220, 250 – 251 
 as physical assault, 15 
 in popular films, 281 – 284 
 power and, 13, 20, 108 
 prevention resources, 284 
 prison, 23, 58 – 59, 120 – 121, 
127 – 128, 142, 230, 255 
 prosecution challenges in, 
56 – 58 
 racism and, 3 – 6, 9, 10, 13, 104 
 rates of, 188 – 201 
 recovery resources, 284 – 285 
 reporting of, 50 – 51 
 same-sex, 20, 34 – 35 
 secondary, 23 – 24, 43 
 serial, 24 – 26 

306 Index
 sexual orientation resources, 
285
 social consequences of, 3 
 speaking out about, 12 
 statutory, 9 – 10, 26 – 27, 112, 289 
 stranger, 40 – 41, 47 
 U.S. military policy on, 1
51 – 153 
 violence/control and, 12, 13 
 as war crime, 73, 76 – 77, 80 – 82, 
96 – 97, 120, 137 – 138 
 war-related, 150 – 151, 276 – 277, 
285 – 286 
 Rape, Abuse & Incest National 
Network (RAINN), 226 
Rape: My Story (Saward and 
Green), 141 
Rape and Society: Readings on the 
Problem of Sexual Assault
(Searles and Berger), 50 
 Rape Crisis—Scotland, 89 
 rape culture, 35 
Rape in Marriage  (Russell), 33 
 rape kits, 10, 49 – 50, 53 – 55 
 rape laws 
 colonial era, 2 – 3 
 in Congo, 75 
 for date rape, 115 
 early, 101 – 102 
 English, 2, 102 – 103 
 in Latin America, 93 – 94 
 marital rape and, 110, 119 
 in Massachusetts, 3 
 in Mexico, 93 – 94, 95 
 in Model Penal Code, 106 – 107 
 in Peru, 94 
 prosecution difficulties, 56 – 58 
 reforms in, 50 
 sex offender residency laws, 
59 – 61 
 sexual psychopath laws, 58 
 in Thailand, 80 
 in Uganda, 75 
 in Virginia, 2, 124 
 waves of, 58 
 rape myths, 13 – 16 
 athletes and, 37 – 39 
 attacker’s acceptance of, 
35 – 37 
 date rape and, 30, 35 
 fraternities and, 39 – 40 
 marital rape and, 36 – 37 
 roots of, 37 
 victim’s acceptance of, 29 – 31 
 Rape of Nanking, 105 
 Rape Prevention and Education 
Program (RPEP), 40 
 Rape Prevention Month, 109 
 rape publicity, 113 
 rape shield law, 12, 55 – 56, 117 
 rape trauma syndrome, 46, 112 
 “Rape—The All-American 
Crime” (Griffin), 108 
 Rayes, Matias, 137 
Real Rape (Estrich), 115, 130 – 131 
 recidivism, 63 – 65, 289 
 Reconstruction, 9 
A Red Record: Tabulated Statistics 
and Alleged Causes of 
Lynchings in the United States
(Wells), 149 
 Redmond, Bill, 139 
 Redmond, Kathy, 139 – 140 
 repeat offenders, 63 – 65 
 re-rape ( reviolé ), 76 
 Richard I (King), 102 
 Richardson, Kevin, 137 
 Rideout, Greta, 22 – 23, 111 
 Rideout, John, 22 – 23, 111 
 Riger, Stephanie, 36 
 Robins, Michel, 212 
 Rodruquez, Alfonso, Jr., 121 
 Rohypnol, 119 
 Roiphe, Katie, 118 
 Rozell, Jami, 51 
 RPEP.  See Rape Prevention and 
Education Program 
 RSP.  See National Sexual Assault 
Coalition Resource Sharing 
Project 
 Ruch, Libby, 48 
rape (continued)

Index 307
 runaways, 258 – 259 
 Russell, Diana, 33, 113, 146 
 Russia, 90 – 91 
 Rutman, Shira, 32 
 Sacred Circle: National Resource 
Center to End Violence 
Against Native Women, 
226 – 227 
 SAEK.  See sexual assault 
evidence kit 
 SAFE TA.  See IAFN Sexual 
Assault Forensic 
Examination Technical 
Assistance
 Salaam, Yusef, 137 
 Saltzman, Linda, 32 
 Samardzic, Nedjo, 131 
Same-Sex Domestic Violence: 
Strategies for Change
(Letellier), 35 
 same-sex rape, 20, 34 – 35 
 Sanday, Peggy Reeves, 39 
 SANE.  See Sexual Assault Nurse 
Examiner
 Santana, Raymond, 137 
 SAR.  See Sexual Assault Report 
 SATI.  See Sexual Assault Training 
& Investigations 
 Save the Children, 77 
 Save the Children UK, 136 
 Saward, Jill, 114, 140 – 142 
 Saward, Michael (Reverend), 
140 – 141 
 Scarce, Michael, 33, 49 
 SCESA.  See National 
Organization of Sisters of 
Color Ending Sexual Assault 
 Scherzer, Kevin, 116 
 Scherzer, Kyle, 116 
 Schwartz, Martin, 39 
 Scottsboro Boys, 11, 105 
 Searles, Patricia, 50 
 secondary rape, 23 – 24, 43 
 Security on Campus, 227 
 self-defense training, 213 
 serial rape, 24 – 26 
 serial rapists, 24 – 26 
 SESAME.  See Stop Educator 
Sexual Abuse, Misconduct 
and Exploitation 
 sex offender notification, 116 
 sex offender registration, 59, 
61 – 63, 118 – 119, 121 
 sex offender residency laws, 
59 – 61 
 Sex Offender Risk Appraisal 
Guide (SORAG), 64 
Sex Roles ( journal), 30, 37 
 sex slaves, 134 – 136, 287 
 Sexual Abuse Act, 112 
The Sexual Abuse of Women by 
Members of the Clergy (Flynn), 
40
 sexual assault 
 in 17th century, 2 – 3 
 in 18th century, 3 – 7 
 in 19th century, 7 – 10 
 in 20th century, 10 – 13 
 history of, 2 – 13, 251 – 255, 
278 – 280 
 myths about, 13 – 16 
 predictors of, 31 – 33 
 religion and, 95 – 96 
 reporting, 43 
 resources for, 251 – 255, 259 – 276, 
278 – 280 
 of runaways, 258 – 259 
 sexual assault evidence kit 
(SAEK), 53 
 Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner 
(SANE), 53, 212, 227 – 228 
 Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner/
Sexual Assault Team 
Website, 227 – 228 
Sexual Assault on Campus: The 
Problem and the Solution
(Bohmer and Parrot), 127 
 Sexual Assault Report (SAR), 
228
 Sexual Assault Response Team, 
212, 227 – 228 

308 Index
 Sexual Assault Training & 
Investigations (SATI), 124, 
228
 sexual coercion, 289 
 sexual crimes 
 categories of, 16 – 27 
 classification of, 1 
 Sexual Disorders Clinic, 68 
 sexual dysfunction, 14 
 sexual harassment, 216, 289 
 Sexual Information and 
Education Council of the 
United States (SIECUS), 228 
 Sexual Offender Act ( Jacob 
Wetterling Law), 118 
 sexual orientation resources, 285 
 sexual psychopath laws, 58 
 sexual revictimization, 32, 289 
 sexual violence 
 attacker/victim relationship 
data, 158 
 offender data on, 156 – 157 
 persons age 65 or older data, 159 
 victim data on, 157 – 158 
 sexually transmitted diseases, 
31, 44 
 Sexually Violent Predators Act, 
124
 Shan Human Rights Foundation, 
81
 Shanley, Paul, 40 
 Shettles, Matthew, 61 – 62 
 Shining Path, 96 
 Sidran Traumatic Stress Institute, 
226, 228 – 229 
 SIECUS.  See Sexual Information 
and Education Council of the 
United States 
 “Silencing State-Sponsored 
Rape in and Beyond a 
Transnational Guatemalan 
Community” (Hastings), 96 
 Simelane, Eudy, 79 
 Simonson, Archie, 110 
 Simpson, Delmar, 119 
60 Minutes , 66 
 Sjodin, Dru, 121 
 Skaf, Bilal, 79 – 80, 120 
 slave codes, 289 
 slaves 
 pardons for, 5 
 property compensation and, 5 
 rape prosecutions of, 4 
 rapes of, 6 
 sentencing of, 4 – 5 
 sex, 134 – 136, 287 
 testimony of, 6 
 white, 290 
 Smith, Joseph Frank, 66 
 Smith, Russell Dan, 142 – 143, 230 
 Smith, William Kennedy, 117 
 SNAP.  See Survivors Network of 
those Abused by Priests 
 SOAR.  See Speaking Out About 
Rape
 sodomy, 20, 124 
 defining, 289 
 laws against, 3, 17 
 legalizing, 121 
 Somaly Mam Foundation, 136 
 Sommerville, Diane Miller, 5 
 SORAG.  See Sex Offender Risk 
Appraisal Guide 
 South Carolina Coalition Against 
Domestic Violence and 
Sexual Assault, 242 
 South Dakota Coalition Against 
Domestic Violence and 
Sexual Violence, 242 – 243 
 South Dakota Network Against 
Family Violence and Sexual 
Assault, 243 
 South Kivu, 74 
 South Korea, 82 
Southern Horrors (Wells), 10, 104 
 Southern Regional Children’s 
Advocacy Center (SRCAC), 
219
SPAZM ( journal), 146 
 Speaking Out About Rape 
(SOAR), 229 
 speakouts, 12, 108, 289 

Index 309
 Special K (ketamine), 17 
 SPR.  See Stop Prisoner Rape 
 Spur Posse scandal, 118 
 SRCAC.  See Southern Regional 
Children’s Advocacy Center 
 St. James, Margo, 209 
 St. James Infirmary, 209 – 210 
St. Petersburg Times , 32, 38 – 39 
 Stalking Resource Center, 229 – 230 
 STAMP.  See Survivors Take 
Action Against Abuse by 
Military Personnel 
 Stansill, Gary, 61 
 State Department (U.S.), 87 
 Statutes of Westminster, 102 
 statutory rape, 111 
 defining, 26, 289 
 establishment of, 102 
 implementation of, 26 – 27 
 in Mexico, 94 
 racism in, 9 – 10 
 Steffy, Richard, 64 
 Stevens, John Paul, 130 
 Stop Educator Sexual Abuse, 
Misconduct and Exploitation 
(SESAME), 227 
 Stop it Now!, 230 
 Stop Prisoner Rape (SPR), 128, 
142 – 143, 230 
 stranger rape, 40 – 41, 47 
 student athletes, 37 – 39, 115 – 116, 
118 
 Student Right to Know and 
Campus Security Act (Clery 
Act), 115, 116 
 substance abuse, 222 
 attackers and, 33 
 by victims, 48 
 Suharto, 143 
 suicide, 31, 47 – 48, 158 
 Sumardi, Sandywan (Father), 
143 – 144 
 Sunrise of Pasco, 32 
 Super Free social club, 80 
 Supreme Court (Kansas), 112 
 Supreme Court (Mexico), 95 
 Supreme Court (New Jersey), 112 
 Supreme Court (U.S.), 57, 63, 
110–112, 115, 117, 119, 121, 
128, 130, 232 
 Supreme Court (Zambia), 137 
 surgical castration, 66 
 Survivors Network of those 
Abused by Priests (SNAP), 
125 – 126, 229 
 Survivors Take Action Against 
Abuse by Military Personnel 
(STAMP), 230 – 231 
 syphilis, 43, 289 
 Tailhook scandal, 117 
 Take Back the Night, 12, 109, 231 
 Task Force on Rabbinical 
Improprieties, 129 
 Taylor, Tammy, 32 
 Temple, Jeff, 47 
 Tendler, Mordecai, 127 
 Tennessee Coalition Against 
Domestic and Sexual 
Violence, 243 
 “Testing Justice: The Rape Kit 
Backlog in Los Angeles City 
and Country” (Tofte), 54 
 Texas Association Against Sexual 
Assault, 243 
 Thailand, 80, 85 – 87, 88 
 Thistlewood, Thomas, 6 
 Thomas, Richard, 37 
Times (London), 68 
 Timmendequas, Jesse, 118 
 Title IX, 140 
 Titus, 5 
 Todd, Sybil, 30 
 Tofte, Sarah, 54 
 Toole, Ottis, 144 
 TOUCH, 212 
 trafficking, 73, 208 
 in Asia, 84 – 88 
 defining, 289 – 290 
 in Europe, 90 – 91 
 in India, 83 
 in Latin America, 97 

310 Index
Treponema pallidum , 289 
 Triads, 85 
 Tucker, Julia, 108 
 Tutson, Hannah, 9 
 Tyson, Mike, 56, 117 
 UCR (Uniform Crime Reporting), 
158, 159, 188 
 Uganda, 75 
 Uganda Women Parliamentarians 
Association, 75 
 ultimate consent doctrine, 8 – 9 
 UNAIDS, 233 
 “Understanding Community-
Specific Rape Myths: 
Exploring Student Athlete 
Culture” (McMahon), 38 
 Uniform Crime Reporting 
program (UCR), 158, 159, 188 
 United Methodist Church, 40 
 United Nations Commission on 
the Status of Women, 137 
 United Nations peacekeeping, 
77 – 78 
United States v. Lanier , 119 
 Urban Institute, 231 
U.S. v. Cadena , 98 
U.S. v. Kwon , 86 – 87 
U.S. v. Milan Lejhanec and Ladislav 
Ruc , 91 
U.S. v. Wattanasiri , 87 
 Utah Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault, 243 
The Vagina Monologues (play), 120, 
231
 VALOR.  See Victims’ Assistance 
Legal Association 
 V-Day, 231 
 Vermont Network Against 
Domestic Violence and 
Sexual Assault, 243 – 244 
 Victim Rights Law Center, 232 
 victims, 290 
 attacker relationship with, 158 
 data on, 157 – 158 
 deaf, 203 
 elderly, 159 
 male, 33 – 34, 48 – 49 
 mistrust of law enforcement by, 
50 – 52 
 predictors of, 31 – 33 
 providing rape services to, 
43 – 45 
 rape myth acceptance by, 
29 – 31 
 of same-sex rape, 34 – 35 
 substance abuse by, 48 
 suicide attempts by, 48 
 television portrayals of, 47 
 Victims’ Assistance Legal 
Association (VALOR), 
231 – 232 
 Victims of Crime Act, 225 
Violence Against Women (Bachman 
and Saltzman), 32 
Violence Against Women ( journal), 
37, 39, 41, 46, 47, 96 
 Violence Risk Appraisal Guide 
(VRAG), 64 
 Violent Crime Control and Law 
Enforcement Act, 118 – 119 
 Virginia 
 rape laws in, 2, 124 
 rape prosecutions in, 3 
 Virginia Sexual and Domestic 
Violence Action Alliance, 244 
 Voices in Action, 232 
 Volkonsky, Anastasia, 155 
 Volunteers for Humanity, 143 
 voyeur, 290 
 VRAG.  See Violence Risk 
Appraisal Guide 
 Wallace, George, 11 
 Walsh, Adam, 144 – 145 
 Walsh, John, 61, 144 – 145 
 Walsh, Revé, 144 – 145 
 war crimes, 73, 120, 137 – 138 
 in Africa, 76 – 77 
 in Asia, 80 – 82 
 in Latin America, 96 – 97 

Index 311
 WARC.  See Women’s Anti-Rape 
Coalition
 war-related rapes, 150 – 151, 
285 – 286 
 resources for, 276 – 277 
 Warshaw, Robin, 30 
 Washington, George, 103 
 Washington Coalition of Sexual 
Assault Programs, 244 
Washington Post , 30 
 Weaver, Elizabeth, 4 
 Weinberg, Matis, 127 
Weishaupt v. Commonwealth , 
113 – 114 
 Wellesley Centers for Women, 
232 – 233 
 Wells, Ida, 10, 104, 149 
 West Virginia Foundation for 
Rape Information and 
services, 244 
 White, Sandy, 34 
 white slavery, 290 
 WHO.  See World Health 
Organization 
Wife Rape (Bergen), 36, 45 
 Wikipedia, 56 
 wilding, 136 
 William the Conqueror (King), 
102
 Wilson, Genarlow, 62 
 Wisconsin Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, 244 
 Wise, Kharey, 137 
 woman-to-woman rape, 20 
 women 
 as property, 1, 22 
 as sex offenders, 41 – 43 
 testimony of, 2, 6 – 8 
Women and Health ( journal), 48 
 Women of Compassion 
Worldwide, 74 
 Women Victims of War, 131 – 132 
 Women’s Anti-Rape Coalition 
(WARC), 108 – 109 
 Women’s History Research 
Center, 146 
 women’s movement, 107 – 108 
 Women’s Network, 90 
 Women’s Rights Project, 205 
 Wooten, Tito, 140 
 World Alliance of YMCAs, 78 
 World Children Award, 136 
 World Children’s Prize for the 
Rights of the Child, 134 
 World Health Organization 
(WHO), 233 
 World War II, 105 – 106 
 Wright, Leroy, 11 
 Wulfstan, Archbishop of York, 1 
 X, Laura, 112, 145 – 146 
 Yakuza, 85 
Yale Law Journal , 130 
 Yamawaki, Niwako, 34 
 Yavneh, 126 
 Yllo, Kersti, 36 
 Yuan, Nicole, 31, 40 
 YWCA of the U.S.A., 233 
 Zimbabwe, 78, 133 – 134 
 Zimbabwe Rape Survivors 
Association (ZRPS), 
133 – 134 
 ZRPS.  See Zimbabwe Rape 
Survivors Association 

This page intentionally left blank 

 About the Author 
CARYN E. NEUMANN is a visiting assistant professor of history at 
Miami University of Ohio. A graduate of Florida Atlantic University 
and The Ohio State University, she is a past managing editor of the  Jour-
nal of Women’s History  and has published several articles on the feminist 
movement. 

