© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
1
                                
DVD 14 – Your State Hypnosis Business Questions Answered
Q&A Session
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Wow, I didn’t realize I was doing another segment. I’ve got to see what 
we’re doing. I was crunching all this stuff thinking, man, I’m out of time. 
Wow. I don’t have anything else to say now. 
What about hypnotherapy?
Hypnotherapy? Oh boy, you guys are so needy. I’m going to have to do 
some hypnotherapy, I guess. I say that in a loving way, of course. What I 
want to do is give you a little bit of Q&A because if you have any more 
specific questions – I mean there’s a lot to cover. In the business, I covered 
a lot of information there, I know. 
We talked about agents, colleges, high schools, clubs, military, theaters, 
cruise ships and so on. So there’s a lot of information. We talked about 
insurance, where to get insurance and everything else. If you have more 
specific questions, I want you to ask me that because, truly, I am here for 
you. If there’s a question you have on your mind that you did not ask me, I 
am not going to be responsible for that because I’m going to do my best to 
give you everything that I’ve got. 
So if there’s something specific, now is your time to please, please ask me 
that question specifically. If you’ve got a microphone, please stand up back 
there, my dear.
Hello. I just want to find out what length of time does it take to promote a gig 
if you’re going to for-wall it yourself?
That is an excellent question. Her question is how long does it take – how 
much leeway should you give yourself if you’re going to do a show? Boy oh 
boy oh. That’s a dandy question. There are so many answers to it. So I’m 
going to give you three of them.
1. I don’t know.
2. As a rule of thumb, if you’re doing a large venue, like in a theater, 
you want to give yourself anywhere between – I’m talking about a 
theater that seats 2,000 or 3,000 people, right. One of these nice 
theaters where they do operas and things at. If you’re doing a gig like 
that, you’re going to give yourself three to six months.
Truthfully, when you’re working with those theaters, they aren’t going to 
deal with you unless you have at least three to six months to work with, 
preferably six months. They’ve got these things booked out way far out 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
2
                                
ahead of time, and they’ve got it down to a rocket science, and they want 
that much time to help you promote your show so that it’s successful.
3. That said I’ve put together a show in a week.
Would that be for a local gig?
For a local gig? Yeah, it can be for a local gig. Here’s an interesting thought 
on that. The thing I just did in Dubai – there again, a lot of it’s a cultural 
thing, too. When we put that together, I was approached on that – is this 
March? Okay, I was there in February 8, 9, 10 to the 16th and I stayed 
another week. We did not start promoting that until a month before. 
I was telling the guy, I said you know what? We do not have enough time. I 
mean this is insane. We’re spending over $40,000 to do this. That’s not 
enough time. You know what? Small market, social networking, it was a 
click, I’m a hypnotist, I’m an American, I’ve got a good résumé, people went 
there and saw it and said, let’s go do it.
And you got full shows out of that?
What?
You got full shows out of that?
We had nice full shows, and then we got invited to a place called Kavali’s,
where they just wanted me to do a demonstration. So we went there and 
they paid me to go over there just to have appearance. I didn’t have to do 
anything, just appear. 
Thank you.
After that, they hired me to come back and do a show a week later. Then 
they put me up in a nice flat for a week. So you never know when you get 
going with it, but if you’re doing a local gig – for example, let’s say you’re 
doing the local Lion’s Club in your home town, give yourself a month for 
promotion.
Here’s why. Because when you do the promotions in your local market –
and maybe six weeks might be better – because you want to make sure 
that you get in all the local rags, the newspapers, the throwaways and 
everything, and you can get free listings in all of those. If you go to the 
newspapers and on the Internet, now they have a place to submit your 
event. So submit your event. Do it in advance. Give it six weeks so people 
can read about it. 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
3
                                
Then a lot of magazines are monthly magazines, all your big entertainment 
magazines in a lot of your smaller municipalities, and they come out once a 
month. So you want to have that time to put it in there, even if it’s a free 
listing, or if you take out a nice quarter page or half page or full page ad, 
which is going to cost you more money. You want to make sure that you 
have enough time to get it into every paper that everybody’s going to be 
reading.
Every market will dictate where you want to spend money on promotion. 
Hands down, if you’re going to spend money on promotions, radio is the 
best. There again, talk to your local market and find out how to do it. It’s 
changing. 
There used to be in the day where you could go into any town and get radio 
interviews. A lot of the bigger radio stations now, the ones that are owned 
by larger corporations, unless you spend a lot of money for advertising, they 
will not have you come in for an interview. There again, that’s in the states 
anymore. Some of the smaller stations that are locally owned will be happy 
to have you come in for an interview. There again, you have to still do the 
work. Knock, knock, knock on doors. 
The thing that I like to do after I’m done with interviews with the radio
people is like to send them a little gift as a thank you. If they drink, I can 
send them a nice bottle of champagne or a nice bottle of vino. Or if it’s a 
lady, I’ll send them some flowers or send them a couple of tickets to a 
dinner somewhere. Just treat them good. They took care of you, so take 
care of them. Then they’ll be happy to have you come back for another 
interview the next time you come to town.
Six weeks, depending on if you’re doing a fund raiser where you’ve got a 
whole school doing all the work for you. That makes it really nice. 
What kind of skits do you prefer when you’re doing corporate work?
What type of skits do I prefer?
Yeah. Is there anything in particular that you go for? I mean you’re not 
going to be doing the strip teases and stuff like that necessarily.
Yes, I will. I’ll do a strip tease, but I’ll strip it down so it’s not so teasing. Do 
you see what I’m saying? You can do these same routines. I have my same 
routines that I’ve done for years. It’s just that how I present them may 
change between a nightclub, a college or a corporate clean show. 
So I’ll change how I structure it and the way that I use words. My 
vocabulary may change, obviously, because I don’t want to use curse 
words that may slip out in a nightclub-type environment where they kind of 
expect that. 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
4
                                
What I do in that kind of situation is I put the onerous on the individuals. I 
will give a suggestion and let them make up the bloops, the blips and the 
blunders. If they do it, then it’s okay. I just say, whoa. If they do it, it’s their 
fault, and if I do it, then it looks bad on me. 
I know you’re at the point now where you can probably sit back and people 
just call you. Hey, Don, come do a show. In the beginning you had to bust 
your keester. How long do you think you were just pounding it and pounding 
it before they just started calling you?
You know what? I think that there are days when I still feel like I’m pounding 
it. No matter how long you’ve been in this business. Doing stage hypnosis I 
think is a whole different level of entertainment than if you’re a rock star or 
something like that and you have millions of followers around the world 
because we don’t have an original song that everybody’s going to be 
singing. So it’s a different kind of structure.
So I think the way that I like to look at it is, you know what? When the 
rollercoaster’s going, jump on and just go with the flow. If it’s going downhill 
and you’re just flying, go with it because tomorrow it may be going uphill 
and it might be a little bit more of a struggle. That’s how I look at that. 
Thanks.
Sure. To answer that a little bit more specifically, also because I busted my 
butt for about five years doing a lot of nightclubs, I worked the nightclub 
circuit hard. I was living in Salt Lake City, and I worked everything between 
Salt Lake; Provo; Ogden; Twin Falls, Idaho; Boise, Idaho; Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming; St. George, Utah; Wendover, Nevada; Sun Valley, Idaho; Park 
City; Deer Valley; and every municipality and every city you could imagine 
in Utah, Idaho, Nevada and Wyoming because that was my region.
I worked a lot of those just going around doing nightclubs. I worked really 
hard doing all those for about five years. After doing that, a lot of them knew 
me and I’d just call them up and say, hey, I’m going to be in town next 
week, can you get me on. They’d say yeah, right on, we’d love to see you 
again. 
There’s a lot of follow up. So if you go and do a good show, and people are 
happy and they’re making money, then they’re going to want to have you 
back. But I busted my butt for a number of years, and then I think what 
really helped me too is when I began working in the theater for 6 ½ years 
because I had anywhere from 300, 400 or 500 people a week coming to my 
show. So then you have a whole different level because you’ve got all these 
people, and you’re consistent. 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
5
                                
You’ve drive down State Street, and you’re always seeing your sign up 
there – World’s Fastest Hypnotist, Every Saturday Night. When you 70,000 
drive-bys a day seeing it, that’s pretty good publicity. Then all of the 
sudden, all the people in the Utah market starting calling me for corporate 
gigs.
Then I had people who would come to the show that were in Salt Lake and 
had heard about me who were from outside the area. Then they would 
begin calling me for corporate gigs because they had recognized me. Then 
I would get people from around the world calling me. Hollywood called me 
for some gigs, so I got those also doing some fun stuff. 
So it will snowball?
It will snowball, but you’ve got to put in the work. If you put in the work, the 
effort, and make yourself known, it’s going to happen. If you want to be a 
celebrity in your local market, find yourself a place to do a show and do it 
every single week. Do it. If you do it, you’re going to get a following. If you 
live in a small place where you don’t have enough people to come every 
week, sacrifice people. Sacrifice. You’re going to have to move to a bigger 
city. 
Make it happen, even if you have to get on a plane and fly. Where I live, 
there’s nobody there. I could probably do a show once a month and get 
away with it because people are just bored to death and they want 
something to do.
Do you do the same show every week if you’re doing it in the same place?
Guess what? Here’s the nice thing about being a hypnotist. You can do the 
same show in the same place every week and have a different audience, 
and it’s always a new show. But I do have a lot of routines where I can 
change it up. 
I’m sorry, you’ve mentioned a couple of times about problems with doing 
military and police people. Can you give us a three-minute real short what 
the problem is and a better way to approach it, just a three minute blurp?
Oh how you go in the back door? You want to know the real deep secrets?
Well, yeah. That’s why I’m here.
Oh you’re here for the military? 
No, if there’s a potential problem, I’d like to run into it before I hit it.
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
6
                                
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
All you have to do is go to the Middle East, and you’re on their list. Yeah, 
you go in the back door, it’s the same thing. All I do is I just become the drill 
sergeant. That’s real simple. I just become the drill sergeant at that point. I’ll 
just play the routine. Listen, this whole thing is just an act anyway. So it 
doesn’t matter where I’m at, I’ll just fall into the role of where I think I need 
to be to fit the scenario.
If I’m doing a corporate gig, I’m not going to be as crazy and animated as I 
normally am. I’ll just be a little bit more reserved, a little bit more 
conventional and I’ll change my movements. I’ll be a little bit more elegant. 
I’ll be more like Igor, which is a good thing. He has a style of presentation 
that he does, so I will move into this role in a corporate situation to make 
sure that everybody is following along with what I have to say. 
So I’ll just switch my personality in order to give the experience that people 
need. Military is very structured and rigid. It’s kind of like, sit back in your 
chairs. Now I want to tell you right now that you will not tell me any of your 
secrets. I am not here to get any military secrets from you. You are here for 
one reason and one reason alone, and that is to have a good time. Usually, 
that’s enough for me to get what I need out of them.
Does that help? Okay, sure. 
You had mentioned that you sell the DVD of the show.
Yes, ma’am.
How do you do that because it’s going to take a little while to get that?
There are two ways to do that.
1. You can travel with a DVD recorder that duplicates four, five or six 
CDs or DVDs at a time. You can do your show and have that all 
prepared within about 15 minutes. Everything’s done. Here you go. 
People are going to be hanging around that long.
2. If you don’t have that capacity, because that will cost you an extra 
grand to get a machine that does that, you can simply just tell them 
you’ll have it to them in a week or two. Go home, make dupes and 
send it to them.
Which way is the best? Have them fill out a coupon with name, address and 
all that good stuff?
Yeah, what I do is when somebody wants that – for example, let’s say I just 
did a show and you want a copy of my tape, and I don’t have any way to 
reproduce it right now. So I just simply say all I need is a check and I’ll have 
that out to you in about a week. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
7
                                
Money, money, money, money– money talks and bullshit walks. This is 
true. Listen, check this out. Now this is about as crazy as it gets. I was 
doing this show in Dubai and I told everybody up on stage, if you’re up here 
on stage, I invite you to come back tomorrow night, no charge, it’s on me 
because you were on stage, and I want you to watch the show. I do that in 
my shows for people who were up on stage. I invite them to come back to 
the next show if I’m going to be there.
So this one guy comes up and goes, Mr. Spencer, I’m not going to be here 
tomorrow night, so can I have one of your DVDs instead for the cost of 
that? I go, of course not. He wanted a DVD on how to hypnotize in 
exchange for not being there the next night. He goes, but if I’m not going to 
be here and you were going to give me a seat anyway, why can’t I have a 
DVD? I said, because you can’t. You’re either here or you’re not. It’s not a 
big deal. 
When you were talking about wardrobe before, is that a tax write-off? And 
your stage appearance?
Yeah. Your whole life is a write-off. I love it. 
Are there any other peculiar things that we might not think of?
The cool thing about it is your life, basically, does become a write-off. If 
there are any tax accountants in here, tell me I’m wrong or correct me. Your 
wardrobe – hey, this watch, I bought it for my show. I got this jewelry for my 
show. I bought these for my show. This shirt is for my show. I have to go 
out to dinner to talk to somebody. It’s for my show. I have to drive from here 
to there, I’ve got write it off. It’s for my show. 
Do you think I’d cut my hair if it wasn’t for my show? No, I would not. You’ve 
got to have the look. So everything actually becomes a write-off. There 
again, I will instruct you to talk to your tax accountant and let them give you 
legal advice on that. Personally, everything is a write-off because you are 
the product. As a stage hypnotist, you’re the product. So it’s pretty groovy. 
A couple of things. Wouldn’t you say, first of all, just to kind of ponder a 
minute, that in a way, we’re getting a break in a way that hypnosis has kind 
of come a long ways since 25 years ago. I imagine it was really difficult 
breaking in 25 years ago. It seems to have gained some more credibility. 
The second thing is when you say you do a demo after your show, what’s a 
demo?
I never said I do a demo, but let address the first thing you said. Hypnosis 
has come a long way over the last 25 years. I give a lot of credit of that to 
the stage hypnotist. Truthfully, without the stage hypnotist, most hypnosis 
would go away because the stage hypnotist creates and excites the 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
8
                                
imagination for a lot of people. It has given credibility to the field of 
hypnotherapy.
I started as a hypnotherapist. When I started as a hypnotherapist years 
ago, we were in about the same position as 20 years before than when 
chiropractors real quack-o-practors. That’s what they were. Now they’re just 
a money-making machine. No offense to anybody who’s a chiropractor. You 
have fine tuned it like dentists have also. They’ve learned how to make a lot 
of money doing their profession.
Hypnotherapists now some people have also brought that to a level where 
they have streamlined it into programs that make them a lot of money at the 
same time. So hypnosis has come a long way over the last 20 years. Thank 
you mostly to the ongoing workings of the stage hypnotist and to those 
people in the hypnotherapy profession who have worked very, very hard to 
bring it to a level of excellence and professionalism that it deserves.
In truth, the professional hypnotherapist is more highly qualified to deal with 
the human psyche than any psychologist or any psychiatrist that I’ve ever 
met. How many of you would agree with that statement? That’s right 
because it’s a specialized field. We are masters in working with the human 
mind. 
We have taken the time to learn what motivates human beings to do what 
they 
do.
We learned 
things 
like 
hypnotherapy, 
hypnosis, 
NLP, 
neurolinguistic programming, and we learned all these other mind 
technologies that help us to help other people to understand why people do 
what they do. Why do we make the decisions that we do? 
The keen observer of human beings, being most of us in this room, we are 
in a unique position to be great people-helpers on this planet, better than 
anybody else. I think, for me, what I like more than anything is that I have a 
unique perspective on human beings that few other people have. 
Part of that comes from being a stage hypnotist too, not just being a 
hypnotherapist, which is where I began. That gave me one perspective on 
people, but going in to the world of stage hypnosis, you have a whole 
different dimension. So when I bring that all together, I’m just going, whoa. 
It’s kind of a nutty, fruity world we live in. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
9
                                
What To Charge
Student:
Spencer:
Regarding travel, would you suggest the radius? I know that you get paid 
for your travel, but for someone who’s starting out, when do you negotiate 
travel? I know what local might be, but when do you start charging? I mean 
Joe got $2,500, but how do you know…
The easiest way to do that is just look at where you’re going, and you figure 
that in on the cost. Let’s say, for example, that you live here in Las Vegas, 
and somebody wants you to go to LA to do a show. You can jump on a 
plane roundtrip for probably $150 or something like that. Or you can drive 
down there in about five hours one way and about five hours back.
What I would do is I wouldn’t say, well, I’m going to charge you $2,000 plus 
expenses. I would just say $3,000, all inclusive. They don’t want to have to 
deal with that. They don’t want to have to deal with what do you mean 
expenses? What do you mean plus lodging? No, $3,000 all-inclusive and 
then you take care of all the incidentals so that they don’t have to. Make it 
as easy as you possibly can for them. 
That said, there are two dimensions to this. Often times when people 
contact me, I’ll give them a choice of what kind of a show they want. My first 
question when somebody calls me is, what is your budget? I want to know 
what their budget is.
They go, we’re thinking about doing a show over here in Los Angeles, and I 
know you live in Las Vegas. What do you charge? I go well, let me ask you
first, who is this for? I want to know who the show is for. Ask who it’s for. 
Let me write this down. Maybe this will help. I will switch into my teacher 
role now. 
Who is the show for?
Where is the show at?
What’s it for?
Who is going to tell me how much money they have? If it’s a large 
corporation, like IBM and they’ve got like 20,000 employees, they got some 
Ka-chunk change to spend. Not a big deal. So I want to know who they are.
Where it’s going to be is going to tell me where I have to go. If it’s only an
hour away it’s not a big deal. If it’s four or five hours away or cross-country, 
it’s going to add another dimension to it. I’ll ask what it’s for meaning is it a 
private party? Is it a corporate function? What kind of an event is it for? 
What’s happening? Who’s going to be there and where is it going to be? 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
10
                                
Then my next question is:
What’s your budget?
They’ll say oh, we were thinking maybe about $500. I say, well, you know 
what? Wow, $500. I think I could find somebody who may be able to do that 
for you. I give them two choices. I say here’s how I work. I can give you a 
couple of different options, and I’m going to be happy to send that to you in 
an email. Then I’ll write it down in an email. 
When is the event?
When is the next question? When are you thinking about doing this 
because I have to check my calendar? I’ve got to make sure that day is 
even available to me. If the day is available to me, then we’ll talk further. So 
the plot, it thickens.
I want to know when. Oh man, I don’t think I can do it on that date because 
I’m booked up. Or, you know I’ve got something that’s going to be over here 
that’s close to you, so I might be able to squeeze you in and give you a 
better rate. If I can’t, if I have nothing there, then here are your options:
1. Do you want a show where I just come there and give you a 
performance, a comedy hypnosis show for your group of 500; or
2. Do you want a production? A production is going to cost a little bit 
more, but it’s a whole lot more fun.
The difference in price is about $2,000. Do you want a lower-end one that’s 
going to cost you $2,000 or would you like one that might cost you $4,000? 
Depending on the location, it could be $3,000 or it could be $6,000. Do you 
see what I’m saying?
And the difference in a production at a low-end is…
The difference in a production is if I’m going to do a production, I’m going to 
make sure that I have special lights, effects and different effect lighting and 
everything else. So I’m going to build it up and make it look like a real cool 
show, like a Vegas show, more of a production. I’ll charge extra because 
I’m going to have to pay extra for it.
My work’s not going to be that much more, but I’m going to have to hire a 
crew to do everything else, and I’ll hire somebody locally to put that all 
together for me. 
Hey, Don. 
Hey. 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
11
                                
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
So you then said that you would send an email that has a couple of options. 
Then in the options, what do you do? Do you talk about door splits or 
different rates?
This has to do with corporate. If corporate calls me. Then after I talk to them 
on the phone, I tell them if I get an agreement that they want to do that, 
what I’m doing is I’m talking to them and I already have my computer open. 
I’ve got my contract out in front of me, and I’m already putting their name, 
date, phone number, everything in on the contract. Then I say listen, I’m 
going to ship you over a contract right now because I’m so busy right now, I 
don’t know if I can hold that date for you. 
So it’s already ready for them. Now all they have to do is just sign it and 
send it back, and then they’re obligated?
They have to send me a deposit within 72 hours or I can’t hold it because I 
don’t know – here’s the deal. I get so many calls. If somebody calls me 
tomorrow and says, I want to do a show on this date, and I say, well I don’t 
know. I promised it to these people, but they haven’t given me a deposit, 
and they want to pay me right now. These guys may beg out and I may lose 
both of them. I don’t want that to happen. 
It’s like selling a house. A few years ago, I was living in Mesa, Arizona. I 
had a very beautiful house on a golf course with a beautiful swimming pool 
in the backyard. I had to move from there, so I sold my house. I’ll be 
damned, the first person I sold it to gave me $2,000, but you always put the 
weasel clause in there. So he lost his $2,000 I got, because whatever fell 
through for him fell through. 
Then I finally sold my house about a week later, and I’ll be damned if the 
same day I sold it, some guy comes up to me and goes, I want to give you 
an extra $50,000 cash for your house. Oh yeah. Wasn’t that crazy? So what 
do you do? It’s the same thing. I always get the deposit up front, and then 
the balance within 30 days prior to the show. 
I have the contract out to them by email within five minutes. I say, all I need 
you to do is sign that and send it back to me by email right now, and then 
just put a deposit in the mail. Or I’ll send them a link to PayPal where they 
can send me a deposit. That’s why I have PayPal, automatic payment. I 
may lose a little bit, 2% of fees, but you know what? I’ve got it. I’ve got 
myself a deal. I’d rather take the deal right here, right now. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
12
                                
More Q&As
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
When you’re taking the bookings, are you concerned about asking them 
about the setup that they’re going to have? Are you going to ask them if 
they have a platform or a stage?
What happens is if corporate hires me, I tell them – it’s in the contract – I tell 
them what I need. It’s all spelled out in the contract. I say I need a riser. I 
need my riser to be a certain dimension, which is usually about 20 x 12. I 
need a backdrop, and I need microphones. I’ll hire a local DJ and he can do 
the rest of it. I just tell them I need a riser and that I’ll hire a local DJ to do 
the rest of it. 
All right, I have a question from a previous experience this past year. I had 
booked a gig for New Year’s Eve. They paid the deposit and they signed 
the contract. My contract states that they’ll pay me prior to performance –
not 30 days out. Two weeks out she cancelled on me because she 
rebooked the room to somebody else. How would you handle somebody 
breaking your contract?
A lawsuit. Just sue them. 
Do you feel that may hurt your reputation? Because whenever I’ve posted 
questions on the forum, they think it will ruin my reputation by having a 
lawsuit on the books.
This is business. If somebody hires me and they back out on it and if I lose 
it because I could have booked that for somebody else for maybe twice as 
much, they’re stealing from me. They are stealing from me. I don’t take it 
personally. Just sue them. No big deal.
I had two questions.
I chose shows like Montel. How do you go about getting gigs there? 
Another question is when you double up on a stage show, what’s the 
advantage of that?
When you double up on a stage show?
Yeah, some hypnotists here have two guys that do the routine. They work 
together on stage.
Is there an advantage to that?
What is the advantage?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
13
                                
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
There is no advantage. That’s just something they wanted to do. I prefer 
working by myself.
And TV gigs?
How do you get on TV appearances? How do you get on Montel and Oprah 
and all those other goofy shows? Jerry Springer, that’s easy. All you’ve got 
to do is be a redneck and say, I had hypno-sex with my neighbor’s dog. 
That’s pretty easy. And the cat was sure pissed off. I know it’s kind of raw.
If you want to get on those kinds of shows, honestly, every TV show has a 
production director. So go on the Internet, look up the show and find out 
who produces it, and send them a tape. 
If you want to do better than that, go to where they are, knock on the door,
tell them who you are and give them a tape. Tell them who you are and 
show them what you’ve got. That’s how Hollywood works. Hollywood works 
best through networking. It’s not what you know; it’s who you know. If you 
want to know, you’ve got to get out there and bust your balls. 
There are a number of agencies you can be involved with down in L.A., that 
are good for socializing and networking with people. So if you want to get 
involved on that level, go down to LA and sign up with a few agencies down 
there. Most agencies down there you can sign up with them for nothing. 
They don’t care, if they get you a gig great for them. If they don’t, they 
haven’t lost anything. If they do, they get money off you. So it’s just another 
name on their roster. 
Other than that, I would go directly to the company that produces the 
various shows, and just begin to research who you need to talk to. You’ll 
find somebody in there. A lot of those places, they are looking for people 
like you. They want to have information from people like you. Then they can 
make a decision after they check you out. You never know. It’s a crap 
shoot. Hollywood is a crap shoot. It really is because you never know. 
Even when you’re doing a movie, you know what? They don’t always pick 
the smartest, best-looking, most talented person to do the show. They’re 
looking for a certain type. So these casting agents have something in their 
mind that they’re looking at when they’re typecasting people for a show. 
I may think I’m the perfect person for this part, but they may like the way 
this guy looks. There’s something about him that makes more sense than 
you; therefore, they’re going to hire him, who has absolutely no experience. 
I’m going to go, that sucks, but that’s Hollywood. Get used to rejection. If 
you want to be an actor or if you want to be a performer, get used to 
rejection. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
14
                                
If you want to be the World’s Greatest Salesperson, get used to rejection 
because if you can’t handle rejection, you are not going to be able to go all 
the way that you need to go to be a successful stage hypnotist or 
successful in any other areas of your life. Does that make sense? You guys
all know that. So just go for it, man. Just go for it. It’s a natural, normal part 
of life, man. 
When somebody says no to me, I go, how can I get around that? To me it’s 
nothing more than an opportunity for me to become better, to achieve 
greater things.
My personal curiosity, you say you tape every show.
I do.
You’ve been doing it…
Except the bad ones.
Have you ever done a bad one?
Oh, I have bad shows.
So do you have a library of like 20 years’ of shows.
I do. I have my very first show I ever did.
Are they tape or digital?
I have boxes full of every performance I’ve ever done. 
I want to see your first test.
Well, you know, I’m going to have to go back and look at the first show 
before I can make that commitment. 
Laughter
I’m going to do that. I’m going to do that for you guys, seriously. That’s a 
good challenge for me. I’m going to go back and find it. I’ll have to convert it
from VHS.
From Polaroid. 
Yeah, from Polaroid. It should have been a beta. Beta is better than VHS, 
but it was VHS. I’ll do that. I’ll get it done some time in the next couple of 
months. Hold me to it. Write to me and let me know. 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
[
]
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
15
                                
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
I was just going to say what a great marketing idea. Show you now and 
then say, look where I came from. I can teach you too.
Okay. Not a bad idea. 
I was going to say the same thing. We had the question how long did it 
take? Did you have a mentor like Don Spencer teaching you when you first 
came into the business?
Well okay, that’s a good question did I have a mentor? Let me answer that 
for you. When I first began doing this, no, I did not have a mentor. Back in 
my day – this makes me sound like an old guy – but back when I began 
doing this, there were no mentors to speak of. There were classes you 
could take on stage hypnosis. 
I took a class once with Orman McGill, who became a friend of mine. I don’t 
know if you all know who that was or are familiar with the name, but he was 
a good guy and I took a number of classes with him. I lived down in San 
Diego at the time, and I first studied hypnosis at a place called The 
Hypnotism Training Institute of San Diego. I studied there for a year and a 
half, three or four nights a week and on weekends.
Orman was part of the staff, and he came in four or five times during the 
year and a half. One of the classes he did was on stage hypnosis. I think it 
was only like a three- or four-hour class where he did some hypnosis on 
people and then he talked about it. 
Was it extensive? No. Did they have any mentors? No. I learned the hard 
way. I went around and I watched every stage hypnosis show I could 
possibly see. I watched every hypnotist that was out there doing anything at 
the time to see what they were doing. I said to myself, I can be better than 
that. I hope that you’re sitting out there right now looking at me saying, I can 
be better than Spencer because I want you to. 
That’s the attitude you have to have. I can be better than that guy. To me, if 
I get my ego out of the way, there are a lot of guys out there that do great 
shows. I think it’s awesome to watch people who do really good shows. So 
that’s how I learned. I just went out and began to watch people and I 
thought, you know what, I’ve got some cahonies, man. I can do that. So I 
just started doing it, and I just kind of like got out there and just started 
doing it. 
I’ll tell you what, if there were someone back then in that day that was a 
mentor that could have taken me by the hand and shown me the in’s and 
out’s, I would have hired them like that. No problem, just like I took flying 
lessons. I took flying lessons to learn how to fly a plane because I didn’t 
want to just do it by myself. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
16
                                
[
]
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Laughter
I wanted somebody to show me how to do it. Like here, get in there, all 
you’ve got to do is just go. There’s that control, pull that back and make 
sure you’ve got your foot down, man, and there you go. Pull back and have 
fun. I scared the hell out of my kids when I took them up. 
I hope this is not a silly question, but what do you consider a good show or 
a bad show? As long as it goes pretty good, what are you looking for, I 
guess, is what I’m getting it. 
What am I looking for?
Yeah, overall.
Here’s what I look for more than anything – and I don’t really care about the 
people that are hypnotized. They’re going to be goofy anyway. They’re just 
going to be hypnotized and they’re going to do whatever happens. I think 
what makes or breaks a show, is the performer. You are the show. That’s 
my point of view. 
I think the performer has to have charisma. You have to have stage 
presence. You have to look good. If there’s something unique about your 
performance where I’m going to go, I kind of liked that. That’s pretty cool 
how that works. One of the good things to build your performance is to 
study performers. Look at performers. How can you develop some of the 
style and flare that other performers have? How can you incorporate that 
into yourself?
It is an act. Yes, be yourself, but be bigger than yourself. Acting is nothing 
more than being bigger than yourself. That’s all it is. When you’re an actor 
on the stage, you just have to become bigger than what you normally are. 
When you’re on a stage production – who does stage work? 
Where’s Alex? You do stage work too and Alex does. Okay, you know that 
when you’re on the stage, you have to talk louder. You have to product 
yourself, and you have to be a little bit more animated about what you do in 
order to get that across to the audience that’s out there. Is that correct? 
Yeah, okay? 
It’s no different than doing a stage presentation. When I’m not up here, I’m 
just the guy out there eating salad with everybody else. But when I’m up 
here, I’m on. I try to do my best to be that thing, the hypnotist. Right now, I 
am the hypnotist. So I try to project myself bigger than what I am because 
I’m a small guy anyway. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
17
                                
I have this thing that I do with myself. I do this by studying other people and 
what they do in their lives. I study actors. I study comedians. I study 
magicians. I study how they appear on stage and what they do. I’m looking 
for these nuances and how can I develop that and integrate that into what 
I’m doing to give the best performance possible. 
What do I look for? I don’t look at the people who are hypnotized I don’t 
care about that. When I look at other hypnotists’ shows, I’m looking at the 
person. I’m looking at how they come across to me. That’s what I look at. 
Yes, I was wondering what to do if you get somebody that does something 
that just cracks you up so bad you just lose it. What if they just do 
something that surprises you so much that you don’t know what to do?
I just laugh. I mean I go with the flow. I have people that do goofy things, 
and sometimes I’m so amazed by what they’re doing, I lose it. I don’t have a 
problem with that. I’m like everybody else. I’m seeing this for the first time 
too. So a lot of things, I know what a person’s going to do because I frame it 
that way, but within framing a scenario, I have no idea exactly how they’re 
going to respond. So I’m always amazed. 
There was another guy in a show and I gave him a suggestion and asked 
him who he was. I said, you’re your favorite TV character, and he stands up 
and says, I’m Superman. I go, really? So what can you do as Superman? 
He goes, I can fly. Then he runs off the side of the stage and jumps down. 
He dives off like he’s flying. At the theater, it’s a cement floor, so you hear 
this thug. I’m going, oh no. 
The people were out there going oh, dear God, and everything just stops. 
They’re looking at me going, you are in big trouble, dude. I was just hoping 
there wasn’t blood everywhere. I looked down and he looks at me and I go, 
are you all right? He goes, oh man that was cool!
Laughter
He gets back up on the stage. He didn’t get hurt. He landed just right. 
Knock on wood, whoever it is. You never know. 
I’ll tell you another one too. I think I told this at Lowe’s, but for those of you 
who weren’t there, I was doing another show. I had everybody as little 
children. You’re little 6-year-old kids and you’re having a good time. We’re 
going to go on a rollercoaster and we’re going to have a lot of fun. This is 
going to be great. You won’t get sick. You won’t wet your pants or anything 
like that. 
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
18
                                
So they’re sitting there, they pull down their safety bar and put on their 
seatbelts. They’re sitting there getting ready to go. They’re all excited. 
They’ve given me their tickets, and we’re ready to go. I look down and I can 
see this one guy’s face turning red. I’m going, not a good sign. Not a good 
sign. I walked over to this guy and go, the person I’m touching right now, 
your head is cool, calm and your stomach is relaxed. You feel good, perfect 
in every way. Take a deep breath and just relax all the way down.
You could see this guy breathing a sigh of relief. I’m going, all right, man. 
That was a close call. That was a close call. In just a moment, I’m going to 
count to three. The music will begin and we’re going to go for a ride. I look 
over and he’s freaking out. I go; calm and cool, everything is relaxed inside. 
He’s sitting there breathing deeply. I turn around and I go, that was another 
close call, folks. Let’s see if we can get this thing going. I turned around and 
all the sudden he’s losing it all over the stage. He just chucks. 
You know how big that stage was, right? This stage was huge, and this stuff 
was – I don’t know where it came from. I mean there was so much of it, and 
he did it like three times, three big heaves. That would be like my most 
embarrassing moment.
So the audience is out there freaking out, and all these people up here that 
were hypnotized that they’re little kids, they were like little kids going, ooh. It 
didn’t break their trances. They were all just going, ooh. He got sick. He 
threw up. I’m going, oh my gosh. 
So I said, will somebody please go get the manager of the theater and have 
him bring a mop up here? He was pretty pissed off at me, actually. He goes 
I’m not going to be cleaning that up. I said, Art, get up here and clean it up, 
man. I can’t do it because I’ve got a show to run. So he came up there with 
a little bucket and cleaned it all up. He was mad at me for about two months 
after that, but he cleaned it up. 
After he got that all cleaned up, I took the guy that threw up – after he was 
done, we gave him a towel and he cleaned himself off a little bit. I had one 
of my assistant’s who was a hypnotherapist at the time – I said, please take 
him outside and give him some fresh air and give him some water to drink. 
Give him whatever he wants. I think he had gone to Kentucky Fried Chicken 
that night or something. That’s all I can think from what I saw. So if you’re 
thinking about going out to dinner tonight, you might think twice. 
So anyway, what I did for this gentleman, and it was very nice because I 
gave him free passes to the show for the next year. The audience was very 
generous too because I took the time to take care of his needs. After I got 
done with that, the show continued. Everybody stayed in form, and I think 
there was about another 45 minutes left of the show.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
19
                                
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
How did you keep the energy going in between that?
The question was, how do I keep the energy going in between that? I didn’t 
need to. There was already enough energy out there. My sound guys just 
put on some music and I said, excuse us for a moment. Go out and have an 
Intermission. Go have some sodas and have some popcorn. Stay away 
from the chicken. As soon as we get this cleaned up, we’ll start the show 
back up again. 
Then my guy was down there he started playing music again, and the show 
just went on. You make it part of the show in a kind of sick sort of a way.
Don, I don’t know whether you’ve had any problems with someone actually 
doing something bad to themselves, because they fell or broke something, 
like they’re injured.
I’ve never had a person injure themselves in my show, ever.
Okay, so maybe from experience talking to others or hearing about other 
experiences, how would you cope with such a situation, not to lose face 
going forward? Say that happened, what would you do?
If somebody hurt themselves?
Yes.
I would stop the show and make sure their needs were taken care of.
But after the show? Because there may some rumors like, don’t go and see 
Spence because you can get injured or something like that.
I don’t really worry about that. Listen, it could happen. I’m not saying it will 
never happen. The thing is, I would take care of it immediately on the spot. 
For example, if this guy that flew off the stage and hit the pavement would 
have gotten hurt, it would have been kind of a bummer, but I would have 
just simply explained to the audience, you know what? I did my best. That’s 
all you can do. All you can do is just try to take care of it in the moment. 
I honestly don’t know how I would take care of that. If it had gotten into the 
papers, I would want to do an interview with them and explain to them what 
happened and offer my apologies to them, and I would everything I could to 
help that person to feel better. That is why you have insurance, right?
That’s PR work. If something like that happens, you follow through and 
you’re generous. I mean, I am. I want to make sure that if something has 
happened wrong because of me that I can take care of it. I do. I’ve had 
people in my show – this is true. I’ve had people in my show that really 
need therapy. Really bad. They get up on stage and you’ll get people on 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
20
                                
your stage that have a borderline personality disorder. Not good because 
you can create a psychotic experience in somebody. 
This is part of the dangers of doing stage work. Thank goodness for me, I 
have years’ of background as hypnotherapist before I ever began doing a 
lot of work, so I knew how to navigate these experiences, and I learned how 
to read people very well. 
Part of the thing that you do will be learning how to read people. I can look 
at people and I can tell you your whole life’s story in about 15 seconds or 
less because I’ve been doing this for a long time. How does he do that? 
Yeah, I can tell you everything about what happened when you were little. 
So take care of your audience, yes.
What if you have somebody that’s trying to set you up in the show, like a 
real heckler that’s pretending to be hypnotized? How do watch out for that, 
like if it’s a comedy show, the audience is laughing and they’re making 
faces and coming out of trance? How do you watch out for that?
Well, when you’ve done enough shows you’ll notice when somebody’s just 
messing with you. The audience is normally very generous, and if they see 
something up there, they’ll say, oh that person’s faking it. So you just get 
them off the stage. That’s really the easiest way to do it because he 
audience is usually very generous. If there’s something that you don’t 
happen to catch yourself, they’re going to catch it. 
But you, the trained professional, competent, confident stage powerful 
hypnotist will notice this at all times, and do you know what you’re going to 
do? You’re going to get him off the stage. Thank you. Go out there and 
have more fun. 
Okay, so I would like to ask you – because I am a hypnotherapist, and I am 
here because I want to be quicker. So you work with the people after 
shows. How long does it take – hypnotherapy? People think that after your 
show, you will put them into trance in five minutes and they will not smoke. 
How long does your hypnotherapy take? Did you understand?
How long does it take my hypnotherapy?
Yeah, I have read on your pages that sometimes you help people.
Oh, like after a show? For example, if somebody comes up to me and they 
go can you work with me right now to stop smoking? Is that what you’re 
saying?
Yeah.
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
21
                                
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
I say, call me tomorrow because I’m exhausted. But I have done that. If I 
work with somebody to do that, I’ll sit down with them for maybe 15 minutes 
and just do something really quick because they’re already in trance by 
what I’ve done. So they’re usually easy to work with. So as soon as they 
give me $100 or $200 or whatever I determine at that moment – I’ll say this 
is going to cost you $100. Thank you. Sit down. Let’s do this very quick. 
Boom! We’re done.
Does that help? If I’m going to be there for a couple days afterwards, I’ll 
have them come see me and give them an hour of my time, but after a 
show, I’m exhausted and the last thing I want to do is spend time talking to 
anybody. I’m tired. It’s like doing a class here all day. You get tired, and you 
need a break every once in a while. 
Since you’re asking for picking your brain, I have a question. It may not be 
totally applicable to others, but I find it’s been difficult to work with a bunch 
of scientists who think all the time. They’re just not good responders. 
So your question is how do you work with a bunch of scientists?
How do you work with them? You talk about working with military people, 
right? Different kinds of people have certain things that you can…
Listen, here’s a very simple answer to that. If I’ve got a bunch of guys who 
are just a bunch of scientists, I think it’s kind of awesome. Thing about it. 
Some scientists work very uniquely. It’s very beautiful. It’s so awesome that 
you have the mind of a scientist because you like to discover things. You 
like to know how things work.
If you notice how your eyes close right now, do you see how that is? Yeah, 
they close because you thought about. With your eyes closed, if you were 
to think about it, you might even notice that there’s a space between your 
eyes and your eyelids there’s a light that comes on and goes off. If you 
were to think about it, there’s a bunch of little dots inside going back and 
forth, Mr. Scientist. Notice those? Nod your head.
I take them through this scientific process of self-discovery, and that just 
drops the person into trance. Does that make sense?
Yes.
So it’s a very non-evasive way for a person to learn how to go into a trance 
without really saying you’re going into a trance. So, if you have a bunch of 
people up here that are being hypnotized in a stage show who are 
scientists, I’d probably do it that same way, because you have to judge your 
crowd just like I do when I’m working with people. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
22
                                
If I’m doing street hypnosis, I don’t think I can walk up to anybody and just 
say, sleep, and they’re going to drop. I think that would be kind of ludicrous 
to think that.
I want to talk to somebody for a little bit and find out a little bit more about 
who they are. For example, come up here, sir. Can I borrow you for a 
second? Ronald? For example, let’s Ronald here – and I don’t really know 
him. Ronald, what do you do?
I’m a retired Clergy. I worked for RCMP, the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police.
Okay, cool. Have you ever done hypnosis before? Say no.
No.
Okay, have you ever done hypnosis before?
No.
Good. See, I want to find out more about him. 
Let’s say that working for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. I might think 
that he may have a little resistance to hypnosis or trance, because coming 
from that area and being clergy, might bring up another red flag for me. 
Because sometimes when you deal with people in the religious sector, they 
may have a preconceived idea about what hypnosis is. It’s the evil 
hypnotist, the mark of the Beast!
That’s one of the things we talked about earlier. Twenty years ago, I had 
fights with people in the newspaper because they were saying I was from 
Satan and that what I did was evil. That being a hypnotist was satanic. It’s 
crazy the way people approached that.
I’ve got the Jesus thing. You should have seen me when my hair was long. 
I got a lot of that, yeah. Anyway, let’s just say that he is – and he is with the 
clergy and the RCMP, I might approach that differently because he might 
be going, well, you know, I’d kind of like to try that, but I’m not really certain 
about that. I think it might kind of not my deal. 
I know you would never say that, but let’s just say that you would say that. 
So before I would even try to do street hypnosis with an individual like that, 
like a scientist, I want to know more about him. Who are you? Where do 
you come from? Because he wants to try it, but he’s kind of a little bit afraid 
of it. Instead of my saying, sleep – because he’s going to probably look at 
me and go, I don’t think so. That’s not going to happen. 
Ronald:
Spencer:
Ronald:
Spencer:
Ronald:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
23
                                
I’m going to talk to him a little more and get to know him. I want to find out 
more about him. What’s it like being in the clergy?
Well, it’s like a lot of things. For me, it was wonderful. Some of my worst 
friends were fellow clergy. 
The interesting thing that I find about being in the clergy is that you pray a 
lot, right?
I do.
Please pay attention because this is important. This is what you do. You 
have got to go into somebody else’s reality, no matter what you do. I want
to know what he is. Somehow I’ve got to relate what I do to what it is that he 
does. So in the clergy, you pray.
Pray and meditate.
And meditate. That’s interesting because what I do in hypnosis is a lot like 
prayer and meditation. It’s exactly the same stage of mind. For example, 
when you calm yourself and you go into prayer, what you’re doing is 
communicating with God and you’re being very, very quiet inside, right?
That’s right.
Well, hypnosis is really the same thing. What you’re doing is really the 
same exact state of mind because your brain is working at the same 
frequency. You have different levels of awareness. Beta- when you’re 
awake. Then, the brainwave activity slows down when you start to pray and 
to, what we call alpha. Are you familiar with that?
Yeah.
Okay, good. Then it drops down into theta and into delta and just continues 
to slow down. So when you go into the prayer or the meditative state of 
mind to communicate with God, your brainwave activity slows down so that 
you don’t have so much outside interference so you can have that 
communion. Isn’t that what it’s all about?
Yes.
It sure is. Okay. So what I’m going to do is I’m going to share with you 
exactly how that works, from my point of view. We’re not going to talk to 
God. I’ll leave that between you and him, but I’ll show you just how to still 
your mind in the same way. How’s that?
Sure.
Ronald:
Spencer:
Ronald:
Spencer:
Ronald:
Spencer:
Ronald:
Spencer:
Ronald:
Spencer:
Ronald:
Spencer:
Ronald:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
24
                                
Spencer:
[
]
Spencer:
Very cool. So do you see what I’m doing right there? I’m just going into his 
reality and using his reality, instead of trying to impose what I think I know 
on him because that would be very arrogant on my part, and I don’t want to 
be arrogant. Arrogance is for the inexperienced lay hypnotist that has a lot 
of needs that need to be met by a qualified professional trained, competent 
hypnotherapist. 
All right, thank you very much. Give him a round of applause. Make him feel 
good.
Applause
So like with the scientists, you just meet them on their level. You don’t have 
to be bigger or smarter or anything. You try to understand where they’re 
coming from, and when you do that, when you take the time and spend the 
time and then it’s kind of like, okay, I can relate to that. Cool. 
So just ahead and close your eyes, and go into that same space of 
communion. As you do you’ll find yourself relaxing down comfortably. Just 
like that, and that feels good. Doesn’t it? 
With the scientists, you are going to do the same thing. They may wonder, 
how do I quiet my mind down? They’re very logical thinkers, and so with 
them, they may spend a little bit more time. I had an individual, a friend of 
mine years ago, and he was a professor. He taught at UCLA. He spoke 24 
languages. He was a smart guy. In fact, he interpreted the sand scripts into 
English. He was an amazing guy. 
He used to teach on this boat called ‘The University of The Pacific’. It was 
this college. You get on this boat and go around the seven seas in this 
university, very smart guy. He had a very smart wife. I used to play tennis 
with her because I couldn’t talk to him because his mind was so active. It 
was crazy. But he was a very brilliant guy and I loved being around him, but 
I enjoyed playing tennis more.
He wanted to be hypnotized because he was doing some research on past 
life regression. So he wanted to do some work with me. My approach with 
him was exactly the same way as I’m doing here. 
Let’s go into that mind of yours that knows all these languages and has all 
these skills. That already knows how to get where you need to be because 
you know how to study, you know how to pull things apart, and as you pull 
those things apart, you know how to bring yourself to that place where you 
can relax. 
You can drop down into that place that you need to be in order to discover 
what past lives really means. It didn’t mean anything to me, but to him it did.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
25
                                
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
When you’re doing your stage show and you end up kicking some people 
off, could you talk about that a little bit more? What you’re looking for when
you end up kicking people off of your stage?
Or, is the question, what am I looking for when I want to keep people on 
stage?
I guess you can go with that too.
It’s easy. What I’m looking for are people on stage who are very highly 
responsive to every suggestion that I give them. So if I’m doing a 
suggestibility test and they’re not responding, I’m just going to take them 
and send them off the stage. All I’m looking for are people who want to 
have fun. When people come to my show, I look at it like this. Party time, 
man, if they can’t keep up with my party, they’re not going to be up here on 
my stage.
That’s the way I approach it. I want people who are going to have a good 
time. If I don’t think they’re having a good time up here with me, I’ll send 
them out there, and they can watch everybody else up here having a good 
time. Does that help?
Yeah, I was just thinking about it in terms of changing color, changing 
breathing and that kind of stuff.
Changing color or changing breathing?
Skin colors, skin tone, a change in breathing and those kind of signs that…
Oh, you’re talking about the signs of hypnosis?
Right.
Yeah, the waxy skin, eyes fluttering and all that kind of stuff. I don’t pay 
attention to that when I’m doing a stage show because it’s a whole different 
dynamic than if you’re working with somebody doing one-on-one type 
trances.
I may notice that when I’m doing street hypnosis. I might look for that. When 
I’m doing a stage show, it’s a different dynamic. It really is. So I don’t pay 
too much attention to that. All I want to know is that if I give them a 
suggestion, they’re going to respond. If they don’t, then they’re off my 
stage. I don’t have to worry about if they have this hypnotic mask across 
their face and their eyes are fluttering, and they’re drooling or whatever. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
26
                                
I look for people first of all that are going to comply with what I say when 
they come up here. When they do the suggestibility tests and when I begin 
to relax them, I want to make sure that they’re just flopped down and they’re 
completely gone. I’ll walk behind people or I’ll notice them as I walk in front 
of them. If I’m doing this and they’re still sitting there relaxed, and if I go up 
and go, relax and they’re like this, then I’m going to go, all right, I know who 
I’ve got to get rid of. It’s this goofball here. He won’t relax. 
I always want to make sure a person is completely like a rag doll. Those are 
the people I want because they’re going to be very good subjects because 
we want to have fun. 
I saw a thing, Joe Kind, one time because I was going to go do a demo for 
the Lion’s Club during a lunch hour, just do kind of a demo and explanation 
of hypnosis and that kind of thing. He had a tip about a tip, which was when 
you get there, go ahead and kind of like gain sympathy with the crowd. Like
hey, I’m kind of new at this. I haven’t been doing this a long time, but I know 
what I’m doing. In other words, a way to get the crowd on your side, almost 
right out of the gate what do you think of that?
What do you think of it?
Well, it’s not real great as it sounds, but it’s not a bad idea. 
Try it out and see how you like it. Personally, for me, I go out there and I 
want to command my audience right away. When I go up on stage, I want 
to command everything. I want to control it. When I go into a room, it’s my 
room and nobody else’s. I don’t want them to feel sorry. I don’t want to get 
sympathy. I want them to do what I say, or I’m going to kick some butt, in a 
good way. 
I mean that’s part of the presence I think and part of the fun of it. You can 
go out there and you can have a lot of fun, but if you go out there and start 
being too loopy-loop, you’re going to lose a lot of people and you’re going to 
lose a lot of credibility because, after all, you are the hypnotist. People look 
at you as the hypnotist, the one who can make them do anything. You are 
in control of all things. You control the wind, the air, the water, the soil, fire! 
It’s true. They have these ideas in their minds. So I just exaggerate them 
because it’s what you want. You want people to have fun and do this stuff. 
Once you have their command and they start doing this, then I say, loosen 
up and after these people are hypnotized, forget about all that other stuff. 
Let’s have some fun now, that’s another way you can approach it, right out 
of the gate; I’d be a serious person. 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
27
                                
Student:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
[
]
Spencer:
Kind of related to what he was saying, I think what he was trying to get is 
like self-deprecating humor. I saw a hypnosis show where I think the guy 
was almost as much a stand-up comedian as he was a hypnotist. He kind 
of set the bar high at being really funny, and just his commentary during the 
show had people laughing really hard, and a lot of it was his own self-
deprecating humor on himself. It made it funny. 
What’s your opinion about being – I know you said you don’t do stand-up 
comedy, but you have to be somewhat funny and entertaining. You can’t 
just give orders. That seems kind of dry. So what’s your opinion on how to 
interlace comedy?
Let me just ask a question. Have I been giving orders? Is there anything 
funny about what I’ve been doing here today?
Yes.
Yeah. I use a lot of self-deprecating humor when I do a stage show. I go out 
there and I command and I have a lot of fun, but I get to the point where I 
let people just start screwing with me. That’s why I send people out into the 
audience and they start yelling at me and screaming at me and telling me 
I’m no good. They say things like, oh you got hands like a woman. Look at 
you. Why don’t you cut your hair, you old hippie. You suck! The audience 
loves it. I don’t care. I like it and I think that it endears you to the audience 
too because, there again, I’m just a human. 
I come out there and I’m being the hypnotist, but at some point its like, I let 
them beat the hell out of me. I like that. I get a kick out of it. If you have a 
fear of people making fun of you, do not go into this business.
Laughter
Enjoy it because they will. Just take it with a grain of salt. Look at me. I’m a 
short guy and sometimes my hair was long, now it’s short again – some of 
you think it’s long. You don’t think it’s short? Well, you’ve seen me with long 
hair. You’re the man. My hair was down to here before I cut it, guys. So I’ve 
cut my hair to comply with society. 
I actually cut it all off almost and I was like, wow, I couldn’t do it because it 
wasn’t me. It was not me. So, whether it’s your hair or your appearance, 
you’ve got to find your own style. 
So I’ll talk about style for a few minutes because we’re almost out of time. 
When you’re doing your style, find a style that is uniquely you. Don’t try to 
be anybody else. Be yourself. Be your most unique, comfortable self. That’s 
all I can say about that. Be your own unique, comfortable human being self. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
28
                                
It doesn’t mean to look like a slob because you want to look good out there, 
but be yourself. 
Dress up nice. Look cool. Look nice. Look sharp. Stand out from the rest of 
the people in the room. They’re coming to see you because you’re a 
hypnotist, because you’re an entertainer, you’re a performer and you’re 
unique in your approach. So develop those skills. Look at other entertainers 
and other performers. Look at what they do, how they dress, how they act, 
how they think, how they talk, how they smell or whatever it is you need to 
do, and begin to take that on. 
The best way to become like somebody else is how? Oh my God. Don’t we 
have people in here that know NLP?
Model.
Model. Thank you. Yes. The best way to become successful is to model 
somebody else who’s already doing it. Find somebody who’s doing what 
you want to do. Check it out. Find out what they’re doing and be like them.
With that said, we will see you after the break, with Mr. Igor. Give him a 
round of applause. He’s back. 
Applause
Student:
Spencer:
[
]

