© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
1
                                 
DVD 10 – The 7 Critical Fazes Every Stage Hypnosis Show
Must Go Through To Be a Sensational Success
Practice Warm Ups
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Welcome back, guys. How are you guys doing?
Great.
I’m not so convinced. How are you guys doing?
Great!
Excellent. Did you enjoy the last session?
Yes.
Did you learn a lot from it?
Yes.
Would you like to do it?
Yes?
Yes, No, Maybe. What is this? Do you want to do the same thing?
Yes!
What I want to do in this session here is to go step-by-step through the 
same thing you saw. Why? Because you’ve got the current experience for 
the field work to go with it. It does not mean that you have to be stuck with 
the same routines and just do that for the rest of your life. 
These are just training wheels to get used to the process of selecting things 
and going things and so on. Then what we’ll do from there, we’re start 
building into it so you can start finding your own routines. You can still have 
other routines and you can just mix and match, depending on the venue, 
the people you’re with and just what you feeling like doing as well. 
My aim is that by the end of today, you can pick up any book of stage 
hypnosis, any DVD on stage hypnosis, watch it and just go, I can do that, 
no problem. I can do it even better than that. Or better still, you’ll watch a 
TV show or a comedian like Spence does. You watch something and it 
inspires you and you go, you know what, you could have a fun dynamic
going on here. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
2
                                 
Maybe you see two kids fighting on a bus and you go, that would be 
awesome to recreate on a stage because it’s hysterical. So now life starts 
inspiring you. But before you can get there, you need to have some 
experience of actually doing this stuff, which is what right now is all about. 
Are you guys good with that?
Yes!
Thank you. Whew. So go ahead and break back up into your groups – the 
13 groups from before. As soon as you’re sitting down, face the front again, 
which tells me that we’re ready to start beginning the whole cycle. Off you 
go.
So here’s what we’re going to do. We’re going to be, basically, recreating 
the same experience you had up here a moment ago, but we’re going to be 
doing a dry run just to get the feel for doing the skits and so on. To make 
life easy, we’re going to pretend you’ve done the whole intro stuff, the stuff 
you did earlier today. 
So now you’ve basically, done the induction and you’re ready to roll. So 
Step 1, this is going to be the Warm-up Phase. I want you to set a scene. 
What is the scene that Spencer set? A beach, right? How can you set a 
scene, given the fact that you’re going to have about one minute to do this 
whole thing, including a skit?
Here’s a simple way. We’re going to take a trip to the beach. Are you 
ready? Is that setting the scene? It doesn’t take very long, does it? You 
don’t need to add, the cool waves washing away and the sun is shining. 
That’s a different context. If you want to do that, you do that during the 
induction, but you don’t do this now. 
1. Set the scene 
We want a beach. What was the second thing Spencer did? Any ideas? 
Anyone remember?
2. Seatbelts
Did you see how Spencer built the safety parameters into the skit? We’re 
going to the beach so you’ll get in the car, you better buckle up. Now you 
can just add a safety suggestion saying, every time you sit in that chair, 
you’ll be safely strapped in. You don’t leave the chair unless asked to move. 
Students:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
3
                                 
So you’re making it as a side comment in the scene setting. The audience 
won’t really know what’s going on, but of course, your panel, your 
volunteers will be responding to that and you create a bit of safety, while 
still creating the atmosphere that you want for the scene. 
What was the third thing he did?
We smoked dope.
You smoked dope. Okay folks, we’re going to have a great time now. Oh 
yeah.
Give them a choice.
Exactly. 
3. You give them a choice. 
In the skit that you’re going to do, you can give them a choice between 
getting drunk and getting stoned, just give them the whole experience. 
You’re on a beach, there’s a fire being lit, people are having a great time. 
Hey, have a drink and look there’s a joint; do you want to have a joint? Just 
take a toke. Enjoy it. So you‘re going to spend one minute getting them 
drunk or stoned, and that’s it.
Now to be a little bit more hypnotic about the whole thing, you have a group 
of five people, apart from you guys. Actually, we might be Debbie in with 
you guys just so you have six as well, and you can play it that way. 
So, you have a group of five people that are going to be your volunteers, 
just like Spencer had here. So I want you to do an instant induction on each 
one of them. That should hopefully take 10 seconds for the whole lot. 
Whack them in. Then, as soon as you put them into an induction, set the 
scene, set the safety parameters, get them drunk or stoned and start 
playing up the whole effect so they’ll start acting it out.
You only have one minute to do the whole thing, so you better get your 
skates on and really get these guys into what you’re doing. There’s only 
one thing I’ll add to this. 
If there’s a volunteer who’s not responding as fully as you’d like them to, tap 
them on the shoulder, wake them up and put them back in trance. Do it 
again, so you’re fractionating two or three times, and then reset exactly the 
same scene again if you have time to do that in that one minute segment. 
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
4
                                 
So now we’re walking pretty quickly, aren’t we? Rest assured you don’t 
have to do the whole fractionation, that’s just extra if you feel like it. This is 
the only thing we want to do. Is that easy?
Yes.
All right, folks. Where’s my watch? Here it is. Get yourself ready hypnotists. 
Oh, actually, do you know what? Seeing as we’ve just moved groups 
around a little bit, please redo numbers. Whoever just joined the group as 
the last number in the sequence, just make sure that everyone knows what 
numbers you guys are, just tell each other your number. 
Just to make this absolutely clear, we’ll pretend that we have, for the 
moment, no audience. They’re going to be behind you somewhere. So the 
people in your group are now the volunteers for your show. Does that make 
sense?
You’re not going to go through any selection process or anything like that
that’s all done now. You’ve even done the induction or you might do a quick 
induction now just to set the scene. You’re going straight into where we left 
off the last time you and I were working together. Does that make sense 
now?
So we’re going to have no audience, just the panel and that’s the only 
people you’re working with. You’ll have 60 seconds to get this whole thing 
done. Hypnotist No. 1, please be ready. Everyone else please be seated.
Your time starts now, off you go.
Give yourself a round of applause, folks.
Applause
You can do better than that. Come on.
Applause
Stay in your groups. How do you feel? 
Drunk.
I’m the world’s most wasted hypnotist. Sleep! 
Okay, settle down. There’s a question here. 
Students:
Igor:
[
]
[
]
Students:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
5
                                 
Quick Exercise Demo
Student:
Igor:
We seem to be a little bit confused. Were we supposed to do an induction 
first and then go to the beach or just assuming that the induction’s already 
been done?
You’re going to do the instant induction you’re not going to do a full two- or 
three-minute induction. Just do everyone an instant 1-2-3-4-5, if I can 
demonstrate for a moment.
Hi, how are you doing? Sleep! All the way down deeper, deeper. 
Relax. That’s right. 
Sleep! All the way. Deeper and deeper. 
Sleep! All the way. Deeper and deeper.
Hi. Sleep! All the way. That’s right. Good.
How are you doing? Sleep! All the way. Deeper and deeper. Good.
You, step aside. Sleep! All the way. 
How are you doing? Ready? Sleep! All the way. Deeper and deeper. 
Now I have them pretty much there. All I’m going to do now is tell them 
we’re ready to go to the beach. 
While we’re going to the beach, put your belts on. That’s right, 
seatbelts on. We’re going to have a nice little trip to the beach. 
Ready for this- 1-2-3- wide awake. 
Ha ha. No more beach. It doesn’t take very long. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
6
                                 
How To Make Transitions
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Arthur:
Igor:
Are you all good with this?
Yes.
We’re going to do the same thing again. This time, we’ll start with the same 
process instant induction. Have everyone lying in their chair. It will take you 
probably about 10 seconds to do the whole row. So you’ll have another 50 
seconds to do a bit of a skit with these guys. 
What we’re going to do now is do two skits back to back, so you get the feel 
for transitioning between warm-up routines. The two skits we’re going to 
use, again, you’ve seen them up here already are:
1. The Big Bandstand where they’re all playing instruments.
2. The Horse Races and you can encourage them to whip their horses, 
kiss their horses, hug them, go faster and make a race out it. So a 
day at the races.
We will be playing the music for you. We’ll switch the music for you. When 
the music switches, you switch scenes. Does that make sense? Does 
everyone understand what they’re doing? Go ahead?
Spencer had them stand up with their instruments. Do you want us to do 
that?
No, keep them in their seats for now, just so you get used to this whole 
process. We’ll do standing skits afterwards so you get used to maneuvering 
people when they’re standing separately. It just keeps life a lot easier for 
you at this point where you just want to make it nice and easy, and then 
we’ll build up from there. 
Arthur has a question first. Go ahead, Arthur.
Does the music have to be so loud it’s hard to hear the hypnotist?
To some extent, we have to turn it up; otherwise, everyone in the room 
won’t hear it. Its part of what you have to deal with in a stage show. The 
bonus of a stage show is that you’ll have a microphone. Here, you’ll have to 
just get in close and just project, so make sure that you get in close.
If someone’s not responding, just get in closer and make sure that they 
hear you, so you’re playing with the group. It will happen for real as well. 
You’ll have people over here, you’ll say something and people will miss it. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
7
                                 
So you’ll have to come back up and say, that’s right, you are Superman. 
Stand up now and be loud and proud, or whatever. 
This just gets you used to the stage a little more. There’s one promise I’ll 
make you guys. There’s one promise I can absolutely make you guys. If 
you decide to do any kind of show, which of course, on Sunday you will, I 
can guarantee you if something can go wrong, it will. At least something will 
go wrong, so you may as well just accept it and learn how to roll with it, 
rather than trying to have the perfect show where nothing will go wrong. 
It’s better to learn how to roll with it than to try to eliminate it. You eliminate 
it as best you can, and then you roll with the rest. All good?
Can we put them in a circle?
That’s fine. You can get in a circle. It’s all good. I mean you’ll play with it 
and you’ll come up with ideas. Remember, you’re the hypnotist. It’s your 
stage. If it’s not working for you, change it. All right everyone good? 
Please let’s have Hypnotist No. 1 up and ready. Hypnotist No. 1 begin.
Student:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
8
                                 
The Main Routines
Igor:
[
]
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Give yourself a round of applause, folks.
Applause
How much fun are you guys having?
A lot!
Just think of this, guys – Come back to me. Come back to me. Just think of 
this, folks. Very soon, you’ll be getting paid to enjoy yourself like this? Isn’t 
that something? Who here wants to get paid to have this much fun? It’s 
possible. That’s all this stage hypnosis thing is about, right?
Okay, let’s take a deep breath. Calm down, calm down, calm down. Would 
it be fair to say that you’ve got a good handle on how to do an Introduction 
for the stage? Like your Introduction and the induction and all that sort of 
stuff, right, straightforward? 
Would it be fair to say you have a good handle on how to warm people up 
to be responsive as subjects, like you’ve just been doing now? Would that 
be fair to say? Yes or no? I don’t know.
Yes.
So now what I want to do is get to the main meat of your show, the main 
routines. Can you remember some of the main or the bigger routines, that 
one-on-one sort of stuff that Spencer was doing? What kind of things did he 
begin with?
Forget your name.
Forget your name. What else?
Send someone back to the audience.
Send someone back with an anchor, with a personal suggestion. What 
else?
Alien language.
Alien language and changing names. 
What we’re going to do now is play with the first three things that he was 
doing, which work quite nice as a routine on their own. We have three 
routines:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
9
                                 
1. Forget your name.
2. Change your name every time you say it. Usually changed to the 
name of someone of the opposite sex.
3. Speak in an alien language. 
You can say speak Chinese and, of course, if there are some Chinese 
people in the room at that point, they probably will. So choose another 
language, like German or something that they’re unlikely to know. At that 
point, you’re going to get more of the comics and sounds out of it, or Alien 
of course.
The key thing here is, if you’re going to give them something like the Alien 
language and you say, you’re going to speak Alien, most people have no 
idea what that means. Notice the way Spencer introduced it was to give 
them an idea of what it means – you’ll bleep, blurp and make all kinds of 
sounds that are alien or foreign to you. 
So you give them some idea of what it is. If you’re particularly good with 
weird sounds, make a few weird sounds to kind of encourage them along 
the way while you’re presenting the suggestion. 
So this is what we’re going to do now. We’re going to practice the transition 
from the warm-up routine you’ve just been doing into a full blown one-on-
one type skit routine, which these three things are about. This is really what 
the meat of the show is about. 
Did you guys enjoy the Bandstand? It was kind of a fun one to do. So, what 
we’ll do is we’ll start the same way, instant induction with everyone. We’ll go 
into the Bandstand for maybe about 30 or 40 seconds. Then when the 
Bandstand music stops – there will be no music for these skits here – when 
the Bandstand music stops, I want you to put them back in trance.
1. We’ve got the warm-up.
2. Then you’ll put them back in trance as they’re transitioning. 
3. Then you deepen it a little bit as well if you want, as a transitioning 
between Bandstand and some of the other stuff. 
Now whilst you’re doing the Bandstand and they’re all playing drums and 
the music and all the rest of it, you choose who you think is going to be fun 
to work with for the next section. If you choose wrong, it doesn’t matter. You 
can always change it halfway through. After all, this is your show.
So just choose someone who you want to get to forget their name. You 
have a couple of choices here. You can choose three people: one to forget 
their name; one to change their name; one to speak Alien. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
10
                                 
Or you can have one person forget their name first, and then follow it up by 
saying, oh, now you can have someone else’s name. In other words, you 
change your name every time. For a guy, it will be a girl’s name; or for a 
girl, it will be a guy’s name.
It’s entirely up to you what you do. You’re going to use three people or just 
two, and escalate the actual suggestions. Whichever way you want to play 
it is fine with me. The only thing you’re going to do is:
1. Induction
2. Bandstand trance
3. Skits or routines in silence 
Is that easy to do? Yes?
Yes.
Do you want a quick demo of this?
Yes.
All right. Can I have five volunteers up on the stage? Or actually just three 
will do. Three volunteers on the stage, please quickly. One more. Thank 
you very much. Have a seat here, here and here. Have a seat. Can I 
borrow your glasses? There you go. Very good. 
Okay, everyone just look at me.
And sleep! All the way. That’s it. 
And sleep! All the way. That’s right. All the way. 
And sleep! All the way. Deeper and deeper and deeper. Very good.
Everyone, we’re going to go and watch a great show, the Bandstand. 
In fact, you are the show. You’re going to enjoy yourselves so much. 
You’re going to show off all your talent, your favorite friends, your 
favorite movie stars and the audience. The better you play and the 
louder you play, the more they will love you. 
Are you ready? Pick up your instrument. And play away. Okay, make 
sure that you are the star performer here. The louder you play and
the better you play, the more they will watch you, the more they will 
love you.
Everyone else, clap along. 
Applause
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
11
                                 
This is for you. Stand up and really go for it. This is your applause. 
That’s it. Go for it. There you go. 
Go crazy, guys. The louder you clap, the more they’ll go. 
Applause
And stop. 
Everyone sit back down. Sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, all the way. Very 
good. So, speaking to you right now, in a moment, when I touch your 
shoulder, in a moment I’m going to wake you guys up and you’re 
going to find the strangest thing.
Whenever I ask your name, you simply won’t know. You will 
remember everything else about your life. You will remember 
everything else about the show. It’s just simply when I ask your 
name it’s escaped your mind. You don’t know what it is. It’s the 
strangest thing. It will be kind of funny to you in some ways. 
I’m going to touch you on the shoulder right now. Every time you 
speak, you’ll speak in an Alien tongue. You can understand me just 
fine, but you’ll be speaking in an Alien voice. There will be all kinds of 
bleeps and blurps and all kinds of strange sounds that no one else 
can understand but make perfect sense to you, nod your head if you 
understand– very good– 1-2-3 wide awake. 
So how are you guys doing?
Good.
Say again?
Biddle beep.
Interesting. What’s your name?
Hi.
Huh?
Hi.
Okay. Have you met Hi?
No.
[
]
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
12
                                 
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Scott:
Igor:
Scott:
Igor:
Scott:
Igor:
Scott:
Igor:
Scott:
[
]
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
You haven’t met Hi yet? Hi, would you say hello to him.
Biddle beep.
What your name?
Scott.
It’s Scott?
Yes.
Sleep! Deeper, deeper, deeper still, that’s right. Very good. 
And can I have your name? Sleep! Deeper, deeper, deeper still.
Okay, every time that I ask your name, you’ll have a girl’s name. 
Each time I ask you though, the girl’s name will change. It will be 
different each time that you do this. Nod your head if you 
understand. Very good. One two three wide awake.
Hi, what’s your name?
Sandra.
Sandra? Okay. Were you always called Sandra?
No.
No? What did you start with?
Silence
Have you met Doug yet?
Yes.
Yes? You may as well introduce yourself again just in case in he 
forgot who you are.
Biddle beep.
Is that easy? 
Everyone, sleep! Sleep! Sleep! All suggestions are removed now. 
You’ll have a fantastic time, especially when you go out there and be 
a hypnotist. You’re going to have such a great time. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
13
                                 
In fact, you’ll have a better time than your subjects, which means 
they’ll be infected by your sense of humor, by your life and what 
you’re doing. You might even find yourself inventing skits on the fly 
just because they’re fun. 
Nod your head if you understand. Okay, all other suggestions, apart 
from the fact that you are going to have the best time ever as you do 
the show. 1-2-3, wide awake ready to rejoin the audience.
Give them a round of applause.
Applause
Thank you very much.
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
14
                                 
Practice Your Routines
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Okay, folks. Is that easy? You’ll have two minutes. The first minute will be 
the Intro stuff and the Big Band. Then when the music cuts, you’ll get to 
play with the audience a little bit with three skits, in any way you want to. 
Then we’ll come back and we’ll just switch around until everyone’s done 
that. Any questions? 
Number 1, please get ready. Two minutes each, so it will be roughly just 
under a minute for the first Bandstand, and then you’ll have about a minute 
or so for the second bit. 
Hypnotists, when you finish your show, when you’ve had time to switch 
hypnotists, make sure you put your volunteers to sleep first. Then bring 
them back with a clear suggestion. So you always have that routine of 
putting them in trance, clearing suggestion and finishing up.
Does that make sense to everyone?
Yes.
So when you finish your skits, at the end, you put them to sleep, clear the 
suggestion and then hand off to the next hypnotist. Okay, folks. Are we 
ready? Okay, number three begin.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
15
                                 
Invent A Routine
Igor:
[
]
All right, folks. Can you guys just come around so you can see this? You 
can leave your chairs there because you’re coming back to them. Just bring 
yourselves over here to see this. Bring your partners out of trance, folks. 
This is not hypnotherapy. Just 1-2-3, wide awake, will do. 1-2-3, wide 
awake, will do. There you go. Just bring them back. We’re not doing 
hypnotherapy here, folks. This is a show. It doesn’t take very long. 
All right, first, how much fun are you guys having?
Applause
Who here is starting to feel like a genuine stage hypnotist? Are you feeling 
it? Good.
So I thought it would be fun before the break to do one more cycle like this, 
but it starts with answering one of the questions asked earlier on. Just start 
spurring your creativity. What I want you to do is to surprise yourself. Here’s 
what I mean.
You’re going to be the hypnotist. You’re going to start with Bandstand 
again, just because you’re used to it. We’re going to do that only for 30 
seconds, just to kind of give you a little bit of thinking time, observation time, 
just feel-good time. 
As soon as the music switches, I want you to invent a routine. Just start 
with anything. It’s not as tough as it sounds. You can choose something you 
already saw someone do, something you’ve seen Spencer do up here or 
something you’ve always wanted to try. I don’t care what it is. It can even 
be a repeat of what we just did now. 
What I want to give you an opportunity of doing is watching people doing 
one of their group routines and saying, you know that person, yeah, that 
person’s digging it. I feel like I’m going to do something like this with them. 
Does that make sense to you guys?
You’re only going to have a minute and half, so 30 seconds for the warm-
up, and like a minute or so to start playing with the routine. Whether it works 
or it doesn’t, I don’t really care. It doesn’t really matter. What matters is that 
you start looking for the opportunities, rather than trying to script it out hard 
lined. 
Does that make sense to everyone? Any questions? This time, make sure 
you’re really observing all your subjects, just to see which one you want to 
play with, what comes to mind that fits that person as you see them 
performing. There will always be one of them; maybe there will be two. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
16
                                 
Make sense? Easy. One question over here…
Can you repeat what we’re supposed to do?
Okay, just to repeat what we’re supposed to do. You’re going to do exactly 
what you did then. 
1. Instant inductions. Sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep.
2. The Big Band – 30 seconds.
3. When the music changes, you get to invent, make up a new routine. 
It can be something you’ve seen, something you’ve heard about, something 
you always wanted to try or something that no one has seen on this planet 
before you came along. I really don’t care what it is. 
If you’re stuck, do you know what to do? One of these things. So, you’re 
never stuck. The point is you’ll always have something to pull out of your 
back pocket when you need it. 
Does that make sense to everyone? Yes? Excellent! All right. Get back in 
your groups. Number 1, please get ready. Okay, number 1, begin.
Student:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
17
                                 
Run A Smooth Show
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Are all the groups complete, more or less? For some of the people, like half 
their brain’s shut off, but that’s all right. How are you guys keeping up? 
Good.
So we’re on one of the last two sessions, so just keep going, guys. This is a 
boot camp. Dig deep. Dig deep now. Come on, deeper and deeper.
Notice how you’re starting to perform like a stage hypnotist. It’s a lot of fun 
once you get into it, right? You’ll learn as you start doing it that more of the 
energy comes from your volunteers than from you because otherwise you’d 
burn out after an hour’s show. That will come with time, so don’t concern 
yourself about that element too much just yet.
What I want to cover a little bit are the dynamics in terms of how I would 
tend to sequence things, just to make it a little easier. Now remember, as 
Spencer said, if you have the right context, the right subjects and the right 
situation, you can pretty much do anything straight off the bat. It’s no big 
deal. 
What we’re trying to do here is create a solid foundation, so you have 
everything lined up in such a way that you get the best possible outcome, 
no matter what group you have in front of you. Does that make sense?
If that’s your starting point, then everything after that is just a variation of it.
You can drop something or move some things, but you’re doing it on 
purpose and you know how to fix it if things don’t quite go right. Does that 
make sense, everyone?
We normally start with:
1. The self-intro.
2. The intro to your show.
3. Calling up volunteers.
4. Doing a little suggestion test with the volunteers.
5. More volunteers.
6. A little induction to have the whole ritual.
7. Plug in exactly what you did a moment ago.
Do you see how the whole thing becomes a nice, rich show-type 
environment? Here’s something that I’d like you to keep in mind. In terms of 
how you select your routines, when you’re warming people up, the first 
thing you’re going to look for, is physical routines, group routines and 
physical group routines.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
18
                                 
Any ideas why? Why would you want to have physical group routines?
Physical suggestions are easy and get group compliance.
That’s part of the reason, but not the main one. 
You want people to move because that’s what your show’s all about.
Exactly. So he’s saying you want people to move because that’s what your 
show is all about. Essentially, what you’re looking for is your warm-up 
routines first, get people moving so that they realize this is a demonstration. 
They can have the best experience inside their head, but if no one sees it –
I mean who here would like to see a show where for 19 minutes you see 
this?
I might be having a great time in here, but you’re going, what the hell is 
this? Is this like modern art or something? So you’re looking for the most 
responsive subject, and they may not necessarily be the best subject or the 
deepest subject or anything like that. You’re looking for the most responsive 
subjects because this is a show. 
You can also encourage people to get more emotion in because the more 
they get physically involved, the more they kind of lose themselves in the 
experience as well. 
Of course, the other thing you’re looking for is you’re already starting to 
choose which people do I want to use next when I start doing the one-on-
one stuff? You’re beginning to notice this guy here is a little bit into it. This 
other guy’s is really into it. Which one do you use? You want physical group 
routines, which gives you a chance to check out who you’re going to be 
using next. 
The next thing you’re looking for are mental routines. They can be 
emotional routines – changing their emotions – or having experiences like 
forgetting a name or something like that, or amnesia or some mental 
experience.
What you’re doing here is, again, all the simple things you’re doing – with 
like name change or forgetting name or forgetting a number – you’re taking 
a low level risk to again find out which ones are responding well so you can, 
for example, choose someone to send into the audience later on to do 
crazy stuff. 
For example, you may have noticed when Steve was up here, he didn’t 
forget his name. So you have two choices. You can do what I did, which 
was just put him in trance and work with someone else. No big deal. 
Everyone will forget that by the end of the show. Or you fractionate him. 
You put him in, put him out, put him in, put him out and try again. 
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
19
                                 
Depending on how much time you have and, honestly, how much effort you 
want to put into it. 
Would I then choose someone like Scott straightaway to go in for a post-
hypnotic suggestion and go into the audience to do something? Not at that 
point. Now I might after I fractionated him and got success with a simple 
mental routine, like name amnesia, number amnesia, changing name or 
something like that. 
I’m looking to see if he’s not only responding physically, but also does he 
have the mental experience as well because now I have the material to do 
a good show, don’t I? See how that works? 
Once you’ve chosen your physically responsive subjects, once you have 
chosen your mentally responsive subjects, pretty much you’re open to 
anything. I mean you saw the heckler routine and the Sheriff. You can build 
that up. I’ve seen things like the Sheriff build up into a 20-minute routine, 
which was hysterical just because they really milked it. 
That only works if you’ve been watching out for the ones that are, physically 
responsive and going to have their own experience as well. So there’s this 
little, I guess, escalation of hypnotic things, experiences. 
By the way, I’m not saying that someone who’s got a mental experience is 
deeper in trance than someone who’s got a physical experience. I’m not. 
These are purely to do with shows. These are just useful things to do in a 
show. That’s all. Are we good?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
20
                                 
Your 7-Step Show
So now we want to put everything together so you have an experience of 
doing that. I want to take five minutes and I want you back in your groups 
again. You’re going to have five minutes from start to finish. We’re going to 
be sequencing to the music for all of you. I want you to really make an effort 
to stick to the music, stick to your timings, because when the five minutes 
are up, I want you to have gone through the whole segment of what you’re 
doing. 
So what is it you’re going to be doing?
1. You’re going to start with an Intro. 
You’re going to be in The Green Room, and as soon as the general 
background music starts, you’re going to be doing your Intro. That will last 
for a few, shall we say, for like 10 seconds or so. Then the volume will go 
up on that normal Intro kind of music, that sort of background music, which 
is, basically, your calling for volunteers.
2. Call for volunteers.
You’ll be given about 30 seconds of that, so you’re now coming close to the 
minute mark. At that point, the music will go back down again to a lower 
level.
3. Do your tests and calling for more volunteers.
This time, just to keep it easy. When you do your first call for volunteers, 
maybe one or two people will come up. No more than that. When you do 
your tests with the three people that are left over, then of course the rest will 
come up, and you’ll again work with five subjects, just to kind of play with 
the dynamic a little bit. 
It doesn’t mean you have to use all five subjects on your stage, but you’ll be 
playing with all five subjects, and you’ll pretend there’s an audience behind 
you. The rest of the room is your audience. 
Does all this make sense so far? It’s what you did earlier today. So let’s just 
get the timings on this. You’ll have a minute for this and a minute for that. 
We’re now into minute 2. 
4. Do an induction.
Now we’re going to do an induction. I want you to do a group induction. You 
can do the whole sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep. That’s fine. There’s no 
problem with that, but I want you to add maybe 30 seconds or 40 seconds 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
21
                                 
of maybe taking them on a beach trip or just progressive relaxation, 
whatever you want to do. 
The point is the audience has come here to see you do this magical, 
mystical experience. Unless you specifically structure your show so there is 
no induction – which some people have done as a gimmick – most people 
expect to see it. It’s just part of the mystery of the show. So you may as well 
give them that mystery. 
So we’re now at 2 ½ to 3 minutes. Actually, you know what? We’ll give you 
30 seconds for this because you’ll need more time for the actual show 
element. 
Let me emphasize why I’m pushing you with these timings. Tomorrow, we’ll 
be going into this in much more detail, and we’ll actually start constructing 
your shows. On Sunday, you will be doing a 9-minute show. Right now, 
you’ll be doing a dry run of a set piece of a 5-minute show, but already see 
how close those timings get. 
If you let the timing slip in here, well, on your show, you may not have a 
chance to complete all the big dramatic stuff, which means your promo tape 
won’t be anywhere near as exciting as you’d like it to be. So I’m pushing 
you just so that you can actually a great 9-minute show with all the bells 
and whistles in place. 
The irony is, come Sunday, it will be easier. Any guesses why? Well, 
because you’ve practiced and it’s easy, but the big reason is the fact that 
here you’ve got to work with whoever is in your group. On Sunday, you’ll 
have a whole audience, and you get to select who the heck you want. You 
can have anyone you want. So at that point, you’ll actually have to work a 
lot less because they’ll be doing most of the work for you. 
So is everyone good for the first 2 ½ minutes? All right. We’re going to cycle 
through these very quickly. We’re going to do two warm-up routines: the 
drunk/stoned one for about 30 seconds and then we’ll move straight into the 
Big Band for about 30 seconds again. 
So again, you’re just really ripping people through these experiences as 
quickly as possible.
On Sunday, you get to choose whether you want to do one warm-up, two 
warm-ups or three warm-ups. You get to choose. You get to choose 
however you want to use your time up. That’s entirely your choice. For now, 
we’re pushing you through these things so you’re familiar with every 
segment of a show. 
Make sense? Yes?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
22
                                 
Students:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
[
]
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Yes.
Did you have a question? Can I have a microphone over here, please?
With the testing volunteers and the induction, that’s a group induction, and 
after you have the volunteer up there, you do the test with them 
demonstrating to the rest of the audience what to do, and you bring up 
more volunteers…
Actually you’ll do the test with the audience. This test here is primarily for 
the audience so you can get more people from the audience to come up on 
stage.
And you use the volunteer to demonstrate to the audience what they’re 
going to do?
No. Let’s say you’re my audience. Can I just borrow you? You’ll be up here 
as one of my volunteers, just to set the dynamic. So my first call for 
volunteers gets me one solitary person. I’m going, oh man, this better be a 
good subject or I’m really screwed on this show.
So now what I’m going to do is, okay, I need more volunteers. Everyone, 
please stand up with your hands out like this. Now you can join along or you 
might even make a show of it. Say, do what Arthur does. Okay? 
Sit down. Thank you. Give him a round of applause for that.
Applause
So the point here, the test – folks, let’s have your attention. This is a good 
question. The point of the test here is you’re doing it with the audience 
because whoever passes the test in the audience, you’ll say – and Spencer 
actually gave you the line for this – if your hands are stuck together and you 
want to have some fun, come on up and join the show, or something like 
that.
And so you wouldn’t use that suggestibility test as an induction, or could 
you? 
You can. Absolutely. You can do anything you want.
So you just tell them to relax, or you could do a very rapid…
For the induction here just do something simple, like what you Spencer 
doing. Just do the beach induction. It will fit into the other thing. Just give 
them soothing sounds, soothing imagery, soothing visualizations. Just 
make a soothing experience for them.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
23
                                 
Why? Because it’s a show as much for them watching as it is for these 
people experiencing it. As far as you’re concerned, all you have to do is go, 
sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, and you’re really into it at that point, but 
they don’t know that. So you can actually do that. You can actually have 
your volunteers up, put them all in trance – sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep, sleep 
– and they’ll all go, oh that’s crazy! 
Remember, if you need an induction, you’ll first turn to your audience and 
say okay folks, we’re about to do something really important here. I’m going 
to ask you to be quiet for the next few moments so I can put these people in 
trance and make sure that they give you a great show. As soon as this is 
done, you can clap, stomp your feet and applaud as much as you want. For 
right now, let’s give them a chance to actually get into the experience fully. 
So it makes it even more mysterious for the audience because now they 
have to do something. Like, oh, be very quiet. 
Does that answer your question?
Yes. Thank you. 
Very good. So are we all good until the first warm-up routine? Yes?
Yes.
Then we’ll just go right back. So up until this point, we’ve been doing the 
physical routines. 
Now we’re going to do our first mental routines, which could be:
1. Forget something.
2. Name change.
3. Alien language.
That will be another minute. So now we’re onto 4 ½ minutes. Your last 30 
seconds is the end of the show. It gives you a little bit of slush time, so if 
you’re running a little long on some of these things you can catch up a little 
bit at the end there. But essentially, I want you to make sure that at the end 
of the show, you put them all back in trance, you clear all suggestions and 
then wake them back up, give them a big thank you and send them back 
out to the audience. Does that make sense?
So now you’re walking through an entire show in a small format. Then we’ll 
start talking about more routines you can use so that you can have some 
more choices on the actual day. Does that work for you?
Yes.
Student:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
24
                                 
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Scott:
Are you happy with this?
Yes.
Any questions? Then we’ll come on down here as well.
Igor, my question is how will we know that our show is about to finish? That 
was a problem last time.
On Sunday or now?
No, now. Will you give us a, 15 seconds left?
All this happens with music. So at this stage, you’ll have the general horse 
race music. At it will be at a low level. When the level goes up, in other 
words it becomes louder, that will be your call for volunteers. 
As soon as the level drops again, it gives you enough quiet to do the test 
with the audience. When the music switches – and I’ll talk about this in a 
minute with Matt to be sure we’ve got the right music – the music will switch 
to the induction music. So when the music switches, you should be in the 
induction phase.
When the music switches again, you’ll be in the drunk/stoned phase. When 
it switches again, you’ll be in the Bandstand phase. When it goes back to 
the regular background music, you’re in this phase here. Yeah, we’ll switch 
it again. I’ll find a track for you guys. 
So when the music switches a final time and it’s completely different music 
that you won’t have heard until this point that will be your cue that you 
better start wrapping things up. 
Does that make sense? Yes? So do listen to the music. Do not skip ahead. 
I know you guys have a group of five. Please stay to these times as well. 
It’s in your interest because otherwise, you’ll have half a show on the day, 
and I’m guess you don’t want that, right?
There’s a question here first, and then we’ll pass it over here.
It was the same question. Musical cues.
Okay, fine. So let’s give Scott a go.
For point number 6, are we doing one mental routine or more than one?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
25
                                 
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
As many as you want. More importantly, as many as you can fit in and if
you can do all three, by all means, do so. If you can only do one, then milk 
it. It’s entirely up to you. This is where you get to start taking control of a 
little bit of the session. 
Is this clear as a process? One last question over here.
I just wanted to clarify if that Intro is also the Introduction of hypnosis as 
well?
Exactly, the whole thing. So you are now pretending that you’re off stage. 
Someone just said, the amazing hypnotist is ready. You’re going to come 
on stage and go, hi. So you’re starting the whole show from scratch. You 
say hi, my name is… This is hypnosis. This is my show come on up, etc. 
So why don’t we take a minute to organize yourselves back in groups. So 
you guys go over here, and get Number 1 ready to start rolling. I’m going to 
cue up the music for you guys. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
26
                                 
Exercises
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
[
]
Students:
Igor:
All the hypnotists into the Green Room, please. You’re off stage. Audience,
please sit down. Oh, I see what you mean, audience stay standing up. 
Are you ready with the music in the back there? Hypnotist Number 1, 
please give me a thumbs up if you’re ready to go. All right, let’s begin.
How are you doing?
Great.
Was that fun?
Yes.
All right, let me try that again. Folks, was that fun?
Yes!
Give yourself a round of applause. You deserve it.
Applause
Do you want to do more of this?
Yes.
Yes maybe? No? All right, we’re having a break right now. So I think we’ve 
run five minutes over on this little session, but it was worth doing just for the 
fun of it. So let’s be back here – it’s now 4:50. Let’s be back here by 5:00, 
and we’ll be starting at 5:05 on the dot. All right? 
So just take care of whatever natural breaks you need to. So be back here 
at 5:00. We’re starting at 5:05 on the dot. So off you go. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
27
                                 
Skit Music
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
So the second white piece of paper, the one you actually have on your chair 
is this. It’s entitled, Music for Skits. What we’re going to be doing is, you 
may have noticed we’ve been playing some music here whilst you’re doing 
here little mini shows today, right? 
We have that music available for you, and each room that we go into on 
Sunday for the shows will have an iPod and these 24 tracks on it. So you 
should recognize a lot of these skits or routines, because you’ve seen them,
done them or talked about them with Spencer. 
Tomorrow, we’ll talk more about this stuff. Tomorrow, you’re going to 
actually start choosing the skits you’ll want to use for your own show, and 
you can choose anything on these things if you want music. If you don’t 
care about music, you can choose anything at all as well. Does that make 
sense? It’s just this is the music you’ll be able to use on the actual show 
and unfortunately, nothing else. I’ll explain why in a moment. 
Could you tell us now please?
Okay, sure. The main reason has to do with copyrights. In order to be able 
to use music and a formal DVD and put that onto your promo tape, you 
have to pay an exorbitant fees on copyrights and so on, and you’ll have to 
pay a fee every time it gets reprinted and stuff like that. It’s just a nightmare. 
So we’ve got royalty-free music for that. That just takes the nightmare 
totally away.
In terms of doing your shows, each country is a little different, so you have 
to check into the rules. As a rule, each country has a copyrights or a 
musical rights association, where people who want to play music pay 
money, and they split it up with some complex formula so the actual artists 
get the money for whatever is being played and used.
Now as a rule, technically, as a hypnotist, when you’re using this music, it 
should be licensed by this organization to be using the various tracks and 
so on. In practice, no hypnotist I know of ever does that. The few that have 
actually approached these musical rights associations have just been told
to go away. This is so insignificant for us it’s not worth our time. Just go 
away and use it anyway. 
So there’s not going to be any trouble, but legally speaking, I can’t tell you 
to do that because it’s, at least in the U.S. and a lot of other countries, that’s 
not the case. You technically have to pay some licensing fees. The best 
thing to do is check with whatever – in the U.K. it’s the PRS, the Performing 
Rights Society. The U.S. will have an equivalent. Just check with them, and 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
28
                                 
as soon as they tell you to go away and jump in the lake, then you can go, 
great. I’ve done what I can, and they ignored me. Make sense?
For the purpose of the show here, we’ve got royalty-free music, so you 
don’t have to even consider that at all. That headache’s been taken care of 
for you. 
Do have a look at these skits tonight. See which ones appeal to you. The 
only one we will not be doing is Number 21. Everyone looks at me and 
goes, all right. For obvious reasons, it’s kind of on there just so you know 
that if that’s the kind of show you want to have, well, I’m sure it will keep 
you company tonight?
The key thing here is – and I know Spencer has already talked to you about 
this a little bit, if you do want to go for more of the X-rated type shows, or 
the adult type shows, by all means, do so. Just remember two things:
1. Nothing will stigmatize you more quickly than that. 
In other words, once you start doing those kinds of shows and that’s what 
you’re known for. That’s pretty much what you’re stuck with. It’s going to be 
very difficult to get out of that mold. Versus if you have a general show, you 
have the flexibility to go into any kind of environment. So that’s one 
consideration to take into account.
2. Only ever do an adult show if it’s advertised as an adult show. 
That way, the audience becomes self-selecting. Otherwise, you’re going to 
have an absolute nightmare up on stage when you start suggesting the 
wrong kinds of things to people and they weren’t prepared or expecting it. 
You’ll have the nightmare on stage or off stage afterwards, and it’s not fair 
to your audience either. So if you’re going to go down that road, that’s the 
only way to do it. Make sure everyone actually understands ahead of time 
what they’re letting themselves into.
Honestly, personally, I don’t see the point. If you want to do that, it’s a 
personal choice. I can’t stop you. I’m just warning you about the 
consequences and, personally, I don’t see the point of it. It’s up to you what 
you do. 
So we’re all cool with the white piece of paper? Do check through it and 
start thinking about what you might find interesting. Think about how you 
might phrase it because tomorrow we’ll start putting it all together. You don’t 
have to design your show tonight. That’s not what I’m suggesting. Just kind 
of get inspired by some of these things, and imagine how you might do this. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
29
                                 
Edward:
Igor:
Edward:
Igor:
Did you say that we could hear this music somewhere? Do you have it?
Unfortunately, we can’t give you all a copy yet, just because we haven’t got 
enough. We thought we’d bring the CDs, but then everyone hasn’t got a CD 
player, so there’s no way we can get you to hear it. What we will do, 
though, if you like is tomorrow at lunch break – it will take about hour to play 
through all these songs because there’s quite a few of them and they’re like 
three minutes apiece. 
What we can do is at some point during the lunch break tomorrow, we can 
play the 24 songs in order and give you like a minute sample, so in like a 
half an hour or 20 minutes, you’ll get a sense of what they all sound like, 
and that will give you a taste of it. Would you guys like to do that?
That would be great. Thank you.
So it means your lunch break will be a bit shorter tomorrow, so be prepared 
for that. If you want to listen in, make sure you pick up a sandwich or 
something from the sandwich store, but tomorrow we can arrange that for 
you guys to have a listen. All right.
So is everyone cool with the white sheet?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
30
                                 
The Law
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Do you have any questions on this? Otherwise, I’ll just leave this and we’ll 
just get onto the other stuff. 
Yeah, one of the things that you said, me coming from Scotland and Great 
Britain, we have such a thing as the Hypnotism Act of 1952. Now I’ve just 
learned before I came out here that before I make a booking to get myself 
on stage, I’m going to have to jump through some loopholes. 
Yes, you do.
One of them being I cannot advertise myself as a hypnotist or that I’m going 
to hypnotize someone on stage…
Not necessarily. 
It must be self-hypnosis. 
Not necessarily. It depends on what you’re doing. Stage hypnosis is legal n 
the U.K. The Hypnotism Act, basically, means you have to be certified by 
the local authority in which you want to be performing a show. They have to 
say yes, you’re approved for doing a show in this area. 
So there are two ways – there’s a cheat way around it. What some people 
do is they don’t actually do a stage hypnosis show. They do a lecture on 
stage hypnosis or they do research on hypnosis, and as long as people fill 
out a form, it’s technically covered. I wouldn’t go down that road. It’s not a 
very safe road to go.
The simpler thing to do is call up your local authority, tell them you’re a 
stage hypnotist, you’ve been trained in Las Vegas and you have your 
promo and stuff like that, so you can show them that you’re good at this 
work. If they need to they can come to us for references and that you now 
want to start working in the U.K. and that you want to work in such and such 
a venue, that you’re professionally trained and that you’ve done all these 
bits and pieces. 
Tell them that you’ve done a show on the Strip in Vegas – because you will 
have done that. Then, ask what the process is that you need to go through 
to get approved or marked for approval to be allowed to do a stage show 
there.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
31
                                 
Some authorities are more hard lined, and some authorities are easier, but 
most of them you’ll get through if you can demonstrate competence. Let’s 
face it, with a promo tape, it’s very easy. Just send it to them and say, 
watch me. 
I’ve been told as well that as long as a sect is private clubs, especially 
Glasgow because Glasgow has a ban on public displays. I mean you can’t 
even do the street hypnosis. If you get caught doing street hypnosis in the 
street, you go to jail. There’s no public display of hypnosis.
I can’t comment on that. As I say, it’s been a long time since I’ve needed a 
lawyer and that didn’t do Scottish law.
That’s why I’m hoping to move over here. 
Well, actually, this is very true. As a stage hypnotist, you’re open to work 
anywhere. You can go to some of the Islands, for example, where there’s 
no regulation. You just go. You can work on a cruise ship. Again, there’s no 
regulation there. You just have to get into that sort of scene. You could 
even be booked in America and be paid to fly over and do some shows and 
have fun at the same time. So you’re not stuck within the U.K. arena. 
Although if you do want to work in the U.K. arena, I recommend that you get 
yourself licensed by the local authority you’ll be performing in. Then if you 
become a traveling hypnotist, it’s a lot easier. Once you’ve got one license, 
it gets easier and easier to get a license in other places too.
Edward:
Igor:
Edward:
Igor:

