© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
1
                                 
DVD 3 – How to Do Dramatic Hypnotic Demonstrations
And Overcome Any Shyness
Hypnotically Locked Arm
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
So how’s everyone doing?
Good.
Remember, we are here to kind of produce a little love vibe, so let’s try this 
again. How are you guys doing?
Great.
Now I like that. All right, go through the room, hypnotize three people and 
come on back. Go.
All right, guys. Are you having fun with that?
Yes.
All right, let’s just try that one again. Are you guys having fun with that?
Yes!
Whew. Now we’re feeling the love. All right, we’re going to start building the 
pace up a little bit. We’re going to do the same thing, three people, we’re 
going to be very fast and we’re going to look for speed. It’s not 
hypnotherapy. We’re not trying to build this crazy amazing experience for 
them. Just enough to be like a strong thing. You’re going to be in and out 
within 20 or 30 seconds. It’s a quick process. 
Speed is your friend, especially in a stage show. You don’t want to be 
boring people into a trance. That’s not much of a show. Choose the ones 
that are responding the best, and then do your show. That’s all you’re 
doing. You’re not here to hypnotize the whole world. That’s more like Street 
Hypnosis stuff, and we can come onto that later.
For the moment, we’re going to pick our subjects, go in quick, out quick and 
it’s done. Make sense? 
So what we’re going to do now is, again, what we did before but another 
level. So you’re going to go and find three people and zone them out 1-2-3. 
What I want you to do is then just fractionate them. So bring them in, bring 
the out. In, out, in, out three times- four times, just for the responses you’re 
getting.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
2
                                 
Once that’s happened, they’ll then have a go at you and then you find the 
next person, three people. You should no need more than, say, three 
minutes for everyone to have their chance both ways, but I’m going to be 
generous and give you five, which means the pressure’s on in terms of 
timing. We want speed. Off you go.
Is that easy? It’s a no brainer, isn’t it? Can I have a volunteer please? 
Anyone? Okay, great. Come on up. Are you ready?
Yes, I am.
Okay, just sleep, all the way. Deeper, that’s right, deeper. That’s it. 
Good, deeper still, all the way, deeper, deeper. Then when I count to 
three, eyes open, wide awake. 1-2-3 how are you feeling?
Good.
Sleep, all the way, deeper, deeper and deeper. Okay, great. Each time 
you go, the deeper you’ll go. Every time we repeat this process, you’ll go 
deeper and deeper still. What I want you to do is listen to the word sleep, 
and you’ll instantly drop in a state as deep as this or even deeper. Nod 
your head if you understand. Very good. 
Okay, eyes open. And sleep, deeper, deeper, deeper still. Very good. 
Arm out. Stiff and rigid. Stiff and rigid. Stiff like an iron bar. Feel the 
energy flowing through it like an iron bar, like cement. Locking it tight, 
licking it tight. Try and bend it and you cannot. Try and bend it. Take this 
hand and try and bend it if you can. Try it. Hard. And sleep. Relax, all the 
way down, deeper, deeper, deeper. You’re doing great. 
Eyes open, wide awake. You did an awesome job. Well done. How do 
you feel?
I feel very relaxed.
You did an amazing job with this one because now you fell from the inside 
out. Give a nice round of applause.
Applause
Do you mind staying here for a second just for the mechanics? So we’re 
doing exactly what we just did a moment ago, right? Now is it so much of a 
stretch to just add something, like put your hand out there, make it strong, 
make it stiff? Is that a difficult suggestion to present?
No.
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
[
]
Students:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
3
                                 
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
[
]
No? The words aren’t exactly going to be taxing on our brains, are they? All 
right, I want a little more enthusiasm, guys.
No!
No, I’m afraid. Don’t make me do this. Oh my God, please. All right,
remember, if nothing else the people you’re working with right now will be 
kind to you and they’ll pretend anyways. So whatever happens, you’ll be a 
success. Let’s face it we’re in a training room. So you cut your teeth on 
these sort of things, and then we’ll start introducing, shall we say, more and 
more wild scenarios so you can do it anyplace, anytime, anywhere. 
By the way, essentially what you just saw happening here, will work in 90% 
of the places you go to just like that. The minute you say, I’m a hypnotist let 
me show you something cool. That’s pretty much the standard response 
you will get not always but most of the time. Does that make sense?
At the moment we’re not really there yet, all we want is a couple of cycles of 
fractionation to actually control it and just say, put it up here. Make is 
strong, lock it tight. Whatever you want to say and then relax. It’s already 
happening, isn’t it? Do you feel that?
Yeah.
You’re going to use your language to stimulate the imagination, stimulate 
the unconscious mind to do things. So how can we stimulate it? What kind 
of things can we say?
Lock it. Isn’t that a word that just implies things? Make is strong. Feel it 
getting stronger. Like cement, like concrete, like an iron bar. Like a lug of 
wood. These are all metaphors, aren’t they, for things that don’t bend very 
well. Like your old primary school headmaster, you know, very stiff and 
rigid? 
Come on. You can do better than that. That was at least worth something. 
Laughter
Thank you. All right, but do you see where we’re going with this? It’s not for 
me to dictate to you that these are the words you must say it’s irrelevant. 
It’s the idea that you’re communicating to them, which is a stiffness or 
rigidity, of things that are stiff and rigid in our day-to-day experience. Does 
that make sense?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
4
                                 
Any questions on that, or is that easy to do? It’s easy to do, right? So go 
around, again, three people at least. I want you to do the fractionation as 
quickly as possible because we’re going to look for the stiff arm as quickly 
as possible. Make sense? Thanks, James. Off you go.
Have you guys tranced each other out? I think they’re both out. They look 
like, who’s the hypnotist? I don’t know. Am I? Are you? What’s going on 
here? Good job. How do you guys feel? 
Great.
Wasn’t that easier than you thought?
Yes.
Okay, so here’s the thing. You guys are doing great because you’re already 
putting in your own – you notice how your own unconscious mind is actually 
providing the language for you? Each one of you sounds very different, 
right? That’s what you want to have happen. I don’t want to give you a 
script because then you’ll get stuck, like what the hell did he say again? Oh 
man, was it stiff and rigid or was it rigid and stiff? Oh Christ. Meanwhile, 
they’re all going, what the hell is this about? 
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
5
                                 
Invent Your Own Induction
[
]
It doesn’t matter if you understand what you’re trying to do. So we’re going 
to have a little bit of fun with this now. What I want you to do now is I want 
you to invent, create out of nothing, an instant induction, fractionate them 
and put the hand out there and lock it up. Okay?
What do I mean by inventing? Basically, you can do anything you want. 
Remember, the cycle is you induce some kind of shock or interruption of a 
pattern of some sort. Then you just deepen when you say the word sleep 
somewhere in the beginning of that cycle. Make sense? So, pretty much 
anything can do.
Can I just borrow you a second, seeing as you’re there? 
Just look at me. Sleep, all the way. That’s it, good, deeper, deeper, 
deeper. 
Do you see a little bit of a shock going on there? Not too much. Do you hear 
the word sleep?
And deeper, that’s right.
Is that easy?
And wide awake, eyes open. Good job. Well done. Sleep! All the 
way, deeper, deeper, deeper. 
You can go on all day long like this. 
Wide awake, eyes open. Good job. This one is for real. 
Give him a round of applause.
Applause
Here’s the key. I don’t want you spending more than 10 seconds on the 
setup. So whatever it is you’re doing, whether you’re going to boink them on 
the head – please no knuckle sandwiches. That’s the wrong kind of sleep. 
Whether you’re going to boink them on the head, shake their shoulders or 
pull their arm, or if you’re going to kind of rock them back gently, whatever it 
is:
1. Make sure it’s safe. Your partner trusts you with their physical well-
being, so make sure its safe.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
6
                                 
2. You spend no more than 10 seconds setting it up so that you’re 
going straight into the meat of it, which is the fractionation and a stiff 
arm at the end of it. 
Does that make sense to you, folks? Any questions on that? 
Yeah, when you’re pulling on someone, you don’t have to be really forceful 
or anything? But you just couldn’t be real gentle, right?
We do not want force. It looks like its forceful, but it’s not. The reason it 
looks forceful is because the person is – can I just borrow you because 
you’re a big chap. Now I want you to just like tense all your muscles up for a 
second. Just tense them up. Everything. Now if I shake here, do you see 
how it doesn’t look like much because he’s absorbing all the shock because 
there’s tension and he’s fighting it. 
Now just relax. This is what all this was about. Let’s just get him to relax. 
And sleep, all the way, deeper. Good, deeper. Maintaining your own 
balance now, go in deeper. Maintain your own balance. Deeper, 
that’s right. Your legs carry your balance deeper and deeper still. 
You did a great job, as a result, of which of course, this exercise is 
going to be so easy for you that it’s unreal. 
For the rest of you, well, you missed out, didn’t you? 
Eyes open, wide awake. Good job. Well done. 
Okay, give him a nice round of applause. 
Applause
So I am not looking for any kind of physical violence because that’s going to 
get you sued and in jail, and someone’s boyfriend who you probably don’t 
want to have that kind of intimate relationship with. 
What you want to do is take care of your partner. The, shall we say, drama 
of it comes from your voice – your voice can be strong and powerful – from 
them being relaxed. Does that make sense? If you start with their body 
being physically relaxed, its must more dramatic. So that may be one of the 
clues as to whatever you invent. 
I just want you to invent something. If you’ve seen something on a stage 
that you’ve always wanted to try out or know how to do, then do that. Do 
your own version of that. If you read something in a book and you go, that 
would be kind of cool, then do that. If you just want to make something up 
off the top of your head, then do that instead.
Student:
Igor:
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
7
                                 
What I want you to do is start using these basic principles and put them all 
together into a nice little simple routine, which ends up with an arm locked, 
stiff and rigid. Make sense? Are you ready for a little bit more, or is that 
enough for now.
More.
All right. So we’re going to do one more thing now. We’re going to now 
create a contrast, which is going to amplify the likelihood that you’re going 
to get that arm stiff. In other words, you’re going to give the unconscious 
mind motivation, more reasons for locking the arm out. Does that make 
sense?
So we’re going to use this same pattern – X 
Y – to link the arm 
getting stiffer, more rigid and not being able to bend to something positive 
to them. Let’s see, maybe making hypnosis easier? Being a great 
hypnotist? Just feeling great? Wouldn’t these be useful things?
So the stiffer their arm becomes, the better you feel. The better you feel the 
more powerful you become as a hypnotist. So make that arm so stiff that 
not even you can bend it so that you can actually trust your unconscious 
mind to make you the best hypnotist in the world. 
Now make it stiff and rigid. Feel better and better.
Do you see how we’re linking motivation for the unconscious mind in with 
the actual result that we want? You don’t have to do it, but it’s a very nice 
little thing to add leverage and, of course, just make it a fun piece for them 
too. Make sense? Any questions? Go and invent. Off you go. 
Are you having fun with this?
Yes.
It’s pretty easy, isn’t it? Isn’t it weird? Who’s seen this sort of stuff done 
before by others? Who’s kind of wanted to give it a go but were a little bit 
timid? Like, oh, I don’t know about this. Now that you know, isn’t it a lot 
easier. Its like, is that all there is to it? Well, the answer is yes, but you’ve 
got to bear in mind that you know things. You’re looking for things that most 
people aren’t, so your timing changes and that’s really the crucial part. 
Do you mind sharing the story you just told me about in terms of what 
happened at lunchtime? Is that okay? I think this is just fun. Can we have a 
microphone up here, please? I mean, this is just to bear in mind that this is 
like lunchtime on the first day of training, and this is what happens quite 
regularly when people do this. Go ahead.
Students:
Igor:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
because

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
8
                                 
Student:
Linda and I decided we were going to go out and do this. So I changed my 
tag to say, Master Hypnotist. That way, I didn’t have to tell people what I 
was. They knew. 
We went to a place and Linda said to this guy who was a masseuse and he 
wasn’t doing anything, she said I’m a hypnotist and we’re taking this class, 
I can relax you and give you a couple hours’ sleep in about 10 minutes
would you like it? He goes, sure. 
She did the fractionation and did a couple of different things, and then after 
she was finished with him, he was like, wow, that’s incredible. Then I 
stepped in, and he was still pretty in much state. I did the same thing again 
to him. Fractionated him again a couple of times, told him he was going to 
be great, he was going to do the best, he was going to actually get a lot 
more customers and everything else.
Finished with him, dropped him out of it – took him out and went about my 
business. 
While we were doing it, there was another man sitting there saying, oh I 
can’t be hypnotized. I never could be hypnotized. It doesn’t matter what I try 
to do. 
I looked at him and I said you know you’re the best one because when you 
say that, I can put you in deeper and better and quicker, and it’s no big deal 
and I’ll show it to you.
So anyway, meanwhile, the masseuse who we told would do better and 
everything and he would go out and get more customers immediately got 
one. He stands there and starts working on her, looks at Linda and goes 
like this, thinking, yeah, I got it. I said to the girl, he’s the best there is. 
So long story short, this guy comes over to me who told me he had 
problems, and we put him in, put him in. I kept fractionating him. I kept 
doing whatever I was supposed to be doing. I kept doing it, kept doing it, in 
and out, in and out. Open eyes, close them. I pinched his arm and brought 
it up and showed his wife that he didn’t feel anything. Then I did it again. 
Then I told him he had insomnia and he couldn’t sleep. So I told him when 
you pinch your ear, you’ll go out and you’ll actually go to sleep. You’ll go 
deeper and you’ll feel better and better. I did it four times and the fifth time I 
did it, I just looked at him and said, okay, go ahead, just touch your thing. 
He touched it and he just fell over on me. His wife just looked at me. 
Then we got the invitation. You’re welcome to come to Puerto Rico. Here’s 
my card. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
9
                                 
Igor:
Student:
[
]
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
[
]
Of course you are.
He said we will take you wherever you want to go. 
Applause
He said we’ll set up shows, we’ll do whatever we got to do for you, but you 
are my hypnotist, and you’re coming to Puerto Rico.
Do you see what happens, guys, now when you go out there and start 
using stuff.
He had a Rolex on. I’m not quite as good as that, but I’ll get there.
We’ll build up to that one, shall we?
Okay.
The reason I want to share that with you is because this is really what 
happens when you start embracing hypnosis as a lifestyle. Use it as a force 
for good. I mean he wasn’t doing anything abusive to this person, making 
them embarrassed or anything like that. No. He’s giving them good stuff, 
good suggestions about sleep, about having the customers and being 
confident and so on, and look what happens?
This is what? Halfway through the first day? Isn’t that insane?
We had a crowd around us. 
Of course you did. It always happens. Here’s the thing to think about, guys, 
which is start doing it. How different was it out there than in here? Linda, 
how much have you done before in terms of hypnosis?
Zero.
First day, from nothing. You guys can do this. It’s just a question of going 
out there and doing it. Now I’m not going to push you. It’s up to you guys 
when and where and how because you’ll find your own time. 
When you do what we’ve been doing today there’s no difference between 
this and someone who’s being paid $2,000, $3,000 or $5,000 to stand up 
here and do a show. No difference given what you already know. So pat 
yourself on the back, there you go. 
Applause

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
10
                                 
How to Beat Shyness
Students:
So, we had a couple of people who were still nervous about the hypnosis 
skills. Who were they? Come forward. Are you still nervous? Come forward. 
Who else was nervous? Debra, come here. Where’s Debbie gone? Trying 
to hide from us Debbie? Come forward. Anyone else. Everyone else is like, 
no, I was going to be shy, but I’m starting to change my mind. You as well, 
excellent!
What I want you to do is you guys just stand – everyone make a line behind 
these guys, please. Debbie, come forward. Form a line behind Debra, 
Karen and, is it Matt? Just form a line behind them, folks. Just roughly 
equal. Debbie, just separate yourself because you have separate lines. You 
have one line and he has one line. Don’t get greedy now. Don’t steal his 
line.
Here’s what I want you to do. You folks in the front just turn around and 
face the people behind you. You’re going to put them in a trance in 10 
seconds, and as soon as you’re done, send them off, go to the back and 
you’ll do the next person, all the way through. Go! Quickly, guys.
Do it again. Keep going. You’re doing great. The main reason for doing that 
is just to show you guys that competence builds confidence. How much 
more confident do you feel just after a few minutes of doing that? It’s just 
repetition, repetition, repetition, repetition, repetition. It will drill in. So the 
more you do it, the easier it becomes.
If any of you take a break after while, let’s say you don’t do it for a couple of 
months I get nerves as well, because I haven’t done it for a while. But once 
you start, it’s like riding a bike. It’s there, so just repeat, repeat, repeat.
What I recommend you do is you treat this as a boot camp. When you are 
done here at 9:00 tonight, rather than crashing out in bed, grab someone 
and do another hour out there somewhere, preferably not in the Venetian. 
Go to another hotel and destroy them. 
Why? I’ll tell you why. Because the minute you start doing it, even with 
yourselves, you will start drawing a crowd just like, I think it was Jim who 
said it a moment ago, you’ll draw a crowd. As the crowd gets drawn in, 
you’ll some people going like this. You’ll go up to them and go, come over 
here, and you’re in it. It’s easy to do, but you need to practice and that’s the 
one thing, I can’t do for you. Are you guys having fun with this?
Yes!

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
11
                                 
Hypnotic Tests & Demos
Students:
Igor:
Okay. So let’s start getting into some suggestion demonstrations. These will 
be useful when it comes to do doing a stage show for selecting volunteers, 
also useful in Street Hypnosis to show some of the power of hypnosis. This, 
of course, was one of them, wasn’t it? 
So let’s play with a classic one. 
Everyone just go ahead and stick your hands out in front of you. Clap 
your hands together. Interlock the fingers. Turn the hand up so the 
knuckles are facing the ceiling, and now open your fingers up. 
Squeeze those hands. Open those fingers.
Now in a moment those fingers are going to start coming together. 
Feel those fingers come together, like a magnet. Imagine the magnet 
coming together. When those fingers touch, just close your eyes and 
go into a trance, closer and closer. Feel those fingers coming like a 
magnet, a force, pushing, locking, tighter and tighter. 
When those fingers touch, just close your eyes. When those fingers 
touch, and then close your eyes. When those fingers touch, just 
close your eyes. 
You guys rock. Look at you guys go. 
And because your eyes are closed right now, deep and relaxing in 
this comfortable state, it means that you can do this experiment so 
easily with people. It takes seconds to do, and you’ll instantly see 
who the quick responders are, who the good responders are and 
who you’re going to work them for a little while before you actually 
start doing anything crazy or dynamic with them.
For now, just allow your hand to rest, return to your sides. You’re 
eyes will only open as quickly as you can internalize how simple that 
was.
And it is simple, isn’t it? 
Yes.
So here’s what I want you to do. Just one-on-one for now, and we’ll start 
building into group stuff in a minute. It’s just three basic steps.
1. You’re getting the hands out. Remember the compliance stuff. You 
can make the shuffling steps if you want. That’s all good.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
12
                                 
2. Hands out, hands together, lock hands, press hands. The pressing of 
hands is important because if they’re hands are like this, this won’t 
work so well. You want their hands pressing together.
3. Quickly tell them what’s going to happen. Fingers are going to start 
coming together. Closer and closer like magnets drawing them. 
Why? Because for most people, they’re not going to last out here for 
very long. 
You’re just going to use the same stuff, associate responses or reactions to 
what’s going on. Does that make sense to everyone? Is that easy to do? I 
want you to spend no more than maximum a minute, but it really should be 
about 30 seconds just running people through this. 
Again, do one they do you and go find someone else. Just keep doing it 
over and over again, until its second nature. Easy. Off you go. 
Was that easy? 
Yes.
Now one of these suggestibility tests you’re doing here or, I prefer them as 
suggestion demonstrations, because they’re just showing the power of 
hypnosis through demonstrations. This one is pretty loaded in your favor. 
Why? Physiologically if you’re squeezing your hands together, those fingers 
will want to come together anyway. So it’s kind of loaded.
It’s useful as a warm-up routine for people, but when you want to select a 
good volunteer for a stage show, you want to make it increasingly more 
difficult for people to “succeed” with these demos. Why? Any ideas? 
You don’t want everyone.
Yeah. You don’t want everyone on stage. There’s like the whole audience 
on stage and there’s like one little grandma knitting in the background 
going, that’s nice dear. 
Laughter
That’s not the kind of show you’re necessarily, going to want, so you get to 
choose who you want to have. A lot of these pieces you’ll do just for the fun 
or just to warm yourselves up, because you’ll feel more confident. But, in 
time you’ll start doing more and more risky pieces precisely because you 
want to be able to filter through who’s really responding powerfully, who’s 
being okay and who’d give the knitting needle to and say, just go ahead and 
make some socks.
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
13
                                 
What we’re going to do now is we’re going to go through a whole bunch of 
different suggestion demos like these that you can start playing with, and 
we’ll start building into a group environment so you can actually start feeling 
like you’re on stage. Won’t that be something? 
Let’s start with everyone, hands out. Say, yes master. Only kidding. 
Laughter
See, I got them now. Oh yeah. 
Hands out. I want you to imagine two magnets, two powerful 
magnets in either palm. As you imagine, look at the space between 
those palms and feel those hands coming together. They want to 
come together, and they will come together. They’re beginning to 
move now, coming closer and closer together. Imagine it, feel it, let it 
happen.
When those hands touch, close your eyes go deep in trance and 
discover so many things about hypnosis, being fully balanced. That’s 
right. Staying full balanced in hypnosis as you discover the power of 
your own mind. That’s right. Imagine those magnets. Feel them. 
There you go. Now it’s happening, coming closer and closer. Feeling 
them closer and closer, drawing in closer and closer. 
When those fingers touch, your eyes will close, your hands will drop 
and you can go into a deep comfortable trance, totally in balance. 
Totally balanced by your own legs, that’s right. Deeper and deeper, 
that’s right. Those of you with your eyes closed right now, these 
suggestions will go 10 times deeper. Those of you with your eyes 
wide open you get to enjoy this for a totally different level. 
As you stand there listening to me right now, your ability to be a 
great stage hypnotist is going through the roof. I’d like you to 
visualize it right now. Imagine it. Think about you on the stage, how 
good it feels and the thunder of applause. People coming up to you 
afterwards shaking your hand, thinking what an amazing show that 
was. See it, feel it and enjoy it now.
When you’re ready, open your eyes and bring yourself back and that 
good feeling can continue in the back of your mind all the way 
through the rest of this training and probably the rest of your life. 
Woo.
Applause
So that one has no physical help involved. That’s purely based on 
suggestion. You can do that with people?
[
]
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
14
                                 
Students:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Yes.
It’s no different from the stiff arm or this one really, is it? Okay, find a couple 
of people. Do it. Off you go. 
Woo. You guys are getting way ahead of the game. All I wanted was people 
just to put their hands together and that’s it. It’s not rocket science, right? 
We’re Master Hypnotists.
Well, I know. You’re way ahead of the game! So far, so good, right. Give 
me a little bit of space so we can just see your wonderful expression. There 
you go.
The question that I have is, for somebody they can look at the arms and 
then close real quickly, where others for me, it’s much better when I have 
my eyes closed. But when you are making the pick, would you want to pick 
someone that can do it with eyes open?
I don’t care. All that matter’s is are they responding? The point is what are 
they responding to? If your suggestion is, look between the spaces when 
those hands come together, you’re only sorting for the people who respond 
the quickest to your suggestions, whatever they are. 
So, we’re looking for the things you paid attention to this morning. Their 
focus, how concentrated are they? How distracted do they get? Are they 
beginning to sway a little bit? You sometimes see people literally doing this.
Do you think they’re ready to go? It’s not rocket science. It’s actually not 
that difficult to spot the good subjects. Basically, whatever you choose, for 
the stage version anyway, you only choose those subjects that respond the 
quickest, most dramatically and so on, and you discard the rest. Not 
because you can’t make anything of the rest, but just because you don’t 
have to. Does that make sense to you guys?
What about you see some shows where they just simply ask for volunteers?
Oh, we’ll come onto that. When it comes to the structure itself, you can do it 
either way. You can just ask for volunteers, but you still have to test them 
either way. 
Up on stage?
Up on stage, yes. Just so you know. Just so you know who to choose. 
And then you get the hard ones.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
15
                                 
Igor:
Students:
Yeah, pretty much. Then you get the hard ones and you just kind of get rid 
of them along the way, just because that’s how the show goes. That’s how 
the show works. Don’t worry. We’re getting there. For now, are you having 
fun with this? Is this is easy? 
Yes!

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
16
                                 
The Performance Mind
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
All right, let’s throw some more classic things in, but before we start 
throwing in some more of the classic suggestion demos, what I want to start 
doing with you guys is actually preparing you mentally for an actual 
performance. 
There is a state of mind that will make you a great performer. Actually, 
makes sure that you can spot everything that’s going on and be in control of 
the stage to have a good time with everyone and so on would you like to 
learn how to do that?
Yes!
Seeing as we’ll be doing this standing up anyway, you may as well stay 
standing. 
I’d like you to pick a spot on the wall up here somewhere. Perhaps 
someplace where the light shimmers, something above eye level, focus 
on it intensely. So intensely, in fact, that your eyes begin to water a little 
bit perhaps because of strain or something like that. 
The moment you begin to feel your eyes strain, I want you to relax your 
eyes. Don’t close them. Keep them open, but relax them and you’ll notice 
your vision beginning to expand. You’ll begin to see the sides and the 
edge of the room, the gold of the wall, the blue of the floor, maybe in the 
lights and the ceiling. 
Let that vision continue to expand until it has a sense of wrapping all 
around you and you know you’ve got it when your breathing shifts. When 
your breathing shifts and is deeper and calmer, just raise your hand.
Meanwhile, allow your sense of expanding vision to continue. Once you 
have that, allow your eyes to come down only as slowly as you can look 
around the room maintaining that state. Your breathing doesn’t change. 
Your eyes still see the whole of the room, but you get to look around the 
room slowly enough that you can still see the whole of the room. Go 
ahead and try that out.
It should feel a little quieter inside your mind. This is your performance 
state. As you look around and you make sure you can see the whole 
room at the same time – the edges of the wall, the floor, the ceiling –
you’ve switched on your parasympathetic nervous system, the relaxation 
response. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
17
                                 
When you are relaxed, it’s easier to see everything that’s going on around 
you. When you’re relaxed as a performer, your best performances come 
out.
So why not relax and take that into your performance so you can see 
everything that your subjects and volunteers are doing, whilst at the same 
time just feeling that good feeling inside? And you do, don’t you? Feel a 
good feeling? 
Did you enjoy that? So from now on, I’m going to ask you that every time 
you start an exercise, you start by getting that peripheral vision, and then 
you’re just talk them through the exercise and so on. 
Does that make sense?
You’re going to train it into your neurology so when you stand up on stage 
and you go, oh, you’ll just go, ah welcome to my show! Does that make 
sense?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
18
                                 
More Hypnotic Demos
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
All right, folks. 
Maintaining that state, I want you to all put your hand out in front of you 
like so. Take one hand. The right hand – the one that most people write 
with – if your left-handed, it’s the other one, and turn it over so it’s facing 
up. With the right hand facing up, I want you to imagine that the right 
hand has a heavy bucket of sand in it, a heavy bucket of sand. 
The left wrist has a bunch of balloons tied to it, a bunch of balloons lifting 
up towards the sky, a heavy bucket of sand and a light set of balloons 
lifting up on the other wrist. 
Now I want you to pour water into that sand bucket so it gets heavier and 
heavier and heavier still. Yet that wrist becomes lighter and lighter. More 
balloons get out of it. Perhaps a swarm of butterflies comes tinkling in 
between those balloons, lifting it higher and higher and higher still.
Meanwhile, your right hand is getting heavier and heavier, dropping down 
lower and lower and lower still. Your left arm lifting higher and higher, 
that’s right. 
When you’re ready, just look around and notice the variation in response. 
Pretty cool, huh? Now bring yourself out of trance, shake your hands out 
and you are ready to rock n’ roll.
Is that easy? Again, we’re looking for a sequence of steps, just purely and 
simply so that we’re getting compliance as we go along. Then just imagine 
something heavy, something light, and create that contrast between the 
hands. It’s easy, isn’t it?
It’s so easy in fact you may as well play with your eyes to make that 
distinction. In other words, that performance state, to lock into more as 
you’re doing it. Off you go.
Is this easy or what?
Yes.
It’s easy stuff. All right, so are you having fun so far? 
Yes!
Ooh, that’s so close, on the line. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
19
                                 
Everyone put your hand out in front of you, please. Clap your hands 
together and interlock your fingers. I want you to start squeezing those 
fists together, those hands together. Squeeze them tight. Look at the top 
of your knuckles. 
Do not look at me. Look at the top of your thumbs and do not look away. 
Focus all of your attention. Squeeze those hands, tighter and tighter. Let 
them become tighter and tighter still, tighter and tighter still.
The harder you squeeze, the more they lock. They more they lock, the 
better you feel. The better you feel the tighter they become. Lock them 
tight. Lock them down so hard that they will not open. They will not open. 
No matter how hard you try, they are stuck. Locked tight. Locked tight. 
Go ahead and try. Try to open those hands, and they’re locked tight. The 
harder you try, the tighter they lock, and the better you feel. That’s right. 
Very good. And sleep. All the way down. Deeper, deeper, deeper, 
deeper, deeper still, that’s right. 
In a moment you’re going to open your eyes, wide awake. This time, 
however, you’ll find that this hand is just stuck to your head. 1-2-3 wide 
awake, stuck tight. Stuck tight. Try to remove your hand. What’s going 
on? 
It’s not moving.
It’s not moving. 
No.
Is that usual?
No.
Does that happen often? But you are awake, right?
Yeah. 
But that hand’s stuck? How does that work?
I don’t know.
You know what? Let’s try this. If you put this one here, perhaps this one will 
release. This one must be stuck instead now, right? Because one has to 
take the place of the other, right? What’s going on?
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
20
                                 
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
[
]
Students:
Igor:
Student:
It won’t move. That’s weird.
But you’re feeling good?
Yeah.
Now here’s a crazy thing. 
In a moment, you find that hand will start to lift, but only as quickly as 
you find it so hysterical that it happened that you’ll laugh and laugh and 
laugh. Go ahead and try it. 
There you go. As that hand begins to remove from your head, you’ll 
laugh harder and harder. By the time that hand has actually unstuck 
itself, you are laughing hysterically. That’s right. 
And sleep. All the way down, deeper, deeper. That’s right, deeper still.
Another suggestion has faded from your mind, knowing that you’ve done 
a great and amazing job. That’s right, an amazingly great job. You can 
have that good revitalizing feeling knowing that your unconscious mind 
did this, and you can do this with anyone. Feel that motivation. Feel that 
sense of achievement that you can do this too. 
Okay, 1-2-3 wide awake. Everyone, if your fingers are still locked just 
release those hands and feel good.
How are you doing?
I’m doing well.
Give her a nice round of applause.
Applause
You can do all this stuff. We’ll be coming onto this sort of stuff in the next 
segment. I just want to start giving you a little bit of a taste of where you’re 
going with this. It’s nothing different from what you’ve done already. 
Are you looking forward to this sort of thing?
Yes.
Go ahead.
Was there a particular reason why you chose her?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
21
                                 
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Students:
She was one of the fastest responders.
And you noticed that from the whites of her hands or whites of her 
knuckles?
Yeah, it was partly from the other exercises we did before. We stacked 
some of these just to watch different responses and, let’s put it this way, 
you’ve been in and out of trance all day long, so I could probably do it with 
most of you in the room, pretty much off the bat at this point. 
Earlier on, I noticed that she was responding much more quickly than the 
rest of you guys. Plus there’s the whole trance locking thing and so on. But 
in terms of what you recognize and what you look for, we’ll come onto that. 
Experience will be your guide. Here’s the crazy thing, guys. Once you get 
onto this, which will be in the next segment. You don’t necessarily have to 
do it now, but if you want to do it, then feel free. Can we just have you step 
aside a little bit? There you go. Can we have a microphone over here as 
well, please?
Once you start doing this, believe it or not, what you want to have happen is 
you want this to actually fail. Let me say this again. In this room right here, 
what you want to have happen when we start getting into more of the 
waking suggestion things, you want it to actually fail from time to time. Do 
you have any idea why?
A couple of things, it’s so you can tell the difference between who’s ready 
and who’s not. If everyone’s ready all the time, how are you going to know? 
Well, you don’t even have to think about that anymore. 
Then you start developing that sense of what was different about this 
person versus that person? You will have success in this room, guaranteed. 
It’s a no brainer. About at least half the people in this room will respond 
quickly. I’d say about eight to 10 people in this room; you’ll be able to do 
that stuff just off the bat.
With some, it might not quite work out the same way. I mean some things 
you’ll have better results with than others. You want to watch what happens 
so you begin to build experience. Does that make sense?
Then it’s also a fact that if it doesn’t work out, do you know what? No big 
deal. Do you know why? Do you want to have a default that gets you out of 
jail for any problem you get into? No matter how much you do this and it 
fails and you go, oh my God, I’m a bad hypnotist, do you want a get out of 
jail free card?
Yes.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
22
                                 
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Yes? May I borrow you for this? It’s just failed, so what you do is you say; l
Look at me, and sleep, deeper, deeper, deeper. Now forget about all 
that. Just fade it from your mind. That’s right. Let it all go, as you just 
feel fantastic. In a moment, I’ll count from 1-3, and you’ll open your 
eyes feeling fantastic, having had a great time here. 1-2-3, open your 
eyes and having a great time.
How are you doing?
Fine.
Did you enjoy that?
Yes.
Fantastic. Off you go. That’s it. You’re done. As far as everyone else is 
concerned, it’s like, oh my God, the hypnotist just put him in trance and he 
did stuff. You cannot fail if you’re doing this especially on the streets. On the 
stage, honestly, if it doesn’t work out do you know what you do? You say, 
thank you very much and good-bye. So either way you win. Does that make 
sense to you guys? 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
23
                                 
Twin Minute Demos 
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
So here’s what I want you guys to do now. I want you to pick groups of four 
people. All right, you’re going to get in a group of four people. In that group 
of four people, we’re going to have one being the stage hypnotist and three 
people being the “audience.” Your audience – it doesn’t matter who it is, 
guys. Just choose any random people. 
The one who is the hypnotist will start by getting yourself in that state. Look 
at your audience, and you have two minutes, only two minutes to do two 
different suggestion demonstrations. Two different hypnotic or waking 
hypnotic demonstrations this one, that one and this one, I don’t care which 
one it is. Two minutes to do both of them. 
At the end of that, you’ll rotate and the next person does their two minutes 
and so on. So the whole thing will take eight minutes tops.  
Are you ready for this? I’m going to ask you guys to keep time. In other 
words, have one person be the official time-keeper in the group because we 
do not want to waste time on the peripherals. We want to get into the show 
and so on. So if you can do it fast, then you can start doing it slower and 
really building it up if you need to. Does that make sense? Any questions? 
Are you ready to do it?
Yes.
All right, come on you guys. Are you ready to do this?
Yes!
Off you go–
How was that?
Cool. 
Who is starting to feel like a reach Vegas-style hypnotist? All right. It’s kind 
of getting there, isn’t it? You guys are awesome. I mean we packed a lot 
into this day, and we haven’t even come close to finishing yet. So I hope 
you guys are feeling really proud of what you’re doing because it is actually 
really, really solid stuff. 
We’re learning all the mechanics today for the actual stage show, which 
we’ll be focusing on tomorrow. Can we have a microphone over here, 
please?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
24
                                 
The key thing right now for you to start focusing on is the variety of 
responses. Can you see different people reacting slightly differently? Some 
a little bit more strongly, some a little bit more mildly, shall we say. By now, 
most people will be a little bit more at the strong of the end of the scale, but 
even so, you still have a bit of a range of responses. 
I just want you to start noticing these things because it’s going to be an 
important thing for you to look out for up here on the stage as a hypnotist 
doing your work, selecting the right people for your show.  .
Yeah, one thing I found is when the hypnotist was doing the thing, that has 
a very strong suggestive effect, that just saying it, like you just did. 
Yes. So just to emphasize, you, the hypnotist, are presenting the 
suggestion at every level. If you say, stick your hands out or stick your 
hands out, it’s a big difference, right? Imagine one hand so heavy. It feels 
heavier and heavier. The other hand is so light. 
Do you see what’s going on, of course, is you’re telling their unconscious 
mind how to respond? If I’m doing, so heavy, and so light, I’m telling them 
to do little things. I’m say, so heavy, so light. I’m already telling them how to 
respond. Does that make sense? So it’s a great thing.
These are the tricks you’ll be picking up and be doing more and more of as 
we continue through, especially the three days of the boot camp. 
Any other questions or comments? What have you guys been learning so 
far? I want a little feedback from you at this point. 
Student:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
25
                                 
Hypnotic Intent H+
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
For me, a little bit – mostly is your H+ thing. Just believe it and it will happen 
pretty much. 
For example, you can believe that you’ll have to answer that phone call the 
next time that happens, right?
I believe I’ll turn it off.
So for those of you who are not familiar with the concept of H+, it’s 
basically, this intense as I hypnotize and intense desire for the experience 
to be positive. At that point, you’re creating this wonderful little vibe that 
people want to respond to by going into trance and whatever the 
experience is that you’re offering them. 
This is something called hypnotic intent in some schools. Some people 
don’t even teach it. The idea is people respond to you at all levels. If I’m 
going to be like, okay go into trance now, there might be something slightly 
wrong with the context it’s happening in.
Would you be feeling safe in someone’s hands that’s going okay- okay, 
okay, now go into a trance? It may not create the healthiest environment 
where people want to create trust and that sort of stuff. So you need to 
create that environment, and you do that by going there first.
Are you having a good time here, guys? Honestly? 
Yes.
If you will remember how good this feels the next time you try to hypnotize 
someone, you feel that and you go, you’re going to have the same 
experience I did. That’s it. That’s all it takes. You all had it. You all come 
from different walks of life, different countries and different professions. If 
you can do it, everyone else can do it too. 
Whether they do it right in front of you is really just a question of when and 
where. Most people you meet, bam! Just like that. It’s your attitude that tells
them this will work. So that’s a key piece. Really, all we’ve been doing this 
morning, the mechanics are pretty straightforward. 
Really, the main thing we’ve been focusing on throughout the day today is 
building up your enthusiasm so that H+, that hypnotic intent, shines out and 
people go, yep, that’s exactly what I want to do. My hand is stuck and I 
guess that’s what’s going to happen. Go ahead.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
26
                                 
Student:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
So we are looking for those people who respond the quickest. Is that a 
percentage?
Yes. 
We can tell what percentage of the audience, when we are doing a show, 
that will be the quick responders?
Absolutely. Quick is one of the tests you’re looking for. You’re looking for 
quickness and completeness, shall we say. So some people are quick and 
go, yeah, that’s good. Others are like, oh my God, this is so cool. They’ll be 
very dramatic for your performance, but we’ll get into that tomorrow.
In terms of percentages, the numbers stated in terms of a stage show is 
one in five people will be a great subject for a show. So, basically, if you 
have an audience of five people, you’ll know you’ll be able to do a show. It’s 
true.
In public, it’s even better if you’re talking about Street Hypnosis and stuff 
like that. We’ll be talking a little bit about that later on today. It’s even easier 
because the ones that are interested will come in and go, wow, what’s that? 
Sleep. 
So the context actually makes Street Hypnosis easier if you get the context 
right. So yeah, you’re looking for one in five. What we were doing, by the 
way, just so you guys are aware, on the Sunday when you do your actual 
shows, you’re going to be doing shows in front of an audience of 30, 40 or 
maybe 50 people, depending if you’re inviting people to come down to it or 
not. It’s up to you. It doesn’t matter.
Now most stage hypnotists will be afraid of doing that. I want to tell you this 
right now. Don’t be afraid. It’s like, oh my God, I don’t know if I can do that 
in front of an audience because they’re looking for the odds. You guys will 
be so well ahead of the game that it will be so easy for you. When you guys 
come it’s like it’s no big deal. Whoever wants to come up, just come up? I’ll 
work with anyone.
So my ambition is to get you to the point at the end of these four days 
together where you’re doing stuff which most other stage hypnotists would 
be afraid to do, but for you it’s a no brainer. I mean think about it. Just think 
about what you just did there. How large was your audience just now? 
Three or four people. No more than that. So you’re already working against 
the odds, and it’s still working. What the hell’s going on there?
Let’s call a break here. It’s now – what time is it? Oh, we have a question 
over here first.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
27
                                 
Student:
Igor:
Just a comment that while I was being hypnotized and the person had their 
hand on my shoulder, I actually felt a vibration. He was actually nervous 
and it generated through my entire body.
Right. So this is just part of getting used to it. As people get more used to it, 
that starts subsiding and you’ll be confident and relaxed. That’s just 
practiced repetition, basically, its good stuff.

