© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
1
                                 
DVD 4 – Discover the Power of Waking Inductions &
How to Train an Audience
The Hypnosis Lifestyle
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Hey, what’s up, guys? 
What’s up?
All right, we’re going to have a good time. Now we’re going to get a little bit 
dirty, how’s that?
Yeah. Let’s do it.
All right. I have to keep it PG, so we’re not going to get too dirty, PG13. I’ve 
got to tell you a story about that real quick and then I’ll go on.
I did a lot of shows in Salt Lake. I produced a show there years ago, where I 
did it for 6 ½ years straight every Saturday night. At the time, it was the 
longest running comedy hypnosis show ever developed, Salt Lake City of 
all places.
We had about 500 people a week that came to my show. So over the 
course of time, I had the opportunity to hypnotize over 100,000 just right 
there at the show, not counting all the corporate gigs that I got out of that. 
Anyway, talking about this PG stuff, Salt Lake City was like that. 
I started working in a lot of nightclubs, doing a lot of nightclub acts. They 
approached me and said why don’t you come and do a show in a theater. I 
said no, I like to party I like to have a good time. You can go to nightclubs 
and people treat you right. Do you know what I’m saying? So, it’s a whole 
different thing. 
But then I thought about it, because they chased me for about three 
months, really wanting me to do it. So one day I sat back and I said to 
myself, I said self, it’s just an act. We’re just actors, so why limit yourself to 
what you can learn and what you can do. 
So I said okay, maybe I can’t say some of the things I normally say. Maybe 
I can’t do some of the things I normally do, but how can I stretch myself as 
a human being and become something different so more people can have 
an opportunity to help me make more money. 
I had to stretch and I did. I stretched. I went to this theater and said okay, I’ll 
do it, and it was PG. My show my PGG. Well, it was G+, PG17, yeah 
because there were a lot of innuendos, so a lot of what you can do in your 
shows is a lot of innuendos.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
2
                                 
What I want to know right now – and I’m sorry that I was late. I just got a 
call from Canada, they wanted me to come up there and do a show for 
$5,000. So I’m sorry that I missed out on part of this earlier, the stuff you 
guys were doing. I say this to you because I want you to know what 
happens. 
All you have to do is walk away and when somebody calls and says we 
want you to come to Canada, we want to give you $5,000 and of course, 
we’ll pay your expenses and everything else on top of that. That’s even 
before you get there and then, of course, when you get there you make 
more money right, because you have other things that you sell while you’re 
there.
Then people want to see you for private hypnosis sessions, so you charge 
them $500 for an hour. It’s not too bad really. So you are learning 
something here that’s very cool and I think what you’ve been doing in the 
last segment was a lot of hypnotic tests is that correct?
Yes.
Somebody show me what you did. What did you learn?
We did suggestibility tests, practiced, the fractionation tests and practiced a 
lot. We put someone in trance, bring them back and then put them back into 
trance and the suggestibility, we did three or four kinds. 
All right, so we’re on track then. This is good. Do you feel pretty good about 
what you’ve learned so far?
Yes.
Do you feel like you’re professional hypnotists at this point?
Yes!
All right, I see a few eyes going, working on it almost there. Give us a 
couple more days. I’m going to tweak your minds a little bit more. 
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
3
                                 
Conversion Inductions
Students:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Bill:
Spencer:
[
]
Okay, this is very cool. With your tests, how do you convert a hypnotic test 
into a full blown hypnotic induction, I mean just drop somebody in a trance? 
Should be have some fun and show you how this is done?
Yes.
I’m going to show you how we do this, we’re going to take that from there 
and then we’re going to break up in to groups like we did earlier so you 
have the opportunity to do the exact same thing, but do it very carefully. I’m 
not very gentle, but I’ll try to be.
I need a volunteer up here.
I’ll volunteer.
Who’s that?
Me.
Did I have you up here before?
No.
Are you sure?
I was up there, but you didn’t put me into trance.
All right. Come on, Bill, right?
Yeah Bill.
Okay, give him some applause.
Applause
This is kind of like between demonstrational-type hypnosis – doing street 
hypnosis on the street – and you can also use it when doing a hypnosis 
show. We’re going to go more into the structure of doing a complete show 
later on tonight and tomorrow. 
Here’s a demonstration and I think for this one, you can do this. Let’s just 
do this.
Put your hands in front of you. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
4
                                 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Bill:
Should I take my glasses off?
Oh you can keep them on. I don’t care. 
I don’t either.
I’m fine because I’m not going to smash your eyes or your face or your 
nose. 
Put your hands out there in front of you. Lock your hands together. 
Squeeze your hands together as tightly as you can. I want you to 
start your thumbs right there. Put them just like that. I want you to 
squeeze your hands together as tightly as you can. Squeeze them 
together, and make sure that your arms are locked and they are 
glued. 
Do you see what I’m doing? I want to make sure that his hands are tight 
and his arms are locked. They are glued and they will not come apart, so I 
want to make sure that they’re tight. I’m not going to fail I want to make sure 
that the person I’m working with has it all together. The person will not fail. I 
will not fail. If they’re not obeying what I’m saying, I’m going to keep working 
with them until they do. 
So, when you as a hypnotist go out and begin working with people, there’s 
no place to slide, just keep moving through it and don’t worry about it.
Make sure those hands are stuck tight, stuck tight, tight, tight, tight. 
Make sure your hands will not come apart. They’re stuck tight. Are 
you sure they’re stuck there, Bill? Are you sure? Sleep.
Okay, so you can see in this instance how you can take a simple test like 
that and you can turn that into an induction of any kind. Do you see how 
that works? It’s the same principle that we were talking about earlier.
Wide awake. Are you okay? Close your eyes. I’m going to count to 
three. Close your eyes. I’m going to count to three, open your eyes. 
This time you’re going to be – close your eyes. 
Do you see how sometimes you’ve got to take these people and tell them 
what to do?
I’m going to count to three. At number three, this time your eyes are 
going to be wide awake and you’ll be full of energy. Get ready. Here 
we go 1-2-3 wide awake. Good. How do you feel?
Great.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
5
                                 
Spencer:
Bill:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Bill:
Spencer:
Bill:
Spencer:
Okay. Now, you can shock a person into trance and you can shock them 
out. Did you see what I did? This is a backwards induction. That’s all it is, 
it’s like giving a person a triple espresso in the brain. It’s the same thing. 
The mind is going, what am I supposed to do? Sleep! Wake up!
Do you see how we took that and converted that into a simple induction? 
Hang on here, Bill. Are you awake, we have a question?
Yeah. 
I’ve heard that when you bring somebody out extremely rapidly that it can 
cause headaches. Is that just a rumor or is it something we should be 
worried about?
I think it’s a nasty rumor. 
Really, okay. 
I mean on the serious side of it, when you’re working with anybody in 
hypnosis, anything can happen and that’s the truth. I mean, could it give 
somebody a headache? Possibly. Have I ever done it? No. Have I heard 
about it? Yeah, but normally that would happen if somebody is not using 
hypnosis properly. 
When you learn how to do hypnosis properly, you’re not going to have 
those problems. Now, let’s say that he did. For example, let’s say that I said 
wide awake and he goes oh, I’ve got a headache. What are you going to 
do?
Put him back in?
Maybe, I don’t know. You can simply say that, but my thing would be –
because listen, I’m a concerned, compassionate human being. First, you 
must care about your subjects at all times. Be a decent human being. So 
first, I’m going to say Bill, you’ve got a headache, okay? Can you give me a 
headache? Okay cool.
You’ve got a neck ache? Far out okay, good. Have you ever had neck 
problems before? 
No. 
No. Just since I yanked you? Okay, cool. So there are no other reasons 
why you would have a headache or a neck ache, right?
No. 
Okay, good.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
6
                                 
Bill:
Spencer:
Bill:
Spencer:
Whiplash.
Whiplash. Okay, so you’ve got whiplash because of me. Okay, cool. He 
doesn’t really have whiplash. We’re role-playing here, but do you see what 
I’m saying? I want to ask because first, if there’s a medical condition that’s 
underlying what’s going on with the person, I want to know if there’s a 
medical condition going on. 
Barring that, typically if somebody has a headache or something like that, it
could just be because oh wow, the re-orientation was so rapid that the 
blood just went to their head very quickly. So I might just say 
Just take a deep breath. Just close your eyes. Just relax for just a 
second. Close your eyes and just relax. Good. Here you go. In a 
moment, I’m going to count to three and on number three, open your 
eyes feeling nice and relaxed. Your head is calm and clear. 
Everything feels fantastic in every way. Here we go. 1-2, nice and 
easy now and then 3, open your eyes. Your head is nice and clear. 
How do you feel now?
Great.
Okay, good. That’s a real simple way to do that. If they still have a 
headache when you do, I would do the same thing again. If they still have 
one, we’re going to talk about that Saturday when I talk more about how to 
do hypnotherapy, because there may be a time when you’re a stage 
hypnotist that you need to apply your skills as a hypnotherapist. 
Does everybody here have hypnotherapy skills?
Who here does not have training in hypnotherapy? Raise your hands. 
Some of you do not. Lots of material back there that’s going to teach you 
good stuff. Igor has some classes coming up and I’ve got training, so there 
are all sorts of things where you can learn. Get yourself competent in it to 
feel really good about it. 
That said; I’m going to teach you some cool mini-hypnotherapy techniques 
that you can utilize when you’re working with somebody if that ever 
happens in a stage show.
Are there any questions on the conversion there? What I want to do is I 
want to break up into groups, and I want to show you guys how to do this. 
Notice something too – here, you don’t have to leave right now. Let’s just 
say I just grabbed this guy off the street and I’m just doing this street-type 
hypnosis or demonstration or even if I’m on stage with him. Notice that I’ve 
always got my arm on him. I’m always holding onto the guy or the lady. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
7
                                 
Why? Because I want to make sure that they’re not going to fall. I want to 
make sure that I have got all their needs taken care of. 
That’s your role, as a stage hypnotist, a demonstrational hypnotist, the 
street hypnotist, or just as a human being. When you’re working with 
another person, please take it seriously. I’ve seen people get hurt by bad 
hypnotists who don’t know what they’re doing.
I’ve been doing this for over 25 years and trust me, I’ve seen hypnotists 
who say that they’re hypnotists who have been doing this for 20 or 30 years 
and I sometimes I have to choke. I just wonder, what is your point why are 
you doing this? I don’t say that to build myself up, but to let know that it’s 
really serious stuff going on here. 
You can have a seat, thanks, Bill. Give Bill a round of applause and make 
him feel good. 
Applause
If you’re working on multiple people how do you take care of all of them?
When I’m working on multiple people in a stage setting? You take one times 
10 and you multitask. You’re multitasking. When you’re working with a 
group, instead of one person you’re just working with a group. When you’re 
doing in stage presentation you’re working for two different audiences. 
You’re working for the people out here and then you’ve got your subjects up 
here on stage. 
You’ve got to keep your eyes on all these people up here and watch what 
they’re doing, and you have to keep your eyes on the audience, so you’re 
playing to two different audiences. You’ll learn in time how to control this
and hopefully, you’ll learn enough of that this weekend that you’ll feel 
confident with that. 
You’re going to feel really confident doing it by going out there and just 
doing it. I can’t stress that enough upon any of you is that you just have to 
go out and do it. Get your feet wet and go do it. Knock on doors – and we’ll 
talk about how to knock on doors and get yourself into gigs where you can 
go and do it. 
One of the things that I was very lucky in also was before I began doing a 
lot stage work and I taught hypnosis at a local college for four years too. 
That was cool because at the college, I had 50 or 60 people in my class 
three nights a week, so I got to do a lot of cool stuff. It really helped me to 
hone my skills of speaking to people and doing demonstrations with people 
one-on-one. 
[
]
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
8
                                 
I’m going to show you – and Igor’s going to show you. We’re going to show 
you the simple way to get good subjects with no problems up on stage so 
that your show is successful. A group is not different than one you just work 
with more people.
Let me show you one more of these tests and then we’re going to break up 
into groups and we’re going to do it. I need one more volunteer out here. 
This one we’re going to do sitting down. Let’s say that you’ve got somebody 
on stage and he’s sitting down. Because oftentimes, you want to get a little 
playful with people, it’s what you do you’re a performer. You guys are 
performers. When you’re on stage, you’re there for one reason and that’s to 
perform, it’s to give the audience a show. 
Yeah, they come to see all their friends get hypnotized because it’s kind of 
cool, but you know what? Who are they looking at? They’re looking at you. 
They want to know that you are awesome. They’re going to be watching. 
They’re going to look at your hair. They’re going to look at your clothes. 
They’re going to smell you. Everything about what you do. Keep that in 
mind. They’re there to see you, nothing else.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
9
                                 
Train Your Audience
Spencer:
Steven:
Spencer:
Steven:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
How are you doing, Steven?
Pretty good.
Good. Have you ever been hypnotized?
Yes.
Very cool. Of course you have been. Let’s just say that Steven’s up here 
and he’s part of the show and let’s say that I just started the show and I 
want to do a test with one person. Sometimes I’ll do that I’ll just do a test 
with one individual. Why? Can anybody answer that question for me before 
I even answer it?
Why would I do that? Why would I do a test with just one person in front of 
everybody before I begin? 
Maybe you spotted him beforehand, and you already know he’s going to be 
a flopper. 
Oh, so are you suggesting that me, the highly competent professional 
hypnotherapist, stage hypnotist who’s hypnotized over a million people is 
trying to set up somebody in the audience to come up here to make sure 
that I don’t screw up?
I’m not saying that you planned it. I’m saying that you like to make things 
easy on yourself and might have already said that guy right there is going to 
go. 
Okay. I’m going to hold onto that thought. I’m going to answer this for you 
guys. I’m going to answer it. Yes?
I’m thinking maybe you’re trying to show people how simple it is, how 
simple it is to do, that it’s not going to hurt anybody, it’s going to be fun,
they’re going to be relaxed and it will make them want to be more 
cooperative. That’s what I’m thinking. 
Very good. Anybody else have an idea on this? Okay, right here?
Is it to show other people how to respond?
Wow, I like that one! Show other people how to respond. Anybody else 
have an idea? 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
10
                                 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Students:
To build credibility.
Build credibility for who?
For the audience, so they know that you’re a confident, competent 
hypnotist. 
That’s a good one too. Say that again, louder I’m what?
Laughter
How’s that for a waking suggestion? Say it again.
You probably spotted something, maybe he’s faking…
So you think I probably spotted something. Let me tell you something, 
99.9% of the time I’m on stage, there’s a big bright light on me. Do you 
know why performers oftentimes wear sunglasses? Not because they think 
they’re cool, but because the lights are so bright it hurts your eyes. I wear 
them oftentimes on big stages because, number one, you can’t see the 
audience anyway. 
I can’t see the audience. It’s pretty dark out there, so I’m usually flying by 
the seat of my pants. I wear glasses sometimes when I start because it’s so 
bright it hurts my eyes until the lights go down. Do we have one more 
person with a thought on this?
To start hypnotizing the audience so you can better subjects when you call 
for volunteers.
That’s a good one. Well, let me answer that for you because all of you were 
partially right. You were the most right. I want to show everybody else how 
to respond. I really do. I don’t really care if it’s somebody who’s a flopper, 
because honestly, when I first began, I wanted to do that. I wanted to know 
who they were. 
It’s like I’m not taking any chances. What if this person is resistant, how are 
you going to deal with that? You want to do a show and if all the sudden 
you don’t get this person hypnotized, they’re looking at you like, what the 
hell you doing? All the sudden, you start sweating. It’s like oh boy whew, 
this is not good. Wow. Everybody’s looking at you and you’re just going, oh. 
It just shows up all over you, and it’s not a good thing.
But now, you are learning to become competent, confident professional 
stage hypnotists, the best in the business, right?
Right.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
11
                                 
Spencer:
Steven:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students
Spencer:
You have the skills to just walk right through that. So I don’t really care who 
it is, because even if the person does not respond the way that I think that 
they should, I’m going to teach them how to do it pretty quickly.
I don’t have a problem with that. I’ve been doing this long enough that I 
know that some people just need some quick training. It’s not a big deal, 
and that’s the difference between an amateur and a professional. 
The professional will take everything, even resistance, as an opportunity. 
Even if he has to take five minutes to teach the audience what hypnosis is 
and what it’s not. Because oftentimes, when a person does not go into 
trance it’s because you have not done your job properly to explain to them 
what hypnosis is. 
How are you doing?
I’m doing great. 
Hey listen, before we even begin this, let’s do something.
Put your hands out in front of you. Okay, this is pretty cool. Put your 
fingers just like this. Okay. 
I don’t really use this, but do you know what this is? Have you guys done 
this?
Yes.
Did you? How’s it work?
Fatigue.
Magnetic force. I’ve got some land. 
What I want you to do is just look at those two fingers. Get ready. 
What we’re going to do is I’m going to count from 10 down to 1, as I 
do those fingers are going to draw together. They’re going to close. 
They’re going to squeeze the other so tight, just like there’s a vice or 
a magnet just pulling them together. Squeeze them together. 
Look at them right now they’re starting to move together right now. 
10 they’re getting closer and closer. 9 they’re going closer and 
closer. You can actually feel them coming together, just like a vice is 
tugging on them, turning them, getting them closer and closer. 8-7-6 
they’re getting in there closer and closer. They want to squeeze 
together. They want to touch. When they touch, your eyes will close 
and you’ll just go into a deep trance– 5-4-3-2-1, just sleep.
:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
12
                                 
There are so many different ways that you can do this and turn it into an 
induction. Is this making sense? Any kind of a test can be turned into an 
induction. You are limited only by your own creative imagination nothing 
more, nothing less.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
13
                                 
Psychology of Demos
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
We’re going to teach you some very good solid foundational skills that you 
can learn and use. Feel free to take what you learn and build on it. Be 
creative. Your feet are stuck together. Put your fingers on your ears they 
won’t come off they stick tighter and tighter. The more you try to pull them 
off, the tighter they stick. 
Why does that suggestion work does anybody have an idea? 
You can open your eyes and pay attention. 
You’re telling him to hold onto it, but then you’re also telling him to take it 
off, so it’s a conflict of suggestion.
Can you elaborate more on what that conflict would be?
Well, hold it tighter and tighter, but try to let them go is not letting them go. 
It’s just to try, so what you’re doing is giving them two different suggestions.
I’ll expand on that more, later. This is very important. When you’re doing 
suggestibility tests and you’re turning them into an induction, I want you to 
understand what the psychological behind this is. Why does it work?
If I tell somebody that their hands are stuck, try to pull them apart and they 
stick tighter and tighter, why does that work?
It’s just that, as they said, it’s a conflict of interest. You’re telling them hold 
tighter and tighter and then you’re telling them to try, which is to feel. 
That’s interesting and I need to expound on that and make that even 
clearer. Because listen, people are going to ask you why it works. You don’t 
have to tell them, but you need to know yourself why things work, because 
you guys are the competent professional confident stage hypnotists. 
You have got to know this inside and out, why these things work. You’ve 
got to be able to explain it, to know this in your sleep with your eyes closed, 
driving down the road. 
It’s just that you overload by just saying words, it doesn’t matter if it’s pulling 
or holding the ears it just overloads the mind. 
Interesting concept, but that’s not it. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
14
                                 
Sperling:
Spencer:
Sperling:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
It’s the weaker part of the sentence which is causing the brain. Basically, as 
he said, to try is to fail, so using the weaker part of the system is going to 
make it to where they’re not going to be able to let go. 
Do I hear you saying that you respond to the stronger part of a suggestion 
or sentence if the opposing part is weaker?
Basically. 
Oh, okay very good. If you guys don’t know that, there is a DVD back there, 
How to Hypnotize Anyone at Anytime. Get it. Learn it. Study it. It’s all on 
there, okay. Let’s go onto the next thing. 
It’s pretty much part of the confidence game. In other words, giving that 
person the confidence and yourself that that will happen.
Sure. 
Is that…
No. You can say that, but that’s not true. Do you see what I just did? I kind 
of tricked her did you all notice that? But the professional just keeps going 
and just makes it part of the show. 
You just walk right through it because that’s also part of it. It you move and 
something happens, you just keep going with the flow. Performance is an 
art. When you’re being a stage hypnotist, trust me, it is an art. You’re a 
performer you’re up there to perform. It’s an art and a craft. You’ve got to 
work on it. You’ve got to hone it. You’ve got to shape yourself. Trust me on 
this. It is so cool once you do it.
You guys are actors. This is all an act. You have to build your persona of 
who do you want to be. Who are you? What do you want to be? Hallucinate 
the possibilities and be it. What have you always wanted to be on stage? If 
you could be anything you wanted to be, what would it be? It’s something 
you could think about for a couple of days.
Someone just gave me some information, which is really weird. He was 
telling me that when sobriety tests…
Sobriety tests?
…yeah, he was telling me that…
Was it a police officer?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
15
                                 
Student:
…
Spencer:
[
]
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
yeah. When a police officer tells you to walk here, they’re controlling you. 
Put your feet together and try to walk that straight line, it’s almost like 
they’re putting that person in a hypnotic trance. The harder they try to walk 
that line, the more likely they will fail.
You can always just refuse the test. 
Laughter
I mean the worst they’re going to do is yank your license for a year anyway. 
Then if you get a good attorney, you’ll probably beat the rap anyway..
I’m still not sure I understand why that works if you tell somebody to stick 
something to a wall or hold your ear and it won’t come lose. What are the 
mechanics of that? I’m not sure I understand why that works.
Okay. Squeeze your hands together. Watch. 
Make your arms stiff and rigid. I want you to squeeze your hands 
together, squeeze your fingers against the back of your hands. 
Squeeze them as tight as you can. The more you squeeze them 
together, the tighter they lock. Try to pull them apart, they stick 
tighter and tighter. Try to pull them apart, they stick tighter and 
tighter.
You respond to the stronger part of the suggestion, if the alternative is 
weaker. Try to pull them apart, they sticker tighter and tighter. The mind 
takes that stronger part at the end and says, got it. Now if a person loosens 
their hands for any reason, I just go wait a minute, listen very carefully to 
what I’m saying. Squeeze them together, make sure those hands are 
locked, they are glued, they are stuck tight and I’ll keep working on them. 
That’s the psychology behind that. We’re going to go on and do some 
conversion. 
It’s challenging.
The professional hypnotist does not take a challenge. If somebody comes 
up to me and says, I bet you $1,000 you can’t hypnotize me. I’d say you’re 
right. Then if somebody comes up to me and says go ahead and hypnotize 
me, see if you can do it. I’ll say okay, $1,000. To me it’s like they’re coming 
up and just being smart asses to begin with. So it’s like, do you want me 
hypnotize you okay, its $1,000 it’s that easy. I’ll be happy to, but you’re 
going to pay me for it. 
So basically, there are cases that you just can’t – the psychology…

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
16
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
You can, but why do that? Why put yourself in that position, because that’s 
nothing more than somebody who wants to be a bully? Why not just diffuse 
the situation and make a joke out of it. Yeah, I’d love to do that just give me 
$1,000 I’ll help you with that. 
You’ll get people at shows that will do that. They’ll come up to you and 
they’re drunks, they’re just obnoxious people. You have to learn how to deal 
with these obnoxious people. So you can do it that way or of course, you 
can have some big bouncers and just say get them out of here. I’ve done 
that many times. You get all sorts of crazy people. You work in a bar you 
know what crazy people are like. 
I’ve done this for 20 years the best thing to do is have your patrol. Next 
round’s on me boys get them out.
There you go. I wouldn’t buy them a drink though. All right, thank you sir.
Let’s do this. You don’t have to move your chairs, but I want you to just grab 
the person next to you and move your chairs together. Turn them together 
face-to-face – two, four, six. If you don’t have a partner please find one. 
I want you to practice this. Let’s do the hand lock to induction. You got that? 
Squeeze your hands tighter and tighter. Make sure your arms are 
stiff and rigid as a steel bar. Make sure their arms are stiff and rigid 
as a steel bar, and their hands are locked tight. They are glued and 
they will not come apart. Your fingers are stuck against the backs of 
your hands. They are stuck. They are glued. You cannot pull them 
apart. No matter how hard you try, they stick tighter and tighter.
You watch those people. Make sure those hands are stuck tight. You make 
sure those arms are stiff and rigid and they will not bend. If a person goes, 
ahh, you go no stiff, rigid and powerful. You have got to be forceful. 
The stage hypnotist is a very commanding individual. They don’t take guff 
from anybody. You can’t. It’s just the nature of the performance. So you 
really want to do that. No matter if you want to be a comedy hypnotist, a 
serious hypnotist, a dramatic hypnotist or a very suspenseful type hypnotist. 
Look at me now and do not look away.
I’m in Dubai, right? There’s this Italian guy up. He looked like a Mafiosa. 
You saw that picture of him, Liz. He comes up to me and starts talking this 
Italian thing. He goes, you stuck Italiano. Okay, look into my eyes. Breathe
in deeply. Sleep. Oh, look at him everybody. Make him feel good he’s on 
the floor. So you can go into all these different things. You’re a showman, 
show woman or a show person. Dig it. Have fun. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
17
                                 
Your hands are locked. Once you get that done, take it and turn it into 
induction. Once you’ve got them like that, just grab their arm and say, 
sleep. Then just bring them down. Go for it. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
18
                                 
Waking Suggestions
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Student:
Let me ask you guys, do you feel more confident now than you did five 
minutes ago?
Yes.
I’m telling you, man this stuff is wild. The possibilities are endless and the 
things that you guys are going to be doing when you leave here today will 
blow people’s minds. 
Now, I’m going to call for some questions later when we get done with this 
segment, but I want to move on with what I’m doing right now. So if 
everybody would do me a favor right now. 
Take your hands and put them in the air. Put them down. Lift up your 
right foot. Put it down. Lift up your left foot. Put it down. Go like this. 
Turn them over. Everybody say ahh.
Ahh.
Okay, now here’s my question. 
Everybody stand up. Everybody sit down. Stand up. Sit down. 
All right, what on Earth am I doing? I need you to raise your hand and I’ll 
give you a microphone, that’s the rule of the room. Right there is a guy. 
What on Earth am I doing?
You’re doing compliance entrainment.
Compliance entrainment.
You’re teaching them to follow your commands without thinking about it.
Okay. Could be, but I want to move into the language of the stage 
hypnotist. But that’s pretty technical, I like the way it sounds. 
Laughter
It makes me sound like I’m a dog trainer. Anybody else want to take a shot 
at that? We’re going into the language of the hypnotist. 
I was going to say compliance testing or compliance conditioning? You’re 
conditioning them to respond to you.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
19
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Conditioning them to respond. Okay, that could be. Anybody else want to 
take a stab at this? 
Getting used to what you’re saying suggestively?
Okay, that’s interesting too. Here’s one right over here.
You’re getting audience involvement.
Audience involvement, I like that too that sounds pretty good. 
The thought that came to me is that you are positioning yourself as the one 
in charge, the one in control, the leader and what you say goes. Up, down, 
round and round. 
Bad ass, mo fo, boy. You can be whatever you want. 
You’re creating group rapport.
Creating group rapport. I like that too. Very cool. In the hypnotic world, we 
call it simply waking suggestions. You’re all correct – compliance. I try not 
to use that kind of word so much, even though that’s really what we’re 
doing. We do not to create the group psychology and get everybody doing 
the same thing and complying. 
It helps to build more fun with the audience. It helps to build more fun for 
you as the performer. If you get everybody involved doing the same thing 
and it makes it easier when you get to that part where you’re going to grab 
one or two people out and do some demonstrations. Yes, you’re going to 
look for the person who’s happy about responding. 
Take all these things into consideration. The stage hypnotist, his mind is 
always turning,
churning and whirling around. He’s multitasking, 
multiplexing, maybe ADHD a little bit. He’s always looking at things that are 
going on with everybody, noticing what’s happening. He looks at the eyes, 
the nose, the ears, the mouth, the breath, the clothes, the way a person is 
leaning one way or the other – up or down, what they’re wearing, are their 
legs crossed or are they wide open. He wants to know everything.
You are an observer of human beings. This is your job. You have got to 
watch everything. No different for those of you who have done it in clinical 
work. If you’ve done clinical hypnotherapy at all, you know that as a clinical 
hypnotherapist, you have got to become your client, right. You have got to 
become your client. To become your client, you have to simply become like 
your client. If you can become like your clients, you can read their minds. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
20
                                 
If you can become like your audience, you can read your audience because 
as a performer, all these tests that we’re doing are to bring the audience to 
you. You’re bringing them your way and that’s the biggest role of the 
performer, is man what if I’m losing these guys, what if I’m really screwing 
up? The act is going wrong and I’m not getting what I want. I’ve got 15 
people on stage and I’ve only got two people left. Oh no, what am I doing to 
do?
So you’ve got to work hard to keep everybody up there that you can, to get 
the audience involved. You’ve got to work. You’ve got to keep them coming 
back. How do you keep them in the palm of your hand? That’s what you 
want to do. You want to keep them in the palm of your hand. They’re yours. 
They become butter in your hands. They’re clay and you mold the audience 
like you mold the subjects. You mold everybody. It’s what you do. 
Do you think you can do that?
Yes!
Wow! Some of you are going I don’t know, man I think I just got in over my 
head. How many of you are going, oh no? Anybody out there going uh oh?
That’s cool, just remember, you don’t have to do what I do, you just have to 
do what I say. Be yourself in whatever it is that you do. That’s really the big 
key to it. 
You’re not going to be like me or anybody else. Be yourself. Be your own 
genuine, authentic self on stage and that’s the only thing that’s going to 
need to come across. You’ve got to let the show be your soul. You’ve got to 
put your soul into it. When you do that, then it becomes real. It becomes an 
art form. Then you can do waking suggestions. You can do tests. You can 
do inductions. 
When people feel that you are real and genuine and you’re just having a 
good time, no matter how you present it, then you’re just your real authentic 
self that’s the biggest suggestion of all.
What is a waking suggestion? 
When you talk about waking suggestions in the hypnosis show, it begins 
with you; when people see you. So, my first experience that’s a waking 
suggestion, they look at it and they go I think this guy is serious. There’s 
something about that that just looks real I think he might be the real deal. 
He might be a stage hypnotist. I can tell by the way he presents that he’s 
not messing around.
You do the same thing. The hypnotic thing begins with your promotion of 
who you are as a human being. It could be on the Internet or it could be 
posters for your show. Does that make sense? When you walk down the 
Students:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
21
                                 
street, are you a hypnotist? Who are you? These are things that go on in 
your mind, but there’s a time, of course, when you just turn it all off 
because, of course, you can’t be a hypnotist all the time. It gets just a little 
bit nutty. 
It gets really nutty and can become overwhelming, especially if you have 
the opportunity – and someday you will have the opportunity – to travel to 
places where they take very good care of you and you’ll be like this 
celebrity where everybody’s looking at you because you’re all over the TV, 
radio and newspaper. You can’t go anywhere because everybody knows, 
hey, aren’t you… it’s you. Yes.
Pretty soon you kind of go, I just want to go to the beach. Put on the
sunglasses and hat and disappear. When you get to do that, then it’s kind 
of cool. It’s kind of fun. 
So the suggestion begins with your promotion of who you are as a person 
in your show because that’s why you’re here – to do shows or promotions. 
Whether you want to work on the stage, in a theater or nightclub, whether 
you want to do corporate gigs or whether you use it to hone your 
demonstrational skills in your own business for a group of people to excite 
the imaginations of your clients by doing demonstrations in getting a little 
compliance going there. 
So you get these yes sets that are going on because you want to build 
rapport with everybody and a waking suggestion continues. It continues 
with your promotion on your video with your photographs, with your own 
presence. When people come to your show, the suggestions continue. Your 
show in the showroom or, however, you present that you want it to look 
elegant and cool. 
You have the stage setup, you have your chairs, you’ve got speakers, 
you’ve got a technician back there working and you’ve got a crew. This all 
says, I think this is serious. It’s all put together pretty well. I think we should 
pay attention to this.
These are all indirect suggestions. An indirect suggestion is also a waking 
suggestion. When you go to a doctor and the doctor says oh, you look 
terrible. That’s why you don’t go to doctors.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
22
                                 
Street Hypnosis Gift
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Eric:
How many of you were at the one-day training that I did I think it was in 
November over at Lowe’s? How many of you here? When I was here with 
these guys, remember we did the handshake?
You looked awful.
How does that work?
It’s wonderful.
Yeah. Please stand up. So say again. You were at Lowe’s and what 
happened, what was the suggestion. 
You were in the class, and you were teaching. In fact, we walked out and 
then remember that little yogurt place? It was an awesome place. We went 
there and poor little girl, she just looked awful tired. Basically, he showed us 
how us, hey, how are you doing? Oh, my God, you look awfully tired. You’re 
holding their hand and you go, how would you like to feel and have a lot of 
energy right now? Wouldn’t that gift feel good to you? He talked us through 
the whole then.
Then you’re just shaking their hands and on four, you close their eyes and 
make them feel really good and then wake them back up. Boom! Hey, don’t 
you feel great? Isn’t that awesome. You did wonderful. They’re like oh yeah.
So it was cool. We tried it a Wal-Mart and they wanted to kick us out. 
In fact, I think that is so cool–there are only a handful of you that know that–
I’m going to teach the rest of you that right now. It’s a very cool waking 
suggestion and it’s a good way for you to practice your demonstrational 
skills out there on the strip tonight, out there in the rooms in the casino. Try 
not to do it to the guy flipping cards. Somebody will grab you by the back of 
the neck and then you’ll be in this room where people are beating you to a 
bloody pulp.
I would suggest not near the gambling.
That’s what I’m talking about right there, they take it pretty seriously. Just 
like you are taking it seriously when you’re a stage hypnotist, right? Those 
guys out there mean business and they’re known to thump you. 
I need a volunteer up here please, with this waking suggestion. Yeah, come 
on up here. Eric, how are you doing?
Very good. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
23
                                 
Spencer:
Eric:
Spencer:
Eric:
Spencer:
Eric:
Spencer:
Eric:
Spencer:
Eric:
Spencer:
[
]
Eric:
Spencer:
Where are you from?
Amsterdam.
Oh yeah, we talked on the Internet, didn’t we? That’s right. Okay. Good, 
cool. One of the reasons I picked you is because it’s a long flight, right? Is 
the jet lag going down a little bit?
Yes.
I thought you looked kind of bad. No, so I want to help you because if I can 
show you a way to feel a little bit better in less than a minute, you’d like that
wouldn’t you?
Sure.
Are you getting this? Listen to what I’m doing. Watch. He’s got jet lag. You 
got jet lag you look awful. You’ve got to be tired. I know I just got back from 
Dubai. It’s the same kind of a trip, maybe about six hours more, but its jet 
lag. 
Yeah, I can see that.
You can see that in me?
You’re jetlagged.
I’m jetlagged.
Laughter
Wow, you feel how he turned that around on me. If I could show you a way 
to relax in less than a minute, you’d like that wouldn’t you?
Sure.
Here’s what I’m going to do. I’m going to take your hand and I’m going to 
shake it four times 1-2-3-4 just like that. The first time I shake your hand,
your eyes are going to want to close down, and that’s fine. 
The second time, they’re going to feel heavier. The third time, just close 
them down all the way and the fourth time, just relax completely. Very cool.
So what I want you to do right now is first, take a deep breathe in 
and exhale. That’s very good. Take another deep breath in. Good. 
The first time I shake your hand, your eyes are going to begin to 
close down. The second time, go ahead and let them begin to close 
down. That’s it. Close down all the way. Just relax completely. That’s 
it all the way down.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
24
                                 
I’m going to talk to the audience while I’m sitting here swinging your 
arm around. 
What I’m doing is I’m telling him exactly what to do. So pay attention 
because what I’m doing is I’m also, as I’m doing this, I want to make sure 
that he’s loose, limp and relaxed just like an old wet rag, like an old doll. 
Okay? If this arm is still tight, I’m going to still work it out and say there you 
go, just relax it all. Just let it go.
Now, why do I say take some deep breaths? Because …
Breath is the key to relaxation. 
Relaxation is the key to suggestion. 
Suggestion is the key to hypnosis. 
So now we’ve got him nice and relaxed. This is what I like to do. You walk 
up to the person – this is just waking hypnosis nothing more, nothing less. 
You can turn this into an induction. Basically, it’s already an induction. He’s 
already gone. You just say good, just sleep, all the way down. 
Then, of course, your leg is always braced back here – your back leg –
because you don’t want him to fall over. No matter how little you are, you 
just use that back leg as leverage. Just tighten it up so you’re always there. 
Of course, if you’re a guy or gal, make sure you’re not getting whacked 
because it just doesn’t look good. It’s inappropriate, so I say it in jest, but at 
the same time, this is a serious thing too. 
You want to make sure because if something like that happened, it could be 
misconstrued, and you just don’t want those kinds of ramification, especially 
if you’re in a foreign country that really looks down on things like that. 
In a moment, what I want you to do is go inside your body and find a 
place that is very calm and relaxed, just put it right there in your 
stomach. Find a place in your life, put it right there in your stomach 
and put your hand on it please. Good. 
Take another deep breath into that. Good. I’m going to count to 
three. On number three, open your eyes, bringing back that 
wonderful feeling, feeling relaxed and comfortable in every way. 
Here we go 1-2-3, open your eyes, all the way back. Now take a 
long, deep breath. Fill up your lungs and stretch. 
How do you feel? Wonderful! Okay, did you guys see that? Let’s break up 
into groups and let’s do that little experience right there. This is called 
waking hypnosis. Again, the waking hypnosis, I want you to take it from that 
into an induction. Did you guys see how I did that? Do I need to show you 
again?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
25
                                 
Students:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Yes.
Okay. Have a seat. I’ll take one more person very quickly. Sure, come on 
up. It’s the same thing. Find somebody. Oh, you looked stressed out. This 
is what you do. You walk up to somebody – this is a waking suggestion, 
and this works very good if you’re out there and you walk into a restaurant 
or into a store. People are stressed out to the max. They’re overloaded and 
overstimulated with everything that’s going on out there. 
If I could show you a way to relax in less than a minute you’d like that, 
wouldn’t you?
Yes.
Of course you would. So here’s what I’m going to do. I’m going to take your 
hand and shake it. I’m going to shake your hand four times. 
The first time I do, your eyes are going to want to close down. 
The second time, your eyes are going to want to close down even further. 
The third time, just let them close down, and 
The fourth time, just relax completely. 
What I want you to do is take a deep breath in and exhale.
Now remember, I have a person breathe, because breath helps you to 
relax. You get oxygen into the brain and the brain goes ahh, yes. Now if you 
are a smoker, smoking doesn’t relax you, the deep breathing does. –A little 
tip from the hypnotist.–
Take another deep breath in now and exhale. Good. The second 
time I shake your hand, your eyes are going to want to close down 
all the way and the third time, just close them down all the way. 
Good. The fourth time, just relax completely. There you go. 
Do you see how we do that? It’s very simple. Good. 
Relax all the way down. There you go. 
You can do this during class, but don’t do this out there with people on the 
strip that you might have somebody smack you, but here in class you can 
do it because everybody knows that we’re doing hypnosis. So practice it 
here in class. I mean you can do whatever you want. I’m not here to tell you 
what to do.
Good, now just sleep all the way down. Way down. Good. Nice and 
relaxed. Good.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
26
                                 
They’re already there. You’re just saying good, now just let it go all the way 
and just sleep. You can do it anyway that you want to. 
On the count of three, open your eyes feeling fantastic. Before I do, 
standing up straight, I want you to go inside yourself, and I want you 
to find a place in your life where you’re totally calm and at peace with 
yourself. Got it? 
Just take that and put it in your stomach. Put your hand down there 
please. Good. Breathe into it. Good. I’m going to count to three. 
Bring that good feeling all the way back with you 1-2-3, eyes all the 
way open now. Take a long, deep breath. Fill up your lungs and 
stretch. Good. How do you feel?
Good. 
Good. See, more waking suggestions. Open your eyes feeling wonderful, 
feeling great feeling good. Give him a round of applause and make him feel 
good.
Applause
Another hypnotic tip for you from the hypnotherapeutic side of this –
because I started as a clinical hypnotherapist, so I worked very hard as a 
clinician for about 10 years, working with everything you could imagine. 
When I do that, when I have a person find a happy time in their life and put 
it in their stomach, it’s because people hold onto anxiety right here. This is 
usually where a person feels stressed, tension and anxiety is right here in 
the pit of their gut. 
So if you can anchor them for this moment to this good feeling, wouldn’t 
that be a cool thing for you to be able to do and for them to be able to take 
with them? Give them a gift. I mean seriously, you’re out there playing with 
people, but give them a gift. Give them something very nice. That’s what 
that’s for. 
Now open your eyes, feeling wonderful. 
All right, let’s have at it. 
We’ve got to move along because time’s running out. You can practice this 
on your break if you haven’t done this. How many of you guys got to do 
three people? How many of you did two? All right, that’s good enough. 
When you started off, you were talking about awful tired. I was wondering 
what exactly the suggestion was. Are you feeling awful or are you feeling 
tired? What was the point of that double…
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
27
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
How would you like it to be?
I don’t know. 
However an individual wants to take it there’s no rhyme or reason for either 
one, truthfully. You could just say oh wow, you look very tired. You look 
awfully tired. You look terrible. You can go into all sorts of tangents, but you 
could use you look awfully tired and, of course, there’s that double meaning 
in there, right?
Yeah.
You don’t need to do that. There again, this isn’t about using conversational 
language or mind bending language in this segment. This is just about 
learning how to work with people, how to get comfortable with people. Put 
all the rest of that aside. Wow, you look tired and stressed, man, if I could 
show you a way to relax in less than a minute you’d like that wouldn’t you?
Excellent. Thank you. 
You’re welcome. Did everybody get that? Does that make sense? All right 
good. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
28
                                 
Group Hypnosis Demo
Let’s move on to another thing here because when you’re working with 
groups, there will be a part where you will do like a fractionization type of 
relaxation. Not always because groups will be different. Sometimes you’ll 
work with groups where you don’t need to do anything except just look at 
somebody and go sleep-sleep-sleep-sleep-sleep. It’s just way cool and it 
looks good. It’s not for every group.
With other groups, we have to do things like, all right, I’m going to teach you 
guys how to relax before we do anything at all. This is another way to work 
with groups. 
This is also about doing suggestibility tests and it’s about getting convincers 
with the people that you’re working with out there so that they know that 
something different is going on with them.
For example, everybody sit back in your chairs. Put your feet flat on the 
floor. Take your hands and put your hands palms down on your lap. All 
right, cool. Before we begin, I’m going to do a little group thing. You guys 
like doing group things, right? All right good. 
Go ahead and close your eyes down all the way. In just a moment, I 
will begin to relax you step-by-step and as I do, simply concentrate. 
What I’d like you to do right now first is just take a long deep breath 
in through your nose and hold it all the way in. Exhale slowly through 
your mouth and just sleep now.
When you hear me use the words “sleep” or “sleep now” during this 
little demonstration, it’s simply a word. It’s a suggestion. It’s an idea 
for your mind and body to relax completely. During your time here 
with me, whenever you hear me use the word “sleep” or “sleep now,” 
it’s simply a suggestion, an anchor for your mind and body to relax 
instantly and completely. 
So I’d like you to think about relaxing all the muscles from the top of 
your head down to the tips of your toes. Think it and you will begin to 
experience it. Think of relaxing all the muscles from the top of your 
head down to the tips of your toes. Think it and you will begin to 
experience it.
Breathe in deeply and breathe out. The deeper you breathe the 
better you feel. The better you feel the more relaxed you become. 
The more relaxed you become, the easier it is for you to follow 
simple hypnotic ideas. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
29
                                 
Take another deep breath in and breathe out. Send a wave of 
relaxation one more time from the top of your head all the way down 
to the tips of your toes. Think it and you will be experience it. You 
may even think about taking a blue ray of light and as you breathe in, 
just breathe in that blue ray of light. Send it down to every muscle, 
nerve, cell and fiber of your body. Think it and you will begin to 
experience it.
I want you to make sure that your neck is comfortable. So if you 
would, go ahead and move your head about just a little bit. Move 
your head around and get all the stress, all the tension and all of the 
anxiety of the day out of you. Let it go completely. Move your head 
around and as you do that your head will come to rest. Let it rest 
down on your shoulder or even down towards your chest. Let all the 
tension go. Let yourself relax. Relaxing easily, naturally and 
comfortable. 
You can start by thinking about relaxing the muscles in your head 
and across your face, all the way down into your neck and across 
your shoulders. Let all those muscles become loose, limp and 
completely relaxed. Let it go down your arms, your right arm, your 
left arm and into your hands. Relax. Relax. Relax.
All the muscles in your chest and your stomach let them become 
completely loose, all limp and lazy. Even into your back, all the large 
and small muscles running up and down your spine let them go. 
Think it and you will begin to experience it.
You will experience all the muscles relaxing in your body, your torso 
and down into your legs - right leg, left leg - it doesn’t matter which 
leg relaxes first. It could be your hands, the handiest place to let go 
before your leg does.
What’s important is that you know how to relax comfortably here in 
the chair in your feet, into your toes, so that every muscle, every 
nerve and fiber is totally loose and limp and completely relaxed.
As you relax, I want you to notice that you do have two arms. You 
have a right arm; you have a left arm. Focus on your arms. Focus on 
those hands. In a moment, I’m going to count from 1 to 10 and as I 
do, your hand, your arm – and it doesn’t matter which one, because 
your body knows which arm is going to feel light and which is going 
to be heavy. 
As I count from 1 to 10, allow that light arm to begin to move and lift 
and rise and drift right up into the air, right up towards the ceiling, 
relaxing you more and more. You might even want to imagine that 
there’s a balloon in front of you. A beautiful balloon filled with helium. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
30
                                 
With each number I count from 1 to 10, that balloon continues to 
expand, and as it does that balloon gets lighter and lighter, and 
there’s a string attached to the balloon coming down and it’s 
wrapped around your wrist, the wrist of that arm, that hand that’s 
light. 
On number one now, that balloon begins to move and lift and rise up 
into the air. That string is actually tugging on your wrist. It’s actually 
lifting your arm, your hand up off of your lap, up into the air, up 
towards the ceiling, relaxing you more and more. At the same time, 
your other arm is heavy. 
Number two and three it’s moving, lifting, rising and floating. Number 
four, higher and higher still, coming up all the way. Number five and 
six, that arm now begins to go faster and faster. The more you 
breathe, the faster it goes up into the air at number seven and 
number eight. On number nine, I want you to take that light arm and 
put it directly above your head. The arm that feels lighter than the 
heavy arm, bring it all the way above your head right now. Do it now. 
I want you to make a tight fist above your head. Make a tight fist if 
you would please. I want you to squeeze that hand together as 
tightly as you can. Squeeze it together tighter and tighter. Make sure 
that the hand is tight; your arm is locked tight, it’s like a solid steel 
bar. 
I want you to squeeze that hand together. Make sure that hand is 
locked. It’s glued. It will not come apart. Your arm is tight. It will not 
bend. Try to bend your arm and it’s stuck above your head. Your 
hand will not come apart. Your hand is stuck. Your hand will not 
open. It’s stuck tight. Very good. 
Before you do another thing, simply open your eyes and look around. 
Very cool. Release your hands, release your arms and take a deep 
breath. Now just relax. 
What am I doing here? This is a simple fractionation teaching the mind and 
body how to relax. You as a stage hypnotist will use this often in an 
audience. Why? Well, time’s ticking, I got two minutes to tell you and then 
we’re going to take a break.
You want to find the people who are highly responsive and from that you 
can pick people out of the audience to bring up on stage to do 
demonstrations. Outside of doing this in a stage show environment, just 
using it in a corporate situation or doing demonstrations for corporate 
groups, it’s a win-win situation because you want to find the best subjects, 
and then you can do demonstrations. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
31
                                 
The purpose of doing demonstrations for smaller groups is to excite the 
imagination of everybody in the room. Wow, if this can happen for that 
person, what can hypnosis do for me? If it’s possible for them, what is the 
possibility for me?
Some people didn’t have the same response. Maybe their arm didn’t go as 
high or maybe it didn’t move at all. That is not a problem. Within the human 
condition, the human mind, we all have different levels of responsiveness.
That’s not a big idea to the stage hypnotist. 
When you’re doing stage hypnosis you’re just there for one reason – to 
perform, to excite the imagination and to get the very best subjects up here 
on the stage so that you can do your show. You’re not there to try to teach 
somebody else how to go into trance when you’re up here trying to do a 
show, that’s not what it’s about. 
If you have a subject come up here that wants to try to hypnotized and 
they’re having a hard time, thank you for coming up here. I think you’ll enjoy 
the show more out here. Come back again and try another time. Make it no 
big deal. The hypnotist does not fail. The subject fails by not responding 
appropriately. Make it part of the show, but don’t make a big deal out of it.
I know a lot of hypnotists will get freaked out and go oh, my gosh, they’re 
not responding right. What am I going to do? Just get them off the stage. 
Use good subjects. If you apply a test like this beforehand and you say 
okay, all you people with your arms that are still stuck in there, I think you’re 
going to have a lot of fun come on up here to the stage right now and take a 
seat. 
Does that make sense?
Yes!
My job here is to make sure that you guys go out there and do a good job 
because you know what? You are going to be a reflection of what it is that 
Igor and I are teaching you. So you are going to get the best of the best 
here because we want to make sure that when you guys go out there and 
do that, you’re going to be a reflection of what we’re teaching you. 
Listen, I’m going to have nothing but the best people out there doing the 
best shows around the world, got it.
Yes.
All right. If you’re out there and you’re doing a bad show, I don’t know you. 
Laughter
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
32
                                 
I’ll tell them you learned from this other guy down the street on the Strip. 
They were just using my name, and it’s not true. So here we go. We’re 
going to take a 15-minute break. Then come back, and we’re going to have 
some fun. If you want to practice out there some more, please do so. 
Give yourselves a round of applause for doing this so far.
Applause
[
]

