© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
1
                                 
DVD 8 – How to Practice the Start of Your Stage Hypnosis 
Show So It Runs Perfectly Every Time
Troubleshooting Q&A’s
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
I have a question more related to what you were saying about how not to 
take subjects that are drunk or on drugs, but in Las Vegas or in the venues 
you’re in, most people are already drinking. How to you differentiate 
between someone who’s – obviously, you can tell if someone is just 
stumbling drunk, but most people at a bar or in a club are going to be 
already intoxicated.
That’s a presumption on your part. A lot of the people will be drinking, and 
most people are drinking, but not everybody is drunk. So when I say drunk, 
I’m talking about the person who comes up there obviously drunk. That’s 
when you say thanks man, I think you’re going to have a much better time 
out there. That’s how I handle that. Does that make sense?
Yeah, so does a little bit of alcohol affect hypnosis that much?
No. A little bit doesn’t, but everybody’s different. Everybody has a different 
tolerance, so I don’t know. It’s just something that you’re going to get a feel 
for as you begin to work with people. Some people can have a few drinks, 
but if they’ve had too much to drink, they’re not going to concentrate and 
they’re going to be kind of goofy. You’ll see a lot of drunks, and they’re just 
being goofy. Just get them off the stage. 
There are times when I’ve had somebody who’s been goofy drunk like that, 
and I’ll just grab them and say sleep and I’ll them on the floor. Just leave
them there. They’re better off over there. They’re not going to bug me, and 
they’re not going to bug the audience. Then if you get the person who’s 
really drunk who’s just obnoxious, then you just get a bouncer to get them 
out of there. The thing is the audience isn’t there to watch a crazy drunk. 
They don’t want them up there. 
Yeah, I was just going to say I’ve been bartending for 20 years and I’m a 
hypnotist. I pull almost all of my client’s right out of my bar. There’s a big 
difference between somebody who has a scotch or a beer after work and 
somebody who slams a bottle of scotch after work. 
It’s pretty obvious, even a rooky bartender is going to be able to pick that 
guy out. You’re going to see him. You will. Somebody who’s got a shot and
a beer in them – I mean I’m hypnotizing people in my bar all the time 
without them even knowing it, constantly. That’s how I get my clients, so the 
alcohol thing, you’ll be able to tell. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
2
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
So does that make sense for you then? So don’t worry about it. It won’t 
happen that often, but I say that because if the person is really drunk, 
they’re going to be a bad subject anyway. 
I guess I would say my fear – that might not even be the best word, but for 
me, the most important part of being a stage hypnotist is the pre-talk. To 
me, I think if you get the pre-talk down, everything is like a piece of cake. I 
got most of what you’re saying can you go over it again?
Sure. I’d be happy to do that. I hear what you’re saying. I want to add 
something to that. Probably 99% of the time, I never do a pre-talk. I do it as 
I go up and start talking to people, and I do it very quickly. After I get 
volunteers up here, then I do a pre-talk with these people up here on the 
stage. 
That’s just the way that I do it, but there’s a lot of value in what you’re 
saying because it will stack the odds in your favor by talking to the audience 
for a little bit, and talking to them about hypnosis – what it’s like and how 
the mind works. So if you wanted to do education and entertainment, you 
can certainly do that. Does that make sense? 
Not necessarily education, because I realize that we’re entertainers and we 
don’t really want to educate people about what hypnosis is all about, but 
getting our volunteers. I mean the fear I was talking about is calling for 
volunteers and no one comes forward. I’m thinking that whatever your pre-
talk is sets the rapport that you need to have…
Let me tell you a story that I think you can relate to. I was invited to do a 
high school reunion. I think it was a 20-year reunion. They hired me and 
they paid me a lot of money. This was in Utah a number of years ago. So I 
went to it, and I got up there and they introduced me. It was in a ballroom 
like this, which is where high school reunions are. I went in there and talked 
to the group for a while. I gave a nice pre-talk, a very thorough one. 
Then I said whoever would like to try this, please come on up. Nobody 
wanted to get hypnotized. Nobody wanted to come up. I’m sitting there 
going, wow. It doesn’t really matter to me because I’ve already been paid, 
but you guys are here and I’m here. I’ll tell you what, how about I give this 
to you because I don’t want to just leave here and take your money. 
How about if I talk to you a little more about the dynamics of the human 
mind would that interest you? They go, yeah, so I spent the next 15 minutes 
talking about why people have fears and insecurities. I talked to them about 
anxiety. I talked to them about confidence and no confidence and about 
what it’s like to grow up as a child with all your friends.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
3
                                 
So now, here we are 20 years later in a room, if somebody sees what I’m 
doing right now that’s different then what I did 20 years ago or if I have had 
some secrets. Then, all the sudden I’m hypnotized and they see something 
that happened or they hear me say something that happened, boy, that’s 
not going to be good. I don’t want any of my secrets to come out. 
This high school reunion invited me to do a show and they paid me a lot of 
money. Nobody wanted to get hypnotized after a lengthy pre-talk. A very, 
very good one, I did a good job. I already had maybe 2,000 shows under 
my belt, so I was pretty confident in what I was doing, but nobody wanted to 
come up, so I decided to talk to them about their own fears and insecurities. 
After I did that, I said now you know what, you guys can continue to live in 
that fear or you can take a risk right now and enjoy something really cool 
that could happen for you just by coming up here and having a good time. 
Who would like to do that now? The whole stage filled up. How do you 
know? Even on the best night, setting up right, there are so many different 
dynamics to that. 
Another example I wanted to add on to that. When I was doing shows at the 
Avalon Theater – I did that for 6 ½ years straight, every Saturday night – I 
never did a pre-talk; never. Partly was because people already knew what 
to expect. They knew what to expect because they had heard about what I 
do to people when they come to my show there. I don’t mess around, man. 
I’d have people come to the show lining up in front of the stage. I’d have 30 
or 40 people lined up in front of the stage. You’re shaking your head 
because you were there. How many of my shows did you go to there in Salt 
Lake?
Quite a few. Yeah, I’ll ask you to talk about that later because I think that 
was pretty cool you were there, I didn’t realize that. But I liked to take 20, 30 
or however many people wanted to volunteer. They would come up here 
and they would line up sometimes two and three bodies thick. I’d have them 
put their hands over their heads and they’d lock them up like this. Then I’d 
just take and grab them and say, sleep, and just drop them across the 
stage. That’s it. That was my show. It had begun right then. 
People would walk in, the lights were off, I had strobe lights going, I had 
funky flashing lights going and I had smoke everywhere. It was like a rock n’
roll show, it was a rock n’ roll show. It was a nice production. I’d just drop 
people. Then after they were dropped, I’d say everybody on the count of 
three get up here on the chairs very quickly, and I went right into my routine
just like that, just smoked it down.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
4
                                 
There’s an entertainment aspect of it. It depends on how you want to 
present yourself. Who are you talking to? I would never do that for a 
corporate group. I would take time. I would dress up and give them what 
they want. I would talk to them very politely in a very businesslike manner 
because I would have more rapport. 
But, people coming to that show, they just wanted to be messed with. They 
just wanted to see what’s the hypnotist going to do tonight? What’s he 
going to wear this time? What’s he going to look like? What’s he going to do 
that’s crazy? 
Does that answer that question? Does anybody else have any questions 
before we break into little groups? 
Yeah, I don’t know how relevant it is, but like you got a room – have you 
pre-designated I’m going to have 20 chairs up there on the stage? I guess 
it’s a ratio maybe. You have 250 people in the audience, so you say to your 
staff or whatever, I want 20 chairs. Or is it 10 or five. How do you develop 
how many you want to work with?
The chairs that are sitting up here are part of the suggestion. I’ve got 20 
empty chairs up there. People are sitting up there going, one, two, three… 
they’re looking around going I wonder who’s going to be doing this? People 
are out there talking about it, and they’re trying to figure out what’s going to 
be happening? So I always have 20 chairs up there. 
I normally will not do an audience under 500 people anyway. I just don’t 
want to. I like larger audiences, but I will. I mean if somebody hires me and 
wants to pay me $5,000 to do 200 people, that’s fine. I don’t care. But I’ll 
still have the same amount of chairs up there. That gives everybody an 
opportunity. 
Whoever wants to try it they can, because even if you have 20 chairs, 
maybe not everybody will get hypnotized, but I’m going to give them a 
chance. My job is not to educate these people. It’s like let’s have fun. If 
you’re not going to be a good subject, get off my stage.
Right. Now again, going back to – I live in a real small town. I’m going to do 
the Elk’s Lodge or the Lion’s Club. You know four, five or six. That way, you 
can kind of keep it under control. 
Those are the most fun. No. Don’t do five or six chairs up there. Don’t. Don’t 
do it. Don’t have less than 15 chairs up on your stage ever. 
Don’t have less than 15?
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
5
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
[
]
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Don’t do it. Don’t do it. Do not do it. If you only have five chairs, you’ve only 
got five people. What if they all suck? You’re going to have a bad night. I 
would rather have 15 possibilities up here than five people that are not 
going to be very responsive, especially in the Elk’s Lodge. 
I’ll be lucky to have 50 people at the Elk’s Lodge.
Say that again.
I’ll be lucky to have 50 people at the Elk’s Lodge.
That’s interesting programming you’re doing for yourself how does that 
work? Do you hear what you’re saying?
I don’t get it. No. Oh, I see what you’re saying. Okay.
I say that with all due respect because, listen, we’re here to program 
ourselves to be powerful, confident, competent stage hypnotists, and we 
have to think differently. I am not going to go into a room where I’m going to 
be lucky if I get 50 people. No way. I’m going to make sure that I have at 
least 100, 200, 500 or whatever it’s going to take to make my show 
successful.
I see. 
Applause
That’s part of the deal. We only have a few more minutes, so I want to 
break up into groups. I know that we’re covering a lot of ground.
Yesterday we were talking about shock. I noticed you did the shock 
induction and they stayed there the whole time. How does that work?
I hear what you’re saying. Understand that we’re a room full of hypnotists. 
Can I do that in a room of non-hypnotists? Yes, but there’s a different level 
of what we’re doing in this room where things take place unconsciously. 
I don’t want to sugar-coat it and make it sound like something different is 
going on. If I do a shock induction and they stand there, why do they stand 
there? Well, number one they’re hypnotized and I tell them to stand there. 
The unconscious mind does what it’s told. If there’s no other logical reason 
for it to not do it, it will say okay. That’s the nature of the subconscious 
mind. 
The conscious mind is the intellectual mind that’s always going whoa, 
what’s going on here? The subconscious mind is the emotional mind and it 
just goes yep, whatever you want I don’t care. It’s the one that says yep,
feels good to me. Does that make sense?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
6
                                 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Yeah, it’s just that it was very clear yesterday that you want to take
advantage of that moment, because they’ll come back up. 
Are you talking about like doing a street demonstration type thing?
Is it different than what you just did?
It’s really no different. What did you want to say?
I would sometimes come back up, like I know that my eyes opened a 
couple of times, but when I heard the sound of his voice and you guys 
laughing, I remember my mind said oh, deepen. Go down, and I would go 
back down to the same deep state.
Listen, the people that I have up here on stage that I’m going to keep, 
they’re hypnotized no matter. They can sit there and chat back and forth 
and they can look at you and smile and do whatever, but I can over there 
and go sleep, it doesn’t really matter because they’re still going to drop. 
Wide awake, do you see what I’m saying? It doesn’t really matter because 
you are the constant performer. You take control of what’s happening. So 
we don’t worry about those things. I know you’re asking because you 
haven’t seen it, you’re not familiar with it and you haven’t done that so you 
don’t have that experience. 
That’s what we’re doing here now. That’s why I’m going over this and really 
stressing it to you and trying to give it to you in a real simple manner. It’s 
like, this is what you can do, and you’re going to know it as you get out 
there and begin to do it and have the experience. One day you’re going to 
go, I get it. Now I get it. It just works. You’ll know by doing. 
I’m so proud of all you who have been going out there and just doing it, I 
think it’s awesome. You guys are blowing my mind. I’m going to have to 
follow some of you guys out there and see what’s happening.
Spencer?
Yes?
Don, may I interject something there.
Yes.
I think one of the things that – I don’t know if you were in the Hypnosis 
Certification Program training that we did with Igor, but one of the things 
that we learned in that is that just because somebody opens their eyes or 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
7
                                 
says something does not necessarily mean that they have come out of 
trance. They can still be in trance and they can actually still respond.
Does that clarify that for you?
Yes.
It is important to do the deepeners. If you think back, what I’ve been saying 
is everything is a deepener. I’ve already clarified that. Everything I do –
listen, during your time up here with me, the sound of my voice helps you to 
go deeper into hypnosis. So, as I’m talking they’re still going deeper. 
There’s a part, like she said I hear his voice and I just seem to get 
hypnotized. 
So the sound of my voice, the music and everything becomes a hypnotic 
suggestion; everything. Everything in the environment is part of it.
Can I just add a little something?
Add it.
Thank you. Last night I had a group of four people in front of me. It was a 
husband and wife, husband and wife. I was doing a quick induction and the 
gentleman with the baseball cap on was going down really quick. So I woke 
everybody else up and I listened to what you said last night about bringing 
the audience in.
So I had them stand all around me and I said, okay, we’re going to have 
some fun with them. Wake up, wake up; watch, watch, watch. I said, okay 
play with the ball, your energy ball in your hand. The guy was going like 
this. I said, the more you play with the ball, the deeper you’re going to go. 
Just like Don was up there just talking about the sound of my voice, the 
laughter of the crowd, the applause, that has a deepening effect. So they’re 
getting fractionated when they come up and they go down. Then, I said 
what I’m going to do is I’m going to take your baseball cap off and as soon 
as I take your baseball cap off, you are going to go down.
I took it and he went out. He had his hands in front of him and I was playing 
with the crowd at that point, and I said okay here we go. I just grabbed him 
and jerked him and sleep. Just like Don was saying, use the words that he’s 
saying. Listen to him. Every time you apply something, use the sound 
around you. 
We were in a bar last night. You couldn’t frickin’ hear your own voice. There 
were four women up in front of us and one of them was scared to fly. I took 
the music, had her dance with the music to get over the fear of flying. So 
you can use anything around you to put people down.
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
8
                                 
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Okay, let’s move on. We’ve only got a couple of minutes left, so I need to 
wrap up this session anyway. 
Let me ask you, are you getting a good understanding of this preshow, 
before the show even begins? Is it making sense to you?
Yes.
Is it really making sense to you?
Yes!
Okay. 
What we’re going to be doing here, in two minutes we’re going to be taking 
a break. Go outside and mingle with yourselves. Enjoy it. When we come 
back, Igor is going to be taking over the next section. He’s going to do a 
bunch of group things with you to help take what we’ve done here and build 
on it so you can have some more fun with that.
Have I woken these guys up yet?
No.
Are you guys woken up yet? A couple of you. Yes. No. Well, that will give 
you something to think about, and when you think about this other thing, 
remember, everybody is already in a trance. It doesn’t matter. You don’t 
have to apply a hypnotic induction to put a person in a trance. Even a 
person that says I cannot be hypnotized I go, oh cool, you’re the, “I can’t be 
hypnotized trance person.”
So everybody is in a trance already. We’ve just got to figure out what it is. 
Once we figure out what that trance is, anybody can be hypnotized quick. 
Just have fun with it, and that’s all I do. If you’re out there on the street 
doing it’s the same thing I do on stage with somebody. If I’m having a 
problem, if I have time, I might talk to them and figure out what’s going on. 
Who are you? What do you need? What do you want? I’ll talk to them and 
get some rapport-building skills going on there. 
Then when I find that moment of passivity that I know then I’ll say, oh cool. 
Sleep! Bam! Does that make sense? The moment of passivity when you’re 
doing street hypnosis, or even stage hypnosis, I’m always looking at 
people. I’m looking at their eyes. I’m looking at their demeanor. I’m trying to 
figure out who’s who, what’s what and how am I going to do it?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
9
                                 
I look for that moment of passivity. It’s this look that you see in a persons 
eyes and in their face and when you know, it’s like yeah, they’re mine. For 
those of you out there who have been doing this and hypnotizing a lot of 
people, you know what I mean. The moment of passivity is that moment 
when a person’s conscious mind just kind of goes… and the subconscious 
mind opens up and you can go, sleep, now!
So go out and have a moment of passivity. We’ll see you back here in just a 
little bit. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
10
                                 
Practice Your Intro
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Welcome back. How are you all doing? 
Great.
Did you enjoy the last section? 
Yes.
If I understand it correctly, you spent the morning looking at the whole 
preshow thing, how to get to the point where the show is actually rolling and 
you’re doing all your demos and that sort of stuff. 
What we’re going to do now is get you guys to do it. It’s one thing seeing it. 
It’s actually another thing rehearsing it and doing it yourself. In a moment, 
we’re going to hand out a little strip of paper like this. I’d like you to look for 
your name and we’re going to get into groups of six. 
You’ll notice that there will be gray and white strips, and each pairing of 
gray and white is one group, so there will be one group of six. In fact, I 
might as well just quickly give you an announcement and read the names 
out. We’re going to have, I think, its 12 or 13 groups. 
So if I just point to different parts of the room, if you would just move over 
there. Bring chairs with you because you’re going to do exactly the same 
thing you saw Spence doing here. So you’ll have six people per group. 
Some groups will be a little smaller just because of numbers. We’ll manage 
those. Don’t worry about the strips right now. We’ll hand them out 
afterwards. We’ll just move into groups now. Then we’ll start doing those 
things bit by bit. Sound good? 
So you all have your groups. Make yourselves comfortable. Here’s what 
we’re going to do. Give each other within your groups a number from 1-5 or 
1-6. That will be the order you’ll be taking turns in today. It allows us to keep 
things rolling as we go along. 
I want number 1 to be the hypnotist first, then number 2, 3 and so on and so 
forth. Make sense? Go ahead and number yourselves now and then we’ll 
start the actual training. 
Hypnotists please stand up. Everyone else, please line up in front of them 
as though you were sitting in these chairs here. Okay, I think we’re looking 
good here. 
We’re going to start with the whole preshow step-by-step. We’re going to 
assume that the intro music and all that stuff we’ve been talking about, has 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
11
                                 
been dealt with. So you have just been announced. You’re going to now 
walk onto the stage and you’re going to do two things. You’re going to be 
off stage in a moment and you’re going to walk on like someone just 
introduced you. In fact, you can have one of your group members introduce 
you if you like. 
You’re going to walk on with a big smile in your full performance character. 
Make sure you walk on you get into that peripheral vision state we did 
yesterday. When you walk on, two things you’re going to do, the only things 
you’re going to do are:
1. Introduce yourself. 
Hi, I’m Igor. 
2. Give them a 10- maybe 20-second intro about the show or hypnosis 
in general.
Hi, I’m Igor. I’m your hypnotist tonight. We’re going to have a great time. For 
those of you who don’t about hypnosis, it’s just the power of the mind. 
We’re not going to ask you to do anything today other than have fun. I’m 
going to ask you to do nothing I wouldn’t ask my own mother to do. 
It doesn’t really matter how you introduce yourself. I only want to have a 10-
to 20-second self intro, plus an intro for your show in general. Does that 
make sense? It’s going to be very, very quick. In this next bit we’re going to 
be zipping through a lot of things very quickly and you’ll have several go’s 
at this so I don’t think about it too much. It will evolve as we go along. 
Do you have a general idea of what you want to say when you introduce 
yourself and your show, yes?
Hypnotists, put your hands up when you have general idea of what you 
want to say. All right, put your hands down. Put your hands up if you have 
any questions about this or any concerns or you’re not quite sure what to 
say yet. Here’s your chance. You will be fine because you get to watch 
them first. 
[Makes comment].
Heterosexual, yeah well, that’s good. You’re just going to introduce 
yourself, like hi, my name is Bill. I’m Bill the fastest hypnotist in the world, or 
whatever and then you’re going to introduce your show. Today is a good 
family show. Hypnosis is just the power of the mind. I’m going to show you 
some amazing things. 
Student:
Igor:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
12
                                 
It’s just to make people feel excited about your show that’s all. Remember, 
what is the point of the introduction? It’s to encourage people to volunteer. 
When they come in, people don’t know what to expect yet. Your 
introduction will decide whether, or not people will want to volunteer. 
If you come in and go h-h-h hi, I’m going to hypnotize you now. Please 
come on stage, they’ll go, I don’t know about this. Why don’t you go? So the 
whole purpose of your introduction is to let people know what character 
your show will be and that they’ll be safe up here whatever venue you 
happen to be in.
In nightclubs you can be a little bit more outrageous; at family affairs, you’ll 
be a little bit more conservation; at corporate shows, you’ll be very 
conservative and on. Does that make sense? So just have that sense of 
how you’re going to introduce yourself. Walk on, do the intro and in 30 
seconds’ time I will cut you off, and the next person will be on. We’ll be 
rolling through this very quickly. Make sense?
Does everyone know what we’re doing? Hypnotists off stage, please. Keep 
an ear out for me because I’m going to be timing you and I’ll be switching 
around each group. Okay folks, starting now, 30 seconds, introduce 
yourselves.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
13
                                 
Get Volunteers
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
Student:
Igor:
Okay, folks. Face in so you can see. Was that fun? 
Yes.
A little bit hectic, right? Did you feel a little bit of tingle, like the excitement 
beginning to build now? This is what a show feels like. This is what you’ll be 
doing on the final day, but right now we’re just getting into it step-by-step.
The second step I want you to get used to is calling for volunteers. So, now 
that you’ve got people excited about your show, you want people to start 
volunteering to come on board. Right now, you’re just talking to an 
audience. Do you see what I mean? 
Here’s what I’m going to do. We’re going to have in each group three 
people come up and volunteer. Decide who’s going to be number 1, 2, 3 
and then 4 for volunteers, and numbers 5 and 6 will stay in the audience. 
You have to have a split between audience and volunteers, so that you get 
used to looking in both directions. Make sense? 
Volunteers, when you come up please take your chairs up with you 
because we don’t have enough chairs to go around. When the volunteers 
come up, come up individually. So we’ll have one volunteer, the hypnotist 
will have to keep talking and kind of get you excited and then we’re going to 
get a second volunteer; keep talking, get them excited and then get a third 
volunteer. Does that make sense?
You will have one minute to do the whole thing. You’ll have one minute to 
come in, introduce yourself, call for volunteers and keep teasing them to 
make sure more volunteers come up on stage until you have your full three 
seats. Does that make sense? You have only one minute for the whole lot. 
Decide how you’re going to present that time. Just remember, they’re not all 
going to come up at once, so you’re going to have extra time to keep 
getting them excited and coming up. Does that make sense to everyone? 
Any questions? 
Could you run through it for us?
Sure.
Hi guys, I am Igor. Thank you for your kind welcome. We have a great show 
for you today. It’s all about the power of the mind. I’m going to show you the 
most amazing things about how your mind works. Up here you see five 
chairs. In a moment, I’m going to ask you guys to come up here if you want 
to experience the true power of your own mind. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
14
                                 
You’re going to have the most fun you’ve experienced in a long time. Rest 
assured I’m not going to ask anyone here to do anything I wouldn’t ask my 
own mother to do. So, if you want to have fun, if you want to have a 
discovery of your mind, just come on up right now and experience the 
power of hypnosis in your life. Come on up right now. 
Does that work? Then as people start coming up, that’s right. You’re the 
first one. You’re going to have such a great time. Up you come. Sit right 
over here. Okay everyone else, come on up, come on up. 
Sound good?
Yes.
You have one minute, so please get ready. Is everybody ready to start? 
Your minute starts now.
Applause
Are you starting to feel it? All right. The pressure’s on.
Students:
Igor:
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
15
                                 
Suggestion Demo
Igor:
So, we’ve come on, we’ve introduced ourselves, we’ve excited people 
about the show and we’ve called for volunteers. The next step in the 
sequence is to get more volunteers through the testing phase.
You can kind of mix these up a little bit. You can do the test first and then 
call for volunteers or you can call for volunteer’s first, test everyone and 
have a second run of volunteers come up after that. That’s a very nice way 
of getting more volunteers. Does that make sense?
I’m going to give you two minutes apiece. In those two minutes, you will 
come on, you will introduce yourself, you will introduce your show, you will 
call for volunteers and you will do a quick, simple suggestion demo. It could 
finger vice, it could hand lock, it could be this one. I don’t care which one it 
is, but you’re going to do this with the whole audience. 
When you first call for volunteers, only one person will come up. Just like 
one of those really quiet shows. You’re going to do the test with the whole 
audience and maybe the person on stage if you want, it’s up to you. You’ll 
do it to the whole audience and then whoever can succeed with that, you’ll 
invite them to come up as well. 
Don’t force them. They can still have a choice. You’ll say you guys did 
great. Come on up. You’ll have a great time. You’ll be surprised with how 
good this is, and so on and so forth. Does that make sense?
You’re just adding one more layer to what you’ve done, which is test and 
another call for volunteers. Easy? Ready for this? All right, number 1, 
please get ready. Number 1, are you ready? All right this group’s almost 
ready. Okay, your two minutes start now – exercise begins-.
All stop and just face the front again, please. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
16
                                 
The Induction
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
How’s that? Are you guys having fun? 
Yee haw.
Much better. Do you guys feel like you’re starting to do some showmanship 
stuff here? You’re like in a show, yes? 
The next step is we’re going to do the whole thing again. This time you’re 
going to get three minutes apiece. You may actually have less time in the 
actual show, but three minutes is decent time. 
In the three minutes, you’ll do the same self intro. You’re still into your 
show. You’ll call for volunteers you’ll test and get more volunteers. Then 
we’re going to do the full induction. The full induction is not technically 
necessary to do stage hypnosis, but its part of what people expect, so you 
may as well give it to them. 
I want you to remember three things for the formal induction.
1. Ask the audience to be quiet for the next segment. Build up that 
sense of mystery. Be quiet enough that you can actually do the 
induction with the people on the stage. Help them concentrate. 
So ask the audience politely to give you the space and give the people on 
the stage enough space to be hypnotized and so to be quiet for a few 
minutes whilst you do that.
2. Do your induction.
Literally, take no more than 30 or 40 seconds because you don’t have that 
much time.
3. Get what’s left of your audience to give the people in trance a great 
big cheer as a kind of building anticipation. 
A nice way to frame it is to say, you guys on the stage here, in a moment 
you’re going to hear the sound of your fellow people in the audience 
clapping and applauding. Every time you hear that, you’ll go deeper, and 
you’ll have an even better show.
That sets the atmosphere up so these guys, when they applaud these guys, 
they’ll further in trance and they get a better show, so they get a sense of 
like hey, I’m going to hypno-applaud these people. Does that make sense?
It’s just a very nice frame to build the applause from the audience. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
17
                                 
So is that easy to do? Three minutes apiece. Ready to do this- number 1, 
please get ready. All right folks, ready? Begin. 
Bring your chairs back to the main group. Your time is up. Give yourself a 
round of applause. 
Applause
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
18
                                 
Time Control
Igor:
Students:
Igor:
A couple of things. Did you notice how three minutes is not a very long time 
when you’re doing stuff? This is important. When you do a regular stage 
show, you’ll probably have 15 minutes to do the whole thing you’ve just 
been doing so far; 10 minutes if you want to and that’s a luxury, isn’t it? 
However, this Sunday, remember you’re doing a 9-minute show. If you run 
over, you have like 9 ½ minutes, but then we pull you off. So if it’s the 
middle of the show, you’ll get pulled off in the middle of the show; 
otherwise, the next person in line won’t have a chance to do their own 
promo tape. Does that make sense?
This means you have to be precise in your timing. Don’t worry. You’ll have 
another go at this. Tomorrow we’ll be drilling you on all the timings and 
drilling you on kind of a mini show as well so that you can get prepared for it 
properly. However, this is a taste and something for you to start thinking 
about is what can you cut out? 
Some of you were done with the whole thing within two minutes. Some 
went up to the three-minute mark and you only just started doing the 
suggestion tests and so on. Does that make sense?
So you can do it within the time it is absolutely possible, you just have to cut 
out a lot of the fat in between, all of the wording and verbiage and all that 
sort of stuff. You can start adding that back in as you have more time in 
your show and are making more of a meal of it so people get entertained by 
it too. Does that make sense?
So you should be able to scale your show all the way down to nine minutes, 
which is what you’ll be doing on Sunday. That’s the shortest show in the 
world. If we actually had time to contact the Guinness Book of Records to 
confirm it, you’d probably be in the record books because this is literally the 
shortest hypnosis show if the world and it will be a fun show. 
Then when you do a normal show, like a 60-minute or 90-minute show, you 
have 10 or 15 minutes to do the whole thing. So you can really take your 
time with it. Don’t take half an hour because doing half a show of just doing 
an induction is not fun. 
Did you enjoy that?
Yes!
Thank you.

