© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
1
                                 
DVD 12 – The Complete Guide to Setting Up Your Own Show
Start Of Day
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Do you all feel like you’re hypnotists now? It’s a progressive thing you know, 
you go from point A to point Z, and I don’t know what you all did this morning 
but when I walked in it looked like you all were doing some stage hypnosis 
work. Is that correct?
Yes.
So, at this point I’m curious, how many of you feel like you could walk out of 
here and do a stage show? Right on, I like it.
Can we have time to go find cute outfits?
I’ll tell you what, there are some really awesome outfits around here, I’ve 
been walking around looking at a lot of these stores and they have some 
nice clothes for the guys, ladies whoa! They’re open late. 
Are they open late?
No, Victoria Secret isn’t the place to get clothes for the stage, that’s where 
you get your undies. But they have some great clothes and if you want some 
really cool clothes for the stage, figure you’ll put out around $2000 to $5000. 
You can do less then that, but for some really funky stuff you can do it for 
about a grand, or $500. 
A lot of things I do is, go to old thrift stores to find old funky jackets and stuff, 
because I can get those for under $100, like $30-$40. I’ve got some of the 
coolest coats just from thrift stores. Especially if you live in L.A., I mean go 
down to Melrose. They have places there in Santa Monica, some funky 
stores down there, but any city will have them.
I live in this little place called Kalispell, Montana and I found a jacket down in 
Missoula, which is about 2 hrs south of there. They have this store there with 
this cool old velvet jackets and stuff, so I picked up a couple because I 
thought they were cool. I don’t know if I’ll ever use them, but I like them.
Before I take any questions I want to go a little further, because what we’re 
going to focus on here for the next while in this segment is this. We’re going 
to go over the anatomy of what it’s like to set up a show. You already know 
how to do a show, you’re already there. 
What goes on in the background? We’ve got music laid out here for you. We 
have music running and you all just do your thing, but what do I do when I 
have to find a DJ? For years I had a sound guy. In fact, I’ve had many 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
2
                                 
different sound technicians. The last guy that worked with me was Dave, who 
was with me for 6 ½ years. He traveled all over the world with me, he was a 
good guy. 
Whenever I had a gig I’d just call him on the phone and say hey Dave man, 
we’re going to the Caribbean do you want to go? He’d say yeah. I go do you 
think your wife will mind? I don’t care, I’m there with you bro. It’s cool to have 
somebody to work with that knows your routine and is free to travel with you. 
So if you don’t have a sound technician that works with you all the time that 
can run your sound, lighting, etc. then option number two is, when you go to 
a different city is to hire a local DJ. Hire somebody to work for you. Most 
good DJ’s, you can spend a half hour with them, go over your show with 
them and they have it down tight. A good DJ is worth $100 to $300, whatever 
they charge, but I don’t think you’ll pay more than $300. 
Although, I think when I was in Dubai, these guys charged a lot of money. I 
think they were charging like 1000 dirham per night, so I was paying them 
about $360 per night, not too bad. Then I had assistants, models that worked 
in the show as well, which is a nice touch, but it’s worth it to put on a good 
presentation.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
3
                                 
For Wall A Show
Students:
Spencer:
We’re not going to get into that part yet, let’s get into the part where we just 
go into a theater or into the Elks Lodge, high school or whatever it is. Or, for 
those of you who are more, high spirited, you go to a place in whatever town 
you’re in and promote your own show. You rent a hall and set up everything 
yourself. You take all the risk. Everything is you. 
It’s called for-walling, which is when you go into a location, rent a room, pay 
for all the advertising, do all the promotion, do all the ticketing sales, etc. it’s 
all on you. Of course, when you do for-walling you get people to go out there 
and work for you. You network it and delegate responsibilities to people. You 
build a crew around you to help you to reach your goals and you compensate 
everybody accordingly, because that’s what you need to do.
Let’s go like this for a second. Let’s pretend I’m a hypnotist and I’m going all 
right, I need $5000 next week because I’m going to have some teeth pulled. 
Everybody has something happening, like I want to buy a new dog or maybe 
I want to buy a motorcycle or, if I’m a lady maybe I want to buy some new 
clothes, new shoes.
So you think like this, this is how I think, I need this much money $5000 in 
the next week, how am I going to produce that? Then I look around, you 
know I live in Kalispell, so let’s just say I’m not on the road traveling around 
the world doing what I want to do so I want to get a local gig in Kalispell, for 
example, because that’s close.
I do shows there about twice a year because I live there and people love it. I 
love working in smaller venues. I like working with a close audience. Here’s 
what I do. First, I contact the venue. The venue I happen to use there is the 
Elk’s Lodge. Why do I use that? It’s the only decent venue in town. It reminds 
me of an old dive bar. Everything is red velvet, but they have a nice stage 
with a nice backdrop, so it all works out good. 
I’ll get 300-400 people coming to the show, all paying $15 apiece, which isn’t 
a bad night. I don’t have to do much to promote it because everybody there 
knows who I am, it’s a small community and word spreads like wildfire. If you 
do the math that’s $6000 and of that I’ll probably spend $500 on advertising, 
which brings it down to $5500. That’s not too bad.
But, once I get there to do the show then I have my back room sales where I 
usually pick up an extra $500 or $1000 there. Not a bad way to go right? 
Could you do that once a week yourself?
Yes!
Here’s what I do in that regards.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
4
                                 
I’ll find the venue, call them up and make a date. Now, a lot of times, what 
really frustrates me is that they want to charge me for a room. I don’t want to 
have to pay for a room. I want to get it for free, I don’t want to pay anywhere 
from $200 to $1000. Wouldn’t that be cool to be able to walk into a place and 
get a room free?
Yeah.
The alternative to that is to go somewhere and have someone hire you, 
which can also happen. I’m a risk taker though, for the most part. The bigger 
the risk the bigger the profit, that’s just the way it is. So I’ve got the room and 
I talk to them. 
I say Lori, hey it’s Spencer and I’m thinking about doing another show there. 
We did a great job last time and I know I brought in so many people that you 
all probably sold out $5000 or $6000 in booze in the back room. I’m thinking 
about coming back again, do you think we can have that room for nothing 
this time? Of course, so they give me the room for nothing, that’s how I 
approach it.
If you go to hotels it’s the same thing. A lot of times hotels will say well, we’re 
going to charge you $300 for the room, $400 for the room for the evening 
and I always go you know what though, and I make sure if it’s a hotel that 
they have a bar there. I want it catered, because you’re going to have adults 
and they’ll want a drink.
So I’ll say listen, I’m bringing 400-500 people to my show and they’re all 
going to be drinking, so why don’t we have a cash bar in the back of the 
room. This is how it normally works out. If you have a cash bar in the back of 
the room, people buy booze and what happens then is you have to match 
the cost of the room with the sale of the booze and you’ll be covered, 
wherein they usually won’t ask you for a dime. Does that make sense?
Yes.
That’s one of the easiest ways to approach hotels and properties. If you 
approach one that doesn’t want to work with you then go somewhere else. 
Or, if you can’t find one then you don’t pay the $300. You have to do the 
math and calculate it for yourself.
So I’ve got my room at the Elks. Now I have to find somebody to run my 
sound. If I don’t know anybody I go on the Internet first and look around for 
local DJs. I want to see their websites, who they are and what they’re doing. 
You have to use the Internet folks, that’s a major resource and the one you 
need.
I put ads on Craig’s List. Hey, need a DJ for a comedy hypnosis show 
coming up in two months. Go to my website and send me an email. So I 
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
5
                                 
receive emails with references and I take it from there to determine who I 
want to hire. We negotiate a price and that’s it. I ask them, what do you want 
to charge? Oh, $300 which is insane. Do you know where we are? This is 
Kalispell and nobody gets $300 for doing this, but I’ll give you $150 and they 
say okay.
It’s all about negotiation. No matter what we do it’s always about negotiation. 
Since you’re the one doing the job and the hiring, you have the greater 
negotiating skills right? So it’s all about business and you keep it that way. 
It’s nothing personal. Everybody wants to make a buck. 
Then, I’ll put another ad on Craig’s List. You need to use this it’s a great way 
to promote yourself. I’ll put something on there under events in this city. 
Coming to this city, comedy hypnosis show with Spencer, the world’s fastest 
hypnotist, tickets now available online. Then I’ll go look for a street team that 
sells tickets. Contact me. Compensation zero. What will you get for it? If you 
bring people to my show I’ll give you $2 to $5 for everyone you bring to the 
show.
Then I print out coupons and send it to them online, a little piece of paper 
with a code on them. They print them and hand them out and they take the 
risk just like I do. It costs me nothing except a few minutes of my time to 
develop the little coupons.
Say again where you’re getting the crew to do that work is that on Craig’s 
List?
Yes, that’s where I go. In any major city that I go to, whether it’s Salt Lake, 
L.A., New York, Chicago or Atlanta, it doesn’t matter. 
What’s the listing you run?
I list it under events, crew or gigs. It’s easy that way, because anymore 
people go to the Internet and savvy people use Craig’s List and I want 
people who are savvy that use the Internet. Because people on the Internet 
are on social media and they work it hard.
If you have these people out and they’re selling tickets, are they collecting 
the money and how do you get the money from them?
They’re not collecting a dime, I’m no fool. All they’re doing is passing out 
discount coupons to people. Then the people bring the coupons and pay at 
the door or they can go to my website and buy them from there. No, don’t 
ever give another person the power to take your money, that’s a big huge 
mistake.
You said a line crew. How would you advertise for a street crew? What was 
the name you associated with them, the one’s that sell the tickets?
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
6
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
I just say I’m looking for a street team to help promote a comedy hypnosis 
show.
Okay.
There are all kinds of people out there that are, just as happy as bugs to do 
it. Women who want part-time income, work from your home, you don’t have 
to go anywhere. All you have to do is be a social butterfly and women are 
just that.
What does the street team actually do?
They promote the show by handing out flyers and posters. They put them 
everywhere, every street corner, café, beauty shop, every story, on every 
windshield, etc. they plaster the town that I’ll be appearing in. Because when 
I go into that town I want to see my face everywhere. When I drive down the 
street, I want to look in that store window and see my face. If I walk into a 
barber shop I want to see my face.
So you make up these coupons, give them to the street crew, who passes 
them out to generally anybody and everybody, as many as they can and you 
say there’s a code on that coupon, so you know it came from them obviously 
and you pay them for each coupon that came from them. 
What about the people that are walking in the front door and paying $12, as 
opposed to the people who got in for the discounted $6?
I make an extra $2 right. It doesn’t matter to me. Nobody cares. It’s the same 
thing here in Vegas some people have discount coupons and some people 
pay full price.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
7
                                 
How To Hire A DJ
Let’s get back to the business of the DJ. How do you work with a DJ and how 
do you find a DJ? You find a DJ by going to the yellow pages or the Internet. 
You call them up and say hey, Mr. DJ. My name is Spencer, I’m a hypnotist 
and I’m coming to your town to do a comedy hypnosis show. 
My first question is have you ever worked with a hypnotist? No. Have you 
ever seen a hypnosis show? Oh yeah, I’ve seen them on YouTube they’re 
pretty cool, or yeah when I was in high school I saw one and it was a blast.
I say great, then you have an idea of what a hypnosis show is like, I can work 
with that. My second question is this. What kind of a sound system do you 
have? Most DJ’s love a decent sound system, so I want to make sure they 
have at least two 15” speakers to go out on the side, powered through an 
amplifier instead of self powered. 
I want to make sure they have two monitors that come up on the stage, 
because when you’re working with people you want monitors on the stage 
facing the subjects so the subjects can hear what you’re saying. If you have 
your speakers out here pointing towards the audience, the audience can 
hear what you’re saying, but it sometimes becomes muffled for the guys up 
here trying to listen to you.
So, if you have monitors on the stage pointing towards your subjects, they’ll 
be able to hear clearly what you’re saying and they need to hear clearly. If 
they can’t clearly hear what you’re saying, you may lose them, they may 
come out of trance and you’ll have less people up here on your stage which 
will affect your show and your presentation.
So my questions to Mr. DJ are what kind of sound system do you have? I 
want to make sure we’re on the same page. Also, I carry my own mics 
because I like my own. I have a wireless headset, a handheld wireless and 
another one that’s hardwired that has a line on it which goes directly to the 
mixing board.
The reason I had that one hardwired is because sometimes you may run into 
an area where you get a lot of scrambled signals, so if that’s the case then 
your headset or wireless mic may not work efficiently. I use that as a backup, 
just in case I need to have something hardwired. It won’t happen often, but 
could happen, so that’s something to keep in mind when you’re doing a 
show.
So, I got Mr. DJ and I’m happy. My next question is do you know how to use 
a computer. Trust me, some people still don’t. Are you familiar with Macs? I’ll 
tell you why I ask. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
8
                                 
When I go do a show and I have my DJ that I’ve hired, I say because you’re 
going to be running the show. I say I don’t need your equipment, everything 
runs from my laptop. Everything I need to run my hypnosis show is in here. 
All the music is here with a line that goes to my mixing board and everything 
goes through there.
Back in the old days I used to use CD players. That no longer works and 
they have other things people used to use, but I’ve found for me, my Mac is 
the easiest way to run your show is on a laptop. I use iTunes. I also use 
another program called DJ. It’s a cool program for Mac. But, if you’re a 
Windows person, they have software available that you can use too that will 
work for you and is just as cool as what we have for the Macs.
I’m not a PC guy so I don’t know what they are, but I know PC guys have 
them. The guys I work with do have PCs with iTunes, so I give them my 
playlist to put on their computers and we run the show. However, my first 
preference in finding a DJ for me is that they need to have a Mac, because if 
they have a Mac then I know we are brothers. If you’re a Mac person you 
know what I’m talking about, we’re a cult. 
So I’ve got my DJ and have this going on, let’s do this.
What’s a good one where you don’t get a lot of interference?
Shop around there are different ones out there. Audiotechnica makes a good 
one; there are a few different kinds available. For a good mic you’ll spend 
$600 for a decent one, because you want to make sure it projects, especially 
if you’re in a large auditorium that seats a couple thousand, that it projects 
good.
But, on the other hand, if you go into a large theater like that, they will usually 
have all the equipment that you could possibly need. I just have backups for 
everything. I have two complete sound systems, because I used to work in a 
huge theater. I’ve got a garage full of big speakers, amplifiers, everything you 
could think of needing.
Shop around, fit your budget just don’t go to Radio Shack. I’m not saying 
that’s a bad thing but you want somebody a little more high-end for what 
you’re doing, because you have to come across nice, crisp and clear.
I have a suggestion. I run sound equipment for my shows now and I use a 
program called Sound Plant and they just came out with a Mac version. It 
makes your entire keyboard a macro, which means if I tell somebody to 
press #1 and my music will come on, when they press 1 the music comes 
on. If they press it again the music crescendo’s out and it’s over with, fading 
itself out.
Matt:
Spencer:
Michael:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
9
                                 
Spencer:
Michael:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
This is a program for PCs and they just came out with one for Mac. Write that 
down, research it and see how it works for you.
The other thing that’s nice about it, the old version– I already have the new 
version since I had the old version– but it’s just been put out recently to 
purchase. The new version will actually have the words of the songs on your 
keys on the screen and the keyboard on your screen will be the full size of 
your screen, which makes it super easy for anyone to work it from high 
school to senior, because it’ll all be right there on your screen.
Very good, thanks. 
Real quick, how about remote. Would you recommend that, where you 
control it?
My recommendation for that is no. Some people use it. I think if you want to 
be a professional then be professional and hire somebody to run it. It looks 
better that way and you’re not bogged down with having to fool with it, etc. 
I’ve seen some people who have this little thing up on stage, they press a 
button and want to do the whole thing to save some money, but save 
yourself the headaches and get someone to do it for you. It makes more 
sense and looks better.
Would it make sense to have your own DJ or does that not make sense cost-
wise, to have your own DJ so he knows your music and travels around with 
you?
If you can afford it, by all means, do. If you have someone who’s available to 
travel with you all the time heck yeah, why not? I had a guy with me like I 
said for 6 ½ years. He started as a friend. He went to the Army, got out of the 
Army, he took a liking to me, he attended my shows and one day when one 
of the guys working for me couldn’t make it, he asked if he could try and I 
gave him a chance.
He did a good job and we got along well, so he stuck with me and wherever I 
went he went too. He liked doing it.
Is it expense?
Well, it’s not really expensive. It doesn’t cost you anything, for example, if 
you’re going to another location, getting hired to do a show then you put that 
into the cost. I need an extra plane ticket or hotel room, it’s the way it is and 
they pay for it. You just add that into your expenses.
If I’m paying for it, I want to make sure I’ll make enough money to cover my 
butt on him. I even have someone who can keep other people away from me 
when doing a show. Because when you’re a performer doing entertainment 
everybody wants a piece of you.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
10
                                 
It’s nice to have someone and Dave is a big Ex-Marine, kind of intimidating 
looking and would always keep people away. Plus, he was big and strong, so 
he could lift all the equipment. He would set everything up and then all I had 
to do was my show. That’s what you need to do is be able to walk into a 
room and just do your show. 
Have a good sound person. Let them set up everything and tear it down, 
your job is to perform, do your show and be the stage hypnotist. You don’t 
really want to have to involve yourself with all the other things. But, you are 
going to learn all those things because if you don’t know that then you can’t 
teach it to somebody else. 
So, we’re finding our DJ. Let’s do this. I need somebody who wants to play 
with me. 
Laughter
Not like that. You guys, I can’t say anything.
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
11
                                 
Train Your DJ
[
]
Alex:
Spencer:
Alex:
Spencer:
Alex:
Spencer:
Alex:
Spencer:
Let’s just imagine that he’s a DJ.
Applause
He’s a DJ and let’s just pretend I’m talking to you. So you’re a DJ right?
Yes.
Cool. What have you done in the past?
Lots of shows.
Cool, have you ever worked with a hypnotist?
Many.
So you kind of have an idea of how that goes. 
I love Macs.
I dig it. That’s going to work very well for me. Here’s what I want to do. I’m 
going to go through my show with you very quickly. Let’s run through it so 
you get it in your mind. I’m going to show you how that works.
Let’s just imagine that we’re in a theater or something. I’m going to pull out 
my Mac and I usually like we’re at a table, so let’s bring the table up here 
and make this look just as real as we can. This is all preshow stuff. We’re 
getting setup, we’ve gone to the Elks Lodge to get everything ready and I’m 
pulling up my Mac. We’re going to open up my iTunes because that’s where 
I keep everything, and I have another program called DJ, which is an 
awesome program and the one I like to work with.
I click on my comedy hypnosis show and everything is right here. What I 
like to do is go through all my routines with the guy running my show. Let 
me give you an idea of what that’s like when I have somebody fresh out of 
nowhere, because I want them to know what it’s like.
So, we have our opening stuff that we do here. This is our opening show, so 
when the show begins I’ll be bringing people in and they’ll be listening to 
this stuff here, so we’re doing this. This is where people are coming in and 
sitting down, they just want their minds tweaked.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
12
                                 
When we begin and after I get people hypnotized we’ll use this one here, 
which is the opening mix. Then, about 11 minutes into the show the music 
shifts.
Eleven minutes?
Just let this music place, because you’ll introduce me, I’m going to come up 
at this point and you can just let this music play. You can see where it shifts 
at nine minutes and 20 seconds, so you don’t have to do anything because 
I’m up there and will be talking to the audience, like this.
During this first part– go back to the beginning of the audio please–
Nine, twenty.
During this part right here, I’ll be out here talking to the people doing what I 
call a preshow thing where I’ll be talking about hypnosis. I’ll be saying okay 
everybody puts your hands above your head, squeeze your hands together 
as tightly as you can to help me get some good subjects. 
Once I get my subjects I’m going to bring them up on stage. You don’t have 
to do anything with this music, because once they’re up on stage I’ve got it 
set where the music is going to make a transition naturally, so you don’t 
even have to deal with it. That makes it easy for you it’s like a no-brainer. 
So it just goes on and then when we get to this point here, the music slows 
down and during this point, after I get people on stage, I’m going to 
hypnotize them by doing a little induction, telling them to relax, breathe in 
and out and all this kind of stuff. You’ve seen a show so you know what I’m 
talking about.
Yeah.
So when I have everyone just where I want them, they’re hypnotized and 
I’m ready to go to the next level, then we’re going to go to the next one. Let 
me show you how this works, because this is how I do it. I’m going to say 
okay cool, it looks like we’ve got some good subjects. In a moment I’m 
going to count to three and on number three, everybody sit up in your chair, 
open your eyes and we’re going to go on a little car rid. 
On three sit in your chair, we’re going to go for a car ride. So you can see 
here I’ve got this queued up where it says car ride. It’s pretty easy, it’s going 
to go like this. I’m going to go I’m going to count to three, everybody sit up 
in your chair. When I begin to count one, I want you to make that transition 
so it’s already going.
Alex:
Spencer:
Alex:
Spencer:
Alex:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
13
                                 
Let’s imagine them doing that. I’m going to count to three, sit up in your 
chairs let’s go for a car ride. One, make the transition please. Scroll down 
you can do it. 
Let that go. So they’re doing that and I’m going to run through this routine 
with people. Then when I’m done with the routine I’m just going to say 
sleep. When I say sleep this stops.
You don’t want to do it.
I’ve got another program I don’t have up here right now, it’s not a big deal, 
but I have a background tune. Just put it on this one, add it to the left please 
and I’ll have that set for you later, but that’s something in the background. 
This goes between every skit that I do, so that’s how that works. 
Now I need to get ready for the next one, so what I want you to do is go 
down here.
Band play.
Yes, let’s do that one. So in a moment, at the count of three, everybody sit 
up in your chairs, you’re going to be in a band. You’ve got drum sticks in 
your hands, I want to see you now put the drum sticks in your hands and 
roam around a little bit, crack your knuckles and get ready for this because 
you can win a million bucks if you have what it takes. 
I’ll count to three, sit up in your chairs, play the drums, here we go 1-2-3 
and you’re already there see how that works? We’re just going to make 
those transitions like that very fast. Now, during this bit right here I’m going 
to do one thing. During this bit right here they’ll be drumming and stuff and 
I’m going to say freeze and when I do just hit the space bar.
Then I’ll talk to people for a second and they’re going to freeze, they’ll be 
really animated and in all these weird positions. Then I’m going to give them 
another suggestion and then say ‘now play’, so when I say play again then 
hit it. And ‘now play’ and then we’re going to go through this and let this 
happen. 
When I’m done with this routine I’m going to say and ‘wide awake’ and all 
this applause is for you, which takes you back to the regular music. You just 
have to have that prepared and there again, I’ll have that on a separate 
track so everything flows naturally.
It always goes back to that?
Alex:
Spencer:
Alex:
Spencer:
Alex:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
14
                                 
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Yes. In a moment I’m going to count to three, everybody sit up in your 
chairs, we’re going to go for a little horse ride. Get ready on three. Make 
sure you have your leathers and boots on. On three, let’s go for that horse 
ride, it’s an old dusty trail 1-2-3. Easy.
Let’s go to what is important, because I think you’ve got this down really 
well and what I want to do now is go to where it is an important part of it and 
that’s really, just the end of it. To me, what’s important in the show is the 
beginning and ending of the show. I want to leave something happening at 
the end, because it’s very important how this transitions.
At the end of it you see where it says wake up, if you could scroll down 
there. There you go, hang onto that. At the end of the show something 
happens here. I’m going to say, ‘because everybody’s been with me for a 
long time, they’ve been hypnotized, you’ve been doing all these routines but 
now the show is coming to an end’, so this is what I want to do.
You have to pay attention. In just a moment I’m going to count from one to 
five and then I will say wide awake. When I say that to you I’m going to look 
at you and I’m going to look at you every time I do a routine, because I want 
to make sure we’re on the same page.
For example, when I say in a moment I’m going to count to three and you’re 
in a car, I’ll be looking at you and when you’re ready you’re going to 
go…because then I know I can proceed with the routine. I don’t want you 
looking around, because when I say three I want those people doing what I 
tell them to do and everything has to coordinate exactly.
Does this make sense to everyone?
Yes.
Are you finding this helpful?
Yes.
Okay, because when you step into a room and you’re working with a DJ, 
you’ve got to have everything setup perfectly. When I do a show I’m a 
perfectionist, man I want things tight. I want things to happen the way I want 
them to happen. 
So, at the end of the show when I’m done with everything, here’s what’s 
going to happen. People are going to be sitting there and I’m going to give 
everybody a gift. I’m going to tell everybody, sit back in your chair, put your 
arm above your head and make a tight fist. I’m going to say I want you to go 
inside right now and find one thing you want to change in your life. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
15
                                 
Maybe you want more confidence, more motivation or more success, 
whatever that is find it right now. When you have that in your mind breathe 
into it deeply. They’ll be breathing in you can see it and I’ll say very cool. 
In just a moment I’m going to count from one to five and then I will say wake 
up. Play it. When I point to you I’ll say wake up. Very cool. Then I’ll say 
wake up at that time and everybody will be wide awake feeling fantastic in 
every way, all the suggestions will now be removed.
That’s how that goes. Pretty simple. Then I’m going to keep talking to the 
people, this song keeps playing it’s a very powerful song which leads to a 
crescendo and then I dismiss everybody. Then when that’s done I have 
music that plays after that and you have nothing else you have to do, 
except sit back and drink a beer.
Too easy.
All right man it works, nice.
Applause
This is how I approach it every time. Sometimes it may take me 20 minutes 
or sometimes even a couple of hours. 
For example, when I was in Dubai, I was in a different level of this. This is 
like if I’m working in a local club or something like that, I can do it very 
quickly with a good smart DJ. In Dubai it was different because I was 
working with people from different countries with different languages and I 
had a sound person who was running the sound. I had a lighting director 
who was running all the lights, because we had these beautiful overhead 
lights.
Gels and then everything that’s coming down on the stage; I’ll set a curtain 
person because we had a large curtain in the back that had to go up at a 
specific time, because in my show I have a big drop down screen with a 
large video presentation that starts before the show even begins. 
Then, when people come into the theater I’ve got this huge screen (movie 
theater screen) that comes down and I have this video presentation that I 
developed, where if people come in there they get mesmerized for about 20 
minutes. It puts them into a hypnotic state of mind or into my kind of 
weirdness. It’s a very weird video, but its’ a lot of fun, so they watch that. 
So, I have that and then I also have a stage assistant who’s a lovely lady. 
The purpose of the assistant is for eye candy and somebody you can play 
off of. She does a couple different things or if you’re a lady, you may want a 
guy to be your assistant, which can look good too.
Alex:
Spencer:
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
16
                                 
The purpose of the assistant is to keep everybody under control up here on 
the stage. If anybody falls off, you get them back on their chairs. And, of 
course, I do some routines with my assistant that, of course, excites the 
imaginations of my audience in different ways.
So I have all these people I need to coordinate and work with. What I do is 
go down on the stage and I’ve got my crew up in the sound booth and I go 
over the entire show from the very beginning of it until the very end, 
because I want to make sure all the sound is tight.
When you’re in a big room like that and you don’t have a DJ who’s close to 
you, he’s at the other end of the theater, then you want to make sure you 
can see him, they can see you and the show is tight, because you’re 
coordinating it with a lot of different people. So it’s a different arena then just 
working by yourself into a smaller venue when you’re getting into a bigger 
theater like that. It’s a lot of fun.
So, I will spend an hour maybe two, going over the entire production and I’ll 
go over it several times until I feel like everybody’s on the same page as I 
am. When you’re doing a performance like that, you want it to be really 
smooth, because people are coming there and paying $60 a ticket. That’s a 
lot of money, so you want to make sure you have it down tight.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
17
                                 
Show Q&As
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Are there any questions to what we’ve covered up to this point? If so please 
raise your hands. 
Do you have any recommendations for lighting, if you’re working in those 
situations?
Lighting will depend on the venue that you’re in. If you’re in a large theater, 
when I do shows, talking about lighting I always want all the lighting down in 
the room, except on the stage. I just want lighting up on the stage area and 
that’s it.
Why?
Because I don’t want people looking around at each other. I want all the 
folks to be up here. This is where people need to be paying attention right 
here on the stage, on you the performer, and your subjects. This is where 
it’s all happening, so I darken the entire room and keep lights on only on the 
stage area.
Now you know if you’re in a hotel ballroom like this or if you’re in a local 
club, you may not be able to do that. The way around that is to bring in your 
own lights. You can have some lights on stands that are placed in various 
locations, all pointing to the stage. You can have some little cans and gels 
with different colors on there. My colors are blue, red and yellow, depending 
on what I want to create.
It depends on how high tech you want to get with your show. You can do it 
anywhere from, just coming into a place like that with all the lights on, have 
a bunch of chairs up here, do a show and have a great time, still making a 
ton of money. It doesn’t matter how you do it. 
If you want to take it to a higher, more professional level and be like a 
hypno-God, then you want to do it right. Then you have a crew, a huge 
theater, it’s opulent and looks great. You’re dressed to the max…when I do 
my shows on those kinds of stages I have this wonderful velvet jacket I 
wear with leather pants. It looks good and it’s a lot of fun.
It’s a whole different level of showmanship. If I go into a local club or 
something like that, I wear a pair of Levi’s and a shirt but I still look good, 
because you don’t want to look bad. The rule of thumb in any kind of 
presentation is, always look better than your audience. Anybody can hire a 
plain Jane person to go into a performance.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
18
                                 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Igor went over how to use copyright free music, but if we want to use 
copyrighted music how do we start going about doing that for the show?
Listen, when I first started doing this I had that conflict so what I did was to 
call and ask specifically. I told them I was a stage hypnotist, I’m doing 
shows and they asked me what I did. I told them I used various parts of a 
song in my routine and they said don’t worry about it it’s not a problem. 
That’s what they told me. Yourself, you may want to check on that yourself.
I have been in clubs, this has happened, even in a nightclub, if a band is in 
there playing a cover song of some rock n’ roll group but they don’t have a 
license, they can get sued. Technically and legally, they have to have a 
license in every nightclub to play music, even if it’s on a juke box. It can get 
pretty nasty that way. 
However, I’ve never had a problem with that and I did call and check on that 
for myself, because I didn’t want to have a problem with that. There’s a few 
of them out there that have the rights for different artists, just cover yourself. 
I doubt that you’ll ever have a problem with it, but it’s certainly worth 
checking into.
Again, I think I mentioned yesterday, when I did a show for Playboy that 
they threw away all my music and said here, you’ll be using this music 
because we use it to televise around the world.
Before you were talking about for walls, renting your own hall, etc. The 
question I want to ask, I don’t know if it means I’m getting ahead of myself 
or if anybody thought about that. How do you integrate dances, eye candy
and the sexy girls dancing, before the show goes on and all this happening 
before you even walk out on stage, to get the audience pumped up before 
you get into your show? 
To keep it simple right now, if you want to go into all of that then I really 
recommend getting the mentoring program where we could really go into 
depth on that and I can help you create your own specific persona. What I 
would do at this point before you get there is K.I.S.S. (keep it simple).
You don’t need to do all that. It’s as simple as, if I just want to do the Elks in 
Kalispell, Montana. So there it’s not a big deal; it’s just an Elks Lodge, 
population grizzly bears. What I’ll do there is get everything setup, I’ll get a 
DJ, I’ve got a gal up there and three people that have worked for me in the 
past.
They all do a fantastic job and they’ll go in there to get everything setup, I 
don’t have to do anything, they’ll just go in and play whatever funky music 
they want to and then about 20 minutes before the show I have my own 
music that I want them to play. Because I want to put everybody into my 
mindset and it helps me to immensely prepare for what I’m going to do.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
19
                                 
That’s all I do and when the last one of my songs comes on they announce 
me…
…then we go on from there.
The eye candy stuff is something different. Could I have an assistant there? 
Sure I could, so for example, if I had somebody working with me in that 
capacity. For example, you’ll see I have a video of the show I did in Dubai, 
it’s on my site at SleepNow.com, from beginning to end. You’ll see what my 
assistant does there. 
After my video presentation goes away, the screen goes up, I come out this 
way from behind the chairs and there’s an opening and she comes from this 
side stage right, takes a chair and puts it back in so all the chairs are lined 
up together. Her job is to stay in the background over here all the time, until 
I ask her to do something specifically.
What I do with her during the show, when people are sitting in the chairs…I 
always say during the show, ‘
. 
She looks pretty hot and is dressed appropriately for the show, so she’s 
always going back to touch them on the shoulder and saying relax. She 
smells good, who wouldn’t want to be touched by that. Relax and people 
just kind of melt since it feels good. Does that help? 
That’s the capacity I use her in, it’s a lot of fun and she also brings me 
props when I need them. When I need the handheld mic she brings it to me 
so I don’t have to do anything. When I’m done with it I’ll be talking to the 
audience, I’ll make a motion and she’ll come and take it from me, making it 
look like a natural part of what I’m doing. Of course, everybody wants to 
look at her again anyway, so it’s all good.  
In reference to the music, I noticed you play Axle F while making a 
suggestion, is that like an anchor for the subjects as well, to know the 
suggestion is coming up?
It’s just the background music. You can use any kind of music you want. 
But you play the same music every time?
Yes. I have four different background things, I don’t even use that one 
anymore, but as a demonstration I have something else I created. I have 
my own music I use for my show. I use that as something that flows through 
the entire show, so when I’m done with a skit then that music plays and 
people all know it.
ladies and gentleman, welcome to the hypnosis show here in Kalispell, 
Montana. Do me a favor and give him a powerful round of applause, make 
him feel good
during your time with me here, at the sound of 
my voice and touch of my hand, the music simply helps you to go deeper 
and deeper into sleep. Whenever my assistant touches you on your 
shoulders and tells you to relax, just let go even more
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
20
                                 
So yes, it’s like an anchor so it becomes an anchor, because it’s like yeah, 
we know what’s going to happen next. 
Do any of the venues that you go to require that you have insurance? Do 
you carry insurance? Is that something we should consider as well for 
liability?
That’s a very important question let me answer that for you. Yes, you 
should carry insurance.
Where do we get that?
There are a few places available. One place to go to is Clowns of the USA. 
There’s another one, but I can’t think of who they are, because they had this 
big insurance fight about six months ago. They carry specialty insurance for 
stage hypnotists it’s a $2 million policy and will cost you about $200 a year. 
It’s not that big a deal, if something happens you want your ass covered.
Protect yourself and the people and truthfully, a lot of places won’t let you 
perform unless you have that. You can go into a bar and they probably 
won’t ask you for it, Elks Lodges and places like that, but if you go to 
colleges they’ll ask for the writer. If you go to big theaters they too will ask 
for the writer. If you go to Dubai, you ain’t working there without a writer or 
somebody who sponsors you into the country anyway.
If you go to most foreign countries, you ain’t working there unless you have 
a sponsor. It’s not going to happen, because they have very strict laws 
about foreigners coming to their country and working. So you have to have 
people there who sponsor you. It’s a lot of red tape. I’m just so lucky they do 
all the red tape for me. They call me, they put it all together and I just show 
up.
The insurances you mentioned, are they international? I know in the UK it 
costs around 1000£ and covers just the UK?
You’ll have to check, you can ask them. I know the Clowns of the USA only 
do coverage in the continental U.S. and in Canada and Hawaii. Outside of 
that I don’t believe they do that’s why when I worked out of the country, I 
leave all of that to my sponsors, they take care of all that.
Oftentimes, the venues that hire you there will take care of all that, it’s 
written into the contract and is part of the fees that are paid. For example, 
this gig I just did it cost $40,000 just to put it together. That’s before we 
even made a dime, so you can see that sometimes some gigs cost a lot of 
money just to put together.
Bob:
Spencer:
Bob:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
21
                                 
We’re going to learn how to do it here for next to nothing. We can do it for 
under $500. You don’t need to spend $40,000 unless you want to go 
overseas and have a sponsor and everything else. 
Where do you find the royalty free music?
Online.
Where?
On the Internet. Jus Google royalty free music and there will be a bunch of 
sites that come up there where you can buy whatever you want. Truly, if 
you have a song you like, you may want to write directly to the artist and 
see if you can have rights to it. A lot of artists are very generous and will 
give you the rights to use their music for a small amount.
They don’t care. It gets them out there all the time they just want to be paid 
something. Don’t be shy or afraid to ask somebody, just go on the Internet 
and listen to music. If there’s something out there that floats your boat that 
you think you can use in a routine, contact the artist and say wow, I dig your 
thing, I think I can use this, would that be okay? What would you charge me 
for the rights to your song?
People are very generous, so don’t be afraid to approach somebody. They 
want to help you and they want to get their stuff out there.
MusicBakery.com is a good place to get royalty free music. Have you ever 
used hypnotic music in your presentation and would you recommend 
something like that, because it might take the whole audience into more 
trance?
All you need to do is come to one of my shows and you’ll hear hypnotic 
music created by me. I create my own music. I have fun with it because my 
brain sometimes just does not go to sleep. So some of my best creativity 
comes with a bottle of wine, late at night when I have nothing else to do I’ll 
sit with my trusty Mac and use tons of different programs on there that I 
create music with.
I play with stuff, pull out my guitar and play with something or I’ll get a beat 
in my head and I’ll start putting different loops and tracks and things 
together until it’s like yeah, in the groove, etc. 
So, in regards to insurance again, if you have a therapy business I’ve been 
told if you’re insured by that and they find out you’re doing stage shows 
they’ll drop you. I’ve been told to not tell the insurance company you have 
for your therapy business that you’re doing stage shows. What are your 
thoughts on that?
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
22
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer
Student:
Spencer:
I think that’s true, there are some insurance companies when you’re doing 
hypnotherapy that don’t want you doing stage work. They have issues. 
They need therapy themselves. They think there’s something wrong with it, 
but that’s my personal opinion about it. Look into it, if they don’t want you to 
and would get rid of your coverage because of that, then you may want to 
find a provider that will cover you on both ends.
Are you still insured with your therapy business or is it all for your stage 
shows?
Mine is all stage stuff. I really don’t do much therapy at all it’s just not where 
I am.
When I work with people it’s the kind of stuff that I would do after a show or 
something, or I do mentoring and stuff like that, but mentoring isn’t therapy. 
When I do coaching it’s not therapy. It’s not what you do it’s what you say 
you do. So for those of you out there saying well, they won’t let me do 
hypnosis in Scotland, then don’t say you’re doing hypnosis, call it something 
else. 
I was in Saudi Arabia a few years ago for a month. There was a guy who 
was doing hypnotizing type of stuff there and got his head cut off for doing 
it. That was a bummer. I heard about it and thought I should be careful and I 
was doing a lecture there one night to a group of people, and there was 
another gentleman there doing a lecture that same week who had a very 
similar type crowd.
He was doing exactly what I do, but he called it ‘science of the mind’.
Semantics is everything when you’re dealing with some of these items. 
As far as the music goes, generally, you’ll have it on as the people are 
coming in, sitting down and 20 minutes before your show. Is there any point 
in time when you just lose the music obviously, or when you have a moment 
when you freeze and shut the music off? Or, do you have something going 
all the time?
I have something going all the time. I don’t like dead spots, I like something 
always happening because it keeps the mind involved because what 
happens, if you have so much stuff going on and all of a sudden it just 
becomes dead, then it’s like people wake up and go what the hell 
happened?
It’s like a trance breaker, in a way, so for me I always have something going 
in the background, because it sounds professional, it looks good, it’s a great 
segue and what you want is something to come across just like that. Make 
everything flow. It’s like you’re tripping out and watching these waves of 
energy, music and performance happening. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
23
                                 
To me it’s like a big orchestra that I see in my mind just happening so I want 
this to continue…that’s how I see it during a performance.
How much do you ask as a beginner stage hypnotist? Do you ask the same 
price for every show or the bigger the audience the more you ask?
As much as you can possibly get. Never short change yourself! If you’re 
doing a show in your hometown, obviously you can do it for a little less than 
if you had to drive for two hours and spend 4 hours on the road, buy gas 
and maybe you’re so tired when you’re done doing a show that you’ll want 
to spend the night.
Listen, when you start doing a show and you really put a lot of energy into it, 
it’s a lot of work and draining. When I get done with a show, because when I 
do a show I put a lot of energy into it, when I’m done I’m spent. It’s done, 
I’m over with. I’m happy to do one show a week and that’s about it. I don’t 
like to do more. 
When I was in Dubai and had to do four, I thought oh my goodness, but 
then I thought okay, I can do it for a little bit. You put a lot of energy into it. 
Years ago they wanted me to come to Vegas to do a show and I had a 
show at the new Frontier. I negotiated that deal for a few months, they had 
the big marquee out there with my name on it for three months and they 
had this big poster of me that was taller then this room.
The negotiations continued between my attorney and theirs, we had a real 
frustrating time. We had ads in all the local papers and magazines, booklets 
plus up and down the strip, on taxi’s and everything, but we had some 
negotiation problems, something I couldn’t overlook.
The night I was supposed to show up for the first show I decided to go fly 
fishing. I stayed away from Vegas for a while. There were some things in 
the contract that I couldn’t live with and they weren’t willing to change them; 
they kept saying… the thing is when you negotiate a contract you have to 
play hardball. If there’s something in a contract that you just can’t live with 
then you just can’t live with it.
To take a contract and have somebody try to control my life saying, if 
there’s anything we don’t like about you, what you say, what you do, how 
you smell, anything about that then we’re going to kick you out within 24 
hours. I said listen dude, I can’t do that. He said we’re not going to do that. I 
said then take it out of the contract. 
We worked on this for about three months, rewriting the contract, so he kept 
saying we’re not going to do that. I said then you need to change the 
contract. So the night of the show that was sold out I didn’t show up. I lost 
about $12 million bucks a year, but so be it, I can live with myself. Why work 
under conditions that you can’t live with.
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
24
                                 
And some things you can negotiate and live with, but sometimes you have 
to make a choice and mine was to go fly fishing.
Applause
Thanks. 
When you see somebody like at the Improv or a comedy show, what is the 
normal financial arrangement there? Are they paying a fee to bring the 
hypnotist in or is there a share of the door, etc.?
That’s going to depend upon the venue and upon you as the performer. 
Your reputation will go out in front of you. Obviously, the more experience 
you have, the more you can demand and that’s the way it is. 
When I work in a comedy club, which I won’t do very often, the main reason 
is that they just don’t pay enough. Here’s what happens when you go to a 
comedy club. They’ll usually have one or two opening acts that will get up 
there and banter for 10-15 minutes. Then they have what’s called the 
headliner.
In most places, the opening act will get between $150 and $300. The 
headliner gets whatever they can get $500, $700, $1000, $2000, $5000, 
whatever they can demand, which again comes with your level of 
experience and your ability to BS.
When I started studying hypnotherapy years ago, I had a wise instructor 
who said 
. There’s another one people always ask me, well I’ve never done 
this how am I going to make the money or get these gigs? You know what, 
fake it till you make it. That’s all you have to do.
They don’t know who you are. But you know who you are, and if you walk 
up there with an err of confidence anybody will give you an opportunity. Say 
listen, let me come do a show, it won’t cost you anything. I don’t even want 
you to pay me, just let me come in and do a show.
You help me promote it and take all the money from the booths and you’ll 
get lots of drinks from that. I’ll just take the door or I’ll split the door with you, 
anything to get inside of a room you can do, but you need to get out there 
and get the experience, whatever it takes, fake it till you make it.
What does, I’ll just take the door mean?
Ticket sales. Listen, most places don’t care about ticket sales because 
they’re going to make so much money on the booze, that’s all they care 
about.
[
]
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
‘If you can’t dazzle them with your brilliance, baffle them with 
bullshit

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
25
                                 
Here in Vegas, they don’t care about the showroom. They limit most shows 
to about an hour because they want people out on the floor gambling. All 
you are is a lost leader item. It’s like going to the grocery store, they have 
these lost leader items on the end of the aisles, but the big thing comes 
down the aisle but it’s no big deal.
I know you said you don’t do small venues or small shows like under a few 
hundred people…
I will. As a rule I do not, but I like to and I will because I really enjoy working 
with smaller more intimate crowds; they’re a lot of fun.
...so as a beginner, for people starting out, we can’t expect to have an 
expectation of getting 500 on a first show. What do you think is the 
minimum amount of people that someone should perform with?
Personally, I wouldn’t do a show with under 100 people. I have done it and 
they’ve been some of the most fun I’ve ever done, but I’ve been doing it for 
a long time. If you’re new at this, then I wouldn’t do it for less than 100 
people. The reason for that is the more people you have, the more 
opportunity you have to get good subjects.
The hypnosis show is like this, it’s like a moth being drawn to the flame. 
When you put it out there (hypnosis), you get this somnambulist out there 
who goes yeah…I want to be hypnotized. A somnambulist is a person who 
walks or talks in their sleep, they’re natural trance people.
We wall do that on some level, anyway. So the hypnosis show draws a real 
element of people who are fascinated with the show and the more people 
we have the easier it is to get people who really want to come out and get 
hypnotized and have a good time, so stack it in your favor and have at least 
100 people in there.
Like I said I’ve done it in smaller venues and have had a fantastic show, so 
you never know. I did this show once and 40 people showed up to it and I 
thought this is stupid I can’t even pay for the venue I’m not going to do this. 
I said listen everybody, thanks for coming out but I’m not going to do it 
because there’s not enough people here. I’m going to give you all your 
money back and even buy you a drink I’m going to take a loss on this.
They go oh, no please stay and do it. I said no, I’m not going to do it. They 
said please we all want to get hypnotized. I said well if you all get 
hypnotized there won’t be anybody out there and they said we don’t care. 
So I said okay and it was one of the funniest nights I’ve ever had. I lost 
money, not as much because I kept all the money since they stayed, but 
that was a long time ago.
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
26
                                 
Student:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
I’ve never heard that description of a somnambulist before as someone that 
walks or talks in their sleep. I’ve heard other descriptions for it that were 
more scientific like clinical, but would that be a good question to ask the 
audience, like how many people here talk in their sleep or have sleep 
walked before, as a way to filter out good subjects?
I wouldn’t worry about that. You could do that, but I don’t worry about that. 
My thing is…listen, I’m glad you guys are here who’s ready to have a good 
time…
Woo-woo.
All right, who wants to be hypnotized?
Woo.
Wow, so I guess the rest of you are here to watch those guys get messed 
with right. Okay cool, that’s what it’s all about, because if you’re not going to 
do it we can watch them and you’re still going to have a good time no 
matter what you do. So, those of you who do want to have a good time, 
come on up and let’s party. That’s how I approach it.
Some people get into the technical kind of stuff, but my feelings are is that 
when I’m doing a show that most people aren’t there for education, they’re 
there for entertainment. So what I try to do is give them an entertainment 
value for their dollar. If they want to do education, in the back of the room 
go pick up that flyer because I’ll be doing a seminar in two days, invite all 
your friends for $50 each. All I need is 200 people, have a good night.
That’s part of the backroom sales and I try to keep that to a minimum.
You mentioned earlier that you recorded the Dubai shows and it’s running 
on your website. It makes me wonder, at what point does it become your 
right to record it or the venues right to record it. Can they control what you 
record in any way, how you use it, sell it or display it?
No, it has nothing to do with them. It’s my show. Do you know how much I 
had to pay for that venue? The room alone was $6000 a night, so it’s mine.
So does it depend on whose paid, because had you negotiated the kind of 
deal where the host is paying for everything, would that then be that they 
say the material is ours?
No, you negotiate all that in the contract. In my contracts everything belongs 
to me, everything. Nobody has the right to videotape record it in any way 
without the permission of Sleep Now Productions, Inc. Anybody who does 
that will be sued and will be held liable. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
27
                                 
Even at seminars like this we don’t allow anybody else to do recording of 
any kind, because we’re putting a lot of effort into what we’re doing. This is 
our business. It’s a business it’s not just a performance so we have to treat 
it that way. So, anybody kind of performer whether it’s the stage hypnotist or 
Madonna whoever, they own the rights to their performance no matter 
where they go.
A venue may say we want to split that with you and some venues will do 
that. They go listen, anything you do in the back room we want 20% of all 
the sales you do. It’s standard in many of the larger theaters. It is what it is. 
Cool, I’ll split it with you take your 20% that’s fine, no big deal because 
that’s still 28% of something you didn’t have to begin with. That’s how I look 
at it.
Super quick…since I’m brand new and have never done a show before, I 
don’t have a contract. Where could I get a boilerplate that I could at least 
hand to an attorney so he wouldn’t charge me for every single word that he 
ever saw?
I won’t charge you that much.
For yours?
Drop me an email and I’ll send you a copy, no big deal.
Thank you.
If you want a copy of a simple contract that you can use in anything, go to 
my website, drop me an email and I’ll be happy to send you one. 
It’s a little off the technical as far as dollars and cents, but my thought is, 
just a couple of skit ideas between a high school, college and a corporation. 
Let’s hold onto that because we’re going to cover that in the next section. 
Spencer, of course, has done this for a while so he has an idea of what to 
look for in a contract. I’m telling you, you don’t want to get screwed out of a 
couple things so find a local attorney who can help you, but like Spencer 
said he’ll shoot you a contract. It’ll probably be pretty solid, but for anybody
else you can find them online, just make sure you’re not getting jogged 
because you didn’t look at the certain things that are in there.
Exactly. When you’re out there doing your own thing, every time somebody 
contacts me and wants to do a gig, I fill out a contract and send it to them. 
They sign it, send me a deposit and everything happens. It’s pretty 
straightforward; whenever I book a gig I want 50% down and I want the 
balance paid 30 days before I perform.
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
28
                                 
Or, if it’s within a 60 day period, I get paid everything in advance before I 
even show up. I have expenses I’ve got to cover and I’m not going to take it 
out of my own pocket for somebody else. Because there’s nothing worse 
then getting to a place and having somebody say they’re going to pay you 
and you don’t get paid. That can happen, so you want to cover your ass at 
all times. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
29
                                 
Abreactions
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
It’s nothing personal it’s just business, it’s not a big deal when somebody 
hires you like that. But what happens if you’re doing a show and somebody 
has some kind of an abreaction and freaks out? I want to cover that for a 
second and then when we come back after lunch I’ll go into it a little more 
in-depth, because we only have about five minutes left and that’s it.
I need somebody who wants to role play with me. Who wants to be messed 
up? All right Edward. Anyway, let’s say I’m doing a show and Edward is 
sitting up on stage as one of the subjects and he’s having some type of 
abreaction and I need to stop whatever I’m doing to work with this guy. It’s 
happened to me before and it can happen to you, it’s just the nature of the 
business of the beast.
And you, the professionally trained analytical and highly competent 
hypnotherapist, besides being a confident, competent stage hypnotist 
professional right, there’s another layer to this…you know how to handle 
anything that comes in front of you, you deal with what emerges. 
So, for example, let’s say something is happening with him and he’s having 
some kind of melt down, he doesn’t know what’s happening and he’s 
freaking out. Can you freak out for me? I may just watch him for a moment 
and let him get filmed.
Dude where am I?
Are you okay?
I don’t like this. Don’t touch me.
Are you all right?
Don’t touch me where am I?
Are you sure?
I don’t know what’s going on.
Hey cool, stop for a second. Look right here.
What? 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
30
                                 
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Take a deep breath in and sleep. Now, what I’m going to do is help a 
person to get out of that completely, very quickly. Sometimes you may want 
to do something like that and it does not work, you don’t know and that’s 
what happens is that you never know what’s going to happen. 
First, what I would do if I’ve got somebody like that I might tell them to sleep 
and say listen, I’m going to count to three, open your eyes and have you 
come off the stage. My assistant is going to help you, she’ll take you back 
stage and talk to you for a little bit.
So my first rule is that I’m going to have my assistant take them off the 
stage and I’m going to go wow, what was that all about? He’ll be back in a 
few moments, but until he gets back let’s go on with the show. I’ll make it 
part of the show first and foremost, because you are the consummate 
performer, the entertainer, so the show must go on.
That said; I’m also not a mean person. I’m a really nice guy and if 
something happens and I have been known to stop a show because 
somebody is having difficulty and I will work with them. Trust me on this, the 
audience is very generous and they think it’s cool that you would take out 
that time to help another human being.
Don’t ever be afraid to stop and help somebody who needs help, because 
you never know what’s going to happen. There may be a time when you 
need help with something and you’ll be glad that somebody stopped to help 
you. 
So anyway, he’s wigging out, going nutty and fruity and stuff like that, so I 
make him sit down and say audience excuse me for just a moment I need 
to help this guy for a second. 
Edward, open your eyes and be nice and calm with me. How are you 
doing buddy? What seems to be going on?
I don’t know where I am.
Okay, good. Close your eyes again. Listen, I’m going to count to 
three, you’re going to open your eyes and wake up all the way 1-2-3, 
all the way awake. How are you doing?
Okay.
Let’s take it to a different dimension. Let’s say the guy is really freaking out 
and having a bad time. I might do a mini session with him. I’ll say close your 
eyes for just a second, you know, you’re shaking a little bit because 
something is going on. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
31
                                 
I have a very straight line approach like, what’s going on in your 
body, where do you feel that, what’s happening?
In my shoulders.
In your shoulders okay, go in your shoulders very quickly, go in your 
shoulders, you got that? Go to that feeling; let’s go back very quickly 
to an earlier time when you had that same feeling. Where that takes 
you is it daytime or nighttime? 
Daytime.
Inside or outside?
Inside.
Alone or is somebody with you?
Somebody’s with me.
Good. How old do you seem to be?
Forty.
Right on, good. What’s happening?
I’m in my office.
Okay, let’s do this very quickly. Before we do anything, let’s take that 
information and what’s happening in your office and let’s move 
through it very quickly. I want you to take yourself out of that 
moment, just breathe into it and then relax. Let’s move to before that 
moment happened and be nice and calm.
Let’s take that moment that happened there and let’s just take it out 
of your brain for a second. For example, just lift it up and move it 
over to the side so its not even there, can you do that? Now, let’s go 
into your life some time where you had something really cool happen 
to you, got it?
Let’s put that back in that spot so you have something really cool 
happening, got it? Now let’s bring it all together, merge it all together, 
on the count of three open your eyes and bring everything back 
feeling great 1-2-3. Good, how do you feel?
Relaxed.
Good. Is everything good?
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
32
                                 
Edward:
Spencer:
[
]
Students:
[
]
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Yes.
Are you ready to go on with the show? All right, good. Thank you 
audience, give him a round of applause and make him feel good.
Applause
That’s one way to approach it on something simple. You may have 
something that’s more intense then that, but hypnotherapy doesn’t have to 
be very difficult or long. I can take a hypnotherapy session and turn it to 
something that only takes a couple minutes to do instead of hours to work 
with.
The nice thing about being a performer is that you learn all these really cool 
techniques that you can get through things very quickly. 
Thanks Edward. 
I’d like to role play this a little, so when we come back from lunch I want to 
talk more about this, because it’s a serious thing that can happen and our 
job is to take care of everyone and make them feel good. We’ll talk about 
doing a mini hypnotherapy session and I’ll show you a couple other 
techniques that will be valuable for you to use. Would you like that?
Yes. Applause
So far have you gotten some good information this morning?
Yes!
After lunch we’ve got a list of things that will have to do with how to book 
shows with everything from cruise lines to theaters and how to work the 
whole gamut of business, so when you are done your day you can go on 
the phone tonight and book a show, right?
Right!
All right. 

