© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
1
                                 
DVD 13 – Secrets to a Successful Stage Hypnosis Business &
How to Promote Your Show Anytime, Anywhere to Anyone
The Stage
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Joe:
Spencer:
Joe:
Spencer:
Joe:
Spencer:
Joe:
Spencer:
Joe:
Spencer:
[
]
Joe:
Let’s find out how to make some money. Who’s here to make money? 
Joe’s making money he just booked a show.
You just booked a show?
He’s going to Italy three days after he gets back.
Italy.
No.
Where is it?
At home in southern California.
What part?
Orange County.
All right, the big OC. What part of Orange County?
Irvine.
I used to go to Irvine Park when I was a little whipper-snapper. I grew up in 
Woodier. It’s not the same as it was back then. Hey Joe, where you going 
with that trance in your hand? How much you getting paid buddy?
Twenty five hundred dollars.
Twenty five hundred dollars, give Joe a round of applause.
Applause
Where did you book it? Stand up Joe, because Joe just booked a show in 
Orange County for $2500 after only two and a half days in the boot camp 
stage hypnosis course here in wonderful Las Vegas, Nevada. Joe, please 
take the floor.
It’ll be on a Tuesday, two weeks from now at the UC Irvine Bren Center. It 
seats a few thousand, I’m hoping for at least a few hundred. I’m working with 
some of the students on campus. I have several friends that work there too, 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
2
                                 
so I’m getting the venue for free and I’m working on getting as many students 
there as possible.
Applause
Right on, that is going to be fun. If that doesn’t inspire you all nothing will. 
What do you do right now Joe, do you work or are you retired?
Sort of.
Cool. Well, you know what, even if you’re not sort of retired, $2500 for a 
couple hours of work isn’t bad wages is it?
Not bad at all.
That’s awesome! I like to hear stories like that. The cool thing about that too, 
working at the college, you’ll get a lot of gigs. Orange County is a good place 
and they should have somebody doing a full-time show there. The thing that 
Orange County and L.A. County competes with is Las Vegas, because it’s so 
cheap to come to Vegas. 
But they have some venues down there…I was there a few years ago looking 
around and thought…there are some great places here if somebody would 
just build a show there, they could do it weekly and bank, making as much as 
the guys in Vegas or more.
It’s a huge market. You could probably do three or four shows a week in one 
venue, that’s just the way it is there it’s a huge market. You can draw 
everybody from Orange County, from L.A. County, San Diego County, all 
over down there and that’s basically, all of southern California. You’re on your 
way. When I come to your show can I get free passes? Of course…the 
professional stage hypnotist notices all ambiance of people. All nuances are 
there, we keep our eyes open.
I want to digress for a moment. Your stage is like this, you have your stage 
area and you have your two speakers out here going out towards the 
audience and then you have your two monitors going here to the people on 
stage. I wanted to give you a diagram of what that looked like so you’d have 
that clear in your mind, because I know I do a lot of pointing like that and I 
know some people are diagram kind of people, so here is your diagram.
[
]
Spencer:
Joe:
Spencer:
Joe:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
3
                                 
Equipment Set Up
Students:
Spencer:
Then, on this side I drew you another diagram. I don’t do a lot of artwork 
because I am not an artist. I draw stick people. Here you go, there’s your 
setup. Don’t be messing with me now, I worked hard on this. Can anybody 
tell me what I’ve done here?
Boxes and switches, mind mapping…
There you go. Here you are sitting right here, here’s your sound guy. Here 
you have your table and where they’re using their laptop or whatever medium 
you used, maybe they’re doing spinning discs, however they have that set up. 
This is so, for example, if you’re working in a nightclub, the Elks Lodge or 
something, you’re new at this and you’re not real comfortable with your 
person being way back in the back of the room, maybe you have them sitting 
over here at a table and they’re set up that way.
Then, if during the show you need to walk over there, make it part of the 
show and check it out. You come back and the audience doesn’t notice it too 
much but you can play that as part of the show. So anyway, from your laptop 
to run the sound, the sound goes out to this thing called a mixing board. You 
can get a mixing board at Radio Shack, they come in all sizes and shapes 
right now and for what your needs are you probably won’t need one with 
more than four channels on it.
It’ll run you around $400 to $700 and will do the job for you perfectly. You’ll 
need a mixing board if you’re running your own sound, and I recommend that 
at some point you get your own equipment. It’s so much cooler to have your 
own equipment then to use somebody else’s. I don’t know how many times 
I’ve walked into a venue and thought, what have I done? 
Now from the mixer where you mix all your sound in here and have all these 
little buttons and stuff. It looks really cool with little things that slide up and 
down. Then from the mixer you have wires that go down here into this little 
thing here called an amplifier, which is a little gadget that powers the 
speakers. You cannot power the speakers without it.
So for your sound, you have your main line coming from your laptop that 
goes into a little control knob, that’s the mixer. If you don’t know what a mixer 
is look in the back. If you see the machine with all the knobs on the far end of 
the table, that’s it.
Well basically, they go down to an amp and from the amp you have wires that 
go out to power the speakers. You can see the lines hanging from the 
speakers here and that’s how your basic setup is, that goes out to your side 
ones on the stage and then her are the two monitors that are coming back 
onto your stage.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
4
                                 
That’s your basic setup for as far as sound goes. When you get to larger 
theaters, like if you’re working at a college that has sound or if you go to a 
high school with a nice auditorium that has a cool stage, which a lot of them 
have now that are very elegant with a good sound room.
All you do is patch into their system. That just means…I take my laptop and 
plug right into their mixer. It’s very simple to do. Does that make sense?
What’s your monitor?
A monitor is, basically, a speaker that’s sitting in front of you pointing towards 
the subjects on stage. It’s just something that you, as a performer, can hear 
yourself talking and that the people up on stage can hear you. Otherwise, if 
the speakers are just going outwards, the sound is oftentimes muffled and the 
people on stage don’t get a clear audio of what you’re saying.
Does everybody understand that?
I just want you to understand the elements of that if you’re doing your own 
show, so that if you want to go that route you can buy your own equipment. If 
you buy your own equipment you’re probably going to spend…for the mixer 
probably $300, amplifier you’ll pay around $800, for good speakers at least 
15” and you’re saying you like the self powered ones –I don’t like them. They 
may be good now they’ve changed but I haven’t really looked at them– I use 
self power and use the amplifier. For good speakers you’ll pay around $700 
to $1500 each.
I have some in my garage in Kalispell if anyone wants to come buy them, 
because I no longer use them. For the smaller monitors you’ll spend $500 to 
$1000 on them.
What size are the monitors?
The monitors are about the same size, like 15”. They can be a bit smaller but 
I like to have at least 15” and these can be 17”, depending on the size of the 
room. Down on the floor here you’ll see what they call sub-woofers, which 
gives it base and tonality. Without those down there the speakers up here 
would sound a bit higher pitched, so that gives it more base and soul.
At the theater I had I took the big sub-woofers and put them under the stage, 
so when I had my music playing the people on stage would feel it because 
the base would be humping through the floor. I did it on purpose.
When we watched you in Las Vegas you had that video thing going on before 
you came out, how did you make that? Did you just do that on your Mac with 
the eyes looking the wrong ways and all that crazy hypno stuff, all the stuff in 
your head that nobody really wants to know about?
Student:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
5
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
That’s true. Yes, I made that on the Mac.
Thanks.
And with different software programs, I just threw it all together.
What he’s referring to, if you weren’t in Vegas, at the show we had a big 
screen on the side and I projected a preshow video on the screen to entertain 
the audience before the show began. I do that because it’s a lot of fun and 
sometimes I’ll put clips of my shows on the monitor so people get an idea of 
what I’m going to do.
They’ll think, so that’s what he’s going to do to us huh, wow! It excites the 
imagination at the same time. So, if you want to use a big screen behind you 
with a projector, create some type of video montage or whatever, you can do 
that. I’ve got four or five different video montages. A lot of them are various 
clips from my shows over the years with me standing on people, etc.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
6
                                 
The Human Bridge
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
[
]
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
I want to talk about that for a second before we move forward. How many of 
you want to know about standing on top of a person, the human bridge? I’ve 
been instructed not to show you but to tell you how it works. I’ve seen too 
many hypnotists do this and have seen too many people hurt, so if you’re 
going to do this then you better damn well get it right. I’ll show you how to do 
it right, so no one gets hurt. Because you can hurt somebody with the human 
bridge, so you have to be very careful.
When I was in Salt Lake I did that every week. It was like the finale of my 
show and it looked very cool. Where’s the guy that’s been to my show? I’m 
interested, stand up and take a mic. I’d like to hear about this. He was telling 
me the other day that he used to go to my show in Salt Lake City, the one I 
did at the Avalon Theater for 6 ½ years, so I was intrigued about this story 
and I haven’t heard it yet. Just take a moment and share with everyone and 
me too...
It all depends, like the routines you were doing?
No, I mean the show. What was it like to go to the show that I did at the 
Avalon?
It was pretty magical like. 
Laughter
When you went, what was the experience? Was there a lot of people there? 
How many times did you go?
I’ve been quite a few times. It’s been about 12-13 years ago.
Wow! Has it been that long?
I’m 25, so that was a while ago. 
I’m 35…
The routines, some of them I can remember pretty well, like you were having 
people drive the car and you caught a speed bump.
Let me ask you this. When you walked into the theater and the show began, 
what was it like at the beginning of the show, do you remember that?
It was like a magic show almost, except it was hypnotic. (thank you)

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
7
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Okay well, you enjoyed the show though didn’t you, let’s just go with that?
Yeah. In fact, it drove a lot of the people I knew over there. My neighbor was 
a weekly…
I have a question, because something is coming to my brain right now and if 
I’m not mistaken, did you come up on stage before?
Yes.
I’m starting to remember something. Did you come up there and you thought 
you were Elvis Presley?
Yes sir. I had the name tag and everything. 
I remember that. At one point I remember I told you to stay off the stage didn’t 
I?
I don’t remember that.
I do remember that. 
Laughter
I don’t mean that in a bad way, but I did a show there every week and I would 
get hundreds of people that would come to the show and people would want 
to come up all the time to get hypnotized over and over again, but I always 
wanted to get some new people. I remember you came up and I had this 
Elvis thing going on and you came up a lot. I remember now.
That’s me.
Tell them, what was it like when I always stood on top of somebody?
You were really fragile when you did it, very cautious. You would stand up on 
the chair, of course, you had those metal folding chairs right?
No, I had some nice beautiful supports on the side.
I mean the chairs where people sat. 
Yes, those were metal. I had everybody sitting on the stage.
Then you had the black and yellow sawhorses.
Come up here. 
Applause

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
8
                                 
That’s good enough for now, I just wanted to get your feedback, but you went 
to the show numerous times, you took a lot of people there and had a great 
time right?
Yes. 
You got your bang for the buck. 
Yes, I mean it was like $3-$4 a night?
Hell no man, it was $6 back then and I finally got the got at the theater to 
raise it to $8. I said no, I want to charge $10 and then I wanted him to raise it 
to $12 and he said no. I said bye.
He was a negotiable guy.
I left at that time and took my show to another venue after 6 ½ years I got 
tired of him. No big deal. It was time to move up and make more money but 
he didn’t want to, so I did. 
With this human bridge, when you have subjects up there and you’re doing 
your show. I’m always looking to keep in my mind who I’m going to use for 
that routine. I notice people and decide who’s a good subject. I always pick 
the smallest person on stage.
Let’s say for example, you’re sitting in a chair hypnotized and so I simply go, 
how would you like to be the most powerful person in this room tonight? 
Sure.
Awesome! Have you ever had a back or neck problem?
No.
Perfect. I want to cover myself on tape. I record every one of my 
presentations. Have you ever had a neck or back problem? If she says yes, 
then I’m going to go okay cool and then I’ll pick somebody else, because 
when you do the human bridge somebody can get hurt because you’re 
making their body stiff and rigid as a steel bar and you’re going to put them 
across two supports and then stand on top of them.
It’s really pretty cool. So, for example, I don’t have the kind of supports I want 
but I’m going to give you an idea of what I would do. I’ll get another volunteer 
up here to help me and to show you how to perform this without performing it. 
I just want to give you the mechanics of it, so if you decide you want to go off 
and do it at some point you’re on your own.
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
9
                                 
Let’s say we’re going to use two chairs like this, for example. Then I’ll have 
another assistant, I need a strong guy. 
I have a judo black belt.
Okay, but are you strong?
What do you want me to do?
When I do this, I’m not going to demonstrate this, but I want to show you the 
mechanics. When I do this I always have an assistant who’s going to help me 
lift the person and put them between two supports. We’re not going to do 
anything I just need you to stand there. With a human bridge what I’m going 
to do is take this individual and the way I approach it. 
Look right here, take a deep breath and make your body stiff and rigid. 
Make everything stiff and rigid and powerful. Put your arms behind your 
back and lock your fingers just like that. Make every muscle stiff and 
rigid. Close your eyes, stand and sleep. Make everything stiff and rigid 
and powerful. I’m going to go down here and make sure everything is 
stiff, rigid and powerful, because I want their body to be stiff and rigid.
Put your head back please. Make everything stiff and rigid and powerful. 
Now, I’ve got this person like this and their body is stiff and rigid. I put their 
hands back to make sure everything is nice, stiff and rigid. 
I’m going to do this, I’m going to say open your eyes and relax 
everything, good take another deep breath. When I said sleep make 
your body stiff and rigid. Stiff and rigid and powerful. Stiff and rigid and 
powerful and I’m going to go through this…stiff and rigid and powerful…
I’m going to go through it two or three times, because I want their body to be 
stiff and rigid. I want to make sure they are in total compliance of what I have 
to say. 
Bring your feet together. Your body is stiff and rigid and powerful. 
At this point, when I’m sure they’re where I want them to be, I simply say…
In a moment I’m going to bring you backwards and I do it while your 
body remains stiff and rigid and powerful at all times. Stiff and rigid and 
powerful.
When I do that I’m going to bring her back. You’ll lift up her feet…stiff and 
rigid and powerful, lift them up. You can see the rigidity of the body. Put her 
down now. Standing up. Relax. At this point, I’m not going to do this but, what 
you want to do when you have the supports is to put the body with the legs 
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
10
                                 
right here, this part on the calves over one part of the support. So if we have 
it like this, the calves would be here and the mistake I see some hypnotists 
make is they will take a person and put their foot on there and put their head 
on the other part.
I’ve seen a hypnotist do that and then they go to stand on somebody and 
they collapse. You can hurt somebody really bad. I always put a support 
between here and right here across the broad of the back. Then on the 
supports I use I have them nicely padded so the person doesn’t get hurt, 
because when I stand on them I stand on them all the way.
For example, if she’s there and you can hallucinate this, then finally I stand 
on top of her and I put one foot when she’s there right here. Then I place the 
other foot right smack in her gut. Then it’s like boom.
That would be impressive.
It is. If you want to see a demonstration, go to YouTube or my website. 
Why are you always worried you’re going to hurt someone, especially if it’s in 
a venue where its strangers coming up?
No, I am not ever. That’s why I always ask the questions. If I feel like 
somebody could get hurt I will not do it it’s that simple. I’ve done shows where 
I can’t find a small gal, so I’ll find the smallest guy I can find. Now, keep in 
mind, if you’re like a 250 pound hunk of man and you want to stand on a little 
lady like this, I would think twice and be very careful.
If I was considering doing this routine, I would take a man like him and a lady 
like her and then have him stand on top of her.
Very good. You can do that but you would want to manage every aspect of it, 
right. For example, when I’m doing this, and you know if you have a stage like 
this perhaps you could have two stands right there. Let’s say this is a person 
and you have them down there lower, you can walk right off the stage and on 
top of somebody just like that, if you have the two supports on the floor.
If you’re back here and you have somebody up here that’s high, then of 
course, you’ll have something back here that you can stand on. You’ll have 
the assistant come over here and help you stand on top of the person. They 
guide you so you don’t fall off. While I’m up there I have them release my 
hand and do my thing for however long I want to stand there for the audience 
to get the wow factor.
Then I take their hand and get down and I’ll simply sit down, cluck her down 
in my lap and rock her to sleep. Wake her up and everybody’s happy. Then, 
when I’m done with that I take the lady and say, do you realize that you just 
had me standing on top of you?
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
11
                                 
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
[
]
Michael:
Spencer:
Michael:
Spencer:
No.
Do me a favor folks, give her a powerful round of applause while she takes a 
bow and make her feel good.
Applause
Then I go further then that and say you know what, you have an 
incredibly powerful mind. Everything you ever wanted to achieve in your 
life you can achieve because of what you can achieve right now, so I 
want you to take this feeling in this moment with you into the rest of your 
life. Give her another powerful round of applause and make her feel 
good.
Applause
I hope that settles your curiosity about that. They are good for various 
reasons, which I’m not going to demonstrate here.
I was just curious, if you found an insurance company that will actually let you 
do that, because I’ve looked around and a lot of insurance companies make 
you go through a safety course and they say don’t do that or you’re not 
insured.
I’ve never had an insurance company say one thing to me. Maybe I haven’t 
asked the right questions. Maybe they haven’t sent me the right forms, 
because I haven’t seen that yet, Michael. Is that something you’ve run into?
Well, when you go out looking for insurance and stuff, there are a lot of 
disclaimers. Now they have you take a course here in Las Vegas or from 
some other person on stage hypnosis safety before you can even get your 
insurance.
I see they changed it because they had a big fight. What’s he’s talking about 
is that last year they had a big fight in the industry about insurance for the 
stage hypnotist and all these different conflicting people…to me it was one of 
those political things inside the industry which I don’t like at all. I don’t like 
politics in the industry. I’m not a political guy. 
I like to say here it is its free, take it, use it, if you don’t want it then discard it. 
I don’t like the politics where one segment says you can only do this or only 
do that, that doesn’t set well with me. Being a free spirited person I like to do 
whatever I want.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
12
                                 
Promote Yourself
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Let’s talk now about your promo pack. You’re a stage hypnotist. You’ve been 
hypnotizing people. You’re good at what you do. You’re feeling good right?
Yes!
You’re ready to go out and make some money now right?
Yes!
But you don’t have all the things you need in order to put it together correctly, 
for most things, except for Joe over there. He’s my hustler. You can all do 
that.
Let me tell you, when you go out and begin to promote yourself, there are 
some things that most venues are going to want, they’re going to want to see 
this thing, especially if you’re going to colleges or high schools and 
universities. If you want to get on the circuit of county, state or city fairs, 
anything, people want to know who you are. 
It’s like who are you? It’s like who are you to come to me to do a show, I 
mean, what are your credentials? This is what people want. I’m going to write 
down some ideas on how to do promotions. 
1. First, they’re going to want a video or a DVD. They want to see you in 
action. They want to see what you have.
Who’s getting a demo from Las Vegas tomorrow?
Woo-hoo! 
Do you think that’s going to be impressive to somebody?
Yes!
That’s why we’re here in Las Vegas. Because you can take this demo and 
say here’s a demo of a show I just did recently at the Venetian Hotel in Las 
Vegas, Nevada. Are you lying?
No!
No. You have been busting your butt the last few days and you have another 
afternoon of busting your butt, and all day tomorrow you’ll be doing more 
stage hypnosis, so you have some experience. In fact, I can tell you this for 
certain, I’ve been in this business for over 25 years and I’ve trained a lot of 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
13
                                 
people. This is one of the most intensive classes I’ve ever participated in for 
stage hypnosis where you are getting more then 99.9% of anybody out there 
whose taking any other type of course, trust me. Your DVD has to look good. 
2. Before you have your DVD you have to have your persona, who are 
you? 
Hallucinate right now the possibility. On your piece of paper in front of you, 
write down who you are. Who do you want to be known as? The booty priest. 
The world’s fastest hypnotist. Who do you want to be? The amazing you. The 
world’s sexiest spy. Who do you want to be? The world’s shortest hypnotist. 
The world’s tallest hypnotist. The funniest guy or the funniest hypnotist ever. 
The Jewish hypnotist. The Muslim hypnotist. 
It doesn’t matter who you are. A clean comedy hypnotist. The dirty hypnotist. 
What do you want to be? Hallucinate, write it down. Start mind mapping it and 
create some possibilities for yourself.
Let me ask you. How many people in here have already thought of some kind 
of title for themselves? Cool. I’m not going to ask you what that is, but I’m 
going to ask you to go as quickly as you can to the world wide web and make 
sure there’s not a domain with that name and register it now before 
somebody else in the room does, because somebody else in here may get 
really mad at you. The first one there wins. That’s just how it is.
If you’d like to share what you think your name is I’d like to hear it. Does 
anybody have a name they’d like to share? You do, is it Elvis? Okay, never 
mind. So, go to the Internet and get yourself a domain name. 
Now, if you’re not familiar with that process, find somebody who can help you 
with that. If you have the skills do it yourself, just do it. You want a presence 
on the Internet. People will go I’ve never done this before, what do I put on 
there? How do I promote myself? 
I’ve got this name, I’m the Las Vegas tomorrow hypnotist, tomorrow’s Las 
Vegas hypnotist, fake it till you make it. The DVD, how do you get the video? 
You have the video clips from tomorrow, so that’s the easy part. If you have 
Mark to do the editing to put the extra titles and stuff on there to doll it up, 
spend the extra money to do it. 
Don’t just get the pictures yourself and think you can do it yourself, unless 
you have editing experience and software to do it. Don’t short change 
yourself have him do that for you that’s what he does. Have him help you out 
with that part. 
Then, you take that DVD and make a bunch of copies of it. Make 100-200 
copies, that’ll be your calling card. You’ll go to a club and say hey, I’m Joe the 
hypnotist. I’m wondering if I can do a job here. I’m looking for a place to bring 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
14
                                 
my show and he’ll go well, do you have a DVD, a video of yourself? You can 
say yeah, as a matter of fact I do, here it is. So now you have your DVD, your 
promo is done.
You’ve got your name that you need to have so you can give it to Mark, so 
when he edits it and puts your name on there that’s done, because you want 
that on there and you want your contact information on that DVD as well. So 
you want to have your website put together. That’s a must in today’s society. 
If you don’t have it you’re going to die, trust me on this, because somebody 
else is going to have it.
There are 100 other hypnotists out there just like you right now that want your 
job. This is one reason I quit going to county fairs. I did them for a while and 
then I was at this convention, here in Las Vegas. They have it every year, the 
International Association of Fairs and Expos (IAFE), where if you want to 
work at state and county fairs, you have to go there. 
It’s where all the entertainers come to sell themselves and get bought. You 
rent a little booth, set it up, you look cute and you stand there for three days. 
By the end of the three days you’re really tired, unless you have somebody 
doing it for you but you want to be there because you’re selling yourself, 
because you are the product.
The fair market is a tough market to get in, because there are a lot of people 
out there who are new and the fairs don’t have a large budget, so oftentimes, 
what they do is undercut you. I just say fine undercut me. It’s not going to 
work I’m not going to do that. If you’re not going to pay me at least $2500 a 
day for six days straight I’m not going to do it. Plus paying for my plane and 
hotel fees, plus buying my food.
Not when they have somebody else who’s going to come in there and say 
well, gee I’ll do it for $300 a day. Forget about it. For me anyway, but if you 
want the experience of going on the circuit, by all means, please do it. I’m not 
saying don’t do it. I’m saying there are pitfalls in there and there are also 
reasons to do it to get the experience, because then you’re on a tour and you 
get to go do all these different fairs.
You’ll have a lot of stiff competition out there. A lot of people who have been 
doing it for years that go to the same markets year after year. My biggest 
encouragement would be, in your own hometown or county, find a place 
there to lock into and really work on honing your skills, get it down tight. 
That’s what all comedians and performers do.
Do you think Jay Leno just gets up on stage and starts yapping away? 
Seinfeld, no, they go to these little dive comedy clubs and they get out there 
and they try out new material to see how it works on an audience. If it works 
they use it, but if it doesn’t work they go I guess it didn’t work too well, so I’m 
not going to use that.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
15
                                 
I do the same thing. If there’s something new I’m working on I’ll try that first. 
I’ll go to a market where people have no idea who I am. I’ll pick a little town in 
nowhere USA. I’ll develop a show and I’ll try out some new material to see 
how it works. If it works, great, then I can build on it. If it sinks then I’ll change 
it. So that’s a good way for you to hone your skills is to find someplace and 
do it.
3. Now, talking about the world wide web, you can also get on the 
comedy circuit where you’ll be dealing with a lot of sleazebag hotels, 
which is fun for a lot of people if you like the road. 
It’s a fun way to learn because you get to sleep in one-star motels. We just 
dropped from hotels to motels and you get to eat road food because they will 
feed you, which is greasy, non-nutritional foods, a step up from road kill and 
sometimes it is road kill.
But you have a lot of fun stories that you can eventually tell to people on the 
road. If I had more time I could tell you hundreds of road horror stories that 
I’ve had over the years. 
I’m going to digress and go back to the promo pack. So you have the DVD, 
your name, the World Wide Web you want that, all this goes on your DVD 
and in today’s market that’s all you need is a website because everybody has 
a computer. Just plug them into that.
4. Besides the World Wide Web, use social media to promote yourself.
If you want to be big use social media networks like Facebook, MySpace, 
Ning (you can create your own page there), Twitter, LinkedIn, Plaxo, Stumble 
Upon, there are all sorts of social media. When you have your DVD done, go 
to YouTube and put your promo there. It costs you nothing and then all of a 
sudden people all over the world will see you. Now you have international 
exposure because you’re on YouTube.
The Internet has changed the way we do business and I find myself having to 
constantly move and shift in proportion to what the world is giving us as far as 
promotions. 
5. Business cards, you can have business cards
I don’t use business cards anymore. People ask me for them but I don’t carry 
them. Maybe I should but I don’t, but have them. They don’t cost that much to 
produce and if you’re out here, like in Vegas, you can take a DVD and a 
business card to every hotel in town and give them to the entertainment 
director in each hotel. They’ll put them in a stock of 500 others of people just 
like you doing the same thing.
It’s not what you know it’s who you know in this business, trust me.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
16
                                 
It’s not how good you are it’s who you know. You can be the best hypnotist in 
the world but if you don’t get out there and network to meet people you’re not 
going to get anywhere and so much of this profession is networking-
networking-networking, meeting people and being a social butterfly for a 
while, you just have to do it.
I don’t have to do it as much as I used to, but when I first started I busted my 
ass doing this. So, I’m letting you know that I busted my ass doing this for 
years, being out there and meeting people, which is what got me around the 
world numerous times. That’s what got me to Playboy and six or seven other 
countries, where you can command fees that pay you $10,000 to $40,000 a 
gig and then you have international exposure.
So you have to pay the price and you’ll get there if you want it bad enough. If 
you’re hungry enough you’ll get there. Who’s hungry in here?
Whoa!
All right. Be that hungry and I promise you will get there.
Before we move forward let’s take your questions now. 
How many languages can you do your show in?
English. Habla Espanol un poquito…enough to get me in trouble.
So you never do translations?
If I’m in a foreign country and people don’t understand me I just use a 
translator.
The direct ones, the one that when you say when they’re here…
Yes, I’ll say something and then I’ll have somebody next to me who repeats it 
in that language, that’s not a problem for me. Why not use a translator? I 
don’t care as long as I’m getting paid.
Do you have any experience using agents or booking companies and do you 
have any thoughts or advice on that?
Yes. We’ll get to that shortly.
It’s about uploading video. If you go to a place called Tube Mogul, it has all 
the major video sites on it, so you can simply plug in your video and then it’ll 
upload to all the major sites and will then get tracking on how many hits you 
get from each site.
Cool.
Students:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
17
                                 
Student:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
I strongly advise you, if you’re going into social media, if you don’t know your 
way about to get someone that does. It can be a bit expensive, but it’s well 
worth it, because you can get huge doing that.
Do you need to have releases from the people who are in your shows if 
you’re going to put them out, broadcast them, like on YouTube and your 
website?
Yes, you should get releases. Good question.
How do you do that? 
I ask them for them. No, I tell them before the show that this is going to be 
videotaped and have them sign a release form that releases me of any 
liability and says they agree to be videotaped, be on any medium and that 
they release all rights to me.
That’s everyone who comes in the door?
Everyone that comes up on my stage that I use for a video. 
He asked, just the people on the stage right?
Listen, I tell people before the show begins, I say listen this is being 
videotaped. If you do not want to be videotaped do not come up on my stage, 
because I will sell this videotape. Again, if you do not want to be on my stage
and videotaped, do not come up on stage. If you come up on my stage then 
you’re giving me permission to be videotaped and I say that as I’m being 
videotaped, so when they come up my ass is covered.
Let’s move on. The other thing with promotions is this.
6. Newspaper articles
Whenever you go to do a show you want to send out a press release to every 
newspaper and radio station in town. You want to send a press release to 
every television station in town. You want to send a press release to every 
Internet development company in the area to let them know that you are 
going to be in town. You want to let them know who you are, what your show 
is about, what you’ll be doing in your show and how to contact you for 
interviews.
If you want free publicity then you need to contact all the media. Ninety 
percent of the time you will be turned down. If you are persistent you will be 
on the phone, in the studio, in front of somebody or on TV giving an interview. 
It’s the coolest thing ever. Once you’re on TV, you are the local celebrity. 
Once you’re on the radio, everybody hears you. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
18
                                 
When I was in Dubai, I don’t know how they heard about the show, but all of 
a sudden Virgin Radio picked up on it and we didn’t have to pay them a dime, 
but they asked me to come to their studio and they did a 45 minute interview. 
Their listenership was 500,000 people in the Gulf region. The highest 
listenership of any radio station and it cost me nothing.
Do you know how much it would cost you to buy 45 minutes of time on radio 
during drive time? 
Twenty thousand a month.
More money than you make in a year for most people, I think. It’s very 
expensive and it was free. Same thing happened with another radio station. 
They did the same thing and gave me a 30 minute spot, just because they 
were fascinated with hypnosis and they thought it was great that I was the 
world’s fastest hypnotist and from America. Plus, I had a very good manager 
who was busting doors down to get me in.
He’s always out there beating on the doors that’s his job, is to promote me 
and brand me in the Middle East. If you get somebody like that and make it a 
partnership, you can go a long ways. Just know who you are and what your 
limitations are, then develop a group to work with and share the bounty with 
everyone.
Let’s say you do radio and TV shows, you’ve sent press releases, you follow 
up with phone calls and send emails. Maybe you talk to people, keep 
knocking on doors, keep sending emails and get on the phone to talk with 
these people. That’s how you get on the radio and TV or in the newspaper.
7. How about doing some lecture demos free? 
If you want to get major exposure out there, write to the paper. Send them 
something that says listen, free demonstrations with free lecture on hypnosis. 
The public is invited at no charge, 1 hour free lecture. You’d be amazed at 
how many people will show up. 
I used to do stop smoking weight loss seminars and charge people $60-$70 
apiece. I got maybe 50 to 100 people in there so I said forget about it it’s free. 
Stop smoking no charge. All of a sudden I doubled and tripled the number of 
people coming to the seminars. Fine, I’d just sell in the back of the room my 
programs to stop smoking and lose weight and made more money that way 
then I did by charging them to come to the seminar.
Then, if you were doing a show, that’s a bonus because when you’re in a 
town doing a show, the next night you’re ready to do a stop smoking/ weight 
loss seminar or stress management seminar. Do you know how many people 
will come to it? Most of them. 
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
19
                                 
So if you’re doing a show and you have 200 people there, they’ll go out and 
tell people wow! I saw that hypnotist he was fantastic and by the way, 
tomorrow he’s going to conduct a weight loss/stop smoking and stress 
management seminar; let’s go. They’re going to go out there and bring 
people back. It won’t cost you anything. You could probably pick up an extra 
$5000 to $10,000 doing that. 
That’s why I live in Montana. I’ll go there and do a show and then I’ll go 
fishing for two or three weeks. That’s why I do this, so I can go fishing. I like 
to fish and mountain bike. 
How do you contact agents and deal with them? What has your experience 
been, in terms of their ability to help?
It depends on the agent. Most agents aren’t going to deal with you unless you 
can produce extraordinary amounts of money for them. If you can fill a room 
with 1000 to 2000 people six nights a week, they’ll go I’m interested in you, 
because that’s more money in their pocket. There are a lot of sites out there 
where they have different people promoting hypnotists, magicians and things 
like that. 
If you want to get on a site, there are some sites like All Time Favorites, Gig 
Masters, Super Solid Something, but there are different sites where you can 
put your information or DVD about you the stage hypnotist. It will cost but 
people use it. Party Pop is another one, but you’ll get some gigs from them 
and you’ll also be on there with about 300 to 500 other hypnotists competing 
for the same person who’s looking for you.
The competition is stiff but…how many people in here golf raise your hands?
You true blue golfers, when you go out and golf who do you play against? 
Yourself. This is no different. You’re not in competition with any other 
hypnotists. Listen to this, there’s more of enough of everything for everybody. 
If you want to attract shows attract abundance and you attract abundance by 
knowing there’s more than enough of everything for everybody.
If you get into the spirit of competition with other people, then you’re going to 
be competing with everybody. All you have to do is go out there and be the 
best you can be for yourself and the Universe will go; what an awesome 
person you are. You are there to support everybody, so support everybody 
and you’ll be supported yourself. If you do that you’ll have a massive amount 
of business coming to you at all times. 
Caveat…you have to get out there and bust your butt right. You still have to 
work. You still have to get out there and get the experience. You have to 
knock on doors. Working with agents can be tricky, because a lot of agents 
don’t take people like us in this business, so most people in this business 
become their own agents. You promote yourself and you may find somebody 
that you work with that does promotions for you.
Student:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
20
                                 
I have a guy now and that’s what he does, he just does promotions for me, 
which is cool I don’t have to deal with it and I don’t really want to I hate it. I 
don’t like the business part of it. I need to know the business part of it but at 
some point I said okay, if he goes out there and gets me a show for $10,000 
a night and he gets $2000 or $3000 grand of that that’s $7000 grand I didn’t 
have to begin with, why not?
There’s more than enough of everything for everybody, right?
Right.
So keep that in mind. When you’re working with agents, they’ll take anywhere 
between 10 and 30% of your chunk at the door.
When I first started with this I worked with different agents in Salt Lake City 
and they actually got me a lot of work. They would charge me 20%. No big 
deal, because they got me into a lot of nightclubs and got me a lot of work 
because they were the entertainment bureau, so they worked with a lot of 
different entertainers.
I happened to be very good at what I did, so they got me a lot of gigs. There 
were some other hypnotists running around town at that time and by the time 
I got done with the town I was the last man standing, because I worked very 
hard at what I did. I wasn’t trying to get rid of anybody, just go out and do 
your thing. Be your genuine, authentic self and be good at it.
There’s not much more you can say about working with agents. When you go 
into venue you can do door splits also, for example, you go into a club and 
they don’t have the $1500 or $2000 to pay you for a show because they’re 
used to paying a band $500 to $700 a night for 5 guys and who are you, just 
one person and you want $2000. They laugh at you, for what? These guys 
are going to play all night, you’re only going to be on for an hour, that’s 
insane and they don’t like that.
So you can do a door split. We’ll charge $15 at the door, you keep half and I 
take half, how’s that for an hour? That’s not a bad deal for either of you. It 
gets you in the door and gets you a lot of work. This is a good way to get 
yourself in the door. Say I’ll do nothing man, just give me the door and you 
keep all the booze. If you start trying to get the booze from them, getting a 
percentage of that then they’ll get queasy on you. 
So, you’re for-walling, you buy the venue, pay for all the promotion, you take 
all the risk and you take whatever you get at the door. By the end of the night 
you hope you broke even. Sometimes you can do very well. I for-wall all the 
time now and I wouldn’t do it unless I was making money.
Students:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
21
                                 
Where To Get Hired
How do you get booked at county fairs? 
I talked about that earlier. If you want to get booked at a county fair, go to the 
IAFE, because that’s the only way they’re going to hire you. You may be able 
to talk to your local fair board director and sell yourself, but they usually have, 
because the fairs come up through June, July, August and September in the 
states. But here it is March, they’ve already gone in November and have 
booked their acts, so most of the county fairs are already done and over with 
for this year. So come this November, if you want part of the action you need 
to go to the expo.
Colleges also have one called NACA. In order to get on the college circuit, 
most of the time–and a lot of times I can call and talk to different fraternities 
and get in there with them they’ll hire you–if you want to get on the college 
circuit you need to go to this NACA. They hold it every year and you have to 
showcase your show in front of a group of people. They will choose who they 
feel is the best suited person to put on the tour for all the colleges around the 
country.
Myself, I call the different universities that I want to work at and talk to a 
different fraternity or organization there. I’ll say listen, I’m a hypnotist. How 
would you like to make some money? They’ll want to make money for their 
organization, so you work out a deal with them. It’s very simple to do, and 
then you don’t have to go to the NACA.
High schools– take your promo pack, send it to the principal. After you send it 
to the principal you call them up on the phone. Hello Mr. Principal, this is Joe 
the hypnotist did you get that promo pack I sent you? Yes, I did. Awesome! 
What did you think about that? It sucks I’m not interested. Okay, great do you 
know anybody who would be? Or, I don’t know I haven’t had time to look at it. 
Well, I’ll tell you what, when you have a moment to look at it is it okay if I give 
you a call back?
My website is on there and we have lots of additional information on there. 
High schools are no different you simply approach the principal at the high 
schools. Then, every high school has a grad night. Hypnotists are the favorite 
at grad nights across this country. High schools love the hypnotist on grad 
night. 
Grad night is when they lock all the kids in for the night and they have 
entertainers come in and do things. Hypnotists are a favorite there. They 
don’t have big budgets, but if you do 20 grad nights in a month and you 
charge them only $1000, that’s not a bad month right? That’s not a bad way 
to go.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
22
                                 
A lot of people like to specialize in different markets and that’s how you 
approach them.
There again, whatever state you live in, go to different cities and to their high 
schools or send them all a promo kit and an email. Call them up and ask who 
you need to talk to. You have to do the footwork. You have to knock on doors 
to make anything happen. You have to go out there and do it. You have the 
skills, now you have to go do the business. This is show business. 
Here’s what frustrates me sometimes. People look at what I do and they go 
well geez, who do you think you are, you go out there and make $10,000 a 
night to do a show, $20,000 on this thing and $5000 grand on that. It’s like 
they get an attitude with me and you know what, I’ve spent 25 years busting 
my ass to do this. You don’t know what goes on behind the scenes. For every 
one hour show that I do it probably takes me five to six hours of preparation 
before and after, so it’s not just about going out there and doing the one hour 
show.
You’ve spent hours developing this show by doing your work with the DVDs 
and your promo’s, updating your website and talking to the media, whoever. 
You have done a lot of work beforehand to make sure your show comes off 
without a hitch, that you make money, they get entertained and that you 
follow up with whoever wants to talk with you afterwards.
So never feel bad for charging people a lot of money for what you do, 
because you’re worth it. You’ve put in the work. In just these four days you 
guys are busting your balls, right guys.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
23
                                 
Q&A Session
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Edward:
I’ll take questions right now and then we’ll go on with more of the business.
Just on the concept of for-walling you call it, that’s where you say I’m going to 
rent out this hall and I’m going to keep some of the money of the tickets and 
the venue gets the other half or whatever percentage you’re giving them or 
do you keep all the money?
All the money. You also have all the risk.
So with that you’re going to advertise yourself beforehand, because you said 
before, never be like a sideshow, you always want to be the destination. So 
you’re going to make sure you advertise yourself before that?
That’s right.
You do that and sell your own tickets. For example, when I do a show like 
that I do all my own ticketing. I use PayPal. It’s simple and easy, I’ve used it 
for years it’s a piece of cake. When I go to do a show and do a for-wall, I’ll 
say buy your tickets here, they click here and go to my sales page. It asks 
how many tickets you want. If they buy one ticket they pay top price, if they 
buy four or five, I’ll take a couple dollars off. The more tickets you buy the 
less it is. It goes through PayPal and into my bank account. Ka-ching and I’m 
ready.
I also do something else, I put on there that everybody who goes to my 
website and buys a ticket I’m going to give them two free audio CDs that are 
worth more than the cost of the ticket. A lot of value there, so they come there 
and spend $15 and I’ll give them $30 to $40 in products.
What does it cost me to do that, to give them something like that? I don’t 
know maybe $.50 who knows. It’s digital. It took me time to create it. I had to 
write out scripts, record and edit it. I had to package it and put it on the 
website, upload it and do all the design work, because I do all my own design 
work on my website.  
I don’t know about anywhere else in the country, but where I am in South 
Carolina, we all have PTA associations and just to let you know, in my own 
personal business, it’s not the principal that runs the business of the school;
his job is to run the school. It’s the head PTA teacher association and they’re 
always doing fundraisers, so they’re looking for new material and they will 
split the funds with you that you bring into it.
They will market and advertise. They’ll send it home through their kids 
throughout the entire school system and you can get your name out there. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
24
                                 
For instance, I’ll go and speak to the parents about college education and 
doing different things to get better grants for schools and the PTA Association 
will actually charge at the door to have people come and they want to hear it, 
so they’re always looking for a fundraiser, so that’s a great idea. 
Let me talk a little bit more on that so we don’t get too far off.
I do a lot of fundraisers, they area great way to make money. It costs you 
absolutely nothing to do. In fact, I did one two months ago at this little high 
school called Eureka in the north country of where I live. They had me do it 
last year and I had so much bloody fun I did it again this year, they asked me 
to come back.
It’s not bad, I go do a fundraiser, they do all the work, I walk away with over 
$2500 and they walked away raising like $4000 themselves. I don’t care. It’s 
a community service thing for me. They do all the work and I still didn’t get 
paid a bad salary, I got paid very well and it was only an hour drive from 
where I live. They put me up in a hotel for the night. I sold a bunch of 
products at the end of it.
That’s what I was going to say then you can sell all your products at the back 
door.
That’s right at the back of the room. It’s a no-brainer. I’ve got the whole 
fundraising thing down. If you need more information you know where to find 
me, go to my website and drop me an email so we can talk more about that. 
When you do a for-wall, do you arrange preliminary acts for yourself or do 
you just do it all by yourself?
It depends. For example, a couple years ago I opened a non-smoking 
comedy club in Kalispell and I ran it for three months, then I got divorced and 
took some time off to deal with that. What I did there was a lot of fun because 
I did a weekly show and I had comics come in who would do…I did my show 
once or twice a month, because it was always the biggest thing that 
happened there. 
I would have comedians come in and there’d be an opening act for 20 
minutes and then I would do the headliner. Same thing comics, you have an 
opening act and then you have a headliner.
Did you pay the comics or do you negotiate?
I tell them what I’m going to pay them. If they want to work in my club they’re 
going to take what they get, it’s pretty simple. 
Back to the equipment…are you schlepping all that from venue to venue? Do 
you take all that equipment with you?
Spencer:
Edward:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
25
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
If the venue doesn’t have it I take it with me. 
How does that translate when you travel?
If I have to travel, it depends, if I’m traveling within three hours its no big deal, 
I’ve got a mini van that will haul all my road gear, so I have a road van that 
goes with me when I do local stuff. If I jump on a plane and go somewhere, I 
just hire a local DJ, I don’t worry about it and they do all this.
This is your basic setup if you have your own equipment. Even locally I hardly 
take mine out of the garage anymore, because I have people I can pay to do 
it all. I don’t want to lift anything anymore. I’m tired. Maybe when my son gets 
bigger he can do it for me, but right now he’s not big enough.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
26
                                 
Types Of Venues
When you’re working at high schools and colleges, the people are floppers. 
They’re easy to work with when you’re doing a hypnosis show. The easiest 
shows you’ll ever do is working the high schools and colleges, because 
they’re highly responsive, they’re a lot of fun so you can walk up to them, sit 
them down in the chairs and say sleep, sleep, sleep and have a lot of fun with 
it.
The induction is nothing more then just dramatic. It adds a layer of suspense 
and drama to your show, so please do that also because it looks cool. People 
like to see people get hypnotized, falling all over and you’ll see some people 
dropping sooner than others. Working with them is different than working in a 
nightclub or in a corporate gig where people are a little more hardwired to 
who they think they are, so your job is a little more difficult, because they’re 
either drinking or they have rigidity of thought because of where they are.
Military is different too. If you happen to get a gig on a military base, which is 
very uncommon because they tell you to never let yourself be hypnotized. 
But, if you happen to get onto a military base…and I had a lady who called 
me on this a while back, because she was thinking about doing mentoring 
with me…she decided she couldn’t afford it so she paid me by the hour to just 
talk to me and get some feedback.
I think she made a big mistake, but she was doing this military base and she 
said nobody would get hypnotized, I didn’t know what to do. I said well, what 
did you do? She goes I couldn’t do anything. I said and that’s why you need a 
mentor. Had you talked to me beforehand we could have eliminated that 
problem right off, because there’s a way you talk to people in the military that 
you can’t talk to the general population.
You have to go in the back door with the military, in the way that their mind 
processes information. Hopefully, you have enough skills to do that. I don’t 
have enough time to go into detail about how to do that exactly with the 
military, because it’s a whole different hypnotic process. But, if you think you 
can go to the military and do a regular show, think twice it’s going to be very 
difficult because they’re trained to not be receptive to people who are 
hypnotists or interrogating them.
You the hypnotist are an interrogator to them, so you have to learn how to 
talk to them, because they’re very rigid. It’s the same thing with police 
officers. You’ll have the same thing with cops up on stage, so you have to 
take an entirely different approach with these individuals because they’re 
trained to resist people like us.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
27
                                 
Who wants to work on a cruise ship?
Hell yeah.
Here’s what you have to do. You have to get a hold of the cruise director, the 
entertainment director on the cruise ship. You have to bang on doors and 
sending out promo stuff. You have to go knock on the door and if I were you I 
would go meet them personally. If you want to go on a cruise line go down 
and meet them personally. Take a cruise. The cruise director is usually on 
there.
They already have entertainment, say hey listen I’m a hypnotist. Maybe they’ll 
let you get up there and do something real quick, who knows? That’s how 
you get on a cruise ship you’ve got to talk to the entertainment director 
because they book all the shows. 
Now, you’ll get a lot of entertainment directors on cruise ships and in places 
like Las Vegas and in casinos around the country that will only work through 
a talent agency. How do you get into a talent agency? The same way, like 
this, and if you don’t have all the big references under your name you fake it 
till you make it. 
Go meet these people personally, develop a relationship with them because if 
you think you’re going to pick up the phone and say hey, my name’s Spencer 
man I’m a hypnotist and I’ve got nothing to back that up, can you put me on 
your roster of entertainers? They’re going to say who the hell are you? 
Because they have dozens of people with big names that have worldwide 
followers, so the best way to do that is to go wherever their office is, knock on 
their doors and have a meeting with them.
When you’re dealing with talent agents and things like that, honestly, the best 
way is to network. Take the time, spend the money, go knock on their door 
and take them out to lunch. Build a relationship with them and let them know 
you’re a real person, you’re good at what you do, you’re looking for some 
work and would they support you in it. Does that make sense? It’s not easy,
but it can be done.
I’m not creating a downer for anybody here am I?
No.
Giving you a lot of good ideas, right?
Yes.
Do you want to know the business of show business? You’re going to get it 
from me, here it comes.
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
28
                                 
How to book a theater? The theater is no different than any other gig. If you 
go to a nice theater that seats 2000 people, a very ornate thing in your local 
community, they’re going to charge you $2000 - $3000 a night to book a 
show. Then they’re probably going to want to take a cut out of your profit. 
But on the upside, when you work with a theater they will also do ticket sales 
for you, which they’ll take a percentage from. They’ll have a ticketing agency 
they work with. And for the most part they also have to work with unions, so 
you have to have union techs working on-site also, so there’s a lot of extra 
expense like security and staff that comes into play that you have to figure 
into your hypnosis show if you want to work in a larger venue.
Now, that’s if you’re buying it and for-walling it. You may be able to sell it to 
them. If you want to sell your show to a theater or to somebody else, then 
you’ll want to find a sponsor. A sponsor is a person who pays you a lot of 
money $500, $1000 or $5000. They give that to you so that they can be 
associated with you and your show. 
They want that, because when you do a show and they have a poster of you 
out there, their name is on their, whether it’s Hertz or Nike, Nokia, Marlboro, 
whoever it is, they get to put their name on there. It’s play money to them, but 
they want to make sure it’s branded correctly, so if you’re good at what you 
do, you treat people right and you have a good reputation, you might pick up 
a sponsor and that’s always a good thing.
When I went to Dubai I had a sponsor who paid for all my limousine services. 
I had a sponsor who paid for my hotels. I had a sponsor that bought my 
roundtrip first-class airfare, that’s $15,000 to $16,000 just for that. I don’t want 
to pay for that. I could go coach for $1000, but why? Why, when you can sit in 
first-class in little cubicles where your chair reclines and has a little vibrating 
massager on it, you have your own private little TV and you get free drinks 
and food the entire trip? Why go coach when you can go first-class? 
Especially when you have a sponsor, so when you work it out right you find 
sponsors to help you and you can find sponsors even at this level. When I do 
shows I look for sponsors. Hell, even in Kalispell, I’ll go around to people I 
know and say hey, how would you like to sponsor this thing? They ask what I 
mean and I say well, I have to sell tickets, etc. 
It’s like, you could use more help in your business so just imagine, 200-300 
people out there hypnotized when I say go shopping at the Redneck check, 
would that not be cool? I really have a sponsor with that name in Montana. 
She has this antique store and boutique, she’s a cool lady.
Do you see what I’m saying? Who in your community can do that? Maybe it’s 
the local insurance agency. Maybe it’s a local automotive dealer. Automotive 
dealers are cool, somebody who worked for me did it, went to this automotive 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
29
                                 
dealer and said listen, we need a sponsor and this guy bought 50 tickets on 
the spot to the show so that we would put his name on our posters.
Isn’t that cool? What he did was he took the 50 tickets and then he put an ad 
in the paper telling people that he was giving away free tickets to the comedy 
hypnosis show for Spencer at SleepNow.com. How much more free publicity 
did I get from that?
A lot.
You see what I’m saying. Am I getting the wheels turning here? There are a 
lot of ways that you can promote yourselves, just be creative. The sky is the 
limit in this business.
Students:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
30
                                 
Extra Cash
How to make extra cash? Again, the back of the room. People are going to 
buy the stop smoking/weight loss/stress management/insomnia…that’s what I 
sell the most of. I don’t carry anything with me anymore because that’s what 
people buy. They also buy my hypno-sex. They really do, when I’m doing 
these shows and there again, if you don’t have that yet I encourage you 
strongly to get that, because it has everything you need in there that people 
will buy in the back of the room.
If you already have your own products, feel free to use them, if you don’t, 
don’t rewrite the will. Get it, use it, take the products you know, copy them 
and put your name on there it doesn’t matter. It’s already done, so make life 
simple for yourself. So that’s where the money is, there’s a lot of money in the 
back room sales. 
Besides that, when you’re doing your show, other extra cash is your weekend 
seminars. Say you do a show on a Thursday or Friday night, Saturday night 
you’re doing a seminar or Saturday afternoon you’re doing a seminar. Or, 
you’re going to spend the weekend, you do a show Saturday night...the best 
nights to do a show are Wednesday through Saturday. Stay away from 
Sunday, Monday and Tuesday.
I wouldn’t do it those days unless somebody else buys you and pays you to 
do it as a corporate gig. Do not try to for-wall yourself on a Sunday, Monday 
or Tuesday. Wednesday is iffy, Thursday is iffy, Friday and Saturday are no-
brainers, but you’re in competition for all the other local things because
weekends is the time when people party, so that’s the time to do it.
Weekend seminars, also when you’re doing your shows, people are going to 
want hypnotherapy, be prepared to spend an extra day. If you do a show 
Friday night, hey I’ll be here all day tomorrow. If you need hypnotherapy I’ll be 
here. Its $150 a session or whatever you want to charge, have them come to 
your hotel room and make sure you have a nice suite so they don’t feel like 
they’re in the fleabag road kill motel from hell.
Make sure you’re in a nice five-star hotel suite and everything is made up so 
they don’t feel uncomfortable coming to your room and make sure when you 
do a show that you videotape each and every show. People up here will buy 
videotapes to your show. They will buy videotapes of what happened, so 
videotape each and every show because you’ll make an extra $20-$40 for 
every person that buys a videotape. 
If you have 10 people up here, multiply that by 30, which gives you some 
extra chunk change there also. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
31
                                 
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Maybe I’m a little bit beyond this, because before you were talking about how 
great your show was keeping it clean and how a clean show gets you the 
greatest audience, but I see a lot of hypnotists here on the strip and big 
venues like in New York or Las Vegas. They have a technique called a 
handshake orgasm.
I know it sounds weird but here on the strip there are a lot of big time 
hypnotists that do that. How would that fit into our venue? What we’re trying 
to do right now in order to make the most money?
That’s not weird. I’m going to answer this and then I’m done.
I would say this, if you’re working in a nightclub and that’s what people 
expect, have fun with it. If you want to make the most money, stay away from 
it. That’s all I can say in what you’re doing. 
Here in Vegas, this is sin city, people want to see nutty, fruity, crazy things so 
if I walk up to somebody and it’s been a great show, when I shake your hand 
you’re going to have the most incredibly orgasm you’ve ever had in your 
entire life, goodnight. You can do that if that’s what you want to be known as 
and Igor mentioned that yesterday, if you want to be known as that, you will 
be labeled as that and people will always know you for that which will limit 
you in what you can do.
That said, we’re going to break, time is up and we’ll talk to you afterwards
Did you all learn a lot?
Applause

