© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
1
                                 
DVD 7 – How to Start a Stage Hypnosis Show the Right Way!
Fun With Street Hypnosis
Spencer:
Sperling:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
All right, here’s what we’re going to do today, we’re going to have a good 
day. How many of you went out last night and did something crazy? Wow!
Briefly I’d like to hear what happened. Who would like to share real quick?
Actually, a couple of us who went out, we had a crew. We went out like a 
pack of wolves. It was very interesting. We went in there and Ed was the 
shiner of the night. Where is he? He was the shiner. He was getting all 
kinds of people. 
I found this group of guys from England though, and they were all sitting at 
the table. So I was like okay, there’s my group I’m going to get them. So I 
went in there and got them. This one guy, I got him to do a finger lock. I did 
the suggestibility test and we got the finger lock. He couldn’t unlock his 
fingers. I tried to take it into an instant induction, but he was so focused on 
his fingers, that he would not go to sleep. 
So I just ran with it, I was like, okay, we’re just going to flow with it, that’s 
cool right? He did that and I broke off for a little bit, then I came back and 
got the other guy and just did the handshake induction. I gave him a bunch 
of energy and confidence and all of that.
After that, it kind of went downhill. I tried to get this other group of girls, but 
it was cool. I was remembering what you guys were saying, like we don’t 
fail; they fail because we’re the hypnotists. So they’re just not suggestible
it’s not my fault. That’s how I was playing it off. I had a whole group of girls. 
We did the finger lock and they were supposed to…
What were you trying to do with the group of women?
Well, I was just trying to see who was more suggestible so I could get 
one…
Get them ready?
Yeah and go from there, right? So I was just practicing, getting in the habit 
of just messing with people basically, and decided I’m just going in there 
and attack a group. 
After all of their hands popped open, I played it off like, you guys just 
messed up my show. None of you are suggestible I can’t use any of you. I 
just played it off and they were all cracking up and everything. So I invited 
them to the show on Sunday. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
2
                                 
Long story short, I was two out of three. Hypnotized two, failed on three, but 
there’s never really any failures. It felt good. I was happy. I was just having 
fun. 
Awesome! Does anybody else have something they want to share? Give 
him a round of applause he did good.
Applause
Well, it was mixed revues last night actually. Bill, right out of the shoot, 
down at the bus shuttle, hypnotized a lady like boom! It was amazing. I’ve 
got it on my little video camera. I, on the other hand, didn’t do quite as well. 
It was a learning experience. So I think the first clue should have been the 
stack of empty beers that were stacked on their table. 
Two of the guys seemed to be having a good time. So I went up and said 
hey, you look like you’re having a good time. I’m a hypnotist. Can I show 
you something kind of fun and whacky? And they’re like, no!
Laughter and Applause
We had a big group and this brave one broke the ice. Oh, you have a 
picture? We went to the bar at The Wynn and there were seven of us. 
I was in Vegas many years ago and didn’t like the whole bar pit manager. 
There was a gentleman standing all by himself who looked like a pit 
manager at the bar, so that would be the last person I’d go up to. 
So he goes up to him first and says, can I show you – and he did the 
suggestibility test. He comes back with a $20 bill. He’s like, I like this. His 
beer was free. Then Kristin and I went up to three men at a table and said, 
can we show you something fun? We’re hypnotists. They were like, no!
They were gay.
Laughter
If two women came up to me and said, do you want to have some fun…
They said no! 
I wouldn’t tell them I’m a hypnotist, though.
We figured they either thought we were hookers or we were out to get their 
money. So I decided, okay, I will not be beat. I went and looked for a table 
of women and there were three young waitress girls. I have daughters, so I 
knew I could get there. 
Spencer:
[
]
Student:
[
]
Student:
[
]
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
3
                                 
So I went up and two of them were like, we don’t want you to read our 
minds. I said I’m not a psychic; I’m a hypnotist. People don’t know. Then 
they said we’re not paying you. I said we don’t want any money. Not even a 
tip. We don’t want any money. That was what I think the essence of what 
maybe those men thought too. So we did a suggestibility test and the one 
that was the best at it was scared to death to be hypnotized. 
And she was what, the best one?
The most suggestible. 
Did you hear that? You’re going to run into this often. You’re going to find 
that the person who has the greatest fear is usually the person who’s the 
mostly highly responsive.
Because they know.
So for you, when you hear that, you should be going ping! A light goes on 
and you’re going, all right this is going to be a good one. 
I think we pretty much figured all three of them would. The second one was 
like, I’ll do it. So I asked her what she would like to improve in your life. She 
said relationships. 
I went and sat next to her and I did the just fell on my shoulder, I brought
her up, fell on my shoulder. I looked up and all seven people were crowded 
around the table. My group, my homies were all there. So I did an in-and-
out several times and then stiff arm and her friends were taking pictures. 
They couldn’t believe it. 
Then I gave her the suggestions of relationship in the pit of her stomach, 
and she can get good guys now, get rid of the bad guys and all kinds of 
stuff. I pulled all kinds of stuff out of the air. Then the guys took over and…
Good. Did you guys hear what she just said? 
I pulled a lot of stuff out of the air.
Out of the air. Yeah. The stage hypnotist, the professional stage hypnotist 
pulls things out of the air. They are the master of improv. They take a 
situation and they make it work. Go ahead.
Then, he came in and grabbed the one girl who was like, oh no, I can’t. She 
was a little crazy and he had her drinking fake drinks. Who else? Yeah, he 
took the one that was scared to death and he ended up putting her under
so all three of the girls, we just had fun, and then the guy that he started 
with asked us not to do this anymore and to please stop, so the night ended 
with that.
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
4
                                 
Spencer:
[
]
Student:
[
]
Spencer:
Student:
[
]
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Very cool. Good for you. Pass that back behind you, please.
Applause
Hi. First, I just wanted to thank you and Igor because when I got home 
yesterday, I wanted to go with the guys, but my wife, who’s over in the hotel 
phoned me up and said, you need to get back, I’ve got some news for you. 
Before I came over, I went to my local Miner’s Club – Coal Miner’s Club, 
and said I’m a hypnotist and I’m looking for work. They confirmed last night, 
and I’ve got my first job as soon as I return in two weeks.
Applause
Right on.
That’s the first confirmed one. The second one is not confirmed until I get 
my proof that I’m working in Vegas at the moment. 
Laughter
And I’m going to get a couple of old service buddies back home – it’s the 
first job I’m going to have had in five years since my accident. I’ve been 
unable to work, I lost my job with the Army through this accident, so I’m 
going to be entertaining the guys before they go over to Afghanistan as well 
in a month’s time on production of the video, of course.
Excellent!
Then last night we went to dinner – myself and the wife. The drinks waitress 
came over at the Mirage and she looked really miserable. I said you look 
awful. I still had the badge on and she asked, what do you do? I’m a 
hypnotist. Oh. I said can I do something for you? I said you look really 
awful. Well yeah, I suppose it wasn’t the usual what I was expecting, no,
have a nice day. 
She looked really miserable. I did the suggestibility test, stuck her hands 
together and I told her it was funny and getting funnier and funnier. The 
more she tried to release it the funnier it would get. I said that feeling you’ve 
got right now, that’s going to stay with you for the rest of the evening. And 
for the rest of the evening, she had this big grin on her face. She just 
couldn’t stop grinning. It was fantastic. 
Far out. Thank you so much.
Applause

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
5
                                 
The Preshow
Students:
Spencer:
When you’re doing a show, professional stage hypnotists, you always have 
a crew to help out. What’s your job, hypnotist? Your job is to do your job. 
There’s a whole business to show business besides just doing your show, 
but you need to focus on what you’re doing in your show. 
So you have people that help you to move things around to make your 
show possible. The hypnotist always makes sure the chairs are together, at 
least I do. I never use chairs that have arms in them, that way people won’t 
be able to fall on top of each other. You want them to fall on top of each 
other because it looks good.
Let me run you through briefly what it’s like to do a show. This is kind of like 
a preshow routine that happens. Let’s just imagine for a second that you’re 
the audience. You’ve come here. You’ve paid the big bucks to see the 
show. You’ve paid $100 a ticket to come to see my show, which you should 
enjoy doing, right.
Oh yeah. Yes.
Good. No discounts for those of you who aren’t speaking up. Anyway, 
we’ve got our DJ. I want to run through this real quickly to show you what 
it’s like and then we’re going to break up and do this in little groups. Then 
I’m going to show you how I do it with a large group and then we’re going to 
break up into small groups and you’re going to have the opportunity to do 
that with yourselves.
If I could have number three please.
You can use a microphone, a headset or a lapel mic, my preference is to 
use a headset. That way my hands are free, but a microphone looks cool in 
your hand, so I always have another microphone over here because I can 
take it from here and when I’m talking to my subjects up here, I can still 
speak without having to go back and forth. 
With the intro – there are different parts to the show. In the preshow, you 
have the audience that comes in, the music is that people entering hear,
they’re sitting down and waiting for the show to begin. 
So when you’re doing a show, you’re always getting ready. Before the show 
begins, you go half a day early and you run through the entire routine. You 
make sure everything is tight. You work with your DJ to make sure your 
sound is working. You make sure everything is happening.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
6
                                 
You go through every single routine in your mind, and you do it with the DJ 
to make sure that you guys are both on the same page. It’s very important 
because you want the show to be flawless. Even during a show, you may
have something that comes off incorrectly, and you just make that part of 
your show. It’s kind of like yeah, bring that music down just a little bit that 
would be cool. 
Then you just go on with your show and just make it a part of it because no 
matter how good you are or your DJ, there will be times when things just 
happen, just manage it and just make it a part of your show.
So the audience is coming into the show. They’ve seen all the promotions, 
they’ve seen your website and they’ve seen the posters. They’ve seen 
everything happening. They paid the money and they’re sitting in here. You, 
the professional stage hypnotist, are off stage in the back room, which is 
usually called The Green Room in a professional theater. If it’s in a 
professional bar it’s called The Bathroom.
Laughter
Or The Kitchen if it’s in a restaurant. All venues are different. I prefer 
venues that have a Green Room, one of those little places where you go 
and they have a nice big room back there with a sofa. They’ve got a wet 
bar. They’ve got an ironing board so you can take your clothes in there and 
make sure they’re all nicely pressed before you do your show.
They’ve got these big mirrors there with lights on them so you can look at 
yourself. And ladies, you can do your face up; and guys, you can do your 
hair and your face or whatever it is that you need to do. Make sure your 
clothes look good and you’re ready. You can brush your teeth, spray and 
everything so you don’t go out there and talk to people with bad breath and
stink and things are out of order.
This is all stuff that happens in the preshow for you guys, as a professional 
hypnotist. Now whether it’s in a big theater or whether it’s at the Elk’s 
Lodge. It doesn’t really matter. It’s the same thing because all eyes are 
going to be on you.
So, the audience is there and we’re gathered to see the hypnotist come. 
Now in a big theater, you want to be off stage. You don’t want to be seen 
before the show. You just don’t want to be. It’s not what you do. You want 
to be mysterious. You want to magically appear when they call out your 
name.
Now, if you’re at the Elk’s Lodge, the Moose Lodge, the Lion’s Club or your 
local bar or something like that, no big deal you’re probably going to be 
sitting there having a cocktail with somebody anyway. 
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
7
                                 
Then when it’s time for you to do your show, you just get up there and do it 
and everybody’s half looped anyway, so it doesn’t really matter. You’re just 
there to have a good time. However, when you get on the big stage, 
everything changes. You’ve got to be the guy that is not seen until the show 
begins. 
So here we are in Las Vegas. I’m going to go down here to The Green 
Room for just a second. Good Green Rooms always have a TV monitor, 
which is cool because you can watch people coming into the theater, you 
can see where they’re sitting and get a look at their eyes and their face. 
It’s kind of fun to see people coming in and bee-bopping around. You’ve got 
music playing in the background because you’re setting a stage. So in my 
shows, what I do is I always set the stage. I’ll let people in about 30 minutes 
early, and I’ll have music that I’ve put together playing. It’s music that I’ve 
created myself. You can use music that you enjoy whatever you want to 
use. 
I’ve created my own music for my own show that’s kind of mysterious and 
fun and funky. I have this eclectic blend of stuff and people are going, what 
the hell is that? Because what I want to do is put people in a different stage 
of consciousness. I don’t want to give them anything that’s too familiar. 
I like to give people something that’s different because it takes them out of 
their world of reality and they have to think wow, where are we going with 
this? What is this? This is different. So I’m already creating this trance state 
with people right away with my music that’s part of the preshow. Does that 
make sense?
Yes.
You can use whatever you want. If it’s in a country bar, I’ll play Garth 
Brooks or something because everybody can relate to that. There’s a 
difference between working in a bar situation and working in a theater 
where it’s a show that you’ve promote or have been hired to do, and they’re 
paying you $10,000 or $20,000 or $50,000 to go do. Whole different level, 
but do them all because they’re all fun to do.
My preference now is working large theaters, but I’ll tell you what I’ll go to a 
bar any day of the week, if I’m paid to go and if they charge people at the 
door. If you accept a job – and we’ll talk more about this in the business –
where they just hire you to come into a nightclub just to perform, chances 
are you’re going to have a poor show. Why? Because you’re not a 
destination. 
Students:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
8
                                 
Your show better be a destination. If you want the best volunteers, the best 
subjects, the best show and the best audience participation, you need to be 
a destination. You don’t need to be the sideshow, where people are coming 
in – well, we’re going to go get drunk anyway. Let’s go where they have a 
hypnotist. Let’s go and check it out. No big deal. We’re still going to party. 
You’re not the main attraction.
So, when you get into the professional realm, no matter where you perform, 
make sure that it’s paid, that people pay to come to see you and you’ll 
greater success then anything.
Now, back to the preshow – we talked about that and that’s part of the 
preshow too– you’ve got your posters up and so you’re back here in your 
Green Room. Then you have the announcer and he goes, ladies and 
gentlemen, please do me a favor – and you’re back there going oh shit, 
there it goes. Maybe you have some butterflies going. You’ve got to go to 
the bathroom one last time. Take a drink of water. Get ready for this, if 
you’re the nervous type. 
Or, you can anchor yourself to a very exciting state. This is what I do. I 
simply, as soon as I get up on stage, I have the microphone. Or as soon as 
I get up on stage if I don’t have a mic, if I just have the hand held. As soon 
as I walk out there, I go into a whole different persona. It’s the stage 
hypnotist persona. 
If I have this, I just anchor to a state where I become just the entertainer, 
nothing else matters, nothing else exists but this. It’s just about what I can 
do for these people. Does that make sense?
That’s what I want you to do. In your preshow, when you get ready, you 
become the hypnotist. You’re nothing else. You’re no longer who you are. 
You become that. You become that person, that individual, that persona, 
that psyche. You become the entertainer.
When you get off stage, you’re just the same old guy that you were before 
you went out to the stage – or the same lady. But, when you’re on stage 
people are looking, so you have that buzz.
So I anchor myself to the state. You can find any kind of positive stage, and 
I’ll show you how to do that here in a little bit. How to anchor yourself to a 
very positive, upbeat, powerful state so that when you get up there on 
stage, you’re there, you’re ready and you’re not going to have butterflies.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
9
                                 
Step 1: Your Introduction
[
]
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
So anyway, you have the announcement. They say ladies and gentlemen, 
please do me a favor and give Spencer a powerful round of applause and 
the audience claps.
Applause
All right, how are you guys doing out there? Are you guys having a good 
time so far?
Yes!
Are you guys ready to be hypnotized?
Yes!
All right. Let me ask, before I even begin, how many people in here have 
been hypnotized before? Raise your hands. Oh, this is going to be a good 
night for sure. Let me ask you, if you have not been hypnotized, raise your 
hands. Wow! One person has not been hypnotized. Wow. Okay, very cool.
Well, before I begin, let me tell you a little bit about what hypnosis is so that 
when you get ready to come up here and enjoy yourself, you’re going to 
already know what’s happening. 
Listen to the words that I’m using. I’m telling people what to expect. Part of 
what I’m doing is building this mental expectancy with people so that when 
they come up here, my job is already done out here in the audience. My job 
is done. I’ve done it. I’m ready. We’re ready to rock and roll. 
How many of you have been hypnotized? And you raise your hands. What 
am I doing right away? 
Getting compliance.
I am getting compliance. I’m getting those yeses. I want to know if you’ve 
been hypnotized, raise your hands. If you have not been hypnotized, raise 
your hands. I’m getting everybody to follow along with these waking 
suggestions left and right. Nobody’s going to escape from the hypnotist. 
I want everybody out there – there is no wrong way to do it and there is no 
wrong answer. I’m going to get the hands going up one way or another. If 
I’m in a place where I see somebody who’s not doing anything and just kind 
of looking at me – you’ll have that. People looking at you like, what’s your 
deal, buddy?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
10
                                 
For example, you’re like, what’s the matter man didn’t you have a good 
night last night? Did your wife kick you out of the house? You’re not here to 
have fun? What’s happening with you? So you can throw little one-liners in 
there and just have fun with people. They may look at you and you go wow, 
you’re one that’s pretty cool. Well, we’re still going to have a good time.
You’ll run into this every once in awhile, not very often, but there’s always 
somebody out there that wants to one-up you, the hypnotist, on the stage; 
not always, but it can happen. So I bring this out to you in the preshow 
because it can happen. Just notice and observe people because what you 
want to do is get people coming your way. 
We talked a little bit about that yesterday. You want them in the palm of 
your hand. I want everybody right here so that I can mold them. I want them 
right there so I can squeeze them a little bit. I want to take their little brains, 
and squish them together. I want them to do what I want them to do. It 
doesn’t always work, but we give it our best shot.
So at this point, you understand where I’m going so far, right?
Yes.
All right. From there, I’m going well, I’ll tell you what. Let me tell you a little 
bit about hypnosis before we even begin, because I know that some of you 
out there think that you haven’t been hypnotized, so let me tell you what it’s 
like. Have you driven in a car and you’ve gone from your house to the store 
or to work. Yes?
Yes.
Everybody’s done that. How many times have you been driving and you just 
kind of like got there? You just happened to get there and its like, how did I 
get here? Or you passed your house and you’re going, oh shoot. How many 
of you have done that? Yeah. Everybody’s done that that’s called highway 
hypnosis, somehow you just got there.
I’ll tell you, I do that every time I get on a plane and fly overseas. You get on 
a flight and it takes you 12 or 20 hours and it’s a long flight, how did you get 
there? It’s a plane trance it’s weird, especially when you go over 10 or 12 
time zones. It’s crazy.
All the sudden, your whole world is upside down. But let me tell you another 
time when you’ve been hypnotized. How about when you watch a movie? 
How many of you have been to a big movie theater? Raise your hands. 
Very cool. 
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
11
                                 
You know, you’re sitting there, you’re watching the big screen and you see 
the characters. You laugh and you cry, you become amused, amazed, 
whatever, but you become involved in the characters. That’s what the 
movie is for. The actors are up there to create a sense inside of you, a 
feeling so when you identify with that feeling, you have been hypnotized.
That’s based on suggestion. 
Let me tell you another time. How about when you read a book? How many 
times have you read a book and you said I’m going to sit down and read 
this book for a few minutes and then all the sudden, you became so 
engrossed in it that hours passed? The book was over. It’s like, wow! How 
many of you have done that? That’s a hypnotic state of mind.
Now for those of you who haven’t raised your hands because you can’t 
identify, let me ask you this. How many times have you said to yourself, I 
am so tired I just need five minutes? Then you go find a chair. You say I’m 
just going to take five minutes. I’m going to close my eyes and after five 
minutes, I’ll open my eyes and I’m going to feel great. I just need these five 
minutes. 
So you sit down, you take that five minutes and then all the sudden 
magically, for some reason, five minutes pass, you open your eyes and you 
feel wonderful. How many of you have done that? You have hypnotized 
yourself. You have given yourself a self hypnotic suggestion. 
So everybody has been hypnotized. Everybody has been and everybody 
will be tonight. I want you to enjoy what we’re going to do for you. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
12
                                 
Step 2: Get Volunteers
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
So here’s what I’m going to do. Let’s do a group thing, everybody sit back in 
your chairs. Put your feet flat on the floor. Take your hands – give me a 
volunteer up here. Come on up here. You’re a good volunteer. How do you 
pronounce your name?
Yuichi.
Okay, everybody do what Yuichi does. Take your hands and put 
them above your head. Palms together and interlock your fingers. 
Arms up high. Squeeze your hands together as tightly as you can. 
Now watch what I’m doing. I’m making sure those arms are up there stiff 
and rigid, right? I am the confident, competent, professional stage hypnotist. 
I don’t care who I pick out of the audience. I don’t care who wants to 
volunteer. There is a risk in this for you, but you can do this. 
Squeeze your hands together as tightly as you can. Close your eyes 
down all the way. I want you to close your eyes down all the way, 
and I want you to imagine that your hands are locked. They are 
glued and they will not come apart. Squeeze them together tighter 
and tighter, and make sure those hands are locked. They are glued. 
Your fingers are stuck against the back of your hands. Your palms 
stick tighter and tighter. 
Your arms are stiff and rigid and powerful. They will not bend. Your 
hands are locked together. They will not pull apart. You can try to 
pull them apart, but they stick tighter and tighter. Try hard to pull your 
hands apart. They’re stuck tight. They will not come apart. Try hard, 
but they stick tighter and tighter. 
Very good, open your eyes and just look around. Okay, now if you’re 
hands are stuck together, and if you are good person and want to 
have a lot of fun, I invite you right now to come to the stage and let’s 
get going with the show. I need all these chairs filled up man-woman-
man-woman. You can relax. I think I’ll keep you. Go ahead and have 
a seat right there.
Do you see how I’m doing this I’m now calling for volunteers? What I’ve 
done is I’ve just very quickly gone out there and talked to the audience, and 
what I want to do is create a sense of rapport. Does everybody in here 
understand what rapport is? Is there anybody here that does not know what 
rapport is? If you do not, raise your hands. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
13
                                 
I’m going to go over it quickly. Rapport is that you want to be able to identify 
with the audience, and you know that people relate on three levels.
1. By what they see
2. By what they feel, and
3. By what they hear
So you want to do is communicate in a language that allows individuals to 
see things visually. The presentation is very visual. I speak loudly because I 
want them to hear what I’m doing, so I talk in words that they can listen to 
because I want them to hear what I’m doing. 
Then it goes into the feeling. I want you to have this feeling, this sense of 
what we’re going. Put your hands together. Let’s get a little tactile. I want 
people to really relate to all this. 
Then I pull up my volunteer here. Now it’s very simple. I have one, two, 
three, four seats up here that are empty. I need four more people up here. 
I’d like to have two men and two ladies come up here right now. The two 
best looking men and the two best looking ladies stand up right now and 
come forward.
Come forward. Give this powerful guy right here a round of applause and 
make him feel good.
Applause
Give this good looking guy a round of applause.
Applause
Give this lovely lady a wonderful round of applause too.
Applause
Very cool. Stand right here for a minute if you would, please. Stand up. Let 
me take you right here. Hang on for just one moment, please. I’ll take you, 
stand up right here. I’m going to put you right there. Actually, I’m going to 
take you right here instead. I’m going to take you, and I’m going to put you 
over here and I’m going to put you right here. That’s no problem come on 
over here. I’m going to put you right there, very cool. Have a seat sit back in 
your chairs. 
What am I doing to these people? I am doing compliance because I want 
them to follow along with what I’m doing, but I also want to have man-
woman-man-woman. The reason for me is because I want to make sure 
there’s a guy on the end because in the hypnosis show, a person can fall 
[
]
[
]
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
14
                                 
over. So if somebody is going to fall over, I don’t want it to be a lady I want 
it to be a guy. 
I’ve seen it happen. It doesn’t happen very often. We’re going to talk about 
safety later because we want to make sure that everybody is safe, but I’ve 
got these guys where I want them.
Now something also, when you’re working in a show let’s say that you have 
a lady that has a dress on. You want to make sure the dress covers 
everything because you don’t want people down there being peeping Toms. 
You want to make sure that they’re comfortable because if they feel 
uncomfortable, they are not going to be a good subject. 
That goes back to respecting your volunteers. Have respect and dignity 
because they’re human beings also. You’re going to have some fun, but do 
it in a way that’s very respectful as much as possible. 
Wow! Good looking people. How are you guys doing? Nice. And your name 
is?
Roy.
Hey Roy. How are you doing?
Good, Spencer.
And your name is?
Kristen. Very good. 
So anyway, I like to find out who these people are so I’ll meet them a little 
bit here. Brian, how are you doing?
Fine. Thank you.
And you?
Roy:
Spencer:
Roy:
Spencer:
Kristen:
Spencer:
Brian:
Spencer:

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
15
                                 
Step 3: Suggestion Demo
Spencer:
So we’ve got our volunteers up here. What are we going to do next? What 
I’d like to do is another test. I’ve already done a test out here, right? 
Now what I want you to do is sit back in your chairs. Put your arms 
directly in front of you. Squeeze your hands together just like this. 
Put our arms up right there. I want you to stare at your thumbs, right 
there, just stare at your thumbs. Squeeze your hands together one 
more time. Squeeze them together as tightly as you can. Make sure 
that your hands are locked and they are glued and they will not come 
apart.
Squeeze your hands together as tightly as you can. Make sure 
you’re staring directly at your thumbs, directly at your thumbs, 
squeezing your hands together as tightly as you can. Make sure 
those hands are glued and they are glued and they will not come 
apart. Make sure that they are stuck tight, stuck tight, and they will 
not come apart.
Try to pull them apart, they lock tighter and tighter. Try as hard as 
you can to pull them apart, but they are stuck tight. They will not 
come apart.
You guys can keep playing with that. This is the second test and I do this in 
every show because you know what? You may have a person that goes like 
this. If that’s the case, I’m going to simply just direct them off the stage. I’m 
going to say listen, I think you’re going to have more fun out here.
It’s not a big deal. You just matter-of-factly take control of your stage. Are 
you messing with me back there? Oh, you guys want to take your hands 
apart?
Look right here. When my hand comes down, release your hands 
and put your palms down on your lap. Close your eyes down all the 
way. Close your eyes down all the way, very good. Continue to allow 
your eyes to remain closed until I ask you to open them. 
I do not intend on doing that, yet. I’m also telling them what to do. I’ll want 
them to be compliant. I want them to go along with what we’re doing. This is 
a show. It’s a performance and you are the conductor. 
I’m constantly talking here to my volunteers, and I’m constantly turning 
around and talking to the audience because you have to perform for two 
sets of people. You’ve got to make sure you’re with these guys, and then 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
16
                                 
you’ve got to come out here and make sure that the people out here are 
following you. 
You want to see a lot of smiles. Also, you want to hear a lot of whoa. When 
you’re doing your job right, you’ll get people out there going whoa, whoa
what’s happening? Have fun with it. You’ll know once you begin to do it how 
much fun it’s going to be. 
So I’ve got my people up here hands and palms down. From here, you can 
go into any kind of induction you want to. You’re going to have a couple of 
different kinds of shows that you’ll be doing and different audiences, and 
they’re all going to respond differently. 
You can walk into a high school and you’ve got a bunch of kids. Man, you 
can just drop them on the floor like flies. It’s real easy. College is the same 
way. 
When you get into a corporate crowd you have older people and they’ve got 
their co-workers out there so it’s a whole different kind of presentation that 
you’re doing, because they’ve got to save face for tomorrow and for some 
of the things that you do, they may go oh, I don’t know so they’re going to 
have more reservations.

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
17
                                 
Step 4: The Induction
Spencer:
So I’ve got the people up here and I’m going to go through an induction, I’m 
not going to do that now, but with the induction part, you can do like a 
fractionization, which is something I like to do. 
There are two parts to that. Is it necessary? Sometimes - never. I do it 
usually for one reason because the people in the audience want to see 
people getting hypnotized. Sometimes if you do it too quickly, people don’t 
get it. They think oh, maybe its set up. So what people want is to watch 
people go into trance. 
They’re seeing these tests that you’re doing here in the audience and the 
tests that you’re doing right here and they’re going wow, that’s crazy. 
You have to understand. This is not my music, we’re using royalty-free 
music, so I have to re-invent what I’m doing in my mind as I go along. 
That’s the thing with having your own music, because I go along with my 
music and I’m always listening to everything that’s going on and if 
something comes up different, it just kind of throws me off and I go whoa, 
what’s that about?
A number of years ago, I did a show for playboy and I got down to LA and 
they go, Mr. Spencer, here’s your music. I go what? They go, here’s the 
music for your show. I go, no I have my own. They go, no I’m sorry but we 
can’t use yours because of copyright laws, so here you go. I’m going oh, my 
gosh. I had like three hours to try to build a whole new routine for this 
playboy show that we did. It was crazy, but we did it. We pulled it off. It 
worked. It was great and we had a fun time. 
So you’ve got your people up here. You’ve got your volunteers up here and 
we’ve done the tests, because I want to know who’s a good subject and 
who’s not. The induction part of it, the fractionization can be as simple as:
Take a deep breath in and breathe out. In just a moment, I will begin 
to relax you step-by-step, as I do just simply concentrate on the 
sound of my voice. I want them to concentrate on the sound of my 
voice, and I tell them, listen to the sound of my voice. 
During your time here with me, the sound of my voice, the touch of 
my hand, the music and the applause from the audience simply 
helps you to relax and go deeper and deeper into hypnosis. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
18
                                 
Everything now is about a deepening technique, so I continue deepening 
the trance. Some of these guys may already be in a deep trance, but some 
may be in a light trance. My job now is to make sure that I get everybody 
into the same depth of trance so that they’re all excellent subjects so we 
can have a lot of fun. 
You’ll discover as you begin to go out there in the real world and do this 
with real people who aren’t a bunch of hypnotists in a room who are 
floppers that the rules are going to change. You’re going to have to be a 
little bit more delicate in what you do in your presentation because it’s going 
to be different out there. 
That’s why we’re going to practice over and over in here today, so you guys 
really get this down. 
Relax all the muscles in your head and across your face, down your 
shoulders. What I want you to do is just roll your neck around a little 
bit, would you? Just roll your head around on your neck. Get all the 
stress and all the tension and anxiety out of there. 
Just relax all those muscles. There you go. Let everything go. There 
you go loosely, limply and relaxed. 
And I always say to people, during your time here with me, that touching my 
hand – because I’m going to be touching people, and I want them to know 
that I’m going to touch them. Why? Well, it’s the same thing as in clinical 
work. For those of you who are familiar with doing clinical hypnotherapy, 
you never touch a client unless you let them know you’re going to because 
you may get a big abreaction. 
The same thing applies on the stage. I never touch my subjects unless I let 
them know that I’m going to be touching them, so I let them know up front 
that I’m going to be touching them tonight. 
Listen, as you continue to relax with each breath that you take, you 
may even notice the person next to you move and shift in their 
position. As they do, simply allow those easy movements to help you 
go deeper and deeper and deeper. All those movements help you to 
relax and go even deeper. 
Now, if they happen to put their head on your shoulder, simply enjoy that. 
Enjoy that feeling of their head on your shoulder and have fun with that. 
There you go, way down. There you go.
So it’s the same thing. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
19
                                 
When you feel the person next to you touch you, just relax and go 
even deeper to sleep. 
Now there will be times when you are doing this, a person puts their head 
on somebody’s shoulder and they’ll open their eyes and they’ll wake up and 
go, what’s going on? You are the trained professional, confident, competent 
stage hypnotist, right? What are you going to do? You have two choices. 
You can either say:
1.
Open your eyes. You’re bugged by these two people on your 
shoulders. You can close your eyes and sleep. Way down. 
2.
And you’re kind of bugged you’re looking at them going, wow. 
And so you’re a good role player. Sleep. Not bad, huh? Okay, 
good. I want you to really enjoy this, so why don’t you go ahead 
and just close your eyes down all the way. There you go. 
Please close your eyes and just relax and enjoy this. 
It might be something as simple as that, and it might be something that’s 
much more difficult, where he just isn’t going to let go because he’s like 
going, I like this feeling. I don’t know if I want to let it go. 
So, I’ll just continue going through the induction, and I’ll let that person sit 
there to hold them up and then after I get everybody else hypnotized, as I 
begin my first routine, I’ll take the person and say thank you very much and 
get them off the stage or have my assistant do that.
Just make it part of the show. You are trained, competent, confident, 
professional stage hypnotist. You are the consummate ultimate performer, 
nothing fazes you. You deal with what emerges, just like in therapy, right.
Just handle it. Make it look cool. Make it be smooth. Yeah, you’re going to 
enjoy it out there. 
Then just turn around and go back and start working with people. Trust me
people are going to be watching you, not them going off the stage. They 
may notice him for a second, but you just go back into your routine and start 
working with somebody else. Just enjoy what you’re doing with that and you 
can have a great time.
Now, these people up here are relaxing.
You can continue to relax all the muscles in your body. 
Now if you folks out there would like to try hypnosis also, I invite you 
to sit back in your chairs and close your eyes down all the way. Put 
your hands, palms down on your lap and your feet flat on the floor. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
20
                                 
Now open your eyes, I’m not really asking you to do this I’m going to 
explain what I’m doing. I will do this in the show this is part of the preshow. 
What I do is I have the audience, as I begin doing this, they’re watching 
these people and I’m going, this is pretty cool. 
Now if you guys would like to experience hypnosis yourself and you’re 
maybe a little bit antsy about coming up here to sleep with this hypnotist…
Laughter
I shouldn’t give away my zinger, should I?
Go ahead and sit back in your chair, put your feet flat on the floor and 
hands, palms down in your lap. Just a few moments of hypnotic 
relaxation is equal to hours of sleep. In fact, after tonight’s 
presentation, you can go home and party all night long and have a 
great time. So go ahead close your eyes down all the way. 
Breathe in deeply and breathe out. Breathe in deeply and breathe out. 
Breathe in peace and relaxation. Release any stress, any tension, 
any anxiety that you may have. In just a moment, I will begin to 
continue to relax you step-by-step.
I do this and the people out here in the audience – they’re going for it too. 
Not everybody, but you’ll get a number of people out there. Why I do this is 
because I’ll get people out there in the audience who will get hypnotized. I 
think that’s really cool. I’m doing my show up here and these guys are in 
trance, and I might get two or three or four or five or six or seven or eight or 
nine or ten – who knows – people out there who are hypnotized.
So when I get ready to do my first routine, I’m going to go, before I begin 
though, is there anybody out there that’s sitting next to you that appears to 
be in a trance? You’ll know who they are because their head’s either on 
your shoulder or in your lap, or maybe they’re on the floor. I don’t know, but 
if there’s somebody like that next to you, please raise your hand.
They raise their hands and I’ll go this is cool. Do you know why? Because 
now you get to go out there you get to mess with somebody in the 
audience. 
The second part to that is people dig having you, the performer, come out 
there because wow, they’re next to you. They can see you. You’re there. 
They can almost touch you. I know it’s crazy, but this is how people think of 
the performer. This is the psychology there. 
For example, go to sleep, right there you, young man. There you go. Thank 
you. Let’s pretend that he just went to sleep in the audience. 
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
21
                                 
If there’s somebody next to you, please raise your hand. Oh, there’s 
somebody next to you? Very good. 
Let me just show you what this is like. I’ll just go off the stage and go, 
excuse me just a second I’m going to go talk to this guy. 
I’m going to touch you right now, sleep very, very deeply. In a 
moment, I’m going to count to three. On number three, your butt’s 
going to be on fire and you’ll very quickly run up to the stage as fast 
as you can because your butt’s on fire. On the stage there’s some 
water. Get ready now 1-2-3 quickly go, quickly, quickly. And sleep.
Okay, very good. 
Now do you see how we have fun with that? That’s why I’ve got another 
volunteer. Hey, give the volunteer a round of applause, folks. Make him feel 
good.
Applause
Come on up here. Have a seat. Do you see how that works? So, if you 
have like four or five people and you can use your creative imagination to 
come up with different things that you want to say to an individual. Trust 
me, I pick my people very well and I have a lot of one-liners, depending on 
the audience, that you can do.
Remember, you’re playing to the audience and you want to be respectful of 
the audience that you’re with. So you want to keep your show clean, but 
you can use innuendos too that are fun because we’re all adults. A little bit 
of adult stuff is a good thing. It’s a good thing because adults get it, but if 
you’ve got little children, you want to be a little more playful, which is why I 
don’t do shows that little children can go to, except for my son he can go to 
them now. He’s 6 ½, he gets it, but sometimes wonders what I’m doing. 
Okay, so we’ve got our people up here. We’ve got whatever people out 
there in the audience up here to be hypnotized. Now, listen there are three 
kinds of people who probably will never be hypnotized. I want to educate 
people. 
1. A small child cannot be hypnotized because they’re already in a 
hypnotic state of mind up until about the age of 8 or 9, somewhere 
along there. 
Whatever you tell that child, they will do they don’t have a critical factor. 
Whatever you do with that child, they’re going to do. That’s why you, the 
parent, are the family hypnotist. How many of you have a small child? Very 
cool. Whatever you teach that child is what they are going to learn. It will be 
up to you to raise that child correctly. So be a good parent, love your kids 
and that’s all I’m going to say about the kids.
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
22
                                 
2. The second kind of person who cannot or will not be hypnotized is 
somebody who’s had a little too much to drink, or who’s been on the 
buzz there a little bit because they can’t concentrate and you don’t 
want someone who can’t concentrate because they already think 
they’re hypnotized anyway. 
3. The third kind of person is somebody who just has a very low IQ. 
Of course, that’s not you, or you wouldn’t be here, so you can all be 
hypnotized at different times. Let’s get on with the show. 
In a moment, I’m going to count to three, and then I have my first routine set 
up. I’m not going to go into that right now. That will be in the next section 
because I just want to go through this part right here, and then we’re going 
to break into little groups, and you guys can have this experience yourself. 
So I’ve these people up here. They all seem to be doing pretty good. I’m 
going to count to 3, and on number 3, everybody open your eyes. 1-2-3, 
wide awake guys. 
Give them a round of applause. Make them feel good. 
Applause
Now sit back in your chair one more time. Take a deep breath in. 
Exhale and just sleep. Way down.
I’m constantly just putting people into trance. Oh, just stop it. Stop it. Some 
people’s children. When you get people like that I’ll either, take them and 
just drop them down real quick or I’ll just take them and throw them off 
stage. I’m not going to worry about it. 
Way down. There you go. Very cool. 
[
]

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
23
                                 
Play With The Panel
Roy:
Spencer:
Roy:
Spencer:
Roy:
Spencer:
Roy:
Spencer:
Roy:
Spencer:
Roy:
Spencer:
Kristin:
Spencer:
Kristin:
Spencer:
Kristin:
Hello? How are you doing? Are you having a good time? Okay, good. Are 
you hypnotized tonight? You think so? 
Everybody open your eyes, wide awake. Okay, cool. Open your eyes 
one more time. And your name was?
Roy.
Roy, what do you do? 
The best I can.
You do the best you can. Okay. Are you hypnotized tonight?
Maybe. 
Maybe? Oh, have you ever been before?
Yeah.
You have been. But maybe you’re not really sure right now, right?
I’m awake now. 
Oh, you’re awake now. So what do you do in real life what kind of work do 
you do?
Solar installations. 
Very cool, I’m glad that you’re here. Sleep! You don’t mind if he’s on your 
lap there for a minute, do you? You can move your hands. Hi, and your 
name?
Kristin.
Kristin, what do you do?
I’m a hypnotist. 
You’re a hypnotist. Really, is that what you do, no kidding. Where do you do 
hypnosis at?
Wherever. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
24
                                 
Spencer:
Kristin:
Spencer:
Brian:
Spencer:
Brian:
Spencer:
Brian:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Wow! Okay, very cool. So if you’re a hypnotist, let me ask you – are you 
hypnotized right now?
Yeah, I think so. 
I would think so. Well, it’s good to have you here. Sleep! 
You’re next. Hi, your name is Brian, right. What do you do?
I’m a hypnotist. 
Oh, you’re a hypnotist too, right on. Wow, I got a bunch of hypnotists in 
here. What kind of hypnotist are you?
Hypnotherapist.
A hypnotherapist. And where do you do hypnotherapy at?
In Denmark. 
In Denmark. Let me ask you, being a hypnotherapist, why do you think 
people are doing this isn’t this kind of weird? Do they need therapy, do you 
think? You have no bloody idea. Good to have you here anyway. Sleep!
I want to meet everybody and I want to find out a little bit about them.
Because what I’m doing, in my mind, I want to know who these people are 
because when I ask them who they are, it helps me to go okay, so this is 
what you do. It helps me to put some things in my mind on where I want to 
go with them and what I can do with them at some point. 
Even though I have all my show laid out – how I want it to appear, how I 
want it to work – there’s always that little part of my mind that – you know, 
you have to be ready for improv. You’ve got to fly by the seat of your pants 
sometimes, because even though you have everything laid out, you may 
not have everybody who’s going to be responsive to everything that you do. 
So I always have about 50 or 60 different routines that I can break into at 
any given moment and then, of course, just basic improv. I’m not a 
comedian. I could not stand up for an hour and talk to people and make 
them laugh. I think that’s the hardest job in the world. But give me a whole 
bunch of people up on stage and I can create mayhem.
Hi, and your name again was?
Yi.
Where are you from?

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
25
                                 
Yi:
Spencer:
Yi:
Spencer:
Yi:
[
]
Spencer:
Yi:
Spencer:
Yi:
Spencer:
Yi:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
What do you mean?
What do I mean? 
Originally?
Like right now.
Two days ago or yesterday?
Laughter
I told you about those earlier, right? Where do you live right now?
LA. 
What part of LA? I grew up in LA.
Ventura.
Near Ventura Highway.
Thousand Oaks.
Nice area. Thousand Oaks. Nice to have you here, sleep! It’s some crazy 
stuff, isn’t it? How are you doing? 
I’m doing okay.
Yeah, do you want to do better?
Yes.
Yeah, I thought you did. Where are you from?
I’m from Portland.
Poland?
Portland.
Portland. I have a brother that lives in Portland, actually and I think Portland 
is pretty cool. Do you go to the Rose Parade there?
Well, I just moved here two weeks ago. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
26
                                 
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
Student:
Spencer:
[
]
Students:
Oh, well you know they have the Rose Parade there and it’s one of the 
most beautiful things that you could ever imagine, I mean they’ve got these 
roses – I mean they’re everywhere. Actually, it should be going on pretty 
soon, right?
I think so?
Yeah, I mean this is the time of the year where the roses start coming out, 
and wow, that’s awesome. All those brilliant colors. Where did you come 
from before you went to Portland?
Eugene, Oregon.
You made a big leap, didn’t you? What is that? About two hours? 
Yeah. 
Good to have you here. Sleep!
So anyway, it’s the same thing. I want to meet everybody and find out a
little bit more about them because I look for experiences in my mind that I 
can relate to who they are. Yeah, I know where Portland is. I know they 
have roses there. 
Portland is a beautiful city. They’ve got a beautiful river that runs through it. 
They’ve got great fishing. They’ve got some of the best coffee shots in the 
world, outside of Seattle. It’s a lot of fun there, and they’ve got this huge 
bookstore downtown. It’s like three stories. It takes up big blocks. What’s it 
called? 
Powell’s.
Powell’s. That’s the one. It’s an incredible bookstore. Anyway, I draw so 
much from my life experiences because I’ve traveled all over the world. So 
it’s fun to do and you can use that in your show.
These are the people we’re going to work with, do me a favor and give 
them a powerful round of applause. Make them feel good. 
Applause
All right. We’ve just done a preshow. Now we’re ready to do our regular 
show. Okay? I’m not going to do that right now. I just wanted to take you up 
to this point to show you what this looks like and how it feels. Do you guys 
think you can do this?
Yes!

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
27
                                 
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
Students:
Spencer:
[
]
Are you guys ready for this?
Yes!
Who’s not ready? I didn’t hear everybody out there saying, yeah. Are we 
ready to be hypnotists?
Yes!
All right and we become hypnotists by doing. We do and we do and we do it 
over and over and over again. I want you guys to do it here. If you do it 
here, you can take it out there and you can do it out there. 
Our goal by the end of these next few days is for you guys to go out there –
and you already have a show coming up, so that’s awesome – and for you 
guys to go home to your home towns, book a show next week and make 
yourself $5,000. Would that be awesome?
Yes!
Yeah, how about if you did two shows for $5,000 each - $10,000 next 
week? Why not? Have fun with it, right? It’s the most incredible profession I 
can even imagine.
I’m going to count to three. On number three, sit up in your chairs. All 
this applause will be for you. 
Now listen, what I say is that all this applause is for you. I like to do that, 
and I encourage you to do that yourself. I see a lot of stage hypnotists that 
are flat and it really drives me crazy. You want to get as much audience 
participation as you can possibly get. 
If you get the audience going, these guys are going to go more because
listen, the more noise you make, the more they’re going to act out for you. 
The more they act out for you, the more noise you need to make. 
Do you hear what I’m saying? I’m giving dual suggestions here. The more 
noise that you make, the more the people up here on stage are going to act 
out for you. The more they act out, the more noise you need to make. So 
I’m giving these dual suggestions because I want everybody involved. If I 
can get everybody involved, we’re going to have a great time. 
Do me a favor and give these guys a thunderous round of applause.
Applause
Just like that, very cool. You keep that up and we’re going to have a good 
time. And that’s it. 

© Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved
28
                                 
I’m going to count to three. At the number three, sit up in your chairs. 
Once again, all this applause is for you 1-2-3, wide awake 
everybody, wide awake. Wake up. Come on.
Applause
All right, cool. 
[
]

