Sharecash Success! 
 
By: Wyatt B. a.k.a. goluigi 
Resale Copy: No 
Review Copy: No 
Price Paid: $10.00 – If you paid more, then you didn’t get it in the right place! 
Guaranteed Success: Yes! 
 
 

With this guide, we will go from this: 
 
To this: 
 
 
This is what happened to me in less than a month. This will be you! 

Step One: Setup. Ok, so I presume you have a sharecash account. 
If not, please sign up at http://www.sharecash.org/. Now we’re going 
to need a few things. First let’s get a folder set up on our desktop. Right 
click > New folder. Name it “Sharecash Success”. 
NOTE: The following programs might not work on a Macintosh system. 
Programs needed: Any Video Converter (That’s the actual name of the 
program), and Utorrent. 
 
 
 
I hope this e-book gets you making money as quickly as possible. 
Remember; try ALL the methods to make money like in the picture. 
Once you get all of the following methods set up, you will only have to 
repeat every 2-3 weeks. This means auto-pilot money. 
 
 
 
 

 
THE WALLPAPER METHOD! -- Whitehat 
First we need to start gathering material. Make a new folder 
called wallpapers then navigate to http://www.4chan.org/wg/. This is a 
great place to find wallpapers. Another place is 
http://www.deviantart.com/wallpapers. Also remember Google is 
ALWAYS your friend for anything you need to find. Save as many 
wallpapers as you can. Also make it as organized as possible. 
 
 
Now right click on the folder and “Add to wallpapers.rar”. Once 
it’s compressed upload to sharecash.org. Now where do I spread the 
wallpapers? Graphics forums. A Google search for that may bring up 

the hackforums graphics section, which is great too. When making a 
thread on ANY forum be polite. I use the following format: 
“Hi! I decided to upload this cool collection of wallpapers for you 
guys because I don’t contribute much. Anyways I have about (nuber 
of wallpapers) HD wallpapers so you can download here: (SHARECASH 
LINK). If you want samples here’s a couple: 
(PHOTOBUCKETLINKTOIMAGE1) 
(PHOTOBUCKETLINKTOIMAGE2)” 
 
Warning: Prepare for a storm of angry people flaming you. Don’t give 
in. If they pull the old “NO SURVEYS IN MAH COUNTRY BRAHH PM 
DIRECT LINK DEWD!”, tell them to get a proxy or VPN running. If people 
flame just ignore and report the post. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

THE YOUTUBE METHOD! – Greyhat 
 
Ok, so let’s get started on this method. We will use Any Video Converter for 
this. If you run Macintosh I’m sure there is an alternative YouTube video 
downloader. So we need to search one of these terms: 
MSN hacker 
AIM hacker 
Skype hacker 
PayPal money adder 
Etc. Go to one of the last pages so you find a video with around 10- 500 views. 
Download this video as so: 
 
Once you have downloaded the video as .mp4 format, Navigate to Documents> 
Any Video Converter> MP4 and upload that video to http://www.youtube.com/. 

Use the following description as YOUR description in the video,  just mess around 
with it a little. 
“Hey guys, I found this cool hacking program. I scanned it with my AVG and 
nothing was going on so I guess it works well. Enjoy! Download: (Your sharecash 
link, It can be an upload of anything that says “hack”). 
 
Now you need to spread your link all over the place. Go to a n00bish forum 
and say “This ULTIMATE hacking tool! Here is the video! (Youtube link). This will 
make your video spread like wildfire. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

THE PIRATE METHOD! – Blackhat 
 
The internet is full of, and always will be full of, Pirates. No, not yar 
har pirates, software pirates. So let’s head over to http://www.thepiratebay.org/ 
and search for some good software. I would recommend the following software: 
Adobe Photoshop CS5 
Adobe Dream Weaver 
Sony Vegas 9 Pro 
FL studio 
Make sure your download is around 250mb or it’s too big for sharecash. 
Once you have downloaded the software, Put it in a .rar (must be 200mb or less, 
Use a stronger compression need be!) and upload to sharecash. Targert sites such 
as http://www.warez-bb.org/ Or any other sites that promote piracy! 

THE FACEBOOK METHOD - Greyhat 
This is the final step to making your thousands. This one might, By far, be 
the easiest method. The first thing to do is make a http://www.facebook.com/ 
account as a girl. Find a girl on Facebook who looks moderately pretty and copy 
her info and pictures into your new account. Next, start mass adding random 16 - 
24 year old men. You can get around 250 people in an hour. After you get around 
500 -1,000 friends, make a post as follows: 
“Lol hi, this is (NAMES) friend. This is what you get you whore! I have 
uploaded your nudes for the world to see here (SHARECASH LINK OF RANDOM 
PICTURES)! I changed your password so you can’t remove this!” 
After about 24 hours you will have half or more of your people download. 
This is probably the quickest way to get downloads. 
 
 
 
So this concludes my e-book on making thousands with 
http://www.sharecash.org/. If this e-book has been leaked report it to 
passhackers.net@gmail .com and you will get a small reward. I hope you can get 
as successful with making thousands as I am and will continue to do. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

