
Advancements in Machining 
Processes Through Hybrid and 
Sequential Approaches
Advancements in Machining Processes Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
is a multi-contributed book that details the most current research in machining 
techniques to manufacture complex structures in difficult-to-machine materials.
This book begins with an introduction to advanced machining techniques 
and highlights their key areas of application. Subsequently, it explores in detail 
developments in the field, focusing on thermal, mechanical, and electrochemical 
energy-based hybrid and sequential approaches. It covers topics such as triplex 
energy-based hybrid machining processes, which include grinding-assisted 
electrochemical discharge machining and ultrasonic-assisted electrochemical 
discharge machining processes. It also delves into the sequential machining 
processes and the postprocessing of materials through advanced finishing tech­
niques such as abrasive flow finishing, electropolishing, ultrasonic vibration 
assisted polishing, etc. With its focus on advanced machining techniques and their 
applications in mechanical, biomedical, automotive, and aerospace engineering, 
this book is sure to pique the interest of those seeking to expand their understand­
ing and enhance their practice.
This book is a must-read for professionals in the field of machining, offering a 
wealth of knowledge and insights that can inspire new approaches and solutions.


Advancements in 
Machining Processes 
Through Hybrid and 
Sequential Approaches
Edited by 
Sahil Sharma, Tarlochan Singh, and Akshay Dvivedi

Designed cover image: Gursimrat Singh Ganda, Dipti Sharma and Sahil Sharma
First edition published 2025
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2025 selection and editorial matter, Sahil Sharma, Tarlochan Singh and Akshay Dvivedi; indi-
vidual chapters, the contributors
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and pub-
lisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. 
The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced 
in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not 
been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so 
we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information stor-
age or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com 
or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-
750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and 
are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 9781032981390 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781032981406 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003597230 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230
Typeset in Times
by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.

Dedicated to my beloved mother, Mrs. Sarla Sharma, 
for her unwavering encouragement and, to young 
researchers, with the hope that this work inspires 
their pursuit of knowledge and innovation.


vii
Contents
Preface..................................................................................................................ix
Editor Biographies................................................................................................xi
List of Contributors.............................................................................................xiii
Chapter 1	
Introduction and Overview of Advanced 
Machining Processes........................................................................ 1
Muhammad Hazak Arshad, Krishna Kumar 
Saxena, Xiaolei Chen, and Dominiek Reynaerts
Chapter 2	
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid 
Machining Processes......................................................................28
Sahil Sharma and Akshay Dvivedi
Chapter 3	
Triplex Hybrid-Based Grinding-Assisted Electrochemical 
Discharge Machining Process........................................................44
Umesh Vishwakarma, Dharmender Singh Saini, 
Akash Pandey, and Sahil Sharma
Chapter 4	
Triplex Hybrid-Based Magnetic-Assisted Rotary 
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process: 3D 
FEM Simulation and Experimental Investigation.......................... 51
Viveksheel Rajput
Chapter 5	
Triplex Hybrid-Based Ultrasonic-Assisted Electrochemical 
Discharge Machining Process........................................................ 69
Anurag Shanu and Pradeep Dixit
Chapter 6	
Introduction and Overview of Sequential 
Machining Processes...................................................................... 83
Sahil Sharma, Ashwani Verma, and Akshay Dvivedi
Chapter 7	
Thermal Plus Electrochemical Based Sequential 
Machining Processes...................................................................... 93
Julfekar Arab and Shih-Chi Chen

viii
Contents
Chapter 8	
Thermo Plus Mechanical Based Sequential 
Machining Processes.................................................................... 109
Ramatenki Chinna, Priyaranjan Sharma, and Filipe Fernandes
Chapter 9	
Hybrid Plus Mechanical/Thermal Based Sequential 
Machining Processes.................................................................... 127
Sahil Sharma and Akshay Dvivedi
Chapter 10	 Advances in Surface Finish Techniques for Additively 
Manufactured Components: A Conceptual Review..................... 136
Adarsh Jaiswal, Krishnakant Dhakar, and Sahil Sharma
Index.................................................................................................................. 149

ix
Preface
The surface properties of machined features in difficult-to-machine materials 
play a crucial role in their functionality across various applications such as 
biomedical, aerospace, gas production, and defense. To achieve intricate 
designs in these challenging materials, researchers have utilized advanced 
machining techniques that involve the simultaneous and sequential applica­
tion of various energies. These cutting-edge approaches allow for the creation 
of complex structures while ensuring the desired surface characteristics and 
performance. This book explores the most current advances in cutting-edge 
machining techniques for manufacturing complex structures in a variety of 
materials. The first chapter provides an introduction to advanced machining 
techniques, discussing their requirements and categorization. Additionally, the 
chapter highlights the application areas where these advanced machining pro­
cesses find relevance and significance.
The subsequent chapters delve into a comprehensive description of the latest 
developments in advanced machining techniques, which are based on thermal, 
mechanical, and electrochemical energy-based hybrid and sequential approaches. 
To structure the subsequent chapters effectively, the subsequent chapters have 
been categorized into three parts. Each part examines advanced machining 
processes in depth, including process mechanisms, parametric effects, and pro­
cess control effects.
The first part of this book focuses on triplex energy-based hybrid machining 
processes, which include grinding-assisted electrochemical discharge machining, 
magnetic-assisted electrochemical discharge machining, and ultrasonic-assisted 
electrochemical discharge machining processes. This part comprises three chap­
ters that provide a comprehensive description of each machining process, cov­
ering both the fundamentals and their applications. The next part of the book 
explores thermo plus electrochemical, thermo plus mechanical, and hybrid plus 
mechanical/thermal energy-based sequential machining processes. Similar to the 
previous part, this section consists of three chapters dedicated to illustrating how 
the integration of these processes can effectively produce intricate shapes in diffi­
cult-to-machine materials. The first section of this part provides a comprehensive 
description of the sequential approach and outlines the various steps involved 
in developing a sequential process, from the formulation of the initial idea to its 
implementation stages. Subsequent sections in this part focus on the conceptu­
alization, process mechanisms, and machining capabilities of the thermo plus 
electrochemical, thermo plus mechanical, and hybrid plus mechanical/thermal 
sequential machining processes.
The postprocessing of materials through advanced finishing techniques, such 
as abrasive flow finishing, electropolishing, ultrasonic vibration-assisted polish­
ing, cryogenic treatment, etc. are also included in the third part of this book. 
These techniques are included to give an overview of various finishing processes. 

x
Preface
The inclusion of these techniques will provide valuable insights to the research­
ers, enabling them to develop highly refined additively manufactured functional 
devices tailored for specific applications.
This book’s ultimate goal is to give in-depth research and development 
expertise in advanced machining processes employed for the fabrication of 
complicated geometries in difficult-to-machine materials. The content pre­
sented in this book will be highly beneficial for researchers working in this 
domain, offering valuable insights from both fundamental and application-
oriented perspectives. Furthermore, the content presented in this book will be 
highly valuable for researchers seeking to deepen their understanding of these 
processes from a scientific perspective. Additionally, it serves as a valuable 
resource for academic curricula aiming to develop a profound knowledge of 
advanced machining processes.

xi
Editor Biographies
Sahil Sharma is working as a research scholar at the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Roorkee, India. He received a B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering 
from Kurukshetra University in 2014 and an M.Tech from the YMCA University 
in 2017. Before joining IIT, Sahil served as a research associate cum assistant 
professor at the Entrepreneurship and Incubation Council (EPIC) Not-For-Profit 
Centre, affiliated with the Ambala College of Engineering and Applied Research 
(ACE) and the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of 
India, under the NIDHI-TBI scheme. During this time, he contributed to various 
research and development projects, gaining valuable experience and expertise. 
His academic background provides a strong foundation for his current research 
interests, which revolve around the advancement of machining techniques 
for difficult-to-machine materials and the development of hybrid machining 
systems for corrosion-resistant materials. Additionally, he is involved in the 
creation of microfluidic devices using the ECDM process on glass substrates. 
He has published six peer-reviewed journal articles, authored two book chap­
ters, completed one government-funded project, and filed two patents, highlight­
ing his commitment to knowledge dissemination and innovation. He received 
the Academic Excellence Award (2013) and the Best Paper Award (2017) at the 
national conference. Through his work, he aims to contribute to the advancement 
of manufacturing technologies and pioneer innovative solutions for the industry.
Tarlochan Singh is working as a Faculty Member in School of Product and 
Industrial Design at Lovely Professional University (LPU), Jalandhar, India. 
Before joining the LPU, Dr. Singh was an Institutional Postdoctoral fellow at 
the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India. He received a B.Tech in 
Mechanical Engineering from Punjab Technical University in 2011 and an 
M.Tech from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee in 2013. He received 
a Ph.D in Advanced Manufacturing from the Indian Institute of Technology 
Roorkee in 2019. His present research interests include the development of 
advanced manufacturing processes for the machining of difficult-to-machine 
materials. Currently, his research work is aimed toward the development of 
microfluidic devices on glass material with the ECDM process. He is also 
working on the ECDM process for the surface modification of ceramics and 
metals for MEMS and biomedical applications. He has published 24 peer-
reviewed journal papers, 11 patents, and 3 book chapters. Dr. Singh has 
received the University Gold Medalist Award (2011), Outstanding Reviewing 
Award (2017), Editor’s Choice Award (2019), and Best Paper Award (2013, 
2019). Furthermore, Dr. Singh is also working on product design and develop­
ment through human-centric approaches.

xii
Editor Biographies
Akshay Dvivedi is currently serving as a Professor at the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Roorkee, India. He has held various notable positions within the insti­
tute, including Associate Dean of Corporate Interaction (ADCI), Tinkering Lab 
Coordinator, Professor-in-Charge of the Department Web Management Committee, 
and Chairman of Planning, Information, and Special Events. Currently, he is the 
Dean of Sponsored Research and Industrial Consultancy (SRIC), overseeing cru­
cial responsibilities related to research collaboration and industrial engagement. 
His research interests encompass a wide range of areas such as product design 
and development, fabrication and machining of metal matrix composites, micro­
machining of difficult-to-machine materials, quality management, and QFD for 
service sectors. With an outstanding academic record, Professor Dvivedi has 
published over 100 peer-reviewed journal articles and international conference 
papers. His expertise is further reflected in his five patents. To date, he has suc­
cessfully supervised the research work of 18 Ph.D candidates and over 30 Master’s 
candidates. His exceptional contributions and achievements have earned him 
numerous accolades, including the Outstanding Teacher’s Award twice, the Best 
Conference Paper Award twice, and the Editor’s Choice Paper Award by Precision 
Engineering Journal in 2019. Moreover, he was nominated for the INAE Young 
Entrepreneur Award in 2020 and recognized by the India Innovators Association 
in their compilation of the “Best 100 Innovations” for the Adaptive Feedback-
Controlled Electric Hydro-Dissection Device, representing the finest innovation 
from the institute in 2019.

xiii
Contributors
Julfekar Arab
Department of Mechanical and 
Automation Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, PR China
Muhammad Hazak Arshad
Micro-& Precision Engineering Group
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Manufacturing Processes and Systems 
(MaPS)
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Shih-Chi Chen
Department of Mechanical and 
Automation Engineering
The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, PR China
Xiaolei Chen
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of 
Nontraditional Machining and 
Equipment
Guangdong University of 
Technology
Guangzhou, PR China
Ramatenki Chinna
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Koneru Lakshmaiah Education 
Foundation
Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India
Krishnakant Dhakar
Industrial Production Department
Shri G. S. Institute of Technology 
and Science (SGSITS)
Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India
Pradeep Dixit
Electrochemical Microfabrication 
Laboratory
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
Akshay Dvivedi
Department of Mechanical and 
Industrial Engineering
AMP Lab, Indian Institute of 
Technology Roorkee
Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India
Filipe Fernandes
University of Coimbra, CEMMPRE, 
ARISE
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Rua Luís Reis Santos, Coimbra, 
Portugal
Adarsh Jaiswal
Department of Industrial Production
Shri G. S. Institute of Technology and 
Science (SGSITS)
Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India
Akash Pandey
Department of Industrial Production
Shri G. S. Institute of Technology 
and Science (SGSITS)
Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India
Viveksheel Rajput
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Punjab Engineering College
Chandigarh, Punjab, India

xiv
Contributors
Dominiek Reynaerts
Micro-& Precision Engineering Group
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Manufacturing Processes and Systems 
(MaPS)
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Dharmender Singh Saini
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
OP Jindal University
Raigarh, Chhattisgarh, India
Krishna Kumar Saxena
Micro-& Precision Engineering Group
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Manufacturing Processes and Systems 
(MaPS)
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Anurag Shanu
Electrochemical Microfabrication 
Laboratory
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
Priyaranjan Sharma
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Koneru Lakshmaiah Education 
Foundation
Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India
Sahil Sharma
AMP Lab, Mechanical and 
Industrial Engineering 
Department
Indian Institute of Technology 
Roorkee
Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India
Ashwani Verma 
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Maharishi Markandeshwar (Deemed 
to be University)
Mullana, Haryana, India
Umesh Vishwakarma
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
OP Jindal University
Raigarh, Chhatisgarh, India

1
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-1
Introduction and 
Overview of Advanced 
Machining Processes
Muhammad Hazak Arshad, Krishna Kumar 
Saxena, and Dominiek Reynaerts
Micro-& Precision Engineering Group, Manufacturing 
Processes and Systems (MaPS), Leuven, Belgium
Xiaolei Chen
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Nontraditional 
Machining and Equipment, Guangdong University 
of Technology, Guangzhou, PR China
1.1  INTRODUCTION
Looking at the history of manufacturing, the machining industry is continuously 
witnessing paradigm shifts since the introduction of ‘first machine-tool’, that is, 
Wilkinson’s boring machine for steam engines, first screw-cutting metal lathe by 
Maudslay and first milling machine for manufacturing rifles by Eli Whitney, fol-
lowed by the quest for precision as evident from the introduction of tolerancing 
in automotive components by Honda® and Ford® to the introduction of computer 
numerical control (CNC) machines and advanced machining processes. This was fol-
lowed by hybrid machining and introduction of parallel kinematic mechanisms and 
robotic manipulators. The machine-tools’ capabilities have been further leveraged 
through on-machine capabilities like sensing and monitoring, closed-loop control, 
on-machine metrology and advanced automation systems. With the advent of indus-
try 4.0, machining industry further aligned toward digital twin, artificial intelligence, 
edge computing and data storage and exchange over cloud to facilitate high-quality, 
efficient production, and the progress continues with the introduction of cobots.
With increasing competition from additive manufacturing (AM), the recent 
and major drivers for machining innovations have been the precision compo-
nents such as freeform optics, astronomical mirrors, semiconductor chips and 
components, batteries, transmission components of energy industry (e.g. wind 
turbines) and automotive industries, turbomachinery components of aerospace 
industry and components of extreme environments facilitating space exploration. 
To meet these ever-growing market demands, advanced machine-tools have been 
developed to facilitate removal at multiple length scales from meter size parts to 
1

2
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
nanometer size chips for ultra-large-scale integration (ULSI). Figure 1.1 gives an 
overview of some of the modern ultra-precision machine-tools.
Machining technologies are continuously needed for components at different 
scales, ranging from the shaping of larger workpieces to the machining of millime-
ter-sized micromechanical components, to achieving micrometer-sized surface tex-
tures, to fabricating –nanometer-sized semiconductor chips and even pushing to the 
atomic level for quantum devices. The successful implementation of the machining 
technologies at different length scales requires fundamental understanding of the 
process-workpiece interactions. Every machining process is limited by the mini-
mum amount of material removal governed by process physics or mechanics. As 
an example, in case of electric discharge machining (EDM), the material removal 
resolution is determined and limited by the energy of a spark; in electrochemi-
cal machining (ECM), theoretically, atomic-level resolution can be achieved and 
the extent of dissolution is governed by the electric field distribution with removal 
rates described by Faraday’s electrolysis principles; for laser and optical machining 
technique, machining resolution depends on the wavelength and spot size of the 
laser/light. For mechanical machining processes, the milling resolution is difficult 
to define owing to the fact that minimum chip thickness is specific to material, 
tool and cutting conditions. In theory, the mechanical processes remove material by 
FIGURE 1.1  Modern ultraprecision machines for fabrication at different length scales 
(a) A 5-axis milling machine for aerospace and turbomachinery components (DMG Mori). 
(b) A vertical 5-axis milling machine (Makino). (c) An ultraprecision turn-mill-grind cen-
ter for freeform optical components (Precitech). (d) An ultraprecision diamond turning 
lathe for freeform optical components up to 350 mm diameter (Moore Nanotech). (e) 
NanoFrazor® thermal scanning probe lithography tool with minimum 15 nm feature reso-
lution (Heidelberg instruments). (f) Integrated water-jet guided laser in a 5-axis machin-
ing platform with kerf width down to 60 µm and aspect ratios of 1:20 (Makino-Synova). 
(g) A Swiss-type lathe for turning of precision micro-components (Tornos Swiss Nano). 
(h) A high-volume extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUV) system with 13 nm resolution 
and production throughput of 170 wafers per hour (ASML).

3
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
plastic deformation, which is essentially the movement of dislocations. Therefore, 
the minimum removal can be of the order of the size of a dislocation. For grinding 
and polishing processes, this is determined by abrasive grain size. These facts pose a 
fundamental limitation to the minimum machinable size and achievable tolerances.
Furthermore, the introduction of newer materials with different compositional 
recipes and extreme mechanical properties, the production of customized com­
ponents, and product miniaturization have pushed the machining industry toward 
further advancements. This is perhaps better reflected in developments such as 
newer cutting tool materials, robotic clamping and tool-changing capabilities, 
downscaling of processes and machine tools, newer process configurations (tro­
choidal milling, power skiving), hybrid machining processes and multifunctional 
machine-tools, material-specific process developments (e.g. ECM, ultrashort 
pulsed laser machining) and coordinated development of machinable materials 
for specific industries such as aerospace. Table 1.1 gives a summary of the differ­
ent machining and polishing processes along with their process characteristics. 
TABLE 1.1
Overview of Modern Machining and Finishing Technologies
Machining 
Process
Removal 
Mechanism
Main 
Parameters
Process 
Metrics
Applications
Water jet 
machining
Erosion/wear by 
kinetic energy 
transfer from 
high-pressure 
water jet to the 
workpiece
Orifice diameter, 
water pressure 
and standoff 
distance
Jet velocity up 
to 900 m/s, 
100 µm slots, 
76 µm accuracy
Cutting variety of 
materials like 
glass, wood, 
stone, plastic, 
metal and 
composites
Abrasive jet 
machining
Brittle fracture due 
to the impact of 
abrasives in 
addition to the 
high pressure of 
water jet
Abrasive grit 
size, air/water 
pressure and 
velocity and 
standoff 
distance
Cutting up to 
6 inch depth 
in metals
Engraving, 
contour cutting 
and precision 
cutting of brittle 
materials (e.g. 
Italian marbles)
Cryo-jet 
machining [1]
Brittle fracture due 
to the impact of 
ice particles 
(same function as 
abrasives) in 
addition to the 
high pressure of 
water jet
Ice pellet size, 
water pressure 
and velocity 
and standoff 
distance
Similar 
performance 
as an abrasive 
water jet but 
less wastage 
generation and 
ice particles are 
melted and 
recycled
Engraving, 
contour cutting 
and precision 
cutting of 
different 
materials
Ultrasonic 
machining
Brittle fracture due 
to tool vibration 
and abrasive 
particles in a 
slurry
Vibration 
frequency, feed 
rate, slurry type 
and grit size
Surface 
roughness <01 
µm, up to 
60 mm3/min 
volume 
removal rate
Machining 
ceramics, glass, 
precious 
gemstones and 
cutting of 
semiconductors
(Continued)

4
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
Chemical 
machining
Corrosion/
non-faradaic 
dissolution in the 
presence of a 
suitable etchant
Etchant, 
maskant, 
etchant 
concentration, 
temperature 
and mask 
dimensions
25 nm surface 
roughness, 
etch rate up to 
005 mm/min
Precise 
microfeatures 
on components, 
electronic 
components, 
finishing and 
patterning
Photochemical 
machining
Light-matter 
interaction, 
corrosion/
non-Faradaic 
dissolution of 
workpiece, 
photo-chemical 
reactions
Mask type, UV 
light intensity, 
UV light 
wavelength and 
etchant type
3 nm logic nodes 
and research 
on 2 nm
Ultraprecise 
machining of 
micro-nano 
components, 
especially for 
semiconductors
Electrochemical 
machining (ECM, 
wire-ECM, jet-
ECM, sinking 
ECM)
Faradaic 
dissolution, 
controlled anodic 
dissolution by 
geometrically 
defined tool/jet
Voltage/current, 
interelectrode 
gap, electrolyte 
type and 
concentration, 
pulse parameters 
(on-time and 
duty cycle)
2–5 μm 
precision 
depending on 
material, Ra 
down to 50 nm 
for tungsten 
carbide
Blisk machining, 
shaving cap 
finishing, fuel 
injector nozzles, 
cutting tool 
inserts, aerospace 
and automotive 
components
Electron beam 
Machining [2]
Melting and 
vaporization with 
a high energy 
density and high 
velocity electron 
beam
Beam energy 
(spot size, energy 
per pulse), 
acceleration 
voltage, current, 
pulse duration 
(50 µs to 15 ms), 
vacuum 
environment
Up to 
100,000 holes/s 
with <100 µm 
diameter
Micro-drilling, 
micro-cutting, 
diffractive 
optical elements, 
lithography, 
jewel-bearing 
watches, surface 
treatment, 
deburring
Electro discharge 
machining (EDM, 
wire-EDM, 
Die-sinking 
EDM)
Melting and 
evaporation by 
spark, erosion, 
cavitation, 
spalling and 
chemical reactions 
depending on 
workpiece/
dielectric 
combination
Pulse generator 
type, energy, 
voltage, 
current, servo 
parameters, 
pulse 
parameters, 
interelectrode 
gap, dielectric 
type
1–5 μm 
precision, 
200 nm surface 
roughness
Any electrically 
conductive 
material, cooling 
holes in turbines, 
dies and molds, 
micro-
components, fuel 
injector nozzles, 
micro-gears and 
micro-molds
TABLE 1.1  (Continued)
Overview of Modern Machining and Finishing Technologies
Machining 
Process
Removal 
Mechanism
Main 
Parameters
Process 
Metrics
Applications
(Continued)

5
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
Dry EDM
Melting, erosion, 
evaporation in 
gas as dielectric 
medium
Pulse generator 
type, energy 
voltage, 
current, pulse 
parameters, gap 
and gas 
pressure
Volume removal 
rate up to 8 mm3/
min, surface 
roughness 
~2 µm, <100 µm 
feature size
Sustainable 
alternative to 
applications of 
conventional 
EDM process
Ion beam 
machining [2]
Bombardment of 
surface by 
high-energy ions 
(eg Ga+ ions) 
and dislodging of 
material through 
kinetic energy 
transfer
Beam current, 
beam energy/
extraction 
voltage, dwell 
time spot size 
and beam 
shape, angle of 
incidence, 
workpiece 
material (atomic 
number, binding 
energy)
Small 
dimensions – 
10–100 nm, 
removal rates 
<1 µm3/s, 
surface 
roughness 
<70 nm
Custom aspheric 
lenses of small 
size (~ mm), 
cross-sectioning 
of samples, 
transmission 
electron 
microscopy 
(TEM) sample 
preparation, 
nanolithography, 
nanofluidic 
devices and 
nano-patterning
Laser beam 
machining
Ablation, melting, 
light-matter 
interaction
Laser power, 
laser pulse 
parameters, 
spot size, laser 
wavelength, 
scan rate, beam 
shape, M2 
parameter
Typical feature 
size ~10 um, 
100 nm feature 
size possible 
with excimer 
lasers, up to 
20:1 aspect 
ratios
Micro-features, 
micro-
components, 
diamond 
cutting, profile 
cutting, surface 
texturing, 
surface 
functionalization
Elastic emission 
machining [3]
Atomic scale 
removal via 
particle surface 
contact induced 
electrical 
polarization, 
charge-up and 
binding energy 
distortion 
at the contact 
interface
Powder particle 
type, powder 
size and 
workpiece type 
(binding 
energy)
100 pm (rms) 
surface 
accuracy and 
50 pm (rms) 
surface 
roughness
Machining of 
precision 
extreme UV 
and X-ray 
mirrors, lenses 
and optics
TABLE 1.1  (Continued)
Overview of Modern Machining and Finishing Technologies
Machining 
Process
Removal 
Mechanism
Main 
Parameters
Process 
Metrics
Applications
(Continued)

6
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
Plasma arc 
machining
Melting of 
workpiece by 
high velocity and 
high temperature 
plasma jet 
(ionized gas)
Electrically 
conductive 
workpieces, jet 
velocity, 
voltage/current, 
gas type
Machining speed 
up to 75 m/min, 
plate thickness 
up to 150 mm
Profile cutting of 
thick plates, 
groove cutting, 
tube cutting, 
typical materials 
– stainless steel, 
titanium, 
copper, brass 
and aluminum
Blast Erosion Arc 
Machining 
(BEAM) [4]
Melting and 
erosion by 
electric arc, 
which is 
controlled 
through 
mechanical and 
hydrodynamic 
arc-breaking 
mechanisms
Dielectric flow 
rate and 
pressure, 
relative velocity 
of tool and 
workpiece, 
pulse 
parameters (ms) 
and electrical 
parameters 
(voltage and 
current)
Volume removal 
rate up to 
7,500 mm3/min 
for SiC/Al and 
11,300 mm3/min 
for IN718
High-speed 
rough 
machining of 
hard materials 
and MMCs
Bio-machining [5]
Corrosion 
(metabolic 
oxidation) by 
chemolithotropic 
bacteria via an 
intermediate 
enzyme layer
Microorganism 
type, culture 
medium and 
concentration
12–22 mg/h 
MRR 
depending on 
bacteria and 
material
Ore mining, 
metal recovery 
and cutting 
fluids for 
milling
Electrolytic 
in-process 
dressing (ELID) 
grinding
Mechanical 
removal of 
workpiece and 
intermediate and 
dressing of wheel 
with electro­
chemical process
Feed rate, 
electrolyte type 
and wheel 
dressing 
parameters 
(voltage, current)
250–8,000 mm3/
min MRR, 
10 nm surface 
roughness
Surface finishing 
of ceramics, 
cermets and 
hard metals
Plasma electrolytic 
polishing (PeP)
Plasma formation 
and anodic 
dissolution at 
high current 
density
Electrolyte 
recipe and 
voltage, 
workpiece 
dimension and 
shape
22 nm surface 
roughness
Surface finishing, 
removal of 
thermal defects
TABLE 1.1  (Continued)
Overview of Modern Machining and Finishing Technologies
Machining 
Process
Removal 
Mechanism
Main 
Parameters
Process 
Metrics
Applications
(Continued)

7
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
Fast tool servo 
machining (FTS)
Ductile mode 
shearing and 
brittle fracture 
with intermediate 
tool engagement 
by means of a 
high frequency 
servo system
Spindle speed, 
feed rate and 
FTS dynamics
<4 nm surface 
roughness, 
<03 µm form 
accuracy, peak 
acceleration 
400 m/s2
Ultraprecision 
structured and 
freeform optical 
components
Magnetic 
rheological 
finishing 
(MRF, rotating 
wheel-MRF, 
rotating 
tool-MRF)
Brittle fracture of 
the peaks on the 
workpiece surface 
where the 
rheology 
(viscosity) of 
polishing fluid can 
be controlled by a 
magnetic field
Types of abrasive 
particles, 
magnetizing 
current, carrier 
liquid and 
magnetizable 
particles and 
their volume 
fraction
Figure accuracy 
<50 nm, surface 
roughness 
<1 nm
Finishing of 
optical glasses, 
silicon wafers, 
hard crystals 
and hard metals
Water jet guided 
laser machining
Ablation and melting 
with simultaneous 
cooling with a 
water jet, laser 
guided in a water 
jet to achieve a 
higher working 
length
Laser power, 
laser pulse 
parameters, jet 
pressure and jet 
diameter
Machining 
resolution 
20 µm, 15 µm 
precision, no 
thermal defects 
and up to 
45 mm/min 
cutting speed
Cutting tool 
inserts, 
manufacturing, 
semiconductors 
and 
watchmaking
Multijet polishing [6] Erosion due to 
kinetic energy 
of jet and ductile/
brittle fracture 
of peaks realized 
by using an array 
of pressurized 
abrasive jets at the 
same or controlled 
pressures
Abrasive type, 
grit size, jet 
pressure, jet 
diameter and 
jet distribution
~6 nm surface 
roughness 
achieved
Surface finishing 
of optics, 
freeform 
surfaces, 
medical 
implants and 
AM parts
Dry electropolishing Anodic dissolution, 
ion transport by 
damp granules 
with suitable 
liquid or solid 
electrolytes
Type of 
granules, 
granule size 
and voltage
10 nm surface 
roughness
Surface finishing 
of medical 
implants, 
automotive parts, 
jewelry, tools 
and aerospace 
components
TABLE 1.1  (Continued)
Overview of Modern Machining and Finishing Technologies
Machining 
Process
Removal 
Mechanism
Main 
Parameters
Process 
Metrics
Applications
(Continued)

8
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
Electrochemical 
grinding
Anodic dissolution 
of workpiece and 
brittle fracture of 
passivation 
(oxide) layer
Feed rate, 
voltage, 
electrolyte 
type, gap and 
wheel rotation
Surface 
roughness 
down to 24 nm, 
volume 
removal rate up 
to 9 mm3/min
Finishing hard 
metals and 
cermets
Hybrid laser 
electrochemical 
machining [7]
– Escalated 
transpassive 
dissolution 
kinetics and 
passive layer 
weakening via 
localized laser 
heating
– Sequential 
anodic 
dissolution and 
ablation via ECM 
and laser 
interpulsing
Pulse parameters, 
laser power, 
voltage, 
electrolyte type, 
flow rate and 
interelectrode 
gap
<20 nm surface 
roughness and 
60% aspect 
ratio 
improvement 
on IN718, 
153 µg/s MRR 
and 15% 
passivation 
reduction on 
NbC cermet 
compared to 
ECM
Shaping and 
machining 
micro-features 
on hard, 
passivating and 
multiphase 
alloys/cermets, 
and 
multilayered 
materials like 
thermal 
barrier-coated 
superalloys
Ultrasonic assisted 
milling/grinding
Mixed removal 
mechanisms 
exhibiting ductile 
mode shearing, 
ploughing and 
brittle mode 
fracture 
depending on 
material and 
parameters
Vibration 
frequency, feed 
rate and tool 
rotation speed
40% subsurface 
damage 
reduction, 
3 × higher 
productivity, up 
to 60,000 RPM
Machining and 
finishing dental 
implants and 
brittle materials 
(technical 
ceramics, glass)
Skiving
Process specific 
for gears where 
removal is 
achieved via 
plastic 
deformation 
employing 
synchronous 
motion of tool 
(pinion) and 
workpiece (gear)
Tool and 
workpiece 
rotation speeds, 
axis crossing 
angle and ratio 
of workpiece/
tool diameters
2–3× time 
higher 
productivity 
than gear 
shaping
Precise 
machining of 
internal, spur, 
helical, 
herringbone 
gears
TABLE 1.1  (Continued)
Overview of Modern Machining and Finishing Technologies
Machining 
Process
Removal 
Mechanism
Main 
Parameters
Process 
Metrics
Applications

9
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
The details of individual processes are available in several publications. Therefore, 
this chapter presents modern views on machining/3D shaping processes and pro­
vides a brief overview of related machining processes that are currently used 
in industries or are under research. The shaping or micromachining processes 
employed in clean-room and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) fabrica­
tion processes, for example, surface/bulk micromachining of silicon, germanium, 
etc., are out of the scope of this chapter.
1.2  TOWARD PRECISION, MINIATURIZATION, HIGH SPEED 
AND PROCESSING OF ADVANCED MATERIALS
The high-tech industrial advancements and growing demands for miniatur­
ized products, high production speeds and processing of novel multifunctional 
materials are continuously evolving, which requires continuous development in 
micro- and ultraprecision machining technologies. Following the Taniguchi’s 
prediction [8], normal machining already achieved 1 µm accuracy in the year 
2000 (Figure 1.2) and the quest for nanometric precision is still an ongoing 
effort. This need for precision comes from the push for better energy efficiency 
FIGURE 1.2  (a) Machining accuracy in respective years as per Taniguchi’s prediction 
[8]. (b) Number of transistors doubling every two years (Moore’s law). (c) Volumetric 
energy density for batteries in respective years (Snail’s law).

10
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
and device performance. Hence, products or product features are continuously 
being downscaled with enhanced capabilities like computing power and battery 
storage (Li ion batteries in particular), as predicted by Moore’s and Snail’s laws 
in Figure 1.2. The precision of machining processes at µm-nm scale is mostly 
hindered by the size effects that come into picture, which limit the downscaling 
of tolerances with the corresponding reduction in part/feature size.
The early waves for micromachines, microfactories and micromachining were 
from Japan focusing on the reduction of size of machine-tools, cutting tools, 
downscaling of processes and manufacturing and assembly on desktop micro­
factories driven by the needs for reduction of material and energy consumption 
as well as market pull for MEMS and silicon technology. Figure 1.3 shows an 
example of a Japanese desktop microfactory (625 × 490 × 380 mm3, 34 kg) with 
a lathe, a milling machine, a press machine and assembly line consisting of a 
transfer arm and a two-fingered hand. Similarly, Swiss industry also pushed 
the micromanufacturing industry and compact machine tool development due 
to the watch industry, ballpoint pens, micromechanical components and Swiss-
type collets. This resulted in the development of Swiss-type compact lathes and 
turn-mill centers as shown in Figure 1.1(g). Besides mechanical micromachining, 
Swiss industry further pushed laser micromachining for ruby and sapphire jewel 
bearings for the watch industry. The machining industry also witnessed the trends 
for high-speed machining (HSM) particularly for mass production of high-end 
components for aerospace, automotive, die and mold and optical industries. HSM 
was characterized by the use of direct drive technology, active magnetic and air-
bearing spindles and advanced machine-tool structures. There have been different 
definitions for HSM relating to cutting speeds (vc > 1,200 m/min), spindle speeds 
(>20,000 RPM), DN numbers (diameter × RPM) >1 million and high dynamic 
FIGURE 1.3  Example of a desktop machining microfactory. (Tanaka, 2001, RIKEN 
review.)

11
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
performance of machine-tool structures and feed-drives. A general advantage as 
depicted in Figure 1.4 [9] was that at higher cutting speeds, the temperature at the 
tool-chip interface starts to decrease, which is more pronounced for non-ferrous 
materials, for example, aluminum. Additionally, at higher cutting speeds, the cut­
ting forces are lower and allow machining of thin-walled parts with a proper 
combination of cutting parameters and tool materials.
Furthermore, the need for improved performance and efficiency, multifunctional 
equipment and exposure of products to extreme environments has also led to the 
development of advanced materials like superalloys, cermets, high-entropy alloys, 
ceramics, composites, etc. to facilitate improved device life, corrosion resistance, 
heat dissipation, energy storage and withstand extreme temperatures and loads 
at even micrometric scales. These capabilities, owing to the extreme mechanical 
and chemical material properties, make it difficult to machine such materials. As 
an example, the drilling of cooling holes in thermal barrier-coated (TBC) turbine 
blades is a common case that remains a challenge in the aerospace industry 
(Figure 1.5(a)) due to the non-conductive TBC layer and delamination along with 
surface-subsurface defects with technologies such as EDM and laser. Ultrashort 
pulsed laser machining can reduce delamination and thermal defects, but the 
removal rates and aspect ratios are extremely low. As another example of miniature 
products in difficult-to-cut materials, Figure 1.5(b) shows a miniature gas turbine 
unit (total size ø 110 mm and length 120 mm) developed for 1 kW power output [10]. 
The compressor side is made by micro-milling of Ti6-Al-4V and the impeller side 
is fabricated by micro-EDM of Si3N4-TiN ceramic composite.
It is now evident that the current machining scenario demands for “ultrapreci­
sion,” “miniaturization,” “high speed” and “processing of advanced materials.” 
FIGURE 1.4  Salomon curve for high-speed machining.

12
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
The manufacturing processes need to adapt with the ever-evolving requirements 
of precision and part downscaling via the development of novel machine-tools, 
cutting tools, removal mechanisms, machining strategies and hybrid variants to 
machine advanced materials. The recent trends (Figure 1.6) to address the afore­
mentioned challenges are briefly discussed in subsequent sections as per their 
primary motivators and applications.
1.2.1  Material-Driven Machining Leading to Process Hybridizations
The main driving force for innovation in machining technology can be attrib­
uted to the development of novel materials for high-end, extreme environment 
and specialized applications or to replace existing materials for enhanced device 
operational capabilities and energy efficiency [11]. The aforementioned applica­
tions often require preservation of material properties since loads can concentrate 
at material defects, leading to catastrophic part failure. Therefore, the aerospace 
(AS/EN 9100) and biomedical (ISO 13485) industries have stringent require­
ments for safety. To address these issues with existing mechanical processes, 
extremely sharp (cutting edge radius ~120 nm) diamond cutting tools are being 
developed for hard, brittle glass and ceramic materials to machine them in ductile 
mode in order to avoid brittle fracture-associated cracks and subsurface damage. 
Furthermore, specific machining processes including hybrid processes have been/
are being developed for each particular class of materials to precisely (<1 µm) and 
efficiently machine defect-free parts and the overview is provided in Figure 1.7 
with process schematics. Some of the processes are summarized later.
1.	Hybrid processes based on non-contact machining technologies: EDM 
and ECM are standard processes to machine difficult-to-cut materials 
independent of their hardness. EDM is a thermal process that erodes 
FIGURE 1.5  (a) Cross-sectional view of a multilayered turbine blade with thermal bar­
rier coating (Engine Alliance - GP7200 jet engine). (b) An ultraminiature gas turbine 
unit where the turbine impeller is made by micro-EDM of Si3N4-TiN composite and the 
compressor is made by micro-milling of Ti-6Al-4V. (Reynaerts et al. KU Leuven [10].)

13
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
conductive materials via electrical sparks in a dielectric medium. ECM 
or EC-jet is a thermal process that anodically dissolves a conductive 
ionizable material in an electrolyte. With the development of advanced 
multiphase materials such as superalloys, cermets, high-entropy alloys, 
etc., these processes suffer from processing issues such as recast layer 
and heat-affected zones for EDM and inhomogeneous dissolution due 
to varying conductivity and passivation tendency for ECM. Hybrid 
variants of these processes are being developed to improve their per­
formance and material processing window, among which the recently 
developed electrochemical discharge machining (ECDM) [12] and laser 
electrochemical machining (LECM) [7] techniques are gaining research 
FIGURE 1.6  Overview of machining trends.

14
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
attention. ECDM can machine both conductive and non-conductive 
materials, but the removal mechanism changes. For a conductive mate­
rial such as superalloy or bulk metallic glass, it removes material in 
EDM mode and the ECM mode helps remove the recast layer to provide 
precise components with good surface integrity (~50 nm Ra). For a non-
conductive material such as glass or ceramic, the process is sometimes 
referred to as spark-assisted chemical engraving (SACE). It uses a tool 
and counter electrode to machine features on the non-conductive work­
piece through electrical discharges in the hydrogen gas film around 
the tool and gap along with chemical etching using a bath of gener­
ally sodium hydroxide (NaOH). These processes have been further 
detailed in the subsequent chapters. The ECM hybrid variant, namely, 
LECM, applies laser and electrochemical process energies simultane­
ously in the machining zone. Depending on the laser energy control, at 
low laser power it enhances ECM transpassive dissolution without bulk 
FIGURE 1.7  Process schematics of different hybrid machining processes for machining 
advanced materials.

15
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
electrolyte boiling (15% higher MRR), whereas, with inter-pulsing of 
process energies, the material removal is realized through sequential 
anodic dissolution and ablation, making it suitable for machining mul­
tilayered materials. At low laser power, LECM facilitates weakening of 
the resistive surface passive layer present in most advanced materials 
and enhances reaction kinetics via an increase in local current density 
to homogenously remove less reactive material phases (20 nm Sa). The 
successful leveraging of these hybrid technologies necessitates research 
into the development of multifunctional hybrid machine-tools and 
synchronized machine kinematics. Figure 1.8(a) shows a hybrid laser-
ECM prototype machine tool developed at KU Leuven, Belgium, and 
Figure 1.8(b) shows an ECM machine tool integrated with a parallel 
kinematics mechanism developed at Kanazawa University, Japan, for 
high-speed translation of tool electrodes resulting in features with high 
dimensional accuracy and surface quality.
2.	Hybrid processes based on mechanical machining technologies: 
Mechanical milling and grinding processes have also been a focus for 
hybridization, especially for improving precision and reducing subsur­
face damage on novel materials. In laser-assisted milling and grind­
ing of hard alloys, cermets and technical ceramics, local laser heating 
induces material plasticization for alloys and cermets and metallization 
for ceramics, which makes it easier for conventional carbide and dia­
mond milling/grinding tools to machine the softened material as well as 
FIGURE 1.8  Custom machine tools developed for advanced machining processes 
(a) Hybrid laser-ECM machine tool developed at KU Leuven, Belgium. (b) Parallel 
kinematic-based electrochemical milling tool for high-speed translation of tool electrode 
developed at Kanazawa University, Japan.

16
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
remove the heat-affected zones. Similarly, in electrochemical milling/
grinding of hard alloys and cermets, the electrolyte jet/bath first anodi­
cally dissolves the surface or softens it through surface anodization 
before subsequent mechanical removal of the surface passive layer 
(~24 nm Ra). Composites (MMC, PMC) present an interesting case 
since the combination of materials with entirely different physical and 
chemical properties results in burrs during mechanical machining and 
inhomogeneous removal in non-contact machining. Therefore, the use 
of a high-pressure water jet with abrasive particles in abrasive water jet 
machining makes precise composite machining possible along with the 
processing of ceramics and multilayered materials.
1.2.2  Mechanism-Driven Machining
The concept of mechanism-driven machining was given by Andreas Klink from 
WZL RWTH Aachen University, Germany [13], where the machining processes 
can be classified according to the involved material loads (thermal, mechanical, 
chemical) and their combinations as illustrated in Figure 1.9. This was a step further 
to the generic term “process signature” put forward by German researchers [14].
Process signature is a modern approach that refers to the fact that each process 
is characterized by a specific combination of acting loads, which can be purely 
thermal, mechanical, chemical or a combination of these, which result in a state 
of surface/sub-surface properties. This is contrary to the definition used tradition­
ally for machining processes where milling is a purely mechanical process or 
EDM is a thermal process. As per the “process signature” concept, milling is a 
combination of mechanical and thermal loads and EDM imposes thermal, pres­
sure and chemical loads on the workpiece. Similarly, for the cutting processes 
with chemically active coolants or chemical assisted vibratory grinding, all three 
material loads can be simultaneously active, and the process is placed in the cen­
ter of the triangle (Figure 1.9).
FIGURE 1.9  Mechanism-based classification of modern machining processes. (Redrawn 
from Klink et al. INSECT 2019, Germany [12].)

17
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
1.2.3  Ultraprecision-Driven Machining
As defined by Ametek Precitech®, the term ‘ultraprecision’ in general refers to mul-
tiple aspects, including machining tolerances in the order of single-digit µm/sub-
µm range, surface roughness (Ra) in nanometer range, machine precision levels of 
sub-nanometer range, workpiece positioning accuracies of 1 micrometer linear and 
±2 arc-sec, sub-micrometer range form accuracy. It also sometimes refers to near-
atomic scale or sub-grain level tolerances and/or features on components.
For ultraprecision machining, the machine design has to focus not just on 
machining but also on active control, monitoring and diagnosis. The driving 
industries for ultraprecision machining are optical freeform surfaces, aspheric 
lenses, Fresnel lenses, high-quality micro-lens arrays, metrology equipment and 
gauges, components for high-precision motion stages and bearings, components 
for precision surgery equipment, diffraction gratings, mirrors for large telescopes 
and equipment for semiconductor industry, especially for USLI and biomedical 
microarrays. Figure 1.10(a) depicts the tolerance pyramid giving an overview of 
the tolerance range for a wide range of machining technologies and Figure 1.10(b) 
depicts some of the examples of optical components produced by ultraprecision 
machining technologies. In order to satisfy the ultraprecision specifications, 
highly specialized and dedicated processes as shown in Figure 1.11 are needed to 
manufacture corresponding molds or directly machine the surfaces. Some of the 
popular ultraprecision machining processes are discussed later.
1.	Fast tool servo (FTS) machining: FTS turning uses a set of micro-feed 
servo systems with high frequency response, stiffness and positioning 
accuracy to directly generate freeform surfaces using monocrystalline 
diamond cutting tools. Modern machines can achieve up to 40 g’s of 
peak acceleration and 500 Hz frequency.
2.	Ultrasonic-assisted milling/grinding: This process employs an ultra-
sonic transducer (piezoelectric ceramic/magneto-strictive), which con-
verts high-frequency electrical energy into high-frequency mechanical 
FIGURE 1.10  (a) Tolerance pyramid for different types of machining processes. (b) 
Examples of the features produced by ultra-precision machining techniques for optical 
components. (RUNSOM).

18
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
vibrations that are transmitted to the cutting tool. The trajectory of the 
cutting tool relative to the workpiece is thus a sine curve with periodic 
reciprocating motion causing continuous workpiece engaging/disengag­
ing with the tool at high vibration frequency (>20 kHz). This technol­
ogy can alter the removal mechanisms at the fundamental level and thus 
finds applications in machining of quartz glass, zirconia, potassium 
dihydrogen phosphate (KDP) crystal, sapphire crystal, high-perfor­
mance ceramics, composites, etc. The process offers material-specific 
processing advantages such as reduction in cutting forces, improvement 
of surface quality, reduction in sub-surface cracks and shift toward duc­
tile removal mechanisms of ceramics.
3.	Electrolytic inline dressing (ELID) grinding: ELID process was first 
proposed in Japan by Hitoshi Ohmori [15]. This process can ensure nano­
metric surface finish on hard and brittle materials including ceramics by 
in-process trueing and dressing the fine-grained metal-bonded grinding 
wheel via anodic dissolution of the metal binder so as to expose fresh 
grains and ensure constant surface roughness throughout the process. 
During electrolytic dressing, a metal oxide (passivation) layer starts to 
form and this prevents excessive dissolution of the metal bond and offers 
a control on dressing depth.
4.	Power skiving: With the growing market for electric vehicles (EVs) and 
wind turbines, research on skiving has revived for high volume, high qual­
ity, and fast machining of mostly internal gears for planetary gearboxes 
as an alternative process to broaching and gear shaping. In this process, 
the tool (pinion) meshes with the workpiece gear during cutting and axial 
FIGURE 1.11  Schematic overview of processes employed for ultraprecision machining.

19
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
feed of the tool (pinion) is performed. The cutting speed is generated by 
the inclination between the axis of the gear being manufactured and the 
axis of the tool (pinion). It uses specific tools for each gear type with high-
speed synchronized rotation of the tool and workpiece for less backlash, 
better tooth profile control and increased productivity. The pre-turning 
and toothing operations are performed in one clamping operation. The 
process can machine various types of gears, such as spur, helical and inter­
nal gears; however, the process has limited capability in producing gears 
with modules less than 1.5 and diameters higher than 400 mm.
5.	Fly cutting: Fly cutting process is used on milling machines to machine 
large and flat surface areas. The process involves the use of a single 
or two single-crystal diamond inserts and can produce complex surface 
structures by combination of spindle rotation with a raster tool path. 
The process comes in both horizontal and vertical axis configurations. 
The resulting surface topography is a result of relative motion between 
tool-workpiece, deformation of the material and separation of material 
with tool geometry. The resulting surface features include tool marks, 
material swelling, vibration/motion-induced waviness, material pile-up 
and surface defects [16].
1.2.4  Functionality-Oriented Machining
The term ‘functionality-oriented machining’ refers to achieving material removal 
while simultaneously achieving the intended functionality of the produced part. 
This can be achieved by using machining technologies such as laser machin­
ing, ECM, water-jet machining or by adopting newer configurations and process 
settings for milling and EDM processes. Some of the examples of functionality-
oriented machining are discussed later.
1.	Machining of shape memory alloys: In case of machining shape mem­
ory alloys, the goal is to shape the material without affecting the shape 
memory property. Therefore, the goal is to minimize the thermal transi­
tions of the austenite and martensite phases [17].
2.	Machining of superconductors: Machining of ceramic high-temperature 
superconductors requires preservation of perovskite-like structures and 
prevents exposure of the material to thermal effects, chemicals, heavy 
ion irradiation and mechanical forces.
3.	Electrical machining to generate electro-plasticity effects: It has been 
observed that application of electric current or electric charge causes 
a change in the microstructure or mechanical properties of metallic 
materials, especially an increase in elongation. This property is known 
as electroplasticity [18]. Electrical machining and polishing techniques 
involve flow of current through the workpiece, therefore martensitic 
transformation has been observed during electrochemical polishing of 
metastable austenitic stainless steel [18].

20
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
4.	Surface structuring of battery electrodes: Functionality-oriented surface 
structuring of battery electrodes using ultrashort pulsed lasers is gaining 
importance. Here, the goal is to perform structuring of electrodes so as 
to improve the adhesion strength between the active material and the 
metallic current collector. The functionality of laser-textured electrodes 
is more pronounced for higher-energy-density active materials such as 
silicon [19].
5.	Machining while retaining sub-surface properties: Several industries 
such as aerospace and biomedical require preservation of sub-surface 
properties in order to pass the certifications for commercial use. This 
limits the application of force- or thermal-based machining technologies. 
Therefore, thermal and non-contact processes such as ECM are gain­
ing traction for specific industries. Recently, ECM has been researched 
for post-processing of EDMed surfaces in order to remove the EDMed 
recast layer, thereby preserving subsurface integrity [20].
6.	Machining to evaluate crystallographic texture: Traditionally, machin­
ing has been employed to remove material, but recently it has been 
demonstrated that controlled material removal through an electrically 
excited electrochemical jet can reveal crystallographic texture or large 
area orientation maps of the material [21]. This is a particularly innova­
tive solution that can be applied to the machine in contrast to tradition­
ally used electron backscatter diffraction techniques requiring extensive 
sample preparation.
1.2.5  Quest for Nanomachining and Downscaling 
the Machining Processes
The quest for nanomachining has been driven by the development of nano/
sub-µm-dimensional devices, features and structures that are of great scientific 
interest due to fundamental phenomena (size effect, atomic forces, surface ten­
sion, capillary actions, high surface-to-volume ratios, etc.) arising at the atomic/
sub-atomic level. Some of the developments in the nanomachining field are dis­
cussed later.
1.	AFM/STM tip-based nanomachining: The resolution of material removal 
depends on the contact area of tool or process energy and workpiece, 
irrespective of the process type. Hence, the tool cutting edge and primary 
force/energy distribution over the workpiece surface need to be smaller 
than the required feature size. This has led to the need for specialized 
AFM tip-based and localized process energy techniques to realize sub-
micrometer to nanometer scale machining outside of costly cleanroom 
processes, especially for electronics, precision optics, energy storage, 
drug delivery and biomedical applications. The AFM/STM-based tips 
have been utilized for nano-milling (Figure 1.12(a)), nano-EDM, nano-
ECM (Figure 1.12(b)) and nano-scratching of different workpieces.

21
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
2.	Ion-beam nanomachining: Focused ion beam machining (Figure 1.12(c)) 
uses a stream of high-velocity ions (e.g. Ga+), respectively, focused into 
a narrow beam to melt or vaporize the material for milling or drilling 
highly localized µm to sub-µm scale features.
3.	Laser based nano-manufacturing: In the field of laser-based nano-
manufacturing, this includes use of laser micromachining to fabricate 
surface nanostructures, synthesis of nanoparticles, nanofluidic devices 
and nanomaterials. This field is under extensive research and needs 
developments in ultrashort pulsed lasers, shorter wavelengths, dedicated 
optics and photonic aspects.
1.2.6  Multiscale Machining
Multiscale machining often refers to multiscale surface texturing and is inspired 
by biological microstructures (Figure 1.13(a–c)). It has revolutionized the way we 
design and control surfaces at the macro- and microscopic levels. The combina­
tion of different biomimetic textures, like the super-hydrophobicity (lotus-leaf 
inspired), light scattering structural coloration (peacock feather inspired), adhe­
sion in different environments and on different surfaces (Gecko-foot inspired), 
antireflection transparency, etc., with different length scales (mm–nm) on the 
same surface, can improve performance and impart various functionalities to 
materials. For instance, cutting tool life can be improved by retaining lubricant 
in oleophilic patches and improving chip flow over the structured patch walls. 
Multiscale machining hybridizes the process chains of shape processing and 
multiscale surface texturing using the same setup and tool, which increases pro­
ductivity and precision as the complete part is machined and textured simulta­
neously. Various machining processes have been/are being adapted by coupling 
process energies, devising machining strategies and designing tools with 
complex features to achieve multiscale machining. Well-known examples shown 
in Figure 1.13(d) include laser-induced periodic surface structure (LIPSS) with 
laser ablation, customized jet-based ECM, customized/textured tool-based ECM 
and EDM and ultrasonic elliptical vibration milling. The requirements on large 
FIGURE 1.12  Process schematics of (a) AFM tip-based nano-milling (b) nano-ECM 
and (c) ion beam machining.

22
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
area and three-dimensional surface texturing have resulted in the development 
of multi-axis and multi-wavelength laser machine-tools (Figure 1.13(e)), thereby 
leveraging the laboratory results into industrial applications.
1.2.7  Polishing and Post-Processing
Surface polishing is a necessary process for ensuring the optical properties of mirrors 
and lenses as well as the tribological, wear and fatigue properties of mechanical parts 
and biomedical implants. Grinding is a standard process for flat and hard surfaces, 
but for brittle materials and complex freeform surfaces with different size scales (cm–
µm), additional tools and automated process controls are needed. Furthermore, the 
rough surfaces and internal structures generated by AM require post-processing to 
remove surface defects, smoothen surface and improve fatigue properties. Figure 1.14 
gives a pictorial overview of different polishing and post-processing technologies. A 
summary of the process principles is discussed in the following points.
1.	Shape adaptive grinding/Bonnet polishing: It is a typical compliant 
shape adaptive grinding/polishing technique for freeform surfaces as the 
tool can passively match the part shape, which can help avoid rigid tool 
contact-induced subsurface damage in glass. The polishing pad of the 
bonnet tool can be adapted for high-hardness and brittle ceramic materi­
als by adding rigid metallic and resin pellets with diamond abrasives.
2.	Multi-jet polishing: This can polish complex surfaces by employing a nozzle 
with multiple jets of high-pressure water with abrasive slurry to reach sharp 
FIGURE 1.13  Multiscale surface microstructures on (a) peacock feather at 500× (Waldo 
Nell). (b) Lotus leaf and (c) gecko foot [22]. (d) Hybridized process chain for simultaneous 
shaping and texturing of features with varying size scales. (e) A commercial 5-axis laser 
texturing machine for freeform and large-area surface texturing (Lightmotif).

23
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
corners and inaccessible sites. Although these processes provide nanometric 
surface quality, their applications are limited to the part surface.
3.	Magnetic field-assisted polishing: This is a flexible technique as it uses a 
magnetic abrasive brush to easily adapt to the complex shape of the parts 
passing through it, as well as slide into open internal structures to polish 
a wide range of materials.
4.	Dry electropolishing is suitable for surface and open internal structures 
polishing for conductive ionizable materials, which uses chamber-filled 
damp soft granules under an applied voltage.
5.	Electropolishing and plasma electrolytic polishing (PeP): It is used for 
electrically conductive materials can also simultaneously polish surfaces 
and internal structures, including blind holes, by immersing parts in a 
specialized electrolyte bath or using a localized jet with an applied volt­
age, making them suitable for AM parts. Furthermore, PeP generates a 
plasma film around/inside the part where the material removal occurs 
through plasma-physical and EC reactions.
6.	Even with the large inventory of available polishing techniques, the 
post-processing of long complex internal structures and blind channels 
of AM parts remains a challenge. Specialized techniques and compliant 
tools are being developed to crawl into the internal structures and the 
research is expected to mature in the coming years.
1.2.8  Bio-machining
The ongoing trend for greener manufacturing practices has resulted in a biological trans­
formation of manufacturing where the manufacturing technologies are considering the 
use of microorganisms to fulfil machining objectives. Two of the machining practices 
(Figure 1.15) under bio-machining research are summarized later.
FIGURE 1.14  Process principles of advanced polishing techniques.

24
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
1.	Microbial-based cutting fluids: The microbial-based cutting fluids are 
being developed to address the sustainability issues with the mineral 
oil cutting fluids [23]. The selection of strains of bacteria (e.g. Spirulina 
platensis) for cutting fluids is based on the lubrication potential.
2.	Bio-machining with specialized bacteria: The term bio-machining refers 
to a controlled and selective micro-scale removal of workpieces by micro­
organisms. The removal mechanisms involve direct and indirect contact 
of bacteria with the metal. In direct bio-machining, the bacteria stay in 
contact with the metal through an enzyme and removal is achieved through 
oxidation and dissolution. In indirect bio-machining, the bacteria are not 
in direct contact with the metal and metal dissolution is accomplished 
by an intermediate redox reaction (e.g. Fe+2/Fe+3). The process has been 
demonstrated on oxygen-free copper [5]. Some of the microorganisms used 
in bio-machining are Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Acidithiobacillus 
thiooxidans, Bacillus sp. and Aspergillus niger. One of the major limita­
tions of the process is the lack of constant removal speed.
1.2.9  Sustainable Machining
While developing novel machining strategies, techniques and tools for difficult-
to-machine advanced materials and miniature features, it is imperative to con­
sider sustainability aspects while devising solutions to protect the environment, 
operator and machine tool. Dedicated research is being conducted but is some­
times overlooked when new processing techniques are proposed. Some key points 
that should be considered are listed later (Figure 1.16):
1.	Easy to source, recyclable and environmentally friendly materials should 
be considered for tooling where large volume production is needed.
2.	Rare and toxic tool materials should only be used where tools do not 
wear or have a long lifetime with low/no availability of alternatives.
3.	Energy and resource consumption of hybrid variants should be mea­
sured. Although it is not straightforward for non-contact and hybrid 
machining processes, some indicative parameters would still be helpful.
FIGURE 1.15  Bio-machining principles.

25
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes
4.	Novel machining techniques should try to minimize/replace usage of 
aggressive and toxic reagents for electrolytes and cooling liquids to 
reduce machine tool wear and safeguard human health, without com­
promising machining performance. If aggressive reagents are necessary, 
they should be efficiently recycled and treated before disposal to reduce 
their associated hazards.
5.	The handling/recycling of the machined waste is an important aspect 
that is lacking for non-contact processes in both industry and academia 
such as ECM and EDM, where the exact nature and composition of by-
products is not always known. With new materials, this issue is further 
magnified and needs dedicated research for investigating the proper­
ties and composition of by-products through advanced spectroscopy 
and metallographic techniques for appropriate disposal and material 
recycling.
1.3  CONCLUSIONS
Toward the beginning of year 2024, the number of scientific literatures has grown 
to 195,501 articles as reflected in the Scopus search with the term ‘machining’, 
thereby highlighting the continuous advancements in machining technology as a 
forefront of high-tech manufacturing. To summarize the modern developments, 
this chapter presents an overview of advanced machining processes involving 
both mechanical and multiphysical processing principles. The contents of this 
chapter are based on modern viewpoints regarding machining while consider­
ing their applications and global industry motivators. The associated fundamen­
tals have been briefly summarized while shedding light on aspects of precision, 
miniaturization, high-speed and processing of ‘difficult-to-cut’ and ‘functional’ 
materials. This blend of diverse perspectives is designed to bring new research­
ers up to speed with the current trends in the vast machining field and stimulate 
experts to contemplate the development of novel machining strategies, process 
FIGURE 1.16  Aspects of sustainable machining.

26
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
hybridization and techniques for leveraging multi-disciplinary knowledge in 
order to keep pace with the advanced industrial needs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge funding support from Research Foundation 
Flanders (FWO) senior research project fundamental research G099420N, post­
doctoral mandate 12ZZ622N, long research stay award V425622N and FWO-
China exchange project award VS02123N.
REFERENCES	
1.	 Jerman M, Orbanić H, Lebar A, Sabotin I, Dreśar P, Valentinčič J. Measuring
the water temperature changes in Ice abrasive water jet prototype. Procedia Eng
2016;149:163–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2016.06.651.	
2.	 Wilhelmi O, Reyntjens S, Van Leer B, Anzalone PA, Giannuzzi LA. Focused Ion
and Electron Beam Techniques, UK: William Andrew, Applied Science Publisher;
2010. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-8155-1594-4.00020-6.	
3.	 Kanaoka M, Nomura K, Yamauchi K, Mori Y. Efficiency-enhanced elastic emission 
machining on the basis of processing mechanism. Proc 12th Int Conf Eur Soc Precis 
Eng Nanotechnology, EUSPEN 2012 2012;2:193–6.	
4.	 Zhao W, Gu L, Xu H, Li L, Xiang X. A novel high efficiency electrical erosion
process - Blasting erosion arc machining. Procedia CIRP 2013;6:621–5. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.procir.2013.03.057.	
5.	 Díaz-Tena E, Barona A, Gallastegui G, Rodríguez A, López de Lacalle LN,
Elías A. Biomachining: Metal etching via microorganisms. Crit Rev Biotechnol
2017;37:323–32. https://doi.org/10.3109/07388551.2016.1144046.	
6.	 Zhang Z, Cheung CF, Wang C, Ho LT, Guo J. Restraint of the mid-spatial frequency 
error on optical surfaces by multi-jet polishing. Opt Express 2022;30:46307. https://
doi.org/10.1364/oe.473235.	
7.	 Saxena KK, Qian J, Reynaerts D. A tool-based hybrid laser-electrochemical micro­
machining process: Experimental investigations and synergistic effects. Int J Mach
Tools Manuf 2020;155:103569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2020.103569.	
8.	 Taniguchi N. Current status in, and future trends of, ultraprecision machining and
ultrafine materials processing. CIRP Ann 1983;32:573–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0007-8506(07)60185-1.	
9.	 Toenshoff HK, Denkena B. Basics of Cutting and Abrasive Processes. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2013. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
33257-9.	
10.	 Liu K, Waumans T, Peirs J, Reynaerts D. Precision manufacturing of key com­
ponents for an ultra miniature gas turbine unit for power generation. Microsyst
Technol 2009;15:1417–25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00542-009-0897-z.	
11.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.	
12.	 Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in electrochemical discharge machining:
A review on electrochemical discharge machining, process variants and their
hybrid methods. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 2016;105:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijmachtools.2016.03.004.

27
Introduction and Overview of Advanced Machining Processes	
13.	 Klink A, et al. Mechanism-based classification of electrochemical machining pro­
cesses. Int Symp Electrochem Mach Technol, Saarbrücken; 2019, p. 166–71.	
14.	 Brinksmeier E, Gläbe R, Klocke F, Lucca DA. Process signatures - an alternative
approach to predicting functional workpiece properties. Procedia Eng 2011;19:44–
52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2011.11.078.	
15.	 Ohmori H, Nakagawa T. Analysis of mirror surface generation of hard and brittle
materials by ELID (electronic in-process dressing) grinding with superfine grain
metallic bond wheels. CIRP Ann - Manuf Technol 1995;44:287–90. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0007-8506(07)62327-0.	
16.	 To S, Wang S. Fly Cutting Technology for Ultra-precision Machining. Singapore:
Springer Nature Singapore; 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-0738-0.	
17.	 Saxena KK, Hazak Arshad M, Van Maele S, Qian J, Reynaerts D. Electrochemical
micromachining of actuator-grade nitinol shape memory alloy with and without laser 
assistance. Manuf Lett 2021;30:5–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mfglet.2021.09.004.	
18.	 Gwon H, Chae J, Jeong C, Lee H, Kim DH, Anaman SY, et al. Martensitic trans­
formation during electrochemical polishing of metastable austenitic stainless steel.
Acta Mater 2023;245:118612. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2022.118612.	
19.	 Romoli L, Lutey AHA, Lazzini G. Laser texturing of Li-ion battery electrode current 
collectors for improved active layer interface adhesion. CIRP Ann 2022;71:481–4.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2022.04.034.	
20.	 Nakano S, Kunieda M, Saito D, Kurokawa T, Yuzawa T. Wire electrochemical
finishing of wire electrical discharge machined surface of highly alloyed materials
with insoluble precipitates. J Mater Process Technol 2023;313:117863. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2023.117863.	
21.	 Speidel A, Bisterov I, Ahmed S, Clare AT. Ambient grain orientation imaging on
complex surfaces. Acta Mater 2024;265:119604. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.
2023.119604.	
22.	 E. Stratakis et al. Laser engineering of biomimetic surfaces. Mater Sci Eng R
Reports 2020:141;100562. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mser.2020.100562.	
23.	 Teti R, D’Addona DM, Segreto T. Microbial-based cutting fluids as bio-integration
manufacturing solution for green and sustainable machining. CIRP J Manuf Sci
Technol 2021;32:16–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2020.09.016.

28
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-2
Introduction and 
Overview of Hybrid 
Machining Processes
Sahil Sharma and Akshay Dvivedi
AMP Lab, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India
2.1  INTRODUCTION
Hybrid machining processes (HMP) are the backbone of the modern manufacturing 
industries. The working principle “1 + 1 = 3” of this approach demonstrates how 
integrating different processes in a single setup can lead to more than double the 
benefits of the individual processes [1, 2]. These benefits include reduced machin­
ing time, cost-effectiveness, better accuracy and precision, automatic process 
integration and good machining ability through enhanced process synergy. This 
makes hybrid machining an ideal choice for machining difficult-to-machine 
(DTM) materials. According to Schuh et al. [3] and Roderburg et al. [4], the term 
“hybrid machining” can be described in three different ways:
1.	Processes in which the simultaneous and controlled interaction of 
different energies in the machining zone takes place (for instance, 
ultrasonic-assisted and laser-assisted electrochemical machining and 
electrochemical spark machining process).
2.	Processes that include the combination of different machining steps 
within one machining cycle (such as simultaneous electrochemical and 
electrodischarge machining process and tandem machining).
3.	System that includes the sequential or parallel machining of components 
within a single machine platform (like compound machining system).
Therefore, hybrid machining simplifies the machining of materials by inte­
grating various elements such as different processes, machining steps or systems 
within a single system for machining challenging materials. This integrating-
machining approach has recently gained significant attention. The network visu­
alization performed using VOSviewer software highlights the most relevant terms 
associated with hybrid machining. These terms clubbed into different clusters, as 
shown in Figure 2.1, illustrate the vast network and application areas of hybrid 
machining, including the machining of different materials, process parameters 
and various types of hybrid machining.
2

29
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid Machining Processes
2.2  NEED, DESIGN METHODOLOGY AND OPTIMIZATION 
FUNDAMENTAL FOR HYBRID MACHINING
Conventional machining systems, which include the interaction between the 
input process variables and desired outputs, can be understood through the cause-
and-effect chain model presented by Klocke et al. [5]. According to this model, 
the conventional machining system can be divided into two submodels namely 
interaction and impact. The interaction model, which is technology-specific, rep­
resents the interaction between the tool and the workpiece in which the transmu­
tation of energies takes place. For instance, the tool’s/workpiece’s kinetic energy 
converts into thermal and mechanical energies. These transmuted energies, also 
known as process characteristics, are helpful in explaining the machining sys­
tem without needing thorough information about the input process parameters. 
In contrast to the interaction model, the impact model is technology-unspecific, 
which specifies the effect of process characteristics on machining outcomes such 
as productivity, tool wear and surface quality of machined features. To achieve 
the best results, modern research primarily focuses on the optimum utilization of 
single processes either by changing the process parameters or modifying the tool 
specifications, as depicted in Figure 2.2(a) (upper part).
FIGURE 2.1  Co-occurrence diagram depicting the relevant terms associated with 
hybrid machining.

30
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
These approaches improved the machining results to some extent but are 
lacking in bringing radical changes in the technology. To tackle this issue, the 
integration of external energies with the conventional single machining opera­
tion was formulated, resulting in hybridization (Figure 2.2(a) (lower part)). The 
external energy is selected on the basis of its interaction with the main mate­
rial removal process. The integration of these external energies in combined or 
assisted forms is beneficial in reducing the process chain and realization of bet­
ter machining results by means of simultaneous process synergy compared to 
the conventional method (Figure 2.2(b)). The development of a hybrid machin­
ing system includes several interdependent steps that are as follows: Initially, 
mechanist analysis is performed to understand the involved process mecha­
nism, its capabilities and interaction with the workpiece. Based on that, the 
cause and effect of poor machining results are investigated, and subsequently, 
a complementary process or external energy source is selected, which assists 
the main material removal process. The compatibility of the complementary 
process with the prime machining process and their synchronization is real­
ized before finalizing the hybridization system. Thereafter, the verification of 
the involved process integration and their positive influence on the workpiece 
FIGURE 2.2  Various aspects of the hybrid machining system, including comparative 
analysis, benefits and design methodology [5]. (a) Comparison of conventional optimization 
with interdisciplinary effect of process hybridization. (b) Benefits of hybridization. 
(c) Design methodology for hybrid process.

31
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid Machining Processes
is conducted. This entire design methodology, including the abovementioned 
steps, is outlined in Figure 2.2(c).
2.3  CLASSIFICATION OF HYBRID MACHINING PROCESSES
Hybrid machining processes integrate various machining processes into a uni­
fied process or system. Based on this, the HMP can be classified and represented 
according to the integration of different processes/energies and by the execution 
timing of the integrated processes, respectively, as shown in Figure 2.3(a–c). In 
terms of integration, the HMP can be categorized into duplex HMP and triplex 
HMP. Duplex HMP integrates two different processes in either a combined or 
assisted manner. In the combined form, the integrated processes work simultane­
ously. In contrast, in assisted HMP, one process serves as the prime governing 
process responsible for shaping the material, while the other process assists in 
improving the overall machining outcomes. Triplex HMP is an advanced version 
of the duplex HMP, where more than two different energy sources are integrated 
into a single platform, offering better results than duplex HMP. The various pro­
cesses associated with the aforementioned HMP methods are categorically illus­
trated in Figure 2.3(b), while their percentage contribution to the literature is 
depicted in Figure 2.3(c). The representation of these HMP processes w.r.t time 
execution (Figure 2.3(a)) reveals their principle mechanism. For example, mixed 
(or combined) and assisted HMP processes operate on simultaneous and con­
trolled interaction concepts. This contrasts with sequential processes, where asso­
ciated processes are executed in a predefined order.
FIGURE 2.3  (a) Representation of HMP w.r.t time. (b) Classification of HMP w.r.t pro­
cesses integration. (c) Percentage contribution of various HMP processes in literature.

32
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
2.4  LITERATURE REVIEW IN DUPLEX HMP
Duplex HMP includes combined and assisted types of HMP processes. The lit­
erature work conducted on these variants of HMP is provided as follows.
2.4.1  Combined duplex HMP
2.4.1.1  Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
Electrochemical discharge machining (ECDM) is a thermal-based process that 
integrates the thermal erosion of EDM with the simultaneous finishing of ECM 
into a single process. It works on the principle of machining work material 
through spark discharges produced by the eruption of dielectric gas film, which 
isolates the cathode surface from the electrolyte [6]. As shown in Figure 2.4(a) 
(upper part), the process initiates with the application of DC power source to 
the working electrodes, leading to the formation of an isolated gas film around 
FIGURE 2.4  Illustration of different machining process mechanisms and their capa­
bilities. (a) Principle mechanism and fabricated features SEM image using ECDM. (b) 
Principle mechanism and fabricated feature’s SEM image using SECDM. (c) Principle 
mechanism of cathodic plasma in EJM with SEM images of  fabricated features [8–10].

33
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid Machining Processes
the tool electrode due to electrochemical reactions. Over time, spark discharges 
emerge from the periphery of the tool electrode, disrupting the gas film due to 
the intense electric field generation. These discharges locally remove the work 
material, thereby determining the shape of the machined feature. In addition to 
this, the subsequent electrochemical reactions eliminate discharge marks through 
high-temperature chemical etching. However, complete removal of thermal 
defects, particularly when using water-based electrolytes, is not possible, result­
ing in the fabrication of features with thermal defects [7]. This phenomenon was 
thoroughly investigated by Han et al. [8], who proposed a novel glycol-based elec­
trolyte for ECDM processing. This electrolyte was observed to produce a stable 
thin gas layer, resulting in the formation of recast layer-free microfeatures in vari­
ous metallic materials. Figure 2.4(a) (lower part) compares the surface condition 
of a fabricated microslit using water-based and glycol-based electrolytes. The slit 
fabricated using glycol-electrolyte exhibited no recast layer, high precision and 
excellent surface quality with a roughness value (Ra) of 0.2 µm.
2.4.1.2  Simultaneous Micro-EDM and Micro-ECM
Simultaneous micro-EDM and micro-ECM (SEDCM) is a specialized hybrid 
machining process that utilizes the ability of deionized water to produce spark 
discharges and anodic dissolution simultaneously within a single operation. The 
principle mechanism illustrated in Figure 2.4(b) (upper part) depicts how the EDM 
and ECM actions are synchronized within a single milling operation. Initially, the 
material is machined through spark erosions when the tool and workpiece gap 
reach the critical value. As the gap width expands beyond this critical value due 
to continuous sparks, electrochemical reactions dissolve the crater marks from 
the machined surface. The tool is continually fed toward the workpiece, and the 
machining sequence of EDM and ECM executes at each layer until the microfea­
ture of the desired depth is achieved. This novel method was proposed by Nguyen 
et al. [9], who demonstrated the capabilities of SEDCM in achieving high dimen­
sional accuracy and excellent surface integrity by fabricating microfeatures with 
a surface roughness of about 22 nm Ra. Figure 2.4(b) (lower part) compares the 
surface integrity of the feature fabricated through EDM and SEDCM processes, 
highlighting the improved surface quality achieved with the SEDCM process.
2.4.1.3  Cathodic Plasma Enabled Electrochemical Jet Machining
Electrochemical jet machining (EJM) recently gained substantial attention due 
to its ability to machine exotic and hard materials without thermal damage or 
mechanical stresses. The production of burr-free machined components with 
excellent surface integrity makes it a superior process compared to other existing 
processes. However, the small material removal rate offered by EJM restricts its 
suitability for industrial applications. Cathodic plasma-enabled EJM is a popu­
lar variant that enhances the machining rate of EJM by achieving high current 
density through high electrical power. To investigate the origination and influ­
ence of cathodic plasma during plasma-enabled EJM machining, Zhan et al. [10] 
conducted a thorough study using high-speed photography, electrical monitoring 

34
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
and characterization techniques. The cathodic plasma observed at high electricity 
(≥200 V) was found to thermally promote the anodic dissolution rate, improve the 
local surface roughness and diminish the stray corrosion ring, as shown in Figure 
2.4(c). A notably improved machined surface with a roughness of 210 nm Ra and 
a 40% reduction in surface roughness compared to EJM alone was demonstrated 
during microgroove fabrication using plasma-enabled EJM.
2.4.2  Assisted duplex HMP
2.4.2.1  Laser-assisted HMP Process
The assistance of a laser in the noncontact machining process helps to attain high 
MRR, better-machined surface integrity and precision. For example, the assistance 
of a laser along with EJM facilitates controlled workpiece dissolution through 
improved reaction kinetics, increased current density and higher electrolyte con­
ductivity. Saxena et al. [11] thoroughly investigated the fundamentals of this pro­
cess during blind hole fabrication in Inconel 718 material. Two distinctive zones 
were identified: the inner central zone depicting the laser-assisted ECM surface 
and the outer zone corresponding to the high-density ECM surface (Figure 2.5(a)). 
In the inner zone, the synchronization action of laser melting and ECM processing 
was identified, leading to the material removal with the preferential dissolution of 
the Nb-rich phase. In this zone, the energy of the electrolyte jet (Ej) and the laser 
beam energy (Eb) were the primary factors responsible for material removal with 
Ej as prime material removal governing energy, as expressed in Equation (2.1):
	
 
( ) ( )
( )
2
0∫
=
σ
E
U
t A t
g t
dt
j
tm
	
(2.1)
here U, t, σ, g, A and tm are applied voltage, time, electrolyte conductivity, machin­
ing area, interelectrode gap and machining time, respectively.
The laser beam energy (Eb) was considered to follow Gaussian distribution and 
expressed as Equation (2.2):
	
 
exp(
)
2
0∫
=
−
E
P f
kr
t dt
b
l
tm
	
(2.2)
here f, Pl, r, k and t are the frequency of laser pulse, laser power, laser spot radius, 
concentration factor and time, respectively.
The outer surface was found to mirror the high current density ECM processed 
surface. This was attributed to the increase in current density (J) and electrolyte 
temperature due to heat generation through a laser beam.
	
J
exp
E
RT
a
ζ β
=
−




 
 
	
(2.3)

35
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid Machining Processes
here ζ, Ea, R, β, and T correspond to the anode process constant, activation energy, 
gas constant, concentration constant and temperature, respectively.
Additionally, a higher oxygen content was observed in the central zone com­
pared to the outer zone, which signifies the occurrence of a high-temperature 
oxidation phenomenon during laser-assisted EJM.
FIGURE 2.5  Schematic illustration of (a) laser-assisted EJM [11, 12]. (b) Ultrasonic-
assisted ECG [13] processes mechanism with machined features.

36
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
2.4.2.2  Ultrasonic-assisted HMP Process
The application of ultrasonic vibration in the noncontact machining process 
leads to achieving better machining outcomes by improving flushing efficiency, 
removing machined by-products, enhancing surface quality with a low HAZ and 
increasing precision through electrolyte circulation. Ultrasonic-assisted electro­
chemical grinding (UA-ECG) is a notable compound hybrid process that utilizes 
small amplitude vibrations of the tool or workpiece to achieve precise holes with 
smooth machined characteristics. Conventional ECG can fabricate microfeatures 
with a good material removal rate but often results in inconsistent machined fea­
tures due to the poor synchronization between electrochemical dissolution and 
mechanical grinding. Zhu et al. [13] observed that during hole fabrication when 
the electrochemical action dominates over grinding, the microholes typically 
have rounded edges and surfaces covered with pitting corrosion. Conversely, 
when grinding dominates over electrochemical action, the holes exhibit sharp 
edges with significant scratch marks on the machined surfaces. Poor removal of 
machining by-products, such as bubbles and machined debris, was identified as a 
cause of suboptimal machining performance. To tackle this issue, the researchers 
incorporated tool vibration with the ECG, proposing the UA-ECG process. Using 
5 µm amplitude tool vibrations, microholes with a diameter of 1.1 + 0.01 mm, 
reduced edge rounding, machined surface roughness of 0.31 µm and a taper angle 
less than 0.6 degrees were fabricated. The mechanism of the proposed UA-ECG 
with comparative analysis of machined surfaces obtained via different process 
mechanisms is illustrated in Figure 2.5(b).
2.4.2.3  Magnetic Field-Assisted HMP Process
Magnetic field assistance, particularly in noncontact machining processes such as 
EDM, significantly enhances machining efficiency, improves surface quality and 
reduces the chances of short-circuiting and arcing by removing debris. Electric 
discharge machining (EDM) is a thermal erosion process where the spark origi­
nating from a plasma channel determines the geometry of the microfeature. The 
intense heat energy from this plasma melts and vaporizes the work material at 
the desired location, thereby altering the surface characteristics of the machined 
features. This alteration results in undesirable surface features including re-
solidified materials, HAZ exhibiting nonuniform layers, globules, thermal cracks 
and ridge surfaces. To improve the EDMed outcomes, Govindan et al. [14] inves­
tigated the impact of a single pulse EDM process under dry and liquid conditions. 
Furthermore, their findings led to the proposal of the fundamental theory of mag­
netic field-assisted EDM (MF-EDM). It was deduced that an external magnetic 
field in EDM enhances the ionization process and reduces the electron’s mean 
free path in the plasma channel. Consequently, this external magnetic field, along 
with the self-magnetic field, induces the Lorentz forces toward the plasma center, 
thereby confining the diameter of the plasma channel, as shown in Figure 2.6(a).
The confinement results in the formation of craters with reduced diameter 
but increased depth. As illustrated in Figure 2.6(b), MF-EDM in dry conditions 

37
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid Machining Processes
demonstrated an 81% reduction in crater diameter and a 27% increment in depth 
compared to dry-EDM without a magnetic field. Similarly, 67% and 37% reduc­
tions in crater size and increment in crater depth, respectively, were observed 
compared to liquid-EDM without a magnetic field.
FIGURE 2.6  (a) Schematic of process mechanism of MF-EDM. (b) SEM images of craters 
formed under different machining conditions [14].

38
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
2.4.3  Triplex HMP
Triplex-based HMP process integrates three different process mechanisms into 
a single operation that eliminates the drawback associated with the duplex HMP 
process. For instance, ECDM is a duplex thermal-based process that offers better 
results than independent EDM and ECM. However, the production of components 
consisting of thermal cracks, heat-affected zones (HAZ), irregular machined 
edges, feather-like nonuniform surfaces and redeposited debris on machined 
surfaces are some drawbacks of this process that require further improvement 
[15, 16]. To tackle these issues, researchers proposed triplex-based HMP methods, 
which are described as follows.
2.4.3.1  Grinding Assisted ECDM Based triplex HMP
Grinding-assisted ECDM (GA-ECDM) combines the material softening effects 
of electrochemical action with the scraping effect of grinding into a unified 
operation to machine hard and brittle materials such as glass. Machining such 
materials through mechanical grinding tends to produce features with wavy and 
cracked edges, fractured surfaces and mechanical scratch marks. Conversely, 
ECDM machining often leads to stray cutting and edge softening with HAZ due 
to the high-temperature material removal phenomenon. Consequently, ECDMed 
surfaces typically exhibit thermal defects and uneven feather-like morphologies. 
Wang et al. [17] thoroughly investigated the impact of these methods during 
microchannel fabrication. They found that the microchannel fabricated by grind­
ing had wavy edges and mechanical scratch marks, while those created by ECDM 
had rounded edges with HAZ and feather-like structures. The surface roughness 
of the microchannel produced by grinding and ECDM were 0.809 µm (Sa) and 
1.685 µm (Sa), respectively. To enhance these machining results, they further 
proposed GA-ECDM using KH2PO4 electrolyte, as shown in Figure 2.7(a) (left 
side). By combining material softening through discharges with the simultaneous 
removal of thermal defects via abrasives of grinding tools, microchannels with 
the clean bottom machined surfaces having 0.423 µm (Sa) roughness were fabri­
cated. The softening depth (h) caused by discharges was modeled as: 
h
U t I t dt
c T
U t I t dt
c T
I
t
U t I t dt
c T
U t I t dt
c T
I
t
t
t
t
t
β
πρ
β
πρ
β
πρ
β
πρ
(
)
(
)
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
( ) ( )
=
∫
∆
+
−
∫
∆



+
×
×
+
∫
∆
−
−
∫
∆



+
×
×
3
3
  2040
3
3
  2040
0
0
0
0
2
0.43
0
0.44 6
3
0
0
0
0
2
0.43
0
0.44 6
3
	
(2.4)
here β is coefficient of energy partition, I is discharge current, U is applied voltage, 
ρ is density, c is specific heat capacity of workpiece, t0 is time and ΔT is the tem­
perature difference between the softening temperature and ambient temperature.

39
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid Machining Processes
The GA-ECDMed microchannel was reported to have 35.1% and 49.1% 
reduced overcut compared to those produced by grinding and ECDM, respec­
tively. Furthermore, reduced edge damage by 42.2% and 56.6% compared to 
grinding and ECDM, respectively, was also observed in the case of GA-ECDM. 
The comparative analysis of microchannels fabricated using grinding, ECDM 
and GA-ECDM illustrated in Figure 2.7(a) (left side) signifies the advantage of 
GA-ECDM for fabricating microfluidic chips for medical applications.
2.4.3.2  Magnetic Assisted ECDM-based triplex HMP
Magnetic-assisted ECDM (M-ECDM) uses the assistance of a magnetic field 
to induce magnetohydrodynamic convection (MHDC) in the machining zone. 
This MHDC enhances electrolyte circulation that helps to attain high aspect ratio 
FIGURE 2.7  Schematic illustration of different ECDM-based triplex HMP processes 
with their process capabilities. (a) Grinding assisted ECDM setup. (b) Magnetic asssisted 
ECDM setup. (c) Ultrasonic assisted ECDM setup [17–19].

40
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
features with better machined surfaces. The continuous replenishment of fresh 
electrolytes and the removal of machined debris from the tool and workpiece gap 
contribute to this improvement. Using this concept, Cheng et al. [18] fabricated 
450 µm deep holes in glass material. The experimental configuration and the 
comparative analysis without and with magnetic field are illustrated in Figure 
2.7(b). High-speed images show that, compared to ECDM (case I), M-ECDM 
(case II) produces an electrolyte circulation and consistent thin gas film formed 
due to the assistance of a magnetic field. This thin and consistent gas film induces 
uniform discharges, resulting in the fabrication of a straight cylindrical hole with 
a hole entrance diameter (HED) of 358 µm, a 23.83% improvement compared to 
the ECDM process. Moreover, a 23.8% enhancement in geometry accuracy and 
a significant 57.4% improvement in machining time reported using M-ECDM 
attributes to its higher performance than ECDM.
2.4.3.3  Ultrasonic Assisted ECDM Based triplex HMP
The fabrication of microfeatures using ECDM is characterized by two zones: 
the discharge zone and the hydrodynamic zone. The discharge zone primarily 
determines the microfeature shape and is typically confined within 300 µm. To 
enhance this zone and to produce a high aspect ratio feature, ultrasonic-assisted 
ECDM (U-ECDM) came into existence. The incorporation of ultrasonic vibration 
to the tool/workpiece serves several purposes including facilitating the fresh elec­
trolytes into the machining zone, removing machined debris and reducing the gas 
film thickness. The formation of a pressure gradient during the tool’s upward and 
downward motion due to vibrations is considered as the primary reason for these 
phenomena. Due to these combined effects, several researchers have reported 
an enhanced discharge regime with a high machining rate. Specifically, a study 
conducted by Chen et al. [19] demonstrated that ultrasonic tool vibration in the 
ECDM helps to attain microchannels of superior quality. They observed a 14.7% 
reduction in width and an 80.99% reduction in surface roughness compared to 
microchannels fabricated by ECDM. The improvement in surface quality and 
width of the fabricated microchannel signifies the enhanced machining capability 
of U-ECDM. The fabricated microchannel using U-ECDM and ECDM shown in 
Figure 2.7(c) clearly shows the tool vibration helps to attain confined width with 
sharp, fracture-free edges. Low peak and uniform stable discharges induced dur­
ing U-ECDM were attributed for this improvement.
2.5  COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF HYBRID 
MACHINING PROCESSES
Hybrid machining offers several notable improvements over the newest sequen­
tial machining methods by merging multiple machining processes within a single 
machining operation. The major advantages are outlined below:
i.	Improved efficiency and productivity: Sequential machining requires sepa­
rate setups for each operation, leading to longer machining times, increased 
handling time and lower productivity. In contrast, hybrid machining 

41
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid Machining Processes
integrates numerous processes into a single continuous operation. This 
single-setup technique removes the need for multiple setups while also 
significantly lowering the overall machining time, increasing productivity.
ii.	Reduced workpiece handling: In sequential processes, moving the work­
piece from one machining platform to another increases the risk of dam­
age. However, in hybrid machining, the machining is conducted at one 
spot, reducing the possibility of workpiece damage. This also helps to 
minimize labor expenses and increases operator safety.
iii.	Reduced setup times: Sequential approach involves individual setup 
durations, which can result in higher cumulative setup times, particu­
larly for complex parts with several machining processes. In contrast, 
the hybrid machining method reduces setup times due to its combined 
machining approach as opposed to the individual machining approach.
iv.	Improved precision and accuracy: Sequential approach requires shift­
ing the workpiece between different machining platforms, which can 
cause alignment and repositioning errors, thereby reducing overall pre­
cision. The fixed position of the workpiece during hybrid machining on 
the other hand reduces these alignment and repositioning errors, result­
ing in improved precision and accuracy.
v.	Automated process integration: Sequential transfer of workpieces 
between machining setups makes automation more complicated. On 
the other hand, the hybrid method enables improved process integration 
and automation. This improves manufacturing efficiency and supports 
smarter manufacturing systems.
vi.	Footprint efficiency and space utilization: Sequential approach requires 
multiple machining setups, resulting in additional floor area accommo­
dation for each process setup. Whereas the hybrid approach consolidates 
different machining operations into a single machine, it reduces the total 
footprint of the manufacturing setup and saves floor space.
vii.	Improved process synergy: Sequential approach lacks synergy due to 
its independent machining strategy, leading to lower material removal 
rates and surface finishes. In contrast, the hybrid process enables mul­
tiple machining techniques to work simultaneously on the workpiece in 
real-time, resulting in higher material removal rates and higher-quality 
surface finishes.
viii.	Cost-effectiveness: While the hybrid machining technique requires a 
higher initial expenditure, it is more cost-effective for long-term use than 
the sequential method. This is due to its faster machining rate, increased 
precision and accuracy, lower labor costs and lesser risk of alignment errors.
2.6  CONCLUSIONS
Hybrid machining processes offer several benefits including the ability to integrate 
multiple machining processes, automatic process integration, cost-effectiveness, 
reduced machining time and enhanced machining outcomes. These features make 
HMP a vital element for the realization of Industry 4.0. This chapter provides an 

42
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
overview of HMP and describes their needs, fundamentals and design methodol­
ogy from basic concepts to industrial applications. It also introduced a new classi­
fication of HMP, reviewed literature work and offered a comparative analysis w.r.t 
sequential machining processes. This chapter will be helpful for the researchers 
working on the realization of Industry 4.0 through a hybrid approach.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in tandem micro-machining pro­
cesses to mitigate the machining issues at micron level: A systematic review, chal­
lenges and future opportunities. Mach Sci Technol 2022;26:515–70. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10910344.2022.2129991.
	
2.	 Saxena KK, Bellotti M, Qian J, Reynaerts D, Lauwers B, Luo X. Overview of hybrid 
machining processes. Hybrid Mach, UK: Academic Press; 2018, p. 21–41. https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813059-9.00002-6.
	
3.	 Schuh G, Kreysa J, Orilski S. Roadmap, hybride produktion. Zeitschrift Für 
Wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetr 2009;104:385–91. https://doi.org/10.3139/104.110072.
	
4.	 Roderburg A, Gerhardt K, Hinke C, Park HS, Buchholz S, Klocke F. Design meth­
odology for innovative hybrid manufacturing technologies. 2011 17th Int Conf 
Concurr Enterprising, ICE 2011 - Conf Proc, Aachen, Germany: IEEE; 2011, p. 1–9.
	
5.	 Klocke F, Roderburg A, Zeppenfeld C. Design methodology for hybrid production 
processes. Procedia Eng 2011;9:417–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2011.03.130.
	
6.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. A review on developments in electrolytes and 
their feeding methods for ECDM process. Silicon 2022;15:1571–95. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12633-022-02134-3.
	
7.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge 
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process 
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.
	
8.	 Han Z, Fang X, Miao G, Liang J, Zhu D. Controllable electrochemical discharge 
machining with energy–electricity regulation in glycol-based electrolytes. Int J 
Mech Sci 2023;247:108161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2023.108161.
	
9.	 Nguyen MD, Rahman M, Wong YS. Enhanced surface integrity and dimensional 
accuracy by simultaneous micro-ED/EC milling. CIRP Ann 2012;61:191–94. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2012.03.011.
	 10.	 Zhan S, Lyu Z, Dong B, Liu W, Zhao Y. Cathodic discharge plasma in electrochemi­
cal jet machining: Phenomena, mechanism and characteristics. Int J Mach Tools 
Manuf 2023;187:104015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2023.104015.
	 11.	 Saxena KK, Qian J, Reynaerts D. A tool-based hybrid laser-electrochemical micro­
machining process: Experimental investigations and synergistic effects. Int J Mach 
Tools Manuf 2020;155:103569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2020.103569.
	 12.	 De Silva AKM, Pajak PT, McGeough JA, Harrison DK. Thermal effects in laser 
assisted jet electrochemical machining. CIRP Ann 2011;60:243–46. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cirp.2011.03.132.
	 13.	 Zhu X, Liu Y, Zhang J, Wang K, Kong H. Ultrasonic-assisted electrochemical drill-
grinding of small holes with high-quality. J Adv Res 2020;23:151–61. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jare.2020.02.010.
	 14.	 Govindan P, Gupta A, Joshi SS, Malshe A, Rajurkar KP. Single-spark analysis of 
removal phenomenon in magnetic field assisted dry EDM. J Mater Process Technol 
2013;213:1048–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2013.01.016.

43
Introduction and Overview of Hybrid Machining Processes
	 15.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Parmar G, Dvivedi A. On material removal analysis in ECSM 
process during micro-channelling with rough tool: Experimental investigation and 
numerical simulation. Measurement 2024;229:114440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2024.114440.
	 16.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Comparative analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and 
electrodischarge machining process. J Micro Nano-Manufacturing 2024:1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4066488.
	 17.	 Wang T, Liu Y, Wang K, Lv Z. Investigation on a sustainable composite method of 
glass microstructures fabrication—Electrochemical discharge milling and grind­
ing (ECDM-G). J Clean Prod 2023;387:135788. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2022.135788.
	 18.	 Cheng C-P, Wu K-L, Mai C-C, Hsu Y-S, Yan B-H. Magnetic field-assisted 
electrochemical discharge machining. J Micromechanics Microengineering 
2010;20:075019. https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/20/7/075019.
	 19.	 Chen Z, Liu Y, Wang T, Wang K. Ultrasonic assisted electrochemical discharge 
milling of complex glass microstructure with high-quality. J Manuf Process 
2023;94:94–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.03.044.

44
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-3
Triplex Hybrid-Based 
Grinding-Assisted 
Electrochemical Discharge 
Machining Process
Umesh Vishwakarma and Dharmender Singh Saini
OP Jindal University, Raigarh, India
Akash Pandey
Shri G. S. Institute of Technology and Science, Indore, India 
Sahil Sharma
AMP Lab, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India
3.1  INTRODUCTIONS
Electrochemical discharge machining (ECDM) is a hybrid machining method 
that combines the electrodischarge and electrochemical processes [1]. This com­
bination facilitates various operations such as drilling, milling and turning. To 
enhance the effectiveness of ECDM-based operations, researchers have intro­
duced additional energies to enable simultaneous and controlled interactions 
within the ECDM framework. This has led to the development of ECDM-based 
triplex hybrid techniques. These triplex hybrid methods can be categorized into 
primary and secondary types, depending on the nature of the assisted energy 
source or interface. Primary hybridization involves the integration of a third 
energy source with ECDM through tool rotations or by introducing powders to 
the electrolyte. On the other hand, secondary hybrid processes are characterized 
by material removal facilitated by mechanical or magnetic forces. It is crucial to 
note that in both types, electrochemical discharge remains the dominant energy 
source for material removal [2, 3]. Primary hybridization involves combining 
a third energy source with ECDM by tool rotations or by introducing powders 
to the electrolyte. Conversely, secondary hybrid processes are characterized by 
material removal helped by mechanical or magnetic forces. It is important to 
remember that in these processes, electrochemical discharge continues to be the 
dominant energy source for material removal.
A thorough explanation of ECDM-based triplex hybrid techniques is given in 
the part that follows in this publication. Numerous drawbacks prevent conventional 
3

45
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
ECDM from being widely used. Its low material removal rate (MRR), which 
causes slower productivity and longer lead times, is one of the main disadvantages. 
Furthermore, there is high electrode wear, which raises the cost of replacements and 
necessitates regular replacements [4, 5]. The process also struggles with achieving 
high precision and accuracy, particularly when compared to other machining meth­
ods. Furthermore, ECDM confronts issues when machining hard materials including 
titanium, hardened steels and composites. In addition, the process produces toxic 
fumes and particles, raising issues for the environment and human health [6, 7]. 
Furthermore, ECDM is less adaptable because it is mostly utilized for specialized 
applications and has little flexibility. Last, its usefulness is further constrained by its 
high operating expenses and low surface finish quality. Because of these drawbacks, 
researchers and engineers have been investigating novel hybrid approaches that inte­
grate the advantages of many technologies in order to tackle these difficulties and 
broaden the applications of ECDM [8]. Triple hybrid-based grinding-assisted ECDM 
(G-ECDM) is one such cutting-edge method that makes use of the synergies between 
ECDM and grinding [9]. By achieving higher MRRs, better surface finish and more 
precision, this hybrid technique makes it possible to produce complicated compo­
nents with previously unheard-of levels of accuracy and efficiency. Surface finish 
and MRRs are improved when grinding and ECDM are combined because the mate­
rial can be removed mechanically and electrochemically. The technique is further 
improved by the use of cutting-edge materials such as composites and nanomaterials.
To sum up, triple hybrid-based G-ECDM is a cutting-edge manufacturing 
technique with the power to completely change the sector. To highlight its effec­
tiveness, the current study investigates the G-ECDM process for drilling blind 
microholes in aluminosilicate glass. This type of glass possesses high thermal 
resistance and durability, making it difficult to machine. To the author’s best 
knowledge, no work has been reported on microhole fabrication in this glass using 
G-ECDM. Compared to traditional ECDM, the triple hybrid-based G-ECDM 
process showed a number of benefits, including higher MRRs, better surface fin­
ishes and more precision [10]. Triple hybrid-based G-ECDM can have a wide 
range of possible applications in the automotive, aerospace, medical and energy 
sectors. With previously unheard-of efficiency and precision, this method makes 
it possible to produce complicated items such as medical implants, engine parts 
and turbine blades. The authors anticipate broad industry adoption of this novel 
process as long as research and development continue.
3.2  PROCESS MECHANISM
The revolutionary production technology known as the triplex hybrid-based 
G-ECDM process incorporates the advantages of both processes, that is, mechani­
cal grinding and ECDM, in a synergistic manner. The triple hybrid-based G-ECDM 
process combines discharge mechanisms with electrochemical reactions to create 
a complicated phenomenon. Electrochemical reactions, such as cathodic reduction, 
in which the workpiece material dissolves and releases ions into the electrolyte, 
are at the core of this process. Furthermore, high-voltage sparks and micro-explo­
sions, respectively, destroy material through spark discharge and electrochemical 

46
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
discharge mechanisms. Moreover, the MRR is increased by mechanical abrasion 
caused by the moving grinding tool. Triple hybrid-based G-ECDM is a potent 
instrument for precision machining applications because of the synergy between 
these processes, which facilitates effective material removal, enhanced surface 
finish and decreased tool wear. As demonstrated in Figure 3.1, this hybrid process 
includes various aspects that combine the flexibility and versatility of ECDM with 
the good MRR and precision of grinding [11], which are discussed as follows:
1.	Pre-processing: In this stage, the workpiece is prepared and clamped.
2.	Grinding: The workpiece is ground using a grinding wheel/tool to 
remove bulk material and achieve a rough shape.
3.	ECDM: The workpiece is then subjected to ECDM, which uses electrical 
discharges to remove material and achieve the final shape and surface finish.
4.	Post-processing: The workpiece is cleaned, and data visualization is 
conducted during this stage.
In triple hybrid-based G-ECDM, grinding is essential for improving surface 
finish and material removal in a number of ways.
1.	Mechanical abrasion: Grinding is a method of material removal that 
increases total MRRs by complementing electrochemical and discharge 
mechanisms.
2.	Surface preparation: By smoothing the workpiece’s surface, grinding 
enhances surface finish and material removal by facilitating better elec­
trochemical reactions and discharge processes.
3.	Reducing the constraints of electrochemical reactions: By manually 
removing material and improving surface quality, grinding helps get 
around the drawbacks of electrochemical reactions, such as low MRRs 
and poor surface finish.
4.	Refining surface finish: Grinding reduces roughness, increases preci­
sion, and refines surface finish, all of which are critical in applications 
involving precision machining.
FIGURE 3.1  Fishbone diagram of G-ECDM.

47
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
5.	Increasing surface area and facilitating more effective ion transport and 
material removal are two ways that grinding might improve electro­
chemical processes.
3.3  EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND PROCEDURE
The experimental work was conducted on the in-house-built facility, as shown 
in Figure 3.2. The setup consists of a workpiece, a fixture, a tool electrode 
serving as the cathode and a spinning grinding tool for mechanical abrasion. 
Electrochemical reactions are aided by an electrolyte, and the ECDM process is 
powered by a high-voltage power source. The ECDM machine’s settings are man­
aged by a computerized control system, while the grinding unit incorporates the 
grinding tool within the machine.
Overheating is avoided via a cooling system and the machining process is 
tracked and recorded by measurement devices. The thorough configuration pro­
vides accurate control over the triplex hybrid process, facilitating the accurate and 
efficient machining of the workpiece. By combining ECDM and grinding, this 
FIGURE 3.2  Schematic illustration of G-ECDM machining setup.

48
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
setup achieves surface finish, improved MRRs and overall machining efficiency. 
The experimental parameters and settings used for the current study are sum­
marized in Table 3.1.
The G-ECDM performance was evaluated by determining and comparing 
the MRR during microhole fabrication with the conventional ECDM. The MRR 
was concluded by dividing the weight difference of the workpiece, measured 
before and after machining, by the machining time (5 minutes). Additionally, the 
machining depth of the G-ECDMed and ECDMed holes was determined using a 
3D surface profilometer.
3.4  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The MRR is a vital parameter for determining production efficiency and assessing 
the effectiveness of the manufacturing process [12]. During microhole fabrication 
using G-ECDM, the MRR was found to be significantly higher by 89.6% com­
pared to the conventional ECDM process. This substantial increment in MRR is 
attributed to the combination of grinding with ECDM, which allows for reduced 
machining time with an average percentage error of 8.38%. After evaluating the 
effectiveness of G-ECDM, the machining outcomes of G-ECDM at 50 V and 
60 V were compared. The microholes fabricated at these voltages are shown in 
Figure 3.3. Specifically, the G-ECDMed hole fabricated at 50 V (Figure 3.3(a)) 
demonstrates a clean and smooth bottom surface compared to the microhole at 
60 V (Figure 3.3(b)). This smoothness at the bottom of the 50 V hole suggests that 
the G-ECDM at this voltage achieves a well-synergized impact of discharges and 
mechanical grinding, resulting in minimal surface irregularities.
However, the side view of fabricated holes represented in Figure 3.3(c–d) 
indicates that the 60 V applied voltage produced a noticeably deeper hole 
approximately 9.56% deeper than the one at 50 V. The color gradient transition­
ing from red/orange to green/blue represents the machining depth at different 
voltages, with the blue region indicating the deepest or bottom part of the fab­
ricated hole. The darker blue zone obtained at 60 V indicates that the increase 
in voltage from 50 V to 60 V resulted in a more aggressive machining process, 
as evidenced by the rougher bottom surface and a deeper hole at 60 V. This less 
TABLE 3.1
Experimental Settings for G-ECDM
Parameters
Value
Workpiece
Aluminosilicate glass
Electrolyte
KOH, 10% Concentration
Auxiliary electrode
Graphite, 50 × 50 mm
Voltage
50 V, 60 V
Current
2 A
Grinding tool
Solid cylindrical abrasive coated 500 µm
Tool rotation
500 rpm

49
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
controlled and rougher finish outcome at 60 V can be attributed to the increased 
intensity of discharges [13, 14].
3.5  CONCLUSIONS
A major development in precision machining, triplex hybrid-based G-ECDM offers 
a cutting-edge method that combines the advantages of grinding, electrochemical 
machining and electro-discharge machining into a unified process. By combining 
mechanical abrasion, electrochemical processes and electrothermal erosion in a 
synergistic manner, this hybrid process improves MRRs, surface smoothness and 
machining precision while mitigating the inherent limitations of traditional ECDM.
The thorough analysis of the process parameters and experimental setup high­
lights the adaptability and efficiency of the G-ECDM approach for machining alu­
minosilicate glass. It is anticipated that this novel technique will be adopted more 
widely as continuous research and development work to improve and polish it. This 
will revolutionize the field of precision machining and make it possible to produce 
complicated components with previously unheard-of accuracy and efficiency.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. A review on developments in electrolytes and 
their feeding methods for ECDM process. Silicon 2022;15:1571–95. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12633-022-02134-3.
	
2.	 Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in electrochemical discharge machining: 
A review on electrochemical discharge machining, process variants and their 
hybrid methods. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 2016;105:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijmachtools.2016.03.004.
FIGURE 3.3  3D surface view of microholes fabricated at (a, c) 50 V and (b, d) 60 V. 

50
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
	
3.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Sidhu SS, Shlykov ES, Ablyaz TR. Determination of nanoin­
dentation behavior of HAZ on glass material machined via ECSM process through 
simulation approach. Materials (Basel) 2022;15:5870. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ma15175870.
	
4.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Finite element modeling for comparing the machining 
performance of different electrolytes in ECDM. Arab J Sci Eng 2021;46:2097–119. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-020-05009-0.
	
5.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in tandem micro-machining pro­
cesses to mitigate the machining issues at micron level: A systematic review, chal­
lenges and future opportunities. Mach Sci Technol 2022;26:515–70. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10910344.2022.2129991.
	
6.	 Singh M, Singh S. Sustainable electrochemical discharge machining process: 
Characterization of emission products and occupational risks to operator. Mach Sci 
Technol 2020;24:739–57. https://doi.org/10.1080/10910344.2020.1752238.
	
7.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Comparative analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and 
electrodischarge machining process. J Micro Nano-Manufacturing 2024:1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4066488.
	
8.	 Sharma S, Shamim FA, Dvivedi A, Kumar P, Singh T. Hybrid machining of metal 
matrix composites. Fabr Mach Adv Mater Compos, Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2022, 
p. 235–54. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003327370-13.
	
9.	 Wang T, Liu Y, Wang K, Lv Z. Investigation on a sustainable composite method 
of glass microstructures fabrication—Electrochemical discharge milling and 
grinding (ECDM-G). J Clean Prod 2023;387:135788. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2022.135788.
	 10.	 Liu JW, Yue TM, Guo ZN. Grinding-aided electrochemical discharge machin­
ing of particulate reinforced metal matrix composites. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 
2013;68:2349–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-013-4846-8.
	 11.	 Zhang S, Zhou J, Hu G, Wang L, Xu Y. Process characteristics of electrochemi­
cal discharge machining and hybrid methods: a review. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 
2023;129:1933–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-023-12452-4.
	 12.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge 
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process 
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.
	 13.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Review—electrochemical discharge machining: Gas 
film electrochemical aspects, stability parameters, and research work. J Electrochem 
Soc.2021;168:013503. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/abd516.
	 14.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Parmar G, Dvivedi A. On material removal analysis in ECSM 
process during micro-channelling with rough tool: Experimental investigation and 
numerical simulation. Measurement 2024;229:114440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2024.114440.

51
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-4
Triplex Hybrid-Based 
Magnetic-Assisted Rotary 
Electrochemical Discharge 
Machining Process
3D FEM Simulation and 
Experimental Investigation
Viveksheel Rajput
Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, India
4.1  INTRODUCTION
When it involves developing various types of microcomponents for microelectro-
mechanical systems (MEMSs) and for microscale fluidic devices, glass material 
stands out as the best option [1]. Glass has many desirable properties that make it 
very popular for various microfabrication processes [2]. It is highly sought-after 
due to its electrical nonconductivity, transparency, and chemical and biological 
compatibility. However, glass’s natural brittleness and hardness present difficul­
ties for glass micromachining techniques, frequently resulting in a reduced sur­
face quality [3]. Notwithstanding these obstacles, glass’s special qualities keep 
it a popular material in the creation of microfluidic devices. Glass components 
are robust at high temperatures and have good corrosion resistance, especially in 
hostile environments. Glass is becoming more and more widespread in MEMS 
technology and other industries that require small and feature-rich equipment, 
like solid oxide fuel cell systems and pumps, due to its superior electrical conduc­
tivity, low heat generation, and transparency [4].
Conventional glass machining techniques, such as mechanical grinding, dia­
mond grooving, and microabrasive air jets, rely on the material being removed 
by brittle cracks formed by a jet’s impingement or a cutting tool’s pressure [5]. It 
leads to the cracks and poor surface finish of the glass material. Nonconventional 
glass machining has been utilized with the goal of improving the machining effi­
ciency and surface characteristics.
An innovative microfabrication method called ECDM is implemented to process 
nonconductive materials such as glass and ceramics [6–8]. The invention of ECDM 
4

52
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
dates back to 1968, when Kurafuji and Suda created a microhole in a glass sub­
strate using this method. Through its ability to overcome the shortcomings of other 
machining techniques like laser beam and ultrasonic machining, it is shown to be 
the most effective way for machining glass materials. Studies have been conducted 
recently to improve the excellence of this microfabrication method [9, 10]. Two 
different electrodes have separate roles in ECDM: one of the electrodes is the aux­
iliary (anode), and the other is the tool electrode (cathode), as shown in Figure 4.1. 
A power source is applied to these electrodes, which are spaced a few centimeters 
apart within the electrolytic cell, resulting in a potential difference across them.
The glass material and both electrodes are submerged in an alkaline electrolyte 
solution. At the corresponding electrodes, the applied voltage causes hydrogen and 
oxygen bubbles to develop. These bubbles then merge to produce larger bubbles. 
As a result, a gas layer develops around the tool, obstructing electron passage and 
isolating the tool electrode from the electrolyte [11]. After that, due to electric 
breakdown, sparks appear through the insulating gas layer. Then, material removal 
happens as a result of the combined effect of thermal erosion and etching action of 
the electrolyte when glass material is placed at a tiny gap under the tool [12]. The 
effectiveness of the ECDM process is influenced by a number of discrete input 
variables, including the applied voltage, the type and concentration level of the 
electrolyte, the gap across the electrodes, the tool movement towards material, the 
material, shape and dimension of the tool, etc. [13]. The MRR is directly regulated 
by voltage and concentration level since higher voltage and concentration cause the 
electrolyte to generate bubbles more quickly. It permits gas film to form quickly, 
which leads to the acquisition of a high rate of work material removal [14, 15]. 
A variety of surface textures of microchannels created under various machining 
FIGURE 4.1  ECDM schematic diagram [8].

53
Rotary Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
conditions were reported by Abu Ziki et al. [16]. Their research demonstrated 
that, among other variables such as tool-workpiece gap, machining voltage, and 
tool travel speed, the electrolyte viscosity has the greatest impact on the chan­
nel texture. To maintain a constant machining gap, the tool feed—the speed of 
the tool in a downward direction in ECDM—must be regulated. Various control 
systems are employed, such as gravity-assisted and constant velocity [17, 18]. High 
rates increase the danger of damaging tools and wear from sparking and thermal 
expansion, while slow rates prolong machining times and increase heat-affected 
zones. Due to differences in electrical conductivity, the selection of electrolytes in 
ECDM has a substantial influence on MRR [19]. Because electrolyte concentration 
enhances chemical action, viscosity is influenced, resulting in smoother surfaces. 
Higher concentrations enhance OH- radicals, accelerating the etching action and 
enhancing MRR, according to research by Rajput et al. [20] on the relationship 
between concentration and glass MRR. Yang et al. [21] arrived at the conclusion 
that because different tool materials have varying thermal and electrochemical 
properties, they show discrete machining features in ECDM. When compared to a 
stainless steel tool, a tool made of tungsten carbide exhibited less tool wear.
Numerous ECDM modifications have been made to improve its effectiveness. 
These modifications include tool rotational effect [22], ultrasonics assistance [23], 
laser assistance [24], magnetic field application [25], and abrasive particle mixed 
electrolyte [26]. Each of these methods contributes to the enhancement of the qual­
ity characteristics of the machined materials. A study by Cheng et al. [25] examined 
the use of magnetic fields in ECDM procedures to improve the efficiency of micro­
hole drilling. Ensuring the electrolyte has appropriate access to the drilling area is a 
challenge in drilling deeper holes. The electrolysis process within the tool region is 
impacted by the magnetic field application to the ECDM process during microhole 
drilling. It is possible to understand this effect by taking into account MHD con­
vection, which increases electrolytic movement in the small space across the mate­
rial and tool [27]. Overall, the application of magnetic fields in ECDM machining 
shows good results for increasing the microhole characteristics and efficiency by 
resolving problems associated with electrolyte accessibility through improved elec­
trolytic circulation. The frequency of bubble discharge rises when buoyancy and 
Lorentz forces are applied. A huge bubble radius is produced, and the bubble release 
rate decreases if the direction of these forces differs. In another study, high-speed 
imaging is applied to investigate the mechanism of the gas film under magnetic field 
during glass machining. The pictures of bubbles and gas film formation with and 
without MHD convection are captured. The result shows that magnetic field appli­
cations enhance both the width of cut and electrolyte steering [28]. Hajian et al. [29] 
evaluated M-ECDM performance during milling, focusing on the depth of channel 
and its surface quality. It is observed that the magnetic field assistance enhances the 
depths, particularly at lower electrolyte concentrations.
Researchers have also used a variety of analytical techniques in addition to 
experimental results to gain a better understanding of the material removal and 
spark phenomena in ECDM. Jain et al. [30] presented an arc discharge valve 
theory in relation to bubbles in their investigation. This theory states that gas 
bubbles function as valves, rupturing in response to an extremely strong electric 

54
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
field to produce sparks in the form of arcs. A two-dimensional FEM model was 
proposed by Bhondwe et al. [31] to determine the temperature variation in the 
glass material. A 3D thermal model is successfully built by Goud et al. [32] to 
forecast the MRR in the ECDM process. For a single spark, heat generation is 
assumed to have a Gaussian distribution. The expected values are then compared 
to the experimental findings, which showed that the two are in good agreement. 
Rajput et al. [33–35] performed various FEM simulation studies to investigate the 
ECDM process. To estimate the MRR of the glass material and compare it with 
the experimental findings, the temperature distribution graphs within the mate­
rial are examined. Through simulation studies, the effects of various electrolytes, 
such as NaOH, KOH, and NaCl, as well as the effects of electrolyte concentration 
and applied voltage, are investigated. Harugade et al. [36] have reported the appli­
cation of FEM to analyze the M-ECDM process in terms of optimizing MHD 
over the glass material.
Based on the literature, it is evident that many experimental studies have 
been carried out on the ECDM process and the M-ECDM process by different 
researchers. A FEM simulation study is one of the most useful methods for deter­
mining the MRR and temperature distribution in the ECDM process. However, 
a very few investigations have been described on the modeling aspect of the 
M-ECDM process using FEM simulation. Moreover, no 3D FEM-based thermal 
model has been documented on M-ECDM as of yet for the evaluation of glass 
material. This paper aims to cover a novel objective by developing a 3D thermal 
model based on FEM that uses the temperature distribution plots produced within 
the glass material to calculate MRR. The study is then continued to perform the 
experimental study on the glass materials using an adaptive tool feed system in 
M-ECDM to analyze ROC and SR. Figure 4.2 gives the flow chart of the simula­
tion and experimental study of the present work.
FIGURE 4.2  Flowchart of simulation and experimental study of the present work.

55
Rotary Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
4.2  SIMULATION METHODOLOGY
The goal of the present investigation is to establish a 3D FEM model for analyzing 
the MRR of a glass in the M-ECDM process. The simulation results are followed 
by the experimental studies on glass material using an adaptive tool feed system. 
The predicted data is compared with the experimental results in order to validate 
the efficacy of the developed model. The effect of electrolyte concentration and 
applied voltage is studied using simulation results. After simulation work, experi­
mental investigation of M-ECDM is carried out to study the ROC and SR of the 
microholes produced on a glass material.
4.2.1  Thermal Model Description
Glass is chosen as the material for investigation, and a 3D thermal model based 
on FEM is established to provide temperature distribution plots within the glass 
material for monitoring the MRR. Table 4.1 lists the essential characteristics that 
were employed in the FEM study. The developed 3D FEM model for M-ECDM 
analysis is given in Figure 4.3(a–b).
4.2.2  Assumptions
Various assumptions have been considered during the establishment of the 3D ther­
mal model based on FEM, which are consistent with the views that have been put 
forward by various authors [34, 35, 37]. It is assumed that the glass material has 
homogeneity and is isotropic in nature. The transfer of thermal energy to the glass 
material is only regarded as partial. It is assumed that Gaussian heat generation 
occurs inside the spark region and stays constant for every spark on the upper sur­
face of the glass material during the microhole fabrication. It is assumed that the 
spark will only ever occur once beneath the tool. According to Kulkarni et al. [38], a 
single spark takes place beneath the tool, leaving a hemispherical indentation on the 
TABLE 4.1
Attributes of Soda Lime Glass Employed for 3D 
FEM Evaluation 
Property
Value
Room temperature, To, (K)
295
Melting point, Tm (K)
1,673
Convective coefficient, hc (W/m2K)
10,000
Thermal conductivity, k (W/mK)
1.6
Density, ρ (Kg/m3)
2,170
Heat capacity, Cp (J/kgK)
670
Source:  Reference [34, 35].

56
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
upper surface of the glass material. It is assumed that any material over the melting 
temperature (Tm) is removed, and the formation of the recast layer and the effects of 
cavitation in the removal process are not taken into consideration.
4.2.3  Model Constraints
Figure 4.3(a) displays the developed model having constraints. The glass material 
starts at room temperature (T0) during the first stage at time (t) = 0, that is, T = T0. 
The surfaces or areas of the glass material, represented by A1, A2, A3, A4, and 
A5, are all insulated and suggest that there is no heat transmission between them. 
Therefore, for surfaces A1, A2, A3, A4, and A5, ∂T/∂n = 0 at /any time t ≥ 0, in which 
n is the boundary normal. The 3D Gaussian distribution of the heat energy (GH), 
applied at the boundary of heat input (AH) on the upper surface of the material, is 
produced by Equation 4.1 (Figure 4.3(b)). Equation 4.2 characterizes the heat release 
(AC) through convection to the atmosphere as the top surface’s remaining boundary. 
(Ep) is the fraction of total energy that reaches the surface of the glass material.
Previous FEM investigations used Ep = 20%, which was derived from Basak 
and Ghosh’s experimental results [11]. Thus, in keeping with earlier FEM research 
[32, 34], the energy transfer (Ep) in this 3D model is taken to be 20%.
	
4.45
 
exp
4.5
 
1
2
2
2
=
−



+ 















G
E VI
Spark Volume
r
R
r
R
H
p
m
m
	
(4.1)
FIGURE 4.3  (a) 3D FEM model with boundary conditions. (b) Activated heat input 
in 3D FEM model. (c) Crater resulted from a 3D single spark using simulation results. 
(d) Schematic diagram of crater [35].

57
Rotary Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
where “ 1r  and 2r ” denote relevant radial distances that vary from the spark’s center, 
“Ep” is energy supplied to the glass material, “V ” is electrical voltage, and “I” is 
the electrical current.
	
(
)
=
−
0
A
h T
T
c
c
	
(4.2)
where “hc” denotes convective coefficient, T is the glass material temperature, 
and 0
T  is the room temperature.
Using the resulting equations from the standard voltage-current (VI) charac­
teristics curve, the values of electric current (I) are calculated [11, 33]. As seen 
later, Equation 4.3 gives the current value for NaOH, which is dependent on the 
electrolyte concentration (C).
	
3.2323 10
0.0027
0.0913
0.7142
5
3
2
=
∗
−
+
+
−
I
C
C
C
	
(4.3)
4.2.4  Spark Radius Calculation
Heat is released by the spark; this heat rises to the center and then progressively 
decreases radially outward. It’s crucial to remember that the spark’s size changes 
and steadily expands with time. The radius of a spark is determined as the radial 
distance at which the heat released by the sparks is still substantial; convection 
processes take over beyond this radius. The 150 μm spark radius that Bhondwe 
and other researchers have employed [31–33] has been widely used in several 
ECDM modeling studies. Kulkarni et al. [38] measured the crater size created 
during microhole fabrication and calculated the spark radius, which came out to 
be 150 μm. In magnetic field-assisted ECDM, the presence of a magnetic field 
produces a Lorentz force when combined with an electric current across the spark 
gap. As a result, there is a rise in thermal energy and electron density, which lim­
its the motion of electrons by reducing their mean free path [39]. This leads to the 
formation of deeper, smaller craters in the machining zone where a more closely 
packed spark radius is observed.
According to Shabgard et al. [40] experimental studies, crater radii are low­
ered by roughly 8–10% when using magnetic field assistance in electric discharge 
machining as opposed to traditional electric discharge machining. For numerical 
simulations, a spark radius of 135 μm is therefore used. Assuming a 3D spark 
zone with a height of 170 μm and a radius of 135 μm [32, 34, 35]. Figure 4.3(b) 
shows the Gaussian distribution within the spark region’s shape.
4.2.5  Material Removal Computation Analysis
The temperature profiles of the glass material are analyzed as part of the 
procedure used to calculate the MRR of the glass material. It is commonly 
acknowledged that a direct relationship exists between the temperature of the 
glass material and its removal. Therefore, it is believed that material removal 

58
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
happens when the glass material’s temperature ( )
T  rises above its melting point 
(
)
Tm , which is represented as
	
>
T
Tm	
(4.4)
Isothermal temperature profiles are analyzed to determine the melting tem­
perature, which produces intercept coordinates, as shown in Figure 4.3(c–d). 
These coordinates are then used to calculate the glass material removal (Vg) 
that is produced by a 3D single spark, which can be mathematically stated as 
follows:
	
 
  2
3
2
∫∫∫
θ
θ
π
=
=
V
r z
dr dz d
r z
g
p
p
p
p	
(4.5)
where the nodal temperature coordinates are obtained to compute the intercepts 
seen on the axis, denoted by “rp” and “zp.”
According to previous studies [33–35], the shape of the crater created by the 
spark is recognized as a hemisphere. Based on the total number of sparks gener­
ated in a minute, calculations are made to estimate the total volume eliminated. 
The final volume removed VT in mg/min is obtained by multiplying the MRR by 
the glass material’s density (ρ).
	
V
V
number of sparks per unit of time
T
s
=
×
× ρ
 
	
(4.6)
4.3  EXPERIMENTATION AND SETUP
The vertical milling center is equipped with an adaptive tool feed method that 
functions on a feedback system, as demonstrated in Figure 4.4. A nonreactive work 
material holding fixture is part of an electrolytic cell, and it is made of polycarbon­
ate. There are two phases to the investigation. In the first stage, the development 
FIGURE 4.4  Developed adaptive tool feed M-ECDM setup [34, 35].

59
Rotary Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
of a 3D thermal model based on FEM and parametric research are the main goals 
in evaluating the MRR of glass material using M-ECDM, followed by its valida­
tion. In stage two, the developed magnetic-assisted adaptive tool feed-based hybrid 
ECDM process, that is, the M-ECDM process, is assessed by analyzing the ROC 
and SR of the machined microholes on the glass material.
4.3.1  Adaptive Tool Feed
The setup uses adaptive tool feed to overcome the drawbacks of constant velocity 
and gravity feed techniques. Permanent tool contact with the glass material in 
gravity feed prevents gas film formation beneath the electrode, which increases 
the number of heat-affected zones and results in uneven material removal. If the 
rate of material removal is not equal to the feed rate, then a tool moving with 
constant velocity runs the risk of damaging itself or materials. Hajian et al. [41] 
noted that contact of the tool with the glass material is frequently caused by the 
thermal expansion of the tool as a result of heating. In order to prevent the tool 
contact with the material, an adaptive system is utilized to maintain an effective 
machining gap. It continuously modifies the tool feed in accordance with the 
MRR to guarantee the presence of an ideal gas film beneath the tool. It uses a sen­
sitive load cell to detect tool contact, then sends an Arduino UNO to the controller 
to move the tool in the opposite direction. Table 4.2 lists the drilling parameter for 
the validation of the simulation study.
4.3.2  Measurements
4.3.2.1  MRR
It is calculated using Equation 4.7 by dividing the difference of the glass 
material’s weight prior to and after the microhole fabrication divided by the 
total drilling time.
	
=
−
((
)/
)
1
2
MRR
w
w
t
g
g
m 	
(4.7)
TABLE 4.2
Constant and Variable Parameters Used for Model Validation and 
Experimental Investigation
Variable Parameter
Constant Parameters
Parameter
Levels
Parameter
Levels
Applied voltage (V)
35 V–45 V
Electrolyte
NaOH
Electrolyte concentration 
(wt.%)
15 wt.%–35 wt.%
Primary tool and 
auxiliary tool
Stainless steel (SS) 
& graphite
Work material
Soda lime glass
Tool feed
3 mm/min
Machining time
3 minutes
Magnetic field intensity
0.33 T

60
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
where 
1
wg  and 
2
wg  is the glass material weight before and after the production of 
the microholes, and tm is the drilling time in minutes.
4.3.2.2  ROC
The diameter of the tool (Dt) is subtracted from the diameter of the hole entry (De) 
of the microholes on a glass material to find the ROC.
	
=
−
ROC
D
D
e
t	
(4.8)
4.3.2.3  SR
An advanced roughness measurement instrument called the high-to-low tempera­
ture tribometer is utilized to evaluate the surface roughness (SR) of the micro­
holes made during the M-ECDM process.
4.4  RESULTS
4.4.1  Model Validations
To estimate the MRR, a 3D FEM thermal model examines the temperature varia­
tions within the glass material. The development of models involves meshing, 
solving to find the temperature variation, and postprocessing to find MRR. With 
the assistance of the meshing tool and the Hex dominating method, the model 
is first discretized for accuracy. The heat boundary refinement increases the 3D 
Gaussian heat input’s precision and solver accuracy. The number of elements 
increases to reach convergence. The meshed 3D model utilized for simulation 
investigation is shown in Figure 4.5, along with the attached 3D spark on the top 
of glass material. Using the intercept coordinates (Figure 4.3c–d) and Equations 
7.4−7.6, the computed temperature variations at melting temperature (Tm) undergo 
additional processing to estimate the MRR.
FIGURE 4.5  Meshed 3D model.

61
Rotary Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
In order to determine whether the predicted MRR is consistent with experi­
mental findings, it is plotted against the electrolyte concentration at constant 
voltage. The illustration shows that the MRR trends for the predicted and 
experimental findings are similar. Acceptable agreement has been determined 
between expected and experimental results. The MRR showed a maximum 
variation of 0.2534 mg/min between the two, most likely due to differences in 
the assumptions used for the M-ECDM numerical simulation. The simulation 
results showing the temperature variations and the crater formation above the 
glass material’s surface are shown in Figure 4.6(a). According to the analysis, 
the crater’s center holds the highest temperatures, which progressively decrease 
radially outward. Furthermore, the outcomes confirm that the heat dispersion in 
the spark zone is Gaussian.
The model is further validated by comparing simulation results for glass with 
previous experimental results of the M-ECDM process [35]. The MRR variations 
for a glass material at various applied voltages are displayed in Figure 4.7(a). The 
MRR’s overall pattern is similar, which supports the model’s validity.
4.4.2  MRR Improvement Analysis in M-ECDM
To determine the effect of a magnetic field on the MRR and the machining 
performance of the ECDM process, simulation studies were carried out with 
and without the magnetic field. The MRR results with and without the magnetic 
FIGURE 4.6  (a) Distribution of the temperature within the glass material during 
M-ECDM simulation study at 15 wt.% and 40 V; glass material temperature acquired in 
the simulation study. (b) Conventional ECDM (c) M-ECDM process.

62
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
field at different electrolyte concentrations are shown in Figure 4.7(b). Through 
the enhanced heat input onto the working material’s surface made possible by the 
magnetic field, the MRR is improved. As a result, Figure 4.6(b) shows how the 
temperature of the glass material increased with the application of a magnetic 
field in the ECDM process at similar machining conditions. It is observed that 
glass material temperature increases 21.9% when a magnetic field is applied. It 
leads to an increase in the removal of glass material.
Notably, the application of the magnetic field results in a 37.8% increase in 
MRR during the simulation study, while an increase of 31.6% in MRR is observed 
during the experimental study at 25 wt.%. Figure 4.8(a) shows the MRR obtained 
with and without magnetic field during experimental investigation at different 
applied voltages.
FIGURE 4.7  (a) Model validation and MRR variation at various levels of applied voltage 
(b) Plot of MRR variation at various levels of electrolyte concentration.
FIGURE 4.8  (a) Graph plot of MRR variation at various levels of applied voltage for 
ECDM and M-ECDM processes. Surface roughness micrographs of the microholes 
drilled on glass material using (b) ECDM (c) M-ECDM process.

63
Rotary Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
4.4.3  Parametric Studies
The effect of electrolyte concentration and applied voltage on MRR in the 
M-ECDM process is analyzed through simulation studies as well as experimen­
tal studies. The MRR distribution of glass material at different concentrations 
of NaOH electrolyte is presented in Figure 4.7(b). Elevating the concentration 
level of electrolyte results in increased heat energy in the machining zone, which 
enhances material removal. The work surface temperature rises by 182 K with the 
rise in concentration level to 20 wt.% from 15 wt.%, according to the simulation 
results as seen in Figure 4.9(a).
In experiments, higher electrolyte concentrations promote faster gas layer for­
mation, more spark striking, and faster ion mobility, all of which lead to higher 
MRR. An increase in MRR of 0.6483 mg/min is noted when the level of elec­
trolyte concentration rises to 30 wt.% from 15 wt.%. The predicted MRR results 
are contrasted in Figure 4.7(a) with the results of the present study experiments at 
various applied voltages.
In every scenario, the MRR trend steadily gets better as the applied voltage is 
increased, suggesting that higher applied voltages result in higher MRR. The rate of 
hydrogen bubble production at the tool increases with applied voltage, which causes 
faster gas film development and results in the higher spark striking on the top surface 
FIGURE 4.9  Glass material temperature obtained during simulation study at different 
electrolyte concentrations (a) 15 wt.% (b) 20 wt.% and at different applied voltages (c) 40 V 
(d) 45 V.

64
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
of glass material [9]. Thus, a higher level of heat is then produced in the drilling 
region. The results of the simulation study present a similar situation; as applied 
voltages increase, the amount of heat produced due to spark rises, as described in 
Figure 4.9(c–d), raising the temperature of the glass material by 236.1K. An increase 
in MRR of 0.6947 mg/min is noted when the applied voltage rises from 35 V to 50 V.
4.5  GEOMETRICAL ANALYSIS OF THE MICROHOLE
4.5.1  Analysis on ROC
In order to compare the geometrical accuracies with and without the M-ECDM 
method, the microscope images of the drilled holes are analyzed. A comparison of 
microholes drilled at 40 V and 15 wt.% with a 3 mm/min tool feed rate is shown in 
Figure 4.10. When compared to microholes created without the M-ECDM method 
(Figure 4.10b–c), those machined with the M-ECDM process show greater geo­
metrical accuracies in terms of ROC, hole circularity, and HAZ (Figure 4.10a,d). 
The M-ECDM ensures that electrolytes are available beneath the tool and that 
the gas film forms consistently. The consistent and quicker formation of the gas 
film leads to the uniform sparks striking over the glass material. As a result, 
stray striking is reduced, and a better hole circularity is noticed. It also reduces 
the ROC. An improvement of 38.6% is observed with the use of the M-ECDM 
process. The application of a magnetic field induces Lorentz that further results 
in MHD convection. It further results in the forced movement of the electrolyte 
FIGURE 4.10  Microscopy images of the holes drilled on glass material using 
(a, d) M-ECDM (b−c) ECDM process.

65
Rotary Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
in the machining area and improves electrolyte circulation. Adaptive tool feed 
system further assists the M-ECDM process by facilitating the achievement of a 
consistent machining gap, which permits the electrolytes to be accessible beneath 
the tool and leads to the reliable development of the gas film.
4.5.2  Analysis on SR
Figure 4.8(b–c) displays the microhole roughness graphs generated with and 
without the M-ECDM. It has been noted that M-ECDM generates enhanced SR 
because of improved, uniform, and constant sparks striking over the glass material 
(Figure 4.8(c) and Figure 4.10(a,d)). The enhanced circulation of the electrolyte 
causes a higher rate of bubble production close to the tool. Subsequently, it causes 
the faster formation of a thinner and uniform gas layer. Thus, channelized spark 
occurrence results in a good finish of the microholes on the glass material. Also, 
the higher etching behavior of the electrolyte beneath the tool due to enhanced 
electrolyte circulation in M-ECDM also results in a smoother surface. Moreover, 
by decreasing the amount of tool contact, adaptive tool feed helps to avoid the for­
mation of unnecessary thermal cracks. On the other hand, without the M-ECDM 
technique, a larger number of thermal cracks and hole shape degradation are seen 
(Figure 4.8(b) and Figure 4.10(b–c)). The considerable amount of roughness was 
produced at the microhole edge because of the nonuniform distribution of the gas 
film at the tool circumference, poor frequency, and irregular spark patterns that 
the conventional ECDM process generated. It leads to the poor surface finish at 
the microhole edge (Figure 4.8(b)). An increase in 0.147 micron is noticed in the 
SR when a microhole is produced using ECDM at similar machining conditions.
4.6  CONCLUSIONS
The present study investigates the effect of magnetic field in the ECDM process 
by developing the 3D FEM-based thermal model. The isothermal temperature 
variations within the glass material are analyzed to predict the MRR with and 
without the M-ECDM process. The impact of electrolyte concentration and volt­
age is also studied using simulation results. Moreover, the effect of magnetic field 
application on ROC and SR is also investigated experimentally. The major con­
clusions withdrawn are presented as follows:
•	 The developed 3D FEM model successfully predicts the MRR of the 
M-ECDM process and can be implemented to analyze its behavior under 
different machining conditions.
•	 The developed 3D FEM model shows a strong correlation with the pre­
vious experimental findings. It is found that the experimental findings 
correspond to the predicted MRR.
•	 An increase in the glass material temperature is observed through simu­
lation study under the application of magnetic field in contrast to the 
temperature obtained without magnetic field. It results into an increase 
of 37.8% in MRR.

66
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
•	 The assistance of the magnetic field in ECDM produces Lorenz force 
that further induces MHD convection. Consequently, the induced MHD 
convection enhances the electrolyte circulation. This results in the 
enhanced MRR and geometrical features of the drilled microholes in 
terms of ROC and SR.
•	 A level increase in electrolyte concentration and voltage results in the 
improvement in MRR due to the rise in heat input produced on the top of 
glass material. The MRR increases by 0.6947 mg/min and 0.6483 mg/min 
in response to applied voltage and concentration increases, 35 V to 50 V 
and from 15 wt.% to 30 wt.%, respectively.
•	 An improvement of 31.6%, 38.6%, and 12.9% in MRR, ROC, and SR 
are noticed with the application of magnetic field to the ECDM process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author acknowledges the support and assistance given by the Punjab Engi­
neering College, Chandigarh, India.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Hamed H, Eldiasty M, Seyedi-Sahebari S-M, Abou-Ziki JD. Applications, materi­
als, and fabrication of micro glass parts and devices: An overview. Mater Today 
2023;66:194–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2023.03.005.
	
2.	 Aralekallu S, Boddula R, Singh V. Development of glass-based microfluidic devices: 
A review on its fabrication and biologic applications. Mater Des 2023;225:111517. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2022.111517.
	
3.	 Zhao D, Zhang Z, Zhu H, Cao Z, Xu K. An investigation into laser-assisted elec­
trochemical discharge machining of transparent insulating hard-brittle material. 
Micromachines 2020;12:22. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi12010022.
	
4.	 Li X, Abe T, Liu Y, Esashi M. Fabrication of high-density electrical feed-throughs 
by deep-reactive-ion etching of Pyrex glass. J Microelectromechanical Syst 
2002;11:625–30. https://doi.org/10.1109/JMEMS.2002.805211.
	
5.	 Schwartzentruber J, Papini M. Abrasive waterjet micro-piercing of borosili­
cate glass. J Mater Process Technol 2015;219:143–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmatprotec.2014.12.006.
	
6.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Comparative analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and 
electrodischarge machining process. J Micro Nano-Manufacturing 2024:1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4066488.
	
7.	 Rajput V, Pundir SS, Goud M, Suri NM. Multi-response optimization of ECDM 
parameters for silica (quartz) using grey relational analysis. Silicon 2021;13:1619–
40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12633-020-00538-7.
	
8.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Parmar G, Dvivedi A. On material removal analysis in ECSM 
process during micro-channelling with rough tool: Experimental investigation and 
numerical simulation. Measurement 2024;229:114440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2024.114440.
	
9.	 Shen J, Kong W, Xu Z, Zeng Y. Improving surface integrity of micro-holes 
in ECDM using ultrahigh-speed rotary of tool cathode and non-water-based 
electrolyte. Chinese J Aeronaut 2024;37:506–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cja.2024.02.004.

67
Rotary Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process	
10.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in tandem micro-machining processes 
to mitigate the machining issues at micron level: a systematic review, challenges and 
future opportunities. Mach Sci Technol 2022;26:515–70. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10910344.2022.2129991.	
11.	 Basak I, Ghosh A. Mechanism of material removal in electrochemical discharge
machining: A theoretical model and experimental verification. J Mater Process Technol 
1997;71:350–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924-0136(97)00097-6.	
12.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Review on recent advances, research trends, and gas film 
in electrochemical discharge-based micromachining. J Micro Nano-Manufacturing
2021;9. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4049418.	
13.	 Wüthrich R, Fascio V. Machining of non-conducting materials using electrochemical
discharge phenomenon—an overview. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 2005;45:1095–108.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2004.11.011.	
14.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Review—electrochemical discharge machining: Gas
film electrochemical aspects, stability parameters, and research work. J Electrochem 
Soc 2021;168:013503. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/abd516.	
15.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Sidhu SS, Shlykov ES, Ablyaz TR. Determination of nanoindenta­
tion behavior of HAZ on glass material machined via ECSM process through simula­
tion approach. Materials (Basel) 2022;15:5870. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma15175870.	
16.	 Abou Ziki JD, Fatanat Didar T, Wüthrich R. Micro-texturing channel surfaces on
glass with spark assisted chemical engraving. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 2012;57:66–72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2012.01.012.	
17.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Performance analysis of closed-loop electrochemical
discharge machining (CLECDM) during micro-drilling and response surface meth­
odology based multi-response parametric optimisation. Adv Mater Process Technol
2022;8:1352–82. https://doi.org/10.1080/2374068X.2020.1860494.	
18.	 Saranya S, Ravi Sankar A. Fabrication of precise micro-holes on quartz sub­
strates with improved aspect ratio using a constant velocity-feed drilling tech­
nique of an ECDM process. J Micromech Microeng 2018;28:125009. https://doi.
org/10.1088/1361-6439/aae8f5.	
19.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. A review on developments in electrolytes and
their feeding methods for ECDM process. Silicon 2022;15:1571–95. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12633-022-02134-3.	
20.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Finite element modeling for comparing the machining 
performance of different electrolytes in ECDM. Arab J Sci Eng 2021;46:2097–119.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-020-05009-0.	
21.	 Yang C-K, Cheng C-P, Mai C-C, Cheng Wang A, Hung J-C, Yan B-H. Effect of
surface roughness of tool electrode materials in ECDM performance. Int J Mach
Tools Manuf 2010;50:1088–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2010.08.006.	
22.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Enhancement of electrochemical discharge machining 
(ECDM). Characteristics with tool electrode rotation, 2023, p. 135–48. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-981-19-6107-6_11.	
23.	 Jain N, Jain JK. Implementation of tool and electrolyte-based development in
the ultrasonic-assisted ECDM process: A review. J Brazilian Soc Mech Sci Eng
2022;44:248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40430-022-03550-7.	
24.	 Kunar S, Rajendra K, Kalepu VVDP, Chatterjee P, Perveen A, Talib N, et al. Laser-
assisted electrochemical discharge micromachining. Hybrid Micromach Microfabr
Technol, Beverly, Massachusetts: Wiley; 2023, p. 137–49. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781394174959.ch6.	
25.	 Cheng C-P, Wu K-L, Mai C-C, Hsu Y-S, Yan B-H. Magnetic field-assisted elec­
trochemical discharge machining. J Micromechanics Microengineering 2010;
20:075019. https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/20/7/075019.

68
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 	
26.	 Tang W, Zhang J, Mao C, Kang X. Investigating discharge and material removal
mechanisms in graphite powder-mixed ECDM. Mater Manuf Process 2024;
39:987–99. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2023.2289671.	
27.	 Rattan N, Mulik RS. Experimental set up to improve machining performance
of silicon dioxide (quartz) in magnetic field assisted TW-ECSM process. Silicon
2018;10:2783–91. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12633-018-9818-z.	
28.	 Xu Y, Jiang B. Machining performance enhancement of deep micro drilling using
electrochemical discharge machining under magnetohydrodynamic effect. Int J
Adv Manuf Technol 2021;113:883–92. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-021-06657-8.	
29.	 Hajian M, Razfar MR, Movahed S. An experimental study on the effect of magnetic 
field orientations and electrolyte concentrations on ECDM milling performance of
glass. Precis Eng 2016;45:322–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2016.03.009.	
30.	 Jain VK, Dixit PM, Pandey PM. On the analysis of the electrochemical spark
machining process. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 1999;39:165–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0890-6955(98)00010-8.	
31.	 Bhondwe KL, Yadava V, Kathiresan G. Finite element prediction of material
removal rate due to electro-chemical spark machining. Int J Mach Tools Manuf
2006;46:1699–706. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2005.12.005.	
32.	 Goud M, Sharma AK. A three-dimensional finite element simulation approach to ana­
lyze material removal in electrochemical discharge machining. Proc Inst Mech Eng
Part C J Mech Eng Sci 2017;231:2417–28. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954406216636167.	
33.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Finite element modeling for analyzing material
removal rate in ECDM process. J Adv Manuf Syst 2020;19:815–35. https://doi.org/
10.1142/S0219686720500365.	
34.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Three-dimensional finite element modeling and response 
surface based multi-response optimization during silica drilling with closed-loop
ECDM. Silicon 2021;13:3583–609. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12633-020-00867-7.	
35.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. 3D finite element modeling and multi-objective opti­
mization for controlling the electrochemical discharge drilling parameters using
the tool feed monitoring system. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part C J Mech Eng Sci 2022;
236:7829–52. https://doi.org/10.1177/09544062221079170.	
36.	 Harugade M, Waigaonkar S, Kulkarni G, Diering M. Experimental investigations
of magnetic field-assisted high-speed electrochemical discharge drilling. Mater
Manuf Process 2023;38:1243–54. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2021.2016814.	
37.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.	
38.	 Kulkarni A, Sharan R, Lal G. An experimental study of discharge mechanism in
electrochemical discharge machining. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 2002;42:1121–7.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0890-6955(02)00058-5.	
39.	 Gupta A, Joshi SS. Modelling effect of magnetic field on material removal in dry
electrical discharge machining. Plasma Sci Technol 2017;19:025505. https://doi.org/
10.1088/2058-6272/19/2/025505.	
40.	 Shabgard MR, Gholipoor A, Mohammadpourfard M. Investigating the effects of
external magnetic field on machining characteristics of electrical discharge machin­
ing process, numerically and experimentally. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2019; 102:
55–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-018-3167-3.	
41.	 Hajian M, Razfar MR, Etefagh AH. Experimental study of tool bending force and
feed rate in ECDM milling. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2017;91:1677–87. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00170-016-9860-1.

69
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-5
Triplex Hybrid-Based 
Ultrasonic-Assisted 
Electrochemical 
Discharge Machining 
Process
Anurag Shanu and Pradeep Dixit
Electrochemical Microfabrication Laboratory, 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India
5.1  ELECTROCHEMICAL DISCHARGE MACHINING (ECDM)
The increasing demand for faster and more reliable wireless communication 
has expanded the use of nonconducting materials such as glass, alumina, and 
other ceramic materials as alternatives to silicon in RF microelectromechani­
cal systems (MEMS) applications [1]. These materials have superior electrical 
insulation, low dielectric constant, and high-temperature capabilities, favored for 
radiofrequency applications where minimal signal loss and precise impedance 
control are essential [2]. However, their brittleness and hardness present signifi­
cant challenges in micromachining, necessitating advanced techniques like elec­
trochemical discharge machining (ECDM) to create microfeatures [3].
The ECDM process operates in an electrolytic environment where a con­
ductive tool, typically made from materials like stainless steel or tungsten, is 
positioned near the workpiece without making direct contact. Applying a DC 
or pulsed DC voltage between the two electrodes initiates electrolysis, forming 
hydrogen bubbles on the tool electrode [4]. When the voltage exceeds a critical 
value, a spark discharge occurs, removing material from the workpiece [5]. The 
ECDM technique has been employed to create various microfeatures, such as 
through-holes, blind holes, embedded redistribution lines (RDL), microchannels, 
etc., in glass-based materials, as shown in Figure 5.1. Harindra et al. [6] cre­
ated through-holes (Figure 5.1a), which were later filled with electroplated copper 
to create 3D interconnects required in 3D packaging (Figure 5.1b). They also 
fabricated macro-sized through-holes and connected them with microchannels 
for microfluidic applications (Figure 5.1c–d) [7]. Karan et al. [8] demonstrated 
that the adhesion of the electroless copper deposited on glass substrates could be 
improved by creating localized surface roughening. By varying ECDM process 
5

70
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
parameters such as voltage, feed rate, and gap, they created regions with different 
surface roughness levels (i.e., ECDM-L, ECDM-H), as shown in Figure 5.1(e–j). 
The ECDM-L sample, processed using KOH electrolyte, exhibited a roughness 
value (Sq) of 1.5 µm. In contrast, the ECDM-H sample, machined using NaOH 
electrolyte, showed a much higher roughness value (Sq) of 30 µm. Meanwhile, 
Patro et al. [9] fabricated blind holes in glass substrates using high aspect ratio 
microtools, which further can be electroless deposited for MEMS packaging 
applications. The top and cross-sectional views of these blind holes are shown 
in Figure 5.1(k–l). Various researchers have also demonstrated the creation of 
microchannels in glass substrates. Bajpai et al. [10] presented a low-cost 3D 
inductor fabricated on a glass substrate. They used the ECDM process to fabri­
cate through-holes in the glass substrate, and embedded RDLs were made using 
ECDM milling. These through-holes and RDLs were later nickel and copper elec­
trodeposited to increase metallization thickness (Figure 5.1m–n).
Although ECDM is used to micromachine glass-based materials, fabricating 
high aspect ratio blinds and through-holes remains challenging [12]. The process 
often finds it challenging to remove debris particles beneath the tool electrode, 
especially in narrow and deep microfeatures, leading to clogging and irregu­
lar material removal [13]. Additionally, the removal rate in ECDM is relatively 
low, and surface quality is often inconsistent due to erratic discharge behavior 
[14]. Spark discharge typically occurs at the tool’s edge, removing material from 
the affected area while leaving the central part unmachined, hindering further 
penetration into the workpiece [15]. Accumulated debris and electrolyte residue 
at the bottom of the tool surface further degrades machining performance [16]. 
These challenges, including low process efficiency, poor surface quality, and low 
material removal rates (MRRs), have led to the development of hybrid machin­
ing processes. By integrating additional energy sources such as magnetic fields, 
ultrasonic vibrations, or rotary tool movement, hybrid processes aim to enhance 
the overall efficiency and effectiveness of ECDM, addressing the limitations 
of traditional methods [17]. Consequently, researchers have explored various 
FIGURE 5.1  Process capabilities of ECDM in glass-based materials [7–11].

71
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
hybridization techniques to improve ECDM performance. Xu et al. [18] utilized a 
magnetic field to enhance the process performance through the magnetohydrody­
namic (MHD) effect, which modifies the film thickness on the tool electrode [19]. 
Bahar et al. further advanced this approach by employing rotary-magnetic dual 
assistance in ECDM, which improved hole circularity by facilitating the evacu­
ation of gas bubbles [20]. While magnetic field assistance can alter the shape of 
the insulating film at the tool surface, it does not fully address the challenge of 
removing electrolytic byproducts.
Other hybrid approaches include rotary-assisted ECDM, where the tool rotates 
to improve flushing by replenishing the electrolyte [21]. While the addition of 
rotary motion aids in replenishing the electrolyte, it is unsuitable for multi-tip 
tools, which are essential for increasing the machining rate. Figure 5.2 compares 
the capabilities of ECDM, rotary-ECDM, and ultrasonic-assisted electrochemical 
discharge machining (UA-ECDM) processes.
It highlights the differences in electrolyte replenishment, sludge removal, and 
aspect ratio capabilities across the three processes. UA-ECDM, enhanced by ultra­
sonic vibrations, ensures effective sludge removal and improved material removal 
through cavitation. Additionally, it supports a multi-tip tool setup, achieving aspect 
ratios greater than 4. Ultrasonic assistance in ECDM represents a significant 
advancement in hybrid machining processes. By incorporating ultrasonic vibra­
tions, this technique addresses key limitations of conventional ECDM, such as low 
MRRs due to debris accumulation and inefficient electrolyte flushing. Ultrasonic 
vibrations enhance debris and gas bubble evacuation, reduce clogging, and facili­
tate the machining of high aspect ratio microfeatures [22]. Moreover, the cavitation 
effects induced by these vibrations promote localized material removal, signifi­
cantly improving overall machining performance.
FIGURE 5.2  Comparative illustration of ECDM, rotary ECDM, and UA-ECDM.

72
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
5.2  ULTRASONIC-ASSISTED ECDM AND ITS MECHANISM
Ultrasonic-assisted vibrations, typically ranging from 20 to 40 kHz with 
micrometer-scale amplitudes, are employed in various machining processes 
to enhance efficiency. Depending on the specific process requirements, these 
vibrations can be applied to the tool, the electrolytic medium, or the workpiece 
substrate. Figure 5.3(a) depicts the UA-ECDM setup, integrating ultrasonic 
vibrations with traditional ECDM. The setup comprises an ultrasonic power 
unit, piezoelectric transducer, and multi-tip tool. High-frequency vibrations are 
generated by piezoelectric transducers, which convert electrical energy into 
mechanical motion, which is further transferred to the tool electrode through a 
horn. The system includes an electrolyte circulation system, a counter electrode, 
and a power supply. Researchers have demonstrated that ultrasonic vibrations 
enhance material removal by improving the microhole gap’s spark discharge 
and electrolyte circulation, which leads to more uniform material removal and 
higher machining rates. Furthermore, ultrasonic vibrations contribute to more 
effective debris removal and electrolyte replenishment through vibrations of the 
FIGURE 5.3  Schematic representation of (a) experimental setup and (b and c) mecha­
nism of UA-ECDM.

73
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
tool electrode, which is advantageous for creating high aspect ratio holes. These 
improvements make UA-ECDM particularly effective for intricate machining, 
especially in applications requiring high precision, such as MEMS devices, 
microfluidic devices, and applications in biomedical engineering [23].
5.2.1  Effect of Ultrasonic Assistance on the Material 
Removal Mechanism
The material removal mechanisms in UA-ECDM differ notably from traditional 
ECDM due to the integration of ultrasonic vibration. In traditional ECDM, mate­
rial removal is achieved through melting and high-temperature chemical etch­
ing induced by localized spark discharge at the workpiece. The process relies on 
breaking an insulating film at high electric field intensity, generating localized 
thermal energy that melts and vaporizes the material. However, ECDM faces 
challenges like tool sticking, sludge accumulation, and inadequate electrolyte 
replenishment, which can reduce efficiency.
Ultrasonic vibration assistance in the ECDM process alters the material dis­
solution behavior significantly. The ultrasonic energy facilitates the movement 
of the tool, which helps overcome workpiece-tool sticking and enhances the 
removal of accumulated sludge. The ultrasonic vibrations create additional drag 
and buoyancy forces that assist in forming a thin film when the tool moves 
upward (Figure 5.3b). In contrast, a thicker gas film develops during the down­
ward stroke (Figure 5.3c). This dynamic interaction leads to improved discharge 
behavior at the tool face.
In UA-ECDM, the tool electrode undergoes ultrasonic vibrations, generat­
ing high-frequency oscillations. This vibration causes rapid compression and 
expansion of the bubbles, leading to enhanced cavitation effects. As the bubbles 
collapse, micro-jets and shock waves are generated [24]. These waves exert addi­
tional mechanical forces on debris in the microhole gap, improving material 
removal in addition to the thermal and chemical effects observed in conventional 
ECDM. The ultrasonic vibrations also aid in expelling debris and facilitating the 
replacement of fresh electrolytes in the machining region.
5.2.2  Gas Film Formation in the UA-ECDM Process
Ultrasonic assistance in the ECDM technique plays a significant role in film 
formation, which is crucial for the overall machining performance [25]. 
Figure 5.4(a) illustrates the influence of vibration amplitude on the thickness of 
gas film. Without ultrasonic vibration, the gap between the machined microhole 
and the tool’s bottom face is larger, resulting in a thick gas film, as observed 
in conventional ECDM. However, with increased ultrasonic amplitude, the gap 
between the tool’s bottom face and the microhole reduced, reducing gas film 
thickness. Consequently, a thinner gas film forms under the influence of ultra­
sonic vibrations. Ultrasonic vibrations facilitate the development of a gas film 

74
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
on the tool surface by promoting the coalescence of hydrogen bubbles [26]. This 
gas film acts as an insulator, and its characteristics directly affect the discharge 
behavior in the ECDM technique. The spark discharge depends on the thickness 
of the film. Singh et al. reported that as the power rating of ultrasonic vibrations 
increases, the film thickness decreases [27]. This reduction is due to the drag 
force generated through high-frequency vibrations, which counterbalance the 
surface tension of the gas film.
High-speed images of the film formed at varying amplitudes are shown in 
Figure 5.4(b). Ultrasonic vibrations create a dynamic environment that signifi­
cantly influences gas bubbles’ nucleation, growth, and departure from the tool 
surface. As the vibration amplitude increases, the drag force on the gas bubbles 
also intensifies, decreasing gas film thickness [28]. This reduction in gas thick­
ness plays a vital role in discharge characteristics. The thinner film formed 
during the tool’s upward and downward motion is beneficial, as it facilitates 
the generation of high-frequency discharges. These discharges are essential for 
improving the depth of penetration (DOP) and overall machining efficiency in 
ECDM [29].
As depicted in Figure 5.4(b), increasing the ultrasonic power to 20% results in 
a thin and unstable gas film, which can burst prematurely before spark discharges 
occur [27]. This instability may reduce the effectiveness of the ECDM process, 
as a stable gas film is crucial for maintaining consistent discharge. Introducing 
ultrasonic vibrations promotes high-frequency spark energy liberations, aided by 
FIGURE 5.4  Effect of ultrasonic vibration on film formation. (a) Schematic of the 
impact of varying ultrasonic amplitudes on gas bubble dynamics, (b) high-speed images 
of the influence of power ratings on film characteristics [27].

75
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
the thin film formed through the tool’s upward and downward motion [30]. This 
high frequency indicates a more efficient breakdown of the gas film, leading to 
improved energy transfer and material removal. However, excessive thinning of 
the gas film at higher power ratings can lead to process inefficiencies, emphasiz­
ing the need for optimal control of ultrasonic parameters to maintain a consistent 
and effective gas film throughout the machining process.
5.2.3  Effect of Ultrasonic Vibration on the 
Temperature Distribution
The application of ultrasonic vibration significantly influences temperature 
distribution in the machining process. Chen et al. [22] reported that increasing 
the ultrasonic vibration amplitude enhances the tool’s oscillating motion and 
the associated heat source, which expands the heat transfer area, resulting in a 
more uniform temperature distribution. This uniformity in temperature leads 
to a reduced maximum temperature at the center, which decreases further with 
higher vibration amplitudes (Figure 5.5). Additionally, their study demonstrated 
that the vibration amplitude directly influences the crater depth. As the vibration 
amplitude increases, both the temperature and discharge depth decrease. This 
is attributed to the improved heat dissipation and reduced heat accumulation 
enabled by ultrasonic vibrations, which effectively regulate the thermal environ­
ment during machining.
As illustrated in Figure 5.5, the crater depth from a single discharge was mea­
sured at 21.2 µm without ultrasonic assistance (Figure 5.5a). However, when 
ultrasonic amplitudes of 5 µm and 10 µm were applied, the microhole depths 
decreased to 17.85 µm and 15.42 µm, respectively (Figure 5.5b–c). Higher ultra­
sonic amplitudes produce shallower craters, indicating more controlled material 
removal. The reduction in crater depth with increased amplitude suggests that 
the machining process becomes more stable. A shallower crater depth is often 
associated with reduced thermal damage and improved surface quality, which is 
essential for high-precision applications.
FIGURE 5.5  Crater depth and crater temperature under different ultrasonic ampli­
tudes [31].

76
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
5.2.4  Effect of Ultrasonic Assistance on Sludge Removal Efficiency
Ultrasonic assistance is crucial in enhancing debris motion during advanced 
machining techniques such as electrochemical machining (ECM), electrical dis­
charge machining (EDM), and ECDM. The influence of ultrasonic vibration is the 
same in all the micromachining techniques, irrespective of the process. Ye et al. 
[32] and Wang et al. [33] demonstrated that in ECM drilling, ultrasonic vibrations 
enhance material dissolution, increase electrolyte flow velocity, and amplify MRRs, 
leading to improved machining quality and surface finish. Similarly, in EDM, Yin 
et al. [34] and Zhang et al. [35] reported that ultrasonic vibrations improve debris 
removal, increase MRRs, and reduce electrode wear, resulting in higher drilling 
efficiency and better micro-hole quality. The effect of ultrasonic-assisted EDM on 
debris removal efficiency is depicted in Figure 5.6 through simulation.
Particularly Figure 5.6(a–c) represents the debris removal efficiency from the 
microhole bottom to the exit of the microhole at different tool vibration ampli­
tudes. At 0.5 µm amplitude, most debris particles stay at the microhole bottom. 
In contrast, at 2 and 6 µm amplitude, the debris removal efficiency improves, and 
the effective number of particles reaching the microhole exit increases. Ultrasonic 
vibrations create a dynamic environment that facilitates the movement of debris 
away from the machining area. This helps to dislodge debris that accumulates 
at the bottom of micro-holes, which is essential for maintaining machining effi­
ciency. Excessive debris can lead to abnormal discharges and increased electrode 
wear, reducing machining performance. Studies show that more debris particles 
are expelled at an optimal amplitude, indicating that the vibrating electrode effec­
tively enhances debris removal and improves overall processing performance.
In ECDM, ultrasonic assistance significantly improves sludge removal and 
electrolyte replenishment efficiency [36]. Ultrasonic vibrations generate a dynamic 
environment that helps dislodge accumulated sludge from the tool’s bottom. 
High-frequency vibrations facilitate the movement of the tool electrode, aiding 
FIGURE 5.6  Debris motion in ultrasonic-assisted EDM at different amplitudes: (a) 0.5 μm, 
(b) 2 μm, and (c) 6 μm [34].

77
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
in removing debris that could hinder machining performance. Additionally, ultra­
sonic assistance produces cavitation bubbles in the electrolyte [36]. When these 
bubbles collapse, they generate high-pressure shock waves like liquid jets, effec­
tively ejecting molten material and sludge from the machining zone. These effects 
make ultrasonic-assisted machining particularly valuable for high-precision appli­
cations like MEMS packaging, hydrogen fuel cells, and medical devices.
5.3  CAPABILITIES OF THE UA-ECDM PROCESS
The vibration amplitude in UA-ECDM plays a crucial role in machining, par­
ticularly influencing the hole overcut. Elhami et al. [37] reported that the MRR 
improves significantly as vibration amplitude increases. This improvement is 
attributed to the enhanced ultrasonic energy, which enhances the electrochemi­
cal discharge process and enables more effective material removal. The ultrasonic 
vibrations contribute to cavitation and chemical etching, both critical mechanisms 
in UA-ECDM. Increasing the amplitude amplifies these effects, leading to more 
efficient material removal and potentially reducing the heat-affected zone in the 
machined area. Wang et al. [38] reported that as vibration amplitude increases, 
the diameter of the machined hole initially decreases and then increases, as illus­
trated in Figure 5.7(a). The microholes machined using conventional ECDM and 
UA-ECDM are shown in Figures 5.7(b) and 5.7(c), respectively. In the UA-ECDM 
process, the hole diameter was reduced to 135 μm compared to 163 μm in the 
ECDM process. Additionally, the hole produced by ECDM exhibited a heat-
affected zone (HAZ) and thermal damage around its periphery. They further 
noted that when the vibration amplitude exceeds 7.5 μm, the stability of the gas 
film deteriorates, making it difficult to maintain a thin film.
This leads to a decrease in discharge frequency and an increase in the micro­
hole diameter, thereby negatively affecting the localization and precision of the 
machining process. Along with that, the hole machined using ECDM had HAZ 
and thermal damage around the periphery of the hole. They reported that when 
the amplitude exceeds 7.5 μm, the stability of the film formation deteriorates, 
making it more challenging to maintain a thin film. This results in a decrease 
in discharge frequency and an increase in the diameter of the microholes, which 
negatively impacts the localization of the machining process.
In a similar study on micro-milling experiments, Chen et al. [31] found that 
increasing the vibration amplitude first decreases the microchannel width and then 
increases. Notably, at an amplitude of 7.5 μm, the microchannel width reaches a 
minimum of 118.9 μm, significantly narrower than the 139.4 μm width achieved 
through conventional ECDM without ultrasonic assistance. The characteristics of 
different vibration amplitudes on fabricated microchannel are illustrated in Figure 
5.7(d–f). This reduction in microchannel width with higher ultrasonic amplitude 
indicates that the electrochemical discharge behavior becomes more stable. The 
improved uniformity of the discharge current leads to more precise material 
removal and better machining behavior. This stability is crucial for achieving 
high-quality microstructures, as it minimizes variations in channel dimensions.

78
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
5.4  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
UA-ECDM represents a significant advancement in nontraditional machining 
technologies, offering substantial improvements over conventional ECDM. By 
integrating high-frequency ultrasonic vibrations, UA-ECDM enhances several 
key aspects of the machining process, including debris removal, electrolyte 
FIGURE 5.7  Effect of ultrasonic amplitude on (a–c) microhole diameter [38], 
(d–f) microchannel width [31].

79
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
replenishment, and MRRs. The ultrasonic vibrations contribute to more uniform 
discharge characteristics and improved control over the machining process, mak­
ing UA-ECDM particularly effective for applications requiring high precision, 
such as MEMS and microfluidic device fabrication. The key conclusions of this 
study are as follows:
1.	Ultrasonic vibrations improve debris removal and electrolyte replen­
ishment, addressing challenges such as inefficient sludge removal and 
inconsistent MRRs.
2.	Applying ultrasonic vibrations contributes to stable film formation and 
enhances the uniformity of discharge characteristics. This results in bet­
ter control over the machining process, improving surface quality, and 
more precise microfeature fabrication.
3.	Future research should focus on developing mathematical models to val­
idate sludge removal efficiency under ultrasonic vibration, particularly 
for deep microfeature fabrication.
4.	Current numerical models predominantly address thermal effects. 
Future work should aim to create comprehensive models incorporating 
debris removal phenomena and cavitation’s effects to predict better and 
control the UA-ECDM process.
Addressing these areas will advance the capabilities of UA-ECDM, expand­
ing its applicability and enhancing its effectiveness for various high-precision 
machining applications.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Watanabe AO, Ali M, Sayeed SYB, Tummala RR, Pulugurtha MR. A review of 
5G front-end systems package integration. IEEE Trans Compon Packaging Manuf 
Technol 2021;11:118–33. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCPMT.2020.3041412.
	
2.	 Shanu A, Sharma P, Dixit P. Micromachining of alumina ceramic for micro­sys­tems 
applications: A systematic review, challenges and future opportunities. Mater Manuf 
Process 2024;39:892–924. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2023.2290244.
	
3.	 Mishra DK, Dixit P. Fabrication of 3D microstructures in glass by direct writing 
electrochemical discharge machining. Mater Manuf Process 2023;38:999–1008. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2022.2146718.
	
4.	 Arab J, Mishra DK, Dixit P. Measurement and analysis of the geometric characteris­
tics of microholes and tool wear for varying tool-workpiece gaps in electrochemical 
discharge drilling. Measurement (Lond) 2021;168:108463. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2020.108463.
	
5.	 Singh T, Dvivedi A. On energy channelization analysis for ECSM process dur­
ing fabrication of microchannels in glass. Mater Manuf Process 2022;37:1506–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2021.2016825.
	
6.	 Kannojia HK, Arab J, Pegu BJ, Dixit P. Fabrication and characterization of through-
glass vias by the ECDM process. J Electrochem Soc 2019;166:D531–38. https://doi.
org/10.1149/2.0141913jes.

80
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
	
7.	 Arab J, Dixit P. Formation of macro-sized through-holes in glass using notch-
shaped tubular electrodes in electrochemical discharge machining. J Manuf Process 
2022;78:92–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2022.03.052.
	
8.	 Pandey H, Pawar K, Dixit P. Localized surface roughening to improve adhe­
sion of electroless seed layer in through-glass vias. Mater Sci Semicond Process 
2024;183:108757. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mssp.2024.108757.
	
9.	 Patro SK, Mishra DK, Arab J, Dixit P. Numerical and experimental analysis of 
high-aspect-ratio micro-tool electrode fabrication using controlled electrochemi­
cal machining. J Appl Electrochem 2020;50:169–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10800-019-01380-5.
	 10.	 Kant Bajpai V, Kumar Mishra D, Dixit P. Fabrication of through-glass vias (TGV) 
based 3D microstructures in glass substrate by a lithography-free process for 
MEMS applications. Appl Surf Sci 2022;584:152494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apsusc.2022.152494.
	 11.	 Arab J, Mishra DK, Kannojia HK, Adhale P, Dixit P. Fabrication of multiple 
through-holes in non-conductive materials by electrochemical discharge machining 
for RF MEMS packaging. J Mater Process Technol 2019;271:542–53. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2019.04.032.
	 12.	 Arab J, Dixit P. Gas bubbles entrapment mechanism in the electrochemical discharge 
machining involving multi-tip array electrodes. J Manuf Process 2023;99:38–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.05.038.
	 13.	 Yang CH, Wang TC, Hung JC, Tsui HP. Ultrasonic vibration-assisted electrochemi­
cal discharge machining of quartz wafer micro-hole arrays. Processes 2023;11:3300. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/pr11123300.
	 14.	 Arya RK, Dvivedi A. Improving the electrochemical discharge machining 
(ECDM) process for deep-micro-hole drilling on glass by application of the elec­
trolyte-air injection. Ceram Int 2023;49:8916–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.
2022.11.047.
	 15.	 Jiang B, Lan S, Ni J, Zhang Z. Experimental investigation of spark generation in 
electrochemical discharge machining of non-conducting materials. J Mater Process 
Technol 2014;214:892–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2013.12.005.
	 16.	 Singh T, Dvivedi A. Impact of gas film thickness on the performance of RM-ECDM 
process during machining of glass. Mater Manuf Process 2022;37:652–63. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2021.1945092.
	 17.	 Han MS, Min BK, Lee SJ. Geometric improvement of electrochemical discharge 
micro-drilling using an ultrasonic-vibrated electrolyte. J Micromech Microeng 
2009;19:065004. https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/19/6/065004.
	 18.	 Xu Y, Chen J, Jiang B, Liu Y, Ni J. Experimental investigation of magnetohy­
drodynamic effect in electrochemical discharge machining. Int J Mech Sci 2018;
142–43:86–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2018.04.020.
	 19.	 Singh T, Appalanaidu B, Dvivedi A. Improvement in energy channelization behav­
iour during micro hole formation in Y-SZ ceramic with magnetic field assisted 
ECSM process. Measurement (Lond) 2022;194:111079. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.measurement.2022.111079.
	 20.	 Bahar D, Dvivedi A, Kumar P. Optimization of rotary-magnet assisted ECSM on 
borosilicate-glass using machine learning. Mater Manuf Process 2024;39:1101–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2024.2304853.
	 21.	 Singh T, Arya RK, Dvivedi A. Experimental investigations into rotary mode 
electrochemical discharge drilling (RM-ECDD) of metal matrix composites. Mach 
Sci Technol 2020;24:195–226. https://doi.org/10.1080/10910344.2019.1636270.

81
Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process  
	 22.	 Jia C, Liu Y, Wang T, Wang C, Wang K. Study on electrochemical discharge 
machining of small holes array on glass with ultrasonic vibrating tube electrode. 
Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2023;129:547–62. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-023-
12304-1.
	 23.	 Bagheri M, Sayadi D, Etefagh AH, Khajehzadeh M, Razfar MR. Drilling of 
Al2O3 ceramic using ultrasonic assisted electrochemical discharge machining 
process. Proc Inst Mech Eng E J Pro Mech Eng 2024;238:251–66. https://doi.
org/10.1177/09544089221141339.
	 24.	 Rathore RS, Dvivedi A. Experimental investigations and its dimensional analy­
sis–based modeling of the UAECDM process. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2020;111:
3241–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-020-06320-8.
	 25.	 Rathore RS, Dvivedi A. Sonication of tool electrode for utilizing high discharge 
energy during ECDM. Mater Manuf Process 2020;35:415–29. https://doi.org/10.108
0/10426914.2020.1718699.
	 26.	 Elhami S, Razfar MR. Effect of ultrasonic vibration on the single discharge of elec­
trochemical discharge machining. Mater Manuf Process 2018;33:444–51. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2017.1328113.
	 27.	 Singh T, Dvivedi A, Shanu A, Dixit P. Experimental investigations of energy chan­
nelization behavior in ultrasonic assisted electrochemical discharge machining. 
J Mater Process Technol 2021;293:117084. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2021.
117084.
	 28.	 Razfar MR, Behroozfar A, Ni J. Study of the effects of tool longitudinal oscillation 
on the machining speed of electrochemical discharge drilling of glass. Precis Eng 
2014;38:885–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2014.05.004.
	 29.	 Pawariya K, Dvivedi A, Singh T. On performance enhancement of electrochemical 
discharge trepanning (ECDT) process by sonication of tool electrode. Precis Eng 
2019;56:8–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2018.08.016.
	 30.	 Elhami S, Razfar MR. Study of the current signal and material removal during 
ultrasonic-assisted electrochemical discharge machining. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 
2017;92:1591–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-017-0224-2.
	 31.	 Chen Z, Liu Y, Wang T, Wang K. Ultrasonic assisted electrochemical discharge 
milling of complex glass microstructure with high-quality. J Manuf Process 
2023;94:94–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.03.044.
	 32.	 Ye Z, Chen X, Li G, Saxena KK, Arshad MH, Zhang Y. Enhancement mechanism 
of electrochemical drilling square-small holes with workpiece vibration. J Manuf 
Process 2024;113:197–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2024.01.064.
	 33.	 Wang M, Lv M, Zhang R, Tong W, Xu X. Effect of ultrasonic cavitation micro-jet 
impact on corrosion of material in ultrasonic assisted electrochemical microma­
chining. J Appl Electrochem 2023;53:1579–93. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10800-023-
01868-1.
	 34.	 Yin Z, Zhang P, Zhou P, Zhang K, Sun Q, Zhan Q, et al. A novel EDM method using 
longitudinal-torsional ultrasonic vibration (LTV) electrodes to improve machin­
ing performance for micro-holes. J Manuf Process 2023;102:231–43. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.07.023.
	 35.	 Zhang P, Yin Z, Yu M, Tao D, Yu D, Zhang Q, et al. Investigating mechanisms 
of debris removal in ultrasonic vibration-assisted EDM drilling. Int J Mech Sci 
2024;279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2024.109486.
	 36.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. A review on developments in electrolytes and 
their feeding methods for ECDM process. Silicon 2023;15:1571–95. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12633-022-02134-3.

82
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
	 37.	 Elhami S, Razfar MR. Analytical and experimental study on the integration of 
ultrasonically vibrated tool into the micro electro-chemical discharge drilling. 
Precis Eng 2017;47:424–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2016.09.015.
	 38.	 Wang T, Liu Y, Lv Z, Wang K. Theoretical and experimental study on localization 
improvement in ultrasonic vibration-assisted spark-assisted electrochemical drill­
ing process. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2022;121:5311–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00170-022-09642-x.

83
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-6
Introduction and 
Overview of Sequential 
Machining Processes
Sahil Sharma and Akshay Dvivedi
AMP Lab, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
Uttarakhand, India
Ashwani Verma 
Maharishi Markandeshwar (Deemed to be University), 
Mullana, India
6.1  INTRODUCTIONS
Owing to fulfilling the ever-increasing demand of tight tolerance, manufacturing 
enterprises are struggling for novel processing methods in order to manufacture 
miniaturized/micro parts. These micro-size parts are being deployed largely in 
emerging areas of microfluidic, microelectronics, microelectro-mechanical sys­
tems, medical diagnostic kits, automotive and military [1]. The usage of these 
micro-size parts is so increasing that it has given birth to newer processing methods 
and paths with distinctive features of low cost and precision [2]. Micromachining 
is carried out as an interacting participation of two entities, viz. tool and work 
material. This participating interaction forms the basis for categorizing noncon­
ventional machining processes into independent machining, hybrid machining, 
and sequential machining. Independent nonconventional machining processes 
employ various forms of energy, namely thermal and electrochemical-based 
energy, to subtract the material from the difficult-to-machine work material [3]. 
While effective, these methods often suffer from drawbacks such as high specific 
energy, low material removal rate (MRR), nonuniform surface topography, poor 
surface integrity, environmental and energy concerns. To address these issues, the 
concept of hybrid micromachining processes emerged, leveraging the “1 + 1 = 3” 
principle to enhance machining performance. This machining process can occur 
in mixed or assisted form [4]. Electrochemical discharge machining (ECDM), 
laser-assisted machining (LAM), magnetic field-assisted machining (MAM), and 
ultrasonic-assisted machining (UAM) are the few hybrid machining processes 
that offer better improvement but are hampered by high equipment cost, complex 
process control, maintenance issues, and inadequate material handling [5–7]. In 
overcoming these challenges, the evolution was thereby achieved in the devel­
opment of the sequential machining process. This novel approach involves the 
6

84
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
sequential execution of two or more processes to enhance the material handling 
and machining outcomes by leveraging the potential benefits of integrated pro­
cesses [8]. The process objective is to provide enhanced MRR and surface finish 
while reducing the surface flaws and environmental issues, by overcoming the 
limitations of both independent and hybrid processes.
This chapter intends to provide a comprehensive overview of sequential 
machining, including its classifications and strategic implementations that have not 
been addressed in earlier research. Additionally, it explores existing literature and 
offers a comparative analysis between sequential and hybrid machining processes 
to provide valuable insights into advanced machining approaches. The overview 
presented in this chapter is intended to assist practicing engineers and research­
ers working in the domain of efficiently machining difficult-to-machine materials, 
facilitating the adoption of sequential machining for real industrial applications.
6.2  NEED, CLASSIFICATION, AND STRATEGY OF SEQUENTIAL 
MACHINING PROCESSES
With an objective to produce microparts with tight tolerances, a newer technol­
ogy, viz. sequential machining, gained momentum and has been considered an 
advanced methodology as far as manufacturing for microparts is concerned. 
The sequential process aims to produce better-machined components through 
the sequential utilization of different nonconventional machining processes. The 
multifunctional approach offers several benefits, including an improved compo­
nent life cycle by producing thermally defect-free desired machined surfaces, 
increased flexibility in the machining cycle, and straightforward machining 
operation. By adopting this methodology, manufacturers can expect to achieve 
a higher level of accuracy without compromising surface quality. The character­
istics of the sequential approach (refer to Section 6.4), which highlight its advan­
tages in meeting industrial requirements, are depicted in Figure 6.1(a).
6.2.1  Classification of Sequential Machining Processes
The sequential machining process employs two or more machining processes in 
a predetermined sequence. As a result, depending on the process execution, the 
sequential process can be classified into two categories: (a) a two-step sequential 
machining process and (b) a multistep sequential machining process, as shown in 
Figure 6.1(b). The detailed description of these two sequential processes is as follows.
6.2.1.1  Two-step Sequential Machining Process
In two-step sequential machining process, two or more machining processes are 
employed sequentially on the same or different machining setups. Initially, the 
first process is utilized to remove the bulk material at high speed for creating the 
desired fundamental shape on the component. The cycle for which this initial 
phase is employed is known as the rough machining cycle. A secondary process 
subsequently is used to improve the surface integrity and topography by eliminat­
ing the nonuniform layers from the machined surface. This secondary process 

85
Introduction of Sequential Machining Processes
serves as the finishing process, and the cycle for which it is employed is known as 
the finishing cycle. In a two-step sequential process, the rough machining cycle 
and finishing cycle are executed sequentially. Therefore, this approach is straight­
forward and is helpful to achieve desired results up to the specified limit.
6.2.1.2  Multistep Sequential (or Tandem) Machining Process
It is an advanced version of a two-step sequential process, where the rough 
and finishing cycles are repeated multiple times with shorter machining cycles. 
Therefore, this machining strategy is also known as tandem machining. Because 
in a multistep machining process, the rough and finishing cycles are executed at 
regular intervals of time, therefore this approach offers excellent machined sur­
faces and higher precision compared to the standard two-step sequential method. 
The distinction between two-step and multistep sequential machining is illus­
trated in Figure 6.1(c). By employing the roughing and finishing cycles subse­
quently, the multistep sequential process ensures high-quality machining at every 
machining depth. However, the frequent changes in process parameters, working 
fluid, and power unit cycle make this method time-consuming and necessitate 
careful attention and specialized machine tools.
6.2.2  Strategy of Sequential Machining
Sequential machining involves the systematic and methodical approach to achieve 
high-standard machined components by utilizing the sequence of the machining 
process performed under optimal settings. This strategy includes several steps as 
FIGURE 6.1  Characteristics of sequential machining process [8].

86
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
shown in Figure 6.2, each focusing on specific aspects of the machining process 
from initial assessment to continuous improvement, described as follows.
a.	Initial assessment: The first step involves the comprehensive charac­
terization of initial machining outcomes, focusing on surface integrity, 
topography, dimensional accuracy, precision, and productivity.
b.	Mechanistic analysis: This phase entails an in-depth cause-and-effect 
analysis through the examination of material interaction behavior and 
degradation mechanisms. This helps to identify the root cause of prob­
lems by analyzing how the specific machining parameters affect the 
material and how the material responds to machining processes causing 
surface degradation.
c.	Identification of complementary process: The identification of comple­
mentary processes is associated with the investigation of secondary 
machining techniques that can supplement the main material removal 
process. The selection of a secondary process is determined by its capac­
ity to complement the main material removal process and its efficacy in 
attaining the desired outcomes.
d.	Planning and designing blueprint: This involves developing a thor­
ough plan that encompasses the design of machine tools and compo­
nents, along with the selection of process parameters to ensure that the 
intended outcomes are achieved.
e.	Integrating systems engineering: The integration of systems and engineer­
ing involves the development of control systems, power units, and jig sys­
tems. These systems are designed to ensure that the workpiece and tools 
are accurately repositioned while maintaining alignment and precision.
f.	Execution and in-depth characterization: During this phase, the com­
ponents are machined using carefully selected machining parameters 
to guarantee that the manufactured components adhere to all specified 
specifications and standards. Subsequently, a thorough examination 
FIGURE 6.2  Sequential machining process strategy.

87
Introduction of Sequential Machining Processes
needs to be carried out to evaluate the quality of the machined com­
ponents, encompassing an analysis of the surface quality, dimensional 
accuracy, and metallurgical properties.
g.	Continuous improvement: In this phase, the machining strategy is consis­
tently monitored to iteratively improve and optimize the machining out­
comes using performance indicators and feedback. This guarantees ongoing 
improvements to maintain high standards of efficiency and quality.
6.3  LITERATURE REVIEW
6.3.1  Two-step Sequential Machining Processes
This sequential combination is utilized to produce high-quality, thermal defect-free 
features in conductive material. In this approach, the high-speed capability of ther­
mal processes such as electric discharge machining (EDM) and laser machining are 
harnessed to produce prime features. However, the use of high-temperature sparks 
and laser beams in the thermal processes leads to the formation of different machined 
zones, namely the recast layer zone, heat-affected zone, and transformed zone on 
the worksurface, as shown in Figure 6.3(a). Subsequently, secondary finishing pro­
cesses like electrochemical machining (ECM) and electropolishing are employed 
sequentially to enhance the surface integrity of the thermally machined surfaces. 
These secondary processes are carried out in a manner that ensures the effective 
and controlled removal of thermally affected surfaces (Figure 6.3(b)). Therefore, 
this two-step combination is required when minimal changes in the surface quality 
are essential. Using this concept, Chung et al. [9] improved the surface roughness of 
microholes from 0.225 µm to 0.066 µm (Figure 6.3c–d). The microholes fabricated 
FIGURE 6.3  Surface integrity and SEM image of hole after (a, c) thermal, (b, d) finish­
ing processes [8, 9].

88
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
in 300 µm thick AISI 304 material were observed to be free from recast layer, and 
crater marks but exhibited a change in shape from sharp edges to rounded edges at 
entrance and exit sides of holes.
To control the excessive dissolution, Hung et al. [10] employed an electrop­
olishing method after EDM, fabricating burr-free and sharp-edged features in 
nickel alloy material. Using a 2 V applied voltage, nonrotary tool motion, and a 
combination of GLO-300 and phosphoric acid, microholes with a surface rough­
ness of 0.69 µm were achieved. In another study, Singh et al. [11] examined the 
effect of different feed rates of wire-ECM to produce slits with smooth surfaces. 
Initially, a laser power ranging from 3,400 W to 4,000 W was employed, resulting 
in the fabrication of a slit with striation marks. The subsequent ECM operation 
removed these striation marks and improved the surface roughness from 6–7 µm 
to 0.86 µm. To achieve smooth surfaces and nearly 95% removal of striation 
marks, a low feed rate of 5 µm/s was recommended over 25 µm/s, due to the suffi­
cient time available for the selective dissolution of the workpiece at the lower feed 
rate. owing to sufficient time associated with the lower feed rate. Figure 6.4(a–b) 
FIGURE 6.4  Feed rate effect during wire-ECM process after laser processing (a) at 
5 µm/sec, (b) 5 µm/sec [11]. SEM images of various artifacts fabricated using (c–e) laser 
and (f–h) sequential EDM machining processes [12].

89
Introduction of Sequential Machining Processes
illustrates the surface condition of fabricated slits after the laser-ECM combina­
tion with varying ECM feed rates, showing better surface quality at the lower feed 
rate (5 µm/s) compared to a higher feed rate (25 µm/s).
EDM is a thermal-based process in which electric sparks are used to remove 
material from the narrowest gap between the working electrodes. This selective 
material removal makes EDM suitable as a finishing process. Building on this 
concept, Kim et al. [12] utilized a sequential EDM process to finish laser-processed 
artifacts. Initially, the desired artifacts were fabricated using high-speed 20W 
laser machining, resulting in a thick recast layer around the fabricated items due 
to the high thermal energy of the laser beams. These recast layers create a narrow 
gap between the tool and workpiece during the EDM process, allowing for the 
selective removal of resolidified material from the machined artifacts through 
intense sparking. The potential of this sequential combination was demonstrated 
by producing various artifacts, as shown in Figure 6.4(c–h).
6.3.2  Multistep Sequential Machining Processes
Multistep sequential machining, also known as tandem machining, is an advanced 
version of a two-step sequential machining process. In this process, selected pro­
cesses are executed on the same machining platform without needing to change 
the workpiece, working fluid, or tool electrode. As a result, the alignment errors 
that typically occur in two-step machining processes are eliminated, making the 
multistep process superior to the two-step process. One notable example comes 
from Sharma et al. [1, 13], who proposed a combined electrochemical and elec­
trodischarge machining process for drilling microholes in Inconel 718 material 
using neutral electrolytes as a working fluid. The proposed process integrates 
ECM and EDM actions by adjusting the interelectrode gap and was observed to 
achieve a superior MRR, better surface quality, and improved hole circularity 
compared to individual ECM and EDM operations. In another study, Zhang et al. 
[14] proposed the integration of EDM and ECM into a unified process using a 
variable amplitude pulse power generator. By switching the machining between 
EDM and ECM through high and low voltage pulses, smooth machined surface 
microholes were fabricated, leading to an 89.57% reduction in surface roughness 
and a 37.92% rise in MRR.
6.4  COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF SEQUENTIAL MACHINING 
w.r.t HYBRID MACHINING
a.	Simplicity in process control: Hybrid machining necessitates complicated 
control systems that can manage different processes simultaneously, 
which makes monitoring and controlling more challenging. In contrast, 
the sequential machining process streamlines process management by 
employing well-established processes in a predetermined order. This 
facilitates effective control, monitoring, and adjustment of integrated 
operation parameters.

90
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
b.	Cost-effectiveness in initial investment: Investing in specialized equip­
ment that integrates different machining processes simultaneously can 
be expensive. On the other hand, the individual costs of setting up for 
each process are usually lower than investing in a single, hybrid machine. 
This makes the sequential machining strategy more practical for MSME 
industries.
c.	Specialization and performance optimization: Hybrid machining com­
promises the optimization of each integrated process to accommodate 
the combined functionality, which potentially impacts the performance 
and quality of individual processes. Conversely, by optimizing each 
machining process specifically for its intended task, it is possible to 
achieve excellent performance and quality for each individual operation 
in the sequential process. Consequently, tailoring each machining pro­
cess can yield the best results for its specific task.
d.	Material handling and workflow management: Managing material 
handling in a hybrid machining system is more intricate due to the 
simultaneous control of numerous processes, resulting in complex 
workflow management. In contrast, sequential machining enables the 
utilization of different processes at different intervals, hence streamlin­
ing the processing of materials and control of workflow management. 
Moreover, interconnected processes can be individually optimized 
for better efficiency, leading to smooth and uninterrupted transitions 
between processes.
e.	Flexibility and modularity: Hybrid machining generally refers to the 
integration of different processes within a single machine, which may 
restrict its flexibility in terms of adapting to various tasks. Sequential 
machining, on the other hand, provides better flexibility as inter­
connected machining operations can be executed on a distinct and 
dedicated platform. This enables convenient customization and recon­
figuration of different machining operations by changing the sequence 
of processes.
f.	Maintenance and troubleshooting: The integration of different pro­
cesses in a hybrid machining system increases the complexity and time 
required for the maintenance and diagnosing. Conversely, sequential 
machining streamlines these tasks by enabling the detection of problems 
that are specific to a particular machine or process phase. This improves 
the convenience of maintenance and troubleshooting.
6.5  CONCLUSIONS
Sequential processing is a developing machining approach that involves carry­
ing out various machining operations in a predetermined sequential order. This 
allows for the benefits of the associated processes to be integrated into the overall 
machining cycle. This chapter provides a comprehensive overview of sequential 
machining methods and categorizes the process into two groups: two-step and 

91
Introduction of Sequential Machining Processes
multistep sequential processes. Utilizing the multistep sequential processes yields 
improved machining outcomes in terms of enhanced machined surface quality. 
However, the requirement of specialized platforms or customized power sup­
plies complicates the process. The chapter additionally presents a novel strategy 
for executing sequential machining processes, supported by a literature review. 
Furthermore, a comprehensive analysis that compares sequential and hybrid 
machining emphasized the superiority of the sequential machining process in 
terms of process control, material handling, flexibility, cost-effectiveness, and 
maintenance. Essentially, the chapter presents the idea and benefits of the sequen­
tial machining process with the aim of encouraging researchers and engineers to 
adopt this approach for industrial applications.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge 
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process 
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.
	
2.	 Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in electrochemical discharge machining: 
A review on electrochemical discharge machining, process variants and their 
hybrid methods. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 2016;105:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijmachtools.2016.03.004.
	
3.	 Benedict GF. Nontraditional manufacturing processes. New York: CRC Press; 2017. 
https://doi.org/10.1201/9780203745410.
	
4.	 Saxena KK, Bellotti M, Qian J, Reynaerts D, Lauwers B, Luo X. Overview of hybrid 
machining processes. Hybrid Mach, vol. 3, Academic Press, UK: Elsevier; 2018, 
p. 21–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813059-9.00002-6.
	
5.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Parmar G, Dvivedi A. On material removal analysis in ECSM 
process during micro-channelling with rough tool: Experimental investigation and 
numerical simulation. Measurement 2024;229:114440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2024.114440.
	
6.	 Sharma S, Shamim FA, Dvivedi A, Kumar P, Singh T. Hybrid machining of metal 
matrix composites. Fabr Mach Adv Mater Compos, Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2022, 
p. 235–54. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003327370-13.
	
7.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Finite element modeling for comparing the machining 
performance of different electrolytes in ECDM. Arab J Sci Eng 2021;46:2097–119. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-020-05009-0.
	
8.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in tandem micro-machining pro­
cesses to mitigate the machining issues at micron level: a systematic review, chal­
lenges and future opportunities. Mach Sci Technol 2022;26:515–70. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10910344.2022.2129991.
	
9.	 Chung DK, Shin HS, Kim BH, Park MS, Chu CN. Surface finishing of micro-EDM 
holes using deionized water. J Micromech Microeng 2009;19:045025. https://doi.
org/10.1088/0960-1317/19/4/045025.
	 10.	 Hung JC, Yan BH, Liu HS, Chow HM. Micro-hole machining using micro-EDM 
combined with electropolishing. J Micromech Microeng 2006;16:1480–86. https://
doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/16/8/007.
	 11.	 Singh T, Arab J, Chen S-C. Improvement on surface quality of Inconel-718 slits 
via laser cutting and wire electrochemical machining processes. Opt Laser Technol 
2023;167:109637. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2023.109637.

92
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
	 12.	 Kim S, Kim BH, Chung DK, Shin HS, Chu CN. Hybrid micromachining using a 
nanosecond pulsed laser and micro EDM. J Micromech Microeng 2010;20:105037. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/20/1/015037.
	 13.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Comparative analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and 
electrodischarge machining process. J Micro Nano-Manuf 2024:1–18. https://doi.
org/10.1115/1.4066488.
	 14.	 Zhang Y, Xu Z, Wang Y, Ni Q, Ling X. Surface-improvement mechanism of hybrid 
electrochemical discharge process using variable-amplitude pulses. Chinese J 
Aeronaut 2020;33:2782–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cja.2019.09.003.

93
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-7
Thermal Plus 
Electrochemical Based 
Sequential Machining 
Processes
Julfekar Arab and Shih-Chi Chen
The Chinese University of Hong Kong Shatin, N.T., 
Hong Kong
7.1  INTRODUCTION
7.1.1  Sequential Manufacturing Processes
In recent years, the demand for precise and complex meso/micro features, devices, 
and systems has increased due to the development of various fields such as aero­
space, micro-total-analysis systems, telecommunications, microelectronics, and 
healthcare [1–4]. These fields often need complex 2D/3D meso/micro features in 
a variety of materials having more intricate shapes, sizes, higher precision, and 
improved surface features for smooth functioning during actual working conditions. 
Concerning these needs, a single machining or processing method is not sufficient 
owing to issues such as higher operating time, higher processing time, limitations 
on the surface quality and form accuracy [5]. Hence, there is a need of following the 
approach of cost-effective, complex multi-structural features-producing machining 
methods. To overcome these issues, researchers have worked toward developing the 
sequential machining techniques to produce the high-quality intricate features with 
faster processing at relatively lower operational costs [6]. Sequential machining pro­
cesses involve the approach of clubbing the different machining methods for form­
ing various meso/micro features on a workpiece in an appropriate and coordinated 
manner in a particular order [7]. The machining in sequential manner assimilates 
multiple stages of processes or machine tools or energies to get the desired output 
as per the demand of final product. This approach can include various machining 
techniques, such as mechanical cutting, thermal energy-based processes, chemical 
reaction-based processes, electrochemical reaction-based processes, grinding, and 
finishing methodologies, among others [8–10], as shown in Figure 7.1.
The sequential processes are generally carried out in a preplanned, defined 
order of operations to achieve the specific requirements of the workpiece mate­
rial with specific consideration to efficiency augmentation, reduction in setup 
time, lowering the machining costs, and form accuracy of final feature as well 
7

94
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
as product. Generally, the sequential machining processes involve two different 
processes, one specifically is the major process that is responsible for the majority 
of the material removal from the workpiece [11]. The second process is gener­
ally employed for the finishing operation or reducing the surface damages such 
as thermal damages, cracks, etc. Integrating different manufacturing operations 
into a sequential process has several advantages, such as optimized efficiency of 
production and improvement in the product quality with appropriate quality stan­
dards [12]. Moreover, sequential processes allow the effective usage of apparatus 
and resources with bigger suppleness in acclimating to variations in manufactur­
ing necessities or product design stipulations.
7.1.2  Thermo Plus Electrochemical Based Sequential Processes
of principles of machining based on heat or thermal energy source along with 
machining based on the electrochemical energy in a successive or sequential 
order. This sequential action is generally carried out to achieve a higher amount 
of material removal as well as getting defect-free and highly finished features in 
the workpiece.
Thermal Processes: Thermal energy-based processes work on the utiliza­
tion of heat energy to melt/vaporize/ablate the workpiece. This heat energy can 
be derived majorly from two sources such as laser heat and electric discharges. 
Electric discharge machining (EDM) and laser beam machining (LBM) are two 
main heat energy-based processes involved in the sequential machining processes. 
In these processes, large bulk of material is removed in a limited amount of time. 
Nevertheless, the heat energy involved in these processes generally produces 
rougher surfaces containing machining debris with other microstructural damages, 
especially heat-affected zones and white layers. These changes happened during 
the processing of the workpiece, reducing the operational life of the components 
[13]. Moreover, the residual stresses generated in the workpiece during thermal 
energy-based processes are of a random nature and can lead to premature failure 
of the component [14]. Hence, a secondary or additional process is needed to over­
come the issues with the primary thermal energy-based process, which can be col­
lectively termed sequential machining process. The secondary process should be 
FIGURE 7.1  Different sequential machining process.
Thermo plus electrochemical based sequential processes involve the utilization 

95
Electrochemical Based Sequential Machining Processes
able to mitigate the thermal damages and improve the surface finish so that pro­
cessed workpiece contains appropriate microstructure with reduced defects [15]. 
Electrochemical processes can be the suitable candidate for the additional process­
ing for the workpiece machined with the thermal energy-based process.
Electrochemical Processes: Electrochemical processes involve the anodic dis­
solution of the material processes in an electrochemical cell at the atomic level [16]. 
The principle of material removal is based on the Faradays law of electrolysis and 
removal depends on the electrical potential, valency, and electrochemical equiv­
alent in the electrochemical machining (ECM). The process is carried out in an 
electrochemical cell, where electrolysis reactions happen when electrical current is 
allowed to flow, resulting in the redox reaction at the cathode and anode terminals. 
Since the material removal is at the atomic level, the machined surface is free of 
thermal damage, heat-affected zones, thermal cracks, and recast layers [17].
Integration of Thermal and Electrochemical Methods for the Sequential 
Process: In this approach of sequential processes, thermal machining is followed 
by the ECM. The thermal machining processes, mainly EDM and LBM, are 
employed to do the main material removal from the workpiece, resulting in ther­
mal defects. After this step, the ECM and other variants of ECM, such as electro­
chemical finishing (ECF), are employed to improve the quality of the workpiece 
processed with thermal machining. In this postprocessing step, the thermal 
defects and other microstructural damages are removed owing to the atomic-level 
material removal criteria of the ECM process. The main combinations of the 
sequential processes available in the literature are shown in Figure 7.2. Further 
sections discuss major sequential machining processes with specific details.
FIGURE 7.2  Different thermal + electrochemical sequential machining process.

96
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
7.2  DIFFERENT APPROACHES FOR THERMO PLUS 
ELECTROCHEMICAL-BASED SEQUENTIAL PROCESSES
7.2.1  ED Drilling and EC Finishing
ED drilling and ECM are used sequentially to drill the hole with improved qual­
ity with a faster machining rate for the fabrication of film cooling holes used in 
aerospace applications. Zhang et al. [18] have employed the sequential process 
where the preliminary machining step was selected as the ED drilling followed 
by the ECM process as the secondary subsequent process. First, hole drilling 
with a diameter size of 0.5 mm in nickel-based superalloy having thickness of 
3 mm using the ED drilling method was conducted with the following input 
parameters: tool size = 0.5 mm, peak current = 8 to 20 A, pulse voltage = 80 V, 
pulse-on-time = 8 to 20 µs, and deionized water conductivity = 0.55 µS/cm. 
Based on the structural characterization of the machined hole, several thermally 
affected damages were observed. Holes were having a recast layer (~20 µm) 
with several cracks and voids on the surface. The images of holes produced 
with EC drilling experimental set up are shown in Figure 7.3. After the step 
FIGURE 7.3  Experimental set-ups for the ED drilling and ECM for the sequential pro­
cessing of the microholes indicating reduction in the recast layer, cracks, and voids [18].

97
Electrochemical Based Sequential Machining Processes
of hole formation with ED drilling, the EC finishing process was employed in 
order to mitigate the thermally affected issues accompanying the previous step. 
Here, a NaNO3 electrolyte solution with a machining voltage of 15–45 V and a 
machining time of 10–60 s was utilized. Post-EC finishing operation ensured the 
complete eradication of the recast layer along with improvement in the sidewall 
surface finish of the holes, as depicted in Figure 7.3.
Chung et al. [19] have also used the approach of using ED drilling and ECM 
sequential machining. In this work, hole ED drilling was carried out initially in 
a 0.3 mm thick AISI 304 grade stainless steel workpiece using a rotary (~1,200 
rpm) tungsten carbide tool electrode having a diameter of 90 µm. The micro­
scope images of the hole sidewall exhibited a rough surface with an average 
roughness value of 0.225 µm. To comprehensively enhance the surface finish of 
the sidewall of the ED-drilled hole, EC finishing process was used with deion­
ized (DI) water as an electrolyte and a similar tool electrode that was used for 
the ED drilling operation. A higher applied voltage of 80 V and lower conduc­
tivity DI water as the electrolyte were employed for the EC finishing operation. 
Other input parameters, that is, machining time of 6 min and tool rotation of 
1,200 rpm, were used to the hole with better finishing having an average surface 
roughness amount of 0.066 µm, which showed the improvement in the surface 
roughness. Nevertheless, the hole diameter increment was observed during the 
EC finishing process for a higher machining time (~6 minutes). The hole quality 
after ED drilling and subsequent sequential EC finishing process is shown in 
Figure 7.4(a–b).
FIGURE 7.4  (a) SEM images of ED drilling. (b) SEM image of ECM sequential process­
ing of the microholes indicating change in the surface roughness [19].

98
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
7.2.2  ED Milling and EC Milling
In this sequential process, milling operation using EDM is used, which is fol­
lowed by the ECM process to generate the 3D features involving intricate shapes 
for various microsystems applications. Zeng et al. [20] have explored the pos­
sibility of forming the cavity features using EDM process and finishing by the 
ECM process with fabrication of tool electrode on the same setup as shown in 
Figure 7.5. Before using the ED milling process, the tool electrode was formed 
using a sacrificial anti-copying metal block. The tungsten cylindrical rod of 
0.5 mm diameter was reduced to fabricate a 0.1 mm diameter tool electrode using 
EDM process. The ED milling operation was carried out further to produce the 
3D microcavities (square pit, five-pointed star, petal, etc.) in 0.4 mm workpiece 
(stainless steel) with the parameters: tool rotation = 2,000 rpm, open-circuit 
FIGURE 7.5  SEM images of the ED milling and ED milling + EC milling processing 
of (a1, a2) pyramid, (b1, b2) five-pointed star, and (c1, c2) petal-shaped structures [20].

99
Electrochemical Based Sequential Machining Processes
voltage = 250 V, pulse interval = 10 µs, discharge time = 7 µs. After the charac­
terization of 3D feature, a rough surface along with craters and thermally affected 
regions such as micropores were identified. So, in the next step, to produce the 
surface with good quality and confiscate the micropores and cracks, EC milling 
step was carried out, with the input parameters: tool feed = 10 µm/s, machining 
voltage = 8–10 V, pulse on/off time = 0.42 µs/0.58 µs. NaClO3 aqueous electro­
lyte with 3 wt% concentration was used along with the EDTA additive of 1 wt% 
concentration for carrying anodic dissolution.
Provision of the EC milling step resulted in a decrement in average surface 
roughness value from 0.7 µm to 0.143 µm. Complete removal of recast layer, 
micropores, and craters was observed after EC milling step. The dimensional 
accuracy of the 3D parts was constrained by the adjusting EC milling conditions 
and choosing proper tool electrode path with an aim to reduce the stray corrosion. 
The 3D parts after ED milling and EC milling are shown in Figure 7.5, which 
indicates the improvement in 3D part quality after sequential processing.
7.2.3  Wire-EDM and Wire-ECM
Wire-EDM process is a distinct type of the EDM process and specifically employed 
for the cutting operation to produce intricate and complicated shapes for different 
applications [21–24]. This variant of EDM has the similar issues of rough surface 
generation with voids and recast layer and hence needs a secondary finishing pro­
cess. In case of cut samples produced by wire-EDM, the wire-ECM process is a 
suitable process for the finishing step. Tayade et al. [25] explored the sequential 
process involving the wire-EDM and wire-ECM to produce the micro-grooves 
(length 800 µm) in the sheet of titanium alloy (Ti6Al4V) of 0.4 mm thickness. 
Brass wire tool electrode with a diameter of 0.25 mm was used in the wire-EDM 
process with wire feed rate of 25 m/min. Other parameters were set as: servo 
voltage = 10–55 V, pulse-on time = 4–22 µs. As displayed in Figure 7.6, the groove 
obtained after wire-EDM process shows the rough edges as well as poor surface 
finish. The machined groove was then subjected to wire-ECM process.
The wire-ECM parameters included brass wire diameter = 0.25 mm, electro­
lyte concentration = 1M NaNO3 + 1M NaCl, machining time = 30–120 s, machin­
ing voltage = 6–12 V. The surface roughness (Ra) obtained after wire-ECM was 
noted at 0.0734 µm, whereas the surface roughness after wire-EDM process was 
observed at 0.124 µm. Moreover, the edges of micro-grooves were observed to be 
straight with negligible increment in the overcut as shown in Figure 7.6(a–b). In 
other work, Plakhotnyi et al. [26] have implemented the sequential process involv­
ing wire-EDM and wire-ECM processes to machine pure iron metal for magnetic 
optics application. The wire-EDM process was subjected to cutting of the work­
piece with parameters as: wire = brass, 0.2 mm diameter, pulse-on time = 3 µs, 
wire tension = 6–8 N. The workpiece cut with wire-EDM process was analyzed 
using profilometer and microscopic images. Wire-ECM method was selected as 
postprocessing for mitigation of the recast layer and to enhance the surface finish. 
The wire electrode for the wire-ECM process was similar to that of wire-EDM 

100
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
process and NaCl electrolyte with 1M concentration was used as working medium. 
The microscopic images after wire-ECM process exhibit the surface without recast 
layer and 77% improvement in surface finish, as shown in Figure 7.6(c–d).
7.2.4  Laser Drilling and ECM
Laser beam machining and its variant involve application of high-energy beam 
on the target material resulting in melting and vaporization of the material to 
produce the complex and intricate features regardless of the hardness and con­
ductivity of the material [27]. Nevertheless, LBM process uses thermal energy 
to machine the workpiece, which results in rough machined surface with recast 
layer. Hence, post-treatment of laser-processed samples is needed with additional 
methods to remove the thermal defects and improvise the machining quality.
Duan et al. [28] have used high-power laser drilling and ECM to machine good-
quality holes. The prefabrication of holes was performed using laser drilling with 
parameters: pulse width = 0.2 ms, energy of pulse = 3.2 J, repetition rate = 70 Hz, 
wavelength = 1 µm. The millisecond pulsed type Nd:YAG laser (GSI-JK300D) 
with gas assistance was used for drilling holes of varying sizes in the Inconel-718 
alloy. The machined holes shown in Figure 7.7 clearly indicate the noncircular 
holes with rough entrance side of the holes along with the recast and oxide layer. 
These prefabricated holes were subsequently subjected to ECM for a constant 
FIGURE 7.6  Optical images of cut features after (a) the wire-EDM and (b) sequential 
wire-EDM + wire-ECM processing [25]. (c, d) Transverse microsections optical images 
before and after sequential processing of wire-EDM + wire-ECM for iron material [26].

101
Electrochemical Based Sequential Machining Processes
machining time of 30 s. The electrochemical head was provided with a wire of 
tungsten steel of 1 mm diameter. Here, the recast layer of 19 µm was completely 
removed. Nevertheless, the hole size increased significantly by 59% at hole exit 
after the ECM processing. The holes after laser processing and ECM are shown 
in Figure 7.7. Sun et al. [29] have used the sequential machining process where the 
FIGURE 7.7  Optical images of machined features after (a) laser drilling and (b) sequen­
tial processing with ECM with resulting feature (c, d, e) SEM Images of holes before and 
after sequential processing [28] (f, g) hole cross-section of sequentially processed work­
piece with complete removal of recast layer [29].

102
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
laser drilling and ECM processes are used in a combined way. A stainless-steel 
plate of 0.55 mm thickness was subjected to laser drilling to produce a hole of 
0.6 mm. The drilled holes indicated the recast layer at internal sidewalls as well 
as molten slag after micro-structural characterization, as shown in Figure 7.7(f–g). 
On the other hand, the hole quality was improved when the laser drilling and ECM 
were used in a combined fashion. In this case the molten slag issue was eliminated 
with no recast layer in the sidewall of the holes (see Figure 7.7f–g).
7.2.5  Laser Cutting and Wire-ECM
Laser cutting process is an important industrial process where various metals and 
polymers can be cut with faster machining speeds to produce intricate shapes [30]. 
Nonetheless, higher laser power sources generate huge thermal energy resulting 
in the formation of striation marks as well as highly rough machined surface. 
Hence, ECM-based postprocessing step is necessary to get smoother surface 
without any striation marks on the cut surface. A sequential machining approach 
involving laser cutting followed by the wire-ECM step was examined by Singh 
et al. [31]. In the reported work, a commercially available laser cutting machine 
with nitrogen gas assistance was used with laser power range of 3.4–4 kW and 
laser feed of 50–90 mm/s. The material cut using laser was Inconel-718 alloy with 
6 mm thickness. The surface topographies were analyzed using optical micro­
scopes and the images are shown in Figure 7.8.
As can be seen, the cut surface indicates the striation marks after laser cutting 
with high surface roughness value. In some extreme cases, where laser power was 
selected as 4 kW, the higher average surface roughness (~22 µm) was observed. 
After the laser cutting step, the wire-ECM step was employed on the pre-cut 
workpiece by laser cutting. A tungsten material wire diameter of 0.2 mm was uti­
lized along with the aqueous NaNO3 solution (10 wt%). The other process param­
eters include machining voltage = 8–10 V and wire feed rate = 5–25 µm/s. The 
surface roughness was reduced by 95% after wire-ECM step and it was observed 
that least surface roughness value of 0.86 µm was noted for the wire feed of 
5 µm/s and machining voltage of 8 V. The surface topographies of the cut work­
piece after wire-ECM are shown in Figure 7.8 and it can be noted that the stria­
tion marks were completely removed with optimized wire-ECM parameters.
7.2.6  Laser Milling and ECDM
The sequential process involving laser drilling and electrochemical discharge 
machining (ECDM) is used for fabricating good-quality and dimensionally pre­
cise holes in nonconductive substrates such as glass. ECDM process removes the 
material using electrochemical reactions leading to discharge heat energy gen­
eration and chemical etching action in the alkaline electrolyte [32–37]. In this 
sequential processing, laser milling can be used before or after the ECDM step 
as per the requirement of the holes. Zhao et al. [38] explored the sequential pro­
cess consisting of laser milling and the ECDM process. Here, the two possibilities 

103
Electrochemical Based Sequential Machining Processes
of sequential steps were illustrated: (i) laser preprocessing + ECDM postprocess­
ing and (ii) ECDM preprocessing + laser postprocessing. In both cases, the laser 
parameters and ECDM parameters were kept constant for creating microgrooves 
in the quartz glass workpiece with 1 mm thickness. Nd: YVO4 picosecond laser 
(Edgewave PX100-1-GM) system functioning in Gaussian beam mode at 1 µm 
wavelength and 12 ps pulse duration was used. Laser parameters include laser scan 
speed = 300 mm/s, spot diameter = 0.02 mm, and laser power = 12 W. The custom-
made ECDM set-up was used for carrying out the ECDM step and parameters 
include tool diameter = 0.2 mm, feed rate = 0.01 mm/s, machining voltage = 25 V, 
duty factor = 50%, pulse frequency = 1 kHz, electrolyte = 30 wt% NaOH. Laser 
postprocessing after ECDM resulted in effective removal of the protrusions at 
the bottom end of the machined microgrooves with average width of ~230 µm. 
The heat-affected zones were not significant due to cold processing effect of ps 
FIGURE 7.8  Schematic images of (a) laser cutting and sequential processing with wire-
ECM (b) with (c, d) optical images of cut samples with improvement in surface finish [31].

104
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
laser. In the second case, the microgrooves were laser preprocessed and subjected 
to ECDM process. These premachined microgrooves resulted into the reduction 
of the thickness of the hydrogen gas film during ECDM processing, which in turn 
reduced the distance of the electrical discharge erosion and improved the machin­
ing quality. The experimental outcomes indicate improved finish at the bottom 
surface of the microgroove after sequential ECDM process. The waviness at 
microgroove edges was reduced after postprocessing ECDM step due to chemical 
etching action during the processing. Moreover, the V-shaped cross-section of the 
microgrooves transformed into the U-shape, which indicates reduction in taper 
angle after the postprocessing by ECDM. These results of combined laser milling 
and ECDM are shown in Figure 7.9.
FIGURE 7.9  Optical images of microgrooves features after (a) laser drilling and sequen­
tial processing with ECDM with resulting feature (b, c) SEM images of micro-grooves 
with improvement in edge quality [38].

105
Electrochemical Based Sequential Machining Processes
7.3  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE SCOPE
Thermal and electrochemical energy-based sequential machining process 
exhibits the unique advantage of utilizing the benefits of the two different 
machining processes to get precise quality machined features with appropriate 
surface profiles. The diverse combinations of thermal processes (LBM and 
EDM) and the electrochemical processes (ECM and ECDM) can be clubbed 
together in a dedicated and suitable order as per the need of the final feature. 
Thermal machining processes comprise the utilization of heat energy to melt 
and vaporize the materials, while the ECM process involves controlled electrol­
ysis, which results in the anodic dissolution of materials. The thermal energy-
based processes contribute to the fast and higher rate of material removal from 
the target substrate. In contrast, the electrochemical processes lead to improve­
ments in form accuracy, precision, and surface finish improvement, along with 
the removal/reduction of thermal damages such as cracks and voids in the 
prefabricated features. As per the requirement of the feature shape and size, 
variants of EDM and laser machining such as ED drilling, ED milling, and 
wire-EDM are combined with ECM variants such as EC finishing, wire-ECM, 
etc. Nevertheless, some challenges are also associated with this type of sequen­
tial process. The major challenges include (i) the machine set-up and tooling 
costs, (ii) workpiece handling and positioning time, (iii) controlling tool wear 
and corresponding machining issues, (iv) increase in energy consumption due 
to multiple processes involved, incorporation of automation in the processes, 
and (v) handling of electrolytes during ECM step.
Hence, future directives for sequential processes must be practiced and 
adopted to make the process more advanced, easy, and controllable. Sensing 
and control methodologies for heat energy and chemical reactions during the 
process can empower improved critical control and monitoring of sequen­
tial machining processes involving thermal and electrochemical processes. 
The use of environmentally friendly electrolyte solutions, along with recy­
cling and waste reduction steps, can make the sequential process sustainable. 
Moreover, incorporating thermal and electrochemical processes with addi­
tional machining processes can enhance the capabilities and flexibility of the 
sequential process.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Kawai K, Yamaguchi F, Nakahara A, Shoji S. Fabrication of vertical and high-
aspect-ratio glass microfluidic device by borosilicate glass molding to silicon struc­
ture. 14th Int Conf Miniaturized Syst Chem Life Sci 2010, MicroTAS 2010 2010;2:
1193–95.
	
2.	 Jain VK, Chauhan AS, Thakur A, Sidpara A. Fabrications of micro tools and micro 
patterns by electrochemical micromachining and some investigation into over­
potential. J Adv Manuf Syst 2013;12:85–106. https://doi.org/10.1142/S021968671 
3500054.

106
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 	
3.	 Mahalik NP. Principle and applications of MEMS: A review. Int J Manuf Technol
Manag 2008;13:324. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJMTM.2008.016780.	
4.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.	
5.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Comparative analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and
electrodischarge machining process. J Micro Nano-Manufacturing 2024:1–18.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4066488.	
6.	 Chavoshi SZ, Luo X. Hybrid micro-machining processes: A review. Precis Eng
2015;41:1–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2015.03.001.	
7.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in tandem micro-machining pro­
cesses to mitigate the machining issues at micron level: A systematic review, chal­
lenges and future opportunities. Mach Sci Technol 2022;26:515–70. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10910344.2022.2129991.	
8.	 Ahmed N, Darwish S, Alahmari AM. Laser ablation and laser-hybrid ablation pro­
cesses: A review. Mater Manuf Process 2016;31:1121–42. https://doi.org/10.1080/10
426914.2015.1048359.	
9.	 Plaza S, Sanchez JA, Perez E, Gil R, Izquierdo B, Ortega N, et al. Experimental
study on micro EDM-drilling of Ti6Al4V using helical electrode. Precis Eng 2014;
38:821–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2014.04.010.	
10.	 Crichton IM, McGeough JA, Munro W, White C. Comparative studies of
ECM, EDM and ECAM. Precis Eng 1981;3:155–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/0141-
6359(81)90007-6.	
11.	 Kshirsagar N, Tayade RM. A review of sequential micro-machining: State of art
approach. Mater Today Proc 2023;72:1394–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.
2022.09.337.	
12.	 Chavoshi SZ, Goel S, Morantz P. Current trends and future of sequential micro-
machining processes on a single machine tool. Mater Des 2017;127:37–53. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2017.04.057.	
13.	 Jain VK, Rajurkar KP. An integrated approach for tool design in ECM. Precis Eng
1991;13:111–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/0141-6359(91)90502-A.	
14.	 Abhilash PM, Chakradhar D. Prediction and analysis of process failures by ANN
classification during wire-EDM of Inconel 718. Adv Manuf 2020;8:519–36. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s40436-020-00327-w.	
15.	 Tanjilul M, Ahmed A, Kumar AS, Rahman M. A study on EDM debris particle
size and flushing mechanism for efficient debris removal in EDM-drilling of
Inconel 718. J Mater Process Technol 2018;255:263–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmatprotec.2017.12.016.	
16.	 Tyagi A, Sharma V, Jain VK, Ramkumar J. Investigations into side gap in wire
electrochemical micromachining (wire-ECMM). Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2018;
94:4469–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-017-1150-z.	
17.	 Zhang A, Xu Z, Lu J, Wang Y. Improvement of blade platform accuracy in ECM
utilizing an auxiliary electrode. Mater Manuf Process 2020;35:951–60. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10426914.2020.1752920.	
18.	 Zhang Y, Xu Z, Zhu D, Qu N, Zhu Y. Drilling of film cooling holes by a EDM/ECM 
in situ combined process using internal and side flushing of tubular electrode. Int J
Adv Manuf Technol 2016;83:505–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-015-7575-3.	
19.	 Chung DK, Shin HS, Kim BH, Park MS, Chu CN. Surface finishing of micro-
EDM holes using deionized water. J Micromechanics Microengineering 2009;
19:045025. https://doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/19/4/045025.

107
Electrochemical Based Sequential Machining Processes	
20.	 Zeng Z, Wang Y, Wang Z, Shan D, He X. A study of micro-EDM and micro-
ECM combined milling for 3D metallic micro-structures. Precis Eng 2012;36:
500–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2012.01.005.	
21.	 Abhilash PM, Chakradhar D. ANFIS modelling of mean gap voltage variation to
predict wire breakages during wire EDM of Inconel 718. CIRP J Manuf Sci Technol 
2020;31:153–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2020.10.007.	
22.	 Spedding T, Wang Z. Study on modeling of wire EDM process. J Mater Process
Technol 1997;69:18–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924-0136(96)00033-7.	
23.	 Joshi K, Ananya A, Bhandarkar U, Joshi SS. Ultra thin silicon wafer slicing using
wire-EDM for solar cell application. Mater Des 2017;124:158–70. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.matdes.2017.03.059.	
24.	 Arab J, Kannojia HK, Dixit P. Effect of tool electrode roughness on the geo­
metric characteristics of through-holes formed by ECDM. Precis Eng 2019;60:
437–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2019.09.008.	
25.	 Tayade RM, Doloi B, Sarkar BR, Bhattacharyya B. Study of micro-groove genera­
tion on titanium alloy (Ti6Al4V) using novel WEDM and WECM sequential electro 
micro machining (SEMM) technique. Mater Today Proc 2020;22:1638–44. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.02.161.	
26.	 Plakhotnyi O, Osypenko V. Forming and finishing surface by sequential electro­
chemical-electrodischarge machining of precision magnetic optics parts. Int J Mach 
Mach Mater 2020;22:331. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJMMM.2020.107061.	
27.	 Yilbas BS, Nickel J, Coban A. Effect of oxygen in laser cutting process. Mater
Manuf Process 1997;12:1163–75. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426919708935210.	
28.	 Duan W, Mei X, Fan Z, Li J, Wang K, Zhang Y. Electrochemical corrosion assisted
laser drilling of micro-hole without recast layer. Optik (Stuttg) 2020;202:163577.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2019.163577.	
29.	 Sun A, Chang Y, Liu H. Metal micro-hole formation without recast layer by laser
machining and electrochemical machining. Optik (Stuttg) 2018;171:694–705.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2018.06.099.	
30.	 Vidya S, Wattal R, Singh L, Mathiyalagan P. CO2 laser micromachining of poly­
methyl methacrylate (PMMA): A review. 2021, p. 939–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-981-15-8542-5_82.	
31.	 Singh T, Arab J, Chen S-C. Improvement on surface quality of Inconel-718 slits
via laser cutting and wire electrochemical machining processes. Opt Laser Technol
2023;167:109637. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2023.109637.	
32.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. A review on developments in electrolytes and
their feeding methods for ECDM process. Silicon 2022;15:1571–95. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12633-022-02134-3.	
33.	 Arab J, Dixit P. Formation of macro-sized through-holes in glass using notch-
shaped tubular electrodes in electrochemical discharge machining. J Manuf Process 
2022;78:92–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2022.03.052.	
34.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Sidhu SS, Shlykov ES, Ablyaz TR. Determination of nanoin­
dentation behavior of HAZ on glass material machined via ECSM process through
simulation approach. Materials (Basel) 2022;15:5870. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ma15175870.	
35.	 Arab J, Dixit P. Influence of tool electrode feed rate in the electrochemical discharge 
drilling of a glass substrate. Mater Manuf Process 2020;35:1749–60. https://doi.org
/10.1080/10426914.2020.1784936.	
36.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Parmar G, Dvivedi A. On material removal analysis in ECSM
process during micro-channelling with rough tool: Experimental investigation and

108
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
numerical simulation. Measurement 2024;229:114440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2024.114440.
	 37.	 Arab J, Mishra DK, Kannojia HK, Adhale P, Dixit P. Fabrication of multiple through-
holes in non-conductive materials by Electrochemical Discharge Machining for 
RF MEMS Packaging. J Mater Process Technol 2019;271:542–53. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2019.04.032.
	 38.	 Zhao D, Zhang Z, Zhu H, Cao Z, Xu K. An investigation into laser-assisted elec­
trochemical discharge machining of transparent insulating hard-brittle material. 
Micromachines 2020;12:22. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi12010022.

109
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-8
Thermo Plus Mechanical 
Based Sequential 
Machining Processes
Ramatenki Chinna and Priyaranjan Sharma
Koneru Lakshmaiah Education Foundation Guntur, India
Filipe Fernandes
University of Coimbra, CEMMPRE, ARISE 
Rua Luís Reis Santos, Coimbra, Portugal
8.1  INTRODUCTION
Thermal and mechanical energies are combined in thermo-mechanical sequential 
processes to enable material removal, deformation, or surface modification. These 
processes follow a methodical approach, starting with the application of thermal 
energy to alter the material properties, thereby reducing the mechanical force required 
for machining. This results in improved precision, surface finish, and extended tool 
life. Such procedures are critical in industries like metalworking, where material 
performance can be significantly enhanced by controlling microstructural evolution. 
The interaction between heat and mechanical deformation not only optimizes mate­
rials used in engineering applications but also facilitates enhancement in properties 
like strength, ductility, and fatigue resistance [1]. Moreover, these processes can alter 
the key material’s mechanical characteristics like ductility and hardness. Wu et al. 
[2] explored the relationships between thermal and mechanical processes in materi­
als under stress using a technique known as sequential coupled thermal-mechanical 
analysis (SCTMA). In order to conduct a mechanical analysis, this method first 
calculates the temperature distribution caused by thermal effects. Understanding 
how materials behave in processes like welding, metal forming, or cutting where 
both thermal and mechanical loads are important is made easier with the help of 
SCTMA. Through the integration of these analyses, SCTMA aids in the prediction 
of potential defects, stresses, and distortions in manufactured components.
8.1.1  Thermal Processes
Thermal methods, including laser heating, plasma treatment induction heating, 
and electrical discharge, are essential in the field of thermo-mechanical sequen­
tial processes. These techniques are used to raise the temperature of materials 
locally, which causes changes in their microstructure. These heat treatments are 
8

110
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
intended to reduce the material’s hardness and increase its ductility, which will 
facilitate further mechanical machining.
1.	Laser heating: This method quickly heats specific regions of the material 
by using a concentrated laser beam. One of the most important benefits 
of laser heating is its precision, which enables exact control over the 
thermal input. The laser can precisely adjust the temperature by aiming 
specific zones, leading to localized modifications in the material’s 
characteristics without affecting the entire workpiece. This approach 
is particularly beneficial for applications requiring high precision and 
minimal thermal distortion.
2.	Plasma heating: This method involves heating the material’s surface 
using plasma arcs. Due to its high efficiency and significant penetration 
depth, a wide range of materials can be treated using this process. The 
plasma arc generates temperatures high enough to alter surface proper­
ties, such as hardness, create a protective layer, or improve surface clean­
liness. Plasma treatment is a reliable method for preparing materials for 
further mechanical processing, particularly in applications requiring 
deep penetration and efficient surface modifications.
3.	Induction heating: Induction heating uses electromagnetic induction to 
heat materials consistently and efficiently. This technique ensures even 
heating of the material while delivering a rapid temperature increase. For 
processes requiring quick and uniform heating, induction heating is an 
excellent choice due to its reliability and speed. Large or intricately shaped 
workpieces can particularly benefit, as induction heating can uniformly 
alter material properties such as reducing hardness and increasing ductility.
4.	Electrical discharge heating: This process generates intense localized 
heat by a multitude of sparking that occurs between an electrode and a 
workpiece submerged in a dielectric medium [3, 4]. By melting or vapor­
izing the material, it enables precise modification or removal. It is widely 
used in electrical discharge machining (EDM) to achieve high precision 
and smooth finishes, particularly on hard materials.
Depending on the particular needs of the material and the planned mechani­
cal machining, any one of these heat methods can be chosen to provide a variety 
of benefits. Applications requiring high accuracy and little thermal distortion are 
best suited for laser heating because of its precise controllability. Complete surface 
modifications are a good fit for plasma treatment because of its deep penetration and 
efficiency. For large or complicated workpieces that need consistent thermal treat­
ment, induction heating known for its quick and even heating is ideal. In thermo-
mechanical sequential machining, the main objective of these heat processes is to 
alter the material properties in a way that makes mechanical machining simpler. 
Through the reduction of hardness and enhancement of ductility, these procedures 
aid in the reduction of cutting forces necessary for mechanical machining conse­
quently mitigating tool wear and enhancing the final product’s surface finish. This 

111
Mechanical Based Sequential Machining Processes
synergistic effect raises the overall precision and quality of the manufactured com­
ponents while also improving the machining process efficiency.
8.1.2  Mechanical Processes
The material is shaped using a variety of mechanical techniques including mill­
ing, turning, and grinding in addition to thermal treatment. Through the process of 
decreasing hardness and increasing ductility, the thermal pre-treatment essentially 
softens the material improving its machining performance. Preheating is essential 
for reducing cutting forces, enhancing surface finish, and prolonging tool life in 
milling where rotary cutters remove material from the workpiece. This is particu­
larly helpful when machining hard materials, which usually result in rapid tool 
wear and subpar surface finish. Pre-heating the material causes thermal softening 
that facilitates cutting, improving surface finish, and dimensional accuracy while 
lowering tool wear in turning, a process where a single-point cutting tool rotates 
the material to shape it. An abrasive wheel is used to remove material during 
grinding, and preheating the workpiece greatly reduces grinding forces, enhanc­
ing surface integrity and reducing flaws like burns or cracks. The end product is a 
surface that is smoother, more refined, and has better structural qualities.
The core of the thermo-mechanical sequential machining method is the integra­
tion of these mechanical procedures after thermal pre-treatment. Heat is used to 
first change the properties of the material, which makes subsequent mechanical 
processes run more smoothly and effectively. This cooperative relationship makes 
sure that the mechanical shaping is done more precisely and with less effort. This 
strategy is especially helpful for materials that are typically challenging to machine. 
Because of their extreme brittleness and hardness, hard metals and alloys for 
instance can be very difficult to machine. By applying heat before handling, these 
materials become softer and more malleable facilitating easier manipulation. This 
leads to lower machining, costs less tool wear, and higher-quality finished goods.
8.2  THERMO-MECHANICAL SEQUENTIAL PROCESSES
Thermo-mechanical sequential processes combine nonconventional machining 
methods with subsequent mechanical processing to enhance accuracy and pro­
ductivity. Early preheating techniques such as laser, plasma induction, and electri­
cal discharge are utilized to improve traditional mechanical processing, leading 
to better material properties and enhanced manufacturing precision.
8.2.1  Sequential Laser-Based Mechanical Machining
Sequential laser-based mechanical machining is a technique that improves 
machinability and yields desired shapes by first modifying a material’s bulk or 
surface properties with a laser. By preheating materials with a laser, a process 
known as laser-assisted machining (LAM) softens materials reducing hardness 
and increasing ductility. For difficult-to-machine materials like ceramics and 

112
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
titanium alloys, this technique works especially well because it minimizes tool 
wear, improves surface quality, and reduces cutting forces. Through the cre­
ation of a localized heat-affected zone, the process improves overall efficiency 
by enabling smoother cutting and lower mechanical loads during machining. 
Hedberg and Shin [5] investigated laser-assisted milling of the orthopaedic alloy 
Ti-6AL-4V ELI. In order to improve machinability through decreased tool wear, 
cutting forces, and increased material removal rates, this technique uses localized 
preheating via laser. Stress testing and microstructure analysis demonstrate how 
the procedure preserves surface integrity by precisely controlling laser heating. It 
also provides economic advantages over traditional machining techniques.
The material properties are altered to improve machinability during the laser 
treatment stage, which may entail surface texturing, shock peening, or laser 
heating. The aerospace automotive and biomedical industries—which demand 
high precision surface integrity and particular microstructural properties—benefit 
greatly from this method. Precision control over machining processes is made pos­
sible by laser techniques, which enable manufacturers to heat or modify materi­
als selectively and produce better results [6]. For example, localized changes can 
be made without affecting the entire workpiece through the use of laser heating, 
which quickly raises the temperature of selected areas using a focused beam. This 
technique is particularly helpful in situations where accuracy and little thermal 
distortion are required [7]. According to Jegadheesan et al. [8], materials can 
be made much softer by laser heating, which also makes them more ductile and 
facilitates mechanical processing. Figure 8.1 illustrates how lasers can be used 
in conjunction with assisted turning, grinding, and drilling to preheat and soften 
materials. While commercially available for laser-assisted turning (LAT), further 
research is required to address issues with laser-assisted milling (LAMill) includ­
ing managing tool paths and laser heat for different workpiece shapes [9].
Three essential elements are involved in LAM: the cutting tool, the workpiece, 
and the laser source. The workpiece which is often made of a hard or brittle 
material that is challenging to machine using traditional methods is heated by a 
high-intensity beam produced by the laser source such as a CO2 Nd or fiber laser. 
In order to improve machinability and surface quality, the cutting tool then works 
in conjunction with the softer material to carry out tasks such as drilling, milling, 
FIGURE 8.1  Schematic illustration of laser-assisted (a) turning, (b) grinding, and 
(c) milling [9].

113
Mechanical Based Sequential Machining Processes
and turning. For improved machining efficiency, LAM depends on multiple criti­
cal mechanisms. Initially, the workpiece undergoes localized thermal softening, 
whereby the laser heats particular regions, thereby diminishing its hardness and 
yield strength and subsequently lowering the necessary cutting forces. Especially 
when machining high-strength or abrasive materials, this decrease in cutting 
forces prolongs tool life by reducing wear on the tool. Furthermore, the softer 
material allows for more precise cutting, which enhances the surface finishes of 
the machined parts. Tadavani et al. [10] stated that cutting forces, tool wear, and 
surface roughness are all significantly decreased during the Inconel 718s LAM 
process. Tool wear and surface coarsening are reduced by 23% and 22%, respec­
tively, by heating the material to approximately 540°C just prior to the shear 
zone. This results in a 35% decrease in machining-specific energy. 80 Hz laser 
frequency, 400 W of power, 540°C temperature, and 24 m/min cutting speed 
are the ideal LAM parameters. Ahn et al. [11] assessed AISI 1045 steels LAM 
efficiency and used thermal analysis to identify the ideal machining parameters. 
LAM found that preheating with a laser significantly decreased cutting forces 
across a range of spindle speeds and feed rates by up to 40% in radial directions 
and 24% in feed directions. LAM is particularly useful for hard-to-machine mate­
rials because it reduces specific cutting energy by up to 60% at a 0 point, 2 mm 
depth of cut, increasing productivity and prolonging tool life.
As illustrated in Figure 8.2(a), laser-based deburring is a sophisticated technique 
that uses high-power laser technology to remove burrs from machined parts. By 
doing away with the necessity for contact tools, this wear-free method lowers main­
tenance costs while boosting accuracy. In order to produce smoother edges and 
higher-quality components, the process involves aiming laser radiation at burrs, 
which results in localized heating that melts and evaporates the material [12].
Modern technological developments have improved laser deburring machines 
strength accuracy and dependability increasing their usefulness for intricate geom­
etries. To further optimize the process and guarantee precise edge refinement 
FIGURE 8.2  (a) Laser-based deburring process. (b) Schematic of selective laser assisted 
milling [13].

114
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
automation specifically adaptive robotic systems equipped with 3D laser trian­
gulation sensors are being developed. As shown in Figure 8.2(b), selective laser-
assisted milling (SLAM) uses laser technology in conjunction with conventional 
milling to increase cutting precision and efficiency. Particularly for hard materials 
like glass and ceramics, SLAM improves surface finish by preheating particular 
areas with a laser. Ito et al. [13] presented SLAM as a method for accurately and 
effectively cutting glass. SLAM uses a fiber laser to heat only the glass that has 
been coated in black body after which the coated areas are removed by cutting. 
According to experimental results, SLAM was 74% more effective at reducing 
surface roughness than traditional techniques. Additionally, the chip morphology 
changed from crack-type to quasi-continuous type. In addition to improving accu­
racy and productivity when cutting glass, SLAM produces a smoother surface 
texture. The effectiveness of SLAM for high-speed precise glass cutting is demon­
strated by observations that show fewer deep cracks and increased fracture tough­
ness (KIc) and critical depth (dc).
According to Ren et al. [12], LAM-based selective laser-assisted turning 
(SLAT) lessens the formation of surface and subsurface cracks, thereby improv­
ing the workpiece’s surface finish. Because SLAT offers greater viscoplastic­
ity compared to conventional machining (CM), which typically leads to deeper 
cracks and brittle fractures. SEM micrographs reveal lesser cracks and better 
surface integrity in SLAT-processed material (Figure 8.3(a–b)). Additionally, by 
reducing flank wear by 55% after 500 seconds of cutting, SLAT minimizes tool 
wear in comparison to traditional machining. The rake face integrity of the tool 
FIGURE 8.3  Surface/Subsurface condition of the workpiece and corresponding tool 
wear, (a, c) SLAT; (b, d) conventional machining [14].

115
Mechanical Based Sequential Machining Processes
was preserved by SLAT, which reduced tool degradation to microtipping and 
abrasion (Figure 8.3c). In contrast, CM results in severe wear chipping and brittle 
fracture because of higher cutting forces (Figure 8.3d).
8.2.2  Sequential Plasma Based Conventional Machining
An essential component of plasma-assisted machining (PAM) is plasma, which 
is an ionized gas composed of electrons, neutral atoms, and ions [15]. The work­
piece’s surface is heated to a high temperature using a concentrated stream pro­
duced by a plasma torch in this PAM method. The material is softer and easier to 
cut as a result of the localized heat, which also lessens the mechanical stress on 
the cutting tool. This lowers tool wear and facilitates smoother machining opera­
tions. By modifying the surface properties of difficult-to-machine materials and 
reducing the necessary cutting forces, PAM improves their machinability. Strong 
material structures can be broken down and more effective material removal is 
made possible by the thermal energy produced by the plasma. Furthermore, this 
process makes materials more ductile, which facilitates their deformation under 
mechanical loads. Heat expansion and contraction caused by quick heating and 
cooling cycles relieve internal tensions and enhance machinability even more.
PAM uses plasma energy to improve machining procedures for materials that 
are challenging to machine with conventional techniques. PAM increases material 
removal rates, tool lifespan, and surface quality by fusing high-energy plasma with 
traditional machining methods. Processing of high-strength materials such as super­
alloys and composites is made easier by the localized heating that occurs during 
plasma application in machining. Treatment of a variety of materials can be achieved 
with plasma treatment because of its notable high efficiency and substantial penetra­
tion depth. It can improve surface cleanliness, create layers of protection, or harden 
the surface. PAM works particularly well in applications that call for strong surface 
modifications and deep penetration as observed by Moon and Lee [16]. Liu et al. 
[17] discussed the workings and uses of low-temperature plasma-assisted machining 
(LTPAM) including the impact of both hot and cold plasma on machining chal­
lenging materials. Low-temperature plasma is produced by gas discharge and is 
defined as having an electron temperature of less than 105 K. It is partially ionized. 
They found that hot plasma modifies the material’s properties, such as hardness and 
strength, and improves machinability by thermally softening the material.
8.2.3  Sequential Induction-Based Conventional Machining
For materials that are challenging to machine, induction-assisted machining (IAM) 
enhances the processability of the material by combining CM with induction heat­
ing. IAM softens the material, lowering cutting forces, extending tool life, and 
producing better surface finishes by using localized heating. Because of their brit­
tleness or hardness, hard materials such as ceramic composites and high-strength 
alloys are difficult to machine. This technique is especially helpful in these situa­
tions. By lowering the material’s hardness and yield strength, precise temperature 

116
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
control made possible by electromagnetic induction preheating the workpiece to the 
ideal temperature makes cutting easier. Figure 8.4 shows the IAM schematic.
One of the main parts of IAM is an induction heating coil, which creates an 
electromagnetic field that causes currents to be induced in the workpiece. As a 
result the material becomes softer for upcoming machining processes like drill­
ing and turning and experiences localized heating. The particular material and 
heating requirements determine the coil’s design including its size, shape, and 
frequency. The material can be machined more effectively once it has sufficiently 
softened. IAM depends on electromagnetic induction-based thermal softening. 
High-frequency alternating current generated by the coil creates an electromag­
netic field that causes eddy currents to form inside the workpiece. Localized 
heat produced by this process enters the material and reduces its hardness and 
increases its ductility to a certain extent. Significant improvements in machining 
performance are achieved by this thermal softening, which also lowers cutting 
forces and tool wear. As stated by Baek et al. [7], by using localized heating, IAM 
dramatically lowers cutting force—up to 83% for AISI 1045 steel and 70% for 
Inconel 718. By softening the material, this method outperforms CM in terms of 
machining efficiency, surface quality, and tool life.
8.2.4  Sequential Electrical-Discharge Based 
Conventional Machining
To improve material removal rates, surface quality, and tool life, electrical discharge-
assisted machining (EDAM) combines traditional EDM with CM techniques. Hard-
to-machine materials like superalloy ceramics and composites—whose hardness, 
brittleness, or heat sensitivity make standard machining difficult—benefit greatly 
from this hybrid process. With the ability to machine complex geometries with 
high accuracy and the precise removal of material, EDAM combines the precision 
of electrical discharges with mechanical machining. The process melts and vapor­
izes the workpiece material by producing intense localized heat through electrical 
FIGURE 8.4  Schematic illustration of induction-assisted drilling [7].

117
Mechanical Based Sequential Machining Processes
discharges. When a tool electrode and a workpiece that is immersed in a dielectric 
fluid have a potential difference, electrical sparks are produced. This method cre­
ates overlapping craters on the workpiece surface to achieve superior surface fin­
ishes and dimensional accuracy while guaranteeing precise material removal.
As illustrated in Figure 8.5, alternating energy electrical discharge machining 
(AE-EDM) enhances material removal by utilizing alternating current intensities in 
addition to traditional EDM. This method produces more precise and finer surface 
finishes by decreasing heat-affected zones, decreasing electrode wear, and increas­
ing energy efficiency. This approach boosts energy efficiency, reduces electrode 
wear, and minimizes heat-affected zones, resulting in finer surface finishes and 
greater precision. Recently, Wang et al. [18] employed an AE-EDM to enhance 
surface modification and workpiece machining. In essence, during the machining 
process, this process switches up the energy levels of electrical discharges. Through 
adjustment of the discharge energy, this technique seeks to maximize material 
removal rates while enhancing surface quality. Modern electrode materials are fre­
quently used in AE-EDM, such as combined electrodes made of tungsten carbide 
and polycrystalline diamond (WC-PCD). These electrodes are made to be highly 
thermally robust and to improve energy alternation efficiency. As a result, when 
compared to traditional EDM, it usually produces a smoother surface. By mini­
mizing crater size and enhancing material removal uniformity, the alternating dis­
charge energy contributes to a smoother surface. The workpieces surface hardness 
can be greatly increased by the procedure. A denser and harder surface layer is a 
result of the controlled variation in discharge energy. They also reduced the thick­
ness of the recast layer as an experimental result resulting in a 40% reduction in sur­
face roughness and a 28.6% increase in hardness in comparison to traditional EDM.
8.2.5  Hybrid Heating-Based Mechanical Machining
Figure 8.6(a) shows how the laser-induction assisted machining (LIAM) process, 
a type of hybrid heating-based machining process, uses both induction and laser 
heat sources to locally soften a material surface prior to it reaching the cutting 
tool. Surface quality productivity and heating efficiency are all improved by this 
FIGURE 8.5  Working principle of AE-EDM process [18].

118
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
hybrid strategy. Experimental research in LIAM revealed that at a preheating 
temperature of 700°C, the ideal separation between the laser heat source and the 
cutting tool (yL) was 2 mm. In order to account for possible interference from 
outside forces like vibrations during machining, the distances between the induc­
tion heat source, the laser heat source, and the workpiece were also set at 2 mm. 
By precisely controlling the heating process, this configuration lowers the need 
for machining forces and increases overall process efficiency and stability [7].
As stated by Kim et al. [19], when compared with CM, hybrid heating of laser 
and induction (see Figure 8.6(b)) offers notable improvements in cutting force and 
surface roughness. But since LAM can maintain constant heating regardless of 
feed rates, it is less susceptible to process changes than IAM, which makes it a 
more effective thermal-assisted machining (TAM) technique. For example, IAMs 
induction heating can be affected by higher feed speeds so it works better at lower 
feed rates. Thus to maintain efficient heating and machining performance, IAM 
should be used with lower feed rates for best results.
FIGURE 8.6  (a) Schematic of laser-induction assisted machining process [7]. 
(b) Schematic of hybrid heating used in machining process [19].

119
Mechanical Based Sequential Machining Processes
8.3  ADVANCES IN THERMO-MECHANICAL 
SEQUENTIAL PROCESSES
Efficiency, accuracy, and sustainability are the main goals of recent developments 
in thermo-mechanical sequential processes. A number of noteworthy develop­
ments that have improved these processes capabilities are covered in this part. 
Wu et al. [2] examined how two distinct thermo-mechanical treatments affected 
the spray-formed 2195 alloys mechanical characteristics and microstructures. 
Important variations in microstructure and mechanical characteristics were 
found by varying the order of homogenization and extrusion. After peak aging, 
the extrusion-homogenization process produced a more refined and uniform dis­
tribution of the β′ phase, larger grain sizes, and lower dislocation densities, which 
resulted in lower strength but higher elongation. Conversely, the homogenization-
extrusion sequence produced distinct mechanical properties and a more uneven 
distribution of the β′ phase. Świć et al. [20] presented a novel approach to thermo-
mechanical treatment for low-rigidity shafts that improves geometric stability and 
accuracy by combining heat treatment and straightening. The technique reduces 
deformation and stabilizes residual stresses by using axial tension during heating 
and regulated cooling. This novel method increases operational precision and fin­
ished shaft quality, experimental validation demonstrates its efficacy.
8.3.1  Integration of Advanced Sensors and Control Systems
Thermal-mechanical processes are now much more precise and repeatable thanks 
to the integration of sophisticated sensors and real-time control systems. Process 
parameter optimization is achieved dynamically through the use of force sen­
sors, temperature sensors, and machine learning algorithms. To ensure ideal 
machining conditions and lower the chance of defects, adaptive control systems 
for example can modify the heating and cutting parameters based on real-time 
feedback. As an illustration, real-time material waste reduction and quality assur­
ance are achieved through the monitoring and control of LAM operations.
8.3.2  Development of Hybrid Machining Centers
It has been possible to create hybrid machining centers that integrate mechanical 
and thermal capabilities into one configuration. These centers facilitate smooth 
transitions between procedures cutting down on setup times and raising produc­
tivity levels all around. An example of a hybrid machining center that improves 
production throughput and drastically lowers cycle times is one that combines 
mechanical milling and laser heating.
8.3.3  Sustainable Machining Practices
Growing concerns in manufacturing are related to sustainability. The environmen­
tal impact of thermo-mechanical processes has been lessened by developments in 
dry machining techniques and coolant technologies [3]. Greener manufacturing 

120
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
techniques also benefit from the use of energy-efficient heating techniques like 
induction and laser heating. An example of a hybrid machining center that improves 
production throughput and drastically lowers cycle times is one that combines 
mechanical milling and laser heating. As an illustration, the use of biodegradable 
coolants in induction heating and machining procedures reduces environmental 
effect while preserving machining effectiveness.
8.4  ADVANTAGES OF THERMO-MECHANICAL 
SEQUENTIAL PROCESSES
These assisted machining techniques are tailored to specific materials and 
applications in the manufacturing sector with each offering distinct benefits. 
Manufacturers can increase productivity, cut expenses, and improve the qual­
ity of their machining processes by utilizing these techniques. By applying laser 
heat to soften hard materials like ceramics and superalloys LAM improves their 
machinability and yields benefits like decreased cutting forces, longer tool life, 
and better surface quality. For machining hard brittle materials like titanium 
alloys, plasma-assisted machining or PAM is the best option because it promotes 
material removal rate and decreases tool wear via localized heating. By soften­
ing materials with targeted heating, IAM enhances machinability and results in 
lower cutting forces and better surface finishes. Hard materials can be expertly 
machined without physical contact using electrical discharge-assisted machin­
ing (EDAM), which offers exact control and low tool wear. Last but not least, 
hybrid heating-based machining is appropriate for a range of industrial applica­
tions because it blends laser and induction heating to improve heating efficiency, 
lower cutting forces, and provide precise temperature control.
8.5  APPLICATIONS OF THERMO-MECHANICAL 
SEQUENTIAL PROCESSES
In many different industries, the advantages of implementing a thermo-
mechanical sequential approach are clear. This process makes it possible to 
machine high-strength alloys effectively, which is important in the aerospace 
industry where material performance and accuracy are paramount. It helps to 
produce components with better surface finishes and dimensional accuracy 
for the automotive industry. The increased precision and surface integrity are 
essential in biomedical applications to produce prosthetics and implants that sat­
isfy strict quality requirements.
8.5.1  Aerospace Industry
High strength and fatigue resistance are frequently required for components in 
the aerospace industry. Complicated materials such as titanium and superalloys 
based on nickel can be machined thanks to thermomechanical processes. One 

121
Mechanical Based Sequential Machining Processes
method to improve tool life and machining accuracy is to use LAM to preheat 
these materials in order to lower their hardness prior to mechanical cutting. For 
instance, cutting forces can be decreased when milling titanium alloys with laser 
assistance, improving surface finish and prolonging tool life [21].
8.5.2  Automotive Industry
The thermo-mechanical methods are useful to the automotive industry for 
producing engine and transmission parts. To attain desired hardness profiles 
and enhance wear resistance while preserving dimensional accuracy, induc­
tion heating is frequently used in conjunction with machining. For instance, in 
automotive applications, the durability and performance of gears are enhanced by 
induction heating and subsequent machining.
8.5.3  Biomedical Industry
Surface integrity and precision are critical in the biomedical field. Materials 
like titanium and stainless steel where CM might result in unintended stresses 
or surface damage are used to make implants and prostheses using thermome­
chanical processes. An illustration of this would be the superior surface finish 
and biocompatibility achieved by plasma-assisted turning of titanium alloys for 
biomedical implants [22].
8.5.4  Electronics Industry
The electronics industry also uses thermo-mechanical processes to produce 
microelectronic components. These processes are perfect for achieving intricate 
geometries and high-quality finishes because they minimize material deforma­
tion and require precision, two crucial attributes in this field. Example: To ensure 
surface quality and dimensional accuracy in the production of microelectronic 
components, precise milling is followed by laser heating.
8.6  CASE STUDIES ON THERMO-MECHANICAL 
SEQUENTIAL PROCESSES
8.6.1  Laser-assisted Milling of Titanium Alloys
Considerable increases in tool life and surface finish were found in a study on tita­
nium alloys milled with a laser. A higher rate of material removal was achieved as 
a result of the laser preheating lowering the cutting forces. The study emphasized 
how crucial it is to optimize laser parameters—such as spot size scanning speed 
and laser power—in order to get the best results. Results: Compared to tradi­
tional milling, optimized laser parameters improved the material removal rate 
and decreased tool wear [23].

122
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
8.6.2  Induction Heating and Machining of Gear Components
To produce high-strength gear components, induction heating and precise machining 
have been used with success. Using this method, gear teeth could be selectively hard­
ened to increase wear resistance without sacrificing overall dimensional accuracy. 
The case study highlighted that in order to guarantee uniform hardening and prevent 
thermal distortion, exact control over the induction heating parameters is necessary.
Results: The gears were more durable and the manufacturing time was short­
ened after induction heating and machining [24].
8.6.3  Plasma-assisted Turning of Nickel-Based Superalloys
When it comes to machining of nickel-based superalloys, plasma-assisted turning 
has demonstrated encouraging outcomes. The material surface was softer after 
the plasma treatment, which also improved the final products surface integrity 
and cut tool wear by 40%. The impact of plasma parameters on the machining 
results such as arc current gas flow rate and treatment duration was also investi­
gated in this study.
Results: Compared to traditional turning, plasma-assisted turning produced 
better surface roughness and longer tool life [25].
8.7  CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Though thermo-mechanical sequential machining processes have developed in 
a promising way, many obstacles still need to be overcome. Important problems 
include residual stresses in machined components caused by the intricacies of 
thermo-mechanical loading. To address these more sophisticated modeling meth­
ods and better thermal aspect integration are needed to control cutting forces 
and tool wear. The complex interplay between thermal and mechanical param­
eters makes it challenging to monitor and regulate these processes in real time. 
Although thermo-mechanical processes have great potential to improve product 
quality and manufacturing efficiency, obstacles must be removed before these 
advantages can be completely realized.
The goal of recent advancements in thermo-mechanical machining is to 
increase productivity and quality by using improved modeling techniques that 
more precisely predict mechanical and thermal effects. To enable the creation 
of intricate microfeatures in advanced materials, researchers are also investigat­
ing ways to solve problems at the micron level. Robust process monitoring and 
control systems are made possible by developments in sensor technologies, data 
analytics, and artificial intelligence. Real-time feedback on variables like force 
temperature and tool wear is provided by integrated sensor networks enabling 
proactive modifications to maximize output and quality. Predictive maintenance 
and process optimization are made possible by machine learning’s ability to spot 
trends in massive datasets. The main issues facing thermo-mechanical sequential 
machining and their potential directions are listed below.

123
Mechanical Based Sequential Machining Processes
8.7.1  Process Integration
Challenge: It can be expensive and complicated to implement the advanced equip­
ment and control systems needed to seamlessly integrate thermal and mechanical 
processes into a workflow.
Future Directions: By streamlining the integration process and increasing the 
accessibility of advanced thermo-mechanical systems to a wider range of manu­
facturers, research and development efforts should be directed toward these goals. 
Reduced costs and implementation barriers can result from the easier integration 
of modular designs and standardized interfaces into current manufacturing setups.
8.7.2  Material-specific Behavior
Challenge: Different materials react differently to heat and mechanical treat­
ments, so different process parameters are needed for different types of materials. 
Process optimization and planning are made more difficult by this complexity.
Future Directions: This obstacle may be addressed with the aid of developments 
in material science and computer modeling. More accurate process simulations 
and optimization may be made possible by building extensive databases and pre­
dictive models for material behavior under varied mechanical and thermal con­
ditions. The adaptability of thermo-mechanical processes for a larger range of 
materials can also be improved by research into adaptive control systems and 
multi-material processing methods.
8.7.3  Thermal Management
Challenge: Managing heat effectively is crucial to preventing unwanted conse­
quences like thermal distortion residual stresses and material deterioration. It can 
be difficult to maintain exact control over the temperature during the machining 
process though.
Future Directions: The development of sophisticated thermal management strat­
egies such as thermal barrier coatings and intelligent cooling systems should be 
the main goal of future research. In order to ensure ideal machining conditions 
and reduce the possibility of thermally-induced defects, real-time monitoring and 
feedback mechanisms can facilitate dynamic adjustments to thermal parameters. 
Thermal stability and control during machining operations can also be further 
enhanced by investigating novel heat transfer mechanisms and materials.
8.7.4  Sustainability
Challenge: With regards to environmental concerns and regulatory require­
ments, sustainable machining practices are becoming more and more important. 
Nevertheless, CM techniques can use a lot of energy and produce a lot of waste 
and emissions.

124
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
Future Directions: Reducing energy consumption, minimizing waste generation, 
and optimizing resource utilization should be the top priorities for sustainability 
in thermo-mechanical sequential processes. The effects on the environment can 
be lessened by research into greener machining techniques like dry machining 
and minimum quantity lubrication. The sustainability of thermo-mechanical 
machining processes can also be improved by investigating renewable energy 
sources and putting closed-loop manufacturing systems into place.
8.8  CONCLUSIONS
To sum up, thermo-mechanical sequential processes symbolize a paradigm 
change in the manufacturing industry by combining mechanical and thermal 
processes in a synergistic way to maximize material processing. These methods 
have revolutionized traditional machining enabling increased sustainability, effi­
ciency, and precision through the integration of cutting-edge technologies and 
creative approaches. The multiplicity and importance of thermo-mechanical 
sequential processes in contemporary manufacturing are demonstrated by the 
various industries in which they are used including electronics, automotive, aero­
space, and biomedicine.
Although thermo-mechanical sequential processes have many benefits, there 
are still certain issues that need to be resolved. Key areas that need concentrated 
attention and continuous research are process integration, material-specific 
behavior, thermal management, sustainability, process monitoring, and control. 
The full potential of thermo-mechanical sequential processes can be achieved by 
addressing these issues and looking toward new avenues such as developing sus­
tainable machining techniques and improving sensor technologies. With its seem­
ingly endless potential to redefine manufacturing processes, thermo-mechanical 
machining has a bright future ahead of it.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Uranga P, María Rodríguez-Ibabe J. Thermomechanical processing of steels. Metals 
(Basel) 2020;10:641. https://doi.org/10.3390/met10050641.
	
2.	 Wu S, Liu Z, Gong Y, Liang X, Wu Y, Zhao X. Analysis of the sequentially coupled 
thermal–mechanical and cladding geometry of a Ni60A-25%WC laser cladding 
composite coating. Opt Laser Technol 2023;167:109595. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
optlastec.2023.109595.
	
3.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge 
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process 
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.
	
4.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Comparative analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and 
electrodischarge machining process. J Micro Nano-Manuf 2024:1–18. https://doi.
org/10.1115/1.4066488.
	
5.	 Hedberg GK, Shin YC. Laser assisted milling of Ti-6Al-4V ELI with the analysis 
of surface integrity and its economics. Lasers Manuf Mater Process 2015;2:164–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40516-015-0013-4.

125
Mechanical Based Sequential Machining Processes
	
6.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in tandem micro-machining pro­
cesses to mitigate the machining issues at micron level: a systematic review, chal­
lenges and future opportunities. Mach Sci Technol 2022;26:515–70. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10910344.2022.2129991.
	
7.	 Baek J-T, Woo W-S, Lee C-M. A study on the machining characteristics of induc­
tion and laser-induction assisted machining of AISI 1045 steel and Inconel 718. 
J Manuf Process 2018;34:513–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2018.06.030.
	
8.	 Senthil Kumar P, Jegadheesan C, Somasundaram P, Praveen Kumar S, Vivek Anand 
A, Pal Singh A, et al. State of art: Review on laser surface hardening of alloy metals. 
Mater Today Proc 2023. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2023.04.259.
	
9.	 Lee C-M, Woo W-S, Kim D-H, Oh W-J, Oh N-S. Laser-assisted hybrid pro­
cesses: A review. Int J Precis Eng Manuf 2016;17:257–67. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12541-016-0034-8.
	 10.	 Azhdari Tadavani S, Shoja Razavi R, Vafaei R. Pulsed laser-assisted machining of 
Inconel 718 superalloy. Opt Laser Technol 2017;87:72–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
optlastec.2016.07.020.
	 11.	 Ahn JW, Woo WS, Lee CM. A study on the energy efficiency of specific cutting 
energy in laser-assisted machining. Appl Therm Eng 2016;94:748–53. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.10.129.
	 12.	 Cerwenka G, Surrey P, Möller M, Conrad C, Prakash V, Heilemann M, et al. 
In-depth characterization of the scanner-based selective laser deburring process. 
J Laser Appl 2018;30. https://doi.org/10.2351/1.5040642.
	 13.	 Ito Y, Kizaki T, Shinomoto R, Ueki M, Sugita N, Mitsuishi M. High-efficiency 
and precision cutting of glass by selective laser-assisted milling. Precis Eng 
2017;47:498–507. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2016.10.005.
	 14.	 Ren G, Song H, Dan J, Li J, Pan P, Yang Z, et al. Thermal analysis and machin­
ability for laser-assisted machining of fused silica. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2020;148:
119078. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.119078.
	 15.	 Sharma S, Gupta M, Kumar R, Bindra NS. Experimental analysis and optimization 
of Process parameters in plasma arc cutting machine of EN-45A material using 
Taguchi and ANOVA method. Int J Mech Ind Eng 2017;121006:1387–91.
	 16.	 Moon S-H, Lee C-M. A study on the machining characteristics using plasma 
assisted machining of AISI 1045 steel and Inconel 718. Int J Mech Sci 2018;142–143:
595–602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2018.05.020.
	 17.	 Liu J, Li Y, Chen Y, Zhou Y, Wang S, Yuan Z, et al. A review of low-tempera­
ture plasma-assisted machining: From mechanism to application. Front Mech Eng 
2023;18:18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11465-022-0734-y.
	 18.	 Wang X, Li C, Guo H, Yi S, Kong L, Ding S. Alternating energy electrical dis­
charge machining of titanium alloy using a WC-PCD electrode. J Manuf Process 
2020;60:37–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2020.10.034.
	 19.	 Kim J-H, Kim E-J, Lee C-M. A study on the heat affected zone and machining char­
acteristics of difficult-to-cut materials in laser and induction assisted machining. 
J Manuf Process 2020;57:499–508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2020.07.013.
	 20.	 Świć A, Gola A, Sobaszek Ł, Šmidová N. A thermo-mechanical machining method 
for improving the accuracy and stability of the geometric shape of long low-
rigidity shafts. J Intell Manuf 2021;32:1939–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-020-
01733-4.
	 21.	 Dargusch MS, Sivarupan T, Bermingham M, Rashid RAR, Palanisamy S, Sun 
S. Challenges in laser-assisted milling of titanium alloys. Int J Extrem Manuf 
2021;3:015001. https://doi.org/10.1088/2631-7990/abc26b.

126
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
	 22.	 Ujino D, Nishizaki H, Higuchi S, Komasa S, Okazaki J. Effect of plasma treat­
ment of titanium surface on biocompatibility. Appl Sci 2019;9:2257. https://doi.
org/10.3390/app9112257.
	 23.	 Kong X, Yang L, Zhang H, Chi G, Wang Y. Optimization of surface roughness in 
laser-assisted machining of metal matrix composites using Taguchi method. Int J 
Adv Manuf Technol 2017;89:529–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-016-9115-1.
	 24.	 Zhang Y, Yan H, Zhu P, Zheng Z. Comparison of the effects of induction heating 
composite shot peening and conventional shot peening on residual stress, micro­
hardness, and microstructure of 20CrMnTi gear steel. Surf Coatings Technol 
2024;485:130887. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2024.130887.
	 25.	 Rao TB. Reliability analysis of the cutting tool in plasma-assisted turning and pre­
diction of machining characteristics. Aust J Mech Eng 2022;20:1020–34. https://doi.
org/10.1080/14484846.2020.1769458.

127
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-9
Hybrid Plus 
Mechanical/Thermal 
Based Sequential 
Machining Processes
Sahil Sharma and Akshay Dvivedi
AMP Lab, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
Uttarakhand, India
9.1  INTRODUCTION
Glass as a material holds significant potential for diverse applications ranging 
from the intricacies of lab-on-chip technology to the subtleties of texturing in 
architectural design [1–3]. Independent nonconventional methods of glass pro­
cessing, such as laser beam machining (LBM), electrochemical discharge machin­
ing (ECDM), ultrasonic machining (USM), and abrasive jet machining (AJM), 
have often been marred by challenges [4, 5], which are tabulated in Table 9.1. 
These challenges include restraints in achieving intricate designs, ineffectiveness 
in energy utilization, expensive machining setups and fabrication of machined 
features with surface cracks, and nonhomogenous machined surfaces.
9
(Continued)
TABLE 9.1
Characteristics of Different Machining Processes w.r.t. Glass Machining
Process
Mechanism
Transfer Media
Advantages
Disadvantages
LBM
Melting/Ablation
Radiation through 
high-intensity light
•	 Hcigh machining 
rate
•	 Good spatial 
resolution
•	 Good repeatability
•	 Thermal damage
•	 Crack on the 
surface and 
poor finish
•	 Formation of 
residual stresses
ECDM
Melting + Chemical 
etching
Electrolyte
•	 Inexpensive and 
small machining 
setup
•	 Good MRR
•	 Fabrication of 
intricate geometries 
in various materials
•	 Thermal damage
•	 Poor surface quality
•	 Poor repeatability

128
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
9.2  CHALLENGES IN GLASS PROCESSING
Some of the other common problems associated with these glass processing 
methods are:
1.	Precision and Intricacy: Attaining precise and intricate designs on glass 
surfaces can be challenging using single nonconventional processing 
methods. The limitations in precision restrict the applicability of glass 
material in industries where intricate patterns or microstructures are 
crucial, such as in optical or electronics devices [6].
2.	Energy consumption: Glass processing especially in high-temperature 
processes like LBM and ECDM demands substantial energy consump­
tion. This not only increases production costs but also raises environ­
mental concerns regarding carbon emissions and resource depletion [7].
3.	Surface defects: During processing, glass can develop surface defects such 
as cracks, scratches, pits, or irregularities [8]. These defects not only com­
promise the aesthetic appeal of the final product but can also impact the 
structural integrity of the machined feature, limiting their functionality.
4.	Environmental impact: The fabrication of intricate features in glass entails 
the utilization of various hazardous chemicals and significant energy 
inputs, leading to potential environmental pollution [9, 10]. Additionally, 
this contributes significantly to the carbon footprint of the glass industry, 
emphasizing a need for the adoption of more sustainable practices.
5.	Cost considerations: The inflated costs associated with specific glass 
processing techniques, such as precision cutting through LBM or AJM, 
can be prohibitive. This cost factor may impede the widespread adoption 
of glass in certain applications and industries.
USM
Brittle fracture
Abrasive slurry
•	 Inexpensive 
machining setup
•	 Small scale 
structure
•	 No thermal 
damage
•	 Severe tool wear
•	 Limited machining 
depth
•	 Crack on the 
surface and poor 
finish
AJM
Brittle fracture
Hot air with abrasive 
particles
•	 Low tolerance, 
share radius
•	 No thermal 
damage
•	 Fabrication of 
µ slots
•	 Low MRR
•	 Poor surface 
quality
•	 Stray abrasive 
action
TABLE 9.1  (Continued)
Characteristics of Different Machining Processes w.r.t. Glass Machining
Process
Mechanism
Transfer Media
Advantages
Disadvantages

129
Hybrid Plus Sequential Machining Processes
6.	Reproducibility and Consistency: Ensuring consistent quality and repro­
ducibility in glass through ECDM, AJM, or USM processing poses chal­
lenges, especially in large-scale production. These inconsistencies can 
lead to variations in product quality, affecting the reliability of glass 
components in various applications.
For addressing challenges associated with independent nontraditional meth­
ods and unlocking new possibilities, the subtractive processing of glass through 
sequential routes emerges as a promising solution – offering fresh perspectives on 
shaping and refining glass material. This approach involves systematically remov­
ing the material through sequential utilization of well-established processes to 
achieve desired forms and properties, resulting in a distinctive framework for 
enhancing both the functionality and aesthetics of glass. The current work exam­
ines the subtractive processing of glass material through a sequential approach, 
allowing readers to delve into the scientific intricacies of glass processing while 
addressing persistent challenges in this field.
9.3  SEQUENTIAL MACHINING AND ITS CLASSIFICATION
Sequential machining is an emerging manufacturing technique that utilizes the 
advantages of well-established processes to overcome the drawbacks of the involved 
processes. Sharma et al. [11] defined the sequential machining process as a “machin­
ing strategy in which different machining processes are executed sequentially on 
one or multiple machining platforms, rather than integrating the processes concur­
rently.” Because it involves the sequential utilization of well-investigated processes, 
this approach is straightforward, flexible, and economical, making it viable for small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) compared to hybrid machining approaches.
Based on the advantages offered by sequential machining, recently vari­
ous researchers have used this technique to create intricate geometries with 
improved machining results in glass materials for lab-on-chips applications. 
These approaches are primarily based on the utilization of a hybrid process, par­
ticularly ECDM with another process, as illustrated in Figure 9.1. ECDM is an 
FIGURE 9.1  Classification of sequential glass machining processes.

130
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
electrochemical discharge and chemical etching-based hybrid process. It is pri­
marily used to create intricate geometries in various glass materials, including 
soda lime and borosilicate glass [12]. Literature reveals that material removal 
in ECDM is influenced by thermal energy from sparks, chemical weathering, 
chemical etching, microcracking, and thermal spalling [13, 14]. Consequently, 
ECDMed geometries often exhibit nonuniform machined surfaces, cracks, and 
heat-affected zones [15]. To address these issues, other processes, particularly 
mechanical and thermal energy-based, are employed in conjunction with hybrid 
processes in a sequential manner. The subsequent section provides comprehen­
sive information regarding these processes.
9.3.1  Hybrid Plus Mechanical Energy-Based Process
The hybrid plus mechanical sequential machining process combines the advan­
tages of ECDM, such as high material removal rate, with the benefits of grinding 
using a PCD tool, which offers better-machined surface quality into a unified 
sequential process, as depicted in Figure 9.2(a–b). Processing glass indepen­
dently using ECDM leads to machined surfaces with nonuniform edges due to 
thermal energy liberated from the tool surface. Similarly, mechanical grinding 
FIGURE 9.2  Illustration of machining setup and machined features after (a, c, e) ECDM 
and (b, d, f) grinding process [16].

131
Hybrid Plus Sequential Machining Processes
often results in a machined surface with microcracks and nondesirable brittle 
fractures, especially at higher feed rates and depths of cut. To mitigate such 
issues, Cao et al. [16] employed sequential ECDM and grinding using the PCD 
tool as the prime material removal and finishing processes, respectively. The 
rationale behind this sequence was to minimize the overall machining time by 
using ECDM as the prime machining and achieving a crack-free surface with 
sharp edges through grinding. The effectiveness of this approach was evaluated 
by fabricating the 150 × 50 µm microgroove in soda lime glass. Initially, the 
microgroove was fabricated through ECDM, resulting in the machined feature 
with wavy edges, as shown in Figure 9.2(c). Subsequently, the wavy edges of the 
ECDMed feature were removed using a 10 µm diamond grit-coated PCD tool for 
grinding (Figure 9.2d). This sequential combination resulted in the machining 
of the required microgroove with sharp edges and crack-free machined surface 
with 72% reduced machining time compared to conventional grinding. The suc­
cessful fabrication of a microcolumn using this machining combination further 
attested the method’s effectiveness in glass machining.
9.3.2  Hybrid Plus Thermal Energy-Based Process
The sequential combination of hybrid and thermal energies integrates ECDM 
preprocessing with the laser postprocessing technique. This combination aims 
to achieve a protrusion-free machined surface, which is generally encountered 
after ECDM processing. The high current density at tool edges is attributed 
to the genesis of spark generation from the edges rather than the tool bottom 
surface. Furthermore, the bubble accumulation in the narrow gap between the 
tool and workpiece restricts the influx of fresh electrolyte flow into the region, 
thus hindering the genesis of electrochemical discharges beneath the tool’s 
bottom. Consequently, protrusions often manifest after ECDM preprocessing. 
Zhao et al. [17] observed such defects during ECDM preprocessing of quartz 
material, as depicted in Figure 9.3(c). To rectify these issues, laser postpro­
cessing with 12 W and 3E5 frequency was employed sequentially (Figure 
9.3a–b). This sequential processing method effectively eliminated protru­
sions and wavy wall edges. The success of this approach was attributed to 
the nonuniform surface of ECDM, facilitating the nonlinear absorption of 
high-energy pulse lasers and thereby eliminating protruded structures from 
the ECDMed surface (Figure 9.3c–d).
9.3.3  Thermal Plus Hybrid Energy-Based Process
The sequential combination of thermal and hybrid energies integrates laser pre­
processing with the ECDM postprocessing technique. This sequential approach 
aims to address the challenges associated with the hybrid plus thermal tech­
nique, particularly the presence of attached machined debris that causes sur­
face roughness. In this approach, the material is initially processed by laser 

132
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
machining, resulting in V taper (Figure 9.4a). The decreases in laser intensity 
with machining depth and expulsion of molten material causing sidewall ero­
sion are considered as the prime reason for this [11]. The ECDM after laser 
processing helps to reduce this effect by changing the taper into the required 
geometric shape, as shown in Figure 9.4(b–c). Using this concept, Zhao 
et al. [17] fabricated a U-shaped microgroove in quartz material, as depicted 
in Figure 9.4(d–e). Initially, the laser processing resulted in the fabrication of a 
microgroove with V geometry. Thereafter, using a tool electrode of 200 µm in 
diameter, ECDM processing was conducted, transforming the V shape into U 
shape geometry. The advantages of laser processing were articulated through 
reductions in gas film thickness and decreases in discharge erosion distance, 
resulting in minimizing the overcut phenomenon caused by ECDM. A notable 
overcut reduction of 3.51% was observed through this sequential approach com­
pared to ECDM at 21 V. Furthermore, the surface morphology of the fabricated 
microgroove was found distinct, with the upper edge surface exhibiting laser 
morphology consisting of sharp edges with no heat-affected zone, and the bot­
tom surface with ECDM morphology having improved flat edges and reduced 
overcut. Hence, the disadvantages of both laser and ECDM processing, namely 
V tapering and heat-affected zones with visible wavy edges of machined struc­
tures, respectively, are eliminated through this approach.
FIGURE 9.3  Illustration of machining setup and machined features after (a, c) ECDM 
preprocessing, and (b, d) Laser postprocessing [17].

133
Hybrid Plus Sequential Machining Processes
9.4  CONCLUSIONS
The present study elucidates the subtracting machining of glass material through 
sequential approach. The conclusions drawn from this study are summarized as follows:
•	 The machining of glass material through independent nonconventional 
machining poses challenges such as inaccuracy, formation of surface 
defects, high energy consumption, environmental concerns, and repro­
ducibility issues that impede their usage for microfabrication applications.
FIGURE 9.4  Depiction of (a–c) process mechanism of thermal plus hybrid sequential 
approach and illustration of machining setup and machined features after (d) laser prepro­
cessing, and (e) ECDM postprocessing [17].

134
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches
•	
Sequential machining represents a novel approach wherein the required
geometries are fabricated through sequential utilization of well-estab­
lished machining processes.
•	
The distinct advantages offered by sequential machining, particularly
flexibility and straightforward approach, make it superior to hybrid
machining.
•	
The sequential combination of hybrid and mechanical energy-based pro­
cesses results in the machining of material with sharp edges and reduced
machining time compared to conventional ECDM and mechanical
grinding processes.
•	
The hybrid and thermal combination is utilized to produce structures
with improved surface morphology compared to conventional ECDM
and laser processing techniques.
REFERENCES	
1.	 Whitesides GM. The origins and the future of microfluidics. Nature 2006;442:
368–73. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05058.	
2.	 Zou Z, Guo Z, Zhang K, Xiao Y, Yue T, Liu J. Electrochemical discharge machin­
ing of microchannels in glass using a non-Newtonian fluid electrolyte. J Mater
Process Technol 2022;305:117594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2022.117594.	
3.	 Hamed H, Eldiasty M, Seyedi-Sahebari S-M, Abou-Ziki JD. Applications, materi­
als, and fabrication of micro glass parts and devices: An overview. Mater Today
2023;66:194–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2023.03.005.	
4.	 Jahan MP, Perveen A, Rumsey AM. A review on the conventional, non-conven­
tional, and hybrid micromachining of glass. Mach Sci Technol 2019;23:264–338.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10910344.2019.1575411.	
5.	 Jain V, Choudhury S, Ramesh K. On the machining of alumina and glass. Int J Mach 
Tools Manuf 2002;42:1269–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-3861(02)00241-0.	
6.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Parmar G, Dvivedi A. On material removal analysis in ECSM
process during micro-channelling with rough tool: Experimental investigation and
numerical simulation. Measurement 2024;229:114440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2024.114440.	
7.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. A review on developments in electrolytes and
their feeding methods for ECDM process. Silicon 2022;15:1571–95. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12633-022-02134-3.	
8.	 Wuthrich R, Ziki JDA. Micromachining using electrochemical discharge phenom­
enon. Second. Elsevier; 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/C2013-0-00654-8.	
9.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.	
10.	 Dhakar K, Chaudhary K, Dvivedi A, Bembalge O. An environment-friendly and
sustainable machining method: near-dry EDM. Mater Manuf Process 2019;34:
1307–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2019.1643471.	
11.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in tandem micro-machining pro­
cesses to mitigate the machining issues at micron level: A systematic review, chal­
lenges and future opportunities. Mach Sci Technol 2022;26:515–70. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10910344.2022.2129991.

135
Hybrid Plus Sequential Machining Processes
	 12.	 Rajput V, Goud M, Suri NM. Finite element modeling for comparing the machining 
performance of different electrolytes in ECDM. Arab J Sci Eng 2021;46:2097–119. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-020-05009-0.
	 13.	 Sabahi N, Razfar MR, Hajian M. Experimental investigation of surfactant-mixed 
electrolyte into electrochemical discharge machining (ECDM) process. J Mater 
Process Technol 2017;250:190–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2017.07.017.
	 14.	 Singh T, Sharma S, Sidhu SS, Shlykov ES, Ablyaz TR. Determination of nanoindenta­
tion behavior of HAZ on glass material machined via ECSM process through simula­
tion approach. Materials (Basel) 2022;15:5870. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma15175870.
	 15.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Comparative analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and 
electrodischarge machining process. J Micro Nano-Manufacturing 2024:1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4066488.
	 16.	 Cao XD, Kim BH, Chu CN. Hybrid micromachining of glass using ECDM and 
micro grinding. Int J Precis Eng Manuf 2013;14:5–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12541-013-0001-6.
	 17.	 Zhao D, Zhang Z, Zhu H, Cao Z, Xu K. An investigation into laser-assisted elec­
trochemical discharge machining of transparent insulating hard-brittle material. 
Micromachines 2020;12:22. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi12010022.

136
DOI: 10.1201/9781003597230-10
Advances in Surface 
Finish Techniques for 
Additively Manufactured 
Components
A Conceptual Review
Adarsh Jaiswal and Krishnakant Dhakar
Shri G. S. Institute of Technology and Science (SGSITS), 
Indore, India
Sahil Sharma
AMP Lab, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
Uttarakhand, India
10.1  INTRODUCTION
10.1.1  Additive Manufacturing and Its Growing Significance
3D printing, or additive manufacturing (AM), is quickly emerging as one of the 
most innovative production methods. Its adaptability, flexibility, and capacity to 
drastically cut lead times are the major reasons for its expansion [1]. With unpar­
alleled design freedom, layer-by-layer manufacturing enables the direct manufac­
turing of complicated components from computer-aided design (CAD) models. 
This skill stands in stark contrast to conventional production techniques, which 
frequently find it difficult to handle the intricacy and time restrictions of compara­
ble operations. Wider use of AM in various industries such as aerospace, defence, 
and automobile has been made possible by the scientific community’s greater 
interest in the technology [2]. The ISO ASTM 52900-2022 standard defines AM 
as a collection of methods that have developed over time to process a broad range 
of materials and create extremely complex components of any size or form. Sheet 
lamination (SHL), powder bed fusion (PBF), material extrusion (MEX), material 
jetting (MJT), binder jetting (BJT), and direct energy deposition (DED) are a few 
of them. Every technique offers advantages of its own, such as handling metals, 
polymers, or composites, and enables manufacturers to effectively and economi­
cally meet a variety of production needs [3].
10

137
Advances in Surface Finish Techniques
The spectrum of materials that may be utilized in AM has significantly increased 
because of research and technical advancements. The primary categories of materials 
associated with AM include metal alloys, polymers, composites, and ceramics. 
Because of the strength and resistance to corrosion, metal alloys, particularly those 
based on titanium and nickel alloys, are preferred for the aerospace and medical 
industries. Polymers, such as ABS and PEEK, are inexpensive and versatile mate­
rials that are frequently used in consumer items and medical prototypes. Carbon 
fiber-reinforced polymers (CFRPs) and other composite materials have a high 
strength-to-weight ratio, which makes them ideal for use in aerospace and automo­
tive applications. Ceramics such as silicon carbide and alumina are highly appre­
ciated for their excellent temperature resistance and electrical insulation; these 
properties are commonly used in medical equipment and electronics. These material 
advancements demonstrate AM’s ability to satisfy a range of industrial needs with 
tailored material properties and complex geometries straight from digital designs.
The primary objective of this study is to highlight the recent advancements in 
AM, particularly for metal alloys. In general, metallic samples are printed using two 
main AM techniques: PBF and directed energy deposition (DED). These methods 
enable the accurate creation of complex forms by melting and fusing metal wires or 
powders using a range of energy sources, including electric arcs, lasers, and elec­
tron beams. PBF usually involves layer-by-layer application of a thin layer of metal 
powder onto a build platform, followed by selective melting of the powder using an 
electron or laser beam to create a solid object [4]. By feeding metal wire or powder 
directly into a melt pool produced by an electric arc, laser, or electron beam, DED, 
on the other hand, makes it possible to build or repair components. These methods 
are critical to the expansion of metal AM’s capabilities and applications because of 
their design freedom, material efficiency, and the ability to make intricate or custom 
components that are difficult to make with traditional manufacturing processes [5].
10.1.2  Importance of Surface Finishing in AM Components
The functional attributes of the objects produced by metal additive manufacturing 
(MAM) are affected by surface topographical problems and poor surface quality, 
which pose significant obstacles to its widespread industrial adoption. Because 
MAM components have a high surface roughness that can cause poor fatigue 
performance, corrosion, fracture initiation, and poor fit with other smoother 
parts in an assembly that can limit their adoption for engineering applications. 
Additionally, the surface color of as-printed metal components may not be aes­
thetically pleasing or functionally acceptable, especially in biomedical devices 
and implants. The surface condition is crucial for structures with a high surface-
to-volume ratio, such as honeycomb or cellular structures, where surface quality 
can dominate part performance. Furthermore, fatigue performance is critically 
important for the target MAM market and is directly linked to the surface qual­
ity of metal components. These examples highlight the importance of achiev­
ing satisfactory surface finishes through postsurface treatment methodologies 
for AM metal parts to meet application-specific requirements [6]. For additively 

138
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
made components with intricate geometries and internal cavities, surface treat­
ment techniques such as mechanical polishing, machining, abrasive flow polish­
ing, and laser polishing pose considerable problems. Applying machining and 
mechanical polishing, for instance, to internal and undercut features is almost 
impossible. Moreover, thin walls, micro-scale components, heat-sensitive materi­
als, multi-layer materials, and components with tailored porosities can all present 
challenges for nonchemical approaches. These drawbacks emphasize the neces­
sity for different surface treatment techniques that can successfully handle the 
special geometries and material characteristics of AM parts [7].
10.2  SURFACE FINISH CHALLENGES IN AM
Layer-by-layer deposition and residual porosity are two process factors that fre­
quently affect the surface quality of AM components. These difficulties might 
take many different forms.
1.	High surface roughness: Surface imperfections, especially for aero­
space, automotive, and medical applications, operate as stress concen­
trators and may cause fatigue failure and crack initiation [8–10].
2.	Internal cavity complexity: AM enables the production of complex 
geometries and internal cavities that are difficult to access, resulting in 
the poor surface finishing [11].
3.	Material sensitivity: Heat-sensitive materials, thin-walled structures, 
and components with engineered porosities present additional chal­
lenges for nonchemical surface treatment methods [12].
4.	Aesthetic and functional demands: For applications like biomedical 
implants, the aesthetic and tactile properties of the surface are as impor­
tant as functional characteristics [13]. Poor surface quality can lead to 
patient discomfort and functional limitations in medical devices [14].
10.3  TRADITIONAL SURFACE FINISHING TECHNIQUES
10.3.1  Mechanical Polishing
The technique of mechanical polishing involves physically abrading a surface to 
lessen its roughness. This technique works well on easily accessible surfaces with 
straightforward shapes. It is a popular alternative for polishing applications where 
geometry presents no substantial problems because it can significantly reduce 
surface roughness. Nevertheless, mechanical polishing is generally inappropri­
ate for interior features or undercuts and is frequently restricted by the shape of 
the object being polished. This restriction results from the abrasive instruments 
inability to readily access internal cavities or complicated geometries during 
mechanical polishing. The labor-intensive procedure also runs the risk of unin­
tentionally adding more surface flaws, which might jeopardize the integrity of the 
finished product [15].

139
Advances in Surface Finish Techniques
10.3.2  Abrasive Flow Polishing
Abrasive flow polishing is a method that efficiently smooths a component’s surface 
by flowing a semi-solid abrasive medium across it, as illustrated in Figure 10.1(a). 
With this technique, polished intricate geometries with high-quality surface 
finish can be achieved. Despite its advantages, this process possesses certain 
drawbacks. For instance, the directed abrasive flow may not cover all areas uni­
formly, leading to uneven surface finishing. Furthermore, the viscosity and flow 
characteristics of the abrasive substance employed limit the polishing efficacy 
and may prevent it from being utilized in certain applications.
Using this finishing technique, Kum et al. [16] improved the surface condition 
of a nozzle guide vane (NGV) that resembles a laser-sintered AM component. 
Between the vanes, a medium-viscosity fluid containing (36 grit size) SiC par­
ticles was allowed to flow at an average flow velocity of 500 mm/s. After the 
AFM action, the surface quality of the fabricated component was improved sig­
nificantly. Figure 10.1(b–c) demonstrates the state of the component before and 
after AFM, respectively.
10.3.3  Laser Polishing
In order to make a material resolidify smoother on the exterior, a process known 
as laser polishing involves using a laser to burn a thin layer off the surface of the 
material. This approach may yield surface finishes of a high caliber as it gives 
precise control over material removal. Because laser polishing carries a danger of 
thermal damage, heat-sensitive materials might not be the best choice.
FIGURE 10.1  (a) An abrasive flow machining mechanism setup [1]. Surface condition of 
NGV component (b) before and (c) after the AFM technique [16].

140
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
There are situations when its utility may be limited due to its accessibility 
limits for complex internal architecture. It remelts a tiny layer of the surface 
using a laser beam, then uses surface tension in the melt pool to smooth out 
any rough spots on the surface. Recently, Tian et al. [17] applied this technique 
to improve the surface condition of a Ti6Al4V component fabricated using 
an electron beam melted (EBM) process. To assess the effectiveness of laser 
polishing, three small test sections were fabricated on the vertical surface of 
the EBMed component, as represented in Figure 10.2(c). Before polishing, the 
EBMed component demonstrated rough surfaces, as illustrated in Figure 10.2(a). 
This roughness was attributed to the attachment of partially melted particles 
on the machined surface. After laser polishing, the surface roughness of the 
laser-polished processed sections was reduced to 5.5 µm, representing a 75% 
decrease compared to the unprocessed sections. The surface condition of the 
laser-polished section, as represented in Figure 10.2(b, d), clearly demonstrates 
this significant improvement.
FIGURE 10.2  SEM images representing condition of (a) unpolished EBMed section, 
(b, d) laser polished section, and (c) fabricated EBMed component [17].

141
Advances in Surface Finish Techniques
10.4  EMERGING SURFACE FINISH TECHNIQUES
Recent advancements have introduced innovative methods to overcome the limi­
tations of traditional approaches, described as follows.
10.4.1  Electropolishing
Electropolishing is an electrochemical process that reduces micro-roughness on 
a workpiece surface by removing a thin layer of material [18]. This method can 
effectively finish intricate geometries and internal cavities that are challenging 
to polish using traditional mechanical techniques. Electropolishing has several 
benefits, including better corrosion resistance, surface quality improvements, high 
precision, and uniformity in surface finish. Additionally, due to its excellent adapt­
ability to delicate interior surfaces, it is a particularly good choice for polishing 
components with complex geometry. Jiang et al. [19] adopted this technique to 
fabricate pentamode metamaterials (PM) without AMed defects. The comparison 
of PM made up of Ti-6Al-4V before and after ECP, shown in Figure 10.3(a–b), 
clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of this process. The CAD model’s intended 
geometric characteristics were as follows: length l = 31/2a/4 ~ 13 mm, large-
diameter D = 2.72 mm (D/a ~ 9%), small-diameter d = 0.8 mm (d/a ~ 2.7%), and 
lattice constant a = 30 mm. A machining mistake between the intended and actual 
sizes of samples is unavoidable.
FIGURE 10.3  Ti-6Al-4V AMed part condition (a) before and (b) after ECP [19].

142
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
10.4.2  Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) and Physical 
Vapor Deposition (PVD)
Recently, surface quality of MAM components has improved by thin coatings 
using advanced techniques like chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and physical 
vapor deposition (PVD) [20]. In addition to extending the component’s usable life, 
these methods are highly beneficial for improving appearance, reducing friction, 
and developing wear resistance. The primary advantage of CVD and PVD is the 
capacity to include functional coatings, such as anti-corrosion and wear-resistant 
layers, without altering the component shape. However, because these processes 
require precise control and are limited by the special material compatibility, that 
makes the process more expensive and complicated [21].
10.4.3  Ultrasonic Vibration-Assisted Polishing
Ultrasonic vibration-assisted polishing creates smooth surfaces by using high-
frequency vibrations without compromising the material removal rate. This method 
is particularly useful for polishing complex geometries and difficult-to-reach 
areas since it provides better surface quality with less physical labor. Because of 
all of these factors, abrasive particles can smooth and further remove big features 
and discontinuities from AM component surfaces. Wang et al. [22] demonstrated 
the material removal mechanisms of the ultrasonic abrasive polishing process 
for additively built components. The schematic diagram depicting the process 
mechanism is shown in Figure 10.4(a). The key advantages of this approach are 
that it delivers higher production with less manual labor and works well with 
hard materials and intricate shapes. However, the procedure involves a number 
FIGURE 10.4  (a) Schematic illustration of the ultrasonic-assisted abrasive polishing 
process and 3D surface topography of (b) before and after polishing with (c) 0%, and 
(d) 10% abrasive concentration [22].

143
Advances in Surface Finish Techniques
of downsides in order to achieve the greatest outcomes, such as costly equipment 
and intricate processes. Additionally, specialized expertise is required.
The 3D surface topography pictures of the surfaces following 30 minutes 
of polishing with 10% and 0% abrasive concentration are displayed in Figure 
10.4(b–d). Regardless of the presence or absence of abrasive particles, partially 
melted powders were eliminated. Nonetheless, it is evident that the use of abrasive 
particles improved the polishing outcome since it also smoothed the step discon­
tinuities and bigger structures. After cavitation treatment alone, the roughness Ra 
was reduced to 5.02 µm; however, the addition of abrasive particles caused the 
roughness Ra to fall to 2.93 µm [22].
10.4.4  Cryogenic Treatment
Components produced by AM are cryogenically treated, which involves cooling 
them to extremely low temperatures in order to minimize residual tensions and 
improve surface smoothness. This process improves the materials properties and 
reduces surface roughness. The key advantages of cryogenic treatment include 
its ability to reduce surface roughness and increase mechanical properties. Its 
adaptability in treating many kinds of materials, including metals and polymers, 
also contributes to its advantages. Nevertheless, the technique may not be suit­
able for all types of materials and requires specialized tools and precise tempera­
ture control [23].
10.4.5  Additive Surface Engineering (ASE)
Using AM techniques, additive surface engineering (ASE) deposits additional 
material layers to increase surface quality. By applying material selectively to 
rough areas using methods like DED, smoother surfaces can be obtained. The 
primary advantages of ASE are its simple integration with existing AM tech­
niques and its accurate control over material deposition. However, ASE is limited 
to specific AM techniques, which might increase the cost and complexity [24].
10.5  ADVANCED SURFACE FINISH TECHNIQUES 
FOR AM COMPONENTS
1.	Chemical treatments: Chemical etching and chemical smoothing 
are examples of chemical treatments for AM components. Chemical 
smoothing is a process that produces a smoother finish by dissolving a 
part’s surface layer with solvents or other chemical agents. Conversely, 
etching carefully eliminates material, frequently producing a patterned 
or textured surface [25].
2.	Mechanical treatments: Mechanical treatments encompass abrasive 
methods including shot peening, brushing, and grinding. Shot peening 
employs high-velocity particles to increase surface characteristics and 
eliminate residual stresses while grinding and brushing remove material 
from the surface to provide a smoother finish [25].

144
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
3.	Thermal treatments: Thermal treatments involve postprocessing using 
heat to relieve stress and improve the surface finish. This can include 
processes such as annealing or heat treating, which can reduce residual 
stresses and improve mechanical properties [25].
4.	Electrochemical and electrolytic processes: Electrochemical and elec­
trolytic processes such as electrochemical polishing and deburring are 
used to refine the surface finish. Electrochemical polishing removes 
material via electrochemical reactions, resulting in a smooth and shiny 
surface. Deburring involves the removal of burrs and sharp edges 
through electrolytic processes [26].
5.	Additive Approaches: Additive approaches involve integrating in-situ or 
postprocessing additive methods to enhance the surface finish. These 
methods include adding a secondary layer or applying surface modifi­
cation techniques during or after the main additive process to improve 
surface quality.
10.6  CHARACTERIZATION METHODS FOR SURFACE FINISH
To assess the quality and performance of AM components, surface finish char­
acterization is crucial. Numerous methods are employed to quantify and analyze 
surface qualities, including:
a.	Profilometry: A technique known as profilometry can be used to mea­
sure surface topography and roughness [27]. Two main types of pro­
filometry exist:
•	 Contact profilometry: With this technology, a stylus makes contact 
with the surface to capture variations in height. With this method, 
which provides accurate measurements of surface roughness and 
texture, the hardness of the material and the presence of debris 
might affect the results.
•	 Noncontact profilometry: Measures surface characteristics with­
out making physical touch by using optical techniques like laser or 
white light. It is less intrusive and useful for capturing precise, high-
resolution surface profiles.
b.	Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM): With SEM, a focused electron 
beam is used to scan the material in order to see surface details with excep­
tional resolution. It offers finely detailed images of surface morphology, 
emphasizing imperfections and textures that other methods might miss. 
SEM is very useful for examining the microstructure of AM components.
c.	Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM): AFM scans the surface with a sharp tip 
to assess surface topography at the nanoscale. For high-precision applica­
tions, this method offers comprehensive information regarding mechani­
cal characteristics, surface roughness, and texture at the nanoscale.
d.	Optical Microscopy: Optical microscopy magnifies and examines sur­
face characteristics using lenses and visible light. Although it offers less 

145
Advances in Surface Finish Techniques
resolution than AFM and SEM, it is nonetheless useful for evaluating 
larger-scale surface features and carrying out preliminary inspections.
e.	X-ray Computed Tomography (CT): Three-dimensional imaging of the 
interior and exterior architecture of AM components is possible with 
X-ray CT. In addition to surface examination techniques, it is helpful in 
identifying interior flaws, porosity, and overall component integrity [28].
f.	Laser Scanning: Laser scanning creates high-resolution 3D models by 
capturing precise surface characteristics using laser beams. This non­
contact technique is used in quality control because it works well for 
evaluating big, complicated surfaces.
10.7  FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND CHALLENGES
AM is a rapidly evolving field as attempts are made to enhance the quality and 
usefulness of components produced with these technologies. Since surface finish 
techniques have a significant influence on the final properties of AM components, 
improving them is an important area of focus. It’s likely that this field will see 
three major avenues for future developments:
1.	Hybrid approaches: Hybrid surface finishing techniques incorporate 
multiple processes to leverage their distinct features [29]. For instance, 
combining mechanical polishing and laser ablation or chemical treat­
ments might yield a superior surface quality than using only one method. 
This process improves the component’s aesthetic appeal as well as their 
functional attributes, such as fatigue strength and wear resistance. 
Manufacturers can precisely select and mix various finishing procedures 
to maximize surface attributes in order to meet application require­
ments. This method is particularly interesting since it allows for tailored 
solutions to address a range of surface finish problems.
2.	Intelligent process control: Adding machine learning (ML) and arti­
ficial intelligence (AI) will revolutionize surface finishing processes. 
By using these technologies, manufacturers may optimize surface fin­
ish parameters in real time, increasing productivity and predictability. 
Algorithms for ML may analyze large amounts of data from previously 
completed operations to identify patterns and predict optimal setups for 
new applications. In order to ensure constant quality, AI systems may 
also dynamically monitor the finishing process and modify settings as 
needed. Intelligent process management reduces the likelihood of mis­
takes and waste in addition to improving surface finishing accuracy and 
supporting greener production methods.
3.	Material-specific solutions: Surface finishing comes with unique char­
acteristics and issues for different AM materials. Producing results 
that are of high caliber requires developing solutions specifically for a 
given material. For example, in order to address the specific features 
of metal alloys, polymers, and ceramics, such as hardness, porosity, or 

146
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
thermal conductivity, distinct finishing techniques are required. Further 
investigation into specialized finishing methods may lead to significant 
improvements in component performance, including increased mechan­
ical strength, resistance to corrosion, and thermal stability. By focusing 
on material-specific solutions, manufacturers can ensure that surface 
finish procedures are customized to the unique requirements of each 
material, which will enhance overall outcomes.
4.	In-situ monitoring and feedback: Real-time monitoring and feedback 
systems are becoming more and more important in the surface finishing 
environment. By using sensors and advanced analytics to provide continu­
ous feedback throughout the finishing process, these technologies allow 
for real-time adjustments and corrections. When desired surface crite­
ria are not being reached, in-situ monitoring may swiftly step in to help 
with the process of continuous quality management. This tactic is part 
of a wider movement known as “smart manufacturing,” which aims to 
increase process reliability and efficiency by utilizing real-time data and 
adaptive control systems. By using in-situ monitoring, manufacturers may 
generate surface finishes that are more precise and consistent, which will 
ultimately improve the functioning and lifetime of AM components [30].
In summary, the future of surface finishing in AM will largely depend on the 
adoption of hybrid techniques, intelligent process control, material-specific solu­
tions, and in-situ monitoring. These advancements have the potential to advance 
the industry by improving the quality, efficacy, and flexibility of surface finish 
processes and satisfying the growing demands of modern industrial applications. 
As these technologies develop, they will be crucial to realizing AM’s full poten­
tial and ensuring that it meets the strict specifications required for a variety of 
industrial applications.
10.8  CONCLUSIONS
Expanding the applications of AM requires a significant advancement in surface 
treatment techniques. Conventional postprocessing techniques such as chemical 
treatments, sanding, and polishing have been improved to address the particular 
difficulties presented by AM, including layer lines and inconsistent materials.
The quality of surfaces is being greatly enhanced by emerging technologies 
including chemical vapor smoothing, automated finishing systems, and sophisti­
cated laser polishing. Precision and consistency are being improved by intelligent 
process control systems, which monitor and modify parameters in real time. In 
order to achieve high-quality finishes, hybrid techniques that combine AM with 
conventional manufacturing processes are also showing promise.
Furthermore, material-specific solutions are essential since many AM materi­
als have unique qualities that require customized finishing methods. It is true that 
using these developments together will be essential to realizing AM’s full poten­
tial and expanding its use across a range of sectors.

147
Advances in Surface Finish Techniques
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Post-processing of additive manufactured compo­
nents through abrasive flow machining process. Handb Post Proc Addit Manuf, 
New York: CRC Press; 2023, p. 169–80. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003276111-9.
	
2.	 Beaman JJ, Bourell DL, Seepersad CC, Kovar D. Additive manufacturing 
review: Early past to current practice. J Manuf Sci Eng 2020;142:1–50. https://doi.
org/10.1115/1.4048193.
	
3.	 Ngo TD, Kashani A, Imbalzano G, Nguyen KTQ, Hui D. Additive manufacturing 
(3D printing): A review of materials, methods, applications and challenges. Compos 
B Eng 2018;143:172–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2018.02.012.
	
4.	 Kumar V, Sharma R, Dhakar K, Singla YK, Verma K. Experimental evaluation 
of magnetic abrasive finishing process with diamond abrasive. Int J Mater Prod 
Technol 2019;58:55. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJMPT.2019.096928.
	
5.	 DebRoy T, Wei HL, Zuback JS, Mukherjee T, Elmer JW, Milewski JO, et al. 
Additive manufacturing of metallic components – Process, structure and proper­
ties. Prog Mater Sci 2018;92:112–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2017.10.001.
	
6.	 Herzog D, Seyda V, Wycisk E, Emmelmann C. Additive manufacturing of metals. 
Acta Mater 2016;117:371–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2016.07.019.
	
7.	 Mingareev I, Bonhoff T, El-Sherif AF, Meiners W, Kelbassa I, Biermann T, et al. 
Femtosecond laser post-processing of metal parts produced by laser additive manu­
facturing. J Laser Appl 2013;25:052009. https://doi.org/10.2351/1.4824146.
	
8.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Comparative analysis of simultaneous electrochemical and 
electrodischarge machining process. J Micro Nano-Manuf 2024:1–18. https://doi.
org/10.1115/1.4066488.
	
9.	 Sharma S, Dvivedi A. Simultaneous electrochemical and electrodischarge 
machining process: An approach to sustainable manufacturing. J Manuf Process 
2023;104:123–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.09.009.
	 10.	 Cunningham CR, Flynn JM, Shokrani A, Dhokia V, Newman ST. Invited review 
article: Strategies and processes for high quality wire arc additive manufacturing. 
Addit Manuf 2018;22:672–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2018.06.020.
	 11.	 Yang J, Hu J, Wang S, Lei N, Luo Z. Differentiable channel design for enhancing 
manufacturability of enclosed cavities. Comput Des 2023;162:103558. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cad.2023.103558.
	 12.	 Yap CY, Chua CK, Dong ZL, Liu ZH, Zhang DQ, Loh LE, et al. Review of selective 
laser melting: Materials and applications. Appl Phys Rev 2015;2:041101. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.4935926.
	 13.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. A review on developments in electrolytes and 
their feeding methods for ECDM process. Silicon 2022;15:1571–95. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12633-022-02134-3.
	 14.	 Vignesh M, Ranjith Kumar G, Sathishkumar M, Manikandan M, Rajyalakshmi G, 
Ramanujam R, et al. Development of biomedical implants through additive manu­
facturing: A review. J Mater Eng Perform 2021;30:4735–44. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11665-021-05578-7.
	 15.	 Bagehorn S, Wehr J, Maier HJ. Application of mechanical surface finishing pro­
cesses for roughness reduction and fatigue improvement of additively manufac­
tured Ti-6Al-4V parts. Int J Fatigue 2017;102:135–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijfatigue.2017.05.008.
	 16.	 Kum CW, Wu CH, Wan S, Kang CW. Prediction and compensation of material removal 
for abrasive flow machining of additively manufactured metal components. J Mater 
Process Technol 2020;282:116704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2020.116704.

148
Advancements Through Hybrid and Sequential Approaches 
	 17.	 Tian Y, Gora WS, Cabo AP, Parimi LL, Hand DP, Tammas-Williams S, et al. Material 
interactions in laser polishing powder bed additive manufactured Ti6Al4V compo­
nents. Addit Manuf 2018;20:11–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2017.12.010.
	 18.	 Sharma S, Singh T, Dvivedi A. Developments in tandem micro-machining pro­
cesses to mitigate the machining issues at micron level: A systematic review, chal­
lenges and future opportunities. Mach Sci Technol 2022;26:515–70. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10910344.2022.2129991.
	 19.	 Jiang S, Guo D, Zhang L, Li K, Song B, Huang Y. Electropolishing-enhanced, 
high-precision 3D printing of metallic pentamode metamaterials. Mater Des 2022;
223:111211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2022.111211.
	 20.	 Muravyev N V., Monogarov KA, Schaller U, Fomenkov I V., Pivkina AN. Progress 
in additive manufacturing of energetic materials: Creating the reactive microstruc­
tures with high potential of applications. Propellants, Explos Pyrotech 2019;44:
941–69. https://doi.org/10.1002/prep.201900060.
	 21.	 Tillmann W, Lopes Dias NF, Kokalj D, Stangier D, Hein M, Hoyer K-P, et al. Tribo-
functional PVD thin films deposited onto additively manufactured Ti6Al7Nb for 
biomedical applications. Mater Lett 2022;321:132384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matlet.2022.132384.
	 22.	 Wang J, Zhu J, Liew PJ. Material removal in ultrasonic abrasive polishing of addi­
tive manufactured components. Appl Sci 2019;9:5359. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app9245359.
	 23.	 Zhou C, Sun Q, Qian D, Liu J, Sun J, Sun Z. Effect of deep cryogenic treatment on 
mechanical properties and residual stress of AlSi10Mg alloy fabricated by laser pow­
der bed fusion. J Mater Process Technol 2022;303:117543. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jmatprotec.2022.117543.
	 24.	 Simoni F, Huxol A, Villmer F-J. Improving surface quality in selective laser melting 
based tool making. J Intell Manuf 2021;32:1927–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-
021-01744-9.
	 25.	 Maleki E, Bagherifard S, Sabouri F, Bandini M, Guagliano M. Hybrid thermal, 
mechanical and chemical surface post-treatments for improved fatigue behavior 
of laser powder bed fusion AlSi10Mg notched samples. Surf Coatings Technol 
2022;430:127962. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2021.127962.
	 26.	 Mu J, Sun T, Leung CLA, Oliveira JP, Wu Y, Wang H, et al. Application of electrochem­
ical polishing in surface treatment of additively manufactured structures: A review. 
Prog Mater Sci 2023;136:101109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2023.101109.
	 27.	 Mei L, Guan G. Profilometry and atomic force microscopy for surface characteriza­
tion. Nano TransMed 2023;2:e9130017. https://doi.org/10.26599/NTM.2023.9130017.
	 28.	 Zanini F, Sbettega E, Carmignato S. X-ray computed tomography for metal addi­
tive manufacturing: Challenges and solutions for accuracy enhancement. Procedia 
CIRP 2018;75:114–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.04.050.
	 29.	 Sharma S, Shamim FA, Dvivedi A, Kumar P, Singh T. Hybrid machining of metal 
matrix composites. Fabr Mach Adv Mater Compos, Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2022, 
p. 235–54. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003327370-13.
	 30.	 Bhatt A, Huang Y, Leung CLA, Soundarapandiyan G, Marussi S, Shah S, et al. 
In situ characterisation of surface roughness and its amplification during multi­
layer single-track laser powder bed fusion additive manufacturing. Addit Manuf 
2023;77:103809. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2023.103809.

149
Index
Note: Page numbers in italics and bold refer to figures and tables, respectively.
A
Abrasive flow
machining, 139
polishing, 138–139
Abrasive jet machining (AJM), 127–129
Accuracy
dimensional, 15, 33, 86–87, 99, 111, 117, 
120–122
machining, 9, 121
precision, 41, 45
surface finishing, 145
Adaptive tool feed, 54–55, 58–59, 65
Additive approaches, 144
Additive manufacturing (AM), 1, 136–139, 
142–146
directed energy deposition (DED), 136–137
importance of surface finishing, 137–138
material categories, 137
powder bed fusion (PBF), 136–137
surface finish challenges, 138
Additive surface engineering (ASE), 143
Advanced machining processes, 1–26
AFM/STM tip-based nanomachining, 20
bio-machining, 23–24
downscaling, 20–21
dry electropolishing, 23
electrolytic inline dressing (ELID) 
grinding, 18
electropolishing, 23, 87–88, 141
fast tool servo (FTS) machining, 17
finishing technologies, 3–9
fly cutting, 19
functionality-oriented machining, 19–20
high speed, 9–25
ion-beam nanomachining, 21
laser based nano-manufacturing, 21
magnetic field-assisted polishing, 23
material-driven machining, 12–16
mechanism-driven machining, 16
miniaturization, 9–25
modern machining, 3–9
multi-jet polishing, 22–23
multiscale machining, 21–22
overview, 1–3, 9
plasma electrolytic polishing (PeP), 23
power skiving, 18–19
processing of advanced materials, 9–25
quest for nanomachining, 20–21
shape adaptive grinding/Bonnet polishing, 
22
sustainable machining, 24–25
ultraprecision-driven machining, 17–19
ultrasonic-assisted milling/grinding, 17–18
Advanced materials, processing of, 9–25
Advanced sensors, 119
Aerospace industry, 1, 11, 120–121
AFM/STM tip-based nanomachining, 20
AI, see Artificial intelligence
AJM, see Abrasive jet machining
Alternating energy electrical discharge 
machining (AE-EDM) process, 
117, 117
AM, see Additive manufacturing
Artificial intelligence (AI), 1, 122, 145
ASE, see Additive surface engineering
Assisted duplex HMP, 34–37
laser-assisted, 34–35
magnetic field-assisted, 36–37
ultrasonic-assisted, 36
Automated process integration, 41
Automotive industry, 120–121
B
Battery electrodes, surface structuring 
of, 20
Binder jetting (BJT), 136
Bio-machining
defined, 24
microbial-based cutting fluids, 24
principles, 24
specialized bacteria, 24
Biomedical industry, 121
BJT, see Binder jetting
C
CAD, see Computer-aided design
Carbon fiber-reinforced polymers (CFRPs), 
137
Case studies
induction heating and machining of gear 
components, 122
laser-assisted milling of titanium alloys, 
121

150
Index
on mechanical based sequential machining 
processes, 121–122
plasma-assisted turning of nickel-based 
superalloys, 122
Cathodic plasma, 32, 33–34
CFRP, see Carbon fiber-reinforced polymers
Chemical treatment, 143, 145–146
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), 142
CNC, see Computer numerical control
Combined duplex HMP, 32–34
cathodic plasma, 32, 33–34
electrochemical discharge machining 
(ECDM), 32–33
electrochemical jet machining (EJM), 
33–34
simultaneous micro-EDM and micro-ECM 
(SEDCM), 33
Complementary process identification, 
sequential machining, 86
Computer-aided design (CAD), 136, 141
Computer numerical control (CNC), 1
Conductive material, 13–14, 23, 51, 87
Contact profilometry, 144
Continuous improvement, sequential 
machining, 87
Control systems, 53, 86, 89, 119, 122–123, 146
Conventional ECG, 36
Conventional machining (CM), 29, 114, 114
glass, 51
sequential induction-based, 115–116
sequential plasma based, 115
Conventional postprocessing techniques, 146
Cost considerations, 128
Cost-effectiveness, 28, 41, 90–91
Crater
depth, 37, 75, 75
temperature, 75
Cryogenic treatment, 143
Crystallographic texture, machining to 
evaluate, 20
CVD, see Chemical vapor deposition
D
DED, see Direct energy deposition
Deionized (DI) water, 97
Depth of penetration (DOP), 74
Designing blueprint, sequential machining, 86
Desktop machining microfactory, 10, 10
Diamond turning lathe, 2
Difficult-to-machine (DTM), 28
Direct energy deposition (DED), 136–137, 143
Discharge zone, 40
DOP, see Depth of penetration
Dry electropolishing, 23
Duplex HMP
assisted, 34–37
combined, 32–34
E
EBMed component, 140, 140
ECDM, see Electrochemical discharge 
machining
ED, electrical discharge (ED)
EDM, electric discharge machining (EDM)
Efficiency, 9–12, 36, 48–49, 119
debris removal, 76
energy, 9–10, 12, 117
footprint, 41
heating, 117–118, 120
material, 137
production, 48
productivity, 40–41
sludge removal, 76–77, 79
Electrical discharge assisted machining 
(EDAM), 116–117, 120
Electrical discharge (ED)
drilling, 96, 96–97, 105
heating, 110
milling, 98, 98–99, 105
Electric discharge machining (EDM), 2, 36–38, 
57, 87, 94
dry, 37
heat-affected zones, 13
liquid, 37
micro, 11, 12, 33
nano, 20
sequential, 88, 89
thermal erosion, 32
traditional, 116–117
ultrasonic-assisted, 76
wire, 99–100, 100
Electrochemical based sequential machining 
processes, 93–105
EC finishing, 96–97
EC milling, 98–99
ED drilling, 96–97
ED milling, 98–99
electrochemical processes, 95
laser cutting, 102
laser drilling and ECM, 100–102
laser milling and ECDM, 102–104
overview, 93–95
thermal processes, 94–95
wire-ECM, 99–100, 102
wire-EDM, 99–100
Electrochemical discharge machining (ECDM)
combined duplex HMP, 32–33
comparative illustration, 71

151
Index
conventional, 48, 61, 65, 71, 73, 77–78, 134
effectiveness, 52
electrodes roles, 52
glycol-based electrolyte, 33
laser milling, 102–104
magnetic fields, 53
modifications, 53
process capabilities, 70
rotary, 71
triplex hybrid-based grinding-assisted, 
44–49
triplex hybrid-based magnetic-assisted 
rotary, 51–66
triplex hybrid-based ultrasonic-assisted, 
69–79
ultrasonic-assisted, 40
Electrochemical (EC)
finishing, 95, 96, 96–97, 105
milling, 98, 98–99
process, 14–15, 44, 49, 95, 105, 141, 144
reactions, 33, 45–47, 102, 144
Electrochemical grinding (ECG), 35–36
Electrochemical jet machining (EJM), 33–34, 
35, 35
Electrochemical machining (ECM), 2, 49, 76, 
87, 95
hybrid laser, 15
hybrid variant, 14
laser, 89
laser-assisted, 34
micro, 33
nano, 21
transpassive dissolution, 14–15
wire, 88, 88, 99–100, 100, 102, 103, 105
Electrolyte concentration, 53–55, 57, 61–63, 62, 
63, 65–66
Electrolyte jet (Ej), 16, 34
Electrolytes
fresh, 42, 73
glycol-based, 33
neutral, 89
selection of, 53
water-based, 33
Electrolytic inline dressing (ELID) 
grinding, 18
Electrolytic processes, 144
Electron beam melted (EBM) process, 140
Electronics industry, 121
Electro-plasticity effects, electrical machining 
to, 19
Electropolishing, 23, 87–88, 141
Embedded redistribution lines (RDL), 
69–70
Energy consumption, 10, 105, 124, 128, 
133
Engine Alliance - GP7200 jet engine, 12
Environmental impact, 119, 128
Execution and in-depth characterization, 
sequential machining, 86–87
Extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUV) 
system, 2
F
Faraday’s electrolysis principles, 2
Faraday’s law, 95
Fast tool servo (FTS) machining, 17
Feed rate effect, 88
FEM, 54–56, 59–60, 65
3D evaluation, 55
3D model, 55, 56, 65
First machine-tool, 1
Flexibility, 45–46, 84, 90–91, 105, 
136, 145
Fly cutting, 19
Footprint efficiency, 41
Functionality-oriented machining, 19–20
evaluate crystallographic texture, 20
generate electro-plasticity effects, 19
retaining sub-surface properties, 20
shape memory alloys, 19
superconductors, 19
surface structuring of battery electrodes, 
20
G
Gas film formation, 53, 59, 73–75
Gaussian
distribution, 34, 54, 56–57
heat, 55, 60
G-ECDM
experimental settings, 48
fishbone diagram, 46
machining setup, 47
performance, 48
Glass machining
conventional, 51
machining processes characteristics w.r.t., 
127–128
nonconventional, 51
sequential, 129
Glass processing challenges, 128–129
Greener manufacturing, 23, 119–120
Grinding
assisted ECDM (GA-ECDM) based triplex 
HMP, 38–39
defined, 22
shape adaptive, 22
uses, 46–47

152
Index
H
Heat-affected zones (HAZ), 13, 16, 36, 38, 59, 
64, 77, 103–104, 117, 132
Heating
efficiency, 117–118, 120
electrical discharge (ED), 110
induction, 109–110, 115–116, 118, 120–122
laser, 15, 109–110, 112, 119–121
plasma, 110
Hex dominating method, 60
High speed machining, 9–25
High-speed machining (HSM), 10, 11
HMP, see Hybrid machining processes
Hole drilling, 96
Hole entrance diameter (HED), 40
Hybrid approaches, 45, 71, 145
Hybrid heating-based mechanical machining, 
117–119
Hybridization
primary, 44
secondary, 44
Hybrid machining centers, development of, 119
Hybrid machining processes (HMP), 28–42
assisted duplex, 34–37
combined duplex, 32–34
comparative analysis of, 40–41
comparison with sequential machining/
approach, 40–41, 89–90
design methodology, 29–31
duplex, 31, 32–40
electrochemical discharge machining 
(ECDM), 32–33
electrochemical jet machining (EJM), 
33–34
grinding assisted ECDM based triplex, 38–39
laser-assisted, 34–35
magnetic assisted ECDM based triplex, 
39–40
magnetic field-assisted, 36–37
need, 29–31
optimization fundamental for, 29–31
overview, 28
simultaneous micro-EDM and micro-ECM 
(SEDCM), 33
triplex HMP, 31, 38–40
ultrasonic assisted, 36
ultrasonic assisted ECDM Based triplex, 40
Hybrid plus mechanical/thermal based 
sequential machining processes, 
127–134
challenges in glass processing, 128–129
hybrid plus mechanical energy-based 
process, 130–131
hybrid plus thermal energy-based process, 
131
overview, 127
sequential machining and its classification, 
129–133
thermal plus hybrid energy-based process, 
131–132
Hybrid process
based on mechanical machining 
technologies, 15
based on non-contact machining 
technologies, 12–15
chemical etching-based, 130
secondary, 44
I
IAM, see Induction-assisted machining
Impact model, 29
Inconel 718s LAM, 34, 89, 100, 102, 113, 116
Induction-assisted drilling, 116
Induction-assisted machining (IAM), 115–116, 
118, 120
Induction heating, 109–110, 115–116, 118, 
120–122
Induction heating and machining of gear 
components, case study, 122
Initial assessment, sequential machining, 86
Innovative microfabrication method, 51; 
see also Electrochemical discharge 
machining (ECDM)
In-situ monitoring, 146
Integrated water-jet guided laser, 2
Integrating systems engineering, sequential 
machining, 86
Intelligent process control, 145–146
Interaction model, 29
L
LAM, see Laser-assisted machining
Laser
assisted ECM, 34
assisted EJM, 35, 35
assisted HMP process, 34–35
based deburring process, 113
based nano-manufacturing, 21
cutting and wire-ECM, 102
drilling and ECM, 100–102, 101
heating, 15, 109–110, 112, 119–121
milling and ECDM, 102–104
polishing, 138–140, 146
scanning, 145
Laser-assisted machining (LAM), 83, 111–114, 
118–121
Laser-assisted milling (LAMill), 15, 112, 112
Laser-assisted milling of titanium alloys, case 
study, 121

153
Index
Laser-assisted turning (LAT), 112, 112
Laser beam energy (Eb), 34
Laser beam machining (LBM), 94–95, 100, 
105, 127–128
Laser electrochemical machining (LECM), 
13–15
Laser-induced periodic surface structure 
(LIPSS), 21
Laser-induction assisted machining (LIAM), 
117–118, 118
LAT, see Laser-assisted turning
LBM, see Laser beam machining
LIAM, see Laser-induction assisted machining
Lorentz forces, 36, 53
Low-temperature plasma-assisted machining 
(LTPAM), 115
M
Machine learning (ML), 119, 122, 145
Machining processes characteristics w.r.t. glass 
machining, 127–128; see also Glass 
machining
Machining setup, illustration of, 47, 130, 132, 
133
Machining trends, overview of, 13
Magnetic-assisted ECDM (M-ECDM) based 
triplex HMP, 39–40
Magnetic field
assisted EDM, 36–37, 37
assisted HMP process, 36–37
assisted polishing, 23
Magnetohydrodynamic convection (MHDC), 
39–40
Maintenance, 83, 90–91, 113, 122
MAM, see Metal additive manufacturing
Manufacturing, history of, 1
Material-driven machining, 12–16
Material extrusion (MEX), 136
Material handling, 83–84, 90–91
Material jetting (MJT), 136
Material removal computation analysis, 
57–58
Material removal rate (MRR), 112, 115–117, 
120–121
improvement analysis in M-ECDM, 61–62
sequential machining process, 83
small, 33
Material-specific behavior, 123–124
Material-specific solutions, 145–146
Measurements
material removal rate (MRR), 59–60
ROC, 60
SR, 60
M-ECDM setup, 58
Mechanical abrasion, 46–47, 49
Mechanical based sequential machining 
processes, 109–124
advances in, 119–120
advantages, 120
aerospace industry, 120–121
applications of, 120–121
automotive industry, 121
biomedical industry, 121
case studies on, 121–122
challenges, 122–124
control systems, 119
development of hybrid machining centers, 
119
electrical-discharge based conventional 
machining, 116–117
electrical discharge heating, 110
electronics industry, 121
future directions, 122–124
hybrid heating-based mechanical 
machining, 117–118
induction-based conventional machining, 
115–116
induction heating, 110
induction heating and machining of gear 
components, 122
integration of advanced sensors, 119
laser-assisted milling of titanium alloys, 
121
laser-based mechanical machining, 
111–115
material-specific behavior, 123
overview, 109–111
plasma-assisted turning of nickel-based 
superalloys, 122
plasma based conventional machining, 115
plasma heating, 110
process integration, 123
sustainability, 123–124
sustainable machining practices, 119–120
techniques, 109–110
thermal management, 123
Mechanical energy-based process, 130–131
Mechanical polishing, 138, 145
Mechanical process, 2–3, 12, 16, 109–112, 
119–123
Mechanical treatment, 119, 123, 143
Mechanism-based classification, 16
Mechanism-driven machining, 16
Mechanistic analysis, sequential machining, 
86
Meshed 3D model, 60
Metal additive manufacturing (MAM), 
137, 142
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMSs), 
9–10, 51, 69–70, 73, 77, 79
Microgroove, 34, 103–104, 104, 131–132

154
Index
Microhole
drilling, 53
3D surface view of, 49
effect of ultrasonic amplitude on, 78
geometrical analysis of, 64–65
Miniaturization, 9–25
ML, see Machine learning
Model validation
constant parameters used for, 59
variable parameters used for, 59
Moore’s law, 9, 10
MRR, see Material removal rate
Multi-jet polishing, 22–23
Multiscale machining, 21–22
Multiscale surface microstructures, 22
Multistep sequential machining processes, 
85, 89
N
Nanomachining
AFM/STM tip-based, 20
ion-beam, 21
laser based nano-manufacturing, 21
NGV, see Nozzle guide vane
Non-conductive material, 14
Noncontact profilometry, 144
Nonconventional glass machining, 51
Nozzle guide vane (NGV), 139, 139
P
PAM, see Plasma-assisted machining
Parallel kinematic mechanisms, 1
Pentamode metamaterials (PM), 141
Performance optimization, 90
Physical vapor deposition (PVD), 142
Piezoelectric transducer, 72
Plasma-assisted machining (PAM), 115, 120
Plasma-assisted turning of nickel-based 
superalloys, case study, 122
Plasma electrolytic polishing (PeP), 23
Plasma heating, 110
Polishing
electropolishing, 23, 87–88, 141
magnetic field-assisted polishing, 23
multi-jet polishing, 22–23
plasma electrolytic polishing (pep), 23
principles of advanced polishing 
techniques, 23
shape adaptive grinding/bonnet polishing, 
22
surface, 22
Post-processing, see Polishing
Powder bed fusion (PBF), 136–137
Power skiving, 3, 18–19
Precision, 9–25
accuracy, 41, 45
limitations in, 128
operational, 119
Precision control, 112
Primary hybridization, 44
Process characteristics, see Transmuted 
energies
Processes employed for ultraprecision 
machining, overview of, 18
Process integration, 28, 30–31, 41, 123–124
Process signature, 16
Process synergy, 28, 30, 41
Productivity, 19, 21, 40–41, 45, 111, 114, 
117–120
Productivity and efficiency, 40–41
Profilometry, 144
PVD, see Physical vapor deposition
R
Real-time monitoring, 123, 146
Retaining sub-surface properties, 20
Robust process monitoring, 122
ROC, 54–55, 59–60, 64–66
Rough machining cycle, 84–85
S
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 32, 37, 
87–88, 97–98, 101, 104, 114, 140, 
144–145
Secondary hybridization, 44
Selective laser-assisted milling (SLAM), 113, 
114
Selective laser-assisted turning (SLAT), 114, 
114–115
SEM, see Scanning electron microscopy
Sequential coupled thermal-mechanical 
analysis (SCTMA), 109
Sequential electrical discharge-assisted 
machining (EDAM), 116–117
Sequential glass machining, 129
Sequential induction-based conventional 
machining, 115–116
Sequential laser-based mechanical machining, 
111–115
Sequential machining processes, 83–91
characteristics of, 85
classification, 84–85
comparative analysis with hybrid 
machining, 40–41, 89–90
complementary process identification, 86
continuous improvement, 87
defined, 129
designing blueprint, 86

155
Index
execution and in-depth characterization, 
86–87
glass, 129
initial assessment, 86
integrating systems engineering, 86
mechanistic analysis, 86
multistep, 85, 89
need, 84–87
overview, 83–84
strategy, 84–87, 86
two-step, 84–85, 87–89
Sequential plasma based conventional 
machining, 115
Setup times, 41, 119
Shape adaptive grinding, 22
Shape memory alloys, machining of, 19
Sheet lamination (SHL), 136
Simplicity in process control, 89
Simultaneous micro-EDM and micro-ECM 
(SEDCM), 33
Sludge removal efficiency, 76–77, 79
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), 
129
Smart manufacturing, 146
Snail’s law, 9, 10
Softening depth (h), 38
Space utilization, 41
Spark radius calculation, 57
Superconductors, machining of, 19
Surface defects, 11, 19, 22, 128, 133
Surface finish techniques, 136–146
abrasive flow polishing, 139
additive approaches, 144
additively manufactured components, 
136–146
additive manufacturing significance, 136–137
additive surface engineering (ASE), 143
atomic force microscopy (AFM), 144
characterization methods, 144–145
chemical treatments, 143
chemical vapor deposition (CVD), 142
cryogenic treatment, 143
electrochemical and electrolytic processes, 
144
electropolishing, 141
emerging surface finish techniques, 141–143
feedback, 146
future directions, 145–146
hybrid approaches, 145
importance in AM components, 137–138
in-situ monitoring, 146
intelligent process control, 145
laser polishing, 139–140
laser scanning, 145
material-specific solutions, 145–146
mechanical polishing, 138
mechanical treatments, 143
optical microscopy, 144–145
overview, 136–138
physical vapor deposition (PVD), 142
profilometry, 144
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 144
surface finish challenges in AM, 138
techniques for AM components, 143–144
thermal treatments, 144
traditional surface finishing techniques, 
138–140
ultrasonic vibration-assisted polishing, 
142–143
x-ray computed tomography (CT), 145
Surface polishing, 22
Surface preparation, 46
Surface roughness (SR), 33–34, 54–55, 59–60, 
62, 65–66, 97, 102, 138, 143–144
Surface topographies, 102
Sustainable machining, 24–25, 123–124
aspects of, 25
overview, 24
Sustainable machining practices, 119–120, 123
Swiss-type lathe, 2, 10
T
TAM, see Thermal-assisted machining
Tandem machining, 28, 85, 89
TBC, see Thermal barrier-coated
Thermal-assisted machining (TAM), 118
Thermal barrier-coated (TBC), 11
Thermal energy-based process, 131
Thermal management, 24, 119, 123–124
Thermal plus hybrid energy-based process, 
131–132
Thermal process, 12–13, 16, 87, 94–95, 105, 
109–111, 124
Thermal scanning probe, 2
Thermal treatment, 110–111, 119, 144
Thermo plus electrochemical-based 
sequential processes, 94–95; 
see also Sequential machining 
processes
Ti-6Al-4V, 12, 112, 141, 141
Tolerance pyramid, 17
Tolerancing, 1
Transmuted energies, 29
Triplex HMP, 31, 38–40
grinding assisted ECDM based, 38–39
magnetic assisted ECDM-based, 39–40
ultrasonic assisted ECDM based, 40
Triplex hybrid-based grinding-assisted ECDM, 
44–49
discussion, 48–49
experimental setup, 47–48

156
Index
mechanism, 45–47
overview, 44–45
procedure, 47–48
results and discussion, 48–49
Triplex hybrid-based magnetic-assisted rotary 
ECDM, 51–66
adaptive tool feed, 59
analysis on ROC, 64–65
analysis on SR, 64–65
assumptions, 55–56
experimentation and setup, 58–60
geometrical analysis of microhole, 
64–65
material removal computation analysis, 
57–58
measurements, 59–60
model constraints, 56–57
model validations, 60–61
MRR, 59
MRR improvement analysis in M-ECDM, 
61–62
overview, 51–54
parametric studies, 63–64
results, 60–64
ROC, 60
simulation methodology, 55–58
spark radius calculation, 57
surface roughness (SR), 60
thermal model description, 55
Triplex hybrid-based ultrasonic-assisted 
ECDM, 69–79
capabilities of, 77–78
effect of ultrasonic assistance on sludge 
removal efficiency, 75
effect of ultrasonic vibration on temperature 
distribution, 75
effect on material removal mechanism, 73
gas film formation in, 73–75
mechanism, 72–77
overview, 69–71
Troubleshooting, 90
Tungsten carbide and polycrystalline diamond 
(WC-PCD), 117
Turn-millgrind, 2
Two-step sequential machining processes, 
84–85, 87–89
U
Ultra-large-scale integration (ULSI), 2
Ultraprecision, defined, 17
Ultraprecision-driven machining, 17–19
electrolytic inline dressing (ELID) 
grinding, 18
fast tool servo (FTS) machining, 17
fly cutting, 19
power skiving, 18–19
ultrasonic-assisted milling/grinding, 17–18
Ultraprecision machines for fabrication, 2
Ultrashort pulsed laser machining, 11
Ultrasonic-assisted
ECDM (U-ECDM) based triplex HMP, 40
electrochemical grinding (UA-ECG), 36
HMP Process, 36
milling/grinding, 17–18
Ultrasonic machining (USM), 52, 127, 129
Ultrasonic vibration-assisted polishing, 142, 
142–143
Ultrasonic vibration on film formation, effect 
of, 74
USM, see Ultrasonic machining
V
Vertical 5-axis milling machine, 2
W
Wilkinson’s boring machine, 1
Wire-ECM, 99–100, 100, 102–103, 105; 
see also Electrochemical machining
Wire-EDM, 99–100, 100, 105; see also Electric 
discharge machining
Workflow management, 90
Workpiece handling, 41, 105
X
X-ray computed tomography (CT), 145
Y
Yang, C. K., 53

