PERSPECTIVES IN MATHEMATICAL LOGIC
Saharon Shelah
Proper
and Improper
Forcing
Second Edition
Springer


Perspectives
in
Mathematical Logic
Editors
S. Feferman W. A. Hodges
M. Lerman (Managing Editor) A. J. Macintyre
M. Magidor Y. N. Moschovakis

Springer
Berlin
Heidelberg
New York
Barcelona
Budapest
Hong Kong
London
Milan
Paris
Santa Clara
Singapore
Tokyo

Saharon Shelah
Proper and
Improper Forcing
Second Edition
Springer

Saharon Shelah
Institute of Mathematics
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
91904 Jerusalem
Israel
e-mail: shelah@math.huji.ac.il
and
Department of Mathematics
Rutgers University
Hill Center - Busch Campus
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
USA
The first edition was published in 1982 under the title Proper Forcing, as vol. 940 of
the series "Lecture Notes in Mathematics" with the ISBN 3-540-11593-5
Cataloging-in-Publication Data applied for
Die Deutsche Bibliothek - CIP-Einheitsaufnahme
Shelah, Saharon: Proper and improper forcing / Saharon Shelah. - 2. ed. - Berlin; Heidelberg;
New York; Barcelona; Budapest; Hong Kong; London; Milan; Paris; Santa Clara; Singapore; Tokyo:
Springer, 1998
(Perspectives in mathematical logic)
ISBN 3-540-51700-6
Mathematics Subject Classification (1991):
03E05, 03E35, 03E45, 03E50
ISSN 0172-6641
ISBN 3-540-51700-6 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other ways, and storage in data
banks. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions
of the German Copyright Law of September 9,1965, in its current version, and permission for
use must always be obtained from Springer-Verlag. Violations are liable for prosecution
under the German Copyright Law.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1998
Printed in Germany
Typeset in TgX by the author using a modified Springer T£X macro-package
SPIN 10014938 
41/3143 - 5 4 3 2 1 0 - Printed on acid-free paper

Perspectives in Mathematical Logic
This series was founded in 1969 by the Omega Group consisting of R. O.
Gandy, H. Hermes, A. Levy, G. H. Miiller, G. E. Sacks and D. S. Scott.
Initially sponsored by a grant from the Stiftung Volkswagenwerk, the
series appeared under the auspices of the Heidelberger Akademie der
Wissenschaften. Since 1986, Perspectives in Mathematical Logic is
published under the auspices of the Association for Symbolic Logic.
Mathematical Logic is a subject which is both rich and varied. Its origins
lie in philosophy and the foundations of mathematics. But during the
last half century it has formed deep links with algebra, geometry,
analysis and other branches of mathematics. More recently it has
become a central theme in theoretical computer science, and its influence
in linguistics is growing fast.
The books in the series differ in level. Some are introductory texts
suitable for final year undergraduate or first year graduate courses,
while others are specialized monographs. Some are expositions of well-
established material, some are at the frontiers of research. Each offers
an illuminating perspective for its intended audience.


Dedicated to My Beloved Son Omri


Table of Contents
Introduction 
xv
Notation 
xxi
Content by Subject 
xxiii
Annotated Content 
xxviii
I. Forcing, Basic Facts 
1
§0. Introduction 
1
§1. Introducing Forcing 
2
§2. The Consistency of CH (The Continuum Hypothesis) 
11
§3. On the Consistency of the Failure of CH 
17
§4. More on the Cardinality 2
N° and Cohen Reals 
23
§5. Equivalence of Forcings Notions, and Canonical Names 
28
§6. Random Reals, Collapsing Cardinals and Diamonds 
35
§7. * Does Not Imply 0 
41
II. Iteration of Forcing 
50
§0. Introduction 
50
§1. The Composition of Two Forcing Notions 
51
§2. Iterated Forcing 
57
§3. Martin's Axiom and Few Applications 
63
§4. The Uniformization Property 
72
§5. Maximal Almost Disjoint Families of Subsets of ω 
83

x 
Table of Contents
III. Proper Forcing 
89
§0. Introduction 
89
§1. Introducing Properness 
90
§2. More on Properness 
98
§3. Preservation of Properness Under Countable Support Iteration 
107
§4. Martin's Axiom Revisited 
117
§5. On Aronszajn Trees 
123
§6. Maybe There Is No N2-Aronszajn Tree 
127
§7. Closed Unbounded Subsets of ω\ Can Run Away from Many Sets 
133
§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are No Kurepa Trees 
137
IV. On Oracle-c.c.,the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra,
and "P(ω)/finite Has No Non-trivial Automorphism" 
144
§0. Introduction 
144
§1. On Oracle Chain Conditions 
148
§2. The Omitting Type Theorem 
153
§3. Iterations of M-c.c. Forcings 
156
§4. The Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra 
161
§5. Automorphisms of P(α )/finite 
171
§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
175
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals 
194
§0. Introduction 
194
§1. ^-Completeness - a Sufficient Condition for Not Adding Reals 
196
§2. Generalizations of Properness 
206
§3. α-Properness and (£, a)-Properness Revisited 
212
§4. Preservation of ω-Properness + the
 ωu;-Bounding Property 
216
§5. Which Forcings Can We Iterate Without Adding Reals 
224
§6. Specializing an Aronszajn Tree Without Adding Reals 
228
§7. Iteration of (£, D)-Complete Forcing Notions 
237
§8. The Consistency of SH -f CH -h There Are No Kurepa Trees 
241

Table of Contents 
xi
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications 
247
§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
252
§2. Examples 
278
§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
309
§4. There May Be No P-Point 
325
§5. There May Exist a Unique Ramsey Ultrafilter 
335
§6. On the Splitting Number s and Domination Number b and on α 
346
§7. On $ > b = a 
362
§8. On ϊ) < $ = b 
366
VII. Axioms and Their Application 
372
§0. Introduction 
372
§1. On the κ-Chain Condition, When Reals Are Not Added 
372
§2. The Axioms 
377
§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
383
§4. Applications of Axiom I 
398
§5. A Counterexample Connected to Preservation 
400
VIII. κ>pic and Not Adding Reals 
403
§0. Introduction 
403
§1. Mixed Iteration - N2-c.c., N2-Complete 
404
§2. Chain Conditions Revisited 
409
§3. The Axioms Revisited 
414
§4. More on Forcing Not Adding α -Sequences
and on the Diagonal Argument 
418
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply
"Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special" 
436
§0. Introduction 
436
§1. Free Limits 
436
§2. Preservation by Free Limit 
439

xii 
Table of Contents
§3. Aronszajn Trees: Various Ways to Specialize 
443
§4. Independence Results 
452
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing 
467
§0. Introduction 
467
§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS
(Revised Countable Support) 
468
§2. Proper Forcing Revisited 
482
§3. Pseudo-Completeness 
491
§4. Specific Forcings 
499
§5. Chain Conditions and Abraham's Problem 
510
§6. Reflection Properties of 3%:
Refining Abraham's Problem and Precipitous Ideals 
513
§7. Friedman's Problem 
524
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results 
532
§0. Introduction 
532
§1. The Theorems 
532
§2. The Condition 
542
§3. The Preservation Properties Guaranteed by the 5-Condition 
546
§4. Forcing Notions Satisfying the 5-Condition 
550
§5. Finite Composition 
558
§6. Preservation of the I-Condition by Iteration 
562
§7. Further Independence Results 
576
§8. Relativising to a Stationary Set 
586
XII. Improper Forcing 
589
§0. Introduction 
589
§1. Games and Properness 
590
§2. When Is Namba Forcing Semiproper, Chang's Conjecture
and Games 
597

Table of Contents 
xiii
XIII. Large Ideals on ωl 
604
§0. Introduction 
604
§1. Semi-Stationarity 
609
§2. 5-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing 
622
§3. On P(ωι)/T>ωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
637
§4. P(ωι)/(Dωι + 5) is Reflective or Ulam 
656
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support 
679
§0. Introduction 
679
§1. /^-Revised Support Iteration 
680
§2. Pseudo-Completeness 
688
§3. Axioms 
715
§4. On Sacks Forcing 
720
§5. Abraham's Second Problem - Iterating Changing Cofinality to ω 
722
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring
N! Is Not Collapsed 
732
§0. Introduction 
732
§1. Preliminaries 
733
§2. Trees of Models and UP 
735
§3. Preservation of the [7P(I, S, W) by Iteration 
761
§4. Families of Ideals and Families of Partial Orders 
769
XVI. Large Ideals on HI from Smaller Cardinals 
778
§0. Introduction 
778
§1. Bigness of Stationary Γ C <S<κ0(λ) 
778
§2. Getting Large Ideals on KI 
785
XVII. Forcing Axioms 
803
§0. Introduction 
803
§1. Semiproper Forcing Axiom Implies Martin's Maximum 
804
§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
809

xiv 
Table of Contents
§3. Canonical Functions for ω\ 
829
§4. A Largeness of Ί)ωι in Forcing Extensions of L
and Canonical Functions 
839
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing 
854
§0. Introduction 
854
§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample and New Questions 
855
§2. Not Adding Reals 
867
§3. Other Preservations 
888
§4. There May Be a Unique P-Point 
932
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext 
940
§0. Introduction 
940
§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
942
§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
961
§3. Weak Diamond for N2 Assuming CH 
982
References 
997
More References 
1012

Introduction
Even though the title of this book is related to the old Lecture Notes "Proper
Forcing", it is a new book: not only did it have six new chapters and some
sections moved in (and the thirteenth chapter moved out to the author's book
on cardinal arithmetic), but the old material and also the new have been revised
for clarification and corrected several times.
Now, twenty years after its discovery, I feel that perhaps "proper forcing"
is a household concept in set theory, and the reader probably knows the basic
facts about forcing and proper forcing. However we demand no prerequisites
except some knowledge of naive set theory (including stationary sets, Fodor
Lemma, strongly inaccessible, Mahlo, weakly compact etc.; occasionally we
mention some large cardinals in their combinatorial definitions (measurable,
supercompact), things like 0# and complementary theorems showing some large
cardinals are necessary, but ignorance in those directions will not hamper the
reader), and the book aims at giving a complete presentation of the theory of
proper and improper forcing from its beginning avoiding the metamathematical
considerations; in particular no previous knowledge of forcing is demanded
(though the forcing theorem is stated and explained, not proved). This is the
main reason for not just publishing the additional material in a shorter book.
Another reason is the complaints about shortcomings of the Proper Forcing
Lecture Notes.
Forcing was founded by Cohen's proof of the independence of the contin-
uum hypothesis; Solovay and many others developed the theory (works prior
to 1977). Particularly relevant to this book are Solovay and Tennenbaum [ST]

xvi 
Introduction
and Martin and Solovay [MS], Jensen (see [DeJo]), Silver [Si67], Mitchell [Mil],
Baumgartner [Bl], Laver [LI], Abraham, Devlin and Shelah [ADS Sl].
We do not elaborate here on the history of the subject (but of course
there are credits and references to it in each chapter or in its sections, e.g. on
Baumgartner's axiom A see VII §4). And in the first two chapters we review
classical material.
Our aim is to try to develop a theory of iterated forcing for the continuum.
In addition to particular consistency results that are hopefully of some interest,
I try to give to the reader methods which he could use for such independence
results. Many of the results are presented in an "axiomatic" framework for this
reason.
The main aim of the book is thus to enable a researcher interested in an
independence result of the appropriate kind, to have much of the work done
for him, thus allowing him to quote general results.
We know how for any partial order P (which we call here a forcing notion) we
can find an extension V
p of the universe V of set theory (e.g. thinking of V as
being countable); this is explained in Chapter I. So for G C P generic over V
(i.e. not disjoint from any dense subset of P from V), V[G] is an extension of
V, a model of set theory with the same ordinals, consisting of sets constructible
from V and G. By fine tuning P we can get universes of set theory with various
desired properties, we are particularly interested in those of the form "for every
x there is y such that ...".
So, e.g., for every Souslin tree there is a c.c.c. forcing notion P changing the
universe so that it is no longer a Souslin tree, but to prove the consistency of
"there is no Souslin tree" we need to repeat it till we "catch our tail". For this
9
 
p*9
an iteration P*Q is defined, and (V )~ =V 
" i s proved (i.e. two successive
generic extensions can be conceived as one). More delicate is the limit case, and
for this case "finite support iteration" (P$, Qj : i < a,j < a) works; by natural
bookkeeping we can consider all Souslin trees and even all Souslin trees in V
Pί
for i < α, and as the c.c.c. is preserved if cf(α) > HI, since a Souslin tree can
be coded as A C ω\, we "catch our tail".

Introduction 
xvii
In other cases countable support iteration can serve for "catching our tail";
some chain condition is then needed.
The main issue is thus preservation, i.e. if each Qi has (in V
Pί) a property,
does Pα, the limit of an iteration, have it (this depends of course on the kind
of the iteration, that is on the support). The most basic property here is not
collapsing NI, which is treated for several kinds of iteration, i.e. supports.
Classically, a natural condition guaranteeing that KI is not collapsed is (the
countable chain condition) c.c.c. under finite support iterations; it is preserved
(see Chapter II). It is natural to ask that the stationarity of subsets of ω\ be
preserved as well (as if (Sn : n < ω) is a partition of ω\ to stationary sets,
we can force closed unbounded subsets En of ω\ without collapsing KI (see
Baumgartner, Harrington and Kleinberg [BHK]) but in the limit necessarily
NI is collapsed). So it is natural to strengthen this somewhat (to preserve the
stationarity of subsets of <S<κ0(λ) for every λ), and we get the notion of proper
forcing, which is preserved under the countable support iteration (see Chapter
III, see alternative proof in XII §1 - and for KI - free iteration in IX). This is
a major notion here and the proof of its preservation serve as paradigm here.
However some forcing notions preserving KI are not proper: Prikry forcing,
Namba forcing. We have to use such forcing (i.e. non-proper) when during the
iteration, in some intermediate stage we have to change the cofinality of some
uncountable regular cardinal (e.g. ^2) to NI. To deal with them we prove the
preservation of semiproperness under revised countable support (see Chapter
X) and show that Prikry forcing is (always) semiproper and Namba forcing
is "often" semiproper. But there may be not semiproper non-proper forcing
notions, in particular Namba forcing may be not semiproper (see XII §2), so
we introduced properties like the 5-condition (guaranteeing that no real is
added (see Chapter XI)) and UP (I) (see Chapter XV), and another one (for
continuum > ^2) see Chapter XIV.
But of course we really would like to have a general framework for pre-
serving other properties. This is dealt with in Chapter VI §1, §2; a prototypical
property is preserving "every new / £
 ωω is dominated by an old g G
 ωα;"
which is done in V §4 (but this is done only under the assumption that the

xviii 
Introduction
forcing does not collapse KI by some of the earlier versions), but includes many
examples like "(/, ^-bounding for a closed enough family of pairs (/, g)". Later
we deal with more general theorems (XIII §3, with a forerunner VI §3, which
deals e.g. with "no new / G
 ωω dominates F").
However the case of "no new reals" is somewhat harder and it is treated
in several places: in Chapter V §3 (for 5-complete forcing, S C <S<κ0(λ)
stationary), in Chapter V §6, §7 (for (< ωι)-proper D-complete (e.g. D is a
simple Ni-completeness system)), Chapter VIII §4 (for a generalization, in
particular D is a simple 2-completeness system) and Chapter XVIII §2 (for
essentially strongly proper forcing notions). Some other properties do not fall
(or are not presented) under any of those cases: strongly proper (see IX, VI §6,
IX §4), not collapsing ^2 for Ni-complete forcing when we use mixed support
(VIII §1).
In all iterations somewhere we need to prove a suitable chain condition in
order to catch our tails; for finite support iteration this is done directly (II),
for countable support iteration see III §4, and more VII §1, VIII §2, and for
revised countable support later in XVII §4 this plays a central role.
Every iteration theorem + chain condition gives the consistency of an
axiom, see VII §3, VIII §4, XVII §1, §2, §3. This stresses the problem of having
a general iteration theorem for "continuum > N3".
Of course much of the book deals with specific problems which serve both
as an illustration of the methods and for their interest per se (see the annotated
content and the separate introductions to the chapters).
The mathematical work was done between 1977 and 1989; the author ap-
proaches other aspects of our subject in Judah and Shelah [JdSh:292], [Sh:630]
(on nicely defined forcing, e.g. Borel), Roslanowski and Shelah [RoSh:470] (on
even more nicely defined forcing, quite explicitly in fact), [Sh:176] §7, §8, Gold-
stern and Shelah [GoSh:295] (on amalgamation and projective sets in the final
model) and [Sh:311] (continuing Chapter XV), [Sh:587], [Sh:F259], [Sh:655] (on
replacing tto,Nι by λ,λ
+) and [Sh:592] (more on FS iteration of c.c.c. forcing
notions).

Introduction 
xix
Prerequisites: 
we assume that the reader has some knowledge of naive set
theory (including stationary sets, Fodor lemma, etc.). The metamathematical
side is avoided by stating the forcing theorem without proof in Chapter I. If
you have read Jech [J] or Kunen [Ku83] you should be well prepared. Several
places present some preservation theorems with less generality and they may
be of some help to the reader (and they can be treated as good preparation
for this book too). Let us list some of them: Baumgartner [B3], Abraham
[Ab], Bartoszyήski and Judah [BaJu95], Goldstern [Go], Jech [J86], Judah and
Repicky [JuRe].
There are many people who gave indispensable help for the book in various
stages.
Concerning the old "Proper Forcing" I heard from Baumgartner the idea of
avoiding the metamathematical side, Azriel Levy, who has a much better name
than the author in such matters, made notes from the lectures in the Hebrew
University, rewrote them, and they appear as Chapters I, II, and part of III.
These chapters were somewhat corrected and expanded by Rami Grossberg and
the author. Most of XI §1-5 were lectured on and (the first version) written up
by Shai Ben David. And most of all Rami Grossberg has taken care of it in all
respects and Danit Sharon typed it.
Concerning the present work, Azriel Levy has helped in transforming the
book from Troίf to TjTJX. Menachem Kojman in addition wrote up first version
of section I §7 from my lectures in the eighties.
Various parts of the book benefitted a lot from proofreading and pointing
gaps by my students, postdocs and co-workers. All of them contributed in
various ways and I am very grateful for their help, though I failed to make a
complete list of the contributors.
Most of all Martin Goldstern has helped in some very distinct capacities.
Not only did he proofread and revise several chapters but also with his magic

xx 
Introduction
touch in various ΊgK-nical aspects he made the appearance of this book pos-
sible.
Last but not least I thank Hagit Levy and Gosia Roslanowska for typing
and retyping and retyping ... the book.
Thank you all.
Saharon Shelah
Institute of Mathematics
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
91904 Jerusalem, ISRAEL
Department of Mathematics
Rutgers University
Hill Center - Busch Campus
New Brunswick, NJ 08854, USA
shelahOmath.huj i.ac.il
http: //www. math. rutgers. edu/~shelah
The author thanks "The Israel Science Foundation" administered by The Israel
Academy of Sciences and Humanities, and the United States-Israel Binational
Science Foundation, and National Science Foundation USA for partially sup-
porting this research^ (the old and the new one) in various times.
This footnote was omitted by mistake in [Sh:b].

Notation 
xxi
Notation
Natural numbers are denoted by fc, ί, ra, n.
Ordinals are denoted by z, j,α,/?, 7, 5, £, £, 0 where 5 is reserved for limit
ordinals.
Cardinals (usually infinite) are denoted by λ,μ, ft, χ. Let Kα be the α'th
infinite cardinal, ωa = Kα, α; = ωQ. Let ^α = {/ : / a function from /? to
α},
 /3>α = |J7</3
7α. For sequences of ordinals (i.e., members of some ^α),
lg(η) = Domτ7, r/(i) the i'th ordinal so 77 = (η(i) : i < ίg(ή)). We write also
(77(0), . . . , 77(71)) or 77(0), . . . , 77(71) as seems fit. We denote sequences, usually of
ordinals, by 77, v, p and also r. The concatanation of 77, v is denoted by η
 Λ v Let
c.l.u.b. or club mean closed unbounded.
Let \A\ denote the cardinality of the set A, P(A) denote the power set of
^4, and cf (α) the cofinality of α.
"A real" means here a subset of cj, or its characteristic functions. The
quantifiers "5*π", "V*n" (sometimes written Ξ3°° and V
00, respectively) are
abbreviations for "for infinitely many n G ω" and "for all but finitely many
n € ω" , respectively.
Let y?, ι/> denote first order formulas. Let (^(XQ? 
> x n-i) means every free
variable of φ appears in {x0, 
> ^n-ι}
Let P (and also Q
 and -R) denote a partially ordered set or even a quasi
ordered set (i.e., p < q < p does not necessarily imply p — q). We call such P
a forcing notion, and assume 0 ot 0pis a minimal member of P. We use G for
a generic subset of P, (usually Gα or Gpa for a generic subset of Pα), (for a
definition of generic see I §1). Let p, g, r denote members of forcing notions, we
say p, q are incompatible in P if they have no common upper bound in P.
We do not distinguish strictly between a model M, or a forcing notion P,
and their universe. Y . 
AΪ is the cartesian product sometimes also denoted by
Πί€/Ai. Distinguish (in principle) it from Πiel μ(i) (multiplication of cardi-
nals). We shall not distinguish notationally between multiplication of cardinals
or ordinals. For an uncountable cardinal λ of uncountable cofinality, V\ stands

xxii 
Introduction
for the filter generated by the closed unbounded subsets of λ; when 5 C λ is
stationary (also denoted by 5 φ 0 mod V\) T>\ -f 5 is the filter generated by
^λ U {5}.
For ordinals ot,β such that β < a we let 5^ = {7 < Nα : cfj = N/?} but
when μ, λ are (infinite) cardinals such that μ < X then S* = {7 < λ : cfλ = μ}
when no confusion arise.
We made a special effort to uniformize the notation we use but still there
may be some exceptions in the chapters, for example in Chapter III, <Sκ0(A) is
used to denote the family of countable subsets of A (see Definition III 1.2) but
the same family in Chapter V is denoted by S<^l(A) (see Definition V 3.3).
So since some of the notions are redefined the reader is advised to check the
nearest definition rather than the first.
Models are denoted by letters M, N perhaps with an index. We shall not
always distinguish between the model and its universe, but always \M\ will
denote the universe of M and ||M|| its cardinality.

Content by Subject 
xxiii
Content by Subject
1. Results Outside Set Theory
In the Appendix, Sect. 2 there are results on the power of Ext (G, Z) assuming
various weak diamonds.
2. Results in Naive Set Theory
In the Appendix §1 we investigate weak variants of the diamond (continuing
Devlin and Shelah [DvShrβδ].)
In the Appendix §3 we prove that CH implies some kind of weak diamond
to Si (and generalizations).
In IX §3 we discuss various specializations of Aronszajn trees.
In XIII §4 a sufficient condition for the existence of Ulam filters is given.
3. Basics of Forcing
In Chapter I we explain how to use forcing and discuss some basic forcing. In
Chapter II we explain iteration with < /^-support, (in particular finite support)
deal for example with Martin Axiom, and more examples.
4. Specific Independence Results on Trees
In III 5.4 we present a proof that every Ni-Aronszajn tree can be specialized
by a c.c.c. forcing notion (and generally in III §5 deal with /ς-trees).
In III §6 we present a proof of the consistency of " ZFC+2
K° = ^2+ there
is no ^2-Aronszajn trees".
In V §6, §7, we present a proof of CON (ZFC+G.C.H.+ every Aronszajn
tree is special) which seems to us more adaptable to further needs (e.g. 2**
1
large).
In V §8 we present a proof of the consistency of the Kurepa hypothesis.
In VII §3 we prove consistency results on Aronszajn trees strengthening
the previous ones, motivated by general topology. This implies the consistency
of G.C.H. + there is a count ably paracompact regular space which is not normal
(see VII 3.25).

xxiv 
Introduction
In VII §3 we present a proof of the consistency of a strengthening of CON
(ZFC-f G.C.H. + there is no Ki-Kurepa tree.)
In VIII §3 we prove the consistency of ZFC+CH+SH+2*
1 > N2
In IX§4 we prove that SH^ " every Aronszajn tree is special" and varia-
tions.
5. Theorems on Ni-Complete Forcing
In VIII §1 we prove that we can iterate N2-complee forcing and Ni-complete
forcing satisfying a strong N2-chain condition, without collapsing NI and b^
In VIII 2.7A we remark on another strong tt2-chain condition preserved
by CS iteration.
6. Chain Conditions
The c.c.c. and AC-C.C. are presented in Chapter II and the preservation of the
c.c.c. by FS is proved there.
In III 4.1 we prove that a CS iteration of proper forcing notions of power
< ft, K regular (Vμ < K) μ*° < /ς, of length K satisfies the κ-c.c. (by proving
that if the length is < «, it has a dense subset < K).
Of course IV is dedicated to oracle-c.c.
Lemma V 1.5 proves the N2-c.c. of a CS iteration of E-complete forcing
notions each of power NI, (assuming CH).
VII §1 deals with a strong κ>chain (e.c.c.), such that if we have a CS
iteration of length K with the condition we use for not adding reals (in V§7,
VIΠ§4) then the forcing satisfies the κ-c.c. So this helps to get consistency
results with ZFC+CH.
In VII §2 we deal with /s-pic (= /ς-properness isomorphism conditions). If
P satisfies it, then P satisfies the AC-C.C., and adds < K reals, and an iteration
of length K still satisfies the /ς-c.c. This helps to get consistency results with
ZFC+2*
0 = N2 + 2
Kl = λ (so we start with V \= "C# + 2
Hl = κ
n and this holds
for the intermediate stages). Application is starting with V \= "CH+2
Hl = ft"
and use a CS iteration Q — (Pi,Qi : i < ω^} to specialize all Aronszajn trees
without adding reals.

Content by Subject 
xxv
On the tt-c.c. for RCS iteration of length K see X §5 (5.3, 5.4) and XI
6.3(2).
On λ-c.c. for κ-RS iterations see XIV.
7. Preservation of Properness and Variants
As the book was written in the generic way, i.e. as the author advance, there
are several such proofs. In III §3 the preservation of properness by CS iteration
is proved. In IX §2 the preservation of properness under Nχ-free limit is proved.
In X §2 the preservation of properness and semi-properness under RCS is
proved, (remember that semi-proper forcing may change the cofinality of some
regular λ > NI to ω). In XII §2 the preservation of properness under CS
iteration is reproved, using the definition of properness by games (similarly
for semiproperness) .
We deal with preservation of α-properness and (ω, 1)- properness in V §2,
§3, X §7.
8. Consistency Results on the Uniformization Properties
and Variants
In II §4 we prove the consistency of "some family P of HI subsets of ω has k-
uniformization property" i.e. if /A : A — > k for A e P then for some / : ω — > k
we have
In V§1, we prove the consistency with G.C.H. of "for some stationary
5 C α i, (As : δ < ωι) have the Ho-uniformization property if each AS is a set
of order type ω, sup(A$) = ί".
In VIII §4 we prove the consistency with G.C.H. of -«Φ^2. Moreover, e.g.:
for (As : δ < ωι limit) as above, n§ < 3 then for some / : ω\ — > 3, for every
δ < ωι limit, for some mδ G {0, 1, 2} \ {n5}, we have (V*α G Aδ)(f(otQ = mδ).
9. Consistency of "Large Ideals"
In XIII we get consistency results on ωi, in XVI use smaller ones, in XIV with
larger continuum.

xxvi 
Introduction
In XVII §4 we deal with properties consistent with -Ό^ (on ω\ being an
α-th function from ω\ to ω\ even α =
10. Other Consistency Results
In III §7 we deal with " for a family of NI countable subsets Ai of ω\(i < ωi),
order type (Ai) < SupAi, there is a club C C ω\ /\i Sup(C Π Ai) < SupAi.
In VI §4 we prove the consistency of " there is no P-point" .
In VI §5 we prove the consistency of " there is a unique Ramsey ultrafilter
(onu;)".
In X, XI we prove various independence results on ω<2, read XI §1, X 8.4,
and XI §7's theorem.
In VII §3, §4, many applications are listed.
In XVΊΠ §4 we prove the consistency of "there is a unique P-point (on
ω)" (which necessarily is a Ramsey ultrafilter).
11. Other Preservations of Generalizations of Properness
In V §3 we prove the preservation of ω-properness+ the α ^-bounding property
(properness suffices - see VI).
In VΊ §1, §2, §3, XVIII §3 we deal with general preservation theorems, e.g.
of covering models, hence of various specific properties which can be formulated
this way (F-bounding properties, Sacks property, Laver property, PP-property,
D generates a Ramsey ultrafilter, D generates a P-point (ultrafilter)). Now VI
§2 relies on VI §1 to give specific results (using covering models); a different
approach, guaranteeing only preservation continue to hold in limit stages, is
VI §3, which apply e.g. to "F C
 ωω is not dominated by •"; this is further
developed in XVIII §3.
In IX §4 we deal with preservation of "(T*, 6')-preserving" which means T*
looks like Souslin trees at levels 5^5, and in the end we comment on possible
generalizations.
Not adding reals is dealt with in V §1, §2 and mainly V §7, VIII §4 and X
§7 and in XVIII §2.

Content by Subject 
xxvii
In V §1 and X §3 we deal with preservation of generalizations of HI-
completeness.
In XI §5, §6 we deal with the preservation of the 5-condition (always
satisfied by Nm which change the cofinality of M2 to MO but guarantees reals
are not added).
In XV §3 we deal with a generalization, i.e. proving preserving of a condi-
tion implying MI not collapsed, which is satisfied by all proper forcing notions
and all forcing satisfying the ^-condition.
12. Forcing Axioms
On consistency, see III §4, VII §2, VIII §3, X 2.6, XIII, XIV, XVI §2. Also XVII
§3 (SPFAK weak Chang conjecture), XVII §1 (SPFAΞ MM), XVII §2 (SPFAK
PFA+)
13. Counterexamples
In VII §5 we build an iteration (Pn,Qn '• n < ω) such that each Qn does not
collapse any stationary subset of ω\\ but any limit we take collapses MI.
In III §4 we build (in ZFC) a forcing notion of power MI, not collapsing MI
but also not preserving the stationarity of some 5 C ω\.
Examples of iteration (Pn, Qn : n < ω) each Qn is α-proper for each count-
able a not adding reals, but any limit we take that collapses HI is presented
in V 5.1 using Appendix §1 (really the previous result of Devlin and Shelah
[DvSh:65]).
In XII §2 we show that many forcing notions satisfy the conditions from XI
but are not semiproper. In fact if there is an {Hι}-semiproper forcing notion
changing cofinaltity of M2 to M0 (e.g. if Nm is {Mι}-semiproper then Chang
conjecture holds.
Examples of iteration (Pn,Qn : n < ω), each Qn is a α-proper and is a
ID-complete for some simple MI-complete completeness system but any limit
adds reals is presented in XVIII §1.

Introduction
Annotated Content
I. FORCING, BASIC FACTS
§0. Introduction
§1. Introducing Forcing
We define generic sets, names for a forcing notion, and formulate the forcing
theorems.
§2. The Consistency of CH
Our aim is to construct by forcing a model of ZFC were CH holds. First we
explain the problem of not collapsing cardinals, and second prove that NI-
complete forcing notion does not add reals.
§3. On the Consistency of the Failure of CH
We construct a model of ZFC in which the Continuum Hypothesis fails; define
the c.c.c., prove that forcing with c.c.c. forcing preserves cardinalities and
cofinalities, and prove also the Δ-system lemma for finite sets.
§4. More on the Cardinality 2^° and Cohen Reals
We construct for every cardinal λ in V which satisfies λ^° = λ a model V[G]
such that V[G] \= 2*° = λ. Also Cohen reals are defined.
§5. Equivalence of Forcing Notions, and Canonical Names
We define when two forcing notions are equivalent, introduce canonical names
and prove that for every P-name τ there is a canonical P-name σ such that
§6. Random Reals, Collapsing Cardinals and Diamonds
We introduce random reals and the Levy collapse, and prove that for regular
λ Levy (Ho? < λ) satisfies the λ-c.c. For every uncountable regular λ and a
stationary 5 C λ define a forcing notion P which preserve the regularity of λ
and stationarity of 5 add no bounded subsets to λ and such that V
p |= Os

Annotated Content 
xxix
§7. A Does Not Imply Diamond
φ is a weak relative of diamond, for S C λ stationary Jb(S) says that we can
find (A§ : δ £ S) AS C δ = sup(A$), and for every unbounded A C λ for some
(= stationarily many) δ G S, AS C A. If CH, Jfr(Hι) = ONI, so we prove the
consistency of Jfr(Hι) + ~^CH, but forcing three times.
Start with V N GCff, for Os for 5 = {δ < H2 : cf(δ) = H0}, using it construct a
"very good" Jfr(5) sequence (A§ : δ G 5). Then force by adding > H2 subsets of
HI by countable conditions, A was constructed to withstood it, lastly collapse
HI to HO by Levy (Ho, HI). As any new unbounded subset of H2 contains an old
one, A still witness Jk(S) but now S is a stationary subset of HI of the last
universe.
II. ITERATION OF FORCING
§0. Introduction
§1. The Composition of Two Forcing Notions
Composition of two notions and state the associativity lemma are defined.
§2. Iterated Forcing
We define iterated forcing, and prove that the c.c.c is preserved by FS (finite
support) iteration.
§3. Martin's Axiom and Few Applications
We prove that ZFC H-2
H° > Hi+MA is consistent. Use MA to prove many
simple uniformization properties.
§4. The Uniformization Property
Here we deal with more general uniformization properties some of which con-
tradict MA. We strenghten the demand of almost disjointness to being a kind
of tree and prove the consistency of a version contradicting MA.
§5. Maximal Almost Disjoint Families of Subsets of ω
A maximal almost disjoint (MAD) subset of P(ω) is a family of infinite subsets
of ω such that the intersection of any two members is finite and maximal with

xxx 
Introduction
this property. We prove using MA that every MAD set has cardinality 2^° . Also
the other direction: for every NI < λ < 2
K° there exists a generic extension of
V by c.c.c. forcing such that in it there exist mad set of power λ.
III. PROPER FORCING
§0. Introduction
§1. Introducing Properness
We define "P is a proper forcing notion " , prove some definitions are equivalent
(and deal with the closed unbounded filter
§2. More on Properness
We define "p is (TV, P)-generic " and deal more with equivalent definitions of
properness.
§3. Preservation of Properness Under CS Iteration
We prove the theorem mentioned in the title, CS is countable support.
§4. Martin's Axiom Revisited
We discuss the popularity of the c.c.c., whether we can replace it by a more
natural and weaker condition. We give a sufficient condition for a countable
support iteration of length K to satisfy the ft-c.c. We prove the consistency
(assuming existence of an inaccessible cardinal) of "ZFC + 2
K° = NI+ Ax[ for
forcing notions not destroying stationary subsets of ω\ of cardinality NI]". We
show that the last demand cannot be replaced by "not collapsing cardinalities
or cofinalities" .
§5. On Aronszajn Trees
We define K- Aronszajn and /ί-Souslin trees. We then present existence theorems
(for λ+ when λ = λ
<Λ) and prove that under MA every Aronszajn tree is
special.
§6. Maybe There Is No N2- Aronszajn Tree
We prove the consistency of ZFC +2
N° = H2+ there is no N2-Aronszajn tree,
the method being collapsing successively a l l λ , ^ ι < λ < κ ( / ς a weakly compact

Annotated Content 
xxxi
cardinal) and treating every potential initial segment of an N2-Aronszajn tree
to ensure it will not actually become an initial segment of such a tree.
§7. Closed Unbounded Subsets of ω\ Can Run Away
from Many Sets
We prove the consistency of ZFC +2
N° = H2 with if for i < ω^ A^ C ω\ has
order type < SupAj, then for some closed unbounded C C ω^ (Vi)[Sup(C7 Π
Ai) <
IV. ON ORACLE-C.C., THE LIFTING PROBLEM
OF THE MEASURE ALGEBRA, AND «P(ω) /FINITE
HAS NO NON-TRIVIAL AUTOMORPHISM"
§0. Introduction
The oracle-c.c. method enables us to start with V \= 0Nι and extend the set of
reals α;2-times (by iterated forcing), in the intermediate stages <>NI holds, and
we omit types of power HI along the way, i.e. promise that some intersections
of HI Borel sets remain empty.
§1. On Oracle Chain Condition
One way to build forcing notions satisfying the HI-C.C., is by successive count-
able approximations including promises to maintain the predensity of countably
many subset, many times using the diamond. We formalize a corresponding
property (M-c.c., M an oracle) and prove the equivalence of some variants of
the definition.
§2. The Omitting Type Theorem
We prove that if the intersection of HI Borel sets is empty and even if we add
a Cohen real it remains empty, (and ONI) then for some oracle M, for every
forcing notion P satisfying the M-c.c., in V
p the intersection of the Borel sets
(reinterpreted) is still empty.
§3. Iterations of M-c.c. Forcings
We show that for Finite Support iteration Q = (Pi,Qi 
: ί < a < α^), if
Mi £ V
Pi is an Hi-oracle large enough for ((M?, P j , Q j ) 
: j <i), and Qi satisfies

xxxii 
Introduction
the Mi-c.c. then Pa = LimQ satisfies the MQ-C.C. The first three sections give
the exact formulation of the aim stated in the introduction and prove that it
works.
§4. The Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
We show how to apply the method described in §1 - §3 in order to get a model
in which the natural homomorphism B —>• B/ (measure zero sets) does not lift.
Where B is the Boolean algebra of Borel sets of reals.
§5. Automorphisms of P(ω)/finite
We use our method to prove that the Boolean algebra "power set of ω divided
by the ideal of finite sets" can have only trivial automorphisms, where those
are defined as the ones induced by permutations of ω or "almost" permutation
of ω. This is equivalent to having the topological space /?(N) \ N having only
trivial autohomeomorphisms. However a main lemma is delayed to the next
section.
§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6
The point missing in §5 is: if F is an automorphism of P(ω)/finite, M an NI-
oracle, then there is forcing notion P satisfying the M-c.c., and a P-name X
of a real such that in V
p, for no Y C ω, (VA,B G P(ω)
v)[X Π A =ae B =>
YΓ\F(A) =ae F(β)], moreover even a Cohen forcing does not introduce such a
y, where =ae means equal modulo finite. We try to build such P, X and prove
that if we always fail F is trivial.
V. α-PROPERNESS AND NOT ADDING REALS
§0. Introduction
§1. ^-Completeness — a Sufficient Condition for Not Adding Reals
We define what it means to be ^-complete e.g., if P C (
Wl>2, <), 8 C ω\
stationary and fn C /n+1 G P, Sup(Dom/n) G £. We show that properness
4- ^-completeness are preserved by CS iteration and get corresponding Axiom.
We also introduce a forcing axiom which is consistent with CH use it to prove

Annotated Content 
xxxiii
a uniformization property which implies existence of a non free Whitehead
group. In this way we get universe in which ω\ is "schizophrenic": for two
disjoint stationary subsets Si, S2 we have 0 on Si but on S2 the situation is
as with MA.
§2. Generalizations of Properness
We introduce various variants of properness. We find it interesting and ben-
eficial to have properties like properness dealing with sequences of countable
models defining in particular α-properness.
§3. α-Properness and (£, α)-Properness Revisited
We repeat the previous section in more detail.
§4. Preservation of "u -Properness + the
 ωω Bounding Property"
P satisfies the ^-bounding property if [V/ G (
ωω)
yP][3g e (
ω)
v] (Λn/(n) <
g(n)) i.e.: every new function / : ω —>• ω is dominated by an old one. We prove
in great detail the theorem stated in the title as it serve a prototype of having
preservation of "properness -f X", dealt with later and is a case of a central
theme to this book.
§5. Which Forcings Can We Iterate Without Adding Reals
We explain why "not adding reals" is not preserved by any kind of iteration,
and suggest a remedy - D-completeness. More elaborately the weak diamond
tell us we have to exclude some forcing notion and D-completeness seems a
simple way to exclude then.
§6. Specializing an Aronszajn Tree Without Adding Reals
We prove that every Aronszajn tree can be specialized by a "nice" forcing:
α-proper for every α < ω\ and D-complete for some NI-completeness system
D. Together with the next section this gives a proof of Con(ZFC + 3«[« inac-
cessible]) -> Con(ZFC + GCH + SH) and with Chapter VIII a new proof of
Jensen's Con(ZFC + GCH + SH) where SH is the Souslin Hypothesis.

xxxiv 
Introduction
§7. Iteration of (E,D)-Complete Forcing Notions
We prove that the limit of a CS iteration of Qi each is α-proper for every
a < ωi, and D-complete for some simple KI-completeness from V does not add
reals.
§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are No Kurepa Trees
VI. PRESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTIES
AND APPLICATIONS
§0. Introduction
§1. A General Preservation Theorem
We present a way to prove preservation of "properness +φ" for properties
φ restricting our set of reals. Our hope is that this framework is easy to be
applied to many properties. In the end we present a version, more general in
one respect, less general in most respects (for readability).
§2. Examples
We specify more the framework in §1 to capture more of the common properties.
Then we prove that the
 ωα;-bounding property, the Sacks property, the Laver
property, the PP-property, some (/, </)-bounding properties and some others
come under the framework of §1; the "Sacks" and "Laver" properties appear
first and most characteristically in the forcing notions bearing the respective
names.
§3. Preservation of Unboundedness
We prove a presentation theorem suitable to prove the preservation of: no
g G
 ωω satisfies Λ/eF / —* 9 ^
or a fi
χed F C
 ωω. We then look at other
examples and prove the consistency of "ZFC 4- s > b" i.e. there is a non-
dominated F C
 ωω, \F\ = NI, but for every B C P(α )/finite of cardinality NI,
some infinite A C ω induce an ultrafilter {B e B : A Cαe B}, but relaying on
the existence of a forcing notion presented in §6.

Annotated Content
§4. There May Be No P-Point
We present a proof of this theorem, using the preservation of the PP-property.
This may serve as a preliminary test, whether our general machinery simplifies
and clarifies proofs,
§5. There May Exist a Unique Ramsey Ultrafilter
The main result is the consistency of ZFC -f 2^° = ^2+ "there is a unique
Ramsey ultrafilter on ω up to permutations of ω". For this we have to prove
that "D generates a Ramsey ultrafilter " is preserved - by another application
of §1, and of course mainly to work on each iterand.
§6. On the Splitting Number $ and
Domination Number b and on α
In §3 we have proved the consistency of s > b, modulo the existence of a suitable
forcing notion: the one that adds an infinite A C ω including an ultrafilter on
the "old" P(ω) (helping to prove $ large), is proper of course and is almost
 ωω-
bounding (helping to prove b small). We define suitable creatures, and then the
forcing notion build from them, and prove that it has the desired properties.
We then prove parallel lemmas on a similar forcing notion "respecting" an ideal
(usually one coming from a MAD family enough indistructible). This helps to
get a universe with α large.
§7. On $ > b = a
We prove the consistency of the statement in the title. The main point is that
if we force as for "CON(ZFC 4- s > b)" and we build in ground model a "bad
enough MAD family", a suitable preservation theorem shows that it remains
MAD.
§8. On ϊj < $ = b
We prove the consistency of the statement in the title; for this we use an
iteration in which we add many Cohen reals making s large (as in §6) and
dominating real. We use the Cohen reals to construct a family witnessing ίj is
small (i.e. KI). To show that this works use our iterating only "nicely definable"
forcing notions.

xxxvi 
Introduction
VII. AXIOMS AND THEIR APPLICATION
§0. Introduction
§1. On the κ>Chain Condition, When Reals Are Not Added
When we iterate H2 times forcings not adding real, (but not necessarily HI-
complete) we suggest a condition called H2-e.c.c. so that if each Qi satisfies the
K2-e.c.c., then Pω2 satisfies the N2-c.c.
§2. The Axioms
We suggest some axioms whose consistency follows from the theorems on preser-
vation under iteration of various properties.
§3. Applications of Axiom II
We prove several applications of an axiom consistent with G.C.H.
§4. Applications of Axiom I
We prove some applications and mention others of an axiom consistent with
2*° - N2.
§5. A Counterexample Connected to Preservation
An example is given of a countable support iteration of length ω of forcing not
collapsing stationary subsets of ωi, but the limit collapse HI.
VIII. K-PIC AND NOT ADDING REALS
§0. Introduction
§1. Mixed Iteration
We prove that we can iterate ^-complete forcings and Ni-complete forcings
satisfying a strong N2-chain condition, without collapsing HI and H2.
§2. Chain Conditions Revisited
We suggest another condition, K - pic, to ensure the limit of the iteration Pκ
satisfies the /ς-c.c. The aim is e.g., to start with V \= "2
H° = HI Λ 2*
1 > H2",
and use CS iteration Q of length ω2 , each time dealing with "all problems"
(there are 2
K l) at once.

Annotated Content 
xxxvii
§3. The Axioms Revisited
We discuss what axioms we can get according to the four possibilities of the
truth of 2
K° = NI, 2
Hl = N2 but assuming always 2
H° < N2
§4. More on Forcings Not Adding α -Sequences
and on the Diagonal Argument
We prove e.g., that CH does not imply Φ^ (a kind of uniformization) by
dealing with completeness systems which are 2-complete. Our main results are
of the form: Suitable CS iteration does not add reals. So we continued the
proof in Ch.V on CS iterations not adding reals, weakening the demand on
the comleteness system from getting Ni-complete filter to "the intersection of
any two members is non empty, and we try to get properties preserved by the
iterations.
IX. SOUSLIN HYPOTHESIS DOES NOT IMPLY
"EVERY ARONSZAJN TREE IS SPECIAL"
§0. Introduction
§1. Free Limits
We look at Boolean algebras generated by a set of sentences in infinitary
propositional calculus (mainly Lωι>ω). This enables us to define free limit.
§2. Preservation by Free Limit
We prove that an iteration in which we use Lωι>urfree limit at limit stages,
preserve properness, in some sense this gives a more natural proof of the
preservation of properness.
§3. Aronszajn Trees: Various Ways to Specialize
We introduce some new ways to specialize Aronszajn trees, and present the old
ones, as well as some connection between those properties.
§4. Independence Results
Here are the main results of the chapter. We use an iterated forcing 5 — st-
specializing any Aronszajn tree. The problem is to make sure that some fixed

xxxviii 
Introduction
tree T* will remain not special. In fact we get that on one stationary S all
Aronszajn trees are special but some trees are "Souslin" on ω\ \S, a strong way
to be not special. We introduce such a property of forcing "(T*, 5)-preserving"
and show that is is preserved in iteration. There is a discussion of the problem
and our strategy in the beginning of the section and a discussion of open
problems and how the preservation theorem can be generalized.
X. ON SEMI-PROPER FORCING
§0. Introduction
We would like to deal with forcing notions not preserving e.g. "5 has uncount-
able cofinality".
§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS (Revised Countable Support)
The standard countable support iteration cannot be applied when some un-
countable cofinalities are changed to ω, we introduce the revised version suit-
able for this case. Though harder to define, this iteration conforms better with
our intuition concerning iterations.
§2. Proper Forcing Revisited
We define semi-properness, and prove that it is strongly preserved by RCS
iteration.
§3. Pseudo-Completeness
We prove that a weakening of HI-completeness (compatible with changing some
cofinalities to NO) is strongly preserved by RCS iteration.
§4. Specific Forcings
We deal with Prikry forcing, Namba forcing and generalizations which are semi-
proper when we use "large" filters which may exist even on small cardinals.
§5. Chain Conditions and Abraham's Problem
We prove that under reasonable conditions when we iterate up to K the /ς-c.c.
holds and get the first application: a universe V in which for every A C ωι
there is a countable subset of ω\ which does not belong to L(A).

Annotated Content 
xxxix
§6. Reflection Properties of S$. Refining Abraham's Problem
and Precipitous Ideals
For some large cardinal /c, by iteration we find a forcing notion P, such that
V
p |= "Λ = N2 and A = {δ < K : cfδ = N0» δ regular in V} is stationary ". So
we may make A large in some sense, as mentioned in the title.
§7. Friedman's Problem
We collapse some large ft, by iterated forcing, which sometimes collapses (2
K2) +
to HI, sometimes changes the cofinality of ^2 to NO, and sometimes adds a closed
unbounded CCS of order type ωi, where S C SQ is stationary. We get a model
V in which every stationary 5 C S$ = {δ < ^2 ' cf (ί) = NO} contains a closed
copy of ω\. By stronger hypothesis we get it for every stationary S C 5£,
cf(Nα) > No-
XI. CHANGING COFINALITIES:
EQUI-CONSISTENCY RESULTS
§0. Introduction
We try here to weaken semiproperness.
§1. The Theorems
Here we describe what kind of a condition on forcing notions we want (i.e.
satisfied by some specific notions and preserved by suitable iterations). Then
we proceed to get consistency results. The proof uses RCS-iteration of length
/ς, K a strongly inaccessible cardinal. In each step, we allow Namba forcing. The
consistency results are mostly from Chapter X but here we use the minimal
large cardinals required.
§2. The Condition
We describe here the condition, called the 5-condition or I-condition for 5 a
set of regular cardinals > HI, I a set of ^-complete ideals, and some helping
definitions and conventions.

xl 
Introduction
§3. The Preservation Properties
Guaranteed by the S-Condition
We prove that, assuming a forcing notion P satisfies our condition, forcing with
P implies NI is not collapsed, and (assuming CH) no real is added; and for this
we need partitions theorems on trees.
§4. Forcing Notions Satisfying the 5-Condition
We show that Namba forcing, Nm satisfies the {^j-condition that Nm and
Nm' are really different forcing notions; that Nm, Nm' may satisfy the ^4-
c.c. (while 2
H° = ttι,2
Hl is large) We also prove Ki-complete forcing and a
forcing notion shooting a closed unbounded subset of order type ω\ through a
stationary 5 C SQ satisfies our condition.
§5. Finite Composition
We prove that under suitable hypothesis, a composition of forcing satisfying an
S-condition satisfies it. For this we prove a combinatorial theorem on trees.
§6. Preservation of the I-Condition by Iteration
Here we prove that if we iterate forcing notions satisfying our conditions, but
enough times collapse the present 2'
p' to KI, the composite forcing satisfies
the condition. So usually we have large segments of cardinals which we have to
collapse by HI-complete forcings, but for strongly inaccessible we can use Nm
straight away (by 6.5).
§7. Further Independence Results
We prove the equiconsistency of "ZFC + K is Mahlo" and " ZFC +N2 has the
Friedman property", and a further result using weakly compact cardinal. We
also prove the equiconsistency of "ZFC 4- K is 2-Mahlo " and of "ZFC+ there
is the club of N2 consisting of regular cardinals of L".
§8. Relativising to a Stationary Set

Annotated Content 
xli
XII. IMPROPER FORCING
§0. Introduction
§1. Games and Properness
Equivalent definitions of variants of properness by games are given, and it is
exemplified how the proofs of the preservation theorems in this context look
like.
§2. When Is Namba Forcing Semiproper, Chang's Conjecture
and Games
We prove e.g., that if some {Nι}-semi proper forcing changes the cofinality
of ^2 to ω then Namba forcing is semi-proper, and Chang's Conjecture holds
hence 0# G V. So without some fairly large cardinals (in some inner model) all
semi proper forcing notions are proper, so actually Chapter X cannot do what
Chapter XI does.
XIII. LARGE IDEALS ON ωl
§0. Introduction
§1. Semi-Stationarity
We define and prove the basic properties of semi-stationarity of subsets of
<S<κ0(λ), and the connection with semiproper iterations up to measurables.
§2. 5-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing
5-suitable iterations, for S C ω\ stationary, are semi-proper iterations in which
we "promise" for some subalgebras of 25f5 = P(ω\)/(Vωι 4- 5) in some V
Pί,
that they remain <§ *&
v 
7 for j > i (<£ means a complete subalgebra - see
0.1(4)); usually the subalgebras are 25 \S in V
Pί. They are reasonable if we
try to get a universe in which not only does P(ωι)/(Dωι + 5) satisfies the ^2-
c.c. but also has more specific structure. We prove various lemmas on how we
can continue such iterations, mainly using sealing forcing, which "seal" various
antichains.

xlii 
Introduction
§3. On 05 - P(ωι)fDωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra
We prove, starting from enough super compacts the consistency of G.C.H. +
(23f5) = P(ωι)/(Dωι + S) is layered, which means that (S C ω\ is stationary
and) "almost" every AC*B\Sof power MI, satisfies Λ. <> 33 (almost means a
club of cofinality MI); we can have S = ω\, if we omit CH. Moreover we can do
this without adding reals and have some forcing axiom. We then get a stronger
condition of this form: 2ϊ \S is (the completion of) the Levy(M0, < M2) algebra;
in fact gives two proofs of this with extra things as above.
§4. On P(ωι)/(Dωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam
We prove, again starting from supercompacts, that in some generic extensions
not adding reals, a positive answer to the Ulam question holds: there are MI
measures on ω\ (really {0, l}-measures) with countable additivity such that
every set C ω\ is measurable with respect to at least one of them. For this we
define when a filter is Ulam, and give a combinatorial sufficient condition for
it (which take some space to show). Then we have forcing doing it, with extra
conclusions as in the solution for layerness. Note that here we have, for δ < K of
cofinality M0, a demand dual to the one when we want to get the Levy algebra:
decreasing sequences of members of \Ji<δ 23
Pί has a positive intersection if this
is reasonable. We also prove the consistency of a weaker statement - among
any M2 stationary subsets of 5, there are M2, the intersection of any countably
many is stationary. Before all this we deal with reflective Boolean algebra.
XIV. ITERATED FORCING
WITH UNCOUNTABLE SUPPORT
§0. Introduction
We try to deal with "P does not change the cofinality of every μ < K" .
§1. K-Revised Support Iteration
We define and investigate ft-RS (^-revised support), intended for iterating
forcing not collapsing cardinals < ft, but possibly changing some cardinals
with cofinality > K to ordinals with cofinality < K.

Annotated Content 
xliii
§2. Pseudo-Completeness
We do not know to generalize the theorem on proper forcing (III) and semi
proper forcing (Chapter X) but we generalize properties like pseudo complete-
ness (see X §3). We deal with such properties, some do not add bounded subsets
to K, some may add even reals. For this we use a forcing notion which has also a
notion of pure extensions [<o]. We define properties like (5,7)-PrJ" saying we
have pure decidability and <o is 7-complete; this is less restrictive than it may
look by 2.4. For such forcing notions we define an iteration with some kind of
mixed support and prove the appropriate preservation theorems and theorems
on chain conditions.
§3. Axioms
We deal with the relevant forcing axioms, and prove that it applies to some
forcing notions.
§4. On Sacks Forcing
We prove that we can apply our condition to Sacks forcing.
§5. Abraham's Second Problem - Iterating Changing
Cofinality to ω
We here apply the previous theorem to solve Abraham's second problem (solved
for ^2 in Chapter X). For this we use a forcing notion based on an initial segment
of a play of a game (using a fixed winning strategy) rather than positive sets
for a fixed ideal.
XV. A MORE GENERAL ITERABLE CONDITION
ENSURING KI IS NOT COLLAPSED
§0. Introduction
A drawback of Chapter IX is that it implies "the forcing notion does not add
real"; our aim is to overcome it.
51. Preliminaries

xliv 
Introduction
§2. Trees of Models and UP
We define a property of a forcing notion, Ϊ7P(I, S, W) where I is a set of ideals,
S a set of regular cardinals (most popular value {^i}), W C ω\ stationary
(e.g. ω\)\ this condition generalizes the one in chapter XI, gives an equivalent
definition for the interesting cases there. We prove some basic properties: it
does not destroy the stationarity of subsets of W, and in suitable cases it is
preserved by composition. For this we again have to deal with the partition
theorems on trees.
§3. Preservation of the E7P(I,S,W) by Iteration
We prove that if we iterate forcing notions with such a property, each time
collapsing soon enough, then the limit satisfies a similar condition. We first
define (3.1), deal with limit of length ω (3.2), ω\ (3.3), note continuity and
chain condition (3.4), iterates up to an inaccessible (3.5), do one more step
(3.6), prove that we have enough freedom in reorganizing the forcings such
that the previous cases suffice (3.7, see 1.7) and conclude enough such iterations
exists (3.8).
§4. Families of Ideals and Families of Partial Orders
A bothersome point in §2, §3 is that for Q, a P-name of a forcing notion
satisfying some C7P(Iι), we demand that the members of |ι were ideals in V,
not V
p. We show here that we can replace a general |, a P-name of set of
ideals in V
p by a family of ideals I
1 in V (not changing much the relevant
properties). For this we find it better to replace the ideals by partial orders,
revising the definition of UP. We then restate our iteration theorem, and have
a theorem on not adding reals parallel to W-complete.
XVI. LARGE IDEALS ON ωι FROM SMALLER CARDINALS
§0. Introduction
§1. Bigness of Stationary T C <S<κ0(λ)
We consider various bigness properties of subsets of <S<κ0(λ), connected reflec-
tion properties and large cardinal properties and interrelation.

Annotated Content 
xlv
§2. Getting Large Ideal on ω\
Here we deal with the appropriate lemmas on iterated forcing and sealing
maximal antichains ofP(ωι)/Vωι1 
and then get consistency results of the form:
(CΈf)+P(ωι)/(Dωι 
+S) is N2-saturated or even P(ωl/Vωι +S) is layered (hence
we can get non regular ultrafilter) or even in the Levy algebra.
XVII. FORCING AXIOMS
§0. Introduction
§1. Semiproper Forcing Axiom Implies Martin's Maximum
We prove the SPFA^MM. Also we prove that SPFAvAzι[Nι- complete] implies
that a forcing notion is semi proper iff it does not destroy the stationarity of
subsets of ω\. We then show that SPFA implies P(ω\/'Dωι) is ^-saturated.
§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+
We prove that SPFA does not imply Axx [semi proper]=SPFA+, and even
AXi [proper]=PFA+. We first prove this consistency starting with a supercom-
pact limit of a supercompact and then show that one supercompact suffices.
We then show that properness is (provably in ZFC) not productive, and that
SPFA implies Axi [tti-complete] or even Axι[c.c.c. * Ki-complete].
§3. Canonical Functions for ω\
We start with g : ω\ —> ω\, such that for no stationary A C ω2 and a < ω2 is
g \A equal to an α-th function, and K supercompact and find a /ς-c.c. semi proper
forcing notion forcing K = K2, PFA+, and g retains its property hence Chang
conjecture fails. For this we define "Q is a 0-small proper forcing notion". We
then prove for a < ω\ additively indecomposable, Ax[α-proper] is consistent
with the existence of (eg : δ < ω\, a divides J), eg C δ closed unbounded of
order type α and for every club E ofωi for stationarily many δ < ω\, c§ C E. So
for a' < a" < ω\ additively indecomposable Axωι [α'-proper] ^Ax[α
;-proper].
Note that CS iteration of ^i-complete and NI-C.C. forcing notion, is α-proper
for every a < ω\.

xlvi 
Introduction
§4. A Largeness of T>ωι in Forcing Extensions
of L and Canonical Functions
We define a property (*)\ of a cardinal λ, such that if it holds in V it holds in
L (and appropriate Erdόs cardinals satisfies it, and assuming 0# we show that
LLevy(K0,</0 μ (*)! holds when λ > ft > N 0).
Now we can iterate (CS) first adding λ functions from ω\ to ω\ and then kill
all stationary subsets of ω\ which contradict "/α is an α-th function for α < λ
and for every g G
 ωιω^ {eq(g,fa) : α < λ} is predense in P(ωι)/T>ωι (we get
a more explicit version: for every x G H(χ) there is a countable TV, x e N -<
(ff(χ), G, <*) such that \g G
 ω^ωl Π N => \/a€XnNg(N n "i) = /«(# Π ^).
We then play with cardinal arithmetic.
XVIII. MORE ON PROPER FORCING
§0. Introduction
§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample and New Questions
We prove that the weak diamond (see AP§1) is not the only obstacle to "the
limit of a CS iteration of proper forcing not adding real does not add reals."
This points to some quite simple forcing notions, such that if we iterate them
with CS the theorem in Ch V (and the weak diamond) does not tell us whether
reals may be added in limits or not.
§2. Not Adding Reals
We give here a quite weak condition guaranteeing that CS iterations of forcing
notions satisfying those conditions do not add reals. Those conditions are par-
ticularly strong for forcing notions of cardinality HI and answer the questions
raised by the first section.
§3. Other Preservations
We deal with preservations of the properties (by CS iteration of proper forcing).
This was done in VI, here our framework is weaker so more general. We then
carry various examples, including preservation of the P-point.

Annotated Content 
xlvii
§4. There May Be a Unique P-Point
We prove the consistency of " there is a unique P-point" it is (necessarily) a
Ramsey ultrafilter but there is no other P-point. In VΊ§5 we have proved
" there is a unique Ramsey ultrafilter". The missing part proved here is: given
DQ <RK DI, DO a Ramsey ultrafilter, DI a P-point, DI ^RK DO, find a forcing
notion Q, \\-Q "Γ>o is not a P-point nor can it be completed to a P-point by
further forcing notions with all the required properties".
APPENDIX: ON WEAK DIAMONDS
AND THE POWER OF EXT
§0. Introduction
§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond
Introduce a generalization of the negation of the weak diamond (i.e., Φ^) and
prove cases of this principle from an appropriate replacement of 2
K° < 2
Hl.
§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem
We show that for "every non free abelian group G is not Whitehead, moreover
EXT(G,Z) large", much less than V = L is needed; this exemplifies the use
of§l.
§3. Weak Diamond for tt2 Assuming CH
We prove that every ladder system ή = (η$ : δ € S%) when 775 is continuous
cannot be uniformized assuming 2K° = NI. This shows some hopeful theorem
on cases of "an CS iteration of N2-c.c. forcing notion not adding reals gives an
N2-c.c. forcing notion not adding reals", similarly for "(< ttι)-support iteration
of Ni-complete forcing notions not collapsing K2 gives a forcing notion not
collapsing H2.
REFERENCES


I. Forcing, Basic Facts
§0. Introduction
In this chapter we start by introducing forcing and state the most important
theorems on it (done in §1); we do not prove them as we want to put the stress
on applying them. Then we give two basic proofs:
in §2, we show why CH (the continuum hypothesis) is consistent with ZFC,
and in §3 why it is independent of ZFC. For this the NI-completeness and
c.c.c.(=countable chain conditions) are used, both implying the forcing does not
collapse KI the later implying the forcing collapse no cardinal. In §4 we compute
exactly 2*° in the forcing from §3 (in §3 we prove just V[G\ \= "2*° > λ"; we
also explain what is a "Cohen real"). In §5 we explain canonical names.
Lastly in §6 we give more basic examples of forcing: random reals, forcing
diamonds. The content of this chapter is classical, see on history e.g. [J]. (Except
§7, 7.3 is A. Ostaszewski [Os] and 7.4 is from [Sh:98, §5], note that later
Baumgartner has found a proof without collapsing and further works are:
P. Komjath [Kol], continuing the proof in [Sh:98] proved it consistent to
have MA for countable partial orderings +-ιCH, and Λ Then S. Fuchino, S.
Shelah and L. Soukup [FShS:544] proved the same, without collapsing HI and
M.Dzamonja and S.Shelah [DjSh:604] prove that A is consistent with SH (no
Souslin tree, hence -iCH).)

2 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
§1. Introducing Forcing
1.1 Discussion. Our basic assumption is that the set theory ZFC is consistent.
By GodeΓs completeness theorem it has a countable model. We make the
following further assumptions about this model.
(a) The membership relation of the model is the real membership relation;
and therefore the model is of the form (V, G).
(b) The universe V of the model is a transitive set, i.e., x E y G V —> x £ V.
Assumptions (a) and (b) are not essential but it is customary to assume
them, and they simplify the presentation. So "V a model of ZFC", will mean
"a countable model of ZFC satisfying (a) and (b)", and the letter V is used
exclusively for such models.
Cohen's forcing method is a method of extending V to another model V^
of ZFC. It is obvious that whatever holds in the model V^ cannot be refuted
by a proof from the axioms of ZFC, and therefore it is compatible with ZFC.
If we show that a statement and its negation are both compatible with ZFC
then we know that the statement is undecidable in ZFC.
Why do we look at extensions of V and not at submodels of V? After all,
looking at subsets is easier since their members are already at hand: To answer
this question we have to mention GodeΓs constructibility. The constructible
sets are the sets which must be in a universe of set theory once the ordinals of
that universe are there. Godel showed that the class L of the constructible sets
is a model of ZFC and that one cannot prove in ZFC that there are any sets
which are not constructible. Therefore, for all we know, V may contain only
sets which are constructible and in this case every transitive subclass V^ of V
which contains all ordinals of V and which is a model of ZFC must coincide
with V, and therefore it gives us nothing new.
1.2 Discussion. Now we come to the concept of forcing. A forcing notion
P G V is just a partially ordered set (not empty of course). Usually a partial
order is required to satisfy p < q&q < p => p = q, but we shall not (this is

§1. Introducing Forcing 
3
just a technicality), this is usually called pre-partial order or quasi order. It is
also called a forcing notion. We normally assume that P as a minimal element
denoted by 0p, i.e.
really from Chapter II on, we do not lose generality as by adding such a member
we get an equivalent forcing notion, see §5. We want to add to V a subset G
of P as follows.
(1) G is directed (i.e., every two members of G have an upper bound in G)
and downward closed (i.e., if x < y G G then also x G G).
Trivial examples of a set G which satisfies (1) is the empty set 0 and {x : x < p}
for p G P.
The following should be taken as a declaration of intent rather than an
exactly formulated requirement.
(2) We want that G $. V and moreover G is "general" or "random" or "without
any special property" .
We aim at constructing a (transitive) set V[G] which is a model of ZFC with
the same ordinals as V, such that V C V[G] and G G V[G], and which is
minimal among the sets which satisfy these requirements.
So we can look at P as a set of approximations to G, each p G P giving
some information on G, and p < q means q gives more information; this view
is helpful in constructing suitable forcing notions.
Where does the main problem in constructing such a set V[G] lie? In the
universe of set theory the ordinals of V are countable ordinals since V itself
is countable. But an ordinal of V may be uncountable from the point of view
of V (since V is a model of ZFC and the existence of uncountable ordinals
is provable in ZFC). Since for each ordinal α G V the information that α is
countable is available outside V, G may contain i.e. code that information for
each α G V. In this case every ordinal of V (and hence of V[G]) is countable in
V[G] and thus V[G] cannot be a model of ZFC. How do we avoid this danger?

4 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
By choosing G to be "random" we make sure that it does not contain all that
information.
While we choose a "random" G we do not aim for a random V[G], but
we want to construct a V[G] with very definite properties. Therefore we can
regard p as the assertion that p G G and as such p provides some information
about G. All the members of G, taken together, give the complete information
about G.
Now we come back to the second requirement on G and we want to replace
the nebulous requirement above by a strict mathematical requirement.
1.3 Definition. (1) A subset J of P is said to be a dense subset of P if it
satisfies
(2) Call I C P open (or upward closed) if for every p, q e P
1.4. Discussion. Since we want G to contain as many members of P as possible
without contradicting the requirement that it be directed, we require:
(2)' G Π X ^ 0 for every dense open subset X of P which is in V.
1.4A Definition. A subset G of P which satisfies requirements (1) and (2)' is
called generic over V ( we usually omit V), where this adjective means that G
satisfies no special conditions in addition to those it has to satisfy.
The forcing theorem will assert that for a generic G, V[G] is as we intended it
to be.
Does (2)' imply that G φ VI Not without a further assumption, since if P
consists of a single member p then G = {p} satisfies (1) and (2)' and G G V.
However if we assume that P has no trivial branch, in the sense that above
every member of P there are two incompatible members, then indeed G φ V
(incompatible means having no common upper bound). To prove this notice

§1. Introducing Forcing 
5
that if G G V, then P \ G is a dense open subset of P in V, remember that
G is downward closed, and by (2)' we would have G Π (P \ G) φ 0, which is a
contradiction.
1.5 The Forcing Theorem, Version A. (1) If G is a generic subset of P
over V, then there is a transitive set V[G] which is a model of ZFC, V C V[G],
G G V[G] and V and V[G] have the same ordinals and we can allow V as a
class of V[G] (i.e. in the axioms guaranting (first order) definiable sets exists
"a: G V" is allowed as a predicate).
(2) P has a generic subset G, moreover for every p G P there is a G C P generic
over V, p G G. 
Πι.5
1.6 Discussion. We shall not prove 1.5(1), but we shall prove 1.5(2). Since
V is countable, P has at most NO dense subsets in V; let us denote them
with 2Όί2Ί)Ϊ2»... we shall construct by induction a sequence pn. We take an
arbitrary p0 We choose pn+ι so that pn < pn+ι G Jn; this is possible since Jn
is dense. We take G = {q e P : 3n(q < pn)}. It is easy to check that this G is
generic.
Since we want to prove theorems about V[G] we want to know what are
the members of V[G]. We cannot have in V full knowledge on all the members
of V[G] since this would cause these sets to belong to V. So we have to agree
that we do not know the set G, but, as we want as much knowledge on V[G]
as possible, we require that except for that we have in V full knowledge of
all members of V[G], more specifically V contains a prescription for building
that member out of G. We shall call these prescriptions "names". We shall be
guided in the construction of the names by the idea that V[G] contains only
those members that it has to.
Remember:
1.7 Definition. We define the rank of any α G V:
rk(o) is |J{rk(&) + 1 : b G a}

6 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
(note if α = 0,rk(α) = 0), the union of a set of ordinals is an ordinal, hence
rk(α) is an ordinal if denned, and by the axiom of regularly rk(α) is defined for
every α. So
1.8 Definition. We define what is a P-name (or name for P or a name in P)
r of rank < α, and what is its interpretation τ[G]. If P is clear we omit it.
This is done by induction on α. r is a name of rank < a if it has the form
r = {(pi,Ti) : i < ZQ}, Pi G P and each TJ is a name of some rank < α.
The interpretation τ[G] of r is {τi[G\ : Pi 6 G, i < IQ}
1.9 Definition.
(1) Let rkn(τ) = α if r is a name (for some P) of rank < α but not a name of
rank < β for any β < a.
(2) For α G V and forcing notion P, ά is a P-name defined by induction on
rk(α);
ά = {(p,6) :peP,bea}
(3) G = {(p,p) ' P € P} (when necessary we denote it by (Gp).
(4) rkr(τ), the revised rank of a P-name r is defined as follows: rkr(τ) — 0 iff
r = ά for some α G V
Otherwise
rkr(τ) = |J{rkr(σ) + 1 : (p, σ) € r for some p}
1.9A Remark. 1) Usually, we use r, /,α etc. to denote P-names not necessarily
of this form.
Eventually we lapse to denoting ά (the P-name of α) by α, abusing our notation,
in fact, no confusion arrives.
1.10 Claim. Given a forcing notion P, and G C P generic over V, we have:
(1) rkr(τ) < rkn(τ) and rk(r[G]) < rkn(τ) for any P-name r.
(2) for a G V, ά[G] = a

§1. Introducing Forcing 
7
(3) G[G] = G.
(4) rkr(r),rkn(r) are well defined ordinals, for any P-name r.
Proof. Trivial. 
DI.IO
1.11 Discussion. Notice that while every name belongs to V, the values of
the names are not necessarily in V since the definition of the interpretation of
a name cannot be carried out in V. It turns out that these names are sufficient
in the sense that the set of their values is a set V[G] as required:
1.12 The Forcing Theorem (strengthened), Version B. In version A, in
addition V[G\ = {r(G} 
\ r e V, and r is a P-name }. 
Dι.ι2
We want to know which properties hold in V[G\. The properties we are
interested in are the first order properties of V[G], i.e., the properties given by
formulas of the predicate calculus. We shall refer to the members of V[G] by
their names so we shall substitute the names in the formulas.
1.13 Definition. If r\..., τn are names, for the forcing notion P, φ(xι,..., xn)
a first-order formula of the language of set theory with an additional unary
predicate for V, then we write p Ihp "φ(τ\..., τn)" (p forces φ(r\..., τn) for
the forcing P) if for every generic subset G of P which contains p we have:
φ(τι[G]... ,rn[G]) is satisfied (=is true) in V[G],
in symbols V[G\ \= V(τι[G],... ,rn[G])".
1.14 The Forcing Theorem, Version C. If G is a generic subset of P then (in
addition to the demands in versions A and B we have:) for every φ(r\..., rn) as
above there is a p G G such that p Ihp "->φ(τι..., τn)" or p Ihp "φ(τι..., τn)".
Therefore V[G\ 1=
 uφ(n[G\... ,τn[G])" iff for some p G G p lhP V(n ... ,rn)".
Moreover Ih (as a relation) is definable in V. 
Πι.i4
This is finally the version we shall actually use, but we shall not prove this
theorem either.

8 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
The forcing relation \\-p clearly depends on P. If we deal with a fixed P
we can drop the subscript P. We refer to P as the forcing notion.
The rest of the section is devoted to technical lemmas which will help to
use the forcing theorem.
1.15 Definition. For p, q G P we say that p and q are compatible if they
have an upper bound. J C P is an antichain if every two members of I are
incompatible. X C P is a maximal antichain if T is an antichain and there is
no antichain J C P which properly includes X. We say J C P is pre-dense
(above p € P) if for every q G P (<? > p) some </ΐ G I is compatible with g.
We say Z C P is dense above p G P if for every # G P such that q > p there
is r, ^ < r G T\ we may omit "above p". We define "J C P is pre-dense above
p G P" similarly.
1.16 Lemma. Let G be a downward closed subset of P. Then: G is generic
(over V) iff for every maximal antichain J G V of P we have |G Π I| = 1.
Proof. Suppose G is generic. Since G is directed it cannot contain two incom-
patible members and hence \G Π I\ < 1. Given T G V, a subset of P, let
J' = {p e P : (Ξςr G I)p > q} G V, i.e., ,7 is the upward closure of J. So ,7 is
obviously upward closed i.e. an open subset, we shall now show that if X is a
maximal antichain of P, then J is dense. For any r G P clearly r is compatible
with some member q of I (otherwise J(J{r} would be an antichain properly
including the maximal antichain Z), let p > r, q. Then, by the definition of J,
p G J and we have proved the density of J.
Since J is dense and open by Definition 1.4A we know GΓ(J ^ 0, let p G GΓ\J'.
Since p G J, there is a q G T such that q < p, and since p G G and G is generic,
q G G and so q G GΠ J, hence |GΠ J| > 1. So (assuming G C P is generic over
V) we have proved: for every maximal antichain J G V of P, |G ΠZ| = 1, thus
proving the only if part of the lemma.
Now assume that for every maximal antichain X G V we have |G Γ\I\ = 1.
First let J G V be a dense subset of P and we shall prove GΠJ7 ^ 0. By Zorn's

§1. Introducing Forcing 
9
lemma there is an antichain J C J which is maximal among the antichains in
J, i.e. the antichains of P which are subsets of J. We claim that J is a maximal
antichain. Let r € P, we have to prove that r is compatible with some member
of I (and hence J cannot be properly extended to an antichain). Since J is
dense there is a p G J such that p > r. Since p e J and I is an antichain
maximal in J necessarily p is compatible with some member q of J, hence r is
also compatible with g; so we have finished proving "J is a maximal antichain
of P". So by our present assumption \GΓ\I\ = 1 hence G Π J D G Γ\I ^ 0.
Secondly to see that G is directed let q, r e G and let J = {p e P : p > q, r
or p is incompatible with q or p is incompatible with r}. Clearly J e V, to
prove that J' is dense let s G P. If s is incompatible with # then s £ J.
Otherwise there is a £ G P such that 5, # < t. If £ is incompatible with r then
ί € J, and we know that t > s. Otherwise there is a w G p such that w > £, r.
Since £ > 5, q we have w > q,r and hence w e J. Since w > £ > 5 we know ,7
is dense. By what we have shown above, G Π J ^ 0. Let p £ G Γ\ J'. We shall
see that p cannot be incompatible with q or with r, therefore, since p G v7,
p > q,r. We still have to prove that no two members of G, such as p and q,
are incompatible. Suppose p, q € G and p and <? are incompatible. We extend
the antichain {p, <?}, by Zorn's lemma to a maximal antichain X € V. We have
J Π G 2 {p, g}, contradicting 11Π G| = 1.
As part of the assumption of 1.16 is "G C P is downward closed", and we
have proved G is directed, and [ J G V is a dense subset of P => G Π JΓ ^ 0],
we have proved that G is a generic subset of P over V (see Definition 1.4A).
Hence we have finished proving also the if part of the lemma. 
Πi.ie
1.17 Lemma. If J is a pre-dense subset of P in V and G is a generic subset
of P then G n J ^ 0.
Proo/. Let J^ = {p € P : (3q G v7)p > <?}. Let us prove that J^ is a dense
open subset of P. Now J^ is obviously upward-closed. Let r G P. Since J' is
pre-dense there is a <? G J such that <? is compatible with r. Therefore, there is
a p € P such that p > q, r. By the definition of J^ we have p e J^. Thus we

10 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
have proved that for every r e P there is a p G J^ such that p > r, and so J^
is dense. Since J e V and jΊ" is constructed from J in F we have J^ £ V.
Since G is generic over V we have GfΊ J^ ^ 0. Let p £ GlΊ J^. By the definition
of J^ there is a </ G J^ such that q < p Since G is downward closed we have
q £ G and hence ς G G Π ,7 ^ 0, which is what we had to prove. 
DI.I?
1.18 Lemma. Let q G P, and let T be a subset of P in V^ which is pre-dense
above q. For every generic subset G of P if # 6 G then G Π I / 0.
Proof. Let T^ — ^Γ(J{p 6 P : p is incompatible with q}. Since T G V also 1^ £ V.
Let us prove that ft is a pre-dense subset of P. Let r € P. If r is incompatible
with ς then r G 2^ . If r is compatible with g then there is an s G P such that
s > r,q. Since J is pre-dense above q, necessarily 5 is compatible with some
member of J, and hence r is compatible with the same member of I which
neccessarily is also in X^ . Thus we have shown that 2^ is pre-dense. Let G be a
generic subset of P such that q £ G. Since ft is pre-dense and ft G V we have
G ΠZt 7^ 0. Let t G G Hit. Since ί, <? G G, t is compatible with </, hence by the
definition of ft we must have t G Z and thus ί G G Π Z ^ 0. 
DI.IS
1.19 Lemma. Let Z = {p^ : i < IQ} be an antichain in P and {r^ : i < i$} a
corresponding indexed family of P-names (in V). Then there is a name r such
that: for every i < ΪQ and for every generic G, if Pi G G then τ[G] = τ^[G] (and
τ[G] = 0 if G Π {pi : i < i0} = 0). (We recall that a generic G contains at most
one member of I and if J is a maximal antichain of P then G contains exactly
one member of X) .
1.19 A Remark. This means we can define a name by cases.
Proof. Suppose 7$ = {(Pij^ίj) 
'- J < Ji}, (of course jι — 0 is possible) and let
T = {{r, Tij) 
: j < ji, i < ΐ0, r > pitj and r > pi}. 
Di.ig
We note also:

§2. The Consistency of CH (The Continuum Hypothesis) 
11
1.20 Claim. Let G be a downward closed directed subset of P. The following
are equivalent:
(a) G is generic.
(b) G Π J 7^ 0 for every dense open subset I of P.
(c) G ΠI / 0 for every dense subset I of P.
(d) G ΠI φ 0 for every pre-dense subset T of P.
(e) G Π J ^ 0 for every maximal antichain J of P.
1.20A Remark. Clearly for J C P,
(1) J is dense open => J is dense => J is pre-dense,
(2) J is a maximal antichain of P => J is pre-dense.
Proof. By Remark 1.20A(1) clearly (d)=Φ(c)=^(b), by 1.20A(2) clearly (d)=»(e)
by 1.16 (e)=^(a), trivially (a)=»(b); by the closing up of subsets of P clearly
(b)=>(c)=>(d); together we have 
finished. 
Πι.2θ
§2. The Consistency of CH (The Continuum
Hypothesis)
Usually the consistency of CH, i.e., of 2
K° = N1? is proved by showing that it
holds in L (the class of constructible sets) but we do not want to go in this
way. So
2.1 Theorem. Model A. There is a model of ZFC in which 2
H° = NI.
Proof. Let us first review the main points of the construction of the model. We
start with a countable transitive model V of ZFC in which 2
N° is either HI or
greater. We shall extend it to a model V[G] in which G will essentially be a
counting of length HI of all sets of natural numbers, i.e. a function g from ω\
onto the family of sets of natural numbers. Each condition, i.e., each member
of P, is an approximation of the generic object G and therefore will consist
of partial information about the counting. Since every two members of G are

12 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
compatible, the members of G, taken together, yield a counting of subsets of ω.
The three things about which we have to worry in the proof are the following:
a) How do we know that every subset α of ω in V will occur in the counting
given by G?
This will be answered by showing that the set of all partial countings in which
a occurs is a dense subset of P, and hence G contains such a partial counting.
b) How will the new subsets of cj, i.e., the subset of ω which are in V[G] but
not in V, be counted when the members of P, being in V, can count only
subsets of ω which are in VI
Here we shall make sure that V[G] has no new subsets of ω.
c) Is NI of V, which we have mapped on the set of all subsets of ω in V[G]
also the NI of V[G}7
Here the answer is easily positive because V and V[G] have the same sets of
natural numbers.
In V[G] we want to obtain a function g from Nx ^ (where Nx ^ denotes
the ordinal which is the NI of V[G], i.e., the least ordinal α such that V[G] does
not contain a mapping of ω onto α) onto P(ω)
v^ (where P(ω) is the power
set of ω and the superscript V[G] means that P(ω)
v^ is the power set of ω
in V[G]). It will turn out that N^ 
— K]
7, and the only subsets of ω available
in V[G] are the members of P(ω)
v. By easy considerations for every countable
ordinal α, the function g\a has to belong to V (as it can be coded by a set of
natural numbers). Therefore partial information about g is given by functions
from countable ordinals into P(ω) in V. Thus it is natural to define
P = {/ : / is a function from a countable ordinal into P(ω)}
where the definition is inside V: with / < g iff f C g.
A member / of P is understood to "claim" that g is like / on the domain of /.
When does a member /t of P give us more information that /? When / C /t.
Therefore we take the partial order < on P to be proper inclusion.

§2. The Consistency of CH (The Continuum Hypothesis) 
13
Let G be a generic subset of P. By the definition of the concept of a generic
object every two members of G are compatible, hence |J G — \J{f 
: f G G} is
a function, we shall denote it with /<-. The domain of fc is the union of the
domains of the members of G and hence it is a union of ordinals < K^ and
therefore the domain of fc is an ordinal < tt]
/. If A is a countable set in V
then in V there is a function r from ω onto A. Since V is a transitive set, V
contains already all the objects which are members of A in the universe and
hence A has no new members in V[G\. Now V[G] has the same set ω of natural
numbers as V and therefore r maps ω on A also in V[G] and A is countable
in V[G]. In particular every ordinal which is countable in V is also countable
in V[G]. Therefore, if K^ is uncountable in V[G] then N^ is the least ordinal
which is uncountable in V[G], i.e., #Y = Nx
 l 
. If N]' is countable in V[G] then
#Y < ^[G\ hence in either case ^ < N^
[G1. Therefore the domain of fG is
an ordinal < Nj 
(since it is < N]
/). We have in fact deal with
2.2 Definition. 1) A first order formula φ(x) (in the language of set theory) is
upward absolute if when V C V^ are models of ZFC with the same ordinals (so
by our conventions both are transitive sets) and a G V, then: V N φ[a] => V^ \=
φ[a\. Note that properties and function are interpreted by first order formulas.
2) We say φ is absolute if both φ and ->φ are upward absolute (i.e. we have
"iff" above).
Obviously (or see [J]):
2.3 Lemma. 1) The following are upward absolute: "α an ordinal", "α not an
ordinal" "α is (not) a natural number", "α = n", "α ^ n", "α = ω", "α ^ ω",
"α is not a cardinal", "α is not regular", "A has cardinality < α", "A C £?",
"A 5 J5", "/ is (not) a (one-to-one) function from A to (onto) 5".
2) In fact any relation (function, property) defined by a ]Γχ - formula, i.e., by
(3y)φ(xQ ..., £n_i, xn, y) when y? has only bounded quantifiers i.e., of the form
(Vzi € ^2)5 (3^ι G 2:2) is upward absolute. 
U2.3

14 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
We have now to prove the following facts.
2.4 Fact. Every A G P(ω)
v is in the range of /<-.
2.5 Fact. P(ω)
γW = p(ω)
v .
Once these facts are proved we know that the range of fc is P(ω)
v^ and
in V[G] the function /G maps an ordinal < N]^
G' onto P(ω) hence in V[G] the
set P(ω) has at most NI subsets, which establishes 2^° = NI in V[G].
Remember that a subset I of P is said to be pre-dense in P if every member
p of P is compatible with some member of J. In particular I is pre-dense if I
is a maximal antichain or if J is such that for every p in P there is a <? G 2"
such that q > p.
Proof of Fact 2.4. Let A G P(ω)
v; we want to prove that A G Rang(/σ),
i.e., for some / G G we have A G Rang(/), or, in other words G Π {/ G
P : A G Rang(/)} φ 0. For this purpose it suffices to show that the set
X — {/ G P : A G Rang(/)} is dense, since this set is obviously in V. Let p G P
then p : α — > P(ω) in V, where α is a countable ordinal. Let / be the function
with domain a -f 1, which is also a countable ordinal in V, into P(ω)
v given
by /(£) = p(ξ) for £ < a and /(α) - A. Clearly / G P, / > p and / G I. Thus
J is dense and Fact 2.4 is established. 
U2.4
Now Fact 2.5 will follow from 2.7, 2.8 below, thus completing the proof of
Theorem 2.1.
2.6 Definition. 1) A forcing notion P is said to be ^-complete, or countably
complete if every increasing (by <) sequence (pn 
: n < ω) of members of P,
i.e., every sequence (pn : n < ω) such that p0 < Pi < P2 < 
•> has an upper
bound p in P (i.e., p > pn for every n < ω).
2) A partial order P is λ-complete if for any 7 < λ and increasing (by <=<
p)
sequence (pi : i < 7) of members of P, the sequence has an upper bound in P.

§2. The Consistency of CH (The Continuum Hypothesis) 
15
2.7 Lemma. Our present set P is count ably complete in V.
Proof. Let (pn : n < ω) be a nondescending sequence of members of P in V.
Since the pn's are pairwise compatible p = \Jn<ωPn is a function. The domain
of p is the union of the domains of the pn's. Thus the domain of p is a countable
union of countable ordinals, and is therefore a countable ordinal. The range of
p is the union of the ranges of the pn's and it consists therefore of members of
P(ω)
v. Thus p G P, and obviously p > pn for every n < ω. 
U2.7
2.8 Theorem. 1) For every countably complete forcing notion P in V and
every generic subset G of P, V[G] contains no new ω-sequence of members of
V, i.e., if (an : n < ω) G V[G] and an G V for n < ω then also (an : n <ω) eV.
In particular if a C ω and α G V[G] then also a eV.
2) If the forcing notion P is λ-complete, G C P is generic over V then V[G]
has no new (i.e.^ V) bounded subsets of λ, not even new sequences of length
< λ of members of V.
Proof. 1) Let (an : n < ω) G V[G], then (an : n < ω) has a name r. By the
forcing theorem (i.e. 1.14) there is a q G G such that q Ih "r is an α -sequence of
members of V". We shall prove that the subset {p G P : p Ih "r G V" } of P is
pre-dense above ς and, by 1.18, therefore G contains a p such that p Ih "r G V"
and therefore r[G] G V, i.e., (an : n < ω) G V is true in V[G]. Here we use
the fact that {p G P : p Ih "r G V™} is in V; this is the case since forcing is
definable in V.
Let us prove now that J = {p G: p Ih "r G F"} is pre-dense above q. Let
<?ΐ > q\ it "knows" (i.e. forces) that every αn is in V, since already ς forces this
statement, but even q^ does not necessarily "know" the identity of αn. We shall
see that we can extend q^ to a condition which "knows" α0(=force a value),
then to a condition which "knows" αi, and so on, and as a consequence of the
countably completeness of P, q^ can be finally extended to a condition p which
"knows" all the αn's. This will imply p "knows" that (an : n < ω) is some
particular member of V, and p Ih "r G V", which establishes the pre-density of
T above q.

16 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
We define a sequence (pn : n < ω) of conditions and a sequence (an :
n < ω) of members of V as follows. Let us mention now that the forthcoming
definition is carried out entirely within V and therefore the obtained sequences
are members of V. We set PQ = q^. For n > 0 we choose pn+ι and an so that
Pn+1 > Pn and pn+ι Ih "τ(n) — άn", where τ(n) = άn is an abbreviation of "the
n-th term of the sequence r is αn" and άn is the P-name of an (see Definition
1.9(2) and 1.9A). Do such pn+ι and an exist? To prove their existence we go
out of V, but this does not matter since once we know they exist the definition
proceeds entirely within V. Let G^ be any generic subset which contains pn.
In V[Gt] we have r[G^] is an ω-sequence of members of V, since q < pn G
G^ and </ Ih "r is an ω-sequence of members of V". Let an be the n-th term of
the sequence τ[G^], then an G V and τ[G^](n) = αn is true in V[G^]. By the
forcing theorem there is an r G G^ such that r Ih "τ(n) = άn". Since r,pn G G^
they are compatible. Choose pn+ι >
 r,Pn then also pn+ι Ih "τ(n) = άn", and
Pn+ι and αn are as required. In order to choose a definite pn+ι in P we assume
that we have some fixed well ordering of P in V and pn+ι is chosen to be the
least member of P in that well-ordering for which there exists an αn so that
Pn+i ^ Pn and pn+ι Ih
 αr(n) = άn". Note that αn is uniquely determined by
pn_ι_ι since if also for some b ^ an we have pn+ι Ih "r(n) = 6" then for every
generic G^ which contains pn+ι we have that the n-th term of τ[G^] is both an
and 6, which is impossible.
Since P is countably complete there is a p G P such that p > pn for all
n < ω. We have, obviously p > po — <7^ and for every n < ω we know p > pn+ι
and hence p Ih "r(n) = άn". Thus for every generic subset G^ of P which
contains p we have: τ[G^] is an α -sequence and r[G^](n) = αn for every n < α;,
hence τ[G^] = (αn : n < ω) G V (note (αn : n < α;} G V since this sequence was
defined in V). By the definition of the forcing relation we have p Ih "r G V",
which is what we had to prove.
If α G V[G] and α C ω then let (an : n < ω) be the characteristic function
of a. Since each αn is 0 or 1 we have (an : n < ω} is a sequence of members
of V and hence, by the present theorem (an : n < ω) G V and α can be easily
obtained from (αn : n < ω} within V'.

§3. On the Consistency of the Failure of CH 
17
2) Left to the reader. 
02.8,2.5,2.1
§3. On the Consistency of the Failure of CH
We first prove a technical lemma, and then prove that 2
H° = Hα is possible for
almost any α.
3.1 The Existential Completeness Lemma. 1) If p0 Ihp "(3x)φ(x)
n 
then
there is a name τ such that po "~P ψ(τ)ι where φ(x) is a formula which may
mention names.
2) Moreover for every formula φ(x) as above for some P-name r
Ihp "(3x)[φ(x)] -> φ(τ)
n and lhP
 u-*(3x)[φ(x)] -> r = 0".
Proof. 1) The idea of the proof is as follows. The condition pQ, "knows" that
(3x)φ(x) but this does not tell us directly that po knows a particular name of
a set x which satisfies φ(x). However with more information than that in po we
know names of sets which satisfy φ(x). What we have to do is to combine the
various names to a single name which equals each of those names just when
the name satisfies φ(x).
Let
J = {q q\\-p "~ (3z)y?(z)" or for some name r we have q Ihp V(r)"}
J is defined in V, hence J e V. We shall now see that J is dense. Let r G P,
but r does not force -*(3x)φ(x). Then there is a generic G C P such that r G G,
and V[G] N "(3x)(^(x)", by r's choice. Since every member of V[G] is the value
of some name we have V[G\ N "φ(τ[G])" 
for some P-name r. By the forcing
theorem there is an r^ G G such that r^ Ihp V(l)" Since G is directed and
r e G without loss of generality r t > r and by definition, r^ G J7. Now if
r Ihp "-ι(Ξz)y?(z)", trivially r e J. Thus we have shown that J is dense. Let I
be a maximal subset of J of pairwise incompatible members. We shall see that
also T is pre-dense. Let q G P and suppose, in order to obtain a contradiction,

18 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
that q is incompatible with every member of J. By what we proved about J
there is a q^ e J such that q^ > q. Also q^ is, clearly, incompatible with every
member of J. Now JUJgt} is a subset of J of pairwise incompatible members
which properly includes J, which contradicts our choice of J.
Let J = {qi : i < α}, since X C J there is for every i < a a name T; such
that qi Ihp VdO" or 9< Ihp "-.(3z)y?(χ)". Let r be the name
f i t 
iffcll-p XrO"
10 
otherwise
which we have proved to exist (1.19) for pairwise incompatible q^s. We claim
that po II- 'V(l)" T° prove that let G be a generic subset of P and p0 € G. Since
J is pre-dense we have GlΊ I ^ 0 and hence for some i < a we have q^ e G. If r*
is not defined q^ Ihp "->(Ξb)(/?(x)", but then <ft,po are incompatible, but both are
in G, contradiction. So ^ Ih 'V(lΐ)" hence we have V[G] 1= φ(Ti[G]). Also since
ft G G we have, by the definition of r, τ[G] - r;[G], hence V[G] N "φ(τ[G\)
n ,
which establishes po 1^ 'V(l)"
2) The second part in the lemma was really proved too. 
DS.I
3.2 Theorem. Model B. There is a model in which the continuum hypothesis
fails. Moreover, for every cardinal λ there is a forcing notion P such that
Ihp "2
H° > λ and every cardinal of V is a cardinal
Convention. We use the word "real" as meaning a subset of ω or its character-
istic function.
Proof. We want to add to V λ real numbers ( i.e., functions from ω into 2).
Each condition gives us some information about them, so we have to make sure
that the information contained in a single condition will not suffice to compute
one of the reals since in this case this real will be already in V. Therefore we
shall define the conditions so that each one will contain only a finite amount of
information, and therefore each condition is clearly insufficient for computing
any of the reals. We shall regard the λ reals, each of which is an ω-sequence of

§3. On the Consistency of the Failure of CH 
19
O's and 1's, as written in a long sequence one after the other to form a sequence
of length λ of O's and 1's. The members of P will be finite approximations to
this member of
 λ2. Therefore we take P = {/ : / is a finite function from λ into
{0,1}} where by " a finite function from λ" we mean a function from a finite
subset of λ. For the partial order on P we take proper inclusion, i.e., / < g if
/ C g. This forcing is called "adding λ Cohen reals."
3.3 Lemma. Ihp "there are at least λ reals".
Proof of the Lemma. We shall prove the existence of the reals by giving them
names. Since for every generic G there is a function g which satisfies g = (J/eG /
we have Ihp "(3x)(x = U/eGP /)"
 and by tne fi
rst lemma in this section, 3.1
there is a name g such that Ihp "g = jJ/eGP /"• Using again the same method
we get, for every i < X a name α^ defined by a^(n) = g(i -h n). Now a^ is forced
to be a name of a real number provided g is a name of a function on λ into
{0,1}. We shall prove it in the next sublemma.
3.4 Sublemma. g is a function from λ into {0,1} (i.e., this is forced).
Proof of the Sublemma. g is a function since G is a directed set of functions,
hence its union g is a function. Also g is into {0,1} since each member of G is
into {0,1}. Next Όom(g) C λ since for every / G G we have / G P and hence
Dom(/) C λ; we still have to prove that Dom(<?) = λ. Let i < λ; it suffices to
prove that the set Ji — {/ G P : i G Dom(/)}, which is clearly is V, is pre-
dense. Let / G P, if i G Dom(/) then / G Ji, otherwise let /t = f\J{(i,Q)}
then /
f G P and /
f > / and /t G Ji. 
D3.4
We return to the Lemma 3.3. Note that since we have proved that Ihp "g is
a function from λ into {0,1}", it is enough to prove for each i ^ j < λ that
Ihp "α,j ^ g,j". For this it suffices to prove that for every p G P there is an
r > p G P and an n < ω such that r Ihp "θi(n) ^ <*>j(n)
n, since this proves
that the set of all p G P such that p Ihp "α^ ^ α^ " is pre-dense.

20 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
Let p £ P. Since Dom(p) is finite there is an no such that for every n > ΠQ
i + n φ Dom(p) and an n\ such that for every n > n\ we have j -f n φ Dom(p).
We set r = p\J{(i + &,0), (j -f fc, 1), where fc > n0,nι. Clearly r is a function
since i + A:, j 4- k φ Dom(p) and i 4- k ^ j -f k since z ^ j. Obviously p < r and
(r forces that ) α (fc) = 0, aj(k) = 1 hence Oi(fc) 7^ αj(j) 
DS.S
Continuation of the Proof of 3.2. We started with λ, which is a cardinal of V
and we proved that in V[G] there are at least λ real numbers, but is λ in V[G]
the "same" cardinal as it was in VI As the matter stands now we do not even
know whether the continuum hypothesis fails in V[G] since even though λ may
be a large cardinal in V it may be countable or HI in V[G]. We shall now prove
that all the cardinals of V are still cardinals in V[G] so for example if λ = Nίf
then λ is still the third infinite cardinal in V[G\ and thus λ = N^'
σ'. We shall
prove that the cardinals of V are not collapsed in V[G] for forcing notions P
which satisfy the countable chain condition and that P satisfies this condition.
I.e. the cardinals of V are still cardinals in V[G], and as V, V[G] have the
same ordinals and no non-cardinals of V are cardinals of V[G] we have: V,
V[G\ have the same cardinals; this is done in 3.6, 3.8 below. This is important
general theorem which we shall use a lot. This will finish the proof of 3.2.
3.5 Definition.
(1) A forcing notion Q satisfies the countable chain condition (c.c.c.) if Q
has no uncountable subset of pairwise incompatible members, i.e., if every
uncountable subset of Q contains two compatible members.
(2) A forcing notion Q satisfies the λ-chain condition (λ-c.c.) if there are no
λ pairwise incompatible members of P.
3.6 Lemma. If a forcing notion Q satisfies the c.c.c. then
(i) forcing with Q does not collapse cardinals and cofinalities, (i.e., \\-Q "every
cardinal of V is a cardinal (of V[6?])), and the cofinality is preserved".

§3. On the Consistency of the Failure of CH 
21
(ii) For every ordinal a and every Q-name r there is, in V, a function F from
a (to V) such that for every β < a we have |F(/3)| < K0 and Ihg "if r is a
function from α into V then (V/3 < α)[r(/3) G F(/3)]".
Proo/ of Lemma 3.6. Proof of (ii): We define the function F on α by F(β) =
{α G F : (3q G Q)(ςr Ihg "r is a function from α and τ(β) = ά")}. We have
to prove that the right hand side is a set, and not a proper class of V and
moreover is countable. We shall assume it now and prove it later. The right
hand side is the set of all possible values of r(β) in all the V[G]'s in which r[G]
is a function from α into V. To see this suppose G is a generic set such that
τ[G] is a function from a into V. Then for some α G V V[G] N "r is a function
from a and τ(/3) = ά". By the forcing theorem there is a q G Q such that
q If-Q "r is a function from α and τ(β) = α". Hence α G F(/J) and therefore
V[G\ N "(V/? < α)[r(/J) G F(β)]
n. Since this is the case for every generic G we
have what is claimed in (ii).
Now we shall prove not only that the class {α G V : (3q G Q)(q \\~Q T
is a function on a and τ(β) = ά")} is a set but even that it is a countable
set, and thus \F(β)\ < N0 Suppose {α^ : i < ωι} is a subset of this class.
For each such α» there is a qi G Q such that <& Ihg "r is a function on α and
τ(/?) = di". Since Q satisfies the c.c.c. there must be some i ^ j such that q^
and ^ are compatible. Let q > qi,qj and let G C Q be a generic subset of
Q which contains q. We have q^qj G G and hence, since ^ Ihg "r(/3) = α^"
and ^ Ihg "τ(β) = α^ ", we have V[G] 
1= "α^ = r(/?) = α/', hence α^ = α^ .
Thus we have shown that at least two of the α^'s must be equal therefore the
class {α G V : 3q G Q(q \\-Q "r is a function from α and τ(β) — α")} must be
countable. The proof that F(β) is a set is similar.
Proof of (i). Let λ be an uncountable cardinal of V and suppose λ is not a
cardinal in V[G]. Then there is an ordinal a < X and a function / G V[G]
which maps a onto λ. Let r be a name for / in V[G]. By part (ii) of our lemma
(already proved) there is a function F from a in V such that f ( β ) G F(β) and
\F(β)\ < ^o for every β < a. We have therefore λ = Rang(/) C (jβ<aF(a).
But in V we have | \Jβ<a F(β)\ < |α|H0 < λ, since λ is an uncountable cardinal

22 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
of V and a < λ, and therefore also \a < λ. Thus we have proved that the
uncountable cardinals are not collapsed in V[G}. Also NO is not collapsed since
the finite ordinals and ω of V are also finite ordinals and ω in V[G].
The preservation of the cofinality is proved similarly. 
D3.6
Similarly one can prove for uncountable λ.
3.7 Claim. If Q satisfies the λ-c.c. then
(i) forcing by Q preserve cardinals and cofinalities which are > λ.
(ii) for every Q-name and ordinal a there is a function F with domain α,
(F e V) such that \\-Q " if r is a function from α to V then τ(β) G F(β)
for every β < α", and \F(β)\ < X for β < a.
3.8 Lemma. The forcing notion P which we use here for Model B satisfies the
c.c.c.
3.8A Remark. Once we prove this lemma we know that all the cardinals in
V here are cardinals also in V[G] and therefore λ is a cardinal also in V[G],
and if λ is the α-th infinite cardinal ttα in V it is also the α-th infinite cardinal
in V[G].
Proof. Suppose {/$ : i < NI} C P, in order to prove Lemma 3.8, it is enough
to prove that two of the functions are compatible. By 3.10 below for some
uncountable A C ω\ and finite w for every i ^ j from A, we have Dom(/i) Π
Dom(/j) = w. The number of possible fi\w is finite (i.e. < 2'™'), so without
loss of generality fi\w = /* for every i G A. Now for any i φ j £ A, we know
fi U fj G P is a common upper bound of /i, f j . 
DS.S
We have promised the so called Δ-system lemma.
3.9 Definition. A family F of finite sets is called a Δ-system if there is a set
w such that for any A, B in F we have A Π B = w.
In this formulation our problem reduces to:

§4. More on the Cardinality 2^° and Cohen Reals 
23
3.10 Lemma. Given an indexed family F of finite sets, \F\ = NI there is
F
1" C F; |F
f| = NI such that F
f is a Δ-system.
Proof. The cardinality of each A in F is a member of α; but there are NI
elements in F, so by the pigeonhole principle some n is obtained uncountably
many times. In similar cases in the future we will just say: w.l.o.g. \A\ = n for
any A in F (since all we need is a family of HI finite sets.)
Now we proceed by induction on n:
For n = 1: this is the pigeonhole principle for HI.
For n > 1 we distinguish two cases.
1) There is a £ (J{A : A £ F} such that there are uncountably many B in F
such that a € £, then you have an easy induction step ( you take a "out"
and put it back after using induction hypothesis).
2) If there is no such a then we build a sequence (Aa : a < ω\) such that
a^β=ϊAaΓ\Aβ = Φ (Aa G F); suppose Aβ is defined for β < α. Now
\Jβ<0ί Aβ is countable. The subfamily of F of members which contain an
element of this union is clearly countable so there is A G F, such that
A Π \Jβ<aAβ = 0, let Aa — A and we are done (in this case w — 0).
§4. More on the Cardinality
and Cohen Reals
Now we want to find what is exactly the power of the continuum in V[G] for
the model from Theorem 3.2.
4.1 Theorem. Let P = {/ : / is a finite function from λ to {0, 1}}. We have
already shown that lhP "2
K° > λ", we shall show now that if λ
N° = λ then
Ihp "2
H° -λ".
Proof. The idea is to construct a family of λ^° canonical names for the real
numbers and then prove that for every name τ there is a canonical name r
f of

24 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
a real such that Ihp " if r is a real then τ — r'". Since a real is a function from
ω into {0,1}, a real r is given by telling for each n < ω whether r(n) = 0 or
r(n) — 1. For a P-name r of a real the answer whether τ(n) — 0 or τ(n) = 1
depends on which condition is in G therefore we shall have a maximal antichain
(Pn,i '• i < &n) in P, where an < ω (because of the c.c.c.), and a function fn on
an which tells us that if pn^ G G then τ(ri) — fn(i). Since each generic G C P
contains exactly one of the pn^ for i < an, this will give, for any given G, the
value of τ(n) in a unique way. For any pair of sequences ((pn,i '• i < otn} : n < ω),
(fn '• n < ω) where for every n < ω, fn is a function from αn into {0,1}, and
(Pn,i ' i < &n) a maximal antichain of P we can construct a P-name, which
we shall denote with r ( ( f n '• n < ω), ((pn,i '• i < &n] : n < ω)) such that r
is a name of a function from ω such that for every n < ω if pn^ G G then
r(n) = fn(^)' There is no difficulty in obtaining such a name by the methods
we described above (or by 3.1). A name of this form is called, in this proof,
canonical.
Let us estimate now, in V', the number of the canonical names. For a
fixed n, and a given αn, there are 2'
aTll < 2
H° different suitable /n's. Therefore
there are < Tln<ω2*° = 2^° possibilities for (fn : n < ω). P is included in
the set of all finite subsets of λ x 2 and |λ x 2| = λ and so, obviously, also
|P| — λ. The number of countable sequences from P is therefore λ
κ°, thus the
number of possibilities for (pn^ 
: i < an) is at most λ
κ°, and for sequence
((Pn,i '• i < θίn) : n < ω) the number is at most (λ
H°)
H° = λ
H°. For each
sequence ((Pn,i '• i < OLU] : n < ω) we have at most 2
K° corresponding sequences
(fn '. n < ω), thus the total number of possibilities is at most 2
K° λ
κ° = λ
H°.
Since λ
H° = X there are at most λ canonical names.
4.2 Lemma. For every P-name r there is a canonical name r (as defined in the
beginning of the proof of 4.1 above) such that Ihp " if r is a real then r = r".
Proof of the Lemma. For every n let Jn = {p G P : p Ihp "r is not a real "
or p Ihp "r is a real and τ(n) = f for some I G {0,1}}. For each n the set
Jn is a dense subset of P, since every q G P can be extended to a p G Jn. (If

§4. More on the Cardinality 2
K° and Cohen Reals 
25
G is a generic subset of P which contains q then in V[G] either τ[G] is not a
real or τ[G] is a real in which case r(G\(n) = 0 or τ[G](n) = 1. By the forcing
theorem some member p of G forces the statements mentioned above which
hold in V[G], and, without loss of generality, we can assume p > q. This p is
in Jn}. Let Tn be a maximal antichain contained in Jn. Since P satisfies the
c.c.c. we have |I| < NO and we take αn = |Jn|, Jn = {pn^ : i < αn}. We define
/n on αn by:
JO 
ifp n > ίlhp '<τ(")=0"
JnVV — 
"SI 1 otherwise
Let r* = r ( ( f n : n < ω), ((pn,i 
i < &n) n < ω)), and we shall prove that for
every generic G C P we have V[G] N " if r is a real then r — τ*[G]". Assume
that τ[G] is indeed a real. Since r* is a name of a real, by its construction
τ[G] = Γ*[G] will be established once we prove that for every n < ω we have
l[G](n) = Γ*[G](n). Since [pn^ : i < an} is a maximal antichain in P (in V)
G contains pn^ for a unique i. Since pn>i G Jn and since pnji cannot force that
r is not a real (as τ[G] is a real in V[G]), we have pn^ Ihp "r(n) = f, for some
^ G {0,1}. By the definition of fn(i) we have fn(i) — i for the same I. By the
definition of r* we have r*[G](n) = /n(i) if pn,t ^ G. Since pn|ί Ihp "τ(π) = f
we have y[G] t= "τ[G](n) = £ = /n(i) - τ[G](n)" which is what we have to
prove.
Π4.2
Continuation of the proof of 4-1- To prove Ihp "2
H° < λ" we shall show that for
every generic G C P we have V[G] N "2
N° < λ". Suppose V[G\ 
\= "2
H° > λ+",
then in V[G] there is a one-to-one function / from λ"
1" into the set of reals.
Let σ be a name of this function. For every i < λ+ there is a canonical
name r\ of a real such that Ihp "if σ(ί) is a real then σ(ϊ) = r*" (since we
can either regard σ(ϊ) itself as a name and use the lemma above, or else use
an earlier lemma, 3.1, which establishes the existence of a name r such that
^~P "?(*) — l" whenever Ihp "(3x)(σ(i) = x)" and then use the lemma to
obtain Ihp "r = r*".) Since there are at most λ canonical names, and λ+ of
V[G] is also > λ
+ of V there is a j ^ i such that r* — r*. Now in V[G] we

26 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
have f ( i ) = σ[G](i) = τ*[G] = τ*[G] - σ[G\(j) = /(j), contradicting the fact
that / is one-to-one. So we have proved 4.1. 
QI.I
4.3 Definition. Cohen Generic Reals. Let us take P = {/ : / is a finite
function from ω into {0,1}}, with p < q being defined as p C q. This is called
Cohen forcing. It is easily seen that if G is a generic subset of P then |J G is a
real. Let us see now that we can reconstruct G from \J G by taking G to be the
set of all finite subsets of \J G. If p G G then p is obviously a finite subset of (J G.
If p is a finite subset of \JG then p — {(fci,^) : i < n} for some n < ω. Since
(ki,ti) G G there is a pi G G such that (A^,^) G p^. Since G is directed there
is a q G G such that q > Pi for all i < n. Obviously p = {(fc-j, £$) : i < n} < ς,
and since G is downward-closed we have also p G G. Since G and |J G can be
constructed from each other we can identify them and speak of a generic real
U G. Given V, we shall call a real number g a Cohen real over V if for some
G C P which is generic over V we have # = \J G.
4.3 A Discussion. When we talk here about reals we talk about members of
the cantor set
 W2, given an open subset A of
 ω2 in V this A is also a set of reals
in the (true) universe, but we are interested not in A itself in the universe but
in the subset of
 ωeϊ in the universe that has there the same description that A
has in V. For example, suppose A is {r G
 ω<2 : V N r 2 p} for some p G P, then
we are interested in the set A* = {r G
 ωel : r 3 p}
Obviously A = A* Π V and A* contains reals which are not in V (since,
in the universe, \A*\ = 2^° while \V\ = NO) and hence not in A. The analogous
situation for the real line R is when we look at a rational interval (α, b)
v — {x G
Rv : α < x < &}, and the corresponding set in the universe is (α, b) = {x G R :
a < x <b}. Obviously (α, b)
v = (α, b)ΠV and (α, 6) contains reals which are not
in V ( since |(α, 6)| = 2^° and \V\ = NO) and hence not in (α, 6)^. Let us denote
with Bp the basic open set {r G
 ω2 : r 2 p} in the Cantor space, and with B^
the corresponding set {r G
 ωel : V N r 2 p} in \Λ Obviously B% = BPΓ\V.
Given an open set A
v in I/ we define A* = (J{BP 
: p e P,B% C Av}.
A* is obviously an open subset of
 ωΊ and Av = A* Π V. For a closed set

§4. More on the Cardinality 2*° and Cohen Reals 
27
Cv we take A =
 ω(2 n V \ Cv and C* =
 ωcl \ A*, we can write it also as
C* = {r G "2 : (Vn < ω) [S^n Π C
y ^ 0]}. One can easily see that if Av is
a clopen (i.e. closed and open) set then A* is the same set whether we regard
Av as an open set or as a closed set.
We shall use Av only when Av G V; in fact for every Borel set A G V
there is a unique Borel set A* in the universe such that they have a common
definition (in V) and then A* Π V = A.
The close connection between Cohen forcing and Cohen (generic) real is a
quite universal phenomena for the forcing in use.
4.4 Theorem. A real number r is a Cohen real (or Cohen generic real) over
V iff r belongs to no <7* where Cv is a closed nowhere dense subset of
 ωcl in
V, or in other words, if r belongs to every set A* for every set A G V which is
a dense open set of
 ωcλ in V.
Proof. Let r be a Cohen real and let Av be a dense open set in V. We
have r — |JG for some generic subset G of P where P is from 4.3. Let
X — {p 
G P : B^ C ^4^}. Since Av is a dense open set, clearly X is a
dense subset of P, and hence G Π X ^ 0. Let p G G Π T. Since p £ G clearly
r — U G D P, i.e., r G Bp. Since p e X we have £^ C Λ
v hence £p C A* and
r e Λ * .
Now assume that for every dense open set Av ,r G ^4*. Let G be the set
of all finite subsets of r, then r = \JG. We shall prove that G is a generic
subset of P over V and hence r is a Cohen real (over V). Let X be a dense
subset of P. Then Av d= \J{B^ : p G J} is a dense open subset of (
W2)
v, and
therefore r G A*, hence r G B^ for some # G P such that 5^ C Av. Since
5^ is a closed set in the compact space
 ω<2 n V and {5^ : p G 1} is an open
cover of Av and hence of B^ there is a finite subset {B^. : 1 < i < n}, with
{Pi : 1 < i < n} C Z which covers β^. Let m be such that ra includes the
domains of all p^ I < i < n, and #. Let r^ be such that r^(j) = r ( j ) for j < m
and rt(j) = 0 for j > m. Since r e Bq also r^ G -B^ and since r t G V also
r ΐ G S^. Therefore for some 1 < i < n, r^ G -B^ and r^ \Ώom(pi) = pi. But r^

28 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
coincides with r on m which includes Dom(pi), hence rfDom(pi) = pi. Lastly
rfDom(^) € G since it is a finite subset of r, hence pi G G. Since Pi G I we
have G Π Z ^ 0 and G is generic. 
U4.4
4.5 Corollary. The set of all Cohen reals over a model V is a comeager subset
of "2.
Proof. The reals which are not Cohen reals are exactly the reals which do not
belong to some set A* where A
v is a dense open subset of
 ω<2 Π V in V. Let
I = {p G P : £^ C Λ
v}. Since A
y is a dense open subset of
 ωfl Π V in F,
clearly X is a dense subset of P and A* = |J{-BP : p G X} is a dense open subset
of "2. The set of the reals which are not Cohen reals is |J{
ω2 \ A* : A
v G V, A
v
is dense open in (
ω2)
v}. This is the union of NO nowhere dense sets (2
ω \ A* is
nowhere dense since A* is dense open, the union is countable since V is ) and
is thus a meager set. Therefore the set of all Cohen reals is comeager. 
D4.5
Remark. Does the Cohen forcing collapse cardinals? No, since P is countable
and hence, obviously it satisfies the c.c.c. See Lemma 3.6 (i).
§5. Equivalence of Forcings Notions, and
Canonical Names
We deal with forcing with a subset of P.
5.1 Lemma. Let (P, <) be a forcing notion in V and let Q be a dense subset
of P.
(a) If G is a generic subset of P over V then H = G Π Q is a generic subset
of Q over V and G = {p G P : (3q G H)p < q}.
If H is a generic subset of Q over V then G =
a generic subset of P over V and H — G Π Q.
(b) If H is a generic subset of Q over I/ then G = {p G P : (3g G #)p < g} is

§5. Equivalence of Forcings Notions, and Canonical Names 
29
(c) The assertion (a) and (b) above establish a one-one correspondence be-
tween the generic subsets of P and those of Q. If G and H are correspond-
ing generic sets then V[G\ = V[H] and therefore the same statements are
forced by the forcing notions P and Q (they are equivalent - see Definition
5.2 below).
(d) Any Q-name is a P-name, and if TI, . . . , τn are Q-names, φ(x\, . . . , xn) a
first order formula then Ihp φ(τι, . . . , rn) iff Ihg φ(τι, . . . , τn).
(e) For any P-name r there is a Q-name σ such that Ihp "r = σ".
Proof of the Lemma, (a) It is obvious that G Π Q is downward closed in Q.
Let p,p^ G G Π Q. Since G is directed there is a p" G G such that p" > p,p^.
Now Q is dense, and hence {<? G Q : <? > p"} is dense above p". Since p" e G
clearly G Π {ςr G Q : q > p"} Φ 0; let q be such that p" < q G G Π Q,
so # > p" > p,pt. Thus we have seen that G Π Q is directed. Let I G V
be dense in Q, then, as easily seen, J is also dense in P. Therefore we have
I Π (Q Π G) - (I Π Q) Π G - I Π G φ 0. We can conclude by 1.20 that G Π Q
is a generic subset of Q (over V).
Obviously {p € P : (3ςr G G Π Q)p < <?} C G. In the other direction, if
r G G then, as we have seen for p" above, there is a q G G Γ\Q such that g > p.
Therefore r G {p G P : (3<? G G Π Q)p < 4} and so
{p G P : (3qr G G Π Q)p < q} = G.
(b) G is obviously downward closed and directed. Let 2 be a dense upward
closed subset of P, then T Π Q is obviously a dense subset of Q. Then 0 ^
fΓΠ(InQ) = ί/'nJCGnI. Lastly H = G Π Q is obvious by the definition
of G as H is downward closed.
(c) Since we have G G V[/f], because G can be easily computed from if, we can
evaluate all the P-names in V[H] and we get therefore V[G] C V [ H ] . Similarly
H G V[G\ implies V[H] C y[G], hence V[H] -
(d),(e) are left to the reader.

30 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
In fact in 5.1 we have proved that P, Q are equivalent where
5.2 Definition. The forcing notions P, Q are equivalent if there are τ,σ, a
P-name and a Q-name respectively such that:
(1) Ihp "r is a generic (over V) subset of Q".
(2) If-Q "σ is a generic subset of P"
(3) for G C P generic, G = σ[τ[G}}
(4) for G C Q generic, G = τ[σ[G\]
Clearly equivalence of forcing notion is an equivalence relation.
5.3 Definition. (1) A function / from P into Q is called a complete embedding
if: for any maximal antichain T C P , f(X) 
= {f(p) 
: p G X} is a maximal
antichain of Q and / \ϊ is one to one of course and P N "p < ς" => Q N "
(2) We write P <> Q if P C Q (which mean: p G P => p G Q, for p, 9 G P we
have P 1= "p < <?" <£> Q N "p < </"), and the identity mapping is a complete
embedding of P into Q.
5.4 Lemma. 1) If / is a complete embedding of P into Q, ί/ien there is a
Q-name σ, Ihg "σ is a generic subset of P". If in addition the range of / is a
dense subset of Q, then P, Q are equivalent.
2) If P <$ Q, and pi, ^2 € P then: pi, ^2 are compatible in P iff pi, P2 are
compatible in Q.
3) Assume P C Q. Then P <£ Q iff every pre-dense J C P is pre-dense in Q
too.
Proof. Easy. 
Dι.5
5.5 Definition. (1) For a forcing notion P, and p, g G P, we say p w q (p, ς
are equivalent ) if any r G P is compatible with p iff it is compatible with q.
Clearly « is an equivalence relation on P.

§5. Equivalence of Forcings Notions, and Canonical Names 
31
(2) We define P/« as follows: the members are p/« (for p e P) and we define
a partial order: (p/«) < (<?/ w) zjff there are p
1" G p/« and ςrt G ςr/« such that
every r G P compatible with q^ is compatible with pt.
5.6 Claim. (1) In Definition 5.5 we have:
(a) 
(p/*)<(qMiffq\}-p
upeGp
n.
(b) w is an equivalence relation.
(c) in 5.5 (2), "there arept € (p/~),q^ € (<?/«)" can be replaced by "for every
pt e (p/«) and tft € (ς/«)»
(d) (p/«) = (g/«) iff (p/«) < (<//«)& (ϊ/«) < (p/«).
(e) P/« is a partial order.
(2) The function p —» p/« is a complete embedding of P into P/w with a
dense range 
hence P, P/w are equivalent. The function preserves "p < g",
"p,9 compatible", "p,</ incompatible" (though not necessarily "-«p < #").
Proof. l)(a) If the right side fails, let G C P be generic over V such that q £ G
but p <£G. Choose a maximal antichain X such that p el e V, then for some r
we have G Γ\X = {r} and g, r are compatible (because they are in G) while p, r
are not compatible (because r ^ p as one is in G the other not and {r,p} C X).
By clause (c) of 5.6(1) this implies the failure of the left side, so we have proved
the only if direction. The other direction in the "iff" is proved similarly,
(b), (c) Easy.
(d), (e) Left to the reader.
2) Easy. 
D5.6
It is interesting to note that in each equivalence class of equivalent forcing
we can choose canonically a representative (unique up to isomorphism), which
is essentially a complete Boolean algebra (without the one).
5.7 Definition. For any forcing notion P let:
(1) A set A C P is called open-regular if it is open and for every p G P \ A
there is q > p incompatible with A, i.e., (Vr G P)(r > q —> r φ A).

32 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
(2) RO(P) is the partial order whose set of elements is the nonempty open
regular subsets of P, and A < B (for A,B G ΛO(P)), if B C A, equiv-
alently if every p G P incompatible with ^4 (i.e. incompatible with every
g G A) is incompatible with B.
(3) For p G P let ro(p) = {q G P : there is no r > q incompatible with p}.
5.8 Theorem. (1) The mapping p ι— > ro(p) is a complete embedding of P into
(2) PO(P)/«, if we add to it a maximal element 1, becomes a complete Boolean
algebra;
(3) If B is a complete Boolean algebra, and P = B \ {!#}, (with the usual
ordering of a Boolean algebra ) then RO(P)/& is isomorphic to P, moreover,
we can use the isomorphism p \— > ro(p).
Proof. Well known. 
Ds.g
5.9 Theorem. The forcing notions P, Q are equivalent iff
ΛO(P)/w and ΛO(Q)/« are isomorphic.
Proof. The proof is easy, using:
5.10 Claim. Suppose A G RO(P) and J a maximal antichain such that for
every pel either p G ^4 or p is incompatible with A. TTien A, UPeAn:r
ro(p)
are equal (in PO(P), union as in a complete Boolean algebra). 
Πs. 10,5.9
5.11 Definition. For any α G W and V C V^ we define rky(α): rkv(α) — 0
iff a G V, and rky(α) = U{rky(6) + 1 : 6 G α} otherwise.
5.12 Definition. We define when a P-name r is canonical by induction on its
rank α: if r = {(pi,Ti) 
: i < ZQ}, then r is canonical if:
(1) If Ihp «rk(r) < /?", then β > α, and if lhP
 
αrkv(r) < β» then

§5. Equivalence of Forcings Notions, and Canonical Names 
33
(2) if Ihp " r has power < λ", λ is a regular cardinal and P satisfies the
λ-c.c. then IQ < λ"
(3) each TI is canonical, moreover: if pi \\- "rk(τi) < β" then rkn(r^) < /?,
and if pi Ih
 uτkv(li) < β" then β > 1 + rkr(r;) and if lhP
 u
Ti has
power < λ", λ a regular cardinal and P\{p 
: p > Pi] satisfies the λ-
c.c. then |r^| < λ.
5.13 Theorem. For every P-name r there is a canonical P-name σ such that
Ihp "r = σ".
Proof. We prove by induction on the rank of r, that
(*) if r € P, r Ih "rkv(τ[G]) < a and ιkv(τ[G\) < β, and τ[G] has power
< λ", and λ is a regular cardinal, and P\{r
f 
: r < r' G P} satisfies the λ-c.c.,
then we can find a canonical P-name σ such that: r Ih "r = σ" and rkn(σ) < α
and rkr(σ) <!+/?, and if σ = {(</;, σ^) : i < ZQ} then i0 < λ.
If rkn(τ) = 0, let σ = r and there are no problems. If not, but Ihp "r G V"
let Z be a maximal antichain of P above r such that for every p G Ί, for some
«P € ^5 P I^P "l = £p" We then let σ — {(p, 6) : p G J, 6 e αp}. So assuming
neither occurs, we can find a maximal antichain X of P above r, so that for
each p G Z, for some ordinals αp and βp and λp we have p Ih "rk(r[G
?]) = ap
and rkv(r[G]) = /3P, and the power of r[G] is λp, (which is a cardinal in
V[G])". Let fp be a P-name such that p Ih
 α/p a function from λp onto r",
for each p G T (use Lemma 3.1). Let r = {(pi,Ti) : i < i0}, and let J77 for
7 < sup{λp : p e X}) be a maximal antichain of P above r, so that each q e JΊ
is above some member p of I, and if 7 < λp, for some i = 1(9,7), 9 ^ Pή
9 II- "/p(τ) = Γ<" and g Ihp "rkd^G]) - α^, rky(r[G]) - β^ and the power
of Ti[G] is λ^ (which is a cardinal in F[G])".
Now apply (*) by the induction hypothesis for r^q^,q for any q e JΊ and
get canonical qΊ^ Let
? = {(^5 2"7>ς) : 7 < sup{λp : p € ΐ] and g G J^}

34 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
As P\{r
f : r < r' G P} satisfies the λ-c.c., \I\ < λ, and as r Ih "τ[G] has
power < λ" , each \p (p G I) is < λ. As λ is regular, UP<EJ λp is < λ, so we can
finish. 
Πs.ia
5.14 Theorem. If PI, P2 are equivalent and disjoint, then there is Q, PI <& ζ),
P^ a dense subset of Q, (for ί= 1,2). 
Πδ.i4
5.15 Claim. The λ-c.c. property is preserved by equivalence. 
Πs.is
5.16 Definition. (1) Tc(x) (the transitive closure of x ) is defined by induction
on the rank of x,
Tc(x) = {x} U \J Tc(y)
y£x
and it is the minimal transitive set to which x belongs
= {x:|Tc(x)|<λ}
5.17 Claim. Let λ be an uncountable regular cardinal.
(1) If r is a canonical P-name, P G if (λ) and V (= cf (λ) > |P|
then:
T € #(λ) ίflp Ihp "r G
(2) (ίf(λ),€) satisfies all axioms of ZFC except possibly the power set
axiom.
Proof. (1) If r £ Ή"(λ) we can prove by induction on rkn(r) that τ[G] G
F(λ)
v[
G' hence obviously lhP "r G #(λ)
V[ζ?]". Now P satisfies the |P|+-chain
condition and H(X) = \J{H(μ
+) 
: μ < λ} so w.l.o.g. λ is a successor cardinal;
clearly |P| < λ (by the definition of ff(λ)). By Claim 3.7, λ is a cardinal also
in V[G] so Definition 5.12(1) gives the other direction.
(2) Is obvious. Furthermore if λ is strongly inaccessible (if (λ), G) is a model of
all ZFC. 
D5.i7

§6. Random Reals, Collapsing Cardinals and Diamonds 
35
5.18 Claim. 1) If P is a forcing notion satisfying the c.c.c. then the number
of canonical P-names of an ordinal < μ is < (|P| + μ + HO)
NO.
2) In (1) the number of canonical P-names of a function from μ to λ, is
3) If P satisfies the ft-c.c., K regular, the numbers in (1) and (2) should be
(|P| + μ + K0)
</ς, (\P\ + μ + A + K0)
<(/ί+μ+) respectively.
Proo/. Included, essentially, in the proof of 4.1. 
Πs.is
§6. Random Reals, Collapsing Cardinals
and Diamonds
Random Reals.
6.1 Definition. Let C be the set of all closed subsets of the real line, B the set
of all Borel subsets of the real line and M the set of all (Lebesgue) measurable
subsets of the real line. For X G {C,B,M} we take Px = {A G X 
: A is of
positive Lebesgue measure }, and p < q if q C p. We use here the real line, but
we could have used also the Cantor space
 ωcl as the real line. For A G .Λ/ί, let
Leb(A) be the Lebesgue measure of A.
6.1 A Discussion. Every measurable set of positive measure includes a closed
set of positive measure, and thus PC is dense in PM- Since C C B C ΛΊ, the
three notion of forcing PM, PB, and PC are interchangeable (in fact equivalent
see 5.1(c) and Definition 5.2). We shall work mostly with PC and when we do
not care with which of these notions we work we shall write just P.
First we shall prove that PΛΛ satisfies the c.c.c. Let pi, i < HI be pairwise
incompatible conditions. For each i < HI we know Leb(p^) > 0, where Leb
denotes Lebesgue measure. Therefore there is a positive integer Ui such that
Leb(pi Π (— ni,rii)) > —-. Since there are KI i's and HO positive integers there
is an uncountable subset 5 of HI and an n < ω such that Ui — n for all i G S.
Since for i,j < HI, i ^ j, Pi and p^ are incompatible we have Leb(p^ Πpj) =0.
Let T C 5 contain 2n
2 4- 1 members, then Leb((— n,n)) > Leb(Uί€Tpi Π

36 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
(-n,n)) = Σ;eτ
Leb(P* Π (-n,n)) > Σ^τ £ = (^ + 1)£ = 2n + i which
is a contradiction.
For every positive real ε in V the set {[nε, (n + l)ε]: n is an integer } is
obviously a maximal antichain, therefore G contains a closed interval of length
ε. For p £ PC let pv^ denote the closed set with the same description in V[G]
as p has in V. If Pi G G C Pc for i = 1,..., n we have Leb(p|™=1 pY) / 0. Since
pΓ
[G1 2 pf we have ΠlLi^1 ^ <*• Let us consider the set {p
vW 
: p
v e G C
PC}- The intersection of every finite subset of it is nonvoid and its members
are closed sets, some of them bounded, hence Γ\p^op
v^ ^ 0 by compactness.
Moreover, since for every positive integer ra the set {p
y[
Gl : p
v G G} contains
an interval of length ^ (since if the length of p
v is ^ so is the length ofp
v^)
necessarily the set Γ\P^GP
V^ consists of a single real g. A real obtained in this
way is called a random real (over V). We shall see that we can reconstruct G
from g. Now let us mention that since PC is dense in P&, we have, for every
p G PB ΠG a condition q > p such that q G PC ΠG, i.e., q C p. Since the generic
real g belongs to q
v^
G\ and since q C p implies qv^ C p^Pl also <; G p^'
G'.
Thus for every Borel set p
v in G we have g G p
v^
σl.
To reconstruct G from # it suffices to tell which closed sets belong to G,
since if we deal with PB or PM , G will consist of all members, of PB or PM which
are < these closed sets. Now we shall see that in V[Gpc], G = {A
v G PC g G
Λ^N}. We have already seen that if A
v G G then # G Av^. Now we assume
that g G A
VI
G1 and prove that A
v G G. Assume A
v φ G and extend {A
v}
to an antichain S of PC which is maximal among the antichains which consist
of pairwise disjoint sets. We shall see that 5 is a maximal antichain of PC- If
this is not the case there is an E G PC such that E is incompatible with every
member of 5, i.e., Leb(EΓ\B) = 0 for every B G 5. By the c.c.c. S is countable,
hence Leb(£\US) = Leb(S)\Leb(EΠ|j5
ί), but Leb(EnljS') < Σβes° = °
hence Leb(£ \ 5) = Leb(£) > 0.
Now E \ U 5 is a Borel set of positive measure, hence it includes a closed set
W of positive measure. For every B G S we know that W Γ\B CW Γ\\JS = 0,
contradicting the maximality of S. Now that we have proved that S is a
maximal antichain we know that G contains some member Bv of 5, which

§6. Random Reals, Collapsing Cardinals and Diamonds 
37
is different from A
v (since A
v φ G) and therefore B
VΓ(A
V = 0. Since Bv G G
we have g G B
VW, hence g G B
VW Π A
VW. Let [n,n + l]
v^ be an interval
which contains g, then B
VM Π A^ Π [n, n + 1] ^ ^ 0.
On the other hand, since (B
v Π [n, n + l]
y) Π [A
y Π [n, n 4- 1] v) = 0 the
distance between B^ Π [n,n 4- 1]^ and A^ Π [n,n 4- I]
17 is some d > 0. Let
e be a rational number < d. There is a finite number of intervals of length e
which separate Vβ Π [n, n + 1] v from A
v Π [n, n + 1] v. The "same" intervals
separate also B
VW Π [n,n + 1}
VW from A
vt
G] Π [n,n + 1]^ contradicting
6.2 Theorem. A real number r is random over V iff for every Borel set A
v G V
such that Leb(A
v) = 0 we have r £ A* iff this holds for every Gσ set A^ (where
A* is the Borel set in the universe with the same description as A.)
Proof. Assume that r is random over V, r G n{B
v^ 
: Bv G G C Pβ}. Let
A
v be a Borel set with Leb(A
v) = 0. As easily seen the complement R
v \ A
v ,
where R
y is the set of all reals in V, is such that {R^ \ A
v} is a maximal
antichain in PB and hence R
v \ A
v G G. Therefore r G IR^l \ A
VW C R\ A*,
i.e., r ^ A*.
Now assume that r ^ A* for every Gσ - set A
v (i.e. countable intersection
of open sets) such that Leb(A
v) = 0. Define G C Pc by Bv G G iff r G S*.
If A
y D 5y G G then also A* D 5* and r G B
v, hence r G A* and A
v G G.
If A
v , 5V G G then r G A* Π 5*. If Leb(Λ
y n 5
V) - 0 then since A
v Π Bv
is closed and therefore is a Gσ-set, we would get r φ A* Π B*. Therefore
Leb(A
v Π B
v) > 0, and since r G A* n B*, we get A
y Π βv G G. Finally, let S
be a maximal antichain in PC, we have to prove G(Ί5 ^ 0 in order to prove that
G is generic. Let E
v = R
v \ (J{A : A G 5}, so £ is obviously a Gσ - set. Since
S is maximal Leb^) = 0, therefore r φ E*. Since E
v = R
v \ \J{A : A G 5},
so we have E* = R \ |Jβ€s B*. Since r g E* we have r G B* for some B G 5,
and therefore £ G G and G Π S ^ 0. 
D6.2

38 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
The Levy Collapse.
6.3 Definition. 1) Levy(H0,λ) = {/ : / is a finite function from ω into λ},
where λ is an uncountable cardinal. For the partial order on Levy (Ho, λ) we
choose inclusion.
2) Levy(tt, λ) = {/ : / is a partial function from K to λ such that |Dom(/)| < «}
ordered by inclusion.
6.4 Discussion. In V[G], where G is a generic subset of Levy(Ho, λ) it is easily
seen that g = (J G is a function on ω onto λ. Therefore |λ|^[
Gl — HQ.
Since in V[G] there are no cardinals between λ and λ+ all the ordinals
< λ+ are countable in V[G] so (λ+)
y = H-^ 
^ provided λ+ is a cardinal in
V[G], thus we must check what is the fate of the chain condition for Levy(H0, λ).
Levy (Ho, λ) has λ pairwise incompatible members, for example {{0, α) : α < λ}.
However, it is easy to see that |Levy(Ho, λ)| = λ and hence Levy(Ho, λ) satisfies
the λ+ chain condition and the cardinal λ+ is not collapsed by forcing with
Levy (Ho, λ).
We define
6.5 Definition. 1) Levy (Ho, < λ) — {/ : / is a finite function from λ x ω into
λ such that /(O, n) =0 and for α / 0 we have /(α, n) < α}. The partial order
on Levy (Ho, < λ) is inclusion.
2) Levy(/ς, < λ) = {/ : / is a partial function from λ x « into λ such that
|Dom(/)| < K and /(O, α) = 0 and α > 0 => /(α, i) < a} ordered by inclusion.
6.6 Discussion. Let G be a generic subset of Levy(H0, < λ) over V, and let
fo = \JG. Obviously for every 0 < a < X the function /σ(α, -) is a mapping of
ω onto α, and hence α is countable in V[G]. What about λ, is it, too, countable
in V[G\ or else is it H^'
G'? If λ is singular in V it stays singular also in V[G],
hence it cannot be Hj ^ 
^ and it is countable.
6.7 Theorem. If λ is regular then Levy(H0, < λ) satisfies the λ-chain condition,
and hence λ = H^
[GI in V[G\.

§6. Random Reals, Collapsing Cardinals and Diamonds 
39
We shall prove the following more general version.
6.8 Theorem. Let λ be a regular uncountable cardinal, \W\ = λ, let (Ax : x G
W) be such that \AX\ < λ for x G W and let P = {/ : / is a finite function on
W such that f ( x ) G Ax for each x G Dom(/)} be a forcing notion such that: if
/, g G P agree on Dom(/) ΠDom(^) then /, g are compatible. Then P satisfies
the λ-chain condition.
Proof. Without loss of generality we can assume that W = λ and Ax C λ for
each x G W. Let ( f a 
: a < λ) be a sequence of members of P. For a < X we
define h(a) — Max[{0}(J(Dom(/α) Π α)]. Since fa is a finite function we have
h(ά) < a for a > 0. Thus h is a regressive function on λ \ {0} and therefore it
has a fixed value, 70 on a stationary subset S of λ by Fo dor's Lemma. Let pt
be the set of all members of P whose domain is included in 70 -h 1. For every
finite subset u of 70 4- 1
|{/ G P
f : Dom(/) - u] = |{/ e P : Dom(/) - u}\ =
The number of finite subsets u of 70 H- 1 is < |7o| + NO < λ hence, since λ is
regular |pt | = £uc7o+i, u is finite K/ € P : Dom(/) = u}\ < λ. For each g G pt
let Sg = {a G S : fa f (70 4- 1) = g}. Clearly Upept
 Sg = S since 
for every
α G 5 we have α G Sy^^o+i)- Since |pt| < λ one of the 5p's say Sgo must
be stationary (since the union of < λ nonstationary sets is nonstationary) . Let
C = {δ < λ : δ a limit ordinal satisfying (Vα < δ)[Όom(fa) 
C 5]}, clearly C
is a closed unbounded subset of λ, hence 5' = Sgo Π C is a stationary subset
of λ. Let a G Sgo and let β G 5^0 be such that α < β G 5 hence /? is a strict
upper bound of Dom(/α), we shall see that fa and /^ are compatible. Since
β € Sgo C S, clearly Max(Dom(/^) Π β) = 70 and since Dom(/α) C β we
have Dom(/α) Π Ώom(fβ) 
C 70 -f 1. Since α,/? G 55o we have /αf(7o + 1) =
//3 Γ(7o + 1) = #o> hence /α and //? are compatible. 
Πθ.8,6.7

40 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
On Diamonds.
6.9 Theorem. If λ is regular uncountable cardinal, 5 C λ stationary, then for
some forcing notion P:
(1) ll-p "Os holds " (see below)
(2) forcing with P, preserve the cardinals μ < X (in fact it is λ-complete
and hence add no new α-sequences of ordinals for a < λ.
(
3) I-P| < Σμ<λ
2μ> so if λ<Λ =
 X Arcing with P does not change
cardinalities and cofinalities,
where: "Os holds " means: there is a sequence (Aa : a G 5), Aa C α
such that for any A C λ the set {α G 5 : A Π a — Aa} is stationary.
Proof. Now the idea is as usual to construct a generic object, by approximations
inside V.
So we define: P — {(Ai : i G SΊΊα) : a < X and Aj C i for every i G 5lΊα},
ordered by: being an intial segment.
Part (3) is easy by the definition of P.
Part (2) holds as P is obviously λ-complete (take union) and the inequality
stated in (3) is straigthforward - [the fact that no new α-sequences are added
follows from regularity of λ]. Now what we are left with is:
(*) if G is P-generic then V[G\ N "Os holds"
Let A be included in λ, and let C be closed and unbounded subset of
λ, both in V[Gr], then C, A have names C,A repectively and for some / in
G, f Ih "C is a club of λ and A is a subset of λ". Let / < p G P. All we
have to do is find q > p such that q — (Ai 
: i G S Π α), α < λ, Ai C i
and q Ih "i £ C&A Π i — A? for some i G S Π α; this will prove that
the set of such <?'s is dense above / hence that G contains one of them so
V[G] 
t= "{α G 5 : A Π a = Aa and a G C} / 0" and as this holds for any club
C G V[G\ clearly V[O\ t= "{α G S : AΠa = Aa} is stationary" i.e., V[G\ N "Os
holds as exemplified by A" where A = \J{f 
: f G G}.
So let us find </, we define by induction on ζ < λ, aζ < λ, pζ = (Ai : i G
S Π αζ), -Bζ and /?£ such that
1) for ξ < C, αξ < αc, p^ < pc, and PQ = p

§7. φ Does Not Imply 0 
41
2) Pc+1 ih «βζ G C"
3) pc+χ Ih "A Π αc = Bζ" for some Bζ G V such that Bζ C αc.
4) for limit C, we have pζ = (Jξ<ζpξ = (A* : i G 5 Π αc).
5) αζ < λ is (strictly) increasing continuous and /?£ is strictly increasing
continous.
6) αc </3c+ι
The definition is easy, remember for ζ successor / Ih "C is an unbounded subset
of λ", so there is β G C, β > Oiζ. For ζ limit remember / Ih "C is closed ".
For (3) remember that P is λ-complete hence does not add new bounded
subset of λ.
Note that for ζ limit &ζ = βζ (by clauses 5), 6)) and that ξ < ζ =>
B^ = Bζ Π aξ. In the end {βζ : ζ < X} is a club in V, but 5 is a stationary
subset of λ (in V) hence for some limit C, βζ £ 5, but then p^ Ih "for ε < ζ",
Λl Π αε = βε and βε e C hence A Π βζ = Bζ = \J^<ζ Bξ and βζ G C". Let
q= (A't'.ie Sn(βζ + 1)), where A^ is: A< if i < /?c and Bc if i = /3C. Easily
p < q, and g is as required.
Note that we also have proved that 5 remains stationary. 
D6.g
§7. A Does Not Imply <>
Note: 4k is a weak version of the diamond.
7.1 Definition. For a regular uncountable cardinal λ and stationary S C λ
set of limit ordinals let us state the combinatorial principle φ:
J|fc(5) = "there exists a witness i.e. a sequence (Aα : α G £) such that for every
a G 5 we have Aa C α and supAα = α and for every unbounded subset X of
λ there exists an α G 5 such that Aa C X" .
When (5) is omitted, it is (Ki).
7.2 Observation. This form of stating A implies the apparantly stonger form
of*:

42 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
"(Aα : α G 5} is as above, and for every unbounded X in λ there are stationarily
many points α G 5 such that Aa C X".
Proof. Assume the first form holds, let X be unbounded and let C be an
arbitrary club in λ. We must show that there is a point a G C Π S such that
Aa C X. Define by induction an increasing sequence (βi : i < λ) of ordinals in
X as follows: 7^ is the first member of C greater than all (βi : j <i), and βi is
the first member of X greater than 7^. As both C and X are unbounded, this
is well defined. Now X'
 ά= (βi : i < λ) is unbounded, therefore there exists an
a G S such that Aa C X
f. But the demand supAa = a implies that a is also
a limit of members of C - as between two consecutive members of X
1 there is
a member of C. By closeness of C, α G C. 
Dγ.2
Next we prove
7.3 Fact, if CH -fJfrs hold, then also Os holds, where 5 is a stationary subset
of NI.
Proof, suppose that (Aa : a G S) is a witness that Jfrs holds. Using CH let
(Bi : i < NI) be a list in which every bounded subset of HI appears NI times,
and such that sup(Bi) < ί. To get such a list start with a function g from NI
onto <S<KO(NI) x HI (this is where CH comes in, where S<^(A) is the family of
countable subsets of A). Define i : HI —> <S<κ0(Nι) by cases as follows: suppose
g(ϊ) = (Ba,β). Set Bi to be Ba if sup(£α) < i, and 0 otherwise. So it is
easy to check that i is a listing of all bounded subsets of KI which satisfies
our requirements. Now define a sequence (Da : a G S) as follows: x G -Dα
iff there is an i G Aα such that x e Bi. Let us verify now that this sequence
demonstrates <>s Let X be a subset of NI. If Λ" is bounded, let X' be the set
of indices of X in our list, namely all i such that Bi — X. Prom our assumption
that each bounded set appears HI times in the list, X
1 is unbounded, and so
there are stationarily many points α G S such that Aa C X'. This implies that
Da is X. Now suppose X is unbounded, and define by induction a function

§7. * Does Not Imply 0 
43
j : KI —-> KI as follows: j(a) = minimal j greater than all the ordinals in
{j(β) 
- β <ot} such that Bi is the bounded set X Π sup{j(β) : β < a}. Now as
j is strictly increasing, for every α we have j(a) > a (the first counterexample
yields an immediate contradiction). So there is a club C whose members are
closed under j. Set X' as the range of j. This is clearly an unbounded set by
the monotonicity of j. So there are stationarily many δ G S for which A$ C X'.
Hence there are stationary many δ G S Π C for which A$ C X'. For each such
£, let us prove that D$ is exactly X Π δ: As ^5 contains only members of X
1',
which are in particular indices of bounded subsets of the form X Π α, it is clear
that D$ - which is the union of these sets - is contained in XΓ\δ. To see equality,
fix an arbitrary β < δ. It suffice to show that in the union D$ appears an initial
segment of the form X Π a with a > β. As δ £ C, clearly δ is closed under
the function j so j ( β ) < 5, and since A§ is cofinal in 5, there is an ordinal 7
such that δ > 7 > j ( β ) and 7 G A$. But A$ C X' hence 7 — j(α) for some α,
now by the monotonicity of j, α > /?. So by definition of j, Bj(a) is an initial
segment of X which is obtained by cutting X somewhere higher than j ( β ) , but
the latter is greater or equal to β. So D$ includs X Π β for arbitrarily large
β < δ, hence D$ include X Π ί; hence equality follows. 
D7.s
7.4 Theorem. A does not imply O
Discussion.
It is clear that the principle 0 implies A, and under CH, we have seen that
A implies O It was asked whether φ —> O As we shall now see, the answer is
negative. We shall build a model of ZFC in which A holds, but CH fails. As
trivially 0 —
> CH, this necessarily implies that 0 also fails.
Proof. Out intention is to begin with a ground model satisfying GCH (or just
2^° — N1} 2*
1 = K2; for example a model of V = L) which has a 0-sequence
on ^2 Using the 0 we will define a ^-sequence on K2 which is immune to NI-
complete forcing, i.e. is still a ^-sequence in the universe after forcing with an
Ni-complete forcing notion. The next step is adding N3 subsets to KI using an
Ni-complete forcing notion. The last stage will be collapsing KI, thus making

44 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
of the cardinal that previously was H2 our present HI. Although this will not
be done by an K2-complete forcing, our Jfc-sequence on N2, which has has now
dropped to HI, will remain a ^-sequence, while there will be K2 subsets of HO
(which were formerly HS subsets of HI). So we change our universe three times.
We will present each stage of our plan in detail:
Stage A: defining a ^-sequence on H2 using
We first note here that a 0-sequence can guess not only ordinary subsets
of H2, but also elementary substructures of any structure over H2. Suppose
a structure M over H2 (in a countable language) is given. For each relation
symbol or a function symbol R fix a subset of AR H2 of size H2 and a 1-1
function FR : H2 ' — > AR such that two different ARS are disjoint where we
let £g(R) = n if R is an n-place relation symbol, and ίg(R) = n + 1 if R is an
n-place function symbol. Thus the set FR(R
M) codes the relation R
M . Let A
be the union of all FR(R
M). So A codes the structure M. If (Ai : i £ S) is a
0-sequence, then A is guessed stationarily often, namely for stationarily many
i G S we have A Π i = Ai. Clearly, the set C = {i < H2: for all R we have
FR(R
M^) C i} is closed unbounded in H2. Moreover, the set of α such that
M \a is an elementary substructure of M is a club by the Skolem-Lόwenhein
theorem and the continuity of elementary chains. So the intersection of the
two clubs with our stationary set is the stationary set S
M of all α such that
M\a is an elementary substructure of M and for all R we have FR(R
M^) C α
and Aa = \jFR(R
M^
a) (that is, M\a contains its own coding and Aa equals
R
this coding). In short we say that for every a. in 5
M, Aa guess the elementary
substructure M\OL.
Let S be the subset of H2 of all ordinals having cofinality HQ. We wish to
make use of Os Why does this principle hold in our ground model? Because,
e.g. we could have forced it easily by a preliminary forcing which appeares in
6.9.
Now we come to defining the Jfr-sequence. Let us choose coding for a
language with two relation signs, <* and a two place relation R( , ), and
let (Ma = (α, <*,Λα) : α G 5) be a diamond sequence for such models. So

§7. * Does Not Imply 0 
45
for every structure M with universe ^2 for this language, for stationarily many
δ € S the substructures M Γ δ of it are guessed by our 0-sequence i.e. M\δ = MS.
Restrict attention now only to those places in which the guessed substructure
satisfies the following sentences (the set of such δ G S will be called S'):
(i) <* is a partial order.
(ii) if β <* 7 then R(β, x) -* #(7, x)
(iii) (Vα)(V/?)(37 > α)(3£ > β)
Note that there are stationarily many such places (by guessing one such struc-
ture on ^2? for example). In each such place δ we define now a subset of δ
of order type ω which we call D$ : let δ be fixed, and let (β^ : n < ω) be a
cofinal increasing sequence in <J; we define by induction on n < ω a sequence
<7n>ίn : ™< ω ) such that
2- 
>
So let 7#, £$ < <J be such that Λ(7o>fo) & $) < ίo» exists by clause (
ni) above,
and the induction step i.e. choosing 7*+1, ξ^+1 such that 7^ <| 7^+1 & /3^+1 <
& Λ(7ί+ι,ίί+ι) is handled using (iii). Set Dδ = {& : n < ω}.
Our Jk-sequence will be the sequence (D§ : δ £ S').
Claim B. (D$ : δ e S') is a Jfc-sequence.
Proof. Suppose X is unbounded in ^2- Define a structure (^2, <*,#) with <*
be the natural order on ^2, and R(y,x) ifί x e X. So for stationarily many δ
in S
f the model is guessed by A$, namely (5, Ag) is an elementary substructure
of our structure. So each ξn G X - which implies that D$ C X.
Stage C: adding ^3 subsets to NI.
We will force now with PI = {countable functions from H3 to 2}, ordered
by inclusion. The advantage of our ^-sequence to other Jfc-sequences is that
it is preserved under the forcing notions we are about to apply, and this is

46 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
what we are about to check now. We must check first, however, the weaker
condition, that this forcing preserves stationarity of stationary subsets of N2
namely that a subset 5 of N2 which intersects every "old" club ( "old" meaning
"in the universe before the forcing") intersects also every "new" club. This
follows from the following couple of claims:
Claim D. PI satisfies the N2-.c.c.
Claim E. Every P that satisfies the N2-.c.c preserves the stationarity of subsets
θfN 2.
Proof of Claim D. let χ be any regular cardinal which is large enough to have
the power set of PI in H ( χ ) . Suppose that J is a maximal antichain of PI whose
cardinality is greater than NI. Now define an increasing sequence of elementary
submodels of (/f(χ), G) of length NI called (Ni : i < NI), as follows:
(i) PI, X are members of 7V0, and 7V0 is countable, has cardinality NI.
(ii) every countable subset of Ni is an element of NΪ+I.
(in) j < i => Nj ^ Ni.
There is no problem to carry out the construction, because at each stage in
the construction the cardinality of the model at hand is at most NI, therefore
it may have at most NI countable subsets (we have CH in the ground model).
So close these NI elements together with everything you already have in an
elementary submodel of cardinality NI using the Skolem-Lόwenheim method.
At limits take unions, for example. Let us denote the union of the increasing
chain as TV. So TV is an elementary submodel of (ίf(χ),E) of cardinality NI.
Furthermore, every countable set of elements of AT is a subset of one of the
models along the construction (say Ni) by the regularity of NI, therefore it is
an element of NΪ+I, and therefore of N. In short we say that "AT is closed under
countable subsets" .
We recall that PI, X £ N. As X is greater in cardinality than JV, there
must be an element p of J which is not a member of N. (Remember that p is a

§7. φ Does Not Imply 0 
47
countable function from K3 to 2.) Look at p
f, which we define as p Π N. From
the countability of p,p' is clearly countable, and as N is closed under countable
sets and p
1 is certainly a countable subset of TV, we have p' € N. Now (H(χ), e)
satisfies the sentence "there is a member of I which extends p
1" (it is p). As
N is an elementary submodel of it, and contains as members all the constants
mentioned in this sentence - therefore there must be an element q G I Π N
which according to TV extends p'. We lack only one more detail to derive a
contradiction: the domain of q is countable, therefore there is an enumeration
of it in N. This implies that Dom(g) is contained in TV. So inspect the union
q U p. Clearly q extends the part of p which is in N, and contradicts nothing
that is outside of TV, as we just saw. Therefore p and q are compatible members
of J.
Proof of Claim E. Let S be a stationary subset of H2 in V, and suppose C is
a PI-name for a club of N2 with the condition p in the generic set forcing p Ih
"C is a club in N2". Attach to each ordinal α < N2 a maximal antichain Ia of
extentions of p such that for each q G Ia there is a β(q) such that q Ih "/?(#)
is the minimal member of C above α". Define as Ba the set of all ordinals 7
for which some member of 2a forces that 7 is the first member of C above a.
Clearly Ba has cardinality < |Jα| which is < N2 hence Ba is bounded in N2
Using our standard argument, we see that C* :— {δ < N2 : for all a < δ the set
Ba is included in δ} is a club of K2. But this club, being defined in V, is an old
club! Therefore it meets 5, let us say in δ. As for each Ia, a < δ the generic
set must choose a condition from Jα, and 5α is contained in 5, ί is a limit of
the realization of C, therefore in it.
Stage F. So we know now that our S
f from the definition of the it-sequence is
still a stationary subset of N2 after forcing with PI. But is the sequence still a
Jk-sequence? We verify this now.
Let X be a Pi-name, p e PI and p lhPl "X C N2 is unbounded and C
is a club of N2" We show that the set of conditions which force "there exists
δ G S Π C such that L^ C X" is dense above p. Fix an elementary submodel

48 
I. Forcing, Basic Facts
N of (if (χ), G), \N\ = H2, N closed under subsets of size < HI, with p, PI, X
and C members of TV. Enumerate in the sequence (pi : i < H2) the member
of PI Π M which are > p and define a structure M with the same language
as above with universe H2 with: i <* j iff PI 
\= Pi < PJ, and R(i,x) iff as
Pi Ih "x G X". From the definition of our diamond sequence (Ma 
: a G 5'),
stationarily many elementary substructures of this structure are guessed by it
i.e. S" = {a e S
f 
: Ma = N\a} is stationary. Let a be one such coordinate
so Da = {£ : n < ω} where £ < £+1 < <* = U £, # N 7- <* 7«+1,
n<u>
and TV N J?Z(7£,f£). Then we have at hand now an increasing sequence in PI
of conditions (q% : n < ω) such that qn Ih "ξ£ G X", just let q% = p7«. From
elementaricity, this is really an increasing sequence of conditions, and let us
bound it by g, which existed by Hi-completeness. So q Ih "D^ C X" and q is
certainly an extention of p.
So we have added ^3 subsets to HI forcing with PI without destroying out
^-sequence nor collapsing cardinals.
Stage G: collapsing HI.
We collapse now HI, P2 being the finite functions from H0 to HI. This is a
forcing notion of size HI and therefore leaves the cardinals above HI unchanged.
To show that our sequence, which was formerly on H2 is now on HI still a Jit-
sequence, it will suffice to prove the following.
Fact H. In the world after the collapse every new unbounded set of (the new)
HI contains an old unbounded set of (the old) H2.
Proof. Suppose p is a condition and p Ih "X is an unbounded subset of H2". So
for every i < H2 there is an ordinal τ(ϊ) and an extention q(ϊ) of p such that
q(ϊ) Ih "H2 > r(ί) > i and r(ί) G X
n. By the pigeon hole principle there are
H2 coordintes i with a fixed ςι(*) = q(i). Set X
 
ά= {r(ΐ) : ςr(*) = q(i)} - then
surely X is unbounded, so (?(*) is an extention of p which forces that X is an
unbounded subset of X.

§7. * Does Not Imply 0 
49
From the lemma we easily deduce both the preservation of stationary sets
(in a new club there is an old unbounded set, the closure of which is an old
club; alternatively use Claim E) and the preservation of our Jk-sequence, for
instead of guessing a new set, it is enough to guess an old subset. 
Dγ.4

II. Iteration of Forcing
§0. Introduction
Suppose Vt+ι is a generic extension of V^, for i — 0,1. Is V% a generic extension
of VQ? In §1 we present the possible answer, in fact if V^+ι = V^[G^], G0 is a
subset of P generic over VQ, G\ is a subset of Q[Go] generic over VΊ, we can get
VΊ by some subset G of P * Q generic over VQ, and there are natural mappings
between the family of possible pairs [Go, GI] and the family of possible G's. In
§2 we deal with iterations (P^, Qi : ί < a) of length an ordinal a.
This seems suitable to deal with proving the consistency of "for every x
there is y such that ..." each Qa producing a ya for some xa G V
p°'. However
V
Pa is not U V
Pί, still if we speak of, say, x £ H(\) and cf(α) > λ and
i<a
PQ, = U PΪ, and PQ, satisfies the c.c.c. (or less), then no "new" x appear in
i<a
V
Pa, so we can "catch our tail."
An important point is what we do for limit ordinals δ. We choose P§ =
U Pi (direct limit), this is the meaning of FS (finite support iteration). An
i<δ
important property is (see 2.8): if each Qi satisfies the c.c.c. then so does P#.
In §3 we present MA (Martin's axiom) and prove its consistency. The axiom
says inside the universe, for any c.c.c. forcing notion P we can find directed
G C P which are "quite generic", say not disjoint to TI for i < i* if Ii C P is
dense and i* < 2
H°. The proof of its consistency (3.4) is by iterations as in §2 of
c.c.c. forcing notions, the point being the right bookkeeping and the "catching of

§1. The Composition of Two Forcing Notions 
51
your tail." We then give some applications; if Ai C ω (i < X < 2
K°) are infinite
almost disjoint, 5 C λ then for some / : ω —> {0,1} f\Ai -αe IA* iff i € S (this
is 3.7), and we can omit "Ai C ω" (by 3.5). Can we, for (/; €
 Λί{0,1} : i < λ),
λ > NO find / : "{0,1} such that f\Ai =ae Λ? (we say (Ai : i < λ) has
uniformization). If the A^s are like branches of trees and the fa are constant
then yes (by 3.9).
In §4 we continue with this question. If Ai C ω (i < λ) and the Ai has
splitting < 2 (if not branches of a tree this mean: if we know the first n members
of AI, there are < 2 possibilities for the nth member) then uniformization fail
(see 4.2 and 4.4). Moreover if MA holds, then (Ai : i < λ) has a subsequence as
above so the answer is no. Still a positive answer is consistent (see 4.6) where
we fix (Ai : ί < λ) and preserve a strong negation of: for no uncountable S C λ,
(Ai : i £ 5} has spliting < 2. For this we demand each Qi to satisfy a strong
version of the c.c.c.
Lastly §5 deals with the existence of mad (^maximal almost disjoint)
families of subsets of u;, showing the consistency of the existence.
Also this chapter presents old material. The material is mostly from Solo-
vay, Tennenbaum [ST] (consistency of Souslin hypothesis using FS iteration of
c.c.c. forcing notions) and Martin, Solovay [MS] (on applications of MA), but
note that [ST] use Boolean algebras. But the iteration like here was shortly
later known, and MA was formulated and proved consistent independently by
Martin and Rowbottom.
The material of §4 is from [Sh:98, §4, §1 (mainly 1.1(3), 1.2)] (where we
phrase the iteration theorem more generally). See more (for higher cardinals)
in Mekler and Shelah [MkSh:274].
§1. The Composition of Two Forcing Notions
1.1 Discussion. We shall now ask the following question. Suppose we start
with V, extend it once by means of the forcing notion P to V[G], where G
is a generic subset of P, then we take a forcing notion Q in V[G] and extend

52 
II. Iteration of Forcing
V[G] to V[G][ff], where H is a subset of Q generic over V[G\\ can V^G]^] be
obtained from V by a single forcing extension? The answer is positive as we
shall now see.
Since Q G V[G],Q does not necessarily belong to V but it has a P-name
Q in V. Since Q is a forcing notion we have, by the Forcing Theorem that
p \\-p "Q is a forcing notion (i.e. a partial order)", for some p G G. We shall,
however, make the stronger assumption, which suffices for all our needs, that
Ihp "Q is a forcing notion." If this stronger assumption would fail to hold we
can define
t 
(Q 
i f p e G
Q
f = < ~
[ {0} otherwise
and then Ihp "Qt is a P-name for Q in V[G\". To prove that "forcing twice" is
like forcing once we want to define a forcing notion P * Q, i.e. the set and the
order.
1.2 Definition. 1) P * Q = {(p, q) : p G P, q is a canonical P-name of a
potential member of Q, i.e., Ihp "q G Q", q a canonical P-name"}.
[What are the canonical names of a potential member of Q and why do
we use this concept? A member of V[G\ may have a proper class of names in
V so P * Q would be a proper class if we would not restrict the names to a
certain representative set. What is important is that every member of Q[G] for
every generic subset G of P has a name in this set, e.g., has a canonical name.
By I 5.13 this is true. Also there is a class of P-names q such that: for some
p G P, we have p Ihp "q G Q"; again demanding Ih "q G <?" suffice as for every
P-name q° there is a P-name q
1 such that Ihp V 
G Q" and Ihp "if q° G Q
then q° = g
1" (why? by I 1.19, definition by cases as we assume Q ^ 0).]
2) We define on P * Q a (pre) partial order as follows:
(Pι»?ι) < (P2,<72) i/Pi < P2 (i.e. P N px < p2) and p2 Ih* "qi < p in the
partial order Q".

§1. The Composition of Two Forcing Notions 
53
1.3 Claim. If P G V is a forcing notion, Ihp "Q is a forcing notion" then P* Q
is a forcing notion.
Proof. First (p, g) < (p, g) since p Ihp "q < g" because (p, g) € P * Q implies
P II" p "^ € Q" and since Ihp "(Q, <) is a forcing notion". Now assume (pi, gi) <
(P2,Q2) < (P3,q3) then, since p3 > p2 > p\ we have p3 > pi and p3 Ihp
"tfi < Q2&Q2 < ^3"- Since also Ihp "(Q, <) is a forcing notion", clearly
Ps "~P "<7ι < <7s" and so (pι,gι) < (^3,^3). We shall use P * Q as a forcing
notion. 
DI.S
1.4 Theorem. This theorem asserts, essentially, that forcing by P * Q is
equivalent to forcing first by P and then by Q[G].
(1) Let GP*Q C P * Q be generic over V then
a. <3p
 d=
f {p e P : (3p
f)(3g)(p < P
f & (p
f,g) G Gίp^g)} C P is generic over
b. GP*Q/GP = {^[Gp] : (3p)[(p,g) G GP*Q]} is a generic subset of Q[Gp]
over
(2) If Gp is a generic subset of P over V and /f C Q[Gp] is a generic subset of
Q[GP] over F[G] thenGP*H
d= {(p,q) : (p,g) G P*Q&p G GP&?[G] G
ίί} C P * Q is a generic subset of P * Q over V.
(3) The operations in (1) and (2) are one inverse of the other.
Proof. (1) a. Gp is downward closed by its definition. Gp is directed since GP*Q
is. Now let I be a dense subset of P. Define 1+ = {{p, ςr) G P * Q : p G I}.
We shall see that T
+ is a dense subset of P * Q. Let (p, ς) G P * Q, then there
is a pt > p such that pt G J. Now (pt, ς) G P * Q. Also (pt, g) > (p, g) (since
pt Ih "g < g", as Ihp "(Q, <) is a forcing notion"). Since (pt,g) e J+ this
shows that X+ is dense. Therefore J+ Π GP*Q 7^ 0, let (p, g) G J+ Π GP*Q, then
p G Z Π Gp, hence X Π Gp ^ 0. As we prove it for every Z, Gp is a generic
subset of P over V.

54 
II. Iteration of Forcing
(l)b. (i) We want first to prove that Gp*g/Gp is downward closed, so
let Q[GP] 
N V < q[GP]» in V[GP] and assume q[GP] G GP*Q/GP. Then
by the Forcing Theorem (and I 5.13) there is a canonical name qi such that
q* = <?t[Gp], and for some pt G GP we have pt Ih "q^ < q and </t G Q".
By the "definition by cases" w.l.o.g. Ihp V 
G Q" (we will usually forget to
mention this explicity). As we assume q[GP] G GP*Q/GP clearly for some
p G Gp we have (p,<?) G GP*Q. Since p
1" G GP there are p
/7,<?
77 such that
(p", <?
77) G GP*Q and pt < p" (by the definition of Gp.) Since GP*Q is directed
there is (p*,<7*) G GP*Q such that (p*,ςr*) > (p,<?), (p",q"}. We claim that
(P*,?
1) < (P*,?*> Since (p*,?*) > (p,?), we have p* Ih V 
> q
n. Since
also p* > p" > pt and pt Ih V < f we have p* Ih V < g", So together
with the previous sentence p* Ih "gt < g*", hence (p*,g*) > (p*,(^) Since
(p*,ς*) G GP*Q also (p*,^) G Gpj)ίQ and ςt = ?t[GP] G GP*Q/GP. Thus
GP*Q/GP is downward closed.
To see that GP*Q/GP is directed let <?,^ be in GP*Q/GP. Then g =
g[Gp],ς^ = ^[Gp] for some q,q^ such that there are p,p^ satisfying (p,9),
(p^»^) ^ GP*Q. Since GP*Q is directed there is a (p",q"} G GP*Q such that
OΛ?") > (P,?>, (P
1,^)- We havep
77 Ih "ς,?t < ?//» and since p" G GP we have
q[GP],q*[GP] < q"[GP] and obviously q"[GP] G GP*Q/GP.
(ii) Let I be a dense subset of Q[Gp] in V[Gp], and we shall show that
IΠ Gp*Q/Gp / 0. Clearly I has a P-name J and for some po G Gp we have
Po "~p "? is a dense subset of Q".
Let J+ - {{p,<?) G P * Q : p Ihp "q G ?&p > p0"} Since p0 G GP
and, as we can replace po by any p
7, po < p
f G Gp, w.l.o.g. there is a qo
such that (po,9o) € GP*Q. We claim J+ is dense above (po,<?o) in P * Q. Let
(p^j^) ^ (Po,<7o) and let G^ be any generic subset of P such that pΐ G G^. In
y[Gt] we know that J[Gt] is a dense subset of Q[Gt], hence (by I 3.1, I 5.13)
there is a canonical name q" of a member of Q such that <?
77[Gt] > q^[G^} and
g
77[Gt] G J[Gt]. Let p
77 G G
f be such that p
77 lhP V
7 G J" and p
77 lhP "q" > gt»

§1. The Composition of Two Forcing Notions 
55
and (as G
f is directed) p" > p
1". Then clearly (p",g") > (pW) and (p",g") G
J+. So we have proved that J+ is dense in P * Q, hence J+ Π GP*Q ^ 0. Let
(Pι,qι) G J+ Π GP*Q, then 0ι [Gp] G J[Gp] = I. So really in V[GP] we have
JΠ (Gp*g/Gp) is not empty, as required.
(2) (i) To see that Gp * H is downward closed let (p, g) G Gp * ίΓ and
(p*ι<fi) < (P> tf) Then p G Gp,pt < p hence also pt G Gp. Now g[Gp] G # and
g
f[Gp] < g[GP] (since p G GP) hence q*[Gp\ G #, therefore (p
t,^
t) G GP * H
so we have proved that Gp * H is downward closed.
To see that Gp * H is directed let (p, g), (p*,^) G Gp * H. Since p,pΐ G Gp
there is a p" > p,p^ in Gp. Since g[Gp], #^[Gp] G H there is a canonical name
g" of a potential member of Q[Gp] such that q"[Gp\ > g[Gp], g^[Gp] and
q"[Gp\ G H. Since Gp is directed we can assume, without loss of generality
that p" Ihp V eQ&q">q&q"> q*
n. Thus (j/
7,/) G P * Q and (p
/;,/) >
(p,?),^,?
1}-
(ii) Let J be a dense open subset of P*Q. Let J/GP = {<?[GP] : (Ξp G GP)
[{p, q) G I}}. We shall see that J/GP is a dense subset of Q[GP] in V[GP]. Let
^o € Ql^pjj then for some canonical name #o of a member of Q we have
qo[Gp] = qo, and let p0 G Gp, so p0 Ihp "#0 ^ Q" Then (po,^o) G P * Q. Let
T ? 0 = { p e P : p > p o & (%f)[P ll-p "?t > ?o" and (p, ςt) G J]} G 1Λ We shall
see that Tςo is dense in P above po Let pi > po, then (pι,^o) G P * Q. Since
J is dense in P * Q there is a (pt, </ΐ) G J such that (pt, g^) > (pi, go) We have
also p^ Ihp "gΐ > g0" hence p^ G Iqo, p^ > p\ and so Iqo is dense in P above p0.
Since po G Gp by I 1.18 there is p2 such that po < P2 G Gp and p2 G Tg0, hence
for some gt we have p2 Ihp "g^ > go" and (p2,<^) ^ 2". Since p2 G Gp we have
q
][GP] > q[GP] = q and ^[Gp] G J/GP (as (p2,g
t> € J). So really I/GP is a
dense subset of Q[Gp] (in V[Gp]). Since H is a generic subset of Q[Gp] over
V[Gp] we have (J/GP) Π H ^ 0, let g[GP] G (I/GP) Π ff. Since g[GP] G I/GP
there is a p G Gp such that (p, q) G J. Therefore (p, g) G T Π (Gp * #), which
establishes the genericity of Gp * H.
(3) Left to the reader. 
Πι.4

56 
II. Iteration of Forcing
1.5 Lemma. For every P* Q -name τ there is a P-name r* such that for every
generic subset Gp of P, τ*[Gp] is a Q[Gp]-name in V[Gp] and for every subset
GQ of Q which is generic over V[Gp] we have (l*[Gp])[Gg] = τ[Gp * GQ]. We
use the notation τ*[Gp] = τ/Gp.
Proof. By induction on the rank α of the (P * Q)-name τ. Suppose τ —
{((Piι<li)ιTi)
 
: i < ^0} where (Pi,qi) G P * Q and Ti is a (P * Q)-name of
rank < α. By the induction hypothesis each τ$ has a translation r\ to a P-
name such that Γ*[^P] ^
s a Q[Gp]-name and Γ*[^P][^Q] = TΪ[GP*GQ] Let σ^
be the P-name of {^, r*) and let r* = {(PI, <ji); i < io}; this is clearly suitable.
(See I 1.8). 
D1<5
1.6 Definition. If P <£ Q (see Definition I 5.3(2)), and G C P is generic over
V, £/&en let Q/G G V[G] be the following forcing notion:
(1) its set of elements is {q G Q : q is compatible in Q with every p G G},
(2) its order is inherited from Q.
Sometimes we write Q/P instead Q/Gp, (so it is a P-name) and if h is a
complete embedding of P into Q (or even to RO(Q)) we write Q/(P, h).
1.7 Lemma. (1) P <£ P*Q (when P a forcing notion, Ihp "Q a forcing notion"
and we identify p G P with (p, 0g})
(2) The forcing notions (P * Q)/P and Q are equivalent (i.e., this is forced by
P). Moreover for any generic G C P, the function /, /((p, Q)/~) = <?[G]/~ (for
(p,q) G P * Q/G, equivalently p G G) is an isomorphism from (P * Q)[G]/«,
onto Q[G]/« (where « denotes the relation defined in I 5.5).
(3) If P <£ Q (both forcing notions in V) then Q is equivalent to P * (Q/P).
Πl.7
It is not hard to see that

§2. Iterated Forcing 
57
1.8 The Associative Law Lemma. If P is a forcing notion, Ihp "<3 a forcing
notion", lhP*Q "R a forcing notion", then (P * Q) * R, and P * (<9 * R) are
equivalent. 
DI.S
§2. Iterated Forcing
2.1 Discussion. We saw already that two successive extensions of V by forcing
are equivalent to an appropriate single extension. We want to ask now the same
question about an infinite number of extensions by forcing. The need for this
arose in the following case.
By a classical theorem, if a linearly ordered set is dense and complete,
has no first or last member, and has a dense countable subset then it is order-
isomorphic to the real numbers. Souslin raised the question whether one can
replace the last requirement, that there is a dense countable subset, by the
requirement that every set of pairwise disjoint intervals is at most countable.
The statement that these two additional requirements are equivalent is called
Souslin's hypothesis, and an ordered set which is a counterexample to Souslin's
hypothesis is called a Souslin's continuum. Jech and Tennenbaum proved the
independence of Souslin's hypothesis of the axioms of ZFC by using forcing to
obtain a universe in which there is a Souslin continuum. Later Jensen proved
that in the constructible universe there is a Souslin continuum. To prove the
consistency of Souslin's hypothesis Solovay and Tennenbaum, [ST] proceeded
as follows: Given V and a Souslin continuum C, one can construct a generic
extension V[G] of V in which C is no more a Souslin continuum by a generic
introduction of an uncountable set of pairwise disjoint intervals in C. In this
case we say that we have "destroyed" C. Using the same method we can go on
destroying more and more Souslin continua. It can be shown that a Souslin's
continuum has exactly 2^° points, hence there are at most 22 
Souslin continua
( up to isomorphism). However, when we destroy one Souslin continuum, new
ones will be created and we must be sure we have destroyed them all. Since
we have infinite time at our disposal this may be possible if we can "catch out

58 
II. Iteration of Forcing
tail" , but for this we need that in the end no new Souslin continua arise which
look doubtful by the above estimate. However we can show that it is enough to
deal with subsets of Souslin continuum of power NI, so there are only 2
Nl such
orders. We shall iterate λ times, so that in the new universe, 2
N° = 2
Hl = λ, so
if the cofinality of the length of the iteration is > HI we have a chance to catch
our tail.
2.2. Definition. We shall call Q = (Qj : j < a) (or Q - (Pj.Qj 
' j < α) or
Q — (Pi,Qj : j < a and i < α)), for some ordinal α, a system of FS (finite
support) iterated forcing (or FS iteration) if each <2j, j < α is a name, for the
forcing notion Pj, of a forcing notion (=quasi-order), i.e., Ihp. "Qj is a forcing
notion", where Pj for j < a is defined by recursion as the set of all finite
functions / with domain included in j such that for all i G Dom(/) we have
f ( i ) is a canonical name for the forcing notion Pi of a potential member of Qi
and we call Pa the direct limit of Q and denote it lim<N0(Q). So i < j < α,
p G PJ =» p\i G Pi and Pi C Pj. We use freely I 5.13.
This is called iterated forcing with finite support since the functions / we
use in the Pj's are finite functions. The Pj's are sets since we restrict the choice
of the /(i)'s to be canonical names of members of Qi. We can replace "finite
support" by CS ("countable support") or "< ^-support", see Chapter III.
The partial order on Pj for j < a is defined as follows: / < g 4Φ Dom(/) C
(V; G Dom(/)) \g\i lhPί "/(i) <?ί g(ι)
n}.
2. 2 A Fact. In Definition 2.2:
(1) If i < j < a then Pi C Pj as sets and even as partial orders.
(2) If i < j < a and p G Pj then p\i G P»; moreover Pj N "p\i < p" and if
p\i < q £ PΪ then r = q\Jp\(j\i) 
belong to Pj and is the least upper
bound of g, p in Pj (actually as we are dealing with quasi order we should
say a least upper bound).
(3) Ίfi<j<a 
then P< <? Pj and q G Pi? p G Pj =» Pj -^ q < p *-> P» N ς < pfi
(4) If j < α is a limit ordinal then Pj = U P^.

§2. Iterated Forcing 
59
(5) The sequence (Qj : j < α) uniquely determines the sequence (Pj,Qj 
: j <
a) and vice versa and similarly for (P^, Qj : j < α, and i < a).
(6) If Q\ is a Pi-name, such that Ih "ζ^ is a dense subset of Qi" then P( =
{/ G Pi: for every j G Dom(/) we have: lhP. "f(j) 
£ QΓI is a dense
subset of Pi. Moreover we can define and prove by induction on i < α,
that P" = {/ G Pi : for every j G Dom(/) we have: f ( j ) is a P/'-canonical
name of a member of Q^} is a dense subset of Pi and Q" is a canonical
Pf-name satisfying lhP. «<$' - <$" and (P' ^Q' , : jo < i,jι < z) is a FS
iteration.
(6A) Assume Q\ is a set of canonical P^-names of member of Qi such that
for every P^-name p for some q G Q( we have lhPi "if p £ Qi then
Qz N "p < ςf"" Then P/ = {/ € P» : for every j G Dom(/) we have
f ( j ) G Q^} is a dense subset of P( and (P/, Qj : i < a, j < a) satisfies (1)
— (4) above.
(7) If λ is regular uncountable, α < λ and lhPί " the density of Qi is < λ"
then the density of Pa is < λ.
(8) If for i < α, lhP. "Q^ G fί(λi)", (λ^ : i < α) is an increasing sequence of
regulars, 2
λi < Xi+ι and for limit δ < α, ^ λ^ < λ^, ί/ien Q G H(Xa).
i<δ
2.3 Definition. Let (P^Qj : i < α, j < α) be a FS iteration. For β < 7 < α
we define P/3)7 and if 7 < α, QY by recursion on 7 as follows: P/?,7, Qif
are P^-names, P/??7 is the set of all finite functions / from 7 \ β such that
for i G Dom(/), /(i) is a canonical P/j-name for a canonical P/^-name of a
potential member of Q\ . Now if 7 < α then essentially P7 = Pβ * P0,7 (see
2.4(a)) and let Qίf
1 be QΊ/GPβ (see Definition 1.6).
The next theorem is given here without proof.
2.4 The General Associativity Theorem.
(a) P7 ~ Pβ * P/3,7 for /? < 7 < α, where P/?,7 is a name in the forcing notion
Pβ for the forcing notion which is P^)7 in V[G], where G is a generic

60 
II. Iteration of Forcing
subset of P/3, and where the Q/s, β < j < a are translated to names for
the forcing notions Pβj, ~ means that one of the two forcing notions are
isomorphic to a dense subset of the other, so that they represent essentialy
the same forcing notion (see I §5).
(b) P/3,/3+ι w Qβ over V[Gβ] where Gβ is a generic subset of Pβ.
(c) If (βi : i < 7} is an increasing and continuous sequence such that β0 = 0
and βΊ = α, then (Pβitβi+l 
: i < 7) is an iterated forcing equivalent ( in
the w sense) to (Qi : i < a). This is, in some sense, a general associative
rule. 
Π2.4
2.5 The Definition by Induction Theorem. (One can construct Q^s by
a given recursive recipe.) If F is a function and α is an ordinal then there
is a unique FS iterated forcing (Qj : j < QQ) such that for all j < αo,
Qj = F((Qi : i < j}) and either αo = OL or else F((Qi : i < αo)) is not
suitable for <3αo, i.e., it is not a name of a forcing notion in the forcing notion
POO.
Proof. This theorem is an obvious consequence of the standard definition-by-
recursion theorem. 
Cb.s
2.6 Theorem. If P and Q are as in the definition of P* Q and P and Q satisfy
the c.c.c., where by "Q satisfying the c.c.c.", we mean Ihp "Q satisfies the
c.c.c.", then P * Q satisfies the c.c.c.
Proof. Let {(pi, qi) : i < NI} be a sequence of conditions in P*Q. We claim first
that there is a p G P such that p \\-P "\{i : p< € Gp}| = NI", where GP is the
generic subset of P. Suppose this is not the case, then Ihp "|{i : pi G G^pjl =
HO"- Let β = {C : (3r G P) [r Ih "sup{i : p< G GP} - C"]} Since each i for
which ^ is defined is a countable ordinal and {i : pi G Gp} is a countable set in
V[Gp] also each ζ G B is a countable ordinal in V[Gp] and hence in V (since
P satisfies the c.c.c., by I 3.6 we know N^
[Gpl = N^). Since P satisfies the c.c.c
again by I 3.6 we know B is countable, so let ξ = sup(£), we have ξ < NI.

§2. Iterated Forcing 
61
Obviously p^+i Ih "£ +1 G {i : Pi G GP}" hence pe+ι Ih "sup{* : pi G GP} > ξ"
on the other hand we have Ihp "sup{z : Pi G Gp} < £", which is a contradiction.
Hence now we know that for some p G P we have p Ihp "|{i : p^ G
Gp}\ = NI"; let Gp be a generic subset of P such that p G Gp. Let A = {i :
Pi G Gp}, then the set {qi[Gp\ 
: i G A} is an uncountable subset of Q[Gp],
in V[Gp] of course. Since Q[Gp] satisfies the c.c.c. there are i,jeA such
that Qi[Gp} and Qj[Gp] are compatible, hence there is a q[Gp] G Q[Gp] such
that q[Gp] > q%[Gp],qj[Gp]. 
Since Pi,pj G Gp and Gp contains conditions
which force q > qi and q > qj, because Gp is directed ί/iere exists a p* G Gp
such that p* > pt,p* > PJ, p* > p and p* Ih "q > qi" and p* Ih "q > qr/,
thus (p*,ςf) G P*Q and (p*,ςf) > (p*,^), (ft,^ ) and so (pi,ςfi> (ft,^ ) are
compatible (in P * Q). 
D2.e
Within the proof of this theorem we have proved the following:
2.7 Observation. Let P be a forcing notion which satisfies the c.c.c. and let
{pi : i < uJι\ be a sequence of members of P. Then for some p G P we have
P Ihp "|{i < ωi : pi G Gp}| = KI", where Gp denotes the generic subset of P
(in fact for every ξ < ω\ large enough, p = p% satisfies the conclusion). 
U2.7
2.8 Theorem. If (Pi,Qi : i < a) is a system of FS iterated forcing and for
each i < a the forcing Qi satisfies the c.c.c. ( i.e., Ihp. "Q satisfies the c.c.c.")
then Pa satisfies the c.c.c.
Proof. We proceed by induction on a. For a = 0, PQ consists of the null function
only, hence it satisfies, trivially, the c.c.c. If a is a successor let a = β -h 1 then
by 2.4 we know Pa — Pβ+i ~ Pβ * Pβ,β+ι ~ Pβ * ζ)/?. By the induction
hypothesis P^ satisfies the c.c.c. and since also Qβ satisfies the c.c.c., theorem
2.6 establishes that also Pβ * Qβ satisfies the c.c.c. The relation « obviously
preserves the c.c.c. (see I 5.15), hence Pα too satisfies the c.c.c.
So assume a is a limit ordinal. Let {pi : i < ω\} C Pa. Now {Dom(p^) :
i < ωι} is an uncountable family of finite subsets of a.

62 
II. Iteration of Forcing
If cf (α) > KI then for some ξ < a we have \Ji<ωι Dom(p ) C £, so p^ e Pξ
for i <ω\ and we can apply the induction hypothesis.
If cf(α) = NO, let a = \Jn<ω^n, &n < αn+ι < ot. So for each i < ωι
for some n(i) < ω we have Dom(p^) C an^. So for some n(*) < ω the set
A = {i < ω\ : n(i) = n*} is uncountable. So {pi : i G A} is an uncountable
subset of Pan(+) so by the induction hypothesis for some i ^ j from A, p^, p^
are compatible in Pαn(Hl) hence in PQ as required.
Lastly, assume cf(α) = HI, so let (α* : i < NI) be a (strictly) increasing
continuous sequence of ordinals with limit α. Clearly for every i < ω\, Dom(pi)
being a finite subset of a is included in Oίg^, for some g(i) < ω\ and is disjoint to
[θίf(i),θLi) for some countable ordinal f ( i ) < i when i is limit ordinal (remember
Oίi is increasing continuous).
So clearly £7 = { ΐ < N ι : ΐ i s a limit ordinal and for every j < i we have
#0) < 0 i
s a club °f NI, and by Fodor lemma for some j(*) the set 5 = {i <
N! : f ( ϊ ) — j(*)} is stationary and let ξ — OLj(*y Now {pi\ξ 
: i G £ Π 5} is
an uncountable subset of Pξ, hence by induction hypothesis there are in it two
compatible numbers Pi\ξ, Pj\ζ, i.e., there is q £ Pξ such that <? > Piί^, PJifξ,
but then clearly Pi,pj are compatible in Pα. e.g. q\J(pi\[£,&) (J(pj\[ζ,ot)) 
is a
common bound. 
U2.8
2.9 Lemma. Assume (P^, Q : i < a) is a FS iteration of c.c.c. forcing notions,
II-Pi "|Qi| < λ" (forcing) and λ^° = λ and |α| < λ.
1) If Ihp. " the set of elements of Q< is C V" (for each i < α) then \Pa\ < λ.
2) Without this extra assumption, Pα has a dense subset of cardinality < λ.
3) In (1) if y C V, |y| < λ then the number of canonical Pi -names of
members of Y is < λ.
Proof. 1) We prove it by induction on α. For each i < α, by the induction
hypothesis, |P^| < λ, by 2.8 the forcing notion Pi satisfies the c.c.c. so by I 3.6
there is a set YJ G V of cardinality < λ (in V) such that Ihp. " every member
of Qi belongs to Y^. As in I §4 the number of canonical P^-names of members

§3. Martin's Axiom and Few Applications 
63
of Yi (hence of members of Q») is at most λ. Let Qi be the set of canonical
P^names of members of Qi. So Pa is the set of functions /, with domain a
finite subset of α, and i G Dom(/) => f ( i ) G Qi. Clearly
2) Let fβ be a P^-name for a one to one function for some ordinal (< λ) onto
Qβ. Now P'a = {p G Pa : for each β G Dom(p) for some canonical P^-name r
of an ordinal, p(β) = fβ(τ)}.
We prove by induction on α that P'a is a dense subset α of cardinality < λ.
3) Left to the reader. 
Π2.9
§3. Martin's Axiom and Few Applications
What is the meaning of MA (Martin's Axiom, discovered by Martin and Row-
bottom independently). It says that we can find quite generic sets inside our
universe. As we have noted before (see I 1.4 ), if P has no trivial generic subset
(i.e., above any p G P there are two incompatible members of P) then we can-
not find a generic subset of P over V. But we may well find such G C P generic
over some V^ C V. So it is plausible that for any family of < K, dense subsets
of P there is a directed G C P not disjoint to any of them. How can we build
a model V satisfying such a requirement? We extend and re-extend the uni-
verse, in stage a we extend the universe we have got Va, to Va+ι = Va[Ga] by
forcing by some forcing notion Qa. The hope is that in the end V\ = LU<λ Va
is as required, as if -R G V\ is a suitable forcing notion (satisfying the c.c.c.
with elements from V and cardinality < λ in our case) and J; C R a dense
subset for i < io, then R and (Ii : i < io) belongs to some VJ, and for some j,
i < j < λ, QJ = R. So the generic object GJ+I C Pj+1 will give a generic subset
of Qj[Gj+ιΓ\Pj] 
as required: essentially Gj+ι/(Gj+ιΓ\Pj)\ 
so this construction
is similar in some sense, to the consturction of λ-saturated models in model

64 
II. Iteration of Forcing
theory. Now V\ = (J Va is impossible when Va = V[Gα], Ga C Pa is generic
α<λ
over V, but H(X)
Vχ 
= \J H(X)
Va is reasonable and is enough.
a<\
This is carried out by iterated forcing.
3.1 Definition. Marlins's Axiom for K. MAK. If P is a forcing notion
satisfying the c.c.c. and 2^ C P is dense in P for i < K then there is a directed
subset G of P such that for every i < K we have G Π 1$ ^ 0.
3.2 Observation. In order to have MA^ it suffices to require that the defini-
tion of MAK hold only for forcing notions P such that |P| < K.
Proof. To prove this let P be a forcing notion satisfying the c.c.c. and for ί < K
let Ti C P be a dense subset of P. For i < K, let fa be a function with domain
P such that for p G P we have fa(p) > p and fa(p) G Ii. Let g be a function
with domain P x P such that for p,q G P if p and q are compatible then
9(pι<ϊ) > P><7 Let PQ be any member of P and let Q be the closure of {po}
under the functions fa for i < K and # (i.e. this is its set of elements, the order
is inherited.) We have |Q| < «. Let us see that Ii Π Q is dense in Q. Let p G Q
then /i(p) > p,fa(p) 
G J*, and /^(p) G Q since Q is closed under fa. Now
let us prove that Q satisfies the c.c.c. Let A be an antichain in Q; we claim
that A is also an antichain in P and hence \A\ < NO- Let p, q G A be distinct,
then p, # are incompatible in P since if p, q were compatible in P we would
have g(p, q) > p, g, but Q is closed under g hence also g(p, q) G Q and p, # are
compatible also in Q, contradicting the assumption that A is an antichain in
Q. By the version of MA^ for |P| < K there is a directed subset G of Q such
that G Π 2; Π Q ^ 0 for all i < «. This G is as required. 
D3.2
3.3 Definition. Martin's Axiom MA. (V/c < 2
H°)MA/ς.
MAκ0 is true since if for i < ω the set 2i is a dense subset of P then let us
pick by induction a sequence (pn : n < ω) such that pn G Tn and pn+ι > pn,
then choose G = {pn : n < ω}.

§3. Martin's Axiom and Few Applications 
65
Therefore we have that the CH implies MA. However, usually one means
by MA, MA with the negation of the CH.
3.4 Theorem. If K0 < λ = λ
<λ then there is a forcing notion P, |P| = λ
which satisfies the c.c.c. and such that Ihp "2
K° = λ& MA".
Proof. First we shall show that if λ = λ
<λ, |P| < λ and P satisfies the c.c.c.
then Ihp "λ = λ
<λ". Since P satisfies the c.c.c. and λ > N0, by I 3.6(i) the
ordinal λ is an uncountable cardinal also in V[G].
To prove the theorem we shall give a canonical name to every function
from μ to λ, where μ is a cardinal < λ. The canonical names (for this context)
will be as follows: such a name has the form
{{Pi,n, (i, ji,n)> : i < μ and n < ω}
where j^n < λ, p^n G P. For each P-name r, Ihp "r a function from μ to λ"
choose for each i < μ, a maximal antichain {pi,n : n < ω} C P (possibly with
repetitions) such that pίjfl Ihp
 uτ(ϊ) = ji,n" for some jίjn < λ ( this is possible
as Ii = {p : p Ihp "τ(i) = j" for some j < λ} is a dense open subset of P, as P
satisfies the c.c.c.)( if the maximal antichain is finite we can change notation
or use "possibly with repetitions"). Let
I
f = {(Pt,n,(i,.7i,n)) 'i <μ,n<ω]
Then clearly Ihp "r^ = r". So we can consider only canonical r. What is
their number? For each i < μ we choose two ω-sequences, one from P and
one from λ, so we have < λ^°|P|^
0; and so the numbers of such names is
< (λ*°|P|*°y* < λ^ < λ
<λ = λ. Hence clearly in V
p, λ^ = λ for μ < λ. Now
we return to the proof.
Let S = (SΊtμ : 7 < λ, μ < λ,μ is a cardinal ) be a partition of λ to
disjoint sets each of cardinality λ such that i G 57>μ => i > 7. We shall define
Qi by induction such that Ihp. "the members of Qi are from V" and |P;| < λ.
Assuming we have arrived to α, we know Pa satisfies the c.c.c. by 2.8 (we carry

66 
II. Iteration of Forcing
the definition by 2.5). At stage α all the Q0's, for β < α, are defined, and
hence Pa is defined. Let (<ξ : ξ G Sa,μ) be a list of the canonical names for
the forcing Pa of quasi-orders of μ. We shall use below <ξ in the ξ-th stage
of the construction but since for ξ G Sa^μ we have ξ > a this does not spoil
the induction. But can we find such a list, i.e. is 5α>μ large enough? So how
many such canonical names are there? By the induction hypothesis and 2.9,
\Pa\ < λ. A quasi-order on μ is a function on μ x μ into {0,1}, and as we saw
in I 4.2 the number of canonical names in the forcing Pa is < λ
<λ = λ, since
\Pa <λ.
Now by the choice of S there are unique 7^ < λ and μα < λ (a cardinal)
such that α G SΊa,μa. By the demand above this implies α > 7^, hence
(<ξ : ξ G SΊa,μa) is already well defined. So in particular <a is a P7e>-name
of a partial order on μa. As 7α < α we know PΊa <$ Pa hence <a is also a
Pα-name of partial order on μα.
We define now
i
(μ«, <α:} 
if H~PO "(^cn <α) satisfies the c.c.c."
(1,{(1,1)}) 
otherwise
It is now obvious that lhpα "Qo, is a forcing notion, it satisfies the c.c.c. and
its elements are ordinals " since if this does not hold for (μα, <a) then we have
chosen Qa as (1, {{!,!)}) which obviously satisfies the c.c.c. So we have carried
the induction. Therefore P = P\ also satisfies the c.c.c. by 2.8. Our argument
above that |Pα| < λ works also for α — λ hence |P| < λ. It is true also that
2^° > λ since, as we shall see in the next lemma MAμ => 2^° > μ and of course
2
H° < λ so equality holds.
Let G C P (= Pχ) be generic over V, we should prove V[G\ 
\= "MAμ" for
a given μ < λ. Let μ < λ, and let R be a c.c.c. forcing notion in V[G] and let
Xi, for i < μ, be dense subsets of R in V[G]. As we saw by 3.2 we can assume
without loss of generality that the set of members of R is μ (if | JR| < μ we can
introduce many "copies" of a single member and setting each of them < than
all others on μ). Let J = { ( i , j ) : ί G Ij} C μ x μ. So for some P-names R, J,
Ii we have R = R[G] and I = J[G], J< = J^G], w.l.o.g. lhP "R is a quasi order

§3. Martin's Axiom and Few Applications 
67
on μ and J is a subset of μ x μ and J» = {j : (i, j) e 1} is a dense subset of R"
(we could have add "and R satisfies the c.c.c." and slightly save later). For each
pair ( i , j ) G μ x μ there is a maximal antichain I^j in P which determines the
truth value of R (= i < j and a maximal antichain Jij in P which determines
the membership of (ij) in I. Now U{Dom(p) : p G (Jij<μ^ίj 
U v7z,j} is a
subset of λ in V of cardinality < μ < λ. Now λ = λ
<λ hence λ is regular (since
λ
cfλ > λ) and therefore 7 =
f sup \J{Όom(p) : p G \Jiίj<tΛIijUJij}+l 
< λ, and
1ij,Jij 
<Ξ Pγ for z, j < μ, and so the P-names R and I of R and Z are names
for the forcing notion P7. For the generic subset G of P let G7 = {^^7 : p G G}.
So G7 is a generic subset of P7. This can be shown in any one of the following
two ways. One way is to use the fact that P\ « P7 * P7jλ (see 2.4) and then
G7 is the first component of G C P7 * P7>λ and we have already proved that it
is generic in P7. Another way is to prove directly that GΊ is a generic subset
of P7 using 2. 2 A. Since in computing R[G] — R and I[G] — T only G7 is used
we have R[GΊ] = R, I[GΊ} = I and
V[GΊ] 
1= "R is a quasi-order with set of elements μ& Ii for i < μ is dense
in jβ and P satisfies the c.c.c. ".
Hence there is a p G G7 such that p\\~p^ "R is a quasi-order μ&R satisfies the
6 \μ 
otherwise
then Ihp^ "<* is a quasi-order with set of elements μ satisfying the c.c.c. ".
Therefore there is a ξ G SΊjμ such that <ξ = <*. Since ξ G 57>μ we know
ξ > 7 hence Gξ 2 G7 and since p e G7 we have Qξ[G^] = <ξ[G^] = P.
Pξ+ι = P^ * Q^ hence G* = Gf+i/Gξ is a generic subset of Qξ[G^] = P over
V[G$] (provided that (μ, <ξ) satisfies the c.c.c. in V[Gξ], but this follows from
V[G] 
\= "R satisfies the c.c.c."). For i < μ we know I* € V[GΊ] C V[Gς] and !»
is dense in Qξ[Gξ] = P hence G* HZ* ^ 0, and G* is a directed subset of P.
3.4A. Lemma. MAμ -» μ < 2*°.
Proof. Assume μ > 2
H°. Let P be the forcing notion of all finite functions
from ω into {0, 1}, with proper inclusion as the partial order (i.e. the Cohen

68 
II. Iteration of Forcing
forcing). For each η G
 ω{0, 1} let Iη = {p G P : p <£ η}, and for each n < ω
let In = {p G P : n G Dom(p)}. Obviously each Xη and Jn is dense (and open)
and there are 2^° < μ such sets. By MAμ there is a directed subset G of P
such that GΓ\Iη ^ 0 for each η G
 ω{0, 1} and Gnln ^ 0 for each n<ω. Since
G is directed g = \JG is a, function, since G ΠJn ^ 0 we know n G Dom(^) for
each n < ω, hence g G
 ω{0, 1}. Now GΓ\Xg = 0 since for every p e G we know
P C U ^ — # hence p £ Xg, but this contradicts G Π Ig ^ 0 which we get by
Π3.4A,3.4
Applications o/MA+2^° > NI.
3.5 Theorem. Assume MA and let λ be a cardinal N0 < λ < 2
H° and let
(Ai : i < λ) be a family of infinite pairwise almost disjoint subsets of ω (i.e., if
i ^ j and i,j<\ then Ai Π Aj is finite), and let 5 be a subset of λ. There is
a function / on ω into {0, 1} such that for alH < λ we have: f\Ai =ae 1.4. iff
i G 5, where 1^ is the function on Ai with the fixed value 1 and =ae denotes
that two functions have the same values for all elements of their domain except
(possibly) finitely many.
Proof. Let
P — {f : f is a function such that Dom(/) = Aiλ U 
U Ain U w for some
ii, . . . , in G 5 and a finite w C ω and for 1 < I < n we have f\Ait —ae ^Aif }•
The partial order on P is inclusion.
Since, for each / G P, /
-1[{0}] is finite we can take for each / G P a finite
Wf 2 /~
1[{0}] to play the role of w in the definition of P.
To see that P satisfies the c.c.c. let (/$ : i < NI) be a sequence of members
of P. Since all the / \Wf belong to the countable set of all finite functions from
ω into {0,1} we have i ^ j, i,j < NI such that fi\Wfi 
— fj\Wf.. 
Obviously
f ί \ J f j is a function and a member of P and above /$ and f j , hence /f and /^
are compatible.
We shall specify below λ dense subsets of P (called J*, J^, Jn,i). By MA
there is a directed G C P such that J Π G ^ 0 for each one of the specified

§3. Martin's Axiom and Few Applications 
69
dense sets X. Let g = \J G. Since G is directed every two members of G are
compatible and g is a function from a subset of ω into {0, 1}. We establish now
the following properties of G.
1. Dom(0) = ω. For n < ω let J* = {/ G P : n G Dom(/)}. Now J* is
dense since for / G P if / $ I* then / |J{{n, 1)} G I*. Since G Π T* ^ 0 there
is an / G G such that n G Dom(/), hence n G Dom(/) C Dom(#).
2. If i G 5 then 01^ =αe l^ For i G 5 let J{ = {/ G P : Dom(/) D AJ.
To see that J^ is dense in P let / G P then Dom(/) = A^ U 
U Ain U w where
ii, . . . , zn G S and w is finite. If i G {ή, . . . , in} then / G Ii. If ί ^ {ή, . . . , zn}
then ^ Π Dom(/) C \Jι<ι<n(Ai Γ\ Aie)\Jw and each set participating in this
union is finite. It follows immediately now that / U [(Ai \ Dom(/)) x {!}] G P
and this member of P obviously is above / and belongs to Iif Hence we have
now G Π Ii 7^ 0. Let / G G Π Ji} f\Ai —ae l^ί and since g 2 / we have
3. If i φ S then ^f^4^ obtains the value 0 for infinitely many members of
Ai. Let Iitn = {/ G P : (3m G A.) (m > n&/(m) = 0)}. To see that Ji)Tl is
dense let / G P, and let / be as in the definition of P. Since i £ 5, neccessarily
z ^ {ύ, . . . , zn}, therefore, as we saw above, Dom(/) Π Ai is finite. Since Ai is
infinite there is an m G Ai \ Dom(/) such that m>n. Now / U {(m, 0)} G P
hence / U {{m, 0}} G Jn>i also / < / U {{m, 0)}; hence we have shown Jn>ί is
dense. Since Jn^ Π G ^ 0 there is an / G G such that there is an m G Ai
satisfying m>n and /(m) = 0, hence g(m) = 0. Thus g(m) = 0 for arbitrarily
large m G Ai. 
Π3.5
3. 5 A. Conclusion. M^λ implies 2
λ = 2
H°. 
D3.5>ι
It is natural to ask
3.6 Question. Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.5, is there an / : ω — >
{0, 1} such that f\A> =ae IΛ< for i G S and f\Ai =ae QA{ for i φ SI
We shall return to this later. Note however

70 
II. Iteration of Forcing
3.7 Theorem. In Theorem 3.5 we can omit the requirement "Ai C ω",
requiring only \Ai\ — HQ.
Proof. We let P — {/ : / is a function whose domain is A^ U 
U Ain and
whose range is C {0, 1} where for some n < ω we have i\ G S, . . . ,in € 5,
/~1[{0}] finite }, ordered by inclusion.
Let Pi £ P (for i < HI) be NI conditions, Dom(pi) — \J Aa with m < X
a£ui
is finite, so w.l.o.g. i ^ j => m (~}Uj = u*. By the definition of P, there are
only countably many possible p^ \ (J Aα, so w.l.o.g. pi \ (J Aa = f for every
c*£u* 
C*€H*
z < NI. Let u^ = Pϊ"
1[{0}], it is a finite set so w.l.o.g. i ^ j — > Wi Π Wi =
w* & \Wi\ = £(*). So for each i the cardinality of {j : Dom(pi) Π w^ \ w* / 0}
is at most the cardinality of Dom(pi) hence this set is countable, so w.l.o.g.
i < j => Dom(pi) Π wj C w*.
Now if i < j and pi? p^ are incompatible, then there is x G Dom(/i) Π
Όom(fj) 
such that f i ( x ) ^ /j(x), so 0 G {/i(^),/j(^)} hence x e Wi\J Wj, in
fact x G (MI \ ιy*) U (ιyj \ w*)] but by the previous sentence x φ W j \ w* so
x G Wi \ ιu*; also x ^ Dom(/) (as p» |Όom(/) — PJ fDom(/)) so x G 
\J 
Aa,
aζUj\u*
hence (wi\w*)Γ\( 
\J 
Aa) ^ 0. Let Wi\w* = {xij 
: i < ί(*)}; so rephrasing
α€uj \w*
if i < jί < KI and p^, p^ are incompatible then for some ot(i,j) G u^ \ u* and
£(i, j) < £(*) we have Xi^(ij) G Aα(ί)<7 ). Let D be a nonprincipal ultrafilter on
ω, so for each j G [ω,u;ι) for some lj < £(*) we have {i < ω : ί(i,j) — i} G D
and as Uj is finite, for some OLJ G Uj \ u* we have {i < ω : o;(i,j) = α^} G D.
The number of possible lj is £(*) so for some j(l) 7^ j(2) G [ω,ωι) we have
^'(1) =^(2) Hence
A - {i < ω : ί(i,j(l)) = ej(l) = tj(2) = ί(ij(2)) and
and ot(ij(2)) = otj(2)}
belongs to D, so Aa.(l} Π Aαj.(2) includes {xi,^(1) : i G A} which is infinite,
hence we have 0^(1) =
 aj(2)
 and (^j(i) \^*) Π (wj(2) \
u*) T^ 0 contradicting the
choice of u*. So P satisfies the c.c.c.

§3. Martin's Axiom and Few Applications 
71
Now if i < λ, i φ S and Ai Π (UjGS A?) i
s infinite, then Iijn = {p G
P : Ai Πp~
1({0}) has cardinality > n} is a dense subset of P. Also for each
x G U Ai we have JT^ = {p G P : x G Dom(p)} is a dense subset of P. Lastly
for i G 5 we have Ii = {p G P : Ai C Dom(p)} is a dense subset of P.
So there is a directed G C P such that GΠ Jί)n ^ 0 for i < λ, i φ 5, n < ω
and G Π I; ^ 0 for i G 5, and G Π J* ^ 0 for x G U Ai Let /* be \JfeG f
and /** be the function extending /* with domain \J Ai and being constantly
zero on \J Ai \ \J Ai. It is easy to check /** is as required. 
D3<7
A partial answer to the Question 3.6 is
3.8 Definition. A sequence (Ai : i < λ) of infinite pairwise almost disjoint
subset of ω is called a tree if for any i, j < \ if n G AiftAj, then AiΓin = AjΓ\n.
An example of a tree of 2
H° subsets of the set of all finite sequences of O's
and I's is the set {Γ/ : / G
 ωϊ} where ϊ> - {/fn : n < ω}.
3.9 Theorem. Assume MA, let λ be a cardinal such that NO < λ < 2
N° and let
(Ai : i < λ) be a family of infinite pairwise almost disjoint subsets of ω which
is a tree. Let S C λ then there is an / : ω —> {0,1} such that for alH G S we
have f\Ai —ae IA» and for alH G λ \ 5 we have f\Ai =ae 0^.
Proof. Let
P = {/ : / is a function and for some ΰ,..., in < λ and a finite subset w
oϊω we have Dom(/) = Aiλ U 
\jAin\Jw, and for t = 1,... ,n: f\Ait =ae \Ai&
iϊit^S and f\Ait =ae ®Aίt if iι $ S}.
The partial order on P is inclusion.
Let us prove now that P satisfies the c.c.c. Let (fa : i < HI) be a sequence
of members of P. For fa let Dom(/i) = Aa(iti) U 
U Aa^n^i)) U w^ where
α(i, 1), α(t,2),... < λ. Let ki < ω be such that ki is a strict upper bound of
Wi and for each ^, 1 < t < n(i), A*(M) n ^ΐ contains a number m such that
fi(πι') = fa(m) for every number m
1 G -Aα(ΐ,*) which is > m. There is such
a ki since each /iί-Aα(i,*) has the value 0 almost everywhere or the value 1
almost everywhere. We demand in addition that for 1 < £, m < n(i), i ^ m,

72 
II. Iteration of Forcing
^α(M) n ki 2 A*(i,m) n kί and A*(i,0 n A*(i,m) ^
 fc*5 without loss of generality
we can assume that for all ϊ < NI n(i) is fixed, i.e., n(ϊ) = n for i < NI, fc» is
fixed, i.e., fc* = fc* for i < HI and for 1 < ί < n, the set Aa^^ Π fc* is fixed (for
each f) and /$ ffc* is fixed and w$ is fixed. We shall now prove that for i ^ j
i,j < NI the conditions fi and /j are compatible. Consider the union ΛU/J. If
this union is a function it obviously belongs to P and is above fi and fj (thus
completing the proof of c.c.c.). Suppose it is not a function. Since fi \k* = fj ffc*
there is a k > fc*(fc < ω) such that fi(k) ^ fj(k). Since Wi = Wj C fc* clearly
fc φ Wi — Wj, hence for some 1 < IQ, ί\ < n, fc e Aα(i^0) and fc € Aa^^. Let
mo = Max A^^ Π fc*, since fc Π Aa^^ contains a number m such that we
have (Vm^lm < m' G Aa(itiQ),fi(m') 
= /t(m)], clearly Λ(m0) = /<(fe). Note
fo ?^ι => Aα(<Λ) Π fc* ^ Aα(<ϊ€l) Π fc* - Aa(jM Π fc*. Since (Ai : i < «ι)
is a tree and fc G Aα(^0) Π Aa^^), fc > fc*, we have £Q = ^i and therefore
ra0 = Max(Aα(j)£1) Π fc*) and, as for i, fj(k) 
= /j(mo). Since mo < fc* and
/iffc* = fj\k* we have /i(mo) = fj(^o) hence /i(fc) — /^(A;), contradicting our
choice of fc.
Looking at the proof of Theorem 3.5 it is clear how to choose dense subsets
Z of P such that if G is a directed subset of P which intersects each one of
them then g = \JG has the following properties: Dom(^) = ω, for i G 5 we
have g\Ai =ae ^-Ai
 and for i G λ \ 5 we have g\Ai =ae 0^. 
Da.9
3.10 Theorem. In 3.9 "A; C α;" is not required, provided \Ai\ < HO
Proof. The proof is analogous to the proof of Theorem 3.7. 
Πs.io
§4. The Uniforrnization Property
Let us present now the setting with which we shall deal with the problem 3.6.
4.1 Definition. Let A ~ (Ai : i < a) be a sequence of sets (or we use a
family of sets), each of which is (usually countable and always) infinite and h a

§4. The Uniformization Property 
73
function from Ui<« Ai to ^
ne class °f nonzero ordinals. We say that (A, h) has
the uniformization property if for every family of functions ( f i ' . i < α) such that
fi\Ai^ Ord and /;(α) < ft(α), there is a function / : Ui<α^» ~^ ^rd suc^
that for each i < α the function /; is almost included in / (i.e., included except
for < |Dom(/ΐ)| members a of Dom(/i); which usually means except for finitely
many a G Dom(/)). We shall denote \Ji<aAi with D(Ά), so Dom(h) = D(A).
If h is constantly λ we may write (A, λ) and if λ = 2 we may write A. We shall
say that A is a tree if there is a partial order < on D(A) such that:
a) CD (A), <) is a tree such that for all x £ D(A) the set {y : y < x] is a finite
set linearly ordered by <.
b) For each i the set Ai is a branch in -D(A), i.e., if x £ Ai and y < x then
also y £ Ai and any two members of Ai are Ocomparable. Since each Ai
is infinite and since by clause (a) the tree (D(A), <) is of height < ω, each
Ai is a maximal branch, i.e., it goes all the way up.
We shall denote (D(Ά), <) with T and Tn will denote the n-th level of T,
that is Tn = {x : \{y : y < x\ = n}. For a branch A we denote with (A)[n] the
only member of A in the level n, i.e., the only member of A Π Tn.
4.2 Claim. If A = (Ai : i < α), a > ω\, is a tree in the above sense and
-D(A) C
 ω>2 and the tree order is < then A does not have the uniformization
property.
Proof. So let 77* £
 ω2 be such that ^ = {ηi\n : n < ω} so (Ai)^ — ηi\n. Let
us define the function fa on Ai as follows. fi(fy\n) = ηi(n). The value of fi for
this member of D(A) tells us which way the branch goes at 77* fn, right or left,
since
ηi\(n + l) =η^(ηi(n)}
Assume now that there is a function / uniformizing all //s, or even all f^s for
some uncountable set / C a. For each i £ / let n(i) be such that fi(x) = f(x)
for every x £ Ai of level > n(i). Since / is uncountable there is an n* < ω
such that {i e I : n(ϊ) = n*} is uncountable, we denote this set with /i.
Since D(A) has at most 2
n* members of level n* there is a p £ n 2 such

74 
II. Iteration of Forcing
that /2 — {i € /i : r?Jn* = p} is uncountable; we denote this set with
/2 For all i,j G /2 we have ηi\n* — p — ηjfn* and since A^ and Aj are
branches we have ηι(k) = ηj(k) for all k < n*. For i ^ j such that i, j G
/2 we know that A^ and Aj are different branches hence there is a least I
such that τ^(£) ^ ηj(£), since £ < n* => n(i) = n(j) clearly ί > n* hence
Λfat W - /for*) and /jfo r*) - f ( η j \ £ ) . By the definition of /, and /, we
have ηί\(l+l) = foΓ*Γ fo(£)> = foWΊ/foW) - WΓ (/W)} (since
r/t \f = ηj \f by the minimality of t) = fo |t)
Λ {%(£)} = ηά \(l +1), contradicting
the choice of t. 
D4.2
4.3 Theorem. Assume MA. Suppose A = (Ai : i < λ) is a family of pairwise
almost disjoint countable sets and λ < 2
H°. Then (A, N0) has the uniformization
property provided that:
(*) for every countable A, {i < X : A Π Ai is infinite } is countable.
Proof. Let fa : Ai —> ω for i < λ, and we shall find /, almost extending each
fi. Let P = {/ : there are ή,..., in < λ such that Dom(/) = AilL U 
U Ain,
Range(/) C ω and / almost extend fi for ί = 1,... ,n} ordered by inclusion.
It suffices to prove that P satisfies the c.c.c., and proceed as in e.g. 3.5.;
but this is not hard (proof similar to 3.9). 
U4.3
4.4 Discussion. Theorem 4.2 asserts that if D(A) is a tree which at each node
branches into at most two branches then A does not have the uniformization
property (the fact that in the theorem D(A) was actually a subset of
 ωcl is
obviously irrelevant). The assumption in the theorem that D(A) is a tree can
be replaced by the following weaker assumption. For each i < a let Ai be given
as a sequence of length ω enumerating its elements with no repetitions, which
we write as (α^Qj
 ai,ι > 
•} so {α^n : n < ω} = Aj. The weaker hypothesis is that
A is uncountable and for each sequence (60,..., 671-1} °f members of D(A) the
set {α^n : (α^o, 
5 &ί,n-ι} — (6o» 
> 6n_ι}} has at most two members, i.e., for
all Ai given α^o, .. ,α^,n-ι there are at most two possibilities for a^n. (This
assumption obviously holds if D(A) is a tree with branching as above and each

§4. The Uniformization Property 
75
sequence (α^o^i,!, . . .) is such that a^n = (^)[n] for all n < ω). We shall see
that also under this weaker assumption A does not have the uniformization
property.
Let A be as above. For each i < a let Bi = {{α^o, . . . ,αi,n-ι) •' n < ω},
B = (Bi : ί < a). Now B is obviously a tree which at each node branches to
at most two branches, and for i ^ j we have Bi ^ Bj since Ai ^ Aj. We can
prove by induction on n that {α^n : i < a} has < 2
n elements, hence \J Bi is
i<a
countable. Let ( f i ' . ί < a) where fa : Bi — > {0, 1} be a family of functions which
cannot be uniformized, by claim 4.2. We define a family (gi : i < ωι) where
gi : Ai — > {0, 1} as follows. Let gi(di,n) = /^((α^o, 
,a>i,n)) We shall see that
this family too cannot be uniformized. Suppose g : D(A) — > {0, 1} uniformizes
this family. Define / on D(B) as follows: /({αi,o, 
,αi,n-ι)) — #(αi,n-ι) if
n > 0 and /({)) can be given any value. We shall see that / is an uniformization
of (fi 
: i < a). Given i < a we know that for some k < ω, for all n > k
we have ^(a^n) = g(a^n) hence, by the definitions of gι and / we have
Let us remark now that the theorem is true also for a tree D(A) which
has a bounded branching at each node (and hence also in the more general
case mentioned above). We shall show it here for the case where D(A) C
 w>4,
which is sufficiently general to exhibit the proof of the general case. For a
natural number k let dι(k) denote the coefficient of 2^ in the binary expansion
of /c, di(k) G {0,1}. We define now on the branch Ai of
 ω>4 two functions
/P and // by setting //((4<)[n]) - ^((^)[n+1]), for * = 0, 1. Let f be the
function uniformizing the functions {// : i < a) for ί — 0, 1. Let n*, z and / be
such that / C α, |/| > K0, (Ai)[n*j = z for i G / and //(n) = /^(n) for n > n*
(as in the proof of the theorem). We get now a contradiction from the fact that
for i, j € / i / j there is a least level where ^ and Aj go to their separate ways,
while at each node (from level n* and above ) /° and fl determine completely
the way the branch goes in the next level so Ai and Aj must go the same way.
We deal here exclusively with trees A and other systems where |D(-A)| =
NO- In 3.8 we dealt with a different definition of a tree, namely we called a
family w of subsets of ω a tree if for all x, y G w if n G x Π y then x Πn = y Πn.

76 
II. Iteration of Forcing
In this case let us define <* on ω by k <* ί if k < t and for every A £ w
if i G A then also k G A. It is easily seen that <* is a partial order; the set
{ f c : f c < * n } i s linearly ordered by <* which coincides with < on this set and
that each A e w is a branch in the tree (tt>, <*). Thus a tree in the sense of 3.8
is also a tree in the present sense.
Now let A be a tree as defined here with |£)(A)| = H0 with <* as the
partial order relation of the tree. Identify the members of D(A) with the natural
numbers in such a way that if k <* I then k < t. Now suppose n G Ai Π Aj and
k < n, k € Ai. Since Ai is a branch of the tree we have k <* n or n <* k] n <* k
would imply n < fc, contradiction; hence A: <* n. Since also A^ is a branch,
n G A; and k <* n we get also fc G Aj. Since this works in both directions we
have Ai Π n = Aj Π n. Thus a tree in the present sense is isomorphic to a tree
in the sense of Definition 3.8.
4.5 Theorem. Assuming MA+2*° > HI. Let A = (Ai : i < HI), Ai =
{aiίn 
: n < ω} be a set of HI countably infinite pairwise distinct sets such
that |jD(A)| = H0. T/ien there is an uncountable subset W C HI which has the
property that for every sequence (&o, 
, bn-ι) the set {α^n : (α^o, 
, αi,n-ι)
= (&0j 
j &n-ι)j and i G VF} has at most two members. As a consequence A
does not have the uniformization property, since A\W does not have it.
Proof. Remember Ai is {^,05^,1, 
•} (with no repetitions). Let
P = {w C HI : w is finite and for all (ί>o, 
, &n-ι) we have
|{αn,i : i G w and (αί)0, 
- - , fli.n-i) = {&o, - 
- , &n-i)}| < 2}
and P is partially ordered by inclusion. By deleting at most HO members of A
we can make sure that for alH < &ι and n < ω:
[For every finite sequence (60, 
, bn-ι) of members of D(Ά), and there are HO
such sequences, if 0 < \{j < HI : (α^o, . . , flj,n-ι) = (bo, . 
, &n-ι}}| < NO we

§4. The Uniformization Property 
77
delete all the Aj's with j in this set, so altogether we deleted count ably many
sets.]
Let us see now that P satisfies the c.c.c. Let (wt : t < HI) be a sequence
of members of P. Let us write wt as {4»4» 
>^n(t)} ^et ^W ^
e tne ^east
number fc such that the sequences (α^t >0, a$t ? 1,..., α^t )A._1) for r = 1,..., n(£)
are pairwise distinct. Without loss of generality we can assume that for all
t < HI we have n(t) = n, k(t) — k and for each r = 1,... , n the sequence
(α t ?o, &i\,,ι, 
, fli* ,fe-ι) is fixed for all t < HI, we shall now see that for s, t < HI
we have ws(Jwt £ P and hence we have ι<;s and u^ are compatible. Proving
ws U Wt G P is equivalent to showing that for all sequences (60, 
, &m-ι) we
have |{α<ιm : i G ws U wt and {α<|0,... ,αi,m-ι> = (&o, 
,&m-ι)}| < 2. If
m < k then the initial (m + 1)- tuples (α^o, 
. , α^m-i^m) of the A^s for
* £ ^s U ^t are exactly these (ra+1) - tuples for i £ ws since for m = 1,..., n we
have (αi ^o,. 
,α^^_ι) = (α^o, . - ,α^,fc-ι), hence {αί>m : i G ιyβU^t
 and
{α^Oj-.-jα^m-i) = (60,...,ί>m-ι)} = {aiiTn : i G ws and {α<ϊ0,... ,αi,m-ι) =
(60,. ., 6m-ι)}ϊ and the latter set has at most two members since ws € P. If
m > k then since the initial sequences of length k of all Ai for ί G ws are all
distinct, and the same holds for all i G wt so (60, 
,δm-ι) can be an initial
sequence of Ai for at most one i e ws and at most one i e wt so that |{i G
^sU^ί : (αi,o, 
,αi,m-ι) = (ί>o,---,ί> m_ι>}| < 2 hence |{oίfm : i G ws\Jwt,
and (α^o,..., αi.m-i) — (&o» 
> &m-ι)}| < 2. So P satisfies the c.c.c.
For ε < HI let Iε be the subset of P, Iε = {w e P : (3j > ε)[j G w]}.
Let us prove that Iε is a dense subset of P. Let w G P and let fc be such that
the sequences (αΐ,θ)
αz,ι> 
ι
ai,k-ι) are all distinct for different i G w. Take a
fixed i € w (the case where w = 0 is trivial ). By our assumption there are HI
ordinals j such that (07,0> 
» o j.k-i) — (
αΐ,o> 
»αi,jfc-ι)» hence there is such a
j > max(iϋ), ε. We shall see that w U {j} G P, to prove that we have to show
that for all (6 0,..., bm_ι)
(*) 
K
α7,m :7^^UO'} and (α7,o, 
,α7,m-ι) = {&o, 
,δm-ι)}| < 2.
If 77i < fc then since the first fc members of Aj are the first k members of A»,
where ϊ E w, the left side of (*) remains unchanged if w U {j} is replaced by w
and since the inequality holds for w, as ιu G P, it holds also for w(J{j}. If m > k

78 
II. Iteration of Forcing
then, since the sequences {α7)o>
tt7,:b 
?
α7,fc-ι) are all distinct for different
7 G w there is at most one jew such that (α7)0,..., α7,n_ι) = (60, 
, &m-ι)>
hence there are at most two 7 G w U {j} which satisfy this equality and (*)
follows immediately.
By MA there is a directed subset G of P which intersects each Xε. Therefore
W = (JG is a cofinal subset of KI. We take now A* = (At 
: i e W). We
still have to prove that for all (60,... ,6m-ι) we have \{aiιrn : i G W and
{αί>0, - - , αi,m-ι) = (δo, 
- , &m-i)}| < 2. Assume that for some (60, 
- - , 6m-ι)
this set has three members αΐl)m,αi25m,αί3)m where ή, 12,^3 G W. Since W —
[JG and G is directed we have 11,12^3 € ^ f°r some w £ G C P. Then we
have |{α;)m : ί e w and (α^o,.. -, αi,m-ι) = (δo> 
- , ί>m-ι)}| > 3, contradicting
tϋ G P. 
D4.5
4.6 Theorem. It is consistent that there is a tree A — (Aa : a < ωι) such
that |Z) (A) I = NO and A has the uniformization property.
4.6A Remark. We can phrase a condition on forcing notions preserved by FS
iteration (it depends on an A with the relevant property) and by this prove the
consistency of an axiom; see [Sh:98].
Proof. Let T be a tree with ω levels, |T| = N0, Tn (the n'th level) is finite for
n < ω and for all x G Tn we have \{y G Tn+ι : y > x}\ > T
1*. We shall obtain
a generic extension of V in which there is a tree A of length NI which has the
uniformization property. We saw above (in 4.4) that if the branching of a tree
at each node is bounded the tree does not have the uniformization property.
Here we shall see that if at level n each node branches to 2
n branches the tree
may have the uniformization property. There is a gap here which one should
narrow or even eliminate.
First one introduces NI generic branches of T by the following set QQ of
conditions
QQ = {/ : f is a finite function on ω\ x ω such that:
(α,n> G Dom(/) => /(α,n) G Γn,

§4. The Uniformization Property 
79
(α, π + 1) e Dom(/) => (α, n) G Dom(/),
/(α,n) < /(α,n 4-1) (when defined)}
The partial order relation on <2o is inclusion. If G is a generic subset of
Qo let F = (JO, ^α - {^(a,ra) : n < ω] and A = (Aa : α < ωι). Now A
will be the tree which has the uniformization property (it is obvious that for
a ^ β, α, β < ωι we have Aa ^ Aβ, since the subset {/ G Qo : 3n[(α, n), {/?, n)
e Dom(/) & /(α, n) ^ /(/?, n)}} of Q0 is dense in Q0) '
The next step is to carry out an iterated forcing so that at each step a
different system g = (gi 
: ί < ωι) where ^ : A{ —> {0,1} gets uniformized.
Eventually we obtain that A has the uniformization property if all appropriate
g's appear. We shall describe first only a single step of this iterated forcing.
The conditions we use now are the following. Let g be a name of a system
of functions as above in the forcing <2o We define Q(g) = {h : h is a finite
function from HI to ω and for every α, β G Dom(/ι) the functions ga \{x G Aa :
height(x) > h(a)} and gβ\{x G Aβ : height(x) > h(β)} are compatible }.
The partial order relation on Q(g) is inclusion. This forcing is done over
V[Go]> where GO is a generic subset of Qo Let G be a generic subset of Q(g)
and H = IJG. We can now define the uniformizing function g : T —> {0,1}
as follows. For x G T if x G Aa and heigth(x) > ff(a) then g(x) = ga(x)\ if
x belongs to no Aa such that H(a) < height(x) we define g ( x ) arbitrarily. If
x G Aa, height(x) > H(ά) and also, β ^ α, x G Aβ and height (x) > H(β) then
since G is directed and # = |JG there is an h G G such that α,/3 G Dom(/ι),
Λ(α) - ίί(α) and h(β) = H(β). Since h G Q(§), h(ά),h(β) < height(x) we, by
the definition of Q(g), have ga(x) = Qβ(x), so that g(x) is well defined. It is
obvious from the definition of g that it uniformizes all (fo's for α < KI.
Let us consider now the set Qo * Q(θ)
 and prove that it satisfies the c.c.c.
Let W be an uncountable subset of Qo * Q(<j) and we shall prove that there are
two distinct members which are compatible. Each (p, q) G W C Q0 * Q(d) is
first extended as we shall tell. If two of the extended conditions will turn out to
be compatible then the corresponding original conditions are compatible too.
First we extend p to p\ which decides exactly the value of q (q is the name

80 
II. Iteration of Forcing
of a finite subset of ω\ x α;), so we shall now regard q as a finite function
from ωι to ω and not as a name. Then we extend p\ to /?2 so that the
Dom'(p2) = {& 
'- (3τΊ)[(α,n) G Dom(p2)]} (which is the set of branches on
which p "speaks" ) will include the domain of q. Let up denote Dom^(p)
i.e., the set of indices of the branches about which p contains information.
For a sufficiently large c < ω we can extend p<2 to p% so that c > |up2|,
Dom(pa) = UP2 x {0, ...,c} and ps(^c) ^ p3U,c) for ί,j G UP2 such that
i φ j (i.e., different i G UP2 are indices of branches of A which branch off from
each other at a level up to level c), and c > q(ϊ) for i G up. ^From now on we
shall assume that all the members of W have the properties of (pz,q)
Using the standard technique we can delete members from W so as to
obtain a set W with the following properties. There are a c < α;, a finite
subset v C HI; finite sequences υ
a = (jf, 
,Jn) f°
r α < ^1 °f n different
members such that the sets {jf, •-,.?£} (which we shall also call v
a) are
disjoint from each other for different α's and are disjoint from v; a function
p with domain v x {0, . . . , c}, a function p with domain {1, . . . , n} x {0, . . . , c},
a partial function q with domain υ and a partial function h on {!,..., n}
such that W — {(Pa,qa) 
ot < HI} and Dom^α) = (υ (J va) x {0, ...,c},
P - pa\(v x {0,...,c}), pαr(uα x {0, . . . , c}) - {((j£,m), p(fc,m)> : 1 <
k < n} and g < qa and qa\Q = { ( J k ' h ( k ) ) : 1 < fc < n}. The members
p(l,c),/o(2,c), . . . ,p(n, c) and p(α,c) (for α G V) of Γc are pairwise distinct
(by the properties of (p, q) obtained above). Above each one of them there are
2 
2
at least 2
C different members of TC+I. Let (tk,t '• 1 < I < 2
C } be a sequence
of 2
C different members of Tc+ι which are above p(fc, c). For α, £ = 1, . . . , 2
C
let ^«^ — PαLJ{(0?5
c+ I))*M) : ^ — ^ — n) Notice that for different α's
the initial parts of the branches with indices jf , . . . , j% were the same, but
this is not the case for the p*^'s since we introduced different branchings at
level c + 1. Let p\ — p\t for H — 1, . . . , 2
C . Since all the p^s behave the same
way on υ and have otherwise disjoint domains also Uκ^<2
c2 P*t ^ Qv Extend
this condition to a condition p* which determines the values of gjc^(p(m,k))
2
for all 1 < α < 2
C , 1 < m < n and 1 < k < c. If we keep α fixed and

§4. The Uniformization Property 
81
let A:, ?rι vary we have here 2
C functions on a set with at most n x c < c
2
members into {0, 1}, hence there must be two different β ^ 7, 1 < /?,7 < 2
C
such that g.β(p(k,m)) = g^(ρ(k,πί)} for all 1 < fc < n, 1 < ra < c (they
~J|C 
~ fc
are Qo-names but we mean the values p* force for them). We claim that
(p*,qβ U ςr7) e Qo * Q(g), hence (pβ,qβ) and (p7,#7) are compatible. What
may prevent (p*,qβ U g7) from being a condition when each of (p*,<?β) and
(p*,ς7) is (since (pβ,qβ) and (pΊ,qΊ} are conditions and p/? < p*, p7 < p*
by the choice of p*)? There may be fcι,ra, fc2, such that m > /ι(fcι), m >
'm) such that #?£ (P(
fcι»
m)) 7^ ^2(p(
fc2,m)) (where
F = Uί/ : /
 G (?Qoh see tne choice of the A/s). But by the choice of p*
this can occur only for m < c, so we get p(fcι,m) = p(A:2,m). This is the
case where the corresponding functions ^j give different values to the same
member p(kι,m) = p(/C2,m) of T and this member is above the place in the
two branches with indices j^ and j^2 where the Uniformization is supposed to
occur. By our choice of β and 7 we have g.β (ρ(k2, m)) = Q»Ί (p(/C2, m)), hence
7fc2
 
fc2
g.β (p(fcι,m)) 7^ σ./3 (/9(A/2,m)) while p(k\,m) — p(A;2,m), but this shows that
7fcl
 
Jfc2
(p*,Qβ) is not a condition in Qo * Q(τ)> which is a contradiction.
This of course does not yet prove Theorem 4.6. If we want to carry on the
iteration, somehow imitating the scheme of Martin's axiom, we should do two
things: first isolate some property of (Ai : i < ω\) in V
Qo, a property which is
the "reason" why Q(g) is c.c.c. Then we should formulate a property of forcing
notion which would ensure the property of (Ai : i < ω\) is preserved, at last
we should show by induction on α: < ω^ that the iteration of Q(g) over all
names for candidates has the desired property. Where by candidate we mean a
9=(9i'Λ <ωι),9i : Ai -> {0,1}.
Assume T was chosen such that:
(Vm)(3n > m)(Vx G Γn)[|{y G Γn+1 : y > x}\
What we get from the genericity of the HI -branches is:
0 for every k < ω and distinct A\ for i < ω\, i < k from A there are n < ω,
and pairwise distinct αi, . . . , α^ G Tn and w C ω\ such that:

82 
II. Iteration of Forcing
(i) di — (Af)[nj for every i G w
(ii) i + j G w =
(iii) H > Π 2l^
<α*}l - i(α0, . . . ,ak-ι) (the i is for notational conve-
£<k
nience)
For ^ - (ga : a < cjj.), ga : Aa -> {0, 1} the forcing notion Q(g) is defined
above, let (Pa,Qa : α < α*} denote a Finite Support iteration of length α*
such that Qo is as above and for a > 0, Qα = Q(g ) uniformizes a candidate
g 
where #α = (^ : ξ < ωι) such that \\-Pa "g
a is ^candidate ". We prove by
a
induction on α < α* the following condition.
(*)α : if k < ω and pi G Pα, A\ G A for i < ωi, £ < fc, then Vm < ω^n < ω,
n> HI 3α0, . . . , dk-1 G T 3w C α i such that
(i) α^ - (^<)[n] for £ < fc, i G iί; and α^ = α^2 <Φ (Vi G w)(A^ - Af
2).
(ii) for i ^ j G it; we have (A|)[n+1] ^ (^)[n+ι] or Af - Λ^.
(iii) |tί;| > i(α0, . . . ,α f c_ι)
(iv) 3g G Pα such that Pi < q for each i G iu
Note that (*)α =^> Pα satisfies the c.c.c. So if we succeed to prove that, the
rest of the proof is like the proof of 3.4. Also note that proving (*)α w.l.o.g.
for each i the sequence (A\ : i < k) is without repetitions. So let us carry the
induction.
Case (1) α = 0 nothing to prove.
Case (2) cf(α) > N2. Then for some β < a we have: i < ω\ => Pi G Pβ so
(*)β gives the conclusion.
Case (3) α limit, cf (a) = ω.
Let α = \Jn<ω
an ^en ^
or eac'1 * < ωι there is n(i) < ω such that:
Pi € Pan(ί) so for some n we ^ave K* : n(*) = n}| = NI then (*)αrι(i) gives the
conclusion.
Case (4) a limit, cf (a) = HI so a = Ui<ωι
 a*
 an(^ (
α* : * < ω^ is increasing
and continuous; for each i we let h(i) = Min{j : Όom(pi\oti) C α^-} this is a
pressing down function on the set of limit ordinals < ωi, so by Fodor's Lemma
for some i0 we have: S
 d= {ί : h(ί) < aio} is stationary. W.l.o.g. pi G Ptti+1,
let p = Pi\cti, so p G Pαίo Now for any finite w C ω\, if {p( 
: ί G w} has

§5. Maximal Almost Disjoint Families of Subsets of ω 
83
an upper bound p* in Pίo, then {pi 
: i G w} has a common upper bound p
in Pa: p* U \J (pi\[θίi,Qίi+ι)). Hence by (*)αίo (which holds by the induction
iζw
hypothesis) we can complete the proof of (*)Q.
Case (5) a = 0 + 1.
If a + 1 this is clear, so assume 0 > 0. Remember that Q(g ) is the set
~ β
of functions / such that : Dom(/) is a finite subset of ω\ and for ξ G Dom(/),
f ( ξ ) < ω and
(VC, e G Dom(/))(Vn) [/(£) <n/\ f ( ξ ) < n
W.l.o.g. for each i < ω\ we have /? G Dom(pj), so p;(/3) is (the name of ) a
finite function from ω\. W.l.o.g. Pi(0) is an actual function, and |Dom(pi(/3))| is
constant so let Dom(pΐ(/3)) = {A\ : k < t < k(ϋ)} (where k comes from the case
of (*)α we are trying to prove) w.l.o.g. pi(β)(A\) depends on I only. We apply
(*)0 to fc(0), pi\β G Pβ and A\(i < ω\,l < fc(0)); we thus get n, at(i < fc(0))
Wo and ςo Clearly we can find q\ G P/3, q$ < q\ such that for each i G WQ?
k < I < fc(0) and m < n we have #ι Ihp^ "gΊ(m) = Ci(£, m)" where Af = ^47; of
course Q(£, m) G {0, 1}. The number of possible functions is ϊ(αjk, . . . ,αfc(o)-ι)
as \WQ\ > i(αo, . 
, αjfe(o)-ι) so f°
r some c, w = {i G υ o : Ci — c} has cardinality
> i(αo,...,αfc-ι). Now g - gi U {{/?,UίGυ;o Pi (/?))} € ^<* and g, at(ί < fc), w
exemplify (*)α. 
U4.6
§5. Maximal Almost Disjoint Families
of Subsets of ω
5.0 Definition. By a mad ( maximally almost disjoint) subset of P(ω) we
mean an infinite subset F of P(ω) such that for all x, y G F we have |x| = K0
but \xΓ\y\ < HO and for every z G P(ct ) there exists x £ F such that |zΠx| = NQ

84 
II. Iteration of Forcing
5.1 Claim. There is a mad subset of P(ω) of cardinality 2
H°.
Proof. Replace ω by the set of all nodes of the full binary tree, i.e., with the
set of all finite sequences of O's and 1's. This tree has 2^° branches and every
two of them are almost disjoint. Extend the set of all branches to a mad set by
Zorn's lemma. 
D5.ι
5.2 Observation. No countable subset ofp(ω) is mad.
Proof. Let (α^ : i < ω) be a sequence of infinite pairwise almost disjoint subsets
of ω. For each i < ω we have α» \ (Jj<i
 aj — aΐ\ Uj<i
 aj n α*>
 and since each
set a,j Π at is finite and α$ is infinite there is an #$ G a$ \ (Jj<i aj For j < i we
have Xj £ α^ while #$ ^ α^ hence Xj ^ £$, therefore the set b — {xi : i < ω} is
an infinite set. Since for j < i, Xi φ dj we have b Π Q.J C {x0,..., Xj}. Thus the
intersection of b with each αj is finite and therefore {α^ : i < ω} is not mad.
Π5.2
So if the continuum hypothesis holds then there are mad sets of cardinality
2
H° = N]_ and of no other cardinality. If the continuum hypothesis does not hold
we are faced with the question whether there are mad sets of cardinalities > NI
but <2
H°.
5.3 Theorem. Martin's axiom implies that every mad set is of cardinality 2
H°.
Proof. Let A be an infinite set of infinite pairwise almost disjoint subsets of ω,
|^4| < 2
H°. Let PA = {(α,ί) : α is a finite subset of ω and t is a finite subset of
.4}. For p — (α, t) and <? = (6, s) in PA we define: p < q if: α C 6, s C ί and for
each u e t we have 6 Π u = α Π u. Now < is easily seen to be a partial order.
The meaning of the condition (α, t) is that the set w which we are constructing
will include α, but for every u G t we will have w Π u = a Π u, so no additional
members of u will be in w (other than those already in α).
If (α,ί), (α, s) are in PA then, obviously, also (α,t(Js) £ PA hence (α,ί)
and (α, s) are compatible. Therefore incompatible members of PA must have
different first components. Since there are only H0 finite subsets of ω every

§5. Maximal Almost Disjoint Families of Subsets of ω 
85
subset of PA of pairwise incompatible members must be countable, and the
c.c.c. holds.
For every u G A let Iu = {(α, t) G PA : u G t}. Now Iu is a dense subset
of PA since for every (b,s) G PA we have (b,s U {u}} G Iu. For n < ω let
^n = {(<M) £ ^U : (3fc > n)k G α}. Let us prove that Jn is a dense subset of
PA- Let (6,5) G PΛ Since s is finite and A infinite there is a v G A \ s. Now
v n (U
 5) — v n Ul^ Π u : u G 5} is finite hence v \ \J s is infinite. Let k G v \ \J s,
k > n, we shall see that (6 U {fc},s) > (6,5). To prove that let u G 5; now
(6 U {k}) Γ\u = bΓ\u since k £ \J s hence k φ u.
By Martin's axiom there is a directed subset G of PA which intersects each
Tu and each Xn. Let A be the union of the first components of G. Let u G «A,
let (α, s) G Zn Π G, then u G 5. We shall see that A Π u = α Π u and hence A Π u
is finite. We know (α, 5) G G so α C A hence αfΊ u C AlΊu; assume that m G A,
then m G 6 for some (6, £) G G. Since G is directed there is an (c, r) e G such
that {c, r) > (o, 5), (6, ί) so m G b C c but m G u by its choice so ra G c Π u.
Since u G 5 and (c, r) > (α, s) we have u Π c = u Π α, hence m G w Π α. So we
have proved 
raG^4nu=>raGαΓlu; 
hence yl Π u C a Π u', so by a previous
sentence A Π it = α Π u, hence A Π n is finite. A is infinite since for every n we
know G contains a member (α,ί) of Xn hence A contains a number > n.
Thus we have constructed an infinite set A which is almost disjoint from
every member of A> and hence A is not mad. 
D5.3
5.4 Theorem. If V does not satisfy the continuum hypothesis and λ is a
cardinal such that KI <λ<2
H° inV then V can be generically extended by a
c.c.c. extension which preserves also 2
K° (automatically it still is a cardinal) to
an extension V[G] where there is a mad subset of P(ω) of cardinality λ.
Proof. We start in V with a sequence (Aa : a < λ) of almost disjoint subsets
of ω (there is such by claim 5.1). Now we proceed with a system of FS iterated
forcing of length ω\ as follows. At step a we assume that we have constructed
a sequence (Ai : i < λ 4- α) of pairwise almost disjoint subsets of ω. We take
Fa = {Ai : i < λ + α} and we use at this step the forcing notion PFa, where

86 
II. Iteration of Forcing
PA is as in the proof of Theorem 5.3, and we introduce by means of it a new
infinite subset A\+0ί of ω almost disjoint with each member of Fa. (This follows
immediately from the proof of Theorem 5.3.) Since Ppa is a c.c.c. forcing, by
2.8 our iterated forcing is c.c.c. For Ppa we can use, instead of pairs (α,t)
where a is a finite subset of ω and t is a finite subset of Fα, such pairs where
t is a finite subset of λ + a and each i G t stands for the corresponding Ai.
Thus each Ppa will consist of elements from V (while its set of elements is not
necessarily in V), and the cardinality of Ppa is therefore Max(α, λ) = λ. For
the iterated forcing we can use only standard names in the set P of conditions,
hence \P\ = λ. Since P is a c.c.c. forcing, standard arguments (as in 3.4) show
that \P(ω)\(
yW = [(λ)*°]
y < (λ"*)
vM < [(2*°)*°]
vr - [2*°]
v, hence in V[G\
we know 2
H° is the same as in V.
Finally let us prove that {Aa : α < λ + ωι} is a mad subset of P(ω).
The "almost disjoint" is trivial. Let A C ω, A G V[G\. For each n G ω let In
be a maximal antichain in P of conditions which decide n G A, where A is a
name of A. Since P satisfies the c.c.c. we know \In\ — NO- Let J = \Jn<ωZn, so
|J| = N0. For each q G J the set Dom(ς) is a finite subset of ωi, hence there is
an α < α i such that for all q G J we have Dom(g) C a. If Gα is the component
of G in the iterated forcing up to and not including α, we have A G V[Gα].
We shall see that A Π Aβ is infinite for some β < λ + a which establishes that
{Ai : i < X + ωι} is mad. Moreover, we shall show that if A Π Aβ is finite for
every β < X -f a then A n Aα is infinite. This follows from the following lemma,
which ends the proof. 
Π5.4
5.5 Lemma. Let F be a set of pairwise almost disjoint subsets of α;, and let
B C ω be such that for every finite subset F* of F the set B \ \J F^ is infinite.
Let G be a generic subset of Pp over V and let A be the union of the first
components of the members of G, then A Π B is infinite.
Proof. For every n let
In = {(α,t) GPF : (3m>n)[mG5nα]}.

§5. Maximal Almost Disjoint Families of Subsets of ω 
87
We shall see that In is dense. Let (b, t) G Pp. By our assumption B \ \Jt is
infinite hence it contains an m > n. Now (α U {m},t) G In and since m φ \Jt
(αϋ{m}, t) < (α, t). Since In is dense, G contains some (α, t) G Tn, hence A D α
and so ^4 contains an m G 5 such that m > n. Since this holds for every n < α;
we have ^4 Π B is infinite. 
DS.S
Discussion. We shall prove that essentially all countable forcing notions are
equivalent. If one carries out the proof of the last theorem for the case where
a — HI, but one starts with a sequence (Ai : i < ω) of pairwise almost disjoint
subsets of ω then each Pp is a countable forcing and therefore equivalent to the
addition of a Cohen real. Thus the FS iterated addition of HI Cohen reals yields
an extension of V with a mad set of cardinality HI. But the iterated extension
of HI Cohen reals is the same as the simultaneous addition of HI Cohen reals
(as in the proof of I 3.2).
5.6 Theorem. Every two countable forcing notions where above every condi-
tion there are two incompatible conditions are equivalent.
Proof. Let P be the set of all finite sequences of natural numbers ordered by
proper inclusion and let Q be a countable forcing as in the theorem. We can
assume that Q has a minimal element 0g (or change the proof slightly). We
shall show that P and Q are equivalent by constructing an isomorphism F from
P onto a dense subset of Q. We shall define F(τ/), for η G P, by induction on
the length of η. Let F(()) = 0g, where 0g is the minimal member of Q. Let
Q = {qn : n < ω}. We shall take care to satisfy the following in the definition.
(i) For every η £ P the set {F(η
Λ (i)) : i < ω} is a maximal set of incompatible
members of Q greater than F(η).
(ii) For every n there is an η G P of length n + 1 such that F(η) > qn.
It is easy to check that this suffice. We assume, as an induction hypothesis,
that {F(η) : ίg(η) = n} is pre-dense in P. Since, by clause (i), for every η G
U
 iω we have {F(η
Λ (i)) : i < ω} is a maximal set of incompatible members of
ί<n

88 
II. Iteration of Forcing
Q above F(η), the set (F(z/) : tg(v) = n] is a maximal antichain of Q. To define
F(η~ (i)), for alH < ω and η G
 nω, define a set J* of pairwise incompatible
members of Q above F(ry) as follows. If ίg(η) = n and F(η) is compatible
with qn let s0 > F(η),qn (in Q) otherwise let s0 > F(η). Let ίι,sι be two
incompatible members of Q greater than s0 and, by induction, let tn+ι, sn+ι be
two incompatible members of Q greater than sn. Take Xη — {tn : I < n < ω},
Iη is a set of pairwise incompatible members, and if F(η) is compatible with
qn then each member of Iη is > qn. Let J* be a maximal set of pairwise
incompatible members above F(η) which includes Tη. Now Z* is countable,
since Q is, and we define the F(η~ (i))'s so that {F(η* (i)) : i < ω} — I*. Since
(ii) holds {^(77) : η G P} is a dense subset of Q. 
D5.6
5.7 Discussion. Using the method of Theorem 5.4 we can extend V so that
in the extension for every λ such that H0 < λ < 2
N° there is a mad subset of
cardinality λ but 2*° is preserved. To do this let (λα : α < μ) be the cardinals
HO < λ < 2
N° in increasing order. For a < μ we construct a mad subset
{A? : i < λα + ωι} of P(ώ) as follows. {Af : i < λα} € V is a family of
pairwise almost disjoint subsets of ω. We extend V by iterating μ x ωi times
and at the step of ordinal μ x i + α we add the set Λ"+ί C ω as an almost
disjoint set of {A° : j < Xa + i} as in the proof 5.5: forcing by P{Λ«:j <λα+i}

III. Proper Forcing
§0. Introduction
In Sect. 1 we introduce the property "proper" of forcing notions: preserving
stationarity not only of subsets of ω\ but even of any S C <S<κ0(λ). We then
prove its equivalence to another formulation.
In Sect. 2 we give more equivalent formulations of properness, and show
that c.c.c. forcing notions and Ni-complete ones are proper.
In Sect. 3 we prove that countable support iteration preserves properness
(another proof, for a related iteration, found about the same time is given in
IX 2.1; others are given in X §2 (with revised support) and XII §1 (by games)).
Also we give a proof by Martin Goldstern (in §3).
In Sect. 4 it is proved that starting with V with one inaccessible ft, for
some forcing notion P: P is proper of cardinality ft, do satisfy the ft-c.c. and
l^p "if Q is a forcing notion of cardinality NI, not destroying stationarity of
subsets of ω\ and Ti C Q is dense for i < ω\, then for some directed G C ζ),
/\i<ωι G Γ\Ii ^ $". For this we need to give a sufficient condition for LimQ to
satisfy the ft-c.c. (where Q — (Pi, Qi : i < ft) is a CS iteration of proper forcing
such that for each i < ft we have Ihp. "\Qi\ < ft"). For this we show that the
family of hereditarily countable conditions is dense in each P, so i < ft => Pi
has density < ft.

90 
III. Proper Forcing
In sections 5, 6 we present known theorems on speciality of Aronszajn
trees.
In Sect. 7 we prove: for V satisfying CH there is an M2-c.c. proper P such
that Ihp " ifϊoΐ i <ω\, the set AI C ω\ is countable with no last element and
< sup(Ai), then for some club C of u^ we have i < ω\ => sup(CΠ Ai) <
In Sect. 8 we prove the consistency of the Kurepa hypothesis (first proved
by Silver [Si67] and see more Devlin). This is a proof from the author's lecture
in 1987.
§1. Introducing Properness
1.1 Discussion. When we iterate we are faced with the problem of obtaining
for the iteration the good properties of the single steps of iteration. Usually,
in our context, the worst possible vice of a forcing notion is that it collapses
MI. The virtue of not collapsing MI is not inherited by the iteration from its
single components. As we saw, the virtue of the c.c.c. is inherited by the FS
iteration from its components. However in many cases the c.c.c. is too strong
a requirement. We shall look for a weaker requirement which is more naturally
connected to the property of not collapsing MI, and which is inherited by
suitable iterations.
We shall now study a certain generalization of the concepts of a closed un-
bounded and a stationary subset oiω\. They were introduced and investigated
by Jech and Kueker.
1.2 Definition. For A uncountable let SNO(^) = {s : 5 C A, \s\ < M0} Let
W C <SNO (A) be called closed if it is closed under unions of increasing (by C of
course) ω-sequences. W C SNO(A) is called unbounded (in «Sκ0(-A)) if for every
s G Sχ0(A) there is a t G W such that t 2 s. If W C 5«0(A), the closure of W
is cl(W) = { U *n : sn € W and sn C sn+1 for n < ω}, (clearly W C cl(W)
n<ω
and cl(W) is closed).

§1. Introducing Properness 
91
1.3 Lemma. The intersection of NO closed unbounded subsets Wί, i < ω, of
< S N A is a closed unbounded subset of
Proof. Since each set Wi is closed, the intersection Πi<ωWi is obviously closed
too. Let us prove now that Γ\i<ωWi is unbounded too. Let s € <Sκ0(yl); we have
to prove the existence of a set t 2 s such that t G Γ\i<ωWi. We shall define
a sequence (sa : a < ω
2) of members of <S^0(^4) as follows. Let SQ — s, for
α > 0, a = ω - k + 1 choose sa as an arbitrary member of Wι which includes
Up<aSβ € SNOCA); it exists as Wt is unbounded. We take now t = (Ja<ω2Sa.
Obviously t D SQ = s. For a fixed i < ω and every α < u;
2, let α = ω k + <£ then
α < α;(fc -f 1) + z, hence, by the definition of sω(fc+i)+i we have sα C sω(k+i)+i
Therefore t = Uα<α;25α = Uk<ωSω.k+i The sequence (sω.k+i : k < ω) is a C-
increasing ^-sequence of members of Wi, and since Wi is closed also its union
t is in Wi. Thus ί G Γ\<u;Wΐ, which is what we had to prove. 
Dχ.3
1.4 Definition. By the last lemma we know that the closed unbounded subset
of <Sκ0(A) generate an Ni-complete filter, namely the filter of all subsets of
<SNO (A) which include a closed unbounded set. We denote this filter with DNO (A)
or T><^1(A) or D(A). A subset of Sκ0(A) is called stationary if it meets every
closed unbounded subset of <$N0(yi), i.e., if it meets every member of T>χ0(A).
We shall now present the lemma which says that for \A\ = NI, <S^0(A) and
£>NO (A) do not differ significantly from ω\ and the filter *Dωι generated by the
closed unbounded subsets of ω\ .
1.5 Lemma. A subset of ωι is a closed unbounded subset of ω\ (in the usual
sense of a closed unbounded subset of an ordinal) iff it is a closed unbounded
subset of <SNO(CJI).
Proof. Easy. 
Πι.5
We shall now introduce a more restricted set of generators for Ί)(A).

92 
III. Proper Forcing
1.6 Definition. M will denote an algebra, with universe A, and with countably
many functions. Let
Sm(M) — {s : s C A, \s\ < NO, s is closed under the operations of M}, i.e.,
Sm(M) is the set of countable subalgebras of M. Now Sπι(M) is obviously a
closed unbounded subset of <Sκ0(A) (even if M is a partial algebra).
A subset of <S<κ0(^4) of the form 5ra(M), is called an Sm-generator of
1.7 Lemma. For every closed unbounded subset W of <Sκ0(A) there is an
algebra M on A such that Sm(M) C W.
Proof. We shall define, for every finite sequence a = (αo, . . . ,αn-ι) of mem-
bers of A, by induction on the length n, a set s(ά) G W such that s(α) D
{αo, . . . , αn_ι} and s(α) 2 s((αθ5 
>
αn-2)) when n > 1 (of course if n = 1
(αo, . . . ,αn_2) is the empty sequence). This is obviously possible because W
is unbounded. We define now n-place functions F^l < ω, for all n < ω such
that s((α0, . . . , αn_ι)) - {F^
n(α0, . . . , αn_ι) : t < ω}. Let M - (A, F?)n<ωj<ω.
Let s = {α0,αι, . . .} be a subalgebra of M. Denote sn = s((α0, . . . ,αn-ι)) =
{F£
n(α0, . - - , αn_ι) : ί < ω}. We have:
a) 5n C 5, since 5 is a subalgebra.
b) sn C 5n+1, by definition of s((α0, . . . , αn».
c) αn G sn+ι> also tne choice of s((α0, . . . , αn_ι))
d) sn G W.
By (a) and (c) we have s = Un<α;sn; by (b) and (d) we get s G W. Thus we
have shown Sm(M) C W. 
Πι.7
We have now seen that the filter T>κ0(A) is generated by the family of sets
5m(M) where M is an algebra on A as above. We shall now see one use of this
fact.
1.8 Theorem. Let P G V be a forcing notion which satisfies the c.c.c., let λ
be an uncountable cardinal, and let G be a generic subset of P over V. Every

§1. Introducing Properness 
93
closed unbounded subset B of ^(A)^'^ in V[G] includes the closure of a
set which is a closed unbounded subset of S*0(\}
(v} in V. In fact £>N0(λ)
(y[G])
is generated by the closures of the 5ra-generators of X>κ0(λ)(
y) (for any 5m-
generator (Sm(M)
v of T>(X)(
V^ in V, its closure in V[C7], is an Sm-generator
of -D(X)(
y™ in V[G], as it is (S
Proof. By what we have proved above we have the following in V[G]. There is
an algebra M = (\,F£)n,t<ω such that Sm(M) C B. In V the function F/
1
has a name F™ (moreover we have in V the sequence (FJ? : n < ω,l < ω)).
W.l.o.g. Ih "F™ is an ^-place function from λ to λ". Because of the c.c.c., by
Lemma I. 3.6 (ii) for all αo, . . . , αn_ι < λ we know in V that the set of possible
values of Fj?(αo, . . . , αn-ι) is countable and not empty. We define the functions
Fpk for k < ω so that these < N0 values are {F^(α0, . . . ,an-i) '• k < ω}.
So we know, for all n,ί < ω and αo,...,α n«ι < λ that in V[G] we have
F^
n(α0,...,αn_ι) G {F^(α0,...,αn_ι) : k < ω}. So N = (X, F£k)ntlιk<ω is
an algebra in V and (in V[G]) every subalgebra of A^ is clearly a subalgebra
of M. We have Sm(ΛO
(v) C Sm(N)
vW 
C Sm(M)W
GV 
C B and Sm(N)^
is a closed unbounded subset of ^(λ)^) in V, and the closure Sm(N)
v in
F[G] is 5m(A^)
v[
G] C B. 
Dι.8
A consequence of this theorem is that in a c.c.c. extension V[G] of V every
stationary subset of <Sκ0(λ)
(v) in V is also a stationary subset of <SK0(A)
(V[
G1)
in V[G]\ in short, the extension does not destroy the stationarity of stationary
subsets of «SN0(λ). We shall use this property to define the concept of proper
forcing. While it is a consequence of the fact that P^0(λ)
y[
Gl is generated by
the closures of the members of T>χ0(X)
v is does not seem to require as much.
1.9 Definition. A forcing notion P is called proper if for every (uncountable)
cardinal λ, forcing with P preserves stationarity modulo £>κ0(λ). We shall
denote this condition for λ with CΌnι(λ) (more exactly Conι(λ,P) but we
omit P when, as usual, P is clear from the context). Note that CΌnι(N0) is
meaningless, or trivially true if you like.
Note that proper ness is preserved by equivalence of forcing notions.

94 
III. Proper Forcing
1.10 Theorem. 1) P is proper iff the following condition holds for each
cardinal λ.
Gon2(λ) = Gon2(λ,P) : Assume that {pij 
: j < α^z < a} C P is
such that α < λ and α^ < λ for i < α, and such that for all i < α the set
{Pij 
'• J < Oίi} is pre-dense in P. Then for all p G P:
{5 G <SN0(λ)
 :(3<? € P)[q>p and {p^ : j < α^, j G 5} is pre-dense
above q for any i G s, i < α]} G 2>κ0(λ).
2) Moreover, for any λ > \P\ -f K l 5 Gon^λ) is equivalent to Gon2(λ); and if P
is a complete Boolean algebra without 1 then Conι(X) is equivalent to Gon2(λ)
for every uncountable λ.
Proof. We assume first -ιGon2(λ), i.e., there are α < λ, o^ < λ for i < α,
{Pij 
'• J < ®i} which is pre-dense in P and p G P such that the set
T = {s G <Sκ0(λ): for no q G P do we have: q > p and {pij : j < α^, j G 5} is
pre-dense above q for any z G s, i < α} is stationary.
Let G C P be a generic subset of P such that p G G. Now G meets every pre-
dense set hence there is in V[G] a function / on α such that Pij(i) G G for all i <
a. For the algebra (λ,/) we have 5m((λ,/)) - 5m((λ,/))
vt
Gl G £>κ0(λ)
(y[G]).
We shall show that T Π 5m((λ, /)) = 0 thus Γ which is stationary in V is no
longer stationary in V[G\. Assume 5 G TΠ 5m((λ,/)), then, as T G V, clearly
5 G V. Since 5 G 5m((λ,/)) clearly s is closed under / hence V[G] 
1= (Vi G 5)
(i < α —> (3j G s)(j < di&εpij G G)), hence some r G G forces this statement.
Since G is directed and p G G there is a # G G such that q > p,r hence
<? Ihp "(Vi G s)(i < a -> (3j G 5) (j < di&zpij G GP))". Therefore for every
i G s, such that i < α we know {pij : j < oti&j G s} is pre-dense above <?
(if this were not the case then for some q* > g, ς* is incompatible with each
member of {pij : j < c^&j G s} for some i G 5, i < α, and for a generic G
which contains <?* we cannot have (3j G s)(j < α^ &pi,j G G)). Thus 5 satisfies
exactly the condition of not belonging to Γ, which is a contradiction.
We have proved that -ιGon2(λ) implies ^Gonι(λ). We shall prove that
Gon2(λ) implies Gonι(λ) for λ > |P| + NI, or for all λ > KI if P is a complete

§1. Introducing Properness 
95
Boolean algebra without 1. This suffices to finish the proof of part (2) (of
1.10). It also suffices for part (1) i.e. for proving that (Vλ)CΌn2(λ) implies
(Vλ)CΌnι(λ) since, as we shall now see if λ > μ > NI, Conι(X) implies Conι(μ)
(see 1.13, note that by 2.1 if λ > μ, Con2(λ) implies Cσn,2(μ)) For this purpose
we shall prove the following lemmas (1.11, 1.12, 1.13 and then return to the
proof of 1.10).
1.11 Lemma. For any sets £>, E we denote by DUE the set {x(Jy : x G D & y G
E}. For all disjoint uncountable sets A,B we have: W is a closed unbounded
(or stationary) subset of <ί>N0(^4) iff WUS#0(B) is a closed unbounded (or
stationary) subset of «SNO(A U B).
Proof. We can deal separately with the case any of the sets is empty, easily, so
w.l.o.g. they are not empty. The proof that if W is closed unbounded in S#0 (A)
then WUSχ0(B) 
is closed unbounded in <Sκ0(^4 U B) is trivial. Now assume
that W is stationary in <Sκ0(j4), and suppose WOS^0(B) is not stationary
in SχQ(A U B). Then there is a model M = (A U B,F£)nj<ω 
such that
(WUS#0(B)) Π Sm(M) = 0. We can assume, without loss of generality, that
the set of functions {F™ : n,ί < ω} is closed under substitution. We define a
function F™ for n-tuples of members of A as follows:
3'"'' n l 
^ any member of A otherwise
Let M = (A,F'Ί)rιt<ω 
We shall see that if 5 G Sm(M) then for some t G
SNO(.B), 5 U ί G Sm(M). Let £ be the subalgebra of M generated by 5; we
have to prove that t\s C B. Let b G t \ 5, then since the set {Ff 
: n,i < ω}
is closed under substitution, b — F£
n(αo,... ,αn-ι) for some n < ω, i < ω
and α 0,... ,αn_ι G 5. If 6 G A then by the definition of F™ we know that
Fj?(αo,...,α n_ι) = 6, and since s G 5m(Af), 5 is closed under Fj?, clearly
6 G 5, which cannot be the case since b e t\s. Therefore b £ A, hence 6 G B
and we have proved t\s C .B. We claim that WίΊSV^M) = 0, contradicting our
assumption that W is a stationary subset of <S^0(A). Suppose 5 G WΓ\Sm(M),

96 
III. Proper Forcing
then, as we have shown, for some t € S#0(B) we have sUt e Sm(M). However
s U t G WUSχQ(B) contradicting (WQSχQ(B)) Π Sm(M) = 0.
Thus we have proved the "only if" part. The "if" part can be proved
similarly or by applying the "only if" part to W\ = S#Q(A) \ W. 
Πi.n
1.12 Claim. (1) If / is a one-to-one function from A into B, then for X C
<SN0(A): X is a stationary subset of <Sκ0(A) iff {α e SχQ(B) 
: f'
l(ά) e X} is a
stationary subset of S#0(B).
(2) If / : A — > B is one-to-one onto, then f induces a mapping from P(S#0(B))
onto P(S#0(A)) preserving Boolean operations and stationarity.
(3) If V C Ft are models of ZFC, A,B G V, V N «\A\ = \B\" , then the
stationarity of some X C <SχQ(B)
v is destroyed in V^ iff the stationarity of
some X C «S^0(A)
V is destroyed in V^ (where X E V of course )
Proof. Note that {α C Sχ0(A U B): if y = /(x) then x e a o y e a } e
-D^(AUB).
The proof is left to the reader. 
Πι.i2
1.13 Claim. If λ > μ > HI then Conι(λ) implies Con\(μ).
Proof. Let VF be a stationary subset of Sχ0(μ)
v . Then, as we have proved in
1.11, <Sκ0(λ \ μ)
vOW is a stationary subset of Sχ0(\)
v . Since CΌτiι(λ) holds
5H0(λ\μ)
vUVF is also a stationary subset of <Sκ0(λ)
yl
Gl in V[G\. We claim that
W is a stationary subset of S^0(μ)
v^ in V[G]. If this is not the case then there
is a closed unbounded subset C of Sχ0(μ)
vW 
in V[G\ such that C Π W = 0.
By Lemma 1.11 <Sκ0(λ \ μ)
v^OC is a closed unbounded subset of S^λ)^
mV[G\. Since C n W - 0 wehave (S^(\\μ)
v^OC) Π (S^0(\\μ)
vUW) = 0
contradicting what we got that <Sκ0(λ \ μ)
vOW is a stationary subset of
Continuation of the Proof of 1.10. We return now to the proof that CΌn2(λ)
implies Conι(λ) for any uncountable λ > \P\ 4- KI or for all λ > HI if P is a

§1. Introducing Properness 
97
complete Boolean algebra without 1. Let T be a stationary subset of <Sκ0(λ) in
V. To prove that T is also a stationary subset of S#0 (λ) in V[G] we have to prove
that for every P-name M = (λ, F?)ιtn<ω of an algebra, 0 lhP 'TnSm(M) ^ 0".
Let p G P, we shall prove that there is a <? > p such that <? Ihp "TίΊ5ra(M) 7^ 0".
Let h : ω>\ —> λ be a one-to-one function. We denote the restriction of h to
n-tuples with h
n. Let /ι^, for ^ < α; be a function such that for n > ί we
have ^(/ι
n(/?o,...,/3n-ι)) = A- For each i < X if i = Λ(n,£,/30, 
,/3n-ι) let
Zi be a maximal antichain of P of conditions which force definite values for
jF7(/?o, 
- - ,/?n-ι) If 1^1 < ^ then clearly |Z^| < λ. If P is a Boolean algebra
without 1 (and the order inherited from the Boolean algebra, not the inverse, so
"x, y incompatible means N x(Jy = 1), then for each β < λ we can put in Z^ the
minimal condition (equivalently the lub in the Boolean algebra of all conditions)
which force F^(/30,.. •, βn-ι) — β> if there are such conditions and then Z^ will
be a maximal set of conditions which force definite values on F™(/?0, 
, βn-ι)
and \Ii\ < λ and Z^ is a maximal antichain. We define for i < λ the ordinal
Oίi and the set {pij 
: j < α^} so that {pij 
: j < c^} = Ii. Let j(i,j) be
such that p^ Ih
 αF^(/?0,...,/3n-ι) - 7(*,jT Let M* = (λ,/ι
n,/ιn,7^)n<ω,
then 5m(M*) G PNo(λ). Let W
 
d= {s G 5Ho(λ) : (3ςf > p) [{pitj 
: j 
G
α^ Π s} is pre-dense over q for all i G s]}; we know that W G ^κ0(λ) by
the assumption Con2(λ). Since T is a stationary subset of <Sκ0(λ) there is an
s G T Π 5m(M*) Π W. Since s e W let q > p be such that {p^ : j G α< Π 5}
is pre-dense above q for each i G 5. Assume /30, 
. ,/?n-i € 5. By definition of
M* and since 5 G 5m(M*), α; C 5. Thus n,l e s and since 5 is closed under
/ι
n+
2 also i = /ι
n+2(n, £, /? 0,..., βn-ι) £ s. Since {pitj 
: j G α» Π 5} is pre-dense
over </, every generic filter G which contains <? contains some pij for j G α* Π 5,
and therefore F™(β0,... ,/3n_ι) = 7(1, j) in V[G]. Since i,j £ s and since 5 is
closed under the function 7 we have F™(βo,... ,/?n-ι) € s. Thus we have in
V[G] that VnW(VA),..., /3n-ι € 5) [*?(#>,..., /?n-ι) e s], hence 5 G 5m(M).
Since this holds for every G which contains q we have q Ih "5 G 5ra(M)", i.e.,
ςr Ih "TnSra(M) ^ 0" (since 5 G Γ). So Γ is still stationary in V
p, as required.

98 
III. Proper Forcing
1.15 Observations. It can be seen, by means of Con<2(\) that in order that
the forcing P be proper it suffices to require Con2(λ), or Con\(\) for some
λ > 2'
pl (see Lemma 2.2). We can also replace, equivalently, α,α^ < λ in
Cori2(X) by a = a.i — λ, and we can replace the pre-dense sets by maximal
antichains and 2'
p' by the number of the maximal antichains (see Lemma 2.2
in the next section). 
DI.IS
1.16 Lemma. If P is a proper forcing then in V[G] every countable set of
ordinals is included in a countable set of ordinals of V (and hence K^ is
uncountable in
Proof. Let a be a countable set of ordinals in V[G], then for some cardinal λ we
have α G <Sκ0(λ)
v[
Gl; now the set {s G ^(A)
17^' : s 2 0} is obviously a closed
unbounded subset of <S^0(λ)
vI
Gl in V[G\. But <SN0(λ)
v is a stationary subset
of <Sκ0(λ)
v in V, hence, since the forcing P is proper, it is also a stationary
subset of <SHo(λ)
V[Gl in V[G}. Thus <SHo(λ)
v ΓΊ {s G Sχ0(λ)
vW 
: s D α} ^ 0
and λ has a subset countable in V which includes α.
An alternative proof is that if s G 5n0(λ)
v[
σl, then Wι = {t : s C t G
Sκo(λ)} £ ^Ko(λ) in V[G\, but in V we have WQ = S*0(\)
v G Pκ0(λ), so in V
WQ is stationary, hence it is stationary in V[G] hence WQ Π W\ ^ 0 which is
just what we need. 
ΠI.IG
As a consequence, if a is an ordinal such that cf (α) > HO in V, we have
alsocf(α) > K0 in
§2. More on Proper ness
Discussion. It is worth noticing that one can use for a set of generators of
T>#0(A) not only the set {Sm(M) 
: M is a model, the universe of M is A and
M is an algebra with NO operations } but also a somewhat wider set {Sπι(M):
M is a model, the universe of M is A and M is a partial algebra with HO
operations }. This can be done since if M is a partial algebra, i.e., an algebra

§2. More on Properness 
99
whose operations are not necessarily defined for all arguments, then Sm(M) is
also a closed unbounded subset of SNO(A).
2.1 Claim. For μ < λ, CΌn2(λ,P) =» Con2(μ,P).
Proof. To see that let {pij : j < OLi,i < a} be as required by Con2(μ), i.e.,
a < μ and c^ < μ for i < α. Since μ < λ we can apply CΌn2(λ) and obtain
D
 
d= {s G <S*0(λ) : 3q[p < q G P& (Vi € 5 Π α) [{p^ : j G s Π α<} is
pre-dense above q]]} G P«0(λ). Since α^ < μ for i < a and a < μ we have
1} = (D Π Sχ0(μ))USχ0(X 
\ μ) (where A05 ^ { z U y i x G A & s / G 5}). By
Lemma 1.11 for Γ C S*0(A), if T05No(β) G PKO(^ U B) then T G V*0(A).
Therefore D Π <?κ0(μ) G T>κQ(μ) which establishes Con2(μ) since D Π Sχ0(μ) is
exactly the set required for Con2(μ). 
U2.ι
2.2 Lemma. Con2(2'
p') =^> (Vλ > Ho)CΌn2(λ), and hence, since μ < \ and
CΌn2(λ) => Con2(μ), therefore (3σ >
 (2\
p\}(Con2(σ}) & (Vλ)C
ron2(λ).
Proof. It clearly suffices (see 2.1) to prove that for λ > 2'
pl we have CΌn2(2l
pl)
=> Con2(λ). Let p, (p^j : j < 0.1,i < a) be as in Con2(λ). Let 2^ denote the
subset {pij : j < Oίi} of P. Let (Ji 
: i < 2'
pl), be a listing possibly with
repetitions of all pre-dense subsets of P. Let (q^j 
: j < /%} be a listing of
the members of Ji, then we can have βi < \P\. We define a partial function
F : λ -> 2
|p| by F(i) = the first 7 such that JΊ = Ii, for i < α. We
define also two partial functions G and H on λ x λ, into λ by G(i,j) =
the 7 such that p^ = <?F(i),7» f°
r * <
 α? j <
 αί?
 an<3 H(i,j) — the least 7
such that pί)7 = qp(i),ji f°
r ^ < α:, j < /?F(I) Since CΌn2(2l
p') holds the set
A
 d= {s G 5Ho(2l
pl) : (3ςr > p)(Vi G s)({qij 
: j G 5 Π ft} is pre-dense above
<?)} is in X>^0(2'
pl). Therefore there is a partial algebra M with universe 2'
p'
such that A 2 Sm(M). Let N be the partial algebra whose universe is λ and
whose partial operations are those of M together with F, G and H (which were
defined above). We shall show that for every 5 G Sπι(N) there is a q > p such
that for alH G s Π α, {pij 
: j G s Π α^} is pre-dense above q. This will establish

100 
III. Proper Forcing
Cori2(X) since the set which is required by Con<2(\) to be in Ί)^Q(X) has been
shown to include Sm(N) which is in £>κ0(λ).
Let s G 5ra(7V); since TV contains all the partial operations of M we have
5 Π 2'
pl G Sra(M). Since Sra(M) C A we have s Π 2'
pl G ,4; therefore there is
6 q>p such that
® (Vi G 5 Π 2
|p|)({^j : j G 5 Π βi} is pre-dense above <?).
We shall show that for this q we have (Vi G s Π a)({^j : j G 5 Π α^} is
pre-dense above #), which is all what is left to prove. Let i G s Π α, since 5
is closed under F also F(i) G 5 Π 2
|p| (since Rang(F) C 2
|p|) hence, by ®,
{9F(i),j : j G s Π ft} is pre-dense above q. We shall see that {qp(i)j 
'- j £
s Γ\ βi} = {pij 
: j G 5 Π OLi} and this will establish that {pij 
: j G s Π α^} is
pre-dense above q. For j G 5 Π ft we know qp(i)j — Pi,H(ij) by the definition of
#. Since i, j G 5 also ff(i, j) G 5 and H(i,j) < α^ by the definition of #. Thus
<lF(i)j — Pί,H(i,j) € {Pi,j : j G s Π α^}. In the other direction, for j G 5 Π Oίi
Pij = 9F(t),G(t,j) ^ {^F(t) : J € s n A}5 since s is closed under G. 
D2.2
2.3 Theorem. Let M = (|M|, . . . , ) be a model with countably many relations
and functions, if M is uncountable then:
Proof. Let M+ be an algebra with universe M and with Skolem functions of
M as operations (their choice is not unique, but is immaterial; we can e.g.
expand M by a well ordering <* of its universe, and use all functions definable
in (M,<*)). Then, as is well known, Sm(Aft) C {AT G 5No(|M|) : N ^ M}.
Since Sm(Aft) G P»0(|M|) also {\N\ G ^0(|M|) : N ^ M} e T^0(\M\). D2.3
2.4 Definition. For a cardinal λ we denote with H(X) the set of all sets whose
transitive closure is of cardinality < λ. For a regular uncountable λ we know
that (fί(λ), G) is a model for all axioms of ZFC except maybe for the power
set axiom. If not said otherwise we assume λ is like that, for simplicity.

§2. More on Properness 
101
2.5 Definition. Let N be an elementary substructure of (#(λ),G) and let
P G N be a forcing notion. For q G P we say that q is (TV, P)-generic, (or
TV-generic if it is clear which P we are dealing with), if for every subset X of P
which is pre-dense and is in TV the set J Π TV is pre-dense above q.
2.6 Lemma. A condition q is (TV, P)-generic z/f for every r which is a name
of an ordinal in the forcing notion P, if r G TV then q \\- "τ G TV" (i.e., if the
name is in TV then q forces the value to be in TV) iff for every P-name τ G TV,
q\\- "if r € V thenr G TV".
Proof. We prove only the first "iff", the second has the same proof. Assume
that q is TV-generic and let r G TV be a name of an ordinal. Let I = {r G P : r Ih
"r = α", for some ordinal a}. J is obviously pre-dense. J is definable from P
and r in (7J(λ), G), hence T G TV. Since <? is TV-generic, ZΠTV is pre-dense above
</. Let / be the function on I defined by /(r) = that α for which r Ih "r = α",
then / is definable in (ίf(λ), G) from r, hence / G TV. Since JΠ TV is pre-dense
above q, q Ih "GP Π (Γn AT) / 0", i.e., ςr Ih «(3r G JΠ TV)r G GP". Therefore if
G is a subset of P generic over V and q G G then τ[G] = /(r) holds in V[G],
where r G (J Π TV) Π G. Since r G TV, also /(r) G TV (as / G TV) thus r[G] G TV
in F[G]. Therefore ςr Ih "r G N".
Now assume that for every P-name r of an ordinal, if r G TV then ς Ih
"r G TV". Let J G TV be pre-dense in P. There is an / G H(\) which maps |J|
onto J, hence there is such an / in TV. We take τ — Min{i : f ( i ) G Gp}. Since
/, P G TV and r is definable from / and P in (ίf(λ), G), also r G TV, and r
is obviously a P-name of an ordinal. By our assumption q Ih "r G TV", hence
<? Ih "(3i G N ) ( f ( i ) G GP)". Since / maps the members of TV Π \I\ to members
of TV Π J, being in N, we have q Ih "(3r G IΠ TV)(r G GP)". Therefore IΠ TV
is pre-dense above q, which is what we had to prove. 
U2.6
2.7 Remark. For λ > |P| it does not matter in Gon2(λ) whether we require
that for each i < a the set {pij : j < oti} is pre-dense or whether this set is
pre-dense above p. Why? on the face of it the version where we require the set

102 
III. Proper Forcing
{Pij '. j < &i} to be pre-dense is weaker since it makes a stronger assumption,
but we now prove from it the stronger version. Suppose each {pij : j < α^}
is pre-dense above p. Blow each such set by adding to it all members of P
incompatible with p, to get the set {pij : j < βi}. Since \P\ < λ we know
\βi\ < λ so we can apply the weak version of Con2(λ) (βi may be > λ but since
only the cardinality figures here it is O.K. as long as βi < λ
+). We obtain a set
A in T>κ0(X) such that for s G A we have a q > p for which for each i G sΓiα the
set {pij 
: j G s Π βi} is pre-dense above q. For α* < j < βi, pij is incompatible
with p and hence also with ς, therefore also the set {pij 
: j G 5 Π α^} is pre-
dense above q which establishes the stronger version of Con^X). For P being
a complete Boolean algebra with 1 omitted it suffice to add -p for p G P, p not
minimal, so λ > NO suffice.
2.8 Theorem. (1) Let λ > 2
|p|, λ regular and assume P G H(X) (this adds
little since H(X) contains an isomorphic copy of P). P is a proper forcing notion
iff for every countable elementary substructure N of (ff(λ),€) satisfying P,
p G N there is a condition q, p < q G P such that q is (N, P)-generic.
(2) For λ > 2l
pl, P G H(λ), P is proper ifft {N : TV -« (#(λ), G) is countable
and there is an (AT, P)-generic <? > p } G T>χ0(H(X)) for every p G P.
Proof. (1) We first prove that "if" part, i.e. suppose the condition of the
theorem holds, and we shall prove Con2(2'
p') (suffice by 1.10 and 2.2). Let
(pij 
: i < α,j < Oίi) be as in CΌn2(2
|p|). Let N -< (H(X),e) 
be such that
P>P> (Pίj '. i < θί,j < Qίi) e N. For i e N,Ii = {pij : j < α4} G N since
it is definable in (ίί(λ),G) from (pί><7 : i < α,j < α^) and i. Let # > p be
(AT, P)-generic; since {PΪJ : j < α^} G N and it is pre-dense we have that
Ji Π N = {pij 
: j G N Π c^} is pre-dense above </. Therefore to establish
Con2(2l
pl) it suffices to prove that the set A = {N Π 2'
pl : N -< (H(X) G),
and p,P,(pij 
: i < α,j < α») G JV, |7V| < H0} is in PKo(2
|P|). The set
A* = {N e S*0(H(X)) : N -< (ff{λ),€) and p,P, (p^ : i < α, j < α<> G TV}
t We do not strictly distinguish between the set of ΛPs and the set of their
universes.

§2. More on Properness 
103
is in £>κ0(#(λ)) by Theorem 2.3. This implies that also A G £>Ho(2
|P|), by the
technique of using a model with operations closed under composition which we
have already used several times, or more exactly by 1.12(1).
Now we prove the other direction of the theorem, so let p G P, {p, P} C
TV -< (H(\),e), N countable and we shall find q as required. Assume that
P is a proper forcing, i.e., Con2(2
|p|). Since λ > 2
|p| in H(\) there is a
sequence (pij 
: i < a,j < α^) where α» < |P|, α < 2
|p| such that for
i < a the set Xi = {pij 
: j < &i} varies over all the pre-dense subset
of P. By Con2(2'
pl) there is a partial algebra with universe 2'
p' such that
Sm(M) C {s G Sκ0(2
|p|) : (3q > p) (Vi G s Π a)[{pij 
: j G s Π αj is pre-dense
over q]}', necessarily M G H(\). Since there are such (ptj 
: i < a,j < α^}
and M in H(\) there are such also in N. N obviously contains all the natural
numbers. Since M is given as a mapping of ω on all partial operations of M, all
these operations belong to TV and hence N is closed under them (if you prefer
to see M as (|M|, F), F a function with domain the vocabulary of M, which is
countable, it works as well). Therefore TV Π 2'
p' e Sm(M) and therefore there
is a q > p such that (Vi G TV ΓΊ ά)({pij 
' j G TV Π c^} is pre-dense over q). Let I
be any subset of P in TV which is pre-dense in P. Since in (H(λ), G) it is true
that "for every pre-dense subset of P there is an i < a such that X = Ti " (since
this is the way we get (pij 
: i < a,j < α^} in (ίf(λ),G)) and this sequence
belongs to TV; clearly this is true in TV. Therefore X = Xi for some i G TV Π α.
For this i, if j G TV Π α^ then also pij G TV (since (pί)<7 : j G TV Π α^} can be
taken to be one-to-one, if Pij G TV also j G TV Π c^). Thus {pij : j G TV Π c^} =
te,j 
: J < <%i} Γ\ N = XiΓ\ N = X Γ\ N and we know that this set is pre-dense
above q ( since i G TV Π α). Thus we have shown q > p to be (TV, P)-generic.
(2) Left to the reader. 
D2.s
2.9 Discussion. We shall now present another proof of the fact that if P
satisfies c.c.c. then it is proper. We shall prove that if r is a name of an ordinal,
TV -< (#(λ), G) and r G TV then 0 Ih "r G TV". There is a maximal antichain X
of P such that for each p G J, p \\~ "r = α" for a unique α. Because of the c.c.c.
|I| < NO so we can take I = {p< : i < α}, α < α;. The sequence (pi : i < a) is

104 
III. Proper Forcing
in H(X) and its properties can be formulated in (ΐf(λ), G). Therefore there is
such a sequence in N. Since ω C N we have pi G N for every ΐ < ω, and if α^ is
the ordinal such that p$ Ih "r = α*", then α» is defined in (if(λ), G) from P, r
and pi hence α$ G A/". As {p; : z < α} is a maximal antichain in P we conclude
0 Ih "τ G {α* : i G α}", but {α* : i < a} C N (see above) so 0 Ih "r G AT".
So for P satisfying the c.c.c., for λ, p, AT as in 2.8(1), we have: p is (TV, P)-
generic.
2.10 Theorem. If the forcing notion P is Ni-complete then it is proper.
Proof. Let λ be large enough, i.e., λ regular and λ > 2'
p', let p, P G N -<
(if (λ), G), |AΓ| = NO- Let (li'Λ < ω) be a list of all pre-dense sets which are in
N. We define the sequence (pn : n < α;} of members of TV Π P by induction on
n: po = p and pn+ι > pnι
rn for some rn G Tn Π A/". There is such a pn+ι G JV
since "pn is compatible with some members of Jn"; Jn being pre-dense in N.
By the NI- completeness of P there is a q such that q > pn for all n < ω. Now
q is (N, P)-generic since for every pre-dense subset In of P in AT, In Π A/" is
pre-dense above <? since q > rn, rn G Jn Π TV. (Remember a set Q is pre-dense
above q if for every p > q there is a member of Q which is compatible with p,
but does not have to be > q). 
Cb.io
Though the following is simple it has misled some.
2.11 Theorem. Let P G N -< (ίf(λ),€), and let G be a generic subset
of P (over V). Let AΓ[G] = {r[G\ : r is a name &r G AT}. Then we have
JV[G] - (AΓ[G],G) -« (^(
y[
GD(λ),G) (and AT C N[G\ of course).
Proof. By repeating the Forcing theorems for AT and if (λ), Claim I 5.17 implies
AΓ[G] C if(A)
v[
Gl - H(X)[G\. Let y?(x,yι,... ,yn) be a first order formula. We
shall prove that if (if(λ), G)
V'
G' N (Ξb)</?(z, t/i,..., yn) for some yi,..., yn G
AΓ[G] then there is an x G N[Gf\ such that

§2. More on Properness 
105
Then, by the Tarski-Vaught criterion we shall have N[O\ 
~<
Since yι,...,y n € N[G], let Γι,...,τ n e TV be P-names such that yι =
τι[G],...,j/ n=τ n[G]. So
V[G] \= "
By the "existential completeness" of the forcing names (see I 3.1) there is a
P-name σ such that
0 Ih "σ G H(\) and (ίf(λ),G) 
" N (3z)y?(z,τι,... ,rn) —» y?(σ,τι, - - >Γn)"
By I 5.17 and I 5.13, there is a name r G H(X) such that 0 Ih V = r",
V[G7]
therefore 0 Ih "(ίf(λ),G) 
" 
|= (Ξkr) y?(x,τι,... ,7-2) —> ^(l,Jι,. • ,Γn)"5
where r G H(X). Forcing statements relativized to H
V^(X) can be defined
in (#(λ),G), hence (ff(λ),G) h (3 a P-name r) [0 Ih "(ίf(λ), G)
V[C?1 h
[(3x(/?(x, TI, . . . , rn)) —> </?(r, TI, ..., rn)]" . By the Tarski-Vaught criterion for
TV -< (-H"(λ), G) there is such a name r G TV. Thus V[G] satisfies:
^!^],^^],^
We finish as τt(G\ = yt for t = 1, . . . , n and r[G] e ^[G]. 
D2.ιι
2. 11 A Remark.
Do we have, in 2.11, also (N[G\,N,e) 
-< (H
vW(\),H(X),e)7 
This holds
iff N[G\ Π H(\) = N.
2.12 Theorem. Under the assumptions of the last theorem, the following three
conditions are equivalent.
(a) G Π TV is TV-generic, i.e., for every J G N which is pre-dense in P,
(b) N[G] Π Ord = N Π Ord
(c) N[G\ nV

106 
III. Proper Forcing
(d) replace in (a) pre-dense by dense
(e) replace in (a) pre-dense by maximal antichain
Proof, (a) => (c). Let x e N[G] Π V. We shall prove x G N. Since x e N[G\,
x = τ[G] for some r G N. Let I
 
d= {p e P : (By)(p Ih "r = y (i.e y)") V p Ih
«τ £ F"} - {p G P : (By G #(λ))|p Ih «τ - y») V p Ih "r
(Remember that by Claim I 5.17, if r G H(\) and p Ih "r = y", then
y G if(λ).) J is obviously pre-dense in P. Since I is definable in (if(λ),G)
from r, P and τ, P e N also I e N. By (a) there i s a p G J n W n G . Since
^[G] N "τ[G] G F" we cannot have p Ih "r £ if(λ)", hence for some y G if(λ),
P "~ "l — 2/" and as P7 1 are in N and τ/ is definable from them, necessarily
yeN, hence x = r[G] = y G N Π jff(λ) C TV Π F.
(c) =» (b) is obvious.
(b) =» (a). Let I G A^ be pre-dense in P. Let J = {q G P: for some p G J
we have p < <?}. Let J^ be a subset of J, an antichain in P and maximal under
those two conditions (for C). As J is pre-dense in P clearly J is dense and open
hence J^ is a maximal antichain of P. By the definition of J, as 1^ C J there
is a function / from Ί^ to J such that for every p G J"
1", p > /(p) and /(p) G J.
Since I G N x (if (λ), G), there is such an J
1" G TV and so w.l.o.g. (I
1" G AT and)
/ G AT, since in if (λ) there is a sequence (^ : β < a] listing the members of
Zΐ , there is such a sequence in N. Let r be the canonical P-name such that for
β < a we have: r [G] — β if qβ G G (since Jt is a maximal antichain of P there is
one and only one such β). So r is a P-name of an ordinal and r G N. By (b) we
have r[G] G AT. So 7
 d= τ[G] G JV. Since (^ : β < a) G N also ?7 G A/\ Since
τ[G] = 7, g7 G G but <?7 G It so /(ςr7) G J, hence f(qΊ) G N (as <?7, f e N)
and /(ςτ) G G (as <?7 > /(<?7) & <?7 G G) hence clearly /(<?7) G JΠ TV Π G and
so J n AT n G ^ 0.
(e) => (a) => (d) Left to the reader. 
^2.12
2.13 Corollary. Assume P is a forcing notion and P G N -< (if(λ),G) and
^ G P, then the following are equivalent:
(a) q in (AT, P)-generic.

§3. Preservation of Properness Under Countable Support Iteration 
107
(b) q Ih "ΛΓ[GP] Π Ord = N Π Ord" .
(c) q\\- "N[Gp}nV = NnV".
(d) for every maximal antichain X of P which belongs to N we have
q\\- "NnlnGp ^0".
(e) for every dense open subset X of P which belongs to N we have:
q\\- "
(f) ς r l h "(7V[Gp],JV,G) -< 
(H(X)
Vl9p],H(λ),€)n.
Proof. Each of the present (a) - (e) is equivalent to the statement that the
corresponding condition in the last theorem holds for all generic subsets G of
P which contain q. 
Eb.is
§3. Preservation of Properness Under
Countable Support Iteration
3.1 Definition. We call Q = (Pi,Qi : i < a) (or (Qi : i < a}} a system
of countable support iterated forcing (or a CS iterated forcing system or a
CS iteration) if the following holds (on canonical names see Definition I 5.12,
Theorem I 5.13):
Pi — {/ : Dom(/) is a countable subset of i and
(Vj e Όom(f))[f(j) 
is a canonical P^-name
and \\-Pj "/(j) € Qi')}}.
Qi is a P^-name of a forcing notion.
The partial order <i on Pi is defined by
j G Oom(f))\g\j 
Ih "/(j) <?.
For every j φ Dom(/) we take f(j) to be a name 0^ = 0^. of the minimal
member of Qj. Let Pα be defined like Pi above. We say: the forcing notion
defined by this system is the (partial order) Pα. We say Pα = Lim<^1 (Qj : j <
a) or Pa = Lim<^1|Q|. We may omit the "< NI".
Instead "f(i) is a canonical Pi-name" we can use other variants.

108 
III. Proper Forcing
3.1 A Fact. For Definition 3.1 the parallel of II 2.2A hold (only in part (7)
(Vα < λ)[|α|
H° < λ] is needed), i.e. in Definition 3.1:
(1) If i < j < a then Pi C Pj as sets and even as partial orders.
(2) If i < j < a and p G Pj then p\i G P;; moreover Pj \= "p\i < p" and if
p\i < q £ Pi then r = q U p\(j \ ϊ) belong to Pj and is the least upper
bound of ς, p in Pj (actually a least upper bound).
(3) If i < j < a then Pi <$ Pj and q G Pi, p G Pj => Pj N q < p <& P* N q < p\i.
(4) If j < a is a limit ordinal of uncountable cofinality then Pj — \J P^.
i<3
(5) The sequence (Qj : j < a) uniquely determines the sequence ( P j , Q j 
: j <
α) and vice versa and similarly for (P^, Qj : j < α, and i < α).
(6) If Q'i is a Pi-name, such that Ih "QJ is a dense subset of Q" then P[ —
{/ G Pi\ for every j G Dom(/) we have: lhPi "/(j) G QJ"} is a dense
subset of P^. Moreover we can define and prove by induction on i < α,
P" = {f G Pi : for every j G Dom(/) we have: f ( j ) is a P/'-canonical
name of a member of Q^} is a dense subset of Pi and Q" is a canonical
Pf-name satisfying lhPί "Q? - Q^" and (J^,Q£ : jo < i, ji < i) is a FS
iteration.
(6A) Assume Q^ is a set of canonical P^-names, such that for every P^-name p
for some q G Q , Ihp. "if p G Qi then Q^ N p < f . Then P{ = {f e P*:
for every j G Dom(/) we have: f ( i ) G QJ} is a dense subset of Pi and
(P/,<2i : i < a) satisfies (1) - (4) above.
(7) Moreover we can define and prove by induction on i < α, FΪ, P" such that
/f = {/ 6 PI : for every j € Dom(/), /(j) e Rang(F,, )}
is a dense subset of Pi and F^ is a function with domain the P/'-names of
members of QJ, satisfying: p G QJ => ίi(p) is a canonical P/'-name forced
to be equal to p. So letting QJ
7 — {p : p a P/'-name of a member of Q^},
we have: (P",Q" 
: i < a) is a countable support iteration, P/' C Pj is a
dense subset.

§3. Preservation of Properness Under Countable Support Iteration 
109
(8) If Q = (Pi, QJ : i < α, j < a) is a CS iteration, and for i < α, \\-P. "Qi G
H(\i)" and (\i : i < α) is an increasing sequence of regulars satisfying
2
λί < λi+i and for limit δ < a => (£ A,)*
0 < λ^ then Q G
3. IB The Definition by Induction Theorem, (one can construct Q^s
by a given recursive recipe ). If F is a function and α is an ordinal then
there is a unique CS iterated forcing (Qj 
: j < a^) such that for all j < αo
QJ = F((Qi : i < j ) ) and either α0 = α or else F((Qi : i < α0)) is not suitable
for Qao, i.e., it is not a name of a forcing notion in the forcing notion Pαo.
Proof. This theorem is an obvious consequence of the standard definition-by-
recursion theorem. 
ΠS.IB
3.2 Theorem. If (Pi, Qi : i < a) is a countable-support iterated forcing system
and for each i < α, lhpi "Qi is proper" then Pα is proper.
Remark. The reader may look at the alternative proofs presented in the book:
IX §2 (for one using alternative iteration) XII §1 (the one using games) and
another proof later in this section.
Proof. In Theorem 2.8(1) we showed that P is a proper forcing iff for some
λ > 2'
p' every countable elementary substructure TV of (ίf(λ),G) such that
P,p G N has a q , p < q G P such that q is TV-generic. As easily seen from the
proof or by 2.8(2) it suffices to require this only for all such N which contain
some fixed member y of H(\).
For our present proof we choose a regular cardinal λ which is large enough
with respect to |Pα|>
 and the definition of the iteration and we shall show that
Pa is proper by showing that for every countable elementary substructure N
of (/f(λ), G) such that (Pi,Qi : i < a) G N, Pa G N and for all p G Pα Π TV
there is a g, p < q G Pα which is TV-generic. We shall show, by induction on
j < a such that j G TV, a somewhat stronger property:
(*) For all i < j, i G TV and for all p G TV Π P, , and q G P» if <? is (TV, P»)-
generic and </ > pf* then there is an r G Pj such that r is (TV, P^-generic, r > p
and r > q and r \i = q (we could add Dom(r) Π [i, j) — TV Π [i, j)).

110 
III. Proper Forcing
For j = 0 the statement (*) is vacuously true. Now we assume (*) for j
and prove it for j + 1. Since j + 1 G N also j G N. Therefore, since (*) holds
for j we may assume, without loss of generality that i = j. Let Gj be a generic
subset of Pj which contains q. By Theorem 2.11 we have
since Pj G N (because j, (Pi,Qi : i < a) G N and Pj is definable in
(if(λ),e) from j and (Qi : i < α}) and ζ^ G N and hence Qj[Gj] 
G JVfG^ ].
Remember that Qj[Gj] 
is a proper forcing in V[Gj]. 
Since p,j e N also
P(j) = PJ £ N and pj [G^] G Qj[Gj] Π W[Gj]; since λ is still sufficiently
large and Qj[Gj] 
is proper there is an TJ G Qj[Gj] 
such that TJ > pj[Gj]
and TJ is ( TV [Gj],Qj[Gj]) 
-generic. Since the only requirement we had about
the generic subset Gj of Pj was that is contains q, q forces the existence of an
TJ as above. By the existential completeness lemma I 3.1 there is a name TJ
such that q \\-j 
"TJ G QJ&TJ > PJ&ΓJ is (N[Gj], Q j )-generic" and w.l.o.g.
\\-P. "TJ G Qj\ We set now r = q U { ( j , r j ) } 
Obviously r G PJ+I and r fj = g.
Also since <? > pfj and q Ih "r^ > PJ" we have r > p. We still have to prove
that r is (AT, Pj+ι)-generic.
By the corollary in 2.13 in order to prove that r is (AT, PJ+1)-generic
it suffices to prove that for all generic subsets G of Pj+i which contain r,
ΛΓ[G]nOrd = ΛΓnOrd. Let Gj be the part of G up to j i.e. GnPj. Since r G G
clearly q G Gj. Since q is (N, Pj)-generic we have N[Gj] Π Ord = N Π Ord. Let
G* C Q j [ G j ] , be the "j-th component" of G. Since r G G clearly r,[G] G G*.
Since r^Gj] is (^[G^^^G^D-generic wehave7V[Gj][G*]nOrd = TVfG^ΠOrd,
and using the equality above we get N[Gj][G*] 
Π Ord = TV Π Ord. We have
to observe that N[G\ C N[Gj][G*], 
then we have N[G\ Π Ord = N Π Ord.
For every Pj+i-name r in N there is a name r* G TV as in Lemma II 1.5
(r* is definable from r and Pj+i, and is hence in N). By Lemma II 1.5,
τlG\=τ [Gj][G*}€N[Gi]lG 
}.
Now we come to deal with the case where j is a limit ordinal. Let (rn : n <
ω) be a sequence of all Pj-names of ordinals which are in N. Note that TV Π j

§3. Preservation of Properness Under Countable Support Iteration 
111
is a countable set with no last element, so let i = IQ < i\ < in < 
, (n < ω),
be a sequence cofinal in it.
For p
1 G Pj and q
f G Pin such that q
1 > p'\ίn let q'ϋpf denote q
f U (p'\(j \
in)). Since q' > p'\in, q'Qp' G Pj and q'Up' > pi. For pι,p2 € Pj we write
Pi w p2 for pi < p2 &P2 < Pi-
We define now two sequences (qn : n < ω) and (pn : n < ω) such that
qQ — q, PQ — p and for all n < ω:
(1) ςfn G Pin and #n is (N, Pirl ) -generic
(2) qn+ι \in = qn
(3) pn G Pj and Dom(pn) C TV Π j
(4) qn > pn \in
(5) Pn+i tin - pn ίin and <?nUpn+l > Pn
(6) Qn ^pln "(3s G P, Π TV) (3ςt > ^Jίstin < ^ &g
f G GPiτι
(7) 9nOpn+ι Ihp, "rn G TV"
Let us assume that qn and pn are defined and that they satisfy (1) - (7).
We shall now define pn+ι and qn+ι- Let G be a generic subset of Pin such that
qn G G. We shall see that there are q^ G G,s and 5* such that
(a) ςft > qn and 5 G Pj Π TV, s\in < g
f, ^Opn ^ ςftQs.
(b) 5* fin < q^ 5* G PJ Π TV, 5* > 5 and s* decides the value of τn.
By (6) there is an 5 G Pj Π TV and a ςft > gn, φn < ςft such that q^ G G
and ςtQs « gtOpn. The set J0 = {s* : s* > s and s* decides the value of rn}
is obviously a pre-dense subset of Pj above s. This set belongs to TV since it is
definable from the parameters 5 and rn which are in TV. Let X denote the set
which consists of the restrictions of the members of IQ to in, since J0 £ TV and
s G TVίΊPj clearly J G TV and J is a pre-dense subset of Pίτι above s \in. Since <?n
is (TV, Piτι)-generic and 5 \in < qn we have ίΠTV is pre-dense above qn. Therefore
J n T V ( Ί G ^ 0 . L e t r G Z n T V n G , then "r is a restriction to in of a 5* G Pj
such that s* > s and 5* decides rn and s*\in G G" is true in (JH"(λ)
vt
G', G).
By Tarski-Vaught's criterion there is such an 5* in TV[G], but 5* G Pj C V
and by 2.13(c) (as qn G G, ςfn is (TV, Pin )-generic) we know TV[G] Π V = TV,
together s* G TV. Thus r = 5* \in G G, and we can take gt to be > s* fin. Thus

112 
III. Proper Forcing
ςft,s* are as required by (a) and (b). Therefore V[G] N
 α(35*)(3^ G G)(s* and
<?ΐ are as in (a) and (b), and 5* is the first such element in some fixed well
ordering of P j ) " . By the existential completeness lemma there is a P^-name
s* such that qn Ih "(3q* G G) [s*,<^ are as in (a) and (b) and 5* is the least
such]". Since each possible s*[G\ is in TV and it satisfies that |Dom(s*)| < K0 in
(JY(λ), G), it satisfies this also in TV, hence Dom(s*) C N (since an enumeration
of Dom(s*) is in N). We define pn+ι as follows. Let pn+ι\in = Pn\i>n For
7 G j ΓΊ TV \ in let pn+ι(7) be the P7-name of the member of QΊ determined by
5* (i.e., if 5* is a set of pairs of members of Pin and members of Pj Π TV then
pn+1(Ί) = {(r,t) : (3rt <r)(3s) «τ t,β) e β*&(3r" <r)«r",ί) € s(7)))}).
Now let us define qn+ι For each s £ Pj Γ\ N such that sfz n < <?n there
is, by the induction hypothesis an qn+ι(s) G Pin+1 such that qn-\-ι(s)\in — Qn,
tfn+ι(s) > stWi and gn+ι(s) is (N, Pin+1)-generic. We define qn+ι as follows.
The domain of qn+\ is the union of all the domains of the ςn+ι(s)'s for 5 G TV
as above, and since TV is countable the domain of qn+ι is countable. Let
q n+i \in = 9n For in < 7 < in+ι such that 7 G Dom(<?n+ι) if qn G G, and G is a
generic subset of Pin, then V[G\ N (3u)(35 G P/ Π AT) ([ςnU5 w qnΰpn+ι] &u =
gn+ι(s)). By the existential completeness lemma there is a Pίn-name u of a
Pin+1-condition such that qn \\-pin "(3s G Pj Π TV) (gnϋs w ςnϋpn+ι&u =
qn+ι(s))". Now u determines canonically a P7-name of a Q7-condition: ^(7),
which is taken to be the value of qn+i(^}.
We shall not present here the proof that pn+1
 and qn+ι thus defined satisfy
(1) - (7).
Now we define r — Un<u;^n. Clearly r belongs to Pj. We claim that for
every n,r > pn. To prove that we have to show that for every 7 G Dom(pn),
r\Ί ^ "Pn(j) <
 r(τ)" Since 7 € Dom(pn) we have, by (3), 7 G TV. Let k be
minimal such that 7 < ik then, by clause (4) we have q^ > pk fife, hence ^ ί7 "~
uPk(Ί) < QkW By the definition of r, ^[7 = r\Ί,qk(<j) = r(j). Also, by (5)
if n > k then ^(7) = Pn(τ)5 hence r\j \\~PΊ
 αpn(τ) < ^(τ)" So assume n < fc
(hence A: > 0); now for i < /c we have: qe\Jpe+ι\Ί 
\\~p^ "pt(j) 
<QΎ ^£4-1(7)"
(by clause (5)) but ^[7 > q£θpt+ι\Ί for £ < k (by clauses (4) and (5)) hence
qk\Ί\^PΊ "Po(7) <Pi(7) < - - . <Pfc(τ)", hence gfe ί7 1^ "Pn(7) < Pfc(7)", but

§3. Preservation of Properness Under Countable Support Iteration 
113
we have proved above qk\Ύ \\~p^ "pk(Ί) < ^(τ)"5 hence qk\j \\-pk "PΠ(Ί) <
qk(lY - However r\j = qk\Ύ and 3^(7) = r ( j ) (as 7 < i^) hence this means
rΓ7 \\~PΊ "pn(7) <
 r(lY as required. So we have really proved Pj N "pn < r".
Thus, by (7), r Ih "rn € TV" and therefore r is (TV, P/)-generic which finishes
our proof. 
D3.2
3.3 Alternative proof of 3.2.
3. 3 A Advice to the reader. There are situations where it is enough to un-
derstand and believe the statement of a theorem (as opposed to its proof). For
example, we took this attitude in Chapter 1 when we discussed the fundamental
theorem of forcing.
However, this approach should not be used here. Not only is the preceding
theorem basic for the theory to be developed in the rest of the book, it is (in
the author's opinion) also essential for the reader to understand the proof, since
variations and extensions of this proof will appear throughout the book.
To help the reader understand the proof of the Theorem 3.2 better we now
give a reformulation of this proof which is due to Goldstern [Go] . This version
emphasizes the fact that the conditions pn are in N by constructing the whole
sequence (pn : n < ω) before constructing the generic conditions qn.
N is an elementary submodel of some H(χ) for some large χ containing
3.3B Fact. If β > α, q e Pa, p G Pβ, q >* p\a, then Q+
 d= q\Jp\[a,β) is in
Pβ, and g+ >* p (i.e., q+ Ih p e O).
3.3C "Existential Completeness Lemma". For any forcing P, and any
condition p £ P, any formula φ(x):
p Ih 3 x φ(x) 
iff 
there is a name r such that p Ih φ(τ).

114 
III. Proper Forcing
Proof. By I 3.1.
3. 3D Preliminary Lemma. (This lemma does not require properness.)
Assume αi < α2 < /?, pi is a Pαι-name for a condition in Pβ. Let T be a dense
open set of Pβ. Then 0ptt2 lhpQ2 3p2<£>(p2), where <^(p2) is the conjunction of
the following clauses:
(1) P 2 G P £ , p 2 > * p ι .
(2) p2 6 J.
(3) If pl \a2 G Gα2 , then p2 k*2 G Gα2 .
3.3E Remark. By the existential completeness lemma there is an α2-name p2
for a condition in Pβ such that \\-pa
3.3F Remark. The Pαι-name p\ corresponds naturally to a P^-name, which
we also call p\.
Proof. Assume not, then there exists a condition r G Pa2 such that
r Ih "there is no p2 satisfying (l)-(3)".
We may assume that r decides what p\ is, (i.e. r \\- pi = pi for some pi G V),
and r also decides whether pi ία2 G Gα2 .
Case ί. r\\- pι\a2 £ Ga2:
But then (3) is true for any p2, so
r Ih "there is no p2 satisfying (l)-(2)"
which is a contradiction since T is a dense open.
Case 2. r Ih pιfα 2 G Gα2, i.e. r >* pιfα 2. Now let r' = r Upιf[α 2,/?) >* Pi,
and find r
/r G D, r" > r
7. Then
r
/ /fα 2 Ih r" satisfies (l)-(3),
again a contradiction, because r
/ ;fa 2 > r.

§3. Preservation of Properness Under Countable Support Iteration 
115
3.3G "Composition Fact", q e Pα+ι is (Pα+ι, A^-generic iff:
q\a is (Pα, 7V)-generic, and q\a Ih
 uq(ά) is (Qα, AΓ[Gα Π AT])-generic."
Proof. See §2.
3.3H Induction Lemma. For all β £ N Π ε, for all α £ N Π ε, all p £ TV
assume p is a Pα-name for a condition in Pβ, and
(a) q € Pα
(b) 
<? is (Pα,7V)-generic.
(c) <?lhpQ "pΓαeGαΓUV'.
Then there is a condition q+:
(a)+ g+GP/3, g+tα = g
(b)"
1" <7
+ is Af-generic
(c)+ g
+lhp, "peG^ΠTV".
(Note that "q is TV-generic" implies already "q Ih p £ AT"", so the main point of
(c) is to say that q Ih p\a € Gα)
(For α = 0 this shows that Pβ is proper.)
Proof.
The proof is by induction on β.
Successor step.
Let β = β' + 1. Since we can first use the induction hypothesis on α, β" to
extend q to a condition <?' £ P^// satisfying the appropriate version of (a)-(c),
we may simplify the notation by assuming β = a + 1.
Clearly q lhPα "AΓ[Gα] -< #(χ)^]", 9 lhPa "there is a (Qα,JV[Gα])-
generic condition > p(a)
n. By "existential completeness", there is a Pα-name
q+ (α) for it. By the "composition fact", we are done.
Limit step.
Let β E N be a limit ordinal, β G N = \J αn, α0 = α, αn £ N. Let (Jn : n < ω)
enumerate all dense subsets of Pβ that are in N.

116 
III. Proper Forcing
First we will define a sequence (pn 
: n < ω), pn G N such that in N the
following will hold:
(0) pn is a Pατι-name for a condition in Pβ
W lh^+1 ?n+l >* Pn
(2) lhPατι+ι ?n+1 € In
(3)
 ll~^τι+1 "If PnΓαn+ι G Gan+l then pn+ι ίαn+ι G Gttn+1".
For each n we thus get a name pn that is in N. For each n we can use the
"preliminary lemma" (and Remark 3.3E before its proof) in N to obtain pn+ι-
Now we define a sequence (qn : n < ω), qn G Pttrι, and gn satisfies (a), (b), (c)
(if we write qn for g, pn for p, and αn for α).
<?n+ι = <?n can be obtained by the induction hypothesis, applied to αn, αn+ι,
and ί>nΓ<*n+ι By (c)+ we know
Hence, by (3) and the genericity of ςn+1 we have
<7n+ι IHp^^ "(Pn+ι[Gαn+1])rαn+1 € G0n+1 Γ\N".
Since gn-i-i \&n — Qn, Q — limς'n exists and is > qn for all n.
We have to show that q Ih p G G0 Π AT and that g is generic. Let Gβ
be a generic filter containing q. We will write pn for pn[Gαn]. (Note that
pn G AT, because ςn was A^-generic and qn G G
f
αn.) Since gn G G/j, we have
pn fα G Gατι Π AΓ and AT N pn >* pn_ι >*...>* p0 Hence pfαn G Gαn Π AT for
all n, and therefore p G G/j Π N. Similarly, pn G G^ for all n.
Consider a dense set In C P^. Since gn_j_ι Ih pn+ι e Xn, we have pn+ι G
G^ Π Jn Π JV. Hence g is generic. 
D3.3
More advice to the reader. It may also be helpful to look at the proof in Chapter
XII, §1, which uses games. (Chapter XII, §1 can be read independently of
chapters IV to XL)

§4. Martin's Axiom Revisited 
117
3.4 The General Associativity Theorem. Suppose (Pi,Qi : i < a) is a CS
iterated forcing system each Qi proper then the parallel to II 2.4 holds.
Proof. Left to the reader. 
Ds.4
3.5 Theorem. Suppose (Qj 
: j < a) is a (< /ί)-support iterated forcing,
If Ihp. "Qj 
<e Q],Qj a dense subset of QJ" and PJ = Lim{Qt : i < j),
t/ien Pj <£ PJ is a dense subset of Pj.
Remark. By Lemma I 5.1 (a), we can replace Qj by any equivalent Qj (just
use 3.5 a few times).
Proof. Left to the reader. 
DS.S
§4. Martin's Axiom Revisited
Why is c.c.c. forcing so popular? I think the main reason is that such forcing
notions preserve cardinalities and cofinalities, so why shall we not be interested
in the property "P does not collapse cardinals " instead "P satisfies the c.c.c. " .
In particular Magidor and Stavi had wondered on the role of the c.c.c. mainly
in MA and asked:
"Is it consistent that for any forcing notion P of power NI not collapsing
cardinals (i.e., NI) and dense Ii C P (for i < NI) there is a directed G C P,
such that G Π Z< ^ 0 for i < NI?"
In particular Baumgartner, Harrington and Kleinberg [BHK] proved that
if 5 C ω\ is stationary co-stationary, and CH holds, then there is a forcing
notion PS = {C : C a countable closed subset of S} with the order C\ < C-2
iff C\ = C<2 Π (SupCi -f 1) which does not change cardinalities and cofinalities
and which collapse 5 ( i.e., collapse its stationarity, i.e., !hps "5 C ω\ is not
stationary " .

118 
III. Proper Forcing
So why not include such forcing in MA? Because we can find pairwise
disjoint stationary sets Sn C ω\,ω\ — Un<α,5n. If we make each Sn in turn
not stationary, ω\ must be collapsed. More exactly, if we try to iterate the
forcings Psn, after ω steps HI collapses, no matter how the limit is taken. It
does not matter if we look at the desired version of MA, in some V and let
J£ = {C € PSn : sup(C) > α}. Thus if G Π J£ ^ 0 for n < α;,α < ωi, then in
V, each 5n is not stationary.
You can still argue that CH is the cause of the problem but we shall prove
in Theorem 4.4 that even 2
H° > Hι,S C ω\ stationary co-stationary there is
a forcing notion P of power HI, not changing cardinalities and cofinalities but
still collapsing S.
So it is natural to change the question to "P of power HI, not collapsing
stationary subsets of HI", and we shall answer it positively, assuming there is
a model V of ZFC with a strongly inaccessible cardinal.
The natural scheme is to iterate (by CS iteration) proper forcing of power
HI, in an iteration of length ω%. However to prove the consistency of almost
anything by iterating proper forcing we usually have to prove the ft-chain
condition is satisfied, where K will be the new H2 and the length of the iteration.
We have a problem even if \P\ = HI, Ihp "|Q| = HI", P * Q have a large power
because of the many names. We can overcome this either by using K strongly
inaccessible, or showing that the set of names which are essentially hereditarily
countable is dense.
Another problem is that "not destroying stationary subsets of ω\
n is not
the same as "proper". However we shall prove that if P is not proper, then
'^Levy(H1,2i
pi) "^ destroys a stationary subset of ω\". So instead of "honestly"
dealing with a candidate P i.e., a forcing notion which does not destroy sta-
tionary subsets of α i, but is not proper we cheat and make it to destroy a
stationary subset of ω\.
4.1 Theorem. Suppose Q = (Pi,Qi : i < K) is a CS iteration Ihp. "Qi is a
proper forcing notion which has power < «", « is regular and (Vμ < κ)μ*° < K.

§4. Martin's Axiom Revisited 
119
Then PK = limQ satisfies the ft-c.c., and each Pi(i < ft) even has a dense subset
of power < ft. Hence for i < ft, Ihp. "2*° < AC".
Proof. Easily (twice use 3.4), w.l.o.g. the set of elements of Qi is a cardinal
μi < ft; (i.e., μ* is a P^-name of a cardinal < ft).
4.1 A Definition. For a forcing notion P and P-name Q of a forcing notion
with set of elements μ (a P-name of cardinal) with minimal element 0g (can
demand it to be 0) we define a hereditary countable P-name of a member of Q:
it is the closure of the set of ordinals < μ (see (*) below) by the two operations
(a) and (b) (see below):
(*) the names ά for a < μ or more exactly for an ordinal α the P-name
τa is such that τa[G] = a if α < μ[Gp] and τa[G] — 0g[Gp] if
α > μ[Gp]. Of course we can restrict to τa such that l/p α > μ. Also
if μ = μ we can use just ά, α < μ
(a) if rn(n < ω) are such names, and pn G P (for n < α;) ίften let r be
the rn for the least n satisfying pn G Gp, and 0g if there is no such
n.
(b) if rn>m(n < α;, m < ω) are such names, let r be the least ordinal a < μ
such that for every n, {τn>m : m < ω} is pre-dense over r (in Q); and
0g if there is no such α. (Remember: the members of Q are ordinals
<μ).
We shall prove by induction on ξ < K that Pξ satisfies the tt-chain condi-
tion.
Suppose this holds for every ζ < £, so for ζ < ξ by Claim I 3.7 clause (ii)
we have < K possible values for μ^, each is < K so
μc
 d=
f sup{μ : I/P( "μ ^ μc"}
is < ft (as ft is regular). So for C < ζ w.l.o.g. μ^ = μ^ (as we can add to Qζ
the ordinals i, μ^ < i < μζ such that i is w to the minimal element 0gJ. Let
us define by induction on C, Pj = {/ : / a function with domain a countable

120 
III. Proper Forcing
subset of ζ, f ( ϊ ) is a hereditarily countable P/-name of an ordinal < μ;}. Let
Pξ C Pξ inherit its order. We now can prove by induction on ζ < ξ, that Pί
is a dense subset of Pζ, using the proof that properness is preserved by CS
iteration. It is clear that |P^| < \ξ\*°, so for ξ < /ς, Pξ has a dense subset of
power < ft. So we finish.
For ξ = ft, if pi e PK for i < «, clearly S = {i < K : cί(i) = NI} is
stationary, f ( ϊ ) = Sup[i Π Dom(pi)] < i is a pressing down function, hence by
Fodor Lemma on some stationary 5ι C 5, h has a constant value 7. There is
a closed unbounded C C K such that: if β G C, α < β, then Dom(pα) C /?. So
5χ Π C is still stationary, hence has power K and for α,/3 e C Π S\,pa,pβ are
compatible iff Pαf7,ί>/3t7 are compatible (in P7 or Pκ, does not matter). But
we have proved that P7 satisfies the K-chain condition, so we 
finish. 
U4.ι
We have proved
4.IB Claim. For Q = (Pi,Qi : i < α), a CS iteration of proper forcing, such
that for each i < a it is forced that Qi is with set of elements C Ord, we have,
for i < a:
1) PI = {/ G Pi', for j e Dom(/), f ( j ) is a hereditarily countable Pj-name}
is a dense subset of P^, and i < j < a and / G P ^ f\i G P/
2) If / is a Pa-name of a function from ω to Ord and cf (α) > NO Λen for a
dense open set of q G Pα, for some β < a and P^-name # of a function
from ω to Ord, q \\-Pa "f = g".
4.2 Theorem. Suppose P is not proper, then there is an Ni-complete forcing
notion Q, in fact Q - Levy(K!,2l
pl) will do, such that |Q| < 2'
pl and \\-Q "P
collapses some stationary 5 C ω\".
Proof. As P is not proper, there is a stationary 5 C <S^0(μ) which P destroys,
NO < μ < 2'
pl. So there are P-names F^ of n-place functions from μ to μ, such
that ll-p "Sm((μ, Fg,...)) Π 5 = 0". Let Q - Levy(Nι,μ) - {/ : / a function
from some α < ω\ into μ}.

§4. Martin's Axiom Revisited 
121
Fact A. \\~Q "S is a stationary subset of SχQ(μ)
n .
This is because Q is HI -complete hence, by 2.10, proper.
Fact B. The statement Ihp "5 C Sχ0(μ) is not stationary " is absolute, i.e., if
it holds in V it holds in V
Q.
We just have to check that the P-names F
L
U continue to satisfy the suitable
requirement (and Q adds no new member to P and no new member to 5).
Fact C. \\-Q " the ordinal μ has power HI".
This is trivial.
Fact D. If forcing by P destroys a stationary subset of Sχ0(A)(A = μ in our
case ), A of power H1? then forcing by P destroys some stationary subset of ω\.
(follows from Lemma 1.5 and 1.12(3)). 
U4.2
4.3 Theorem. Suppose ZFC has a model with a strongly inaccessible cardinal
K. Then ZFC has a model in which 2*° = H2 and
(*) If P is a forcing notion of power HI not destroying stationary subsets of
α i, and Ti C P is dense for i < ω\ then there is a directed G C P satisfying
Q toτi<ωl.
Proof. Notice that ΐ / V N "« > H 0&κ
< / ς = κ& |P| < «&(3λ < /ς)[P has the
λ-c.c.]" then Vp N "*;<* = Aί&« > H0".
This is proved exactly as the parallel fact in Theorem II 3.4. Now let
{Sa 
: a < /ς} be a partition of K to K sets such that β G Sa => β > α,
and |5α| = K. Define by induction on i < K a CS iterated forcing system
(Pi, Qi : i < K). Let (<ξ : ξ G 5α) be a list of the canonical P^-names of partial
orders on ω\. The induction hypothesis for i < K is:
(1) Qj is proper for j < i.
(2) the density of Pj is < K (i.e. it has a dense subset of cardinality < «).

122 
III. Proper Forcing
Assuming (Pj, Qj : j < i) is already defined, let
_ ί (ωi, <i> 
if Il-Pi "(ωi, <i) is proper"
\ Levy(Nι, 2*
1) 
otherwise
where Levy (Hi, 2
Hl) means "2
Nl and the Levy collapse are interpreted in V
Pί",
so are P^-names. Clearly Pi is proper (by Theorem 3.2 and remembering that
Levy(Nι,2
Kl) is Ni-complete hence by Theorem 2.10 proper). We still have to
check that density(Pi) < K but it is easy, note that we use Theorem 4.1. Finally
also Pκ is proper by 3.2 and (again by Theorem 4.1 ) satisfy the ft-c.c. which
makes it possible to prove V
Pκ N (*) exactly as in the proof of Theorem II 3.4,
but using 4.2 above. 
U4.3
Note that in view of Theorem 4.1 we have a parallel of MA for proper
forcing without assuming an inaccessible. We now return to a promise.
4.4 Theorem. Suppose 5 C ω\ is stationary co-stationary (i.e., also ω\\S
is stationary too). Then there is a forcing notion PS which shoots a closed
unbounded CCS (i.e., add such a set ) without collapsing cardinals (or
changing cofinalities).
Remark. So we cannot answer Magidor, Stavi's question positively in the orig-
inal version.
Remark. Assuming CH this was done by Baumgartner, Harrington, Kleinberg
[BHK]. Without CH, Abraham [A] and Baumgartner [B3] introduce forcing
notions which add a new closed unbounded subset of ω\ (for different purposes).
We can adapt each for proving 4.4., and will use a forcing similar to Abraham's.
Proof. Let P = Levy(N0> < NI) So P is essentially adding N! Cohen reals. If
Gp C P is (directed and ) generic over V, then Gp is also generic over L (the
constructible universe) as P € L and also over L[S\. By Theorem I 6.7 the
forcing P satisfies the countable chain condition and H^ p^ = ^
and V, V[Gp] have the same cardinals and cofinalities. Let

§5. On Aronszajn Trees 
123
Q = {G : C a closed bounded subset of 5 which belongs to L[S, Gp}}
GI < G2 iff GI = C2 Π (Max(CΊ) + 1)
Clearly Q is a forcing notion of power NI, so it cannot collapse cardinals or
regularity of cardinals except possibly KI (all finite subsets of S belong to Q).
So we shall prove that P* Q does not collapse NI. So let (in V) N -< (H(X), G),
TV countable, (p, q) G P * Q G N, (p, q) G TV, 5 = N Γ\ ωι e S and suppose
Gp C P is generic over V and p G Gp. Note that as S is a stationary subset
of ωι, there is such N (in V). So it is enough to find (q
r,p') > (q,p) which is
(N, P * Q)-generic. As P satisfies the countable chain condition, p is (TV, P)-
generic (by 2.9), hence N[GP] Π V = N. Clearly Q[GP] G L[S,GP] C V[GP],
now N[Gp] does not necessarily belongs to L[S, Gp], but N[Gp] Π L[S, Gp] is
N[GΊ] Π L5[5, Gp] = Lδ[S, Gp] G L[5, GP] and is a countable set in L[5, GP].
In LfίS, Gp] we have an enumeration of Q[Gp] Π 7V[Gp] (of length ω), say
(ςn : n < c«;} (but not of the set of dense subsets ); in fact we have it even
in L[S, Gp \(δ + 1)] (and as we use Levy(Ho, < NI) not Levy(^o? < ^) even in
L[5, GP \δ]). Now in L[5, GP] there is a Cohen generic real over V[GP \(δ + 1)]
say r* G
 ωω and we use it to construct a sequence G — (Cn : n < ω) such
that Cn G Q[Gp] in L[5, Gp] i.e. C £ L[S, Gp], e.g. we choose Cn by induction
on n; we let GO = q[GP] and we let Gn+ι be ςm(n) where m(n) is the first
natural number m such that: m > r*(n) and Q[Gp] |= "Gn < qm
n. Let G =
{q : ςf G Q[GP], and q G AΓ[GP] and for some n, Q[GP] |= q < Cn}. Clearly
G' C 7V[Gp]nQ[Gp] is generic over V[GP\(δ+l)}. So qi = {JnCnU{δ} G Q[GP]
is (AΓ[Gp],(3[Gp])-generic. Going to names we 
finish. 
D4>4
Remark. Also N in V[Gp] is O.K. as it still belongs to some V[Gp \a] for some
a <ω\.
§5. On Aronszajn Trees
5.1 Definition. 1) A cardinal K, is said to have the tree property if every tree
of height K in which every level has < K, members has a branch of length AC. A

124 
III. Proper Forcing
tree which is a counterexample to the tree property of K is called a K- Aronszajn
tree. By the Kόnig infinity lemma H0 has the tree property.
2) A ft- Aronszajn tree in which every antichain is of cardinality < K is
called a κ-Souslin tree. An Hi-Aronszajn tree, and an Ni-Souslin tree are called
an Aronszajn and a Souslin tree, respectively. A λ+-Aronszajn tree is said
to be special if it is the union of λ antichains, if λ = NO we may omit it. A
special Aronszajn tree cannot be Souslin, since in a Souslin tree every antichain
is countable, hence the tree, being uncountable, cannot be the union of N0
antichains. A λ-wide Aronszajn tree is a tree with ω\ levels, λ nodes and no
5.1 A Remark. It is easy to show that an Aronszajn tree T is special iff there
is a function / : T — > Q which is order preserving. A A~*~-tree which is special
is a λ
+-Aronszajn tree. The following was proved by Aronszajn, [Ku35] (and
5.3 is a well known generalization).
5.2 Theorem. There is a special Aronszajn tree T.
Proof. The members of the α-th level Ta of T will be increasing bounded
sequences of rational numbers (of length α) with < as the tree relation. When
we come to define Ta we assume that for all β < 7 < α and for all x G Tβ
and every rational q > Sup(Rang(x)) there is a y G TΊ such that x < y and
Sup(Rang(i/)) = q, and \Tβ\ = N0 If α = 0 take Ta = {<>}. If a = 7 + 1
take Ta = {z~ < q >: z G TΊ&q G Q&g > Sup(Rang(z))}, where Q is the
set of all rational numbers. Obviously \Ta\ = \Tβ\ 
N0 = NO- The induction
hypothesis holds also for β < α, as easily seen. If α is a limit ordinal then
for every x G Uβ<olTβ and every q > Sup(Rang(x)) we shall construct a
sequence y of length α which extends x such that Sup(Rang(y)) = q. Let
(βn 
: n < ω) be a (strictly) increasing sequence such that x G Tβ0 and
Sup{/3n : n < ω} = a. Let (qn : n < ω) be an increasing sequence of rationale
such that <?o > Sup(Rang(x)) and Supn<ωqn = q. We define now a member
xn G Tβn such that Sup (Rang (xn)) = qn as follows: x0 = x Assume xn G Tβn is

§5. On Aronszajn Trees 
125
defined; Sup(Rang(zn)) = qn < qn+ι then by the induction hypothesis there is
an zn+ι G T0n+l such that xn < xn+l and Sup(Rang(zn+ι)) = gn+ι Take
y = Un<u;
χn, then the length of y is Un<ωβn = a and Sup(Rang(y)) =
Sup(Rang(xn)) = Supn<ωqn = q. As y was chosen for x and # we let y = y^.
Lastly let Tα = {yx,g: x £ \Jβ<aTa and Sup(Rang(x)) < q e Q}. Since we
introduced one such y for each x e U^<αΓ/3 and q > Sup(Rang(x)) and there
are only K0 such pairs clearly |Γα| < K0.
T has no branch of length ω\ since if S is such a branch then U5 is an
increasing sequence of rationale of length ω\, which is impossible.
By our construction of T, for every x G T we know Sup(Rang(x)) is a
rational number. Therefore T = UgeQ{
χ ^ -^ : Sup(Rang(z)) = #}, and each
set {x E T : Sup(Rang(x)) = q} is clearly an antichain. Thus the tree T is a
special Aronszajn tree. 
U5.2
When we want to construct a ft+ Aronszajn tree we use, instead of the
rationale, the set Qκ of all sequences of ordinals < K of length K which are
eventually 0, ordered lexicographically. We can proceed as in the construction
of the Ni-Aronszajn tree, but when we construct Tα, for a limit ordinal a such
that cf (a) < K, we have to put in Ta all the increasing sequences y of members
of QΛ of length a such that y\β € Tβ for every β < a. Otherwise we have no
assurance that we can carry out the construction of Ta for a limit ordinal a
such that cf(α) = AC. In order to be sure that \Ta\ < /£, for every a < κ
+ we
need that κ
<κ = Σμ<κ ^ ~
 κ> since this will enable us to prove that if for
a limit ordinal α with cf (a) < K, we construct Tα as mentioned above we still
have |Tα| < K.
So we have presented a proof of the well known:
5.3 Theorem. If K = κ
<Kt then there is a ft
+-Aronszajn tree.
If the continuum hypothesis holds then Hj
0 = HI and therefore there is
an H2-Aronszajn tree. Therefore, if we look for a model with no N2-Aronszajn
tree, the continuum hypothesis should fail to hold in such a model. There is
a theorem which says that in such a model N2 is a weakly compact cardinal
in L, hence the consistency of the inexistence of K2-Aronszajn trees is at least

126 
III. Proper Forcing
as strong as the consistency of the existence of a weakly compact cardinal; we
shall see that these two consistency assumptions are equivalent. Mitchell had
proved this theorem, and Baumgartner gave a simpler proof by proper forcing.
The following theorem is due to Baumgartner, Malitz and Reinhart [BMR].
5.4 Theorem. For every tree T of height ω\ with no branch of length ω\ (no
restrictions on its cardinality) there is a c.c.c. forcing notion P such that in the
generic extension of V by P the tree T is special. If \T\ < 2
H° then by Martin's
axiom it follows that T is special.
As a consequence, if we assume Martin's axiom and 2^° > NI, then all
Aronszajn trees are special and hence there are no Souslin trees.
Proof. Let P be the set of all finite functions p from T into ω such that if
p(x) — p(y) then x and y are incomparable. For every x € T the set Xx of all
members of P whose domain contains x is obviously dense in P, hence if G is
a generic subset of P, F = UG is defined on all of T and if F(x) — F(y) then x
and y are incomparable. If we have Martin's axiom and \T\ < 2^° then there are
< 2N° dense sets Ix and the directed set G can be taken to intersect all of them,
and F = UG is as above, i.e., it specializes T since T — Un{x : F(x) = n}.
We still have to prove that P satisfies the c.c.c. Suppose there is an un-
countable subset W of P whose members are pairwise incompatible. Without
loss of generality we can assume that all members of W have the same car-
dinality, that their domains form a Δ-system with the heart s and that for
all p G W,p\s is the same function. Denote W = {pa : a < ω\} and let
Dom(pα) \ s = {x t t fi,... ,£α,n} Let a,β < ωi, pa and pβ are incompatible,
hence pa Upβ φ P. Since pa and pβ coincide on s and the rest of their domains
are disjoint we must have for some 1 < k,l < n, pa(xajk) = Pβfaβj) 
while xa^
and Xβtt are comparable. Let Ya,k,ι = {β < ωι '• β ¥" α>Pα(
χα,/c) = pβ(xβιι)
and xα>fc and Xβj are comparable }. As we saw Uι<k,e<n Ya,k,t — ωι \ {α}
Let E be a uniform ultrafilter on α i, then for every α there are k and I such
that Ya,k,e £ E, let fc(α) and ί(a) be such. Therefore for an uncountable sub-
set A of ωι,fc(α) = k and i(a) = £ for α G A. Let a,β € A then YQ^,

§6. Maybe There Is No N2-Aronszajn Tree 
127
y/3,fc,£ G E hence Yα,;^ Π 10,*,* G £ and therefore |yα,/fe^ Π y/j.fc,*! = NI. Let
7 € y^^Γiy^M th
en x«,/c and Xβtk are comparable with XΊJ. Now £7/s with
different 7 G Ya,k,t Π 10,/c,.£ are different, and since there are only countably
many members of T below xa,k or below Xβ^ (in T's sense) there must be
some 7 G Ya,k,e n ^/3,M sucn that
 xτ,^ i
s greater than both xa^ and x/^ (in
T's sense) and since Γ is a tree, xa^ is comparable with Xβ^ This holds for all
α, β € ^4 hence Γ has a linearly ordered subset of cardinality KI: {xα,fc ' & G -A},
and therefore a branch of length cji, contradicting our assumption. 
D5.4
§6. Maybe There Is No N2-Aronszajn Tree
Toward this we mention (see for history, 6.2 below):
6.1 Lemma. 1) Assume V \= "2
H° > tti&T is an N2-Aronszajn tree." Let P
be an Hi-complete forcing notion. Then V[P] 
N= "Γ has no cofinal branches".
(#2 may become of cardinality NI in V[P] so it does not have to stay an ^2-
Aronszajn tree.)
2) Assume:
(a) T is a tree with 5* levels such that cf(<5*) > NO
(b) for no limit δ < 5* of cofinality N0 can we find pairwise distinct xη G T§
for η G
 ω2 such that: [α < δ => {xη \a : η G
 ω2} is finite] (χη \a is the
unique y <τ xη, y G Tα)
(c) P is an Hi-complete.
Γften forcing by P add no new £*-branch to Γ.
Proof. 1) Assume that po N~ "-B is a cofinal branch in Γ". We shall define in V
two functions F :
 ω>el — > Γfα for some α < ω2 and 5 :
 ω>2 — > P such that:
(i) F(<>) = the root of Γ, 5(<>) = p0
(ii) for all x G 2
<ω we have 5(x) Ih
 uF(x) G β".
(iii) x < y =» 5(χ) <P 5(y), F(x) <τ F(j/), and
(iv) F(χ
Λ < 0 >) and F(χ
Λ < 1 >) are incomparable in Γ.

128 
III. Proper Forcing
F(η) and 5(77) are defined by induction on the length of 77. Assume 5(77),
F(η) are defined we shall define S(τf (£}), F(τf (£)) for I = 0,1. Since 5(77) >P
po, S(η) has, for every β < ω^, an extension which forces some member of Tβ
(i.e., the set of vertices of height β in the tree) to be in B. If {t : F(η) <τ t and
there is p >p S(ή) such that p Ih "£ G B"} was a set of pairwise comparable
members of T then they would be a branch of T in V, contradicting our
hypothesis. Therefore there are two incomparable £'s in this set, take one to
be F(η~ < 0 >) and the other to be F(η~ < 1 >) and choose S(η~ < 0 >)
and 5(77
Λ < 1 >) as conditions > S(η) such that S(η~ < ί >) Ih "F(rf < i >
) G B" for I G {0,1}. Since the range of F is countable it is included in some
T\OL for some a < ω<2. Since P is HI -complete, for every 77 G 2
ω,P contains a
condition pη which is an upper bound of {5(77 fn) : n < ω}. Since pη > PQ there
is a ^ > pη and a tη G Tα such that ς^ Ih % G B". Let ^ ^ 77, and i/, 77 G 2
ω.
Let n be the least such that v\n φ 77fn, then by requirement (iv) above we have
that F(v\n) and F(η\n) are incomparable in Γ. Now P |= "^ > pη > S(ηfn)",
hence also ^ Ih "F(η\n) G B". Since ^ forces that β is a branch of Γ and that
^,^(77fn) G B clearly tη and F(nfn) are comparable in T. Since the height
of F(η\ri) is < a and the height of tη is α we have F(η\ri) <τ tη Similarly
also F(v\n) <τ tι> and since F(nfn) and F(v\ri) are <τ-incomparable also tη
and tv are <τ-incomparable and hence different. Thus Ta contains 2
K° > HI
different members tη, contradicting the assumption that T is an K2-Aronszajn
tree.
2) Similar proof. 
Πβ.i
6.2 Theorem. If ZFC is consistent with the existence of a weakly compact
cardinal then ZFC is consistent with 2^° = ^2 and the non-existence of N2-
Aronszajn trees.
Remark. By what was mentioned in the last section we have "iff" in this
theorem. Mitchell had proved the theorem and Baumgartner [B3] gave a simpler
proof by proper forcing.

§6. Maybe There Is No N2-Aronszajn Tree 
129
Proof. Let K be a weakly compact cardinal. We shall use a system (P^, Qi : i <
K) of iterated forcing with countable support. Qi will be the composition of two
forcing notions Q^o
 and Qi,ι Now Q^o will be the forcing notion of countable
functions from ω\ into ω2 (in V[Pi]) which collapses N2 i.e. Levy(Nι,N2). Now
Qito is obviously Hi-complete. VfPijfQ^o] contains wide trees of cardinality
KI and ω\ levels with no ωi-branches (e.g., {(α,/?) : β < a < ω\} with
(a,β) <τ (α
1,/^) iff α = at&/3 < /3
f). Let W be the disjoint union of all
such trees (up to isomorphisms), as a single tree with at most 2**
1 roots ( we
take all the trees to be ω\ x {i} with some partial orderings). The tree have
ω\ levels, < 2**
1 nodes and no α i-branch. By Theorem 5.4 there is a c.c.c.
forcing Q^i which makes this tree special, and hence makes every fti-wide tree
of cardinality NI special, provided it has no ω\- branch.
Note that in V
Pί, Qi,o has cardinality < 2
Hl, and Q^\ in V 
has
cardinality < 2**
1. Let us notice that these descriptions of Q^Q in V[P»] and
Qitι in V[Pi][Qi5o] = V[Pί * Qΐ,o] really yield corresponding names Qί>0
 and
Qi,ι by the Lemma of the existential completeness which we proved.
Since Q^Q is tti-complete over V[Pi] and since <3i,ι satisfies the c.c.c. over
V[Pt][Qi,o], both are proper, hence Q^Q * (5i,ι is proper and therefore also each
PΪ,Z < K, is proper. Thus HI is not collapsed even in V[PK] (by 3.2). Let λ be
an inaccessible cardinal, λ < «. Our construction of Pi and Q^ are such that for
i < X we have \Qι\ < λ, hence each Pi has a dense subset of cardinality < λ.
Therefore, as we proved in 4.1 also PΛ satisfies the λ-c.c. and therefore λ is not
collapsed in V[Pχ] and thus V[Pχ] 
\= "λ > K2" (since NI too is not collapsed).
Before finishing we prove two lemmas.
6.3 Lemma. V[P\] N " there are at least λ real numbers " for every λ < K.
Proof. It suffices to prove that for every i < X there is a real in V[P$+i] \
V[Pi][Qϊ,o] We shall see that a forcing notion such as Q^i introduces a Cohen
real over the previous universe. Let us simplify the notation by writing V^ for
V[Pi][Qi}o]j
 and Q f°
r Qί,ι
 and T f°
r tne tree in V^ which Q makes special.
Let (a,j 
: j < ω) be an ascending sequence in T in V^ (i.e., j < k < ω —>

130 
III. Proper Forcing
dj <τ α/c) Now Q introduces a function F on T into ω such that if α, b G T
and F(a) = F(b) then α and b are <τ-incomparable. For j < ω let t, — 0 if
F(cij) is even and tj = I if F(α^) is odd. We shall see that t — (tj : j < ω)
is a Cohen real over V^ i.e., for every dense subset I of
 ω><2 in V^,t\n G J
for some n < ω. For p G Q let p* = {{j, s) : j < ω and α^ G Dom(p) and
([5 = 0&p(αj) is even] or [s = I &εp(a,j) is odd] )}. Let Qx = {p G Q : p* G J};
we shall see that Qx is a dense subset of Q in V^. Clearly Qx G V"l" since
it is defined in V^ . For q G Q let r > <?*,r G T; there is such an r since
I is dense in
 ω>2. Let n be a strict upper bound of the range of q. Let
p = q U {{α^ , 2n + 2j + r(j)) : j G Dom(r) &α, £ Dom(ςr)}. Obviously p G Q,
and p* = r G J hence p G Qj. Since p>q we know Qj is dense. Let G be the
generic subset of Q then there is a p G G Π Qj such that p* G J, and for some
n < ω,p* G
 n2 (as p* G Q =
 ω>2). Since p C F[G] we have t[G\ \n = p*, hence
t[G\ \n G J, which establishes that t is a Cohen real. 
D6.3
6.4 Lemma. For every inaccessible λ < «, V[Pλ] ^ "λ
Proof. Let G be a generic subset of Pλ. We saw already that V[G] \= "λ > N2".
Suppose now that V[G\ 
\= "N2 = μ", where μ < λ. Let F G V[G\ be a function
on μ x ωi such that for all 0 < α < μ we have {F(α,/J) : /? < α i} = α, i.e.,
F(α, — ) is a mapping of ωi on α. Let F be a name of F and let po € G force
that F is as we described. For each α < μ and /? < ω\ let Jα^ be a maximal
antichain of members of P\ which are > po and which give definite values to
F(α,/3). Since as we saw, PΛ satisfies the λ-c.c. condition, clearly \Iaίβ\ < λ.
Let J = Uα<μ>/3<ωιIα>/3. Since λ is regular \I\ < λ. Since each member of
JU {po} is a countable function on λ there is a 7 < λ such that JU {po} ζ Pγ
Let GΊ = G Π P7, then clearly F G V[G7] (since we define F(α, β) in V[G7] to
be that 7 for which there is a ςf G I0iβ^GΊ such that g Ih "F(α, β) = 7"). Then
V[G7] N μ < «2, but since V[G] N "μ = ^2" we have V[GΊ] N "μ - N2". But
since we force above V[GΊ] with QΊ$[GΊ} which collapses the H2 of V[G7], we
have V[GΊ][GΊfl] 
N "μ < H2" hence V[G\ N "μ < K2", which is a contradiction.

§6. Maybe There Is No K2-Aronszajn Tree 
131
Continuation of the Proof of Theorem 6.2. Now let us go on with the proof
of the theorem. Assume that there is a PQ G Pκ such that PQ lhpκ " there is
an K2-Aronszajn tree," i.e., po "~pκ " there is a ft-Aronszajn tree T on ft and
a function F on ft such that for a < ft, F(α) is the rank of a in T, (since by
the lemma V[PK] 
\= "K2 — ft"), i.e. po "~PK " there is a transitive relation T
on ft such that for all a,β, 7 G ft we have: [αT7&/3T7 => αT7] and there is a
function F from ft into ft such that for all α,/3 < ft: if αT/3 then F(α) < F(/3),
for all a G ft and 7 < F(a) there is a βTa such that F(/3) = 7, and for all
7 € ft there is a /? G ft such that for all α G ft if F(α) = 7 then α < /?, and for
all £ C ft there are a, β G 5 such that a ^ β Λ -ιαTβ Λ --/?Tα, or else there is
a β < ft such that β C /J". This implies, by the existential completeness that
there are canonical names of T and F of relations on ft such that:
(*) Po "~ "T is a transitive relation on ft and (Vα,/3,7 < ^(aTj&εβTj 
—»
αT7) and (Vα,^,7 < /c) [α = /? V αΓ/3 V /3Tα] and (3F : ft -^ κ)(Va,β < ft)
[(αΓ/3 -> F(α) < F(^)) & (/3 < F(α) -^ (37 < ft)(7Tα Λ F(-γ) = β))} and
(V7 < ft)(Ξ/3 < ft)(Vα < ft)(F(α) = 7 -* α < /?)"
and for every canonical name B of a subset of ft
(**) Po IK* "(3α, /? G B)(α 7^ /? Λ -παΓ/3 Λ -ι/3Γα) V(3/3 G κ)(B C β)".
Now a name X of a subset of ft x ft (like T) or ft (like B) or even a subset of
H(κ)
v, we can assume the name is canonical (see Definition 15.12 and Theorem
I 5.13). So X is a subset of {(p, x) : p G P« and x G #(«)}, so a subset of ίΓ(ft)
and even assume that for each x G H(κ) the set Jχ>x 
== {p : (p, x) G X} is
an antichain of Pκ. But PΛ satisfies the ft.c.c. hence x G #(ft) => \Zχ,x\ < ^,
hence E = {μ < ft : μ strong limit singular, and [j < μ => Qίj G H(/x)] and
x G #(μ) =» Xχ,x G H(μ)} is a club of ft. So for μ G F, XΓ\H(μ) is a Pμ-name.
Consider now the structure (#(ft), G,Γ, F). The statement (*) is a first
order statement about this structure, and that (**) holds for every B as
mentioned is a ΐl\ statement about this structure i.e. a statement of the form:
for every subset X of the model some first model sentence holds. We now use
one of the equivalent forms of the definition of weakly compact (can be read
from the proof, or see e.g. [J]). Since ft is weakly compact and therefore ΐl\-

132 
III. Proper Forcing
indescribable there is an inaccessible cardinal λ < ft, from E such that (H(λ), G
, TfΊλxλ, FΠλxλ) is an elementary substructure of (H(κ), G, T, F) and satisfies
the I!* statement mentioned above. P« and lhpκ are definable in (H(κ), G, T, F)
and the same definitions give Pχ and lhPλ in (ίf(λ), G , T n λ x λ , F ( Ί λ x λ ) .
Therefore (TΠλ x λ)[Gλ] is a λ-Aronszajn tree in V[G\] (where G is the generic
subset of Pκ over V and GΛ = G Π Pλ). We claim that (T Π λ x λ)[Gλ] is the
part of the tree T[G] up to level λ. Let (α, β) G (T Π λ x λ)[Gχ] then α, β < X
and for some p G Gλ, p lt-pλ {α,/?} G (Γ Π λ x λ), hence p \\-PK "(α,/3) G Γ"
(by the relation between the two above mentioned structures), hence, since
p G G, (a,β) G T[G], shows that (ΓΠλ x λ)[Gλ] is included in the part of Γ[G]
up to level λ. The proof of the equality of these two trees will be completed
once we show that in T[G] all the ordinals in the levels below λ are < λ. Let
μ < X then, since (*) holds for the structure (if(λ),...) there is a p G G\ and
an ordinal β < λ such that p lhPλ (Vα G λ) (F Π λ x λ)(α) = μ -» α < /?),
therefore p lhPκ (Vα G ft) (F(α) = μ —> α < /?), and since p G G we have in
V[G] that all the ordinals in the level μ are < β < X.
Thus in V[P\] we know T Π (λ x λ) is a λ-Aronszajn tree, i.e., an ^2-
Aronszajn tree. Now we saw that in V[P\] there are at least λ real numbers,
i.e., 2^° > ^2 m ^"[-Pλ]
 an<i we know Qλ,o is an ^i-complete forcing notion
in V[Pλ], therefore, by Lemma 6.1 T Π (λ x λ) still has no cofinal branch in
y[P\][Qλ,o] Since in ^[P\][Qλ,o] we have |λ| = HI there is a subset α of λ
of order-type ω\. Let b be the set of all the ordinals in Γ Π λ whose level is
in α, so T Π b is an Ni-tree with no cofinal branch in ^[Pχ][Qλ,o] Now Qλ,ι
makes this tree special (dealing with a tree isomorphic to it). Thus the tree
T\{t 
: F(t) G α} is a special Ni-tree in V[Pλ+ι]
 an<i therefore it stays so also
in V[PΛ] since the function which makes it special is in V[P\+ι] and hence also
in V[PK]. Thus in V^[P^] we have T\X is a tree which has no cofinal branch
and {t G T : F(t) G α} is (in V
Pi+l) an Hi-wide Aronszajn tree, but this is a
contradiction since T Π (λ x λ) is the part up to level λ of the ft-tree T and as
such it must have branches of length λ. 
D6.2
We used a weakly compact ft to obtain a generic extension in which there
are no ^-Aronszajn trees. If all we want is to obtain an extension of V in

§7. Closed Unbounded Subsets of ω\ Can Run Away from Many Sets 
133
which there are no special ^2-Aronszajn trees ( i.e., trees which are the union
of NI antichains ) then it suffices to use a Mahlo cardinal K (see [B3] on this).
§7. Closed Unbounded Subsets of ωι Can Run
Away from Many Sets
Baumgartner [B3] has proved the consistency of the following with ZFC+2^° =
N2: if Ai C ωι, for i < α i, is infinite countable then there is a closed unbounded
C C ω\ such that Ai £ C for every i < ω\. We prove a somewhat stronger
assertion.
7.1 Theorem. ZFC + 2
H° = N2 is consistent with:
(*) if Ai C α i has no last element and is nonempty and has order type
< SupAi, for i < ωι, then there is a closed unbounded subset C of ωi, such
that C Π ^4i is bounded in ^ for every i
Remark. Abraham improved Baumgartner's result to:
ZFC + 2
K° = anything +
(**) there are N2 closed unbounded subsets of KI, the intersection of any KI of
them is finite.
Galvin proved previously that CH implies (*) fail. Our proof is similar to
[Sh80 §4].
Proof. We start with a model V satisfying CH, and use CS iterated forcing of
length u;2, such that in the intermediate stages CH still holds. So by 4.1, it
suffices to prove.
7.2 Lemma. Suppose V satisfies CH. There is a proper forcing notion of power
NI which adds a closed unbounded subset of C of ωι and Sup[C Π A] < Sup A
for any infinite A C ω\ with no last element and order type < Sup(^4), which
belongs to V.

134 
III. Proper Forcing
Discussion. A plausible forcing to exemplify 7.2 is:
Q = {C :C a closed countable subset of ω\ so that if A G V is a set
of ordinals < ω\, δ = Sup(A) is a limit ordinal, A has order
type < <J, then Sup [A Π C] < δ}
(so if δ > sup(C) this holds trivially), with the order
CΊ < C2 iff C2 Π [(MaxCi) + 1] = Ci.
So the elements of Q are approximations to the required C. It is clear that a
generic subset of Q gives a C as required, provided that N! is not collapsed;
hence the main point is to prove the properness of Q. Unfortunately it seems
Q is not proper, in fact has no infinite members. However if we want to add
a C G Q which is (AT, Q)-generic for some TV -< (ίf(λ),G) a c.c.c., forcing is
enough. So we could first force with some P, |P| = ^2?^ satisfies the c.c.c.
such that
Ihp "2*° = N2 and MA holds".
Then we define Q in V[Gp] for Gp C P generic over V; similar to the definition
above but members of the forcing notion are from V[Gp] whereas the A for
which we demand sup(C) Π A < sup(A) are from V. So
Q = {C € V[G]: C a closed countable subset of ω\, and if A G V is
infinite with no last element and (order type A) < SupA < MaxC, then
Sup(CnA) < SupA}.
Now Q is proper, and adds a C as required, so P*ζ) adds a C as required.
Unfortunately P* Q also collapses ^2, so if we are willing to use some strongly
inaccessible K, > NO> there is no problem. Otherwise, we use a restricted version
of MA, which is consistent with 2
K° = NI, so 7.3, 7.4, 7.5 below prove Lemma
7.2 hence Theorem 7.1. Throughout we use the order < on Q defined above.
7.3 Claim. Suppose
(a) V satisfies CH, P is a forcing notion of power HI satisfying the c.c.c.
and G C P is generic over V.

§7. Closed Unbounded Subsets of ωι Can Run Away from Many Sets 
135
(b) δ < ωι is a limit ordinal, (Vα,/3 < δ)[a + β < δ], R e V[G\ is a
countable family of closed bounded subsets of δ, ordered by C\ < C2
iff Cι = C2 Π (MaxCΊ + 1)
(c) Define (in V[G\):
Q = QR
 
d= {(C,{(Ai,ai) 
: i < n}) 
: C G R,n < ω, for each
i < n, Ai G V is a subset of δ of order type < J, and C Π A* C α< and
a.i is an ordinal < 5},
the order is
(CMί^αJ) : i < n
1}) < (C
2,{(A
2,α
2) : t < n
2}) itfC
1 < C
2,n* <
n
2 and for every i < n
1 for some j < n
2 we have (A\,a\) = (Λ?,α?)
and C
2 \ C
1 is disjoint to A\.
Then
1) QR satisfies the c.c.c.
2) if for every C G fl, {/? < ί : C U {/?} G R] has order type 5 then
"~Q "
 UCGGQ C' is an unbounded subset of ί".
Proof. 1) Trivial, as any two conditions with the same first coordinate are com-
patible, and there are only countably many possibilities for the first coordinate.
(2) Trivial, because if Aι,...,A n are subsets of & of order type < 5,
their union has order type < δ by Dushnik, Miller [DM]. So for every p =
(C, {(At, at):ί< n}) G Q the set
Bp = {β < a : p < (C U {β}, {(At, a€) : £ < n}) G Q and β > max(C)}
has order type δ because
Bp = {0:C\J{β}eR}\(\jAt\J( 
maxC-f 1))
t<n
and the first set has order type δ (by an assumption) whereas the second has
order type < δ (by the previous sentence as otp(A^) < δ by the definition of
Q, and otp([0, maxC + 1)) < δ by the assumption on R). Now Bp C δ being
of order type 5, necessarily is unbounded in 6 and we are done. 
Dγ.s

136 
III. Proper Forcing
7.4 Claim. Suppose V satisfies CH. There is a forcing notion P of power HI
satisfying the c.c.c., such that the following statement is forced:
(*) Suppose δ < ω\ is limit, (Vα,/3 < δ) [a + β < δ] (equivalently <5 is an
ordinal power of ω) and R is a countable family of closed bounded subsets of
δ such that (VG G Λ)(V/3) (MaxC < β < δ -> C U {/?} € Λ) and for n < ω we
have: Zn is a dense open subset of R such that X\ = {(C, 0) : C G Tn} C Qβ
is pre-dense in Qβ (where QR is from 7.3 clause (c)). Then there are Cn G Λ,
such that Cn < Cn+ι, SupnMaxGn = 5, Cn+ι G In and for every A G V, A C 5
of order type < 5, Sup[A Π (UnCn)] < 5; moreover we can choose CQ e R
arbitrarily.
Proof. We can use an FS iteration (Pi, Qi : i < ω\) of forcing notions satisfying
the c.c.c., such that for every possible R and δ (which are in V or appear in
V
Pί for some i < ω) for uncountably many j < ω\ in V
p* we have Qj = QR.
7.5 Claim. Suppose V satisfies CH, P is as in 7.4, and Q = {C : C G V
p
a closed bounded subset of ω\, such that for every infinite countable A G V,
A C cji with no last element, and (order type of A) < supΛ, if SupA < MaxC
then Sup(A Π C) < Sup A} ordered by: C\ < C2 iff C\ = C2 Π ( maxC + 1).
T/ien Q is proper (i.e., Ihp "Q is proper ") and has cardinality < HI.
Proof. Let G C P be generic over V, λ be regular big enough and let in V[G]
S
 d= {N : N x (ff(λ),€),P G TV, #(N2)V G TV, G G AT, and there is a
sequence (Ni : i < δ) such that A^ X AT, (A^ : j < i) G A^+i, A^ = Ui<$Wi and
(5 = AT Π α i (automatically Q[G] £ N)}
It is easy to check the following facts, and by 2.8 they imply Q is proper,
so we finish the proof of 7.2, hence 7.1.
Fact A. S G Γ>κ0((/f(λ)) (in V[G], remember we do not distinguish strictly
between A/' and its set of elements).

§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are No Kurepa Trees 
137
Fact B. In V[G\: if N G 5, δ = N Γ] ω^ R
 d= Q[G] Π TV, and J G TV is a dense
open subset of Q[G],
(a) {(C, {(Ai,a.i) 
: i < n}) e QR : C eIΓ\R} is a, dense subset of QR and
{(C, 0) : C G IΓ\ R} is a pre-dense subset of QR.
(b) For every C G Q[G] Π AT there is C*, C < C* G Q[G] and C* is (Q[G\,N)-
generic.
Proof. Let (A^ : i < 5} be as in the definition of 5. Let pQ = (CO,
<£ < n}) G Qβ and let J G Af be a dense open subset of Q[G], so for some i < δ
we have J, p G A^. Let <^ be A^ Π ωι. Let ^ = {j < δ : A{ Π [δj, δj+ι) ^ 0},
so otp(^) < otp(Aι) < δ. hence as in the proof of 7.3 there is j G (i, δ) which
does not belong to A'£ for t < ω. Now pi = (CO U {(^ },{(^,α^) : £ < n})
belongs to R and is > p. There is C2 G Q[G] Π Γ[G] such that C U {^} < C2
(in Q[G]), hence there is such C% in A^-+ι (as relevant parameters belong to it).
Now p2 = (C-2, {(^, θίt}\i< n}) belongs to Q[G] Π N and is > pi > pQ. This
proves clause (a).
Let (In : n < ω) list the dense open subsets of Q[G] which belong to Af
and C G Q[G] Π AT, and let Jn = Ί^ Π AT, and let β = Q[G\ Π AT with the
inherited order. Trivially C G R & max(C) < /? < AT Π α i => C <Λ C U {/?},
and the other assumption in (*) of 7.4 holds by the previous paragraph, so
there is (Cn : n < ω) as guaranteed there (with C < CQ).
Now C* = U Cn U {AΓΠα i} belongs to Q[G], Cn < C* and Cn+ι G Tn C
n<ω
Z^, so as Jn was open, C* G Tn. So we have proved clause (b) too. 07.5,7.2,7.1
§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are
No Kurepa Trees
8.1 Definition. For any regular ft, a ft-Kurepa tree is a ft-tree such that
the number of its ^-branches is > K. Let the ft-Kurepa Hypothesis (in short
K— KH) be the statement "there exists ft-Kurepa tree". We may write "KH"

138 
III. Proper Forcing
instead of ωi-KH. (Be careful: KH says "there are Kurepa trees", but SH says
"there are no Souslin trees"!)
Solovay proved that Kurepa trees exist if V = L, more generally Jensen
[Jn] proved the existence of ft-Kurepa's trees follows from Jensen's <0
+, which
holds in L for every regular uncountable ft which is not "too large" . But -<KH
is consistent with of ZFC -f GCH, which was first shown by Silver in [Si67],
starting from a strongly inaccessible ft. The method of his proof is as follows:
collapse every λ, ω\ < X < ft using Levy's collapse Levy(Nι, < ft) — {p : \p\ <
NI & p is a function with Dom(p) C K x ωι Λ V{α,ξ) G Όom(p)(p(a,ξ) e a)}.
Now Levy(Nι,< ft) can be viewed as an iteration of length ft, and satisfied
the ft-c.c. on the one hand, and Ni-completeness on the other hand. Therefore
NI does not get collapsed, as well as any cardinal ^a > ft. Suppose now that
T e V
p is an α i-tree. So it has appeared already at an earlier stage along the
iteration, say T € Fp/, where Vp is obtained from Vp> by an Ni-complete
forcing. In Vp the tree T has at most 2**
1 branches, and this is less than ft.
Note that by 6.1(2) the tree T can have no new ωi-branches in V
p . So T is
not a Kurepa tree in V
p.
Devlin in [Del] and [De2] has shown, starting from a strongly inaccessible,
the consistency of GCH + SH -f ->KH. For a proof by iteration see Baumgartner
[B3].
8.2 Remark. In both proofs the inaccessible cardinal is necessary, for
implies that ^2 is an inaccessible cardinal of L.
The main point in Silver's proof, is the fact that Ki-complete forcing
notions do not add new branches to ωi-trees. In this section we prove that
the property of not adding branches is preserved under CS iterations and use
this to give another proof of CON(SH + ->KH) from the consistency of "(3ft) ft
inaccessible". This serve as a prelude and motivation to Chapter V (and even
more Chapter VI), which deals with preservation of such properties. In chapter
V we will show that moreover the iteration we construct here does not add
reals, so (since we start from a model of CH) we will get a model of "CH + SH
+ -KH".

§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are No Kurepa Trees 
139
8.3 Definition. A forcing notion Q is good for an ωi-tree T (so the α-th level
of T is TO, etc.), if for any countable elementary submodel N -< H(χ, G), for
X large enough, with T, Q G TV, and every condition p G N Γ\ Q, there exists
an (AT, Q)—generic condition q > p such that if τ G AT is a name, </ Ih "either
χ[Gp] is an old branch of T or τ[Gp] Π T<«5N is not a branch of T<(5N with a
bound x G T$N", where SN denotes N Π ω\ = sup(N Π α i).
8.4 Fact. Q is good for an ωi-tree Γ iff Q is proper and Q does not add a new
branch to T.
Proof. =>: Suppose Q is good for T. The properness of Q follows trivially.
Let p \\-Q "τ is a new branch of T", and we shall derive a contradiction; let
{T,p, Q} G AT -< (ίf(χ), G), x large enough and AT countable. So let g > P be
as in the definition of good.
If τ[G] is an old branch — we are done. If not, τ[G] Π T<$N ^ Bx = {y :
y <τ x] for all x G T$N. But this implies that τ[G] being linearly ordered by
<τ has no member of level > £#, so it cannot be a ωi-branch of T.
Conversely, suppose that Q is proper and does not add a new ω\ -branch to
T. Let τ,p G AT be as in the definition, and pick q > p which is (A/", Q)-generic,
and a generic subset G of P over V with ςι G G. So τ[G] G W[G] X H(χ, G)[G],
and r[G] is either an old ωi-branch, or is not an ωi-branch at all. In the first
case we are done. Now if r[G] is not an α i-branch, then either (3α)τ[G](ΊTα = 0
or 3α;,y G τ[G] such that x, y are not comparable in T. By elementaricity of
Af[G], such an a or such x, y exist also in N[G\. So q forces what is required by
the definition. 
Dg.4
8.5 Theorem. If Γ is an ωi-tree and Q — (Pi,Qi : i < a) is a countable
support iteration such that for all i the forcing notion Qi (is forced to be) good
for Γ, then also Pa — Lim(Q) is good for Γ.
Proof. We break here the proof into two parts. The first part is nothing more
than another proof of the preservation of properness under countable support
iteration. It is meant to help those readers who find the proof in III 3.2 hard

140 
III. Proper Forcing
to follow. In the second part we show how to extend the first part in order to
get a full proof of the theorem.
Let Q = (Pi,Qj 
: i < a,j < a) be a countable support iteration such that
\\-P. "Qj is proper" for all j < a. We fix some regular χ which is large enough
for what we need. As in III 3.2 we prove by induction on j < a the condition
(*)j, which is stronger than the proper ness of PJ:
(*)j Pj is good for T, and
(a) forcing with Pj add no ωi-branches to T and:
(b) for all i < j and countable N -< (#(χ), G) such that i, j, Q e N and
p G PJ ΠTV and an (TV, P^)- generic q G Pi which satisfies q > p\i there
is r such that:
(i) r e Pj
(ii) r\i = q
(iiΐ) r is (TV, Pj)-generic
(iv) p < r
(v) Όom(q)n[iJ) = NΠ[iJ).
The proof is split to cases. Note that though in the statement (*)j(b) we
say "for i < j" it holds for i = j too.
Case 1. j = 0
Trivial.
Case 2. j a successor ordinal
Let j — jι + 1, now (a) of (*)^ holds as (a) of (*)J 1 holds and Qi is good for T,
so we shall deal with (b) of (*)^. So by the induction hypothesis applied to j\
and i (see remark above) w.l.o.g. i = j\ and continue as in the proof of III 3.2.
Case 3. j a limit ordinal
We first look at a case of clause (b) of (*)j and/or of clause (b) of (*) j (by 8.4
this suffice) so i, N, p, q are given as there.
As TV is countable, we can pick a sequence of ordinals of order type ω,
(in : n < ω) which is cofinal in TV Πj and such that io = i and in G TV for all n.
Let (Tn : n < ω), enumerate all the dense sets of Pj in TV. Let ((τn, xn) : n < ω)

§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are No Kurepa Trees 
141
enumerate the pairs (τ, x) where r is a P^-name from N and x G TδN where
c 
def A r _
ό^y — YV Πu;ι.
We define by induction on n a condition gn and a P^-name of conditions pn
such that:
(a) gn G Pίn is (W,P<n)-generic.
(b) qo = q
(c) gn+ι Γzn = ςn, Dom(^n) = Dom(<?o) U ([i0, in) Π AT)
(d) PQ = p and pn is a P^-name of a member of Pj
(e) <7nlhPίrι ' K G P nJnΠΛP'
(0 9nlHp,n "pfίneGp,/
(g) 
<7n I^Pin "Pn < Pn+l"
(h) if GJ C P^ is generic over V and qn G G^ Π Pίn and pn[Gj 
Γ\ Pin] G G
?PJ.
then either (3α < ^)(lin[G'j] Π Γα g {ί : t <τ xn} or Γ Π rίn[Gj] is an
ω\ -branch of T from V.
Let us carry the induction. For n = 0 there is no problem.
Suppose now that we have defined qn >Pn and let us define pn+ 1, qn+ι> Pick
a generic subset Gpίn of Pin such that #n G Gin. So by clause (e) we have
Pn[Gin] G Pj Π JV, let p;
 d= pn[Gin]. Define, in y, the set Jn = {u G P<n :
(3r)[p* < r & r G J n & u = rfin]} G V. As pn[Gin] belongs to N, so does Jn.
Clearly, Jn is dense above pn[Gin] \in. Define jfn = Jn U {IΛ : u is incompatible
with p^Γ^n} £ V. So Jn e N is & dense subset of Pίτι. By the genericity of
gn, the set Jn Π A/" is predense above <?n, and as a consequence there exists a
condition u0 G JnΓ\NΓ\Girι . As by clause (f) we have p* fin = pn[Gin] \in € Gίn ,
clearly WQ cannot be incompatible with it, but UQ G Jn so by the definition of
Jn necessarily UQ G Jn. There is, therefore, a condition r0 G In such that
UQ = r0 Nn By elementaricity of TV, we can assume that ΓQ G N.

142 
III. Proper Forcing
In V[Gin], for any p e Pj/Gin = {p € Pj : p\in e Gin} let B% = 5£[GJ =
{t G T : p \Yp.jGi 
"^ ^ In"}> equivalently {£ G T : for some p satisfying
p < p' G Pj/Gin we have p' Ih "£ G τn"} We now choose p^+1, αn such that:
(i) Pfc+i € P, /Gίn
(ϋ) ro <P, p°+1 € N(Gin]
(iii) one of the following occurs
(a) Bς[Gin]nTan£{t:t<τxn}
(
b) Pn+i
 lhP,/Gίτι
 α^Πrn is an ωi-branch of T".
Why is this possible? If for some r, r0 < r G Pj/Gin and £?™[GiJ is disjoint
from some Tα then there are such r, αn G Af[GiJ and p^+1 = r is as required.
If for some α < α i, β^0 [C?in] Π Tα has at least two members, then there is such
oi-n < ωij and so there is ίn G 5^0[Gin] Π Γατι C JV such that -ι(£n <τ a:n). By
the definition of β^o[Gίτι] there is p°+1 satisfying r0 < p^+1 G Pj/Gin such that
Pn+i '^~PJ "^n ^ In") and Pn+i?
 αn5 ^n are as required. Again by elementaricity
w.l.o.g. p°+1 G 7V[G,J so ^+l G jv (as JV[G<n] Π V = N).
Define now pn+ι? a Pin-name by cases. Let pn_|_ι[G^J be pntG^] if qn is not
in the generic set G^, and equals pn+1 as described above otherwise. For
the definition of qn+ι we utilize the induction hypotheses (*)*„. We have just
given a prescription, i.e. a name, for pn+ι We can choose a maximal antichain
JΓ = {u™ : ζ < Cn(*)} of Pin of conditions which decide this name, namely
u™ Ih "pn+i = p?
+1" for some p?"
1"
1, and u^ > ^n or u^ is incompatible with
tfin
For each ζ < ("(*) we can apply the induction hypothesis (*)in+1 holds so
apply (*)in+ι clause (b) with in, zn+ι, JV, u^, p^"
1"
1 here standing for i, j, AT,
g, p there and get q™*
1 G Pin+ι as guaranteed there. Define qn+ι as follows:
Dom(gn+i) = (Dom(gn))U(7Vn[zn,zn+ι)), for 7 G Dom(^n+i): if 7 G Dom(<?n)
then ςfn+ι(7) = ςfn(τ)ί if 7 ^ ^ Π [in,in+ι) then ρn+ι(7) is a P7-name: if
C < Cn(*) and u™ G Gp^ then it is p£
+1(7) Check that qn+\ is as required.
So we have succeed to carry the induction. Let q — (J </n, clearly ς' G Pj
n<ω
and ^izn = qn. As in the proof of III 3.2 we can show that:

§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are No Kurepa Trees 
143
(*) if GJ C PJ is generic over V and q G Gj then pn[Gj Π P$J G Gj.
So g is (TV, Pj)-generic and as
clearly q is above p. This show that q is as required in clause (b) of (*)J . But
by the choice of p^+ι (and the list {(τn,xn) : n < ω)) necessarily q Ih "for
every r G -/V[Gj], if r is not an old ωi-branch of T then r Π N[Gj] is not of the
form {t :t <τ #}, for x G T^N". So ^ is as required in clause (b) of (*)J and in
Definition 8.3. 
Dg.5
8.6 Theorem. If CON(ZFC + « is inaccessible) then CON(ZFC + GCH
+SH + -.KH).
Proof. Described in 8.1, using 8.5. For CH we need to use the results from
chapter V, sections 6 and 7.

IV. On Oracle-c.c.,
the Lifting Problem
of the Measure Algebra,
and
 uP(ω} /finite Has No
Non-trivial Automorphism
§0. Introduction
We present here the oracle chain condition and two applications: the lifting
problem for the measure algebra, and the automorphism group of P(ω)/finite.
Let B be the family of the Borel subsets of (0,1) (i.e. sets of reals which
are > 0 but < 1). Let Imz be the family of A G B which have Lebesgue
measure zero. Clearly Imz is an ideal. The lifting problem is: "Can the natural
homomorphism from B to B/Imz be lifted (= split), i.e. does it have a right
inverse? Equivalently, define on B an equivalence relation: A 1,^2 G B are
equivalent if (A\ \ A^) U (A2 \ A\) has Lebesgue measure zero: is there a set
of representatives which forms a Boolean algebra? If CH holds the answer is
positive (see Oxtoby [Ox]). (This holds for any Ki-complete ideal). We will
show, in §4, that a negative answer is also consistent with ZFC.
Since the problem of splitting the measure algebra is simpler, we will
consider it first, but in the introduction we use the second problem to describe
the main idea of our technique.
It is well known that if CH holds then P(ω) /finite is a saturated (model-
theoretically) atomless Boolean algebra of power NI, hence has 2
2 °-many
automorphisms, as any isomorphism from one countable subalgebra to another

§0. Introduction 
145
can be extended to two different automorphisms. It was not clear what the
situation is if CH fails.
On the other hand any one-to-one function / from one co-finite subset of
ω onto another co-finite subset of ω induces an automorphism of P(ω) /finite:
A/finite is mapped to /(^/finite. We call such an automorphism trivial. A
priori it is not clear whether 'P(α )/finite has nontrivial automorphisms. Our
main conclusion is that possibly all automorphisms are trivial (i.e. this holds
in some model of ZFC); In fact in some generic extension of V. Hence there is
e.g.-no Borel definition of such automorphism.
In this chapter our main aim is to present "oracle chain condition forcing".
Iterating forcing satisfying the NI-chain condition, introduced by Solovay and
Tennenbaum [ST], is well known (see Ch II). We use mainly the same frame-
work: we start, e.g., with the constructible universe V = L, and use (finite
support) iteration of length ω% of forcing notions, (Pi,Qi : i < 0^2), each Qi
satisfies the KI-C.C. and is of power Nj.. At stage a we guess an automorphism
fa of ^(ω)/finite in V
Pa, more exactly a Pα-name of such an automorphism,
such that for any Pω2-name / of an automorphism of P(ω)/finite, there are
stationarily many a < ^ for which we have: cf(α) = NI, and fa C / (this
is possible if we have a diamond sequence on {δ < ω^ : cf(ί) = NI} and CH
holds, by some simple considerations). Our means of killing the automorphism,
i.e., guaranteeing fa cannot be extended to an automorphism of P(CJ)/finite in
V
Pωι, is to add a set X C ω so that for no Y C ω:
(*) X Π A is finite & Y Π fa(A) is finite for every A € [P(u}}yPa.
The demand (*) helps us since if / D fa is an automorphism of the Boolean
algebra [P(ω)]
γPω2 /finite then F/finite = /(X/finite) satisfies (*).
This looks very reasonable, but even if we succeed to show that when we
add X (by forcing Qa) we do not add a Y satisfying (*), how can we know
that such a Y is not added later on during the iteration?
This is the role of the oracle chain condition. The best way we can explain
the construction is as follows. We can look at iterated forcing as a construction
of the continuum in ^2 steps, i.e., at each successor step we add more reals, and

146 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
even at limit steps of cofinality HO we do so (but not at limit steps of cofinality
HI). Now promising not to add a Y as in (*) is an omitting type obligation,
and building a model of power ^2 by a chain of ω<2 approximations, promising
to omit types along the way, is a widely used method in model theory (mainly
for HI instead of ^2). See e.g., Keisler's work on L(Q), for HI; the ^2 case like
ours is somewhat more difficult, see [Sh:82], [Sh:107], [HLSh:162].
The oracle chain condition is an effective version of the Hχ-c.c. Assume
that we want to construct an HI-C.C. forcing notion P with an underlying set
ω\. If M = (M§ : δ < ωι) (the HI-oracle) is a 0-sequence on ω\\ i.e. for each
A C ω\ the set {δ : A Π δ G MS} is stationary, and we demand:
(f) If A G MS is pre-dense in P\δ, then A is pre-dense in P, then, as we will
see in 1.6(1), P satisfies HI-C.C.
We call (a variant of) this the M-c.c., (assuming each MS is closed enough).
The connection between the M-c.c. and the omitting type argument discussed
above is the following.
Suppose Bi are Borel sets of reals (i < HI) such that their intersection
is empty even if we add a Cohen real. (Note: finite support iteration always
adds Cohen reals at limit stages of cofinality HQ. Hence we have to deal with
Cohen extensions.) If 0 holds then, as we will see in §2, there is an Hi-oracle
M such that in any generic extension of V by a forcing satisfying the M-chain
condition no real is in all the B^s (note that in a bigger universe we reinterpret
each Bi using the same definition).
Clearly in order to apply oracle chain condition forcings we have to prove
relevant lemmas on composition and preservation by direct limit. It is also very
helpful to replace a sequence (Mi : i < HI) of oracles by a single oracle M such
that any P satisfying the M-c.c. will satisfy all Mi-c.c.'s. For this we have
to choose the right variant of the definition. Altogether the situation is that
at step α we are given an HI-oracle which Qa has to satisfy, and are allowed
to demand, for HI Borel types, that V
p"* will omit them provided that not
only our universe V
Pa omits them, but even forcing by Cohen forcing does
not change this. This is done in §1,2,3, and of course does not depend on
any understanding of the automorphism of P(ω)/Άmte or of homomorphism

§0. Introduction 
147
from B/Imz into B. So it is sufficient to read §1-3 if you want to apply the
oracle chain condition; though you may want to read 4.6 (which is the proof
of Theorem 4.3) to see how all the threads are put together (modulo specific
lemma, in that case 4.5), and it is commonly believed that seeing examples
helps to understand a method.
Of course, to apply this we have to look at the specific application at some
point; this is done in the induction step, i.e., working in V
Pa and being given
an automorphism /α, and an cji-oracle M we have to find Qa adding a real X
and satisfying the M-c.c. so that (*) holds for no Y even if we add a Cohen
real.
Of course if fa is trivial this cannot be done. We shall construct ζ)α, assume
that there is a (QaxCohen)-name Y forced to satisfy (*), and analyzing this
situation we shall eventually prove fa is trivial. We have to note that if /
is a Pω2-name of a nontrivial automorphism of 'P(u )/finite, then for a closed
unbounded C C α;2, for every δ G C with cf(ί) = α>ι, f\[P(ω)/Άmte]
v 
δ has
a Ptf-name forced (for Pg) to be a nontrivial automorphism of P(ω)/fmite 
in
V
Pδ, hence a diamond on {δ < ω2 : cf(ί) = ω\} can guess it stationarily often,
hence we have "killed" it somewhere in the process. We can have the results of
§4 and §5 together.
A natural question is:
Question. Find a parallel to M-c.c., replacing Cohen forcing (in the assumptions
of the omitting type theorem) by random real forcing, or any other reasonable
forcing adding a real.
In [Sh-b, IV], only the case "every automorphism of P(u;)/finite is trivial"
appear. The other is from [Sh:185]. On the first use of the method see [ShilOO].
On further works see [BuSh:437], [Ju92], [Ve86], [Ve93], [ShSr:296], [ShSr:315],
[ShSr:427].
Note that if P C Q then P <& Q iff every pre-dense subset of P is pre-dense
in Q (to see that this is a necessary condition, assume Z C P is pre-dense; let
I* = {p £ P : (3g G T}p > q} and let 2"** be a maximal set of pairwise

148 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
incompatible conditions contained in J*; then J** is a maximal antichain of P,
hence of Q, therefore it is pre-dense in Q and so is I, see I 5.4(3)).
§1. On Oracle Chain Conditions
1.1 Definition. An ^i-orade is a sequence M = (Ms : δ is a limit ordinal
< cji), where M«s is a countable transitive model of ZFC~ (or a large enough
portion of ZFC) such that δ + 1 C MS, M$ 1= "5 is countable" and M satisfies:
(Wl C ωι)[{δ : A Π δ G M5} is stationary]. (ZFC" is ZFC without the power
set axiom).
Remark. Note that the existence of an NI -oracle is equivalent to the holding
of Otfj (by a theorem of Kunen, we shall use only the trivial implication: Otti
implies the existence of an Ni-oracle), and that ONI implies CH.
To help the reader to understand our intention to associate a condition
on forcing notions with each Ni-oracle M, we give here a tentative definition
(which we will modify later):
1.2 First try. A forcing P with universe ω\ satisfies the M-c.c. if for every
δ < ω\ :
(t) (VA G MS) [A C δ&A is pre-dense in P\δ => A is pre-dense in P].
But if we adopted this definition, it could happen that we have two iso-
morphic forcing notions, one satisfying the definition and the other not. The
solution will be to require the property (f) not for all 5, but only for a large
enough set of ί's.
1.3 Definition. With each Ki-oracle M we associate the filter DM over ω\
generated by the sets !&(£) = {δ < ωι : A Π δ G Mδ} for A C ωλ. Let P(δ) be
{A : A C δ}.

§1. On Oracle Chain Conditions 
149
1.3A Remark. Recall that (S$ : δ < ω\) is a 0*-sequence if \Sg\ < NO and for
every A C ω\, {δ : A Π δ G S§} contains a closed unbounded subset of ω\\ and
if V = L, then a 0*-sequence exists (by Jensen's work).
1.4 Claim. 1) If (Mδ Π P(δ) : δ < ωι) is a 0*-sequence (see 1.3A) then every
generator of Z)^, IM(A), contains a closed unbounded set;
2) For every A, B C ωι there is C C ωl such that IM(C) = IM(A) Π IM(B).
So: for a set Z C u i, Z G £>M ^ (^M/M^
4) C Z].
3) DM is a proper normal filter, containing every closed unbounded set of limit
ordinals < ω\.
4) For every A C ω\ x ωι or even A C ίf(Nι) the set /M(A) belongs to D^.
Proof. 1) By the definitions of a 0*-sequence and of I^(A).
2) Let g : ω\ — > α i be the map defined by p(α) = 2α, and let / : ω\ — > α i be
the map defined by /(α) = 2α + 1. If δ < ω\ is a limit ordinal, then δ is closed
under #, /, and g\δ,f\δ G M^.
Now, taking C = g(A) U /(B) we obtain what we need (remembering M§
is a model of ZFC~).
3) a) DM contains every closed unbounded set of limit ordinals < ω\.
For this, we have to construct, for a given M and an increasing continuous
sequence (δ^ \ i < ω\) of limit ordinals, a subset A of ω\ such that if δ < α i,
δ ^ δi for all i < α i, then ^4 Π ί φ M$. We construct such A piece by piece,
namely determining AΓ\[δi,δi+ ω) by induction on i (we begin with i = — I
taking δ_ι =0; outside these intervals all ordinals are in A). Having determined
A Π ίi, we have 2
K° possibilities for An(δi+ω)', we choose one which does not
belong to the countable set {B Γ\ (δi + ω) : B E M$, δi < δ < ίi+i}. It is easy
to check that A satisfies our requirement.
b) DM is a proper filter.
By 2) every set in DM contains some IM(A) which is stationary by the
assumption "M is an NI -oracle", hence it is nonempty.
c) DM is normal.

150 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
It suffices to show that if Ai C ω\(i < ω\) then there is A C ω\ such that
A Π δ G MS implies Ai Π δ G MS for alii < δ. By a) and 2) it suffices if the
implication holds for a closed unbounded set of J's.
Let {—, —) be a nicely defined pairing function from ordinals to ordinals,
(preserving countability), and let C = {δ < ω\ : δ is closed under (—,—}}.
For δ G C, the restriction of {—, -) to δ x δ belongs to MS because the nice
definition of {—, —) is absolute for M$, hence C is closed unbounded in ω\.
Let A = {(i, α) : α G Ai and i < ωι}, assume δ G C and A Π δ G M$, and
let i < δ. Then also Ai Π δ G M$, which completes the proof.
4) Similar to the proof of 3). 
Dχ.4
1.5 Definition (the real one). We define when a forcing notion P satisfies
the M-c.c. by cases
a) If |P| < No, always.
b) If |P| = NI and for some (every) / : P —> ω\ which is one-to-one,
{δ < ωι : for A G M$, A C ί, f~
l(A) is pre — dense in f~
l{i : i < δ}
implies f~
l(A) is pre — dense in P} G D^
To see the equivalence of the "some" and "every" versions let / : P —> ω\
witness the "some" version and let g : P —> ω\ be another one-to-one
function. Then the set
B
 ά= {δ < ωι : fl({i 
: i < δ}) = g~
l({i : i < δ})
and for every A G MS
[f~
l(A) is pre-dense in f~
l({i : i < δ}) ==> f~
l(A) is pre-dense in P]
belongs to DM and witnesses that g also satisfies clause b).
c) If \P\ > NI and for every P
f C P: if |pt| < ^χ then there are P" such that
|P"| < Ni, P
f C P
;/ C P and / : P
/; -* ωi, as in b) such that: P" Cίc P,

§1. On Oracle Chain Conditions 
151
which means, if p, q G P" then: P \= p < q <Φ P" \= p < g, and: p, q are
compatible in P iffp,q 
are compatible in P".
Notation. P |= M-c.c. denotes that P satisfies M-c.c.
Remark. In this chapter we use iterations of length ω2 starting with V = L and
every iterand is of size ωi, so we work explicitly only with the case |P| = NI.
1.6 Claim. 0) If Pι,P2 are isomorphic forcing notions, then: PI satisfies the
M-c.c. if P2 satisfies the M-c.c.
1) If P satisfies the M-c.c. for some KI -oracle M, then P satisfies the
HI-C.C.
2) Let M be an Ni-oracle, P <Φ Q. If Q satisfies the M-c.c., then P satisfies
the M-c.c.
3) In Definition 1.5 for the case |P| > HI, we can demand P" <£ P and get
an equivalent definition (remember we are assuming CH as we are assuming
Proof. 0) Trivial (by the equivalence proved in Definition 1.5 clause (b)).
1) Clearly, it suffices to prove it for P with universe ω\. So, assume that
J is a maximal antichain in P of power KI. Then there is a closed unbounded
subset C of ω\ such that: if δ G C, q < δ then there is p G J Π δ compatible
with q, and also if p, q < δ are compatible then they have a common upper
bound in P\δ.
As P satisfies the M-c.c., there is δ G C Π IM(J) with the property:
[A G M«5 & A is a pre-dense subset of P f ί] => [A is pre-dense in P] (actually,
the set of these £'s is in DM). But J Π <5 is a counterexample as: J Π 5 G M^
(because 5 G IM^)), &
nd JΓ Π 5 is a pre-dense subset of P\δ (because δ G C
and the definition of C) hence (by the previous-sentence) any p G J \ <5 is
compatible with some q G J Π 5; contradiction.
2) Assume first that |P| = \Q\ = NI. W.l.o.g. the universe of Q is ω\. We
have to show that for a set in D^ of 5's, if A is pre-dense in P\δ and A G M^
then A is pre-dense in P; since P <> Q we know P Cic Q hence it suffices to

152 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
show that A is pre-dense in Q. Since Q satisfies the M-c.c., it suffices to show
that A is pre-dense in Q\δ.
For q G Q define Ig = {r G P : r is incompatible with q, or (Vr^ > r)(r^ G
P =$> r"f is compatible with q)}.
Let ^ be a maximal set of pairwise incompatible elements in Xq . As clearly
Xq is dense in P, Jq is a maximal antichain in P, hence in Q (since P <£ Q). Pick
?~g € v7g such that (Vrt > rg)(r^ G P => r* is compatible with q)] such rg exists
since otherwise q would contradict the fact that Jq is a maximal antichain in Q.
We may assume that δ is such that: q < δ implies rq < 5, and any Pι,p2 € -Pfί
compatible in P are compatible in Pfί, and the same holds for Q.
Now let A be pre-dense in Pfί and let q € Q\δ. Since rς G Pfί, there is
p e A compatible with rq. Let r
1" G Pfί be above p and rq. By the choice of
rq we know that r* is compatible with g, hence p is compatible with q, so A is
pre-dense in Q\δ. Hence we have finished the case |P| = |Q| — HI.
Before proving the claim for all P, Q we present the following simple fact
on forcing notions.
1.6A Fact. (CH). If PI C P2, |Pι| < NI, and P2 satisfies the KI-C.C., then there
is P3 such that |P3| < HI and PI C P3 <> P2.
Proof of Fact. We define, by induction, an increasing continuous sequence
(p(
α) : α < ωι) of subsets of P of cardinality < HI as follows:
P(°>=Pι,
P
(a} = U/5<αP
(/3) for limit α.
For α = /3 -f 1, for every countable subset 2 of P^ which is not pre-dense
in P2, pick px G P2 exemplifying this. Let P0
(α) be the set obtained by adding
the pj's to P^
3). Let P^ be the set obtained from P^
α^ by adding a common
upper bound for every pair in Pjj 
having one in P2.
Now, P3 = Ua<ωιP(
aϊ is as required, proving the Fact. 
Πi.βA
Continuation of the proof of 1.6
Returning to our claim, we distinguish the following cases:

§2. The Omitting Type Theorem 
153
i) \P\ < NO- Then trivially P satisfies the M-c.c.
ii) \P\ = HI. Then since Q \= M-c.c. there is pt Cic Q, P C pt, such that
P
1" satisfies the M-c.c. and \P*\ = HI. Since P <£ Q, clearly P <$ pt, and now
by what we have already proved P satisfies the M-c.c.
iii) |P| > HI. Let P* C P, |pt| < HI. Using the Fact 1.6A, we obtain P",
such that |P
/r| < HI and P
f C P" <o P. Since P <o Q it follows that P" <o Q,
so by i) or ii) we have: P" satisfies the M-c.c. Hence P satisfies the M-c.c.
3) Let P satisfy the M-c.c. (by Definition 1.5), |P| > HI, and let P
f C P,
|pt| < HI and (by 1.6A) choose P", \P"\ < HI such that P
f C P" «? P. From
2) we know that P" satisfies the M-c.c., hence is as required. 
Di.β
1.7 Fact.
1) IfP<$R,PCQCiCR 
then P <£ Q
2) Pi, P2 <£ Q, PI C P2 then P! <$ P2; if PI, P2 Cic Q, Px C P2 then
Pi Cίc P2
3) Cic is a partial order. 
Dχ.7
§2. The Omitting Type Theorem
2.1 Lemma. (<>NI) Suppose ψi(x)(i < ω\) are Π^ (i.e., V real 3 real ...)
formulas on reals (with a real parameter, possibly). Suppose further that there
is no solution to /\i<ωι ^%(x] in V\ and moreover even if we add a Cohen real
to V there will be none. Then there is an Hi-oracle M such that:
(*) P t= M-c.c. implies: in V
p there is no solution to /\^ ψi(x).
Proof. Let n < ω be large enough so that the forcing theorems can be proved
from ^n sentences in ZFC, and the assumption of the lemma can be formulated
as a Σn statement.
Now, for a given countable forcing notion P and a given P-name for a real
r (w.l.o.g. canonical), let M(P,r) be a countable ]Γ)n-elementary submodel

154 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
of V containing P, r and (φi : i < ωι). Let I(P,r) be the collection of all
pre-dense subsets of P lying in M(P,τ).
2.1 A Claim.
1) If P Cic pt and every A e I(P, r) is pre-dense in P
f, then
(note that r is also a Pΐ-name; we can restrict ourselves to i £ M(P, r)).
2) Assume that P is a countable forcing, r a P-name of a real, a canonical
one, ψ a Πj -formula, p Ihp 'V(l)" Then for some pre-dense Xn C P for
n < α;, z/P Cic pt, each 2n is pre-dense in pt then p Ihpt 'V(l)"
Proo/ o/ Claim. 1) Let G be P^-generic over V. Since every A € J(P, r) is pre-
dense in Pt and therefore intersects G, GίΊP is P-generic over M(P,r). (Why
is GΠP directed? If p, <? € GnP then J = {r e P : r incompatible with p (in P
or equivalently in pt), or r incompatible with qorp<r&q<r}e M(P, r) is
predense in P hence in pt , hence not disjoint to G Π P.) Also r[G] = r[G Π P].
Since M(P, r) is a J]n-elementary submodel of V, it satisfies the assumption
of the lemma, hence M(P,r)[GnP] \="-τφi(τ[G\) for some i < KI". So for some
i < NI, i G M(P,r) we have M(P,r)[G Π P] |= -«^t(r[G?]) (remember that P
is countable (even in the sense of M) and therefore adding a generic subset
of P is equivalent to adding a Cohen real). Since X^ statements are upward
absolute from M(P, r)[G(ΊP] to V[G] by Schoenfields's absoluteness theorem,
it follows that V[G\ \=
 u-rφi(τ[G\)
n , proving the claim.
2) Proved above. 
Eb.iA
Continuation of the proof of 2.1: Now, using ONI and a closing process, we can
obtain an Ki-oracle M = (M$ : δ < ωι) satisfying: if P is a forcing notion, has
universe δ < ω\ and P, r € MS then J(P, r) C M§ (remember that P, J(P, r)
are countable). We will show that M satisfies the requirement of the lemma.

§2. The Omitting Type Theorem 
155
Assume, on the contrary, that pt \= M-c.c. but r is a P^-name of a real so
that ypt t= /\ί ψi(τ). We may assume that |Pt| = HI because:
a) |P^Ί < HO is impossible by the assumption of the lemma.
b) if |Pΐ| > KI then by 1.6(1) and 1.6(3) we can find P" such that r
is a P"-name, \P"\ = H1? P" 
<e pt and P" N M-c.c. Since P" 
<$ pt,
V
p" N ^ψi(τ) would imply V
p N ->^(τ) (again by an absoluteness argument),
hence V
p" N /\i ^i(r) So P" can replace pt in the sequel.
W.l.o.g. the universe of P^ is ω\. We can find δ < ω\ such that letting
P = P
f ί δ the following will hold:
i) r is a P-name.
ii) P,τGM 5.
in) PC < cpt.
iv) A G M$, Λ is a pre-dense subset of P => A is pre-dense in pt.
Prom these facts, the claim and the construction of M, it follows that
V
p 
N -i f\i Ψί(ΐ)ι a contradiction. 
U2.ι
2.2 Example. If V N [OHj&^l C R & Λ is of the second category] then there
is an α i-oracle M such that:
P N M-c.c. =$> V
p 1= "A is of the second category".
Proo/. Let A = {n : i < cji}, ^(^) = (n £ Bx) where JBX = Un<α,B£,β£
closed nowhere dense, where J5^ is "simply" described by x such that every set
of the first category is a subset of Bx for some x and absolutely, for every real
x and n < ω, B™ is nowhere dense. Each ψi is trivially Π^. We still have to
show:
(*) if P is countable, the following fails: Ihp " for some real x, for every
i < ωι we have r^ G Bx" .
Suppose, on the contrary, that there are r G P and a P-name x, so that
r Ihp "x is a counterexample". Then for every z, for some p G P and n we have
p Ihp «r< G BJ". Let ^ = {r< : p lhP ^ G P^"} we have shown A C \Jn,pA%.
We shall show that every A™ is nowhere dense and get a contradiction.

156 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
Let n < ω, p G P, (cι,c2) a rational interval. It suffices to find a rational
subinterval disjoint from A™. But Ihp "B™ is nowhere dense". So there are
pt > p, (4,4) £ (cι,c2) such that pt Ihp "β£ Π (4,4) = 0" Clearly:
Γi €(4,4)^^ Ihp "nφB™ =ϊ
Π2.2
The arguments above give the following fact, too:
2. 2 A Fact. If A C R is of the second category and P is the forcing notion of
adding α Cohen reals to V, ί/ien V
p |= "A is of the second category". 
D2.2
It simplifies to note:
2.3 Fact. Let P be a countable forcing notion, Q Cohen forcing
1) If J is a pre-dense subset of P x Q, then we can find pre-dense subsets Xn
of P, for n < ω such that:
(*) if P' is a forcing notion, P C P' and each In is a pre-dense subset of P'
too, then J is a pre-dense subset of P' x Q.
2) The same applies to P x Q, P' x Q as for any forcing R, R x Q is a dense
subset of Rx Q.
Proof. 1) Let {qn : n < ω} list the members of Q and let Jn = {p G P : for
some q we have: qn < q £ Q and (p, ρ) is above some member of JΓ}.
2) Should be clear. 
D2.s
§3. Iterations of M-c.c. Forcings
3.1 Claim. If Mi (for i < ω\) are Ki-oracles then there is an Ki-oracle M such
that:
(P N M-c.c.) => ( /\ P N Mi-c.c.).

§3. Iterations of M-c.c. Forcings 
157
Proof. Let M* = (Mj : δ < ωι).
Choose MS such that Ui<$Mj C M$, M# a countable transitive model of
ZFC~. Clearly M = (M^ : <5 < ω\) is an Ni-oracle. It suffices to prove that:
(*) if MI, A/2 are Ni-oracles, {5 : Mj C M|} is co-bounded (i.e., with a
bounded complement) then M2-c.c. => Mj-c.c.
Since for each Aζ-ωι, every sufficiently large 5 G /^ (A) is in 7^2 (A), it
suffices to show that if δ has the required property with respect to M2 (and δ
is sufficiently large) then it has the required property with respect to MI. But
this follows trivially from Mg C M|. (Of course in (*) we can require e.g. just
"{δ : Mj £ M|} is not stationary or just = 0 mod £>M
2") 
^3.1
3.2 Claim. If Pi(i < α) is the result of a finite support iteration, each Pi
satisfying the M-c.c. and P = U^<Q,Pi, ίften P satisfies the M-c.c.
Proof. We demand superficially less on the P^'s: Pi <$ P; for z < j, and
P5 = Ui<5Pi for limit δ < α, and each P^ (for i < α) satisfies the M-c.c.
Case I: α successor.
Clearly P 6 {Pi : i < a} (it is Pa-ι) so by the assumption P satisfies the
M-c.c.
Case II: cf(α) > HI.
If P
f C P, |pt| = «!, then there is i < a with P
f C P^ because cf(α) > H x.
Since Pi \= M-c.c. we can find an M-c.c. P" Cic P^ of size KI such that
Pt C P". So P μ M-c.c.
Case III: cf(α) = HI.
Obviously it is sufficient to deal with the case OL — ω\. We will now show
that it is sufficient to deal with the case |P| = KI.
Indeed, if |P| < KI then the conclusion of our claim holds. So assume
|P| > KI, and P does not satisfy the M-c.c. Then there is P^ C P of power KI
so that Pt C P" Cic P, |P"| = HI imply that P" does not satisfy the M-c.c.
We note that P satisfies the KI-C.C. (See Claim 1.6(1) and the proof of Lemma
II 2.8).

158 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
Let N be an elementary submodel of (if(χ),€,<*) for a large enough
regular χ such that pt, (Pi : i < ωλ) G N, N
ω C N and \\N\\ = «ι. Take
P/' 1l
f p. n AT. Then P/' <£ P; (as in the proof of 1.6A) and (P " : i < ωi) is
increasing continuous and pt C P^. But |PJJ = HI and it does not satisfy
the M-c.c., so we have reduced our counterexample to one of power HI.
We assume now, w.l.o.g., that Pi \ \Jj<iPj C ωι x {i}. We let A<
 d= {5 : if
C G MS is a pre-dense subset of Pi \(δ x δ) then C is pre-dense in P^}.
For each i < ω^Ai G DM (as Pi |= M-c.c.). Since Pi <£ P and P< |= NI-
c.c., by the proof of claim 1.6(2), we can find a function pr^ from P x ω
into Pi such that: p G P$ is compatible with q G P in P iff for some n,
pri(q, n),p are compatible in P;. We let Bi = {δ : pr"((δ x δ) x ω) C δ x δ and
pri Γι(δ x δ) = pri \((δ x δ) x ω) G M5}.
For each i < ω\, Bi G -Dj^.
We let A
 ά= yMi - {<* : for every i < δ,δ G AJ and B = V;#z
 d= {5 :
for every i < 5, δ G JE?i}. As DM is a normal filter, clearly A, B, A Π B G D^.
Assume now that 5 G AlΊβ, V G M§ is a pre-dense subset of P\(δ x δ). Notice
that
(*) p G Pi is compatible with some q G Y iff it is compatible with some
r G pri(Y x ω).
We know that for alH < δ we have pri(Y x ω) G M§ (as 5 G Bi) and it
is a pre-dense subset of Pif(ί x δ) by (*). Therefore, as δ G A^, pr^(y x ω)
is pre-dense in Pi. Using (*) again, (as P^ = U^P^PI^ x δ) C P5), Y is
pre-dense in PS, and since P$ <£ P, y is pre-dense in P. Thus we have proved
that P satisfies the M-c.c. (Note that for some/any bijection / : ω\ x ω\ —* ω\,
{5 : f"(δ x δ) — δ} is closed unbounded).
Case IV: cf (α) - N0-
One can deal with this case as with Case III (the diagonal intersections
are replaced by countable intersections). 
Ds.2
We shall deal now with the "real" successor case:

§3. Iterations of M-c.c. Forcings 
159
3.3 Claim. Assume V N <)KI , M is an Ni-oracle, P is a forcing notion of power
NI satisfying the M-c.c. Then in V
p there is an Nχ-oracle M* such that: if
Q G V
p satisfies the M*-c.c. (in V
p) then P * Q (which is in V) satisfies the
M-c.c.
Proof. First we observe that if M* in V
p is good for all Q of power < KI then
it is good for all Q. Hence we shall treat Q as a P-name of a binary relation on
ω\ (but we shall define M* without depending on a given Q). We also assume
that P has universe ω\ , and we fix for the rest of the proof a generic G C P
(which has a canonical P-name in V). Note that ω\ x ω\ is a dense subset of
P * Q, so we can use it as the set of members.
For A C ωι x ωλ and G C P we define A[G\ = A
G = {a : (3p G G)[(p, α) 6
A}}.
Let 5 < ω\ be a limit ordinal. In V[G] we let M£ be a countable transitive
model of ZFC~ containing ί, Mff and {A° :ACδxδ,Ae Mδ}. We will first
show that M* is a tti-oracle in V[G].
The following fact implies this statement.
3.3A Fact. (VA G D)(3B G D&)[B C A].
Proof o/ ίfte Fαcί. Let S be a P-name of a subset of OΊ. Let Γ = {(p, α) : p G P
and p Ihp "α G 5"}. Clearly S[G\ = T[G]. Since P satisfies KI-C.C. and so
(Vα < ωι)(3β < ωι) [τ[G]Πα = Γ[GΠ/?]nαl , we have in V a club C C ωι such
that Ihp "Γ[G]Πί = T[GΠδ]
n for each δ G C. So ί G C and A = Tn(5x5) G M5
implies A
G = T[G Π ί] Π δ = T[G] Π 5 G M|. But these restrictions give an
element of DJVΪ by 1.4(3). So we have proved that for every P-name 5 C α;1?
for some Γ C ωi x wi we have Ih "/^,(5)
yP 2 IM(T)
V" 
(well, T C cjx x α i,
and not T C ωι, so use a pairing function, see 1.4(4)).
Π3.3Λ
Thus we have proved that M* is an Ki-oracle in V[G].
We now assume that A C 5x5, A G M$ and Λ is pre-dense in (P*Q) t(5xί).
We want to show that A is pre-dense in P * Q. The proof will be broken into

160 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
three steps, and as we proceed we will impose restrictions on 5, the reader can
easily verify that these restrictions are allowable (in the sense of D^) and do
not depend on A and G.
First Step. If G C P is generic over V, then A
G C δ, A
G € M% and AG is
pre-dense in Q[G] \δ.
Proof. The first two facts are immediate.
Let (p, <?), (α, β) G P * Q. We define /(M)(α, /3), whenever (p, ςι) and (α, β)
are compatible, as the least ordinal which is the possible P-part of a condition
above (p, q) and (α, β) in P * Q. We may assume that for each p, q < δ
f'/ 
q^(δ x 5) C δ and for each ς < δ the mapping p >-» /(p>q) Γ(£ x ί) for p < δ
belongs to M$.
Let q G Q[G] \δ, and define Iς = (Jp<δf(p^(A). 
Then Zq C δ, Iq G M5 and
Iq is dense in Pfί (as A is pre-dense in (P * Q) f(ί x δ) and by the definition
of /(p,g)). Hence we may assume that Jς is pre-dense in P (by our assumption
that P satisfies the M-c.c.).
Let r G Ig. Then for some p < δ, s G Q and (α, β) G A we have in P * Q
(r,s) > (p,ς),(α,/?). As P N "r > α", r lhP "α G GP", so r lhP "/? G Λ^
P";
as r \\-p "β <Q s and q <Q 5" it follows that r lhP "g is compatible with some
element of A
G". As this holds for all r G Iq and J9 is pre-dense in P, it is true
in V[G], and as this holds in V[G\ for all q G Q[G]f<5, we obtain that A
G is
pre-dense in Q[G] \δ.
Second Step. If G C P is generic over F, then A
G is pre-dense in Q[G].
Proof. This follows from the assumption that in V[G], the forcing notion Q[G]
satisfies the M*-c.c. We only have to observe here that the restriction to a set
in D^* can be replaced by a restriction to a set in DM, by Fact 3.3A.
Third Step. A is pre-dense in P * Q.

§4. The Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra 
161
Proof. Let (p, q) G P * Q. Since for any G C P generic over V, in V[G] the set
A
G is pre-dense in Q[G], there exist r > p, (α,/3) G -4 and 5 G Q such that
r Ihp "α G GP and /? <Q 5, and q <Q s". As r lhP "α G GP", r > α, so
(^ 5) > (p, #), (α, /?), in P * Q, proving what we need.
Π3.3
§4. The Lifting Problem
of the Measure Algebra
4.1 Notation. Let B be the family of Borel subsets of (0,1). Every Borel set
C (0,1) has a definition φ (in the prepositional calculus Lωi)W), i.e. let φ be
a sentence in the Lωi)U, propositional calculus, with vocabulary {tq : q G Q},
where Q denotes the rational numbers, (tq stands for the statement r < q).
We let A = Bo[φ] be the Borel set correspondending to this definition, i.e.
A = {r : r G (0,1), and if we assign to the propositional variables tq the truth
value of "r < c£\ the sentence φ becomes true}. Notice that the answer to
"r G Bo[y>]" is absolute.
If B G S in V, and V[G] is a generic extension of V, then let B
VW be the
unique Bl such that for some φ, V \="B = Bo(<p)", and V[G] N"J5ι = Bo[φ]".
Note that the choice of φ is immaterial.
Let Imz be the family of A G # of measure zero and Ifc be the family of
A G B which are of the first category. If α, b are reals, 0 < α, 6 < 1, let
(α, b) — {x : α < x < b or b < x < a}
[a,b] is defined similarly. Again this is absolute. We can use R or (0,1), does
not matter.
4.2 Definition. If B is a Boolean algebra, / is an ideal, we say that B/I
splits if there is a homomorphism h : B/I 
—> £ such that h(x/I)/I 
= x/I.

162 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
Equivalently there is a homomorphism h : B — •» B with kernel / such that
h(x) = x mod /.
4.3 Theorem. It is consistent with ZFC that β/BΓ\Imz does not split (if ZFC
is consistent).
4.4 Discussion. (1) If CH holds then B/Imz splits (see Oxtoby [Ox]); in fact
this holds for any Ni-complete ideal.
(2) Note that *&/Imz has a natural set of representatives:
h
m(X) = {aeR:l = lim[Leb(X Π (α - ε, α + ε))/2|ε|]}
where Leb(X) is the Lebesgue measure (for a set of reals). Unfortunately h
m
is not a homomorphism.
Now for X G B, h
m(X) € B and hm(X) = X mod Imz (see Oxtoby [Ox]).
(3) Note also that (B 4- /®z)//®z splits where B -f /®z is the Boolean algebra
of subsets of (0, 1) generated by B and 7®z and J®z = {A : A is a subset of
some member of /mz}. A function exemplifying this can be defined as follows:
for each real r let Er be an ultrafilter on (0, 1) such that if A C (0, 1) and
1 = limε^0[Leb(An(r-ε,r + ε))/2|ε|], then A G Er and for every X G
let
mz.
Clearly h(X) = h
m(X) mod Imz hence h(X) - X mod J
(4) The dual problem, replacing "measure zero" by "meager" can be solved
too. I.e.
(*) it is consistent with ZFC that B/BΠ/fc does not split (if ZFC is consistent).
The proof is like the proof of 4.3, replacing "measure zero" by "meager" ,
it is done explicitly in [Sh:185] [were also Theorem 4.3 was proved].
(5) The author was asked this problem by Fremlin and Talagrand during the
Kent Conference, summer 79, who said it is very important for measure theory;
Talagrand even promised me flowers on my grave from measure theorists. I did
not check that yet . . .

§4. The Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra 
163
4.5 Main Lemma. Let M be an Ki-oracle (so CH and even ONI hold) and h be
a homomorphism from B to B with kernel /mz, such that h(X) = X mod Imz
for every X G B.
Then there is a forcing notion P of cardinality HI satisfying the M-
chain condition, and a P-name X (of a Borel set) such that for every generic
G C P x Q over V (where Q is the Cohen forcing) there is no Borel set A in
V[G] satisfying:
α) A = X[G]
/?) for every 5 G £
v, if £
V1
G1 C X[G] mod Imz then (/ι(£))
v[
Gl C A,
7) for every B e B
v , if B
VW Π X[G] - 0 mod /mz then (/iGB))^] Π A = 0.
4.6. Proof of the Theorem from the Main Lemma. For simplicity our ground
model is a model of V = L. We intend to define a finite support iteration
(Pi, Qi '• i < MZ) such that \Pi\ < ^2 and P^ |= NI-C.C. for ί < ω^
We also want to define a sequence (Fi : i < ω2), Fi G V
Pί , F^ C [β x #]
v
(more exactly a P^-name of such set), such that for any PC [B x B]
v "
2 , the
set
is stationary in ω%.
This is possible, using <>{δ<ω2 .cf(δ)=^}'
(Fi is a P-name. So it becomes meaningful after we have defined P^, but
using 0{δ<ω2:cf(δ}=ωι} we obtain a schematic definition of the P^-s which does
not depend on the actual construction of the P^'s or just guess P\i and F^i.
See more detatils for the second case in Claim 5.3).
So how do we define Pi for i < ω^ As we are going to iterate with finite
support, Pi(i < ωz) will be determined as soon as we define (Qi : i < ω%) by the
relations P0 = {0}, P +i = Pi*Qi and Pδ = Ui<δPi for limit δ and Pjti = Pi/Pj.
Actually, we will define by induction Q^ Pjti G V
Fj and ^i-oracles Mi G V
Pί+1
(actually a Pi+ι-name) and M? G V
Pi for j < i < ω^ (remember that having
defined Qi we have determined Pi+χ so we can go about our next task). We
define by induction demanding that:

164 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
(*)i for each j < i in the universe V
p*+
l, the forcing notion PJ+IJ satisfies the
Mj-c.c (if j 4-1 = i this is an empty demand).
For i = 0 we have nothing to check. For i limit use the claims on FS
iteration from II and Claim 3.2. So to carry the induction assume that i < ω%
and QJ (j < i) and Mj G V
p*+
l (for j < i) have been defined (so also Pj for
j < i, and (*)t holds). For each j < i, let P^ G V
Fj be the (Prname of the)
forcing notion (of power NI) such that P^ = Pj * P^ i.e. PijGp.. We assume
that FΪ G V
Pi is a splitting homomorphism; otherwise we let Qi be a P^-name
of the Cohen forcing and Mi be any Ni-oracle in V
Pί+l (remember that 0^
holds in the ground model and the P 's satisfy the NI-C.C. and have power < N2
and Cohen forcing satisfies every Ni-oracle). Let M/ G V
Pί (for j < i) be an
Ni-oracle with the property: if Q N M/-C.C. in V
Pi then Pj+i,i * Q N Mj-c.c.
in y^+1 (note that M/ exists by Claim 3.3., by the induction hypothesis).
Now, let M* G V
Pί be an Hi-oracle such that M*-c.c. implies M/-C.C. for j < i
(existing by Claim 3.1). Apply now the main lemma 4.5 in V
Pί (for h = F^) to
obtain P = Qi G ΐ^
Pί and Jfj (a Qi-name so actually a Pi_|_ι-name) satisfying
the conclusions of 4.5, so by the choice of M*, j < i implies in V
PJ+1, the
forcing notion PJ+I^+I = P7 +ι)i*Qί satisfies the Mj-c.c. Finally apply Lemma
Pi*Qi
2.1 in V
Pί+l —V 
" f o r the type appearing in (α) — (7) of 4.5, to obtain an
Ni-oracle Mi G V
Pί+l such that the above mentioned type is omitted in any
generic extensions of V
Pi+1 with forcing notions satisfying the M^-c.c. and such
that: if R is a (P-name of a) forcing notion satisfying the M^-c.c. in V
Pi+
l then
Qi * R satisfies the M*-c.c. in V
Pi. Now we can check (*)i+ι
As Pω2 satisfies the HI-C.C. (by 1.6(1)) and has power ^2, there are at most
^2° — ^2 Pω2-names of reals; on the other hand we have added reals ^2 times,
so yPc,2 μ«2
H° =N 2».
To conclude the proof of 4.3, assume that F G V
Pωz is a splitting homo-
morphism. Then there is some i < ω^ such that Ff[#]
v l = Fi is a splitting
homomorphism in V
Pi (and cf(z) = HI). So at stage i we had Qi introducing
X G B and an Ni-oracle Mi G V
Pi+1 such that P(X) cannot exist in generic
extensions of V
Pί+
l with forcing notions satisfying the M^-c.c. Examining our

§4. The Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra 
165
construction and remembering Claim 3.2 it is easy to prove by induction on
a < ujϊ that for a > ί we have V
Pί+1 \= "Pi+ι?α satisfies the MΪ-C.C.". Hence
V
Pωz = (y
pΐ+ι)
p;+ι,"2 is such an extension of V
Pi+l, a contradiction. 
U4.3
4.7. Proof of the Main Lemma ^.5. In this proof let Se denote the set of
sequences ά = (α^ : i < ω) such that the sequence is monotone, α^ ^ a$+i, for
i < ω, a*i is rational, but aω is irrational, and (α^ : i < ω) converges to aω (and
they are from the interval (0,1)).
4.7A Definition. Let P = P((ά
α : α < β)) where β < ωl,ά
a G Se and α£ for
α < β are pairwise distinct, denote the following forcing notion: p E P iff the
following three conditions hold:
(a) p = (t/p, /p), where Up is an open subset of (0,1), cl(E7p) is of measure
< 1/2, and fp is a function from Up to {0,1};
(b) there are n and 6/, (for / < n), // (for i < n) such that 0 = bo <
61 < 
< 6n_ι < 6n = 1 and Up = U^
1//, Iι is an open subset of
(&ιΛ+ι) and even cl(//) C (fe/,6/+ι).
(c) // is either a rational interval, fp\Iι 
constant, or for some α < β
and fc/ < ω, Iι = ^kl<m<ω(a^m,aξm^1), Λ>rKm4-2^
α4m-f2i+ι) is
constantly i when /c/ < 2m, m < α;, i G {0,1}.
The order on P is: p < q iff Up C Uq, fp C fq, and cl(E7p) Π t/g = [7p.
Finally we let XP = V{fp
l{0} 
: P G GP}.
4.7B Stage 1. We will define here a statement, in the next stage prove that
it suffices for proving the main lemma, and later prove it.
(St) Let PS = P((a
a : a < (5)), δ < ωι be given, δ > ω as well as a countable
model M£ of ZFC~ such that P$ G M£, a condition (p*,r*) G P<5 x Q and a
(P$ x Q)-name y? of a definition of a Borel set (this is a candidate for h(Xp)
i.e. the A in 4.5; Q is of course Cohen forcing).
Then we can find ά
δ G Se such that (Vα < ί)[αf, 7^ α£] and letting
= P((ά
a : a < 5)), the following conditions hold:

166 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
. (A) Every pre-dense subset of PS which belongs to MS is a pre-dense subset
of PS+I (note that if MS is quite closed this implies the same for (Ps x
Q,P 5+ιxQ), see 2.3(1)).
(B) There is (j/,r
;) G PS+I x Q, such that (p*,r*) < (p',r') and one of the
following holds, for some n:
(El) (p',r') lhPδ+lxQ "α* G Bo[<p], and Un<m<ω(αJm+2,αJm+3) nXP,+1 =
0" and "α* G /ι(Un<m<ω(αfm+2,αlm+3))";
or
(B2) (j/y) lhPi+lXo"αf, t Bo(φ) and lUm<>ln,<n+ι) £ XPi+l"
4.7C Stage 2. It is enough to prove the statement (St).
We choose M
a and ά
a G Se by induction on α < ω\ such that β < a =>
aω ^
 aωi
 and we a^
so choose pre-dense subsets J7 of P((a^ : β < α)) for
7 < ωa -f ω such that: 7 < ωαi 4- ω, αi < 0:2 implies J7 is a pre-dense subset
of P((ά
β : /? < α2}) (of course αi < α2 implies P({α
α : α < QI)) C P((ά
α :
α < α2)), moreover P((ά
a : α < QI}) Cic P((ά
a : a < 0:2)), read Definition
4.7A). For a < ω choose any α
α G Se with Z7 = {(0,0)}. Generally make
sure {lu α+n : n < α;} include { J : I G U/3<a^0> ^ a pre-dense subset of
P((a& : β < a))}. Now in stage α > ω a bookkeeping gives us a (P$ x Q)-
name φa as in (St). Choose M
α including U7<α^7' ^«5 ffi 
'- β <
 α)? choose
α
α as in (St) and choose {Zωα+n : n < α;} such that all forcing statement
mentioned in clause (B) of (St) continue to hold if we replace P^+i by any
P such that P<5+ι Cic P and each Xωα+n is pre-dense in P for n < ω and
each predense subset of P^ which belongs to MS appears in {Xωa+n 
: n < ω}
(possible by 2.1(A)(2)). Clearly P = P((α
α : α < ωi)) satisfies the M-c.c.
For the conclusion of 4.5 let X = Xp and (p*,r*) G P x Q force A is a
counterexample, (so (α), (/?), (7) there hold) so for some δ G [ω,α;ι], A = ψξ.
Remember that if (p',r
f) 
lί~pδ+1χQ "α
5 G Bo(φ)
n then this remains valid
if we replace P^+i by any forcing notion P, P^+i Cic P provided that certain
(countably many) maximal antichains of P$+ι remain maximal antichains of P

§4. The Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra 
167
which we have guaranteed.
If clause (Bl) holds then B = Un<m<uX
αin+2>
α4m+3) contradicts clause (7)
of 4.5 (for A =Bo(£)) and if clause (B2) holds then B = Un<m<c>4m> <n+ι)
contradicts clause (β) of 4.5 (for A =Bo(</?)). We get a contradiction, so P,
X from above proves the main lemma 4.5 (which suffices for proving theorem
4.3).
So from now on we concentrate on the proof of (St).
4.7D Stage 3. Choosing ά
δ. So let Pδ, (ά
a : a < δ) , φ, M5* and (p*,r*)
be given, as in the assumption of (St), choose λ big enough (i.e. λ = Dg"),
TV a countable elementary submodel of (ff(λ),G) containing P^, (α"
α : α <
i),£,M6*,fc.
Choose a real αf,, which belongs to (0,1) \ cl(t/p*) but does not belong
to any Borel set of measure zero which belongs to N. This is possible as by
demand (a) in the definition of P((ά
a : a < ί)),cl(C/p*) has measure < 1/2.
So (0,1) \ cl(i/p*) has positive measure, whereas the union of all measure zero
Borel sets in TV is a countable union hence has measure zero. So αf, is a random
real over N and N[a^\ is a model of enough set theory: ZFC~-f- "P
8(ω) exists"
(where P(A) is the power set, P
n+
l(A) = P(P
n(A))) (all those facts are well
known; see e.g. Jech [J]). Clearly αf, G /ι((0,αf,)) or αf, G ft((αf,, 1)), so w.l.o.g.
the former occurs. It is also clear that for every ε > 0, αf, G ft((αf, — £,αf,))
[Otherwise, choose a rational 6, αf, - ε < b < αf,, then αf, ^ Λ((αf, — £,αf,)) =>
αf, 6 ft((0,6)). Hence αf, G ft((0,6)) \ (0,6), but this set has measure zero (by
the property of h) and obviously belongs to N].
Now let (bn : n < ω) G -/V[αf,] be a strictly increasing sequence of rationale
converging to αf,. Next in A^[αf,] we define a forcing notion R (the well known
dominating function forcing):
R — {(/»^) : / a function from some n < α; to α;, satisfying (Vi < n ) f ( i ) >
z, and g is a function from ω to ω}.
The order is

168 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
(/,<?) < (/',<?') i f f f Q 
/', (VZ)fl(O < a' (I) and
(Vi)[i <Ξ Dom(/')&i £ Dom(/) => 0(i) < /'(ί)].
Choose a subset G of R (remember that R G AΓ[α£,]) generic over AΓ[α£,],
next define a function /* - /*[G] - U{/ : (/,#) G G} G (JV[α*])[GJ. So it
is known that (W[α£,])[G] = C/V[α£,])[/*] and a finite change in /* preserve
genericity, i.e. if /' : ω — » ω, (Vi < ω)f(i) 
> i and {n : /*(n) ^ /'(^)} is
finite then for some subset G' of jR generic over N[α^\ we have /' = f[G'\
and (N[α
δ
ω])[G\ 
= (#[<£])[/*] = (N[α
s
ω})[f] 
= (N[α
s
u})[G'}). We shall work
for a while with the model N[α£,][/*]. We define (in this model) a sequence of
natural numbers (n(l) : / < ω), defining n(l) by induction on /. Let n(0) = 0,
and n(l + 1) = f * ( n ( l ) ) . Now we define for m < 4 and k < ω a set A^,
So A^m = 0,1,2,3) is a partition of (60, «£,) modulo measure zero as
{bn 
: n < ω} has measure zero, but remember αf, G /ι((6o,α£,)) hence for
some unique m(*),α£ G Λ(A^(lll)). Note that < G JV[α*][/*], but h\N[α
δ
ω][Γ]
does not necessarily belong to this model, so we determine ra(*) in V. As we
could have made a finite change in /* (replacing /*(0) by /*(n(m(*))), legal
as /*(n(m(*))) > n(m(*)) > m(*) > 0) we can assume αf, G ft(-Ag).
As αf, G Λ((αf, — ^,«f,)) for every ε, and as h is a homomorphism, αf, G
h(A§) for every fc.
First let us try to choose ά
δ = (6n(/) : / < α;)
Λ(αf;).
4.7E Stage 4. Condition (A) of (St) holds.
This means:
4.7E1 Subclaim. Every pre-dense subset J of P§ which belongs to M§ is
pre- dense in PS+I.
Proof of the Subclaim. As M§ G N clearly J G N. Let p G P$+ι, p $ P<5, so
by the definition of P^+i there are q G P£ and rational numbers CQ,CI and a
natural number /(O) such that
0 < C0 < a
δ
ω < Cι < 1, 
C0 < 6n(4i(0))ϊ
 
C0 > ί>n(4i(0))-lϊ
cl(t/q) Π [co, ci] - 0, 
E7P - Uq U ^(0) U Af\ 
fp = fq U 0 ,ί(0) U 1 «(0) .

§4. The Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra 
169
(OA is the function with domain A which has constant value 0; similarly l^ )
Before we continue we prove:
4.7E2 Fact. Let r £ Pδ,J C P§ be dense, (CQ, GI) C (0, 1) be an open interval
disjoint from Ur. Then
C — {x G (CQ, ci) : there is r\ G J such that r\ > r and x φ cl(Urι}
has measure \c\ — CQ\ (subtraction as reals).
Proof of the Fact. The condition is equivalent to "(CQ,CI) \ C has measure
zero", so we can partition (CQ,CI) into finitely many intervals and prove the
conclusion for each of them. So w.l.o.g. the measure of (CQ,CI) is < 1/2. Now
for every ε > 0 we can find ΓQ, r < ΓQ G P§ such that Uro Π (CQ,CI) = 0 and
Uro has measure > 1/2 — ε (but of course < 1/2). As J C Pδ is dense, there
is r2 G ι7, r0 < r2 € P^ So (ignoring the sets cl(Z7ΓI) \ Urι , Z = 0, 2 which have
measure zero):
(i) (c0,cι) \ UΓ2 C C (by C"s definition);
(ϋ) (co^On^ct/^^ .
Hence
(iii) Leb((c0, Cl) \ C) < Leb((co, ci) Π t/r2) < Leb(C/Γ2 \ Uro) < Leb(ί/Γ2) -
Leb(C7ro)
As this holds for every ε we finished the proof of the fact. 
Π4.7E2
4.7E3. Continuation of the proof of the subclaim. Let J\ — {r G P§ : (3gι G
v7)(^ι < r)}, so v7ι is a dense open subset of P§ and JΊ G TV. Now for every
k > n(4Z(0)) let
Tfc = {ί : ί G P<5 , ί/t is the union of finitely many intervals whose endpoints
are from {&/ : n(4/(0)) < / < fc} and Leb(C7^ U Ut) < 1/2}.
So Tk is finite, and for every teTk,q<q(Jte Pδ, and of, φ cl(Z7t) (where
g U ί = (l/g U I7t, fq U /t), of course; on q see beginning of the proof of 4.7E).

170 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
Now in the model TV (as Mδ G N hence Jι G N) we can define, for each k and
t G Tk:
Dt
 d= {x G (CQ,CI) : there is r G Jι,r > q U ί,x <£ cl(E7Γ)}.
By the fact 4.7E2 we have proved, we know that (CQ,CI) \Dt\Ut has
measure zero (note, cl({7t) \ Ut has measure zero). As αf, G (0,1) \ C/t and a
δ
ω
does not belong to any Borel set of measure zero which belongs to ΛΓ, clearly,
(*) 
for every k > n(4Z(0)) and ί G Tfc we have αf, G Dt.
So for each k > n(4Z(0)) and t G Γfe, there is rt G P<5,rt € JΊ, t U ς < rt
such that a
δ
ω φ c\(Urt). Hence for some g(t) < ω, [&#(*), αf,] Π cl([7Γt) — 0 and
(
af>~A(i)) < l/2-Leb(l7rt). As Tk is finite, we can define a function g : ω —> ω,
by #(fc) = max{#(t) : t G Tk}. Clearly g G N[αf,], because, in defining # we have
used Jι, n(4/(0)), (fy : / < ω), αf,, but not (6n(i) : I < ω), (n(l) : i < ω) or /*.
Hence for every large enough l , g ( l ] < /*(/)> because /* dominates N[a^\ Γ\
ωω.
So by the choice of the n(Z)'s, for every large enough l,g(n(l)) < n(/-hl). Choose
a large enough /, let k = n(4Z) + l, Ut = Up\[bn^ι(^,bk]Jt = fp\Ut, t = (Ut, ft)
and it belongs to Tk. Now rt and p are compatible, (the "(αf, — 6p(t)) <
1/2 - Leb(E/rt)" guarantees that Leb(Up U t/Γt) < 1/2: other parts should be
clear too). So we finish the proof of the subclaim 4.7E1. 
HU.TEi
This really proves part (A) of (St).
4.7F Stage 5. Condition (B) of (St). Remember ψ is a P§ x Q-name of a (code
of a) Borel set (and it belongs to AT, hence the HO maximal antichains involved
in its definition are, by 4.7E1 maximal antichains of P<5+ι x Q), so it is also a
(Pδ+i x <9)-name. Pick a large enough k such that:
p* - (Up. U A
k
0 U A%, fp* U 0 Λj U I AJ) belongs to Pm.
So pί G JV[α*][/*] and (pj,g*) > (p*,ςf*) in Pδ+l x Q, so there is (p
;,r') >
(pϊ,^*) forcing an answer to "αf, G Bo[<p]", i.e. (p
7,/) H-p6+1xg"αί; e Bo[y?]" or
(p
7,/) ll-p6+1xQ"αf, i Bo[y?]". If the second possibility holds, then (B2) holds,
so condition (B) of (St) holds (remember we have made of, G h(A$) for every
fc in stage 3).

§5. Automorphisms of P(ω)/finite 
171
So suppose (p',r
r) H-p6+1xg"α£, G Bo[^]". Observe that the truth value of
such a statement can be computed in AΓ[α£,][/*] (i.e., we get the same result in
the universe and in this countable model). But /* is .R-generic over N[a
δ
ω}. So
if something holds, then there is (/o,#o) G G is such that:
(α) (/o,0o) ll-Λ'ΌΛr') I^Pδ+1χQ"αf, e Bo[v>]" ",
(/?) /o C /*, (Vi < ω)[i i Dom(/0) =Φ <*>(<) < Γ(01-
(Note that the definition of P$+ι depends on /*.) So if we change /* in
finitely many places, maintaining (/?), it will still be true that (p',r') H-p5+lXQ
"of, G Bo[</?]". But we can do it in such a way that only finitely many n(Z)'s
are changed and for some n the old AQ becomes A%, and the old Aίj becomes
AJ
+1, so now clause (Bl) of (St) will hold.
In any case (B) of (St) holds, hence we have finished proving (St) hence by
4.7C we have finished the proof of the main lemma and by 4.6 we have finished
the proof of the theorem. 
D4.5
§5. Automorphisms of P(α;)/finite
General topologists have been interested in what AUT(P(ω)/finite) can be.
(P(ω) is viewed as a Boolean algebra of sets, 'P(α;)/finite is the quotient when
dividing by the ideal of finite subsets of ω). Or equivalently: what can be the
group of autohomeomorphisms of /3(N) \ N?
Note that AUT(P(ω)) is isomorphic to the set of permutations of ω
(Per(ω)). It is well known that:
5.1 Claim. (CH) P(α )/finite is a saturated atomless BA (= Boolean algebra)
of power KI, so it has 2
Hl automorphisms (saturated in the model theoretic
sense). 
Π5.ι
5.1 A Remark. This claim will not be used here.

172 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
It is also easy to note that:
(*) If / £ Per(ω) the set of permutations of ω, then A/finite -> /(A)/finite is
an automorphism of P(ω) /finite.
Moreover:
5.2 Claim. If / is a one-to-one function, Dom(/), Rang(/) are cofinite subsets
of ω then A/finite —> f(A)/finite is an automorphism of P(ω)/finite. (Such an
/ is called an almost permutation of ω, and the induced automorphism is called
trivial, and we say it is induced by /). 
U5.2
5.3 Claim. If V = L, or just V f= "2*° = HI, 2*
1 = H2 and Osj holds where
5? = {5 < H2 : cf(<5) = Hi}" Λen we can define for i € S?, f?1, F< such that:
(a) P? is a c.c.c. forcing of cardinality HI and for simplicity the set of elements
of P* is i.
(b) Fi is a P*-name of a subset of [P(ω) x P(ω)]
yPi
(c) if (Pi : i < ω2) is <£-increasing continuous sequence of c.c.c. forcing notions
of cardinality HI, the set of elements of P$ is C ω2 and Pω2 = (Ji<u;2 ^' ^
is a PU;2-name and F C [P(ω) x 'P(^)]^ ^
2, i.e. this is forced then the set
{i-.S^-.P* = P* and F\[P(ω)]
yPi = FJ is stationary in ω2.
Proof. Translate everything to Pω2-names and apply 0{<5<ω2:cf(5)=Nι} (remem-
ber the Hi-chain condition). 
Dδ.a
5.4 Claim.
Suppose Pi (i < ω2) are as in Claim 5.3, F G [AUT(P(ω)/finite)]
yP"
2 
and
{i < ω2 : cf(ί) = HI and F\[P(ω)/finite]
yPί is
(i) not in V
Pί or
(ii) not an automorphism of [P(ω)/finite]
y 
* or
(iii) induced by some almost permutation / of ω
(f e V
Pί i.e. a P^-name, of course)}

§5. Automorphisms of P(ω) /finite 
173
is stationary.
Then F is trivial.
Proof. Since the sets defined by (i) and (ii) are not stationary,
S = {i < ω2 :cf(i) = Hι,F\[P(ω)/Gmte]
yPi 
is in V
Pi,
and is a trivial automorphism }
is stationary.
For i G 5, let fa G V
Pί be an almost permutation of ω inducing
F\[P(ω) /finite] v *. By a suitable version of Fodor's lemma we can find /* G
F
p-2, 5* C S stationary, such that (Vi G 5*) [fa = /*]. Clearly /* induces
F\[P(ω)/Άmte}
yPω2. 
D5.4
We want to show:
5.5 Main Theorem. CON(ZFC) implies CON(ZFC +2*° = N2+ every auto-
morphism of P(ω)/fmite is trivial). In fact, if φm and 0^2, where S$ = {δ <
ω<2 : cf(ί) = NI}, then for some c.c.c. forcing notion P of cardinality H2, the
conclusion holds in V
p .
We postpone the work concerning specifically automorphisms of P(ω) /finite to
the next section. To be precise we will prove there the following.
5.6 Main Lemma. Suppose
V N "2*° = Hi, M* is an ^-oracle, F G AUT(P(ω) /finite) is not trivial".
Then there is a forcing notion P such that
i) |P| = «ι,
2) P satisfies the M*-c.c.
3) P introduces a subset X of ω, such that if Q is the Cohen forcing, then in
P*Q
V 
~ there is no Y C ω satisfying {Y Π F(C) =αe ί'ί-B) <^ X Π C =αe .B :
C,B G [P(α;)]
v} (where ^ =αe A^ means A Cαe ^t and ^f Cαe A, where
-4 Cαe A
1 iff A \ A
t is finite) or even just satisfying {Y Π F(C) =ae F(B) :
XnC=aeB where B, C G [P(α;)]
y }.

174 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
5.6A Remark. Note we really replace F by some F^ from P(ω) to P(ω) such
that F(A/&mte) = Ft( A)/finite; but we do not distinguish.
Proof of 5.5 (assuming 5.6). The proof of 5.5 from 5.6 is very similar to the proof
of 4.6 (just replace "splitting homomorphism" by "nontrivial automorphism".
Note that 5.6(3) corresponds to 4.5 (a)-(j)). 
D5<5
5.7 Claim. In our scheme (of oracle c.c., as used in 4.6) we can demand:
1) for any second category A C [P(ω)]
v 
ω<2 we have {α < ω2 cf(α) = HI =ϊ
AΓ\ [P(ω)]
v 
τ G V
Pi and is of 2nd category} contains a closed unbounded
set.
2) if A C ['P(ω)]
v *, A G V
Pi, A is of 2nd category, then there is an oracle M
(in V
Pi) such that for any forcing notion P G V
Pί satisfying the M-c.c.,
in (V
Pi)
p the set A remains of the 2nd category.
Proof. For 1) It follows by 2). For 2) see 2.2.
5.8 Conclusion. 1) We can add in 5.5 that in V
p any second category set
contains such a subset of cardinality HI.
2) We can find HI-dense sets of reals, some of the first category, some of the
second category.
3) Baumgartner's construction [B4] cannot be carried out here as his conclusion
fails.
Proof. 1), 2) Left to the reader.
3) Baumgartner [B4] proved the consistency of: if for I = 1,2, Ag 
<Ξ R,
\Aι Π (c,d)| = HI for any reals c < d then (Aι,<) = (A2,<); but this fails
in V
p by part (2). His proof was: for given AI, A2 in a universe satisfying CH,
builds a c.c.c. forcing notion P, such that Ihp "(Aι,<) = (A2,<)" So for an
Hi-oracle M, and A\,Aι from V (where V \= O^J there is no such P satisfying
the M-c.c.

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
175
§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6
Since the proof is quite long it will be divided into stages.
Stage A. Preliminaries. For a sequence A = (Ai : i < a) (a < ω\) of almost
disjoint infinite subsets of ω, define
P(A) = {f :/ is a partial function from ω to 2 = {0,1},
/ is a finite union of functions of the form:
(1) finite functions,
(2) 1A. \ finite,
(3) 0Λi \ finite}
where IA (I £ {0,1}) is the function /(α) = ί if α G A, undefined otherwise,
and /\finite means /f(Dom(/) \ A) for some finite A.
The idea of the proof is as follows: we try to define A = (Ai : i < ω\} such
that: P(A) will satisfy the requirements of the lemma for X whose characteristic
function is U{p : p G GP(A)} We will have a general pattern for defining A.
Our work will be to show that if all instances of this pattern fail then F must
be trivial.
Our first worry is how to make P(A) satisfy the M*-c.c. The following
(*1) takes care of this while leaving us with a sufficient degree of freedom in
the construction of A.
(*1) If A — (Aj 
: j < α), α < α i, Ma is a countable collection of pre-dense
subsets of -P(-A), B C ω is almost disjoint from each A j ( j < α) and is
infinite, then we can find disjoint, infinite CΊ, C2, CΊ U C2 = B such that
for every I <E {1,2} and every A C Q, if \A\ = \Ct \A\ = K0, then every
I G MQ is pre-dense in P(A
Λ (A, Q \ A}).
Remark. Note that by 2.3, the same statement holds if we replace P(A) by
P(A) x Q, where Q denotes the Cohen forcing.

176 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
Proof of (*1). We define by induction on n < ω a number kn < ω and disjoint
finite subsets C£, C% of B such that C\ U C% = B Π kn and
m < n =» C^ = C
l
n n fcn & C^ = Cl Π fcn.
In the end we will let C/ = \Jn<ω C
l
n.
In each stage we deal with an obligation of the following kind:
J G Ma is a pre-dense subset of P(-A), r is a term for a member of
P(Ά" (A,Cι \ ^4}) (or €2 in the other case); note: A, CΊ, are not known yet,
still A C CΊ; our task is to ensure r will be compatible with some member
of J no matter how A and CΊ are defined as long as CΊ C £?, C^ C Ci and
C*nd = 0.
r has the form / U iA\k^Jd\A\k where i, j G {0, 1}, k < ω, / G P(A) (if
this union is not a function, then we don't need to do anything.) We don't know
what AnC* is. There are 2
10-
1 subsets of C\ : AI, . . . , At, . . . , for 1 < i < 2
|c-
1
look at ji = f U ^£\/c U Jc^\At\k Suppose this is a function, then it belongs
to P(Ά), hence is compatible with some gt G I. Now Dom(^) Π B is finite (for
B being almost disjoint from every Aj and gι G J C P(A)).
Let : Jkn>£ = Max(Dom(#) Π 5) for 1 < ί < 2
|c-
1, and /cn?0 = A:n;
+ 1 : 0 < I < <2\
c^;
Taking additional care to make CΊ = (Jn<ωC^ and C2 — Un<α;C^ infinite,
we obtain what we need. 
Π(*i)
In view of (*1), it is convenient to introduce the following notation:
Q will denote Cohen forcing. For OL <ω\, Pa will denote the forcing notion
corresponding to A — (Aj : j < a) (we delete a from our further notation when
α is fixed).
Pέ[A] will denote P(A ~ (A, d \ A)) for t G {1, 2}, A C Q as in (*1).
P?[A\ will denote Pέ[A] x Q.

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
177
I f p , q e Pωι x Q then we let p = ((p)0, (p)ι) and q = ((<?)0, (<?)ι), we will
write pU ςr for ((p)0 U (g)0, (p)ι U (9)1). For p G Pωι, q G Pωι xQ,p(Jq means
(P U (g)o, (g)ι), etc. We identify Pωι with PUl x {0} C Pωι x Q.
For A C B, Chj; will denote 1^ U QB\A
Stage B: The outline of the proof. We say that F is trivial on A C α; iff there
are A! ΞΞae A and / : A
fl^
lω such that F(£) Ξae f ( B ) for each 5 C A'. Let
«/ = {^4 C ω : F is trivial on A}.
We should distinguish two cases:
Case 1: J is dense, i.e. for every A G [ω]
Ho we have J Π [Λ]
N° ^ 0
Case jS: there is A+ G [a;]
H° such that [A+]"° Π J = 0.
We will construct the sequence ^4 = (A^ : α < α i) by induction. During
the induction we will require 0ι, where
Θi Aa G J in Case 1 for each a < ω\ and ω\A0CA+m Case 2.
Note that in Case 2 Aa C A
+ guarantees ^4α ^ J for 0 < a < ω\.
In stage C below we shall describe the inductive construction of (Aa : a <
ωι) and (Ma : α < ω\) and we show that either P((Aa \a <ω\)) satisfies our
requirements or in some step a the statement (*2) defined in stage C holds.
In stage D we shall show that if (*2) holds, then F is trivial on any B
provided that B is almost disjoint from {Ai : i < α}, so B G J, hence Case 1
holds.
In stage E we shall construct a function g which generates F on α;, which
proves that F is trivial. This concludes the proof of the main Lemma.
Stage C: Note that (*1) enables us to construct A as follows: We let (An : n < ω)
be any pairwise disjoint infinite subsets of ω satisfying Θi from Stage B. At
each later stage, we can use (*1) for any infinite B which is almost disjoint
from each earlier set (we can always find such B: arrange the earlier sets in an
ω-sequence (Bn : n < α>), and let B = {bn : n < ω} where bn G Bn\Um<nBrn).
Then we choose by induction on a G [ω,ω\) the set Aa.
What about Mα? It includes M* (in order to prepare the satisfaction
of the M*-c.c., M* is given in the assumption of 5.6), as well as additional

178 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
pre-dense subsets which will be specified in the sequel, when their necessity
becomes apparent; and of course Ma increases with a and is a model of ZFC~.
Sometimes, these will be subsets of Pa x Q which are to remain pre-dense in
P t [ A ] , but we can deal with such subsets in the framework of (*1) without
difficulty by 2.3(1). Also, we will preserve pre-density above a given condition,
but all these pre-dense sets are in Ma provided Ma is closed enough.
Altogether our induction hypothesis on α G [ω^ω\) are ®ι and
Θ2 (Aβ : β < a) is a sequence of infinite, pairwise almost disjoint subsets of
ω and Pa
 d= P((Ai : i < α» (and Pωι will be P((Ai : i < ωι))).
Θ3 Na is a countable set of pre-dense subsets of P((Aβ 
: β < α)) increasing
(but not continuous) in α, M* C Mα, and Na is equal to Ma Π { J : I a
pre-dense subset of P((Aβ 
: β < α})} where Ma is the Skolem hull of Na
in (ffp+), €,<!,+ ).
Now, in using (*1) we can choose between various candidates for B, and
for each of them we can choose between various continuations of A (namely,
we can choose ί E {1, 2} and A C Q). How do we choose?
In the verification of 3) of the lemma, we have to consider all possible
Y which are Pωι x Q-names of subsets of ω. By CH and the HI-C.C., we can
find Pa x Q-names Yα, which are determined schematically before the actual
construction of A, so that the sequence
(Ya : ω < α < ω\ , a an even ordinal )
will contain all possible Y, each appearing Ni-times. [More explicitly, we can
identify a Pωι x Q-name of a Y C ω with (qi,j,ti,j :i,j <ω), Qij G Pωι x Q,
tij a truth value, for each i < ω the sequence (q^j : j < ω) is a maximal
antichain, ςfίj<7 Ih "[i G Y] = t^". We consider Ya only if Ma already contains
each (qij : j < ω), so they remain maximal antichains. Of course we do not
know apriori Pωι but we can make a list of length ω\ including all possible
Pi(i < ω\) and Ya. As there are < HI candidates, and each candidate appears
HI times everything is clear]. Our choice of B (hence CΊ, C2 by (*!)), ^, A
will be as follows: whenever possible, we choose them so that θi from Stage B

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
179
holds and
[Ch£t \\-PQ[A] Ύa Π F(Cέ) =ae F(A)
n] is false .
Assume now that Pωι was obtained by such a procedure fails to satisfy
the requirements of the lemma. As 5.6(1) is clearly satisfied and we ensured
the satisfaction of 5.6(2), only 5.6(3) may be false. We will show that this is
exemplified by X = (J{f~
l({l}) 
: / € G} where G C Pωι is the name of the
generic subset of Pωι. If the existence of an appropriate Y is not forced already
by (0,0) the minimal condition in Pωι x Q, then some r G Pωι x Q forces that
there is such Y and in this case Pωι \{p : p > (r)o) satisfies the requirements
of the lemma (as the Mα's take care of the satisfaction of the M*-c.c. for such
restrictions of Pωι as well). Hence we may assume that (0,0) forces the existence
of such Y. So, there is Y = Ya(ω < a < ω\, a even) which realizes the relevant
type, and w.l.o.g. α is large relative to Y (remember each Y appears NI times.)
Since Chςi \\~puι XQ "X Π Cι = A" (referring to the Ci and A with which we
actually choose at stage α), it follows that Ch£t \\-Pωι xQ "YΓ\F(Ct) =ae F(A)
n.
(F from the assumption of 5.6.)
Now, when we are at stage α we know Ya, Pa but not Pωι. So we want to
show that this is already true if we consider forcing in P®[A]. As the forcing
relation for each formula n G Y is not affected by this shift, our only problem
arises from the fact that equality is forced to hold only ae. This difficulty is
overcome as follows: if, on the contrary, there is p > Ch^£ in P)P[A] forcing
Ύ Π F(Cι) ^ae F(A)
n, then for each k < ω the set of those conditions
"knowing" some counterexample to the equality above k is pre-dense above
p in P^[A]; so, as we remarked above, we can assume this pre-density is still
true in Pωι x Q, but (as p > Oι$£) p \\-PωιχQ Ύ Π F(Ct) =ae F(A)
n, a
contradiction (i.e. we can discard this case instead taking care of it).
So, Ch££ ll-pQ[Λ] Ύ Π F(Ci) =ae F(A)". But we chose B,t and A doing
our best to avoid this, so we must have had no better choice; thus:
Fact. If Pωι does not satisfy our requirements then there is α < α i, a > ω such
that (*2) below holds:

180 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
(*2) Assume Aj(j 
< α), Mi(i < α) were determined as well as a Pα-name
Y — Ya of a subset of ω. Let B be any infinite subset of ω almost disjoint
from each Aj(j < α) such that B G J if Case 1 holds, (in Stage B), and let
B — C\ U CΊ be some partition obtained as (*1). Then for every ί G {1,2}
and every A C Q such that | A| = |Q \ A| = NO, we have:
T
Note that (*2) is a kind of definition of F, not so nice though; so our aim is
to show that if F is definable in this weak sense then it is very nicely definable:
is trivial.
Stage D: Under (*2) we have F is trivial on B (i.e. for some one to one
g : B -» ω, for every B' C β, F(B') =ae {g(m) : m G B'}.
We will eventually show that (*2) implies that F is trivial but first we
want to prove that F\P(B) is trivial (this will be accomplished in (*13) below;
however those proofs will be used later, too).
We now assume B is as in (*2) and concentrate on CΊ; C^ can be treated
similarly, putting together we can get the result on B. So now we shall use
P?[A] 
foτACCi.
Let Pa x Q = {pi : έ < α;}, and let for n < ω, Xn be a dense subset of
PC, xQ,In = {qf :i<ω}, such that qf lhPttXQ "[n G Y] = tf" (t? denotes a
truth value, 1 is true, 0 is false).
We want to show that F\P(C\) is trivial (i.e. for some / : C\ — •» ω for
every C' C Ci, F(C
7) -ae {/(n) : n G Ci} (so Rang(/) =ae F(d)). To do this
we partition CΊ into three pieces, C\ — AQ U A\ U A^ and we shall prove (step
by step):
(a) F\A* is nicely defined by (*6) on a set of 2
nd category.
(b) F \A? is continuous on a set of 2
nd category.
(c) F \A* is trivial apart from a set of first category.
(d) F is trivial on A*.

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
181
We shall now define by induction on k < ω a natural number Uk and a
function /& : α& —» {0,1} where α/- — [nk,rik+ι) Π CΊ. We will take A* =
Um<u;
 α3m+ΐ for i < 3. We want our n/c, /£ to satisfy (*3) and (*4) below:
Let us denote by IF(k) the set of the functions /, Dom(/) a proper initial
segment of CΊ \ [0, nfc), Rang(/) C {0,1}.
(*3) (a) n0 - 0
(b) n j f e +ι>n J b,Rang(Λ) = {0,l}
(c) For any £ < &, m < n&, a function / from CΊ Π [0, n&) to {0,1} and t
denoting a truth value, the following holds:
if for some i, tf = t and / U /fc U pi U ςβ* G Pα x Q
then for some j, t™ — t and for every /ι G /F(fc 4-1),
/ U /fc U h U p^ U gj
1 G Pa x Q.
(*4) For every I < k and go> Pi functions from [0, n&) Π CΊ to {0,1}, one of the
following holds: (F is from the hypothesis of the Main Lemma 5.6):
Case (da): for no m G F(C\) \ [0, n^+i) are there ΐ(0) < ω, i(l) < ω,
t™, ^ t^x, and /ι G IF(k -h 1), 5uc/ι ίftαί for every M,
/ι C Λt G /F(fc 4-1) implies
Po U /jt U /ι^ U p£ U ^]70x and ^i U fk U Λ^" U pi U gj?i)
are both in Pa x Q.
Case (dβ): for every fe(*) > k and function /ι from [nfc+^n/^*)) Π Ci to
{0,1} there are m G F(CΊ) Π K(sll),nfc(*)+ι), i(0) < ω,
z(l) < α; 5wcΛ ^/ιαί t^0s 7^ ^ί?i)> an<i f°
r everY ^^ ^ IF(k(*) H- 1),
are both in Pa x Q.
We have now to convince the reader that we can define Uk, fk that satisfy
(*3), (*4). Assume that we have defined n 0,..., n^-i, njfc and / 0,..., fk-i and
we want to define nk+ι,fk 
We have finitely many tasks, of three types:
(i) instances of (*3), (c) namely: given i < /c, m < n^, / : C\ Π [0, n&) —>
{0,1} and t, we have to satisfy "z/for some i..."

182 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
(ii) instances of (*4) (dα), namely: given i < fc, #0,#ι £ {0, l}[°'
nfc)
nCl,
we try to satisfy "for no m..." (but sometimes we fail - then we will
remember this failure in (iii), at all later stages).
(iii) failures of (*4)(dα) in the past: given a task of type (ii) which we did
not fulfill at a previous step, we have to satisfy (dβ) for /c(*) = our
present k.
We will define fk by taking approximations of it in ZF(fc), each one of
them intends to fulfill one task and contains its predecessor - this ensures that
once we have constructed an approximation fulfilling a given task, the fk that
we will eventually obtain will also fulfill it. Our initial approximation is an
arbitrary element of IF(k) assuming the values 0 and 1.
So now we deal separately with each type:
(i) Assume such i exists (with fk interpreted as our current approximation
of it). The addition of h can create a contradiction only inside C\ (by the
definition of IF(k +1)), and since C\ is almost disjoint from the domain of any
condition in Pa (in this case (pi U <7™)o), by defining fk in the dangerous finite
portion C\ Π Ώom(pι U 9^)0? as (pt U <7Γ)Γ^Ί (
and extending for making its
domain a (proper) initial segment of C\ \ [0, n^)) we fulfill our task.
(ii) Let IFc(k) denote the subset of IP(fc) consisting of those functions
containing our current approximation of fk Assume that:
<8>ι There exists / G IFc(k) such that for every m G F(Cι), m >
Sup(Dom(/)), and for every /
f G IPc(fc), /t D /, and for every i(0),i(l) < ω,
if for every /" G ZFc(fc), /" D /t both 9o U /" \JPi U ς^0) and 9l U /
/; (Jp£ U ^1}
are in Pα x Q ίften t^0) - t^1}.
Assuming this, we take such / as our next approximation of /&, which will
satisfy this instance of (da). So if we fail, we put burden on the future cases of
(iii) but we know that:
®2 For every / G IFc(k) there are m G F(CΊ), m > Sup(Dom(/)) and
/
f G IFc(fc), /
f 2 / and i(0),i(l) < CJ sucΛ tftαt t^0) ^ t^1} and for every
/" G JFc(fc), /" 2 /
t both ^o U /" U pt U <?™0) and ^ U /
;/ U pi U ^1} are in

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
183
(iii) Adapting our notation to that of (ii), we denote our present k as fc(*)
and consider some k < fc(*) and assume that the property <8>2 (written at the
end of (ii)) held for t < k and #0, 9ι € [°>
n*)
nCΊ{0, 1}. (This we have found in
stage fc, note there are for each k only finitely many triples (A#o, #ι) )
By the formulation of case (dβ) we are given h € K+ι>
nfc(*))
nCΊ{θ, 1};
let /£, v be our current approximation of /&(*) and use the property <g)2 for
/ — fk U h U /]j?(#) to obtain ra, /t, ΐ(0), ΐ(l) as described there. Letting A#\ =
/t \ (fk U /ι) = /t f(Dom(/t) \ [njk, ftfc(*)]) and extending it if necessary to ensure
that m < njfe(*)+ι, we obtain the next approximation to /&(*) fulfilling our task.
So the definition of n^, /& can be carried out, so we have gotten (*3) and
(*4).
D(*3),(*4)
Our treatment from here on concentrates on A* — U/c<u,α3fc+ 1 (remember
ajς = [n/^n/c+i) Π C\). The other "two thirds" of C\ can be treated similarly.
Let /* - Uk<ω(hk U/3fc+2), Ai - Γ"1^!})- Notice that by (*
3) (
b)' both Aι
and its complement in Dom(/*) are infinite.
Thus, from (*2) it follows that:
(*5) For every A C A*, 'Ch%. U/* \\-pQ[AuAl] Ύ Π F(d) =ae F(A\JAl)
n.
Hence, for every A C A*,Ch^* U /* can be extended to a condition (in
P®[A U AI\) forcing equality above a certain n and in particular deciding for
each m > n in F(Cι) whether it belongs to Y (as no other names are involved
in the equality). Looking at P(A*) as a topological space, we conclude (as
\Pa x Q\ = Ho):
(*6) There exists a condition p* G Pa x Q, a finite function /ι* satisfying
Dom((p*)o) Π A* C Dom(h*) C A*, and n* < ω such that
^ =
f {A C A* : /ι* C Oι^ and for each m > n* in F(CΊ) we
have: [p* U Ch%. U /* H-pgμuAl] "m G F" or p* U Oι^ U /*
H p^μu^l^^r]}
is of the second category everywhere "above" h* (i.e., its intersection

184 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
with any open set determined by a finite extension of h* is of the second
category) .
We now define, for A G A,
Fι(A) = {me F(d) : p* U Ch
A
A, U /* lhpgμιMι] "m 67"}-
It follows from (*5) that
(*6A) F(A U Ai) =ae Fι(A) for all A e A.
We will verify next that A is a Borel set. The demand ft* C Cft^* defines an
open set, and then we have a conjunction over all m > n* in F(Cι) of conditions
each requiring that p* U Ch^* u /* decide whether m belongs to Y. Denoting
Aq — {A C A* : q is incompatible with p* U Cft^* U /*} for q G Pα x ζ), and
remembering that Jm = {q™ : i < ω} is dense in Pa x Q and we can preserve
its pre-density in PI [A U AI], we see that A C A* satisfies the requirement for
m iff it belongs to [n{A?™ : i < ω,t™ is true }] U [Π{Λ,m : i < ω,t™ is false}].
As each Aq is open, we have shown that A is Borel.
As A is a Borel set, we know by a theorem of Baire that (by extending ft*)
we may assume that { A C A* : A ^ A, and ft* C Cft^* } is of the first category.
Let k be large enough so that n^k > ft*, maxDom(ft*) and £ < 3/c — 1
where p* = p^.
For A G ^4, let t™ denote the truth value of m £ Fι(A). Then for every
TO- ^ [ftsfcj ftsfc+a) Π F(Cι) we know p* U Cft^* U /* is compatible with some ςf
1
but is not compatible with any q™ such that t^
1 ^ t^J (remember the definitions
of Fι(A) and ^4 and observe that m > n*, m G F(CΊ)).
Hence by (c) of (*3), t^ is determined, for A G A and m G [fts/ofts/c+s) Π
F(Cι), by αι^4[0,n3fc+4) ^ Oι^Γ[0,ft3fe+2); that is: t^ = t iff for some i,
t^
1 = t and for every ft G IF (3k + 4) we have
Oι
A
A, f[0, ft3fe+2) U /* t[0, n3fe+4) U ft U p* U ^m G Fα x Q.

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
185
Now we want to show that t™ is determined (for A, m, k as above) by
4* \azk+ι alone. So let us assume that A^\ A^ G A and Ch^° \a3k+ι =
Ch^ Γαsfc+i, and for some m G [n3k, 713^+3) ΠF(CΊ) we have t™(0) φ t™(1) . Let
for t = 0, 1, & = (Chj ? U Γ)r([0,n3fc-ι) ΓΊ Ci). From the way t™(0), t™(1) are
determined (see end of previous paragraph) and from t™(0) ^ t™(1) it follows
that at stage 3k — 1 of (*4), for the above #o> <7ι and p* = pi, clause (dα) fails
(take h = /*f(α 3fcU α3fc+2 U α3fc+3 )UGΛ^.* Γ^sfc+i, which does not depend on ί).
Hence (d/?) holds in this case. Using this, we want to construct B^\B^ G A
such that A^Πn3k-ι = B^Πn3k-ι for i = 0, 1, and B^\n3k-ι = B^\n3k.l
and we shall choose them in such a way that for infinitely many m G F(Cι),
Ch
1^*
 
an<^ C^A* 
determine t^(0),t^(1), respectively, to be distinct. Since
B<°> =αe β(1), also by (*6A) we know Fι(B^) =ae F(B^(JA1) =ae F(B™ U
AI) —ae Fι(B^), so this will be a contradiction. Thus, it remains to show
how to carry out the construction of B^\ B^ . We do it by an ω-sequence of
finite approximations, the set of finite approximations is {(ei, 62) : for some n,
ei, e2 are finite functions from ^4* Π [0, n) to {0, 1} e*, includes CTi^l^
31 and
We start with the respective characteristic functions of A^\A^ up to
n3k-ι. As A^\A^ G ^4, both characteristic functions contain h*.
As {^4 C A* : A φ A and h* C C7ι^ } is of the first category, we have a
countable family of nowhere dense subsets of P(A*) which are to be avoided
by βWjβί
1), to ensure B^,B^ G A. So we arrange all these tasks (each
time dealing with either B^ or B^ and one nowhere dense subset) in an ω
sequence, and by the definition of "nowhere dense" we obtain each time a finite
extension of our former approximations which ensures the implementation of
our task. Say (An 
> n < ω) is this sequence of nowhere dense sets, and we
choose (6^,62) for i < ω approximations such that for i — 3j, (e
1^
1
 ^ e
1^
1)
ensure £(0) φ Aj and maxDom(e
ΐ
1) > j, for i = 3 j + 1 (e^
1 , e
lj~
l) ensure
jB^
1) $ AJ, and for i = 3j 4- 2 (e\
+1 , e
1^
1) ensure that for some k < j and
m G [nfc,Πfc+ι) is as required (i.e. Ch%° , Ch^ί determine t^(0), t^(1) are
distinct). If we succeed, £(0) = \Ji<ω e\, B^ = \Ji<ω e\ are as required. Why
can we carry the construction? The least trivial case is the last.

186 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
We will show that our construction is all right by proving: if/c(*) > 3k — I
and fc(*) = 1 (mod 3) then there is m G F(Cι) Π [nk^^nk^+ι) such that for
t = 0,1 there are i(t) < ω such that t^0) / t^1} and for every h G IP(fc(*) + 3)
we have Ch%? ί[0, nkM) U /fcw U /* r[0, nfcW+3) U h U p* U q%t} G Pα x Q. To
prove this, use (dβ) for such fc(*) and h — (Ch^ U /*) t[^3fc?^/c(*)) We thus
get the desired contradiction.
So, by the last four paragraphs and (*6A), as F is an automorphism and
AI is fixed, we have proven (for the last equality: we can just subtract F(Aι)):
(*7) There are functions G'k : P(cizk+ι) — >
 /P(F(A*)n[n3fc, n3fc+3)) such that for
every A G A we have F(A) =ae F(A\jAι)\F(Aι) 
=ae Fι(A)\F(Aι) =ae
Now, (*7) would be good enough (as we shall see later) if it were not restricted
to A. So we want to achieve a similar result without this restriction.
We define by induction a sequence of pairs (u^gi) (I < ω) such that (ui :
ί < ω) is a partition of A* \Dom(/ι*) into finite subsets and gt : ut —* {0, 1}, as
follows: for r < ω, let Λr be the r-th element in a sequence of nowhere dense
subsets of P(A*) showing that {A C A* : A (£ A,h* C Ch%+} is of the first
category. Each (ut,gt) is defined so that:
(i) Ui is disjoint from um for all m < L
(ii) if ί G (A* \ Dom(/ι*)) \ Um<€um then ί G ut.
(iii) if A C A*, gt C Ch%* and i = 2k or t = 2k -h 1 then A £ ,Afc.
To see that this is possible, use the fact that At is nowhere dense taking
into account one after another all the elements of
 υ{0, 1} where υ = (Um<^um)U
Dom(/ι*).
Now, for t = 0, 1 let Bt* = Ur<α;U2r+t and #t* = Ur<u,^2r+t, Bt = 9t~
l ({ID-
Then Dom(^t*) = Bϊ and (BJ,Bϊ,Dom(Λ*)) is a partition of A*. Prom (iii) it
follows that if A C A*, h* U #t* C Ch^ then A G Λ

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
187
Prom (*7) we can thus derive a definition for F(AΓ\BQ) working uniformly
for all AC A* extending G'k to G£
G'ί(A Π £?* Π a3k+l) = G'k([(A Π £*) U Bi] Π α3fc+ι) \ F(Bι)
(where F(B\) G P(ω) denotes one fixed representative of the equivalence
class F(Bι)). Similarly we can derive a definition for F(A Π BJ). Prom these
two definitions (we can use F(\Jn<ω u2n+ι), F((Jn<ω ^2n), ) remembering that
Dom(/ι*) is finite, we obtain:
(*8) There are functions Gk : P(a3k+ι) — > P(F(A*) Π [713*, 713^+3)) such that
for every A C A* we have F(A) =ae Uk<ωGk(A Π α3fc+ι).
With this result in hand, we have good control <ΛF\P(A*). We prove first:
(*9) For every large enough k and disjoint 61,62 ζ
 α3/c+ι?
Otherwise there is an infinite S C ω, and 61,62 ^
 α3fc+ι for k G 5,
&fc Π 6£ - 0, Gfc(6j) Π Gfe(6|) ^ 0. Then let Al = (Jkesb^ A2 = Ufc€S6§. Clearly
AI Π A2 = 0 and AI, A2 C A*, and F(Aι) ΠF(A2) ^αe 0. This contradicts that
F/finite commutes with Π.
As F commutes with U we can get similarly:
(*10) For every large enough k and disjoint 61, 62 C
Gk(blUb2)=Gk(bl)(JGk(b2),
and as F is onto (and monotonic) we have:
(*11) For every large enough fc, for any singleton 6 C 03^+1 we have: Gk(b) is
a singleton (and also Gk is onto F(A*) Π [nsfc, 713^+3).

188 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
Define g, Ώom(g) = A*, Gk({ί}) = (g(ί)} for i G α3fc+ι, k large enough. So
clearly by (*8)-(*ll):
(*12) For every A C A*, F(A) =ae 9 (A) — {g(i) : i G A} and g is one-to-one.
Remember that A* is one third of C\. Doing this separately for each third
and then the same for C%, we obtain for every B which is almost disjoint from
each Aj(j < α): (that we can get a one-to-one g is proved like (*9)):
(*13) There is a one-to-one function #, Dom(^) =ae J5, such that (Wl C B)
[g(A) =ae
Stage E: F is trivial on ω.
Let / be the ideal generated by {Aj 
: j < α} and the finite subsets of ω.
Let /!
 d= {B Cω:(\/Ae I)\B Π A| < K0}. Clearly, /i is also an ideal.
Remember J = {A C α; : F is trivial on A}. In stage D we have shown
that F is trivial on sets in /i (if (*2) holds). If Case 2 from stage B holds then
there is A+ e [ω]
κ° such that [A+}"° Π J = 0, hence cj \ A0 C A+ but there are
£Γs as in stage B and by it (*2) holds hence by stage D we know that B G J
and obviously B Π AQ is finite. So B gives contradiction. Hence Case 1 of Stage
B holds i.e. J is dense. We now outline the rest of the proof, and then shall
give it in details. Using the knowledge we gathered on F in the previous stage
we construct count ably many functions {gp : p G Pa x Q} such that for each
B G /i Π J there is p G Pa x Q such that gp \B induces F on B.
Next we shall put these functions together to get a single function g such
that g induces F on every A G I\. Finally we shall show that in this case g
defines F.
Notice:
(*14) Every A which is not in / contains an infinite subset in /i.
To see this, let (Bn : n < ω) be an ω-enumeration of the generators of /
(i.e. {Aj : j < α}). We try to define a sequence (αn : n < ω) such that αm / an
for m < n and αn G A\U m < n5 n. If we succeed we obtain a subset as required.

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
189
If we cannot define αn, then A C (Um<nJBm) U {αm : ra < n}, hence A G /,
contrary to our assumption.
Let £ e J Π /i be infinite, B = Cι U C2 as in (*1).
(*15) Let g induce F|T(£) (in the sense of (*13)), and let t e {1, 2}. Then for
every p G Pα x Q there are g, p < q G Pα x Q and n such that:
(Vm G C,)(m > n => [<?U {(m,0)} lh P α X Q ^(m) £ Γ'D
and:
(Vm G Ct)(m >n^ [q\J {{ra,l}} I^P«χQ "<?(™) G F"])
Proo/ o/ (*15). It is enough to prove it for ra G CΊ, so £ = 1. Suppose it fails
for #, p. Let {qe : I < ω} be the set of all conditions in Pa x Q above p. Let
n i—> ((n)o, (n)ι) be a mapping of ω onto ω x ω.
We will define an increasing sequence of finite functions functions hn(n <
ω), Dom(/ιn) C CΊ, Rang(/ιn+ι \ /ιn) = {0,1}, and if n e CΊ then n G
Dom(/in+ι); we will also define mn G CΊ(n < α;), as follows:
We let Λo - (p)0r(Dom((p)o) Π Ci).
Assume that we have defined Λn, and we will see how we define mn and
/in+ι. If ftn is not compatible with ^(n)0 then mn is chosen arbitrarily and
ΛΠ+I 2 ftn is chosen in accordance with our requirements above. If hn is
compatible with <7(n)0, we use our assumption for q — hn U <?(n)0 Notice that if
m is large enough then m ^ Dom((<?)0) Π CΊ and [m G CΊ =» ί/(m) is defined,
^(m) G -F(CΊ), ^(m) > (n)ιj. So we can find m = ran G CΊ satisfying all these,
and kn G {0,1} such that /ιnU^(n)oU{(mn, A:n)}FPαXQ^(mn) ^ y iff fcn - 0".
Note: kn = 0 is a failure of the first conclusion of (*15), kn = 1 is a failure of
the second conclusion of (*15) . We will choose kn = 0 if possible.
Let 4 > hn U q(n}o U {{mn, fcn)} force "^(mn) G F iff A;n - 0". Let /ι^+1 -
(gt)0|-(Dom((4)0)nCi), and let hn+1 3 Λ^+i satisfy Rang(Λn+ι\Λn) = {0,1}
and n G Dom(/ιn+ι) if n G Ci \ Um<n Dom(Λm).
Now, Ώom((Jn<ωhn) = CΊ. Let A C Ci be the subset with characteristic
function Un<α,ftn. So A and Cι\A are infinite, so by (*2) we know Chci "~p
Q[Λl
αr Π F(Cι) =αe F(A)". By our choice of ft0, Ch^ = Un<ω/ιn is compatible
with p, so some extension ofpUCh^ 
in P;P[A] forces the equality above some

190 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
integer. So there is n such that:
9(n)o U Ch^ lhpgμ] Ύ n F(Cι) \ (n)χ = F(A) \ (nh"
sadF(A)\(n)1=g(A)\(n)ί.
We refer now to the definition of ran, /ιn+ι,fcn, suppose that fcn = 0,
the other case is similar. Since hn C Ch,£1 is compatible with <7(n)0, we had
Qn
 l[~P«χQ "#(
mn) £ ϊ™ where ς£ was above /ιnU<?(n)0U{(mn,0)}. Now, mn φ A
since ftn+1 says so, hence 0(mn) ^ g(A). As 51 (mn) > (n)ι, g(mn) φ F(A)\ but
#(ran) G F(CΊ), hence g(n)o U C7ι^ lhpgμ] "s(ran) ^ y». But ς£ forces the
opposite (we know it in Pα x Q, but it does not matter), and they are compatible
(because q^0 C ^ and C7ι^ and g^ are compatible by our choice of ft^+i), a
contradiction. So we have finished the proof of (*15).
We define now, for every p G Pa x Q, a partial a function from ω to cj as
follows: flfp(m) - fc iff [pU {(m,0)} lhp a X Q "fc ^ Y" and p U {{m, 1)} lh P α X Q
"fc G y" and fc is the only one satisfying this].
Our intention in defining gp is to have countably many functions which
induce F\P(B) uniformly for all B G /i.
(*16) For every B G J Π /i and every p e Pa x Q there is 9, p < <? G Pα x Q,
such that B Cαe Dom(^9) and (VA C B)[F(A) =ae 9q(A)].
Proof of (*16). If B is finite, then there is nothing to prove, so we assume that
B is infinite. Let g exemplify B G J (remember /i C J).
Let us call /c a candidate to be gp(m), if it satisfies the first two parts of
the definition (but maybe not the uniqueness requirement). We notice that if
k is a candidate to be gp(rn) and k^ is a candidate to be gp(rrύ) and ra ^ m^,
then k ^ fcΐ (consider p U {(m,0), (m^, 1)}, it forces both k φY and fct G y).
Notice also that in (*15) we have shown that for every large enough m G Q
(and appropriate q) g(m) is a candidate to be gq(m).
Thus, given B and p, we apply (*15) first for i — 1 and p, and then for
ί = 2 and the condition obtained for £ = 1, obtaining q > p such that for
every large enough m G -B, #(m) is a candidate to be gq(m). Now, it suffices to
show that B Cαe Dom(gq), since whenever <?q(ra) is defined there is only one

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
191
candidate, but g(m) is one, so for almost all m G B we have gq(m) = g(m) and
we know that g induces F\P(B).
Assume that B <£ae Ώom(gq). Then w.l.o.g. B is disjoint from Όom(gq)
and we have km (m G B} such that fcm and g(πι) are distinct candidates to be
gq(m). Let C = {km : m G B}. Then C is infinite and disjoint from g(B) (as no
k is a candidate for two ra's). We let D' = F~
l(C)', more exactly F(D') =ae C
(possible as F is onto). Choose an infinite D C D
1 such that D G J. Then as
g(B) =ae F(B), D
1 is almost disjoint from B.
Case I: D G /i
In this case, we apply (*15) for D and q twice (as we did above for B and
p) to obtain q^ > q such that for large enough mϊ G D, g^(mϊ) is a candidate to
be #9t(rnΐ) (where #t induces FΓP(-D)). But for large enough m^ e D, m^ £ B
and #ΐ(mΐ) is a candidate to be gqϊ(m) for some ra G JB (as g*(D) =ae F(D),
F(D) Cae {fcm : m G B}, and <? < gt G Pa x Q), a contradiction (as in the
beginning of the proof of (*16) we observe that no k is a candidate to be gqτ (n)
for two rt's).
Case II: D <£ /i.
Then w.l.o.g. D C Aj for some j < α. By strengthening q we can assume
w.l.o.g. that \AJ \finite < qoτ OA., \finite < q. Assume that the former is the case
(the second case is dealt with similarly). Then q \\-pω XQ "Aj Cae X", hence
Q lf~pwι xQ "F(Aj] Cαe y". As we have seen in the proof of (*2), by preserving
the pre-density of (countably many) appropriate subsets above corresponding
conditions, we can conclude that q lhp α XQ "F(Aj) Cae Y
n. Hence there are n
and qt > q in Pa x Q such that ς
t lh P a X Q "n
t G Y
n for all n
f G F ( A j ) , n
f > n.
But F(D) Cae C Π F ( A j ) , so taking n\ = km large enough we know that n^ is
a candidate to be gςt (m) - a contradiction.
So we have finished the proof of (*16).
(*17) For Pι,p2 £ Pa* Q, B = {n : gpl(n),gp2(n) are defined and distinct} G /.
Proof of (*17): If not, then by (*14) there exists an infinite B' C B which
belongs to /i, but as we are in Case 1 (from stage B, as said in the begining of
stage D) there is an infinite B\ C B' which belongs to J. Together BI G I\ Π J

192 
IV. On Oracle-c.c., the Lifting Problem of the Measure Algebra
is such that gpl, gp2 are defined everywhere in B\ but they never agree there.
By (*16) we can find for i = 1,2 condition ^ > pi such that BI Cae Ώom(gqi)
and (VA C Bι)F(A) =ae 9qi(A). It follows that gqι \Bι =ae 9q2 Γ-Bi; otherwise,
we have an infinite B% C B\ on which the functions never agree, and we can
divide B2 into three parts each having disjoint images under the two functions
(decide inductively for n € BZ to which part is belongs, a good decision always
exists as the functions are one-to-one); one part at least is infinite, call it £3,
then F(B$) is almost equal to both gq^(B^) and gq2(B^) which are disjoint.
But, whenever gpλ,gqλ are both defined they must agree (since qι > Pi), and
the same holds for P2><72j so we obtain that gpl \B\ =ae gp2 ί^i? contradicting
our assumption. So (*17) holds.
By arranging the conditions in Pa x Q in an α -sequence and using (*17)
we obtain that there is a partial function g° from ω to ω such that for every
p G Pa x Q we have
{n : gp(n) is defined but g°(n) is not defined or is ^ 9P(n)} € /.
Hence, by (*16), for every B G JΠ/i, B Cαe Dom(#°) and (VA C B)F(A) =ae
9°(A).
We have almost achieved our goal of inducing F\P(B) uniformly for all
B G J Π /i - the missing point is that we want g
Q to be one-to-one. But this
must be true after discarding from Dom(<7°) a set from /, because otherwise
we can construct (bn : n < ω) with bn ^ bm for n ^ m, ^°(?>2fc) = 9
Q(bzk+ι)
and B — {bn : n < ω} G J Π /i (see the proof of (*14) noting J Π /i is
an ideal); then for large enough n and an appropriate gq (inducing F\P(B))
g®(bn) = gq(bn), so gq is not one-to-one, a contradiction. Since discarding a
set in / does not affect the other properties of g
0, we have a one-to-one g°
inducing F\P(B) uniformly for all B G J Π /i. But any element of /i contains
an element of J Π /i, so #° induces FίP(J3) for all B G /i [Why? Assume
5 G /i, -*[F(B) =ae 9
Q(B)], then one of the following occurs:
(a) F(B)\g°(B) is infinite, so as F is onto for some infinite Bl C B, F(Bι) Π
g
Q(B) = 0 and we can find £2 Q #ι which belongs to J, so F(JB2) =αc

§6. Proof of Main Lemma 5.6 
193
g°(B2) but g°(B2) C g°(B) whereas F(B2) Cae F(Bl) <ae ω \ g°(B)
contradiction,
(b) g°(B) \ F(B) is infinite so there is an infinite BI C B such that g°(Bl) C
g
Q(B) \ F(B) and we get a similar contradiction.]
As we are in Case 1 (from Stage B, see beginning of Stage E) (Vj < a)Aj G
J, and they are almost disjoint, there is g
l, one-to-one partial function from ω
to cj, so that for every B G /, F(B) =ae 9
l(B) and B Cae Dom^
1). Clearly
Dom^
1) U Dom(#°) is co-finite (use (*14)).
Let /* be the ideal that /U/i generates. Let D = {n : g
l(n) ^ g°(n) and
both are defined}.
If D φ Γ we can find (as we found B3 C B2 in the proof of (*17)) DI C D
such that D! φ Γ and g
l(Dl) Γi g
Q(Dι) = 0.
As F is onto, for some D\ C Dl5 F(D|) =αe F(£>ι) Π ί/
0(Z)ι). Then
jDJ G /i, otherwise it has an infinite subset D'{ G /, so F(D'{) =ae g
l(D'{)
hence F(D'{) Cae g
l(Dl), but F(D'{) Cαe F(.D{) Cαe ^
0(A), a contradiction.
Similarly, DI \ D\ G /; so DI G /*, a contradiction.
So D G /*, hence by trivial changes in g°, g
l we get D = 0. Let g — ^
1 Ug°.
For every A G /*, -F(-A) =αe ^(-4), so as /* is dense, F is an automorphism,
this holds for any A.
As F(ω) =ae g(Dom(g)), Rang(^) is co-finite.
Why can we assume g is one-to-one? No integer can have an infinite origin
set A, since then F(A) is infinite while g(A) is a singleton. Only finitely many
integers can have a non-singleton origin set, otherwise we would have two
disjoint infinite sets with the same infinite image under g. So we can throw
out the problematic finite part of g.
Thus F is trivial. 
Πδ.6,5.5

V. α-Properness and
Not Adding Reals
§0. Introduction
Next to not collapsing NI, not adding reals seems the most natural requirement
on a forcing notion. There are many works deducing various assertions from
CH and many others which do it from diamond of HI. If we want to show that
the use of diamond is necessary, we usually have to build a model of ZFC in
which CH holds but the assertion fails, by iterating a suitable forcing. A crucial
part in such a proof is showing that the forcing notions do not add reals even
when we iterate them. So we want a reasonable condition on Qi (in V
Pί) which
ensures that forcing with Pa does not add reals when (Pi,Qi : i < α) is a
CS iterated forcing system. Another representation of the problem is "find a
parallel of MA consistent with G.C.H.".
The specific question which drew my attention to the above was whether
there may be a non-free Whitehead group of power KI (from [Sh:44] we know
that there is no such group if V = L or even if Os holds for every stationary
S C ωι, and that there is such a group if MA +2^° > N! holds). This is
essentially equivalent to: "Is there a stationary 5 C ωi, and for each δ E 5
an unbounded subset AS of order-type ω, such that A = (A$ : δ E S) has the
uniformization property" (see II 4.1, i.e. if h = (h$ : δ E S), hg a function
from Aδ to 2 = {0,1} then for some h : (J AS —> 2 for every 5, hg C* h i.e.
δ£S
{a E AS ' hs(a) ^ h(a)} is finite). It is easy to see that Os implies (Ai : i G 5}

§1. £-Completeness-a Sufficient Condition for Not Adding Reals 
195
does not have the uniformization property (and in II 4.3, we proved, from ZFC
+ MA -f2^° > HI, that A has the uniformization property).
The solution was surprising. By Devlin and Shelah [DvSh:65] (see AP §1
here), there is a weak form Φ^ of 0^ which follows from CH; in fact is equiv-
alent to 2
H° < 2
N l. This statement implies many consequences of the diamond
(see on it in Appendix §1; see [Sh:87a], [Sh:87b], [Sh:88] and a systematic de-
velopment in Abraham and Shelah [AbSh:114] and [Sh:192] and lately [Sh:576],
[Sh:600]). In particular (A$ : δ G S) does not have the uniformization property
when S G Ί)ωι i.e. S contains a closed unbounded subset of ω\. This still leaves
open the question for 5 a stationary costationary subset of ω\. Now for such
sets it was proved in [Sh:64] that the uniformization property may hold for a
fixed stationary costationary subset S of ωi, i.e. for all (A§ : δ G 5), AS C δ
unbounded of order type ω. However Ou>ι\s (and even 0^\ 5) may still hold.
On the situation for λ > HI see [Sh:186], Mekler and Shelah [MkSh:274] and
[Sh:587]. More information on the connection between unifomization and group
theoretic questions see [Sh:98] or see the book [EM] and lately Eklof, Mekler,
Shelah [EMSh:441], [EMSh:442], Eklof, Shelah [EkSh:505].
We also deal with "when does a CS iteration of proper forcing add no new
reals?" For this we need two properties. One is D-completeness (see §5) which
is a way to exclude the impossible cases, and another is α-proper for α < ωi,
where we replace a countable elementary submodel by tower of height a of
such models (in §3, and in §2 for more general case). The iteration theorem
is proved in §7, but to apply it to the classical problem of SH we need "good
forcing notion", this is done in §6; Jensen's original proof use a different forcing.
Lastly, in §8 we deal with KH giving a proof in our context to results of Silver
and Devlin. We also start investigating preservation of additional property: in
§4 we deal with ^-bounding.
Notation. In this chapter λ,μ will stand for uncountable cardinals, if not
explicitly stated otherwise.

196 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
§1. ^-Completeness - a Sufficient Condition for
Not Adding Reals
1.1 Definition. Let 8 be a family of subsets of <Sκ0(μ) (we assume always
Sκo(μ) G £, so μ is reconstructible from 8 but using specific 8 we may forget to
write SNO(M))- In an abuse of notation, instead of a singleton {£}, E C <Sκ0(μ),
we write E. When 8 = {a G Sχ0(μ) 
: a Π ω\ G 5} we write {5} or 5 (here
S £ S^oί^i) or just 5 a subset of ωi), similarly if 5 C 5κ0(μι), we may interpret
it as {α G <Sκ0(μ) : αΠμi G 5}. Remember £>κ0(A) is the filter {A C Sχ0(A) 
: A
include some club of <Sκ0(A)} (see Definition III 1.4), it is Ni-complete, fine (i.e.
x G A = > { α : z G α } G £>κ0(A)) and normal (i.e. Ax G Ί>κQ(A) for x G A implies
(1) We say that 8 is nontrivial if for every λ large enough, there is a countable
N -< (if (λ), G) such that 8 G N and AT Π μ G A for every A G £ Π TV. We
say in such cases that AT is suitable for 8.
(2) We say, for a nontrivial £, that a forcing notion P is ^-complete if for every
λ large enough, and N -< (if (λ), G) countable, suitable for £, to which P
belongs, the pair (N,P) is complete (see below).
(3) The pair (TV, P) is complete if every generic sequence (pn : n < ω) for
(TV, P) has an upper bound in P, where:
(4) (pn :n< ω) is a generic sequence for (N, P) if pn G PnTV, P t= pn < pn+ι,
and for every dense open subset I of P which belongs to AT, Jn {pn : n <
1.2 Claim.
1) If E is nontrivial and 8 G #(λ), Λen the set of suitable TV's is unbounded
in S*0(H(\)). Moreover 8 is nontrivial C P(S*0(μ)) iff the fine normal
filter on Sχ0(μ) it generates is a proper filter. So if 8 = {E}, we can add
"iff E is a stationary subset of <Sκ0(μ)".
2) In the definition, in (1) we get the same answer for all λ for which 8 G if (λ);
if we replace "£ G N X (ίf(λ), G)" by "TV X (ff(λ), G,£)" we get the same

§1. £-Completeness-a Sufficient Condition for Not Adding Reals 
197
answer for all λ for which <Sκ0(μ) G if(λ), so we may replace the universal
quantifier on λ by an existential.
3) If 8 is nontrivial, it has the finite (in fact, countable) intersection property.
4) If S C ωι is stationary, then 8 — {S} is nontrivial (for μ = ω\).
5) If P is ^-complete for some nontrivial £, then P does not add reals.
6) If N -< (-ff(λ), G) is suitable for 8, P G N a forcing notion, q G P is generic
for (TV,P), then q \\-P
 UN[GP] is suitable for S" .
7) If S C 7>(<SHo(μ)), μi = |£|+μ, 5 = {Xi : t < |£ 1} and £* - {α G S^(μι):
if i G α and i < |£| then α Π μ G Xi], then: S is nontrivial iff {E*}
is nontrivial; also for any forcing notion P, P is ^-complete iff P is E*-
complete.
8) If P, Q are ^-complete, then P x Q is £ -complete.
9) If N X (if (λ), G) and μ, E G AT and E C S<κ0(μ) then: AT is suitable for
{E} i
Proof. 1) Fix λ and a countable α G if(λ). We want to find a suitable TV such
that α G TV (then also α C TV). Assume
(*) there is no suitable TV -< (if (λ), G), α G TV.
T/ien for some λi > λ we have (if(λι),G) |= "(3α € #(
λ))[(*)Γ an^ ίf(λ) G
H(\ι) of course, and λi is as required in Definition 1.1(1). Let NI -< (/f(λι), G)
be suitable for £ . Then for some α G Λ^ Π ίf(λ), TVi |= "(*)". Now consider
TV = NI Π -ff (λ) and get a contradiction. The other two sentences are easy too;
on the normal fine filter on <Sκ0(μ) which S generates see 1.4.
2) Easy, by an argument similar to III 2.2.
3)-9): Easy, (for (6) see 1.3(1)). 
Dχ.2
1.2 A Explanation of 1.1(4). λ is large enough to ensure everything about P,
forcing, etc., is expressible in ίf(λ), now as TV is an elementary submodel, it is
legitimate to ask what goes on when you force with P starting in TV, of course
a generic sequence is not far from being a generic subset, so what (4) says is
that for any generic extension N[G\, there is p G P which knows everything
about it (so G C P n TV is generic over TV).

198 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
1.3 Theorem.
(1) If P is £-complete (so £ nontrivial in V), then Ihp "£ is nontrivial".
(2) If Q = (Pi,Qi : i < α) is a countable support iteration, Ihp. "Q^ is £
-complete", then Pa — limQ is ^-complete.
1.3 A Remark. So in (2) it is enough to assume £ is not trivial in V and Ihp. "
if ε is not trivial then Qi is ^-complete."
Proof.
(1) Note: Sχ0(μ)
v = SχQ(μ)
v 
. Let λ be large enough and p G P. Let N X
(ff(λ),€) be suitable for £, P G N, p G W, hence (7V,P) is complete (see
Definition 1.1(2)). Choose (pn : n < ω), a generic sequence for (AT, P), p0 = p
and choose p* > pn for all n < ω. Since p* is (TV, P)-generic by Corollary III
2.13 (see clauses (a), (f)) we have, p* Ih "(TV[G],G) X (#(λ)
vl
Gl, G); £ G N[G\
and TV[G] Π μ = N Π μ and H(X)
V nN = H(X)
V Π JV[G]" and as £ E V also
N[G\ Π £ = N Π £, hence 5^0(μ) Π AT = <SNo(μ) Π N[G\ (as forcing by P adds
no new countable subsets of μ) hence
A= 
A
A^ε
AeN[G)
So p* > p forces AΓ[G] to exemplify that £ is not trivial.
(2) Let λ be large enough, N -< (H(X),e) 
suitable for £. Let (pn : n < ω)
be a generic sequence for (AT, Pα), (note pn G AT, Dom(pn) countable hence
Dom(pn) C N). Define p* G Pα : its domain is TVΠα, and for i G Λ/ΊΊα, p*(i) is
a member of Qi which is an upper bound for {pn(i) : n < ω and i G Dom(pn)}
if there is such upper bound (in Qi, say first such upper bound in some well
ordering <i of Qi (a P^-name)). We now prove by induction on i G N Π α
that p* \i > pn \i for every n (note i G Dom(pn) for every n large enough as
{p G Pα : ^ G Dom(p)} is a dense open subset of Pα which belongs to TV). There
are no special problems.
Πl.3

§1. £- Completeness- a Sufficient Condition for Not Adding Reals 
199
1.4 Claim.
(1) The minimal normal fine filter on Sχ0(μ) which includes 8 is T> = T>(8)
which is defined by:
A G V if and only if there is C G £>N0(/-0 and Λ G £ U {Sκ0(μ)} for i < μ,
such that {α G C : (Vi G α)α G AJ C A
(2) 8 is nontrivial if and only if 0 £ £>(£).
(3) P is £ -complete if and only if P is D(£)-complete.
Proof. Easy. 
Πι.4
1.5 Lemma. Assume 2
K° = NI. If 0 = (Pi, Qi : i < α) is a countable support
iteration, Ihp.
 α|Qi| = NI", £ a family of subsets of <Sκ0(μ) which is nontrivial,
and each Qi is 8 -complete. Then Pα = Lim Q satisfies the N2-chain condition.
Proof. Let {pi G Pα : i < ^2} be given. We shall find two compatible conditions
among them. Pick λ regular large enough, foj every i < N2, let Ni -< (-ff(λ), G)
be countable such that {Q,p;,z,£} C Ni and AΓ^ is suitable for £.
1.5 A Fact. We can find i < j < ω^ and an isomorphism h : Ni — > JVj (onto
A^ ) such that h(pi) = PJ and h\(Ni Π A^ ) = i
Proo/ o/ ίΛe Fαcί. Denote 5^ = {7 < ^2 : cf (7) = KI}, clearly it is a stationary
set; define 7(7) = Um{β : A^7 Π (Uί<77Vi) - 7V7 Π (Ui<βNi)}. Since ||AΓ7|| = K0
and [7 G Sj =Φ cf(7) = KI] clearly / is a regressive function on Sj, hence by
Fodor's lemma there exists 5 C 5j stationary and /? < ^2 such that /[5] = {/?}.
The number of countable subsets of Ui<βNi is
therefore we may choose Γ C S of cardinality ^2 and a set 5* such that
(V7 G Γ)[7V7 Π (Ui<βNi) = B*]. For every 7 G Γ define ^ - (NΊ,pΊ,c)ceB*.
The number of isomorphism types is < 2^° = NI hence we may choose S^ C T,
|5t| = K2 such that i ^ j e S ^> N^ NJ. Pick such i, j from St. Let

200 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
h : Ni — > Nj be the isomorphism. As each c G 5* is an individual constant, h is
an isomorphism over J5* (i.e., it is the identity on JB*) and similarly /i(p^) = PJ.
This is the isomorphism we promised in the Fact so we have proved the fact.
Continuation of the proof of 1.5: Let i < j and h be as in Fact 1.5 A. Now
choose {pf e Pa Π Ni : n < ω} such that pi = p® < pi < p\ < 
and
for every dense subset I G Ni of Pa there exists n such that pf £ T and let
{p™ G PQ; Π NJ : n < ω} be defined by p™ = h(pf). 
Define a condition r as
follows: Dom(r) = (α Π A^) U (α Π A^ ), for ξ G α Π Ni \ Λ^ , r(f) will be a
Pξ-name of an upper bound of {&?(£) : n < ω} if there is such a bound, and
otherwise 0 = 0pξ. For ξ e α Π Nj, r(ξ) will be a name of an upper bound of
{PJ (0 : n < ω} if there is such an element, and otherwise 0 = 0pξ. It suffices
to prove that for every n < ω we have pf < r and p™ < r. We shall prove by
induction on 7 < α that for every n < ω, pf ί7,p^ f7 < r\j. This suffices as for
7 = α we get that r is a common upper bound of pi \a — pi and PJ \a = PJ (in
Pa). For 7 = 0 this is trivial.
For 7 limit, it follows from the induction hypothesis (and the definition of the
order).
For 7 = £ + 1, notice that Dom(p^) C N^ Π α, Dom(pp C Nj Π α, and divide
to 4 cases:
1. ζ φ Ni and ξ ^ Nj] trivial.
2. ξ €. Ni\Nj, it suffices to prove
(*)rrξlh P ξ "p?(0<r(0"
If {pf(ζ) 
'. n < ω} has an upper bound in Qξ then this is true by construction
(i.e. the choice of r(ξ)).
By the choice of (pf : n < ω) as Pξ <£ Pα clearly (pJ
1 fξ : n < ω) is a generic
sequence for (Λ^, Pξ), hence by the induction hypothesis r fξ is (^, Pξ)-generic.
So by 1.2(6) and the definition of the order of Pα we have r\ξ H-P£ "Ni[Gξ] is

§1. £- Completeness- a Sufficient Condition for Not Adding Reals 
201
^-suitable and (pf(ξ) 
: n < ω) is a generic sequence for (Ni[Gξ],Qζ)" . Hence
r\ξ \\-pζ "(p?(ξ) 
: n < ω) has an upper bound in Qξ" , so we finish.
3. ξ G NJ \ JVi, symmetric proof to 2 (using the choice of h).
4. ζ e NiΓ\ Nj\ remember that w.l.o.g. Qξ (set of elements) is ωι and as above
by the induction hypothesis r\ξ is (Λ^P^-generic and (Λ^P^-generic. Since
NiΠωi and NJ Γ\ω\ are initial segments of ω\ and Ni = NJ (and ω\ G NiΓiNj)
clearly TV Πu i = NJ Πωi. Also r\ξ determines Gpς ΠTV^ and Gp^ ΓiNj hence for
every ra there is an n G ω, and α
m G A^Πα i, such that pj
1 fξ lhp£ "^(0 = α
m" .
To this relation in Ni we can apply h, which yields p!?f£ lhPί "p™(£) = α
m"
(since α
m G Ni Π A^ ) Hence r\ξ lhp£
 (χ
m(0 = p^(0" for all m < ω. Now
continue as in the previous case 2.
Πl.5
1.6 Theorem. Suppose that CH holds in F, and 8 is a nontrivial family of
subsets of «SNO(//), χ**
1 — χ = cf(χ). Then V has a generic extension V\ by
proper forcing in which:
(*) (a) CH holds, 8 is not trivial, 2
Kl = χ, and
(b) If P is an ^-complete proper forcing notion, |P| = KI and Xi C P is
dense for z < i$ < cf(χ), then there is a directed G C P such that
^ ^ 0 for i < i0.
1.6 A Remark.
(1) Properness is not essential in the proof of the theorem (except for having
it in the conclusion), its use will appear in 1.7.
(2) Also the reader should be aware of the fact that ^-completeness and
properness is more than properness alone, otherwise 1.6 would say:
& CH,

202 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
which is of course impossible.
Proof. We use countable support iterated forcing systems (Pi,Qi : i < α) such
that
(*) a < χ
+ and lhpi "\Qi\ — #ι,Qi is proper and is ^-complete".
For any such system Q, LimQ is an £-complete forcing notion which satisfies
the ^2-chain condition (by 1.3(2) and 1.5 respectively). Also by III §3 LimQ is
proper.
By usual bookkeeping it is enough to prove the subfact below (note that
for R—{f: for some α < ωi, / : a —> {0,1}} ordered by inclusion, always (a)
of (iii) below holds).
1.6B Subfact. If Q
1 satisfies (*), P
l = LimQ
1 and R is a P
1-name of a forcing
notion, then there is a Q
2 such that:
(i) Q
2 satisfies (*).
(ii) Q
1 is an initial segment of Q
2.
(iii) for some maximal antichain J of P
2, for every p G T (where P
2 — LimQ
2):
either (a) p lhP2 " there is a directed subset of R, generic over V
Pl" (in fact, it
is the generic subset of some Qβ, β G 
fe(Q
1),^g(Q
2)]),
or (b) for no Q> and q do we have: Q satisfies (*) and Q
2 is as initial segment
of Q and p < q G LimQ, and q H-LimQ "•? *
s a proper ^-complete
forcing with universe ω\".
Proof. Immediate. 
Πι.6B,i 6
1.6C Remark. 1) This is different from the situation of II 3.4, where we had
"c.c.c." instead of "^'-complete for some suitable £"'.
2) So the Schemma of the proof of 1.6 is more general than the one in II 3.4.
3) Assume that P, R are forcing notions in V, 8 C <S<κ0(μ) is nontrivial:
(a) if R is not proper in V, P is proper, then R is not proper in V
p (use
the equivalent definition in III 1.10(1) and for simplicity the set of
members of Q is an ordinal): similarly for 8-proper (see Definition
2.2(5) below). The proof is included in in the proof of III 4.2.

§1. £-Completeness-a Sufficient Condition for Not Adding Reals 
203
b) If R is not ^-complete in V, P is e.g. ^-complete, then R is not £-
complete in V
p .
c) Without "P is proper", clause (a) is not necessarily true.
4) By (3)(a) (of the Remark 1.6C), as \β < a =» Pβ/Pa is proper], we can
use in the proof of 1.6 the older Schemma.
5) We can omit χ = cf(χ) in 1.6 and replace i < IQ < cf(χ) by i < χι where
Xi < X is regular. (And use iterated forcing of length δ < χ
+, cf(ί) — χ\.
Instead χ+ we can use an inaccessible.)
1.7 Conclusion. In the model from 1.6, if S = {ω\ \ S}, S C ωi, stationary
costationary the following holds:
a) for any (Aj 
: δ G S), such that A§ C δ unbounded of order type ω for
δ G S, we have: ((A$ : δ G S), NO) has the uniformization property.
b) S is still stationary (after the forcing, by properness).
Remark. Remember, we say a family P = {Aa : a G S} of sets has the K-
uniformization property (or (P, K) has the uniformization property) if for every
family {/α : a G 5}, /α a function from Aα to «, there is / : Uαes Aa —> K such
that Λα/α =αe /f^*, where / =αe 9 if |{α : /(«) 7^ ^(«),« 6 Dom(/)}| <
|Dom(/)| (note: this is symmetric and transitive only if we demand Dom(/) =
Dom(p)).
Proof. Let (As : δ € 5) be as above, f§ : A§ —> α;, and Q = = { / : / a function
from some α < ωi to ω, such that for every limit δ < α, δ G 5 we have
f\Aδ =ae /s}, ordered by C.
We have to check the following four facts:
Fact A. If p G Q, Dom(p) < a < ω\ then, there is q, p < q G Q, Dom(ς') = a.
Fact B. Q is 5-complete.
Fact C. If p G Q, ^1 C ω\ \ Dom(p) is finite, / a function from A to ω, ί/ien
there is g, p < ςf G Q, / C g.
. Q is proper.

204 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Proof of Fact A. Let {δi : i < j < ω} be a list of all limit ordinals δ G 5, such
that Dom(p) < δ < a. As Aδl has order type ω, and Sup(A5J = δ^ clearly
AS£ Π Agm is finite for m < i, hence we can define by induction on £ < ω,
βι < δi such that βι > Dom(p) and βι > Max(A^ Π A^) for m < I. Now
define ς, a function from a to ω:
ί
p(ϊ) 
i G Dom(p)
fδi(i) 
ie(Aδί\βt)
0 
otherwise (but i < a)
Now q is well defined as the βι were defined such that the Aδί \ βι are pairwise
disjoint and disjoint to Dom(p). It is trivial to check p < q G Q.
Proof of Fact B. Trivial. (Note that if (pn : n < ω) is an increasing sequence
of members of Q, then (J pn satisfies almost all the requirements, the prob-
n<ω
lematic one is: if δ G 5 is (J Dom(pn) (i.e. the supremum of the domain)
n<ω
then ( U pn} \Aδ =ae fδ- But by Fact A the set \Jn<ω Dom(pn) is N Π ωλ if
n<ω
(pn : n < ω) is a generaic sequence for (AT, Q), so if ΛΓίΊu i G ω\ \S the sequence
has an upper bound, and this holds for N suitable for 5.)
Proof of Fact C. Let A = {aι : i < m} increasing with i and we define by
induction pt <E Q (for t < 2m), pQ = p, Dom(p2m) = «*> Dom(p2^+2) = α/H-1,
(<Xί) — ffa^iPi ^ ί^+i Now the existence of ί^+i follows by Fact A, and
belongs to Q as for every limit 5, [δ < Dom(p2€+ι) <=> 5 < Dom(p2^+2)]
Now q — P2m is as required.
Proof of Fact D. Let λ be large enough, μ > (2
λ)+, <* a well ordering of if (μ),
for which λ is the first element and let <*χ=<*μ \H(\). It suffices to prove that
for any given countable N -x (H (μ), €, <*), Q € N, pe N Γ]Q there is q G P
which is (N, Q)-generic, p < q. So let δ
 d= N Π ωι and choose αn < 5, such
that αn < αn+ι, ί = Un<u;αn. Let {^ : £ < α;} be a list of all members of
N Π ff(λ) and Nk be the Skolem hull of {Q,p} U {b£ : £ < k} U {i : i < ak}
in the model N*
 
d= N\H(X) 
X (Jf(λ),€,<J). So clearly Nk e N (as λ is
definable in (if (μ), G, <J), being the first, hence (if (λ), G, <J) belongs to N).

§1. £-Completeness-a Sufficient Condition for Not Adding Reals 
205
It is also clear that Ufc<ωJVfc = JV
t, so every pre-dense I C Q,X G N belongs
to N^ hence to some AΓfc. Now, define by induction on n,pn such that:
a) Pθ = P>Pn< Pn+l
b) PU G Nn n Q
c) if 5 G 5, then pn, /$ agree on A5 Π 7Vn \ Dom(p0)
d) if £ < n, 6^ an open dense subset of Q then pn G 6^
e) an G Dom(pn+ι)
For n = 0,po — P satisfies all the requirements.
If pn is defined and satisfies the requirements, first note that AS Π Nn+ι is
finite as: AΓn+1 G AT, Sup(iVn+ι Πωi) G TV hence Sup(JVn+1 Πu i) < 5, whereas
^ has order type ω with Sup(A$) = δ. By Fact C there is p^ > pn, p^ G Q,
p|» 2 Λ r(^n+ι nAd\Dom(pn)) and by Fact A w.l.o.g. an C Dom(^) (if δ i 5,
we use only fact A). As AΓn+1 -« (ff(λ), €, <J), {pn,Q,αn,/5ί(AΓn+1 Π A)} G
AΓn+1, we can find such p^n G AΓn+1. Now p^n satisfies all the requirements on
pn_ι_ι (for c) use the induction hypothesis) except maybe d) for I — n. So if bn
is an open dense subset of Q, we choose pn+ι € &n? Pn+i ^ Pn'Pn-fi € Nn+ij
and if 6n is not an open dense subset of Q, we choose pn+\ = p^n.
So, we have completed the definition by induction of the pn's. Now q =
Un<ωPn is a member of Q because: by a)(and b)), q is a function from an
ordinal to ω; by b) we have Dom(pn) C ί, and by e) we have αn C Dom(pn)
hence Dom(^) = 5; for δι < δ we have q\A§1 =ae fδl as q\A§1 C pn G Q for
some n and if 5 G 5 then <?fA<$ =αe /« by c). Also q belongs to every 6^ which
is an open dense subset of Q (by d) as pt+ι < q). But, every open dense subset
of Q which belongs to TV, belongs to if (λ) (as λ is large enough) hence to N^
hence is bt for some £, so q is (N, Q)-generic. 
DI 7
* * 
*
We can easily get similarly (more exactly, combining 1.7 and [Sh:44], [Sh:64]):
1.8 Conclusion. In the model from 1.6, if £ = {ωι \ 5}, S C tϋi stationary
costationary, the following holds: If G is an abelian group, G = Ui<ωιGi, Gi

206 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
increasing, countable, free, and Gi/Gj is free when j £ 5, j < i, then G is a
Whitehead group. 
DI.S
Also note that if 8 is a normal filter on α i, it is well know that by £-
complete forcings we can "shoot" through all A e 8 closed unbounded subsets
of ω\. We can in 1.7 (hence 1.8) replace {ωι \ 5}, by a normal nontrivial ideal
on ωι] which we can assume is dense in the sense that every stationary S C ω\
contains a subset in the ideal.
The reason for 1.8 is
1.8A Fact. For G = (Gi : i < α i), S C ω\ as in 1.8, H an abelian group,
h a homomorphism from H onto G with kernel Z, letting Hi = h~
l(Gi),
the following forcing notion is proper and (ωι \ 5)-complete: P — {g : g a
homomorphism from Gi into Hi such that (h\Hi) o g = id^}. 
ΠI.SA
Note
1.9 Claim. If P is {Sj-complete, S a stationary subset of ω\ and in V we have
Os then in V
p we also have Os
Proof. Straightforward (as in IV, we use Os to given the isomorphism type of
a countable elementary submodel and a name of a subset of ωi). 
D1-9
§2. Generalizations of Properness
We shall repeat most of this section in the next one, with more details and less
generality.
2.1 Definition. For an uncountable cardinal λ, countable ordinal α and ί < ω:
(1) Let SQS^(X) be the set of sequences (Ni : i < a) such that:
a) Ni a countable submodel of (-ff(λ), G).

§2. Generalizations of Properness 
207
b) i G Ni and (Nj : j < i) G Ni+ι+t or, at least, (Nj : j < i) is definable in
c) If φ is first order, α G TV; and (#(λ),G) t= "Ξb φ(x,ά)
n, then for some
6 G TV^, (tf(λ), e) N φ(b,ά) (so for limit ί < α, TV5 -« (ff(λ), G)).
d) TVi (i < α) is increasing and continuous.
(2) A forcing notion P is (α,£)-proper, if (for λ large enough): for every
TV = (Ni : i < a) G SQS%(λ) (the zero is intended), such that P G TV0,
and for every p e TV0, p G P, there is an r G P,r > p which is (TV, P,^)-
generic (or (P, -Q-generic for N, or ^-generic for TV), which means: for every
i, r ihp
 uNi[GP] Π V C Ni+ι
n, where:
(3) If P G TV C ff(λ), G C P generic, Λen A^[G] - {r[G] : τ a P-name first
order definable from parameters from TV}. We define N[G] similarly, for
N= (Ni :i<a).
2.1 A Remark.
1) Note that for I = 0, Ni X (ίf(λ), G).
2) Note that by Lemma 2.5 it follows that (£, α, £)-properness is equivalent
to (£,α, fc)-properness for k,£> 0. See 2.5A(0).
2.2 Definition.
(1) <S^o(μ) = {{α^ : z < α) : α^ G S#Q(μ) and the sequence is increasing
continuous}.
(2) We call 8 C U^<α7
:>(<S^o (//)), (α, £)-nontrivial, if for every large enough
λ, SQS£(λ,£) ^ 0, where 5Q5^(λ,5) is the set of TV - (TV; : i < α) G
SQS*a(X) such that: £ G TV0 (and μ G TV0) and </ A G £ Π TV0 Π P(<S^o(μ))
and 7 < α, ί/ien (TV^ Π μ : i < 7) G A. In such a case, we call TV suitable
for ε.
(3) P is (^,α,^)-proper means: if λ is large enough, and TV G SQS^(X^ε),
β < 7 < α, 7 a limit ordinal, P G TV/3 and p G P Π Nβ, then there is g,
p <q € P such that <? is (TVf[β, 7], P, £)-generic.
(4) In Definition 2.1, 2.2 we may suppress I when it is zero.

208 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
(5) A forcing notion which is (£, 0, 0)-proper will be called ^-proper.
(6) A forcing notion will be called (α, £)-proper if it is ({Sχ0 (μ)}, α, £)-proper.
2.3 Theorem. Assume 8 is (α, ^)-nontrivial. Countable support iteration pre-
serves (£,α,£)-properness, provided that ί — 0 or a is a limit ordinal.
Before proving we show 2.4, 2.5 below.
2.3A Remark. There are examples that the notions are distinct, proper is
({5Ho(μ)},0,0)-proper.
2.4 Claim.
1) If P G N -< ( H ( X ) , e , < * χ ) , N countable, G C P generic over V, then
N[G] = [τ[G] : r G N a P-name}.
2) If TV G SQS%(X),P 
G TV0,G C P is generic, then V
p 
1= «N[G\ G
3) If TV G SQS%(\), Q = (Pι,Qt 
: £ < n) £ N0 is iterated forcing, re a
P^-name of a member of Q£, is (N\G^,Qt, fc)-generic (Gι C P^ the generic
set), thenr= (ro,rι, . . . ,rn_ι) is (TV, Pn,nA:)-generic.
4) If P is (α, Improper and a = ωβ, then P is (/?, 0)-proper.
5) If P is (αι,£ι)-proper, QI > α2, ^i < ^2, then P is (α2, ^-proper. Also P
is (0, 0)-proper iff P is proper.
Proof. 1) Straightforward.
2) like 1.3(1).
3) Left to the reader.
4), 5) Check. 
Q2 4
2.5 Lemma. Consider the following properties of a forcing notion P, p G P,
countable limit ordinal α, λ regular large enough and <^ a well ordering of
-ff(λ), 7 is an α-sequence of ordinals, strictly increasing, 7(1) < i + α;, k an
α-sequence of natural numbers, k(i) > 3, are equivalent:

§2. Generalizations of Properness 
209
(1) There is a function F, Rang(F) C S<^(P(P)), Dom(F) = S
such that (but for I C P, A C P(P) we let I Π A = {p G I : {p} G
for every increasing continuous sequence of countable subsets of P(P),
Ai(i < a) satisfying: F((Aj : j < i)) C AΪ+I, p G P Π AQ there is a q e P,
q > p, such that for every ί < α and J G ^ a maximal antichain of P,
JΠ F({Aj : j < i)) is pre-dense above q.
(2) For every Ni C (tf (λ), G, <^) for i < α satisfying (a), (b), (c) listed below
and p G NQ Π P there is a <? G P, g > p such that
(*) for every i < α and P-name β of an ordinal, /? G 7V;, we have
where
(a) (Nj : j < i) G A^+i, A^ continuously increasing, Ni is countable and
P G AΓ0, α G AΓ0.
(b) For every (first-order) formula </?(x, ά), α G A^, i < α, (J^(λ), G, <^) |=
(3x)(/?(x,ά) implies (#(λ),E,<^) N (5x € Wί+ι) φ(x,α)
(c) In b) we can allow α C 7V^ U {{^ : j < ί ) } .
(3);γ The same as (2) omitting (c), replacing JVi+1 by JV7^)+3 in (*).
(4)^ The same as in (2), replacing TV^+i by Ni+k^ in (*), omitting (c).
(5) Like (4) for k constantly 3.
2. 5 A Remark. (0) The point of this lemma is to show that some natural
variants of Definition 2.1(2) are equivalent.
(1) Note that clause (2) is just a case of (α, l)-properness.
(2) "λ large enough" just means P(P) G #(λ); we can replace P(P) by the
family of maximal antichains of P.
(3) As (1) of 2. 5 does not depend on λ, we get the equivalence of the others
for all suitable λ, similarly concerning 7 and k.
(4) We can replace α G NO by "i + 1 C JVy .
Proof. (1) => (5): We can assume that the F exemplifying (1) is definable
in (jfJ(λ), G, <λ) (by a formula with the parameters P and α only); just

210 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
take the <λ-first F satisfying (1). Moreover we can assume there is an
/ = (/0,/j, . . .)n<ω G H(X) similarly definable such that F((Aj : j < i)) C
{ f n ( ( A j 
: j < i)) : n < ω}. Clearly for every i < α, n < ω and (Aj : j < i)
we can find some first order φn(x,P,p,(Aj 
: j < i)) such that the unique
x G H(X) satisfying it in (if (λ), G, <J> is fn((Aj 
: j < i)). Hence, if Ni(i < α)
are as in (4)^, then for every i < α, n < ω, fn((N2j 
Π P(P) 
: j < i))
is definable with parameters from Λ^+i, hence is an element of N H+Z. So
F((N<2j Π P(P) : j < i)) C JV2i+2. So, if q exemplifies the satisfaction of (1) for
(N2jΓ\P(P) 
: j < α), then it exemplifies the satisfaction of (4)^ for (Nj : j < a)
where k^ — 3.
(1) =» (2): Similar proof, but we use F((Nj Π P(P) : j < i», made possible by
use of (c) from (2).
(2)=» (1): To define F((Aά 
: j < i)), we define a sequence (Nζ((Aj : j < i)) :
C < 2i + 2) as follows: Nζ = |J7<C A^7 for limit C, and Nζ = Nζ((Aj 
: j < i)) =
the Skolem hull of {(NΊ : 7 < β) : β < ζ] U {Aj 
: 2j < ζ} in the model
(ff(λ),€,<*) for a successor C and ζ = 0. Note that Nζ((Aj 
: j < i0)) =
Nζ((Aj 
: j < ύ}), if C < 2z0+2, C < 2^+2. Let F((A, : j < i)) = P(P)ΠAΓ2i+2.
If (Ai \ i < a) obeys F, let Nζ = Nζ((Aj 
: j < i)) for some (or all) i such that
C < 1i + 2. Then (Nζ : ζ < α) satisfies (a), (b),(c). For p G A0 = P(P) Π N0,
find ς' as guaranteed in (2). Let I G A^ Then J G 7V2ί+ 1, so, by (2), IΓ\ ΛΓ2;+2
is pre-dense above g and it includes XΠ ^({Aj : j < i)), just as required.
(5) => for some fc, (4)^: Trivial.
(4)fe => for some Ί (3)^: (i.e. 7 depends on fc): Given k define 7(0) = fc(0),
7(1) - U^iTU) + k(Uj<iΊ(j)) + 8.
(1): Similar to the proof of (2) => (1), only we define Nζ((Aj 
: j < i))
for C < 7(0 + 8 x (7(0 + 1 - sup{£ : ί limit < 7(0 })• Note that as {P, α} G Nδ
7 belongs to P or at least some.
Putting together all the implications, we have 
finished. 
D2.5

§2. Generalizations of Properness 
211
Proof of 2.3. We seperate the proof to the two natural cases. Let (Pζ, Qξ : ζ <
ζ*,ζ < C)
 De a countable support iteration and let λ be large enough.
Case A: I = 0.
We prove by induction on ζ < ζ* and then by induction on 7 < a the
following
(*)C,7 tft <ζ,N£ SQS°a(\,ε),Q G TVo, β < Ί < <*, {CO e Nβ and q G Pξ
is (N\[β, 7],P^)-generic and p G Pζ Π Nβ satisfies: p\ξ < g, or just p is a
P^-name, \\-pζ "p G Λ^ n Pζ, p\ξ G Gpξ", ώen there is r G P^ such that: r
is (N\\β, 7], Pc])-generic, r \ξ = q and p < q and Dom(r) \ ξ = NΊ Π ζ \ ξ.
As case B is more involved we do it in more details.
Case B:t=l
Note that by 2.4, each Qi is proper. We prove by induction on ζ < ζ* and
then by induction on 7 < a and ζ < ζ* the following:
(*)c,τ 
tfξ<ζ< 
C*> N ^ SQS2(λ,£), Q G A^o, /^ < 7 < α, 7 a limit ordinal and
/? is a non limit ordinal, {£, £} G Nβ and <? G Pξ and ^ Ihp^ "if β < β\ < 7
then Λ^JGpJ Π V C 7V/5l+n for some n < ω" and p e Pζ Π Nβ satisfies
pίί < Q' or just p is a P^-name of a member of PζΓ\Nβ such that pf£ G Gp^
and Dom(<7) = NΊ Π ξ and u C [/?, 7) is a finite set of non limit ordinals
then there is r G Pζ such that
(a) r lhPζ " if /?</?!< 7 then TV^ [GPς] Π F C A^/31+n for some n < ω"
(b) r lhPζ "if A G u so /?</?!< 7, then Nβl [GPζ] Π F
p^ - Nβ(GP^
(c) p <r
(d)r\ζ = q.
Note that when ξ = ζ the assertion is trivial.
case 1: ζ = 0. 
There is nothing to prove.
case 2: ζ = ζι + l.
So ξ < Ci, so by the induction hypothesis (and the form of what we are
trying to prove) w.l.o.g. ξ = Ci and β G u and (Vβ')[β
f + l G u & / ? ' > / ? - >
β' G u], and /? G u. Let u = {β0, βl + 1,... ,^9n - 1}, β = A) < Λ < 
- - < βn-ι
and let βn = 7. Let g G Gξ C P^, Gξ generic over V and let JV/ =

212 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
for i G [/3,7], so (Nl'.ie [/?,7]> G 5Q5(°τ_^Hl(λ,£) in V[Gξ]. If 7 = a let
Λ£+ι -< ( H ( χ ) [ G ξ ] , e ) 
be countable such that {N,Gξ,p,q,Q,ξ,ζ} G
Clearly p(0[Gξ] G Qξ[Gξ]nΛ^o, so there is p0 G ΛΓ£o+1 which is (ΛΓ£
generic (because as noted above, lhpξ "Q^[Gξ] is a proper forcing").
We now choose by induction on <£, p^ G JV££+ι such that:
(*)ι Vtβ<j< βι, j is a limit ordinal ίΛen p^ Ih A^[GQJ Π F[Gξ] = AΓj
(*)2 ifβ<j<βι 
then pt Ih <Wj[GQJ Π V[G€] C ΛΓ^.^^j for some
n<ω".
(*)3 Qξ[Ge]Np(0[Gξ]<p€<pm
For ί = 0 this was done above, for ^ — n this complete the proof for the
present case so let us choose p^+i assuming we have already chosen p^.
Now if βi+\ = βt + 1 we just use \\-pζ "Qξ is proper", so assume βι+ι >
βi -f 1, so by a demand on u we know that βt+ι is a limit ordinal. So first
choose P£ G Qξ[Gξ] Π N^i+2 which is above p^ and is (JV/3£+ι,Qξ[Gξ])-generic
(using again properness) and then choose pι+ι G Qξ[Gξ] Π Nβl+1+ι above p^
and satisfying (*)ι 4- (*)2, which is possible by the induction hypothesis on 7
(and βι+\ being a limit ordinal), so we have finished the induction step on ί
hence the present case.
case 3: ζ a limit ordinal.
First as in the proof of the previous case, w.l.o.g. u — 0. Now use diago-
nalization as usual. 
D2.3
§3. α-Properness and
(£, α)-Properness Revisited
In §1 we gave some solution to "which forcings do not add reals". What occurs is
that we may have a small stationary subset of ω\, on which e.g. uniformization
properties hold. But we want e.g. to be able to prove the consistency of CH +
SH, which is impossible by §Γs method, because it is possible that the model
Vι from Theorem 1.6 satisfies also Oωu
 and even 0^ \ g (see 1.9 or [Sh:64]).

§3. α-Properness and (£,α)-Properness Revisited 
213
Here we make an investment for this goal by developing α-properness (and
(£, α)-properness) which is a generalization of properness, when the genericity
is obtained for some tower of models simultaneously. In almost all cases the
proof that properness holds gives α-properness. The point is that for some
properties X, for "X + α-properness" it is easier to prove preservation by CS
iteration.
To a large degree we redo here §2, with more explanation and, for nota-
tional simplicity, only for t = 0.
3.1 Definition. For a < ω\ the forcing notion P is said to be a-proper if for
every sufficiently large λ and for every sequence (Ni : i < a) such that Ni is
a countable set, Ni -< (ff(λ),e), if the sequence (Ni : i < a.) is continuously
increasing, i G JV<, (Nj : j < i) G ΛΓi+1, P G N0 and p G P Π 7V0, then there is a
#5 P < Q € P which is (N^ P)-generic for every i < a.
3.2 Remarks.
(1) Obviously, a forcing notion P is 0-proper if and only if it is proper.
(2) It is also obvious that if β < a and P is α-proper then P is also /3-proper
(every sequence (Ni : i < β) which satisfies the above conditions can be
extended to a sequence (Ni : i < a) which satisfies these conditions and,
since P is α-proper there is a p < q G P which is (Ni, P)-generic for every
i < α). Therefore, in particular, every α-proper P is proper.
(3) If P is α-proper it is also (α + 1 4- α)-proper. To see this let (Ni : i <
a + 1 + α), p be as required. Since P is α-proper there is a <?o> P < (7o € -P
which is (Ni, P)-generic for every i < α. Since Na+ι -< (H(X), G) and p, P,
(Ni : i < α) G Na+ι there is such a go G Na+ι. Since P is α-proper there
is qi, QQ < Qi G P which is (7Vα-fi+^,P)-generic for every i < α. Since
Qi > <7o5 <7o is also (A^, P)-generic for every z < α 4-1 + α.
(4) Note that if α is limit, (Ni : i < α) increasing and continuous, p is
(A^,P)-generic for z < α (and P G JVo), then p is (N, P)-generic where
N = Ui<aNi. As a consequence of this and (3), if P is proper it is n-proper
for all n < ω and if P is ω-proper it is α-proper for all ω < a < ω
2. And:

214 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
P is 7o-proper iff P is 7ι-proper when 700; = 71 ω. Hence it is enough to
deal with additively indecomposable 7 (i.e. (V/? < 7) (/? + /?< 7)).
(5) For (Ni : i < a) as in 3.1, α additively indecomposable, as α G Λfα, for
some β < α, a G Nβ\ now α = β + α, so with easy manipulations this
definition is equivalent to the one with α G NQ.
3.3 Definition. <S£o(A) = 5°^ (A) = {(
α* : * < « > : a< ^ 5«0(A) for all
i < a and (ai : i < a) is continuously increasing}. Let F be a function from
U0<β ^(A) into 5<Kl(A) and let G(F) - {(α, : i < α) G 5°Nl(A) : (Vt < α)
(V finite 6 C oi+ι) F({a, : j < i),6) C αi+ι)Λ(V finite 6 C α0) F(6) C α0} where
we write F(6) instead F ( ( b ) ) and F(α,6) instead F(α
Λ{6)). Let Fn, n < ω,
be functions into <S<H!(A) and let F be given by F(x) = Un<Ct;Fn(x), then
G(F) C Γ\n<ωG(Fn), hence the set of all G(F)'s generates an Ni-complete
filter -D^(A) on S^(A).
3.4 Theorem. The forcing notion P is α-proper if and only if it preserves the
property of being a stationary subset of <S^Kι (A) (i.e. being a set of positive
measure) with respect to the filter P"Nι(A) for every uncountable A.
Proof. Similar to the proof of the corresponding fact for proper forcing. 
Da.4
3.5 Theorem. For each a < ω\, α-properness is preserved by countable
support iterations.
Proof. Again the proof is similar to the one on properness, or see 2.3(1). DS.S
Now we add 8 as a parameter, where 8 is similar to what we did in §1.
3.6 Definition. A family S of subsets of U7<α;ι ^KO(^) *
s α-riontrivial if: For
every λ large enough, there is a continuous sequence N = (N^ : i < a) of
countable elementary submodels of (if(λ),e), (Nj : j < i) G Afi+i, S G NQ
such that: (Ni Π μ : i < a) belongs to ΠiX : ^ G f Π NQ}. In this case we call
N suitable for B and for (B, a). Let Pα(£) = {5 C <S£0(μ) : B U {<S£o(μ) \ 5} is
α-trivial}.

§3. α-Properness and (8, α)-Properness Revisited 
215
3.6A Remark. 1) If α < ωi, SβίΊ C P(S%~
0(μ)) for β < 7 < α, β not limit,
then we can find S C P(5go(2^)) such that: if λ > 2", (^ : i < a) € SQS*(\)
and μ G AΓ0, tfoen (a)φ>(b) where:
(a) (TVi Π μ : β < i < 7) G £/3,7 when EβιΊ is defined.
(b) (JVί Π2» :i<a) eε.
2) We also use in this section the following stronger demand than 3.6:
if β < α, then (Nβ+Ί Π μ : 7 < α - / 3 ) e 
{Y : Y G 8 Π
3) The point of 3.6A(1) (and its parallel for 3.6A(2)) is the variation in Defi-
nition 3.6 do not give a really new notion.
3.7 Definition. A forcing notion P is (£,α)-proper (£ as above, α-nontrivial)
iffoτ every TV which is suitable for (£, α) and p € TVo, P £ NQ Π P there is q > p
(in P) such that q is (JV^, P)-generic for every i < a.
The following repeats 2.3.
3.8 Theorem. Suppose 8 is α-nontrivial, 8 C U7<ωιP(5^o(μ)).
(1) If P is (£,α)-proper, then Ihp u€ is α-nontrivial" .
(2) If Q = (Pi,Qi '. i < β) is a countable support iteration, Ihp. "ζ^ is (£,α)-
proper", P^ = LimQ, then Pβ is (£,α)-proper.
(3) If P G A^o, AT is ^-suitable, p G P is (Ni9 P)-generic for every i < ίg(N),
thenp\\-P
 
α]V[G] is ^-suitable" .
3.8A Remark. So in (2) (by (1)) it suffices to assume Ihp. "if 8 is α-nontrivial
(in V
Pi) then Qi is (£,α)-proper".
Proof. No new point. 
D;13.8
3.9 Theorem. If P is (£,α)-proper and Q is not (£,α)-proper, then Ihp "Q is
not (£,α)-proper".

216 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Proof. Easy. 
^3.9
§4. Preservation of u -Properness
+ the ^α -Bounding Property
4.1 Definition. A forcing notion P has the ^α -bounding property if: for any
/ G (
ωω)
vW 
(G C P generic) there is g G (
ωω)
v such that f < g (i.e.
4.2 Discussion. Clearly the ^u -bounding property can be considered as an
approximation to the property "not adding reals". Also this property, and
similar properties play crucial parts in many independence proofs. That is,
many times we want on one hand to add many reals, but on the other hand to
preserve something, e.g. to preserve: the set of old (or construct ible) reals is of
the second category or does not have measure zero, or every new real belongs
to an old Borel set of special kinds, etc. In the next chapter we shall deal with
various such properties. But here we choose to deal with
 ωu;-bounding, as it is
very natural, and as the proof of its preservation is a prototype for many other
such proofs. To be more exact we do not prove that it is preserved, only that
together with ω-properness it is preserved. (This will be eliminated in the next
chapter). The proof also serve as introduction to the proof of preservation of
"no new reals" in §7 and to VI. Of course VI §2 gives an alternative proof of
the theorem 4.3.
4.3 Theorem. The property "ω-properness + the
 ωu;-bounding property" is
preserved by countable support iteration.
Proof. Let (P^ Qi : i < a.) be a CS iterated forcing system. We prove that it has
the
 ωω-bounding property by induction on α (the preservation of ω-properness
follows from Theorem 3.5). For α = 0 there is nothing to prove. For α + 1 we
have V
Pa+
l = (V
P<*)
Q<*. If / G V
p"
+1 - (V
Pa)
Qa, then there is a function

§4. Preservation of ω-Properness + the
 ωα>-Bounding Property 
217
g G V
p° such that g > f (since Qa has the
 ωu;-bounding property) and, by the
induction hypothesis, there is an h G (
ωω)
v such that h > g, so h > f.
If a is a limit ordinal and cf (α) > NO, then every / G V
Pa already appears
in some V
Pi, i < α (by III 4.1B(2)), so we can apply the induction hypothesis.
So we are left with the case α is a limit ordinal of cofinality N0.
The following lemma is the main point.
4.4 Lemma. Suppose
a) P a proper forcing notion, Q a P-name of a proper forcing notion, (p, q) G
P * Q and P, Q have the ^α -bounding property, λ large enough, 7V0 -<
NI X N2 -< Cff(λ), G), and P, Q, P * Q and (p, g) belong to N0.
b) Λf0 G Nι,Nι G 7V2, and each A^ is countable.
c) r G P is (Λfc, P)-generic for i = 0,1,2 and r > p.
d) (2^ : <£ < cj) is a list of all maximal antichains of P which belong to Λ/o,
2^ C Ϊ£ Π Λ^o is finite, ϊ^ pre-dense above r and (It 
: £ < ω) £ NI,
(XI :t<ω}£Nl.
e) {Ji : £ < cϋ) G A/i is a list of the maximal antichains of P * Q which belong
to W0.
Then there is a qι G Q Π A/2, J7/ C Ji n ΛΓ0 finite for -ί < ω, such
that: (r,gi) > (p,#), and each JT^* is pre-dense above (r,#1) (hence (r,q\) is
(AΓ0, P * Q). generic) and (Jf 
: ί < ω) G N2.
4.4A Remarks.
(1) Instead of a maximal antichain, we can look at a name of an ordinal, or
dense subsets.
(2) The situation for P, A^o, A^i, r in the assumption is similar to the situation
of P * Q, NO, AΓ2, (r, q
1) in the conclusion when q
1 > qι is (JV2, Q) generic.
So we preserve the situation while not increasing the condition in P. So,
every time we advance one step in the iteration, we lose genericity for one
of the models (Nι). This will give us the induction step in the proof of 4.3
for cf(α) = NO-

218 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Proof of Lemma 4-4- For helping us in understanding let G = Gp C P be
generic over V, and we shall work sometimes in V[G], sometimes in V. Note
that if r G G (which is the interesting case for us) then for ί = 0,1,2 we
have Nι[G\ Π H(X)
V = Nέ and Ne[G] 
-< (#(λ)[G], G) and even (Λ^[G], 7V>,G
) x (ff(λ)[G],#(λ),G) and Λ//[G] G A^+it^]- Alternatively, we could rewrite
statements of the form V[G] \= ... as r Ih ...
First try:
As JO is a maximal antichain in P*<5, the set {<?°[G] : (p°, #°) G JTΌ? P° € G} is
a maximal antichain of Q[G]. Hence q[G] is compatible with some such q°[G].
Let p°,q° be P-names such that:
Ihp "p° G Gp,(p°,g°) G Jb and, ς,g° are compatible in <2". Let 2J - {pη :
η G TO}, where TO C
 xμ for some μ codes a maximal antichain in P deciding
which element of J0, (p°,?°)[G] will be, i.e, p,, Ih "(p°,ςr°) - (p°,ςβ)", where
(p°,?°) G Jb iff r/ G T0. Then pη Ih "p° G G", so without loss of generality
pη >Pη, and Pη Ih "g and ^ are compatible in Q".
Similarly for each η G TO; if pη G Gp and there are p
l > pη, and
( p i i Q i ) £ Jι
 SUCΓ1 tnat Pi ^ P
1? P
1 ^ Gp and p
1 Ihp "g,q^,qι are compatible".
So, there is a TI, T\ C
 2μ for some μ, 77 G T\ =Φ> 77 fl G TO and for every ry0 G T0
for some η\ G TI, 770 = 771 fl, and jj = {p^ : η G TI} is a maximal antichain of
P, Pη > Pη\l, Pη > Pη, (PηiQη) ^ Jl and Pη "~
 UQ^Qη\l^Qη ^Γβ Compatible Πl Q" .
So, we can easily define inductively on n, Tn, ^^(77 G Tn), J^ and (p^, ^) G
Jn (for η G Tn).
Looking at the way we have defined this, clearly we can assume Tn,
(pη : η G Tn) G 7V"0 (i.e. Tn and the function r? »-> p^ in AΓ0) and ((p^,^) : r? G
Tn) G ΛΓ0, B
U^ as {^n '• n < ω) does not necessarily belong to Λf0 (in fact it
cannot), we do not try to claim (Tn : n < ω) G NO, etc., but we can assume
that <{Tn, (p^ : η G Tn), {(pj}, ςβ) : ry G Tn)) : 0 < n < ω) belongs to JVi.
Now as each ZJ G NQ is a maximal antichain of P, for some n(^) < ω,
ZJ = Zn(£), hence Z\^ C Zn(£) Π NQ = ZJ Π A/o is pre-dense above r and is
finite. Let T/ = {77 G T£ : p^ G I*w} So, it is natural to look for g^ G Q[G]

§4. Preservation of α -Properness + the ^α -Bounding Property 
219
(where r G G) such that for each I < u;, {^[G] : η G T/} is pre-dense above q\.
This will be sufficient - it implies (in V[G]) that q\ is (7Vo[G],<3[G])-generic,
q\ > #[G], and in V, for some P-name <?ι we have JΓ/ = {(pη,Qη) 
'> η G T/}
is a finite subset of Ji Π 7V0 pre-dense above (r, #ι); moreover clearly we can
choose #ι G 7V2, in fact <?ι G 7Vι.
Unfortunately, there is no reason to asssume q\ exists. Look at the extreme
case T^ = {ηn} (e.g. when P is Ni-complete and r determines Gp Π NQ). So
in V[G] we know #, ^£(^ < α;) and we know {q, q^t : I < ί0} is compatible for
every £Q < ω; this is not a good reason to assume {q, qηι : ί < ω} is compatible,
except when Q is Ni-complete and any two compatible members have a least
upper bound.
Second Try:
Let JtΠNo = {(z4,ς£j : m < ω} (Ji from (e) of 4.4) and as N0 e N^
(Ji 
: ί < ω) e NI, we can assume that (((p^q^) 
: m < ω) : £ < ω) G Nλ.
Let 5^ = {m < ω : p^ G Gp}. This is a P-name, 5^ G A^i and even
(Si 
: I < ω) e NI. If AΓ0[G] Π V = N0 then in F[G] there is a function
/ : ω — > ω such that
ϊι= ?[G]Λ/\ 
V ^1°]
£<α; 
m<f(t)
is consistent (because Q nas the ^α -bounding property and Nβ[G] Γ\ V C NQ) .
More formally, this means that in Q[G] there is a q\ > q[G] such that for every
ί < ω, {<tfn[G] 
' m < f(f) 
and m G ^[G]} is pre-dense above q\ in Q[G].
And also, equivalently, there is q\ G Q[G\ such that q\ \\~Q\G\ "<1 ^ GQ and for
every i < ω for some m < f(£) we have p^ G G, ς^JG] G GQ" (anyhow, the
expression qι has intuitive meaning, formally see later in this section).
But as P has the ^α -bounding property, we can assume that / G V. Also
as Nι[G\ -< (ff(λ)[G],G), and the parameters appearing in the requirements
on / belong to A^ι[G], we can assume / G V Π Nι[G] = NI.

220 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Now in V we have a P-name of it , / G NI such that \\-P
 
UAΓ0 [GP] Π V = ΛO
implies that / is as above; also in any case / G (
ωω)
v"; so in particular r
forces / to be as above. As r is (Λ/ι,P)-generic we have just countably many
candidates for / G (
ωω)
v Π NI i.e. for /[G]; and clearly there is in V a function
/* G
 ωω such that for every g G NI Π
 ωω we have, g <ae /* (i.e. {n < ω : not
g(n) < /*(n)} is finite) and /* G ΛΓ2. So it is reasonable to try
qι=q(G]Λ/\ 
V 
ίSJG],
(i.e. it is consistent; see in the beginning of the second try or end of the
section concerning an exact definition.) The (NQ,P * Q)-genericity of (r,q\)
and (ι7/ : t < ω) G 7V2 should be clear. So the question is whether
r ll-p "q[Gp] Λ /\ 
\/ 
<?™[Gp] is consistent in Q[GP]
n.
t 
m<f*(l)
(If so we can use a suitable P-name for qι\ let q\ G AΓ2 be the above expression
(or just a condition forcing it) if it exists and q otherwise).
Unfortunately, though /* is a very plausible candidate, the fact is that if
G C P is generic over V, r G G, the relation /[G](n) < /*(n) may fail for some
n, though necessarily only for finitely many n's.
T/wrd try:
The second try almost succeeded, except that the function /* did not work
on a finite set. So we try to take care of all finite sets that could occur, using
the first try. Remember T\ = Xn(£)>
 
an<3 %n(i) is a ^nite subset of In^ n AΓ0
(pre-dense above r). Let 1^ = {pη : η G Γ/}, T/ a finite subset of 2> and so
for some k(ί) < ω, for every η G Γ/ we have (p^qty G {(p^,^) : m < k(ΐ)}
when (pmiQm) were chosen in the second try.
Clearly (k(ΐ) : ^ < ω) G A/i, (as it can be computed from (n(^) : i < ω)
and (X* : n < ω) and {(p^,,^) : m < ω) : £ < ω) all of which belong to
and so in the second try w.l.o.g. k(t) < f*(f) for every i < ω.

§4. Preservation of α -Properness + the ^α -Bounding Property 
221
Now return to the beginning of the argument in the second try. We know
that for every g
1" € Q[G\ Π NQ[G] there is a / <G (
ωω)
v[G] such that
V 
&[β\
is consistent (i.e., as said above, some member of Q fores all those pieces of
information). In particular for every η — (mo, . . . , mn-ι)(πii < ω) there is
an / = /„ e ("ω)
vM such that: if {q[G\, &,(€!}, &M 
- .C^JG]} is
compatible (in Q[G]) then
(*)„ 
qWt^^q^G]?, /\ 
V 
&[G}
t<n 
n<ί<ω 
m<f(l)
m€Sι[G]
is consistent (i.e. some member of Q[G] force this). Without loss of generality
fη e (
ωω)
v . Let, for i < ω, /+(i) = Max{/7?(z) : η = (ra0, . . . ,mn_ι), n < i
and mo < fc(0), . . . , mn-ι < k(n — 1)}. The maximum is taken over a finite set,
hence, it is a well defined natural number, so /+ G (
ωω)
v^. So there is in V
a function /
f e (
ωα;)
y such that /+ < /
f.
Now we work in V. For each η £
 ω>ω there is a P-name fη of a function
from ω to α; which belongs to V, such that if /^ as above exists, then fη is such a
function; w.l.o.g. ( f η : 77 €
 ω>α;} G JVi, and remember that {&(<£) : £ <ω) € NI.
Hence /+ (which is defined from them as above) belongs to NI; as well as /t.
Note that r Ih "the fη's and /
+, /
f are as above". Let /* € N2 be as in the
second try be such that kι < /*(£), so we know /t <ae /*.
Now we shall prove that
r Ihp "q Λ /\ 
Y ^ is consistent (in
t<ω 
m<Γ(i)
As remarked in the end of the second try this suffices. So let G C P be a
subset of P generic over V, r G G. So /
f - /
f[G] G NI Π (
ωω)
v (C F) hence

222 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
/
t <ae /*• So in V[G] for some i < ω, for every j, i < j < ω => f\j) < /*(j).
Also there is a unique ω-sequence η of ordinals such that η\i G T^, j/ ^ G (2 for
1 < £ < α; (from the first try; remember {p^ : η G T/} is a maximal antichain
of P and p^ < p^). So, (p^,ς£r*) - (Pm£><?mJ
 for some ™* < ω. BY the
definition of fc(£), and m^ we have mi < k(£) < /*(-£).
Let η = (mo, . . . ,mi-ι) (where i was chosen above). Then by (*)r?,
V
is consistent, so the result follows, since / > i => f η(ί) < f+(£) < f*(£) < f * ( ί ) .
Π4.4
Continuation of the proof of the Theorem 4-3:
We were proving by induction on a that if Ihp. "Q^ is α -proper and has the
 ωω-
bounding property", Q = (Pi, Qi : i < α) is a CS iteration then Pa = LimQ is
ω-proper and has the
 ωα;-bounding property. The ω-properness follows by 3.5,
and for the
 ωα;-bounding property only the case of cf (α) = N0 was left. Now
by III 3.3 w.l.o.g. a = ω. Let / be a PQ-name, p G Pα, p Ih "/ G
 ωω
n, and we
have to find g £ (
ωω)
v and q satisfying p < q G Pa such that q Ih "/ < ^". We
can assume w.l.o.g. that
(*) f(
n) is a Pn-name
(this follows from the proof that Pω is proper, see III 3.2).
Let NI -< (H(\), G) (λ large enough) be an increasing chain such that, p,
(Pn,Qn 
n < ω) G NQ,N£ G NI+I each NI countable (Note that NI X NI+I
follows from NI G Λ^+i, NI countable, and N^Nt+i -< (ίf(λ), G)).
We want to find q G Pω, g > p, ςf lhFω "/ < #" for some ^ G (
ωω)
v. For
this we now define by induction on n a sequence (qn : n G ω), where each qn is
in Pn such that the following will hold:
1) qn+ι\n = qn, P\n < qn

§5. Which Forcings Can We Iterate Without Addding Reals 
223
2) qn is (JVfc, Pn)-generic for k = 0, and n 4-1 < k < ω
3) there is a function Fn G ΛΓn+ι, whose domain is the set of maximal
antichains of Pn which belong to TVo, and for every I G Dom(Fn),Fn(T)
is a finite subset of T Π JVo pre-dense above qn.
Clearly, if we succeed then q = Un<ωqn G Pω is as required as then we can
define g(n) as the minimal g(τi), qn IH
 uf(n) < ff(n)", #(n) exists by 3) and (*).
For n — 0 use the ω-properness of ζ>o> and for n 4-1 we use first the lemma
4.4 and then u -properness. 
U4.3
4.5 Definition. 1) For a forcing notion Q, let Q+ be the following forcing
notion, first defining Q£:
(a) the set of members of QQ is the closure of Q under the operation p Λ #,
P V g, - p, /\n<ωpn, Vn<ωPn (assuming no accidental equality)
(b) GQ is the P-name of the following subset of Q£:
for r <=<9, r G Gj 
iffreGq
for r = p Λ ς, r G G^ ^p G Gj and ςf G GJ
for r - p V g , r G G+ tffp G G+ or g G Gj
for r = -.p, r G Gg iff p ^ GQ
for r = f\n<ωPn, r G GJ ij^pn G Gj for every n < α;
for r = \Jn<ωpn, r G Gj iff pn G Gj for some n < α;
(c) for n,r2 G Qj, we define n <
Q+ r2 zfflhg "if r2 G G^ then n G Gj"
(d) Q
+ - {q G Q+ : for some r G Q,r Ih "ςf G G^"}.
4.6 Fact. 1) lhQ"Gj is a generic subset of Q+ (or V) and G^ Π Q = GQ"
2) Q is a dense subset of Q
+
3) essentially Q - Q+\Q i.e. for p,g G Q, Q+ μ "p < q & -»(3r)(r G Q&p <
r & [ς, r incompatible])". 
Π4 6
4.6A Remark. We can continue and do iteration in this context, see X §1.

224 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
§5. Which Forcings Can We Iterate Without
Adding Reals
In Sect. 1 we have proved that we can iterate forcing notions of special kind
(^-complete) without adding reals. As a result we get a parallel of MA for such
forcings and get the consistency of some uniformization property (see more
in Chapters VII, VIII). However this axiom, quite strong in some respects,
is consistent with diamond on HI: (see [Sh:64], [Sh:98] or 1.9 here). On some
stationary subsets of ω\ it can say much, but on others nothing.
So we shall try here to find another property of forcing notions, so that
forcing with LimQ,0 — (P%,Qi : £ < α) a CS iteration of such forcing, does
not add reals.
5.1 Example. Assume 2
H° = NI (or even 2
N° < 2*
1 suffices).
Let AS C δ be unbounded of order type ω, for δ < ω\ limit, so by [DvSh:65]
(or see AP §1), (As : δ < ωι) does not have the uniformization property, hence
there are f§ '. A§ —> {0,1} such that for no / : ω\ —> {0,1}, is f\A& =ae fδ
for every δ. Let / = (f$ : δ < α>ι), Pj — {/ : Dom(/) is an ordinal a < ωi,
δ <a =^ [ f \ A s =ae f δ } } , ordered by inclusion. Consider the dense sets.
Ii = {f:i< Dom(/) and / G Pf}
So clearly there is no directed G C Pj such that G Π Xi / 0 for every i < ω\.
5.1 A Remark. 
Previously Jensen (see Devlin and Johnsbraten [DeJo])
showed, that though forcing with Souslin trees does not add reals, starting
with V = L (at least with V \= 0*0 there is a CS iteration of such forcing of
length ω, such that forcing by the limit adds reals. This, however, does not ex-
clude a suitable MA for the example above, because MA for this forcing implies
-.CH.

§5. Which Forcings Can We Iterate Without Adding Reals 
225
Now, Pf is a very nice forcing - e.g. it is α-proper for every a < ωι, but
our desired property should exclude it. The following is a try to exclude this
case by a reasonable condition.
We shall return to this subject in VIII, §4 (going deeper but also having
presentational variations of the definitions).
5.2 Definition.
(1) We call D a completeness system if for some μ, B is a function defined
on the set of triples (TV,P,p), p G TV Π P, P G TV, TV X (ίf(μ),e), TV
countable such that (P is meant here as a predicate on TV, i.e., P Π TV):
B(JV,P,P) — B(TV, P,p) is a filter, or even a family of nonempty subsets of
Gen(TV, P) = {G : G C TV Π P, G directed and G ΠI ^ 0 for any dense
subset X of P which belongs to TV} such that if G G Gen(TV, P) belongs to
any member of B(JV,P,P)> then p G G.
(2) We call D a λ-completeness (λ may also be finite or NO or NI) system if each
family D(jv,p,p) has the property that the intersection of any i elements is
nonempty for ί < 1 -f λ (so for λ > NO, B{JV,P,P} generates a filter). Now,
such D can be naturally extended to include TV -< (if(μt),G), μ G TV,
μ < μ
f by D(TV, P,p) = D(TV Π if (μ), P,p). We do not distinguish strictly.
(3) We say D is on μ. We not always distinguish strictly between D and its
definition.
5.3 Definition.
(1) Suppose P is a forcing notion, 8 a nontrivial family of subsets of <S^0(μ)
and B a completeness system on μ.
We say P is (£,B)-complete if for every large enough λ, if P, £,B G TV,
p e P Π TV, TV X (if (λ), G), TV countable, , 4 e £ n T V = > T V n μ e A , then
the following set contains some member of B{;v,p,p) (i e
 > D{wnH(μ),p,p))
:
Gen+(TV, P) = {G G Gen(TV, P) : p G G and there is
an upper bound for G in P}
(2) If 8 — {<SNO(AO} we write just B-complete.

226 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
5.4 Remark.
(1) We can think of D(ΛΓ,P,P) as a filter on the family of directed subsets G of
PΠ TV generic over TV, to which p belongs. The demand "(£,B)-complete"
means that (for £>(£)-majority of such TV's) the "majority" of such G's
have an upper bound in P hence the name (£,D)-completeness.
(2) In some sense the definitions above are trivial: if P is £-proper and does not
add reals, then there is a ^-completeness system D such that P is (£,B)-
complete for all K simultaneously. Because, given (TV, P, p), we extend p to
q G P which is (TV, P)-generic. If {In : n < ω] is a list of the dense subsets
of P which belong to TV, Jn Π N — {pnjk 
0 < k < u;}, we can define a
P-name x:
x — {(n, k) : n < ω and k is minimal such that pn^ G Gp}
Clearly q Ihp "x G
 ωω", and since P does not add reals there is an x* G
(
ωω)
v, and r, q < r G P, r lhP "x* = x". Let Gr = {pt G PΠN : pt < r}.
Clearly Gr G Gen(AΓ, P) and let
D(ΛΓfP,p> = {{Gr}}
So what is the point of such a definition? We shall use almost always
completeness systems restricted in some sense: O(JV,P,P) is defined in a
reasonably simple way. The point is that usually when we want to decide
whether some G G Gen(TV, P) has an upper bound, we do not need to
know the whole P, but rather some subset of AT, e.g. a function / from
Λf to itself. Check the example we discussed before: if δ = N Π α i, then
we just need to know f\δ. But two f\δ's may give incompatible demands,
so for it the system is only a 1-completeness system. So if we deal with
No-completeness system, we exclude it (in fact later we shall discuss even
2-completeness system).
An explication of "defined in a reasonably simple way" is:

§5. Which Forcings Can We Iterate Without Adding Reals 
227
5.5 Definition.
(1) A completeness system D is called simple if there is a first order formula
ψ such that:
B(7V, P,p) — {Ax :x a finitary relation on TV,
i.e. x C N
k, for some k G ω]
where
Ax = {Ge Gen(7V,P) : (7VU P(N), G,p,P,ΛO 1= φ[G,x}}
(2) A completeness system D is called almost simple over Vb (Vb a class, usually
a subuni verse) if there is a first order formula ψ such that:
D(7V, P,p) = {AXtZ 
: x a relation on N, z G Vb}
where
where e
Λ= {(x, y) : x G A, y G A, x G y}.
(3) If in (2) we omit z we call D simple over VQ.
5.6 Claim.
(1) A λ-completeness system (see Definition 5.2(2)) is a λ*-completeness sys-
tem for every λ* < λ.
(2) P is (£,D)-complete for some D if and only if P is £ -proper and (forcing
with P) does not add new reals.
Proof. (1) Trivial.
(2) The direction 4= (i.e. "if") was proved in Remark 5.4(2) above. So, let
us prove the "only if" part. So P is (5, Incomplete.
Suppose TV -< (ff(λ),e), p G P and {p,P,£,D,μ} e N, N countable and
TV Π μ G 
Π 
A So £ = {G G Gen(ΛΓ, P) : G has an upper bound and

228 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
p G G} G D(Λr,p,p), hence B ^ 0 (by Definition 5.2) and let G G B. So G has
an upper bound q (by the definition of (£,O)-completeness), G G Gen(7V, P),
and by Definition 5.3, p G G. So <? > p is (AT, P)-generic. If p lhP "/ G "ω",
/ G N, then for every n, Jn = {r G P : r Ih "/(™) = fc" for some /c < ω} is a
dense subset of P which belongs to AT, hence Jn Π G ^ 0. Hence g determines
the value of /(n). So g determines /(n) for every n. Hence it determines /, i.e.
/ is not a new real. Now if there were a new real, some p would without loss of
generality force / is such a real. Choosing N as above we get a contradiction.
Π5.6
5.7 Example. Forcing with a Souslin tree T is not D-complete for any simple
2-completeness system B.
Let N -X (iΓ(λ), G) be countable, T G N, δ = NΠωi. Note that Gen(N, P)
consists of all branches of T Π N, and Gen
+(ΛΓ, P) consists of the branches of
T Π N which have an upper bound, i.e. Ax = {y G T : y < x], where x G T$ =
the 5-th level of T. Now N "does not know" what is the set of such branches
of T Π TV, and two disjoint sets are possible.
The above is an argument, not a proof. To be exact, we can, assuming
diamond of NI, build a Souslin tree, such that no first order formula Ψ defines
a simple 2-completeness system for which T is D-complete.
§6. Specializing an Aronszajn Tree Without
Adding Reals
The traditional test for generalizing MA has been Souslin Hypothesis. Jensen
has proved the consistency of the Souslin Hypothesis with G.C.H. (see Devlin
and Johnsbraten [DeJo]). He iterates forcing notions of Souslin trees, in limit
points of cofinality NO he uses diamond to refine the inverse limit of the trees,
in limit points of cofinality NI he uses the square on ^2 (and preparatory
measures in previous steps). In successor stages he specializes a specific tree,

§6. Specializing an Aronszajn Tree Without Adding Reals 
229
by first forcing a closed unbounded set and then building a Souslin tree using
OS (more precisely he adds N2 closed unbounded subsets in the beginning).
We shall prove that there is a D-complete forcing notion PT specializing
an Aronszajn tree T, for D a simple HI-completeness system. The proof is close
to Jensen's successor stage. We feel that the ideas of the proof are applicable
to related problems, see [AbSh:114], [AbSh:403], [DjSh:604].
Notation. For an Ni-tree T, T; is the i-th level, T\i = U^T}, and for x G T/j,
OL < β, x\θί is the unique y G Tα, y < x.
6.1 Theorem. There is a simple NI-completeness system D, such that for every
Aronszajn tree T, there is a D-complete forcing notion PT, specializing it, i.e.
lhpτ "T is a special Aronszajn tree", also PT is α-proper for every countable
ordinal a.
Proof.
First Approximation:
Let
PT — {/ : / a function from Tf(α + 1) to Q (set of rational numbers)
such that a <ωι,x <y=> f ( x ) < f(y)}.
The order is inclusion. If / G P£, Dom(/) = T\(a +1) we say / has height α,
ht(/)=α.
Clearly P% specializes Γ, but we have to prove that it is proper and does
not add reals and more. Let N -< (-ff(λ), G) with Γ, P% G N and N Π ω\ = ί,
(JV countable). Let (the 5-th level of Γ be) !> = {xn : n < ω}. It is trivial that
we can extend any condition to a condition of arbitrarily large height. So we
have to define an increasing sequence of conditions pn G P$ Π TV, which will
be generic for TV (hence their heights converge to δ) and has an upper bound.
Now in order that {pn : n < ω} has an upper bound, it is necessary that for
each I < ω, the sequence (of rationale) {pn(a*Γht(pn)) : n < ω) is bounded. So
a natural condition to ensure it is e.g.

230 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
(*) for £ < n we have pn(xι\ht (pn)) + l/2
n > pn+ι(xt\ht (pn+ι))
This is not difficult by itself, but we have also to ensure the genericity of
(pn : n < ω). So it clearly suffices to prove, for each n
(**)n if p G Pγ Γϊ TV, n < α;, J an open dense subset of P£ which belongs to TV,
#0, 
- , #n-ι € T/vnωi
 and £ > 0 (a rational or real), ften there is a # G P£ Π TV,
p < </, ς G J and
p(x^ t ht (p)) + ε > q(xι \ ht (ς)) for i < n
Unfortunately we see no reason for (**)n to hold.
In fact, it is false, and for every natural number n, Zn = {p G P^ : for every
x G ht (p), we have p(x) > n} is dense.
Second Approximation:
We can remedy this by using Pf = {/ : / G P£, and: i//3 < ht(/),x G 2>
and ε > 0 and T is a Souslin tree, then for some y we have x < y G T
1^/) and
Now for n = 1, (**)n is true; more generally for any n < ω, (**)n is true if:
(* * *)n {(2/0, 
,3/n-ι) : Λ*<n2fe € T&jfc < z*} is generic for G/V,Tn)}.
(Tn - the n-th power of T i.e. the set of elements is in [Jϊ<u;ι
 n(^)>
 and ^ < V
Why? Though it is not used we shall explain. For a given p and rational ε let
R = Rp,τ,ε = {(yo, - 
- , yn-i) : for some a < δ, a > ht (p) & yι G Tα, and for
some ς G Pj
1,^ < q G J, ht (ς) = α, q(yt) < q(xi \ ht (p)) 4- ε}. Now # is a dense
subset of {(2/0, 
2/n-ι) : for some 7, for each ^,z^f ht (p) < yι G T7}. [Why?
as given (y0, 
, 2/n-ι) €
 n(Γ7) we can find r, p < r G Pτ, ht (r) = 7, r(yt) <
r(yt\ht(p)) + ε (by a density argument), let εi = Min{r(y/) - r(y/ίht(p)) :
I < n}, and let us choose q, r < q G J, without loss of generality q e N.
Now by the definition of Pf we can find y'^ yι < y'e G Γht(ς) such that

§6. Specializing an Aronszajn Tree Without Adding Reals 
231
q(y'ί) < (l(yt) + ει Clearly q exemplifies (y
f
£ 
: I < n) G R as required]. Hence
there is a (y0, 
- - ϊ/n-i) £ R, f\i yt < xi
However, there may be Souslin trees which do not satisfy (* * *)n for n > 1.
6.1A Explanation. So we shall change P£ somewhat by adding "promises"
such that if (the parallel to) (**) fails, then we can add one more promise to
p guaranteeing that p has no extension in I, a contradiction to J being open
and dense.
The Actual Proof.
6.2 Definition. We call Γ a promise (more exactly a T-promise) if there
are a closed unbounded subset C of ω\ and n < ω (denoted by C(Γ), n(Γ)
respectively) such that:
a) the members of Γ are n-tuples (XQ? 
?#n-ι) of distinct elements from
Ta where α G C. We say (x0, - ,xn-i) < (i/o» 
»2/n-ι) if ^o <
2/o,...,x n-ι <2/n-ι,
b) if α < β are in C, x G Γ Π
 n(Tα), ίften there are infinitely many ?/'s,
x < y G Γ Π
 n(Tβ) which are pairwise disjoint (i.e. the ranges of the
sequences are disjoint),
c) Γ Π
 n(TminC(Γ)) is not empty.
6.3 Definition. We let PI = {(/, C) : C is a characteristic function of a
closed subset of some successor ordinal a + 1 < ωi, with the last element
a — £t(C), and / is a monotonically increasing function from \J Ti to Q}. Let
i€C
(/i, <?i) < (/2, ^2) if and only if CΊ C C2 (equivalently Ci - C2 Γ(Λ(CΊ) + 1))
and /i C /2.
6.4 Definition. We say that (/, C) € PI fulfills or satisfies a promise Γ if:
ίt(C) e C(Γ) and C(Γ) D C \ MinC(Γ) and for every a< βin C(Γ) Π C and
x G Γ Π
 n(Tα) (where n = n(Γ)) the following holds:

232 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Θ for every ε > 0 there are infinitely many pairwise disjoint y G Γ Π
n ( T β ) such
that f ( x i ) < f ( y t ) < f ( x i ) + ε for t < n and x < y.
6.5 The Main Definition. P = Pτ = {(/,C,Φ) : (/,C) G PI, and Φ is a
countable set of promises which (/, C) fulfills }
(/ι,Cι,Φι)<(/ 2,C 2,Φ 2)if:
(/i, CΊ) < (/2, C2) (in PI) and Φi C Φ2 and: α G C2\Cι implies α G f)
(actually follows).
6.5A Notation. If p = (/,C,Φ) we write / = /p, C = CP,Ψ = Φp, #p =
6.6 Fact. If p G P, β < ωι, then
(1) there is a q G P, q > p, and itq > /?,
(2) moreover, if β G f|
 
C(Γ) and β > ίtp, then we can have ^ίg = β,
re^p
(3) moreover, if m < u;, j/o» 
ϊ2/m-ι ^ ^/35 ε > 0 we can in addition to (2)
demand /p(y< fftp) < /g(i/i) < /p(2/< ί^p) 4- ε for i < m.
Proof. (1) Clearly 
f] C(Γ) is a closed unbounded subset of ω\ (as Φ is
Γ6ΦP
countable and each C(Γ) is a closed unbounded subset of α i). Hence there
is an ordinal /?t, β\ > ^,/?t > #p and /jt e η c(Γ), and apply (2).
reφp
(2) Let a = tip. We define Cq = CP\J {β}, Φς = Φp, so we still have to
define /9, but as we want to have /p C /ς, we have to define just fq\Tβ. We
have two demands on it, in order that <j G P:
(i) monotonicity: /p(xΓα) = /9(xΓα) < fq(x) G Q for x G Tβ
(ii) Θ from Definition 6.4 for aι < α2 in Cq \ Min(C(Γ)) (hence in C(Γ),
Γ G Φp - Φ9, x G ΓΠ
n(
Γ)(Tαι) when α2 = /3 (for α2 < /? usep G P)).
If we succeed to define fq\Tβ such that it satisfies (i) and (ii), then q is
well defined, and trivially belongs to P and is > p.

§6. Specializing an Aronszajn Tree Without Adding Reals 
233
Now, (ii) consists of count ably many demands on the existence of infinitely
many£G
nCZ».
Let {(Γm,7m,x
m) : m < ω] be a list of the triples (Γ,7,z), Γ G Ψ p,x G
Γ Π
 n(Γ)(Tγ), 7 < /?, 7 G Cp Π C(Γ), each appearing infinitely often (if this
family is empty, we have no work at all).
We now define by induction on m, a function /m such that:
a) fm is a function from a finite subset of Tβ to Q such that fp(x\a) 
<
fm(x) for x G Dom(/m).
b) fm C /m+l
c) There is a y
m C Dom(/m+ι) \ Dom(/m), y
m G Γm, x
m < y™ and
for every t < n(Γm) (which is the length of x
m) f p ( x f ) 
< fm(y
m) <
fp(x
m) 4 1/m.
This will be enough, as any triple appears infinitely often and the y
m's are
pairwise disjoint and 1/m converges to zero, so any completion of Um/m to a
function from Tβ to Q satisfying (i) is as required.
We let /o be arbitrary satisfying (a), e.g. the empty function.
If /m is defined, consider Γ = Γm. Let n = n(Γ), if 7m — α we know that Γ
is a promise, 7™ G C(Γ), (part of requirements of (Γm,7m,x
m)) and β G C(Γ)
(by the hypothesis of Fact 6.6(2)). Hence (by the definition of a promise) there
are infinitely many pairwise disjoint y's, x
m < y, y G ΓΠ
n(Γ^). As the domain
of fm is finite there is such a y disjoint from Dom(/m). So we let:
Dom(/m+ι) = Dom(/m) U {y0, . . . , t/n_ι}
If 7m < α, we use the fact that (fp,Cp) 
G PI, satisfies the promise Γ,
7m G C(Γ) and α G C(Γ) (by Definition 6.4 C(Γ) D Cp \ MinC(Γ) and
α G Cp,α > 7m > MinC(Γ)). So there is a z G Γ n
 n(Tα) such that x
m < z,
and /p(^) < fp(x
m) 
4- l/3m. Now we apply the argument above, replacing x
m
by f .
(3) The same proof as that of (2), using our freedom to choose /0.
So we finish the proof of Fact 6.6. 
De.e

234 
V. α -Properness and Not Adding Reals
Now we shall prove the crux of the matter: the parallel of (**).
6.7 Fact.
(1) If N 
-< (fΓ(λ),e) (λ large enough) P,p G N, p G P, N countable,
N Π ω\ = 5, ε > 0 and XQ, . ?^n-ι € T§ (are distinct) and X e N is
an open dense subset of P, Λen there is a q G Z Π TV, q > p, £tq = δ and
fq(xi\ttq)<fp(xi\ttp)+e.
(2) In (1), we can instead of XQ, - - , #n-ι have £?o, . . . , £n_ι, 5-branches of
Tδ Π N (i.e. J5^ = {xf : i < 5}, xf G Ti} xf < x^ for i < j). Define
B£\O. as the unique x G -B^ Π Tα, and replace the conclusion of (1) by
fg(B£\ttq)<fp(Bt\etp)+ε.
Proof. (1) By (2), using B£ = {yeT:y< x£}.
(2) Suppose p, TV, ε, β0? 
5 #n-ι form a counterexample, for simplicity ε
rational and let a = ltp and x^ = jE^ fα, x = (XQ, . . . , xn-ι) Let
Γi = {y : y G
 n(Γ^) for some /3 > α, x < ^, and there is no (g, 7, z) such that:
^ < y, 7 > α,^ € n(T7),<? >p,ίtq=Ί,q£l and V£ < n[/ς(z*) < /g(x/) +e]}.
So Γi is, in a sense, the set of "bad" τ/'s; the places to which we cannot
extend p suitably. More explicitly:
6.7A. Subfact. If β G f| C(Γ) \ (ttp + I),β< δ, then
Otherwise, for some α < 7 < /? there exists a (9,7, z) witnessing
But then ς exemplifies p, JV, ε, .Bo, 
- , ^n-i do not form a counterexample,
except that maybe q φ N .
Clearly Γi is definable in H(\) using parameters which are in TV, hence
Γi G N. Now, the requirements on q are also first order with parameters in A/",
so w.l.o.g. q G N. So subfact 6.7A holds. 
Πβ.7Λ

§6. Specializing an Aronszajn Tree Without Adding Reals 
235
Let Ci = ΓlreΨp C(Γ) \
 etP' so aSain CΊ
 G N- βy the subfact β 7A> N N " for
every 7 G Ci there is a y G Γi Π
 n(T7)" but AT X (-ff(λ), G), hence also the
universe V satisfies the statement.
Our plan is to get a promise Γ C Γi in ΛΓ, and show that r = (/p, Cp, Ψ PU
{Γ}) G P, jp < r, and above r there is no member of J, thus getting a
contradiction to " J is an open dense subset of P" .
Let Γ2 = {y G Γi: there are uncountably many z € Γι,y < z}. By the
above, x G Γ2. We shall prove later:
6.7B. Subfact. There is a closed unbounded C* C ωi, α = MinC*, C* C d,
such that Γ = {y G Γ2: for some i G C*, ?/ G
 n(Tί)} is a promise.
Let us show that this will be enough to prove 6.7, hence Theorem 6.1
except checking simplicity.
As before, we can assume C* G N; and as MinC(Γ) = MinC* = a = ίtp,
clearly p
t = (/p, Cp, Φp U {Γ}) e PΓ\N and p < pt. As J is an open and dense
subset of P there is a # > p^ in J. As q G P, (/g, Cg) satisfies the promise Γ,
- so as α G C(Γ) Π Cq, also /? = ίtq G C(Γ) Π Cg. Hence by the definition of
"fulfilling a promise" and as x G Γ (see above), there is a y G
 n(T/3) Π Γ such
that x < y and fq(yι) < fp(xt)+ε 
for each ί < n. So by IYs definition, y φ Γi
(as ς G J) but y G Γ C Γ2 C Γi. We arrive at a contradiction thus proving
Fact 6.7, except that we need:
Proof of Subfact 6. 7B. Note that
a) if z G U
 n(Ti), z < y G Γi, then z G Γu so clearly Γ2 has this
i>a
property too.
Next note that
b) for any y G Γ2 the set {z G Γ2 : y < z} is uncountable.
(Why? If not, for some 7 such that δ < 7 < ω\ there is no z G Γ2,
y < z, z Φ U
 n(ϊl). But there are distinct z* G Γi, z < z
1 for i < K x, so
i<7
w.l.o.g. z
l G
 n(Γ7(i)), 7(1) > i. Now, there are just countably many possible
{*δΓ7» 
ι*n-ιΓ7) (for 7 < ί < wi), (as TΊ is countable), hence for some

236 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
z G
 n(Tj) the set {i : 7 < i < ωι,2Jf7 = zt for I < n} is uncountable, hence
z G Γ2).
c) for any y G Γ2 Π
 n(T;), i < j < ω\ there is a z G
 n(T7 ) Π Γ2, y < z.
This is just a combination of a) and b).
d) for any y G Γ2 Π
 n(Ti) there is a j such that i < j < ω\ and disjoint
Otherwise for i < j < ωι, let z
j G Γ2 Π
 n(Γ7 ), z < z
j (by c)). So for
i < ξ < C < ωi, for some ί and fc, z| < z£ (otherwise use (c) on z^ with ξ,£
here standing for z,j there to get a contradiction). This contradicts T being
Aronszajn by the proof of Theorem III 5.4.
e) for any y G Γ2 Π
n(Ti) and m < ω there are j < ωi, j > i and pairwise
disjoint z
1, . . . , z
m G Γ2 Π
 n(TJ ) j/ < ^ for f = 1, . . . , m.
Just by induction on n, using d) and c).
Now we prove the subfact itself. For any y G Γ2 there are (by (e)) jm(y)
(m < ω) such that there are m pairwise disjoint members of Γ2 Π
 n(Tjm^)
which are > y. By c) this holds for any j > jm(y). Now, if j > \J jm(y), then
m<ω
we can find for every ra, m pairwise disjoint members of Γ2 U
 n(Tj) which are
> y. Let {z
1 : i < i0} be a maximal subset of {z G Γ2 Π
 n(Tj) 
: y < z, j G ωι}
whose members are pairwise disjoint. If IQ < ω, choose another such set {y
1 :
I < niQ + 1} (exists as j > \Jjm(y))' 
Now, at least one y* should be disjoint
m
from all z
z's, a contradiction to the maximality of {z
1 : i < i0}- Hence IQ is
infinite. Let C* = {i : i is α or i > α, i G C\ and y G Γ2 U \J
 n(Tj] implies
j<i
that i > U jm(y)}
m<ω
It is easy to check C* is as required in 6.7B. So we finish the proof of 6.7.
ΠΘ.TB,-?
Continuation of the Proof of 6.1. The only point left is to prove the existence of
the appropriate simple NI -completeness system D. This is trivial. (It is easy to
see that if x : TΠAΓ — > ω codes the branches of TΓ\N (use x which is eventually
constant on each 5-branch of T Π N where δ = N Π ωi), then Gen
+(AΓ, P) can
be written as Ax with some suitable ^ as in 5.5. The point is that f}i<ω AX£ / 0
because we prove not only 6.7(1) but also 6.7(2).) 
D6.ι

§7. Iteration of (£,D)-Complete Forcing Notions 
237
§7. Iteration of (£, D)-Complete
Forcing Notions
The discussion in the two previous sections lacked the crucial point that we can
iterate such forcing notions without adding reals. In order to get a reasonable
form of MA we need to iterate up to some regular K > KI and have the κ-c.c.
For K — K2, Lemma 1.5 does not suffice as \Pτ\ = #2 (Pr from the proof of
Theorem 6.2; not to speak of the lack of 8-completeness) but meanwhile K
strongly inaccessible will suffice (see VII §1, or VIII §2 for eliminating this).
An aesthetic drawback of the proof is that we do not prove that the forcing we
get by the iteration enjoys the same property we require from the individual
forcing notions but see VIΠ§4, which contains more detailed proofs of stronger
theorems.
7.1 Theorem. Let Q = (Pi,Qi 
: i < a) be a countable support iteration,
Pa — LimQ; 8 a nontrivial family of subsets of S#0(μ).
(1) If each Qi is /3-proper for every β < ω\, and (£,D^)-complete for some
simple NI-completeness system D^ (so D^ is a P^-name), then Pa does not
add reals.
(2) We can replace in (1) "simple" by "almost simple over V" (note: V and
not V
Pί).
Combining the ideas of the proofs of 7.1 and of 4.3 we can prove
7.2 Theorem. In Theorem 7.1 we can weaken "Ni-completeness system" to
"Ho-completeness system".
However we shall not prove it now (see VIII §4 for more).
Proof of Theorem 7.1. Note: D is a function with domain α, BΪ is a Pi-name (of
an HI-completeness system or more acurately a definition of such a system).
For clarity of presentation we first deal with the case α = ω (for α < ω there
is nothing to prove).

238 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Let Ni -< (H(X), G) be countable (for i < ω),D, Q G 7V"o, Ni G Ni+ι (hence
Ni -< AΓi+1) each Ni is suitable for 8 (remember Definition 1.1(1), really just
Λ/o suitable suffice) and p G Pω Π 7VΌ, and / G AΓ0 be a P^-name of a real.
Now we shall define by induction on n < ω conditions rn,pn such that:
(A) (1) rn G Pn, rn =r n + 1fn
(2) rn is (]Vi, Pn)-generic for i = 0 and n-}~\ <i < ω.
(B) (1) There is a G* G Gen(7Vo, Pn) which is bounded by rn and belongs to
ΛUi
(2) pn < pn+ι, pn G Pω Π AΓ0, p0 = P and pn\n < rn (equivalently,
PnΓneσ;).
(3) Let {Jn : n < ω} be a list of the open dense subsets of Pω which
belong to AΓ0; then pn+ι G Jn.
Finally, let r be such that Vn[rfn = rn]. Then r > pn, so r decides all
values of f ( k ) (as for each k for some n we have Zn = {q G P^ : q force a value
to /(fc)}.
Let us carry out the induction.
n = 0: Trivial (Note P0 = {0}).
n + 1: We shall first define Pn+ι> then C*+1, and finally rn+ι.
5ίep. We want to find pn+ι G Pω Π AΓ0, pn+ι > pn, pn-ι-ιN ^ G* and
Pn+i G Jn. As Jn C Pω is dense and Jn G NO? above every q G PU> Π 7V0
there is r G PO, Π AΓ0 Π Jn, r > <?. Let J7n = {r G Pn: there is an r* G Pω,
r* > Pn, ^** ^ ^n, ^*f^ — 7*}, clearly it is dense above pn\n (in Pn). But
pnίn G G* G Gen(A^0,Pn), and Jn G 7V0, hence there is r G G* Π Jn, and so
there is an r* G Pω, r* > pn, r* G Jn, r* fn = r. So, clearly, r* can be chosen
as pn+ι we need.
Second step. Let Gn C Pn be generic over V, rn G Gn (hence G£ C Gn). We
shall try to see what are the demands on G£+1. Really we want in V[Gn], to
find a member of Gen(A/
r
0[Gn],Qn[Gn]) which has an upper bound in Q[Gn]
and pn(n) belongs to it.

§7. Iteration of (£,D) -Complete Forcing Notions 
239
Note that Dn is a Pn-name which belongs to 7V0. So there is also a Pn-
name ψn for the formula ψ appearing in the definition of simplicity (or almost
simplicity), and it belongs to NQ. As we "know" Gn Π NQ = G£, we "know"
Ψn — Ψn[Gn], i e some member of G* force ψn = ψn. So we know that for
some AXjy (x a relation on TVo, y G V, see Definition 5.5) every G G AXιV has
an upper bound (in Qn[Gn]), where
AI>y = {Ge Gen(N0(Gn},Qn[Gn}) 
: (V U N0(Gn]
ey, €N0[G,]^(N0[GΛ])t 
pn+1(n)[Gn},Qn[Gn],V,N0[Gn}) 
N ψ[G,x,y}}.
So we have Pn-names x,y for x and ?/. Now x, 2; are quite unlikely to be
in N0 (as their definitions used 7V0 as a parameter) but they can be chosen in
Nn+ι[Gn] (remember Nn+l[Gn] 
-< (fΓ(λ)[Gn], G) as rn G Gn, rn is (7Vn+1,Pn)-
generic, and 7V0[Gn] G JVn+ι[Gn]).
Moreover, though we need to know Gn to be able to find their exact
values, we know that they are in V (remember P(N[Gn}) G V and Pn does not
add reals and even α -seqeunces of a member of V); well formally Nn+ι[Gn]
cannot be in V as it has members like Gn, but the isomorphism type of
(Nn+ι[Gn],Nn+ι,Gn,c)C£Nn+l 
does, and so does the isomorphism type of the
model appearing in the definition of AXty. If you are still confused see VIII §4,
where essentially we make the set of members of Qn[Gn] and Nn[Gn] to be a
set of ordinals.
So as rn is (7Vn+ι,Pn)-generic rn Ih "x, y G Λfn+ι", so we have just
countably many possible pairs (those in Nn+ι). Now Nn+ι "thinks" there
are uncountably many possibilities, but as -/Vn+ι G Afn+2> ^n+2 ^ "Nn+i is
countable", in Nn+2 we "know" that Π{^z,2/ : x>2/ ^ ^n+i} is nonempty
(remember G* G 7Vn+ι hence A^0[G*] G Nn+ι). So, in Λ/n+2 there is a G
n C
Qn [Gn] Π NQ [G^] which belongs to the intersection. So though we do not know
exactly what x and y will be, we know (as long as rn G Gn)) that G
n G Ax^y.
From G
n, G; we can easily compute G*+1 G Gen+^o, Pn+ι), G*+1ΠPn = G* ,
Gn+ι = { (90,91,.- ,?n> 
(9o,9ι,-..,9n-ι> ^ G*, ^n € N0 and^n[Gn] G Gn}.

240 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Third step. We now have to define rn+ι G Pn+ι, so as we require rn+ι \n — rn,
we just have to define rn_(_ι(n). What are the requirements on it? Looking at
the induction demand, just:
fn \\~pn "rn+ι(ri) is above each q(n)[Gn] for members q of G*+1 and is
(Ni[GPn],Qn[Gpn])- 
generic forn + 2 < i < ω",
and there is no problem in this. We have finished the proof of 7.1 for α = u;.
Now we have to turn to the general case i.e. with no restriction on α.
Let p, Q G NQ -< (#(λ),G),ΛΓ0 countable, NQ suitable for 8 and p G Pa.
Let NQ Π (α + 1) = {A : i < Ί], i < j => ft < /fy (so AΓ0 Π (α + 1) has
order type 7 + 1). Now we can find Ni -< (-ff(λ), G) for i < 7, Ni countable,
(Ni : j < ί) G Ni+i (just define by induction on i) and let Λfo = (Ji<δNi for
limit J < 7.
As AΓ0 G NI, 7 + 1 C NI, hence i G A^.
7.3 Definition.
A pair (r, G*) is called an (i, ζ)-th approximation if (i < ζ < 7 and) :
a) r G Pβi and r is (Λ^ , P/j.) generic for j = 0 and i -f 1 < j < C
b) G* G Gen(AΓ0,P/3ί), and G* is bounded by r and G* G N<+I.
Now it suffices to prove
7.4 Claim. I f O < i < j < ζ < 7 and (r, G*) in an (ΐ,£)-th approximation,
p G P^. Π 7V0, pf/?i G G*, ί/ien there is a (j,ζ)-th approximation (r^,G^) such
that p e G
f, r
f r/3i = r and G
f Π P^ = G* (actually G
f depends just on G*
and (Nβ : β < 7), but not on r).
Why is the claim sufficient? Just use i — 0, j — ζ = 7 (so βΊ = α), and we
get what we need.
Proof of 7.4. Now, the proof of the claim is by induction on j (for all i,ζ).
Then for successor this is just like the induction step for a = α;, and for limit
j we diagonalize using the induction hypothesis (also taking care of clause (a)
of Definition 7.3). 
Π7.4>7.ι

§8. The Consistency of SH 4- CH 4- There Are No Kurepa Trees 
241
§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are
No Kurepa Trees
We wish now to give yet another application of the technique of not adding
reals in iterations.
8.1 Definition. For any regular ft, a ft-Kurepa tree is a ft-tree such that the
number of its /^-branches is > ft. Let the ft-Kurepa Hypothesis (in short ft—KH)
be the statement "there exists ft-Kurepa tree". We may write "KH" instead of
α i-KH. (Be careful: KH says "there are Kurepa trees", but SH says "there are
no Souslin trees"!)
Solovay proved that Kurepa trees exist if V = L, more generally Jensen
[Jn] proved the existence of ft-Kurepa's trees follows from Jensen's 0+, which
holds in L for every regular uncountable ft which is not "too large". But - KH
is consistent with of ZFC -f GCH, which was first shown by Silver in [Si67],
starting from a strongly inaccessible ft. The method of his proof is as follows:
collapse every λ, ω\ < X < ft using Levy's collapse Levy(Kι, < ft) = {p : \p\ <
NI & p is a function with Dom(p) C ft x ω\ Λ V{α,ξ) G Dom(p)(p(α,ξ) G α)}.
Now Levy(Nι,< ft) can be viewed as an iteration of length ft, and satisfied
the ft-c.c. on the one hand, and NI-completeness on the other hand. Therefore
NI does not get collapsed, as well as any cardinal Kα > ft. Suppose now that
T £ V
p is an ωi-tree. So it has appeared already at an earlier stage along the
iteration, say T G V
p , where V
p is obtained from V
p> by an Ni-complete
forcing. In V
p' the tree T has at most 2**
1 branches, and this is less than ft.
Note that by 6.1(2) the tree T can have no new ωi-branches in V
p. So T is
not a Kurepa tree in V
p.
Devlin in [Del] and [De2] has shown, starting from a strongly inaccessible,
the consistency of GCH -f- SH + -iKH. For a proof by iteration see Baumgartner
[B3].
8.1 A Remark. In both proofs the inaccessible cardinal is necessary, for -«KH
implies that ^2 is an inaccessible cardinal of L.

242 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
8.2 Definition. Suppose T is an ωi-tree, and that Q is a forcing notion. We
say that Q is good for T if for every p G Q and a countable elementary submodel
N -< (-ff(χ), G), for χ large enough such that T, Q, p e AT, there is an (AT, Q)-
generic condition q > p such that for every name r G N of a branch of T, either
?
 lhQ "τ[Qθ\ € N and is an old cofinal branch of T" or q \\-Q "τ[G] Π T(δ(N))
is not 6(α) = {x £ T(δ(N)) 
: s < a} for any α G
8.2A Fact. A forcing notion Q is good for an ωi-tree T iff Q is proper and in
V® there are no new cofinal branches of T.
Proof. 
=>: Suppose Q is good for T. The properness of Q follows trivially.
Let p \\-Q "τ is a new branch of T", and we shall derive a contradiction; let
{T,p, Q} G N -< (H(χ), G), x large enough and AT countable. So let q > p be
as in the definition of good.
If τ[G] is an old branch — we are done. If not, τ[G] Π T<<$N ^ Bx — {y :
y <τ %} for all x € T^. But this implies that τ[G] being linearly ordered by
<τ has no member of level > SN, so it cannot be a ωi-branch of Γ.
Conversely, suppose that Q is proper and does not add a new ωi -branch to
Γ. Let r,p G AT be as in the definition, and pick q > p which is (Af, Q)-generic,
and a generic subset G of P over V with ςr G G. So τ[G] G AΓ[G] -« H(χ, G)[G],
and r[G] is either an old α i-branch, or is not an α i-branch at all. In the first
case we are done. Now if τ[G] is not an cji-branch, then either (3a)τ[G]Γ}Ta 
= 0
or 3x,y G τ[G] such that x,y are not comparable in T. By elementarily of
N[G], such an a or such x, y exist also in N[G]. So g forces what is required by
the definition. 
D8.4
8.3 Lemma. If Q is an Ki-complete forcing notion and Γ is an α i-tree, then
Q adds no new cofinal branches to T.
Proof. 
It is enough to show that Q is good for Γ. Suppose that N -< (ίf(χ), G)
is a countable elementary submodel and that T, Q G AT. Let (Xn : n < ω) be
a list of all dense open subsets of Q which belong to TV. Let p G Q Π AT. Let

§8. The Consistency of SH + CH + There Are No Kurepa Trees 
243
{(^m In) : n < ω) be a list of all pairs (xn, τn) such that xn G Tg(N) and τn G TV
is a Q-iiame of a branch in of T.
By induction on n we construct a sequence of conditions pn such that:
(1) Po = P
(2) Pn<Pn+l G g n T V n J n .
(3) pn+ι Ihg "rn is an old cofinal branch of Γ" or there is some x G T Π TV
such that x ^τ xn and pn+ι \\-Q "x G T".
Suppose first that the construction is carried out. Let q € Q extend
all pn (q exists by Ni-completeness). Clearly, q is (N, Q)-generic. For every
T G N, a <2-name of a branch of T, either <? Ih "r is an old branch of Γ",
of <? Ih (Vn)[r Π Γ Π AT φ {x : x <τ χn}]. In the first case, as q is generic,
g Ih T G TV". In the second, clearly <? forces that r is not a cofinal branch of Γ.
Therefore Q is good for T.
We still have to show that the construction can be carried out. Suppose
pn is picked. First find an extention p' > pn that decides whether rn is an
old branch or a new branch. If p' Ih "r is old", define pn+\ = p" for some
p' < p" eInΠN. Else, p
1 Ih "r is new". Let B = {x € T : 3p" > p',p" Ih "x <E
r"}. Clearly, J5 is downward closed, and B G A^. If B were a cofinal branch,
this would contradict p' Ih "r is new". Therefore there are two incomparable
elements in B. By elementarity, there are two such elements in TV. Therefore
we can pick in N a condition pn+ι > Pn such that pn+ι Ih "r Π T$ = x" for
some x such that x ^T #n 
^8.3
8.4 Theorem. Suppose T is an ωi-tree, (P^ Qi : i < a) is a countable support
iteration, and no Qi adds new cofinal branches to T, then also Pα does not add
cofinal branches to T.
Proof. By induction on a. If a — 0 or a is a successor ordinal, there is not much
to prove. Suppose that a is limit. Let TV be a countable elementary submodel
as usual and suppose that p G Pa Π TV. Pick a sequence (a : n < ω) of ordinals
such that αn G TV Π α, αn+ι > an and \J an = sup(α Π TV).
n<ω

244 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Let (In : n < ω) be an enumerations of all dense open subsets of P which
belong to N. Let ((xn, τn) : n < ω) be a enumeration of T$(#) x {r G N : τ is
a Pα-name of a branch of T}.
By induction on n we pick pn, qn as in the proof of preservation of
properness under countable support iteration in III, §3. In addition to the
conditions there we demand:
(*) qn II- "Pn+i If- (3α)rtα ^ {x 6 Γ(α) Λ x <τ xn}" or
We show how to pick pn+ι- let G C POLn be generic such that q G G. Then
there is a p G Xn Π N such that pfαn G G. There is some extention p' > p which
decides whether rn is old or new. The rest is as in the proof of the previous
Lemma. 
Dg.4
We shall utilize now the preservation Theorem we just proved to reprove
Devlin's result:
8.5 Theorem. If CON(ZFC + « is inaccessible) then CON(ZFC + GCH +SH
+ --KH).
Proof. Let K be strongly inaccessible, we define a countable support iteration
of lengh K of proper forcing notions, (Pi,Qj 
: i < «, j < K). When i is odd,
Qi = Levy(Nι,N2)
V[Pίl When i is even, Qi = Q(Ti) is the forcing notion
defined in §6 which specializes some given tree T^ (a Pi-name) without adding
reals and every such names appear.
8.6 Claim.
(a) Pκ has the K2-cc.
(b) Pκ does not add reals.
(c) V
p* N SH.
(d) V
p* 1= -.KH.
Proof. 
Clause (a) is easy by III 4.1. For (b) see §6 and §7. Clause (c) is clear, as
every ωi-tree gets specialized along the way by suitable bookkeeping. Suppose
now that T is some ωi-tree in V
Pκ. There is some intermediate stage Pi for

§8. The Consistency of SH + CH 4- There Are No Kurepa Trees 
245
i<κ such that Γ G V
Pi . In V
Pi the tree T has at most 2*
1 (of V
Pi) branches.
As ft is inaccessible in F
Pί, the number of branches of T is < K. So there is
some j < K such that in V
Fj the tree T has at most NI o/d branches. What is
left to see is that the rest of the forcing does not introduce new branches to T.
By theorem 8.4 it is enough to show that no Qj adds branches (for j > ϊ). In
case Qj is Levy(Hι,H2), this is known from Lemma 8.3, because the collapse
is Ni-complete. The remaining case is that Qi = Q(Ti) is the forcing notion
defined in §6 for specializing a given Aronszajn tree 2V So our proof is finished
once we know that this forcing notion does not add branches to an ωi-tree T.
8.7 Claim. Suppose T is an Ni-Aronszajn tree, and T* is any Ni-tree. Then
Q = Q(T) is good for T, where Q(T) is the forcing for specializing T defined
in §6.
Proof. 
Suppose that TV -< (£Γ(χ), €) is a countable elementary submodel such
that Q, T, T* G N and p e Q Π AT. We shall find a condition q > p such that
q is (Q, TV) -generic and such that for every Q-name r G TV of a branch of T*,
q Ih "r is an old branch of T* or r Π Γ* Π TV .φ b(a) for all α e Ϊ?(ΛΓ)">
In the proof we shall follow the proof of Theorem 6.1, in which the proper-
ness of Q was shown.
8.8 Definition. Suppose that p € Q and δ > it(p). For x = (x0, 
,#n-ι) €
n(T$) and ε > 0 we say that q > p with ίt(q) < δ respects x by ε iff
< fp(xι \lt(p)) -h ε for all I < n.
The main point is the following claim which is the parallel of 6.7.
8.9 Claim. Suppose that TV -< (H(χ), €) is as usual, and p 6 TV is a condition
and r € TV is a Q-name of an α i-branch of T*. Let δ = TV Π ω\, x € n(T$ ),
α G T^ and ε > 0. TΛen there is a condition q £ N, q>p and <? respects x by
ε and such that:
(i) q Ih "τ\δ φ b(a) = {y : y <τ* a£} or
(ii) q Ih "r is an old branch of T".

246 
V. α-Properness and Not Adding Reals
Proof. 
Suppose there is no q > p in N as required and which satisfies (i).
We shall see that there is one which satisfies (ii). Define the set of "bad" y as
follows: Γi is the collection of all y G
 n(Tβ) such that β > a and
(a) For every 7 < β and z G
 rn(Tβ), ra < u;, there are 7' G [7,/3) and an
extension of p of height 7' < β which respects (zt \^' : I < £gx) by ε and
which determines the value of r f7,
(b) There are no two extensions, q$ and #ι, of p such that q& respects y by ε
(for k = 1,2) and <?ι and go force contradictory information about r.
Let -B(Γι) be the set of levels β for which there is y G Γi of height β.
Observe that x G IV Why? Clause (a) follows from 6.7; if (b) does not hold
then there is a condition q such that q !h "r is not 6(α)", contrary to our
assumptions, remembering α is constant in 8.9. Observe also that by 6.7, there
is a club E of ω\ such that if z G Γi and y < z is of height β G £", then y G Γi.
W.l.o.g. E G N. As x G Γi, δ G J5(Γι) Π£7. Therefore B(Γι) n£ is unbounded,
and clearly it is closed.
Let Γ2 = {y G Γi: there are uncountably many z G Γi such that y < z}.
For each y G Γ2 of height /?, define t(y) to be the set of nodes t G T such that
some extension of p of height /3, which respects y by ε forces that £ G r. Then
ί(y) is linearly ordered and contains in fact a branch of height β. If y\ and 2/2
are any n-tuples in Γ2, then t(y\) and t(y2) are compatible. (Why? By clause
(b).) Thus the function t defines a cofinal branch of T and the intersection of
this branch with Γ5* is just 6(α). Since Γ2 is definable in N, this branch is an
old branch in N. Now, as before, we get a promise Γ out of Γ2 and we add this
promise to p in order to obtain the desired q. It follows now that q Ih "r is this
old branch".
Πδ.9,8.6,8.5

VI. Preservation of Additional
Properties, and Applications
This chapter contains results from three levels of generality: some are
specific consistency results; some are preservation theorems for properties like
"properness +
 ωω-bounding", and some are general preservation theorems, with
the intention that the reader will be able to plug in suitable parameters to get
the preservation theorem he needs. We do not deal here with "not adding reals"
- we shall return to it later (in VIII §4 and XVIII §1,§2).
Results of the first kind appear in 3.23, §4, §5, §6, §7, §8. In §4 we prove
the consistency of "there is no P-point (a kind of ultrafilter on ω)". We do
this by CS iteration, each time destroying one P-point; but why can't the filter
be completed later to a P-point? (If we add enough Cohen reals it will be
possible.) For this we use the preservation of a property stronger than
 ωω-
bounding, enjoyed by each iterand.
More delicate is the result of §5 "there is a Ramsey ultrafilter (on ω) but
it is unique, moreover any P-point is above it" (continued in XVΠI §4). Here
we need in addition to preserve "D continues to generate an ultrafilter in each
yP«»
In 3.23 we prove the consistency of $ > b = NI; i.e. for every subalgebra B
of P(ω)/&mte of cardinality KI, there is A C ω which induce on B an ultrafilter
{^/finite: B G B and A C* B}; but there is F C
 
ωω, \F\ = NI with no
g G
 ωω dominating every / G F. We use a forcing Q providing a "witness"
A for B = (P(ω)/finite)
y; not adding g dominating (
ωω)
v we iterate it (CS).
After ω% steps the first property is O.K., but we need a preservation lemma
to show the second is preserved. The definition of this Q and the proof of its

248 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
relevant properties are delayed to §6. In §7 (i.e. 7.1) we prove the consistency
of α > b. Lastly in §8 (i.e. in 8.2) we prove the consistency of ίj < b = α. On
history concerning §6, §7, §8 see introduction to §6. See relevant references in
the section.
* 
* 
*
We now review most of the preservation theorems appearing here for count-
able support iteration of proper forcing; actually this is done for more general
iterations (including RCS, a pure finite/pure countable, FS-finite support), see
0.1 and we can weaken "proper". You can read it being interested only in CS
iteration of proper forcing, ignoring all adjectives "pure" and the properties
"has pure (0χ, ^-decidability" (or feeble pure (#ι,^-decidability), so letting
<pr = <
O.A Theorem. For any CS iteration (Pi, Qj : i < δ,j < δ) if for each i < a we
have Ihp. "Qi satisfies X" then PS satisfies X', for each of the following cases:
1) X = "Q is proper and ^-bounding" [Why? By 2.8D, i.e. by 2.3 + 2.8B
4- 2.8C].
2) Let /, p : ω —> ω -f 1 \ {0,1} be functions diverging to infinity [i.e. (Vn <
cj)(3fc < ω)(Vra)(fc < m < ω ^ f ( π ι ) > n&g(m) > n)} and:
X = "Q is proper and for every i < ω and η € (Πn f(n)^
n^)
yQ
there is a sequence (un 
: n < ω) G V such that f\nη(n) G un and
|un| > 1 =» |un| < g(n)
1^. [Why? By 2.11F.]
3) X — "Q proper and every dense open A C
 ω>ω includes an old such set".
[Why? See 2.15D; or see 2.15B(2) for an equivalent formulation, then by
2.15C, 2.3(5) we can apply 2.3(2)].
Remark. Particular cases of O.A(2) are the Sacks property (/ constantly α;, all
#'s), and the Laver property (f,g vary on all legal members of
 ωω), the names
were chosen for the most natural forcing notions with these properties. Other
pairs /,# e
 ωω were introduced in and important for [Sh:326 §2]. Concerning
the PP-property and the strong PP-property see 2.12, 3.25-6.

VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications 
249
For some other properties we can prove that in limit stages, violation does
not arise; but leave to the specific iteration the burden for the successor stages.
We say "X is preserved in limit".
O.B Theorem. For CS iteration of proper forcing, Q = (Pα, Qβ : a < δ, β <
5), δ a limit ordinal.
1) If for α < 5, in V
p<* there is no new / G
 ωω dominating all h e (
ωω}
v
then this holds for V
p* [see 3.17(1)],
2) If for α < ί, in V
Pa there is no new / e
 ωω dominating all h e (
ωω}
v and
no real which is Cohen over V then this holds for V
Pδ [see 2.13D(2); more
on Cohen see 2.17].
3) If for α < δ in V
Pa there is no random real over V then this holds for V
Pδ
[see 3.18].
* 
* 
*
We now turn to the third kind of results.
In §1 we present a general context suitable for something like: for every
η G (
ωω)
γQ there is a "small" tree T C
 ω>ω from V such that η <Ξ lim(Γ); so
we assume that the family of small trees has some closure properties. In 2.1 -
2.7 we more specify our context, so that we can get preservation in successor
stages too. In 1.16, 1.17 we deal with a generalization where we have several
kinds of η G
 ωω (but for simplifying the presentation, we restrict generality in
other directions). A reader who feels our level of generality is too high (or goes
over to this view while reading 2.1-2.8) can prefer a simplified version (which is
[Sh:326, A2 pp 387-399]), so read only 1.16, 1.17 for the case fc* = 1 and then
look at any of 2.9 - 2.17 (each dedicated to a specific property being preserved)
ignoring the undefined notions.
In 3.1 - 3.13 we give another context (tailored for "there is no dominating
reals"). Here for successor stages we use a stronger property (like almost
 ωω-
bounding). In XVIII §3 we give another such general theorem.
The reader is tuned now to countable support iteration of proper forcing
but we shall later consider other contexts (semiproperness in Chapter X; forc-
ing with additional "partial order <pr" (pr for pure) plus some substitute of

250 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
properness in Chapter XIV, XV). To save repetition, in 0.1 below we describe
the various contexts. The subscript θ has a role only when <pr is present (cases
D-F below) and its meaning is described in 0.1(3). Note that also FS iteration
of c.c.c. forcing is a particular case: <pr is equality and θ — HI (the relevant
results will be presented in §3). Let θ missing mean θ = 1. We may write e.g.
0.10=κ0 rather than 0.1 NO to stress this.
0.10 Iteration Context:
1) We shall use iteration Q = (Pj,Qi 
: j < OL,I < α) of one of the following
forms:
(A) Countable support iteration of proper forcing (see III). In this case
<pr is the usual order, 1.11 is just III 1.7; "purely" can be omitted;
similarly for (B) (C).
(B) Like (1) but for δ < a limit we weaken "Q§ is proper" to "for
arbitrarily large i < δ,P^ι/Pi+ι is proper or even just E"-proper"
where E C <S<κ0(μ) is a fixed stationary set (we can use similar
variants of the other cases).
(C) RCS iteration which is a semiproper iteration (see Chapter X).
(D) Each forcing notion Qi has also a partial order <pr, ]p <pr q => p < q}\
a minimal element 0g and is purely proper (i.e. 
ifpζQΓ\N,QeN,
N countable and N -< (H(χ), G, <*), then there is a (JV, Q)-generic
q,P <Pr Q £ P) The iteration is defined as Pi = {p : p a function
with domain a countable subset of i, for j 6 Dom(p) we have: Ihp.
«p(j) G Q/' and {j : not lhP, "0Q, <pr p(j)" } is finite}.
A particular case is FS iteration of c.c.c forcing. This (i.e. clause (D))
is a particular case of Chapter XIV.
(E) The iterations Q which are GRCS as in XV §1 (and see 0.3), such
that: for each a < lg(Q) for some n we have \\-pQ+n "(2
Kl) 4- |Pα| is
collapsed to NI" and each Qa is purely semiproper.
(F) The GRCS iterations as in XV §3 (so each Qi satisfies E7P(I,W),
where W C ω\ is stationary.

VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications 
251
(G) The GRCS iteration as in XV §4.
2) We say "P purely adds no / such that (Vx G V)φ(x, /)" z/for every p G P
and P-name /, for some q G P and x G V: p <pr # and q Ih "/ does not
satisfy </?(x, /)".
3) 0 G {l,2,N 0,Nι} and: # = 1 means no demand, θ > K0 means each Qa
(or each Pα, Pa/Pβ+ι) has pure (0,2)-decidability (see Definition 1.9) and
θ = 2 means they have pure (2,2)-decidability (see Definition 1.9).
Remark. We shall concentrate on case F in 0.1(1) as it is the hardest.
0.2 Definition.
1) We say W is absolute if it is a definition (possibly with parameters) of
a set so that if V
1 C V
2 are extensions of V (but still models of ZFC
with the same ordinals) and x G V
1 then: V
2 \= "x G W" iff V
1 μ
"x G W". Note that a relation is a particular case of a set. It is well
known that Π^ relations on reals and generally ft-Souslin relations are
absolute.
2) We say that a player absolutely wins a game if the definition of legal
move, the outcomes and the strategy (which need not be a function
with a unique outcome) are absolute and its being a winning strategy
is preserved by extensions of V.
3) We can relativize absoluteness to a family of extensions, e.g. for a
given universe V and family K of forcing notions we can look only
at {V® 
: Q G K}] so for V
Qo we consider only the extensions
{V® : Qo <£ Q G K}, or even demand Q/Qo has a specified property.
We do not care to state this all the time.
Though Case D is covered by Chapter XIV, (and XV) we may note:
0.3 Theorem. 1) The iteration in case (D) preserves "purely proper".
2) X§2 is generalized to "purely semiproper is preserved" by GRCS iterations.

252 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
§1. A General Preservation Theorem
An important part of many independence proofs using iterated forcing, is to
show that some property X is preserved (if satisfied by each iterand). We have
dealt with such problems in Chapter V (preserving e.g. "ω-properness 4- the
ωu;-bounding property"), [Sh:b] Chapter VI (general context and many exam-
ples), [Sh:207], [Sh:177] (replacing the weak form of ω-proper by proper), Blass
and Shelah [BsSh:242] (preserving ultrafilters which are P-points), [Sh:326]; in
[Sh:b] Chapter X §7 we have dealt with semiproperness. Here we redo [Sh:b]
Chapter VI §1, giving a general context which serves for many examples re-
placing proper by the weaker condition semiproper and even UP and "CS
iteration" by "GRCS iterations" i.e. revised countable/finite support with pu-
rity (and correcting it). You may read this section replacing everywhere: UP
by proper, RCS iteration by countable support iteration, <pr by the usual or-
der, S by the class of regular cardinals, W = ωi, semi-generic by generic, omit
I-suitable, then 1.9, 1.10 are not necessary.
In fact there is more in common between the examples discussed later even
than expressed by the stricter context suggested here (fine covering model) (i.e.,
the use of trees T, TΠ
 nω finite and absoluteness in the definitions of covering
models) but the saving will not be so large; we shall return to this in §2.
Unfortunately "adding no reals" will require special treatment (as is the
case even if we assume properness). We have dealt with it separately in Chapter
V and will return to it in VIII §4, XVIII §1, §2.
For applications it suffices to read Definitions 1.1 - 1.5 (the fine covering
models and preservation of them); also 1.9 and Theorem 1.12 (on more general
preservation theorems). Another general way to get such preservation theorems
is presented in XVIII §3. A simpler version of the theorem is presented in 1.16,
1.17 here (and see 1.3(10); earlier see [Sh:326, Appendix A2 pp. 387-399] (but
also for a finite sequence of covering models)).
1.1 Definition. We call (D,R) a weak covering model (in V) if:

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
253
a) D a set, R a two place relation on D, xRT implies that T is a closed
subtree of
 ω>ω (i.e., {) G T, T is closed under initial segments, and
above any η G T there are arbitrarily long members of T),
b) (D,R) covers, i.e. for every η G
 ωω and x G Dom(.R)(= {x 
:
(3T)xRT}) there is T G D such that xRT and η G limT, where
limΓ = {η G
 ωω : η \ k G T for every k < ω}
1.1 A Remark. The intuitive meaning is: xRT means T is a closed tree of
"size" at most x. In Definition 1.2, which exploits more of our intuition, we
have an order on the set of possible x's, x < y, with the intuitive meaning "x
is a smaller size than y" . So it would be natural to demand:
xRT, x < y =ϊ yRT and xRT, T
1" C T
However, no need arises. Note also that sometimes x appears trivially (e.g. see
the
 ωα;-bounding model in 2.8).
1.2 Definition. (1) A fine covering model is (D,R, <) such that:
(a) (D, R) is a weak covering model
(/?) < is a partial order on Dom(.R), such that
(i) (Vy G Dom(#))(3z G Ώom(R))(x < y)
(ii) (Vy,x G Όom(R))(3z G Όom(R))(x <y-+x<z<y)
(Hi) if y < x, yRT then for some T* G D, T C T* and xRT*
(iv) if y < x and for Z = 1,2 yRTi then there is T G D such that:
xRT, TI C Γ and for some n, [z/ G Γ2 & ί^ f n G TI => ι/ G T]
(7) (a) If x > x
f > 2M+1 > yn for n < ω and Γn G D, ynRTn (for n < ω)
then there is T* G D,xRT* and an infinite set w C ω such that:
limT* D {ηiηis'm
 ωω and for every i G w, 77 \ mm(w \ (i + 1)) G (J 7} U T0}

254 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(b) if r?, ηn G
 ωω, η\n = ηn\n for each n < ω and x G Dom(#) then for
some T G -D, xRT, η G limT and ηn G limT for infinitely many n.
(δ) condition (7) continues to hold in any generic extension in which (α)
holds.
(2) For a property X of forcing notions, (D, β, <) is a fine covering model
for X-forcing if Definition 1.2(1) holds when we restrict ourselves in (δ) to
X-forcing notions only.
(3) We say (D,R,<) is a temporarily fine covering model if it satisfies
(α), (β), (7) i.e. is a fine covering model for trivial forcing.
1.3 Remark. 1) In an abuse of notation we do not always distinguish between
(D,R,<) and (D,R).
2) Look carefully at ((5), it is in a sense, meta-mathematical.
3) So if (D, R, <) is a fine covering model and P is a (D, #)-preserving forcing
notion (see Definition 1.5 below) then in V
p the model (D,R, <) is still a
fine covering model. [Why? In Definition 1.2(1) clause (α) holds as P is (£>, R)-
preserving, clause (β) holds as it is absolute, clause (7) holds as in V, (D,R,<)
is a fine covering model by clause (δ) of Definition 1.2(1) and clause (δ) by its
transitive nature.]
4) In (7)(α) of 1.2(1), we can replace "2/nflTn" by x^RTn (by (β) (ii) (iii)).
5) We write in 1.2(l)(/3) (iv)+ if n = 0.
6) If we assume 1.2(l)(0)(iv)+, then in 1.2(l)(7)(α) w.l.o.g. Tn C Tn+ι hence
the conclusion in (7)(α) is:
limT* D {r/ G
 ωω : for every i G υ;, ry f i G Tmax[(^ni)u{0}]}.
7) We can in (7) add "and 0 G w".
8) A condition stronger than (7) = (7)0 of 1.2(1) is:
(7)1 = (7)
+ if x > x
f > ΐ/n+i > 2/n forn < α; and Γn G D,ynRTn (for
n < ω) then there is T* G D,xRT* and an infinite set w C ω such that:
limT* 2 {ry : η is in
 ωω and for every i G w, η \ i G

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
255
(I.e. it implies both (a) and (b) of 1.2(7) (when (D,R) covers, of course).)
If we assume (/3)(iv)
+, then in 1.2(1)(7) w.l.o.g. Tn C Γn+1 hence the demand
in (7)+ is limT* D {η e
ωω : for every i G w, η \ i G TJ.
Why? Let y'n be: y'Q = yQ, y'n+l = yn+2. We choose by induction on n, T'n
such that ynRT'n and TQ = TO, and T'n C T^+1 and for some kn we have
η\kn G T'n & η G |J 
Tm => 77 G T^+1. Now by clause (7)+ there are an
m<n+l
infinite if/ C w and T* such that xRT* and lim(T*) I> {77 G
 ωu; : for every i G
w
f we have 77 fz G U Tj}. Let i(/ = {rii : i < ω} with n^ < n$+i. Let jf(^)
j<ΐ
j'6if
(£ < ω) be increasing fast enough, i.e. n^+i) > fcnj ( / )_ι» w = {™?(^) : t <
 w}-
It is enough to prove that w and T* are as required in clause (7). So assume
η G
 ωu; belongs to the set on the right hand side of the inclusion in clause (7),
and we shall prove η G limT*. So we are assuming that for every I < ω we
have 77ί^i(£+i) G |J Tnj U TQ. So it is enough to prove that η appears in the
3<t
right side of the inclusion in (7) for w
1', (T/ : i < ω). So let i < ω and we
should prove that η\rii G \J T^t (as w' — \Ui : i < ω}, r^ increasing with i).
t<i
Let ^ be such that j(l) < i < j(l + 1), so by the assumption on η we have
η\Ui < η\rij(i+i) G U ^}(m) U TQ. We prove this by induction on i.
m<i
Case 1: η\nj(ί+i) G Γ0
So η\m G To, but T - 0 - T(5 C T' , hence η\m G Γn(<) C (J T' 
as
v ; 
^<i
 
v '
required.
Case 2: 
There is πi < I such that ryfn^+i) G Tnj.(m)
Necessarily z > j(^) > j(m) so by the induction hypothesis on i we
have η\nj(i)^ G 
U 
^ήfc but Γ^ C T^ so T/Γn^j-i ^ T' 
l as by
*<jW-ι
assumption rjΓn^+i) G Tnj.(m), m < ^, by the choice of T' 
as j(^ -f 1) >
knjw-i necessarily η\nj(i+l) G Γ^.(O but Γ^.(£) C Γ^. and n» < nj(^1} hence
t/Γfii G T'n. < U T^ as required.
t<i
8A) In clause (7) w.l.o.g. Tn C Tn+ι (i.e. this weaker version implies the original
version using (α), (β) of course).
[Why? By 2.4D (note 2.4A, 2.4B, 2.4C, 2.4D do not depend on the intermediate
material).]

256 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
9) Note in 1.2(l)(7)(a), that any infinite w
f C w is o.k.
10) In some circumstances clause (b) of 1.2(1)(7) is a too strong demand, e.g.
preservation of P-points. We can overcome this by letting R = V^<fc Rt (k
is finite) and demanding 1.2(7)(a) f°
Γ each Rt whereas instead 1.2(7)(b) we
demand
(b)' if r/n, η G
 ωω, ηn\n — η\n for n < ω, and for some ra < k we have
(Vx G Oom(Rm))(3T)(xRmT 
& η € limΓ) 
and
(Vx € Dom(#m)) /\(3T)(xRmT & ηn G limΓ)
n
then for every x € Dom(Λm) for some T we have: xRmT and for infinitely
many n < ω, ηn € lim(Γ).
See more on this in 1.16, 1.17 and §5.
Proof. E.g.
9) Assume η €
 ωω and
(*)o i e w
f => 77|min(w' \ (i -fl)) € 
(J 
T., UT0;
jew'jjXt
we have to prove η G lim(Γ*). For this it suffices to prove:
(*)ι i ew =>η\(mm(w \ i - f l ) ) E 
|J 
Γ^ UΓo.
j6if,j<i
Let ϊ G w, define zi = i, jι = min(iί;
/ \ i), z2 = min(tJί; \ (^ + 1)),
J2 = min(κ;
/ \ (jΊ + 1)); so in particular ή < ji G ιy
;, ή < i2 < J2, ji < J2
As (*)o holds apply it to jι and get η\j2 G 
(J 
Γ^ U TO, hence for some
j€w',j<jι
^o, jo = 0 V (jo < ji & Jo G ty
x) and we have η\j2 € Tjo. As ΐ2 < J2 clearly
77^2 € T^0. As ji = min( u/ \ ύ) we know that ή < ji and [ή, ji) n w
; = 0 and
thus jo = 0 V (jo < iι & jo 6 i(/) Hence jo = 0 V (jo < ή & jo € w). So
η\i* G TJO C 
(J 
Γj UTO, as required. (See more 2.4D.) 
Dι.3
j€w,j<i
1.4 Convention. If the order < is not specified then <=<dis (see below). Let
<o be such that:
x <o y iff x, y €
 ωω & x(0) <ό j/(0)

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
257
where (ω, <ό) is isomorphic to (Q, <) (i.e. the rationals). Let <dis be:
x <dis V iff x,y £
 ωω, I < x(n) < y(n) for every n
and y(ri)/x(ri), x(ri) diverge to oo.
Let <Jis be: x <3is y iff y <dis x. (Note: in DP^α;) =
f {x G
 ωω : x(n) > 1,
(x(n) : n < ω) diverges to infinity}, <o, <dis and <*dis satisfy clauses (β)(ι)y
(ii), (iii) of Definition 1.2(1)).
1.5 Definition. Let (D,R) be a weak covering model. We say that a forcing
notion P preserves (D, R) 
or is (D, R)-preserving if lhP "(£>, R) is a weak
covering model". We add "purely" if: for every p G P and / such that p Ih
"/ G
 ωω" and x G Dom(#), for some q,T we have p <pr q G P^ΉT and q Ih
"/GlimΓ".
1.6 Definition. 1) For a weak covering model (D,R) and t/ G Όom(R),
(D,R)\= Vdiβ(l/)
M if:
/or every η* G
 ωω and function F from Dxα; to Rang(Λ) = {Γ: (3x G D)xRT}
such that (Vn)(Vz G Dom(Λ))[zΛF(^,n) and 77* fn G F(z,n)].
ί/iere are T*, yRT* and an infinite set lί; of natural numbers, and ^ G Dom(^)
for t G w such that:
Γ* 2 {η G
 α>>α; : there is £ G w such that 77 f t < r?*, and 77 G F(ZΪ, ΐ)}.
Note that the truth value of (D, R) \= "</?dis (?/)" depends on V (remember <
means initial segment).
1 A) For a weak covering model (D, R) and y G Όom(R) we write (D, /Z) |=
Vdis α/r i^
/or et ery 77* G
 ωα; , 
and a function F : D x ω —> Rang(.R)} such that
(Vn)(Vz G Dom(JR))>a;ΛF(z,n) and a function # from D x ω into ""a; such
that ry* f n < ff(z, n) G lim F(z, n) (so ry* \ n G F(z, n))
there are T*, y^T* and an infinite w C ω and n^ < ω, and z^ G Dom(JR) for

258 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
lew such that:
T* D {η G
 ω>ω : there is i G w such that η \ t < η*,
and η \ HI < H(ZI,£) and η G F(ZI,£)}.
(If n^ > £, then "77 f £ < r/*" is not necessary and if nt < I, then 77 \ri£ < H(zt,l)
is not necessary). Note that the truth value of (D, R) \= φ^s(y) depends on V
and ^dίs(y) =^ ^dis (?/) (as i
n ^dis the
 se^ °f Ή ^ w>α; whi
cn we demand to be
in T* is smaller than for φ dis ) .
2) We call (D,R) a covering model if it is a weak covering model and
(c) for every y G Dom(#), (D, Λ) |= <^dis(2/) or at least (D, Λ) |= ^is(2/)
3) For a weak covering model (D,R) and x = (xn 
: n < ω) and z, where
{xn:n <ω}U {z} C Dom(β) we say that (£>, R) \= -0dis(:r, z) if:
(*) /or every 77* G ^α; and a set {Tnj : n, j < ω} such that xnRTnj for
n,j < α; there are (T
a : a < ω) such that:
(i) T
n C Γn+1 and T° C T
ω
(ii) ^^T
ω (so T
ω G D)
(iii) 77* GlimT
0
(iv) if n,j <ω and v G (limΓnj ) Π (limΓ
n) Π (limT
ω), then for some fc:
< P e rnj => p G τ
n 
n
4) (D, J?) is a strong covering model if it is a covering model and
(d) For every z G Dom(#) there are xn(n < ω) such that:
(A
1.7 Definition. 1) Let K be a property of weak covering models. We say that
a forcing notion P is .KT-preserving if:
for any (D,R) G V satisfying K, P preserves (D,R). We add "purely" if for
any (D,R) satisfying K, P purely preserves (D,R).
2) We call a covering model (D, #) smooth if:
for any (D,Λ)-preserving forcing notion P, Ihp "(-D, JFZ) is a covering model".

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
259
3) We call a strong covering model (D, R) strongly smooth if:
for any (D, ^-preserving forcing notion P we have \\-p "(D, R) is a strong
covering model" .
1.8 Claim. 1) If (D,R, <) is a fine covering model then (D,R) is a strongly
smooth strong covering model.
2) The following is a sufficient condition for (D,R) |= ψ<&s((xn n < ω),z):
(*) for some yn G Όom(R) (for n < ω) :
(a)n ifn<ω, xnRTj for j < ω and ynRT then for some (HJ : j < ω) and T*:
(i) 7/n+ιΛΓ*
(ii) T C Γ*
(iii) ηeTj&η\njeT=>ηeT*
(b) if 2/nΛT
n for n < ω, Γ
n C Γ
n+1 tfien for some T*, z#T* and Λn T
n C Γ*.
3) For a weak covering model (£), R) we have: if (Z), R) is a strong covering
model then it is a covering model, and strongly smooth implies smooth.
Proof. 1) By 1.2(l)(α) we have: (D, R) is a weak covering model. Now we show
that it is a strong covering model. So by 1.6(2), (4) we have to check conditions
(c), (d) of Definition 1.6.
Proof of (c) 
We are going to prove that for y G Όom(R) we have (D,R) \=
φ*diS(y)
So suppose 77* G
 ωα;, F is a function from D x ω to Rang(Λ), and H is a
function from D x ω to
ωω such that:
(Vn)(Vx G Dom(Ή))[zRF(z,n) & 77* f n
First we use a stronger assumption.
Proof of (c) assuming (7)+ of 1.3(8): 
So there exist, by (/?) (i) , (ii) of Definition
1.2, yt, xn (for n < ω) such that y > y^ > xn+ι > xn > . . . > XQ (choose y
t and
then, inductively on n, xn). Let zt = xt and n^ = ί and let Tn = F(xn,n).
Apply condition (7)+ of Definition 1.2(1) (i.e. 1.3(8)) to get T* and an infinite

260 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
w C ω such that limT* O {η e
 ωω : for every i G w,η \ i G \Jje™ Tj} and
yRT*. Remember nt > ί.
We shall show that T* and w and (HI : I < ω) are as required in 1.6(1 A).
We have to prove that (for each £ G w and η G
 ω>ω):
(*) η \ ne < H(zι,l) & η G F(zέ,l) 
=Φ 77 G Γ*.
(Note: 77 f ^ < 77* follows from η \ i = η \ m < H(ZI,£) because 77* \ i <
H(ZI,£) by the assumptions on if in 1.6(1A).)
So assume η \ HI < H(z^f) 
and η G F(ZI,£) (so 77 G Γ/), and we have to
prove η G T*. We can choose z/, 77 < i/ G limF(z^), so it suffices to show that
for any i G w we have ^ f i G |J ,<* T,. If i > i, then: z/ \ i G F(z/,£) = T/ C
ie w
\Jj<i TJ and if i < i then: v\i — η \ i = 77* f i < H(zi,ϊ) G limF(zi,i), hence
j€ιu
ί^ f i G F(zi,ϊ) — Ti C UJ<T Tj (remember i G w). So by the conclusion of
j'G u>
(7)+ (in 1.3(8) which we have applied) v G limT* hence 77 G T* is as required;
so we have proved condition (c).
The full proof of (c): 
Let y^xn be as above. Now we prove (c) using (7) of
1.2(1) only. So we are given 77*, F and H as in the assumptions of 1.6(1 A).
Apply condition (7)(b) of Definition 1.2(1) with x0,?7*,H(xn,n) (for n < ω)
here standing for x, 77, ηn (for n < ω) there, and get an infinite WQ C ω
and TO G Rang(#) such that xQRT0 and /\newo H(xn,ri) G limT0, hence
77* G limT0.
Let WQ — {ki : i < α;}, kg, increasing with ί, of course w.l.o.g. fc^ -f 1 <
fc^ (hence ί + 1 < fo). Applying (/3)(iv) (of 1.2(1)) choose TM_I such that
Xfc£+i^T^+i,vT0 C T^+ι, even T^ C T^+ι, and for some m^ < ω we have:
[pfm^ G To & p G F(xkί,k<>) 
=> p G T£+1]. So by (7)(a) (of 1.2(1)) for
some T* and infinite w\ C α; we have: yRT* and for every 77 G ^ω we
have [/\iewιη\mm(wι \ (i + 1)) G |J .^<
ί τj U T0] -Φ ry G T*. We define
w = {ki 
: i -f 1 G wι} and for i + 1 G w\ let us define n^ as the first
natural number n = n^ such that n&£ > ^, in the interval (£, n^) there are at
least two members of MI, and n^^ > πi£.
We are going to prove that w, (rij : j G tί;) are as required (in 1.6(1 A)).
Remembering that the general members of w have the form ki with ί +1 G w\,

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
261
it suffices to prove that (the replacement of η G
 ω>ω by v €
 ωω is as in the
proof above of clause (c) from (7)+ of 1.3(8)):
(*) for any ί and v we have <8> => Θ where
® (A) kι e w (i.e. ί+lewι)
(B) i/ G
 ωα;
(C)ι/rfc/<η*
(D) I/ft*, <H(zkί,kt)
(E) ι/€lim(F(zfc£,fc/))
θ ί/Glim(T*)
By the choice of T* , for getting 0 it suffices to prove
<8>ι if i = i\ G MI, and 12 = min(tt;ι \ (ή 4- 1)) then z/fo 6 
|J 
7} U TQ.
^"€^ιj<iι
Note that kι G WQ (see above before choice of the T/s). We split the proof of
<8>ι accordingly to how large i is.
Case 1: -«(3j)[^ < j 6 MI Π ή]
By the choice of nkl we know that in interval (t^n^) there are at least
two members of MI, but ύ < min(iί;ι \ ((, 4- 1)) and 12 = min(wι \ (i\ 4- 1)) so
necessarily ΐ2 < n^ Hence (by the previous sentence, by ®(D), by the choice
of Γ0, and trivially respectively) we have
v\i<ι < v\nkt < H(zkt,kt) e lim(Γ0) and thus ι/|ϊ2 G 
|J 
T^ U T0
as required (in <8>ι).
Let i0 — max(iί;ι Π ύ), so by the assumption of the case not only IQ is
well defined but also it is > ί. Looking at the desired conclusion of ®ι and
the definition of i0 it suffices to prove that v\i^ G Tio. But we know that
[n< ω => Tn C Γn+ι] and (by the previous sentence) I < i0, hence Γ^+ι C Tίo,
so it suffices to prove v\i2 G T/+I. For this by the choice of 7>+ι it suffices to
show the following:
(8)2 (A) i/fm/GΓo
(B) i/^eFίxfc,,^)

262 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
As for clause 02 (B), by the assumption 0(E) it holds. As for clause 02 (A), we
know
v\nkί < H(zkl,kι) G lim(Γ0).
[Why? first < holds as mt < nke by the choice of nktί second < holds by
assumption 0(D), and the last "G" holds as kι G WQ and the choice of TO, WQ.]
So both clauses of 02 hold hence 0ι holds in case 2 hence in general, hence
we have proved (*). Thus we have finished proving clause (c) in the general case.
Having proved condition (c) we shall now prove condition (d).
Proof of (d). Choose x^ and then by induction on n < ω,xn such that
%n < x n+ 1 < ... <x^ < z (they exist by (/?) of Definition 1.2(1)).
So it suffices to prove that (D, R) |= V
;dίs((^o, xι, 
•),*)• Let 77* G
 ωω and
(Tnj : n, j < ω} be as in (*) of Definition 1.6(3).
For each n < α;, by applying ω times Def 1.2(l)(/?)(ii), we can find xnj (for
j < ω) such that xn < xn$ < xn,ι < ... < xn,ω < %n+i (first choose xn,ω and
then xnjo, #n,i» 
•)• We now define by induction on n, T^ such that xnRT* and
τn ^
 Γn+ι First let Γo be such that xoRT£,η* G limΓ0* (possible by l.l(b)
and 1.2(l)(α)). Second, assuming T* was defined, we can choose by induction
on j trees T^ satisfying: T^ C T^.+1, Γ^0 - T*, xntjKΓ^,η* G li
and such that for some ra = m(n,j) we have
(possible by 1.2(l)(/?)(iv)). Now by (7)(a) of Def 1.2(1) we can find w(n) C <
infinite and T*+l such that xn+ιRT*+l and
T*+1 2 {r? : for every i G w(ri), η \ mm(w(n) \ (i + 1)) G y T'n^ U Γ^}.
Necessarily Γ^ C T* r

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
263
Then applying (7) (a) of Definition 1.2(1) we can find w C ω infinite and
T£ such that zRT* and:
T* 2 {77 : for every i G w, η \ mm(w \ (i + 1)) G |J T* U Γ0*}.
j«
j'e UJ
As said above Γ^ C Γ^+1 for each n, clearly from the condition above zRT*
and Γ0* C T* and in particular 77* G limΓ0* C limϊ£. So in 1.6(3) (*), (with
T* here for T
a there) conditions (i), (ii), (iii) are satisfied. As for condition
(iv), let v G (limTnJ) Π (limΓ*) Π (limϊ£). Then any k < ω such that:
k > mm{i ew:\iΓ\w\(n + l)\>l} and k > min{i : \i Π w(n) \ (j + 1)| > 1}
and A: > m(n,j) is as required. So T* is as required in 1.6(3), i.e. we have
proved (d) from 1.6(4).
Now why is (D,R) strongly smooth? By remark 1.3(3). Suppose P is
(jD, Λ)-preserving then in V
p still (D, R) is a weak covering model as P is
(D, #)-preserving, hence (α) of Definition 1.2(1) holds in F
p, (β) is trivial,
and (7), (δ) hold by (5). So (D,R, <) is a fine covering model in V
p hence,
by what we already proved it is temporarily a strong covering model. As this
holds for every P we finish.
2) Similar proof.
3) Read the definitions. 
Di.g
1.9 Definition. A forcing notion Q has pure (#ι,^-decidability if: for every
p G Q and Q-name t < θ\, there are α C #ι, |α| < 62 (but |α| > 0) and r G Q
such that p <pr r, and r Ihg "ί G α" (for #ι = 2, alternatively, t is a truth
value), [if θ = Q\ = #2 we write just θ].
1.9A Remark. 1) If N0 > #2 > 2, pure (#2>2)-decidability is equivalent to
pure (2,2)-decidability.
2) Q purely semiproper implies Q has (Nι,N^-decidability.
3) If Q is purely proper then Q has (λ, N^-decidability for every λ.
4) If <pr=< and Q is proper or Q has the c.c.c. (and we let <pr be equality if
not defined) then Q is purely proper (see 0.1 case D).

264 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
1.10 Lemma. For (θi, 02) 6 .{(2,2), (N0l. 2)} the property "Q has pure
(0ι, 02)-decidability" is preserved by GRCS iteration as 0.1.
Proof. In quoting we refer to case F. We prove it by induction on the length of
the iteration (for all ς, t and generic extension of V). By the distributivity of
the iteration (in case F claim XV 1.7) it suffices to deal with the following five
cases:
Case 1. α < 1 Trivial.
Case 2. a = 2 
Easy.
case 3. a = ω\ 
If there is </ι, q <pr q\ G Pa such that for some β < α, and
P0-name ίi,: q\ G P/3 and </ι lhpα "ί = |ι", then we can use the induction
hypothesis. By XV 3.3 this holds
Case 4- OL strongly inaccessible, α > \Pi\ for i < α: 
Even easier than the case
a — ω\.
case 5. a = ω: 
So 02 = 2, and w.l.o.g. p = {pn : n < ω},pn a Pn-name of a
member of Qn We define ςn such that:
(i) qn a Pn-name of a member of Qn
(ϋ) lhpn "pn <pr <7n"
(iii) in V
Pn, qn decides sn, where:
for Gn+ι C Pn+ι generic over V, sn[Gn+ι] is fe-f 1 iff there is r G Pω/Gn+ι
such that Dom(r) — [nH-l,α;), Pω/Gn+\ \= p \ [n + l,α;) <pr r and r ^pω/on+ι
ut = fc", with k minimal under those conditions; otherwise (i.e. if there is no
such fc) sn = 0. (Actually qn is a Pn-name of a member of Qn[<?n]0 (K ^i — ^o
- clear, if θ\ = 2 - use Definition 1.9 twice, see 1.9A(1)).
Now q = {</n : n < ω} G Pω,ί> <pr 95 clearly there is r, ς < r G Pω and
ί < 0ι such that r Ih "t = Γ. Also w.l.o.g. for some n(*), [n(*) < n < ω => r \
{n} is pure]; hence r \n(*) lhPn(Λ) "Pw/Pn(*) h P f K*),ω) <pr r \ [n(*),ω)
υ.
We can prove by downward induction on m < n(*) that for some £ > 0 we
have (r \ m) U {qm} Ih
 α5m = Γ.
For m — 0 we easily finish (by the definition of sm). 
DI.IO

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
265
1.10A Claim. Assume that Q is (£), /Z)-preserving, (D,R) a is weak covering
model, Q has pure (0ι,02)-decidability and for some λ and stationary 5 C
<S<N0(λ), the forcing notion Q is purely S-proper (or the parallel for semiproper
and |D| = NI, follows from 0.1(1) in all cases there).
(a) If (0ι, 02) = (No, 2) then Q is purely (D, Λ)-preserving.
(b) If (0ι,02) = (No, NO) and for every x G Dom(#) there is y G Dom(#) such
that for each n < ω:
n 
n
(VΓ 1 ?..., Tn G Rang(Λ))(3T G Rang(Λ))[/\ yβΓ, -> xΛΓ & f\ T£ C T]
£=1 
1=1
then Q is purely (D, β)-preserving.
Proof. Straight. 
ΠI.IOA
1.11 Claim. 1) Assume Q = (Pn,Qn
 : n < ω) a GRCS iteration with Qn
having pure (N0,2) decidability, as XV 3.1. Then for every p € Pω, p Ih "/ G
ωω" there is g,p <pr q G Pωi 
such that <? Ih "/(n) = fcn" where kn is a
Pn-name.
2) If we assume in addition: p \\-pω "/ < p", g G
 ωα;" (and # G V) t/ien we can
replace "having pure (No,2)-decidability" by "having pure (2,2)-decidability".
Proof. Straightforward. 
D1.11
1.12 Theorem. Suppose (D,R) is a smooth strong covering model, Q =
(Pi, Qi : i < δ) a GRCS iteration as in 0.1, e.g. satisfying (1^, λij, μ^ , Sij, W :
(i, j) G W) (as in XV 3.1), I = Uft,,- : (ί, j) G W}, and S C Sid for (i, j> G W,
each Qi with pure (0ι,02)-decidability and
(*) (0ι, 02) € {(Ho,2), (2,2)} andt if (0l502) = (2,2) then for each T, x, fc
there is F G
 ωα; such that
Vr?[zflT & 77 G
 ω>u; & (3fc)(τ/(fc) > F(fe)) & r / t f c G T ) = Φ r / G T ]
^ The meaning of this is like 1.11(2), i.e. we are not interested in all
 ωω just
in {η : η G
 ωω and η < g (i.e. (Vn)(η(n) < g(n))}.

266 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
and
(**) \D\ < HI or at least every regular uncountable K < \D\ belongs to S.
If Pi is purely (D, #) -preserving for each i < δ (δ a limit ordinal) then P$
is purely (D, ^-preserving.
1.12A Remark. If <^=<
Qi^ the pure (0ι,02)-decidability is always trivially
true for (No, 2) and even (oo,2).
Proof. By XV 1.7 it is enough to consider only the cases δ — ω,δ = ω\,δ
strongly inaccessible f\i<δ δ > \Pi\. In the last two cases R
v δ = \Ji<δR
v 
τ so
w.l.o.g. δ = ω.
Suppose p e Pω, f a P^-name, p \\-Pω "/ G
 ωω" and z € Όom(R).
By 1.11 above (using part (1) if (#ι,#2) = (No, 2) and using part (2) and
(*) if (0ι, 02) — (2, 2)) w.l.o.g /(fc) is a P^-name of a natural number.
For notational simplicity we shall write the members of Pn as (qι : t <
n), \\rpi "qt € Qe" and similarly for Pω. Let p — (qι : I < ω), and let for m < n
(in V
p™) Pn/Pm = Qm * Qm+ι * ... * Qn_!.
Now we define by induction on n < ω, a condition p
n G Pn such that
P
n — (<$ 5 
» ^n-i)'
 an<^ ^
or eacn m ^ n a Pm-name tn>rn such that:
α) p \ n <pr pn, and pn <pr pn+ι Γ n, moreover
II 
ίί.~ ^ 
~7l ^ 
_Tl-j-l"
Irp, 
Qf <pr ^ <pr ^
/3) If Gm C Pm is generic (over V) m < n, then in V[Gm] we have
so ίn,n = /(n). Equivalency, (0, 0, . . . , 0, ?» , . . . , ^_x) lhPn »/(n) = ίn,m" .
7)^Pm Γ«S,ll-Qm "ίn,m+l=ίn,m"l
L 
J
This is easily done: define {<$ : i < n < ω) by induction on n, for each n
let ίn,n — /(
n)
 and define ^,ί^,n by downward induction on £ < n.

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
267
Let fm be the Pm-name of a function from ω to ω defined by: for n > m
we have: fm(n) — tm,n and for n < m we have: /m(n) = /(n). So clearly we
have:
ί) 
(0, . . . , 0, C> ll-pm+ι "/m \n =
By Definition 1.6(4)(d) there are xn(n < ω) such that
(D,R)\=ψdia((xQ,...),z).
Now let x be large enough, and we split our requirement according to the kind
of iteration. (The cases are from 0.1, cases A,B of 0.1 are covered by the later
cases).
Let N be countable (the cases listed cover all possibilities):
Case D or C: N -X (if (χ), G, <*), N is countable such that (*) below holds.
Case E,F,G: Let (Nη 
: η G (T, I)) be an 
(I, W)-suitable tree of models,
N = N<> such that
(*) (Pi,Qt : t<ω), P G N, and also (Z?,Λ),/, (<$ : ί<n< ω), (tn,m :
m < n < ω) belong to TV and TV Π ω± e W in cases E, F, G.
Let (Tnj : j
 ? < ω) enumerate {T G £> Π TV : xnjRT} and 77* be /o (which is a
Po-name, i.e. a function in V). Now let (T
a : α < ω) be as guaranteed in (*)
of 1.6(3).
We now define (in V!) by induction on n conditions r
n = (ΓQ, . . . ,rn_ι) G
Pn (so trivially r
n = r
n+1 f n) such that:
a) p \ n <pr r
n,
b) r
n Ih "/n € (limΓ
n) Π (limΓ^)",
c)Case D: r
n is generic for (N,Pn).
Case C: r
n is semi-generic for (N,Pn).
Case E,F,G: for some Pn-name ryn, letting Nηn = \Jk<ω Nr,n^k
we have: r
n is semi-generic for (Nηn,Pn)
and r
n lhPτι "^[Gp^] is (\Jl>n I^)-suitable model for x"

268 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
If we succeed then we easily finish; clearly r^ = (ro,rι, . . . ,rn, . . .) satisfies
P <pr ft; also for n < ω :
Hence (r* \ n) \\-Pn 
"f f n G Γ
n Π Γ
ω" and therefore r* lhPω "/ G lirnΓ" ".
As zRT
ω (by 1.6(3)(*)(ii)) clearly rt,T
ω are as required.
So we have just to carry out the induction. There is no problem for n = 0 (by
the choice of 77*). So we have to do the induction step. Assume r
n is defined,
and we shall define r
71"
1"
1.
Note, as Pn+ι purely preserves (D,R) we can deduce:
<g) 
Qn ( in V
Pn) purely preserves (D,R).
Let Gn C Pn be generic over V,r
n G Gn, so /n+ι becomes a Qn[Gn]-name
/n+ι/Gn of a member of
 ωu;. But (D, Λ, <) is purely preserved by Pn+ι, hence
for every q G Qn[Gn], and y G Dom(β) there is a condition q^ q <pr q^ (where
tf € Qn[Gn]), such that βt lh9n[Gn] "/n+1/Gn € limTt " for some Γ* e D
satisfying yRT^. Also there are {ς] : ί < ω), and i/ such that:
z/ G limT^ in Qn[Gn] we have q^ <pr ςfj <pr q[ <pr ... and q\ Il-Qn[σni
Vn+i ί t = v \ Γ . [Why? v = /[Gn] can serve.]
We can use choice functions, so let v = F1(q,z) and q\ = F2,£(ς, z) and
T^ = F0(g, z), and ςt = ^(ς, z). By our hypotheses (smoothness) in V[Gn] we
know that (D,R) is still a covering model. Note also that w.l.o.g. ίb,Fι,F2^
belong to .N[Gn]. Remember (by (a)) that in Case F N[Gn] is an (\Jέ>rlι)-
suitable model for χ.
So now we apply condition c) of Definition 1.6(2) (the definition of a
covering model) and get that in V[Gn] the statement v?£is(zn+ι) holds. Look
at the definition of φ^is (1.6(1A)) and apply it to η* = fn[Gn] 
(which is an
actual member of
 ωω in 7V[Gn]), the function H with domain D x ω, H(z, m) =
Fι(q™,z) and the function F : Dom(Λ) x ω -* D defined by F(z,m)
 d=
F0(^, z). So we get a tree T£ G D, and an infinite set wn as described there.

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
269
However note: D C V, so though T^ is defined in V[C?n] it is an element of V.
Working in V we have Pn-names T*,wn.
In fact without loss of generality T* G N, hence (by assumption (**) of
1.12 and condition (c) on r
n) we have (r0,... ,rn_ι) lhPn "T^ G £> Π TV" so
for some Pn-name j = j(n) (of a natural number) we have (r0,.. - ,rn_ι) lhpn
JTn = Tn/ Now (r0,... ,rn_ι) forces /n G (limΓ
n) Π (limT
ω) Π (limΓ*) =
(limΓ*) Π (limΓ") Π (limΓn^(n)).
Hence, working in V[Gn], by the choice of (T
a : a < ω) (see 1.6(3)(iv))
there is k < ω (which depends on /n[G?n]) such that:
(A) fn[Gn] \k<Pe Tnj(n}[Gn] n Γ" => p G Γ"
+1 n T».
Now w.l.o.g. we can increase fc, so w.l.o.g. k G ^n[Gn] (and k > n); (fc was
defined in F[Gn]). By the choice of q% and the /^'s:
(B) «*n-9n[Gf., "/„[(?„] r*«/ n +Λ
also by the choice of F0, FI, F2, F2^ :
(C) F2,,(^,xn+1)lh9τι[Gτι] «/n+1 r€<Fι(^,x n +ιr and
(D) <£ < F2,,(^,xn+1) G Qn[Gn]nN[Gn], and
(E) ίf(xn+ι,fc) = Fι(ςf*,xn+ι) and F(xn,n) = F0(ς£,xn).
Now by the choice of Γ^ = Γ^.j^j for some i
(F) ff(xn+ι, fc) t / < p G F(xn, n) => p G Tnιί[Gfn]
So together.
(G) F2,z(gn»
 χn+ι) is a member of Qn[Gn]ΠJV[Gn], it is a pure extension
of pn and it forces /n+ι (really /n+ι[Gn]) to belong to limT
n+1 Π limΓ^.
Now we can choose rn,F2,i(ς£,xn+ι) <Pr rn G Qnl^n] to satisfy (c) thus
finishing the induction and the proof. 
Πι.i2
So e.g.
1.13 Corollary. Suppose
(α) (Pi,Qj : i < aj < α) is a GRCS iteration as in XV 3.1. (i.e. 0.1F)
(β) (D, R) is a fine covering model,

270 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(7) "~Pt "Qί is purely (£), #)-preserving"
(δ) D has cardinality NI (or just (**) of 1.12)
(ε) each Qi has pure (N0,2)-decidability.
Then Pa is purely (D, #)-preserving.
Proof. We prove by induction on α that lhpα "(D, R) is a smooth strong covering
model" and Pα is purely (JD, Λ)-preserving.
Case 1. a — 0 By 1.8(1) we know (D,R) is a smooth strong covering model.
Case 2. a = β + 1 By the induction hypothesis V
Fβ \= "(£>, #) is a smooth
strong covering model", as Qβ is (D,^-preserving V
Fβ (= [Ihg^ "(D,R) is a
weak covering model"], hence (see Definition 1.7(3)):
y
p£ |= [\\-Qβ "(D,R) is a strong covering model"].
Let R be a Pα-name of a (D,R)-preserving forcing notion; easily Ihp^
"ζ> * R is (D, Λ)-preserving" so as above Ihp^ "[Ih "Q^Λ (D,R) is a strong
covering model"]" .
So in V
Pa = (y
p/3)" , for every (D,Λ)-preserving forcing notion β,
Ihft "(D, ίϊ) is a strong covering model".
So in V
Pa, (£), Λ) is a smooth strong covering model. As for "Pα is purely
(D, β)-preserving", by 1.10A it follows by the previous sentence and clause (α).
Case_ 3. a limit The real case, done in 1.12. 
Πi.is
1.13A Corollary. Suppose:
(α) Q is a countable support iteration of proper forcing
(β) (D, R) is a fine covering model
(7) "-Pi "Qi is (D, ^-preserving "
Then Pa is (D, .R)-preserving.
1.13B Remark. 1) We have parallel conclusions to 1.13 weakening (ε) to
(ε)' "Qi has (2,2)-decidability "
if we add the requirement from 1.12(*) for (61,62) = (2,2).
2) We can have parallel conclusions to 1.13 weakening (ε) to

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
271
(ε)" "Qi has (Ko, ^-decidability"
if we add
(C) each Qi is purely ^α;-bounding.
1.14 Definition. 1) A class (= property) K of objects (D, R, <) is a fine class
of covering models if:
(i) each member satisfies (α), (/3), (7) of Definition 1.2.
(ii) if Q is a forcing notion, ^-preserving (i.e. each (D,R, <) G K
v is a weak
covering model even in V
Q) then in V
Q: each (D,R, <) G Kv is in KγQ
and satisfies (7) of Definition 1.2(1); note that clauses (α), (/?) of 1.2(1)
follows.
2) "K is a (smooth) (strong) class of covering models" are defined similarly.
1.15 Theorem. In 1.12, 1.13 (and 1.13B) we can replace the covering model
by a class of covering models.
1.16 Definition.
1) (D,~R) is a weak covering fc*-model if: ~D = (Dk : k < fc*), ~R = (Rk : k <
A;*}, fc* < ω and
(a) for each k < fc*, Dk is a set, Rk is a two place relation on D^, xRkT
implies T is a closed subtree of
 ω>ω.
(b) (£>, jR) covers, i.e. for every η G
 ωω, for some k < fc*, η is of the fc-th
kind which means: for every x € Dom(^) = {x : (3T)xRkT} there
isT <Ξ Dk such that x^^ and η G lim(Γ).
2) (D,Λ,<:) is a fine covering fc*-model if
(α) (D, .R) is a weak covering fc*-model
(/?) <" = {<^: k < fc*), <k is a partial order on Dom(^) such that
(i) (Vy G Όom(Rk))(3x G Dom(Λfc))(x <k y)
(ii) (Vj/,x G Dom(jRfc))(32: G Dom(βfc))(x <k y-> x <k z <k y)
(iii) if y <fc x, yRkT then for some T* G Dk, T C Γ* and

272 
VΊ. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(iv) if y <k x and for i = 1,2 we have yRkTt then there is T G Dk
such that:
xRkT, Tι C T and for some n, [i/ G Γ2 & v f n G TI => i/ G T]
(7) (a) for each fc < fc* the following holds. If x >& x^ >& τ/n+ι >£ yn for
n<ω and Γn G Dk, ynRkTn (for n < ω) then there is Γ* G Dk, xRkT*
and an infinite set w C ω such that:
limΓ* D {η e
ωω : for every i G ιy,ry f min(u;\(i + l)) G (^J 7}UΓo}
(b) if fc < fc*, {77} U {ηn : n < ω} C
 ωω, η \ n = ηn \ n and x <fc t/,
and 77, ηn are of the fc-kind (see below), then for some T G Dfc we have
yRkT & 77 G lim(T) and for infinitely many n, ?7n G lim(T).
(5) condition (7) continues to hold in any generic extension in which (α)
holds.
3) For a property X of forcing notions, (£), R,~<) is a fine covering fc*-model
for X-forcing if Definition 1.16(2) holds when in (δ) we restrict ourselves
to X-forcing notions only.
4) We say (D,R,~<) is a temporarily fine covering fc*-model if it satisfies
(α), (/?), (7) i.e. it is a fine covering fc*-model for trivial forcing.
5) We say η G
 ωω is of (fc, x)-kind (or just the x-th kind when (Όom(Rk) : k <
fc*) are pairwise disjoint) if there is T such that η G lim(T) and xRf~T (note:
(D,R) covers iff for any 77 G
 ωω and x = (x/, : fc < fc*) G Π Όom(Rk)
for some fc, the sequence η is of the (fc,Xfc)-kind). We say 77 is of the fc-th
kind if it is of the (fc, x)-kind for every x G
For simplicity we restrict ourselves to the fine case (and not the parallel of
smooth strong covering).
1.17 Theorem. Assume (D, #,<) is a fine covering fc*-model.
1) If Q = (Pi, Qj : i < ί, j < δ) is a CS iteration, each Qj preserves (75, β, <")
then so does P$
2) Similarly for other iterations as in 0.1 (with pure preserving).

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
273
Proof. For simplicity Όom(Rk) are pairwise disjoint so let <= \Jk<k* <k We
concentrate on part 1). By V 4.4, if δ is of uncountable cofmality then there is
no problem, as all new reals are added at some earlier point. So we may suppose
that cf (δ) — NO hence by associativity of CS iterations of proper forcing (III)
without loss of generality δ = ω.
We claim that \\-Pω "(D, R, <f) covers." (Note that this suffices for the proof
of the theorem.)
So let p* be a member of Pω and / a Pω-name such that p* \\-pω "/ G
 ωω" ,
and xk G Dom(Rk) for k < fc*. It suffices to prove that for some fc, Γ, and p
we have: p* < p G Pω, xkRkTk (so Tk G Dk) and p lhPu; "/ G lim(Γfc)". As
we can increase p* w.l.o.g. above p*, for every n, /(n) is a Pn-name. Let χ be
large enough and let TV be a countable elementary submodel of (-ίf(χ), G, <*)
to which {xo, 
,Zfc*-i»P*»/» <2} belongs.
For clarity think that our universe V is countable in the true universe
or at least ΠadP^D^ is. We let K — {(n,p, G) : n < ω, p G Pω is above
p*, G C Pn is generic over V and pfn G G}. On /f there is a natural order:
(n,p, G) < (n',p', G'} if n < n' , Pω μ p < p' and G C G'. Also for (n,p, G) £ K
and n
; G (n,α;) there is G
f such that (n,p, G) < (n',p, G') as Q is an iteration
of proper forcing notions. Also if (n,p, G) G K and p < p' G Pu /G (i.e.
p' G Pα; and p'fn G G) then (n,p,G) < (n,p',G). For (n,p,G) G K let
k(n,p,G) = {g '• g G (
ωω)
v^ and there is an increasing sequence (pt : i < ω) in
V[G] of conditions in Pω/G, p < p0, such that pt Ih /^ = ^^}. So:
(*)2 (n,p,G)GK^
(*)a 9 £ i(n,P>G) => (/ \n)[G\ =9\n
Note also
(*)4 L(n^p^Qn} is a Pn-name.
(*)5 if (n,p,G) < (n',p',G
f) then Z>(n',p',G') Π V C L(njp)G)
1.17A Fact. There are k < fe* and (n,p,G) G K such that if (n,p,G) <
(n
7,!/,^
7) G /f Λenfor some (n",p",G") G K, (n
1 ,p
f ,G') < (n" ,p" ,G"} there
is g G £(n",p",G") which is of the fc'th kind.

274 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
[Why? otherwise choose by induction (n
e,p
l,G
l) for i < k*, in K, increasing
such that: £(n*+ι,p*+ι,G*+
1) nas no members of the £'-kind for i' < i. So
L(n
k* ,p
k* ,G
k*} — 0) a contradiction.]
So choose k and (n®,p®,G®) G K as in the fact, w.l.o.g. n® = 0.
Remember that f ( n ) is a Pn-name for each n.
1.17B Fact. If (n®,p®,G®} < (n,p,G) G K and x G Dom^) then there is
g G L(n)p5(3) which is of the (fc,x)-kind.
Proo/. By the choice of (n®,p®,G®) there is (n',p',G') G K such that
(n,p, G) < (n',p',G
f) 
and I/(n',p',G') nas a member # of the /c-th kind. So
there are Γ G Rang(Ήfc) and (p^ : £ < ω) such that # G lim(T), xRkT, p'Q = p',
p'i < Pt+n Pi G PW/G
;, p^ lhPω/σ/ "/Γ^ = 9\F- Note that Γ G V. Prom the
point of view of F[G], all this is just forced by some q G G
7, so q forces that
(#g : I < ω), Γ, g are as above. So we can find (qt : i < ω), qt G Pn
f/G, qι
increasing, q < qt and qt forces a value to p'^ say p^
; and to g\t and is above
P'i\n'.
And we are done.
1.17C Fact. If T C Rang(βjfe) is countable and x <k y, and (VΓ G T)(3z <fc
x)(zRkT] and T° G T then for some T
1 G Rang(Pfc) we have yRkT\ T° C Γ
1
and for each T G T for some ra we have:
(Vz/)(z/ G T & v\m G T° =» i/ G T
1).
Proof. Let (Tn : n < ω) list T (possibly with repetitions) such that TO = T°.
Let x <k x' <k y, choose inductively xn, x <^ xn <k x n+\ <k %' (possible
by clause (/3)(ii) of Definition 1.16(2)). Choose inductively T'n G rang^) such
that To = TO = Γ° and xnRkT^ T'n C T^+1 and for some kn < ω we have:
v G Γn, v\kn G Γ^ ^> ί/ G T^+1 (possible by clause (/J)(iv) of Definition
1.16(2)). Choose, for each n, Γ^ G Rang(βfc) such that x'RkT^ T'n C Γ^
(possible by clause (/3)(iii) of Definition 1.16(2)). Next use 1.16(l)(7)(a) to find

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
275
an infinite w C ω and T
1 G R&ng(Rk) such that yRT
1, T0" C T
1 and
i G w & i/rmin(w \ (i + 1)) e |J 
Γ/ U Tg => v G T
1.
Check that T
1 is as required. 
Πi.irc
Continuation of the proof of 1.17.
Choose x' < x£ and then inductively on n choose xn such that xn <& x'
Xn <k #n+ι> and choose a countable TV -< (H(χ),e) 
(with χ = cf(x) >
ΠωdPωD) such that all the elements (xn 
: n < ω), (Pn,Qn 
: n < ω), /,
p® belong to N. Now, working in V, we choose by induction on n sequences
(pη:ηe
 nω}, (fη:ηe
 
nω), (qη : η €
 nω), and Γn such that
(A) pη is a P^g^-name of a member of Pω Π TV, PQ = p® , ^ < pη* (i},
Pη\n<qη\n
(B) ^ is (7V,P^g(r7))-generic, ^ G P^g(77) and [t < lg(ή) ^ qη\i = qηH}.
(C) fη is a P^g^-name of a member of
 ωω and ^ H~p£g(τ?) "/»/ G lim(Γn) Π
N\-
Gpt&(r,ϊ\ is of the (fc,^3n)-kind and belongs to £(n,pη[ζ?P/,g(τ7)],Gp£g(τ7))"
when η G
 nω.
(D)
(E) Pη -
Suppose we succeed in this endeavour. By (/3)(iii) of 1.16(1) we can find T'n
such that Tn C T^, x'R^T'n (as #3n <fc x'). Let w and T* be as guaranteed by
clause (τ)(a) of Definition 1.16(1) (for (T^ : n < ω), x
7, x) and let (HI \ i < ω)
be the increasing enumeration of w. So xR^T* and: if r/frii+i C y T^. UTg for
j<i
each i < ω then 17 G T*.
Let <?(ΐ) = n^. Let ι/ — (nzj+i : j <ω).
So it is enough to prove that for some q G Pω which is above p
Θ, we have
q "~Pω "/ ^ lim(T*)". We choose q G P^ by q\i — g^^, by clause (B) we have:
q G Pω is well defined and above each qv\i and above each p®\i hence above
We just have to prove: g Ih "/K+i G |J T'n. UT^". As gt(i + l)
j<t
by clause (A) we havep^j-^!) < gf(zH-l); by clause (E) letting η — v\i^i — v(ΐ)

276 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
we have q lhPu; "fη\ί 
= f^(t)\l = f\P, but i = v(ΐ] = n2i+i, so we have
q Ih "/Γ^2i+ι = /ι/rtfa2i+ι"; now by clause (C) applied toη = v\i remembering
Tn C T£ we have ςι Ih "/i/Γt £ lim(^)" hence by the last two statements
? II- "(/|ri2i+ι) € 2V". So, as rij < rij+i, for i = 0 we have q Ih "/fat G T<5",
and for i > 0 we have q Ih "/fa2i+ι G T/ C Γ^.j" and for i > 0 we have
q II- '7fa2i+2 < /fa2;+3 € 2V+1 C 2^" so q Ih "/K+i G \J T'n. U T^" holds
j<*
(check by cases).
Hence we have finished proving lhpω "(D,R) covers
 ωω". So it suffices to
carry out the induction.
There is no problem for n — 0.
Let us deal with n + 1. By fact 1.17C (above) there are Tn>ΐ G Rang(#fc)
for i < ω such that
(*) (i) Tn,0 = Tn
(ii) Tn,< C
(ill) XSn
(iv) if T G (Rang(jRfc)) Π N and (3z)(2 <k x3n+i & a βfcϊ
1) then for some
ra = 77iτ < ω we have ι/ G T & i/fra G Tn^ ^ v G Γn>i+ι.
Let Tn+ι = Tn,3.
Next we define pη
Λ(t), fη~(£)ι qη
Λ(£) f°
r Ή ^
 ncjj ^ < ω. It is enough
to define then in N[Gpn] where Gpn is any generic subset of Pn to which qη
belongs (note that e.g. pη - ^ is a Pn+ι-name, and if qη φ Gpn the requirements
on it are trivial to satisfy).
Let 77 G
 nα;, and let Gpn be a subset of Pn generic over V such that
qη G Gpn. So now pη is in (Pω/Gpn)Γ\N[Gpn], 
and /^ = fη[Gpn] 
is a member
of
 ωω of the (fc,X3n)-kind which belongs to L(n}pτ?j(3Pn), moreover /^ G -/V[Gpn].
So in AΓfGp^] there is an increasing sequence (p®* ,^ 
\ i < k) of members of
Pu/GPn ,Pη=P*η- (o), P° ~ (t) H-pω/Gpn '7^ - /r, Γ^ w.l.o.g. pθη. w \n = Pη \n.
If Gpn+1 C Pn+ι is generic over V extending Gp^ and p^ * ^ f(n + 1) G Gpn+1
then(n+l,p^w,GPn+1) > (n®,p®,G®) is from #, so by Fact 1.17B there are
/T7,£ £ (
ωα;)
v''
σpτι+
1' and an increasing sequence (p^. /^v . : j < ω) of conditions

§1. A General Preservation Theorem 
277
from Pω/Gpn+1 starting with p®~ ^ such that p*- ^ j Ih "f\j = fηtt\j
n and
fη,ι is of the (fc,z3n)-kind, say fηt£ G lim(T^), x3nRkT^£.
Letting Qn = Qn[Gpn] we have Qn-names for these objects so ( f η j 
: i <
ω) is a Qn-name of an u -sequence of members of
 ωω of the (fc,xsn)-kind and
T% and (Pη-/t\ j 
'- j < ω) are Qn-na,mes as above.
W.l.o.g. {(/„,<, 7** (pj- Wj. :j<ω)):l<ω)e 
N(GPn}.
So we can find ((Pη^τ^£) : I < ω) such that:
jf/ lhgn "Γ^ = Γ^ hence /^^ G lim(Γ^)
M
and
Also we can find ^, p^^ (£ < ω, j < ω) such that
Pη,ι,j+ι and Pη,ιj "~Pu,/GPrl "/i?^ U = fl'ty^ U" where gηtέ G
 ωα; necessarily
9*ι\3 € T^ hence ^f/ G lim(T^). W.l.o.g. (pj^ : £ < ω, j < ω>, (gηj 
: I < ω)
belongs to N[Gpn]. So gηj, fη G
 ωω are of the (fc,x3n)-kind and gη,ι\l = fη\£,
so by clause (τ)(b) of Definition 1.16(2), there is Γ^ G Rang(^) such that
x3nRkTη and B% = {i<ω : gηj G lim(Γ^)} is infinite.
Now as fη G lim(Tn), x3nRkT^ and T^
2 G N[GPn] Π Rang(Λ/b) clearly, by
(*) above, for some mη < ω, fη \mη < v G Γ^ =Φ ί/ G Tn+ι. Hence
^ G lim(Γnιι).
As x3n
have
G
G
Π Rang(.Rjfc) clearly for some mηtι G (mη,ω) we
/ G Γ 
and hence
and
Thus Pr^,mτ7ι, lhQτι "/^^ G lim(Γn>2)". (Note that Sg, Γ^, mn, m^,^ are Pn-
names.)

278 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Now, at last, we define pη - ^ for i < ω. So pη - ^ \n = pη, and we define
pη~(ή(n) in V[G?pJ where qη e Gpn (justified above). Let ί(i) be the £-th
member of B% \ mη, and pη - (i}(n) = Pηti(i)tmriιW and fη - (i} be fη,t(i)).
Lastly let qη - {ί} G Pn+ι be such that qη ~(i)\ = qη,qη~ (»> above pη ~ (i} and
is (TV, Pn+ι)-generic (possible as in the proof of preservation of properness by
iteration. 
DM?
§2. Examples
In this section we use the machinery from the previous section. First (2.1-2.7)
we try to restate the results in a way easier to apply by putting more of the
common part of the examples in the general results, but you can deal directly
with the examples i.e. you can essentially ignore 2.4-2.5, start with 2.7, and
use 1.15 (instead 2.1 - 2.5) but have to check somewhat more. Then we deal
with several properties which we call:
 ωcj-bounding property, Sacks property,
Laver property, (/, ^-bounding and more. Several have been used (explicitly or
implicitly) and we show that their preservation by countable support iteration
follows from 1.13A (so actually from 1.12; really we use 1.15). We usually
present the "classical" examples of such forcing.
Names (Sacks, Laver) come from the forcing which seems to be "the
example" of a forcing with this property. However as Judah comments, maybe
"Sacks property" is confusing as Sacks's forcing satisfies a stronger condition.
For simplicity:
2.0 Convention. Forcing notions are from the first case of 0.1 (e.g. proper)
and Vt subuniverse of V means, if not said otherwise, V — (V^)^, Q as above.
2.1 General Discussion and Scheme.
For usual notions we have two variants of the preservation theorem. We
first define a family K of candidates for covering models, usually they have all
the same definition, φ but applied in some subuniverse V^ (with the same NI)
and we get φ(V^), and demand that it is a weak covering model (or a family of

§2. Examples 
279
covering models; this restricts the family of V^ we can further restrict ourselves
to the case V = V^ [G] where G is a subset of some forcing notion P G V
1" generic
over V). We then write K — Kφ (φ - the definition, possibly with parameters).
Then we prove:
(A) any model from Kφ is actually a temporary fine covering model.
So
(B) if (D, R, <) G (Kφ)
v still covers in V
p then it is (in V
p) still a temporary
fine covering model.
This implies that
(C) if Q = (Pj,Qi ' j < α, i < a) is an iteration as in 0.1, α a limit ordinal,
(£>, jR, <) € Kφ in V and for every β < a we have \\-Pβ "(£>, R, <) still
covers, so it is a weak covering model" then (D,R, <) covers in V
Pa.
But we may want a nicer preservation theorem in particular dealing with
the composition of two.
2.1A Definition. 1) For a formula φ = φx (possibly with a free parameter
x) defining for any universe V^ which satisfies x G V^ a weak covering model
y?x[Vt] (the definition in V^) and a property Pr of forcing notions, we do the
following. Let
K
Pr = φ
pr(V) = {φx[V^\ :F
f a subuniverse of V, V = (F
t)
Q for some
forcing notion Q satisfying Pr,x G V^,
covers in V, so Q is φx[V ^-preserving},
so φx[V] is a member of φ
Pr(V). We omit Pr if Q fits into the appropriate
case of 0.1 (see 2.0); for simplicity we concentrate on this case^.
2) A forcing notion P is /{^-preserving or (^-preserving if it preserves each
(£>, β, <) G K
pr. We may add "purely" to all of them.
3) Writing D*, R
φ, <
φ we mean φ[V] = (D*, W, <^); if φ has a free parameter
x and a fixed parameter t we write ^[F x], or ^,X[F].
t it is reasonable to deal only with Pr preserved by the relevant iterations,
and everything is similar.

280 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
2.2 Restatement of Definition.
1) φ is a temporarily definition of weak covering models if (each instance
satisfies):
(α) (a) l.l(a)
(b) l.l(b) (i.e. φ[V*] covers in the V^ in which we define)
1A) φ is a temporary fine definition of covering models if (α) (above) and in
addition:
09) 1-2(1)09)
(7) 1.2(1)(7) i.e. φ[Vi] satisfies it in V^
2) φ is a fine definition of covering models if in addition:
(δ) if Q G V is <£(V)-preserving (i.e. each member of φ(V) covers in V
Q
i.e. (α)(&) holds also in V®) then in V® still each member of φ(V®)
satisfies 1.2(1) (7).
3) φ is a finer definition of covering models (for simplicity with no free pa-
rameter) if'm addition:
(α)(c) <
φ is absolute for (^-preserving extensions i.e. if V
1 is a class of
V
2,φ(V
l) covers in V
2 (remember 2.1A(3) and 2.0), x,y G V
1 then:
V
1 [= x <* y iff V
2 |= x <
φ y. Similarly for D*, W.
(ε) if Q is <p(V>preserving, φ[V] \=
 uy < x", and Γ* G V
Q and φ[V^] \=
yRT* then for some Γ** G V we have: Γ* C Γ** and ^[F] (= xβΓ**
moreover
(ε)
+ like (ε) above but Q is demanded only to be <^[V]-preserving.
4) φ is a finest definition of covering models if in addition:
(ζ) if Q is (^(V^-preserving, and x £ Dom(JR
v?[F
<5]) ί/ien there is a y G
Dom(Λ*[VΊ), such that φ[V
Q] \=y <x.
5) the (/^-covering model is φ[V]] a ^-covering model is a </?[V^] for an appro-
priate subuniverse V^ so it belongs to φ(V).
6) (JD,β,<) is 2-directed when: if y < x,yRΓι,yRΓ2 (so x,j/,Tι,Γ2 G D)
ί/ien for some Γ, x#T and TI U T2 C T. We say y? is 2-directed if every
φ[V] is (see 1.2(l)(/3)(iv) and 1.3(5)).

§2. Examples 
281
2.3 Restatement of Theorems.
1) If φ is a fine definition of covering models, Q = (Pi,Qj : i < α, j < a)
is an iteration as in 0.10=κ0
 and Qj is purely (^-preserving for j < a then
Pa is purely (/^-preserving, hence: φ[V] covers and φ is a fine definition of
covering models, even in V
p°.
2) If φ is a finer definition of covering models, Q = (P^, Qj : i < α, j < a) is
as in 0.10=N0 and
(*) each QJ is purely </?[^
PJ]-preserving (and (see 0.1) Qj has pure (Ho, 2)-
decidability)
then Pa is purely φ[V]-preserving.
3) In (2) we can weaken (*) to
(*)"" for i < j < α, i non limit we have Pj+ι/Pi is purely </?[V
Pΐ]-preserving
4) fine <= finer.
5) finer 
Φ= 
finest.
6) If φ is a finer definition of covering models, and Q is φ[V]-preserving then
Q is <p(V)-preserving.
7) We can replace pure (tto> 2)-decidability by "pure (2,2)-decidability" if each
φ(V) is as in 1.12(*).
Proof. Straightforward. E.g.
6) Suppose φ[V] = (D',R',<
f) 
G φ(V), so V = (F')
Q/, Q' as in 0.1 and
(£>', β
7, <
7) covers in V too. Suppose further that p € Q and p Ih "/ G
 ωω" and
x G Dom(D
/); choose y G Dom(JR
/), ι/ <' x.
By clause (α)(c) (see 2.2(3)) φ[V] 
N «j/ < x" (and x,y G Dom(Λ*M) As
Q is purely φ[V]-preserving there are q and 7\ such that: p <pr ^ G Q?
Γi G Dom(^t
y]), (^[F] N
 uyRΓι
n and ς Ih "/ G lim(Tι)". By clause (e)+
(see 2.2(3)) there is Γ0 G Rang(.R
/) such that χβ
7Γ0, TI C Γ0. So g, Γ0 are as
required. 
Π2.3
We can save somewhat using: (we shall usually use 2.4(2))
2.4 Claim.
1) Suppose (i) (D, R, <) is a temporarily fine covering model in V, and:

282 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(ii) V is a subuniverse of V^ and (D,R, <) covers in V^ or just V^ —
V
Q, Q is (D, R, <)-preserving,
(iii) every countable α C D from V^ is a subset of some countable b e V
(e.g., Q is proper or: Q preserves NI, V |= "\D\ < NI"),
(iv)* there are one-to-one functions hn : ω -+ ω such that /ι nfn = Λ>n+ι ί
n>
and (Rang(ftn)) Π (Rang(/ιm)) C Rang(/ιn fMin{n, m}) and: for ev-
ery x G D for some y G D, for every T\ such that yRT\ there is TO,
zβϊb such that: η G limTi implies (η(h n(f)) 
: t < ω) G limΓ0 for
infinitely many n. In fact (hn : n < ω) may depend on x.
Then (D, jR, <) is a temporarily fine covering model in V^ .
2) We can replace (iv)* by
(iv)** there are an infinite w C ω and functions hn : ω —+ ω and a sequence
((9k, f
k] 
k < ω) such that
(α) hn \n = ftn+i fn
(/3) for fc < α; the set vk
 ά= {(n,£) : ί > n - l,n < α; and hn(^) = fc}
is finite, ^fe is a function from (
υfc)cj to α;, /
fc — (/^^ : (n,-?) G fjt),
/(n,/) : ω -+ ω SUch that f(no,to)(9k( 
, ™(n,0» ' ' )(n,/)€t;fc) = m(n0Λ)
(7) for every x G DomjR for some T/ G DomjR we have: if yRT\ then there
is ΓQ satisfying xRTo and
(Vry 6 limΓO^nW/MM^))) : ^ < ω) € limT0]
3) We can replace (iv)* by
(iv)*** for every x G DonxR for some Borel function B from {(ηa : a < ω)
ηa G
 ωω and ηω \n = ηn \n} into
 ωα;, there is y G ΌomR such that:
for every T\ satisfying yRTi there is Γ0 satisfying x^Γ0 such that
(ηa : α < ω) G Dom(B) & B((r/α : α < α;» G limϊi
Remark: Applying 2.4 we may wonder if (iii) is a burden. At first glance, if
yt — γQ ^ Q not proper, this may be so. But actually we need it only for the

§2. Examples 
283
limit cases, and there in the cases of iteration of non-proper forcing notions,
we usually assume that in some earlier stage the cardinality of D becomes NI.
Before proving 2.4, we make some observations of some interest, among them
a proof.
2.4A Observation. If f\nTn C Tn+ι and Tn,T are perfect subtrees of
 ω>ω
and w is a witness for (*)/τ .n<ω\ T ^en u ιs a witness for (*)/τ .n<ω\ τ if ®
holds, where
(*)(Γn:n<ω),r ^n' T perfect trees C
 ω>ω, Γ0 C T and for some w =
{no, rii,...} (strictly increasing called a witness): η G
 ω>ω,
0 u C α; is infinite and: if z0 < ή < ^2 are successive members of w then
\u Π (io, ^2)! < 1 and the second member of w is smaller than the second mem-
ber of u.
Proof. Let w = {rii : i < ω}, and u = {nii : i < α;}, both in increasing order.
Assume η G
 ω>ω and /\i ryfmi+i G Ujxi ^m, U ϊb and it suffices to prove that
Λi^faz+i € U?<i ^Wj U ΓQ. As each Tj is perfect without loss of generality
lg(η) = ?Ίt(*) for some z(*) > 0, and we shall prove by induction on i < ϊ(*)
that η\rii+ι G Uj<i ^ UT0. For i — i(*) - 1 we will get the desired conclusion
by the choice of w. For i = 0 we have (J,^ Tm. U Γ0 = Γ0 = \Jj<:i Tn . U Γ0 so
as mi > HI the conclusion should be clear.
For i + 1 > 1, as \u Π (n<_ι,n<+ι)| < 1 (holds by 0), if u Π [0,ni_ι] = 0
then by u Π [0,nΐ+ι) has at most one member hence mi > n^+i and we do
as above. So there is j < ω such that mj+i > n^i, m^-i < Ui-\. Now we
know ryfm^+i G U e<jϊm β
 u ϊb, so if ryίm^ +i G Γ0 then T^fn^i < r/ίmj+i G
TQ C Uε<i Tnε U TO and we are done. So for some ε < j, η\rrij+ι G Tme hence
r/K+i < f/rm^+i G Tmε C Tm._ι C Γn..1 C \Jζ<iTnζ U Γ0 as required. \32ΛA
2.4B Observation. Suppose /ι : ω — > α; is one to one (or just finite to one),
Tn, 5n,T are perfect subtrees of
 ω>ω, /\nSn C Sn+ι,T0 C 50 and for each n
for some m G [n,α;) we have (*)^h ^ 5^ x holds (see below).

284 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Then (*)<sn:n<^>,τ => (*)
l(τn .n<ω),τ where:
(*)(T n<ω) T
 Tm T perfect trees C
 ω>ω, T0 C T and for some w = {n0, πi, . . .}
(strictly increasing): η G
 ω>ω, ΛJ^N+i
 G ^Jj<i
Tnj U T0] => 77 G T,
(*)τι,τ2 τ3
 for some * < ω (the witness) P G TI & pΓ/c G T2 => p G Γ3.
tfemαrfc. Note (*)£. τ* τ* & T[ C Γf & Γ^ C Γ2* & T3* C Γ£ => (*)£, Γ, Γ,
1 ' 2 ' 3 
1 ' 2 ' 3
Proof. We want to prove (*)(Tn:n<α,),τ> so we have to find an appropriate
Let Wι — {rii : i < ω} (the increasing enumeration) witness (*)\sn .n<ω),τ
for j < ω let kj be such that it witnesses (*)^h . ,s.,sm (f°
r the nrst possible
ra > n, note that (*)τhω,^.,5m+1
 is preserved by increasing m as 5m C Sm+ι).
By 2. 4 A above without loss of generality
0 Λi
ni e Rang(ft), and kni < n<+ι and (Vfc)(Λ(fc) < n» => fc < ni+ι),
hence n^ < h(πi+\) < rii+z, and also for some m € (ni,ni+ι) we have
(*)τh(ni),sns,sm ^ get (*)^(ni)f5ni,5ni+1)
Choose m^ = /ι(n4^_f-4). Now we shall prove that w = {πii 
: i < ω} is
a witness to (*)/yn.n<ω\ T ^us finishing the proof of 2.4B. So we assume
η G
 u;>ω, /^Tyfmi+i G U^ΐ^m,, u ^b and we have to prove that η G T.
As iϋι = {n^ : i < ω} witnesses (*)/sn.n<ω\ τ? it suffices to prove: for each
i < ω we have η\ni+ι G U^<i ^ U 50.
We prove it by induction on i If n»+ι < mi then as rjfmi G Γ0, Γ0 C 50,
Γ0 is perfect, clearly ryfni+ι G 50 C \Jj<:iSj U 50. But ni+ι < mi holds if
ftt+i < ft(ns) what implies i < 9. So we assume i > 9. Let 4i(*) -f 2 < i <
4(i(*) 4- 1) -f 2 (so i(*) > 1). So by the assumption ®, we have r/frii+i <
τ?ίM
n4(;(*)+i)+4) = ^Nί(*)+ι G Ujx^*)^ UΓ0. Stipulating m_ι = 0, for
somej(*) G {-1,0, . . . ,i(*) - 1} we have η\mi(^+l G Tm.(^. If j(*) - -1,
then η\Πi+ι < ^miW+i G T0 C SQ C \Jj<iSnj U 5o as required. So assume
j(*) G {0, . . . , i(*) - 1}. But we know that (*)2, 
<, 
Q 
ίWhy?
/mj(*)'°rι 4J (*)+4'
0^4j(*) + 5
 
L
As by the definition m^*) = Λίn^ ^)^), and by 0 above], and we want to
apply it to p = ^Γm^/*). i. The first assumption of (*)2, 
Q 
Q
V ;T 
/ J^ (*)'
<3^4j(*) + 4''
:>4j(*) + 5
was deduced above: p — r/fra^+i G ^mj(^ The second assumption there is

§2. Examples 
285
Sn4j(*}+4 (by the choice of fcn4j(,)+4), now we know j(*) < ϊ(*) and
[Why? First, the equality holds as:
(a) p = η\mi(^+1
(b) fcn4j (#)+4 < rai(*)+ι» because ra^j+i = Λ(n4(i(*)+i)+4) > ™4(i(*)+i)+3
(why? by definition of raφ«)+ι, by φ, arithmetic, as i(*) > j(*),
arithmetic and 0 respectively).
Secondly, the < holds as &n4j>)+4 < n4j (*)+5 by φ.
Finally, the membership holds - by the induction hypothesis on z, and
(Sn : n < ω) being increasing, note the induction hypothesis can be applied
as j(*) < i(*) hence 4j(*) + 5 < 4(i(*) - 1) + 5 = 4i(*) 4- 1 < i].
So we can actually apply (*)^ 
o 
<? 
and get p — η\mi(#\+ι
/ j ί τ r ιj(*)' t : > τ l4j(*) + 4'0τ'-4j(*) + 5
 
V ^
belongs to 5n4ί.(O+5. As r/fn^i < ^Γm^j+i = p (see above) and 4j(*) + 5 <
4(i(*) — 1) + 5 < 4ϊ(*) H- 2 < i, really ry \ni+\ G Uj<i ^ U 5o as required, thus
we have 
finished. 
1^2.45
2.4C Observation. If (*)/τn n<ω) T holds as witnessed by w, and f\nTn C
Tn_|_ι and /ι : α; — > ω is such that Rang(/ι) is infinite, h(0) = 0 and we let
T^
ά=Th(n} then (*)JTι:n<ω)|Γ.
Proof. Let u C α; be infinite such that ftfu is one to one (possible as Rang(Λ)
is infinite), h\u is strictly increasing and for i < j in u, h(ί) < j & i < /ι(j),
moreover, |(/ι(z), j) Γ\w\>2. Now u is as required by 2.4A above. 
^2.40
2.4D Observation. In 1.2(1) (7) (a) we can add the assumption Tn C Tn+ι
and get an equivalent condition (assuming 1.2(l)(α), (β) of course).
Proof. Of course we only need to assume this apparently weaker version and
prove the original version. Let XQ < . . . < xn < xn+\ < . . . y+ < y, xnRT^
be given. We define by induction on n, T^ such that: T^ C T^+1, T% = T§,
Xn+iRT^ and (*)%,<> TΎ τ^ 
(possible by 1.2(l)(/3)(iv) which says: if y < x,
ln>
 Ln> ln+l
then (3Γ)[Γι C Γ & (*)^ Γ τ]) So Γ^ C T^+1 and (as we are assuming

286 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
the weaker version of 1.2(1)(7)(a)) (*)/τn.n<α,\ ^ holds for some T such that
yRT. By 2.4B, (with Sn
 d^ T^ Tn H
f Γ° and A(n) = n) we get (*)|τo:n<ω),Γ
as required. 
Π2.4D
2.4Έ Observation. If V, V^, (D, R, <) satisfy conditions (z), (ii), (πi) of claim
2.4(1) then (D,R, <) satisfies (j)(a) of 1.2(1) also in V^.
Proof. Let x > x^ > yn+ι > 2/n for n < ω and Tn G V be such that ynRTn
(but the sequence (Tn : n < ω) may be from V^. Let 6 be a countable set
from V such that {Γn : n < ω} C 6 C T/. Let (5° : n < ω) € V enumerate
{T G 6 : (3τ/)(y < x^byRT)}, so {Γn : n < ω} C {5£ : n < α;}. Without loss
of generality S® — T0 and for each n for infinitely many ra we have S^ = S%
By 1.2(l)(/3) we can find in V a sequence (zn,S^kn : n < ω),z^ such that
x* < zn < zn+ι < z^ < x for n < ω (of course S^ £ V), kn < ω such that
znRS
l
n, and S^ - Γ0,5^ C 5i+1 and [p G 5« & pf/cn G S^ => p G 5i+1] (choose
them inductively). So (*)|o 51 51 
5 now (*)?_ 
has obvious monotonicity
n' n' τι+1
properties in its variables (see 2.4B), hence no < n < n\ => (*)|o 51 51
Choose by induction on n, h(n) as
min{m : Tn — 5^ and m> n and ra > sup{/ι(fc) : k < n}},
well defined by the choice of (5^ :m<ω). So we know (*)^0 
01 qι
ύh(nΓύniύ
h(n) + ι
We want to apply 2.4B with (5^ : n < ω), (Tn : n < ω), h here standing
for (Sn : n < α;}, (Tn : n < ω), /ι there; we have here almost all the assumptions
(including /ι is one to one (even strictly increasing) and /\ V (*)^ 
51 sι 
)
n m>n 
h(τι)' n' Tn+1
but still need to choose T* and prove that xRT* and (*)/5ι.n<ω\ τ*
Apply (7)(a) of 1.2(1) in V (which holds by (i)) with (S* : n < ω), (zn :
n < ω),z^,x here standing for (Tn : n < ω), (yn : n < ω),x^, x there, and get
T* (in VI) such that (*)/5i.n<ω\ T* holds and xRT*. So we can really apply
2.4B hence get that (*)/τ .n<ω\ T* holds, as required. 
Π2.4#
2.4F Proof of 2.4(1). From definition 2.2(1 A), part (α) and (/?) should be
clear. By 2.4E we know that (7)(a) of 1.2(1) holds, so it suffices to prove (7)(b)

§2. Examples 
287
of 1.2(1).
Given x G Όom(R) and 77, ηn G
 ωω such that η\n = ηn\n, let y and hn
(n < ω) be as in (iv)*. We can find v G
 ωω such that: for each n < ω
we have ηn(k) = v(hn(k}) (note that there is such v G
 ωω because if I =
hm(kι) = ^712(^2) then^ G Rang(/ιnι)ΠRang(/ιn2) hence fci, fc2 < min{nι,n2},
so /ιn2(^2) = hnι(kι) = hn2(k\), but /ιn2 is one to one so fci = fc2). As (D,R, <)
covers we can find TI such that y#Tι and v G lim(Γι). Now let TO be as
guaranteed by (iv)* (of 2.4). 
D2.4
2.4G Proof of 2.4(2), (3). Similar.
2.5 Claim.
(1) We can get the conclusion of 2.4 and even strengthen it by " in V^ the
model (D,R, <) still satisfies (7)1 (see 1.3(8))" if we replace (iv)* by:
(iv) every / G (
ωω)
v is dominated by some g G (
ωω)
v',
(v) (D,R, <) satisfies (7)1 of 1.3(8),
(vi)' (D,R, <) is 2-directed (see 2.2(6)).
(2) In 2.4(1) we can replace (iv)
4" by (iv)~, (v)' below and (vi)' above, where
(iv)~ no / G (
ωω)
v* dominates (
ωω)
v
(v)
;(7)2 if y,x,yi,xn,Tn G Dφ[V], 
XQ < Xι < ... < y
] < y, xnRTn,
Tn C Tn+ι (for each n < ω) then for some k < ω and (T
l : I < fc),
(B^ : ^ < n) we have:
(a) ω = U 5£
^<fc
(b) ifneBι,ηe Γn, r/fn G Γ0 then η e T
£
(c) 2/ΉT*.
(3) Assuming (α), (/?) of 2.11 we have (7)3 => (7), (7)3 => (72) where
(7)3 like (7)2 replacing (b) by
(b)+ if t < fc, and (Vn)(η\n G \J{Tm : m < n and m G JB*}) implies
r/GlimΓ
£.
Remark. Can we phrase a maximal (7)71? Like (7)2 but without Tn.

288 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Proof. 1) As in the proof in 2.4F, we have (α), (/?), (7) (a) of 1.2(1) and it
suffices to prove (7)(b) and (7)1 of 1.3(8), but the latter implies the former.
So let Vt, (xn : n < ω), #t, x and (Tn : n < ω) be given as there. So xnRTn,
{χΐ,x} C Dom(β), xn < xn+ι < #t < x. As in the proof of 2.4E we can find
((z£,S$) 
: I < ω) G V such that {(xn,Tn) : n < ω} C {(zn,S°) 
: n < ω},
and w.l.o.g. n < ω =>• Zn-RS'S & ^n < x^ By the 2-directness we can find a
sequence {(yn, S^) : n < ω) G V such that yn < yn+ι < ^ and S£ = T0 and
2M#Sn and S^ U 5 * C S*+1 (possible by (vi)' which). Define h G (
ωω)
v* by
h(n) = min{m : Tn = S^} and choose a strictly increasing function g G (
ωω}
v
such that [n < ω => /ι(n) < #(n) & n < #(n)]. By (7)1 of 1.3(8) applied to
(Sg,ή : ί < ω) in V there are T* G Rang(β) and infinite w\ C α; such that
(*)ι x#T
(*)2 lim(Γ*) 2 {r? : ry G
 ωω and i G wι =ϊ η\i G 
U 
S
l
g(j}}
j£wι,j<i
Let us prove that T* and w are as required. So we assume
(*)3 η G
 ωω and
We should prove that η G lim(Γ*), but by (*)2 it suffice to prove:
(*)4 iεwι=*η\iε 
U
 
sl
g(j)
jGtϋl,J<Z
As Tj C 5
1/ -N this is immediate.
2) As in the proof of 2.4(1) we can deal with conditions (α), (/?), (7) (a) (the first
two: trivially, the last one by 2.4E). For (7)(b) let r?, ηn G (
ωω)
v , ηn\n — η\n
and y G Dom(.R) be given and choose χt; (xn : n < ω), (Γn : n < α;), (x = y)
(S^ : n < α;}, xn, y^ as in the proof of 2.5(1), so in particular η £ SQ and
/ι(n) = min{m : m > n and r/n G lim(S£)} are well defined; note 5^ C 5^+1.
Let g G
 ωω be strictly increasing, g(ϋ) — 0 such that A — {n : h(n) < g(n)}
is infinite. We can find such g by clause (iv)~ of the assumption. Now apply
(7)2 to yn (n < ω), x* , y, (5^(n) : n < ω), and get k < ω, (Bt ' i < fe>,
(T
e : I < k) as there (in particular yRT
1). Now for each n G A for some
l(n) < Jfc, we have (ι/ G
 ω>ω) & i/fn G 5^(0) & i/ G 5^(n) => i/ G ϊ*<
n>. So, if
n e A, ry nfn = ryfn e 50
X - 5i(0), τ/n e ^(n) C S
l
g(n) hence ryn G T^ . So for
some ί < /c, {n G A : ί(n) = i} is infinite and we are done. 
D2.5

§2. Examples 
289
2.6 Definition. TTR = {T Π
 m^ω : m < ω, T C
 ω>ω a closed tree and for
every n < ω we have T Π
 n-ω finite }, where "T is a closed tree" means, as
usual: Γ ^ 0 J r 7 e Γ & ι / < r 7 = Φ i / e Γ ] , [ 7 / € T = * V;<ω *f (*) e Γl Note that
TΓ.R has a natural tree structure: t < s i f t = sΓΊ
 n-α; for some n. For t €
let ht (t) = min{n : ί C
 n^ω] and TT#n = {ί € TTR : ht (ί) = n}.
2.6A Notation. DP(
ωω) = {x e
 
ωω : x(n) > 1 for every n and (x(n) :
n < ω) diverges to infinity, i.e. for every m < ω for some k < ω, for every
n > k,x(n) > m.}
2.6B Remark. Usually we can replace x by x
;, x'(ri) = Min{x(m) : n < m <
α;}, hence without loss of generality x is nondecreasing.
2.7 Fact. Each closed tree Γ C
 ω^ω such that (Vn)[|Γ Π
 n^ω\ < N0] induces
a branch {T Π
 n^ω : n < ω} (in the tree TTR) and is its union. Now TTR is
isomorphic to
 ω>ω.
* 
* 
*
Now we deal with some examples: we do not state the aim - the preservation
theorems by combining with 2.1-2.7 - for each ψi separately but usually we
mention the case of CS iteration of proper forcing.
2. 8 A Definition, [^α -bounding]: 
1) We define φ = φl
m (a definition of
covering models) by letting φ[V] — (D,R) if:
a) D = H(^)
v
b) xRT 
iff x, Γ G D, x G DP(
ωω], Γ is a closed tree and (Vn)(ΓfΊ
 nω
is finite) (so x has really no role)
c) <=<o (see 1.4)
2) A forcing notion P is ^α -bounding (in V) if it is (pf
m-preserving (see 2.8C-
equivalent to the definition from V).

290 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
2.8B Claim, φ = φ™ is a finest definition of covering models for proper
forcing, and it is 2-directed.
Remark.
1) Instead of "proper" we can use "forcing Q such that every countable subset
of min{(2
H°)
vl : φ
crn[V
1} covers V} from V
Q is included in one from V" .
2) We just "forget" to mention the pure version.
Proof. Let us check the conditions in Definition 2.2, the 2-directed should be
clear.
(α) (a) Trivial by a), b) of Definition 2.8A.
(α) (b) Trivial (a tree with one branch).
(α) (c) and (β) are trivial.
(7), (7)+ Let x > y,yRTn (remember 1.3(4)).
Put w
 d= ω, T*
 d= {η: for every k < ω, η \ k G IJjXfc
 τj} and check that
T* is as required.
(δ) By 2.4 for (7), 2.5(1) for (7)+.
(ε)+ Now we use Fact 2.7 applied to Γ*, (i.e. to the branch of TTR which
T* induced). So there is a closed tree C C TTR,C G D,xRC and for every
n, T* Π
 n>ω e C. Let T** = {77 <E
 ω>ω: for some t € C, η G ί}. Clearly T** e D
(as C e D, ,D - ίf(Nι),T** is a closed tree C
 ω>ω), and T* C Γ**. In addition,
for every n
T** Π
 nω = \J{t Π
 nω : t e C Π TT.Rn+1},
so, being a finite union of finite sets, Γ** Π
 nα; is finite.
(C) Easy. 
D2.8B
2.8C Fact. If V C yt then (^ί
m[y] covers in W i/ and on/y i/
and on/y i/
(Vj/ € DP(
ω
ω)
vt)(3x 6 DP(
ωω)
v)[ι, <is x]

§2. Examples 
291
if and only if
(Vy G DP (
ωω)
v*)(3x G DP (
ωω)
v)[y <dis x].
2.8D Conclusion. For a CS iteration Q = {P»,Qj : * < α,j < α) if Ihp. "Q^
is proper and
 ωu;-bounded" for each i then Pa is proper and
 ωα;-bounding.
Proof. By 2.3(2) and 2.8B + 2.8C.
2.9A Definition. [The Sacks property] 
Define φ — φ™ (a definition of a
covering model) by letting φ[V] = (D, R) be
a) D = tf(Hi)
b) xRT 
iff x,T G D and x G DP(
ωω),T C
 ω>α; and for every n < ω,
TlΊ
 nω has at most x(n) elements.
c) <=<dis (see 1.4).
2.9B Claim, φ = φψ
1 is a finest definition of covering models.
Proof. Let us check the conditions in Definition 2.2.
(α) (a) Trivial by a), b) of Definition 2.9A.
(α) (b) Trivial.
(α) (c) Trivial.
(β) Trivial, by the definition of the partial order (1.4).
(7)+ Let ynRTn and yn <dis yn+ι <dis x
f <dis x (for n < ω). Define nk
inductively as the first n < ω such that t < k => nt < n and for every £,
n < ί < ω, we have (fc + 2) χ+(ί) < x(i). Let w = {nk : k < ω} and
Γ* - {η : n G w => η \ n G (J Γn}.
(5) Immediate by 2.4(1).

292 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(ε)+ There is by 2.7 a closed tree C C TTR in D, Γ* Π
 nω G C, 2#C where
z(m) = x(m)/y(πι). Let Ci = {t G C: for every n, |ί Π
 nω\ < y(ri)} and let
C2 be the maximal closed tree C C\. Clearly C2 G £> and T* Π
 nu; G C2 for
every n, now Γ** — \J{t : t G C2} € D is as required.
(C) Easy by 2.8C. 
D2.9B
2.9C Claim.
1) If V C yt, <^™[y] covers in Ft ^for every ^ e ("u;)vt and
there is (a^ : £ < ω) e V, a^ C α;, |α^| < y(ί) and f\eη(£) €
2) If V C Ft and ^[V] covers in yt ^en φ<™[V] covers in
Proo/. Straight.
2.9D Conclusion. For a CS iteration Q = (Pi,Qj : i < α, j < a) if Ihp. "Q^
is proper and has the Sacks property" then Pa is proper and has the Sacks
property.
Proof. By 2.3(2) and 3.9B + 2.9C.
2.10A Definition. [The Laver Property] 
1) We define φ = φψ
1 by letting
φ[V] = (D, R, <) (the Laver model) be
a) D^H(^)
V.
b) xRT iff (x,Γ € D and) x € DP(
ωω), T C
 α;>α; a closed tree and:
(Vn) [the set {η(n) : 77 e T,lg(η) = n + 1, (Vi < 71)77(1) < x(2i)} has
power < x(2n + 1)].
c) x < y iff (x(2n + 1) : n < cj) <dis (y(2n + ΐ):n<ω) (see 1.4B) and
(x(2n) : n < ω) = (t/(2n) : n < ω).
2.10B Claim, y? = (/?3
m is a finest definition of a covering model.

§2. Examples 
293
Proof. It can be proved very similarly to the proof of 2.9B. The proof of (α),
(β) is totally trivial and (δ) follows from (7) by 2.4(1), so we shall prove (7)+.
Let x > y > yn+ι > yn, Tn, be given and ynRTn.
We can choose no < ni < n2 < . . . (by induction) such that: for fc > m,
(ί + 2) x y(2k -I- 1) < z(2fc + 1), and let w = {nt : t < w},
T* = TO U {η : for every i G w, η \ i G (J ,-<* T- }
j€tiί
Γ° = {77 G
 ω>ω : for every i < lg(ή), η(ι) < x(2i)}
Clearly T* C
 w>α; is a closed tree, and for any fc, |Γ°nΓ*Π
 feω| < z(2fc-f 1),
because, letting nt < k < n*+ι, {r/(fc) : -ίgr/ > fc, η e T° Π Γ*}| < \{η(k) : Igη >
k,η 6 τ° n U
T
n
! <
 
: ft > fc,^ e τ° n rn 
<
So T* the definition of xRT* is satisfied and Γ* is as required.
(ε)
+, (C) left to the reader - similar to the proof of (δ). 
^2.105
2.10C Claim. 1) UV C V^ φ^
m[V] covers in V* iff 
for every η G (Un<ω(n+
l))
yt and y G DP(
ωω)
v there is (at : t < ω} G F, α^ C ω, |α^| < y(£) and
Λ^W ^
 α^ ^for every /
 G (JλPCM)
v for every y G (DPί^α;))^^ and
^7 £ ( Π /(^))
V+ there is (α^ : ^ < ω} G F, |α^| < y(l) and Λ ^W ^ ^ ^
n<ω 
^<ω
similarly for some /.
2) A forcing notion P has the Sacks property (i.e. is (^-preserving) iff it has
the
 ωα;-bounding property (i.e. is φ\
 m-preserving) , and the Laver property (i.e.
is (/?3
m-preserving).
Proof. Easy.
2.10D Conclusion. For a CS iteration Q = {P<, Q^ : i < α, j < α), if lhP. "Q^
is proper and has the Laver property" then Pa is proper and has the Laver
property.
Proof. By 2.3(2) and 2.10B + 2.10C.

294 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
The next example deal with trying to have: every new 77 € Πn<ω f ( n ) belong
to some old Πn<u>
α^' (l
α^l : n < ω} quite small, where f ( n ) can be finite.
Below we could have used Y = {id}, but in applying it is more convenient to
have Y. See more on this in [Sh:326] and much more in Roslanowski, Shelah
[RoSh:470].
2.11A Definition. Let / denote a one place function, Dom(/) = ω, 1 < f ( n ) <
ω, / diverges to oo and g denote a two place function from ωto{α::l<α!<u;};
both nondecreasing, for clarity. Let Y C DP(
ωω) have absolute definition and
<=<y be an absolute dense order on Y with no minimal member, and those
properties are absolute (so Y may be countable, if Y = DP(
ωω) we omit it).
Finally, let H denote a family of such pairs (/, g). If H = {(/, g)} we write /, g.
We define φ — φl
rγ.H> Dut if V = DP(
ωω) we may omit it, by letting for
a universe V, φ[V] be (D, R, <) where
a) D = ίΓ(Nι),
b) Dom(JR) is the set of triples (z,/,#) for z G F, (/,#) € #; more
formally member x € DP(
ωω) such that (x(3£ -f i) : ί < ω) codes z when
i = 0, / when i = 1 and # when i — 2; we write x = (z
x,f
x,g
x). 
We define:
xRT iff x, T G £>, x G Dom(.R), T C
 ω>ω is a closed tree and for each n
the set {η(n) : 77 G Γ, £g(τ?) = n + l,(Vi < n)ry(i) < /
x(i)} has cardinality
< 1 -f g
x(n,z
x(n)}. (So for #
x(n,z*(n)) = ω this means "finite".)
c) <γ is the dense order of Y (e.g. <0 or <dis) and (z
l,f
l,g
l) 
<
(z
2,/
2,^
2) iff/
1 - /
2, fli =g* and z
1 < z
2.
We may use also g with positive real (not integer) values, but still algebraic.
Let us note that φ™ (
ωω-bounding), φψ
1 (Sacks), φψ
1 (Laver) are par-
ticular cases of φ^γ.fj'-
2.11B Claim. 1) Let / = ω (i.e. the function with constant value ω), g(n, i) =
ω and Y = DP(
ωω). Then for universes V C V^φ^V] covers in V^ iff
ψTf 
[V] covers i
n V^ (hence a forcing notion Q is (^f
m-preserving iff it is

§2. Examples 
295
2) Let g be g(n,ί) = 1 + i. For universes V C V^φ^V] covers in F
t iff
for every / G DP(
ωω)
v , φ
c^} g\Y] covers in V* (hence a forcing notion Q is
</?§
m-preserving iff it is ^j^-preserving for every / G DP(
ωω)).
Proof. Check.
2. 11C Claim. 1) Assume
(i) H is a family of pairs (/, g) and Y C DP(
ωω) (an absolute definition,
dense with no minimal element),
(ii) each (/,#) G Jϊ is as in 2.11A and x <γ y => (g(n,y(n))/g(n,x(ri)) :
n < ω) diverges to oo,
(iii) for every (/,#) G -H" and y G Y there are x G Y and (/',#') G if
and hn : ω -+ ω one to one, ftnfa = /Wi IX [n < m => Rang(/ιn) n
Rang(Λm) - Rang(Mn)] and g'(hn(t),x(hn(£))) 
< g ( ί , y ( ί ) ) and
TΛen φ
(£γ H is a fine definition of covering models.
2) In part (1) we can replace clause (iii) by
(iii)~ for every (f,g) G H and y G Y there are x G Y and (/',<?') G if and
hn\ω^>ω such that:
(α) /ιn N = hn+ι \n
(β) for every k < ω, letting Wk = {(n,(>) : I > n — I and hn(ί) — k} we
have 
Π m < /'(*)
(n,^)€u)fc
(T) SM > ί/(rαnW)
3) Assume we replace (iii) by
(iii)* for (/,#) G H,xl < y in Y there are x2 £ DP(
ωω], ( f ' , g
r ) G fl" such
that: for every n large enough f'(n) > /(n)^^
n'
Xl^
n^ and #(n, y(n)) >
fli(n,xι(n)) x0
7(n, x2(n)).
T/ien φ
c£γ^H is a finest definition of a family of covering models.
Proof. 1) Let us check the conditions in Definition 2.2. Let (/,#) G # and we
deal with each φ
c^γj^g\Y] separately (this is enough).
(α) (a) Trivial by definition 2. 11 A.
(α) (b) Trivial.

296 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(α) (c) Trivial.
(/?) Check.
(7)+ Let y < x, yRTn for n < ω (remember 1.3(4) letting y = x^).
Choose rik by induction on fc such that: f\t<k
 Uf < nk an(*
 nk < ω
[πk < £ < ω => k x g(i,y(t)} < g(l,x(t))} (possible by assumption (ii)). Now
w — {nk : k < ω} and T* = {η G
 ω>ω : for every n G w,η \ n G |J*<™ Ti} are
^e u;
as required.
(δ) By 2.4(1) (for (iv)* use the assumption (iii) of 2.11C(1)) and 2.7.
2) The proof is similar to the proof of part (1) using 2.4(2) instead 2.4(1) in
proving clause (δ).
3) Note that (iii)* => (iii)- easily, so demands (α), (β), (7), (7)+, (δ) hold.
(ε)
+ Straightforward (use a tree T, x^RT, to "catch" the T in a narrow
tree C TTR).
(C) Check. 
D2.uc
2.11D Conclusion. For y, if satisfying (i), (ii), (iii)* of 2.11C, for any CS
iteration Q = (P^Qj : i < α, j < α>, if lhP. "Qi is proper and φ
c£γ.H[V
Pi}-
preserving" then Pa is proper, φl^γ.H[V] -preserving.
2.11D Definition. We say that a forcing notion Q is (/, (^-bounding (where
/, g e
 ω(ω + 1 \ {0, 1})) if for every η G ( Π f(n})
γQ there is (an : n < ω) G V
n<u>
such that |αn| < ^(n) and η G Π αn.
2.1 IF Conclusion. Assume
(*) /> 9 €
 ω(
ω + 1 \ {°5 1}) are diverging to infinity.
If Q = (P^Qj : i < a,j < α) is a CS iteration such that Q^ is (f
9* ,\g]
l/l)-
bounding in V
 Pί for every ί < ω then Pa is proper and (f
9 , ^)-bounding for
every I < ω.
Proof. We use 2.11C(3) (and 2.11A, 2.11B and 2.3). We let Y = {x G
 ωω : x
constant }, so we can identify x with z(0), let {αn : n < ω} list the positive

§2. Examples 
297
rationale, define x < y & ax^ < ay^ and let gt(n,x(ri)) = [g(n)
aχ(
n)/
£] 
(=the
integer part, note: x is constant so x(ri) = x(0)) and fι(n) = /(n)^(
n)
£].
Lastly let H = {(/*,#) : I < ω}, so φ$$r.H is well defined.
Now we show that φ
c£γ]H is a finest definition of covering model, to get this
we would like to apply 2.11C(3). Among the three assumptions there, clause
(i) holds by the choice of Y and H. Also the first phrase in clause (ii) holds, as
for the second, if x < y and (/,#) G H, then for some ί, (/,#) = (/£,#), hence
g(n,y(n}}/g(n,x(n)} =
as α2/(0) > αx(0) > 0, this clearly diverges to infinity.
Lastly for clause (iii)*, let (/,#) 6 H (so for some I, (/,#) = ( f t , g i ) ) and
let xι < y in Y. Now choose x^^Y such that ε + #2(0) < t/(0) — xι(0) for some
ε > 0 and choose ra such that axι^j/l < m and let (/',</) = (fέ+mide+m)- Let
us check:
/(n) = /£+m(n) = /(n)^^
£+w = (/(n)'<
Λ>><
Λ>
m = Λ(n)^
n>
m
(the last inequality because ^(n,a;ι(n)) = [g(n)
aχ^
n^
i] and axι^/ί < m)
g(n,y(n)) = gι(n,y(n)) =
> g(n,xι(n))g(n,x2(n))g(n)
ε/l - 1 > g(n,x1(n))g(n,x2(n))
(the last inequality: for n large enough).
So really (iii)* of 2.11C(3) holds hence 2.110(3) applies and φ
c£γ.H is a
finest definition of covering models, so 2.3(2) applies.
Lastly, we can check that by monotonicity
® Q is </?^>;/rpreserving iff Q is (/^, [g
l/i] Abounding for every I < ω.

298 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
So by the last two sentences we are done.
2.12A Definition. [The PP property] 
1) We define φ = </?§
m (a definition
of a covering model) by letting φ[V] = (D, #, <) (the PP model) where:
a) D = ίΓ(Nι)
b) xRT iff z, T G D, x G ^ω is strictly increasing, T C
 ω>α; is a closed
subtree and T Γ\
nω is finite for every n and:
(*) for arbitrarily large n there are fc, and n < i(0) < j(0) < i(l) <
j(l) < . . . < i(fc) < j(fc) < ω and for each ί < fc, there are m(£) < ω and
τ?
£'°, . . . , ττ*
 mW G T Π J^α;, such that: j(£) > χ(i(£) + m(l)) and
(Vf? E T Π *ω) 
^'m < η.
t,m
C) < is <*dis
Remark: concerning the PP property, there is a strong version ("strong PP-
property" ) proved in 4.4 and 5.6 for the forcing notion there and a weak version
("weak PP-property" ) derived in 2.12D below and used in 4.7 and 5.8 (though
in the statement the "PP-property" appears). See Definition 2.12E.
2.12B Claim. 1) If the forcing notion P is (/^-preserving then it has the
 ωω-
bounding property; if P has the Sacks property (i.e. is (/^-preserving) then it
is (/?5
m-preserving.
2) If (D, β, <) is a Sacks model (i.e. φξ
m [V]) then
(Vη G
 ωcj)(Vz)(3Γ G D) [x G (Dom(Λ^
m)) n D => xΛ^
mr & r? G limT]
3) If (D, β, <) is a PP-model (see 2.2(5)) ί/ien
G "ω)(\/x)(3T e D) [x e (Dom(Λ^ί
m)) Π D =» xΛ^ϊ
mΓ & r? G limT].
Proof. Easy.
2.12C Claim. (/? = (/?5
m is a finest definition of a covering model, 2-directed.

§2. Examples 
299
Proof. Let us check the conditions in Definition 2.2.
(α) (a) Trivial by a), b) of Definition 2.12A.
(a) (b) Check.
(α) (c) Check.
(β) Trivial.
(7)(a) So let (£>, R, <) be φ[V]. Let x > y, and yRTn. Let hm : ω -> α; be
such that for any n there are i(0) < j(0) < ... < j(k),ηιtί (for i < m(£), £ < jfc)
witnessing (*) of Definition 2.12A(l)(b) for yRT^ and n (so n < i(0)) such
that j(fc) < hm(n). Now we define n^ by induction on ϊ,n0 = 0 and ra<+ι is
such that: choose 4,^,... ,^<+1 as follows: 4 = ™*,^+i = Λnj.(^ ) 4- 1, and
rii+i = £<+ι. Let T* - {r? : for every i,η \ nm G U^^nJ i.e. we choose
w = {rii : i < ω}.
So clearly xR^T* is as required.
(7)(b) Easy.
(δ) We use 2.4(2) with hn(ΐ) = i. So let x G Dom(Λ), and we choose y = x.
Now wι = {(n, ί) : £ > n}, gn is any one to one function from
 nω onto ω, /P ^
is thus determined. Now check.
(ε)+ So we know Q is v?§
m[F]-preserving, φ^V] N y < x and T* G F
Q,
and </?[V
Q] ^ 7/ΛT*. We should find T** G V such that: Γ* C Γ** and
φ[V] 
\= xRT**. We work in F+ = V
Q but (D,R,<) = (^§
m[F]. The proof
is straight but still we elaborate. Let ft* : α; —> α; be defined for Γ* as /ιm
was defined for Γm in the proof of clause (7)(a). So by 2.12B(3) there is
/ι** G (Dί~]
ωω)
v such that Λ** is strictly increasing and (Vn)[/ι*(n) < /ι**(n)].
We now choose 2 such that for every n, there are n = m^ < ray < ... <
mn+ι»
m?+ι = ^**(^F) + m? + 1, and let z(n) = m^+1. Clearly z G .D
y.
So remembering 2.7, we can apply the "covering property" of (D, R) to Γ*
(i.e., the branch T* induces in TTR). Apply it for z and we get an appropriate
closed subtree C G D = #(Nι)
y of TTΉ, (so Γ* Π
 n^α; G C for every n).
Clearly Γ** = (Jί€C ί is a closed subtree of
 ω>ω, it belongs to D, and there is
no problem to prove Γ* C Γ**. The only point left is why xRT**.
Let C
f be the set of t G C such that if n < ω, h**(n) < ht(t) then for some
k < ht(t] and n < i(0) < j(l) < ... < i(fe) < j(fc) < Aί(ί) the statement in

300 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(*) of Definition 2.12 A clause (b) holds (for t and y). Let C" be the maximal
closed tree C tf . It is easy to check that C" G D, and that T* induces a branch
C C", so without loss of generality C - C
] = C" .
Now for arbitrarily large n, there are k < ω, and n < i(0) < j(0) <
i(l) < j(l) < . . . < i(k) < j ( k ) < ω, and for each t < k there are m(ί) < ω,
^,o, 
, **,m(*) £ C Π TTRj(i} such that j(£) > 2(i(-Q 4- m(ί)) and
By the definition of z, there are ξ(£,0) < ... < ξ(£,ra(£) + 1) such that
i(*)+m(*)+l < ξ(*,0) andξ(£,m(£)+l) < j(ί), and h**(ξ(£,m)) < ξ(*,ro+l).
So by the assumption on C(= tf) for each such t < fc, m < m(ί), there
are fc^m, ξ(^,m) < i(0,£,m) < j(0,£,m) < i(l,^,m) < j(l,^,m) < ... <
i(^,mj^^) < j(kt,m,ί,rri) < ξ(ί,m + 1) and n(α,ί,m) (for α < fc^?m) such
that j(α, £, m) > x(i(α, ^, m) 4- n(α, £, m)) and r?a,/3^m G (^(
α^
m)α;) Π t€>m (for
/3 < n(α,£,m)) and (Vi/ G t/,m n«^'
m+1) ω)[\Jaιβηa,β < i/].
Now the set of i(α,£,m), j(α,f,m),n(α,f,m) and ηatι,m,β f°
r ^ < n(α,^,m)
supplies the required witnesses.
(C) Easy (by 2.8 C). 
D2.12C
2.12D Claim. Assume V CV
r and (/?5
m (V) covers in V . Then for every η G
(
W2)
y/ there is an infinite wCω from V and (fcn, (in(ί\jn(i) 
: £ < kn) : n e w)
from V such that:
(a) n < in(0) < jn(0) < in(l) < jn(l) < . . < in(fcn) < jn(fcn) < min(υ; \
(n + 1)).
(b) for every n G w for some t < kn we have η(in(£)} = ^O'n(^))-
Remark. Only the x defined by x(£) = 2^ suffices.
Proof. Easy.
2.12E Definition. 1) A forcing notion Q has the PF-property ij^it is v?5
m-
preserving.

§2. Examples 
301
2) A forcing notion Q has the weak PP-property if V, V
Q satisfies the conclusion
of 2.12D.
3) A forcing notion Q has the strong PP-property if changing φζ
m to φf^ in
Definition 2.12A by demanding k = 0 in (*), we have: φ[V] covers in V
Q.
2.12F Claim. For a forcing notion Q:
1) the strong PP-property implies the PP-property.
2) The PP-property implies the weak PP-property.
2.12G Conclusion. For a CS iteration Q = (Pi, Qj : i < α, j < α), if lhP. "Qt
is proper with the PP-property" then Pa is proper with the PP-property.
Proof. By 2.3(2), by 2.12C.
The following deals with "no Cohen real 4- no real dominates F (C
 ω>ω, see
§3)".
2.13A Definition. We define φ = φ™ (a definition of a covering model) by
letting φ[V] = (£>, JfZ, <) where
a) D = H(^)
b) xRT iffT is a perfect nowhere dense tree, x e DP (
ωω).
c) <=<o
2.13B Observation. Q is φ%
m preserving iff Q adds no Cohen real.
2.13C Claim. φ^
m is a 2-directed, fine definition of a covering model for
forcing which are ^f
m-preserving
t (= ^-bounding) or even just not adding a
dominating real^ and are proper (or satisfy UP) (caution: not preserved under
composition).
t Of course as ^α -bounded forcing necessarily add no Cohen reals.
tf On this see 3.17(2),(3).

302 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Proof, (a) (a), (b), (c) Trivial
(/?) Trivial
(7) Check, even (7)1 (see 1.3(8)) and (7)2 (of 2.5(2)) hold. E.g. concerning
(7)2, given (Tn \ n < ω), nowhere dense trees, choose by induction on i < ω,
Hi < ω as follows: no = 0, rii+ι is minimal n such that n G (ni,ω) and for every
η G
 ni-(rii + 1) there is v\ η < v G n>n such that v φ (J 1}. Let for £ < 2,
j<n;
T
1^ = {77 G
 ω>ω : for some i = i mod 2, and n G [n^n +i) we have η\n G T0,
and 77 G Γn}.
(5) By 2.5(2). 
D2.13C
2.13D Conclusion. 1) For a CS iteration Q = (Pi,Qi : i < α,j < α),
if \\-pί "Qi is proper not adding a Cohen real (over V
Pi)" and Pa adds no
dominating real over V then Pa is proper and adds no Cohen real over V.
2) The property "P purely does not add a Cohen real nor an η G
 ωω dominating
F" where F C
 ωω is fixed not dominated in the old universe, is preserved in
limit of iterations as in 0.10=κ0
Remark. 1) Note we have (|D|, Discovering in §1.
2) What if in 0.1 we use (D), <pr is = (so we use FS iterations satisfying the
c.c.c.)? In the limit we add a Cohen real, necessarily the family is empty. We
cannot apply it as for P a c.c.c. forcing, <pr is equality so "P purely preserves
<^o
m" always fails.
3) Of course we can interchange using/not using F in parts (1) and (2) of
2.13D.
Proof. 1) By 2.3(1) and 2.13C applied to φ^
m.
2) Usually using in addition 3.17. 
U2.ISD

§2. Examples 
303
The following deals with "every new real belongs to some old closed set of
Lebesgue measure zero".
2.14A Definition. We define φψ
1 (a definition of a covering model) by letting
φ[V] = (£>,#,<) where
(a) D = H ( K l ) .
(b) xRT means T is a perfect tree, with limT having Lebesgue measure zero.
(c) <=<o
So if Q is y?γ
m-preserving then Q adds no random real but not inversely.
2.14B Claim, φψ
1 is a 2-directed fine definition of a covering model for forcing
which are purely φ™-preserving (= ^u -bounding property) or even just not
adding a dominating real (caution! not preserved under composition.)
Proof.
(a) Trivial
(β) Trivial
(7)+ Check
(5) By 2.5(1). 
D2.17D
2.14C Conclusion. 1) The property "P purely does not add any real, which
does not belong to any old closed measure zero set from V and is purely
 ωω-
bounding and has pure (2,2)-decidability" is preserved by limit (for iterations
as in 0.10=2) [but not necessarily composition].
2) The property "P purely does not add any real not belonging to any closed
old set of measure zero from V and adds no real dominating F" is preserved
in limits for iterations as in 0.1, where F C
 ωω is a fixed undominated family.
Proof. Like the proof of 2.13C. 
DI2.14C

304 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
The following deals with "every new dense open subset of
 ω>ω is included in
some old one" .
2.15A Definition. Let (p*t 
: t < ω) enumerate
 ω>ω. Let Γ* C
 ω>ω be a
perfect tree such that for every v G limΓ*, Av = {p^ : ί < ω and z/(2£) = 1}
is open, and p\
 Λ££(2^+i) € ^.f (hence Av is dense)}, and such that for every
dense open subset A of
 ω>ω there is v G limT* such that A = Av.
We define (^§
m (a definition of a covering model) by letting
(a) D =
(b) xRT means that x G DP (
ωω) and Γ C Γ* is perfect satisfying:
Π{A/ : v G limT} is dense open.
(c) <=<o (see 1.4)
2.15B Claim. 1) For A C
 ω>ω there is a closed Γ = TA C T* such that:
if 77 G limT* then Aη (which is dense open) include A iff η G limTA. So
T G Rang(Λ) iff for some dense open AC
ω>ω we have T CTΛ
2) A forcing notion Q is </?g
m (V)-preserving iff every open dense subset of
ω>ω in F^ include a dense open subset of
 ω>ω from V iff for some (every)
subuniverse V^ of V such that <^8
m(^) covers in V, Q is <p§
m(^) preserving.
3) If Qo is <^
m(F)-preserving and lhQo
 
ίίQl is <^
m(y
Qo)-preserving" then
Qo*Qι
is (/?g
m(y)-preserving.
4) If Q is 9?8
m-preserving then Q is ^-bounding.
Proof. 1) - 3) Check.
4) For h G (
ωω)^
Q let Ah = {η G
 ω>ω : for some n, /\l<nη(ί) = 0, 77(71) ^ 0
and lg(η) >n + h(n) -f 1}. So A^ C
 ω>ω is dense open, so there is A C
 ω>α;,
dense open, A £ V,A C Ah. Define g : ω — > α; in V by: p(n) = min{ίg(?7) :
η G A, n = min{^ : τ/(^) > 0}}. Then g : α; -> α;, g G V and (Vτι)ft(τι) < #(n).
2.15C Claim. (^g
m is a finest definition of a covering model which is 2-directed.

§2. Examples 
305
Proof, (α), (/?), 2-directed: easy, now we prove more than (7) (see 2.5(3)).
(7)3 Assume yRTn, so for each n there is a dense open An C
 ω>ω such that
ϊ"n £ ΪΛn We choose by induction on n < α;, fcn < ω such that Λ^<n ^ < ^n>
and if £ < n there is p G Πm<n ^m suc^ *^
a* Pe ^ P^ P ^ ί^m : m < kn}- Now
let A: = 2, and for z < k let
Bi = {n: for some £ = i mod 2 we have kι < n < A ^+i}
and let
Γi - {i/ G T* : if n < ίg(z/) then v\n G (J{TΛm : m < n and m G BJ.
(J) by 2.5(2) (remember that (7)3 =» (7)2 by 2.5(3)).
(ε)
+, (C) left to the reader. 
Eb.isc
Remark, alternatively, instead of 2.15 B,C, look in XVIII §3.
2.15D Conclusion. For CS iteration (Pi,Qj : i < α, j < α), if Ihp. "Qi is
proper and any new open dense subset of
 ω>ω includes an old one" then Pa
is proper and any dense open subset A G V
p of
 ω>ω includes a dense open
subset A G V of
 ω>ω.
Proof. By 2.3(2) and 2.16C (and 2.16B(2)).
2.16 Conclusion. For θ = K0 the property " Q is purely φe[V]-preserving with
pure (θ, 2) decidability" is preserved by iteration as in 0.10 for ί = 1,..., 8 (e.g.
by CS iterations of proper forcing). This is true for θ = 2, ί — 1,... ,8 when
(*) of 1.12 holds (recheck).

306 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
The following is an addition from early nineties, inspired by the interest in
"adding no Cohen real". It is dual to 2.13, see 2.17 C(l) below.
2.17A Definition. For Y C DP(
ωω) with an absolute definition we define
φ^Y, a definition of a covering model. For a universe V we let φ[V] = (D, R, <)
be:
(a) D = H(Nι).
(b) xRT iff
(i) x= {χ[°],χW,χI
2]>,sayx(3n + i) codes χM(n), xM G Y, χW(n + l) >
χW(n) and the difference is a power of 2, χl
2'[n] < Iog2[x^(n + 1) —
χM(n)l,
(ii) Γ G
 ω>α; closed subtree,
77 G
 ω>ω & r/fn G Γ & 77(71) > x
[0](n) =» 77 G Γ.
(iii) for each n the following holds:
(*)n for any ra < (xW (n +1) — x'
1! (n))/2
x 
^
n^ there is a function g = gntΎn
with domain the interval 
[χW(n)+m'2
χ[2](
n\χW
x
[Ό](£)] and [η G Γ & £g(r?) > χW(n
C-, 
dβf 
I
I 
i 
I 
, 
-I—Γ 
fΠl / Λ\ 
Π 
ι
So g. == U #n,m belongs to ll^<ω^
1 J(^)> we ca" 9 a witness.
n,m
(c) x < y iff χ[°l - y[°l, χ[
χl - y^ and χί
2! <dis yί
2! (see 1.4).
Explanation. So what is the meaning of xRTl The interesting part of T is
T^ = {η\£ : η G (limT) Π f| x'°l(n)} and T is in a way "explicitly nowhere
n<ω
dense" i.e. for some g G Π x'°](n), for every 77 G lim(T') for every n for many
n<ω
subintervals / of [χW(n),χW(n + 1)) we have g\I ^ η\L
2.17B Claim. Assume V CV+. Then (7) =» (/3) => (α), where:
(α) "for every / G DP(
ωα;)
v and g G (Π^<ω /(^))
y+ there is h G
such that {£ : h(£) = g(£)} is finite.
(β) Ψ^γ[
v\ covers in v+ for Y = ΐ
)ί
)(
α;^)
(7) every covering model from ^g^p^jίV') covers in V+.

§2. Examples 
307
2.17C Remark. 1) It is well known that: condition (a) implies there is no
Cohen real over V in F+; and if VQ C V\ C T^, in V\ there is a real / in
 ωω
dominating (
ωω)
v 
and in V^ there is g G Π^<α; fW contradicting (a) then in
F2 there is a Cohen real over VQ.
The preservation theorem below implies a Cohen real is not added in limits.
2) Note that making x'
0' smaller makes being in limT, xRT, harder.
3) The absoluteness requirements can be restricted as usual.
4) What we deduce below is complimentary in a sense to 2.13 A-C.
5) Why in 2.17A the 2
X ^1 Of course a more general notion will use norms
(see [RoSh:470]).
6) If Y is closed enough then in 2.17B we have (7) <Φ (β).
2.17D Claim. 1) Assume
(i) Y is a subset of DP(
ωω),
(ii) for every x G Y there is y £ Y and there are (£* : n < ω) such that:
(a) limί* =00
n
(b) 1 < l*n < ίn+ι> C a power of 2 (for technical reasons)
(c) xW - yW
(d) xM = yt°l
(e) 2/[
2](n)=χ[
2](n)-log2(C)>0
(iii) for < from 2.17A(c) (y, <) is dense with no minimal member.
Then ψg^iV] is a fine covering model.
2) Assume (i) Y is an absolute definition of a subset of DP(
ωω),
(ii) clause (l)(ii) holds absolutely,
(iii) clause (l)(iϋ) holds absolutely.
Then φ^γ is a fine definition of a covering model.
Proof. We check the condition in definition 2.2.
(a) (a)(b)(c) Check.
(β) Check.
(7)+ We check on 
φffi[V].

308 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
So let xn < xn+ι < x
t < y be given, xnRTn. Now any thin enough infinite
w C ω will work as:
® 
U^<^(*) Ώ satisfies (*)n from (b)(iii) of Definition 2.17A for y if /\£χβT^,
χ[°l - ι/[°], XW = j/M and 2
aclal<
n>/*
Ial<»> is > £(*).
(5) We use 2.4(3) (and for checking the demand (iv)*** there we use
assumption (ii)).
Let x G Ώom(R) be given and we shall define y and B as required in
clause (iv)*** of 2.4(3). So let y be as defined by clause (ii) of 2.17D(1). Now
we define the Borel function B; we let B((ηa : α < ω)) — v (where ηa G
 ωω,
ηa \a = ηω fα, v G
 ωω) if:
(Θi) Let n< ω, m, (χM(n + 1) - χM(n))/2
χl21(n)
(a) (τ/ω(χM(n) + m 2
χίal<
n> + % ) : % < 2
χ[2]^) is equal to (v(y^(n) + m
(b) if fc < £; - 1 ίΛen (τ/fc(x
[1](n) + m - 2
χ[2] W + i) : i < 2
χ[2](
n)) is equal
to (ι/(yW(n) + m - 2
zl21(
n) ^ + (* + !)• 2
a?I21(
n> -f i) : i < 2*
ί21<
n>).
So assume T\ satisfying yRT\ is given and we should define appropriate T\ .
As yJfZΓi, there are functions 0£jm forn < ω, m< (yM(n + l)-yN(ri))/2
yl*
]W
witnessing it. For n < ω, m < (yW(nH-l) -y[
1'(n))/2
x ^ we define a function
#n,m as follows. Its domain is of course (x W (n) + m 2
X (
n) , x^
1' (n) -f (m 4- 1)
2*
121<
n>) and for each fc < £;, we have <£Λ.m+, C ^m.
The checking is straight. 
Π2.17D
Remark. 
Note that for many pairs (XQ,XI) from TΊ, x\RT\ we can produce
TO, xo-RTo, where TI in a way codes TQ.
2.17E Conclusion. For φffi 
as in 2.17D(1), for CS iteration Q = (P^Qj :
i < <55 j < ί)» if I^Pi "Qi is proper" and Pi preserve </>9^y[^] for i < δ then PS
preserve <$£y[V].

§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
309
§3. Preservation of Unboundedness
3.1 Notation. 1) ψ may denote an absolute definition of a two-place relation
on
 ωω which we denote β^[V] (so when extending the universe, we reinterpret
β, but we know that the interpretations are compatible). We write xRy instead
of R(x, y). Sometimes ψ is an absolute definition of a three-place relation R on
ωω and then we write xR
zy instead of β(x, y, z).
Let R denote (Rn : n < ω) (each Rn as above) so R
m = (R™ : n < ω). We
identify (R : n < ω) with R.
Remember S<K(A) — {B C A : \B\ < K} and if K, is regular uncountable
then T><K(A) is the filter on S<K(A) generated by the sets G(M) = {\N\ : N -<
M, 11N11 < K and N Π K is an ordinal} for M a model with universe A and < K
relations.
3.2 Definition. 1) For F C
 ωω and a two place relation R on
 ωα;, we say that
F is Ή-bounding if (V# G
 ωω)(3/ G F)[gRf}.
2) F C
ωω is β-bounding if it is Λn-bounding for each n (where R = (R^ : n <
ω)).
3) For F C
 
ωω, R (each Rn two place) and 5 C 5<«1(F) the pair (F,fl) is
S-nice if:
α) 
F is jR-bounding.
/3) 
For any N G 5, for some # G F, for every no, mo < ω player II has a
winning strategy for the following game and, moreover, the strategy is absolute.
The game is defined for each countable set N (but only N Π F is needed) and
it lasts ω moves.
In the fcth move: player I chooses fk €
 ωω,gk G F Π TV, such that /& f
= jt Γ rn^+i for 0 < ί < fc and fkRnk9k and then player II chooses
> TO* and nfc+ι > nfc.
In the end player II wins if (\Jk<ω fk \ mk} Rnog, (or if player I can't
choose in the fc'th move he lose).
4) We say (F, R) is S/V^Q (F)-nice if: for some C G PKo(F), we have: (F, R) is
(5 Π C)-nice.

310 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
5) We omit S when this holds for some 5 G
3.3 Notation. <* is the partial order on
 ωω defined as: / <* g iff for all but
finitely many n < ω, f(n) < g(n). In this case we say that g dominates /. We
say that g dominates a family F C
 ωω if g dominates every / G F.
3.4 Definition. 1) A family F C
 ωω is dominating if every g G
 ωω is dominated
by some / G F.
2) A family F C
 ωω is unbounded (or undominated) if no g G
 ωω dominates it.
3.5 Definition. 1) A forcing notion P is almost
 ωu;-bounding if: for every P-
name / of a function from ω to ω and p G P for some g : ω — > ω (from VI) for
every infinite A C ω (again A from V) there is p' ,p < p' G P such that:
p
r \\-p "for infinitely many n G A, f(n) < g(n)"
2) A forcing notion P is weakly bounding (or F-weakly bounding, where
F C (
ωω)
v)) if (
ωω)
v (or F) is an unbounded family in V
p .
3.6 Claim.
1) If a forcing notion P is weakly bounding, and Q (G F
p) is almost
^-bounding, then their composition P * Q is weakly bounding.
2) If Q is almost ^-bounding, F C
 ωω an unbounded family (from V)
then F is still an unbounded family in V®.
3) If Q is adding λ Cohens (i.e. Q = {/ : / a partial finite function from
λ to {0, 1}} ordered by inclusion) then Q is almost
 ωα;-bounding.
Proof. 1) By part (2) (apply it in V
p to F = (
ωω)
v and the forcing notion Q).
2) Assume p G Q forces that / dominates F and we shall get a contradiction.
Let g G (
ωω)
v be as in Definition 3.5(1). As in V, F is unbounded, for some
/* G F we have {n < α; : #(n) < f*(n)} (G V) is infinite, so choose this set as
-A, so by Definition 3.5(1) we know that for some p'\
(a) p < p' G Q

§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
311
(b) p' \\-Q "for infinitely many n G A, f ( n ) < g(n) (hence by A's definition
f(n)<g(n)<Γ(n)Γ
and this contradicts p \\-Q "/ dominates F" .
3) Easy. 
Π3.6
3.7 Definition. R^° = ψo(V) is: fRg iff {n : /(n) < g(n)} is infinite.
3.8 Claim. A forcing notion P (in V) is weakly bounding (= adds no domi-
nating real) iff \\-P "F is ^-bounding" where F = (
ωω)
v , R = R*°. 
D3.8
3.9 Claim. Let R = R^° and F C
 
ωω be an β-bounding set, such that
(V/o, - - - , /n, - - - € F)(3g G F)[Λn<ω /n <* g]. Then (F, β) is nice.
Proof. We have to describe g and an absolute winning strategy for TV (and
n0,m0). Choose 0 € F such that (V/ G N)[f G F => / <* g]. As for the
strategy, n^ is irrelevant, we just choose m^+i = min{m : there are at least k
numbers i < m such that g(i) > Λ(ΐ)} 
^3.9
3.10 Claim. Suppose that P C [ω]^° is a P-filter (i.e. it is a filter containing
the cobounded subsets and for any An G P (n < ώ) for some A* G P we have
(Vn)[,A* Cαe An]) and P has no intersection (i.e. there is no X G [CJ]
NO such
that X Cαe A for every A G P; recall that X Cae A means "X \A\s finite").
Let R be:
xRy iff x ^ [ω]*° or y φ [ω]"° or x gαe y.
(We identify x C ω with its characteristic function. The case "y ^ [α;]^
0" will
be irrelevant.)
Then
1) (P, R) is nice.
2) Let Q be a proper forcing notion. P is ^-bounding in V® iff Ihg " the filter
P generates is a P-filter with no intersection " (i.e. every q G Q forces one
statement iff it forces the other) .

312 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Proof. 1) Clause a) of Definition 3.2(3) is obvious as "P has no intersection"
(see above). In (β) choose g = A* eP such that
Again, the least obvious point is the winning strategy; again rik is irrelevant
and player II chooses mk = min{m : fa Π m \ g has power > fc}.
2) Left to the reader. 
Πa.io
3. 10 A Remark. We can use ω\ instead
 ωω.
Sometimes we need a more general framework (but the reader may skip it, later
replacing Hz, R
z
n by F, Rn).
3.11 Notation. If if is a set of (ordered) pairs, let Rang(if) = {y :
(3x)[(x,ϊ/) G if]} and Dom(if) = {x : (3y)[(x,y) G ff\},Hx = {y : ( x , y ) G if}.
We shall treat a set F (from e.g. Definition 3.2) as the following set of
pairs: {(Oω,x) : x G F} where Oω is the function with domain ω and constant
value 0 (so e.g. 3.13 applies to 3.2 too).
3.12 Definition. 1) For a set if C
 ωω x
 ωω, and R (an ω-sequence of three
place relations written as xR
zy) and 5 C 5<^1(if) we say that (if, R) is 5-nice
if:
α) if is ^-bounding which means: for every z G Dom(if ), ίfz is #
z-bounding,
i.e. (Vn)(V/ G
 ωω)(3g G Hz)[fR
z
ng] 
letting R* = (R
z
n : n < ω).
β) For any N G 5, z G Dom(if ΠAΓ) and for every no, mo < ω for some g G if z
and ZQ G Dom(if ) Π TV player II absolutely wins the following game which
lasts ω moves.
In the fcth move: player I chooses /& G
 ωω,gk G Rang(if Π N) such that
fk \ mt+ι — ft \ mt+ι for 0 < ί < k and fkR^k9k\ then player II chooses
rafc+i > mk,nk+ι > nk and zk+ι G Dom(if Π N).
At the end of play, player II wins iff (\Jk fk

§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
313
2) (H, R) is S/VχQ(H)-mce 
if for some C G V*Q(H) we have: (H, R) is (SίΊC)-
nice.
3.13 Lemma.
1) Suppose
(i) 0 = (Pj, Qi : i < δj < δ) is an iteration as in 0.1, for* I
(ii) S C «S<^1 (ff) is stationary in V, and if we are in one of the cases (C),
(E), (F)of0.1,then|fl
r|-H 1
(iii) (fl
r,β)is5/P<^1(H)-nice
(iv) for every i < 5, in F
Pi we have: if is ^-bounding
(v) all Qi have pure (K0,2)-decidability (see Definition 1.9)
(vi) \HI = NI or at least
(Vα G [V
p*]) [|α| < Ko & α C # => (36 e (5No(ff))
v)[α C 6]] .
Then in F
p<5, H is ^-bounding.
2) We can weaken (v) to
(v)~ all Qi has pure (2,2)-decidability
provided that for some fixed /* €
 ωω, [(3i)[/(i) > f * ( i ) ] =ϊ fR
z
ng\ for
any z G Dom(Jϊ) and g £ Hz.
3) Assume .R = {.Rn : n < ω) a decreasing sequence of (absolute definitions
of) three place relations on
 ωω, F C
 ωω is R bounding (i.e. we are in the
context of Definition 3.2 not 3.11, 3.12). Assume further (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
and (vi) from (1), replacing H by F and
(v)/ all Qi have pure feeble (H0,2)-decidability (see Definition 3.14 below).
Then in V
Pδ, F is ^-bounding.
4) Assume, as in (2) that for some fixed /* G
 ωω, [(3i)f(ί) 
> f*(ϊ) => fRng\
for any /, g G
 ωω. The results of (3) holds if we replace (v)/ by (v)J
meaning replacing there (Ho, 2) by (2,2).
t So the reader may think on CS of proper forcing so <pr=<- The I is from
clause (F) there, so can be ignored for the cases (A)-(E), e.g. the two cases just
mentioned.

314 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
3.13A Remark.
1) You can read the proof with no = 0, F instead H, R instead R^
n (see 3.11).
2) The proof gives somewhat more than the lemma, i.e. it applies to more
cases, "ίί is /^-bounding" means that (α) of 3.12 holds.
3) We can weaken 3.12(l)(β) to " in no generic extension of F, no strategy of
player I is a winning strategy"( and 3.13 still holds). The proof is similar,
only we choose the Gk in v^y(*°^
P"
{).
4) Part (3) (or (4)) of 3.13 is suitable for FS iteration of c.c.c. forcing by
3.16(4) below.
3.14 Definition. 1) A forcing notion Q has pure feeble (#ι, ^-decidability if.
for every p G Q and Q-name r satisfying p \\-Q "T < #ι" there are a C 01? |α| <
02 and q,p <pr q G Q such that q weakly decides r G α; where
2) q G Q weakly decides r G α (or any other statement) if no pure extension of
q decides this is false.
3) A forcing notion Q has pure weak (#ι, ^-decidability if for each p G Q in
the following game, player II has a winning strategy.
In the n'th move player I chooses rn, a Q-name of an ordinal < θ\ and
player II chooses αn,αn C #ι, |αn| < #2- In the end player II wins the play if
for every n < ω there is qn, p <pr qn G Q, qn weakly decides f\i<n it G α^.
3.15 Proof of 3.13 (1). We speak mainly on cases (A) and (F) of 0.1(1). W.l.o.g.
cf(5) = NO or for every i < δ we have \\-p. "cf(<5) > NO" (by 3.16 below we
have associativity; use a maximal antichain of conditions deciding and restrict
yourselves above one member; then if necessary use renaming.)
If cf(5) > HO, then any real in V
Pδ belongs to V
Fj for some j < δ (see
III 4.1B(2), (or X or XIV or XV); hence there is nothing to prove, so we shall
assume cf(ί) = ω. By III, 3.3 or XV 1.7, w.l.o.g. δ = ω.
Suppose p G Pω, z G Dom(#), n0 < ω and \\-Pω "/ G
 ωω" 
we shall find r,
P <Pr r € Pω and g G Hz such that r \\-pω
 ufR^Qg
n. Let mo < ω. Let TV be a
countable elementary submodel of (H(X), G) (λ regular large enough) to which

§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
315
(PjyQi : i < ω,j < ω},p,f,z,S,H belong as well as the parameters involved
the definitions of the Rn's. The set of such N belongs to P<κ1(Jff(λ)), hence
for some such N, N n H G S (and TV is I-suitable for case (F) of 0.1).
By 1.11 w.l.o.g. for each n < ω,f(ri) is a Pn-name, and we let p = (p
Q
n :
n < ω) where \\-Pn "p° G <3n" Let g G H z and ZQ G N Π Dom(#) be as in
clause (/?) of Definition 3.12 (for N Π H and z, n0, m0).
We shall now, by induction on k < ω, define qk,pk,gk,zk,mk, nk such that
(a) qk € Pfe is (JV,Pjfe)-generic (for (A) of 0.1(1)) or (N, Pk] -semi-generic
(for (F) of 0.1(1)) and qk lhPfc 'W[GPJ Π H = N Γ] H"
(b) qk ί n = qn for n < k
(c) Pk £ Pω, in fact is a P^-name of a member of Pω
(d) pk \ k <pr ςffc
(e) pfc+i f A: = pk \k and pfe <Pr Pk+i
(f) ^ ll-pjb "Pfe € N[ζ?pJ" i.e. pjfe is a P^-name of a member of N[Gpk] Π
(g) Zk is a Pjfc-name of a member of Dom(#) Π N
(h) mfc < mfc+ι and nk < J}k+ι
(i) ra/c, n/, are P^-names of natural numbers
Note that (a) implies that TV Π H belongs to the club of S<^1 (H) involving
U(H,R) is5/P<Nl(ff)-nice
w.
For k = 0 we let qβ = 0,po = P>
For fc+1, we work in V[Gk], Gk a generic subset of P^ satisfying qk € Gk. So
Pfe = Pfc[G/c] G ΛΓ[Gfc] and pfe Γ * ^ Gfc- In ^[Gfc] we can find an <pr-increasing
sequence of conditions pk,i G Pω/Gk for i < ω, such that pk,o = pk[Gk] and
Pk,i € N[Gk], moreover even (pkίi 
: i < ω) G N[Gk] and pfc>< forces values
for f ( j ) for j < i. So for some function fk G JV[G;b] we have fk G ^α; and
Pkti *-pu/Pk "/ Γ i - Λ Γ i". As 7V[Gfc] X (H(λ)[Gfc],e) (see III 2.11), for
some gk G N[Gk] Π HZk = N Π #Zfc, we have JV[Gfc] h ΊkR
z
n
k
k9k"
] '• Now
we use the absolute strategy (from Definition 3.6(2) for N Π H) to choose
t Really n^, 0* are P^-names so we should have written nk[Gk] but ignore
this.

316 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
z/c+ijn/e+ijrafc+i (the strategy's parameters may not be in JV, but the result
is) and we want to have pk+\ = Pk,mk+1 However all this was done in V[Gfc],
so we have only suitable P^-names which is O.K. In the end, let r G Pω be
defined by r \ k = qk Γ fc for each fc; by requirement (b) we know that r is
well defined and belongs to Pω. Suppose r e Gω C Pω,Gω generic over V. As
in the proof of the preservation of properness we can prove by induction on
k that pk <pr r for each k. Then in V^G^] we have made a play of the game
from Definition 3.12(l)(/3), player II using his winning strategy so (((J/fc ί
k ~
k)[Gω])R^Qg holds in V[Gω], but clearly pk,nk <Pr Pk+i <Pr r hence pk,nk £ Gω
hence (/ \ mk)[Gω} = ( f k \ mk)[Gω}. Consequently f[Gω] = (\Jkfk 
\ k)[Gω]
and f[Gω]Rn0g holds in V[Gω] and r forces the required information .
Proof of 3.13(2): Similar.
Proof of 3.13(3)\ Like 3.13(1). We use freely 3.16 below, but note that no
harm is caused if player II increases ra^, nk (not z/J). A play (or an initial
segment of the play) in which player II do this is said to weakly follow the
strategies. Now the strategy in use is to weakly follow all possible subplays. I.e.
above (in the proof of 3.13(1)) we, by induction on k < ω, choose g/c, pk, gk,
(Uvί^vϊ^υ) : k e v C k + 1): and mjt, n^ such that:
(a) - (f ) and (h) as before
(g)' zv is a P/c-name of a member of Όom(H) Π N
(ί) mv, nυ are P/c-names of natural numbers, and
fc = max(τ ) => mv < mυ\{k} & nv < nv\{k}
(j) rrik = max{mυ -f fc : υ C k -h 1}, nk = m3x{nυ + fc : v C fc 4- 1}.
In the induction step, pk,i (i < ω), fk are chosen such that: pk <pr
pjfe,o, Pk,ι <pr Pfc,t+ι
 and no pure extension of p^ in Pω/Gk forces f\i /
//c fi. Now for each υ such that 
fcGfCfc 
+ l w e pretend that the play so
far involve only player I choosing {(/*,#) : I e v) and player II choosing
<(φt;n(£+i),ϊ*t;n(€+i)^t;n(£+i)) : ^ € 
*> \ {fc}) and player's II given winning
strategy dictates (rnυ,nv,zv). Lastly rrifc+i, n^+i are computed by clause (j).

§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
317
We have defined a name for a strategy; we can show that it is forced that
unboundedly often we have made the right move, so moving to the appropriate
subplay we are done.
Proof of 3. 13(4): Similar. 
Π3.ι3
3.16 Claim. 1) For (0ι,02) € {(2,2),(N0,2)} the property "Q has pure feeble
(0ι, 02 )- decidability" is preserved by iteration as in 0.1.
2) Similarly^ for "pure weak" .
3) Q has pure feeble (0ι, 02)-decidability if Q has pure weak decidability.
4) If Q has feeble pure (0*,2)-decidability and 0* is uncountable and <pr is
equality (as we do for FS iteration of c.c.c. forcing) or 0* > 2 and <pr is <
Q
(as for CS iteration of proper forcing) then Q has pure feeble (0, 2)-decidability
for every 0.
5) For (0ι, 02) G {(n,2) : 2 < n < ω}, every Q has pure feeble (0ι,02)-
decidability.
Proof. 1) We copy the proof of 1.10, changing (iii) (in the proof of case 5
(a = ω)) to
(iii)' first for n < ω we define a Pn+ι-name sn: for Gn+ι Q PΠ+I generic over
y» §n[Gn+ι] is k + 1 if there is r G Pω/Gn+ι such that Dom(r) = [n + l,ω),
Pω/Gn+ι |= "p Γ [n + l,ω] <pr r" and r weakly decides t = k, i.e. for no
r',r <pr r' G Pω/Gn+ι does p' ll-p^/Gn+i "ί ^ ^"5 ^ t^ιere is no suc^ r'
Second let qn G Qn[^n] be such that pn <pr gn and qn weakly decides the
value of 5n, (i.e. of sn/Gn) (if θ\ = 2, use Definition 3.13A twice).
Also in the end we prove by downward induction on ra < n(*) that
(r f m) U {q m} weakly decides sm — t.
2) Similar proof (using 3.16(1)).
3) Read the definitions.
4) Straight.
Alternatively use XIV §2.

318 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
5) Easy. 
D3.ι6
We now give some applications. Concerning 3.17 if you want also "no Cohen",
see 2.13.
3.17 Conclusion. 1) The property "P is weakly bounding" i.e. "P does not
add a dominating real over V" is preserved in limit (for iterations as in 0.10=2,
see 0.1(3)) provided that bv = NI in the non-proper case.
2) If F C
 ωω is not <*-bounded then "P does not add a <*-bound to F
n is
preserved in limit (for iterations as in 0.10=2) provided that e.g. |F| = Nj in
the non proper-cases.
3) In parts (l)+(2) we can use iterations as in 0.1 with pure feeble (N0,2)-
decidability.
Proof. 1), 2) Let Q be such an iteration, F = (
ωω)
v for 3.17(1), given for
3.17(2) and R is defined by Ί/>O (see Definition 3.7). By 3.9 (F, R) is a nice pair
in V. Even for every i < £g(Q), in V
Pi the set F is still unbounded and every
countable subset of F in V
Pί is included in a countable subset of F from V;
hence by 3.9 (F,R) is a nice pair even in VPi. By 3.13(3) this is true also in
F
Pδ (where <5 = ^g(Q).
3) Similar proof (to that of 3.13(1)) or by 3.13(3)). 
D3.ι7
3.18 Lemma. The property "Pα purely adds no random real over V" is
preserved under limits for iterations as in 0.10=2 or just by iteration as in
0.1 with every Qi having pure feeble (No,2)-decidability (see 3.16(4)).
Remark. Concerning the successor case see XVIII 3.20(i). Before we prove 3.18
we need some definitions and claims. Now for T C
 ω>ω, and η G
 ω>2 we let
T^ = {v : η~v\[eg(η),ω) G T}. Note that Lemma 3.18 includes the case of
FS iterations.

§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
319
3.19 Definition. 1) We let ψι be as follows:
xR^y iffy is a perfect subtree of
 ω>2 with positive Lebesgue measure, x eω2
and (Vn < ω)(Vp G
 n2)[p~ (x\[n,ω)) i limy].
2) Let HY be {(yi, t/2) : 2/ι? 2/2 are perfect subtrees of
 ω>2 with positive Lebesgue
measure such that: \imy2 ζ {η e
 ω2 : for some n < ω and p e
 n2 we have
p
Λ(r/r[n,u;)) Glim?/!} }
3.20 Claim. 1) HY is an ^-directed partial order.
2) Suppose V C Vί , and for any countable α C HY from Vί there is a countable
6 C Ff, α C 6 G Vί (and R = R^). The following are equivalent:
(i) no real in V\ is random over V
(ii) Ώom(HY) is ^-bounding in V\
(iii) (Dom(fίι
/),β) is nice in V\ (here Definition 3.2(3) is the relevant
one, with Όom(HY) here having the role of F there).
Proof. 1) Easy
2) (i) => (ii): Let x G ("2)^. As x is not random over V there is a Borel
set B G F of Lebesgue measure 0 such that x G B (i.e. x belongs to the V\-
interpretation of B). Without loss of generality B is closed under =* (i.e. if
r?ι,r/2 G
 ω2 and ηι =* 772 (ΞΞ V m\(n,ω) = τ/2ί[n,u;)) then 171 G B = r?2 G B).
n<ω
There is T C
 ω>2 perfect, T G V such that limΓ has positive measure and
lim(T) Π B = 0. So it is enough to prove that xRT, i.e. (Vn < ω)[x φ limT<
n)]
where T<
n> =
f {η : for some p G T we have ίg(p) = ^g(ry) and (V^)(n < ί <
Igp -> p(ί) - rj(^))} i.e. x G
 ω2 \ \Jn<ω lim(T^
n>), but this follows from x G B.
(ii) => (iii): Condition (α) of Definition 3.2(3) is clear. For condition (/?) let
N -< (//"(χ),G) be countable, z0 ^ ^ Π DomίfΓi), so for some α we have
NΠHY CαC HY, α eV,V 
\= \α\ = N0- So there is Γ G Dom(Jfί1
y), such
that
 ω2 \ Un<α, Γ<
n> contains all 2
ω \ Un<α; lim(ϊί
n>) for T! G TV Π Domiff}"),
hence it contains all Borel measure zero sets from V which are in N.
We have to give the winning strategy for player II.
In stage fc, fk,gk are given fkRQk,9k € JVnDom(ff^), so ^ is a perfect subtree
of
 ω>2 of positive Lebesgue measures. Then p^ (fk\[n^ω) 
φ lim^ for P € n2,

320 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
n < ω and (^, Γ) G H\\ together with the choice of T we know that for n < ω
and pen2we have p ~ ( f k \ [ n , ω ) ) φ limΓ.
Choose rafc+i > m^ large enough such that: for every n < ra^, p e
 n2 we
have: pVfc ί [n,rafc+ι) £ Γ.
(iii) => (i): Immediate. 
Π13.20
3.21 Proof of lemma 3.18
Let F = Όoιrϊ(HY). Let Q be an iteration as in 0.1, £g(Q) = δ, and in
no V
Pί(i < δ) is there a real random over V. So by the claim 3.20(2) we know
that (F,R) is nice in V
Pί. Hence by 3.13(3) it is nice in V
Pδ, hence by claim
3.20(2) in V
Pδ there is no real random over V. 
Πa.is
We now give an application of 3.17, taken from [Sh:207], Lemma 3.22 is proved
in §6 (see 6.13). On history see introduction to §6.
3.22 Lemma. There is a forcing notion Q such that
(a) Q is proper
(b) Q is almost ^u -bounding.
(c) IQI = 2«°
(d) In V
Q there is an infinite set A* C ω such that for every infinite
B C ω from V we have A* Π B is finite or A* \ B is finite.
3.22A Remark. For 3.23 it is enough to prove 3.22 assuming CH.
3.23 Theorem. Assume V |= CH.
1) For some forcing notion P*, P* is proper, satisfies the fr^-c.c., and
(*) In V
p*, 2^° = ^25 there is an unbounded family of power KI, but no
splitting family (see below) of power HI.
2) We can also demand that in V
p* there is no MAD of power HI (see
Definition 3.24(2)).

§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
321
3.24 Definition. 1) P is a splitting family if P C [ω}"° (= the family of
infinite subsets of ω) and for every A G [ω]^° for some B G P we have:
2) A family Λ is MAD (maximal almost disjoint) if:
(a) Λ is a subset of [ω]^°
(b) for any distinct A,BeA the intersection A Π B is finite
(c) .4 is maximal under (a) 4- (b).
3) Let b = min{|F| : F C
 ωω is not dominated} where "F not dominated"
means that for every g G
 ωω for some / G F we have -</ <* #. Let 
T> =
min{|F| : F C
 ωω is dominating} where "F is dominating" means that for
every g G
 ωω for some / G F we have # <* /. Let 5 = mind'PI : P C [ω]
Ko is a
splitting family (see above)}
Proof of 3.23. 
1) We define a countable support iteration of length N2 :
(Pa,Qa '• OL < ω<2) with (direct) limit P* = Pω2. Now each Qa is the Q from
3.22 for F
p«, so V
p<* \= "\Qa\ = 2*°". As V |= CH we can prove by induction
on α < ω2 that \\-Pa "CH" (see III, Theorem 4.1). We also know that P*
satisfies the N2-c.c. (see III, Theorem 4.1). If P is a family of subsets of ω of
power < HI in V
p* then for some a < ω%, V G F
Pa, and forcing by Qa gives a
set A*a exemplifying P is not a splitting family by clause (d) of 3.22. So from all
the conclusions of 3.23 only the existence of an undominated family of power
NI remains. Now we shall prove that F = (
ωω}
v is as required. By 3.8 it is
enough to show
(*) lhPu,2 "F is R^
Q -bounding" (see Definition 3.7).
Now note: F has power KI as V \= CH. We prove that F is Ή^-bounding in
V
Pa by induction on α < α;2. For a = 0 this is trivial; a = β + 1 : as Qβ is
almost ^-bounding (see 3.22 clause (b)) and by Fact 3.6(1); if cf(α) > N0 by
Conclusion 3.17(1).
2) Similar. We use a countable support iteration (Pj,Qi '• i < ^2, j < ^2}
such that:
(a) for every i < ω2, and MAD (Aa : α < ωι) G F
Pί, for some j > i,
either Q^j = adding HI Cohen reals, and QΊJ+I — {p G <2
V 2j+ 1 :

322 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
p > Pzj+i} where in V
P2J+1 we have P2j+ι H~Q "{A* : OL < ω\) is not
a MAD family"
or QZJ = adding Ki-Cohen reals, QZJ+I — Q[/2j+ι] where /2j+ι is
the ideal (of subsets of ω) which (Aa : a < ωι) and the cofinite sets
generate (on Q[I] see Definition 6.10).
(b) For j even Qj is adding HI Cohen reals.
(c) For j odd, Qj is <2, or {p G Q : p > PJ}, or it is Q[!A] where A is a
Pj-i-name of a MAD family of cardinality HI and V
Fj 
1= [Ihg "^ is
MAD"]
(d) for K2 ordinals j, Q2j+ι is Q^'+1.
There is no problem to carry out the definition. Each Qj is almost
 ωω-
bounding by 3.22 (i.e. see 6.13, when Qj = Q
γPj), by 6.22 (when Qj = Q[/A.]
we can apply it to V
pj~
λ as QJ-I is adding HI Cohens so 6.15 applies and the
second possibility in 6.22 fails by clause (c) above) and 3.6(3) (if j is even i.e.
Qj is adding HI Cohens). So as in part (1), Pω2 preserves "(
ωω)
v unbounded".
Also $ — H2 and 2^° = ^2 are proved as part (1) by clause (d). Lastly assume
A C P(ω) is a MAD family, |^4| = KI, so for some i, A G V
Pi. So there is j as in
clause (a). Work over VQ = V
p<2j so Q^j is adding HI Cohens. If p lt~Q2.,*Q "A is
not MAD" for somep € Qij*Q thenw.l.o.g. p e Q (as Q^j is homogeneous) and
we use the second possibility in clause (c). If not, we use the third possibility
of clause (c). 
Ds.23
We add the following in Summer'92 after a question of U. Abraham. In the
proof of the consistency of "there is no P-point" below (§4) we use the "PP-
property" (see 2.12A-F). We actually prove a stronger property called "the
strong PP-property" which implies the "PP-property" which we have proved
is preserved, so Abraham asked whether it itself is preserved. The following
variants would have sufficed for the purpose of §4 which was the reason of
existence.

§3. Preservation of Unboundedness 
323
3.25 Lemma. Assume that f : ω -> ω + 1 \ {0, 1}, h : ω -> ω \ {0, 1} and
ί1 <Ξ Πf h
 d= {/ : Dom(/) = ω and /(
n) a subset °f f OΌ of cardinality
< h(n), lim (|/(n)|/h(n)) = 0} are such that:
n— »oo v
(*) for any countable Λ C F there is f e F such that /\ (V*ri)[g(ri) C
Let R be defined as: ##/ iff
(a) #, / € Πf h (i e we consider a member of
 ωω as coding such sequences)
(b) (3*n)S(n) C /(n).
Let 5 C <S<N2(F) be stationary and assume F is ^-bounding.
T/ien (F, R) is S-nice. (Hence, we have a preservation theorem for a limit).
Proo/. Check Definition 3.2(3). Part (α), F is ^-bounding, should be clear. For
clause (/?), given TV G S, let fNeFbe 
such that / G N Π F => (V*n)[/(n) C
)] (it exists by the assumption (*)). The winning strategy is clear: choose
such that {i < nik+i : fk(i) ζ 9k(ϊ) ^ /ΛΓ(*)} has at least k members.
But of course it is nicer to have also preservation for composition of two forcing
notions.
3.26 Lemma. 1) Let f : ω -> ω + 1 \ {0, 1}, h* : ω -» ω \ {0} for t G Q be such
that for 5 < t (from Q) we have 0 = lim (h
s(n)/h
t(n)) and for each t G Q the
n— >oo
set Πf,h* satisfies (*) of 3.25. The following property is preserved by iterations
as in 0.10=2 and as in 0.1 with each Qi having pure feeble (2, 2)-decidability:
(*)ι (a) Q is purely
 ωα;-bounding.
(b) for every s <t from Q, / <Ξ V
Q such that / G Πf,h* and fc0 < fci < . . .
(so (ki : i < ω) G V) for some g G V such that g G Πf,h* we have
1A) So e.g. in (1), if Q = (P^Qj : i < a,j < a) is CS iteration, lhP. "Q; is
proper satisfying (*)ι" then Pα is proper satisfying (*)i.
2) We can replace (*)ι, by
(*)2 (
a) Q is purely
 ωα;-bounding

324 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(b) for every s < t from Q and / G V
Q , such that / G []f,h* f°r some
g e V, g e Πf,h* and for every infinite A G ([ω])*°)
v, for infinitely
may i G A, f ( ϊ ) C g(ϊ).
3) In (1) we can assume F = (
ωω)
v/ (for some V C V, a just reasonably
closed) is unbounded Ni-directed by <* and replace (*)ι by
(*)s (
a) Q purely preserves "F is unbounded"
(b) like (b) of (*)ι for (A* : i < ω) G F.
Proof. Similarly to the previous Lemma one may deal with limit cases using 3.13
for the respective variant of clause (b) (and by 2.8 for (*)ι(a), (*)2(a), 3.17 for
(*)s(a)). So now it suffices to prove this for iteration of length two: P<2 = Qo*Qι
(so PI = Qo5 PQ is trivial). First we prove part (2). Let / G (Πf hO^
2
 > s < t
from Q. Choose t' G (s,ί)q. Applying (*)2 to /,$,£', V
Pl,V
F2 we can find
/' £ [Πf h*']^ 1 satisfying the requirements there on #. Next we apply (*)2 on
f,t',t,V,V
pι and get <? G [Πf,ht]
V
Now for any infinite A C ω, A G V, by the choice of # we know that
A' =: {i G A : f ' ( i ) C #(i)} G F
Qo is infinite. Hence by the choice of /' we
know that A" = {i G A' : f ( i ) C /'(i)} is infinite and clearly it belongs to
yp2. Putting together A" = {i G A : f ( i ) C f ' ( ϊ ) C p(i)} is infinite. So p is as
required.
Now we prove part (1), so we are given s < t from Q and (ki : i <
ω) G V (strictly increasing) and / G (Πfh*)
V 2 ^et ^ ^ ( M)Q Applying
(*)ι, to /,s,ί
;, y
psy
p2,(fc, : i < ω) we get /' G (Πf,hf)
yPl satisfying the
requirements on g in (*)χ. So A =: {i : for every t G [fc$, fci+i) we have f(f) 
C
/
;(£)} is infinite. As Qo is ^cj-bounding there is a sequence ί(0) < 1(1) < . . .
(in V) such that An [-ί(i), l(i + 1)) ^ 0 for every i < ω. Let k( = fc^) and apply
(*)ι to f',t',t, V, V, {fc^ : i < α;} and get #, which is as required.
The proof of part (3) is similar.
3.26A Remark. In 3.25 we have the requirement FnΠf h satisfies (*) of 3.25.
We can work as 3.26(2) and weaken it to:

§4. There May Be No P-Point 
325
(*) 
for any s < t and countable A C Πfh* tnere is / € Πfh* sucn
Λ (Vn)[ff(n) C /(n)].
§4. There May Be No P-Point
We define the forcing notion P(F) (introduced by Gregorief) which, for an
ultrafilter F, adds a set A such that ω \ A, A ^ 0 modF, see definition
4.1. If F is a P-point (see definition 4.2A) this forcing is α-proper for every
α < ωι, and has the PP-property. Our point is that P(F)
ω enjoys all these
properties and in addition \\~P(F}" "F cannot be completed to a P-point ".
We will argue in the following way: as we use P(F)
ω, we can define a new
subset An of ω such that \\~p(F}" "An G F", where F is an extension of F
to an ultrafilter in the generic extension, but for each g G
 ωω Π V we have
lhP(F)w "ΓUcuΛ^n U0(n)) = 0 mod F".
We originally (see the presentation in Wimmer [Wi]) use the stronger
version of the PP-property, but there were problems with the preservation
theorem i.e., in that version the essential forcing was not an iteration.
Note that, we continue to add reals after forcing with P(F)
ω, so in fact we
prove the above described argument works with Q instead of P(F)
ω provided
P(F)
ω 
<£ Q, Q has the PP-property. So the importance of proving that this
property of Q is preserved is clear. The iteration in the end is standard.
The proof presented in [Wi] uses not exactly P(F)
ω. Rather we note that
if Q satisfies the c.c.c. then for any P-point FQ in V
p there is F\ = {A C
ω : A G F, \\-Q "A G F0"} which is a filter enjoying some of the properties of
FO : P(ω)/Fι (in V) is a Boolean algebra satisfying the c.c.c. and (if Q has the
ωα;-bounding property), for every An G FI there is A G FI, /\n<ωA Cae An.
Let {F* : i < H2} (assuming G.C.H.) list all such filters in V. Now the product
P with countable support of all the P(F
i)
ω satisfies: in V
p', no F
1 can be
extended to a P-point by an argument as mentioned above. However to close
the proof we need "P satisfies the c.c.c. ", which fails. But we replace P by a
subset which satisfies it and still has the desirable other properties. I expect

326 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
that the proof can be modified to have 2^° > ^2 (but this was not carefully
checked), whereas for the present proof we do not know how to do this.
4.1 Definition. For a filter D on a set / (we always assume all co-finite subsets
of / are in D), we define the following forcing notions ordered by inclusion:
1) P(D) = {/ : / is a function from B to {0,1} for some B = 0 modD, i.e.
BCI,I\BeD},
2) pt(D) = {/ € P(D) : f'l({l}) is finite },
P'(D) = {/ : / a function from B to {0,1}, B ^ / mod D},
P"(D] = {fe P'(D] : Γ
1({1}) is finite }.
4.1A Remark. Mathias [Mt3] used P"(D) for the filter D of co-finite subsets
of ω\ Silver used P^(D) for the filter D of cofinite subsets of ω and for an
ultrafilter D, Gregorief used P(D) for an ultrafilter D, and proved that it
collapses NI iff it is not a P-point.
4.2 Lemma. If F is a P-point (see below) then Q = P(F)
ω is proper (in fact
α-proper for every a. <ω\) and has the PP-property.
Proof. It will follow from 4.3 and 4.4. 
U4.2
4.2A Definition.
1) A filter F on / is called a P-filter or P-point filter if (it contains all co-
finite subsets of / and) for every An e F (for n < ω) there is A e F such
that ACaeAn for every n. Just "a P-point" means an ultrafilter.
2) We call F fat if for every family of finite pairwise disjoint wn C / (for
n < ω) there is an infinite .S C α; such that Unes ^n = 0 mod F. (Clearly
every P-point is fat.)
3) F is a Ramsey ultrafilter (on 7) if for every h : I —> ω there is A G F such
that h\A is a constant or 1 — 1 (and F contains all co-finite subsets of /).
Note that a Ramsey ultrafilter is a P-filter.

§4. There May Be No P-Point 
327
4.3 Fact. Assume F is a fat P-filter on ω. Let F* be {^4 C ω x ω : for every n
for some B G F, A Π ({n} x ω) = {n} x B}. Then F* is a fat P-filter on ω x ω,
and the forcing notion P(F)
ω is isomorphic to P(F*).
o/ toe
condition: F* zs a /ϊfter on ω x ω including all co-finite sets. Check.
Second condition: F* ώ a P-filter. Let Afc G F*, then ^ Π ({n} x ω) =
{n} x Bk,n f°r some Bk,n G F. As F is a P-filter there is B* G F, .B* Cae Bk,n
for every fc,n. Let B*n ^ B* Π Π*<» BM and A* ^ Un<.({^} x ^)
Clearly jB* G F (as we have assumed that F is a filter), hence A* G F*.
NOW A*\Ahc Un<JM x (BΪ \ BM)] ^ Un<*[M
 x (^ \ Bfcιn)], but
5* \ Bk,n £ B* \ Bfe>n, hence it is finite. Therefore A* \ A& is finite and hence
A* Cαe ^4fc. But k is arbitrary, so A* is as required.
condition: F* zs /at Let wn C ω x ω be finite and pairwise disjoint for
n < ω. We define by induction on n infinite sets Sn C ω, Sn+ι C 5n such that
{i < ω : (n, i) G Lkesn ^} ~ ^
 mo(^ ^ ^e can ^°
 tn^
s w^^ no problem,
and let fc(0) = Min(50), fc(n) = Min(5n \ {fc(0) ...k(n- 1)}). As every cofinite
subset of ω belongs to F, it is easy to check Un<α;
 wk(n] — 0 modF*.
So we have established the first conclusion of 4.3.
The isomorphism of P(F)
ω and P(F*) is trivial, for p = {/0, /i, /2 . . .) G
)-, let H(p) G P(F*) be ff(p)«n, Λ» - /n(fc). 
Π4.3
So it suffices (for proving Lemma 4.2) to prove:
4.4 Lemma. If F is a fat P-filter on a countable set £/ιen P(F) is proper (in
fact α-proper for every α < α i) and has the PP-property.
4. 4 A Remark. We will really prove the strong PP-property, see remark to
2.12AandDef 2.

328 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Proof 0/4.4. W.l.o.g. F is a filter on ω. So let p0 e P(F), {po,F} G AT ^
(ίί(λ), G), AT is countable and λ is large enough. Now, before proving proper-
ness, we prove:
4.5 Crucial Fact. For every p G P(F) and every P(F)-name t of an ordinal
and n < ω, there is q G P(-F), p < </, such that ςfra = pfn and for every
g : n — > 2, there is an ordinal α9 such that (q\[n, oo)) U g Ihp(jr) "ί = αp".
Proof. Let ^ (for i < 2
n) be a list of all functions g : n — » 2. We shall define by
induction, an increasing sequence of conditions p^ G P(F) (so p^ < Pi+i), for
i < 2
n. Let po = P, and if p^ is defined let
pt = (pir[n,oo))U^.
Clearly p\ G P(-F) hence there are a9i and pf € P(F),pt < ^ such that
P" ll-p(F) "ί = V Let Pi+i = P* UpΠKω). Clearly p< < p<+1 G P(F), and
(Pί-f i Γ[
n? ω)) U (ft Ih "t = α^" . So p(2n) is as required from q. So we have proved
Fact 4.5. 
D4.5
Before we prove 4.4 we also note
4.6. Fact. Assume F is a fat P-filter (on ω). If pn < Pn+i (for n < ω),
pn G P(-F) ίΛen there is ς[ G P(F), g > Po such that g > pn f [n, oo) for infinitely
many n.
Proof of Fact 4.6. Let An be the domain of pn, so An = 0 modF hence
ω \ An G F. As F is a P-filter there is A, ω \ A G F, such that for every
n, (ω \ A) Cae (ω \ An) i.e., An Cae A. Hence there are kn < ω such that
(An \ [0, fcn)) Q A. w.l.o.g. AO = Dom(po) C A and kn > n.
Now we shall choose natural numbers £(0) < t(l) < ί(2) < . . ., and want
to choose them such that
q = PO u U(P*(n) Γ[^(n),ω)) e P(F)
n

§4. There May Be No P-Point 
329
So as q is a function from a subset of ω to 2, (because pn < pn+ι) we only
have to take care of the demand Dom(ς) = 0 mod F. Note that Dom(g) \ A =
) \ A \ [0,%)) = )Jn<ω (Ai(n} \ A \ [0,*(n))) = (Jn(A£(n} n
(remember Λn \ [0, fcn) C A, A0 C A).
Now let wι = [I, kt), (for t < ω) which is a finite set. As Min^) = ί, there
is an infinite 5 C ω such that {w^ : I G 5} is a family of pairwise disjoint sets.
Since F is fat there is an infinite Si C S such that \J{we : I G Si} = 0 mod F.
So let {ί(n) : n < ω} be a list of the members of Si, %) < ί(n + 1). Then
<? G P(F) which proves Fact 4.6. 
D4.6
Continuation of the Proof of 4-4- Let {TI : i < ω} be a list of all P(F)-names
of ordinals which belong to N. Using the crucial fact 4.5 we can define by
induction on n, pn G P(F) Π TV, pn < pn+\ (po is already defined) such that:
(*) if g : n —> 2 = {0,1} and t < n then for some ordinal α(#, I)
(pn f[n, ω)) U g lhP(F) "r^ - a(g, ί)
n.
Applying the Fact 4.6 for the sequence (pn : n < ω) constructed above with
the property (*) we obtain a q G P(F) such that q > po and q > pn\[n,ω) for
infinitely many n. For such an n we have (pnί[^»^)) ^ ^ί[0?
n) ^ ^? hence q Ih
"for £ <n, τt = a(g, ί) for some function ^ : n —> 2 extending ς f [0, n)". So ςf is
(AT, P(F))-generic, and as ς' > po, we have proved that P(F) is proper. In fact
not only q is (N,P(F))-generic, but even q\[n,ω) for any n < ω is, as every
^UgΓ[n,α;) is, for g : n -> {0,1}.
Let us prove P(F) is α-proper for any countable α, by induction on a.
Let (Ni : i < a) be as in V.3.1, p G P(F) and {p,F} G A^0; we shall prove
that not only is there q > p, (Ni, P(F))-generic for every i < α, but also
q\[n,ω) is (JVί,P(F))-generic (for i < α,n < ω). If α = 0 we have proved
this, if α is a successor use the induction hypothesis. So assume a is limit
and let a — \Jn<ω&nι ®n < <*n+i- By the induction hypothesis we can define
<7n ^ NC^+IJ such that for every i < an and A: < ω we have gnf[fc?oo) is
(JVi,P(F))-generic and g0 > P,

330 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Apply Fact 4.6 to po, <Zo, <Zι> 
- and get q as required, remember that as q
is (7Vi,P(F)))-generic for every i < α, it is also (7Vα,P(F))-generic.
^From Lemma 4.4 only the strong PP-property remains to be shown (see
on it 2.12, particularly 2.12E(3); this suffices by 2.12F(1)). So let x €
 ωω diverge
to infinity, and let TV be as above, / G N be a P(F)-name of a member of
 ωω,
and w.l.o.g. we can assume that for n < ω, r^n — f(n) where {rn : n < ω}
was a list of the names of ordinals used in the proof of the properness of
P(F). When we define the pn, by induction on n, make one change in (*)
above (in this proof): instead of considering t < n, we consider the i such that
ί < 2x(n + 1 + 2
n+1) + 2. So we have:
(*)' if g : n -» 2 and t < 2(x(n + 1 + 2
n+1) + 1) then for some ordinal a(g,£),
Now we let kn = 0, mn(0) = 2
n, in(0) = n + 1, jn(0) = z(n + 1 + 2
n) + 1.
Then, by (*)', we have pn\[n,ω) lhP(F)
 uf\jn G {/ιpjτl : p : n -> 2}", where
hgjn(£) = a(g,2£). Sopn\[n,ω) allows /fjn(0) at most 2
n possibilities which is
ran(0). As ς > pnf[n,α;) for infinitely many n, and for each such n, ς "allows"
f\jn less than mn(0)-|-l possibilities, clearly kn = 0,mn(0),zn(0), jn(0) witness
n is as required in 2.12E(3) (i.e. 2.12A(b)(*) with k = 0), so we have finished.
EU.4,4.2
4.7 Lemma. Suppose F is a P-point and P(F)
ω 
<$ P and P has the PP-
property (or just it is ^α -bounding and has the weak PP-property, see Defini-
tion 2.12E).
Then in V
p ', F cannot be extended to a P-point.
Proof. Suppose p G P forces that .E is an extension of F to a P-point (in V
p).
Let (rn : n < ω) be the sequence of reals which P(F)
ω introduces (i.e. rn(ϊ) — i
iff for some {/o, /i, . . .) G Gp(F)
ω we have /n(0 = ^) Define a P-name:
ft(n) is 1 if {i < ω : rn(i) = 1} G E and
h(n) is 0 if {i < ω : rn(i) = 0} G E.

§4. There May Be No P-Point 
331
So p Ihp "ft G
 W2". Now as P have the PP-property, by 2.12D (and see 2.12E),
there is p\ > p, (p\ G P), and for each n < ω there are k(n) < ω, in(0) <
jn(0) < in(l) < jn(l) < 
< in(k(n)) < Jn(k(n}}, and jn(k(n)) < in+ι(0)
such that:
Pi Ihp " for every n < α; for some t < k(n) we have h(in(ί)) = h(jn(l))
n.
Now define the following P-names:
4n = {m < ω : for some £ < k(n),rin^(m) = Γjn(^)(
m)}
4.7A Fact. pl Ihp "An G E".
This is true because p\ forces that for some ί < k(ri) we have h(in(t)) =
h(jn(i}) and by the definition of h we know:
p Ihp "{m < ω : rin(i](m) = h(i n(f))} G E"
p Ihp "{m < ω : rjn(£](m) = h(jn(l))} G E» .
Putting together these three things (and p < Pi) we get pi Ihp "{m < ω : for
some £ < k(n) we have rin^(m) = h(in(ί)) = hj(jn(t)) = rjn(i)(rri)} G E" but
this set is included in An, hence p\ Ih "An G E" . So Fact 4.7A holds. 
^4.7^
So pi Ih "{An : n < ω} C ^", but as pi Ih "£ is a P-point" for some g we also
have pl Ihp "^ G
 ωω and Πn<u;(^n U [0,^(n)]) G £7". Now as P has the PP-
property by 2.12B(1) (or 2.12F(4)), it has the ^α -bounding property, hence
there is p%, Pi < Pi G P and g G
 ωω (in V) such that P2 "~p "0(ft) < ^(
n) for
every n" . Hence
P2 Ihp " f| (An U [0,^(n)]) G JB"
and therefore
(*) 
P2 Ihp "Πn<u;(^n U [0,0(n)]) ^ 0 mod F.".
As p2 G P and P(F)
ω <> P, there is g = (/0,/ι, . . .) G P(F)
ω such that p2
is compatible (in P) with any q^q < qϊ G P(F)
ω '. As F is a P-point, there

332 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
is A* C ω (in V) such that A* = 0 mod F and Dom(/i) Cαe A* for every i.
Choose, by induction on n < ω, αn < αn+ι < ω, such that αn > </(n) and for
t < k(n):
(Dom(/inW) U Dom(/jτιW)) \ [0,αn) C A*.
Now we shall define ^ = (/] : i < ω), q < q^ G P(F)
ω. Let: // (£) =
/tnwUO[anjan+1)\A. and/JnW = /jn(*)Ul[αnϊαn+l)\A. (where Oβ is the function
with domain B and constant value 0,IB defined similarly.) Otherwise /^ — /m.
Plainly, /^ is a function (by the definition of αn), its domain is the same as
that of fm plus a finite subset of ω, hence Dom(/r^l) C α;, Dom(/r^l) = 0 mod F.
Also fm C /^, hence 9 < gt = (/t,/t,...) G P(F)". Clearly ρt |hp "An is
disjoint to of [αn, αn+ι) \ A*" (by the definition An and /i nm»/J nm)
Also g(n) < αn, hence
9
t ll-p "^n U [0,^(n)] \ A* is disjoint to [αn,αn+ι)"
and thus
(An U [0,^(n)] \ A*) is disjoint to (^J[α:n?αn+ι) = [αo,ω)".
n
Consequently (as A* = 0 mod F and [0, αo] is finite)
9
f lhP " Π (^n U [0,flf(n)]) = 0 modF ".
By the choice of q we know that p2> ^ are compatible in P so let ps G P be a
common upper bound of p2, ^5 hence pa Ihp " p| (AnU[0,p(n)]) = 0 mod F"
n<ω
which contradicts (*). 
U4.7
4.8 Theorem. It is consistent with ZFC +2^° = ^2 that there is no P-point.
Proof. It is left to the reader, or see the 5.13, where a similar proof is carried
out. 
dU.β
n<ω

§4. There May Be No P-Point 
333
4.9 Claim. Assume iteration Q = (Pi,Qj : i < δ, j < δ) is as in 0.1, E is a
non principal ultafilter in V which is a P-point (i.e. if An G E for n < ω then
for some A G E we have A \ An finite for each n < ω) and if Pδ is not proper,
E is generated by < KI sets. If E is (pedantically generates) an ultrafilter in
V
Pί for each i < δ (and δ is a limit ordinal) then E is a P-point in V
 Pδ .
Remark. We weaken the assumption on E (in V) to
(*)o E C P(u ) and fil(£) = {A C ω : (3B G £7)4 2 B} is a non principal
ultrafilter on ω, which is a P-point.
Proo/.
We shall use 1.17 (see Definition 1.16, for our family of forcing notions).
Let fc* = 2, Dt = H(χ)
v, and
xΛoΓ iff (x € (
ωu;) Π D and) for some A = A^ G E for every η G lim(T) we have
{n < ω : 77(71) = 1} 2 A
xR\T iff for some 4 = A^ G £ for every η G lim(T) we have {n < ω : η(ri) =
1}ΓΊA = 0
(so the x's are not important).
Then clearly (D,R) — ((/?o,-Dι), (Ro,Rι)) is a weak covering 2-model, in
particular it covers in V; use the standard <Q. Note
(*)ι (D,R) covers in V
p iffE 
generates an ultrafilter in V
p
(*)2 if in V
p the family E generates an ultrafilter then E generates a P-point
in V
p (of course provided that P is proper or P preserves KI and \E\ = NI
or Ihp «5<Nl(|E|)
v is cofinal in S
We next prove that (D, P, <") is a fine covering 2-model. We check Definition
1.16(2).
Clauses (α), (β) are trivial.
Clause (7) (a): Let k < 2, xRkTn. By symmetry let fc = 0 so xRoTn. So let
4n = Aτn , so 4n G £". We can find B e E such that 5 C 40, ^ Cαe 4n for each
n. Let T* = {η G
 ωα; : (Vi G B)η(i) = 1} so the choice A% = B exemplifies
xRkT* (for any x), so it suffices to prove the inclusion from (7) (a). Toward this
let for i < ω let m* G (i, ω) be such that B \ mf C Λ<, and let it; C α; be infinite

334 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
such that if i < ω, j G w, i < max(i(; Π j) then πii < j. Now suppose η G
 ωω
and i G w => η\(mm(w \ (i + 1)) G 
U 
Tj U Γ0, and we are going to prove
j<ij£w
η G lim(T*). This means that we should prove A' = {n < ω : η(n) = 1} 2 B',
so let n G B; if n is smaller than the second member of w, then applying
the assumption for i = the first member of w we get η\(n + 1) 6 Γ0 which
implies the desired conclusion. If not let IQ < i\ < n < i^ where ^o, ή, 12
are successive members of w. So by the assumption η\i^ G (J 1} U TO, now
j<io
if r/fz2 G TO we are done, so assume η\iz G ϊ}, j < ΪQ, hence raj < i\ < n.
Then Aϋfr Π [7717,00) 2 £ Π [m^ , oo) 2 {n}, hence as η G 1} we get η(ri) = 1 as
required.
Clause (τ)(b): We can find Bi e E such that {n < ω : 77^(71) = A:} D Bi, then
we can find B e E such that β \ Bi is finite say C [0, m^) for i < ω. Choose
(rij 
: j < ω) as in the proof of (7)(a); by symmetry w.l.o.g. U[
n2j?
n2j-fi)
j
belongs to the ultrafilter which E generated. So B Π U[
n2j>
 nϊj+1) n {^ : ^W —
j
fc} belongs to this ultrafilter, hence it includes some B
1 G E. Consequently,
{i < ω : r?n2j(0 = k} 2 B
1 for each j < ω and {i < ω : η(i) — k} 2 -B', as
required.
Clause (5): Straight by (*)ι, (*)2 
CU.g
4.10 Remark. 1) Mekler [Mk84] considers the generalizations to finitely addi-
tive measures μ : P(ω) —» [0, I]R, generalizing this proof to prove the con-
sistency of "the parallels of P-points do not existence". Though there the
PP-property fails, he showed that
 ωα;-bounding suffices. Still we felt the PP-
property is inherently interesting.
2) Baumgartner [B6] was interested in ultrafilters with properties which weaken
"being P-points". Answering his question we prove that if in the iteration above
we use unboundedly often random real then there is no P-point (see above),
and there is a measure zero ultrafilter (see [B6]).
3) The question of whether there are always NWD-ultrafilters (see van Douwen
[vD81], and [B6]) is answered negatively in [Sh:594], generalizing the proof here
(and continuing the "use of J5" from [Sh:407]). There the PP-property is used.

§5. There May Exist a Unique Ramsey Ultrafilter 
335
§5. There May Exist a Unique
Ramsey Ultrafilter
Usually it is significantly harder to prove that there is a unique object than
to prove there is none. The proof is similar to the one in the previous section,
but here we are destroying other Ramsey ultrafilter (in fact "almost" all other
P-points) while preserving our precious Ramsey ultrafilter. By a similar proof
we can construct a forcing notion P such that e.g. in V
p there are exactly two
Ramsey ultrafilters (in both cases up to the equivalence induced by the Rudin
Keisler order) or any other number.
More exactly we shall prove the consistency of "there is a unique Ramsey
ultrafilter FQ on ω, up to permutation of ω, moreover for every P-point P,
F0<RKF".
Note that if there is a unique P-point it should be Ramsey; however,
concerning the question of the existence of a unique P-point we return to it in
XVIII §4.
Our scheme is to start with a universe with a fixed Ramsey ultrafilter FQ,
to preserve its being an ultrafilter and even a Ramsey ultrafilter. Our ultrafilter
will be generated by N! sets. Now in each stage we shall try to destroy a given
P-point F such that F^RKF. The forcing from §4 does not work, but if we
use a version of it in the direction of Sacks forcing it will work.
5.1 Claim.
1) If F is a P-point in F, P is a proper forcing notion and Ihp "F generates
an ultrafilter " then it (more exactly the one it generates) is a P-point in
V
p.
2) If the ultrafilter F is Ramsey in Vί, and P is
 ωω-bounding, proper and
Ihp "F generates an ultrafilter", then in V
p', F still generates a Ramsey
ultrafilter.
Proof.
I) As for being a P-filter, let p Ihp "{An : n < ω] is included in the ultrafilter

336 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
which F generates ". So w.l.o.g. p \\-p "An G F", and by properness for some
<7> P < Q £ -P> and Anj7n G F (for n,m < ω) we have g Ihp " for each n,
An G {Anjm : m < α;}". As F is a P-point in V and {-An,m : n,ra < u;} C F
belong to V, there is Λ G F which is almost included in every ^4n>m hence in
each An\ (note: e.g., if F is generated by NI sets, then "P does not collapse
NI" is sufficient instead "P is proper").
2) As F generates a P-point in V
p', the following will suffice: let 0 = n0 < ni <
r>2 
and p G P; then we can find ^4 G F and <? > p such that # Ih "An [n^n^+i)
has at most one element for each i" (i.e. F is a so called Q-point). Remember
P has the ^α -bounding property. So there are h G
 ωω Π V, and q > p such that
<? "~p " (Vi)ni < h(iγ. W.l.o.g. Λ is strictly increasing.
Define n* (in V by induction on i): n^ = 0, n*+1 = h(n* + 1) + 1. Now for
no i j j we have Ui[G\ < n^ < n!-+1 < ni+ι[G]. [Why? Assume this holds and,
of course, i < j; as n^ < n^+i, clearly t < nt[G] hence
7Ίj+ι > h(n*j 4-1) > h(rii[G\ + 1) > h(i -f 1) \
(remember h is strictly increasing), a contradiction]. Also F is an ultrafilter
in V[G], by the assumption. As in V, F is a Ramsey ultrafilter and (n* : i <
ω) G F, there is A G F such that A Π [n*,n*+1) has at most one element for
each i. Let G C P be generic over V be such that q G G. Checking carefully
in V[G] we see that for every i we have A Π [fti[G],ni+ι[G]) has at most two
elements and in this case they are necessarily successive members of A. Let
AQ = {k G A : |Λ Π fc| is even}, so either AQ or A \ AQ belong to the ultrafilter
which F generates, and both are as required. 
D5.ι
5.2 Lemma.
1) "F generates an ultrafilter in V
Q which is a P-point, Q is proper" is
preserved by countable support iteration for F a P-point.

§5. There May Exist a Unique Ramsey Ultrafilter 
337
2) "F generates an ultrafilter in V® which is Ramsey -f Q is ^α -bounding
4- Q is proper " is preserved by countable support iteration for F a Ramsey
ultrafilter.
Proof. 1) By 4.9 and see 5.1(1).
2) Combine (1), 5.1(2) and 2.8. 
D5.2
5.3 Definition. For F a filter on ω, let SP(F) be {Γ : T is a perfect tree
C
 ω>2 and for some A e F, for every n G A, η G Γ Π
 n2 implies 77
Λ (0) G
T & 77^(1) G T}. The order is the inverse inclusion. We denote the maximal
such A by spt(Γ).
5.3A Remark.
1) So SP(F) is a "mixture" of P(F) and Sacks forcing and SP*(F) (defined
below) is halfway between SP(F) and SP(F)
ω.
2) Remember Γ^j ^f {v e T 
: v < η or η < v} for any η G T and
T[n] def 
€ Γ
5.4 Definition. Let T® =
f X^<n(% T®
 ά= \Jn<ω T® ordered by the being
initial segment, i.e. for / G T® and g G T® we set / < g iff f ( ϊ ) = g(ϊ) for each
i < n. (Note f ( i ) G *2). For a filter F on ω, let SP*(F) be
{T : T is a perfect tree C T® and for every fc < ω we have sptfc(Γ) G F},
where
sptfc(Γ) = {n < ω : for every η G T^(= T Π T®) and i/ G
 k2 there is
pe
n<2,η~(p) G T®,.! ΠΓ such that p\k = v}.
The order is the inverse inclusion.
5.5 Claim. Let F be a filter on ω and Q be SP(F) or SP*(F).

338 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
1) If T G <2,T[
nl - {T7i,...,ifo} (with no repetition), ϋ = T[ηι],τ} G Q,
2ί < T\ (i.e. T/ C ϊ» then T < T^
 ά= (jJU
 Γ*
 G Q and τt lh "for some
t G {1, . . . , k] we have T\ G GQ".
2) If t is a P-name of an ordinal T G Q and n < ω then there are T"ΐ,
T < Γ* G Q and A such that T* lhg "ί G A" and |A| < |Tl
n]|, and
^ ^f Moreover for each r/ G Tl
n],T 
determines ί.
Proof. 1) Observe that spt^Tt) D Πι<^<jb
sP^(Ώ) \ (
n + 1)
2) For each ry G T^ there is T
77, T[η] < T
η such that T
7? decides the value ί.
Now amalgamate the T
η together by applying part 1). 
D5.5
5.6 Lemma. Let F be a P-point ultrafilter on ω. Then
1) SP(F) is proper, in fact α-proper for every α < ωi, and has the strong
PP-property; and so is SP(F)
ω
2) SP*(F) is also proper, α-proper for every a < ω\ and has the strong
PP-property.
Proof. Similar to the proof of 4.4. For its proof we shall use the following
theorem, of Galvin and McKenzie, (but later we shall prove a similar theorem
in detail (5.11)); note that we use only the "only if" direction.
5.7 Theorem. Let F be an ultrafilter on ω. Then F is a P-point [Ramsey
ultrafilter] iff in the following game player I has no winning strategy:
in the n-th move:
player I chooses An G F
player II choose wn C An,wn is finite [a singleton].
In the end player II wins if Un<ω ^n G P.
Proof of 5.6 from 5.7. We just have to define a strategy for player I, (in the
game from 5.7): playing on the side with the conditions in the forcing. From the
two forcing listed in the lemma we concentrate on proving only the properness
of SP*(F) (the other have similar proofs and this is the only one we shall use).
Let N -< (#(χ),G,<*) be countable with F G N, so SP*(F) G AT; and let

§5. There May Exist a Unique Ramsey Ultrafilter 
339
T G SP*(F) Π N and let (In : n < ω) be a list of the dense subsets of SP*(F)
which belong to N. We shall define now a strategy for player I. In the n'th
move player I chooses "on the side" condition Tn G SP*(F) Π TV in addition
to choosing An G F and player II chooses finite wn C An. For n = 0, player I
chooses TO = T and AQ = ω.
For n > 0, for the n'th step player I, using 5.5, chooses Tn G SP*(F) Π ΛΓ,
such that Tn-ι < Tn, r£
n] = τlH where kn
 d= max[U{wn' : n
7 < n}U{n}] +
n + 1 and (Vry G rJH) ((Γn)M G I). Then player I plays An = sptn(Γn). Note
that whatever are the choices of player II, we have Tn G N and we can let player
I choose Tn as the first one which is as required by the well ordering <* . As F is
a P-point, by 5.7 there is a play in which he uses the strategy described above
and player II wins the play; this will give us the desired sequence of conditions.
Indeed, Γ = Γ\n<ωTn G SP*(F) satisfies sptn(Γ) 2 \J{wk : k G [n,α;)} (for
each n < ω) and hence T belongs to SP*(F). 
D5.6
Similar argument is carried out in more detail in the proof of 5.12.
5.8 Lemma. 1) If F is a P-point ultrafilter, SP(F)
ω 
<$ Q, and Q has the
PP-property then in V^, F cannot be extended to a P-point ultrafilter.
2) If F is a P-point ultrafilter, SP*(F) 
<Φ Q, Q has the PP-property then in
V®, F cannot be extended to a P-point ultrafilter.
Proof. The proof is almost identical with the proof of 4.7, so we do not carry
out it in detail. (In fact we get the variant with weaker assumption as proved
in 4.7).
This is particularly true for part (1). For part (2) copy the proof of 4.7,
replacing P(F) by SP*(F) and defining rn as:
Γn(0 =eiffi<n=>e =
T^)(T = T[η] & (
This is done up to and including the choice of p% (i.e. (*) in the proof of 4.7).

340 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
As pi G P and SP*(F) <£ P clearly there is q G SP*(F) such that p2
is compatible in P with any q' satisfying q < q' G SP*(F). For k < α;,
as g G SP*(F) by Definition 5.4 we know that sptA.(ς) G F, so as F is a
P-point there is B* G F such that B* \ sptk(q) is finite for every k < ω.
Choose by induction on n < ω, an < ω such that αn < αn+ι, αn > g(n) and
αn > Jn(fc(n)) and jB*\sptjrι(/c(n)Hl(g) C [0, αn). Define q'
 d= {η : η e q and for
every m < ω we have: if αn < m < £g(?7), m < αn+ι and m G sptjn(fe(n^+1(^)
then for each i < k(n) we have (r/(m))(zn(^)) = 0 and (η(m))(jn(f)) 
= 1}.
Now
(a) </' C T
Θ is closed under initial segments and {) G q'
[Why? Read the definition of q'\
(b) q
1 has no <-maximal element
[Why? Assume η G q' Π T®. If m < QQ then any v G Sucς(?7) belongs to q
r .
So let αn < m < αn+ι; if m ^ sptjn(fc(n))+1(g) again any v G Suc^r?) belongs
to q
1 ', so assume m G spt,/-ri(/,(n))+1(g), which means
(Vr/ G ςΠΓ^)(Vp G ^(
fc^)
+12)(3ι/)[r7
/Λ(z/) G q & ι/tjn(fc(n)) + 1 =
Apply this for rf and for the p* G ^((
fc(
n))+
12 defined by {£ < jn(k(n)) -h 1 :
p*(^) = 1} = {jn(t) : ^ < fc(n)}, and find v satisfying p* < v and such that
?7
Λ(ι/) G Sucς(τ7) and even r/
Λ(ι/) G Sucς/(τ?).]
(c) If αn < m < αn+ι, m G sptjn(fc(n))+1(ς) then m G spt^^^')-
[Why? Same proof as of clause (b) noting that for any p\ G ln^2 we can
find p* such that pi < p* G ^WΌH^, such that for m G [in(0)Jn(k(n)) + 1),
we have p*(m) = 1 <Φ m G {jn(£) : £ < fc(n)}]
(d) Let fc < cj, then sptfe(g
/) G F.
[Why? Choose n(*) such that k < in(*)(0) Now if m G £* \ αn(*) then
for some n, n(*) < n < α; and αn < m < αn+ι hence m G spt^fc^+i^) and
so by clause (c) we have m G sptiτι(0)(g
7). But spt^g') decreases with I and
k < in(*)(0) < ΐn(0), so m G sptk(q') 
Together B* \ an(*} C sptk(q
f), but the
former belongs to F.]
(e) q' ll-sp (F) " Π (4n U [0, g(n))) is disjoint to 5* \ α0"
n<u;

§5. There May Exist a Unique Ramsey Ultrafilter 
341
[Why? Because if an < m < αn+χ and ra G B* then: by the definitions
°f 2X(€)» ΐjn(i) 
(£ ^ ^(
n)) and ^n (which is {a < ω : for some ί < fc(n),
r*n(*)(
α) —
 rjn(t)(
a)}) 
we know m φ An, also m > αn > #(n), together this
suffices.]
Now g', p<2 are compatible members of P (see the choice of q and remember
g < q' € SP*(F)), so let p3 e P be such that p2 < Pa, #' < Pa So by clause
(e) the condition ^3, being above g', forces that p| (An U [0,p(n))) is disjoint
n<ω
to a member of F. So as p2 < P3 clearly p2 cannot force P) (An U [0, #(n))) ^
n<ω
0 mod F. But this contradicts the choice of p%. 
DS.S
We now state some well known basic facts on the Rudin-Keisler order on
ultrafilters.
5.9 Definition.
1) Let FI, F<2 be ultrafilters on /i, /2, respectively. We say FI <RK F^ if. there
is a function / from /2 to I\ such that /(/2) = {/(O : i £ h} £ FI and:
AeFliSf~
l(A)eF2
2) In this case we say FI = /(F2), if |/ι| < |/2| we can assume w.l.o.g. / is
onto 11.
5.9A Remark. We shall use only ultrafilters on α;, which are not principal,
i.e. in β(ώ) \ ω in topological notation.
It is known (see e.g. [J])
5.10 Theorem.
1) <RK is a quasi-order.
2) An ultrafilter F on α; is minimal 
iff 
it is Ramsey (minimal means
F
f <RK F => F <RK F
f (see part (4)).
3) If F is a P-point, F^ <RK F then F
f is a P-point.
4) If F
1 <RK F
2 <RK F
1, ίften there is a permutation / of ω such that

342 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Proof. Well known. 
Πs.io
5.11 Lemma. Suppose F0,Fι are ultrafilters on ω. Then the condition (A)
and condition (B) below are equivalent.
(A) FI is a P- point, FQ is a Ramsey ultrafilter, and not FO <RK F\.
(B) in the following game player I has no winning strategy:
in the n-th move, n even:
player I chooses An e FQ
player II chooses kn G An
in the n-th move, n odd:
player I chooses An G FI
player II chooses a finite set wn C An
In the end player II wins if
{kn : n < α even} G FQ and M{wn '• n < ω odd } G F\.
Proof. -ι(A)=» -"(B): If FI is not a P-point or F0 is not Ramsey then player I can
win by 5.7. (I.e., if FI is not a P-point, then are Bn G FI for n < ω such that
for no B G FI do we have B\Bn is finite for every n, now player I has a strategy
guaranteeing: for n odd, An = 
p| 
Bt\ (sup(J{i(^ : ί < n odd) -f 1), this
€<(n-l)/2
is a winning strategy. If F0 is not a Ramsey ultrafilter there are Bn G F0 for
n < ω such that for no kn G Bn (for n < ω) do we have {kn : n < ω} G F0,
now player I has a strategy guaranteeing A2n = Bn, this is a winning strategy.)
So we can assume FI is a P-point and FQ is Ramsey, so by ~
ι(A) necessarily
FO <RK FI, hence some h : ω —> ω witnesses FQ <RK FI. Then player I can
play such that \J{h~
l(kn) '. n e ω} and \J{wn : n G ω} will be disjoint. So one
of them is not in FI , thus player I wins.
(A)=>(B): Suppose H is a wining strategy of player I. Let λ be big enough,
N -< (H(X), G), {FO, FI, H} G N and N is countable. As F^ is a P-point there
is AI G Fi such that A\ Cae B for every B G FI Π N.

§5. There May Exist a Unique Ramsey Ultrafilter 
343
Now we can find an increasing sequence (Mn : n < ω) of finite subsets of
N,N = \Jn<ω Mn such that it increases rapidly enough; more exactly:
a) #, FO,FI G M0,Mn G Mn+ι; also can demand x e Mn & x finite => x C
Mn; also Mn Π ω is an initial segment of ω,
β) if ^(x,α0, . . .) is a formula of length < 1000 + |Afn| with parameters from
Mn U {Mn} satisfied by some x e N, then it is satisfied by some x G Afn+ι,
7) for £ = 0, 1 if 5 G Ft Π AT, £ e Mn then £ U Mn+ι D 4J,
5) MO Π ω = 0.
Let un+ι = (Mn+ι \ Mn) Π ω. So (iίn : n < ω) forms a partition of ω.
As F^ is an ultrafilter, there are Si C ω such that \J{un : n G St} G F^, and
n < m &: {n, m} C S^ => m — n > 10.
Can we demand also n G So, m G Si implies the absolute value of n — m
is > 5? For the SQ, #1 we have, for each n G So there is at most one m € Si
such that |n — ra| < 4 and vice versa. So in the bad case there are S^ C 5^,
/ : S^ -> S\ one to one and onto, n - 4 < /(n) < n -h 4, U{un : n G SJ} € F^
for I = 0, 1; moreover, for any S% C 5],
: n G S0*} G F0 
iff
provided that S* = /(So). Also as F0 is a Ramsey ultrafilter, there are kn G un
(for n G So) such that {fcn : n G S^} G F0. So the function f*:ω-^ω defined
by /*(£) = fcn for t G w/(n)> n ^ 5^, and /*(ί) = 0 otherwise, exemplifies
FO <RK FI, contradiction.
So without loss of generality
(*) for n G So, m G Si we have n — m has absolute value > 5,
(**) there are fc* G un Π^Q (
for n € so) sucn tnat ikn : n G ^0} € F0 (because
FO is Ramsey.)
It is also clear that by (7) above, as Λ* G FI:

344 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(* * *) For n G Si let vn =
f un Π f|{4 : A G FI Π Mn_2}. Then
also h\ G f|{^ : A G FO Π MnJ.
[Simply note un Π A* C υn and w.l.o.g. min(5£) > 2].
Now there is no problem to define by induction on I < ω, Ui < ω and
an initial segment ? of length ί of a play of the game (both increasing) such
that: the initial segment belong to Mnι] and every fc* will appear among the
fc's which player II have chosen in the play if n < n^ n G 50; and every vn will
appear among the w's player II have chosen in the play if n < n^ n G S\\ and
Πi has the form n* + 2 with n* G 50 U 5ι; and player I uses his strategy. But
in the play we produce player II wins, contradiction. 
DS.II
5.12 Main Lemma. Suppose FQ is a Ramsey ultrafilter (on ω), F is a P-point,
and Q = SP*(F), and Ih0 "F0 is not an ultrafilter" then F0 <RK F.
Proof. Let Γ0 G Q, A be a Q-name, T0 Ihg "A C ω and ω \ A, A ^ 0 mod F0" ,
and w.l.o.g. \\-Q "A C ω", (such Γ0, ^4 exists as after forcing with Q? ^o will no
longer generate an ultrafilter). Note that by the choice of T0, A for any T > Γ0:
{n : for some T
f > Γ, Γ
f lhQ "n G ,4" and for some Γ
f > T, Γ
f lhQ "n ^ A"}
belongs to FQ.
Now we use the game defined in Lemma 5.11. We shall describe a winning
strategy for player I. During the play, player I in his moves defines also Tn G Q
preserving the following:
(*) (a) Tn+1 > Tn
(b) Tn lhQ "k£ G A" for I even, I < n
(c) T^ft
01 = Γ,l
m(n)1 where m(n) - 1 + max[|J{^ : ^ odd, ί < n} U {n}]
(d) for ί < n odd we have: wt C spt^(Tn) (see Definition 5.4)

§5. There May Exist a Unique Ramsey Ultrafilter 
345
(e) for n even, for the play from 5.7 player I chooses
(f) for n odd, for the play from 5.7 player I chooses An = sptm(n)(Tn).
More exactly, player I chooses Tn+ 1 in the n-th move after player IΓs move (see
below more).
This is enough, as if in the end \J{wt : t < ω odd } G F, then T
 ά=
Γ\nTn e Q, because for each ί < ω, we have n > i => spt^(Tn+ι) C spt^(Γn)
and spt^+1(Tn) C spt^(Tn) so by clauses (c)-f(d)
(*) ί < m < k => wk C sptχrm).
Hence spt^(T) D Γ)m>^
sP^(^™) - \Jm>e
w™> ^ F (as all cofinite subsets of ω
belong to F). Now T forces {ki : i < ω even } C A (remember clause (b)),
so {hi : I < ω even } φ FQ by the hypothesis on TO, A (as {k^ : t < ω} £ F,
and TO < T, T lhP "{fy : ^ < ω} C A" so {fc^ : ί < ω} e F0 implies:
T Ihg "ω\ A = 0 mod F", a contradiction). So the strategy defined above is a
winning strategy for player I hence by Lemma 5.11, FQ <RK F. So it remains
to show that player I can carry out the strategy i.e. can preserve (*). Note that
TO is defined.
Case 1: n even > 0: Player I lets m(n) < ω be max[|J{ιι^ : t < n odd}U{n}] +
1, and let TU 
= {770, . . . ,τ?s(n)} wrtn no repetition. For each ηt (I < s(n))
clearly (Tn)[ηt] is > T0 and belongs to Q, hence
A? = {k< ω: there are T[^T^k > (Tn)[ηι], such that T^k \\-Q "k e A\ and
belong to FQ.
Now: player I plays An — Π^<s(n) ^ί which is clearly a legal move.
Player II chooses some kn G An.
Player I ("on the side") lets Tn+ι = |J T'tk 
(it is as required in (*)).
ί<s(n]
Case 2: n odd: Player I lets An = sptm(n)(Tn) (note Q - SP*(F)). Note Tn
has just been chosen.

346 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Player II chooses a finite wn ζj An and player I lets on the side Tn+ι = Tn.
Π5.12
5.13 Theorem. It is consistent with ZFC +2
H° = N2 that, up to a permutation
on ω, there is a unique Ramsey ultrafilter on ω. Moreover any P-point is above
it (in the Rudin-Keisler order).
Proof. 
We start with a universe satisfying 2^° = HI -f 2
Hl = ^2 and
0{<5<N2:Cf (£)=*<!}• There is a Ramsey ultrafilter F in V. We shall use a CS
iterated forcing (Pi,Qi : i < ω^) such that each Qι is proper, has the PP-
property (hence is
 ωω-bounding), has cardinality continuum and forces that F
still generates an ultrafilter. So by 5.1, 5.2, F remains a Ramsey ultrafilter in
V
Pi for i < ω-2 and also we can show by induction on i < ω^ that in V
Pi, CH
holds and Pi has cardinality HI; so by VIII §2 below Pω2 satisfies the N2-chain
condition. If FI £ V[GW2] (G C Pω2 generic) is a P-point, not above F, then
there is a p £ PU2 forcing FI is a name of such ultrafilter, and for a closed
unbounded set of δ < »2, cf (δ) = NI implies that F\
 d= Fl Π P(ω)
γPδ e V
p*
and p forces that F\ is a P-point not above F (in V
Pδ).
Now, by the diamond 0{δ<κ2:cf(<5)=Kι} we can assume that for some such
δ, Qδ = SP*(FJ).
Now by 5.12 forcing with Q§ (over V
Pδ) preserves "F (generates) an
ultrafilter", by 5.6(2) Qδ has the PP-property hence (by 2.12B) Qδ is
 ωω-
bounding and trivially Q$ has cardinality continuum; so Qi is as required. Now
as each Qj (i < j < ω z) has the PP-property, Pω2/Pδ has the PP-property (by
2.12C+2.3). So by lemma 5.12 we know Fj cannot be completed to a P-point
inF
P ω2. 
Π5.ι3
§6. On the Splitting Number s and Domination
Number b and on α
For a survey on this area, see van Douwen [D] and Balcar and Simon [BS].

§6. On the Splitting Number $ and Domination Number b and on α 
347
Nyikos has asked us whether there may be (in our terms) an undominated
family C
 ωω of power HI while there is no splitting family C [ω]^° of power NI.
He observed that it seems necessary to prove, assuming CH, the existence of a
P-point without a Ramsey ultrafilter below it (in the Rudin-Keisler order).
In the third section we have proved a preservation lemma for countable
support iterations whose first motivation is that no new / £
 ωω dominates all
old ones, and prove (3.23(1)) the consistency of ZFC+2*
0 = ^~\-D=$>b
where ϊ> is the minimal power of a dominating subfamily of
 ωω (see 3.24(3)),
and s is the minimal power of splitting subfamily of [ω]^° (see Def 3.24(1))
and b is the minimal power of an undominated subfamily of
 ωω (see Definition
3.24(2)).
However one point was left out in Sect. 3: the definition of the forcing we
iterate, and the proof of its relevant properties: that it adds a subset r of ω
such that {A € V : A C α;,r C* A} is an ultrafilter of the Boolean algebra
P(ω)
v\ but in a strong sense it does not add a function / G
 ωω dominating all
old members of
 ωω\ this was promised in 3.22. Note that Mathias forcing adds
a subset r of ω as required above, but also adds an undesirable /. This is done
here; its definition takes some space. This forcing notion makes the "old" [ω]^°
an unsplitting family. The proof of this is quite easy, but we have more trouble
proving the "old"
 ωω is not dominated. </,From the forcing notion (and, in fact,
using a simpler version), we can construct a P-point as above.
Then A. Miller told us he is more interested in having in this model "no
MAD of power < NI" (MAD stands for "a maximal almost disjoint family
of infinite subsets of ω") (i.e. 5, α > NI = b). A variant of our forcing can
"kill" a MAD family and the forcing has the desired properties if we first add
KI Cohen reals (see 3.23(2), 6.16). We also like to prove the consistency of
ZFC+2"
0 - 2*
1 - N2 + N2 - * > α - b - NI, where α - min{μ| : A a
maximal family of almost disjoint subsets of ω} (see Definition 3.24(2)). In the
seventh section we show that in the model we have constructed (in the proof of
3.23(1)) there is a MAD (maximal family of pairwise disjoint infinite subsets of
ω) of power NI (hence α = NI). This answers a question of Balcar and Simon:

348 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
they defined
as = rmnd^tl :Λ is a maximal family of almost disjoint subsets of ω x ω,
which are graphs of partial functions from ω to ω}.
They have proved $ < as and α < as < 2^° , so our result implies that α < as
is consistent.
In the eighth section we prove the consistency (with ZFC +2
K° = 2
Hl = ^2)
o f N ι = f ) < α = b = N2 (where ϊ) is the minimal cardinal K for which
P(u;)/nnite is a (/ς, 2^° )-distributive Boolean algebra).
The relations between the cardinals above are described by the following
diagram.
s — > D - > 
2
H°
ΐ 
ΐ 
ΐ
KI — > t) — > b -> α -» αs
(where arrow means "< is provable is ZFC") (see [D] and [Sh:207] for results not
mentioned above, and two other cardinal invariants); sections 6, 7, 8 represent
material from [Sh:207] (revised).
* 
* 
*
Now we turn to the definition of the forcing we iterate and the proof of
its relevant properties: that it adds a subset r of ω such that {A € V : A C
ω, r Cae A} is an ultrafilter in the Boolean algebra P(ω)
v\ but in a strong sense
(that is, almost ^ω-bounding) it does not add a function / e
 ωω dominating
all old members of
 ωω.
More on such forcing notions see [RoSh:470].
6.1 Definition. 1) Let Kn be the family of pairs (s, ft), s a finite set, ft a
partial function from P(s) (you can think of h(t) when not defined as -1) to
n + l such that:
(a) h(s) — n
(b) if h(t) = ί + l (sot C s),t = ί 1Ut 2thenΛ(ίι) > ^ or ft(t2) > ^ and |ί| > 1.
We may add

§6. On the Splitting Number s and Domination Number b and on α 
349
(c) if ti C £2 are in Dom(/ι) then h(tι) < h(t<2).
2) K>n,K<n,Kn,m are defined similarly, and K = \J Kn.
n<ω
We call s the domain of (s, h) and write a G (5, /ι) instead of α G s. We call
(s, /ι) standard if s is a finite subset of the family of hereditarily finite sets. We
use the letter t to denote such pairs. We call (s,h) simple if h(t) — [Iog2(|ί|)]
for t C 5. If t — (s, h) G K, let lev(ί) = lev(s, h) be the unique n < ω such that
6.2 Definition. 1) Suppose (s^hi) G lfs^) for £ G {0,1}. We say (s0,M <
d
(sι,Λι) (or (sι,Λι) refines (so,M) it
50 = 5ι and [tι C £2 C s0 & ftι(ίι) < ftι(ί2) =* Λι(ίι) < Λ0(ίι) < /lofe)] (so
lev(so,/io) ^ lev(sι,/iι) and Dom(/iι) C Dom(/io))
2) We say (50,M <
e (sι,/iι) if for some 4 
G Dom(Λ0), (sό>
ΛoΓ^(sό)) =
(5ι, ΛI)
3) We say (s0,M < (5ι,Λι) if for some (s',ti], (s0,h0) <
e (s',h
f) <
d (s^hi).
6.3 Fact. The relations <
d, <
e, < are partial orders of K. 
D6.3
6.4 Definition.
1) Let Ln be the family of pairs (5, H) such that:
a) S is a finite tree with a root called root (5).
b) H is a function whose domain is in(5) =the set of non-maximal points
of S and with values Hx for x G in(5).
c) For x G in(5), (Sucs(x),ifx) G /f>n> where Suc^(x) is the set of
immediate successors of xinS, so Hx(Sucs(x)) > n.
2) We say (5°, H°) < (S^H
1) if 5° D S\ they have the same root, m(S
l) =
S
1Π m(S
Q) and for every x G intS
1), (Suc5o(x),^) < (Suc5ι(x),fli) and
of course Suc£i(x) = Suc5o(x) Π 5
1.
3) Let int(S)
 d= S\ in(5), lev(5,H) - max{n : (S,H) G Ln}, x G (S,H)
means x e S. A member of Ln is standard if int(5) C ω and in(5) consists
of hereditarily finite sets not in ω. Let for x G 5, (5, H)W = (S
where S& is S\{y G 5 : 5 \= x <s y}.

350 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
4) For t G Ln let t = (S
1, H
l) and let lev(t) = max{n : t G Ln}
5) We say t1,!2 G (jn<ω Ln are disjoint if. S*
1 Π S*
2 = 0.
6) Let int(t) = i
7) Let L = U Ln
n<ω
6.5 Fact. The relation < is a partial order of L = \Jn Ln. 
D6.5
d
6.6 Fact. If (S, H) e Ln then (S', H') = half(S, #) belongs to L[(n+1)/2] and
(5, if) < (£',#') where S' - 5, H'X(A) = [HX(A) - lev(5,ff)/2] where [x] is
the largest integer < x and Dom(^) = {A : fΓx(A) > lev (5, H)/2}. 
D6.6
6.7 Fact. If (5, H) G Ln+ι, int(S) = A0(JAl then there is (S\H
l) > (5, ff),
<E Ln such that [intί^
1) C A0 or int(5
1) C AI}.
Proof. Easy by induction on the height of the tree (using clause (b) of Def
6-1(1)). 
D6.7
6.8 Definition. We define the forcing notion Q:
1) p G Q ifp = (w, T) where w is a finite subset of ω, T is a countable (infinite)
set of pairwise disjoint standard members of L and TΓ\Ln is finite for each
n, moreover for simplicity the convex hulls of the int(t) for t G T are
pairwise disjoint; let cnt(T) and cnt(p) mean \J,H 5xeτint(5, H). Writing
T = {tn : n < ω] we mean (min(int(tn)) : n < ω) strictly increasing.
2) Given ti = (Sι,/ίι), ...,tk = (Sk,Hk) all from L such that S* Π 5 j = 0
(i ^ j), and given t = (5, H) from L, we say t is built from ti, . . . , t& if:
there are incomparable nodes αi, . . . , α& of S such that every node of S is
comparable with some αi} and such that, letting 5(α») = {6 G S : 6 >s α^}
we have (5,,^,) - (S(ai),H\S(ai)).
3) (w*,T°) < (w
l,T
l) iff: w° C w
l C w° U cnt(T°), and, letting Γ° =
{t§,t5, . . .}, T
1 = {tj,tι . . .}, there are finite, nonempty pairwise disjoint
subsets of ω, J3o, Bι> 
j an(l there are t< > t? for all i G (Jj Bj sucn tnat

§6. On the Splitting Number s and Domination Number b and on α 
351
for each n only finitely many of the t^ are inside Ln and such that for each
j, letting BJ = { I I , . . . , ik}> t) is built from tiχ , . . . , tifc .
4) We call (w,T) standard if Γ = {tn : n < ω}, max(w) < min[int(tn)],
max[int(tn)] < min[int(tn+ι)] and lev(tn) is strictly increasing (and writ-
ing T = {tn : n < ω} we mean this).
6.9 Definition. For p = (w, T) we write w — w
p, T = T
p. We say q is a pure
extension of p (p <pr q) if q > p, w
q — w
p. We say p is pure if w
p = 0, and
p <* q means omitting finitely many members of T
q makes q > p.
The following generalization will be used later.
6.10 Definition. 1) For an ideal / of P(ω) (which includes all finite sets)
let Q[I] be the set of p G Q such that for every A G /, for infinitely many
t G T
p, int(t) Π A = 0. The main case is / = family of finite subsets of ω (then
Q[I\ = Q).
2) Let Q'[I\ be {p G Q : there is q such that Q \= p < q and q G Q[I]} (so
<2[7], Q'[I] are equivalent).
6.10A Remark. 1) So if p = (w, {tn : n < ω}) <E Q[I] then p < (w, {half(tn) :
2) More generally if p — (w, {tn : n < ω}) G Q[I] and h : ω — > ω is a function
from ω to ω going to oo (i.e. lim inf h(n) — oc) and t^ > tn, or even \!n > tlf
n'
and lev(t ) > /ι(lev(tn)) then (tι;, {t'n : n< ω}) G
6.11 Fact. 0) Q is a partial order.
1) If p G Q and τn (for n < α;) are Q-names of ordinals, then there is a pure
standard extension q of p such that: letting T
q = {t^ : ί < ω}, for every n < ω
and w C max[int(tn)] 4-1, if we let ςζ = (it;, {t^ : I > n}), then for k < n:
q
1^ forces a value on r^ ΐjff some pure extension of q^ forces a value on τ\~.

352 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Moreover if T
p = {t^ : n < ω}, we can demand 
/\ tι = t$ but then the
£<n*
demand on n, w above is for n > n* — 1 only.
2) Q is proper (in fact α-proper for every α < ω\}.
3) Ihg "{n : (3p G (?g)[n G if
37]} is an infinite subset of ω which ^(α;)^ does
not split."
Proof. Easy (for (3) use 6.7, see more in 6.16(3)). 
D6.n
6.12 Lemma. Let g, τn be as in 6.11(1). Then for some pure standard extension
r of ς, letting T
r = {t'n : n < α;}, (lev(t^) strictly increasing, of course and)
the following holds.
(*) For every n < ω, w C [ max(int(t^_1)) 4-1], and \!^ > \!n (so we ask only
lev(t^) > 0) there is w
f C int(t^), such that (w U w', {t^ : i > n}} forces a
value on τm for m <n (we let max int^t^) be max(κ;
ρ U {—!})).
This lemma follows easily from claim 6.14 (see below) (choose by it the \!n
by induction on n) and is enough for a proof of Lemma 3.22, which we now
present.
6.13 Proof of Lemma 3.22. By 6.11(2), clause (a) (of 3.22 i.e. Q is proper)
holds (more fully use the last clause of 6.11(1) to get a sequence of conditions
as needed); and by 6.11(3) clause (d) (of 3.22 i.e. inducing an ultrafilter on the
old P(ω)) holds; and clause (c) (of 3.22 i.e. |Q| = 2
K°) is trivial. For proving
clause (b) (i.e. Q is almost ^α -bounding, see Definition 3.5(1)) let / e
 ωω and
p e Q be given. Let τn = /(n), apply 6.11(1) to get q and then apply (on
<2S In (n < ω)) 6.12 getting r = (w
p,{\!n 
: n < ω}) > q. We have to define
g G
 ωω (as required in Definition 3.5(1)). Let g(n) = max{/c + 1 : for some
w C [ max(int(t^)) + 1] we have (w,{\!t 
: I > n) Ih "/(n) = /c"}. Let A be
any infinite subset of ω, and we define p
1 = (w
p, {t'n : n G A}), so p' > r > p.
We have to show that p' \\-Q "for infinitely many n G A, f(n) < g(n)". So
it is enough, given ΠQ < ω and p
2, p' < p
2 G Q to find n G A \ no and p
3
such that p
2 < p
3 G Q and p
3 Ihg "/(n) < #(n)". So assume that n0 < ω and

§6. On the Splitting Number $ and Domination Number b and on α 
353
p' < P
2 € Q, and p2 = (w2,T2), T2 = {t2 : n < α;}, and w.l.o.g. for some
*(*) > fto for every n we have min[int(t
2)] > max[int(t^))] > sup(iί;
2). As
P
2 > P' 'j we can find k < ω, i\ < - 
< ik from A, and t*£ > \!it such that t j is
built from t*l? . . . ,t*fc; by the previous sentence i\ > i(*). By (*) from 6.12 (as
w
2 C max[int(t^ χ)j 4- 1, and i(*) < iι and r from 6.12 is standard), there is
w" C int(t*J (hence w" C int(tg)) such that p
3 = (w
2 U w" , {tj : j G (ifc,ω)})
forces a value, say m to /(i/c), so by the definition of g clearly m < g(ik) But
clearly p
2, p
3 have a common upper bound: p
4 = (it;
2 U ID", {t
2 : n G (714, ω)})
for every 714 < ω large enough (really n± = 0 is O.K.!). So we are done. D3.22
6.14 Claim. Let (0,T) be a pure condition, and let W be a family of finite
subsets of cnt(Γ) so that
(*) 
for every (0,T') > (0,Γ), there is a w C cnt(T') such that w eW.
Let k < ω. Then there is t G L/C appearing in some (0,T") > (0,Γ) such that:
t' > t 
=> 
(3tι; G W) [ιy C int(t')] .
Proo/. Let T* be arbitrary such that (0,T) < (0,Γ*) G Q, and Γ* = {tn :
n < ω}. For notational simplicity, without loss of generality let W be closed
upward.
Stage A: There is n such that for every \!t >half(fy) (for i < n) we have
(Jt<n
 int(ti)
 G W- This is because the family of (tj : -ί < n), n < ω, tj >half(t*)
form an α -tree with finite branching and for every infinite branch (tg : I < ω)
by (*) there is an initial segment (t'£ : ί < n) with U^<n ήιt(t^) G W. [Why?
Define (S*, ff^) G L such that 5^ - S^ and H$(A) = H*f (A) (and not H% (A)\)
when x G in(S'), A C Suc,s£(x), so letting T
1 =: {(S
£,H
1} 
: ί < ω} we
have: lev(S
£,H
£) > lev(t£)/2
£ - 1/2 and (0,Γ*) < (0,Γ'). Now apply (*)
remembering W is upward closed.] By Kόnig's lemma we finish.
Stage B: There are n(0) < n(l) < n(2) < . . . such that for every m and
tj > half(t^) for n(m) < ί < n(m + 1), the set U{int(t^) : n(m) < ^ <
n(m -f 1)} G W. The proof is by repeating stage A (changing T*).

354 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Stage C: There are ra(0) < m(l) < ... such that: if i < tα, for every function h
with domain [m(i), m(i +1)) such that h(j) G [n(j), n(j +1)) and tj > half(t^)
for all relevant t then Uί^m : 3 ^ [m(i),m(i 4-1))} belongs to W.
The proof is parallel to that of stage B; as there it is enough, assuming m(i*) was
chosen, to find appropriate m(i* +1) > m(Γ). The set of branches corresponds
to {(t'έ : ί G [m(i*),α;)> : for some function he 
fl 
[n(ί),n(ί + 1))
*e[m(i*),ω)
for every £ G [ra(ί*),ω), tj > half(t/l(^))}. So if the conclusion fails i.e. for
every m > m(i*) if we assign m(i* -f 1) = m, for some function hm with
domain [ra(i*),m), Λ(^) G [n(£),n(£ + 1)) and (t^
1 : ^ G [m(i*),m)), where
t™ > half(t/lm(^)) the desired conclusion fails. So by Kόnig's lemma we can
find h G 
Π 
[n(t),n(e+ 1)), (tj : ^ G [ra(i*),ω)) such that for every
£e[m(i*),u;)
m' G [ra(i* ),(*;) for infinitely many m G [ra',0;) we have
t G [m(i*),ro') => hm(£) - h(ΐ) & tj = t?
1.
As before using (t^€x : I < ω) we can contradict the assumption (*).
Stage D: We define a partial function H from finite subsets of ω to ω: let
H(u) > 0 if for every tj > half (t^) (for £ G u) we have (U^€n int(t^)) G W and
let H(u) > m + 1 if [u = ui U u2 => ff(uι) > m V if(τx2) > m].
We have shown that H((n(ϊ),n(i 
-h 1))) > 0, and ίf([n(m(i)),n(m(i 4-
1)))) > 1, (for the later, assuming u = [n(m(ΐ)),n(m(ΐ -f 1))) = ui U ^2
we have that: either u\ contains an interval [n(j),n(j -h 1)) for some j G
[m(i),m(i -h 1)) or U2 has a member in each such interval so it contains
m(i+l)-l
{h(j) 
'• j € [m(i),m(i -f 1))} for some h G 
Π 
[n(^),n(^ + 1)); now apply
*=m(i)
stage B to show that in the first case H(u\) > 0 and Stage C to show that in
the second case H(u%) > 0).
It clearly suffices to find u, H(u) > k. [We then define t = (5,ff) as
follows: 5 — \JeeuS
tl U {u}, u is the root with set of immediate successors
being (root(t^) : i G u\\ and the order restricted to S
tl is as in t^; and for
x G S^ we have flj - #£
alf(t£) and fζ(A)
 d= H({i : root(S^) G A}).] We
prove the existence of such u by induction on fc, (e.g. simultaneously for all T',

§6. On the Splitting Number s and Domination Number b and on α 
355
(0,T") > (0,T)). This is done by repeating the proof above (alternatively, we
just repeat 2
k times getting an explicit member of Kk in the root). 
Πβ.i4
The rest of this section deals with Q[I\. Note that by 6.21(2) below in
the interesting case the set of standard p e Q[I] is dense. For the rest of this
section:
6.15 Notation. 1) Let <2° De the forcing of adding HI Cohen reals (r^ : i < α i),
Ti €
 ωω. We usually work in V\ = V® .
2) Let A — {Ai : i < α*} denote an infinite family of infinite subsets of ω
(usually the members are pairwise almost disjoint).
3) Let / = I A be the ideal of P(ω), including all finite subsets of ω but
ω $. I and generated by A U {[0,n) : n < ω}. So /4 depends on the universe
(the interesting case here is A a MAD family in V, of the form {Ai : i < ω\},
Q[IA] means in V\ — V
Q ). If not said otherwise we assume 0 φ IA
6.16 Claim. Assume A £ V is a family of subsets of ω (not necessarily MAD),
and we work in V\ — V
Q , and / = I A so Q[Γ\ is from V® :
1) If p G Q[I] and rn (n < ω) are (3[7]-names of ordinals then there is a pure
standard extension q of p such that: q € Q[7], and letting Tq = {tn : n <
ω}, for every n < ω and w C [ max int(tn) + 1] let q™ = (w, {tt : n < ί <
ω}), then (q™ G Q[7], of course, and) for every fc < n we have: q™ forces a
value on r^ iff some pure extension of q^ in Q[I] forces a value on τκ.
2) Q[7] is proper, (moreover α-proper for every α < ω\ (not used)).
3) "~Q[/] "{n : (^P ^ GQ[i])
n ^ wP} is an infinite subset of α; which is almost
disjoint from every A G / (equivalently Λ G >t)."
/. 1) Let λ be regular large enough, TV a countable elementary submodel of
(-ff(λ), G, V Π if (λ)) to which 7, (r< : i < α i), Q[7], p and (rn : n < ω) belong
and TV' = TV Π V G V (remember we are working in Vί). Let 5 = ΛΓ Π ω\ (so
δ <£N).So N = N'[(ri : i < δ)} belongs to V[(τi 
: i < δ)}.
We define by induction on n < ω, q
n G Q[I] ΠJV, tn and kn < ω such that:

356 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
a) each q
n is a pure extension of p.
b) q
n > qf' for ί < n and if w C fcn, m < n + 1 and some pure extension
of (w,T
qn) forces a value on rm, then (w,T
qn) does it.
c) kn > kϋ and kn > maxint(t^) for I < n.
d) every ί G cnt(g
n+1) is > fcn i.e. t G T
9"
4"
1 => min[int(t)] > fcn.
e) tn > t'n for some t^ G T
qn and lev(tn) > n and min[int(tn)] is > fcn.
There is no problem in doing this: in stage n, we first choose fcn, then q
n and
at last tn. We want in the end to let T
q — {tn : n < ω} (and w
q = w
p). One
point is missing. Why does q — (w
p,T
q) belong to Q[I] (not just to Q}1 But
we can use some function in V{(ri : i < δ)] to choose fcn, q
n and then let tn
be the r§(ri)-ih member of T
qn which satisfies the requirement (in some fixed
well ordering from V of the hereditarily finite sets). As A G V and r^ G
 ωω is
Cohen generic over V[(ri : i < δ)], this should be clear.
2) Easy by part (1).
3) Use Definition 6.10 and Fact 6.7. 
D6.ιβ
6.17 Claim. Assume A = {Ai : i < α*} G V is a MAD family, and in Vι
we have that \\-Q"{Ai : i < a*} is a MAD family". In Vί, let / be the ideal
generated by {Ai : i < a*} and the finite subsets of ω. Then: 
(w, {tn : n < ω})
is a [standard] condition in Q'[I] iff
it is a [standard] condition in Q and there are finite (non empty) pairwise
disjoint HI C a* (for I < ω) such that for each ί, for every fc for some n < ω,
for some t^, t^ > tn, lev(t^) > fc and int(t^) C Uί€u, Ai iff
as before but there are singletons HI as above.
6.17A Remark. Note: if A G V, by 6.17 the standard <? G Q[I\ are dense in
], but otherwise we do not know. In the proof it does not matter.
Proof. The third condition implies trivially the second. We shall prove [second
=> first] and then [first=>third] . Suppose there are uι (i < ω) as in the second
condition above and we shall prove the first one. So for each I < ω we can
find (t^ : n G BI), BI C ω is infinite, t'n > tn, lev(t^) > \Bt Π n\ and

§6. On the Splitting Number s and Domination Number b and on α 
357
int(t^) G (J Ai. Wlog (Bf.i< ω) are pairwise disjoint, so p < p'
 ά= (w, {\.'n :
ί£uι
n £ U Bi}}
 and P' ^ Qi so it suffices to show p
1 G Q[I\. Now every B G / is
i<ω
included in \J^U Ai U {0, . . . , n* — 1} for some finite ?/ C ωi and n < ω. But for
some ^, ι^ is disjoint from u, hence £? Π (Uieu* ^*) ^
s finite- We know that for
infinitely many n G £^, int(t^) C |Ji€u£ Ai and the int(t^) (n < α;) are pairwise
disjoint, hence for the infinitely many n < ω, int(tn) Π B = 0, as required in
the first condition.
Lastly assume the first condition and we shall prove the third one. Suppose
p = (w,{tn : n < ω}) G Q'[I\, see Definition 6.10(2), w.l.o.g. p G Q[I\. We
choose by induction on m a finite um C α*, disjoint from U£<m
 ut sucn
5m = {n < ω : for some \!n > tn we have lev(t^) > lev(tn)/2 — 1
and int(tn) C (J ^}
i€um
are infinite and moreover um is a singleton.
Assume we have arrived to stage m. Let B = {n : int(tn) is disjoint
to (J{Ai 
: i £ 
U u^}}, so J5 is necessarily infinite (by the Definition of
Km
Q[/]), moreover p° = (w, {half (tn) : n G 5}) belongs to Q[I] and is above
p. Now clearly Q[/j C ζ), hence p° G Q. By an assumption of 6.17, we know
.4 = {Ai : i < α*} is a MAD family even after forcing by ζ), so there are
p
1 = (w
r, {\!n : n < ω}) G Q, p° < p
1 and i0 < α* such that
(*) 
p
1 Ih "{n : (3ς G GQ)[n G ^
9]} Π Aio is infinite".
Let n* be > sup(^0 Π (J{Ai 
: i G U uι}). By 6.7 (more exactly, as in
£<m
the proof of 6.16(3)), without loss of generality, (J cnt(t^) C Aio \ n* or
n<ω
U cnt(t^) Π A^0 = 0, but the second possibility contradicts (*) so the first
n<ω
holds.
But p
1 > p° (in Q) so for each n < ω for some k < ω and jn$ <
< jn,k-ι from β, t^ is built from half(tjn 0), . . . ,half(tjn k _ 1 ) . So for some
y G \!n we have (t^)^' > half(tjτι 0), hence clearly (or see 6.20 below) there is
t£|0 > tjVti0, such that int(t^o) C Aio \n* and lev(t^ J > lev(t,-τiι0)/2. Lastly
let um = {ZQ} (i.e. all depend on m). 
Eki?

358 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
6.18 Claim. Let Vi, A, I = I A be as in 6.16 4- 6.17 (so A is a MAD family in
V, Vi and V
Q). Assume we are given fc* < ω, (0,Γ) = (0, {tn : n < ω}) G <2[/],
and a family W of finite subsets of cnt(T) such that
(*) if (0,Γ) < (0,T') G Q[/] then there is w C cnt(T') such that w eW.
Then there is t G Z/&* appearing in some (T", 0) > (T, 0) such that:
t' > t =» (3w G W)[κ; C int(t
7)].
Proof. Without loss of generality T is standard (by 6.16(1)) and W upward
closed (check). Moreover we may assume that lev(tn) > 2fc* for each n < ω.
We know, by 6.17 above, that there is T* = {tn : n < ω}, such that
(0,T*) G Q is standard, (0,Γ) < (0,Γ*) and for some sequence (jm : m < ω)
of pairwise distinct ordinals < α* and partition (Bm : m < ω) of ω to infinite
sets we have:
neBm=ϊmt(tn)CAjrn.
For every finite u C ω define
nor(w) = max{m : for every cover (ut : I < 2
m) of u
(i.e. Ui C u and U ^ = u)>
^<2m
for some £ < 2
m and for every t > half (ti)
for i G u^ we have: [ (J int(tj)] G W}.
If for some finite u C ω, nor(u) > fc* we can finish. Why? Just as in the end
of the proof of 6.14 we define t = (5, if) as follows: S = (Jί^ : ^ G u} U {u},
u is the root, its set of (immediate) successor is (root(S'
t£) : ί G u}, the order
is defined by: restricted to S
tl is as in t^, for x G S
lί we let ίζ - #£
alf(t£)
and #£ is defined by: for υ C u let H^({τoot(S
tl) : £ G υ}) = nor(υ). We know
#n({root(5
t£) : € G u}) > fc*. This suffices as Θi below holds. Clearly by the
definition of nor we have
θo 
t > t' =» (3w; G W)[iϋ C int(t')]
Now we have to prove

§6. On the Splitting Number s and Domination Number b and on α 
359
0ι if υ = vι U ^2, nor(τ ) > ra + 1 then: nor(vι) > m or nor^) > m.
Proof 0/01. If nor(fi) ^ m, then there is a cover (v\ : i < 2
m) of ^i such that:
(*)ι for every ί < 2
m for some t^ > half(tm) (for m G υj) we have
[\Jm€vlmt(t'm))]iW.
Similarly, if nor(^2) ^ m then there is a cover (v\ : £ < 2m) of t^ such that:
(*)2 for every £ < 2m for some t^ > half(tm) (for m G ι>f) we have
U 
to&WJiw
uί
Define for i < 2
m+1:
1 
if i < 2
m
j 
LJ 
I <^ Δ
2 
?7 ? P f2
m 2
m"
f"
1>l
i—2
rn 
ij 
* *z [A 
, A 
).
So if the conclusion fails then (vi : i < 2
m+1) exemplifies nor(t ) ^ ra + 1, a
contradiction.
We can conclude from all this that, toward contradiction we can assume that
0 u C ω finite => nor(u) ^ &*•
So
0ι for every n = {0,..., n — 1}, nor(n) ^ fc* so there is a cover (υf 
: i < 2
fc*}
of n such that:
0 for every ί for some \!i > half(t^) (for i G vf) we have [Uieυ
n ^(^ί)] ^ ^
By Kόnig's lemma there is a sequence (v^ : i < 2^*) of subsets of α; such
that for every m < ω for some n = n(m) > m we have i^ Π m = v^
1 Π m.
Now for some t — £(*) < 2^*, for infinitely many m < α; for infinitely
many n G 5m we have n e V£ (on the βm's, see beginning of the proof of 6.18),
so by 6.17 we know that (0, {t; : i G t>*(*)}) G Q[/] (and of course is > (0,Γ)).
(Alternatively, for some f < 2
fc*, for every A G /4, for infinitely many n G ^
we have int(tn) C α; \ -A. If not then for each ί some ^ G 1Ά fails it. So let
A— 
\J 
AI e IA and we get contradiction to (0, {t^ : i < ω}) G Q[/].) Now
for every fc letting n = n(fc) be such that v^(^ Π k = v^,^ Π fc, we apply 0.
So there are t^ > half(t^) (for i G ^7(*))) sucn tnat \Jiev
n ^
nt(
tO ^ ^>
 anc^
£(*)
by monotonicity Uiev/ „ nfc ^W) ^ ^ ^y Kόnig's lemma (as W is upward
closed) there is (t* : i G V£(*)), t* > half(ti) such that for every n we have

360 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
U-iennt;^) "^(t ΐ ) ^ ^ S° (agaui as llί tne proof of 6.14, see 6.20 below) choose
(S
l,H
l) € L such that int(S*) = int(tj) and lev(S*,fΓ*) > lev(t/)/2, i.e.
S* - Stί, fl*(t;) - min{[lev(t)/2],fl£(τ;)} (when υ C Suc5<(z)). So clearly
(0,Γ*) < (0, {(£*,#*) : £ < ω}) € Q[7] (see 6.10A(2)) and we apply (*) from
the assumption and we get a contradiction, so finishing the proof of 6.18. DG.IS
6.19 Claim. Let A, I = IΛ be as in 6.18. Let ς, rn be as in 6.16(1). Then
for some pure standard extension r G Q[I] of g, letting T
r = {t'n : n < ω},
(standard (see Definition 6.8(4)) so lev(t^) strictly increasing, of course) the
following holds:
(*) For every n < ω, w C [ max(int(t^_1)) -f 1], and t^ > t^ (so we ask
only lev(t^) > 0) there is w' C int(t^), such that the condition (w U w
1',
{t^ : £ > n}) forces a value on τm for m < n (we let max iut^^ be
9 U -
Proof. Like the proof of 6.16(1) but using as the induction step claim 6.18.
Πβ.19
6.20 Fact. If ti > half(t0), then for some t2 > to we have int(t2) = int(tι),
Iev(t2) > lev(t0)/2.
Proof. Included in earlier proof: 6.14. 
Πe.20
6.21 Conclusion. Let Vί, A, I = I A be as in 6.18.
1) If p e Q[I] and ω = \J AI where k < ω then for some p
1', p <pr p' e Q[I\
and for some I < k we have cnt(Γ
p) C AI.
2) The set of standard p G Q[ί] is dense, in fact for any p G Q[ΐ\ there is
a standard g, p < q G Q[/], w
q = w
p and Γ
9 C T
p.
Proof. 1) By repeated use w.l.o.g. k = 2. Let p <G Q[/] and T
p = {tn : n < ω}.
For each n apply 6.7 to find t'n > tn such that int(t^) C A or int(t^) C ω \ A
and lev(t^) > lev(tn) - 1. Let YQ = {n : int(t^) C A}, YI - α; \ y0, so for some

§6. On the Splitting Number $ and Domination Number b and on α 
361
I G {0, 1} we have: for every X G / the set {n G Ύt : int(t^) ΠX = 0} is infinite.
[Why? If Xt contradict the demand for ί = {0, 1} then XQ U Xλ G / contradict
p G Q[/j by Definition 6.10.] So (w
p, {\!n : n G Yt}) G <?[/] is above p, and it
forces (J{υ;
r : r G (?Q[/]| \ w
p is included in A£.
We give also an alternative proof, which can be applied for more general
question. Let p = (w, {tn : n < ω}) G Q[I}. By the proof of [first condition =>
third condition] in 6.17, there are pairwise distinct jm < ω\ (for m < ω) such
that for each m the set
Bm = {n < ω : there is \!n > half(tn) such that int(t^) C Ajm}
is infinite. So we can find B'm C Bm for m < ω such that: (B'm : m < ω)
is a sequence of infinite pairwise disjoint sets. For each m < <j, n G .Bm
choose t^ > half(tn) such that int(t^) C Ajm. Let t£ > tn be such that
int(t£) - int(t^) and lev(t^) > lev(tn)/2.
If lev(t^) > k, let t^ > t^ be such that lev(t^) > lev(t^) - k (really
> lev(tJί) - [1 + Iog2(fc)] suffices) and for some £ = £(n), int(t^) C Ai(nγ For
each m < ω, for some £m the set B'ή = {n £ Bm : lev(t^) > k,ί(n) = £m}
is infinite and for some £(*) < fc the set {m < α; : tm = £(*)} is infinite. Now
p = (w
p, {t^ : for some m we have £m = £(*), and n G #^J) is as required.
2) Left to the reader (or see 6.16(1)). 
D6.2ι
Now we pay a debt needed for the proof of 3.23(2).
6.22 Claim. Assume Vί, A, I = /A are as in 6.18. Then Q[I\ is almost "ω-
bounding or for some p G Q we have p Ihg "{A; : z < K*} is not a MAD."
Proof. Assume the second possibility fails. So let p G Q[I] and / be a Q[/]-name
of a function from ω to ω. Let rn = /(τι), and apply 6.16(1) and get q as there.
Next apply 6.19 to those q, rn and get r which satisfies (*) from 6.19.
By 6.17, 6.21(2) and we can find ri = (w
p, {t'n : n < ω}), a standard
member of Q[I] such that r < r\ and for some pairwise distinct jm < ω\ the sets

362 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
Bm = {n < ω : int(t^) C Ajm} are infinite. Clearly also r\ satisfies (*) of 6.19.
Choose pairwise distinct n(m, £) for m < I < ω such that n(m, ί) G Bm \ {0}
and min int(t^/m ^) > I. Now we define a function g : ω —> ω (in Vί) by
#(.£) = max{{^ + 1} U {fc : for some m < t and tu C [0, max int^^^.J]
and MI C int(t^m^) we have
KU^,{t; : n > n(rM)}) lhg[/] «/(*) - fc"}}.
So # G ("u;)^
1, and let A C ω (A G Vί) be infinite, and let pA = (w
p, {t'n(m^ :
m < f. and I G A}). Now clearly 7*1 < p^ G Q, p^ standard and even p^ G Q[I]
because still for each m < ω the set {n : \!n G T
PA and int(t^) C Ajm} is
infinite: it includes {n : n — n(ra,£) for some I G A \ (m + 1)}. Now one can
easily finish the proof. 
ΠΘ.IG
A trivial remark is
6.23 Fact. Cohen forcing and even the forcing for adding λ Cohen reals (by
finite information) is almost ^α -bounding.
§7. On $ > b = a
See background in §6.
7.1 Theorem. Assume V \= CH. Then for some forcing notion P*, P* is
proper, satisfies the ^2-c.c., is weakly bounding and:
(*) In V
p* we have 2^° = ^2, there is an unbounded family of
 ωω of power
NI (i.e. b = NI) and also a MAD family of power ^ i.e. α = NI, but there
is no splitting family of power NI i.e. $ > NI (so $ — N2).
Proof. The forcing (Pα,<2α : α < ω2), P* = Pω2 are as in the proof of 3.23(1).
So the only new point is the construction of a MAD of power NI. This will

§7. On s > b = α 
363
be done in V\ the proof of its being MAD will be done directly rather than
through a preservation theorem (though the proof is similar).
Let {(B^ : n < ω) : i < KI} enumerate (in V) all sequences (Bn : n < ω) of
finite nonempty subsets of α; (remember CH holds in V). Next choose a MAD
family (Aa : a < KI) such that
(**) for each infinite ordinal α < ω\ and i < a: iffoτ every k < ω, αi, . . . , α^ <
a for every m for some (equivalently infinitely many) n < ω, min(J5^) > ra
and B
l
n Π (Aaι U . . . U Aak) = 0
then
(a) for infinitely many n < ω, B
l
n C Aa
(b) for any k < ω and αi, . . . , α& < α for infinitely many n < ω we have
β;n(LM«£) = 0.
*=1
[How? let -An = {fc
2 + n : k G (n,ω)}, and then choose Aα for a G [ω,ωι) by
induction on α as required in (**).]
Let λ be a regular large enough cardinal, a < ω^. For a generic Ga C Pα,
a model TV X (ff(λ)[Gα], G) is called ^ood if it is countable, Gα, (Pj,Qi : ϊ <
«:, j < α), (Ai : i < α i), {{β^ : n < α;) : i < ωi) G N and for every set
{Bn : n < ω} G N of finite nonempty subsets of ω, letting 5 = TV Πα i we have
®! (Vm,fc < ω)(Vαι,...,o f c < <5)(3*n < ω)[Bn Γ\ (Aa, U . . . U Aa J =
0 & min(βn) > m]
ί/ien (3*n)[βn C Λ^] (remember 3*n stands for "for infinitely many").
Note that in the definition of goodness, we have that <8>ι is equivalent to
<8>2 (Vm,fc < ω)(Vaι,...,ak 
< ωι)(3*n < ω)[Bn n (AQl . . . U Aak) =
0 & min(βn) > m]
We shall prove by induction on α < ω^ that:
for every β < α, a countable AT ^ (ίf(λ),G) to which (Pj,Qi 
: i <
ot,j < α), and α, /? belong and generic Gβ C P^ i/ A^fG^] Π α i =
ΛΓΠ ωι (so ΛΓ^] Π V = N), N[G(3] is good (in V[Gβ] of course) and

364 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
pe N[Gβ]nPa/Gβ 
then there is q G Pa/Gβ,q >p,Όom(q)\a = Nnβ\a,
q is (N[Gβ], Pα/G0)-generic and: if Ga C Pα is generic, Gβ C Gα, q G Gα,
then N[Ga] is good.
This is proved by induction. The case α — ω<2, β = 0 gives the desired
conclusion.
[Why? If not for some p G P* = Pω2 and a P^-name J3 = {kn : n < ω}
we have
p ll~pα,2 "JB is an infinite subset of α;, moreover fcn < fcn+ι < ω for n < ω,
and B ΓiAa is finite for every α < ω\" .
Let AT X (if(λ,€) be countable such that (Pa,Qa : α < ω2), ^* = ^2, P,
β, (fcn : n < ω) belong to AT, and let £
 d= TV Π ωι. Clearly AT Π {(B
l
n : n <
ω) : i < ωι} = {(β^ : n < ω} : i < 5}, so by the choice of the Aα's (see (**)
above), N is good (in V = V
p°). Hence there is g G Pu,2 such that p < ς, g is
(ΛΓ, Pω2)-generic and ς Ihpω2 "-/V[GW2] is good". Let G C PW2 be generic over
y, g € G, (hence p € G) so W[G] is good, Λ^[G] Πωi - 5 and ({A:n[G]} : n < ω)
belongs to N[G]. Hence by the definition of good, (3*m)[fcm[G] G -4$], but this
means A§ Π B[G] is infinite, contradicting the choice of p (as p G G).]
The case α = 0 is trivial (saying nothing) and the case α limit is similar
to the proof of 3.13. In the case a successor, by using the induction hypothesis
we can assume α = β + 1.
By renaming V[G^], N[Gβ] as V, N we see that it is enough to prove that
for any good N and p e Q Γ\ N (remember Qβ = Q
V^
G^) there is q > p which
is (AT, Q)-generic and q lhQ "N[G\ is good".
Let δ = N Π cji, and let δ = {^(l) : t < ω}. Let {r^ : I < ω} be a list of
all Q-names of ordinals which belong to A/", and {(B^ : n < ω) : i < ω} be a
list of all Q-names of ω-sequences of nonempty finite subsets of ω which belong
to A/", and which are forced to satisfy 02 » eacn appearing infinitely often. For

§7. On 5 > b = α 
365
notational simplicity only, assume p is pure. We shall define by induction on
t < ω pure pt = (0, T
pί) = (0, {t£ : n < ω}) such that:
a) pi e TV, pi standard (so maxint(t^) < minint(t£+1)),
b) Po =P,pι+ι >pt,
c) t£ - t£
+1 forn < t and lev(t|) > f,
d) for any finite w C ω and finite T' C T^1 we have (w,T
p£+
1 \T") Ihg
"it £ C£" for some countable set of ordinals C£ which belongs to TV,
e) for every WQ C (max[int(t|)] -1-1), m < t, and t > t^} there is
κ;ι C int(t) such that the condition (WQ U wι, {tf
+1 : i 4-1 < i < ω})
forces that
"(aj)[min(£™) > £ and £™ C Aδ]
n.
Below we shall let pf = (0, {4'm : n < ω}). Let pQ = p.
Suppose pi is defined. By 6.12 there is a pure p® > pi in N such that
tf ° = tf for z < I, and for any finite w C ω and finite T' C Γ
p° we have
(tί;,T
p° \ T') = p$ Ih "r^ G C;" for some countable set of ordinals CJ from AT
[why? read (*) of 6.12].
Given p\ we define:
B = {B : B C α; is finite, min(β) > ^, and there is standard
p* = (0, {t; : n < ω}) > pj such that /\ t* - tf
i<i
(solev(tj+1) >ί + l) and:
for every WQ S max int(t|) -f 1 and t > tj+1 and m < £, for some
^i C int(t), the condition (WQ U ίi i, {t* : i > I + 1 and i < ω})
forces " for some j < ω we have -B^
1 C 5"}.
./ 
~ j 
— 
j
Clearly
(A) B G TV
(B) B satisfies (<g>ι) from the definition of good.
[Why? Let k < ω, αi,... ,(*& < 5. By the assumption, Ihg "for each m < I,
the sequence (B^
1 : j < ω) satisfies (8)2" hence Ih " for every m < t for some
n = n(m) we have min(5^) > t and 5^ Π (Aαι U ... Aak) = 0. Hence there

366 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
is standard q = (0, {s*+ι,s*+2, 
•}) € Q> 9 > (0> {*£+!> ^+2* 
•}) such that
lev(s^+ι) > l+l and:
0 if wo C max(int(t|)) 4-1, m < £, t > s^+i then for some w\ C int(t) and
fCo.u i < ω and C™o,™ι We have
(α) (ιι;oUtί;ι,{s/(1)+1,Sφ)+2,...}) Ih "B^^ = C™|Wl''.
0
s) GJJhun £ "V> and CZ,™ι is nonempty finite disjoint to A α oU.. .\jAak.
So necessarily Ul^^o,™! : w° - πιax(int(t|)) +1 and t > s^+i, and w\ C int(t)
and C™QίWl is well defined and m < 1} € B is as required finishing the proof
of clause (B). We could have demand in Θ above for one w\ to be O.K. for all
m <L]
(C) We can define p^+i
[Why? As B G N satisfies (<8>ι) and JV is good necessarily there is B 6 B,
B C Aξ. For this .B there is p* as in the definition of B. Let t^
4"
1 = t^ for n < I,
t^1 = t; for n > £ So pm - (0, {t£
+1 : n < α;}) is defined.]
So we have defined pι+\ satisfying (a)-(e). So we can define pi for £ < ω
and now q = (0, {t£ : n < ω}) is as required. 
Dγ.i
§8. On ϊ) < s = b
See background in §6. We first recall well known definitions.
8.1 Definition. 1) Let f) be the minimal cardinal λ such that there is a tree
T with λ levels (not normal!) and At G [ω]*° for t G T such that [t < s =>
As Cae At] and (VB G M*°)(3ί G T)[At Cae B] and if t,s G Γ are <τ-
incomparable then As Π At is finite. See Balcar, Pelant and Simon [BPS] on it
(and in particular why it exists which was for long an open problem).
2) Let Q
d = {(n, /) : n < ω, f G
 ωω} with the order defined by
(ni, /i) <(n2, /2) if and only if
ni < n2,/1rm - /2Γm and /! < /2

§8. On ϊ) < 5 = b 
367
This forcing adds a dominating real and it satisfies c.c.c. This is called Hechler
forcing or dominating real forcing.
8.2 Theorem. Assume V \= CH.
For some proper forcing P of power ^2 satisfying the N2-c.c., in V
p', ϊ) = NI,
b=s = K2 (and 2*° = 2*
1 = N2).
Proof. We shall use the direct limit P of the CS iteration (Pi,Qi : i < ω2)
where:
A) letting i = (ωι)
37+j, j < (ωi)
3, if j ^ ω^ω^ + 1 then Qi is Cohen forcing;
if j = (Jjl then Qi is Q from Definition 6.8 (in V
p*) and if j = ω\ 4-1 then
<2i is Q
d (see Definition 8.1(2), also other nicely definable forcing notions
are O.K.).
B) We use the presentation of countable support defined in III, proof of
Theorem 4.1, i.e. using only hereditarily countable names. We let r^ be
the generic real of Qi.
Clearly |P| = ^2, P satisfies the ^2-c.c. and is proper (see III §3, §4), hence
forcing by P preserves cardinals. Clearly in V
p', $ > #2 (because for unbound-
edly many i < ^2? Qi = Q (from Definition 6.6, and 6.11(3)) and b > ^2
(because for unboundedly many i < N2, Qi = Q
d) and 2
K° = ^2- Hence in V
p
we have $ = b = ^2 (so D = K2) and always f) > NI. So the only point left is
V
p |= "t> < Kj".
We define by induction on i < ω% (an ordinal a(i) and) Pα^)-names ηiΊ Ai
such that
(a) α(t) = (α;1)
3(t + l),
(b) rji e \Jβ<ωι
 β+
l(ω2) \ {TJJ : j < i} and for every successor β < tg(ηi)
we have η^β G {ηj : j < i}) (i.e. those things are forced),
(c) ηj <3 r\i => Ai Cαe AJ (for j < i) and ^ is an infinite subset of ω,
(d) if A C ω is infinite and A G V
p^' then for some i < j +ωι, AC AJ,
(e) Ai includes no infinite set from V
Pt*w when j < i, and moreover is a
subset of the generic real of

368 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
(f) if 77i, r\j are <-incomparable then Ai Π Aj is finite (i.e. this is forced).
There is no problem to do this if you know the known way to build trees
exemplifying the definition of f) (by Balcar, Pelant and Simon [BPS]), provided
that no ωi-branch has an intersection. I.e. for no η G
 ωι(ωz) and B G [ω]
H°
(in V
p^} do we have B Cae Aia where η\(a + 1) = ηia for a < ω\\ by
clause (e) above necessarily ia is strictly increasing. Let i(*) = 
\J iΊ and
7<ωι
α(*) — U7<α;ι
 α(^y)> m V
Pa(*
} there is no intersection by clause (e) (even in
the case η φ F
p<*(*)). So it is enough to prove this for a fixed i(*) hence also
α(*).
We can look, in y
p«(*), at the iteration Q' = (P'β,QΊ : α(*) < 7 < ω2,
α(*) < β < α;2>, where P^ =
f Pβ/Pa(*). Let GI C PαH be generic, Vι = V(Gl\.
Note that every element of P^2 can be represented by a countable function from
ordinals (< ω2) to hereditarily countable sets (built from ordinals < u^)- The
set of elements of P'ω<2 as well as its partial order are definable from ordinal
parameters only (all this in V[Gι]). Suppose p e P^2 forces B (a P^2-name of
a subset of ω) and iΊ (for 7 < ω\) to be as above (so with limit i(*)). W.l.o.g.
for each n < ω there is an antichain (gn>^ : ί < ω) which is predense above p,
such that qnj Ih "n € B ifftn,t"ι 
tn>^ a truth value. So for some j(*) < α(*)
we have p, ((qUtt : I < ω) : n < ω) G F[GX n P^*)].
There is pi, p < pi G P^2 such that pi Ih "iΊ = i" for some 7,1 such
that j(*) < (ωι)
3i < α(*) so pi Ih "B C rω3ί+3" where rwsi+3 is the generic
real that the set GI Π Qω3i+3 gives (see the end of clause (e)). Now using
automorphisms of the forcing P«(*)/P;(*) we see that there is p2, p < P2 £ P^2
such that p2 Ih "I? is almost disjoint from rω3ΐ+3". Prom this we can conclude
that p Ih " U7<α;ι Vi y & ^[^i]" (otherwise some po > P forces a particular value
and repeat the argument above for po). Hence it suffices to prove by induction
on β G [α(*),α;2] that forcing with Pβ adds no new α i-branches to the tree
T G Vι where T = {ry»[Gι] : i < i(*)}, ordered by <, (i.e. all are on V
p<*(*)}.
Let ϊ]i — 77i[GI] for i < i(*).
We prove by induction on β G [α(*),α;2] that
no new ^i'^12111^ to T G V"ι.

§8. On I) < s = b 
369
So assume po € Pβ is such that po "~ "(ίΛγ '• 7 < ωi) is a new ωi-branch of
fa:i<i(*)}eVΛ
In Vi choose a sequence {7Vm : m < ω) of countable elementary submodels
of (H(χ), e, <*) such that 0, <>', P, JB € ΛΓ0, JVm e JVm+1, Nω = |J JVm. Let
m<ω
δm = Nm Π ωi, and let
-4m = {J
7 = (^7 : 7 < <W : ^ £ Nm+ι and for every 7 < Jm, Pf7 € Nm}.
So {Am : m < ω) € Vi, and we can list Am = {Pm>* : έ < ω}, ((v
m^ : i <
ω) : m < ω) e Vι. The real r^*) is a Cohen real over VΊ (as (iΊ : 7 < α i) is
strictly increasing with limit «(*)), and we can interpret <3ΐ(*) as ω>ω, so let
Γt(*) = (Im : m <α;).
Clearly for proving (*)^ it is enough to find q such that:
(*)2 ^ € P^, Po < q, q is (JVm, P^)-generic for each m < ω and <? Ih^/
 
u(ι/7 :
m,^m
7 < δm) ^ (VΊ 
: 7 < ίm}" for each m.
The proof splits to cases, the first four cases give (*)^ directly, the last
three do it through (*)2
Case 1: For β = ω^ no new branches appear (by ^2-c.c.).
Case 2: For β = ΐ(*) trivial.
Case 3: For β = α + 1, Qα Cohen: use "Qα is the union of NO directed sets" (and
such forcing notions do not add a new α i-branch to any old tree).
Case 4- For β = a 4-1, Qa = Q
d: similarly, as
Q
d = \J{{(n,f) :fe
ωω&εf\n = η}:n<ω,ηe
 nω}.
n
Case 5: For β — a. + 1, Q& — Q- so for some 7 we have α = 0^7 -f α i, shortly
p
;
3
we shall work in the universe V
 ωι
Ί. Let q
r G P£ be (AΓm,P^)-generic for each
m < α;, po ί^ ^ ί' (such ς'' exists as all those forcing notions are α -proper and
ω-properness is preserved by CS iteration by V §3). Let G'a C P^ be generic
over Vi such that q' G G"α, and we work in V2 = Vι[G'a}. Let N'm = Wm[G^],
iϋ = w
po(°0 (a finite subset of ω, actually it is W
PQ(OL^
G'^).

370 
VI. Preservation of Additional Properties, and Applications
We choose by induction on m < u;, qm = (w, Tm) G Qα, Tm = (t™ : n < ω)
such that:
(a) qm e N!^ Π Qα, gm < ςfm+ι, [n < m => t™ - t™
+1], p0(α) < <?o,
(b) ςm+ι is (7V^,Qα)-generic
(c) gm+1 Ih "<z,7 : 7 < δm) ϊ (v™*™ : 7 < <U"
This clearly suffices and for the induction step, clauses (a), (b) are possible
by the proof of "Qα is proper" (in §6), and reflecting on the proof there also
clause (c) [in more details given qm, let (τm^ : k < ω) list the Q-names of
ordinals which belong to 7Vm, now we choose by induction on fc < ω, qm^ =
(w,Tm,k) and 7m,fc, Tm?fc = {t™'* : n < α;} standard, {9m,fc,7m,fc} e Nm,
Qm = ςfm.o, 9m,fe < ςfm.fc+i, [n < m -f fc => t^
1^ = t^], and for every
WQ C max[int(t^^fc)] + 1 and t > t^^fe+1, for some w\ C int(t) we have
(WQ U wι, {C^fc+2, C^+3,...}) force z/7m k = p, p ^ v™*™ and forces a value
to ii^\ for the induction step get a candidate for all ^ <ω\ and use Δ-system
(and "the branch is new" i.e. not from V
p*).}
Case 6: β > α(*) is a limit ordinal; cf(β) = K0
Quite straightforward as in the proof of the preservation of α -properness
(of course we could work in V rather than in V\ and use the induction hypoth-
esis). Choose (βn : n < ω) such that β = \J βn, i(*) = /30, βn < βn+ι < β,
n<ω
and βn G NQ. We choose by induction on n, #n, pn such that:
(a) qn G P'βn, Dom(<?n) = ( \J Nk) n [α(*),/3n)
/c<ω
(b) ςn is (Λ
Γ
i,P/3τι)-generic for each i < ω
(c) pn is a P0n-name of a member of Pβ Π AΓn
(d) Pn\βn < qn, qn+l\βn = ^n
(e) pn < Pn+1
(f) pn+ι is (A
Γ
n,P/5)-generic (i.e. forced to be)
(g) Qn U (pnΓ[/?n,/?)) I^P, "(^ : 7 < «0> / (^ ' Ί < ^θ)".
The induction should be clear and q = \Jqn = U(<?n+ιί[/?n,βn+ι)) is as
n 
n
required.
Case 7: β > α(*) a limit ordinal, cf (β) > N0
Like case 6, but βn = sup(AΓn Π ^9). 
D8.2

§8. On ϊ) < s = b 
371
Concluding Remark. The proof of "no new ω\-branch" has little to do with the
specific problem. More on definable forcing notions see [Sh:630].

VII. Axioms and Their Application
§0. Introduction
In the first section we introduce the κ-e.c.c. (ft-extra chain condition). We prove
that if we have an iteration of length < K of (< ct>ι)-proper forcing notions
which do not add reals, and if, moreover each forcing used is B-complete for
some simple Ni-completeness system D, then the limit satisfies the κ-c.c. . This
helps us e.g. in iterations of length ω^ of forcings among which none add reals,
but each adds many subsets of HI.
In the second section we deal with forcing axioms; essentially our knowl-
edge is good when we want 2
H° = 2
Hl = ^2 and reasonable when we want
2^° = HI and even 2
N° — H2. In the third section we discuss applications of
the forcing axiom which is consistent with CH as just mentioned. In the fourth
section we discuss the forcing axiom which is consistent with 2^° = 2**
1 = ^2?
and in the fifth section we give an example of a CS iteration collapsing HI only
in the limit. See relevant references in the sections.
§1. On the κ>Chain Condition, When Reals
Are Not Added
When we prove various consistency results by iterating proper forcings, we
often have to check that the H2-chain condition holds.

§1. On the «-Chain Condition, When Reals Are Not Added 
373
Remember, we deal with a CS iteration Q — (P^, Qi : i < a) where Qi is a
Pi-name of a proper forcing (in V
Pi), Pa = {/ : Dom(/) is a countable subset
of α and i G Dom(/) implies 0 Ihp.
 
u f ( ι ) e Qi" , i.e. /(i) is a P^-name of a
member of Qi}. So, Pα is proper by III 3.2. Here, we concentrate on the case
when no real is added, in fact when we have a sufficient condition for it. The
case without this restriction will be discussed again in VIII §2 .
Remark. Note that even if \\-pi "IQ
1] - NI", still may be |P2| = 2
Nl, as there
may be many Pi-names of elements of Q\.
1.1. Lemma. If K is regular, (Vμ < κ)μ"° < K and V
p" N "|Qα| < K" then Pκ
satisfies the /ς-chain condition.
Proof. See III 4.1.
1.2. Definition. P satisfies the ft-e.c.c. (ft-extra chain condition) provided that
there is a two place relation R on P (usually £>#<? is intended to mean that "p
and q have a least upper bound") such that:
A) for any pi G P (for i < K) there are pressing down functions fn 
: K — > K (i.e.
(Vα)/n(α) < 1 4- α) for n < ω such that: Q < i,j < K and /\n<ω(fn(i) =
fn(j)) imply piRpj.
B) if in P we have PQ < pi < p2 < 
< Pn < Pn-f i < 
Pα; and ^o < Qi <
^2 < 
< ^n < Qn+ι < 
Qω and l\npnR(ln, then there is an r such that
f\nr>pn& f\nr>qn
1.2A Remark. This is very similar to the condition used in [Sh:80] (and
similar to a work of Baumgartner, see VIII 1.1, 1.1A(1)). The real difference
is the absence of NI -completeness. The fact that there (in [Sh:80], clause (C)
there is a parallel to clause (A) here) we use only one function and closed
unbounded C, and demand i, j G C, cf(i) = cf(j) = HI, is just a variant form
which was more convenient to represent there. The role of pω,qω is just to
show that {pn 
: n < ω] and {qn : n < α;}, each has an upper bound (so

374 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
for a Ni-complete forcing they are not needed, hence, also £g(Q) < ft is not
needed). Even closer is Stanley and Shelah [ShSt:154], [ShSt:154a]. We can
ask in (A) only that there are p( (for i < K) such that P \= pi < p\ and
[0 < i,j < K,Λ n(/n(0 = /nW)
1.3. Lemma. Suppose V N 2^° = NI while (Vμ < κ)μ*° < K and K is regular.
Suppose further that Q = (P^, Qi : i < QQ < ft) is a CS iteration.
In addition:
(a) Each Qa is (< ωι)-proper (= α-proper for each α < ω\)\
(b) Each Qa is D-complete for some HI -completeness system from V (see
definition in V §7) and, for simplicity, the set of elements of Qa is a subset
of λ = 2
|p«ol and λ > κ;
(c) Each Qa satisfies the κ-e.c.c.
Then Pαo satisfies the ft-c.c. (— tt-chain condition).
1.3 A Remark.
1) Compare with Theorem 7.1 from V. We add part (c) to the hypothesis
(and αo ^ *0>
 and get the /t-c.c. of Pao. In fact, to prove 1.3, we shall
repeat the proof of V7.1, after an appropriate preparatory step.
2) We can weaken Definition 1.2 so that the proof of 1.3 still works, e.g. by
strengthening the hypothesis on the pn,qn in clause (B). For example,
we could have demanded that qn+ι G Z[qn], Pn+ι € 3Γ[pn] where for
r G P we have that I[r] C P is a dense subset of P (or even <?n+ι €
3) Note that when P is Ni-complete, 1.2(B) is satisfied for R = "having a
least upper bound". Also 1.2(A) can be weakened by e.g. demanding the
conclusion to be true only for i,j G A, for some A in some appropriate
filter on K x «, or for some A which is not in an appropriate ideal which is
precipituous.

§1. On the rc-Chain Condition, When Reals Are Not Added 
375
Proof. As in the proof of Lemma III 4.1 we can conclude that if the Lemma
holds for each αo < ft, then it also holds for αo = ft. So, w.l.o.g. α0 < ft. Let
Ri be (a Pi-name of a 2-place relation ) exemplifying Definition 1.2 for Q;. Let
Pa £ Pa0 (a < ft) be given. We now define, by induction on n < ω, countable
models N£ (for all α < ft simultaneously) such that:
i) NS x (tf(λ),e),Pao € NS,Q e N^Pa e N°a, \\N£\\ = K0, and α € N°.
ii) N™ -< ΛΓ™
+1, and the additional conditions below are satisfied.
For n — 0, choose any N® satisfying (i).
If we have defined N% for n, let N£ Π Pαo - {p^t :£<ω}, p^Q = POL.
For i < αo and I < ω, consider the sequence (p^^i) : α < ft) (if
i 7^ Dom(p^^) then we are stipulating p^(i) = 0Qj In V
Pί it is a sequence of
length ft of elements of Qi. But Qi (in V
Pί) satisfies the ft-e.c.c., so there are
ω-sequences of functions /^ = (f^k 
: k < ω) exemplifying that condition (A)
from Definition 1.2 holds. In V we have P^-names ft^ for /^.
We now define N£+
l such that N$ -< N%+
1 -< (ff(λ), G), and
iii) ((/
n 
: i < α0), (P^ : Ί < K) 
: t < ω) e Λ£
+1,Λ£ 6 TV^
1 and
~M
{7V^ : /? < ft) G TV^
1.
Now, using that (V7 < ft)7^° < ft and that ft is regular, we can easily find
i < j < ft, and h such that:
a) h is an isomorphism from N? onto Nf such that Λ(i) = j.
b) /ι is the identity on NfίΊNf 
(so it maps to themselves: (pa : a < ft), (p£,/ :
α<κ>,«/^:i<α 0>:«<α;)).
c) 7V7 n ft c j.
d) A^ Π (α0 -hi)- N? Π (α0 + 1) = {<*(£) : C < fo < ^i}, «(0 increasing.
Also N? n j = N? n i = TV/ n i
Now we choose countable Nς X (#(λ), G) for C < ξo such that h 6 A^0, and
]V7, ΛΓ/ € AΓ0, (AΓα : α < C) € NC+I.
We now repeat the proof of V 7.1, more exactly:

376 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
1.4. Claim. Suppose that 0 < ξ < ζ < &, Ni(i < &), N? G AΓ0, N? G ΛΓ0,
are as above, r G Pα(0, G* C (AΓ^ u AΓ^) Π Pα(ξ), G* Π N? is generic for
(N?,Pa(ξ)) (i.e. G* ΠΛ^ is directed and if I G Λ^> and J is pre-dense in PαK),
then J Π G* Π AΓ^ φ 0), and h maps G* Π AΓ^ onto G* Π ΛΓ^. In addition,
every element of G* is < r, r is (]Vε,Pξ)-generic for any ε satisfying ε = 0 or
e < ε < ίo, ^* € Nξ and Pί Γα(0, Pj KO e G* and G* G 7Vξ+1.
T/ien there is a G C (AΓ^ u Nf) Π Pα(c) with G* C G, G G 7VC+1, G Π AΓ^ is
generic for (AΓt
ω, Pα(C)) such that Λ maps GΠAΓ^ onto GΓ\Nf and r/\/\qeG q^$
(Boolean intersection). In other words: r H-pα(O "G has an upper bound "in
P<*(ζ)/G <*(£)"'
Proof. The proof is as in V 7.1. The only difference is the case ζ — ξ + 1, here
we use clause (B) of Definition 1.2: necessarily G* "tells" us the functions have
the same values, as they are pressing down. 
Dι.4
Continuation of the proof of 1.3 From Claim 1.4, it follows that pi and PJ are
compatible in Pαo, for i and j that we fixed earlier.
Πι.3
Remark. Note in Lemma 1.1, if the iteration is defined such that we have a
support of power < μ, and (Vχ < κ)χ
μ < K, K regular, still Pκ satisfies the
ft-c.c. (On free limits, see IX §1,2)
1.6. Lemma. We can replace (in 1.3) "Ki-completeness system" by "No-
completeness system".
Proof. Using V 7.2 instead of V 7.1.
1.7. Remark. We can even replace "Ki-completeness system" by "2-complete-
ness system", using VΊΠ 4.5, 4.13.

§2. The Axioms 
377
§2. The Axioms
AXIOM I.
1) 2*° - 2
Hl - K2 and:
2) if |P| = N2,P proper, J^ C P pre-dense (for i < ω\), then there is a
directed G C P, Λi<Wl Gnu ^ 0.
2') Moreover if |P| = N2,P proper, !» C P pre-dense (for i < ω2), P =
Ui<α; ^ where Pi are increasing and |P;| < MI, £ήen there is an α < u;2,
cf (α) = ωi and a directed G C Pa such that:
3) If |P| = NI,P is proper iff forcing with P does not destroy stationary
subsets of (jj\.
AXIOM II.
1) 2
H° - NI and 2
Nl - K2.
2) If |P| < 2**
1, P is α-proper for every α < α i, and P is D-complete for some
simple No-completeness system B, J^ C P ( for z < α0 < 2^
α) and each Ti
is pre-dense, ί/ien there is a directed G C P, such that, Λ^<α0 G ΠXj / 0
(we can also define 2
X like we did in Axiom I.).
AXIOM If [S]. (S C ω\ stationary, costationary)
Similar to AXIOM II, but B-completeness refers only to those N for which
N Γ\ωι £ S (i.e. we have (D, 5)-completeness) also in the definition of (< ω\)-
properness we can demand NiΓ\ωι φ S provided we add properness to the set
of hypotheses.
2.1. Theorem. Suppose CON(ZFG + "K is 2^-supercompact"). Then
CON(ZFC+ Axiom I).
Proof. We start as in III 4.3, defining (Pi,Qi : i < «). Given P^, define Qi by
induction on i < K (K is 2
Λ- supercompact in V), as usual.

378 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
Case I. If i is not strongly inaccessible, Qi is the Levy collapse of (2'
Pίl)
v
to N ι : Qi = { f : |Dom(/)| = «0, Dom(/) C c^, Rang(/) C (2\
p*\)
vP*}.
Case II. If i is strongly inaccessible and, in V
Pi, there is a proper forcing
P, with universe i and 1$ C i (for j <ϊ), each Jj pre-dense, and {j : there is
a G C j, directed by < and Λ£<J G ΠZξ ^ 0} is not stationary (subset of i),
then Qi — P i.e. Qi is one of those P's.
Case III. not I nor II - proceed as in Case I.
Now Pκ is proper, has density < K and satisfies the ft-c.c. (by Lemma 1.1), so
in V
p", 2
H° = K = N2 (Why? K < N2 by case I, 2
H° < K as PΛ satisfies the
K-c.c., has density ft and K is strongly inaccessible, N2 < 2
H° as clause (2) of
the axiom I holds, as is proved below). So clauses (1), (3) of Axiom I hold -
as in III 4.5 and clause 2) follows from clause 2'), so we are left with proving
clause 2') of Axiom I.
Suppose in the end that R, Ia(a < K) are Pκ-names of a counterexample
to 2').
Let E be an ultrafilter over S<K(2
K) exemplifying that K is 2^-supercompact;
and we code PΛ, jR, Ia(a < K) on K. Let 50 = {A G <S<Λ(2
K) : P(A Γ\ K) C A,
A is closed under reasonable operation, and A Π AC is a strongly inaccessible
cardinal}. Clearly S0 € Έ
Then, for A G 5o, the forcing notions PΛ Π A = PAΠK
 an<i R\A are proper
(see the definition of proper for a discussion of this: in 2'
p' we can get a witness
for properness etc). So, we have proved that i — A Π ft, Pi = PAΠK and,
RΓ\A, (IaΓ\A : a e AΠK) are candidates for the case II in the definition of Qi.
So, if A G SQ, then i = A Π K, is inaccessible and there are some P
l,Zj(j < i)
which we have actually chosen.
By the properties of E, there are such i(0) < i(l),P
ΐ(0) C P'U)^
0) =
I* 
Π ΐ(0) for j < i(0) and we almost get contradiction to the choice of P^
1)
Using such i(£), ξ < λ,i(λ) = λ < K which form a stationary subset of λ
we get a contradiction. 
D2.ι
Remark. We essentially use the proof that ()κ holds for K measurable, which is
well known.

§2. The Axioms 
379
2.2. Theorem.
1) CON(ZFC -f K is 2*-supercompact) implies CON(ZFC 4- Axiom II +
G.C.H.).
2) In both cases (2.1, 2.2(1)) we can relativize to 5 (S C ω\ stationary,
costationary). If in Axiom II we assume \P\ < 2
K l, no large cardinality is
needed.
Proof.
1) Similar.
2) Just note that the same iteration works. 
D2>2
2.3. Discussion. In almost all the applications we need a weaker version of
the axioms for whose consistency we do not need a large cardinal.
Usually our task is to show that for every A C iΓ(Nι) with \A\ = HI, there
is B C ff(Nι) such that
where for Axiom II, φ is any first order (or LωiίUl) sentence, and for Axiom I,
φ should have quantifications on A, B only.
So we iterate ω2 times only, each time forcing a B for a given A, till
we catch our tail in ω2 steps (we can have \A\ — N2 and visit A Π V
Pa for
stationarily many a < α;2,cf(α) = ω\).
So, only Consis(ZFC) is needed.
For Axiom I part (3), K inaccessible suffices (see III 4.1,2,3), whether it
is necessary is still not clear. We can get Axiom I without inaccessible in the
cases above, when we are able, provably, to find QA in an intermediate V. For
Pω2 to satisfy the N2-c.c. we need \QA\ — NI With K inaccessible, QA should
just have a cardinality smaller than AC.
For \P\ = HI, if P £ V
Pw2, P is proper in V
Pωz, and for arbitrarily large
β < α, Qβ = Levy (Hi, 2
Hl), then P is proper in V
Pa for every α large enough,
(by III 4.2 though not vice versa). So Axiom I 2) for \P\ = NI comes under the
previous discussion.

380 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
There may be applications where we really have to use information on
V
Pa(a < ω%) to build Qα, mainly like in Axiom I, when we want to build
a forcing giving B for a given A (see above) and we want to use CH or 0^
for the building. But with Axioms I, II (or the versions we can get with an
inaccessible) we can use the axiom: collapse 2^° , building a forcing and look at
the composition (see §3, Application G).
Sometimes we use properties of Pa (like ^ω-boundedness) which we usually
demand from each Q^, and from P in the axiom, and we have to prove that Pa
satisfies it, (see Chapter VI).
However still Axioms I, II look like a reasonable choice. We shall use them,
and can remark, for suitable applications, that only CON(ZFC) is needed.
As we mentioned (see III 4.3) CON(ZFC-h K inaccessible) implies the
consistency of
AXIOM Ia:
If \P\ — MI, P does not destroy stationary subsets of ω\ and 1$ C P pre-dense
(for i < u i), then there is a directed C C P, such that
We can ask whether we can get something like Axiom I for 2^° = N3.
Roitman (see [B]) proved that this is difficult, by proving that:
2.4. Theorem. (Roitman)
1) If Q — (Pn,Qn : n < u;} is a CS iteration, Qn nontrivial (i.e. above every
element there are two incompatible ones) then LimQ does not satisfy the
2^° -chain condition.
2) If Q = (P»,Qi : i < ωι) is a CS iteration, Qi nontrivial, 2
N° > N1? then
LimQ collapses 2
N° to NI.

§2. The Axioms 
381
2.5. Question.
1) What kind of axioms can we get with:
A) 2*° - N3?
B) with Ni <2*° <2
H l?
2) Can we define properness so that it works for higher cardinals (e.g, for
SH.)?
3) Similar to (1), but we ask about iterations.
For 1), a solution for particular problems appears in [AbSh:114].
2.6. More Discussion. In connection with the beginning of the previous
discussion, there is no problem if for A C ίf(Nι), \A\ = NI, we need to force
by some QA of large cardinality to get some B C Ord. We iterate up to the
first larger cardinal. Baumgartner and Mekler have improved Theorem 2.1 as
follows.
2.7 Theorem.
1) (Mekler) In 2.2(1) we can weaken the hypothesis on ft to πl-indescribability
(the advantage of this property is that if ft satisfies it in V, it satisfies it
inL).
2) (Baumgartner) If ft is supercompact in some forcing extension V^ of V,
*v* = KV,K^ = ft, 2*° = N2 and if
(*) P is a proper forcing, and Si(i < ω\) are P-names such that Ihp "Si
is a stationary subset of ωi",
then there is a directed G C P, and stationary Si C α i (i < α i) such
that for every j, i < ωι, for some p G G,p Ih "j G SV' and j G 5», or
p l h "j^5<" and j ^ 5*.
Proo/.
1) For simplicity assume V = L.
We define the CS iteration (Pi,Qi : i < ft), such that |P<| < ft, and each
Qi is proper, and Qi is the first P^-name of a counterexample for "V
Pi 
\= "Qi
satisfies the axiom"". If Pκ is not as required look at {(P,Q, (Ii : i < ωι)) :

382 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
p G Pκ,Q,Ii are Pκ names, p Ih ζ), Ii (for i < ωi) form a counterexample}.
Choose the first (by the canonical order of L) member (p, Q,J). Now use
indescribability.
2) By Laver [L], w.l.o.g. ft remains supercompact if we force by any ^-complete
forcing. Force by {Q : Q is a CS iteration of proper forcing of power <
ft> ^g(Q) < ft}> ordered by being an initial segment. The generic object is,
essentially such Q of length ft, so force by limQ. 
U2.7
Probably better is the following:
2.8 Definition. Let ft be a supercompact cardinal. We call / : ft — •> #(ft) a
Laver diamond if for every cardinal λ and x G ff(λ), there is a normal fine
ultrafilter D on S<K(H(\)) such that the set
AD(X) = {a e S<K(H(X)) : x G α, α Π ft G ft, and in the Mostowski collapse
MCα of α, x is mapped to /(α Π ft)}
is in D.
By Laver [L] , if ft is a supercompact cardinal, we can assume that a Laver
diamond for it exists.
2.9 Lemma. Suppose ft is a supercompact and /* is a Laver diamond for it.
Define Qi by induction on i < ft, as follows:
If f * ( ϊ ) is a Pi-name, \\-pi "f*(i) proper" , i limit, then Qi = /*(ΐ).
Otherwise Q =
Then \\-Pκ "(*) of 2.7(2) , i.e. Axωι [proper] " (see Definition 2.10 below).
Proof. By the proper ness iteration lemma, Pκ is proper, and also it satisfies
the ft-c.c. Let Q be a PK-name for a proper forcing, and λ a regular cardinal
IQI
such that Q G ff(λ); without loss of generality \\-pκ "2 " < λ". We use the
formulation of Definition 2.10: Axωι [proper] . Let Ii(i < ω\) and Sβ(β < ω\)
be given as in Definition 2.10 (i.e., they are P^-names of such objects). Apply

§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
383
\PK*Q\
Definition 2.8 to x — Q and λ such that Q G H(X) and even 2 
< λ, and
get D as there. Choose a G AD(X) such that (Ii : i < ωι) and (Sβ : β < ω\)
belong to α, (α, G) is isomorphic to some (if(χ), G) and letting MCa be the
Mostowski Collapse of α (i.e. the unique isomorphism from (α, G) onto ( H ( χ ) , G)
and μ = a Π K G ft, we have f(μ) = MCa(Q). Note MCa(Q) is a Pμ-name of a
proper forcing etc. Easily, Qμ = f*(μ) in V
Fμ , and Qμ is isomorphic to αΠ Q,
so we can finish.
2.10 Definition. (1) Let α < ωi, y? a property of forcing notion, λ a cardinal.
Then Axa)p[φ, λ] means:
</
(1) P is a forcing notion satisfying φ and P G H(\).
(ii) Zj is a pre-dense subset of P for i < i* < β.
(iiΐ) Si is a P^-name of a stationary subset of u>ι, for z < α.
ί/ιen there is a G such that:
G is a directed subset of P,
G is not disjoint to T^ for i < i*
5f [G] = {ζ <ωι : for some p G G we have p lhP "C in 5^'},
is a stationary subset of α i for each i < α.
(2) If λ = K2 we omit it. If β = ωι we may omit it. If a = 0, we omit it.
Ax+[φ, λ] is Axι[φ, λ].
§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds)
3.1 Application A. Axiom II implies SH(= SH^J, in fact - every Aronszajn
tree is special. (See V. 6.1.) Alternatively, see Application F.
3.2 Application B. On isomorphisms of Aronszajn trees on a closed un-
bounded set of levels, etc, see U. Abraham and S. Shelah [AbSh:114].

384 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
3.3 Application C: Uniformization. Axiom II implies: If η$ is an increasing
α -sequence converging to 5, for any limit δ < ω\ then for every F : ω\ — » ω there
is a g : ω\ -> ω such that: (Vί < ωι)[δ limit -> (3n)[n > F(J) & n = g(ηδ(k)}
for all but finitely many fc < ω]]
/. Let 775 for limit 5 < ω\ be given. Let PF = {/ : Dom(/) is an ordinal
< α i, Rang(/) C ω, and for every limit δ < Dom(/) the condition above holds}.
The order on Pp is the extension of functions. Now, α-properness is very easy.
We prove D-completeness for a simple K0-completeness system B .
We have to note that if TV is a countable elementary submodel of (ίί(λ),
G), PF G N, NΠωi = δ, p e N and r/^F
1^), . . . ,η%,F
n(δ) are n "can-
didates" for 775, F(δ), then we can choose at < δ (for £ = l,...,n) and
77i > Max£=ι)nf^(ί), such that A = U^(Rang(77|) \ aι) has order type ω and
is disjoint to Dom(/), and find a q > p, q is (AT, PF)-generic, gfA is constantly
771.
More formally, (see V. 5.2, 5.3), we shall define D(jv,prw,p)> as a filter on
A0 = {G C P Π N : p G G, G is directed not disjoint to any I G JV, J C P, J
pre-dense} such that it depends only on the isomorphism type of (AT, P,p). Let
The filter will be generated by AJJjp, where for n < ω,η an α -sequence
converging to 5, A^p = {G C AQ : for some fc < ω, and fc > n, for every q G G
and e<ω,\f η(i) G (Dom(ςf) \ Dom(p)), then ς(ry(ί)) = 
fc}. 
D3.3
A conclusion is the following:
3.4 Application D. G.C.H. /> Φ^°. (For a definition - see below).
But we know (2
H° < 2
H l) =^ Φ^ (Devlin and Shelah [DvSh:65], or here AP
§1).
3.4A Definition. The statement ΦJ is defined as: For every G :
 Λ>2 — > «; there
is an F : X — » « such that for every p G
 Λ2 we have {i < λ : G(^tz) = F(i)} is
stationary.

§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
385
Question. Does G.C.H. -* Φ^? (See the next chapter.)
3.5 Application D*. Axiom II implies: If (η§ : δ < ωi, limit} is as above, and
cδ e
 ωω, then there is an / : ωι -> ω such that (Vί)(3°°n)[/(^(n)) = cδ(n)}
(this was proved in U. Abraham, K. Devlin and S. Shelah [ADSh:81]).
There an application of this to a problem of Hajnal and Mate on the
coloring number of graphs is given.
Proof. Easy by now. 
Π13.5
3.6 Application E. Fleissner showed:
Φ^° =Φ> (topological statement A) => not there is a tree Φ = (ηg : δ < ωi),
with Dom(τ7$) = ω, for each 5, and ηs(n) (for n < ω) are increasing with
δ — |Jn η§(n), such that:
(V/i : ωi —> ω)(3f 
: ω\ —> ω)(3/ι' : α i -> α;)(V limit 5 < α i)
(3 m* < α;)(Vn > m^)[/i(J) < f(ηs(n)) < h'(δ
For a definition of the topological statement A see 3.20(3), 3.25A, 3.25B.
Clearly we can choose any Φ and then use application C to see that this
Φ satisfies the conclusion above:
So Axiom II => not (topological statement A) and Axiom II is consistent
with ZFC + G.C.H, so
3.7 Conclusion. G.C.H. ^> (topological statement A) (again CON(ZFC) suf-
fice) .
3.8 Application F. Fleissner asks about the consistency of the following with
G.C.H. (*#) there is a special Aronszajn tree T such that letting T^ = {t e T :
ht (t) limit} (where ht (t) is the level or height of t) we have (we may assume
that T = (α i, <τ) with i-th level [α i,α i + ω), and we may write x < y instead
x <τ y}'

386 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
<8>r (V/ : Γ -> ω) [(Vt € Γt)(3a; < t)(Vy)[z < y < ί -» /(y) < /(ί)]
(3p : Γ -* ω)(Vί 6 Γt)(3x < ί)(Vy)[a: < y < ί -»
(This is sufficient for the existence of some examples in general topology, see
the end of the application and 3.25 below; we can add (Vy)(/(y) < g ( y ) ) . )
Again CON(ZFC) suffices (as Claim 3.19 F10 holds), i.e. we prove:
Claim. [Axil] Every Aronszajn tree T satisfies 0τ (remembering that Axil is
consistent with G.C.H. and implies that every Aronszajn tree is special, we get
the desired answer).
The proof is quite similar to that of Application A, see V 6.1. However,
here we have to do more; an incidental point is that here we have to find a
g : T — > ω, not from a club of levels but from all of them.
Let T be an Aronszajn tree and /* : T — » ω be such that:
(Vί € Tt)(3x < t)(Vy)(x < y < t -> /*(y) < /*(*)).
Let F = {(g,C) : for some countable ordinal i we have Dom(g) — T<i =
Uα<i
τ*ι Rang(<?) C ω (and, if you like, (Vx G Dom(^))[/*(x) < g(x)]),
C C(i + l},C closed, i € C, and
(Vt € Γt n T<<)(3x < t)(Vj/)[z <y<t^f*(y)< g(y) = g(x)]}.
For (^, C) G F, let i(#) be the unique i such that Dom(^) = \Ja<i Ta. We order
Fby
(0ι, CΊ) < (^2,C2) iff ^ C ^2,d - C2 Π (i(^) + 1).
A generic subset of F gives g as required, but F not only is not necessarily
Ni-complete but may collapse NI, or add reals.
So what do we do? We add obligations.
3.9 Fl Definition. / (more formally (/, C, m)) is called an obligation for
(T, /*) if C — C(ΐ) is a closed unbounded subset of α i, m — m(I) < ω and:

§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
387
a) 7 C U{(^)
m(/) : α > Min(C)} and
(αι,...,o m (/)) G /=> 
/\
k€[l,m(
b) if Min(C) < α < /?, and (αi, . . . , αm(/)) G (T0)
mW Π 7, then
(of course for α £ T/j, αfα is the unique 6 £ Ta such that 6 <τ α),
c) if α = Min(C), then (Tα)
m^
7^ Π / has K0 pairwise disjoint members,
d) if α e C, (αj, . . . , α^(/)) e (Tα)
mW Π J and β e C, α < /3, then
m(J)
{(αι,...,α m ( / ))€(Γ / 3)
m(
J)nJ: f\ aέ\a = afi
1=1
contains NO pairwise disjoint members,
e) there are nt(I) < ω (for ί = 1, . . . ,m(/)) such that: if a e In (Tα)
m(
7),
6 6 / Π (Tβ)
mW 
and α,/? € C,α < /3 and ά < 6 (see below), ί/ien
n/(J) > Max{/*(ί) : α^ < t < be} < ω.
Notation. If α G (Γα)
mW, then α(ά)
 d= α.
3.10 F2 Definition. For α,6 € /,α < 6 holds i/ α G (Tα(ά))
m(/), 6 6
(Γβ(δ)r(
J),α(ά)<α(6),and
m(J)
Then we say 5 extends α or 6 is an extension of α.
Let θίξ(I) be the ξ-th element of C7(/), in the increasing enumeration of C(I).
3.11 F3 Definition, (g, C) fulfills the obligation 7 if a), b) and c) below hold,
where:

388 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
a) i(g) G C(I\ i(g) > αι(J) and C \ α0(/) C C(J).
Subdefinition (F3i). We say that g is /-good for α € / if 'α(α) < i(#) and
< y < a£ -> /(j/) <
moreover (W)(Vτ/)[l < I < m(I) & aέ\aQ(I) < y <
b) There are άw G /Π^^)^7),^ G /Π (Γαo(/))
m(
7), (fc < ω,£ < ω) such
that: α/c < α^^; {α^ : A: < ω} are pairwise disjoint and for each k we have:
{άk,£ '. i <ω} are pairwise disjoint and g is /-good for each α/-^.
Subdefinition (FSii). We say (#, (7) is /-very good for ά ifa(ά) G CΠC(/),
and for any /?, α(α) < ^ G C Π (i(^) -f 1), δ has K0 pairwise disjoint
extensions in / Π (Tβ)
m for which ^ is /-good.
c) If α < β < 7 are in C Π C(J), α G / Π (Ta)
mW and, (^, C) is /-very good
for ά ί/ien α has K0 pairwise disjoint extensions in / Π (Tβ)
m^ for which
(g, C) is /-very good (7 appear just to make β not of maximal level as
then /-very good is meaningless).
3.12 F4 Definition. P(τ,/*) = {(0> ^ 5) : (0» C) G F, ^ a countable family of
obligations for (T, /*) which (#,(7) satisfies}.
For short, we may write PT for
3.13 (F5) Claim. I<
 d= {(g,C,B) G P(τ,/ ) : * < i(g)} is a dense subset of
(f°
r eacn ί < ωι)
Proof. Let (^, (7, £?) G -P(τ,/*)
 and * < ^i
As 5 is countable, ΓΊ/££<7(/) is a closed unbounded subset of ωi. So we
can find a ξ such that: ξ > i, i(^) and ξ G C(/) for every / G β. We let
Ct-CU{^}, Bt =jg.
Now we shall define #
; (such that (</, C
f, fit) > (^ c, 5) and (p
7, <7
f, βt) G
J^ will exemplify the desired conclusion).

§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
389
The nontrivial part in defining g' is to satisfy Definition (F3)(c). There,
the nontrivial case (and it implies the others) is β = i(g),Ύ = ξ. So, for each
a < β (= i ( g ) ) and / G B, a G C(I) Π C and ά G (Ta)
mW Π / such that (g, C)
is /-very good for α, we have to provide NO pairwise disjoint 6 > α such that
b G (:7»m(/) ΓΊ/ and (g
1, &) is /-very good for b. (Hence (g
1, C
f) will be /-very
good for ά.)
Let {(/fc,θ!fc,άfc) : k < ω} be a list of all triples as above. As (g,C) is
//--very good for αjt, there is a set of pairwise disjoint sequences {bkte 
t <
ω} <Ξ (T0)
m(
/fc) Π /£ such that g is /^-good for 5^ and ά& < 6^.
Now we can easily find an infinite S^ C ω (for k < ω) such that £ι G 5^,
^2 € 5/e2, fci / &2 =^ δjfej ^j Π 6fc2 ^2 = 0 (more exactly, the intersection of their
ranges is empty). Also for fc, ί < ω we can choose cj^ G (T7)
m(
/fc)n/A; for m < ω
such that: 5W < ^ and m(l) ^ m(2) =* Rang(c^
1}) Π Rang(c^
2)) - 0;
remember 7 — ξ.
Let 6M - (6fe^,e : 1 < e < m(/fc)} and ^ - (c^e : 1 < e < m(/fc)}. Let
7M
(i
)>m(2) ^f Maχ{C : c^grC = <SrC}, so by Ramsey theorem and basic
properties of trees for any fc, I < α;, e G [1, m(/fc)], either (37)(Vm)[7^ e = 7]
or 7J^g e 
does not depend on m(2) and is strictly increasing in m(l).
Now we have to define g'\(\J{Tζ : i(g) <ζ< ξ}). If t G \J{Tζ : i(g) <ζ<
ζ}, bkt£lG <t< c™^ e, then note that by clause (e) of 3.9
Max{/(5) : 6Mιe < s < t} < ne(/fc),
in which case we let g
f ( t ) = ne(Ik) (by the above choice of bkj there is no
contradiction, as bk&e = bk^i^ei => k = ki&zl = li&ze = eι).
By the assumption on the cj^e's, if t G IJί^C : ^(d) < ζ < ζ} an<i ^'(0 is not
yet defined ί/ien: g'(y) is not yet defined for any large enough y < t or t φ T^.
Let {tn 
: n < ω} be a list of all t G \J{Tζ : ϊ(0) < C < f}, such
that for arbitrarily large 5 < t we have that #'(s) is still undefined and the
height of t is a limit ordinal. We can easily define by induction on n, sets
An C \J{Tζ : i(g) < ζ < ξ}, such that: on every t G An, #
7(ί) is undefined,
An are pairwise disjoint, each An is linearly ordered, each An is convex (i.e,

390 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
x,y G An ί\x < z < y =Φ z G An), and for every ίn, for some xn < ίn, and
n' < n we have {y : xn < y < tn} C A n/, and Supx€Λτι/*(x) < ω (see the
hypothesis on /*;An may be empty).
Define g'(t) for £ G An as MaxxG^τl/*(^) Complete #' to its required
domain Uα<ξ
 Ta by g'(t) = f * ( t ) if #'(£) not already defined. It is easy to
check (0',£7t) G Fj (0',ct,βt) G p(T|/φ) and (0,C,B) < (0',Ct,βt). 
Π3.i3
3.14 F6 Claim. If (g, C, B) G P(τ,/*), ί > *(0)» ί
 G Π/GB ^ί
7) is a limit ordi-
nal and ti, . . . , tn are branches of (Jα<ξ
 T^, and j/i, . . . yn are <τ-incomparable,
yt € t^, y€ ^ Dom(^), n^ > Max{/*(x) : x = zt oτ yι < x e t*}, tten
there is a (^^t,^) G pτ such that i(0t) = ξ,(^,C,B) < (^^t,^) and
ye<x-> g'(x) = nέ).
3.15 Remarks. By the demand on /* we know that n^, yt always exist, if tι
have distinct an upper bound in T (in particular the Max is well defined).
Proof. Same proof, assuring bk^e φ 
fy. 
Πs.i4
3.16 F7 Claim. If λ is large enough (2
Hl should be o.k.), {P(T)Γ),T,/*} G
N -< (ίf(λ),G), \\N\\ = K0,δ
d= α;ιΠ7Vandtι,...,t n are (distinct) 5-branches
of N Π Γ = \Ja<δ Γα, (p, C, B) G PT Π AT, J G AT a maximal antichain of PΓ,
2// ^ t£, 2/1, . . . , 2/n are pairwise <τ-incomparable, ^ G U*<i(p)
 Ti and for everv
£ and z, 7/£ < z G t^ we have
m > Max{/*(z) : yέ < z G t/, ht (z) > i(g)}
and
nι = ^(y^) = fl^(^) when yt < z e it, ht (z) < i(p)
(remember, ht (z) is the height of z in the tree), then there is a (#', C^, βt) G
PTΠA^ such that (g', &,B
]) > (g, C, B) and (#', C
f, βt) is above some member
of J and (Vx G

§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
391
Proof. Suppose not. Define
7o=
f {(αι,...,α m) : for some β< ωι,β > %),αι, ... ,αm G Tβ,
at > Ϊ£\i(g) = the unique x G it Π Γ^),
(so necessarily 01, . . . , αm are distinct), β G P| C7(/),
/€S
/\(Vx)(x <at/\xφ Όom(g) =* /*(x) < n*)
^and there is no (#', C
f, 51) > (#, C, 5) such that:
a) i(g') < β
b) (</, C,B^) is above some member of J
m
c) /\ (Vx)[x < at & ht (x) > i(g) & ht (x) < i(g')
1=1
Clearly /o G A/", and if α^ G t^ Π T^ (for I — 1, . . . , m) are distinct (and for
/? € [*(#)> ^) there are such α^) (aι is determined by t^, /?), then (αi, . . . , αm) G
/o, provided that i(0) < β G f|/eB ^W Note: a G ^o => α(α) G f| C[7]
/€B
But in TV, the set Π/eB ^(Ό ^ ^ is unbounded below J.
So JV N "for arbitrarily large /? < c^i there is an α G /0 Π (Tβ)
m" . So by
TV's choice this really holds.
We now define, by induction on ε < (2
Kl )+, a set Iε. /o was already defined.
For limit ε, we set Iε = Γ\ζ<ε ^O
 an(^ ^ ε = C + 1 then α G 7e iff α G /ζ and
for arbitrarily large 7 < ω\ we have: there is b G (T7)
m such that α < 6 G /ζ.
Clearly, if α < b are in / and b G /e then α G 7ε; also for some ε(*) < (2
Nl)
+ we
have ε(*) < ε < (2
Nl)
+ => /e = /ε(*) For α G 70 let ε(ά) = Min{ε : ε = ε(*),
or α ^ Iε+ι} Returning to t^'s, easily ε((tι\β : I = 1, . . . , n)) is nonincreasing
with β for β G (i(g), TV Π α i), hence eventually constant, hence is constantly
ε(*). So (tέ\β : ί = 1, . . . ,n) is in 7ε(5(e) for β G (ϊ(0),ί), hence /e(j|c) ^ 0.
By the proof of Theorem III 5.4 (as in V §6), there is a closed unbounded
C* C Π/6B ^00 \ (*(^) ~^~ ^ ) sucn that there are NO pairwise disjoint members of
7e(*) in (T^)
771, moreover there are N0 pairwise disjoint members of 7ε(#) in (T^)
771
which are above ά, if α G (Γ^)
771, α G 70, ^ < δ, δ G C* and α G (T^)
m Π 7e(s(£).

392 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
Define /
 d= {α : for some 7 we have 7 > β > Min(C*), α G (l»
m,δ G
I e Wn(T 7Γ,7eσ*,α<5}.
Then / ( more formally (/, C*, ra)) is an obligation for (Γ, /*). By a variant
of 3.14 F6 we can find a (g
f,C^ J?ΐ), where g
f > g,i(g) = &i(I) = second
element of C*, C
1" = CU{
αoCO» αι(/)}, #
f = B U {/}, such that for infinitely
many pairwise disjoint α G J(Ί (T"αo(/))
m, for infinitely many pairwise disjoint b
we have ά < 6 € / Π (Γαι(/))
m and Λ*Lι(
Va;)[z <
 bt
 Λ ht (
x) > *(0) -» 9'(
x) =
So, there is a (0",C",B") > (^C^βt) in P(τ,/*) which is above a
member of J. As / G βt, clearly i(ρ
;/) G C* = C7(J), and there is an α e
7 Π (?i(0"))
m for which g" is /-good. This contradicts the definition of /o? I
3.17 F8 Claim.
1) PT is proper
2) PT is α-proper for every a <ω\.
Proof.
1) If AT is as in 3.16 F7 and δ
 d= N Π α>ι, while (y0, CO, BO) e P(τ,/*) Π ΛΓ, let
{ Jn : n < α;} be a list of maximal antichains of PT which belong to N. We
define (gn, Cn, Bn) G P(τ,/*) Π AT which are increasing, (<jn, Cn, βn) is above a
member of Jn-\ (when n > 0) and "on the side" we all the time have more
comitments of the form that appear in 3.16F7. More specifically, together with
(<7m C
f
n, Bn) we have t^, y^, m^, for ^ = 1, ... , fcn, such that t^ is a branch
of Γ Π AT with an upper bound in Tδ, yt G t€, y^ G Ui<»(p)
 T*> (^Nί^n) : ^ =
1, . . . , fcn) are pairwise distinct, ^ < y G t^ Π Ui<i(P)
 T< ^ ^(y) < n^ and
n^ > Max{/*(5) : yt < s G t^} and if ί^ G T§ is the upper bound of t^ then
^ > f*(te)- We can continue by 3.16 F7 in order that in the end we get a
condition. We have two kinds of tasks:
A) for every t G T$, there is an x G Uj<«5 Tj,x <t such that
(V3/)(x < y < t -> /* (y) < (y(j/) - ^(x) & /* (t) < (/(x))

§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
393
If our promise until now is tι,nι,τ/ι... , t^,n^,^ we let fy+i = {x : x <τ t},
ni+i = Min{n : for some z G fy+i, for every y, z < y < t =Φ /(y) < n} and
then choose ye.+ι appropriately.
B) for every / 6 Bn, α G Cn Π C(/), α G (Tα)
m Π /, (gn, Cn) is /-very good for
α, and A; < ω, we want that there will be A: pairwise disjoint 6's in (T^)
771 Π /,
so that (U<;n, UCn) will be /-good for 6.
(As we do this eventually for every A;, we can get K0 pairwise disjoint δ's.)
This is again quite easy.
We have only K0 tasks, so there is no problem. Having defined ((gn,Cn,Bn} 
:
n < ω) it is straightforward to find an upper bound (#*, C*, B*) G P^j*}, with
i(g*) = ί, which is (N, P(^j*))-generic and is above (#o,Q),5o)
2) A similar proof. 
D13.17
3.18 F9 Claim. PT is D-complete for some simple KI-completeness system D.
Proof. As in the proof of 3.17 F8 above, we have to prove that z/for one N
(with δ = N Π ωi) we are given countably many possible pairs
(Tδ, (I Π (T5)
m : / G N an obligation for (T, /*)})
then we can define a sequence ((gn,Cn,Bn) 
: n < ω) which is appropriate for
all of them at once. This is trivial as in the proof of 3.17 F8 we do not actually
need to assume that te has an upper bound in T$ (i = 1,..., fcn), just that it
is well defined as a 5-branch of T§ with sup{/*(t^fα:) : α < δ} < ω. 
DS.IS
The following is not needed for applying Axil, but is needed if we want to
use the weaker variant equiconsistent with ZFC.
3.19 F10 Claim. Pτ satisfies the N2-e.c.c. (see §1).
Proof. Trivial: define h : PT -» ω\ such that
h(g,C,B] = Λ(0',CtjBt) iffg = g

394 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
(this is possible as 2*° = NI). Let (g, C, B)R(g' , C^B^) mean (g, C) = (#',
and in Definition 1.2(B) let
Remember that (0, C, B), (p, C, βt) have a lub: (g, C, B |J 
fit). 
D3.ι9,3.8
3.20 Discussion.
1) The proof here is appropriate for Application A; the small gain is that we
directly find a function specializing T rather than finding one specializing
a closed unbounded set of levels, and then using a theorem saying this is
equivalent.
2) In applications A and F, compared to Jensen's CON(ZFC 4- G.C.H. +
SH), we can get also CON(ZFC + CH + SH 4- 2
Nl=anything of cofinality
> HI) using Lemma 1.3, and iterating ω2 times, each time specializing all
Aronszajn trees. The same proof works for all the relevant cases.
3) Fleίssner's Question. It is unknown whether ZFC h " there is a countably
paracompact non normal Moore space" . (Equivalently, there is a countably
paracompact not hereditarily countably paracompact Moore space).
Such spaces can be constructed by Wager's technique from normal non-
metrizable Moore spaces.
Application E gives the first example of such a space not constructed in
this way.
Application F shows it can even be a Jones road space - a more traditional
space than the space constructed in §3 E] see more in 3.25.
3.21 Application G. Ax II implies: There are no Kurepa trees. Moreover,
every Ni-tree (a tree of height ω\ with all levels countable) is essentially spe-
cialized, i.e. there is an / : T — > Q (rationale) such that: t < s => f ( t ) < /(s),
and t < sι,t < s2,/(t) = f(
sι) ~ f(
sz} =^ (
5ι ^
 52 or $2 < sι) (Why does
this imply that T is not a Kurepa tree? On any ω\ -branch B, f is eventually
constant, so choose the minimal x G B, f\{y G B : y > x} is constant, call it
x(B). Then BI ^ B2 ωi-branches => x(Bι) ^ x(B2), so T has < HI branches.)

§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
395
3.22 Remark. Here Con(ZFC -f 3 inaccessible) is sufficient (and necessary).
Proof. First, let PQ be a Levy collapse of H2 to HI (which is HI-complete).
In V
rp, by Silver (or see III 6.1), T has at most HI many ωi-branches. Let
{Bi 
: i < ωι} be a list of the ωi-branches of T, w.l.o.g. they are pairwise
disjoint (choose B\ C Bi pairwise disjoint end segments by induction).
Now Q is a forcing (in V
p) which specializes Γ as in Application A, but
on each Bi the function is constant. The proof is the same.
So P * Q essentially specializes Γ and so guarantees that T has < HI
branches. A directed G C P * Q defines the function / which essentially
specializes T if it meets the following HI dense sets:
Xt = {p : p |h "/(ί) = q" for some q € Q} for t <E Γ.
So by Axiom II there is a G as required, provided that P * Q is (< ω\)-
proper and D-complete for a simple HI-completeness system D.
For (< α>ι)-properness: P obviously is, Q - as in Application A, (in V
p)
and so by III 3.2. applied to (< ωι)-properness, P * Q is (< ωι)-proper. The
task of checking for D-completeness is left to the reader. 
Πs.21
3.23 History for G. Baumgartner Malitz Reinhart [BMR] prove MA +-Ί CH
=Φ every Aronszajn tree is special.
Silver proves that by Levy collapsing κ=first (strongly) inaccessible to H2
one obtains that there are no Kurepa trees (this includes the lemma we quote).
Devlin proved: CON(ZFC + MA + 2
N° = H2+ no Kurepa trees).
Shelah [Sh:73] used essential specialization function as the function above
and showed that we can use HI-C.C. forcings to essentially specializes HI-trees
with few branches (the proof uses more particularly unnecessary information).
Baumgartner [B3], using proper forcing, defines essential specialization and
strengthens Devlin's result to: CON(ZFC + MA + every tree of power HI and
height HI is essentially special). Independently, Todorcevic proved these results
too.
It is well known that for such a consistency result an inaccessible cardinal
is necessary.

396 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
3.24 Application H. Assume Axiom Π'[S]. For δ G S let η§ be an u -sequence
converging to δ. Then (η§ : δ G S) has the No-uniformization property. See
[Sh:64], and [Sh:98]; this result should be an exercise to a reader who arrives
here (but you may want more refined results as in [Sh:98], then proofs there
are still of interest).
3.25 On Countable Par acompact ness. Some general topologists consider
suspiciously application F. So, let us give the derivation of the solution of the
original problem.
3. 25 A Problem. Is the existence of a countably paracompact regular space
which is not normal consistent with G.C.H.?
3.25B Definition. A topological space X is countably paracompact if for
every family of open sets Un of X (for n < ω), which forms a cover (i.e.
satisfies X — [Jn<ω Un), there are open U'n (n < ω) which refine Un (n < ω)
(i e Λn VnX £ ^m) and form a cover of X (i.e. X = \Jn<ωU^ which is
locally finite (i.e. for every x G X, {n : x e U'n} is finite).
3.25C Definition. We shall consider a tree T as a topological space as follows:
the set of points of the space is the set of nodes of T, for t £ T its neighbourhood
basis is:
if ht (t) non limit.
I {y : x <τ y <τ t} x <τ t j if ht (t) is a limit ordinal.
3.25D Fact. For a o^-tree T we have:
(*) as a topological space, T is Hausdorff (use the normality of the tree) and
even regular. 
IU3.25D
3.25E Claim. If T is an u i-tree satisfying ®τ (the conclusion of 3.8(=Appli-
cation F)) above, then, as a topological space, T is countably paracompact.
Proof. Let Un C T be open with T = \Jn<ω Un. Define a function / from T to
ω by: f ( t ) = Min{n : t € Un}.

§3. Applications of Axiom II (so CH Holds) 
397
First check that / satisfies the antecedent of <8)τ, i.e. (Vt G
t)(Vy)[x < y < t => /(y) < f(t)} (the order is of the tree).
So let t G Tt, i.e. t G T, t € T$, δ a limit ordinal. For some n, n = /(t) so
t E E/n, hence for some x < t, {y : x < y < t} C [7n, hence x < y < t => /(y) <
n = /(t), as required. So by ®τ there is a function g : Γ — > ω satisfying the
conclusion of ®Γ, i.e. (Vt G Γ^)(3x < ί)Vy[x < y < t -> /(y) < #(y) = #(x)].
Now, without loss of generality as asid above we can force it, still we derive it.
[Why?
(*) /(*) < 9(t) for every t G T.
Let ί G T"ΐ, so for some x\ < t we have:
(*)ι 
xι<y<t=>f(y)<f(t)
(this is true, as we have verified the antecedent of <S>τ)
and for some x2 < t
(*)2 z2 < V < t => /(y) < ff(y) - fl(x2)
(this is possible by the choice of g) .
Now ifyeAt
 
d= {y :y <t,xι <y,x<2 < y}, then /(y) < f ( t ) (by (*)i),
< 9(t) (by (*2), by the "/(y) < ί/(j/)
w there) and g(t) = g(x2) (by (*)2,
by the
 ug(y) = g(xιY there) and g(x2) = g(y) (by (*)2, by the "g(y) =
^(x2)" there). Together, y G At =» /(y) < y(y). So, {t : f ( t ) > g(t)} is
necessarily a set of isolated points with no accumulation point. Hence we
can change the values of g on it while not harming the conclusion of <8>τ] .
Define U'n^ = {x G Un : g(x) = ί} (for n < ί < ω). First, clearly
U'n £ C Un. Second, each U'n ί is also an open set: if t G Γ^ Π U' ^ let x2 < t be
such that x2 < y < t => /(y) < ^(y) = p(x2) = ^(*)> so X2 < y < t ^> g(y) =
i — g(χ2) (there is such an x2 by the choice of g). Let Xi < t be such that
xι<y<t=>y£Un (there is such an x as we have verified the antecedent of
<8>τ) and choose an x < t, x > xι,x > x2, clearly {y : x < y < t} C E7n,£. If
t G T \ Tt, obviously {t} C U'n^
Third, T = \Jn<£<ω U'n έ because if t G T, then for some n, we have that
t €Un\ Um<n Umi hence by the choice of /, f ( t ) = n and for some t we have
g(t) =t,sote U'nj and n < £ as n = f ( t ) < g(t).

398 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
Fourth, {Untι : n < ί < ω} is locally finite: if t G Γ, Γ = 0(ί) then (Un,t 
n <
£<ω,te Un,t} C {Unt£ :n<ί = e*} which has £* + 1 members. 
D3.25E
It was proved in [DvSh:85] (using the weak diamond) that
3.25F Claim. (CH) No special Aronszajn-tree is normal (as a topological
space, in the topology we considered). 
Πs.25F
So we can solve Watson's problem:
3.26 Conclusion. Axil (which is consistent with G.C.H.) implies that every
Aronszajn ωi-tree T is special and (8>τ holds. Hence, we have a countably
paracompact, non normal, regular topological space which is an Aronszajn
tree. In fact, it suffices to use a weaker version of Axil, for whose consistency
(even with GCH), CON(ZFC) suffices. 
D3.26
§4. Applications of Axiom I
4.1. Claim. P is proper and even α-proper for every α < ω\ if at least one of
the following holds:
1. P satisfies the NI-C.C.
2. P is tti-complete (then P is even strongly proper and ^ω-bounding)
3. P is Sacks forcing, or Silver forcing, or Gregorief forcing, or a product with
countable supports of such forcings (then P is even strongly proper and
 ωω-
bounding) for definitions see Lemma VI 2.14(2); Remark VI 4.1A; Definition
VI 4.1(1) and VI 4.1A, Definition IX 2.6, Definition V 4.1 respectively).
4. P is Laver forcing (P = {T : T C
 ω>ω, T non empty closed under initial
segments, no XX-minimal element and for some η € T such that: TΓ\^
η^ω —
{η} and η < v G T => (3*n)(z/
Λ (n) € Γ)} ordered by inverse inclusion).
Proof. An exercise. 
Q14.1

§4. Applications of Axiom I 
399
4.2. Discussion. Baumgartner [B3], independently of the author's work on
proper forcing, and at about the same time, introduced Axiom A forcing defined
below. It covers a large part of the application of proper forcing, but to many
it seems easier to handle.
P satisfies Axiom A if there are partial orders <n on P such that:
i) <o is the usual order <,
ii) x <n+1 y =» x <n y,
Ίii) if f\n xn <n Xn+i then {xn : n < ω} has an upper bound in <,
iv) if T is a name of an ordinal, p G P, n < u>, then there are q G P,p <n q
and a countable A C Ord, A G V such that <? Ihp "r G A"
Baumgartner proved "P satisfies Axiom A =Φ P is proper"; in fact "P
satisfies A => P is (< u>ι)-proper". Which forcing notions are equivalent to
ones satisfying Axiom A? See XIV 2.4.
4.3. Discussion. Baumgartner [B3] found many applications for proper forc-
ing: new ones and simplified proofs for the old ones (see proofs there). It is a
matter of taste whether to deduce them from Axiom I, or build a forcing doing
it. Some of them are:
4.3A. Pα, the forcing giving finite information on the enumeration of a closed
unbounded subset of GUI, is proper.
Remark. But Pα is not ω-proper, so this shows proper ^ ω-proper.
This club does not include any old infinite sets. So if we iterate ω^ times (by
Axiom I or any variant) we obtain that for any HI infinite subsets of ω\ there
is a club which does not include any of them. So this statement is consistent
with 2
N° = ^2- In fact 2^° can be anything, since if Pω2 is the forcing for doing
the above, its product with adding κ; Cohen generic is also O.K.
U. Abraham proved the consistency of a similar assertion for N2 (with CH).
4.3B. Every tree of height HI and power HI is essentially special.

400 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
See §3 Application G. Only before forcing with P, add a Cohen real. Here
the forcing specializing T consists of finite information, but the first part is the
same (see history there, more exactly in 3.23).
4.3C. CON(ZFC -|- no ^2-Aronszajn trees) (originally proved by Mitchell and
Silver). We use K, weakly compact.
4.3D. Laver's consistency of BoreΓs conjecture: Baumgartner iterates ^2 times
the forcing P = {A : A C ω is infinite}, ordered by A <p B iff B <ae A for
adding a Ramsey ultrafilter, and Mathias forcing for those ultrafilters (note
that we can use the preservation of the Laver property (see Definition VI 2.9
and Conclusion 2.12)).
4.3E. CON(ZFC -f "there are no K2 subsets of HI of power NI, with pairwise
countable intersection"), originally proved by Baumgartner.
4.4. On isomorphism of Aronszajn trees see Abraham and Shelah [AbSh:114].
§5. A Counterexample Connected
to Preservation
5.1 Example. If we iterate forcing which does not destroy stationary subsets
of ωι we may destroy NI.
Proof. For every α < ω^, let α = \Ji<ωι Af where Af are countable, increasing
and continuous in i and let ha(i) = the order type of Af.
Let Ί) — Vωι (the filter of closed unbounded subsets of ω\). Then g\ <χ> g%
means {α < ω\ : g\(ot) < g^a)} G 2λ
Then α < β => ha <τ> hβ. Suppose
(*) (Vα < ω2,)[ha <τ> g] for some g : ω\ —> ω\ (g exists e.g., if V = L).

§5. A Counterexample Connected to Preservation 
401
Define Pg = I (/ι, s,F, T) : h is a function from some i < ω\ to ωι,i is
a successor ordinal, s is a characteristic function of a closed subset of i, and
h <s g, which means s(j) — 1 => /ι(j) < g(j), F is a countable subset of
{ha : a < 6^2}, T is a function from F to the set of closed subsets of i such
that ha G F& j G T(ftα) => Λα(j) < /ι(j)}.
We call z the domain of the condition.
The partial ordering is obvious. Pg is not necessarily K
5.1 A Fact. If CH, then Pg satisfies the ^2-chain condition (moreover there is
a function h : Pg — > ω\ such that if h(p0) = h(pχ) then p0, Pi and a lub).
Proof. For the first phrase find a Δ-system then take the union.
(For the second let h((Λ,s,F,Γ)) code (h,s).) 
D5.ιΛ
5. IB Fact. Forcing with P^ does not destroy stationary subsets of α i and does
not add reals.
Proof. Let S C cji be stationary, p G PG
 and C a Pp-name of a closed
unbounded subset such that p \\-pg "C is disjoint to S" .
First take N x (if(N7),G,P,C,S,p), ||JV|| -Hi such that ωl -h 1 C ΛΓ.
Let TV Π ω2 = ε, so ε = {C(^) : z < α i}, and without loss of generality TV
is such that N — \Ji<ωι Ni,Ni -*.N,Ni are increasing continuous, \\Ni\\ = HO,
and (Nj : j < i) G M+i-
Now /ιe <χ> ^f by the assumption on g. So let C0 be a closed unbounded
set such that i G CQ => hε(i] < g(ϊ).
For each i < ωι,ζ(i) < e so ft^) <p hε. So let C* be a closed unbounded
subset of ωi such that j G C
1 => hζ^(j) < hε(j).
Let Ci C α i be closed unbounded such that
Now
C
 d= {i e Co Π Ci : (V? < ί)i G

402 
VII. Axioms and Their Application
is known to be closed unbounded subset of ω\. Choose a δ G C and let
δ = LUn,jn < δ.
Now, by induction on n < ω, define pn G Pg Π N§,p — po, Pn < Pn+i such
that jn C Dom(/ι
pτι),pn+ι Ih "7n G C" for some 7n, jn <jn<δ.
Now (J pn can be extended to a condition p* G Pp by adding δ to
n<ω
the domain because δ G C and hε(δ) can serve as the value of h(δ) i.e.
p* - (h
p* ,s
p* ,F
p* ,T
p*) is defined by: Dom(/ι
p*) = <S 4- 1, h*\δ = (J /ι
p"
n<ω
(well defined as jn C Dom(/ι
pτι)), and h
p* (δ) = he(<5), s
p* is a function with
domain J + 1, s
p* \δ = \J s
p" and s
p* (δ) = 1, F** = |J FP» (which is C TV
n<ω 
n<α;
as each pn belongs to N) and lastly if ha G F
p* let n(α) = Min{n : ha G F
pτι}
and let T
p* (ha) = ( 
\J 
T
p- (Λα)) U {5}. Why p* G Pp? As ί G C0, we have
n6[n(α),u;)
Λe(5) < flf(ί) and ζ e J V n α ; 2 = > C = CW> ^
or some * < ^> hence Λζ(J) < Λe(5)
(as δ G C) but hβ(ί) < ^(ί) so hc(ί) < g(δ). Now p* Ih "J G C" as C is closed
and δ = \Jnjn = \JnΊn and pn+ι "~ "7n G C". But δ G 5, so p cannot force
that C is disjoint to 5. Also, if r G NQ is a P5-name of a real then we can
arrange that pn+ι forces a value to r(n) hence p* Ih "r = r" for some old real
r 
D5.is
Pp in general is not proper. Now if G C Pg is generic, we can find a generic
function h such that
(Vα < ω<2)ha <χ> h <χ> g .
So Ph is well defined.
If we iterate ω-times (taking any kind of limit) we necessary destroy ω\ .
Why?
We get /io,ftι... functions from ω\ to ω and ftn+ι <χ> Λn (any closed
unbounded subset of ωi remains closed unbounded), contradiction. (Note: the
kind of limit we take at ω is irrelevant.) 
D5.ι

VIII. ft-pic and Not Adding Reals
§0. Introduction
In the first section we show that we can iterate K2-complete forcing, and KI-
complete forcing which satisfy the ^2-c.c. in a strong sense.
In the second section we deal with a strong version of the K2-c.c. called ^2-
pic. It is useful for proving that for CS iteration of length ω<2 of proper forcing
notions, the limit still satisfies the N2-c.c. This in turn will be used in order to
get universes with 2*
1 > 2*° = N2.
In the third section we deal again with the axioms; starting with a model
of ZFC (not assuming the existence of large cardinals) we phrase the axioms
we can get. There are four cases according to whether 2
N° is NI or K2, and 2**
1
is ^2 or larger [our knowledge on the case 2^° > ^3 is slim].
In the fourth section we return to the problem of when a CS iteration of
proper forcing preserves "not adding reals". We weaken "each Qi (a P^-name)
is D-complete for some D a (λ, 1, /ς)-system", by replacing "each Dx is an NI-
complete filter" or even just "each Dx is a filter" by "each D^ is a family of
sets, the intersection of e.g. any two is nonempty". So we can deduce ZFC-fCH
V Φ^. We also try to formulate the property preserved by iteration weaker
than this completeness. See references in the relevant sections.

404 
VIII. κ-pic and Not Adding Reals
§1. Mixed Iteration- ^2-c.c., ^-Complete
1.1 Lemma. Suppose Pa (a < α0) are forcing notions in V and V \= CH and
Qa are such that:
1) Qa is a Pα-name of a forcing in V
Pa,
2) Pα = {/ : |{2/3 : 2/3 < α and 2β G Dom(/)}| < N0 and |{2/3+l : 2/3+1 < α
and 2/34-16 Dom(/)}| < NI and 0 lhp. "/(*) ^ Q" for all i G Dom(/)},
3) Q20+ι is ^-complete (i.e. in V
P*P+
I, if ςf» G Q2/5+ι(* < 5 < ω2) are
increasing, then (3qδ G Q2/3+ι) Ai<5^i < Qδ),
4) for α = 2/3, in y
Pθ£ there is an ha : Qa —> α i, such that: ftα(p) — &α(^) =>
(p, q has a least upper bound p Λ #),
5) Q2/3 is Ki-complete,
6) y N Cff.
7) The order on Pa is as usual: Pa 1= "p < ςf" ij^* for every β G Dom(p) we
have q G Dom(p) and q\β \\-Pβ
 
up(β) < q(β)
n
Then: Pao is Ki-complete and does not collapse ^2
1.1 A Remark.
1) Condition 4) was introduced by Baumgartner for getting a weak MA for a
&ι-complete forcing.
2) For simplicity, we assume that 0 G Qβ is minimal, /i20(0) = 0, and adopt
the convention: if / G Pa and /(/?) is not defined otherwise, then /(/3) =0.
3) Of course the decision to use odd and even ordinals for the two different
cases is arbitrary, since any other iteration along two disjoint sets of ordinals
for the two different cases can be translated into such an iteration.
4) For a better theorem — see Chapter XIV.
5) We can replace HI by K, if K is regular, K = κ
<κ (so "countable" is replaced
by "of cardinality < K" .)

§1. Mixed Iteration-K2-c.c., ^-Complete 
405
Proof. Let λ be large enough, N -< (ίf(λ), G), Pao G TV, ||TV|| = NI, and every
countable subset of TV belongs to N. Let p G Pαo Π TV, and (ZQ, : α < α>ι) be a
list of all maximal antichains of Pao which belong to TV (so (Ia : a < ω\) φ N
but for each α* < ω\ we have that (Ia : a < α*) G TV, by the choice of TV).
It is trivial that Pαo is tti-complete. It then suffices to prove the existence of
a p* G Pαo, p < p* such that p* is (TV, Pαo)-generic, so proving that Pao is
"somewhat proper".
By CH, we can let {(o£ , A* , (^n : β G A^n < ω)) : ξ < ωι} be a list
of all triples of the form (α,Λ, (7^ : β G A,n < ω}} such that α < ωi,
A C {2β : 2/3 G α0 Π TV}, \A\ < K0 and -γβιn < ωλ.
We now inductively define conditions p% G TVΠ Pao (for ξ < ω\) which are
increasing, with po = P > such that:
A) Dom(pξ) Π {2/3 : 2β < α0} C Dom(p)
B) 2β G Dom(^) => pξ(2β) = p(2β)
C) z/ there are p
n G Pαo
 n N (f°
r n < ^) sucn that
G ^ ^ (p
n+1r2/J) IKp2/3 "^(P
n(2/?)) - 7/3^" » and
(iii) for some ^ G Iaζ we have q < p°
then there are such p
0,]?
1 . . . such that:
[2/3 + 1 e Un<ω Dom(p»)] => Λn<ω[»-^+l " if P°W + !) ^ P'
. . . < p
n(2/3 + l)(in Q2/3+1) then p"(2/3 + 1) < pί+ι(2/3 + !)»].
We let p^ = p
n and ς'ξ = q.
There is no problem in the definition; we can assume w.l.o.g. that
for every n, as we can replace pj? by rn where r
n(2β) = p^ (2/3) and rn (2/3+1) =
p|(2/3 + 1) for the maximal I < n such that (p™(2/3 4- 1) : m < ί) is increasing
(this is of course a P2/3+ι-name).

406 
VIII. κ-pic and Not Adding Reals
Now we define p* : if 2/3 G Dom(p), p*(2/3) - p(2/3), and if 2/3 + 1 €
Uξ<ωι Dom(pξ) then p*(2/J 4- 1) is (a P2/3+ι-name of) an upper bound (in
92/3+ι) of {pξ(2β + ! ) : £ < ωι} if it exists, and p(2β + 1) otherwise. So
P-Po <P* € Pα0. So if (2/3 + 1) G JVnα 0 then p*t (2/3 + 1) lhp2/3+1 V (2/3 + 1)
is an upper bound of {pζ(2β + 1) : ζ < ω\ (and 2/3 + 1 G Dom(pc))}".
Now we prove that for each α < ω\, Xα Π ΛΓ is pre-dense above p*. Clearly,
there are p® and g* G Pao such that p* < p®, q* < p^, q* G Ia.
Let AO = Dom(p2) Π {2,5 : 2/3 < α0} Π AT. Now, by the NI-completeness of
Pαo, there is a p\ G PKO> P2 ^ P*> sucn tnat f°
r every 2β £ AΌ,
(pi \1β) \\-p2β
 
Kft20(p2(2/?)) = 72/3,0"
for some 72/3,0- We continue to define p*"
1"
1 > p™ such that
for every 2β G An
 
d= Dom(p^) Π {2/3 : 2β < α0} Π N. We now define
= (Un<u; -^n)> ^2/3,n = 0 for 2/3 G >l \ ^4n. So, for some ξ we have a^ = α,
A^ - A, (72/3,n : 2/3 G Λ,n < ω) = (7^^ : 2/3 G A,n < ω). As these objects
are countable subsets of JV, by the choice of A/", they belong to N.
As N -< (/f(λ),G), for this ξ there are #,p
n as mentioned in clause (C)
above, p° > ς G Za. Again, without loss of generality, p
n G Pao Π N and
g G Jα Π A/", so <?ξ, {p^ : n < ω}, as in (C), are well defined. Now by the
properties of /i2/3? we can prove, by induction on 7 < αo, that
(*) for every ζ < 7, and r G Pa such that p™ \ζ < r and p^\ζ < r for n < ω,
there is an r* G PΊ such that p£fy < r*, p^ \j < r* for n < ω, and r* fζ = r,
and Dom(r*) Π [C,7) C (jn<ω Dom(^) U Un<u; Dom(pϊ).
For 7 a limit there are no problems: use the induction hypothesis and
the "bound" on the domain of r*. For 7 = 2/3 + 2, w.l.o.g. C = 2/3 + 1 (by
the induction hypothesis for "7^ =2/3 + 1"). By clause (C) and the induction

§1. Mixed Iteration-^2-c.c., ^-Complete 
407
hypothesis we know:
r \(2β + 1) lhPa/J+1 "rf(2/3 + 1) > p*(2β + 1) > %+ι(2/3 + 1) > p?(2β + 1)" ,
so by the NI -completeness of ζ?2/m> r exists. Lastly, for 7 = 2/? + 1, the
nontrivial case is that 2/3 belongs to (Jn<α; Dom(p£) and also to Un<ω ^
om(P* )
hence 2/3 G AT Π αo Again w.l.o.g. £ = 2/3, and by the hypothesis on r and
r\(lβ)\\-P2β Ή
So r forces that p£(2/3),p£(2β) have a least upper bound p£(2/3) Λp£(
and as p^(2/3) < p£
+1(2/3), and p?(2/3) < rf
+1(2/3) (i.e. r forces this), also
p£(2/3) Λp?(2β) < p^
l(2β) /\pΐ+
l(2β), hence by the Nx -completeness of Q2β,
there is a q(2β) such that r ί(2/3) lhp2/3 " ^<ω(p
n^β) Λpϊ(2/3)) < r*(2/3)" and
0 '^2/3 *V*(2/3) G Q2β\ so we are done.
Taking ζ = 0, 7 = α0 in (*), we see that the set {p£, p™ : n < ω} has an upper
bound which necessarily is a common upper bound to q^ #*, so as Jα is an
antichain, <?* = q% G AT, soIaΓ\ N is pre-dense above p*, and we finish. 
DM
1.2 Remark. The reason for including this is as follows. It was a consequence
of the work on proper forcing that we can iterate NI -complete and KI-C.C.
forcings together. So it was natural to ask the parallel for ^-complete and
Ni-complete with the ^2-
c c But we do not know how to iterate the second
kind alone (and in general this is impossible since H2 will collapse). So it is
reasonable to replace N2-c.c. by something stronger (here - clause (4) of the
lemma). (Remember p?(2β) is 0 when 2β £ Dom(pJ), and /ι2/?(0) = 0). Of
course, much better would be to find one condition unifying the two conditions
- see Chapter XIV.

408 
VIII. 
K-pic and Not Adding Reals
However as the interaction has no applications now, we shall not discuss
it further (there are other tries at N2-
c c., see [Sh 80]).
Note also that the analogous lemma for Ni-complete, NI-C.C. forcing holds,
but now it has no application.
1.3 Claim. If 0^ holds, then in 1.1 we can change the iteration to the usual
(< ^2)-support iteration and the conclusion still holds.
Proof. We let N — \Jζ<ωι Nξ, Nς 
•*< N where Nξ are countable, increasing and
continuous. By ONI there are for ξ < ωι, 2-place functions /ξ from
Yξ 1l
f { { α , β ) : β , a e N t , a , β ordinals}
into <jι, such that for every 2-place / : \Jξ<ωι Yξ, —> ωi the set {ξ : f\Y$ = f ξ } is
stationary. Repeat the proof of 1.1 but in the definition of the Pξ's, we replace
A), B), C) by:
A) if ξ < ζ < ωι and 2/3 G Nς Π α0, then pζ(2β) = pζ(2β)
B) Pζ < Pζ e N Π Pao foτξ<ζ<ωl
C) Ifξ<ωι, and there are q and p
l(i < ω) such that:
(i) Q < ίΛ Q £ 2α, and p^ < p°
(ii) for i < j < ω,p
l < pi, moreover Ihp^ "^(7) < ^(7)" for each
7 G Dom(p
l)
(iii) p\
+ H(2/3) \\-p2β "Λ2/3(p
<(2j9)) = fς(i,2β)
n for 2/3 € Nζ Πα0,
then there are q, p^(i < ω) satisfying (i), (ii), (iii), such that:
for i < ω and 7 € Dom(p^) \ {2/3 : β £ JVξ and 2/3 < α0}, we have
II-P, Vξ(7)<Pξ+ι(7)"
In the end we define p*, Dom(p*) = α0 Π ^?P*(7) is ^$(7) for any even 7, and
for any ξ such that 7 G ΛΓξ, and it is any upper bound of ^(7) : ξ < ω\} for
7 odd. 
Πι.3
1.4 Remark. See more in [Sh:186], [Sh:587].

§2. Chain Conditions Revisited 
409
§2. Chain Conditions Revisited
We here deal again with problems like those of §1 from VII, but allowing the
continuum to increase somewhat. Here, K is a fixed cardinal.
2.1 Definition. P satisfies the ft-p.i.c. (ft-properness isomorphism condition)
provided the following holds, for λ large enough:
Supposed < j < «, K; e Ni -< (jff(λ),E,<λ), (<λ is a well ordering of -ff(λ))
and KeNj* (ff(λ), G, <λ), \\N.\\ = \\Nj\\ = K0,PeNiΠ N^i e N,J G 7V, ,
NiΓ\κCj,NiΓή 
= NjΓ\j,pζPn 
Ni, h an isomorphism from Ni onto Nj,
h\(Ni ΓΊ Nj)= the identity and h(i) = j.
Then there is a q G P, such that:
(a) p,h(p) < q, and for every maximal antichain Z C P, I G Ni we have that
IΠ Ni is pre-dense above #, and similarly for T € Nj (but clause (b) below
implies that this follows from the rest of (a))
(b) for every r € NΪ Γ\P and gt such that q < q^ € P there is a <?", gt < q" £ P
such that [r < q11 iff /ι(r) < ς
;/]; equivalently;
(a'+b
7) letting G be the P-name of the generic set
q \\-P "(Vr € Ni Π P)(r G G iff Λ(r) € G)",
9ll-p"p€G",
and q is (Λ^, P) - generic.
2.2 Claim.
1) If Definition 2.1 holds for P, #(λ), <λ, ίften it holds for any λi > 2
λ and
well ordering <ι of -ff(λι) (in fact, we can omit the well ordering).
2) If Definition 2.1 holds for P,if(λ), <χ then it holds for some λi, <ι such
that λi < (μ -h |P|)
+, where μ is the number of maximal antichains of P
(w.l.o.g. P € H(\P\+)).
Proof. Similar to the proof in III §1,2. 
U2.2

410 
VIII. K-pic and Not Adding Reals
2.3 Lemma. Suppose (Vμ < ft)μ**° < ft where ft is regular and P satisfies the
ft-p.i.c. Then P satisfies the ft-chain condition.
Proof. Let pi G P for i < ft be given. Let (H(\), G, <λ) be as in Definition 2.1.
Find, for i < ft, models Ni such that i,pi G JV< -< (ff(λ),G,<λ), \\Ni\\ = NO-
Define /(i)
 d= Sup(7V; Π i), so cf (i) > N0 => /(i) < i
By Fodor's Lemma, for some 7 the set {i : /(i) = 7} is stationary. As (Vμ < ft)
μ
H° < K and ft is regular, for some A C 7, 5 — {i : Ni Π i = A} is stationary.
Similarly, we can assume that for some B,i^jeS=ϊNiΓ\Nj=B 
(see
the proof of VI.5A). Also C = {δ < K : (Vi < δ)(Ni Π ft C δ)} is closed
unbounded, so SΊ = 5(ΊC is stationary. Now there are K models (</Vi,pi, i, α)αe#
where Pi,i,α (α G B) are individual constants and ft > 2
N°, and the number
of isomorphism types of such models is 2
H°, so for some i < j there is an
isomorphism h : Ni —> A^ (onto), /i(p^) = pj,h\B = the identity. Now apply
Definition 2.1 for N^Nj,h,pi. 
D2.3
2.4 Lemma. Suppose Q = (Pi,Qj : i < Q:0,j < Oίo} is an iteration with
countable support. Suppose further
(*) Qa satisfies the ft-pic (for each α < QQ) and ft is regular.
Then 1) If αo < ft, Pαo satisfies the ft-p.i.c.
2) If α0 < ft, Pao satisfies the ft-chain condition, provided that
(Vμ < ft)(μ
N° < ft).
Proof. l)Let (H(X), €, <λ), h,i,j be as required for Definition 2.1. Let Gβ be
the P/5-name of the generic subset of Pp. Without loss of generality Q G NiΓ\Nj
(because Pαo G Ni Π Λfy), hence α0 G Ni Π Λ^ ; as α0 < ft, N» Π α0 = Nj Π α0,
(read Definition 2.1) and the proof is now similar to the proof of properness.
We prove by induction on ξ < αo that:
(**) for every ζ < ξ, ζ G Λ^ΓΊαo, £ £ A^ίΊα0 andp G NiΓ\Pao or even just a Pξ-
name p of such a condition, <?ζ G Pζ, qζ > p\ζ, Qζ > h(p) fζ, such that qς is
(N^ Pc)-generic and (A^ , Pc)-generic and qζ lhPζ "(Vr G ΛΓiΠPζ) [r G Gc iff

§2. Chain Conditions Revisited 
411
h(r) G Gχ]'\ there is a q$ G Pξ such that qξ\ζ = qς, qξ > p\ξ, qξ > h(p)\&
qξ is (7Vi,Pξ)-generic and (ΛΓ^P^-generic and qξ Ihp^ "(Vr € TV; Π Pξ)
[rGG eiff /ι(r)GGξ]".
Note that (**) with p an element implies the apparently more general
version with p being p, a Pξ-name of a member of N Π Pαo, such that gξ lhp£ "
for some p G Ni Π Pαo, p[GpJ = p, and p[( < <? and h(p) \ζ < q". (Used in the
inductive proof for ξ limit.)
For ξ a successor, we first, by the induction hypothesis, define q^_ι as
required (necessarily ξ — I G Ni Π Λ^ ); then notice that, by the induction
hypothesis, if we force with Pξ_ι and get a generic Gξ_ι C P^_x and q^-i is
in this generic set, then h is still an isomorphism etc, so we can use the Ac-p.i.c.
on Qξ_ι[Gξ_ι].
For cf (ξ) = NO, we work as in the proof of properness (III 3.2), using the
induction hypothesis. Noticing that qξ \\-Pζ "(Vr G P$) (r G Gξ iff h(r) G G^)"
makes no problem in the limit, we do not have to take special care. For cf
(£) > NI the proof is similar but easier.
2) Trivial by 1) and 2.3 and the proof of III 4.1. 
D2.4
2.5 Lemma. If P is proper and K > \P\ then P satisfies the ft-p.i.c.
Proof. We start with i, j, Ni, A^ , (ff(λ),E, <χ), p and AC as in 2.1. Remember
that P G Ni Π TVj. In (H(\), G, <λ) there is a <λ-first one-to-one function #
from |P| onto P, so g G Ni Π TV}. Also as |P| G JV» Π A^, by the assumption
on Ni,Nj,κ from Definition 2.1, |P| < i,j and hence JV» Π |P| = A^ Π |P|.
Hence (using the function g), Ni Π P = Nj Π P and so /ι is the identity on
P Π JV». Now it may well be that there is an I G Ni, a pre-dense subset
of P, which does not belong to Nj. But if q is (Nj?, P)-generic then for any
X e NΪ & pre-dense subset of P, h(I) G A^ is a pre-dense subset of P and
IΠNi =IΠ(PnNi) = h ( I ) Π ( P π N j ) , 
hence JnA^i = h(Z)Γ\Nj is pre-dense
above g. So # is (JVΐ,P)-generic too and we can use the properness of P to
define q as required (with clause (b) of Definition 2.1 being trivial). 
D2.5

412 
VIII. tt-pic and Not Adding Reals
2.6 Definition. The Ac-p.i.c* is defined similarly to ft-p.i.c, but we add one
assumption:
for any a G Ni there is a sequence (aa : α < AC) in Ni Π A^ such that α^ = α
(this implies the corresponding condition on Nj); equivalently Ni is the Skolem
hull of (Ni Π Nj) UW> and TV, is the Skolem Hull of (Ni Π Nj) \J{j}.
2.7 Lemma.
1) The Ac-p.i.c. implies the Ac-p.i.c*.
2) Lemmas 2.2-2.5 hold for /ς-p.i.c*, (and we call them 2.2*,. . . , respectively).
3) P satisfies the ft-p.i.c* if P satisfies the conditions from [Sh:80] which are:
a) P is NI -complete.
b) for any pi G P (i < AC) there are p\ G P, Pi < pj and pressing down
functions Fn : AC \ {0} — > AC, (i.e., Fn(α) < α) for n < α;, such that: if
i < j and /\nFn(i) = Fn(j), thenp\,pj have a least upper bound in
P, called pt Apt.
2.7A Remark. So 2.7(2), (3), 2.4*, 2.4* give an alternative proof of [Sh:80],
for the case αo < AC. In fact, 2.4* holds for QQ not necessarily < AC, when each
Qi is Ni-complete, and this gives an alternative axiom for [Sh:80].
Proof. 1) Trivial.
2) The least trivial part is 2.3. Here the extra assumption is the least
obvious. So, by induction, we define N*(k < ω). For fc = 0 we choose Nf
such that: {Pii} G N? -< (H(λ), G, <λ), \\Nf\\ = »0- Suppose N* (for each
i) has been defined and let {α£e : e < ω} enumerate the members of N *.
We choose N*+
l such that N* G N*+
l -< (ff(λ),e,<λ), ||^+Ίl = NO, and
Now let Ni = \Jk<ω N£ and proceed as in 2.3.
3) Let Ni, Nj, h be as in the definition of Ac-p.i.c*, p G N^ Let (In : n < ω)
be a list of all maximal antichains of P which belong to Ni. For every a £ Ni
let seqα G Ni Π A^ be a sequence of length AC such that α = seqα(i). We define,

§2. Chain Conditions Revisited 
413
by induction, conditions pn:
Po =P,
ifp2n is defined, choose ί>2π+ι > P2n, such that P2π+ι £ PΠ AΓ^, P2n+ι > (some
Qn € 2n),
if P2n+ι is defined, consider seqpn+ι = (rαjn : α < K). We can assume w.l.o.g.
(Vα < K) rα>n e P. So there are (Fn : n < α;), (r^n : α < ft) as mentioned in
2.7(3)(b). As {rα>n : α < K) G NiΓ\Nj and <λ is a well ordering, we can assume
that (Fm : m < ω), (r^n : a < K) G Ni Π TV^ . Let p2n+2 = rj>n (remember
P2n+ι —
 rί,n <
 rJn) Notice that /ι(r^n) = r^ ^, and by the choice of Ni,Nj
we have Λ m
F™W =
 Fm(j) 
So rt n = p2n+2 and r]>n = Λ(p2n+2) have a least
upper bound <72n+2 == P2n+2 A Λ(p2n-f2) In the end:
< Λ(p4) <
Now ^2n+2 £ ^2n+45 as they are least upper bounds. So by NI -completeness
there is a q, /\n q > qn. Now q is as required. 
D2.r
2.8 Lemma. 1) All forcings used in VII §3 (= applications of Axiom II) satisfy
the K2-p.i.c*, (but of course Levy(Kι, < K) if K > H2)
2) Moreover for each application we can find a forcing notion doing all the
assigments of this kind present in the current universe and satisfies the K2-p.i.c*,
and in fact all are (< α;ι)-proper and D-complete for a simple HO -completeness
system D.
Proof. We elaborate two of them leaving rest to the reader.
application F: Let T = ((T
a, /*) : α < α*) be a sequence of pairs (T, /*), T an
Aronszajn Hi-tree, /* : T — > ω satisfies the antecendent of (8) in VII 3.8 (in the
main case: listing all of such pairs). We define a forcing notion Pψ. A member
p of Pψ has the form p = (i, w, ~g, C, B), where:
(i) w C α* is countable,

414 
VIII. K-pic and Not Adding Reals
(ii) i < cji, C — (Ca : a G w), Ca the characteristic function of a closed subset
of i -h 1 to which z belongs
(iii) g = (ga : a G w), ga a function from Γ|. = (T
α)<i to ω such that (#α, Ca)
is as in VII 3.11.
Notation: For finite u C α* we letting T
u be the disjoint union of {T
a : α € u}
(i.e. make them disjoint).
(iv) B is a countable family, for each member / for some finite u = u(I) C u;,
(pH, Π £«,
application C: Use product with countable support. 
U2.8
2.8A Remark. We do not investigate the connection between ft-p.i.c, and
ft-e.c.c. However, ft-e.c.c. was introduced to deal with the case in which we
iterate forcings which are D-complete for some D. We introduce the ft-p.i.c. to
deal with the case in which we want to get V N "N2 = 2
H° < 2
Nl". So we use
an iteration of length α;2 where each iterand does not add reals. On the other
hand, ft-p.i.c.* seems to replace ft-p.i.c. totally.
Note that the property of being κ>p.i.c. essentially (but seemingly not
formally) implies properness.
2.9 Claim. If αo < ft, (Pa,Qa ' & < #0} is a CS iteration, OLQ < K, each
Qa satisfies the /ί-p.i.c* and (Vμ < κ)μ
H° < ft; ί/ien, in V
P(XO we have (Vμ <
ft and 2
H° < ft.
Proof. Trivial.
§3. The Axioms Revisited
3.1 Thesis. Proper forcing is efficient for getting models in which 2
H° < ^2
and important things it gets are such universes of set theory which in addition
satisfy conditions of the form "for every A C ωι...". The reason is that we,
at present, can iterate only ω^ times without collapsing ^2 (of course, if we are

§3. The Axioms Revisited 
415
interested in c.c.c. forcing, we can increase this to 2
N°). So we have a division
to four main cases we can reasonably handle:
I) 2
H° = 2
Hl = N2,
II) 2
Ho =N!,2
H l =N 2,
III) 2*° =N 2 <2
H l,
IV) 2*° =«ι,« 2<2
M l.
3.2 Discussion. We have dealt in VII §2 with I), II), and have the appropriate
axioms. Also in previous works we dealt with mainly I), II); sometimes we get
more for free: e.g. in Laver [LI] (consistency of Borel conjecture), the value of
2
1*
1 was immaterial.
For getting such models with some extra properties we iterate ω2 times. At
some stages we increase 2**
1, or add "a few" reals (and preserve CH meanwhile
(see 2.9) if K2 in the end is a given inaccessible ft, "few" can be interpreted as
< ft) (according to the case - for I, III each time we add a few reals, for III, IV
we start by adding many A C ω\). In other stages (for I and II) we consider
A C ω\ and force "for" "it" some B. If we want III or IV, we consider all A C ω\
of a certain kind and simultaneously add for each such A an appropriate B.
Sometimes we want the forcing to preserve something (e.g.
 ωα;-boundedness,
or a Ramsey ultrafilter etc.) but we shall not deal with those things here, for
the number of axioms arising is not bounded.
For other possibilities of 2
N°, 2
Nl the situation is not clear. On some con-
sistency results see Abraham and Shelah [AbSh:114]. We get there results with
2^o > ^2 but £he results are on A C ω\. Resolving the problematic cases, first
of all 2^° > ^3 seems to me a major problem; we shall discuss this later.
Note: in case IV for example, we are restricted by our iterations being of length
α>2
Generally, for getting the consistency of stronger axioms we have to assume
the consistency of ZFC-h some large cardinal. Here we concentrate on assuming
the consistency of ZFC only.

416 
VIII. κ>pic and Not Adding Reals
3.3 Notation. φ, ψ are first order sentences (in the language with — , e and
one predicate P).
M is a model with universe ω\ and language of cardinality < NO, M =
(|M|, . . . ,Rι . . .)i<i0<u; Let N denote an expansion of M, again with < K0
relations and φ a first order sentence in TV's language.
3.4 Lemma. If ZFC is consistent, then so are ZFC + each one of the following
axiom schema (separately):
Axiom Schema. /&: For each (ψ,φ), for every M with universe C
such that (#(Nι),G,M) N i/;, there is an expansion N of M such that
N N (/?, provided that
(*)/6: the following is provable from ZFC + G.C.H.: if(H(#ι), G, Af) μ
for some proper forcing notion P satisfying the N2-p.i.c.*, |P| < ^2, ll~p "there
is an expansion TV of M, N satisfying φ and 2
H° = HI".
2) 2*° = Ni + 2
Nl - K2 (4- G.C.H. if you want) +
Axiom Schema. Ilf. For each (ψ,φ), for every M with universe C H(#ι)
such that (ίί(^ι),G,M) 1= ψ, there is an expansion TV of M such that
N \= φ, provided that
(*)//, the following is provable from ZFC + G.C.H. : i/(£Γ(Nι), G,M) 1= ψ then
for some (< α;ι)-proper P, B-complete for some simple No-completeness system
P, satisfying the N2-p.i.c.*, |P| < ^2 and Ihp " there is an expansion N of M
satisfying y>". We can use here #(^2) instead of ίΓ(Kι).
3) 2
H° = HI -f 2
Kl = any cardinality of cofinality > H24-
Axiom Schema. /VJ>: For each (ψ,φ), for every M with universe C H(^ι)
such that (ff(^ι),G,M) 
1= ^j there is an expansion N of M such that
AT N (/?, provided that
(*)/Vί> the following is provable in ZFC + CH: there is a (< ωι)-proper forcing
notion P, D-complete for some simple No-completeness system D, satisfying the

§3. The Axioms Revisited 
417
N2-p.i.c.*, \P\ < 2*
1, such that \\-P "for every M E V, if (H(Kι)
v, G,M) N ^,
then there is (in T/
p) an expansion TV of M satisfying </?".
4) 2*° = K2 < 2
Hl = anything of cofinality > K2+
Axiom Schema. I lib- For each (^, y>), for every M with universe C .ff(Nι)
such that (/f(Nι), G,M) N ^, there is an expansion N of M satisfying φ,
provided that
(*)///b
: the following is provable from ZFC + CH: there is a proper forcing P
satisfying the K2-p.i.c*., \P\ < 2
Hl such that:
Ihp "CH and for every M £ V with universe C
if (ff(Nι)
v r,e,M)l=V', then
there is (in V
p) an expansion N of M satisfying φ" .
Proof. Straightforward by now, when we use the relevant theorems on forcing.
Π3.4
3.4A Remarks on 3.4(3).
A) Notice that we use CH instead of G.C.H, and we here put first 3P and
then VM. We can also assume that P is an iteration with countable support
satisfying the above conditions.
B) If 2
Nl is such that (Vμ < 2*
1) [μ
H° < 2
Nl], we can replace ff(Nι), by #(2
Kl).
Of course, as we use "larger" cardinals K to be collapsed to K2, we can get
stronger axioms:
3.5 Lemma. If "ZFC -f 3 an inaccessible cardinal" is consistent, then so are
"ZFC + each of the following" (separately).
Axiom Schema. Ia: like /&, but we replace (in (*)/6 the demand) ". . . P,
satisfying the K2-p.i.c.*", by ". . . P, |P| < first strongly inaccessible".

418 
VIII. K-pic and Not Adding Reals
2) G.C.H. +
Axiom Schema. IIa: like IIb, but we replace "..., P satisfies the N2-p.i.c.*,
|P| < N2" by "..., |P| < first strongly inaccessible".
3) 2^° = NI + 2
Hl = first inaccessible +
Axiom Schema IΠa. Like I lib but we replace "... P, P satisfies the tt2-p.i.c.*,
|P| < 2
Hl" by "... P, |P| < first inaccessible".
4) 2*° = K2 = 2
K l= first inaccessible +
Axiom Schema IVa. like IV^ but we replace "...,P satisfying the N2-
p.i.c.*" by "... P, |P| < first inaccessible".
3.5A Remark. 1) Our use here of Ia is not the same as in VII §2, but we can
take their union as Ia.
2) We can replace in this section "D simple No-completeness system" by
D G V
p° is a 2-completeness system (see §4).
3) We can replace in 3.5 "|P| < κ
n by "P N κ-p.i.c.*".
Proof. Again easy.
Remark. We can of course try more axioms, but those mentioned above seem
to suffice.
§4. More on Forcing Not Adding u -Sequences
and on the Diagonal Argument
4.1 Discussion. We have proved in VII §3, application D, that CH /> Φ^°
whereas in Devlin and Shelah [DvSh:65] (or see somewhat more [Appendix
§1]) it is shown that CH —> Φ^ But Axiom II does not prove the consistency
of "not Φ^" with CH. More generally, we can ask whether we can make the
condition on the Qa (in V 7.1, 7.2) weaker.
We saw no point in trying to weaken the assumption "α-proper for every
OL < ωι
n to e.g. u -proper, as it seemed to us that every natural example of fore-

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding ω-Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
419
ing will satisfy it (truly, sometimes we want to destroy some stationary subsets
of ω\ and under reasonable conditions we can succeed, for example, the proof
the consistency of "the closed unbounded filter on ω\ is precipitous" (see Jech,
Magidor, Mitchell and Prikry [JMMP]), but we can amalgamate such a proof
with our constructions). The hard part seems to be the D-completeness, where
D G V or D is simple, again, do not seem to be a serious obstacle to anything;
but the requirement that any finitely many possibilities are compatible (i.e.
^(N,p,p) generates a filter) seemed to be an obstacle - e.g. to the natural forc-
ing for making Φ^ false. Remember, B{w,...) was a family of subsets of P(N)
with the finite intersection property. We shall try to replace this requirement
by the requirement that the intersection of any two is nonempty. As an appli-
cation we get consistency with CH of variants of Φ^ (we hope there will be
more). Note that we replace here 1®(N,p,p) by another equivalent formulation.
Note another drawback, which at present is only aesthetical, the D-
completeness is not preserved; i.e. we have not stated a natural condition,
preserved by CS iterations, that implying that no α -sequence of ordinals is
added. Note that we do not use the full generality of Definition 4.2. We treat
it in 4.14—4.22. A minor difference with Chapter V is that we use countable
subsets of some λ instead of Jϊ(λ), but this is just a matter of presentation.
For another point of view and more results see [Sh:177] or better yet XVIII
§1, §2 .
4.2 Definition. 1) Let λ be a cardinal. D is called a (λ, 1, fc)-system (or
completeness system) if:
(i) D is a function (where D(x) may be written as D^),
(ii) 11^(0,<*,x,p) is well defined iff α 6 Sχ0(λ), <* is a partial order of α, x C a x a
and p £ α,
(iii) 1^(a1<*ίχjp) is a family of subsets of 'P(α), the intersection of any i of them
is nonempty when i < 1 + fc.
2) We say that D is a /.-completeness system if for some λ it is (λ, l,fc)-
completeness system.

420 
VIII. K-pic and Not Adding Reals
4.3 Definition. A forcing notion P is called (P, D)-complete, where T> is a
filter over S#0(X) and D a (λ, 1, /c)-system, if λ > 2'
p', P is isomorphic to
P* = (P*, <*), P* C λ, and for every p G P* and Jα - {pf 
: i < ia < X}
pre-dense subsets of P* (for a < λ), for some x C λ x λ, the family of all
a G <Sκ0(λ) that satisfy the following, is in T>:
(*) the following contains, as a subset, a member of D{α,<*rα, x\aχa, p)-
{G C α: 1) for every a G α, for some i G α Π iα, p" G G
2) (3ς G P*)(Vr G G)(r <* ?)
3) p G G}.
If Ί) = £><κ!(λ) (see V §2) we may omit it and write D instead of (£>,D). If
£> = P<Hl(λ) -h 5, where 5 C S<^1(\) is stationary, then we may write 5
instead of V.
4.3A Remark.
1) In Definitions 4.2, 4.3 we can replace λ by any set of this cardinality or by
any larger cardinality.
2) We omit T> in 4.5 below from laziness only.
3) In 4.4 and 4.3 of [Sh:b] we use α G <S^o(λ) for some fixed α, but we use only
the case α = 1 in Theorem 4.5; to help the reader we delay this generality
to a later part of this section.
4) If T>\Q is a fine normal filter on ^^(λo), and λi > ΛQ, we let Ί)\ 
be the
fine normal filter on 5<«1(λι) generated by
{{α G 5<κ1(λι) : α Π λ0 G X} : X G V°XQ} .
5) If 5 C S<^1 (λ) is stationary we may write 5 instead of T><^1 (λ) -f S.
6) Instead of 2a for a < X we can use Ta for α < α*, α* < λ.
4.3B Fact. 1) In Definition 4.3, any choice of (P*,<*) gives an equivalent
definition. Also we can increase λ in a natural way.

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding u -Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
421
2) Definitions 4.3 and 4.4 (simplicity) are compatible with the definition of
completeness systems from V5.2, 5.3, 5.5.
Specifically:
(A) For a forcing notion P, k < KI and a family 8 of subsets of 5<κ1(/x), the
following are equivalent:
(i) For some λ > μ, P is (2λ<Nι(λ) + £, D)-complete for some simple
(λ, fc, Incompleteness system D in the sense of 4.3, 4.4 below, where
V<^1(\) + 8 is the fine normal filter on 5<κ1(λ) generated by
{{α G 5<Nl (λ) : α Π μ G X} : X 
<Ξ f} .
(ii) P is (£, D)-complete for some simple ^-completeness system in the
sense of V §5.
(B) For a forcing notion P, k < NI, 8 a family of subsets of ^^(μ), and a
subuniverse VQ (Vo a transitive sub-class of V containing all ordinals and
being a model of ZFC) such that S G VQ, the following are equivalent:
(i) For some λ > μ and (λ, fc, Incompleteness system D G VQ, the forcing
notion P is (P<Nι (λ) 4- 8, B)-complete in the sense of V §5.
(ii) For some λ > μ and fc-complete system D which is almost simple over
VQ, the forcing notion P is (£, D)-complete in the sense of V §5.
Proof. Straightforward. 
EU.SB
4.4 Definition. We call D simple if for some first order formula ^(v,u),
D(α,<*,x,p> = {{G C α : p G G,(a\JP(a x α),G fα, <*,*,p) h ^(G,u)} :
u C α}, (φ can have a countable sequence of ordinals as a parameter).
4.5 Theorem. If (Pα, Qa : a < QQ) is an iteration with countable support and
each Qa is /3-proper, for every β < ω\ and D
α-complete for some (λα,l,2)-
system, D" G V (possibly D
α, λα are actually Pα-names p
α, λα but it does not
matter), then forcing with Pαo does not add any new ω-sequences of ordinals.

422 
VIII. tt-pic and Not Adding Reals
Note:
4.6 Claim. Any simple system in V
Pa (where Pa is a forcing notion adding
no new ω-sequences) is in V.
Note:
4.6A Remark. Every Qa is
 ωα;-bounding because it is IF-complete, which
implies it does not add (to V
Pa) reals and even does not add ω-sequences of
ordinals.
Proof of 4.5. We prove some claims and then the theorem becomes obvious
(Claim 4.10 is the heart of the matter).
4.7 Definition. Let A = (Ai : i < /?), β countable, each Ai is a countable set
of ordinals, Ai(i < β) is (strictly) increasing and continuous. For ξ < ζ,ξ G
AO, C £ A), A as above, we define when A is long for (£, £), by induction on ζ:
Case (i). ζ = ξ: A is long for (ξ, ζ) (under the assumptions above) if β > 0.
Case (ii). ζ a successor, ζ > ξ : A is long for (£, ζ) if for some β^ < β we
have that (Ai : i < β
f) is long for (£, ζ-ϊ).
Case (Hi), ζ a limit: A is long for (ξ, ζ) if there are βi(i < ω
2) (the ordinal
square of ω) such that: i < j < ω
2 =» ^ < βj\ βω2 +ω + 1 < β\ and for every
i and (£ι, Ci) we have: ξi € Aβ^ζi € A^., ^ < ξi < Ci < C and i < ω
2, implies
that (Aj : A + 2 < j < A+i) is long for (&,£).
4.8 Claim.
1) If ξ < ζ G A0, (Ai : i < β) is as in the assumptions of Definition 4.7,
A) < ft < 0, and (A; : A) < i < βι) is long for (ξ, C) t^en (A< : i < β) is
long for (£,().
2) (Ai : i < β) is long for (£, ζ) iff (A, Π (C + 1) \ ί : i < 0) is long for (ξ, C).

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding ω-Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
423
Proof. 
1) By induction on C, and there are no problems.
2) Easy. 
Π4.8
4.9 Claim. Let λ > ωι, β < ωl and for i < β we have Ni X (ff(λ), G), and Ni
are countable increasing continuous and (Nj : j < i) G N^i and ξ < ζ G NQ.
Then we can find an a such that β < a < ωι, and a countable Ni for /? < i < α
such that JVi -< (ff(λ),e), (Λ^ : j < i) G Wm for i < a,Ni are countable
increasing continuous in z and (Λ^ Π λ : i < a) is long for (£, ζ").
Proof. Again by induction on ζ.
4.10 Claim. Suppose <3i,Pi,α0 are as in Theorem 4.5, λ is large enough and
for i < β(< ω\) Ni -< (if (λ), G, <J) is countable, increasing, continuous and
(Nj :j<i)e #i+ι, ξ < C Ξ Wo Π (α0 + 1), (Pi,9i : * < αo) € 7V0.
Suppose further that (Ni Π α0 : i < /?} is long for (ξ,C), Ge(e = 0,1)
are directed subsets of Pξ n Np, re G Pξ (for e = 0,1), (Vςr G Ge)^ < re,
GO Π A^o = GI Π AΓ0 and i < β => J Π Ge Π ^ ^ 0 for every pre-dense I C Pξ
with I e Ni and e = 0,1. Suppose also p G Pζ Π JVΌ and p\ξ G G0.
Tften there is a directed G* C Pζ Π 7V0 such that G0 Π 7V0 C G*, G* not
disjoint to any pre-dense I C Pζ,I e N0,p G G*, and re \\-Pζ "{q\[ξ,ζ) : tf G
G*} has an upper bound in Pζ/Pξ" for e = 0,1.
Proof. By induction on C (for all ξ < C)
Note that the assertion (for ξ = 0) implies that forcing by Pζ does not add
α -sequences of ordinals.
Also note Ίfp < q are in PξΓiN0, q G G0ΓW0 thenp G G0ΠAΓ0 (as {r G Pξ : r > p
or r,p incompatible in Pζ} is pre-dense in Pζ and belongs to 7V0); similarly for
Nβ instead 7V0 and/or for GI instead of G0. Also, for e = 0,1 and i < /?, we
have G en7ViG7V m. Why?
This is easy, as the set I C P^, defined below, is pre-dense and belongs to
-/Vi+i, hence is not disjoint from Ge Π AΓί+1. So there is an r^ G I Γ\ Ni+ι with

424 
VIII. K-pic and Not Adding Reals
r t G G eΠ ΛΓi+i; but by the assumption (Vg)[ςf € GeΓ\Ni — > g < re] and r^ < re.
Hence, by the definition of Z° below, we know that r^ φ Z°, so r^ G T
1 (see
below), and necessarily {q G Λ^ Π P£ : q < r
f} = Ge Π A^. So Ge Π Ni G W<+ι
as it is defined from parameters (A^,P^,r^) in it. Here is the definition of Z:
I = Ί?\Jl
l, where
J° = {g G Pξ : there are no r G Pξ, r > q and G C Ni Π Pξ such that
(V G G) p' < r and
(VJ G TVo) [J pre-dense in Pζ -> J n G ^ 0]}
J1 = {^ G Pξ : there is a G C AΓ0 Π Pe such that (Vp' G G) p
r < ς and
(VJ Ξ Wo)[J pre-dense in Pξ -> J Π G / 0]}.
Case (i): ζ = ξ.
Trivial. Just let G* = G0 Π N0.
Case (ii): ζ a successor ordinal > £ .
So by Definition 4.7, for some 7 < /3, (N; Π λ : i < 7) is long for (f , ( - 1). For
e = 0, 1, we can find r^ G Ge Π AΓ7+1 such that r" is above every member of
Ge Π NΊ (see the proof above). Hence, by the induction hypothesis, there is a
G* C ΛΓ0 Π Pc_ι such that:
(a) for every pre-dense X C P^_i,X G A^>, the intersection G* ΠZ is not
empty,
(b) rl lhPί "G* has an upper bound in PC-ι/Pξ",
(c) G eΠAΓ 0 = G*ΠP ξ.
Now without loss of generality G* is definable (in (ff(λ), E, <£)) from the
parameters Q, (Λ^ : i < 7), ro,rf,C,ξ, hence
(d) G*G
Now we want to define G** C Pς Π NQ as in the conclusion of the claim. G*
determines D^"
1 G V, as ζ G NO (i e. some member of G* forces (ll-pc_1) D^"
1
to be some D^"
1). Let G* C G
f
ζ-l C Pc_! where G^ is generic (over V).
Clearly, some members of Gί-^ force NQ Π λζ_ι (λζ_ι is from the definition

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding cj-Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
425
of D^"
1) to be in the appropriate closed unbounded subset of <Sκ0(λζ_ι), so
we "know" D = ΠK"
1 and it belongs to A^+ifG Lj (and to V] why not to
NI? we need G*; "know" means independently of the particular choice of
Gf.j). In V
pc-i, let (QJ,<J) * (<2o<)> Qζ £ λ, x C λ x λ code a list
(v7α = (pf : i < ia) : OL < α*} of the pre-dense subsets of (Qί_1? <ί j) from
Definition 4.3 and x is as in Definition 4.3. They may be Pζ_ι-names, but
without loss of generality (Ja = (pf 
: i < i^} : a < q*), (Qjϊ_ι, <£_!), ft
and x belong to ^[G^J. [Why? By III 2.13.] And we can compute x\(N0 Π
λc_ι), (Q^^JK^bnλc-i) so that A^Gf.J X (#(λ),G,<^). Finally,
let y = {ΛΓonλc-i^J.Jί^onλc-i^xKί^bnλc-i) x (7V 0nλ c_ι)),ft(p))
There is a set ^4 G Dy such that (in F[G^_X]) for any G G A, we have that
G C TVo Π Qζ.-jGί J is not disjoint to any pre-dense Z C Q£_j which belongs
to T V o f G ί j and G has an upper bound in Q£_ι[G>_ι] Note that G ί j C P^_χ
is an arbitrary generic set which includes G*, so there is a -P^-i— name r such
that H-pc_! " if there is an A as above then r names it ". Again without loss of
generality r G A^+^G^J.
Now X* = {q G Pζ-ι : ^ forces r to be some specific A G D^} is pre-dense
in Pζ-i and belongs to ΛΓ7+1 C A^. So, by the assumptions on Ge, there are
r* for e - 0,1, such that r* G Pc_ι Π Nβ, r*\ξ G Ge, (Vςf G G*)(q <PC_X r*)
and r* Ihp^, "r = Ae", where Ae G Dy, Ae G Nβ. By the hypothesis on D^
1,
AQ Π AI / 0 so as Λ), -4ι ^ ^ there is a G® G A) Π ^4ι Π Nβ.
Then
G** - {q :q G A^0 Π Pc and q\(ζ - 1) G G* and for some r G G®,
HI-PC., "%(C-l))=r
M} ?
is as required (it is well defined as though ft is a P^_ι-name, it belongs to 7V0
hence ftίA^o can be computed from G*).
Case (Hi), ζ a limit.
So there are βi(i < ω
2) such that i < j < ω
1 -> βi < βj, βω* + ω + 1 < β and
for any (£ι,Cι) in Nβ. if ξ < ξι < ζι < ζ then (Nj Π C : βi + 2 < j < βi+l) is

426 
VIII. κ-pic and Not Adding Reals
long for (ξι,(ι) and (βi : i < ω
2) is increasing continuous (we can assume this
by 4.8(1)).
Let β* = βω2 and w.l.o.g. we can assume (βi : i < ω
2) G Nβ*+ι (as there is
such a sequence in Nβ*+ι, because it exists in V). Similarly i < ω
2 => (βj : j <
i) G N0.+ι. Choose ζn G NQ Π ζ such that ξ = C0 < Ci < - 
Cn < Cn+i 
- - < C
and [7 G ΛΓ 0&7 < C => V nT < Cn]
Now we define by induction on n < ω, kn = k(n) < ω, G™ (for η G
(fc(n)) 2) j r* j rjn such that:
1) r* is a member of Pζn HTV^+^+i with domain CnΠ-W/^+u,, ΓQ < τ*o, rj < ri
(see below for formal problems or let ΓQ = 0 (so Dom(r2) = 0) but then
we use r* U re to force anything),
2) r*+1 |χn = r^, (or you can say that r^ is a Pζ-name of such a condition
with ΓQ, TΊ deciding the value but see (8) or the beginning of the proof
below)
3) if n -f 2 < m < ω, r* is (Nβ*+m, PCJ -generic,
4) if J C Pζn is a maximal antichain, I G Nβ*+ι then for some finite
J' C J n Nβ*+ι, J is pre-dense above r* (note that, as described in
the beginning of the proof of 4.10, this implies that the function giving
J (from X) belongs to JV0*+n+2),
5) *d = l,G^e>=σβnΛfc.,
6) GΪ C Pζn Π Nβ. , G^ G Nβ*+! for 77 G ^2,
7) if m < n and r/ G ^2, then G™fc(m) - G^ Π PCm,
8) ηn is a P^-name which belongs to W/3*+ι,
r* Ih "GJJ^ is included in the generic subset of Pζn",
9) if j < β*, but for no /c < fe(n) is βωk -f 1 < j < /3ω(fc-ι-i) ίften for every
pre-dense I C PCn , J G AΓj ;, and 77 G
 fe(n)2 we have Nj Π J Π G^ ^ 0,
10) 77,1/6
 fe(n)2, η\k = i/rfc, fe < fc(n) implies G^ΠΛ^^+i = GJnJV/j^+i and
we denote both by G^fc,
11) (Vg G 7V^ Π PCJ [(3gt G G^)(g < ςft) -, g G G£] for 77 G
 
fc^2.

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding ω-Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
427
There is no problem for n = 0 (how do we define ΓQ? we can assume that
QΊ is closed under disjunction. Let ε G Nβ Π (ζ + 1) be maximal such that
(Vr G Nβ+ω Π Pε}(r < r0 = r < TI), by the definition of CS iteration it is
well defined. As before we can find r'e G Nβ*+ω+ι which is below re and (Vr G
Nβ+ω Π Pc)(r < r'e = r < re), r& fε - r{ \ε, ε < ζ => r'0 \ε \\-Pε "r£,(ε), r((ε) are
incompatible in Qe" and define ΓQ as follows: Dom(ro) = Dom(rό) U
and
ro(7) —
 rό(7) otherwise.)
So assume we have defined for n and we shall define for n + 1.
First we define, by induction on ί < fc(n), for every η G
 £2, the sets G™"
1"
1
(see (10) above), and we have to satisfy (9), (7), and r^ should force G
1^
1 is
(bounded by) a condition, if η = ηn \t.
This makes no problem, using the induction hypothesis on ζ and (< ω\)-
properness.
Second we want to define k(n + 1), G^
+1 (for r/ G
 fc(
n+
1)2). Let Gζn C Pζn be
generic, r* G G^n and work for a while in V^G^J.
For each p' G Nβ.(Gζn] Π (PCn+i/GCn), there is a G C Pζn+1/Gζn, p' G G,
G has an upper bound, and ifp' G Nj,j < β* is as in (9) then GΓ\Nj is generic
for (A^, Pζn+1/Gζn) [equivalently, if I C P^n+1 is pre-dense, J G JVj, then the
set J Π Nj n G is not empty]. So there is a function F giving such a G with
Dom(F) = (Pζn+1/Gζn) Π 7V> [GCJ. So, in F, we have a PCτι-name F for it. As
its domain is countable, \\~pζn "F G F" (the domain is essentially C 7V^*).
Also it is clear that, without loss of generality, F G Nβ*+ι as (Ni : i < β*) G
Λ^*+ι, r* G Gζn and condition (9), (4).
So, by condition (4), there are FI, . . . , Fm G Λ^*+ι such that r* Ih "F G
{FI, . . . , Fn}", FI . . . G V (note that so their domain is computed by Gηn . . .).
By renaming, choose k(n + 1), Fη (for η G
 fe(
n+
1)2) such that for every
η G k^2 we have {Fi, . . . ,Fn} = {F» : i/ G *("+
1)2, ι/r*:(n) = r;}. Now for any

428 
VIII. tt-pic and Not Adding Reals
η G
 k(
n+
lϊl we can first define G™+
1 Π A^fc(n+i)-f2 so that it depends on η\k(n)
and not η, and then let G,, - Fη(/\(G^
1 Π ^wfcn+i+2)).
Third we define r^+1 by V 4.5. 
EU.io
Proo/ o/4.5. Immediate by 4.10. 
Π4.5
4. 10 A Remark.
1) So now everywhere we can use 4.5 instead of V 7.1 and strengthen Axiom
II, Πα, IIb etc.
2) We could use shorter sequences, e.g. β = β* + 2 is o.k. (see implicitly VI
§1, and explicitly XVIII 2.10).
3) By easy manipulations, it does not matter in Theorem 4.3, whether D" is
a Pα-name of a member of V, or simply a member of V (i.e. the function
α μ_» D<* is in V).
4.11 Conclusion. It is consistent with ZFC -f G.C.H. that:
(*) If k < ω and ηs is an ω-sequence converging to δ for any limit δ < ω\ and
(Aδ : δ <ωι) is such that AS C fc, \Aδ\ < fc/2
then there is an h : ω\ — + fc such that for every limit δ < ωi, (h(η$(n)) : n < ω)
is eventually constant, and its constant value ^ A§.
4.12 Conclusion. G.C.H. ^> Φ^.
4.13 Lemma.
1) The demand on each Qa in 4.5 follows from: Qa is 7-proper for every
7 < α i, and Dα-complete for some simple 2-completeness system Bα.
2) We can demand in 4.5 that each Qa is 7-proper for every 7 < ωi, and
Dα-complete for some almost simple 2-completeness system over V.
Remark. See Definition V 5.5.

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding ω-Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
429
Proof. Straightforward. 
HU.ia
* 
* 
*
Finally, we indicate how to rephrase the proof in the form of a condition
which is preserved by iteration.
4.14 Definition. We
1" call E C S^(X) 
stationary if for every χ > 
X
(equivalently, some χ > λ
N°) and for every x G H(χ) there is a sequence
Ίf = (Ni : i < a) such that
(a) TV = (Ni : i < a) is an increasing continuous sequence of countable elemen-
tary submodels^ of (-ff(χ), G, <*), a < ωι and Ίf\(i + l) G Ni+1 for i < tg(N),
(b) x G NO,
(c) (NiΓ(λ:i<a) eE.
4.15 Definition. Let λ be a cardinal, E C S<%^ (λ) stationary, and K a cardinal
(may be finite). We call B a (λ, E, /ί)-system if:
(A) D is a function (written Dx).
(B) D(ό,<*,α;,p) is defined iff α = (α^ : i < α) G E, <* a partial order of α^, x
is a binary relation on αα and p G αo If ID{o,<*,x,p) ^
s we^ defined then it is a
family of subsets of P(a$).
(C) // i < I + ft and (α, <!• , a^ , p) G Dom(D) for j < i (note: same ά and
p and possibly distinct <! ,Xj) and <!• fα0 =<S ί^Oj XJ\OΌ — ^ί«o and
Λ € ^(ά^-.x^p) for J < *, *Λen Π^i^j 7^ 0-
4.16 Definition. A forcing notion P is called (X>, B)-complete, where P is a
(fine normal) filter on <S<κ0(λ) and B is a (λ, E
1, fi)-system (so E C «S<^(λ) is
stationary) if:
(A) λ > 2'
pl, P is isomorphic to (P*, <*), P* C λ,
(B) for any p G P* and pre-dense subsets Ia of P*, Ia = {p? 
: i < ia < X}
(for α < λ), for some x C X x X and a nonstationary Y C S<£* (λ), we have:
t Remember 5<^ (λ) = {A : A an increasing continuous sequence of count-
able subsets of λ of length <
tt Of course we can omit <* and still get an equivalent formulation.

430 
VIII. κ-pic and Not Adding Reals
(*) If a = (di : i < α) G E \ Y for i < α, then the following set includes a
member of ^(a,<^\a0ίx\a0,p}'
\ G C αo: 1) for every α € αo for some i G αo, pf G G.
(C) for every Y G T> we have {α G £ : αo ^ Y} is not stationary (as a subset
(D) if Y C <S<κ0(λ), y ^ 0 mod £> then {α € £ : α0 G Y} is stationary.
4.1T Convention. If T> = £><κ0(
λ) + Ή), ίb ^ 0 mod ^<^0(
λ) Λen we
write FO instead of V.liΊ) = £><κ0(λ) we shall write D instead of (P,D). We
do not always distinguish between Ί), a fine normal filter on <S<N0(λ) in V, and
the fine normal filter it generates in a generic extension of V.
4.18 Claim. (1) If P is (Γ>, D) -complete, then forcing with P adds no new
α -sequence of ordinals (in particular, no reals).
(2) Suppose P is (P, D)-complete for a (λ, £?, /^-completeness system D, and
μ>λ.
Then for some D', E' , V we have :
(a) E
1 C S^l (μ) is stationary and for D
;
a (μ,E', /-^-completeness system P is (Γ^D^-complete,
(b) V is the normal fine filter on <S<κ0(μ) generated by
| { α : α Π λ e y } : y G £>}.
(c) £' - {α : (α; Π λ : i< ίg(a)) G E and α G 5|^(μ) and α0 Π λ G P}.
(d) ID' is defined naturally.
(3) If V \= 2
λ < μ then (in the first part) V has the form £><κ0(λ) + F for
some stationary F C <S<κ0(λ).

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding ω-Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
431
4.19 Claim. 1) Assume E C «S<jJ
1(λ) is stationary and Ί), E satisfy condition
(C) of 4.16. If Y G V and H is a function from Y to λ, then {a G E : H(α0) £
αi} is not stationary.
2) In definition 4.14 the value of χ is immaterial and, if χ > 2
λ, we can omit
3) Assume Q = (Pξ,Qζ : ξ < C* and C < C*} is a CS iteration of proper
forcings. Assume also that V is a (fine) normal filter on <S<κ0(λ), and for
ζ < ξ < C* < λ, Eζtζ C «S<No (λ) is stationary and each quadruple (D, E, Pζ/Pξ)
satisfies in V
Fζ conditions (C), (D) of Definition 4.16. Then
E = {a : a G <S<N* (λ) and there is (ε^ : ζ G α0 Π (ζ* -f 1)) increasing
continuous, 0 < εo, ε^* < £g(o), for each ζ G α0 Π (ζ* + 1) we have
(α0)
Λ (αe : ε^ + 2 < e < ε^+i) G £εζ,εζ+1 and
αo, «£g(ά)-i5
 αες-f i belong to {60 : b G EQ}}
is stationary and satisfies clauses (C), (D) of Definition 4.16.
(4) If F C <S<κ0(λ) is stationary and in (3) we add [ά G Eς&ζ < ( " * = >
Λi<^g(ά)
 α* ^ ^1 then we can replace S by E
f = {a G E : Λi<^g(α)
 α* ^ -^}
Proof. Straightforward. 
1^4.19
4.19A Remark. If λ < χ, Ni X (#(χ), G, <*) for i < a is countable, increas-
ing, continuous (in i) and (Nj : j < i) G Wi+i t/ien we can find a limit β > OL
and Ni (for i G (α, /?]) such that:
(a) (Ni : i < β) is increasing and continuous, Ni -< (H(χ), G, <*) is countable,
and (Nj : j < i) G Wm.
(b) λ G AΓα+1 and i/E G AΓ^, E C <S<^0(λ) is stationary Λen for some i, j, we
have a < i < j < /?, E G Λ/i and (7V7 Π λ : i < 7 < j) G £".
4.20 Theorem. Assume
(a) Q = (Pα, Qα : α < α*) is a CS iteration,
(b) each Qa is (< ωι)-proper (in V
Pα),
(c) K > 2, λ > 6Jι a cardinal, α* < λ, λ = λ^°, and Pα* has a dense subset of
cardinality < λ,

432 
VIII. ft-pic and Not Adding Reals
(d) λ is a cardinal, V is a normal filter on S<#0(X) (or T> = 2?<N0(λ) + F),
(e) for every α, lhPα "Qα is (D, D
α)-complete", D
α a Pα-name of a (λα, JEα, «)-
completeness system from V, Eα is a Pα -name of a member of V which
is a stationary subset of 5<^(λ) (in V) satisfying (C), (D) of 4.18.
Then:
(1) Pα* is (P, B)-complete for some (λ, £, /^-completeness system D G V, for
some stationary £ C 5<^(λ), satisfying:
(J Rang(ά) C {α* : VίPa "α ^ E
α for some α < α*" and ί < ^g(α)},
ά€£
(2) moreover, if α < β < α*, then in V
Pa,Pβ/Pa is (P,D)-complete for some
(λ, J5
α'^, κ)-completeness system D € V, for some ^
α'^ G V as above.
4.20A Remark. Why can we assume that λ is constant? see 4.18(2).
Proof. This is proved by induction on α*. Fix a one to one function H* from
5<«o(
λ) onto λ and let (0°^'^) : C <
 λ)
 list> in v> a11 P
airs (D,-B), D a
(λ, E, k)-completeness system such that for some a < β < α*,lhpα "(D, E)
is <^+-first for which Pβ/Pa is (P, D)-complete, D is a (λ, E, /^-completeness
system and D, E € V"". There is such a list of length λ, as α* < λ and Pα* has
a dense subset cardinality < λ (see assumption (a) of 4.20).
By the following subclaim, without loss of generality (D
α, E
a), for α < α*,
are really (D
α,£/
α) (i.e. members of V rather than names of such members)
and E
a Π 5|^o(λ) = 0 and similarly (B^'^E^), for α < β < α*. (We can
alternatively redefine the iteration, inserting many trivial forcings, i.e. replace
Qί by Q\χi+ζ(ζ < λ) which is (Γ>,B^)-complete (one of them is Q^, the others
are trivial).)
4.21 Subclaim. Under the assumption in 4.20, for each α < α*, for some
(D, E) G V, D is a (λ, E, /^-completeness system in V, E e S<|£ (λ) is station-
ary and \\-Pa "Qa is (D, B)-complete".

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding ω-Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
433
Proof. Let
£* = {α :α G S^ (λ), tg(a) > 2 and for some ε - {(ε£, ε£) : C € α0 Π α)
for every ζ G α0, ε£ < ε£ < ^g(α) and εί( G 7Vεc and
(a» : i = 0 or ε£ < i < ε£) G
By 4.19(3) we can show that E* is of the right kind. 
CU.21
Continuation of the proof 0/4-20: By the associativity law for CS iterations of
proper forcing, the following cases suffice. Also, clause (1) of the conclusion is
a special case of clause (2) and if β < α* then the statement has already been
proved (by the induction hypothesis).
First Case: a = 0, β - α* = 1.
Trivial.
Second Case: a = 1, β — α* = 3.
Let E
1'
3 = {a :ά G 5<^o(A), α = (α» : i < i*} and for some j j j ^2 we nave •'
0 < JΓ < J2* < i*, Ά + 5 < i* and afO'i 4- 1) e B
1
Cα,se: a = 0, /? = a* = 2.
Similar to the second case, but easier.
Fourth Case: a ~ 1, β = a* = ω.
E
a>0 = {a : for some (βj : j < ω
2) increasing and continuous, βo = 0, £g(a) =
βω2 + ω 4- 1, and for each n,m<ω, (dβωn)
 Λ (α7 : /3α;m+n + 2 < 7 < /?u;m+n+ι)
belongs to E
n}.
If /ς > NO, (/?j : j < ω} suffices.
Fifth Case: α = 1, /? = α* = cf(α*) > N0-
ga,β — {α e ^^(λ) : ^ € α0 and for some (/^ : j < ω
2) increasing continuous
βQ = 0,^g(α) = βω2 + α; 4- 1, and we can choose (α(n) : n < α;} such that:
a(ri) G α0 Π /?, α(n) < a(n 4- 1), α(0) - α(= 1) and sup(^ Π α0) = Un<α; α(n)'

434 
VIII. κ-pic and Not Adding Reals
and for each n,m < ω we have (aβωn}~ (aΊ : βωm+n + 2 < 7 < /3ωm+n+ι>
belongs to £"(n),α(n+i)}B 
Π4.2o
4.24 Concluding Remarks. 1) There is not much difference between using
(D, D)-completeness and (F, D)-completeness (where F is a stationary subset
of <S<κ0(λ) for some λ), as long as we do not mind increasing λ (see 4.18).
2) In Theorem 4.20 (< o>i)-proper can be weakened by restricting ourselves to
e.g., E^-proper for every α, where Eft, = {{a» : i < a) € 5<^o(λ) : a» Π ω\ G
VF} for a stationary subset W C. ω\\ demanding that each Eβ is a subset of
Uα<ω EWI then also in the definition of "long " (4.17) we restrict ourselves to
the case /\; NΪ Π ωi G W.
3) We could have replaced E
a by Dom(B
a), etc.
4) We may note the following generalization. Call E C «S<£ * (λ) unambiguous
if for no α, 6 G E is α a proper initial segment of 6. Then for c € 5<{J^ (λ), we let
C#(c) be the unique ζ < ίg(c) such that c\ζ G E (maybe Cs(c) is not defined.)
Now in Definition 4.15 we will have also E* C <S<^* (λ) stationary such that
E C Dom(ζ£;*) and now we call D a (λ, E, E*, «) -system and note that only
now (in (B)) B^^A,?) is a family of subsets of P(a^E*(u)). Now, in Definition
in 4.16, the family is:
{G : 1) for every ε < ζ(α), α € αε for some i e αε we have p^ G G
2) (Ξςf G P*)(Vr G G)(r < g) (i.e. G has an upper bound in (P*, <*))
3) p G G}.
(This generalization adds some indices to the proofs but no essential changes.
This was the point of the original version of 4.2, 4.3.)
5) We can view (4) as a particular case of, more generally, putting an induction
hypothesis on G Π NQ.
6) See more in X §7 and XVIII §1, §2.
4.22 Definition. We say E C 5|^(λ) is simple if letting ff(Nι,λ) be the
closure of λ under taking countable subsets, E is first order definable in

§4. More on Forcing Not Adding cj-Sequences and on the Diagonal Argument 
435
4.23 Claim. In 4.20 condition (e), instead of "D, J5 are from V™, it is enough
to demand that they are simple.

IX. Souslin Hypothesis
Does Not Imply
"Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
§0. Introduction
We prove that the Souslin Hypothesis does not imply "every Aronszajn tree
is special"; solving an old problem of Baumgartner, Malitz and Reinhardt.
For this end we introduce variants of the notion "special Aronszajn tree" and
discuss them (this is §3, see references there). We also introduce a limit of
forcings bigger than the inverse limit, and prove it preserves properness and
related notions not less than inverse limit, and the proof is easier in some
respects, and was done already in 78; see §1, §2. We can get away without
using it for the present theorems, but we want to represent it somewhere. The
Aronszajn trees are addressed in §4; we choose a costationary 5 C ω\ and make
all tti-trees S-st-special, while on "ω\ \ 5 the tree remains Souslin". If S = 0
this means that every Hi-tree is special when restricted to some unbounded set
of levels, in fact while there is no antichains whose set of levels is stationary.
See more in 4.9.
§1. Free Limits
1.1 Discussion and Definitions. For A a set of propositional variables, λ
a regular cardinal, let: L\(A) be the set of propositional sentences generated
from A, by negation and conjunction and disjunctions on sets of power < λ.

§1. Free Limits 
437
Let Lμ(A) = Uλ<μ ^λ(^4) for μ a limit cardinal (> NO) or oo. Let φ, ψ, θ denote
sentences; Φ, Ψ set of sentences.
We define (in L00(A)) h ψ, or Φ h ψ as usual (the rules of the finite
case, and Φ h /\Φ, and from Φ h ψi for i G / deduce Φ h Λie/^)
 an<^ ^
V<Vt = -'Λi-
|V
?i
Always h means in Z/oc(^4) even if we deal with L\(A).
The following is well known.
1.2 Theorem. The following are equivalent for Φ,φ:
(1) Φ h φ
(2) there is no model of Φ IJί"
1^} with truth values in a complete Boolean
algebra;
(3) if λ is such that | Φ | , and the power of any set on which we make conjunction
inside some sentence θ e ΦtJί^} are ^ λ and P — Levy(N0>λ) i.e. the
collapsing of λ to ω by finite functions, then
\\~P " there is no model of Φ
1.2A Remark. This can be proven by a small fragment of ZFC, admissibility
axioms, at least when we prove only (1) <^> (3). Hence (by proving not (1)
implies not (3)):
1.3 Conclusion. If A is a transitive admissible set, Φ,</? G A then "Φ h φ
n
has the same truth value in V and in A.
1.4 Definition. For given A and θ G L^A), let FFχ(θ) be {φ : ψ G Lχ(A),
θ Y ->ψ} partially ordered by ψι < ψ<2 if θ Λ 1/^2 t~ Ψi - (FF denotes free-forcing;
we can identify φ, ψ if φ < ψ < φ.)
Reversing the definition of < and adding a minimal element, we get a
Boolean algebra in which every set of < λ elements has a least upper bound
provided that we identify ^i, φ^ when θ h ψi = ψ>2

438 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
1.5 Definition. For any forcing notion P let Θ[P] be the following sentence:
/\{(c — > -ιd)Λ(6 — > α) : α, b G P, α < 6, c, d G P, c, c? incompatible} Λ/\{V α eχα :
Z C P & maximal set of pairwise incompatible elements}.
1.6 Definition. Let Pi(i < δ) be <Φ-increasing, δ an ordinal (λ an infinite reg-
ular cardinal). Then their λ-free limit (Flim^<5P<) is FFχ(/\i<δθ[Pi\) 
(where
the set of prepositional variables is \Ji<δ Pi)- If we omit λ we mean λ = HI.
1.7 Claim. P <Φ Q implies Θ[Q] h 0[P], and P <o F F χ ( θ [ P ] ) .
Proof. The first statement is trivial, for the second see the proof of Claim 1.8.
Πl.7
1.7A Remark. Our notation may be confusing, as for conditions p, q G
is "p and <?", i.e., both are in the generic set so in our order p Λ q is above p
and above q as it give more information.
1.8 Claim. If as in Definition 1.6, Pδ is the λ-free limit of Pi(i < δ) then
Pi <£ Pδ for i < δ.
Proof. Let us check the conditions.
proof of clause (b) Let X C P^ be a maximal set of pairwise incompatible
elements of P$. Suppose φ G Flim^<sPi is incompatible with each a G T. As
φ G Flim^<<5Pi, by definition /\i<δθ[Pj] Y -><£>. So by 1.2, after some forcing
there is a model of φ, /\j<δθ[Pj} 
But Vαez
α *
s a conJunct of the second
sentence, so in the model some q G X is true. So after some forcing, there
is a model of φ Λ qr, Aj<(5 0[ίj ], so by 1.2, /^ θ^ ] F -π(y? Λ ςf), so φ Λ ςr G
]); so φ,q are compatible in
proof of clause (a) Let α, 6 G P$, if they are compatible in P^, for some c G PΪ,
α < c, 6 < c, and this clearly holds in P^ by its definition.
If they are incompatible in Pi then α — > -A appears as a conjunct in 0[P$] and
we can finish. Similarly for α, b G P*, α < 6 in P» implies α < 6 in Pg. 
Dι.8

§2. Preservation by Free Limit 
439
1.9 Remark. We can change the definition of FFχ(θ) 
(hence of Flim) by
changing K The natural way is to let K be a class of complete Boolean algebras,
and Φ \~κ ψ iff any Boolean valued model of Φ is a Boolean valued model of
φ provided that the complete Boolean algebra is from K. So F F χ ( θ ) = {φ G
Lχ : ΘPκ^φ}.
The most interesting K's seems
Kι = {B : forcing with B \ {0} satisfies X]
where X — does not add reals, does not collapse KI, does not collapse stationary
subsets of HI, the UPι(S) condition (MinS > N2,^ = 0,2, see XV §3).
§2. Preservation by Free Limit
2.1 Theorem. If each Pi is a forcing notion; and Pi (i < δ) is <Φ-increasing,
each Pi is proper as well as Pj/Pi(i < j < δ) and for a < ί, cf(α) = N0 =»
Pα = Flimf^Pi then their Ni-free limit P = Flim^F* is proper. Also P/P;
is proper for any i < δ.
2.1A Remark. Similarly for μ-proper by [Sh lOO] terminology if we take μ+-
free limit. We can restrict ourselves to non-limit i,j.
Proof. Let N -< (-ff(χ), G) be countable such that (Pi : i < δ) e N,p e P Γ\ N
and x big enough (see III). Let {Xn : n < ω} be a list of all pre-dense
subsets of P which belong to N. Let ί(*) = sup[J Π AT], and let P^ = P,
soNnP = NπPδ C NnPsw andif5(*) < δ then A^ΠPδ(^ = \Ji<δ(^ NnPi.
As necessarily cf(ί(*)) = ^o clearly Pδ^ — Flim^^x sP^. So it is enough to
prove p Λ AnίVαewnz^
 α) ^ ^(*) (^
n Boolean algebras terms: is not zero), for
p being any member of P Π TV.
Now assume w.l.o.g. that everything is in some countable transitive model
M (e.g. work in V
f = V^vy(κ0,μ)^ χ strong limit such that (p. . ^ < j) G H(μ^
μ < x, let M = H(μ)
v and remember 1.3). We can find αn < αn+ι,αn G
ΛΓΓU,

440 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
Let (Φn : n < ω) be a list of all countable (in M) subsets of Pδ^ which
belongs to TV.
We now define by induction on n, in V, Gn,pn such that:
(1) G nCP α n,G nCG n+ι,
(2) Gn is Pan-generic for M and Gn Π N is (Pttn Π 7V)-generic for AT,
(3) pn < Pn+l, P = Pθ,Pn£NΓ}P,
(4) pn is compatible (in P) with every member of Gn,
(5) P2n+ι is > qn for some qneInΓ\ N,
(6) either £>2n+2 t~ ΛΦn or j?2n+2 I—*rn f°
r some rn G Φn.
The proof is trivial (provided you know about the composition of forcings and
completeness theorem for the propositional calculus Lωι>ω).
In the end G = (Jn Gn gives us a model of Λj<5(*) θ[Pj] (by: members of
G are true, members of (Jj<<5 -Pj \ ^ are false). This holds by clause (2).
For r G P Π TV, r is true in the model iff pn > r for some n (this is proved
by induction on the complexity of r, (see conditions (4) and (6)). In the model
pn is true (for each n < ω), hence Vaex nnA^
a ^
s true (f°
r eacn n < ^) hence
P Λ ΛnΐVαeZnΠJV α) is true there (P true as PO = P).
So in V there is a model of f \ j < δ ( * ) θ [ P j ] , 
p Λ Λ n(V'ati nnN
α) so
P
 Λ Λn(Vα€XnnN
 α)
 G PS(*) ^ ^quired. 
D2.ι
2.IB Remark. Part of the proof is essentially a repetition of the completeness
theorem for LωiίUJ (propositional calculus). But note that in this proof there
was no need (as in the ones for inverse limit) to use names. Also, almost all
previous theorems on preservation hold for free iterations.
2.2 Definition. Let Q = (Pi,Qi : i < IQ) be an ωi-free iteration if :
(a) Pi is <£-increasing,
(b) Pί+1 = Pi * Qi = {(p,q) 
: p € Pi,lhP. 
"ςr G Q^"}, with the order
(P,q) < (P^»^) O p < p^ /\[pϊ 
Ihp q < qϊ]; and we identify p 6 Pi
with (p, 0),
(c) for limit 5, P^ is the tti-free limit of (P^ : ί < δ).

§2. Preservation by Free Limit 
441
2.3 Definition. For an N^free iteration Q = (Pi,Qi : i < i0) let Flim
Nl<2
be Pa * Qa if IQ — a + 1 and Flim^^P^ if i0 is a limit ordinal, and we let
2.4 Definition. We say that Ni-free iteration preserves a property if whenever
each Qi (in V
Pί) has it, then so does Pi.
2.5 Theorem. Properness is preserved by Ni-free iteration.
Proof. See 2.1; and prove by induction on β that for α < /?,
(*) If (P. : i < z,0) G TV -< (#(λ), G), \\N\\ = K0,α < /? < i 0 ϊα G TV,/? G 7V,p G
PβΓ\N,q € Pβ, and for every pre-dense J C Pα, [J G TV, => Z" Π TV is pre-dense
above <?,] and every q^ , g < q^ G Pα is compatible with p then for some r G P/?,
for every pre-dense J C P^ we have [J G TV => Jn A^ pre-dense above r], p < r
and for every q^ : ς < q^ G P/j => q^ compatible with r. 
U2.5
The following Definition and Theorem are not really necessary for the rest of
the chapter, but will help in understanding §4.
2.6 Definition.
1) P is strongly proper when: if\ is large enough (i.e. λ > (2'
p')~
l~), P G N -<
(#(λ), G), \\N\\ = No,p € P Π N and In C AT pre-dense in TV Π P (but
we do not ask Jn G TV), ί/ien for some </,p < <? G P, each Jn is pre-dense
above #.
2) P is strongly α-proper z/for large enough λ, P G Λ^ -< (-ff(λ), G), ||^|| =
K0, (A^ : j < i) G 7Vi+ι for i < a, Ni increasing continuous, p G P Π TVo,
P, i G Nij 1^ C P Π Λfi is a pre-dense subset of P Π TV^ (for n < ω) and
(Z£ : j < ί,n < ω) e Ni+ι (for i < α) ί/ien there is a q G P,p < q, If
pre-dense above q (in P, for each n < ω, i < α). Note that we can replace
(H(\),€)by(H(\),e,<*χ).
2.7 Theorem. Strong properness is preserved by HI -free iteration.

442 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
2.7 A Remark. A similar theorem holds for strong α-properness and for CS
iteration.
Proof. Let (Pf, Qj : i < ZQ, j < io) be an Ni-free iteration. We prove by induction
on α < IQ that for any β < α:
(*)βta Let (Pi,Qj : i < i0,j < ιQ) G N x (#(λ),G) (where λ > (2l
pl)+), ||TV|| -
NO, C a countable family of N0 pre-dense subsets of PαΠTV, closed under the
operations listed below. Suppose β < α,p G Pa Π TV, α € TV, /? G TV, ς G P/?,
no <?t,<? < gΐ G P/3 is incompatible with p, and [I C P^&Z G C ^> 2"
pre-dense above ςr]. Γ/ien there is qa,p < qa G PQ,, q < qa, no q < q^ G Pβ
is incompatible with ς^α and [I € C => I pre-dense above qa].
The family of operations under which C is closed is (for p G N Π P^0,7 G
TV Π ΪQ and I e N a, pre-dense subset of Pίo):
(Op 1) Opι(T, 7,p) = {r : r G P7 Π AT and either for some r* G PΪO and
TI £ Z we have π < r* and p < r* but no r^, r < r^ G P7 Π TV is incompatible
with r* or r is incompatible with p} for 7 G AT, I G C, p G Pα. (Note that for
p = 0 the last phrase is vacuous.)
For α = 0. Totally trivial. For α = 7 4-1. So/3<7, also as α G N clearly
7 G TV and by the induction hypothesis for 7, (*)/3,7 holds, so w.l.o.g. β = 7.
So we want to use the hypothesis Pα = P7 * Q7, Q7 is strongly proper; then we
use (ςf,r), r G QΊ a name of an appropriate element of QΊ. We have to prove
that the appropriate subsets of N[GpΊ] Π QΊ[Qp^\ are pre-dense subsets. But
as C is closed under (Op 1) this is easy.
For α limit. Let αn G TV, Un<u;
α™ ^
s α or at ^east [Un
α^'
α) Π TV = 0
(note [α^,α) is interval of ordinals).
We work as in 2.1 using the induction hypothesis. 
D2.r
2.8 Claim. 1) If we iterate ω-proper, ^u -bounding forcings it does not matter
whether we use HI-free iteration or countable support one (in the latter we get
a dense subset of the first).

§3. Aronszajn Trees: Various Ways to Specialize 
443
2) We can replace "ω-proper" by proper.
Proof. Left to the reader. 
D2.8
2.8A Remark. For the proof, see V §3 (and for (2) see XVIII §2). The parallel
of 2.7 for countable support was noted by Harrington and the author.
By the way we note that unlike NI-C.C. forcing:
2.9 Example. There are proper forcing P, Q such that P <Φ Q but Q/P is not
proper.
Proof. We let PQ = adding a subset r of ω\ with a condition being a countable
characteristic function.
Let Qo e V
p«, Q0 = { f : Dom(/) = a < ω^ Rang(/) = {0,1}J~
1({0}) is
a closed set of ordinals (not just closed subset of α!) included in r}. (r denotes
the generic subset of ω\ which P0 produces.)
Now PQ, PQ * Qo are proper but in V
p°, QQ = PQ * QQ/PQ is not proper as
it destroys the stationarity of U I \ Γ Q .
§3. Aronszajn Trees: Various Ways
to Specialize
We introduce new variants of the notion "special Aronszajn tree", define some
old ones (special, r-special) and prove some known theorems and some easy
ones. See Kurepa [Ku35], Baumgartner, Malitz and Rienhard [BMR], Baum-
gartner [B] and also Devlin and Shelah [DvSh:65]. Recall
3.1 Definition.
(1) An u;ι-tree T — (|Γ|, <τ) is a partially ordered set, such that (when no
confusion arises, we write < instead of <τ and T instead of |T|):
(a) for every x G T, {y G T : y < x] is well-ordered, and its order type
which is denoted by rk(x) = rk^(x), is countable,

444 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
(b) Γα = {x £ T : rk(x) = a] is countable, / 0,
(c) if rk(x) = rk(y) is a limit ordinal then x = y O {z : z < x} = {z : z <
y},
(d) if x G Ta,a < /?, then for some y G Tβ,x < y, in fact there are at
least two distinct such y's.
If we wave (c) and (d) we call it an almost α i-tree; similarly for the other
definitions.
(2) A set B C T is a branch if it is totally (i.e. linearly) ordered (hence well
ordered) and maximal; it is an α-branch if it has order type a.
(3) An Aronszajn tree is an u i-tree with no α;χ-branch.
(4) An ωi-tree is Souslin or ωi-Souslin tree if there is no uncountable antichain
(= set of pairwise incomparable elements).
3.1A Remark. Condition (l)(d) is not essential, except to make every Souslin
tree an Aronszajn tree. So except this implication all the definitions and results
in this section hold for almost ω\-trees.
3.2 Definition.
(1) For a set 5 C ω\ which is unbounded, we call an ωi-tree 5-special if there
is a monotonic increasing function / from \Ja^sTa to Q (the rationale),
i.e., x < y => f ( x ) < f ( y ) .
(2) A special ωi-tree is an cji-special α i-tree (this is the classical notion).
(3) r-special, S — r-special are defined similarly when the function maps T
into R (the reals).
(4) We say / specializes (S-specialize, etc.) T. We can replace 5 by a function
/ι, Dom(/ι) = ωi, Rang(/ι) = 5, h increasing.
3.3 Definition. For a stationary S C ω\ we call an u i-tree 5-st-special if there
is a function /, Dom(/) = Uaesuo} ^»»
 an(^ % £ Ta => f ( x ) e α x ω (cartesian
product) such that x < y =$- f ( x ) 
=£ f(y) when defined. If S is a set of limit
ordinals we can assume x G Ta => f ( x ) < α. So if 5 C ω\ is not stationary this
says nothing.

§3. Aronszajn Trees: Various Ways to Specialize 
445
3.4 Claim.
(1) If T is S-special or S — r-special (5 C ω\ unbounded) or S-si-special
(5 C ω\ stationary) ωχ-tree then T is an Aronszajn tree but not Souslin.
Any u i-Souslin tree is an Aronszajn tree.
(2) The following implications among properties of ωi-trees hold (where 52 C
Si Qωi, S2 unbounded in ω\, S\ = {α(i) : i < ω\}, Oίi increasing with i)
(a) Si-special => 52-special,
Si -special =Φ Si — r-special,
Si — r-special => S2 — r-special,
Si — r-special =Φ Si Π {a(i 4- 1) : i < c^ij-special,
(b) for Si stationary: Si -special => Si — si-special,
(c) Si — si-special =>• S2 - si-special, (if Si, Si are stationary subsets of
ωi).
(d) for C C ω\ closed unbounded: Si Π C — si-special <=> Si — si-special,
(e) if (Vi)Λι(i) < hι(ϊ) and T is /ii-special then T is ^-special.
Proof. Trivial:
(1) for S-special, and S-r-special - well known, for S-si-special by the Fodor
lemma.
(2) Trivial - check. E.g. the last phrase in (a), if / is Si — r-specialize T, define
/* : U<ωι
 T"(*+i) -> Q
 by
: if x G Γ«(i+i) then /*(χ) is a rational < /*(*) but
> f ( y ) where ?/ G Γα(i), y < x. 
D3<4
Remark. By 3.4(2)(d) dealing with S - si-special we can assume all members
of S are limit, and so Rang(/) C ωι in the Definition.
3.5 Claim.
(1) T is S-special iff S C ωι is unbounded and there is / : \Ja<ESTa 
—> ω,
(x < 2/&rk(x) G S&rk(y) G S => /(x) ^ /(y)].
(2) T is α i — si-special iffT 
is special.
Remark. See Claim 3.11.

446 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
Proof. (1) Well known ( the "only if" part is trivial; for the "if" part, with
given / : \JaeS Ta -> ω we define fn : {x : x G \Ja£S Ta and f ( x ) < n] -> Q by
induction on n such that fn C /n+ι, /n satisfies the requirement (see Definition
3.2) and Rang(/n) is finite. Now \Jn<ω fn is as required).
(2) The "if" part is trivial.
So suppose / ωι — si-specialize T. For every x G T, let Kx = {t G
(rk(x) -f 1) x <j: for no y < x is /(?/) = t}. We now define by induction on
® <ωι,ga and A^ (for t e Kx,x e \Jβ<aTβ) such that:
(a) ga is a function from T<a = \Jβ<aTβ to ω,
(b) x < ?/, x G T<α, ?/ G T<a => 0α(z) ^ 0α(y),
(c) β <a^gβC 0α,
(d) Ac?ί (for t e Kx,x € T<a) is an infinite subset of ω,
(e) for every x G T<α, t ^ s e Kx => AXtt Π A X j S = 0,
(f) ί G K x,x e T<α =» Ax,t Π {^α(y) : y < x} = 0,
(g) if x <y&zeT< α&;2/ £T<a,t G KxΠKy then A^ = A^t.
For α = 0,1, α limit - no problem.
For a + 1 > 1 - let x G Ta C Γ<(α+1), and s = /(x), so by K's definition
for some y = yx < x, 5 G Ky. We choose ga+ι(x) G Ay>s (= Az,s for every z
satisfying y < z < x) and let 0α+ι fT<α = ga.
For t G Kx \ U2<χ ^ (there are K0 such ί's) we choose Axj C A^^ \
{ga+ι(x)} infinite pairwise disjoint. If t G Kz \ {/(a;
7) : z' < x} for some z < x
we let AXtt — Az,t.
Now by 3.5(1) clearly g = Uα<u;ι 9<* shows T is special. 
DS.S
3.6 Claim. Let 5 C ω\ be unbounded.
(1) If every Aronszajn tree is 5-special then every Aronszajn tree is special.
(2) If every Aronszajn tree is 5 —r-special then every Aronszajn tree is special.
Proof. (1) Let Γ be an Aronszajn tree, 5 = {OL(I) : i < ω\], a(ί) increasing.
Define T* (a partial order): The set of elements is {(x, 7) : x G T, 7 < α(rkr(x))
and y < x => α(rkτO/)) < 7}; the order in Γ* is: (x,7) <τ* (^j7^) if a: < x^
or x = xΐ, 7 < 7^.

§3. Aronszajn Trees: Various Ways to Specialize 
447
Now T* is almost an Aronszajn tree; the only missing part is in Definition
3.1, part (d) ("in fact there are at least two distinct such y's") the problem
is e.g. when i is a limit ordinal, a(ϊ) > Uj<i
αO')» m ^
eve^ \Jj<i
a(J) 
We can
add more elements and find an Aronszajn tree, Γ** such that T* C T**, and
if #** ^-specializes the tree Γ**, we let g : T -> Q be defined by g(x)
 
ά=
#**({x, α(rkτ(x)))), it specializes T.
(2) By 3.6(1) and 3.4(2) (a), last clause. 
D3.6
3.7 Lemma.
(1) (Oωi) There is an r-special Aronszajn tree which is not special.
(2) Moreover (in (1)) there is no antichain I such that rk(I) = (rk(x) : x G 1}
contains a closed unbounded subset of ω\ .
(3) (O^i ) There is an r-special Aronszajn tree, such that for no antichain
I C Γ is rk(I) = {rk(x) : x G 1} stationary.
Remark. Part (1) was proved by Baumgartner [Bl].
Proof. We define by induction on a < ω\ the tree (T<cn<τ \T<a) and / :
T<0ί — > R satisfying x < y => /(x) < f(y) such that if β < 7 < α, x G T]g, ε
a real positive number (> 0), then for some y,x < ?/ G T7, /(y) < /(x) 4- ε;
and x G Tα+ι 4=> /(x) G Q and if δ < ω\ is a limit ordinal, x G T^ then
/(x) = sup{/(y) : y < x} G M.
For α = 0, α-successor of successor or a limit, no problem.
For α -f 1, α limit, we are given antichains J£ C T<a for (n < ω) (by O^i
or 0^) and we can define Γ<α+ι (and hence /|T<cH_ι) such that
(*) if x G Tα, n < ω and {y G T<Q: : y < x} Π J^ = 0 then for some ?/ < x,
and ε > 0, /(y) < /(x) < /(T/) 4- ε, and there is no z, z G 1^, y < z G T<α and
Now T = Uα<ωι ^<Q:
 and / are defined in the end. Suppose J C Γ is an
antichain Now C = {a < ω\ : α limit, and if x G T<α,ε > 0, and there is
y G J, x < 2/,/(x) < /(y) < /(x) 4- ε then there is such y G T<a} is closed

448 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
unbounded (note that it suffices to consider ε G {1/n : n positive natural
number }).
Now if a G C,IΠ T<a = 2£(0) G {J£ : n< ω}, α G rk(J) then by (*) we
get JΠ Tα - 0 (if y G I,y G Tα, by (*) we know {z : z < y} ΠZ£(0) 7^ 0; let 2
be in it, then z < y both in J, but J is an antichain).
Now by defining J£ using Oωι or <>*, we get (1), (2) and (3). 
D3.7
3.8 Claim. (0^) Let h be a function from ω\ to ωi. There is a tree Γ which
is /ii-special iff {i : h(ί) < hι(i)} contains a closed unbounded subset of ω\ (see
Definition 3.2(4)).
Proof. Similar to the proof of 3.7. 
Ds.8
3.9 Lemma. Let 5 C ω\ be stationary, and assume 0^ \$ hold. There is an
5 — si-special tree which is Si — st-special iff S\ \ 5 is not stationary; moreover
there is no antichain J, such that rk(I) \ 5 is stationary. (If S = ω\ we do not
need any hypothesis, 00 is meaningless anyhow and this is the classical theorem
on the existence of special Aronszajn trees of Aronszajn himself.) Also we can
make the tree such that it is not /ι-special for any h.
Proof. We define by induction on α < ωi, (T<Q,<T fT<α), and (/fT<α) :
Γ<α -> α x ωι\ such that x G T<a \ T0&rk(x) G S =» f ( x ) G rk(x) x α;;
x G TO => /(x) G {0} x ω = 1 x ω; rk(x) < α i \ S ^> f ( x ) G (rk(x) + 1) x ω
and x < y => f ( x ) ^ /(y), such that
(a) β G 5, x G Tβ => |/3 x ω \ {/(y) : T/ < x}| = K0, (if β is a non-limit ordinal
this holds trivially.)
(b) if x e Γ0./3 < 7 < α, {(ξ,n)}LU C ((/? + 1) x ω \ {/(z) : z < x}),
(£,n) ^ A and ^4 is finite, then there is y G T7 such that x < y and
{/(z) :z < y} Π A - 0 but {£, n) G {/(z) : z < y}.
We can demand
(c) if α is limit, α φ S and x G Ta then f ( x ) £ a x ω
and note that we have
(d) if α is limit, α G 5 and x G Γα tfien /(x) G (α x ω \ {f(z) : z < x}).

§3. Aronszajn Trees: Various Ways to Specialize 
449
We let Ta — [aω, (a -f l)ω) (so T has infinitely many minimal elements; we
can add a root). Let Pa C P(a) for α < ω\ \ S be countable such that
(Pa ' Oί < ω\ \ S) a witness for O^v^ Let us carry the definition.
Case 1: a — 1
<τf T<\ is the equality.
Let / f TO be any function from Γ0 to 1 x .ω.
Case 2: a limit: trivial.
Case 3: a = β + 2.
Let (Ax : x G Tβ) be a partition of T^+i = [(/? + l)α;, (β + 2)ω) to (pairwise
disjoint) infinite sets. Define the order on T<a by:
for x, y <E Γ<α :x <τ 2/ iff
y or (3z
: α = ί + 1, ί e 5 (5 limit).
As in the construction of special Aronszajn trees using (b) (and taking care of
it).
Case 5: a = δ + 1, δ <£ S (δ limit).
Let {Bn : n < ω} be a list of maximal antichains of T<£ including all maximal
antichains which belongs to P$. Let {(τn, kn) : n < ω} enumerate δ x ω.
Choose (βn:n< ω) such that /?0 = β,βn< βn+ι < δ and \Jn<ω βn = δ.
For each β <δ,x £Tβ and finite A C ((/? + 1) x ω \ {/(z) : z < x}), we choose
by induction on n,yn = y
δ
n[A,x\, and εn = εn[A,x] such that:
(i) yQ = x, 
yn G Ten, τ/n <τ<ό 2/n+ι^ * > ^n > βn
(ii) >1 is disjoint to {f(z) : z < yn}

450 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
(iii) let l(n) < ω be minimal such that:
(7*(n), **(n)> i {f(z) : z < yn} U A,
then (7*(n),**(n)) € (f(z) : z < yn+ι}.
(iv) either {z : z < yn+ι} Π B^ ^ 0, or there is no y € T<£ satisfying
2/n < J/, {/(*) : z < J/} Π A = 0, {z : z < y} Π B
δ
n ^ 0.
The induction step is by part (b) of the induction hypothesis.
Let ((x^β^Al) 
: i < ω) list all triplets (x,/3,A) as above (i.e. xf G
Tβ* , # < 5, A* finite C ((/3f + 1) x α; \ {f(z) : z < xf }).
Now we define
2/1 <τ<a 2/2
zjff for some /3 < 5, 
2/1 <τ<β y2, or for some i < ω we have y2 = <W, Vn<α; 2/ι ^
y*[Af,xf]. Let f ( δ + i) = (5,0). It is easy to see that we finish this case, too.
So we have carried the inductive construction.
Now let us see that Γ = T<ωι = \Ja<ω T<a is as required (clearly
/ : Γ — > ω\ x ω). Being 5-st special is by the requirements
rk(x) G 5 => /(x) G rk(x) x α;
Now suppose Z C T is an antichain, 5ι = rk(Z) \ 5 stationary.
For each α G Si, let xa G 2", 
rk(xα) — α. Note: /(xα) = (o;, 0). Now, by the
definition of 0^\ 5, for some club C of ωi:
5 G C Π Si => {xα : α < 5 Π 5ι} G Pδ.
Choose <5(*) G C Π 5ι such that M$^ -< Mωι where for δ < ω\ we define
Ms = (T<δ, <τ<δ , f \T<δ, {xa:a&S1Γ\ δ}) .

§3. Aronszajn Trees: Various Ways to Specialize 
451
So {xa : a < ί(*)π5ι} G PS(*) hence for some n we have {xa : a < 5(*)(Ί5ι} =
Bn 
and for some i < ω we have xδ^ = ί(*) -f i. Now xδ^ (which is well
defined as ί(*) G Si) is in TδM and ym
W[A?
(*\z?
w] <τ z*W.
As α € Si => /(xα) - (α,0), by the choice of y^l[A^
(*\x^] 
(clause
(iv)) and by the choice of C
{z:z< y*(
+WU4W]} n {xα : α < <5(*)} ^ 0
contradicting {xα : α G 5ι} being an antichain. 
D3.9
3.10 Lemma. (0Wl) There is a special Aronszajn tree T, such that for no
antichain I C Γ is rk(J) closed unbounded. (For stationary: there is necessarily:
this is mentioned in Devlin and Shelah [DvSh:65] p. 25).
Remark. E.g., MA + 2*° > NI implies that this fails.
Proof. We define by induction on α, (Γ<α,<Γ |T<α) and / : T<a -> Q
monotonic, so that / 3 < 7 < α , x G T ^ , ε > 0 implies that for some y G TΊ
we have x < y & z f ( x ) < f ( y ) < f ( x ) + ε. For limit δ < ω\ we are given an
antichain Jα C T<α (by OπJ and demand that for x G Γα, either
or (Ξy < x) [there is no z, y < z G Ia, f ( z ) < f ( x ) G Q].
[How? For each y G T<δ and rational ε > 0, choose if possible, z = 2^
such that y <τ<δ z G Iδ, f ( z ) < f ( y ) + ε, if not let zyί£ = y. Let qyi£ =
f(zy,ε) 4- (/(y) H- ε - f ( z y t £ ) ) / 2 . So we can demand that for every x G Γ^ for
some y G Γ<5 and rational ε > 0 we have zy>e <τ<(6+1) ^ and /(x) = qy,ε }
The checking is easy. See the last two paragraphs of the proof of 3.7. 
ΠS.IQ
3.11 Lemma. T is {α + 1 : a < ωι}-special iff T is r-special.
Remark. Proved by Baumgartner [Bl].

452 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
Proof. The direction <= already appears.
For => let / {a + I : α < ωι}-specialize T.
Let g : Q — » Q and ε : Q — > {1/n : n > 0 natural} be such that the
intervals [0(g) — ε ( q ) , g ( q ) + ε ( q ) ] are pairwise disjoint and g is order preserving
(possible: let Q = {qn : n < ω} and define f(qn)^ ε(qn) by induction on n).
Now define /* as follows: x G Tα+ι => f * ( x ) = g(f(x))
x G Γα,α limit => /*(x) - Sup{0(/(j/)) :y<x,y£ Tβ+ι,β < a} .
Now /* r-specializes T; the only point to check is:
x G Tα+ι,α limit =» flf(/(x)) > Sup{^(/(τ/)) :y<x,ye Tβ+ι,β + I < a}
which follows by g's definition (the sup is < g(f(x)) - ε(/(x)) as for every
y <
 χι #(/(
x)) ^
s smaller than it). 
Πa.n
§4. Independence Results
It is well known that
4.1 Claim. If Γ is an Ni-Souslin tree, λ > NI, N X (ίf(λ),€), ||-/V|| = KO
Γ G A^,x G TS, δ = α i Π AT Λen 5T(x) = {y G T<^ : y < x} is generic for
(T, TV), i.e., for every I £ N,I CT which is pre-dense in Γ, we have:
I n βτ (x) - J n TV n Bτ (x) + 0-
4.2 Definition. 1) For an Aronszajn tree Γ,
Q(T) = {(/ι, /) : h is a partial function from ω\ to ω\\
a < β & {α, β} e Dom(h) ^ 0 < α < /ι(α) < /3 <
/ is a finite function,

§4. Independence Results 
453
Dθm(/) C Uα6Dom(/ι)
 Th(a) ',
x e Th(a) => f ( x ) e a x ω;
x < I/ & [a .y € Dom(/)] =}> f(x) φ f(y)}
The order on Q(T) is denned by (h,f) < (Λt,/*) if Λ C tf,f C
We let 
' 
"
2) We say that T is (5, /ι)-st-specialized by / if: 5 is a stationary subset of ωi,
and /ι is a function from 5 to ωι satisfying (Vα € 5)(α < ft(α)) and ft is a
function with domain (J T^(α) satisfying
a£S
α € 5 & x G T α ^ > /(x) G a x ω 
and
α < β & x G TΛ(β) & j/ G Γh(/3) & x <τ ί/ => F(αr) ^ /(y).
So T is (S, Λ)-st-special if some / (5, /ι)-st-specialized it.
(Easily implies T is not Souslin.)
4.3 Definition. For an Aronszajn tree T and stationary set 5, Q(T, 5) =
{(Λ, /) : (Λ, /) € Q(T), and α G (Dom(Λ)) Π (S\ {0}) implies Λ(α) = a}, order
- as before.
Explanation. Our aim is to get a universe in which SH (Souslin Hypothesis)
holds (i.e., there is no Souslin tree) but not every Aronszajn tree is special. The
question was raised by Baumgartner Malitz and Reinhardt [BMR], and later
independently by U. Abraham, and is natural as, until now, the consistency
of SH was proved by making every Aronszajn tree special; see the proof of
Solovay and Tennenbaum [ST], Martin and Solovay [MS], Baumgartner, Malitz
and Reinhard [BMR] without CH, and Jensen proof in Devlin and Johnsbraten
[DeJo] with CH (and Laver and Shelah [LvSh:104] for N2-Souslin tree). For this
aim we have introduced in §3 various notions of specializations (each implying
the tree is not Souslin). So the program is to make every tree special in some
weaker than the usual sense. The notion r-special which had been introduced
by Kurepa [Ku35] is not suitable, as if every Aronszajn tree is r-special then

454 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
every Aronszajn tree is special (see 3.6(2)). Similarly "ft-special" for any fixed
increasing h : ω\ —> ω is not suitable by 3.6(1) (see Definition 3.2(4)).
So a natural candidate is "/ι-special for some /ι" (i.e., for every tree there
is an h for which it is Λ-special). Forcing with Q(T) does the job for T -
we take generic h and /. (It would be more natural to let / go to Q and be
monotonically increasing, but by 3.5(2) the forcing Q(T) makes T ft-special
for some ft, and this way we have more uniformity with Definition 4.3.) So we
should iterate such forcings, but retain some T as not special.
A second way is to make each T S — si-special for some fixed stationary
5; for this Q(T, 5) is tailored. (Note that the / we get from a generic subset of
<2(T, S) has domain LLeSi ^« where S\Sι non-stationary.) For 5 — 0 we get
the previous case, so we shall ignore Q(T).
This leads to a secondary problem: Can every Aronszajn tree be Si — si-
special, but some Aronszajn trees are not 82 — si-special (Sz\Sι stationary,
of course)? We answer positively.
4.4 Claim. 1) For T an Aronszajn tree, 5 C ωl5 Q(Γ, 5) is proper.
2) For T an Aronszajn HI-tree, and 5 C ω\ we have:
II-Q(T,5) "T is not Souslin tree, in fact for some
function h is (ωi, ft)-st-speciaΓ.
3) In part (2), if S is stationary then H-Q(T,S) "7
1 is 5-st-special".
Proof. We can assume w.l.o.g. |T0| = NO- Let λ > (2
Kl), N ^ (jff(λ),e) be
countable, T, 5 G N, po = (ft, /) G Q(Γ, S) Π TV, and let δ = N Π ωl.
Then pl = ( h \ J { ( δ , δ ) } , f ) G Q(T,S) exemplifies what is required.
For checking, we really repeat the proof of Baumgartner Malitz and Rein-
hardt [BMR] that the standard forcing (now) for specializing an Aronszajn tree
satisfies the NI-C.C. (or read the proof of demand (iii) in the proof of 4.6 - it is
just harder).
2) Let h = \J{h : (ft,/) G Gg(τ>5)}, and C - Dom(ft) and / - |J{/ : (
Λ'/) ^

§4. Independence Results 
455
GQ(T,S)}- We know (see III) that it is forced that C is a club of ω\, so T
becomes (C, /ι)-st-special.
3) Should be clear. 
04.4
4.5 Definition. We call a forcing notion P, (Γ*, 5) -preserving (do you have
a better name?), where T* is an Aronszajn tree, S C ω1? if: for every λ >
(2l
pl+Nι)+, (P,T*,S) G TV ^ (H(X),e),N 
countable, 5 =
f TV Π α i g 5 and
p G N ΓΊ P, there is pi which is preserving for (p, TV, P, T*, 5); i.e.,
(i) P<Pi£P,
(ii) pi is (TV, P)-generic,
(iii) for every x G T^, z/
(*) x G A -> (3j/ < x)(j/ G A) holds for every ACT*,A e N,
then
(**) for every P-name A,Ae N such that lhP "A C T*"
the following holds:
4.6 Lemma. If Γ*,T are Aronszajn trees, 5 C ω\, then Q(T,5) is (T*,5)-
p reserving.
Remark. If T* is Souslin tree then (*) from Definition 4.5 is satisfied by every
countable TV -< (#(λ), G) and x G Γ5* when TV Π ω\ = 5 (this follows by 4.1).
Proo/. Let P
 d= Q(Γ,5). Let TV X (JT(λ),€), J d= TV Π ^ ^ 5, ||TV|| - N0,
{T*, T, 5} G TV hence P G TV, p - (Λ0, /o) € P Π AT (as in Definition 4.5.), and
(remembering δ - TV Π ωj let 5* = sup{/(J) + 1 : / G N , f ( δ ) is an ordinal
Define pi = (/ι0 LJ{(^^*)})/o)5 demands (i) of Definition 4.5 is trivial,
and demand (ii): its proof is easier than that of demand (iii), so let us check
condition (iii). So suppose x G Tg and
(*) if 4 C T * , A G T V , z G , 4 t h e n (3y)(y <τ

456 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
Let A be a Q(T, S)-name of a subset of Γ*, and A G N. We shall prove
that for every p%,pι < pi G Q(Γ, 5), for some ^3,^2 < Pz £ Q(T,S), and
Pz Ih "x ^ A" or p3 Ih "y G A for some y <τ* x"
Let p2 = (/i2, /2), if P2 lt~p "^ ^ ^4" , then we can choose pa = p2 Otherwise
there is p% G P, such that
lhP "
Let p^ - (4»/2
f)» ^ - P2llP2? where p5 - (/i^/2
α), ^2
^2 — ^2^5 ^2 — ^Γl^^i) (closed open interval) and
Note that by the definition of Q(Γ, 5):
4.6A Fact.
(1) p ^ G P Π T V ,
(2) z G Dom(/|) => rkτ(z) > (5*.
Now let α0 = SupRang(Λ,2) (which is < δ) and we define a function F as
follows:
Dom(F) = {y G T* : rk(y) >τ
F(y) = Sup{α* < ωi : there is (*Λ|,*/|) (in Q(T,5)) such that:
(a)Min(Dom(*h|)) =
(c)
(so we demand also that (Λ§ |J *hξ, /f |J */|) is in Q(T, 5)).
Now clearly F G AT (as it is defined by a (first-order) formula in (if (λ), G)
whose parameters are in AT). Clearly F(y) < ω\ (for y G T* \ T<αo). Let
A* = {y G T* : rkτ*(y) > α0, F(y) - α i}. (Note that A* C Γ* is a set, not a
P-name of a set.).
Let F* be a function from ω\ to ω\ defined by:

§4. Independence Results 
457
F*(α) - Sup{F(y) + 1 : y G T^rkτ*(y) > a0,y £ A*, i.e.,
As |T<J < NO, we have F* : α i — > α i, and clearly F* £ N (same reason).
By the definition of £*, F*(ί) < 5*. But (Λξ,/!) exemplify F(x) > ί*, so
necessarily F(x) = ωι. So by the definition of A* above x G A*. Hence by the
hypothesis (*) there is y <τ* x such that y G A" . So (in H(\), hence in TV) we
can define a sequence p = ((h^
1 ', /2'*) : i < α i) such that:
(a)' Min(Dom(/i2'')) = rkτ*(y) > α0,
(by 
Λ
(c)' (
For i < δ let pj - (Λg |J ^2 U Λg
1*, /2
α U /2 U /2
6'') If Pz £ Q(T> S) then by
clause (c)' and as y <τ x, this condition is as required.
Why can p\ be not in Q(T,5)? The first coordinate (h% (J h2 (J h
b^) is
O.K., as h% C h
b^ G N.
What about the second? Note that fξUf^fξUf^ 
are ° κ as Pi £
Q(T, 5) and by (c)
7 above correspondingly. Hence the only danger is that there
are 2* G Dom(/|),z2 G Dom(/2
6ί<), z2 <τ zl (as /*'* G TV, τk(Zl) > h
b
2(δ) = ί*
this is the only bad possibility).
But remember that in -ff(λ) we have z G Dom(/2'
z) ^> rfc(z) > i, so by a
lemma on Aronszajn trees due to Baumgartner, Malitz and Reinhart (in their
proof of MA h "every Aronszajn tree is special" ) which appears in the proof
of III 5.4, there is a sequence (in : i < ω}(in < ωι) such that
m ^ n & Zl G Dom(/2)
6ϊ<TO &
So again there is such a sequence in TV, and all but at most |Dom(/2)| are O.K.,
i.e., p\ G <2(T, 5). So we 
finish. 
D4.6
4.7 Theorem. Let T* be a Souslin tree. Suppose Pa(ot < αo), QQ;(O: < QO)
form an Ki-free iteration (i.e., Pa+ι = Pa * ζ?α> -P* — Flί
mα<α0^")
 anc^ ^
or
every α at least one of the following holds:

458 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
(α) Qα is (in y
p«) (T*,S)-preserving,
(β) there is a P^-name 2a of an antichain of T* (in V
Pa), Sa == rk(Zα) C ωι\S
where rk(Jα) — (rk(x) : x G Jα}, and in V
Pθί:
9« = Qc/nfe(^i \ Sa) = {g : for some i < ωι, Dom(#) = i + 1, Rang(#) = {0,1},
{.7 < ϊ : #(0 — 1} is closed and is C α>ι \ 5α},
Then Pao is (T*,5)-preserving.
4.7A Remark. l)We can amalgamate conditions (α) and (β) but it has no
use.
2) See on such theorems in XVIΠ§3.
3) Note that the forcing notion Q(T, S) (T is an Aronszajn tree, 5 C ω\ co-
stationary) adds an antichain T of T such that rk(Z) \ 5 is stationary. This is
because by the proof of 4.4 H-Q(T,S) "{^ < ωi 
for some (/ι,/) € GQ(τts)ι we
have ί G Dom(/ι), ft(ί) = 5 e 5} is stationary" (together with Fodor's lemma).
Proof. We prove by induction on a < αo the following:
Θα Suppose β < a < a0, N ^ (fΓ(λ),e), β e N,a e N, (Pi : i < a) £ N,
δ = NΠωi £ S, pe PaΓ(N, qie Pβ, and
(i) (a) pί/3 < <?ι (natural meaning: no ς^, qι < q^ G P^ is incompatible with
p; if we deal with complete BA, p\β is the projection),
(b) Moreover, if p\β < p^ G Pβ Π TV, then q\,p^ are compatible;
(ii) ςf! is (AT, P^)-generic,
(iii) if x G T; and (VA C T*)(A G AΓ&x G A -> (3y < x)y G A) then for very
P^-name A G N, we have gi lhP/3 "x G A -> (3y <τ* x)y G A".
Then there is p\ G Pα such that
(i)' (a) pi \β = qι, p < p\ (natural meaning).
(b) \£p\a<p^ G Pα Π N then pι,pt are compatible,
moreover (this implies (a)+(b)): ifp\a < p^ G PαΠ7V, 91 < g
f G P/3,p
f Γ/3 <
ς^ tfiera pt,pi, ςt are compatible (= have an upper bound),

§4. Independence Results 
459
(ii)' pi is (7V,Pα)-generic,
(iii)' the parallel of (iii) with β \-+ a, qι *-* pi.
Case 1. a = 0. Trivial.
Case 2. a + 1. By the similarity between the assumptions on q\ and the
conclusion on pi, we can assume w.l.o.g. β = a. Let G C Pa be generic over
V, qι e G. Then N[G\ -< (JEΓ(λ), G) (see III 2.11).
Now in V[G\ (hence in H(\)[G\) we can find in Qa[Gpa] a condition
Pi > p(a), which is (A^[G],Qa[G])-generic, as in Definition 4.5. Why?
Note that we can ignore (i)'(b), as we can take a disjunction over countably
many possibilities one for each r € N[G\, Pa+ι/G, r > p. More accurately,
maybe in Qa it does not exist, but we can make a trivial change in Qa to ensure
it, without affecting the iteration (in fact, the forcing notion we actually use
has such a condition anyway).
Now our proof splits according to which of the conditions (α) or (β) from
the theorem, Qa[G] satisfies.
(α) Straightforward, by Definition 4.5.
(β) By the choice of T* (a Souslin tree), by Claim 4.1 we have: [x G A e N and
x G T5* => (3y < x)y G -A]. So by the assumption on qι for every A G V[G], A C
T*, A G Af[G], of course there is a Pα-name A € N, A[G] — A\ now we know
Qι ll-pβ "* € 4 -> (3y < x)y G Λ", hence in V[G\,xe AΓ\T£ ^ (3y < x)y G A.
In particular, we can take A = Ia[G] G A^[G] (remember Ia[G] G F
Pα
and as (Pi : i < a) G N hence w.l.o.g. (/^ : j < α and if Q^ satisfies clause
(/?), /^ is as there, otherwise /^ = 0}). So clearly if x G Γ5* Γ\Ia[G] then
x G >1 implies Jα[G] is not an antichain, contradiction. So Γ5* ΠI a[G] = 0, so
δ £ Sa[G] = rk(Jα)[G], and then the desired conclusion is quite easy (remember
Qα's definition).
So we have pi as required. Now p\ is in V
Pa, so in V we have a Pα-name pi
for it, and let pi = (^ι,Pι) G Pa * Qa which by the usual thing for composition
of forcing, is as required.

460 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
Case 3. a limit.
Choose an for n < ω such that /? = QI < . . . αn < αn+ι < . . . αn G N and
We define by induction on n < ω,n > 1, qn G PQn, gn+ι fαn = <?n,
#ι is given and qn+ι is obtained from qn by the induction hypothesis, with
p, <?n, ςn+ι, αn, αn+ι here standing for p, q^p^a.β there.
Let {(An, xn) : n < ω) be a list of all pairs (A, x), where A is a Pα-name of
a subset of T*, x G Γ/ and A is in AT; let (Jn : n < ω) be a list of all pre-dense
subsets of Pα which belong to TV. Let
Pi=VΛ n4nΛΛ n(V r^ nnNθΛ Λn<JVίP ^ Pαntf :plh P α "y G An"
for some y <τ* £n} V \f{qn Λ l\r^jT 
: J' C N Π Pα,,7 is definable in
(TV, {y : y < x}) and ^n Λ f\r^r lhPα "xn ^ An"}].
There are two facts on pi we have to prove:
(A) Pl G Pα = Flim^jPi, i.e., f\i<a(^ θ(Pi] 
¥ Pl (as clearly Pl has the
right form),
(B) (i)', (ii)
7, (iii)' (of Θα above) hold.
For proving both facts we do the following. We assume everything is in
some countable transitive model M (or M => V, V => V* , in V * we have
|ίf(λ)
v| is countable which is easy by forcing).
Let pt ,<?t be as in (i)
7 (the "moreover" version).
We let Gαι C Pαι = P^ be generic (i.e., M-generic) such that p^\β, q^ G
Gai
We shall find Ga^ C Pα(#) such that for each n the set Gα(slc) Π PQ:^ is
generic (for (M, Pαn)), and the truth values it gives to all p G \Jn<ω Pan make
Pi Λp^ true (so we have, in V, a model exemplifying Λΐ<α(*) ^1^1 ^ "'(Pi
 ΛP^)
(-fact (A)), andGαι C Ga(^.
As for fact (B), clause (B) (ii)
; holds trivially by the definition of pi (i.e.,
Λ n(Vr€Jn r)) Similarly the last conjunct takes care of (B) (iii)'.
The "moreover" phrase of (B) (i)' holds by the free choice of p^q^ (and
the way C?αι,Gα(#) are chosen), hence p\\β = q\\ the other inequality follows
by pi's definition. So it is enough to find Gα(*).
We define by induction Gan,pn such that (as in the proof of 2.2):

§4. Independence Results 
461
(1) Gan C Pan,Gan C Gan+1j
(2) Gan is PQτι-generic over M,
(3) pn < Pn+l,PO = P^Pn G Pα Π W,
(4) pn is compatible (in Pa) with every member of G0ίn^qn G Gttτι,
(5) p3n+ι is > ςft for some ς£ e Jn Π N,
(6) psn+2 f- AΦn or psn+2 ' — 'fn for some τn G Φn, where (Φn : n < ω) is a
list of all countable Φ C Pα, Φ G A/',
(7) in M[GαJ for every A G W[GαJ, A C Γ* we have [x G T5* &x G A -*
(3y < x)y G A] holds (^n G Gan do the job),
(8) PSn+3 Il-Pβ "(3y < Xn)y € An" OΓ p3n+3 Λ Λr€j7 Γ lhPα "^ ^ 4n" , for
some J", such that ^7 C Gατι_15 and J' is definable in (A/", {y : y <^* xn})
(remember {(An, xn) : n < ω} list the pairs (A, x), A G N a Pα-name of a
subset of T*, and x G T£.)
As in the proof of 2.2, this suffices [for J as in (8), use the conjunct
corresponding to J U {p3n+3J in p\\. The only nontrivial part in the definition
is taking care of (8). So let n = 3k + 2,pn, Gαn, be defined, and we shall define
pn+ι,Gan+ί. We define:
Al = {y G T* : there is r G Pα,r > pn, which is compatible with every
member of Gan(— the name of the generic subset of Pan) such that
HhPα «yeAk
n}.
Clearly A\. is a Pατι-name (as we use GOLn in the definition but not Gan+ι)
and if pn fαn < r G PQ,^ then:
(*) r Ihp^ "y φ A\
n implies r Λp n lhpατι "y £ Afc".
However the inverse implication does not follow. Now if we can choose pn+ι>
such that pn < pn+ι G Pa Π Ar,pn+1 compatible with every member of Gan
(equivalently of Gan Π N) such that pn+i lhpα "y G Afc" for some y <τ* Xfc 5
then we can proceed to define Gan+1 with no problem.

462 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
So we assume that there is no such pn+ι and let pn+ι — pn. Let
J = {-πr : r G Pan Π N , r lhpβn "y G A[
n for some y <τ* xk}.
Clearly J is definable in (N, {y : y <τ* Zfc}), J C Pttrι Π AT, and J C Gttτι (as
if (-<r) G JΓ, (~τ) ^ Gατι then r G <jατι so we would not have arrive here), and
Pn < Pn+1 € Pa Π N and pn+ι G Pa/Gaτι so it is enough to prove
(**) Pn Λ tfn Λ Λr(E^ r !hpα "Xfc ^ Ak".
Now Aj. is a Pατι-name of a subset of T* (and it belongs to JV), so by the
choice of qn:
qn ll-pβn "a* € ^ -> (3y <τ* χ*)y e ^".
However for each y <τ* Xk,
Jy = {re Pan : r lhpaτι «r G ^" or r \^Pan "y ^ 4"}
is a dense subset of POLn which belongs to N hence Jy Π AT is pre-dense above
gn (in Pttn) (as y G A/"). So qn forces that if y G ^(y <τ* Xfc) then some
r G v7y Π AT is in the generic subset of P0ίn ) and r ll~pαn "y G A*k". Hence
Qn Λp n G Pα forces that: if xk G A^, then necessarily x^ G AJ[ (see (*)) hence
some y <τ* ^/c is in A£. Hence some r G J^ Π AT for which r IHpαrι "y G A\." is
in the generic set , and clearly -ir G J'. So clearly (as pn G ,7) gn Λpn Λ Λr€s7 r
forces that: x/e G Afc leads to a contradiction (as r and -«r are incompatible)
so it forces x^ ^ A^ i.e. (**) holds as promised, so we have succeeded to define
Pn+ι — PS/C+S as required. There is no problem to define Gan+l, so we finish
proving (8) hence the theorem. 
U4.7
4.8 Conclusion. Assume 5 C ω\ is co-stationary. For some forcing notion P,
not collapsing NI, in V
p we have: every Aronszajn tree is 5 — si-special, but
some Aronszajn tree T* is not 5* — si-special for any 5* C ω\ \ S stationary,
moreover for every antichain X of T*, rk(T) \ 5 is not stationary. Also there is
no Souslin tree. Assuming 2^° = 2
1*
1, 2
Kl = ^2 we have: P is proper ^2-c.c. of
cardinality ^2-

§4. Independence Results 
463
Remark. S is co-stationary - otherwise it is not interesting, but there is no
other restriction e.g. 5 may be empty. See more 4.9(2).
Proof. Trivial by the previous Theorems 4.6, 4.7, but note that for ensuring in a
transparent way that T* remains an Aronszajn tree we would start the iterated
forcing by Q(T*, S). As for the K2-chain condition, see VIII §2. Remember also
that our forcings are proper and proper forcings preserves stationarity of subset
of ω\ (see III). In more details, by some preliminary forcing without loss of
generality V \= "0^ + 2*
1 = K2" and let T* be a Souslin tree. We can define
an Ni-free iteration (Pi, Qj : i < ω2, j < ω2) as in 4.7, such that:
(a) g0 = Q(T*,S)
(b) each Qa satisfies one of the following:
(α) Qa is proper and (T*, 5)-preserving of cardinality NI.
(β) for some P^-name of an antichain Ia of T*, rk(Jα) Π S = 0 and
Qa = Qc\ub(ωι \ rk(Jα)) = {g : for some i < ω\ g is a function from
i + 1 to {0,1}, g~
l({l}) closed and included in ω\ \ rk(Jα)}.
(c) for every 7 < u;2 and P7-name I of an antichain of T* such that \\-py
"rk(Jα) Π S = 0", for some β < ω2, Iβ = I (and 7 G (/3,ω2) and
\\-pβ "Qβ = Qciub(ωι\τk(ir).
(d) for every 7 < ω2 and P7-name T of an ωi-tree for some β < α;2 we have
"~p/32 "Q0 = Q(Tβι S)ι Tβ is an Aronszajn tree, and if T is an Aronszajn
tree (in V
pβ) theπTβ = T".
Now:
(i) Pa (and Pa/Pβ for β < a) is 5-proper [Why? as in both cases in (b), Qa
is iS-proper]
(ii) Pa is (Γ*,5)-preserving [Why? By 4.7].
(iii) Pa does not collapse KI [Why? By (ii) as S C ω\ is co-stationary.]
(iv) in V
Pa (if α > 0) T* is an Aronszajn tree [Why? Q0 ensures it: if h* =
(J{h : (3f)((h,f) 
6 GQo}}, f* = U{/ : (3Λ)[(Λ,/) € GQo]}, Dom(Λ*) =
{
a(j) 
'• J' < ωι} is increasing and continuous (by density) we have: /* is a
function with domain Ui<ωι
 Th (<*(i)) and x G Th*(a(i)) ^ ^(
x)
 G α(*) x ω»

464 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
[x G Dom(/*)&y E Dom(/*)&x <τ* y =» f * ( x ) ^ /*(!/)] and i e 5 =*
Q/(Ϊ) = i on 5. So by Fodor's lemma, T* has no uncountable antichains).]
(v) We can define (Pi,Qj 
: i < ω%,j < ω^} to satisfy condition (a), (b),
(c), (d). [The least trivial point is to ensure an instance of condition (d),
given by the bookkeeping, which is fine as for Aronszajn tree T, Q(Γ, 5)
is proper (by 4.4.) and (T*, 5)-preserving by (4.6). We succeed in having
the bookkeeping as 2
Hl = ^2-]
(vi) Pω2 satisfies the ^2~
c c [Why? As in III, using "(T*,5)-preservance" here
similarly to the way we use "5-properness" there. Remember we have
assume V N <>KI hence 2
H° = NI ]
(vii) Pω2 collapses no cardinal and changes no cofinality.
(viίi) in V
Pω*, T* is 5-sί-special [Why? use Qo]
(ix) in V
Pωι, for every antichain J of T*, rk(I) \5 is non-stationary (remember:
rk(J) - {rk(z) : x e I}) [Why? by condition (c)]).
(x) in V
Pω2, every c^i-Aronszajn is 5-sί-special [Why? By clause (d) and the
definition of Q(Γ, 5)]
(xi) in V
PuΊ there is no α i-Souslin tree provided that [Why? By 3.4(1) and
clause (x) above when S is stationary or 4.4(2).]
(xii) Pa preserve stationarity of subsets of α i, moreover is proper. [Why? It is
(α;ι\5)-proper by its being (Γ*, 5)-preserving clause (ii), and it is 5-proper
by clause (i)]
Putting together (i)—(xii) we have clearly 
finished. 
U4.8
4.9 Concluding Remarks.
(1) We can ask: can we do it with G.C.H. and can we get independence of other
variants of "every Aronszajn tree is non-Souslin, special, etc." but we have not
tried. For G.C.H. it is natural to use a variant of the forcing used in V §6 for
the consistency of G.C.H. + SH with ZFC.
(2) By the definition of the forcing Q(T, 5); and by 3.5(2) (applied to an almost
subtree), in 4.8 we get that every Aronszajn tree is 5^-special for some S^ (the
range of the generic /ι). So for S empty, we get: every Aronszajn tree is S^-

§4. Independence Results 
465
special for some S^ (equivalently ft-special for some h : ω\ —•> ω\) but some tree
is not 5* — si-special for any stationary S* C,ω\.
(3) Note that case (/?) in 4.7, is needed for the part of conclusion of 4.8
saying: for no antichain X C T* is rk(J) \ S stationary (we are adding a closed
unbounded subset of ω\ disjoint to any such rk(2") \ 5). Waving this we can
omit (β) in 4.7.
(4) Abraham noted that "T is ft-special for some ft" is equivalent to "T is 5 —r-
special for some closed unbounded S C ω\\ Note that we can define S — P-
special for every partial order P, and if c^ G P(i < ω\) implies (3i < j < ω\)
Oίi < OLj then "T S - P-speciaΓ implies "T is not Souslin". Note also that
11S — r-special for some closed unbounded 5" implies ω\ — M x Q-special [R-
reals, Q-rationals, the order-lexicographic]. So we have proved, e.g., "every
Aronszajn tree is ω\ — R x Q special" does not imply "every Aronszajn tree is
special".
(5) We can also try to get a model of ZFC where, e.g,
(A) (for some stationary co-stationary S C. ωι) every Aronszajn tree is
S — si-special, but some Aronszajn tree T* is not ft-special for any ft;
or
(B) there is no Souslin tree but some Aronszajn tree is not /ι-special for
any h.
For (A) it is natural to define Q
f(Γ,5) = {(ft,/) : (ft,/) 
<G <2(Γ,S),
Dom(/) C U/ι(cθ=α^cJ ^ut ^ ^
s tne uni°n of ^o disjoint copies of T*, so
Q(T, 5) cause "T* is ft-special for some ft".
(6) We can generalize Definition 4.5. Let M = (Ma : a < ωι) be a sequence of
countable models, the universe of Ma is 7^, 7α(α < ωι) increasing continuous,
and let φ(x, y, U) be a quantifier free formula, where x, y are individual variables
and U is a monadic predicate. We call a forcing notion (M, </?)-preserving
if for λ large enough and N a countable elementary submodel of (jff(λ),£),
P G 7V,p G TV, there is # > p which is (N, P)-generic and, letting δ = N Π ω\\

466 
IX. Souslin Hypothesis Does Not Imply "Every Aronszajn Tree Is Special"
if x e Mδ+ι and (MA G N)(3y G Mδ)φ(x,y, A)
then
q Ihp "(VΛ 6 ΛΓ[G])(3y 6 Mδ)φ(x,y,A).
(7) Note that if a(i) < ω\ is (strictly) increasing continuous in i, T is an ω\-
tree, /ι is a function, Dom(fr) = U«ω^α(<+i)> [
χ e ^a(t+i) =^ ^(
x) < a(0 x ^]
and /ι(x) = h(y) =Φ -«(x <τ y), ί/ien there is /ι* : \Ji<ω Tα(ί+i) —> Q such that
(*) x,y € Dom(/ι*)&£ <τ y => /ι*(x) ^ Λ*(τ/) and even (^lί)"
1" x, 2/ G
Dom(/ι*)&x <τy=> h*(x) < h*(y).
The proof with (*) is similar to the proof of 3.5(2). So to derive (*)+ first prove
with (*) and then use 3.5(1).

X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
§0. Introduction
We weaken the notion of proper to semiproper, so that some important prop-
erties (the most important is not collapsing NI, being preserved by some itera-
tions) still hold for this weaker notion. But the class of semiproper forcing will
also include some forcings which change the cofinality of a regular cardinal > NI
to NO- We will also describe how to iterate such forcings preserving semiproper-
ness. So, using the right iterations, we can iterate such forcings without col-
lapsing NI. As a result, we solve the following problems of Friedman, Magidor
and Abraham respectively, by proving (modulo suitable large cardinals) the
consistency of the following with G.C.H.:
(1) for every 5 C N2, 5 or N2 \ S contains a closed copy of α i,
(2) there is a normal precipitous filter D on ^2, {S < ^2 : cf(<5) = #0} G £>,
(3) for every A C N2ί {^ < ^2 : cf (ί) = K0, δ is regular in L[£n^4]} is stationary.
However, the countable support iteration does not work, so we introduce the
revised countable support. Though it is harder to define, it satisfies more of
the properties we intuitively assume iterations satisfy and is applicable for the
purpose of this chapter.

468 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
Notation.
Ord is the class of ordinals, Car the class of cardinals, ICar the class of
infinite cardinals, UCar = ICar \ {No} and RCar the class of infinite regular
cardinals, SCar = RCar U {2}, RUCar = RCar Π UCar, and we let
« = {δ < Kα : cfί -
§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS
(Revised Countable Support)
Iterated forcing with countable support is widely used since Laver [LI]. One of
its definitions is that at the limit stage with cofinality N0 we take the inverse
limit, and at the limit stage with cofinality > NO we take the direct limit.
Another formulation is given in Definition III 3.1. However, the applications,
as far as we remember, are for forcing notions which preserve the property "the
cofinality of δ is uncountable" , and in fact are E-proper, for some E which is
a stationary subset of «S<N0(L)£7).
However, in our case we are interested just in forcing notions which do
change some cofinality to NQ. In these cases, we cannot break the iterated
forcing into an initial segment and the rest (i.e., break (Pi,Qι : i < a) into
(Pi,Qi 
: i < β)) and (Pi/Pp,Qi 
: β < i < a)). The reason is that maybe
the first forcing changes the cofinality of some 5, β < δ < a to N0; but then
Pδ/Pβ is not the inverse limit of (Pi/Pβ, Qi'.β<i<δ), and lhPβ "(Pi/Pβ, , Q» :
β < i < α) is not a CS iteration" . In fact, as every p G P§ has domain a bounded
subset of 5, if Ihp^ "αn E (/?,δ),cun < αn+ι,ί = \J αn, and (pn^ : i < λ) is a
n<ω
sequence of pairwise incompatible conditions in Q^n or just in Pan+l/Pan i e
Pαrι-names of members of Pan+ι/Qpan"
 
an<^ we let r : α; -^ λ be τ(n) — i if
Pn,i[Qpδ n Pβ] belongs to Gpδ or there is no such i and we let r(n) — 0, then
\\-pδ "τ is a function from ω onto λ -f 1". So if each Qi has two incompatible
members and δ is divisible by cj
2, then P§ will collapse KI and even ^°v β
for β<δ.

§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS 
469
Hence we suggest another iteration, RCS (revised countable support),
which seems to be the reasonable solution to this dilemma.
The essence of the solution is that a name of a condition is really a
condition. More exactly, in countable support iteration a condition may be
{(/?, q)} such that q is a P^-name of a member of Qβ, so q is a name but β is
a "real" ordinal. But now we allow β to be a name. But a name with respect
to which forcing notion? We would like to use Pα-names, but then we get a
vicious circle, defining what is a condition of Pa using P^-names. So we can
allow P7-names β for some 7 < α, such that Ihp^ "7 < β < α", and then allow
a Pγ-name of condition as above etc (this is the successor case in clause (B) of
Definition 1.2(1), and shall use it freely in later sections). The exact definition
appears below; though it has a somewhat cumbersome definition, it seems to
conform better to our intuitive idea of iteration. A first version of it can found in
[Sh:119]. For other realizations of this (and alternatives to §1 here) see [Sh:250],
which is redone here in Chapter XIV. In XIV §1 we deal with /ς-RS. There, all
the induction on 7 disappears as K, > NI makes it unavailable. An alternative
way is XIV 2.6=[Sh:250, 2.6] where we simplify matters by demanding, e.g., for
Q-named ordinal ζ that: q lh"C = ξ" => q\ξ Ih "ζ = f", the price is the loss of the
associativity law (see 1.1A(1)), this makes the treatment later less elegant, but
does not cause real damage as far as we know: i.e. we cannot restrict inductive
proofs to the cases the length δ of the iteration being 1, 2, ω, ωi, K inaccessible,
but rather have 1, successor, for some a < δ, p\a Ih cf(ί) = K0 (where we are
interested in the forcing above p) etc. As things are, we need to consider in e.g.
l.l(B), not only r G Pξ but also r e P^+i except when £ -f 1 = α (to avoid
vicious circle), hence we have 7 = /3 +1 <aoi'j = β = a — 1 there. Compared
to the previous (i.e. [Sh:b]) version, for smoothness we essentially complete the
Qi's and we also give (for completeness) the equivalent outside definition of
Q-named ordinals (and conditions (1.3(2))).

470 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
1.0 Remark.
(1) If PI = PO * Qo, x a Pi-name, G0 C P0 generic, then in V[Go], x can
be naturally interpreted as a Q0-name, called x/Go, which has a P0-name
x/Go or X/PO; but usually we do not care to make those fine distinctions.
(2) Using Q — (Pi,Qί : i < α), Pα will mean Rlim Q (see Definition 1.1).
(3) If D is a filter on a set J,£> G V, V C T/t (e.g., yt = y[G]) then in an
abuse of notation, D will denote also the filter it generates (on J) in V^.
(4) Formally, if Ihp0 "Qo is a forcing notion " then PO *Qo is a class, but this is
for superficial reasons. We can demand that the set of members of Q0 (in
V
p°) is a cardinal, and use only "canonical" P0-names (as in 1.1 (B)), or
restrict ourselves to members of some H(χ). In the iteration in this section
(see 1.1), writing |P|, we mean |P/ « | (see I 5.5). We may use instead
d(P), the density character, which is defined as Min{|P'| : P' C P, Vp G
P 3p' G P'\p < p'}} or the essential density d!(P) = Min{|P'| : for some
P", P <> P", P dense in P" and P' C P" and (Vp G P)(3p
; G P')^ ll-p-
"p G Gp//"]} (we say P
1 is essentially dense in P; this means it is dense in
the Boolean completion of P). The change does not make much difference.
(5) T>κ is the closed unbounded filter on K.
(6) For a forcing notion Q, an almost member q of Q is {(p^, qι) : i < i*}
such that [pi, ^ G Q] &[pi,pj compatible => <fo = <£,], and for r G Q, q < r
means r \\-Q "for every i < i* if pi G GQ then ^ G GQ"; if q', q" are
almost members of Q we define: g' < q" iff (Vr G Q}[q" < r => g' < r]. If,
as we normally agree, 0g G Q is minimal in Q then we can identify r G Q
and the almost member {(0q, r)}. The set of almost members of Q will
be denoted by Q (this is in fact just the completion of Q but if p, q G Q
are equivalent (i.e. Ih "p G GQ <-* q G GQ" then in Q, p < <? < p so they
can be identified).
(7) Note that an almost member of Q is equivalent to a member of Q, but is
not a real almost member, but we usually ignore the distinction.
(8) See more on why the iteration is good in XI §1.

§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS 
471
1.1 Definition. We define and prove the following (A), (B), (C), (D), Def.
1.2 and claims 1.3(1), 1.4, by simultaneous induction on a (also for generic
extensions of V):
(A) Q — (Pi, Qi : i < a) is an RCS iteration (RCS stands for revised countable
support).
(B) a Q-named ordinal (or [7, α)-ordinal), (above a condition r).
(C) a Q-named condition (or [7, α)-condition), and we define gf£, q\{ξ} for a
<5-named [7, α)-condition q and ordinal ξ and they are a member of Pξ
and a Pξ-name of a member of Qξ respectively; of course ξ G [7, a] (and
ξ G \j, OL) respectively).
(D) the RCS-limit of Q,RJimQ which satisfies PI <£ RlimQ for every i < a
and p\ξ, p\{ξ} for ξ < α, p e RlimQ.
(A) We define "Q is an RCS iteration"
a = 0 : no condition.
a is limit: Q = (Pi, Qi : i < a) is an RCS iteration iff for every β < α, Q\β is
one.
a = β 4-1 : Q is an RCS iteration iff Q\β is one, Pβ = Rlim (Q\β) and Qβ is
a Pβ-name of a forcing notion.
(B) We define "ζ is a Q-named [7, α:)-ordinal of depth T above r" by
induction on the ordinal T (and α = £gQ).
The intended meaning is an (RlimQ)-name of an ordinal of a special kind,
however Rlim Q is still not defined. So we use the part already known.
For T = 0 : "£ is a Q-named [7, α)-ordinal of depth T above r" means ζ
is a (plain) ordinal in [j, α), i.e., j < ζ < α,r G P£+I; but if £ + 1 =0: then
r GP C.
For T > 0 : "C is a Q-named [j, α)-ordinal of depth T above r" means that
for some β < α, (letting 7 = /3 + l i f / 3 - h l < α : and 7 = /? otherwise) r G P7,
and for some antichain J of P7, pre-dense above r, I = {pi 
: i < IQ} C P7,
{Ti : i < i0} and {Ci : i < io}, we have P7 N "(rf7) < p^" (for simplicity), ft is
a Q-named [ max{j, /?}, α)-ordinal of depth Ύ; above p<, T^ < T, and C is C< if

472 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
Pi and r (i.e., if p^r will be in the generic set then ζ will be £$; this is informal
but clear, see formal version in 1.2(1)).
Without T : We say ζ is a Q-named [j, a)-ordinal above r, if it is such for
some depth.
Without r : r = 0.
Similarly, we omit "[j, α) — " when j — 0.
(C) We define "<? is a Q-named [j, α)-condition of depth T above r" and
also q\{ξ},q\ξ and the Q-named [j, α)-ordinal ζ(q) associated with q.
The definition is similar to (B).
For T = 0 : We say "# is a Q-named [j, α)-condition of depth T above r"
if for some ordinal ζ", j ' < ζ < a and q is a P^-name of a member of Qζ (see
1.0(6)), r G PC+I but if ζ -f 1 = α then r G PC and for simplicity q is above
r \{ζ} i.e. if C + K α then r \ζ lhPζ « in Qc, r\{ζ} < f 
(note: rfC € PC, r KC}
is a member of Qζ). We let
9 
if ί > C + 1
notes: 0 G PQ and remember 1.0(7). Finally we let ζ(q) = ζ. [What if we
wave "q above rf{C}"? Then ξ — ζ 4- 1 need special attention as in Qf£, r
may not be in Pζ so we have to transfer the information of q to "allowable"
form, so q\ξ depend also on r; so q should also tell us who is r or require
r\ζ !h [Qc
 N rKC} < f or we should write q\rξ, q\r{ξ}.}
For T > 0: We say q is a Q-named [j, α)-condition of depth T above r,
if for some β < a (letting 7 = / ? - t - l i f / 3 f l < α and 7 = β otherwise) for
some Q-named [j, α)-ordinal of depth T above r, ζ, defined by /3, 7, {pi : i <
io} ζ Pγ,{T^ : i < ZQ}, {ζi ' i < io}, we have for each i < i0 a Q-
named
[ max{/3, j},α)-condition g^ of depth T^ above r\Jpi (see clause (c) in (D)

§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS 
473
below), so informally ζ(qi) = G, and q is qi if Pi and r are in the generic set of
P7).
We then let ζ(q) = ζ.
Now we define q\ξ and <?ί{ξ}; [really, we can just replace ^ by qi \ξ, q^ \{ξ}
respectively. In order to be pedantic, we need the following]. We define q\ξ as
follows (below we ask r G \J£<ξ ^ε+i, because if ξ is a successor, r G Pξ is a
reasonable situation, if ξ a limit ordinal - not). Ifr G \Jε<ξ Pε+ι and β + 1 < ξ,
then q\ξ is defined like q replacing qi by qi \ξ. If r G \Jε<ξ Pε+ι, β + 1 = ξ = α,
then #Γ£ is g. If r G Uε<£ ^e+ι> /? + ! = £ < α then q\ξ is the following P^-name
of a member of Qβ'>
if r\β G GP/3 then ?fξ is {(p<r{)9},g<) : Pi\β eGPβ,i< iG} G Q.
If r G Uε<ξ
 pε+ι> /? + !>£ or r<£ Uε<ξ Pε+i then: gίξ is 0 (or not defined).
Similarly for q\{ξ} If r G Pξ+i (or r G Pξ), Ί < ξ then ςf{£} is defined like
q replacing qi by qi\{ξ} If r G Pξ+i, β < 7 = ξ 4- 1 (hence /? = ξ < α) then
gf{^} is the following P^-name of a member of Qp' {(r\{β} ^Pi\{β},qi\{β}) :
Pzf/? ^ Gp/3 and r\β G P/? and i < i0}. If r G P^+i, /? = 7 = f + 1 (actually
is ruled out) or 7 > ξ -f 1 then q\{ξ} is 0. If r φ Pξ+i, then q\{ξ} is 0 (or not
defined).
[The definitions of C(tf ΓO» C(^Γ{^}) are left to the reader].
We omit T and/or "[7, α) -" if this holds for some ordinal T and /or j = 0.
We omit r when r — 0(= 0p0) We leave the definition of q\[ζ, ξ) to the reader.
(D) We define RlimQ as follows:
if a = 0 : RlimQ is trivial forcing with just one condition: 0 = 0p0
if a > 0 : we call q an atomic condition of /ftimQ, if it is a Q-
named
condition.
The set of conditions in Pα = RlimQ is
{p : p a countable set of atomic conditions; and for every β < α, p\β =
{r\β :r G p} G P/j, and p\β \\-Pβ "p\{β}
 
d= {r\{β} 
: r G p} has an upper
bound in 
"}-

474 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
The order is inclusion, (but in later sections we sometimes ignore the
difference between p < q and p\\- "q G G")
Now we have to show:
(a) Pβ <£ RlimQ (for β<ά). [By 1.4(1) below.]
(b) For β < α, any (Q f/3)-named [j, /3)-ordinal (or condition) above r is a Q-
named [j, α)-ordinal (or condition) above r. [Why? Obvious.]
(c) If ξ < α, q is a Q-named (atomic) condition above r, r G Uε<£ ^' t^ιen #tf
is a (Qfξ)-named (atomic) condition above r. [Why? Obvious.]
(d) If βι < βz < α, p G Pβ2 \ Pβί, p < q in P^2 then 4 £ P/?1 (though it may
be equivalent to one).
(e) If ξ < α, q a Q-named atomic condition above r, r G |J P£ ίfoen Ihp "ς ί{ξ}
ε<C
is a member of Q ".
~ t
1.1A Explanation. l)What will occur if we simplify by letting in l.l(B),
for T > 0, 7 = β always? Nothing happens, except that 1.5(3) is no longer
true; though this is used later, we can manage without it too, though less
esthetically; for variety, XIV 2.6 = [Sh:250, 2.6] is developed in this way (for a
generalization called tt-RS, our case is K = NI). For the case which interests us
the two definitions are equivalent - by the proof of 2.6 (here).
2) So why in l.l(B), for T > 0, we do not let 7 = β +1 always? If β +1 = α, we
fall into a vicious circle; defining P/3+ι using conditions in P0+ι; alternatively
see XIV §1.
LIB Remark. We can obviously define Q-named sets; but for conditions (and
ordinals for them) we want to avoid the vicious circle of using names which are
interpreted only after forcing with them below.
1.2 Definition.
(1) Suppose C is a Q-named [j, α)-ordinal above r, r G G C \Ji<a Pi and GπP^
generic over V (whenever i < a) (say G is in some generic extension of V).

§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS 
475
We define ζ[G] by induction on the depth: if the depth of ζ is 0, it is ζ", if
the depth of ζ is > 0, and it is defined by β, 7, {pi : i < ΐ0}, {ζi : i < z0},
{Ύi : i < IQ} as in Definition 1.1 (B) then for a unique i < i0,pi G G and
we let ζ[G] = ζi[G] (remember Ύ^ < T). (If there is no such i, it is not
defined but as we demand {pi : i < IQ} is a predense above r\Ί in PΊ above
r and 7 < a and r G G, it will be defined).
If r $ G then ζ[G] is undefined, or we can give it a default value, like oo.
For a Q-named [7, α)-condition q above r, we define q[G] similarly (with
default value 0).
(2) For ζ a Q-n&med [j, α)-ordinal above r, and q G \Ji<a Pi let q Ihg "C = ξ"
if for every G C [ji<a PI, such that each G Π P^ (i < α) is generic over V,
g G G =» ζ[G] = ξ, (similarly q \\-Q "ζ undefined".)
1.3 Claim.
(1) Suppose ζ is a Q-named ordinal [above r], (Q an RCS iteration, a =
ίg(Q)). If G C |J.<α Pi [and r G G] and each G Π P» (where i < α) is a
generic subset of Pi over V, then for some ξ, C[G] = ξ,j < ξ < &• Moreover
for some q G Pξ+i Π G we have q \\~Q "ζ = ξ" and [ξ + 1 = α =» g G Pξ].
(2) Suppose Q is an RCS iteration of length α, j < α, </?(x, y) a definition
with parameters in V and r e (Ji<a Pi such that:
(i) // G* is generic over V for some forcing notion, in V[G*] we have G C
Ui<α ^ ^
s directed, for each i < a the set G Π P$ is generic over V and
r G G then V[G] 
\= (3\x)φ(x, G) and we call this unique x, xφ[G\.
Suppose further that for such G*, G we have xφ[G] is an ordinal ζφ =
ζφ[G] e [j,α) (or it is a pair (C*,?*) = (ζφ[G\,qφ[G\), with CV[G] an
ordinal G [j, α), ^[G] G Q 
[G Π PC¥,[G]]) and r G P^tGl-f i
~C<,[^1
(ii) If G*, G,x = xφ[G] are as in (i), then for some q G GnPCv>[G]+ι Π(|Jί<α P<)
we have:
(*)? ϊ/G**, G' G y[G**] satisfy the requirements on G*, G and q G G'
then xφ[G'} = x(= xφ[G\)\ note ζx = a - 1 ^ q G Pα_ι follows,

476 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
(iii) if δ < a is limit, r G Pβ, β < δ, and G* generic over V and G G V [G*] and
r G G C \Jε<δ Pε and G Π Pε generic over V for ε < 5, ίften
either for some q G G, and x, (*)£ above holds, (so ζx < δ)
or for some βι G (/?, δ) and r*, r < r* G P/^ Π G we have:
for any β' G (βι,δ) for any r
7, #':
r* < r' G P/3/&(*)ϊ/ =» C*' > δ
Then there is a Q-named [j, α)-ordinal above r, £ [or Q-named [j, α)-condition
q] such that:
If G* is generic over V" for some forcing notion, in V[G*], G C \Ji<oePi
directed, for each i < a the set G Π Pi is generic over V and r G G ίften
x^[G] = ζ[G] [or xφ[G] — q[G] (i.e. equivalent members of Qζ[q][G][G ^
1.3 A Remark. 1) Concerning 1.3(2), of course every Q-named ordinal (or
condition) [above r] satisfies these conditions.
Proof. (1) The proof is by induction on the depth of ζ.
(2) The proof is straightforward. For notational simplicity we deal with the
case of Q-named [j, α)-ordinals only; but for easing the induction we define in
Definition 1.1 clause (B) also "extended Q-named ordinals" by just allowing ζ
also values > α (but still j < a. and now in (*)| we have ζx > a — 1 =$> q e Pa-ι
(and we stipulate for α not successor, α — 1 = α)), and so similarly in 1.3(2)(i);
clearly it suffices to prove 1.3(2). for this extension. Let β* be minimal such
that r G Pβ- we know β* < α. Let I be the set of r* G \Ji<a Pi such that:
(*)[r*] for some /3,7 we have: r < r* G PΊ,j < β < a, β < 7 < α,7 < β + 1 and
there is an extended Q-named [/?, oo)-ordinal ζ such that:
if G* is generic over V for some forcing notion, G G V[G*], G C
\Ji<a PI, G Π PΪ is generic over V for i < a and r, r* G G
thenxφ[G] = ζ[G\.

§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS 
477
Let J = {p G I : for some 7 < a we have p G PΊ \ Ue<7 ^ε and for no
T', j < 7' < 7 is there p' € J Π P7/, p
7 compatible with p (say, in P7)}. It is
enough to prove r G J, so assume that this fails. Choose χ large enough such
that Q G H(χ), G* be such that in V[G*] the cardinal 2
X becomes a countable
ordinal.
Now
(*)o If /?, 7, r* are as in (*)[r*j and r* < r** G P7 then r** € I
[this is trivial].
(*)ι If r < r* G P/?, β* <β < α, JΠ P^ \ (J7</3 P7 is pre-dense above r* in Pβ
then r* G I.
[Why? Straightforward by the inductive step in (B) of Definition 1.1].
For /?' < α, r G G C Pβ>, G generic over V, we define j!Gl = {p €
U<α P^ : P G U/3'<e<α ^/G aϊld f°Γ SOΠle Γ/ G G Wβ haVΘ P U Γ/ G T)'
(*)2 Assume r G G C P^/, G is generic over V, p G \Jp<e<aPe/G 
and for
some extended Q-named [j, cx>)-ordinal ζ' above p we have: G C G' C
\Jε<a Pε &p G G' & [for ε < α, G
;ΠPε is generic over F] => x^fC?
7] = C'fG
7].
Then p G J'
G1 . [Why? Check, using the successor case in clause (B) of Def-
inition 1.1.
We shall prove by induction on β G [/?*, Uε<α
 εl
<8) if /3* < /3(0) < /3, G0(o) C P/3(0) is generic over V, r G G^(0), G^JQ) Π J - 0
ίften there is Gβ such that [/? < α => Gβ C P^ is generic over V],
[β = a^Gp C \Ji<a P^& Λi<« ^/3 Π Pi is generic over V], G/3(0) C G^
and GβΓ] J = 0.
It suffice to prove (8), as from ® for /3 = Ue<α ε we β
e^ 1-3(2); why? there
is Gβ* C P^* generic over V, such that r G G^* and Z Π G^* = 0 (otherwise
by (*)ι applied to r* = r, /3* = /? we get r G T). Now use 0 with /3(0) = /?*,
/3 = Ue<α ε' and ^/9(o) — G^* and get G^; contradiction to the assumption (ii)

478 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
of 1.3(2), thus finishing the proof of 1.3(2).
Note that as G
0 Π X = 0 also G Π 1^ = 0.
First case: β = β* . Empty.
Second case: β — βι + 1 > β*. So by the induction hypothesis without loss of
generality β(0) = β\. Clearly, β < a (otherwise we are done). As G^(o) £ Pβ(Q)
is generic over V (and r G G^(o)), there is r* G G^(o) such that r < r* and r* Ih
"JΠ (7/3(0) = 0" So there is no r
7, r* < r' G P^Q) Π J. Is there r' G Q0(o)[G/3(o)]
incompatible with every {p\{β\} : p G P/j(o)+ι Πl, pf/3ι G G^o))}? (Note (*)0
and remember β\ = /3(0).) If so, no problem to find G^ as required; otherwise,
without loss of generality, r* forces this and by (*)ι, r* G T, contradiction.
Third case: β — a is limit. Without loss of generality in V[G*], Pα (and α) are
countable. Let in V[G*], (βn : n < ω) be increasing with limit /?, /3o = /5(0). We
define by induction on m < ω, G/3m C Pβm generic over V, increasing in n such
that: Gβm Π J = 0. Let n(0) = 0, G/30 = G0(0). For m + 1, use the induction
hypothesis. Now Um<ω Gβm is as required.
Fourth case: β — δ < a is limit. Let α* > α be an ordinal never of the form
ζφ[G\ We shall define φ'(x,y) such that for Q
f = Q\δ, r' = r,j' = j the
assumption of 1.3(2) holds: if r G G C \Jε<δ Pε and G Π Pε is generic over V
for ε < δ then:
(a) if for some q G G, q > r and x, the statement (*)£ holds then xφ[G] = x.
(b) otherwise, x^[G] = α*.
Now to see that assumption (i) of 1.3(2) holds we use assumption (iii) of
1.3(2) and also the other assumption holds. So by the induction hypothesis on
α, an extended Q'-named [j, oo)-ordinal ζ
f exists, say of depth Ύ. Looking at
1.1 (B) there is a set T of strictly decreasing finite sequences of ordinals closed
under initial segments and (ζη,Ύη,pη,βη '• η G T), where
(
α) £<>
 = £'' PO
 = r'
 τo
 the deP
th of
 £<>>
 r G p(/3<>-M)
(/?) if η is maximal in T then T^ = 0, βη < 5, ζ^ an ordinal ζη > βη,
Pri £
 p(/3,+i)
(7) if 77 G T is not maximal in T then z/ G Suc^(?7) => p^ < p^ G P(^ +χ) &> βη <

§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS 
479
A/, (PV 
- v G Sucτ(ry)) is a maximal antichain in P(/3r?+1) above pη, ζη is the
following extended Q-named [βη, oo)-ordinal above pη: if pv then it is ζy.
Suppose first: [77 maximal in T & pη \β(Q) G G/3(o) & ζη = of 
=ϊ pη £
j[
G/3(o)]]. Let T
1 = {η G T : Pt,|7?(0) G G/3(o)}; we define ζ. Just for every
maximal η G T' such that ζη = α*, "plant" a witness to p^ G J^0)!. In
details, we prove that for every 77 G T, there is a Q-named [7, α:)-ordinal £*
above p^ such that: if Gβ(Q} C G' C (J Pε & p^ G G
x & (Vε < α) (Pε Π G" is
ε<α
generic over V) then xv?[G
?/] = Ql^Ί This is shown by <-downward induction
on η G T. In the case 77 is maximal in T, then: if pη \β(Q) $. Gβ^ the demand is
quite vacuous, if ζη ^ α* we can use a Q-name of depth 0 and in the remaining
case we know that pη G Z'^0)' and this give the required conclusion. The
remaining (=second) case is 77 G Γ not O-maximal, and so use the induction
hypothesis (and as in (*)1? the successor case of clause (B), Definition 1.1).
So we have gotten a name of the right kind in V[Gβ^]^ so by (*)2 we get
a contradiction. So for some maximal η G Γ, pη\β(ύ) G Gβ^^ζη = α* and
pη φ I^
Gβ(°^. If for any such 77, {q G P§ : pη < q G 2} is pre-dense in P§/Gβ^
above pη, we again can get a witness to pη G T^
Gβ(
Q^ (reread clause (iii) of
1.3(2)), again contradiction. So some q* G P§ is > pη and is incompatible
with any q G T Π PS in Ps/Gβ^. Any G^ C P5 generic over V which include
Gβ(o) U {g*} is as required. 
DI.S
1.4 Claim. Let Q = (Pi? Q^ : z < α) be an RCS iteration, Pα = RlimQ.
(1) If β < α, then not only Pβ <> P«, but if ^ G P/3, p G PQ,, then q,p are
compatible in Pa iff ^,pf/J are compatible in Pβ. Moreover if q G Pβ,p G
P&,Pβ \= "p\β < ^" then pU ^ is a common upper bound of p,q in Pα
(even a lub, and in particular Pβ N "q\a <q").
(2) If /?, 7 are Q-named [7, £g(<5))-ordinals, then Max{/?, 7} (defined naturally)
is a Q-named [j,£g((5))-ordinal.
(3) If α = /?o 4-1, in Definition 1.1, part (D), in defining the set of elements of
Pα we can restrict ourselves to β = β$. Also in such a case, Pa = Pβ0 * Q^0
(essentially). More exactly, {pU{<?} : P ^ Pβo> Q a P/30-
name °f a member

480 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
of Qβ0} is a dense subset of Pα, and the order pi \J{qι}<ιp2 U{^2J iff
[pi < P2 (in Pβo) and P2 '^PPO "QI < Qi m Qβo"} i
s equivalent to that of
Pα, i.e., we get the same completion to a Boolean Algebra.
(4) The following set is dense in Pa : P^ = {p G Pα: for every β < α, if
Π, r2 G p, then \\-Pβ "if n \{β} / 0, r2 ί{/3} ± 0 then they are equal"}.
(5) |Pα| < (Σi<α2l
Pίl)l
Q!l, for limit α (i.e. we count conditions only up to
equivalence) .
(6) If Ihp. "|Qi| < « " , « a cardinal, then |Pi+ι| < 2'
Pil + /c (i.e. identifying
equivalent names).
(7) If Ihp. "d(Qi) < AC" then d(Pi+ι) < d(Pi) -h « (where d is density).
(8) For a limit d(Pα) < 2
Σί<«^
Pί).
Proof. Easy.
1.5 The Iteration Lemma.
(1) Suppose F is a function, then for every ordinal a there is RCS-iteration
Q = (Pi, Qi\i< αΐ), such that:
(a) for every ΐ,^ = F(Q\ί),
(b) at < a,
(c) either a^ = a or F(Q) is n°t an (Rlim Q)-name of a forcing notion.
(2) Suppose β < a, Gβ C Pβ is generic over V, ί/ien in V[G0], Q/G/? =
(Pi/Gβ,Qi 
: /? < i < α) is an RCS-iteration and Rlim (Q) = P^ *
(Rlim Q/Gβ) (essentially) .
(3) The Associative Law.
If Qξ(ξ < £(0)) is increasing and continuous, CUQ = 0, Q — (Pi,Qi : i <
is an RCS-iteration, Pξ(0) = RlimQ, then so are
and (Pi/Pa(ξ},Qi 
: a(ξ) < i < α(£ + 1));
and vice versa.

§1. Iterated Forcing with RCS 
481
(4) If Q is an RCS iteration, p e RlimQ, P( = {q e Pi : q > p\i},Q'i =
{p£Qi'.p> P\{i}} then Q = (P ,Q( : i < igQ} is (essentially) an RCS
iteration (and RlimQ' is P't ^).
Proof. (1) Easy.
(2) Pedantically, we should formalize the assertion as follows:
(*) There is a function F = F0 (= a definable class), such that for every RCS-
iteration <2, and £g(Q) = α, and β < α, FQ(Q, β) is a P^-name of Qt such
that:
a) \\-Pβ "Qt is a RCS-iteration of length a - β" .
b) P^*(RlimQ
t) is equivalent to Pα = RlimQ, by Fι(Q,/3) (i.e., Fι(Q,β)
is an isomorphism between the corresponding completions to Boolean
algebras) .
c) if β < 7 < α \\-Pβ «F0(QΓ7,)3) = ^(Q^)K7 ~ /^)" and Fι(Q,^)
extends F\(Q\Ί,β) and Fι(Qf7,/?) transfer the P7-name QΊ to a
P/3-narne of a (Rlim(Qt f(7 _ /3))-name of Q\_β (when Q
f = (Q\ •
i<Ί-β}}
The proof is by induction on α, and there are no special problems.
(3) Again, pedantically the formulation is
(**) For Q is an RCS-iteration, ίg(Q) = a$(o)j & — (&ξ '• ζ < ίW) increasing
continuous, Fs(Q,α) is an RCS-iteration Q^ of length a^0) such that:
a) F±(Q, δί) is an equivalence of the forcing notions RlimQ, RlimQt.
b) F3(Q\aζ,ά\(ζ + I)) = F3(Q,a)\ζ.
c) Q^ is the image by F4(<3fαξ,αΓ(£ + 1)) of the Paζ = Rlim(Qta^)-name
The proof again poses no special problems.
(4) Left to the reader.
1.6 Claim. If K is regular, and \Pi\ < K (or just d(Pi) < K) for every i < /
and Q — (P^, Qi : i < K) is an RCS-iteration, then:
(1) every Q-na,med ordinal is in fact a (Q |^)-named ordinal for some i < α,

482 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
(2) like (1) for Q-named conditions,
(3) P« = \Ji<KP*.
Proof. Easy.
1.7 Claim. Suppose Q — (Pi,Qi : i < δ) is an RCS-iteration, δ limit and
p € PS, and ζ is a Q-named ordinal. Then there are i < ί, and p^ G Pi+\,p\(i -f
1) < pt such that pt |h0 "ζ = i" (or pt Ih "([G] undefined " if we allow this).
The same holds for Q-named conditions (if Qi C V).
Proof. Easy. By 1.3(1).
§2. Proper Forcing Revisited
2.1 Discussion. Properness is a property of forcing notions which implies that
HI is not collapsed by forcing with P, and is preserved by countable-support
iteration (and also Hi-free iteration, see IX.). This property was introduced
in chapter III, and (see VII §3,4) many examples of forcing not collapsing
HI were shown to be proper (Hi-complete, c.c.c., Sacks forcing, Laver forcing
and more). It was argued that proper forcing is essentially the most general
property implying HI is not collapsed and preserved under iteration. So the
forcing of shooting a closed unbounded set through a stationary subset S of HI
(see Baumgartner, Harrington and Kleinberg [BHK], and III 4.4), though not
collapsing HI, is excluded as if HI = \Jn<ωSn,Sn pairwise disjoint stationary
subsets of HI and we shoot a closed unbounded subset through each ωι\Sn,
in the limit HI is collapsed. Of course we can "kill" stationary sets in a fixed
normal ideal of HI (see e.g. [JMMP]) and properness really demands somewhat
more than not destroying stationary subsets of HI (also stationary subsets of
£<N0(λ) = {A C λ : m<H0 should not be destroyed); but those seemed
technical points.
However, in Chapters III-IX we were mainly interested in forcings of
cardinality HI, so another restriction of properness was ignored: if P is proper,

§2. Proper Forcing Revisited 
483
any countable set of ordinals in Vp is included in a countable set of V. So
forcing changing the cofinality of some λ, cfλ > NI, to NO, are not included.
In fact, there are such forcings which do not collapse NI, and moreover, do
not add reals: Prikry forcing [Pr] (which changes the cofinality of a measurable
cardinal to NO)
 an(3 Namba [Nm] which changes the cofinality of N2 to NO (and
do not add reals when CH holds).
We suggest here a property of forcing, called semiproperness, such that
most theorems proved for proper forcing hold (when we use RCS-iteration)
and it includes Prikry forcing. We did not know whether there is a forcing
changing the cofinality of N2 to NO which is semiproper (i.e., provably from
ZFC), but we shall have an approximation to this, (but see XII §2).
So in this section we introduce the notion, and prove the preservation
under RCS-iteration. In this we weaken a little the assumptions: for limit J,
Qs is not necessarily semiproper, only P§+ι/Pi+ι(i < δ) is semiproper. This
change does not influence the proof, but is useful, as we can exploit the fact
that δ was a large cardinal in V. Note that the useful result is Corollary 2.8.
2.2 Definition. A forcing notion P is 5-semiproper (S a P-name of a class of
uncountable cardinals of V) if for any large enough regular λ, and well-ordering
<* of £Γ(λ), and countable TV -< (H(X), G, <*), such that P G TV, S G TV, and
for every p G P Π TV there is ς, p < q G P such that: for every cardinal K G TV
and P-name β G TV of an element of AC,
q \\-P "if « G 5 then there is A G TV, | A\
v < K, β G A"
Equivalently, if S consists of regular cardinals of V, q \\~p "if K G S then
Sup(TV n Λ) = Sup(TV[G] Π AC)" or even q II- " if cf (K)
v G 5, then Sup(TV Π AC) =
Sup(TV[<7] Π AC)"; the case "S = {Ni} is the main case.
(Note that we write A and not A, i.e., A is in V; also when K is regular in V,
without loss of generality A = 7 for some 7 < ft; this is the main case.)
We call q, under such circumstances, 5-semi-(TV, P)-generic. "Semiproper"
means "{Nι}-semiproper", and "semi-generic" means "{Nι}-semi-generic" (we

484 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
change the conventions of [Sh:b] where they mean URCar
v - semiproper,
URCar
y -semi-generic respectively (see below)).
2.2 A Remark. We could here change the definition to:
q Ihp " if K e S Π N[G\ then, letting N
f = the Skolem Hull of TV U {^}, we
have Sup(W n «) = Sup(W[G] Π «)"
(in this case every K e S is regular > N0) We have not looked into this variant.
2.2B Remark. When we write "P is UCar-semiproper" or "P is UCar-
semiproper", UCar means {δ : δ = $% or cf
y (δ) > N0} so it is a P-name.
Similarly for SCar, RUCar instead of RCar (and also NI) etc. But e.g. RUCar
v-
semiproper means the regular uncountable cardinals of V.
2.3 Claim.
(1) If P is UCar
v-semiproper, or even S-semiproper, 5 = {λ : cfλ > H0 and λ
a cardinal, in V}, or even RUCar
v-semiproper, then P is proper, and vice
versa. Moreover, in this case, q in Definition 2.2 is (A
7", P)-generic which
means: if β £ N is a P-name of an ordinal then q Ihp "/? £ AT".
(2) P is 5-semiproper iff the condition of Definition 2.2 holds for some λ > 2'
p',
and well-ordering <* iff it holds for λ = (2l
pl)+ (provided that P G H(X)).
Also, the well ordering <* is convenient but not really necessary.
(3) P is .S-semiproper iff (B
p \ {0}, >) is, where B
p is the complete Boolean
algebra corresponding to P.
(4) In Definition 2.2, for K > N0, and κ> |P|, the condition is trivially satisfied
by any <?, so only 5 Π {AV : K0 < K < \P\} is relevant.
(5) If P <> Q, S a P-name and Q is 5-semiproper Λen P is S'-semiproper.
(6) If P is 5-semiproper, lhP
 uκ e 5", cf(/c) > N0, ΐften lhP "cf(«) > K0". In
particular, if K^ G S then K]
7 - N^
P.
(7) If Ihp "5
1 C 5
2", P is ^-semiproper then P is S ^semiproper (similarly
for semi generic).
Proof. Easy. 
Cb.s

§2. Proper Forcing Revisited 
485
2.4 Definition.
(1) A property is preserved by RCS-iteration, provided that for any RCS-
iteration Q = (Pi,Qi : i < α), if Qi has the property (in V
Pi) for each i,
then Rlim Q has the property.
(2) A property is strongly preserved by RCS-iteration provided that, for Q —
(Pi, Qi : i < a) an RCS-iteration, we have
(a) if for every 7 < β < a such that 7 not a limit ordinal, Pβ+ι/PΊ has
the property then RlimQ has the property and
(b) if a = β + 1 > 7, Pβ/PΊ and Qβ have the property, then Pa/PΊ has
the property.
(3) We can replace RCS-iteration by any other kind of iteration in this defi-
nition.
2.4A Remark. In VI 1.6, 1.7, many properties were shown to be preserved
by CS iteration. In fact we have proved they are strongly preserved for CS
iteration - see VI 0.1 (B) and even RCS iterations.
2.5 Claim.
(1) In Definition 2.4(1), (2) it suffices to consider the two-step iteration and
the case where a is a regular cardinal and: 7 < β < a implies Pβ/PΊ has
the property (where for 2.4(2) 7 is zero or a successor ordinal).
(2) If a property is strongly preserved by RCS-iteration then the property is
preserved by RCS-iteration.
(3) In (1), for a regular, we can add: \β < a ^\\-pβ "α is a regular cardinal"]
provided that: Pa has the property iff {p G Pa : Pa \{q : q > p} has the
property } is dense.
Proof. Easy, by induction on α; for (1) use the associative law 1.5(3). For (3)
use 1.5(4). 
Π2.5
2.6 The Semi-Properness Iteration Lemma.
(1) "Q is S^-semiproper" is strongly preserved by RCS-iteration for

486 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
S® = {^} U {K : in V
Q we have "« = cf/c > H0"},
so it is a Q-name.
(2) Suppose Q = (Pi,Qi : i < a) is an RCS-iteration, for successor j < a
for arbitrarily large non limit i < j, Pj/Pi is 5^-semiproper (and 5^ is
defined, §ij is a P^-name). Let (5 is a Pα-name):
5 = {λ : λ an uncountable regular cardinal, and for every i non-limit we
have: cί(X)
v 
* G Sij for every j G [i,α), for which 5^- is well defined }.
Then Pa = RlimQ is 5-semiproper provided that:
(Cl) for every limit δ < a there is ξ < <5, such that
lhpξ "[cf(ί) = HO or for every ξ <i < j < δ : if 5*j is defined
then Ihp./Pί "cf(£)
vPί eSij}".
(3) In (2) we can weaken (Cl) by replacing ξ by a (Qfί)- named [0,5)-ordinal
ξ i.e. if p G Pξ+i, p ll~ "^ = ξ" then, for ξ < i < j < 5, i non-limit we have,
p\ξ lhPξ « [cfί - Ho orpfK.J) »-p,/p,
 u(cfδ)
yPi 
G 5,,/']", and replace S
by 5 = {λ: for every non-limit i < α and j G [i,α) (such that 
Sij[Gij]
well defined), the cofinality of λ as computed in V
Pi is > HO and belongs
to5<fJ [Gp.]}.
(4) In part (2) we can omit the condition (Cl) and replace "for arbitrarily large
non-limit ί < j" by "for every i$ < j there is a Q-named [i0, j)-ordinal i
forced to satisfy the demand on i".
Remark.
(1) For i < a non-limit clearly 5i,ΐ+ι is defined, so Qi is 5^_|_ι-semiproper.
(2) In 2.6(2) and (3), in (Cl) we can replace "for every" by "for arbitrarily
large" assuming Sij decreases with j.
(3) See XII§1 for an alternative proof, using games.

§2. Proper Forcing Revisited 
487
Proof. (I) Follows from (2).
(2) We prove the theorem by induction on α, for all Q's and even for Q's in
forcing extensions of V.
Let T = { ( i , j ) : S^ is defined } (here T G V).
Note that for any β < 7 < aβ non-limit, Q\[β^) = (Pi/Pβ,Qi 
: β <
ί < 7) satisfies the hypothesis on Q. Let λ be big enough, <* a well-ordering
of #(λ), Q G #(λ), N X (#(λ), G, <*), N countable, 5 G N, Pa G N hence
w.l.o.g. Q G N [because (ίf(λ),G,<*) t= "there is Q, an RCS-iteration as in
2.6(2) such that Pa = RlimQ", as Pa G N -< (#(λ),G,<*) there is such a
Q in N]. Similarly w.l.o.g. (Sij 
: ( i , j ) G T) belongs to N. Furthermore, let
p G Pα Π N.
Case A. a non-limit.
The cases α = 0, α = 1 are too trivial to consider. For α > 1 by the
induction hypothesis on a and 1.5(3) we can assume a = 2.
So by 2.3(3)+1.4(3) w.l.o.g. P2 = <2o * Qi, and let p = (p0,Pι) G PI Π TV.
As clearly Qo ^ N, there is #o G Qo> Po < ^o, which is SΌ,ι-semi (A/", P)-generic.
To help us in understanding let GO C QQ be generic, QQ G GQ. As <* is a well-
ordering of -ff(λ), (ίf(λ)[Go], -ff(λ), G, <*) has definable Skolem functions, and
a definable well-ordering (and note: H(X)[Go\ is -ff(λ) of the universe V[Go] as
we know that any member of H(\)[GQ] has a name in -ff(λ)).
Now 7V[G0] is the Skolem Hull of N in (ff(λ)[G0], G, <*). So: as pι[G0] G
7V[G0] (because pi, GO G N[GQ]), Qι = Pι/G0 is SΊ,2-semiproper (i.e. SΊ,2[G0]-
semiproper), and Qι,pι[G0] G A^[G0] -< (ίf(λ)[G0], G, <*), there is qι G Qi
which is 5ι,2-semi (JV[G0],Oι)-generic and qι > pι[G0}. Let GI C Qι be
generic, gi G GI. Note that 5 C 5Ό,ι Π SΊ^
So if K G JV and cf(κ ) G 50,ι[G0] then as qQ is 50,ι-semi (TV, Q0)-gβneric
and go € Qo clearly Sup(7V Π K) = Sup(N[Go] Π K); and similarly if K e N and
cf
v[Gol(κ) G 5ι>2[G0,Gι] then Sup(7V[G0] n«) = Sup(7V[G0,Gι] n«). We have
described #1 knowing GO, hence there is an appropriate Qo- name ql such that
#0 I^ 
"^i i
s a
8 described above".

488 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
As S C 5o,ι Π 5ι,2 and as Go,Gι were arbitrary except that QQ G GO,
qι G GI, clearly (qo,qι) is 5-semi (Af, P2)-generic.
Case B. a a limit ordinal and there are β < a and p^ such that p\β < p^ G
Pβ andpt \\-Pβ "cf(α) = N0"
As AT -x (ίf(λ),€>, Q e N and β e N, p e N, we can assume /3 is
a successor ordinal and pt G JV, hence by 1.4(1) without loss of generality
Pfβ = ί^ Moreover by Case A it suffices to prove that Pa/Pβ,Pβ 
are S-
semiproper (for P/?, more exactly {K, : for no q G Gpβ,q lhpα "« ^ 5}|. By the
induction hypothesis this holds for P^; for Pa/Pβ (we are working in V[G0],
Gβ C Pβ generic over V, p^ G G/? by 1.5(1)) w.l.o.g. /3 — 0 so cfα = N0> and as
Q G AT, α G ΛΓ, clearly there are αn < α, αn < αn+ι, α = Un<^
 αn, and w.l.o.g.
each αn is a successor ordinal or 0 and αn G AT, QQ = β and (αn,αn+ι) G T.
Now let {(βn-, R n) : n < ω} be a list of the pairs (β,«), where K G AT and /?
a Pα-name of an ordinal < K, /? G N. We define by induction on n < ω pn, qn
such that:
(1) pn is a Pατι-name of a member of AT Π Pα,Po = P^
(2) qn G Pttn, ςn-hifαn - ^n,ςn is (Πfe<n ^«fc,αfc+1) -semi (JV,Pατι)-generic,
(3) pnfαn < ςfn, (i.e. this is forced)
(4) pn+ι lhPα "^n < 7n for some 7n a Pατι-name of an ordinal < «n, 7n G ΛΓ".
(5) gn I^Pαn "Pn < Pn+1 (in Pα)w
This is easy (ςn+ι ί[αn,αn+ι) can be constructed like qι in case A). Of
course the point is that a Pατι-name of a condition in Pαrι+ι/Pατι is essentially
a condition in PQτι+1 Now Un<α; ^ *
s as reφiired.
Case C. a a limit ordinal and for no β < α, pΐ G Pβ, p\β < p^ does
ptihp, «cf(α) = »0".
Let ξ = ξ* be as guaranteed by condition (Cl) from the hypothesis. By
case A without loss of generality ξ — 0. Let αn G AT, αn < αn+ι, (Jn<u;
α™ =
Sup(AΓ Π α) (exists, as α G AT), and α0 = 0, αn non-limit; and repeat the
previous proof getting (qn : n < ω), adding

§2. Proper Forcing Revisited 
489
(6) if r G Pn (so r is a Q-named atomic condition) then for some ra and
Pατι-name ξm < a we have
in other words for n, k < ω for some m > n and Pαm-name £m we have:
for every Gατrι C Parn generic over V to which <7m belongs, letting r be the A -th
member of pn in the canonical well ordering of pn of order type ω, we have:
either for ξ = £m[GαJ < αn , and some p
1 G GαmnPξrrι+ι,p'lhPί+1 £(r) = f" or
for some f G [αn,α)(rW[Gαn]), we havepm[Gajr(£ + 1) lhPa/Gan "C(r) - Γ
By condition (Cl) from the hypothesis and as ξ* — 0, we have qn \\-pan
 
uNΓia
is unbounded in N[Gan] Π α, i.e. {αn : m < ω} is an unbounded subset of
N[Gan] Π α". Let ςf G PSup(JVnα)> ^Γ<^n = 9n Tne new Point is tnat condition
(3) above does not immediately give pn < q, only yields (*) Pn\((Ji<ω&i) <
(Ji<ω qi But if q G G C Pα, G generic over V, then p^ = pn[G Π PΛn] is a
member of N[Gan] Π Pα, and for every Q-named condition r G p'n we know by
(6) above that for some m, ξm is a Pαm-name and letting ξ = ξm[G Π P«m]
we have p^+1 rξ lhP, «C(r) - £"- But C(r) G 7V[GαJ C 7V[G] and gn is {cfα}-
semi (7V[Gan],Pα/Pαn)-generic hence ξn[G] < sup(7V Π α) hence by (*) we
know {r} G G. This insures that: if q G G C PSup(Λrnα:)5 G generic over V and
f € Pn[Gaτι] (n < ω) (so r is a Q-named condition) then ζ(r)[G] < sup(NΓ\a).
As this holds for every r G p'n we necessarily have p'n G G [as some </* G G
forces (Vr)(r G p^ =Φ r G G). Why? As this hold; assume toward contradiction
that g* I/ "/4 G G" so, w.l.o.g. it force the negation, but you can check that
p'n U #* G Pa/Gan, contradiction].
As this holds for every appropriate G, we have q \\-pa "pn G GPo" which is
enough.
(3) A similar proof ( only we increase p to determine ξ).

490 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
(4) The proof is like the proof of part (2), but in the case α is a limit ordinal
(i.e. cases B, C), we use an a Q-named ordinal, so conditions (l)-(5) (see case
B) should be revised accordingly and if n < ω, ξ is a Q-named ordinal in the
Skolem-hull of N U {pn} then for some ra, \\-Pa "ξ < gm". 
D2.6
As we do not actually need 2.6(4) we have not elaborate. In fact, essentially
we have proved above also the following, which will be useful e.g. for chain
conditions:
2.7 Lemma. If Q = (P<,<2t : i < $) is an RCS-iteration as in 2.6(2) or 2.6(3),
δ a limit ordinal, and 0 lhP. "cfί > N0" ( and of course Ih "Ni G S", really
(Cl) of 2.6(2) is needed for δ only), for every i < δ, then 0 Ihp6 "cf(5) > K0".
Moreover, in this case, (Ji<δ Pi i
§ a dense subset of P§ more exactly essentially
dense (i.e. for every p G P$ for some q G \Ji<δ Pi we have q Ih "p G Gp6").
Proof. Let p G P$. Let χ be large enough, <* a well ordering of £Γ(χ), N -<
(jff(χ),€,<*) is countable, {Q,5,p} C N. In the proof of 2.6, for α = <J,
necessarily case C occurs. Now g G PSup(Nnα) ^ U/3<α ^ ^
s at>ove po which is
p. Now in (Cl) the second possibility always holds, so if τ : ω —> δ is a P^-name
from AT, then q forces each τ(n) to be equal to some Pαfc(τι)-name of an ordinal
< δ from N, which q forces to be < sup(7V Π δ). Together we 
finish. 
D2.τ
Also note that the most useful case of 2.6 is
2.8 Corollary. Suppose (Pi,Qi : i < δ) is an RCS-iteration, and for every
j < δ for arbitrarily large non-limit i < j +1, Pj +i/Pi is {Nι}-semiproper, and
for every i < 5, lhpί+τι " the power of Pi is NI" for some n < ω. Then P$ is {Ni}-
semiproper. If in addition |P^| < |ί|, for i < δ and 5 is inaccessible then P§ is
S'-semiproper, for 5 = {K^} U {K :\\-pδ "K is a cardinal, K, — cf(κ) > H0"} If in
addition cf (δ) = KI then [_)i<δ PΪ is a dense subset of PS more exactly essentially
dense (i.e. for every p G P<s for some # G \Ji<δ P% we have q Ih "p G Qpδ").
2.9 Remark. For iteration of proper forcings, there is really no difference
between CS and RCS-iterations (see III 1.16), i.e. for Q an RCS iteration of

§3. Pseudo-Completeness 
491
proper forcing, {p G RLimQ: the set {α: for some r € p and q G Pβ+i we
have q \\-pβ+l "ζ(r) = /?"} is countable} is a dense subset (in a weak sense) of
RlimQ In fact J5-properness (for some stationary E C <S<κ0(U£?)) suffices.
2.10 Conclusion. Suppose K is supercompact (without loss of generality,
with Laver indestructibility). Then for some κ-c.c. semiproper forcing notion
P of power *;, lhP "SPFA" and even lhP "SPFA
α" for all α < ωi, where
SPFA = SPFA
0 and SPFA
α is the assertion Axa [semiproper], i.e.:
IfQisa, semiproper forcing notion, (TI : i < ωι) a sequence of Q-names of
members of V, (Sβ 
: β < a) a sequence of Q-names of stationary subsets of
α i, then for some directed G C Q:
(a) for every i < ωi, for some q € G, # forces a value to r^.
(b) for every β < α, {ζ < ω\ : 3<? € G, # Ih "ζ € 50} is a stationary subset of
Proof. Same as PFA-see VII, 2.7(2) or VII 2.9. We use iteration as in 2.8, e.g.
require Q2i+ι is Levy(Nι, 2l
p2i+
1'). 
D2.ιo
§3. Pseudo-Completeness
A widely used family (or property) of forcing is NI-completeness, i.e., if pn <
Pn+i G P, then there is p G P, pn < P for every n. This is the simplest family
of forcing which does not add reals, nor new cj-sequences of ordinals. In our
perspective we want a condition parallel to this, including, e.g., Prikry forcing.
3.1 Definition. For a forcing notion P, a P-name S of a set of cardinals of F,
an ordinal δ (always a limit ordinal) and condition p we define a game US(P, P)'
in the i-ih move, player I chooses a cardinal (in V) \i and a P-name βi of an
ordinal < λi, and player II has to find a condition ^, and a set Ai C λ^,
|A;| < λi? Ai^V such that:
(A) P ίlh "^G^orλ^5";
(B) pi >p,pi> PJ for j < i.

492 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
The play continues for δ moves.
In a specific play, player II wins iff {p} \J{pi : ί < δ} has an upper bound
(and loses otherwise). If a player has no legal move (this can occur to player II
only) then he loses instantly.
We say that a player wins the game if he has a winning strategy.
3.2 Claim.
(1) At most one player can win the game c)|(p, P).
(2) If for every A^ G 5 and μ G SCar, μ < \i =$> μ G 5, then in the definition
of the game, it does not matter if we demand \Ai\ = 1 (i.e., if one side has
a winning strategy iff he has a winning strategy in the revised game).
(3) If μι is regular, μ\ < μ0, δ divisible by μi (and if μi = μj "ί divisible
by (μ2)
2" suffice) and for every cardinal μ, [μi < cfμ < μ < μ0 => μ G 5]
then in the definition of the game, it does not matter if we demand, when
λ; — μo, that \Ai\ < μ\.
(4) Also we can replace \i by any set B G V, |J3| = λ;. If λ^ is regular (even
if only in V) we can demand Ai G λ^ (i.e., it is a proper initial segment).
(5) If for every regular μ satisfying KQ < μ < λ we have μ G 5 and there is
n G 5, 1 < n < HO and for every p G P, player II does not lose in the game
D|(p, P), then forcing by P does not introduce new 5-sequences from λ.
(Usually n = 2; for n > 2 we have to work somewhat more in the proof.)
(6) If n G 5, n < ω, adding {m : n < m < NO} to 5 does not change anything;
also if cf (λ) G S adding λ does not change anything.
(7) In Definition 3.1, if cf
v(λ) G 5 we can add λ to S with nothing being
changed.
Proof. E.g. (3), player II can find a response in the revised game by playing
< μi many moves in the original game, each time having a family P of < μi
candidates, and for each A G "P, if cf(|-A|) G [μi, μo] we replace it by a subset of
smaller cardinal by one more, and if cf(|A|) < μi, we represent it as the union
of < μi sets each of cardinality < \A\. In (6) (as well as in (2), (5)) just let

§3. Pseudo-Completeness 
493
player II use several moves to "answer" one question (if ra = ω it is still finitely
many though without an a priory bound). 
U3.2
3.3 Definition. The forcing P is (5, $)-complete if player II wins in the game
D|(p,P) for every pe P.
We define "P is (5, < /:?)-complete" similarly. P is pseudo /^-complete if it
is (tt
+ Π SCar
v^)-complete for every (cardinal) μ < K.
3.4 Lemma.
(1) If P is |5|
+-complete then it is (Car
v, 5)-complete.
(2) If P is (λ+ ΠSCar
v, incomplete, δ < λ, then forcing by P does not change
the cofinality of any μ, NO < μ < |ί|, and forcing by P does not add new
5-sequences from λ .
(3) In particular if P is ({2},α;)-complete (or even ({n},u;)-complete) then
forcing by P does not add reals.
(4) If P is (5,α;)-complete then P is 5-semiproper.
(5) If P is (SΊ, incomplete, then it is (£2, £2)-complete provided that (77 e
S2)(3/3 € Si) [cf(7) = β or 7 - β] and δ2 < SL
(6) P is (S, 5)-complete implies (B
p \ {0},>) is (S, 5)-complete, (B
p is the
complete Boolean algebra corresponding to P). (See also 3.8.)
Proof. Easy. 
U3.4
3.5 Theorem.
(1) RCS-iteration strongly preserves (SCar,α;)-completeness, and (RCar,α;)—
completeness and (RUCar,ω) -completeness. Moreover, if the assumption
holds for the iteration Q, Q has limit length, and λ is in the sets of cardinals
mentioned above in each V
Pί, i < IgQ, then it is so in V
Pδ.
(2) RCS-iteration strongly preserves (5,^-completeness for 5 C {2,K0,Nι},
if we restrict ourselves to <2's satisfying (Vz < ίg(Q))[(3n) \^pi+n "|Pi| <
»l"].
(3) The strong preservation in (2) holds even without the extra assumption.

494 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
3.5A Remark. Actually, we demanded in 3.1 that S is a set of cardinals but,
for example, SCar is essentially |P|
+ Π SCar.
3.5B Remark.
We can also imitate 2.6, and vice versa.
Proof. (1) We use Claim 2.5(1), so have to deal only with iteration Q = (P^, Qi \
i < α) where α = 2 o r α = λa regular cardinal.
Let 5 be any one of those three classes of cardinals, (remember, the
meaning of our S depends on which forcing it applies to say 5 = 5
P, which we
know by the game we are using) so 0)5(7?, P) means d^P(p, P).
Case A. a = 2.
Let p = (PQ,PI) £ QQ * Qi, and let FQ,FI be the winning strategies of
player II in ό)s(po>Qo)j ^(piiQi) respectively. By 3.2(4), we can assume F\
gives us an ordinal or a member of {0,1} if the corresponding λ is regular or 2
respectively. The idea of the proof is that the output F\ gives us, a Qo-name
for an ordinal, can be used as input for FQ.
Let in the i-th move player I choose λ^ and a P2-name β% of an ordinal
< \i, and player II choose (po,i»Pι,i) € P2> a Pi-name A\j, and a set AQ^ C A;
(Officially player II plays (PO,I»PM)» ^o,i? and chooses Aιti for himself). Player
II preserves the following property:
(*)(a) po,t Ί~Qo "tne following is an initial segment of the play of S|(pι,Qι) in
which player II uses the strategy F\ : ( . . . , ( λ j , β j ) , (pij,Aij),.. 
)j<i"
(b) Po,ΐ Ί~Qo "^ι,ί ^
s an ordinal α^ < λ^ if λ^ > NO and a singleton {α^} C λ^
if λ< = 2 and Aι f < C Λ/
(c) Ao,i is an ordinal < λ^ if λ^ > NO and a singleton C 2 if λ^ = 2.
(d) The following is an initial segment of a play of the game 0)5 (po»Qo) in which
player II uses his winning strategy F0: in the j-th move player I chooses

§3. Pseudo-Completeness 
495
λ, , OLj such that: [λ» > K0 => AM = α;] and [λ< = 2 =» AM = {a<}] and
player II chooses p0,j, A),j
It is easy to see that player II can do this and that it is a winning strategy.
Case B. a = X a regular cardinal and p G Pχ and there are β < λ,pt € Pβ,
P\β<P
] such that pt |hP/3 «cf(λ) - K0".
By the previous case, it suffices to prove that Pα/P0+ι is (5, u>)-complete,
so w.l.o.g. cf(λ) = NO and in fact λ = N0» and there are no problems. We leave
the details as an exercise to the reader.
Case C. a = X is regular and for every β <a, p\β \\-pβ "cf(λ) > NO".
We will first give an informal sketch of IPs strategy. We will also choose
ζn, 0 = £o < fi < 
< ζn < λ. After each move (λn,αn) of player I, player
II starts a new game Dn = D| bnΓ[ξn,&ι+ι),^n+1/^J, where pnΓ[ξn,cO is
chosen such that it decides an up to a P^-name gn,n. He then plays one step
in each of the games Dm (m — n — 1,..., 0), simulating for Im (i.e. first player
in Dm) the move (λn,gn,m+ι) and Πm answer (pnf[im^m+i),an,m> (where
gn?m is a Pξm-name) where we choose a constant winning strategy for Πm (it
is a Pξ^-name) and player II answers in the true game in αnjo The £/s must
be big enough such that all the pn's are eventually forced to be essentially in
(Jt<ω P& (i.e. equivalent to a member). We only have to deal with countably
many Q-named ordinals, so we can take care of finitely many at each step n.
We now describe more formally the winning strategy of player II. By a
hypothesis, for every non-limit β < 7 < α, and r G Pβ,Ί(— P-γ/Pβ) player II
has a winning strategy FβίΊ(r) (a P^-name) for winning the game D^r, PΊ/Pβ).
We can change a little the rules of the game D|(r,P7/P/3), letting in stage n
player I choose k < ω and a finite sequence (λy, /?J,..., λ£, β%) (β™ a PΊ/Pβ-
name of an ordinal < λ™) and player II will choose α^,..., αjϊ € Fp^, and a
condition pn G PΊ/Pβ satisfying V
pe \= "a? < λ?", pn I^P^/P^ "*/λ? G 5 ίΛen
β% <a'% < λ^ when λ^ > α; and /?£ = α^ when λ^ = 2" and pn > p,pn > pn-ι,

496 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
(remember here S is really a P7-name). Note: if player II wins the usual game
he will win also the revised one.
Let for every p G Pα, p = {p^ 
£ < ω},p^ a Q-named condition.
Now player IΓs winning strategy uses some auxiliary games which he plays
on the side. In stage n, player I chooses λn, gn (a P^-name of an ordinal < λn),
but player II chooses not only pn, An, but also a non-limit ordinal ζn < λ, and
for I < n Pξ£-names an^ of ordinals < λn and for k < n also /?J? which is a
Pξfc-name of ordinal < λ such that:
a) P < Pn,Pn-ι < Pn, £o = 0, fn+ι = Max{£n + I,β$ + l:e<n}
b) Pn\[ζn,&) II~P« "gn = gn,n> C(pi ) i
s ^ ^n < ^(= Oί) (or undefined) for
£, fc < n such that I = n — \\/ k = n — 1" where gn,n? /?5J are P^-names.
c) for each ra < n, the following is an initial segment of a play in the
game G|(pmϊ[ξm,ξm+ι), ^ξm+ι/
P£rJ in whicn P
laY
er π uses hίs winning
strategy Fξm)ξm+1 (Pm\[ξm,ξm+ι))'
;
/ \ 
λ 
/O?7l-|-l\ 
/ 
h[£ 
^ 
\ 
/O77l-(-l\
\
Λm+l5 gra+l,ra+l} Aι Pm+ln \Pm+l I [sm> sm+ljj gm+l,m» Pm 
/' 
'
~ 
' 
~
/ \ 
\ 
/-?^ 
\ 
/ 
!*[£ 
(^ 
\ 
/-?^' '
\ 
TL 5 ;™7l,77l-|-1 ? ^5 '771-1-1 / ' \*Ή I LζϊTT' 5 ζ?7l>-|-l / ) χ^7T,Tl 7 r^TΓL ι
i.e.
1< i < n — m
d) Player II choice of An, is An — an$ if λn > ω and An — {αn)0} if λn = 2.
Player II can carry out his strategy easily, defining in stage n, first fn,
second Pn\[ζm&)ι Qn,n and /3JJ, third he defined by downward induction on
m<n, pnΓtξmjξm+i], ^n,m,^m5
 and fourth play as in d).
2) The proof is left to the reader. (Compare 2.8).
3) Combining the proofs of 2.6(4) and part (1). 
Ds.5
3.6 Definition.
For a forcing notion P, a P-name S of a set of cardinals, an ordinal δ and
a condition p we define the games ED|(p, P), R£)|(p, P)
(or ED
5(p,P, 5),RD
5(p,P, 5) respectively; £? stands for essentially, R for re-
ally).

§3. Pseudo-Completeness 
497
(1) In a play of the game ED|(p,P) in the ϊ-th move, player I chooses a
cardinal λ^ and a P-name βi of an ordinal < λ^ and player II has to find
aset A eλi, IA<| <λi, (A<€ V).
The play continues for δ moves. In the end player II wins if he can find a
condition pΐ G P, p < p^ such that for every i < δ, pΐ Ihp "/?» 6 A*, or
XiφS".
(2) In a play of the game RZ)|(p, P) in the ί-th move, player I chooses a
condition q^ qi > PJ for every j < i and ^ > p, and a cardinal λ^ and a
P-name βi of an ordinal < λ^ and player II has to find a condition p^ and
a set At C λi, |Ai| < A», (A» G V) such that
(A) p< Ihp " / 3 i E A < o r λ i £ 5 " ,
(B) p, > qi.
The play continues for δ moves, and player II wins if {p} \J{pi : i < δ} has
an upper bound.
Note: 3.6(1) is close to 3.1, 3.6(2) is stronger. Comparing Definition 3.6(2) with
XIV Definition 2.1, the definition here is stronger when δ > ω.
3.7 Definition. The forcing P is essentially (5, incomplete [really (5,α)-
complete] if player II wins in the game ED|(p, P) [Rϋ)|(p, P)] for every p e P.
3.8 Lemma.
(1) The parallels of 3.2, 3.4 hold.
(2) Let P be a forcing, B the corresponding Boolean algebra. Then P is
essentially (5, α)-complete iff (B
p \ {0}, >) is (5, α)-complete; and if α >
ω, this implies P is 5-semiproper. If P is complete (i.e. for any TCP
there is p such that every G C P generic over V
Γ : p G G i ί f J π G ^ 0
and (Vg e i)(^ < p)) then P is (5, α:)-complete iff P is essentially (5, α)-
complete. If P is really (5, α)-complete then P is (5, α)-complete which
implies essentially (5, α)-complete.
Proof. Easy. 
DS.S

498 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
3.9 Theorem. (1) RCS-iteration strongly preserves the notions "essential
(S, ^-completeness" for S G {SCar,RCar,RUCar}. Similarly for "real (S»-
completeness.
(2) Moreover, if the assumption holds for the iteration Q, Q has limit length,
and the cofinality of λ is in the set of cardinals mentioned above in each V
 Pί ,
i <£gQ, then it is in V
Pδ.
(3) RCS-iteration strongly preserves essential (5,α;)-completeness for S C
{2, HO 5 NI}, if we restrict ourselves to Q's satisfying
(or even without it).
Proof. Similar to previous ones. 
Ds.g
3.10 Definition. For W C ω\ we call a forcing notion pseudo (*, W)-complete
if for each p 6 P in the following game player I has a winning strategy. The
play lasts ω moves. In the n'th move: player I chooses an ordinal αn < ω\ such
that l\£<n βι < an
 and a -P-name τn of a countable ordinal. Player II chooses
ordinals /3n,7n < ^i such that αn < /3n, /\ί<nβι < βn In the end player II
wins the play iff (a) or (b) where
(b) there is q G P satisfying: p < q and q Ihp "rn = 7n for n < ω
n .
3. 10 A Remark. We can define games and completeness variations of the
earlier notions in this section with length of game ω with a stationary W C ω\
as a parameter as we have done to ({2},(j) -completeness in 3.10 and the
parallel theorems hold.
3.11 Claim. (1) Pseudo (*, W)-completeness is strongly preserved by RCS-
iteration.
(2) If W is stationary (subset of ω\) and P is (*, W)-complete then forcing with
P preserves stationarity of subsets of W and adds no real.

§4. Specific Forcings 
499
3) If ω\ \ W is not stationary, P is pseudo (*, W)-complete then P is essentially
({Nι},u;)-complete.
Proof. Left to the reader. 
Πs.n
§4. Specific Forcings
We prove here for various forcings that they are semiproper and even (5, δ)-
complete; of course, otherwise our previous framework will be empty. See [J],
chapters 5-6, for a discussion of some of the large cardinals we use (which are
standard).
Prikry forcing (adding an unbounded α -sequence to a measurable cardi-
nal without adding bounded subsets) satisfies all we can expect. But for our
purposes, more important are forcings which change the cofinality of ^2 to NO,
without adding reals (or at least not collapsing NI). Namba [Nm] has found
such a forcing, when CH holds.
However we do not know the answer to:
Problem. Is Namba forcing {Nι}-semiproper? (But see XII §2).
However, Namba forcing is not necessarily ({2},ω)-complete; this is equiv-
alent to "Ί>$>2 is Galvin" (see below).
We deal with a variant of Namba forcing, (for the original see XI 4.1),
Nm'(2)) (2) a system of filters on sets of power ^2? see below), and prove
the relevant assertion (4.7). Then we prove that if each filter in 2) has the
({2,N0,Nι,},u;)-Galvin property (see 4.9, 4.9A), then Nm'(2>) is semiproper,
moreover is ({K0, NI, 2}, α;)-complete. The point is that when a large cardinal is
collapsed to ^2, if D was originally a normal ultrafilter, then after the collapse
it may well have some largeness property like the Galvin property.
4.1 Definition. If D is a complete normal ultrafilter on K, then the D-Pήkry
forcing, PF(D), is:

500 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
{(/, A) : f a function, with domain n < ω, f is increasing, (\/i < n ) f ( ϊ ) <
ft, and A belongs to D}.
(/i, Ai) < (/2, A2) iff/i C /2, A! 2 42, and for i G Dom(/2)\Dom(/ι),/2(i) €
Ai.
Prikry defined this notion and proved [Pr] in fact that:
4.2 Theorem. For any normal ultrafilter D over ft, P = PF(D) is (RCarp, λ)-
complete for every λ < ft, and changes the cofinality of only one cardinal, ft (to
NQ) (So remembering the notation introduced before 3.2, (RCar
p, λ)-complete
really means (Car \ {ft}, λ)-complete).
4.3 Definition. (1) A filter-tagged tree is a pair (T,S)) such that:
(a) T is a nonempty set of finite sequences of ordinals, closed under taking
initial segments, and there is some maximal 770 G T for which [z/ G T,
tg(v) < Ig(η0) =>v = ηo \ίg(v)]', we call r?0 the trunk of T, ηQ = tr(T).
(b) 2) is a function such that for every η G T, 2)^ = !Σ) (77) is a filter on some
set C {ry
Λ (α) : α an ordinal} and if tr(Γ) < η G Γ ί/ien Sucτ(?7) = {i/ G
Γ : €g(ι/) - £g(η} + 1, ι/f£g(ry) - η} ^ 0mod2)r/.
(2) We call (Γ, 2)) normal if Dom(2>) = {η G T : tr(Γ) < η} and for every such
η, Or) is a filter over Sucτ(η) (see below). For η <E Γ, (T,2>)w = (Tw,2>)
 d=
({i/ e T : i/ < ry or r/ < z/}, 2>).
(3) We call (T,Σ>) λ-complete if each Όη(η G Γ) is λ -complete.
4.4 Definition. For filter-tagged trees (ϊι,5>ι), (Γ2,2)2):
(1) We define: (Tι,S>ι) < (Γ2,352) iff
(a) Γ 2CΓι,
(b) For every r/ G T2, if r/ > tr(T2) then Sucτ2(ry) ^ 0modϊ>ι(r/) and
^lί
7?) ίSucτ 2(^) — 2>2(^)fSucj'2(
77) where for a filter D over /, and
J C /, J^0modD we let:
D\J = {^Π J: A G D}.

§4. Specific Forcings 
501
(2) We define: (Γι,Dι) <pr (Γ2,2>2) ( "pure extension") if in addition tr(Γι) =
tr(Γ2).
(3) We define: (Tι,35ι) <n (T2,352) if in addition (to (2)) for η of length < n,
η G Ti Φ> 77 G Γ2.
(4) Nm'(T*,2>*)
 d= {(T,S>) : (T*,S>*) < (Γ,S>)} ordered by <. We write
η G (Γ,2>) for 77 G T. If p = (T*,Σ>*) we write Tp for Γ*, 35P for 35*.
Instead of Tp, Γp/, ΓP1, Tpfc, etc, we usually write just Γ, Γ', TI, T
fc, etc.
4.4A Remark. For every filter-tagged tree (T, Σ>) for a unique normal (T,
we have (T,35) < (T,35t) < (τ,»).
2)So we can restrict ourselves to normal members of Nm'(T*,2)*).
4.5 Claim. 1) If η G Γ => |Sucτ(r/)| < K2 then Nm'(T,2>) is ({λ : λ = cfλ >
K2},α;)-complete.
2) Moreover, in the cases where we shall prove that Nm' is (5, ω)-complete,
S C {2, HO, HI}, we could prove it is (5 U {λ : λ = cfλ > N2},u;)-complete (see
4.12).
Proof of 1). It is enough to prove:
(*) if p G P = Nm^T, 2>), n < ω, r a P-name of an ordinal, then there is
q € P, p <n q and a set ^4 of ordinals, \A\ < K2, ς' Ih
 αr G A".
Proof of (*): Let
^o ~ ί
7/ ^ P ' ^βC
7?) ^
 n5 t
r(p) < r/, and (p)^] has a pure extension deciding the
value of r},
T* - {r/ G Γ0*: there is no v < η, v G T0*}.
4. 5 A Subfact. TJ" is a front of r for some r satisfying p <n r; i.e every ω-branch
of r contains one and only one element of Tf.
Proof of the Subfact. Clearly without loss of generality tr(p) has the length > n.
By a partition theorem in [RuSh:117] (or see here XI 3.5 or XV 2.6B(2), and
if CH see 4.6 below) there is r G Nm'(Γ, 55), p <pr r, such that:

502 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
either (a) for every η G lim(r), (3n) [77 fn G Γf]
or (b) for no 77 G lim(r), (3n) [ryfn G 7\*].
If (b) holds, then we can find p' and 7 such that: r < p' and p' Ih "r = 7" .
But then let v G p', ίgz/ > n, £g(tr(p')). Then i/ G T0* (witnessed by (p')[ι/j)
hence for some k < n, ι/\k G Γj". But this is a contradiction to (b), as v G r.
Hence (a) holds, hence Tj" is a front of r, and p <n r because p <pr r and
*g(tr(p))>n. 
Π4.5Λ
Continuation of the proof of 4-5: Let, for v G T j*, q" be a pure extension of
(r)[z/] satisfying
^ Ih "r = 7™.
Then ρ = U{g^ : i/ G Tf} is a condition (i.e. Γς = (J Γς. and S)g - 2)p) such
ι.eτ;
that p <n r <n ς and
q\\-
 C ίrG{7
I /:ι/GΓ*}.
So (*) is proved.
2) Check the proof of part (1). 
U4.5
4.5B Remark.l) In 4.5(1), (2) we can replace ^2 by any μ > N2
2) As in the proof of 4.5(1) we prove (*) we can (e.g. in 5.5) use the preservation
of RUCar-properness (3.5(1)) instead of 3.5(2).
4.6 Lemma. If (T,2>) is a filter-tagged tree, which is λ+-complete (i.e., each
5)η is a λ+-complete filter) and H : T -> λ and λ
H° = λ, then there is (T* , S)t),
(T,S>) <pr (T
f,2>) such that ff(ry) depends only on £g(r?), for 77 G T
f.
Remark. See Rubin and Shelah [RuSh:117] p. 47 - 48 on the history of this and
such theorems there.
Proof. For any sequence α = (αn : n < ω), αn < λ, we define a game D«
:
Let r/o be the trunk of Γ.
In move 0 player I chooses A\ C Sucτ(^o)?^4ι = 0mod2)T7o, and player II
chooses 771 G

§4. Specific Forcings 
503
In move n, player I chooses An+ι C Sucτ(ηn), ^4n+ι = 0mod!Σ)77τι and
player II chooses ηn+l € Sucτ(ηn) \ An+l.
In the end, player II wins the play if for every n we have H(ηn) = an.
Now we prove:
(*) For some ά = (αn : n < ω), an < λ, player II wins the game (i.e., has a
winning strategy).
Clearly the game is closed, hence it suffices to prove that for some α, player
I does not have a winning strategy. So assume that for every α player I has
a winning strategy F& in the game ό)ώ, and we shall get a contradiction. A
winning strategy is a function which, given the previous moves of the opponent
(771? 
j^n-i m °ur case), gives a move to the player, so that in any play in
which he uses the strategy he wins the play.
Now define by induction on n, ηn G T such that £g(ηn) = ίg(tτT) + n and
ηn+ι\n = ηn'
ηo is the trunk of T
ηn+l G Sucτ(^n) \ Uα
 F<*((ni> '"> Vn))-
Why does ηn+ι exist? For every α, Fa((ηι, - - , ηn)) = 0modΣ)77τι, Όηn is λ"
1"-
complete and the number of α's is λ^° = λ < λ+. So Uά^Mfaij 
?^n)) =
0mod2)r?τι, and so ηn+ι exists as Sucτ(^n) 7^ ϊ
110^®^ by Definition 4.3(1)
clause (b).
But let α£ = H(ηn) and α* = (α£ : n < α;}, so
Fa* (<>), r/i,.. , Fa* ((r/i,..., ηn)), ηn+ι,...
is a play of Dδ* in which player I uses his strategy Fώ*, but he lost: contradic-
tion, hence (*) holds.
Proof of the Lemma from (*). Let (an : n < ω) be as in (*), and W be the
winning strategy of player II.

504 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
Let TO = {77 G T : for some n, we have: ig(η) = ^g(^o) + ft, and for some
AI, . . . , An, for every 0 < £ < n we have η\(tgηo + ί) = W((Aι, . . . , A*))} U
It is clear that TO is closed under initial segments. Now if η G TO, 770 < η G
TO then Sucτo(^) 7^ mod 3?^, for otherwise if n = £g(η)-£g(ηo), and AI, . . . , An
are "witnesses for η G TO", then player I could have chosen An+1 = Sucτ0(^),
and then by definition W(Aι, . . . , An+ι) G TO and also W(Aι, . . . , An+ι) ^
SucTo(τ7) = An+1 but W(Aι,...,A n+ι) G Sucτ(?7) and SucTo(r?) = T0 Π
Suc^(?7), contradiction.
So (T0, 2)) <pr (T,S>) and (Γ,3>) is as required. 
D4.6
4.7 Theorem. Suppose (T*,2)*) is an ^-complete filter-tagged tree. Let
P = Nm'(T*,Σ>*) then
(1) (CH) P does not add reals.
(2) If for every (T,2)*) G P for some 77 G T,tr(T) < η and for some A C
Suc^iT) and function F : A -> λ we have (Vα < A^F"
1^ : i < α}) =
0modΣ>;] and A ^ 0 mod D* ΐften lhp "cf(λ) - K0".
(3) P does not collapse NI (and if Σ>* is A
+-complete, cf(λ) > 
KQ then
Ihp «cf(λ) > Ho").
4.7A Remark. If we waive CH, P may add reals but it does not collapse HI;
sometimes it satisfies the fr^-c.c. even though 2**
1 > ^4 (see XI 4.3).
4.7B Notation. If Dom(2)*) - T let Nm
r(2)*) - Nrn^T,®*), and if T =
ω>(cj2), 2>*(r?) - {{r/
Λ < a >: α G A} : A G £>}, we let Nm'(T,£>) -
=Nm
/(3)*).
4.7C Remark. So if P - Nm'(L>*), D* 2 2>&(
d= {A C H2 : A co -
bounded}), G C P is generic, Λen |J{^ : r/ G (T,£>*) for every (Γ,D*) G G}
is a member of
 ω(ωz) (in V[G]) and as D* 2 ^δo' ^ ^
s unbounded in ^2 so

§4. Specific Forcings 
505
Proof of 4.7.
(1) Now suppose r is a name of an ω-sequence from ωi, and let (T, 2)*) G P.
It is easy to define by induction (Tn,£>*) such that:
(a) (Γ0,2>*) = (T,2>*),
(b) (Tn,2>*) <n (Tn+ι,2>*) and (Tn,2>*) <pr (Γn+1,2>*),
(c) for every η G Tn+ι, if ίg(η) = n + 1, then for some ά^ and £ < n
we have: (Tn+1,2)*)^] Ihp "τ\l — ά^", and £ is maximal, i.e.,
either ^ = n, or there are no T^, α such that a < ω\ and (T^, 2)*) Ih
«τ(*) - α" and (Tn+1,2>*)w <pr (Γt,S>*).
Clearly (O^Γ^S)*) G P and (Γn,2>*) < (Πn<^n,S>*).
Now use Lemma 4.6 on (Πn<ω^n»®*)»
 an(^ H,H(η) 
= aη and get
(Tt,2)*), (Πn<ωTn,2)*) <pr (Tt,»*), H(r/) - ά
n for r/ G Γ*, lg(η) = n + 1.
Now for each ^ there is (T
/7,2)*), (^,2)*) < (Γ
r/,2)*) and α such that
(T",2>*) Ihp "rί^ - α", and let ry0 G Γ" be the trunk of T"; w.l.o.g.
f + 1 < ^g(r/o) By the choice of aηo,l < £g(aηo) hence a = ά
k\l for
* = ^g(^o), hence for every 77 G Γ
f, ^g(ry) = ^g(r/0) implies α^ff = άηo \l,
hence (Γt,»*)w Ih
 uτ\l = άηo\l = a
1". But (Tt,3)*) Ih " for some 77 G Γ
f,
ig(η) = i and (Γ^Σ)*)^] belongs to GP (the generic subset of P)." So
clearly (Tt,2>*) Ih "rf£ = α^^^ίf, and as this holds for every t we have
(Tt,2)*) Ih "r = (α
m^
n^(n) : n < ω}" when we choose the numbers ra(ra) large
enough, i.e., such that n < £g(ά
m(n)).
(2) Clearly the following is a dense open subset of P, J0 = {(ϊ
1,2)) : (T, 2)) G P
and for every η G T, z/ there are ^ C Sucτ(^/), for z < λ, (Jj^Aj 
—
0 mod 2)7,, Ui<λ^* ^ ^
 moc^ ^^ ^en ^here is F^ : Sucτ(η) —* λ such that
Λα<λ{^ : ^
 G Sucτ(r/),F(^) < α} = 0 mod 2)^}. Now for each (Γ,2>) G J0
let S(Γ,2>) = {η G Γ : there is Fη as above}. Note: (Γι,2>) < (T2,2>) =»
β(Γι,2>) Π Γ2 - B(Γ2,2)); by [RuSh:117] or XI 3.5 or XV 2.6B(2) here, for
every (Γ,2>) G IQ there is (Γ',2)), (T,2>) <pr (Γ
7,®) such that:
(a) (\/η G limΓOP^nJ^rn € B(T,2>)], or
(b) (Vη G limT
/)(3
<H°n)[77rn G

506 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
In the second case, applying again the partition theorem mentioned above
we get a constant bound n to {ig(rf) : η G B(T, Σ))}, and increasing the trunk
contradict the hypothesis (of 4.7(2)). So Iι = {(T,S)) G J0 and (a) holds} is
dense open subset of P. Fix (T, 2)) e Ii- For ry G B(T, 2>), let F^ be as required
above; and let r be the unique ω-sequence such that for every p G Gp, and
n < ω, τ\n £ p. Then λ Π {Fτ^n(τ(n)) 
: n < ω ( and F rf n is well defined) } is
a countable unbounded subset of λ.
3) Similar to part (1) using XI 3.7 instead of 4.6 (but not used here). 
U4.7
4.8 Problem. Is the forcing semiproper? (See XII.)
4.9 Definition. For a filter D on a set /, and a set 5 of cardinals, we call
D an (5, α)-Galvin filter (and the dual ideal a Galvin ideal) if player II has a
winning strategy in the following game, for every J C /, J φ 0 mod D (we call
the game the (5, α)-Galvin game for (£>, J)):
In the ith move player I chooses a function F$ from / to some λ G S and
player II chooses Ai C J n p| Aj such that |Fi(A^)| < λ. Player II wins if
j<i
p| Ai / 0modZλ For simplicity we can say J was chosen by player I in his
i<OL
first move.
4.9A Remark. Galvin suggests this game for D^2 = the co-bounded subset of
K for a cardinal K, a = ω and 5 = {2}. So for a = ω, S — {2} we omit (5, α).
Note that only S Π (|/| 4-1) is relevant for the game.
4.10 Definition. A filter D on K has the Laver (or Ni-Laver) property, if there
is a family W of subsets of ft, A ζW =ϊ A ^ f y mod D, W is dense [i.e. VA C /ς,
A ^ 0mod£> -» (35 G W)(B C AmodD)], and W is closed with respect to
countable intersections of descending chains.
Related to this property is the following game:
In the n'th move, player I chooses a set An and player II chooses a set Bn, such
that for all n An D Bn D An+ι ^ 0mod£>, II wins iff [}n<ωAn ^ 0modZλ

§4. Specific Forcings 
507
Clearly, if D has the Laver property, then player II wins.
Galvin, Jech and Magidor [GJM] and Laver independently proved the following.
4.11 Theorem. If we start with a universe V, V N "G.C.H. + K is measurable"
and use Levy collapsing of K to N2 (so every λ, KI < λ < K now will have
cardinality HI) then in the new universe F[G], T>^ is a Galvin filter, in fact
(Car \ {N2},u;)-Galvin filter. Moreover if D 6 V was a normal ultrafilter on ft,
then in V[G] the filter D has the Laver property. [We identify here D with the
filter it generates in V[G] which is normal.]
More exactly, [GJM] proved that player II has a winning strategy in the
play above for D a normal filter on λ, Laver proved the Ki-Laver property in
that context, but the difference is not essential in our context.
(We shall not prove it here.)
The relevance of this is:
4.12 Theorem. Let 5 C SCar.
(1) If P is Nm'(Γt, S>*) (see 4.4(4)), each S>* is an (S,ώ)-Galvin, N2-complete
filter then P is S'-semiproper and even (5, ω)-complete (and we can add
allλ, cf(λ) >|Γt| to 5).
(2) We can strengthen the hypothesis in (1) by "Σ>* is |α|
+-Laver" and then
get even "(5, α)-complete for pure extensions" (see XIV).
Proof. (1) Also easy, but we shall do it. By 3.4(4) it suffices to prove (5,α;)-
completeness. Let p* £ P and we shall prove that the second player wins in
ds(P>
p}- For every V € T* \ {v : v < tr(Γ*)}, let Hη be a winning strategy of
player II in the (S',α;)-Galvin game for (2>η,Sucτ*(^)).
We first prove
4.13 Fact. Suppose p <E P, (P = Nm
7(Tt,£>*),£>* is K2-complete), λ G 5,
and a is a P-name of an ordinal, p Ih "α < λ" and

508 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
(*) X G 35+, F : X -> λ =» (3α)[{ι/ G X : F(ι/) < α} ^ 0 mod 2)] (this
follows from 2)^ being (5,ω)-Galvin).
ΓΛen there are p
t and α < λ such that p <pr p^ G P and pMh "[λ > NO =Φ α <
α] and [λ = 2 => a = α]".
4.13A Remark. In the proof of the fact we do not use the Galvin property
assumption; also the ^-completeness can be waived, see 4.14 below.
Proof of the fact 4-13- For notational simplicity only we assume, 2^5. Easily
we can find p\ = (TΊ,2>*), p <pr pi, such that for every η G TI, if there are
β < λ, and <?, (Γι,D%] <pr <7, 9 Ih "α < /3", then (Γι,»*)w Ih "α < /3"
for some /?. For each 77 G TI, let /J^ be such that (pi)^] If- "α < βη", βη may
be undefined for some η but if η < z/ € TI, ^ defined, then ^ is defined and
equal to βη. So for every 77 € limΓi, {^ : ^^
 no^ defined} is an initial segment
of ω. By the K2-completeness and 4.6 if CH and XI 3.5 in general, there is T2,
(ϊι,S)*) <pr (T2,2>*) and a set A C ω such that Vr? G Γ2 ^ is defined iff
ig(η) e A (A is an endsegment or the empty set (so there are only countably
many possibilities, this is why XI 3.5 can be applied)). But A — 0 is impossible
by density. So for some n βη is defined for every η G T2, £g(η) = n. We can (by
induction on n using (*) in the assumption, see below for a similar argument or
again by XI 3.5) define p3, (T2,2)*) <pr ps, and β < X such that [η G pa & ^
defined => /?,, < /?] this implies p% Ih "α < /?", so the Fact holds. 
^4.13
Continuation of the proof of 4-12(1): Remember p* = (T*,2)*) is given;
w.l.o.g. the trunk of T* is <>.
In the first move player I chooses λo G 5 and a P-name /?o of an ordinal
<λ.
Player II chooses βQ < λ and po G P such that p* <pr p0» Po ll~p "/?o < ^"
(possible by the Fact 4.13 above).
However if player II continues to play like this, he may loose as maybe
n (where pn = (Tn,2>*)) will be {<>}.

§4. Specific Forcings 
509
So he is thinking how to make SUCQ 
ττ,(
<>) ^ 0niod2><>. If he, on
the other hand, will demand PQ <ι pn+ι> he
 wϋl nave SUCQ 
τ^(<>) φ
I m <u;
0mod2)*, but it will be hard (and in fact impossible) to do what is required
when, e.g., λn = NI. So what he will do is to decrease Sucτn(<>), but do it
using his winning strategy H<> for the (5, ω)-Galvin game for Σ><>. So in the
second move player I chooses a cardinal \ι £ S and P-name β\ of an ordinal
< λi. Player II, first for each η e Po, ίg(η) = 1, chooses p[ = (Γ^Σ)*) such
that (po)fo] <pr Pi and pj
 lhP "/?ι < AΛ this is possible by 4.13. This defines
a function from Sucτ0(<>) to λi, so player II consults the winning strategy
ff<>, gets A° > C λi, \A*<:>\ < λi, and lets TI - |JW : A? € A° >}. Now at
last player II actually plays: the condition (Γι,2)*) and the ordinal sup^49v.
In the third move, player II tries also to insure that {η G ^\Tn : tg(η) — 2}
n
will be as required. Now player I chooses \2 G S and a P-name /32. Player II
chooses for every η G TI, ^g(ry) = 2 a condition p^ such that (pi)^] <pr ί>2
and p*2 Ihp "/?2 < /?r/" So for every 77 G TI, ^g(τy) = 1, we have a function
from Sucr?(Tι) to A2, so consulting the strategy Hη, player II chooses A^ C λ2,
|A^| < λ. We can assume that each A^ is a proper initial segment (i.e., an
ordinal) and for λ = 2, a singleton. So the number of possible A^ is λ. So
now the function η ι—> Aη (η 6 Sucτj(θ)) is a function whose domain is
SucTiίo). So player II can consult again the strategy #<>, and find >!<>,
and let T2 - U{^ W = 2, 17 € TI, βη G Aj f l and A
l
η^ C A
2
ηlo = A^}.
Now at last player II plays: the condition (T2,£)*) and the ordinal supA?x.
The rest should be clear (compare with the proof of 6.2).
(2) By 4.13 it should be clear 
D4.ι2
4.14 Remark. Really in 4.12(1) we can replace ^-completeness by KI-
completeness by using XI 3.5 instead of 4.6. In fact even this can be waived.
We use K2-completeness only in the proof of Fact 4.13; but we now give a
proof which eliminate it. Instead of choosing T2, we let H : limT^ —> 2 be
defined by H(η) — 0 iff (3n)[βη\n is defined], and so there is T' such that
(T
f,2>*) <pr (T',55*) and H is constant on lirnT
7 (by XI 3.5 which does not

510 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
need any completeness). Now on B — {77 G T" : (W < lg(η}) [βη\e is not
defined]}, we can define a rank:
ΐk(η) = (J{7 + 1 : {v : v G B Π SucT'(ry) and rk(ι/) > 0} ^ 0modΣ>rJ.
If for some 77, rk(r^) = oo we let T" 
= \y G T' 
: v < η or η <
"fc/W/^AMO = oo}; we get T", (T',Σ>) < (Γ",Σ)),T" C T', con-
tradiction to the choice of T". Otherwise (i.e. η G T' => rk(r/) < oo) we can
prove by induction on its rk(trT') that we can find pΐ as required.
(Note we are not assuming CH).
§5. Chain Conditions and Abraham's Problem
Chain conditions are very essential for iterated forcing. In Solovay and Tannen-
baum [ST] this is the point, but even when other conditions are involved, we
have to finish the iteration and exhaust all possibilities, so some chain condition
is necessary to "catch our tail." In our main line we want to collapse some large
ft to ^2? in an iterated forcing of length (and power) ft, each Pi of power < K,.
So we want that ft stays a regular cardinal, and the obvious way to do this is by
the ft-chain condition. We prove it by the traditional method of the Δ-system.
For general RCS iteration, we have to assume ft is Mahlo (i.e., {λ < ft strongly
inaccessible} is stationary) and for iteration of semiproper forcing we ask for
less.
Now we are able to answer the following problem of U. Abraham:
Problem. Suppose G.C.H. holds in V. Is there a set A C NI so that every
α -sequence from ^2> belongs to L[A]?
To construct a model where the answer is "no" we shall collapse some inac-
cessible ft, which is the limit of measurable cardinals, changing the cofinalities
of arbitrarily large measurables < ft to NO-

§5. Chain Conditions and Abraham's Problem 
511
5.1 Definition.
(1) For any iteration Q = (Pi, Qi : i < α) and a set S C α we call p — (pi :
i G S) a Δ-system if, for i < j in S,pι \i — PJ \j and pi G Pj. We call pi \i
the heart of the Δ-system, hr(p).
(2) For a forcing P, we call p = (pi : i G S) a //-weak Δ-system if />i G P,
Uies i is a regular cardinal tt, and there is a condition # = hr(p) (the
heart of p) such that for every r, q < r G P there is α: < ft satisfying : if
a < Oίi G 5 for i < μ\ < μ then {r} \J{pai '• i < P>ι} has an upper bound
in P.
5.2 Claim. Any Δ-system in an RCS iteration as in Definition 5.1 (1), with
a = supS and Pa = \Ji<a PΪ is an Ni-weak Δ-system.
Proof. Easy. 
D5.2
5.3 The Chain Condition Lemma.
(1) Suppose Q = (Pi,Qi : i < ft) is an RCS iteration, K regular, |P^| < K
for i < K and let A = {X < K : λ strongly inaccessible}. Then for every
sequence p = (PJ : j G B C A), we can find a closed unbounded C C K,
and a pressing down function h on CΓ}B (i.e., h(j) < j) such that for any
α> (Pj : j G S Π C, /ι(j) — α) is a Δ-system. (So in the non trivial case AV
is strongly inaccessible Mahlo cardinal.)
(2) Assume A^ — K and: Qi is RUCar-semiproper (for all i) or semiproper,
lhp.+n. " (2l
pί')
v has cardinality HI" (for all i) or even Q as in 2.6(3), Q
as in 2.6(4) and A* = {i : 0 lhPi "Uj<i
pj is dense in P^} Then in ί
1)*
we can replace A by A^ (We know that if each Qi is semiproper (or just
Pj/P<+ι) then [
cfV(^) = Ni =» i G Al] and also:[i limit, 2.6(2) or 2.6(3)
apply to Q\i and Ihp. "cfz > HO" for every j < i} => i G A^]).
(3) If we agree to weaken the conclusion to "Ki-weak Δ-system", we can
replace "|P^| < K for i < /ί" by
 ud(Pi) < « for i < «" or even, for any
A C /ς, "each P^i < /ς) satisfies the conclusion of (1) for A". In (2) we can
assume just each Qi is semiproper.
Before we prove the lemma note:

512 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
5.4 Corollary.
(1) If in 5.3(1), A is stationary or in 5.3(2), A^ is stationary, then PΛ = RlimQ
satisfies the ft-chain condition.
(2) If D is a normal ultrafilter on ft, B G £>, B C A then (in 5.3(1)) for some
£f G D, (PJ : j G βt) is a Δ-system.
Proof o/5.3. (1) If 5 is not stationary (as a subset of ft), the conclusion is
trivial, so suppose B is stationary. Necessarily ft is strongly inaccessible (as ft
is regular, every member of A is strongly inaccessible and B C A), hence by
1.6, Pκ = Rlim<5 = \Ji<κ PΪ As |Pj| < ft for every i < ft, there is a one to one
function H from Pκ onto ft. Again as \Pi\ < ft for i < ft, clearly
C = {i : ίί maps U?<i ^j onto * an^ f°
r J < ^ if j G B then p^ G P^}.
is a closed unbounded subset of ft. We now define the function h with domain
BΠC: h(ί) = H(pi\i).
We first prove that h is pressing down. Clearly pi \i G P^, and if i G 5 Π C
then i is strongly inaccessible and (Vj < ϊ)[\Pj\ < i] hence by 1.6, Pi = U?<i Pji
hence pi\i G Uj<i Pj> so ^(0 ^ *• Now looking at the definitions of h and C
we see that (PJ : j G B Π C, /ι(j) = α) is a Δ-system, for any α.
(2) The proof is similar, using 2.7 instead of 1.6.
(3) Left to the reader. 
D5.3
5.5 Theorem. Suppose Con (ZFC + "there is an inaccessible cardinal ft which
is the limit of measurable cardinals"). Then the following theory is consistent:
ZFC + G.C.H. +(VA C Nι)(3ά) (α an ω-sequence of ordinals < N2, a £ L[A]).
Proof. We start with a model V of ZFC + G.C.H + "ft is strongly inaccessible,
and limit of measurables" . We define an RCS iterated forcing (P^Qi : i < ft),
such that \Pi\ < ft. We do it by induction on i, and clearly (see 1.4(6) for i limit)
the induction hypothesis |P4| < ft continues to hold. If Q
l = (Pj,Qj 
j < i) is
defined, let ft^ be the first measurable cardinal > |P^|, where Pi = RlimQi- It is
known (see e.g. [J]) that ft j is measurable in V
Pi , and any normal ultrafilter on
it from V is an ultrafilter (and normal) in V
Pί, too. As |Pj| < ft, by hypothesis

§6. Reflection Properties of S$ 
513
κ,i < AC. So let Qiβ be PF(Dι) (see 4.1) where Di G V is any normal ultrafilter
on /Ci, and let <2i,ι be PI * Q^0-name of the Levy collapse of κ+ to KI (i.e.
Qi,ι — {/ '• Dom(/) is an ordinal < NI, and Rang(/) C κ+}, with inclusion as
order). We let Qi = Q<|0 * Qi.i
Now by 4.2, Qi>0 = PF(Di) is (Car
y \{^},cj)-complete, QM is (Car
v,α;)-
complete trivially (by 3.4(1)) hence by 3.5 Qi is (Car
v \ {^},α;)-complete.
Hence by 3.5(2), Pκ = Rlim(Pi,Qt : i < «) is ({2,N0,Nι},ω)-complete,
hence it does not add reals and does not change the cofinality of NI. By 3.4(4)
Pκ is semiproper. By 5.3(2) Pκ satisfies the tt-chain condition, so clearly if
G« C Pκ is generic then ^[Gκ] = ti% ,ti%
[Gκ] = AC, V[GK] have the same reals
as V, and V[GK] satisfies the G.C.H.
Now if A C ωi , then as PΛ satisfies the K-chain condition, A is determined
by d = GκnPi for some i < «. By l.l(D), Gi is generic for Pi? so L[A] C V[G»],
but in V[Gi] an α -sequence from N2
 
Λ i
s missing: the Prikry sequence we shot
through Ki+ι which was measurable in V[G$]. 
Ds.5
§6. Reflection Properties of
Refining Abraham's Problem and Precipitous
Ideals
In the previous section we have collapsed a large cardinal K to H2, such that to
"many" measurable cardinals < K we add an unbounded ω-sequence. However,
"many" was interpreted as "unbounded set" . This is very weak and we often
desire for more, e.g. in 6.4, we would like to change cofinalities on a stationary
set.
Notice that it is known that if we collapse a large cardinal by Ni-complete
forcing then 5^ = {δ < ^2 : cf(^) — ^1} nas reflection and bigness properties,
e.g., those from Definition 4.10. However, for SQ, we get nothing as it is equal
to {δ < ^2 : in the universe before the collapse, cf(δ) = HO} and it is known,
e.g., that on such a set there was no normal ultrafilter.

514 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
So we can ask whether S$ can have some "large cardinal properties". The
natural property to consider is precipitous normal filters D on N2 such that
SQ G D. Such filters were introduced in Jech and Prikry [JP1] and studied in
Jech and Prikry [JP2], Jech, Magidor, Mitchell and Prikry [JMMP].
Their important property is that if we force by PP(D) (which is {A C /ς :
A ^ 0modD} ordered by an inverse inclusion), G is generic, the domain of D
is /, and in V[G], E D D is the ultrafilter G generates (on old sets) then V
1 /E
(taking only old / : / -> V) is well-founded. Jech, Magidor, Mitchell and Prikry
[JMMP] proved that the existence of a precipitous filter on HI is equiconsistent
with the existence of a measurable cardinal, and also proved the consistency of
"l>Kι (= the filter of closed unbounded sets) is precipitous". (Notice that the
Laver property is stronger). Magidor asked:
Problem I. Is ZFC 4- G.C.H.-I- there is a normal precipitous filter D on ^2,
SQ e D consistent?
We answer positively, by collapsing suitably some K to ^2- Letting D be
a normal ultrafilter on K in V, provided that A = {X < K: in the old universe
λ is measurable } G D. We will force that in the new universe, D generates a
normal precipitous filter (which we also call D) such that 5o belongs to it.
This was proved previously and independently, using supercompact cardi-
nals, by Gitik.
We can also consider the following strengthening of Abraham's problem:
Problem II. If V satisfies G.C.H., does there exist A C N2 such that, for every
δ < ^2? every ω-sequence from δ belongs to L[A Π δ]?
Again we have to change the cofinality on a stationary set, and to iterate
forcing such that stationarily often we change the cofinality of ^2 to NQ.
When we do this the first time, in stage λ for example, the forcing so far P\
is just Levy's collapse Levy(Nι, < λ) so by 4.11, 4.12 we have a (Car
v\{N2},u;)-
complete forcing Qχ doing this; but later the collapse Pχ is not even HI-
complete. We have two ways to cope with this. One way is to look again at
theorem 3.5 on iterated (5, ω)-complete forcing (for various 5), from which we

§6. Reflection Properties of Sg 
515
see that less is needed. If P\ = Rlim ζ), Q — (Pi, Qi ' i < λ) collapses λ to N2, it
suffices that (RlimQ/Pz+i) * Q\ is ({2, K0, KI},CJ)-complete. We will show that
we can achieve this by using Namba forcing as Qi and our induction hypothesis
there. The second possibility is to demand e.g. each Qi is quite pseudo-complete
and prove that in V
Pλ we get a large ideal in λ. We use the first approach (but
see 6.1 A). For clarity of exposition, we first prove a weaker lemma.
6.1 Lemma. Suppose D is a normal ultrafilter on λ, Q = (Pi,Qi : i < λ)
an RCS iteration and for all i < λ, \Pi\ < λ. Suppose further Pχ = RlimQ
is ({2,K0,Kι},α;)-conιplete and collapses λ to K2. Consider the following game
D(po, AQ) — ^(POJ AQ, P\,D], fc>
r Po £ -Pλ> AQ a P\-name of a subset of λ such
that PQ lhPλ "AQ ^ 0mod£>". (The game is played in V.)
In the first move:
Player I chooses P\~
names βι (°f an ordinal < KI) and F\ (a function
from λ to NI).
Player II has to choose pi £ P\, Po < Pi and 71 < cji and /3χ < α i such
that pi lhPλ "Ai = AQ ΠF]~
1({7ι}) ^ 0modD, and ^i - /?ι".
In the n-th move, player I chooses P\-names βn < ωι,Fn : X —> KI,
and player II chooses pn, pn-ι < pn and 7n < ω\ and /3n < ω\ such that
Pn I^PA "An = An^ Π F'^ίTn}) φ 0modD, and ^n - βn».
In the end, player II wins if {pn : n < ω} has an upper bound p G P\ such
thatplh P λ " Π An ^ 0mod D".
n<ω
Our conclusion is that player II wins the game.
6.1A Remark. If{i : Pχ/Pi is {({2, H0, Nι},u;)-complete } € D (i.e. for almost
all i, for every G< C P4 generic over V, in yfGJ, Pλ/Gi is ({2,N0,«ι},ω)-
complete) then in V
Pλ, D is a {2,tto>Nι}-Galvin filter. Similarly for 6.2 (see
XIII 1.9).
Proof. Let PQ G PA, ^4o a Pλ-name, po "~pλ "^o ^ 0modD". We shall describe
the winning strategy of player II in the game D(po> AQ). Let the winning strategy

516 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
of player II in S^NO.NI}^'
 Pχ"> be H \P\ By 3 2(
2)> we can assume tnat player II
really determined the value of the P\-names of countable ordinals given to him.
We can also assume player II is given by player I a pair of names of countable
ordinals (instead of one).
Let B0 = {i < λ: there is p > p0, P ^pχ "i £ ^o"} Now B0 G D
because otherwise, as D is an ultrafilter in V we have BQ — 0mod D, but since
Po lί-pλ "AQ C BO" (by BO'S definition) we have p0 l^pλ "4o = 0mod£>",
contradiction.
Now for every i G BQ, there is po,i £ -Pλ> Po < Po,ί such that po,i "~pλ "^ £
AO".
So let player Γs first move in D(p0,^o) be choosing β\ (a P\-name of an
ordinal < HI), and F\ : X —> HI, FI a P\-name. Now for each z G B0, player
II simulates a play of the game D< = U^.NO.NI}^'*'^)' He plays (^lϊί'iW)
(i.e., a pair of names of ordinals < HI) for player /^, and by the strategy iΓ[po,ϊ]
gets a move for player 11^: p\^ e P\? Po,i < Pi,i» and αi^ < HI, 61,1 < HI such
that pι,i lhPλ
 
α/3ι = αM and Fι(i) = εi/'. Now for some BI C B0, BI e D,
and (pi^i : i G BI) is a Δ-system with heart pi (see 5.4(2)), and we can also
make (αi^εi^ € BI) constantly (αι,ει) (for i G BI) since there are only HI
many possibilities.
Now player II can make his move in D(po? AQ): he chooses pi, 0:1 and εi. It is
easy to check that this is a legitimate move. (Use 5.2 to show pi Ih "βi = c*ι".)
So player II continues to play such that after the n-th move:
(*)n there are Bn C Bn_ι C ... C Bx C B0 all in D, pΛi G Pλ, for 0 < I < n,
i G B^, p0,i < Pι,ΐ < 
< P^,ΐ, (Pi,i '• i £ BI) is a Δ-system with heart pi (for
0 < ^ < n) po < Pi < 
< Pn, and at the ^-th move player I chooses βι, FZ,
and player II chooses p^, α^, ε^ and (for 1 < £ < n and i G B^) p^ Ih "α^ = ^
and Fι(i) = ε/'. Also for each ί < n, ί > 0 and each i G B^, the following is
an initial segment of a play of a game D^2>KθjNl}(po,tj Pλ), in which player II;
uses the winning strategy

§6. Reflection Properties of S$ 
517
It is easy to check that player II can use this strategy; moreover, by the
choice of /f[po,t], f°
r every i G ^\Bn the set {pn^ : n < ω] C Pχ has an
n
upper bound, say <^; as Bn G £>, nn<ω£n G £> and clearly, by 5.4(2), for some
Bω G D, Bω C Πn<ω ^n and fa* : *
 G Π
 Bn) is a Δ-system with heart p, clearly
n
pn < p for each n, and so by 5.2 p lhpλ " {i G Π^n
: & ^ (?PA hence for every
n
£ β£ = at & Fι(i) = εt} ^ 0modD". So clearly player II has won the play,
hence the game.
Π6.ι
6.IB Remark. We could have used any S, S C {2, H0, HI} instead of {2, H0, HI}
and would have obtained a parallel result. The same holds for 6.2 and 7.2 . Also
in both we can replace completeness by essential completeness.
6.2 Lemma. Suppose λ is measurable, D a normal ultrafilter over λ, Q —
(Pi,Qi : i < X) an RCS iteration, each Pj, Pj/Pi+ι is ({2,tto,Nι},ω)-complete
and |P;| < λ for i < j < λ.
pλ*9
T/ien, letting Q\ — Nm (D) in the universe V 
~ the forcing notion P\ * Q\
is ({2,Ho,Hι},ct;)-complete.
Proof. Just combine the proofs of 6.1 and 4.12(1) (so now we will have a
tree of conditions instead pt^i G Be)) Let us give the details. We will only
prove essential ({2, KQ, KI},C<;)- completeness (which is enough for all practical
purposes) and indicate modifications for ({2, ^o?Nι}5 ^-completeness (if we
like to use only the essential version, naturally we should then also assume
only that P$, Pj/Pi+ι 
are essentially ({2,N0,Nι},ω)-complete; remember the
implications from 3.8(2)). So let S = {2, N0, NI}, r* = (p*, q*) G Pλ * Qx and
we shall describe a winning strategy for player II in the game ED^r*, Pχ*Q\)
(see 3.6). As S = {2, HO, HI}, by 3.2(2) without loss of generality player II has
to give actual values.
Without loss of generality p* IHPλ "tr(ςf) = 17*", η* G ω>\. For notational
convenience only (or considering Q'x = {T G Qχ : tr(Γ) > 77*} ^ Qχ) we may
assume η* =<>. In the n'th move (n > 0) player I will choose a Pχ * Qx-name

518 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
β
n of a countable ordinal, and player II will choose a countable ordinal 7n [and
a condition for the "real" game ^^(r*, P\ * Qχ)}
To make his choice, player II plays on the side also trees Tn C
 
n-λ,
ordinals (iη : η G Tn Π
 nλ), and Pλ-names of Qλ-conditions (q^ :η eTnΓ]
 
n\)
and conditions (p™ : 77 G Tn) in certain forcings appearing in the iteration Q
and names of ordinals (β™ : η G Tn U {{)"}), preserving the following:
(A)(l) Tn C
 n^λ, each r? G Tn is strictly increasing.
(2) If η E Tn, * < *g(τ/), then η\t G Tn.
(3) If η G Γn, ^g(η) < n, then {z > λ : rf (i) G Tn} G Zλ
(4)τn+1n ^λcτ n.
(B)(l) If n > 1, η G
 nλ, then we let η~ =η\(n~ I).
(2) If η G Tn Π
 nλ, then i^ < λ, iη a successor ordinal > η(n — 1).
(3) If η G Γn Π
 nλ, n > 1 then z,, > i^-
(4) <>~ is not really defined, but we let ί<>- = 0,
soP^/Pi^, =Pi<>/PG = Pi<>.
(C)(l) For η G Tn, p» G P^/P^ . (So for η =<>, p»> G P^J.
(2) For 77 G Tn Π Tn+ι we have p™ < p^1 (this is actually implied by (3)
below).
(3) For η G Tn, {/3*, pξ, ^_ : £g(τj) < f < n) is an initial segment of a play
of ΰ^b^
7^, Piη/Pi -} in which player II uses his winning strategy. So /?* is a
Pΐτ7-name for a countable ordinal and /?<>- is a real ordinal. Player II lets (in
the actual play) 7^ = /^> (for the "purely" essential version we should just
have Pη be in the completion of P^/Pi _ ).
(4) For p G Pα, p/ G P\/Pa, p(Jp/ is the element of P\ corresponding to
(p,p/) e Pα * (Pλ/Pα) We let p^
 d^ U,<ίg(ί?) P^r, € P«, (see Cl).
(D)(l) q™ is a P\-name for an element of Qχ — Nm'(D) with trunk η
(remember η € Tn Π
 nλ).
(2) (0, Q") lhPλ,9λ "^" = ^" when η € Tn Π "λ.
(3) For r? € Tnn"λ, p^ lhPλ «[Qλ μ c Γ
1 < ^ and Qλ h [^Γ
1]^ <pr ς^"].

§6. Reflection Properties of S$ 
519
For the following, note that lhpλ "D is an K2-complete filter", so by 4.13
we have lhpλ " for every q G Q\, every Qχ-name β of an ordinal < ωι, there
is 7 < ωi, and q
1 ', </ <pr </', # Ih β = 7". In move number 0, player I plays β°.
Player II finds #<> G <2λ and a P\-name /?<> such that:
lhpλ V <pr g° >, so tr(g° >) =<>, and g° > lhQλ "£° - /3° >'»'.
But as P\ H λ-c.c., /?<> is really a Pί<:>-name (for some successor ordinal
i<> <
 λ)> so player II can find p^> G P;<:> such that Pλ |= V < P^" and
P<> "~ "/?<> = To", for some 70 < ω\. Then player II lets Γ0 = {<>} and play
7o
In move n -f 1, player I plays a P\ * ζ?λ-name /?
n+1. For each η G Tn Π
 nλ,
let (in y):
Bη = {a<X:W< tg(η)[a > η(f)} and 3p € Pλ/Pi,,, ^ Up lhPλ «η
Λ(a) G
6.2A Claim. Bη G D.
Proo/ of the Claim. For each α < λ let t% be the following P^-name:
t% = 0 if I^PΛ/GP. 
"r/
Λ(α) ^ ^" and t° = 1 otherwise.
As there are (essentially) < λ many possible such P/
l+1-names [as \Pir)\ < λ,
so 2
|Pί^ < λ], for some Aη G D and t, Vα G ^ : ί^ = ί. If p^ Ih "ί - 1", then
Aη C Bη and we are done. Otherwise, there is p
r > p%, p' G P^, p
f Ih "ί = 0".
But p% Ih "{α < λ : rf (α) G q%} ^ 0mod J9" and p
7 Ih "Vα G Aη, η"(a) φ ς£",
a contradiction (as Aη e D). This ends the proof of the claim. 
Πe.2A
Continuation of the proof of 6. 2: For a G β^ , let pj\ / αv be a p as in the definition
of Bη. Then let <7
nΐ^\
 De (a P\-name of a member of Qλ) such that:
pr
— /ί
71^-
1 "1"
~ £v<a) J '
where /3
n^/a\ is a P\-name. Again by λ-c.c., for some large enough successor
ordinal iηΊa} < λ, ffi\a) is a Pίτ7.(Q)-name and pffia) 
G Pirj.(a}/Pirj (and
^ < i»7
Λ<α>) and α < iη» (α). We can increase P^^ and ^-{a) such that

520 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
, 
II-P,,.^,/^ T^M = &1"" for some ^
As there are only < λ many such names of countable ordinals, we can find
G D, S%
+1 C Bη, and a name /3%+
l such that for all a G S£
+1,
= /?2
+1. Now we can, for each η = v" (a) G Tn n
 
nλ, play a step
, P?
+1, ^J m the game D^,P,r//Pv], to get P^.-name ^
(i.e. we play for player 1^ the name /?™
+1, and the winning strategy of player
llη gives us Pη~*~
l,β™-
l
a', & was the last element in 77). Again, for each v G Tn
of length n - I there is a set S?+
l G D, 5£
+1 C {α : ι/
Λ{α) G Tn}, and for all
r\ CL Qn+1 /3
n+! 
— ftn+1
<2 G ^ 
5 PV
 Λ (α) - Pi/
We continue by downward induction (in each step fc, n > k > 0 defining P^-
names /S^
1 ^
or v~ (
a) £ TnΓ\
 feλ, satisfying demand (C3) and then "uniformiz-
ing" using a set 5JJ
+1 G D as before). Finally, player II plays 7n+ι = β<ί>
lι
 arιd
define Tn+1C
 n+^λ by:
(l)Γ n + 1Π °λ = {<>}
(2) for η G Tn+1 Π
 kλ, SucTn+l(η) = {η~(ά) : a G 5^
+1}, for k < n.
This completes the description of player IΓs strategy. Finally, define T as
T = U<ω Πn>X^n Π ^λ). Clearly (->λ,S) <pr (T,£>) (where 2), - D). For
each η G T let pη G P^/Pi _ be > p^ for every n > ig(η) (i.e. this is lhp. _ );
(exists as we have used a winning strategy in %, ^0,^1}^ ' ^»,/^\-])
Let p^ = U*<*g(τ7)ϊM* e P»»ι ^y repeated use of 5.4(2) we can find Γ',
(Γ,3D) <pΓ (Γ',^) and (p+ : r? G Γ) such that for each η G T' we have
OV(α) : α < λ,τΓ(α) ^ Γ) is a Δ-system with heart p+ G P\/Pir]. Note:
η- =v,ηeT'=*p+ <pη.
It is easy to see that if (pα : a < X) is a Δ-system with heart p+, then
p+ lhpλ "{α : pα G Gpx} ^ 0mod.D in V
Pλ". Using this fact we can show that
Po Up^> Ih «?
 d- {ry € Γ
7 : ft, Up+ e GPJ G Qλ - Nm'(D) and g* <pr f .
To finish the proof it is enough to show that (p<> Up<>, q) Ih "(Vn)/3
n =
7n". Assume that this is false, then there is a witness, i.e. (p',q
f) > (p<> U
P<»9), n G cj and α* < ωi, such that (p',^
7) Ih "^
n = α*", but α* ^ jn.
Without loss of generality q
1 has a trunk of length > n, and also there is 77 G

§6. Reflection Properties of S$ 
521
ω>λ such that p' Ih "tr(ς') = η" and ίg(η) = m > n. As p
1 Ih "77 € q", without
loss of generality Ml < ίg(η) : pnte (Jp+te < p'. By (D), p' Ih V > 9 > q^t" for
all £ < ίg(η). So for ί = n we get (p',q') > (^n,q^n), so (p',q') Ih "/Γ = 7n"
and we are done.
If we want to play D^ NO ^\
 anc^ n°t
 only ^{2, KO ,KI}> we a^
so have to
give conditions rn forcing β
n = 7n at each step n.
Without loss of generality we may assume that for each η € Tn, of length
< n we have (pn~/a\ 
'
 rl^(
Oί) € Tn) forms a Δ-system with heart p™. Let
Pn = P5>
 UP<» 9n = {»? €
 ω>λ : ^(ί?) < n => i% Up^j € GPχ, lg(η) >n^
η e ?»rn}.
Then as above we can prove (pn,qn) 
II- "/?
n = 7n"5 then we have to
show (pn,?n) < (Pn+i^n+i), and finally that (p<> Up£>,g) (from the end
of the proof for ED^2) ^Oj NI}) ^
s ^ (Pnj^n) f°
r all n (in P\ * Qλ, or at least in
P\ * Qλ/ — )• These details are left to the reader. 
U6.2
6.3 Definition. A filter D on a set / (in a universe V) is called precipitous if
the following holds:
H~pp(D) "there are no fn 
: I —> ordinals, fn G V, such that /n+ι <E fn for
each n", where
(i) PP(D) = {A C / : A ^ 0modD} ordered by reverse inclusion.
(ii) E is the filter generated by the generic set of PP(D),
(iii) f <E 9 means {a G / : /(α) < ^(α)} G E.
6. 3 A Remark. The following is an equivalent definition: a filter D over / is
precipitous if player I does not have a winning strategy in the following game
First move
player I chooses A\ C /, AI ^ 0mod £>,
player II chooses BI C Aι,Bι ^ 0mod£>;
n-Λ

522 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
player I chooses An C Bn-ι, An ^ 0modD,
player II chooses Bn C An,Bn ^ 0mod£>.
Player II wins if p| An (which is = p| Bn) is nonempty (not necessarily
n<ω 
n<ω
See Jech and Prikry [JP2], and Jech, Magidor, Mitchell and Prikry
[JMMP].
6.4 Theorem. Suppose "ZFC -f G.C.H. + K is strongly inaccessible and
A ~ {λ < K : X measurable } is stationary" is consistent. Then:
(1) The following statement is consistent with ZFC + G.C.H.: for every B C N2
for some δ < N2 (in fact for some club C of λ for every δ G AnCn(5^)
yI
Gl),
cf(5) = NO, but in L[B n<J], δ is a regular cardinal > NI (in V[G], X = N2).
(2) If in the hypothesis A G D, D is a normal ultrafilter on ft, then there is a
normal precipitous filter on N2 to which 5$ belongs.
Proof. So let V be a model of ZFC +G.C.H., and let ft be a strongly inaccessible
cardinal, such that A = {X < ft : λ measurable} is stationary.
We now define by induction in i < ft forcing notions Pi G V, Qi G V
 Pί ,
such that \Pi\ < ft, (Pj,Qj : j ' < ft) is an RCS iteration. So by 1.5(1) it suffices
to define Qi for a given (Pj,Qj 
: j <i).
Case A. i = X is a measurable cardinal, such that for every j < λ, \Pj\ < X.
In this case let D\ be a normal ultrafilter over λ (in V), and Qλ = Nm'(Dλ)
(In V
Pλ, D\ is not an ultrafilter any more, since we may have lhpλ λ = N 2> but
it will still be "large", see 6.1, 6.2).
Case B. Not case A.
In this case let Qi be the Levy collapse of (2'
Pil + \ί\
+)
v to NI, i.e.,
{/ G yPί : / a countable function from ωi to 2'
Pil -f |t|
+}
Now by 3.5 and 6.2 it is easy to see that Pκ — Rlim(Pi>Qi : i < K) is
({2,N0,Nι},u;)-complete (note: if for i Case A occurs, then for every j < i,

§6. Reflection Properties of S$ 
523
in V
PJ'
+1, D is still a normal ultrafilter), and by 5.4 it satisfies the /ς-chain
condition.
So clearly in V
Pκ G.C.H. holds, every real is from V, and NI = N^, N2 — ft.
Also if λ G A, then (Vz < λ) \Pi\ < X (prove by induction on i for each λ). Let
G C Pλ, be generic, and we shall prove that V[G] satisfies the requirements.
Part 1. So let B C N2, and let B G V be a P^-name for it. Then C0 = {δ : for
every i < δ we have ^Π{i} has a P^-name for some j < 6} is a closed unbounded
subset of ft, because Pκ satisfies the /ς-chain condition (and Pj <§ Pκ = \Ji<κ Pi
for j < K) and obviously CO G V.
Now if λ G CO Π A, then we can check that |P$| < λ for i < λ, so case
A holds hence Qχ = Nm'(Dχ), hence in V[G\, cf(λ) = K0 by 4.7(2). On the
other hand, clearly G Π Pλ is a generic subset of Pλ (as Pχ <> PΛ), by 5.4 Pλ
satisfies the λ-chain condition, so lhpλ "cf(λ) = λ". Hence in V[G Π Pλ], A Π λ
is present, but λ is a regular cardinal > KI. So also in L[A Π λ], λ is a regular
cardinal > KI. Lastly as Pκ satisfies the κ-c.c. also in F
Pλ, A is a stationary
subset of K = Nrf *. Together we finish.
Part 2. The following implies the desired conclusion; it is essentially the same
proof as [JMMP] who do it for the Levy collapse; and it suffices for (2) of
the theorem. It follows from Magidor [Mg80] Theorem 2.1, and is included for
completeness only. (By construction, V
p \= "A C S% and A G D").
6.5 Lemma. Suppose K is measurable, D a normal ultrafilter over ft, Q =
(Pi,Qi\i< K) an RCS iteration, |P^| < AC for i < «, P = Pκ = RlimQ.
Then in F
p, D is a precipitous filter.
Proof. If not, in V
p there is A0 G PP(£>), A) ll-pp(D) "</n : n < ω) is an ω-
sequence of functions from K to ordinals which belong to V
p which is decreasing
mod.E, fn G F
p" where £" is as in clause (ii) of Definition 6.3.

524 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
So there is p G P, a P-name AQ, and P * PP(D)-names /£ of the fn such
that p lhpλ "^4o> /n are as above".
Let BQ — {λ < K : λ is strongly inaccessible and for some pΐ > p, pΐ G P,
andpt lhPλ "λ € A0"}.
Because D is normal, K measurable, {λ < K : λ strongly inaccessible} G Z),
hence BQ G D. For each λ G B0 choose pλ,o, P < Pλ,o G P, Pλ,o ll~ "λ G A0".
By 5.3 there is B^ C B0, B\ £ D such that (pΛ,o : λ G β^} is a Δ-system with
heart pt .
Now we define by induction on n < ω, p\,n,pn,ph Bn,B^n, An, A^ gn, αλ,n
(for λ G B^) (An, A^gn are P-names) such that:
(1) (pλ,n : λ G B^) is a Δ-system of members of P with heart p^.
(2) £n+1 C βt ς βn, £n+1 G D,
(3) Pn+i > P*n > Pn all in P,
(4) Pλ,n+ι ^ Pλ,n both in P, ^n a P-name of a function from K, to Ord,
(5) Pλ,n ll-p "A G An and ρn-ι(λ) = «λ,n-ι", o;λ,n < ^λ,n-ι for n > 0,
(6) A^ — {λ G -B^ : pλ,n is in the generic set of P},
(7) Pn+i lh> "^n+i € PP(D) and An+1 C ^ and [An+l lhPP(D) "/n/B =
pn/E"] and An+i C (i < « : flfn(i) < 5fn_ι(i)}",
(8) βn+ι = {λ G Bit : tnere is P
f ^ PA,n,P
f > Pn+ι? such that for some α,
The definition is easy: for n > 0, we first we define pn, An and ^n_ι (by 7),
then Bn and pλ,n (by 5 and 8), then B^ and p^ (by (1), using 5.4), finally A^n
by (6).
Now as B^ G D, f] B^ ^ 0, and if λ belongs to the intersection, (αλ,n ' n < ω)
n<ω
is strictly decreasing sequence of ordinals, contradiction. 
Πβ.5,6.4
§7. Friedman's Problem
Friedman [Fr] asked the following.

§7. Friedman's Problem 
525
7.0 Problem. Is there for every S C S£ (= {i < ttα : 
c f ( i ) = N0}), a closed
set of order type α i, included in S or in Sff \ S? We call this statement Fr(Kα).
Let Fr
+(Nα) means that every stationary S C SQ includes a closed set of order
type ω\.
Van Liere proved that Fr(N2) implies N2 is a Mahlo strongly inaccessible
cardinal in L; and Fr(Nα)+ not Fr(N2) (Nα regular > N2) implies 0# exists
(using squares). We prove the consistency of Fr(N2)+G.C.H. with ZFC, modulo
the consistency of a measurable cardinal of order 1 . We recall the well known:
7.1 Definition. We define by induction on n what are a measurable cardinal of
order n and a normal ultrafilter of order n. For n = 0 those are just a measurable
cardinal and a normal ultrafilter. For n + 1, D is a normal ultrafilter of order
n - h l o n / ^ i f { λ < A v : λ i s measurable of order n} G D and it is a normal
ultrafilter. We call K measurable of order n -h 1 if there is an ultrafilter of order
n + 1 on it.
7.2 Lemma. Suppose D is a normal ultrafilter on ft, Q = (Pi,Qi : i < «} an
RCS iteration and |P^| < K for every i < K.
Suppose further that G CPκis generic, 5 C (Sξ)
vW,S G V[G] stationary
and even ^ 0 mod jD, and (in V[G]) let
Qκ — {/ : the domain of / is some successor ordinal α < KI, / is into S and
it is increasing and continuous }
So let 5, Qκ be Pκ-names for them and \\-Pκ "5 ^ 0mod D and 5 C Sff". We
then conclude:
(1) If Pκ is {Kι}-semiproper, then so is Pκ * Q^,
(2) If Pκ is essentially ({2, N0, Nι},ω)-complete, then so is PΛ * Q^.
Proof. (1) The problem is that Q/ς may destroy a stationary subset (of α^), so
it is not proper, though it obviously does not add ω-sequences. So let 5, Qκ be
P^-names for 5, Qκ. Let A — {a < K : α a strongly inaccessible cardinal and
(Vt < α)(|Pi| < α).

526 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
Let λ be regular, big enough, Q,QK, S G H(X), let <* be a well ordering
of H(X) and let N -< (#(λ),G,<*) be countable, p,q,Q,S,QK G TV, (p,q) G
PK, * QK, and we shall prove the existence of an {Nι}-semi (TV, Pκ * Qκ)- generic
condition > (p,q). In V (hence in ίf(λ)), we let
S0 = {λ G A : there is p
] G PΛ such that p < p
1" and p
f Ih "λ G 5"}.
As in previous proofs So G D, and for each λ G So let p\$ G Pκ, pλ,o > P,
Pλ,o II- "A G 5" and for some 5ι C S0, Si G D, and (pλ,o : λ G Si) is
a Δ-system (see 5.4(2)). As N was an elementary submodel we can assume
So, Si, (Pλ,o : λ G Si) and its heart po belongs to N (but of course not all
included in N). Let S2 = Si Π f}{S^ 
: S
f G D and S
1" G TV}, so clearly
S2 = {pίi : i < 
AV} C Si is an indiscernible sequence over TVjJα i in the
model (ff(λ),E,<*) (but does not belong to TV). Note that for a formulae
<£> = </?(#!,... ,x«;ί/ι,... ,2/n) with n parameters yι,...,2/ n froni α i, and fe
parameters xi < ... < £&> from /ς, the corresponding function / : [κ]
k ->
{true, 
false}**™ is in TV and it is constant on 82- (The function / is: for
αi < ... < aκ < K let /(αi,... ,α«) - {(/?ι,... ,/3n,t) : /3ι,...,/? n < ^i the t
is the truth value of y?(αι,..., α«, /?ι,..., βn)}) Clearly p < po
Let NΓ\PKC Pμ, S3 = S2 \ (μ + 1) ( with μ < «, of course).
Clearly S3 G D hence S3 ^ 0. Let χ G S3 be such that χ = sup(S3 Π χ),
and TV* be the Skolem Hull (in (#(λ), G, <*)) of TV|J{χ}, by the choice of S2
(and Rowbotton theorem), clearly δ = TV* Π ωι = TV Π ωι and /ςΠ(Skolem hull
of TV U x) = x (or you can choose such χ).
Also Px G TV* (as (PiΊQi : i < κ> G TV*,χ G TV*) and clearly Pχ <$ PΛ.
Now Pκ is {^i}-semiproper and (PA,O : λ G Si) G TV* and χ G TV*, hence
pX)o G TV* and po < Pχ,o and there is pi G P«,pι > px,o> which is {Kι}-semi
(TV*, P^)-generic. As TV* Π ωι = TV Π α i, pi is also {Nι}-semi (TV, Pκ)-generic.
Let G C PΛ be generic, pi G G, and we shall find / G QK[G] which is {Ni}-
semi (TV[G],Q«[G])-generic, this obviously suffices. We have δ = TV*[G] ΠtJi.
In V[G\, x has cofinality N0, (as px,0 11- "x G S" and S C (Sζ)
yPχ). So

§7. Friedman's Problem 
527
there are α0 < ... < αn < αn+ι < 
, Un<α; an = X>
 αn G W*[G], and let
{7n : n < u;} be a list of all Qκ[C?]-names of countable ordinals which belong
to N[O\ (not N*[G\\). We let /0 - q[G\ G JV[<3], 7Vn be the Skolem Hull of
N\J{<*o, 
- ,θίn} in (#(λ),G,<*) and define by induction fn 
G Nn[G] such
that QK[G\ \= Vn+i > /n", X > SupRang(/n) > αn and fn \^QK[G] «yn = βn
n
for some βn. This will suffice because \Jn<ω fn U{(*> x)} ^ Qκ[G] and is {Ni}-
semi (7V[G
?],Q/ΐ[G
r])-generic because Nn Π ωi C A/'* Π ω\ = N Π ωi. Defining
/n+i, the only nontrivial point is x > SupRang(/n+ι), but /n+ι G JVn+ι[G],
and 7Vn_|_ι[G] Π K C χ, (as by a version of Rowbottom's partition theorem on
normal ultrafilters 53 \ x is indiscernible, in (-ff(λ), G, <*), over 7V|Jx) Now,
for every PΛ-name β G Nn of an ordinal < AC, for some /? G Nn Π AC, lhpκ "/? < /?"
(as PΛ satisfies the K-C.C., see 5.3) hence Sup(7Vn[G] Π AC) = Sup(Nn Π K) < χf
So we can define /n+ι, hence all the /n's hence, as said above, we finish.
(2) By 3.8(2) the complete Boolean algebra P = RO(Pχ) is (S, ω)-complete,
where S will be {2, N0, NI}; let Q - RO(QK).
Let (p, g) G P * Q. Clearly it is enough to describe the winning strategy of
player II in ED£ ((p, q), P * Q\.
Suppose in the n-th move, player I chooses the P*Q-name βn of an ordinal
< NI, and player II will choose βn. Player II will do the following: after the
n-th move he will have (p, qη) G P * Q and β'η,βη for every increasing sequence
η of ordinals < AC of length < n such that:
(1) (
(2) (
(3) (p,qη) Ih α^g(r?) - ^", /?; a P-name (of an ordinal < ^).
(4) for some An G D, for every increasing 77 C An of length < n we have
A? =/
?/g(τ;)»
(5) plhp "SupRang(^) > MaxRang(τy)",
(6) For 77 G
 nAc increasing, {^Q,/^ro,^!,/?^!, - - - >βη\n>βrι\n) is an initial
segment of a play of ED^(p, P) in which player II uses his winning strategy.

528 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
Clearly Player II can do the above and it gives him a strategy, (i.e. the
zero-th move is easy. In the (n-hl)'th move; first for every increasing v G
 nκ for
every 77 = v~ (α) first choose qη to satisfy (2), (5) and force βιg(η) to be equal
to a P-name β'η; then choose βη to satisfy (6). Finally he chooses An and βn to
satisfy (4) ). We have to prove that he wins by this strategy. So let A = p| An,
n
and for 77 G ω A increasing, we know that for some (by clause 6) pη G PΛ, pη Ih
Let K = {T : T a tree of finite increasing sequences from A, closed under
initial segments, {) G T and for every 77 G T, {ί G A : 77
Λ (i) G Γ} G D}
(we can replace D by T>κ -f A or Pjf -f A in this context since we only need
/^-completeness). Remember limΓ = {77 : £g(η) — ω, η\k G Γ for every k < ω}.
So K is closed under intersection of < K elements. For each T G K, 77 G T, let
x^ be, in ΛO(P), Suppjp^ : z/ G limT and v > 77} (Remember, we replaced
Pκ by a complete Boolean algebra Bp or see 1.4(9)). Clearly x^ decreases
with T, so as P satisfies the ft-chain condition, for some T,xΐ, is minimal (i.e.,
Tt C T, T"t G K implies x£ = xTj), and similarly for every 77 G Γ.
Obviously,
(1) x^ = Sup{x^ ^ : 77
Λ < ί >G Γ}: (this holds for any tree),
(2) RO(P) 
\= 0 < b < x? implies {i : ΛO(P) |= b Π x^ <i:> ^ 0} ^ 0mod£>
(by T's minimality).
Let T* = {77 : x^ belongs to the generic set of P}. Hence xT^ Ihp "T* ^ 0, in
fact (} GΓ*", and
(3) x?5 Ihp " for any 77 G T* for K many i's we have 77
Λ (i) G Γ*".
Now if G C P is generic, xT\ G G then ^[G] is a stationary subset of 5o, and
C — {δ: if 77 G
 ω>δ, then Rang(^[G]) C δ} is closed unbounded. Hence for
some 77, δ with 77 G
 ωδ the following holds: δ G ^[G] Π G, (Vk)η\k G T*[G], and
= δ Let ^* = U<ω ςft,^ U{(Sup U/<ω Dom(^r,), 5)} G Q. Let g* be
the P-name of such a ς*. It is easy to check (xT^q*) is as required. 
Dγ.2

§7. Friedman's Problem 
529
7.2A Remark. In 7.2, we can weaken the assumption allowing S = 0 mod D
when e.g. Pj,Pj/Pi+ι 
are semiproper. (A complete proof of a better theorem
appeared in XL)
7.3 Theorem. If "ZFC + G.C.H. 4- there is a measurable of order 1" is
consistent, then so is "ZFC 4- G.C.H.+ for every subset of SQ, either it or its
complement, contains a closed copy of ω\".
Remark. We do not try to get the weakest hypothesis. It will be interesting to
find an equi-consistency result. (See XL)
Proof. So let V satisfy G.C.H., B C K the set of measurables of order 0,
not 1, and for every μ G 5, let Dμ be a normal ultrafilter on μ; we know
(see below why) that Oβ holds, and let S = (Sμ 
: Sμ C H(μ),μ 
£ B),
exemplify it. Moreover, if 5 C H(κ), φ a Π} sentence, (//"(AC), G,5) N φ then
{μ € B : SΓ\H(μ) — 5μ, (if (μ), G, 5μ) N 9?} is a stationary subset of K. It is well
known that there are such Sμ. [Why S exists? Choose inductively Sμ C #(μ)
for μ G B such that if possible {μ' : μ' G μ Π J3 and 5μ Π //"(μ') ^ 5μ/} is not a
stationary subset of μ].
We define an RCS iterated forcing (P^, Qi : i < K) by induction on i, such
that IPΪ I < κ;, and for every measurable μ < AV, z < μ => |P^| < μ.
When we have defined Q? for j < i then Pj(j < i) are defined. If i G /c\ J5,
Qi is {/ : / a countable function from KI to |P;|+ + 2
H2} (2^
2 of V
Pί).
If i G J5, Si = (p, 5),p € P^ 5 a Prname, p lhP. "5 is a subset of 5^ and
5^0 mod D for some normal ultrafilter D G V on i", then we let ft be as in
7.2 if p is in the generic set, and trivial otherwise. We can finish as in previous
proofs. 
Π7.3
7.3A Remark. 1) We leave the checking that the forcing works, to the reader.
For the normal ultrafilters £)', D" on K if, for B' C K, we have B
1 G D' Φ> {λ G
B : J3' Π λ G £>λ} G D", then we can get in V
Pκ every A' G (£>')+ contains a
closed copy of ω\.

530 
X. On Semi-Proper Forcing
2) Note that Pκ will be {Nι}-semiproper and even {2, NO, NI }-complete (see
3.5).
3) In fact we could have gotten that every stationary S C SQ contains a closed
copy of ωi, i.e. Fr"
l"(^2) if we use 7.2A.
4) The forcing in the proof of 7.3 preserve "cf(ί) > N0" [Why? Use 2.7 and
simple properties of the Q^s.]
is
7.4 Theorem. Suppose "ZFC + there are two supercompact cardinals
consistent. Then so is ZFC + G.C.H. + "Fr+(Nα) for every regular Nα(α > 1)".
Remark. Slightly better is XI 7.6. We can also get result like XI 7.2(c) i.e.
(*) for every θ = cf(θ) > ^4 and stationary W* C {δ < θ : cf(δ) = NO} we can
find an increasing continuous h : ω\ —> S such that h(ϊ) G Wί
Proof. Let V \= "2
μ = μ+ for μ > λ" and K < X and «, λ are supercompact.
By a theorem of Laver [L] we can assume no ^-complete forcing will destroy
the supercompactness of K. The following is known:
(*)o If Hα > λ is regular, S C Sft is stationary, then for some μ, ft < μ < X and
δ < NQ, we have cf (δ) = μ and S Π <5 is stationary.
Let P be the Levy collapse of λ to /ς+. By Baumgartner [B2], in V
p,
(*)ι for every stationary S C λ Π S£°, for some 5 < λ, cf (ί) = K (in V
p), S Π 5
is stationary.
Moreover,
(*)2 If in yp, H/5 > λ, #β regular, S C SQ stationary, then for some δ < N0,
cf (δ) = /ί, and S Π 5 is stationary in δ.
(why? as |P| = λ < N/j = cf (N/j), 5 is the union of λ sets from V, so at least one
of them is stationary (subset of λ in V), so without loss of generality S € V.
Now by (*)o above we can find δ as there. But P is /ς-complete and collapses
δ to size ft, so cf (5)
v = «, and 5 Π 5 is stationary in F
p. We want to deduce
Ihp "5 Π δ is stationary in 5", as δ G 5 => cf(<5) = N0 this is easy).
We can conclude

§7. Friedman's Problem 
531
(*) in V
p, if μ > K is regular, S C μ Π 5*0° is stationary then for some
δ < μ, cf(δ) = K and S Π δ is stationary.
Let Q be the forcing from 7.3 A(3) (or the proof of XI 7.1), we shall show that
P*Q
V 
is as required.
Note: #Y *" = Nj", N^ *~ = « , * # * " = λ and every cardinal μ > λ of V
P*Q
remains a cardinal in V 
~ and the properties "δ a limit ordinal" "cf (ί) = NO" ,
cf(ί) > NO are preserved by P (being Ki-complete) and Q (by 7.3A(4)) so S£°
p*9
has the same interpretation in V, V^ and V 
".
P*Q
Let, in V 
", μ be a regular cardinal > HI and S C μ Π 5^° be stationary.
If μ < /c, apply the proof of 7.3, 7.3A(3). If μ > K then, as F
p 1= "|Q| = /ς", S
is the union of K subsets which belong to V
p, so at least one is stationary, so
w.l.o.g. 5 G F
p.
So in V
p, for some ί, cf(5) = /ς, ί Π 5 is stationary; as Q satisfies the
p*9
tt-chain condition, 5 Π δ is still stationary in V 
", as required. 
D7.4

XL Changing Cofinalities;
Equi-Consistency Results
§0. Introduction
We formulate a condition which is (strongly) preserved by revised countable
support iteration, implies HI is not collapsed, no real is added and is satisfied
e.g. by Namba forcing, and any Ki-complete forcing. So we can iterate forcing
notions collapsing ^2 but preserving HI up to some large cardinal.
Our aim is to improve the results of chapter of X to equi-consistency
results. If you want to add reals, look at Chapter XV. To prove the preservation
we use partition theorems and Δ-system theorems on tagged trees (3.5, 3.5A,
3.7 (and 4.3A)). Some of them are from Rubin and Shelah [RuSh:117], see
detailed history there on pages 47, 48 and more on mathematics see [RuSh:117],
[Sh:136] 2.4, 2.5 (pages 111 - 113).
§1. The Theorems
1.1 Discussion. In this chapter we list the demands that we would like our
condition to satisfy, and show how, having a condition satisfying these demands
we can prove our theorems. Then, in the following sections we will formulate
the condition and prove it satisfies all our demands. Lastly we shall prove some
more complicated theorems applying the condition.

§1. The Theorems 
533
The Demands. We will have a condition for forcing notions such that:
(i) If P satisfies the condition then forcing with P does not collapse KI and,
moreover, (when CH holds) it does not add reals.
(ii) If P = RlimQ, where Q is an RCS iteration of forcing notions such that
each of them satisfies the condition then P satisfies it as well.
(RCS iteration was defined in X §1. In 1.9 we will recall its basic properties).
Really we do not get (ii) but a slightly different version (ii) , which is as
good for our purpose:
(ii)' Assume V satisfies: if Q — (P%,Qi '• i < δ) is an RCS iteration, Qu+i is
Levy collapse of 2'
p2i+1l
+l
ll to KI (by countable conditions), each Q^i sat-
isfies the condition. Then P$, the revised limit of ζj, satisfies the condition
(see also 6.2A).
(iii) If Q = (Pi,Qi : i < K) is an RCS iteration as in (ii)', K is a strongly
inaccessible cardinal and \Pi\ < K for i < K then Pκ, the revised limit of
Q, satisfies the ft-c.c.
(iv) The condition is satisfied by the following forcing notions:
a. Namba forcing. (See 4.1, it adds a cofinal countable subset to α;2
without collapsing ω\.) We denote this forcing notion by Nm.
b. Any Ni-closed forcing notion.
c. P[5], where 5 is a stationary subset of ω^ such that α G 5 => cf (α) =
ω, and P[S] = {/ : / is an increasing and continuous function from
a + 1 into 5, for some a < ωι}. Note that P[S] shoots a closed copy
of ω\ into S hence collapses fc^
Remark. The condition on P is, by the terminology we shall use, essentially
the {λ < |P| : λ regular > Kι}-condition; more exactly, the definition of such
a notion is in 6.7, where (ii)
; is proved. Now (iv)α holds by 4.4, (iv)^ by 4.5,
(iv)c holds by 4.6, (i) by 3.2 and (iii) automatically follows from 6.3A(1) as in
X 5.3, see 1.13.

534 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
Remark. The preservation theorem in this chapter is in a sense orthogonal to the
one of Chapter X, since here we are not interested in semiproperness of forcing
notions (e.g. Namba forcing may fail to be semiproper, but it always satisfies
the condition in this chapter). In chapter XV we will present a generalization
of the S-condition which also generalizes semiproperness.
Assume we have a condition satisfying all of these demands and let us get
to the proofs of our theorems.
1.2 Theorem. If "ZFC + G.C.H. -f there is a measurable cardinal" is consis-
tent then so is "ZFC -f G.C.H. 4- there is a normal precipitous filter D on ω^
such that Si G £>".
Remark.
(1) S 0
2is{α<ω 2:cf(α) = N0}.
(2) By [JMMP] the converse of this theorem is also true, so we have an
equiconsistency result.
(3) In fact if "ZFC + there is a measurable cardinal" is consistent then so
is "ZFC -f G.C.H. + there is a measurable cardinal", so we can delete
"G.C.H." from the hypothesis of our theorem.
Proof. We start with a model of ZFC -f G.C.H. with a measurable cardinal K.
We iterate, by the RCS iteration, forcing with Nm K many times. More exactly
let Q = (Pi,Qi : i < K) be an RCS iteration, Qu is Nm (see (iv)α above),
<22ΐ+ι = Levy(Nι,2l
p2ί+
1'). Let V denote our ground model, and P denote
RlimQ We can prove by induction \P^\ < κ; moreover if λ < K is strongly
inaccessible then i < X =>• |P;| < λ, and P\ has power λ.
By 1.1 (ii)', P satisfies the condition (remembering (iv)a-h(iv)b) hence by
l.l(i), forcing by P does not collapse NI nor add reals and so V
p t= CH. On
the other hand clearly \Pi\ > i, hence Qn+i collapses \i\ to NI, hence all λ,
HI < λ < K are collapsed by P. By l.l(iii) (or X 5.3(1)) P satisfies the K-chain
condition hence K, is not collapsed. So clearly ^ — Nj', H^ 
= K and V
p
satisfies G.C.H.

§1. The Theorems 
535
Let F be a normal ^-complete ultrafilter over K (in V), then by (iii) and
X.6.5 (see references there), F generates a normal precipitous filter on K in V
p.
Let A be {λ < K : X is inaccessible} (in V) then A € F so we are done with
the proof once we show that λ G A implies λ has cofinality ω in V[P\. As Nm
satisfies our condition (by demand (iv)a ) and λ is inaccessible in V we know
that the iteration up to stage λ satisfies the λ-c.c. (by demand (iii), or by using
X5.3(l) provided that we restrict A to Mahlo cardinals). Hence after forcing
with P\ we have λ = ^2 and at the next step in the iteration Nm shoots a
cofinal ω-sequence into λ, a sequence that exemplifies cf(λ) = N0 in V
p', see
4.1A. 
Dι.2
1.3 Theorem. If "ZFC + G.C.H. + there is a Mahlo cardinal" is consistent
then so is "ZFC -f G.C.H. 4- for every stationary S C S$ there is a closed copy
of ωi included in it".
Remark. Earlier Van-Liere has shown the converse and is a variant of a problem
of Friedman, see on this X 7.0.
For the clarity of the exposition we prove here a weaker theorem and
postpone the proof of the theorem as stated above to Sect. 7 of this chapter.
1.4 Theorem. If "ZFC + G.C.H. + there is a weakly compact cardinal" is
consistent then so is "ZFC + G.C.H. -h for every stationary S C S$ there is a
closed copy of ω\ included in it".
Proof. The proof is very much like the proof of Theorem 7.3 of X; the only
difference is that now we do not have to demand that there will be measurable
cardinals below the weakly compact cardinal. We give here only an outline
of the proof. Let /ς be weakly compact, w.l.o.g. V = L, so by Jensen's work
there is (Aa : a < K, a inaccessible), Aa = (Aa,e 
: e < nα), a diamond
sequence satisfying: Aa,e C H(a), and for every finite sequence A of subsets of
H(κ), and Π} sentence φ such that (H(κ), G, A) N= ψ there is some inaccessible
λ such that A\H(\) = Aχ (i.e. nλ = lg(A) and Λλ,e = A. Π H(λ)) and

536 
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
(ίf(λ), G,^4λ) f= V
7- Now we define an RCS iteration Q = (Pi,Qi : i < K). Let
Qa = P[§a] (as it was defined in 1.1 (iv)c) whenever Aa — (Pa,Pa,Sa), a
strongly inaccessible and pa G Pα and pa\[-pa
 
uSa is a stationary subset of SQ
(= {δ < X : cf(δ) — HO})", and in all other cases we force with the usual Levy
Hi-closed conditions for collapsing 2'
P°
!!~
I~I
Q:L
In the model we get after the forcing K — H2 and every stationary subset of
50 includes a closed copy of ω\. (For checking the details note that our forcing
notion, and any initial segment of it, satisfies our condition thus no reals are
added, HI is not collapsed and in any λ-stage for inaccessible λ, the initial
segment of the forcing satisfies the λ-c.c. so at that stage λ = ω%, when we use
P[S\] 
we are forcing with P[S] for 5 which is a stationary subset of SQ). DI.S
1.4A Remark. If K is only a Mahlo cardinal then this proof suffices if we just
want "for every 5 C 5^, 5 or 50 \ 5 contains a closed copy of ω\ " or even if
we want "if h is a pressing-down function on SQ, then for some α, h~
l({a})
contains a closed copy of ω\". See more in 7.2.
1.5 Theorem. If "ZFC + G.C.H. -f there is an inaccessible cardinal" is
consistent then so is "ZFC 4- G.C.H. + there is no subset of HI such that
all α -sequences of ^2 are constructible from it".
Remark.
(1) This theorem answers a question of Uri Abraham who has also proved its
converse.
(2) Again we can omit G.C.H. from the hypothesis.
Proof. Let K be inaccessible and let Q — (Pi,Qi : i < K) be an RCS iteration,
Q2i = (Nm)
yP2ί, Q2i+ι = Levy(H2,2l
p2*l+l*l). In the resulting model K = H2
and as the forcing satisfies the tt-c.c. any subset of HI is a member of a model
obtained by some proper initial segment of our iteration, but the ω-sequence
added to ω^ by the next Nm forcing does not belong to this model so it is not
constructible from this subset of HI. 
DI.S

§1. The Theorems 
537
1.6 Theorem. If the existence of a Mahlo cardinal is consistent with ZFC
then so is "G.C.H. + for every subset A of N2 there is some ordinal δ such that
= NO but δ is a regular cardinal in L[A Π ί]".
Remark. Again this is an answer to a question of Uri Abraham and again he
has shown that the converse of the theorem is true as well by using the square
on λ.
Proof. Let K be Mahlo (in a model V of ZFC + G.C.H.), w.l.o.g. V = L and
iterate as in the proof of 1.5. Let A be a subset of N2 in the resulting model.
As the forcing notion satisfies the ft-c.c., we can find a closed and unbounded
C C N2 such that for δ e C we have A Π 5 G V[P$] where P$ is the Λlirn of
ί'th initial segment of our iteration. As K is Mahlo, {λ < K, : X is inaccessible}
is stationary in it so there is some inaccessible λ in C. Such λ exemplifies our
claim. P\ satisfies the λ-c.c., so in V[Pχ] we have λ = K2 hence Nm at the
λ-step of the iteration adds a cofinal ω sequence into λ, so in V[PΛ], which is
our model, cf(λ) - N0 But L[A] C V[Pχ] as λ G C (and Pδ «? P = PΛ). Dι.6
One more answer to a question from Uri Abraham's dissertation is to get V
such that if A C α>2 and K2 
— N2 then L[-A] has > K2 reals. We had noted that
for the statement to hold in V, it is enough to have: L[{δ < Krf : cf
v S = NO}]
has at least H^ reals; more explicitly, it is enough to produce a model in which
there are K2 distinct reals r, such that for some λ G Car
L we have r(£) = 0 iff
cf((λ+^)
L) = HO (i.e., the cofinality is in V, \+i is computed in L). Then the
answer below was obtained by Shai Ben-David using the same method as of
1.5, 1.6:
1.7 Theorem. [Ben David] The consistency of "ZFC + there exists an inacces-
sible cardinal" is equivalent with the consistency with ZFC of the statement:
"There is no cardinal preserving extension of the universe in which there is a
set A C N2 such that L[A] satisfies C.H. and

538 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
However, this proof relies on a preliminary version of this chapter in
which forcing notions adding reals were permitted, which unfortunately seems
doubtful and was abandoned. The framework given in 1.1, is not enough since
in (iv) no forcing notions adding reals appear, but we can use XV §3 instead
(i.e. for unboundedly many i, Qi is Cohen forcing)
Remark. In fact there is no class of V which is a model of ZFC, having the
same NI and ^2 and satisfying C.H.
1.8 Remark. The partition theorems presented later can be slightly general-
ized to monotone families (instead of ideals) as done in the first version of this
book. But this is irrelevant to our main purpose.
We now recall the main properties of RCS iterations. Whenever it is
convenient, we will assume that all partial orders under consideration are
complete Boolean algebras i.e. are (B \ {0}, >).
1.9 Definition. We say that a sequence (Pa,Qβ,\β : a < δ,β < δ) is an RCS
iteration of length δ (δ not necessarily limit ordinal), if:
(1) For all /?, 1/3 is a dense embedding from Pβ * Qβ into Pβ+\, or into
the complete Boolean algebra generated by P/3+ι [We usually do not
mention Ίβ and identify Pβ * Qβ with Pβ+ι}
(2) For all α < β < δ, Pα <£ Pβ. [We assume that for all p <Ξ Pβ, the
projection of p to Pa exists, and we write it as p\a. We write Pa,β
for the quotient forcing Pβ/Pa or Pβ/Ga in V
Pa or t^[Gα], and let
p H-> p\[a,β) be the obvious map in V
Pa.}
(3) Whenever α < δ is a limit ordinal, then Pa = R\im(Pβ : β < a).
Also, if we write Q — (Pa,Qa : α < 5), we automatically define PS =
RlimQ (if δ is a limit) or P§ = PS-I * Qδ-ι (if 5 is a successor), respectively.
We say that (Pa : α < 5} is an RCS iteration iff (Pa,Qa '• OL < δ) is one,

§1. The Theorems 
539
We will not define here what Rlim Q actually is. A possible definition is in
chapter X. Here we will only collect some properties of RCS iterations which
we will use. First, we need a definition:
1.10 Definition. If g is a P^-name we say that g is prompt, if Ih "g < J", and
for all ordinals ξ < 5, all conditions q e P$:
whenever q Ih "g = ξ", then already q\(ξ + 1) Ih "g = ξ".
(where gf(ί + l) = q)
Note that
1.10 A Observation. 1) For a P^-name g we have:
g is prompt iff Ih "g < <P , and for all ξ < δ and all p £ P$:
if p Ih "g < ξ" , then pK£ + 1) Ih "g < Γ -
Also the inverse implication holds, of course.
2) If S is a set of prompt P^-names, then also Sup(5) is a prompt P^-name and
min(S') is a prompt P$-name.
Proof. Easy.
1.11 Definition. If g is a prompt P^-name, then
(a) Pa
 d= {pePδ: (Vg > p) [if q Ih "g = ξ", then q\(ξ + 1) lhPδ «p G G5"]}
(b) for an atomic Q-condition p, pfg is naturally defined: for G& C Pδ generic
over V, (p\a)[Gδ] is p[G«] if ζp[Gδ] < g[Gδ] and 0 otherwise
(c) for p G Ptf, let pίg = {r\g : r e p}

540 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
It may be more illustrative to consider the following dense subset:
1.11 A Remark.
(a) For any prompt P^-name a we have PQ, <£> P$. Moreover, if \\-Pδ "gi <
g2",thenPgι «Pg2.
(b) If ά is the canonical name of α, then Pa = P?.
1.12 Properties of RCS iterations. Let Q = (Pα,Qα : α < δ) be an RCS
iteration with RCS limit Pδ. Then
(0) Assume α(*) < 5, g is a prompt P^^-name of an ordinal > α(*), X is
an antichain of Pα(*)+ι such that p G I => p Ihp5 "g = α(*)" and for each
p G T, /3p is a prompt P^-name of an ordinal > α(*). T/ien for some prompt
Ptf-name 7 we have lhpδ " if p G J Π Gp5 then 7 = /3p and if J Π Gpδ = 0
then 7 = g" .
(1) Whenever (gn : n < α;} is a sequence of prompt P^-names, satisfying
I^P6 "Qίn < 9Vι+ι" f°
r a^
 n? an(l "~P5 "^ω = supngn", then P^ω is the
inverse limit of (PgKn : n < α;). So in particular: whenever (pn : n < ω) is a
sequence of conditions in P^, and pn G Panι and pn+ι Γ^n — Pn f°
r all n,
then there is p G Pttu, such that for all n, p\an — Pn Moreover if p0 G P^0
and pn+ι is a Pgτι-name of a member of Pgn+1 such that pn+ι \Qίn = Pn
then there is p as above.
(2) Let α(*) < (5 be non-limit, Gα(s|t) C Pα(*) generic over V, and (α^ : ζ < β)
an increasing continuous sequence of ordinals in V[Gα(*)], αo = «(*),
α/3 = 5, each αζ+i a successor ordinal.
In V[GaM], we define P^ - Pαc/Gα(*), Q
;
c - Paζ+1/Gaζ 
(where Gαζ
is the Po^-name of the generic subset of P^, which essentially means a
generic subset of Paζ over V extending Gα(*) (Qς is still a P^-name)
Q' = (Pζ,Qζ 
- C < β)- Then in V[Ga(*)], Q' is an RCS iteration with
limit P'β.

§1. The Theorems 
541
(3) If δ is limit, then for all p G P$,
ll-p, "P ^GδifiVa<δ 
[p\a G Gδ]
n
(4) If δ is a limit, then for all p G PS we have a countable set {C
fc(p) ' k < ω}
of prompt names with Ih "ζ
k(p) < ί" for all fc such that letting ζ* =
suP{C^(p) •' A; < ω}, we have ζ* is an almost prompt P^-name and p G Pζ*.
(5) If J is a strongly inaccessible cardinal and for every a < δ we have |Pα| < δ
then PS is the direct limit of Q that is (J Pα is a dense sunset of Pδ.
a<δ
1.13 More properties of RCS iterations. As corollaries of (4) and (5)
above we get:
(1) Let Q be an RCS iteration as above, and assume
Ihp, «cf(ί) > No"
Then
(a) Uα<<5 -^α *
s (essentially) a dense subset of Pδ that is for every p G P«5
for some ς G U Pα we have g Ih "p G Qpδ" (so P^ is the direct limit
a<δ
of (Pa : α < ί))
(b) No new α -sequences of ordinals are added in stage 5, i.e., whenever
p G P<5, r a P^-name and p lhpδ "r : α; —>• Ord", tfeen there is an α < <5,
a Pα-name r* and a condition </ > p such that <? Ih "r = r*".
(2) // {Pα, Qα : « < K) is an RCS iteration, AC a strongly inaccessible cardinal,
Pκ does not collapse NI, and for all α < K we have |Pα| < «, ίΛen PΛ
satisfies the tt-chain condition.
Proo/. (la) Let p G P$, C* as in 1.12(4), and let q > p decide the value of C*,
say q \\-pδ "C* = ξ". Then q\(ξ + 1) G Pξ+i is essentially stronger than p.
(Ib) Not hard.
(2) Easy, since we take direct limits on the stationary set S" — {δ < X :
cf(ί) - Ki}, by

542 
XL Changing Cofmalities; Equi- Consistency Results
§2. The Condition
In this section we get to the heart of this chapter, the definition of our condition
for forcing notions. We need some preliminary definitions.
2.1 Definition. A tagged tree (or an ideal tagged tree) is a pair (Γ, I) such
that:
(A) T is a tree i.e., a nonempty set of finite sequences of ordinals such that if
η G T then any initial segment of η belongs to T; here with no maximal
nodes if not said otherwise. T is partially ordered by initial segments, i.e.,
77 < v iff 77 is an initial segment of v.
(B) I is a function with domain including T such that for every η G T : 1(77)
( = 1^) is an ideal of subsets of some set called the domain of 1^, and
Sucτ(r?) = {y : v is an immediate successor of η in Γ} C Dom(lr7).
(C) For every η G T we have Sucτ(^) ^ 0 and above each η G Γ there is some
v G T such that Sucτ(^) $. \v.
2.1 A Convention. For any tagged tree (T, I) we can define |t,
|t — {{α : 77" (α) G A} : A G 1^}; we sometimes, in an abuse of notation, do
not distinguish between I and |t; e.g. if |t is constantly /*, we write /* instead
of I. Sometimes we also write Sucτ(η) for {a : η~ (a) e T}.
2.2 Definition, η will be called a splitting point of (T, I) if Sucτ(η) $ \η (just
like v in (3) above). Let sp(Γ, I) be the set of splitting points of (Γ, I).
We call (T, I) normal if η G Γ \ sp(T, I) => |Sucτ(τ?)| = 1 (we may forget
to demand this).
2.3 Definition. We now define orders between tagged trees:
(a) (T2,I2) < (Tι,lι) if TI C T2 and whenever η G TI is a splitting point
of TI then SucTl(ry) φ \z(η) and li^JfSucT^) = l2(^)ΓSucTl(^) (where
I\A = {B : B C A and B G /}) and Όom(I\A) = A.

§2. The Condition 
543
(b) (Γ2,I2) <* (ϊι,lι) iff (Γ2,I2) < (ϊι,lι) and every η £ TI which is a
splitting point of T2 is a splitting point of TI as well.
2.3A Notation. We omit li and denote a tagged tree by TI whenever \η —
{A C Sucτ(η) : \A\ < |Sucτ(r?)| if |Sucτ(r7)| > N0, and A = 0 if |SucΓ(η)| < N0}
for every η £ T.
2.4 Definition.
(1) For a set I of ideals, a tagged tree (T, I) is an I-tree if for every η £ T, 1^ £ I
(up to an isomorphism) or |Sucτ(r/)| = 1.
(2) For a set S of regular cardinals, T is called an 5-tree if for some I, (T, I)
is an Is-tagged tree where Is = {{A C X : \A\ < X} : X e S}
2.5 Definition.
(1) For a tree T, limT is the set of all ω-sequences of ordinals, such that every
finite initial segment of them is a member of T. The set lim T is also called
the set of "branches" of T.
(2) A subset J of a tree T is a front if r?, v £ J implies none of them is an
initial segment of the other, and every η £ limT has an initial segment
which is a member of J.
2.6 Main Definition. Let S be a set of regular cardinals; we say that a forcing
notion P satisfies the S'-condition if there is a function F with values of the
"right" forms, so that for every 5-tree T:
if f is a function / : Γ —> P satisfying
(a) v < η implies f ( v ) <p f ( η ) and
(b) there are fronts Jn(n < ω) (of T) such that \Jn<ωJn = sp(T,/),
every member of Jn+ι has a proper initial segment belonging to Jn
and η £ Jn implies
(Sucτ(τ7), {/(*/) : v £ Sucτ(r/))) - F(η,w[η], (/(i/) : v < 17))

544 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
(w[η] is defined below) and Sucτ(^) = {η* (&) : a < X} for some
λ G S (for simplicity).
then for every Γ^ Γ <* T
1" there is some p G P such that p \\-P "3η G limT
f
such that Vfc < ω we have f ( η \ k ) G GP" where Gp is the P-name of the generic
subset of P; note that in general η is not from V, i.e. it may be a branch which
forcing by P adds.
2.6A Explanation. First for the notation: w[η] — {k < tg(rj) 
: η\k G
U«ω4}
Now for the meaning: One can regard the situation as a kind of a game. There
are two players. In ω many steps they define a tree T and an increasing function
/ : T — > P. In the n'th move, player I defines an initial segment Tn of the tree
T (so Tn will be the set of nodes up to some member of the front Jn) and a
function /n : Tn — > P which is increasing such that ra < n => fm C fn (see
below). Player II end-extends the tree Tn to a tree T'n by adding successors
to each leaf (=node without successor) in Tn and extends fn to a function
f'n on T'n. Then player I plays Γn+ι (an end extension of T'n with no infinite
branches), and a function /n+ι Q /£), etc. Finally, T = \JnTn, f = \Jnfn
Player II wins a play if for all T
f: if T <* Γ
f, then there is p G P such that
p Ihp "(3r? G limT^ίV/ς < ω)f(η\k) G GP". P satisfies the 5-condition if there
is a winning strategy F which at each point η depends only on what happened
so far on the nodes below η.
However F, the "winning strategy" of player II, has only partial memory.
Remark. It does not matter if we require \Jn Jn = sp(T, /) or \Jn Jn C sp(Γ, /),
or equivalently whether we allow player I to play any end extension Tn of T!rι_l
or only end extensions with no new splitting points.
Remark. (1) If P is a dense subset of Q, then P has the I-condition (see 2.7
below) iff Q has it.
(2) If P <£ Q, and Q has the I-condition, then also P has the I-condition.

§2. The Condition 
545
The proof of (2) uses the fact that if: / : T — > P, then the existence of a
branch in {η G T : f ( η ) G Gp} is absolute between the universes V
p and V
Q .
2.6B Convention.
(1) In Definition 2.6, the value F gives to Sucτ(η) is w.l.o.g. {η
 Λ (α) : α < λ}
for some λ, and we do not strictly distinguish between λ and Sucτ(η).
(2) The domain of F consists of triples of the form (77, it;, /), where η is a finite
sequence of ordinals, w C Dom(?7), and / is an increasing function from
{η\k : k < ig(η)} into P. The value F(η,w,f) has two components: The
first is of the form {η~ (i) 
i G ^4} for some set A of ordinals (by (1),
without loss of generality A = \A\) and the second component is a family
of elements of P above /(?/), indexed by the first component.
When we define such a function F, we usually call the first component
"Sucτ(^/)" (here "T" is just a label, not an actual variable), and we write the
second component as f\Sucτ(η) or (/(^) : v G Sucτ(?7)} (i.e. we use the same
variable "/" that appears in the input of F) .
2.7 Definition. For a set I of ideals we define similarly when does a forcing
notion P satisfies the I-condition (the only difference is dealing with I-trees
instead of ^-trees), so now
{Sucτ(ry), !„, {/(i/) : v G Sucτ(τ7))) - F(η,w[n], f\{v : v < η})
and Sucτ(η) = Dom(lT7). We allow ourselves to omit Sucτ(^) when it is well
understood. (We can let the function depend on \v(y < 77) too).
2.7A Remark. If / is restriction closed (i.e. I el, A C Dom(/), A φ I then
I\A G I at least for some B C A, B $. /+ and J G I we have I\B = J) then we
can weaken the demand to
S\ιcτ(η) C Dom(l,), 
Sucr(τ?) φ /,)•

546 
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
§3. The Preservation Properties
Guaranteed by the 5-Condition
3.1 Definition.
(1) An ideal / is λ-complete if any union of less than λ members of / is still a
member of /.
(2) A tagged tree (T, I) is λ-complete if for each η e T the ideal 1^ is λ-
complete.
(3) A family I of ideals is λ-complete if each / € I is λ-complete.
3.2 Theorem. (CH) If P is a forcing notion satisfying the I-condition for an
^-complete I then forcing with P does not add reals.
As an immediate conclusion we get:
3.3 Theorem. (CH) If P is a forcing notion satisfying the 5-condition for a
set S of regular cardinals greater than NI then forcing with P does not add
reals.
The main tool for the proof of the theorem is the combinatorial Lemma 3.5
from [RuSh:117], for which we need a preliminary definition. More on such
theorems and history see Rubin and Shelah [RuSh ll?].
3.4 Definition. We define a topology on HmT (for any tree T) by defining
for each η G T the set T[η] = {y : η<y or v<_η} and letting {limT^j : η G T}
generate the family of open subsets of limT (so each such set lim(T[77]) is also
closed and is called basic open, and an open subset is an arbitrary union of
basic open sets). The family of Borel sets is the σ-algebra generated by the
open sets.
3.5 Lemma. 1) If (Γ, I) is a λ+-complete tree and H is a function from limT
to λ such that for every a < X the set H~
l({a}) is a Borel subset of limT (in
the topology that was defined in Definition 3.4) then there is a tagged subtree
(Tt, I), (T, I) <* (T
f, I) (see 2.3(b)) such that H is constant on li

§3. The Preservation Properties Guaranteed by the S-Condition 
547
2) In part (1) we can let H be multivalued, i.e. assume lim(Γ) is \J Ha, each
α<λ
Ha is a Borel subset of lim(T). If (T, I) is λ
+-complete then there is (T^, I) such
that (T, I) <* (Γt,I) and for some a we have lim(Γt) C Ha.
Proof. 1) First note that ifTi C T is such that: () G TI; for every η G TI if η is a
splitting point of (T, I) then Suc^ (η) = Sucτ(η) and if η is not a splitting point
of T then |SucTl(r7)| = 1, then (T, I) <* (Tι,l|Tι), so w.l.o.g. we can assume
that in T every point is either a splitting point or it has only one immediate
extension.
For each a < \ let us define a game Dα: in the first move player I chooses
the node r/o in the tree such that t>g(ηo) = 0, player II responds by choosing
a proper subset A0 of Sucτ(ηo) such that AQ G 1^, in the n-th move player I
chooses an immediate extension of ηn-ι,ηn such that ηn φ An-ι or ηn-ι is not
a splitting point of (T, I), and player II responds by choosing An G 1^.
Player I wins if for the infinite branch η defined by 770, τ/ι, ?72? 
we have
H(η) = α. By the assumption of the lemma this is a Borel game so by Martin's
Theorem, [Mr75] one of the players has a winning strategy. We claim that
there is some α < λ for which player I has a winning strategy in the game Dα.
Assume otherwise, i.e., for every α < λ player II has a winning strategy Fa.
We construct an infinite branch inductively: let 770 = (), 770 G T. At stage n
let An be (Jα<λ Fα(r/0, r/i, . , r/n-i); now if τ?n_ι is a splitting point (of (T, I))
then \ηn_1 is λ+-complete and each Fa(ηQ,... ,ηn-ι) is a member of it, hence
An G \ηn_ιy so clearly Sucτ(τ7n_ι) g An.
If 77n_ι is not a splitting point it has only one immediate successor and let
it by ηn, otherwise since Suc(^n_ι) φ Iηn_^ An G 7^^, we have (Suc(τ7n_ι) \
An) 7^ 0 so we choose ηn G (Sucτ(τ?n-ι) \ An). Let η = Un<u; ^ ^e the infinite
branch that we define by our construction and let α(*) = #(77). Now in the
game Dα(#) if player I will choose ηn at stage n (for all n) and player II will
play by Fα(*), player I will win although player II has used his winning strategy
•Pα(*)> contradiction.
So there must be α(*) such that player I has a winning strategy #α(*) f°
Γ
Da(*) and let Γ
t be the subtree of T defined by {η : (η |Ό,..., η \(n - 1)) are the

548 
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
first n moves of player I in a play in which he plays according to Ha^}. Now
for η G T
1" Π sp(Γ), let A = Sucτt(r/). Then A £ Iη, otherwise player II could
have played it as An. So Γ <* T+, and T* is as required.
2) Same proof replacing H~
l({a}) by Ha so H(η) = a by η G Ha. 
DS.S
3.5A Corollary. If (Γ, I) is a λ
+-complete tree, and g is a function from Γ into
λ, and λ
H° = λ, then there is a tagged subtree (T
1",/), (Γ,/) <* (T^I) such
that g\T^ depends only on the length of its argument, i.e. for some function
0t : w -> λ, for all η G Γt, g(η) = gi(tg(η)). 
D3.5Λ
Proof of Theorem 3.2. Let r be a name of a real in V[P] and PQ e P and
we will find a condition p G P forcing r to be equal to a real from V and
po < P. Let /, (Γ, I) be such that Rang(l) C I, / : T -> P and be defined as
follows: we define by induction on fc, for a sequence η of ordinals of length /c,
the truth value of η G T, /(rj), and then 1^. We let (} G T, /((}) = p0 For η G T
of even length 2/c, we use F from the definition of the I-condition, to define
Sucτ(r?),!»,, f\Sucτ(η). For η G Γ of length 2fc + 1, we let Suc^ίT) = {rf (0)},
and we define /(τy
Λ (0)) such that it will be an extension of the value of / on
its predecessor and such that f(η) forces a value for r(fc) (the fc'th place of the
real that r names).
We continue by defining H : limΓ —» Rv (as we assume C.H. clearly
|R
V| = H1? so it is just like a function from Γ to α i) by letting H(η)(k) =
the value forced by f(η\(2k + 1)) for r(fe). By Lemma 3.5 there is (T^ I),
(Γ, I) <* (Tt, I) on which H is constant, now let p be the forcing condition
that by Definition 2.6 forces "3/7 G HmΓ
1^ such that V k [ f ( η \ k ) G GP]". This p
forces r to equal the constant value of H on T* which is a member of V, and
p l h Mpo€Gp M. 
Π3.2
3.6 Theorem. If P is a forcing notion satisfying the 5-condition for a set of
regular cardinals 5 and NI φ S then forcing by P does not collapse HI.

§3. The Preservation Properties Guaranteed by the S'-Condition 
549
Remark. 1) Note that this is stronger than 3.3, as we do not assume C.H. and
that we allow K0 G S. The proof is quite similar to the proof of Theorem 3.2
but here we use a somewhat different combinatorial lemma. Note also that we
shall not use this theorem;
2) We can generalize 3.2 and 3.6 to I-condition when I is ^2-
compl
ete, striaght-
forwardly, see 3.8.
3.7 Lemma. Let (T, I) be such that for some regular uncountable λ, for every
η G T either 1^ is λ+-complete or |Sucτ(^)| < λ, then for every H : T —> λ
satisfying {77 G lim T : H(η) < a] is a Borel subset of lim T for any successor
α < λ, there is α < λ and (T', I), (T, I) <* (T', I) such that for all η e T' we
have H(ή) < α, and for all η in T", if |Sucτ(r?)| < λ, then Sucτ>(η) = Sucτ(η)
Proof of the lemma. We define for each successor α < λ a game ό)α very much
like the way we did it for proving Lemma 3.5, the only difference being that if
|Sucτ(τ?n)| < λ player II chooses An such that \Sucτ(ηn) \ An\ = 1 (otherwise
player II chooses An G \ηn just like in 3.3); player I wins if for every n < ω
H(ηn) < a. Here again the game Dα is determined for every α (here simply
because if player II wins a play he does so at some finite stage). Again we claim
that there should be at least one α for which player I has a winning strategy.
Assume the contrary and let Fa be player's II winning strategy for each α < λ.
We construct a subtree T* deciding by induction on the height of the members
of T which of them are the members of T*. For η that is already in T*, if
|Sucτ(?7)| < λ we include all the members of Sucτ(η) in T*; otherwise 1^ is
λ+-complete so Sucτ(r?) \ \Ja<\ Fa(η\Q,η\l,... ,η) is not empty, so we pick
one extension of η from this set and the rest of Sucτ(η) will not be in T*. Now
T* is a tree of height ω branching to less than λ successors at each point, so as
λ is regular uncountable |Γ*| < λ and there is some α* < λ such that η G Γ*
implies H(η) < α*. Regarding the game DQ*, there is a play of it in which
player I chooses all along the way members of Γ* and player II plays according
to Fα*, of course player I wins this game contradicting the assumption that
Fα* is a winning strategy for player II.

550 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
We define T" just like we did in the proof of Lemma 3.5, collecting all the
initial segments of plays of player I in the game ό)Q* when he plays according
to his winning strategy Ha*. 
Da.γ
Proof of Theorem 3.6. Just like in the proof of 3.2, having a name τ of a function
in V[P] mapping ω into ω\ we take an S-tree T, define a function h : T —> P
using the F in odd stages and in even stages forcing more and more values for
r. Using 3.7 with λ = NI, we get a condition p G P forcing the function that τ
names to be bounded below ωi, so we are done. 
Ds.e
Similarly we can prove:
3.8 Theorem. If P satisfies the I-condition, and λ is regular uncountable and
(V/ € I) [| \JI\ < λ or / is λ+-complete] then lhP "cf(λ) > N0" If (V/ e I) [/ is
λ
+-complete] and λ = λ
H° then P adds no new ω-sequence from λ.
3.8 Warning. The statement "in V
P,Q satisfies the 5-condition" may be
interpreted as "in V
P,Q satisfies the I-condition" in two ways:
(a) I - {{A e V
p : A C \,V
P \= \A\ < X} : X G 5}
(b) I - {{A G V : A C λ, V N \A\ < λ} : λ G 5}
Note that / € I is identified with the ideal it generates.
However the two interpretations are equivalent if P satisfies the λ-chain
condition (or is λ
+-complete) for each λ G 5 (and even weaker conditions) [and
this will be the case in all our applications.]
§4. Forcing Notions Satisfying the 5-Condition
4.1 Definition. Namba forcing Nm is the set {T : T is a tagged {N2}-tree,
such that for every η G T, for some z/, η < v G T and |Sucτ(^)| = ^2} with the
order T < T' iff T D T' (see 2.4); so smaller trees carry more information and
we identify T and (Γ,I^), I™ is the ideal of bounded subsets of α;2. We will

§4. Forcing Notions Satisfying the ^-Condition 
551
write h or hNm for the generic branch added by Nm, i.e. lh"ή : ω —> ω%
n, and
for every p in the generic filter, tτ(p) = trunk(p) C /ι", where the trunk of T
is η G T of maximal length such that v € T & ^g(^) < ^g(r?) =Φ i/ < η. We can
restrict ourselves to normal members: T such that η G T => |Suc^(?7)| £ {1, ^2}-
For / an ideal of ω^ Nm(/) is defined similarly (not used in this chapter).
4.1 A Claim. Nm changes the cofinality of H2 to N0 (/^vm exemplifies this).
Remark. In X 4.4 (4) the variant of Namba forcing Nm' is the set of all trees of
height ω such that each tree has a node, the trunk such that below its level the
tree-order is linear and above it each point has ^2 many immediate successors,
the order is inversed inclusion. Namba introduces Nm in [Nm]. Both forcing
notions add a cofinal ω-sequence to ω2 (Nm by 4.1A, Nm' by X 4.7(2)) without
collapsing KI, and (if CH holds) neither of them adds reals (Nm by 4.4, Nm'
by 4.7(1), (3)), but they are not the same.
4.2 Claim. (Magidor and Shelah). Assume CH. If h[h'\ is a Namba sequence
[Namba'-sequence] then in V[h] we cannot find a Namba'-sequence over F, nor
can we in V[h'\ find a Namba-sequence over V.
Proof. Trivially we can in Nm and Nm' restrict ourselves to conditions which
are trees consisting of strictly increasing finite sequences of ordinals. First we
look in V[ft'], let h' be the Nm'-name of the Namba' sequence, and let / be a
Nm'-name of an increasing function from ω to ω^ Let T° G Nm' and suppose
Γ° \\-Nm. "Sup Rang(/) - ω^". Now it is easy to find Γ
1 in Nm', Γ
1 > Γ°, such
that for each m, n < ω the truth values of "f(n) = Λ'(m)", and "/(
n) < Λ'(m)"
are determined by Γ
1 (i.e., forced), (possible by X 4.7(1), as forcing by Nm'
does not add reals.)
Let A = {k < ω : for some m, T
1 forces that for every i < k we
have f ( i ) < h'(rn) < /(&)}, so A is an infinite subset of <j, in V, and let
A = {ki : ί < α;}, &o < kι < &2 < ... and there are (πi£ : i < ω) such that
πii < mt+ι < ω and T
1 Ih "f(i) < Λ'(ra/) < /(*/) for i < k£ and ί < ω". Now

552 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
(*) T
1 IhNm' " f°
r every F G V, an increasing function from ω<2 to α;2, there
is 4 < ω such that for every ί > 4 + 3, /(**) > F(/(fc^_2))".
Why? This is because for every F G V (as above, without loss of generality
strictly increasing) and T
2 > Γ
1 (in Nm') if IQ is the length of the trunk of T
2
then for some T
3 > Γ
2;
(**) T
3 lhNm, " if I > 4> + 3 then f(kι) > F(/(fo_2))"
Why? Simply choose Γ
3 - {η G Γ
2 : if £g(τj) > £ + 1 > 4 then τj(£) >
F(η(l - 1))}, clearly Γ
3 G Nn^T
3 > Γ
2 and Γ
3 satisfies (**).
So (*) holds, but it exemplifies / is not a Nm-sequence, i.e., T
1 Il-Nm/ "/
is not a Namba-sequence". [Why? Because ll~Nm " for some function F G V
from α;2 to ω2 for arbitrarily large I < ω we have Λ(fc^) < F(/ι(/^_2))"
as if T G Nm and for simplicity each η G T is strictly increasing we let
F 
: ω<2 —> ω2 be such that F(α) = min{5 : if η G T Π ω>δ then for some
i/, η <3 z/ G Γ Π
 ω>5}, and let Γ' - {η G Γ: if t < £g(τ?) and τ?|t G sp(Γ) and
\{m < i : r^trn G sp(Γ)}| G U{[*iOi,fciOi+5) : * < ^} then r/(£) < F(r/(£- 1))},
and T' forces the failure.] So we have proved one half of 4.2.
Now let us prove the second assertion in the claim, i.e., let / be a Nm-name
of an increasing function from ω to u;2, and we shall prove that it is forced, not
to be generic for Nm' so assume ll~Nm " U f(
n) —
 ωϊ" - Clearly this is enough.
m<ω ~
Let Γ G Nm, then we can find Γ° > Γ, T° G Nm (normal) such that for
every splitting point η of Γ0 and v = η
Λ (a) G Γ°:
1) for some nv, Γ^ \\-Nrn "nv = Min{£ : f ( ί ) > MaxRang(z/)},
2) for some 7,, Tft II- "/(n.) = 7,"
3) if pv is the trunk of Γ^ then (Vβ)[py 
~ (β) e T° -+ β > 7^].
If nv is not defined let nv = ω (this occurs if v $_ sp(T).
Now by 3.5A there is T
1, Γ° <* T
1 (in Nm) and m>(£ < ω) such that
nη = nlg(η) for every 77 G Γ
1. Let {^ : i < ω} be a list of {£ < ω : n^+ι ^ cj},
such that ^ < ^+ι, so 77 G T
1, ίg(ry) = ^ implies 77 is a splitting point of T
1.
Note that if η G T
1, ίί+1 G Dom(r7), then Γ^ Ih
 uη(ίi) < f(nέi) < r/(£i+1)".
Let Γ
2 = {77 G Γ
1 : if I2i < tg(η), then η(l2i) = Min{α : (τy^2i)
Λ(α) <E Γ
1},
F(α) - Min{7 : (Vfc < α;) (Vι/ G T
2 Π
 ω>a)(3p G
 fc7)(ι/> G Γ
2)}. So F is

§4. Forcing Notions Satisfying the 5-Condition 
553
nondecreasing and Ίfη] 
Ih "/(n/ai) < 77(^+1) < F(η(ί2i-ι)) <
for i G (0,ω).
Let 4
 d= {ni2i :0<i<ω}.
Then Γ
2 G Nm,T
2 > Γ
1, and F G V is a function from ω2toω2,AeV
an infinite subset of ω and
Γ
2 Ih^ "for every n G A,/(n) < F(f(n - 1))".
This shows that (Γ
2 forces) / is not a Nm'-sequence. 
U4.2
4.3 Claim.
(1) Nm', Nm do not satisfy the 2
H°-chain condition.
(2) It is consistent with ZFC that 2*° = NI, 2
Nl arbitrarily large and Nm, Nm'
satisfies the fr^-c.c.
4.3A Remark. The proof of (2) is inspired by the proof of Baumgartner of the
consistency of: ZFC + 2^° arbitrarily large + "there is no set of KS subsets of KI
with pairwise countable intersection" . Thinking a minute the close connection
between the problems should be apparent. The other ingredient is the Δ-system
theorem on trees from Rubin and Shelah (again see [RuSh:117]).
Note that Nm, Nm
7 necessarily colapse ^3 (see [Sh:g, VII 4.9]) so 4.3(2) is best
possible.
Proof. (I) For every real η (i.e. η G
 ω2), let Tη = {v : v a finite sequence of
ordinals < ω2, and n < tg(v) => z'(n) + 77(71) is an even ordinal}.
Clearly Tη G Nm and Tη G Nm', and the Γ^'s are pairwise incompatible
(in Nm and in Nm') and there are 2
N° such T^'s.
(2) Let V satisfy G.C.H. K > K2 and P = {/ : / a countable function
from K to {0, 1}} ordered by inclusion. Suppose in V
P,Q is Nm or Nm', and
it does not satisfy the N^chain condition. So there is PQ G P and P-names
Ti(i < K4) such that p0 lhP "each Ti belongs to Q (for i < N4) and they are
pairwise incompatible in Q, Q is Nm or Nm'". Without loss of generality pQ Ih "
if Q = Nm', then every T< has trunk {)".

554 
XI. Changing Cofmalities; Equi-Consistency Results
For each i we can now find a tree of conditions p
l
η deciding higher and
higher splitting points of TV Specifically, we will define A
1 C
 ω>(ω>2), p
l
η, v^ for
77 G A
1 such that
(a) ()eA\p\}>Po
(b) pi, Ihp "η G TV' (and pj, G P of course).
(c) p
l
η Ihp "i/J is a splitting point of Ti,ry^ι/*, and: if p < ι/* is a splitting
point of Ti then for some ί < lg(η) we have p = ^i^'
(d) 77 G -A*, p G -A*, r; < p implies i/^ < i/*
(e) i/*
 Λ (α) € A* iff for some q G P,p^ < q and ς lhP "i/*
 Λ (α) G Γ^" .
(f) iΐρ = v
l
η~ (α) G A
i then p^ < pj,, and p
l
p lhP "p € ΪY' [this actually follows
from (b) and (d) and η < z/*].
(g) if Q is Nm' then for every i and r/ G A
1, ^ = 77.
This is easily done, and let T? = {η\t : I < £g(η),η € A*}, and let pfa G T?)
be pj,,^ G -Aj, where 77 < i/, and (Vp)[r/ < p <3 i^ — > p ^ -A*]. By the Δ-
system theorem on trees from [RuSh:117, Th.4.12, p. 76] there is T/ satisfying
Tf <* T;
1, and ς* (r/ G ϊ?) such that:
(α) p^ < 4 hence p0 < g* (and ς* G P).
(/?) if ry is a splitting point of T/, then 77
 Λ (o), r/
Λ (β) G i;1 & α ^ /3 implies
<α) ) Π Dθm(4 ^ (β) ) = Dθlϊl(4) aild ^ ^ 4
 Λ (α) > ^ ~ 4 ^ («
(7) if η is not a splitting point of T/, (77 G T/) then for the unique α such that
rf (α) G Tl, we have ς^ . (α> = g* .
Now by the usual Δ-system theorem there are i < j < R* such that
T/ = Tj and for every η G T/, ςj, ^ are compatible. Let

§4. Forcing Notions Satisfying the ^-Condition 
555
Clearly T is a P-name of a subset of
 ω>(ωz), closed under initial segments,
T C Ti, TJ, so it suffices to prove
q* Ih "Ti <* T & T, <* T & Γ G 9"
which is easy. 
U4.3
4.4 Lemma. Nm satisfies the 5-condition for any 5 such that ^2 G 5.
Proof. To show our claim holds we have to describe F and then show that F
does its work. At a point η where we use F, F has to determine Sucτ(?7), and
/(r/) for any immediate successor η
f of η (see 2.6B for the notation). At such
a point f ( η ) is already known and is a condition in Nm. Let vη be a point
of minimal height in f ( η ) such that v^ has ^2 many immediate successors (in
/(r?)). Let Sucτ(ry) be {r/
Λ (α) : ^
 Λ (α) G /(r?)} and for each r?
Λ (α) in Sucτ(r/)
let /(τ/
Λ (Q:)) be the subtree of f ( ή ) consisting of members of f ( η ) which are
comparable with ι/η
 Λ (α) (in the tree order of /(??)). When we want to check
that our F does the work; we are given an 5-tree T, fronts Jn and a function
/ : T — > Nm as above in 2.6 and we are given a subtree T', Γ <* T". We have
to find a condition r G Nm so that r Ih "there exists an infinite η such that for
every n < ω,η\n G T' and f(η\n) G G". We produce r by passing from T
1 to
a subtree T
11 > T' such that every point in T" either belongs to some front Jn
(and thus fits the demands of F and in particular has ^2 many successors) and
is a splitting point, or it has exactly one immediate successor. Now r is the tree
of all the initial segments of trunks of f ( η ) for some η G T" n (\Jn<ω Jn)\ that
is:
r = {p : 3η G ( (J Jn) Π Γ" such that /?<^}
where vη is from the definition of f ( η ) according to F. By the construction, if
f?ι, τ?2 are <l-incomparable, then so are J^, i/^, hence by the definition of Nm,
r is a member of Nm. As any p G Nm forces that "3η G lim(p) such that for all
n the subtree defined by η\n belongs to G", it is not hard to see that r is as
required. 
Q4.4

556 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
4.4A Claim. If /* is an N2-complete ideal on ω2 to which every singleton
belongs and /* G I then Nm satisfies the I-condition.
Proof. Same, and really follows (see more generally in XV §4). 
EU.4Λ
4.5 Lemma. Any ωi-closed forcing notion satisfies any 5-condition.
Proof. This is trivial with no "real" demands on F, when we are in the relevant
situation with an S-tree Γ', Γ <* T' and / : Γ -» P we just pick r G P such
that r > Un<ω f(
1Ί\
n} f°
Γ some Ή £ limT", such r exists by the completeness of
P and it forces that any smaller condition is a member of GP, so we are done.
Π4.5
4.5A Remark. The same is true for strategically Ki-closed forcing notions
(games of length ω -f 1 suffice).
4.6 Lemma. Let W be a stationary subset of S$ — {α < ω% : cf (α) = ω} and
let P[W] = {h : h is an increasing and continuous function from a + 1 into W
for some α < ωi} ordered by inclusion, Λen P[W] satisfies the 5-condition for
any 5 such that N2 £ S.
Proof. We define the F and then show why it works. Each F(η) will determine
Sucτ(η) to be (ry
Λ(α) : α < u^} and f ( η ~ (a)) a condition above /(r/) such
that Max(Rang(/(τ7
Λ(α}))) > α (note that by the definition of P[W] each
function h which belongs to P[W] attains its maximum: max(Rang(/ι)) =
/ι(max(Dom(/ι))). Let us denote Max(Rang(/(r/))) by aη. For proving that F
works, assume T is an 5-tree, Jn fronts, / : Γ —> P[W] meets our requirements
for F (see 2.6) and Γ <* T'. Let CΊ be a closed unbounded subset of α;2
such that if ί G CΊ and η e T' and ry G
 ω>5 then α^ < 5. Let C2 be a
closed unbounded subset of ω<2 such that for δ G 62,77 G T' Π (Un<α> ^)
satisfying η e
 ω>δ and α < 5 there is always some β such that a < β < δ
and 77
Λ {/?) € T1'. Now for some η G Γ
; we pick 5 G CΊ Π (72 Π W such that
α^ < δ and construct an <d-increasing sequence (ηn : n < ω} in T
7 such that
linin^^α^ = δ (this is possible as cf (δ) = ω using the definitions of CΊ and

§4. Forcing Notions Satisfying the 5-Condition 
557
C2). Let r = Un<ωf(ηn) U {(Supn<ωDom(/(r;n)), ί )}, clearly r e P[W] and
forces each f(ηn) to belong to the generic G so we are done. 
U4.6
4. 6 A Lemma. Let W — (Wi : ί < ωι) be a sequence of stationary subsets of
50 = {α < ω2 : cf (α) = ω} and let the forcing notion P[W] be defined by
P[W] = {/ :/ is an increasing and continuous function from
a -f 1 into WQ for some α; < ω\ , and /ι satisfies
Mi < a : h(ϊ) G WJ
(ordered by inclusion), then P[W] satisfies the 5-condition for any S such that
Proof. We define the F as in the previous lemma: Each F(η) will determine
Sucτ(?7) to be {η~ (a) : a < ω^} and f(η~(a)} a condition above /(r/) such
that Max(Rang(/(/7
 Λ (α))) > α. Let us write aη for Max(Dom/(τ7)) and 5^ for
Max(Rang(/(r?))).
Now assume T is an 5-tree, and / : T -> P[W] obeys F, and let Γ <* T' .
By Lemma 3.5 with λ = NI (not λ - 2*°) we can find a subtree T", T' <* T"
and an α < ω\ such that whenever 770 < 771 ... are elements of T", then
ω α^ = α. Now as in the proof of 4.6 let 5 G Wtt be such that
(Vry G
 <ω£ Π Γ
;/)(Vi < δ)(3j < δ)[aη <δ,η~ (j) G T" and i < aη- {j} < δ}.
Again we can construct a sequence r/o < η\ < . . . in Γ
;/ such that
HmSupRang(r7n) = 5.
Let r = \Jn<ω f(ηn) U {(α, δ)}, then r G P[W] and r forces each f(ηn) to
belong to the generic G. 
Π4.6A
4.7 Lemma. Suppose
(a) P satisfies the I0-condition.

558 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
(b) For every 70 G IQ there is I\ G Ii such that \JAeIl A C (J^e/o ^
 anc*
Then P satisfies the Ii -condition.
Proof. Trivial. 
Π4.7
§5. Finite Composition
5.1 Theorem. Let QQ satisfies the I0-condition and let Qι be a Qo-name of
a forcing notion such that the weakest condition of QQ forces it to satisfy the
Ii-condition. Let
(a) μ be the first regular cardinal strictly greater than the cardinality of the
domain of each member of I0
(b) λ be such that λ = \<μ > \QQ\
(c) assume Ihg0 "Ii is λ
+-complete"
(d) let I be I0 U lι
Then P = QQ * Q\ satisfies the I-condition.
Remark. Note that EI G V (we will not gain much by letting Ii G V
Qo.)
Proof. Once again we have to define the function F and then prove it does
its work. We will need a combinatorial lemma and its proof will conclude
the proof of the theorem. For f ( η ) G P we denote by /°(τ?) its Qo-part and
by f
l(η) the Qi-part (it is a Qo-name of a condition in Qi), let F° be the
function exemplifying Qo satisfies the Io-condition and -F
1 be the Qo-name of
the function exemplifying Q\ satisfies the Ii-condition.
We divide the definition of the F to even and odd stages. In even stages i.e.,
when \w\ is even, we will refer to the QQ part of P and use F°. More precisely, let
(B, lη, (TV, : v G B)) = F^(η, (f°(η\t) 
: ί < ίg(η))) where wl = {i G w : \ίΓ(w\
even}. Now let Sucτ(η) = B and for ι/ G B, f
l(v) = f
l(η), /°(ι/) = rv. In
odd stages we essentially do the same for the Qi-part but we need a little

§5. Finite Composition 
559
modification; F
l is just a Qo-name of a function and we may not even know
the domain of the ideal 1^ it give (= the Sucτ(^)), so first we extend f°(η)
to a condition q'Q satisfying f°(ή) < q'Q G Qo and forcing a specific value for
\η (hence for Sucτ(η)) as defined by F
1, and then proceed like in the Q0 part
(of course we change each f°(η) there to f
l(ή) and so on) and we let the QQ
part /°(τ/) for each η' € Sucτ(η) be the q'Q we have picked (the Qι part will
be defined by F
l(η, (f
l(η\ί : ί < ίg(η)))) (if we want to allow F to have just
Sucτ(η) ^ 0 mod 1^, act as in the proof 6.2).
Before we can show that this definition works we need a definition and a
combinatorial lemma.
5.2 Definition. For a subset A of T we define by induction on the length
of η, resτ(τ?,A) for each η e T. Let resτ({),A) = {). Assume resτ(τ7,A)
is already defined and we define τesτ(η
Λ(θί),A) 
for all members r/
Λ(α) of
Sucτ(^). If η G A then resτO?
Λ(α), A) = resτ(r/, A)
Λ(α) and if η £ A then
resτ(rf (α),,4) = τesτ(η,A)~(0). Thus res(T,A)
 d= {τesτ(η,A) 
: η € T} is
a tree obtained by projecting, i.e., gluing together all members of Sucτ (?7)
whenever η φ A.
5.3 Lemma. Let λ, μ be uncountable cardinals satisfying λ
<μ = λ and let (T, I)
be a tree in which for each η G T either |Sucτ(τy)| < μ or 1(77) is λ+-complete.
Then for every function H : T -> λ there exist T', (T, I) <* (T', I) such that
(letting A = {η G T : |Sucτ(τ?)| < μ}) for η,η' G T': resτ(ry, A) = resτ(r/,A)
implies: H(η) = H(η') and η € A iff η' G A, and if η € T' Π A, then
Sucτ(τ7) = Sucτv(?7). (Note that the lemma is also true for λ = μ = NO).
5.4 Continuation of the proof 0/5.1. Using the lemma let us prove the theorem.
So we are given (Γ, I),/, Jn for n < ω as in 2.6 for our F, and consider
/° : T —> Qo as a function to λ, (remember |Q0| < λ).
We let A = {η : \Sucτ(η)\ < μ}) By the lemma for every (T', I) satisfying
(Γ,l) <* (Γ',l) there is a subtree T",(T',I) <* (T",l) such that for every
77, η' £ T" we have: f°(η) = /
0(^0)
 an(^ η £ AiSη' £ A whenever resτ(?7, A) =

560 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
resτ(η
f, A). Let T* = {resT(r/, A) : η G T"}, it is an I0-tree (since the "even"
fronts of the original tree now become splitting points) and /° induces a
function /° from it to Q0 i.e., v = ΐesτ(η,A) implies f
Q(v) = f°(η) (by the
conclusion of 5.3, /° is well defined).
By the definition of F for even w\'s and the assumption that F° exemplify the
Io-condition we can find an r0 G Qo and a Qo-name η of a member of limT*
such that r0 Ihg0 "for every k < ω we have f°(η\k) G GO" where GO is the ζ)0-
name for the generic subset of Qo" Let T+
 d= {p G T" : res(p, A) = res(r/, A)};
this is a Qo-uame of an Iχ-tree and by the definition of F in the odd stages (i.e.
Fw when \w\ is odd) there are a Qo-name Γi °f a member of Q\ and a Qo * Qi-
name v of an u -branch of T+ such that TO Ihg0 [r*ι H-QJ " v G limT~
l~ is such
that f
l(v\k) 
G GI for every k < ω"] where Qι is the name of the generic set
for Qι and v is forced to be a name in Qi of a member of limT
+. The condition
in P = Qo * Qi which witnesses that the I-condition holds is of course (r0,rι),
since (r0,ri>
 lh "" £ limT, and for all fc G α;, /°(z/tfc) = /
0(res(ί/ΓA:), A) G G0,
and/(ι/tfe)€G. 
D5.ι
We now pay our debt and prove Lemma 5.3; the proof is in the spirit of the
proofs of the previous combinatorial Lemmas 3.3 and 3.5.
5.5. Proof of Lemma 5.3 Without loss of generality η~(a) G T => a <
|Sucτ(^)| We will prove the lemma by induction on μ. We start with a successor
μ, in such cases there is a cardinal K such that μ = κ
+ and for each η G T we
have resτ(η,A) G
 ω>K. Let {(ha,ga) : α < λ} be a list of all the pairs (h,g)
such that g is a function from ω> K to {0,1} and h is in a function from
 ω>κ
to λ (by the assumption λ<μ = λ, hence there are at most λ many such pairs).
For each α < λ we define a game Dα just like in the proof of 3.7, except that
now player I wins if for the η G limT that they constructed along the play
we have: η\k G A iff ga(τesτ(η\k, A)) = 0 and H(η\k) = ha(τesτ(η\k,A)) for
every k < ω.
If for every α < λ player II had a winning strategy we could build a subtree
T* by induction on the height of η G T taking into T* all members of Sucτ(η)

§5. Finite Composition 
561
when η G A, and otherwise picking as the only member of SUCT* (η) an element
of Sucτ(η) that is not in any of the Aa's that are defined for player II at that
stage by his winning strategy for Da (this is possible as we assume that η φ A
implies Iη is λ
+-complete).
The map η ι-» res(?7, A) is 1-1 on T*, so there is a pair (hao,gao) in our
list such that for each η G T* we have H(η) = hao(ΐesτ(η, A)) and gaoM — 0
iff η G A. Now we define a play in the game 3ao: player I plays choosing only
members of T* while II plays according to his winning strategy for 3ao , but in
such a play, player I surely wins and we get the desired contradiction.
So there exists some β < X for which player II has no winning strategy
in dp, but the game is determined hence player I has a winning strategy for
dβ . Now let T
1 be the tree of all sequences η that can appear in a play where
player I used this strategy. T
1 satisfies the requirements (similar to 3.5). This
finishes the case where μ is a successor.
If μ is singular, then λ < \<μ+ = X
μ < (\<»)
c{» = λcf^ < X<» = λ, so we can
without loss of generality replace μ by μ+ . If μ is a regular limit cardinal (or
just NO < cf(μ) < μ), then we first use Lemma 3.7 to find T', (Γ, I) <* (T', I),
and μ' < μ such that for every η e T': 1^ is λ+ complete or |Sucτ(r/)| < μ',
and then use the induction hypothesis on μ' . 
Ds.3
5.6 Corollary to 5.3. Assume that 1 = λo < μo < λi < μi < . . . are
cardinals satisfying λ££j = λfc+i for all k. Let (T,I) be a tagged tree, and
assume T — (Jk A^ where for all η G Ak'
\η\ < μk and Iη is λ^" - complete.
Let fk :Γ-+ λfc, for fe < ω.
Then there is a tree Γ* such that (Γ, I) <* (Γ*, I) and for all fc and all η, v
inT*:
(*) 
if res(τ7, (J AJ = res(ι/, \J AJ, thenfk(η) = Λ(^)

562 
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
Proof. As λo = 1 clearly TO = Γ will satisfy the condition for k = 0. We apply
Lemma 5.3 to T0 (with λ = λi, μ = μo, / = /i, A = ^40) to get a subtree
TI satisfying the condition also for k = 1. We continue by induction. In the
/c-th step, we apply Lemma 5.3 to T/- with λ = λfc+i, μ = μ&, / =
Finally, let T* = ΓVZV Clearly Γ* satisfies (*). Note that () G Γ*, and if
77 G T* Π Afc, then by the conclusion of lemma 5.3,
so Sucτ*(τ7) = SucTfc(r?). Hence Γ* is a tree and (T0, 1) <* (T*, I). 
D5>6
§6. Preservation of the E-Condition by Iteration
6.1 Definition. We say that Q = (Pi,Qi : i < α) is suitable for (Ii> j , λ^ j , μi}J :
(i, j) G VF*) provided that the following hold:
(0) W* C {{z, j) : i < j < α,i is not strongly inaccessible } and {{i 4- 1, j) :
i + 1 < j < \Jβ<a β + 1} £ ^* (we can use some variants, but there is no need)
(1) Q is a RCS iteration.
(2) Pij = Pj/Pi satisfies the ^-condition for ( i , j ) G W*.
(3) for every / G lij the set \J I is a uncountable cardinal, / is λ^-complete,
\ij < \JI < μiji μij regular, and \Pi\ < λ^j, and λ^ > ^2 (note that
\i,j is from V and not V
Pί , and i < \ij < μij).
(4) if i(0) < i(l) < i(2) < α, <i(0),t(l)> G W*, <i(l),i(2)) G W* then
(5) for every / G Ii(2),i(3) and ϊ(0) < i(l) < i(2) < i(3),/ is λΐ Qx
6.2 Lemma. If Q = (P n, Qn '• n < ω) is suitable for (I^ , Xij.μij 
: i < j < ω),
and I = Un<ω ^n,n+ι ^en ^ω = RlimQ satisfies the I-condition.
Proof. Let I» - Iί)i+ι, λ» - λM+ι, μ^ = μM+ι, note that Pί>ί+1 = Qi? so Q^
satisfies the Ii-condition, \P^\ < \i,μi < \i+ι = λi+ι
<μί < μi+i

§6. Preservation of the I- Condition by Iteration 
563
For each i < ω, let Fi be a P^-name of a function witnessing that Qi
satisfies the E^-condition. We will act as in the proof of Theorem 5.1, but now
we have count ably many F^s rather than two. We can a priori partition the
tasks, so let ω = \Ji<ω Bi, the Bi pairwise disjoint, each Bi infinite.
Now we shall define the function F which exemplifies
 uPω satisfies the
I-condition" . So we have to define F(η,w,f\{v : v < 77}), (see Definition 2.6).
Let i be the unique i < ω such that \w\ G Ai, let w* — {ί G w : \ίΓ\w\ G AI},
and let (B, /, (τv : v G JB)> - Ffaw*, (f(η\ί)(i) 
: i < ίg(η))), (so lhPi "JB =
Dom(/)")
We choose qη G P$, such that (f(ή)\ϊ) 
< qη and for some λ^, qη Ihp. "\B\ =
B — Xη" and qη Ihp. "/ is 1^ which belongs to I, in fact to I* = I^+i (by
the natural isomorphism /η)", (see 2.6B). Let pη = f ( η ) \(i -f l,α;). We choose
Sucτ(η) = {η"(a) 
: a < \Jlη}, and define: F(η,w,(f(v\t) 
: ί < ίg(η)}) =
(λrp \η, (ΐv UpηUqη 
: v G Suc(η))), [really we should replace rv by the function
{(i,Γι/)}>
 and \ by {η~ (i) : i < λη} but we shall ignore such problems].
We now have to prove that Pω, I, and F satisfy Definition 2.6. So let (Γ, I),
Jk(k < ω) and / : Γ -> P be as in Definition 2.6 and (T, I) <* (Γ°, I) and we
have to find a p G P, such that p Ih "3r/ G lirnΓ
0 such that (Vfc < ω)f(η\k) G
GPW".
First define Λ : Γ° -* Pfc by /fe(ry) - f(η)\k. Let Afc - {ry G Γ° :
1^ G Ifc}. By 5.6 we can find a tree Γ*, (Γ°, I) <* (Γ*, I), such that whenever
77, v G Γ* and res(?y, U^ ^) = res(ι/, (J^jt ^i), then ^(77) = fk(v). Let Tfc* =
res(T*, Ui<fc+1 A,). Define /* : T,* -, Q* by fliresfa, U<<fc+ι ^)) - Λ(τ?)(*).
By induction on i = 0,1,2... we can now define Pj+i-names j]i and
conditions p(ι) € <5» such that (p(0), . . . ,p(i)) lhpi+1 "T/J e limT/ and (W <
ω) /ί*(5iΓθ € G i " and for all i < j,
= res(|?i-r/, (J
Finally we can find a Pω-name η such that for all £ \\-pω "for all large enough i
η\l = ηi\P\ It is now clear that \\-Pω "ry G limΓ*, and W f ( η \ ί ) G GPJ . D6.2

564 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
6.2A Remark. Note that here as well in the next theorem we need that the
lij's are well separated (compare 6.1(4), (5)) i.e. some have small underlying
sets, others have large completeness coefficients (e.g. in the previous theorem
we required that ideals 1$ are on sets C μ^, and ideals in Ii+ι had to be \i+ι-
complete, λί+ι > μ^.To satisfy these requirements we will in applications only
work with iterations in which in every odd step some large enough cardinal is
collapsed, see l.l(ii)'.
6.3 Lemma.
(1) If Q = (Pa,Qa : a < ωι) is suitable for {Iα,/3,λα)/3,μα>/3 : a < β < ωι,a
non-limit), and I = U{^«,/3 ' OL < β < ω\ and a non-limit} then P = Pωι —
limQ satisfies the I-condition.
(2) We can replace ω\ by any δ such that K0 < cf
v<5 < Min{λttιjg : (α, β) e W*}.
Proof. 1) We will first prove this assuming CH (which is enough for all appli-
cations in this chapter), and then indicate how we can get rid of this extra
assumption. The proof consists of two parts: In part A we define the function
F, and in part B we show that it satisfies the requirements from definition 2.6.
Part A: To each p G P we have associated a countable set {ζ
k(p) : k < ω} of
prompt names, such that letting C*(p) = sup{£
fc(p) : k < ω}, we have p e Pζ*
(see 1.12(4)). Let \Ji<ω Bi be the set of odd natural numbers > 2, the Bi infinite
pairwise disjoint, be such that (W G Bi)(i + 1 < f).
Let F^β be Pα-name of a function exemplifying "Pa,β satisfies the !«,/?-
condition."
Let us explain our strategy; we cannot deal with all pairs (α,/3) along a
branch as the branch is countable, and α, β range over an uncountable set. So
along each branch η we try to determine the Q-named ordinals, ζ
m ( f ( η \ f y ) , so
we get a potential bound α* to larger and larger parts of each f(η\l) and we
shall use the functions .FQ*jα* 
, where α* = (J
αn
We shall define now the function F which exemplifies "P satisfies the I-
condition," so we have to define F ( η , w , ( f ( η \ £ ) 
: ί < ίg(ry)». If \w\ £ U»
B<

§6. Preservation of the I-Condition by Iteration 
565
define it as any ( I , ( f ( η ~ ( ξ ) ) 
: ξ G B)) such that /(r?
Λ{£)) forces a value to
Now let \w\ G |Jiβί
Naturally we shall use one of the Fαjjg, but we have to determine which one.
By the way we are defining F, we can assume that for k < ig(η), f(η\(k + 1))
determines (i.e. forces a value to) ζ
m(f(η\£)) 
for I, m < fc, so we can define the
following:
Let αo(τ ) = 0, and for 0 < ft < £g(τ?) let
4- k : £,m < k}
Note that for any finite or infinite sequence v\ if η < v, k < £g(τ?), then
<*k(n) = αfcM
Let i be such that \w\ G B^. Then i + 1 < \w < £g(η), so
(*) 
OL = oti(η) 
β = αi+ι(r/)
are well defined.
Let w* = {k G tϋ : \w Π fc| G Bi}, and let
<BJ, (r, : v € JB» - Fttϊ/3 (τy,ιι;;, (/(7/Wf[α,/3) : € G ^ U
(recall α and /? should have subscripts η and iu, which we suppress for notational
simplicity) .
Now choose qη > f(η)\a such that qη € Pa and such that qη \\-po
"J is isomorphic to I,,, 1^ G Iα>^", and let F(η,w,(f(ι/\e) 
: I < ί g ( η ) ) ) =
(IryX^UΓi/ - v = η~(a) and α < Dom(lr7)}}.
Port 5. Now we have to prove that P,I and F satisfy Definition 2.6. So let
(Γ, I), Jfc (k < ω) and / be as in Definition 2.6 for the F chosen above, and
(T, I) <* (T^, I) and we have to find the required p. To each branch η of T^
we have associated a sequence (0^(77) : k < ω) of countable ordinals. Since we
assume CH we also have ft^° = NI, so by Lemma 3. 5 A we can find T" such

566 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
that (Tt, I) <* (T", I), and for some fixed sequence (a*(k) : k < ω) we have
α*(fc) - ak(η) for all η G lim(T").
Now we continue as in the proof of 6.2. We let At — {η : Iη G Iα*C£),α*0£+i)}
and /€(r/) - f ( η ) \a*(ί). By 5.6 we can find a tree Γ*, (T", I) <* (Γ*, I) such
that for all 77, ι/inT*:
If res(r?,LUfc^) = res(ι/,U,<fc^), then /(r/)fα*(fc) - /(ι/)Γα*(fe).
We let Tfc* be {resτ*faU*<fc^) ^ e ^*> and /£ : T]£ -> Pα*(fc),α*(fc+i) is
defined by
ft(τ<»r.(η, \J At)) = p iff /fo)Γ[α*(fc),α*(fc + 1)) = p
^<fc
Now note that ( Jn : n G BQ) is a system of fronts as in 2.6, and at each
η G Jn, if n G B0, then the function F(η, {k : η\k G (Jm ^m}, {/M ' v < η))
used the function Fα.(0)lα*(i)(r/,{fc : η\k G IJmeBo
 J^>' </Mt[
a*(
0)» «*(!))))
(but Fa*(0),a*(i) is Fα*(o),α*(i) as α*(°) = 0)> so we can find pi G Pα*(i)> sucn
that for some Pα*(i)-name 770
and
Continuing by induction, we define pn G Pα*(n+i) satisfying pnfα*(m +
1) — Pm for m < n, such that for some Pα*(n_j_1)-name ηn
Pn ^Pα*(»+i) "5n e limΓ* and 7*^^) e ^pα*(rι+1) for every I < ω and
θΐm<n,<ω,ηrn 
= resτ*
So p = \Jn<ωpn € Pα*, where α* = Un
α*(
n)'
 ancl t*
1616 is a Pα*-
name η such that p lhpβ«, "η G limΓ* C limΓ", and for every n,m < ω,
resτ*(??ίn,U€<n^) = rymfm" (this determines 77 uniquely as T* C T"). So
p lhpa, "for every m,ί < ω, f(η\t)\a*(m) G QPa^ hence, by the definition of
RCS, as α* is limit: p lhPβ. "for every £ < ω, f(η\t)\a* G GPQΦ".
We have here a problem: A priori, f(η\l) is not necessarily in Pα*, (only
in Pωι) so f(η\ί)\a* G G^p^* seems to be weaker than the required "f(η\f) G

§6. Preservation of the I-Condition by Iteration 
567
<?PWI". However, we have f(η\(m + ί+l)\ [7 \\~PΊ
 
ίίζ
m(f(η\^)) 
= 7" for
some 7, so 7 < αm+^+2(^) = α*(ra 4- £ + 2) < a*
Since also p H-pβ# "f(η\(m + ί + 2)) fy G Gpβ# ", we conclude that
for every £,m < ω.
So p essentially forces Wf(η\t) 
G Pα* Hence clearly p lhpωι "f(η\t) G
/nr 
)5
&Pωι
If we do not have CH, we modify the proof as follows: let g : ω — > ω be such that
g(m) < m and (Vra)(3°°ra)[0(m) = n]. Next, for each α < ωι let (pf 
: £ < ω)
list all finite sequences of the form ((ik,βk) '• k < fc*}, A> = 0, /?& < /?&+! < α,
*fc <ύ+ι <α; such that if p^ < p% then ^ < ^2 Let p^ - ((ik(a,£),βk(a,i)) 
:
k < fc*(α,^)), second, we write the odd natural numbers > 2 as a doubly
indexed union Ui m Sΐ>m of infinite disjoint sets (instead of Ui^) Then,
instead of (*), we define p[tu,?7] as p" 
when |tϋ| € B^i where oti(η) was
defined in Part A and so define i = iw, I = £w. Next, we define by induction on
\w\ when (^,77) is nice: it is nice when k*(ai(η),f) = 0 or for k < fc*(α^(?7),£)
wehaveik(ai(η),l) G w, and p[w Π ik(α,i),η\ik(α,£)} = p"
i(η] \(k -f 1).
Now if (w,η) is not nice we do nothing, if it is nice, we let k = k[w,η] be
the k = g(k*(αi(η),ί)). We let
α = α[w,η] = 
βik(αi(η)t£)(oti(η),ΐ)
β = β[w,η] = βik+lιw,η](αi(η),e)
tϋ* = iϋ*[iϋ,r/] = {i : (α[w Γιi,η\i],β[w Γιi,η\i\) = (α,/3) and for some m < fc*,
i — *m(
αΐ(^))^)} Then we define the function F as before.
In part B, when we check that this construction works, we can only find
a tree T" with the property that for some α*, for all branches η in T",
\imk-+ωαk(η) = α* (using 3.5). Let (α*(fc) : k < ω) be a sequence of ordinals
converging to α*. Now we can shrink T", so as to use only ^a*(n),a:*(n+i)
(n < ω), i.e. let us define by induction on n (stipulating J'_ι = {{)} J'n =

568 
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
{Π 
V £ Un<u,
 J™> and letting w = [t < ig(η) : η\t G \Jm<ω Jm} for some
fe* and z0 < . . . ΐ f c * _ ι from tu, l\i<k*it G J^ and p[ty,r/] = ((^,α*(£) : £ <
fc*}
Λ {(^g?7,Q:*(A:*))} (it is a system of fronts, i.e., every branch of T" meets each
Jn infinitely often) and let Γ°, (T"', I) < (T°, I) be such that:
if ry G Γ°,ry G Un
 Jn then (Vα)(ry
Λ (α> G T" ^ rf (a) G T°)
if η G T°,r7 £ Un
 Jn then (3!α)(τf (α) G T°).
Now we continue as before.
(2) Left to the reader (essentially the same proof). 
Dβ.a
6.3A Corollary. (1) For P = RlimQ as in the previous lemma, \Ja<ω Pa is
(essentially) a dense subset of P i.e. for every p G Pωι there are q and α such
that pfα < ςr G Pα, ς Ih "p G GPωι" (in fact r G p ^> q Ih "C(r) < α").
(2) For Q = (Pi, Qi : i < δ) as in the previous lemma (so δ — ω\ or just
cf(ί) = α i), ί/α is a P^-name of an ω-sequence of ordinals (P^ = RlimQ, of
course) p G PS then for some ί < 5, q G Pj, and /3 a P^-name of an α -sequence
of ordinals, Pδ \= "p < ςf", and q lhP, "α - /j".
Proof: By 1.13 (or directly from the proof of 6.3). 
ΠΘ.SA
6.4 Lemma. Suppose Q — (Pa,Qa : a < K) is suitable for (Iα,^,λαj)g,μα)/3 :
( i , j ) G W*, ), /ς is strongly inaccessible |P^| + λίj<7 + μ^j -f | U/| < K for every
{α,/3> G VF*, / G Iα,/3 and let I = LU./jW 
Γ/ιen P« = Rlim(Q) satisfies the
I-condition.
Proof. This is quite easy, because Pκ = \Ja<KPa- So let Faβ be a Pα-name
of a witness to "Pα,0 = Pβ/Pa satisfies the Iαj/3-condition", for α < /? < K,
α non-limit, and let α; = Uα<α; ^iϊ ^^
e ^'s are i
nfi
nite, pairwise disjoint and
n G -Ai+i => n > 1 + i (so /9(fc) is an ordinal < /ς, not just a name). Now we
shall define the function F, so we should define
F(η,w, (f(η\f) 
' I < ί g ( η ) ) ) (See Definition 2.6). Let i be such that \w G A i }
w* = {I G w : |ιt; Π ί\ G A.} and let β(0) = 0, /?(!) - 1 and for k > 1,
fc < £g(r/), let /3(fc) - Min{7 -f Jk : ί < k =» /(r/fί) G P7}. Now we shall

§6. Preservation of the I-Condition by Iteration 
569
use JF>(<)ι/9(<+1), so let FW),W+i)(r?,ΐ/Λ ( f ( η \ f ) \ \ β ( ί ) , β ( i 
4- 1) :l < lg(η))) be
{/, (rv : ^ £ U/»» and choose q% G P^) such that ςβ lhP/3(1) "/ = 1^", and
Pβ(i) H-'7fa)r/J(0 < <• Now we can define F(η,w,(f(η\l) 
: £ < £g(η))) =
{!„, </(ι/) : ι/ e 5ucτ(r?))} and 5ucτ(r?) - {rf (α) : α < UU> and /M =
#JJ UTV Note that β(k) depends on η\k, so we should have written β(η\k), see
below.
Now suppose we are given (T, I), Jn, / as in Definition 2.6. (for P = Rlim Q
and I = |Jΐ< Hi j) and (^ 0 ^* (^"j 0 and we have to find p as required. Let for
every η G T, /?(r/) be 0 if ^g(rj) = 0, 1 if ig(η) = 1 and Mm{^+lg(η} 
: f(η) G P7
otherwise; so v < η => /3(^) < /9(?y) and /?(/?) is never a limit ordinal. So by a
repeated use of Lemma 5.3 we can get T*, (T^, I) <* (T*, I) such that:
(*) for every η G Γ* and 77 < ^ G Γ*, res(ι/ι, ^4^) = res (1/2? ^77) then
(fvι\ι\β(ri)} 
I < tgiΊ) = (Pv*\t(β(η)} 
t < tg"*) where Aη = {i/ G Γ :
M| <μβ,β(η)}
By induction on n we will now define prompt names /3n of ordinals,
conditions pn G P/^ and P^^ -names ηn and ί/n such that pn forces the following
(1) 7M G TVg^n) = n
(2) 5n<ι/ nGlim(res(T*,Λ 7 n))
(3) Vp G T*VJ < ω: if i/nί* - res(p,^J, then /(p)^n G G n and
For n = 0 there is nothing to do: (770 = (}, βo = 0).
In stage n + 1 we will work in V[Gpβn], where Gpβ^ is a generic filter on Pβn
containing pn, more formally, we have βn < K and Gpβn C Pβn generic over
V such that ^pκ,/GPβn 
"βn - βn
n. We let r/n+ι - vn\n + 1, /?n+1 - /?(r?n+ι).
Since we have used ^(T^/^T^+I) we can find a condition pn,n+ι in P0n,pn+l
and a P^^^-name ι/n+1 such that
Now we can return to V and translate everything back to Pβn -names, and get
a condition pn+ι from pn and pn,n+ι

570 
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
Since we are using RCS iteration see (1.12)(1), letting β* = supn/3n, we can
after ω many steps find a condition p G P$* which is stronger than every pn,
and a P0*-name υ of a branch in T*, defined by v = \Jn ηn. This is as required.
Π6.4
6.5 Lemma. Suppose Q = (Pa,Qa : a < K) is suitable for {Iα>/3,λα,/3>μα,/3 :
(a,β) G W*), K is strongly inaccessible, \\JI\ + λa,β + μa,β < K for any
(α,/3) G W*, and / G Iα,0, Qκ is a Pκ-name of a forcing notion satisfying the
lU-condition and let I0 = Uα,/3 !<*,/?, I = Io U IΛ. Let
A* = {α < K : for every i < α, Ihp. "cf (α) > K0" and for every / G IQ,
^ 1= " 
7 ^ α =^ I is |^l
+-complete" and
> cfα ^> / is |cfα
+|-complete}
and assume:
(a) for every / G IΛ: either / is /^-complete or / is /^-complete and normal
and K \ A* G /.
(b) for some /* G Iκ and \JI* — K and all singletons are in /*.
Then Pκ * Qκ satisfies the I-condition.
Remark: In Gitik Shelah [GiSh:191], (α) + (b) were weakened to: each / G I is
^-complete (or see XV §3).
Proof. Let Faj witness "Pαj/3 = Pβ/Pa satisfies the I^-condition" and Fκ
(a P^-name) witness "Qκ satisfies the I^-condition" and Uij,fc,m<ω ^t ,j,fc,m —
{3n 4- 2 : n < α;}, the A^j^m^ infinite pairwise disjoint and n G A^j^m =>
i,j,k,m <n.
Now we shall define the function F, so we should define (1^, {/(^) : ^ G
Sucτ(r7))} - F(η,w, (f(η\ί) 
: ί < tg(η))) (see Definition 2.6). If p G PΛ * Qk
we will write p\κ for the P^-component of p and p(κ) for the Q^-component.
Case i. \w\ is divisible by 3.

§6. Preservation of the I-Condition by Iteration 
571
We let \η = /* and for v G Sucτ(η) we have f(v) > f(η) be such that:
if i < ίg(η), η(ί) G A*, then for some α < η(e)J(ι/)\η(£) 
G Pa (possible
by 6.3(2)). We denote the minimal such α by a^i. Thus, α^ < v(ΐ) and
Case ii. \w\ + 2 is divisible by 3. We act as in the proof of 5.1, i.e., we use
our winning strategy for the game on Qκ: let w* = {ί G w : \wΓ\l\+2 is divisible
by 3}, and we let {/, (rv : v G JB» = Fκ(η,w\ (f(η\t)(κ) 
' i < *gfa)».
Choose qη € PΛ, qη > f(η)\κ, qη lhpκ "/ = \η" for some 1^, and let
F(η,w, (f(η\t) : t < ίg(η))) = (\η,(qη,r») : v = η~ (a}, a < |J \η))
Case in. \w\ 4- 1 is divisible by 3.
So for a unique quadruple (i, jf, fc,m), |ιy| belongs to ^j,A;,m, (hence
i, j,A;,m < |ιy| < ^g(^)) and let iί;* = {ί G w : |tι; Π^| G AiJ)A:?m}.
Now we shall use Fu(η,w*, ( f ( η \ £ ) \ [ ξ , ζ ) 
: t < ίg(η))) were ξ < ζ < K
are chosen as follows
if η(i) < η(j),η(i) 
G A*,η(j) G A*,z < fe,^ < k,k < m, |ty Π fe| and
I it; Π m| are divisible by 3, (so θiη\k,i,&ηim,i are well defined) then let ξ =
Otη\k,i + Λ + 1, C =
 αr/rm,z + m + 1
ί f η ( i ) < η(j),η(i) G A*, η ( j ) e A*,i < kj < fc, k = m, |iϋ Π fe| - 1 is
divisible by 3 and τ/(z) < α^j^ then let ξ = 77(1), C = «»/tA:,i 4- fc 4- 1
^/^(i) > ^O')* ^W ^ ^*' i < k <m, \wΠk\ and |iϋ Π m| are divisible by 3
ίften let ξ = aη\k,i + fc + 1, C = α^^.i + m + 1
if η(i) > ^O')?
7/^) ^ ^*' « < A; = m, |iί; Π A:| is divisible by 3 £/ιen let
z/none of the above occurs ί/ien let ^ — 0, ζ = 1.
So let (T, I), Jn, / be as in Definition 2.6 and (T, I)* <* (T', I), w.l.o.g. Un<α, Jn
is the set of splitting points of (T, I), (shrink T considering T'), and for nota-
tional simplicity we assume Jn = {η G T : ^g(ry) = n}. So for η we have used
ω = {ί:ί< ίg(η)}. Let σ, ^ η(ίg(η) - 1).
We have to find p as required there.

572 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
Assume for simplicity CH. So by Lemma 3.5A, we can find T
1, (T^, I) <*
(Γ
1,!) such that
(a) For some BQ C ω x ω, for every η G limT
1, η(ϊ) < η(j) iff ( i , j ) G BQ
(b) For 77 G T
1 : ^g(τy) G jBi z/f 1^ is tt
+-complete; also ίg(r/) G B\ implies and
£g(η) + 2 is divisible by 3
(c) If £g(τ7) G B2
 d= {n < ω : n + 2 is divisible by 3, n φ BI} then κ\A* elη
and lη is a normal ideal on K
(d) If ίg(η) G £3 = {n : n + 1 is divisible by 3 } then (J 1^ has cardinality
< AC.
Let A** = {a G A* : α is strong limit and for every ( i , j ) G W* , / G Ii)<7 , if
i<j<a then | |J/| 4- λί>:7 4- μitj 4- |P^| < α}
Clearly if / G ί.κ is not κ
+ -complete then K, \ A** G / (since / is normal)
(e) if (ig(ή) — 1) G B± = {n : n divisible by 3} and σ^^+i) G A** then
(being normal) f(τ])\o'η^rn^ 
is (equivalent to) a member of (Jί^-y : 7 <
say to some member of Parι>rn, where aη,m < η(m) (see case (i)).
We can conclude (by (c) and (e) above) that without loss of generality
(f) If η G TVg(τ?) - 1 G 52 then ση G A**. Also η(ί) < K =» ry(£) < ση, and
[| U Itjtml < « => I U liyfrnl < ^] for every i < ίg(η) - 1, m < £g(τy); and if
77" (α) G T
1, 1^ is tt^-complete then a > K.
For 77 G T
1 if ig(η) - 1 G 52 let
A^ = [v G T
1 : z/<77 or.η<v and | U lη|
v < ση}
At = {z/ G Γ
1 : z/<77 or. 77 < z/ and | (J 1^^ < cf^ίσ^)}
By a repeated use of 5.3 (starting at () and going up in T
1) we can find
T
2, (Γ
1,!) <* (Γ
2,l) such that
(g) If 77 G T
2,£g(η) - 1 G J32, ^g(r/) < m < cj, m divisible by 3 and for ί = 1, 2,
^ G T
2, ^g(^) = m 4- 1, res(^ι,Ar/) = res(z/2,A,) then α^,^^)-! =
α^2,fa(r?)-ι (notice that αί/)Zg(r7)_ι < ση < «, so /^-completeness suffices).
(h) If 77 G T
2,£g(r?) - 1 G J52, ^g(τ?) <m<ω,m divisible by 3, then there is
7r/,m < Vη SUch that if Z/ G Γ2, ίg(l/) = 771 + 1 then Otv^(η)-\ < 7r/,m
Note

§6. Preservation of the I-Condition by Iteration 
573
(i) If η G T
2,£g(η) - 1 G £2, then ση has cofinality > K0 hence 7^ = U{7r/,m :
77i > lg(η), m divisible by 3} is < ση.
Now if η G T
2,£g(τ7) G £2 then the function α >— > 7^- ^ is a regressive
function on a subset of K which do not belong to 1^. Hence for some 7, {y : z/ =
r/
Λ(α),7ι/ = 7} is not in l^
So without loss of generality
(j) If η G Γ
2, ^g(τ/) G £2 then for some 7^ < K:
So w.l.o.g.
(k) If 77 G ΓVg(τ?) G B2, η < v G T
2 then (I^ < 7ry or !„ is σI/r(/g(t?)+ι)|
+-
complete.
So w.l.o.g.
(1) If ?? G T
2,eg(η) e B 2, and for £ = 1,2 ι/< e Γ
2, η < vtt res(ι^,Λ,) =
res(ι/2, ^4η) then p^ Γ7»7 = P»2 \Ίη and | U 1^ | < jη <ί=> | |J 1^ | < 7, =^> 1^ =
l,2,]
Let £Q — 0
 an(3 {^m : 1 < 7τι < α;} be an enumeration in increasing
order of {I < ω : i - 1 G £2} For any η G T
2,tg(η) = lm we define ^ as
Sup{7iχ : 77 < v, 7j, defined and ^g(^) < d+ι} Remembering that if l&(y) φ B<2
then I U 1^1 < /ς or \v is Ac
+-complete it is clear that w.l.o.g.
(m) If 77 G T
2, lg(η) = £m then βη < κ; and 77 < v G Γ
2, lg(v) = £m+ι implies
βη<σ». Let, forr?GΓ
2,£g(r?)=C,
A;
 d= {i/ G Γ
2 : i/ < 77 or 77 < i/, | |J !„( < 7^}.
For every 77 G T
2,lg(η) = lm we define Γ
2 =
f {res(z/,A;) : i/ <
77 or 77 <] i/} and we define fη and \
η (functions with domain C T
2) by:
Λy(p) = f(")\βη and 1^ = IT? if ^7 < z/ G Γ2, p = res(z/, A*), is except that
\
η
p is defined only if | |J \η\ < jη.

574 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
Now look at ^Λ>/() and p\ctQ (w.l.o.g. p\ctQ = p\κ). As in case (iii) of
the definition of F we work hard enough (repeating previous proofs) there is a
P/3()-name η^ and QQ G Pβ(} such that :
#{) "~P/3 
"/oί^oϊ O € Qβo fo
r every f as our strategy will often have
usedFβ<)ι/3<>.
Now comes a crucial observation: if Gβ(} C Pβ(} is generic (over V) η G
T2,ίg(η) = t>ι and res(τ7, AO) < η()[Gβ<}], v = η~ < α >G T
2 then we can (as
in 5.1 and above) find qυ G Pβvί and Pβv -name j]v such that: qv is compatible
with every member of Gβ() and
9ι/ H~/30 "/i/ί^i/Γ^) ^ ^^ for every -ί, and for every ry G T
2, [res(τy,Λ*) <
r\v ^ res(r/(),A^) < T/()]". Note that ςr0 Ih "{α : q^ {a} G GP,} ^ 0 mod 1^".
Hence each qη can play the role of q^ in the next step:
We can continue and define qv^r\v for every v G T
2, \j πι<ω ^g(^) = ^m with
the obvious properties:
(1) <fc,€P 7 i / l
(2) ^tK,7^) = <lv when ίg(ι/) > 0,
(3) <?„ ll-p^ > € limT2"
(4) ^ ll-p^ "if for every £m < fg(z/), res(z/, A*^) < ^r£m and
for every k
then for every A: < ω and ^m < ^g(^),
and f^η^k) G G 
and
Now we define a PΛ-name of a subtree of T
2 : T
3 = {i/fn : n < -ί
/) = ^m for some m, qv G GP/c and for i < m q^i. G GPK and res(ι/, -A*
}. Clearly,
ςf() H-pκ'T
3 C T
2,Γ3 is closed under initial segments,
Suc^s (77) ^ 0 mod \η for 77 G Γ
3 and
if r/ G T
3,£g(r/) G BI U 52 then Sucτ3(ry) = Sucτι(η)"

§6. Preservation of the I-Condition by Iteration 
575
q() \\-Pκ " for every η G T
3, f ( η ) f[0, «) belongs to GΛ".
Now we can use the hypothesis "F^ exemplifies that Qκ satisfies the Iκ-
condition" and case (ii) in the definition of F to 
finish. 
DΘ.S
6.6 Lemma. Suppose Q = (Pi, Qj : i < a,j < a) is suitable for (Iί><7 , \ij ,
faj 
'• i < J< OL , i is non-limit), i(*) < α is non-limit, (?$(*) C P^*) generic
over F, and (iζ : ζ < β) is an increasing continuous sequence of ordinals in
V^Gφ,)], IQ — i(*), i/3 = α, each iζ+\ a successor ordinal .
In V[GiM] 
we define P{ = Piζ/Gi(*), Q'ζ = Qiζ/[Gi(*}], (still a Pc-name)
Q' = <
PC' Q'ζ ζ<β^<β^ then in V[Gi(*)]> Q' is suitable for (liζ^, λ<Cι^,
Mic,<i : C < £ < A C non-limit ).
Remark. Had we allowed I^j, A^j, //ij to be suitable names we would have
obtained here a stronger theorem.
Proof. Straightforward. 
D,'6.6
6.7 Conclusion. Suppose
(a) Q = (Pi, Qi : i < a) is an RCS iteration.
(b) Q^-satisfies the I^-condition, and 1^ is K2-complete (in V
 Pi , but 1^ € V)
(c) if cf(z) < i V (3.7 < ϊ)\Pj\ > i, then for some A,// we have Uj>»^' ^
s
λ
+-complete and (V/ G \Jj<:ilj)(\\JI\ 
< μ) and |Pi| < A = \<^
(d) if cf(i) = i & (Vj < i)|Pj| < i then every / e I* is ^-complete or normal,
and e.g. A* = {a < i : cf(α) 7^ ^1} G /.
Γften RlimQ satisfies the ((Ji<a Hi) -condition; if in addition K is strongly
inaccessible and f\i<κ \Pi\ < K then RlimQ satisfies the tt-c.c.
Proof. We should prove by induction on i < a that for every j < i,
satisfies the \J{1Ί ' j < 7 < i}-condition using 5.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5 (and 5.6).
Dβ.7

576 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
6.8 Conclusion. We can satisfy the demands of 1.1 by "P satisfies {λ : ^2 <
λ < |P|,λ regular }"-condition.
Concluding Remark. We could have strengthened somewhat the result 6.6, but
with no apparent application by using a larger A*.
§7. Further Independence Results
In this section we complete some independence results.
7.1 Theorem. The following are equiconsistent.
(a) ZFC + there is a Mahlo cardinal.
(b) ZFC + G.C.H.+ Fr+(N2) (where Fr+(N2) means that every stationary
S C S$ — {δ < ^2 ' cf (ί) = NO} contains a closed copy of ωi).
Remark. Our proof will use, in addition to the ideas of the proof of Theorem
1.4 also ideas of the proof of Harrington and Shelah [HrSh:99], but, for making
the iteration work, we build a quite generic object rather than force it (as in
[Sh:82]).
2) In b) we can also contradict G.C.H. (using XV §3 for a) => b)).
Proof. The implication b) => a) was proved by Van Lere, using the well known
fact that if in L there is no Mahlo cardinal, then the square principle holds for
^2- So the point is to prove a) =» b). As any Mahlo cardinal in V is a Mahlo
cardinal in L, we can assume V — L, K a strongly inaccessible Mahlo cardinal.
We shall define a revised countable support iteration Q = (Pi, Qi : i < «),
\Pi\ < Nΐ+i If * i
s not a strongly inaccessible cardinal Qi is the Levy collapse of
2
Hl to NI by countable conditions (in V
Pi). If i is strongly inaccessible then Qi is
P[Si] (see 4.6), Si is a P^-name of a stationary subset of 5§ = {δ < i : cf(J) = K0
in F} (note \\-pί "i = ^2" by 1.1(3)), where §i will be carefully chosen as

§7. Further Independence Results 
577
described below. Note that N^ = N^ κ, K = HJf " (again we use 1.1(3)) so Pκ
collapse no cardinal > AC and in V
Pκ the GCH holds.
We let PK = RlimQ. In V
Pκ we define an iterated forcing Q* = (P?, Q* :
i < At"
1"}, with support of power NI, such that (in V
Pκ) for each z, 5* is a
P^-name of a subset of 50 which does not contain a closed copy of α>ι, and:
Q* — {/ G (y
p*)
p** : / an increasing continuous function from some
a < ω2 into Lϋ2 \ S* and if a is a limit ordinal, Ui<o! /(O Φ §i} (so Φ* makes
S* nonstationary).
We shall prove that (if the SVs were chosen suitably then):
(*) For every a < «
+, forcing by P* does not add new u i-sequences (to V
Pκ)
and P£ contains a dense subset of power < ^2 (everything in V
Pκ).
This implies that P*+ satisfies the K"
1"-chain condition, so by a suitable
bookkeeping every P^+-name of S C 5o which does not contain a closed copy
of ωι is 5* for some i. So easily we can conclude that it is enough to prove (*).
So let α* < ft"*",p G P^*, and r be a P^*-name of a function from ω\ to
ordinals.
For all those things we have P^-names, (but α* is an actual ordinal in V,
as Pκ satisfies the «-c.c.). Now in V we can define an increasing continuous
sequence N*(i < K) of elementary submodels of H(κ
+++) of cardinality < K
such that PKί Q and all the names involved belong to Nj$, (N* : i < j) G
-/V*+1, A^*+1 is closed under sequence of length < \Nj 
.
Now in V, as V = L, 0{λ<«:λ is strongly inaccessible } holds, so we have guessed
(N* : i < λ), r,p,... in some stage λ, (Ui<λ ^*) Π « = Λ(J Π « = λ. Really we
are only guessing subsets of K,, so we can only guess the isomorphism type of N\,
etc., or equivalently, its Mostowski collapse. I.e. let / be a one to one function
from K onto (J N*, let h be a one to one function from κ
3 onto «, and hi : K —> K
i<κ
for I < 3 be such that ε = Λ(α,/3,7) <^> α = ft0(α) & /? = ήι(/3) & 7 =
Let
A = {Λ(0, α, ^) : /(α) G /(/3) and α, /? < ^} U {h(l, i, α) : /(α) G ^

578 
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
Let (A\ : λ < K inaccessible) be a diamond sequence. Let N
χ be the unique
transitive subset of H(κ) isomorphic to (λ, G
Λ) where G
λ = {(α, β) : a < λ, β <
λ,Λ(0,α,/3) € A\}, if there is one. Let g
χ : λ — > N
χ be the isomorphism. Let
for i<X,Nl
χ = N
χ\{g
χ(a) 
: Λ(l,i,α) G Aχ} and x
λ = (Q
λ,Q*'
λ,τ
λ,p
λ,α*'
λ)
be such that x
λ = #
λ(α), α - min{/? : Λ(2,0,/?) G Aλ} (if there are such α).
Now necessarily W = {λ < « : λ inaccessible, and A Π λ = A\, and / maps λ
onto Nχ} is stationary and for λ G W, N
χ is well defined and isomorphic to Nχ
say by #* : N
χ -> AT* and #*(Λ^) = TV* (for i < λ), Q
χ = Q\λ, <7*(Q*>
λ) - Q*,
S*(l
λ) - Γ,0V) = P, <?(α*'
Λ) ^ <**.
So now we will explain what we did in stage λ to take care of this situation.
First we will give an overview of how to get the sets S\; In stage λ (an
inaccessible below «, so work in V
Pa) we use 0, i.e. A\ to obtain a continuous
increasing sequence (N* : i < X) of quite close models (which guesses (the
isomorphic type of α) a sequence (N* : i < K) as above). We also guess an
ordinal α = α*'
λ G N
χ (so actually we are only guessing otp(α* Π Nχ)) and
x
λ "guess" (0,Q*,Γ,P^
λ)5 . . -Let Gλ C Pλ be generic over V, p
λ G Gχ. We
now try to construct a sequence (p» : i < λ) of conditions in P^;
λ
λ Π N
χ[G\]
which will induce an N
χ[Gχ] -generic set. If we succeed, letting p\ = g*(pi) in
V[G\] we have p( G Nχ Π P is increasing and p\ = limi<λ(pi) will decide all
names in N^[GX] (pλ has domain 7Vλ*[Gλ] Πα*, pλ(/?) - U«λPί(^) u ί(
λ' λ)»
Moreover, Pλ(β) will be an actual function (at least above p\\β) rather than
just a P£-name, for all β G Dom(pλ) Q N\[G\]- τhis wil1 show that in γP^
the set
D ^ {p G P*. : V/3 G Dom(p)3/ : pf/? »-
 Cίp(^) = /"}
is dense, P^* contains a dense subset of cardinality < «(= H2), in V
F|e, which
is one of the demands in (*), [which implies that P^* satisfies the κ
+-c.c. The
usual Δ-system argument (recalling that P* used Ni-support) then shows that
also P*+ satisfies the «
+-c.c.)].
We will try to build these pt in otp(7V
λ[Gλ] Π (α*'
λ -I- 1)) many steps, by

§7. Further Independence Results 
579
constructing initial parts (pi\Ί : i < λ) for 7 G N
χ Π (α*'
λ -f 1), by induction
on 7.
However, it is possible that our construction will get stuck in some stage
7 G N
χ[G\] Π (α*
?λ 4-1). In this case we show that we will have constructed a
stationary subset of λ (which guesses 5* Π λ). We will use this set as S\ (and
hence contradict the guess, since no superset of one of the sets S\ can appear
in the second iteration as some 5*). However, since our guess must be correct
on a stationary set of λ's, the construction will be completed stationarily often.
Before we start the construction of the p^'s, we will try to guess its outcome.
In our ground model V = L we have OΛ> so as |P\| = λ, we still have in V
Fχ
i.e. V[(?A]J that ^2 is λ, and
 <0
>{i<λ:cf(t)=bίι} holds. Note Nf[G\] 
is well defined:
yyλ
Gχ Π N* is a generic subset of Pκ
 ί . So we can choose for each i < X a sequence
(Qi£ '• ζ < i) and a name Ti such that:
(α) every initial segment of the sequence {(r^, (q^ : ξ < i)) : i < λ) belongs to
(β) Qi,ξ € Nf[Gχ] 
Π P*, is increasing with ξ.
(7) if (<7ξ : ξ < λ) satisfies (a) -f (β) [i.e., it is increasing with ξ and qς G
(N
λ Π P*«,,A)]» and r G A^
λ[Gλ] is a P^-name of an ordinal then {i : (q^ :
ξ < i) = (ς^ : ξ < ί) and r = Ti} is stationary.
Note that 7V
λ[(3λ] is closed under taking i-sequences (in V
Px) for i < X so
clause (a) is not necessary.
Now at least for ordinals i such that cf(z) = ω it is not clear whether
(<li,ξ '• ζ < ^} has an upper bound in P^
λ
λ, however we can find a(ϊ) G
N
X[GX] Π (α*'
λ + 1) and <?* G 7V*[GA] Π P^*^, q? > q^\a(i) for ξ < i, and
if α(i) < α*'
λ then q* I^P*
 
u(ft,ξ(
αW) : ί < 0 nas no upper bound (in
[Just let α(i) G ^ Π (α*'
λ + 1) be maximal such that q^
 d= (\Jξ<i qiίζ) \a(i)
belongs to Pα(f); hence q^ Vίp*,χ 
"(Uξ<i^i,ξ)(
αW) ^ Φα'm" hence some r, ς'^ <
r G P^/^v is as required]. Moreover, we may also assume that q* decides the
value of r< if Ti is a P^-name.

580 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
Now we define by induction on 7 G N
χ [G\] Π (α*
)Λ + 1) a set C7, a sequence
(C/3,7 : β < 7, β G N
A[£A] n (
α*'
Λ + 1)>
 and sequences (p7jί : i G C7) satisfying
the following:
(i) Each C7, and each Cβ}Ί is a closed unbounded subset of λ, Cβ,Ί C
C^ncv
(ii) p7>i G Λf
Λ[Gλ] Π P7'
Λ, and is increasing with i.
(iii) pΊίi \β = pβιί, for β < 7, i G C/3,τ.
(iv) if (p7ιj : j < i), (<^j '• j < i) (from the diamond above) satisfy
(Vj < i)(3C < i)(p7J- < (/iίCr7), (V( < i)(3j < ΐ)fe,7Ϊ7 < P7,) and
a(i) > 7 ίften g* <p7li-
We will define this sequence by induction on 7. For 7 = 0 there is nothing
to do. If 7 is a limit of cofmality < λ, let 7 = Uξ<cf(7) 7£ w^^ C < C <
 cf (7) =>
7ζ < 7ξ < 7. We let
CΊ = 
f] 
C
f
7o7ξ.
For i G C7, we let p7ji = Uξ<cf(7)P7^ (This is a union of a sequence of
at most NI conditions which are end extensions of each other (in the sense
that pΊξίi = P 7 ζ,ΐf7ξ for ζ < ξ < cf(7)), hence this limit exists.) Finally, we let
CβtΊ = ^nC7nf|e<cf(7) Cβ^ [where we let Caβ = λ for α > β]. If cf(7) > λ,
then we can find an increasing unbounded sequence (7^ : ξ < λ) in 7 Π N
X[G\]
such that for all ζ < X we have (7^ : ξ < ζ) G ΛΓ
λ[Gλ]. We let CΊ be a diagonal
intersection:
C7ζ,7J
and for i G C we let p 
=
7 =
f{t<λ:(Vj<t)i€C / 9, 7 j}.
An easy calculation shows that (ii) will be satisfied.
Successor step: Let 7 = /? + 1. If the set 5^ as computed by (pβ,i '• i G Cβ) (i.e.
the set {ε < λ : for some i G Cβ we have p^ Ih "ε G §*β"}) does not include a
stationary subset of λ, let CΊ C C/? be a club set disjoint from this set. We let

§7. Further Independence Results 
581
C/3ι7 = CΊ. For β
r < β we let C0/>7 = C/?/,/? Π C7. So for i G C7, we will have
PΊ,ί \β = Pβ,ί, so we only have to define p7)ί(/3). We will do this by induction on
i: If i is (in C7) the successor of j, then we let pΊ^(β) be a condition extending
pΊj(β) 
such that there is ε G C7 with ht(p7ιj (/?)) < ε <ht(p7jt(/3)) (where
ht(r) = sup(range(r)). This will ensure that in limit steps the supremum of
the conditions constructed so far always exists. For limit i, we first take the
supremum of the conditions constructed so far, and, if possible, increase the
condition again to make it stronger than q*(β).
Finally if S£ as computed by (pβi 
: i G Cβ) does contain a stationary set, we
will choose this as S\ when defining the first iteration Q. Note that this choice
of S\ does not depend on Nχ,... but only on 7V
λ,... so all is O.K. As remarked
above, this will not happen if 0 has guessed correctly. 
Dγ.i
7.2 Theorem. The following are equi-consistent
(a) ZFC + there is a weakly compact cardinal.
(b) ZFC + G.C.H. + if S", S" C Sg are stationary, then for some δ G 5?, S'nδ,
S
/f Π δ are stationary.
(c)ZFC + G.C.H.+ "if Si C Sfi are stationary sets for i < ω\ then there is
an increasing continuous sequence of ordinals < ω^ (a$ : i < ω\) such that
Oίi G Si.
Remark. In (b), (c) we can also contradict G.C.H. (use XV §3 for Con(a) =>
Con(c)).
Proof. The implication Con(a) =^> Con(b) was proved by Baumgartner [Ba],
the inverse by [Mg5]. Now Con(c)=^Con(b) is trivial, and so the point is to
prove Con(a)=>Con(c) which is done just like the proof of theorem 1.4, using
the forcing notion P[(Si : i < ω\)] from 4.6A. 
D7.2
Before we prove the next theorem, we recall the forcing notion for "shooting
a club through S":

582 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
A known forcing is
7.3 Definition. For any set S C ω^ define the forcing notion Club(S') by
Club(5) = {h : for some α < ω^ we have:
Dom(/ι) = a + l,Rang(/ι) C 5, h continuous increasing}
This forcing notion "shoots a club through 5". See on it in [BHK] and more in
[AbSh:146].
For h e Club(5) let
α(/ι) = max Dom(/ι) 
δ(h) = h(a(h))
7.4 Lemma.
(a) If 5 Π SQ is stationary, then Club(5) does not add new ω-sequences of
ordinals.
(b) If the set
5
 d= {δ G Si Π S : 5 Π δ contains a club subset of δ}
is stationary, and CH holds, then Club(S) does not add ωi-sequences of
ordinals to V.
7.4A Remark. Instead CH it suffice to have for some list {αα : a. < ω^} of
subsetes of ω<2 that {δ e Sf : there is a club C of δ such that CCS and
α < δ => C Πα G {dβ : β < a}.
Proof: We leave (a) to the reader as it is easier and we will need only (b).
To prove (b), let p G Club(5), τ a Club(5)-name such that p lh"r is a function
from ω\ to the ordinals". Let N -< (#(N3), e) be a model of size NI which con-
tains all relevant information (i.e., {5,p, r} C TV), is closed under α -sequences
and satisfies N Π ω<2 G 5. We can find such a model because we have CH and
5 is stationary. Let C C δ Π 5 be a club set.

§7. Further Independence Results 
583
Now we can find a continuous increasing sequence (Na : a <ω\) satisfying the
following for all a < ω\:
(a) Na G TV, Na -< TV, Na countable.
(b) 
(Nβ:β<a)€Na+l.
(c) sup(NaΠω2) G C.
(d) {S,p,τ}CTV 0.
W.l.o.g. \Ja<ωι Na
 = ^ ^et Po ~ P»
 an<^ define a sequence (p$ : i < ωι)
satisfying
(0) Pi e N
(1) pi+i decides the value of τ(ϊ)
(2) Letting a» = min{a : p€ G A^a & a > a(pi)}, we demand a(pi+ι) >
sup(Nai Πω2) and ί(p<+ι) > sup(AΓα. no;2) (see 7.3).
(3) If j < i, then p^ < pi.
Given p^, it is no problem to find Pi+i. If i is a limit, then letting α* =
* 
i^(ft')) we nave ^* — ^«* Π α;2 G 5, so we can let
Pi = Ujxift U {(
α*'^*)} Note that ^ G N, because A^ was closed under
ω-sequences.
Finally, \Ji<ωι Pi can be extended to a condition pωι because δ G 5. Now
pωί l^τeV. 
D7.4
The following solves a problem of Abraham.
7.5 Theorem. The following are equi-consistent
a)ZFC + there is a 2-Mahlo cardinal.
b)ZFC + G.C.H. + {5 < ^2 : δ inaccessible in L} contains a closed unbounded
subset of ω2
Proof. Con(b) ^> Con(a):
Let C be a closed unbounded subset of ω2 consisting of regular cardinals of L.
So each δ G C Π S$ is inaccessible in L, hence each δ G C Π 5^ is Mahlo in L,
hence #% is 2-Mahlo in L, i.e., {λ : λ < Njf, λ Mahlo in L} is stationary.

584 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
Con(a)^Con(b):
So without loss of generality V = L, K is 2-Mahlo.
We define an RCS-iteration Q — (Pi, Qi : i < «), where:
l)if i is not strongly inaccessible, Qi is Levy collapse of 2
Hl to HI by countable
conditions.
2) if i is strongly inaccessible but not Mahlo, Qi — Nm'.
3)if i is a strongly inaccessible Mahlo cardinal, Qi — P[Si] where Si = {λ < i : λ
strongly inaccessible }.
It should be easy for the reader to prove that Pκ — RlimQ satisfies the
ft-chain condition, and the S-condition, 5 = {λ : HI < λ < K, λ inaccessible (in
L)}.
Lastly in V
p* let P* =Club({λ < K : X inaccessible in L}). So our forcing is
Pκ * P* € V.
Now P* is not even HI-complete, but still P was constructed so that P* does
not add Hi-sequences by 7.4(b), and Vp**p* is as required. 
D7<5
7.6 Theorem. Assume ft* is supercompact. Then for some forcing notion P,
in yp, for every regular λ > HI, Fr^(λ) holds (and we can ask also GCH).
Proof. W.l.o.g. V \= GCH. Let K will be the first strongly inaccessible cardinal
ft which is ft
+7-supercompact. Let j : ft —> H(κ), j(ά) G fί(|α|
+6) be a
Laver diamond under this restriction. Let (P~,Q~ 
: i < κ,j < K) be an
Easton support iteration. Q~ is j0(j) if j(j) = ( j t ( j ) 
: ^ < 2} and J0(j)
is a P^-name of a j-directed complete forcing notion, j strong inaccessible,
(V£ < j)(|Pcl < j), and the trivial forcing otherwise. Let Vb = V, V\ = VQ
K .
Clearly Vι 1= 0{μ<κ:μ is strongly inaccessible }. Let Λ = Levy(λ, < ft*)
Vl, so in VR,
for every regular θ > «* we have:
(*)(9 if 5 C {5 < θ : cf(5) = HO} is stationary then for some 5* < λ we have:
cf ((5*) = K, and S Π 5* is a stationary subset of 5*. (see Fact in X 7.4)
In V2 = VR we have *;* = κ+ and define Q, PΛ, Q* - (^,9* : i < *;+),
P*+ as in the proof of 7.1 except that for δ < K strong inaccessible, Q§ is
suggested by jι(5) when j(ί) = (j^(ί) : £ < 2} as above, jι(ί) a (P^1 * P5)-

§7. Further Independence Results 
585
name of a forcing notion satisfying the 5-condition (in the universe V
Pδ+l XPδof
course). So we force with R' = R*PK*P*+ (really we can arrange that Pκ G VΊ,
P* is an .R x P^-name). Looking at the proof of 7.1, the only point left is to
prove (*)0 for θ = cf(0) > ft*. If θ > ft*, as the density of PΛ * P* + (e F2) is
ft*, any stationary 5 C {δ < θ : cf(δ) = NO} from V
Λ / contains a stationary
subset from V^. We can use V% N (*)0, so we are left with the case 0 — ft*.
If in V2, 5 is a Pκ * P*^+ name, p e PΛ * P*^, p Ih "50 C {5 < ft+ : cf(ί) =
stationary", let
Sl = {δ < ft
+ : cf(<f) - NO and p I/ "5 φ SQ
n}.
For J G Si choose p5 G P« * P*+, P < p5, Pδ ^
 uδ € 5". Let 52 - {δ e S1 :
PδεGPlt*p 
+},8Qp\\- "S2CSQ
n.
Let E — {a < ft
+ : α limit and ί € SΊ Π α =^> p$ G P« * P*} is a club of ft+
in V2 It is enough to show that
0 ty =
f {5 < ft
+ : cf (5) = ft, ί e £7 and p ll-pK*pj "^2 Π 5 (which is a
(PΛ * PJ* )-name) is a stationary subset of 5" } is a stationary subset of ft"
1".
[Why? As then instead of guaranting 52 Π δ will continue to be stationary, we
guess such name and related elementary submodel in some α < ft and in Qa
take care of 52 Π δ having a closed subset of order type ω\ .]
Let GR C .R be the generic subset of R.
In Vi we can find δ < ft* such that V\ N "ft < δ < ft*, δ is strongly
inaccessible" and letting Rg = Levy (ft, < δ) <> R, GRS = GR Π R§, in ^[G#J
we have Q, Q*\δ hence Pκ * P^, (pi : i e 5ι Π δ) and SΊ Π δ is stationary
(and of course V[GRS] 
t= 5 = ft
+). Also in Vi[G#6], the forcing notion Pκ * Pό*
satisfies the δ-c.c. (just as in Fι[G/?], Pκ * P* satisfies the ft*-c.c.). So for a
club of i < 5, i G SΊ Π J implies p» Ih "5*
 d=
f { j e Si Π 5 : PJ e GPκ*p*} is
a stationary subset of 5*" (as in Gitik, Shelah [GiSh:310]). Choose such i(*).
If this holds in Vi[G#] too, then we are done so assume towards contradiction
that this fails, so moving back to VQ for some q e P^", r G R and p we have
l hp*β " i * <pεP** P
 
and for some p~ * ^ *
 p« *

586 
XL Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
we have
(<!,£, p) \\-p-*ft*(p 
#p+\ "E is a club of δ disjoint to 5*".
~ 
K
~
.
\
^
K 
^ ξ ) 
~
Let M x (#((«*)++),€) be such that ||M|| = κ+, tf(κ
+) C M, x =
{κ,«*,ί,^,9,(r)p),Λ/GΛί,Plt * P;} C M and *M C M.
Let (M
1 ,x') be isomorphic say by g to (M, x), M transitive, so g : M — >
M
1. We can find 23 -< (#(κ;+
6),G) to which x' and M' belong, such that
letting θ = 03 Π K we have: 0 is strongly inaccessible fl+^-supercompact, 2S ~
(#(0+
6), G) and j(0) - (jo(0), jι(0)) € #(0++) is such that: J0(0) - g(Rs) and
jι((9) is the g(P~ * β5 * P/ς)-name i.e. (P^ * Q^ * P5)-name of g(P£) * club(5*).
We can finish easily. 
D7>5
§8. Relativising to a Stationary Set
8.1 Definition. For a set I of ideals and stationary W C ω\ we define when
does a forcing notion P satisfies the (I, W)-condition (compare with 2.6). It
means that there is a function F such that (letting J^ =the bounded subsets
of ωι):
, I), / satisfies the following properties:
(*) (a) (T, Oisanίl
(b) f .T^P.
(c) v < η implies P |= /(z/) < f ( η ) .
(d) There are fronts Jn(n < cj) of T such that every member of Jn+ι has a
proper initial segment of Jn and:
(a) If η G Jn then (Suc(τy), I,,, (/(i/) : i/ G Sucr(τ/)» - F(η, w[η], {/(i/) :
// < 77)) (where ιy[ry] = {κ:η\κ £ UnJn}).
(/?) U Jn is the set of splitting points of (Γ, I)
(7) If n is odd, η G Jn then \η = J^f.
(δ) If n is even, 77 G Jn then 1^ G I.

§8. Relativising to a Stationary Set 
587
then
(**) if (T, I) < (Γ*, I), [η G Γ* Π (Un<α; J2n) =* Sucτ*(τ/) £ !„] and for some
limit δ e W for every η 6 limT*, δ = sup{η(k) : η\k € Un<ω ^Wi }
then for some ς G P we have ς Ih "(3r?)[τ7 G limΓ*& Λfc<u, /fa I*) ^ (?P]"
8.2 Claim. l)If P satisfies the I-condition, e.g. P is N2-complete ί/ien P satisfies
the (I, ωi) -condition.
2)If Wi C W2 C α i, P satisfies the (I, W2)-condition Λen p satisfies the
(I, Wι)-condition.
3) If W C cj! is stationary, I is a family of K2-complete ideals, and the forcing
notion P satisfies the (I, W)-condition then forcing with P does not collapse
HI and preserves the stationarity of W.
Proof. 1) If F witnesses "P satisfies the I -condition", define F' such that if
(T, I), /, (Jn : n < ω) are as in Definition 8.1, then for n = 2m, η € Jn:
(Sucτ(77), {/(i/) : v G Sucτfa))) - F'((η, w[η], /(i/) : i/ < η)))
= F((η, {I : η\ί G \J J2fc}, 
(/(i/) : i/ < 77)})
fc<ω)
This finishes the proof.
2) Trivial.
3) Suppose p G P, p Ih "ζ7 is a club of α i". Choose (Γ , I), /, { Jn : n < ω) as
in Definition 8.1 such that:
(i) Jn = {η € T : £g(η) = 2n}
(ii)If η G T, ίg(ή) odd then Sucτ(^) = {η~ (0)} and for some aη
(a) min (α i Π Rang(?7)) < aη < ωι
There is no problem in this. Let Γ0 = {η G T : ifk < ίg(η), k = 4m + 2, £ < fc,
^ = 2n -h 1 then α^^ < τ/(fc))}. Clearly (Γ, I) < (Γ°, I) and the requirement
in (**) of Definition 8.1 holds. By XV 2.6 (no vicious circle! as it does not use
any intermidiate material) there is a club C* of ω\ and for each δ G C*, a tree
TS such that:

588 
XI. Changing Cofinalities; Equi-Consistency Results
(a)(Γ°, I) < (Tδ, I)
(b)/7 G T5, r? G Un Jϊn^ηt sp(Γ«, I).
(c)r/ G limT«5 =>> 5 = sup(Rang(ry) Π ωι)&δ ^ Rang(?7).
This last statement holds also for branches of T$ in extensions of the universe,
being absolute. Choose δ G VFΠC*, and apply Definition 8.1 to (T$, I) (standing
for Γ
1" there), and get q as there. Now q Ih "{/(τ/|^) : £ < ω} C GP, ry G limT"
(for some P-name 77). In particular q Ih "p G Gp" (as p^ = p) so w.l.o.g. p < q.
Also by (ii) (α), (iii) above ςf lh p "sup(Rang(ry) Πα i) = sup {αr?r(2n+i) : n <
α;}". And so q Ih "5 - sup{αr7r(2n+1) : n < ω}". As 9 Ih
 ilf(rj\(2n + 2)) G GP"
also (see (β) of (ii)) we have q Ih "cy(2n+i) G C" hence q Ih "<5 G C"'.
As (5 G W we 
finish. 
D8.2
8.3 Lemma. Let W C ω\, be stationary. All the theorems on preservations of
the I-condition (in §5, §6) for ^-complete I hold for the (I, W)- condition.
Proof. Same proof, sometimes using XV 2.6.

XII. Improper Forcing
§0. Introduction
In Chapter X we proved general theorems on semiproper forcing notions, and
iterations. We apply them to iterations of several forcings. One of them, and
an important one, is Namba forcing. But to show Namba forcing is semiproper,
we need essentially that H2 was a large cardinal which has been collapsed to ^2
(more exactly - a consequence of this on Galvin games). In XI we took great
trouble to use a notion considerably more complicated than semiproperness
which is satisfied by Namba forcing. However it was not clear whether all this
is necessary as we do not exclude the possibility that Namba forcing is always
semiproper, or at least some other forcing, fulfilling the main function of Namba
forcing (i.e., changing the cofinality of ^2 to ω without collapsing KI). But we
prove in 2.2 here, that: there is such semiproper forcing, iff Namba forcing is
semiproper, iff player II wins in an appropriate game ιD({Nι},u;, ^2) (& game
similar to the game of choosing a decreasing sequence of positive sets (modulo
appropriate filter, see X 4.10 (towards the end) and the divide and choose
game, X 4.9, Galvin games) and, in 2.5, that this implies Chang's conjecture.
In our game player I divide, played II choose but here it continue to choose
more possibilities later. Now it is well known that Chang's conjecture implies
0# exists, so e.g., in ZFC we cannot prove the existence of such semiproper
forcing. An amusing consequence is that if we collapse a measurable cardinal

590 
XII. Improper Forcing
to K, by Levy-collapsing P, then Chang's conjecture holds as by X 6.13 in
V
p player II wins the game mentioned above (Silver's original proof of the
consistency of Chang conjecture uses a Ramsey cardinal, but he has first to
force MA -\- 2
H° > KI and then use a more complicated collapsing).
In Sect. 1 we give the various variants of properness equivalent formations
using games 1.1, 1.7; we also show how the preservation theorems work in
this setting, thus getting alternative proofs of the preservation theorems for
semiproper and proper, (1.8, 1.8A, 1.9). This alternative proof for properness
was later and independently discovered by Gray in [Gr]. Related games have
been investigated by Jech (which are like Galvin games, but using complete
Boolean algebras) but his interests were different. Compared to [Sh:b] the order
of the sections is inverted.
§1. Games and Properness
1.1 Theorem. A forcing notion P is proper iff player II has a winning strategy
in the game Pc)
ω(p, P), for every p, where:
1.2 Definition. In a play of the game PD
α(p, P) (α a limit ordinal, p G P)
in the /3-th move player I chooses a P-name ξβ of an ordinal, and player II
chooses an ordinal ζβ.
In the end after α moves player II wins if there is q such that p < q € P
and q Ih " for every β < a we have ξβ G {C/3+n ' n < α;}", and player I wins
otherwise.
1.3 Remarks.
1) Note that we can allow player II to choose countably many ordinals ζβj
(ί < ω) and demand q If- "ζβ G {ξβ+n,t ' n,ί < ω}". Similarly player I can
choose countably many P-names, and nothing is changed, i.e., the four
variants of the definition, together satisfy (or do not satisfy) "player I (II)
has a winning strategy".

§1. Games and Properness 
591
2) Similarly for PD
w(p,P,λ) (see Definition 1.4(1)).
Proof of 1.1.
The "if" part.
Let λ be big enough, N -< (-ff(λ), G) is countable, {P,p} G 7V,p G P. Then
a winning strategy of PD
ω(p,P) belongs to N. So there is a play of this game
£n?Cn(^ < ω) m which player II uses his winning strategy in choosing ζn G N
and every P-name ξ G TV of an ordinal appears in {ξn : n < ω} and each ξn
belongs to N. So clearly ζn G N for every n.
So there is ς, witnessing the victory of II, i.e., p < q G P, ς Ih "ξn G
{Cm : m < ω}", (for every n), but (m G AT, so q Ih "ξn G N for every n". As
{ξn : n < ω} lists all P-names of ordinals which belong to TV, q is (TV, P)-generic;
and q > p, so we finish.
The "only" if part.
For λ big enough, expand (-ff(λ), G) by Skolem functions and get a model
M* and we shall describe a strategy for II: If player I has chosen up to
now £o, 
, fn, let TVn be the Skolem hull of {p, P} (J{ξo, 
, ξn} in M*, and
{Cn,£ ^ < ^} will be the set of ordinals which belong to Nn (remember Remark
1.3).
Suppose £θj Co,^ < ω), ξι,ζι,e(£ < cj),... is a play in which player II uses
his strategy (see remark 1.3(1)). Why does he win? Clearly N = \Jn 7Vn, which
is the Skolem hull in M* of {p, P} U{& : ^ < ^}, is an elementary submodel of
M*, (similarly for the reducts) so there is q > p which is (TV, P)-generic, so as
ξn G N we have q Ih "ξn G N" but the set of ordinals of N is {ζnj 
: n,f < ω}.
So we 
finish. 
Dχ.ι
1.4 Definition.
(1) PD
α(p, P, λ) is defined similarly, but ξβ are P-names of ordinals < λ. For
λ = oo (or just λ > |P|) we get PD
α(p, P).
(2) For a set S of cardinals, the game PD
α(p, P, 5) is defined as follows: in
the /3-th move player I chooses Xβ G 5, and a P-name ξp, and player II

592 
XII. Improper Forcing
chooses for 7 < β subsets Aβ^ of λ7, of power < \Ί(Aβ,Ί G V) (for λ7
regular these are w.l.o.g. initial segments of λτ).
In the end player II wins if there is q G P, q > p such that q Ih "£7 G
U7</3<7+u; A0,7 f°
r 7 < α" The definition for a P-name S is similar, but
player I chooses \β (not a P-name), and in the end, q forces only that: "if
Xβ e S then ..."
If not said otherwise we restrict ourselves to sets of regular cardinals in V.
1.4A Remark. Note that 1.4(1) is in fact a special case of 1.4(2) when we
identify λ with 5 = {μ : HI < μ < λ,μ regular}, i.e. a winning strategy for
PD
α(p, P, λ) can, in a canonical way, be translated to a winning strategy in
PD" (p, P, 5) , and conversely.
1.5 Definition.
(1) P3"(p, P, λ) is defined similarly for t = 0, 1, 2, but:
for i = 0 it is exactly PD
a(p, P, λ);
for t — 1 player I chooses ξ/j, a P-name of an ordinal < λ. Player II chooses
countably many ordinals (ζβlH for n < ω) and player II wins if q Ih "ξβ e {C/5,n :
n < ω} for each β < α" for some q > p
for 1 = 2 player II chooses NO P-names (ζβ,n for n < ω) of ordinals
< λ and player II chooses N0 ordinals ζβ^n for n < ω\ and player II wins if
Q "~ "£/3,n £ {C/M : ^ < ^} for every β, n" for some q > p.
(2) The games P3"(p, P, 5) (f = 0, 1, 2, 5 a set of cardinals of V) are similar
toPD>,P,S);
In PD^, (p, P, 5), player I chooses (in move /3) a cardinal \β G 5 and a
name of an ordinal £0 < λ/j. Player II plays a set A^ C λ/3, |A^| < λ/3, ^4/3 G V
(if V |= "λ regular" w.l.o.g. Aβ = ξβ). After o; moves II wins if he can find a
condition q > p such that q Ih "(V/3 < a)ξβ G A^".

§1. Games and Properness 
593
In PD£(p,P,S), player I chooses Xβ G S and N0 names ξβtn of ordinals
< Xβ, player II chooses Aβ C Xβ, as above and in the end player II has to find
a condition q > p such that q If- "V/3 < α Vn < ω (ξβ,n € -A/?)".
Similarly, we can define Pc3^(p, P, S), where 5 is a name of a set of regular
cardinals of V.
1.6 Claim.
(1) Player II wins PD°(p, P, λ) iff he wins PD£(p, P, λ) provided that λ = N:
or λ^
0 = λ or at least there is in V a family {Ai 
: i < X} of countable
subsets of λ such that in V (VA C λ)(3i) (|A| < N0 -> A C ^).
(2) Player II wins PD" (p, P, 5) iff he wins PD£ (p, P, 5) (when 5 is a P-name
of a set of regular cardinals > NO).
1.6A Remark. Note that if player II wins one of the games Pc)"(p, P, λ) then
p forces (VA e V
P)(3B e V) [A C λ Λ \A\ < N0 =» A C 5 Λ |5| - N0].
Proo/. (2) The "if" part is trivial.
For the "only if" part: Note that by the assumption Ihp "λ £ 5 —•» λ =
cf
V(X) 
> NO" and that as player II wins P0^(p, P, <S) we have: for any λ,
Ihp "λ G 5 —> cf(λ) > NO"). Now when player I chooses λ/? and {ξ/3,n n < ω},
player II "pretends" player I has chosen Sup{^?n : n < ω}, and chooses a
suitable initial segment of Xβ. So he translates a play of PD^(p-> P?
s) to one of
«P3?(p,P,s)".
(1) Really the same as the proof of (2): the "if" part is trivial and for the "only
if" part, player II let iβ = Min{z : {ξβ,n 
'. n < ω} C A^} where {Ai : i < X} is
as mentioned in 1) (such a family exists in V if λ — NI (Ai — i) or λ
H° = λ
({Ai : i < X} — {^4 C λ : \A\ < N0}) and as in the proof of part (2) above, the
forcing preserves this property).
Now because player II wins Pc)?(p, P, λ), he can find in the β-th move
(of a play of Pΐ)%(p,P,\)) 
ordinals iβtn(n < ω), such that at the end of
the game ςlh"3n(i/3 =
 
/i/3,n)"5 and so his move in Pd%(p,P,X) 
will be the
countable set \Jn Aiβ<n. (More formally, fixing a winning strategy F\ for player

594 
XII. Improper Forcing
II in (Pu)2(p,P,A), we shall describe a winning strategy F% of player II in
Pί>2 (P) P> λ). During the play he simulate a play of PD?(p, P, λ) by playing in
the /3-th move j^.) 
Di.e
1.7 Theorem.
(1) P is α-proper ^jff player II wins Pd
ω(
l~*~
a\p, P; oo) for every p.
(2) P is (α, l)-proper iff player II wins PD^O^P; °°) f°
r every p.
(3) A forcing notion P is semiproper iff player II has a winning strategy in
PD£(p, P, NI) for every p G P.
(4) A forcing notion P is S-semiproper iff player II has a winning strategy in
PUQ(P, P, 5) for every p G P.
Proof. Similar to 2.1, for (2) use V 2.5. 
DL7
1.7A Remark.
(1) Call a forcing notion P "S-semi-α -proper" (for 5 a P-name of a set of
cardinals of V), if for all large enough cardinals λ, and all (Ni : i < α) G
5Q5^(λ) (see V2.1) for which P, 5 G AΓ0:
for all p G P Π TVo there is q > p, such that for every i < a we have
q Ihp " if μ e S then sup(μ Π Ni[G\) = sup(μ Π Ni)
n.
Then we have: P is 5-semi-α-proper iff player II wins PD
ω^
1+Q!^(p, P, 5).
(2) For countable ordinals to demand ξ@ G {C0,n : ^ < ω}" is equivalent to
demanding ξβtn < Sup{ζβtn 
: n<ω}, etc.
1.8 Theorem. The property "player II wins PD"(p, P,λ) for every p G P" is
preserved by CS iterations (Pί? Qi : i < α(*)), for £ — 0,2, α < α i, if |α(*)| < λ.
1.8A Remark.
(1) So we get here an alternative proof of the preservation of properness and
(α, l)-properness: we could give such proofs for other theorems as well.
(2) The situation is similar with S instead of λ, and easier for RCS iteration
by X 2.5 (stated in 1.9).

§1. Games and Properness 
595
Proof. Let (P^, Qi : i < α(*)} be a countable support iteration. Let us consider
a game PDg (P,Pa(*}ι λ) (the others are similar). By the hypothesis for each
ί < α(*), player II has, for every q G ζ^, a winning strategy s^ = sti(q) in the
game PDg (<7> Q^ λ) where ς, Qi, s£i are P-r names.
Without loss of generality for Qi we use the version of the games in which
player I plays a countable set (of names of countable ordinals) at each stage,
and player II answers with a single ordinal. But for PD0 (p, Pα(*), λ) we use the
version where both players play singletons, this is legitimate by remark 1.3(1).
(The remark at the end of the proof will explain why it is more convenient to
let player I choose a countable set of names in the games PD0 (0.1 Qίt λ))
Now player II plays as follows: in the n-th move he will define wn,pn, t™(i G
wn) such that:
(1) pn G Pα(*),P < PO, Pn < Pn+l,
(2) wn is a finite subset of Dom(pn), wn C wn+ι, and if Dom(pn) = {in^ : k <
ω} and w.l.o.g. in$ — 0 then wn = {im^ '• m < n,k < n}, (so eventually
(Jn<ω Wn = Un Dom(pn) and wn depends just on (pt : I < n))
(3) Pn-i \Wn = pn \Wn for Π > 0.
(4) For i G wn, let n(i) = Min{m : ί G wm}, and t*n = {{Γj., Cjt) : ^(i) < k < n)
is such that ΓJ. is a countable set of P^-names of Q^-names of ordinals < λ
and Cfc a P^-name of an ordinal, and pn\i Ihp. "t
l
n is an initial segment of
a play of P3"(pn(ΐ)(0>Qij^)ϊ m which player II uses the strategy sti =
δίi(Pn(t)W)"
(5) In the zero move (as WQ — 0), player I chooses a Pα(5)c)-name of an ordinal
£cb and player II chooses po ^ P? Po '^~P0(*) "ίo — Co'\ and play the ordinal
Co-
(6) In the n-th move, let player I play ξn, a Pα(5le)-name of an ordinal < λ.
Let (jn(rn) 
: m < ln) enumerate wn in increasing order (so jn(0) = 0) as
in,o - 0. Let jn(ln) = α(*), and let ^(*} - ^(/τl) - ξn.
By downward induction on m (ln > m > 0), player II will define
Γjn(m) 
ΛJn(m) 
f0|lowς.
Pn,mι*-n 
•> Sn 
aS lOllOWS.

596 
XII. Improper Forcing
A) Given ζn m+ ' (for m = ln — I this is ξn), a PJ τι(m+1)-name of an
ordinal, he can find a condition pn?m (but see below) of the forcing notion
pjn(m+i)/^Λ(m)+ι (in the universe y
p^(-)+ι); Pn f [jn(m) + 1, j(m + 1)) <
Pn,m5 such that pn?m decides ζn m
 
up to a P7 τx(m)+1-name. So we have the
freedom to choose a countable set Γn m' of Pjn(m)+ι -names (of ordinals < λ,
but see below) such that
"
+1) "C
B) Once Γ^
(m) is defined, demand (4) yields a Pjrι(m)-name ζn
n(m).
Finally, player II plays ζn = ζ% = ζ?? 
(which is a P0-name, hence a real
ordinal) and define pn+ι by: for j G wn, pn+ι(j) = Pn(j), and pn+ι \\jn(rn) +
1, j(ra + l)) = pn,m
This is easily done and in the end, as for each i G \Jn<ωWn, player II
has simulated a play of PC)Q (Pn(i) W» Qϊ> λ) in which the second player uses his
winning strategy st^ (the union of t
l
n(n < ω)), there is a P^-name g(i), such
that lhPί
 Mpn(i)(i) < g(i)", and lhPi [j(i) lhQi "U{Γm : n(i) < n < ω} C {fm :
m<ω}"].
It is clear that ςf (i.e. Dom(g) = Un<ω'
lϋ^'^(^) defined above) belongs to
Ptt(*) We have to prove q Ih "ξ^ G {C^ : n < ω}". Let r > q be such that
r Ih "ξ£ = ξ*".
Note first that q > pn for every n < α;.
We prove by induction on i G Un<ω
tί;n that if ξ G U{Γ{ : j < i,n(j) <
k < ω} then q \ i \\-pi "ξ G {ζ^ : n < cj}". This suffices as for each n we have
q Ih ξn G UiGtϋ T -^
or ^ limit-trivial; for i successor - use the choice of pn,m
and the winning of the second player in Pc)o((pn(φ Qi> λ).
At first glance we get it too cheaply.
But there is a delicate point - the choice of pn,m; it is really not a condition
of Pj(m+i) or PQ,(*) but a PJ (m)+1-name for it. The delicate point is that
its domain is a name, whereas it is required to be a set. However, it is not

§2. When Is Namba Forcing Semiproper, Chang's Conjecture and Games 
597
fatal as long as at least q would be a real condition, for which it is not
necessary to really know Dom(pn>m), just to find a countable set including
it. So into the list of names player II is manipulating he has to add names of
the members of Dom(pn,m). So it is enough to ask that (J Γ^ Π α* C \J wn
n<ω 
n<ω
and Dom(pn>m) C Γn m) i.e., there are Pjn(m)-names ξ^^ 
(f- < ω) such that
ll-p,(mfn)+1 "Dom(pn,m) = {ε^(m) : t < α;}" and we let ε$m) G lt(m). But
Player II can manipulate only names of ordinals < λ; this is why |α(*)| — λ
was required so in the end we know Dom(pn?m) C {ξk : k < ω}, and there are
no problems.
The cases I — 0, a. > ω are proved by induction on α.
For ί — 2, we already know from what we prove that player II wins
PD0 (p, Pα(#); λ) for every p G Pα(#), and the proof is simple. 
DI.S
We leave to the reader the easier theorem (by now):
1.9 Theorem.
1) RCS iterations preserves the following property of forcing notions:
for every p G P, Player II wins PG%(p, P, NI).
2) Similarly for PD^(p, P, NI), and variants with 5.
§2. When Is Namba Forcing Semiproper,
Chang's Conjecture and Games
2.1 Definition. For a filter D on a set /, and a set S of regular cardinals and
ordinal α we define a game D(5,α, £)): the game lasts α moves, in the /?-th
move player I chooses a cardinal Xβ G 5 and a function F^ from / to \β.
Then player II has to choose an ordinal iβ < \β. In the end of the game,
player II wins if
{i G /: for every λ G 5, if for some /?, λ = Xβ then Sup{Fβ(t) 
: Xβ = λ} is
< Sup{iβ : λβ — λ}} φ 0mod£>; also player I has to choose each Xβ infinitely

598 
XII. Improper Forcing
often otherwise player II wins (though not every λ G S appears).
If / — λ, D = D
cχ (the filter of cobounded subsets of λ) we replace D by λ.
Remark.
(1) This is close to the games in Definition X 4.9, X 4.10 (toward end) and
reference there but here we do not choose immediately the bound, we
increase it later.
(2) We do not list the obvious monotonicity properties.
2.2 Theorem.
Namba forcing is {Kι}-semiproper iff player II wins D({Nι},α;,N2) iff there is
a {Nι}-semiproper forcing P changing the cofinality of ^2 to NQ
2.2A Remark.
It does not matter whether we use Nm or Nm' (see XI 4.1, X 4.4), so we deal
with the somewhat harder case: Nm'.
Proof. We use the criterion for semiproperness from 1.7(3)
third condition implies second condition
We assume P is {Kι}-semiproper; and so (by 1.7(3)) we can choose a winning
strategy for player II in PD = PD
ω(po,-Pj{^ι}) (in the variant where both
players choose countable sets) and we shall call its players /PD,//PD for clarity.
Now we describe a winning strategy for player II in D({Nι},α;, ^2). Player II
will simulate for this a play of PD, in which IIp^ uses his winning strategy and
/PO is played by him (player ΠinD({Hι},α;,K2)) Let ξn be the P-name of the
n-th element in an ω-sequence which is unbounded in K2.
In the n-th move let player I choose Fn : ^2 —> NI, player II will play
for Ipd the P-names Fn(ξι) 
(I < ω), (see 1.3(2)), so he knows the ordinals
OLn,i < ωι (for ί < ω) which IIp^ plays (according to his strategy). Now player
II returns to his play and makes the move an = Sup{an^ + 1 : ί < ω} < ω\.

§2. When Is Namba Forcing Semiproper, Chang's Conjecture and Games 
599
In the end there is a condition q e P, q > po such that q Ih "Fn(&) <
\Jm αm" for n, I < ω. Let for each t < ω:
At = {a < ω-2 : q does not force ξι ^ α, i.e.,
there is r G P such that r > q and r Ih "ξι = α"}
By our choice of ξι(l < ω), for some £, A^ is an unbounded subset of ω%
(otherwise \Jt<ωAt would be bounded, as in V we have cf^) = ^2 > ^o so
q Ih "{ξι : I < ω} C |J At" give a contradiction to the choice of (ξe : I < ω)).
t<ω
Now clearly α G At implies Fn(a) < (Jm αm; hence ^ is as required.
First implies third condition
Trivial
Second condition implies first condition
The proof is similar to that of X 4.12(3), it is similar for Nm and Nm
1', and
we present the one for Nm'.
We again use the games and prove player II wins PC)Q (p, P, ^1} for every
p G P, P — Afra' = Nm
f(D^2) (see X Definition 4.4(4) (we can in fact replace
NI by {λ : λ a regular cardinal ^ ^2}))- For notational simplicity assume p's
trunk is {) i.e. (Vr? G p)(3*
2i)(η~ (i) G p).
During the play, in the n-th move player I chooses a P-name of a countable
ordinal ξn, and player II will choose ξn < ω\. On the side, player II in stage n
also chooses a condition pn G P and a function Fn from pn Π (
n-(α;2)) to α i
such that:
(a) p < Po,Pn < Pn+ι, Pn Π (
n-(^)) = Pn+i Π (
n-(ω2)), and the trunk of each
Pn is {}.
(b) For η <E pn+ι Π (
n(ω2)) and I < n, either (pn+ι)w I^P "6 < ^n(^)" or
there is no q, (pn)[η] < <l, with trunk η and ζ < ω\, such that q Ihp
 αξ£ < C"
(remember ςr^j = {ί/ G ^ : ^ < r/ or r/ < ι/}.
(c) For 77 € pn Π (
m(ω2)) and m < n let Fn5r? : ω2 -> ωi be defined by
-Fn.t W = ^n(^
Λ(^)); and we demand that -Fn(ry) is defined such that

600 
XII. Improper Forcing
: I < n — m) is an initial segment of a play of
in which the second player uses his winning strategy (i.e.
one we choose a priori).
(d) At last player II actually plays ζn = Fn(Q).
There is no problem for player II to use this strategy: Stage 0, is trivial, stage
n+1: for each η G pnn(
no;2) define q^n by induction on I < π+1 : q^n = (pn)fo],
q^n ^ 4τ7,n5 nas trunk η and either it forces ξι < ζ for some ζ < ω\ which we
call C^,n or there is no such q (satisfying the two previous conditions). Then
and for η G pn Π (
n(ω2)).
Fn+l(η) = Max{C*,n :ί<n + l, C£n well defined} |J{0}.
Now he defines Fn+l(η) for η G pn Π (
n>(ω2)) - Pn+i Π (
n>(α;2)) by
downward induction on lg(η), using (c) (i.e., the winning strategy of the second
player in D({N2},ω,Nι).)
In the end player II has to provide the suitable condition q > p] we define
q Π
 nω2 by induction on n:
{) G #, and if we have decided that η G q then: η
 Λ (i) G </ zjff Sup{Fn(?7
 Λ (i)) :
n <ω,n> lg(η~ (ί))} < Sup{Fn(r/) : n < cj, n > lg(η)} (and ry
Λ(i) G p^g^+i
of course) .
By (
c)> 9 will b
e a condition; and by (b) it forces ξn < \Jn<ω ζn
 : otherwise
there is r > q, r Ihp "ξn > \Jn<ω ζn" Let η be the trunk of r, and then using
(b) we get a contradiction. 
D2.2
2.3 Definition. More generally, if we have a family D of filters, a set 5 of
regular cardinals, and a relation K C 5 x D, we define the game D(K, α) as
follows: In the β 
move (β < α), player I chooses a pair (λ/j, D^) G K and a
function F'β from UD/3 to λ^g. Player II chooses an ordinal iβ < \β. In the end,
player II wins if for each D G D the set {t G (JD : for every λ with (λ, D) G K,
if for some /?, (λ,D) - (\β,Dβ), then Sup {F0(ί) : (λ,D) - (\β,Dβ)} < Sup
{z^ : (λ,D) = (λ^,D/3)}} is y^ 0 mod D. (Also, player I has to choose each

§2. When Is Namba Forcing Semiproper, Chang's Conjecture and Games 
601
\β infinitely often, otherwise II wins but some λ G S may never be chosen).
Again, we may write K, for D^
b.
2.4 Theorem. For a countable set S of regular cardinals, and a countable set
D of Hi-complete filters, player II wins D(S x D, ω) iff there is an S-semiproper
forcing notion P, such that for all D € B
Ihp "3w C (jD[w countable, w ^ 0 mod D, that is, it is not
disjoint to any A e D(so A e V)]n .
(If D = Dχ*, then the above condition is clearly equivalent to Ihp " cf(λ) =
HO ")
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of 2.2. To show the "only if part, let
D = {Dn : n < ω}, where each Dn occurs infinitely often. Let P — TVra'(T, 3)),
where Γ = {η : η a finite sequence, (Vfc)[fc < ίg η => η \ k G Dom(Z)fc)]}, and for
each η <ΞT,lefΣ)η = {{η
Λ(i) : ί £ A} : Ae D£g(η^}. 
D2.4
2.5 Theorem.
(1) If player II wins D = 3({Nι},α;ι, ^2), Λen Chang's conjecture holds.
(2) Moreover if e.g. χ > 2
K2, M* an expansion of ((ff(χ),e)) by Skolem
functions, N -< M* is countable, then for arbitrarily large α < N2, there is
7Vα, A/' x Na -< M*, α e JVα, and 7Vα, JV have the same countable ordinals.
(3) In (2) we can find TV', N ^ N' -^ M*, TV'fΊu i = AΓΠα i and |7Vnu;2| = KI.
Proof. (1) Follows easily from (2). We can easily build a strictly increasing ele-
mentary chain of countable models, of length ωi, all having the same countable
ordinals.
(2) Clearly some winning strategy for player II in D belongs to TV. So we
can construct a play of D, F0,α0,Fι,αι, . . . such that player II uses his strategy,
each Fn belongs to TV, and every function from ω2 to ω\ which belong to TV
appears in {Fn : n < ω}.

602 
XII. Improper Forcing
As the strategy and Fo,...,F n belong to TV, also an belongs to AT. In
the end for arbitrarily large a < ^2, Fn(a) < {Jmctm for every n. But clearly
N Π ω\ is an initial segment of α i, hence |Jm αm C TV, so Fn(a) £ Af for every
α satisfying /\nFn(a) < |Jmα!m. Now we can take as Na the Skolem hull of
N\J{a}.
We have to show that N and Na have the same countable ordinals. Every
7 G AΓα Π ω\ can be written as 7 = τ(α, αi,..., αα), where αi,... αΛ G Λf, and
r is a Skolem term.
In TV, we can define a function / : ω^ —> ωi, by
yv^\ _ f τ(i, αi,..., αfc), 
if this is < ω\
10 
otherwise.
So / = Fn for some n, but clearly 7 = τ(α, α n,..., αn) = /(α) = Fn(α) G JV.
(3) By the proof of (1). 
D2.5
We can prove similar theorems for 5 not necessarily {&ι}, e.g.
2.6 Theorem. If player II wins ό)({λ},u;,μ), λ < μ, M a model with universe
H((2
μ)+) and countably many relations and functions, including e and Skolem
functions, N 
-< M countable, then there is AT
1", TV X AT
1" -< M, AΓt ^ AT,
Sup(AΓt π λ) = Sup(AΓ Π λ), Sup(AΓt n μ) > Sup(AΓ Π μ), and |AΓt n μ| = NI.
Proof. Similar. 
D(2.6
2.7 Conclusion. (1) For some regular λ, player II wins in c)({^ι},α;, λ) iff
there is an {Nι}-semiproper forcing P not preserving "cf(α) > NQ"
(2) So if e.g. 0^ does not exist, a forcing notion is proper iff it is 5-semiproper,
5 = {#Y} U {« : cf(κ)
yP 
> NO K regular (in F) and K > ^}.
Proof. (1) By 2.4, D -
(2) If P is 5-semiproper and preserves "cf (α) > K0" then by Claim X
2.3(1) P is proper (see Definition X 2.2, 5 is essentialy equal to the 5 from
Claim X 2.3(1) because P preserves "cf(α) > N0")

§2. When Is Namba Forcing Semiproper, Chang's Conjecture and Games 
603
If P is 5-semiproper not preserving "cf(α) > KQ" then for some p G P,
and regular λ > KI (in V) Q = P\{q € P : p < q} is 5-semiproper hence
{Nι}-semiproper and 0 Ih
 αcf(λ) = K0" But then by 2.7(1) player II wins the
game ό)({Hι},α;ι,λ) hence the conclusion of Theorem 2.6 holds and by well
known theorems such variants of Chang conjecture imply 0^ G V. 
^2.7
Note that
2.8 Conclusion. If K is measurable in V, P = Levy(Kι, < λ) (so elements of
P are countable partial functions), then in V
p', Chang's conjecture holds.
Proof. By 2.2 and X 4.11.

XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
§0. Introduction
Here we shall start with K e.g. supercompact, use semiproper iteration to get
results like (S C ω\ stationary costationary):
(a) ZFC 4- GCH 4 P(ωι)/(Dωι 4 5) is layered 4 suitable forcing axiom and
note that by [FMSh:252] this implies the existence of a uniform ultrafilter
on ω\ such that K^
1 /D — NI (which is stronger than "D is not regular").
(b) ZFC+GCH+P(α;ι)/(Pωι 4 5) is Levy 4 suitable forcing axiom.
(c) ZFC4GCH4:P(u;ι)/(£>α,1 4 S) is Ulam 4 suitable forcing axiom,
where (a) Ulam means
(Dωι 4 5)+ - {A C ωι : A Π 5 ± 0 mod Pωι}
is the union of NI, Ki-complete filters, hence on R there are KI measures such
that each A C R is measurable for at least one measure
(b) Levy means that, as a Boolean algebra, it is isomorphic to the
completion of a Boolean algebra of the Levy collapse Levy(K0, < ^2)
(c) layered means that the Boolean algebra is Uα<H2 ^^ w^ere B& are
increasing, continuous, \Ba\ < HI, and cf(α) = NI =Φ Ba <£ P(ωι)/(Dωι 4 5).
We also deal with reflectiveness (see 4.3).
This chapter is a rerepresentation of [Sh:253], we shall give some history
later, and now just remark that this work was done (and reclaimed) after

§0. Introduction 
605
[FMSh:240 §1, §2] and [W83] ([W83] starts with "ZFC+DC+ADR+0 regular"'
and forces "ZFC+CH-fthe club filter on some stationary S C ω\ is KI dense")
but before Woodin obtained a similar result from a huge cardinal.
In this chapter we got results by semiproper iteration iterating collapses
and sealing some maximal antichains of P(ωι)fDωι 
up to some large K. So it
is a natural continuation of Chapter X. Our ability to do this to enough chains
comes from reflection properties of K, which is super compact (or limit of enough
supercompacts).
The first section contains preliminaries on semi-stationary sets, relevant
reflection properties and what occurs to some such properties when we force.
In the second section we deal more specifically with our iterations (5-suitable
iterations). In the third section we deal with getting Levy algebra and lay-
eredness, and in the fourth we deal with reflective ideals (see 4.3) and with
the Ulam property. Note that for much of the chapter the iteration is of 53-
complete forcing notion, for some (fixed) stationary 83 C α i, and in this case
the iteration is (equivalent to) a CS one; so we will stress less the names of
conditions etc.
By Foreman, Magidor and Shelah [FMSh:240], CON(ZFC+Av is supercom-
pact) implies the consistency of ZFC+"Ί}ωί 
is ^-saturated" [i.e., if 23 is the
Boolean algebra P(ω\)/Vωι^
 
ίίfDωι is H2 saturated" means "23 satisfies the
K2-c.c."]. This in fact was deduced from the MM+(=Martin Maximum'
1") by
[FMSh:240] whose consistency was proved by RCS iteration of semiproper forc-
ings (see Chapter X, Chapter XVII §1). Note that [FMSh:240] refutes the the-
sis: in order to get an elementary embedding j of V with small critical ordinal,
into some transitive class M of some generic extension V
p of V, one should
start with an elementary embedding of j of V into some M' and then force
over V
1'. Previously, J. Steel and Van Wesep got the same result starting from
ZF+AD+ACβ (see [StVW]).
This thesis was quite strongly rooted. Note that it is closely connected
to the existence of normal filters D on λ which are λ
+-saturated or at least
precipitous (use for P the set of nonzero members oίP(X)/D ordered by inverse
inclusion, j the generic ultrapower). See [FMSh:240] for older history.

606 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
In fact, it was shortly proved directly that MM
4" = SPFA+ and much
later it was proved that MM is equivalent to the Semi-Proper Forcing Axiom
(in ZFC) (see XVIII §1).
The rsults of [FMSh:240, §1, §2] motivated much activity. Woodin proves
from
CON(ZF+ADR+<9 regular) the consistency of ZFC+"23ΓS is Ni-dense", for
some stationary 5 C ω\.
By Shelah and Woodin [ShWd:241], if there is a supercompact cardinal,
then every projective set of reals is Lebesgue measurable (etc.). This was
obtained by combining (A) and (B) below which were proved simultaneously:
(A) The conclusion holds if there is a weakly compact cardinal ft and a forcing
notion P, |P| — ft, satisfying the ft-c.c., not adding reals and Ihp "there is
a normal filter D on ωi, *B = P(ω\)/D satisfying the N2-c.c."
(B) There is a forcing as required in (A) (see [FMSh:240, §3]).
This was improved for projective sets which are Σn using approximately
n cardinals ft satisfying:
(*) for every forcing notion P e H(κ) and stationary costationary 5 C ω\
there is semiproper Q, not adding reals, \\~P*Q "T>ωι \S is ft-saturated,
K = ft2" (and Q is not too large).
A sufficient condition for (*) is Prα(ft) = ft is strongly inaccessible, and for
every / : ft — > ft there is an elementary embedding j : V — * M (M is a
transitive class), ft the critical ordinal of j and H(j(f)(κ)) 
C M. Moreover it
suffice (Woodin cardinals) Pr^ft)' = ft is strongly inaccessible, and for every
/ : ft — > ft there is fti < ft, (Vα < ftι),/(α) < fti and for some elementary
embedding j : V — > M (M is a transitive class), fti is the critical ordinal of j
By [Sh:237a] "2
H° < 2
Nl => T>ωι is not Hi-dense", and by [Sh:270] if D is a
layered filter on λ = λ
<λ then D+ — {A C λ : A £ D} is the union of λ filters
extending D.
' Later results of Martin, Steel and Woodin clarify the connection between
determinacy and large cardinals.

§0. Introduction 
607
This chapter is a representation of [Sh:253] which was done then, but was
mistakenly held as incorrect for quite some time. The main change is that we
replace part of the consistency proof of the Ulam statement, (P(ωι) is the
union of HI HI-complete nontrivial measures), by a deduction from a strong
variant of layerness. Later Woodin proves from a huge cardinal CON(ZFC+
GCH+P(u;ι)/(Z>ωι 4-5) is Ni-dense).
0.1. Notation and Basic Facts.
(1) P(A) is the power set of A, S<χ(A) = {B : B C A, \B\ < λ}, <*χ is a well
ordering of H(\) which, for simplicity only, we assume is an end extension
of <* for μ < λ.
(2) T>\ is the club filter on a regular λ > HO and Ί)<\(A) is the club filter on
S<x(A).
(3) (a) 53 is the Boolean Algebra P(ωι)fDωι] we do not distinguish strictly
between A € P(ωι) and A/T>ωι and for stationary S C ω\, *&\S is
defined naturally.
(b) 03 of course depends on the universe, so we may write *B
V or 03[V
1];
instead of 93 [V
p] we may write 23 p or 23 [P].
(c) If V
1 C V
2, ωY
1 = ω\\ then 03 [V
1] is a weak subalgebra of 93 [V
2]
(i.e., distinct elements in 03[V
1] may be identified in 03[V
2]).
(d) If P £ V is a forcing notion preserving stationary subsets of ωι,
then 03 = 03[V] is a subalgebra of 03 p (identifying (A/Vωι)
v and
(A/τ>ωι)
yP for A G 7>(ωι)
v). If Q = (P^φ : i < a) is an iteration
(with limit Pα, so i < j < α => Pi <§ P, ), we let 03*
5 - Uί<α23
Pί+
1.
(4) (a) Let us say, for Boolean algebras BI and B2, that £χ <$ 52 iff BI C S2
(i.e., BI is a subalgebra of B2) and every maximal antichain of £?ι is
a maximal antichain of B2.
(b) Note that, for Boolean algebras BI and B2, BI <£ £?2 #f £?ι C B2 and
(Vx G B2 \ {0})(37/ G Bl \ {0})(Vz € fiOfz Π i / ^ O - ^ Π z ^ O ] .
Hence, if BI <$ B3 and BI C B2 C B3, then βx <> J52.
(c) Hence, the satisfaction of "Bι <> B^ does not depend on the universe
of set theory, i.e., if V |= Bl <o B2 and V C V
1 then F
1 f= Bl <o S2.

608 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
(d) By Solovay and Tennenbaum [ST], <£ is transitive, and if (Bi : i < a)
is ^-increasing and continuous then Bi <£ [_) 
<aBj.
(e) Also, if (Bζ : ζ < ξ) is a C-increasing sequence of Boolean algebras
and BQ <> Bζ for ζ < ξ, then β0 <» Uζ<ξ ^C
(f) If (Bi : i < δ + I) is an increasing continous sequence of Boolean
algebras, cf(ί) > H0 and [i < δ => ||^|| < £], and S
 d= {i < δ : B< <o
is a stationary subset of δ then £5 <£
[Why? If x G B(5+ι \ {0} then by clause (b) for each α G S for some
ya£ Ba\ {0} we have
So by Fodor lemma for some
is stationary. And so for some y the set {a £ 8% : ya = y} is station-
ary and y is as required.]
(g) For a Boolean algebra B, Xλ <£ X2 (in B) ijff Xx C X2 C B\{0β} and
every predense subset of X\ is a predense subset of X% where y is a
predense subset of X if Y C X & Vx G X3y G Y(3z G X)(* Cβ xΠy).
If Oβ G X2 we mean Xl \ {Oβ} <o X2 \ {0B}.
This definition is compatible with the one in clause (a) and the itera-
tion in clause (b) is still true; also clause (c) holds (the others are not
needed here).
(5) If in V we have PI <£ P2 <> ^3, in V
p<2 we have 03 Pl <£ »P2, and in
V
p*i*B
p* 
<> <B
P3, Λen in y
p3,23
Pl <$ Q3
P3, [follows by (4)(c), (4)(d)];
similarly for 23 Pί \S.
(6) For a set a and forcing notion P, Gp is the P-name of the generic set and
α[Gp] = α U {x[Gp] : x G a is a P-name}. So α[Gp] is a P-name of a set,
and for G C P generic over V its interpretation is a[G\ = αU {x[G] : x G α
is a P-name} (x[G] is the interpretation of the P-name x).

§1. Semi-Stationarity 
609
(7) If λ > NO is a cardinal, N a countable elementary submodel of (-ff(λ),
G),P G TV and G C P is generic over V, then N[G\ X (#(λ)
yP,G) (as
P = {r[G} : r € H(X) a P-name} and if lhP "(#(λ)
vP,G) h
(x,α)" then for some P-name τ G H(\) we have lhP "(#(λ)
yP, G) h
<Xτ,α)"). See III 2.11, I 5.17(1).
(8) Also, if some p G G is (AT, P)-generic then (TV,G) -< (H(\)
v,e,G) (i.e.,
G is an extra predicate, so you may write (TV, G Π \N\)). Also, if Λ is any
relation (or sequence of relations) on H(X)
V, 
N -< (ίί(λ)
v,€,Λ) (and
P G AT, G C P generic over V) and some p G G is (TV, P)-generic then
(TV,G) -< (tf(λ)
v,G,#,G) and even (N[G\,\N\,R
N,G) 
X (ff(λ)^
P,G
, H(X}
V,R, G). Usually we use a well ordering <*x of if (λ).
(9) Let N <κ M mean N C M and N Π AC is an initial segment of M Π K
and A^ -< M; if we use it for sets (rather than models), the last demand is
omitted. Note that if N -< M -< (H(μ), G), K < μ and N Π K = M Π K then
TV <Λ+ M.
§1. Semi-Stationarity
1.1. Definition.
(1) A forcing notion P is semiproper if: for every regular λ > 2'
p', any
countable TV -< (/f(λ),e) to which P belongs, and p G P Π N there is
q such that: p < q G P and <? is (TV, P)-semi-generic (see below).
(2) For a set α, forcing notion P and # G P, we say ς is (α, P)-semi-generic z/i
for every P-name a G α of a countable ordinal, </ Ihp "α G α" [i.e., if: q Ih
αα[Gp] Π ωι = a Π α i" see 0.1(6); note a[GP] = [x[GP] 
: x G α a P-name}
if α is closed enough, i.e. for x G α also x G α where x[G\ is x].
(3) We call W C ίS^ (A) (where ωi C Λ) semi-stationary in ^4 (or in ^^j (A)
or subset of A) z/for every model M with universe A and countably many
relations and functions, there is a countable TV -< M, such that (3α G
ωι <Ξ « C TV], [equivalently, {α G 5<Nl(A) : (36 G W)[aΠωl C

610 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
b C a]} is a stationary subset of 5<^1(A) (i.e., ^ 0 mod T><^l(A)). As we
allow functions in M, we can require only N C M].
1.2. Claim.
(1) If W C 5<«1(A) is stationary and ω\ C A then W is a semi-stationary
subset of A. Also if ω\ C A,W C 5<^1(-A) is semi-stationary in A,.
C G £><*!( A) a n d [ α G W & & G C & 6 n u ; ι C α C & = > 6 G W ]
ίften W is stationary (subset of 5<N1(-A)).
(2) If ωι C A C B, and W C 5<Nl(A) then: W is semi-stationary 
mAiffW
is semi-stationary in B (so we can omit "in A").
(3) If VFi C WΊ C 5<^1(A), and Wj. is semi-stationary, ίften VF2 is semi-
stationary.
(4) If I-A I = NI, ω\ C A, A = U^<u;ια^, α^ increasing continuous in i, with
α^ countable, ί/ien W C «S<^1(A) is semi-stationary iff 5v^ = {ί : (36 G
W)[i C 6 C α^]} is stationary (as a subset of ω\).
(5) If p G P is (6, P)-semi-generic, bΓ\ωι C α C 6 thenp is (α, P)-semi-generic.
(6) If W C 5<Nl(λ), μ > λ, W G AT, TV X (ff(μ), G) (hence |W| < μ), and for
some α G V F , N Γ\ωι C a C N then W is semi-stationary.
(7) Assume A is an uncountable set, W C ^^(A), /i, /2, are one to one
functions from ω\ into A, and Wι = {a U {α < ω\ : /g(o:) G α} : α G
W} C 5<^1(AUα;ι). T/ien Wi is semi-stationary iff W 2 is semi stationary,
so in Definition 1.1(3) (of semi stationarity) we can replace "α i C A" by
"A uncountable".
(8) If AI, A2 are uncountable sets, / is a one to one function from AI to
A2, W2 C 5<Nl(A2), Wι C 5<Hl(Aι) and [α G Wi =» /
;/(α) G W2] and
[6 G W2 =» (3α G VFι)6Π /
/;(Aι) = /"(α)] then: Wi is semi-stationary iff
W2 is semi-stationary. If / is onto A2, necessarily W\ = {α G *S<H,(Aι) :
Γ(α) G W2}.
Proo/. (1) - (5), (7), (8) Left to the reader.
(6) If not, some M = (λ,... ,F n,...) exemplifies that W is not semi-
stationary, so some such M belongs to N, hence N Π λ is a submodel of M
(even an elementary submodel of M), a contradiction. 
Dι.2

§1. Semi-Stationarity 
611
1.3. Claim. A forcing notion P is semiproper ^jff the set
Wp = {a G £<><! (P U
 p(ωι + 1)) : for every p G P Π α there is <?,
such that p < q G P and
<7 is (α, P) -semi- generic}
contains a club of S<#l(P U
 
p(ω\ 4- 1)) where each h : P 
—+ (ωι -f 1) is
interpreted as a P-name a^ with the property that: if
g°h[G]=mm{h(r):reG},
then gh[G] is α$[G] if the latter is < ω\ and zero otherwise.
Proof. Immediate. 
Dι.3
1.4. Claim. The following are equivalent for a forcing notion P:
(1) P is semiproper.
(2) P preserves semi-stationarity.
(3) P preserves semi-stationarity of subsets of «S<
Proof. (1) => (2). Let ωi C A, and W C ^^(A) be semi-stationary. Suppose
p e P and p Ihp "W is not semi-stationary". So there are P-names of functions
Fn(n < ω) from A to A, Fn is n-place, and p Ih "if α C A is countable closed
under Fn(n < ω] then -ι(36)[α ΠωiCbCa&be W}" .
Let λ be regular large enough. Let N -< (ίf(λ),G) be countable so that
A, (Fn : n < ω),p, P belong to TV and there is 6 G VF such that TVΠα;! C b C N
(such TV, 6 exist as W is semi-stationary by 1.2(2)). Let q be (TV, P)-semi-
generic, p < q G P. So q lhP
 
CW[G] Π ωi = N Π α i and N C JV[G]" hence, for
the b above,
q\\-P
 ίίN[G}Πωl CbC N[G}" .
Also q Ihp "N[G\ Π A is closed under the Fn's" (as N[G] -< (ff (λ)[G], G) and
-Fn[G] G A^[G], see Basic Fact 0.1(7) in §0), contradicting the choice of the
(2) ^> (3). Trivial.

612 
XIII. Large Ideals on ωι
-ι(l) =* -.(3). Let W = <S<Kl(P U
 p(ωl + 1)) \ WP (where WP is from
1.3). As -ι(l), W is stationary, so for each α G W choose pα G P Π α which
exemplifies a φ Wp, i.e. there is no <?,p < ς G P and g is (α,P)-semi-generic.
By the normality of the filter Ί><^λ(P U
 p(ωι + 1)), for some p(*) G P the
set Wi = {α G W : pa = p(*)} is stationary. Hence W\ is semi-stationary (by
1.2(1)). But by the choice of (pa : α G TV) and W^, easily p(*) Ih "Wι is not
semi-stationary". Clearly |P U
 p(ωι + 1)| = 2|p| (as P is infinite w.l.o.g.),
so let / be a one to one function from 2'
p' onto P U
 p(ωι + 1) and let
W<2 = {a G <S<Hl(2l
pl) : /"(α) G Wi}. By 1.3(8) we have W2 is semi-stationary
and p(*) Ih "W2 is not semi-stationary" so (3) fails. 
Dι.4
1.5. Definition.
(1) Rss(ft, λ) (reflection for semi-stationarity) is the assertion that for every
semi-stationary W C 5<«1(λ) there is A C λ, ω\ C A, |A| < «; such that
WnS^CA) is semi-stationary (in S<^l(X)).
(2) Rss(«) is Rss(«, λ) for every λ > K.
(3) Rss
+(«, λ) means that for every semiproper P of cardinality < K we have
Ihp "Rss(«,λ)".
(4) Rss
+(^c) is Rss
+(/^, λ) for every λ > K.
1.5A Remark. In 1.5(3), we could strengthen the statement by replacing
"semiproper" by "not collapsing HI" with no change below. If we use below
forcing notion from a smaller class we could weaken the statement in 1.5(3)
accordingly.
1.6. Claim.
(1) In Definition 1.5(1) we can replace λ by B, when \B\ = λ, ω\ C B.
(2) If /€ < KI < λi < λ and Rss(κ,λ), then Rss(«;ι,λι). If « < λi < λ
and Rss
+(κ,λ) then Rss
+(/ς,λι). Lastly, if Rss"
l"(^,λ) (for i < α) then
Rss
+(supΐ<QΛi,λ).
(3) If ft is a compact cardinal, then RSS(AV);
(4) If ft is a compact cardinal then Rss
+(fr).

§1. Semi-Stationarity 
613
(5) If K is measurable, Wi C ^^(A) and Ui<KWi is semi-stationary then for
some α < K, (Ji<aWi is semi-stationary.
(6) If AC is a limit of compact cardinals, then Rss
+(/s).
(7) If AV is λ-compact, λ = λ
N° > K, then RSS(AV, λ) and even RSS
+(AC,A).
Proof. (1) Trivial.
(2) Use 1.2(2).
(3) Let K, C A, W C 5<«1(A), and: W Π S<^1(B) is not semi-stationary for
every B C A,ωιCB, with \B\ < K.
Define the set of sentences Γ:
Γ = Γ
α U Γ
b U Γ
c
where (each c G A serves as an individual constant):
Γ
α = {ci 7^ C2 : ci, C2 are distinct members of A},
Γ
b = {Λ(co,cι, . . ,Q, . . .)i<ω : Q G A, {cz : I < ω} G W},
Γ
c is the singleton with unique member (Fn is an n-place function symbol,
remember ω\ C Λ):
(Vxoj^ij 
» ϊ^n, 
)n<ω if {xo,^ι, . . .} is closed under Fn(n < α;), ίften
-•(32/0, 2/ι, - - -) (Λ(2/o, . . - , 2/n, - - •) &
{x/ : / < cj, Vi < ω ιx/ = i} C {2/j : / < α;} C {xm : m < ω}) 1 .
Every subset of Γ of power < K has a model (if it mentions only c e B where
B C A and \B\ < K, then use a model witnessing "W Π 5<^1(B U ω\) is not
semi-stationary"). A model M of Γ exemplifies "W is not semi-stationary" (in
|M I, hence in A by 1.2(2)).
(4) As forcing notions of cardinality < ft preserve the compactness of K.
(5) Let Γ
α, Γ
c be as in the proof of 1.6(4), and:
Γ =

614 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Now Γ
α U Γ
c U \Ji<κ Γ^ has no model, hence (using the Los theorem for LωiίUl
and Hi-complete ultrafilters) for some a < ft, we have: Γ
α U Γ
c \Ji<a Γ^ has no
model.
(6) Easy (use last phrase of 1.6(2)).
(7) Same proof as 1.6(3), (4). 
DL6
1.7. Claim.
(1) If Rss(κ,2l
pl) and P is not semiproper, then P destroys the semi-statio-
narity of some W C S^^A), \A\ < K (i.e. some p G P forces this)
[Why? By (1) 4Φ (3) from 1.4, for some p G P and semi-stationary W C
5<H1(2'
P'), we have p \\-p "W is not semi-stationary". By the assumption,
for some A C 2|p| we have: |A| < K and Wι
 d=
f W Π S<^ί(A) is semi-
stationary. Clearly by 1.2(3) we have p Ihp "Wi is not semi-stationary",
as required].
(2) If P destroys the semi-stationarity of W C S<^1(A), \A\ = KI, then P
destroys the stationarity of Sw £ MI [with S\γ as defined in 1.2(4)], which
means that Sw is stationary in V but not in Vp.
(3) If Rss(N2,2l
pl) and P preserves stationarity of subsets of α i, then P is
semiproper
[Why? By parts (1), (2) above].
(4) If W C S<χl(A) exemplifies the failure of Rss(N2, \A\), then there is
a forcing notion P of power |-A|**°, not semiproper but not destroying
stationarity of subsets of KI
[Why? Let P be {A 
: A = (Ai 
: 
ί < a) is an increasing continuous
countable sequence of countable subsets of A, each Ai satisfying -ι(3α G
W)(Ai Π ωι C α C Ai)}, ordered by being an initial segment. As forcing
with P destroy the semi stationarity of W, clearly P is not semiproper;
let us prove that forcing with P preserve the stationarity of subsets of
ωι. If p e P and p Ih "5 is not stationary" where S is a stationary set
of limit ordinals < α>ι, we can find an increasing continuous sequence
(Ni 
: i < ω\) of countable elementary submodels of (ffpτ~),G), with
{W,p,A} G NQ, Ni G N +i- So C = {δ < ωι : δ a limit ordinal and

§1. Semi-Stationarity 
615
= δ} is a club of ω\. By the choice of W, for some club C\ C C of
cji, ί e CΊ => ->(3α)(α E VF Π J C α C Λfc), hence we can find δ € CΊ Π 5
and ς > p which is (TV, P)-generic, an easy contradiction.].
(5) Rss(K2) is equivalent to the assertion: every forcing notion preserving
stationarity of subsets of ω\ is semiproper.
[By parts (3), (4) above]. 
DI.T
1.8. Definition. (Pi,Qj 
: i < a,j < α) is a semiproper iteration if:
(A) it is an RCS iteration [see Ch. X, §1];
(B) if i < j < a are non-limit, then \\-pi "Pj/Pi is semiproper";
(C) for every i < a we have, ll-pi+1 "(2
Kl)
v * is collapsed to Nj" (we can use
another variant instead).
We shall use not only Gpi (or CpJ but also Gi (or Qi) for the (name of the)
generic subset of Pi.
1.9. Theorem. Suppose \ is measurable, (Pi, Qj : i < X , j < X) is a semiproper
iteration, |P;| < λ for i < X, and {i < X : Qi is semiproper } belongs to some
normal ultrafilter D on λ. Then in V
Px, Player II wins D = D({Nι},α;, ^2).
1.9A. Remarks. On D see Ch. XII, Def. 2.1. or see below.
(1) The game lasts ω moves; on the nth move Player I chooses fn 
: ^2 —» ω\
and Player II chooses ξn <ω\. In the end Player II wins if A = {i < ^2 :
Λn Vm f n ( i ) < ξrn} is unbounded in H2.
(2) We can modify the game by requiring A ^ 0 mod E for a filter E on ω^.
We then denote the game by 3({^ι},ω,E). The result is true for E = D.
(3) By XII 2.5(2) we know the following: if Player II wins D({Nι},α;, N2), λ >
2^
2, N a countable elementary submodel of (H(X), G, <£), then for ar-
bitrarily large i < ω2, there is N' -< ( H ( X ) , £ , < * χ ) , N ' 
countable, N C
N
f, i e N
f and A^ Π ωι = N' Π ωι (hence A^ <ω2 N'; see Basic Fact 0.1(9)
in §0).
If Player II wins 3({^ι},ω,E) (where E is a filter on ω%) then the set of
such i is 7^ 0 mod E', so we have equivalence.

616 
XIII. Large Ideals on ωι
(4) Can we demand in (3) (on both see XII §2 when we use E) that N
r Π i =
N Π ΐϊ If {δ < ω2 : cf(ί) = H0} G E the answer is No. If {δ < ω2 :
cf(ί) = NI} € £ the answer is Yes provided that we can change the game
to D7: Player I is also allowed to choose regressive functions Fn : ^2 —> ^2,
and Player II in the nth move has to choose also ξ'n < ω%, and in the
end Player II wins if 5 = {δ < K2 : for n < ω, we have δ > ξ£, and
/n(«) < Umfm, ^n(ί) < Um O 7^ 0 Πlθd E.
(5) If in the theorem lhP "{£ < N2 : <?<* is semiproper and cf(ά)
yP = NI} ^
0 mod D" ί^en Player II wins also in this variant (from (4) above). The
proof of 1.9 still works.
(6) We can replace NI by any regular 0, NO < θ < λ, (as the range of fn)
and use the game D({0},μ,£7), E a normal filter on λ, (Pi,Qi 
: i < X)
is a (< 0)-revised support iteration (see Chapter XIV), such that the set
of i < λ satisfying the following belongs to D: "in V
Pί for p G Pχ/Pi in
the game PG
ω(p, Pχ/Pi, λ, 0) (see below and Chapter XII, 1.7(3), 1.4), the
second player has a winning strategy".
(7) We can replace in the assumption of 1.9, "D is a normal ultrafilter on K" by
"D is a normal filter on κ
n and the second player wins in D' ({Nι},u;, D).
(8) If we use the strong preservation version of theorems, we do not need 1.9
(a weaker version is then proved, e.g. for α < λ, (Pκ/Pa) * Nm is semi
proper) and is really changed.
Proof of 1.9. Let D be a normal ultrafilter on λ (in V),A G D a set of
(strongly) inaccessible cardinals such that: (V/c G A)[(Vi < κ)(\Pi\ < «) & Qκ
is semiproper (in V
Pκ)].
For each K G A the forcing notion P\/PK (in V
Pκ) is a semiproper forcing,
hence for each p G Pλ/P/c in the following game, PD
ω(p, Pχ/Pκ, NI), Player II
has a winning strategy which we call FP(P\/PK) (G V
Pκ)', if p = 0pλ/pκ, we omit
p [see Chapter XII, 1.7(3), Definition 1.4]: a play of the game lasts α -moves,
in the nth move Player I chooses a Pχ/P«rname ζn of a countable ordinal and

§1. Semi-Stationarity 
617
Player II chooses a countable ordinal ξn. Player II wins a play if
(3q)(p < q e Pχ/Pκkq\^ «/\[ζn < \J fm]»);
m<ω
without loss of generality the ξn are strictly increasing.
Let us describe a winning strategy for Player II in D({Nι},α;ι, H2) in
V[Gλ], where G\ C Pχ is generic over V. In the nth move Player I chooses
ίn '•
 ω2 —
> ωi, Player II, in addition to choosing ξn < ωι, chooses An, f'n, Oίn
such that:
(0) an < αn+ι < λ; in stage n Player II works in V[GαJ, so D is still an
ultrafilter (pedantically: generates an ultrafilter);
(1) An G D, An+ι C An C A and for all δ e An, we have an < ί;
(2) Ihp
 
Ufn:ω2-+<*>!»',
(3) f'n[G\] = fn'ι fn *
s tne fi
rst sucn name so /^ is from V;
(4) for K € ^4n? {(/zWϊ^) : ^ —
 n) ^
s (
a ^«-
name of) an initial segment of a
play of PD
u;(0pλ, P\/GK, NI) in which Player II uses his winning strategy
F(P\/GK), i.e. some condition in Gατι forces this.
How can Player II carry out this strategy? Suppose he arrives at stage
n and Player I has chosen fn 
G V
Pλ,/n : λ —> α i. Stipulate α0 = — 1. Let
5n = An-ι if n > 0 and Bn = A if n = 0. Player II chooses for fn G V
the first (by <*, χ = (2
λ)
+) Pλ-name /n such that /^[Gλ] - /n. Now for
every K e Bn, working in V[GΛ], he continues the play {{//(«),£?) : / < n) of
PD
ω(0P,Pλ/G/ί,Hι), letting the first player play /^(/c), and let ^(/ς) be the
choice of the second player according to the strategy F(Pχ/Gκ). 
So ξ^(κ) =
ξn(
κ) i
s a ^-name. Now (in V[Gαn_1]) for every p G P\ and K € Bn there is
ζta ^ Pκ/Gan compatible with p and forcing a value to £°(ft). But as £?n C A,
and by the choice of the set A (and X 1.6) we know that Pκ = [Ji<κ P%, so we
can use the normality of D] so for some ξ < ωi, A™ G D, A™ C Bn and q,
we have # is compatible with p in P\/G0ίn_1 and (We G Ap)[ς« = q and # lhP/c
"£θ(tt) — ξ"]. So there are such q G GA, and ξ (which we call £n) and a set
which we call An. It is easy to choose αn.

618 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
We should still prove that this is a winning strategy. We shall consider
one play and work in V, so everything is a P\-name (&
s we are using RCS,
no problems arise). I.e. we have p* G Pχ such that p* !hpλ "{/n,ξn : n < ω)
is a play of the game with Player II using his strategy, choosing on the side
(fn,Qίn, An : n < ω)
n. Now fn, An, an are Pχ-names of members of V (f' n a
Pλ-name of a Pλ-name) so there is a maximal antichain Jn of P\ of conditions
forcing a value to each of /n, ξn, /^, αn, An. But PA satisfies the λ-c.c.,
Pχ = \J Pa so for some α(*) < λ, f\ Jn C. Pa(*) Also w.l.o.g. α(*) is bigger
α<λ 
n<u>
than every possible value αn.
Work in V[Gα(*)]. Now D is (essentially) an ultrafilter (on λ) in V[Gα(*)].
Each An is a P\-name of a member of V so really there are < λ candidates so
we can find Aω, such that for each n we have \\-px/ca(^ "Aω C An," Aω G D
(alternatively we can compute p| An in V[Gα(s|t)]). Now for /ς G Aω, « > α(*)
n<ω
the sequence ((/z(«),ξz) : / < cj) is a play of PD
ω(0p,Pλ/ P/c,Nι) where Player
II uses his winning strategy (this is a Pκ-name, but fortunately (ξι[Gκ] 
: I <
ω) G V[Ga(^}). So there is qκ G Pχ/Pκ so that
(more exactly:
<
actually qκ is a Pκ/GQ!(s|<)-name of a P\/PK-condition).
We can consider qκ as a P\-condition with Όom(qκ) C [«, λ), because we
use RCS iteration. Now easily (qκ : K G Aω) G V[Gα(#)], and
" f t € Ά : 9κ ^ GΛ 
is unbounded in λ"
Why? As every r G P\/Ga^ has domain bounded in λ, we have: q^ is compat-
ible with it for K large enough. This finishes the proof that the strategy works.
Πl.9

§1. Semi-Stationarity 
619
1.10. Claim. Suppose ft is measurable, Q is a semiproper iteration, ίg(Q) =
ft, \Pi\ < ft for ί < ft and {i : Qi semiproper } belongs to some normal ultrafilter
on ft (this holds e.g. if {i < ft : if Us strongly inaccessible and (Vj < i)[\Pj\ < i],
then Qi is semi proper} G Ί>κ). Then:
(1) Rss+ (ft, λ) implies lhP|ς "Rss(ft,λ)".
(2) If Q is a Pκ-name of a forcing notion, (P^/Pi+i) * Q is semiproper for each
i < ft (i.e. this is forced for P +i) #ιen lhP/ς "Q is semiproper".
(3) We can replace measurability of ft by: ft is strongly inaccessible and lhPκ
"Player II wins
Proof. (1) Let ψ be a P«-name and p G PΛ be such that p lhPκ "W C <S<Kl (λ)
is semi-stationary".
For i < ft, let Wi = {a : a e V
Pi , a G tS^ (λ), and for some q G GPi , q \\-Pκ
"α G W"}. So tfi is a P -name.
Let x be regular and large enough, and <* a well ordering of H(χ)
v.
Let p G G — Gκ C PΛ, G generic over V and G^ = G Π P^ for z < ft.
In V^Gtf], as ^[G^] is semi-stationary, there is a countable (N,GK Π N) -<
(ίfίχJ^^j^jG^), such that for some α G WfG^] we have N Π α i C α C
Λ^ Π λ, and p, T}
7, λ, ft, Q belong to N (note: GΛ is considered a relation of those
models) .
So there are q G Gκ and P^-names 7V,α such that q lhPκ. 'W,α are as
above", and as p G G^, without loss of generality p < q. As N and α are
countable subsets of H(χ)
v and λ respectively and P^ = \Ji<KPi satisfies the
ft-c.c. (by X 5.3(3)), for some i < ft we have AT, a are P^-names, lhPi "AΓίΊft C i"
and q £ Pi Now by 1.9 4- 1.9A(3), in y
p/c, for arbitrarily large ordinal
θ < ft, AΓl
61! Π ωi — N Π α i, and Q,9 is semiproper (if not, replace it by θ -f 1),
where we let:
N&
] d= Skolem Hull (N U {θ})
(in (H(χ)
v , G, <* , GΛ), working in the universe V[GK] such that ^ G GΛ).
Choose such a β > i. Now 0 G N^ and (N^,GΘ) 
-< (H(x)
V , e, <*,GΘ), as
> i clearly α[G0] G ψθ[Gθ] and ωl Π 7V^ C a[Gθ] C TV^l. Let ΛΓ[β] be the

620 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Skolem Hull of N U {9} in (H(χ)
v, G, <*,G0); note as AT is a P0-name, in
V[G0] we can compute N[GΘ] = N[GK] = N (and a[Gθ] = α[GΛ] = α). Clearly
ΛΓM Πcj! C α[G0] C N C Afy] C AΓ^l; hence by 1.2(6), V[GΘ] 
\=
 UWΘ[GΘ] is a
semi-stationary subset of 5<N1(λ)" (remembering that in (ίf(χ)
v, G, <* , G0)
we can interprete (H(χ)
v^
Gθ\ G tf (χ)
y, <*,G)).
As Rss
+(ft, λ) clearly V[G0] |= Rss(ft,λ), hence in V[G0] for some A C
λ, \A\ < ft and VF0[G0] Π 5<«1(A) is semi-stationary. As Pκ/Pθ is semiproper
(by the choice of 0) it preserves the semi-stationary of W0[G0] Π 5<«1(A) (see
1.4), hence V[GK] 
\= "WΘ[GΘ] n5< N l(A) is semi-stationary", but W[GΘ] C
W[GK] hence V[GK] 
1= "W[GK] Π<S<H0(A) is semi-stationary".
(2) This is similar: suppose p \\-PK "AT ^ (H(χ)
v, G, <*,GPJ and p
7 G
Q Π AT are counterexample to semiproperness of Q".
Let Gκ C Pκ be generic over V 
and p G G^. Let 0 < ft, with 0 >
sup(ΛΓ[GΛ] Π ft), be such that AT is a P^-name and sup(AΓ[G] Π ft) < ft and
N[GK]W Π ωι = N[GK] Π α i- Now work in V[GK n P0+ι] and use: lhPθ+1
"(P/c/Pβ+i) *Q is semiproper". (Note that if Rss
+(ft) we can get the result by
1.7(3)). Alternatively prove that forcing with Q[HK] preserve semi stationarity
of sets.
(3) In the proof of (2) we use this only. In the proof of (1) we could have
chosen 0 to be a successor ordinal (so QQ is semiproper). So PK/G0 preserves
the semi-stationarity of W", hence V[GΛ] |= "W is semi-stationary". 
DI.IO
1.11. Claim. Suppose Rss(ft, 2
Λ), ft regular and: ft = K2 or (Vμ < ft)μ
H° < ft.
Then for λ > 2* for every countable N -< (if (λ), G, <£) to which ft belongs, for
arbitrarily large i < ft, letting N® = Skolem Hull (ATu{i}), we have N <ω2 N®
(note that we do not demand N Π ft 7^ A/"W Π ft).
1.12. Remark. (1) The "ft = ft2 •" can be omitted if we replace "for arbi-
trarily large i" by "for some i < ft with i > sup(N Π ft)".
(2) We can replace "ft = ^2, or ..." by
(*)ι "if α < ft, then there is a closed unbounded C C «S<κ1 (α) of power
< ft" (see the proof).
It even suffices to assume

§1. Semi-Stationarity 
621
(*)2 
"for every stationary W C S<^l(a)^(a < K) there is a semi-
stationary W C W of cardinality < ft" .
(3) If in the conclusion we want to get N <κ N^, we have to replace "(Ξ3α G
W)(N 
Π ωι C α C JV)" in the definition of semi-stationary (Definition 1.1) by
"(3o G VF)(AΓ Π ft C α <κ N Π AC)" .
Proof of 1.11. Let
W - {|7V| : N -< (H(κ+), G, <*+), N countable and
for some IN < ft, for no i G [ZΛΓ, «) do we have TV <ω2
Assume first that W is a stationary subset of H(κ+). So, as Rss(«, 2*) holds
(and \H(κ+)\ = 2*) there is A C ff(«+), cji C A, |A| < « such that:
WΛ = {α G W : a C ^4} is a semi-stationary subset of S<^1(A). Without
loss of generality (see 1.2(2))
M
 d^
f μ, G \A, <;+ r^4) ^ (^(/^
+), e, <+)
and ^4 Π K is an ordinal < K (remember K is regular) .
Remembering that (by the definition of W) for countable elementary sub-
models NI C N2 of (H(κ+),e, <*+), \Nι\ eW, NI Γ\ωι = N2 Π ωl implies
|A^| G W] by 1.2(1) clearly WA is stationary (as a subset of 5<^1 (A)). We know
by assumption that for some closed unbounded C C 5<κ! (-4), C has cardinality
< K. So
C
 d= SUP{ZΛΓ : |7V| G C Π WA} < K.
Now for some club CΊ C C, for every α G CΊ, the set α^' = Skolem Hull of
α U {C} (inside (H(κ+), G, <*+)), satisfies α^l Π -A = α, hence α <ω2 α^. But
we can choose α G CΊ Π WΛ, contradiction.
So VF is not stationary and let C* C S<κl(H(κ~*~)) be a club disjoint to
W.
Let λ > 2
Λ, so #(AV+), <*+, VF G ίf(λ), and let AT be such that K G
N x (ίf(λ), G, <^) and TV is countable. So H(κ+) G AT (and <* + =<λ \H(κ+))
hence W G A^ and without loss of generality C* G A^. Hence N Π ^(κ
+) G C*,

622 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
and so for arbitrarily large i < K there is TVf such that N\H(κ+) 
-< TVf -<
(H(κ+), G, <* + ), N\H(κ+) <ω2 Nΐ and i G TVJ. Let TV* be the Skolem Hull of
TV U (N{ Π K). We can easily check that TV* Π « = TVf Π «, so TV* is as required.
§2. 5-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing
2.1. Definition. We say Q = (Pi,Qj,tj 
: i < α, j < a) is S-suitable (itera-
tion), where S C cji is stationary, if:
(A) Q is an RCS iteration; (i.e. if we remove the t/s);
(B) we denote | Uj<i -Fj'+il — ^ί — κ? so ^o = 1? ^ increasing continuous.
We demand that KI is strictly increasing;
(C) for i successor κ,i is strongly inaccessible;
(D) for i < j < a. non-limit, Pj/Pi is semiproper;
(E) Qi satisfies the ^_|_ι-c.c., H^ ϊ+l — ^i+i;
(F) if t^ = 1, i < j < a and j is a successor, then 23 Pί fS <£ 25 Pj [5 (see
0.1(3)(a) + (b)).
Remark: We may, but do not, use tβ which are names. Also the demand "Qi
satisfies the ttΐ+i-c.c." is just for simplicity.
2.1A. Notation, α^ = α,P^ = ^,θf = Qj,tf 
= tj and (remember and
recall 0.1(3)(d)): <£>$ = U{»
Pi+
1 : i < lg(Q)}.
2.2. Claim.
(1) Suppose Q — (Pi,Qj : i < a,j < a) is a semiproper iteration (see 1.8 for
definition). Then:
(a) If i < a is non-limit or Qi is semiproper or Qi preserves stationarity
of subsets of ω\ from V
Pί or i is strongly inaccessible and /\ \Pj\ < i,
j<i
then every stationary subset of ω\ in V
Pi is also stationary in V
Pa
(i.e., 23 [P^ is a subalgebra of 23 [Pα]).
(b) κr = κί
rPβ

§2. iS-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing 
623
(c) If a > NO is strongly inaccessible, and |P^| < α for i < α, then Pa
satisfies the α -c.c. and so
P(ωι)
γPa = (J P(ωl)
yPi and V
p<* \= "2
Hl - N2".
i<a
(d) If ωι\S is stationary, each Qi is (α i \ 5)-complete [see V §3], then
so is Pα, hence forcing by Pα preserve the stationarity of ω\ \ 5 and
even subsets of it and does not add ω-sequences of ordinals, hence
(e) If Q G NI X NI X ( H ( X ) , e ) , N 2 
countable, TVi <α AΓ2,α strongly
inaccessible and belongs to Λ/ι,α > |P*| for i < a and q is (JVι,Pα)-
semi-generic and i = min(α Π 7V2 \ A/i) is regular, ί/ien <? is (7V2, Pt)-
semi-generic.
(2) Any 5-suitable iteration Q is a semiproper iteration and t^ — 1 => 23 [Pi] \S
<> 5B[Pj]f5] when: j > z, and j is: successor or strongly inaccessible
satisfying [7 < j =^> |P7| < j ] .
(3) If (in (1)) K < a is strongly inaccessible, \Pi\ < K for ί < /ς, and lhpκ
"Rss(H2)" then Qκ (and Pj/P^ when ft < j < α) are semiproper.
Proof. Left to the reader. For instance:
(l)(e) Clearly i is a strong limit [as {j < K : j strong limit } is a club of /ς
which belongs to NI , hence ί necessarily belongs to it] . Also we have assumed i
is regular hence i is strongly inaccessible; similarly i > N0 and j < i => \Pj\ < i.
If T G Λf2 is a maximal antichain of P;, ί/ien by X 5.3(3) for some j < i we
have T C P^ , so that consequently there is such j in 7V2, and hence j G NI and
also the rest is easy.
(2) If j is a successor ordinal use clause (F) of Definition 2.1, if j is strong
inaccessible use 2.2(l)(c) and 0.1(4)(e).
(3) By 1.7(3) it is enough to prove that forcing with Qκ does not destroy
the stationarity of any A C ωι, A € V
Pκ. However, by 2.2(l)(c) (and 2.2(2))
for some β < α, A e V
PP. Clearly A G V
Fβ and is a stationary subset of ω\ in

624 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
γPβ+ι
 
m AS Pκ+ι/Pβ+ι is semiproper, A is also stationary in (V
pP+
l)
p*
+1/
pβ+l 
=
Q/c
yPκ+ι _. (T/
p«)~ , as required. 
Π2.2
2.2Λ. Remark. It follows that if K is strongly inaccessible, and \Pi\ < K for
ί < ft, and A is a stationary subset of ω\ in V
p>c, Λen A is a stationary subset
of ω\ in V
Pa for every large enough a < K.
2.3. Claim. Suppose Q = (Pj,Qi,ti : j < a,i < a) is an RCS iteration, α a
limit ordinal and 5 C ω\ is stationary.
(1) If Q\β is 5-suitable for β < α, ί/ien Q is 5-suitable.
(2) If for /? < α, Qί/3 is a semiproper iteration, ί/ien Q is a semiproper
iteration.
(3) In (2), if i < α and .4 is a Pi-name then: \\-Pa "A <° 23° ΓS" if and only
if a = sup{j < α :lhPj+1 "A <Φ 95^'+* Γ^"'} if and only if for arbitrarily
large j < α we have Ihp. "A <$ ^B
Fj".
(4) In (2), if a > |Pi| for i < α, and a is strongly inaccessible, then 93^ =
<B
P«.
Proof. (1) For clause (D) from Definition 2.1 use the semiproper iteration
lemma. The other clauses are also obvious.
(2), (3), (4) are also easy. 
D2.3
2.4. Definition. Let A — (Aζ : ζ < ξ) be a sequence of subalgebras or just
subsets of 95(= 95^) such that 5 belongs to each *4ζ where 5 C ω\ stationary.
(1) Sm(A,S) = {A C S : for some C < ξ, {x G ^lc : x ^ 0 mod Pωι
and x Π A — 0 mod P^i) is pre-dense in ^4^} (we should have written
x/T>ωι G ^4^ for x, x C α i; Ξ is predense in Aζ means that for every
y 6 Aζ, such that Λ: ^ "y / 0" for some x G Ξ we have ^ N "xΠy ^ 0").
(2) For Ξ C 25
y let seal(Ξ) — {{α^ : i < a) : a is a countable ordinal, and
letting aa = \J α^ we have α^ G 5<^1(Ξ U α i), α^ (i < α) is increasing
i<a
continuous, each α^ countable and α^ Π ω\ is an ordinal which belongs to
|JΛGΞnα. >!}, ordered by being an initial segment.
(3) We define the sealing forcing Seal(*4, S) as the product with countable
support of { seal(Ξ) : for some ζ < £, Ξ is a pre-dense subset of Aζ and

§2. S'-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing 
625
ωι\S G Ξ}. Let Seal'(./ϊ, S) = {c : c a partial function from Smpϊ, 5), with
countable domain, and if A G Sm(.4, S)nDom(c), then CA is a continuously
increasing function from some countable 7 + 1 to ω\ \ ^4},
the ordering is defined by:
c
1 < c
2 if A G Domic
1) implies A G Dom(c
2) and c\ C c^.
(4) If A — (A) we write Λ instead of A in (1), (2) above and (5) below.
(5) For K (> MO) strongly inaccessible we define the strong sealing forcing
SSeal(v4, 5, K) as Pκ, where (Pi, Q3 : i < κ,j < K) is an RCS iteration with
QJ = Seal(ΛS')^ x LevyίNi^^)^^'
1-
(6) We call Ξ C ?&
v semiproper iffseal(Έ) 
is a semiproper forcing notion.
(7) WSeal(5) is the product, with countable support, of seal(Ξ), Ξ semiproper,
ωι \ S e Ξ.
(8) For K not strongly inaccessible, but still .4-inaccessible, which means:
(*) (Vμ < κ)[μ"° < κ],κ = cf(«), Ac'^l = κ for C < ί, and ξ = ίg(Λ) <
K, Av > KI,
we define the strong sealing forcing SSeal*(*4,5, K) as Pκ where (Pi,Qj :
* < ^7j < ^} is an RCS iteration; Q? = seal(Ξj,5)
v J,Ξ^ is a maximal
antichain of Aζ(j) to which ωι\S belongs for some ζ(j) < ξ (in V
pj) and
every maximal antichain Ξ of some ^4^ from V
Pκ is Ej for some j < K. [Pκ
is not neccessarily well defined].
(9) If Ξ C {Ξ : Ξ C 03} then seal(Ξ) is the product, with countable support,
of seal(Ξ) for Ξ G Ξ.
2.5. Remarks.
(1) We could have used CS iteration for SSeal and SSeaΓ.
(2) If every maximal antichain of *B
V is semiproper, the difference between
WSeal(5) x Levy(Nι,2
Nl) and Seal(<8
v,S) defined in 2.4 (7), (3) respec-
tively, is nominal (i.e. they are equivalent, i.e. have isomorphic comple-
tions).
(3) If Aζ\S <£ *B
V\S and μc| < NI for C < tg(A), then Seal(Λ^) is
equivalent to Levy(Kι,2
Hl).

626 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
(4) If \Λζ\ < NI (for every ζ < ig(A)) then the difference between Seal (A, S)
and Seal'(*4, 5) is nominal (i.e. they are equivalent i.e. have isomorphic
completions).
(5) We use below mainly SSeal(^4, 5), we could use S Seal* (.A, £,^2) instead.
Also instead SSeal(Λ 5) we could use SSeal'(ΛS) by 0.1(4)(c) (and see
o.i(g)).
(6) For convenience we shall use mostly SSeal(,4, S). So in, e.g., 2.11, 2.13 we
can deal with SSeal* .
2.6. Notation. We omit K in SSeal(.4, 5, K) when it is the first strongly
inaccessible. We omit 5 when S = ω\. We write A instead of (A).
2.7. Claim. If in V,
(VCi < ξι)(3C2 < 6)[^ <$ Λ
2
ζ2 (inside
(VC2 < &)(3Ci < ξι)[Λl 
<$ A
1^ (inside
then
Seal
7 (A
l,S) -Seal
7 (A
2, S) and
1, 5, K) -SSeal(^
2, 5, «).
Proof. Easy. 
D2.γ
2.8. Claim.
(1) Let Ξ C *B
V be pre-dense. Then Ξ is semiproper iff. for λ regular large
enough and countable N -< (#(λ), G) with Ξ G N, there is a countable
AT, N -< TV' -x (ff(λ) , €, <Λ), satisfying ]V Π α i - N
f Π ωi G UAEBΠAΓ' A
[Why? For the implication "=>" let ρ G seal(Ξ) be (TV, seal (Ξ) ^semi-
generic. Let αi[Gseai(s)] be α^ for any ά = (a,j : j < α) G GSeai(Ξ) whenever
α > i so C = {αiΠα i : i < ωι} is forced to be a club of ω\. So C G JV, hence

§2. S'-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing 
627
as q is (N, seal(Ξ))- semi-generic, necessarily q Ih "ί = TV Π ω\ G C". In
fact δ = α$ Πωi = (J α; Πα i, so possibly increasing <?, for some (bi : i < δ)
q Ih "α; = &ΐ for i < ί", so
g Ih «δ = ωιΠ (Skolem hull in (ff(λ), G, <£) of |7V| U 65 - |7V| U (J &.)".
So this Skolem hull is N
f as required. For the implication "<=" use 2.8(4)
below.]
(2) lhSeai(Ξ) "Ξ C 23l
seal(
Ξ)] is absolutely pre-dense" (absolutely means for
extensions not collapsing NI; more specifically in this chapter, there is
a list (Ai 
: ί < ω\) of members of Ξ and a club C of ω\ such that
S G C =» J G Uΐ<£^) [Why? Let (α< : i < α i) be as in the proof of
2.8(1), so let ^4i be such that (Ai : i < δ) lists the member of Ξ in a§ for
limit δ < ωι.]
(3) WSeal(5) is semiproper and lhWSeai(s) "z/Ξ G V is semiproper in 95 y and
(ωι\S) G Ξ, £/ien Ξ is absolutely pre-dense in 2j[
WSeal(
5')]»< [Why? For
semiproperness use 2.8(8) below; for absoluteness use 2.8(2) above.]
(4) seal(Ξ) is A-complete (see V §3) for A G Ξ; so WSeal(S) is (ωι \ S)-
complete. [Why? Think.]
(5) If Ξ is pre-dense in 95 [V], then seal(Ξ) preserves stationarity of subsets of
ω\\ if A C 93
V,Ξ a pre-dense subset of A \ {0} then seal(Ξ) preserves
stationary of subsets of ω\ which belongs to A or just are not in Sm(»Λ, 5).
[Why? Use 2.8(4) as any A-complete forcing notion surely preserve the
stationarity of subsets of A.]
(6) The forcing notion seal(Ξ) forces |Ξ| < NX and has cardinality < (|Ξ| -h
HI)
KO. The forcing notion Seal (A, S) is (ωι \ 5)-complete; SSeal*(^, 5, K)
and even any initial segment of such iteration of length K, is (ωι \ 5)-
complete and if K, > KQ is .A-inaccessible and S C ω\ is stationary then it
satisfies the 0-c.c. if θ = cf(fl) > \Aζ\ for C < tg(A) and /\ |α|
H° < θ. If
K > KQ is strongly inaccessible then SSeal(^4, £,«) satisfies the AC-C.C. and
is (ω\ \ 5)-complete.

628 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
(7) If Rss(H2,^2(^ι)) then for every pre-dense Ξ C 23(V), seal(Ξ) is semiproper.
[Why? By 1.7(3) and 2.8(5).]
In this case Seal (35
v, S), SSeal(<B
v, 5, «), SSeal*(S3
v, S, «) are semiproper.
(8) For λ regular large enough, and countable N -< (ff(λ),£,<£) tfcene is a
countable TV
7, N X TV' X ( ff(λ), G, <J) satisfying: TVn^i - WlΊα i and for
every semiproper Ξ C 23 y we have: [Ξ G TV =^> N' Π ωi G LUeΞn v ^ tuse
part (1) repeatedly ω-times] and even Ξ G N' => N' Π ω\ G LUesrw ^
[use the previous statement repeatedly α -times]. 
U2.8
2.9. Claim. Suppose A = (Λζ 
: ζ < £) is an increasing sequence of
subalgebras or just subsets of 23, K > NO is strongly inaccessible or just
SSeaΓ(Λ£» is well defined. Assume (A,κ) G N -x (ff(λ),G), N count-
able, P =
f SSeal(Λ 5, AC) or P = SSeal*(A 5, /ς) respectively and
9^ s if Ξ G AT is a pre-dense subset of Aζ for some ζ G N Π ξ and ωi \ 5 G Ξ,
then N Π α i G UAGΞΓW ^
T/ien for every p G PΠ7V, ί/iere is q £ P, (AT, P)-generic, p <q,q force a value
N[GP]
to GP Π AT and g Ih "Θ^55 
holds".
Proof. We have to find ς, p < g G P, which is (TV, P)-generic. We first show:
(*) if C, Ξ G TV are P-names, Ihp "Ξ is a pre-dense subset of Aζ", p G A/ΉP,
ίften for some p
2, p < p
2 G TV Π P, and for some A, ζ we have p
2 Ih "£ = C and
A G Ξ Π TV Π Aζ" (so A G V, and A G TV Π Aζ and A G V) and TV Π cji G A.
Proof of (*). We can find p°, p < p° G TV Π P, and C such that p° Ih "ζ - C"
(so necessarily ζ G TV). Next define
T = {Λ G A: : for some p
1, p < p
1 G P, and p
1 Ih "A G Ξ"}.
Clearly T G TV, T G V, and T is a pre-dense subset of Aζ, ζ G TV.
By Θ^ s there is A G T Π TV such that TV Π cji G A. By the definition of T
there is p
2, p° < p
2 G P and p
2 Ih "A G Ξ". As p°, A and Ξ are all in TV, we

§2. 5-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing 
629
can choose such p
2 in TV, thus finishing the proof of (*).
Now we continue with the proof of 2.9. We define pn for n < ω such that:
(a) po =p, pn+ι >pn;
(b) Pn G Pκ Π TV;
(c) for every dense subset J of Pκ which belongs to N for some n, pn+\ € J]
(d) «/ J € ft Π TV,Ξ, C are P^-names from TV and Ihp. "ζ" < £ and Ξ C ^ is
pre-dense" then for some n < ω and 5 € 2JV Π TV, we have N Π ωi G B
and
Pn+XUII-p, "£€Ξ".
This clearly suffices, as (using the notation of Definition 2.4(5)):
(α) for j e N Π K we have (\Jn<ωpn)(j) 
is in Qj by (d), and
(0) Un<ωPn & (N,P)-generic by (c).
So we can assign the tasks, and for satisfying (b) and (c) there is no
problem. For (d) use (*). 
D2.g
2.10 Claim. Suppose
(a) seal(Ξ) is semiproper for every maximal antichain Ξ of 23
v to which ωι\S
belongs, A - (<B
V) = (A)
or
(a)
; A = (Λζ 
: ζ < ξ), Aζ C 23
v, and seal(Ξ) is semiproper for any predense
subset Ξ of Λζ, ζ < ζ
and
(b) AC > NO is strongly inaccessible
or at least
(b)
f 
K > NO is inaccessible or just |^4ζ|-inaccessible for ζ < ζ (see 2.4(5)).
Then P
 
d= SSeal(Λ 5,«) if (b) or P
 
d= SSeal*(^,5,/c) if (b)' (both well
defined), is semiproper, have the /c-c.c., is (ωι \5)-complete and Ihp "(Aζ \S) <$
(32>
P\S)" (and in case (b)' if (9 - cf(<9) > \Aζ\*°, fl-c.c.)-
Remark. Some points in the proof are repeated in 2.11.

630 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Proof. The (ω\ \ S) -completeness is trivial by the definition of P and Ch. V,
Def. 1.1 (and the preservation theorem there i.e. by 2.8(a)).
For semiproperness let λ be regular and large enough, and N -< (ff (λ), G)
countable, P G N and p G P Π TV. Applying repeatedly 2.8(1) (or directly
2.8(8)), there is TV', N -< N
f 
-< (#(λ),G), NΠωl = N' Πα^AΓ' countable,
and for every maximal antichain Ξ C 95 (or just pre-dense Ξ C *B
V if (a) or
predense subset Ξ of Aζ for some ζ < ξ, if (a)'):
|J A.
Now use 2.9. (with (93
V), N
f here standing for (Aζ : ζ < ξ) , N there) .
So we have proved that P is semiproper and by the present proof and
the Δ-system lemma (alternativelly if K is strongly inacessible by 2.2(l)(c)
or 2.8(6)) P has the /c-c.c., hence lhP "(Aζ\S) 
<£ (<B
PίS)" follows from the
definition of P as every P^-name of a subset of some Λζ is a P^-name for some
j < K (as Pκ satisfies the «-c.c.). 
Hb.io
2.11. Claim. I{A=(Aζ:ζ<ξ),Aζ\S<> 
*B
V \S for ζ < ξ, each Aζ \S satisfies
the ^2-c.c. (e.g. has power < HI) and K > NO is strongly inaccessible, then
(1) Pκ
 d= SSeal(^, 5, K) is proper;
(2) ihPκ "Arts <° »
p" Γ s for c < Γ;
(3) in fact, Pκ is (α i \ 5)-complete, strongly proper and satisfies the κ-c.c. and
\\-PK «/ς = «2 = 2
K l";
(4) if α i \ 5 is stationary, PΛ does not add α -sequences of ordinals.
Proof. (1) Let λ be regular large enough and N -< (-ff(λ), G) countable, Q £ N
(hence Pκ G AT) and p G Pκ Π N. We want to apply 2.9, so we have (and it
suffices) to verify 0 there, i.e.
(**) if Aζ \S <$ βpr] f5, Λ satisfies the N2-c.c., Aζ G N -< (H(χ), G, <* ),
N countable, Ξ C Aζ is a pre-dense subset of Aζ and ω\ \ 5 G Ξ t/ien
AT Π ωι G (J{^ : A G Ξ Π AT}.
of (**). As *4ζ f5 |= "N2"-c.c., clearly without loss of generality |Ξ| < KI,
so let Ξ = {Ai 
: i < ωι} (as Ξ ^ 0 this is possible) and say AQ = ω\ \ 5.

§2. S'-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing 
631
Since Λζ\S <£ *B
V\S, clearly Ξ is pre-dense in 23
V, hence we know {δ : δ G
\Ji<δ Ai] G Vωι (otherwise the complement contradicts the pre-density of Ξ in
2S
V), so there is a closed unbounded C C ω\ such that C C {δ : δ G \Ji<δ Ai}.
As Ξ G TV without loss of generality (Ai : i < ωι) £ N and without loss of
generality C G N. As N -< (H(X), G) clearly C Π TV is unbounded in TV Π α i,
hence TV Π ω\ = sup(C Π TV Π α i) G C, so N Π α i G (J{^ -i£ NΓ\ωι},so for
some j G N Π α i, TV Π ω\ G Aj. But (A* : i < α i) G N so A^ G TV, as required.
(2) If A G ^(α i)^ * then as P« satisfies the κ-c.c. (by 2.10 or as by part
(1), {p G Pκ : Dom(p) is countable} is dense in P^, clearly we can apply the
Δ-system lemma) for some a < ft, A G P(ωι)
v ", and so by the definition of
SSeal(.4, S,«), if A/T>ωι is disjoint to a dense subset of x G Aζ, A C 5, ζ < ξ
then we "shoot" a club through its completion in the (β + l)-th iterand in the
iteration defining SSeal(*4, 5, K) for β G (α,«) large enough. Why? As F
Pκ |=
"\Aζ\ < HI" (as PI collapses 2
Hl to K x see 2.4(5)) there is β,a < β < K such
that for every x G Λζ, if x Π A is not stationary in V
Pκ, then it is not stationary
inF^.
(3) Easy (strong properness hold by the proof of 2.9 and use IX 2.7, 2.7A
for preservation of strong properness or prove directly).
(4) By 2.8(4) and V §3. 
D2.n
2.12. Claim. Let Q = (P^, Q} , : i < a,j < a) be a semiproper iteration, and a
be a limit ordinal. Suppose lhpα "Ξ C 03^ is pre-dense" and i < a. Then (a)
<& (b)+ => (b), where:
(a) (PQ /P^)* seal(Ξ) is semiproper (in F
Pί);
(b) If λ is regular large enough, Q G N -< (if(A),G,<J),^ countable, Ξ G
AT, p G N Π Pα, i G N Π α, ςι G P< is (JV, P»)-semi-generic, pfi <
there are TV
1,^
1,^
1, A and j such that:
(i) A^A^tf^G,^),
(ii) N
1 is countable, ΛΓ
1 Π α i = TV Π α i,
(iii) p<pl £N
lnPa,
(iv) i < j < α, j a non-limit ordinal,

632 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
(v) j G N\
(vi) q<ql^P^
(vii) q
l is (AT
1, Pj)-semi-generic,
(viii) p
l\j <q
l,
(ix) A G N
l is a P^-name,
(x) q
l\\- "N
lΠωl G A",
(xi) ^UpHfrcOlb^ "4GΞ";
(b)+ Like (b) but AT is a P^-name and N
l is a P^-name.
Remark. There is not much difference if in clause (b) (or (b)
+) we replace clause
(ix)by
(ix) A G N is a Pj-name
but then j is allowed to be P^-name.
Proof, (a) =» (b)+ Let Q
 d= seal(Ξ) and let q G G; C Pi? G» generic over V\ In
V[Gi], apply the definition of "(Pα/Pi) * seal(Ξ) is semi porper" to the model
TV = ΛΓ[Gi] and the condition p, and get a condition g°, so g° is (TV, (Pa/Pi)*Q)-
semi-generic. Let G be such that q° G G C Pα * Q, Gi C G, and G is generic
over V. So by the definition of Q =seal(Ξ) for some A G Ξ[Gα] Π AΓ[G] we have
AT Π ωi - TV[G] Π ωι e A. As A e Ξ[Gα] C 03^ = \Jj<a BfPj+i], for some
jo € α Π JV, A G 93[Pi0+i], and there is a Pj0+ι-name A G N[G] such that
A[G] = A, and without loss of generality q° forces this. Now
X — {r :r G P^ and r is above p or incompatible with p and
r lhPα "A G Ξ" or r \\-Pa "A φ Ξ}
is a dense subset of Pa and r = the <^-least member of X which belongs to
Gα is a Pα-name, and J G AT, r G AT. Hence r[G] G N[G\ and clearly r[G] is
compatible with ςr°, p < r[G] and r[G] 1= "A G Ξ", so w.l.o.g. r[G] < ςf
0. Let
N
l be the Skolem hull of N U {jo, A,r[G]} in (ίf(λ),G,<J), let j - j0 4- 1,
g
1 ^ς°ίj andpi =r[G].
(a) =» (b) Similar proof.
(b)
+ => (a) Use (b)
4". Specifically, for i < α let G^ C P^ be generic over V,i <a.

§2. 5-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing 
633
Assume the desired conclusion in clause (a) fails then this is exemplified by some
TV, (p, r) where N -< (H(λ)
v^
Gi^ G) is countable, (p,r) G (Pa/Gi) *seal(Ξ) and
( P i ΐ ) ^ N (where N G V[G$]). So for some QQ G GI and x we have: x is
a Pi-name, x[Gi] = N and qQ \\-p. "x and (p,r) G (Pa/Pi) * seal(Ξ) form a
counterexample to semiproperness" .
Clause (b)
+ applied to x, q0, P gives N
l^p
l^q
l^Aq(^ and j as there and
w.l.o.g. q
l \i G Qi and let N
1 = N
l[Gi].
As Pa/Pj is semiproper, there is q
2 G Pα which is (A^
1,PQ,)-semigeneric,
p < g
2 and g
1 = </
2fj and let Gα be such that </
2 G Ga C Pα and Gα is
generic over V. By the choice of #o (which is < qι < q
1 < q
2 G Ga) without
loss of generality G* = Ga Π P^. So Ξ,p, r, ^4 G AΓ[Gα], where on A see clauses
(ix), (x), (xi) and as seal(Ξ[Gα]) is A [Ga] -complete there is r
2 G seal(Ξ[Gα])
which is (Λ^
1[GQ;],seal(Ξ[Gα])-semiproper and above r[Gα]. So for some r*,
Q
2 "~pα*seai(Ξ) " Γ* ^
s above r and is (N[Ga], (Pa/Gi) * seal(Ξ))-semi generic".
So (^
2,r*) contradict the choice of #o and we are done. 
^2.12
2.13 Claim. Let Q — (Pi,Qj 
: i < a,j < a) be a semiproper iteration and a
be a limit ordinal.
(1) If we have Pα-name Ξ satisfying Ξ C Ξ* = {Ξ G V
Pa : Ξ is a P^-name
of a maximal antichain or just a pre-dense subset of 25^, such that for
every i < α, (Pα/Pi+1)* seal(Ξ) is semiproper (i.e. this is lhp.+1)} then
(Pα/Pi_i_ι)* Seal(Ξ) is semiproper for every i < a.
(2) If
(*) (Pα/Pi+ι)* seal(Ξ) is semiproper for every i < a and maximal an-
tichain (or just a pre-dense subset) Ξ of 35^ (from V
Pa) to which
ωι\S belongs,
then for every i < α, (Pα/Pί+ι) * Seal(^8^,5) is semiproper and for
K > \Pa\ strongly inaccessible (Pα/Pi+ι) * SSeal(25^,5, /ς) is semiproper
with ft-c.c.
(3) The hypothesis (*) of (2) holds if for arbitrarily large i < a:
Qi is semiproper and Ihp. "Rss(K2)"

634 
XIII. Large Ideals on ωι
(4) If (A is a Pα-name and it is forced for Pa that) Ξ is a predense subset
of A V;<α<4 C 23
Pί+S and ,A <> <B<2 (for this α - sup{i : A <S 23
Pί+
1}
suffice), thenΞe Ξ* (Ξ* from part (1)).
(5) Assume
(**) A = (Aβ : β < β*} and for β < β* we have: \\-Pa "Aβ C 23
p*+ι
for some i < α" and if i < a and Ξ is a P^-name of a pre-dense
subset of .4/3 to which ωι\S belongs then \\~pί+1 " if Aβ C 23
Pΐ+1 then
(Pα/P$+ι) * seal(Ξ) is semiproper".
Then for every i < α, (PQ/Pί+1) * Seal (^4, 5) is semiproper and if K > \Pa\
is strongly inaccessible then (Pα/Pί+1) * SSeal(.4, 5, K) is also semiproper,
satisfies the ft-c.c., has cardinality ft, forces K = ^2 and forces A/? 
<Φ
Proof. (1) Use Claim 2.12 α; times and the definition of RCS (note that in
2.12(b) we do not get q
l \i = ς, but we can replace q by any g
;, q < q
1 G P^).
(2) For the first phrase use 2.13(1). For the SSeal case, use also 2.9 with
A — (25^} (so ξ — 1), where the assumption of 2.9 can be gotten by the first
phrase; the κ>c.c. is proved as in 2.11(3) using models N as in 2.9.
(3) By 1.7(5) the statement Rss(K2) implies that semiproperness and pre-
serving stationarity of subsets of ω\ are equivalent. Suppose i < α, Qi is
semiproper and Ihp. "Rss(N2)" As by 2.8(5), seal(Ξ) (for Ξ C 23^ a maximal
antichain) preserves stationarity of subsets of ω\ from V
Pί which are stationary
in V
Pa (and this property is preserved by composition (though not by limit))
and Pa/Pi — Qi * (Pα/Pi+ι) is semiproper hence preserve stationarity of sub-
sets of ωi, we get that (Pα/Pί)* seal(Ξ) preserves stationarity of subsets of ω\
hence is semiproper (in V
Pί of course). This holds for arbitrarily large i < α,
hence (by the composition of semiproperness) for every non-limit i, which is
the demand (*) of (2).
4) As in the proof of (**) from the proof of 2.11(1), it suffices to prove
clause (b)+ of 2.12 for successor i < α, so let A, Ξ be as in the assumption of
2.13(4), q Ih "{.A,Ξ} e TV" and N,i,p,q be as in the assumption of 2.12(b) + .
We know that for some ZQ > i we have AC *B
Pίo+
1 , so without loss of generality

§2. 5-Suitable Iterations and Sealing Forcing 
635
(possibly increasing p and q) for some IQ,P\\~ "A C 2$i0+ι" , by the preservation
of semiproperness by composition without loss of generality i§ — i + 1. Let GI
be such that q G GI C Pi? GΪ generaic over V and AT = W[Gi]; in V[Gi]
we define T
 d= {A G 03
Pίo+ι : p ^Pa/Gi "^ ^ Ξ"}. So T G ^[G<] and
i] \= 1
TI < NΓ, T ^ 0 so let, in F[G;], T = {Ac : C < α>ι} and without loss
of generality (Aζ : C < ωi} G JV[G<]. Let B = {δ < ω\\ δ limit and δ φ \Ji<δ A;},
so B C ωι, B e V[Gi], and (in V^Gj) we have: B Γ\ Aζ = Φ mod 2^. So in
V
Pa , 5 cannot be stationary (as B G 2J^, A <> 23^) so as Pa/Gi is semiproper
also in V[Gi] we know that B is not stationary, and we finish as in the proof
of (**) from the proof of 2.11(1).
5) The proof of 2.13(2) (and see 2.16). 
D2.ι3
2.14 Claim. Suppose Q = (Pi,Qj,tj 
: i < α + 1, j < α+1) is an RCS iteration,
Q\a is 5-suitable, and K > \Pa\ is strongly inaccessible.
(1) If tα = 0,Qα = SSeal((Q5[Pj] : j < α,t, = 1),S» then Q is 5-suitable
and also: for a successor or α = cf(α) > \Pi\ for i < a even Qa is proper.
(2) If a is a limit ordinal, A = (Aζ : ζ < ζ) is a sequence of (Pα-names of )
subalgebras of 23
Qrα with Λc Vi<a ^ζ £ ®
Pί+1 ,
 an<3 for every C < ξ, l^pα
"for C < ξ the set {i < α : .4cf5 <$ »[Pi+1]ί5} is unbounded below α",
and \\-pa "for every j < α satisfying t^ = 1 for some ζ, 93
 p^ f5 <> ^f5"
and tα = 0, and Qa = SSeal(^ϊ, 5, K) then Q is 5-suitable.
Proof. (1) First assume a is non-limit or α = cf(α) > |P^| for i < α. We have
to check clauses (A) - (F) of Definition 2.1. Clause (D) holds by Claim 2.11(1);
clause (E) holds by Claim 2.11(3); clause (F) holds by 2.11(2); the other parts
of Definition 2.1 hold trivially. Lastly the conclusion concerning "Qα is proper"
holds by 2.11(3).
If α is limit, then this follows from 2.14(2) which is proved below.
2) Let Ξ = {Ξ : Ξ is a P^-name of a pre-dense subset of 23[Pi+ι] to which ω\ \S
belongs for some i < a and (Pα/Pj+ι) * seal(Ξ) is semiproper for every j < α}.
By 2.13(4) above: if Ξ is a Pα-name of a maximal antichain of A^(C < 0

636 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Ξ G Ξ. So by 2.13(5) clauses (D),(E),(F) of Definition 2.1 hold (the others are
trivial). 
CU2.14
2.15 Claim. 1) Suppose A — (Λζ '• ζ < ζ) is an increasing sequence of subal-
gebras (or just subsets) of 23, χ regular, N a countable elementary submodel
of ( H ( χ ) , G, <* ) and Θ^5 from 2.9(1) holds, i.e.
Θ^ s if ζ e ξΓ\ N and Ξ G N is a pre-dense subset of Λζ and ω\ \ 5 G Ξ
then N Π ωι G LUewnΞ ^
If Q G N is a strongly proper forcing notion, p G Q Π AT ί/ien there is
q£Q,p<q,q is (AT, Q)-generic and 4 Ih
 αθ^
[^
p!".
2) In 2.10 we can conclude also that for a strongly proper Q which is (ω\ \ 5)-
complite and satisfies \Q\ < ft, the forcing notion Q* SSeal(Q5
v, 5, κ)
γQ is
semiproper (ω\ \ 5)-complete.
3) Parallel strengthenings of 2.11, 2.13 (see mainly 2.13(1)) and 2.14 hold.
2.15A Remark. This claim can be used in §3, §4 to get appropriate axioms:
it gives a comprehensive family of forcing notions which we can use quite freely
in the iterations, without making problems for what is already accomplished
there.
For a more general property: see 4.6.
Proof. Straightforward (reread the proof of 2.11). 
^2.15
2.16 Claim. Assume A = (Λζ : C < 0» ΛK £ »V \S,
W = WA = < a :a C /ίp2(Hι)), a is countable, a Π ω\ is an ordinal and:
if ζ < ξ, Ξ C Aζ, Ξ is a pre-dense subset of *4ζ,
ω\ \ 5 belongs to Ξ and {(", Ξ} G a
then a Π ω\ G |^J{^4 : A G Ξ Π α} j
is a stationary subset of #(^2(^1)) and K, > NO is strongly inaccessible. Then
(1) Pκ
 d= SSeal(A, 5, K) is W-proper.
(2) lhPκ «Aζ\S ^ B
vt5" for ζ < ξ.

§3. On P(<jθ\)/Vωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
637
(3) In fact, Pκ is (ω\ \ S
f)-complete strongly W-proper and satisfies the ft-c.c.
(4) If ωι \ S is stationary then Pκ does not add ω-sequences of ordinals.
(5) If ζ = ζ +1, Λ: = 2&
V and Rss(N2) then Pκ is semiproper.
(6) If λ > Λ, Rss+(κ,λ) then V
p« \= Rss(N2,λ).
Proof. 1) PF-properness is proved as in the proof of 2.11(1) (and 2.9) restricting
ourselves to models N such that N Π if (^(^i)) £ W.
2), 3), 4) As in the proof of 2.11(2), (3), (4).
5) VF-properness implies semiproperness by 2.8(7), (8), (note: we can
ignore Λε when ε + 1 < ξ as W^ξ_^ = Wj).
6) Should be clear. 
Cb.iβ
2.17 Claim.
Assume Q = (Pi,Qj 
: i < κ,j < K) is an RCS-iteration, K is strongly
inaccessible (i < K =>• \Pi\ < K) and, for stationarily many i < /ς, for arbitrarily
large j G (i, K), 33^* <$ »
PΛ Thenin V
p«, for ^ - <B[PΛ]), W = W^ contains
aclubof5< N l(ffp 2(Nι)).
Proof. By Fodor's Lemma, 03
Pκ satisfies the ^2-c.c., hence we can apply 2.11.
Π2.17
§3. On T(ωι)/Ί>ωι Being Layered
or the Levy Algebra
On layered ideals see [Sh:237a], Foreman Magidor Shelah [FMSh:252] and
[Sh:270]. A reader can read sepeately 3.1 - 3.3, 3.4 - 3.8, 3.4 - 3.10. Here
in 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 we deal with "23\S being layered"; in 3.4, 3.5, 3.6 we prepared
the ground for "^Bf5 being the Levy algebra" and in 3.7, 3.9 we deal with
"25 \S being the Levy algebra". We deal also with getting forcing axioms and
try to present some approaches (rather than saving in consistency strength
around "ZFC+ there is a supercompact cardinal").

638 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
3.1. Theorem. Suppose K is super compact. Then for some forcing notion P:
(i) P satisfies the «-c.c., has cardinality tt, does not collapse NI, but collapses
every λ G (Ni, «) and lhP(c "« - N2, and 2*° - 2*
1 - N2",
(ii) 93 [P] is 5*-layered (see 3.1A(4) below), for some stationary 5* C {5 < K :
cf(ί) - N! (in V
p)},
(iii) in V
p, AE+ JQ semiproper collapsing N2 and 93[(F
P)] <o
3.1A Remark. 1) In (iii), of course if we have Ax rather than Ax+, we can
replace the condition on the forcing Q by:
for some R, Q <$ β, R is semiproper, <B[V
P] <£ 23[(F
p)
β] and B collapses
2) Note for 3.1(iii) that, in V
p, we have |93| - 2*
1 = N2.
3) In (iii) of 3.1 we can replace Ax+ by Axωι\ similarly in 3.2, 3.3(l)(iii).
4) A Boolean algebra B of regular cardinality λ is 5*-layered (for S* C λ)
if: letting B = \Ji<χBi, Bi increasing continuous in i, \Bi\ < λ, we have
{δ < λ : δ e 5* =Φ Bδ <£ B} G Pλ.
5) We say that a filter V on a set A is 5-layered if P(A)/D is 5-layered.
Proof. Let 5 = ω\ and let h : K -+ H(κ) be a Laver diamond (see Definition
VII2.8; later we may say: repeat this proof for other stationary S C ω\ and
h : K; — > H(κ)). By induction on i < /ς we define P{, Qi, t^ such that:
(A) Q
α = (Pi,Qj,tj : i < α, j < α) is an 5-suitable iteration.
(B) Qa is defined by cases:
CASE a: Assume (*)ι -|-(*)2 where
(*)ι a is measurable and /\i<0ί[\Pi\ < cx\ and [i < α & t* = 1 =>
93 [P»] <o 93[PΛ]j, and Rss
+(α,2
Q:) and
(*)2 h(ά) is a Pα-name of a semiproper forcing notion, and \\~pa*h(a)
"93 [Pα] <> 93[P« * Λ(α)] and α = ^[Pa] is collapsed".
TTien ta = I and Qα - h(a) * SSeal
y[
p«*
/l^)]((23[^] : i < α, t» = 1), 5).
CASE b: Assume (*)ι but not (*)2,
then ta = 1 and Qα - SSeal ((93[P<] : i < α, t< = 1), 5).
CASE c: Assume not (*)ι.

§3. On P(ωι)/Vωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
639
Then tα = 0 and Qa = SSeal^
p^((23[Pi] : i < α,t< = 1),5).
3. IB Observation. Q is 5-suitable and β < K => Q\β G H(κ) and: Qβ is
semiproper when β = cf(β) > \Pi\ for i < β (or β successor).
Proof of 3. IB. We prove by induction on β < K that Q\β is 5-suitable and
when β < «, then <5Γ/2 belongs to /f (/ς) and if /? = a + 1, α = cf(/3) > |P*| for
i < a then <3α is semiproper.
For 0 = 0: trivial.
For β limit: by 2.3(1).
For 0 = α 4- 1 and for α, (*)Ί above fails: By the induction hypotheses Q \a —
(Pi,Qj,tj 
: i < a,j < a) is 5-suitable, hence it is a semiproper iteration and
by our choice Q\β — Q\(ot + 1) is an RCS iteration and letting κa be the
first strongly inaccessible > |Pα|, we have Qa = SSeal ((95 [Pi] : i < α,ti =
l),S,«α).
Now by 2.14(1) we are done (in particular Qa is semiproper if: α is a
successor or a — cf(α) > |Pi| for i < a).
For β — α + 1 and for α, (*)Ί above holds but (*)9. fails
By the induction hypothesis Qfα = (Pi,Qj '• i < ^, j < α) is 5-suitable,
hence a semiproper iteration and by our choice Q\β = Q\(a + 1) is an RCS-
iteration and letting κa be the first strongly inaccessible > |Pα|, we have:
tα - 1 and in V
p<* we have Qa =SSeal((95[Pi] : i < α, t< = 1), 5, /cα).
Note that, as (*)ι holds, α is measurable so {7 < a : case (c) applies and
7 = cf(7) > |Pi| for i < 7} includes all strongly inaccessible non-measurable
cardinals in C, for some club C of a. It is well known that there is a normal
ultrafilter on a to which this set belongs so 1.10 applies.
By 1.10(1) and, as V N "Rss+(α,2
α)" holds by (*)ι, we know that in
V
p«, Rss(N2,2*
2) holds. So by 2.8(7) every maximal antichain Ξ of 95[Pα]
(in V
Pa) is semiproper. Hence by 2.10 SSeal(95, 5, κa) is semiproper. Now
= fQP<* [as a js (by (*)ι) strongly inaccessible, f\i<a \Pi\ < «, now use

640 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
2.2(l)(c)], and SSeal(<B
0rα, S, κa) = SSeal((QS[Pί] : i < α,ti = l>,5,κα) by
claim 2.7, as tα = 1 and [i < a & t; - 1 => 33 [Pj fS <° 33[Pα]]. Together, ζ)α
is semiproper and we can check that Q \β is 5-suitable.
For 0 = a 4- 1, and for α, (*)ι 4- (*)s above holds.
Similar to the previous case, but now we use the statement in (*)2 to
note that h(a) is (in V
Pa) a semiproper forcing. Now by (*)2 we know that
33[Pα] <S 23[Pα * Λ(α)] and V
p<**
h^ N
 ct33[Pα] has cardinality HI" hence we
can use 2.11 to show that SSeal
v[
p-*
h(
α)l(33
p-,5) is semiproper. 
Π3,1B
Remark. Note that we could use only semiproper Qa's (so demand in (*)2 that
h(a) is semiproper).
3.1C. Observation. (1) If a < ft, and tα = 1 (equivalently (*)ι holds) then
in V
p* we have 33[Pα] \S <£ *£>[PK}\S.
2) If P is a normal ultrafilter on S<κ(H(3s(κ)), then {α : α e 5<Λ(ffp8(«)))
and (*)ι is satisfied by a Π ft} G P.
Proo/ o/ 5.ί C7. Should be clear. 
D3.ιc
Letting P = Pκ and 5* = {α < ft : (*)ι 4- ->(*)2 holds for a or at least
(*)ι + V
p« \= "cf(α) - HI"}, we easily finish, note that for α G 5* U {ft} :
2J[Pα] = \Ji<otV&[Pi] and for α G 5*: tα = 1. As ft is supercompact 5* is
a stationary subset of ft (by 3.1C) and forcing with Pκ preserves it (as Pκ
satisfies the ft-c.c.) and a G 5* => Ihp^ "cf(α) = KI" (check Qα). Also the other
requirement causes no problems. 
DS.I
3.2 Theorem. 1) In 3.1 we can weaken "P satisfies the ft-c.c" to "P does not
collapse K2 and has cardinality ft" but add that we have 23 [P] is layered, which
means it is SMayered for 5*
 d= {δ < K2 : cf(ί) = NI (in V
p)}.
2) In 3.1 we can add to the conclusion (P = Pκ, Q — (Pi,Qj,tj : i < ft, j < ft,}
is S suitable and):
(iv) In V
p, Ax [Q is semiproper and i < ft & t* - 1 =» 23
Pί <* 3S[(V
P)
Q]].
3) In 3.2(1) we can add to the conclusion (P = PΛ, Q as above and):

§3. On P(ωι)/T>ωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
641
(iv)~ In V
p we have Ax+ \Q is semiproper changing the cofinality of K2 to
NO, and i < K, & t< = 1 =» <B
Pί
Proo/. 1) Force as in 3.1, and then let P = PK*QK where in V
P*,QK =
club(S*U{<ϊ : cf
yP(δ) = N0}), where for S, club(S) = {h : h a strictly increasing
continuous function h from some 7 -f 1 < sup(5) to S}.
As, in V
P|C, the set 5* = {α < AC : (*)ι -h -ι(*)2 from the proof of 3.1
hold} C {δ < N2 : cf(ί) = KI} is stationary, moreover α G 5* implies: there
is, in V
Pκ , a subset feα of a of order type ω\ such that 7 < α = > f r α Γ i 7 G
U V
pe. As ( U (P(/?) Π V
pe) 
: a < K) is increasing and continuous and
β<a 
β<a
γPκ μ "\P(0) nV
p?\ = KI", clearly Qκ adds no bounded subsets to K and
K 
so B[PΛ] - 23 [P« * 9*] and lhQκ "{5 < « : cf(ί) = NI but not
<o *B[PK]\S} is not stationary.
P*Qκ.
Why does (iii) of 3.1 continue to hold? Suppose, in V 
,R is a semiproper
forcing collapsing N2 such that (V
P)
Q« 
|= [lhΛ "OS <$ 33[β]"]. Let β be a
PK * Q«-name of such a forcing notion and (p,#) G Pκ * Qκ- Apply (iii) to
ζ)/t * /? in V^[PK] (strictly speaking, its proof). I.e. by the properties of the
Laver diamond, for some χ, 2 * 
< χ, and M ^< (H(χ), G, <*) to which
Q, Q«, Λ, and (p,ς) belong and M isomorphic to some (H(χι), G, <*J, by
the Mostowski collapsing isomorphism g, taking Pκ to PKί where KI = M Π K,
and /I(KI) = #(Q/ς * Λ) Clearly «ι satisfies (*)ι and without loss of generality
also (*)2, hence tκι = 1. So we could have increased (p, ς) to guarantee the
existence of the generic enough subset of R (i.e. we use the generic subset of
d(Qκ) to increase q).
(2) In the proof of 3.1, case b is now divided into subcases 61 and 62;
case bi : (*)ι, not (*)2 but
(*)ι.5 h(a) is a Pα-name of a semiproper forcing notion such that i < α,
Then we let tα = 0,9* = fι(α)* SSeal^t^^^Kί®^] * <
where /cα is the first strongly inaccessible > \Pa * h(α)|.
case b ?: (*)ι, not (*)2 and not (*)ι.5

642 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Then (as in the old case b) tα = l,Qα = SSeal
y[
p«l({23[Pί] : ϊ < α,t< = 1),S).
3) Should be clear. 
D3.2
3.3 Theorem. In 3.1, 3.2 we can add, as a parameter (from V), S — (SΊ, 52, S3)
a partition of α i, S — Si is a stationary and restrict ourselves to pseudo (*, 53)-
complete forcing, see X 3.10, (so if 53 is not stationary this is not a restriction)
so if S3 is stationary the forcing notions will not be adding reals; i.e.
1) There is a forcing notion P such that:
(i) P satisfies the ft-c.c., does not collapse N1? but collapses every λ G
(«ι,«), Ihp "K = K2 and 2*° < N2,2
Hl = N2 and if 53 = 0 mod Vωι
then 2
K° = H2" and P is pseudo (*, ^-complete,
(ii) 93[P]ΓSΊ is SMayered, for some stationary 5* C {δ < K : cf(ί) = NI
(inF
p«)},
(iii) in V
p ,Ax
+\Q semiproper, pseudo (*,53)-complete collapsing H2 and
(iv) if 53 is stationary, the forcing P adds no new reals (so V
p \= CH).
2) In 3.3(1) we can replace "P satisfies the /ς-c.c." by "P does not collapse
κ
n and have 95 [Pi] is layered, i.e. 5* - {δ < N2 : cf(δ) = KI} (in F
p).
3) We can add in 3.3(1): (P = PΛ, Q = (P^, Q^ , t^ : i < /ς, j < «) is 5ι-suitable
and)
(v) in F
p, Ax[Q semiproper, pseudo (*,53)-complete and i < K & t^ =
4) Actually in (3) it suffices "for i < AC, (P^/P^+i) * Q is semiproper, pseudo
P«χQ
(*, 53)-complete and: j < i & t j = 1 ^> 95^' <$ V
3.3A. Remark. 1) In 3.2(2)(iv) and in 3.3(3)(v), if we deal with Ax (Ax+) it
is enough that Q <£ Q', Q
r as there, or more directly, for each i < «, there are
enough models N as in 2.9.
2) The "solution" of x/3.3(3),(4) = 3.2(3)/3.2(2) holds.
Proof. 1) Like the proof of 3.1 but we seal only 95^t
Pί' fSΊ when t^ — 1 and in
(*)2 we add "/ι(α) is pseudo (*, 53) -complete", but we have to check that all

§3. On P(ωι)/T)ωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
643
forcing notions Qa are pseudo (*, 53)-complete (and use the iteration lemma
X 3.11). Now all the sealing forcing notions which we use satisfies this trivially.
2), 3), 4) Similar. 
D3.3
3.4. Claim. Suppose Q = (Pi,Qj : i < ft, j < K) is a semiproper iteration, K
strongly inaccessible with K > |P$| for i < K, and lastly 5 C ω\ is stationary.
Suppose further
(*) (a) for i < «, in V
Pi+
l, Player II wins S({Λι},ω,Vκ + £+) where E+ =
{δ < K : δ > i, δ strongly inaccessible, (Vα < ί)[|Pα| < δ] and \\~pδ/pί+l
"Qδ is semiproper"}; (for a definition of the game see 1.9A(2)) so we
are assuming E* ^ 0 mod T>κ in V
Pi+1 for each i < «; and let
E+=E+.
(b) E* = {i < K : lhpi "Rss(^2) and Qi semiproper"} is unbounded in K.
Then Λί+i
 d= (PΛ/Pi+ι) * Nm * SSeal(»[PΛ], S) is (in the universe V
Pί+
l , Nm
in V
Pκ, SSeal in V
Pκ*
Nm of course) is semiproper for every i < K.
3.4A. Remark. (1) Remember that Nm = {T : T C
 ω>(K2) is closed under
initial segments, is nonempty, and for every η G T we have |{z/ : 77 < v € Γ}| =
N2}; ordered by the inverse of inclusion. Clearly {T : for η G T, Sucτ(^) is a
singleton or has power ^2} is a dense subset, so usually we restrict ourselves to
it. For such T\ the trunk is the η € Γ of minimal length such that |Sucτ(τ/)l > l
(2) We can use Nm(D) instead of Nm and even Nm', Nm^D).
(3) We can replace Nm by any forcing notion satisfying, e.g. pseudo (*,5)-
completeness (see X 3.9, 10) or the E-condition (see Chapter XI) where I £ V
is a family of ^-complete normal ideals or even f7P(I), see Chapter XV.
(4) Instead of (*)(b) we can have "largeness" demands on «. We need it to
make (Pκ/Pj)* 
seal(Ξ) semiproper for j G E+,Ξ a maximal antichain of 23
(5) Note that lhPκ "cf(<J) = H0" is not forbidden in the definition of Ef\
we can in clause (a) of (*) of 3.4 in the game allow pressing down functions
(see 1.9A(4)), add \^pδ+1 "cf(δ) = HI"; in the proof below we strengthen the

644 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
definition of j G E® by j = mm(NηίjΓ{κ\Nη) 
and demand E® to be stationary
and this somewhat simplify the proof.
Proof. We work in V
Pi+l so let G$+i C Pί+1 be generic over V. Let λ be regular
and large enough, N X (/f(λ)[Gi+ι],e,<J) countable, i e N, K G N, K G
TV, Q G TV and (p
a,p
b,p
c) G fli+i Π TV.
We shall choose below <?<> G Pκ/Pi+ι which is (TV, P^/Pi+i)-semi-generic,
P
α < <?() and GK C PΛ generic over V containing GΪ+I U {^{)}.
We now, in V[GK] (but G« is defined only during the definition for n — 0)
define by induction on n, Tn, A^ (ry G Γn) such that:
(A) Tn C »>«,
(B) To = {( }},
(C) (Vi/ G Γn+1)[ι/rn G Γn] and Γn+1 n
 n^κ - Γn,
(D) (Vrj G Γn)[{i : η
Λ(i) G Tn+1} ha^ power Λ],
(E) N[GK]nH(X)[Gi+l] 
<ω2 N(} x (F(λ)[G,+1],G,<^,G,) and N(} is
countable and (p
α,p
fe,p
c) G TV() and Q G TV(), (note, abusing notation
we do not distinguish strictly between NQ and (AΓ^,GΛ Π 7V(>) and
similarly for JV^)
(F) for r? G Tn+ι the model Λ^ -< Γff(λ)[Gi+ι], G, <λ,GΛ) is countable,
extends ^rn, and Nηtn <κ Nη,
(G) ry G Λ^
(H) If Ξ is a P^/Pi+i-name of a dense subset of 95(P«), Ξ G TV^ and
77 G Γn, ί/ien for some natural number fc = fc(Ξ, ry) and every ι/ : if
77 < i/ G Tn_(-fc then:
(3A G N,,) [A G Ξ & A a (P^/Pz+i) - name & TV n ωi G
(I) E® is a stationary subset of AC, where

§3. On P(ωι)/Vωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
645
£θ
 d= {j < K :Nη <κ NηJ where NηJ is the Skolem Hull
of A ^ U U J i n (#(λ)[Gm],e,<,G,) and
j is strongly inaccessible in V and
(Vi < j)[\Pi\ < j] and Ihp. "Qj[Gj] 
is semiproper}".
Now in carrying out the definition, (H) involves standard bookkeeping.
For n — 0 (we start to work in V[G$+ι]) our main problem is satisfying
(I). We shall now define <?(). For j < K, let Nj be the Skolem Hull o f N Γ ] 
{j}
in (#(λ)[Gm], €,<;;). By (*)(a) and XII 2.6.
El = {j < K : N <α>2 N j , j strongly inaccessible, \Pi\ < j for every i < j and
lhp./p.+1 "Qj is semiproper"}
is a stationary subset of /ς. So by the Fodor lemma [as δ G E
l => cf(ί) > H0
in V^Gi+i] and μ < ft => μ
κ° < ft] we know that for some stationary E
2 C
J5
1, (A^ : j G £
2} form a Δ-system; let n{^ : j G E
2} be ΛΓ('}. For j G E
2 let
gj G PK/PΪ+I be (A^, Pκ/Pi+ι)-semi-generic and above p
a. Now we know that
Pj = Uζ<j Pζi hence by the Fodor Lemma w.l.o.g. qj \j is constant, so let this
constant value be called <?( >. Clearly q^) is (A/
r/
/v,P/ί/P^_f.ι)-semi-generic and it
is the </{ ^ which we promised. Now we actually choose Gκ i.e. a subset of Pκ
generic over V and including G +iU{<?()}. Let N() = N
f^[Gκ]r}H(X)[Gi+ι}. 
So
7V() x (ff(λ)[Gί+ι],e,<5; ), moreover (N(},GKΠN(}) 
-< (^(λ)[Gm], G, <^
, Gκ) so 7V{}) is as required in clause (E). As for clause (I), by the genericity
of Gκ we have {j G E
2 : ^ G Gκ} is unbounded in K (even stationary) and it
include E° (think).
For n > 0 assume A^ are defined, ig(η) = n - 1. Clearly, as Pκ satisfies the
ft-c.c., for some εη < K we have (A^^ : ^ < ^g(ry)) belongs to F[G£J and εη is
a successor ordinal > sup(Nη Π «). By (I), E^ is a stationary subset of ft, and
we shall define E^ D ^ stationary and will let
2ig(,,)+ι Π {i/ : η<v G
 (n+1)ft} - {rf (j) : j G ^}.
So T^g(r/)+1 will really be constructed as required.

646 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Actually E® is the interpretation of some P^/G^-name E^ forced to be
as above: just read the definition in clause (I). W.l.o.g. some member of G£r]
force (\\-pκ) that TV, E^ are as above.
In V[GK] for each 7 G £$ - E°η[Gκ/G£η} there is q^Ί G GΛ/GefI such that
ς£ι7 Ih "7 € JE°". So in F[GΛ], for some q* G G* we have {7 G £° : ς^fr = <£}
is stationary. As we can increase εη w.l.o.g. q* G Gεr]. In V[GeJ we define
E* = {7 : there is <? = q* ^ such that q* ?7 \*γ = q^ and
so E^ G F[GεJ, £7^ 2 ^ hence E* is stationary.
So, in V[GK], N*tΊ = the Skolem Hull of Nη U {7} in (ff(λ)[G<+ι],<Ξ
, <^,G/ς), clearly A^7 C NηtΊ (as G7 is definable from Gκ and 7) hence
Nη <κ N%ιΊ. Also for every x G AΓ^7 for some function / G Nη, Dom(/) = «,
7(7) is a P7-name of a member of H(X) and x = /(7)[G-γ]
But P7 satisfies the 7-c.c., hence 7(7) is a P^-name for some β < 7 and let
/ι/ (7) < 7 be minimal such β so h/(7) G A^>7, but &s Nη <κ N^7, it follows
that ft/ (7) G Λfη, so sup^€N (ft/ (7)) < 7? hence, increasing ε^ and decreasing
E^ (preserving their properties) w.l.o.g. we have 7V^7 G V[GeJ.
For 7 G E^ choose any G7+1 such that q$ι7Γ(7 4- 1) G G^+1, G7 C G7+1
and G7+1 is generic over V. Let our bookkeeping give us Ξη G Nη C N°57, a
Pκ-name of a pre-dense subset of 95 [P«].
We shall now prove that condition (a) of 2.12 holds for the iteration
and any non-limit ordinal (denoted by i in 2.12) in the universe V[G7+1].
Let ξ G [7 4- 1, K) be a non-limit (or just Qξ semiproper). By (*)(b) from
the assumptions of 3.4 we can find 7(£) G E*,ξ < j(ξ) < K, such that:
''γ(0
) and Q7(ξ) is semiproper"

§3. On P(ωι)/Vωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
647
Now (PΛ/P7(£))* seal(Ξ) does not destroy stationary subsets of ω\ (as PK/PΊ^
is semip roper and Ξ is pre-dense so that seal(Ξ) preserves stationary subsets
of ω\)\ so because j(ξ) G E* this forcing is semiproper by 1.7(3). As Qξ
is semiproper, PΊ^/Pξ> is semiproper. Hence (PΛ/Pξ)*seal(Ξ) is semiproper.
So condition (a) of 2.12 holds, hence condition (b) of 2.12 holds. Let N
l
be the Skolem hull of Λ^7 in (H(X)
vl
G*+ύ,e,<*χ,G'Ί+l). 
Note that q^η Ih
"<7 -< <7 £ Λ^7", hence <^7 Ih "Λ^ X JV°7 X TV^ ^ TV^ and
Nηnκ = 7V°>7 n 7 = N*ίΊ n sup(A^ n /ς) e «".
Now by 2.12(b) applied in V[(?7+1], there is countable model A^7 satisfying
N^Ί X (H(\}
v\
G^\e,<*x,G'Ί+^ 
such that N^ <7+ι A^
2
7 (remember
0.1(9), and \\~pΊ+l "7 < ^2") and q^Ί € P^/G^+i and j^^ < « successor
such that:
(i) 47 G PhJG'Ί+ι, 7 < ^,7 e <7,
(iii) ^?7 is (N*tΊ,Pjη J-semi-generic, and
(iv) g^7 H-p^^/p^! "for some A G A^)7 we have: A G Ξ^ and TV Π ω\ G A"
and A is a P^^-naine.
Also by (*)(a) of the assumption of 3.4, there is ^j7 > sup(Λ^7 Π «) > 7
strongly inaccessible, such that Λξ<ξ 
l Pξl < 67,75 an(i ^,7 — Skolem Hull of
ΛΓ2ι7U{6,,7} in (ίf(λ)[G7+1], e,G'Ί+ί < χ ) satisfyies ^2,7[ί?;+1] <κ N^ and
«ί,7 € PU-, Back to ^[^7]' let K,τ be the Skolem Hull of N^ U {7,ξ^ιΎ}
in (H(\)[Gi+ι],€,<χ,Gerι), 
and ς^,Ύ € PitiT/G£?) forces all the above and in
particular is above q% and q*^. In addition ^,7f[7 + l,κ) = 9^,7t[7 + !,«) =
<7Γ[7 + 1,^,7). and <fr,,Ί\(Ί + 1) 6 G;+I) so «*i7re, € Ge, and ^ -< N^,
7 € Λ^ι7, AT, Π K = Nn Π 7 = ΛΓ^7 n sup(ΛΓ,, n K), and
Ih'the Skolem Hull N^Ί of N^Ί in (#(λ)
κlGί+lJ, G, <J, G7+ι)
satisfies JV£7 Π sup(A^ Π K) = A^ Π /ς",
hence
q^Ί lh"the Skolem Hull N^Ί of Λ^>7 in (^(λ)
v[G?ί+l1, G, <J, G7+ι)
satisfies ΛΓ®>7 Π sup^ Π K) = A^ n K (as V[G7+ι] N (7) = KI)".

648 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
(looking at the definition of Eη in clause (I) above). As we can increase εη and
decrease E
2, w.l.o.g. q^ [7 G G£r) and q^ fy is the same for all 7 G E
2 .
Now as 47 e PK/G£7J and ^ r7 e Gε^, easily lhPκ/Gej) «Ej ^ {7 : <$„ €
Gκ} is a stationary subset of ft" , so we have defined at least E^. Now in VfG^],
if 7 6 E*[Gκ] then 7 G E® (see above). We still have to define Nη^Ί) and
E® ~ ^ (for 7 e jE?ι [Gκ]). For each such 7 we repeat the proof in the case n — 0
with universe V[G^J and Skolem Hull of Λ^7 in (j^λ)^*1', G, <λ,Gξτ? J
here standing for V[Gi+ι], AT there.
We have carried out the construction.
We now define by induction on n, for every η G Γ Π
 ntt, a condition
p^ <Ξ Nm and πιη < ω such that (note A^[GJ ^ (if (λ)[GΛ], G, <*), ^[G^] Π
(a) p^ G ΛΓrJGj, m^ < α; and p\} - p
b[GΛ],
(b) p^ G Nm, and tr(p{j) (the trunk of p
b
η) has length > ig(η) (and has K
immediate successors in p^),
(c) pj^£ < p^ and m^^ < mη when £ < ίg(η)\ and if p^^ has a trunk of length
> ίg(η) or m^^ > £g(ry) then: p
b
η = p
b
η{l & mη = mη^
(d) if η G Tn, α is a Nm-name for a countable ordinal, α G A^[G], then for
some k = k
l(α, ή), and every v G |J Tm, for some ordinal β = β(α, v) G
m<ω
NV we have
fc+1 - |{^ < *g(ι/) : m,r£ < m^M}\ & ry < i/ =* p^ lhNm "α - /3(α, ι/)
w,
(e) if η G Tn and Ξ is a Nm-name for a pre-dense subset of 95 [PΛ] and
Ξ G Nη[Gκ], then for some k — /c
2(Ξ, 77), for every v G \J Tm we have:
[fc+1 < \{ί < lg(v) 
m^t < ra^+i)}! & η < z/]
=» [for some A G N^GN^ we have TV Π ω\ G A & p^ lhNm M G Ξ"].
(f) if pk has a trunk of length < tg(η), say ι^, and m^ < ig(η) and if /i^ is a
one-to-one function from K onto {j < K : vη
 Λ (j) G p^}, hη G A^[GK], then

§3. On P(ωι)fDωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
649
for 77
Λ{^) e(jnTn we have:
(g) for 77 G Tn we have: the sequences (k
l(a,ή) : α G Nη[Gκ] is a Nm-name
of a countable ordinal) and (A;
2(Ξ, 77) : Ξ G Nη[Gκ] is a Nm-name of a
predense subset of 03[P κ]) are with no repetitions, with disjoint ranges
whose union is a co-infinite subset of ω [Why the ra^'s? just as below T
depend on p
b
η}.
There is no problem to do this. [For (e), when we come to deal with Ξ, say at
77, where p
b
η has trunk of length < tg(ή) and mη < ίg(η), we let
T - {A : (3p)(p
b
η <peNmkp lhNm "A G Ξ")}.
So T G Nη[Gκ] is a pre-dense subset of 2J(PΛ), and by (H) above there is
k(Ύ,p) as there, choose it as k
2(Ξ,η), so we shall have p
b
v — p
b
p if v < p G
Now in V
Pκ let:
q
b = {p £
ω>κ : p £ p
b[GK] and for some r? G [Jrn,p is an initial segment
n
of the trunk of p
b
η}.
We can easily see that p
b < q
b G Nm (in V[GK]). Also (in F[G«]) ^
6 is
ic and moreover
q
b lhNm «« Π 7V[^][GNm] = Λ Π
where G^m is the (canonical name of the) generic subset of Nm and η is the
Nm-name of the α -sequence in
 ωκ which it defines naturally and y is the Nm-
name of the ω-sequence in
 ωκ such that v\η G Tn and the trunk of p
b. is <η.
[Remember that if N^N2 -< (H(X),e),NιΓ\ωι 
= Λ^Πu i, and i G NιΠN2, i <
N2, then JVi Π i = JV2 Π i] Hence ^ lhNrrι
 
tβp(α;ι)
vl
σ-] Π N[GK}[GNm] 
=

650 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Now clearly by the above and (e) we have
q
b ll~Nm "for every pre-dense subset Ξ of 25[PK] in -/V[G«][GNm]j
So we can apply Claim 2.9 to get <f , which is (N[GK][GNm\, SSeal(33[PΛ], S))-
semi-generic > p
c [Gκ] [GNm] . Let q
a = q^ so we are assuming just q
a G
Gκ C PK,GK generic over V and so for some Pκ-name q
b, we have: q
a \\-pκ
"q
b is as above ". Similarly for some ς
c, (q
a,q
b) l^(pκ/pί+1)*Nm "q
c is as above".
Now (q
a,q
b,q
c) is as required (i.e., (Λi+i, AΓ)-semi-generic). 
D3.4
3.4B Remark. It seems that we can weaken clause (a) of (*) of 3.1 to
(a)
7 for i < K in V
p<+1, player II wins in the game D({Nι},ω, K).
See [Sh:311]
3.5 Claim. Suppose Q = (Pi,Qj 
: i < K, j < K) is a semiproper iteration,
κ> \Pi\ foτ i < K and 5 C α i is stationary. Suppose further that
(*) (a) for i < «, in V
Pί , Player II wins in D({Nι}, ω, Vκ + E?) where Ef = {δ <
K : δ > i, (J strongly inaccessible, ll~pδ/pί "Q^ is semiproper"},
(b) E = {i < K : \\-p. "Rss(^2) and Qi-semiproper" } is unbounded,
(c) It is forced (lhPJ that W C {δ < K : V
p« \=
 
ucf(δ) = N0" } is stationary
(W a Pκ-name).
Then (Pκ/Pί+ι)*clubH1(lf)*SSeal (95(PΛ),5) is semiproper for i < Λ where
clubμ(VF) = {/ : for some non-limit 7 < μ, / is an increasing continuous
function from 7 into W}.
Proof. Like the previous claim, only after defining Nη for a set GΛ C Pκ
generic over V,ςf() G GΛ, in V[GΛ] there is η G
 
w«, f\n(η\n G Tn) such

§3. On P(ωι)/Vωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
651
that η(£) > sup(Nη^ Π K) and sup{τ?(£) : i < ω} belong to W[GK] and then
in V[GK] continue with (J£ Nηιι[G\. 
D3.5
3.5A Remark. 3.5, 3.4 are cases of a more general theorem, see XV.
3.6 Claim. In 3.4, 3.5, if we add to the hypothesis:
(*) player II wins in V
Pi(i < AC), for Ί)κ in the game of "divide and choose"
i.e. X 4.9 for S = {2, N0, Nι},α - ω,
(*)' for i < j < K non-limit, Pj/Pi is pseudo (*,α;ι \ S*)-complete,
then (Pκ/Pi+ι) 
* Nm and (PΛ/Pi+ι) * club^OίO are pseudo (*,α;ι \ S*)-
complete.
Proof. Left to the reader.
3.7 Theorem. 1) Suppose {μ < K : μ supercompact} is unbounded below K
and K is 3-Mahlo.
If (Sι,S2,S3) is a partition of ω\ with Si stationary, then for some
semiproper pseudo (*, S3)-complete forcing notion P satisfying the κ-c.c., we
have:
Ihp "93[PΛ]tSΊ has a dense subset which is (up to isomorphism) Levy(K0,<
»2)
M.
Proof. We define by induction on z, P$, Q^, t^ such that
(A) Q
a = (Pi,Qj,tj 
: i < α, j < a) is Si-suitable,
(B) there is no strongly inaccessible Mahlo λ, i < X < |P^|,
(C) if i is a singular ordinal or (3j < ϊ)[\Pj\ 
> i] or i inaccessible not a
limit of supercompacts or i inaccessible not Mahlo then t^ = 0, Qi —
SSeal((B[P, ] :j<i, tj = 1), Si) (as defined in V
Pi, of course),
(D) if i is supercompact, not limit of supercompacts then t^ = 1,Q^ =
SSeal(»[Pi],Sι),
(E) if (Vj < i)[\Pj\ <i],i limit of supercompacts and i is inaccessible 1-Mahlo
but not 2-Mahlo, we let t» = 1, Qi = Nm * SSeal(B[Pi]) (the SSeal in
P<*Nm
V 
of course),

652 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
(F) if (Vj < i)[|Pj| < i]ji is 2-Mahlo and a limit of supercompacts then
Wi = {δ < ί : δ = cf (5) is Mahlo and a limit of supercompacts and
(Vj < δ)[|Pj| < δ}} is a stationary subset of i, then we let:
= 1, Ql =
Why is Q Si -suitable? We shall prove by induction on i that Q\i is
SΊ -suitable.
Note that the use of SSeal guarantees (F) of Definition 2.1, as well as (E)
(see 2.11(3), 2.13(2)). Remembering 2.3(2), it suffices to show by induction on
i that j < i => (Pi/Pj+ι)*Qi is semiproper (actually the only problematic case
is when i is inaccessible limit of supercompacts, but then for arbitrarily large
j < i we have Rss
+ (j) (by 1.10, 1.6(2), 1.6(4)), so in V
Fj , every forcing notion
preserving stationary sets is semiproper, but we check by cases:
For i = 0: trivial.
For i + 1, and i satisfies clause (C) above (in the definition of Q) the result
follows by Claim 2.14.
For i 4- 1, and i satisfies (D) above: first note that \Pj\ < i for j < i,
hence j < i & tj = 1 =» 25 [Pj] 
<£ 03 [Pi], hence by Claim 2.7 we have
Qi = SSeal(B
Pi,Sι) - SSeal((5B
p' : j < i,tj = l),fiΊ). Now for a club
C of i, j E C & j = cf(j) => Qj is semi proper (see the previous case),
so by 1.6(4)4-1.10 we have Ihp. "Rss(«) i.e. Rss(tt2)". Hence by claim 2.10,
SSeal(a5[PK], 5ι) is semiproper in V
p- .
For i + 1, and i satisfying clause (E) above: we shall apply 3.4 with i here
standing for K there. Note that condition (*)(a) (of 3.4) holds for E^ = {S <
i : δ > j, δ strongly inaccessible, not Mahlo, δ > \Pζ\ for ζ < δ, Q§ semiproper}.
Why does the second player win c)({^ι},ω,l^i 4- E^) in the universe V
Fj+l7
By 1.6(6) clearly for j < i,V
pι |= "Rss
+(i)" and use 1.11, (and 1.9A(3), i.e.
XII, 2.5(2)) but this give just winning in D({Nι},α;,ft). However for μ < i,
there is a μ-complete filter on i containing the clubs of i and E^ so winning
the game is easy, and lastly if j < i is strongly inaccessible not Mahlo and
(Vε < j ) ( \ P ε \ < j) then Qj is even proper by 2.11. Condition (*)(b) of 3.4

§3. On P(ωι)/Vωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
653
holds by the definition of case (E): if λ < i is supercompact then Rss
+(λ),Qλ
semiproper by the induction hypothesis (see previous case) so any λ < i which
is supercompact satisfies the requirement on E* .
For i -f 1, and i satisfying clause (F) above: similar to the previous case by
replacing 3.4 by Claim 3.5 (and remember 0.1(5) of the Notation).
Also each Qi is pseudo (*, 53)-complete (by 3.6), hence Pκ is pseudo (*, 53)-
complete so when £3 is stationary,
and in any case lhPκ "2
Kl =κ = ^κ}".
Let *Bi = »[Pi], so t< = 1 =» SB, rSi <S »[P«] ίSi Let
So in V
Pκ (as case (F) occurs stationarily often),
W**
 d= {δ e W* : cf (5) - N! and W* contains a club of δ}
is stationary. Hence it is well known that in V
 Pκ ,
club/ί(VF*) — {h :h an increasing continuous function
from some a -h 1 < K, to W* }
does not add bounded subsets to κ(= ^2)- (More exactly, if CH holds this
is straightforward. If CH fails, this holds if we can find P = (Pa 
: a < «),
Pa £ S<Nl(α), \Pa\ < NI (P G y
p« of course) such that {δ e W** : for some
unbounded C of ί we have that C C W*, otp(C) = α i and α e C ^ C Π α G
U P/?} and this holds (with Pa = (5<Nl (α))
vPα in fact α G C => CΠα € Pα).)
/3<α
So forcing will give us a universe as required. 
Da. 7
3.8 Remarks. The proof of 3.1, 3.7 exemplifies two constructions which we
may interchange. Another variation is 3.9 below.

654 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
3.9 Theorem. Suppose {μ < K : μ supercompact} is unbounded below K, K is
strongly inaccessible, h : K — > H(κ), and (Si, 62, #3) is a partition of ωi, and
Si is stationary. Tften for some forcing notion P:
(i) P satisfies the ft-c.c., is pseudo (*, S^-complete, has cardinality /ς,
does not collapse NI and /ς but collapses every λ G (Nι,ft) and in
V
p«, K = N2, 2
Hl = N2, and 2
H° - NI «=> 53 stationary,
(ii) 25 [P] [Si has a dense subset isomorphic to Levy (No, < N2),
(iii) in V
p , an axiom holds as strong as /ι is a diamond, i.e.
(a) If h is a Laver diamond for x G H(2
χ) then in V
p, Ax[Q is a pseudo
(*> ^3 ) -complete, semiproper*[
5ll (see definition below), Q G ίί(λ)] (see 3.9A
below) and Ax+[Q is pseudo (*,5s)-complete, semiproper*[
5ll,Q £ H(X) and
<B[V
P] <B[(V
p)
g].
(b) When λ = «, then we can weaken the demand on h to: for every
x C K satisfying a Σj-sentence ψ (i.e. (3z C P(κ) such that . . . )) then {i < K :
/i(i) = x π z, (ίf(i), G,x Π i) |= ^} is stationary. T/ien a conclusion similar to
the one in clause (a) holds for Q C H(κ)
where
3.9A Definition. Let A = (Λζ : C < 0» A
1) A forcing notion Q is semiproper*^ if x regular large enough, N 
-<
(ff(χ), G, <* ) is countable, Q G N, A G AT, p G QnAΓ satisfies "(VΞ, C)[Ξ G
TV a pre-dense subset ofAζ&cζζ.NΓ\ξ=ϊNΓ\ωι€ 
\J A]" (if Λζ satisfies
Λ€Ξ
the ^2-c.c. this always holds) then there is q G Q which is ( JV, Q)-semi-
generic and g Ih "if C G ξ Π TV[Gg] and Ξ G N[Gq] is a pre-dense subset of
Λζ, thenN^\ωl £ U{A : A e N[GQ}}" .
2) If ξ = l,Λζ = {A C ωι : A Π (ωl \ 5) G {0,ωι \ 5}}, write *[5] instead
*[,4]. We do not strictly distinguish between 95[y]f5 and {A G 95 [V] :
Proof. We define by induction on a < /ς, P^, Q^, t^ for i < a such that:
(A) Q
a = (Pi,Qj,tj 
: i < α,j < α) is 5ι-suitable, |Pi| < « for i < /ς, and
for α < ft, Q
α G if («) and t» = 1 -ΦΦ (ΐ successor or i strongly inaccessible

§3. On P(ωι)/Vωι Being Layered or the Levy Algebra 
655
& f\ \Pj\ < ϊ), (note that for i limit we are trying to get 23^
ri <£
j<i
not 23 Pί <> 23
P/C). Let ^ be the following P^-name: if j = 0 we let Aj be
trivial, if j > 0 we let it be 23^ = \J BfP/j+i].
£<J
(B) For z non-limit, let κ>i be the first supercompact > |Pi|,
if i = 0, let Qi = Levy(Nι, < «0),
if i > 0, let φ = SSeal({A; : j < i),Sι,Ki).
(C) For i limit < K such that ft(i) is a P^-name of a pseudo (*,S3)-complete
semiproper*^
1], where A
1 = (A, : j < i), remember Λi = 23^.
Let κί+ι < 
K; be such that Λ(i) e fί(«i+ι), κί+ι supercompact and
Qi = Λ(<) * SSeal({^, SΊ, Λ<+I).
(D) For i limit, but (C) does not hold, let Qi = SSe&l((Aj : j < z),SΊ,Ki+ι),
Ki+ι as before.
We can prove by induction on α that Q
a is SΊ-suitable and Qa is
semiproper, and if i < K is successor, then Ihp. "Rss(K2)" If α is limit or-
dinal use 2.3(1) and for α = 0 this should be clear. If α = β + 1, β not limit
by 2.11 we can see that Q
a is Si-suitable, i.e. the first phrase holds. For the
second, clearly by 2.7 we have Qβ = SSeal(25[P/?],Sι, κ/3+ι), and by the in-
duction hypothesis V
PP 
t= "Rss(H2),K2 = Λ/J+I", hence by 2.8(7), lhP/3 "Q^
is semiproper". Moreover in V
Fβ , Q/3 is an iteration (see Definition 2.4(5))
(P?,Qj : z < κ/3+ι, j < fi/3+ι) and for every strongly inaccessible j < κ,β, Q
β
and even P^/P/ are proper by 2.11. So by 1.10 we have lhPα "Rss(^)". For
a. = β 4- 1, /? limit use 4.9 from the next section and 2.11 for the first phrase (if
clause (D) apply then use 2.13), the second is proved as in the previous case.
Remembering strong preservation of pseudo (*,S3)-completeness we have no
problems. 
Da. 9
3.9B Remark. We can wave in the proof some tj — 1, more acurately some
Aζ's and then get stronger forcing axioms.

656 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
§4. T(ωι)/CDωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam
In 4.3 we deal with reflectiveness: if Ai C S C ω\ is stationary for i < N2
then for some W C K2 of cardinality ^2? [w <Ξ W & IH < HO => Π Ai is
iGω
stationary]. Claims 4.1, 4.2 prepare the ground. In 4.4 we deal with the Ulam
property, for this we prove in ZFC a sufficient condition for a filter to satisfy the
Ulam property (see 4.5A - 4.5F, Definition 4.6 and the proof of the consistency
of the Ulam property (i.e. 4.4) in 4.7). The rest of the section deal with the
forcing.
4.1 Claim. Suppose S C ω\ is stationary Q — (Pi,Qj 
: i < α, j < a) is a
semiproper iteration, μ < a (μ — 0 is allowed), and \\-pμ "Rss(N2[F
p^])" (e.g.,
if μ is supercompact, [i < μ => \Pi\ < μ] and {i < μ : Qi is semiproper (i.e.
If" Pi "Qi is semiproper")} belongs to some normal ultrafilter on μ); note that
"~Pμ V — ^2" if μ is strongly inaccessible, |Pj| < μ for i < μ.
Let A be a P^-name for a subset of 5 and B a P^-name for a member of
23 [Pμ] such that:
Then
® z/ λ is regular and large enough, A^ -< (ίί(λ),G,<^) is countable, and
Q, λ, p, A, B and μ belong to JV, p G Pα Π N and ς G Pμ is (TV, Pμ)-
generic, p\μ < q and qUp\[μ, a) \\-pa "NΓ\ωι G J3" (if 5 is a Pμ-name this
means q \\-pμ "NΓ\ωι G -B"), ίften there is a (N, Pα)-semi generic condition
q' G Pα satisfying q'\μ = q such that </ IKPα "TV Π ω\ G A" .
4.1A Remark. (1) If Q is 5-suitable, tμ = 1, and A ^ 0 mod Pωι, A is
a P/3-name for some β < α, then we know that such JB exists as tμ — 1 (by
definition 2.1).
(2) Note, e.g., for 5-suitable Q,ίg(Q) = a = \Jn<ωan,otn < αn+ι,tαn = 1, we
can use Qa = SSea^QS^, 5) and not only SSeal(Q3
Pα, 5) [because in 2.13 we
had demanded "(PQ/Pi+i)* seal (Ξ) is semiproper"].

§4. P(ωι)/(Dωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam 
657
Proof. As we can increase p, without loss of generality p forces B to be equal
to some Pμ-name, so without loss of generality B is a Pμ-name.
Let us fix p, A, B, μ and work in V[Gμ], Gμ C Pμ generic over V such
that q £ Gμ. Let
Wχ
 
d= {N -<(H(X)
yl
GΛ, G, O : AT is countable and TV Π ωι G S[Gμ], but
there is no r G Pa/Gμ such that:
r is (TV, Pα/(7μ)-semi-generic, p\[μ, a) < r and
r\\-Pa/Gμ "NΓ\ωι G ,4"}.
If 1/F\ = 0 mod P<κ1(JT(λ)
v[
pμl), we can easily get the desired result (as
in the proof of 1.11)): let λi be such minimal that 2
λl < λ, and Q G H(\ι).
Clearly also WXl = 0 mod P<Nl(JT(A)
v[
p"]) and let W(τ C 5<Hl(^(λι)
y[
p^
be closed unbound disjoint to it. So if N is as in the assumption of ®, then
necessarily λi G TV hence l/F\i ^ ^
 and w.l.o.g. WXι G -/V. Then clearly
NnH(\ι) G W^, hence NΓ\H(\ι) φ Wλl, hence N φ Wλ, which suffices. So (in
V[(?μ]) the set VF is a stationary subset of «S<«1(f/"(λ)), hence semi-stationary.
As F[Gμ] |= "Rss(N2)" there is u C H(λ) such that α i C u, \u\ < M2 (in V[Gμ})
and VF Π S<^l(u) is semi-stationary; now by 1.2(2) without loss of generality
(u, G, <^ \u) -< (if (λ), G, <£). Let u — Uζ<u;ι ^C' w^n eac'1 uζ countable and
Uζ is increasing and continuous. So
Bi = {( < ωι : (37V G W)(ωl Π uζ C TV C uc)}
is a stationary subset of α i (see 1.2(4)) which belongs to 95[Pμ], and obviously:
(*) 
p \\-pa/o 
"4 Π -Bi is not stationary".
[Why? For C G BI let α i Π uζ C Nζ C uc, NζeW and for ^ < ωι let ^ be the
Skolem Hull in (H(\)
V\
G»\ G, <J) of {C : C < ί}U{p, (uc, A^C :ζeB^ζ< £)},
and
C - ί < α i : 
[GPJ Πωι=ξ and 
[GPJ Π n = uξ}.

658 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
As (Nt[Gpa] 
: ξ < ωι) is increasing continuous, clearly C is a Pα/Gμ-name
of a club of ω\. Now C Π A is necessarily disjoint to BI by the definition of
W: if C < ωι,ς G Pα/Gμ, and q \\-Pa/Gμ "C £ Q Π A Π BI", then 7VC G W is
defined (because C G BI) and qrα is (ΛΓζ,Pα/Gμ)-semi-generic, and qa \\-pa/Gμ
ίίNζΓ\ωl G A\ contradicting "AΓC G W" so (*) holds]. Also
(**) 
Bi C B
by the clause "AT Π ωi G B[Gμ]" in the definition of W.
Of course BI G V
Pμ and as said after the definition of BI , it is stationary
so we get a contradiction to an assumption on A, B.
Π4.ι
4.2 Claim. (1) Suppose Q = (Pi,Qj : i < α, j < α) is a semiproper iteration,
(μ^ : C < ξ) an increasing sequence of strongly inaccessible cardinals < α,
Λς<ξ [(Vt < μζ)(|Pi| < μc) and \\-Pμ( "Rss(μζ)"] and
(*) every countable set of ordinals from V
Pa is included in a countable set of
ordinals from V.
Suppose further that B is a Pμo-name of a subset of ω\, Aζ is a Pμς+1-name
of a subset of ω\ (if ζ + 1 = ξ we stipulate μ^+ι — α) and p G P satisfies:
pfμo "~pμo "B is stationary",
p\μζ+ι I^Pμζ+1 " for every X G 23[PMc] \ {0}, if X C B ί/ien Ac Π X is
stationary ".
Then p \\-pa "the intersection of any countable subset of {Aζ : ζ < ξ} is
stationary".
(2) In 4.2(1) we can replace the assumption (*) by:
(*)~ if δ G (μo,α) is strongly inaccessible and [i < δ => |P;| < ί], ίften
lhPa «cf(ί)> V-
Proof. 1) Let -w; be a Pα-name for a countable subset of ξ. So without loss
of generality w = w and let w = {ζ(n) 
: n < ω}. Let Y be the closure of
{μζ : ζ < ξ}U{θί} (in the order topology on the ordinals). If the conclusion of 4.2

§4. P(ωι)/(T>ωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam 
659
fails then (as we can increase p) without loss of generality p lhpα "Γ\n<ω ^c(n)
is disjoint to C where C is a club of ω\\
We now prove by induction on j G Y:
®j if μo < * < Jj both in y, λ regular and large enough, TV -< (-ff(λ), G, <J)
countable, C G TV, £ G TV, (μc,Ac : ζ < ξ) G N and {i, j, Q} G AT,
p < p' £ N Γ\ Pa and g G P$ is (A/", P$)-semi-generic, p'fi < q, and
<? Ihpj 
"TVίΊu i G J3 and forn < ω we have [μ^(n) < i => NΠωi G 4c(n)]">
then there is #' G P/, (AT, P/)-semi-generic, p'fj < q',q'\i — Q. and ^ Ihp.
"TV Π ωi G B and for n < ω we have [μ^(n> < 3 => ^ Π ωi G ^c(n)]"
Clearly this is enough (apply it with p' = p, i = μ0> j = &, and there are TV, q
as required and B is a Pμo-name of a stationary subset of C α i).
Case 1. j = μo. Trivial.
Case 2. j is an accumulation point of Y (hence is of countable cofinality).
As in the proof of the iteration lemma for semiproperness.
Case 3. j = μ^+i.
Apply the previous claim 4.1 (for Q\μζ+ι and μζ).
2) The proof is similar but w is Pα-name of a countable subset of C, and for
j G [μo,α] the statement ®j is now for every w which is a P^-name (not Pα-
name) of a countable subset of {ζ : μζ < j}. So proving it we increase pf[z, j]
also for this purpose and i G [μo >.?')• Cases 1, 3 remain as before. Note that we
can replace w by a larger set
Case 2A. j > sup[j Π {μc : C < ξ}]
Trivial
Case 25. j = sup[j Π {μc : C < ξ}].
W.l.o.g. p force a value to supu> Π {μ^ : ζ < ξ}, call it ξ*.
Subcase α. ξ* < j: the proof is as in case 2A, as increasing w w.l.o.g. it is
P£*+ι-name.
Subcase β. ξ* = j: for some iι < j, p\i\ l/p^ "cf(j) = j" is easy too.
W.l.o.g. iι < i (by the induction hypothesis), p\iι Ih "cf(j) < j". So in V
Pi we
know cf(j), and it is KQ or NI. Now MI is impossible (as ξ* = j) and if it is H0
act as in the old case 2.
But by (*)~ of 4.2(2), one of the subcases occurs. 
D4.2

660 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
4.3 Theorem. Suppose {μ < ft : μ supercompact } is a stationary subset of
ft, (Si, 52,£3} is a partition of ω\ with each Si stationary. Let h : ft —> H(χ)
and assume {μ < ft : μ supercompact, Λ(μ) = 0} is stationary. Then for some
forcing notion P:
(i) P = Pκ (= RLΊmQ for some 5ι-suitable Q) is 53-complete, or at least
Ss-proper and satisfies the ft-c.c.
(ii) In V
Pκ, from any ^2 stationary subsets of S\ C ω\, there are ^2 of them
such that the intersection of any countably many of them is stationary
(and *B
Pκ is layered, of course). We then call 93[V
pfC] reflective,
(iii) A forcing axiom as strong as h holds (see the proof and 3.9).
4.3A Remark. 1) We really use a weaker assumption
(a) {μ < ft : μ measurable} is stationary;
(b) {μ < ft: for χ < ft,μ is χ-compact} is unbounded; use 1.6(2), 1.6(3),
1.10(1). See more in XVI§2.
2) The situation is similar in 4.4, where we get better bound (i.e. using smaller
large cardinals) for a stronger result (but lose in forcing axiom.)
3) We can demand only "Si is stationary" etc. if we use 4.1(2) instead of
4.1(1), but then we should satisfy (*)" of 4.1(2).
Proof. We define by induction on α < ft the iteration Q
a — (P^Q^tj : i <
a,j < a) such that:
(A) Q
a is Si-suitable.
(B) Each Qi is S3-proper.
(C) Q
α, Pa G H(κ) when α < ft.
(D) If h(i) — (t, JR), i measurable, t a truth value, R a P^-name and t =
1 => B[Pi]ΓSι <o <&[Pi * JR]ϊSι] and [j < i & tά = 1 =» &[Pj]\Sι 
<o
03[Pi * R]\Sι\ and (P^/Pj+i) * R is semiproper and Ss-proper for j < i
then ti = t,Qi = R* SSeal ((95[Pj] : j < i,tj = 1)).
(E) If not (D), i is inaccessible, \Pj\ < i for j < i, h(ϊ) = 0, and lhP. "Rss(^2),"
then ti = 1 and Q^ - SSeal((Q5[Pj] :j<i, tj = 1), S).

§4. P(ωι)/(T>ωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam 
661
(F) If neither (D) nor (E) then t^ = 0, and
We can carry out the construction and prove by induction on a that Q
α
is Si-suitable.
α = 0. Trivial.
a limit. By Claim 2.3(1).
a = β + 1, (F) applies to β. By 2.14(1).
a = β + 1, (D) applies to β. By Claim 2.11.
a = β + 1, (E) applied to β. By 2.16 note:
(*) if i G B = {i : i inaccessible, j < z => |P, | < z} then: if for i clause (E)
or clause (F) occur then Qi is semiproper. [Why? If Ihp. "Rss^)"
by 1.7(5), otherwise clause (F) applies, t; = 0 and we can use 2.11.]
But clause (D) does not apply to i non-measurable so
(**) for i non measurable \\-pi "Qi is semiproper".
Now suppose p G Pκ, (Ai : i < K) a P^-name and p Ih "Ai C Si is stationary".
Let Y = {μ < K : μ strongly inaccessible, /\i<μ |P»| < μ and Ihp. "Rss(K2)"
and tμ = 1}. Note that in V
Pκ, Y C {δ < K : cf
v[Pκ](δ) 
= NI} is stationary
because if μ < K is measurable, limit of super compacts, Λj<μ \Pj\ < P>
 and D
is a normal filter on μ, concentrating on non-measurable so Xμ = {i < μ : i
inaccessible, not measurable, Λj<J^Ί < μ} £ D. We use 1.10(1) (noting
Rss
+(μ) holds, by 1.6(6)) to get μ G Y. Now for each μ G Y choose pμ G Pκ
and a Pμ-name ^μ such that:
P<Pμ,
pμ\μ\\- "BμCSι is stationary, 5M G 33 [Pμ]",
Pμ ll~pκ "fo
r every nonzero X G 2J[Pμ],
if X < Bμ then X Π Aμ is stationary" .
Why does such a pμ exist? As 25 [Pμ] <S 35 [PΛ] (and see 0.1(4)(b)). Remember
that Pμ satisfies μ-c.c. so Bμ G H(χμ) for some χμ < μ and without loss

662 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
of generality B is a PXμ-name and tXμ = 1 (i.e. by increasing χμ; also, Y is
stationary by a hypothesis).
By Fodor's lemma, for some stationary Ύ\ C y, there are p and B such
that for μ G y"ι : pμ [μ = p, and Bμ = B.
As each Aζ is a P\-name for some λ > ζ, λ G y, without loss of generality
[//i < μ2 in YI =» Aμι is a Pμa-name]. Now, for μ e YΊ let A'μ be Aμ if
Pμ £ Gpκ and 5 otherwise.
Note that y"ι £ V and every countable subset of YI is contained in a
countable set from V [Why? Remembering 83 is stationary, by 5s-properness.]
Now we apply the previous Claim 4.2 to JB, (A'μ : μ € YI). 
Π^
4.4. Theorem. Suppose K = sup{λ < K : λ a compact cardinal} and
(SΊj £2? £3) is a partition of ωi to stationary sets. T/ien for some forcing notion
PeV:
(i) yp is a model of: ZFC + 2*° = NI + 2
Nl = N2,
(ii) in F
p, the statement Ulam(Pα;ι -f SΊ) holds, where, for a uniform filter
D on λ, Ulam(J9) means: there are many λ λ-complete filters extending
D, such that every D-positive set belongs to at least one of them (A is
^-positive if A C λ, and (X\A)$D).
Remark. So in V
p', Ulam's problem has a positive solution: there are NI mea-
sures on [0, I]E, each countably additive, such that every A C [0, I]R is measur-
able with respect to at least one of them.
Proof. Before we do the forcing, we work out some combinatorics, which will
tell us what will suffice.
4.5A. Context and Notation.
(l)λ = λ
< λisa fixed regular uncountable cardinal.
(2) W denotes a fixed class of ordinals (in the actual case W C λ
+), 0 G W,
for every i, i + I G W, and
Ho < cf (i) <\^iφW.

§4. P(ωι)/(Vωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam 
663
(3) B will denote a Boolean algebra.
(4) For a Boolean Algebra B, let B+ = B \ {0}.
(5) Pr(αι, 02,^1,^2) means: Bι,B2 are Boolean algebras, BI C £?2, αi G
Bf, α2 G £3", and (Vx)[x G Bj
1" & x < αi -» x Π α2 ^ 0].
(6) If the identity of #2 is clear (when dealing with one Boolean Algebra and
its subalgebras) we just write
4.5B. Observation.
(a) Pr(l,x,Bi,B 2)forxeBi,|J3i| = 2;
(b) if Ba C Bb C 5, x 6 £+, yeB+,zeB and Pτ(x,y,Ba}, Pr(y,z,B6)
then Pr(x, z, jBα);
(c) if Pr(x,y,Bi,B 2),0<x'<x,x' εBι,y<y' eB2 ίΛen Pr(x',y',Si) and
Pr(x',ynx,5i).
4.5C. Notation and Definition.
(1) We call 5 1-o.k. (for W) if j§ = (B^ : i < α) is an increasing continuous
sequence, each ^ a Boolean Algebra of cardinality < λ, [i, j G a Π PF and
i < j =ϊ Bi 
<$ JB^ ,] and [i G W Π α =>> Bi is λ-complete] .
(2) We call w C W Π α closed (subset of W Π α) if
(i) for every accumulation point δ < a. of the closure of w (that is
δ = sup(w Π δ) & 5 < α) we have
(ii) for every δ < a we have: Min(w) <(ί + l ) E w & ; N o < cf(J) < λ =>
δ — sup(JΠtί ),
(iii) if Min(n ) < βeW, β + lew then βew.
(3) Let CSb(α) = {w : w a closed subset of W Π a of power < λ},
CSbn(o;) = {w G CSb(α) : w unbounded below α}.
(Clearly CSbu(α) ± 0 => ^0 < cf(α) < λ).
(4) For tϋ G CSb(α) and B = (Bi : i < β) which is 1-o.k. such that /3 > α, let
(i) Seq^(B) = {(α* : i G w) : α» G 5+,^ is decreasing;

664 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
if i G w, i — 5 + 1, δ limit of course, S φ W,i > Min(κ ) then
&i — \ \j£wni
aj'>
ifiζw, i> Min(iϋ), cf(i) > λ, then α^ = α^ G Bj for some j G i Π w\
and if i < j are in w(C W) then Pr(α^, α^, S^, Sj)}
(ii) Let Seq(£) =
f (JίSeqJB) : for some α (< ^g(S)), α - ^g(B) or α
is successor of a member of W, we have ΊU G CSb(α)}.
Let SeqjS)
 d= (JίSeqJB) : w G CSbu(^g(S))}.
It is naturally ordered by α
1 < α
2 if letting of- — (αf : i G Wf) then
tt;
1 C w
2 and [( G w
1 =Φ αi > α?].
(iii) Wien α - 5 + 1 < £g(5), ty G CSb(δ) let
d 
, : (α, : i G ™) G
: ti; G
If ig(B] = δ + 2, we may omit 5.
(5) We call S 2-o.k. if for every limit δ < ίg(B), 0 φ Z
δ(B) and B is 1-o.k.
(6) We call B 3-o.k. if it is 2-o.k. and for limit δ < ίg(B] of cofinality < λ we
have: Z
δ(B) is a dense subset of B$+I.
(7) If B is not continuous, we identify it with the obvious correction for the
purpose of our definitions.
(8) We call T C Sequ(j§) dense if for every α G Seqn(5) for some α' G T we
have α < a'. We say T' refines T if (Vα G T)(3α' G T
7) [α < α']. We say
T C Sequ(B) is open if α < a! (in Seqn(B)), α G T implies α' G T.
4.5D. Fact. Suppose B is 2-o.k., B = (Bi : i < δ + 1), H0 < cf (ί) < λ. Then:
(0) (i) CSbu(£) ^ 0, moreover for every α < δ + 1 and υ C a of cardinality
< λ we have:
HO < cf(α) < λ => there is lί; G CSbu(α) such that υ C w and
cf(α) > λ => there is w G CSb(α), such that υ C w and
α = ΐ - f l & ΐ G Ϋ F = > there is it; G CSb(α) such that v Cw and i G u>.
(ii) If we CSbu(δ),a < δ, then w\ae CSbu(<5); similarly for CSb(α).

§4. P(ωι)/(T>ωι 4 S) is Reflective or Ulam 
665
(iii) If a < δ and w G CSbn(α) and a = ε 4 1 and N0 < cf(ε) < λ then
wU{a}e CSb(J).
(iv) If w G CSbw(ί), α G w then there is β G w \ a such that β £ {ε + 1 :
NO < cf (ε) < λ}; in fact β = min(u> \ (a 4 1)) is as required.
(v) If we 
CSb(α) and β < α, then w Π β G CSb(/J).
(1) If w G CSb(ί H-1) then ZW(B) includes BMin(tι;), hence: N0 < cf(5) < λ =>
D 
f— ^7^ f D\
IJ X \ 
Xy 
I f> I .
(2) 
(i) If wι, W2 G CSb(ί) and Min(u^) < Min(iί;3_^) =Φ Min(κ;3_^) G ι/j£
thenwi U w2 G CSb(δ).
(ii) Similarly for CSbw(£).
(3) 
(i) If wι C iί;2 are both in CSb(α),min(iί;ι) = min(iί;2), (α^ : i G Wι) G
Seq Wl (5) then (a,i :i e w%) G Seq^.2 (B) provided that for i G w2\wι
we define a$ = a max(iπυ;ι) which is well defined,
(ii) If α < sup(w), and w G CSb(5), and (α^ : i G ιw) G Seq ^(B) ίften
(αi : i G ιy \ α) G Seq^\a(5) and (α^ : i G ιy Π α) G Seqυ;nQ:(J§).
(iii) If wι C W2 are both in CSb(δ) and (α^ : i G 1^2} € Seq^2(J) and
(di : i G Wι) G SeqWl(5).
(iv) If β < 5, /? is a successor of a limit ordinal, n; G CSbu(β — 1),
Min(ιy) < /? < ε + 1, wι = w U {β} and (α^ : i G w) G ZW(B)
then we can find α/3 such that (α^ : z G Wι) G ZWl(B).
(4) If tϋi C iί;2 are both in CSbw(5) and min(iϋι) = min^) then ZWl(B) C
(5) If (α^ : i G u>ι), (6^ : j G w2) are in Seq^^B), Seq^2(B) respectively, and
(Vi G wι)(Ξ3j G 1^2)^-1 < frj then Γliewi
 ai — Γ\j^W2 ^'
(6) If (di 
: i e w) e 
Seqw(B),Q < b < amin(w} and 6 G Bmin(w} then
(7) ΊfB = (Biii <a) is Z-o.k. (I = 1,2,3), ^ < α (for i < i(*)) is strictly
increasing continuous and [i G VF Φ> 7^ G W] and [N0 < cf(i) < λ ^>
^ΐ+1 — ^ 4-1] ίften (BΊi : i < i(*)) is /-o.k.
(8) Assume B = (B» : i < a) is 1-o.k.
(i) if β < 7 < a, β G W, 7 G W, b G J57 ίften for at most one a we have:

666 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
(*) α G Bβ and BΊ |= "o > 6" and Pr(α, 6, B/j, B7),
(ii) if α^ G Seq^£(B) for ί = 1, 2, tfien {/?:/? G iϋι Π iί;2 and a
l
β = α^} is
an initial segment of wι Π w<2.
(9) Assume B - (B; : i < α) is 3-o.k., [δ < α&cf(ί) >X^δeW}.
(i) If u € CSb(/3), /? < a + 1 is a successor of a member of W, and 761;
and d G B7 ίΛen the set Γ = Γαjυ)7)d = {α G Seq (B) : υ C Dom(α)
and [α7 Π d — 0 or aΊ < d\} is a dense and open subset of Seq (B).
(ii) If NO < cf(α) < λ, v G CSbu(α), 7 G υ and d e BΊ then the set
Γ = Γα = {α G Seqn(B) : v C Dom(α) and [α7 Π d = 0 or α7 < d}} is
a dense open subset of Seq(B).
(iii) If β < α, d G B/? \ {0} and v C /3 -f 1, |f| < λ ί/ien there is tί; satisfying
υ C w G CSb(/3 + 1), βew and α G Seq^(B) such that aβ < cί.
Proof. Easy, e.g.,
0)(i) We prove it by induction on α. For a non- limit the result is trivial so
assume α is a limit. So for every j < α there is Wj such that: υ Π j C w^
and [No < cf(j) < λ => Wj G CSbuO')l and [cf(j) £ [N0,λ) =Φ [cf(j) >
λ V (Ξi)(j = i + l&i € W) => tϋj e CSb(j)]]. Let (je : ε < cf(α)> be an
increasing continuous sequence of ordinals < a with limit α. If cf (α) = N0 then
w.l.o.g. jn + 2 G v for n < cj and then w = U{^n+ι+3\(jnH-3) : n < cc;}
is as required (remember i + 1 G W for any ordinal i by 4.5A(2)). If cf (α) > λ
then for some j < α, we have v C j and we can use the induction hypothesis.
If cf (α) > NO but still it is < λ, without loss of generality each jε is a limit
ordinal with cofinality < cf(α) < λ. Let w = { jε -i- 1 : ε < cf(α)} U Uε<cf(Q!)
(wjε+l+z \ (jε + 3)) U Wj0+z and note that it belongs to CSbn(α) and includes
υ, as required.
(0)(iv) See the last phrase of 4.50(2).
(1) For the first phrase note that for α G Bmin(iϋ)> ba — (a : i G w) G Seqw(B)
(see Definition 4.50(4) (i), (iii)).
The second phrase follows by the definition of Z
δ(B) and 4.5D(0)(i).
(3)(i) Why is max(i Π wι) well defined?
First note: i Π w\ ^ 0 as i φ w\ implies i ^ min(tί ι), but min(tt ι) — min(κ;2)

§4. P(ωι)/(Dωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam 
667
so i > min(wι) hence min(κ ι) G i Π w\.
Second note: \fiΓ\wι has no last element, let β = sup(z Π wι), so β < i and
NO < cf(β) <\wι\< λ, hence β φ W, so β φ w2 and β < i. Also β +1 G MI (as
wi is closed and β < i < a so β + 1 < ί), so /? -f 1 cannot be in z Π MI, hence
i — /? -f 1 G u>ι, contradicting the assumption on i (i.e. z G w2 \ u>i).
(3)(iv) Note that, as w G CSbu(/J - 1), necessarily cf(β - 1) < λ. Also
wι G CSb(δ + 2), so ZW(B) is well defined. Also α/j = Πze u;
 α^ is we^ defined
as Bβ is λ-complete, and \w\ < X as w GC CSbu(/?) C CSb(β) (see Definition
4.5C(3)). As B is 2-o.k. (see Definition 4.5C(5)), QBδ+1 Φ Z
δ(B), but clearly
ap G ZW(B) C Z
(3(B) hence α/j 7^ Oβ^+i The order requirements for (a» : i G
u>ι) G Seq^ί-B) are easy too.
(4) Use (3)(i).
(6) Let for i G w, Q = α^ Π 6 and /? = min(iί ). So
(i) Ci = aiΓ}beBi [as o< e Bi,b e Bβ C J5<];
(ii) for z < j from it;, c^ < Ci [as α^- < αί? clearly α^ Π 6 < a» Π 6];
(iii) for i < j' from w, PΓ(Q,CJ , Si).
[Why? Let 0 < d < Q, d G B< then 0 < d < a<, d G 5, hence (by
Pr(a^, dj,Bi)) d Γ i d j ^0 and cf < Q = α^ Π b < b so d Π 6 = d, hence
dΓ\Cj = d Π (07 Π 6) = (d Π 6) Π dj = d Π CLj
so d Π Cj ^ 0 as required.]
The other conditions are easy too.
So(c, : J G ^ ) G Seqw(B).
(9) We prove this by induction on α ((i), (ii) and (iii) together). In parts
(i) and (ii), Γ being open is immediate, so let us prove density. So assume
c = (^ : i G v0) belongs to Seq(B) (for 9(i)) or Sequ(B) (for 9(ii)), υ C α,
7 G υ, d G 57 as there and we shall find 6, c < 6 G Γ (see end of 4.5C(4)(ii)).
In the cases below for 9(iii) only the assumption on α is relevant.
Case 1: a = 0
Trivial.

668 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Case 2: a = ε + I, ε G W.
For 9(iii) note that by the induction hypothesis we have to prove only the
case β = α — ε + 1 and d G Bβ = Ba is given. Let d\ G S^ be such that
Pτι(dι,d, Bε,Ba). By the induction hypothesis we can find wi G CSb(ε + 1),
such that ε G u>ι, and α G Seq^B) such that αe < dι.
Let it; = Wi U {α}, αα = α^ Π d G £?+ (not zero as a,β < d\ and the choice of
dι). So (di : z G w) G Seq^(S) is as required.
Now as α is a successor only 9(i) is left, by the induction hypothesis
β = a + 1 and by the assumptions of 9(i), β is a successor of a member of W
so α G W hence VQ has a last element. Let d^ be: c max(υo) Π d if not zero and
c maχ(υo) otherwise and as we have proved 9(iii), there is (α^ : i G w) G Seqw(B)
satisfying w G CSb(α + 1) such that: VQ U υ U {ε,α} C w, and αα < ofo- So
α<* < d or αα Π d = 0; by 4.5D(8)(ii) we are done.
Case 3: a = ε + 1, ε £W (so only 9(i)4-(in) apply and ε is a limit ordinal) (as
βtW, cf(ε) < λ).
For 9(i) as in case 2 it follows from 9(iii), so let us prove 9(iii), by the induction
hypothesis w.l.o.g. β = a. As B is 3-o.k. by Definition 4.5C(6) there are
WQ G CSbu(ε) and (6? : ί G WQ) G Seq^0(5) such that Γ\iew0
 b°i is not zero
and is do < d.
By the induction hypothesis we can apply 4.5D(9)(ii) to ε, CSbu(ε),
(tf 
: i G WQ) and so we can find (6^ : i G wι) such that (6j : i G tί o) <
(bi : i £ wι) G Seq(Bfα) and υ C w\. As β is 2-o.k., ba = Γ\ieWl ^
 G ^α is
not zero. Let w = Wι U {α}, so w G CSb(α + 1) and (6» : i G υ;} G Seqn(5) is
as required.
: a is a limit ordinal, cf(α) > λ (so α G W by an assumption of 4.5D(9)).
As Ba = \Jβ<a Bβ and the third requirement in the definition of ά G Seq (see
4.5C(4)(i)) it is easy.
Case 5: a is a limit ordinal, cf (α) < λ.
So 9(i), 9(iii) does not apply. First as for 9(ii) we can assume υ \min(τ;o) = VQ.

§4. P(ωι)/(Vωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam 
669
[Why? By 4.5D(0)(i) w.l.o.g. 0 G v & VQ C v. But sup(voUf) > sup(^o) = OL, so
v = VQ\JV G CSbu(α), and lastly apply 4.5D(3)(i) to replace VQ by v\rnin(v0).]
Second we are given 7 G v, d G £7 (so, as we can increase 7 w.l.o.g. 7 G t>o)
Now v0 Π (7 4-1) G CSb(7 + 1) and so (a : i G VQ Π (/? + 1)} G Seq (5), and by
the induction hypothesis (on 9(i)) we can find (&9 : i G w0) G Seq(Sf(/? 4-1))
such that (c< :ieυ0n(β + 1)) < (6? : i G w0) and 6^ < d V 6^ Π d = 0. Define
W = WQ U ^o,
i 
ifi<β 
(so z G WQ)]
^Γ\Ci ifi>β (so i G VQ).
Now (bi : ί £ w) is as required. 
Π4.5D
4.5E. Claim. If B = (B» : i < λ+) is 3-o.k. and [i < λ+ & cf (i) > λ =» i G W]
then B^+ is the union of λ many λ-complete filters.
Proof. Note that by 4.5D(9) we have:
(*) for every α G W and x G B£ for some w G CSb(α + 1) and (α^ : i G
w) G Seqυ;({JB^ : f < α 4-1}) we have 0 < f]iew α* < x, 0 G w, and w is closed
and has a last element α.
Now remember that Seq (B) = \J{Seq((Bi 
: i < a)) 
: 
α < λ
+ is a
successor of a member of W}.
It is well known that there is H 
: {w C λ
+ : \w\ < λ} —> λ such
that: H(w) — H(u),a G w Π u implies α Π w = α Π u; also jH"(w) = -ff(u)
implies that w,u have the same order type (let fa 
: a —> λ be one to one,
H°(w) = {(otp(wΓ\a),otp(wΓ\β),fβ(a)) 
: a < β inw}. Now #° is as required
except that Rang(#°) ^ λ, but |Rang(#°)| = λ, so we can correct this).
Let Fi be a one-to-one function from Bi+\ into λ. We say (α^ : i G MI), (α? :
i G ^2) G Seq(B) (hence wi, tϋ2 have last element) are equivalent if.
(a) jff(wι) - H(w2) and
(b) i/αi G wι and 0:2 G ^2, and tϋi Π QI, ^2 Π #2 have the same order
type and ΌL\ — 71 + 1, 0:2 = 72 + 1,

670 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
Now the number of equivalence classes is < λ
<Λ = λ. So it is enough
to show that if (a^ 
: i G Wζ) G Seq (B) are equivalent for ζ < £(*) <
λ, 0 G Wζ, max(wc) G Wζ, then Πc<C(*)
 αCmaχ(™c) ^ ° (see (*))- Note tnat if
α G K;^ Π Wζ2 , then α^,
1 = α£
2 .
Toward this end we prove by induction on α G W :
(*) (1) Xα =f f\<C(*)
 αCmax(™ζn(α+l)) iδ nθt ZeΓO (and belongs tθ Bα);
(2) if 7 < α (and 7 G W) then Pr(x7, xα, Bβ)]
(3) if 7 <α is a limit ordinal then:
(a) cf (7) < λ =Φ xΊ+ι = Γ]{xε : ε G 7 Π W},
(b) cf (7) > λ => XΊ = xε for every large enough ε < 7.
Clearly xa is decreasing (as α£ is decreasing in α for each ζ) and well defined
as max(tί;ζ ΓΊ (α + 1)) belongs to wς when a eW (remembering 0 G Wζ).
Case 1. a. — 0
Then m3x(wζ Π (α + 1)) = 0 and α£ = αg G 5^ for every £ < £(*). So
(*)(!) holds and (*)(2), (3) do not apply.
Case 2.a = β + I,βζW
Note that if (C < C(*) and) a = β + I φ wζ then α
C
max(w;cn(α+1)) -
αc
" max(υ;ςn(/3+l))
So if a φ Wζ for every ζ < £(*) then xα = x/5, so (*)(!) holds. As for
(*)(2): for 7 < β use the induction hypothesis; for 7 = β this is easy. Similarly
for (*)(3).
If for some ζ < ζ(*) we have a G u^, let v = {ζ < £(*) : α G Wζ}
So xa = Γ\ζ£v α
C
max(υ;ζn(/3+1)) Π nc€υ α^. By the definition of the equivalence
relation and the F^'s, for some α we have [ζ G v => α£ = α —
 α^maχ(ιu n(/3-fi))l
and [C, ξ G v =ϊ Wζ Π (α + 1) = Wξ Π (α 4- 1)]. Clearly
= Π ^
Π Π flα
C<C(*)
x/3 Π α.

§4. P(ωι)/(T>ωι + 5) is Reflective or Ulam 
671
Now as β G W, Bβ is λ-complete, hence Xβ G Bβ. Now α G Ba and let
C(0) = min(t ), 7(0) = max(^(0) Π (/? + !)), the maximum exists as said above.
Clearly 7(0) - β (see 4.50(2)(iϋ)), α < α^j and Pr(α^J,α,^) by the last
clause in the definition of (α^
0) : i G Wζ(o)) G Seqw 
(B) (see 4.5D(4)(i)). As
Xβ G Bβ, and easily αj^ > Xβ > 0, clearly Xβ Π α / 0. So (*)(!) holds. As for
(*)(2), by 4.5B(b) as there is a maximal 7 G w Π α, i.e. /? = 7(0) (see above) it
is enough to prove (*)(2) for 7 = β = 7(0). So let d G Bβ, 0 < d < Xβ. Then
d <
 α7(θ)' hence by Pr(a^/Qv,o, Bβ),aΓϊd ^ 0, but a Π d = dΓ\Xβ Πa = dΠx a,
so we are done. Lastly (*)(3) holds by the induction hypothesis.
By an assumption of 4.5E, K0 < cf(/3) < λ so by 4.5D(0)(i) there is
w G CSbu(/J) such that ζ < £(*) => lϋζ C ti; and i G tϋ&cf(i) = λ =>
• Π i) < j < i & j G w). Note that
£ 
= O ^
max(tί;ζΠ(Q:-{-l)) 
| | 
max(u;^n(7-f 1))'
[Why? If a φ Wζ, as (c£max,w 0(7+1)) : 7 < /^} is nonincreasing and eventually
constant (because { max(tϋζ Π (7 4- 1)) : 7 < β) is eventually constant), it is
equal to
max(u;ςn(c*+l)) = [ ]
 tt
Ί<β
If a G Wζ, as (α^ : 7 G Wζ) G Seq(β) (see in Definition 4.5C(4)(i) the second
clause in the definition of α^ G Seq (£?)).] Now:
max(tt;cn(α+l)) = 
[ ] 
[ | fl
C<C(*) 
C<C(*)τ</?
= I I ( I I
 tt max(υ;cn(7+l))) = [ |
 X/V
C<C(*)
So (*)(3) holds (as 7 — /? is the only new case). Also it can be checked
that (xε : ε G w) G Seqw(B) (in Definition 4.50(4) (i), the first clause by the
definition of xa and (*)(!), the second clause (xe decreasing) is shown above,
the third clause (continuity) by (*)(3), the fourth clause by the choice of w and

672 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
the definition of xε, the fifth clause by (*)(2)). As B is 2-o.k. (see 4.5C (5)) (as
(*)(2) holds below β) we get that xa = Π{
χε : ε G u ΓΊ β} ^ 0. Similarly, using
4.5D(6), we can check (*)(2).
Case 4- OL limit
As a G W, necessarily cf(α) = λ. But then, by the definition of Seq^(j5), if
a G Wζ though necessarily max(wζ Π (α +1)) ^ m&x.(wζ Π (7 -f 1)) for 7 < α,
still for 7 < α large enough α£ - α
C
max(w;cn(7+i))> hence αCmax(™ζn(α+i)) =
Π7</3α
C
max(™ζn(7+i)) for every larβe enough β < a. If a φ wζ this holds on
simpler grounds. But £(*) < λ = cf(α). So xa = XΊ for every large enough
7 < α, and we can finish easily. 
Π4.5E
4.5F Remark. The proof is written such that it will be easy to change it
for B = (Bi : i < 7), 7 < (2
λ)+, so \Bi\ = \i\ 4- λ, βί+ι is generated by
Bi U B'i, \B(\ — λ, B( is λ-complete and in the definition of Seqw(B) add: if
i = β + l,β G w then (3x G J5^)[αi = α/jΠz].
Just use fί : {α : α C 2
λ, |α| < λ} -> λ such that H(ά) = H(b) & α G
α Π 6 => otp (α Π α) = otp(6 Π α) which exists by Engelking and Karlowic [EK].
But it is not clear whether there is interest in this.
4.6 Definition. 1) We say Q = (Pi,Qj,tj,Ai 
: i < α,j < a) is an 5-o.k.
sequence for W (where S = (SΊ, 52, 5a), a partition of α i) if:
(A) Q is a 5ι-suitable iteration (forgetting the Λ^s).
(B) Each Qi is 5s-complete.
(C) Λi is a P^-name of a subalgebra (or just subset) of 25
Pi.
(D) Λi is increasing continuous.
(E) tj G {0,1} and: if t^ - 1, then lhP. "A <$ Q3
Pί ΓSΊ".
(F) ti = 1 for every successor ordinal i.
(G) Ihp. "(Aj :j<ije W) is 3-o.k. for W" where on If see clause (H)
below and λ from 4.5A(1) is chosen as HI (see below and 4.5C(1), (5),
(6))

§4. P(ωι)/(τ>ωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam 
673
(H) If i is successor or zero then i G W. If, in V
Pi+
l, i is a limit of cofinality
NO then i φ W. Also "i G W" is a P +i-name and ΐf C a.
(I) lhpί+1 "Rss(N2)".
(J) If i is neither a limit nor a successor of a limit ordinal, then A* =
B
p'rsι.
2) If W is not given we mean {i < a : if i is limit then (in V
Pί+l) cf(α) > KI}.
4.6A Remark. Note that W determines (tα : a < K) in Definition 4.6, so we
could in 4.7 below forget it.
4.7 Proof of 4.4. Let h : K -> ff(/ς). We define Q
a = (Pi,Qj,tj,Ai 
' i < <*J <
a) by induction on α < K such that in stage α, the objects Q j ( j < α), Pj(j < α),
tj (j + 1 < OL + 1) and Λj(j < a) (and the truth value of "j G W" is as in
4.6(2)) have already been defined and for successor z, 23
Pί <> -4i-|_ι and:
(A) Q
a is 5-o.k. (and increases with α).
(B) Q
α G H(κ) for α < «.
(C) If a is non-limit, let ttα+i be the first compact cardinal > |Pα|, and
Qa = SSeal(23
Pθί,5ι,/ία_(-ι) if α is successor and Levy(Nι,< /^α+i) if &
is zero and Aa+ι = 95
Pot+
1 fSΊ (and .40 the trivial algebra). Lastly of
course tα+ι = 1 and "α G W" is true also t0 = 0 and "0 G W
n.
(D) If a is a limit ordinal, h(ά) = {t, Q, .4), Q a P^-name of a forcing notion, .4
a Pα * Q-name, and for some R G H(κ) we have lhpi "Q <$ Λ" and by the
following choices for Q""
1"
1 we get a 5-o.k., then so we choose Q
0^
1; where
the choices are: tα = t, Qa = R, and >tα = 95
5rα f5i, Pα+ι = Pa*R and
.4α+ι = 95[Pα+ι]. If possible we choose R = Q.
(E) If clauses (C), (D) do not produce a definition of Q
a^
1^ let κa+ι be the
first compact cardinal > \Pa , and then:

674 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
first case if in V
Pa , cf (α) > NO then
Λa
 ά^ aS^rSi i e. Λa
 d^ U »^« ΓSi - (J
Qa = SSeal((^ : j < a), S1,κa+1) =
= SSeal«<B
p^ : j < a) " (A
p"),Sι,κa+1)
tα — tα+ι = 1
second case if in F
Po: , cf (α) = N0 (i.e. α ^ W) ί/ien
(in y
p«) let ^α+1 be Z
α - Z
a((Λj 
: j < α)
Λ(»
p«r5ι)) (a subset of
95
 Pα fSi, see Definition 2.4(2)) and Aa+ι be the subalgebra of <8
Pα+1 f5ι which
•ί^ά+i generates. We let
Qa =
- 0, tβ+ι - 1.
//we succeed to carry the induction, then letting G C Pκ be generic over V we
know:
(a) Nj_ ^ = #Y and (Si, 3%, 83) is a partition of α i to stationary subsets (as
Pκ is semiproper by clause (A) of Definition 4.6).
(b) N2 
^ — K (similarly, noting that Pκ satisfies the «-c.c.).
(c) Every countable set of ordinals from V
Pκ is included in one from V (see
(e) below).
(d) (Ai[G\ : i < «) is 3-o.k. (by clause (G) of Definition 4.6).
(e) PΛ is 53-complete (see clause (B) of Definition 4.6) hence, as 83 is sation-
ary, Pκ adds no reals so V[GK] 
(= "2^° - HI, so λ - λ
<λ".

§4. P(ωι)/(Dωι -f S) is Reflective or Ulam 
675
(f) *B
vί
c}\Sι is Ulam i.e., omitting 0, it is the union of λ — HI many λ-
complete filters. [Why? By 4.5(E) and (d) above (as W = {a < K, : a zero,
successor or has cofinality > KI (in F, equivalently in ^[<2«])}).]
To carry the induction it is enough to show that when clause (E) in the
construction is applied, we get an S-o.k. iteration; this is dealt by 4.9 below
+2.13 + 2.16 for (*&® \S) for the first case, and by 4.10 below -f 2.13 -f 2.16 for
W defined by 4.10 for the second case. 
U4.7
4.8 Remarks. 1) We could have allowed in clause (D) during the proof 4.7 (of
4.4) to decide if i G W, i.e. decide Wι = WΓ\i, i.e. demand h(a) = (t,s, Q, A),
and try to define Q
α+1 as there with the following addition: the truth value of
"α G W" is s, a Pa * Q-name, and at the end shoot a suitable club of K through
the "good" places.
2) We could have gotten a forcing axiom, as before.
3) In fact we can weaken the large cardinals demand to "ft = sup{λ < K : X
strongly inaccessible and Rss
+(λ) or at least /\μ<κ Rss
+(λ,μ)}".
4.9 Claim. Suppose S C ω\ is stationary, Q = (Pi,Qj 
: i < α, j <
a) is a semiproper iteration, a a limit ordinal, and, for simplicity, \\~pi+1
"Rss(K2[F
Pί+1])" for i < a. Let T be a Pα-name of a dense subset of
&Q \S = \Ji<a *B
Pί \S for i e W*.
Then
<S> if λ is regular and large enough, N 
-< (#(λ),G,<^) is countable, and
0? λ, p, T, belong to TV, pePanN,βeanNa successor ordinal and
q G Pβ is (N, P0)-semi-generic, p\β < q and N Π ω\ G 5, then there is a
countable TV', N <β N' -< (fί(λ), G, <J), N Π ω\ = N
1 Γ\ω\, successor
7 G \β, α), P7-name A G N' and q
1 ', p
7 satisfying p < p
; G Pα Π N', q
f G P7,
< ^
x, q'\β = q and j/Γ/7 = pt/3 such that g
7 lhFa "TV Π ^ G A" and
4.9A Remark. 1) Note that B^^
1 ΓS <$ S Γ ^ for z < α.
2) The claim gives more chains than used in 4.7.
3) This is naturally used together with 2.13.

676 
XIII. Large Ideals on ωι
Proof. Let us fix p, Ύ, β and work in V[Gβ] where Gβ C Pβ generic over V
and q e Gβ. Let λ be large enough and
W
 d= {M X(if (λ), G, <Λ) : Af is countable, M Π wi G 5, but
there are no successor 7 G M Π [/3, α), r G PΊ/Gβ and
A G M (a P7-name) and p
f G Pα/G/3 Π N such that:
r is (M, P7/G0)-semi-generic, p < p',p'\j < r and
r lhPa/G/3 "Mnα;! G A",p' Ih "A G T"}.
If W = 0 mod P<κ1(fl"(λ)), we can easily get the desired result (as in the
proof of 1.11)).
So (in V^G/j]) the set W is a stationary subset of S<^1 (if (λ)), hence semi-
stationary. As V[G/j] (= "Rss(K2)" (remember β is a successor ordinal and
clause (I) of Definition 4.6) there is u C if (λ) such that α i C u and |u| < ^2
(in V[G0]) and WΓ\S<^l(u) is semi-stationary. Now without loss of generality
(u,£,<£ Γu) -< (ίf(λ),€,<J). Let u — Uζ<α;ι
 UC'
 UC ^
s countable, increasing
and continuous. So
Bl
 d= {ζeS: (3M G W)(α;ι Π uζ C M C uc)}
is a stationary subset of 5 C ω\ (see 1.2(4)), it belongs to 95 [P^], and we shall
prove:
(*) 
P ^Pa/Gβ 
" f°
Γ every X G T the set X Π A Π 5ι is not stationary" .
[Why 
(*)? If not then for some p' and Pα-name A, p < p
f G Pa/Gβ and
P
7 1^/0/3 "^ G T and 4 Π Si is stationary". As T C 58^, for some 7 < α,
A[Gpα] is in ^B
p^, so (possibly increasing p) without loss of generality for some
successor 7 G [β, α), A is a P7-name of a member of 93
 p^. For ζ G BI, let the
model Mζ be any member of W which satisfies ω\ Π Uζ C Mζ C w^ (see the
definition of BI). For ξ < ωι, let ΛΓ^ be the Skolem Hull (in (if (λ), G, <£)) of
{C : C < C} U {p,ι/, A, W, (uc,Mc : C € BI», and

§4. P(ωι)/(T>ωι + S) is Reflective or Ulam 
677
C = {ξ<ωl: N'ξ[GPa] Πωι=ξ and N'ξ[GPa] Π u = ue}.
As (Nζ[Gpa] : ξ < ωι) is increasing continuous, C is a Pa/Gβ-n&me of a club
of ω\. Clearly C Π A is necessarily disjoint to B\ by the definition of W: if
ζ<ωι,qe Pa/Gβ, and ςr \^Pa/Gβ "ζeCnAn BI", then TVC G W is defined,
<7α, is (TVζ,Pα/G0)-semi-generic, and qa \^pa/Gβ 
"Nζ Π ωi G ^4", contradicting
"TVC G W so (*) holds.]
But (*) contradicts p \\-Pot/Gβ "Ύ £ 23° is dense " as Bl G B^ C 23 <3.
Π4.9
4.10 Claim. Suppose 5 C ω\ is stationary, Q = (Pί^Qj^jjAί 
: i < .7, .7 < α)
3-o. k. sequence for W, 5-suitable iteration, α limit ordinal and (for simplicity)
cf(α) = K0 and let Aa = t&® (a Pα-name). Let A = (Ai : i < a and i eW).
Then:
(8) z/ λ is regular large enough, TV X (#(λ), E, <J) countable and <3,λ,p
belong t o A ^ , p G P α Π 7 V , ^ G α Π A ^ a successor ordinal and g G P^ is
(TV, P0)-semi generic, pf/? < g and A^Πα i G 5 then there is an (A/", Pα)-semi-
generic #' G Pa , ^ f β > q and ^' lhpα " for every dense open T C Seqn(v4)
(see 4.5A(4)(ii), (9)) which belongs to TV[Gα], for some (^ : i G iϋ) G
TV[Gα] Π T we have TV Π ωl G f}iew W -
4.10A Remark. 1) If "cf (α) ^ H0" we can still assume p forces cf (α) = K0 or
p forces cf(α) = KI or "α is inaccessible, /\i<a \Pi\ < α" and in the first case
prove 4.10 with minimal changes.
2) Note that Z
a[(Ai 
: i < a)} is a subset of <B
Po; extending VS® , 0 is not in it,
but there is no reason for it to be closed under differences.
Proof. Standard, by now. Let (βt : ί < ω) G TV be an increasing sequence of
successor ordinals with /30 — β, \Jt<ω βι — &• Let T = (Tn : n < ω) list the
sets T G TV which are P^-names (forced to be) pre-dense subsets of Sequ(.Λ).
We choose by induction pn, gn, TVn, α
n, Gβn such that:
(a) Gβn C Pβn generic over V, Gβn C G/3rι+1,
(b) TV0 =TV,p0 =P,^o = 9,
(c) TVn <ω2 TVn+1,TVn X (#(λ),e,<X) and TVn G

678 
XIII. Large Ideals on ω\
(d) Pn < Pn+liPn € TV Π Pa/Gβn,
(e) qn e Gβn C Pβn is (7Vn,P^J-semi-generic,
(f) Pn\βn<qn (ίnP/jJ.
(g) ά
n = (g% : C e wn) G Seq((Λ : i < α» Π Tn,
(h) wn C wn+ι and α£
+1 < α^ for C € wn)
(i) {A : £ < n} C u;n,
(j) TVn Π α i G a^n that is ςn U pn ί[/3n, α) forces this.
The induction step is by 4.1 (and 4.5D(9)). As we are using RCS iteration,
this suffices (i.e. we can make the Gβn disappear).
The details are left to the reader. This induction suffices as we can use RCS
iteration, so we can find q' as required. 
Ekio

XIV. Iterated Forcing
with Uncountable Support
§0. Introduction
This chapter is [Sh:250], revised. Here we consider revised support for the not
necessarily countable case. In §1 we define and present the basic properties of
tt-RS iterated. This includes the case K — HI and so it can serve as a substitute
to X §1. The main difference is that here we have to use names which sometimes
have no value as we cannot use rank as there.
Unlike Chapter X, we do not have a useful properness to generalize, so
naturally the generalizations of completeness are in the center. In 2.1 we intro-
duce, and in 2.4 we show it does not matter much if we use the version with
games of length ft = cfft or the version with a side order <0, the "pure" exten-
sion which is /^-complete. Then we define iterations of such forcing notions and
prove the basic properties (2.5-2.8). This repeats §1, so against dullness this
time we waive the associativity law and simplify somewhat the definition of
the iteration. In the definition of the order except finitely many places (which
are names) the extensions are pure (i.e. <0) in the old places. The first use of
"pure" extensions is Prikry [Pr], and the first use of iterations with the dis-
tinction between old and new places (in normal support of course) is Gitik
[Gi] which uses Easton support iteration Q's for high inaccessibles, each Qi
is ({2}, Ki)-complete where for the important i's κ>i = i\ a subsequent proof
more similar to our case is [Sh:276, §1]. The application we have in mind is

680 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
K = μ+, {θ : No < θ = cf(0) < K} C S C {2,N0} U {θ : θ = cf(0) < «},
and we shall iterate the forcing notion Qi which has (5, < tt)-Pr, (so necessar-
ily the cardinals θ < K remain cardinals), the iteration being κ-Sp2-iteration,
and characteristically the length of iteration is some quite large cardinal λ,
i < X =$> \Pi\ < λ, and we collapse all cardinals > ft, < λ (so μ, ft play the
role of NO > NI in Chapter X). So we need to know of such iterations of forcing
notions having (5, < ft)-Prι, which is done in 2.9. We could also deal similarly
with iterations Q of length λ, λ strongly inaccessible [i < λ => Pi < λ] and
5 C ft unbounded in λ. In 2.18, 2.19 we look at the case essentially cofinalities
are preserved (i.e. no θ = cf(0) > ft becomes of cardinality < K).
In the third section we indicate what forcing axioms we can get (3.4), and
show how e.g. Mathias forcing fits in assuming MA</ς (in 3.3). We then give a
solution of the first Abraham problem (3.5).
In the fourth section we show how to fit Sacks forcing. The last section is
a real application- to the second Abraham problem. In it we consider a forcing
e.g. preserving θ < ft, making the cofinality of ft+ to NO> assuming only a weak
form of "on ft+ there is a large ideal" in which there the ideal disappears.
§1. ^-Revised Support Iteration
T>κ is the closed unbounded filter on ft.
A work of Groszek and Jech (see [J86] deal with making the continuum large
(in a different way and effect, done about the same time independently).
1.1 Definition. Here K is an infinite cardinal, but when it is an infinite ordinal
which is not a cardinal we mean \κ\
+ (this is intended just for the case K is
collapsed during the iteration). We define the following notions and those in
1.2 and prove 1.4 by simultaneous induction on α:
(A) Q = (Pi, Qi : i < a) is a ft-RS interaction (RS stands for revised support)
(B) a Q-named ordinal

§1. ^-Revised Support Iteration 
681
(C) a Q-named atomic condition q, and we define tff£,</ί{£} for a Q-named
atomic condition q and ordinal ξ when ξ < α, ξ < a respectively and
q\[ζ,ξ)whenζ<ξ<a.
(D) the ft-RS limit of Q5 Rlim^Q which satisfies P^ <£ Rlim^Q f°
r every i < a
and we define p\β G Pβ for p G Rlim^Q and β < a ( We may omit K if
clear from the context).
Let us define and prove
(A) We define "Q is a κ-RS iteration"
α = 0: no condition.
a is limit: Q = (Pi, Qί '• i < Oί) is a /ς-RS iteration iff for every β < α, Q\β
is one.
α -f 1 : Q is an κ-RS iteration iff Q\β is one, Pβ = Rlim^QΓ/?), and Q^ is
a P/3-name of a forcing notion.
(B) We define "ξ is a Q-named ordinal". It means:
(1) £ is a function, Rang(£) C Ord.
(2) for r G Dom(^), letting β — ξ(r), we have /? < α, and r e Pβ*Qβ.
(see an identification later).
(3) for every rι,r2 G Dom(ξ), if rι,r2 are compatible, then ξ(rι) = ξ(r2).
[What do we mean by "r*ι, r2 are compatible" ? Let ri G P/5j * Qβλ and
r2 G Pβ2 * Q^2. If ^i = /?2> there is no problem in defining compatibility.
Otherwise, without loss of generality β\ < /?2. Then, as noted in 1.4, Pβl * Q^j
is essentially the same as P/^+i and Pβτ+ι <$ P^2 <$ P/32 * Q^2, so we can test
compatibility in Pβ2 * Qβ2].
1.1 A Remark. For α a limit ordinal, Dom(£) is essentially a subset of
{Jβ<a Pβ, so ^ is a "partial name" for an ordinal. Note that Dom(£) is not nec-
essarily pre-dense (there is no point in requiring it to be pre-dense in \Jβ<a Pβ ,
since this will not imply pre-density in Pα ='Rlim«Q, which is the forcing we
are interested in).

682 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
Continuation of 1.1.
(C) We say "q is a Q-named atomic condition" if:
(1) q is a pair of functions (Cq,cndq) with common domain D = Dq.
(2) ζq is a Q-u&meά ordinal.
(3) if r*ι, Γ2 G Dg and rι,Γ2 are compatible (see above) then cndg(rι) —
(4) if r G Dq, letting β = ζq(r), we have:
r\β\\-
 uc
(note: we can add: it is forced (II- p^) that Qβ \=
 ur(β) < cnd^(r)" with little
subsequent change). We define q\ξ as (ζq\Dι,cndq\Dι) where DI — {p G Dq :
CS(P) < £}• We define q\{ξ} as (C? \D^ end, ^2) where £>2 - {p G D, : ζq(p) =
£}, and ςΓ[C,0 similarly.
1.1B Remark. The definition would become simpler if we demand r G Pβ
instead of r G Pβ * Qβ in (B2). (e.g. we could then drop the clause
 
ur(β) <
cndg(r)" in (4)). However, we need this more complicated definition if we want
associativity i.e. 1.5(3):
Consider a K - RS iteration Q — (Pa,Qa '• 
OL < α*). Then a condition
in Pα* could be of the form p — ({(r,/3)}, {(r,q)}) with r G Pβ, q G Qβ.
Now assume that (α(ξ) : ξ < ξ*) is an increasing continuous sequence with
α(0) - 0,α(ξ*) = α*, and a(ξ) < β < β + 1 < a(ξ H- 1). Then in the natural
"isomorphic copy" of p in P* = Rlim^Q', where
/3 would become ξ (as g correspond to an element of Q^). However, r may not
be in P^ but can only be found in Pξ * Q^. However this is mainly an aesthetic
problem- saving here costs us some cumbersomeness in application, but no real
damage: when we prove statements on iteration Q we cannot restrict ourselves
to length α = 0, 1, 2, or α = cf (α) etc. For diversity, we do use this way in §2.

§1. K-Revised Support Iteration 
683
(D) We define Rlim^Q as follows:
if a = 0 : Rlim^Q is a trivial forcing with just two compatible conditions
i.e. RliπuQ = {0, {(0,0)}} say with 0 < {(0,0)}
if a > 0: we call q an atomic condition of Rlim^Q, if it is a Q-named
atomic condition.
The set of conditions in Rlim^Q is
{p : p a set of λ atomic conditions for some λ < AC;
and for every β < a,p\β = {q\β : q G p} G Pβ,
and p\β \\-pβ "the set {q\{β} : Q € p} has an upper bound in Qβ"}
More precisely, the last condition in the previous paragraph means
p\β\\-Pβ
 
u3q0ζQβVqep\/reDq:
if ζq(r) = β and r \β € GPβ then
q0 \\-Q0 [if r(β) € G$/3then cnd?(r) e Ggβ\
n
(where Gp is the canonical name for the generic set for P).
Remember that we have defined p\β = {q\β : q G p} and p\[β,7) for
β < 7 < α, similarly.
The order: p0 < Pi iff Po Q Pi or just p0 Q {q\β ' q £ Pi and β < a}.
The identification. 
Clearly for β < α, we have Pβ C Pa. We can identify
P^ * Qβ with a subset of Pa when /? -f- 1 = α : (p, q) is identified with p U {[q]}
where [g] = (C, end), Dom(C) = {0}(0 the empty condition of Pβ), C(0) = β and
cnd(0) = q.
It is easy to check the demands, e.g. under this identification Pβ * Qβ is a
dense subset of P/J+I.
Now we have to show Pβ <$ Rlim^Q (for β <a). Note that any Q f/3-named
ordinal (or condition) is a Q-named ordinal (or condition), and see Claim 1.4(1)
below.

684 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
1.1C Remark. Note that for the sake of 1.5(3) we allow K to be not a cardinal
and then we really use |ft| + .
1.1D Remark. We can obviously define Q-named sets; but for condition (and
ordinals for them) we want to avoid the vicious circle of using names which are
interpreted only after forcing with them below.
1.2 Definition.
(1) Suppose Q is a κ>RS iteration, ζ is a Q-named ordinal, a — ίg(Q),
G G Gen(Q) (see part (2) of the Definition below). We define ζ[G] by:
(i) ζ[G\ = Ί if (7 < a
 d= tg(Q) and) for some p G Dom(C) Π G7+ι which
is in PΊ * QΊ we have ζ(p) = 7.
(ii) otherwise (i.e., G Π Dom(ζ) = 0) ζ[G] is not defined.
(1A) For a Q-named condition g, we defined q[G] similarly.
(2) We denote the set of G C \Ji<a Pi+ι such that G Π Pί+ι is generic over V
for each i < a by Gen(Q). We let d = G Π P<.
(3) For C a Q-named ordinal and q G (Ji<a Pi let q Ihg "C = ξ" if for every
G G Gen(Q) we have: q G G =» £[G] = ξ, i.e. if ς Ih "£[G] is defined and
equal to ξ". Similarly for p Ihg "g = r" and for p Ihg "g G G".
1.3 Remark. 1) From where is G taken in (2), (3)? E.g., V is a countable
model of set theory, G taken from the "true" universe.
2) If p,p' G Pα,P £ p' and for all (ξ, end) G p' \ p there is a /? < α such that
PΪ/3 lt~ "ξ[G] undefined", then p and p' are essentially equivalent, i.e. for all
q 2 p we have: <? and p' are compatible; or equivalently, p Ih "p' G G".
Now we point out some properties of κ-RS iteration.
1.4 Claim. Let Q = (P^Q^ : i < α) be a κ-RS iteration, Pa = Rlim^Q.
(1) If β < a then: Pβ C Pa and p e Pβ =ϊ p\β = p b Pa \= p\β < p; for
Pι,p2 £ P/3 we have [P/3 N p! < p2 iff Pα N Pi < P2J; and Pβ <> Pα.

§1. K-Revised Support Iteration 
685
Moreover, if q G Pβ,p G Pα, then q,p are compatible in Pα iff q,p\β are
compatible in Pβ] if p\β < q, a least upper bound of <? G P/?, p G Pα is
q U pf[/3, α). Also for ft < /?2 < α and p G Pα then p|7?ι = (p|7?2) f^.
(2) If ζ is a <2-named ordinal and G, G
1 G Gen(O) and G (Ί P^+i = G' Π P^+i
and ζ[G] = ξ then ζ[G'] = ξ; hence we write ζ[G Π Pξ+ι] = ξ.
(3) If/3,7 are Q-named ordinals, then Max {/3,7J (for a generic G G Gen(Q),
this name is defined if both are defined and its value is the maximum)
is a Q-named ordinal. Also Min{/2,7} (defined if at least one of them is
defined, if only one is defined the value is its value, if both are defined the
value is the minimum).
(4) If α = βo 4- 1, in Definition l.l(D), in defining the set of elements of Pa,
in the demand "β < a => p\β G P0", we can restrict ourselves to β — βo.
(5) The following set is dense in Pα : {p G Pα; for every β < α, if ri, r2 G p,
then \\-Pβ "if rl \{β] ^ 0, r2 \{β] ^ 0 then they are equal" } where Y C Pa
is dense iff for every p G P there is <?, p < g and q is equivalent to some
q' G y (i.e. g Ih V G G" and q' Ih "g G G") (can even we It-φ/j).
(6) Pa < (Πi<α 2
|Pil)
<κ for limit « (where |P| is the number of elements of
P up to equivalence). Also if β < a => density(PQ:) < λ — cf(λ) and α < λ
(or just a < λ+) then density(Pa) < 2
λ.
(7) If Ihp. "|Qi| < λ & Qi C y" (and λ > 2), then (essentially) |Pί+ι| <
λ'
Pi'. (Why "essentially"? We have to identify P^-names of members of Qi
which \\-p. "they are equal".) We can replace |Pi| by density(Pi) and get
density(Pΐ+ι) < density (Pi) + λ + N0 Instead of "Qi C V
n it suffices that:
λ
<μ = λ and: Q (i.e. set of members) is included in the closure of V under
taking subsets of power < μ.
(8) Suppose Q is an κ-RS iteration, φ(x, y) is a formula (possibly with param-
eters from V) such that:
(a) for every G G Gen(Q) there is at most one x such that (V[G], V, G) (=
"φ(x,G)", this x is called x[G] if there is such x, and x[G] is not
defined otherwise.

686 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
(b) if G GGen(Q), χ[G\ defined then it is an ordinal < ίg(Q), call it
/?, moreover for some p G P/j+i, such that if β -f 1 = ^g(Q) then
p € Pβ * Q/?, we have:
Γ/ien there is a Q-named ordinal ζ such that: for every G G Gen(Q),
x[G] — ζ[G\ (i.e. they are both defined with the same value, or they are
both undefined).
(9) Suppose Q, φ(x, y),x[G]( for G G Gen(Q)) are as in (8) except that clause
(b) is replaced by:
(b)
7 if G GGen(Q) and x[G] is defined, then it has the form (C,p)?C <
^g(Q)>P £ Qζ[Gζ] 
and for some q we have: q G G Π Pζ+i, and
[C + 1 = ίg(<3) => q G G Π Pc] (and if we make the addition in 1.1 (C)
clause (4) then Qζ[G Π Pc] 1=
 U
9f{(} < p") and [q G G' G Gen(Q) =»
there is a Q-named condition g such that:
for every G G Gen(Q), x[G] = (ζq[G\, q[G}) (so both are defined and equal
or both are not defined).
Proof. By induction on α.
1.4 A Remark. The inverse of 1.4(8) and of 1.4(9) hold, of course.
1.5 Lemma. The Iteration Lemma
(1) Suppose F is a function, then for every ordinal a there is one and only one
tt-RS iteration Q = (P^, Qi : i < c^) such that:
(a) for every i, Qi = F(Q\i),
(b) at < a,
(c) either a^ = a or F(Q) is not an (Rlimκ(5)-name of a forcing notion.
(2) Suppose Q is a /s-RS-iteration, α = ig(Q),β < a, Gβ C P^ is generic over
V. Γften in V[Gβ],Q/Gβ 
= (Pi/Gβ,Qi 
: β < i < K) is a /ί-RS-iteration
and Rlim^Q = Pβ * (Rlim^Q/G/?) (essentially).

§1. κ;-Revised Support Iteration 
687
(3) The Association Law: If α^ = α(ξ) (ξ < ξ*) is increasing and continuous,
<*o = O Q = (Pi,Qi : * < α*) is a ft-RS-iteration, Pα* = Rlim^Q and
αξ* = α* and K is a successor cardinal (for K inaccessible we need to as-
sume more); then so are (Pa($ , Pa(t+i) / Pa(£) :£<£*) and (Pi/P^^Qi :
α(f) < i < a(ξ + 1)) (with Λ-RS-Limits Pα^ and Pα(ξ+1)/Pα(ξ) respec-
tively) and vice versa.
1.5 A Remark. In (3) we can use α^'s which are names.
Proof. (1) Easy.
(2) Pedantically, we should formalize the assertion as follows:
(*) There are function ίo? Fι(
= definable classes) such that for every «-RS-
iteration Q with ίg(Q) — OL, and β < a,F0(Q,β) is a P^-name Q such that:
(a) \\-Pβ "(5
f is a ^-RS-iteration of length a-β".
(b) Pβ * (Rlim^O
1) is equivalent to Pa = Rlim^Q, by Fι(Q,β) (i.e.,
Fifaβ) 
is an isomorphism between the corresponding completions
to Boolean algebras)
(c) if β < 7 < OL then \\-Pβ
 
uFQ(Q\^β) 
= FQ(Q,β)\(Ί - β)« and
Fι(Q,/3) extends Fι(Q\^β) and Fι(Q\Ί,β) transfers the P7-name
QΊ to a P/5-name of (RlimΛ(0 \ (7~/3))-name of Qίy.^ (where Q^.^ =
The proof is induction on α, and there are no special problems.
(3) Again, pedantically the formulation is: There are functions F3, ^4 such
that
(*) For Q-iteration, ίg(Q) = aξ*,a = (atξ : ξ < C) increasing continuous,
Fz(Q,a) is a tt-RS-iteration Q^ of length α^* such that
(a) F4(Q,ά) is an equivalence of the forcing notions Rli
(b) F3(Q\a^a\(ξ + l)) = Fs(Q,ά)\ξ
(c) 0^ is the image by F4(Q\a^ά\(ξ + 1)) of the Pa^
name
The proof is tedious but straightforward.

688 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
1.6 Claim. Suppose we add in Definition l.l(B) also:
1.1(B)(4) if α is inaccessible > AV, and for some β < a for every 7 satisfying
β < 7 < α we have \\-Pβ "\PΊ/Pβ\ < α" then (3/3 < α)[Dom(C) C Pβ].
Then nothing changes in the above, and if λ is an inaccessible cardinal > AV
and \Pi\ < X for every i < X and Q = (P^ Qi : i < λ) is an RSK-iteration, then
(1) every Q-named ordinal is in fact a (Q fi)-named ordinal for some i < λ,
(2) like (1) for Q-named conditions.
(3)Λ = U<A*
(4) if λ is a Mahlo cardinal then Pχ satisfies the λ-c.c. (in a strong way).
1.6A Remark. As in XI §1, actually if "θ = cf(θ) > AC" is preserved by every
PQ, for α < α*, then: a < a* &cf(α) = θ implies \J@<a Pβ *
s dense in Pa. In
this case, if α* is strongly inaccessible > θ and [a < a* =Φ density(Pa) < α*]
then Pa* satisfies the α*-c.c.
§2. Pseudo-Completeness
We think here of replacing KI by, say, κ
+. So we want to deal with forcing
notions not collapsing any cardinal < κ
+, but possibly collapsing ft
++, and
possibly adding reals and changing the cofinality of AC++ to say NQ So on the
one hand we want to have support < AS, and even a κ
+-RS; and on the other
hand some amount of pseudo completeness (expressed in Definition 2.1 below).
Further consideration lead to finite pure.
We deal with forcing notions Q satisfying:
2.1 Definition. Let 7 be an ordinal, 5 C {2} U {λ : λ a regular cardinal }.
1) Now Q satisfies (5,7)-Prι if:
(i) Q = (|Q|, <, <o) (here \Q\ is the set of elements of Q)
(ii) as a forcing notion, Q is (|Q|, <), with a least element 0g
(iii) <o is a partial order (of |Q|).
(iv) \p <0 q =$> p < q]

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
689
(v) pure decidability: for every cardinal θ G S and Q-name r, such that
"~Q "l € θ" and p e Q for some q e Q and β e θ we have: p <0 g and
ςf lhQ "if θ = 2 then r - β and if θ > N0 then r < /?"
(vi) for each p G Q in the following game player I has a winning strategy:
for i < 7 player I chooses p2* G Q such that p <0 P2i A /\ p,,- <0 p2ί
j<2i
and then player II chooses p%i+ι G Q such that p2i <o P2z+ι
Player I loses if he has some time no legal move, which can occur in limit
stages only.
2) Q = (|<9|,<,<o) satisfies (S,7)-Pr+, if (i)-(v) hold and (Q, <0) is 7-
complete (i.e. if pi G Q for i < β < 7, and i < j < β => pi <0 PJ
then for some p G Q we have: i < β => pi <0 p).
3) A forcing notion (Q, <) satisfies (5,7)-Prχ (or (5,7)-Pr+), if there is a
relation <o such that (Q,<,<o) satisfies (5,7)-Prι (or (5,7)-Prj
1")).
4) Q satisfies (5,7) — Pr^ or 5 — Prj" if it satisfies (i) - (v) of part (1) (note:
the ordinal 7 does not appear in conditions (i)-(v) of 2.1(1)).
5) If a member of S is an infinite ordinal δ which is not a regular cardinal,
we mean cf(ί) (occurs e.g. when Q G V
p and 5 G V).
6) If Q = (\Q\, <, <o) then Q is defined as follows:
the set of elements is {u : u C Q, and if u ^ 0 then for some q G u,
(Vp G u)(3r G u)(p < r & ^ <o r) and there is r* G Q such that for
every such q, r* is a <o-upper bound of {r G u : q <o r}},
ί/ιe order ui < u^ iff tti = u2 or for some q% G u^ for every ^i G 1/1,
9ι < 92,
ί/ie pure order u\ <o tt2 iff Ui = u2 or for some g2 G ιt2 witnessing
u2 G Q f°
r every q\ G ui witnessing ui G Q we have (Vp G uι)(3r G
^ι)[p < r&^i <o r <o 92] (this is naturally used in 2.7; we usually
identify p G Q with {p} G Q).
2.2 Fact.
(1) If K < 71, 72 < κ+ ίften (5,7ι)-Prι is equivalent to (5,72)-Prι.
(2) If K 4- 1 < 7 < κ+ and D« (which can be stated as, i.e. an equivalent
formulation is: there is a sequence (Ca : a < κ+),Ca C α closed, for

690 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
limit α the set Ca is unbounded in a and [αi G Ca => Caι = Ca Π αi],
and cf(α) < K => \Ca\ < K) and Q satisfies (5, 7)-Prι then Q satisfies
(S,κ+)-Pπ.
(3) Assume Q satisfies (5, 7)-Prι. If λ < 7, and λ G 5 then in V
Q still λ is a
regular cardinal (or at least !hQ "cf(λ) = cf
y(λ)"). If 2 G S, then Q does
not add bounded subsets to 7.
(4) If Q satisfies (5, 7)-Prι, λ G 5, λ regular, and for every regular μ, 7 <
μ < X =H!-Q "μ is not regular" (e.g., [7, λ) contains no regular cardinal)
then X is regular in V®.
(5) If Q satisfies (5, 7)-PiΊ, 7 > ω + 1, then Q is S-semiproper.
(6) Similar assertions (to 1-5) holds for (S, j)-Pr^ (but in (2) we do not need
DΛ) and (5,7)-Prf implies (5,7)-Prι.
(7) In 2.1(6), <^, <J are quasi orders of the set of elements of Q and for p,
q G Q we have
(i) 
Qϊp<q*ϊQϊ{p}<{q},
(ϋ) Q 1= p <o 9 ^ Q N {p} <0 {g}
(on incompleteness see inside 2.7(D)).
(8) Assume Q — (|Q|, <, <o) satisfies:
(*) 
P < q < r & p <o r => p <o q
then in Definition 2.1(6):
if </, ςr
/; G iti witness u\ G Q Λen there is g G ϊ/i such that #' <0
q & ^ <o q
Also: if g
; G HI witness HI G Q and q' < q £ uι then g' witness MI G Q,
provided that
(9) In definition 2.1(6), if MI ^ u% and ^2 witness u\ <o ^2 then u\ <o ^2 ^o
(or more formally u\ <o {#2} <o ^2) so {{p} : p G Q} £ Q is dense.

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
691
Proof: Straightforward. E.g. for (2), note that otp(C<5) < K for all δ < κ+.
Without loss of generality a G Cg => a is even (so Cza+\ = 0). So in stages α,
player I can apply his strategy to the play (pΊ,pΊ+\ : 7 G Cα)). 
D2.2
2.2A Remark. Concerning 2.2(2) note that DNO always holds trivially (see
[Sh:351, §4]). The equivalence of this formulation of square to the standard one
is similar to the proof in [Sh:351, §4].
2.3 Definition. (5, < κ)-Prι will mean (£,7) — Pri holds for every 7 < K.
2.4 Fact. The following three conditions on a forcing notion ζ), a set 5 C
{ 2 } U { λ : λ a regular cardinal } and regular /ς are equivalent:
(a) there is Q
f = (Q', <, <0) such that (Q', <), (Q, <) are equivalent forcing
notions and Q' satisfies (5, κ)-Pΐι.
(b) for each p e Q, in the following game (which lasts K, moves) player II has
a winning strategy:
in the iih move player I chooses λ^ G 5 and a Q-name Ti of an ordinal
< λi, then player II chooses an ordinal α* < A^. In the end player II wins
if for every a < K there is pa G Q, p < pa such that for every i < a we
have pa Ih "either λ^ = 2 & r* = α^ or λ^ > α0 fer^ < α^".
(c) like (a) but moreover (Q', <0) is ^-complete (i.e. Q' satisfies (5, κ) — Pr+).
(d) like (a) but moreover (Q
1 <o) is K-directed complete, i.e.
if B C Q, |J5| < AC and for each finite B' C B there is a <o-upper bound
to β
x, ίften -B has a <o-least upper bound.
Proof, (d) => (c) =^> (α): trivial.
(α) ^> (6): As Q, Q' are equivalent, there is a forcing notion P and / : Q -» P,
/' : Q
7 —> P both preserving < and incompatibility and with dense ranges.
Choose <? G Q' which essentially is above p i.e. /'(<?) Ihp "/(p) G GP" . We
describe a winning strategy (in the game from (b) of 2.4) for player II: he plays
on the side a play (for q) of the game from 2.1(vi) for Q
1 where he uses a
winning strategy (whose existence in guaranteed by (a)). In step i of the play

692 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
(for 2.4(b)) he already has the initial segment (PJ 
: j < 2i) of the simulated
play for 2.1(vi). If player I plays λ^, TI in the actual game, player II defines
Pzi £ Q
f (for player I) in the simulated play by the winning strategy of player
I there and then he chooses pu+iipu <o Piί+i £ Q
1', which force for some α^:
Xi = Oίi if \i — 2, Ti < Oίi if λ^ > NO (exists by 2.1 (v)) (more formally, for some
TI G Q, we have /'(pzi+i) Ihp "/(
rί) € Gp" and r^ forces Ti — α^ & λ^ = 2 or
Ti < αi & λi > NO, alternatively we can interpret T$ as a Q'-name using /, /')
and then plays α^ in the actual play. In the end for α < «, there is p* G Q such
that f(p2a) ^P "f'(p2a) 
G Gp", now p^ exists and is as required.
(fr) => (cί): Fix a winning strategy Stp for player II in the game from 2.4(b) for
each p G Q. We define Q' as follows
Q' = {(P, (λi,Γi,αi :i < 0)
 :P ^ <?> and (
λi^ Γi)«t i < ξ)
is an initial segment of a play of the game
from 2.4(b) for p in which
player II uses his winning strategy Stp}.
The order <o is:
(Mλi.Ti.αi : » < 0) <o (P', (λj, Γ , α : < < ξ'»
iff (both are in Q') and
p = p', ξ < £', and for i < ξ
A* = λ^,Ti = rj, Oίi = α^
and the order < on Q
x is
P = (P, {λ^Ti, a* : i < 0) < P
7 = (P', (λ ,I^ <4 : i < ξ'))
iff (both are in Q' and) p <o p' or Q N p < p', and p' Ihg "A^ = 2 & TI — OLi or
λi > NO & ji < OLi" for every i < ξ.
The checking is easy. Note that
(α) the map p *-> (p, <>) is a dense embedding of (Q, <) into (Q', <).

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
693
(β) hence Q
f-names are essentially Q-names,
(7) (P, (λi, Γi, at : i < 0) II-Q' "(V* < ξ)[(λi = 2 -» Γi = α<) & (λ< > H0 -> Γi <
αOΓ
(ί) for (d) note that every <o-directed set is linearly ordered by <o and if its
cardinality is < AC then it has a <0-lub. 
U2.4
2.4 A Remark . So (5, /c) — Pri and (5, AC) — Pr]
1" are "essentially" the same
(for /c regular).
2.5 Definition.
(1) Assume P is a <£-increasing sequence of forcing notions.
(a) Let
Gen
r(P)
 d=
f {G : for some (set) forcing notion P* : /\ P< <£ P*
i<a
and G* C P* generic over V
and G - G* Π (J PJ.
i<α
(b) For a set E
1 of regular cardinals we say that P obeys E if for 7 G E
1
we have: Pα = |J P^ and P/? satisfies the 7-0.c. for β < 7. We say
β<Ί
that P strongly obey E if in addition β < 7 G jB => \Pβ\ < 7.
(c) Let -B(P) = {7 < ίg(P) : 7 is strongly inaccessible , uncountable and
β < 7 => P7 satisfies the 7-c.c.}, £7β(P) = {7 G £(P) : /3 < 7 =»
1^1 < 7}
(2) If Q — (Pi : i < α) or Q = (Pi,Qi : i < α) where P^ is <$-increasing,
obeying E (so here we ignore the Q^s) we define a Q-E-n&me r almost
as we define (\Ji<α Pi)-names, but we do not use maximal antichains of
\Ji<aPi
(*) r is a function, Dom(r) C (Ji<a Pi and for every directed G G
Gen
r(Q), τ[G] is defined iff Dom(r) Π G ^ 0 and then τ[G] G V[G]
[from where "every G..." is taken? e.g., V is countable, G any set from
the true universe] and r is definable with parameters from V(J{G} (so

694 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
T is really a first-order formula with the variable G and parameters
from V) and (V/J G E Π £(Q))(37 < /3)[Dom(r) Π Pβ C P7].
Now Ihg has a natural meaning. If E is not mentioned we mean: any
fixed E Π (lg(Q) + 1) = £(Q) understood from the context, normally just
£({Pi : i < α)), below we fix E - E* .
(3) For Q-names TO, ... ,Γn-ι we let {T O,... ,Γn-ι} be the name for the set
that contains exactly those Ti[Q] that are defined. For p G Q (i.e., p G
Ui<α ft) we let p Ih "r - x" if for every G such that p G G G Gen
r(Q) we
have τ[G] - x. (But see 2.6(2).)
(4) A Q-S-named [j,/?)-ordinal C is a <5-£-name ζ such that if ζ[G] — ξ then
j < ξ < β and (3p G G Π Pξn«)ί> I^Q "C - Γ (where α - €g(Q)). If we
omit
 α[j,/3)" we mean [0,*g((Q)) - [0,α).
2.5A Remark. 1) We can restrict in the definition of Gen
r(Q) to P* in some
class K, and get a K-variant of our notions.
2) Note: even if in 2.5(1) we ask Dom(r) to be a maximal antichain it will not
be meaningful as in the appropriate PS, we have Λi<5 ft "$ ft but it will not
in general be a maximal antichain.
2.5B Remark. Note that we wrote PξΠα not P(ξ+i)nα Compare this to the
remark LIB. We will not have a general associativity law, but the definition
of Sp^ - Lim^Q will be slightly simplified. As said earlier we can interchange
decisions on this matter (this does not mean this is the same iteration, just that
it has the same relevant properties). Of course also Ch.X can be represented
with this iteration.
2.5C Remark. Note that a Q — 0-named ordinal ζ is Q — £"*-named ordinal
zjff for every β G E* Π E(Q) for some 7 < β we have Ihg "ζ φ [7, /?)".

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
695
2.6 Fact.
(1) For P = (Pi : ί < ίgP), a <£ increasing sequence of forcing notions
and P-named [j, /2)-ordinal ζ and p € \Ji<a Pi there are £, q and qι such
that p < q G \Ji<egp Pi and: either q Ihp "ςfi G G", gi € ffe, £ < α,
[p G Pf => <? = qι] and <?ι Ihp "£ = f" or </ Ihp "ζ is not defined" (and
even p Ihp "(is not defined").
(2) For P as above, and P-named [j, /3)-ordinals ζ, ξ, also Min{C, £}, Max{C, £}
(naturally defined, so Max{C,f}[G] is defined iff a ζ[G\, ξ[G] are defined,
and Min{C,£}[G] is defined iff ζ[G\ is defined or ξ[G\ is defined); both are
P-named [j, β)-ordinals.
Similarly for Min{ξ0, 
- , fn-ι}» Max{ξ0, - 
, ξn-i} ^ P - £-named or-
dinals.
(3) For P as above, n < ω and P-named ordinals ξι,...,ξ n and p G
Ui<^g(p) -Pi there are ζ < a and q G P£ such that, first: p < # or at least
q lhpc "p G P;/(?PC for some i < tg(P)
n (actually i = mm{i : p G PJ)
and second: for some t G {!,...,n} we have qfC "~p 
"C = ί^ =
Max{ξι,... ,ξn}" or P N~p "Max{^ι,... ,ξn} not defined", in the second
case we can add q Ihp "^ not defined". Similarly for Min.
(4) Convention: If Q = (Pi,Qi : i < α), P^ is <£-increasing, we may write Q
instead of (Pi : i < α).
2.6A Convention. E* is a class of strongly inaccessible cardinals > K fixed
for this section, not mentioned usually. So a P-named (e.g. ordinal) mean a
P-(EΠE(P))-named (e.g. ordinal). Outside this section the default value is the
class of strongly inaccessible > K.
[The reader can simplify life using E* = 0, he will lose only 2.7(4), hence case
II of 3.4, so this is a reasonable choice.]
2.7 Definition and Claim. Let e G {1,2}. We define and prove by induction
on α the following simultaneously (all forcing notions satisfying 2.1 (i)- (iv)):

696 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
(A) Q = (Pi, Qi : i < a) is a K — Spe-iteration or really AC — Spe - E*-iteration
(the Q's below will have this form).
(B) A Q-named (that is Q-E*-named) atomic condition q (or atomic \j,β)-
condition, β < α) and we define q\ξ, q\{ξ}, q \ [ ξ , ζ ) for a Q-named atomic
condition q and ordinal ξ < ζ < a (or Q-named ordinals ξ, ζ instead £, ζ).
(C) If q is a Q-named (or really Q-E*-named) atomic [j,/3)-condition, ξ < α,
then q\ξ is a (Qfξ)-named atomic [j, Min {/3, ξ})-condition and <?f{ξ} is
a Pξ-name of a member of Qξ or undefined (and then it may be assigned
the value 0qί? the minimal member of Qξ).
(D) The K — Spe-limit of Q, Spe - LimKQ, (really Spe — E* - Lim^Q) denoted
by PQ, for Q as in clause (A), and p\ξ and Dom(p) for p G Spe — Lim^Q? C
an ordinal < a (or Q-named ordinal ζ etc.).
(E) Spe - Lim^Q satisfies (i)-(iv) of Definition 1.2 and it obeys E* Π E(Q) (so
if ίg(Q) G E* Π E(Q) then Spe - Lim/,(Q) = 
|J 
Pβ). Also if β < α,
/3</p(Q)
/? € E* Π -B(Q) and C is a (Qί/?)-named ordinal then it is a (ζ)f7)-named
ordinal for some 7 < /3; similarly for atomic condition.
(F) If /? < α = ^g(Q) then Pβ C Spe - Lim^Q (as models with two partial
orders, even compatibility is preserved) and [p G Pβ => p\β = p] and
[Pa 1= "P < 9" => P/3 N "Pt/ϊ < ςft)9"] and [Pα N "p <0 g" => P/j N "pί/? <o
gΓ/3"] and Pα N "pf/3 < p". Also ςf G Pβ,p G Spe - Lim^Q are compatible
iff q,p\β are compatible in Pβ. In fact if q G P/?, P/? |= "pf/3 < g" then
q U (pί[/3,α) is a least upper bound of p, <?, and if P/? |= "p\β <o ς" even
a <o-least upper bound of q. Hence Pβ <£ (K — Spe — Limκ(Q)) and so
/3 < 7 < ^g(Q) =*Pβ<$ P7-
(G) The set of p G P^ such that for every β < a we have Ihp^ "pf{/?} is a
singleton or empty", is a dense subset of Pα. Also we can replace Qβ by
Qβ (see Definition 2.1(6)) and the set of "old" p G Pa is a dense subset of
the new (but actually do not use this).

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
697
Proof and Definition.
(A) Q = (Pi, Qi : i < α) is a K — Spe-iteration if Q \ β is a K — Spe-iteration for
β < α, and if a = β 4- 1 then Pβ — Spe-Limκ(Q\β) and Qβ is a P/3-name
of a forcing notion as in Definition 2.1(l)(i)-(iv).
(B) We say q is a Q-named atomic [7, β)-condition when : <? is a Q-name (i.e.
a Q — E*-name), and for some £ = £g, a Q-named [7, β)-ordinal (i.e. a
Q — E*-named [j,/?)-ordinal), we have Ihg "£ has a value iff q has, and if
they have then j < ζ < Mm{β,£g(Q)} and q G Qζ" . Now ρ|£ will have
a value iff £ς has a value < £ and then its value is the value of q. Lastly,
q\{ξ} will have a value iff ζq has the value ξ and then its value is the value
of q (similarly for ξ and tf f[C£) and <?Γ[C>£))
(C) Left to the reader.
(D) We are defining Spe — Lim^Q (where Q — (P^ Qi : i < a) of course). It is
a triple Pa = (|Pα|» <> <o) where
(a) |Pα| is the set of p = {qi : i < i*} satisfying:
(i) i* < rt,
(ii) if e = 1, 0 < p (see below)
(iii) each q^ is a Q-named atomic condition, and for every ξ < α, lhpξ
"ptίίj = {<7ΐΓ{£} : ^ < **} if not empty, has a <o-upper bound in Qξ
or at least a weak <0-upper bound i.e. for some nonempty u C Γ and
r e Qξ we have Λ<«. V^et* * KO < Qj \{ξ} and Λ^n ft \{ξ} <o r and
V ί 6uΛ, €uftΓ{ί} <o qj\{ξ} (i.e. ςffίί} € Q )".
€
(b) for p G Spe - LimΛ(Q) and ξ < £g(Q) we let:
we define similarly pf[C,0» Pt{C}, Pt[C,ί)-
(c) Pα |= "p
1 <0 p
2" iff for every ξ < a we have (letting p
i = {ςf : i < i€(*)}
for ^= 1,2):
{^2 fξ : i < i
2(*)} \\-Pζ "p
2 \{ξ} = 0 => p
1 \{ξ} = 0 and one of the following
holds:

698 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
(i) {flί Γ{£>
: * < **(*)} are equal for * = 1,2,
(ii) letting u
1, u
2 be as in clause (a)(iii) above for ς
flί{^}, <?
2t{£} respec-
tively for some j% G u
2 for all j\ < i
l(*) if ζqι = ξ and j\ G it
1 then
(note (i) V(ii) means Q N p
1 f{£} <0 p
2 \{ξ})
~ξ
(iii) e = 2 and p
l \{ξ} = 0" .
(d) Pa[=pi<ι?iS
(i) for every ξ < ίg(Q) we have (letting p* = {q% : i < i*(*)}, <£ = 1, 2):
{g
2ίξ : i < z
2(*)} lhPξ Vf{ξ} = 0 =» pHίί} = 0 and one of the
following occurs: p
l f{ξ},p
2 \{ξ} are equal as subsets of Qξ, or for some
h < ^
2(*) for a11 Ji < ^(*) we nave Qξ ^ "[tfJ! < ^2]" (i e tne order
of Q ) .
e
(ii) for some n < ω and Q-named ordinals £ι, . . . , £n
 we have:
for each ζ < tg(Q), p2\ζ lhPς "if ζ £ {ξl7 . . . ,ξn} then: p
1 ί{C} - 0 and
e - 2 or Q N "[{r[GPc] : r € pι,Cr = C} <o {r[GPζ} 
: r € p2,Cr -
~ C
C}]", note that the truth value of C = ξe is a Pζ-name so this is well
denned. Note: p
l \{ζ} = 0 not just = 0Qi but q e p
1 => -ι[ξ = C?[^c]]
We then (i.e. if (i)-f(ii) ) say: pi < p2 over {ξi, . . . ,ξn}
Lastly (as said above) if p E ft - Spe - Lim^Q then we let p\ξ = {r \ξ : r G P}
and Dom(p) = {ζg : q G p} and similarly pfC, pf[C,0> Pt[CO-
(E) : Let us check Definition 2.1 (l)(i)-(iv) for Pa
 d= Spe - Lim^Q:
<
Pa is a partial order: Suppose p0 < Pi < P2 Let n^, ξj, . . . ,ξ^ appear
in the definition of pi < pe+ι. Let n = n° 4- n
1, and
if 1 < i < n
1
Now for ^ = 0,1 and ξ < α we have Ihp^ "if pt+ι \ξ is in the set GQ then
Pt\{ξ} < Pι+ι\{ξ} in Q ", hence lhPί "if p2Γξ is in the set Gζ then
~ ξ
P2\{ξ}mQ".

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
699
Also for C < ot we have p2\ζ IHP< "if ζ φ {ξι,...,ξn} then (in Q )
Po r{C} <o Pi \{ζ} <o P2 Γ{C}" or e = 2, Po Γ{C} - 0" - So we finish.
<o is a partial order: check.
P <o <7 => P < <?' By the definition; easy.
So in Definition 2.1, (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv) hold.
We still have to check that Q obeys E* Π E(Q), now by the induction
hypothesis the only thing to check is: if α = ίg(Q) = /3 + 1, /3 G E*Π E(Q)
then Pβ — \J PΊ. This follows as β > «, and each (Q f/?)-named ordinal is a
7<0
(Q Ϊ7)-named ordinal for some 7. This is true by the definition of a Q — E-named
ordinal.
(F) , (G) We leave the checking to the reader (for the first sentence of (G) see
2.10(1) below). 
D2.7
2.8 Claim. Suppose Q = (Pi,Qi : i < α) is a K — Spe-iteration (so Pa =
Spe-Lιmκ(Q)).
1) If p < q in Pa then there are r, n, ξi < ... < ξn < a such that:
(a) r e Pa
(b) q < r
(c) p<r above {ξι,...,ξn}
2) We can find such r simultaneously for finitely many p^ < q.
Remark. In fact we can have rf[ξn,α) = q\[ξn,a).
Proof. 1) We prove this by induction on α
Case 1: α = 0. Trivial.
Case 2: α = /3 + l.
Apply the induction hypothesis to Q \β, pf/?, g f/3 (clearly Q \β is an κ-Spe-
iteration, p\β = Pβ, q\β e Pβ and P/? |= "p < ς", by 2.7).
So we can find r
7, m, {ξ(,..., ξ'm} such that:
(a)' r' G P/3
(b)' P^

700 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
(c)' p < r' (in Pβ) above {&,... ,fm}.
Let n = m + 1, and
= /# </€€{!...,m}
and lastly r = r U (q\{β}).
Case 3: a is a limit ordinal.
Let p < q (in Pα) above {£ι, . . . ,fn}. We choose by induction on t < n,
Tίiβliξϊ 
SUCΠ
(α) rte
(β) n <
(7) q\βι<rι
(δ) βe < βl+l < a
(ε) β0 = 0, r0 = 0Po
(0 for ί G {0, . . . , n- 1} we have: either r^+i Ih
 α^+ι = ξ|+1" and £?+1 < ^+1
or βι+ι = βt&Ti+\ = r^ and r^ U (ςf[/3,o:)) l^pα "ξ^+i is not defined".
Carrying the definition is straight: for i = 0 use clause (ε). For i +
1 < n when the second possibility of clause (C) fails there is r', such that
re U (gf [/?,«)) < r' G Pα, and r' lhPα "ξm is defined", so there are r" ,
f|+1 such that r' < r" G Pα and r" Ih "&+ι - ^*+1" so as "ξ|+1 is a Q-
named ordinal" we know that ξ|+1 < a and r"f£g+1 Ihp^,,
 
α^+ι = ^|_|_ι" Let
= max{/3^, ξ|+1}, and r^+i = r
/; t^+i So we have carried the induction.
Apply the induction hypothesis to Q\βn p\βn, ^n\ it is applicable as βn <
α, and Pβn \= "p\βn < q\βn < rn" . So there are m < ω, ξι < . . . < £m < /3n
and r* such that P^n |= rn < r*" and p <r* (in P^ ) above {ξi, . . . , ξm}. Now
let r
 d= r* U (q\\βn, α)), clearly g < r and p < r above {ξi, . . . , ξm, /?n}
2) Should be clear. 
D2.s
2. 8 A Claim. Let Q be a ^ - Sp2-iteration (of length α).

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
701
(1) If β < a and ζ is a P^-name of a Q-named [/J, α)-ordinal ί/ien for some
Q-named [/?, α)-ordinal ξ
lho"C = f
(2) The same holds if we replace "ordinal" by "atomic condition" .
(3) If β is a Q-named ordinal, and for each β < α, ζβ is a Q-named [/?, α)-
ordinal then for some Q-named ordinal ξ
(4) Similarly for atomic conditions.
Proof. Easy. 
Π2.8Λ
2.8B Discussion. Why do we use iteration of kind Sp2 when Spj may seem
simpler? Think that we want say ft, κ
+ to play the roles of N0, NI in Ch.X.
Suppose (Pi,Qi : i < AV+) is an ft
+ — Sp1-iteration which is nice enough such
that U Pi is a dense subset of Pκ+ . Suppose further that for i < ft"
1" , we have
i<κ+
{pi} G Pα such that: lhpi "p^ G Qi, and for every # such that g G QΪ, 0Q{ <o ^
there is r such that q <Q r e Qi and r is incompatible with pi (in Qi)". These
are reasonable assumptions for the iterations we have in mind.
Let u — {i < κ
+ : {pi} G Gpα}, so this is a Pα-name of a subset of κ
+.
As 
U Pi is a dense subset of κ+ clearly I^PK+ "u is an unbounded subset
i<κ+
of ft
+". But for each p G P^+ and α < κ+ w.l.o.g. we have some n and
6 <•-. <ξn<κ+ such that i € Λ
+ \ { ξ ι , . . . , ξ n } = ^ ptill- '% <opΓ{iΓ-
Now there is g G P^, such that p <0 q (i.e. for every i we have q\i lhP.
"Pf{i} <o q\{i}") and for every i G α \ {ξι,...,ξn} we have !hPί "ς(i), Pi
are incompatible in Q^" . So q\\- "u Π α C {ξ1? . . . , ξn}" . As α was an arbitrary
ordinal < κ;+, necessarily H~PK+ "u has order type < α;" , but as indicated earlier
\\-Pa "sup(u) = /ς
+". Together lhP^+ "cf(ft+) = K0", certainly contrary to our
desires.

702 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
So the use of our choice is e = 2. Where is this used? In the proof see end
of the proof of 2.13 (hence also in 2.14, 2.15).
2.9 Claim. Let Q = (Pi, Qi : i < a) be an ft-Sp2-iteration, Pa = Sp2 — LimκQ
(as usual).
(1) If /?, 7 are Q-named [j, ^g(Q))-ordinals, then Max{/3,7} (defined naturally)
is a Q-named [j, £g(Q))-ordinal.
(2) If α = /?o + 1, in Definition 2.7, part (D), in defining the set of elements of
Pa we can restrict ourselves to β = /30 Also in such a case, Pa = Pβ0 * QβQ
(essentially). More exactly, {pU{<?} : P ^ Pβo> Q a P/30-
name °f a member
of QβQ} is a dense subset of PQ,, and the order pi (Jί^i) ^ Pz Ufe} iff
[Pi < Pi (in Pβo) and P2 II~PPO "^i < ^2 in Q/?0"] is equivalent to that
of Pα, in fact is the restriction of <
p° to this set, so we get the same
completion to a Boolean Algebra.
(3) |Pα| < (Σi<α 2l
P il)N, for limit α (where of course |P| - \{p/ w: p G P}|
po « Pi iff P^ IK "Pi-^ € GP" for € = 0,1).
(4) If lhPi "|Qi| < μ", μ a cardinal, then |Pί+ι| < 2'
Pίl 4- μ.
(5) If Ihp. "d(Qi) < μ" then d(P;+ι) < d(Pi) 4- μ, where d(P) is the density of
P.
(6) For α limit d(Pα) < 2
Σί<«
d(
Pί).
(7) If P = Q then P is essentially complete, i.e. for every maximal antichain
IQ U Zi of P with J0 Π Ii = 0, for some q € P, for every p G J0 U Ii, ςf is
compatible with p iff p G JQ
. Check. 
D;2.9
2.10 Claim. Suppose (K is regular and):
(a) Q = (Pi,Qi : i < a) is a AC - Sp2-iteration (and of course Pα = Sp2 -
Limκ(Q)
(b) Ihp. "(Qi, <o) is 19-complete" for i < a
(c) θ < K
Then

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
703
(1) (Pα, <o) is ^-complete, in fact: if δ < 0, (pi : i < δ) is <o-increasing then
it has an <o-upper bound (in fact, as in 2.7(G))
(2) for β < α, Pa/Pβ is ^-complete.
(3) In fact we can get <0 —lub if this holds for each Qi.
Remark. We deal with Pr+ and not Pri (here and later) just for simplicity
presentation, as it does not matter much by 2.4.
Proof: Straightforward.
(1) So assume δ < θ and pi G Pa for i < δ and [i < j < δ => Pi <0 PJ]. Now it
is enough to find p G PO such that
i < δ => pi <o p
Ihg "Dom(p) = (J Domfe)"
lhpc "pf{C} is a singleton or 0".
Let pi = {q
τ
Ί : 7 < 7i} where 7^ < K and for each ζ < ζi,q'ζ is Q-π&med
atomic condition, say Ihg "q
l
Ί G Qζί", where ζ
l
Ί is a Q-named ordinal which is
ζqi. Now for each β < a let <£ be a P^-name of a well ordering of Qβ. For
each ΐ(*) < ί,7(*) < 7i let r^*A be the following Q-named atomic condition:
Let ζ < α, Gζ C Pζ generic over V and ζ /*A[Gχ] = C> now work in V[GJ,
let iϋζ = {i < δ : for some 7 we have (7(6^] = ζ}, and for each i e wς let
wί = {7 < Ίi '• C^GC] = C}) clearly not empty; moreover for some β G u^ we
have
(V£ G ^)(^7 G ^)(q
lβ.[Gζ] <o ^[G^] & ^[G<] ^ ^7!
and let υ 
= {7 G i 
: ^JGC] <0 ^[G<]}, clearly also υf is not empty.
(As Pi is <0-increasing, Wζ is an end segment of δ and z(*) G Wζ.) We define
1: For some i G Wζ we have:

704 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
By the definition there is r G Qi such that 7 G i^ => q
l
Ί[Gζ] <0 r.
We let r^ be the <ζ[Gζ] -
 first such r
Case 2: Not case 1.
Let w'ζ = {i ewζi for no j e wς Π i do we have (PJ \{ζ})[Gζ] = (pi \{ζ})[Gζ\}.
Note, w'ζ has no last member and moreover is unbounded in 5; let j(i) =
mm(w'ζ \ (i + 1)) for i G w'ζ.
For each i G w^ by 2.2(9) we know there is βi G ΐA^ such that
[7 e t f ^ QC[GC] N «<^GC] <0 <$VcΠ
Hence by 2.2(9) we know (ςr^ [Gζ] 
: i G w£) is a <o-increasing sequence
in Qζ[Gζ], hence it has a <o-upper bound; so let rΐl be the <£[G]-least Sc-
upper bound of such a sequence in Qζ[Gζ}. Because of the "such" the choice
depend on £, Gζ but not on i(*), 7(*). Now
P
 d= ίr^**) i(*) < * and 7(*) < 7^*)}
is as required.
2), 3) Similar proof and will not be used (or use the associativity law, see
2.21(3) (which could be proved before 2.10)). 
D2.ιo
2.11 Definition. Let Q = (P^ Qi : i < a) be an K - Sp2-iteration
(1) We say y is a (Q, ζ) — E*-name (again we usually omit E*) if. y is a Pα-name,
ζ is a Q — E*-named [0, α)-ordinal, and: if β < a , GPa C Pa is generic
over V and for some r G GPa Π Pβ, r \\-Q "C = /?", ^en y[GPβ] G V[CP/3]
is well defined and depends only on Gpa Γ\Pβ so we write y[Gpa Γ\Pβ\] and
if Gpa C Pα is generic over V, C[^P«] not well defined then 2/[GPJ is not
well defined.

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
705
(2) If p G Pα, GPa C Pa generic over V\ (or just in Gen
r(Q)), thenp[GPo] is
a function, Dom(p[GPJ) - {ζq[GPo\ : q e p} and (p[GPJ)(e) - {q[GPo\ :
qεpandζq[GPa] = ε}.
2.12 Claim. Suppose
(a) (5 — (Pi> ζ?i •' 2 < α) is a ft — Sp2-iteration
(1) Assume that g is an atomic Q-named condition and ξ is a Q-rmmed ordinal
and ςfξ is defined naturally (i.e. if G G Gen(Q), and £0 = ζ[G] and
C - ζg[G\ then C < ί => (?ΓC)[G] = ?[G], and C > ί ^ OgK)[G] not
defined). Then gfξ is an atomic Q-condition with C(gtf) —
 mi
n{Cgj^} (see
2.9(1)). Similarly for q\[ξ,a). we can let Pξ
 d= {p G Pa : pff - p} and it
has the natural properties.
(2) Assume in addition
(b) p G Pα, C is a Q-uamed [0, α)-ordinals
(c) r is a (Q, C)-named member of Pa/Pζ
(d) K a successor (or just not a limit cardinal)
Then: there is q G Pα such that:
(*) ίfξ<a,GξC 
Pe generic over F, and ζ[Gξ] = ξ then (p\ξ)[Gξ\ =
(q\ζ)[Gt] and 
( q \ [ ζ , a ) ) [ G t ] = r \ [ ζ , a ) [ G ζ ]
In fact q = (p\ζ) U [rί[C^)] will do where p\ζ = {p'\ζ : p' G p},
rr[C,α) = {r
/r[C,α):r
/er}.
(3) If in (2) in addition
(c)' r is a (Q, ζ")-name of a member of Pa/Pζ above pf[ζ, α)
ί/ien we can add p < q (but now g = p U (r Γ[£, α)).
(4) If in (2) in addition
(c)+ r is a (Q, C)-named of a member of Pa/Pζ purely above p\[ζ, a)
then we can add p <o q (and now g = p U (r f[£, α)).
Proof. Straightforward (think particularly on the case ζ[G] G E* Π E(Q)).

706 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
2.13 Claim. Suppose
(a) Q — (Pi, Qi : i < a) is a K — Sp2-iteration
(b) each Qi satisfies ({2,0ι},N0) - Pri
(c) each Qi satisfies 2.1(l)(v) for θ G {2,6>ι}
(d) K is successor
Then
1) Pa satisfies 2.1(l)(v) for θ G {2,6>ι}
2) for β«x, Pa/Pβ satisfies 2.1(l)(v) for θ € {2,0ι}
Proof. 1) Let p G Pa and r be a Pα-name of an ordinal < 0, 0 e {2, #ι}. We
define a Q-named [0, α)-ordinal £: for r e Pβ, r Ih "( = /?" ίj(f
(a) there are 4,7 such that r U (pt[/3,α)) <0 q G Pβ and ςr|y3 = r\β (= r) and
7 < 0 and ς Ih "if 0 = 2, then r = 7 and: if 0 > 2 then r < 7"
(b) for no β' < β and r', r\β' < r' G P/?/ does (r
7,^
7) satisfies (a).
Note that: if β is a limit cardinal we can get (by 2.8) a contradiction to
clause (b).
However we would like to apply 2.12(2) and for this we need to prove that
ζ is a Q-named ordinal, i.e. a Q — E*-named ordinal. So (by 2.5C) let β < λ,
β G E* Π E(Q), and it suffice to find 7 < β such that \\-Q "C φ [τ,/?)" But
p\β G P/3 = U P7, so for some 7 < /?, p|y3 G P7 and this 7 is as required
7<0
because we are using Sp2 (and not Spx), that is; because if p \ β < q G Pβ then
Let q* be a (Q,C)-named member of Pa as in clause (a). Let pQ = p
and pi = p0 U (g*r[C>«))> now Po <o Pi ^ ^« by 2.12(4). We now define
P2 = Pi U {Γg '• 9 € Pi} where rq is defined as follows
(*) if β < α, GPβ C P^ generic over V and Cgl^pJ = /? and in VfGpJ there
is r such that
(i) 
Qβ[Gpβ]\=«p\{β}<*{r}zQβ[GPβγ
(ii) for some r\ G P/j+i we have: ri f/3 G Gp^ and n f {β} = r and: ri
forces (ll-p^ ) C = β + 1 or rι forces C ^ /^ + 1 and in the former case

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
707
if θ = 2 the condition r\ U (pi \[β -h 1, α)) forces a value to r, if 0 7^ 2
forces a bound to r
rg[G/j] is the <β[Gβ] -first such a member otherwise it is $Qβ.
Let us choose now β < a minimal such that
(g) there are r\ G Pβ and 7 < 0 such that p2|7? < ^i and n U (p2\[β,Cί)) 
Ih
"θ = 2,τ <7or 0^2, 1^7".
There is such /? as for some β < a and r we have p2 f/3 < r £ P/3 » and
r Ih "£ = /?" and see the choice of ζ and pi, p2; actually we can use β = a.
If β = 0 we are done. If /? is limit without loss of generality, by 2.8 for some
n < ω and ξι < . . . < ξn < β we have: p2 \β < τ\ above {ξι , . . . ,ξn}.
By the choice of r\ there are q € Pα and 7 < # such that: ς|7? = ri and
rι U (p2Γ[/3,α)) <o 9 and q lhPα "0 = 2, r = 7 or θ ^ 2, r < 7", just use
q = Π\J (P2\\β,a)). Hence β' = ζn + 1, r' - n K£n + 1) satisfy: r' <= Pξn+ι,
P2 Γ^ < r
7, ςf t^ - ^Γ(ίn + I) = ri r(ξn + 1) = r
7, and q lhPa «fl - 2, r = 7 or
β ^ 2, r < 7" and r
7 U (pt[/?
7,α)) <0 r
7 U (gt[/?
7,α)). So by the definition of
ζ we have r
7 Ih "£ < /3
7" and of course /3
7 < β. So we get a contradiction to
the choice of β. Lastly assume β = j + 1, and let G
fpj. C P^ be generic over V
such that 7*1 \j e Gpj . If for some q e pi we have Cg[^Pj] = 3 (so we could use
ΐq £ Pi) tne contradiction is gotten similarly using the definition of p2 (note
that for θ ^ 2 we use the result for θ = 2!). In the remaining case we can
decrease β by the definition of <0°< (as we use Sp2 rather than SpjJ).
2) Same proof (or 2.21(2)). 
Π2.ι3
Now 2.10 -h 2.13 suffice to show that no bounded subset of K, is added by the
K - Sp2- iteration (if say each Q< has ({<9 : H0 < θ = d(θ) <κ}U {2}, 7) - Prf
for 7 < «. But we may like to deal with iterations which e.g. add reals. The
next claim does better.
2.14 Claim. Assume
(a) Q = (Pi, Qi : i < a) is a « — Sp2-iteration

708 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
(b) each Qi satisfies the ({(9}, NI) - Prf, and θ = cf(θ) > H0
(c) K is a successor cardinal.
Then
(1) Pa satisfies ({0},Nι) - PrJ-
(2) also for β < α, Pα/P^ satisfies ({0},Nι) - Pr+.
Proo/ of2.14. Before proving, (in 2.14E) we define and prove in 2.14A - 2.14D,
retaining our 0, /ς, K - Sp2-iteration Q, and α = ίg(Q). We can assume that
2.14 holds for any case with a' < a instead of α
2.14A Definition.
(1) Γi = {(p, (,τ) 
'- P £ Pa and ζ is a Q-named [0, α)-ordinal and r is a Pα-
name of an ordinal < 0 such that: if p G Ga C Pα, Gα generic over V and
£[Gα] = ζ then for some r G Gα Π P^ and ε < θ we have r lhpα "r < ε"}
(2) Γ2 = {(p, C>l) ^ IV. Ihg "ζ is a non limit ordinal", and for every β < a
we have: if there are r and q such that P/3 \= "p\β < r", r G P/?, lhP/3 "ςι G
9^ & pf{/3} <0 f and r U {?} lhQ "C - β + 1" or r U {?} Ihg "C ^ /? 4- 1"
ίften we can use ς = pf{^}}
(3) For y = (p, ζ, τ) let us define a Pα-name ^^ for Ga C Pa generic over V
wy[Ga] — {β < a : for some r e GaΓ\Pβ and q G p we have
r^ll-<5
t tC s[G
fP/ 5]=^ and
r and -(3r
7 G P/3+ι)(r < (/^)
&rΊhg "C is not =)
2.14B Subclaim.
(1) If le {1,2} and (p,C,r) ^
 Γ^ and p <0 Pi e Pα then(Pl,ζ,τ) eΓέ
(2) If p G Pα and r is a P^-name of an ordinal < 0 ίften for some (p', ζ', r
f ) G
we have p <0 p
x and p' \VPa "τ' = r"

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
709
(3) If (p, C,τ) £ Γi ίften for some (p',C',r') € Γ2 we have p <0 p', lhPβ "£' < C
andτ'>τ".
Proof. 
1) Read the definitions.
2), 3) Like the proof of 2.13. 
Π2.ι4β
2.14C Subclaim. If y — (p, ζ", r) 6 Γ2 then the (P^-name of a) set wy satisfies:
(a) lhPα «β G wy => /? < C"
(b) if Gα C Pa is generic over V and β £ wy[Ga] then some r G Gα Π Pβ
forces this; in fact if r lhPα "/? G wy" then r f/3 lhPa "/? G w/.
(c) lhPcy "^ is a finite subset of α"
Proof. For clauses (a), (b) read 2.14A(3), so let us prove clause (c).
If not, for some Gpa C Pa generic over V, and wy[Gpa} is infinite, and let
Co < 0 
- be the first ω members. Let δ
 d= \Jn<ω ζn, so V[GPa] 
\= "cf (δ) =
»o
M.
Let ί and (ζn : n < α;} be the corresponding Pα-names, so there are
r G Gpo and /? and 5 < α such that r lhPα "ζ" = β and δ = δ (and ^ is
infinite)". Now as ζn[Ga] G t/;y, by Definition 2.14A(3) (the clausep\β < r) we
have pfCn[^α] ^ Gα; and as this hold for every n we have p\δ G Gα, so as we
can increase r w.l.o.g. p\6 < r. Hence by 2.8 without loss of generality for some
n < <j, and ξι <...,< ξn < α, we have pfί < r above {£ι,..., ξn} so letting £0
be: β if β < δ, 0 if β > δ and letting ξ = sup[δ Π {ξ0, fi, 
, ξn}] we know that
ξ < ί and r lhPα
 u<u;y Π (ξ, δ) ^ 0" hence for some ε and ri, we have r < TI G Pa
and ε G (^, δ) and ri lhPα "ε G wy". But by the definition ofwy, i.e. by 2.14C(b)
we have: r±\ε lhPe "ε G wy" and clearly nfε lhPe "pί{ε| <0 rf{ε}" hence by
the definition of wy we have (rifε) U (rf{ε}) ^Pe+1 "C is not = ε + 1" hence
(as C is a ζj-named ordinal) there is r2 such that (rifε) U (rf{ε}) < r2 G Pε+ι
and r2 \\-Q "ζ = ε -f 1". But ε 4-1 ^ /3 by the choice of £0 and ξ and ε, and
r lhPα "C = β" so r2, r should be incompatible in P. But
r t(ε + 1) < (ri fε) U (rfίε}) < r2 G Pe+ι.

710 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
[Why? As r < 7*1, and choice of r% (twice).]
Hence by 2.7 clause (F) we know r, r% are compatible, contradiction. 
Π2.14C
2.14D Subclaim. If y = (p,C,l) € Γ2 then we can find p+, ζn, rn for n < α;
such that:
(a) p <o P+ € Pa
(b) (p+,Cn,Tn)eΓι
(c) if Ga C Pα is generic over V, then Cn[<?α] is the n-th member of wy[Ga]
if there is one, if so then for some r £ GC^GC,] we have p
+ ίCn[Gα] < r and
r U (p
+Γ{Cn[Gβ]}) lhpα « if C[GPJ - Cn[Gα] 4-1 then r(Ga] < rn[Ga]
n.
Proof. Straight using 2.10 (for θ = NI) to have a <o-upper bound, and taking
care of n work as in 2.14B(2) i.e. as in 2.13. 
Π2.14D
2.14E Completion of the proof of 2.14. We concentrate on part (1) (the
proof of part (2) being similar or use 2.21(3), and it is not used). By 2.7, clause
(E) we know that (i) - (iv) of Definition 2.1(1) holds, and by 2.10(1) not only
clause (vi) of Definition 2.1(1) and the extra demand from Definition 2.1(2)
hold, so the problem is to verify clause (v) in Definition 2.1(1), i.e. the pure
decidability. So let p G Pa and r is a Pα-name and p\\- "r < θ", we have to find
</, j such that p <0 q £ Pa and j < θ and q lhPα "r < j
n. So we can replace p,
r by p', r
1 if p <0 p
r and p' Ih "r < r
1 < θ". By subclaim 2.14B(2)+(3) w.l.o.g.
for some ζ the triple (p, ζ", r) belongs to Γ2 We choose by induction on n < ω,
pn, p+ and ((ζη,τη,jη,τ'η) 
: η G
 nω) such that:
(a) po - P, r() = r, C{> = C = J{)
(b) (pn,C»?»Γτ7) ^
 Γ2 for each n < ω, η G
 nω
(c) pn <0 Pn <0 Pn+1
(d) for each n and 77 £
 nω we have:
(ΐ) OV<fc) : fc < ^} list ^(pn.C^Γ,) U {0}
(
n) Jr7
Λ(/c) is a Q-named [0, α)-ordinal
(iii) 
Tη~/k) i
s a P^.^^name of an ordinal < θ

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
711
(iv) if Ga C Pa is generic over V, and β = jη[Ga], and p+ \(β + 1) G Ga
and β = ζη[Ga] then τ'η.(k}[Ga] > τη[Ga]
W (p^M*>'2v<fc))
€ Γ l
(e) pn+ι \\-Pa "Crf (fc) < .?><*), and CrΓ(A ) is πon limit and r^/,} > r^(A;)" for
n < ω, η G
 nu;, and k < ω.
The case n = 0 is straight. Having arrived to stage n, i.e. pn and ("77, IT?
for η G
 n-α; are defined and as required, list (
nω) as (ηι : I < ω) and choose
by induction on I < ω, p+^, jηι~(k),
 
Tη^(k) for k < ω such that Pn,o = Pn,
Pni ^o Pn^+i
 an<^ ^n^+i
 satisfi
es tne requirements of p+ for η = ηt which is
possible by Subclaim 2.14D. Then let p+ = (J^^ί^ (^ ^
s a ^o-upper bound
of {Pnt : ^ < ω}; by 2.10 + assumption (b) of 2.14 it exists, but why it still
satisfies the demands? By Subclaim 2.14B(1)). Now the choice of Pn+i, ζη~(k)ι
IV (fc) f°
r η £
 U(jji k < ω is by Subclaim 2.14B(3) again using 2.10(1).
Again there is p"
1", a <o-upper bound of {pn : n < ω}, it satisfies p <Q pn <o
p+ G Pa and letting 7 = supjr^ : jη = 0} < θ we can prove p+ Ih "τη < 7
when τη is defined". For this we prove by induction on j < a that p\j \\-p0 "if
η G
 ω>ω and jη < j then τη < 7" (similarly to the proof of 2.13). As r = T{>
we are done. 
1^2.14
Remark. Actually the tree we use is of finite splitting.
2.15 Conclusion. Assume
(a) Q = (Pi, Qi : i < a) is a K, — Sp2 - E*-iteration
(b) each Qi satisfies (5, < K) - Pr^" and (N0 G 5 => 2 G S)
(c) K successor
(1) Pa satisfies (5, < K) - Pr^
(2) for β < α, Pα/^9 satisfies (5, < K) -
Remark. 1) Note: if ft is not a cardinal we can replace it by |/ί|+; &ΐ/£ during
the iteration |κ|
+ may increase.

712 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
2) We can replace Prf by Pri with minor changes but because of 2.6 the gain
is doubtful.
Proof. By 2.10, 2.14 (and 2.7 of course). 
D2.ι5
2.16 Discussion. Suppose α is an ordinal and Q = (P^, Qi 
: i < a) is a
K — Sp2-iteration (so Pa — Sp2 — Lim/c(Q)). We may wonder whether:
(a) If a is strong inaccessible and density(P^) < a for i < a then density(Pα) ==
α.
(b) If a is a Mahlo and Mi < a[\Pi\ < α], then Pa satisfies the α-c.c.
As unlike X §1 we use antichains of (J Pi (rather than antichains which
i<a
are maximal in P whenever /\ PI <£ P) this is not clear. Note that in 2.17
i<a
below, we can weaken the Pri demand to lhpα "0 remains regular" .
2.17 Lemma. Suppose Q = (P;, Qi : i < a) is a κ-Sp2 — E*-iteration, K > N0
a successor cardinal, S C {2} U {μ : NO < μ,μ regular }, HO € 5 = 2 G 5, and
each Qi (in V
Pί), has (5, < K) - Pr^ (see 2.1(4)). Then:
(1) If K < θ G S and cf (α) = θ then \Ji<a P< is dense in Pα.
(2) If a is strongly inaccessible > min(5 \ K), α > |P$| -f ft for i < α (or just
Pi satisfies the α-c.c.) and a G E* then Pa satisfies the α-chain condition
(in a strong sense).
(3) If each Qi satisfies (RCar \ K, K) — Prf and has power < χ, then Pa has
a dense subset (even a <o-dense subset) of power (2^
+x)
<κ and satisfies
(3) If α is strongly inaccessible and E* Π α is a stationary subset of α and
[i < α => I Pi I < α] or at least [i < α => P^ satisfies the λ^-c.c. for some
λi < α] then Pa satisfies the α-chain condition (a strong version indeed).
Proof. 1) Left to the reader.
2) Choose θ G S \ K. Let (PJ : j < α) be a sequence of elements of PQ, now as
α G E* we have PJ G \Ji<a Pi- Let A — {j < a : cf(j) = #}, this is a stationary
set. For j e A choose TJ G (Ji<c PΪ, TJ > PJ \j (why such TJ exist? by part (1)),

§2. Pseudo Completeness 
713
say TJ G PUJ), i(j) < j. Let C = {i : j limit, Vi < j3j < j f a G PΊ]}. This is a
club subset of α.
By Fodor's lemma we can find B C C Π A stationary such that for all
j i i f a £ B we have i(jι) = i(fa) and TJI = Tj2 = r or at least r^, rj2 are
compatible in \Ji<i(jl}
 pi and let rjι»
 rja ^ r e U<iϋ1)
 P*
(Remember that |P^| < a or at least Pi satisfies the α-c.c. for i < a)
But for any such j\ < fa the condition r U PJI \\jι, fa) U pj2 \\J2,a) is a
common upper bound for PJI , pj2 .
(3) Like III 4.1 use only names which are hereditarily < AC (see below).
(4) Like part (2) using 2.7(E) (so 2.5(1) (b)) instead using part (1). D2.i7
We may wonder about K - Spe-iterations which essentially do not change
cofinality.
2.18 Definition. We define for an Spe-iteration Q, and cardinal μ (μ regular),
what is a Q-name hereditarily < μ, and in particular a Q-named [j, α)-ordinal
hereditarily < μ and a Q-named [j, α)-atomic condition hereditarily < μ, and
which conditions of Spe-LimκQ are hereditarily < μ (formally they are not
special cases of the corresponding notions without the "hereditarily < μ"). For
simplicity we are assuming that the set of members of Qi is in V . This is done
by induction on a = ίg(Q).
First case, a = 0
trivial
Second case, a > 0
(A) A Q-named [j, α)-ordinal ξ hereditarily < μ is a Q-named [j, α)-ordinal
which can be represented as follows: there is ((pi,ξi) : i < i*),i* < μ, each
ξi an ordinal in [j, a),pi G P& is a member of P^ hereditarily < μ and for
any G G Gen
r(Q), ζ[G] is (" iff for some i we have
(a) P i€G,Ci = C
(b) if PJ € G then Ci < <,- V (ζt = ζjki < j)

714 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
(B) A Q-named [j, α)-atomic condition q hereditarily < μ, is a Q-named [j, α)-
atomic condition which can be represented as follows: there is ((pi, ζi, qi) :
i < i*),ί* < μ,ζi G b',α),pi G PCi,ft € V, and for any G G Genr(<5),</[G]
is q iff for some i:
(a) PieG,q = ft, and Pi lhpCi "g G QCί"
(b) if 
ft G G then Ci < 0 V (Ci = Cj & * < j)
(C) A member p of Pα = Spe - LimΛ(Q) is hereditarily < μ if each member of
r is a Q-named atomic condition hereditarily < μ.
(D) A Q-name of a member of V hereditarily < μ is defined as in clause
(B), similarly for member x G V
Pa such that y G transitive closure of
x & y φ V => 12/| < μ.
2.19 Claim. Suppose (Pi,Qi : z < α) is an K —Spe-iteration, Pα = Spe-Lim^Q,
AC a successor cardinal, each Qi (in V
Pi) satisfies (RCar
v x \ «, K) — Prf. Tften
(1) {p G Pα 
P hereditarily < K} is a dense subset of Pα, even a <o-dense
subset
(2) Pα preserve "cf(ί) > K"
(3) for every p G Pα and r a Pα-name of an ordinal there are p*, p <o p* G Pα,
and Λ G V, a set of < K ordinals such that q \\-pa "τ G A".
Proof. Should be clear. 
D;2.19
2.20 Remark. We can also get a similar theorem for forcing notions (Q, <, <o)
as in 2.1 where instead of <o is ^-directed complete (see 2.4(d)) we demand
that (vi) ("strategical completeness" of <0).
2.21 Claim. (1) Suppose F is a function and e — {1,2}, then for every ordinal
α there is Spe-iteration Q = (Pi, Qi : i < α^}, such that:
(a) for every i,Qi = F(Qfi),
(b) α
f < α,
(c) either α^ = α or F(Q) is not an (RlimQ)-name of a forcing notion.

§3. Axioms 
715
(2) Suppose Q is an ft — Spe-iteration of length a and β < a, Gβ C Pβ is generic
over V, ίften in V^G/j], <9/G/j = (Pi/Gβ,Qi : /? < i < α) is an Spe-iteration
and Spe — Lim(Q) = Pβ * (Spe - LimQ/G^) (essentially).
(3) If Q is an ft - Sp2-iteration, p G Sp2 — Lim(<5), P/ = {# G P; : <? >
p\i}, Q'i = {p^Qi^P> P\{i}} then Q = {/*, Q( : i < IgQ) is (essentially) an
Spe iteration (and Sp2Lim(<3
/) is P£ *).
Proof. Should be clear. 
IU2.12
§3. Axioms
We can get from the lemma of preservation of forcing with (5, 7) - Prf by
K — Sp2 iteration (and on the λ-c.c. for then) forcing axioms. We list below
some variations.
3.1 Notation. 1) Reasonable choices for S are
(A) S% = RUCar<κ = {μ : μ a regular cardinal, N0 < μ < ft}
(B) Si = {2} U RCar<« = {2} U {μ : μ a regular cardinal, N0 < μ < ft}
(C) If we write "< ft" instead < ft (and S<κ instead S^) the meaning
should be clear.
2) [Convention] E* is the class of strongly inaccessible cardinal > ft.
3.2 Fact. Suppose the forcing notion P satisfies (5,7) — Pri
(1) If 2 G 5 then P does not add any bounded subset of 7.
(2) If μ is regular, and \i(i < μ) are regular, and {μ} U {\i : i < μ} C 5, D
here is a uniform ultrafilter on μ, θ = cf(Πi<μλi/D) 
(λ^-as an ordered
set) then P satisfies (5 U {#}, 7') - Pri whenever μ^' < 7, (μ^
1 is ordinal
multiplication). We can do this for all such θ simultaneously.
(3) If λ G 5 is regular, μ < 7 then for every / : μ — > λ from F
p, for some
g : μ — > λ from V for every α < μ, f ( a ) < g(oί).

716 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
Proof. (1) and (3) are clear.
For (2), fix an increasing cofinal (modulo D) sequence (/^ : a < θ) in 
Y[ X?
i<μβ
if θ = cf ( Π λ</JD0) with \l G 5, μ = μθ G 5.
i<μ
To play the game DI for (S(J{Θ}, 7')— Pri from 2.4(b), player II on the side plays
the U2 game for (5, 7) but for move β in DI, he uses moves (ζ : IJ7</3 CT < C <
£0) in D2, he also chooses Cα's during the play. If player I chooses a Xβ e 5, r/3,
in DI, player II copies Γs move to 0)2 and plays his answer from there and let
C/3 = U7</9 Cγ + l If player I plays in the β-th move Xβ = cf(Πj<μ 
Xptj/Dβ),
Tβ, player II simulates μ moves of 0)2 :
Then player II finds Oίi such that {j : a? < fai(j)} 
€ D and plays this α; and
let ζβ = U7</3 C7 + M-
It is clear that α^ is as required, and as μ^' < 7, D2 does not end before DI.
Π3.2
3.3 Claim. Suppose MA<K holds (i.e., for every P satisfying the NI-C.C. and
dense Ii C P (for i < α < K) there is a directed G C Q such that Λ;<α ^n^ /
0). Tften the following forcing notions are equivalent to forcing notions having
the (RUCar,*)-Pri.
(1) Mathias forcing; {(w, A) : w C α; finite, A C α; infinite} with the order
(wι,Aι) < (W2, AZ) 
iff lϋi C iy2 C lϋi U AI, ^2 C AI.
(2) The forcing from VI §6(=[Sh:207], Sect. 2).
(1) Let P' be the set of (w, A, B) satisfying: w C ω finite, B C ω infinite,
C A C α;, with the order
(n i, A!, fix) < (ιι;2, A2, B2) iff (u>ι, AI) < K, A2)
and B2 C* B^i.e. , J52 \ J3ι finite)

§3. Axioms 
717
(wι, A\, BI) <0 (w2, A2, B2) iff: wι = w2
B2 ^ B\.
Let us check Definition 2.1: (i) - (iv) easy.
Note that {(w, A, A) : (w, A, A) G P'} is dense in P', and isomorphic to
P.
Proof of (υ). Let μ > H0 be a regular cardinal, τ a P'-name, Ihp "r < μ. Let
p = (w, A, B) be given. Choose by induction on i < ω,m, Bi such that
(a) B0=B(CA)
(b) Hi — Min(β-j)
(c) J5ί+ι C Bi \ {nj
(d) for every u C {0,1,2,..., nj (not just C {n0,nι,... ,nj!) one of the
following occurs:
for some α^u < μ, we have (u,Bi+\,Bi+\) Ihp "r = ai?n"
or for no infinite C C Bi+ι and α < μ do we have (u,C,C) Ih "r = α"
There is no problem to do this, now q = (w, A, {rii : i < ω}) satisfies:
(e) p < q G P' and even p <0 q.
(f) q Ihp/ "r G {α;,u : i < α; and u C {0,1, 2,..., nj}".
[Why? If not, then for some α G μ \ {α?ΐ,u '• i < ω and u C {0,1,..., τii}}
and r we have q < r e P' and r Ihp/ "r = α". Let r = (vjA
7,^') so
B' C ^l
7, β
7 is infinite, β
7 C* {n^ : i < ω} and A! C A. As v is finite
and by the definition of C* there is i < ω such that: υ C {0, ...,71*} and
B' \ {0,... ,ni} C {nj : j < ω}. So without loss of generality Mm(B') > n^,
and A' = B'\ so by the choice of Bi+\, (υ,Bi+ι,Bi+ι) Ih "r = α^,n", but
a/ ^ Qjΐ)υ so (v,Bi+ι,Bi+ι), r = (v,A',B') are incompatible, contradiction]. So
q is as required.
Proof of (vi). Suppose pi(i < 7) is <0-increasing so Pi — (w,A,Bi) and
Bi C ^4, and J?ΐ is C* decreasing. It is well known that for 7 < AC, MA<K
implies the existence of an infinite B C ω such that (Vi < j)B C* Bi. Now
(w, A, B) G P' and i < Ύ =ϊ Pi <o (w, A, B), as required.
(2) Left to the reader (similar to the proof of (1)). 
Π3.3

718 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
3.4 Discussion - Proofs. Let K, < λ, λ regular. Each of the following gives
rise naturally to a forcing axiom, stronger as λ is demanded to be a larger
cardinal (so if λ is supercompact we get parallels to PFA).
If φ is a property of forcing notions, let Ax<a(φ, λ, μ) be the following
statement: For every forcing notion P of size < μ if P satisfies φ and ϊ = (Xi :
i < i* < λ) is a sequence of dense subsets of P and ((KJ,§J) : j < j* < α) a
sequence of pairs, with Sj a P-name of stationary subset of KJ, where KJ is a
regular uncountable cardinal < λ then there is a Z-generic subset G of P such
that (as say i < i* => Ii Π G ^ 0 and) j < j* =Φ §j[G] a stationary subset of
*j
Case /. We assume K is successor cardinal and use Q of length λ, a K — Sp2-
iteration, lhp. "|Q;| < λ", each φ having (S*,«)- PrJ" and £ € {0,2} and
(usually) 0{μ:μ<λ is strongly inaccessible}-
Now PΛ — K — Sp2-Lim^Q have the (S^, K) — Pr+ by 2.15, so all regular
μ < K remain regular and every λ' E («, λ) is collapsed (in the general case i.e.
if Q "generic" enough). But λ is not collapsed if it is strongly inaccessible (by
2.17(2)). If 2 E S£, no bounded subset of K is added. We can get Ax<κ((S^ «)-
Pri, λ,λ
+j. Note: if λ is in V, supercompact with Laver diamond, we get
Ax((S£,<«)-Prι,λ,oo) (see VII).
So (even if we assume E* = 0) the theorems of §2 are strong enough to deal
with such iterations get forcing axioms etc. Of course you may then look for
forcing notions which can serve as iterant, of course ^-complete and ^-complete
θ~*~-c.c. forcing notions can serve. For some more see §4, §5 below.
Case II. Like Case I (but K, may be limit > HO) with (ft + 1) — Sp2-iteration each
Qi-having (S^κ + 1) — Prf and every λ' G («, λ) is collapsed. Here we can
get Ax<\ ((S£, K + 1) — PrJ, λ, λ+ J. Here λ is not collapsed (even Pχ satisfies
the λ-c.c.) if it is strongly inaccessible Mahlo (by 2.17(4)). If λ is supercompact
with Laver diamond we get Ax<\ ((S£, K + 1) — Pr, λ, oo J.
The situation is similar to that of case 1: this time better using a non
empty E* e.g. the one of 3.1(2).

§3. Axioms 
719
Case lll\ Like case 1 but Qi satisfies (5^., AC^) - Pr/~, Ki+ι >density(Pi) and AC^
strictly increasing with i. So in V
Fχ, X is still inaccessible (though not strongly
inaccessible) .
Here we better do a variant of §2 (i.e. 2.6A -2.21) without AC. Let E* be the class
of strongly inaccessible > NO- In Definition 2.7 there, the restriction of \p\ for
p G AC - Sp2 - Lim<2 is only: β G E* Π E(Q) =» for some 7 < /?, p\β G PΊ (this
change 2.7(D), the above statement replaces (A)(i)). For any Q and β < a
(= ig(Q) we define a partial order <o,0 on Pα: p <o,0 # iff pf/3 = q\β and
P <o #• Now 2.10 is changed to
(*) if i G (/3,α) ^Il-Pi (Qi, <Q^) is ^-complete then (Pα, <o,0) is ^-complete.
In Claim 2.12 we can omit clause 2.12(2)(d).
In Claim 2.12 becomes
(*) for (our kind of) <3, and β < a — ^g(Q), and regular θ assume i G
β(a) =φlhpi "Qi satisfies ({^};^ι) - Pr^, and Pβ satisfies the 0-c.c. and
p lhpα "r < β" then for some q and C? we have p <o,0 q £ P&, and
9i^"r<C<0"
Ca.se VI: Like case I but AC is an uncountable inaccessible (possibly weakly)
cardinal.
The problem with applying §2 is rooted in assumption (d) in 2.12(2),
which is needed for the iteration as presented. We should change 2.7 as follows
in 2.7(D) allow z* < AC, but demand Ihg "{ζqi[G} : i < i*} has order type < AC".
Of course we should assume each Pi has at least ({AC}, KI) — Pr]
1". However,
does this really add compared to Case II?
3.5 Conclusion. Suppose λ is strongly inaccessible, limit of measurables,
λ > AC, AC successor. Then for some λ-c.c. forcing P not adding bounded subsets
of AC, |P| = λ, and Ihp "2* = λ = AC+, and for every A C AC there is a countable
subset of λ not in
Proof. Use case I of 3.4. We use AC - Sp2-iteration (P^, Qi : i < λ), \Pi\ < λ. For
i even: let AC^ be the first measurable > |Pi|, (but necessarily < λ). Then Qi is

720 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
Prikry forcing on «$ and Qi+ι is Levy collapse of «t to K. (Compare X 
5.5.)
Π3.5
§4. On Sacks Forcing
We continue 3.3, 3.4. Assume for simplicity λ is strongly inaccessible, λ > K.
We want to show that we can find an K — Sp2-iteration which force some Ax[. . .].
A natural way is to use a preliminary forcing notion R.
A natural candidate is: R = {Q : Q G H(X),Q an K — Sp2-iteration of
forcing notions satisfying (5, tt) — PrJ" }. As an example, we will prove this for
Sacks forcing.
4.1 Lemma. Suppose
(i) R is an NI -complete forcing notion.
(ii) For r G R, Q
r = (PI : ί < α
r), PI is <£-increasing in i and if j < a
r
has cofinality ω\, then every countable subset of α;, which belongs to
V
p* belongs to V
p^ for some i < j. We write P
r for P£r
(iii) If r
1 < r
2 then Q
r* < Q
r* (end extension), so P
rι <$ P
r*
(iv) 
If r £ R and Q is a P^-name of a forcing notion, ί/ien for some
r
1 > r, α
rι > α
r and P^+1 = Par * Q
7 and Ihpn " if Q does satisfy
the c.c.c. then Q' = Q"
(v) If r^ for (ζ < δ) is increasing, δ <ω\, then for some r
** < r and αr = ^J αrc .
ζ<δ 
ζ<δ
Let P[Gβ] be \J{P[ : r G Gβ, i < αr}, so it is an P-name of a forcing notion.
Then Ihfl [!!~P[GR] "f°
r anY ^i dense subsets of Sacks forcing, there is a directed
subset of Sacks forcing not disjoint to any of them"].
Remark. Remember Qsacks — {r : r C
 
ω><2 is closed under initial segments
nonempty and (Vr? G τ)(3z/)(τ/ < z/ & v~ (0) G r & v 
(1) G r)} and TI < r2 if
τ C 
.

§4. On Sacks Forcing 
721
R*P[QR}
Proof. Let for ξ < ω\, Iξ be R * P^βj-name of dense subset of QSacks 
for
ξ < ω\ (Quacks is Sacks forcing in the universe V). W.l.o.g. the Xξ are open.
We will find a c.c.c. subset Q' of Qs*^,
[f
βl such that Iζ Π Q' is dense in Q' for
each ξ < ω\. Then any generic subset of Q' intersects all Zξ's.
For a subset E of Sacks forcing let var(E') be {(n,τ) : r G E, n < ω}
ordered by (m, n) < (™2, τ2) iff ni < n2, τ2 C n and n Π
nι^ 2 = r2 Π
nι^ 2.
(If D C var(Qsαcfcs) is sufficiently generic, then rjr> = U{τfn : (n, τ) G d} is
a condition in Qsacks)- We now define by induction on ζ < cji, r(ζ), and D^
such that (the order as the one on Q Sacks)'-
(a) r(ζ) G β is increasing, αr(£)-increasing continuous.
(b) £>£ is a P
r^
+1)-name of a countable subset of Qsacks-
(c) If T G £>£, 77 G r then r^ = {ί^ : 77
 Λ z^ G r} belongs to Dζ. (We use
round parentheses to distinguish it from r^j, see clause (f)).
(d) Ifrι,r 2GD cthen{(}, (0) "η : η G n}, {(}, (1)
 A η : 77 G r2} and their
union belongs to Dζ.
(e) Let ξ < C, then for every TI G Dζ there is τ2 G Dζ such that TI < τ2
and for every r2 G Dζ there is TI G Dξ such that TI < τ2.
(f) If T G Dζ then for some n for every 77 G
 n2 Π T we have T^J = {i/ G
T : z/ < 77 or η < v} belongs to Iζ (i.e. is forced (Ihβ) to belong to it).
(g) Suppose C is limit, then P^J^ = ^ί(C) *^C? «C is [var Ue<C ^CJ"
(the α -th power, with finite support).
(h) the generic subset of Qζ gives a sequence of length ω of Sacks con-
ditions; closing the set of those conditions by (c) -f (d) + (f) we get
Dζ
We have to prove that Qζ satisfies the KI-C.C. in V
R*
Ptχr(U: (to get a
generic subset by (iv)). If £ < u i this follows by countability. Let ζ = ω\.
[
-in
var Uf<c^d 
satisfies the HI-C.C. where n < ω.
So let J be a R * P^9--name of a maximal antichain of var U<^ Dξ\ .
def 
Λ*P
r(c)
We can find a ξ < ζ, cf (ξ) = H0 such that J| = {x : x G Va ,^ 
and every

722 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
p G (R*P
r^(ζ})/(R*P
r^}) 
force x to be in J] is pre-dense in [var (J7<ξ LU *
(exists by (e) and assumption (i)). Check the rest.
Notice that we have used:
(a) ifY C Uξ<ξ0
 D& £o < C» Y £ F
p"^o) and y is a pre-dense subset
of Uξ<£0 ^ (^ does
 no^ matter where but e.g., in V
p) then y is a
pre-dense subset of (Jξ<c -^ξ? because
(al) every r G £)ξ0 is included in a finite union of members of Y.
(a2) every r e \Jξ<ε<ζ Dε is included in some member of DξQ.
4.2 Remark. 1) This argument works for many other forcing notions, e.g.,
Laver forcing.
2) The var(Sacks) was introduced by author to show Sacks forcing may
not collapsed ^2 (see Baumgartner and Laver [BL]).
3) In later work Velickovic get results for > NI dense sets.
§5. Abraham's Second Problem -
Iterating Changing Cofinality to ω
5.1 Definition. Let 5 be a subset of {2} U {K, : K is regular cardinal}, D a
filter on a cardinal λ (or any other set). For any ordinal 7, we define a game
D*(5, 7, D). It lasts 7 moves. In the i-th move player I choose a cardinal ^ G 5
and function FI from λ to ^ and then player II chooses α^ < «;$.
Player II wins a play if for every i < 7,
d((ftj, Fj, Oίj : j < i)) = {ζ < λ : for every j < i we have
[Ki = 2 => Fj(ζ) = otj] and [KJ > 2 => F^C) < α^]} ^ 0 mod D.
5.1 A Remark.
(1) This is similar to the game of X4.9, but there we also demand d({κj, F3 , QJ :
j < -y) ^ 0 mod D.
(2) If not said otherwise, we assume that λ \ {ζ} G D for ζ < λ.

§5. Abraham's Second Problem - Iterating Changing Cofinality to ω 
723
(3) If D is an ultrafilter on λ which is /^-complete for each K e S and \Ύ\~*~-
complete (if 7 a cardinal 7-complete) then player II has a winning strategy
(if 7 is a cardinal, 7-completeness suffices).
(4) Of course only F i \ d ( ( κ j , F j , a j 
: j < i)) matters so player I can choose
only it.
5.2 Definition. For F a winning strategy for player II in D*(5, 7, D), D a
filter on λ (we write λ = λ(£>)), we define Q = QF,\ = ζ?F, s,7,£>, with
Q = (\Q\, <,<o) as follows.
Part A. Let (T,H) G Q iff
(i) T is a nonempty set of finite sequences of ordinals < λ.
(ii) η G T => η\i G T, and for some (unique) n and 77 of length n we
have: T Π
 n^λ = {77^ : ί < n}, |Γ Π
 n+1λ| > 2; we call η the trunk of
Γ, 77 = tr(Γ) = tr(Γ, /f) (it is unique).
(iii) if is a function, T \ (tr(T) ^ : ^ < ίg(tr(Γ))} C Dom(#) C
 ω>λ.
(iv) for each η G Dom(if), #(77) is a proper initial segment of a play
of the game ό)*(5, 7,-D) in which player II use his strategy F so
H(η) = (λf
W, Ff
 (η\ a?^ : i < i*W) and <^> < 7.
(v) if tr(Γ) < η G Dom(#) Π Γ we have {( < λ : r/
Λ (ζ) G Γ} = d(tf(r/))
(see Definition 5.1).
(vi) convention: if p = (T, H) we may write η G p for 77 G Γ.
Part 5. (Γi, #ι) < (T2, ^2) (where both belong to Q) iff Γ2 C TI and for each
η G T2, if tr(Γ2) < η then ^1(77) is an initial segment of #12(77).
Part C. (Ti, #ι) <0 (Γ2,ίf2) (where both belong to Q) if (Ti, fίi) < (Γ2, ff2)
and tr(Γι) = tr(Γ2).
5.2A Remark . (1) So if (Γ, H) G QF,λ and F,λ,£>,7, 5 are as above,
η G T, 77 > tr(T) ί/ien d(H(η)) ^ 0 mod -D. (So this forcing is similar to
Namba forcing, but here we have better control of the sets Sucτ(η)>)
(2) We can of course generalize this to cases where we have different strategies
(and even different λ's and Z}'s) in different nodes.

724 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
(3) If (Γ,fl» G QF,Λ for £ = 1,2 #ιΓT = #2ίT then (T,#ι), (T,#2) are
equivalent (see Chapter II).
5.2B Notation . For p = (T, H) G QF> λ and η G Γ let pM = (T^, if), where
TW = {i/ G Γ : v < η or 77 < v}. Clearly p < pM G QF, λ
5.3 Lemma. If Q = QF,s , -γ,D
 and £) is a uniform filter on \(D) then
Proo/. Let r?Q - LK
tr(p) : P £ QQ}
Clearly if (T£, HI) 
G GQ for ί = 1,2 then for some (Γ, ff) G GQ,
(ϊi, #*) < (T, £Γ); hence tr(ϊi) < tr(Γ), hence tr(Γι, HI) U tr(T2,ff2) is in
ω>X. Hence ηq is a sequence of ordinals of length < ω.
For every p = (T, ff) G Q, and n, there is η G Γ Π
 nλ, hence p < pW G Q
(see 5.2B), and p
[r7' Ih "tg(ηq) > n" because η < tr(pW) and for every q G Q
we have q \\-Q "tr(ςr) < ?]Q". So Ihg "T^Q has length > n" hence Ihg "T/Q has
length ω".
Obviously, lhg
 αRang(r/Q) C λ". Why !hQ "sup Rang(ryQ) = λ"? Because
for every (T, H) G Q and a < λ, letting η
 d= tr(Γ), clearly d(H(η)) ^ 0 mod D
(see Definition 5.2) but D is uniform, hence there is β G d(H(η)), β > α, so
r/
Λ(/3) G T, and (T, ff) < (T, H)h
Λ Wl G Q and (Γ, H)b" Wl lhQ
 uη" (β) <
ηQ
n hence (T, H)h "
 (/3)] Ih "supRang(r7Q) > /?", as α < β we 
finish. 
D5.3
5.4 Lemma. If λ, 5, 7, D are as in Definition 5.1, N0 ^ 5, F a winning strategy
of player II in D*(5,7,D) and cf(7) > NO, Λen QF,A satisfies (5,cf(7)) - Prf
(see Definition 2.1(2)). [So if 2 G 5, then forcing by QF,X add no bounded
subsets of 7] .
Proof. In Definition 2.1, parts (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and part (vi) are clear. So let
us check part (v). Let K G 5, τ be a Q-name, Ihg "r G K" and p = (Γ, H) G Q.
We define by induction on n, pn = (Tn, #n) and (α^ : η G Tn Π
 nλ) such that:

§5. Abraham's Second Problem - Iterating Changing Cofinality to ω 
725
(a) PQ = p, Pn <0 Pn+l, Tn Π U^\ = Tn+1 Π n^λ
(β) if ry G Γn Π
 nλ, and there are q G Q and α < /ς satisfying
(*) If pi?
1 <o 4 € Q, α < ft and <? It- "if « - 2, r = α, if « > N0, r < α"
^j.!, α^ satisfy this.
Let pω be the limit of (pn 
: n < ω), i. e., pω = (Tω, ffω) where Γ^
 d=
Γln<u,
 Tn and #wfa) is the limit of the sequences Hn(η) (for ηeTω\ (tr(T) |^ :
ί < ίg(trT)}). It is well denned as cf(7) > N0 and pn <0 pω G Q. We now
prove two facts:
5.4A Fact . If p = (Γ, H) e Q and / : T Π
 n+1λ -» « and K € 5, ίften there
is p' = (T', H') G Q and (/^ : η <E
 nλ Π Γ) with /^ < «, such that:
(a) p <o P
7
(b) r nn
n^λ = τ
/n
n^λ
(c) for every η G T' Π
 nλ we have: « = 2 and /fSucT'fa) is constantly = βη
or K > NO and Rang(/fSucτ/(ry)) C ^.
Note that we may allow / to be a partial function; now if « — 2 then / f Suc^' (η)
is defined on all or undefined on all. If K > NO, /ίSuc^/(r7) may be a partial
function. Similarly in 5.4B.
Proof. For each η G T Π
 nλ we have: H(η) is a proper initial segment of a play
of the game D*(5, 7, £>), and it lasts iH^ moves. Player I could choose in his
i
H(^-i}\ move the cardinal K, and the function fη 
: X — > ft,
Λ(0 = /ft ' (0) 
(which is < K) if T? ~ (C) € T
/η(ζ) =0 
if otherwise.
So, for some βη, H(η)
 Λ (α, fη, βη) is also a proper initial segment of a play of
D*(5, 7, I>) in which player II uses the strategy F. So there is p' = (T', H')
such that H'\(T' \
 nλ) - H\(T' \
 nλ) and ff
7(τy) - H(η)*((κ, fη, βη)) for
η G TΠ
 nλ. (If is partial for /c = 2 we should do this twice: for definability and
for value.)

726 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
We can easily show
5.4B Fact . If p = (Γ, H) G Q, m < ω, and ft G 5 and / : T — > «, ί/ien for some
pi = (Ti, jffi) G Q, p <o Pi, and for every k < m we have [« = 2 & /f(Γι Π
f cλ)
is constant] or [« > NI & f\(Tι Γ\
kλ) is bounded below «].
Proof. W.l.o.g. m > £g(trp). We define by downward induction on n G
[£g(trT),rn] the condition r
n, p <o rn+1 <o rn G Q, rn satisfying the con-
clusion of 5.4B for p^ for every η G p of length n. For n = m this is triv-
ial. For n < ra, use Fact 5.4A m — n times, for fc G (n, m] for the function
yn+l . Trn+l n n+lλ _, κ defined by: /^(η) is 7 if
(Vι/)[ι/ G Γ
r-
+1 Π
 fcλ -> (« - 2 & /(*/) =7) V (K > NO & /(ι>) < 7)];
now r^
g^
trp^ is as required]. 
Πδ.4B
Continuation of the proof of 5.4- By repeated application of 5.4B we can define
by induction on n, qn G Q such that qβ = pω (see before 5.4A) and qn <o ςn+ι
and /?£ for ry G T*
n, ^g(ry) < n such that:
(a) /3^ = α^ if this is well-defined, β® =-l otherwise (on aη see (β) above).
(b) when K > H0: tg(η) < n & η* (ζ) G Γ^ =» /5-+
1 > ^ <c>
whenever the later is well defined.
(c) when κ = 2: ig(η) < n & rf (ζ) G Γ^^
1 =Φ 0J+
1 - /3^ <ζ> (so both
are defined or both not defined).
Lastly let qω G Q be such that qn <o qω for n < ω.
Now if At > HO (is regular), we claim
" <
Clearly p <Q qω £ Q and Un<u> /^<> < κ so *^s suffi
ces Why does this hold? If
not, then for some q' and /?, qω <q' £ Q, g
; Ihg "r = /?" and K > β > \Jn /3<>.
Let 77 = tr (<?'), so 77 G Γ
ςw , and aη is well defined, and > β. But as 77 G Πn<u; TQn
and /?<> > ^ = Qη, and we get a contradiction.

§5. Abraham's Second Problem - Iterating Changing Cofinality to ω 
727
If AC = 2, we note just that for some η € T
Qω, the number aη is well defined,
hence β^
(η] is defined hence $• is defined for I e [tτ(qω),tg(η)}. 
Π5.4
Remark. We can rephrase much of this lemma as a partition theorem on trees
as in [RuSh:117].
5.5 Lemma . Suppose Q = (Pi, Qi : i < λ) is a K - Sp2-iteration, |P<| < λ
for i < λ,7 < ft, each Q$ has (5,7) — Pr+ and K regular and even successor,
S C {2} U {# : θ regular uncountable < K} and in V, .D is a normal ultrafilter
on λ (so λ is a measurable cardinal). Then !hpλ "player II wins £>*(£, 7, £>)".
Proof. Let ^4 = {μ < λ : (Vi < μ)[|Pi| < μ], μ strongly inaccessible Mahlo
cardinal > K}.
Let G\ C PX be generic over V and for α < λ let Ga = G Π Pα.
W.l.o.g. player I choose P\-names of functions and cardinals in S. Now
we work in V and describe player IΓs strategy there (see proof of XIII 1.9).
For each μ G A the forcing notion Pχ/Pμ has (S, 7) — Prj
1"; hence, player II
has a winning strategy F(Pλ/Gμ) G V[G?μ] for the game from 2.1(l)(vi), so
F(Pλ/Gμ) is a Pμ-name, (F(Pχ/Gμ) 
: μ) a P\-name. Let us describe a winning
strategy for player II (for the game ό)*(5,7, .D)).
So in the i-th move player I chooses 0* G 5 and /i : λ —» ^. Player II
chooses in his z-th move not only α^ < θi but also Ai, /», 7^, ((p^ : j <i) : μ E.
Ai) such that
(0) 7i is an ordinal < λ,
(1) j <i=>Ίj < Ίi
(2) A* € A 4i <Ξ y, ^ C Π^, Aj and ^ - Πj<5 Λ
(3) l h
α Λ : λ - , ^ , ^ G 5 "
(4) for μ e Ai, ($ : j < 2i + 2) is a Pμ-name of an initial segment of a play
as in (vi) of 2.1(1) for the forcing Pλ/Gμ, p£.+1 lhPλ/Gμ "/,-(μ) = g^ if
θj = 2, ^(μ) < α^ if ^ > N0
υ, g£ a Pμ-name.

728 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
In the i-ih stage clearly A® = Γ\j<i 4? n A is in D, and let 7? —
so 7Z° < λ and choose 7^ G (7?, λ) such that <9; is a Py-name. For every
μ G A®, μ > 7^, we can define Pμ-names pί^, pi^+u
 αi* sucn that:
(a) lhpμ "(p^ : j < 2i + 2) is an initial segment of a part as in (v) of 1.1(1)
for Pχ/Pμ in which player II uses his winning strategy 
~F(Pχ/Gμ).
α/*(μ) ^ αf if fl = 2, Λ(μ) < αf if & > H0".
Now as αf is a Pμ-name of an ordinal < « < μ, it is P^(μ)-name for
some β[μ] < μ (as Pμ satisfies the μ-c.c. see 2.17(2)). By the normality of the
ultrafilter D, on some A] C A®, β[μ] = βi for every μ G 'Uj. Let 7^ — 7^ -f ft.
Easily for each i < σ, lhpλ "{μ G ^ : p^+i € (?λ} 7^ 0 mod £>", so we
finish.
Π5.5
5. 5 A Comment.
We can present it (and the proof of XIII 1.4) slightly differently.
In V let
W, - {(p
μ :μeA):At D^ = (β : j < i),
lhpμ "(p^ : j < i) is a <0 -increasing sequence in P\/Pμ"}
and let
i
We define on W a relation < by:
(p^'
1 :μ G A!> < (p^'
2 : μ G A2) iff
AI 2 ^2 and μ G ^2 => P
μ'
1 is an initial segment of p
μ'
2
Clearly < is a partial order on W, and for p = (p
μ : j < i) let
B(p) = {μ € ^ : {^ : j < i} C
so clearly

§5. Abraham's Second Problem - Iterating Changing Cofinality to ω 
729
(a) lhPλ "p
1 < p
2 implies ^(p
1) D 5(p
2)"
(b) lhPλ "JB(p) φ 0 mod D"
(c) For every a < λ, p € W; and P\-names θ € S and / : λ — > θ there is q,
p < q G Wi+i and a P\ name r of an ordinal < θ such that:
(*) if q = (q
μ : μ G A
9), and μ G A
9, then ς£+1 forces
(0 = 2 & /(μ) = r) V (0 > No & /(μ) < l)
Now we can solve the second Abraham problem. (See also X 5.5.)
5.6 Conclusion . Suppose λ is strongly inaccessible {μ < λ : μ measurable } is
stationary, K = cf(κ) < λ a successor cardinal, K+ΠRUCar C S C {2}(J{Θ : θ <
K regular uncountable}. Then for some forcing notion P we have: |P| — λ, P
satisfies λ-c.c. and (5, «) - Prf and lhP "λ = |κ|
+" (so lhPμ 2^1 = λ): and for
every A C λ, for some δ < λ, there is a countable set a C ί, which is not in
V[A Π ί]. We can also get suitable axiom (see 3.5).
Proof. Should be clear (see 3.4 Case I (and 5.4)). 
U5.6
5. 6 A Remark . 1) We can also prove (by the same forcing) the consistency
of "there is a normal filter on λ to which {δ < X : cf(δ) — H0} belongs which
is precipitous" if in addition there is a normal ultrafilter on λ concentrating on
measurables.
2) We can use (5, < K) — Pri— forcing notions.
5.7 Discussion. Can we weaken the assumption cf (7) > NO in 5.4 to cf (7) > NO
and/or allow K — H0? The answer is yes if {2, K} C 5.
As in 5.4A, 5.4B we can assume p = (T, H) satisfies
(*) for η G p, ^g(^) > tr(p) and there are q and α < K such that p^ <o q 6 Q
and g Ih "ft = 2 & r = a or AC > NO & r < α" then p\ η\ aη satisfies this.

730 
XIV. Iterated Forcing with Uncountable Support
Let for η G T
p of length > ^g(tr(p)):
Pp(η) = {A C \ : for some initial segment y of the game continuing
H
p(η), we have d(y) C A}
(where d is from Definition 5.1).
Note that as 2 G S we have
(**) A C λ =Φ A G PP(T7) V (λ \ A) € Ppfa)
(* * *) if 4 6 Ppfa), ACBeX then £ e Pp(ry).
We define a function rkp : T* = {77 : tr(p) < ry € Γ} -> Ord U {00} by
defining by induction on the ordinal ζ when rkp(r/) > £, the definition is splited
to cases.
.4. ζ limit
Case 5. C - 1
> 1 iff a^ is not well defined (and η G T*)
C. C = ε + 
l>l
so ε > 0; let rkp(τy) > ζ iff: tr(p) <ηeT
p and the set {/9 < λ : rkp(τ/
 Λ (/3)) > ε}
belongs to Pp(ή).
So rk(ry) = 0 if a,, is well defined and rk(r?) - C > 0 if -^(rk(η) > ζ + 1), C
minimal, and rk(τ?) = oo if rk(r/) > C for every ζ>l. Now the proof is splited:
Subcase Cl. rkp(tr(p)) = cx>.
Clearly for η € T*, if ιkp(η) = oo then {β < X : rkp(rf {/?)) - 00} e Pp(r?).
Hence we can find q such that p <Q q £ Q such that:
tr(p) < η e T
q =Φ rkp(ry) = oo.
There is r such that q < r e Q and r forces a value to r, so αtr(r) is well
defined but tr(p) < tr(r) G T
r C T
q hence rkp(tr(r)) = oo hence atr(r) is not
well defined, contradiction.
Subcase C2. rkp(tr(p)) < oo.
So choose η G T
q, tr(p) < η e T
p such that α^ is not defined and, under those
restrictions, rkp(ry) is minimal.

§5. Abraham's Second Problem - Iterating Changing Cofinality to ω 
731
Let
A = {7 < λ : 77^(7) G p and aη~(Ί} is not defined}.
We can find q, pW <o q and d(H
q(η)} is included in A or disjoint to it.
In the second case we can easily get "aη well defined", contradiction. So
assume d(H
q(η)) 
C A, and neccessarily there is v G d(H
Q(η)) such that
rkp(ι>) < rkp(^) by the definition of rank. We get easy contradiction.

XV. A More General
Iterable Condition Ensuring
Is Not Collapsed
§0. Introduction
Chapter XI was restricted to forcing notions not adding reals in a specific way
so that under CH, Nm is always permissible. This was used to show that various
combinatorical principles of N2 were equiconsistent with the existence of (small)
large cardinals. We constructed our models starting from CH without adding
reals, so that CH also holds in the final model. But what if we want CH to fail
in the final model? Can we phrase a condition preserved by iterations, implying
KI does not collapse and include semiproper forcing and Nm? This, promised in
the first version of this book, is carried out here. We start with notions similar
to the one in Chapter X, and then move in the direction of semiproperness.
Further theorems (which shed light on preservation of not adding reals) will
appear elsewhere (see [Sh:311]). The preservation theorems from this chapter
are sufficient to prove analogue of some theorems from Chapter XI with the
negation of CH. For example adding Cohen reals to the construction of XI 1.4
we can show: If "ZFC+ 3 weakly compact cardinal" is consistent, then so is
"ZFC-f 2
N° = N2 + for every stationary S C SQ there is a closed copy of ω\
included in it". Generally the preservation proofs generalize those of Chapter
XI, except in the case of "iterating up to a strongly inaccessible and doing one
more step (in this case 3.6). We generalize Gitik and Shelah [GiSh:191] which
improve the relevant theorem in XI (i.e. [Sh:b, XI]).

§1. Preliminaries 
733
Of course we can also add reals to the construction in XI 1.2 and get
an extension V
p where K^ — Kf , K = K^ 
and the filter generated by the
measure on K in V will include Sfi, and it is not clear that it will be precipitous,
see X §6. As in Chapter XI, we use for proving the preservation, partition
theorems and Δ-system theorems on trees: mainly 2.6 and 2.6A, 2.6B, 2.6C.
Some of them are from Rubin and Shelah [RuSh:117], see detailed history there,
on pages 47, 48.
§1. Preliminaries
The replacement of RCS (revised countable support) by GRCS (defined below)
is not essential - it is intended to simplify the preservation theorems (one of
the cases in Chapter VI refers to GRCS).
1.1 Conventions. A forcing notion here, P, is a nonempty set (denoted
by P too) and two partial orders <pr, < and a minimal element 0p € P,
[p <pr q —* P < Q] We call p e P pure if 0p <pr p and we call q a pure
extension ofp if p <pr q. (In Chapter XIV=[Sh:250] this was written <o).
We denote forcing notions by P, Q, R- (The forcing relation of course refers
to the partial order <).
1.2 Definition. Let MAC(P) be the set of maximal antichains of the forcing
notion P.
1.2A Remark. 1) Note: \MAC(P)\ < 2'pl, P satisfies the |P|+-c.c. and if P
satisfies the λ-c.c. then \MAC(P)\ < |P|
<λ.
2) Note
(*) if Q is a forcing notion, λ = λ
<λ > \Q\ + H0, \\-Q "(Vμ < λ)μ
H° < λ" and
Q' = Q * Levy(Nι, < λ) then \MAC(Q'}\ - |Q'| - λ
1.3 Notation. Car is the class of cardinals.
IRCar is the class of infinite regular cardinals.

734 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
RCar = IRCarU{0}.
RUCar is the class of uncountable regular cardinals.
T>
cχ is the filter of co-bounded subsets of λ.
η- = η\ (tg(η) - 1) for η G V
<ω and ίg(η) > 0
1.4 Notation. H(χ) is the family of sets with transitive closure of power < χ;
let <* be a well ordering of H(χ).
1.5 Definition. GRCS iteration is as defined in Ch X, except that, for each
condition all but finitely many of the atomic conditions in it are pure (or as in
Chapter XIV §1 for K = NI, e = 1).
1.6 Fact. (*)ι if Q is a GRCS iteration, and for each i <^=<
Qί then Q is
an RCS iteration.
(*)2 if Q is an GRCS iteration, and for each i the order <Qf is equality then
Q is essentially a finite support iteration.
(*)3 the distributivity law, etc. (Chapter X 1.5, and §1 generally) holds for
GRCS (by Chapter XIV §1).
1.7 Claim. Suppose we want to prove for all generic extensions V
Q of V, that
for iteration (PΪ7 Qj : i < α, j < α) as in 3.1 below, for a property φ that:
Q*P
(*) if Q and each Qi has the property φ (of course Q in V, Qi in V 
~ *)
then Pa has the property φ (in V®).
Then it is enough to prove (*) when (a) and (b) below hold:
Q*P
(a) for i < j < α, Pj/Pi has the property φ (in V 
" *)
(b) ^g(Q) is: 2, or ω, or ωi, or strongly inaccessible > |P;| for each i <
Remark. You may add:
(c) (*) holds for all ζX, (P/,Q^ : i < α
7, j < α
7) for which a
1 < a (not just in
V, but in every generic extension of it).

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
735
Proof. By induction on α, using 3.7 (later in this chapter) and X §1 (or XIV
§1).
§2. Trees of Models and UP
2.1 Definition.
1) A tagged tree is a pair (Γ, I) such that:
(a) T is a ω-tree, which here means a nonempty set of finite sequences of
ordinals such that if η G T then any initial segment of η belongs to Γ.
T is ordered by initial segments, i.e., η < v iff η is an initial segment
of v.
(b) I is a partial function from Γ such that for every η G Γ : if \(η) = \η is
defined then \(η) is an ideal of subsets of some set called the domain
of l^, Dom(lr7), and
Sucτ(η) = \y : v is an immediate successor of η in Γ} C Dom(lr7),
and if not said otherwise S\ιcτ(η) φ \η. Usually 1^ is ^-complete.
(c) For every η G T we have Sucτ(η) ^ 0.
2) We call (Γ, I) normal if η G Dom(lr?) => Dom(lr?) = Sucτ(τ?).
2.1 A Convention. For any tagged tree (Γ, I) we can define I
1", by:
Dom(Γ) = {η : Sucτ(η) C Dom^), and Sucτ(r/) φ \η} and
we sometimes, in an abuse of notation, do not distinguish between I and |t e.g.
if |ΐ is constantly /*, we write /* instead of I.
2.2 Definition. 1) η will be called a splitting point of (Γ, I) if 1^ is defined and
Sucτ(η) φ \η (normally this follows but we may forget to decrease the domain

736 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring HI Is Not Collapsed
of I). Let split(Γ, I) be the set of splitting points. We will only consider trees
where each branch meets split(T, I) infinitely often.
2) For η G T, T^
 d= {v G T : v = η or v < η or η < v).
2.3 Definition. We now define orders between tagged trees:
a) (Tι,lι) < (T2,I2) if T2 C TI, and split(T2,l2) C Split(Tι,lι), and Vr? G
split(T2,l2) : l2(r?nSucT2(r?) - 11(77)^^(77).
(where /fA = {B : B C A and Be/}). (So every splitting point of T2 is a
splitting point of TI, and I2 is completely determined by li and split(T2,12)
provided that I2 is normal.)
b) (Ti, li) <* (Γ2,12) ttfCΓi, li) < (Γ2,12) and split(Γ2,12) = split(Γi, lι)ΠΓ2.
c) (Tι,lι) <® (T2,I2) if (Γι,l!) <* (Γ2,I2) and η G T2 \ split (Γi, li) =>
SucT2(τ7) = SucTl(τ7)
(d) (Γι,l!) <® (T2,I2) t/(Γι,lι) < (Γ2,I2) and 77 G Γ2 & |SucΓl(τ/)| < μ =»
SucT2(τ7) - SucTl(ry) and r^ G T2 & |SucTl(r/)| > μ & ry G Sp(T1? li) ^> ry G
Sp(Γ2,l2)
2.4 Definition. 1) For a set I of ideals, a tagged tree (T, I) is an I-tree if for
every splitting point η G T we have 1^ G I (up to an isomorphism).
2) For a set S of regular cardinals, an S-tree Γ is a tree such that for any point
η G T we have: |Sucτ(r/)| G S or |Sucτ(r?)| = 1.
3) We omit I and denote a tagged tree (T, I) by Γ whenever 1^ = {A C Sucτ(^) :
|A| < |Sucτ(τ7)|} and |Sucτ(r?)| G IRCar U {1} for every η G Γ.
4) For a tree T, limΓ is the set of branches of T, i.e. all ω-sequences of
ordinals, such that every finite initial segment of them is a member of T:
limΓ - {s G
 ωOrd : (Vn) s|n G Γ}.
5) A subset J of a tree Γ is a front if: 77 / f G J implies none of them is an
initial segment of the other, and every η G limT has an initial segment which
is a member of J.
6) (T, I) is standard if for every nonsplitting point η G T, |Sucτ(??)| = 1.
7) (T, I) is full if every η G T is a splitting point.

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
737
2.4A Remark. (1) The set limΓ is not absolute, i.e., if V\ C F2 are two
universes of set theory then in general (limΓ)
Vl will be a proper subset of
(2) However, the notion of being a front is absolute: if V\ |= "F is a front in Γ" ,
then there is a depth function p : T — » Ord satisfying r/ < ι/& Vfc < ίg(r/)[r/ffc ^
F] — > p(r/) > p(ί^). This function will also witness in V^ that F is a front.
(3) F C T contains a front iff F meets every branch of T. So if F C T contains
a front of Γ and T' C Γ, then F Π Γ' contains a front of Γ'. Also this notion is
absolute.
2.4B Notation. In several places in this chapter we will have an occasion to
use the following notation: Assume that (T, I) is a tagged tree, and for all η G T
there is a family aη of subsets of T^ such that η < v => MA G α^ 35 G α^
[S C A]. Then we can define for all α G Ord U {00}
Dpα(τ?) iff V/J < αVA G α^i/ G ,4 Π split (T)[{p : p G SucrM&Dp^ip)} ^ 1^].
Then it is easy to see that
Dp(τ?)
 d= max{α G Ord U {00} : Dpjr?)}
is well defined, and Dpα(τ/) <^ Dp(τy) > α. We call Dp(r/) the "depth" of η
(with respect to the family a = (aη : η G Γ) and the tagged tree (T, I)). It is
easy to check that η <\ v => Dp(ry) > Dp(z/).
2.5 Definition. 1) An ideal / is λ-complete if any union of less than λ members
of / is still a member of /.
2) A tagged tree (T, I) is λ-complete if for each η G Γ Π Dom(l) the ideal 1^ is
λ-complete.
3) A family I of ideals is λ-complete if each / G I is λ-complete. We will only
consider H2-complete families I.
4) A family I is restriction-closed if 
I G I, A C Dom(7), A φ I implies
I\A = {B G / : B C A} belongs to I.
5) The restriction closure of I, res-cl(I) \s{I\A:Iel,AC Dom(7), Aφl}.

738 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
6) / is λ-indecomposable if for every A C Dom(/), A φ /, and h : A —* λ there
is y C λ, |y| < λ such that h~
l(Y) £ I. We say I or I, is λ-indecomposable if
each \η (or / G I) is λ-indecomposable.
7) / is strongly λ-indecomposable if for Ai G I(i < λ) and A C Dom(7), A φ I
we can find B C A of cardinality < λ such that for no i < X does Ai include
B.
2.5A Remark. As indicated by the names, if / is strongly λ-indecomposable
then / is λ-indecomposable at least when λ is regular. [Why? Given A, h as in
2.5(6), let Ai = h~
l({j : j < i } ) ] if for some z, Ai φ I we are done, otherwise
by 2.5(7) there is Y C A, \Y\ < X f\.Y £ A». But as λ is regular > |y|,
z(*) = sup{fo(x) -f 1 : x G Y} < X hence Y C A^*), contradiction.]
2.6 Lemma. Let θ be an uncountable regular cardinal (the main case here
is θ = HI). Let I be a family of fl^-complete ideals, (To, I) a tagged tree,
A = {η G T : 0 < |SucTo(r?)| < θ}, 
[ηeT0\A=ϊ\ηe I&SucToM Φ M and
[η e A => SucTo(r?) C {η~ (i) : i < 6>}] and H : Γ0 -> <9 and e = (eη : η e A),
is such that eη is a club of θ. Then there is a club C of 0 such that: for each
5 G C there is T£ C Γ0 satisfying:
(a) T<5 a tree.
(b) If η G Ή, |SucTo(r?)| < β, then SucTδ(τ7) - SucTo(r7), and if |Suc(τy)| -
θ, then Sucτδ(r7) = {η* (i) ' i < 6} Π Sucτ0(^) and δ G eη.
(c) ry G T§ \ A implies SucTδ(η) φ \η
(d) for every η G Tδ: H(η) < δ.
Proof. For each ζ < θ we define a game Dζ. The game lasts ω moves, in the nth
move ηn G TO of length n is chosen.
For n — 0 necessarily 770 = ( ).
Forn = m + l: If |Sucτ0(f?m)| = β, then the first player chooses r/m+ι G
SuCTo(r?n), ^m+lM < C
If |SucTo(??m)| < β, then the /ϊrst player chooses any rym+ι G
SucTo(r/m).

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
739
If ηm φ A, then the first player chooses Am G \ηm, and then the
second player chooses η rn+i £ Sucj 0(?7m) \ Am.
At the end, the second player wins if for all n, H(ηn) < ζ and |Sucτ0(^n)| =
θ => ζ G eηn. Now clearly
(*) if for a club of ζ < θ the second player has a winning strategy for
the game D^, then there are trees T$ (as required).
Let 5 = {δ < θ : second player does not have a winning strategy for the game
us}; we assume that 5 is stationary, and get a contradiction.
Let for δ G 5, F$ be a winning strategy for first player in D§ (he has a
winning strategy as the game is determined being closed for the second player).
So FS gives for the first (n — l)-moves of the second player, the nth move of
the first player.
Let x be regular large enough, and let (No, G) -< ( H ( χ ) , G) be such that
θ +1 C NO, |N0| = θ, (T0,1) e N0, e G N0, and (F* : 5 G 5) G N0. We can find
NI -< NO such that \Nι\ < θ, NI Π θ is an ordinal and (Γ0,1) G A/Ί, (Fδ : δ G
5} G NI and e e NI. Let 5 = NιΓ\θ. Since 5 was assumed to be stationary,
we may assume δ G 5.
Now we shall define by induction on n, ηn G TO Π NI of length n, such that
(ηt : t < n) is an initial segment of a play of the game 3$ in which the first
player uses his winning strategy F§.
Case 1. n = 0:
We let r?o = (). (The AI G \ηι are not mentioned as they are not arguments of
Fδ).
Case 2. For n = m + l , r / m G ^ 4 : the first player has a winning strategy F$ for
the game 0)5. So F$ gives us ηn. Now if |Sucτ0(^m)| < θ then Sucτ0(?7m) £ NI
(because TO, ηm belongs and N\ Π θ is an ordinal), hence ηn G N\ as required.
If |SucTo(r7m)| = θ then necessarily SucTo(^m) Q KrΓ (i> : i < 0}, ??n =
^m
 Λ (i),ί < ^ (as the play is of the game D$), so necessarily i e NI hence (as
also ηn G NI.

740 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
Case 3. Lastly if n — m 4- l,^m Φ A : so F§ gives us A^ G 1^ which is not
necessarily in AΓ1? however let A* = IJί^m : C £ £» and there is a play of Dζ in
which (ηt\i< m) were played and the first player plays according to Fζ (this
play is unique) and the strategy Fζ dictates to the first player to choose A^} .
Now A" is in N\ (as F G Λ/Ί) and as the union of < θ members of \ηrn it
belongs to \ηrn hence A* Γ\ Sucτ0(f/m) is a proper subset of Sucτ0(^m)5 so there
is η m
 Λ {*} G Sucτ0(?7m) \ ^4*? so there is such i G Λ/i (so necessarily i < ί). Let
the second player choose ηn = ηm
 Λ (i).
So we have played a sequence (ηn : n G ω) of elements of AΓ1? always
obeying F^ so this sequence was produced by a play of DS in which the first
player plays according to the strategy F$. But then for all n : ηn G NI =>
r/n € JVi => er,n G ΛΓi =>ί = sup(er?τι n ί) => ί G e^;
hence second player wins in this play. So F$ cannot be a winning strategy.
Contradiction, so S is not stationary. 
U2.6
2.6A Lemma. Suppose (T, I) is an I-tree, θ regular uncountable, (Aη : η G T)
is such that: Aη is a set of ordinals, [η < z/ => A^ C A^] and
(*) (a) S C RUCar,
(b) F = I \ {/ : |Dom(/)| < μ} is μ
+-complete or at least strongly μ-
indecomposable for every μ such that μ G S or μ G pcf (S Π Aη) for
some 77 G T and
(c) I is 0-complete and | pcf (S Π Aη)\ < θ for η G Γ and (9 < min(S)
(d) \Aη\< min(S) for η G T
T/ien there is T
f, (Γ, I) <* (T
f, I), such that:
if λ G Aυ Π S and v G Γ^ then for some αιy(λ) < λ for every p such that
v < p G limT^ we have α^(λ) > sup(λ Π Un<u; ^ptn)

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
741
Proof. It is enough to prove the existence of a T^ as required just for v — ( ) (as
we can repeat the proof going up in the tree) . This can be proved by induction
on max(pcf (S Π A( ))) (exist see [Sh:g, I 1.9]). Let a\(η) = sup(Aη Π λ).
As this lemma (2. 6 A) is not used in this book we assume knowledge of
[Sh:g].
Let α = S Π AQ (if α is empty we have nothing to do), μ = maxpcf (α), and
(fa '. OL < μ) be <j<μ[α] -increasing cofinal. Let {bε : ε < ε(*)} be cofinal in
J<μ[a] e.g. this set is {\Jθec 60 [α] : c C pcf α\ {μ} finite} so ε(*) < θ hence by
an assumption I' is |ε(*) ^-complete.
For ε < ε(*), ζ < μwe define:
(*)ζ there is a subtree T' of Γ, (T, I) <* (T', I) such that for every η G lim(Γ
/)
and \n G α\ bε we have ot\n(η\n) < fζ(λn).
It suffices to find such T
1 (for some ε, C) as: maxpcf (bε) < maxpcf (α), so
we can apply the induction hypothesis on T
1 '.
In V define for ζ < μ and ε < ε(*).
Bζ = {η G lim(Γ) : for some ε < ε(*) for every λ G α \ bε we have
B^£
 ά= {η e lim(Γ) : for every λ € α \ b ε , n < u ; = > aχ(η\n) < /c(λ)}
Clearly Bζ,ε is closed and Bζ = 
\J 
Bζί£. Now ζ < ξ < μ => Bζ C Bξ, (as
ε<ε(*)
/C <J<μ[α] Λ) and lim(Γ) - UC<μ
5C (*s (/c : C < μ) is cofinal in Πn<u;
λn))
hence using 2.6B(3) below (with μ, ε(*) here standing for 0, ε* there) for some
C(*) < μ and ε < ε(*) and T' we have (T, I) <* (T
f, I) and lim(T') C JBc,ε. So
(*) holds, but as said above this suffices. 
^2.6A
Question. If I G #(χ) is there a countable JV -< (H(χ), G, <* ) such that: le N
and for every λ G RCarΠ N, letting l'
Λ' = { J G I : J is λ+-complete }, there is
(N* : η G (T, I)) an 1^ -suitable tree (see Definition 2.10) such that N <χ
(Or replace RCar by a thinner set.)
2.6B Lemma. Let (Γ, I) be an I-tree, I a family of ideals,

742 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
1) If H : T —> μ and μ*° < λ and I is λ - complete then there is T" such that
(T,I)<*(
η, v € r
2) If lim(T) = (Ji<9 Bi, θ < λ, I is λ - complete and each Bi is a Borel set
ί/ien there is T' such that
(T, I) <*(!*, I)
for some i :[limT C Bi]
3) If θ is regular uncountable, lim(Γ) = \J B^ and £i is a Borel subset of
ΐ < 0
lim(Γ), increasing with z, and (*) below holds then
(a) for some i < θ and T' we have (T, I) <* (T',1) and lim(Γ
/) C B<
(b) if in addition η eT\ split ((T, I)) => |Sucτ(r?)| < θ then in (a) we can
demand (T, I) <® (Γ', I)
where
(*) every / £ I is 0+-complete or at least strongly 0-indecomposable (see
2.5(7)).
4) Assume lim(T) = \Ji<θ\Jε<εi &i,e, each Bit£ is a Borel set, [i < θ =»
ε^ < σ], I is σ-complete, and each I e I is strongly ^-indecomposable, and
Bi = \^)ε<ε. Bi^ε is increasing in i and
[ηeT\ split(Γ, I) =» |Sucτ(r?)| < σ].
Then for some i < θ and ε < ε^ and T' we have (T, I) <
Θ (Γ',1), and
lim(T') C Bit£.
2.6C Remark. 1) We can combine 2.6B(3), (4) with 2.6A.
2) To what can we weaken "strongly ^-indecomposable"? A sufficient condition
is the existence of a precipitous normal filter E on θ such that for every I G I
and Ai G / for i < θ and A* e /+ there are Xi G A* for i < θ such that
{i e A* : {Xj : j < i} <£ A^} ^ 0 mod E
3) We can elaborate 2.6B(4). We can have t C
 ω>Ord be a tree with no ω
branch, (Bη : η G t) a sequence of subsets of lim(T) such that:

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
743
(a) if η G max(t) then Bη is Borel
(/?) if 77 G £ is not maximal, then (a) or (b)
(a) I is |Suct(r?)|+-complete, Bη = |J{^ : ^ £ Suct(r/)}
(b) (Bη-φ : η~(ϊ) G 81104(77)) is increasing and letting θη = cf(otp({i :
η~(i) G £})), I is strongly ^-indecomposable.
Now we prove by downward induction on η G t that
(*)τ7 there are (Γ', I) and i/ such that: 77 < v G max(ί), (Γ, I) <* (T', I) and
lim(T') C Bi or in the game corresponding to (J{BP : η < p G max(ί)}
the first player wins
4) We can combine 2.6C(3) with 2.6B(3).
Proof. 1), 2) By [RuSh:117] or see here XI 3.5, 3.5A.
3) Similar to the proof of 2.6. First we prove clause (a). Without loss of
generality (Γ, I) is standard, so for notational simplicity it is full (see Definition
2.4(6), (7)). For each ζ < θ let Dζ be the following game with ω moves, letting
770 = () and in the n'th move 77n G T is chosen; the first player chooses An G \ηn
and the second player ηn+ι G Sucτ(7?n) \ An. In the end (jn<ωηn € lim(Γ),
and the second player wins the play if |Jn ηn £ Bζ. It suffices to prove for some
C < θ, the second player has a winning strategy. So otherwise for each ζ the first
player has a winning strategy Fζ. Let χ be large enough, NI -< (H(χ), G, <*),
\\Ni\\ < θ, δ
 d= NI Π θ < θ such that (T,l), (Bζ : ζ < θ) and (Fζ 
: ζ < θ)
belongs to NI. We shall simulate a play (^4m,?7m+ι ' rn < ω) of D$ such that
77m+ι G NQ. Assume (At,ηt+ι : £ < m) is already defined. Let S'm — {ζ < θ:
there is an initial segment of a play of c\ in which the first player uses the
strategy Fζ and the second player plays (77^ : ί < m)}, note that such initial
segment is unique, for a given ζ. For ζ G S'm let A^ be the (m + l)'th move
of the first player, for such a play with the second player using the strategy
Fc, so (A^ 
: ζ G S'm) G NI, also clearly δ G S'm, hence |5^| = θ and by the
assumption (*) for some B € NI, B C Sucτ(τ7m), \B\ < θ and Λζ€5^ B 2 Am-
As B G NI and NI Π θ = δ, clearly B C NI and choose i G B \ A
δ
m and let

744 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
For proving clause (b), denning Dζ if \Sucτ(ηn)\ < θ we change the rule
and let player I choose ηn+ι G Suc^(?7n).
4) We define, for ζ < θ and ε < ες a game Dζ?ε as in the proof of 2.6B(3)
clause (a) for Bζί€. If for some ζ < θ, ε < ες the second player wins then
we get the desired conclusion. Otherwise as each such game is deter mind (as
Bζ^ε is a Borel set) there is a winning strategy Fζ,ε for the first player. As I
is |εζ |+-complete, there is one strategy Fς good in all the games Fζί€(ε < εζ)
simultaniously (take the union of the sets suggested by all those strategies). So
Fζ is a winning strategy in Dζ, and we can proceed as in the proof of 2.6B(3).
2.7 Definition. Let I be a set of ^-complete ideals, S a set of regular cardinals,
NI = Min (S) and P a forcing notion.
1) We say that (T, I, λ, ξ, ξ) is a (I, P, S)-tree if:
a) (T, I) is a I-tree (see Definition 2.4(2))
b) λ is a function from T to S
c) ξ is a function with domain T such that for every η e T, ξ(η) is a
P-name of an ordinal < X(η)
d) ξ is a function from T \ {{)} such that each ξ(η) is an ordinal.
2) We say that the (I, P, S)-tree (T, I, λ, £, ζ) obeys a function F if there are
fronts Jn C T for n < ω (see Definition 2.5 (2)) such that every member
of Jn+ι has a strict initial segment in Jn and η G Jn implies
(Sucτ(η),\η, (CM : " € Sucτ(τy)>) -
where w[η] is {k : η\k G \Jt<ω Ji}
2.7 A Definition. We say that the forcing notion P satisfies EΛP(I, S, W) (the
"universal property"), where W C ω\ is stationary, S a P-name of a set of
uncountable regular cardinals (in V) which contains Nf, provided that: letting
S* = S*[S] = {AV : K regular < |P|, JK "K φ S"}, for every p G P there is a

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
745
function Fp (with domain and range as implied implicitly in (2)) such that: for
any (I, P, S*)-tree (Γ, I, λ, £ ξ) obeying Fp and any T*, 
(Γ, I) <* (Γt , I) there
is q G P, p <pr q such that:
q Ihp "there is η G limT
t such that: if sup{ζ(η\£) :£<ω and ζ(η\t) < ωι}
is not obtained and belongs to W then: for every m < ω satisfying
X(η\m) e S, for some ί < ω we have ξ(η\m)[GP] < ξ(η\£) < \(η\m)"
2.7B Notation. 1) If I is the set {j£
d : λ > N 2,λ is regular} (where
{B C A : sup(B) < sup(4)}) then we may omit it. We let λ^
 d=
f λ(ry),
1^ 1l
f £(77), ζη
 d= ζ(η). If S = {Ni} we may omit it and omit λ. If S = RUCar
v
we may write * instead of S. If W — ω\ we may omit it (note: no object can
serve as two among I, S and W, so no confusion should arise).
It is always understood that the trivial / is in E (even if we write 1 = 0),
a trivial / is the empty set with domain a singleton.
2) If not said otherwise, we shall ignore the non- ^-complete members of I, i.e.
E7P(I, S, W) means C7P(F, S, W) where Γ = {/ G I : / is N2-complete}.
2.7C Remark. l)Why do we use S* and why can we require S* C IP]"
1"?
(a) S is only a name (if S was a set 6 V, S* = S is o.k.) and
(b) P-names of an ordinal < λ, λ = cfλ > |P|
+ have an apriori bound.
2) A reader may use S = {Ki} all the time.
2.7D Claim. 1) In Definition 2.7, if S = RUCar
v we can replace in 2.7(1) (c)
"a P-name of an ordinal < λ(r/)" by "a P-name of a member of V", in 2.7A
demand ζ(η\m) = ζ(η\(£)) and omit λ and get an equivalent definition (we can
also replace < |P| by < Min{κ; : P satisfies the κ-c.c.}).
2) The forcing notion P satisfies Ϊ7P(I, S, W) iff its completion (to a complete
Boolean algebra) satisfies it (assuming ^pr^^).
3) If Q satisfies C/P(I, *,W) (i.e. as in part (1)) and I is μ+-complete (e.g.
1 — 0) then any "new" countable set of ordinals < μ is included in an "old"
countable set of ordinals i.e. one from V.
4) Q satisfies ί/P(0, *) iff Q is proper

746 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
5) Q satisfies [7P(0, {Hi}) iff Q is semiproper.
6) If Q satisfies E7P(I,S, W) and I C I^Si C S and \Nl C W then Q satisfies
UP(Iι,Sι,Wι).
7) In Def. 2.7A, we can replace S by any set S' of uncountable regular cardinals
of V, such that Ihp "S Π |P|+ = S' Π |P|+".
Proof, (sketch) (1) is easy.
(2) Note that F is defined on sequences of names, and it is well known
that P-names can be canonically translated to Q-names, if P is a dense subset
of Q.
(3) Use 2.6B(2) repeatedly.
(4), (5): If I = 0, then each branch of an I-tree is itself an I-tree, so a
strategy from XII 1.1 (or 1.7(3)) easily yields a function F.
(6) Easy.
(7) By 2.7C(l)(b). 
D2.7D
2.7E Convention. 1) We write Fw(η, (λ/,ξ/,C* : ί < lg(n))) for
we omit A£ when S = {Nι}
In Definition 2.7, the value F gives to Sucτ(r?) is w.l.o.g. {r?
Λ (α) : a < X}
for some λ, and we do not strictly distinguish between λ and Sucτ(^).
2.8 Definition. 1) For an ideal collection I, a set S of uncountable regular
cardinals, (where KI = min(S), and I is N2-complete) and χ regular large
enough, we say a countable model N -< (Jf(χ), €, <*) is strictly (I, S,W)-
suitable for χ if. N Π ω\ G W and in the following game the second player has
a winning strategy (letting NQ = N).
in the nth move: the first player chooses In G I Π Nn and set An (not
necessarily in ]Vn),^ln C Dom(/n), An G /n,
then the second player chooses xn G (Dom(/)) \ AI and let Nn+ι D Skolem

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
747
Hull of Nn U {xn} such that for each λ G S Π Nn:
sup(7Vn+ι n λ) = sup(7Vn n λ)
2) If W is omitted we mean W = ωι, if S is omitted we mean {Ni}, if both are
omitted we write strictly I-suitable.
2.9 Claim. A model N -< (H(χ), G, <*) is strictly (I,S, W)-suitable for χ iff
there is an I-tagged tree (T, I) and (Nη : η G Γ) such that:
a) 7V = ]V ( ),{I,S,W}G7V
b) Nη -< (#(χ), G, <*) is countable
c) Nηtk -< Nη
d) for λ G S Π Nηjk, k < lg(η) we have: sup(Nη Π λ) = sup(^rfc Π λ)
e) for every η G Γ and / G I Π Nη
{v \ η < v, v a splitting of (Γ, I) and \v = 1} contains a front of
f) rye TV
g) T V Π u i e W.
Easy: from a winning strategy we can build a tree, and for any such tree
(Nη : η e T) a winning strategy of player II is to choose some r/n+ι G T, ηn <
r/n+i preserving |J^n N^U N C Nn = Nηn. 
D2.9
2.10 Definition. Fix I,S, W.
1) An I-tagged tree of models is an I-tagged tree (T, I) whose nodes η are used
to label countable models Nη (we write this as TV = (Nη : η € (T*,l)})
satisfying the following:
(a) for 77 G Γ we have Nη -< (-H"(χ), G, <* ) is a countable model.
(b) NQ contains all necessary information, in particular I, S, W.
(c) η < v G Γ implies Nη ~< N»
(d) for η G Γ we have η e Nη and 1^ G A^.
Whenever we have such an I-tagged tree N of models, we write Nη =
2) We call such a tree l-suitable if

748 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring HI Is Not Collapsed
(e) \fη G TV/ G I Π Nη {v G T^ : v G split(Γ), \v = I (or just they are
isomorphic) } contains a front of T'
77].
3) We call N suitable* if instead of (e) we only have
(e)* Vr? G TV/ G InW{ι/ G Γ^ : v G split(T), \v <RK /} (see 2.10A below)
contains a front of T.
4) We call TV ^-strictly (I,S, W)-suitable if N is suitable and in addition
(f) for some δ G W, for all η G T we have: Nη Π ω\ — δ
5) we call TV strictly (I, S, W)-suitable, if in addition to clauses (a) - (e) we
have:
(g) for all v G T, λ G S Π Nδ there is δχ < X such that Vr? G Γ
\v < η =» sup(AΓr/ Π λ) = Jλ].
6) We call N uniformly suitable or Ki-uniformly suitable if (g) or (f) respec-
tively hold only for all η G lim(Γ).
Remark. Note: for suitable trees, S is essentially redundant so we may omit
it or allow names. Similarly so for W. In 2.9 and 2.10 we omit W when it is
α i, and omit S when S = {^ι}5 so I-suitable means (I, {Nι},cι;ι)-suitable. Let
η G (T, I) means η G T and we write T when I is clear.
2.10A Definition. 1) For ideals Ji, J% we say
if there is a function h witnessing it, i.e. h : Dom( J2) — > Dom( Ji) is such that
for every A C Dom( J2) : A ^ 0 mod J2 => h"(A) ^ 0 mod Ji
or equivalently, J2 5 {h~
l(A) 
: A G Ji}.
2) For families Iι,I2 of ideals we say Iχ <RK ^2 if there is a function H
witnessing it i.e.
(i) H is a function from Ii into I2
(ii) for every J G Ii we have J <RK H(J)
3) For families l!,I2 of ideals, Ii =RK I2 ifli <RK I2&I2 <RK Ii-
2.10B Fact. Assume I </?/<: F, where I,F are families of ideals.

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
749
1) If (TV T? G (T, I)) is a I'-suitable* tree and I G N(}, then (Nη : η e (Γ, I)}
is also I-suitable*.
2) If (Nη : η G (Γ, I)) is I-suitable*, then there is a tree (T', I') satisfying the
following:
(a) Γ' C T (but in general not T < T', as the function I
7 will be different)
(b) sPiit(r, v) = r n spiit(τ, i)
(c) (^ : T/ e (T', Γ)) is I-suitable.
Proof. (I) Should be clear, as <RK is transitive ( as a relation among ideals
and also among families of ideals).
(2) For each η e split (T, I) pick an ideal \'η G I Π Nη, \'η <RK 1^ such that:
for all v G T, for all Γ G I Π Nv : {η G I'M : /' = \'η} contains a front of Γ^l
This can be done using a bookkeeping argument.
Now define T' as follows: If 77 G Γ'\split(T, I), then SucT'(r/) - Sucτ(τ?). If
ry € T' Π split (T, I), then \'η is already defined and it belongs to Nη. Let gη be a
witness for 1^ <RK \η, so ^ introduces an equivalence relation on Sucτ(^). Let
Aη be a selector set for this equivalence relation, i.e. gη \Aη is 1-1 and has the
same range as gη. Note that we can choose gη and Aη in Nη. So without loss of
generality we may assume that gη\Aη is the identity, and let Sucτ(η) — Aη.
Π2.10B
2.11 Claim. Assume I is a restriction closed family of ideals, S a P-name of a
set of regular uncountable cardinals, P a forcing notion, I is ^-complete and
W C ω i . ThenTFAE:
(A) P satisfies C7P(I,S,W).
(B) for large enough regular χ, if S* - {λ JKP "λ ^ S" and λ < |P|} and
TV = (Nη : η G (T, I)) is a (I, S*, W)-suitable tree of models for χ (see
Definition 2.10(2)) and p G JV{) Π P, t/ien there is a ς G P, p <pr 9, such

750 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
that:
q \\-P " for some η G limΓ ( in (V
p)) (J Nηιk Πα i φ W or :
k<ω
for every fc < ω, and λ G S Π A^^ and
Qi £ Nη\k, a P— name of an ordinal < λ
we have g[GP] < sup[(J(A^fn Π λ)]"
n
i.e. 4 Ihp "for some η G lim(T) : if sup(\Jk<ω Nη^ Π ωi) G W then
sup(U ^>r*[Gp] n λ) = supOJfc Nηlk Π λ) for λ G S Π (Ufc Λ^)"
(B)* Like (B) replacing suitable by suitable*.
2.11A Remark. We can use, in (B), "λ G S Π Nηlk[GP]" 
instead of "λ G
S Π Nη\k" if in 2.7(1) we change all λ(τ?) to be P-names. Such a change would
not hurt the rest of this chapter.
Proof. (A) ^ (B)
So let (Nη : η G (T, I)} be (I,S, W)-suitable tree of models for χ and p G
NQ Π P. We should find q as in (B). There are F G N( ) witnessing UP (I, S, W)
for p and χ0 e N{} (such that <*0G N(}) where {F, P, 2'
pl} G N( > Π ί/"(χ0)
Now we form an (I, P, S)-tree (T^, l"*",λ,ξ, ζ) which obey F, and a func-
tion /ι : Γ
f -> T satisfying 
[ry < z/ ^> ft(τ/) < ft(ι/)] and 
[77 G T
1" =>
{^^^(ry),^),^)} G 7VMr7)], and:
(*)ι for every η G T*, λ G Nη Π S*, / G I Π AΓη and ξ G Nη a P-name of
an ordinal < λ, for some front J of T^ consisting of splitting nodes of (T^, I)
above ry,
l v ε J = * ( λ ( v ) , ξ ( v ) ) = (λ,ξ)}
[v e 7 => It = /]
Note that as F 6 NQ -< Nv necessarily
[v € J

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
751
Now apply Def 2.7A to (Γ* , |t , λ, £ C) so in V
p we get q G P and η G lim(Γt)
(a P-name) as required there (i.e. forced by q to be so), now there is a P-name
v G lim(Γ) such that f\k<ω h(η\k) < v\ so g, ι/ are as required.
(B) =» (Λ)
Easy. Choose χ large enough, and let us define a function F which will exemplify
(A). Let (An : n < ω) be pairwise disjoint infinite subsets of ω, with Min(An) >
n and α; = ]Jn<ω An.
Now
is defined as follows: let n be the unique n < ω such that \w\ G An, son <
and let v = v^ = ryfn, we let ^
 d=
f the Skolem Hull of {S, I, η}U((\ι,ξι,ζι) 
: I <
n) in (ff(χ), G, <* ); and let {(/£, λ^,ξ^, C) : m G An) be the <* -first list of
this form of all tuples (/, λ, ξ, C) such that / G Ny Πl, λ G RUCar Π Λ^, ξ G Λ^
a P-name of an ordinal < λ and ζ G N» an ordinal.
Lastly,
C(/?
Λ(x})^ sup(λ|w| n Λ/^)
So let (T, I, λ, ξ, 0 be an (I, P, S)-tree obeying F.
Now apply (B) to (Nv : v e T) and get ς, η as required in (A), i.e. they are as
required in 2.7(3).
(B)* => (B) Easy as a suitable tree is a suitable* tree.
(B) =*(B)* By 2.10B(2). 
Π2.n

752 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring HI Is Not Collapsed
2.12 Claim. If S,P,I,W,z G H(χ) and S* is as in 2.7A (i.e. S* - {θ :
θ = cf(0) < |P| and ¥P "0 φ S"}, e.g. S = {Ni}), I is N2-complete or for
each / G I, K G S we have / is /^-indecomposable, ίfeen there is a Ni-strictly,
uniformly (I, S, W)-suitable tree TV with x G NQ.
Proof. We will construct this tree in three steps: first we find a suitable tree,
then we thin it out to be a uniformly suitable tree, then we blow up the models
to make it Ni-strict. For notational simplicity let S = {Ni} so S* = {Ki} .
First Step: An easy bookkeeping argument (to ensure 2.10(e)) yields an (I U
{J£f })-suitable tree (Nη : η G (Γ, I)}; so for η G lim(Γ) we let Nη = (J Nηli.
i<ω
Hence we get that for all η G lim(T), for all / G (I Π Nη) U {j£f}, there are
infinitely may k such that η\k G split (Γ, I) and Sucτ(η\k) — {η* (x) : x G
Dom(/)}.
Second Step: Define H : T —> ω\ by if (r/) = sup(A^ Π α i) < ω\. Apply 2.6 to
get a subtree T
;, and a limit ordinal ί G W C ω\ such that clauses (a) - (d) of
2.6 hold. By clause (d) of 2.1, for all η G T', NηΓ\ωιC δ. Let <50 < ίi < ...,
(Jnδn = δ, and let
Γ2
 d- {η G Γ
x :Vfc < ίg(η), if Sucr^t/c) = {η\k~ (α) : α < ωi}
(so Suc τ/(ryffc) = {η\k~ (a) : a < δ}) then ry(fe) = δfc}.
Clearly T2 will be Ki-uniformly suitable.
Third Step: For r? G Γ2, let Λ7^ =the Skolem hull of ^ U 5. So A^ Π ωi D δ.
Conversely, let v G lim(T2), η < z/, then Nη U δ C Nμ, so N^ C N^ hence
Λ^ Πα; C <S. So ΛΓ^ nα i = 5, i.e. (N^ : η e Γ2) is an Ni-strictly by (I, S, W)-tree
of models (see Definition 2.10(4)).
We claim that this tree is still suitable. Indeed, let η G Γ2, v G lim(Γ2),
77 < v and / G IΠ AΓ^. Then for some a < δ, I is in the Skolem hull of Nη U α.
Let k < ω be such that α G Λ^ Π ωi, fc < ^g(r ). Then since (TV^ : 77 G Γ2)
was suitable, there is £ > fc such that \y\i = I. So {AΓ^ : η G T2) is also suitable.
^2.12

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
753
2.12A Conclusion. If P satisfies UP(l, S, W) and S is as in 2.7A (or S = {Ki})
(recall that this notation implies I is N2-complete, KI G S, W C ωι stationary)
then Ihp "W is stationary". Moreover, if W C W is stationary then also Ihp "W
is a stationary subset of ω\\
Proof. The "moreover" fact is by 2.7D(6) (i.e. monotonicity in W).
Assume that p\\- "C is a club of ω\ and C Π W = 0". By 2.12 we can find
an Ni-strictly (I, S, W)-suitable tree of models (Nη : η G (T, I)} with C, p G NQ .
Let δ = N Π ωι, so δ G W. By C7P(I,S, W) we can find a condition q as in
2.11(B) in particular p <pr q. Clearly q Ih
 UN^[G] Π ω\ = ί" and, trivially
p Ihp "C is unbounded in N(}[G\ Π ωi" hence p Ih 'Wo^] Π α i € C". So
ς f l h "(5GCΠW". 
D2.i2A
2.12B Remark. From now we shall use 2.11+2.12 freely. Usually we assume
I, S satisfies 2.6A(*)(a)+(b), S = {Ki} is the main case. We could have started
with 2.11(B) as a definition of UP but did not as the definition 2.7 was closer
to Chapter XL
2.13 Remark. From the proof of 2.12 we can conclude that in 2.11; in clause
(B) we can replace "(I, S, W)-suitable" by "Ni-strictly (I,S, W)-suitable, Nη Π
ω\ — δ G W", and then the condition q will be N^-semi generic.
2.14 Conclusion. 1) If P satisfies UP(l, S, W), Q a P-name of a purely proper
forcing then P * Q satisfies I7P(I, S, W).
2) If S = {Hi}, Q purely semiproper is enough.
3) Generally Q is purely (S, W)-semiproper is enough where:
Q is (S, W)-semiproper when: if χ regular large enough, Q G N -< (-ff(χ),
G, <*), \\N\\ = HO, P € Q Π N and AΓΠ α i G W ί/ien there is <?, p <pr ς G Q,
such that:
<7 Ih "for every λ G T V π S , i f g G A Γ i s a Q-name of an ordinal < λ then
a[GQ] < sup(A^Πλ)".
(Note that Q is (S, W)-semiproper iff Q satisfies the £/P(0,S, W)).

754 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
4) Suppose Qo is a proper forcing (in V), λ > |Qo|
K°, (of course λ = λ*° >
density of Q0 suffices), I G V is a λ
+-complete family of ideals which is λ+-
directed under <Rκ and Ihg0 "Qi is a forcing notion satisfying t7P(I)".
Then Qo * Qi satisfies E7P(I) (in V).
5) In 4) we can add W.
6) If Q satisfies the λ-c.c., satisfaction of "Q satisfies Z7P(I,S, W)" depend on
S Π λ only so we shall ignore S \ λ. For notational convenience we will demand
URCard\λ C S.
Proof. 1), 2), 3), 5), 6). Left to the reader.
4) Let x be regular large enough and let (Nη : η G (T, I)) be an I-suitable
tree of models for χ, (po»Pι) £ Qo * Qi and {(po,Pι),Qo * Q
1'^}
 G ^<> ^or
77 G lim(T) we let Nη
 d= \Jk<ωNηιk. As λ > |Q0|
H°, as I is λ+-complete, by
2.6B(1) w.l.o.g. for η € T we have: Λ^ Π Qo depends only on t^rj) and hence
Nη Π Qo is the same for all branches η G lim(T). Now for each η € lim(T),
in V Nη is a countable elementary submodel of (ff(χ), €, <*) hence there is
9° € Qo,Po <Pr ^°, and g° is (]V7?,Q0)-generic.
Now for each q,pQ <pr q G Qo, let
£g = {77 G lim(Γ) : q is (7Vr/,Q0)-generic}.
So lim(T) - U{Bς : pQ <pr g G Q}
Note
(*) for η G lim(T), p0 <Pr g G Qo, we have: η e Bq 
iff for any maximal
antichain J7 G A^ of Q0, we have: [r G JΓ \ AΓ^ => r, g incompatible].
Hence, Bς is a closed subset of lim(T), (as if 77 G lim(Γ) \ Bq then for
some J G MAC(QQ) Π A^ and r e J\Nη we have r,<? are compatible; then
for some m < ω, J G Nηfm, and ryfm < z/ G lim(Γ) still implies r G J \ A^
(because NηΓ\Q0 = N^Γ\ Q0) but r, g compatible. So lim(T) \ JBς contains the
neighborhood determined by r/fra).

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
755
So by 2.6B(2) if λ > |Qo|*°, for some q G Q0 and T' we have: p° <pr g,
(T, I) <* (T', I) and lim(Γ') C Bg. So g lhQo
 uNη[GQo] Γ}ωλ = Nη Πωl for every
η G T'" and clearly q Ih
 u(Nη[GQo] : r? G Γ') is an I -suitable* tree of models for
X". Why the suitable* not suitable? There may be η G Γ', 1 G KnNη[GQo]\Nη',
we get the I-suitable* by 2.14A below.
So we can finish easily. 
[U2 14
2.14A. Assume that (Nη 
: η G (Γ, I)} is a (I, S, W)-suitable* tree, Q is a
forcing notion satisfying ft-c.c. and (I, <RK) is ^-directed. Then \\-Q "(Nη[G] 
:
η G (Γ,l)) is (I,S,W)-suitable*".
Proof. First we claim that for each name 7, if p Ih "7 G I" then there is J G I
such that p Ih "7 <RK J" - Indeed, since Q satisfies the κ-c.c. we can find a set
Y Cl,\Y\ < K such that p Ih "7 G F". Now let J be a <βκ-upper bound for
Y. So for all Γ G Y we have 7' </?/<: J. The function witnessing this relation
will also witness it in V
Q, hence p Ih "7 <RK J" •
Now work in V[G]. Let 7 G Nη[G] Π I. Applying the claim we have just
proved, in Nη we can find J G Nη Π I such that 7 <## J. In V[G] the set
{x G Tfol : 77 < z/, J ^ΛK 1^} contains a front F of T^l F is also a front in
], so by transitivity of <RK we are done. 
Π2.14Λ
2.15 Theorem. Suppose
a) <3o is a forcing notion, satisfying C/P(Io,So, W)
b) Ihg0 "ζ>ι is a forcing notion satisfying C/P(Iι,Sι, W)". So: S0,Iι are Qo-
names and Si is a <2o * Qi-name.
c) λ - λ
κ° > |MAC(Q0)|, and [7 G I0 ^ λl
Dom(
7)l - λ]
d) ϊi is λ+-complete. (i.e. Ihg0 "each 7 G \\ is λ
+-complete ").
e) {^} C So C {μ : Nx < μ = cf(μ) < λ},
f ) IQ C I and I \ E0 is λ
+-complete and (I \ I0, <RK) is λ
+-directed (or just
/^-directed where Qo satisfies the tt-c.c).
g) lhQo "for every 7 G Ii for some Γ G 1,7 <RK /'" (<RK - Rudin Keisler
order, see 2.10A), moreover Γ G I \ I0 (hard to fail this addition).

756 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
h) S - So Π Si i.e. Si Π (s0 U (|Qo|, |Qo * Qι|]) -
Then Qo * Qi satisfies Z7P(I,S, W)
2.15A Remark. 1) Comparing with Ch XI, 5.1 we lose a little: we demand
λ > \MAC(QQ)\ instead demanding λ > |Qo| but this seems marginal, (see (*)
of 1.2A(2)).
2) More on <RK is this context see §4.
2.15B Example. Let Qo — Nm, Q\ = Levy(Nι,λι) (for some large enough
λi (in V
Qo)) Q2 = Nm (in V
Q°
xQl), Q3 = Levy(Nι,λ3) for some even larger
λ3, etc., then Q0, Qo * (Qi * £2), (Qo * (Qi * Qi}} * (Qs * £4), . satisfy E7P(I)
for appropriate I, by 2.15.
Before we prove 2.15 we will remind the reader of a definition and a
combinatorial lemma.
2.16 Definition. For a subset A of (an ω-tree) T we define by induction on
the length of a sequence 77, res^(^, A) for each η G T. Let res^({ ), A) = { ).
Assume resτ(r?,A) is already defined and we define resτ(r/
Λ(α), A) for all
members r/
Λ{α} of Sucτ(τ?) If η £ A then resτ(^
Λ (α), A) — resτ(?7, ^K(
α)>
and if η ^ A then resτ(^
Λ (α), A) = τesτ(η, A)
Λ{0). If η G lim(Γ), we let
res(r/, A) = \Jkeω ΐes(η\k, A).
Explanation. Thus res(T, A) = {resτ(f?, A) : η G T} is a tree obtained by
projecting, i.e., gluing together all members of Sucτ(^) whenever v φ A.
We state now (see Chapter XI, 5.3):
2.17 Lemma. Let λ,μ be uncountable cardinals satisfying λ
<μ = λ and let
(T, I) be a tagged tree in which for each η £ T either |Sucτ(τ7)| < μ or \(η)
is λ
+ -complete. Then for every function H : T — » λ there exist T' satisfying
(T, I) <* (T',l) such that for η
l,η
2 G T' we have: (letting A = {μ G T :
|Sucτ(μ)|<μ}):
τesτ(η
l,A) = resτ(τ7
2,^4) implies:

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
757
H(η
l) = H(η
2) and η
1 G A <£> η
2 G A, and: if η G T' Π A, then Sucτ(r?) =
Sucτ/(r/)
Proo/ of Theorem 2.15. Let χ be large enough. Let (Nη : η G (T, I)} be an
Ki-strictly (I, S, W)-suitable tree of models for χ such that
{Qo,9ι,S0,Sι,Io,ϊι,W}G N(}, and (po,pι) € (Qo * Qi) n 7V( },
let μ = Min{μ : λ
μ > λ}, so μ > N0,μ > |Dom(/)| for I G I0, μ = cf(μ), and
λ = λ
<μ. Let us define a function H with domain Γ: #(77) is the pair
Π MAC(Qo), isomorphism type of (Nη,Nηlo . . * ,
so |Rang(fΓ)l < λ. By the lemma above there is T
1 satisfying (T, I) <* (Γ
1, 1)
such that for η, v e T
1 :
7, A) = resτ(^, A) =» ff (77) = ff (i/) & [77 G ^ <=^> i/ G A]
where >1 = {77 G Γ : |Sucτ(r?)| < μ}
letT* = {resτ(r?,^) : η G T
1}.
We can find T
2 satisfying (Γ
1,!) < (Γ
2,l) such that the mapping η ι->
resτ(τ7, -A) on Γ
2, is one to one onto T*. By 2.6A (for S = {^i}) without loss
of generality for some δ < cji, η G lim^
1) =ϊ δ = \Jι<ω Nη\tΓ\ω\, by the proof
of 2.12 without loss of generality η G T
1 => A^ Π ω\ — 5; and looking at the
definition without loss of generality δ G W. Let Afr'es , 
Ax = Λ^ for 77 G T
2.
By assumption (f) we have (N^ : v G T*} is an (I0, SQ, W)-suitable tree for
X, po G Qo Π A/"^. So there are <?0,Po <pr <?o € Qo? and Qo-name z/ G lim(T*)
such that go '^Q0 " Ufc ^t/cI^Qo] n λ and Ufc N^kΓ\X has the same supremum
Let T+ - {77 G Γ
1 : resτ(r/,^) = ^^g(ry)}, this is a Q
Let qo € G C QQ,G generic over V, and let ί/ = z/[G].
Now we need:
2.18 Fact. 1) (Nη[G\ : η G (T+[G\, I)) is an ^[G]- suitable* tree for χ.

758 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring KI Is Not Collapsed
2) For η G lim(T+[G]) and K G (SJ U S0[G]) Π \Jk<ω Nηlk we have:
sup(|J Nηik[G\ Π «) = supdjΛΓ^fc Π «).
3) Moreover if in (2) we choose η in some further generic extension, it still
holds.
Proof of 2.18. 1) One point is Nη[G\ Γ\ ωι = Nη Γ\ ωι(t ωι) which follows by
the choice of qQ, v as NI G S0 (in fact Nη[G\ Π ω\ — 5, for every 77 G T, as TV
was Ni-strict). Another point is that for / G Jι[G] Γ\Nη[G\, η G T+[G] we have
{i/ : r? < v G T+[G] and / = \η or at least 7 <RK \η}
is a front of (T+[G])M, this follows as : if / G Nη[G\ Πl^G] then there is
Y G A^, |y| < |Qo| (even |y| < K if Q0 satisfies the ft-c.c) such that
note / φ IQ. Now y Π I \ IQ has a <κκ-upper bound in II hence in I Π Nη by the
assumption on I\!Q being λ^-directed, λ > |Qo| (or ^-directed, Q0 satisfying
the K-C.C.).
2) If K > λ then «: > |Qo| hence this is immediate; so assume K < X.
Let v — v\G\ be the branch we obtained by applying J7P(I, S,W) to ζ>o,
and let 77 G lim(T+) be any branch. Now there is an isomorphism g = gη
from \JkNηtk onto \JkN^k such that g(η\l) = v\l for ί < ω, g \ N ( ) = the
identity, g"(Nη\t) = N^£ for ί < ω, and necessarily g\(MAC(QQ) Π Nη\k) =
the identity (as NηnMAC(Q0) = N^MAC(QQ)). Now for every α G (Jfc ^rfc
a Qo-
name of an ordinal < tt,α is just a maximal antichain of Qo with a
function from it to ordinals. So g(g) = a and of course g(κ) — K. So as the
isomorphism g is onto \Jk Nv\k we see that go H~Q0 "if Ή ^ li
m(T
+[^Q0]) t^ιen
a = ^(g) < sup(Ufc ΛΓηffc Π «)" as required.
3) Same proof as g can still be defined. 
1^2. is

§2. Trees of Models and UP 
759
Continuation of the proof of 2.15: By the fact 2.18 in V[G] there are v\ and
<?ι such that Qι[G] 
\= [pi <pr <?ι; 
Qi 
IH "*Ί a branch of Γ
+[G], and for
K G Si[GjnTV^ we have sup(\Je<ω N^ r* Π «) = sup \Ji<ω(N^ l£[G] Π «)"].
Now, back in V, there are £Ί,gι and q'Q £ G such that #0 '^Q0 "#ij£Ί are
as above" (actually ί/i is a <3o-name of a Qi-name); w.l.o.g. QQ = gό(e Qo) as
the existence proof works for any G such that #o € G. Note (^ό?^ι) £ Q and
ι/ι e lim(T+) C lim(Γ) are as required (remembering 2.15A(3)).
Π2.15
Now clearly
2.19 Claim. 1) If (a forcing notion) P satisfies the (I, W) - condition (see Ch
XI) then P satisfies £7P(I, W) [look at Definition 2.7, 2.7A]
2) if P = Nm'(jD) (see chapter X), D an N2 - complete filter, I = {/ : for some
A C Dom(D) satisfying ^4^0 mod D we have / = {X C A : X = 0 mod D}}
then P satisfies UP (I)
3) Let (Γ*, Γ) be an I-tagged full tree, and
P = {(Γ, I) : (Γ*, I*) < (T, I), and for every η € lim(Γ) we have
(3°°n)[η\n is a splitting point of (T, I)}
ordered by inverse inclusion.
P' = {(Γ, I) : (Γ*, I*)W <* (T, I) for some η G Γ*}
ordered by inverse inclusion.
Then
(a) P, P' satisfies UP(I)
(b) if for λ regular
Vr? G lim(Γ*) 3°°n VA G (\*lnΓ[\η\A is not λ-indecomposable]
thenlhp, "cf(λ) = N0"
(c) if (Vη G lim(Γ*))3nΛm>nVA G (i;fn)
+ [I^A is not λ-indecomposable]
thenlhp
 αc

760 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring KI Is Not Collapsed
4) Let λ = cf(λ) > Ni, S C {δ < X : cf(δ) = N0 } stationary, club (5) = {h :
h an increasing continuous function from some i + 1 < ω\ into 5} ordered by
inclusion. Then club (5) satisfies UP({/}) if / is a uniform filter on λ.
Proof. We will only give a sketch of (2), leaving the other claims to the reader.
We will use the following fact about Nm'(Z)):
(*) If p G Nm'(D), α is a Nm
/(JD)-name of an ordinal, then there is q, p <* q
such that the set {η G q : for some β we have qW Ih "α = β
n} contains a
front.
This fact follows easily from 2.6B(2) (let H : P -> {0,1} be defined by
H(η) = 1 iff pfal decides α, define H(η) = \imneω(H(η\n)) for η G lim(p), and
find </ such that fl" is constant on lim(g)). Let I be such that the ideal dual to
D is in it.
Now let (Nη : η G (T, I)) be an Ni-strictly I-suitable tree, {p,D} G NQ a
condition. We can now find a condition <?, p <* <?, an index set (pη : η G p) of
conditions and a function / : q —> T satisfying the following:
1. If 77 < ι/ in q, then /(r?) <3 /(ι/)
2. For all 77 in #, Sucτ(/(^)) ?^ 0 mod D and 1^ is the ideal dual to D
3. For all η in ςr, Sucς(ry) C Sucτ(/(r/))
4. For all η in <?, p^ G Nf(η),tτ(pη) 
= r/,pW <* p^.
5. For all ry in q, pη < q^.
6. For all η in <?, all names α in ^V/(r/)j the set {z/ G ς : Pt/ decides α} contains
a front of p^.
We can do this as follows: by induction on n < ω we choose <?n
n(Dom(D))
and ((f(η),pη,Sucq(η)) 
: η G qΓ\
n(Dom(D))) satisfying the relevant demands. If
^ < ^g(tr(p)) this is trivial. If we have defined for n, for each v G gn
n(Dom(D))
and 77 G Sucq(ι/), we do the following. We can find f(η) satisfying (l)+(2)
because (Nη : η G (T, I)} is I-suitable. We choose pη using a bookkeeping
argument to take care of (4)+(6), using (*). Then we choose Sucq(η) such that
(3) and (5) are satisfied.

§3. Preservation of the UP(l, S, W) by Iteration 
761
Now let G be Nm'(£>) -generic, q G G. Now G defines a generic branch
η through q. This induces a branch v through T by: v = \Jneω f(η\n). Let
a G Ny\k, then there is ί such that pημ Ih "α = β and β G Nf^η^ C Nj," .
2.19A Remark. 1) Note: 2.19(1) tells us that various specific forcing notions
satisfy E7P(I, W) via Chapter XI 4.4, 4.4A, 4.5, 4.6.
2) We leave to the reader to compute the natural S's.
§3. Preservation of the C7P(I, S, W) by Iteration
3.1 Definition. We say that Q = (Pi, Qi : i < a) satisfies { Iί><7 , λ^μ^ , Sij :
( i , j ) G W*) for W provided that the following hold:
(0) W* C {(i,j) : i < j < ct,i is not strongly inaccessible}, W* 2
{(i 4- Ijj) : i < j < a} (we can use some variants, but there is no
need),
(1) Q is a GRCS iteration.
(2) Pitj = Pj/Pi satisfies UP(litj,Sitj, W) for (ij) G W* (in V
Pi).
(3) for every J G I^j, the set Dom(/) is a cardinal, / is λ^-complete (in
V), \ij < |Dom(/)| < μitj and \MAC(Pi)\ < \ij, and \itj > H2 and
(^ ij,<Rκ) is λ^ - directed (note that lij is from V and not V
p\
and i < \ij < μi,j)
(4) if <(0) < i(l) < t(2) < α,(i(0),i(l)) G W*,(i(l),t(2)) G W*
ίften (λi(i)^(2))
<μί(0)'
ί(1) = λi(i)^(2). (Hence λ<(0),t(i) <
(5) for every / G Ii(2),i(3) and i(0) < i(l) < i(2) < i(3) such that
(<(0),<(1)> G W* and (i(2),i(3)) G W* we have: / is A+0)|.(1)-
complete.
(6) ift(O) <i(l)«(2),

762 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
and then Si(0)li(2) is S^o),^!) Π Sί(1))i(2) [this holds if (always) S<j =
{^i}, and essentially if (always) Sij — RUCar ]. (Remember - by
2.13(6) every χ G RCar \ (P^i)!
4" C RCar \ λi(i)|ί(2) is considered to
be in Si(0),i(i).)
Note:
3.1 A Remark. If I is λ
+ - complete, K < λ+,
/\ |Dom(/)| < μ, 
[ /\ μ* < μ => H μ* < μ] 
and
i<OL
iM
 d= IU {Π«α/i : 
α < K, 
K < μ,/< G 1}
(product Πi<α^ defined in 4.11(1)) ίften iW is λ
+ - complete, / G 1^1 
=>
|Dom(/)| < μ and (1^, <RK) is K - directed (see more in 4.11).
We shall use 3.1 A freely.
3.2 Lemma. If Q = (Pn,Qn '• n < ω) satisfies (I^Aij^j,?^ : i < j < ω)
for W and I = \Jn<ω In>n+ι then Pω = RlimQ satisfies [7P(I,S,W) where
S = {λ : λ is regular > NO and for every n, cf(λ) G Sn} (a P^-name.)
3.2A Remark. For the case <pr^< use VI 1.10.
Proof. Let En = In,n+ι and λ^ = λ-^+i and μ» = μi,i+ι, note that PΪ}Ϊ+I — Qi
[see 3.1(2)], so Qn satisfies the In-condition, \P^\ < λ^, and μ^ < λi+i =
Let (Nη : η e (T, I)) be an Ni-strict (I,S, W)-suitable tree of models for
χ , 7 V ( ) Π α ; 1 G W , p G A Γ ( ) n P U J a n d { W , Q, ((In,λn,μn) : n<α;)}GAΓ ( ).
The proof will combine the proof of Ch XI 6.2 and the argument in
preservation of (semi) properness.
We now define by induction (similarly to Ch XI§1) on n < ω, a tree Tn
such that (letting An = {η G T : \Sucτ(η)\ < μn})
(i) To = T
(ii) (Tn,l) is an I-tree

§3. Preservation of the UP (I, S, W) by Iteration 
763
(iii) (Γ n,l)<*(ϊWι,l)
(iv) if η, v e Tn+ι , res(η, An) = res(ι/, X) ίΛen
(a) Nη n MAC(Pn+1) = Nv n MAC(Pn+1)
(b) the structures
and
are isomorphic
(v) if 77 G Γn+ι, |SucTτι(r7)| < μn *Λen SucTτι+1(r?) =
This is done by applying to (Γn, I) Lemma 2.17 (for the function H implicit
in (iv), and (λ,μ) there correspond to (λn+ι,μn) here).
In the end let T* =
f Πn<u; ^n5 now for every n we have (Γn, I) <* (Γ*, I);
why? 
if η € T*, then for some n 
(Vfe < ίg^))^^ € U?<nH hence for
fc> n, 
SucTfc (η) = SucTfc+1 (77).
We let T- =
f {res(ι/, An) : v e Γ*}.
We now define by induction on n < α;, pn^n^n and Pn-name ί/n such
that:
(a) qn € Pn
(b) gn+1 fn = ^n
(c) pfn <pr ςn
(d) ^n Ih Vn G lim(T-)" (lim is taken in F
p-)
(e) qn+ι Ih "res(ι/n+ι,Λn) = i/n" (more exactly res(ι/n+ι, {res(p, An+ι) : p G
(f) qn+ι Ih "z/p G limΓ*,res(p, An) — vn then
<u
n<ω

764 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring KI Is Not Collapsed
moreover for every K, G Γ\e<n(§W+ι u [l ^ l~M^ω|]) which belongs to
(Jn<ω
NP\n we have
sup (U
 
NP\n)[Gpn]rικ 
= sup
n<ω
. n<ω
(g) ηn e T*,77n < ηn+ι,lg(ηn) = n
(h) res(77n,An) = ι/nΓn
(i) po = P,Pn <Pr Pπ+i € Λ^n+1 and p nfn = pn+ifπ (we can get this from
chapter VI).
(j) Pn\n <pr qn
(k) if K G A^n a regular cardinal, α G A^n is a Pω-name of an ordinal < K
then for some m, and /? G A^m we have β is a Pm-name of an ordinal < K
andpm+ι Ih "α < β or K £ 5".
The induction step is done as in the proof of 2.15 (remember that by 3.1(3)
(It,jϊ ^RK) is λ^
1"-directed), (plus bookkeeping for (k) if <prτ^< we use VI 1.10).
Π3.2
3.3 Lemma.
1) If Q = (PaiQa 
OL < ωι) satisfies (lajβ,λa,β,μ>a,βι§a,β '. a < β < ωι
&α non-limit ) for W, and I = Uftj '• i < j < ωι,i non-limit } then
P = Pωι = RlimQ satisfies UP (I, S, W) where
S=
2) For P = RlimQ as above, Uα<u;ι ^
α *
s a dense subset of P, moreover for
every p G P there is q such that p <pr q G Uα<α;ι ^
α'
3) We can replace ω\ by a 5 such that cf 6 < \ij and lhpi "cf<J G S^./" for
any ( i , j ) G W*.
Proo/. 1) Let (Nη 
: η e (T, I)) be an Ni-strict (I,S, W)-suitable tree of
models for χ,N()Γ\ωι 
G W, {W,Q, {{Iα,/3,λαί/g,μα^,SαϊJg) : α < β <

§3. Preservation of the UP (I, S, W) by Iteration 
765
ωι,a non-limit )} belongs to NO and p G Pωι Π NO. So I G NO, hence
(as Nη Π ω\ — NQ Π ωι):
(*) for every η G T, 1^ € I^j for some i < j < N(> Π ω\.
Let 0 = 70 < 71 < 72 < - -, Un<a; 7n = 5 = ΛΓ(} n ωi and each 7ι+n is a
successor ordinal. We repeat the proof of 3.2 (again remembering 3.1(3)) using
PΊn instead Pn, and get q — qω, vω as there.
The new point is why p <pr q, and not only p\δ = p\(\Jn<ωΊn) <pr Q
The answer (as in Chapter XI, proof of 2.6) is: Let ζ
n(pi) be prompt names as
in XI 1.9. By (k) above q forces ζ
n(pi) to be bounded by δ = N( > Π ω\, so we
can finish.
2) We have proved this: for every p G Pωι by 2.12 we can find (Nη : η G
(T, I)) and q G Pωι,p <pr Q, as above; q is as required.
3) Almost the same proof. 
DS.S
3.4 Conclusion. 1) For Q an iteration as in 3.1, and limit δ < £g(Q) such
that cf(ί) = ω\ and [i < j < ί, i non-limit =Φ ( i , j ) G W*] ίΛen Ui<5^i i
g a
dense subset of P$.
2) Instead cf(<5) = α i, it is enough that for some i < 5, Ihp. "cf(5) = ωi",
3) Also if δ is strongly inaccessible, |Pi| < δ for i < δ then
(a) conclusion of (1) holds.
(b) Pκ satisfies the κ-c.c. (in a strong sense: Δ-system lemma!)
4) In (1) we can weaken the demand on W*, it is enough: for some unbounded
A C δ we have [i < j & i G A & j G A => (i, j) G W*].
5) Moreover in (4) we can replace A by a set of strictly increasing sequences
of ordinals < δ, such that [η G t => η(0) = 0], [m < k < ίgη & 77 G t =>
(77(71), 7j(fc)) G W*] and [77 G t & α < 5 =» V0e(α,ff) ^ (0) € *]• Of course this
is because we can use a sequence from ί as (70,71, 
•} in 3.3. Similar claims
holds for 3.5, 3.6.
Proof. Easy. 
D13.4
3.5 Lemma. Suppose Q = (Pi, Qi : i < K) satisfies (I<j, λij,μi,j,Sij 
i < j <
K, i non-limit} for W, K is strongly inaccessible \Pi\-\-\ij-\-μij -I- |Dom(/)| < K,

766 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
for every (ij) G W* J G I j and I = Ui,jt,j τ/ιen ^ =
 lim(<2) satisfies the
condition C/P(E,S,W) where S = {λ : for every (ij) € W*, in FPi, cf(λ) G S*
(or λ = c f λ > IP,-))}.
Proof. Let (Nη 
: η e (Γ, I)) be an Ni-strict (I,S, W)-suitable tree of models
for x. Choose for each η G T a strictly increasing sequence (7™ : n < ω) of
non- limit ordinals from NηΓ}κ such that 0 = 7^, sup(Nη Γ\κ) = \Jn<ω 7τp
 and
7?rfc < 7£ for k < tg(η). Let A^n = {PeT: \Sucτ(η)\ < μ7»ι7»+ι}
We define by induction on n, Tn such that
(i) To - T
(ii) (Tn,l) is anl-tree
(iii) (Γn,l)<*(Γn+1,l)
(iv) if η G Tn, and ίg(ry) < n then 77 G Tn+ι
(v) if η G Tn, ig(η) = n, 
r? < 1/1 G Γn+ι,r/ < ι/2 G Γn+1 and
res(ί/ι, A^^) = res(z/2,Λ,n) then
(a) JV^ Π MAC(P^) = N»2 n
(b) the structures
> » ^ij
 c)c€ΛΓ, 
and
are isomorphic.
There is no problem in this: Let Γ* - Πn<ω
 Tn> easily (
τn? 0 <* (Γ*, I) for
every n (by (iii) and (iv)). The rest is like the proof of 3.3. The only difference is
that instead of actual ordinals 7n we will have prompt names: jn = 7^ . We can
use XI 1.10 to get the conditions pn G PΊn. Also remember that every Q-named
ordinal ζ(< K) is bounded below K (as for δ < K of cofinality NI, \Ja<δ Pa is a
dense subset of PS). 
Πs.5
3.6 Theorem. Suppose
(a) K is strongly inaccessible,

§3. Preservation of the UP(l, S, W) by Iteration 
767
(b) Q = (Pi,Qj : i < K) satisfies (I^j, \ij,μij, Sij : i < j < κ,i
non-limit) for χ, W, \Pi\ < K for i < K, Pκ = \Ji<κ
pi-
(c) \\-Pκ "Qκ satisfies t/P(IΛ,SΛ,W), lκ is /^-complete" and (lκ,<RK) is
(< AC) - directed.
(d) I = IΛ
(e) S = n«lJ
Γften PΛ * Qκ satisfies £7P(I, S, W).
Remark. This generalizes Gitik, Shelah [GiSh:191] which improves the relevant
theorem in XI §6.
Proof. Let (Nη : η G (Γ, I)) be an Ni-strict (I, S, W)-suitable tree of models for
X, N( ) Π ωi e W, (pa,Pb) € (PK * QK) n ^{) You maY assume, for simplicity
that Sij — {Kι},SΛ = {Ki} = S. Let T* be as in the proof of the previous
theorem. Let G* C Levy(^0,2
x) be generic over V. Let « = Un<α;
α^' eac^
αn+ι a successor, α0 = 0, αn < αn+ι, Un<u;
α^ = κ (
in ^t^*]')-
We choose by induction on n, βn, Gn € V [G*], Tn, ι/n such that
(a) Gn C Pβn, Gn generic over V, Gn+ι Π P^ - G?n, αn < /3n < βn+ι < «,
(b) Γ° -Γ*, Γ
n+1 CΓ
n,
(c) (A^[Gn] : ^ € (Tn, I)) is an En-suitable* tree of models for χ, In = \J{lij :
(iJ)εW*, i>βn}\Jlκ,
(d) Nη[Gn] nωι = N(}nωl for all η G Γn
(e) T
n has a unique member of length fcn, z/n,
(f) if # is a function (from F), Dom(F) - Γ, if (r/) G I,,, for n < ω, Jn is a
front of T and [17 G Jn+ι =* M i<igηη\£ G Jn] and 77 G Jn =» 1^ G lκ then
for infinitely many n, there exists mn, kn > n such that ι/nffcn G Jmτι and
Now G = U Gn is a generic subset of Pκ over V (as PΛ satisfies the
n<ω
K-c.c., every maximal antichain in P^ is contained in some Pατι, hence meets
some Gn).
We define Γ
α - {77 G Γ : ^[G] Πα i - 7V()
We define a depth function on T
α:

768 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
Dp(η) > 0 iff ηeT
a.
Dp(η) > α(> 0) iff for every β < a
for every / G lκ Π Nη[G\, there is z/, / <RK /,/, 
η < v G T
a such that
{ ί : z/
Λ(i) eT
a,Dp(v~(ί)) >β} ^0mod/ ί /.
Easily Dp G V[G\ and its definition is absolute, [η < v G T
α => £>p(z/) <
£>p(r/))] and Dp({ )) = oo as Un<u, "n witnesses (in F[G*]).
So in F[G], Γ
6 =
f {i/ G T
α : Dp(ι/) = 00} is the desired tree (i.e. we can
continue as in 2.15 with Pκ, Qκ here corresponding to Qo? Qi there). 
Ds.6
3.7 Lemma. Suppose Q = (Pi,Qj : i < a,j < a) satisfies (I^λ^μ^S^ :
i < j < a,i non-limit) for W;z(*) < α is a non-limit, G^ C P^ generic
over V, and (iζ : ζ < β) is an increasing continuous sequence of ordinals in
V[Gi(#)],io = i(*),iβ = α, each a^+i a successor ordinal.
In V[GίW], we define P^ - Piζ/Gi(*},Q'ζ = QaJGi(^Q' = (P'^Q^ : C <
β,ξ<β), then, in F[Gί(*)],Q' satisfies (Iα c,t€,λi ζ,ή»Mi c,i€»sic,ύ : C < C < A C
a non-limit) for W.
Proof. Straightforward. 
D,13.7
3.8 Conclusion. For every function F, stationary W C ω\ and ordinal α* there
are a < α* and a GRCS iteration Q of length o; satisfying {I^ , A^j, μίjι7 , Sij<7 ; f <
j < a, i non-limit ) for W with (Qi,IM+ι,Si,i+ι) = F(Q\ί) and α = α* or
a < α*, and F(Q) does not satisfy (*) below or there is /?, β + α; < α and
(*)F(Q) has the form (Q, I, S), Q a Pα-name of a forcing notion satisfying
UP(I,S, W), and (a) or (b) below holds:
(a) 
\\-Pa "α φ H2" (i.e. lhα "|α| < K2") and for some λ the family I is
λ+-complete, where λ = λ
|Dom(/)l whenever / G l^,i < j < α, and
\MAC(Pa)\ < X and (I, <βκ)-is λ
+-directed.

§4. Families of Ideals and Families of Partial Orders 
769
(b) 
\\-po "α = ^2" (i e. α is strongly inaccessible, \Pi\ < a for i < α), I
is α-complete and / 6 lij&z < .7 < α => |Dom(/)| < a and (I, <RK)
is α-directed.
Proof. Straightforward. 
D13.8
§4. Families of Ideals
and Families of Partial Orders
4.1 Definition. 1) We call an ideal J fine if {x} G J for every x £ Dom(J).
2) We call the ideal with domain {0}, which is {0}, the trivial ideal.
4.2 Claim. 1) If an ideal J is not fine then J <RK "the trivial ideal". (See
2.10A for the definition of <RK)
2) In 2.10B we can weaken the hypothesis to Iχ <RK ^2 where 1'2 = IfeU {the
trivial ideal}. The same holds in similar situations.
3) <RK is a partial quasiorder (among ideals and also among families of ideals).
Proof. Easy. 
U4.2
4.3 Definition.
1) For an (upward) directed partial or just quasi order L = (JB, <) we define
an ideal id/,:
idL = {A C B : for some y G L 
we have A C {x G 5 : -«y ^ χ}}
(Equivalently the dual filter fil^ is generated by the "cones" Ly = {x e
L : ?/ < x}.) We call such an ideal a partial order ideal or a quasi order
ideal. We let Dom(L) = Dom(id£/)(= 5), but we may use L instead of
Dom(L) (like Vx G L) abusing notation as usual.

770 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
2) For a partial order L let dens(L) = Min{|Θ| : θ C Dom(L) is dense i.e.
(Vα G Dom(L))(36 G θ)[α < b])} (this applies also to ideals considered as
the quasi order (/, C)).
3) For a family C of directed quasi orders let id/: — {idz, : L £ C}.
4.4 Fact.
1) id^ is λ-complete iff L is λ-directed.
2) dens(L) — dens(id(L)<), C)
3) If h : LI — > L2 preserves order (i.e. Vx,y G L, (x < y =Φ> h(x) < h(y))) and
has cofinal range (i.e. Vx G L2Ξh/ G LI(X < h(y))) then idι,2 <RK idz,ι
4) /ι : LI — * 1/2 exemplifies idL2 <κκ id^ 
ijff for every x2 G £2 there
is #ι G LI such that: y G LI & #ι <LX y => %2 <L2 My) (i e f°
r
y e LI 
: 
~ x2 <L2 My) =^ ""^i ^LI y but /ι is not necessarily order
preserving) .
5) the ideal id(£5<) is fine iff (L, <) has no maximal element.
Proof. Straight. E.g.
4) Note: h exemplifies idL2 < id^ iff
(MA C Lι)(A ^ 0 mod idLl -> (Vx2 G L2)[ti'(A) Π{yeL2:x2 <L, y} ^ 0])
iff
(Vx2 G L2)(VA C Li) [A ^ 0 mod idLl -^ /ι
;/(A) Π {y G L2 : x2 <La y} φ 0]
(Vx2 G L2)[{y G LI : -.χ2 <L2 Λ(2/)} = 0 mod idLl]
(Vx2 G L2)(3x! G Lι)(Vy G Lι)(-.χ2 <L2
iff
(Vx2 G L2)(3x! G Lι)(Vj/ G LI)(XI <Ll y -> ^2 <L2
Π4.4

§4. Families of Ideals and Families of Partial Orders 
771
4.5 Fact. 1) For every ideal J (such that (Dom(J)) φ J), let J\ = id(jjς),
then
(i) Ji is a partial order ideal
(ii) |Dom(Jι)|HJ|<2
|Dom(J)l
(iii) J <RK Jι
(iv) if J is λ-complete then (J, C) is λ-directed hence J\ is λ-complete
(v) dens(J, C) = dens(Jι,C)
2) For every dense Θ C J we can use id(θ,c) and get the same conclusions.
3) For every ideal J there is a directed order L such that:
J <RK idz,, 
dens(J) = dens(L) and:
for every λ if J is λ-complete then so is id£.
Proof. Least trivial is (l)(iϋ), let h : J — > Dom(J) be such that h(A) G
(Dom(J)) \ A (exists as (Dom(J)) φ J). Let Ji = i
If X C Dom(Jι) - J,X i Ji and A
 
d= h"(X) belongs to J, then
{B G J : -Ά C B} G id(j,c) = Λ (by the definition of id(j?c)) hence (as
X φ Ji) for some B G X,A 
C J5, so Λ(β) G h"(X) = A contradicting the
choice of h(B) (as A C B). 
D4<5
4. 5 A Remark. So we can replace the ideals by partial orders without changing
much the relevant invariants such as completeness or density.
4.6 Conclusion. For any family of ideals I there is a family of L of directed
partial order such that
(i) I <RK {id(L,o : (L, <) G C}
(") 14 < |I|
(iii) sup{|L| : (L, <) G £} < sup{| J\ : J G I}) 
< ( sup{2l
Dom(
J)l : J G I})
(iv) sup{ dens(L, <) : (L, <) G £} = sup{ dens(J, C) : J G 1}
(v) if I is λ-complete then every (L, <) G £ is λ-directed.
Proof. Easy. 
D4.6

772 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
4.7 Definition. For a forcing notion Q, satisfying the ft-c.c., a Q-name L of a
directed partial (or just quasi) order with (for notational simplicity) Dom(L) G
V] let L* = apκ(L) be the following partial order
Dom(L*) = {α : α C Dom(L) and |α < K}
a <* 6 iflf lhg "(Vy G α)(3x G 6)[L |= j/ < z]"
(this is a quasi order only, e.g. maybe a <* b <* α but a^b).
4.8 Claim. For a forcing notion Q satisfying the AC-C.C. and a Q-name L of a
λ-directed partial order (with Dom(L) G V for simplicity) such that λ > « we
have:
(i) apκ(L) is λ-directed partial order (in V and also in V®).
(ii) 
|αpΛ(L)| < |Dom(L)|<
Λ
(in) 
\\-Q "idL [G] <βχ idαp.(L)"
Proof. We leave (i), (ii) to the reader. We check (iii). Let G C Q be generic
over V, and in V[G] we define a function h from apκ(L) to Dom(L[G]):
/ι(α) will be an element of Dom(L[G]) such that
(VxGα)L[G] μ
 ux<h(ά)
n.
We can now easily verify the condition in 4.4(4). 
U4.8
4.9 Conclusion. 1) Suppose Q is a forcing notion satisfying the AS-C.C., |ι a
Q-name of a family of λ-complete filters and λ > K. Then there is, (in V), a
family U2 of λ-complete filters such that:
(i) II-Q "!ι <RK I2"
(ii) |I2| = |Iι|
(iii) 
sup{|Dom(J)| : J e 1%} = sup{(2
μ)
</ΐ: some q G Q forces that some
J G Ii has domain of power μ}.
2) If Ii has the form (id(£}<) : (L, <) G C} then in (iii) we can have
(iii)' sup{|Dom(J)| : J G I2} = sup{μ
<Λ : some g G Q force some (L, <) G C
has power μ}.

§4. Families of Ideals and Families of Partial Orders 
773
Proof. Easy. 
Π4.9
4.9A Remark. The aim of 4.8, 4.9 is the following: We will consider iterations
(Pi, Qi : i < a) where Ihp. "Qi satisfies {/.?(!$)", but 1$ may not be a subset of
the ground model V. Now 4.9 gives us a good <^^-bound 1$ in V, and we can
prove (under suitable assumptions) that Pa will satisfy the UP(\Ji<ali).
4.10 Definition. 1) We say a family I of ideals is /^-closed if. for every a < K
and Ji € I for i < a there is J G I, /\i<a Ji <RK J It is strongly ^-closed it is
/^-closed, and it is closed under restriction.
2) We say a family C of partial orders is ^-closed if {idi, : L G C} is.
4.11 Fact. 1) Let ( Ji : i < a) be a sequence of ideals; we define J = Πi<α Ji
as the ideal on Y[i<a(Dom(Ji)) 
generated by {Uj <α IL<α ^' : for iJ «* we
have A{ C Dom(Ji) and for each i < a we have A] G J^}, then
(i) J is an ideal
(ii) |Dom(J)| = Ui< JDom(J,)|
(iii) dens(J)<Πί<α dens(J,)
(iv) if each Ji is λ-complete then J is λ-complete
(v) Ji <RK J for each i < a
(vi) if for each ί, (Dom( Λ)) £ Λ then (Dom( J)) φ J
(vii) if ^ = id(Li)<.) then J is naturally isomorphic to id(£,}<) where
(^<)=Πi<α(^ <«)
2) This product is associative.
4.12 Definition. 1) For K, a regular cardinal the K-closure of a family I of
ideals is
2) Similarly for a family of partial orders
4.13 Fact. For a family I of ideals let F be the /^-closure of I, then:
(i) |I'| < |I|<«
(ii) F is /^-closed
(iii) supJ€F|Dom(J)| < ( supJβ(|Dom(J)|)<-

774 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring HI Is Not Collapsed
(iv) if I is λ-complete so is F
(v) supJ€I ( dens(J)) < ( supJ€l dens(J))
<κ
(vi) if I = {idL : L G £} then F =RK id/:/ where C' is the ^-closure of C (in
fact, F, id/:, are isomorphic)
Proof. Easy. 
D4.ι3
The following claim gives better cardinality restrictions in §3 (and 2.17)
and not having to use "not too large I for Pi in the iteration for the sake of
Qi" (also alternative proofs). Here S is just {Hi}.
4.14 Claim. Suppose Q satisfies t/P(I, W), Q satisfies the κ-c.c. and (Nη : η G
(Γ, I)) is an Ni-strict (I, W) - suitable tree of models (for χ). Let F = {/ € I: /
is ^-complete } and assume F is ^-closed, Nη Π ω\ — δ G W.
Then for every p G NQ Π Q there is an (N§, Q) - semi generic q,p <pr q G Q
such that
q IΓ-Q" there is T' C Γ such that (^[Gg] : η G (Γ
7,1))
is a Ni-strictly (F, W) - suitable* tree of models"
Proof. Let G C Q be generic over V. Let 5 = NQ Γ\ω\. By 2.14A we know that
(Nη[G\ 
: η G (T, I)} is (F, W)-suitable*, but it is not necessarily Ni-strict. So
let (in V[G\) :
T* - Γ*[G]
 d= {r/ G T : ΛΓ^[G] Π ωι = δ}.
C7P(I,W) implies that we can find <? such that p <pr g and q forces that T*
contains a branch, but we want T* to contain even an (F, W)-suitable* tree.
Define (in V[G])) a depth function Dpτ as follows:
Dpτ(τy) > a iff : η G T* and V/3 < αVJ G F Π Nη[G\ 3vη G T*
[ry < i/i, & / <RK \^^{p:pe SucT K), Dpτ(p) > /?} ^ I,J.
Clearly Dpτ : T* —> Ord U {00} is well-defined, and if ry < z/, then
> Dpτ(ι/).
For each η G Γ, define A^ as follows:
if 77 £ split (Γ*, I) or \η £ F, then Aη = 0
otherwise A^ — {p G Sucτ*(??) : Dpτ(r/) = Dpτ(p)}.

§4. Families of Ideals and Families of Partial Orders 
775
If Aη G \η let Bη = Aη, otherwise let Bη = 0. Now we return to V. So for
each η we have a name Bη such that Ihg "β^ G 1^ G I'". As I' is /^-complete
and Q satisfies the «-c.c., there is B* G \η such that \\-Q "β^ C β*". Now
define T° as follows:
T° = {η : for all ί < ίg(η), if \η\t G I' and η\ί G split (Γ, I), then η(i) $ β*}.
So we have (Γ, I) <* (Γ°, I), and (Nη : η G (Γ°, I)) is still an Ni-strictly (I, W)-
suitable* tree of models. So we can find a condition q and a name η such that
P <Pr Q and q Ih "77 G lim(T°) and for all ί < ω: Nηl£[G] Π ωi = ί". We now
claim
(*) g Ih " for all ί < ω, Όpτ(η\l) = oo".
So work in V[G], where q G G. Clearly η\£ eT* for I < ω and assume toward
condition \^tΐ>pτ(η\£) < oo. As 77 < ι/(e T*[G]) => Dp(r/) > £>p(ι/) for some
to < ω, (it > 4)[Dpτ(?7|t) = α0 < oo]. Let r/0 = r/Γ^o % definition of Dpτ,
there are / G Nη[G] Π F and β < α0 4-1 such that for all ι/ G T*: if 77 < z/, and
/ <ΛK li/ and z/ G split (Γ, I) then {p G Sucτ*(^) : Dpτ(p) > /?} G 1^. W.l.o.g.
β — αo Since (^[G] : i^ G T°) is suitable*, and 77 is a branch, we can find
i\ > £Q, such that (letting η\ = r f^i): / <RK lτ?ι and Sucj (ryι) ^ 1^; now as
lι > IQ clearly η <η\ and (by the choice of ^o) Dpτ(?7ι) — o o; by those things
and by the previous sentence {p G Suc^*(?7ι) : Dpτ(p) = QQ} ^ l^i But then
we must have η\(ί\ 4-1) G {p G Sucτ*(r?ι): Dpτ(p) = αo} C Aηι — Bηι C Bη.
This is impossible as η\(ίι -h 1) G T°. So we have proved (*). Now it is easy
to see that T'[G] = {η G Γ*[G] : Dpτ(r/) = CXD} satisfies all requirements. D4.ι4
We can conclude (and it should be easy for a reader who has arrived here):
4.15 Iteration Lemma. Suppose:
(a) (P^, Qj : i < α, j < a) is an RCS iteration
(b) for every i for some n we have lhpί+n "|P^| < HI"
(c) W C ω\ stationary

776 
XV. A More General Iterable Condition Ensuring NI Is Not Collapsed
(d) for each i for some P^-name of regular cardinal $i > NI (in V) and P^-name
I,:
(a) Pi satisfies the ^-c.c. (i.e. if p Ihp. "& = ft" then Pi\{q £ Pi,q > p}
satisfies the ft-c.c.) and
(β) ""Pi "Qi satisfies C7P(Ii, W) and !» is ^ - complete."
Then
(1) PQ, satisfies C7P(I,W) for some (Mπii<α/5;;)-complete I(e V) (i.e. I is K-
complete where K = Min{/ί : for some i and p G P^,p Ihp. ^ = «).
(2) U;<<5 -Pt is a dense subset of P^ (δ limit ordinal < α) if: cf(5) = HI or
!hpδ "cf(ί) = HI" or 5 strongly inaccessible and /\i<δ |P$| < 5.
(3) also the existence lemma holds, (like 3.8).
Proof. Should be clear. 
CU.is
We note:
4.15A Claim. 1) In 4.15, we can use the "strong preservation" version (and
it works).
4.16 Lemma. The following property, t7Pcon(I, W), is preserved (even strongly
preserved) by iterations as in 4.15, and implies that forcing by Q add no real,
where:
Z7Pcon(I» W) is satisfied by the forcing notion Q, if: for any (Nη : η G (Γ, I)}
an Ni-strict (I, W)-suitable tree of models for χ, such that for every 77, v e
T, of the same length hη^ is an isomorphism from Nη onto Nv,hη^(Q) =
Qi 
hη\e,ί/\ι S h>η^ and: i/ 77* G lim(T) and Gη* is a directed subset of
\Ji<ω Nη* \i Π Q, not disjoint to any dense subset of U^<ω ^Γ t^ ^ Q defined
in (Um<u;^*rm, ^* ^> Q' 'tj* ^)^<ω ^en ΛβΓe ™ Q € Q SUch that ςf Ihg
"there is v G lim(Γ) (in V
Q) such that U^<α; ^\t,v\t(G Π JVΊ/^) is a subset of
GQ".
4.16A Remark. 1) This property relates to the UP (I, W) as E-complete re-
late to E-proper (see V §1).
2) Who satisfies this condition? W-complete forcing notions, Nm^Z)), Nm(D)

§4. Families of Ideals and Families of Partial Orders 
777
(D is H2-complete) Nm^(Γ,2)) (2) is ^-complete), and shooting a club
through a stationary subset of some λ = cf(λ) > HI consisting of ordinals
of cofinality ω (and generally those satisfying the I-condition from Chapter
XI).
Proof. Should be clear (and will be elaborated elsewhere, see [Sh:311]). D4.ι6

XVI. Large Ideals on
from Smaller Cardinals
§0. Introduction
We give here better consistency strength than in XIII for having some large
ideal on ω\\ possibly without adding a real using e.g. a Woodin cardinal. By
this we keep old promises from 84 - 85, mentioned in [Sh:253], Shelah and
Woodin [ShWd:241], (part of the delay was because it was originally intended
to be part of [ShWd:241] which later was splitted to three). This will be
continued elsewhere - getting suitable axioms in 2.4, 2.5, 2.6+2.10. Woodin
told the author that the results (in 2.4 - 2.6(+2.7)) threw some light on the
structure of universes of set theory satisfying AD. In §2 we use from §1 only
1.2(1),(2), 1.3(1), 1.8 for 2.1; weakening somewhat the results in §2, we can use
2.8, 2.9 instead of 2.1 (so replace (*)26[λ] by "λ is a Woodin cardinal" in 2.4,
2.4A, 2.5, 2.6 thus using only 1.14, 1.15, 2.2 - 2.10).
The large cardinals from [ShWd:241] are defined in 1.14, 1.15.
§1. Bigness of Stationary T C <S<κ0(λ)
1.1 Notation. 1) λ a fixed regular cardinal > NO-
2) For sets α, 6 let a <κ b mean: α Π K = b Π K and a C 6 and let a <κ b means:

§1. Bigness of Stationary T C S<χ0 (λ) 
779
α C b and α Π K = b Π sup(α Π K) (i.e. α € a Π « => α Π (a + 1) = b Π (α 4- 1)), so
a <κbfi a <κb\ And a <κ a holds!
3) /f (α) is the family of sets x whose transitive closure has cardinality < α, and
if α is not cardinal we add: x of rank < a. Let <* be some well ordering of H(a)
increasing with a. We let TV denote a model (usually N -< (#(χ), G, <£),7V
countable), |7V| its universe, and ||7V|| its cardinality. We write NI <κ 7V2
instead |Λ/Ί| <κ |Λ^|, similarly for <Λ.
4) <S<μ(A) - {6 : b C 5, |b| < μ}
V<μ(B) is the filter on S<μ(B) generated by the closed unbounded subsets
of S<μ(B) (similarly T><μ(A) for μ regular uncountable).
5) 5, T denote subsets of some S<μ(A). We concentrate on μ = NO-
1.2 Definition. 1) Γ C <S<κ0(λ) is (β,C*)-big (where ^<θ = cf(fl) < λ and
C* C λ closed unbounded) z/
for every a < λ there is /?, a < β < Min(C* \ (α + 1)) such that for every
C e £><N0(β) the set {α G S<κ0(a) : (36 e CnT)[α <θ 6]} belongs to £><κ0(α)
We say T is (< σ, C*)-big if for each θ < σ we have Γ is (0+, C*)-big.
We define T is (0, /)-big where / : λ — > λ similarly only "/? < /(α)" replace
"/3 < Min(C* \ (α + 1))" . If -ι(N0 < <9 - cf(9) we mean the first such θ
1 > θ.
2) T C £<N0(β), is <9-*big (where θ C B) if. for every x regular large
enough and countable N -< (ίf(χ),€,<*) to which T, β, θ belong there is
AT', AT <θ N
1 -X (#(χ), G, <* ) such that AT' Π B <E T.
3) Let λ C β and θCB.We say T C 5<No(β) is <9-big (for β; if the identity
of λ not clear we add "in λ") if. for every C G D<κ0(5) and α < λ such that
[θ < λ => α > 0] we have: {α: α G <S<κ0(α), and for some b G Γ Π C we have
If 0 = λ we may omit θ (remember that λ is fixed (see 1.1(1))). If B — λ
we may omit it.
4) We say Γ is (0,*)-big if Γ C <S<N0(λ) is (0,/)-big for some / : λ -* λ;
equivalently (0, C*)-big for some club C* of λ.
If not said otherwise, and λ is strongly inaccessible, then we assume: (here as

780 
XVI. Large Ideals on NI from Smaller Cardinals
well as in 1.11, 1.13) for β G C*, we have f ( β ) (or Min(C
f*\(/3 + l))) is a strong
limit of cofinality > β.
1.3 Definition.
(1) For cardinals μ > λ > θ we say T C <S<κ0(λ) is (μ,0)-big or big for (μ, θ)
if. for every C
l G £><N0(/Ό for some C G £><
(Vα G
(2) We say T is (< μ, 0)-big if it is (μi, 0)-big for every μi, λ < μ\ < μ.
1.4 Definition. Suppose λ C B. We say T C <S<^0(jB) is ^-essentially end
extension closed set (for B) ifϊoi some E G P<
In short we write 0-EEEC and we call E a witness for T. If £ = <S<Hi (£) then
we say T is #-end extension closed set (for β), in short 0-EEC.
1.5 Definition. 1) Pr^(λ) means: every 0-EEEC 0-big (see Definition 1.2(3))
set T C «S<H0(A) is also (2
λ,0)-big (see Definition 1.3(1)).
2) Pi0(λ) means:
for every semiproper forcing notion P of cardinality < λ,
Ihp 'Trg(λ) "
3) Pr^(λ) means Pr^(λ).
1.6 Fact. 1) In Definition 1.3(1) we can replace μ by any set A satisfying
λ C A, \A\ = μ.
2) If θι < Θ2 < X < μι < μi and T C «S<κ0(λ) is (μ2,02)-big (see Definition
1.3(1)) then T is (μι,0ι)-big.

§1. Bigness of Stationary T C S<#0 (λ) 
781
3) If λ C B, 0ι < 02 and Γ C S<χ0(B) is 02-big (see Definition 1.2(3) so for B,
in λ) then it is #ι-big.
1.7 Fact. 1) If λ is weakly compact, T C <S<κ0(λ) is 0-big (see Definition
1.2(3)) and θ < λ then T is (λ,0)-big (see Definition 1.3(1)).
2) If λ is weakly compact, T C <S<Ho(λ) is big (i.e. λ-big) then T is (λ, *)-big.
Proof. 1) Let C
1 G £>κ0(λ) be given. Let
E = {a G C
1 : -.(3α' G C
x)[α <θ o! G C
lba' Π λ G Γ]}
If E = 0 mod £><κ0(λ) we finish.
Otherwise by weak compactness, for some λ* < λ (inaccessible, θ < λ =>
Λ* => θ) we have E Π <S<N0(λ*) 7^ 0 mod P<κ0(λ*). As T is 0-big we get a
contradiction.
2) Easy too. 
Dι.7
1.8 Fact. 1) If T C 5<Ho(λ) is big for (2
λ,6>) (see definition 1.3(1)) then T is
<9-*big (see Definition 1.2(2)).
2) If T C 5<κ0(λ) is 0-*big, and μ > λ then Γ is (μ, 0)-big.
1.8 A Remark. So the two conditions in 1.8(1) are equivalent.
Proof. 1) We check definition 1.2(2), so say χ > 2
λ. Clearly #(λ+) 
<E
AT, |#(λ+)| - 2
λ, and 56
 d= {M -< (F(λ
+), G, <* + ) : ||M|| - ^0 and Γ,λ,6>
belong to M} G W and 56 G £><κ0(#(λ+)). By the assumption of 1.8(1) for
(Vα G C)(3α')[α <^ α' G Sb]
As all the parameters in the requirements on C belong to TV, without loss of
generality C G TV. As C G TV is a club of <S<N0(#(λ+)), clearly 7V(Ί#(λ+) G C.
So there is N' G 56, N Π ff (λ+) <0 AT
7.

782 
XVI. Large Ideals on NI from Smaller Cardinals
Now λ Π Skolem Hull [WJ(TV'nλ)] - JVΠλ (Skolem Hull - in ( H ( χ ) , G, <* ))
and this implies the conclusion. Why the equality holds? Enough to look at
τ(z, y) for r a term, x G TV, y G N' Π λ such that Vxy[τ(x, y) G λ)]. In N there
are x' G N Π if (λ+) and a term T' such that (Vy G λ)[τ(z, y) = τ'(z', y)]. Now
x' G TV' and we finish.
2) Easy. 
Πι.8
1.9 Fact. Suppose T is big for (λ,0),2
λ = λ+ and
(*) for every u C <S<κ0(λ+) such that u ^ 0 mod 2?<N0(λ+) for some B C λ+,
uΠ<S<N0(£) /0modP<Ko(.B) and |B| < λ.
Then T is (9-*big.
Proof. Like the proof of 1.7 (remembering 1.8).
Similarly we can prove
1.9A Fact. Suppose for every μ, such that λ < μ < 2
λ we have:
(*)ι (VstatE C S<χQ(μ))(3A C
Then every (9-big T is (2
λ,6>)-big (equivalently, <9-*big.)
1.10 Fact. If Pr0(λ) (see Definition 1.5(3) and 1.5(1)) and λ = κ+ = 2* ίften
(κ) is precipitous; moreover, semiproper (see below).
Proof. Let x be regular large enough, N -< (-EΓ(χ), G, <* ) countable.
It suffices to prove X><NO(K) is semiproper; i.e.:
1.10A Definition. P<N0(ft) is semiproper provided that the following holds.
If (Bi : i < λ) is a maximal antichain of stationary subsets of <S<κ0(ft) which
belongs to N where AT -X (ff(χ),e,<*) and χ large enough tfien there is a
countable M, M X (fί(χ), G<* ), TV x M, AT <Λ+ M and MΠ « G \JieM Bi [i.e.
sealing forcing is semiproper].

§1. Bigness of Stationary T C 5<^0(λ) 
783
(Hence by repeating one such M works for every such (Bi : i < λ) which
belongs to it; this definition is what we need; from this precipitousness follows).
Continuation of the proof of 1.10: So let TV -< (H(χ), G, <*) and (Bi : i < λ) G
N be as in Definition 1.10A. Let T = {a G <S<N0(λ) : a Π K G \Ji€aBi}. We
shall first prove that for a in the interval [K, λ) the set Ea — {N Π a : N -<
(H(χ), G, <* ), TV Π K G fl^N Si} belongs to P<κ0(α).
If EΌ, $ D<NO(O:) let / : α — > K be one to one onto, let
C' = {α C α : /"(α) - α Π α and α = /"
1/7(α Π α)}.
Clearly C" G £><κ0(α) and
[(5<No(α) \ Ea) Π C')] f« is stationary (i.e. φ 0 mod ^<KO(^))
(where E
1* f/ς = {α Π K : a G S*}), hence this set is not disjoint to
some .#i(*) and then we get an easy contradiction. So Ea G P<NO(O:) for
α G [/ί,κ+). Let (9 =
f λ(= /ί
+), clearly Γ is θ - EEEC (see Definition 1.4,
use as witness C — «S<N0(λ), noting that B = X here). Also as Ea G ^<N0(
a)
for a G [K, «
+), clearly T is 0-big (see Definition 1.2(3)). But by an assumption
Pr0(λ) = Pr£(λ) (as θ = λ) hence we can deduce Γ is (2
λ,0)-big (Definition
1.3(1)), hence by Fact 1.8(1), T is <9-*big. So by Definition 1.2(2) there is N',
N <θ N' -X (H(χ), G, <* ) such that N' Π λ G Γ. By the choice of Γ there is
i G N' Π λ, such that TV' Π K G Bi, as required in Definition 1.10A.
So we have proved semiproperness. 
Πi.io
1.11 Definition. 1) Pr|(λ, £>,<?*) means: C* a club of λ,D is a normal filter
on λ concentrating on regular cardinals and for every 0-EEEC (0, C*)-big
TC«S<N 0(λ) we have:
(so here we use Def. 1.3(1) with λ replaced by K.)
We may replace C* by a function / : λ — > λ as in Definition 1.2(1).
1.11 A Remark, for "0-EEEC" see Definition 1.4.

784 
XVI. Large Ideals on HI from Smaller Cardinals
1.12 Definition. 1) Pr#(A, D, C*) means that: for every semiproper forcing P
of power < λ, we have Ih "Pr^(λ, £>,<?*)"•
(D generates a normal filter in V
p and we do not strictly distinguish
between the two).
1.13 Definition. 1) Pr^(λ) means (3D) (VC*)Pr^(λ, £>,<?*).
2) Prs(λ, C) means: for some fixed D, for every semiproper P of power
From Shelah and Woodin [ShWd:241]:
1.14 Definition. (Shelah) 1) Prα(ft) means: Prα(ft, /) for every / : ft — > ft,
where
2) Prα(ft, /) means: / : ft — » ft and there is j : V — > M (elementary
embedding into a transitive class) with critical point ft (i.e. j is the identity on
K hence on ff («)) such that flYj(/)(κ)) C M and M
<κ C M. Let Prα(ft, /, D)
means Prα(ft,/) is witnessed by j and D — {A C K : K e j(A)}. Note K is
necessarily measurable in all those cases.
1.15 Definition. (Woodin) Pr&(ft), now called "ft is a Woodin cardinal"
means:
for every / : ft — > K there is λ < K such that Prα(λ, /fλ); equivalently
for every / : K — » ft, there is an elementary embedding j : V — •> M with critical
point λ < ft, such that #(j(/)(λ)) C M and M
</ς = M.
So ft is a Mahlo cardinal, but not necessarily a weakly compact cardinal.
We can add
1.16 Definition. For W C ft, we can add:
1) Prα(ft, W) means Prα(ft, W, f) for every / : ft — > ft, which means Prα(ft, /, D)
for some D to which W belongs.
2) Let Prb(ft, W) mean for every / : ft — > ft there is λ < ft such that Prα(λ, WΓ\
λ,/fλ) (so in particular Rang(/fλ) C λ)

§2. Getting Large Ideals on NI 
785
§2. Getting Large Ideals on
Note Ξ is a maximal antichain of Vωι if Ξ C P(ω\) and for no stationary S C ω\
do we have (\Λ4 G Ξ)(AΓ\S = 0 mod PWl); we do not strictly distinguish A G Ξ
and A/2>ωι or Ξ and {AfDωι 
: A G Ξ}.
Remember 93 — P(ωι)/T>ωι; on seal(Ξ) and variations see XIII 2.4(2).
2.1 Lemma. A Sealing is a Semiproper Criterion: Let λ be strongly inacces-
sible, OCX closed unbounded, [δ G C =ϊ (#(5),G,<£) X (#(λ), G, <};)] (so
each δ G C is a strong limit cardinal). The following conditions satisfy (B)+ =>
(C) => (A) =» (B)-.
(A) Let C be an end segment of C*. For every Levy(Nι,< λ)- name Ξ =
{Ai : i < X} of a maximal antichain of Όω\
 e 
1><c 
, the forcing notion
Levy(Nι, < λ)* seal(Ξ) is semiproper, provided that:
for δ G C, (if (ί), G, <S, Ξ Π ff (ί)) X (ff (λ), G, <J, Ξ) .
(B)- Let C be an end segment of C*. If T C «S<κ0(λ) is (< λ,C)-big (see
Definition 1.2(1)) and λ - EEEC (see Definition 1.4) then Γ is (2
λ,α;2)-big
(see Definition 1.3(1)) provided that:
, G,
(B)+ Let C be an end segment of C*. If Γ C <S<κ0(λ) is (N2,C)-big (a weaker
assumption see Definition 1.2(1)) λ-EEEC and then Γ is (2
λ,α>2)-big pro-
vided that Θβ holds.
(C) Let C be an end segment of C*. Suppose P = (Pi : i < λ) is <£-incr easing,
for i < λ, ^ G ίf(λ),P< <$ Pλ where Pλ
 d= Uα<λ
po!, and the forcing
notions Pi,P\/Pi are semiproper, P\ satisfies the λ - c.c., lhpλ "λ = H2",
and Ξ = {Ai/T>ωι : i < X} a P\ - name of a maximal antichain of Ί)ωι .

786 
XVI. Large Ideals on HI from Smaller Cardinals
Then P\*
 seal(Ξ) is semiproper provided that:
2.1 A Definition. Assume λ is strongly inacessible, P = (Pi : i < λ), P are
as in clause (C) of 2.1 or P^ = Levy(Nι,< i), P = |J P» (for some closed
i<λ
unbounded C C λ). If A is a P-name of a subset of ω\ let
i(A/Ί)ωι) = min{i : for some P -name A! ',lhp "A = AJ" mod Pωι}
(note i(A) < λ as P satisfies the λ-c.c.). Let us redefine
A/X>ωι = {B : B is a P^)-name of a subset of ω\ such that lhpλ "JB = A"}.
Proof. Clearly (£)+ => (B)~, just read Definition 1.2(1).
-.U) =» -.(C)
Immediate: use P = Levy(Nι, < λ), and Pi = Levy(Kι, < i).
Let T, C be a counterexample to (B)~, in particular 0^ holds and we can
choose a club E C ^^^λ) witnessing Γ is EEEC i.e. a£E&beE&a<\
Let
W
 d= {ί < λ : (Vα < <S)(Vα G <S<^0(α))
[(36) [6 6 T & α <λ 6] =» (36)[6 € T & sup(6) < 5 & α <λ 6]] }.
So W is a club of λ, definable in (-ff(λ), G, <ΛJ^) hence by Θ# for 5 G C we
have sup(W (Ί <$) = £, and W D C.
For £ < λ after forcing with Levy(Nι,< \δ\~*~) we have (αί : ζ < ωi)
increasing continuous, each α^ countable, \Jς<ωι a
δζ = δ. Let (α* : ζ < ωι) be a
Levy(Kι, < |ί|+)-name for such a sequence, and B$ = {ζ : α£ G Γ}, this is a

§2. Getting Large Ideals on NI 
787
Levy(Nι, < |<J|
+)-name; and then let (again a Levy(Nι, < |£|+)-name):
AS = BS — V Ba (V-diagonal union, actually well defined only mod *DωΛ).
a<δ ~
As Γ is λ-EEEC, clearly in V
Levy^>
<χ\ Bδ/Vωι 
(δ G W) is increas-
ing and is the least upper bound of {Aa/T>ωι 
: a G (δ -f 1) Π W] 
(in
(P(ωl)/Vωι)^
v^^
<x^}. 
Let W* = {a : a G W, and Aa ± 0 mod 2^}
(it is a Levy(Nι, < λ)-name)
Clearly Ξ — {Aa/
/Dωι 
: 
a G W*} is an antichain (we should not mind
the 0/PWl's, i.e. some A^'s are not stationary).
Clearly Ξ is a Levy(Nι, < λ)-name satisfying 0,4.
2. IB Fact. Ξ is a maximal antichain.
Suppose toward contradiction that A is a Levy(Nι, < λ)-name of a sta-
tionary subset of ωι, but p G Levy(Kι, < λ) force it is a counterexample. So for
some θ < λ, A is a Levy(Nι, < 0)-name, and p G Levy(Nι, < θ). Let ^i = (2^)
+,
μ = 2
θl, and
y^
 dJ:
f {α G S<χQ(H(μ)) : there is q G Levy(«ι, < β) such that: p < q,
q is an (α,Levy(Nι, < ^))-generic condition,
and 
ςf Ih "α Π ω\ G A".}
Clearly Yf φ 0 mod
Now, as λ is strongly inaccessible, 2
μ < λ, and as Γ is (0ι,C)-big (as T
exemplifies -«(J5)), there is β satisfying 2
μ < /? < λ (and moreover 2
μ < β <
min(C \(β + 1))), such that: for every E G £><NO(/?) we have:
{α G <S<N0(2
μ) : there is b such that α <βl δ and b G E Π Γ} G £><N0(2
μ).
Hence, as |ff(μ)| < 2^, for every E G £><κ0(/3)
{α G S(H(μ)) 
: there is 6 such that a <Θ1 b and 6 G E,

788 
XVI. Large Ideals on HI from Smaller Cardinals
Let
EI = {N : N is a countable elementary submodel of (Jf p7(λ)
+), G, <*)
to which p, λ, θ, μ, β, A, ((Ba,Aa) : α < λ)
and {{α" : C < ^i) '• α < λ) belong}.
Clearly it is a club of 5<H1(^
rp7(λ)
+)), and let
clearly it belongs to T><^l(H(β)). So we can use E2 as E above hence
^3 = {N
 : N is a countable, elementary submodel of (£Γ(μ), E),
such that p, 0, A, /3 belong to it and for some M/v 6 EI we have
Π β G T and AT <θl MN G T}
belongs to T><t<l (H(μ)). Hence we can find N G JE^ΠY^, hence by the definition
of Yp
μ there is a condition q G Levy(Nι, < β) such that p < q G Levy (Hi, < 0)
and q is (W, Levy(Nι, < 0))-generic and q Ih "TV Π ωι G A" . As N G £3 clearly
MJV is well defined (see the definition of E3), so MJV e EI, N ^ MN G JS?ι
and N <θl MN, hence N Π 2
61 = M^ Π 2
Θ, hence AT Π Levy (Hi, < θ) = MJV Π
Levy(Nι, < θ) and moreover N Π P(Levy(Hι, < θ)) = MN Π P(Levy(Hι, < 0));
hence as q is (TV, Levy(Kι, < 0))-generic we know that q is (M]v,Levy(Nι, <
0))-generic. As Levy(Hι,< λ)/Levy(Kι,< 0) is Hi-complete there is q\ G
Levy(Hι, < λ) such that q\ \θ = q and qι is (M#,Levy(Nι, < μ))-generic, hence
clearly qι Ih "MN nβ = a
β
MN^ωι = α^nα;ι" but MAT Π β G T (see the definition
of E3) hence ςi Ih "N Π c^i G JBμ".
There is C" such that lhLevy(H1,<λ) "if Bβ n A is not stationary then
Bβ Π A Π C
7 = 0, and C" is a club of ωi". So as Bβ, A G AT C M^, clearly
w.l.o.g. C' G MN hence ςi Ih "AT Π ωi G C
7" hence qλ Ih "β^ Π A Π C
7 ^ 0
hence qι lhLevy(^1)<:Λ) "β/3 Π A is stationary" which is enough for the fact 2. IB
as Bβ = V Aa mod Ί)ωι. 
^2.15

§2. Getting Large Ideals on NI 
789
Continuation of the proof of 2.1.
Lastly to show that -*(A) holds, we still have to show that:
the forcing notion Q = Levy (Hi, < λ) * seal(Ξ) is not semi proper.
Suppose it is semiproper, χ large enough. Let TV -< (H(χ), G, <*) be
countable, Q, T, Ξ, C G N. Let δ = N Π ω±.
So there is p G Q which is (TV, (3)-semi generic. So for some q satisfying
P < Q £ Q, and α, we have g lhQ "α € ΐf *, J G Aα, α € N[GQ]", (W* was
defined just before Ξ); so Aa, Ba G N[GQ] and clearly q \\-Q "α£ = 7V[GQ]na",
hence necessarily also g \\-Q "δ G #«"•
Hence 
q lhg
 CW[GQ] Π α G Γ" (read the definition of JBα).
Hence w.l.o.g. for some 6 G T we have 
g Ih "AΓfGg] Π α = 6" .
Let Wi be the Skolem Hull of |ΛΓ| U b in (ff(χ), G, <*). Clearly ΛΓi Π α =
& G Γ and 7Vι Γ\ω\ = ύΠcc i = δ so N <^2 JVi This shows T is a N2 - *big (see
Definition 1.2(2)), which by 1.8 is equivalent to "T is (2
λ,K2)-big"; but this is
a contradiction to our assumption "T exemplifies -ι(β)~".
We also prove
Let P,Ξ = {^4^ : i < λ} and C contradict (G) or (A) (in the later case
Pi = Levy(Nι, < i)). Let, for each p £ Pχ:
Tp = {N Π λ : p G AT, for some strong limit cardinal σ < λ,
TV ^ (H(σ) , G , <^ , P Γσ, Ξ f σ, 1 fσ) so we consider
P, Ξ, A as predicates, and TV is countable,
{P, Ξ, (Ai:i<\)} belongs to N,
and there are j,i £ N Γ\σ and g G P», such that
p < g, g is (W, Pi)-semi-generic, ^ is a P^-name,
and g lhP. 'W Πα i G Aό and j G AΓ[GPJ"}.
Γ+
 d= {6 G 5<Nl (λ) : for some α G Γp, α <λ 6}.

790 
XVI. Large Ideals on NI from Smaller Cardinals
Assume first that every T+ is (2
λ, ^2)-big. So for every χ > 2
λ and countable
N -< (H(χ), G,<*), to which P, Ξ, (A» : i < λ) belong, and p G AT Π Pλ,
we know λ G TV hence Jff(λ) G TV and <^G TV hence Γp G N. By 1.8(1)
we know Tp hence Γ^
1" is ^2-*big, hence (Definition 1.2(2)) we can find M,
N <κ2 M -X (ff(χ), G, <* ), M countable, Mnλ G ϊ£~, hence for some MI G Γp
we have MI Π λ <λ M Π λ. Clearly for α, |6eία G MI Π λ we have
MI N "α is cardinal" <^ M N "α is a cardinal,"
and so (Vσ e MI Π λ)(2
σ G MI Π λ); as [σ G MI Π λ => ff(σ) is an initial
segment by <^ of if (λ)], easily σ G MI Π λ =» M! Π H(σ) = M Π #(σ), hence
M — 1 <Λ M. Let g, σ, i, j witness MI G Tp (see the definition of Tp), and easily
we can deduce what semiproperness would have required. But P\ * seal(Ξ) is
not semiproper (as P,Ξ contradict (C)). So the assumption above was wrong,
i.e., for some p G Pλ, T+ is not (2
Λ, H2)-big. Let j(*) = min{j G C : p G H (j)},
and let C
; = C \ j(*), we shall prove that Γ^
1", C' exemplify -"(£)+, renaming
C' = C i.e. p G ff(min(C)). Also ΘB holds for T+ easily. Let j(*) = min{j G
C : p e H ( j ) } , and let C* = C \ j(*), we shall prove that T^, C* exemplify
-π(J3)+, renaming C* = C i.e. p G ff(min(C)). Also T+ is λ-EEEC by its
definition. To complete the proof of "TJ+ exemplifies -ι(5)
+" we need only to
prove "T+ is (< λ,C)-big" (see Definition 1.2(1)). So let θ < λ, θ > N2, and
we shall prove that Tp is (0, C)-big; this suffices. We can find i(*) such that
lhP.(φ) "|6>| = HI". So let α < λ be given such that α > i(*), 6>. We define in
(ίf(λ), G, <J, P, Ξ) a function ^ from P(S<κ0(a)) to λ, ^(^) is: the first strong
limit cardinal of uncountable cofinality β < X such that β > i(*), β > α, β > θ
and:
)£
)/3 for every U G 2><κ0(/3), the set {α G X : (36 G W Π Γp)[o <θ 6]} is
^ 0 mod £><N0(α) z/ there is such β, and α 4- 1 otherwise.
So # is definable in (ff(λ),G, <J,P,Ξ) with the parameters 0, α, i(*)
hence β* = supRang(^) < Min(C \ (α + 1)) (remember 0^ is assumed). If
β* is not as required in Definition 1.2(1), then there is U* G £><N0(β*)> sucn

§2. Getting Large Ideals on HI 
791
that X
 
d= {a G <S<N0(α) : -(36 G W Π Γp)[α <Θ b}} is ^ 0 mod P<*0(α). Now
we know Ihp "|α| < HI", and as P satisfies the λ-c.c., there is a name for a
function exemplifying this mentioning only members of some Pi(i < λ), but
Pi <£ P, so lhpi "|α| < HI", say h is P^-name of a function from ω\ onto α.
As Pi is semiproper, by the assumption on X we have lhpi "Y = {ε < ω\ :
there is a G X, ε C α C /ι"(ε),ε = α Π ωi} is a stationary subset of ω\
n .
Hence Ihp "Y C ω\ is stationary" hence Ihp " for some ξ < λ, Y Π Aξ C ω\
is stationary". Hence for some j G (i,λ) and P^-name ξ of an ordinal < j we
have: Y, ξ and Λξ are P^-names and Ihp. "Y Π Aξ C cji is stationary".
Hence there is a strong limit j\ G (j, λ) such that
cf(jι) > HO, and Y, ξ, i, j, α, /?*, ZY* G ίf(jι). Now there are δ < ω\ and
countable TV -< (ff(χ),€,<*,P,Ξ) and ςr such that: {Y,ξ,i, j,α, ji} G AT,
p < ς G PJ, g is (N,Pj)-semi 
generic, TV Π ω\ = δ, q Ihp. "5 G Y Π Aξ" ,
and (remember the definition of Y) there is α* G X, (5 C α* C A/". Clearly
ji G TV, JVίfΓϋi) X (ff(χ), 6, <* , P, Ξ) and TVt^O'i) e Γp ( see the definition
of Γp). As ji G TV, X G N this implies that for every U G ^<N00'ι) we nave
{α G X : (36 G U Π ΓP)[α <^2 6]} ^ 0 mod P<κ0(α). So (*)^ holds; hence
by the definition of g and β* without loss of generality j\ < /?*, hence (check
definition) (*)^ hold, but this contradicts the choice of of X. So together we
have gotten a counterexample to (B)
+. 
Π2.ι
2.2 Definition. 1) (*)
α[λ, C] means condition (C) of 2.1 holds for P and C (so
C satisfies <8>c) such that
{δ < λ : if δ is strongly inaccessible then P^ = I) P^}
i<δ
contains a club of λ (so for many C's this is empty demand).
2) (*)2f>[λJC
f] means that for every semiproper forcing Q from H(MmC) we
havelhg "(*)
α[λ,C]".

792 
XVI. Large Ideals on HI from Smaller Cardinals
3) We omit C if this holds for every club C of λ.
.3 Conclusion. Suppose (*)2&[λ, C], λ strongly inaccessible. If P, C and Ξ
re as in 2.1(C) and i < λ, then in V
Pί the forcing notion (Pχ/Pi)* seal (Ξ) is
am i τ»τrΛTΛ or
2
are as
semiproper
2.3A Remark. So if Q is a semiproper iteration, (P*+i : i < λ),C, Ξ as in
2.1(C) then Q~ (RlimQ,seal(Ξ)) is a semi proper iteration.
2.4 Theorem. Suppose K is strongly inaccessible, and:
(*)αbN f°
Γ everY closed unbounded C C «, for some λ € C (strongly in-
accessible) we have λ = sup(C Π λ), and (*)^[A, C Π λ].
Let S C ω\ be stationary.
Then for some semiproper forcing P of cardinality λ satisfying the λ-c.c., we
have Ihp "£>ωι + 5 is H2-saturated".
Also P is (ω\ \ 5)-complete hence if ω\ \ 5 is stationary it does not add
α -sequences of ordinals.
Moreover
2.4A Lemma. 1) The following homogeneous forcing can serve in 2.4. We
define by induction on a a semiproper iteration Q
a = (Pi,Qi : i < α) with
|Pi| < λ (and, for simplicity, Q
i G if (λ)) for i < a (see XIII 1.8) as follows. If Pi
is defined, i strongly inaccessible and j < i => |Pj|, then let, in V
Pί, Qi be the
product with countable support of (seal(Ξ) : Ξ G Ξi}ULevy(Hι,2
K2)
v τ where
Ξ^ is {Ξ : Ξ (in V
Pί) is a maximal antichain of Ί)ωι and for every j < i, \\~pj+l
"Pi/Pj+ι * seal(Ξ) is semiproper", such that ω\ \ 5 G Ξ if it is stationary }.
Otherwise Qi is Levy(Nι,2
H2)
yPί.

§2. Getting Large Ideals on NI 
793
2) Moreover we can replace Ξ$ by
Ξ^ = {Ξ : Ξ (in V
Pί) is a maximal antichain of X>ωι
which is semi proper (that is seal(Ξ) is semi proper)
such that ωι \ S G Ξ if it is stationary}
provided that λ is Woodin.
2.4B Remark. 1) We can e.g. use Levy(Kι,2
N2)
v * when i is not strongly
inaccessible and the CS product of {seal(Ξ) : Ξ G Ξ^} otherwise.
2) By 2.7(3) below if K is Woodin then it satisfies the assumption of Theorem
2.4. Similarly in 2.5 and 2.6 concerning the μ in the definition of W*.
3) If ω\ \ S is stationary, the iteration is essentially CS (as the condition with
a "real" support are dense).
4) Homogeneity is actually gotten also in the other proofs, in particular 2.5,
2.6 (and results in Chapter XIII).
Proof of 2.4. Follow by 2.4A.
Proof of 2.4A. By XIII 2.13(1) clearly Q
ί = ( P j , Q j 
: j < i) is a semiproper
iteration (P$ = RlimQ
1) and if j < i then \\~pj+1 "(Pi/Pj+ι)*Qi 
is semiproper".
Also the (ωι \ S)-completeness and λ-c.c. are clear. Why lhpλ "Ί)ωι 4- S is N2-
saturated" ? Let Ξ be a PA -name of a maximal antichain of Ί)ωι (to which ωι\S
belongs if stationary), so let Ξ = {Ai : i < λ}. Let
C = {μ<\: (H(μl^<^{(Q\Aτ/Vωι] 
: i < μ})
X(tf(λ),e,<, {(Q\Ai/Vωι): 
i<\})
and μ is strong limit}
So by the assumption of 2.4 for some regular (hence strongly inaccessible)
μ e C we have μ = sup(μ Π C), and (*)*b\μ,C Π μ]. For part (1), by 2.3,
{Ai : i e 1} e Sμ, and the rest is easy. For part (2) similarly using 2.8. D2.4
2.5 Theorem. Suppose λ is strongly inaccessible, S = (5ι, 52, 53) a partition
of cJi, Si stationary and

794 
XVI. Large Ideals on NI from Smaller Cardinals
VF* = {μ < X : 
μ strongly inaccessible and (*)^,[μ]} ls a stationary subset
of λ.
1) Then for some forcing notion P:
(a) |P| = λ, P satisfies the λ-c.c.
(b) P is semiproper.
(c) Ihp "P(ωι)/(Vωι + Si) is W-layered" (see XIII 3.1A(4), (5)).
(d) P is Ss-complete hence if £3 is stationary, then P adds no new ω-
sequences of ordinals.
(e) Ihp "W* is a stationary subset of {δ < N2 = λ : cf(δ) = NI}".
2) Hence, if Q is the forcing notion of shooting a club through {δ < N2 :
P*Q
cf (5) = NO}UVF* in the universe V
p , then in V 
" w e have: P(ωι)/(Dωι +
Si) is layered (see XIII 3.1A(4),(5)) (and hence e.g. there is a uniform
ultrafilter E on ωι such that K^/E = #ιSθE not regular; by [FMSh:252]).
Proof. 1) Similar to XIII 3.1 (see on history there).
We define by induction on i < «, Pi, Qi, ti such that:
(A) Q
a = (Pi,Qj,tj 
: tj : i < α,j < α) is an Si-suitable iteration (see
Definition XIII 2.1).
(B) tα is 1 iff: a is strongly inaccessible, [i < a => \Pi\ < a] and lhpa "23 v α fSi
satisfies the α-c.c. i.e. ^2-c.c.".
(C) Qa is defined , in V
Pa , as (where κα+ι is the first strongly inaccessible
> |Pα|) Q^* SSeal((23
Pί : i < α,ti - l),Sι,κα+ι) (see Definition XIII
2.4(5)) where Q^ is the product with countable support of (seal(Ξ) : Ξ G
Ξα} (defined as in the proof of 2.4(1); or use Ξ" from 2.4A(2)).
We should prove by induction on a that Q
a is an Si-suitable iteration.
first case for α = 0 - this is trivial.
second case for a limit - this holds by XIII 2.3(1).
third case for α = β 4- 1, t/j = 0.
We should repeat the proof of XIII 2.14(1); we do this case in details.
Let x be regular large enough, i < β,Gi+\ C Pi+ι generic over V, in
V^Gi+i], TV is a countable elementary submodel of (ίf(χ)[Gi+ι ],€,<*) such
that Q
α € N, p e Pa/Gi+ι,p G N.

§2. Getting Large Ideals on NI 
795
We should find q,p < q G Pα/Gi+ι, and q is (-/V[Gi+ι],Pα/Gi+ι)-generic.
By repeating the use XIII 2.12 ω times, we can find qQ G Pβ/Gi+ι,p\β < qQ
such that if Gβ C P^ is generic over V, GΪ+I U {go} £ G^ then:
(*) in V[Gβ], there is TV', TV C N
f ^ (H(χ)[Gβ], G, <*), N
f countable, N' Π
ωι — AT Π ω\, and: for every Ξ G JV'lΊ H(κ) a dense subset of 23 7 for some
7 G N
f Π /?, such that t7 = 1 we have N' Π α i G LUewn- A.
In V^G/j] we can find pn G 9$[G/j],pn G N' ,pn < pn+ι,p0 the Q^[G]-
component of p(/3), such that
(a) ifleN'Ίsa 
dense subset of Qjg[G/j] ί/ien for some n,pn G T.
(b) if Ξ is a Q^[G/3]-name of a pre-dense subset of 23
 p^ , 7 G βΓ\N, t7 = 1,
Λen for some n and ^4, pn Ihgo [G/3] "A G Ξ" and N
f Π ωi G A.
By standard bookkeeping there are no problem; taking care of an instance
of (b) is just like the proof of XIII 2.9, as
(**) z/7 G β Π N', t7 = 1, Ξ G N
1 is a pre-dense subset of 23
 p^ , ωi \ 5 G Ξ tfien
Why does this hold? As β is strongly inaccessible /\ |P7| < /3, we know
7<£
23
 p^ - U7</3 23
P^
+1, hence [ty = 1 => 23
P^ <> 23
 p^] and |23
P^| = NI in V
p? .
fourth case α = /3 + l,t^ = l.
Q^ is semiproper by XIII 2.8(3) and SSeal((23
p^ : 7 < /3,t7 - l),5ι,/c/3+ι) is
the same as SSeal(23
p/3,5ι,ft/3+ι) which is semiproper by XIII 2.14(1).
Now if λ G W*, Λ [l^γ I < λ], then exactly as in the proof of Theorem 2.4,
7<λ
lhPλ "23 Pλ satisfies the λ-c.c.", hence tλ = 1, hence 23 Pλ <Φ 23
P>C.
As 23 Pλ = 23^ ^
λ and (JBΦΓ" : α < «) is increasing continuous with limit
B
Pκ , clearly Pκ is as required.
2) No problem ( or see proof of XIII 3.1). 
D2.5

796 
XVI. Large Ideals on HI from Smaller Cardinals
2.5A Remark. Of course, we know |P$| < first strongly inaccessible > |P$| (by
a variant could have gotten |P;| < ^i+ι)
2.6 Theorem. Suppose λ strongly inaccessible and the set
W* = {μ < X : 
μ measurable and (*)£jμ] }
is not only stationary, but for stationarity many K < λ, W* Π K is stationary.
Let (Si, 52,83) be a partition of ωi, Si is stationary.
Then for some forcing notion P
(a) |P| = λ, P satisfies the λ- cc.,
(b) P is semiproper.
(c) Ihp "P(ωι)/(Dωι 4- Si) is the Levy algebra" (i.e. as isomorphic to the
complete Boolean algebra which Levy (No, < ^2) generate).
(d) P is pseudo (*, S3)-complete hence if S3 is stationary then P adds no
reals.
Proof. Similar to XIII 3.7.
Of course we can translate our assumptions to a standard large cardinal
hierarchy, essentially by Shelah and Woodin [ShWd:241], i.e. we note:
2.7 Fact. 1) Suppose Prα(λ, /) (see Definition 1.14), C a club of λ, [δ G C =>
(ff(μ),€,<*) -< (ff(λ), G,<J)] and /(i) < Min(C \ (i + 1)). Γ/>en (*)
α[λ,C]
(see Definition 2.2(1)).
2) As Prα(λ, /) is preserved by forcing of cardinality < λ, we can deduce in (1)
also (*)2b[λ,C7] (see Definition 2.2(2)).
3) If λ is a Woodin cardinal i.e. Pr&(λ) (see Definition 1.15) then (*)αJλ] (see
definition in Theorem 2.4).
Proof. 1) By 2.8 below, condition (C) of 2.1 holds in the cases refered to in
Definition 2.2, hence (see Definition 2.2(1)) we get (*)
α[λ,C].
2) Easy.

§2. Getting Large Ideals on NI 
797
3) See Definition 1.15 and part (2) of 2.7. 
Π2.7
2.7A Remark. If you want to get versions of 2.4, 2.5, 2.6 without §1 + 2.1,
you can use 2.8 below (+2.9).
2.8 Claim. Sealing is Semiproper Criterion.
Suppose
(i) P — (Pi : ί < λ) is <£-increasing sequence of forcing notion, PI e H(\)
and Ihp. "K^ is a cardinal", and for any j < X for some i, j < i < X and
2*
2 of V
p* is collapsed to NI in V
Pί.
(ii) Prα(λ,/,D) (defined in Definition 1.14).
(iii) {δ < X : Pδ = \Ji<δ Pi} G D 
[hence P, <e Pλ where Pλ
 d= U«λ
 Pi and
P\ satisfies the λ-c.c.]
Hence
BQ = {μ < X : (a) μ is a strong limit
(b) Pμ = U P,
i<μ
(c) Pμ satisfies the μ-c.c.
(d) lhPμ "μ - H2" and
(e) for A € P(ωι)
yPμ the statement
"A C α i is stationary"
is preserved by P/Pμ} € D
hence
Bl
 d= {δ < X : P/Ps preserves the stationarity of A G P(ωι)
yF>δ}
is unbounded in λ.
(iv) B = {a < X : Pχ/Pa is semiproper} is unbounded in λ.
(v) {δ < X : Pχ/Pδ does not destroy semi stationarity (see Definition XIII
1.1(3)) of subsets of <S<κ0(2
K2)) (where 2*
2 is computed in V
Pδ)} e D.
By Claim XIII 1.4, (Pχ/Pδ) being semiproper is enough.

798 
XVI. Large Ideals on KI from Smaller Cardinals
(vi) lhpλ "A = (Ai : i < λ) is a maximal antichain of *Dωι" and
(vii) The following set belongs to D:
{δ < X : f ( δ ) is a strong limit and for some β satisfying δ < β < f ( δ )
we have \\-Pβ "(2*
2)
yP5 is collapsed to NI", Pβ G H ( f ( δ ) ) and for every
Pβ-name A of a subset of ω\ stationary in V
Px, for some α(*) G B (see
clause (iv)) and i we have: Ai Π A is forced to be stationary, i and Ai are
Pα(*rnames, μ < α(*) < /(ί), and {A,Pα(llI),α(*),i,^} G H(f(δ))}.
Then lhPλ "1 is semiproper" (see XIII 2.4(6)).
Proof. Assume the conclusion fails. Let j : V — > M 
be an elementary
embedding, M a transitive class, and
[# (θ(/))(λ))] 
C M and D - {A C λ : 
λ G j(Λ)} and M
<λ C M
(exists as Prα(λ,/, D) holds by assumption (ii)).
By assumption (iii) we have M |= "Pλ = (j(P)) (λ)", let j(Pλ) = (Pi :
i < j(λ)) and Pj(λ) = j(Pλ) = U«j(λ) ^ (Note: the two definitions of P<
for i < λ are compatible by the beginning of this sentence). Similarly let
By (vii) we have M |= "(j(/))(λ) is strong limit", so as [#((j(/))(λ))]
v C
M, really j(/)(λ) is strong limit in V so for statements in ff(j(/)(λ)) we can
move freely between V and M . Let Gj(λ) £ -^j(λ) be generic over M, so we let
G^
fGj(λ)ΓΊP;.
Clearly GΛ+I C Pλ+ι is generic over V because, generally P» G if (j(/)(λ))
implies Gi is generic over V and Pχ+ι G if ((j(/))(λ)) by (vii). Until almost the
end we shall use G\ only. Note: in V[G\] we have M[Gλ]
<λ C M[Gλ] because
PX satisfies the λ-c.c. (see (iii)).
Remembering (vi), in V[Gλ], ^[Gλ] = (Ai[Gχ\ : i < X) is a maximal an-
tichain of T>ωι and seal(A) has cardinality (2
Kl)
vI
Gλ] = λ = N^
[G?λI (remember
(i)). Let
5
 d= {N : N ~< (if(λ
+)
y[
Gλl, G , <*), 
N countable, and there is no NI,
N -X Ni -< (if(λ
+)
vl
Gλl,G, <*), JVi countable and

§2. Getting Large Ideals on NI 
799
In V[Gχ] 
the set 5 is semi-stationary (subset of 5<N0(fΓ(λ+)
vl
Gλ]), as we
are assuming that the conclusion failed — by XIII 1.3; we note: H(\
+)
v^
Gχ^ =
ff(λ+)
Mt
Gλ'. 
Clearly λ belongs to the set defined in assumption (vii), so in
M there is β as there, so λ < β < /(λ), \\-Pβ «(2^)
vPλ is collapsed to NI",
Pβ G ff((j(/))(λ)) and the last condition there hold.
So there is a P^-name (α^ : ζ < ω\) such that:
\\-pβ "(α,ζ : C < u>ι) is increasing continuous, each α^ countable,
Let A = {ζ : 
(3JV G S)[ωι Π α^ C |7V| C α^]}, clearly it is a Pβ-name.
By assumption (v), Ihp^ "A is a stationary subset of ω\ " hence by the
last condition in (vii) for some j, α(*) we have: α(*) G j(β), j and AI are PQ(#)-
names, /? < α(*) < j(/)(λ) and {ί,α(*),4,4j, 
^α(*)} 6 ff((j(/))(λ)). So
for some regular μ (in M and in V) we have μ < (j(/))(λ) and this set G H(μ) =
#(μ)
M moreover P(Pα(*)) G ff(μ). So in M [Gα(#)], we have Ai[Gα(llt)] Π AfG/j]
is a stationary subset of ω\. Again this holds in V[Gα(#)] too, (and of course in
*)] 
NI is not collapsed). Let, in M, w = {i < α(*) : AΪ is a Pα(J)e)-name},
So in M [Gλ]
Sl
 d= {N ^ (H(μ)
Ml
Gχ\e, <*, M, Gλ) : N is countable
and for some p G Pa(*)/G\,
p is (Λ/
r,Pα(5|e)/GΛ)-semi-generic
andplh "TVΠα i G
r 
χ - |
λ
is stationary subset of <S<κ0 (H(μ)) 
in M[Gλ], hence in V[Gλ] too. Note
that j induces a unique elementary embedding j"
1" from V[Gλ] into M [Gj^)], j
+
is really j+, a Pj(λ)-name, and if x G H(\+)
M\
G^ then }+(x) G M [Gλ], that is
the name belong, and it can be considered a Pj(λ)/Gλ-name (but j
4" φ M[GΛ]).

800 
XVI. Large Ideals on NI from Smaller Cardinals
In F[GA],
: N countable, and
{0C : C «"ι), j(P), α(*),
A, A*, and j+ \H(X
+), tf p2(j(λ+))], P, Gχ
belong to TV}.
is in [p<Ho(Fp3(j(λ+)))+)
M[
GA]^
y[Gλ]
 and is a subset of M[GΛ] (though
not a member) as y[Gλ] N "M[Gλ]
<λ C M[Gλ]"
So there are NI G Si, 
N2 G S2, such that 7V2^(μ)
MlGλl - Wi and
p G Pa(*)/Gχ witnessing 7VΊ E Si (see the definition of Si). Let 5 = A/i Π ω\.
Note: Nι,ΛΓ2
Now as p Il~pα(llc)/Gλ "^ ^ 4" j by the definition of A there are q and 6 satisfying
p < q G Pα(*)/Gλ, and AT G 5, such that letting 6 = |JV|, we have ^ Ih
"5 C 6 C α5" so 6 G M[Gλ] as b G 5.
Also as q is (7Vι, 
PQ:()(c)/Gλ)-semi-generic (being above p, as p witness NI G
Si) and (αc : C < ^1} E NI (as it belongs to N2 and to #(μ)
Ml
Gλl) clearly
q IK "α, = Nι[GPa(^Gχ} Π
[Why? As (αc : C < ^} E NI and #(λ+)
M!
Gλl G NI, clearly the function fti :
ίί(λ
+)
MlGλl ^ωι,hι(x) = min{( < ωι : x G αc} belongs to ^ι[Gpβ(#)/σλ] and
also some function /ι2 : ^i
 χω — > JH"(λ
+)
Mί
Gλl such that α^ = {/i2(C? n) : n < α;}
belongs to Ni[GPa(^/Gx].]
Hence
n-
 
c* c Λ Γ G ? 
n
As 7Vι Π P(Pα(*)/Gλ) - 7V2 Π P(Pa(+)/Gχ) 
(power set in M[Gλ]), we can also
replace in those statements NI by 7V2. As -Pj(λ)APα(*) is semiproper in M[G\]
(α(*) being in j(β)) there is ς
;, q < q' G Pj(Λ) such that <?' is 
(N2,PJW/GX)
semi-generic in M[G\].
W.l.o.g. q' G Gj(λ) as only GΛ was used. Work in M[Gj(λ)], remember 7V2 G
M[Gλ] So really 6 C JV2[Gj(λ)], now as j+ maps N2[GP.(χ)/Gχ} Π

§2. Getting Large Ideals on NI 
801
into Λf2[Gpj(λ)/<3λ] (see the definition of 52) clearly 61 — j
+//(6) = {j
+(x) : x G
6} C N2[Gj(λ)]. Now as M[G\] 
1= "6 is countable", necessarily 61 = j
+(6). By
the properties of j+, bι = j
+(&) G M[Gj(λ)]; remember j+ is the elementary
embedding j induces from V[G\] into M[Gj(^)], so as b G 5 we have: M[Gj(λ)] \=
But as q < q' G Gj(λ)» N2[Gj(\)/G\], 
i[Gj(\)/Gχ] 
contradicts this. So we have
finished proving 2.8. 
U2.8
When you want to accomplish other things by forcing remember XIII 1.10
(2):
2.9 Conclusion. 1) Assume
(i) P = (Pi : i < λ) is <$-increasing sequence of forcing notion, Pi G H(\)
and \\-pi "#Y is a cardinal", and for any j < λ for some i, j < i < λ and
2*
2 of V
pι is collapsed to NI in V
Pi, let Pχ = \J P^
i<X
(ii) Prί,(λ), i.e. λ is a Woodin cardinal,
(iii) for a club of cardinals μ < λ, if μ is strongly inaccessible then Pμ = \J P^,
i<μ
Pχ/Pμ is semiproper.
Then in V
Px , every maximal antichain Ξ of T>ωι is semiproper i.e. seal(Ξ) is a
semiproper forcing.
2) We can above replace (ii), (iii) by
(iii)
7 W = {δ < λ : Pδ = U Ή and Pχ/Pδ is semiproper}.
i<δ
2.10 Concluding Remarks. Can we improve 2.6?
Note: we do not know imitate XIII 3.9 (on the Ulam property) as the super-
compactness was used more deeply. But even trying to imitate XIII 3.7 (getting
the Levy algebra, that is weakening the assumption of 2.6 to "for stationary
many μo < λ, for stationary many μ\ < μQ we have (*)2&[μι]) we have a prob-
lem: Is Nm semi proper? In 2.6 the measurability demand in the definition of
W* solves the problem. But it is natural and better to use W* = {μ < X : μ
strongly inaccessible and WLfcJμ]} or W** = {μ < X : Pr&(μ)}

802 
XVI. Large Ideals on NI from Smaller Cardinals
To get such a theorem it is natural to use XV §3 to prove that the forcing
does not collapse NI and does not destroy stationary subsets of ω\. If 53 =0 we
finish. To prove (d) - relativize Chapter XI to 5ι (as done in XI §8, or see XV).
Still we have to check the parallel of 2.8. We intend to continue in [Sh:311].

XVII. Forcing Axioms
§0. Introduction
This chapter reports various researches done at different times in the later
eighties. In Sect. 1, 2 we represent [Sh:263] which deals with the relationship of
various forcing axioms, mainly SPFA — MM, SPFA Y PFA+ (—Axi[proper])
but SPFA implies some weaker such axioms (Axι[Kι-complete], see 2.14, and
more in 2.15, 2.16). See references in each section.
In sections 3, 4 we deal with the canonical functions (from ω\ to ω\) modulo
normal filters on ω\. We show in §3 that even PFA+ does not imply Chang's
conjecture [even is consistent with the existence of g G
 ωιωι such that for no
α < H2 is g smaller (modulo Vωι) than the α-th function]. Then we present
a proof that Ax[α-proper] Y Ax [/3-proper] where α < β < ω\, β is additively
indecomposable (and state that any CS iteration of c.c.c. and Ni-complete
forcing notions is α-proper for every α).
In the fourth section we get models of CH -f "ωi is a canonical function"
without 0^, using iteration not adding reals, and some variation (say ω\ is the
α-th function, CH + 2
Nl = N3 α| = H2 (see 4.7(3)). The proof is in line of
the various iteration theorems in this book, so here we deal with using large
cardinals consistent with V = L.
Historical comments are introduced in each section as they are not so strongly
related.

804 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
We recall definition VII 2.10: If φ is a property of forcing notions, α < ω\ then
we write Axα[y?] for the statement:
whenever P is a forcing notion satisfying φ, (Ii : i < ωι) are pre-dense subsets
of P, (Sβ : β < a) are P-names of stationary subsets of ω\,
then there is a directed, downward closed set G C P such that for all i < ωi,
Xi Π G ^ 0 and for all /? < α the set Sβ[G] is stationary.
We write Ax[φ] for Ax0[^] and Ax+ [φ] for Axi [</?], PFA for Ax[proper], SPFA
for Ax[semiproper], similarly PFA+ and SPFA+.
§1. Semiproper Forcing Axiom
Implies Martin's Maximum
We prove that Ax[preserving every stationarity of 5 C ωι] = MM (— Martin
maximum) is equivalent (in ZFC) to the older axiom Ax[semiproper] = SPFA
(— semiproper forcing axiom).
1.1 Lemma. If Axι[Nι-complete], P is a forcing notion satisfying (*)x (below)
then P is semiproper, where
(*)1 = "the forcing notion P preserves stationary subsets of ω\\
1.1 A Remark. 1) This is from Foreman, Magidor and Shelah [FMSh:240].
2) It follows that SPFA+ = Axi [semiproper] is equivalent to MM+ (compare
[FMSh:240]). The conclusion is superseded by 1.2, but not the lemma.
3) The proof is very similar to III 4.2.
4) Of course every semiproper forcing preserves stationarity of subsets of ω\
(see X 2.3(8)).
Proof. Clearly Axι[Nι-complete] implies Rss(Nι,ft) for any K (see Defefinition
XIII 1.5(1).). By XIII 1.7(3) "forcing with P does not destroy semi-stationarity
of subsets of 5<κ1(2'
pl)" implies P is semiproper. (So by 1.1A(4) these two
properties are equivalent). 
DI.I

§1. Semiproper Forcing Axiom Implies Martin's Maximum 
805
1.2 Theorem.
Ax [not destroying stationarity of subsets of ω\] =Ax [semiproper], i.e. MM (=
Martin Maximum) = SPFA (i.e., proved in ZFC).
Proof. As every semiproper forcing preserves stationary subsets of ω\ (X 2.3(8)),
clearly MM => SPFA. So it suffices to prove:
1.3 Lemma. [SPFA.]
Every forcing notion P satisfying (*)ι is semiproper, where
(*)ι = "the forcing notion P preserves stationarity of subsets of ω\\
Proof. We assume (*)ι Without loss of generality the set of members (=
conditions) of P is a cardinal λ0 = λ(0). Too generously, for t = 0,1,2,3,
let AM-I - \(ί -hi)- (2l
H<
λ'>l)+. Let <*£ be a well ordering of H(X£), end
extending <^ for m < i. Let
),G,<^ 2),||TV|| = K0,P G TV (hence λ0,λι G TV) and
> G P Π N)(3q)\p < q G P and q is semi generic for (TV, P)]}
and
i 
def
POS ef {N :N ^ ^(Aa)j G j <*2))5 HATH = HO, P G TV (hence λ0, λt G TV)
and -(3TV
7)[^ -< N
f e K™
g and TV Π ωl = N'
We now define a forcing notion Q
Q = {(Ni :i<a):a< ω^ TV, € tf£eg U K£OS,
Ni G TVi+ι, and TV, is increasing continuous in i}.
The order on Q is being an initial segment.
The rest of the proof of Lemma 1.3 is broken to facts 1.4 — 1.11.
1.4 Fact. If P G MO X (#(λ3), G, <J3), ||M0|| = NO, ίften there is Ml such
that Mo -< Ml 
-< (ff(λ3),e,<3;3),||Mι|| - N 0,M 0nα;ι - Ml Π ωι and

806 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
Proof. As P G MO, clearly λ0 G M0; hence λι,λ2 G M0 hence (if(λ^), G, <J£)
belong to M0 for ί = 0, 1, 2, so K£
OS G M0 and K™
g G M0. We can assume
M0tif(λ2) £ #£°
s, so by the definition of #£
os there is N
f such that (abusing
our notation) M0 Π if(λ2) - MQ\H(X2) ^ N' e K™
g, \\N'\\ = N0 and
N' Π ωι = (Mo f-ff(λo)) Π ωι] hence ΛΓ' Π ω\ = M0 Π ωi .
Let MI be the Skolem Hull of M0 U (N' Π if (λi)) in (if (λ3), G, <J3). So
if (λ3) : 
Mo 
- > Mi
ίf(λ2): 
M 0Πif(λ 2) 
-< 
N
f 
J
if(λι): 
ΛΓ'nίf(λι)
We claim that MI Π if (λi) = JV
7 Π if(λι). To prove this claim, let x be an
arbitrary element of MI Π if (λi). Now x must be of the form /(y), where / is a
Skolem function of (if (λa), G, <^3) with parameters in MO, and y G N'Γ\H(\ι)
(note that N' Π if(λι) is closed under taking finite sequences). Note that /'s
definition may use parameters outside if (λ2), but /' = / Π (iί(λι) x iί(λι))
belongs to if (λ2), so /' G M0 Π if (λ2) C N', so also x = /(y) - /'(y) G N'.
So we have
MI Π ωi = JV
7 Π ω\ = MO Π α i,
We can conclude by 1.5(1) below that Mιfif(λ2) G #£
eg, thus finishing the
proof of Fact 1.4, as:
1.5 Subfact. 1) Suppose for ί = 0,1, N
e is countable, P G N
1 -< (if(λ2),G
, <*J and JV° Π if (λi) - N
1 Π if (λi), then N
1 G K^
eg <Φ N
2 G #p
eg.
2) Really, even N
1 Π ^ C N° C N
1 x (if(λ2), G, <jj, AΓ° G iίpeg implies
AT
1 G Kp
eg (we can also fix the P in the definition of
 UN G #p
eg")
Proo/. 1) Because in "<? is (TV, P)-semi generic", not "whole AT" is meaningful,
just NΓ\ωι, the set AT Π P and the set of P-names of countable ordinals which

§1. Semiproper Forcing Axiom Implies Martin's Maximum 
807
belong to N, hence (for "reasonably closed N") this depends only on N Π 2'
pl
(even |P|
<K, when P \= «-c.c.).
2) Assume AT
1 φ Kp
eg. If p G P Π AΓ° then p G P Π AT
1, hence there is <? G P
which is (A/'
1, P)-semi generic, q > p. But as N® -< JV
1 have the same countable
ordinals, <? is also (A^°,P)-semi generic. 
Πι.5,ι.4
1.6 Fact. Q is a semiproper forcing.
Proof. Let Q,P G M -< (#(λ3), G, <J3),M countable. Let p G Q Π M. It is
enough to prove that there is a g such that p < q G Q and <? is semi generic for
(M,Q).
Let 5 = M Π ωi. By Fact 1.4 there is MI, with M -< MI ^ (if (λ3), G, <J3),
IIAfiH - No,Mi Π ωv = δ and Mι\H(λ2) G tf£
eg U tf£
os. We can find by
induction on n a condition qn = (Ni : i < δn) G Q Π M\,qn < qn+ι,qQ = p,
such that: for every Q-name 7 of an ordinal which belongs to MI for some
natural number n = 71(7) and ordinal a(j) G MI we have qn \\-Q "7 = #(7)"
and for every dense subset X of Q which belongs to MI, for some n, <?n G J\
Now q =
f (Ni:i<δ*) with ί* = (J 5n and 7V5,
 d= \Ji<δ* Ni will be (Mi, Q)-
n<ω
generic if it is a condition in Q at all, as for this the least obvious part is
Nδ. G #p
eg U K»
os. Clearly (by 1.4) for each x G £Γ(λ2), Ix = {{M/ : i < j) G
Q : x G (J;<j Mt } is a dense subset of Q and [x G MI Π ίf(λ2) => Ix G MI]
and (M/ : i < j) G Q Π MI =Φ U«j ^ C MI (as M/, j are countable), and
so |J;«5* ^ = Mi Γff(λ2), which belongs to ^eg U K»
os by the choice of MI.
Now q> q$ = p] and, as # is (Mi,<3)-generic it is (Mι,(5)-semi generic hence
as in the proof of 1.5 (or see X2.3(9)), as M X Mι,MΠωι = MiΠα i, we know
q is also (M, Q)-semi generic, as required. By the way, necessarily 5* = δ. Dι.6
1.7 Conclusion. [SPFA] There is a sequence (Λf* : z < ω\) such that
(Vα<ωι)[(7V* : i < a) G Q].
Proof. By Fact 1.6 and SPFA (and as Iao = {(Ni : i < a) : a > a0} is a dense
subset of Q for every αo < ωι; which can be proved by induction on αo : for

808 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
QO = 0 or αo = β + 1 by Fact 1.4, for limit QQ by the proof of Fact 1.6 or
simpler) .
Πl.7
1.8 Observation, i C N* for i <ω\.
Proof. As [i < j 
=Φ> Ni C Nj] and as N* G N*+l (see the definition of Q), we
can prove this statement by induction on i. 
Di.g
1.9 Definition. 5
 d= {i < ωl : AT* G #£
eg}.
1.10 Fact. 5 is not stationary.
Proof. Suppose it is; then for every i G 5 for some pi G N. * Π P there is no
(7V*,P)-semi-generic q such that pi < q G P. By Fodor's lemma (as TV* is
increasing continuous and each N* is countable), for some p G Uz<Wl ^i ^ -P
the set Sp = {i G 5 : pi — p} is stationary.
If p G G C P and G generic over V, then in V[G] we can find an increas-
ing continuous sequence (Ni : i < ω\) of countable elementary submodels of
(/f
v(λ2), G, <^2, G) (with G as a predicate), N* C Ni. As P preserves station-
arity of subsets of u i, and E — {i : N* Π c^i = Ni Π ωi = i} is a club of α i (in
V[G]), and Sp C α i is stationary (in V, hence in V[G]), it follows that there
is δ G Sp with N£ Πωi = N§Γ\ωι = δ. As this holds in V[G],p G G, clearly
there is q G G,q > p, such that g Ih "5 and (Ni : i < ωi) are as above". As
q Ih "JV; C N£[G] C JVff and 5 G E", also ςι Ih "AT; Π ωι = N%[G] Π c^i", so q
is (AΓ£, P)-semi generic, contradiction to the definition of 5 and K™
g and the
choice of p§ = p. 
DI.IO
1.11 Fact. P is semiproper.
Proof. As 5 is not stationary, for some club C C ω\, (V<5 G C)N$ G Kp°
s. Now
if M -< (ίί(λ3),G,<^3) is countable, and P,(N* 
: i < α>ι),G belong to M,
then M Π (Jί<u;ι ^* - Nj for some 5 G G; hence Nj C Mt/f(λ2); as both JV5*

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
809
and M\H(\2) are elementary submodels of (jEf(λ2), G, <]\2) we β
et
Clearly N£ Π ω\ — δ = M Π ω\. As M\H(\z) is countable and by the meaning
of "7V7 G #£
os" we have Mf^(λ2) ^ K™
g, i.e., for every p G P Π Af (= P Π
(M\H(\2)))) there is an (Mf#(λ2),P)-semi-generic q,p < q G P. Necessarily
<? is (M, P)-semi-generic (as in the proof of 1.5(1)); this is enough. DI. 11,1.3,1.2
1.12 Conclusion. SPFA implies P(ωι)/Ί)ωι is N2-saturated i.e. satisfies the
N2-c.c.
Proof. Actually it follows by Foreman Magidor Shelah [FMSh:240], and Theo-
rem 1.2, but as this is a book we give a proof.
Let Ξ C P(ω\) be a maximal antichain modulo Vωι. Remember seal(Ξ) =
{{(7i,αi) 
'• i < a) : a < ωi, α^ is a countable subset of Ξ, non empty for sim-
plicity, 7i < ωijtti and 7^ are strictly increasing continuous in z, and for limit
δ < a we have 75 G Uΐ<<5 Uyieαi ^} ^
n^
s f°
rci
ng is S'-complete for every S G Ξ
(see XIII 2.8) hence does not destroy the stationarity of subsets of ω\. Hence
by 1.3 seal(Ξ) is semiproper.
Now Ti — {α G seal(Ξ) : ίg(a) > i} is a dense subset of seal(Ξ). So by
SPFA there is a directed G C seal(Ξ) satisfying /\i<ωι G Π J< φ 0. Let \J G
be ((7i, a») : i < α i). We claim Ξ = \J{di : i < uι}. Let C = {7^ : i — 7^ = ωi
is a limit}, α^ = {A* 
<^ < ωϊ], A = {δ < ω\ : (3i < δ)(δ G Ai)}. Now if
S G Ξ\ {A : i < α i}, then for alH < ωi, 5(Ί ^ is nonstationary, so also SΓ\A
is nonstationary, which is impossible as C C A and C is a club. 
Πι.i2
§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+
It is folklore that in the usual forcing for PFA(=Ax[proper]) (or SPFA=
Ax[semiproper]) any subsequent reasonably closed forcing preserves PFA (or

810 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
SPFA). Magidor and Beaudoin refine this, showing that starting from a model
of PFA, forcing a stationary subset of {δ < ω2 : cf(5) = K0} by
P = {h : h a function from some a < ω% to {0,1} such that :
for all 5 G Si we have : Λ~
1({1}) Π δ is not stationary in δ}
(ordered by inclusion) produces a stationary subset of {δ < ω^ : cf(5) = NO}
which does not reflect, and this still preserves PFA but easily makes PFA+
(and SPFA) fail.
We can also start with V |=PFA, and force h:ω<ι-> ω\ such that no /ι~
1({α})(Ί
δ is stationary in <5, where α < u>ι, δ < cj2, and cf(5) = NI.
It had remained open whether SPFA h SPFA+ and we present here the
solution, first starting with a supercompact limit of supercompacts and then
only from one supercompact. I thank Todorcevic and Magidor for asking me
this question.
2.1 Theorem. Suppose K is a supercompact limit of supercompacts. Then, in
some generic extension, SPFA holds but PFA"
1" fails.
The proof is presented in 2.3 - 2.9.
Overview of the Proof. Let /* be a Laver diamond for K (see Definition VII
2.8, as Laver shows w.l.o.g. it exists). Our proof will unfold as follows. We shall
first define a semiproper iteration Q
κ. Now \\-pκ "SPFA" is as in the proof of
X 2.8. We then define in V
Pκ a proper forcing notion R and an jR-name 5, \\-R
"5 C ωι is stationary". We then show, that for no directed G C R in V
Pκ is
S[G\ well defined (i.e., (Vi < ωι)(3p G G)\p !hβ "i G S" or p \\-R
 ui $ 5"]), and
stationary (i.e., {i < ω\ : (3p G G)p Ih "z G 5"} is stationary).
Before we start our iteration, we will define several forcing notions (which
we will use later when we construct #, and also during the iteration), and we
will explain some basic properties of these forcing notions.
Convention. Trees T will be such that members are sequences with the order
being < (initial segments) and T closed under initial segments so £g(η) is the
level of η in T. But later we will use trees T whose members are sets of ordinal

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
811
ordered by initial segments, so we can identify a name η if η is strictly increasing
sequence of ordinals, α = Rang(ry).
2.2 Fact. Let Γ be a tree of height ωi, K > NI with K = 2*
2 if not said
otherwise. Let P = R\ * #2, where #ι is Cohen forcing and R<2 is Levy (Hi, /ς)
(computed in V
Rl). Then every u^-branch of T in F
p is already in V.
Proof. Well-known and included essentially in the proof of III 6.1.
2.3 Definition. Let T be a tree of height ω\ with NI nodes and < NI many
ωi-branches {B* : i < i* < ωi} and let {yi : i < ω\ and [i < 2i* => i odd]}
list the members of Γ such that: [yj <τ yi =^ j < i] Let B* be: £j if i = 2j,
j < i* or {^} if yj is defined. Let β^ - β* \ (Ji^ 5*, Xj = min(B^.) if β^ ^ 0
so that the sets Bj are disjoint nonempty end segments of some branch By,
or the singletons {yj} or 0; let B'3 φ 0 <ίΦ i G w and so (B^ : j e w) form
a partition of T. Let A = {xi 
: i G w} (so A does not include any linearly
ordered uncountable set). The forcing "sealing the branches of T" is defined as
(see proof of 2.4(3)):
PT = {/ / a finite function from A to ω, and
if x < y are in Dom(/), then /(#) ^ f ( y ) }
See its history in VII 3.23.
2.4 Lemma. For T, Pτ as in Definition 2.3:
(1) PT satisfies the c.c.c.
(2) Moreover: If (pi : i < ω\) are conditions in P, then there are disjoint
uncountable sets Si, 52 C ω\ such that: whenever i < j, i G Si, j G 62,
Λen pi and PJ are compatible.
(3) If G C Pτ is generic over V, F[G] C V*, and «Γ - KΓ, then all ωi-
branches of T in y* are already in V.
Proof. (1) Follows by (2).
(2) Recall that p and q are incompatible if:

812 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
either pΌ q is not a function or there are η G Dom(p), v G Dom(g) such that
p(ή) = q(v), and η and v are distinct but comparable, i.e. η <τ v or v <τ η.
Let (pi : i < ω\) be a sequence of conditions in Pp. By the usual Δ-system
argument we may assume that for all i,j < ω\ pi U PJ is a function, and we
may also assume that |Dom(pi)| = n for all i <ω\. We will now get the desired
result by applying the following sub claim n
2 times:
2.4A Subclaim. If (77^ : α G Si), (η^ : α G 52} are lists of members of >ί
without repetitions, Si, £2 are uncountable, then there are uncountable sets
S[ C Si, £3 C £2 such that: α G S( , /? G S^ => T/^, 77^ are incomparable.
Proof of the subclaim. for £ = 1, 2 and ζ < α i, let:
Let (^ = min{£ : i^(£) is uncountable}, and if all Li(ζ) are countable, let
ζι =ωι
We now distinguish 4 cases:
Case ^: ζi < ^2^ Since 1/2 (Ci) i
g countable, for some 77 the set S{ = {a < ω\ :
lg(ηa) > Ci
 and η <τ ηl} is uncountable (as NI = cf(Nι) > K0), and as Lι(Cι)
is uncountable, S^ ^ {α < wι : ^g(^) ^ C
 and "'^ <τ ^} is uncountable. So
SJ, Sr> as required. We are done.
Case 2: £2 < Ci' Similar.
Case 3: ζι = (2 < MI' By induction on 7 < ω\ choose /3(1,7) and ^8(2, 7) such
that:
) > Ci and τ/£(1|7) Ki ^ {rfβ(w 
ΓCi : V < 7, * = 1, 2}
) > C2 and 77
2
(2)7) ίC2 itfβW) 
ΓC2 : y < 7,^ = 1, 2}
and let S^ - {/3(^,7) : 7 < ^i}> ^ = 1,2.
Case ^: ζι — (2 = ω\ and no earlier case. For ί — 1, 2, ζ < ω\ let
Λ^ = {77 G T : £g(τ?) = C and there are KI many α with η
£
a\ζ = 77}, clearly
A\ ί 0.

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
813
So T^ = Uc<α; ^c ιs a downward closed subtree of T, possibly only a single
branch.
Subcase 4a: For some £ and C, \Aς\ > 1. Without loss of generality \A^\ > 1.
Let ι/2 € ^ΛJ vι £ Aς\ {2/2}? for ^ = 1,2 we let 5^ = {a < ω\ : vι <τ η^}.
Subcase 4b: For each £ = 1,2 the set Γ
£ = \Jζ<ωι ^-ζ ιs a branch, say B^. If
ΐ(l) ^ ί(2) then we can again find z/i and z/2 as m case 4a. So let i = i(l) = i(2).
It is impossible that uncountably many η^ are on Bi (by the choice of A
in Definition 2.3), so we may assume that no η^ is on B». By induction we
can find uncountable sets S[ C SΊ, 5^ C 5χ and sequences (z/^ : α G 5J),
(ί/2 : α G 52) such that: ι/£ G B<, i^ <τ r^, ^f(£g(ι/^) -f 1) φ B», and
{z/i : α G 5(} Π {ί/2 : α G 52} = 0. This shows that for α G S(, β G 5^ the
nodes 77^ and ry^ are incomparable. So we have proved the subclaim and hence
2.4(2).
Proof of 2.4(3). Since T = \Jj<ωι Bj is a partition of T, we can for each y G T
find a unique j — j(y) with y G Bj. Let ft(ι/) = mmB'., , G A In V
Pτ we have
a generic function g : A —> α>, and we can extend it to a function g : T -^ ω
by demanding #(?/) = g(h(y)). Now let B* be an α i-branch of T in some KI-
preserving extension of yPτ. Clearly g\B* takes some value uncountably many
times, but g(yι) = g(y2) & yι <τ yz implies j(yι) = .7(2/2), so 5* C Bj for some
2.5 Fact. There is a family (775 : δ < ω\,δ limit) such that:
(A) ηs : ω — > ί, and sup{τ?<$(n) : n < α;} = δ
(B) For all limit 5ι, ί2 < ^i and m, n2 < α; we have: if ηδl (HI) = η§2 (n2), then
HI = HZ and ηδl \nι — η§2 \n2
(C) if m < I < ω and δ < ω\ is limit, then ηs(m) -h ω < ηs(£) + ω.
Proof. Easy. Let ff :
 ω>α;ι — > α i be a 1-1 map such that for all η G
 ω>ω\ we
have if (77) G [ maxRang(τ?), maxRang(?7) + ω) (and can add v < 17 =4> if(z^) <
Now for any limit ordinal 5, let αo < αi < 
be cofinal in 5, and define η$

814 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
inductively by
ηδ(n) = H(ηδ\n~ (an)).
Π2.5
2.6 Definition. Assume that (ηδ : δ < ω\, δ limit) is as above.
(1) For η G
 ω>ωι, let Eη = {δ : η < ηδ}.
(2) Let Z = {η G
 ω>ωι : Eη is stationary}, C0 = {δ < ωι : (Vn < ω)ηδ\n G
Z}.
(3) Let Z* - {r/ G Z : (3
Hlz < ωi) η
Λ (i) G Z}.
(4) Let C* - {ί G Co : (3°°n)^rn € Z*}.
(5) Let Z0 - {r? G Z : (Vfc < tg(η))η\k φ Z*}
2.6A Fact.
(1) Z is closed under initial segments, so Z is a tree (of height ω). Z* is the
set of those nodes of Z which have uncountably many successors.
(2) Z defines a natural topology on CQ, if we take the sets Eη as basic neigh-
borhoods.
(3) C0 and even C* contains a club of ω\.
(4) For every finite u C Z \ Z0 there is p G Z which is <-incomparable with
every η G u moreover p G Z \ ZQ.
Proof. (1) and (2) should be clear.
For (3), let χ be some large enough regular cardinal. If ω\ \ C* as stationary,
we could find a countable elementary submodel JV -< (#(χ),G) such that
δ
 d= Nnωi φ C* and (ηδ : δ < ωι limit) belongs to N (hence (Eη : 77 G
 ω>(ωι)),
Z, C0, Z*, C*, Z0 belong to TV). Assume that for some no < ω for all n G (no, ω)
we have 775 \n φ Z*. So the set
Y 1l
f {i/ G Z : i/ < r/^no or. r/^no < i/ and (Vfc G (no,€g(ι/)))ι/Γfc ^ Z*}
is a subtree of Z with countable splitting, hence is countable. Let δ' = sup{z/(fc) :
v G F,fc G Dom(ί/)}. Since y G AT, also 5' G JV, but (Vk)[ηδ\k G Γ], so
ηδ(k) < δ' < 5, contradicting 5 = sup{τ7δ(fc) : fc < α;}.

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
815
(4) So if u C Z \ ZQ is finite, let η G u be of minimal length and as η $ ZQ
there is v < 77, such that i/ G Z*, so for some z < ω\, p = v~ (i) G Z and p is
<-incomparable with every η
f e u and p <^ Z0 as ϊ/ <3 p, z/ G Z*. 
Cb.θA
Prom Z we can now define the forcing notion R±, to be used below:
2.6B Definition.
R4 = {(u, w) : w a finite set of limit ordinals < ω\,u a finite subset of
Z \ Z0, and u> Π Eη = 0 for η G u}.
with the natural order: (MI, MI) < (^2^2) iffui 
C ^2 & Wi C u>2.
Note that it; Π J^ = 0 just means that for all δ G w, η jd 775. Actually η = η$
never occurs as [77 G u> => ^g(r/) < ω] and [5 G u => ig(ηδ) — ω].
So we have that (u, w) and (ΐ/, ι</) are incompatible iff (u U u', w U u/) is not in
#4, i.e., either there is η G u, 5 G K/ such that 77 < 775, or there are such 77 £ u',
ί G κ;.
#4 produces a generic set 5
4 = |J{κ; : (3u)[(u,w) G Gβ4]} (i.e. this is an R±-
name) , which can easily be shown to be a stationary subset of ω\ (in V
 R* , see
2.6E(l))(actually V[S*] = V[GR4}).
2.6C Fact. ί?4 satisfies the NI-C.C.; in fact for every HI conditions there are HI
pairwise compatible (and more).
Proof. Let (u», ^) G R± for i < ω\. Let t>;
 d=
f U{Rang(ry) : η G iti}.
Thinning out to a Δ-system we may assume that there are a < ωi, w* C α,
v* C α, u* C ω>a such that for all i<ωι\a,
and for all i ^ j: Wi Π lϋ^ = ΊU* , ^ Π ΐλj = υ* and u^ Π Uj = u* . So 77 G Uj \ u* =>
maxRang(τ7) > α. We may also assume that none of the Vi or Wi is a subset
of α, and thinning out further we may also assume that for all i < j we have
α < max(tί i) < min(vj \ α).
Now if i < j and (ui,Wi) and (uj,Wj) are incompatible, then we must have one
of the following:

816 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
(a) (3η eui\ u*) (3δ G Wj) η < ηδ
(b) (3η G Uj \ u*) (3δ £Wi)η< ηδ
Now if if clause (b) holds for η G Uj\u* and δ G Wi, this implies δ <
min(vj \ α) < max(Rang(?7)) < δ. [Why? As δ G Wi\ by assumption above;
as 77 G Uj \ u*; as η < η$ and the choice of η§ (see 2.5(1)) respectively.] A
contradiction, so clause (a) must hold. Now we claim that: for each j < ω\ the
set Sj = {i < j '• Pi and PJ are incompatible} is finite.
Why? Assume not; by the above for i G Sj necessarily there are η
l G Ui \u*
and δi G Wj such that η
1 < η^. But for i(Q) < z(l), both in s^ , we get
that 77*(°) and η
1^ must be incomparable, since neither of Rang(τf(°)) and
Rang^
1)) can be a subset of the other. Hence all the δi(i G Sj) are distinct
— a contradiction as Wj is 
finite. 
Π2.6C
2.6D Fact.
(1) If A C α i is stationary, n < α>, ί/ien there is 5 G A such that Eηδ\n Π >1 is
stationary.
(2) If β C cji is stationary, then also the set
B'
 d= {5 G B : (Vn < ω) [£?^rn Π S is stationary]}
is stationary, and in fact B \ B
1 is nonstationary.
Proof. (1) Using Fodor's lemma we can find a stationary set A
f C A and a finite
sequence 77* such that for all δ G A' we have η$\n — η*. So A' C A Π Eη* =
Ar\Eηδιn for all δ G A'.
(2) Let A
 ά= B \ B', An
 ά= {δ G B : Eηδ \n Π B is nonstationary}. By (1),
each An must be nonstationary, so also A = (Jn An is nonstationary. 
U2.6D
2.6E Fact. Let 54 be the jR4-name of a subset of ω\ defined in 2.6B. Then we
have
(1) 54 is stationary in V
R*.
(2) If A C ωι is stationary in V, then in V
β4 there is 77 G Z such that A(~]Eη
is stationary and Eη Π 54 = 0.

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
817
(3) Every stationary subset of ω\ from V has (in V
R*) a stationary intersection
with ω1 \ S
4.
Proof. (1) Easy; for each p = (u, w) G #4 and club E G V of ωi, as u C Z \ Z0
is finite there is 77 G Z \ ZQ which is <-incomparable with every v G u (see
2.6A(4)) so Eη is stationary hence we can find δ G E Π Eη \ (sup(w) + 1), so
q = (u,wU {δ}) G #4, p < g and ? \\-R4 "S
4 Π E φ 0". As R± satisfies the c.c.c.
this suffice.
(2) Let A be stationary. By 2.6A(3) w.l.o.g. A C C* and by 2.6D(2) we may
w.l.o.g. assume that (Vί G A) (Vra < ω)[Eηδ\nΓ\A is stationary]. Fix a condition
(i£, u>) 6 #4- Choose δ e A \ tu, then for some large enough n, .E^Γn Π it; = 0
and 775 fn $ ZQ, so (u U {η§ fn}, w) is a condition in #4 above (u, υ) £ ^4 and it
clearly forces ^1 Π £?^ f n Π 5
4 = 0.
(3) Follows from (2). 
D2.6£;
2.7 Definition of the iteration. We define by induction on ζ < K an RCS
iteration (see X, §1) Q
ζ = (Pi,Qj 
: i < ζ,j < ζ), and if C < «, Q
ζ 6 ίf(«),
which is a semiproper iteration (i.e. for i < j < ζ, i non-limit Pj/Pi 
is
semiproper but for a limit ordinal j the forcing notion Qj is not necessarily
semiproper) and, if ζ = 5, δ a limit ordinal, also P^-names, ^4^, T^ (of a tree),
and Pζ+i-name Wζ = (H^(a) : a G α G ^4^}, as follows:
(a) Suppose C is non-limit, let Kζ < K be the first supercompact > |PJ, so
κ,ζ is a supercompact cardinal even in V
Fζ, and let Qζ be a semiproper
forcing notion of power Kζ collapsing κ,ζ to K2 such that I^PC*QC "any
forcing notion not destroying stationary subsets of ω\ is semiproper",
[it exists e.g. by Lemma 1.3 and X 2.8 but really Qζ — Levy(Nι, < Kζ) (in
V
Fζ) is okay, as
lhPς*Qc "Axωι[#ι -complete]"
and even Axi [Hi-complete] implies (by 1.1) the required statement.]
(b) Suppose ζ is limit, Qζ will be of the form Q
a * Q
b * Q
c. Remember that
/* : K —> H(κ) is a Laver Diamond (see Definition VII 2.8).

818 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
If /*(C) is a Pζ-name, lhpc "/*(() is a semiproper forcing notion", then let
Qζ = /*(C) If /*(C) is not like that, let Q
a
ζ =the trivial forcing.
Q
bς will satisfy the following property:
(*) If ξ < ζ, ξ is non-limit, A G V
p*, A C ωi, and A is stationary in V
p*
PC*Q?*Q£
(equivalently in V
 
c) t/ien ^4 is stationary in V 
~ ~ .
(This property (*) will follow from 2.6E, it will assure that the iteration remains
semiproper)
If C is divisible by α;
2, we will let Q
b
ζ = Q\ * Q
2 * Q*. First in V
p< choose
(see 2.1, 2.3) Q]. = #ι * jR2 * Pτζ, where Tζ = {6 : 6 an initial segment
of some a £ Uξ<£^f} ordered by being initial segment (for the definition
of Aξ see the definition of Wξ below). From the generic subset of Qj (and
^C * Qζ) we can define, for each ωi-branch B of Γζ, a 2-coloring Ha(B) of
ωι : Ha(B) = \J{H^(a) : ξ e a € B and C > ξ > α and ίf|(α) is well defined}.
(See the definition of Wζ below, we can say that if Ha(B) is not a 2-coloring
of ω\ we use trivial forcing). Remember 2.4(3).
To define Q?, we need the following concept:
We will say that a function h : [ωi]
2 —> 2 is almost homogeneous if there is
a partition ω\ = \Jn<ω An and an £ € {0,1} such that for all n the function
/ιf[An]
2 is constantly = t. We may say h is almost homogeneous with value i.
We choose Q? G H(κ) such that
(g) if there is Q G Jϊ(κ) such that
(i) Q is a Pζ * Q£ * Q^-name of a forcing notion
(ii) For every ξ < ζ the forcing notion (Pζ * Qζ * Qj * Q)/Pξ+ι is semi
proper, (equivalently, preserves stationarity of subsets of α i)
PC*QJ*QJ
(iii) if, in V 
" 
" , B is a branch of Tζ cofinaF in C, # < ^i, then the
Pc*QJ*Qj*Q
coloring Ha(B) of α i, is almost homogeneous in V
then Q^ satisfies this.
Otherwise Q
2 is trivial.
^ Note: members of £ are subsets of ζ with last element, so { max(α) : a G
B} is a subset of ζ.

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
819
Pζ*Qς*Qj*Qζ
In V 
we now define a set Sζ, which is supposed to guess the
set S[G\. More on S will be said below (and see "overview").
We let a G Sζ if for all the α i-branches B of Tζ cofinal in ζ (i.e. such that
\J{a : a G £?,otp(α) a successor ordinal} is unbounded in ζ) the function
Ha(B) is almost homogeneous with value 1.
Now we let Q^ be the forcing notion which shots a club through the complement
of Sζ, unless Sζ includes modulo T>^ some stationary set from U^<c^
P^' m
which case Q^ will be trivial. This completes the definition of Q
bζ when ζ is
divisible by α;
2, otherwise QΪ is trivial.
We let Qζ = Q
a
ζ * Q
b
ζ * Q
c
ζ where Q
c
ζ is the addition of (Kx + 2*°)
vPζ
Cohen reals with finite support. Clearly for ξ < ζ, (Pζ/Pζ+i) * Qζ preserves
stationarity of subsets of ωι, hence it is semiproper (see (a)), so Qζ is o.k. An
alternative to (b): we can demand Q" forces SPFA. If ζ is not divisible by ω
2
let Qζ be Q
a
ζ * Q
b
ζ * Q
c
ζ, with Q£, Q£ trivial, Q°ζ as above.
(c) For ζ limit we also have to define Wζ (in F
p^+
1).
(i) Wζ is a function whose domain is Aζ = {α : α C ζ+1, ζ £ α G F
Pc , and
α is a countable set of limit ordinals and £ G α = > α Γ Ί ( £ - f - l ) G V
p* }.
(ii) For α G Aζ, Wζ(α) = (H^(a) : a < otp(α)), where ff£(α) is a function
from [otp(α)]
2 = {{jι,h} : j\ < J2 < otp(α)} to {0, 1} (where otp(o)
is the order type of α) .
(iii) For every ξ e a e Aζ (check definition of A ζ ) , a Π (ξ -h 1) G A^
and for α < otp(o Π (ζ 4- 1)), ίf|(α Π (ξ + 1)) is ίϊ£(α) restricted to
(iv) If α G Aζ, we use the Cohen reals from Q£ to choose the values of
Ha(
a)({h,h}) when a = otp(α Π C) or jl = otp(α Π ζ) or j2 =
otp(αfΊ£) that is when not defined implicitly by condition (iii), i.e. by
fΓ| (not using the same digit twice (digit from the Cohen reals from
9c))
(v) ΓC(G V
p<) is the tree (\J{Aδ : δ < ζ a limit ordinal}, <Tζ), (<TC is
being an initial segment i.e. α < 6 i f f α = 6 n ( max(α) -hi)).
There is no problem to carry the inductive definition.

820 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
Note that we can separate according to whether the cofinality of ζ in V
pζ
is NO or > NI (so for a club of ζ < K, we can ask this in V) and in each case
some parts of the definition trivialize.
2.7A Toward the proof: Clearly Pκ is semiproper, satisfies the /ς-c.c., and \PK\ =
K. In VQ = V
p« let T* = [J{Aδ : δ < K (limit)}, and let <τ* be the order:
being initial segment. Let T = {α : a an initial segment of some b G T*}.
So Γ is a tree, and the (α 4- l)'th level of T is {a G T : otp(α) = α + 1}.
The height of T is ωι (since all elements of T are countable) and all elements
of T have K = ^2 many successors and every member of T belongs to some
ωi-branch.
For every cji-branch B of T we get a family of ω\ many coloring functions
Ha(B) 
: [ωi]
2 -> 2, by letting fΓ«(B)({Jι, J2» - Ha
m^
(a\a)(jlJ2) 
for any
α G B with otp(α) > max^Ί,^,^) successor ordinal. Now we want to show
that PFA+ fails in V
Pκ. To this end, we will define a proper forcing notion R
and Λ-name 5 of a stationary set of ω\. R will be obtained by composition.
The components of R and of the proof are not new.
2.8 Definition of R. Let VQ = V
p*. Let R0 be Levy(Nι,N2) (in V0) In
Vi - Vo*
0, let Rl be the Cohen forcing; in V2
 d= V^ let R2 be Levy(Nι, 2^).
Let V3 = V^
2. Let (Bi : i < i*) € VΊ list the ωi-branches of T in Vi and
IQ < i* be such that i < i$ 4Φ K > sup[|J{α : α G B^}]. Easily in Vi, T has
cji-branches with supremum K (just build by hand) so really IQ < i*. Forcing
with RI * R<2 over V\ does not add α i-branches to T (by 2.2), hence in V$ it
has < HI α i-branches, so let us essentially specialize it (see 2.4(3)), using the
forcing notion R% = PT from 2.3. Let V^ — V^
3. Let R^ be the forcing defined
in 2.6B, and let V5 = V/*
4. In V
5 we now define #5: it is the product with finite
support of R^i(θί < LJI,IQ < i < i*), where the aim of R^ is making ω\ the
union of NO sets, on each of which .Ha = Ha(Bi) is constantly 0 if α £ 5
4,
constantly I if a <£ S
4 (remember Ha(Bi) was defined just before 2.8 and 5
4
was defined from Gβ4), see definition below. See definition 2.6B and Fact 2.6E.
Let VQ = V6
 5. So the decision does not depend on i.

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
821
Now R^ai is just the set of finite functions h from ω\ to ω so that on each
h~
l({n}) the coloring Ha is constantly 0 or constantly 1, as required above
(so some case for all n <ώ).
Lastly, let R = RQ * RI * RZ * RS * R± * #5. We define 5 such that
S
4 C 5 C S
4 U {7 + 1 : 7 < ωι} and, if G C R is directed and S[G] well
defined, then all relevant information is decided; specifically: for the model TV
of cardinality HI chosen below, for every jR-name a of an ordinal which belongs
to N we have (3p € G) [p forces a value to α] (i.e., what is needed below
including a well ordering of ω\ of order type ζa for α < u;2).
2.9 Fact. The forcing # is proper (in VQ).
As properness is preserved by composition, we just have to check each Ri
in Vi. The only nontrivial one (from earlier facts) is R$. For this it suffices
to show that the product of any finitely many R^ satisfies the KI-C.C. Let
m < ω, and let the pairs (α/,i/) for / < m be distinct (so aι < ωι,i$ < i\ < i*).
Note that each Bif (an ωi-branch of T) is from V\. So for some β* < ω\,
i£l ^ ii2 =^> Bitι,Bil2 have no common member of level > β*. Now we claim
that in F5 (on H
l
a
] see in 2.8):
(*) If for each I < m, (w^ : 7 < ωι) is a sequence of pairwise disjoint finite
subsets of ω\ \ β*, then for some 7(1), 7(2) < ω\, for each even £ < m
[x G w'ΊW & y e <(2) => fΓW({x,j/}) - 0]
and for each odd t < m
[x e *4(1) & j/ G <(2) =* H^({χ,y}) - 1].
Why? First we show that this holds in V\ (note: R§ € V\\). Because -Ro is
Ni-complete, it adds no new α -sequence of members of Vb, hence for some
C < κ,{(£,t/4> : 7 < ω,£ < m} belongs to V
p< and to ίf(C). Note that for
each £ < m, the sequence (w^ : £ < m, 7 < ω) is a sequence of pairwise disjoint
subsets of ωι \ /?* and remember the way we use the Cohen reals to define

822 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
the Hf(ays. We can show that for any possible candidate {it/ : I < m) for
(w* : ί < m) or even just for a sequence (w
£ : £ < ra), w
i C w
A
ε (for any
ε < ω\ large enough) for infinitely many 7 < u;, the conclusion of (*) holds for
(7(1), 7(2)) = (7, ε).
Clearly (*) implies that any finite product of R^ i satisfies the NI-C.C if it holds
in the right universe (V5). So for proving the fact we need to show that the
subsequent forcing by Rι,R>2,Rz, R± preserves the satisfaction of (*).
The least trivial is why R$ preserves it (as R<2 is Ni-complete and as R\ and
#4 satisfy: among HI conditions NI are pairwise compatible (see 2.6(C)).
Recall from 2.4 that for any sequence (pi : i < ω\) of conditions we can find
disjoint uncountable sets 81,82 such that for i G Si, j G 62 the conditions
Pi and PJ are compatible. (This is also true for RI and #4). We will work
in Vs. So assume that (w^ : 7 < ω\,t < m) is an #3-name of a sequence
contradicting property (*) in V3
 3. For 7 < ω\ let pΊ be a condition deciding
(w^ : ί < m), say p7 Ih w^ = *w^. Let Si, 52 be as above, 5^ = {7^ : α < ω\}.
Let u^ = *w^ι U *u/2 for £ < m. By thinnings out we may without loss of
generality assume that the sets U^m^l f°
r a < ωι are P
ai
fwi
se disjoint,
so we can apply (*) in Vs. This gives us α(l), α(2) such that for all even £,
x ^
 ul(i)' 2/ ^ ^1(2) ^ -ffα/ ({
χ»2/}) — ^
 and similarly for odd I we have
x e
 ui
a(i) & y
 G ul(2) ^ -ffαί'ίί^ί/}) = 1- Let 9 be a condition extending
p7ι 
and p72 
, then q Ih "iLj) and 7^(2) are as required". 
D2.g
So R is proper in VQ; as in Vs, 5
4 is stationary and #5 satisfies the NI-C.C,
clearly 5
4 is a stationary subset of ω\ in VQ too; hence, by the choice of S (just
before 2.9) we have \\-R "5 C cJi is stationary".
2.9A Claim. In V
p«, PFA+ fail as exemplified by R, S.
Proof. In V
Pκ, let x be e.g. 33(κ)+ and let N -< (H(χ), €, <J) be a model of
cardinality HI containing all necessary information, i.e. the following belongs
to N: i (if i < ωi), (#0,£ι,#2,Λ3,JR4,Λ5>, <Pi,Qj : i < κ,j < «), GP|C> 5
4
(but not 5!), / (see below), (Bi : i < i*),ij. Suppose that G G F
p", G C R is

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
823
directed and meets all dense sets of R which are in AT. It suffices to show that
S[G] is not stationary. Note that N is a model of ZFC~ etc.
Let / € TV be the Re-name of the function from ω\ onto ft, then easily
f[G] is a function from ω\ onto some δ < ft, cf(ί) = HI, in V
Pκ. Note that
T[G\ e N[G\ is just Tδ, and if N[G\ 
\= "B[G\ is an ωi-branch of T cofinal
in ft", then J3[6?] is as ωi-branch of T§ cofinal in J, and similarly with the
coloring. We will now show how we could have predicted this situation in V
 Pδ :
Let h : ω\ x ω\ — > T be an J?-name (belonging to N) which enumerates all
ωi-branches of T (we use the essential specialization by #3) i.e.
i*}"
Then each set {h(i^j)[G\ 
: j < ω\} (for i < ω\) will be an ωi-branch of T§
(remember T$ — Uί^C 
C < ^ limit}), some of them cofinal in 5, and these
ωi-branches will be in V
P**
Q* , as Q
b
δ (more exactly Qj, see 2.7) was chosen in
such a way that no α i-branch can be added to 7$ without collapsing NI. Also
all the ω\ -branches of T[G] = Tζ will appear in this list.
Now we can recall how the set S§ was defined: For each α i-branch B of T$ (in
P5*9?*Qj*Q5 
Ps*Qs
V 
equivalently in V 
) which is cofinal in 5, we have HI many
coloring functions Hα(B), and there are such ωi-branches. We let α G S$ if for
all these ωi-branches B the function Hα(B) is almost homogeneous with value
1.
Now note that the set G also interprets the names for the homogeneous sets for
the colorings H$ . These homogeneous sets exist in V
 Pκ hence in V Pί for ξ < ft
Ps*Qs*Ql
large enough, so in V 
~ ~ there is a forcing producing such sets, which, for
every ξ < δ preserves stationarity of sets A, which are stationary subsets of ω\
in V
p*
+l (the forcing is Q^ * Q
c
δ * (Pκ/P$+ι)). Using the supercompactness of ft
we can get such a forcing in H(κ). But this implies that these sets are already
Pδ*Qs*Q
l
δ*Q
2
δ
almost homogeneous in V 
~ 
(see clause (b) in 2.7), so also S[G\ is in
ensures that 85 is not stationary.

824 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
2.10 Lemma. We can reduce the assumption in 2.1 to "« is supercompact"
Proof. We repeat the proof of 2.1 with some changes indicated below. We
demand that every Q§ is semiproper. We need some changes also in clause
(b) of 2.7 (in the inductive definition of Qi), we let Q% = f * ( ζ ) only if: /*(£)
is a Pζ-name, lhpς "/*(0 is semiproper" and let Q* be trivial othervise. Let
Q
b( be trivial except when for some Xζ < /ς, /*(£) G ίf(λζ), and ζ is
pc*9c
supercompact. In this case we let (in V 
" ), Qζ be defined as in the proof
of 2.1 except that the R^j are now as defined below, Q^ is a forcing notion of
cardinality (2*ι)
yP'*
9ζ*
9ζ which forces MA. Now let Sδ G y
Pc*
Qζ*
9ζ*
9c be as
described below, and Q* is shooting a club through ω\ \ S§ if Qΐ * Q\ * Q? * Q?
is semiproper, and trivial otherwise. Now Q£ = Qj * Q^ * Q^ Lastly Q£ is as
in the proof of 2.1 and Qζ = Q
a
ζ * Q
b
ζ * Q
c
ζ, now clearly Qc G #p8(λc)). This
does not change the proof of 2.1. Now we let Qκ = shooting a club called E
(of order type K) through {i < K : V \= "cf(i) = NO" or V \=
 ui is strongly
inaccessible in V, λ^ well defined and i is D8(λζ)-supercompact"} (ordered by
being an initial segment). Now it is easy and folklore that, for such Q^, we have
V "*"
 κ ^SPFA, and show as before V ** - * |= -,PFA
+.
Why the need to change Q?? As the result of an iteration we ask "is there
Q such that (i), (ii), (iii) of ®", and this may well defeat our desire that Qζ
hence Q\ belongs to H(2&(\ζ)). We want to be able to "decipher" the possible
"codings" fast, i.e., by a forcing notion of small cardinality, so we change R^^s
inside the definition of R, in Definition 2.8).

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
825
We let 7α><7 be 0 if a 6 S
4 and 1 otherwise, and let R^ 
be defined by:
&J = {(w, h) :w is a finite subset of ω\ and ft is a finite function
from the family of nonempty subsets of w to ω such that :
ifuι,υ,2 G Dom(ft) and ft(uι) = h(v,2)
then \u\\ = \U2\ and [ζ G ui \ u2 & £ G 1x2 \ u\ & C < ζ =>
(actually coloring pairs suffice).
2.10A Definition. 1) A function ff : [ωi]
2 -> {0, 1} is called ^-colored (where
[-4]* = {α C A : |α| = K}) if £ € {0, 1} and there is a function ft : S<^0(ωι) — > α;
such that: if Uι,u2 are finite subsets of α i and ft(uι) = ft(n2) then |uι| = \u^\
and [C € ui \ ^2 & ί e u2 \ tii & C < ξ =» ff ({C, C}) = ^]
2) Called /ί (as above) explicitly non-^-colored if there is a sequence (u7 : 7 <
ωι) of pairwise disjoint finite subsets of ω\ such that: for any α < β < ω\ there
are C G uα, ξ G u^ such that #({C,ξ}) 7^ ^
2.10B Claim. 1) 1-colored, 0-colored are contradictory.
2) If H is explicitly non-£-colored then it is not ^-colored.
3) If MA + 2
H° > Ni, i < 2 and H : [ωι]
2 -> {0,1} ίften if is ^-colored or
explicitly non ^-colored.
Proof. 1) Clearly H cannot be both 0-colored and 1-colored.
2) Note also that if H is ^-colored, and Uζ (ζ < ω\) are pairwise disjoint non
empty finite subsets of ω\ such that ζ < ξ =ϊ sup(u^) < min(ι^) then for some
ζ < ξ, H(uζ) = H(uξ) hence H \{{a,β} : a G uς,β G u^}} is constantly ί.
3) Use R defined like R^ from above.
If it satisfies the c.c.c., from a generic enough subset of RH we can define a
"witness" ft to if being ^-colored. If RH is not c.c.c. a failure is exemplified say
by (uζ : C < <*>i); without loss of generality it is a Δ-system i.e. C < ζ < ωi =>
uc n U£ = u*. Reflection shows that (uζ \ u* : C < ωύ exemplifies "explicitly
non-^-colored" . 
Eb. IOB

826 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
The needed forcing Q^ is not too large (< λζ), and by 2.10B it essentially
determines the ^aj (i.e., we can find 7^- so that if we have an appropriate G,
the values of the 7^ will be Ίa,j)- ^° we nave a^ most one candidate for S[G],
namely S$, and if ω\ \ 85 is not disjoint to any stationary subset of ω\ from
V
Pδ modulo P^15 we end the finite iteration defining Q$ by shooting a club
through ω\ \S§.
Why is Qs still semiproper? Clearly Qζ, Qς, Q^ are semiproper and so preserve
stationarity of subsets of ωi, and also Q^ do this and Qς satisfies the c.c.c.
So it is enough to prove that. Now use Rss (see chapter XIII §1 but assume
on δ (remember we should shoot a club through E) that we have enough
supercompactness for δ) to show that we still have semiproper = not destroying
the stationarity of subsets of ω\ for the relevant forcing.
This finish the proof that we can define the iteration Q as required. Lastly in
the proof of the parallel of 2.9A we use also E e N hence δ G E. 
Hb.io
2.11 Claim. If α(0),α(l) < ωl and |α(0)| < |α(l)|, then
Axa(G) [semiproper] Y- Axa^ [proper] (assuming the consistency of ZFCH-Ξ3 a
supercompact).
Proof. Similar. [Now the Laver Diamond is used to guess triples of the form
(Qto Qδ, (Si'.i < α(l))), Qs is a P^-name of a semiproper forcing, H-p^+Q^ "5i
is a stationary subset of u i". In (b) from the colourings corresponding to the
branches we decode a sequence (5* : a < α(2)) of stationary sets and try to
shoot a club through ω\ \ 5* for one of them such that Sf \ 5^ is stationary
for every i < α(l) (in addition to the earlier demands.] 
Cb.ii
2.12 Observation. Properness is not productive, i.e. (provably in ZFC) there
are two proper forcings whose product is not proper.
Proof. Let T be the tree (
ωι>(ω<2), <); now one forcing, P, adds a generic
branch with supremum cj2, e.g., P = Γ (it is Ni-complete). The second forcing,
Q, guarantees that in any extension of V^, as long as HI is not collapsed, T

§2. SPFA Does Not Imply PFA+ 
827
will have no ω\ -branch with supremum ω% . Use Q = Q\ * Qz * Qs, where
Qι is Cohen forcing, Q% — Levy(Mι,2
Nl) in V
Ql (so it is well known that in
yQι*Qz ^ cf(ωrf) 
= cji, and T has no branch with supremum ω<2 and has no new
ωi-branch so has < MI ωi-branchs), and Q$ is the appropriate specialization
of T (like #3 in the proof of 2.1, see Definition 2.3). Since in VPxQ there is a
branch of T cofinal in ω^ not from V and VPxQ is an extension of V
Q , HI
must have been collapsed (see 2.4(3)).
We could also have used the tree
 ωι>2, but then we should replace "no ω\-
branch with supremum ω^
v^ by "no branch of T which is not in V". 
Π2.12
2.13 Discussion. Beaudoin asks whether SPFA h Ax\ [finite iteration of Mi-
complete and c.c.c. forcing notions]. So the proofs of 2.1 (and 2.2) show the
implications fail (whereas it is well known that already Ax(c.c.c.)=>Axι (c.c.c.)).
But Mi-complete forcing would be a somewhat better counterexample. We
have
2.14 Fact. SPFA h Ax i [Mi -complete].
2.14A Reminder. We recall the following facts and definitions (see XIII):
(1) If P and Q are Mi-complete, then Ihp "Q is Mi-complete".
(2) For (Ai \ i < ω\) such that Ai C ω\ we define the diagonal union of these
sets as Vz<u>! Ai = {δ < ω\ : (3i < δ)(δ G Ai)}.
If Ai C α i is nonstationary for all i < ω\, then Vi<ωι ^ ^
s nonstationary
(and if Ai is stationary for some i, then Vi<Wl AΪ 2 -Ai\(ΐ+l) is stationary).
(3) If 5 C ω\ is stationary, then the forcing of "shooting a club through 5" is
defined as club (5) = {h : h an increasing continuous function from some
non-limit α < ω\ into 5}. We have ll-cιub(5) "ί^i \ S is nonstationary", and
for every stationary A C 5 we have H-ciuMS) "^4 is stationary".
Proof of 2.14- Suppose V |=SPFA, and P is an Mi-complete forcing, 5 is a
P-name, and Ihp "S C ω\ is stationary". For i <ω\ let (Pi, Si) be isomorphic
to (P, 5), and let P* be the product of Pi(i < ω\) with countable support; so

828 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
Pi <£ P*,P* is Ni-complete, and 5* is a P*-name and lhPί "P*/Pi does not
destroy stationarity of subsets of ω\
n.
Let Ξ = {A e V : A C ωι,A is stationary and Ihp "5 Π A is not
stationary"}. Clearly if A G Ξ and B C A is stationary then B G Ξ. Let
{Ai : i < i*} C Ξ be a maximal antichain C Ξ (i.e., the intersection of any two
elements is not stationary).
So, by 1.12 i*\ < ω\, so without loss of generality i* < ω\ and define
Ai = 0 for i G [i*,cjι). Let A = Vi<ωι Ai. Then also Ihp "A = Vi<ωιAi\ so
we have:
(i) Ihp "5 Π A is not stationary", and
(ii) for every stationary B C ωι\A, for somep G P, we havep Ihp* "5(ΊB
is stationary".
Let 5 = ω\ \A. So 5 is stationary (as Ihp "5 is stationary"). Also,
clearly,
(iii) for each i < ωι, and stationary B C S for some p G Pi <£ P*, we have
p Ihp* "Si Π β is stationary".
As P* is the product of the Pi with countable support, P*/P^ does not
destroy stationarity of subsets of ωi, so we have
(iv) for every stationary B C 5, Ihp* "for some i, 5$ Π B is stationary".
Let 5* be the P*-name: Vi<ω1 §>
 d= {a < ωι : (3i < α)α G 5J. So lhP*
"for every stationary B C S (from V), we have B Π 5* is stationary".
In V
p* let Q* be shooting a club C through A U 5* (i.e., Q* = {h : h an
increasing continuous function from some non-limit a < ω\ into A\JS} ordered
naturally). Now Q* does not destroy any stationary subset of ω\ from V (though
it destroys some from F
p*). So P* *Q* does not destroy any stationary subsets
of ωι from V; hence by Lemma 1.3 it is semiproper. Now if G C P* * Q* is
generic enough, for each i < ω\,G Π Pi is generic enough such that Si[G] is
well-defined, and since C* = C[G] is a club set and C* C A U Vί^ £;[<?], we
have 5 Π C* C Vi<u;ι §i[G]. As 5 is stationary, for some i, 5^[G] is stationary
so the projection of G to Gi C P^ is as required, and we have finished. U2.14

§3. Canonical Functions for ω\ 
829
2.15 Remark. A similar proof works if P = P
a * P
6, where P
a satisfies the
^i-c.c. and P
b is Ni-complete in V
Pa , if we use P* = {/ : / a function from
ωi to />,/(») = (pi.fc) € F
α * P
6, |{i : Pi ^ 0}| < N0, |{» : <7i ^ 0}| < NI} Note
that necessarily even any finite power of P
a satisfies the KI-C.C. In short, we
need that some product of copies of P is semiproper, i.e:
2.16 Fact. [SPFA] Suppose Q is a semi proper forcing notion, and there is a
forcing notion P and a family of complete embeddings fa (i < i*) of P into Q
such that:
(a) for any p £ P and q € Q for some i, the conditions fa(p)^q are compatible
with Q.
(b) the forcing Q/fa(P) 
does not destroy the stationarity of subsets of ω\.
Then for any dense subsets Zα of P for a < cji, and S a P-name of a subset of
ωι , ^~P "S ζ ωι is stationary" there is a directed G C P, not disjoint to any
Tα (for α < α i) such that S[G] is a well defined stationary subset of ω\.
Proof. Like 2.14. We define A C ω\ satisfying for S and P the following
conditions (from the proof of 2.14): (i), (ii), hence (iii), (iv) (with Pi = fa(P)
D2.i6
§3. Canonical Functions for
3.1 Definition. 1) We define by induction on α, when a function / : ω\ — >
ordinals is an α-th canonical function:
/ is an α-th canonical function (sometimes abbreviated "/ is an α-th
function" iff
(a) for every β < a there is a /3-th function, fβ<f mod X^
(b) / is a function from ω\ to the ordinals, and for every f
1 
: ω\ — > Ord,
if A
1 = {i < ω\ : /
x(i) < /(*)} ^
s stationary then for some β < a and
/3-th function /
2 : ^ -> Ord the set Λ
2 d- {i e A
1 : f
2(i) = f
l(i)} is
stationary,

830 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
2) If we replace a "stationary subset of ω\" by "^ 0 mod D" (V any filter on
ωi); we write "/ is a (P, α)-th function". Of course we can replace ω\ by higher
cardinals.
Remember
3.2 Claim. 1) If a < ω^^ot — \Ji<ωι &i, (0,% : i < ωi) is increasing continuous,
each α; is countable, and /α(i) = otp(α^) then fa is an α-th function.
2) If for every α there is an α-th function, then T>ωι is precipitous; really "for
every α < (2
Kl)+ there is α-th function" suffices, in fact those three statements
are equivalent.
3) If / is an α-th function; Q — U+λ = {A C ωι : A is stationary} (ordered
by inverse inclusion) then \\-Q "in V
ωι/Gq, we have: {x : V
ωι/Gq 
|= "x is an
ordinal < /α/Gg"} is well ordered of order type α" (remember V
ωι/Gq is the
"generic ultrapower" with universe {f /Gq : f £ V and / : ω\ —> V} and Gq
is an ultrafilter on the Boolean algebra P(ωι)
v).
4) Any two α-th functions are equal modulo Dωι.
5) Similarly for the other filters (we have to require them to be Ni-complete,
and for (1) - also normal).
Proof. Well known, see [J]. We will only show (1): Let A
1 = {i : f ( i ) < fa(i)}
be stationary. So there is a countable elementary model N -< H(χ) (for some
large x) containing α, /, (α» : i < ωi) such that δ = N Π ω\ G A
1. We have
f ( δ ) < fa(S) = otp(α5), and aδ = Ui6N
α^ - ^» so t^ιere is ^
 G ^ sucn tnat
/(5) - otp(α5 Π /3). Let A
2 = {i G A
1 : /(i) = otp(α< Π /?)}. Since A
2 € N,
f e N, β £ N, (di : i < ωι) € AT and δ G A
2, we can deduce A
2 is stationary.
Π3.2
The following answers a question of Velickovic:
3.3 Theorem. Let K be a supercompact. For some ft-c.c. forcing notion P not
collapsing HI we have that V
p satisfies:

§3. Canonical Functions for ωι 
831
(a) there is / €
 ωιωι bigger ( mod Pωι) than the first α;2 function hence
the Chang conjecture fails.
(b) PFA (so Pωι is semiproper hence precipitous).
(c) not PFA+
Outline of the proof: In 3.4 we define a statement (*)5, which we may assume
to hold in the ground model (3.5). We define a set 3%. C S<^l(χ) and we
show that if (*)g holds, then Sg is stationary (3.8). In 3.9 we recall that the
class of 5^-proper forcing notions is closed under CS iterations, so assuming a
supercompact cardinal we can, in the usual way, force Ar[5£-proper]. Finally
we find, for each α < α;2, an S^-proper forcing notion Ra such that Ax[.Rα] =>•
fa <τ>ω2 g
3.3A Remark. Remember that the first clause of 3.3(a) implies that Chang's
conjecture fails, so the negation of 3.3(a) is sometimes called the "weak Chang
conjecture".
Proof of 3.3A. Let M = (M, E,ω\,...) be a model with universe u;2 which
codes enough set theory. Assume that there exists an elementary submodel
N x M with \\N\\ = Ni, |ωf I = No- Let δ = ω? = ωl Π N. In M we have
the function / from 3.3(a) and also a family (fa,Ea : α < α;2), (/α is an α-th
canonical function, Ea C α i is a club set, fa\Ea < f\Ea) as well as a family
(Eatβ 
\ a < β < a;2) of clubs of ω\ satisfying fa\Eaβ < fβ\Eaβ. For α < /?,
α, ^9 G ΛΓ we have 5 G £?α,/3 Π f?^, so
(A) (Vα,/3eΛθ [α<^:
(B) (Vα G AT): [/α(ί) <
So the set {fa(δ) 
: a G N} is uncountable (by (A)) and bounded in ω\ (by
(B)), a contradiction. 
ΠS.SA
3.4 Definition. Let fa be the α'th canonical function for every α < ω2 (so
without loss of generality the fa are of the form described in 3.2(1)). Let

832 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
g : ω\ — > Ord. We let (*)g be the statement:
(*)0 
for all a < ω^ we have 
->(g <vω fa)
By 3.2(4) this definition does not depend on the choice of (fa:a< 
ω^)-
3.5 Remark. It is easy to force a function g : ω\ — > ω\ for which (*)9 holds:
let P — {h : for some i < ωι, h : i — > ω\} ordered by inclusion. P is Kj-
complete and (2*°)+-c.c., so assuming CH we get \H\
P = #Y and K%
P = K% .
Let (fa : α < ω^) be the first ω2 canonical function in V, then they are still
canonical in V
p ', and it is easy to see that for any / : ωi — > ω\ in V we have
V
p \= ->(g <τ>ωι /) where g is the generic function for P.
3.6 Definition. 1) We call AT X (ff(χ),€,<J) 0-small (in short g - sm QΪ
more precisely (g, χ)-small) if AT is countable and otp(7V Π χ) < ^(A/" Π α i).
2) We let 5^
 d=
f {α : α G «S<κ0(χ), α Π o^ is an ordinal and otp(α) < g(a Π ωι)}
3.7 Definition. We call a forcing notion Q g-small proper if. for any large
enough χ and N -< (ίf(χ), €, <*), satisfying \\N\\ = KQ, Q e N, p e N Π Q
such that TV is g-small there is q > p which is (AT, Q)-generic. We write g-sm
for ^-small.
3. 7 A Observation. 1) Any proper forcing is g-sm proper.
2) Without loss of generality g is nondecreasing.
Proof. 1) Trivial.
2) Let E = {a < ω\ : α is a limit ordinal such that β < a => <j(/3) < α and
(V/3 < α)(37)(/3 < 7 < α&^(τ) > ^)}, and let
Λ , v -
^ ^ ; ~ \ sup{p(/3) : β < a} 
otherwise.
Now, for our definition g' , g are equivalent but g' is not decreasing. 03.7,4

§3. Canonical Functions for ω\ 
833
3.8 Claim. 1) (*)<, holds
ifffoτ 
every x > ^2 the set S^ is a stationary subset of S<^l(χ)
iff S^ is a stationary subset of ^^(fr^)
iff for some χ > ^2, 5£ is a stationary subset of 5<^1(χ).
2) For a forcing notion Q and x > 2'^' we have: Q is g-sm proper iff Q is
S£-proper (see VI. 1(2)).
3) If (*)g holds and Q is g-sm proper then
\\-Q "(
Proof. 1) first implies second
Assume (*)p holds, x > ^2 is given, and we shall prove that S£ is a
stationary subset of 5<Nι(x) Let x G H(χι) and χι = 3s(χ)+( e.g x = Sg).
We can choose by induction on i < ω\,Ni -< ( H ( χ ι ) , G, <*J increasing
continuous, countable, x G A^ € A^+I. Clearly for each i we have δi = NiΓ\ωι
is a countable ordinal, and the sequence (δi : i < ωι) is strictly increasing
continuous. Now letting N = \Ji<ωι Ni, then ωι + 1 C N -< (Jf/(xi),G, <*J
and TV has cardinality HI, so otp(TVΓ)χ) = a for some a < ω^ let /ι : NΓ\χ — > α
be order preserving from TV Π x onto α.
Note: letting a] = NΪ Π x, α^ = rang(/ιfα^) we have: α is Ui<α;
 ai where
a,i is countable increasing continuous in i and /α+ι(i) = otp(α^) -f 1 is an
(α + l)-th function (see 3.2(1)). Also C = {i 
: δi = i} is a club of ω\
so by (*)p we can find i G C such that /α+ι(i) < g(i), so otp(A^ Π x) =
otp(αj) - otp(α») < /α+ι(i) < ^(i) = #(<^) = ^W Πα i). I.e. for this i, Ni is
p-sm; easily Ni Π x G S£ and it exemplifies that S£ is stationary.
second implies fourth. Trivial
fourth implies third. Check, (note: for x > K2, otp(χΠTV) > otp^Π N)).
third implies first. Let a < ω<ι,θί — Ui<ωι
 a^ where α^ are increasing
continuous each α^ countable, so /α(i) = otp(a^) is an α-th function and let
C be a club of ω\. Let α = {α^ : i < ω\). Let x be regular large enough (e.g.

834 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
>3j). Clearly
{N Π N2 : N is countable, N -< (if (x), G, <* )}
is a club of <Sκ0(N2) So by assumption for some countable N -< (if (x), G, <*)
we have C, ά G AT" and
(i) otp(AΓnN 2) <0(ΛΓΠϋ;ι).
But as α G TV also faeN 
and we have [j < TV Π ω\ =ϊ dj G N => α^ C AT]
hence |J{
αj : j < A Γ ί Ί ω ι } C A / ' n α but this union is equal to α^nωXα is
increasing continuous:) so, as α G AT,
(ii) otp(aNΠωι) < otp(aNnωι U {a}} < otp(NΓ\ω2).
But
(iii) fa(NΓ}ωι) 
= otp(aNnωι).
By (i) + (ii) + (iii) we get fa(NΓ\ωι) < g(NΓ\ωι) and trivially NΓiωi e C,
but C was any club of α i, hence {j < ωι : f a ( j ) 
< g ( j ) } is stationary. As α
was any ordinal < ω^ we get the desired conclusion.
(2) This is almost trivial, the only point is that to check Sg-properness it
is enough to consider models AT -< (if (χ), e, <* ), but for sm-g properness we
should consider AT -< (if(χ0),^j<χ0) fo
f all large enough χ0 First assume Q
is g-sm proper, and we shall prove that Q is 5^-proper; and let %o be large
enough (say > Π2(χ)) Let M be the Skolem Hull of {α : α < 2'
QI} U {Q,χ}
in (if(%o),e,<*0). Note ||M|| = 2\
Q\ < χ hence otp(M Π χ0) < X and there
is an order-preserving h : M ( Ί χ — > (2'
QI)
+ < χ onto an ordinal belonging
to AT. Let AT be a countable elementary submodel of (if (χo) £> <£0) to which
x = (Q, x, M, h) belongs, and (AT Π x) G S
9
χ. Let Af
7 d= AT Π M, so ^ Π ωι =
N Π ωi, N
f is a countable elementary submodel of (if (χ0), G, <*0) and
otp(ΛΓ' Π XQ) = otp(h"(N
f Π χ0)) < otp(AΓ Π Rang(Λ))
< otp(AΓ Π x) <
[Why? as h is order presserving; as N is closed under ft, ft"
1 and AT' -< AΓ; as
rang(ft) C χ; as A/' Π x G 5^; as N
1 = N Π M respectively]
Applying "Q is g-sm proper" to AT', for every p G Q Π AT' there is <? such that

§3. Canonical Functions for ω\ 
835
p < q G Q and q is (7V',p)-generic. But QnN = QnN' and [q is (7V',p)-generic
Φ> <? is (7V,p)-generic] as 7VΠ2
I Q I = 7V'fΊ2
l < 5 1. As we can eliminate "x G N
n (as
some such x for some χ', /f(χ') G H(XQ) and χ' belongs to N) we have proved
Q is 5^-proper.
The other direction should be clear too.
3) Letχ = (2'SI)+.
By part (2) we know Q is ^-proper; by V 1.3 - 1.4(2) as Q is Sg-
proper, we have that Ihg
 
U(S^)
V C S<^1(χ)
v 
is stationary". Clearly \\-Q
"(S%)
v C (S^)
yQ" hence lhQ "(5^)
v° is a stationary subset of 5<Xl(χ)". So
by part (1) (fourth implies first), we have Ihg "(*)5" 
Π3.8
3.9 Claim.
Assume (*)p (where g G
 ωιωι). TΛen the property "(a forcing notion is)
g-sm proper" is preserved by countable support iteration (and even strongly
preserved).
Proof. Immediate by V 2.3 and by 3.8(2) above. 
D13.9
3.10 Claim. Suppose, g G
 ωια>ι, and (*)p holds, ft supercompact, L* : ft —»
7J(κ) is a Laver diamond (see VII 2.8) and we define Q = (P^, Qj : i < κ,j < ft)
as follows:
(i) it is a countable support iteration
(ii) for each z, if L*(i) is a P^-name of a g-sm proper forcing and i is
limit then Qi = L*(i), otherwise Qi = Levy(Kι,2
H2), (in V
Pi, i.e. a
P^-name).
Then
(a) Pκ is ^-sm proper, ft-c.c. forcing notion of cardinality ft, and N^
P^ =
ft
(b) Axωι [g-sm proper] holds in V
Pκ
(c) PFA holds in V
p«
(d) in V
Pκ for every α < ft,^ is above the α-th function (by <pα,1).
Proo/. Q is well defined by III 3.IB.

836 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
Clearly \\-p. "Qi is g-sm proper" - by choice or as Levy(Ki,2
H2)
vi
Pil is
tti-complete hence proper hence (by 3.7) g-sm proper. So by 3.9 the forcing Pκ
is g-sm proper; P satisfies /ς-c.c. by III 4.1 hence \\-pκ "K regular, N^ regular".
The use of Levy (tti, 2
K2)
vI
Pίl for i non-limit will guarantee K = K2 in V
p*.
Also \PK\ = K is trivial, so (a) holds.
The proof of (b) is like the consistency of lhp "Axωι[proper]", in VII 2.8
hence (by 3.7A(1)) we have lhP|ς "PFA" i.e. (c) hold.
So it remains to prove (d), so let α < N^'
P*' = ft. This will follow from
3.10A, 3.10B, 3.IOC below together with (b) above. Let us define a forcing
notion Ra:
3.10A Definition. Ra = {{α^ : i < j) : j is a countable ordinal, each α^ is a
countable subset of a and (α^ : i < j) is increasing continuous, and for i a limit
ordinal otp(α^) < g(i)} The order is: p < q iff p is an initial segment of q.
We can assume g is nondecreasing (see 3.7A(2)).
3.10B Observation. Ra is #-sm proper.
Proof. Left to the reader.
3.IOC Observation. If G C Ra is sufficiently generic, then G defines an
increasing continuous sequence (α^ : i < ω\) with \Ji<ωι &i = OL and hence
defines an α-th canonical function below g. 
Πs.ιo,3.3
* 
* 
*
Answering a question of Judah:
Question. Does Ar[Countably Complete * c.c.c.] imply PFA?
3.11 Claim. The answer is no.
Proof. Countably complete forcings and c.c.c. forcings and also their composi-
tion are α -proper. So we have

§3. Canonical Functions for ω\ 
837
PFA =>Ax[α;-proper]=>Ax[countably complete * c.c.c.].
We will show that the first implication cannot be reversed:
3.12 Definition, c — (c(ϊ) 
: i < ωι) is a α -club guessing for ω\ means that
c(i) is an unbounded subset of i of order type ω for each limit ordinal i less
than α i, such that every closed unbounded subset c ofω\ includes c(i) for some
limit ordinal i < ω\.
3.13 Claim. (1) If c is a α -club guessing for ωi, and P is α -proper, then Ihp "c
is a α -club guessing for α>ι".
(2) φωi implies that there is a α -club guessing for ω\ (so a α -club guessing can
be obtained by a small forcing notion).
Proof. (1): Let C be a name for a closed unbounded subset of α i, p G P. We
need to find a condition q > p and some i < ω\ such that q Ihp "c(i) C C".
Let (ΛΓi : i < α i) be an increasing continuous sequence of countable models
Ni x (#(%),£<*), X large enough, {p,C,P} G ΛΓ0 Let ^ = Ni Γ\ ωλ. Let
(7* = {i < ω\ : i» = i}. Now C* is closed unbounded, so there is some i
such that c(i) C C*, say c(i) = {io,iι,...}, io < ii < — Let g > p be JVi£-
generic for all n < ω. So g Ih % = ^[G] Π α i = Ni£ Π α i", and clearly
Ih "^£[G] Π α i G C", so q Ih «c(i) C C\
(2) Should be clear. 
D3.ιs
3.14 Claim. Suppose c = (c^ : 5 < ω\) is such that: Q is a closed subset of δ
of order type < α*. Let
βg J: {(i,G) : i < α;ι,C is a closed subset of i + 1, such that for every
5 < i, sup(c<5 Π C) < δ},
order is natural. Let
IΊ
 d^
f {(i, C) e R-c : 7 < max(C)}.
T/ien: βδ is proper, each IΊ is a dense subset of RC, and if G C Rc is
directed not disjoint to each IΊ, then C* = U{C : (i, C) € G} is a club of HI
such that: δ < ω\ => sup(C Π cδ) < δ.

838 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
Proof. Straight.
For proving "flg is proper" denote q = (i
q, C
q), i
q = Όom(q), let N -< (ff (χ), G
,<*), N countable, p G N n βg, and {c,β5,α} G AT. W.l.o.g. Π^ < χ. Let
δ — N Ou i, and so we can find (TVj : i < <5), an increasing continuous sequence
of elementary submodels of (#p+), G), ΛΓ< C AT, TV Π #p+) - U;«5 #i and
p G AΓ0. So we can find IQ < i± < . . ., δ = \J^<ω it such that ω\ Π ΛΓ^+i \ JVί/ is
disjoint to Q. Let (τn : n < ω) list the .Re-names of ordinals from AT, and we
can choose by induction on n a condition pn, qn such that: p < p0 G -/Vi0+ι> ^
Po
is Wio Π α i, and [i
p,7Vίo+ι Π α i) is disjoint to C
p°, pn < qn G Rδ Π ΛΓirι+1, gn
force a value to r^ if ^ < n & r^ ^ -^ίn+ι>
 an<^ ^n < Pn+i) ^
Pτl+1 — AΓ*n+ι Π α i,
and [i
pτι+SAΓίτι+1 Πα i) is disjoint to c
pn+1. Now (pn : n < ω) has a limit as
required.
Another presentation is noting:
(*) for each p* = (i*,C*) G #c and dense subset I of P, there is a club
E — Eq,ϊ of ωι such that:
for every α G E, α > i*, and there is (i
α,C
α) G RC, (i
a,C
a) >
(α,C*) > (i*,C*), (i
α,C
α) is in J and i
α < min(J5\ (α + 1)).
(**) if p e N ^ (ίί(χ),G,<*), AT countable, {c,#c,α*} G JV, and I G AT
a dense subset of RC, then Epj Π N has order type AT Π ω\ hence for
unbounded many α G N Γ\Epίχ, the interval [α,min(E\(α + l))) is disjoint
3. 14 A Conclusion. PFA=> there is no α -club guessing on ω\. On the other
hand "Ax[α;-proper]-f there is a α -club guessing" is consistent, since starting
from a supercompact we can force Ax[u;-proper] with an u -proper iteration (see
V3.5). 
D3.π
3.15 Remark. The generalization to higher properness should be clear: for α
additively indecomposable, Ax[α-proper] is consistent with existence of (c(i) :
i < ω\ and α divides i } as in 3.12 only the order type of c(ϊ) is a (for a club of
i's), for it to be preserved we use c — (c(ΐ) : i < α i, and α devides i) such that
for every 7 the set {c(ϊ) Π 7 : i < ω\ divisible by a and 7 G C(ϊ)} is countable.

§4. A Largeness of Vωι in Forcing Extensions of L and Canonical Functions 
839
On the other hand Ax[α-proper] implies there is no (c(i) : ί < ω\, aω divides
i) such that: c(i) is a club of i of order type aω and for every club C of ω\ for
some i, c(i) C C.
§4. A Largeness of Ί>ωι in Forcing Extensions of
L and Canonical Functions
The existence of canonical functions is a "large cardinal property" of ω\, or
more precisely, of the filter Ί)ωι. For example, the statement "the α-th canonical
function exists for any α" will hold if Vωι is K2-saturated, and it implies that
the generic ultrapower V
ωι /Gq (see 3.2(3)) is well-founded. If we know only
that ω\ is a canonical function, we can conclude that the generic ultrapower is
well-founded at least below ω\.
It was shown by Jech and Powell [JePo] that the statement
 
uωι is a
canonical function" implies the consistency of various mildly large cardinals.
Jech and Shelah [JeSh:378] showed how to force the N2-th (or the 0
th, for any θ)
canonical function to exist (this is weaker than "ωi is a cannonical function").
After this paper Jech reasked me a question from [JePo]: "if the function ω\ is a
canonical function, does 0# exist?" We give here a negative answer. Our proof
which uses large cardinals whose existence is compatible with the axiom V = L,
is in the general style of this book: quite flexible iterations, quite specific to
preserving NI. We thank Menachem Magidor for many stimulating discussions
on the subject. Subsequently Magidor and Woodin find an equiconsistency
results with different method.
This section consists of two parts: First we define a large cardinal property (*)j^
and show (in 4.3)
Conf (3G) \V = L[G] + G C ωι is generic for a forcing in L + (3λ)(*) j l),
assuming the existence of 0^ or some suitable strong partition relation. Then
we show (in 4.6, 4.7) that (*)^ implies that there is a generic extension of the

840 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
universe in which ω\ is a λ-function, and make some remarks about possible
cardinal arithmetic in this extension.
We think that the proof of 4.6 is also interesting for its own sake, as it gives a
method for proving large cardinal properties of T>ωι from consistency assump-
tions below 0#.
4.1 Definition, λ ->+ («)μ
ω means that for every club C of λ and function F :
[\}
<ω -> μ there is X C C,otp(X) = K such that: uι,u^CX\j min(X), \uι\ =
\u2\ < NO, MI n mm(X) = u2Π mm(X) implies F(UI) = F(u2). Let λ -> (κ)<%
mean: if F : [\}
<ω -> λ, F(u) < min(uU{λ}), then for some X C λ, otp(X) = K
and Ff[X]
n constant for each n.
By the known analysis
4.2 Remark. 1) If λ is minimal such that λ —> (κ)μ
ω then λ —> (ft)<5\ and λ
is regular and 2^ < λ for θ < λ, from which it is easy to see λ —>+ (κ)μ
ω- Such
λ's are Erdδs cardinals, which for ft > ω\ implies the existence of 0# so implies
V 7^ L. But of course it has consequences in L.
2) Remember A^ = {b : 6 C A, \b\ = n}.
3) Of course μ > 2 is assumed.
4) λ —>+ (κ)μ
ω implies λ is regular, μ < λ, and λ —>+ (
κ)μ? f°
Γ any Mi < λ.
4.3 Claim. If in V: λ —>+ (^)«
ω and K is regular uncountable, (hence λ > 2
K)
then in y
Levy(No,<«0 an(j even in ^LβvyίNo^/c) (the constructible universe after
we force with the Levy collapse) (*)J is satisfied, where:
4.4 Definition. For λ an ordinal, (*)^ is the following postulate:
for any χ > 2
λ, and x G #(χ), there are ΛΓ0, Λ^i such that:
(a) Λf0, A^i are countable elementary submodels of (ίf(χ), G, <*)
(b) xeNo^Nί
(c) otp(7V0 Π λ) = otp(7V"ι Π ωι)
(d) in NI there is a subset of Levy(K0, ΛΓ0 Π ωι) generic over NQ.

§4. A Largeness of T>ωι in Forcing Extensions of L and Canonical Functions 
841
(e) The collapsing map / : NQ Π λ —» ω\ defined by f ( a ) = otp(7V"o Π α)
satisfies:
whenever u G N0, u C λ, \u\ < NI, then f\u G NI (note f\u is /ί(u(Ί7V0)).
Proof of 4..S. Straightforward: let G C Levy (No, < ft) be generic over V hence
it is also generic over L (note: Levy(N0, <ft)
y = Levy(N0, <κ)
L) It is also
easy to check that V[G\ |= "λ ->+ (tt)<
ω and even λ ->+ (ft)^" because
|Levy(N0, < κ)| < λ, see 4.2.
Let x > 2
λ, in L[G] and we shall find N0,Nι,f as required for L[G],x G
#(χ)
L'
G' (because L[G?] is the case we shall use, V[G] we leave to the reader).
In V we can find a strictly increasing sequence (α^ : i < K) of ordinals < λ,
indiscernible in (H(χ)
L^
G^ G, λ, G), each α$ G C* = {a < λ : a belongs to any
club of λ definable in (#(χ)
LI
Gl, G,λ,G)} (so each α4 is a cardinal in L[G]).
We define, by induction on n, in, </Vo,nj ^ι,n such that
(α) α; < in < in+ι < α i, ίn is limit, z0 = α;
(^) AΓ0,n is the Skolem Hull of {x} U {^ : i < in} in (H(χ)
L^
G\ G, λ, G)
(7) 7V1?n is the Skolem Hull of ΛΓ0,n U U{otp(#o,n Π λ) + 1} U {/n : u G 7V0,n is
a set of at most KI of ordinals < λ} where fu : u Π A^o,n ~~* ^2 is defined
by fu(a) = otp(7V0,n Π α) in the model (H(χ)
LM,e, λ, G).
(£) in+ι = otp(JVι,n Πα i).
There is no problem to do this. Let i^ = sup{in : n < ω}.
Finally let Λ^0 = Un<ω
ΛΓo,n and NI = \Jn<ωNιtn. Now N^NiJ are not
necessarily in L[G] but we now proceed to show that they satisfy requirements
(a)-(e) from (*)]v. Clauses (a) and (b) are clear, since the models TVo and NI
are unions of elementary chains and N% -< N^ and x G A^,n
Clearly NιίTL Π K is an initial segment of K (as V[G] \= K = NI), so A/"1>n n «
is an initial segment of -/Vι>n+ι Π «. Hence otp(AΓ! Π K) = sup{otp(A^ι)n Π K) :
n < ω} = sup{in : n < ω} = i^. Since {α^ : i < i^} C A^0 and the α^ are
strictly increasing, we have otp(AΓ0 Π λ) > otp{ia 
: a < \Jn<ωin} — *oo So
otp(AΓ0 Π λ) > otp(7Vι Π K).
For the converse inequality, note that 7Vo)Tlnλ is an initial segment of 7Vo,n.f i Πλ
(as the OLi are indiscernible and in C* and see Definition 4.1) so otp(7Vo Π λ) =

842 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
sup{otp(ΛΓo,n Π λ) : n < ω] < sup{otp(A/i,n+i Π ω\) : n < ω\] < otp(Nι
So (c) holds.
Next we have to check (d). Note that NQ is the Skolem Hull of {c^ : i < i^}.
Let δ = NQ Π ft; by the previous sentence also δ = 7Vo,n Π ft, and even NQΓ\LK =
7Vo,n Π Lκ. Let G = (Ga : α < ft), so (J Gα is a function from ω onto α. Define
Q = Levy(N0, ^ι)
N°, P - {JΠ Q : 7V0 μ "J is a dense subset of Q}". Now in
V[G], we see that Q is Levy(N0,5) and P is a countable family of subsets of
Q. Hence for some a < ft, Q and V belongs to V[(Gβ : β < a)]. Without loss
of generality α > 5, and a is divisible by δ x δ and without loss of generality
Oί G Nιtι (this is a minor change in the choice of the ΛΓ0)n, Λ/ι)n's). Define
/ : α — > 5 by /(5i + j) = j when j < 5, now / o (\J Gα) is a function from ω
onto ί, is generic over V[(Gβ : /? < α)] (for Levy(Ko,α)) hence is generic over
NQ and it belongs to Λ/i, so demand (d) holds (alternatively we can demand
(α^ : i < ft) G V and proceed from this.)
Finally clause (e) follows as Λ^o,n Π λ is an initial segment of TVo Π λ hence
defining / : NQ Π λ — > ft by f(a) = otp(No Π α), used in clause (e) we have:
for u e AΓ0jn, \u\ < NI, u C λ, we have u Π AΓ0jn = u Π AΓ0)n+1 = u Π NQ (by the
choice of the α^'s) and /u (defined is clause (7) above) is f\u (i.e. f\(u Π NQ))
which we have put in -/Vιjn+ι.
So NQ,NI,/ are as required except possibly not being in L[G], But the
statement that such models 7V0, NI exist is absolute between L[G] and V[G].
Π4.3
4.5 Claim. 0# implies that if N0 < K < λ (in V) then L
Lev^^<^ satisfies
Mi-
Proof. Left to the reader as it is similar to the proof of 4.3. 
D4.5
4.6 Main Lemma. If (*)^, λ = cf (λ) > NI, and 2^° = NI ίften for some forcing
notion P:
(i) P satisfies the b^-c.c and has cardinality (λ^
1)"
1".
(ii) P does not add new ω-sequences of ordinals.

§4. A Largeness of T>ωι in Forcing Extensions of L and Canonical Functions 
843
(iii) Ihp "α i (i.e. the function (ω\ \ a < ωι}) is a λ-function".
(iv) Ihp "2*
1 - |P| - [(λ
Kl)
+Γ' (so for μ > ^ we have
(v) in V
p, for large enough χ and x G H(χ) and stationary S C α i there
is a countable A/" -< (#(χ),G), x e N such that TV Π ω\ G 5 and
(V/ G ΛO[/ G #&/ G ^ωi =» (Ξα G λ Π TV) [TV Π ω, G eq(/tt,/)]],
where eq(/Q,, /) = {i < ω\ : fa(i) — f ( i ) } , and fa is an α-th function
(and (fa 
: a < λ) G N).
4.6A Remark, (a) Let us call a model N -X (#(χ),G,<*) "good" if (V/ G
N Π
 ωιωι)(3α G λ Π N) [N Π ωi G eq(/α,/)] (where / - (fa 
: a < λ) is as
above); note that this implies eq(/α, /) C ω\ is stationary.
Let, for x G -ff(χ),
Λ^x 1l
f { JV Π 2
Hl : TV is good and, x G TV}
Note Λ^x Π My — <M{Xίy}. So (v) can be rephrased as:
(v)' The family (Mx : x G H(χ)) is a base for a nontrivial filter on
<S<Kl(2
Hl) (i.e. on the Boolean algebra (5<Nl(2
Kl)).)
(b) Note that 4.6(ii) implies IhpCH, and (i) and (ii) together imply that P
does not change any cofinalities.
(c) 4.6(v) implies almost 4. 6 (iii): for some β < λ, {c^i : a < ω\) is a β-th
function.
Proof of (c). Let / : ω\ — » Ord, 5 — {i : /(i) < α i} is stationary, and assume
that for all a < X and α-th function fa the set eq(/, /α) Π S is nonstationary
(if there is such a fa) say disjoint to the club set Ca. Let N be a model as
in (v) containing all relevant information. Let δ = N Π ω\ so δ G S. Then for
some a € N we have 5 G eq(/, /α) Π 5 where /α G TV is an α-th function. But
as α G AT we also have δ G Cα, a contradiction.
4.7 Conclusion. 1) If in V we have λ ->+ (κ)<
ω (or just 0# G V, N0 < « < λ
are cardinals in V or just V = L
Levy(
No><Ό and V f= (*)];), #*en in some generic

844 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
extension V
p of L, 2
H° = K = N]' and 2
μ = λ+ when /ς < μ < λ, 2^ - μ+
when μ > X and cji is a λ-th function (and (v) of 4.6).
2) We can, in the proof of 4.6 below, have α* = 7 if cf (7) > λ, 7 divisible by
|7| and |7| = ^l^
1 (just more care in bookkeeping) so Ihp "2
Kl = |7|" is also
possible.
3) If e.g. (1) above, and we let Q - Levy(N2,λ+)
yP then in V
P*
Q we have
2*° = HI, 2
Hl = N2 (and conditions (iϋ)+(v) from 4.6 hold but λ is no longer
a cardinal) and V
p ', y
p*^ has the same functions from ω\ to the ordinals.
4) We can have in 4.6(1), that V
p satisfies 2
μ = λ for μ G [«, λ) and 2
Hl = λ
(and 2
μ — μ+ when μ > X and u i is a λ-th function).
We shall prove 4.7 later.
Proof of Lemma 4.6. We use a countable support iteration Q = (Pa, Qβ ' & <
α*,β < α*), such that:
(1) α* = (λ^)+
(2) if β < λ, then Qβ is adding a function f£ : ω\ — > ωi :
Q/5 = {/ : for some non-limit countable ordinal i < ω\,
f is a function from i to
order: inclusion.
(3) if β = λ 4- λβi -f $2 where βi < βz < X then Q/5 is shooting a club to
on which /^ is smaller than /^2 :
Q^ = {α : for some i < ω\, a is a function from {j : j < i} to {0, 1}
such that: { j < i : a(j) = 1} is a closed subset of sm(/^, /^2)
where s m ( f , g )
 
d= {i < ωι : f(ί) < g(i)},
order: inclusion.
(4) if β < (λ
Hl)
+, β > λ
2 and for some g, A and 7 < β and p we have

§4. A Largeness of T>ωι in Forcing Extensions of L and Canonical Functions 
845
®σ A 7 p 
3 ιs a P-γ-name of a function from ω\ to u i, A is a P7-name of a
subset of ωι and p e Pβ:
p \\-pβ "A is a stationary subset of α i, but for no α < λ,
is eq[#, /QJ] Π ^4 stationary"
then for some such (^,^,7^,^), with minimal 7/3, the forcing notion
Qβ is killing the stationarity of Aβ, that is: Qβ = {a : for some i < α i, α is
a function from {j : j < i} to {0,1} and {j : j <i and a(j) = 1} is closed
and if p£ G GP^ then α is disjoint to A*β}
order: inclusion
(5) if no previous case applies let Aβ = 0,7/3 = 0,0/3 = Oωι, and define Q/? as
in (4).
There are no problems in defining Q. Let P = P(λ«1)+.
Explanation. We start by forcing the /α's, which are the witnesses for the
desired conclusion and then forcing the easy condition: fa < fβ mod Ί)ωι for
α < β < λ. Then we start killing undesirable stationary sets. Note that given
/ G V
Pί, maybe in F
Pί we have S = {a < λ : eq[/,/α] is stationary in V
Pί}
has cardinality λ, and increasing i it decreases slowly until it becomes empty,
so it is natural to use iteration of length of cofinality > λ e.g. λ^
1 x λ+ (ordinal
multiplication) is O.K. The problem is proving e.g. that NI is not collapsed.
Continuation of the proof oj 4.6.
The main point is to prove by simultaneous induction that for α < (λ
Hl)
+
the conditions (a)a — (e)a listed below hold:
(a)a forcing with Pa adds no new α -sequences of ordinals.
(b)a Pa satisfies ^2-c.c.
(c)α the set Pa of p G Pa such that each p(β) is an actual function (not just a
P^-name) is dense.

846 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
Before we proceed to define (d)a, note that for each β < a (using the
induction hypothesis),
\\-pβ "CH and \Qβ\ = NI and Qβ is a subset of
H = {h : h G V is a function from some ί < ω\ to ω\\ G V
ordered by inclusion".
So (as Pβ satisfies the N2-c.c.), the name Qβ can be represented by NI maximal
antichains of Pβ : ((Pζ^ '• ζ < ^i) : h G if), i.e. for each ζ < ωiιPζjh forces
h G Qβ or forces ft ^ Q/?. So, u£ = \J^£ Dom(p^) is a subset of β of cardinality
< NI (all done in V). We may increase u*β as long as it is a subset of β of
cardinality < N x. W.l.o.g. p£h G P£.
Call u C α closed (more exactly Q-closed) if /? G u implies: u*β C u and
g'βiAβ are names represented by KI maximal antichains C P^ with union of
domains C u*β and Dom(p^) C u*β. W.l.o.g. each u£ is closed. For a closed
u C α we define Pu by induction on sup(u) : let Pu = {p G Pα: Dom(p) C u
and for each β G Dom(p),p(/3) is a Pnn/3-name}. Let P^ = Pu Π P
f
a. Lastly let
(d)a Pu <$ Pa for every closed u C α; moreover
(e)a if it C α is closed, p G P^ then:
(1) pfu G P^ C P^ and
(2) pfiz < g G P^ implies q U [pf (Dom(p) \ u)} is a least upper bound of
P,g(inP^).
Of course the induction is divided to cases (but (α)α is proved separately).
Note that (e)α ==»(d)α.
Case A: α = 0 Trivial
Case B: a = β + 1, proof of (6)β, (c)α, (d)α, (e)α.
So we know that (ά)β — (e)β holds. By (d)β (as noted above), Qβ has power
NI. So we know P^ satisfies N2-c.c., and lhP/9 "Qβ satisfies the K2-c.c." hence
Pα satisfies the H2-c.c., i.e. (b)a holds.
If p G Pα, then p(/3) is a countable subset of ω\ x ωi from F
p/3, hence by
(α)^ for some / G V and q we have p\β < q G Pβ and ς lhP^
 
αp(/3) = /". By

§4. A Largeness of T>ωι in Forcing Extensions of L and Canonical Functions 
847
(c)0 w.l.o.g. q is in P'β. So q U {{/?,/>} is in Pα, is > p and is in P^; so (c)α
holds.
As for (d)α and (e)α, if p G P«, we can observe (e)α(l) which says:
"p\u G Pu C Pα". [Why? lϊ β φ u, it is easy, so assume β e u; now just
note that pΓ(/3 Π u) G P^πn <> -Pα by the induction hypothesis, now p\β \\-Pβ
"p(β) £ Qβ\ but Q0 is a P^nn-name, P^ <> P^ (as u is closed and the
induction hypothesis), so by (d)β we have (p\u)\β lhPwn/3 "p(β) 
G Qβ
n\ so
ptu G PQ, and as Dom(pfu) C u we have p\u 6 Pu.]
Next (e)α(2) follows (check) and then (d)α, (e)a follows.
Case C: α limit cf(α) > N0, proof of (6)α, (c)α, (d)α, (e)α.
Clearly Pα = U/3<α ^ (as the iteration is with countable support), hence
(c)α follows immediately; from (c)α clearly (6)α is very easy [use a Δ-system
argument, and CH], and clause (e)α also follows hence (d)α.
Case D: a is limit cf (α) = NO, proof of (6)α, (c)α, (d)α, (e)α.
As in Case (C), it is enough to prove (c)α. So let p e Pα. Let χ be
regular large enough; TVo -< NI be a pair of countable elementary submodels of
(ff (χ), G, <*) to which Q, α, λ,p belongs, satisfying (a)-(e) of (*)\ in Def 4.4.
We can find an ω-sequence (um : m < ω) such that:
(i) each um is a member of TVo, and is a bounded subset of α of power
< NI which is closed for Q\a
(ii) um C um+ι
(iii) if u G A^o is a bounded subset of a of power < NI closed for Q Γα ίΛen
for some m we have u C um.
There is no problem to choose such a sequence as the family of such n's is
directed and countable. Let (Im : m < ω) be a list of the dense open subsets
of Pα which belong to NQ.
Note that in general, neither (um : m < ω) nor (Jm : m < ω) are in Λ/I.
Let ί
 d^
f TVo Π ωi and note that δ € NI. Let R be LevyίNo,^)^, the ω-
th power of Levy(N0,5) with finite support, so R is isomorphic to Levy(No,5)
and it (and such isomorphisms) belongs to NI so there is G* G NI, a (directed)
subset of R, generic over N0. Note that from the point of view of TVo, Levy(N0, δ)
is Levy(N0,N!) hence ((Levy(N0,Nι)Γ)
No = (Levy(N0, <*))", so G* is an ^o-

848 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
generic subset of (Levy(N0)Nι)
ω)
No Let G* = (G| : I < ω). Note that
N0[G*} N ZFC- 
and ΛΓ0[G*] C NI.
By the induction hypothesis PUm <£ PUτn+ι <$ P(supum+ι)+ι ^ -Pα f°
r every
m. Now we choose by induction on m < ω,pm and Gm C Pα Π NQ such that:
P<Pm <Pm+l,
Jm n NQ
G Gm
Gm C ΛΓ0 Π P^m is generic over Λ^0
U Gic Gm,
^<m
Gm G 7Vχ, moreover Gm € N0[(GJ : £ < m)].
Why is this possible? Arriving to m(> 0) we have P^m_1 <£ Pα, ^m-i £
Pύrn_l Π JVo is generic for Λ^o, we can choose pm as required (pm G Xm Π NQ
and pm_ι < pm and pmίum_ι G Gm_ι). Also P'Urn = PUm Π P'a belongs to
TVo, (as Q,P^, and um belongs), now it has cardinality HI (and of course all
its members are in V as well as itself), so some list (r^
m : ζ < ω\) of the
members of P'Ujn of length ω\ belongs to NQ. So as 6 = NQ Π ω\ G Λ/Ί, clearly
P^m Π A^o = {r^
m : C < ^} belongs to A/Ί and N\ "know" that it is countable.
As G^ is a subset of Levy(N0, ^1)^° = Levy(K0, ^)N0[(Gί:έ<m)]9 
generic
over NQ[(G£ 
: t < m)} there is in N[(G| : ί < m>] a subset of P^m Π 7V0 generic
for {Z : Z G 7Vo[Gm_ι] and T C P^ and Z is dense in Pn} extending Gm_ι.
So in A/i and even AΓ0[(G| : ^ < m)] we can find Gm C PUrn Π 7V0 generic over
NQ with pm tum G Gm and Gm_ι C Gm.
Note: as PUrn <> Pum+i we succeeded to take care of "Gm C Gm+ι". Let
G = (Jm Gm, J — NQ Π ωi. We define q — qo, a function with domain α Π NQ:
for β e UmΓϊNQ let
</£r(/3) — Ui
r(^) : f°
r some m < ω we have r G Gm and r(/3) is an actual
(function not just a P^-name) }
qG(β) is: ^(/?)U{{5, otp(7V0n^)}} if β < λ, and q'G(β}Ό {((5,1)} if ^ > λ.
Clearly g is a function with domain αΠ7V0, each q(β) a function from <5-f 1
to ω\. (Here we use the induction hypothesis (c)^.)

§4. A Largeness of Vωι in Forcing Extensions of L and Canonical Functions 
849
If q G Pa then we will have q G P'a and q is a least upper bound of
Uτn<cj Gm and of {pm 
i 771 < ω}. Hence in particular q > p thus finishing the
proof of (c)α, hence (as said above) of the present case (Case D). Now we shall
show:
® Q Nm £ NI for each m < ω
Clearly ς£?Γ
wm € Λ/i as Gm G N! (and P'Um G NI), hence to prove
<g> we have to show that {(β,(qc(β))(S)) 
'• β G um} belongs to NI. Now
{(β, (q(β)W)) 
β £ umπN0\λ} is {<£ i) : β G umnN0\λ} - (umnN0\λ)χ{i}
belongs to NI as um G N0 -< NI and as said earlier, as TVo Π ω\ G N^
NQ N |u0| < KI we have um Γ\ NQ G A^i and λ G NQ -< Λ/Ί. Next the set
{(/3,g(/3)(ί)} : /? G um Π 7V*o Π λ} is exactly /fu m, where / is the function from
4.4(e).
So by Claim 4.8 below we finish.
Case E: α nonzero, proof of (α)^.
So by cases (B), (C), (D) we know that (6)α, (c)α, (d)α, (e)α holds.
Now we imitate the proof of Case (D) except that in (i) and (iii) we omit
the "bounded in α". So now PUrn <£ Pα" is justified not by "(c)β for β < α"
but by (c)α + (d)a. We can finish now, by using again 4.8.
4.8 Claim. If
(a) 7V0 ^< NI 
-< (if(χ),G,<*) are countable, Q is as in the proof of 4.6,
Q G JV0,
α = ^δ(O)
 G NO, 5 = AΓ0 Π ωι, otp(λ Π ΛΓ0) = otp(JVι Π α i), and
part (d) of (*)]; of Definition 4.4 holds.
(b) G CPanNQ,G is directed,
(c) there is a family Z7 such that:
(a) iϊ u e U then n G NO, u C o; is closed (for Q i.e. α G u =Φ u* C u) of
power < ^i,
(β) (Ji
u ' ueU} = N0Γ}a,U is directed (by C) and if u G NQ is closed
(for Q) bounded subset of α of cardinality < NI then u G U.
(7) if u G U then G Π Pu is generic over NO
(δ) if u G £7 then G Π Pu G NI

850 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
(d) q — qc is defined as in case D of the proof of 4.6 above, i.e. Dom(g) =
and
q'(β) — U{
r(β) f°
Γ some u £ U , r G Gm, r(/J) an actual function}.
q(β) is: ?'(/?) U {{5, otp(JV0 Π £)}} if β < λ, <?'(£) U {{ί, 1)} otherwise.
Then
(i) q is in Pα (and even in P^)
(ii) q G P^ is a least upper bound of G.
Proof. We prove by induction on β G AΓ0 Π α that <?|7? G Pα (hence G P^).
This easily suffices.
TVoίe. if u G TVo is closed and C u
7 G U then we can add it to U.
Case 1: /? = 0, or β is limit. Trivial.
Case 2: /3 = 7 + 1, 7 < λ. Check.
Case 3: /3 = 7 + l,/3> λ.
We should prove q\j \\-pΊ
 
uq(y) G Q7". Recall that u* is the subset of 7
(of size NI) which was needed for the antichains defining Q7, and ί = ΛΓo Πωi.
Clearly u* and u* U {7} belongs to U (being closed bounded and in NQ). As
G Π Pu*u{-γ} is generic over JV0, clearly
q\Ί "~P^ "^(7) is a function from 5-1-1 to α i, such that
for every non limit ζ < δ we have 4(7) \ζ G Q7" .
Noting (^(7)) tC, where C < ^j is of the right form; and 7 > λ ^>
(ς'(7))~
1({l}) is closed and by the choice of q ( j ) ( δ ) , clearly it is enough to
prove that:
<8>α if λ < β < λ
2 and β = X + \βι 4- /32,/?ι < βi < λ
thenq\β\\-Pβ
 
uf^(δ) < f^(δ)
n
(8)b if λ
2 < β < tg(Q) then q\β Ih "p^ e GQβ =ϊ δ £ A*β
n .
Now ®α holds as ς' \\~PQ "(/*(5) : 7 G NQ Π α) is strictly increasing" (just
see how we have defined qc(l) in clause (d) of 4.8 above).
So let us prove (8V, remember Qβ is a Pn*-name and (i^ being closed)
Aβ,g*β are Pu* -names, p*β G AΓ0 Π P^. If gΓu£ Ih "ί ^ Aβ or p^ ^ ^PU*" we

§4. A Largeness of T>ωι in Forcing Extensions of L and Canonical Functions 
851
finish. Otherwise there is r, q\u^ < r G Pu* and r Ih "δ G Aβ & p^ G Gp^";
w.l.o.g. r G P^*. AsG\Pu* G A^i by the proof of (g> in 4.6, case D (near the end),
also q\u*β G 7VΊ, and remembering β e NQ => Pβ e NQ and £ G NI, and Pn*,
P^* G NI and A/?, p£ G NI, clearly w.l.o.g. r £ NI. As β € N^g*β £ NQ C NI is
aPn*-name and δ G Λ/Ί, w.l.o.g. r forces a value to #£(£), say Ih "g*β(δ) = £(*)".
Now £(*) G NI hence £(*) < otp(7Vι Π ωι) < otp (NQ Π λ) (here we are
finally using 4.4(c)), hence there is 7 G λ Π NQ such that £(*) = otp(7Vo Π 7).
But now (see definition of Qβ) we have r \\-pβ "e<?[<7J3,/7] Π Aβ is not
stationary, so it is disjoint to some club C^ of ω\
n where C*β is a P/3-name and
w.l.o.g. C* G NQ.
[Why? As gβ,fj,Aβ 
G AΓ0 there is a P/3-name C*β such that lhP/3 " if
eq[<7|, f * ] Π A^ is not a stationary subset of ω\ then C£ is a club of α i disjoint
to this intersection, otherwise C£ = ωι"}.
So Ih "(70 is a club of α i". By the induction hypothesis for β (in particular
(b)β from the proof of 4.6 which says that Pβ satisfies the ^2-c.c.)' f°
Γ some
Q-closed bounded u C /?, |u| < HI, u G AΓ0 and C^ is a Pn-name.
By the induction hypothesis q\β G P^; now by the construction of
4, q \β ^Pβ "C*β Π δ is unbounded in 5" hence (ςr f/3) U r [i.e. r U (ς \(β Π Dom(^) \
u^))] is in P^, is an upper bound of q\β and r and it forces 5 G C^, hence 5 G
eQ[dβjf^] 
=> δ £ A*β. But the antecedent holds by the choice of r, 7 and £(*).
So we finish the proof. 
U4.8
Continuation of the proof of 4.6: So we have to check if conditions (i)-(v) of
4.6 hold for P = Pα*. Now (i) holds by (6)α* + (c)α* (α* is the length of the
iteration- (λ
Nl)+); condition (ii) holds by (α)α*. Condition (iii) should be clear
from the way Qα(λ < a < α*) were defined (see the explanation after the
definition of Qa). Prove by induction on 7 < λ"
1" that
(*)7 if g is a P7-name of a function from ω\ to α i, A is a P7-name of a subset
of ω\ and p* G P7 then:
if p* Ih " for every α < λ the set AΓιeq(g, fa) is not stationary subset
of α i"
thenp* Ih "A C ω\ is not stationary".

852 
XVII. Forcing Axioms
Arriving to 7 let ( ( g ζ , A ζ , p ς ) 
: ζ < λ) list the set of such triples (their
number is < λ as |P7| < λ = λ
Hl and PΊ satisfies K2-c.c. and the list includes
such triples for smaller 7*3). For each ζ we can find a club Eζ of λ+ such that:
if α < β e Eζ, then for some Pβ-name Ca,Aζ,9ζ we have
lhpλ+ "if Aζ Π eq(gζ, /α) is not stationary
then it is disjoint to CΌ:,Aζ,0ζ"
ll~pλ+ "Ca,Aζίgζ is a club of ωι".
For any δ £ ΠC<A ^C which has cofinality > HI, we ask whether when choosing
(gβ,Aβ,jβ,pβ) do we have a candidate (#, A,y,p) as in <8)p,A,y> V < 7
If for every such 5 the answer is no, we have proved (*); if yes, we get easy
contradiction.
For finishing the proof of condition (iii) note that we can let f\(ϊ) — ω\,
and prove by induction on α < λ that /α, is an α'th function as follows:
β < a < λ => fβ <T)^ fa (see Qλ+λ/3+α's definition) and if S C ωι, f G
 ωιωι,
S Π eq(/, /α) not stationary for every a < X we get S is not stationary by the
definition of Qβ (for β G [λ
2, α*)) so if g <τ>ωλ fa then for every β G [α, λ) the
set eq[#, fβ] is not stationary and compare the definition of the o 'th function
and the definition of the forcing condition).
Lastly clause (iv) of 4.6 holds as a* = (λ^
1)*, each Qa has cardinality HI,
and Pa* is a dense subset of Pα*. Finally, condition (v) follows from 4.8.
Π4.6
4.9. Proof of 4.7. l)By 4.3, (*)λ holds in lLevy(K0,</0 and λ is regular hence
λ*ι - λ. By 4.6 we can define a forcing notion P in L
Levy^
<κ\\P\ =
[λ+]L[Levy(No,<κ)] = λ+ ag required.
2) Iterate as above for α* with careful bookkeeping.
3) Left to the reader.
4) Lastly over V
p force with Levy(λ, λ+) such that 2*
1 = λ. 
D4.7

§4. A Largeness of 'Dωι in Forcing Extensions of L and Canonical Functions 
853
4.10 Discussion. 1) Can we omit the Levy collapse of λ"
1" in the proof of
4.7(4) and still get 2*
1 = λ (and (ωι : i < ωι) is the λ-th function)? Yes, if we
strengthen suitably (*)];. (e.g. saying a little more than there is a stationary
set of such λ' < λ, (*)v)
2) In 4.6 we can add e.g. that in F
p, Ar[proper of cardinality KI not adding
reals as in XVIII §2]. We have to combine the two proofs.
3) Suppose V \= "(*)\", and for simplicity, V |= "G.C.H., λ is regular -<(3μ)[λ =
μ+ & μ > cfμ < NI]". (E.g. lLevy(K0,</0 when Q# exists, K is a cardinal of
V.) For some forcing notion P, |P| = λ
+, and in V
p we have: ω\ is an ω3-
th function, Ihp "Ni - NJ^Na = (N 2)
V,N 3 = λ, N4 = (λ+)
y and CH and
2^ι = N4", (so we can then force by Levy(H3, H4) and get 2
Kl = H3).
Proof. 3) Let R — Levy(K2, < λ), R is N2-complete and satisfies the λ-c.c. and
\R\ = λ, so forcing by R adds no new α i-sequences of ordinals, make λ to N3.
Let P^* be the one from 4.6 (or 4.7(2)). As R is K2-complete, also in V
R we
have: P^* satisfies the ^2-c.c., and P^* has the same set of maximal antichains
as in V. So the family of P^-name of a subset of ω\ (or a function from ω\ to
ωι) is the same in V and V
R. So clearly P£* x R is as required. 
^4.10
Problem. Is ZFC + "0 is an α-th function for some a (for D^)" 4- -Ό
#
consistent? For θ G {^i, N^i) °r any preassumed 0? (Which will be < 2
Nl.)

XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
§0. Introduction
From the last eight chapters you may have gotten the impression that we are
done with properness, but this is not so. First, we turn to the problem of
not adding reals; remember that by V §7, VIII §4, for CS iterations of proper
forcing notions not adding reals, the limit does not add reals, provided that
two additional conditions hold: one is D-completeness (for, say, a simple 2-
completeness system) and the second is (< ω\)-properness (see V §2). Now,
the first restriction is justified by the weak diamond (see V 5.1, 5.1A and AP
§1); that is not to say that we have to demand exactly D-completeness, but
certainly we have to demand something in this direction. However, there was
nothing there to justify the second demand: α-proper for every α. In the first
section, (following [Sh:177]), we show that we cannot just omit it, even if we
use an HI-completeness system. It is natural to hope that this counterexample
will lead to a principle like the weak diamond (so provable from CH). Thus
the construction of this counterexample leads to questions like: Assuming CH,
can we find (C$ : δ < ωι), C$ an unbounded subset of ί, say of order type ω,
such that for every club E of ωi, for stationarily many limit 6 < (Ji, C§ C E or
δ = sup(Cδ Π E) or (Vα G δ)[mm(E \ α) < mm(Cδ \ (a + 1)]? (They are kin to
"the guessing clubs", the existence of which for, e.g. ^2, follows from ZFC, see
[Sh:g].) It interests us as the theorems (and proofs) from V, VIII §4 do not give

§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample and New Questions 
855
us the consistency of their negation with CH. However, those statements do not
follow from ZFC 4- CH; for this we prove in the second section a preservation
theorem for CS iterations of proper forcing not adding reals. Again we have two
conditions (called there (4)2 or (4)κ0 and (5)). The first, (4)2, is done "against"
the weak diamond, and is weaker than the older D-completeness, but this is
just a side gain. The second condition says our forcing remains proper even if
we force with "forcing notion from our family, in particular not adding reals".
Note that for forcing notions of cardinality HI, this is a very mild condition.
Sp, the results of §1 remain the only restrictions on theorems on preservation
by CS iteration, and there is a gap between them and the results of §2.
Then, in the third section we turn to other preservation theorems, giving an
alternative to the theorem from VI §1 - §3, and dealing with some examples.
(For a simplification of possibility A in 3.3, see [Go]).
Finally, in the fourth section we turn to the problem of a unique P-point. In
VI §4 we have proved that there may be no P-point; remember, a P-point
F is a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω such that if An G F for n < ω then for
some A € F we have f\n A Cae An (A Cae An means A \ An is finite). Now,
to prove the consistency of "there is a unique object" is typically harder then
proving there is no one. Unique here means up to permutations of ω. In VI §5
we have proved a weaker result: there may be a unique Ramsey ultrafilter, but
there could have been many P-points above it which were not isomorphic. We
continue this and prove the consistency of "there is a unique P-point".
§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample
and New Questions
1.1 Lemma. Suppose V satisfies 2
N° = Nι,2
Nl = N2) and for some A C ωi,
every B C ω\ belongs to L[A] and for limit δ < ω^
L δ [ A Γ \ δ ] h Discountable".

856 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Then we can define a countable support iteration Q = (Pi,Qi : i < ί*) such
that the following conditions hold:
(a) Each Qi is proper and Ihp. "Q; has power NI".
(b) Each Qi is D-complete for some simple NI-completeness system D
(hence does not add reals).
(c) Forcing with P^ = LimQ adds reals.
Proof. We shall define Qi by induction on i < i*, i* < ω
2, so that conditions
(a) and (b) are satisfied, and Ci is a Q^-name of a closed unbounded subset
of ω\. Let (/| : ξ < ωι) G L[A] be a list of all functions / which are from
δ to δ for some limit δ < ω\^ and let h : u i —> ωi, ft G I/[A], be defined by
Λ(α) = Min{/3 : /? > α and /^[A Π α] h "|α = K0"}
Suppose we have defined Qj for every j < i] then Pi is defined, is proper
(as each Qj, j < i, is proper, and III 3.2) and has a dense subset of power HI
(by III 4.1). Let Gi C P^ be generic, so, clearly, there is a Bi C ωi such that in
V[C?i], every subset of ω\ belongs to L[A, S^]. The following now follows:
1.1A Fact. In V[Gi], every countable AT -< (H(#2),e,A,Bi) is isomorphic to
Lβ[A Πδ.BiΠ δ] for some β < h(δ), where 5 - δ(N)
 d= ωλ Π N.
We shall assume also that V[Gi] has the same reals as V (otherwise we
already have an example).
We now define by induction on α < u>ι, a set Ta = T^ such that the
following conditions are satisfied:
(i) Each / G Ta is the characteristic function of a closed subset of some
successor ordinal β < α, i.e., Dom(/) = /3, and /"
1({1}) is a closed subset
of β and is included in the set of accumulation points of Γ\j<i ^r If 7 < #j
then TΊCTa.
(ii) If / G Γα,7 + 1 < Dom(/), then f\(Ί + 1) G Tα, and even /f(7 4-1) 6 T/3
for 7 + 1 < /3 < α.

§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample and New Questions 
857
(iii) If / G Tα, Dom(/) = /?, /3 < 7 < α, 7 a successor, then /' = /UO^) G
i.e., Dom(/
/) = 7, and
// 
_//(£), </*<&
(iv) If /, 0 G Γα, /(/?) ^ 0(/3), then f~
l({l}) Π ^({l}) \ β is finite.
(v) If / G Tα, 7 > β = Dom(/), 7 + 1 < α, 7 is an accumulation point of
f| <i Cj and the order type of f~
l({I}) has the form ξ + 2 or is > 0 and
< ω, then /
; = / U 0[/3>7) U {(7, 1)} e Ta.
(vi) If / G Tα, ί 4- 1 = Dom(/), 5 limit, and /(β) = 1 for arbitrarily large
β < δ, then Min{£ : f\δ = f £ } is larger than Min{£ : 5 < ξ G C^ } (for
3 < 0-
(vii) If J -f 1 < α, 5 is an accumulation point of Γ\j<iCj, ξ* < ^i, and
/ G T<5 Π L^^ Π ί], ίften there is a g G Γα, 5 + 1 = Dom(^), such that for
every J G Lh($)[AΓ\δ, BiΓ\δ] (an open dense subset oίTsC\Ls[AΓ\δ] (ordered
by inclusion)), for some 7 < δ we have g\^y G J and g\δ £ {/£ : ξ < ξ*}
and / = #fDom(/).
(viii) For / G Γα, if ί = sup(5 Π fl 
( { ! } ) ) (hence f ( δ ) = 1), δ < β, and
f ( β ) = 1, then for every j < i, for some 7 < /?, the characteristic
function of C^ restricted to δ is /*; and if 5, / f j and /3 satisfy this then
f\(δ + 1) U 0[ff+ι>/3) U l[/3,/3+i) belongs to ϊ>+2
Let us carry the induction.
. a is limit, or a = 7 + 1, 7 limit. Let Ta = \Jβ<a Tβ or Ta - \Jβ<Ί Tβ.
Case B. a < ω. Let Ta = {/ : / a function from β < a to {0}}.
Case C. α = /3 + 3>α;. LetTα = Γ/9+2U{/:Dom(/) = /J + 2,/Γ(/3 + l) G 7>+2,
provided that (viii) is satisfied }.
Case D. a = δ + 2, 5 limit, ί G ace Πj<i^j 
(
acc~ denotes the set of
accumulation points). This is the main case. Let {// : i < ω} be a list of
TS Π LS [A Π ί], each appearing NO times, and {J^
1 
: I < ω} be & list of
all open dense subsets J of (T$ Π L§[A Π ί],C) which satisfy: J belongs to

858 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Lh(δ}(A Π δ, Bi Π δ] or J = {/ e Tδ n L5[A Π 5] : / £ /£} for some ξ <
We now define by induction on n < ω, an ordinal βn = β%
a < δ and a finite
set Fn = F%
a C{f eTδnLδ[Anδ]:βn = Dom(/)} such that
if n > 1, (V/,0 € Fn) (f\βn-ι ί g\βn-ι => /"'({I}) n ^({l}) C ^.^ .
Subcase a. If n = 0 mod 3, then /3n+1 = βn + 1 and Fn+ι = {/ U {(/3n,0)} :
/ G Fn}; and if n = 0, then Fn = 0 and /3n = 0.
/?. If n = 1 mod 3, then /3n+1 - βn -f 1; let /^ - /fn-i)/3 and
/?; - Dom(/fn_1)/3) if Dom(/fn_1)/3) is < /?n, and let /; = 0, /£ = 0 otherwise;
now let
= {/ U 0[^n A+l) : / G Fn} U {/; U 0^ι/3n+l)}.
Subcase 7. If n = 2 mod 3, (n - 2)/3 = m
2 4- fc, fc < 2m, then every / G Fn+ι
belongs to jT/c = J^
1 Note that we have to take care to satisfy (*); hence let"!"
Fn = {ft : I < |Fn|}, and define /3^
n for ί < \Fn\ and ^ for ί < \Fn\ by
induction on ί : βfi = βn\ if β? is defined, choose ^, f£ U 0^,^] C ^ e Jfc,
and /3^+1 - Dom(^). Now let
Note that only in Subcase 7, do we have a free choice, and we eliminate
it by choosing the first candidate for Fn_j_ι by the canonical well-ordering of
L[A, Bi], and we also require that (J^ : t < ω) be the first such sequence in
the canonical well ordering of L$[A Π 5, Bi Π δ]. So we have finished defining the
Fn's and we let
Tδ+2 = Tδu{f :Dom(/) = δ + 1 and : either / = /' U 0[7>ff+i),
where /
; E T$, 7 = Dom(/') or for some fc < α;,
T Of course, we suppress the dependency of βn,ff,o^,gf 
on δ and i.

§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample and New Questions 
859
It is easy to check that that T§+2 is as required. (Case β in the definition
of Fn enables us to satisfy demand (vii)).
Case E. a = δ + 2, δ limit, δ φ ace (f|j<z
 cj) 
- Let Ta=Tδ(j{f 
: Dom(/) =
5 + 1, (30 G Γ*)[g C / & /r((<S 4- 1) \ Dom(0)) is zero ]}.
So we have defined Ta = T^ for α < ωi, and let Qi G V[Gi] be Uα<α;1
 Ta
ordered by inclusion; and it is easy to see that Qi is as required (in (a) and (b)
of 1.1). Let Ci = \J{Γ
1({1}) ' f e GQJ, so Ihg. "C; is a club of oV'.
So Q = (Pi,Qi : i < ω
2) is defined, and it is easy to see that we can
replace (in V[Gi]) B{ by C
i = (Cj : j < ί). Let G C Pω2 be generic, and
Ci the interpretation of CV Let fa be the characteristic function of Q, and
C = Πi<u,2 Ci, and {α^ : ζ < ω\} an enumeration of C (in increasing order).
We shall suppose that forcing by Pω? does not add reals, and shall deduce that
(fi'.i< ω
2) G F, which is clearly false, as lhQo "C0 i F".
By the assumption the sequence (fi\a^ 
: i < ω
2) belongs to F, and we
shall show how to compute (fi\aζ 
: i < ω
2) for every ζ, by induction on C; as
the computation is done in V we get the desired contradiction. More formally,
there is a function F in V such that
(/itαc+i : i < ω
2) = F[(fi\a( 
: i < ω
2}].
So suppose {/j \otζ : i < ω
2) is given, and let, for i < ω
2:
βi
 d^
f Min (d \ (αc + 1)), 
&
By demand (i) in the definition of the Γ^'s C» C ace (flj<t
 cj) 
- So clearly
βj < βi, for j < i and βi G Cj for j < i. Also by demand (vi) on the Γ^'s,
βj < ξi for j < i, and by demand (viii) on the T^'s ξj < βi for j < i. We
can conclude that Sup{/?i : i < ωn} — Sup{^ : i < ωn} for all n G ω;
but from (fi\aζ 
: i < ω
2) we can compute 7n ^f Sup{ξi : i < ωn}. As
/?i G Cj for j < i, 7n G Cj when j < ωn, and clearly 7n < 7n+ι, so we have
7 = Un<ω Tn ^ Πj<α;
2 ^ By the definition of the αc's, 7 = αc+ι. As we know
Γ° Π L<y[A], and we know {7™ : n < ω} C Co; /o Γ7 is uniquely determined (by

860 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
demand (iv)). Similarly we continue to reconstruct fa \*γ by induction on i < ω
2
(see end of Case D in the construction - the canonical choice), thus finishing
the proof. 
DI.I
1.2 Remark. The ω
2 in 1.1. is best possible.
1.3 Lemma. (1) Fixing (/* : a < ωi), a list of F = {f 
: f 
: (0 + 1) -*
{0,1}, /~
1({1}), closed, β < ω\(f G V, of course) } ( so we are assuming CH)
and h : ω\ —> α i, we can repeat the construction in the proof of 1.1 (omitting
the assumption on A), and its conclusion holds provided that
(*)ι (α) if x is large enough, T C {f*\r. 7 < ωι,a < α i}, T G N -< (#(χ),G,
<*), N countable, J G N a dense subset of (Γ, C), then J Π N G {J/ 
:
I < h(δ)} where δ = ωι Π N, and {j| : £ < α i} is a list of all subsets of
{Ί«\Ί'-Ί,<*<$}•
(β) moreover, after CS iteration of length i < ω
2 of forcing notions of this
form ((T, C)), giving generic sets G j ( j < i), (a) continues to hold with
{Jι : t < h(δ)} replaced with the family of subsets of {/*ί7 : 7,α < δ}
definable in (δ U {/* \Ί : 7, α < δ} U {(7, α, JJ): Ί<δ,a< ft(7)}, G, ),<z,
or, at least
(*)2 for each δ < ω\, we have g
δ — (g
δ
η : η a sequence of successor length < ω
2,
each η(ί) is in
 W2) such that:
(α) g^,fi : 5 —» {0,1}, (^/^)~
1({1|) is an unbounded subset of 5 (and if
η,v have length i -f- 1, η\i ± i/fi, then (^ω)~
1({l}) Π (^ω)"1({l» is
bounded in δ).
(β) Suppose i < ω
2, x large enough, N -< (H(χ), G, <*), N countable, δ —
NΓ\ωι,Q
ί = ( P j , Q j : j < i) G N defined as in 1.1, is a CS iteration, each
QJ proper satisfying (i) - (viii) from the proof of 1.1 (with (vii) rephrased in
terms of {Jf 
: t < ^(5)}), Pi adds no reals, and (gLj\ 
'• j < i) is generic for
Pi Π N, then for at least one v G
 ω2,g*- v is (N\g^ : j < i], Qi)-generic.
(2) If <2* is adding NI Cohen reals, and V |=CH then V
Q* |= (*)2.
Proo/ of 1.3 (1) Same proof as 1.1.
(2) Left to the reader. Note: let Q — {/ : / a finite function from ω\ to {0,1}},

§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample and New Questions 
861
let /* be the generic function; now in F[/*], if
\^V ΠfΓ(χ), /*,<*) countable,
then TV G V[f*\(N 
Π ωι)]. So for 5, defining g
δ, we have to consider only
N G V[f* \δ], so /* \[δ,ωι) is "free" to be used for defining g
δ .
1.4 Lemma. (1) We could weaken the demands on V (in 1.1) to V |=CH,
provided that we also waive the requirement lhpi "\Qi\ = NI".
(2) Assume CH and
(*)s there are C = (C$ 
'. δ < ω\ limit) and h : ω — > ω such that:
(α) C$ is an unbounded subset of δ of order type ω
(β) for every club E of ωι,Sh(E, C)
 ά= {δ < ωι : Cδ Π E is unbounded in
5, and, moreover, for arbitrarily large a G C$, |<7<5 Π Min(C$ Π E \ α)| >
h(\a Π C$|)} contains a club of α i ΐ ,
(7) /ι diverges to infinity.
Then the conclusion of 1.1 holds except that we weaken condition (α) to: Qi
satisfies the ^2-pic and is proper.
(3) Assume CH (for clarity). There is a forcing notion Q, \Q\ = 2
N l, Q is
Ki-complete satisfying K2-pic, and Ihg "(*)3"
Proof o/1.4(l): By (2) and (3).
o/ 1.4(2): The proof is similar to the proof of 1.1. The main difference
is that defining Tj+2 for δ G ace (lΊj^CjK we do not choose the members
/ of TS+I such that δ = sup/~
1({l}) by "inverse limit construction" i.e.,
by constructing the Fn's, but by induction on ζ < ω\. W.l.o.g. h is non
decreasing Choose (hi : i < ω\}, hi : ω — > ω diverging to oo, non decreasing,
[i < j 
=> for every k large enough, hj(k) < hi(k) < h(k)] and [i,ωι,k <
ω ^ hi+ι(l)/hi(l 4- fc) goes to infinity]; why can we? choose hi by induction
on i < α i, for each i we diagonalize. Defining Qi, we shall assume that in
t So if CGΛΓ^(#(χ), £,<*), 
δ = NΓ]ωl < ωi, and δ G
if S G ^V is a club of α i then C$ Π £^ is unbounded below 6.

862 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
V[GpJ, (C, hi) still exemplify (*)s. So, for limit i, we have to repeat the proof
of preservation of properness and preserve (*)a.
We now define the Q^s. First, we define Q®: initiating the construction in
the proof of 1.1, in Case D we have to change somewhat (to guarantee that
forcing with Qi preserves "C exemplifies (*)s"). We choose by induction on
ζ < α i, a function f^
τ : δ —> δ such that: (letting C$ = {β^ : n < ω},
increasing in n)
(a) for each 7 < δ we have
(β) The set Y^ = {n : /£* \\β^ β
δ
n+l) φ O^β^)} satisfies: for n large enough
if n < m are successive members of Yς
 )l then n -f h^n) <m<n + /i2ί+ι(
n)
(7) if ξ < ζ then Y** Π Y** is finite.
(δ) if { J/ : I < ω) is a list of dense subsets of Γj Π {/ξ* f7 : ξ < 5, 7 < δ}, each
satisfying <8)^* (see below), then for some ζ, for every n G Y^'*: if m < n and
there is #, /f * ^ C ^ G Γj Π {/* ί7 : ξ, 7 < 5}, <; G f\<n J* > then /f * satisfies
this for such maximal m(<ri)\
Where
®j if / € Tj n {/|r7 : ί < ί,7 <^} and
^/.j ={α € C4 : if / C /' e Ίi n {/ξ* ί7 : ξ < 0,7 < α} then for
some /" € J we have /' C /" e Tδ Π {/ξ* ^7 : ξ < a, 7 < δ}
then for infinitely many a € Cg we have
\{βζCδ:a<β and (α,0) C ^/i(7}| > h(\CfΠn\)

§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample and New Questions 
863
How? First choose inductively πii such that: πii -f i + 1 < rrii+i < ω,
and for i large enough m* + z + 1 + h^πii 4- i + 1) < rrii+ι, rrii+i 4- i 4- 2 <
ra-i 4- ^21+1(^1) (this is possible as fc < ω =Φ (Ii2i+i(m)/h2i(m 4- fc) : m < α;)
goes to infinity). Second list {j : j < i} as (jfc : k < α;), and diagonally choose
F/'
1 Π [mi, mi + i 4- 1), a singleton. Now, for a G Y^'* we deal with the J* ,^
where: for each <£, for some k no two successive members of g^
l{ί} are of
difference > fc.
Now, Q® is defined analogously to the Case D in the proof of Lemma 1.1.
Then Qi is the result of CS iteration starting with Q9, and continuing with
shooting club through Shi+l (E, C] for every club E C ω\, (by initial segments).
(3) Q is forcing C by initial segments and then CS iteration (of length 2
Hl) of
shooting club through Sh(E,C) for every club E C ω\ (by initial segments).
Πι.4
1.5 Claim. Under the assumptions of 1.1 for ε < ω\ additively indecomposable,
we can add to the conclusion: for ζ < ε and i < i*, the forcing notion Qi is
("-proper.
Proof. We again assume Gi C Pi generic is given; hence (Cj : j < i) (which
serve as Bi too) is also given and by induction on α we define T£, so that
in the definition of T^ we use A and (Cj Π a 
: j < i) only (and the list
{/ξ : ζ < ωι} £ £[^])> so that a variant of (i) - (viii) holds. The changes are:
(iv)
; i f / , 0 e ϊ j , /(O ^^W, then/-
1({1})Π^-
1({1}) \ihas order-type
< ε.
(viiy In addition to (vii), if (δζ : ζ < ζ*) is an increasing sequence of
accumulation points of Π^Cj, (δζ 
ξ < ζ) e Itfc+1[A Π ic+i], for
C < C*, / € T|o Π L5oμ Π Jo], /m e Tc^+1 for m < m* and m* < ω,
C* < ε, then there is g € T£,+2, / C g, Dom(^) = (* 4- 1, such that
the following conditions hold:
(a) For every J G Lh^[AlΊί, BiΠί] (an open dense subset 
ofT$Γ)Ls[Anδ]
(ordered by inclusion)) for some 7 < 5, (7^7 G J7", where 5 G {5ζ : ζ < ζ*}.
(β) g~
l({l}} \ {δζ : C < C*} is a bounded subset of 5C .

864 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
(7) For every m < m*,^!}) Π /^(U}) \ {<*C 
= C < C} Q Dom(/).
In the proof of Case D, we use the canonical well-ordering of -H"(Nι)
LM on
our assignments (for the existence of g e T|+2, Dom(^) = δ + 1), and construct
a witness, preserving and using (vii)'. 
Π1>5
1.6 Discussion. 1) Also 1.3, 1.4 can be generalized to this context.
2) We have shown that just excluding the forcing notions like the one from
Example V.5.1 (by demanding D-completeness for a simple 2-completeness
system) is not enough to ensure that CS iteration of proper forcing does not
add reals. In VIII §4, on the other hand, we have quite weak restrictions on
such Qi ensuring Lim{Pi, Qi : i < a) does not add reals. However, the examples
above (1.1-1.4) lead naturally to forcing notions which fall in between (and the
corresponding consistency problems), which we now proceed to represent.
1.7 Problem. Let f§ : δ — >• δ for any limit δ < ω\. Is there / : ω\ — > ω\
such that for every δ < ω\, for arbitrarily large a < δ, fs(θί) < /(α)? I.e., the
problem is, assuming CH, whether it is possible that for every such {/$ : δ < ω\)
there is a suitable / [negative answer follows from Ottu and c.c.c. forcing
preserves a negative answer].
1.7A Definition. For any sequence / = (f$ 
: δ < α i), f$ : δ — > 5, let
po = {g : g a function from some a < ω\ into ωι, such that for every (limit)
δ < α, for arbitrarily large β<δ, fδ(β) < g ( β ) } ]
ordered by inclusion.
1.7B Discussion. Now if CH -f Ax[forcing notions of the form P|] holds in
some universe, the answer to 1.7 is yes ( in that universe). So it is enough
to show that if we iterate, with countable support, such forcing notions, then
no real is added. A positive answer follows by 1.8 below and next section.
A negative answer could have been viewed as proving a very weak form of
diamond. The situation is similar for the other problems here.

§1. No New Reals: A Counterexample and New Questions 
865
1.8 Problem. Let C§ C δ be an unbounded subset of £, for δ < ω\. Is there a
closed unbounded C C ω\ such that for no ί, C$ C C? Consider in particular
the cases when we restrict ourselves to:
(a) Cζ has order-type ω, δ = Sup C$,
(b)ξ Cfi has order- type £, ί = Sup C$ and £ limit,
(c) C<5 has order-type < δ, δ = Sup C$,
(d) C«5 = 0 mod D«5, £>$ a filter on ί, δ = Sup C$, for a given D = (D& :
δ < ωι).
1.8A Definition. For C = (Cδ 
: δ < ωι),Cδ C δ, let P± = {/ : / a
function from some α + 1 < α i to {0, 1}, /~
1({1}) is closed and for no δ < α,
Order: inclusion.
We may consider also
1.8B Definition. For D = (Dδ : δ < ωi), Dδ a filter on 5, let
PQ — {/ : / a function from some α + 1 < ω\ to {0, 1}
such that /~
1({1}) is closed and for no δ < α,
Order: inclusion.
1.9 Problem. Let C$ be an unbounded subset of 5, for δ < ω\. Is there a
closed unbounded C C α i such that for every 5, C Π C$ is a bounded subset of
5, when we restrict ourselves as in 1.8?
1.9 A Definition. For a sequence C = (C§ : δ < ωι), C§ an unbounded subset
of J, let
P^ — {g \g a function from some α -f 1 <ω\ to {0, 1}, such that
g~
l({l}) is closed and for every δ < α, Sup[Cδ n ^"Hίl})] < ^}

866 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Order: inclusion.
1.9B Definition. For a sequence D = (D§ : 6 < α i), D$ a filter on 5, let
P£ = {g : g a function from some α 4- 1 < ωi to {0, 1} such that g~
l({l}) is
closed and for every δ < α, g~
l({l}) Π δ = 0 mod D$}
1.10 Claim. 1) Pj?, P£ and P? (when one of the Cases (a)-(d) from 1.8 holds)
are proper and D-complete for some simple HI -completeness systems and
2) P?,P<i is strongly proper.
3) P£ is proper (and does not add reals) even in V
Q if forcing by Q adds no
reals (for P|, P^ this follows by part 2).
Proof. Left to the reader.
1.11 Definition. For each S < ω\, let F§ be a function, from Dom(F$) = {/ : /
a function from some α-fl < δ to {0,1} such that /~
1({1}) is closed } to ω. Let
C$ C δ be an unbounded subset of δ of order type ω and C — (C$ : δ < ωι).
Let
PC^F — {9 : 9 a function from some α 4- 1 < cji to {0, 1}
5
f~
1({l}) is closed and for every δ < a for
some ns : if /? G C5, |C« Π /5| > n$, and
Min(Cδ \ ()9 + 1)) > Min (g'
l({l}) \ (β + 1)) and
β < 7 € Cδ, Min (C5 \ (7 + 1)) > Min (g~
l({l}) \ (7 4- 1)),
|7 Π C5| > Fδ(g\(Mm (Cδ \ (β + 1)))}.
1.11A Claim. PF(^ (for F, C as in definition 1.11) is proper, D-complete for
some simple Hi-completeness system and
(g) it is proper not adding reals even after forcing by any proper forcing
notion not adding reals.
(see 2.13(2)).

§2. Not Adding Reals 
867
Proof. Left to the reader.
Remark. In 1.11 (and 1.11 A) demand
|7 Π Cδ\ > Fδ(\Cδ Π (β + l)Ur(min(C5 \ (β +1))).
§2. Not Adding Reals
We prove here that we can iterate (CS iterations) the forcing notions introduced
at the end of the previous section, and not add reals. The real work is in
Definition 2.2 and Lemma 2.8, but the reader may look at Conclusion 2.12
(or at 2.16). For our aim , naturally, we phrased a condition NNR?,, on CS
iterations of proper forcing, saying we add no reals (condition (3)), a quite
weak condition for avoiding "collision" with the weak diamond, and another
condition, (5), intended to avoid collision with the counterexample of §1. It
says each Qi stays proper even if we force with forcing notions of the kind we
iterate. Having phrased the condition, the main point is proving it is preserved
by CS iteration, mainly in limit stages.
So, suppose Q has length £, and for each a < δ , Q \a is as required. Assume
for simplicity we do not try to kill Φ^°; say, using NI-completeness systems. As
seems natural, we start with a countable N -< (H(χ), G, <*) and p G P$ Π TV
and try to find <?, p < q G P<5, q is (N, P$)-generic and determine GPδ ΠAT", which
should be an old set if we succeed. So, if sup(δ Π TV) = (Jn<ω an, an < αn+ι,
Oίn G TV we should try to choose approximations qn G Pttn, qn+\ \an = qn. But,
as we do not have Ki-completeness we cannot do this per se. In V§7 a major
point in the proof is that we have "above" N a sequence TV = (Ni : 1 < i < ζ),
ζ and each Ni countable (letting TVo = TV), TV quite "long" in suitable sense,
and we demand qn is (TVj,Pαn)-generic for "many" i's. So if e.g. an+\ = αn + l,
i < ζ such that qn is (TV^, Pαn)-generic, we have only N0 candidates for members
of the relevant completeness system. However "using TV^ is destroying it", "it is
consumed ", as qn+\ is not (TV^, PQ,n+1)-generic. Why is this so? In the first step,

868 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
say choosing GQ0ΓWo, we have no problem; for GQ^NQ^QQ] we have to choose
a common member from all the candidates A to be "a subset of Qι Π NQ[GQO]
in the appropriate family Dx". Now the common member is naturally not in
NI. We can use stronger induction hypothesis, then use only HO-completeness
system or even 2-completeness system, so we have for GQQ Π NI only finitely
many (or two) candidates, so a common member exists in NI. But after ω steps
it is not clear how to guarantee Gpω Π NQ G NI .
One approach, suggested in [Sh:177], is to weaken "Q is α-proper" to "for
p e Q Π 7V0, N = (Ni : i < a) as usual, there is q,p < q G Q, q is (Ni,Q)-
generic for "many" i < α" this work for "easy" cases like interpreting "many"
as "having the same order type". While this work for e.g. P^ (from 1.8(a),
1.8A), this does not seem strong enough , but it covers the forcing notion of
V for specializing Aronszajn tree, which the present condition do not. Here we
rather say: having two candidates for G Π NI , we demand they are a subset of
(Qo Π N) x (Qo ^ N) generic over ΛΓ0; for making this work we are carried to
the following.
Here we have A/i, NQ -< NI, qn is demanded to be (7Vι,Pαrι)-generic too;
We have several possibilities, we actually have a finite tree of possibilities for
Gpa 
Π NI which is generic for an appropriate product of finitely many copies
of P/s, i < an. But to proceed with this we have 7V2, where again we have a
finite tree of possibilities for Gpan Π 7V2' But only each one is generic over AΓ2.
Above this we imitate V 4.4. Now qn is (N^ Pαn)-generic for i = 3,4,5 and for
each Pαn-name r G AΓ4 of an ordinal it allows only finitely many possibilities,
but unlike V 4.4 we do not use α -properness. So we have for each n a "tower"
of six models. For higher I < 5 , qn "knows" less on NI, but our knowledge goes
down "slowly" so moving from n to n + 1, taking care of £, the knowledge on
Gparι ΠNI+I is enough to move ahead. Probably this explanation is meaningless
for many readers, but will be helpful if read in the end or middle of reading
the proof.
Note that §1 (particularly 1.5) show the impossibility of too good iteration
theorems (say CS, of proper forcing not adding reals) but do not block consis-

§2. Not Adding Reals 
869
tency of appropriate forcing axiom with CH as we may instead of forcing with
candidates, spoil their being candidates (as in III, V).
2.1 Definition. 1) For a finite tree t (i.e. t = (|ί|,<*),|ί| a finite set, <* a
partial order on \t\ such that for x G ί, {y : y <* x} is linearly ordered), let
trindα(ί) — {α :α = (aη : η G ί), each α^ is an ordinal < α
and // < ι/ in t implies aη < &„}
trind<α(ί)= [J tτmdβ(t).
β<a
2) For a given iteration Q = (Pi,Qj '• i < ot,j < α), a finite tree t and a G
trindα(£) let
POL — {p ' P — (Pη '• η £ t) 5 and for η G t we have pη G Pttτϊ and if t \= η < v
ordered by
P < q iff for every η e t, Par] |= pη < qη.
3) t Cend siftiss restricted to the set of members of t and: s \= ["77 < z/",
v € ί] implies [77 £ £].
4) We write (ί) for α = (α^ : η G t), when t has one element, say <> and
5) For Q an iteration of length α, ί a finite tree, α G trindα(t), and model TV:
(a) αGenq(TV) = {G : G a subset of Pδ Π N generic over N such that for
each η G t, G^ = {p^ : p G G} has an upper bound in Paτt }
[Note: G can essentially be identified with (Gη : η G t)].
(b) sGeng(TV) = {G : G a subset of P& Π A/" generic over TV which has an
upper bound in Pώ}.
(c) Gen|(JV) = {G : G a subset of P^ Π N generic over N}
6) If tlCt2,a£e trind tt£ (*/), and ft G Pa< for I G {1, 2}, and Λf|€tl ^ < α^
then p
1 < p
2 means Λ^€ίl Pη < Pη K-
2.2 Definition. Q is an AΓA^^-iteration for (£o?£ι>£2) means:

870 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
(1) Q is a CS iteration of £o-proper forcing (see V2.2).
(2) For t — 0, 1, 2, £^ is a stationary subset of S<^1 (λ^) for some uncountable
(3) Forcing with Pa adds no reals for a <
(4)2 If.
(a) N -< (if (χ), G, <*) is countable, (χ regular large enough),
(b) TVΠλi Gfi,
(c) {Q,£o,£ι,£2) belongs to AT,
(d) i* < i < j < α < ^g(Q), i* G ΛΓ, i G AT, j G JV and i*, i are non-limit,
(f) p G AT Π P, , pfi G G
α, and
(g) 9o j <?ι are upper bounds of G
a in P^, and <?o ί^* = 9ι N*>
ώen there is G
; G Gen|
 7>(AΓ), extending G
α, pfj G G' and g^gfe 
Pj
such that: go ^ 9o" Γ*» 9ι — 9Ϊ" Γ*»
 anc^ for ί = 0, 1, g/ is an upper bound to
G
1. Let G
1 extends G
α, mean that (p
1 eG' =ϊp'\i€ Ga] and c^ \i* = q£ \i*.
(5) Assume i are not limit ordinals, i < j < α, Q
r a CS iteration of length /?
satisfying (1) - (4), a < β,Q = Q'\OL, Q' satisfies (l)-(4), t a finite tree,
77* G t, ά G trind0(£), α^* = i, 5 = t\{η : r; < 77*}, (so P^5 is essentially
Pi), and let R
 d= P^/Pi (a P^-name).
If R is an 82 - proper forcing not adding reals, then
H~Pi*β "Pj/Pi is a ^2— proper forcing not adding reals" .
2.2A Remark. Note that for i < j < tg(Q], i non-limit, we have: Pj/Pi is
(έ^o U έ^i U ^2)-
2.3 Definition. Q is an NNR#0 - iteration for (^0,^1,^2) is defined similarly,
replacing (4)2 by (4)^0 below (so, in clause (5) now we mean this (4)) where:
t Actually, e.g. if Qo? Qi are proper forcings not adding reals and QQ x Qι is
proper, then Qo χ Qi does not add reals; in fact by 2.5 the "not adding reals"
is redundant.

§2. Not Adding Reals 
871
(4)«0 tf
(a) TV -< (H(χ), G, <* ) is countable, (χ regular large enough),
(b) A Γ Π λ i G έ i ,
(c) (Q, £0,^1,^2} belongs to TV,
(d) i < j ' < α, i non-limit, z G AT and j G AT,
(e) G« G
(g) t G JV a finite tree, ά G trindi(£), each aη non-limit,
(h) q G PU, and if 77 G t, αη = i, then qη is a bound to G
α, and
(i) β = (βη :η et) where for r? G £ :
if rv 
— ?'•
ir α^ — z,
( a
— } A
(^ J
TΛen there are G' G Gen^
>(JV) extending G
a and f G P^, such that:
(α) each 7*77(77 G ί, θίη — ΐ) is a bound of G'
(0) 9 < f.
Before we state and prove the main lemma, we prove a few claims.
2.4 Claim. 1) Suppose x G {2,N0}> Q
1 is an iteration satisfying (1) - (3),(4)2:
of Definition 2.2 or 2.3, Q = Q'\a, β = tg(Q
r), Q is an AW^-iteration
for (£"0,^1,^2), X is regular large enough, N 
-X (#(χ), €,<*) is countable,
(Q7, fo,^ι,^2,Qί) belongs to N, N Π λ2 G <?2> 
^ ίend 5 are finite trees,
β G AT is in trind^(s), α = β\t, Rang[^ί(5 \ *)] C α, Ga G Gen|(AΓ) and
^ — (^ '• ^? G ί) G Pa is above Gώ, p G P^ Π A/", and pft G Gώ
Assume in addition:
(*)ί for each η G £, the forcing notion Pά/^αf{ί/:ι/<r7} is ^-proper not
adding reals.
Then there is a G^ G Gen^(ΛΓ) extending Ga (recall, Gβ extending Ga
means [σ G Gβ 
=Φ σft G G«] ) to which p belongs and f e Pβ above G^,
ί ^ ^Γ^i (and it follows p < f).
2) Moreover, if 77 G t, and v <
l η is maximal such that (3p G s\t)(v < /?),

872 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Proof. We prove it by induction on the number of elements of s.
By the induction hypothesis, we can show that if t C tι C s&ti ^ s,
then (*)ίl holds. Hence, it is easy to reduce the claim to the case s\t has a
unique element, say η. Assume first that there is a maximal v G t with v <
s η
and let ί* = t\{p : p G t, p < ι/}; so by (*)t we know Pa/Pa\t* is a £2-proper
forcing not adding reals. Let R be the P^r-name Pa/Pa\t* 
Note that Part*
is isomorphic to Pαι/. Let z = α,,, j = α^ and apply (5) of Definition 2.2 (or of
2.3, of course). We obtain r = (rp : p e s).
But why is rp a condition in Parj and not a P^-name of such a condition?
As all the influence of Pά/Pa\t* is on the set of dense subsets of Par] in 7V[Gp_],
which we know (and it is in V) so as we know there is rp we can inspect each
candidate (not i), we use our demanding q < f \t rather than q — f \t. 
U2.4
2.5 Claim. If Q satisfies (1), (2), (3) of Definition 2.2, α = ίg(Q), t is a
finite tree, β G trindo (t) and Pβ is Sz-piopei, then it does not add reals.
Also, if GU C PU is generic over V, we let Gη — {qη 
: q G GQ,}, then
(Gη 
: η G Dom(ά)) determines G& (hence we do not distinguish strictly ).
Similarly, for "G C P& Π N generic over AT".
Proof. Immediate.
2.6 Claim. Let (i) Q be a CS iteration of ^α -bounding proper forcing notions,
(ii) i < j < lg(Q),No -< NI are countable elementary submodels of
(ίf(χ), G, <*), (Q,i,j) G NO, X regular large enough, and N0 G NI.
(iii) p G Pj Π NO, g G Pi, pfi < ςf, g is (Nx, P^-generic, and (JV0> Pi)-generic.
(iv) for every pre-dense J C P^ from AΓ0, some finite JΓ C JΠ JVo is pre-dense
above q.
Then there is r G Pj, rfi = <?, p < r, r is (Λ^P^-generic and (N0,Pj)-
generic such that for every pre-dense T C Pj from NO some finite J C J Π N0
is pre-dense above r.
2.6A Remark. This claim is from [Sh:177] and is implicit in VI §1.

§2. Not Adding Reals 
873
Proof of 2.6. By VI Theorem O.A, P;, PjjPi are ^-bounding. Let (τn : n <
ω) G NI list all P^-names of ordinals which belong to NQ.
We can find a functions F, H G 7V"o such that: for every p, a P^-name of a
member of Pj/Gpi , and r, a Pj-name of a ordinal, we have p' = F(p, r) is a P^-
name of a member of Pj/Gpi satisfying p'[GpJ fi = p[GpJ fi, p[GpJ <
PJ p'[GpJ
in P and σ = H (p, r) is a P^-name of an ordinal such that
Let po = p\[ij), Pn+i = F(pn,τn), σn = ff(pn,τn), so pn, σn G 7V0, and
σn is a Pi-name of an ordinal and ((pn,<?n) 
' n < ω) e NI. For each n
we can find (p^,y
n) £ Λ/Ί, moreover {(p^,5
n) : n < α;) belongs to 7Vχ such
that v
n is a P^-name of a sequence of finite sets of ordinals which belongs to
NI (so Ihp. "ϋ € V") p+ a Prname of a member of Pj/GP., and in ^[Gp.]
p+[G+] is above pn[GPί] (in Pj/GpJ 
and is ( N [GPi},Pj/GPi) -generic and
p[GpJ G -ΛΓι[GpJ Γ\V (for any GPi C P^ generic over V). Let ϋ — (ym : m < α;),
^m — U ^m so 5 ^ ^i i
g a ί^-name, Ihp. "ϋ is an α -sequence of finite sets of
n<m
ordinals" (we can make Ihp. "ϋ G V" but we not use).
Let (u
n : n < ω) list all sequences, u = (um : m < ω) G NI, um a finite
set of ordinals. Let u
n = (u^ : m < ω). Choose (u* : n < ω) G V, a sequence
of finite sets of ordinals, such that:
(*) for each n < ω and for every large enough ra,ι^ C u^.
As σn G TVo are P^-names, by assumption (iv), we can find (υ* : n < ω) G V
a sequence of finite sets of ordinals such that
Now, clearly it suffices to prove:
® ^ I^Pi "there is a condition r G Pj ,rfz = q, [i,j) Π Dom(r) = 7VΊ Π [i, jf),r is
(7Vι, Pj)-generic, r is above some pn, and r Ihp. [/\n rn G v* U u*]"
[as there is a P^-name of such a condition, and we know the domain, there
exists an actual such r G Pj].

874 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Why ® holds? Let Gi C P$ be generic over V, q e Gi. Then ϋ being a P^-name
from Λ/Ί, satisfies ϋ[Gi] = (vn : n < ω) e Nι[Gi] so vn C NI Π Ord, hence for
some (v'n : n < ω) G V, and ω-sequence of finite sets of ordinals, /\ vn Cυ'n,so
n<ω
w.l.o.g. (v'n : n < ω) G 7Vι; so for some n(*),Λm>n(*)
 υ* -
 υή ^
 un Choose r
as (Wι[Gι], Pj/P^-generic such that Dom(r) = Nι[Gι] Π [ij) = NI Π [z, j), and
^n(*) K^]' Pn(*) ^
 r> sucn r exists by the theorem of preservation of properness.
Now r is as required in <8>. As we have done it in any V[Gf],Gi £ Pi generic
over V,q e Gi, clearly q forces (II-pj there is such r. 
D2.6
2.7 Claim. Let
(i) Q be a semiproper iteration of
 ωα;-bounding forcing notions
(ϋ) i < j < tg(Q), N0^N^ (H(χ), 6, <*), (Q, i,j) € N0 and ΛΓ0 e ^ both
countable, and χ regular large enough.
(iii) p G Pj nTVΌ, ^ G PΪ, pfi < ς, q is (JVi, P^-semi generic and (JV0, Pi)-generic,
(iv) for every r G Λ^0 a P^-name of a countable ordinal for some finite u,
ς f l h "r Gu".
T/ien, there is an r G P-/, r \i — ς, p < q, r is (A/j, Pj)-semi generic and (JVo, Pj)-
semi generic such that for every P^-name τ G NQ of a countable ordinal, for
some finite tt, we have r Ihp. "r G u".
Proof. Same as 2.6 except that: using RCS, the issue of the domain of r
disappears, and the names we deal with are names of countable ordinals. U2.7
2.8 Main Lemma. If x G {2,K0}, Q is a CS iteration of (limit) length δ
and for every α < 5, Q\a is an AW^-iteration for (^0,^1,^2)) then Q is an
ΛWJ^-iteration for (£0,£ι,£2)
2.9 Remark. 1) Our main object is usually to preserve clause (3) of Definition
2.2: adding no real.
2) Comparing this with the result is V §7 and in VIII §4, we gain in replacing the
completeness system by condition (4)x, which is weaker; but "(< u;ι)-proper"
seems incomparable with condition (5) which replaces it.

§2. Not Adding Reals 
875
2.10 Proof of 2.8 . We have to prove the five conditions from Definition 2.2 (or
2.3).
Conditions (1) and (2) are easy (part (1) follows from part (2), for part
(2) see 2.2A and V).
Condition (3) follows from condition (4) (use i = 0, j = J, r a name of a
real).
So, it is enough to prove:
(a) condition (4) and
(b) condition (5) assuming (3), (4) hold.
2. 10 A Proof of Condition (5), Assuming Conditions (3), (4). So, forcing with
PS adds no reals and Q satisfies (1) — (4).
Let i, j be non limit ordinals, i < j < <J, jR, Q', s, ί, α, η* be as
in the assumption of (5). So let χ be regular large enough, N a countable
elementary submodel of (H(χ), €,<*), N Π λ2 G S2,i G N,j e N,R e
N,Q G N,(qo,qι) e Pi * jR is (JV,P» * jR)-generic and force GP^R Π TV to
be G
α,p G P, Π W,pti € G
α Π Pi (equivalently p\i < q0). It suffices to find
r G Pj above #o and above p, and r is (N[G
a], P^-generic, and r forces a value
to GPj Π N.
By the assumption, a < δ ^> Q\ais N NRX -iteration for (£0?^ι,^2
if j < δ the conclusion holds. So, assume j = δ.
Let NQ = N and choose NI satisfying:
(α) NI is countable
(7) NI Π λ0 G <?o
(5) TVo G 7VX
(ε) G
a,qQ,qι e NI.
Let i = IQ < iι < i^ < 
< in < ' ' ' (™ <
 ω) be such that:
in is not limit, ine N0Γ}δ and sup[5 Π AΓ0] = sup{in :n<ω}.
Let (Jn : n < ω) G NI be a list of the Pi * jR-names of dense subsets of
Pi in 7Vo.

876 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Now we choose by induction on n, p
n, q
n such that:
(A) (l)q*ePin,
(2) g
n is (Λ^, Pin)-generic for I = 0,1,
(3) Dom(gn) - in Π JVi
(4) 9o < 9°
(5)g
n+1Γin = (7
n
(B) (1) p
n is (a Pin - name of) a member of P^ Π NQ
(2)p
n\in<q
n
(4) pn+1 G In (more exactly: pn+1 G In[G
a] i.e. q
n+
l \\-Pin
"p
n+l e Jn[G
α]" where
Tn[G
α] = {r G N : for some p
f G G
a p' lhp. "r G Xn"})
(C) g
n Ih "Gin Π A^o is generic for (NQ[G
a], (P
Note in (B)(l) that p
n should not depend on GR.
For n = 0 - easy.
For the induction step, defining for n + 1, first note that
(*) 
"~Pi*[^x(Pin/Pi)l "
pin+i/
pin
 is £2 - proper not adding reals".
We get (*) by applying (5) of the Definition with Q\in+ι (which is NNRX-
iteration for (£0)£ι5£2)),Q5 ί*,ά*, r/
71"
1"
1, ϊ n j *n+ι here standing for Q,Q
f, ί,
α, ry*, i, j there, where: ί* is t when we add ηn just above r/* and r/
714"
1 just
above ?7
n and let α* fί = α, α*^ = zn and α* +1 = in-\-ι
To apply condition (5) we have, however, to know that Pώ* \(tu{η
n}) *
s
^2-proper not adding reals; but this is guaranteed by Claim 2.4.
So, (*) above holds; so, after forcing with Pi * [R x (Pin/Pi)] 
(with
#
n> (<lθιQι) m the generic set) we shall find a q G Pin+ι/Pin generic for
(N0[G",GPin/Pί], 
[Pin+1/Pin]).

§2. Not Adding Reals 
877
(Note: 7Vo[G
α] had no new members of V, so no new members of Pin+l/Pin).
Now, the forcing with R is irrelevant (except for the information in G
a and
G
a G V!) So, there is a P^-name of such a <?, and there is a P^-name of a <?',
<? < q
f G Pin+l/Pin, q' forcing a value to Gpi 
Π 7V0.
So, there is a q' G A/i, a P^-name of a condition from Pin+1/Pin satisfying the
above if there is such q' at all.
Now, as in the proof on the preservation of properness, we can choose qn+ι
In the end, let r' = q° U Un4
n+1 IK, Wι)
 N°w (Jn Π GPj : n < ω) is
clearly a Pj-name, so, by condition (3), there is some r, r' < r G P,, and r
forces an (old) value to it. Now, this r finishes the proof. 
E^.IOA
2.1 OB Proo/ of condition (4)κ0 when we deal with NNR#0:
So let TV, z, j, ά, yS, G
a, p, ί, (^ : η G ί) are as there. By the assumption
w.l.o.g. j = ί.
Choose ΛΓ€ (for £ = 0,1,2,3,4,5) such that:
(α) every NI is countable, NQ — N
(β) 
Λ^Λ^ιX(#(χ),E,<pfor£ = 0,l,2,3,4
(7) NI nλi e Si, N2 nλ 2 G 52, ^3 nλ0 G £0, ^4n λ0 G £0, ^5 nλi G f0,
(remember NQ Π λi G fi)
(5) NteNt+i foil = 0,1,2,3,4
(ε) 
qeNl,Ga^Nl.
Let i = io < H < ^2 < - 
< in < - - (n < α;) be such that: each in is
non-limit, belongs to AΓ0 Π 5, and
sup(£ Π NO) = sup{zn : n < ω}.
Let (In : n < ω) e NI be a list of the dense subsets of PS which belong
to NQ. For simplicity, w.l.o.g. we can assume t is a subset of
 ω>ω ordered
by < (being an initial segment), aη = i & ίg(η) = m* (remember only
η <* v => aη < Oίv was required). Let t* = t Π
 m*ω and stipulate ί_ι = ί \ ί*.
Now we define by induction on n < ω, pn, ς^(?7 6 Γ), G^,ίn, ά
n, Gζ, G^
(for 77 G ίn) such that:
(A) (1) <# G Pin (for 77 G Γ)

878 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
(2) ςr» is (Nt, Pίn)-generic for I = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
(3) For every pre-dense subset X of Pin from Λ/4 for some finite J C
IΓ\ Λ/4, ,7 is pre-dense in Pjn above ς™ (hence this holds for £ < 4)
(4) qη < <j» for η € t*
(5) if i/ e ί \ **, i/ < T/i € t*, v < η2 € ί* then ς^ [α,, = ς°2 fαv
(6) <#
+1r*n = <for77€ί*
(7) Dom(ς£) is in Π N5
(B) (1) G£ is a generic subset of Fin Π NO over ΛΓ0
(2) G"n+1nPin=G"n
(3) G§ = G
α
(4) g» ll-pίn "GPin n 7V0 = G«" for 77 e Γ
(C) (1) Pn € ΛΓ0 n Pi
(2) P < pn < Pn+1
(3) Pn+l e Jn
(4) pn\in€G»
(D) (1) ίn is a nonempty finite tree, ί0 = t,tn Cend tn+1,
(2) a
n = (o%:ηetn),
(3) α
n = α
n+1 fίm cί:
0 = δ, so we may write aη for α™ when η € tn
(4) if 77 € ίn+ι \ tn then there is a vn € ίn such that: η is an immediate
successor of //„, £*„ = in+1, α^ = in.
(E) (1) <G£ : η € ίn> belongs to
(2) G* e ΛΓ2
(3) C?«
(4) tn \= η < v implies G
c
η C G
c
υ
(5) G' € ΛΓ3
(6) G»g(77)_m. C G* C G
C
Ώ for η e (tn \ ί) U Γ so ^(η) > m*, of course
(7) if η e ί* then g£ Ih "for some p € ίn \ |J ίm we have: Oί
n
p = in, η < p
m<n
If we succeed, then let rη = q% U Un<ω^
+1Γ[in,in+ι) (
for V £ **, so
Qr, = i and βη = j = δ) and let r^ = ^ for η e t \ ί*, all are members of P^.

§2. Not Adding Reals 
879
For η E t*, rη is (JV0, P5)-generic and forces GP<5 Π AT = GP<5 Π W0 = (Jn<u; G£
and (rη : η et) £ Pβ. So, it is enough to carry the definition.
The case n — 0 is easy (better to define (q® : η E to) E Pa by steps i.e.
choose q® by induction on ίg(η)\ remember Pώ is proper not adding reals as
Qί^o is an NNR^0 -iteration).
Let us do the induction step: defining for n + 1.
Step. Choose pn+ι E Tn Π 7V0 such that pn < pn+ι and pn+ι \in E
Straightforward.
Second Step.
First note:
(*)ι the following set is a dense subset of Pώn:
J = {ς' :^ E P«n, and ezί/ier for some r/ € ίn, α^ = in and
or there is a G
; E Genp.^ 
χ (No) such that
G
7, G
; Π P^ - G^ and:
= i
f =>q'η lhP.n "in Pin+l/Pirl the set G'
has an upper bound"}.
This follows by (4)κ0 for Qfin+ι (which is an NNR#0 -iteration).
Also
(*)2 there is a q' e J which belongs to (G
b
η : η E tn) (i.e. η e tn =ϊ q'η £ G^
and ς
; E Pa«) such that [77 E tn & ^ = in => q'η is above G£].
(this is as there is q* E (Gξ : η E ίn) which belongs to J (as J e NI and
is a dense subset of P^ and (G
b
η : η E tn) is in sGenp_τl(A/1) and the first
possibility in the definition of J cannot hold as G£ C G
b
η whenever αη = in).
Now choose G^+l satisfying: (B)(l), (B)(2) and for every η E tn of length
n + m* for some q* E Pίn+1 Π^i : ^i»n € G^ and ς; Ih "GPίτι+χ Π7V0 - G«+1".
This is possible by (*)ι 4- (*)2.

880 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Third Step. Let for each v G tn with OLV — in, (G^m : m < ra,,) be such that:
<fi\m* ^Pin
 Utf°ί ^ QPir. then $Pin
 n ^3 € {G,,ιm : m < mv}.
(This sequence exists and is finite by (A) (3), and as Pin adds no new reals).
Now we let
and choose α
n+1 by (£>)(3) and
Fourth Step. Repeating the proof of 2.4 (but choosing the appropriate forcing
conditions from G^(η G ίn^ry — *n))j we choose (G
b
η : η G £n+ι \t n) and (rjj :
r? G ίn+ι \t n> such that: (G
b
η : r? G ίn+ι) G sGeng^^ΛΓi) and <ζr(m.+n) e G^
(^77t(m*-ι-n) ^
s from ^
ne en(ί °f ^
ne second step) and r^ G Pin+l Π A^2, which is
an upper bound to G^ and r
b
n\in G G^r(m,+n) (just order tn+1 \ tn, and then
choose (G^,r^) by induction on 77, see 2.4(2)).
Fi/ίfc Step. We choose (Gξ : η G tn+ι \ ίn), (r
c
v : v G tn+ι \ ίn) satisfying (E)
and \y G tn+ι feα^ = in+ι => r^ G G^] and for ry G ίn+ι \tn, η = z^(ra), we
have r^ G Pin+l r\N3,r^ \in G G^m, r^ a bound of G^; this is possible as in the
proof of the preservation of properness.
Sixth Step. We choose (q™
+l : ry G t \ ί_ι so aη — i) by Claim 2.6 making
sure that {r£ : v G £n+ι \ tn,η <3 i/} is pre-dense above ς^
+1, this to guarantee
(E)(7); do it for each such η separately.
So, we have finished the induction step, hence the proof of (4)κ0. Hence,
the proof of the Main Lemma. 
tlb.ioβ
2. IOC Proof of Condition (4)2 When we are Dealing with NNR%
We mix the proof of VIII, §4 and the previous proof t.
So let x, TV, i*,i, j, G
α,p, <?o5<7ι &
re as there. By the assumption w.l.o.g.
j = δ. Let Xl = (2*)+,t = {(),{0),{1)} C
 ω>ω,α<> = i*,α<0> = α<ι> =
^ The readers who are happy to have the details should thank Lee Stanley
for his advice.

§2. Not Adding Reals 
881
= qo\i*(= Qι\i*) and q<0> = 4o,4<i> = qi, and q = (qη : η G t),
stipulate ί_ι = {{)}.
Choose Nt(t = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) such that:
(α) every A^ is countable, TVo = </V,
(7)
(ε) 
? € E Λ Γ ι , G " G J V ι .
Let i = i0 < ύ < *2 < 
< ^n < 
- (n < ω) be such that: each in belong
to NO Π 5, is a non-limit ordinal and
sup(ί Π 7V0) = sup{in : n < ω}.
Let (In : n < ω) G NI be a list of the dense subsets of P§ which belong to
7V0 Let t* =tnlω.
Now we define by induction on n < ω, kn G ω, (Mfc : fc < fcn), pn,
q»(η G Γ), G
a
n,tn,a
n,sk,β
n*,hk,hl(k < kn),G
b
η,G
c
η (for 77 G ίn) such that:
(A) ( i ) # e P < n f a € θ
(2) ^ is (7V^ p. J-generic for t = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
(3) For every pre-dense subset X of Pin from A^, for some finite
J C Zπ A^4, J is pre-dense in P^ over ^ (hence this holds for i < 4)
(4) </„ < ς° for η€t*
(7) Dom(^) is in Π ΛΓ5
(B) (1) Gn is a generic subset of Pin Π JV0 over N0
(2)G« + 1nP ί n=G«
(3) Gg = G
a
(4) < Il-P4n "Gpin nNQ = G»" (for T? € ί*).
(C) (l)p n€7V 0nP ί
(2) p < pn < Pn+l
(3) pn+ι € Jn for η e ί*.

882 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
(D) (1) tn is a nonempty finite tree, ί0 = t,tn Cend ίn+1,
(2) ά
n = (cς : η € ίn>,
(3) ά
n = a
n+1 \tn, a° = a, so we may write aη for α™
(4) if 77 e ίn+ι \ ίn then there is ι>η 6 tn such that: 77 is an immediate
successor of ι/η, aη = in+ι,aVη = in
(E) (1) (G
b
η : η € tn) belongs to
(2) G
b
ηeN2
(4) ίn |= η < v implies G
c
η C G£
(5) G< € 7V3
(6) G?fl(lϊ)_ι C G* C G
c
η for η € tn(^(τj) > 1, of course)
(7) if η e t* then
<lη ^Pin "for some P 6 ίn \ {{)} we have: α£ = in and G^ C GPirι"
(we can demand it is a Pjn-name pn and ρn < pn+ι)
(F) (1) Mo = Λ/Ό
(2) Mfe -< Mfc+ι x (ff(χ), €, <* ) for fc < kn
(3) Mfe is countable,
(4) Mk € Mfe+1
(5) Mk e TVi
(6) fcn < fcn+ι < ω,ko = 1 (stipulate fc_ι = -1)
(G)(l)β0 = {<>},«! = «
(2) if kn <k<kn+1 thensfc =s f e nU{ι/
A(ί) : t < 1
k-
k™,v € skn,
tg(v) = n + 1}
(3) for kn < k < fcn+i, we define /ife, a function with domain Sfe+i and
range s^: hk \skn = identity, and for v" (£) € sk+ί \ skn
(4) β
n'
k = (/3Jf'
fc :vζskn,k<kn) is defined as follows: /?<'> =
(remember s0 = {()}) and if k > O,/?"'* is i* if ίg(v) = Q,ieg(

§2. Not Adding Reals 
883
if 0 < ^g(^) but v is not maximal in sk, and finally in if v is maximal
in skn
(5) skn = tn
(6) For fc such that kn < k < fcn+ι> h% is the function with domain
Skn+ί = *n+ι to 5fc> ΛJίfa) = Λfc o Λfc+1 o hkn+1-ι(η) (and ft£n+ι =
idίrι+1), also if A: < fcn, /ι£ is defined by the downward induction
on m as h™ o /ι£ 
where km < k < km+ 1 (no incompatibility).
(H)(l) if ι/, 77 G tn = βfcn, fc < fcn+i and /ιg(r?) = ΛJJ(ιx) ( both well defined)
then G
b
v Π Mk = G^ Π Mfc, and we denote this value by G^fa,
(2) (G^'
71^ : pe sk) e sGen
k(Mk) and it belongs to Mfc+ι (and to
If we succeed, then let rη = q® U Un<α;^
+1ί[^n, Wi) (for ^ € ^*5 so
α^ = ί) and let rη = qη for η G t \ ί*, they are members of P^. For η 6 £*, r^
is (A^o,P<5)-generic and forces Gp5 Π N = Gpδ Γ\ NQ = Un<α;^n (remember
(C)(l)-(4)), and (rη : η G t) G Pg. Here, /3 is as in Definition 2.3(i). So, it is
enough to carry the definition.
The case n — 0 is easy (better to define (q™ : η G to) € P« by steps).
Let us do the induction step: defining for n + 1.
First Step. Choose pn+ι E Jn Π AΓ0 such that pn < pn+ι and pn+ι fzn € G^.
Second Step.
First Note:
(*)ι the following set is a dense subset of P^n,ι:
,7 = {<f :ς' e P^n.i and either for some 77 G Si,/^'
1 = in and
or there is a G
1 G Genp^ 
(7V0) such that:
Pn+i r^n+i G G
; Π Pίn - G
a
n and:
r/ G 5! fc^'
1 =in=>q'η \\-Pin " in Pίn+1/P<n the set G'
has an upper bound"}.

884 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
This follows by (4)2 for Q\in+ι (which is an N ΛΓ^-iteration)
Also
(*)2 there is a q
f G (G
b
η : η G 8l) (i.e. Λ,,€βl q'η G G^'
1) such
that [η G si fe/3™'
1 = in =* ^ is above G?£] and <f G J.
(This is as {G^'
1 : η G si) is in sGenP.n|1 (Mi) and G£ C G*'*
1'
1 whenever
Now choose G£+1 satisfying: (B)(l), (B)(2) and for every η e Si with
β%>
1 = in for some q^° G Pirι+l Π MI we have: q%>°\in G G^
71'
1 and ς^'
0 Ih
"GP<n+ιnJVo = σ^+ι".
This is possible by (*)ι + (*)2.
Third Step. Let for each z/ G tn(= Skn) with /3^'
feτι — in, (Gι/>m : m < m^} be
such that (on ς£ see (A)(l), (2), (3)):
Cn
 lhPiτl
 
U</
GS ^ Qpin
 then ^Pίτι
 n ^3 G {G^ : m < mj".
(This sequence exists and is finite by (A) (3) and as Pin adds no new reals).
W.l.o.g. mv is a power of 2, mv = 2
n" , and does not depend on i/, and let
fcn+ι be such that fcn+ι - kn = 2
m" for any such ι/. So Sfc,fcn < k < fcn+ι
and tn+ι are well defined. Now we can choose appropriate Mk(kn < k <
fcn+ι) such thatt: Mfc -X Nι\H(χ),Mk 
G NI, Mfe_ι ^ Mfc, Mfc_! G Mfc,
Mfc[(G^ : ry G tn>] ^ (Nι\H(χ))[(G* 
: η G tn>]. Why can we choose such
Mfc's? By (E)(l), (G* : η G tn) G sGen|
n
rίn(Nι), and Pa» is <f0-proper. Let
GM,A: ^ G^ Π Mfe for 7/ G tn. Also /3
n+1»
fc(fc < fcn+i) and sk(k < fcn+ι) are
well defined now. Now we define by induction on k = 0, . . . , fcn+ι, a condition
<#
 fc(i7 € sfc&^+1 * = in+ι) and (G*>
n+ί>
k : η £ sk) € sGenf +l'*(Mfc) such
t Remember χι = (2^)+ and Nt X (/f(χι), e, <*J for £ = 1,2,3,4,5.

§2. Not Adding Reals 
885
that
(α) k < fcn+i&r? G 
n
(b) q^
k G Mfc+i for 77 G Sfcn+1(if k = fcn+i then q£
k G 7Vι)
(c) <# *Γin e G*'
n'* when 77 G
(d) <#•* G σ*'
n+1'
fc+1
/ \ >nfb,n+l,fc x- x-fb,n+l,/c r 
,-
l
eJ
 U/ι£(τ7) 
- ^η 
IOΓ " fc
For /c = 0 ςf^
 0 was already defined and let G^
n+1'° = G£+1-see second step.
For k + 1 we repeat the proof.
Fourth Step. Repeating the proof of 2.4 (but, choosing the appropriate forcing
conditions from G^(η G tn \ {()}, aη = in)), we choose (G
b
η : η G ίn+ι \ tn) and
(r* : η G ίn+ι \ tn) such that: ^ffίίi) ^ G
b
η and r^ G Pin+1 Π 7V2, which is an
upper bound to G
b
η and r
b
n \in G G^/1+nx (just order £n+ι \ίn, and then choose
^,ίζ) by induction on r? see 2.4(2)).
. We choose (G^ : ry G £n+ι), (^ : ^ ^ *n+ι \ *n) satisfying (E)
and [z/ G ίn+ι&^ = Wi =^ ^ e Gj] and r^ G Pin+1 Π 7V3, r^fin G
Gη\(i+n),η(i+n)ι
rη a bound of G^\ this is possible as in the proof of the preser-
vation of properness.
Sixth Step. We choose (qη : η G t \ {0},^ = i) by Claim 2.6 for each such η
separately taking care that {r
c
v : v G tn+ι \tn,η < v} is pre-dense above q™
+l
(this will guarantee (E)(7)).
So, we have finished the induction step hence the proof of (4)2. Hence, the
proof of the Main Lemma also for x = 2. 
U2. ιoc
2.11 Claim. If Q has length α + 1, Q \a is an ΛW^-iteration for (£0, B\, £2),
l^~p« "Qα is strongly proper, and condition (4)x holds for i = α, j — a + 1"
is an A^TVβ^-iteration for (ίo?^ι?^2)
Proof. Straight.
Now we can phrase various conclusions on sufficient conditions for the limit of
a CS iteration not to add reals.

886 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
2.12 Conclusion. Suppose Q = (Pi,Qj 
: i < a,j < a) is a countable support
iteration of strongly proper forcing satisfying (*) defined below. Then we can
conclude that forcing with Pa adds no reals (hence, being proper, no new ω-
sequences of ordinals, and in fact Q is an ΛW^-iteration) where
(*) If i0 < iι < a then (*)*°'
<1'
<1+1 holds, where we let
(*)$
l<lί<a io < ii < Ϊ2 < α = *g(Q) and in V
p* : if N -< (#(*),€,<*)
is countable, {Q,io,H,*2> £ N, p e [PiJPio] Π W, ς',g" e P^/P^ are
(^GpJ^/PiJ-generic, p|n < ςfj, p^i < ςr" and ςf
7,^
7 force GPiι/P.Q Π
AT = G
1, ίΛen for some (ΛΓ[Gp.J,Pί2/Pi0)-generic r
7, r
77 G Pi2/Pi0 we
have: p < r',p < r", q
f < r',q" < r" and r
7,r" force (GPί2/Pio) Π N = G
r
for some G
r.
Proof. Straight.
2.13 Claim. 1) A sufficient condition for (*) from 2.12 is that each Qi is (D, £)-
complete for some simple 2-completeness system (see VIII, 4.2, 4.4).
2) We can in 2.11, 2.12 replace strongly proper by:
0 "proper not adding reals even after forcing by any proper forcing notion
not adding reals."
(3) If V N CH, K supercompact with Laver diamond then for some proper
forcing P not adding reals, of cardinality K, satisfying the K-C.C., in V
Pκ we
have HI = Nj', K2 = «, 2
K° = NI, 2*
1 = N2 of course and:
Axωι [Pr(<3)] where Pr(<3) means:
(A) forcing with Q does not add reals
(B) part (A) holds even in a larger universe which has the same reals gotten
by a proper forcing
(C) the forcing notion Q is proper and for some simple 2-completeness system
D (or, even a Ni-completeness system) Q is D-complete.
2.14 Remark. 1) Part 3 is a specific case, of course.

§2. Not Adding Reals 
887
We can now conclude the consistency of appropriate other axioms (see Ch.
VIII).
2) We can now solve the problems from the end of §1.
2.15 Definition. 1) A finite tree t is simple if it has a root(= a minimal
member) and all maximal η G t are from the same level ( the level of η in t
is Igη = | { ι / : ι / < r / } | ) . t i s called standard if t C
 ω>ω is closed under initial
segments, the order being <. Let max(£) be the set of maximal members of t.
2) If ε is a finite non-decreasing sequence of ordinals, n = Igέ, t a simple finite
tree with n levels then at^ = (α^ : η G t) where aη = ε^gη.
2.16 Theorem. Suppose S C <S<κ0(λ) is stationary, Q = (Pi,Qj 
: i < α*,j <
α*) a CS iteration, and for each α < α*, (*)S'^
+1 holds (see below), then forcing
with Pα* adds no reals, where for β < 7 < α* we define:
)^ Assume
(a) k <ω,n<ω,έ= (ε0, . . . ,εn_ι),ε0 < 
< εn-ι < /3,
πii < ω for i < n,
t a standard simple tree with n levels,
t* = t U {η
 Λ (i) : i < 2*, η G max(ί)}
is 
Λ / r. /on 
Λ / Λ 
, N
{[ι/2]> 
ι/ -77 (*>,^e max(ί)
and let ft = ft^, to — ^j *ι = fi+i
If 5 = (^ : ^ € to), let ρ
h - (qh(η) : r/ G tι>
(b) AT ^ (ff (χ), G, <* ) is countable, Q, λ0, e, /?, 7 G AΓ and
A^ Π λ0 G fb, while β < 7 < α*.
(c) GO C Pαtθjff - <β) Π A/" is generic over JV, (so we may write G0 = (G®
(d) p G NnPάtQ ε. . <7> is compatible with G° (note P«t0)£- . (/J> C PatQ s .
so this means ^topη\β € G°).
(e) ^ G Pαtl e- (β)
 such tnat ^ ^
s above GQ i.e., f G G0 => f'
1 < q.
Then we can find GI, f, such that

888 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
(α) GI C P&t 
_ „ ^ Π ΛMs generic over N
(βJp^G,.
(7) GO C GI (see remark in (d)).
(X\ r ^ P- 
- , v 
π < r
V 
/ 
^- 
ott 
ε 
\Ύ) ' :/ —
(ε) f is above Gf.
Proo/. We prove by induction on a < tg(Q) that for every β < 7 < α,
(in particular that Qfα is a CS iteration of £ -proper forcing). The main point
is the case 7 = α is a limit ordinal whose proof is similar to the proof in 2.IOC.
Π2.16
§3. Other Preservations
A central theme in this book is that it is worthwhile to have general preservation
theorems on iterated forcing. While it seems that this is reasonably accepted
in the community for properness, this seemingly is not so for preservation
theorems like "proper-f^u -bounding" and even less for a general framework
for them. So here we try another way to materialize the theme (in 3.1-3.6).
We then present several applications (but, generally, we do not repeat VI). A
simple case of our framework is [Sh:326, A 2.6(3), pp.397-9]
This section passed through several versions, e.g. in most of them the proof
of 3.6 was left to the reader. Goldstern [Go] starts from an earlier one, he cuts
the generality for the sake of completeness. Relative to the present version he
restricts himself to the case A and α* = ω, in Definition 3.4 omit demand (xi)
((x) irrelevant) and demand it adds reals. Also Rn C Rn+ι and he omits S and
g (so uses (
ωω)
v as a cover: a gαnv is chosen in the proof.).
Lately we added the proof of 3.6 (and added 3.4B, 3.13) and in some of the
cases (i.e. when d[a] G α, α* > 1 and we are not in Possibility G(G*)) we added
the condition 0& (or Θi).

§3. Other Preservations 
889
3.1 Context. S C ^^(A) for some A — \JS (usually 5 is stationary). For
a G S c[α],d[α] are subsets of α, and there are c'[α],d'[α] defined such that:
Case a: if d[a] G α then cf[a] = c[α], d'[a] = d[ά\.
Case b: if d[a] φ a then c[a] φ a, c[a] = c'[a] Π α, d[α] — d'[α] Π α.
.Adwse to ί/ie reader: At first reading the reader may think of a typical
case: χo « X? A = #(%o)? and elements of 5 are of the form TV Π fl"(χo)j f°
r
some N -< (H(χ), G, <*) such that χ0 £ W, all in the original universe VQ. A
typical case for d[a] φ a would be d[a] = α, or d[a] — a Π ωi, and below (in
Definition 3.2) choose one possibility, say (B).
In addition we have g = {gα : α € S) where gα is a function from d[α] to
c[a] and α* is an ordinal > 0.
The set \J S is, for simplicity, transitive, R is a three place relation, (more
exactly a definition of one) written as fRag, and whenever fRag, for some
α G 5 we have: α G α* ΓΊα and /, g are functions from d[a] to c[α]; for notational
simplicity \d[a] G α <ί=> c[o] G αl and (Vα G 5)[d[α] G α] or (Vα G 5)[d[α] φ α];
and d^α],^^] G α (of course d'[α] Π α = d[α], c'[α] Π α = c[α]), and ±^α is
absolute (enough to restrict to extension by forcings e.g. by proper forcing).
Generally, saying absolutely or in any generic extension V
Q, we may mean for
generic extensions by proper forcing, or any other property preserved by the
iterations to which we want to apply this section.
3.2 Definition. 1) We say (β, S,g) covers (in V) if for χ large enough, for
every x G H(χ)
v there is a countable TV X (#(*), G,<*) to which (β,5,g)
and x belong, and TV is (R, 5, g)-good, which means:
α = TV Π (\JS) belongs to 5, (so {d'[α],c'[α]} G TV) and: for every function
/ G TV such that / maps d[α] into c[α], (so d[α] C Dom(/) but not necessarily
Dom(/) C d[α]) for some β G α* Π α, we have ( f \ d [ a ] ) R β g a j 
the most natural
case is: / a function from d'[a] to c?[a].
2) We say (β, 5, g) fully covers (in V) if: the above holds for every countable
TV -< (H(χ), G, <*) to which (β, 5, g) and x belong and TV Π (\J S) G S and in
addition S is stationary.

890 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
3) We say (R, 5, g) weakly covers if d'[a] — d, c'[a] = c for every a G 5 (so
c, d are constants, for example ω) and for every / G
 dc for some α, α we have
3. 2 A Remark.
1) Actually, if the function a ι— >• gα is one to one, then we can omit α and write
/βgo where R is defined by /Λg iff (3α 6 S)[g = gα & Vαeαnα /#»&»];
the notation above is just more natural in the applications we have in
mind.
2) Of course, in Definition 3.2, x is not necessary.
3) If V
1 C V
2 C V
3 are universes, (β^S
1^
1) G V
1 weakly covers in F
2
and (£
2, S
2, g
2) G V
2 weakly covers in V
3, IgR^lgR
2 < ωγ and Vα(Ξα #1
have the same definition for all ί = 1,2 and α G S^ (which is absolute for
the cases of extension) and are partial orders and S
1 is a stationary subset
of 5<«1(US'
1) even in V
3 then (R,S
l,g
l) weakly covers in V
3.
4) We can translate an instance of Case a (in 3.1) to an instance of Case b,
by replacing d[a] by α and replacing / G
 d'
αlc[α] by a function f^ where
the function /I
αl is /Uθα\d[αj, for example. This may help to apply e.g. 3.3.
Possibility A, the case a G S => d[a] φ a but has a price: d[a] $. a makes
Definition 3.4 stronger, as the assumption becomes weaker (see clauses
(vii)-f(ix)), though we add the assumption in clause (x) so really there is
no clear order.
3.3 Definition.; We say (R, 5, g) strongly covers if (it is as in 3.1 and) it covers
(in V, see Definition 3.2(1)) and one of the following possibilities holds:
Possibility A: Each Ra is closed (2-place relation on
 dl
αlc[α])ΐ (note that if Ra
is open then R = \Jn<ω Ra,n where each R^n is closed, hence this possibility
applies replacing α* by ωa* , using R'ωθί+n = Ra,n) and: [α G 5 => d[a] φ a] or
α* = 1 or Θ/c for every k < α;, which means^
t It is enough that each {/ : fRaga} is closed.
tt Instead of the forcing notion P we can just demand that this holds
absolutely.

§3. Other Preservations 
891
if
(a) P is a proper forcing notion preserving "(#, 5, g) -covers" and in V
p,
Q is a proper forcing in V
p [or just P, Q are P^, Qi as we get in our
iterations]
(b) in V
p, N -< (#(χ),G,<*)
vP is countable, and (Λ, S, g)-good (so in
particular (β, 5, g) G N, a = N Π |J 5 G 5) and Q G N, p G Q Π N
(c) for each I < k we have: /£ G Λf is a Q-name of a member of
 d l
α'c'[α],
(d) Xi < X (Xι large enough e.g. (P,Q) 6 #(χι) but 2*
1 < χ), NI ^<
),e,<U is countable, ^ G TV, {Q,p, fi,S,g,/*} G 7Vl5 p G
(e) ft G αΠα* and //ί
then for any ?/ G N Γ\H(χι) there are Λ^, ^2 satisfying (the parallel of) clause
(d), such that y G AΓ2 and: for some 7^ G α, 7^ < /^ (for I < k) we have
Also instead of 0& we can require:
0J. z/in some (e.g. proper) forcing extension, N is (^, 5, g)-good, Λf Π |J 5 =
α G S, fc < ω, for t < k we have f^Rβ£ga (where βι G αΠα*), (f£n 
: n < ω)
converge to /; (i.e. f£n G
 dl
αlc[α]? Vx G d[α]3mVn > m[/;>n(x) - /*(χ)])
and (// 
: n < ω), // G N then for some 7^ < βt,Ίt € α we have
Vn<u; l\i<κ f^n^Λa
Remark:
1) we can specify how //, /^ come from Λ/i, (see the proof of 3.7E) (possibly
in some V
Q ', Q (P, 5, g) -preserving). This is close to VI §1 (if η G
 ωω,
ηn e
 ωω foΐ n < ω and ηn\n = η \n and x G Dom(JR) then for some Γ,
z#T and η G limΓ, (3°°n)(r7n G limΓ)). The original θ^ is better when
not all ((Pm : ra < ω) : n < ω) work, but some do.
2) So possibility A splits to four cases: [α G S => d[α] ^ 5], α* = 1, /\k 0^
Possibility B: Here we assume d[α] ^ α for α G 5 or α* = 1 or at least 0^ for
every k < ω. Let χ be large enough. For each α G S if (Skolem hull of a in

892 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
(H(χ), G, <* ) J Π U S — α, then player II has an absolute winning strategy (i.e.
an absolute definition of it) which works in any generic extension V
Q of V by a
(proper) forcing notion Q G //(χ); during the play, stipulating 6_ι = 0, in the
n'th move player I chooses /g
1, ...,/£ satisfying ft\d[a] G
 d'
alc[a] (see clause
(b) below) and α#, . . . , <_l5 <,
such that:
(α) for I < n ofy G α Π α*, and α£ < α™"
1
(/?) if I < n, a? = a?'1 then ft rftn-i = /Γ* Γ^n-i
(7) f?Ra?ga for l<n (hence α£ G α)
Player //chooses finite 6n, frn_ι C bn C α.
In the end player II wins if:
(a) letting α^ — min{α™ : ί < n < ω} and n(ί) = min{n : α™ = aι} and
ίi = U n<r /^
nt6n, we have //Λα£gα
n>n(£)
or
(b) α ^ (U 5)Π (Skolem hull of α U {ft : i < n < ω}).
Possibility C: Let χ be large enough. For each α G 5 in any forcing extension
of V (of our family) player II has a winning strategy in the following game.
In the n'th move: player I chooses Nn, Hn such that:
(a) Nn is a countable model of ZFC~ (so G
 Nn is G \ Nn but Nn is not necessarily
transitive), Nn Π (\JS) = α, 5 G ΛΓn, g G Nn, R G Nn (and d'[a] G
Nn, c'[a] G AΓn) and [t < n => A^ C AΓn] and AΓn μ= "(β, 5, g) covers" and
[/G 
d/[βMα]
(where βα = Vαeαnα* β«)
(b) //n C {(/o, . . . , fn-ι): for some finite d C d
;[α], each /^ is a function from
d to c'[a}} and //n G Λfn is not empty.
(c) if (/o, . . . , /n-i) € //n and d C Dom(/0) is finite ί/ien (/0 fd, . . . , /n-ι fd) G
ffn-
(d) if {/o, - 
- , fn-i) € //n, Dom(/o) C d, d finite C d[α]
tfeen for some {/Q, . . . , /ή_ι) e //n we have Dom(/^) = d, and jt C /^
(e) m < n & {/o, . . . , /n-ι) € //n =» {/o, - 
- , /m-i) € //^ (see below).

§3. Other Preservations 
893
Player II chooses (/£,..., f^) G Hn Π Nn and lett
/f* = {{/o,. 
, fn-ι)
: f°
r each £ the functions /g, /™ are compatible^ }
In the end player II wins if: for every ra < ω, (Jn>m /m *
s a function which has
domain d[a] and (Un>m/m)^αSα [note: if e.g. {/ : /#αgα} is a Borel set, then
the game is determined and a winning strategy is absolute].
Possibility A*: Each Ra is closed and
0 if αι,α2 G 5, αi G α2, ώen (c'[αι],d'[αι]) = (c'[α2],d'[α2]) and absolutely
for every / G
 d>
2lc'[α2] we have: (/ΓφiD/ϊαxgα! =» (/rd[a2])#a2ga2
and : (Vα G S)(d[α] £ α) or α* = 1 or Θi. Note that in cases A*, £*, C*, for
some (c',d') we have (c^αjjd^α]) = (c
1 ,d') for every α G 5 (as 5 is directed).
Possibility B*: We assume
0 if αι,α2 G 5, αi G α2 ίften (c^αij^^oi]) = (c'^],^
7^]) and absolutely
for every / G
 d'^c'[a2} we have (/ΓφiD^gαi =» (/rd[α2])#α2gα2,
and player II has an absolute winning strategy in a game similar to the one in
Possibility B except that only fQ,ά$)bn are chosen. And: (Vα G S)(d[a] φ a)
or α* = 1 or Θi
Possibility C*\ We assume
0 if αι,α2 G 5, αi G α2 then (cf[aι],d
f[aι\) 
= (^[α^d
7^]) and absolutely
for every / G
 d>
2lc'[α2] we have (/ΓφiDΛαxgα! =» (/Γφ2])Λαagαa,
and player II has an absolute winning strategy in a game similar to the one in
Possibility C
(a) as before
(b)* Hn C {/ : for some finite d C d'[α], /o is a function from d to c'[α]}
(c)* if / G ίfn, d C Dom(/) is finite ίften f\de Hn
(d)* if / G ίίn, d C Dom(/), d C d'[α] ώen for some f e Hn, we have
Dom(/') = d and / C f
(e)* ffn C
We could give the second player more influence, see proof of 3.6.
We could add i < m < n => /™ C f f , no real difference.

894 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
3. 3 A Remark. 1) In Possibility B, we can restrict the forcing to a suitable
family.
2) Below in the cases d[a] φ a we use (see Possibility C) d'[a] — c'[a] = \JS.
This is essentially a notational change.
3) In Possibility C* we can weaken <8>ι to the weaker version
(S>j~ iffoτ 
some forcing notion P, in V
p , (R, 5, g) still covers, N is a countable
elementary submodel of (H(χ)
v 
, G) to which (jR, 5,g) belongs, and so
is a model of ZFC~, and α
 d= N Π (\JS) G S and if αi G 5 Π TV and
/ € jy π (
dl
α)φ]) then for some α2, αi G α2 G S Π TV and /rd[α2]βα2gα2
then fRaga
3.3B Observation. 1) In
f Definition 3.3
(a) (Vα G 5)[d[o] ^ α] & Possibility B* implies Possibility B.
(b) (Vα G S)[d[a] φ a] & Possibility C* implies Possibility C.
(c) (Vα G S)[d[a] φ a] & Possibility A implies Possibility B.
(d) Possibility A* implies Possibility B*
2) If Possibilities A* or B* or C* of Definition 3.3 hold, (or just (g) from there),
Q is a proper forcing and Ihg "for every / G
 d/l
αlc'[α], for every αi G S Π N for
some α2 satisfying a\ G α2 G 5 Π TV we have (/td[α2])#α2gα2" and Q G AT ^
(#(χ), G, <* ), TV Π (U 5) G 5, N countable and g G Q is (N, Q)-generic then
q\\-
 UN[GQ] is (Λ,S,g)-good".
3) A sufficient condition for 0/e of Definition 3.3 is^
0^ if (a),(b),(c), (d), (e) are as in 0^ of Definition 3.3, then for some p' G GI,
Ίi ^ (βt + 1) n α an(i Borel set (even ΣI set over \J S i.e. quantifying over
ω(U5), with R, 5, g as parameters will do), At e N (for t < k) we have
(α) p
1 Ihg " 
G Λ for £ < /c"
Proof. (1) Easy, For clause (a) note that:
t We can replace (Vα G S)[d(a) 
φ α] by α* = 1, and/or add X G
{A,B,C} & (Vα G S)[d(a) £ α] implies Possibility X & Possibility X*. Note
that for possibility C and C*, w.l.o.g. α* = 1.
tt Many times this is easy.

§3. Other Preservations 
895
(i) increasing bn may only help player II as it just strengthen the restrictions
on player II,
(ii) having more ff 
may only help player II as it make the satisfaction of
clause (b) of possibility B (or B*) more probable. So for player II, having
a winning strategy in the two games are equivalent (but not so for the
'player I has no winning strategy; see hopefully in [Sh:311]). Similarly for
clause (b).
(c) We should give a winning strategy for player II. Let α — {xi : i < ω}
and his strategy is to choose bn — {x# : i < n}.
2), 3) Left to the reader. 
D3.3β
3.4 Definition. We say that a forcing notion Q is (R, 5, g)-preserving for
possibility X if (where X G {A,B,C,A*,B*,C*}, for Possibilities C, C* (in
Def 3.3) we can omit (iv)-(xi) and conclusion (a) as they hold vacuously; if we
omit "for possibility X" we mean X = C):
(*) Assume (i) χ\ is large enough, χ > 2
Xl
(ii) TV -< (JEΓ(χ), G, <*), N countable, N Π (|J 5) - a G S
and(g,S,g, X l)GΛΓ
(in) N is (R, S, g)- good (see Definition 3.2(1)) and p G Q Π N.
(iv) In Possibilities A, B we have k < ω and for i < k we have ft e N is
a Q-name of a function, Ihg "Dom(/£) = d'[α]"; for Possibilities A*,
B* the situation is similar but k — 1. For Possibilities C, C* we can
let k = 0.
(v) if I < k, then // is a function and Dom(//) = d[a]
(vi) for n < ω we have: p,pn G Q Π TV, p < pn < pn+ι
(vii) if d[a] G α then (pn : n < ω) G N and (// : I < k) e N
(viii) for each x G Dom(//) and t < fc, for every n large enough
Pn \\-Q
 afe(x) - //(*)"
(ix) for t < k we have f^Rβfga where /% € α ΓΊ α*.
(x) if d[a] $. α, X G N a dense open subset of Q then for some n,pn^X
(xi) if d[α] G α, then for some Λ/i a countable elementary submodel of
(if (%ι), G, <*J which belong to N and include

896 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
d[α] U φ] U {d[α], φ]} U {Q, S, g} U {f£ : £ < k} we have*:
/\Pn £ A/i, \/pn £ 2" for any J G Λ/i, a dense subset of Q.
n 
n
Then there is a g, 
p < q G Q such that: g is (AT, Q)-generic and
(a) q \\-Q "(/*Γd[α])Ay£gα for some 7^, 7^ < βi&Ίt G α n α*" for each £ < fc
(b) g l h Q "7V[GQ]is(Λ,5,g)-good"
3.4A Claim. 1) If α* = 1 then "Q is (Λ, 5, g)-preserving" (see 3.4 above) is
equivalent to : if N -< ( H ( χ ) , G, <*), N countable, N is (R, 5, g)-good, Q G N,
p £ N Γ\Q then for some (TV, Q)-generic g G Q, q > p we have g Ih "-/V[Gg] is
(Λ,5,g)-good"t.
2) If 0 (of possibilities A*, B*, C* of Definition 3.3) hold, Q proper and α* - 1
ί/ien: "Q is (f£, 5, g)-preserving" is equivalent to : for every / G
 d ^c
f[a] from
V
Q for some α2 we have α G α2 G 5, (/ίd[α2])jRα2gα2
3) If (β, 5, g) is as in Possibility A* (of Definition 3.3) and (Vα G 5)([d[α] G α])
and ®
+ below holds then: for any proper forcing notion Q, if !(-Q "(Λ, 5, g)
covers" ί/ien Q is (-R, 5, g)-preserving for possibility A* where
(g)
+ Assume^ we have a countable N -< ( H ( χ ) , G, <*) such that (Λ, 5, g) G N,
αi G α2 Π 5, α2 = JV Π (\JS) G 5, (φι],d[αι]) = (φ2],d[α2]) and
{/,{/n : n < α;)} G AT and /βαgα2, and {/,/n : n < ω} C ^Iφx],
/n#anga! and (Vx G d[α])(V*n)(/n(x) = /(x)) and α, αn G α* Π αi. Then
for some n < ω and finite d C d[αι] we have
* We may add a\ C JVi
JVi Π (J 5 - αi and
(φι],d[αι]) = (φ],d[α])
and similarly add in Θjt of Definition 3.2. Then in the proof of 3.5, 3.6 change
somewhat (as in the proof of 3.4A), using some absoluteness for xRga
t This gives the results of VI §3.
ΐΐ We can add A/i G AT, NI -< JV, A/i Π (U 5) = aι and even more in this
direction.

§3. Other Preservations 
897
(*) iff 
€ d^c[a2]9 f'Rangaι and f'\d = fn\d then f'Raga2
(we can look for /' G F, or in 7Vι[Gg] for every GQ C Q generic over V
where Q G NI is proper, Nι[G] Π V — N\, N[G] Π V — TV, the second is more
restrictive)
4) If Q is (R, 5, g)-preserving for possibility X for some X then Q is (fi, 5, g)-
preserving.
Proof. 1) Left to the reader.
2) Remember that (by <g> of case A*, B*) there is a pair (c',d
r) such that:
α G S => (c'[α],<f [α]) = (c'X) Also note
αi G 5 & αi G α2 G 5 & α2 = TV Π |J 5 & S G TV ^< (if (χ), G) ^> αx C α2.
First we assume "Q is (R, 5, g)-preserving" and let p G Q, α G 5 and / be
such that p \\-Q "/ G
 d'Wcf[a]
n i.e. p \\-Q "/ G
 d'c'\ Take AT x (if(χ), G, <*)
such that α, (β, 5, g), p, f G TV, and TV is (^, 5, g)-good. So by the assumption,
for some (TV, Q)-generic q we have p < q G Q and <? Ihg 'W[Gg] is (jR,5,g)-
good". Let α2 be MΊdJS), so ς" Ih /fd[α2] G
 d^c[a2] satisfies /rd[a2]^a2ga2",
as required.
Second, to prove => i.e. the "if" direction, assume that in V® for every
/ G
 d d from V® for some a\ we have a\ G 5 and f\d[aι]Raιgaι. This means:
for every GQ C Q generic over V the statement above holds. Now let, in V,
N -< (ίf(χ),G,<*) be (£, 5,g)-good and assume q G Q is (AT, Q)-generic. Let
<? € GQ C Q, GQ generic over V, so it suffices to prove V[Gg] Ih "^[Gg] is
(Λ, 5, g)-good". So let α2 - 7Vn(U 5), and let / G N[GQ], f G ^'^^[02] -
 d'c'.
So for some αi G 5 we have f\d[aι]Raιgaι, but N[GQ] -< (ίf(χ)[Gg], G) hence
w.l.o.g. αi G A^[Gg] Π 5 = N Π S. Now apply (g) of Definition 3.3 possibility A*
(or B*, or C*), which we are assuming, to deduce /fd[α2]#α2gα2. As this holds
for every such / really V[GQ] N N[GQ] is (Λ, S,g)-good.
3) Let JV, JVi, /o, /Jo? P = (Pn ' n < ω) be as in Definition 3.4 for possibility A*.
Let α = N Π ((J 5). See in particular clause (xi) there. We can find M2 -< 7V2 -X
(if (χi), 6, <*J, {TVi, (pn : n < ω), /0} G M2 G A^2 G N and ΛΓ2n|J 5 - α2 G 5,

898 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
M<2 Π (\bigcupS) = 62 and (c[62],d[&2]) = (φ2],d[α2J) = (φ],d[α]). Also we
can find (pn>m : n,m < ω), (fn : n < ω) such that: pn < pn>m < pn,m+ι,
pn?o is (M2,Q)-generic, and pn?o If- "/o^αng62" f°
r some αn € 62 Π α* and
(Pn,m : ra < ω) is a generic sequence for ΛΓ2 (i.e. if J C Q is dense, I e N2 then
(3m)(3r G Jn ΛΓ2)(r < pn,m)), /n G
 dWφ], and
Vx G d[α]Vn < u;V*m(pn,m Ih /0(x) - /„(*)).
W.l.o.g. (pn,m : n,m < ω}, (αn : n < ω} and ( f n ' n< ω) belongs to AT.
Clearly fnRan^b2- (Here we used {/ : fRangb2} is closed and (pn,m m < ω)
is generic enough; Borel suffices. Why? Let Gn = {p G QΠ AΓ2 : (Ξm)p < pn,m}
be a subset of Q Π AΓ2 generic over AΓ2, so AΓ2[Gn] N "/o[Gn]βαngαι" but
/n = /θ[Gn].)
Now apply (g)
+ with 62? ^? /o 5 /^o, (/n : ^ < ^)» {<^n : ^ < α;) here standing
for αi, α2, /, α, {/n : n < α;), (αn : n < ω) there, and get n and dn as there.
Let m be such that pn>m force a value to /ofd n, so it is fn\dn. Let q G Q be
(AT, Q)-generic such that pn?m < q. Now suppose # G GQ C Q, GQ generic over
V\ by the conclusion (*) of (8>
+ (i.e. the choice of n, dn) we get /0[GQ]jR00gα.
We still have to prove
 UN[GQ] is (β, 5, g)-good". But this holds by the proof
of 3.4(2) above.
4) Easy. 
E\3ΛA
3.4B Claim. 1) Assume
(a) (β, 5,g) is as in 3.1, (Vα G S)(d[a] G α),
(b) (β, 5, g) covers,
(c) we have
θf Assume we have a countable N -< (ίf(χ), G, <*) such that (β, 5,g) G N,
αi G α2 Π 5, α2 = A'' Π (\JS) G 5, (φι],d[αι]) = (φ2],cί[α2]) and
{/,(/n : n < ω)} G TV and /βαgα2, and {/,/n : n < α;} C ^Iφ^,
/nβατιgαι and Vx G d[αι](V*n)(/n(x) = f(x)) and α, αn G α* Π αi. Then
for some n < ω and finite d C d[αχ] we have
(*) <//' €
 dt
α2]c[α2], /'J?Qngoi and /'fd = fn\d then /'βQgα2,

§3. Other Preservations 
899
moreover
(c)+ for every proper forcing P preserving "(Λ, 5, g)-covers" we have 0+ in Vp.
Then in the definition of "(Λ, 5,g) strongly covers for possibility X" X = A*,
B* we can omit Θi of Definition 3.2.
2) Assume (a), (b) as in (1) above and
(c) for each k < ω we have
Θfc~
+ as in Φ+ but in the conclusion we replace "some n" by "for every n
large enough"
or at least
Θ^ Assume we have a countable N -< (-ff(χ), G, <*) such that (R, S, g) G
AT, αi G α2 Π 5, α2 - Nn (|J5) G S and (φι],d[αι]) = (φ2],d[α2])
and {ft 
: I < k} U {(f* 
: n < ω) : ί < k} G N and ΛflαWgαι, and
{/,,/* : £ < fc,n < ω} C Φilφi] f^RanWgaι and α(f), αn(*) G
αi ΓΊ α*. T/ien for some n < ω and finite d C d[a\] we have
(*) ite<k,fίe 
d^c[aι}, flRan(e)Saι and /^d = ft\d then f,Ra^.
(c)
; Moreover (c) is preserved by proper forcing preserving "(Λ,5,g)- covers".
Then in the definition of "(Λ, 5, g) strongly cover for possibility X", when
Vα G 5 (c[α],d[α]) = (c,d) X = A, B we can omit (Vfc)θjfe.
Proo/. Like the proof of 3.4A(3). 
D3.4B
3.5 Claim. 1) If (R, 5,g) covers in V and Q is an (β, 5, g)-preserving forcing
notion ί/ien in V^, 
(Λ, 5, g) still covers.
2) Assume (Λ, 5, g) covers. The property "(Λ, 5, g)-preserving for possibility
X" is preserved by composition (of forcing notions).
Proof. 1) Just read the definitions.
2) Each part has some versions, according to whether in Definition 3.4 we
choose Possibility A, A*, B, B* or Possibility C, C* and whether d[α] G α or
not.
Let Q = Qo * Qι; let χι, χ, AT, AΓ1? α, fc, /£, ft, /; (for £ < fc), p, pn (n < ω)
be as in Definition 3.4. Let p = (q^.q
1) and pt = (ς$,ςfj). By condition (vi) of

900 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Definition 3.4, for each n < m < ω we have q^ \\-QQ "Qi |= q
l < q\ < g^",
hence without loss of generality:
(*)ι Il-Qo "Qι ϊql<ql
n<ql
mϊoιn<m< ω\
(*)2 for every x G d[a] for every n < ω large enough, (0,<j£) forces f t ( x ) to be
equal to some (specific) Qo-narne, for each i < k.
[Why? By clause (x) or (xi) of Definition 3.4.]
Now we define /^, a Qo-riame of a member of
 dl
αlc[α] , such that Ihg0 " for
each x G d[α], for every n large enough q\ Ihg1
 
ί[f'i(x) 
= /^(x)]'". Easily:
d[α] G α =ϊ f't G TV.
By Definition 3.4 (and the assumption) there is go G Qo which is
(TV, Qo) — generic, is above g° (in Q0) and forces TV[Gg0] to be (Λ, 5,g)-good
and for some 7^ < 7^, 7^ G AT we have go "~Q0 "/^^'βo f°
r ^ < fc"
Let GO C Qo be generic over V such that go G GQ. We want to apply
Definition 3.4 with N[GQ], q
l[G0], (?J[ί?o] : t < ω), {//[G0] : ^ < fc>, (/J[G0] :
I < k), (^ : I < k), Qι[Go] (and sometimes 7Vι[G0]) here standing for AT, p,
( p t \ I < ω), (ft 
: t < fc), {/; : £ <k), (βe:ί < fc), Q there (and sometimes
NI) (and same (β,5,g)).
So we have to check the assumptions of Definition 3.4; now we check all
clauses of Definition 3.4.
clause (i): clear by the "old" (i).
clause (ii): holds as g0 € G0 is (TV, Q0)-generic so TV[G0] Π (U S) = N Π (|J S)
and the "old" (ii).
clause (Hi): holds by the choice of g0 € G0 that is g0 "~ "TV[G0] is (Λ, 5,g)-
good" by the choice of go and clause (b) in the conclusion in Definition 3.4.
clause (iv): clear by the "old" (iv).
clause (v): If x G d[α], then (x G A/" or G TVi and) for some i and Qo-name
r G N or G ATX we have lhQo "^g] lh?1 "/^(x) = r e c[α]"j" (as the set of
(ΠhΓi) ^ Qo x Qi such that
"[n It-Q.
 B//(a:)=Γ"]"

§3. Other Preservations 
901
for some Q0-name τ, is dense open subset of (<3o, Qi) so some (q®, q\) is in it,
and there is such τ so w.l.o.g. τ G N or G 7Vι). So /i[Go](α:) = l[Go] € φ]
clause (vi): by (*)ι above (in our proof) this holds.
clause (mi): Check (see (*)2)
clause (vίίi): This is by the choice of f £(x) and (q\ : I <ω).
clause (ix): by the choice of QQ (and as QQ G G0) and the choice of 7^ (for
l<k).
clause (x): by the "old" clause (x) and as in the proof of clause (v) above. In
details, if N[G0] N "J C Qι[GQ] is dense open" so I G N[G0] then for some
Z
f G N we have Ihg0 "T
7 is a dense open subset of Qi" and Z = T'[Go]; let
J = {(ro.Γi) € Qo * Qi : IHQo "n e J"'},
clearly J7 G NI is a dense open subset of Qo * Qi hence for every large enough
*,
(rf,?/) e J hence ς£[G0] € ?;[G0] - J,
hence we finish.
clause (xi): Use αi, 7Vι[G0] Note that we do not require 7Vι[G0] Γ\V = NI, still
Nι[GQ] X A^[G0], A^ifGo] G A^[Go] and {^[G0] : t < ω) is as required there.
So really we can apply 3.4 and get qι G Qι[G0] which is (A/"[G0],Qι[Go])-
generic, and Qι[G0] N V[Go] < ς[ι" and (7^ : i < fc), 7^ < 7^ such that
^i "~Qι[G0] "ftRiΛa" - As G0 was any generic subset of Qo to which g0 belongs,
for some Q0-name qι we have ς0 Ί~Q0 "9ι i
s as above". Now (ςf0, #1), (7^ : £ < k)
are as required. If we do have the demands on a\ in Definition 3.4, clause (xi)
we should replace NI ny another model in the intermediate stage as done in
the proof of 3.4A (but we use absoluteness of xRga). 
Ds.5
3.6 Theorem. 1) Suppose X G {A,B,C,A*,£*,C*} and in V we have
(R, 5, g) strongly covers, (Pi,Qj 
: i < a,j < α) is a CS iteration of proper,
(Λ, 5, g)-preserving for possibility X forcing notions, then Pa is a proper,
(β, 5, g)-preserving for possibility X forcing notion.

902 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
2) This is true also for more general iterations, as in XV when |α*| < NI (in
fact all cases in VI 0.1 apply) '.
Proof. 1) We prove by induction on ζ < α, that: for every ξ < ζ, Pζ/Pξ is
(5, 5, g)-preserving for possibility X (in V
p*), moreover in Definition 3.4 we
can get Dom(ς) = (ζ \ ξ) Π N. For ζ zero, there is nothing to prove, for ζ
successor - use 3.5(2), so let ζ be limit, ξ < ζ. Let Gpξ C Pξ be generic over
V and χ,-ΛΓ,p, k,fι,fϊ,βι 
(for I < fc), and possibly pn, χι,Nι be as in (*) of
Definition 3.4 (with Pζ/Pξ,V[GP(i} 
here standing for <2, V there); for X = C,
C* we have k = 0 so /^, /|, βι disappear and for cases d[a] φ a we have no
NI and for X = A*, B* we have k = 1. Let G0 = {p G PC/
GP* : P € #ι when
well defined and p e N otherwise and for some n, p < pn} (used in the proof
of possibility B, d[a] G α).) We can choose Cn>Co = £, Cn < (n+i G A/" Π ζ and
sup(JV Π C) = Un<u; Cn Let go G Gpξ force all this (so we can work in V, so we
have GO).
The proofs are built after the proofs of preservation of properness and the
proofs in VI §1, VI §3 (particularly the proof of Possibilities A, d[a] G α).
The case when cf(ζ) > 
NO is elaborated when possibility B, d[a] G α, is
considered (note that the arguments there apply to all Possibilities).
Possibility C: Let (ft:ί< 
ω) list the Pc-names / G
 d'^d[d\ satisfying / G N.
Let (rn : n < ω) list the P^-names of ordinals which belong to N. We choose
by induction on n, <?n, fn,Hn 
(f™ : ( < n) such that:
(a) qn G Pζn, Dom(gn) \ ξ = AT n Cn, ζ?n+ι ΓCn = 9n (of course <?0 is given)
(b) qn is (JV[Gpξ],PCn)-generic
(c) gn Ih "N[GPJ is (Λ,5,g)-good".
I But in the applications presented here we "forget" this. Of course if we
consider forcing notions with an additional order <pr on them, and the cor-
responding iteration (see XV), then "pure (0,2)-decidability" has to be added
for appropriate θ (mainly d[a] G TV, θ = HO).

§3. Other Preservations 
903
(d) pn is a P^-name of a member of Pζ Π N such that
(e) Jΐn is a P^-name, Hn = {(/o, 
,/n-ι) 
d 
<Ξ d[α] is finite and
?n^Pζ/Gpu "</ord,...,/n-ird>^(/0,.-.,/n)
M}
(f) /£ is a P^-name such that
^
n "~
pcn "(/F : -^ < n) ^ ^?n and for every ra < n we have
Pn+llGpJ JKp/Ptn «-- Λ // 2 /Γ"
(We can demand that gn forces that pn+ι [GpCτι ] forces ί < n => /^ [Gpζτι ] C
/£, minor difference.)
(g) gn Ih "pn+i forces a value to rn".
Now there is no problem to carry out the definition but still we have
freedom to choose (/£ : ί < n). For this we use the winning strategy from
Possibility C of Definition 3.3; choosing there the nth move of player I as:
ίfn[Gpζrι] 
= {{#05 
>#n-ι) : f°
r some finite d C d[a] with have:
gt € dc[a] for I < n and
F ''{/ofd, - - ,/n-lΓd) ?έ (50, 
- ,fln-l>"}
(so the nth move is defined in V
p^\ we can work in yLevy(^0,(2
 PO£ )
+)^ ]^ow
of course while playing, the universe changes but as the winning strategy is
absolute there is no problem.
Possibility (7 By 3.3B(2) it is enough to show that for every Pς-name /0 of
a function from d'[o\ to c'[α] for some b e 5, ((c'[&],<f[&]) = (c
7[α],d!'[α])) and
/o^bgb This is proved as in the proof of Possibility C, dealing only with /0
(and using Possibility C* of Definition 3.3 of course.)

904 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Possibility A, d[a\ φ a: Let {TJ : j < ω} list the P^-names of ordinals which
belong to N. We shall choose by induction on j < ω, rij < ω such that :
(A) rij < Πj+i < ω
(B) for some sequence (TJJ : ί < j) G ΛΓ, with τ^t a P^-name we have:
(β) for I < j we have pn. \[&, 0+ι) lf-pC£+1 "r
(c) if j = i + M<ithenih P ζ w
 cκrκ>,o+ι)<P
(D) if j = i + 1 then lhPζ "pnί ί[Ci, C) < P*, ί[C<, 0"
[Why can we carry the induction? It is enough to prove for each j that,
given (rii : ί < j) as required, the set of candidates for p G Pζ satisfying the
requirements on pnj is dense which is easy by clause (x) of (*) of Definition
3.4.]
Let {fj : j < ω} list the Pζ-names of members of
 d [
α'c
7[α] which belong to
N (for ί < k we let f j be as given). Note also that we can replace (pn : n < ω)
by (pnj ' j<ω).
Hence without loss of generality we have r^j G N for j < i < ω, T^J a P^.-
name such that pι\[ζe,ζ) lhpς/ "τ£ = r^\ P t \ [ ζ j , ζ j + ι )
 
lhPc,-+1 "Π,j+ι = !*,/'•
Let h(j,x) < ω be such that Xh(jίX) 
— fj(%) 
We can now define for n < ω,
j < ω, fnj a P^-name of a function from d[a] to c[α]. Let fnj(
χ) 
be τ/ι(j,χ),n
if Λ(j,x) > n and τh(^x}M^x} if /ι(j,x) < n so /^ = /ί for j < fc.
We choose by induction on n, ςfn, fcn, a% (for £ < fc + n) such that:
(a) qn <E PCτι, Dom(gn) \ ξ = N n Cn, 3Wi ΓCn = 9n, (^o is given).
(b) <?n is (7V,PCn)-generic
(c) qn lhpCrι "AΓ[GpcJ is (£,S,g)-good"
(d) kn is a Pζ^/Gp^-name of a natural number, kn < kn+ι (for Possibility
(A), with which we are dealing) kn — n + 1 is O.K).
(e) PfcoΓCo < 9o (in PCo).
(0 9nrCnlf-p C n ^*n +ιr[Cn,Cn +l)<ςn +ir[Cn,Cn +l](inP C n + 1/Pc»Γ
(g) for £ < /c 4- n, α^ is a Pζn-name of an ordinal in α Π α*, α^
+1 < α™,

§3. Other Preservations 
905
(h) for i < k 4- n we have qn \^Pζn "/n,^α?gα"
The induction step is by the induction hypothesis (and Definition of
"(β, 5, g)-preserving" (see Definition 3.4)). In the end let q = \Jn<ω qn
Now why q is (N, Pζ) -generic? Clearly q G Pζ (by condition (a)); let q G Gζ C
Pζ be generic over V, Gζ C Gζ, and Gζn = Gζ Π Pζn. Now for each Pζ-name
r of an ordinal, for some j < ω, r — TJ necessarily &(*) = kj[Gpζ. 
] > j (see
condition (d)) hence: QJ forces that Tj,j[Gζj] 
£ N. But for i > j and ji G [j,ω)
we have ft Γ[&,CM-ι) < Pji \[ζι,ζι+ι) hence by (e)+(f), Pj\[ζt,ζι+ι] < #+ι» so
together ft Γ[0» Ui<w Ci) < Q so ft t[Cj, C) < 95 hence also ςι forces TJ = r^ j. By
the last two sentences <? lhpζ
 uTj[Gpζ] 
G TVπOrd" so # is really (JV, Pζ)-generic.
Now for each I the sequence (α^ [Gζ] : ί < n < ω) is non increasing (see con-
dition (g)) hence eventually constant; say for n € [n^ώ) has value α|. Now if
x G d[α], j < α; then for n > ft(j,x) clearly fcn > h(j,x) so /j(x) = /J>n(x),
so for every finite 6 C d[α], {(/j,nf^)[GpCτι] : n < α;} is eventually constant,
equal to ( f j \ b ) [ G ζ } . 
So for n large enough, ( f j \ b ) [ G P ζ ] 
= (/*n^)[GPζJ and
So in F[GC], [/j][Gζ] satisfies
<g> for every finite b C d[α] for some /', /^[G] f6 = /'ffc and /
;βαjgα.
But we are in Possibility A of Definition 3.3, so Ra* is closed, so fjRa*&a This
finishes the proof that q Ih "A/^G^] is (β, 5, g)-good" . The last point is noting
< α£?0 = βι fo
f ^ < fc, so we finish.
Possibility B, d[a] £ a: The proof is similar to the previous case, only the win-
ning strategy in the game is described in Definition 3.3 (Possibility B) to make
the kn large enough such that the part of the proof concerning fι[Gζ}Ra^ga
works.
Possibility A* d[a] £ a: By 3.2B(1), the next case implies it.
Possibility B* , d[a] $. a : By 3.3B(2), we have to take care of /o only, and this
is done as in Possibility B, d[a] $ α, not increasing the set of fis we consider.

906 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Possibility B, d[a] G a : We shall reason as in the proof of Possibility A, d[a] $. α,
for NI (which vary).
If cf (ζ) > NO then the set J — {p G Pζ : for some ζ
f < C, and P^-names
gι we have p Ih "ft — gι for i < fe"} is a dense subset of Pζ and belongs
to NI. So for some n, pn G T, by renaming without loss of generality p G T;
w.l.o.g. ζ' < (Ί. We can easily find (qn : n < ω), (p^ : n < α;) such that
<Zn+lKn = (/n, <7n € Pζn, <?n IH "N[GPJ 
IS (£, 5, g)-gOθd", Ql Ih "//A^fo"
for some 7^ G α, 7^ < A and gn lhPζn "p'n G PζnN, p'n\ζn G GP^ and
m < n => p^ < p^", and pό = p, and for every Pζ-name of ordinal r G N for
some n, ςn lhpζτι [p^ lhpς "τ — aτ",ar G AT] where ar is a P^-name of an
ordinal. Now qω = \J qn is (TV, P^)-generic, and p < qω] so ςfω is as required,
n<ω
so in the case cf(£) > H0 we are done^.
So we are left with the case cf(C) = αo We have N* = 1 or /\ 0^; as the
A:
later case is harder we speak on it. This time we use the full version of clause
(xi) of Definition 3.4. Let {rj : j < ω] list the P^-names of ordinals from N
and {fj 
: j < ω} list the P^-names of functions / G
 dt
α'c[α] which belong to N
with fj = fj for j < k and {xj : j < ω} list d[a]. We now define by induction
on n < ω, Mn, G
n, gn, p^, 6n, q^(i < k + n) (note that go and also G° are
already given):
(a) qn G PCn, Dom(gn) \ ξ = N Π Cn \ C, 9n+ι ίCn = 4n (ς
fo is given).
(b) qn is (AΓ,PCτι)-generic
(c) g nlhp ζ τ ι <W[GpcJis(£,S,g)-good"
(d) Mn, G
n, p^, 6n, α^ (for £ < fc + n) are P^-names
(e) qn ll~pζτι "bn is a finite subset of d[α], Mn a countable elementary
submodel of (^(χι)[Gpζrι], G, <*J which belongs to N[GPζn}^ and
^ This applies to all possibilities.
t And if we adopt the demand on a\ in clause (xi) of Definition 3.4, we
should add Mn Π ((J 5) G 5

§3. Other Preservations 
907
(f) qn lhpCτι "G
n C Pζ/Gζn 
ΓΊ Mn[GpJ is generic over Afn[G?PζJ,
pn[QPζn] G G
n so p'n G Pζn n TV (i.e. j/n[GpCn] G PCτι Π N) and
KKn € GpCrι and /,- G Mn, /, [G"]#αngα»
(g) ίn+i II- Vn < K+i, /;[G
n] ff>n C /J [G
Λ+
1] \bn for j < ft + n".
(h) ςn Ih
 up'n+ι[Gpζn] forces a value to τ'n (in Pc/GpCn)" and to /,- f6n for
j < k + n.
There is no problem to carry the definition using f\k 0^. Now we have some
freedom: choosing the bn. So actually this is a play of the game, where the
choices made above are fixing the moves of player I (with some extras). It will
suffice to have player II winning, which is O.K. (so less than "I wins the game"
is used).
In the end we let qω = \J qn and continue as in Possibility A, d[a] φ a.
n<ω
Possibility 5*, d[a] G α: Combine the proofs for possibility B* when d[a] φ a
(i.e. use 3.3B(2)) but Mn = NI and the proof of possibility B when d[a] G α.
2) Left to the reader 
D3.6
3.7 Application. Open dense subsets.
3.7A. Context and Definition. Let (η% : t < ω) enumerate
 ω>ω such that
^m ίn £ {nl 
'- i ^
 m}? let fRnd mean
f,g 
:
 ω>ω ->
 ω>ω and η G
 ω>ω \ {η% : t < n} implies that there is v such
that Ύ]<v< v* j(v) < η~g(η).
Note that if fRng and g
1 :
 ω>ω ->
 ω>ω and (Vη)(g(η) < g'(η)) then fRng'.
Let, for some subuniverse V
7, S C 5<^1(ίί(Nι)
v' ), and for α G 5, gα G \JS
be such that (V/)(/ G α & / is a function from
 ω>ω to
 ω>ω ^ Vn /#nβα)
Clearly such g = (gα : α G 5) G V exists.
Let Λ = Vn<u; ^n» and let ^* be the familY of functions from
 ω>ω to
 u;>α;.
3.7B Claim. 1) (Λ, 5, g) covers zjffS is stationary and

908 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
2) If (β, 5, g) covers then it strongly covers (for possibility A*) and
(V/€
 ω
3) If N -< (ff (χ), 6, <* ) is countable, (β, 5, g) covers and N Π (|J 5) = α G 5
then N is (β, 5, g)-good.
4) Each Rn and R — \Jm<ω Rm are transitive.
Proof. Straightforward. E.g.
(2) First let us show that 0f of 3.4B(1) hold. So suppose that N, 01, α2, /,
( f n ' - n < ω) and α, αn are as assumptions of θί~. For n < ω we define
d°n = {ηϊ:Kn and (Vm <
4 = 4 U {77; : £ < an}.
Note that
(*)ι d^Cd^C. 4 are finite subsets of
 <ωω,
(*)2 each dj, (ί < 3) is closed under initial segments,
(*)3 (Vi/ 6
 ω>
ω)(V*n)(ι/ e 4).
Using (*)s one easily constructs a function /* G F* Π A/" such that
(*)4 (Vfc < ω)(τ,jE ^ d°n =s> /nΛfc/*)
(note that the sequence (d^ : n < ω) is in ]V). Then for some β < ω we have
and
Take n such that
(*)δ (Vm</?)(^€
and put cί = {z/ : (3τy
Suppose that /' G F* is such that f'Rangaι and /
7fd = fn\d. We are
going to show that fnRa^a2' To this end suppose that t < a and consider the
following three cases.

§3. Other Preservations 
909
Case l\ηϊi (%
Then ηl φ d° and hence (by (*)5) i > β. Since gαι#/3gα2
 we find v £
 ω>ω such
that
ηΐ < v < ^gcnH < f?ΓgαaW?)
It follows from (*)2 that v ^ d^, so i/ = 77^ for some k > an. Since f'Rangai
we find ry such that
r
as required.
Case 2: ry; G
Since 77^ ^ d^ we know ί > β. As /*-R/3ga2> we fi
n<i fc such that
Necessarily r?£ ^ cί^ and therefore fnRkf*- 
Consequently we find v such that
Plainly v G d (as 77^ G cZ^) and therefore /n(^) = /'Mϊ so we g
et what is
required.
Case 3: η^ ed^
Since fRaga2 we find i/ such that
ηl < v < z/ VM < ^Γgα2(^*)
As 77! G d^ we know that /n(^) = /(^) so we conclude
This finishes verifying the clause θί". Now we may apply 3.4B(1) and easily
check that (Λ, 5, g) strongly cover for possibility A* (i.e. this claim gives θi of
Definition 3.3).
The other parts should be clear. 
ΠS.TB

910 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
3.7C Claim. Suppose in V, (R, 5, g) covers, Q is a proper forcing notion, then:
Q is (#, 5, g)-preserving for possibility A* iff
(so also \\-Q "(R, 5, g) covers" is equivalent to them).
Proof. The "only if part is straightforward.
The converse implication follows from 3.4A(3) (note that the demand <8>
+
was proved in the proof of 3.7B(2)). 
ΠB.TC
3.7D Claim. If (Λ, S,g) covers then "proper + (Λ, 5, g) - preserving" is pre-
served by composition, and more generally by CS iteration.
3.7E Claim. 1) Suppose (Λ, 5, g) covers, ίften for every dense open A C
 ω>ω
there is a dense open β C
 ω>ω, B e\jS and £ C A.
2) If F
v is the family of functions from
 ω>ω to
 ω>ω and F C F
v is such that
Vg3f [gRf] and 5 C S<^l(H(χι)) is stationary then we can find g = (gα : a G
S), gα G F such that (Λ,5,g) covers.
Proof. 1) For a dense open set A C
 ω>u; define fΛ^Fby
/A(n) is such that ry
 Λ /Λ(T/) ^ ^4
Let n<ω, g£\JSbe such that fA^nd and define
£ = {77 G
 ω>ω : for some z/ G
 ω>ω \ {77^ : t < n} we have ^g(z') < r^},
Clearly B is open dense, B G \J 5, and B C A.
2) Straightforward. 
Da.rβ
3.7F Remark. 1) In 3.7A we could have weakened fRng to: η $ {η$ 
:
£ < n} implies that for some ϊ/,ι/ < ι/
A/(ι/) < η" g(η), call it βJJ' (and
R
W,R
W,(S,R
W,%) are defined accordingly). So we can demand () ^ Rang(#).
Then 3.7 B-E holds for this version too. (For 3.7B(2) second clause: for every

§3. Other Preservations 
911
/ G
 ωω let /' : ">ω -*
 ω>ω be such that f((n}) = (n,n + 1, . . . ,n + /(n)>,
and /'({}) - /'({O}). So there are g' G \JS and n such that /'#n#'. Let
<j(n) - min{£g(ι/ VM) : i/ VM < (n)
 Λ/'«n»}; easily /* <* g G (JS-)
2) Assume Λ is as in 3.7A and 5, g as in 3.1. Then also the inverse of 3.7E(1)
holds, see 3.7H.
3.7H Claim. Suppose (fl.SSg
1), (5™,S
2,g
2) is as in 3.7A for the same V
(for R
w defined in 3.7F) and S
1, 52 C 5<κ0(Hι)
y/ are stationary even in V,
then: (R,S
l,g
l) covers
ifffoτ 
every dense open A C
 ω>ω there is a dense open B C
 u;>ω such that
covers.
Proof, first => second: this is 3.7E(1).
second =Φ ί/wrrf:
Let /(G V) be a function from
 ω>ω to
 w>α;; we define A/ = {p : p G
 ω>ω
and (ΞZ/XZ/"/^) < p)}. Clearly A/ G V is a dense open subset of
 ω>ω. So by
the assumption there is a dense open B C
 
ω>α; which belongs to U^
2 and
B C ^4y. So, working in V there is g G |J52 such that: g is a function from
ω>ω to
 u;>α; and for every η G
 u>>α; we have η" g(η) G 5. It suffices to prove
that fR0g (as fR^g =» /Λ^f and # is a partial order). Now for every η G
 ω>ω,
we know 77
 Λ g(η) G β hence 77
 Λ g(η) G A/, but by its definition this implies the
existence of v G
 ω>α; such that ι/
Λ /(i/) < η* g(η). So ί/ is as required.
t/iirc? => /irsί:
Let / be a function from
 ω>ω to
 CJ>α;. Let us define a function /' from
ω>ω to ^^^α; as follows. For η G
 ω>α;, let (p% 
: k < kη) be a list of {p 
:
p G
 ω>ω,ίg(p) 
= £g(r?) and /\t<ίgMP(f) 
< ηW}* so ^ appears in it and
1 < kη < ω. W.l.o.g. η = Pη 
. We now choose by induction on fe < fc^, a
sequence ι/£ G
 ω>α;. Let ι/° = 17, and ι/^
+1 be:
(^ U ^ \[lgη, €gι/*))
 Λ /[pξ U (i/* r[/OT, «g^))]
 Λ (0) .
Finally f(η) is defined by η* f(ή) = ^^^ remember η = p^'1 .

912 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
So by the assumption there is g' G U 52 such that g
1 is a function from
ω>ω to
 ω>ω and f'R
wg'. As (J^
2 includes the set of functions from
 ω>ω to
ω>ω in V, without loss of generality f'Rfig', and as {) φ Rang(/'), by 3.7F we
know Vr/[£g(/
/(?7)) > 0). We now define a function g from
 ω>ω to
 ω>ω\ we define
g(η) by induction on /c = ig(ή)', given 77 of length fc, we choose by induction
on ί < k natural numbers iι G {η(t ),η(£ ) + 1} such that for ra < k we have
^ is not the first element of /'((io, ..., ^-i)) (possible as f
f ( ( i o , . . . , ^-i)) has
length > 0).
Let 77' = (io» 
,fcfc-ι) and #(77) = g'(η'). Note: 77' is well defined and for
every ί < k the sequence η
f (and even η'\(£ + 1)) is not an initial segment
of (n'\tyf(rf\f). 
By the choice of g
1 and definition of Rfi we know that
there is ι/° G
 ω>ω such that ι/° < z/° V'O'
0) < */Vfa')
 
BY the choice
of r/',--^
0 < r/) so necessarily r/' < zΛ Let z/
1 = 77 U (z/°Γ[fc,^gι/
0)), so
77 < z/
1, ^(i/
1) - 4(ι/°) and (Vί)^
1^) < ι/°(ί)]. Hence by the choice of
/'(i/
0) there is ί/
2,^
1 < ι/
2 < ι/
2V(^
2) < ^
2V(^
2)
Λ{0) < ^V'K), Just
choose m such that i/
1 = p^0 and put ι/
2 d^
f p^0
 Λ «£ r[^g^
0,^g^)). Note that
ί
/ l Λ/
/(i
/ 0) 53 η^d'W) —
 77^5
f(
?7) and hence So /.Ro^ As ^ was defined from /'
alone; and R is a partial order so we may easily 
finish. 
Πs.7#
3.8 Application. Old reals of positive measure:
This is closely related to Judah Shelah [JdSh:308, §1].
3.8A Context and Definition.
Let 5 C 5<N1(fΓ(Nι))
vl, A
 d= \JS transitive model of ZFCΓ and S a
stationary subset of <S<N1((J'S') ^or ^ ^ ^ let gα e
 ω2 be random over α, for
simplicity: gα G \JS and α* = ω. For n < α* we define relation Rn by fRng
iff: g G
 ω2, / a sequence of nonempty rational intervals (in our context means
Ip = {77 G
 ω2 : p < 77} for some p G
 ω>2) andt Σι<ω Lb(/W) < 1 (where
Lb({τ? G
 ω2 : p < η})
 d= 2"€βW), and m > n ^> g φ /(m).
I Lb stands for Lebesgue measure.

§3. Other Preservations 
913
3.8B. Claim.
1) If (R, 5, g) covers then it strongly covers (for possibility A).
2) If (R, 5,g) covers then SΠ
ω2 does not have measure zero (equivalently, it
has positive outer measure).
3) If (R, 5, g) covers then "proper -f (R, 5, g) - preserving" is preserved by
composition and more generally by CS iteration.
4) If in V, A C
 ω2 is not null (i.e. does not have Lb measure zero) and
S C S<^1(H(^ι)) is stationary then for some g = (gα : α G 5), we have:
(β, 5, g)-covers and α G S => g0 G A
Proof. 1) We check that Possibility A holds, so we have to check Θ/c So in V
p
let Q, A/", α, JVi, αi, G
1, p, fc, /^, /3^, // (ί < fc), x, ?/ be given as there (so by 3.8A
we have d[a] G α). Let (pn : n < ω) be such that p < pn < pn+ι G G
1, (so p,
pn e Q Π 7Vι) and Λg6cι Vn<u, ^ < Pn Let 7V2 X (#(χι), €, <*J be countable
such that
{Nι, (Pn n< ω), {//,// : £ < fc),x,y} G 7V2
and α2
 d= ^2 Π \JS e 5 and AΓ2 e ΛΓ. Let (p£ : m < ω), /;>n be such
that: p^ = pn, p^ < p^+i, (p^ : m < ω) is a generic sequence for (JV2,Q)
and p^ Ih "/^fm = /?nίm"; without loss of generality (//>n,p^ : I < k,n <
ω,m < ω) G AT. Clearly for some m|n < ω we have f^nRm* gα. As we
can thin the sequence ((pn,Pm '. n < ω) : n < ω) as long as it belongs
to N without loss of generality for some rational un G Q, 0 < u < 1, and
pn Ih ΣLb(/*(ί)) G (u^^n + l/A:2
2n] and (u£ : n < α;) G N is strictly
i 
~
increasing and (u^ -f l/kZ
2™ 
: n < ω) is strictly decreasing, and pn forces a
value to ft\m^n such that 
J^ /^(i) > u^ and (m^?n : n < ω) G AT. So it
i<mί>n ~
is forced by pn that /^ίm^,m has the value above, and £] /(i) < l/fc2
2n,
i>mι,n ~
so //n satisfy this too. For every n we have Σ^<fc Σΐ>m* n^(//W) < 1/2
2"
and p^ Ih "/^ \m^n = // fm^?n" , hence Σ Σ{Lb (7p): for some £ < fc, n < ω we
have /p - /; (i)} < Σ ΣLb/;(i) + ΣΣ Σ Lb/;ιΠ(i) <
n
Σ Σn 1/2
271 so this is a sum of two reals < oo (note that in first sum for each
t

914 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
i it is on the set double appearances not counted). Hence gα belongs to only
finitely many of the sets \J{IP : for some t < k,n < ω,Ip = ft,n(i)}, so the
rest is easy.
2), 3) are left to the reader.
4) Straightforward. 
DS.SB
3.8C Claim.
(1) Assume S C S<^ί(H(^ι)), and S is stationary as a subset of So^US),
and g : 5 ->
 ω(2 is such that:
(*)s,g if x, 5 G H(χ) then for some countable N -< (#(χ),G<*) we have
{x, S, g} G JV and N Π (|J 5) = a G S and gα belongs to no measure
zero set from N.
Then: if (Pi,Qj : i < α, j < a) is a CS iteration of proper forcing proper
notions, each Qi preserving (*)sι,gι whenever US' G \JS
1, (Vα G 5
1)(α Π
(US) G 5), gi - gαn(Us)> this means yPi 
N " i f (*W then Ih0i
(*)5ιjgι") then Pa preserves (*)s,g.
(2) Assume X C.
 ω2 has positive (outer) Lebesgue measure. If (Pι,Qj 
: i <
α,j < α), is CS iteration of proper forcing, each Qi preserve the property
(*)s,g whenever g : 5 —> X, then Pa preserves the property of "being of
positive outer measure" for X' C X.
Proof. 1) As we can replace Q by (Pβ+i/Pβ, Qj : i < a — β, j < a — /?}, and 5 by
5ι C S as long as (*)sΊ,gt5ι holds in V
P(3, it is enough to prove \\-pa "(*)5,g"
Now letting S* = {α G S : gα is random over α}, clearly 5* C S is stationary
and 5*,gΓ5* fit 3.8A.
We prove by induction on i that
(a) Pi is (R, 5*,g|"5*)-preserving (for possibility A) and
(b) Ihp. "Qί is (JR,5*,gί5*)-preserving".

§3. Other Preservations 
915
Arriving to i, clause (a) holds by 3.8B(3). To prove clause (b) first we deal
only with clause (b) of definition 3.4 and, for χ large enough in V
Pί we let
W = {N : (i) N is a countable elementary submodel of (ff(χ), G, <* ),
to which 5*, g, Qi belong and a = N Π (|J 5) <E S,
and gα is random over N
(ii) for some p G Qi Π N there is no q such that
p < q £ Qi, q is (W, Q^-generic and
tf'l-Qi "Wβil is (£,£*, gΓS*)-good}.
If (b) fails then W is stationary (otherwise if χ' = (2*)+, {W,χ} e N ^
(ff(χ'), G, <* ) then for JV the required conclusion holds and we clearly finish).
For p G Qi let Wp be defined like W with p (in clause (ii)) fixed. So by
normality for some p, Wp is stationary. But defining g
1 = (g^ = gNn\ 
ι s :
NeWp), clearly V
Fi Ih "(*)ιvpϊgι" but F
Pί N " lhQί -(*)ιyp,gι" contradicting
the assumption.
But we have to deal also with clause (b) in the conclusion of Definition
3.4, so define
W' = {N :(i) as before
(ii) for some peQiΓ\N and k < ω and fι G N(ί < k)
Nι,aι,(pn :n <α;),//
as in (*) of Definition 3.4
there is no q satisfying (a) 4- (b) of Definition 3.4 }.
Assume toward contradiction that clause (b) here fails, hence W C S<χQ(H(χ))
is stationary and w.l.o.g. let (m^n ' t < k, n < ω) G N be as in the proof of
3.8B. So for some x - (p,ή, (pn ' n < α;),^Vι,αι, (// : I < k), (m^n : t,n)) we
have
W'x
 ά= {N eW :x e N gives a counterexample in (ii)
of the Definition of W'}

916 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
is stationary. Let χι » χ In (V
Pi)~\ clearly {gα : a = N Π \JS, N G W'x} is
not null. Also for every club E of <S<κ0 (H (&ι)
v l ) we have: the set {gα : α G Ue}
is not null where UE = {N Π H(χι) : N G W£} Π E.
So for some club £"*, the outer measure of {gα : α G £/#} is minimal. So
really in V
Pί we have a Q^-name E* G ff(χι). We can find χo < X large enough
such that letting
: α G £ * } and W£' - {N Π #(χ0) : N G W'x}
we have all those properties and there are <* -first hence belong to Λ/Ί. Replac-
ing NI, (pn : n< ω) by N2, (p'n : n < ω) by 3.8B, we have {W£, χι, E' , x] G N^
So choose N G W'x.
Now for some n, pn force outer Lebesgue measure of {gα : α G U^,} is
> 1/n*, n* > 0, and if n is large enough, it forces value to /^fra, and force
Σ Lb(/(i)) < l/n*(fc + 1). Let pn G GQi C Q^ GQi generic over F
Pί.
i>m
So E® - {AT -< H(χ) : ^[GQi] Π Όrd C AT} is a club, so restricting
ourselves to it does not change the outer measure. Let N G UE' Π E® , then
V ' ^ftRβtgNr\ |5. There are 2fc possibilities: which i, and if bad i is > fcra^n
or < m^)7l, later is impossible.
The outer measure of former is < fcl/n*(fc -f 1) < 1/n*, but by the choice
of the club E* contradiction.
Remark. 
Really this is part of a quite general theorem. We shall return to it
elsewhere.
2) Should be clear. 
DS.SC
3.9 Application. Souslinity of an ωi
Here we return to the issue of IX §4.
3.9A Context and Definition. Let T be an c^i-tree, say with [ωa,ωa. + ω) \
{0} being the (1 -f α)-th level. Let W C ω\ be the set of limit ordinals δ — ωδ
(for clarity). Let for t G TΊ,β <Ύ,t\β be the unique s G T/?, such that s <τ t.
Let for δ G W, aδ = δ U
 ω>δ, S = {aδ : δ G W}, d[a] - α, c[a] = a (so d' = ωi,

§3. Other Preservations 
917
d =
 ω>(jj\) and {tn : n < 75 < ω} be a subset of T§ for some non zero 75 < ω.
Let α* = ω\ and lastly we choose^ gα such that: for a G a Π α*, we let fRaga
iff one of the following holds:
(α) a = 0 and f~
l({l}) (Ί {s e T<δ : 0 < s <τ t
δ
f(0}} ± 0 or
(β) 0<a<δ and /"Hi
1}) n is G τ«* : */(o) Γ<* < * and 5 ^ 0} = 0 or
(7) -(/(O) G 7,).
Let Y = {ί^ : n < 75, 5 € VF}; we say the tree T is F-Souslin if: for χ large
enough, for every x e H(χ) for some N we have: x, T e N ^ (H(χ), G, <*),
TV countable, δ = N Π α i, and for n < 75, {s : 5 <r £„} ^
s (^» T)-generic. For
W CW let
- {t* : n < 75 and 5 € W}.
3.9B Claim. 1) If /\δTδ = {t
δ
n : n < 75} then Y-Souslin means Souslin. If T
is y-Souslin then T is not special, even not W-special.
2) If T is a F-Souslin tree then (R, 5, g) fully covers (so for any forcing notion
Q, if in V
Q the tree T is still F-Souslin, then (β, 5,g) still fully covers),
3) If (R, 5, g) covers then (f£, 5, g) strongly covers for possibility A.
Proof. 1), 2) Straightforward.
3) Clearly each Ra is closed and as [α G 5 ==> d[a] φ α] we are done.
3.9C Claim. A forcing notion Q is (R, 5, g)-preserving iff Q is (Λ, 5, g)-
preserving for possibility A.
Proof.
The "only if" direction.
Let N -< (ff(χ),G,<*) be countable (β,5,g) G N, and p, (pn : n < ω),
(ft : ^ < fc), (/^ : ^ < fc), (ft : £ < fc) be as in Definition 3.4.
We can assume 2**
1 < χι = cf(χι), 2
Xl < χ.
t As commented earlier, actually the identity of gα does not matter only the
Sets R^a = {/ : fRa

918 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
Let w = {I < k : fι(0) < 7$ and βt φ 0}. For t G k \ w choose xt G T Π N
that xt <τ ί^(0) and \Jn<ωpn 
H~ " f έ f a ) = 1 or fι(0) > 75". So for some
such that
n(*)
Let
X = {<7 G Q : for each I e w,q forces a value to /g(0), say m^, and it
forces a truth value to (3x)(t^ \βt <τ x & /^(x) = 1)}.
So for some n > n(*), we have pn G J, so those truth values which it forces
are all false (as if pn Ih (3x)(ί^ ί^ <τ x & /*(#) = 1) then for some n' > n,
pn/ forces a specific such x so F/(x) = 1, contradiction). So any (AT, Q)-generic
ς G Q which is > pn and satisfies (*)ς below is as required, where
(*)q for n < 7^00;! , the branch {t : t <τ t
δ
n] of T Π N is (AT, Γ)-generic.
Its existence follows from "Q is (β, 5, g)-preserving."
ΓΛe "i/
;; direction.
It is trivial (reread Definition 3.4). 
Πa.9C
3.9 D Definition. We say Q is F-preserving when: if TV -< (Jϊ(χ),e,<*)
countable, <5 = A/Ή Wι, {Y, T} G W, and p G Q such that n < 7 => {t : t <τ t
δ
n}
is (N,T)- generic, then there is ςf, p < ς G Q, <? Ih "n < 75 =» {ί : t < t
δ
n} is
(AΓ[GQ],T)-generic."
3.9 E Fact. Q is Y-preserving iff Q is (β, 5, g)-preserving.
3.9 F Conclusion.
If T is an ω\ - tree, Y C T ίften the property "Q is ^-preserving and is
proper" is preserved by CS iterations (and composition).
3.10 Application. Being a nonmeager set

§3. Other Preservations 
919
3.10A Context and Definition. Let 5 C S<^l(H(χ)), for a 6 5, d[a] =
c[a] =
 ω>ω. Let fRg iff (/ is a function from
 ω>ω to
 ω>ω and g a function
from ω to ω) & (3°°m)[(g\m) *f(g\m) < g}. Let g = (gα : a € 5) where
Remark. Note that if TV is a model of ZFC~, then: "g is Cohen over TV" iff
(V/ G TV)(/ : ">ω -> ">α; =s> (3°°m)[((/rm) V(ί/M < g])
iff
"(V/ G N)(f : ">«; -+ ">u; => (3m)[(^N) V(^M < #])
(as AT is closed enough).
3.10B Claim. 1) If (Λ, 5,g) covers in V ίften it strongly covers in V (by
Possibility B, C).
2) In V, if AC.
 ωω is not meager and 5 stationary subset of e.g. S<N1(.ff(Nι))
then for some g we have (Λ, 5, g) covers in V and g(α) G A for a G 5.
Proof. 1) We can show that in Definition 3.3 Possibility B holds. The winning
strategy is in stage n, to choose bn so large that for ί < n, there are at least n
members in solutions of {m : (gα fra)
 Λ /^(gα ί^) <1 ^} &
re guaranteed (similar to
VI §3, because the property has the form (3°°m)) (i.e. G$ Borel set) (remember
α* = 1 so Θfc is not needed). The proof for possibility C is similar.
2) Straightforward. 
ΠS.IOB
3. IOC Claim. If (JR, S,g) covers, then "proper f(Λ, 5, g)-preserving" is pre-
served by composition and more generally by CS iterations.
Proof. Remember that (jR, 5, g)-preserving means "for possibility C" (the case
where Definition 3.4 is more transparent). Now use 3.6. 
Πs.ioc
3.10D Claim.
(1) Assume 5 C 5<^1(ff(Nι)), and 5 is stationary as a subset of
and g : S -+
 ω2 is such that:

920 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
(*)s,g if x, 5 G H(χ) then for some countable N -< (#(χ),e<*) we have
{z, 5, g} € N Π (U 5) G 5 and gα belongs to no meagre set from N.
Then: if (Pi,Qj 
: i < a,j < a) is a CS iteration of proper forcing
proper notions, each Qi preserving (*)sι>gι whenever \J S e \J S
l , (\/a e
S
1)(aΠ (\JS) e S), gi = gαn(y(S) (and (*)sι,gι is defined as in part
(1); this means V
Pl N " if (*)5ι)gι then Ihg. (*)5ι?gι") then Pa preserve
(2) Assume X C
 ω1 is not meagre. If {P<, Qj :i < aj < α), is CS iteration of
proper forcing, each Qi preserves the property (*)S)g whenever g : 5 —> X,
then Pa preserves the property of "being of not meagre" for X' C X.
Proof. Like 3.8C.
3.10E Claim. If (β, 5, g) covers in V and Q is a forcing notion which is Souslin-
proper in any extension (i.e., we have a Souslin definition which in any generic
extension is Souslin-proper) and Ihg "1^(1^2 is not meager" (in every extension)
then in V® we have: (R, 5, g) still covers and Q is (Λ, 5, g)-preserving.
Proof. It follows from Lemma 3.11 below.
3.11 Lemma. [Goldstern and Shelah] Assume that Q is a Souslin proper
forcing, say definable with a real parameter r*, with the property
II-Q "V Π
 ω2 is not meager"
and continues to have these properties in any extension of V (by set forcing).
If N -< (-ff(χ), 6, <* ) countable, x0 a Cohen real over TV and p € N Π Q, then
there exists a condition g > p, g is (AT, Q)-generic (i.e. (N, Q
v)-generic), and
g r l h "z0 is Cohen over N[GQ].
n
We will prove this through a sequence of lemmatas. We always assume that
Q is a forcing notion satisfying the assumptions of our lemma, TV is a count-
able elementary submodel of some (ff(χ), €) (χ big enough, regular), M is a

§3. Other Preservations 
921
countable transitive model satisfying a large enough fragment of ZFC. We let
λ G TV be a regular cardinal that is reasonably big (say λ > D2) but still small
compared to χ, say 2
2 < χ.)
3. HA. Fact. Assume B is a complete Boolean algebra, BQ C B a complete
subalgebra and {β,f?o} £ N. If GO C BQ is TV-generic, then there exists an
TV-generic filter G C B extending GQ.
Proof. Easy.
3.11B. Fact. Assume B G N is a forcing notion, XQ £
 ω2 a Cohen real over TV.
Assume c is a jB-name such that
\\~B "c is a Cohen real over V"
Then there is a TV-generic filter Gβ C B such that C[GB] is almost equal to XQ.
Proof. Without loss of generality we assume that B is a complete boolean
algebra. For any formula φ in the forcing language of B we write {φ] for the
Boolean value of φ. We write [<p] = 0 if 
H-# -«/?. Assume that XQ G
 ωc2 is
Cohen-generic over TV, and c£
ω2 is forced to be Cohen-generic over V. Let
Then T is a tree, and lhβ "c G limΓ". So LimT cannot be nowhere dense,
so for some ηQ G T we must have (Vτ/)(ryo < *7 €
 ω>2 =» [r? G T]). For notational
simplicity only we assume 770 = 0 (otherwise we have to consider c\[ίg(ηo),ω)
and XQ\[ig(ηo) , ω) instead of c and #o)
Let BQ C Bbe the complete Boolean algebra generated by the elements [77 C c],
where η ranges over
 ω>2. Then BQ is a complete subalgebra of B, and the map
that sends η G
 ω><2 to fr/ C c] is a dense embedding of
 ω>2 into BQ. Thus
#0 induces an (TV, Q
N)-generic filter GO C BQ. By 3.11A, G0 can be extended
to an TV-generic filter G C B. Clearly c[G] = XQ, as for every n G ω, letting
J we have [ry C c] G GO C G. 
ΠS.IIB

922 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
3.11C. Lemma. The formula "M C ω xω codes a well founded model of ZFC~
with universe ω, q is (M, Q)-generic, and q \\-Q x is Cohen over M[Gg]" is
equivalent to a Π^-formula (about x, q, and M as parameters). (M-generic
means M'-generic, where M' is the transitive collapse of M. We will not
notationally distinguish between M and M'.)
Proof. First we note that "q is (M, Q)-generic" is a Π}-statement, as it is
equivalent to
for every A G M such that M |= "A is pre-dense in Q", and
for every r > q there is α G M,M |= "α G A", and α,r are compatible.
(Recall that in a Souslin forcing notion the compatibility relation is Σ\ and
πi )
If q is (M, Q)-generic, then we have: q Ih "x is Cohen over M[G]" iff for all
T G M such that M |= "τ is a Q-name of a nowhere dense tree C
 ω>2", and
/or all r > q there exists a condition p' G M Π Q and a natural number n such
that p', r are compatible, and M |= "p
7 Ih xfn ^ r". Again it is easy to see that
this can be written as a Π^-statement. 
Πs.nc
3.11D. Lemma. Assume M is as above, p G Q Π M, A a comeager Borel set.
Then there exist a real x G A and a condition q > p such that q is (M, Q)-
generic, and q Ih "x is Cohen over M[Gg]."
Proof. Let ς0 > P be (M, Q)-generic. Work in V[G], where q$ G G C Q, G is
generic over V. Since V Π 2
ω is not meager (in V[G.]), Av^ is comeager, and
the union of all meager sets coded in M[G] is meager, we can find x G V(~] Av^
which is Cohen over M [G], by absoluteness x G A. Now let q > qo be a condition
which forces this. 
ΠS.IID
3.HE. Proof of the Lemma 3.11: Recall that λ G N is much bigger than cj,
but much smaller than χ. Let M
 d= (ff(λ), G). So M G AT.
Let f? be the algebra that collapses #(λ) to a countable set (using finite con-
ditions) i.e. Levy(N0, \H(X)\). Clearly lhβ"M is a countable model of ZFC~."
We assert that

§3. Other Preservations 
923
(*) \\-β "There exists x (Cohen over V) and q e Q, q is (M, Q)-generic, and
\\-Q x is Cohen over M[Gg]".
To prove this assertion, work in V
B'. The set of all closed nowhere dense sets
coded in V is now countable, so the set of Cohen reals over V is comeager,
and hence contains some comeager Borel set A. Now apply the previous lemma
3.11D. This finishes the proof of the assertion (*).
Prom the assertion we can get names x and q such that all the above is
forced by the trivial condition of B. Clearly we can assume that x and q are in
TV.
Now apply Fact 3.11B to get an TV-generic filter G C B (in VI) such that
x = x[G] is almost equal to XQ Let q — q[G], Then
N[G] 
\= "q is (M, <2)-generic, and q \\-Q c is Cohen over M[Gg]"
and N[G\ Π Ord = TV Π Ord.
Since Π^-formulas are absolute, we can replace N[G\ by V (remember
N[G] C V). We can also replace x by Xo5 since modifying a Cohen real in
finitely many places still leaves it a Cohen real. Thus,
V \= "q is (M Π TV, <3)-generic, and q \\-Q x0 is Cohen over M[Gg]."
(Why MΓiN and not M? As we should look at M as interpreted in TV[G], note
N[G\ \= "M is countable"). As M Π N and N have the same dense sets of Q,
q is (M, <3)-generic iff it is TV-generic. Similarly, x0 is Cohen over M[G] iff it is
Cohen over TV[G], so we are done. 
Πa.n
Remark. We shall deal with more general theorems in [Sh:630].
3.12 Concluding Remarks. 1) We may consider the following variant of this
section's framework concentrating on d[a] G α (of course if RajS — Ra we g
e^
back the previous version).
(A) We replace Ra by Λα>t for t e Q such that s < t ==> βα?s C Λtt)t; we
may use Λα = VS<ΞQ^<*,S

924 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
(B) TV is (fl,S,g)-good iff a
 d= N Π ((JS) G 5 and for every / G N
satisfying / G
 rf'
α'c[α] for some α < α* and t G Q we have fRa,t9-
(C) "Strongly covers" is defined as before except that 0^ is changed
parallely to the change in (D) below, i.e. I.e.
Θ/c if (a) - (d) of (*) of 0^ from Definition 3.3 and
(e) βt e aΓ}a*,tι < st are rationale and ft[G
l}Rajga
then for any y G N Π H(χ) there are TV2, <72 satisfying (the parallel of)
clause (d) such that y G TV2 and: for some 7^ G α, 7^ < /%, s^ G Q, sj < s^
(for £ < fc) we have /*[G2]Aγ<,βjgα (for £ < fc).
(D) Q is (β, 5, g)-preserving means: if (*) of Definition 3.4 holds (having
now fiRβitΛa and s^ > t^ s^ G Q) then there is an (TV, Q)-generic g,
p < q G Q such that q \\-Q "for I < k there are 7^ < /?£ and 5^ G Q
such that 7^ = ^ =^> s < s^ and
2) If we have 0jζ of 3.3B(3) ί/ien (b) of the conclusion in Definition 3.4 can be
omitted (as it follows from "q is (N, Q) -generic" under the circumstances).
3) Another variant of our framework is as follows.
(α) Let R be a definition of a forcing notion, i.e. partial order, [Zy : y G Y } be
a definition of a family of dense subsets of it (e.g. all), all absolute enough,
K be a definition of a family of forcing notions closed under CS iterations
(so e.g. if Qi G K
Vt, Vi^ = V?
1 then Ql * Q2 € Kv\ similarly for limit.
We have: if in V^0, p < q G R, y G γ(γQQ\ p G Iy then this holds in
Qo*Qι
~
(β) S G Vb, 5 a stationary subset of S<
(7) for α G 5, gα is a directed subset of .RΠα not disjoint to αΠ Iy for y G Y Πα
(absolute as in (a)).
(δ) in V^
0 , TV is (R, 5, g)-good if: TV -4 (H(χ), G, <* ) is countable, (Λ, 5, g) G
TV, α
 d= TV Π H(χ*}
v* G 5 and [y G TV Π yyQ° =» 3p G J^ G gα(p < ς)]
(of course gα is still a directed subset of Rv ° Π α) .

§3. Other Preservations 
925
3.13 Preservations connected to Norms.
3. 13 A Context and Definitions.
1) Assume we have (n*,nδr, w) where
(α) ή* = (n* : i < ω) is strictly increasing.
(/?) nor = (noli : i < ω), where nor^ : ^([n*,n*+1)) —> ω satisfies:
u\ C u2 C [n*,n*+1) => noii(ui) < nor^(u2)
noΓiflnJX+i)) >0
(nori([n*,n*+1)) : i < ω) converge to infinity
(^) w = (wi : i < ω) where Dom(^) = ω, Rang(κ i) C {[/ : U C
^([
ni»
ni+i)) i
s downward closed, {/ ^ 0} or even^ Dom(^) =
 ϊ+lω
and for every u C [n*, n*+1) with nori(u) > 0 and x G α; (or x e
 l+
lω
otherwise) for some u' C u we have u' G wn(x) and nor^u') >
nori(u) — 1 (if ϋ) is omitted then Wi(x) is: let x(i) code wx^ C
P([n*,n*_}_1)), now let ^(x) = ^(^ if {^(x) : i < ω} is O.K. and let
Wi(x) = P([ra*,ra*+ι)) otherwise.
2) Let
'
n*+ι)) = ίί:ίi ς KX+ι) and (norί(ί4) : i < ω)
converge to infinity nor^) > 0}
3) We define two partial orders on Πi<ω^([
nΐ»
ni+ι))
:
t < s iff ti 2 5^ for every i < α;
ί <* 5 iff ti 2 Si for every i < ω large enough
(note that < is a partial order, <* is a partial order such that every
increasing ω-chain has an upper bound)
t 
Instead of ω = Dom(wi) or
 lω = Dom(tί i) we can use other finite or
countable set.

926 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
4) We call Γ C Π*<u; P(K, nj+1)) a nice set if:
(a) Γ is <*-directed
(/?) every <* -increasing ω-chain in Γ has an upper bound in Γ
(7) for every x G
 ωω, for some t G Γ we have ti G Wi(xi) (or ti 6
Wi(xf(i + 1))) for every i < ω large enough.
3.13B Fact.
!) (Πzχu,^([
n*X+ι))> <) is a partial order.
2) (ΠΓ<u; ^([
n? »
 nπ+ι))> ^*) i
s a partial order with any <*-increasing u -chain
having an upper bound.
3) t < s=>t <* s.
4) If CH (or just MA) then there exists a nice Γ and hence 5, g as in 3.13C
(2), (3) below exist.
Proof. Straightforward.
We want to show that niceness of Γ is preserved under limit of CS proper
iteration
3.13C Context and Definition.
1) Let Γ be nice in a universe VQ,
2) 5 C 5<Nl(ff(Ni)) be stationary,
3) g : 5 -* Γ be such that: gα - (gfl|i : i < ω) G Π*<^ P(W , <+ι)) and
(α) for every x G (
ωω) Π α we have (V*i < ω)[gα,ΐ ^ ^ί(^ί)]
(/?) for αi G α2 from 5 we have gαι <* gα2 (can ask that moreover
gαi ^ a,2)
4) d[α] = c[α] = ω
5) -R = (.Rn : ra < ω) and xRnga mean (Vi < α;)[i > n — > gα^ G W^x^)]
3.13D Claim.
1) (Λ,5,g) is as in 3.1, it covers (in V, see 3.2, we are assuming 3.13C of
course)

§3. Other Preservations 
927
2) If in V
p , we have "(^, 5, g) covers" then it also strongly covers by Possi-
bility A*
3) If (R, 5, g) cover in V
p , Q is a proper forcing notion preserving "Γ is nice"
then Q is (β, S, g)-preserving.
Proof. 1) Read definitions.
2) Check (for Θi, can apply 3.4B and the proof of Θ"
1" from there in the proof
of part (3) below).
3) We use 3.4A(3), so the least trivial condition is <8>+ from there. Let F
p, N,
ait &2> /, (fn 
'• n < ω), α, (an : n < ω) be as there. We can find a finite d C ω
such that:
(*) if I G ω \ d then gαiι* 3 gα2,^,
w.l.o.g. also {0, . . . , α — 1} C d, {0, . . . , QQ — 1} C d (remember α < α* = ω).
Let ki > i be maximal such that fi\ki = f\k^ so lim ki — oo.
i— >oo
Also w.l.o.g. a.i> ki> sup(d) and we can find an infinite A C ω such that
([fci,αi) : i G A) are pairwise disjoint, and w.l.o.g. A e N and n G [minA,α;) =>
/n(0) = /(O). Now define 0 G
 ωcj by:
for i G A and^ίω 
fci,αi 
C
so clearly g e
ωωnN, hence V ##fcgα2
 so w.l.o.g. £ G α; \ d => gα2,^ G wι(g(l)).
k
Omitting finitely many members of A we can assume i G A => d C fc^ and
hence /^fd = /fd. We will show that any i G A, d* = {0, ... ,α* - 1} are as
required in Θ+, so assume /' G
 d^c[a2] =
 ωω, f\di = fn\di and /
;βα.gαι. So
let £ G α; \α, and we should prove gα2^ G wt(f'(i)), thus proving f'Raga2
 an<i
finishing the proof of Θ
+; we divide this to cases.
case 1: i φ di
So t > oti and we know fRaitiaι hence gαij| G wι(f(ΐ))\ 
but also ^ ^ d
hence (see (*) above) gαι,^ 2 gα2,^ an(i
 wi(fW) 
ιs downward closed so
gα2,^ ^
 wt(f'(£)} as required.
cα,5e ^:£G d. \ {0,. ..,*;»- 1}
Soki<t< α<. Asledi we know /'(^) - Λ(£) and /<(ί) - #(£), but as £ φ d
we have gθ2^ G wι(g(£)), together we finish.

928 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
case 3: i < ki
But f\ki = fi\ki = f\ki, hence f(t) = /(£), and as fRaga2 we are done. So
we have finished checking the condition (g)
4" of 3.4A(3), thus proving 3.13D(3).
ΠS.ISD
3.13E Conclusion. If Γ is nice, Q = (Pj,Qi 
: j < δ,i < δ) is a CS iteration
of proper forcing, each Qi preserves the niceness of Γ then P§ preserves the
niceness of Γ.
3.13F Remark. Similarly for the other variants in VI 0.1, for pure preserving.
3.14 Example (of 3.13).
3. 14 A Context. We work inside the subcontext of 3.13.
Let n* = (n* : i < ω), n* « m* « /c* « n*+1.
By renaming we replace [ft*,ft*+ι) by cl ~ cti = {(^1^2) : -^1^2 £
[n*, fc*)}, so we consider subsets of C* only, but actually can consider instead
e 6 Ei only where:
£?i = {e : e an equivalence relation on [n*, fc*) and each equivalence
class has exactly n* + 1 elements, except possibly one.}
For e G Ei we let Dom(e) = U{
χ/
e : l
x/
el —
 nΓ + 1} ^0 make it fit we identify
e with
Se = {(^1,^2) : ^i e [n*,fc*) and £2 G [n*,fc*) and
we will not continue to mention the minor changes; now we let
nor^(e) = Iog2log2(fc* - n* - |Dom(e)|)/m*
rounded (to maximal natural number < than this or zero if it is negative).
For x — (xj : j < i) we define Wi(x): we consider Xi as (being or just coding)
a pair (fXi,Ax.), 
where AXi C ω finite non empty and fx. 
: [n*,n*+1) ->

§3. Other Preservations 
929
(A'i {0,..., n*}) (so a € AXί =» fxt [a] : [n*, n*+1) -> {0,..., n*})
Wi(x) = je G.Ei : for > (n*)
nί~
l~
2 equivalence classes u of e,
1 
|{α G AXi : (/*. [α]) fw is not one to one }|
1 ~ (log2K))*° - 
IΛJ
We should check
(*)ι if (i is large enough and) eo G £?$ and nor^ei) > ί 41 and x = (x^ : j <
i + 1) as above ίften for some e2 G £?», se2 C 5eo, nor^(e2) > nor^eo) - 1
and e2 G Wi(x).
[Why (*)ι holds? Choose by induction on m < n*
 d=
f (n*)
(n**+
2) a set ιtm C
[n*,n*+1) satisfying |nm| = n*+1 and um disjoint to 
U um/ U |J{
χ/
eι :
7n
7<τn
\x/eι\ = n* + 1} and:
2
< |{α G Ax. : (fXi[a])\un 
is not one to
nJ+2
(Why? If v C [n*, n*_|_ι), |υ| = n* 4- 2 is disjoint to the set above then for each
\{u G [ι>]
nt*
+1 : (fXi[o])\u 
not one to one}| > (1 
) x |H
nt*
+1|,
so by the "finitary Fubini", some u G [υ]
ni
+1 is (much more than) as required,
increasing υ we get better estimates.)
Let e2 G EΪ be such that: the set of e2-equivalence classes of cardinality n* 4 1
is
{x/ei : |x/eι| - n* 4 1} U {um : m < (n*)< 4 2}.
Now
nor**(e2) - Iog2log2(fc* - n* - |Dom(e2)|)/m*
= Iog2log2(fc* - n* - |Dom(eι)| - <(n*)
n**
+2)/ra*
= Iog2log2((fc* — n* - IDom(eι)l) x (1 — 
—
' 
^ 
i»* ft-1 *
= Iog2[log2(/c* - < - |Dom(eι)|) + Iog2(l -

930 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
but as nor^eo) > 0, necessarily
fc? - n* - |Dom(eι)| > 2^ » n*(n*)<
+1,
hence
Hence nor
tί(e2) > nor^eo) — 1.]
Moreover, the proof gives
(*)2 if e0 G EΪ, nor^eo) > ^ + 1 and X is a set of n* (or less) (i + l)-tuples
x = (xj : j < z + 1} as above then for some e2 G £;, sG2 C seι and
nor
tί(e2) > no^^ei) - 1 and /\ e2 G ^i(x)
[Why? We define above um for m < ((n*)
71**
 +2) x |X| dealing with each x G X
by wm) (
n*)
nt*
+2 times. As |X| < n* there is no problem.] 
Πs.i4Λ
Remark. 1) Think first for the case A'x a singleton.
2) (log(n*))
xo+
2 serves as the /(-, -) in [RoSh:470]
3.14B Claim. If the forcing P preserve T is nice" then there is no Cohen real
over V in V
p .
Proof. For this the case AXi is a singleton suffices. If η G
 ωω is Cohen over V
then
(W G Γ)(3°°z)(?7 is not 1-to-l on any equivalence class from s^)
(better look at {η <E
 ωω : i < ni+ι => η(i) < n*}) 
Π3.ι4β
3.14C Claim. Random real forcing preserves a nice Γ.
Proof. Let p eRandom be such that p Ih "x = (ye : £ < ω) G
 ωcc;". W.l.o.g.
p Ih "x0 - xo, and a* - (fXi,AXi), 
^ ^ AXi C ω finite, /x. G ^{0, . . . ,n*}".

§3. Other Preservations 
931
As Random forcing is ^α -bounding w.l.o.g. p \\-Q "\A
%
X\ < t", where
(ίi : i < ω) G V Π
 ω(ω \ {0}) and as we can replace A by any A x B w.l.o.g.
Ax. = A\ (not name). Now define #;, Dom(^) = [n*, n*+1) x A* x {0, . . . , n*},
as follows: if m € [n*, n*+1), a £ A* and £ 6 {0, . . . , n*} then
gi(m, a,l) = Lbί maximal q > p forcing (/^JαK^i)) — t) J/Lb(limp)
W.l.o.g. p — lim(T) where T is a closed subtree of
 ω>2 and we can choose for
each i < ω, a natural number ti large enough so that from η G p Π T Π **2
we can read fXi that is for any η G T Π
 t{2 we have lim(TM) force a value
t° /x» (where Γ^l = {z/ G T : z/ < 17 V η < η} of course). For z < ω
we let A( — A* x ((^2 Πp), and we let ^ be the function from [n*,n*+1)
to ^
A^{0, ...,n*} defined as follows: for (α,ry) G A( and m G [n*,n*+1) we
let (0 [(α,τ/)])(m) - ^ iff lim(ΓW) Ih (/ί.[α])(m) - £. So apply T nice" to
3.14D Claim. If Q has the Laver property or just is (/, ^-bounding with
f ( i ) = 2
2 l l , #(ΐ) = n*, then Q preserves any nice Γ.
Proof. Assume p G Q, p Ihg "x = (xn : n < ω), x0 < ^? and xn codes
(Ax 
)
fxί 
[n* , ra*+ι) — * "
 ?ΐ {0, . . . , n*}" and we shall find p', α such that p < p
7 G Q,
α G 5 and // lhg< x.Rga", this is enough. So w.l.o.g. p Ih "x0 — ^o" For each
n C [n*, fc*), |u| = n* + 1, we let tiίU be the truth value of the statement
1 - l/(log(n*))
xo+2 < \{a G A*. : (f &[<*]) \u is not one to oue}\/\ASi\.
Let fi = (ti^u : u C [n*, fc*), |u — n* + 1). The number of possible u is < 2
kikί ,
hence the number of possible interpretation of t is < 2
2 l * . By the assumption
w.l.o.g. for each i we have (i
l>
1 : I < n*) (all in V not names) such that
p l h " V 
t<=t
<»
/ w.
€<nr
So we can find, in V, {(-Aj, /j) : ί < n*, i < ω) such that (AJ, /J) is a possible
case of (Ax., f x . ) . By the way the norm was defined (for i large enough) by

932 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
dropping the norm by 1 we can deal not just with one case (i.e. one possible
t^ i.e one (Aj,/])) but even with n* of them. This is (*)2 of 3.15A.
Note: if p G G C Q, G generic over V then for some i < n\, (AJ..,/j. ) —
(AJ, /]), and they have the same Wi(—).
3.15E Claim. The forcing as in [FrSh:406] is like that.
fc*
Proof. W.l.o.g. the i-th splittings are included in (2
2 ί ,log2log2(n*+1)), so
follows by 3.15D the ((2^^
n**"
l"
1,n*) : i < ω)-bounding version.
§4. There May Be a Unique P-Point
This section continues VI §5.
4.1 Theorem. Assume V satisfies 2
H° = NI and 2*
1 = N2, F0 is a Ramsey
ultrafilter on ω. Then for some N2-c.c. proper, ^α -bounding forcing notion P
of cardinality ^ in V
P there is a unique P-point, and it is F0 (i.e. the filter it
generates in V
p).
4.1 A Remark. In fact, in V
p, FQ is a Ramsey ultrafilter (actually this follows).
Proof. By the proof of VI 5.13, it suffices to prove the following lemma:
4.2 Lemma. Suppose
(*)o -Pbj FI are ultrafilters on cj, FQ is a Ramsey ultrafilter, FI is a P-point,
FO <RK FI but not FI <RK F0.
Then there is a forcing notion Q such that:
(a) Q has the PP-property, (hence is
 ωω bounding) and is of cardinality 2
N°
and
(b) \\-Q "F0 is an ultrafilter", but
(c) if Q <£ Q
7, Q' has the PP-property then in V®' we have: FI cannot be
extended with to a P-point (ultrafilter).

§4. There May Be a Unique P-Point 
933
4.2A Remark. During the proof of 4.1 we use the forcing notions SP*(F) from
Definition VI 5.4 to kill the P-points F with F0 ^RK F.
The rest of this section is dedicated to the proof of this Lemma.
Proof. Since F0 <RK F\ and FI is a P-point, there is a function h : ω —> ω such
that
(*)ι ft(Fι) = FO and for each I < ω the set 1(1) = h
 d= h~
l({ί}) is finite.
Note that then [A C ω & /\1 > \It Γ\ A\ => A £ FI] because FI ^RK F0.
i
Now in Definition 4.4 below we define a forcing notion Q = SP*(FG, FI, ft) and
then prove in 4.3 — 4.9 that it has all the required properties thus finishing
the proof of 4.2 and 4.1.
4.3 Claim. In the following game player I has no winning strategy: In the
n'th move player I chooses An e F0 and Bn G FI; player II chooses kn G An
(kn > ki for ί < n) and wn C Bn Π Ikn. In the end player II wins the play if
{kn : n < ω} G FO and (J{wn : n < ω} G FI (the first demand follows from the
second).
4.3A Remark. Clearly player II has no better choice than wn = Bn Π Ikn.
Remember Ikn = h~
l({kn}) is finite.
Proof. Suppose if is a wining strategy of player I. Let λ be big enough,
TV -< (-ff(λ), G, <χ) be such that {F0, FI, ft, if} G TV and N is countable. As Fg
is a P-point there are, for ί G {0,1} sets A\ £ Ft such that A\ Cae B (i.e.
A*ι\B finite) for every B £ F£ Π N.
Now we can find an increasing sequence (Mn : n < ω) of finite subsets of
N, N = \Jn<ω Mn such that it increases rapidly enough; more exactly:
α) H, FO, FI, ft G MO and Mn G Afn+ι,
/?) if (^(x, αo,. •) is a formula of length < 1000 + \Mn\ with parameters from
Mn U {Mn} satisfied by some x G TV, ίften it is satisfied by some x G Mn+ι,
7) if i G {0,1}, 5 G Ft Π TV, JB G Mn then 5 U Mn+ι D AJ,

934 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
δ) Mo Π ω = 0,
ε) if i G Mn then /(£) C Mn+ι and Mn is closed under h (we can demand
ra 6 Mn 4Φ /ι(ra) G Mn if we make the domains of FQ, FI disjoint).
Let un+ι = (Mn+ι \ Mn) Π ω. So (un : n < ω) forms a partition of ω into
finite sets. As F0 is Ramsey, we can find A G F0 such that /\n |un Π A\ < 1 and
A C AQ and
u n Π ^ ^ 0 & u m Π A ^ 0 & n < m =» ra - n > 10.
Let A = {^ : ζ < ω} (increasing), iζ G unζ. Now we define by induction on (,
Aζ, Bζ, kζ, Wζ such that
(a) (Aξ, .Bξ, fcξ, Wξ : ξ < ζ) is an initial segment of a play of the game in which
Player I uses his winning strategy.
(b) (Aξ,Bξ,kξ,Wζ:ξ< 
ζ) belongs to Mnζ+3.
(c) kζ = iζ and Wζ = Bζ Π I(kζ) Π A\.
There is no problem to carry out the definition, and clearly Player II wins
because not only {kζ : ζ < ω} — {iζ : ζ < ω} = A C AQ but also
[J Wζ = AI Π I^J Wζ = A* Π {j < ω : Λ(j) = iζ for some C < ω}
[Why? As respectively: Wζ C A^ as A\ \ Aξ C (J{wζ : ζ < iξ + 4} by clause (7)
above; as A = {ίc : ( < α;}; as AJ G FI and A G F0 hence {j : h(j) G A} G FI-]
Contradiction. 
U4.3
4.4 Definition. Let l£ - Π^<n /Wx€2 and let Th = [Jn<ω T%. Note that T
h
is a perfect tree with finite branching ordered by < (being initial segment). Let
Q = SP*(F0, FI, Λ) = {Γ : Γ is a perfect subtree of T
h and for each k < ω
for some Ak G F0 and Bk G FI we have: if t G Ak and η G T^
 d= T Π T% and
p G (^n/W)xfc 2 then for some v G
 JW
χ*2 we have p C i/ and 77
 Λ (i/) G T}.
The order: inverse inclusion.

§4. There May Be a Unique P-Point 
935
4.5 Claim. 1) If T G Q, Γ^ = {r/i,... ,r?fc} (with no repetition) Tt =
T[ηι]
 
d= {v G T : ηι < v or v < ηέ}, T} e Q, Γ< < T\ (i.e. T\ C T,) then
τ<τt
d^
fuLι
τ^Q
2) If r is a Q-name of an ordinal and n < ω then there is T^, T < T^ G Q such
that Γ
f lhg "r G A" for some .4 satisfying \A\ < |ΓM|, and Γ Π U*<n
rM =
T
1" Π \Ji<n Γ^. Moreover for each η G Γ^,!1^ determines r.
Proof. Same as in the proof of VI 5.5. 
D.14.5
4.6 Claim.
Q is proper, in fact α-proper for every a < α i, and has the strong PP-property
(see VI 2.12E(3)).
Proof. First we prove properness. Let λ be regular > 2**
1, N -< (H(X), G, <J)
be countable, {Q, F0, F1? ft} G A^ and Γ G TV Π Q.
Let {T£ : I < ω} list the Q-names of ordinals from N. We now define a strategy
for player I in the game from Claim 4.3. In the n'th move player I chooses
An G FO Π N, Bn G FI Π N and player II chooses kn G An and tί;n
 d= Bn Π /fcn
(remember 4.3A); on the side player I chooses Γn G N Π Q and ran such that
To - Γ, Γn < Γn+ι, Γ,l
mn+l1 - Γ^+l1 and mn > max{mn_l5 fcn/ : n
; < n}
and mo — 1.
In the (n + l)'th move, player I first chooses ran+ι as above then he
chooses Tn+ι G Q, Tn < Γn+ι, Γ^ΐ
+l1 = τj™"+
l! such that for every η G
TA
mn+ , (Tn_j_ι)^] forces a value to r^ for ί < mn+ι. This is possible by 4.5.
Then as Tn+ι G Q Π AT there are sets An+ι G F0 Π JV, βn+ι G FI Π AT such that
for every Λ G An+ι, η G (Tn+ι)W and p G (^+ιπ/(/c))xn2 for some ^ G J(fc)xfc 2 )
we have: p C v and 77
Λ (i/) G Tn+i and for simplicity An+ι Π mn = ^4n Π mn.
Note that the amount of free choice player II retains is in N.
So by 4.3 for some such play, player II wins. Now Γ* = Γ\n<ω Tn G Q as
{kn : n < ω} G F0 and |J Bn Π I(kn) G FI witness; of course Γn < Γ* for
each n hence Γ - T0 < T* and Γ* Ih
 ar^[GQ] G TV Π Qn" (as Γ^+ι < T*, see
its choice).

936 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
So Q is proper. The proof also shows that Q has the strong PP-property
(see VI 2.12: for more details see the proof of VI 4.4.). The proof of α-properness
is as in VΊ 4.4 (and anyhow it is not used). 
U4.6
4.7 Lemma. Suppose ((*)o of 4.2, Q =SP*(jF0? PI, ft) as defined in 4.4 of course
and) Q <£ P and P has the PP-property.
Then in V
p', F\ cannot be extended to a P-point.
Proof. Suppose p G P forces that E is an extension of FI to a P-point (in
V
p). Let (rn : n < ω) be the sequence of reals which Q introduces, i.e.
rn(ί) = ί G {0,1} is defined as follows: clearly for a unique fc < α;, i G /&;
now rn(i) = £ iff: n > fc, ί = 0 or for some T G GQ, T^1! - {r?} and
(η(k))(i,n) = £ (remember that η(k) is a function from /(fe) x k to {0,1}).
Define a P-name ft:
Λ(n) is 1 if {i < ω : rn(ί] = 1} e E and
ft(n) is 0 if {i < ω : rn(i) = 0} G £"
So p Ih "ft G "2". Now as P has the PP-property, by VI 2.12D, there are
Pi > P, (Pi e P), and {{(fc(n), (in(£), jn(£)} : ί < fc(n)> : n < ω) in V such
that k(n) < ω, in(ϋ) < jn(0) < in(l) < jn(l) < ... < in(k(n)) < jn(k(ri)), and
jn(k(n)) < in+ι(0) such that:
pi Ihp " for every n < α; for some ί < k(ri) we have h(in(t)} = ft(JnW)"
Now define the following P-names:
An = {m < ω : for some ί < k(n)^rirι^(m) = ΐj n(i)(τn)}.
We can conclude as in the proofs of VI 4.7, VI 5.8. 
U4.7
4.8 Claim. In V
Q, FQ still generates an ultrafilter.
Proof. If not, then for some Γ0 G Q, and Q-name A we have T0 Ihg "A C ω
and A, α; \ A are ^ 0 mod F0" -

§4. There May Be a Unique P-Point 
937
By the proof of 4.6 without loss of generality, for some A0 G FQ we have:
for k G AQ and η G T^
4"
1', (T0)[η] forces a truth value to "fc G A" which we
call t(T0, 77); without loss of generality for η G TQ ', k φ AQ => |sucτ0(^)| = l
Now for every Γ > Γ0 and £ < ω there are A(T, I), B(T, ΐ) as in Definition
4.4. For every t < ω, T > T0 and k G A(T,ί) fix an arbitrary η(T,t, k) G 7*1
Then, by observation 4.9 below, there are m^fe G I(k) Π B(T,C) and a
partition {M< (Γ, ^ fc) : i < 3) of /(fc) Π B(Γ, £) and a triple {t<(T, ^ fc) : i < 3) of
truth values and jk(T,l) G {0, 1} and truth value sk(T,£) such that:
(*) (a) if jk(T,£) = 0 then for i < 3, for every p G M7V,fc)χ^2 there is
i/ G
 7(
fc)
xA;2 such that p C z/ and τy(Γ, ^, fc)
 Λ (i/) G Γ and
(Clearly t ί(T,ί,fc)=t(Γ 0,r/
Λ {i/))).
(b) ifJk(T,έ) 
= 1 then for every p G U(fc)nB(τ,m{mT),)fc})x*2 there is v G
(J(fc)χfc) 2 SUch that: p C i/ and (r/(Γ,^, fc))
 Λ (z/) G T and T[rΓ (l/)] lhQ "fe G A
So for some j(Γ, ^) < 2 and i(T, ί) < 3 and truth value t(Γ, ^) we have
(α) 'ύj(T,ί) = 0, then
(^)(^^fc) : 3k(T,l) = 0, fc G ^(Γ,ί),t<(TΛ(T,£,*;) - t(T,^) G F
(β) ifj(T,l) 
= 1 then {k G A(Γ,£) : jk(T,l) = l,sk(T,l) = t(Γ,£)} G F0.
Note:
Θ for (T,t) as above there are A = A*(T,t) G F0, B = B*(T,() G FI
satisfying: for every k G A there is 77 G Γ, ^g(r/) = k such that: every
p G ((/(fe)ns)x«2 can be extended to v G
 /(
/c)
χfc2 satisfying: η" » G Γ,
[Why?
,fc) : jk(T,ί) = 0, fc G

938 
XVIII. More on Proper Forcing
and A = {k : I(k) Π B ^ 0}. Check the demand by clauses (*)(α) and (α)
above. So assume j ( T , f ) = I and let
B = \J{I(k) Π B(T,t) \ {mτ,M} : k G A(T,ΐ) and jk(T,t) = 1,
and
(why £ G FI? because FI ^RK F0!). Put A = {k : Ik Γ\ B ^ $} and check the
demand by clauses (*)(b) and (β) above].
Note that we have been dealing with fixed T, ί.
As we can increase TO without loss of generality: for some truth value t* for
a dense set of T
1 > T0 for the F0-majority of I < ω we have and t(T', t) = t*.
Now we can define a strategy for player I in the game from 4.3. So in the
n'th move player I chooses <An, Bn and player II chooses kn,wn] but we let
player I play "on the side" also Tn, tn (chosen in the n'th move) such that:
(A) T < Tn < Γn+ι, Γ^+1] - Γfc
+11, ω > 4+ι > 4, and t* -
(B) For every k G An+ι and η G T 
there is 771, η < ηι G T 
such
that for every p G (
β-+ιn/(/c))x^+12 there is ι/, p C i/, 771
 Λ (ί/> G Γn,
t(Tn,£n,fcn) = t(Γn,4) = t*, (note Tn+ι is chosen only after fcn+1, wn+ι
were chosen).
We should prove that player I can carry out his strategy. For stage
n + 1 let {770, . . . ?^(n)} list Γn + , so for some £n+ι > £n, for each
C < m(n) there is Γn>c > (Γn)[t?»] such that t(Tn,c,4+ι) = t*. Let £n+1 =
Πc<m(n) B*(TnfC,*n+ι) and An+ι - {fe G An : fc > kn and J(fc) Π βn+ι ^ 0}.
By clause (B) above, after player II moves, we can choose Tn+ι as required.
As this is a strategy, by Claim 4.3 for some play in which player I uses it he
looses. For this play {kn : n < ω} G F0, Un<u, wneFl9aoT
 
d= f}n<ω
 Tn e Q.
By tracing the demands on the t's:
Θ forn < ω, η G T, ίg(η) = kn + 1 we have T[r?] Ih "fcn G A iff t*".
We conclude: Γ Ih "{fcn : n < ω} Π A is 0 or is A" as {kn : n < ω} G FQ we get
the desired conclusion. 
U4.8

§4. There May Be a Unique P-Point 
939
4.9 Observation. Suppose t is a function from X* — ]\t^uAt to {0,1}, u
finite.
Then at least one of the following holds:
(a) we can find i^, Xi (i < 3) such that :
(a) (ui : i < 3} is a partition of -u,
(b) XiCX*,
(c) t\Xi is constant,
(d) for every i < 3 and p G Πteu. At there is v G Xi, p C ιy,
(/?) for some x G u, there is X C X* such that tfA" is constant and for every
P £ l\teu\{χ}
 At there is i/ G X, p C i/.
Proof. Let for j G {0,1}, Pά , = {v : v C u and there is X C X* such that t\X
is constantly j and for every p G Πt€v At there is v G X, p C z/}. Clearly
(A) ϊ/i G Ppi/o <Ξ ^i implies UQ G Pj. [Why? Same X witnesses this.]
(B) ui C u & wi ^ PJ implies u\uι £ PI-J [Why? As u\ φ Pj, for some
P £ Πtem ^ for no v e Πt€ii\«ι
 A* does t('°
 U ^) = X let X ^ i^
 G
Πt€n ^* : /° — v}ι it is as required for u\uι.]
(C) 0 G PO U PI. [Why? Trivially.]
Case (i): P0 U PI is not an ideal.
So there are UQ, u\ G PO U PI with v = UQ U ui ^ PQ U PI. By (A) without loss
of generality UQ Π u\ = 0. Let ^2 = u \ v, so (UQ, ^1,^2) is a partition of u. Now
by clause (B) we know that u<2 G PO (and to PI) as v — u \ 1^2 does not belong
to PI (and to P0). Now we know 1/0,^1,^2 G PO U PI, so for some (jι : t < 3)
we have u^ G P/£ for ί < 3, and let Xi be a witness. Now check that clause (a)
in the conclusion holds.
Case (ii): PQ U PI is an ideal.
If u G PO U PI, then t is constant so conclusion (α) is trivial, so assume not. By
(B) above the ideal is a maximal ideal so it is principal (because u is finite),
i.e. for some x G u , u \ {x} G PO U PI, {x} φ P0 U PI so we have finished.
(Reflection shows we get more than required in (/?): reread the proof of (B)).
^4.2,4.1

Appendix. On Weak Diamonds
and the Power of Ext
§0. Introduction
In [DvSh:65] K. Devlin and S. Shelah introduced a combinatorial principle
Φ which they called the weak diamond. It explains some of the restrictions
in theorems of the form "the limit of iteration does not add reals". See
more on this in [Sh:186] and Mekler and Shelah [MkSh:274] (on consistency
of uniformization properties) [Sh:208] (consistency of "ZFC+2*
0 < 2*
1 <
2*
2 + -Φ{5<H2:cf(5)=κ1}") and very lately [Sh:587].
Explanation. Jensen's diamond for NI, denoted 0^, see [Jn], can be
formulated as: There exists a sequence of functions {ga : ga a function
from a to α where a < ω\] such that for every / : ω\ —> ω\ we have
{α < ω\ : f\a — ga} Φ Omod T>^ (recall that T>^ is the filter on λ generated
by the family of closed unbounded subsets of λ). Clearly <>NI —> 2
H° = NI.
Jensen (see [DeJo]) also proved that 2^° = KI ^> OKI (see Chapters V and
VII remembering that 0^ implies existence of an Aronszajn tree which is not
special (even a Souslin tree)). You may ask, is there a diamond like principle
which follows from 2*° = NI?
K. Devlin and S. Shelah [DvSh:65] answered this question positively, formulat-
ing a principle Φ which says:
(*)ι (VF :
 ωι>2 -> 2)(3Λ : ωλ -> 2)(Vr/ : ωl -> 2)
{α < ωι : F(η\a) = h(ά)}

§0. Introduction 
941
The author had hoped that 2
H° < 2
Hl < 2*
2 would imply that Sg is
not small, i.e. for all F :
 K2>K2 -* 2 there exists η e *
22 such that for all
g : N2 -> N2, for all C club of N2 there is 5 G Sg Π C with η(δ) φ F(g\δ). In
[Sh:208] a consistency result contradicting this was proved.
In fact 2^° < 2
Hl <=> Φ. If the statement above holds for F, h we say
that h is a weak diamond say for (the colouring) F. The principle Φ was used
as a successful substitute for 0Kl in [Sh:88], [AbSh:114], [Sh:140] and [Sh:192].
An equivalent form of Φ is (just replace ft by 1 — ft)
(*)2 (VF : ωι>2 -+ 2) (3ft G
 ωι2)(Vr? <Ξ
 ωι2)
[{α < ωι : F(η\a) = h(a)} φ X mod D^].
Φ can easily be generalized to higher cardinals than NI, for example define
for uncountable regular λ and K < λ:
φ* <=> (VF :
 λ>2 -> «) (3ft : λ -> /c)(Vry : λ -> 2)
[{α < λ : F(h\a) = η(a)} φ OmodPλ]
So Φ <ί=> Φ^.
We thank Grossberg for reminding us that because of a flaw in [DvSh:65]
he and Magidor saw conclusion 1.15 after which this section was written.
There is natural generalization. Instead of quantifying over η G
 λ2 — Y 2
consider quantifying over η G 
βi (and change the domain of F accordingly).
i<\
These generalizations are our goal in the first section but instead of gen-
eralizing Φ^χ we generalize its negation. Another possible generalization is Φg
for 2 < K < NO which by VIII §4 is stronger (its negation is consistent with
G.C.H.). We do not assume the reader is familiar with [DvSh:65], for example
the hard direction of Φ^ <=> 2*° < 2
Kl follows from Theorem 1.10 substitut-
ing λ = KI and μ = 2. This generalization of Φ^ was used in [Sh:88 §6] and
mentioned there in a remark; since we were asked to explain it, we present it
here.
In Sect. 2 we present applications of the principle from §1 to the Whitehead
problem, we shall use it for two theorems. The first, Theorem 2.2, evaluates
the cardinality of Ext(G,ff), and the second one is Theorem 2.4 where we

942 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
give information on the torsion free rank of Ext (G,H). We shall define here
all the group theoretical terminology and shall use only one easy lemma which
we quote from somewhere else. But this section is not an introduction to the
subject of the Whitehead problem; the interested reader is referred to the book
of P. Eklof and A. Mekler [EM], to the exposition [E] or to the original papers
where the corresponding theorems were proved (from stronger set theoretical
hypotheses ) [Sh:44],[HHSh:91].
In [Sh:64] another combinatorial principle was introduced:
For a limit ordinal δ less than ω\, an increasing ω-sequence η$ of ordinals cofinal
in δ is called a ladder on δ. A ladder system ή is {η§ : δ G 5}, where S C α i;
we say that such a ladder system fj has the uniformization property if for every
{cδ G
 ω2 : δ G S} there exists h G
 ωι2 such that (Vί € 5)(3n < ω)(Vk <
ω)[k > n —> cs(k) — h(ηs(k))]. In §3 we define the uniformization property for
a ladder system η — (η§ : δ G S), where 5 a set of ordinals with each member
of cofinality NO, in particular S = {δ < ^2 : cf(ί) = NO} We try to prove an
analogous result to the one in Sect. 1, and we shall prove it assuming 2^° = KI;
for more details see the introduction to Sect. 3. Sect. 3 does not depend on
sections 1 and 2.
§1. Unif: a Strong Negation
of the Weak Diamond
1.0 Notation. We will write 
μ^ for the cartesian product of the ordinals
i<\
μ; (that is for {/ : / a function with domain λ such that f(i)<μi}), and will
write Y\ μi for the cardinality of this product.
i<\
Let's recall that (see (*)2 in the introduction) the negation of Φ^ is:
(3F :
 ωι>2 -> 2)(Vh : ωl -+ 2)(3η : ωl -> 2)
[{α < ωι : F(η\a) = h(a)} G PHl]

§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
943
This is the motivation for the following definition (we replace sometimes func-
tions by sequences, when sequences are easier to handle).
1.1 Definition. For a regular uncountable λ and sequences β = (μ(ϊ) 
: i < λ),
χ = (χ(i) 
: i < λ) of cardinals > 1 let Unif (λ, μ, χ) mean: There is a function
F with domain D(μ) = LU<λX 
/-*(*) suc^ that:
(a) for every a < λ and η 6 Da(μ) = ^. 
μ(ί) we have ^(77) < χ(α).
(b) for every h 6 X 
χ(α) there exists 77 € ^ 
μ(α) such that the set
{a < λ : F(η\a) = h(ά)} belongs to Vχ.
1.1 A Notation. (1) If /i is constant, i.e., μ = (μ : i < λ) we may write μ;
similarly for %.
(2) If (Vα < λ)[μ(l + α) = μ(l)] we may write (μ(0),μ(l)) instead of μ and
Unif (λ,μ(0),μ(l),χ) instead of Unif (λ,μ,χ). We let
Da(μv,μι)
d= {η: ηe a Ord , η(0) < μ0 and η(l + i) < μι}
and
= (J Da(μQ,μι).
Similarly we define Da((μ)) = Da(μ), so D(μ) —
 λ>μ.
(3) Prom now on we assume that λ is an uncountable regular cardinal.
(4) Remember that we use δ always as limit ordinal; so for 5 C λ the set
{δ < λ : δ G 5} is the set of limit ordinals which belong to 5.
1.1B Remark. (1) Unif (Hi, 2, 2) is the negation of Φ^ i.e., it is the negation
of the weak diamond.
(2) We shall say (concerning Definition 1.1) that the function F exemplifies
Unif(λ,μ,χ).
(3) If 2*° = 2*
1, then Unif (Ni, 2, 2) holds. (Noted by Abraham: the converse
is a theorem: see 1.10.)
Proof of (3). Let H :
 ω2 ->
 ωι2 be onto. Define F :
 ωι>2 -> 2 as follows:

944 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
If η € n2, n < ω, then F(η) = 0
If η E
 α2, α > ω, then F(r/) = H(η\ω)(a).
Now check that F witnesses Unif (Ni, 2, 2).
Recall that we can strengthen the statement in 0 by working only on a
stationary set S C λ. Similarly we can consider stronger forms of the weak
diamond, i.e. weaker forms of Unif by relativizing to a stationary set S.
1.2 Definition. Let λ,μ, χ be as in Definition 1.1 and let S C λ.
(1) Unif (λ, £, μ, x) is defined similarly to the definition of Unif (λ, μ, χ)\ just
replace (b) there by
(V) for every h E Y 
χ(α) there exists η £ X 
μ(α) such that the
» »θ!<CA 
* »Q!<^A
set {δ E 5 : F(τ/Γ<$) = Λ(5)} belongs to £>λ + 5.
(2) Let Id - Unif (λ,μ,χ)
 d= {5 G λ : Unif (λ, 5, μ, χ) holds }.
(3) If (Vα) (μ(l + α) = μi) we may write Unif(λ,S,μ(0),μι,χ) and Id -
Unif (λ, μ(0),μι,χ) in parts (1) and (2) respectively. So Unif (λ,μo,μι,χ)
mean Unif (λ,λ,μ0,μι,χ).
(4) If x is constantly x we may write x (in Definitions 1.1, 1.2(1), (2), (3)).
1.2A Remark. The notation of Definition 1.2(2) will be justified in Lemma
1.9 where we shall prove that if Unif (λ, μ, χ) fails, then Id — Unif (λ, μ, x) is an
ideal. Note also that Unif (λ, μ, χ) is trivially equivalent to Id — Unif (λ, μ, χ) 7^
P(\).
1.3 Remark. The diamond Oλ implies the weak diamond Φ^, and more
generally 0\(S) implies the failure of Unif (λ, 5, 2, 2, 2).
Proof. Let (ηa : α G 5} be such that for every η : λ — > 2 the set {α G 5 : η \a =
ηa} is stationary. Now if F :
 Λ>2 — > 2, then we let h : λ — > 2 be defined by
/ι(α) = F(r/α), so clearly for any η : λ — > 2 the set {α G S :
will be stationary.
1.4 Lemma. Let λ,5, μ,χ be as in Definition 1.2.

§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
945
(1) If {i < X : χ ( i ) = l}eVx then Unif (λ,S,μ,χ) holds.
(2) Let x^x
2 satisfy the requirements for χ in Definition 1.1. then
{ί € S : χ
l(i) =χ
2(ί)}eτ>χ + S imply that
Unif (λ, 5, μ, x
1) <=» Unif (λ, 5, μ, χ
2)
(3) Unif (λ, S, μ, x) implies that | \a<χ χ(a)/(Dχ + S)\< Ua<x /*(<*) (notice
that the left hand side of the inequality is the cardinality of a reduced
product).
(4) If there exists a β < X such that | Xα<λ χ(α)/(Dλ 4- 5)1 < ΓL</? £(<*)»
then Unif (λ,5, μ,χ) holds.
(5) Let μ, χ,μ*,χ* be sequences of cardinals > 1 of length λ such that
for every α < λ we have χ*(α:) < χ(α) and μ(α) < μ*(θί). 
Then
Unif (λ, S, μ, x) => Unif (λ, 5, μ*, χ*)
(6) If 5* = {5 € 5 : χ(ί) > 1} then Unif (λ, 5, μ, χ) o Unif (λ, 5*, μ, χ).
Proof. Easy (note that part (4) can be proved just like 1.1B(3)).
1.5 Lemma. Let λ, S, μ, χ be as in Definition 1.2. Let us define the following
cardinals μ0 = Σa<\ ΓL<α M(»). and Mi = MinQ<λ Σ,a<λ Πi</3 A(α + i); then
the following are equivalent.
(A) Unif(λ,5,μ,χ)
(B) Unif (λ, S, μ0,μι,χ) (see 1.2(3)).
The proof will use the following easy fact.
1.5A Fact. Assume that D(μ) can be embedded into £>(μ*), i.e., there is a
partial function g : D(μ) —> D(μ*) such that:
(a) If η < v are both in Dom(^), then g(η) < g(v)
(b) g is one - to - one
(c) g is continuous, i.e., whenever {77α : a < S) is a sequence of elements of
Dom(#) satisfying αi < α2 => ry^i < ^α25
 then also % == U ^α is in
a<δ
Dom(^), and p(r/5) = (J ηa.
a<δ

946 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
(d) For every η G \ μ(i), the set {i < λ : η\i G Dom(^)} is unbounded in λ
(by (c), this set will also be closed).
Then Unif (λ, S, μ, x) implies Unif (λ,S,μ*,χ).
Proof. Assume Unif (λ,S, μ,χ) holds. Let g' = g\{η G Όom(g) : lg(η) —
£g(g(η))} The function g' will also satisfy (a) — (d). Choose F which witnesses
Unif (λjS, μ,χ), and define F* on D(μ*) as follows:
( F(η), 
if g'(η) = v for some η G Dom(g
x)
F» = I
v 0 
otherwise.
Note that F*(ί/) is well defined as there is at most one η G Dom(^
/) such that
g'(η) = v as g' is a one to one function. Let h G Π xW> so as F witnesses
Unif (λ, S, μ, χ)5 necessarily there is η G ^μ(i) such that 50 = {δ < X :
F(η\δ) = h(δ)} belongs to Dχ + S.
By clause (d) of the assumption, the set C = {δ < X : η\δ G Dom(</)} is a
closed unbounded subset of λ. So δ G C => ^g(^(^t^)) — ^ Let ^ = \J g(η\ϊ),
i€C
clearly v G Π A* (*) and S ^ S^C =ϊ F*(v\δ) = F*(g'(η\δ)) = F(η\δ) = h(δ).
i<\
So it is easy to see that F* witnesses Unif (λ, 5, μ*, χ) 
ΠI.SΛ
Proof of 1.5.
(A) => (B)
Let α* < λ be such that for all i we have: α* < i < X =ϊ μ(ϊ) < μi, and let
{i/ξ : ξ < μό} be a 1 — 1 enumeration of 
μ(i), where μό = Π β(i) ^ Mo
by the definition of μo Now define a partial function g : D(μ) — » ,D(μo, μi) by
the following conditions:
Dom(<7) - {η G D(μ) : lg(η) > α*}
9(vξ » = (0 >» whenever ξ< μ'0,Vξ~η£ D(μ)
Clearly ^ satisfies clauses (a) - (d) of fact 1.5 A, so Unif (λ, 5, μ, x) implies
Unif (λ,5,μ0,μι,χ).

§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
947
(B) =» (A)
This time we will construct an embedding g : D(μo,μι) —> D(μ) and again use
1.5A. For simplicity, let us first assume
Let α* < λ be such that for all β G [α*, λ) we have \D(μ\\β, λ))| = μi, i.e.
W.l.o.g. α* > 2. We claim that:
(a) There exists an antichain (ι/| : ξ < μ0) in £>(μ) (and w.l.o.g. £ < μo =>
€g(φ > «*)
(b) For each η G -D(/i) there exists an antichain (i/? : ξ < μi) in D(μ) satisfying
ξ < μι =ϊ η < v\.
("Antichain" means that for ξ ^ ζ we have neither v^ < v^ nor v*l<vT).
We will prove only (a), as the proof for (b) is similar. For each z/ G D(μ),
define ^*^ as follows:
, and
ι/(0) 
if i = 0
0 
i f i < α
0
if i = α* + 2j 4- 1, j < ^g(ιχ)
if i = α* -f 2£g(ι/) or i = α* + 2£g(ι/) 4-1.
Then {5
f*(t
/) : ^ G D(v)} is an antichain of size μo This ends the proof of (a).
(We needed (g) to ensure v(ϊ) < μ(ϊ).)
Now we define g : D(μo,μι) —» D(μ) inductively as follows:
9(9) = 0,
g((ξ)) = i/l when ξ < μ0,

948 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
(0) = "lη 
when lg(η) > U < μi,
α)' when ^g(ry) is a limit ordinal.
Again g satisfies clauses (a) - (d) of 1.5 A, so we are done.
We have only one problem left: what occurs if ® fails? Really this is not
serious, e.g. by the following claim 1.6 (if β*(j + ί) — 1 for every i, then
μo = Πi^ μWϊ μi — I? so tne lemma becomes trivial, by 1.4(3), (4), as
μi = i) 
Πι.5
1.6 Claim. Let λ,5, μ,χ be as in Definition 1.1.
(1) For every {α^ : i < X} C λ increasing and continuous such that αo = 0,
and U»<λ
α< =
 λ;
 for every
 i <
 χ define μ*M =
f Uaί<j<ai+lβ(j} We
have that Unif (λ, 5, μ, χ), and Unif (λ, 5, μ*, χ) are equivalent.
(2) For any μ there exist {α^ : i < λ} C λ as in (1) such that letting μ* be
defined using α^'s as in (1) we have μ*(l + i) < μ*(l -f- j) for i < j and
μ*(i) > I-
Proof. (1) Similar to the proof of 1.5.
(2) Let ft* be minimal such that {i < X : β(i) > ft*} is bounded in λ, so for
some Oίi < X we have [QI < i < λ => μ(i) < ft*]. If ft* = ft"
1", it is enough
to choose inductively α^ (when 1 < i < λ, increasing continuous) such that:
{j 
: OLi < j < ai+ι,μ(j) 
= ft} has the same order type (hence the same
cardinality) as c^+i, hence 
f] 
μ(i) = ft'
0^
1' will be non decreasing for
j€[c*i,αt+ι)
i€[l,λ).
If ft* is limit, necessarily cf(ft*) < λ.
If cf(ft*) = λ choose Oίi (when 1 < i < λ, increasing continuous) such that
for i > 0, {β : c^ < β < Oίi+ι,μ(β) > sup{μ(7) : αi < 7 < α^}} has cardinality
> H
If cf(ft*) = θ < X let (fte : ε < θ) be a strictly increasing sequence of
cardinals < ft* with limit ft* and choose α^ (when 1 < i < λ, increasing
continuous) such that for every i > 1 we have the order type of {β : c^ < β <
and μ(β) > ftε} is QΪ+I for each ε < θ. 
Dι>6

§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
949
1.7 Claim. (1) If Unif (λ,S,μ,χ), AC < λ and μ*(i) = μ(i)
κ, χ*(i) - χ(i)* for
i <λ then Unif (λ,S,μ*,χ*)
(2) If Unif ( X , S , β ξ , χ ξ ) for £ < «, « < λ and μ(i) - Π^/^W and xW =
Πξ<κXeW ^en Unif (λ, S, μ, x)
(3) If β is a nondecreasing sequence of infinite cardinals and Unif (λ, 5, μ, x)
and χ*(i) < (χ(i))'*' Λen Unif (λ, S,μ,χ*)
Proof. (1) Easy. Let (71 : μ*(i) — > μ(ί) (for £ < «) be such that for every
{αξ : ξ < K) G
 Λμ(ϊ) there is a unique 7 < μ*(i) such that (Vξ < «)C?^(7) = α$
that is, identifying μ(i)
Λ with the cartesian product *μ(i), the function G^ is
the projection onto the ξ-th coordinate. Similarly Hζ : χ*(i) —> χ(ΐ) for ξ < K.
If F exemplifies Unif (λ, 5, μ, x) let us define F*:
For η e D(β*) let F"(τ7) be the unique 7 < χ*(^g(ry)) such that
So given h G Y. λχ*(i) we have to find appropriate η. Let hξ G
. 
χ(i) be such that ft^(i) = H^(h(i)). By the choice of F, for each ξ < K
there is r/e G X.<A μ(i) such that Ce
 d= {5 G 5 : F(r/ξ ^) = hζ(δ)} eT>x + S.
Define η(i) as the unique 7 < β*(i) such that (r/^(i) : ξ < K) = (0^(7) : ξ < «}.
Now Πe<« Q ^ ^λ + S and for every 5 G f\<κ Cξ we have F*(ry) - ft(5) so
we finish.
(2) Similarly.
(3) Without loss of generality χ*(i) - \χ(i) 
\*\ (by 1.4(5)). Let (hζ : ζ < λ) be
such that: hζ is a strictly increasing function from λ to λ and (Rang(/iζ) : ζ < λ)
are pairwise disjoint and μ(i) < β ( h ζ ( i ) ) (for ζ < λ,i < λ). Let ff| : χ*(z) — >
χ ( i ) for ξ < i < λ be as in the proof of part (1). Let
C* = {δ < λ : δ a limit ordinal such that for every ζ < 5,
the order type of δ Π Rang(ft^) is δ so /iζ maps δ to (5}.
Lastly define F* by: if 5 G C* and 77 G Dδ(β), let rjKl G Dδ(μ) be defined
by ηKl(i) = τy(Λ c(i)), and F*(ry) is defined such that H^F^η)) -
F*(η) = 0 otherwise. The checking is as above.

950 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
1.8 Conclusion. If Unif (λ,μ(0),2,χ), 1 < K < X and μ(0)" = μ(0) then
Unif(λ,μ(0),2,χ").
Proof. By the previous lemma 1.7(1) we have Unif (λ,μ(0)
/ς,2'
c,χ'
c) and as
μ(0) = μ(0)* by applying 1.5 twice this is equivalent to Unif (λ,μ(0),2,χ
κ).
1.9 Lemma . 1) Id — Unif (λ,μ, χ) is either P(X) or an ideal on λ.
2) If μ is non decreasing then Id — Unif (λ, μ, χ) is either P(X) or a normal
ideal on λ (i.e., on P(X)) containing all nonstationary sets.
1.9A Remark. Note that Id - Unif (λ, μ, χ) is equal to Id - Unif (λ, μ0, μi, χ)
when μo, μi are defined as in 1.5. Also Id — Unif (λ,μo,μι,χ) is equal to
Id — Unif (λ, μo, μo, λ) if cov(μo, λ) = μo (see Definition 1.12 below) by 1.14(5),
(6) below (applied twice), so of course the normality holds in such cases.
Proof. 1) Trivial.
2) Call the ideal /. Trivially any nonstationary S C λ belongs to /. So it
is enough to prove that if S C X and / is a function from λ to λ such that
(Vα G 5)/(α) < 1+α, and for every i < X we have Si ^f {α G S : /(α) = i} G /
then S £ I. Let Fi exemplify that Si e I and (hζ : ζ < λ), C* be as in the
proof of 1.7(3). Let us define F: if η G L>(μ0,μι), ig(η) G S< Π C*, we let F(η)
be Fi((η(hi(j)) 
: j < lg(η))), otherwise F(η) = 0, and we can finish as in the
proof of 1.7(3). 
Dι.9
1.10 Theorem. 1) Assume the following conditions hold:
(A) λ regular and 2
<λ < 2
λ.
(B) μ*° < 2
λ.
Then Unif (λ,μ,2
<λ,2
<λ) fails.
2) Moreover in part (1) instead of (B) it suffices to assume
(B') The following property does not hold:
(*) There is a family {£» : i < 2
λ}, 5» C μ, |^| = λ and i ^ j < 2
λ
implies |5i Π 5j| < KQ

§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
951
1.10A Conclusion. If for some θ < λ, 2
Θ = 2
<λ < 2
λ (hence λ regular
uncountable) then Unif (λ,2
<λ,2
<λ,2) fails.
[Why? This holds as by 1.10 applied to μ = 2
<λ we get -. Unif (λ, 2
<λ, 2
<λ, 2
<λ)
now apply 1.7(1) for /ς = θ.]
Proof. First notice that (B) => (B'). [Why? Assume by contradiction that (*)
holds, choose Ti C Si countable for every i < 2
λ. So necessarily i ^ j =$> Ti ^
Tj, and we got {Ti : i < 2
λ} C {5 C μ : \S\ = N0}, i.e., 2
λ < μ
H° contradiction
to μ*° < 2
λ.]
Therefore from now till the end of the proof of 1.11 we assume that (*)
fails. This implies μ < 2
λ as if μ = 2
λ then the family {Si : i < 2
λ} where
Si
 d= {a: Xi<a<\i + X}{ori< 2
λ would show that (*) holds trivially . We
also assume the conclusion of the theorem fails (i.e., Unif (λ, μ, 2
<λ, 2
<λ) holds)
and eventually get a contradiction. Let F exemplify Unif (λ,μ,2
<λ,2
<λ). Let
us define:
Mod- {(a,CQ,gQ,Cι,gι,...Cβ,gβ,...)β<β(Q) : 0(0),α < λ,
gβ a function from α \ {0} to
 λ>2, Cβ a closed subset of α}
Clearly | Mod| — 2
<λ hence we can fix a one-to-one function H : Mod —»
λ>2. Now for every function / : λ —> (0,1} we shall define by induction on
β < λ, functions h/β : λ —>
 λ>2 and g$β G D\(μ,
 λ>2) and a closed unbounded
subset Cftβ of λ. If we have defined for every β < 7,7 < λ let us define /ι/)7,
#/,7,Cf)7 as follows.
7/7 - 0, let h/ι7 = gftΊ = f and C/,7 = λ \ {0}.
//7>0, let:
A) Λ/ι7(i) is H((a, Cft0na,gffl\(a\{0}),..., 
C/)/3Πα, gf,β\(a\{0}),.. .)/3<7)
where α = α(i, /, 7) = Min(Π/3<7 C
f
/)/3 \ (i + 1))
B) As /ι/)7 : λ —>
 Λ>2 is defined, and as we are assuming Unif (λ, μ, 2
<λ, 2
<λ)
is exemplified by F, there are a function # £ D\(μ, 2
<λ), and a closed
unbounded subset C of λ such that: C C {5 < λ : F(g\δ) — hβ,Ί(δ)}. Now

952 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
let #/)7 — g and C/,7 be the set of accumulation points of Π/3<7 @f,β
In order to finish the proof we need (proved later):
1.11 Fact. If /ι,/2 G
 λ2 , and jn < X for n < ω, [n ^ m -> jn ^ jm], and
5n
 d= MinC/lJτι - MinC/2jn and 0Λ ιjn \δn = ghjn \δn and /ι(0) = /2(0) ίften
/I — /2
Continuation of the proof of 1.10.
For every / : λ —> {0,1}, define
^/ = { & 9 f , j ( 0 ) , 9 f t j \ ( δ 
\ {0}),/(0)) : j < λ,ί - MinC,}. Clearly |A/| - λ.
If A/! Π Af2 is infinite, we can easily get the hypothesis of Fact 1.11 hence
/i = /2 So A/j Π A/2 is finite for /i ^ /2 The A/'s are not subsets of μ
but of A* = λ x μ x
 λ>(
<λ2) x 2, which is a set of cardinality μ + 2
<λ so
P = {A/ 
: f a function from λ to {0,1}} is a family of 2
λ subsets of A*, each
of power λ, the intersection of any two is finite. If \A*\ = μ we finish (having
contradicted (*) of (B)'), otherwise \A*\ = 2
<λ and 2
λ = \{A/ : / a function
from λ to 2}| < |A*|*° < (2
<λ)
N° = 2
<λ < 2
λ (second inequality-as in the
proof of (B)=>(B') above), contradiction.
Proof of Fact 1.11. By Ramsey theorem, and as the ordinals are well ordered,
w.l.o.g. jo < jι < ... < jn < jn+ι < 
, and let j
 d= \Jn<ωjn
Let C
£ = Γ\n<ω Cfι,jn fo
r f — 1,2, and let C
l = {jf 
: i < λ}, 7^ increasing
continuous, and let 7^ = λ.
Now we shall prove by induction on i < X that:
a) Ίi = Ίi
b) for every ζ < j, 0/lfcΓ(7i \ ί°}) = Qf^Kll \ {0})
This is enough, as in particular it says, for i = λ, ζ — 0 that <7/1)0 ί(λ\{0} =
0/2,0 t(λ \ {0}), but by its definition gM = f£, so /i \(λ \ {0}) - /2 ί(λ \ {0}).
But in fact we have assumed /ι(0) = /2(0), so f\ = /2, which is the desired
conclusion of the fact. So for proving the fact, it suffices to prove (g).

§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
953
Case I. 
i = 0
We first prove clause a) of 0. Now for ί = 1,2 clearly 7^ = MinC* > δn
 d=
f
MinC/j jn, hence 7^ > Supn<ωδn. On the other hand for n < ra, Cftjm 
C C/£>J n
(as jfn < jm) hence (ίm : m < ω) is non decreasing and {5m : n <
m < ω} C Cf£jn, hence Supm<α;(5m - Supm€[nfW) 5m e C/£ϊJ n, hence
Supm<α;όm € Πn^C/^n = &, so 7* - MinC* < Supm<α;Jm. Clearly we
got 7^ - MinC^ = Supm<ωίm, so 7^ - 7^.
For clause b) of ® we can choose large enough n, such that ζ < jn(< j )
and
(*)o ff/liζ tίTo
1 \ {0}) ^ ^/2)ζ Γ(7o
2 \ {0}) implies gf^ \(δn \ {0}) φ gf^ \(δn \ {0})
and C/1>c Π 7^ C/2)C Π 7^ implies C/1?c Π δn φ C/2>c Π δn
Now we have assumed in the statement of the fact that:
(*)l 9fι,jn\
Sn 
=9f2Jn\δn
hence
(*)2 F(gfljn\δn) 
= hhjn(δn) = 
H((a,...,Cf^na,gfίίβ\(a\{0}),...)β<jn)
where α - α(τf, Λ, jn) = Min[Π^<jτι C/,f/3 \ (<Jn 4-1)].
We can conclude, as the left side in (*)2 does not depend on I, (by (*)ι)
and as H is one-to-one, that β < jn 
=> fl/lι/sr(7o \ ί0)) = 0/2,/s Γ(7o \ {0»
and β < jn => Cfiβ n 7o — ^/2,/3 n 7o -^
ut m particular ^ < jn hence
^/ι,c K*n \ {0}) - 9/2ίζ \(δn \ {0}) and C/1>c Π 5n - C/2,c Π 5n so we have gotten
tf/i.c f(To \ {°}) = ^.c t(To \ {°})
 by (*)o So we have proved clause b) of 0 (for
the case i = 0).
Case II. 
i limit
This is easy: clause a) holds as 7^ (for ξ < i) is increasing continuous and
(V£ < i) 7! = 7? by the induction hypothesis, and similarly clause b) holds.
Case III. 
Prove for i 4-1, assuming truth for i.

954 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
For any n < ω, #/1Jn Ϊ7o = 9 f 2 t j n Ϊ7o by the assumption in the fact. By
the induction hypothesis g/1jn \(^l \ {0}) = g/2jn Krf \ {0}). Together we can
conclude
(<*) 0/ι jn \Ίi = 0/2 ,j« \ΊΪ for n < ω
By the definition of g f £ j n , for ί — 1, 2 we have
(β) F(9ft,in\Ίt} = hh,jn(Ίl) =
H((a'n, ..., Cftιβ Π α£, 0Λι/> Kα£ \ {0}), . - .)0<jn)
[where α£ = α(7f , //, j«) = MinΠ^ Cfttβ \ (7f + 1)]
As H is one-to-one, by (a) and (/?) we can conclude
(7) <αi, . . . , σ/ll/3 n α£, <7/1)/5rK \ {o}), - - W -
- (α£, . . . , C/2ι/3 Π α^ , 0/2ι/3 r(α2 \ {0}), . . .)β<jn
So α^ = α£; it is also clear that, for ί — 1, 2 QQ < . . . < ofn < ofn+l < . . .
and Un<α; αl =
 U[n[Γ\β<j
 Ch,β \ (7i + 1)] is 7ί+ι, so we can conclude 7/+1 =
TH-I (i e clause a) of
 (8)) Also, by (7), for every ζ < j for every n large enough,
C < J'n and C/ι,c Π α^ = C/2jζ Π α^, and as this holds for every n and α^ = α^
and τf+1 = \Jn<ω a
e
n clearly:
W C
f/1,cΠ7/+1-C'/2,cn7?+1.
Similarly gf^ζ\(ji+l \ {0}) - gf^ΊΪ+i \ {0}) , and so we finish proving
clause b) of 0 for i + 1. So we have finished proving 0 for all i. As stated earlier
by this we prove Fact 1.11. 
Πi.n
1.12 Definition. Let X be a set and λ a cardinal.
(1) A family T of subsets of X is an (X, λ)- cover if for all 5 C X, \S\ = λ,
there is T G J
7 such that 5 C Γ, and all the members of J
7 are of cardinality
< λ. In other words, .T
7 is cofinal in the directed partial order (S<χ(X), C).
(2) The covering number of (X, λ) which is denoted by cov(X, λ) is :
cov(X, λ) = Min{| Γ\ : T is a (X, λ)-cover}.
Clearly cov(X, λ) depends just on \X\ and λ (see 1.13(1) below) so we
usually use cardinals for X.

§ 1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
955
1.13 Lemma.
(1) X C y => cov(X,λ) < cov(y,λ), and \X\ < \Y\ =* cov(X,λ) < cov(y,λ)
hence if \X\ = \Y\ then cov(X,λ) - cov(y,λ)
(2) if λ < μ then cov(μ, λ) > μ
(3) 
i. cov(λ, λ) - 1
ii. for λ < μ we have cov(μ+, λ) = cov(μ, λ) 4- μ+
iii. If μ is a limit cardinal, λ < μ and let {μ^ : i < cfμ} be an increasing
sequence with limit μ and μo > λ; then cov(μ, λ) < Πi<cfμ
 cov(/^> λ).
(4) cov(λ+
α,λ)<(λ+
α)l
αl
Remark. See more in [Sh:g], [Sh:400a].
Prro/. (1) E.g., if X C Y and if f is a (y, λ)-cover, then Ft = {AnX : A G f}
isa(X,λ)-cσverand \J*\ < \F\.
(2) Because if T is a (μ, λ)-cover then \J{A : A G F} is necessarily μ hence
μ < I U{^ : A G .F}| < Σ N < l^lλ so \Γ\ > μ.
A€^
(3) i. Take F = {λ}. It is obvious that this is a cover as required.
(3) ii. Clearly cov(μ+, λ) > cov(μ, λ) by part (1) and cov(μ+, λ) > μ+ by
part (2). So it suffices to show that cov(μ
+,λ) < cov(μ, λ) -f μ
+. We do this
by finding a (μ+, λ)-cover f of cardinality cov(μ, λ) +μ+. For every ordinal α,
λ < α < μ
+ let J ^ be an (α, λ)-cover such that \fa\ = cov(|α|, λ) < cov(μ, λ)
(we use part (1)). Define T = \Ja<μ Fa, we shall prove that it is (μ+, λ)-cover.
Let 5 C μ
+ be of cardinality λ, from the regularity of μ
+ follows the existence
of α, μ < α < μ+ such that 5 C α, since Fa is a (α, λ)-cover there is T G Fa
(T G T since fa C J") such that S C Γ, |Γ| < λ, so we have proved one
inequality. The other was done before.
(3) iii. We shall find a (μ, λ)-cover T of the appropriate cardinality. For
i < cf(μ) let Ti be a (μ^, λ)-cover exemplifying cov(μ^, λ), define ^ = ^U{0},
J ^ {U-65 Si : Si e F\, S C cf(μ) and |5| < λ}. It is easy to verify that f is a
(μ,λ)-cover and \F\ < Ui<cfμ cov(μί?λ).
(4) Prove by induction on α < λ.
For α -f- 0, we have cov(λ+°, λ) = cov(λ, λ) = 1 < (X)+° (by 3 (i)).
For a = β + I we have cov(λ+
α,λ) - cov(λ+^
+1),λ) - cov((λ
+^)+,λ) -

956 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
cov(λ+^,λ) -f (λ
+^)
+ where the last equality holds by clause (ii) of part (3);
now, using the induction hypothesis, cov(λ+^
+1),λ) < (λ+
β)\
β\ +
For a a limit ordinal; let {α^ : i < cf(α)} be a cofinal sequence in α; then by
3(iii) cσv(λ
+α,λ) < Πi<cfμ cov(λ
+αSλ) < (λ+")
cf<* < (λ
+α)H 
Dι.13
1.14 Lemma. 1) Let λ < μ < 2
λ, χι, χ be cardinals, χ = (xi : i < λ),
X — sup{χi : i < λ}, λ regular uncountable, then
Unif (λ,μ,μ,χ) implies Unif (λ, cov(μ, λ), λ,χ).
2) In part (1) assume μo + Mi +X < 2
λ, λ < χ and cov(χ,λ) < μ0 (and μi > 2).
Then Unif (λ,μ0,μι,χ) <ί=> Unif (λ,μ0,μι, λ).
3) In part (2) if in addition μ0 < μi, λ is not strong limit and only 2 < x is
required then Unif (λ,μo,μι,χ) <=> Unif (λ,μ0,μι,2).
4) If λ < μo < μi < 2
Λ and χ = (x^ : i < λ) is a sequence of cardinals, λ is
regular uncountable then
Unif (λ,μ0,μι,χ) => Unif(λ,μ 0+ cov(μι, λ), λ,χ).
5) In part (4) if μo > cov(μι, λ) > μ\ > 2 then
Unif (λ,μ0,μι,χ) <^ Unif (λ,μ0, 2,χ).
6) We get similar results if we add S C X is a parameter (in parts 1) - 5)).
Proof. 1) We do it by translating every g G D(μ,μ) to g* e D(cov(μ, λ),λ)
where the first coordinate <7*(0) codes a subset of μ of cardinality λ which
covers Rang(^), and #*(! -f i) tells us where g(ϊ) appears in it (e.g. the place
in some well ordering) of order type λ. More formally let K = cov(μ, λ),
and let J 
— {Ai 
: i < K} exemplify this, where w.l.o.g. Ai ^ 0 and
let Ai = {&ij 
: j < λ} possibly with repetition. We define a function H
from
 λμ to D\(κ, λ). For a given g : λ — » μ let h = H(g) be defined by:

§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
957
/ι(0) = min{i < « : {g(a) 
: a < X} C AI} and h(l + i) is the first
j < X such that g(ϊ) = α/ι(o)j Let F exemplify Unif (λ,μ,μ,χ), and we
shall define F* which will exemplify Unif (λ, ft, λ, χ) : for η G D(κ,\) let
F*(77) - FKα^oMi+o : 1 + i < *gη)) if η ^ {), and F*(η) = 0 if r? = {>•
2) By 1.4(5) the implication => holds.
For the other direction, assume that Unif (λ,μo,μι, λ) holds. Let T = {Ai :
i < μo} exemplify cov(χ, λ) < μo with Aζ — {ctζj 
: j < X} and let
F exemplify Unif (λ,μo,μι,λ), and let pr(— ,— ) be a pairing function on
μo (so it is onto μo). Now we define F* as follows: F*({)) = 0 and for
η G D(μ0, μι)\{{)}, let ry(O) -pr(/50,Λ),^ - (ft)
 Λ η \ [Mgfo)), and we choose
F*(η) = θίβQ,F(^γ Now check that F* exemplifies Unif (λ,μ0,μι,χ); for any
g G
 λχ, let Rang(#) C Aζ, g(ϊ) = α^^W where Λ € A^5 let ^*
be such that for some club C of λ, δ G C => F(τy*f5) = h(δ). Now define
i/* G DΛ(μo,μι) as follows: ι/*Γ[l,λ) = tfTM) and ι/*(0) - pr(C,r/*(0)). Eas-
ily 5 G C&δ > 0 => F*(z^* \δ) = otζth(δ) = g(δ), as required
3) W.l.o.g. 2 < μi (otherwise the statements are trivially false). By monotonic-
ity (=1.4(5)) and part (2) without loss of generality χ = λ, and we have to
prove the 4= direction. Now apply 1.7(3) and 1.5.
4) Repeat the proof of part (1).
5) The implication => holds by monotonicity (that is by 1.4(5)). The implica-
tion <= holds by part (4) above and 1.5.
6) Same proofs. 
Πι.i4
1.15 Conclusion. Let μ < Nωι and assume μ
H° < 2
Nl, then Unif (Nι,μ,μ, 2)
fails.
Proof. Assume toward contradiction Unif (Kι,μ,μ, 2); from Claim 1.7(3) we
obtain Unif (Kι,μ, μ,2
<Hl) is true, apply Lemma 1.14(1) and we have
Now by Lemma 1.13(4) ( let Nα = μ,α < cji) cov(μ,Hι) < K
l£
l < μ*° < 2
Hl.
This is a contradiction to theorem 1.10. 
Πι.15

958 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
We can strengthen theorem 1.10 to
1.16 Theorem. Suppose λ is regular uncountable, 2
<λ < 2
λ, and μ > λ. If
Unif (λ,μ,2
<λ,2
<λ) holds then:
(*)2\μ,λ+ There is a family {Si : i < 2
λ}, Si C μ, \Si\ = λ+ and
\SiΠSj\ < N 0 f o r i ^ j .
Proof. Similar to 1.10; we may assume μ < 2
λ, otherwise the conclusion
is trivial. Prom the proof of 1.10 we get 2
λ < μ
κ°. Hence we may assume
μ > (2
<λ)+
ω (otherwise we have μ = (2
<λ)+
n for some n, so by the Hausdorff
formula we get μ
H° = μ + (2
<λ)
H° = μ-f-2
<λ = μ < 2
λ < μ
κ°, a contradiction).
Let for every α < λ
+, α = (Ji<χ B f , \Bf\ < λ, Bf increasing continuous in i,
and we can assume: Bf Π λ = i, and βj G Bf =ϊ B? C Bf. For notational
convenience let β(α,z) = Bf. We follow the proof of 1.10 and mention only
the differences. We let
Mod = {(a,...,Cβ,gβ,...}β£B(θί^ 
β < λ+,i < \,9β a function from £f \{0}
to
 Λ>2, Cβ a closed subset of z}, so from x G Mod we can reconstruct α and
B(a, ϊ) hence i. Now for every / : λ — > {0, 1} we define by induction on β < λ
4"
functions h/tβ : λ — >
 λ>2, g/?/3 G Dχ(μ,
χ>e2) and a closed unbounded subset
If we have defined for every β < 7 and 7 > 0, let
Λ/>7(i) = if ({α, . . . , C/,/3 Π α, ^/j/3 f(α \ {0}), . . .)
where a — α(i, /, 7) is the minimal α > i, a G Π{C/,/3 : /3 G £(7, i)} and we let
CfίΊ = {δ : if β e 5(7, δ) then 5 is an accumulation point of Cf^}.
We modify Fact 1.11 to : there are no distinct jn < λ
4" for n < ω and
/o G
 λ2 such that the set Y
 d= {/ G
 λ2 : gf,jn(Q) = 9f0jn(fy 
for each n < ^}
has power > 2
<λ (the number is just to give us two distinct /'s as required for
starting the induction there).
How do we prove this new version of 1.11? Assume (jn 
: n < ω) and /0
form a counterexample. Without loss of generality /\njn < jn+i
 and choose

§1. Unif: a Strong Negation of the Weak Diamond 
959
i < X large enough such that jn G B(jm, ί) for n < ra, and for each / G Y let
α(/) = Min{α : α > i, α G Πn<α; ^/Jnlί we define a relation £ on F:
fιE/2 
iff 
a(fι) = α(/2) and forn < α;,
and <7/1Jn fa(/) - ghtjn 
\a(f)
Now £ is an equivalence relation with < λ x (2
<λ)
H° x (2
<λ)*° = 2
<λ
equivalence classes. So we can find /i ^ /2 G V which are equivalent.
Now 9 f l t j n ( 0 ) 
= 9 f 0 t j n ( f y 
— 9hJn(ty by the definition of Y. Now we can
apply the proof of 1.11 to /i, /2, contradicting the choice of /i 7^/2-
Why is this new version of 1.11 enough? For /0 G
 λ2 let Y}Q
 
d= {/ : / G
 λ2
and for infinitely many j < λ+ we have <7/,j(0) = 9 f 0 , j ( Q ) } , now the number
of possible (jn 
: n < ω) is < (λ+)*° < 2
<λ + λ
+ which is < 2
λ. Moreover
sup{|y/| : / G
 λ2} < λ+ + 2
<λ < 2
λ. As /0 G F^ ^ /i G r/o we can find
F* C
 λ2 such that |F*| - 2
λ and /0 G F* &/ι G F* &/0 ^ Λ => /0 ^ F^. So
{{(#/,.? (°) > •? ) : ^ < ^+) : /
 G ^*) is a family of 2
λ subsets of μ x λ+; which by
the choice of F* satisfies: the intersection of any two is finite, confirming (*) of
1.16 (note that without this symmetry we could have used HajnaPs free subset
theorem [Haβl]). 
Πi.ie
1.17 Conclusion. If λ = cf (λ) > N0, 2
λ > μ > 2
<λ = 2
Λ, cov(μ, λ) < 2
λ ί/ien
Unif (λ, μ, μ, 2) fails.
Proof. 
Let σ = 
cov(μ, λ) and let us assume toward contradiction that
Unif (λ,μ,μ,2). Now by Claim 1.7(3) we have Unif (λ,μ,μ,2
<λ), and by
Lemma 1.14(1) we have Unif (λ, cov(μ, λ), λ, 2
<λ) i.e. Unif (λ, σ, λ, 2
<λ) hence
by monotonicity (i.e. 1.4(5)) we have Unif (λ,σ, 2
<Λ,2
<λ), so by 1.16 we know
that (*)2λ σ λ+ holds. Now we would like to apply [Sh:430, 2.1(2)], with ft+, λ,
μ here standing for AC, λ, μ there, but we have to check the assumptions there:
"μ > λ > AV" is obvious, as μ > λ > κ
+; as for "cov(λ,κ, ft,2) < μ" trivially
|«S<Λ+(λ)| < μ suffices but |5<Λ+(λ)| = X" < 2
<λ < μ. Now "cov(μ,λ+,λ+, 2)"

960 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
there means cov(μ, λ) here, so we get σ
<κ 
= σ. Hence σ = σ
κ° hence
(*)2
λ,σ,λ
+ is impossible. 
DI.IT
1.18 Conclusion. 1) If θ < X are regular cardinals, 2
Θ = 2
<λ < 2
λ,
and λ < μ < 2
λ and -"(*)2λ,μ,λ+ (this is the statement from 1.16) then
-πUnif(λ,μ,2
<λ,2*).
2) Under the assumptions of 1) if cov(μ, λ) < μ or just cov(2
(9,λ) < μ then
-Unif (λ,μ,μ,λ).
Proof. 
1) By 1.16 we have-Unif (λ,μ,2
<λ,2
<λ) i.e. -Unif (λ,μ,2
<λ, 2
Θ).
2) By part (1) and 1.14(2). 
Dι.18
1.19 Conclusion. 1) If θ < X are regular cardinals 2
Θ = 2
<λ < 2
λ (e.g. λ = 0+,
2
Θ < 2
λ) and θ > X then for every μ < λ, we have - Unif (λ, μ, 2
Θ, 2^).
2) Moreover if cov(μ,λ) < 2
λ then -Unif (λ,μ,2^, λ).
Proof.
1) By 1.18 it suffices to prove ~'(*)2λ,μ,λ+ which is proved in [Sh:460]. For the
reader's benefit we derive it from the main theorem of [Sh:460]. As μ > θ > I
main theorem of [Sh:460] says that for every regular large enough ft < X, the
ft-revised power of μ, μW, is μ where
μM = miu{\P\ :P C S<κ(μ) and every a C S<κ(μ)
is included in a union of < ft members of P}
Let P C <S<«(μ) exemplified μM = μ, and let PI = {b : |6| =
ft and (3α)(6 C α G P)}, so PI C 5<Λ(μ), |Pι| < μ x 2
K < μ + X = μ.
Now if {Si : i < 2
Λ} C S<χ+(μ) is as required in (*)2\μ,λ+' each ^ contains
some α^ of cardinality ft, hence for some ζ* < ft, bi^ G P for ζ < ζ* we have
α* ζ 
U ^ί,C» hence for some ζ(i) we have Ci = α^ Π 6i^(i) has cardinality
c<c;
ft. Clearly a € PI, but |Pι| < μ < 2
λ hence for some i < j < 2
λ, c3 , = Ci so

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
961
Cj — Ci is a subset of 5^ Π Sj of cardinality AC contradiction to the choice of
{Si : i < 2
λ}.
2) By part (1) and 1.18(2). 
Πi.ig
Remark. Even for smaller λ, (*)2\μ,λ+ is a verY strong requirement, and it is
not clear if it is consistent with ZFC. By [Sh:420, §6] it implies that there are
regular cardinals 0$ G (2
<λ, μ) for i < X such that Π θi/S<^Q(\) is μ+-directed
i<\
and even has true cofinality which is > μ.
1.20 Question. 1) Does λ = cf(λ) > K0, λ < 2
<λ < 2
Λ imply that
Unif (λ, 2,2,2) fails?
2) Is it consistent with ZFC that for some strongly inaccessible λ we have
Unif (λ, 2,2,2) fails?
3) Can we prove in 1.14(2) equality? can we omit the "λ not strong limit" in
1.14(3)?
4) How complete is Id — Unif (λ,μo, A^i>x)?
§2. On the Power of Ext and
Whitehead's Problem
Let the word group stand here for abelian group, for notational simplicity. A
comprehensive book of set-theoretic methods in Abelian group theory is [EM].
By [Sh:44], [Sh:52] if G is a non-free group and V = L then Ext (G,Z) ^
{0}. In Killer, Huber and Shelah [HHSh:91], it is proved that if V = L, the
torsion free rank of Ext (G, Z) is the immediate upper bound: Min{2l
Kl : K a
subgroup of G such that G/K free }.
Now in fact not the full power of the axiom V — L is used, just the
satisfaction of the diamond principle for every stationary subset of a regular
uncountable cardinal. Devlin and Shelah [DvSh:65] introduced a weakening of
this principle, and in [HHSh:91] we stated that for the result mentioned above
it is enough that the weak diamond holds for every stationary subset of any

962 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
regular uncountable cardinal. Here we prove a somewhat stronger result, using
failure of cases of Unif, (e.g., χ = 2
H° suffice). Meanwhile Eklof and Huber
[EkHu] found an alternative proof, more group-theoretic, for the result with
weak diamond (really a slight weakening)
On the difference between weak diamond and failure of Unif, and between
variants of Unif, see [Sh:98] also §1 of this chapter and VIII §4 (where we
show that it is consistent that only one of them holds). On the torsion part of
Ext(G,Z) see Sageev and Shelah [SgSh:138] [SgSh:148]; an alternative proof
to [SgSh:138], more group theoretic, Eklof and Huber [EkHu]; on other car-
dinals Grossberg and Shelah [GrSh:302] and Mekler, Roslanowski and Shelah
[MRSh:314].
2.0 Definition.
(1) A group (G, -f) is called torsion free, if for all g G G \ {0}, for all n > 0 we
have ng ^ 0.
(2) The torsion free rank of an (abelian) group G, ro(G) is the maximal size
of a set {cii : i < X} C G such that for every finite non empty S C λ, for
all (ui'.ie S} (iii G Z \ {0}), we have £ u^ / 0.
ies
(3) For g G G and n such that 0 < n < ω, we say that "n divides g in G"
(G N n\g) if there is g' G G such that ng' = g. A subgroup A C G is called
a "pure" subgroup if for all α G A, all n, 0 < n < ω we have: G N n|α
implies A N n|α.
(4) If A C G is a subgroup, we write G/A for the quotient group, and for
α G G we let α + A or a/A be the equivalence class of α.
(5) G is called divisible, if for all α G G, all n > 0 we have G N n|α.
(6) G is called free if it has a free basis, where (xι : i G Γ) is a free basis of G
iff every element of G has a representation J^ UiXi where S C T is finite
ΐ<ES
and Ui G Z, and ^ u^x^ = 0 => /\ u^ = 0.
i€5 
165
2.0A Fact.
(1) If G is torsion free, A C G a pure subgroup, then G/A is torsion free.

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
963
(2) If G is not a torsion group (i.e. 3α G G Vn > 0 [na φ 0]), then the two
cardinals
: A C G, for all αi φ a^ in A, all n > 0 : nαi
and
: A C G, for all α G G there is u G Z, such that
are equal to max{r0(G), K0}
(3) If G is torsion free non zero, then |G| = max{r0(G), N0}.
(4) If G is an abelian group and 0 < n < ω then we can find α^ G G for
i < \nG\ such that i φ j => n(a» - a?) 7^ OG, where nG = {na : a G G}.
Note that if G is divisible then \nG\ = |G| as nG = G.
Recall (see [Fu])
2. OB Fact.
(a) If H and G/H are free (so HCG), then G is free.
(b) If G = U GΪ where (G» : i < λ) is an increasing continuous sequence of
i<λ
groups, GO is free and for all i < λ the group Gi+ι/Gi is free, then G is
free.
(c) If G = U Gi where (G^ : i < λ) is an increasing continuous sequence of
i<\
group, each Gi is free and for a closed unbounded set of i < \ we have
(Vj)(i < j < λ => Gj/Gi is free) then G is free.
After Fuchs [Fu] pp. 209-211:
2.1 Definition. For abelian groups A, H let
(1) Fact (A, H) is the family of functions / : A x A — > ίί such that
/(α, -α) = /(α, 0) = /(O, α) = 0 and
/(α, 6 + c) + /(&, c) - /(&, α + c) + /(α, c) - /(c, α + b) + /(α, 6)
(2) We make Fact (A, H) into an abelian group by coordinatewise addition.

964 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
(3) For each function g : A — > H satisfying #(0) = 0, g(-a) = —g(ά) (we
call such g normal) let (dg) G Fact (A, H) be defined by (9#)(α, 6) =
(4) Trans (A, H) is {dg : g a normal function from A to H}, and it is a sub-
group of Fact (A, H) and we make it to an abelian group by coordinatewise
addition.
(5) Ext (A, G) — Fact (A, G}/ Trans (A, G) (quotient as an abelian group).
2.1A Fact.
(1) If h : A —* B is a group homomorphism, ίften h induces naturally a
homomorphism
ft: Fact (£,#)-* Fact (A, H)
(namely, ft(/)((αι,α2)) 
i-+ / '(ft(αι) , ^(^2))) for αi, α2 G A which satisfies
ft(d#) = 9(0 ft) so maps Trans (£?, if) into Trans (A, H) and so naturally
induces a homomorphism
ft: Ext(£,if) -» Ext (A, if)
(satisfying h(f 4- Trans (5, if)) = ft(/) + Trans (A, if)).
(2) If ft is 1 — 1, then ft and ft are onto.
(See [Fu, 51.3] for ft and [HHSh, Lemma 1] for ft.)
2. IB Remark. (See [Fu])
(1) If G is free, then Ext (G, if) - {0} i.e. Trans (G, if) - Fact (G, if).
(2) G is called a Whitehead group if Ext (G?,Z) = {0}.
(3) If G is divisible, then Ext (G, if) is torsion free (see [Fu, 52.1 I]).
2.2 Theorem. Suppose λ is a regular uncountable cardinal, if , G = G\ are
abelian groups, Gi (for i < λ) torsion free abelian subgroups of G, |G| = λ >
|Gi|, G = \Ji<:xGi,Gi(i < λ) increasing and continuous, and let χ ( i ) be the
cardinality of Ext (Gi+ι/Gi, if). If Unif (λ, \ H \ , χ ) fails ίften | Ext (G, if )| > 1.

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
965
Proof. First we remark that we may w.l.o.g. assume that each Gi is a pure
subgroup of G (and hence of G$+i): the set C = {i < X : Gi is a pure
subgroup of G} is a closed unbounded subset of λ, say C = {& : i < X} an
increasing continuous enumeration. Let G\ — G^, χ
f(i) = |Ext (G£+1/GJ,if)|,
E = {i 
: ξi — z}, then E is closed unbounded and for i G E we have
G't = Gi C Gi+i C G^+1 so χ'(i) > χ(i) (by 2.1A(2)), so the failure of
Unif (λ, \ H \ , χ ) implies the failure of Unif (λ, \H\,χ') by 1.4(2) and 1.4(5), and
we can continue the proof with G(, χ'(ϊ) instead of G^, χ(ϊ) renaming them as
d, χ(ί). Let μ = (μ(ϊ) 
: i < λ) be defined by μ(ϊ) = \H\™, so by 1.6(1) we
get that Unif (λ, μ, χ) too fails and we can assume |Gα| > |α| -f NO-
Next we prove
2.3 Claim. Let H,A,B be abelian groups, B a pure subgroup of A, / G
Fact (B, if). Then there are ft G Fact (A, if) (for t G Ext(A/B,ίΓ)) extend-
ing /, such that
(*) there are no distinct ί, s G Ext (A/B, H) and normal functions <&, #s from
A to H such that θ#t = /t, 9p5 = /5 and pt fβ = ps fβ.
In other words, for any normal function go : B —> H there is at most one
t G Ext (A/B, H) such that for some normal g : A —» H extending p0 we
have ft = dg.
Proof of the Claim 2.3 By 2.1A(2) there is /0 G Fact (A, H) extending /.
Let for each t G Exk(A/B,H),ht 
€ Fact (A/B, H) represent ί, i.e., ί =
ht/ Trans (-A/B, if), and w.l.o.g. Λ0 is the zero function. For t G Ext (A/B, H)
let Λ G Fact (A, H) be defined by:
(g) for α, b G A, /t(α, 6) = /0(α, 6) 4- Λt(α/B, b/B) (where α/B, 6/B G A/B 
are
defined naturally).
Clearly each ft is well defined and belongs to Fact (A, if), (and the two
definitions of /o agree).
Suppose ί, s are members of Ext (A/B, if), and there are normal functions
gt,ga from A to if, % - /t, <9#5 = /θ and & fJ5 = #θ fS. Let /*
 d= ft - fs G

966 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
Fact (A, H), g* = gt—gs (a normal function from A to H), so clearly dg* = /*
and f*\B = Oβ, moreover, /*(α,6) = h*(a/B,b/B) where Λ* = Λt - Λβ (see
(g) above). It is also clear that h* G Fact(4/B,ff) and h* / Trans (A/B, if) =
t-s^Q.
Now if in A, c - a = b G B then fc*(α/B, 6/5) = /*(o, 6) - (9flf*)(α, 6) =
<?*(α) - <?*(α + 6) + fl*(b) - fl*(α) - <?*(c) + <;*(&). As 6 G B, </*(&) - 0# by
"0* = gt- gs and ^B - #JB" and δ/B - QA/B hence h*(a/B,b/B) =
h*(a/B,0A/B) 
= OH (as Λ* G Fact (A/B, G)). So putting together the last
two sentences 0# = g*(ά) — g*(c) + O//, hence ^*(α) — ^*(c).
We can conclude that c/B = a/B implies α — c G B hence <7*(α) = g*(c).
So there is g^ : A/B — * H such that g*(ά) = g^(a/B). We can check ft* = dg^
but /ι*/ Trans (α/B, H) = t — s ^ 0, contradiction. 
U2.3
Continuation of the proof of the Theorem 2.2.
Recall that we assumed that each Gi is a pure subgroup of G. We define by
induction on α < λ for every η G Y . 
χ(ϊ) a function /^ (note that χ(ι) > 1
for every i) such that:
a) fη G Fact (Gα, if) (when £g(ry) = α)
b) if i/ = r/t/3, and β < ίg(v) then /„ C fη
c) if ξ < ζ < χ(α), then there are no normal functions go,gι from Gα+ι
into if, such that 9flf0 = Λ
 Λ <ξ>, ^i = fη
 Λ <C> and ^o \Ga - ^i fGa.
Hence
c)' for any function go : Ga — > H there is at most one ξ < χ(α) such
that there exists a normal function g : Gα+ι —> H extending </0 with
fη
 
Λ (ξ> = dg.
There is no problem in the induction, as the induction step is done by the
Claim 2.3.
In the end, it is enough to prove that: for some η G 
\^^ ^
or no
normal function g from G into H do we have fη = dg. So assume that for
each η G ^ χ(ά) there is a normal function gη : G ^ H such that fη = dgη.
a<\
So also fηla 
= fη\(Ga x Ga) = d(gη\Ga), if ίg(η) = a. Hence ry(α) can
be computed from ( η \ θ ί j g η \ G 0 ί ) j 
since it is the unique (by (c)) ξ < χ(a)

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
967
such that there is a normal g : Ga+ι —> H extending gη \Ga and satisfying
f(η\a)
 
Λ {£) = dg. What is the cardinality of {(η\a,gη\Ga) : η G
 λ2}? Clearly at
most ( Π X(β)) x |ff|
|Gβl < ( Π (|if|
|G"
xG"
1) x l#|
|Gα| - |Jf|
|Gβl = μ(α) as
β<a 
β<a
\Ga\ > |α| +No» we thus easily get that Unif (λ, μ, χ) holds, which is equivalent
to Unif (λ, |if|,χ). This contradicts our assumption. 
U2.2
2.4 Theorem. Assume λ is regular uncountable, H, G are abelian groups, Gi
a torsion free abelian subgroup of G increasing continuous with i for i < X
such that G = \J G*. Let χ° = (χ
Q(i) : i < λ) be defined by χ°(i) =
;<λ
|Ext(Gi+i/Gi,if)| and let χ
l = ( χ
l ( ί ) 
: i < λ) be defined by χ
1^) -
|Ext(G
?
ί+ι/Gί)/Torsion(Ext(G'ί+ι/G'ί,Jfί))|. Let £(*) < 2 and assume that
Unif (λ, |JT|, χ*<*>) fails (note: ^(i) is K0 x r0(Ext (G^/G^H))).
(1) Ext (G, ff) is not a torsion group provided that
(*) (a) l(*) = 1 or
(b) £(*) = 0 and the Boolean algebra P(\)/ld - Unif (λ,//,^
1) is
infinite.
(2) If Unif (λ, μo, |-H"|, X°) fails and (*) of part (1) then the torsion free rank of
Ext (G, if) is >μ0.
(3) Suppose Id — Unif (λ, |ίf|,χ°) is not /^-saturated, N0 < K < λ then the
torsion free rank of Ext (G, H) is at least 2
K.
Remark. 1) An ideal / on λ is called ^-saturated if there are no K pairwise
disjoint non zero elements in the Boolean algebra P(X)/I.
2) An ideal / on λ is called weakly λ-saturated if there are no λ pairwise disjoint
sets in P(X) \ /.
3) As is well known; if / is ^-complete the two notions are equivalent.
4) It is well known that the extra hypothesis in 2.4(3) is very weak (i.e. the
assumption that there is a normal /^-saturated ideal on λ has high consistency
strength and put other restrictions on λ e.g. λ not successor).

968 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
Proof. (1) As in the proof of 2.4 w.l.o.g. each Gi is a pure subgroup of G, hence
Ga,Ga+ι/Ga are torsion free. Also |G^| > N0> and letting β(i) = \H\\
Gί\ also
Unif (λ, μ, x^*)) fails. Now we prove two claims:
2.5 Observation. There are pairwise disjoint Sn C λ,n < ω such that
Unif (λ, 5n, μ, x) fails, provided that one of the following holds:
(α) μ(i) < 2
<λ
(β) P ( X ) / l d - Unif (λ,μ,χ) is an infinite Boolean algebra
(7) β(i) non decreasing, λ not measurable.
(δ) χ(α) > 2 for every α or just for every normal ultrafilter D on λ, {α :
χ(α) > 2} G D.
Proof. If clause (/?) holds, this is very trivial. If the Boolean algebra P(\)/ld —
Unif (λ, μ, x) is atomless below some element, say 5/Id — Unif (λ,μ, x) we
choose by induction on n a set Sn C S such that 5n/Id — Unif (λ,μ, x)
is not zero and Sn C 5 \ U St, and S \ |J St φ Id - Unif (λ,μ,χ), so
t<n 
i<n
(Si : t < ω) is as required. If P(λ)/Id - Unif (λ,μ,χ) is an atomic Boolean
algebra, it has infinitely many atoms say (S
f
n/ld — Unif (λ,μ,χ) : n < ω) are
disjoint atoms, so Sn = S'n \ (J S'e are as required. So assume clause (α), so
i<n
by 1.7 w.l.o.g. μi = 2
<Λ. By induction on n try to choose pairwise disjoint sets
Sn € P(X) \ Id - Unif (λ,μ,χ) such that λ \ U Sk £ Id - Unif (λ,μ,χ).
k<n
Assume that we cannot continue the induction in stage n, then clearly S' =
{α < λ : χ(α) — 1} belongs to the ideal (by 1.4(1)), hence the restriction of
Id — Unif (λ, μ, x) to S = λ \ (J 5^ is a maximal ideal. Since it is also normal
k<n
by 1.9(2), λ must be measurable and the dual filter is a normal ultrafilter
to which 5 belongs. So Os holds. Now it is easy to find disjoint stationary
sets Sn C 5, n < ω such that for all n the statement Oλ(Sn) holds (e.g. let
(Xa : a e S) be a diamond sequence, and let Sn = {α : Min(Xα) = n}). Since
Oλ('S'n) implies the weak diamond on Sn i.e. ->Unif (λ, 2,2,2) (by 1.3) by 1.7
also -«Unif (λ, 2
<λ,2
<λ,2) hence by monotonicity (1.4(5)), we are done.
The proof when clause (7) holds is included in the proof above. 
U2.5

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
969
2.6 Claim. Let H,A,B be abelian groups, B a subgroup of A, A/B torsion
free and / G Fact (B, H) and n, 0 < n < ω.
(1) Then there are fi G Fact (A, H) for i < χ = \ Ext (A/B, H)\ such that:
(*) there are no i < j < χ and normal functions g^gj from A to H such
that dgi = nfi,dgj 
= nfj and gi\B = gj\B. This means that for
every normal #o : B —> H there is at most one i < χ such that for
some normal g : A —> /ι extending #o we have n/i = dg.
(2) Then there are fi 
G Fact(^4, #) for i < (the torsion free rank of
Ext (A/B, H) multiplied by N0) such that
(**) There are no i ^ j and functions g^gj from A to H and 0 < m < α;
such that mfi = dgi, mfj = dgj and gi \B = gj \B.
Proof. (1) As A/B is torsion free, Ext(A/B,H) 
is a divisible abelian group
(see [Fu]), hence we can inductively find ti G Ext (A/B, H) for i < χ such that
i < j implies n(tj — ti) ^ 0 (see 2.0A(4)). Now repeat the proof of Claim 2.3.
(2) We can choose a sequence (ti : i < ro(Ext (A/B,H)) x N0) such that for
ra < ω if mti = mtj and m ^ 0 then i = j (this is possible by 2.0A(2)), and
continue as in 2.3. 
U2.6
Continuation of the Proof of 2.4(1)- Let us first assume -£(*) = 0 and the
Boolean algebra P(\)/Id - Unif (λ, μ, χ
Q) is infinite (i.e. possibility (b) holds).
Let Sn C λ (for n < ω) be as in Fact 2.5, and w.l.o.g. λ = \Jn<ω Sn.
Let us define by induction on a, < X for every η G Y. 
χ(i) a function fη
such that
a) fη G Fact (Ga,H) (when £g(^) - α)
b) if v = η\β,β < £g(ι/) then /v C fη.
c) if α G Sn,ξ < ζ < χ(a) and η G ^ α X W *en t'lere are no normal
functions ^QJ^I fr°
m ^α+i into fl" such that 9^0 = (n + l)fη- <ξ>, 9^ι =
(n 4-1)/^ * <c> and g0 \Ga = g1 \Ga.
Hence
c)
; if α G Sn and 77 G Y X°(0 ίΛen for every normal #o : G^α ~^ H there is
i<α
at most one ξ < χ(a) such that for some normal function g : Gα+1 -> ίί
extending ^o we have (n -f l)fη - ^ = d(g)

970 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
There is no problem in the induction as the induction step is by Claim
2.6(1), and we finish as in the proof of 2.2.
If we do not assume (*)(a) but rather (*) (b), we have to use 2.6(2) instead
of 2.6(1) and let Sn = X for n < ω (so in clause (c) above, the demand is for
every α < λ, n < ω).
Proof of 2.4(2). As in the proof of part (1) w.l.o.g. Gi is a pure subgroup of
G, infinite. Let μ = (μ(i) 
: i < X) be defined as: μ(0) = μ0 x |ίf|
|Go1, and
μ(i) = \H\\
Gi\, and again as in the proof of part (1) also Unif (λ,μ, χ°) fails.
Note that μ(0) > N0
We define fη as in the proof of 2.4(1). If the torsion free rank of Ext (G, H)
is < μo> then there are ta G Ext (G, H) (a < μo) such that for any t G
Ext (G, H) , for some n > 0 and for some α we have nt = ta (note that w.l.o.g.
μo > NO by the proof of 2.4(1)). So there are g
a G Fact (G, H) for α < μ0, so
that for every / G Fact (G, H) there are n/ > 0 and a function #/ from G to
H and α(/) < μo such that
In particular this holds for every fη,η G X 
λxW First assume (*)(b),
so we have defined the 5n's. So for each 77 G y^χ(0? f°
r eacn * £ 'S'n/ and
i<λ
g' 
: Gi ^> H satisfying dg
7 = /rjfGΐ we have η(ι) can be computed from
(a(fη),η\i) 
as
(*) "the unique ξ < χ^(i) such that for some normal g : Gi+i — > #, and we
have n/ x Λ,r/3 - (0 = 00 + 0
α(/ιr/0.»
This contradicts -> Unif (λ, μ, χ) (which was deduced above). If we assume (*)(a)
holds just replace "i G 5n/" by "i < λ" and use 2.6(1) rather than 2.6(2) and
in (*) replace "and we have n/x" by "and for some n we have nx"
Proof of 2.4(3).
As in the prove of part (1) w.l.o.g. Gi is infinite pure subgroup of G and
Unif (λ,μ,χ°) fail with μ(ί) = |tf|
|Gί|. Let (5f : i < κ,n < ω) be pairwise
disjoint subsets of λ which are positive modulo Id — Unif (λ, |iΓ|,χ), and

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
971
let Si = 
U 
S f . Using a lemma similar to 2.6(1) we can define a family
0<n<ω
(hη : η G
 λ>2), hη G Fact (Gέg(η) , H) such that:
whenever α G Sf (so n > 0), χ(α) > 1, η G "2, # : Gα+ι -> # is
normal and n(hη - (0) — ^
 Λ <i}) = <9<7, then g\Ga ^ 0.
For each 77 G
 λ2 we thus get a function /i^ = 
\J hη\a G Fact (G, #). Be-
α<λ
low we will select 2* many 77 G
 Λ2 such that the corresponding hη witness
Let (Aε : ε < 2*) be subsets of K such that for any ε\ ^ 62 the set Aει \A£2
is nonempty.
For each ί < K, n < ω define F/
1 on |J
 
α2 x
 α2 x
 GaH as follows: if 771,
αGST
1
^72 ^
 α2, ^o Ga — > JT is normal, α G 5f and there is a normal g+ : Gα+ι — > 7f
extending gQ such that
then ίT
1 (1/1,772,^0) = 1, otherwise ^(771,7/2,00) = 0.
Since 5f ^ Id - Unif (λ, μ, 2) we can find a weak diamond f? for F
 1 and
5f (so only f?\S? matters).
Now for ε < 2* define τ/(ε) G
 λ2 by
v 0 
otherwise.
We now claim that for all εi / £2, for all n > 0
n/ιr?(ει) ^ nhη(ε<2} mod Trans (G,H).
(This claim will finish the proof of 2.4(3).)
So assume that nhη(ει) — nhη^ε^ = dg for some normal g : G -+ H. Let
7/1 = τ/(ει), 7/2 = τ/(ε2). Choose i G Aeι \ A£2. Since ff was a weak diamond
for F/
1 on SJ
1, the set
{α G S? : Fr(ηι\a,η2\a,g\a) = f?(ά)}

972 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
is nonempty, so let a be an element of this set.
Case 1. /p(α) = 1.
So there is normal g' : Gα+i — > H such that
n(
hm
 Λ (0) - hη2 - (o)) = <V and #' extends g\Ga.
But we also have
n(
hηι\(a+l) ~
Note that r/ι(α) - /f (α) - 1, r/2(α) = 0, since α G SJ
1, i G Aει \ Λ£2. So
subtracting the two equations above, we get
n(
hm
 Λ (o) - hηi
 Λ (i)) = d((g' - g) \Ga+ι).
Since ((g
1 — g) \Ga+ι) \Ga — 0, this contradicts our choice of (hη : η e
 Λ>2).
Case 2. /f (α) - 0.
So there is no normal g' : Gα+ι — > H satisfying
n(
hm
 Λ <o> ~ hη2 - (o)) = dg
f, g' extends g\a.
This is a contradiction, since g' = pίG^+i satisfies the requirements (as
f7ι(α) =r/2(α) = 0). 
D2.4
2.7 Conclusion. Assume that
0 for every regular uncountable λ, for all stationary subsets 5 C λ, the weak
diamond holds on 5, or just Unif (λ, 5, 2, (2^ : i < λ}) fails.
Then
(a) Every Whitehead group is free.
(b) If G is torsion free but not free, uncountable and for all subgroups H of
cardinality \H\ < \G\ the quotient group G/H is not free, then the torsion
free rank of Ext (G,Z) is 2\
G\.
Remark. 1) If there is no inaccessible cardinal then Θ is equivalent, by 1.7(2),
to

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
973
0' for every regular uncountable λ, for every stationary subset S of λ, the
weak diamond holds for 5, that is Unif (λ, 5,2,2).
2) We can get a weaker version, still sufficient for our theorem, if we restrict
F in the definition of Unif to the particular kind of functions implicit in the
proof. See generally on such version of the weak diamond in [Sh:57β, §2].
Proof. First note that (b) implies (a). Indeed, let G be a nonfree Whitehead
group of minimal size. The countable case is well known (see below) so assume
|G| > K0. Then G is almost free, so all subgroups H such that |if| < |G| are
free, hence G/H is not free (by 2.OB) so G satisfies the assumption of (b), hence
its conclusion so | Ext (G, Z)| > 1.
Proof of (b). We prove by induction on λ.
The case |G| = H0 is well known (see e.g. [HHSh:91]) and the case |G| is
singular is just like [HHSh:91]. So assume λ — |G| is regular > No-
Let G — (J G7 with G7 a continuous increasing in 7, each G7 a pure
7<λ
subgroup of G of size < λ such that:
(*) If G/G7 is not almost free i.e. if (3/3)(7 < β < X & Gβ/GΊ not free), then
G7+ι/G7 is not free.
Let
5 = {7 : G7_|_ι/G7 is not free}.
χ = (x(i) •* < λ)
χ(i) - r0(Ext (G7+1/G7,Z) x K0
Note that by induction hypothesis for all 7 G S we have ^(7) > 2 (in fact
> 2
N°).
If S is stationary, then 5 can be divided into λ many stationary sets
(Si : i < λ). By our assumption, all the sets Si will be φ 0 mod Id —
Unif (λ, 2,2,2) = Id - Unif (λ, N0, NO, 2), so by 2.4(3) we know that Ext (G, Z)
has torsion free rank 2
λ.
If S is not stationary then by (*) we have a continuous increasing sequence
(7i : i < λ), (J 7i = λ with i < λ => GΊί+l/GΊi is free. Then it is easy to

974 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
see that G/G7o is free (see 2. OB, clause (c)), contradicting an assumption (of
clause (b) of 2.7). 
D2.7
A more detailed analysis of the situation shows that for a given group G of
cardinality λ (regular uncountable), we do not need the full strength of 2.7Θ
(assuming the induction hypothesis of 2.7(b)).
2. 7 A Theorem. Assume G satisfies the assumption on G of clause (b) from
2.7, |G| = λ, λ regular uncountable and that all groups of size < λ satisfy
2.7(b) or just: \H\ < λ, H not free => Ext (if, Z) ^ 0. Let G = \J Gi be an
i<\
increasing union of (w.l.o.g. pure) subgroups of G, and let
S* C {i < X : Gi+i/Gi is not free}.
(Note that S* is stationary since G is not free.)
Now assume that 5* is not in Id - Unif (λ, 2, 2, χ), χ* = Ext (Gi+i/G., Z) (so
i e 5* => Xi > 2) and i G 5*, i inaccessible => Ext(Gί+ι/Gi,Z) = 2*. Then
r0(Ext(G,Z)) = 2
λ.
Proof. As remarked in 2.0 ([Fu], or see essentially [HHSh:91, Lemma 1 p. 41]) if
G^ is a subgroup of G, then Ext (G^, H) is a homomorphic image of Ext (G, if),
hence the torsion free rank of Ext (G, H) is not smaller than the torsion free
rank of Ext (G
1", if) , so we shall freely replace G by some subgroups during
the proof.
We split the proof to cases.
Case I: G has subgroups G*, Gα(α < λ) such that:
|Gα| < λ,G* C Gα,Gα/G* is not free and {Gα : α < λ} is independent over
G*, (i.e., if n G (0,ω) and xm G Garn \ G* for m < n, the αm's distinct then
We choose, for any n < ω,a < X , a function /™ G Fact (Gα/G*,Z)
such that /° = 0, and for n ^ 0 we have n/£/ Trans (Gα/G*,Z) ^ {0}. Let
F : ω x λ -^ λ, be one to one onto. Let {Ai : i < 2
λ} be a family of distinct

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
975
subsets of λ, and define, for i < 2
λ, a function ξi : X —> ω by: &(α) = n if
for some ζ G -£», α = F(n, 2C) or for some C € λ \ A<, α = F(n, 2£ 4-1), and
ξi(a) = 0 otherwise.
So we have defined functions ξi (for i < 2
λ), from λ to α;, such that for
every n < ω and i ^ j <2
χ for some α < λ we have £i(α) = 0, ξj(a) = n.
For every i < 2
λ we define ft, G Fact (Σα<λ
 Gc*,Z): if z = Σα
χβ,2/ =
Σay<* and xα,2/α € Gα (so xt = yi = 0 for all but finitely many i's) then
Λ»(x,2/) = Σafa 
(za/G*jya/G*) 
(the representation x = Σα
x<* is not
unique, but for any two representations x — Σα xα = Σα x£, we get xa/G* =
χt,/G*, so /ii is well defined).
It is easy to check ft» G Fact (Σα G?α, Z).
Now if the torsion free rank of G (= ΣaGa) is < 2
λ, there is an n,
0 < n < ω such that {rafti/Trans (G^Z) : i < 2
λ} has power < 2
λ. We
know that 2
|G*' < 2
λ (if 2|cr| = 2
λ, then letting χ(α) = μ(α) = 2 we get
["] χ(α) = 
I"] μ(α), so Unif(λ,μ, x) holds by 1.4(4)) so without loss
α<λ 
α<|G*|
of generality (by renaming ) n/^/Trans (G, Z) are equal, for i < (2'
G*I)
+.
Hence there are normal functions Qi : G —» Z such that n/ι^ — nhQ = dgi
for i < (2
|G*
l)'
f. Now the number of g^G* is < (2
|G*!), hence without loss of
generality for every i such that 0 < i < (2^*')"*" we have gi\G* = g*.
We can choose a < X such that ξι(α) = 0, ξzfa) = n. Now restricting
ourselves to Ga, note for some k (namely k = ξo(α)), h0\(Ga x Gα) = /^ and
(Λi - fto) \(Ga x Gα) = /2 - /ί, (Λ2 - ΛO) ί(Gα x Gα) = /2 - /5 and now we
can apply the proof of Claim 2.3, and get a contradiction.
So we have finished Case I.
* 
* 
*
Let from now on, G — Ui<λ^*»^* increasing and continuous, |G*| < λ,
all Gi are pure subgroups of G, hence all the quotients G/Gi are torsion free.
2.8 Subclaim. If Case I does not hold, we can assume that:
(a) for every 7 < λ, there is no Gt, GΊ C Gt C G, |Gt| < λ, Gt Π G7+ι - GΊ
and G^ /G7 is not free.

976 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
(b) for every limit J, G/G$ is (cfJ)-free, except, maybe, when cf(<5) = K0.
Proof of the Subdaim. We define by induction on i < λ, α^ < λ, increasing and
continuous.
Let αo = 0, and for a limit i let α^ = Uj<i
αj ^ ai ιs defined let
{G£ : ζ < ζi} be a maximal family of subgroups of G, satisfying: Gai C
G
lζ> \G
lζ\ < ^5 G
lζ/Gai not free and {G£ : ζ < ζi} is independent over Gαi; such
a family exists by Zorn's Lemma and ζb < λ as Case I does not hold.
Let oίi+i — Min{α : α* < α and G£ C Gα for every C < ζi}>
We know that a$+i exists as λ is regular, |G£| < λ, <^ < λ. Also there is
no G?t,G?α. C Gt C G, |Gt| < λ,G^ Π Gαί+1 - Gai and Gt/Gα. not free, as
this would contradict the choice of {G£ : ζ < ζi} as a maximal family.
Now we can replace (Gα : a < λ) by (Gai : i < λ) and clause (a) of the
subclaim will hold, so without loss of generality (a) holds, i.e., α^ = i. What
about (b)? Now we will show that (a) implies (b). So assume that G/G§ is not
cf(5)-free, where cf(5) > NQ. Let G*/G$ be a non-free subgroup of cardinality
AC < cf(5). Let {xj : j < K} be a set of representatives, and let K be the group
generated by this set. Clearly \K\ = K (K, > K0? as G/G§ and hence G*/G^
are torsion free). So there is an ordinal 7 < δ such that K$ Π G$ C G7. Hence
(#$ + G7) Π G7+ι = G7, and
(Kδ -h G7)/G7 ^ /O/tf* Π G7 - ^/K5 Π G5 ^ (K5 + Gδ)/Gδ = G*/Gδ
is not free. This contradicts condition (a) for 7. 
U2.8
Continuation of the proof of 2.7 A Recall S* C {7 < λ : G7+ι/G7 is not free}
and let 5 = {7 G S* : 7 is a regular limit (i.e. inaccessible) cardinal}. Let
X - (X(7) : 7 < λ), χ(τ) - |Ext(G7+ι/G7,Z)|
//: not Case I and S* \ S φ Id - Unif (λ, N0, x)
We can use 2.4(3), because of the following well-known theorem:

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
977
Theorem. Assume λ is regular, D a normal filter on λ, 5° φ 0modD and
S £ S° => cf(^) < 5 (i e δ n°t a regular cardinal). Then there are pairwise
disjoint Sa C S°(a < λ), Sa φ Omod D.
Proof.
Clearly cf (— ) is a regressive function on 5° \ {0}, hence for some K and S
l C 5,
S
l φ 0mod£>, (VJ G 5*)[cf(5) - «]. For each 5 G S
1, choose (α($,f) : £ < K)
an increasing continuous converging to ί, and let Aςj = {δ G 51 : α(ί,£) = j}.
Now we can prove that for some ξ for λ ordinals j we have Aξj φ Omod J9,
and as Aςj Π Aξti — 0 for i φ j we will finish.
So we have finished Case II.
Continuation of the proof of 2. 7 A
Case III: 5* \ 5 G Id - Unif (λ, N0, x)-
So by our assumption S φ Id — Unif (λ, NO, X) Note that by an assumption
We first state (and prove later).
2.9 Subclaim. Assume G
G,G
l are torsion free, G° a pure subgroup of G
1,
fi G Fact(G°,Z), for i < x and the torsion free rank of Ext(G
l/G
Q,Z) 
is
> λ > x and λ > NO- Then we can define /i>α G Fact(G
1,Z), fi C f^a for
α < λ such that:
(*) if β φ 7 < x and 0 < n < ω and g : G° — > Z is a normal function then for
at most one α there is a normal function g^ : G
1 — » Z extending g, such that
π//3,α -n/7,α = 9^.
Continuation of the proof of 2. 7A
So let us prove the theorem in Case III. We define by induction on i < λ, for
every η G Y . .Xj and A C i, a function /^ G Fact (G*, Z) such that
a) if j < lg(η),η G X^-XUM C i ίften /^^^ - Λ^rί^ x G j ) .
b) if ^
 G X, <z+ι ^')' Λ S C i + 1, A n i = B n i then fηΛ = fη,B.
c) if δ G 5 (so χ(δ) = 2l*l),τ/ G X ( X U ) , ^ C 5,.B C 5,^ : Gδ -> Z is normal

978 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
and 0 < n < ω then for at most one j < χ(δ) there is a normal g^ : G$+ι —> Z
extending g such that nfη-^^ — nfη^j^β 
= dg^.
There is no problem in the definition: for c) use the subclaim 2.9, remembering
δ G 5 => χ(δ) = 2
δ. Now for at least one η G X 
\ X W > ^
or evelT distinct
A,B C λ and 0 < n < α;, nfη^A —
 nfη,B 
$• Trans (G,Z). Otherwise for every
η G y. 
£(i) there are Aη ^ Bη C λ and 0 < n^ < α; and g^ : G —» Z such
that
By condition c) above, for every δ G 5, from nη, fη,A \(G$ x G$) = fη\δ,Anδ,
fη,B \((*δ x Gδ) = fη\δ,Bnδ and gη \Gδ we can compute η(δ), so this contradicts
5^0 mod Id — Unif (λ, NO, χ) Now for such an 77, {fη,A 
'• A C λ} exemplify-
that the torsion free rank of Ext (G, Z) is > 2
λ. 
Π2.7Λ
Proof of the subclaim 2.9.
Let {(iζj Oίζ) : ζ < X} be a list of all pairs (i, α), i < χ, α < λ, and we define
/iς,ας by induction on ζ. Suppose we have defined /ΐί)αί for every ξ < ζ, £ < λ
and they are required, and let us define /iζ,ας
Let (t(j) : j < λ} be members of Ext(GVG°,Z) such that nt(jι) -
nt(jϊ) ^ 0 for n > 0, ji ^ j2. By Claim 2.6(2) there are f
j ( j < λ) such that:
f
j G Fact(G
1,Z) extend /<c, and there are no n > 0, j(l) ^ j(2) < λ and
normal g : G
1 -> Z such that n/
J'
(1) - n/
J'
(2) = dg and gfG
0 = 0.
We can try to let /iζ>αζ = f
j for any j < X and assume toward contra-
diction that it always fail. The only thing that can go wrong is (*) from the
subclaim. So for every j there are βj,Ίjι
nj 
> 0
 and normal gj : G° —» Z
and αj 7^ α| and normal gj 
: G
1 —» Z,^
2 : G
1 —> Z extending ^ such that
{(/?j,α}), (7j»«)), ()8j)^)» (7j,«j)} ^ {(*C>
αc) : C < J'} and letting /ίζιαc = /•?
we have:
(**) Πjfβ 
αι — n y/y αι = dg} and n^ fg. α2 — n? /γ. α2 = 9^?.
Λ-J > j 
/J > j 
J 
Λ'J > j 
/J > j 
J

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
979
Now there are λ ordinals j and only NO x 1C + 1| x 1C + 1| x 1C + 1 x |C + 1| < ^
possible 5-tuples (nj,/3j,7j,αj,α?): so without loss of generality for j < ω we
have the same n, /3,7, αι,α2 Also by the induction hypothesis, at least one of
{(/?, αi), (7, αi), (β, 0:2), (7, α2)} is not in {(ie, αξ) : £ < C} hence is (ic, αc), so
by symmetry without loss of generality (/?,αι) = (^,0^). As β ^ 7, QI ^ #2
clearly {(7,^1), (A α2), (7,^2)} £ {(iξ,cκξ) : £ < C} So for each j < ω
(subtracting the equations in (**)) we have:
nj
j - n/7>αι - nfaαa -f n/7)CK2 = dg] - dg] = d(g] - g?)
Subtracting the equations for j = 0, 1
n/
1 - n/° = d(g\ - gΐ) - d(g\ - g
2
0) = d(g\ - g\ - 9
1
0 + 5o
2)
clearly (g\ — g\ ) fG° = 0 and (#o — 9ι ) Γ^° = 0 so we get a contradiction to the
choice of the /
J's. 
U2.9
Now similarly to [HHSh:91] by our proof:
2.10 Conclusions. If 0 of 2.10 holds, G a torsion free group, λ
is free }, then Ext (G,Z) has torsion free rank 2
λ.
Remark. The use of Z instead H in 2.13, 2.10 is just for simplicity.
How strong are the assumptions of theorem 2.7?
Unlike the full diamond, the weak diamond has only little influence on
the behavior of the exponentiation function K ^ 2
K, as the following theorem
shows:
2.11 Theorem. Assume V N GCH, F is a function defined on the regular
cardinals, F(λ) a cardinal, (Vλ)cf (F(λ)) > λ,
® Vλ[ ^ 
F(μ) < F(λ)] (so in particular F is strictly increasing).
μG Reg Πλ

980 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
Let Pf be Easton forcing for F. (So (Vλ G RCar)[F
p^ N 2
λ = F(λ)].)
Then V
PF N Vλ regular, VS C λ stationary, -i Unif (λ, 5, 2, 2, 2) holds.
(Note that for inaccessible λ, 2
<λ = 2
Λ implies the failure of the weak diamond,
so <g) is a reasonable hypothesis.)
Proof. Recall that Easton forcing Pp = 
Π 
P\ with Easton support (i.e.
λeRCar
bounded below inaccessibles, full support below non-inaccessibles) , where
Pχ = {F: Dom(/) G [F(λ)]
<λ and Rang(/) C {0, 1}}.
So fix λ and a name S for a stationary subset of λ. We will work in V\ =
λ
p-. Note that Vι satisfies GCH up to λ, as Π Pκ is λ+-closed, hence
κ>\
does not add any subsets of λ. So we have to deal with the forcing P° x Pχ,
where P°
 d= Π
 Pμ Let ? be tne name °f a function, lhPoxPλ "F :
 λ>2 -> 2".
μ<λ
Dom(F) is in Vf 
, as P\ adds no bounded subsets to λ. Since P° x Pχ satisfies
the λ
+-c.c., we can find a set A C F(λ), satisfying |F(λ) \ A| = λ such that F
and 5 are P° x (Pλ ί^l)-names, where Pχ\A
 d= {/ G Pλ : Dom(/) C A}. (We
can even find such A of size λ.)
Assume that p Ih " there is no weak diamond on 5 for F" .
We may also assume p G P° x (P\\A), and for notational convenience
assume A = [λ,F(λ)).
Let /λ : F(X) — > 2 be the name for the generic function for Pχ. We claim
that a = fχ fλ is a weak diamond for F on 5. So assume that η is a P° x Pχ-
name such that
p Ih "77 G
Let N = (Ni : i < λ) be a continuous increasing sequence of elementary
submodels of H(χ) (for some large enough χ) satisfying

§2. On the Power of Ext and Whitehead's Problem 
981
CΊ, p, r/, 5, F,... eTVo
Define a name C2 by
a[GpoxPχ] n\ = NaΓ}\ = a}".
Since C^ is the name of a club set, we can find an ordinal δ and a condition
ς > p in P° x P\ such that
As g Ih "δ G *S"' clearly the set J§ C P° x P\ [A is predense above g where
J5 = {r G P° x (PΛ ΓA) : r forces that 5 G §}.
As <? Ih "5 G C2", clearly for every a < δ the set J5>α C P° x (PλΓ(<* U A)) is
predense above ς, where
Zδ,a = {r G P° x (PΛ Γ(ί U A)) : for some β G (α, δ) r forces that β G CΊ}.
Why? Let G C P° x Pλ be generic over V, and 0 G G, so 5 G C^G] hence
Λfe [G] Π λ = 5 C ΛΓ, so there is β G (α, 5) Π CΊ [G] hence for some p G AΓ5 [G] Π G
we have p Ih "β G CΊ" , so p G 2i,α Π G.
Define g
7 G P° x Pλ by g'fP
0 - q\P°, q'\Pχ - gί(Pλr(5 U A)). It is clear
that also J§ and J$)α (for a < δ) are predense above q
1 hence
^ Ih "(5 G 5 and J - sup(CΊ n δ) hence δ G CΊ".
(Alternatively for every (P° x P\)-name r G N$ of an ordinal < λ the set
JΓ = {p :p G P° x PΛ and p\P\ G PΛ \(δ U A) and p forces a value to τ
which is 7T)P and is < δ}
is predense above q
1 ', hence

982 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
So since Ih «CΊ G AΓ0[G] C Nδ[G\
n, we also have q
f Ih "5 G CV'.)
But now we can extend q
f to a condition q" forcing a value to F(rjfα), say f,
again by the choice of A w.l.o.g. q" G PO x Pf(ί U A). Now we can extend q"
to a condition forcing f\(ot) = I*, a contradiction. 
Hb.n
The following variation of the weak diamond is also sufficient for our
purposes (see more in [Sh:576, §1, §3]).
2.12 Definition. 1) We say F :
 λ>2 -> 2 is "μ-definable" if for some Y C λ,
for every δ < λ, η G
 52 we can compute F(η) in L[r/, V]. If μ = X we may omit
it.
2) We say F is "weakly definable" if it is //-definable for some μ < 2
λ.
2.13 Remark. 1) For the proof of 2.7A it is enough to have the weak diamond
for all weakly definable F. (We let the set Y code G, (Ga : a < λ), H, and for
each a where Ga+ι/Ga is not free, Y computes a function / G Fact (Gα+ι, if),
/f(G α x Gα = 0, and in V there is no g G Trans (Gα+ι, -ff), g\Ga = 0, / = 50.
See [MkSh:313] for a related argument.)
2) Now all Easton forcings P/ (not just the ones satisfying ® from Theorem
2.11 stating with universe satisfying GCH) satisfies: in V
Ff the definable weak
diamonds hold for 5 C λ whenever λ is regular uncountable, S stationary.
§3. Weak Diamond for #2 Assuming CH
3.1 Definition. Let λ be a cardinal and S C λ. The sequence ή — (η$ : δ G S)
is called a ladder system if for all δ G 5, 775 = (ηδ(i) 
i < ^g(^)) is increasing
and cofinal in δ. We say that ή is continuous if each η$ is continuous.
η has the uniformization [alternatively: club uniformization] property if:
Whenever c = (c$ : δ G S) is a sequence of functions c§ : £g(rj§) — > 2, then we
can find a function ft : λ — > 2 such that for each δ € S the set
: cδ(ί) =

§3. Weak Diamond for N2 Assuming CH 
983
is cobounded [alternatively: contains a closed unbounded set] . (In this case we
say that h "uniformizes" c.)
3.2 Remark.
(1) If η is a ladder system on S then we can thin out η to a ladder system η'
on 5 satisfying £g(η'δ) = cf (5) for all δ G S. Moreover, if ή was continuous,
and if η had the uniformization property, then also η
1 will have it.
(2) If 2*° < 2
N l, then no ladder system on S%
 d= {δ < HI : cf(<J) = H0} has
the uniformization property.
Proof of (2). ^Prorn 2
K° < 2*
1 we conclude that Unif (Ni, 2, 2
H°) fails (by 1.10).
Let — * be the equivalence relation on
 ωe2 defined by / =* g iff Vfc 3n > k such
that f ( n ) — g(ri). Let A =
 ω2/ =* be the set of equivalence classes. By the
failure of Unif (Ni, 2, 2*°) we know that
(*) VF :
 ωι>2 -> A3/ι : ωi -> AV# : cji -> 2 [{α : F(prα) ^ Λ(α)} stationary].
Fix a ladder system f/ = (775 : δ G 5o). We will show that η does not have
the uniformization property. Let
F(s) = (so ηδ/ =*) G A for s G
Let h : ω\ — > A be as in (*), and let h : ω\ — > 2^ be such that
Λ(α) = (Λ(α)/ =*).
Define cδ : ω -> 2 by c$(π) = Λ(5)(n). Now check that c = (cδ : δ e SQ)
witnesses the failure of the uniformization property of η. 
D3>2
Recall that S?
 d= {i < N2 : cf(i) = HI}.
In this section we will consider continuous ladder systems on Sj, and we ask
the following
3.3 Question. Can η = (ηδ : δ G Sf } have the (club) uniformization property
(with 77^ increasing continuous with limit 5, of length cf (ί))?
We shall answer this question negatively even for club uniformization
property in Conclusion 3.7 assuming 2^° = MI.

984 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
3.4 Why only for continuous η$7. The reader may ask what happens if
we waive the restriction that η§ be a continuous sequence and require just
η$ which is cofinal in δl By works of the author (see in [Sh:80], Steinhorn
and King [SK] and [Sh:186] and very lately [Sh:587]) even assuming GCH a
sequence (η$ : δ G S^) may have the uniformization property. But if we require
e.g. each c$ to be eventually constant, for every η§ which enumerates a club
of 5, we have consistency. Also if we restrict ourselves to (η§ : δ G S) where
S C Si, Si \ S stationary we have consistency results.
3.4A Discussion. This shows the impossibility of some generalizations of
MA to Ni-complete forcing notions. Why? Suppose ή = (η§ : δ G Sj
2), η§
is increasing continuous with limit 5, and c = (05 : δ € Sjf), c$ G
 ωι2. We
define Pη^ = {p '• p = (u, i, d, /) = (u
p, i
p, J
p, f
p) where u is a countable subset
of Si, i a successor ordinal < ωι, d = (d$ 
: δ G u), d£ a closed subset of
i, / is a function from Dom(/) = {ηs(j) 
'• S G n, j < i} to {0,1} such that
j G cfo & 5 G u =Φ f ( η δ ( j ) ) = Cδ(j)} ordered by p < q iff u
p C u
9, z
p < i
9,
[δ euP ^d
p
δ=d
q
δΓ]i*], fP C /«, and i
p < i
q & δι G u
p & 52 G u
p &ix 7^ 52 =>
{%U) : j e [i«,α;ι)} Π {^2(j) : j G [i«,ωι)} - 0.
So:
(*) if the answer to 3.3 is no as exemplified by c, tten there is no directed
G C P^jδ which intersect each I$ti — {p G P^,c : 5 G u
p and i < i
p and
cίj \ i ^ 0} which is dense.
So any generalization of MA as above necessarily does not include Pη^
which is a quite nice forcing notion: it is Ni-complete, and can be divided to
HI formulas, each NI-directed.
3.5 Convention. Let F denote a function from
{h : h a function, Dom(/ι) C u;2 is countable, Rang(/ι) C 2} into 2 = {0,1}.
3.6 Theorem. 1) (2*° = NI): For any function F and fj = (ηδ : δ e S?) as in
3.1 ί/iere zs (cfo : 5 G Sι),ds G
 α;ι2, (we can call it a weak diamond sequence)
such that for any h : ω<2 —» 2, for stationarily many 5 G S^, for stationarily

§3. Weak Diamond for ^2 Assuming CH 
985
many i < ω\ ,
2) Suppose
(a) θ < K = cf(/c), 2
Θ = 2
<κ = K (so AC = κ
</c).
(b) S={δ<κ+ :cf(δ) = κ}.
(c) for each δ G 5, η§ is a strictly increasing continuous function from ft to δ
with limit 5.
(d) F is a function with domain {h : h a partial function from ft+ to {0, 1} of
cardinality < K} with range {0, 1}.
Then we can find (ds : δ G 5), d§ £ *2 such that for any h : ft
+ — > {0, 1} for
stationarily many δ G 5 for stationarily many i < K, we have
3.6 A Remark. Note the "j < i" rather than "j < i" in part (1).
3.7 Conclusion. (CH) η — (η§ : δ G 5^) does not have the club uniformization
property.
Proof of 3.7. Let F(h) be Λ(MaxDom(/ι)) if defined, zero otherwise. By 3.6
there are for F, η$ a sequence (ds '• δ € 8%) as there; let c^(i) — 1 - cfc(z).
Proof of 3.6. We prove part (1) as (2) has essentially the same proof. Let λ
be big enough (e.g., (2^
2)
+), and M* be an expansion of (ί/"(λ), €) by Skolem
functions (if it has a definable well ordering it suffices).
Suppose 77, F form a counterexample. It is known that there is a function
G from {A : A C ω2, |A| < H0} to α i such that G(A) = G(B) implies
A,B have the same order type and their intersection is an initial segment
of both (e.g. if ha : a —» ω\ is one-to-one for α < α i, we let GQ(A) =
{(otp(A Π α),otp(A Π β), hβ(a)} : a e A and β G A}. Now G0 is as required
except that Rang(G0) 2 ωi but |Rang(G0)| < #ι so we can correct this).

986 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
We now define a procedure for defining for any p G ί/"(λ), (<?δ : δ G 5?)
where c£ : ω\ —> H(ω\), which we shall use later.
For every δ G Sf, i < ωi, let 7V^ be the Skolem hull of {5,i,p} in M*,
and let
c£(i)
 d= ( isomorphism type (tf£.,p, 5,i), G(JV£. n «2)).
Remarks. I) The model of (Ng^p^δ^i) 
is not in -ff(Nι), but since JVJ^ is
countable we can assume its isomorphism type does belong.
2)(JVj
>
ί,p, i, 5) is TVj^ expanded by three individual constants.
Now remember we have assumed F, ή form a counterexample. So for every
cs G
 W12 (δ G Si) there is ft$ : 6^2 — * 2 such that for a closed unbounded set of
δ G Si, for a closed unbounded set of i < ωi, c§(i) — F(h§\{ηs(j) : j < ί } ) .
Now we can easily replace 2 by the set
 ωcl as follows.
For /ι a function into
 ω2, let ftW be /ιt
nl(i) - (h(i))(n) for i G Dom(Λ).
Define F* by: F*(ή) - (F(h^) : n < α;); now if we are given (cδ : δ e Sf)
where c5 G ^("2), i.e., Q : ωi ->
 W2, so 4
nl G
 ωι2 is well defined for each
δ G Sf and let /ι'
nl : K2 -* 2 be such that for a club of 5 G S? for a club of
i < α i we have
Define Λ : H2 — >
 ω2 by Λ(i) = (hW(i) 
: n < α;), it is as required.
Now as \
ω2\ = 2
H° - |ff(Nι)|, we conclude:
(*) for every cδ G
 W ljff(«ι) (5 G S?) there is ft : α;2 -> ff(^ι) such that for a
club of δ e Si for a club of i < α i, 05(1) = F*(h\{ηs(j) : j < i})
Now we define by induction on n < α;, p(n) G ίί(λ), and hn : ω^
Let p(0) = (ry). If we have defined p(n), let cγ
n* : ω\ — > ίί(Nι) be as we
have defined before (in 0), so by (*) there is a suitable hn : ^2 —> Ή"(^ι); i.e.,
there is a closed unbounded VF
n C K2 such that for every δ G VF
n Π 5^, there

§3. Weak Diamond for N2 Assuming CH 
987
is a closed unbounded Wg C ω\ such that for i G WJ
1, 5 G W
n Π 5^ we have:
c?δ
(n\ϊ) = 
F*(hn\{ηδ(j):j<i}).
Let p(n + 1) =
f
(p(n), /in, W™, (W7 : 5 G W
n Π 5?>, <(JV*<
n) : i < ωι) : δ G 5?».
Now let W = Πn<u,
 WU-> and for 5 G W let W* = Πn<u, wδ Clearly W is
a closed unbounded subset of N2, and W$ is a closed unbounded subset of ω\.
So for every δ G WΠ5ι, there is i(δ) G W$; so as ηδ(i(δ)) < δ by Fodor lemma,
for some i < N2 and z* < NI the set {5 G W Π 5? : ηδ(i(δ)) = i and i(5) = i*}
is stationary. As CH holds there are ίi, ί2 in W n 5^ and ξ < ω\ such that
A) ηβί (0 = % (0 moreover % \ (ξ + 1) - %2 f(ί + 1)
B) Ji < 52
C) ξ€Wi, for £-1,2.
So clearly we can assume
D) there are no δ^δ^ satisfying (A), (B) and (C) such that δ{ < 5χ, δ\ < δ<2
Now as δι < 52, for some i > £,77^(1) / %(i), and there is a minimal
such i; but as 17^ , 77^2 are increasing and continuous, such minimal i should be a
succesor ordinal, so there is a maximal ζ among those satisfying ζ < ω\ , ηδl \ζ —
%ΓC, %(C) = %(C) and C e Wδl Π W52. So ωi > C
f > ^^=1,2^ ^ Wδl
implies 775l(C
f) 7^ ^ίC
1) or at least ηδl \(ζ* + 1) ^ % fCC
1 + 1).
So for every n
(a) 
cg
n>(0=cg
n)(0
as both are equal to F*
 :(hn\{ηδέ(j) 
' j < C}) Looking at the definition of
c? 
(C) (see θ) we see tnat ^! ,c i
s isomorphic to A^f2 C ' and ^
et tne isomor~
phism be called gn. Note that the isomorphism is unique (as G in those models
is transitive well founded).
By the definition of (?δ 
(C)» clearly without loss of generality
9n\p(n)] =p(n),gn(δι) = δ<2,gn(ζ) = C

988 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
Looking at p(n)'s definition we see that gn(nδι) = %
 and for n > 0
gn(W"-i) = W-1 and gn(W^
1) = W?~
l and gn(f^^) 
= N^ G
ΛrP(n)
7V52,C
As N%^~ 
is countable and belongs to </V^ ^ , it is also included in it,
hence gn \N^~
1} is an isomorphism from N^~l} onto N^~l} hence (by the
uniqueness of gn )
(β)
For ί = 1,2 let 7V> = \Jn<ωN$$ and # = \Jn<ωgn] so # is an isomorphism
from NI to 7V2.
By the definition of c^
n)(C), clearly the second coordinates are the same, thus:
(7)
hence those sets have their intersection an initial segment of both hence also
NI Π α;2, ΛΓ2 Π α;2 have their intersection an initial segment of both (as usually,
we are not strictly distinguishing between a model and its universe), hence g
is the identity on NI Π AΓ2 Π ω^.
Note that clearly δι φ N% as g(δι) = 6% ^ ίi, hence 62 ^ NI.
Let <j;
 d= Min(α;2 Π N£ \ (^ n AΓ2)), so clearly δ*t < δ£, gffi) 
= δ% and so
cf(ίί)=cf(ί5).
Why? Otherwise cf(5ί) - H0, and as 5? G Wi for some n, 5ι G ΛΓj^,
hence there is {βm 
: m < ω} C ίj Π ΛΓ^ ^ cofinal in ίj. By the choice
of ίf,/3m G JV! Π JV2, hence ^(/3m) = βm let /?* - mm(#£
(J \ Um^m), so
^* e JVgJ C <5+1), so δl = Sup{/3m : m < ω} = sup(/?* Π ΛΓjJJ) G 7V2,
contradiction.
So we have proved (5).

§3. Weak Diamond for N2 Assuming CH 
989
Now let for ί = 1,2, αι — NI Π α i, (it is an initial segment) and βt =
sup(Nι Π 5|) hence βι = /32 (by δ% definition) and call it β. As cf(ί^) > NI
clearly ί| > α i, and so clearly by g's existence αi = α2 and call it a (also as
α i G NI Π ΛΓ2 Π α;2, necessarily NI Π α i = 7V2 Π α i).
As 775* is a one to one function (being increasing) from α i, clearly
775* (i) G A/i iff i < a.
Also NI \= "(ffaj W 
'- i <
 ωι) is unbounded below ίj" (remember A/i -< M* as
N$$ ^M* for each n).
So clearly /3 = Sup{r/5j (i) : i < α}; but η§* is increasing continuous and α
is a limit ordinal (being NI Π α i), hence β = η$* (a).
For the same reasons β — 775* (α).
Now 775* fα = 775* fα because ^(775*) = 775*, and α G WJi for each n < ω(t —
1,2) as NI \= "WJl is a closed unbounded subset of α i". For similar reasons
δl G Wn for each n: as Wn G ^^^ hence Wn G AΓ^ hence Wn G NI Π ΛΓ2,
and as Λ/Ί, AΓ2 X M*,M* has Skolem functions, clearly ΛΓi Π 7V2 -< M*, so
Wn is an unbounded subset of NI Π AΓ2 Π α;2. So in A^, Wn is unbounded in
δl = Min[(α;2 Π Nt) \ (Nι Π JV2)], hence AΓ^ μ "5; G HV' hence 5; G Wn.
We can conclude that δ^δ^β satisfy the requirements (A), (B), (C)
on #ι,£2,ξ. Hence by requirement (D) on them, δι — 5^, 52 = 6%. But,
ζ G Nfa^ 
C AΓ^ hence C < ωi Π AΓi Π AΓ2 hence C < «, so clause (α) contradicts
the choice of ζ, so we get a contradiction, thus finishing the proof of the theorem
(3.6). 
D3.6
3.8 Concluding Remarks. 1) If λ = /s
+, K, is strongly inaccessible then the
conclusion of 3.6(2) may fail (see [Sh:186], we repeat the proof in [Sh:64], see
more in [Sh:587]).
2) If 2
H° = 2
N2, then it follows that for some F and 77 we have uniformization.
Just choose 77 = (775 : δ G 5^) such that (775 fα; : δ G S%) are pairwise distinct and
for every δ G S± and non successor i < ω\ and n < ω for some non successor
j < ω-2 we have ηδ(ί + n) = j + n. Now let ((c] : δ G 5?) : 7 < 2*
2} list the set

990 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
of sequences (eg ' δ G S?),c$ G
 ωι2. Let (ra : a < 2
H°) list distinct reals, and
we let h
Ί G
 W22 be: Λ
7(z -f n) = rτ(n) for any non-successor ordinal z < ω\.
Now define F by: F(h) — c^(i) if Dom(/ι) = {α? : j < i} with QJ increasing,
i > α;, (h(an) : n < ω] — rΊ.
3) In 3.6(2) we may demand that (e) F(h\Rang(ηs\(i 4- 1))) only depend on
h(ηs(i)) and i. Then we can weaken clause (a) there as follows.
3.9 Theorem. Suppose
(a) NO < cf (0) - θ < ft = 2
Θ,
(b) S={δ<κ+ :cf(5)>0+}.
(c) for each δ e 5, τ?<5 is a strictly increasing continuous function from cf (<5) to
5 with limit δ.
(d) F is a function with domain {h : h a partial function from ft
+ to ft such
that |Dom(Λ)| < θ} with range {0,1}.
(e) ά=(al :δ eS,ί< cf(ί)), αf C ^(i) -h 1 and |αα| < θ,
Then we can find (d§ : δ G 5), cί^ € K2 such that for any h : ft+ —> ft for
stationarily many 5 e 5 for stationarily many i < cf(J), dj(i) = F(ftfαf).
3.10 Conclusion. If ^, ft,fy as above t/ien ry = (775 : δ G 5) does not have the
club uniformization property.
Proo/ o/ 5.^0. Let F(h) = Λ(MaxDom(Λ)) if defined, zero otherwise. By 3.6
there are for F, 77$ a sequence (ofo : 5 G Sj); let ^(i) = 1 — d§(i).
The proof of 3.10 is very similar to that of 3.6.
Proof of 3.9. Let λ be big enough (e.g., (D3(ft))
+), and M* be an expansion of
(H(X), G,r;, α,z)^<0 be Skolem functions (if it has a definable well ordering it
suffices).
Suppose fy, F form a counterexample. It is known that there is a function G
from {,4 : A C ft+, |A| < θ} to ft such that G(A) = G(B) implies AΠft = 5Πft,
^4,5 have the same order type and their intersection is an initial segment
of both (e.g. if ha : α —> ft is one-to-one for a < ft
+, we let Go(A) =

§3. Weak Diamond for N2 Assuming CH 
991
{(otp(A Π α),otp(^4 Π /?), hβ(a)) : a e A and β G A}. Now GO is as required
except that Rang(Go) <2 « but |Rang(G0)| < κ
θ — K so we can correct this).
We now define a procedure for defining for any p G #(λ), ((?δ : 5 G 5),
c£ : cf(5) —> H(θ
+), which we shall use later.
For every <S G 5, i < ωi, let N^ be the Skolem hull of {5, i,p}U{α : α < θ}
in M*, and let
0 cP(i) 1l
f { isomorphism type (N^p, δ, i), G(^ Π
Remarks. 1) The model of {ΛΓj^p, ί,i) is not in H(θ+), but since ΛΓ^ has
cardinality < ^ we can assume its isomorphism type does belong.
2)(7Vj
?
i,p, z,£) is JV^ expanded by three individual constants.
Now remember we have assumed
0 F, a, η form a counterexample.
So for every c& G
 cf(^2 (for 5 G 5) there is h$ : /^
+ — > /€ such that for
a closed unbounded set of 5 G 5, for a closed unbounded set of i < cf(ί),
Now we can easily replace 2 by the set ^2 as follows.
For ε < θ and h a function into *2, let /i^ be /iW(z) = (Λ(i))(e) for
i G Dom(Λ). Define F* by: F*(/ι) = (F(/ιI
εl) : ε < 0); now if c* G
 cf(
5)(^2)
for δ G 5, i.e., c5 : cf(ί) -> ^2 (so 4
el are well defined for ε < 6>). So by
the assumption "F, α and 77 form a counterexample" for each ε < θ there is
hlε] : ^+ _^ 2 be such that for a club of 5 G 5 for a club of i < cf (δ)
Define the function Λ : κ
+ -> ^2 by h(i) = (Λ
[e](ϊ) : ε < α;>.

992 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
Now as \
Θ2\ = K = |if(0
+)|, we conclude:
(*) for every cδ G
 cfWjϊ(0+) (5 G 5) there is ft : AC+ -> #(0+) such that for a
club of δ G S for a club of i < cf(ί) we have c$(i) = F*(/ιfαf ).
Now we define by induction on n < ω, p(ri) G H(X), and /ιn : «+ — > H(θ+).
Let p(0) - (η,ά,F). If we have defined p(n), let c£
(n) : cf(ί) -> #(0+) be
as we have defined before (in 0), so by (*) there is a suitable /ιn : /ς
+ — > H(θ+)]
i.e., there is a closed unbounded VF
n C AV
+ such that for every S G W™ Π 5,
there is a closed unbounded W£ C cf (ί) such that for i G Wf, δ G VF
n Π 5 we
Let
p(n 4- 1) -f (p(n), hn, W
n, (W? : ί G W
n Π 5), {{JVg
n) : t < cf (δ)) : ί G 5)}.
Now let W = Γ\n<ω
wn> and for δ £
 W>
 Wδ = Γ\n<ω
wδ- Clearly W
is a closed unbounded subset of «+, and if δ G VF Π S then W$ is a closed
unbounded subset of c/(ί). So for every 5 G W Π 5, there is i(δ) G W^; so
as ηs(i(δ)) < δ for some i < κ+ and i* < K and 5 = cf(ί) < K the set
{δ e W Π S : η$(i(δ)) = i,i(δ) = i* and cf(ί) = δ} is stationary. As K = κ
θ
holds there are Ji, #2 in W Π S and ξ < cf(ίι) such that
A) %1(0 = % a(Oandcf(ίι) = cf(J2)
B) ίi < ί2 (so both in W Π 5)
C) ξ G Wί£ for ί = 1, 2 (so ξ < cf (ί)).
So clearly we can assume
D) there are no ίj,^ satisfying (A), (B) and (C) such that δ\ < δι, δ% < #2
Now as δι < 62 for every large enough i < cf(ίι), riδ2(ϊ) > ίi, hence
{C < cf(ί) : C ^ Wδl, ζ G Wi2 and ^(C) = %(C)} is a bounded subset of
cf(ίι). As W^jW^ are clubs of cf(Jι) and T/^,^ are increasing continuous,
the set above is closed hence it has a last element. So there is ζ < cf(<$ι) such

§3. Weak Diamond for N2 Assuming CH 
993
that ηδί(ζ) = ηδ2(ζ) and ζ e Wδl Π W§2, but C
f > C,A^i,2C
f € Wδt implies
WΛCO^WΛCt)-
So for every n
(a)cg
n)(0=cg">(0
as both are equal to F*(/ιnfα** (£)), which do not depend on t as ηδι(ζ) =
ηs2(ζ)) and they are equal to hn+ι(ηst(ζ)) Looking at the definition of <% 
(ζ)
(see Θ above) we see that N^^ is isomorphic to N^^ , and let the isomorphism
be gn. Note that the isomorphism is unique (as G in those models is transitive
well founded).
By the definition of <fδ 
(C)> clearly without loss of generality
gn(p(n)) =p(n),gn(δι) = δ2,gn(ζ) = ζ
Looking at the definition of M* and p(n), p(0) we see that gn&δi) — %
and for n > 0 we have gn(W
n~
l) 
= W
n~
l and g^W^'
1) = Wg~
l and
n (N
p(
n~
1^ — N
p^
n~
1^ 
(= /V
p(n)
9n(^sltζ 
) - ^
V52,C 
E iV52,C
As Nfζ~
l} 
is of cardinality Θ and belongs to JVjJJ, and Θ + 1 C 7V£
(n)
clearly N$^~ ' is also included in it, hence gn\N%^~
1' is an isomorphism
from N%^ζ~ 
onto N%^~ 
hence (by the uniqueness of #n and the previous
sentence)
For ί = 1,2 let ^ = Un<w ^fc.c* and ^ = Un<ω^n; so g is an isomorphism
from NI to AΓ2.
By the definition of c££
(n)(C), clearly:
n Λ+ = G 
n
hence sets NI Π /ί
+, A^2 Π ft+ have the same intersection with K and have

994 
Appendix. On Weak Diamonds and the Power of Ext
their intersection an initial segment of both (as usually, we are not strictly
distinguishing between a model and its universe), hence g is the identity on
NI n W 2π«
+.
Note that clearly δι φ 7V2 as g(δι) = 62 ^ <Jι, hence 62 φ N\.
Let δ*t =
f Min(«+ Π Nt \ (Nι Π ΛΓ2)), so clearly ί* < δt, g(δl) = δ%. Note
cf(ί ) < « (as 5; < «+) so cf(ί ) G AT/ Π (/c 4- 1) C #1 Π 7V2 Π «+ and so
cf (<Sf) = cf(&£). Call it σ, so σ G NI Π 7V2 Π (« + 1) is regular.
(δ) cf(<5*) > 0.
[Why? Otherwise cf(ίϊ) < 0, and as ij G JVi for some n, 5ι G W^, hence
there is b G JVf^, b = {βε 
: ε < σ} C 5* cofinal in δ^. As \b\ = σ < θ,
b G JV£
(J and (9 + 1 C JVjJJ necessarily 6 - {& : ε < σ} C JVjJJ. By the
choice of <$ί,/Je G A/Ί Π N2 Π Λ:
+, hence p(/?ε) = βε. Easily p(6) - {g(βε) 
: ε <
σ} = {βε : £ < σ} = b (as (9 + 1 C NI Π AΓ2) and ^ N "5* = sup(6)" hence
^2 N "g(δ*) =
 suP(d(
b)T that is ^2 N "ί5 = sup(fr)" so ίj = 5$, contradiction.]
So we have proved (ί).
Now for ί = 1,2 let α^ = sup [Λ^Πcf(ίι)], so as NIΪΊK — N2Γ]κ, clearly aι — α2
call it α. Let βt = sup(A^ Π ί|) hence /?ι = /32 (by ί|'s definition) and call it
As T/δ* is a one to one function (being increasing) from σ, clearly
ηδ*(i) 
eNiίSieσΠNi.
Also NI \= "(ηδ*(i) ' i < σ) is unbounded below ίj" (remember A/Ί X M* as
AΓJ^ ^ M* for each n).
So clearly β = Sup{τ?«5*(ΐ) : i < α}; but 775* is increasing continuous and α
is a limit ordinal (being sup(Nι Π σ)), hence β = η$* (a).
For the same reasons β = 77,5* (α).

§3. Weak Diamond for N2 Assuming CH 
995
So η&* (a) — η$* (a) and α G WJl for each n < ω(£ = 1, 2) as
N£ |= " WJl is a closed unbounded subset of σ" . For similar reasons ί| G W™
for each n: as Wn G W£
(£
+1) hence Wn G N£, hence Wn G NI Π 7V2, and
as NI,NZ 
-< M*,M* has Skolem functions, clearly Λ/i Π A^2 -< M*, so Wn
is an unbounded subset of Λ/i Π N% Π κ
+. So in N£jWn 
is unbounded in
δl - Min[(κ+ Π A^) \ (Nι Π JV2)], hence Nέ |= "(5; G Wn" hence J| G Wn.
We can conclude that δ$, δ%, β satisfy the requirements (A), (B), (C)
on £ι,#2,£ Hence by require-mint (D) on them, δι = 5J, 52 = <52. But,
j ^ C 7V^ hence C G AίΠA/iΠ^ hence ζ < α, so clause (α) contradicts the
G
choice of £, so we get a contradiction, thus finishing the proof of the theorem
(3.9). 
D3.9
3.11 Remark. We can replace in the conclusion of 3.9, F(h\a^) by Ff(h\ so
F is replaced by (Ff : δ G 5, ί < cf(5)}, where Ff is a function from
 κ K to
{0, 1}. Also we may weaken αf C ryo(0 4- 1 to αf C λ
+.


References
[Ab] 
Uri Abraham. 
Lectures on proper forcing. 
In M. Foreman
A. Kanamori and M. Magidor, editors, Handbook of Set Theory.
[A] 
Uri Abraham. Isomorphisms of Aronszajn trees and forcing with-
out the generalized continuum hypothesis (in Hebrew). PhD thesis,
The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 1979.
[AbSh 146] Uri Abraham and Saharon Shelah. Forcing closed unbounded sets.
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 48:643-657, 1983.
[AbSh 114] Uri Abraham and Saharon Shelah. Isomorphism types of Aron-
szajn trees. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 50:75-113, 1985.
[AbSh 403] Uri Abraham and Saharon Shelah. A Δ| well-order of the reals
and incompactness of L(Q
MM). Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
59:1-32, 1993.
[ADSh 81] 
Uri Avraham (Abraham), Keith J. Devlin, and Saharon Shelah.
The consistency with CH of some consequences of Martin's axiom
plus 2
K° > HI. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 31:19-33, 1978.
[AbSh 106] Uri Avraham (Abraham) and Saharon Shelah. Martin's axiom
does not imply that every two Ki-dense sets of reals are isomor-
phic. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 38:161-176, 1981.
[AbSh 102] Uri Avraham (Abraham) and Saharon Shelah. Forcing with stable
posets. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 47:37-42, 1982.

998 
References
[BPS] 
Bohuslav Balcar, Jan Pelant, and Petr Simon. The space of ultra-
filters on TV covered by nowhere dense sets. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, CX:ll-24, 1980.
[BS] 
Bohuslav Balcar and Petr Simon. Cardinal invariants in Boolean
spaces. In J. Novak, editor, General Topology and its Relation
to Modern Analysis and Algebra, Proceedings of the fifth Prague
Topology Symposion 1981, volume V, pages 39-47, Berlin, 1982.
Helderman Verlag.
[BaJu95] 
Tomek Bartoszyήski and Haim Judah. Set Theory: On the Struc-
ture of the Real Line. A K Peters, Wellesley, Massachusetts, 1995.
[B] 
James E. Baumgartner. Decomposition of embedding of trees.
Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 17:967, 1970.
[Bl] 
James E. Baumgartner. Results and independence proofs in com-
binatorial set theory. PhD thesis, Univ. of Calif. Berkeley, 1970.
[B4] 
James E. Baumgartner. All Ni-dense sets of reals can be isomor-
phic. Fund. Math., 79:101-106, 1973.
[B2] 
James E. Baumgartner. A new class of order types. Annals of
Math. Logic, 9:187-222, 1976.
[B5] 
James E. Baumgartner. Almost disjoint sets, the dense set prob-
lem and partition calculus. Annals of Math Logic, 9:401-439, 1976.
[Ba] 
James E. Baumgartner. Almost disjoint sets, the dense set prob-
lem and partition calculus. Annals of Math Logic, 9:401-439,1976.
[B3] 
James E. Baumgartner. Iterated forcing. In A. Mathias, editor,
Surveys in Set Theory, volume 87 of London Mathematical Society
Lecture Notes, pages 1-59, Cambridge, Britain, 1978.
[B6] 
James E. Baumgartner. Ultrafilters on ω. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 60:624-639, 1995.

References 
999
[BHK] 
James E. Baumgartner, Leo Harrington, and Eugene M. Klein-
berg. Adding a closed unbounded set. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 41:481-487, 1976.
[BL79] 
James E. Baumgartner and Richard Laver. Iterated perfect-set
forcing. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 17:271-288, 1979.
[BMR] 
James E. Baumgartner, Jerome Malitz, and William Reinhart.
Embedding trees in the rationals. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.,
67:1748-1753, 1970.
[BD] 
Shai Ben David. On Shelah's compactness of cardinals. Israel J.
of Math., 31:34-56 and 394, 1978.
[BsSh 242] 
Andreas Blass and Saharon Shelah. There may be simple P^-
and Pκ2-poi
11^
8 and the Rudin-Keisler ordering may be downward
directed. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 33:213-243, 1987.
[BuSh 437] Max R. Burke and Saharon Shelah. Linear liftings for non com-
plete probability space. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 79:289-
296, 1992.
[C] 
Paul Cohen. Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis. 
Ben-
jamin, New York, 1966.
[Del] 
Keith J. Devlin. NI trees. Ann. Math. Logic, pages 267-330, 1978.
[De2] 
Keith J. Devlin. Concerning the consistency of the Souslin Hy-
pothesis with the continuum hypothesis. 
Ann. Math. Logic,
19:115-125, 1980.
[DeJo] 
Keith J. Devlin and Havard Johnsbraten. The Souslin problem,
volume 405 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer, Berlin,
1974.
[DvSh 65] 
Keith J. Devlin and Saharon Shelah. A weak version of 0 which
follows from 2*° < 2*
1. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 29:239-
247, 1978.

1000 
References
[DvSh 85] 
Keith J. Devlin and Saharon Shelah. A note on the normal
Moore space conjecture. Canadian Journal of Mathematics. Jour-
nal Canadien de Mathematiques, 31:241-251, 1979.
[DM] 
Ben Dushnik and E. W. Miller. Partially ordered sets. American
Journal of Mathematics, 63:600-610, 1941.
[DjSh 604] Mirna Dzamonja and Saharon Shelah. 4» does not imply the exis-
tence of a Suslin tree. Israel Journal of Mathematics (submitted).
[EkHul] 
Paul C. Eklof and Martin Huber. On the rank of Ext. Math.
Zeitschrift, 174:159-185, 1980.
[EkHu] 
Paul C. Eklof and Martin Huber. On the p-ranks of Ext(A,G),
assuming CH. In Abelian Group Theory, volume 874 of Lecture
Notes in Math., pages 93-108. Springer, 1981. (Oberwolfach 1981).
[EM] 
Paul C. Eklof and Alan Mekler. Almost free modules; Set theoretic
methods. North Holland Library, 1990.
[EMSh 441] Paul C. Eklof, Alan H. Mekler, and Saharon Shelah. Uniformiza-
tion and the diversity of Whitehead groups. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 80:301-321, 1992.
[EMSh 442] Paul C. Eklof, Alan H. Mekler, and Saharon Shelah. Hereditar-
ily separable groups and monochromatic uniformization. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 88:213-235, 1994.
[EkSh 505] Paul C. Eklof and Saharon Shelah. A Combinatorial Principle
Equivalent to the Existence of Non-free Whitehead Groups. In
Abelian group theory and related topics, volume 171 of Contempo-
rary Mathematics, pages 79-98. American Mathematical Society,
Providence, RI, 1994, edited by R. Goebel, P. Hill and W. Liebert,
Oberwolfach proceedings.
[EK] 
Ryszard Engelking and Monika Karlowicz. Some theorems of set
theory and their topological consequences. Fundamenta Math.,
57:275-285, 1965.

References 
1001
[FMSh 240] Matthew Foreman, Menachem Magidor, and Saharon Shelah.
Martin's maximum, saturated ideals, and nonregular ultrafilters.
I. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 127:1-47, 1988.
[FMSh 252] Matthew Foreman, Menachem Magidor, and Saharon Shelah.
Martin's maximum, saturated ideals and nonregular ultrafilters.
II. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 127:521-545, 1988. will
reapeare (in a revised form) in chapter XIII of [Sh f].
[FrSh 406] 
David H. Fremlin and Saharon Shelah. Pointwise compact and
stable sets of measurable functions. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
58:435-455, 1993.
[Fr] 
Harvey Friedman. One hundred and two problems in mathemat-
ical logic. J. of Symb. Logic, 40:113-124, 1975.
[FShS 544] Sakae Fuchino, Saharon Shelah, and Lajos Soukup. Sticks and
clubs, preprint.
[Fu] 
Laszlo Fuchs. Infinite Abelian Groups, volume I, II. Academic
Press, New York, 1970, 1973.
[GJM] 
Fred Galvin, Thomas Jech, and Menachem Magidor. An ideal
game. J. of Symb. Logic., 43:284-292, 1978.
[Gi] 
Moti Gitik. The negation of SCH from o(κ) = κ++. Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic, 43:209-234, 1989.
[GiSh 310] 
Moti Gitik and Saharon Shelah. Cardinal preserving ideals. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic (submitted).
[GiSh 191] 
Moti Gitik and Saharon Shelah. On the I-condition. Israel Journal
of Mathematics, 48:148-158, 1984.
[Go] 
Martin Goldstern. Tools for your forcing construction. In Set
Theory of the Reals, volume 6 of Israel Mathematical 
Conference
Proceedings, pages 305-360.
[Gr] 
C. Gray. Iterated Forcing from the Strategic Point of View. PhD
thesis, UC Berkeley, 1982.

1002 
References
[GrSh 302] Kami Grossberg and Saharon Shelah. 
On the structure of
Extp(G,Z). Journal of Algebra, 121:117-128, 1989.
[Ha61] 
Andras Hajnal. Proof of a conjecture of S.Ruziewicz. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 50:123-128, 1961.
[HrSh:99] 
Leo Harrington and Saharon Shelah. 
Some exact equiconsis-
tency results in set theory. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
26:178-188, 1985. Proceedings of the 1980/1 Jerusalem Model
Theory year.
[HLSh 162] Bradd Hart, Claude Laflamme, and Saharon Shelah. Models with
second order properties, V: A General principle. Annals of Pure
and Applied Logic, 64:169-194, 1993.
[HHSh:91] 
Howard L. Killer, Martin Huber, and Saharon Shelah. The struc-
ture of Ext(A, Z) and V = L. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 162:39-
50, 1978.
[J] 
Thomas Jech. Set theory. Academic Press, New York, 1978.
[J86] 
Thomas Jech. Multiple forcing, volume 88 of Cambridge Tracts in
Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 1986.
[JMMP] 
Thomas Jech, Menachem Magidor, William Mitchell, and Karel
Prikry. On precipitous ideals. J. of Symb. Logic, 45:1-8, 1980.
[JePo] 
Thomas Jech and William C. Powell. Standard models of set
theory with predication. Bulletin of the AMS, 77(5):808-813, Sep
1971.
[JP1] 
Thomas Jech and Karel Prikry. On ideals of sets and power set
operation. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 82:593-595, 1976.
[JP2] 
Thomas Jech and Karel Prikry. 
Ideals over uncountable sets:
application of almost disjoint functions and generic ultrapowers,
volume 214, 18(2) of Amer. Math. Soc. Memoir. AMS, 1979.
[JeSh 378] 
Thomas Jech and Saharon Shelah. A note on canonical functions.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 68:376-380, 1989.

References 
1003
[Jn] 
Ronald B. Jensen. The fine structure of the constructible hierar-
chy. Annals of Math. Logic, 4:229-308, 1972.
[JuRe] 
Haim Judah and Miroslav Repicky. No random reals in countable
support iterations. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 92:349-359,
1995.
[JdSh 308] Haim Judah and Saharon Shelah. 
The Kunen-Miller chart
(Lebesgue measure, the Baire property, Laver reals and preserva-
tion theorems for forcing). The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 55:909-
927, 1990.
[JShW 339] Haim Judah, Saharon Shelah, and Hugh Woodin. The Borel con-
jecture. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 50:255-269, 1990. Cor-
rection of third section has appeared in the book by Bartoszynski
and Judah.
[Ju92] 
Winfried Just. A modification of Shelah's oracle-cc with applica-
tions. Transactions of the AMS, 329:325-356, 1992.
[Kol] 
Peter Komjath. Set systems with finite chromatic number. Euro-
pean Journal of Combinatorics, 10:543-549, 1989.
[Ku83] 
Kenneth Kunen. Set Theory: An introduction to independence
proofs, volume 102 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of
Mathematics. North-Holland Publishing Co, 1983.
[Ku35] 
C. Kurepa. Ensembles ordonnes et ramifies. Publ. Math. Univ.
Belgrade, 9:1-38, 1935.
[K] 
C. Kurepa. Transformations monotones des ensembles partielle-
ment ordonne. C.R. Acad. Sci. Pans, 205:1033-1035, 1937.
[LI] 
Richard Laver. On the consistency of Borel's conjecture. Acta
Math., 137:151-169, 1976.
[L] 
Richard Laver. Making supercompact indestructible under K-
directed forcing. Israel J. of Math., 29:385-388, 1978.

1004 
References
[Lv82] 
Richard Laver. Saturated ideals and nonregular ultrafilters. In
Procedings of the Bernays Conference 1980, Pabras, Greece. North
Holland, 1982.
[LvSh 104] Richard Laver and Saharon Shelah. The N2-Souslin hypothesis.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 264:411-417,
1981.
[Mg] 
Menachem Magidor. On the singular cardinals problem I. Israel
J. Math., 28:1-31, 1977.
[Mg4] 
Menachem Magidor. 
Changing cofinality of cardinals. 
Fund.
Math., XCIX:61-71, 1978.
[Mg80] 
Menachem Magidor. Precipitous ideals and Σj sets. Israel J. of
Math., 35:109-134, 1980.
[MS] 
Donald Martin and Robert M. Solovay. Internal Cohen extensions.
Annals of Math Logic, 2:143-178, 1970.
[Mr75] 
Donald A. Martin. Borel Determinacy. Annals of Mathematics,
102:363-371, 1975.
[Mt3] 
A. Mathias. Happy families. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 12:59-
111, 1977.
[Mk84] 
Alan H. Mekler. Finitely additive measures on N and the addi-
tive property. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society,
92:439-444, 1984.
[MRSh 314] Alan H. Mekler, Andrzej Roslanowski, and Saharon Shelah. On
the p-rank of Ext. Israel Journal of Mathematics (submitted).
[MkSh 313] Alan H. Mekler and Saharon Shelah. Diamond and λ-systems.
Fundamenta Mathematicae, 131:45-51, 1988.
[MkSh 274] Alan H. Mekler and Saharon Shelah. Uniformization principles.
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 54:441-459, 1989.

References 
1005
[MiRa] 
Eric Milner and Richard Rado. 
The pigeon-hole principle for
ordinal numbers. Proc. London Math. Soc., 15:750-768, 1965.
[Mil] 
William Mitchell. 
Aronszajn trees and the independence of
the transfer property. 
Annals of Mathematical Logic, 5:21-46,
1972/73.
[Nm] 
Kanji Namba. Independence proof of (α;,α;α)-distributive law in
complete Boolean algebras. 
Comment Math. Univ. St. Pauli,
19:1-12, 1970.
[Os] 
A. Ostaszewski. On countably compact perfectly normal spaces.
Journal of London Mathematical Society, 14:505-516, 1975.
[Ox] 
John C. Oxtoby. Measure and Category. Springer, 1980.
[Pr] 
Karel Prikry. 
Changing measurable to accessible cardinals.
Rozprawy Matematyczne, LXVΠL5-52, 1970.
[RoSh 470] Andrzej Roslanowski and Saharon Shelah. Norms on possibilities
I: forcing with trees and creatures. 
Memoirs of the AMS (ac-
cepted).
[RuSh 117] Matatyahu Rubin and Saharon Shelah. Combinatorial problems
on trees: partitions, Δ-systems and large free subtrees. Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic, 33:43-81, 1987.
[SgSh 148] 
G. Sageev and Saharon Shelah. 
Weak compactness and the
structure of Ext(<A, Z). In Abelian group theory 
(Oberwolfach,
1981), volume 874 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 87-92.
Springer, Berlin New York, 1981, ed. Goebel, R. and Walker, A.E.
[SgSh 138] 
G. Sageev and Saharon Shelah. On the structure of Ext (A, Z) in
ZFC
+. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 50:302-315, 1985.
[Sh 311] 
Saharon Shelah. A more general iterable condition ensuring KI is
not collapsed, II. preprint.

1006
References
[Sh 576] 
Saharon Shelah. Categoricity of an abstract elementary class in
two successive cardinals. Israel Journal of Mathematics (submit-
ted).
[Sh 630] 
Saharon Shelah. Non-elementary proper forcing notions. In prepa-
ration.
[Sh 587] 
Saharon Shelah. Not collapsing cardinals < K in (< /ς)-support
iterations. In preparation.
[Sh 656] 
Saharon Shelah. On CS iterations not adding reals. In preparation.
[Sh 460] 
Saharon Shelah. The Generalized Continuum Hypothesis revis-
ited. Israel Journal of Mathematics (submitted).
[Sh 594] 
Saharon Shelah. There may be no nowhere dense ultrafilter. In
Proceedings of the Logic Colloquium Haifa'95( accepted). Springer.
[Sh 486] 
Saharon Shelah. Uniformization. Preprint.
[Sh 44] 
Saharon Shelah. Infinite abelian groups, Whitehead problem and
some constructions. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 18:243-256,
1974.
[Sh 52] 
Saharon Shelah. A compactness theorem for singular cardinals,
free algebras, Whitehead problem and transversals. Israel Journal
of Mathematics, 21:319-349, 1975.
[Sh 64] 
Saharon Shelah. Whitehead groups may be not free, even assum-
ing CH. I. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 28:193-204, 1977.
[Sh 80] 
Saharon Shelah. A weak generalization of MA to higher cardinals.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 30:297-306, 1978.
[Sh 73] 
Saharon Shelah. Models with second-order properties. II. Trees
with no undefined branches. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 14:73-
87, 1978.
[Sh 100] 
Saharon Shelah. Independence results. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 45:563-573, 1980.

References 
1007
[Sh:98] 
Saharon Shelah. Whitehead groups may not be free, even assum-
ing CH. II. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 35:257-285, 1980.
[Sh 120] 
Saharon Shelah. Free limits of forcing and more on Aronszajn
trees. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 38:315-334, 1981.
[Sh 119] 
Saharon Shelah. Iterated forcing and changing cofinalities. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 40:1-32, 1981.
[Sh 82] 
Saharon Shelah. Models with second order properties. III. Omit-
ting types for L(Q). Archiv fur Mathematische Logik und Grund-
lagenforschung, 21:1-11, 1981.
[Sh 140] 
Saharon Shelah. On endo-rigid, strongly Ni-free abelian groups in
NI. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 40:291-295, 1981.
[Sh 122] 
Saharon Shelah. On Fleissner's diamond. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 22:29-35, 1981.
[Sh 125] 
Saharon Shelah. 
The consistency of Ext(G, Z) = Q. 
Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 39:74-82, 1981.
[Sh:b] 
Saharon Shelah. Proper forcing, volume 940 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, xxix+496 pp,
1982.
[Sh 87a] 
Saharon Shelah. Classification theory for nonelementary classes,
I. The number of uncountable models ofψe Lωι,ω. Part A. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 46:212-240, 1983.
[Sh 87b] 
Saharon Shelah. Classification theory for nonelementary classes,
I. The number of uncountable models of φ G Lωι,ω. Part B. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 46:241-273, 1983.
[Sh 136] 
Saharon Shelah. Constructions of many complicated uncountable
structures and Boolean algebras. Israel Journal of Mathematics,
45:100-146, 1983.
[Sh 185] 
Saharon Shelah. Lifting problem of the measure algebra. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 45:90-96, 1983.

1008 
References
[Sh 107] 
Saharon Shelah. 
Models with second order properties. IV. A
general method and eliminating diamonds. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 25:183-212, 1983.
[Sh 176] 
Saharon Shelah. Can you take Solovay's inaccessible away? Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 48:1-47, 1984.
[Sh 186] 
Saharon Shelah. Diamonds, uniformization. The Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, 49:1022-1033, 1984.
[Sh 177] 
Saharon Shelah. More on proper forcing. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 49:1034-1038, 1984.
[Sh 207] 
Saharon Shelah. On cardinal invariants of the continuum. In Ax-
iomatic set theory (Boulder, Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemp.
Mathematics, pages 183-207. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
1984. Proceedings of the Conference in Set Theory, Boulder, June
1983; ed. Baumgartner J., Martin, D. and Shelah, S.
[Sh 208] 
Saharon Shelah. More on the weak diamond. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 28:315-318, 1985.
[Sh 237a] 
Saharon Shelah. On normal ideals and Boolean algebras. 
In
Around classification theory of models, volume 1182 of Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, pages 247-259. Springer, Berlin, 1986.
[Sh 88] 
Saharon Shelah. Classification of nonelementary classes. II. Ab-
stract elementary classes. In Classification theory (Chicago, IL,
1985), volume 1292 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 419-
497. Springer, Berlin, 1987. Proceedings of the USA-Israel Confer-
ence on Classification Theory, Chicago, December 1985; ed. Bald-
win, J.T.
[Sh 253] 
Saharon Shelah. Iterated forcing and normal ideals on ω\. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 60:345-380, 1987.

References
1009
[Sh 263] 
Saharon Shelah. Semiproper forcing axiom implies Martin maxi-
mum but not PFA
+. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 52:360-367,
1987.
[Sh 192] 
Saharon Shelah. Uncountable groups have many nonconjugate
subgroups. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 36:153-206, 1987.
[Sh 250] 
Saharon Shelah. Some notes on iterated forcing with 2
H° > H2.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 29:1-17, 1988.
[Sh 276] 
Saharon Shelah. Was Sierpiήski right? I. Israel Journal of Math-
ematics, 62:355-380, 1988.
[Sh 270] 
Saharon Shelah. Baire irresolvable spaces and lifting for a layered
ideal. Topology and its Applications, 33:217-221, 1989.
[Sh 351] 
Saharon Shelah. Reflecting stationary sets and successors of sin-
gular cardinals. Archive for Mathematical Logic, 31:25-53, 1991.
[Sh 400a] 
Saharon Shelah. Cardinal arithmetic for skeptics. American Math-
ematical Society. Bulletin. New Series, 26:197-210, 1992.
[Sh 407] 
Saharon Shelah. CON(u > i). Archive for Mathematical Logic,
31:433-443, 1992.
[Sh 326] 
Saharon Shelah. Viva la difference I: Nonisomorphism of ultra-
powers of countable models. In Set Theory of the Continuum,
volume 26 of Mathematical Sciences Research Institute Publica-
tions, pages 357-405. Springer Verlag, 1992.
[Sh 420] 
Saharon Shelah. Advances in Cardinal Arithmetic. In Finite and
Infinite Combinatorics in Sets and Logic, pages 355-383. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1993. N.W. Sauer et al (eds.).
[Sh:g] 
Saharon Shelah. Cardinal Arithmetic, volume 29 of Oxford Logic
Guides. Oxford University Press, 1994.
[Sh 430] 
Saharon Shelah. Further cardinal arithmetic. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 95:61-114, 1996.

1010 
References
[ShSt 154] 
Saharon Shelah and Lee Stanley. Generalized Martin's axiom
and Souslin's hypothesis for higher cardinals. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 43:225-236, 1982.
[ShSt 154a] Saharon Shelah and Lee Stanley. Corrigendum to: "Generalized
Martin's axiom and Souslin's hypothesis for higher cardinals"
[Israel Journal of Mathematics 43 (1982), no. 3, 225-236; MR
84h:03120]. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 53:304-314, 1986.
[ShSr 315] 
Saharon Shelah and Juris Steprans. PFA implies all automor-
phisms are trivial. Proceedings of the American Mathematical So-
ciety, 104:1220-1225, 1988.
[ShSr 296] 
Saharon Shelah and Juris Steprans. Nontrivial homeomorphisms
of/3N\N without the continuum hypothesis. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 132:135-141, 1989.
[ShSr 427] 
Saharon Shelah and Juris Steprans. Somewhere trivial automor-
phisms. Journal of the London Mathematical Society, 49:569-580,
1994.
[ShWd 241] Saharon Shelah and Hugh Woodin. Large cardinals imply that
every reasonably definable set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 70:381-394, 1990.
[Si67] 
Jack Silver. The independence of Kurepa's conjecture and two-
cardinal conjectures in model theory. In Axiomatic Set Theory,
volume XIII of Proc. Symp in Pure Math., pages 383-390, 1967.
[So70] 
Robert M. Solovay. A model of set theory in which every set of
reals is Lebesgue measurable. Annals of Math., 92:1-56, 1970.
[ST] 
Robert M. Solovay and S. Tennenbaum. Iterated Cohen extensions
and Souslin's problem. Annals of Math., 94:201-245, 1971.
[StVW] 
John Steel and Robert van Wesep. Two consequences of determi-
nacy consistent with choice. Transactions of the AMS, 272:67-85,
1982.

References 
1011
[SK] 
Charles L. Steinhorn and James H. King. The imiformization
property for N2. Israel J. Math., 36:248-256, 1980.
[D] 
Eric K. van Douwen. The integers and topology. In K. Kunen
and J. E. Vaughan, editors, Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology,
pages 111-167. North-Holland, 1984.
[Ve86] 
Boban Velickovic. Definable automorphisms of P(ω)/fin. 
Pro-
ceedings of the AMS, 96:130-135, 1986.
[Ve93] 
Boban Velickovic. OCA and automorphisms of P(ω/fin). 
Topol-
ogy and Applications, 49:1-13, 1993.
[Wi] 
Edward L. Wimmers. The Shelah P-point independence theorem.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 43:28-48, 1982.
[W83] 
Hugh Woodin. Some consistency results in ZF using AD. In
Cabal Seminar, volume 1019 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
pages 172-199. 1983.

1012 
References
More References
For the reader's convenience we list here again all references to papers of the
author, this time sorted by number.
[Sh:b] 
Saharon Shelah. Proper forcing, volume 940 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, xxix+496 pp,
1982.
[Sh:g] 
Saharon Shelah. Cardinal Arithmetic, volume 29 of Oxford Logic
Guides. Oxford University Press, 1994.
[Sh 44] 
Saharon Shelah. Infinite abelian groups, Whitehead problem and
some constructions. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 18:243-256,
1974.
[Sh 52] 
Saharon Shelah. A compactness theorem for singular cardinals,
free algebras, Whitehead problem and transversals. Israel Journal
of Mathematics, 21:319-349, 1975.
[Sh 64] 
Saharon Shelah. Whitehead groups may be not free, even assum-
ing CH. I. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 28:193-204, 1977.
[DvSh 65] 
Keith J. Devlin and Saharon Shelah. A weak version of 0 which
follows from 2*° < 2Kl. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 29:239-
247, 1978.
[Sh 73] 
Saharon Shelah. Models with second-order properties. II. Trees
with no undefined branches. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 14:73-
87, 1978.
[Sh 80] 
Saharon Shelah. A weak generalization of MA to higher cardinals.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 30:297-306, 1978.
[ADSh 81] Uri Avraham (Abraham), Keith J. Devlin, and Saharon Shelah.
The consistency with CH of some consequences of Martin's axiom
plus 2N° > KI. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 31:19-33, 1978.

More References
1013
[Sh 82]
[DvSh 85]
[Sh 87a]
[Sh 87b]
[Sh 88]
[HHSh:91]
[Sh:98]
[HrSh:99]
Saharon Shelah. Models with second order properties. III. Omit-
ting types for L(Q). Archiv fur Mathematische Logίk und Grund-
lagenforschung, 21:1-11, 1981.
Keith J. Devlin and Saharon Shelah. 
A note on the normal
Moore space conjecture. Canadian Journal of Mathematics. Jour-
nal Canadien de Mathematiques, 31:241-251, 1979.
Saharon Shelah. Classification theory for nonelementary classes,
I. The number of uncountable models of ψ G Lωι^ω. Part A. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 46:212-240, 1983.
[Sh 100]
Saharon Shelah. Classification theory for nonelementary classes,
I. The number of uncountable models ofψe Lωι,ω. Part B. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 46:241-273, 1983.
Saharon Shelah. Classification of nonelementary classes. II. Ab-
stract elementary classes. In Classification theory (Chicago, IL,
1985), volume 1292 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 419-
497. Springer, Berlin, 1987. Proceedings of the USA-Israel Confer-
ence on Classification Theory, Chicago, December 1985; ed. Bald-
win, J.T.
Howard L. Killer, Martin Huber, and Saharon Shelah. The struc-
ture of Ext(A, Z) and V = L. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 162:39-
50, 1978.
Saharon Shelah. Whitehead groups may not be free, even assum-
ing CH. II. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 35:257-285, 1980.
Leo Harrington and Saharon Shelah. 
Some exact equiconsis-
tency results in set theory. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
26:178-188, 1985. Proceedings of the 1980/1 Jerusalem Model
Theory year.
Saharon Shelah. Independence results. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 45:563-573, 1980.

1014 
References
[AbSh 102] Uri Avraham (Abraham) and Saharon Shelah. Forcing with stable
posets. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 47:37-42, 1982.
[LvSh 104] 
Richard Laver and Saharon Shelah. The N2-Souslin hypothesis.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 264:411-417,
1981.
[AbSh 106] Uri Avraham (Abraham) and Saharon Shelah. Martin's axiom
does not imply that every two HI-dense sets of reals are isomor-
phic. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 38:161-176, 1981.
[Sh 107] 
Saharon Shelah. 
Models with second order properties. IV. A
general method and eliminating diamonds. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 25:183-212, 1983.
[AbSh 114] Uri Abraham and Saharon Shelah. Isomorphism types of Aron-
szajn trees. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 50:75-113, 1985.
[RuSh 117] Matatyahu Rubin and Saharon Shelah. Combinatorial problems
on trees: partitions, Δ-systems and large free subtrees. Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic, 33:43-81, 1987.
[Sh 119] 
Saharon Shelah. Iterated forcing and changing cofinalities. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 40:1-32, 1981.
[Sh 120] 
Saharon Shelah. Free limits of forcing and more on Aronszajn
trees. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 38:315-334, 1981.
[Sh 122] 
Saharon Shelah. On Fleissner's diamond. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 22:29-35, 1981.
[Sh 125] 
Saharon Shelah. 
The consistency of Ext(G, Z) = Q. 
Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 39:74-82, 1981.
[Sh 136] 
Saharon Shelah. Constructions of many complicated uncountable
structures and Boolean algebras. Israel Journal of Mathematics,
45:100-146, 1983.
[SgSh 138] 
G. Sageev and Saharon Shelah. On the structure of Ext(A, Z) in
ZFC+. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 50:302-315, 1985.

More References 
1015
[Sh 140] 
Saharon Shelah. On endo-rigid, strongly Ki-free abelian groups in
NI. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 40:291-295, 1981.
[AbSh 146] Uri Abraham and Saharon Shelah. Forcing closed unbounded sets.
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 48:643-657, 1983.
[SgSh 148] 
G. Sageev and Saharon Shelah. 
Weak compactness and the
structure of Ext (A, Z). In Abelian group theory 
(Oberwolfach,
1981), volume 874 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 87-92.
Springer, Berlin-New York, 1981. ed. Goebel, R. and Walker, A.E.
[ShSt 154] 
Saharon Shelah and Lee Stanley. Generalized Martin's axiom
and Souslin's hypothesis for higher cardinals. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 43:225-236, 1982.
[ShSt 154a] Saharon Shelah and Lee Stanley. Corrigendum to: "Generalized
Martin's axiom and Souslin's hypothesis for higher cardinals"
[Israel Journal of Mathematics 43 (1982), no. 3, 225-236; MR
84h:03120]. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 53:304-314, 1986.
[HLSh 162] Bradd Hart, Claude Laflamme, and Saharon Shelah. Models with
second order properties, V: A General principle. Annals of Pure
and Applied Logic, 64:169-194, 1993.
[Sh 176] 
Saharon Shelah. Can you take Solovay's inaccessible away? Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 48:1-47, 1984.
[Sh 177] 
Saharon Shelah. More on proper forcing. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 49:1034-1038, 1984.
[Sh 185] 
Saharon Shelah. Lifting problem of the measure algebra. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 45:90-96, 1983.
[Sh 186] 
Saharon Shelah. Diamonds, uniformization. The Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, 49:1022-1033, 1984.
[GiSh 191] 
Moti Gitik and Saharon Shelah. On the I-condition. Israel Journal
of Mathematics, 48:148-158, 1984.

1016 
References
[Sh 192] 
Saharon Shelah. Uncountable groups have many nonconjugate
subgroups. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 36:153-206, 1987.
[Sh 207] 
Saharon Shelah. On cardinal invariants of the continuum. In Ax-
iomatic set theory (Boulder, Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemp.
Mathematics, pages 183-207. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, HI,
1984. Proceedings of the Conference in Set Theory, Boulder, June
1983; ed. Baumgartner J., Martin, D. and Shelah, S.
[Sh 208] 
Saharon Shelah. More on the weak diamond. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 28:315-318, 1985.
[Sh 237a] 
Saharon Shelah. 
On normal ideals and Boolean algebras. 
In
Around classification theory of models, volume 1182 of Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, pages 247-259. Springer, Berlin, 1986.
[FMSh 240] Matthew Foreman, Menachem Magidor, and Saharon Shelah.
Martin's maximum, saturated ideals, and nonregular ultrafilters.
I. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 127:1-47, 1988.
[ShWd 241] Saharon Shelah and Hugh Woodin. Large cardinals imply that
every reasonably definable set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 70:381-394, 1990.
[BsSh 242] Andreas Blass and Saharon Shelah. There may be simple P^-
and Pκ2-points and the Rudin-Keisler ordering may be downward
directed. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 33:213-243, 1987.
[Sh 250] 
Saharon Shelah. Some notes on iterated forcing with 2
H° > ^2-
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 29:1-17, 1988.
[FMSh 252] Matthew Foreman, Menachem Magidor, and Saharon Shelah.
Martin's maximum, saturated ideals and nonregular ultrafilters.
II. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 127:521-545, 1988. will
reapeare (in a revised form) in chapter XIII of [Sh f].
[Sh 253] 
Saharon Shelah. Iterated forcing and normal ideals on ω\. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 60:345-380, 1987.

More References 
1017
[Sh 263] 
Saharon Shelah. Semiproper forcing axiom implies Martin maxi-
mum but not PFA+. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 52:360-367,
1987.
[Sh 270] 
Saharon Shelah. Baire irresolvable spaces and lifting for a layered
ideal. Topology and its Applications, 33:217-221, 1989.
[MkSh 274] Alan H. Mekler and Saharon Shelah. Uniformization principles.
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 54:441-459, 1989.
[Sh 276] 
Saharon Shelah. Was Sierpiήski right? I. Israel Journal of Math-
ematics, 62:355-380, 1988.
[ShSr 296] 
Saharon Shelah and Juris Steprans. Nontrivial homeomorphisms
of /3N \ N without the continuum hypothesis. Fundamenta Math-
ematicae, 132:135-141, 1989.
[GrSh 302] Kami Grossberg and Saharon Shelah. 
On the structure of
Extp(G,Z). Journal of Algebra, 121:117-128, 1989.
[JdSh 308] Haim Judah and Saharon Shelah. 
The Kunen-Miller chart
(Lebesgue measure, the Baire property, Laver reals and preserva-
tion theorems for forcing). The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 55:909-
927, 1990.
[GiSh 310] 
Moti Gitik and Saharon Shelah. Cardinal preserving ideals. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, submitted.
[Sh 311] 
Saharon Shelah. A more general iterable condition ensuring KI is
not collapsed, II. preprint
[MkSh 313] Alan H. Mekler and Saharon Shelah. Diamond and λ-systems.
Fundamenta Mathematicae, 131:45-51, 1988.
[MRSh 314] Alan H. Mekler, Andrzej Roslanowski, and Saharon Shelah. On
the p-rank of Ext. Israel Journal of Mathematics, submitted.
[ShSr 315] 
Saharon Shelah and Juris Steprans. PFA implies all automor-
phisms are trivial. Proceedings of the American Mathematical So-
ciety, 104:1220-1225, 1988.

1018 
References
[Sh 326] 
Saharon Shelah. Viva la difference I: Nonisomorphism of ultra-
powers of countable models. In Set Theory of the Continuum,
volume 26 of Mathematical Sciences Research Institute Publica-
tions, pages 357-405. Springer Verlag, 1992.
[JShW 339] Haim Judah, Saharon Shelah, and Hugh Woodin. The Borel con-
jecture. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 50:255-269, 1990. Cor-
rection of third section has appeared in the book by Bartoszynski
and Judah.
[Sh 351] 
Saharon Shelah. Reflecting stationary sets and successors of sin-
gular cardinals. Archive for Mathematical Logic, 31:25-53, 1991.
[JeSh 378] 
Thomas Jech and Saharon Shelah. A note on canonical functions.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 68:376-380, 1989.
[Sh 400a] 
Saharon Shelah. Cardinal arithmetic for skeptics. American Math-
ematical Society. Bulletin. New Series, 26:197-210, 1992.
[AbSh 403] Uri Abraham and Saharon Shelah. A Δ| well-order of the reals
and incompactness of L(Q
MM). Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
59:1-32, 1993.
[FrSh 406] 
David H. Fremlin and Saharon Shelah. Pointwise compact and
stable sets of measurable functions. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
58:435-455, 1993.
[Sh 407] 
Saharon Shelah. CON(u > i). Archive for Mathematical Logic,
31:433-443, 1992.
[Sh 420] 
Saharon Shelah. Advances in Cardinal Arithmetic. In Finite and
Infinite Combinatorics in Sets and Logic, pages 355-383. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1993. N.W. Sauer et al (eds.).
[ShSr 427] 
Saharon Shelah and Juris Steprans. Somewhere trivial automor-
phisms. Journal of the London Mathematical Society, 49:569-580,
1994.

More References 
1019
[Sh 430] 
Saharon Shelah. Further cardinal arithmetic. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 95:61-114, 1996.
[BuSh 437] Max R. Burke and Saharon Shelah. Linear liftings for non com-
plete probability space. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 79:289-
296, 1992.
[EMSh 441] Paul C. Eklof, Alan H. Mekler, and Saharon Shelah. Uniformiza-
tion and the diversity of Whitehead groups. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 80:301-321, 1992.
[EMSh 442] Paul C. Eklof, Alan H. Mekler, and Saharon Shelah. Hereditar-
ily separable groups and monochromatic uniformization. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 88:213-235, 1994.
[Sh 460] 
Saharon Shelah. The Generalized Continuum Hypothesis revis-
ited. Israel Journal of Mathematics, submitted.
[RoSh 470] Andrzej Roslanowski and Saharon Shelah. Norms on possibili-
ties I: forcing with trees and creatures. Memoirs of the A MS,
accepted.
[Sh 486] 
Saharon Shelah. Uniformization. preprint.
[EkSh 505] Paul C. Eklof and Saharon Shelah. A Combinatorial Principle
Equivalent to the Existence of Non-free Whitehead Groups. In
Abelian group theory and related topics, volume 171 of Contempo-
rary Mathematics, pages 79-98. American Mathematical Society,
Providence, RI, 1994. edited by R. Goebel, P. Hill and W. Liebert,
Oberwolfach proceedings.
[FShS 544] Sakae Fuchino, Saharon Shelah, and Lajos Soukup. Sticks and
clubs, preprint.
[Sh 576] 
Saharon Shelah. Categoricity of an abstract elementary class in
two successive cardinals. Israel Journal of Mathematics, submit-
ted.

1020 
References
[Sh 587] 
Saharon Shelah. Not collapsing cardinals < K in (< 
/ v)-support
iterations, in preparation.
[Sh 594] 
Saharon Shelah. There may be no nowhere dense ultrafilter. In
Proceedings of the Logic Colloquium Haifa'95, accepted. Springer.
[DjSh 604] 
Mirna Dzamonja and Saharon Shelah. φ does not imply the exis-
tence of a Suslin tree. Israel Journal of Mathematics, submitted.
[Sh 630] 
Saharon Shelah. Non-elementary proper forcing notions, in prepa-
ration.
[Sh 656] 
Saharon Shelah. On CS iterations not adding reals, in preparation.

