For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
Automatically Install The 
Attitudes & Techniques Of A 
Master Hypnotist With The 
Hypnotic Hero's Journey. 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
Automatically Install The Attitudes & Techniques Of A 
Master Hypnotist With The Hypnotic Hero's Journey. 
 
Preparing For The Journey 
 
Introduction  
This is a very special masterclass, as it gives you the opportunity to experience the journey to 
being a TRUE Master of Hypnosis.  
 
Unlike all of the previous masterclasses, this is an experiential masterclass, as you will be 
guided through a journey within which you have the opportunity to gain a deeper 
understanding of your individual pathway that you have chosen to follow on your way to 
mastering hypnosis.  
 
During this journey, do not be surprised if you find yourself periodically experiencing flashes of 
insight, new realizations about long possessed abilities, and gradually bringing new abilities to 
awareness as the ideas and concepts that this journey sows begins to bear fruit. 
 
Overview Of The 3 Stages of Learning  
A Mechanic is someone that has a toolkit. As long as they have an appropriate tool to apply for 
the situations that are encountered, everything goes great. 
 
An Engineer has the ability to take apart existing tools and create entirely new tools to fit 
whatever situation is encountered. 
 
A Magician doesn't dwell on any tools at all, they simply INTEND a particular result, and it 
occurs. 
 
The Deeper View: Mechanics, Engineers & Magicians  
Hypnosis is based around the simple fact that what we think is reality is malleable. Change the 
way we think and perceive it and we change the entire world we live in. The result is that you 
are left happier and more successful in your endeavours. At least that is the theory. 
  
Now when looking at the malleability of reality, Change is one extremely useful unit of 
measurement. So realities can change quickly or slowly. They can change by small or large 
amounts. The changes can be temporary, semi-permanent, permanent or not take place at all.  
 
In each case we judge the proficiency of the practitioner, by his or her capacity to induce the 
desired amount of change for the desired amount of time. A master of hypnosis stands or falls by 
her ability to manipulate realities at will. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
  
The acquisition of any skill usually involves a progression through distinct levels of ability that 
the earnest student must travel through in order to achieve mastery. The student must learn to 
manipulate his chosen medium - be that wood, metal, food, medicine or realities - in ever more 
powerful and refined ways.  
 
The old system of apprenticeship recognised this transition formally in the roles of the 
apprentice, the journeyman (or craftsman) and the master of his craft. I believe this kind of 
distinction is a useful one to draw out for reality manipulators in order to give us all an 
understanding of where we still need to grow and evolve our skills.  
    
Many hypnotists make one fundamental mistake when it comes to hypnotic processes. It is a 
mistake that I believe all the greats in this field have avoided in one way or another, and this 
was one of the reasons that they became great!  
 
The mistake is a simple one: they get caught up with and are stuck at the level of technique. To 
get stuck at the level of technique is to confuse the content with the process. 
  
This level of thought (which, by the way, is a useful one to go through in your evolution into a 
Hypnotist!) is what I like to refer to as the level of reality mechanics.  
 
A Reality Mechanic is someone who has a bag of tricks, or a toolkit. Every time she meets an 
unpleasant reality she pulls out the appropriate tool, follows the step by step instructions on the 
gadget and somehow, inexplicably, magic happens.  
 
When magic does not happen she merely blames the tool and says "IT must be broken" or "IT 
doesn't work". Because she only has predetermined patterns to run, she can only tinker with 
realities. She needs to rely on the robustness of the gadget she is using to be enough to meet the 
situation she faces. 
  
The problem with Reality Mechanics is that they are stuck. They cannot generate patterns 
because they have not studied the mechanisms inside the gadgets they are using. If they meet a 
situation they have not encountered before, they may not choose the right tool to meet the 
problem - either because they cannot match the dynamics of the tool to the problem or because 
they simply do not have a pattern designed to meet that kind of situation.  
 
Reality Mechanics are powerful people who can do a lot of good, but they have to rely on 
someone else to develop new techniques and technologies. Their personal development is thus 
dependant on "greater" minds spoon feeding them with new content. 
  
To burst through the bubble of limitations inherent in being a reality mechanic, you need to 
elevate yourself to the next level. This is what I like to call the realm of the reality engineer.  
 
A Reality Engineer works not on the level of technique, but on the level of principles. He 
understands what makes a process work. He has seen the clockwork that makes the machine do 
what it does and understands why it has been put together in that way.  
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
This means he is free to make up his own techniques on the spur of the moment as the situation 
requires. He can flip into seemingly contradictory positions and still get the results he wants 
because he can see the process that is at work and leverages off that to get a result.  
 
A Reality Engineer can confidently meet entirely new situations and know that all he has to do is 
gather enough information in order to start selecting the appropriate principles with which to 
engage.  
  
Whereas a Reality Mechanic can only tinker and tune an engine or apply pre-packaged 
solutions to "common" problems, the Reality Engineer can take the entire mechanism of reality 
apart, clean it up and put it back together in a more useful and efficient way. A reality Engineer 
has more choice and is therefore more powerful as an individual. His scope for personal growth 
is self reflexive - he applies the principles he has mastered to himself to reinvent himself as time 
passes. 
  
A Reality Engineer is free to explore the world with new eyes and to choose how the world 
should respond to him. As he gets better with this process, he internalises the principles that 
form the stuff of his magic. What once required a conscious choice to engage begins to be 
turned over to the vastly superior resources of unconsciousness. At that moment a magical door 
opens to him. When he steps through that doorway he will have become a reality magician. 
  
A Reality Magician is the most difficult level to describe. It is an incredibly powerful state in 
which you stand beyond the self imposed limits that holds back even the Reality Engineer.  
 
I am not suggesting that the Reality Magician operates at a level beyond principles. That is kind 
of true but also quite inaccurate. Principles are absolutely important at this level, it is just that 
you can go beyond them to either discover new principles or you bend the boundaries within 
which Principles are thought to operate.  
 
This is the level where you don't TRY and do something - apply a principle or a technique - you 
merely INTEND something and it occurs. When you get here you have internalised so many 
experiences, you literally BECOME the process. You unconsciously apply hypnosis in everything 
you do so that magical things just seem to happen to you and around you.  
 
As the great master of change, Milton Erickson, put it: you become the scenery to which the 
other people NATURALLY respond in the way that you intend them to.  
 
That is a very powerful place to be in. It takes a very special way of thinking to appreciate what 
this means and to operate at this level. It is NOT an end point, but a beginning of an incredibly 
fruitful experience. 
  
This special Mind Set is an incredibly important thing to understand and internalise. This 
Masterclass will take you to the level of an expert Reality Engineer – the level at which lies 
Mastery.  We will leave the journey beyond that for another time. 
 
So, whilst you will invariably have begun your hypnosis journey as Reality Mechanics, I urge 
you to ensure that over time, and with experience, you keep moving on to the other stages of 
Reality Engineers and maybe one day even that of a Reality Magician. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
 
Reality is a malleable thing. Learn to experience it just so and magic happens. 
 
Overview Of The Journey To Physical Mastery (Reality Engineers) 
There are two stages that you will transition through, both of these stages are covered in this 
month’s masterclass. 
 
Stage 1: Creating A Solid Foundation With Deep Roots:  
This part of the journey is covered in session 1 (the preparation) session 2 (phases 0, 1 & 2), 
session 3 (phases 3 & 4) and session 4 (phase 5).  
 
Stage 2: The Hypnotist in Relation to the External World:  
This is the journey you will take in session 5 (phases 6 & 7), session 6 (phases 8 & 9) and session 
7 (phases 10 & 11). 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
 
Stage 1: Creating A Solid Foundation With Deep Roots 
 
 
Session 01 – Prepare Your Mind For An Adventure 
 
This session is your setup session to create the mental space you will need to take this journey. It 
is often said that a journey will be as successful as the prior preparation was thorough. This 
session will ensure your success 
 
Session 02 – The Inner Work 
 
Phase 0: The Inspiration  
Starting with nothing a hypnotist must find he's inspired by the field. The inspiration defies logic 
or reason - though there may be logical reasons attached. The people that ONLY have a narrow 
interest in hypnosis: to cure the odd affliction or prevent pain -- will never be Masters of 
Hypnosis because they cannot see anything beyond a mechanical tool. If you get excited by 
hypnosis and have difficulty getting others to see why - then you really have the inspiration of a 
Master! 
 
Warning: There is a chance of getting stuck here with feelings of awkwardness or confusion. 
 
Phase 1: Resources  
Now that there is a goal, it is easy to give into the impulse to pursue mastery, to search out new 
information. Whether it involves going to the library, reading books, finding articles in 
magazines, and listening to recordings, all the tools are readily available once the initiative is 
taken to find them.  
 
It is easy for a hypnotist to get excited at this point, fantasizing about doing all this really cool 
stuff, learning this cool technique and that fascinating method, beginning to realize that this is 
all just language, the same power of communication that we exercise every day. 
 
Warning: When introduced to new tools, there may be some passing feeling of megalomania, 
recognizing the power that these tools convey for both good and evil. 
 
Phase 2: Inner Wisdom  
After looking for so much knowledge from the outside, it can be balancing to realize how much 
innate knowledge we already have. Sometimes intuitively knowing something to be true, maybe 
posing yourself a question and discovering answers coming to you in unexpected ways, through 
dreams, or even finding meaning in something someone else said that was completely unrelated 
to your initial query. 
 
Warning: Be aware of the temptation to flee reality, and do not get stuck in indecisiveness. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
Session 03 – Taking It Into The Real World 
 
Phase 3: (H+) Nurturing Nature 
With so much new knowledge giving birth to new ideas, it sometimes helps to take a step back, 
and look at things from a new perspective, and try new behaviours on for size.  
 
When you experience how much you have to gain simply by having positive intentions (H+) 
around others, it really gives you a great feeling of being alive. As you bring these new gifts into 
the world, you start noticing more and more support coming in from around you. 
 
Warning: Without structure, wild growth can occur, creating instability. 
 
Phase 4: Command or Stability  
To bring ideas and intentions into reality requires powerful authority, the awareness of 
responsibility, and a realistic attitude of what needs to be done. As you develop your inner 
power, it is important to recognize the healthy attributes of the people around you as well as the 
damaging aspects so that you can choose which attributes to take on. 
 
Warning: Stability taken to an extreme can bring perfectionism and stubbornness. 
 
Session 04 – The Search For Deeper Knowledge 
 
Phase 5: Seeking Knowledge  
After a certain amount of learning from books, it is good to seek out a mentor to better prepare 
you for the journey ahead.  
 
Going to a seminar can be like the first day of school, where you initially feel out of place, and 
in awe of all that there is to learn, which gives way to a feeling of comfortable belonging, and 
gives you a chance to experience things in a completely different manner. When surrounded 
with people that are searching for meaning in the same field, many things can become apparent 
that were previously concealed. 
 
Warning: Don’t become a seminar junkie. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Stage 2: The Hypnotist in Relation to the External World 
 
Session 05 – Declare Your Independence  
 
Phase 6: Balanced Decision Making  
Standing at the crossroads, a decision needs to be made, to stay with the well-worn and 
comfortable path, or to make a decision of one’s own free will to forge a new path. Making an 
intense heartfelt declaration to your new focus creates a determined resolution to carry you 
forward.  
 
Warning: Be sure to make the decision with you heart and move forward; don’t stay at the 
crossroads too long.  
 
Phase 7: Enthusiastic Action 
All the necessary foundational groundwork has been laid, so now is the time to enthusiastically 
charge out into the wide world beyond books and seminars with self-confidence and optimism.  
 
Be proactive, take charge of your situation and really make the most of it. 
 
Warning: Don’t become arrogant. 
 
Session 06 – Allow Hypnosis To Change You 
 
Phase 8: Strength  
Intuitively integrating intellect and instinct, allowing knowledge to be automatically expressed. 
Strength comes when you can trust yourself to do the right thing, when you don’t hold back.  
 
People around you really start noticing how amazing you have become.  
 
Warning: Sometimes strength can be very intimidating to others. 
 
Phase 9: Solitude & Reflection  
Removing yourself from the everyday experience can help you get past the masks that you have 
taken on, which allows you to see yourself for who you really are. Feeling inner peace and 
clarity, you begin to perceive your personal standards of values, which may suggest a 
completely different way of interacting with the world around you. 
 
Warning: Don’t use feelings of loneliness as an excuse to not give yourself peace and quiet. 
 
Session 07 – Exert Your Power 
 
Phase 10: Big Picture or Divine Plan  
An experience of the big picture brings insight into what is necessary. It is time to face one’s 
tasks, learn their true meaning, and begin to understand that life’s ups and downs allow us to 
become whole.  
 
Without a deep understanding, the underlying feeling of this experience may seem like chance 
or luck, but when more closely examined, can often make perfect sense. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
 
Warning: Don’t get stuck in the belief that everything is predetermined and unalterable. 
 
Phase 11: The Eye of Truth or Clear Vision or Clarity  
Many issues present themselves that require balanced judgment. Having the courage to make 
the right decisions is quite a responsibility, one that requires an understanding of the laws of the 
world around you. Having the ability to view actions and see the consequences is an important 
skill to have. 
 
Warning: Be cautious about being to cold or taking a know-it-all attitude. 
 

