For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
Advanced Secrets That Create 
Highly Responsive Hypnotic 
Subjects! 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
Advanced Secrets That Create Highly Responsive Hypnotic 
Subjects 
 
Session 1: The Principles Of Deep trance Training 
 
The Key To Mastering Hypnosis 
 
The key to being a Master Hypnotist is having great subjects. So how do you ensure that every 
subject is a great one?  
 
You train them to be able to access the full range of hypnotic phenomena! 
 
To do this you will need special tools, principles, strategies and experience. 
 
The Mind Of A Great Subject 
 
Great subjects have a certain mindset that allows the hypnotic suggestions perfect ground in 
which to grow. The two classic instructions to produce this mindset have been: 
 
1. Blank your mind – let my voice flow over you… 
2. Really focus completely on this idea… 
 
They sound different, but actually do the exact same thing: they create a Receptive Mind. 
 
The Key Hypnotic Principles For Deep Trance Training 
 
1. (A) Get Attention – both forms of setup instructions for a Receptive Mind arrest the 
subject’s attention 
2. (B) Bypass The Critical Factor – James Braid knew this was important over 100 years ago 
when he tried to change the name of hypnosis to monoideism. Both setup suggestions 
have this effect by either understimulating or overstimulating the mind. 
3. Just Ask! – to find the best approach, just ask the subject what their experience was with 
each type, and you know what approach will work best for them! 
4. Switch Mindset – Hypnosis used to be something you did to people. Then it became 
something to do with people. Things become even easier when you realise that all that 
matters is what they experience. Its OK to get feedback from the client mid-session! 
5. Connection – Subjects need to feel that you mean what you say, otherwise they won’t 
bother following your suggestions. That is why you must…  
6. Go First – your internal experience as a hypnotist will change the impact of your 
suggestions. This is the essence of (H+) – intend to hypnotise and do some good! 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
The Purpose For Training Subjects 
 
Our aim is to train subjects to respond easily through the full range of hypnotic phenomena. 
These “special abilities”, like hallucination or pain control, were first discovered by accident – 
they occurred in some subjects spontaneously as a side effect of being in trance. Once they 
were spotted, hypnotists tried to recreate them again on purpose in other subjects. 
 
A key principle is the Law Of Successive Approximations. This basically means that every 
experience is made up of other experiences, so to get a certain deep trance phenomenon you 
can build up to it methodically. For example: a Regression requires the ability to Hallucinate 
(you actually experience the old events as if you were back there), Hypermnesia (an increased 
ability to remember events with pinpoint accuracy) and Amnesia (the ability to forget that 
anything after the regressed moment has happened yet.) 
 
So you can use experiences a person can access easily as building blocks to create new 
hypnotic experiences step by step. 
 
The Myth Of Trance Depth 
 
Hippolyte Bernheim came up with the idea at the turn of the 20th century that there might be 
different depths of trance. This was later developed by Ambroise-Auguste Liebeault who was the 
first hypnotist to suggest that “deeper” trance states allowed for more complex phenomena to 
emerge. This was later set in stone by research scientist Clark Leonard Hull in his famous 
experiments using Hypnotic Suggestibility Scales to try and prove that only a certain number of 
people can go into hypnosis. 
 
Looking at trance and its phenomena as a range of experience allows us to break through the 
limitations (and the flaws) inherent in Hull’s experiments. Instead of trying to fit everyone into 
the same mould, we can now target certain experiences – like memory, and enhance or 
diminish those to get the results we want. 
 
So it is not hypnosis that gets deeper, it’s the specific experience in hypnosis that is deepened! 
 
Hypnotic Responsiveness 
 
There are 4 useful ways that someone can respond during the hypnotic process: 
 
1. Voluntary Compliance – they do what you ask consciously 
2. Non-Voluntary Compliance – a response that they could control (like breathing or arm 
levitation) occurs spontaneously. They could stop it, but they don’t. 
3. Involuntary Compliance – a response occurs that they have no conscious control over 
(e.g. change in heartbeat, capillary bleeding etc.) 
4. Non-Voluntary Dissociation – a response they can usually control comes up, but they are 
powerless to resist it this time. 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
The 9 Suggestion Types 
 
There are 9 ways of phrasing suggestions that will impact differently on different people. These 
can be loosely split into direct types and indirect types. 
 
5 Direct Suggestions: these tend to work faster but risk conscious interference more. 
 
1. Instruction/Description Suggestions: these are the easiest to formulate, you simply give a 
direct instruction for or description of what you want – Your arm is lifting! 
2. Cognitive Suggestions: these engage the intellect to activate the suggestion -  Think about 
your arm lifting… 
3. Simple Imaginative Suggestions: simply engages the imagination by instruction – Imagine 
your arm lifting! 
4. Sensory Suggestions: these focus on stimulating one of the five senses – Feel your arm 
lifting… See your arm lifting… 
5. Imaginative Metaphors: these use simple analogies to imply the effect – Imagine a bright 
blue balloon tied to your arm, lifting it… 
 
Indirect Suggestions: these take a bit more time to emerge, but have a lower risk of the 
conscious mind interfering 
 
6. Embedded Suggestions: these are suggestions hidden inside other sentences – Like a good 
shot in the arm people can have uplifting experiences in so many ways… 
7. Associational Suggestions: these trigger a train of associations by stimulating similar 
experiences from the past – When you eat your hand automatically lifts your fork… 
8. Situational Suggestions: these are similar to Associational Suggestions, here we focus 
more on the context in which the effect naturally would have to happen – Can you adjust 
your lapel for a moment… 
9. Implied Suggestions: here you imply the effect in one of dozens of different ways -  You 
could lift your arm… or experience it lifting all by itself… 
 
The Pendulum Game 
 
Inside your own mind, formulate a couple of ways of phrasing suggestions for each of the 9 
types in order to get someone to move a hypnotic pendulum back and forth. Then find someone 
and test them all out! 
 
Principles In Eliciting Deep Trance Phenomena 
 
Remember that trance and its phenomena are part of a learning process. Some get it quickly, 
some require longer to make the adjustment – just like some people are naturally fit and others 
need more time before they are ready for a full body workout! 
 
The Laws of Successive Approximation & Compounding Effect are very important. Build up to 
experiences gradually and make sure you always move from one success to the next. Never 
move from a point of failure! 
 
Depth is NOT a measure of success. Find a specific experience and deepen that! 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
Responsiveness Training 
 
Before the formal hypnosis begins we want to ensure the best conditions for the work to 
commence in. Part of that is creating the Receptive Mind. There is a simple indirect way of 
testing how receptive the mind is and simultaneously make it more receptive. 
 
To achieve this we will use the Law of Compounding Effect: every time someone carries out a 
suggestion, whether it is voluntary compliance of non-voluntary, they become more responsive. 
This is the secret mechanism behind the Yes Set. 
 
Another layer deals with the way memory works. After an activity has been carried out, there is 
a kind of trace memory left over. That trace will be very useful for getting non-voluntary 
responses. 
 
Exercise – The Ghost Arm Effect: To illustrate this trace memory effect try the following –  
 
1. Stand next to a wall, with your arm leaning against it. 
2. Push against the wall, try an lift your arm and let the wall stop you. 
3. Push for 30-60 seconds with ALL your strength (this sets the trace) 
4. Relax completely and step away from the wall – that arm will want to drift up on its own. 
 
We can take advantage of the Ghost Arm Effect by getting people to rehearse responses that you 
want before formally suggesting them. Of course the rehearsal is another opportunity to activate 
the Law of Compounding Effect! 
 
Example Strategies For Getting Arm Levitation 
 
• Insistence & Repetition – your arm is lifting, lifting, lifting… lifting, lifting, lifting 
• Associational – our bodies know how to move without us thinking about it, you touch a 
hot object and your hand jumps away before you know it… you eat a meal, and the fork 
automatically makes its way up to your mouth and down to your plate… 
• Descriptive (Serial Suggestions) – soon your arm will lift, already it is getting stiff, the 
fingers getting tense, and then first one finger will lift up, and now another and another, 
soon your elbow will be as tense as that hand, and the it will start to contract, allowing 
your forearm to start lifting… 
• Rehearsal – lift your arm, now put it down, lift your arm, now put it down, lift your arm, 
now put it down, lift your arm, now put it down, now rest it there and notice it starting to 
lift all by itself… 
 
The Ghost Arm Induction 
 
1. Get your subject to try and lift their arm as you pin it against their leg (activates the Ghost 
Arm Effect) 
2. Do an instant induction – surprise them with SLEEP! 
3. Release the arm and suggest that it will lift all by itself – it is virtually guaranteed to do so 
now, the Ghost Arm Effect will ensure this! 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
Session 2: The Step By Step Training Programme 
 
Two Methods For Training Highly Responsive Trance Subjects 
 
There are two fundamental approaches to training deep trance responses. They can be 
intermixed to suit the individual subject and hypnotist – The Direct –v– the Indirect Approach. 
As with the 9 Suggestions Styles, the same risks and advantages apply to the training 
approaches.  
 
The Direct Trance Training Approach 
 
1. Pretalk – Set the frames and parameters for the session (can take 10 seconds or 45 mins!) 
2. Test Responsiveness – Check how quickly people comply with simple instructions. The 
quicker they do, and the less thought is evident the more receptive the mind is. 
3. Rapid Graded Suggestions – The purpose is to overload the conscious ability to keep up 
or anticipate what’s going to happen. Apply the Law of Successive Approximations by 
breaking each task down to baby steps and suggest those in rapid progression. Throw in 
the odd curve ball to ensure they are not anticipating the next instruction. 
4. Fractionate – Take them in and out of trance 4-8 times. Avoid “relaxation” suggestions if 
you want them to be active in trance (e.g. for automatic writing) 
5. Stack Suggestions – Move from motor responses to sensory responses – motor (i.e. 
movement based) suggestions tend to promote Non-Voluntary responses, whilst sensory 
changes usually require Involuntary responses. 
Also you may need to reframe beliefs about what they are capable of! 
6. Wash, Rinse, Repeat – Always move on from a point of success. If a suggestion fails, then 
simply move back a step (wash), repeat something they have already succeeded at (rinse) 
and build on from that until your are ready to try the failed suggestion again (repeat.) 
7. Warm Ups – Prime the mental pump by using associational suggestions to set the scene 
before asking for action. Also remember the Law of Successive Approximations: succeed 
at a small thing first to warm them up for the same kind of thing on a bigger scale. 
8. Suggest – You want to actually ask for what you want, and do it reasonably early on. 
Don’t spend too long beating about the bush – that’s for the Indirect Approach! 
 
You can use this to go after a specific effect (like a regression) or to train someone in the full set 
of responses. 
 
The Indirect Approach 
 
This is my preferred way of working. It is a matter of personal style rather than efficacy. Both 
approaches can be made to work really well. 
 
The key to the indirect approach is to allow time for the unconscious mind to activate the 
suggestions. That means pausing to allow integration to occur. It is also my preference to split 
the induction sequence into 3 phases that achieve separate aims: 
 
1. Session 1: A quick show that trance is a safe place. Set the scene for later trances. 
2. Session 2: Plants the seeds for all the trance phenomena to be activated in phase 3. 
3. Session 3: start calling on each of the phenomena in turn, and build on them. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
Notes On Trance Training Session 1 
 
When you listen to the demonstration recording of this session, listen out for the following 
structure/manoeuvres: 
 
1. Trance – fixate attention, quiet the mind, induce mild trance 
2. Conscious/Unconscious Dissociation – give the conscious mind some task to get busy 
with so that it does not interfere with the unconscious 
3. Boiler Plates – these are the standard things every induction needs to handle the 3 most 
common problems: distractions, losing touch with the hypnotist and safety 
4. Trance Themes – we seed 3 trance themes to assist the training process: 
a. You can have new insights and understandings 
b. You can experience anything you want 
c. There are many benefits to being in trance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Session 3: Further Trance Training 
 
Notes On Trance Training Session 2 
 
When you listen to the demonstration recording of this session, listen out for the following 
structure/manoeuvres: 
 
• Continuity – The induction revivifies Session 1 so we can pick up where we left off. 
• General Priming – We want them to realise that in trance they can have access to 
abilities that would be unusual for the conscious mind. I include many Power Loops 
dotted throughout the induction to make this point in different ways. These include: 
! You Have Hidden Potential 
! You Can Have Any Experience – Like In A Dream 
! Your Unconscious Knows So Much More, Trust It 
• Boiler Plates – As in Session 1 
• Main Trance Theme Seeds 
! Automatic Movement 
! Hallucination 101 
! Dissociation 
! Negative Hallucination 101 
! Amnesia 
! Contextual Hypermnesia 
! Hypnotic Dreaming 
! Regression 
! Hypermnesia 
! Negative Hallucinations 102 
• Convincer – prove to the conscious mind that something hypnotic is going on, usually 
through something like catalepsy, automatic movement etc. 
 
Notes On Trance Training Session 3 
 
When you listen to the demonstration recording of this session, listen out for the following 
structure/manoeuvres: 
 
• Parameters – Ask the conscious if it wants to have or avoid a given trance phenomenon 
• Boiler Plates – Receptive Mind, Distractions, Safety, Connection With Hypnotist 
• Hypnotic Phenomena – In the demonstration recording you will hear the following being 
elicited and experienced: 
! Mental Imagery (turns into full open eyed hallucination) 
! Negative Hallucination 
! Some Time Distortion 
! Regression (not induced by an Affect Bridge) 
! Hypermnesia 
! Memory Training (this is the payoff for the volunteer) 
! Catalepsy 
! Automatic Motion 
! Hypnotic Dreaming (used to reward second volunteer) 

