 
 
 
 
 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
 
SHM Discover How To 
Really Use NLP In 
Hypnosis For 
Amazing Results 
 
 
Street Hypnosis(TM) 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
2 
Table Of Contents 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2 
FOREWORD BY STEPHEN BROOKS 
9 
INTRODUCTION 
10 
YOUR GUIDE, CURIOUS? 
11 
NLP AND THE MIND 
12 
THE UNCONSCIOUS MIND 
12 
COMMUNICATION – BIRDWHISTELL STUDY 
13 
THE UNIVERSAL MODELLING PROCESS 
14 
PREMATURE COGNITIVE COMMITMENT 
16 
WHAT IS NLP? 
17 
PROCESSES –V- CONTENT 
18 
LEARNING STRATEGIES 
19 
NLP MODELLING 
21 
MECHANICS, ENGINEERS AND MAGICIANS 
23 
RAPPORT 
27 
TRUST & COMFORT 
27 
MATCHING & MIRRORING 
28 
UNCONSCIOUS RAPPORT 
30 
MATCHING EXPERIENCES 
32 
MATCHING LANGUAGE 
33 
VOCABULARY 
33 
SLANG 
33 
REPRESENTATIONAL SYSTEMS – PREDICATES 
34 
BIG PICTURE –V– DETAILS (CHUNK SIZE) 
35 
EMOTIONAL –V– FACTUAL 
35 
BACKTRACK FRAME (THE ECHO EFFECT) 
35 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
3 
BREAKING RAPPORT 
35 
CALIBRATION 
36 
PRIMARY EXPERIENCE 
36 
BMIRS 
38 
CALIBRATION EXERCISES 
39 
CALIBRATION EXERCISE 1: LIKE/DISLIKE VISUAL 
39 
CALIBRATION EXERCISE 2: LIKE/DISLIKE AUDITORY 
40 
CALIBRATION EXERCISE 3: LIKE/DISLIKE KINAESTHETIC 
41 
CALIBRATION EXERCISE VARIATION 1: TRUTH/LIE 
42 
CALIBRATION EXERCISE VARIATION 2: YES/NO 
43 
CALIBRATION EXERCISE 4: MIND READING –V– SENSORY BASED 
DESCRIPTIONS 
44 
MINIMAL CUES 
45 
IMPROVING VISUAL ACUITY 
45 
IMPROVING AUDITORY ACUITY 
45 
IMPROVING KINAESTHETIC ACUITY 
45 
EYE ACCESSING CUES 
46 
EYE ACCESSING ELICITATION QUESTIONS 
47 
PRIMARY SYSTEMS, LEAD SYSTEMS AND SYNAESTHESIAS 
48 
PRIMARY SYSTEM 
48 
LEAD SYSTEM 
48 
SYNAESTHESIA 
48 
HAKALAO 
49 
OUTCOMES 
50 
GOAL SETTING 
50 
SMART GOALS 
52 
SPECIFIC 
52 
MEASURABLE 
52 
AFFECT 
52 
REALISTIC 
53 
TIMED 
53 
WELL FORMED OUTCOMES – CONDITIONS 
54 
STATED IN THE POSITIVE 
54 
SENSORY BASED 
54 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
4 
INITIATED AND MAINTAINED BY INDIVIDUAL 
55 
ECOLOGICAL 
55 
PRESERVES THE POSITIVE BY-PRODUCT OF THE PRESENT STATE 
56 
SPECIFIC AND CONTEXTUALISED 
56 
INCLUDES: INTERNAL PROCESS, INTERNAL STATE AND EXTERNAL 
BEHAVIOUR 
56 
WELL FORMED OUTCOMES – ELICITATION QUESTIONS 
57 
TRADITIONAL GOAL GETTING STRATEGIES 
59 
AFFIRMATIONS 
59 
VISUALISATIONS 
60 
LANGUAGE PATTERNS 
61 
PRESUPPOSITIONS 
62 
LINGUISTIC PRESUPPOSITIONS 
63 
PRESUPPOSITIONS EXERCISES 
67 
PRESUPPOSITIONS EXERCISE 1: IMPLICATION 
67 
PRESUPPOSITIONS EXERCISE 2: PRESUPPOSITIONS –V– MIND READING 
68 
THE META MODEL HISTORY 
69 
THE META MODEL – SHORT FORM 
70 
THE META MODEL TABLE 
73 
RE-CHUNKING QUESTIONS 
74 
INTENTION 
75 
CLASS 
75 
THE MILTON MODEL HISTORY 
76 
THE MILTON MODEL – SHORT FORM 
77 
ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE PATTERNS 
79 
CONGRUENCE 
81 
LANGUAGE FLOW CARDS (4 WORDS OF POWER) 
83 
EXERCISES: CONSTRUCTING LANGUAGE PATTERNS 
84 
EXERCISE 1: CREATING PRESUPPOSITIONS 
84 
EXERCISE 2: STACKING PRESUPPOSITIONS 
84 
EXERCISE 3: PREDICATES AND LINGUISTIC BRIDGING 
84 
EXERCISE 4: META MODEL 
85 
EXERCISE 5: MILTON MODEL 
85 
EXERCISE 6: META MODEL CHALLENGE 
86 
EXERCISE 7: DECONSTRUCTING AND INDUCTION 
86 
EXERCISE 8: POLISHING PRESUPPOSITIONS 
87 
EXERCISE 9: META MODEL CHALLENGE OF A LIMITING BELIEF 
88 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
5 
EXERCISE 10: TRANSFORMATIONAL LANGUAGE 
88 
EXERCISE 12: TRANCE FORMING ABILITIES 
88 
FRAMES 
89 
SETTING THE CONTEXT FOR MEANING 
89 
REFRAMING 
90 
USEFUL FRAMES 
91 
THE NLP PRESUPPOSITIONS 
91 
CAUSE – V – EFFECT 
92 
BLAME – V – OUTCOME 
93 
FEEDBACK FRAME 
93 
ASSOCIATION – V – DISSOCIATION 
94 
PERCEPTUAL POSITIONS 
95 
NEGOTIATION FRAME 
96 
TROUBLESHOOTING 
97 
ANCHORING 
98 
STATE DEPENDANT LEARNING 
99 
NATURAL STATE GENERATORS 
100 
ELICITING STATES 
101 
REVIVIFICATION 
101 
PROCESS LANGUAGE 
102 
GO FIRST! 
102 
USEFUL STATES TO ELICIT 
103 
CONDITIONS FOR ELEGANT ANCHORING 
104 
BASIC ANCHORING TECHNIQUES 
105 
BASIC ANCHORING 
105 
STACKING ANCHORS 
106 
SLIDING ANCHORS 
107 
SUBMODALITIES 
108 
STRUCTURING INTERNAL MAPS 
108 
MODALITIES, SUBMODALITIES AND NEURO-DRIVERS 
109 
SUBMODALITIES CHECKLIST 
110 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
6 
CONTRASTIVE ANALYSIS 
111 
SUBMODALITIES ELICITATION HINTS 
112 
SUBMODALITIES EXERCISES 
113 
EXERCISE 1: FEEL GOOD 
113 
EXERCISE 2: FEEL BAD 
113 
EXERCISE 3: KINAESTHETIC EXPLORATION 
114 
EXERCISE 4: SYNAESTHESIAS 
115 
TIMELINES 
116 
SUBMODALITIES EXPRESSED IN LANGUAGE 
117 
CHANGING SUBMODALITIES 
118 
MAP ACROSS 
118 
DIRECT SUGGESTION 
119 
PRESUPPOSITIONS & HYPNOTIC LANGUAGE 
119 
BUILDING POWERFUL INTERNAL REPRESENTATIONS 
120 
CONFUSION TO UNDERSTANDING MAP ACROSS 
120 
ENHANCING EXPERIENCES 
120 
HAVE A GREAT TIME… NOW! 
121 
NLP PRACTITIONER TECHNIQUES 
122 
GUIDELINES FOR CHANGEWORK 
122 
ANCHORING 
124 
COLLAPSE ANCHORS 
124 
CHAINING ANCHORS 
125 
CHANGE PERSONAL HISTORY 
127 
RE-IMPRINT METHOD 
128 
THE CIRCLE OF EXCELLENCE 
129 
SUBMODALITIES 
130 
SWISH TECHNIQUE 
130 
THE FAST PHOBIA CURE 
131 
VISUAL–KINAESTHETIC DISSOCIATION 
132 
VISUAL SQUASH 
133 
HYPNOSIS 
134 
SIX STEP REFRAME 
134 
THE NEW BEHAVIOUR GENERATOR 
135 
TIMELINES – CHANGE PERSONAL HISTORY 
136 
TIMELINES – CHANGE LIMITING DECISION 
137 
TIMELINES – CREATING A FUTURE GOAL 
138 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
7 
STRATEGIES 
139 
STRATEGIES DEFINED 
139 
THE TOTE MODEL 
140 
UTILISING STRATEGIES 
142 
WELL FORMED STRATEGIES 
143 
STRATEGY ELICITATION 
144 
ORIENTING QUESTIONS 
144 
ELICITATION OF THE TRIGGER (ALSO THE FIRST TEST IN THE CYCLE) 
144 
ELICITING THE OPERATION 
145 
ELICITING THE TEST 
145 
ELICITING THE EXIT 
145 
GUIDELINES FOR STRATEGY ELICITATIONS 
146 
STRATEGY INSTALLATION 
147 
REHEARSAL 
147 
CHAINING ANCHORS 
147 
SUBMODALITY SHIFTS 
148 
METAPHORS 
148 
HYPNOSIS & TRANCE 
149 
WHAT IS HYPNOSIS? 
149 
THE PURPOSE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS 
150 
TRANCE INDUCTIONS 
151 
GO FIRST! 
151 
10 SECOND HYPNOTIST 
151 
LINGUISTIC BRIDGES (4 WORDS OF POWER) 
152 
PACING & LEADING 
152 
SENSORY RICH DESCRIPTIONS 
153 
METAPHORS AND NESTED LOOPS 
154 
THE STORYTELLING TRADITION 
154 
NESTED LOOPING – THE BASIC STRUCTURE OF STORYTELLING 
155 
HYPNOTIC METAPHORS 
157 
TRANCE TONALITIES 
158 
EMBEDDED COMMANDS 
159 
IDEOMOTOR SIGNALLING 
160 
UNCONSCIOUS FINGER SIGNALS 
161 
ENDING TRANCE 
162 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
8 
CLOSE LOOPS 
162 
CANCEL SUGGESTIONS 
162 
SELF-ESTEEM BOOSTING SUGGESTIONS 
163 
FUTURE PACE RESULTS 
163 
THE META-PATTERN OF ALL CHANGE 
164 
A BASIC STRUCTURE FOR HYPNOTHERAPY 
165 
THERAPEUTIC PREPARATION 
166 
MEET AND GREET 
166 
INTERVIEW CLIENT 
167 
IDENTIFY WHAT CHUNK TO WORK ON 
167 
INDUCE TRANCE 
168 
CHANGEWORK PATTERNS 
168 
TEST & FUTURE PACE 
168 
END TRANCE 
169 
TASK & DISMISS 
169 
NLP COACHING 
170 
COACHING – V – THERAPY 
170 
THE ROLE OF THE COACH 
171 
A BASIC STRUCTURE FOR COACHING 
172 
PREPARE 
173 
MEET, GREET AND REVIEW 
173 
THE COACHING QUESTIONS 
174 
GENERAL INFORMATION GATHERING 
174 
SMART GOALS 
175 
HONING THE CLIENT’S THINKING 
175 
TASKING 
176 
GETTING COMMITMENT FROM THE CLIENT 
178 
END SESSION 
178 
ADDITIONAL SUBMODALITIES CHECKLISTS 
179 
CONVERSATIONAL HYPNOSIS 
183 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
9 
 
 
Foreword by Stephen Brooks 
 
When I discovered that Igor Ledochowski had managed to track me down to my 
home in the jungles of Northern Thailand I felt instant panic. Why would this 
somewhat over enthusiastic man, trek through remote tropical jungle, with his 
backpack, cassette recorder and no financial incentive, to try and persuade me to write 
a foreword to his book? 
 
After he had finally coaxed the village Shaman to point the way to my home (turn 
left at the waterfall – second cave on the right), I realized that this remarkable young 
man had a manner that was highly infectious, somewhat similar to my own, and that 
he was a man of commitment to his purpose.  
 
He claimed to practice something called NLP, it sounded a bit weird to me but I 
accepted his grubby manuscript never the less and then sent him packing.  
 
Well it’s not a bad read, in fact it’s quite good, possibly the work of genius. So this 
is my foreword to his remarkable book.  
 
Igor modestly made me swear that I would not praise him too highly, so I am not 
going to. But I will say this - if you want a book that is written by someone with 
total dedication to helping people achieve what is best, that is concise and precise, 
and that teaches you how to put into practice the core skills of what NLP is about 
right now, then this book is it. There is no better book available, apart from any that 
I might subsequently write myself. 
 
Stephen Brooks – Thailand.  
www.waterheart-foundation.com 
 
 
Stephen Brooks was a pioneer in the field of indirect hypnosis and personal 
development in Europe in the 1980’s and 90’s. His work had a major influence 
on the way that hypnosis was used in the caring professions. At the height of his 
career he quit his western lifestyle and retired to the jungles of Northern 
Thailand to lead a reclusive life studying Theravada Buddhism and Shamanism. 
He is a folk hero to many young therapists now practicing NLP and Ericksonian 
hypnosis. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
10 
Introduction 
 
Welcome to the companion manual for the “How To Really Use NLP For Amazing 
Results” course.  This guide is not meant to be yet another definitive textbook on 
NLP and its applications. There are all too many books like that in existence 
already. Rather its purpose is to serve you in your exploration of NLP and to act as a 
reference guide for you to dip into time and again after your initial steps down a 
very interesting path. 
 
Now, allow me to congratulate you for taking your first steps down that path at this 
time. As you learn, you can expect to take change of the way you think, feel and 
behave. This will give you more freedom and success in the way you communicate 
and move through life. In the modern world there are countless opportunities for 
people to live their dreams. NLP is a discipline whose specific purpose is to enable 
people to acquire the skills and access the resources you will need to achieve the 
things that you want. 
 
Whilst this manual does cover all the elements a NLP practitioner should know (and 
a few more things), it is not meant as a substitute for a live training programme. 
NLP is not an academic discipline. NLP is a practical set of attitudes, understanding 
and skills. Like any skill, much insight can be gleaned from a book, but to truly 
learn it you need experience. The hard way to get experience is to use trial and error 
over extended periods of time to work out what works and what does not. The easy 
way to do it is to go to a skilled guide. Such a guide will help you to condense 
many years of experience into a short time frame. He can help you to avoid the blind 
alleys so you can concentrate on the experiences that create true insight. On the spot 
feedback and elegant demonstrations are things that you can only get from a live, 
interactive environment! 
 
Having said that, there are still many useful things that you can glean from this 
manual. You are about to embark on a fascinating adventure. This companion guide 
will reveal to you some of the vast treasures that NLP has to offer. Beyond that, the 
audio seminar that comes with this manual is specifically designed to bring the heart 
of NLP to life for you: the attitudes and understandings that will allow you to weave 
your own magic in the world. 
 
I wish you much pleasure and amusement on your own journey of discovery. Feel 
free to begin in the middle or anywhere else that you wish to. It will all come 
together in time anyway. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
11 
Your Guide, Curious?  
 
Igor Ledochowski is a certified Trainer of NLP, HNLP and Hypnosis. He has helped 
countless people to release remarkable abilities. As an Executive Coach, his main 
focus was on working with senior executives at some of the world’s leading blue 
chip corporations to help them realise not just their own potential but to show them 
how to harness and grow the dynamic abilities of the people that they lead. 
 
Igor began his career as a lawyer with the international law firm Linklaters. After 
several years with them, and following extensive retraining, he decided to launch his 
own training and executive coaching organisation, iledo. iledo soon became very 
successful and he started to collaborate with a diverse group of interesting and 
dynamic people to offer organisations wildly different solutions that no one else 
could offer. In late 2003 that group of people decided to come together officially, and 
they created the Curious Company. 
 
Since then he has taught at many hypnosis conventions and AGMs in the UK, he 
has presented special seminars for his Fortune 500 clients and been a guest lecturer at 
a business school in Chicago. 
 
Igor also runs the unique Private Hypnosis Club (www.PrivateHypnosisClub.com) 
where novice and experienced hypnotists get to participate in unique hypnosis 
masterclasses. He created the concept of Street Hypnosis, a unique concept akin to 
Guerrilla Kindness (random acts of kindness deliberately calculated to spread 
pronoia
1 through the population.) Street Hypnosis (www.StreetHypnosis.com) is 
about using skills such as NLP and Hypnosis in ordinary everyday relationships in 
such a way as to positively affect the realities of all the people around you. This is 
also where people who wish to deepen their learning will find most of Igor’s books 
and other products online. 
 
“Igor is the definitive expert on the mind, on fast results, and a genius in the field 
of subconscious influence and change. He influences you consciously and 
subconsciously to release an impressive potential in people. Its like magic: he gets 
absolutely amazing results! If you want to work with the best work with him!! But 
be warned: he gets exceptional results by doing exceptional things... sometimes 
unusual things happen when you are around him.” 
 
David Taylor, author of “The Naked Leader” 
                                                
1 Pronoia is the unshakable and irrational suspicion that everyone is out to help you! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
12 
NLP and the Mind 
The Unconscious Mind 
Human consciousness is a strange thing indeed. We like to think of ourselves and 
our intellect as being at the top of the food chain – after all look at all the things we 
have accomplished. To a certain extend we might even be correct. But there is an 
error that most people (understandably) make: they confuse what they are aware of 
with who they are/what they are capable of.  
 
Allow me to explain: the mind functions in different, simultaneously processed 
streams. On the one side (to use a basic model) is the conscious mind, which is that 
part of your thinking that you are aware of right NOW! On the other side is a whole 
collection of processes that happen outside of your ordinary awareness. So when you 
heart keeps beating, or your breathing continues at night, or you go to sleep with a 
problem on your mind and you wake up with a solution – at these times something 
clearly happens outside of your ordinary conscious awareness. That something is 
incredibly powerful, and we will call this set of processes the “unconscious” because 
you are, not conscious of it. 
 
Studies on preconscious learning have suggested that ALL learning, behaviour and 
change occur unconsciously first
2! In fact there is a noticeable time lag between 
being unconscious in your learnings and realising you know it. Often you will have 
learned something and you might never actually realise that you have done so
3. This 
is important, because it shows you that it is natural to learn with your unconscious. 
In fact, your unconscious mind has been estimated to be processing somewhere in 
the region of 2.3 million – 2.3 billion pieces of information at any given moment. 
By way of contrast, your consciousness has the ability to process only 5–9 pieces of 
information
4 at a time.  
 
Trying to learn things one little piece at a time is not only boring, it actually 
inhibits the brain’s natural way of learning (unconsciously) – the mind needs 
multiple inputs
5. That is why NLP is something that cannot be acquired from dusty 
old books. It only comes to life when you use it in the real world. NLP needs to be 
learned initially in a live class where you can see it, hear it, experience it and do it – 
maybe even all at the same time! 
                                                
2 E.g. Pfurtscheller G. & Berghold A. in “Patterns of Cortical Activation During Planning of Voluntary 
Movement”, Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 72, (1989): 250-258. 
3 E.g. Berry D. and Broadbent D “On the relationship between task performance and associated 
verbalizable knowledge”, Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, Vol. 36A (1984):209-231. 
4 Goerge Miller's 1956 Essay, “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our 
Capacity for Processing Information.” 
5 Caine R. and Caine G. “Making Connections: Teaching and the Human Brain.” Addison-Wesley. 
Boston, MA, 1994. Botella J. and Eriksen C. "Filtering Versus Parallel Processing in RSVP Tasks." 
Perception and Psychophysics 51.4 (1992): 334-343 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
13 
Communication – Birdwhistell Study 
 
Dr Ray L. Birdwhistell was an anthropologist who specialised in studying non-
verbal communication. He spent his lifetime studying the way that people 
communicate using all channels. He is famous for suggesting
6 that in a general 
context, the meaning of a communication is transmitted by: 
 
 
 
7 %  
Words 
 
 
 
38 %  
Tonality 
 
 
 
55 %  
Non-verbal cues 
By non-verbal cues we mean signals such as facial expression, eye blinks, breathing 
rate, skin colour, and posture. Tonality refers to the pitch, rhythm, voice tone, 
timbre, tempo and the like.  
 
This concept is incredibly important when you communicate with others. When 
people send mixed signals – known as incongruent communication i.e. when their 
non-verbal cues or tonality do not match the actual words they are using – then they 
significantly impact how that message is received. Humour, sarcasm, lies, 
dishonesty, ironies, disdain, scorn, approval, admiration or agreement are all 
perceptions suggested more by how you say something than by what you actually 
say! This is not too surprising when you remember how the unconscious mind 
prefers to process many things at the same time.  
 
The really interesting thing is how we all naturally convey messages within 
messages within messages every time we communicate. Most of us are not aware of 
the subtexts that we are signalling to others, or indeed how we unconsciously 
respond to the sub-communications that others are sending our way. These sub-
communications profoundly influence the way we think, feel and behave and 
ordinarily lie outside of our conscious perception. 
 
Part of your NLP training will focus on sensitising you to the sub-communications 
so that you can begin to communicate with people on multiple levels in a congruent 
way. An expert communicator can offer several parallel layers of meaning to her 
audience. The renowned (and deeply respected) psychiatrist Dr. Milton H Erickson 
developed a whole new paradigm in the fields of hypnosis and therapy by doing 
exactly this. Near the end of his life, Dr. Erickson would conduct workshops for 
small groups (15-20 people) in which he would tell many seemingly unconnected 
stories. Yet he would tell these stories in such a way that everyone would think 
“he’s talking to me!” and would derive some secret therapeutic benefit from it. 
Uncannily, Dr Erickson later admitted that he was offering sub-communications 
tailored to each unique individual! 
                                                
6 In his book “Kinesics and Context: Essays on Body-motion Communication”, University of 
Pennsylvania Press (1970). The original study was in Mehrabian, A., and S. Ferris. 1967, “Inference of 
attitudes from nonverbal communication in two channels”, Journal of Consulting Psychology, 3: 248–252.  

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
14 
The Universal Modelling Process 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are many philosophical schools debating what is True, Good or Real. I don’t 
want to open that intellectual debate. What I will assume however (and it is only a 
small assumption), is that we have no way of knowing what is in the world “out 
there” apart from through our 5 senses. When a stimulus activates one of our senses a 
process is kick started that ultimately ends up in some kind of sense being made of 
things.  
 
For example: when a photon (light) strikes the retina, a chemical reaction starts a 
chain of electro-chemical signals that pass along special nerve cells to the brain 
(primarily the visual cortex). It is only in the brain that these signals are translated 
into something meaningful that we can understand as a picture. That picture is in 
turn processed again so we can attach some kind of meaning to it: mother, danger, 
food, sex etc. 
 
The pure, unprocessed “picture” is known as Primary Experience (or First Access) 
because we have not “coloured” its meaning with our own personal history. 
Secondary Experiences result when we make some form of judgement about that 
picture. This is how we know what that picture means to us.  
 
Now there is too much information in the world out there for our minds to take in 
and remain sane. So our brains filter out bits of information considered irrelevant or 
not useful to lighten the load. During this filtering process we will delete 
information, distort it or generalise from it. 
 
A deletion occurs when you take something away. So right now there are parts of the 
experience of the environment you are in that you have deleted out of awareness: 
maybe you “forgot” about the ceiling or the floor, perhaps you “ignored” the view of 
the sky outside, or the background noises in your building. Until I drew attention to 
them, these were all deletions from your present experience. Deletions keep us sane! 
State 
Physiology 
Behaviour 
Sensory Input 
(VAKO/G) 
 
Internal 
Representation 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
15 
A distortion occurs when we change our basic perception of something. If you have 
ever seen faces or shapes in cloud structures, then you have distorted information. 
Likewise you can pick out your name spoken softly in the middle of a gathering 
because it “seems louder”. Distortions underpin our creativity – our ability to take 
one thing and create something “new” out of it. 
 
A generalisation is the ability to take one experience and apply it to similar 
experiences in the future – as a general rule. You know how to open doors because 
you have opened them in the past and have “generalised” that knowledge to 
anything that exhibits door-like qualities. Putting the door handles on the wrong 
part of the door (i.e. on the inside, next to the hinges) will throw most adults who 
expect the door to work differently and so get stuck pushing or pulling the wrong 
part of the door. Generalisations are the basis for our ability to learn. 
 
Now, over the years our minds develop a series of filters that make it automatic for 
us to know what information to delete, what to distort and what to generalise. These 
filters are made up of our beliefs, the things we value in life, previous experiences and 
conclusions etc. As an event in the world stimulates our senses, the Primary 
Experience of it gets filtered and leaves inside our minds a representation of what is 
happening “out there”. Much like Plato’s cave analogy, we have a kind of map 
inside us of what we think is going on. This map is made up of pictures, sounds, 
feelings, tastes and smells that are meant to represent what is happening “out there”. 
This is called an “Internal Representation” or IR. 
 
Our IRs are what tell us how to feel about something and how to behave towards it. 
So our IRs (or internal maps or our model of the world) tell us how we should feel at 
any point in time. Our feelings (our psycho-physiological state – i.e. how we feel in 
mind and body) in turn affect our physiology (how we stand, move, breathe etc) and 
both in turn influence our external behaviour. 
 
So if we want to change the way we feel or behave in a given situation, we need to 
change our internal maps, the IRs we carry, and the rest will flow from that. 
 
Likewise, if we change our behaviour or posture, we will in turn affect our state, 
which can in turn influence our internal maps that make sense of the world for us. It 
is a two way street.  
 
NLP communication is all about how we influence those IRs inside ourselves and in 
other people! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
16 
Premature Cognitive Commitment 
 
As you know, the information our senses draw in as Primary Experience get filtered 
down to something manageable and meaningful (our Secondary Experience – our 
IRs). The filters that do this are incredibly useful – when they work properly. The 
trouble is sometimes we outgrow these filters or adopt unhelpful filters from our 
environment as we grow up (from parents, friends, school society in general etc). If 
we get stuck with an old, unhelpful, filter it can severely restrict how we lead our 
lives. In mainstream psychology this is called Premature Cognitive Commitment. 
 
As an example you might try the following experiment: get a large jar and fill it with 
flies. Cover the top with a plastic lid or cling film, leaving enough air a food in the 
jar for several days. Typically the flies will buzz around bouncing into the “invisible 
ceiling” for some time. After a few days you can remove the cover. Very few flies will 
escape. They have created a limiting belief – a cognitive commitment – about what 
is possible in their little world and so they stop trying to get out. 
 
Human beings do exactly the same thing. Often we continue to engage in limiting 
patterns long after the conditions that gave rise to them disappeared. Take a phobia 
for example. As a child, Bobby was bitten by a dog. He was frightened and hurt. 
This experience generalised over time (maybe even outside of conscious awareness) 
to a general fear of dogs. All dogs. Bobby may be six foot four and built like a tank, 
but he still goes to pieces when he is near dogs. Even Chihuahuas. He has no 
“choice” in the matter because the filters in his mind turn any encounter with a 
Chihuahua into something of life-threatening proportions.  
 
Bobby’s phobia is not a bad thing per se. It served a useful purpose when he was 
young, allowing him to remain safe from a specific hazard. However as conditions 
changed – Bobby becoming larger, tougher and he met other, friendlier dogs – this 
filter became outdated software. And like regular software, unless it is deleted or 
upgraded it continues to run, even if it messes up the rest of the system. 
 
The good news is that these filters can be changed. The software can be upgraded. In 
changing the filters (the software), the meaning of an encounter (with Chihuahuas in 
the above example) can be changed. So you will naturally feel and respond 
differently.  
 
Creating elegant change will make feeling good as automatic as feeling bad used to 
be! 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
17 
What is NLP? 
 
This is truly the million dollar question. There can be as many definitions of it as 
there are people in this world. The quick answer would be to look at the words that 
describe this discipline: 
 
Neuro: from the Greek neuron, referring to your neurology. 
Linguistic: from the Latin lingua, referring to language. 
Programming: how components of a system are organised to create a predictable 
pattern of behaviour. 
 
So Neuro-Linguistic Programming is the study of how language affects your 
neurology and your behaviour. Many people have defined NLP as the “Psychology 
of Achievement” or “Software for the Brain” – as it allows you to run your own 
mental processes more effectively so you can consistently get the kind of results in 
the world that you want. In fact John Grinder, one of the two Co-developers of NLP, 
defined NLP as: 
 
“NLP is the study of excellence, specifically the difference that makes the difference 
between the excellent and the average performer in any field” 
 
Many people, however, mistake NLP with the information that NLP has generated 
about people. There are many techniques that have been developed to allow you to 
run your own brain or do therapy with clients. But these are not NLP per se. They 
are applications of NLP in a specific field. NLP itself is more a state of mind and an 
approach to learning. Richard Bandler, the other Co-developer of NLP, puts it like 
this: 
 
“NLP is an attitude and a methodology that leaves behind a trail of techniques” 
 
The attitude is one of curiosity and wanton experimentation.  
 
The methodology is the art of modelling, the process of extracting and replicating 
excellence/elegance in any given field. 
 
The techniques of NLP number in the hundreds and are specific applications for the 
fields of therapy, sales, coaching, teaching etc. Such NLP applications focus on 
communicating influentially and on creating behavioural change within the context of 
their field. We will be covering all of the practitioner level patterns as well as 
additional materials in this Companion guide. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
18 
Processes –v- Content 
 
There is a psychological game we engage in that is called Backwards 
Rationalisation. In essence you make your mind up about something or do 
something for non-logical reasons, and you later rationalise the decisions as being 
logical. One neurologist at the University of Iowa claims that every decision we 
make is an emotional one; one which we later rationalise
7. In fact, in some cases 
trying to exclude emotions from a decision can actually lead to irrational behaviour
8! 
 
This means that people rarely appreciate consciously why they do something – like 
have a problem with something, or make a given choice (even a really good 
decision). In fact there is other evidence to suggest that all our decisions are made 
unconsciously a fraction of a second before we think we have made a conscious 
(rational) decision
9. 
 
People’s descriptions about their own behaviour can therefore often be misleading. 
Such descriptions are meant to create the kind of reality in which the problems they 
have are totally “logical”. But that is precisely why they are stuck with them. 
 
One of the unique things about NLP is that we do not concern ourselves too much 
with what appears to be true for someone. These justifications, pseudo-reasons and 
rationalisations are the content of a given discussion. However, the way they talk 
about something, their tonalities, non-verbal cues, the patterns and repetitions often 
provide a separate unconscious message that tells us far more about what is really 
happening. So in NLP we will look at patterns of behaviour, the processes people 
run. Paying too much attention to content can lead you to become locked into (at 
times fascinating) wild goose chases! 
 
This preference for processes over content has led to a unique creation in NLP: 
content free therapy (CFT). In CFT you help someone make therapeutic changes 
without ever knowing what the problem was! 
 
Just remember John Grinder’s words on this: “There’s no content in content worth 
knowing!” 
                                                
7 Antonio Damasio, “Descartes’ Error”, G.P. Putnam's Sons, (1995). 
8 Ibid. 
9 Benjamin Libet actually recorded the time differential between the desire to make a spontaneous (i.e. 
unplanned) movement and this preconscious readiness potential. On average the nervous system was 
ready for the activity 550msec. before the subjects experienced even the wish to move! See “The 
Volitional Brain - Towards a Neuroscience of Free Will” Edited by Benjamin Libet, Anthony Freeman 
and Keith Sutherland for more. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
19 
Learning Strategies 
 
Whilst many of the materials in this manual are set down in an orderly, seemingly 
linear fashion, NLP is not a linear discipline. By that I mean that NLP is not like a 
story that has a definitive beginning, middle and end. Consider NLP to be more like 
a picaresque adventure: though there are guiding themes, it is the detours when the 
story branches off to the left or take the right path time and again – then you notice 
the really interesting things happening. You see the mind prefers to learn quickly and 
all at once. Classical education tries to chunk things down into small, dull pieces 
that can be understood thoroughly before they are digested. This is like eating a meal 
one pea or grain of rice at a time and never mixing things up. Or like reading a book 
and restricting yourself to reading only one word per week. 
 
That is dull and boring. As Mark Twain put it “I never let my schooling interfere 
with my education” and neither should you! Learning is a fun activity. If it is not 
you are not doing it right! Learning should also happen in complex layers. The fact 
is all learning (and behaviour and change) occurs unconsciously first. This is a 
tremendous thing because it means you can let go of making any real effort and let 
things just happen at their natural pace. It is just like watching a great cartoonist 
such as Rolf Harris at work: you see the lines going on the page and try to guess 
what he is drawing. You fail time and again to see what is drawn until finally with 
the addition of a small dot here or a tiny line there the cartoon figure is revealed. It 
jumps out at you so obviously that you wonder how you might have failed to see it 
before. That is the true process of discovery – to enjoy sitting in the dark, engrossed 
in the experience of something, knowing that any moment now illumination will 
strike you with the twin thunderbolt of clarity and understanding! 
 
For some of you, perhaps, I am advocating something a little radical here. In the 
western world we fear confusion and uncertainty. In school confusion was equated 
with being slow or stupid. It was punished either directly or indirectly. These 
“Punishments” inevitably had their impact on our self esteem. The spark of 
creativity, the willingness to embrace the unknown, slowly dies. It is ironic to see 
the ingenuity that people demonstrate in order to avoid situations that will put them 
on the spot, where there is a risk they might not know “the answer”. It is so sad to 
see so much potential routinely blocked by senseless fear. 
 
By contrast, look at almost any ordinary preschool child and you will see them take 
great delight in failing time and again. Children question everything. They do not 
realise that they are meant to feel bad about the fact they don’t know something 
before they experienced it. They live in a world they do not understand. They know 
they are ignorant and they have the affront not to care. Until they are taught to feel 
bad about not “getting it right”. Then they learn to be afraid. Then they take that 
fear and grow up with it, thinking it is normal to be uncomfortable (read “fear”) with 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
20 
the unknown. That is when people start to crave rules, order, predictability. Small 
chunks they can digest slowly before they are willing to do anything with them.  
 
I would like to invite you to revisit that kind of childhood only long enough to 
realise that your mind has continued to learn countless things, most of which 
happened when you were not paying attention. It is a fact. Everyone has had an 
experience of surprising themselves at one time or another, when you forgot to 
inhibit yourself! The ability is still there. Just as the childhood rebel is who likes to 
break all the rules, on purpose, just to find things out for yourself! Imagine that, 
breaking the rules just because you were curious. Wantonly Curious?! 
 
Watch children at play and you can only marvel at how adaptive they are. Most of 
the most fantastic discoveries made by man happened as a result of an accident – an 
event most adults would be embarrassed about.  
 
NLP is not a traditional discipline, and I would encourage you to not-learn it in the 
traditional way. That leaves you free to discover other ways. Take everything and 
test it. By all means learn the individual pieces thoroughly, but enjoy the process. 
You cannot fail, you are gathering experience – more information, more feedback! In 
fact you will get more out of traditional failures than success. So remember to fail for 
success. There is even a formula for success: 
 
1. Know your outcome (Purpose) 
2. Be flexible (Adapt) 
3. Use your senses to gather feedback (Calibrate) 
4. TAKE ACTION NOW!!! (Engage!!)  
 
Remember to PACE yourself. PACE your learning and learn to trust that your 
unconscious, those 2.3 billion bits of processing power, is doing its job. Just get 
out of your own way long enough to let the real expert run the show. Your job is to 
smell the roses. Enjoy the experiences. The lid is off the jar. Unlike the flies you 
have a choice. You can choose a new way! 
 
I once taught an advanced hypnosis class to a group of professional hypnotherapists. 
On the second day a lady joined us. She had never even seen hypnosis before. She 
was late, overwhelmed by everything and felt intimidated by everyone else’s skill. 
She was ready to quit. I convinced her to stay a while and just have a bit of fun – 
after all she’d paid her money. I started her on a few unusual exercises. She enjoyed 
herself and decided to stay. By the end of the day she not only hypnotised dozens of 
people (several times), she was eliciting hypnotic phenomena from them as well! She 
had no idea how she got there: after a day of crazy games, it just all seemed to fit. It 
always fits. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
21 
NLP Modelling 
 
NLP has a very valuable perspective to add to learning. John and Richard actually 
first developed the NLP skills and techniques by using this non-traditional 
methodology.  It is a very human way of learning – children do it instinctively. So 
do adults when they are not paying attention! I am of course referring to the art of 
Modelling. 
 
Modelling is this “methodology that leaves behind a trail of techniques” that 
Richard talked about. It is a systematic way of learning a skill that someone has 
ingrained so deeply that even they do not know what they are actually doing. 
Remember that what people do and what they think/say they do are often totally 
different things. This is just as true when we do things right as when we do things 
badly. Modelling not only avoids learning the wrong thing because you were told 
to, it completely bypasses traditional, slower learning methods. Modelling slip 
streams straight to where things really happen: the unconscious! 
 
Modelling is not necessarily something you learn to do. It is more something you 
have to remember. Children learn this way all the time. A study in Tanzania
10 
showed that children learned to perform all the tasks of living in a village (foraging 
for food, maintenance and repairs etc) at least as well as the adults by the time they 
were seven year old. How did they do that? They simply copied the adults until 
they got it right. 
 
However, there is a problem with simply copying an expert. At least there is a 
problem for most adults. The problem is that we unconsciously filter what we 
experience and reinterpret it in our map making process. As a result we do what we 
think our model is doing or what we believe our model should be doing, instead of 
repeating what she is actually doing. This slows down our progress immensely! 
 
The strange thing is that learning is actually easier when we cannot interfere. The 
unconscious mind has a vast capacity to tease out the most remote patterns from 
events in the world. As an example, studies on implicit learning
11 have put people 
into environments in which they have to learn to do something based on a complex 
pattern. For example
12 you play the role of a production manager of a factory 
replicated by a computer programme. In order to get maximum output with 
                                                
10 Reported in the New Scientist in 2003. 
11 Implicit learning is the kind of learning that happens by accident rather than by design. These are the 
skills we pick up along the way but never quite know we can do. Most of people’s social skills are learned 
this way. Some people call it learning by osmosis! 
12 Berry D. and Broadbent D. “On the relationship between task performance and associated verbilizable 
knowledge” Journal of Experimental Psychology, Vol. 36A (1984):209-231. See also the useful overview 
of these results by Berry D. and Dienes Z. in “Implicit Learning” London, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
1992. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
22 
problematic resources (raw materials, staff shortages etc) you have to juggle elements 
that feed into a very complex formula. No one is given the formula, you just play the 
game cold. Over time, people start to make the right decisions consistently. When 
asked why they are doing it, they make replies such as “it was a guess”, “it felt 
right”, “no particular reason”. They had no conscious insight into what they were 
doing and so assumed that they were just “getting lucky”. In fact they were getting 
smart. 
 
Modelling relies on our ability to get smart in this way. So the first step is to get 
your conscious mind (and the various internal filters) out of the way. You need to 
enter a happy “know nothing” state. You put your expectations and prejudices on 
hold. Do not analyse or seek to understand anything. 
 
Then you keenly begin to observe the model
13. You want to identify as keenly as 
possible with this model. You want to observe the way he stands, moves, breathes, 
talks and interacts with others. You need to keep right on observing him until you 
find a set of behaviours to copy. Do not analyse or seek to understand anything. 
Merely observe keenly. 
 
Then you go off and you copy everything you observed. You stand in the same way 
as the model, move in the same way, breathe in the same way and then observe 
whether or not you are getting the same kind of results. Do not analyse or seek to 
understand anything. Merely repeat what you observed. 
 
By now it will be time to go back to the observation stage to tinker with what you 
are doing. Keep observing, adjusting and then testing what you are doing until you 
start to get the same kind of results consistently! Do not analyse or seek to 
understand anything yet. 
 
Only once you get consistent results is it worth analysing things. Now you can 
bring your conscious intellect on line and seek to understand. This is where the 
western method of dissecting a field of study is highly valuable. You start to test 
each of the behaviours you have been unconsciously copying to see if you can still 
get the same result without that specific behaviour. If you can then you don’t need to 
do that bit any more, it had nothing to do with the skill.  
 
The purpose of modelling is not to create carbon copies, but to create an elegant, 
streamlined way of doing what the model can do. If you do this final stage 
thoroughly, you may even find yourself getting better results than your model can, 
because you will have thrown off all unnecessary baggage! 
                                                
13 Making such keen, and clean, observations is a skill of its own. Look at the Calibration section in this 
manual for some exercises on how to sharpen up and clean up your perceptions! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
23 
Mechanics, Engineers and Magicians 
 
Both NLP and Hypnosis (and related disciplines) are based around the simple fact 
that what we think is reality (our maps or IRs) is malleable. Change the way we 
think and perceive it and we change the entire world we live in. The result is that 
you are left happier and more successful in your endeavours. At least that is the 
theory. 
  
Now when looking at the malleability of reality, Change is one extremely useful unit 
of measurement. So realities can change quickly or slowly. They can change by 
small or large amounts. The changes can be temporary, semi-permanent, eternal or 
not take place at all. In each case we judge the proficiency of the practitioner, by his 
or her capacity to induce the desired amount of change for the desired amount of 
time. A practitioner of NLP, hypnosis or any other change-work technology (e.g. 
meditation, psychotherapy etc) stands or falls by her ability to manipulate realities at 
will. 
  
The acquisition of any skill usually involves a progression through distinct levels of 
ability that the earnest student must travel through in order to achieve mastery. The 
student must learn to manipulate his chosen medium - be that wood, metal, food, 
medicine or realities - in ever more powerful and refined ways. The old system of 
apprenticeship recognised this transition formally in the roles of the apprentice, the 
journeyman (or craftsman) and the master of his craft. I believe this kind of 
distinction is a useful one to draw out for reality manipulators in order to give us all 
an understanding of where we still need to grow and evolve our skills.  
  
As a slight aside, I of course presume a desire on the part of NLP practitioners and 
hypnotists to improve their skills and I do so quite deliberately: NLP is after all 
(inter alia) the study of Human excellence. It is not the study of human adequacy. 
Hence there is a built in presupposition of a never ending (yet highly rewarding) 
quest for increasing levels of elegance, excellence and effectiveness. And it is with 
this in mind that I present the following models of development for you. It is in 
order to assist you in escaping certain traps in your thinking and perceptions that I 
have (unfortunately) seen many NLP practitioners and hypnotists fall foul of!  
  
Before I go on let me make a general disclaimer: what I am about to say is just one 
way to look at things. It is not the truth, it is not necessarily even 100% correct. It 
is merely a useful description of something that is a bit larger than we can currently 
comprehend without the use of convenient metaphors. As such just treat it as food for 
thought to help you go off and make up your own mind about how to look at things. 
  
Many NLP practitioners and hypnotists make one fundamental mistake when it 
comes to hypnotic processes. It is a mistake that I believe all the greats in this field 
have avoided in one way or another, and this was one of the reasons that they became 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
24 
great! The mistake is a simple one: they get caught up with and are stuck at the level 
of technique. To get stuck at the level of technique is to confuse the content with the 
process. When you do this you are basically saying: NLP is the Swish technique, a 
Collapse Anchors or a Visual Squash. 
  
This level of thought (which, by the way, is a useful one to go through in your 
evolution into a NLP practitioner/Hypnotist!) is what I like to refer to as the level of 
reality mechanics. A Reality Mechanic is someone who has a bag of tricks, or a 
toolkit. Every time she meets an unpleasant reality she pulls out the appropriate 
tool, follows the step by step instructions on the gadget and somehow, inexplicably, 
magic happens. When magic does not happen she merely blames the tool and says 
"IT must be broken" or "IT doesn't work". Because she only has predetermined 
patterns to run, she can only tinker with realities. She needs to rely on the 
robustness of the gadget she is using to be enough to meet the situation she faces. 
  
The problem with Reality Mechanics is that they are stuck. They cannot generate 
patterns because they have not studied the mechanisms inside the gadgets they are 
using. If they meet a situation they have not encountered before, they may not choose 
the right tool to meet the problem - either because they cannot match the dynamics 
of the tool to the problem or because they simply do not have a pattern designed to 
meet that kind of situation. Reality Mechanics are powerful people who can do a lot 
of good, but they have to rely on someone else to develop new techniques and 
technologies. Their personal development is thus dependant on "greater" minds 
spoon feeding them with new content. 
  
To burst through the bubble of limitations inherent in being a reality mechanic, you 
need to elevate yourself to the next level. This is what I like to call the realm of the 
reality engineer. A Reality Engineer works not on the level of technique, but on the 
level of principles. He understands what makes a process work. He has seen the 
clockwork that makes the machine do what it does and understands why it has been 
put together in that way. This means he is free to make up his own techniques on 
the spur of the moment as the situation requires. He can flip into seemingly 
contradictory positions and still get the results he wants because he can see the 
process that is at work and leverages off that to get a result. A Reality Engineer can 
confidently meet entirely new situations and know that all he has to do is gather 
enough information in order to start selecting the appropriate principles with which 
to engage.  
  
Whereas a Reality Mechanic can only tinker and tune an engine or apply pre-
packaged solutions to "common" problems, the Reality Engineer can take the entire 
mechanism of reality apart, clean it up and put it back together in a more useful and 
efficient way. A reality Engineer has more choice and is therefore more powerful as an 
individual. His scope for personal growth is self reflexive - he applies the principles 
he has mastered to himself to reinvent himself as time passes. 
  

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
25 
A Reality Engineer is free to explore the world with new eyes and to choose how the 
world should respond to him. As he gets better with this process, he internalises the 
principles that form the stuff of his magic. What once required a conscious choice to 
engage begins to be turned over to the vastly superior resources of unconsciousness. 
At that moment a magical door opens to him. When he steps through that doorway 
he will have become a reality magician. 
  
This level of being is the most difficult to describe. It is an incredibly powerful state 
in which you stand beyond the self imposed limits that holds back even the Reality 
Engineer. I am not suggesting that the Reality Magician operates at a level beyond 
principles. That is kind of true but also quite inaccurate. Principles are absolutely 
important at this level, it is just that you can go beyond them to either discover new 
principles or you bend the boundaries within which Principles are thought to 
operate. This is the level where you don't TRY and do something - apply a principle 
or a technique - you merely INTEND something and it occurs. When you get here 
you have internalised so many experiences, you literally BECOME the process. You 
unconsciously apply hypnosis/NLP in everything you do so that magical things just 
seem to happen to you and around you. As the great master of change, Milton 
Erickson, put it: you become the scenery to which the other people NATURALLY 
respond in the way that you intend them to.  
 
That is a very powerful place to be in. It takes a very special way of thinking to 
appreciate what this means and to operate at this level. It is NOT an end point, but a 
beginning of an incredibly fruitful experience. 
  
This special Mind Set is an incredibly important thing to understand and internalise. 
At some point I may write more about that kind of mindset. But to be honest you 
really need the power of a live, hands-on training – i.e. personal experiences – to 
truly internalise the understanding.  
  
 
As an example, during a Street Hypnosis
14 training in Bangkok an interesting 
question came up when we examined Embedded Commands in action. There was a 
segment which appeared to give contradictory suggestions "You cannot feel... 
now feel comfort..." How can someone both feel and not feel at the same time? 
  
                                                
14 NB Street Hypnosis can easily be misunderstood as a quirky branch of the entertainment industry - 
stage hypnosis with a twist or maybe a hypnotic magic act performed on the street following models like 
David Blaine. If that is your understanding then I have failed miserably in what I set out to achieve. Street 
Hypnosis is not a bunch of tricks to entrance innocent members of the public. Street Hypnosis is about 
creating powerful people. People that live in a personal world that is so rich that it spills out of them and 
colours the realities of all that come into contact with them. That is one of the structures of charisma: 
people that live such compelling versions of reality that they draw you in and make you want to live in the 
same world! For more information about this check out www.streethypnosis.com. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
26 
That is in an interesting question. It is pointless intellectualising about such 
questions: it is absolutely a complete paradox when judged from a segmented 
mindset. There was really only one way in which I could answer such a question: I 
put the student in trance. I led him through an experiential process culminating with 
that exact same set of contradictory suggestions. When the student emerged from 
trance he had a little glint in his eyes and simply said "I understand!" - he had had a 
glimpse of how a Reality Magician thinks. And that is something you must 
experience for yourself. Or to put it more accurately, it is a way of thinking that you 
have to remember all over again. 
 
Although NLP is renowned for its techniques, such as the Fast Phobia Cure, it is 
important that you remember not to get too caught up inside them! In fact it is useful 
to remember that nothing works for everyone 100% of the time. What is much more 
powerful, are the principles and the mindsets from which these techniques evolved. 
The NLP Practitioner intensive programme we run through the Curious Company 
will teach you the Attitudes and the Methodology that underpins NLP. You will get 
the chance to experience the NLP mindset as well as the techniques in action. You 
can also check out the “NLP – An Unconscious Review” CD set available on 
www.streethypnosis.com. These CDS are designed to help you enter the NLP 
mindset more easily and understand the inner workings of many of the NLP 
techniques by understanding the NLP principles they are made up of. 
 
So, whilst you will invariably begin your NLP journey as Reality Mechanics, I urge 
you to ensure that over time, and with experience, you keep moving on to the other 
stages of Reality Engineers and Reality Magicians. 
 
Reality is a malleable thing. Learn to experience it just so and magic happens.  

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
27 
Rapport 
Trust & Comfort 
 
Many people see rapport as a relation of mutual understanding or trust between 
people. Some see it as a feeling of sympathetic understanding. Everyone agrees that 
it is one of the magic ingredients that allow people to forge strong relationships 
(whether business, personal or otherwise) that last in the long term. Rapport is a 
vital ingredient in the artful communicator’s skill set as it allows you to connect 
with another human being in such a way that many of the natural defences people 
carry around to protect their self esteem are spontaneously lowered. 
 
Whilst building rapport has an infinite level of complexities and subtleties that a 
person could spend a fruitful lifetime exploring, it is also (fortunately) something that 
you can learn to do very simply. At the most basic level, rapport can be boiled down 
to two concepts: Trust and Comfort. 
 
Building Trust & Comfort are the essential elements that you must look for in any 
encounter that you wish to prolong, harmonise the communication or create a 
connection with someone else. In this section we will be exploring several processes 
that human beings naturally engage in which result in a natural rapport. 
 
Please bear in mind, whilst we may be addressing many behavioural structures that 
“mimic” rapport signals, it is always best to be genuine about your communication. 
Much of the non-verbal subtext that you will be broadcasting will be unconscious. 
So communicating with integrity and an aligned set of internal maps will be the best 
way to ensure you broadcast only congruent rapport signals to others. As Trust and 
Comfort are at the root of this set of experiences, you would do well to project 
precisely those qualities. This is much like the approach taken by the famous 
psychotherapist Carl Rogers. He simply advocates that you have a “high 
unconditional regard” for the other person! 
 
Finally, what you project (i.e. the conscious and unconscious signals that you send 
out) when building rapport is only one half of the equation. Rapport is a feedback 
process between two or more entities. In order to feed back something to another 
person, you need to be able to receive – rather perceive – the changes that occur in a 
live interaction. The ability to refine your senses to perceive such signals will be 
dealt with under Calibration. But just because that “topic” is covered elsewhere does 
not mean that it does not have great value here! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
28 
Matching & Mirroring 
 
People like people like themselves. It is a simple concept with a vast potential 
depth. Behavioural scientists have noted that people seem to “spontaneously” strike 
up a rapport with people that have similarities. At the most fundamental level it is 
similarities in our non-verbal behaviour that develops profound rapport. This is 
largely because these tend to go unnoticed in western cultures. 
 
This behavioural similarity goes far beyond crude mimicry. In fact mimicking a 
person’s behaviour is a sure-fire way to quickly loose rapport (and, incidentally, it is 
also a great way to get into a fight!) This is because mimicry draws conscious 
attention to the act, which triggers most people’s personal insecurities. The power of 
matching someone’s behaviour comes from avoiding conscious detection but 
ensuring it is perceived unconsciously. 
 
Many long-standing couples are said to resemble each other. This is because over 
time they begin to subtly match each other’s behaviour such a facial expressions, 
posture, breathing rates etc. When you begin to do the same, i.e. when you begin to 
subtly copy the unconscious mannerisms of those around you, they will begin to 
respond to you as literally “one of their own”. If you cross over into mimicry, 
however, then please pretend you never heard of NLP – and if anyone asks, you 
certainly did not read this manual! 
 
When you Match someone, you do the same thing they do. When you Mirror them 
you become like a mirror image of their behaviour (so left becomes right). Matching 
& Mirroring is a form of Pacing someone. When you Pace someone it creates a 
feedback loop which, if recognised unconsciously, creates a very deep connection. It 
is a way of subtly signalling “I can work from the same map that you’re working 
from – we are the same”. 
 
Whole body matching (or mirroring) occurs when you match or mirror larger 
structures like posture, breathing, arm or leg movements (crossing, uncrossing, foot 
tapping etc). Remember that the key here is to do it subtly. You need to maintain a 
sense of “naturalness” about what you do. You do not have to match them in every 
detail and you do not have to move at exactly the same time. In fact watch natural 
matching and mirroring occurring, perhaps amongst old friends in a coffee shop. You 
will see that when one person shifts position, the other one will follow – but not 
immediately. Usually there is a few seconds gap and the following motion will seem 
a totally natural part of their conversation.  
 
This phenomenon is called “Leading” – because one person had enough rapport with 
the other that when he changed position her friend followed. A good way to test you 
have rapport is therefore to “Pace” the person (in this case through matching and 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
29 
mirroring) and then to “Lead” by changing something. If they follow, you have a 
good level of rapport! If they do not, you simply have to do a little bit more! 
 
Now the interesting thing is that this pacing and leading phenomenon works as well 
in the conceptual realm of ideas as it does in the physical realm of postures, 
breathing rates etc. When you have rapport with an individual you will, as a general 
rule, find that they are less argumentative, less prone to take offence and more likely 
to indulge you. All useful things in certain contexts. 
 
Here are some additional Matching and Mirroring style manoeuvres: 
 
Cross over matching – this is where you slyly match one behaviour from the 
person, e.g. their tapping foot, with a totally different behaviour of your own. In this 
case you could match the rate of the tapping foot by drumming your fingers, tapping 
a pencil, blinking (if you can do it without looking like you lost a contact lens!) etc. 
 
Movements – match or mirror their expressions, gestures or gesticulations. You do 
not have to repeat the whole motion (that could become obvious mimicry and get 
you in trouble!) but you can definitely pick up the gist of their motion. A man 
stroking his beard can be matched by a woman touching her mouth “pensively” etc. 
 
Breathing – this is actually a subset of matching movements, but is so powerful 
that it deserves to be marked out. Matching someone’s breathing either with your 
own or by cross over matching (e.g. by blinking at the same rate), you create an 
incredibly powerful feedback loop. It can create very deep levels of rapport. 
 
Tonality – remember that Birdwhistell’s study showed that beyond non-verbal cues, 
38% of the sub-communications are carried by voice tones. These are as open to 
matching as the non-verbal behaviour. You can pace people by matching their voice 
tone, speed, rhythm, pitch etc. 
 
Micro-matching – this is the same ordinary matching only this time you do not 
engage in the full behaviour that you are matching. You actually tone all the 
behaviours way down. Actually this is the secret to successful matching and 
mirroring. A certain amount of “gross mimicry” is a stage most people go through 
to learn the process. In time you want to adapt so that the minimum amount of effort 
gets you the maximum result. Micro-matching is important as it allows you to use 
your space more freely whilst still creating the connection.  
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
30 
Unconscious Rapport 
 
It is all very well discussing the merits of subtly matching people’s behaviours in 
order to create rapport. But that takes quite a bit of work. When we start looking at 
additional rapport builders such as conceptual rapport or using language to build 
trust and comfort, there will soon be too much going on for you to keep track of 
consciously. So having put the groundwork into understanding matching and 
mirroring, it is time to let it all go. You can achieve the same results better by 
leaving it all up to your unconscious. 
 
The fact is that almost every human being has grown up knowing how to build 
rapport intuitively. Think about it – you have done it thousands of times in your life 
up until now: with close friends, family, the odd stranger that you just clicked with 
etc. The only problem was that these times seemed to happen randomly. You did 
not know how to repeat the process. The fact is that you can.  
 
The principle that you must remember is Go First! 
 
By going first I mean entering the state you want to project so intensively that other 
people pick up the natural signals you unconsciously broadcast and respond to it. As 
an example, everyone can recall at least one event where you felt a little down and 
you bumped into a friend bubbling over with enthusiasm. Soon enough that 
enthusiasm seemed somehow to affect the way that you felt too and before you knew 
it your whole mood shifted. 
 
Well this works with rapport too. Think back to a person that you have a strong 
rapport with. When you recall how you feel when around this person – the same 
sense of comfort and trust – you begin to slip into the same state again. People have 
different ways of knowing they are in rapport. For some it’s a warm glow in the 
chest or the solar plexus. Others feel it as an easing of tension around the chest, 
making it easier to breathe and smile. Others still may get an intense fluttery feeling 
inside their bellies. Whichever way that you do it is fine, the important thing is to 
get into that state intensely, until it almost seems to leak out of you. You might 
even associate a colour with it. The strange thing is that if you take that colour or 
the sensation and expand it throughout your body, it intensifies even more. The 
more it intensifies the more it will expand. Eventually it kind of leaks out of you, 
surrounding you – in kind of a glow or “aura” you can sense around yourself. It may 
or may not be real; but it is something that you can be aware of. 
 
Well when you take that feeling that surrounds you and “project” it towards another 
person, it will expand towards them. Then you can allow it to surround that person, 
like a warm comfortable blanket that links the two of you together. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
31 
Now what this does is trigger your unconscious to begin broadcasting rapport 
signals to the people around you. You will naturally tend to engage in matching and 
mirroring behaviours as well as communicating rapport on many other levels. All 
the things you have learned so far (and will learn later) still count, so do as much of 
that as you can comfortably keep track off, and allow the rest to take care of itself. 
 
This concept of altering your state in order to build rapport and trust your instincts 
to guide you in an interaction is nothing new. Two of the oldest fields that need to 
specialise in rapport building for success are psychotherapy and sales. The greatest 
exponents in both fields end up saying very similar things about building rapport. 
Take this excerpt from Carl Rogers
15 for example: 
 
“An empathetic way of being with another person has several facets. It means 
entering the private perceptual world of the other and becoming thoroughly at 
home in it. It involves being sensitive, moment by moment, to the changing felt 
meanings which flow in this person to the fear or rage or tenderness or confusion 
of whatever that he or she is experiencing. It means temporarily living in the 
other’s life, moving about in it delicately without making judgements; it means 
sensing meanings of which he or she is scarcely aware, but not trying to uncover 
totally unconscious feelings, since that would be too threatening… To be with 
another in this way means that for the time being, you lay aside your own views and 
values in order to enter another’s world without prejudice. In some sense it means 
that you lay aside your self; this can only be done by persons who are secure 
enough in themselves that they know they will not get lost in what may turn out to 
be the strange or bizarre world of the other, and they can comfortably return to 
their own world when they wish.” 
 
Notice how Carl talks about putting your own mental maps on hold in order to 
travel along the maps made by other people for a time. Natural sales experts echo 
this belief when they talk about “getting into the mind of the prospect” (prospective 
customer) or “walking a mile in his/her moccasins”. 
 
This acceptance of another person’s model of the world discussed by Carl is pacing 
in the extreme. You may have observed that this level of “empathy” relies on highly 
fine tuned sensory awareness – Calibration of the other person. This takes much 
practice in live situations. Luckily for non-clinical interactions, a much less intense 
level of rapport will be more than adequate. However do always keep in mind that 
your aim is to enter the other person’s reality as much as you can, and respecting it 
(though being aware that it is no more than a helpful/unhelpful fiction). 
                                                
15 From Rogers C., “A way of being” Boston, Houghton-Mifflin 1980 pp142-143. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
32 
Matching Experiences 
 
We have spoken a lot about the non-verbal approaches to matching. These are very 
powerful, but they are not the only ones. When asked, most people will tell you that 
to build rapport you must find common areas of interest: going to the same school, 
sharing a hobby, having similar life experiences etc. All this (good!) advice shares a 
simple characteristic: matching people’s internal maps of the world.  
 
Strictly speaking you are violating one of the tenets of NLP here, as this kind of 
matching involves going into content. However it is an effective way of building 
trust and comfort when used to complement the other more process based 
approaches. Do remember that if you match experiences but mismatch at the level of 
process (tonality, non-verbal cues etc) then you will be breaking rapport. 
 
There are several different categories of experiences that you can match: 
 
Personal History: if you come from the same home town, went to the same school, 
knew/know the same people or do the same things (hobbies, business etc), you 
create an area of commonality that is a doorway into genuine rapport. However this 
is the weakest method for building trust & comfort! 
 
Values: Values are semi-unconscious filters people use, and are therefore a stronger 
way to create trust & comfort between two people. A Value is something that a 
person invests time and effort to have in his/her life. It is usually an abstract concept 
like Fun, Love, Happiness, Friendship, Trust etc. You can build rapport when you 
share a Value, but it is more powerful to actually satisfy it (e.g. by having fun with 
someone). 
 
Beliefs: Beliefs are another type of semi-unconscious filter. These are the things we 
hold true about the world and ourselves. Most westerners do not believe in ghosts. 
Go to Thailand however and the belief is reversed. Sharing and validating close held 
beliefs can build rapport – you are just pacing an important element in their model of 
the world. 
 
Emotional State: this is a much more subtle rapport builder. The old saying 
“misery loves company” is true because being in the same state as another builds 
rapport – it paces their experience. If someone is angry, it is hard to be reasonable 
with them. Matching their state however, by increasing your volume, pitch etc 
(though not necessarily their intention – i.e. do not get angry back (causing a clash) 
but do “get angry” in a way that diverts it elsewhere!) you pace them. This allows 
you the opportunity to slowly lead them into a calmer state by gradually shifting 
your own.  

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
33 
Matching Language 
 
Creating rapport can also be done linguistically. You can use language in a variety of 
ways to promote the growth of trust & comfort: 
Vocabulary  
Language has a profound impact on our nervous system. Certain words are more 
loaded with meaning than others. For example, the words “baby” and “infant” can 
be used interchangeably, but “baby” is a more loaded word – people respond to it 
more powerfully. “Baby” is said to be semantically packed.  
 
The meaningfulness of a given word will vary from individual to individual. If you 
listen to them speak, you will hear which words have more meaning to them. These 
words will be emphasised, used more frequently and provoke a stronger non-verbal 
reaction. When you reflect these words back (using the same tonalities) you are 
reactivating the same part of the nervous system and creating a more powerful 
response.  
 
In simple terms, if you start talking like someone, you will be perceived as being 
like them and chances are that they will start to like you! Do be careful to not fall 
into the trap of mimicking someone. If you try and copy their vocabulary, reflecting 
back words, phrases or even the slang that they use, but you get the tonality or the 
associated non-verbal behaviours wrong, it will sound weak or like a parody. This 
tends to break rapport – it shows you are different and are either trying too hard or are 
mocking them. If you imagine the Queen of England trying to do a “gangsta rap” – 
it is precisely that incongruity that makes this a ridiculous thought! 
 
Slang 
Understanding and using slang eloquently can however send out very powerful 
signals. By slang I do not mean simply cursing. Each subculture develops its own 
set of slang terminology over time as a shorthand method of talking about 
commonly re-occurring experiences. The legal profession has huge amounts of 
private slang (dressed up as “legal terminology”), as do bankers, doctors, 
accountants, school children, soldiers, drug dealers, singers etc.  
 
By understanding slang and using it appropriately you are indirectly stating “I am 
part of the same subculture; I share the same set of experiences, values and beliefs as 
you; I am like you.” Because this is a sub-communication, it tends to bypass 
conscious/critical thinking and creates a powerful unconscious response. This is 
much like scientists attracting birds to a concrete replicas by playing a sound 
recording of the appropriate mating call.  

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
34 
Representational Systems – Predicates 
You will remember that we make sense of the world by processing information from 
our five senses and creating mental maps of our experience. Whenever we speak, we 
are in essence describing one of these maps out loud – that is how we know what we 
want to say. When you listen to people’s language, you will either see what they are 
saying or you simply will not grasp what they are trying to get at. 
 
You will notice that the predicates underlined above make reference to a sensory 
modality. That is because I was describing what portion of this mental map I was 
paying attention to whilst communicating with you. People will have a preference for 
paying attention to/processing visual (see), auditory (hear) or kinaesthetic (feel) 
information
16. This will come out in the predicates they tend to use most often. 
When you reflect these predicates back to them (i.e. start talking to “visual people” 
in visual terms like “I see what you mean” or “let me paint you a picture”) you will 
not only be understood more easily, but you will also promote the growth of rapport 
between you. 
 
We will come back to this concept in more detail in the Calibration section. For the 
moment, look at the sample predicates/phrases below that show a preference for each 
Representational System (or sensory modality): 
 
Visual 
Auditory 
Kinaesthetic 
 
dim, foggy, hazy, gaze, 
see, imagine, look, clear, 
watch, outlook 
 
hear, tune, listen, say, 
talk, cry, voice, call, 
sound, silence 
 
Touch, feel, grasp, rough, 
solid, soft, flow, tremble, 
hard  
 
• I’m drawing a blank… 
• Let me draw you a 
picture… 
• See the light at the end 
of the tunnel… 
• Not a shadow of a 
doubt… 
• I take a dim view… 
• The future is bright… 
• Clearly… 
 
 
• It rings a bell… 
• I hear what you’re 
saying… 
• I like the sound of 
that… 
• Get in tune with it… 
• It’s as clear as a bell… 
• Let’s get in synch… 
• Ding, dong! 
 
 
• Get a load of this… 
• Hang on a sec… 
• Get in touch with… 
• Tough luck! 
• Go with the flow… 
• Pull yourself together! 
• Let’s touch base… 
• I need something 
concrete… 
 
 
                                                
16 Olfactory (smell) and Gustatory (taste) modalities are underdeveloped in western culture and occur 
infrequently. Certain professions, like chefs, will have these modalities developed more strongly and may 
actually reflect that preference unconsciously through their language. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
35 
 Big Picture –v– Details (Chunk Size) 
Another useful filter to be aware of is what type of information a person tends to sort 
for. Some people like to get an overview, the big picture. If you start to give them 
too much detail they overload and shut off. They stop listening. By contrast 
someone who is driven by detail will get frustrated with all the wishy-washy big 
chunk pieces. They need the nitty-gritty details.  
 
Trying to force the wrong information chunk size on someone is as frustrating as 
trying to force the star shaped piece through the round hole. Whilst people can sit in 
between these categories as well, it is worth finding out what kind of information a 
person needs to get. An easy way to find out what preference someone has it to 
simply listen to the information they are giving you. People tend to communicate by 
giving the kind of information chunk size that they want to be getting back!  
Emotional –v– Factual 
The final distinction I will make on these filters is the difference between people that 
respond well to emotional language (I did this and felt… it was an amazing 
sensation…) and those that prefer factual or procedural information (I went there, did 
that, and took this). When you start to talk their language, you will again be 
building rapport. 
 
As a general rule women tend to prefer emotional descriptions and men more factual 
ones. Like all generalisations, this is not always true, so take it with a pinch of salt! 
 
If you want to learn more about these kinds of internal filters that people use, you can 
look at personality profiling or the NLP Metaprogrammes taught at 
Masterpractitioner level. 
Backtrack Frame (The Echo Effect) 
The specific words and phrases that people use activate certain portions of their 
neurology. They have a unique meaning for that individual. Backtracking is a way of 
demonstrating you “understand” or are in rapport by repeating the last few words of 
an utterance. It puts you firmly inside their map. This is in stark contrast to “active 
listening”, which recommends reflecting back what was said using different words. 
This is weaker than backtracking because you are activating different neurological 
networks by using your own words! 
Breaking Rapport 
Though we have focused on how to create rapport (that sense of connection with 
someone else) do remember that there are times where it is useful and desirable to 
break rapport. At such times you can simply systematically break every single 
recommendation I have made in this section! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
36 
Calibration 
Primary Experience 
 
There is an old saying “People don’t see the world as it is, they see the world as 
they are!” There is a lot of truth to this saying. The problem is that our internal 
filters have a habit of deleting, distorting or generalising the information from our 
senses to fit what we expect/would like to see. This leads to all kinds of problems. 
When we base our decisions on faulty information, reality will crash in on us time 
and again and leave us disappointed. 
 
The main reason we get ourselves in difficulty is because we insist on attaching 
meaning to everything. For example: you see a man sitting in a chair, alone, with a 
smile on his face. Some people would interpret that scene as sad – a lonely man 
sitting by himself. Others may call him devious, as the facial expression seems 
“fake” to them. Others still may admire the man for being so happy and carefree. But 
these are all interpretations forced on the scenario. The only facts we know are true 
are that there is a man, sitting on a chair, alone, with a smile on his face. Everything 
else is a (poor) attempt to Mind Read! 
 
Our almost obsessive desire to label things creates other limitations. Take for 
example the common chair. By accepting the description of the item, we pigeon-hole 
it so well we eliminate other perceptions of it: the fine wood, its unique molecular 
structure, its use as a table, a toy, a weapon, fuel, raw materials for another project 
etc. 
 
This form of thinking is nothing more than a bad habit caused by lazy thinking. 
Limiting the scope of the chair means we don’t have to think about it any more or 
even truly perceive it. We can turn our minds off and stop responding to it. It 
happened to the flies in the jar when they stopped trying to get out (see Premature 
Cognitive Commitment above). We know that we are often caught out by this – we 
have sayings like “a wolf in sheep’s clothing” and “don’t judge a book by its 
cover” to remind us that all is not as it seems.  
 
This desire to label everything around us is largely responsible for creating 
misunderstandings, inappropriate responses, disappointment and many neurotic 
conditions
17.  
 
                                                
17 Neurosis is a mental or personality disturbance, not attributable to any known neurological or organic 
dysfunction, manifested by symptoms such as insecurity, anxiety, depression, and irrational fears, but 
without psychotic symptoms such as delusions or hallucinations. Neurosis can be said to arise out of a 
dissonance between what is and what we believe should/might be. It is largely our desire to live in a 
fantasy world dominated by the past, alternative presents or a hypothetical future that causes people to 
ignore the actual present reality and leads to such mental anguish as anxiety, depression etc. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
37 
So what is the solution? Retrain your perception to get as close to the Primary 
Experience as you can do.  
 
This is an important point. Pretty much every neurotic condition (insecurities, 
phobias, depression, guilt, low self esteem etc) that we have been forced to endure 
will disappear as soon as you stop making assumptions about life and only pay 
attention to what is happening in the here and now! 
 
Think about it. People love to “get away from it all”. Amusement parks, cinemas, 
the excitement of a sporting event or the serenity of Mozart’s Requiem all do the 
same thing: they stop us from worrying about the past, or fearing the future and arrest 
our attention so firmly in the living moment, in direct and enjoyable sensory 
experiences,  that for a time you feel happy, satisfied and fulfilled. 
 
Paying attention to our sensory experience is something you can do anywhere. 
 
It sounds simple. But it takes effort. A great deal of effort. To stop roaming around 
in our own heads, talking to ourselves and jumping to conclusions takes a very 
intense kind of attention. That takes mental effort. And most of us don’t yet have a 
strong enough mental muscle to do this for any extended period of time. 
 
The good news is that building this kind of mental muscle is just like building any 
other kind of muscle. We practice, get tired, rest and grow stronger! 
 
There are additional benefits to paying attention to the world without judgement. As 
your unconscious intellect, with its superior processing ability, comes more directly 
online, you begin to sense the situation more accurately and respond better 
“intuitively”. Take this example from Carl Rogers
18: 
 
“I have come to value highly these intuitive responses... they are almost always 
helpful… In these moments I am perhaps in a slightly altered state of 
consciousness, indwelling in the client’s world, completely in tune with that world. 
My non-conscious intellect takes over. I know much more than my conscious mind 
is aware of. I do not form my responses consciously, they simply arise in me, from 
my non-conscious sensing of the world of the other.” 
 
Learning to use your perceptions well is one of the most important things you can 
ever learn to do. A lifetime spent on refining your perceptions, is a lifetime filled 
with increasingly rich rewards! 
                                                
18 Extract taken from Rogers C., “Reaction to Gunnison’s article of the similarities between Erickson and 
Rogers”, in the Journal of Counseling and Development, (1985) 63 page 565. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
38 
BMIRs 
 
As you know, every Internal Representation will affect your nervous system. You 
subtly change the way you feel, carry yourself and behave. These subtle external cues 
in posture and behaviour can be read by a skilled practitioner and give strong clues 
as to what is happening inside at the level of mental maps. We call these cues 
“Behavioural Manifestations of Internal Representations” (BMIRs for short). When 
you get good at reading these cues people are constantly broadcasting, you will get 
very good at reading people – even to the point where you might appear to manifest 
psychic abilities! 
 
It is vital in Calibrating (i.e. reading) people’s minimal cues that you open yourself 
as widely as possible to unadulterated Primary Experience. This will allow you to 
pick up on subtleties that you might ordinarily ignore, delete or even distort out of 
awareness. The renowned psychotherapist Milton Erickson, MD was so good at 
reading minimal cues he could tell when a woman became pregnant from the slight 
shift in the position of her hairline (a reaction to the new hormones in her system) 
and if a man had had an affair from the way he chose to sit in Milton’s office! 
Erickson would even, during an ordinary conversation, monitor people’s heart rate 
from their pulse in the ankle! 
 
The most accurate information a person will give you is behavioural. It will be a 
direct, unconscious response to the IRs that person is making at that moment in 
time. So it is vital to pay attention to what is happening without falling into the trap 
(described in Primary Experience above) of interpreting those BMIRs to mean one 
thing or another. To do so would be to try and read someone’s mind. Whilst it is 
true that with experience you will be able to make very accurate guesses as to what is 
inside someone’s mind, Mind Reading per se is a dangerous activity prone to 
mistakes! It is better to stick to “clean” sensory based descriptions. 
 
For example: the person you are with does something you think she is embarrassed 
by. This is a Mind Read. What you can observe is that the skin in her cheeks 
flushes, she draws back her lips to expose the upper teeth, bows her head forward at 
an angle, drops her gaze to the floor, shifts her breathing (higher in the chest and 
more rapid), the pulse in the side of her neck has sped up and the muscle in her jaw 
has tensed up.  
 
Now you have a basis from which to calibrate! You do not yet know the meaning of 
these responses, but you can find out. She might be embarrassed. She might also be 
angry, upset, frustrated, secretly pleased etc. In future when you see the same set of 
responses in her, you will know she is having the same experience again. Like a fine 
instrument, you have calibrated your senses to her responses! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
39 
Calibration Exercises 
Calibration Exercise 1: Like/Dislike Visual
19 
 
This exercise is the foundation for calibration. Practise it well! Remember, 
everything you have done to this point still counts: so build Rapport, use your 
Personal Power and Expand your Senses. 
 
1. Clear your mind of any thoughts. 
 
2. Expand your Senses and notice everything about the person in front of you. Let 
go of all your preconceived notions about them. 
 
3. Ask them to think about someone they like. Observe what you notice about 
them. Note any changes: e.g. in facial expression, breathing, skin colour (are 
they blushing slightly), pulse (see side of neck out of the “corner of your eye”), 
posture, their overall rhythm, movements, eye patterns. 
 
4. Now ask them to clear their mind. 
 
5. From a neutral state ask them to think of someone they mildly dislike. Observe 
what you notice about them here. Note any changes, in particular those that 
contrast with what you saw in step 3. 
 
6. Ask them to clear their mind. 
 
7. Repeat steps 3-6 until you think you can spot the difference between when they 
are thinking of each person. 
 
8. Ask them to clear their mind and think of either person. Then notice whatever 
you notice about them. Do they look more like they did in step 3 or step 5?  
 
Check with your partner if you are right. Do this 10 times in a row and keep track of 
your accuracy. 
 
Variation 
A variation of this exercise is to ask your partner questions, such as “which person 
lives closest to you” or “which person is taller” and then calibrate the non-verbal 
responses to your answer. 
 
                                                
19 This exercise is reproduced with permission from Ledochowski I., “The Deep Trance Training Manual 
Volume 1”, Crown House Publishing, 2003. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
40 
Calibration Exercise 2: Like/Dislike Auditory 
 
This exercise is similar to the first, only this time you will be using the auditory 
channel to calibrate. 
 
1. Clear your mind of any thoughts. 
 
2. Turn your back on your partner. Do not touch them. 
 
3. Expand your Senses and notice every sound in the room, especially those 
coming from your partner. Let go of all your preconceived notions about them. 
 
4. Ask them to think about someone they like. As your partner does this she will 
count out loud from 1-10, or speak in gibberish (to keep you out of content!). 
Note the voice qualities: volume, rhythm, pitch, speed, tone, pauses. 
 
5. Now ask them to clear their mind. 
 
6. From a neutral state ask them to think of someone they mildly dislike. As your 
partner starts to count again, listen to what you notice now. Note any changes, 
in particular those that contrast with what you heard in step 3. 
 
7. Ask them to clear their mind. 
 
8. Repeat steps 3-6 until you think you have tuned into the difference between 
when they are thinking of each person. 
 
9. Ask them to clear their mind and think of either person. As they count out 
loud once again, notice whatever you notice about that. Do they sound more 
like they did in step 3 or step 5?  
 
Check with your partner if you are right. Do this 10 times in a row and keep track of 
your accuracy. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
41 
Calibration Exercise 3: Like/Dislike Kinaesthetic 
 
This exercise is similar to the first two, only this time you will be using the 
kinaesthetic channel to calibrate. 
 
1. Clear your mind of any thoughts and close your eyes. 
 
2. Place your hands on your partner’s chest/shoulders for one minute to feel their 
breathing. This will sensitise you to the kinaesthetic modality. 
 
3. With your eyes closed, hold hands with your partner palm to palm. Feel the 
weight of their palms pressing against yours. 
 
4. Expand your Senses and notice every feeling and sensation, especially those 
coming from the contact with your partner. Let go of all your preconceived 
notions about them. 
 
5. Ask them to think about someone they like. As your partner does this, note the 
feelings you have – both the sensations in your palms and in the rest of your 
body (your “gut instinct”, so to speak). Pay attention to such distinctions as: 
weight, temperature, sweatiness of palms as well as internal sensations (i.e. 
feelings in other parts of your body). 
 
6. Now ask them to clear their mind. 
 
7. From a neutral state ask them to think of someone they mildly dislike. Again, 
feel for what you notice now. Note any changes, in particular those that contrast 
with what you heard in step 3. 
 
8. Ask them to clear their mind. 
 
9. Repeat steps 3-6 a few times. It does not matter if you don’t feel you have 
acclimatised into the differences between when they are thinking of each person. 
 
10. Ask them to clear their mind and think of either person. As they do, notice 
whatever you notice about that. Then simply take a wild guess. Keep guessing 
until you start to guess accurately. 
 
11. Make a note of how and where you were feeling something when you knew the 
right answer. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
42 
Calibration Exercise Variation 1: Truth/Lie
20 
 
This exercise is almost the same as Like/Dislike. It builds on the skill you started 
learning there. You can use this variation to systematically train up your visual, 
auditory and kinaesthetic channels of perception. 
 
Remember: this is only an exercise. It does not matter if you get it right or wrong 
straight away. With time and practice you will improve! 
 
1. Clear your mind and Expand your Senses as before. Let go of all your 
preconceived notions about your partner. 
 
2. This time ask them a question, which they will answer truthfully. You can ask 
any question you like, but keep it emotionally neutral, e.g. are you wearing 
shoes today? What is your name? Etc. Observe what you notice about them. 
 
3. Now ask them to clear their mind. 
 
4. From a neutral state ask them another question. This time get them to lie when 
they answer. Look and listen to what you notice changing here. Note any 
changes, in particular any differences from what you noticed in step 2. 
 
5. Ask them to clear their mind. 
 
6. Repeat steps 2-5 until you think you can spot them lying. 
 
7. Ask them further questions and get them to lie or tell the truth at random. 
Notice whatever you notice about them. Then guess whether they are lying. Go 
with your first impression! 
 
Check with your partner if you are right. Do this 10 times in a row and keep track of 
your accuracy. 
                                                
20 This exercise is reproduced with permission from Ledochowski I., “The Deep Trance Training Manual 
Volume 1”, Crown House Publishing, 2003. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
43 
Calibration Exercise Variation 2: Yes/No 
 
This exercise is almost the same as Like/Dislike. It builds on the skill you started 
learning there. You can use this variation to systematically train up your visual, 
auditory and kinaesthetic channels of perception. 
 
Remember: this is only an exercise. It does not matter if you get it right or wrong 
straight away. With time and practice you will improve! 
 
1. Clear your mind and Expand your Senses as before. Let go of all your 
preconceived notions about your partner. 
 
2. This time ask them “Yes/No” style questions, which they will answer 
truthfully. You can ask any question you like, but keep it to closed yes/no style 
questions, e.g. you are wearing shoes today? Your name is Fred? Etc. Keep 
asking various yes/no questions and observe what you notice about them.  
 
3. Now ask them to clear their mind. 
 
4. From a neutral state ask them another yes/no question. This time calibrate their 
non-verbal response. Are they signalling yes or no? 
 
5. Repeat steps 2-4 until you can accurately read a yes and a no response. 
 
Check with your partner if you are right. Do this 10 times in a row and keep track of 
your accuracy. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
44 
Calibration Exercise 4: Mind Reading –v– Sensory Based 
Descriptions 
 
Below you will find a list of statements. Decide which statements are Mind Reads 
and which statements are in fact clean Sensory Based Descriptions: 
 
 
• 
He was happy to be alive. 
• 
She frowned with displeasure. 
• 
He sighed, picked up the suitcases with a grunt and left. 
• 
He leant across the chair to read the letter. 
• 
She cried tears of joy. 
• 
She shouted loudly at me and furrowed her brow. 
• 
I asked the question and he raised his eyebrows at me. 
• 
His shoulders were tense and his fists clenched. 
• 
She breathed deeply with even rhythmic breaths. 
• 
She was so arrogant and dismissive. 
• 
Coldheartedly she brushed of his advances. 
• 
He leaned back in his chair with disinterest. 
• 
He smiled deviously. 
• 
She laughed out loud. 
• 
She smiled invitingly. 
• 
He had a fantastic day. It was written all over his face. 
• 
He cut me off impatiently. 
• 
He looked at me with hatred. 
• 
He thinks I am stupid. 
• 
She cried and sobbed for hours. 
• 
She loves to dance. 
• 
She moved gracefully across the dance floor. 
• 
He had a cold, hard look on his face. 
• 
He stared at me without blinking, with a slight tremor around the eyes. 
• 
He looked relieved to finally see her. 
• 
He spoke quickly and used short, choppy hand gestures. 
• 
She flew into a rage when she heard the news. 
• 
She saw his eyebrow knitting and knew she was in trouble. 
• 
After the accident he was still breathing quickly and shallowly – he was 
still in shock.  
• 
He sweated profusely. 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
45 
Minimal Cues 
 
Now that you have had the chance to experience calibration in action, you will have 
paid attention to a collection of tonal and non-verbal signals in the visual, auditory 
and kinaesthetic channels. You should have noticed that the following are 
particularly useful clues to pay attention to: 
 
Face – the expression, muscle tension, skin colour, eye movements (see also Eye 
Accessing Cues later), mouth position, lips swelling. 
Body – posture, gestures, arm/leg movements, head tilt. 
Breathing – location (high, mid or abdomen), pace (fast, slow), rhythm (regular, 
erratic). 
 
These are all important. The question is how can you improve you attention paying 
skills? You can play with the following exercises. Then make up your own! 
Improving Visual Acuity 
1. Close your eyes. 
2. Open your eyes for 10 seconds and closely study your partner (posture etc) 
3. Close your eyes. Your partner will change something. The better you get at 
this the more subtle the change your partner makes. 
4. Open your eyes again. Physically demonstrate the difference. 
Improving Auditory Acuity 
1. Sit back to back with your partner. Do not touch. 
2. Have partner say something. 
3. Repeat it using the same rhythm, pitch, tone etc. 
 
1. Close your eyes. 
2. Partner A claps his hands then says his name. Then Partner B does it. 
3. After Calibrating, A or B claps, you decide who was clapping. 
Improving Kinaesthetic Acuity 
1. Close your eyes and lightly place your hand on top of your partner’s 
hand/wrist. Do NOT grab old of it. Just rest it lightly on top. 
2. Your partner gently guides you around the room, whilst moving his hands 
high and low. 
3. With eyes closed, you have to follow your partner’s lead without breaking 
contact. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
46 
Eye Accessing Cues 
 
For a long time now it has been an established fact of neuroscience that how your 
eyes behave is directly related to how your mind is processing information. This fact 
has passed into popular sayings like “the eyes are the window of the soul”. For the 
purpose of Calibration, it is interesting to know that people will look in certain 
directions consistently in order to access certain types of information. Examine the 
following diagram: 
The diagram above indicates what it means when a normally organised right handed 
person moves their eyes (as you look at the person). The eye accessing patterns are 
indicators of what Representational System is being accessed. As with all other 
generalisations, this one does not hold true for everyone, so test it out and let 
experience be your guide! 
 
Visual Construct (V
C) – the first direction marked indicates that the person is 
creating visual images. They are imagining something. 
 
Visual Remembered (V
R) – looking in this direction indicates that the person is 
remembering a visual image. So it is something they actually saw once. 
 
Auditory (tonal) Construct (A
C) – this direction indicates that a sound is being 
imagined. For example how two instruments might sound played together. 
 
Auditory (tonal) Remembered (A
R) – looking to the side horizontally like this 
indicates the person is recalling the sound of something they previously heard. 
 
Kinaesthetic (K) – looking down in this direction implies the person is getting in 
touch with a feeling (either physical sensation or an emotional interpretation). 
 
Auditory Digital (Ad) – this direction suggests the person is listening to internal 
dialogue – i.e. he is talking to himself! 
 
Forward Defocused – sometimes people will simply stare straight ahead and 
defocus their eyes and/or dilate their pupils. This is a sign that they are accessing 
information in any of the Representational Systems, though it would most typically 
be the visual system that is accessed in this way. 
VC
Ad
AR
K
AC
VR

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
47 
Eye Accessing Elicitation Questions 
 
To check how a given individual’s eye accessing patterns are organised, simply ask 
them questions that require information from a specific Representational System and 
observe where their eyes go to answer the question.  
 
Here are some sample questions you might ask. Try them out. Then make up your 
own questions following the same structure. 
 
Visual Construct (V
C)  
• What would a Tiger with a Giraffe’s head look like? 
• What would you look like with short/long/purple hair? 
• What would your house look like covered in pink fur? 
 
Visual Remembered (V
R)  
• 
What does your living room look like? 
• 
Does your father have a beard? 
• 
What room is the largest mirror in your house in? 
 
Auditory (tonal) Construct (A
C)  
• 
What would a whisper sound like in space? 
• 
What would an elephant trumpeting “God Save the Queen” sound like? 
• 
What would a choirboy sound like singing AC/DC’s greatest hits? 
 
Auditory (tonal) Remembered (A
R)  
• 
Listen to your favourite song in your mind. 
• 
Which door slams more loudly your bedroom door or the kitchen door? 
• 
Just hum your national anthem for a moment. 
 
Kinaesthetic (K)  
• 
What would it feel like to stroke a lovely Persian cat? 
• 
What does it feel like to float on water? 
• 
What does the warmth of the sun feel like on your face? 
 
Auditory Digital (Ad)  
• 
Say to your self “The moon is green on the Ides of March!” 
• 
Mentally recite your favourite poem. 
• 
What do you say to yourself to get yourself motivated for something? 
 
TIP: if the person’s eyes do not respond clearly to these questions, ask them a 
detailed question requiring a comparison between two similar things.  
 
• 
Which is more X, A or B? 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
48 
Primary Systems, Lead Systems and Synaesthesias 
Primary System 
Most people will prefer to process information using one Representational System 
over another. You can tell this from several clues: their predicates (see 
Representational Systems – Predicates above), from their eye accessing cues (does 
looking in one direction seem to occur a lot?) and from other non-verbal cues.  
 
This preference is said to be the Primary System. 
Lead System 
A Lead System is the Representational System that someone has to go to first in 
order to access information in another system. It is like the key code in which all the 
other information is stored.  
 
For example, you might ask someone what the sound of her father’s voice is like. In 
order to answer she might have to first remember a picture of her father, imagine him 
speaking and then pay attention to the sound of his voice. In this case the Lead 
System would be visual as she had to access visual information before she could 
access the auditory information you asked about. 
 
You will detect a Lead System most easily by observing their eye accessing cues. 
Typically the eyes first go to one location (in this case V
R) and then move on to 
another location (here it would be A
R). 
Synaesthesia 
A synaesthesia occurs when information in two separate Representational Systems 
overlap so closely that they seem to merge. Typically the person’s eyes will go to 
one location (for example A
R) but their answer will be in a different Representational 
system (e.g. talking about their feelings - K). 
 
Synaesthesias are very useful patterns to have in high performance situations, like 
sports which require the ability to make virtually instant decisions and act on them. 
But they can also be the cause of problems. For example a simple phobia is a 
synaesthesia combining the stimulus (seeing a dog, for example) and a feeling (the 
sensation of fear). So a phobia is a V/K synaesthesia: see the dog = instantly feel fear. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
49 
Hakalao
21 
 
This exercise is useful to learn how to open your filters and perceive more of what is 
happening around you. It is taken from an ancient tradition known as Huna. In that 
tradition, the old masters would live in a very calm yet alert and aware mind-body 
state giving them direct access to Primary Experience. These masters where not only 
renowned for being highly perceptive and intuitive people, they also led very rich 
and fulfilling lives.  
 
1. Find a comfortable position, either sitting or standing. 
 
2. Fix your attention on a single point slightly above eye level. Focus on that 
point exclusively for a few moments, making fine distinctions in what you see. 
 
3. Then relax your eyes and notice the tendency for your vision to expand. You can 
see the floor, the ceiling and the sides of the room at the same time. There is no 
need to focus in on any particular thing. 
 
4. As you notice your breathing beginning to shift, become deeper and calmer, take 
this sense of visual awareness and wrap it around you and behind you like a 
velvety cloak. You may not be able to see what is behind you, but you can get a 
sense of what that would be like. 
 
5. Now focus on your hearing. Imagine your ears to be like a bat’s sonar device. 
Imagine your hearing stretching out in wider and wider circles. Become aware of 
the things you hear: people talking, the hum of the heating, traffic outside. 
 
6. Then move to your feelings. Imagine your feelings to be centred in your belly. 
Push your feelings out around you into the room like a sphere radiating from 
your belly. Get a sense of almost touching the walls with this felt-sense and 
everything in between. Know what that would feel like. 
 
7. Finally become aware of all three senses radiating around you like interlocking 
circles at the same time. Rest in this expanded awareness for a while, then come 
back to your ordinary state – if you wish it! 
 
 
                                                
21 I adapted this exercise from something I learned at a workshop with John Overdurf and Julie 
Silverthorn. This exercise is reproduced with permission from Ledochowski I., “The Deep Trance 
Training Manual Volume 1”, Crown House Publishing, 2003. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
50 
Outcomes 
Goal Setting  
 
Outcomes and Goal Setting are about the same thing: getting results. In my capacity 
as an executive coach for many senior figures at international organisations, I have 
had the good fortune of meeting many hugely successful people. The interesting 
thing is that the areas of their success, without a single exception, where the areas in 
which they knew what they wanted and went for it. Think back to the PACE formula 
for success: 
 
1. 
Know your outcome (Purpose) 
2. 
Be flexible (Adapt) 
3. 
Use your senses to gather feedback (Calibrate) 
4. 
TAKE ACTION NOW!!! (Engage!!)  
 
The very fist thing you have to do is to know what you want. This is nothing new. 
There is a well known Urban Myth about a Harvard/Yale Business School study
22 
on the setting and achieving of goals. It is supposed to have found that 
 
 
 
83 % of people in the study did not set goals; 
 
14 % did have goals, but did not write them down; and only 
 
3 % had goals, wrote them down and followed a daily plan of action. 
 
The follow up study years later showed that the 3% that wrote down their goals, 
were now earning more than ten times more than the 83 % that did not have any 
goals. 
 
People who don’t know where they want to go, end up going nowhere. 
 
The mind is designed to be goal oriented. That means that whatever you focus on 
will tend to become real for you. There is a theory that the act of writing down (or 
otherwise committing to) a goal engages the reticular activating system (RAS) in the 
brain, honing your awareness to the natural opportunities that we otherwise delete 
out of our awareness.  
 
Everyone has had the experience of buying a car or learning a new word, or 
something similar. All of a sudden, for the next few weeks, that type of car or word 
seems to appear everywhere. Coincidence? No! That is the RAS honing our 
                                                
22 Many self-improvement authors cite this study, sometimes as coming from Yale, sometimes from 
Harvard. Sadly neither university has any such study in its records, it appears that this is just an urban 
myth – though a might inspiring one! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
51 
awareness and drawing our attention to information that we used to delete up to that 
point. 
 
There are rules for engaging our natural goal achievement mechanism. Your mind is 
an information processor and the kind of information you put in will dictate the kind 
of results you get out. Over time hundreds of methods have developed designed to 
harness that goal-getting system and focus the mind on what you want. We will be 
addressing two of those systems later in this section. Remember however that the 
fundamental structure behind all of them is the PACE formula you are already 
familiar with. Whatever goal-setting and goal-getting system you decide to use for 
yourself, will ultimately be a refinement of those four simple steps. 
 
It is also worth re-emphasising that whatever happens on your journey is probably 
the right thing. Life has a habit of not taking the straight path. But if you are willing 
to take the picaresque adventures offered, you can often be delightfully surprised by 
those detours. Sometimes the detour ends up being quicker or getting you 
somewhere even better. In a book by Henriette Klauser
23 there are dozens of examples 
of people writing down a goal, losing the paper it was on, only to find it again years 
later and discovering they had achieved that goal already. 
 
This is an important point. Just as we can consciously interfere with our natural 
ability to learn, so we can “try too hard” to achieve our goals – leaving us with 
nothing. Sometimes our unconscious steps in and takes a hand. In the same way as 
the unconscious can “repress” traumatic memories, it can also cause us to “forget” 
about our goals. We misplace our paper and get sucked into life, leaving the 
unconscious mind free to navigate the channels of opportunity that life creates.  
 
We will be addressing those unconscious mechanisms later in this section. Before 
we get there though, it would be a very good idea to make sure that you actually 
want whatever it is that you set out to get/achieve. I am reminded of the old proverb: 
“Be careful what you wish for, because you might get it!” 
 
Finally, remember that the PACE formula begins with a purpose, but ends with you 
engaging in action. The biggest difference between a Walter Mittey figure and a… 
(insert your own role model for achievement here!) is that willingness to engage – to 
take action NOW!: 
 
“Whatever you can do, or dream you can, begin it. Boldness has genius, power, and 
magic in it. Begin it now!” 
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 
                                                
23 Klauser H. “Write It Down, Make It Happen: Knowing What You Want - and Getting It!” (2001) Simon 
& Schuster. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
52 
SMART Goals 
 
SMART is a simple acronym for the rules for setting goals. There are many others. 
It is neither the only one formula nor the best. But it is useful and serves as a great 
introduction for goal setting. As you know, the brain needs certain types of 
information in order to kick start the goal getting process. These are summarised in 
the SMART formula:  
 
Specific,  
Measurable,  
Affect (with emotion – so it affects you),  
Realistic,  
Timed. 
Specific  
Many people make the mistake of wanting something vague. They want to be 
“better” at something or have “more” of another. Well if your goal is to have more 
money, then finding a penny on the street will have achieved that. Job done. The 
mind can then turn on to other things. So be very specific about what you want. The 
easiest way to do this is to make sure the goal is measurable. 
Measurable 
How do you know when you are done? A goal is all about achieving something. 
Winning a race is about being the first across the line. What is your goal about? 
How will you know when you are done? You need to be able to measure the goal in 
some way. The best way to do that is to make sure that you define your goal in 
sensory specific terms.  
 
What will you be seeing, hearing, smelling, and feeling when you are done? 
Feelings are particularly important. Your feelings about the goal will provide the 
motivation to do something. No motivation, means no engagement! In order to have 
motivation, you need emotional content, or affect. 
Affect 
Affect, or the emotions you feel when you think about your goal, is the fuel that 
drives the engine. The stronger your emotions, the higher the motivation. The 
higher the motivation, the more resources your unconscious puts at your disposal. 
That way if it can be achieved, it will be. So you do need to be realistic. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
53 
Realistic 
All goals need to be rooted in the real world. They have to be humanly possible, 
and possible for you. This is a tricky area to judge – many people hide behind the 
idea that something is impossible as an excuse for not aiming too high! 
Timed 
Finally you need to set a timeframe for your goals. If you have no deadline, then you 
could spend a lifetime working towards it and never quite getting there. Exams have 
a way of focusing people’s minds – because of the deadline. Harness that power by 
committing to achieve your own outcomes! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
54 
Well Formed Outcomes – Conditions 
 
This is the traditional NLP model for setting goals – or outcomes. Outcomes need 
to be well formed. The SMART formula is a simplified example of the well-
formedness conditions in action. The advantage of this longer formulation is that you 
automatically clarify whether or not you actually want what you think you want. 
Checking that out in advance can save you a lot of time and aggravation later! 
 
There are seven conditions you need to fulfil when creating any goal: 
Stated in the Positive 
Any outcome that you plan needs to take you towards something not necessarily 
away from something. The problem with many people is that they are very clear on 
what the do not want, but have no idea about what they do want. There are two 
problems with this. First of all, there are a thousand ways of not getting something. 
The end goal is still unclear and there is still nothing concrete to aim for. 
 
Secondly, at the level of our Internal Representations there are no negations. You 
cannot not think about something, without thinking about it first. Try this: do not 
think of a red cat. Do not think of that red cat sitting in a red tree. Now don’t picture 
that red cat, sitting in that red tree, flicking its little red tail… What happened? You 
had to think about the red cat before you could negate it. It dominated your 
perceptual focus.  
 
Now remember that your focus determines your reality. If you keep focusing on what 
you do not want, your mind has a tendency of giving it to you. It is like sending an 
instruction to your unconscious saying “make me fail”. Obligingly enough it will 
respond along the lines of “you want failure? I can do that! Have an extra generous 
helping on me!!” 
 
So when creating your outcomes, be sure to plan for something you do want not 
something you don’t. 
Sensory Based 
This condition helps to make sure your goal is rooted in reality and is measurable. 
When setting goals you must avoid abstractions – they are by definition unclear and 
possibly unreal.  
 
Whatever you can imagine in all your senses, on the other hand, tends to become 
more real, more tangible and more motivating for you. So make sure you aim at 
something you can see, hear, feel, taste and smell. Create a vivid mental 
reconstruction of what it will be like when you get what you want. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
55 
Initiated and Maintained by Individual 
Another trap that people fall in to is absolving themselves of the responsibility to 
make something happen. They do this by including elements into their vision, their 
goal, which they have absolutely no control over. Typically this will include 
someone else doing something or making a change. 
 
Some examples of this mistake are: a wife setting a goal for her husband to pay more 
attention to her. A student planning to win the lottery. An aid worker setting a goal 
for world peace. 
 
Now the above goals are not all fatally flawed. It is possible for a wife to get the 
attention she craves from her husband. But she must be the one that changes. She 
needs to start asking herself “how do I have to start acting for him to want to be as 
attentive as I want him to be?” That is something she can initiate. 
 
You should also take care to ensure that whatever actions this goal demands of you 
things you can maintain. If you are like the student who wants to be a millionaire, 
and your solution involves working 18 hour days for 365 days in the year, please 
think again.  
 
This thought trap is one that almost every single person that goes on a diet falls 
into. The typical pattern for dieters is: imagine and ideal weight, start the diet plan, 
do well for a while and get to the target weight (or close to it). Then it all falls apart. 
The behaviour they engaged in to get to their outcome stops. They change their diet 
and, surprise, surprise, the weight comes piling on again. This is a classic example 
of someone neglecting to include and element of maintenance into their outcome! 
Ecological 
This is another facet of goal setting that is rarely talked about. By ecology we mean, 
how does this goal fit into the rest of that person’s life? Does it fit with his own 
personality, his family relationships, values and life goals? Is the goal worth the 
price you have to pay to get it? 
 
In the example of the would be millionaire, working hard may be fine per se. But let 
us imagine that he has just married and has children on the way. If he has to work all 
hours of the day, his goals for creating wealth may clash with his relationship with 
his wife. He may (as so many workaholics find out) loose his family that way. If the 
whole point of creating wealth was to support his family, he has totally blown it. 
Often the unconscious will sabotage attempts to achieve such goals because in the 
wider context of that person’s life it would simply be un-ecological! 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
56 
Preserves the Positive By-product of the Present State 
This condition is related to the ecology check. It refers to what psychologists call a 
“secondary gain”. Very often the side effects of problems we have or the positions we 
find ourselves in in life are highly desirable. The net hidden gain this condition may 
give us outweighs any drawbacks the problem may have. 
 
For example: a beautiful, young girl gets subjected to a sexual advance she does not 
know how to handle. Unconsciously she comes to the conclusion that she must 
become sexually undesirable in order to avoid such problem situations. So she feels 
compelled to eat until she reaches gargantuan proportions – she has achieved her 
unconscious aim, she is left alone. But now she needs to slim down for health 
reasons. This creates a dilemma: if she slims down, her social protection will go; if 
she does not, she may die… 
 
Any outcome that included her getting slimmer would also have to include an 
element dealing with the feared sexual advances or the goal will simply get 
sabotaged. The outcome needs additional elements such as assertiveness training, or 
enhanced self-esteem. NLP is about giving people more choice! 
Specific and Contextualised 
This combines the specific and time elements of the SMART formula. The goal 
needs to sit within a context of the person’s life tapestry. Making sure that the goal 
is sensory based will ensure it is also specific. But, she will need to make sure she 
considers such questions as where, when and with whom does she want this 
outcome (and where, when and with whom does she not want it!) 
Includes: Internal Process, Internal State and External Behaviour 
Achieving a goal will mean that you have to think in certain ways (your mental 
maps have to be changed), you have to feel certain things (remembering how state 
drives your behaviour) and finally you have to do certain things. 
 
The other six steps will have gone a long way to influencing your internal processes. 
The NLP change techniques were created to influence your internal processes through 
reframes, submodality shifts and altering strategies. 
 
Your outcome will also have to define how you will feel, both before and after you 
achieve it. It would be a hollow victory to get your hearts desire and be totally 
disappointed by the whole experience. Anchoring will help you find the states that 
motivate you and attach powerful feelings to your achievements. 
 
Planning without action is like trying to drive a car without an engine – it might be 
fun for a while, but is completely pointless. So make sure you include behavioural 
elements in your goals. You will have to do certain things both to get what you 
want and to keep it.  

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
57 
Well Formed Outcomes – Elicitation Questions 
 
1. Stated in the Positive 
What do you want? State it in the positive! 
 
2. Sensory Based 
What will you be seeing, hearing and feeling when you have achieved this goal? 
 
3. Initiated and Maintained by Individual 
Is this goal within your power to achieve, or even achievable at all? 
 
How much effort would you have to put into i. making the change happen and ii. 
keeping it going? 
 
What would motivate you to put that effort in? What might de-motivate you? 
 
4. Ecological 
What will change when you have your goal? 
 
Who will be affected by this change? 
 
How might others benefit from your achieving this goal? 
 
5. Preserves the Positive By-product of the Present State 
What won’t happen any more after you’ve changed? 
 
How has the problem been useful for you (NB you can ask this question sometimes, 
or ask yourself the question given your understanding of the whole situation!)? 
 
6. Specific and Contextualised 
Where and when do you want it? 
 
7. Includes: Internal Process, Internal State and External Behaviour 
How will you be feeling when you are being this new way (state)? 
 
What will you be doing (behaviour)? 
 
How will you be thinking (strategy)? 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
58 
Transformational Questions
24 
 
1. What do you want 
 
2. How will you know when you have it (keep it sensory based!)? 
 
3. When and where do you want it? 
 
4. What will happen when you have it? 
 
5. What will happen if you don’t have it (ecology check)? 
 
6. What won’t happen when you have it (ecology check)? 
 
7. What won’t happen if you don’t have it? 
 
8. What resources do you have to achieve this outcome? 
 
9. What are you going to begin to do right now! To achieve this outcome? 
 
10. How has your outcome changed (from question 2)? 
 
 
Basic Outcomes Interview 
1. Elicit Present State 
• 
What feelings/behaviours don’t you want anymore? 
• 
Context Where and when is the problem occurring? 
• 
Trigger what are seeing, hearing or feeling just before the problem 
starts? 
 
2. Elicit Outcome State 
• 
What do you want? 
• 
How will you know you have it (what will you be seeing, doing, 
feeling etc)? 
 
3. Elicit Resource States 
• 
What resources does the person have that can make a bridge from the 
Present State to the Outcome State. 
 
                                                
24 My thanks go to John Overdurf and Julie Silverthorn for this formulation. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
59 
Traditional Goal Getting Strategies 
Affirmations 
An affirmation is a positive statement that you repeat to yourself in an effort to 
persuade some part of you that it is true. Typical affirmations would be statements 
like “I love and accept myself”, “I am a successful…” and the classic “every day in 
every way I am getting better and better”. 
 
Affirmations were the brainchild of a French pharmacist and psychotherapist called 
Emile Coué. Dr Coué was influenced by some of the early pioneers of hypnotic 
techniques in France
25. Coué began to adopt hypnotic process in his work with 
people and he achieved some remarkable success. He later became internationally 
famous for preaching a form of self hypnosis, or autosuggestion. In this system he 
encouraged people to train their minds and use them more effectively to overcome 
illnesses, neuroses and other conditions.  
 
It was Coué who first came up with the self suggestion “every day in every way I am 
getting better and better”. He would train his patients to enter a hypnotic state, 
build their belief system and have them repeat these suggestions. After the initial 
training regime
26 these patients would respond tremendously well to self 
suggestions. Coué was also one of the first people to make a personal development 
film and cut a “self help” record. His popularity spread across the globe. 
 
This is where things went slightly awry. The public only got half the message. 
People started to believe that all they had to do was repeat a positive statement to 
themselves a few times each day and all would be well. In some cases that was 
indeed enough. But not in all.  
 
What is missing from affirmations is the suspension of the critical factor. That is 
key. Even Coué emphasised repeatedly that the autosuggestions must completely fill 
your mental perceptions. You cannot have a little voice in the background saying 
“that’s rubbish… of course its not true…etc”. One way to accomplish this is to go 
into trance. In trance the critical factor of the mind is suspended. That is why 
suggestions have a greater impact – they are accepted without being trashed on the 
way in. So affirmations will work, but you must suspend that disbelief as you use 
them, or they fall apart! 
                                                
25 Dr Bernheim and Auguste Liebault founded the Nancy School of hypnosis and psychotherapy. Freud 
later briefly studied with them as well. 
26 This is a very interesting regime training people to respond to “waking suggestions” like the Postural 
Sway, Full Body Catalepsy or Locking Hands. For more information on hypnotic techniques such as these 
see Ledochwoski “The Deep Trance Training Manual, Vol 1”, Crownhouse Publishing, 2003. For more 
information on the work of Coué, see Coué’s “Self mastery through conscious autosuggestion”, reprinted 
by Sun Publishing in 1981. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
60 
Visualisations 
 
The same mechanism that can make affirmation so powerful also makes 
visualisations work. A visualisation is an internal representation of something you 
want. It has been called guided meditation, guided fantasy, metaphorical processing, 
constructive daydreaming, imagineering and a host of other things. 
 
In essence, a visualisation is creating an experience inside the mind (in any sensory 
channel – so something you hear, feel, taste, smell and see inside your mind) that 
leads you towards a desired outcome. In that sense you could say that affirmations 
are type of visualisation. Visualisations do the same things, they just have a greater 
selection of senses to work through and choose from. But visualisations are prone to 
the same Achilles’ heel as affirmations: belief. 
 
If you can totally immerse yourself in a visualisation, to the point where you have 
not a scrap of attention left to doubt the content/process, your mind will tend to 
accept it as true and make it so. It is the element of doubt which destroys the efficacy 
of this system. This is why there are so many Walter Mitty figures out there. These 
are people wracked by self doubt busy trying to “programme” a better future, but self 
sabotaging it the moment they begin. Unfortunate to say the least! 
 
The solution, as with affirmations, is relatively simple: trance. In trance, we have an 
ever increasing suspension of the critical system – that part of our minds that 
analyses information and makes snap judgments about whether or not to believe the 
information. When the critical factor is asleep, information that was routinely being 
rejected or distorted has a chance to make an impact on our neurology, and change 
can occur. 
 
This is a good thing because visualisations, when used well, offer us a very powerful 
tool for personal change and for enhancing our present experience. In later sections of 
this companion book (e.g. Submodalities or Hypnosis & Trance) you will find 
many refinements to this simple concept which will allow you to transform the way 
in which your future unfolds. 
 
For the moment, however, there is an old adage amongst hypnotists which I would 
like you to remember: where the will and the imagination conflict, the imagination 
always wins. 
 
If you're going to be thinking, you may as well think big.  
Donald Trump 
Without dreams, there is no reality! 
Luis B. Couto 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
61 
Language Patterns 
 
Language is at the heart of NLP. It is also at the heart of how people create the 
realities they live in. The ability to use language with elegance and sophistication in 
order to influence people in positive ways is one of the hallmarks that sets NLP aside 
from other disciplines. It is worth getting to know this section very well. 
 
The use of “language patterns” is nothing more than consistently using certain 
methodologies in your communication style in order to enhance the impact. 
Everyone knows that there are people who are influential and charismatic (as 
therapists, businessmen, politicians etc) and people who are not. The fact is that 
everyone can be charismatic and influential if they communicate in charismatic and 
influential ways. That is something you can learn, as surely as you learned your 
native language. The study of language patterns can be said to be synonymous with 
studying the actual language of influence. 
 
Language is incredibly important as it has the power to simultaneously trap us and 
liberate our thinking
27: 
 
“The suggestion is that the function of the brain and nervous system and sense 
organs is in the main eliminative and not productive… The function of the brain 
and nervous system is to protect us from being overwhelmed and confused by this 
mass of largely useless and irrelevant knowledge, by shutting out most of what we 
should otherwise perceive or remember at any moment, and leaving only that very 
small and special selection which is likely to be practically useful… To make 
biological survival possible, Mind at Large has to be funnelled through the 
reducing valve of the brain and nervous system. What comes out the other end is a 
measly trickle of the kind of consciousness which will help us to stay alive on the 
surface of this particular planet. To formulate and express the contents of this 
reduced awareness, man has invented and endlessly elaborated those symbol-
systems and implicit philosophies that we call languages. Every individual is at 
once the beneficiary and the victim of the linguistic traditions into which he has 
been born – the beneficiary inasmuch as language gives access to the accumulated 
record of other people’s experience, the victim in so far as it confirms him in the 
belief that reduced awareness is the only awareness and as it bedevils his sense of 
reality, so that he is all too apt to take his concepts for data, his words for actual 
thing.” 
 
Language is an incredibly powerful tool. When used well, it can liberate the mind, 
affect people’s health and create wonderfully rich experiences for people. When used 
negatively, it can hurt, inhibit and in extreme cases even kill. 
                                                
27 Aldous Huxley, “The Doors of Perception”, New York, Harper and Row, 1954, pages 22-23. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
62 
Presuppositions 
 
A presupposition is a linguistic assumption, usually implied, that something is true. 
As an example, if I tell you the “the chair is in the back of the room”, I am 
presupposing an almost endless set of things: 
 
• 
There is such a thing as a room. 
• 
There is a larger structure to which the room belongs (rooms don’t exist by 
themselves!). 
• 
There is a “front” and at least two “sides” of the room. 
• 
The item identified as “chair” is separate from other items and from the rest of 
the room. 
• 
I am aware of the chair. 
• 
You understand the English language. 
 
The list of presuppositions that can be inferred from the simple statement can be 
extended from the pedantic to the bizarre. And yet these assumed meanings still 
guide our thought processes and can lock up our thinking. As these assumptions 
work outside of conscious analysis, we do not even know that there is an assumption 
being made which we might want to challenge. This makes presuppositions a very 
powerful way of communicating influentially – be that in education, therapy or 
business.  
 
Presuppositions are much weaker when they are stated deliberately than when they 
are implied. This is because stating the assumption out loud draws conscious 
attention – and thereby critical analysis – to it. Consider the following statements: 
 
• 
Just sign on the dotted line and you can take your new car home today! 
 
• 
I assume that you want to buy this car and that you want to take it home right 
now, so go ahead and sign on the dotted line and a binding contract will exist 
between us so that you can do just that. 
 
Both statements say essentially the same thing. However by implying the desire to 
buy the car, an automatic process is engaged. It is harder for someone to break 
through the implication, analyse the underlying assumption and the decide whether 
or not to reject it, then to just go along with things. You should remember that 
people can and do break such presuppositions on a daily basis. It does happen, 
particularly when people grow wise to such tactics (many people will be more wary 
when interacting with a sales person than in other situations). All that 
presuppositions do is stack the deck in your favour! 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
63 
Linguistic Presuppositions 
 
Presuppositions can be classified in all manner of ways. The labels of the 
classification are not important, it is the ideas that they represent that matter. By 
understanding different categories of presuppositions, you gain more choice both in 
the way you communicate and in the way you respond to other people’s 
communications! 
 
1. Existence 
Presuppositions of Existence suggest that something exist and something else 
does not exist. It creates a duality in reality. If I say “the chair is here” I am 
implying that a thing called a chair exists and that there are such things in 
existence that are not-chairs. Similarly saying “John is here” implies that there is 
a (person) thing called John and that other things are not-John. 
 
So existence can be implied by names, pronouns or descriptions (generic or 
precise). Likewise both adjectives and adverbs imply the existence. Saying that 
“there is a blue dragon” is more persuasive than simply “there is a dragon” as 
we assume that dragons exist, and the point of analysis is whether or not it is of 
the blue variety (NB notice that we are implying that other colour dragons also 
exist!)  
 
These are key presuppositions to master to present elegant and persuasive 
suggestions! 
 
2. Awareness 
Presuppositions of awareness direct attention without requiring a direct request or 
an order. If I were to ask you “did you notice the pressure of your shoes against 
your feet?” you have to put your awareness on your feet in order to answer that 
question. Chances are you were not aware of your feet until I made that statement, 
just as you were not noticing the sensation on the top of your scalp… but you do 
now. 
 
So we can direct people’s experiences directly or through negation. “Don’t think 
of a red cat. Don’t notice that red cat slinking around a red tree…” becomes a 
very leading statement – you have to think about it because you cannot not think 
about something without thinking about it first. This can be used to your 
advantage in a very powerful way when we delve deeper into hypnotic language. 
 
The key words here are things like: notice, aware, sense, realise, think, consider, 
feel, hear, see, observe… in fact any word that engages one of your five senses will 
focus the awareness as you wish it. 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
64 
3. Modal Operators 
Modal operators imply either a need (modal operator of necessity) or ability/desire 
(modal operator of possibility). This is implied by the language people use: 
 
Necessity: I need… we should… you must… they have to… she ought to… I am 
supposed to… 
 
(Im)Possibility: I can… we are able to… you will… you want to… I choose to… 
he decided to… she intends to… 
 
Necessity or possibility sends out strong messages on motivation. “You can’t do 
that!” is a controlling statement calculated (unconsciously) to imply impossibility 
and inhibit the likelihood of someone engaging in the activity (and finding out for 
themselves whether that is true!) 
 
4. Temporal 
Time is an interesting phenomenon. It only exists in our minds. When you think 
about it, all that exists is the present moment. When you think of the past, you 
are experiencing a memory construct in the present. When you plan the future – it 
happens in the present moment. Temporal Presuppositions play with people’s 
understanding of time to imply all kinds of things: 
 
Conditional Time 
If John becomes a fireman, I’ll eat my hat. John is not a fireman now. 
 
Similar phrases are: if, when, as soon as, once. 
 
Tense 
When I was a young man… I am not a young man now. 
 
This is the normal declension inherent in almost every language: I am, I was, I 
had been, I will be, I will have been. 
 
Change of time 
I am already here.  
 
Similar words are: begin, yet, stop, start, proceed, continue, still,  
already, 
anymore. 
 
Putting these together you can create a real time-warp in a mouthful: Once you 
begin to understand what you have not yet grasped you will stop worrying about 
what you cannot do and start to anticipate a time when you will have looked back 
at all this fondly and get on with learning just one thing at a time. 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
65 
5. Ordinal 
Ordinal Presuppositions imply a certain order or sequence of events. The second 
thing you should note is that you will only understand that last point when you 
examine it with the very first thing you learned about.  Thirdly remember that 
implying an order also implies a flow of time, so in some ways these 
presuppositions are linked to Temporal ones. 
 
Also look out for words like before, earlier than, ahead of, in advance, previous to, 
during, throughout, for the duration of, in the course of, after, following, 
subsequent to, later than, next, prior to. 
 
6. Binds 
Binds and double binds are a very peculiar type of presupposition. Whole 
textbooks have been written on double binds as they are very powerful ways of 
constraining thoughts and understandings. This can be useful (as when applied 
therapeutically) or unhelpful (causing people to have problems or be inhibited in a 
negative way). 
 
A bind in essence creates a dichotomy: it is this or that. This can be an unfair 
division as in “who do you love more, your son or your daughter?” or a helpful 
way of making distinctions. 
 
A double bind is a bind presented in such a way as to give the illusion of choice. 
The overused sales line “would you like to sign the contract out here or in my 
office?” illustrates this illusion clearly. The choice is not about whether or not 
you sign the contract (that bit is presupposed) but where that will take place. We 
will cover more convoluted examples of double binds in action in the Milton 
Model part of this section. 
 
7. Cause-Effect 
Cause-Effect presuppositions assume that one thing caused another. Some of the 
other categories of presuppositions often have the effect of implying that one thing 
caused another: as soon as you close your eyes, you will feel more relaxed. This 
implies a clear relationship between eye closure and relaxation. The interesting 
thing is that when the statement is accepted without too much critical thinking, it 
will become accepted and unconsciously every time you close your eyes, you will 
automatically begin to relax more fully! 
 
Words to look out for are: as… then, causes…, because…, makes…, if… then, 
since…, … so…, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
66 
8. Complex Equivalence 
This is another powerful presupposition implying synonymity. When two things 
are equated in the mental maps then they become the same experience for us. Take 
“The ice cream is cold” we have linked the ice cream and the state of being cold. 
They are the same thing. Ice cream = cold and cold = ice cream.  
 
Complex equivalence is the glue that holds our internal realities together. This 
category will be examined more fully in the Meta and Milton Model sections. 
 
Words to look out for are any variation of the verb “to be”. 
 
9. Comparison 
“If you loved me as much as you love your pets, we would be happy!” A 
comparison can imply things whilst diverting attention away from the suggestion. 
In this example, the implication is that the person loves her pets. That is not “at 
issue” here. If something is going to be analysed (and argued) it is more likely that 
it will be how much she “loves me” or how happy the two would be together. 
 
10. Repetition 
Any word the begins with the prefix “re-“ has embedded the suggestion that the 
action has already occurred at least once. “He returned to the lake” can only mean 
that he was at the lake at least once before and that he left the lake before coming to 
it second (or third etc) time. 
 
This repetition can also be implied by other words that have a similar effect: “He 
walked to the lake again”. Look out for words such as again, once more, for a 
second time, another time, also, too, as well etc. 
 
11. Other Classes 
Presuppositions can arise in any context. The above are just some common 
examples. More sneaky ones exist: “The teacher is pregnant” clearly suggest that 
the teacher is a woman (unless you are reading a science fiction novel).  
 
Likewise “If he talked to the police, we are done for!” shows how 
presuppositions can be created by something as subtle as a change of intonation. 
This last example, without any emphasis being placed, would imply that “he” 
may or may not have talked to someone. However as soon as “the police” is 
emphasised in a given tonality, there is no doubt that “he” did talk to someone, it 
is just a question of who that someone might have been. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
67 
Presuppositions Exercises 
 
Presuppositions Exercise 1: Implication 
 
What is the implication of the following statements: 
 
• 
If he says that again, I will hit him. 
• 
The next thing to do is whip up the egg. 
• 
I had a crush on him. 
• 
He moved to the front of the room. 
• 
He spoke slowly and deliberately. 
• 
She is more competitive than her sister. 
• 
He likes to remember the good old times. 
• 
If only the firemen had come sooner, the house would still be standing. 
• 
As soon as you’ve turned over your papers the test begins. 
• 
His smile made her feel weak. 
• 
Shyness is caused by fear. 
• 
He is frowning, which means he is unhappy with me. 
• 
You need to pay more attention to details. 
• 
Have you seen that sunset! 
• 
Did you know that your hat is on your head? 
• 
Either he goes or I quit? 
• 
Have you stopped beating your wife yet – answer me Yes or No?! 
• 
Sad films make me cry. 
• 
Dogs frighten me. 
• 
Turning the alarm on is the last thing you should do each night. 
• 
Talking to her is the last thing you want to do! 
• 
He has to find a job before he can respect himself again. 
• 
John broke the chair over his back. 
• 
Notice the film beginning to grow over the liquid. 
• 
Can you hear that? 
• 
Don’t look at his eyes, it only makes him angrier! 
• 
Only you can learn this. 
• 
You can only learn this. 
• 
You can learn only this. 
• 
I wanted to talk to her, but I did not have the time. 
• 
You can jump high, but you can’t run far. 
• 
You can jump high and you can’t run far. 
• 
You can jump high even though you can’t run far. 
• 
Have you understood it yet? 
  

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
68 
Presuppositions Exercise 2: Presuppositions –v– Mind Reading 
 
There is a difference from what a sentence implies must be true and what it implies 
could be true, though it need not be so. “I love big planes” presupposes that I have a 
strong positive feeling for planes. You might think that it also implies that I dislike 
small planes. This may or may not be true. I t would require a mind-reader (or 
another question) to know for sure. Notice how the boundary between truth and 
fiction (presuppositions and mind reads) is not always clear cut: 
 
• 
I don’t know if I should stop beating my son. 
1. He has a son. 
2. He is a bad father, and should be shot. 
3. He currently beats his son. 
4. He loves his son. 
 
• 
I don’t see why I can’t do it. All my friends can do it! 
1. He feels he’s being treated unfairly. 
2. He wants to be more like his friends. 
3. His friends do something he does not do. 
4. He is an incompetent fool, and should be shot. 
 
• 
He thought it was better to try and fail than not to try at all. 
1. He was afraid. 
2. He failed. 
3. He tried to do something. 
4. He is a looser trying to make himself feel better, and should be 
shot. 
 
• 
If the cat does not stop meowing, I will have to shoot it! 
1. The cat is meowing. 
2. The cat was meowing. 
3. The cat will meow. 
4. He wants to shoot the cat. 
5. He is a cruel man (who should be shot) 
 
• 
I have to set up unrealistic expectations. 
1. She feels trapped. 
2. She has expectations. 
3. She knows when she’s being unrealistic. 
4. She is obsessive about making unrealistic expectations. 
5. She should be shot. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
69 
The Meta Model History 
 
The Meta Model was born in the mid 1970s when the co-developers of NLP, John 
Grinder and Richard Bandler, undertook a very interesting project. They realised that 
there were two leading therapists, Fritz Perls and Virginia Satir, who were getting 
consistent and exceptional therapeutic results with their clients, at a time when other 
therapists had at best haphazard results. They decided to model these therapists 
using an intriguing approach: language.  
 
First they became good therapists themselves, so that they could share the same 
intuitions as their models. They both ran group therapy classes to practice their 
skills. Once they could both get consistent changes with the people in their groups, 
they began to analyse the language they were using and compared it to transcripts 
from Fritz and Virginia. Patterns began to emerge. It appears that the same type of 
questions were being asked time and time again immediately before a client made an 
important shift. The rest of the time seemed to be spent on fluff talk. 
 
John and Richard began to experiment with their findings. They would restrict 
themselves to asking only one type of question for the course of a session. Everyone 
that came to their group that week would be asked the same question over and over 
again, to test the results. Slowly but surely they teased out a set of patterns that 
allowed them to perform verbal miracles: they had discovered a language that had 
“magical” effects on people with problems. The Meta Model was born. 
 
The Meta model is a way of analysing the things that people say in order to see what 
kind of mental maps they are making – including the all powerful assumptions that 
they have made about life, the universe and everything. As you will recall from the 
Universal Modelling Process on page 5, our experience gets deleted, distorted and 
generalised before we can create a more simplistic and workable map of the world. 
When people speak, they are indirectly describing the building blocks of their mental 
maps. They are telling you what they are paying attention to and what they are 
ignoring.  
 
The Meta model allows you to recover deleted information, so you have more to 
work with. It allows you to challenge rigid mindsets, to open the doorway for more 
flexibility and better choices (the holy grail of therapy!). Finally it stops you from 
making your own assumptions about what is going inside someone else’s head. 
Instead it compels you to ask meaningful questions so that you can understand what 
is actually happening inside someone else’s mind, as opposed to hallucinating how 
you think they should be thinking! 
 
N.B. Use this model carefully. The wrong tone could make you seem hostile! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
70 
The Meta Model – Short Form 
 
The Meta Model is an application of the work done by Noam Chomsky
28. Grinder 
and Bandler applied Chomsky’s ideas to therapeutic conversations – later extending 
it to any kind of communication. It first appeared in print in the mid 1970s
29 and 
forms the backbone of NLP. In fact it was around several years before the Milton 
Model and the now infamous “NLP techniques” were developed.  The following is 
only a working introduction to the Meta model. For a deeper understanding, I 
strongly recommend that you read Grinder and Bandler’s original books on this 
topic
30.  
 
According to Chomsky
29, language exists on two levels: the surface structure and 
the deep structure. Surface structure refers to the words and phrases people use to 
represent their experience (their mental maps) to others. Deep structure refers to the 
underlying mental map, the full linguistic representation of the experience inside a 
person. If the surface and deep structures match, they are said to be “synonymous”. 
If, however, they do not match, they are said to be “ambiguous”. The purpose of the 
Meta model is to gently probe for and retrieve from the source of any ambiguity so 
that the surface and deep structures match each other again – they become 
synonymous. 
 
Distortions 
Cause-Effect 
“You make me feel inferior.” 
A cause-effect construction exists where a person incorrectly assumes that someone or 
something outside of themselves is to blame for causing them to feel or behave a 
certain way. The fact is that the individual causes themselves to feel or behave in a 
particular way. At some level they have chosen to respond to that someone or 
something as they did.  
 
The Meta Model challenge here is designed to recover that choice! 
 
Complex Equivalence 
“When he looks that way, he hates me.” 
A complex equivalence is the interpretation of one experience meaning (i.e. being 
synonymous with) another experience. In fact the two may not actually mean the 
same ting at all. In the above example, “the look” may be simply be a genetically 
accidental arrangement of his features, which is being misinterpreted. 
 
The Meta Model challenge provides a counter example to balance out the deep and 
the surface structures. 
                                                
28 Noam Chomsky, Syntactic Structures. 1957, Mouton de Gruyter; Reprint edition (June 1975). Chomsky 
later changed his theory, but the basic structure is still highly enlightening. 
29 Grinder J. and Bandler R. “The Structure of Magic: A Book About Language and Therapy” Volumes I 
and II,  Science & Behavior Books; (reprinted 1990 and 1980 respectively). 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
71 
 
Mind Read 
“She fears me!” 
A mind read is a statement claiming to know what someone else is thinking or 
feeling, without identifying the basis for reaching that conclusion. Whilst reading 
people’s minimal cues can give you an accurate understanding of what someone is 
thinking or feeling (see Calibration), that requires a sensory based source of 
information that has been checked for accuracy. Often people distort their perception 
and forget how they know what they think they know! 
 
The Meta Model challenge recovers this source of information. 
 
Lost Performative 
“Too many cooks spoil the broth.” 
A lost performative is a value judgement about something without any further 
information. The person who made the original judgement gets deleted and the client 
ends up acting as if the statement were true. Old truisms like “a stitch in time saves 
nine” and “many hands make light work” are classic lost performative. But so are 
more subtle statements like “that’s not possible”. These are statements of belief that 
may or may not be true. 
 
The Meta Model challenge recovers the source of the belief, so that the person can 
decide on a more rational basis whether or not it is actually true! 
 
Generalisations 
Modal Operators 
There are two kinds of modal operators:  necessity and possibility. 
 
Necessity 
“I have to win!” 
These verbs assume a need or requirement to do (or not do) something. This 
assumption deletes the ability to select from other choices that might be available. 
The choices that are left might be unpleasant or limiting, leaving the client nowhere 
to go. Trigger words for this pattern are: I must, should, need to, have to etc as well 
as I must not, shouldn’t etc. 
 
The Meta Modal challenge recovers consequences and possible outcomes. 
 
Possibility 
“I can’t do it!” 
These assume certain things about what choices are available and what is possible, 
rather than what is necessary. Trigger words are can, might, could, can’t, won’t etc. 
 
The Meta Model challenge recovers the cause or the consequence of breaking through 
the limitation presupposed by the statement. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
72 
Universal Quantifier 
“I can never get it right!” 
These are the ultimate generalisations. They presume the extreme in a very black or 
white kind of way. They assume that something is always true or never true, and 
thus cut out the possibility of having shades of grey! Trigger words include never, 
always, all, everyone, nobody etc. 
 
The Meta Model challenge recovers alternative possibilities. 
 
Deletions 
Nominalisations  
“My decision is final!” 
Any abstraction is a nominalisation. So if you cannot put it in a wheelbarrow (albeit 
a very large one) then it is a nominalisation, a figment of our imagination. It is an 
attempt to turn a process into a thing. A “decision” does not exist because a 
constant choice has to be exercised to maintain that “decision”. Similarly, “love” 
does not exist. It is a process – a way of feeling about someone and interacting with 
them. It is not something that you have, like a vase; it is something you do, like 
breathing! 
 
The Meta Model challenge transforms the concept back into something you do! 
 
Unspecified Verbs 
“I can’t learn” 
An unspecified verb refers to any verb (i.e. action) that is not properly described. In a 
certain sense you might say that ALL verbs are unspecified, because you could 
always say more about how specifically someone is doing something. 
 
The Meta Model challenge recovers information about the action. 
 
Simple Deletions 
Simple Deletions 
“I’m not sure” 
 
The Meta Model challenge recovers the portion that was deleted. 
 
Lack of Referential Index 
 
“It’s not safe” 
Here the person or thing doing something is deleted. 
 
The Meta Model challenge recovers the subject (i.e. the person doing it) 
 
Comparative Deletions 
“It is better there” 
Here a comparison is made, but without saying what it is being compared to. 
 
The Meta Model challenge recovers the person or thing that is being used for 
comparison. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
73 
The Meta Model Table 
 
Meta Pattern 
Example 
Challenge 
 
Distortions 
Cause-Effect 
You make me feel 
inferior. 
How does X [do I] cause 
you to choose to Y {feel 
inferior]? 
Complex Equivalence 
When he looks that way, 
he hates me. 
How does X [him looking 
that way] mean Y [he 
hates you]? 
Mind Read 
She fears me! 
How do you know? 
Lost Performative 
Too many cooks spoil the 
broth. 
Says who?!? 
 
Generalisations 
Modal Operator: 
Necessity 
I have to win! 
What would happen if 
you didn’t? 
Modal Operator: 
Possibility 
I can’t do it! 
1. What would happen if 
you did? 
 
2. What prevents you? 
Universal Quantifier 
I can never get it right! 
1. Never ever?!? 
 
2. What about time X? 
 
3. What would happen if 
you did [get it right]? 
 
Deletions 
Nominalisation 
My decision is final! 
How are you X-ing 
[deciding] that? 
Unspecified Verb 
I can’t learn. 
How specifically do you 
X [can you not learn]? 
Simple Deletion: 
 
   1. simple deletion 
 
 
I’m not sure. 
 
 
About what? 
   2. lack of referential 
index 
 
It’s not safe. 
 
What specifically [is not 
safe]? 
   3. comparative 
deletion 
 
It is better there. 
 
Compared to what? 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
74 
Re-chunking Questions 
 
An important influence on the way people think, feel and behave is the level of 
abstraction that they like to think in. It seems obvious that giving lots of detail to a 
“big picture” thinker would be a lesson in creating frustration, but what can be done 
about it? 
 
The ability to recognise the level of abstraction that a person is operating from will 
allow you to match your communication style to that of your audience. These levels 
of abstraction also contain the key to creating agreement (as in conflict resolution and 
other negotiations) as well as creating a valuable tool for creativity. 
 
Re-chunking questions are a series of questions that will allow you to climb up the 
ladder of abstraction into global concepts, or climb down into detail, as well as 
allowing you creative lateral leaps. Re-chunking questions come in two forms, 
intention and class. 
 
Before we get into those concepts, let’s have a look at logical levels: 
 
Let us take a tree as an example. A tree is an example of a plant. A plant is an 
example of a life form. But a tree can also be specified into type (oak, hazel, ash) or 
into parts (branches, twigs, leaves). Each part can in turn be broken down further into 
minute details, ultimately reaching the subatomic level.  
 
The questions that we ask will allow us to navigate up and down this “scaling” 
mechanism to find the right level of abstraction for the situation in hand.  
 
To climb up the ladder, we simply ask “what is this an example of?” 
 
To climb down the ladder, we ask “who, what, how, when, which… 
specifically?” 
 
We can also chunk laterally by chunking up and back down one step. So an Oak is 
an example of a tree. An Ash is a specific type of tree. So an Ash would be a lateral 
chunk from an Oak. This is the basis of lateral thinking! 
Plants 
Tree 
Branches, Twigs, Leaves 
 
 
U
p 
 
D
o
w
n 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
75 
 
Intention 
 
Human beings can not be random. Every act, thought or feeling is a consequence of 
some process and some form of evaluation occurring. When there is a conflict, either 
internally in the person, or externally with others, there is a lack of agreement or 
harmony in the detail. The traditional solution is to compromise. That way nobody 
gets what they want. But there is a better solution: chunking up on the intention. 
 
You see, every behaviour is motivated, ultimately, by a positive intention. 
Sometimes you have to look for a while to get to something positive. Persist, 
because it is there! When you find that intention, you can chunk down from that 
intention to alternative behaviours, which still satisfy the intention. If you have two 
people and chunk up high enough on their intentions, you must eventually come to 
a point of contact. That is your starting point for a solution (see the negotiation 
frame under Framing later). 
 
To chunk up on an intention, ask questions like: 
 
• 
What is the purpose of doing X? 
• 
When you get X, what does that give you? 
• 
What does that allow you to do/feel/have? 
• 
What is important about that? 
• 
What is your intention? 
 
Class 
 
Chunking up and down on class is the conventional way to use of logical levels of 
abstraction. The example of the tree above is an exercise in chunking up and down 
on class.  
 
This is a very useful exercise to create freedom in the way you think and express 
yourself. Creativity relies heavily on your ability to chunk laterally (which is 
nothing more than chunking up a step, then chunking back down to an alternative at 
the original level).  
 
Practice climbing and descending this ladder of abstraction until you can navigate it 
fluidly in any direction. That will serve you very well in the future when you want 
to communicate with certain people (who prefer a different chunk size to you), when 
you wish to solve problems or when you need a little more creativity. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
76 
The Milton Model History 
 
After Grinder and Bandler had cracked the Meta Model, they felt very pleased with 
themselves. They thought they had found the “universal solution” to helping people 
make positive changes in their lives. All they had to do was to get very specific with 
people and use carefully honed questions to let people rediscover that they had a 
choice in life. 
 
They went to their mentor, Gregory Bateson, and revelled in their cleverness. 
Bateson was suitably impressed. Then he turned the tables on them. He told them of 
a remarkable man, a Dr Milton Erickson, who achieved what appeared like miracles 
on a routine basis. He worked with psychiatric patients no one else could get 
through to, as well as with ordinary people. But Erickson was not being very 
specific with his language. In fact he was quite the opposite. He had turned being 
vague into a true art form – a therapeutic art form! 
 
John and Richard were intrigued. They had to meet this man and unravel the 
enigma. How could he systematically break all the rules they had so carefully laid 
bare, and yet achieve even better results than they did?!? So they travelled to 
Phoenix, Arizona to discover things for themselves. What they learned completely 
altered the course of their research. NLP was finally born. 
 
What John and Richard discovered was that Milton was inducing trances in people 
by using a very respectful and elegant form of language that violated everything the 
Meta Model did. In fact Milton used language construct that did not even exist in 
the Meta Model. All of his language managed to be very vague, whilst it sounded 
completely specific. Dr Erickson’s patients would unconsciously fill in the details 
with their own therapeutic content and thus overcome their problems quickly and in 
a manner that uniquely fitted them. 
 
Richard and John studied Milton’s technique intensively, and finally managed to 
distil it into a simplified model – the Milton Model
30. The Milton Model simplifies 
the genius of one of the best hypnotists and therapists in the western world. It is a 
powerful model for influential communication in general – not just therapeutic 
trances. Elements of the Milton Model have made their way into fields like sales, 
motivational speaking, story telling and education. 
 
I will not go into great detail with the Milton Model in this book. It is already 
covered by me in the Deep Trance Training Manual. Instead I will give examples of 
the Milton Model in action, with only a very few additional explanations. 
                                                
30 The Milton Model was first published in Grinder and Bandler “The Patterns of the Hypnotic 
Techniques of Milton H. Erickson, M..D.” Vol 1 & 2 (Vol 2 with Delozier, J) Meta Publications 1975. 
Reprinted by Metamorphous Press 1997. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
77 
The Milton Model – Short Form 
Cause - Effect 
Because you have taken time to read this section carefully, you will find it easier 
and easier to understand these language patterns. As soon as you close your eyes 
and consider what you have learned, all will become very clear for you, which will 
cause you to feel a tremendous sense of satisfaction NOW! 
 
Complex Equivalence  
Reading this means that you are absorbing all kinds of things unconsciously. Any 
unconscious activity you have means your body can relax more fully. Now as you’re 
relaxing now, that means that you are going deeper and deeper into trance… 
 
Mind Reading 
I know that you’re wondering how to make sense of this all. You will be feeling a 
sense of curiosity about the Milton Model, and that curiosity is making you wonder 
about all kinds of things…  
 
Lost Performative 
And it’s a good thing to wonder about things. Wonder leads to learning and it is 
important that you learn things now… 
 
Modal Operators of Necessity/Possibility 
And you must not relax too much, although you can relax as much as you need to 
learn what you have to learn and absorb only as much as you can do so 
comfortably… 
 
Universal Quantifiers (Generalisations) 
Because you have all the knowledge you need. Everywhere you turn there are new 
things to be discovered, you can never not learn or discover something. You must 
always remember that you have everything you need to achieve all the things you 
want to… 
 
Nominalisations 
And your learnings will grow into new heights and grow to new depths as your 
curiosity propels you into the future where all the happiness and satisfaction that 
your achievements can bring you to, increase your education, and leverage off the 
understandings you have acquired over time so that they reorganise into the perfect 
structure to attract wealth, happiness, health and love into your life… 
 
Unspecified Verbs  
You can do this, by simply allowing the sensations to intensify, you learn, grow 
and transform… 
Lack of Referential Index 
one can learn to transform and grow in this way… 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
78 
 
Comparative Deletions 
You simply learn more and become better at using your internal processes to give 
you the quality of experiences you really want more of. Because it is good to strive 
to have more good things in life, better relationships, happier times, greater 
resources… 
 
Tag Questions   
And you know what it is like to have such resources, don’t you? You’ve learned 
many things in the past, haven’t you? Which means you can continue to learn the 
kind of things you need to learn in order to achieve the things you want to achieve, 
don’t you? 
 
Pacing Current Experience 
And as you sit there, reading these words and allowing the sounds of your 
environment to continue without disturbing you, you can enter a deep state of 
reflection. This reflection can intensify as you breathe in and when you breathe out 
you can notice your breathing as you continue to ease deeper and deeper into a very 
pleasant state of comfort… 
 
Conversational Postulate 
and could you feel more relaxed and absorbed in these ideas I am presenting you? 
Would it be possible for you to enjoy a deepening sense of comfort and 
tranquillity? Would that mean you are learning things at a deeper unconscious 
level? 
 
Double Binds 
So, do you want to go into a deep trance now and learn, or would you prefer to 
learn about the right level trance for you right now? 
 
Extended Quotes (Stacking Realities) 
As Milton Erickson used to say “it is important that you learn to trust your 
unconscious mind implicitly… it is a hell of a lot smarter than you are! 
 
Ambiguities  
Phonological - homonyms create mild confusion and hence trance: "here (hear) 
now, what's going on?" 
Punctuational - a run on sentence: "use your head… right into trance now" 
Syntactic - the syntax is not immediately clear: "Hypnotising hypnotists can be 
tricky" 
Scope - the scope of the context is unclear: "Speaking to you as someone fascinated 
by hypnosis…" 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
79 
Additional Language Patterns 
 
Truisms about Sensations  
"Most people experience one hand to be warmer than the other." 
"Most people enjoy the warmth of a summer’s day." 
"Many people feel good, as they recognise certain facts about themselves." 
 
Truisms utilising Time  
"Sooner or later, your eyes will close." 
"As soon as you’re ready you can go into trance now...." 
 
Not Knowing, Not Doing 
"And there’s no need to talk or move or make any effort." 
"You don't even have to think about that now." 
 
Open-ended Suggestions 
"We all have potential we are unaware of, and we usually don't know how it will 
be expressed." 
"He doesn't know what he is learning, but he is learning. And it isn't right for me 
to tell him, 'You learn this or you learn that!' let him learn whatever he wishes, in 
what ever order he wishes." 
 
Covering all Possibilities of Responses  
"Soon you will find yourself really understanding this. Perhaps that will happen 
quickly, or perhaps it will take longer and perhaps you will not think you’re 
understanding anything at all. Let that be your sign that you’re learning at the 
deepest unconscious level!" 
 
Questions to Facilitate New Response Possibilities (TDS) 
Focus Attention "How do you know when you are truly motivated?" 
Facilitating Internal Change "And what will be the effective means of improving 
now? Will it be because you simply remember to do all those little things you need 
to first because they make the big tasks really easy?" 
 
Compound Suggestions 
Yes Set "The sun is shining, its warm, it is such a beautiful day, let's go 
swimming." 
Associations "With each breath you take you can become more aware of the natural 
rhythms of your body and feelings of comfort that develop." 
Opposites "As the door closes feel yourself going even deeper into trance now." 
 
Negative - Tag Questions  
"And you can, can you not?"  
 
"You can't stop it, can you?" 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
80 
Negative - Until 
"You don't have to sign the contract until you are ready." 
"You won't do it until you’ve seen how easy it is." 
 
Shock, Surprise 
"Your sex life…  (Pause) just what you need to know and understand about it… 
(Pause) Secretly what you want… (Pause) is more important to you.” 
 
Implication and Implied Directive  
“If you sit down then you will learn this more easily.” 
"If... then" statements 
 
Binds and Double Binds 
Approach – Avoidance “Would you like to sign the contract now or later?” 
Conscious – unconscious “your unconscious is the storehouse of all your 
memories, skills and resources, so your unconscious mind knows more than your 
conscious mind does, and if your unconscious mind knows more than your 
conscious mind does, then you really know more than you think you do.” 
 
Multi-Level Communication (What is a Meta for?) 
As the Unconscious mind responds strongly to symbolism, very often an anecdote or 
seemingly unrelated story can be used to get the point across. Metaphors can be used 
directly and indirectly and are a specialised form of language pattern all of their own. 
In brief however, an easy metaphor can be constructed using an isomorphic structure: 
that is elements in the metaphor represent and mirror events being experienced by the 
person in the real world. An example of a metaphor for getting the best out of people 
can be taken from Dr. Milton Erickson’s work: 
 
One day an unknown horse strayed into the yard of the farm where I lived as a 
child. No one knew where the horse came from, as it had no markings by which it 
could be identified. There was no question of keeping the horse – it must belong to 
someone. 
 
My father decided to lead it home. He mounted the horse and led it to the road and 
simply trusted the instinct of the horse to lead itself towards its home. He only 
intervened when the horse left the road to eat grass or to walk into a field. On 
these occasions my father would firmly guide it back to the road. 
In this way the horse was soon returned to its owner. The owner was very 
surprised to see his horse once more and asked my father, ‘how did you know the 
horse came from here and belonged to us?’ 
 
My father replied, ‘I didn’t know, the horse knew! All I did was to keep him on the 
road.’ 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
81 
Congruence 
 
Language patterns are powerful, but only when they are supported by the right 
setting. As you recall the Birdwhistell study from the beginning of this manual, you 
will remember that only 7% of the meaning is conveyed by the words that you use. 
The rest is transmitted by your tonality and you body language. Whilst much can be 
done to improve these (and I’ll make a few suggestions shortly), the most effective 
way to communicate is to actually mean what you say. Your unconscious will then 
be free to transmit the appropriate non-verbal signals to support your message! 
 
Non-verbal cues 
 
Non-verbal cues are very important, as carry approximately 93% of the meaning in 
any communication you make. To be influential, your voice will be the tool of 
choice so you must learn to play it like an instrument. At advanced levels of 
communication your voice and tone will allow you to communicate with someone at 
several levels at the same time. This is one of the primary skills of influential and 
charismatic people. Tonality can be honed by paying attention to some basic 
concepts. 
 
Posture 
It is important to have a balanced and aligned posture in order to give the vocal 
chords sufficient room to vibrate and to use the whole chest cavity to create depth 
and volume. Your posture will also affect the state of mind you are in, which in turn 
will affect your BMIRs. The best way to stand is relaxed, with a straight back, your 
head balanced lightly on loose shoulders. This way you ensure that your spine takes 
all of the weight of your head and back as opposed to forcing your muscles to do 
that.  
 
Breathing 
Deep breathing is essential to projecting your voice and increasing volume without 
strain. All singers know how vital it is to use your lungs fully in order to get the 
most out of your voice. As a rule you should be breathing from low in your belly as 
opposed to high up in your chest. 
 
Emotion/Enthusiasm 
Enthusiasm comes from the Greek word “Entheos” – meaning god-like – because it 
has a god-like effect on other people. When communicating, learn to squeeze the 
meaning out of words so that the very sound of them conveys your message. The 
easiest way to do that is to actually feel the excitement, love, or danger of the 
situation you are describing. Your state will then invariably affect your tonality. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
82 
Inflection 
In the English language, we have three primary inflections for conveying different 
messages. An upward inflection usually suggests a question, a flat/even inflection is 
used for statements and a downward inflection is reserved for commands/instructions. 
People tend to respond to these inflections instinctively without analysing them. By 
using them with precision, you can cast doubt on an idea, get people to ask 
questions of themselves and have people follow instructions without overtly having 
to do any of these things. Inflections and tonality are also crucial when it comes to 
Embedded Commands (see Hypnosis & Trance). 
 
Pauses 
Although not strictly a part of tonality, pauses can have a powerful effect when used 
at the right time. They can be used in multi-level communications (e.g. to mark out 
embedded commands), to build response potential from your listener when making a 
point or to gain an advantage in negotiations (most people cannot leave a silent gap 
beyond a few seconds and will begin to provide alternative options to fill them if left 
too long). Be aware however that pausing at inappropriate moments can make a 
person appear slow witted, incompetent or unsure of themselves. 
 
Exercise 1
31 
 
1. Stand with your back and head up straight. Breathe deeply from your belly. 
2. Look at the list of words below. Think of what each word means to you, the 
emotion associated to it. Ask yourself: what sound best represents that 
meaning/emotion? 
3. Say the word out loud to your partner using that sound. 
 
Curious 
Love 
Playfulness 
Huge 
Powerful 
Tiny 
Amazement 
Relax 
Calm 
Comfort 
Peace 
Delight 
 
Exercise 2 
 
Read excerpts out from a book, a poem or a hypnotic script to your partner. Take 
your time and make sure that you pronounce each word meaningfully so that it 
sounds like the message you want it to convey. 
                                                
31 These exercises are reproduced with permission from the Deep Trance Training Manual Volume 1. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
83 
Language Flow Cards (4 Words Of Power) 
 
The cards below contain pre-packaged language patterns that you can use to make 
fluid links when you use the Milton Model. Start off with a simple word, like 
“Relax” and practice flowing with that: As soon as you relax, you’ll feel the comfort 
of relaxation growing. So will you relax deeply, or will you simply relax 
comfortably now? The more you relax, the easier it is to relax deeply… etc. 
The more… the more… 
 
The more you absorb yourself in the 
experience and are willing to get it wrong a 
few times, the more quickly and easily you’ll 
learn now. 
You don’t have to… 
 
You don’t have to be able to use these 
patterns naturally right away, its only natural 
that you progress as easily as seems right to 
you. 
… to the point where… 
 
Its only natural to practice each step one at a 
time to the point where you’re improving 
your language skills without thought. 
Notice… 
 
Notice how a single word will define your 
focus. You could try to resist it, but to listen 
even halfway you have to notice first. Notice 
how your thoughts can be lead in any 
direction quite innocently. 
Most people can, [NAME]… 
 
Most people can, Jane enjoy the process of 
communicating with more subtlety and 
clarity. 
As soon as…, you’ll… 
 
As soon as you discover the ease with which 
you can use this model, you’ll feel great 
about the fact you put in so much effort to 
learn it now. 
Will you… or…? 
 
Will you practice them daily and enjoy the 
learning process you go through, or will you 
just be implementing these patterns 
completely unconsciously so that your skill 
improves before you realise it? 
What would it be like if… 
 
 
 
What would it be like if you found yourself 
absorbing these patterns naturally? I’m not 
suggesting that you can do that, I just wonder 
what it would be like. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
84 
Exercises: Constructing Language Patterns 
 
Exercise 1: Creating Presuppositions 
In groups of 3 (a triad), person A generates 5 simple statements. B and C tease out 
the presuppositions that the statements contain. Then rotate roles. 
 
 
Exercise 2: Stacking Presuppositions 
In a triad, A now creates a complex statement stacked with as many presuppositions 
as possible. B and C unpack it. Repeat 5 times, then rotate roles. 
 
 
Exercise 3: Predicates and Linguistic Bridging 
 
a. In a triad, A makes a statement using visual language. He includes a link 
(like the ones in the Language Pattern Cards) and looks at B meaningfully. 
B then completes the sentence using visual language and generates his own 
visual sentence for C to complete. 
 
A: “I see your shoes AND…” 
B: “… the colour is nice BECAUSE…” 
 
After a few cycles, change to auditory and then kinaesthetic predicates. 
 
b. In a triad, repeat exercise a. only this time A will make TWO sentences. 
The first sentence will be visual, the second auditory. Everyone cycles 
through as before. 
 
A: “AS I look at the clock, I hear it ticking AND…” 
 
c. 
Repeat exercise c. above, only this time making THREE sentences: visual, 
auditory and kinaesthetic before handing over to the next person. 
 
A: “WHEN I saw his face, I heard the anger in his voice AND felt very 
afraid BECAUSE…” 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
85 
Exercise 4: Meta Model 
In a triad, person A checks the Meta Model Table and creates a “problem” statement 
in each of the categories. A presents these to the others in a random order. B 
identifies the pattern. Then B and C then take turns challenging the “problem”. A 
gives feedback on the impact that each challenge makes (harsh, respectful, insightful, 
funny etc). Rotate roles. 
 
Exercise 5: Milton Model 
 
a. 
Individually generate 10 examples of each of the Milton Model Patterns 
around the themes of relaxation and learning. Write these down: 
 
1. 
Cause - Effect 
2. 
Complex Equivalence  
3. 
Mind Reading 
4. 
Lost Performative 
5. 
Modal Operators of Necessity/Possibility 
6. 
Universal Quantifiers (Generalisations) 
7. 
Nominalisations 
8. 
Unspecified Verbs  
9. 
Lack of Referential Index 
10. 
Comparative Deletions 
11. 
Tag Questions   
12. 
Pacing Current Experience 
13. 
Conversational Postulate 
14. 
Double Binds 
15. 
Extended Quotes (Stacking Realities) 
16. 
Ambiguities (Phonological, Punctuational, Syntactic, Scope) 
 
b. In a group of 4 or 5, A reads a few to B making sure to include LINKS. B 
then carries on with a few of her own before passing things down the circle. 
You do NOT have to present the Milton Model patterns in any particular 
order! 
  
A: “Blinking will make you feel more relaxed WHICH means you can feel 
more comfortable AND…” 
B: “I know you are thinking about all the things you learned here today… 
AND it is a good thing to learn… JUST NOTICE…” etc 
 
c. 
Write down all the Milton Model patterns the other people in your group 
thought of. Write each pattern on a separate sheet of paper. You should have 
30-50 examples of each pattern now. 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
86 
Exercise 6: Meta Model Challenge 
In a new triad, take each of the Milton Model patterns created in Exercise 5 and 
systematically challenge each statement using the Meta Model. 
Exercise 7: Deconstructing and Induction 
Read the following hypnotic induction. In groups of 3-4 analyse the patterns that you 
find in it. Then have one person read the whole thing out loud and simply listen: 
I would like to invite you… to close your eyes and relax… because.. with your eyes 
closed… you can awaken to…  an internal awareness that is of great importance… 
right now… you are sitting down… hearing the sound of my voice… and feeling 
more and more relaxed… and my voice can travel right along with you… wherever 
your mind decides to wander (wonder)… and it does not matter where your 
attention goes… because your unconscious mind continues to hear my voice…just as 
it continues to make sure your heart keeps beating…and your breathing… how is 
your breathing?... more comfortable, is it not?... I know that you’re curious about 
trance… forming your life… in a very important kind of way… we each have 
something of importance… that we wish to achieve… in life… or at particular 
stages in life… so we can later look back at them… and feel good about what we 
achieved… and so… I’d like your unconscious mind… to pay careful attention… as 
you simply go deeper and deeper into the trance… experience… -ing yourself getting 
more and more comfortable… more and more relaxed… and the sound of my 
voice… going with you… wherever you wonder… about all the possibilities… that 
your unconscious has yet to explore… in your life… out there… in here… the sound 
of my voice… and go deeper and deeper into that very pleasant… hypnotic state… 
of relaxation… like travelling on life’s highway… your mind can pass this scene… 
or that scene… charming memories from the past… pleasant… and how long was it 
since you last thought of remembering something like that?... so pleasant to look 
back… and remember… remembering something pleasant from the past… a sense 
of achievement… a wonderful experience… to feel the satisfaction… of having done 
something well… everyone deserves to feel that way… at least a few times… every 
week… every day… doing the things that must be done… and enjoying the 
rewarding experience of completing them… the pleasure of a task well done… pride 
and satisfaction… NOW… I’d like you to take these feelings… and travel into the 
future… the future you… and you can experience yourself now… in this future… 
feeling a sense of pride… satisfaction… achievement… only you don’t know what it 
is you have achieved yet… and you really shouldn’t concern yourself about that… 
because your unconscious knows.. better than you do… the things that are of 
greatest importance.. that thing you really should have achieved by this future 
point… and your unconscious can take great delight… in hiding from your 
conscious mind… exactly what marvellous thing.. it is you have achieved… so that 
as you return to the present… you will have to wonder… about what the good thing 
will be… that your unconscious will be achieving… and you’ll keep right on 
wondering… as the days and the weeks go by… and good things happen to you… 
always more to come… now its time to come out of trance… in your own way.. take 
all the time you need and do that… 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
87 
Exercise 8: Polishing Presuppositions 
The following exercises will polish your ability to presuppose things elegantly: 
 
1. Time 
 Design 3-5 sentences that presuppose the acceptance of an idea: 
 
a. 
Use tenses and tense based nouns to imply learning in the: 
• 
Past: old, yesterday, was, did, had, again 
• 
Present: now, am, have, today, new 
• 
Future: will, shall, might, tomorrow, new, forwards 
 
b. Use Tag Questions to imply a temporal shift from: 
• 
Past <–> Present: “You used to feel good, aren’t you now?” 
• 
Present <–> Future: “You can do this, won’t you?” 
• 
Future <–> Past: “You will enjoy that, haven’t you?” 
 
2. Space 
Design 3-5 presuppositions playing with the idea of space, and move things 
around: 
• 
Location Proximity: Here/There. This/That. 
• 
Relative Positioning: Above/Below. In/Out. On/Off. Left/Right. 
• 
Quantifiers: Some/Many/Few. More/Less. Better/Worse. 
 
3. Awareness 
Design 5-10 presuppositions directing someone’s awareness: 
• 
Sensory Based Terms:  see, hear feel, look, touch, taste. 
• 
Abstract Terms: realise, think, notice, aware, know, sense. 
 
4. Importance  
Design 5 sentences shifting the importance of what you say: 
 
• 
But, And, Even Though:  
I love you BUT I have to go – negates what came before it. 
I love you AND I have to go – equal value given to both. 
I love you EVEN THOUGH I have to go – negates what comes 
after it. 
 
• 
Old, New: can suggest time, value or a sequence. 
 
• 
Try and If: both these words imply failure. 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
88 
Exercise 9: Meta Model Challenge of a Limiting Belief 
In a triad, A states a simple limiting belief like “I can not understand X”.  
 
a. 
B and C question A using the Meta Model with charm and elegance. B and 
C calibrate changes in A’s BMIRs. 
 
b. B and C see if they can alter A’s belief purely by asking Met Model 
questions and feeding back the missing information they received. A reports 
back his experience. 
 
c. 
B and C generate presuppositions that imply the belief is changing/has 
changed. Intersperse these whilst asking (or in the form of) further questions. 
 
d. B and C now generate hypnotic language patterns (Milton Model) to 
suggest a change of belief. B and C do a double induction on A which 
include: hypnotic language, presuppositions and any information gained 
from the Met Model questions above. 
Rotate roles. 
 
Exercise 10: Transformational Language 
 
a. 
In a group of 5, each person creates 10 sentences stacked with 
presuppositions and Milton Model language about relaxation and learning. 
A reads a few sentence to B, using a hypnotic tonality and linking the 
sentences as you did with the Language Pattern Cards. B then continues 
using the same rhythm, pace and tone. C takes over and the whole thing 
continues around several laps of the circle. 
 
b. In a triad, repeat Exercise 10, only this time A and B will be speaking 
simultaneously and use all of the patterns they have generated. Remember 
to us: a hypnotic tonality, slow pitch and rhythm, Linking words, 
presuppositions and Milton Model hypnotic language patterns. 
 
Exercise 12: Trance Forming Abilities 
a. 
Write 10 inductions using every pattern you have learned to suggest, 
presuppose, imply, hint, insinuate, intimate, evoke, assume or state directly 
that someone is learning more and discovering wonderful things that give 
them a thoroughly rewarding life.  
 
b. Record the inductions on tape, MP3, minidisk – whatever you can find. 
 
c. 
Listen to these recordings often! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
89 
Frames 
Setting the Context for Meaning 
 
Everything you say is open to interpretation. There is a duality of meaning in 
everything. So to determine the “true” meaning of something we need to look at the 
context in which it exists. Take the following example: 
 
• 
You are standing at a set of traffic lights. They are red. Suddenly you see 
an Ambulance speeding past you, through the red lights. How do you feel 
about it barging past you and running a red light? Most people will find 
this completely acceptable behaviour. Ambulances can do that kind of thing 
– in fact it is important that they do so.  
 
• 
Now what if you then saw a red Ferrari slipping into the opening created 
by the Ambulance and also running the red light? At this point most 
people would be annoyed at the “liberties” this driver is taking. 
 
• 
But what if I told you the driver of the Ferrari was the husband of the 
pregnant woman in the Ambulance. She was being rushed to hospital to 
try and save their baby. He was following the Ambulance to hospital to be 
there with her.  
 
Suddenly our understanding changes completely. The same set of events is 
totally transformed by the context. Our feelings are totally changed by the 
context.  
 
Every communication appears within a frame. Just like a picture frame will enhance 
certain features of the painting and de-emphasise others, so you can colour the effect a 
communication has by changing the frame that you put around it. The frame 
becomes a reference point for understanding what is said and done. You might 
happily accept a naked person in the context of a theatre production or a nudist 
beach. However the same naked person in a library, cinema or at a bus stop would at 
the very least make you raise an eyebrow! 
 
Control the Frame and you control the meaning that people will make of something. 
Unless the person manages to break your frame and tries to substitute their own. 
This type of Frame War is often seen during political debates or in business when 
two departments clash over a business decision. Knowing how to substitute frames 
and spotting it when others attempt to do it to you will give you much more 
effectiveness as a communicator. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
90 
Reframing 
 
Reframing occurs when we change the frame around a situation to change the way the 
event impacts on others. In essence you are saying to someone: try looking at things 
this way instead. 
 
There are basically two kinds of reframes in NLP: meaning reframes and context 
reframes. 
 
A meaning reframe will keep the context in which something happened constant, 
but change the meaning that it has. There is an excellent example of this in the book 
Reframing
32.  
 
In the example a woman complained that she could not stand it when her shagpile 
carpet was looking less than pristine. Unfortunately this meant having to hoover it 
constantly and she kept moaning at her family for leaving footprint patterns on the 
floor. The therapist put the woman in trance and then took her time to describe an 
idyllic scene in which the carpet looked absolutely perfect in every detail. Just when 
the woman was beaming with pleasure she added “and all this means that none of 
the people that you love are home!” The woman’s face fell. From that day forward 
she felt very comfortable about her carpet having a “lived in” look – because it meant 
that her family, the people she loved, were close at hand! 
 
A context reframe will maintain the situation or the behaviour, but will seek out a 
context in which the problem behaviour suddenly becomes an asset. 
 
For example, a man dragged his daughter to a therapist complaining wilfully and 
obstinately about how wilful and obstinate she was being. The therapist took time to 
build rapport and ask a few questions. The he said to the father: “Your daughter is a 
wilful and obstinate child, and you want something done about that, so that she 
does what she is told. Now she is almost 16. Soon she will be going out on dates 
and it strikes me as rather fortunate that she will be obstinate and wilful enough to 
resist if a boy tries to pressure her into sleeping with him! Do you really want to 
stop her being so powerful?” 
 
The father suddenly changed his mind about changing his daughter and instead 
focused on creating a better and more respectful relationship with her. 
 
                                                
32 Grinder and Bandler, “Reframing Neuro Linguistic Programming and the Transformation of Meaning”; 
Real People Press 1984 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
91 
Useful Frames 
 
The following are a series of frames that you can try out for size and see how they 
affect the way you interact with the world. These frames were designed to help you 
live in happier and more successful ways. To the extent they allow you to do that, 
embrace the frames. To whatever extent they might hinder that, simply ignore that 
frame and get on with enjoying a happier and more successful way of living! 
The NLP Presuppositions 
The following beliefs are core to NLP. If you treat them as being true, you might 
find that you have more choice and more freedom.  
 
The map is not the territory. This frame was first posited by Alfred Korzybski in 
the 1950s
33. As Huxley pointed out, many people confuse the things that they speak 
about with reality. They think that that is simply the way things are, rather than 
realising that it is just a description of their internal maps. They are a guide to the 
outside world and not to be confused with the real thing. To do so would be like 
going to a restaurant and trying to eat the menu – it is only a guide, not the actual 
meal! 
 
The meaning of your communication is the response you get. Poor 
communicators blame their audience for misunderstanding what they wanted to say. 
It is convenient to do so. But by taking responsibility for your communication, you 
regain the power to direct the flow of things. If your message is arriving in a warped 
state, change the outgoing message so that something more pleasing reaches your 
listeners. You are back in charge! 
 
Individuals have all the resources they need to achieve their desired outcomes. 
People have a remarkable capacity to learn and change. If someone is stuck in their 
life, even if they have a skills shortfall, they ultimately still have the capacity to go 
out there and learn. That way they can acquire the skills that they are missing. 
People who are in flow always find a way to achieve what they want. It is when they 
get stale, dried up, fearful etc that they stop progressing. NLP is all about re-
empowering people to achieve their dreams. 
 
There is no failure only feedback. You can either learn from your mistakes or be 
paralysed by them. Self recrimination, fear, doubt, guilt all achieve one thing: you 
stop moving forward. Often this can leave a person doomed to repeat the very same 
mistake! By learning something from an experience, you have the capacity to let it 
go, get over it and move on. Just improve. 
                                                
33 Alfred Korzybski, “Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General 
Semantics” Reprinted in 1995 by the Inst of General Semantics. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
92 
Every behaviour is motivated by a positive intention. People make the best 
choices they can with the resources they have available. This is an interesting 
belief to have. It requires the ability to separate intention from behaviour. Very few 
people do unpleasant things simply to be unpleasant. They do them because it is the 
only way they can think of of satisfying an important internal need. By discovering 
what that need is (chunk up on intention) you can get to more suitable behaviours 
(chunk down from that intention) that will actually get them better results and stops 
them doing unpleasant things! 
 
Effective communicators accept and utilise everything. Resistance is a sign of 
insufficient pacing. If someone resists you, consider the possibility that you have 
not respected their model of the world enough for them to feel safe to follow you into 
new and unknown lands. Go back, build rapport, pace their reality and then lead 
them one baby step at a time so they can follow you easily. 
 
The element in the system that has the greatest flexibility will be the catalyst of 
that system (and control it) [the law of Requisite Variety]. Behavioural flexibility 
is a key attribute to have in NLP. This does not mean that you bend over backwards 
in order to try and please everyone. Sometimes the person that is willing to be 
stubborn and not budge an inch, is actually being the most flexible! 
 
Respect each person’s model of the world. This is about as personal as it gets for 
people, especially the one’s that still believe that their model of the world is 
actually the real world! If that reality is threatened, people will fight tooth and claw 
to preserve it. This is why some people have difficulty changing – it might involve a 
leap into the unknown. That is frightening for people. Also bear in mind the 
following: how do you know that your version of reality is any better for that person 
than their own one is?! Treat people with respect and making changes becomes 
much easier! 
 
Cause – v – Effect 
 
This frame marks the end of innocence, the death of excuses: There are two kinds of 
people in this world, those that are at cause and those who are at effect. People at 
cause delude themselves to think that they can make a difference and that if they do 
not like the things going on around them, it is up to them to change it. People at 
effect think that the world just conspires against them, and that all would be fine if 
the world would just change and be different. 
 
Both kinds of people are right. You have choice of what kind of person you would 
like to be. I know which I would rather be. Here is a hint: it is a lot easier to change 
one person (and be happy) than to change the whole world! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
93 
Blame – v – Outcome  
 
The Blame frame is one that the western world suffers from a lot. At the heart of our 
way of thinking we like to hold people accountable for their actions. A good thing 
on the whole. The problem occurs when people get more attached to finding who is 
at fault about something than to actually fixing it!  
 
The other problem is that a witch hunt forces people to become very defensive as a 
self protection mechanism kicks in. By pointing the finger of blame and trying to 
force someone to be accountable, you make it harder for them to take responsibility. 
A vicious circle is formed where one person tries to blame and the other to protect 
themselves. Or perhaps the blamer revels in his righteous wrath, whilst the person at 
fault is paralysed with guilt. What a great model for progress that is! 
 
Now, by focusing on the outcome instead on who you can blame, things start to get 
done. Mistakes can be rectified, solutions can be obtained. There may well still be a 
case for blame, but always consider first: will that actually achieve something or is it 
a witch hunt designed only to make someone else suffer? 
Feedback Frame 
 
It is a sad fact that our culture has created a deep seated fear of receiving feedback. 
Most people give feedback in a very poor way. The effect of constructive criticism is 
often more “criticism” with very little “constructive” left over. The problem with 
this is that it threatens people’s ego: being told what a miserable failure you are is 
not very healthy for our self esteem, so people switch off unconsciously. Some people 
manage to dissociate from the criticism and learn something. But why not make it 
easy on everyone to start with? 
 
The following is known as a feedback sandwich. It allows you to present feedback in 
such a way that the mind doesn’t have to turn off to protect itself: 
 
1. Positive specific: start off by telling people in very specific terms what it is you 
liked about their behaviour, performance etc. This makes the mind more 
receptive – it wants to hear more nice things. 
2. Challenge: this is the feedback bit. Rather than telling someone everything they 
did wrong, it is better to set them a challenge which will mean they are 
improving. Instead of “you’re too distracted” a challenge might be “focus on 
the people you are talking to more fully”. 
3. Positive general: sugar-coat the whole thing with general positive remarks. It 
leaves them with a better memory of the experience. 
4. Future pace: now paint them a picture of how great the future will be once they 
have changed and incorporated your feedback. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
94 
Association – v – Dissociation  
 
Association and Dissociation are two fundamental ways that our minds are hardwired 
to perceive the world. Both will give you a very different experience and both can be 
tremendously useful when applied in the right context. 
 
Association puts you into an experience. It allows you to experience it fully and 
completely. When you are associated, you see things through your own eyes, hear 
things through your own ears and feel things inside (and on the surface of) your 
body. It means you are fully engaged, so that you totally feel the emotional impact of 
that experience. This is true whether you are in the middle of some live experience, 
you are remembering a past event, or whether you are anticipating (or mentally 
rehearsing) something happening in the future. 
 
Being associated is tremendously good when you are involved in a pleasurable 
activity and want to enjoy the experience more. Some examples of activities where 
you would really want to be associated into your experience might be playing with 
your children, falling in love, enjoying a piece of music, eating a fine meal, reading a 
good book etc. 
 
Likewise there are bad times to associate. For example if you are being given a hard 
time, receive bad news, get criticised, or getting depressed – that would be harder to 
cope with whilst associated. 
 
Dissociation is the polar opposite to association. In dissociation you are one step 
removed from your experience. It seems that things are a little distant. You are not 
really affected by what is going on around you. It is like stepping out of your body 
and looking back at it like a third party. When someone suffers a shock (whether 
physical or psychological) the body/mind tends to respond automatically by 
dissociating you from the experience, in order to protect you from being 
overwhelmed. In the short term this is a good solution. But in the long term it is a 
terribly sad way to live a life: disconnected, unenthused, alone… 
 
So there are obviously times when you really do not want to be dissociated: e.g. 
when you want to make love to someone it is not good to be totally disconnected. 
However, dissociating from your experience can have its plus points. All the 
scenarios in which you really would not want to be associated are much easier to 
deal with when dissociated. Soldiers in a dangerous situation often spontaneously 
dissociate from their experience so they can get on and do an important task without 
being paralysed by fear. Remember when dissociated you are shielded from your 
emotions! 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
95 
Perceptual Positions 
 
Changing perceptual positions is a powerful way to change your point of view (or 
someone else’s) by the way that you change your frame of reference. Changing 
perceptual positions allows you to get multiple perspectives on something that is 
happening. Too many people are stuck in one mode of thinking. Some can only see 
things from their own point of view (first position) and cannot empathise with 
someone else perspective – especially if the topic is a charged one like politics or 
religion. Other people can only ever see things from someone else’s point of view 
(second position). They become martyrs that spend their lives trying to make other 
people happy or rescuing them from one thing or another and never have any time to 
lead their own life, to be happy in themselves. 
 
Imagine what it would be like to experience every interaction from three unique 
points of view. Your own (First), the other person (Second) and a fly on the wall 
watching the scene impartially (Third). Everyone is capable of doing this. It does 
help to practice. Some remarkable insights can be gained from doing this.  
 
Changing your perspective in this way allows you to check how your own behaviour 
impacts on other people, so you can get a more accurate sense of how they may be 
feeling about you. Switching your frames of reference frees your unconscious to 
present you with information which simply did not seem “relevant” when viewing 
the world exclusively from one position. Many people spend their lives ignoring 
things either by accident or on purpose because they simply have not fine tuned their 
neurology in a way that will allow them to access information about the world that 
is open to us all. Becoming adept at switching between the various positions is also 
an invaluable skill to have in the context of conflict resolution. 
 
The three positions are to explore are: 
 
 
1. Position 1: the first position is yourself. Seeing things fully associated to 
your own body, experiences etc. You know you are doing this when you 
pay full attention to what you are feeling, hearing and seeing out of your 
own sense organs. 
 
 
2. Position 2: you get to the second position when you step into someone 
else’s shoes for a while. Seeing things from that perspective, including the 
internal filters that you know/guess that person has. You want the 
experience to be as realistic as possible, so you will need to account for 
their beliefs, values and life experiences when stepping into their shoes 
completely.  
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
96 
A highly developed form of second positioning can be done in trance and is 
called a deep trance identification. This happens when you temporarily 
suspend your own personality and completely assume that of the other 
person. For a moment in time you literally become that other person. 
 
Children do this. They learn by literally putting their own personalities on 
hold and becoming the adult they are imitating. The same is true of certain 
rituals found in hunter/gatherer cultures. The ritual dancing with the skin of 
animals on is a primordial effort to enter the animal’s world so fully that 
you understand it’s behaviours. Later when you hunt you can instinctively 
“outthink” the animal. 
 
 
3. Position 3: in third position you play the role of a fly on the wall, or a wise 
mentor watching the situation without being involved in it. It is a way of 
accessing an internal wisdom innate in everyone which allows you to make 
better choices without being blinded by the emotional charge of situation. It 
allows you to be at a little distance, whilst remaining concerned/interested 
in the best outcome. Third position is a form of dissociation. 
 
Negotiation Frame 
 
The secret to successfully negotiating through conflict is to satisfy people’s highest 
intention and not necessarily what they say they want. As an ex-lawyer (I have 
almost recovered now) I remember many situations where a client would ask for one 
thing, but it was clear that he needed or even wanted something else. He just asked 
for what he thought might get him to where he wants to go. People do this all the 
time. Then they get stuck on the details. Part of your job as a skilful negotiator is to 
separate what they ask for from what they actually want or need. 
 
Finding a win : win solution is actually easier than you might think. At higher 
levels of abstraction people will almost always find agreement. If you focus only on 
what people demand, you end up negotiating on the minutiae and getting bogged 
down in conflict with every step. People unconsciously habituate to the conflict and 
soon start objecting to irrelevancies. They are looking for conflict! 
 
But if you start from a point of agreement and keep moving only as quickly as you 
maintain that agreement, it gets easier to resolve a situation. Starting a negotiation 
from that assumption, and maintaining a certain momentum with that agreement, 
makes it easier to challenge people’s objections as negotiations develop. People have 
habituated to agreeing and will focus on finding that, rather than conflict. 
Setting up an agreement frame might look something like this: 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
97 
1. Stated outcome for A: ask the first party (A) what they actually want to 
achieve. Do not let B challenge any part of this yet! 
2. Stated outcome for B:  ask the second party what they want to achieve. Do 
not let A challenge anything at this point. 
3. Separate Intention (A): now we get to the real story. Asking A what the 
specific outcome will achieve or do for him will get you in to the realm of 
intentions, which is where you want to be! 
4. Separate Intention (B): repeat for B 
5. Chunk up to Agreement: now you chunk up on both A and B’s intention 
until you reach a point of agreement. Now they want the same thing, its 
just a question of how to make that happen concretely – but they are pulling 
in the same direction! 
6. Chunk down: now it is just a matter of finding the details that will make 
the common intention concrete for both parties. 
 
Using this kind of format you eliminate an adversarial framework and subtly force 
both parties to join the same side. When they essentially become one “team”, they 
will find it easier to agree on a common set of details to make their intention 
manifest in concrete terms. 
 
Troubleshooting 
 
If the parties become deadlocked again at some stage, it is paramount to return to 
appoint of agreement. That may be difficult to do with both of them present – if they 
have slipped into an adversarial frame of mind, they may feel compulsed to find fault, 
criticise and disagree in any way they can. The following strategy might help in that 
kind of scenario: 
 
1. Separate Parties: put them in separate rooms to “cool off” and to take 
away the stimulus that is causing them to conflict. 
2. Re-establish Agreement Frame: chunk up again to a common point of 
interest. They have to concede that this is something that they want! 
3. Social Constraint: make the parties publicly commit to the “joint” 
outcome in step 2. There is tremendous pressure instilled into people to 
conform with their public commitments.  
This is a well researched phenomenon. For example, during the Korean war 
the Chinese developed a very subtle brainwashing method for use on 
American POWs. It was based on creating a public persona of the POWs, 
which they in turn felt that they had to live up to! 
4. Relevancy Challenge: dismiss irrelevant, counterproductive or petty points 
as irrelevant and unhelpful for the proceedings. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
98 
Anchoring 
 
In 1902 Ivan Petrovich Pavlov, a Russian researcher at St Petersburg University, 
began work on an interesting phenomenon: the conditioned reflex
34. He noticed that 
he could train dogs to salivate at the sound of a bell. He did this by ringing a bell 
just before feeding them. Soon the dog’s autonomous nervous system learned that 
bell = food and would begin to drool at the sound of the bell alone. 
 
This discovery helped to nurture a growing new field of psychology
35. But whilst 
many experiments were carried out on the conditioned response phenomenon, it 
made a very small impact on therapeutic or educational techniques. This was partly 
due to a perception that it took countless repetitions to properly install a conditioned 
response. Meanwhile hypnotists around the world had been using the phenomenon 
for centuries in order to induce trances in the subject more quickly. They would use 
simple things like finger clicking or eye stare or “sleep NOW!!” suggestions to 
trigger trances instantly. The thing was that nobody had bothered to tell the 
hypnotists that they needed to spend hours and hours conditioning the response. So 
they did it in a matter of minutes with great success. Later this principle was 
developed for therapeutic application by such pioneers as Dr. Milton H Erickson. 
Anchoring was born. 
 
An anchor is a conditioned response. It is possible to anchor pretty much anything 
that an organism can do. So you can anchor a behaviour, a feeling, a mind-body 
state, a memory, something you learned or even (if you are perceptive enough) a 
thought. The interesting thing is that it happens automatically all the time. It is the 
mechanism behind recognising the face of a friend. It is the reason why you can sit 
on a bicycle, or a horse or get in a car after many years, and discover that your body 
remembers how to do the activity. The feeling of the saddle was an anchor – a cue to 
your body – to remember how it is done. It is also how people create true phobias
36.  
 
NLP adopted and developed anchoring as a core approach to change. This is because 
it allows people to make dramatic shifts quickly, easily and without any cognitive 
interference. This means you can change for the better without having to know what 
was wrong – your unconscious can sort all of that out. Indeed your unconscious has 
been doing precisely that throughout your life. You just never noticed it because 
your unconscious was doing such a great job! 
                                                
34 In reality he was beaten to the punch slightly by an American Dr Twitmeyer who studied the knee-jerk 
reflex in human beings, conditioning them to jerk the knee at the sound of a bell. Unfortunately his 
research fell on deaf ears, whilst Pavlov became a star (Pavlov received the Nobel prize in 1904). 
35 Known as “Behaviourism”. 
36 NB there is a difference between a real phobia and what many people think is a phobia. A phobia is an 
instant reaction: see the stimulus, get the bad feeling. It is automatic. Everything else is a fear. Fear is 
something that people build up inside their minds and maintain by the way they choose to think. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
99 
State Dependant Learning 
 
In the early 1980s a range of interesting experiments were carried out on people’s 
ability to learn
37. They took a group of students and divided them into two groups. 
Both groups had to memorise a series of nonsense syllables. Group A was given a 
few shots of alcohol, group B remained sober. They were given some time to 
memorise the content. Then they were given a few hours (to allow the mild effects of 
the alcohol wear off) before being tested. Unsurprisingly group A underperformed. 
 
Then they repeated the experiment. Only this time BOTH groups were given a 
measure of alcohol before being allowed to answer the test. Group A did better this 
time. Why? State dependant learning. 
 
Imagine that your nervous system is like the lights that decorate a Christmas tree. 
Every time you are in a particular state (mood, feeling etc) a unique pattern of light 
lights up. Whatever you learn whilst in that state is stored in that part of the system. 
That means that it is easiest to access that information (memory or behaviour) when 
you are in the same state again. So the students in group A had a better access to the 
memorised list when they had alcohol in their system because that is where the list 
had been stored in the first place. 
 
The implications of this are huge. Every behaviour you engage in, every memory 
you experience can be enhanced or inhibited by the state that you are in. So for 
example, when someone is feeling a little low, even depressed, they find it almost 
impossible to remember anything pleasant that has happened to them. Even if they 
can drag up the memory, it seems “distant” and unreal to them. They cannot get the 
feelings associated – because they are in the wrong state! 
 
Athletes have known this instinctively for centuries. This is why they develop many 
pre-match rituals – they are anchors to put them back into a high performance state in 
which they have access to all their skills and abilities. 
 
Anchoring is a powerful way to create a shortcut back into these states. It can be used 
to learn more, perform better, overcome problems
38 or install new strategies for 
living. Anchors will allow you to enter any one of an almost infinite range of mind-
body states to greatly enhance your choices. 
 
Because the state is the gateway to the stored memories and behaviours, NLP 
anchoring focuses on working with the states. 
                                                
37 Eich, J.E. (1989).Theoretical issues in state dependant memory. In H.L. Roediger & F.I.M. Craik (Eds), 
Varieties of memory and consciousness (pp. 331-354). Hillsdale, N.J. : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
38 If you always bypass the neurological circuits of the problem state, you will never have that problem 
again. You simply don’t have access to it anymore – a very good thing, I think you’ll agree! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
100 
Natural State Generators 
 
Human beings are walking, talking and breathing state generators. It is what we do. 
Our neurology is so complex that we can create an almost infinite series of states to 
live through.  
 
Lets go back to the fairy lights on a Christmas tree analogy. Every set of connections 
that your nervous system makes, i.e. every unique pattern of lights lit up, is a mind-
body state. Now your nervous system can create approximately (1010)
11 different 
connections. That is a vast number. It is more than every single grain of sand that is 
to be found on this planet. It is greater than the number of stars that we know exist. 
We have a vast amount of choice! 
 
The interesting thing is that some people have deluded themselves to believe that 
they can only have a small range of states from which to function. They spend many 
years practicing feeling depressed, frightened or frustrated. Eventually they come to 
believe that that is all that they are capable of experiencing. But the odds are stacked 
against them. Their neurology is designed to experience so much more. They just 
need to exercise their neurology to discover how much more choice they have than 
they thought they had. 
 
The more you practice something, either through intensity or repetition, the easier it 
will be to find that state again in future. It is like beating a path through a forest, in 
time the path becomes easy to spot. Anchoring speeds up that process so that you 
can design the paths you want so that they lead you from wherever you happen to be 
to the kind of destinations you want to go to. In this way you can circumnavigate all 
the worn out paths you no longer enjoy using and build brand new ones (or 
rediscover old ones) that bring you more pleasure and enjoyment. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
101 
Eliciting States 
 
Before you can anchor a state, you must have something to anchor present. You can 
only anchor an experience that is live in the moment. You cannot anchor something 
abstractly – you need to have an actual response in order for the nervous system to 
catch on. 
 
So we need to address the question of how to access a particular state (and later what 
kind of states are worth eliciting). Sometimes a state will arise spontaneously – i.e. 
unconsciously. These states are the best ones to anchor. You can also evoke a state 
through the questions you ask and the language you use: 
Revivification 
A revivification occurs when you bring an experience back to life for someone. If you 
have ever been on a holiday with a friend and later decided to talk about it, you may 
recall how your experience changed. You began to feel how good it felt being on 
holiday, just by speaking about it. So anytime you ask someone about a memory 
and get their attention immersed in it, it begins to intensify, become more real. The 
same is true when you look at an old photograph album (the photos are actually 
naturally occurring anchors!) or when you hear a special “holiday tune” (yet another 
naturally occurring anchor). 
 
You can begin a revivification by asking innocuous questions like “What do you do 
to relax?” or “When was the last time you were completely excited about 
something”. Whatever they respond is fed back to them along with more questions 
to intensify the experience. Then you can even add sensory rich descriptions 
(language filled with words about what they can hear, feel, see, touch, taste or smell). 
A “typical” elicitation might go something like this: 
 
A: “what do you like to do to relax?” 
B: “I like to read.” 
A: “You like to read! What happens to you when you’re reading? 
B: “Well I can loose myself in the book. I get so absorbed by the characters that it 
all seems to become real for me.” 
A: “So as you’re reading, you loose yourself in the book and become totally 
absorbed. The experience becomes real for you.” 
B: “That’s right.” 
A: “So where do you feel the relaxation the most, when you’re absorbed in a good 
book?” 
B: “It starts in my chest and spreads. Its just very comfortable.” 
A: “So you get a very comfortable feeling in your chest that spreads when you’re 
absorbed in a good book. A very pleasant way to loose yourself… and your 
breathing rate changes… and you feel totally relaxed inside…” 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
102 
 
This is a powerful hypnotic technique for re-activating experiences. Sometimes you 
will not need to go beyond the first question. What you have to do is pay attention 
to the person you are with so that you can see when they alter their state and shift 
into the new one. Then you can anchor it. 
Process Language 
Another way to revivify an experience to induce a different state in someone is to 
present them with a description of the state you want them to go into, without 
directly asking them to have the experience. In order for someone to make sense of 
what you are saying they HAVE to sample the experience themselves first.  
 
This can be great fun whilst sitting on a busy train or airport lounge. Talk to your 
friends about some very pleasant experience and watch how everyone within earshot 
naturally responds by feeling that way. A good friend of mine Stephen Brooks, one 
of the leading hypnotherapists alive today, did this quite by accident one day several 
decades ago. He was sitting in a train reading his son a Mr Happy story. Being a 
great hypnotist he did so hypnotically to give his son a very pleasant trance 
experience. Now as he told his hypnotic story, he noticed every newspaper in the 
carriage slowly being lowered as the people holding them went into trance 
themselves! 
 
Use all the skills you learned in the Milton Model and Presuppositions sections to 
create a vivid experience for people to respond to. The richer and more compelling 
your stories are the more profound the experiences that people around you will have. 
This is a good thing no matter what the context!  
Go First! 
People are unconsciously very aware of, and attuned to, people. We are constantly 
scanning people for the tiny unconscious, non-verbal signals that they give, and we 
respond to them. When we meet someone who is nervous or edgy, we start feeling a 
little ill at ease ourselves. When we meet someone who is happy and relaxed, that 
attitude seems to rub off on us as well. It is a natural thing that we do. In fact you 
cannot not do it! 
 
So another powerful tool for eliciting a state is for you to GO FIRST. Have the 
experience yourself and others will follow. A happy, smiley person can brighten up 
your day and a gloomy miserable person can depress you. You are responding to 
their state. You can use that to your advantage. If you want someone to enter a 
particular state, have the experience yourself first. They will unconsciously pick up 
on it and respond to it too! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
103 
Useful States to Elicit 
Whether you are coaching someone, teaching them, building a relationship (business 
or personal) or doing therapy, there are certain types of experiences that are to be 
preferred over others. As a general rule, pleasant experiences are good: people will 
like you more, want to be around you more, find making changes easier, access 
internal resources effortlessly etc. At times unpleasant experiences can be useful – 
mainly to keep people away from dangerous things. 
 
The good thing is that people have a vast capacity to feel good things. These states 
can be mixed up to create wonderful new hybrid states that may be completely new 
to someone, like relaxed anticipation or deeply comfortable concentration. The 
building blocks from these states can be taken from the person’s own wealth of life 
experiences. Take these examples: 
 
• 
Experiential Absorption/Trance: What kind of activities allow you to be 
pleasurably absorbed? Reading books, movies, sports, work…? 
• 
Relaxation: How do you like to relax? 
• 
Age Regression: What were your favourite games as a child? 
• 
Confidence/Security: What kind of things are you good at?  
• 
General: Can you remember a time you felt really XXX? Where was that, what 
was that like? 
 
Later on, in the Stacking Anchors or Chaining Anchors section you will learn how 
to combine such naturally occurring states to create designer cocktails of experiences 
to propel people into the future. 
 
For the moment it is enough that you remember that you want to find states that 
will allow the person to perform better and access internal resources that they would 
otherwise be blocked from. A little common sense and exploration of the client’s 
model of the world will tell you what they need and what they have to satisfy that 
need! 
 
You can then use anchoring to do things like: 
 
• 
Induce/re-induce Trance 
• 
Give a sense of security  
• 
Dissociate from/reintegrate experiences 
• 
Change or stabilise an internal state 
• 
Cross-contextualise changes 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
104 
Conditions for Elegant Anchoring 
 
The process of anchoring is relatively simple. But it requires a little understanding, 
careful observation and good timing! 
 
In order to set an anchor you need to meet the following conditions
39: 
 
1. Pure Access State: the state you want to anchor must be strong and clear. If you 
have conflicting states or weak emotions then you don’t really have anything 
worth anchoring. You need the experience you are anchoring to be prominent in 
the client’s mind. The more intense the state is the better. Remember that a 
phobia is an example of a naturally occurring anchor! 
2. Timing: emotions and other states have a natural rhythm. They will swell in 
intensity, peak and then become weaker. The anchor should be set as the state is 
in the process of intensifying, before it has peaked. Calibration is a key skill to 
use when deciding when to apply anchor to create an associational bond. 
3. Unique stimulus (anchor): the anchor needs to be unique so that it does not 
get fired off constantly and randomly. Also certain actions, e.g. shaking hands 
have other strong responses/meanings associated to them which may interfere. 
4. Easily duplicated: if you cannot repeat the anchor, you cannot fire it off. If the 
trigger is watching a full solar eclipse, for instance, it will take you a long time 
before you can fire that anchor again, making it practically worthless. 
 
                                                
39 Reproduced with permission from Igor Ledochowski, “Conversational hypnosis Vol 1” 2003. 
Release Anchor 
Intensity 
Time 
Set 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
105 
Basic Anchoring Techniques 
 
Basic Anchoring 
Remember to use every tool you have at your disposal (hypnotic language, 
revivification, client’s natural responses etc.) to make the experience as intense as 
possible. 
 
1. Rapport: anchoring is easiest when you have rapport and experientially 
absorb all of the client’s attention. This tends to intensify her experiences, 
which makes for a better access to states. 
 
2. Go First: Enter the state that you would like your client to enter. If you 
have build good rapport (pacing them) this will amount to an unconscious 
lead making it easier for them to follow you and enter the same state. To go 
first direct your intention, focus and energy into the new state and into the 
desire to have the other person join you. Enthuse them with your state! 
 
3. Access: the next step is to access an intense state in the client. Revivify an 
experience and intensify it if necessary. Ask them questions, use hypnotic 
language and project your own state to influence them. Later, when we 
cover sliding anchors, stacking anchors etc. you will have additional ways 
of intensifying the state. 
 
4. Calibrate: as you are doing all this, remember to keep a sharp eye out for 
the BMIRs that tell you that they are shifting state. The anchor needs to be 
set just before the state peaks and released just after. You judge this by 
observing the client carefully! 
 
5. Anchor: now it is time to set the anchor. You can use any experience in 
any sensory modality that you wish. A facial expression (V), a gesture (V), 
a word (A), the sound of a bell (A) or a touch (K)
40. Just touch them as the 
experience peaks, and release the touch as it starts to ebb. 
 
6. Break State & Test:  now distract the client’s attention. Refocus their 
mind on something unrelated, like thinking of the colour white. You want 
to break their state so you can test the anchor. Fire the anchor when they are 
in a neutral state and see if the state you anchored spontaneously re-occurs. 
If not just repeat the steps to condition the anchor. 
                                                
40 Of course you could use the channels of smell and taste as well, its just harder to set the conditions. It 
can be done though. Aromatherapy practitioners work with olfactory (smell) anchors all the time. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
106 
Stacking Anchors 
 
Stacking Anchors is a way of intensifying an anchor by layering on several different 
states onto the same trigger. You can also use this to create a cocktail blend of states 
which gives someone a unique resource they may never have experienced before. 
 
1. Select States: before you can anchor anything you have to select the states, 
or combination of states that you want to anchor. A simple stacked anchor 
might just be for relaxation. So you find three or four different experiences 
of being relaxed – like reading a book, a favourite holiday, talking with a 
friend and walking in the park. All of them may have the same quality of 
relaxation but they are different experiences. 
 
2. Anchor First State: next you take one of the experiences in step 1 and 
anchor it as outlined in Basic Anchoring. For this example, lets imagine 
you choose to anchor the relaxation of reading a book by touching the 
client’s left shoulder. Anchor it and test it. When you have a good anchor, 
proceed to step 3. 
 
3. Repeat for Each State:  now you can repeat step 2 for each of the other 
experiences in turn. Always use the same anchor (in this case, the touch on 
the client’s left shoulder). That way you are stacking the states one on top 
of the other like sheets of paper. Then test it to make sure it works before 
you proceed to add the next state to the mix. With each additional state, 
you should notice the client having an increasingly intense experience. 
 
• 
Variation: instead of selecting three or four different examples of the same 
experience, you can also stack three or four different experiences on top of 
each other. This is one way to create designer states. Mixing relaxation, 
alertness, focus and energy will create a unique state with unique properties 
which are different from simply relaxing or being focused on their own. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
107 
Sliding Anchors 
 
A sliding anchor is a non-verbal suggestion to increase or decrease the intensity of a 
state. Like ordinary anchoring, a sliding anchor can be used in any sensory modality. 
 
A simple way to use a sliding anchor is to go through the ordinary anchoring 
process. Then you fire off your anchor, wait for the state to “take” and then you add 
an analogue signal that intensifies/diminishes the state. Here are some examples of 
analogue signals that can be used as sliding anchors: 
 
Kinaesthetic 
Assuming you touched their arm, you could increase the pressure (to intensify the 
experience) or decrease the pressure (to diminish it). You could also slide your finger 
up and down the arm like a volume control. 
 
Auditory 
Let us assume now that your anchor was the word “relax” said in a particular 
tonality. You could intensify or diminish this experience by saying the word 
more/less deeply, add/reduce the timbre, speed up or slow down, say it harder or 
softer or even saying it more loudly or more quietly. 
 
Visual 
Suppose we used a gesture like a pointing finger. We could change the intensity of 
the anchor by moving the finger closer or further away from the person. We might 
raise or lower the hand or even turn it like a volume control to suggest the increased 
or decreased intensity we want. 
 
Hypnotic Language 
Hopefully you will have worked out that sliding anchors are a form of non-verbal 
suggestion. If the unconscious understands it can respond appropriately. To increase 
your chances of success, you can add some direct suggestion to intensify/diminish 
the experience: 
 
“Now as I slide my finger up your arm [slide it] the feeling can get stronger... 
stronger... and stronger still” 
 
“Notice how curious it is that that feeling gets weaker and weaker as I pull my 
hand away…[draw hand away, but maintain the gesture]… that’s right, weaker and 
weaker and weaker still…” 
 
“Well you know how to relax… so you know how to relax more deeply… and 
RELAX… RELAX… R – E – L – A – X!” 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
108 
Submodalities 
Structuring Internal Maps 
 
You will recall that we make sense of the world by creating little mental maps, 
copies of the world out there, inside our minds. These Internal Representations of the 
outside world are the way in which the brain knows how it should be responding to 
certain situations. Change the maps and we literally change the world we live in. 
 
These maps are made up of the bits and pieces that we absorb through our five 
senses. Each one of our senses, known as a sensory modality, adds information to 
the map. After all, each internal representation is made up of a mixture of pictures, 
sounds, feelings even tastes and smells. Change a unit of that information and we 
change what that information means. 
 
In the past, many “visualisation” techniques have evolved. In these techniques you 
are asked to imagine something pleasant and to focus on it until it happens for real. 
There is a lot of merit in this method. But there is also something missing. 
Visualisations tend to focus on the content of a given image – perhaps you are 
looking fit and healthy, wearing an expensive suit, sipping champagne, whatever it 
is that motivates you. So far so good, but what is missing? 
 
Lets look briefly at the history of the cinema. The very first version of public 
cinemas arrived in the form of shadow puppets. These were replaced by photographic 
images lit by a lantern. In time these static images evolved into the first moving 
images. The first moving pictures were dull and grey and with a low optical quality. 
Over time that improved as advances in technology allowed more pictures to be 
taken, smoothing out the motion and focusing each image more clearly. Then sound 
arrived, marking the end of such artists as Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton. 
Despite their obvious talents, people craved the additional stimulation that sounds 
had to offer. Advance after advance continued to come: better sound, colour film, 
larger screens, clearer pictures… Yet the stories were much the same. What changed 
is how the stories were delivered. Each new advance “made it” because people 
wanted the experience it offered. Something about the quality of the experience had 
improved. 
 
Watching a film on a small black and white TV is totally different to watching it on 
a giant IMAX screen. Listening to a rock song quietly is nothing like feeling it roar 
as you crank up the volume. Intensity and meaning are linked not just to the sensory 
modality – what you can see, hear or feel –, but the building blocks that make up 
each of those sense modalities. The difference that makes a difference is in the sub-
modalities! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
109 
Modalities, Submodalities and Neuro-Drivers 
 
A modality is the sensory channel through which our nervous system gets 
information: sight, sound, feeling, taste and smell (also known as the 4-tuple: 
VAKO/G). Each modality is made up of finer distinctions that define its qualities. 
So you can see something which is sharp or defocused, colour or black and white, 
near or far away, large or small etc. Likewise your hearing can be broken down into 
pitch, rhythm, sound direction, volume, timbre etc. These finer distinctions are 
known as submodalities.  
 
Just like watching a film on a small TV set is different to watching it on a big screen 
or even a giant IMAX screen, so our internal realities will change in intensity as we 
alter the submodalities that we place an event in. 
 
As an example, imagine something pleasant. Maybe your partner saying or doing 
something nice for you, perhaps you win the lottery. Simply imagine something 
nice. Notice how good it makes you feel. Now take that picture and move it away 
from you, until it is small and dark, way off in the distance. Then see how you feel. 
Did the feeling get stronger or weaker? Now reverse the process, bring the image 
closer and closer. Make it larger, brighter, fuller colours… and ask yourself, did your 
experience of it change? 
 
Most people, though not all, will experience the intensity of emotions associated 
with the picture I asked you to make increasing as the image comes closer, larger, 
brighter etc. When the image moves away, becomes smaller, darker the intensity 
also tends to fade. This is why film techniques have evolved in the way they did – 
they are mimicking the way the brain naturally experiences reality in order to make 
one scene more intense and another softer, quieter, duller etc.  
 
Every experience you have, every urge and every feeling, will have an internal 
representation (IR) at the root to let your brain know how you should be feeling. The 
clever part is that by changing the submodalities of these IRs, the way you 
experience that event changes. Frightening things can become dull. Interesting things 
more fascinating. You might want to create a compulsion to study, so that the more 
you do it the better you feel. All this can be done when you use submodalities. 
 
As you begin to experiment with your subjective experience, you will notice that 
many submodalities have a slight effect on how you feel about something. But one 
or two completely change it. It seems these special submodalities drag all the other 
ones along with them. These special submodalities are known as neuro-drivers, 
because the drive your whole nervous system to experience things one way or 
another. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
110 
Submodalities Checklist 
 
Visual 
Motion/Still 
 
 
Colour/B&W 
 
 
Location 
 
 
Associated/Dissociated 
 
 
Framed/Panoramic 
 
 
Large/Small 
 
 
Near/Far away 
 
 
Focused/Blurred 
 
 
Bright/Dim 
 
 
3D/Flat 
 
 
 
Auditory 
Location of Sound 
 
 
Tone 
 
 
Tempo 
 
 
Volume 
 
 
Duration 
 
 
Pitch 
 
 
Pace 
 
 
Rhythm 
 
 
 
Kinaesthetic 
Location (in body) 
 
 
Breathing Rate 
 
 
Shape 
 
 
Size 
 
 
Temperature 
 
 
Movement 
 
 
Weight 
 
 
Pressure 
 
 
Texture 
 
 
 
Olfactory/Gustatory 
Sweet/Sour 
 
 
Salty 
 
 
Bitter 
 
 
Aroma 
 
 
Intensity 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
111 
Contrastive Analysis 
 
The only way that we can experience something is by making a contrast of it with 
something else. If you look at a fixed point in space, your eyeballs are actually 
continuously moving a tiny fraction from left to right in order to create a contrast that 
lets you see. If a contact lens with a spot on it is placed on your eye, so that the spot 
remains stationary relative to your retina, within a few seconds that spot will 
disappear! 
 
When you want to find out what a submodality does, or you want to make changes, 
it helps to have something to compare it to. If you ask someone if their mental 
picture is large or small, it is a nonsense question unless you are comparing it to 
something, like another picture. If you want to find out what makes you like 
chocolate so much and why you are indifferent about carrots, it helps to compare the 
two pictures to each other. It gives you that crucial contrast that allows you to see 
differences.  
 
Now when you look at two pictures or listen to two different sounds, or even 
compare feelings, you are doing something called a contrastive analysis. The 
purpose of a contrastive analysis is to find out what changes you need to make in 
your IRs in order to experience some aspect of the world differently. In the above 
examples you could transform the way you feel about chocolate and carrots, so that 
you end up craving carrots as much as you used to crave chocolate whilst chocolate 
becomes something that you are indifferent about. 
 
The ability to do this offers you tremendous freedom. You can run your own brain so 
that you can feel the way you want to about things. If you listen to people’s 
language, they are often unconsciously describing exactly what is happening to them 
when they change: “she just turned me off”, “I cannot see a way out”, “it all seems 
like gibberish to me”, “the future is getting brighter” etc. Doing it with conscious 
volition can be as easy as every unconscious change (and there have been many of 
those) that you have experienced. 
 
In order for a contrastive analysis to be effective, you need to be very systematic in 
your explorations of the effect a given submodality has on a person’s experience. 
Change one thing at a time and find out what effect that had. Then return it to 
normal before trying out another submodality. Later you can go back and change all 
the submodalities that gave you a better, more enjoyable experience. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
112 
Submodalities Elicitation Hints 
 
The following are a few guidelines that should make your exploration of 
submodalities a little easier (especially if you want to practice with a non-NLP 
trained subject!): 
 
1. Be conversational: the best submodalities to examine are the ones that 
arise spontaneously, i.e. unconsciously. If you try too hard to elicit 
something, you may lead some people to interfere with their natural 
processes and give you a misleading/confusing result. 
 
2. Avoid Jargon: this is true of anything that you do. Your job is not to 
educate the outside world in the methodology of NLP (unless you are a 
NLP trainer, in which case it is your job!)  
 
3. Know the Checklist: you need to know your way around the submodalities 
checklist so that you can engage someone conversationally. If you refer back 
to your notes constantly it can be distracting. 
 
4. Watch the Client: it is vital that you watch the client when they are 
speaking. You must catch the non-verbal cues that something is changing. 
Clients who are used to ignoring their feelings will usually be the last to 
know that something has changed! Do not watch your notes, watch the 
client! 
 
5. Use Clean Language: we have many idioms that actually alter 
submodalities. “it’s a grey area”, “pull yourself together” or “get a 
handle on it” all of these are instructions to change at the level of 
submodalities. Later on we will explore how you can change people’s 
submodalities (and thereby their reality) just by the way you use language. 
For now keep your language clean and ask only for precisely what you 
want. 
 
6. Go Quickly: a typical novice mistake is to take forever. The mind learns 
quickly, changes quickly, does things quickly. Asking someone to hold 
firm an internal image is like reading a story to someone at the rate of one 
word every week. It looses all cohesion. So go reasonably quickly – a 
normal conversational rate is perfect. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
113 
Submodalities Exercises 
 
In the following exercises, focus on just one sensory modality at a time. So you 
might start with the visual system and explore that one. Then you could move on to 
the auditory system to find out what you can discover. Finally you might try the 
kinaesthetic system. Pay particular attention to any cross-system shifts, i.e. if you 
make the picture larger, do the sounds improve or if you shift the location of the 
feeling, do the pictures move automatically too. 
 
Exercise 1: Feel Good 
 
1. Find a partner.  
 
2. A thinks of something that makes her feel good. You will not have to 
discuss what you are thinking about, so make it really good! 
 
3. B goes through the Submodalities Checklist and changes one submodality 
at a time. Remember to return the submodalities back to normal before 
experimenting with the next one. 
 
4. A changes her submodalities as slowly as she can remain engaged in the 
exercise. A reports back to B the effect this is having. If A finds a Neuro-
driver, tell B what it is. B takes careful notes. 
 
Exercise 2: Feel Bad 
 
1. Do this with the same partner as Exercise 1. 
 
2. A thinks of something that is mildly unpleasant, frustrating or annoying. 
Do NOT choose the biggest life trauma you can remember, this is not the 
time for that yet. 
 
3. Repeat Exercise 1, changing each submodality one at a time and returning it 
to normal before moving on. B takes notes for A 
 
4. Compare the results from Exercise 2 with those from Exercise 1: do the 
same set of submodalities affect both set of memories in the same way? 
 
Change roles and repeat both exercises for B. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
114 
Exercise 3: Kinaesthetic Exploration
41 
 
This exercise is particularly useful for people that have “locked themselves away” 
and are “not in touch with themselves”. It allows you to access your body and its 
signals once again. 
 
1. Create an anchor to return you to the outside world. You will only need 10-
15minutes for this exercise. Arrange for someone to fire you “come back out 
anchor” at the end of that time. 
 
2. Sit or lie comfortably and close your eyes. 
 
3. Notice whatever sensations you become aware of in your body. Whatever 
sensation you notice, say to yourself “Now I am aware of… XXX.” 
 
4. Start with directing your attention to external tactile stimuli. The feeling of 
your clothing against your back, the pressure of the chair/floor, the 
temperature in your hands, the feeling of your breath going in and out of 
your nostrils/mouth etc. 
 
5. Slowly begin to notice more internal kinaesthetic responses: tension in your 
shoulders, a tingling in your hands, a gurgling in your stomach. Keep 
pointing things out to yourself, “Now I am aware of… the pins and 
needles in my legs… Now I am aware of… a pressure in my gut…” 
 
6. Notice if you are equally aware of the sensations in every part of your body, 
or if some areas are easier to access than others. 
 
7. At the end of your time, fire off the alertness anchor and reorient back to the 
outside world. 
 
                                                
41 This exercise on body awareness can be found in many different systems from Gestalt therapy to Yoga, 
Zen Mindfulness and even some hypnotic exercises. It can lead to very profound (and pleasant) hypnotic 
experiences, which is why an “alertness” anchor will help you reorient to the outside world more easily. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
115 
Exercise 4: Synaesthesias
42 
 
This exercise is a great way to explore your internal realities and the natural 
associations your mind makes. Milton Erickson once ran a series of research 
experiments in which he hypnotically induced colour blindness
43. In one such case 
he reports a man who spontaneously forgot the number 3 existed as soon as he lost 
the ability to perceive the colour red. In his mind the link between the two was that 
strong! 
 
1. Set an anchor for reorienting to the outside world after the exercise. 
 
2. Select a colour, like blue, and mentally immerse yourself completely in that 
colour. Imagine you were in a place where the only thing that existed was 
the colour blue. 
 
3. When you have a full sense of the colour, allow your awareness to drift into 
the auditory channel. Notice what sound you spontaneously hear 
accompanying that colour. Let the sound become as loud and clear as it 
needs to. 
 
4. Then turn your attention to your kinaesthetic experience. Start to notice 
what body sensations accompany the colour and the sound. Where in your 
body do you feel it? Is the feeling moving or still? 
 
5. Repeat steps 2-5 with a different colour. Keep choosing a new colour until 
you have explored at least six colours. 
 
 
A nice variation of this exercise is to pick an object, like a leaf or a stone, and 
examine it thoroughly – get a good feel for it. Then close your eyes and go on an 
imaginary journey into the object. Shrink yourself down to size or enlarge the size of 
the object so you can step inside it. Then just notice the things your imagination 
allows you to see, hear, feel and even taste and smell. Build up the senses slowly, 
one at a time. If you have a copy of the Deep Trance Training Manual Volume 1
44, 
you could ask someone to guide you through this with the Sensory Overlap 
induction (on page 81). 
                                                
42 I first saw this exercise in Bandler and MacDonald, “An Insider’s Guide to Submodalities”, Meta 
Publications 1988, although I have seen many variations on this theme in non NLP fields as well. 
43 Erickson, “The Induction of Color Blindness By A Technique of Hypnotic Suggestion” reproduced in 
Erickson and Rossi, “The Collected Papers of Milton H Erickson Volume II – Hypnotic Alteration of 
Sensory, Perceptual and Psychophysiological Processes” Irvington Publishers 1980, pp 18-32. 
44 Igor Ledochowski, “The Deep Trance Training Manual Volume 1”, Crownhouse Publishing 2003. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
116 
Timelines 
 
Time is something unique. It is a complete fabrication of the human mind. Time as 
such does not exist. All that exists is the present moment. When you think about 
the past or about the future, you are doing so in the present moment, because that is 
all that really exists. However, we have as a society learned to organise ourselves 
around a concept of time, and that has its uses. 
 
As a mental construct our concept of the past and the future will be represented by 
our submodalities. Try this experiment: 
 
1. Close your eyes and think about something that happened yesterday. Notice 
where you perceive that image to be. 
2. Now think about something that happened to you last week, month or year. 
Notice where that is located. 
3. Now think about the future. What is something you know you will be 
doing tomorrow – brush your teeth, have breakfast etc. Notice this third 
location. 
4. Now think about something that will happen in a few weeks or months: 
your birthday, a friend’s birthday, Christmas, Easter any event like that. 
Notice where you perceive that plan for the future to be. 
 
Now, if you connect the dots between distant past memories, recent past, near future 
and distant future, you will see that a line is implied. Some people have their line in 
front of them going from left to right. Others have their timeline going from front to 
back. In Japan, I am informed, many people have their timeline going from beneath 
them to above them. 
 
These timelines are the way in which we organise time to allow us to experience 
what is happening temporally. Our language reflects many of our submodality biases 
on time: “just put it behind you”, “lets keep things moving forwards”, “turn to 
face your future!” 
 
You can change your perception of time in the same way as you change any other 
submodalities. For example, some people put their past right in front of their eyes, 
obscuring the future. These people are prone to be “haunted” by the past. They keep 
reliving their past mistakes! Other people might repeat the same mistakes again and 
again, and seem unable to learn from the past. Often this is a result keeping the past 
directly behind them and out of sight – they literally cannot see the mistakes they 
made before and so repeat them again! 
 
Navigating your timeline is useful for creating futures (goal getting), learning from 
the past and letting go of old baggage! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
117 
Submodalities expressed in Language 
 
The way we express ourselves tends to be a literal description of the thought 
patterns and internal maps that we are functioning from. When you listen to your 
own and other people’s figures of speech, they are actually telling you exactly how 
they have created problems or discovered solutions in their life. The following list is 
just a sample for you. With each description, get a sense of what submodality shifts 
are literally being described: 
 
Visual 
 
• 
He’s got a colourful past. 
• 
The future is bright. 
• 
I take a dim view of that. 
• 
Its all a bit too hazy for me. 
• 
Life is so drab. 
• 
Don’t blow it out of all proportion. 
• 
When he told me, I could only see red! 
• 
We really see eye to eye. 
 
Auditory 
 
• 
He’s just asking for trouble. 
• 
The obvious choice was just screaming out for attention. 
• 
I get you loud and clear. 
• 
We came to a screeching halt. 
• 
I keep telling myself “That’s no good at all!” 
• 
We’ll have to fine tune the situation. 
• 
I just want a bit of peace and quiet! 
 
Kinaesthetic 
 
• 
He’s far too slimy! 
• 
She is so hot! 
• 
Ease up on the pressure, will you?! 
• 
Keep a lid on it! 
• 
That’s a real weight off my shoulders! 
• 
He’s a real pain in the neck. 
• 
We started off on the wrong foot. 
• 
Its all off kilter. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
118 
Changing Submodalities 
 
Map Across 
A Map Across is a way of transforming your experience. When you recall the 
submodalities exercises you did earlier on, you will remember that your experiences 
changed as you altered the submodalities and then returned them to normal. 
 
In a map across you will alter the submodalities and leave them altered for a change. 
But what should you change them to? A simple formula for this kind of change is 
this: 
 
a. 
Think of something you want to change, maybe you like it a little too 
much. Call this A. E.g. A could be chocolate. 
b. Think of something that you makes you feel the way you would like to feel 
about A. Call this B. E.g. B could be carrots. 
c. 
Do a contrastive analysis of the submodalities in A and B. Which ones are 
different? 
d. Change all the submodalities in A to those in B, but keep the content of A, 
to the extent that you can. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is a very simple a direct way to make changes. To install the change you can 
make the Map Across by using the Swish Technique (see NLP Practitioner 
Techniques), Direct Suggestion, Presuppositions or Indirect Hypnotic Language. 
 
A 
 
B 
 
A 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
119 
Direct Suggestion 
 
In direct suggestion you simply tell the person what to do. That could be a simple 
as saying: make all the submodalities in A the same as in B. Or you could specify 
each change more fully: move the image of A to the same location B was in… now 
change the sound, make it softer like in B… now make it louder… etc. 
 
Presuppositions & Hypnotic Language 
 
You can (in fact you should!) use all your language skills presuppose, suggest, 
imply and assume that the change is happening/has occurred. This can be done at 
any stage of the process. 
 
You have ample opportunities in which to stack presuppositions in the favour of 
change. For example, during the test phase you could ask your client “can you get 
the old picture back?” or you could say “now I want you to try to get the old 
picture back, and see what happens.” 
 
First off, remember that the word “try” implies failure, so you have sneaked in one 
presupposition already. Then there is the “and see what happens” part. Why would 
you add that unless something unusual was going on – like someone making an 
internal change. Tagged on after the “try” there is a snowballing effect and the 
implication intensifies. 
 
Of course you could get a similar effect from the straight question if you modulated 
your voice and changed your facial expression as you ask the question in such a way 
as to imply doubt. Barristers and other skilled courtroom lawyers are experts at 
casting doubt with every part of their communication (especially their sub-
communications!) 
 
Other aids to change might be to use the power of the imagination to change the 
submodalities. For example: You could make strange statements like “well of 
course your second picture is lower, so all you have to do is give it a nudge, like 
so, and whoop… there it goes, it just slots neatly into its new position”  
 
This may not make logical sense, but in the heat of the moment the unconscious 
goes along with the metaphorical suggestion and yes the picture just seems to move 
all by itself! This is one of the reasons for using your analogue signals (like making 
the “woosh” noise with a swish pattern) – they add a non-verbal suggestion to the 
proceedings to make them more persuasive. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
120 
Building Powerful Internal Representations
45 
Confusion to Understanding Map Across 
This is the classic exercise in shifting Submodalities: 
 
1. Pick a confusing subject: ask your partner to pick something she is confused 
about. Make a distinction between confusion and ignorance. Ignorance comes 
from not having sufficient information about something. Confusion arises when 
you have all the information you need, you just don’t know how to put it 
together! 
 
2. Choose understanding: now ask your partner to choose something she 
understands just fine. 
 
3. Contrastive analysis: use the Submodalities Checklist above to contrast the 
submodalities of the two experiences. Record her answers. 
 
4. Map Across:one by one change the submodalities of the thing she is confused 
about into the same submodalities of the thing she understands. On each shift 
ask her if she is still confused. Notice how subtly the change begins. 
Enhancing Experiences 
This is a valuable way of enhancing any experience in the moment. It is a great way 
to train your neurology to start having more fun and look for more the interesting 
things in life! 
 
1. Select a lacklustre experience: ask your partner to select an experience in which 
he simply “made do” or “did the best he could” with the situation. 
 
2. Select an interesting experience: now ask him to select an experience in which 
he managed to turn things around so that they became better than he had 
anticipated. 
 
3. Contrastive analysis: now do a contrastive analysis between the submodalities 
of both experiences. 
 
4. Enhance the NOW: as soon as you know what your partner does to make 
things more fun, get your partner to make the experience he is having RIGHT 
NOW to be more fun and exciting. Make them enjoy the moment RIGHT 
NOW completely! 
                                                
45 These exercises have been adapted from Bandler and MacDonald, “An Insider’s Guide to Sub-
Modalities”, Meta Publications 1988. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
121 
Have a Great Time… NOW! 
 
This is yet another exercise designed to get your neurology to “be in the moment” 
and really appreciate every second’s worth of experience for the fun and excitement it 
has to offer! It utilises the SWISH Technique, which we go through more formally 
under the NLP Practitioner Techniques: 
 
1. Internalise NOW: ask your partner to close her eyes and see exactly what 
she was seeing when she had her eyes open. She may have to open and 
close her eyes a few times to get it. 
 
2. Prepare for SWISH: ask her to put a tiny picture in which she sees herself 
having a FANTASTIC time, right in the centre of the NOW image. 
 
3. SWISH: now tell her to explode open the tiny picture until it takes over 
her old NOW picture completely. Make a great big WOOOSSHH!! Noise 
to add a little effect. It is just like going to the cinema and watching one of 
the special effects change all the action on the screen. Make sure the new 
picture completely replaces the old. 
 
4. Associate: get her to step into this new picture so instead of seeing herself 
in the picture, she is seeing out of her own eyes, hearing with her own ears 
etc. 
 
5. Intensify: as soon as she is fully associated to the new NOW in which she 
is having a fantastic time, put another tiny picture in the middle of her 
NOW, in which she is having an even better time still. Then  
WOOOSSHH!! Open that one and step inside to associate into the new 
NOW! 
 
6. Repeat: repeat these steps up to ten times (or until she cannot stand the 
amount of fun she is having!) 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
122 
NLP Practitioner Techniques 
 
Guidelines for Changework 
 
Personal change is a complex field. The NLP techniques do not sit in a vacuum. 
They have to be applied in a context. The techniques require someone’s co-
operation: clients have to be willing to follow the steps suggested. You also need to 
make sure that you direct the client’s attention to those portions of her experience 
that will allow her to change. Attention and energy are the basic currency of change 
(whether that change is to take place in the context of education & learning, therapy, 
coaching, sales, leadership, business relationships or parenting). 
 
You will see later (when we cover the Meta Pattern of ALL change) that states are 
everything. If you create exquisite states for people and attach them to the right 
things (yourself, your products, a task, a new way of being, a new behaviour) change 
will happen automatically! But remember that “states” are a nominalisation: they 
do not exist. They cannot be put inside a wheelbarrow. States are not things, they 
are processes. States are something that people do. 
 
The following guidelines are designed to help you put a context around the NLP 
techniques. That way you can tailor your approaches to each unique situation of 
every individual client. 
 
1. Clear your mind:  you will need to calibrate the client exquisitely. If your 
head is full of other things, that will be difficult. Remember the NLP 
presuppositions – they are frameworks that influence what your mind will 
let you see. This is invaluable when it comes to creating change! 
 
2. Maintain rapport: keep the client on your side. Use your language 
carefully to be respectful of the client. If you are pushing hard (like when 
you use the Meta Model), make sure that your tone is soft. Use softeners 
like “maybe… I wonder… etc” to take the edge of suggestions and 
challenges. Take your time, don’t rush through the processes! 
 
3. Go First!:  by now you should have learned to enter your own altered state 
in which you are more alert to your client (calibration), you have access to 
all your NLP learnings and experiences and have learned to trust your 
unconscious mind’s ability to find solutions. Use it! Another essential part 
of going first relates to states. States are everything when it comes to 
change. If you want someone to get excited, get excited first! If you want 
someone to calm down, join their excitement and then calm down yourself. 
Go First! People will follow. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
123 
4. Don’t change their mind, change their mood: decisions, beliefs and 
behaviours occur within states. Change the state and the decision, belief or 
behaviour no longer exists (for that period of time). That is one reason for 
using trance: it’s an altered state in which the problem does not really 
exist! Change their mood (state) and all else will follow! 
 
5. Know your outcome: always communicate with an outcome in mind. If 
you don’t know where you are going, do not be surprised if you go 
nowhere very fast! How will you be able to judge if you are “on track” if 
there is no track you want to be on. Your unconscious gives you what you 
want, but you have to want something before it can give! 
 
6. Everything counts: everything you have ever learned still counts. Use it 
all to get to the outcome you have in mind. Just because you think you 
want to do a SWISH, does not mean that you can not use reframing, 
language patterns, Meta Model questions, submodality adjustments and 
anchoring to make the effect more powerful. Use everything you have to get 
the change and make it last! Change the technique if you have to, just make 
it work! 
 
7. Utilise everything from the client: everything the client gives you is 
useful. If he “resists” there is something useful within that process that can 
be turned to help your cause. Resistance is a sign of insufficient pacing. 
Sometimes resistance is the client’s unconscious telling you how he wants 
to change! Listen!! Remember: what you resist will persist; what you accept 
you gain the power to utilise and transform. 
 
8. Move from the least intrusive to the most intrusive: if doing something 
subtle and indirect can create the change, do it. One reason for using the 
Meta Model first, is that the challenges “loosen the concrete” paving the 
way for other things to work better. The same is true of the Milton Model, 
presuppositions etc. Whenever I work with a client I will do my best to get 
the change through conversational hypnosis language patterns before it 
looks like we have begun. It makes life so much easier for everyone! 
 
9. Under pressure the mind reverts to base experience: when you (or a 
client) are under pressure, you revert to doing what you have practiced. That 
is one reason for having the client rehearse and condition a technique several 
times (including during the Future Pace). The good news is that intense 
visualisations are real experiences. The brain, under pressure, reverts back 
to what you rehearsed in your mind too. So you can practice many things 
through full-sensory visualisations! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
124 
Anchoring 
 
Collapse Anchors 
A collapse anchors is the basic therapeutic technique. In collapse anchors you take a 
problem trigger and transform it so that instead of it triggering the problem reaction, 
it instead triggers the solution. It is a very elegant way to do Changework. When 
your nervous system tries to access two conflicting states, the strongest of the two 
will prevail. So if your resources are stronger than your problems, your problems 
simply disappear – they cannot compete! 
 
1. Anchor the problem state: the first step is to elicit and anchor the problem 
state. Lets call this Anchor A. You will be using this later. 
2. Break state: next you need to get the client out of the problem state. You need a 
neutral state so that he can begin to access solution states without getting that 
mixed up with the problem. Typical break states might include distracting 
attention, thinking of a white canvass, getting the client to stand and “shake it 
off” etc. 
3. Identify resources: now you can get the client to search for solution states. 
How would he have to feel or be in order for the problem to simply not exist 
anymore? NB the solution states must be stronger than the problem state is. 
4. Anchor resource state(s): next you elicit the resource(s) the client needs and 
you anchor them. Make them really juicy – they have to be stronger than the 
problem state is. If you want to you can stack several resources together, pump 
them up with a sliding anchor and adjust the submodalities to really make it a 
humdinger of an experience! Lets call this Anchor B. 
5. Break state, Test and Break state: to make sure you have a good resource 
anchor, then clear the slate so you can do the real work. 
6. Collapse Anchors: tell the client to go to the problem context in his mind. As 
he does this, fire off the problem anchor A. Watch him closely. As soon as he 
starts to go into the problem state physiology, fire off the resource anchor B. 
Hold both together.  
7. Integrate: watch the client as both states battle it out. This is the integration 
process. Eventually they will come to rest. When the client’s physiology settles 
down, you can release both anchors. 
8. Test: fire the problem anchor A and watch. If he goes into the solution state 
physiology, you are done. If he starts to go into the problem, fire Anchor B 
again and allow the integration to occur again. You may need to condition this 
process up to 5 times. 
9. Future Pace: send the client into the future to the same problem context and see 
if he can get the problem back. If not he’s done! 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
125 
Chaining Anchors 
 
Chaining Anchors is a way of installing a strategy or a sequence of states in 
someone. This is particularly useful when the jump from the problem state to the 
solution state is too large to manage in one fell swoop. 
 
Chaining Anchors has two distinct stages: chain design and chain installation. 
 
Chain Design 
 
1. Elicit Parameters: elicit the problem state (state 1) and an ideal solution 
state (state 5) as you would in a simple collapse anchors. There is no need 
to anchor these yet (though you can do if you wish). 
 
2. Bridge the gap: decide on the number of steps it would take to get from 
the problem state to the solution state. Consider the size of the gap between 
the start and finish points and how much movement is in each state, i.e. do 
you have to move from a fast state (e.g. panic) to a slow one (e.g. calm) or 
from a very slow one (e.g. depression) to a fast one (e.g. excitement).  
 
3. Elicit intermediate states: 
 
a. 
Lets assume you chose to have three intermediate states (five in total, 
including the problem and solution states). Ask yourself: what state is 
halfway between the problem and the solution that would cause the 
client to move towards the outcome? This is state 3.  
 
b. Repeat the question to bridge the gap between state 1 and state 3, to 
give you state 2.  
 
c. 
Repeat again to bridge the gap between state 3 and state 5 to give you 
state 4. 
 
4. Check States: now that you have all the states in the sequence, try them on 
for size on yourself and ask yourself: would it work for me? Would it move 
me to move from problem (state 1) to solution (state 5)? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State 1 
State 
3 
State  
2 
 
State 
4 
State 5 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
126 
Chain Installation 
 
Now that you have the sequence of states that your client will need, it is time to 
install the whole chain. The sequence in which you anchor the states is important as 
you want to allow the client to unconsciously rehearse running the chain before 
officially doing so – you want them to succeed before they even know there might be 
a chance to fail! 
 
1. Anchor state 2: anchor state 2 first of all. This is will be the first step in 
the solution sequence. You do not want them to go into the problem until 
you are ready to obliterate it! Test it and Break State. 
2. Anchor state 3: anchor, test it and Break State. 
3. Anchor state 4: anchor, test it and Break State. 
4. Anchor state 5: anchor, test it and Break State. 
5. Anchor state 1: anchor the problem state last of all. You want the client to 
have had an experience of the chain working to some extent before you start 
them down the problem path. Break State. 
6. Install the Chain: Fire state 1, as it starts to come up fire state 2 and 
allow a moment for integration. Then fire state 3, and wait for the 
integration. As the integration peaks, fire state 4 and wait for the 
integration. As the integration peaks, fire state 5 and wait for the 
integration to complete. 
7. Condition the Chain: repeat the process once or twice to condition the 
chain into their neurology. 
8. Break State and Test: from a neutral state, ask the client to associate to the 
problem context, fire the anchor for state 1 and tell him to “run the rest of 
the chain on your own”. Make sure it happens automatically. 
9. Future Pace:  ask the client to associate to some future context in which 
they would have had the problem in the past, and notice what happens. To 
be really rigorous ask them to try and get the problem back. The harder 
they try, the more they fail. The change will last! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Installing a 
 
State 1 
State 
3 
State  
2 
 
State 
4 
State 5 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
127 
Change Personal History 
 
Change personal history is a way of using anchors to free people from being haunted 
by the past. 
 
1. Anchor problem state: find the problematic feeling and anchor it. This 
anchor will be P1. 
 
2. Follow the feeling: let the problem feeling take the client back and remind 
her of other experiences in the past in which she felt the same way. 
 
3. Anchor the past: Calibrate their physiology, when exaggerations occur, 
she has hit on a significant event. Stop her and ask her what age she was 
during that experience. Anchor this event as P2. 
 
4. Repeat: using P1, keep the client going backwards in time (its OK if she 
regresses). Each time a significant event occurs, ask for the age and anchor 
each event as P3, P4, P5 and P6. 
 
5. Break State: clear the air, reorient her to the present and distract her. 
 
6. Access resources: back in the present ask the client what resources she 
would have needed in that earliest event (P6) to feel good about herself. 
Elicit this and anchor it as R1. Then Break State. 
 
7. Collapse the past: starting with event P6, do a collapse anchors with P6 
and R1 until the client is totally resourceful and happy with that past event. 
Then move on to P5 and collapse again with R1. Repeat one by one with 
P4, P3, P2 and P1. If there is a problem, find a more powerful resource state 
and start again (from where you left off). 
 
8. Test:  have client remember the past events to see how she does naturally. 
 
9. Future Pace: If all is well, orient her into the future into contexts in which 
she would have had a problem in the past and see what happens. 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
128 
Re-imprint Method 
 
This is similar to change personal history, but has a much wider scope for the 
client’s personal development and learning. 
 
1. Identify problem: find a recent experience with negative feelings that keep 
coming back in different contexts. 
 
2. Find imprint event: Follow this feeling back to the earliest memory, like 
in change personal history. 
 
3. Dissociate: ask the client to float out of the body of that younger him so he 
can view it all like a fly on the wall or as if he were in a cinema. 
 
4. Find Intention: for each of the players in that scene, get the client to chunk 
up on their intention for behaving in the way that they did. Find the 
highest positive intention for each person (including the young client). 
 
5. Identify Resources: from the dissociated position, ask the client what 
resources each person in that scene needed in order to properly satisfy the 
positive intention. 
 
6. Anchor the child: anchor the resources the child needed. Run through the 
scene first dissociated and then again associated. Notice any changes. 
 
7. Anchor other players: take one of the other players in that scene and 
anchor in the resources that that individual needed. Then run through the 
scene again dissociated followed by associated. The client should experience 
this from the new player’s point of view! 
 
8. Repeat for the cast: repeat step seven for each of the other people in that 
scene, one by one. 
 
9. Associate: finally run through the scene once again, with the client 
associated into his younger self. 
 
10. Reorient and Break State: bring them back and distract. 
 
11. Test: ask the client casually about the situation in step 1. Notice the natural 
response. 
 
12. Future Pace: orient the client to future scenarios. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
129 
The Circle of Excellence  
 
This is a wonderful technique to practice feeling great at any time of day. It is 
particularly useful for energising yourself before an important meeting, date, 
competition etc. In many ways this is a stacked anchor that you can take anywhere 
you want to re-experience whenever you want or need to. 
 
1. Identify state of excellence:  choose any state that you find appealing and 
particularly resourceful. It could be a time of great energy and enthusiasm, 
or time when you had real insight and clarity of thought. It might be a time 
in your life when you felt completely happy, fulfilled, confident, loved, 
unstoppable… 
 
2. Create the circle: imagine a circle out in front of you. 
 
3. Dissociate: see yourself standing in that circle buzzing with this state you 
have chosen. See yourself standing, moving, breathing and behaving the 
way you did back then. Notice the expression on your face which tells you 
exactly how good it feels to be that you! 
 
4. Associate: as soon as you step into that circle, you will step into that 
happy, energised, confident you. See through those eyes, hear through those 
ears, and feel the feeling that being this you brings. 
 
5. Anchor: at the peak of the experience, anchor the feeling to a gesture (closed 
fist) or a word (“YES!”). As the feeling starts to fade step back out of the 
circle leaving all those feelings inside the circle. 
 
6. Condition: repeat steps 3-5 three or four times to condition the experience. 
 
7. Future Pace: suggest that you can take this circle anywhere you go and 
place it in front of you, so that anytime you wish or need to feel this good 
again, all you have to do is step inside the circle and let the magic begin! 
 
This is a great way to exercise your neurology. Feeling great and resourceful is a 
habit just like any other. Why not make it as natural to feel great and be 
resourceful as it is to walk, talk or breathe? You can use this equally well on 
yourself, with friends or clients. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
130 
Submodalities 
 
Swish Technique 
The swish technique is another one of those NLP classics. You can use it anywhere 
where you want to change habits, install a new strategy or to make a map across 
more fun. 
 
In essence this is a map across using Neuro-drivers and some contextual suggestion 
in order to replace an unwanted internal representation with something that is more 
desirable. 
 
1. Identify trigger: find whatever trigger sets off the unwanted behaviour. 
Often it will be a mental picture of something. But it could also be 
something as simple as a smoker seeing/feeling a cigarette in his hand. 
Make a still picture of the trigger. 
2. Break State 
3. Create an outcome: find out how the client wants to be different. If you 
really want to make things juicy, enhance the submodalities so that it is 
really appealing. 
4. Begin Change: ask the client to temporarily shrink the picture so it is a 
tiny dot in one corner of the old trigger picture. 
5. SWISH!: ask the client to simultaneously shrink the trigger picture into 
nothingness and enlarge the outcome picture. Let the outcome picture 
become bigger, bolder, brighter and better. Make the final picture really 
attractive. As the pictures change, make swishing noises for added effect 
(and to amuse yourself!) 
6. Break State 
7. Condition: tell the client to go inside and repeat it five times to condition 
it. Each time will be faster and remember to put a break state in between 
each cycle! 
8. Test and Future pace: ask the client to try and get the old picture back. 
Really push them so that they know they have changed when they fail. 
Then orient them into the future where this change can occur automatically. 
 
The Swish outlined above uses size as the Neuro-driver for change. There may 
be other Neuro-drivers that you may have to use. Distance (slingshot the trigger 
away as the outcome explodes towards the client) is an important alternative. 
You can also experiment with combining several elements at once: as the picture 
goes into the distance, it fades out, shrinks in size and is blacked out until it is 
gone. The outcome, meanwhile, can come closer, grow larger, brighter and have 
increasingly vivid colours. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
131 
The Fast Phobia Cure 
 
This another one of those classic NLP techniques that have made NLP famous. This 
technique was designed explicitly for dealing phobias, i.e. there is no huge 
underlying trauma that needs to be dealt with. 
 
1. Security anchor: the first thing to do is create a security anchor to bail the 
client out in case it all gets too much for her. 
 
2. Identify phobia: calibrate to make sure that she can reproduce the feelings! 
Trace the feeling back to an imprint event. 
 
3. Dissociate: get her to “step out of the picture” so she sees her younger self 
in the first frame of a black and white movie. The start of the movie is 
before the problem began, i.e. the client is still safe and all is well. 
 
4. Fast forward: now get the client to run the movie forwards at super high 
speed, in black & white.  
 
5. White out: at the peak of the event, just at the critical scene, have the client 
white or bright out the entire scene.  
 
6. End the film: after the “white out” allow the film to carry on to the end, 
still in black & white and at super high speed. The film does not stop until 
it is all over and the client is safe and calm again (in the film) 
 
7. Associate & rewind: at the end of the film have the client step into the film 
and assume the role associated again. Then run the film backwards at triple 
speed. If you want to add some humour, add a humorous soundtrack like 
circus music or the theme tune from the “Benny Hill Show”. Play the film 
and everything backwards (with the client associated, i.e. inside the film, 
where the action is). 
 
8. Condition: when the client is back at the start (all is well, nothing bad has 
happened yet), get the client to dissociate herself by stepping out of the 
picture again and viewing herself on the screen. Repeat steps 3-7 until the 
client cannot get the feelings back. 
 
9. Test and Future Pace. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
132 
Visual–Kinaesthetic Dissociation 
 
This technique is one of the more heavyweight therapeutic procedures. Use it 
whenever a client experiences overpowering negative emotions, such as when dealing 
with a phobia or trauma. 
 
1. Security anchor: the first thing to do is create a security anchor to bail the 
client out in case it all gets too much for her.  
 
2. Dissociate: have the client enter a cinema or theatre with curtains closed. 
Behind the curtain will be the traumatic scene they want to work through. 
The scene will begin before anything bad starts to happen, so the client is 
still safe. Anchor this state (this is the first dissociation, D1). 
 
3. Double dissociation: have the client float out of his body and back into the 
projectionist’s booth, so he can see himself sitting down there in the 
theatre, the other him is watching the screen where the action is about to 
begin. Anchor this second stage dissociation (D2). 
 
4. Observe event: have the client watch his other self (D1) watch his younger 
self going through the traumatic event on the screen. The film finishes only 
after the trauma has ended and the young version of the client is safe again. 
Freeze the film here. 
 
5. Release double dissociation: have the client float back into the body of the 
self that was watching the film (D1). 
 
6. Reframe: have the client walk up to the younger self on the screen and talk 
to him. Here it is time to comfort, reassure, support the younger self. The 
therapist should use his/her skill to suggest that the client is learning, 
healing, accepting, moving on, comforting and safe & secure. Overload the 
moment with positive suggestions and experiences. 
 
7. Integration: let the younger self in the screen step out and merge in with 
the older self that was watching. Let the two integrate together so that the 
younger version grows up protected, comforted etc. Fire the security anchor 
at this point to add that resource into the integration process. 
 
8. Reorient: bring the client back, giving them plenty of time and space. 
 
9. Test and Future Pace. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
133 
Visual Squash 
 
The visual squash is known in other circles as a parts negotiation. It is used in 
circumstances when a person seems to be split in two – part of him wants one thing, 
and another part desires another. This is known as a towards-towards conflict (the 
client is torn between two good things). It is also very useful if the client keeps 
sabotaging himself (a towards-away conflict). 
 
1. Identify parts: clients will often do this spontaneously when they say 
things like “on the one hand there is X, but on the other hand I want to do 
Y” 
 
2. Anchor parts: have the client create a visual image to represent each of the 
parts. Place one of the parts in each hand. 
 
3. Separate intention: remind the client that there is a difference between what 
each part is doing (behaviour) and what it wants to achieve (intention). 
Even the most destructive of parts (e.g. responsible for anorexia, self harm 
etc) is trying to achieve something positive (create a place of safety or 
control etc). 
 
4. Chunk up on intention: take the “negative” part first. Chunk up on the 
intention until you reach the highest level of abstraction you think you can 
get to (e.g. to be happy, to be loved etc). Now chunk up on the intention of 
the other part, until you get to the exact same highest intention. It is vital 
that you chunk both sides up to absolutely the same highest intention. 
 
5. Reframe: point out that both parts actually want the same thing. They are 
just going about it in different ways. Of course they would do far better if 
they both worked together! 
 
6. Harmonise: identify unique resources from each part which the other part 
could use to achieve its highest intention better.  
 
7. Integrate: using general hypnotic language, let the hands come together 
automatically only as quickly as the two images blend and merge into one 
unified, integrated new vision. Then bring the hands up to the chest to 
allow this “new part” to slip inside and integrate with the rest of the 
person. 
 
8. Test and Future Pace. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
134 
Hypnosis 
 
Six Step Reframe 
 
This is a powerful pattern for generative change. It was originally developed to teach 
therapists resistant to the idea of using hypnosis a formidable hypnotic technique in 
disguise. This process can be used either in conjunction with a formal trance 
induction or “conversationally”. 
 
1. Identify problem: identify an unwanted behaviour or feeling. 
 
2. Communicate with the unconscious: check inside to see if your 
unconscious mind is willing to communicate with your conscious. 
Whatever internal signal the client gets, ask the unconscious to intensify it 
for a “yes” response and diminish it for a “no” response
46. 
 
3. Separate intention from behaviour: ask the unconscious to communicate 
its highest intention behind the behaviour. If it won’t play ball, negotiate! 
 
4. Generate alternatives: remind the unconscious mind of its boundless 
creativity (dreams, problems solved in the past, general life learnings etc) 
and ask that the: unconscious mind searches through all your memories, 
experiences, learnings and creativity to come up with at least five 
alternative behaviours that will satisfy the intention at least as well as… 
[the unwanted behaviour]. Ask for a “yes” signal when the five alternatives 
have been found. 
 
5. Ecology Check: get the unconscious to go into the future and try these 
behaviours out for size. Have it make any adjustments it needs to to ensure 
the change succeeds. 
 
6. Future Pace: is your unconscious willing to take responsibility for 
implementing these alternatives instead of [the problem]? 
 
7. Reorient and integrate: end the trance experience and make sure that the 
person comes back with everything back to normal, looking forward to 
discovering the changes his unconscious has made. 
 
                                                
46 You can also use Ideomotor signalling if you are using trance formally. See Ideomotor signalling in the 
Hypnosis & Trance section. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
135 
The New Behaviour Generator 
 
This is a great process for accelerated learning, particularly for picking up new skills 
quickly and easily! 
 
1. Identify model: the first thing you must do is find a model who is 
exceptional at the behaviour you want to acquire. A real model is ideal, 
though a fictional one can also have interesting results. 
 
2. Dissociate: create a mental movie and watch your model engaging in the 
behaviour you want to have. The more precise and detailed you can make 
that movie the better. Make sure this is still the right model. If you’re not 
happy, find a new one! 
 
3. Morph: now watch the film again, only this time putting your features on 
the models face. Gradually transform the model to look like you and to 
sound like you, but still performing the behaviour excellently. 
 
4. Ecology check: check you are happy with all the consequences of behaving 
in this way. Are there any situations where you do not want to have this 
behaviour? How will it affect the rest of your life? 
 
5. Associate: step inside your image and associate fully. See through your 
eyes, hear through your ears, feel what it is like being you and engaging in 
this behaviour fully. See the people around you, add a soundtrack if 
necessary. Notice how you think and feel, how you talk to yourself and 
what your expectations are. 
 
6. Future Pace: go into a future where this behaviour is natural to you. Pick a 
specific situation. Notice the cues that naturally trigger the behaviour. Flow 
into it effortlessly and enjoy it. 
 
7. Condition: repeat steps 5 and 6 with a new situation until you are sure it 
has automated. 
 
8. Re-orient: come back to your present context and environment and look 
forward to the good things the future will bring! 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
136 
Timelines – Change Personal History 
 
Timelines can be walked physically (in real space) or manoeuvred metaphorically in 
the imagination. Both seem to work for different people at different times. 
 
1. Identify problem: identify a feeling the client wants to change (P). 
2. Establish timeline: elicit the client’s submodalities for time (see Timelines in 
the Submodalities section) and ask him to set it out on the floor in front of him. 
3. Navigate Timeline: ask the client to walk backwards on the physical timeline 
into the past. 
4. Root cause: at each point the client feels P, he should make a mental note of the 
location on the timeline (points 2-4 in the diagram) and continue to drift/walk 
back to the very first experience. You can mark these out for him with pieces of 
paper if you like. 
5. Dissociate: when the client reaches the first event, he steps off the timeline (to 
point A in the diagram) and looks at his younger self in the event (point 1).  
6. Learn: the client reviews the event and gathers every learning he can in order to 
enable him to let go of the emotion attached to that event. 
7. Resource: from that vantage point (still point A), pump in all the resources the 
younger client needs. Fill him up with good things. 
8. Dissipate emotions: walk back to just before the initial event and look into the 
future – the actual present day – (from point B). Make sure the client notices that 
the emotion has vanished. 
9. Associate & Test: step into the actual event (point 1) to make sure that the 
emotion has become “flat”. 
10. Change history: now, dissociate again and walk forward next to the timeline, 
back to the present day, stopping briefly just before each sensitising event 
(points C) to make sure that the emotion has drained from all those events as 
well. 
11. Re-orient to present. 
 
Future 
Past 
1
Present 
2
3
4
A 
B 
C 
C 
C 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
137 
 
Timelines – Change Limiting Decision 
 
This timelines pattern works particularly well in trance, getting the client to imagine 
floating above her timeline. 
 
1. Rehearse: this is quite an intricate process, so talk the client through it first 
so she knows what is expected of her! 
2. Induce Trance: either formally or informally (see Hypnosis & Trance). 
3. Dissociate:  ask client to float up above her timeline and backwards in time 
to the initial point when the limiting decision was made (point 1). Along 
the way she might note other events in which she continued to accept that 
limiting decision (points 2-4). 
4. Associate & dissociate: when the client gets to point A, above the initial 
event, ask her to dip into the event to get the feelings and then to float back 
up to point A. Make sure she takes all the learnings from that situation. 
5. Remove emotion: next, have her float back to the moment just before the 
whole set of events at point 1 began (maybe 15 minutes earlier – this is 
point B), and ask: “now where has the emotion gone?”  
6. Remove decision: if the client agrees that the emotions have evaporated, 
then ask: “and the decision, did that disappear too?” 
7. [Troubleshooting: if the emotions do not disappear, or the limiting 
decision remains stuck, it is because the client has not taken on board 
everything that she needs to learn from that event. Go back to point A and 
gather those learnings. You might also want to incorporate other techniques 
here, like Reframing, the Re-imprint Method or a parts negotiation.] 
8. Return: ask the client to return to the present only as quickly as you allow 
the events between then and now (points 2-4) to re-evaluate themselves in 
light of the new choices and let go of all the negative emotions. Stop in 
position C as you come back, so you can absorb the learnings and let go 
of the emotions and allow each event to be re-evaluated automatically as 
you come back to the present… NOW! 
9. Reorient: let her have time to come back and reorient herself. 
Future 
Past 
1
Present 
2
3
4
A 
B 
C 
C 
C 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
138 
Timelines – Creating a Future Goal 
 
Timelines can also be used to project a future goal and creating an unconscious 
propulsion to achieve it. 
 
1. SMART: construct a well-formed or SMART goal. 
 
2. Outcome picture: make an image of the outcome you want. How will you 
know that you have achieved it? What will you hear, feel and see? 
 
3. Associate: step into the IR, see what you see, hear what you can hear and 
feel what you can feel. Make sure it is what you want! 
 
4. Emotion: adjust the submodalities to make the internal representation of 
your goal as appealing and intense as possible. 
 
5. Dissociate: step back out of the IR and float above your time line with it. 
 
6. Energise: take three deep breaths to energise the internal representation. Fill 
it with desire, emotions and vitality. 
 
7. Future: now float over into the future and drop the representation into your 
timeline. 
 
8. Return & evaluate: now have the client return to the present as she notices 
how the events between the future goal and the present re-evaluate 
themselves to support the goal. 
 
9. Reorient. 
 
IR 
 
A 
 
IR 
Future 
Past 
1
Present 
2
3
4
 
A 
 
IR 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
139 
Strategies 
 
Strategies Defined 
 
Human beings cannot be random. Every behaviour that we have is the result of some 
internal programme: we have to know when it is time to engage in that behaviour, 
how to adjust the behaviour mid-stream to achieve whatever purpose it is for and 
finally we have to know when it is time to end the behaviour. The programmes that 
do this are known as strategies.  
 
You have a strategy for everything you do: from scratching your head in the morning 
to making a fortune in business. Some strategies are simple, involving only a few 
steps. Others are vastly complex and may include a meta-strategy that that triggers 
off a whole plethora of sub-strategies under different conditions. Strategies run our 
lives and dominate our ability to learn. Yet there are very few disciplines in which 
you will learn to do something better by redesigning the strategy that is running that 
behaviour. NLP is one such discipline. In NLP you learn tools for discovering what 
strategies run you (or another person) and for changing those strategies to make them 
more useful. 
 
Strategies were borrowed from the work of some of the leaders in the field of 
experimental psychology, Miller, Galanter and Pribram
47. These researchers were 
dissatisfied with the Stimulus-Response (S-R) theory of behaviour that evolved from 
the seeds of Pavlov’s initial research on conditioned responses (remember Pavlov’s 
dogs?) The S-R model suggested that every behaviour was simply a response 
triggered by a specific stimulus. So there was a unique set of triggers that would 
make you scratch your head in the morning and another unique set of triggers that 
triggered you into making a fortune in business.  
 
Miller et al. thought the S-R model simply did not explain complex human 
behaviour well enough. They thought the model too simplistic – it broke down in 
situations where the behaviour was constantly being refined to meet a situation. That 
was something that the S-R model could not comfortably explain. Miller et al. 
wanted to find a better explanation of how people engaged in complex behaviours. 
Their research led them to the creation of what is known as the TOTE model of 
information processing theory. In time the TOTE model was accepted as a general 
theory of human cognition. It lies at the heart of the way NLP conceptualizes and 
uses strategies. 
 
                                                
47 Miller, G.A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K.H. “Plans and the Structure of Behavior”, Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston 1960. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
140 
The TOTE Model 
 
TOTE stands for Test – Operate – Test – Exit. In a T.O.T.E. a person has an 
internalised goal she wants to achieve. This is tested against the results that she is 
getting. If the goal has not been achieved, the person will go into an operations 
phase in which she engages in a behaviour designed to achieve that goal. The new 
outcome is tested again to see if it measures up against the goal. If it does, the 
strategy exits and the behaviour ends. If it does not, the strategy loops back to the 
operations phase and a new series of behaviours is engaged in. This loop or cycle 
continues until the goal is either achieved or abandoned. 
 
The T.O.T.E. model is traditionally represented as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In NLP the T.O.T.E. model has been adapted to incorporate some of the 
understandings we have gathered from the Universal Modelling Process and 
experiential observations. When the idea of strategies was being investigated by 
John, Richard and their team, they wanted to know what was happening inside the 
“Test” and the “Operate” phases of the model.  
 
The first question is: how does someone know whether the Test should lead to an 
Operation or to the Exit? 
 
In order to test an outcome, a comparison has to be made internally. The person will 
compare the Internal Representations of the goal they have in mind against the actual 
information their senses are feeding them about the outcome they have just achieved. 
If they match each other, the strategy exits. If they mismatch, the Operation is 
triggered. 
 
Test 
Operate 
Trigger 
Exit 
External Input 
from Event 
Internal Representation 
of the desired Goal 
 
Operate 
Test 1 
Internal Representation 
of the desired Goal
External Input 
from Event
 
Exit 
Test 2 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
141 
The operation phase is made up of a series of external behaviours (EB) that are 
triggered by internal representations (IR). The EBs and IRs should link together in a 
finite chain or sequence with the purpose of gathering, organising and modifying 
information in order to attain the desired goal. At the end of each specific chain lies a 
new Test phase. The Test phase simply compares the information (which was 
gathered and organised) against that desired goal. Then a decision is made to:  
 
• 
Exit,  
• 
loop back into Operate,  
• 
Exit into a new strategy, or  
• 
change the parameters of the desired goal (and restart the test/operate 
sequence.) 
 
This is a typical structure for an operation: 
 
 
 
 
To see what an operation looks like in action, lets imagine a simple strategy for 
negotiating a raise. That strategy might look like this: 
 
1. Ask for a raise (EB – A)  
2. Listen to reply (EB – A) 
3. Imagine what you are offered (IR – V) 
4. Talk to yourself about the offer – mull it over (IR – Ad) 
5. Accept (EB – A) 
 
 
 
A whole TOTE sequence for that negotiation would look like this:  
 
 
 
EB 
IR 
IR 
 
EB 
IR 
2
1
3
4
5
2
1
3
4
5
OPERATE 
Desired Goal 
Event 
TEST 
 
Exit 
 
Trigger 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
142 
Utilising Strategies 
 
All of our decisions, behaviours and plans are created using strategies. If these 
strategies are working for us, then all is well. If they are flawed or cumbersome, it 
can make life difficult. For example, many poor spellers are not poor at spelling 
because they lack intellect. What they lack is a good spelling strategy
48. 
 
This kind of problem can be resolved relatively quickly with a strategy intervention. 
After eliciting someone’s strategy and subjecting it to a logical analysis, you will 
often see quite quickly whether there is a flaw in the cycle. Eliminate the flaw and 
you get a better result. In this respect you can either adjust a strategy (to streamline 
it) or simply replace it with something more fitting! We will look at how to install a 
new strategy a little later on in this section. 
 
There is another very valuable use for strategies: influence and persuasion. By 
influence and persuasion I do not mean to suggest that strategies only have 
applications in fields like sales or public speaking. Strategies can be used to help 
people learn or make decisions much more quickly. 
 
As an example, imagine you were helping me book a holiday. You know that my 
decision strategy for that process is to: look at a brochure, see an image that is 
attractive, imagine myself being there, say to myself “would I like to do this?” and 
finally get a good feeling that lets me exit the loop. By presenting me with 
information in that exact sequence (i.e. in the sequence that  I need to process it all 
in), you instantly streamline the speed at which I can make a decision.  
 
If, however, you first talked to me about the holiday, then asked me what that would 
feel like and finally you showed me a photo album of your trip there, you would be 
slowing things down: the information is coming in in the wrong order. I would have 
to collect it, then back track one step at a time until I have processed it all in the 
sequence I need to do it in! 
 
By working out people’s strategies you know how to motivate them, inspire them, 
educate them, build trust and comfort (another strategy!), sell things to them or 
simply help them improve the way in which they do things. 
                                                
48 Spelling is a visual process. Good spellers will visualise the word internally or out in front of them and 
then “copy” what they see. Over time this strategy naturalises and they cease being aware of the internal 
images. A poor speller, on the other hand, made the mistake of buying into the presuppositions embedded 
in the “phonetic” spelling system – which attempts to sound out the sound of words as a means of getting 
the correct spelling. But English is not a phonetic language (if it were it would have to be a “fonetik” 
language!) and so, many good listeners (who have done what they were asked to do!) are falsely labelled 
as being learning impaired! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
143 
Well Formed Strategies 
 
Just like outcomes, strategies should conform to certain rules in order for them to 
have been well formed. If the well formedness conditions are not met, then you may 
well have a problem. A flawed strategy can be cumbersome or even destructive. 
 
 
1. Strategies need a well defined representation of the outcome. 
 
 
2. They must include information from the three major representational 
systems (VAK). 
 
 
3. There are more than two points in the loop. 
 
 
4. There must be an exit (after a certain number of cycles through the loop 
or after a certain amount of time). 
 
 
5. A strategy should use the least number of steps to get to the outcome. 
 
 
6. Every cycle should have an exit point. 
 
 
7. The flow of Internal Representations and External Behaviours should be 
logical. 
 
 
8. The structure must follow the TOTE model. 
 
 
9. The strategy must be ecological. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
144 
Strategy Elicitation 
 
You can elicit people’s strategies through the questions that you ask. Remember that 
only a part of the information you need will be known by the client on a conscious 
level. So when eliciting a strategy you have to pay very careful attention to 
 
• 
Eye movement patterns: the eye movement patterns tell you what 
information they are accessing and in what sequence! 
• 
Predicates: whilst observing eye movements, listen to the predicates that 
they are giving you. It is only through these that you will discover if there 
are synaesthesias (e.g. they are aware of seeing something but unaware that 
it makes them feel a certain way at the same time). 
 
Orienting Questions 
 
The first set of questions to ask a client is needed to associate the client into the 
experience. You want the client to actually have the experience as you talk to them 
so that you can see the strategy run its normal course. As a general rule maintaining 
the present tense will help the client stabilise the association as though it were 
happening now. 
 
• 
Think of a time when you learned something easily [or made a good 
decision, or bought a car, or fell in love etc]… just go be there NOW! 
• 
What happens to you when you’re learning something easily? 
 
Elicitation of the trigger (also the first TEST in the cycle) 
 
The strategy has to start somewhere, so some event in the world must trigger it, or 
the person would not know it is time to run it! You want to elicit the trigger that 
fires the strategy in the same was as you would want to elicit triggers for anchoring. 
The trigger in a strategy is actually the first test: the client has checked the input to 
the desired goal and realised that he has not achieved it yet, so the Operate phase is 
started up. 
 
• 
How do you know when it is time to learn something easily [or buy a car 
or fall in love etc]? 
• 
When did you begin to do X? 
• 
What lets you know you are ready to start Xing? 
• 
What is the very first thing that causes you to totally X? 
Is it something you see, hear or feel? 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
145 
Eliciting the Operation 
 
Once you have the trigger, use it to stimulate the Operate phase of the strategy. Then 
follow the sequence along until the strategy has completed itself. 
 
• 
As you see (or hear/feel) A (the trigger), what is the very next thing that 
happens? 
• 
What steps do you go through? 
• 
What is the first thing you do? 
• 
What happens as you begin? 
• 
What do you do when you are not sure if you have achieved goal X yet? 
• 
What happens next? 
• 
After you do A, B and C what happens next? 
 
Eliciting the Test 
 
As soon as they have run through the whole Operate sequence, you need to find out 
what criteria they are using to test against (i.e. what is the internal goal, how closely 
would the external event have to match the idealised internal condition). You may 
have discovered this during the trigger phase (which was the first test), or you may 
not. 
 
• 
What comparison are you making? 
• 
How do know when you have satisfied your criteria? 
• 
What lets you know you are not yet finished Xing? 
• 
How do you evaluate the alternatives? 
 
Eliciting the Exit 
 
Once the cycle has been run, something has to occur for the person to know that the 
external event matches her internal goal so she can stop. If a strategy has no Exit 
criteria, it is seriously flawed and the person will be compulsed to cycle through the 
operate cycle more and more intensely (as happens with many obsessive compulsive 
disorders). 
 
• 
What lets you know you are done? 
• 
How do you know when you are done? 
• 
How do you know that you have made a decision? 
• 
What lets you know you are ready to move to something else? 
• 
What lets you know you’re successful at X? 
• 
How do you know when you have ended the process? 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
146 
Guidelines for Strategy Elicitations 
 
In order to elicit strategies elegantly, you have to be alert so you can spot eye 
accessing cues and predicates in the language whilst engaging them in meaningful 
questions and paying attention to their verbal answers. It helps tremendously if you 
are in rapport with the person. This makes it more likely for them to enter and do 
the strategy in front of you.  
 
Next you should set a framework around what you are doing. Get the client 
associated into the context first. You need to make sure that the eye accessing cues 
are steps in the strategy you are interested in, instead of the strategy the client uses to 
remember a past event! Once the client is associated, anchor the state to stabilise it. 
It will make rooting around in there much easier. Also use the present tense, it 
makes the experience more “here and now”, enabling the client to actually experience 
the strategy in front of you. 
 
Keep asking small questions like the ones suggested above. Back up a step or two if 
necessary. For example if there seems to be a logical jump between one step in the 
sequence and the next, you have either discovered a flaw, or missed the cue that there 
was an intermediate step. Check it out! Make sure that you catch all the main pieces 
that allow the strategy to run effectively. 
 
Pay attention to the client’s non-verbal cues. They may mark out predicates or other 
words as they say them and they should definitely be demonstrating natural eye 
accessing cues.  
 
Get as much information as possible, then test it. Feed back the sequence you think 
you have discovered and see if that hits home. The strategy should produce the same 
feeling or behaviour when you fire it artificially as when it happens “naturally”. That 
is how you know you have the full sequence. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
147 
Strategy Installation 
 
A strategy can be installed in any number of ways. We will briefly look at some of 
the tools that you might like to use. 
Rehearsal 
 
Remember that under pressure your mind gives you what you rehearsed. The more 
you do something, or the higher the intensity associated with it, the more it tends to 
“stick”. A rehearsal of a new strategy can take place physically – by actually running 
through the process several times (as you did when you learned to read and write). 
You can also rehearse a strategy internally, by associating into the experience and 
running the new sequence several times. 
 
The key piece in either event is to TEST your work. Fire the trigger and wait for the 
strategy to run all by itself. If it does not, then more installation is required. 
Chaining Anchors 
 
The astute reader will have noticed that a strategy sounds remarkably similar to the 
process that someone goes through when you install a chain of states through an 
anchor. Chaining anchors is a means of installing a strategy. You can anchor internal 
states as well as the external behaviours that accompany them. Then fire the sequence 
and let the chain run itself. 
 
To install a new strategy, simply anchor each part of the chain up to the decision 
point (exit or loop back). Then follow the ordinary chain installation procedure. 
 
For example, a simple strategy to change a habit might be:  
 
1. trigger,  
 
2. see the worst case scenario of the consequence of the habit,  
 
3. feel the negative emotion,  
 
4. reject the habit,  
 
5. see the positive consequence of rejecting the behaviour,  
 
6. feel good and exit. 
 
Now simply create six anchors, one for each of the steps, and chain away! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
148 
Submodality Shifts 
 
Another way to install or change a strategy is through a submodality intervention. 
You can take any step within the strategy sequence you elicited and change the 
submodalities of the experience so that it flows better. You can also install a whole 
new strategy by manipulating the internal representations that chain together to create 
a strategy. 
 
For example, a SWISH technique is in fact a strategy installation: the trigger 
instantly runs a chain that creates the solution. Instead of feeling bad, you now feel 
good. Lovely! 
 
The Fast Phobia cure is another example of intervening on a negative strategy 
through submodalities. In that sequence you are actually altering the strategy behind 
a phobia. A phobia is in fact one of those two point loops (see the spider, feel the 
fear) that I cautioned you about. The Fast Phobia cure simply interrupts the strategy, 
adds a few steps in (like the circus music), and changes the submodalities other steps 
(e.g. “whiting out” the traumatic event). 
 
Metaphors 
 
Metaphors are powerful constructs. We will cover them more fully in the next 
section on Hypnosis & Trance. For now it is enough that you know that inside a 
story you can embed all kinds of messages. Some of these messages can install new 
strategies. If you tell a story of someone rehearsing a new strategy and getting it 
right, the person listening has to at some level experience the same rehearsal (in 
order to understand what you are saying). This is why sporting metaphors or success 
stories can inspire others so well: when done adroitly, they are actually installing the 
strategy! 
 
Another way to use metaphors is to indirectly create a chain of experiences that are 
subtly anchored (visually or auditorily). Once the series of steps has been anchored, 
the chain can be conditioned by simply running the chain in the story! You can be 
even more subtle in that the story might be completely unconnected with the 
problem strategy. Its sole purpose is to install a series of states. These are then 
chained together at the end to create a powerful new strategy.  
 
There is a great example of this in action by the stand up comedian Eddie Izzard. In 
one of his shows he tells elaborate (and very funny) stories about a number of 
creatures. Each one is anchored with a certain mannerism or voice by the comic. At 
the end of the show he tells one final story in which each of the previous characters 
plays a role. The audience are in stitches as anchor after hilarious anchor is fired off in 
an intense sequence that brings the house down. What if you could laugh at all 
your problems like that!?! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
149 
Hypnosis & Trance 
 
What is Hypnosis? 
 
Hypnosis is a completely natural phenomenon. A hypnotic experience is simply an 
altered state of consciousness. In some ways you could say that any altered state is a 
hypnotic one. Every time you shift someone’s mood, let your mind drift off and 
daydream, become absorbed in a film or are mesmerised by the numbers in a lift 
(elevator for our American friends) – you are going into trance! 
 
Human beings need trances in order to survive. The renowned hypnotic researcher 
and therapist Ernest Rossi
49 suggests that we naturally go through 90 minute cycles 
ending in a very naturalistic trance experience. During this “ultradian rhythm”, our 
body/mind takes the time to reorganise itself and the most recent set of experiences. 
This is a vital process. It is as detrimental to our health to negate these “natural 
breaks” as it is to deprive someone of REM sleep. 
 
Hypnosis has received some very bad press in the past. Partly due to the “evil 
powers” of dark Svengali-like figures in books and films, and partly from an illusion 
created by stage hypnosis shows. What you see is definitely not what you get! A 
hypnotist does not stare deeply into your eyes (though I guess she could if you really 
wanted her to!), steal your mind and turn you into a robotic slave that can be 
programmed to do her bidding. If that were the case, believe me, I would now be 
sitting on my private island in the Bahamas, generously “sponsored” by the world’s 
banking consortia. Sadly I am not. 
 
Hypnosis is however incredibly powerful. In hypnosis a mind/body connection can 
be established that allows you to do seemingly impossible things. There are 
countless examples of medical doctors performing full blown surgical procedures 
without anaesthetic, with the patient calmly watching the operation and feeling no 
discomfort at all
50. Hypnosis can stimulate the body’s own natural genius for healing 
– something that western science still does not yet comprehend properly. 
 
As well as an increased physical well being, hypnosis can offer you an expanded set 
of mental functions. In trance you can study faster, remember more clearly, increase 
your reactions and become more creative than you ever imagined. It is a very 
powerful discipline with many things to offer. Study it well! 
                                                
49 Ernest Rossi, “The 20 Minute Break: Reduce Stress, Maximise Performance, Improve Health and 
Emotional Well-being Using the New Science of Ultradian Rhythms”, Zeig, Tucker & Theisen, Inc, 1991. 
50 Dr Escudero (a modern day Spanish doctor) has created a whole wellness programme “Noesitherapy” 
based on thousands of cases of live operations using no anaesthetic other than the mind! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
150 
The Purpose of the Unconscious 
 
The unconscious mind has a certain mandate to carry out. These are the unwritten 
rules by which it functions. Knowing these is essential when negotiating with the 
unconscious. These directives are leverage points for persuasion, therapy and change! 
 
Body 
It is the unconscious mind’s task to run and preserve the body. It keeps your heart 
beating, regulates your blood-flow, sugar levels, hormone secretions, body 
temperature, digestive track and runs a thousand other tasks all at the same time. 
The unconscious also generates, stores and distributes your energy levels. It appears 
that evolution has left our unconscious minds with a bias towards an economy of 
effort to conserve that energy. 
 
Emotion 
The unconscious creates all emotions. Every emotional response you have is 
unconscious. You cannot will yourself to have an emotion. You can only go through 
a process to which your unconscious responds emotionally. Congratulations, you are 
communicating with your unconscious mind! 
 
Your unconscious also takes everything personally. Whatever you say about others 
will in some way be taken as a self suggestion. This is one of the reasons that people 
who complain, whine, fear or hate others are left with a much poorer quality of life. 
 
Memory 
The unconscious organises and stores your memories. It will also repress negative 
emotions to protect your conscious mind from emotions it cannot process yet. The 
unconscious only presents negative memories to your conscious mind when it 
appears ready. 
 
Communication 
The unconscious is the place where the “raw data” that creates perception is 
analysed. It is the place where your internal maps are generated. Also, the 
unconscious works symbolically. It cannot directly process a negative statement. 
Ultimately, the unconscious must serve your conscious mind. 
 
Performance 
Your unconscious creates and uses “instincts”. It needs repetition to achieve this. 
The unconscious is highly goal oriented and functions best holistically, i.e. likes to 
see the bigger picture and work towards a goal that fits that bigger picture. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
151 
Trance Inductions 
Go First! 
 
In hypnosis, your clients will become highly sensitised and responsive to your 
minimal cues. You need to ensure that all your non-verbal communication is aligned 
to the purpose you have in mind. The easiest way to do this is to make sure you Go 
First. 
 
This holds particularly true for the trance induction itself. If you Go First, that is 
enter your own trance state during your induction, you are sending powerful signals 
to the client on how to access trance, how to behave and that this slightly weird 
thing occurring is quite natural and quite OK
51.  
 
Going First will also activate your trance learnings more fully (remember state 
dependant learning). Your own personal trance experiences will feed into your 
trancework and you will discover that you can do amazing things you did not know 
you could do, just by trusting your unconscious. As the unconscious takes 
everything personally, you begin to benefit from whatever therapeutic work you do 
with someone else. So a side effect of doing this work well is that your own life 
improves too! I am very sorry, that is just something you will have to learn to live 
with, NOW! 
 
10 Second Hypnotist 
 
I first developed this exercise in order to teach people hypnosis quickly and easily. I 
wanted to remove the performance anxiety most novice (and too many experienced!) 
hypnotists had when faced with inducing trance in a real live person. In the following 
exercise, I want the hypnotist simply to pretend to hypnotise the client and I would 
like the client to simply pretend to be in trance. That is something anyone can do 
comfortably: 
 
1. Close your eyes and  go into trance 
2. Every time I do XXX…, you go deeper  and  deeper 
3. As I do YYY… your mind opens ready to learn easily and  respond to my 
suggestions [now do whatever YYY was!] 
4. In a moment I will count to 3, at the count of 3 you will open your eyes,  
alert out of trance feeling fantastic! 1. feeling good, 2. feeling great and 3. 
open your eyes feeling fantastic!! 
                                                
51 Some people who have not experienced trance formally before may feel very self conscious about the 
process of accessing trance and inhibit themselves because of it. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
152 
 
 
I can teach someone the basics of hypnosis in under an hour just using this exercise!  
 
There is a lot in there. Remember that hypnosis is natural. Most people can access it 
in seconds. So why take half an hour or more when you first learn to induce a trance? 
Do it more quickly and you get to practice it more often! 
Linguistic Bridges (4 Words Of Power) 
 
A linguistic bridge is the kind of linking words that you learned during the Milton 
Model and other language pattern exercises. If you look at the 10 second hypnotist 
again, you will notice that the flow of language comes from these linking words. 
They also carry the force of suggestion as they naturally create complex equivalences, 
cause-effects and other Milton Model constructs. 
 
Have a look at the Language Flow Cards in the Language Patterns section above. 
Repeat the exercise of simply using the natural flow of language to suggest things 
like relaxation, learning etc. Only this time blend this together with the more formal 
10 second hypnotist approach. This will allow you to flesh out the structure and 
create several minutes of soothing trance experiences. Have fun with it – get as 
outrageous as you can allow yourself to be! 
 
For those of you who would like to hear these two exercises in action, go to 
www.streethypnosis.com and get a copy of my “Introduction to Conversational 
Hypnosis” CD. It is not expensive and has examples of both of these exercises in 
action! 
Pacing & Leading 
 
This is one of the fundamental patterns behind elegant hypnosis. It should be 
adopted into the core of your approach because it is so versatile and useful. A Pacing 
and Leading induction follows a simple pattern
52:  
 
1. Pace: say three or four things that are true and verifiable: you are sitting there, 
hearing my voice, being aware of that hand touching there... 
2. Lead: next add one leading statement with a link: and you can relax… 
3. Repeat: gradually use less pacing statements per lead: 4 paces 1 lead… 3 paces 
2 leads… 2 paces 3 leads etc. 
4. Tonality:  as you progress, gradually shift your voice into a trance tonality. 
5. Reverse: to end the trance simply reverse the process, or count up again. 
  
                                                
52 For more information on the Pace & Lead construction, see either “the Deep Trance Training Manual 
Vol1” or the “Conversational Hypnosis Vol 1” CD set available from www.streethypnosis.com. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
153 
Sensory Rich Descriptions 
 
Our internal experiences are made up from piecing together different bits of the 
experiences that our five senses have absorbed over our lifetime. In trance you merely 
suggest an experience for the client to have. If you do it well, the person will have 
the experience. To assist you with that, you can use language that is rich in sensory 
descriptions. Rich sensory language forces the listener to activate that very 
experience: 
 
Compare the following two experiences: 
 
Imagine standing on a beach… you can see the beach and the ocean… and notice 
all the things around you… you can hear the water of the ocean… and maybe a 
seagull up above… 
 
Imagine standing on a warm and sandy beach… the sand is so fine and warmed by 
the sun… you might even be tempted to take off whatever you are wearing on your 
feet… so you can feel the fine texture as the sand sifts between your toes… the 
temperature of the sand against your skin… if you dig a little deeper with your 
foot… you’ll reach a cooler, damper layer of sand.. how curiously pleasing it is to 
feel that warmth and coolness… as the sand mingles like that… and over there is 
the ocean… the colour is so soothing as you watch the waves roll in one by one… 
the whiteness of the surf… the hissing of the water as it dissolves onto the 
beach…hmmm… what a wonderful sensation to watch the surf come sweeping up 
the beach… and gently roll back… the sound of the ocean… perhaps there is a gull 
up ahead… can you see it circling… round and round the blue sky?... can you see 
the markings… white wings…a little tip of black… yellow beak… and the sound 
that it makes… as it cries… so much a part of the seaside… as that rolling expanse 
of ocean… 
 
Of the two descriptions, the second is more compelling (for most people!) because it 
carries much more sensory information for the mind to process. The experience is 
simply more real because each sensory description has to be processed and 
experienced in order to be understood. That is not to say that the more vague 
experience cannot be hypnotic also. It can and absolutely has a place in the trance 
process. What I would like you to understand however, is that you have a set of 
tools and skills that you can apply to enrich any experience. Sensory rich 
descriptions are just on such tool. 
 
Now it is your turn. Describe a pleasant scene to someone using detailed sensory 
language. You should try to be vague enough to allow them some scope to interpret 
the experiences you are describing. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
154 
Metaphors and Nested Loops 
 
The Storytelling Tradition 
 
Storytelling is an old tradition. It predates the oldest civilisation and is so 
fundamental to our nature that it continues to exist in the modern era: books, films, 
plays, musicals and the news all offer us an unending flow of stories. These stories 
shape our perceptions, change our lives. Tribal witchdoctors, medicine men or 
shamen have used stories for millennia as a way of keeping the tribe together, 
resolving conflicts and overcoming difficulties. Modern dictators have known the 
value of storytelling: Hitler, Mussolini, Franco and countless others kept a careful 
eye on the news, theatre and films being broadcast because of their power to make or 
break an empire. 
 
Even modern therapy has come to accept the power of storytelling in influencing the 
unconscious. Milton Erickson pioneered a whole therapeutic system based on telling 
hypnotic metaphors – stories that spoke directly to the unconscious mind and had a 
powerful therapeutic effect. From there a new breed of storytellers has evolved. They 
have spread from the therapy clinic to the sales room, the corporate boardroom, the 
classroom even the sports field with great success. Stories are here to stay! 
 
Stories appeal to us in many different ways. For a start there are very few children in 
any culture that are not weened on bedtime stories. Once upon a time… has become 
such a powerful phrase because it regresses us to childhood. It gives permission for 
us to (in fact it demands that we) suspend our critical thinking and just accept the 
story as it is. Meanwhile all kinds of unconscious connections are being made. Most 
of the western fairy tales (stemming mostly from the stories collected by Hans 
Christian Anderson and the Grimm brothers) are actually teaching tales. They 
suggest solutions to common life problems, embed a moral code and administer 
harsh warnings to people who wish to step outside of certain social constraints. 
 
As children we absorbed and were shaped by these stories more than we realise. In 
hypnosis we also like to use stories because of the way that they appeal so directly to 
the unconscious mind. A hypnotic story (officially known as a metaphor) is 
particularly useful because you can embed several different layers of meaning inside 
it. Such stories can be deeply transformational. 
 
I would strongly recommend that you invest time and effort in mastering the art of 
hypnotic storytelling
53. 
                                                
53 For those interested in exploring this further, look at my course  “Improvisation and Storytelling” 
www.curioustraining.co.uk. This is a unique course designed to create charismatic and influential people.  

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
155 
Nested Looping – the Basic Structure of Storytelling   
 
NLP is all about teasing out the structure that makes things work. Many people 
believe that they are uncreative because they tried being creative in the wrong way. 
By understanding how a story works it becomes relatively easily to create your own.  
 
Before we have a look at the construction of a hypnotic metaphor, let me say that a 
metaphor or story does not have to follow the “fairy tale” construction of “once upon 
a time there was a little prince(ss)…” Any anecdote, joke, story, memory, 
experience, tale, fable, film, play or real life event can serve as a story or metaphor. 
The story is just a vehicle for the other message that you wish to embed. 
 
Now a story is a little like an elephant: we can recognise one when we see one, but it 
is hard to describe it. Stories are so much a part of our psyche that we will instantly 
recognise them when we stumble across them. So, for example: 
 
I walked through the forest and arrived safely at home on the other side. 
 
This is an event, a routine and not a story. Everyone would recognise that 
something is missing. So we have to add something: 
 
As I walked through the forest, I found a piece of an old mirror on the floor. I 
picked it up and went home safely. 
 
This is getting better. The routine has been interrupted. It has the makings of a 
story. But even a five year old child (or should I say, especially a five year old – she 
is the expert at this after all!) will tell you that the story is incomplete. We want to 
know what the mirror is for. So it is a good act 1, a beginning of a story, but still 
incomplete. We need an act 2: 
 
As I walked through the forest, I found a piece of an old mirror on the floor. I 
picked it up and carried on walking. Then I entered a clearing. I saw a large spider 
frantically looking for something. It seemed to be trying to replace something in a 
hole on its side. When I looked more closely, I saw that the whole was the same 
shape as the mirror. So I put the piece of mirror in its side. Instantly the spider 
calmed down. It decided to become my friend and accompanied me all the way 
home, where I arrived safely! 
 
Now we have a story. It may be simple, but it is complete. It feels complete! 
 
When you look at the examples you will begin to see that the story has been made 
up of a few layers. There are three essential layers that you can track. These three 
layers form the essential structure of all stories: 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
156 
1. Routine: The first layer of a story begins with a routine. In the example, the 
routine was walking through a forest. It could equally have been climbing a 
mountain, going to work or ploughing a field. A routine is an event with a 
beginning and an end. And it is totally uninteresting as it stands. 
 
2. Break Routine: in order for a story to be born, we have to break the routine 
that we established at the beginning. This is what makes it interesting. This is 
what sucks in our attention. Finding a piece of mirror was the break in the 
routine. The story was still incomplete, but it was far more interesting than just 
the routine. 
 
3. Close the Loop: every story must end by looping back on itself. It has to re-
incorporate the elements introduced, or there is something missing. In our 
example the mirror had to serve a purpose. A mystery had been offered. Until 
that mystery was unravelled the story could not end. So we gave it a purpose by 
“fixing” the giant spider with it. Notice how we did not have to explain 
absolutely everything. We could have deepened the story by finding out why the 
spider needed the mirror or having the spider protect us from a later event (a 
second layer of re-incorporation). But we did not need it for the story to 
complete.  
 
This re-incorporation is known as a nested loop. It is the meta-strategy for getting 
and keeping attention, particularly unconscious attention. It is phenomenally useful 
principle in all kinds of situations.  This phenomenon is closely related to the 
Zeigarnik effect
54. When you combine the Zeigarnik effect with storytelling, you get 
something very powerful
55.  
 
In hypnosis, Erickson pioneered an approach in which he would tell a series of 
stories, 5 or 6, in a row, without finishing any of them. In the middle of these stories 
he would weave hypnotic suggestions. Then he would close his loops.  This way 
his clients consciously forgot the therapeutic suggestions in the middle of his stories 
and somehow, magically, got better. This worked so well that most of Erickson’s 
stories (told as hypnotic multiple embedded metaphors) served as the trance 
induction, therapy, instruction for change and resolution all wrapped up in one very 
clever package! 
                                                
54 Bluma Zeigarnik  (b 1900), was the Russian psychologist who first described the effect in 1927. It refers 
to the psychological tendency to remember an uncompleted task rather than a completed one. 
55 Take for example Shahrazad’s tales in “One Thousand and One Arabian Nights”. Shahrazad cleverly 
employs the Zeigarnik effect to stave off execution for the 1001 nights by starting a story each evening, 
but not finishing it until the next. Curiosity kept the sultan from executing her like his previous wives. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
157 
Hypnotic Metaphors 
 
The Greek root of the word metaphor means “to carry over” or “transfer”. In the 
dictionary the description is even more interesting. In a metaphor one object is used 
in the place of another by way of suggesting a likeness between them. This is the 
power of a hypnotic metaphor in a nutshell. A metaphor is a story with an implied 
relevance to the client’s problem. So to create a hypnotic metaphor with a persuasive 
character (whether for coaching, therapy, sales or leadership) the story must in some 
way parallel the experience of the listener. 
 
Volumes have been written on the construction of a metaphor
56. To simplify all these 
models, a hypnotic metaphor must be isomorphic. In other words the structure of 
the metaphor must parallel what is happening in the client’s life and have a solution 
attached at the end. It is like a giant pace & lead construction. Pace the problem, 
then lead to a solution.  
 
A classic example of this is the story of the tortoise and the hare. Telling that story 
to a pupil that is falling behind at school might motivate her to keep at it. A 
business man having trouble with a project in light of steep competition might 
decide to be more persistent. The story speaks to the individual in accordance with 
his/her needs. Turn back to the heading “Multi-level Communication (What is a 
Meta For?)” (under the Milton Model of the Language Pattern section). How many 
hidden “meanings” can you find in that? 
 
To make metaphors even more powerful we can follow Erickson’s example of 
creating nested loops – or stories within stories within… To do this is easy. Choose 
3-5 stories on a theme. Tell the first story, but don’t finish it. Move on to story 2, 
but never quite finish that. Keep going in this way until all your stories are “open” 
(i.e. you have told maybe 80-90% of each story). Now you can either layer in more 
therapeutic content or begin to close your loops one by one. If you really want 
people to be curious, you could always “forget” to close a loop or two, thereby 
keeping the Zeigarnik effect activated. 
 
 
 
                                                
56 Lankton & Lankton “Tales of Enchantment: a collection of goal-oriented metaphors of adults and 
children in therapy” , Brunner/Mazel 1989. Gordon “Therapeutic Metaphors. Helping others through the 
looking glass” Meta Publications 1978. Battino “Metaphoria: Metaphor and Guided Metaphor for 
Psychotherapy and Healing”, Crownhouse Publishing 2002. 
Story 1  
Story 2 
Story 3 
     Therapeutic Suggestions 
Story 3 
Story 2 
Story 1 
 
O
P
E
N 
 
C
L
O
S
E 
Multiple 
Embedded 
Metaphors 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
158 
Trance Tonalities 
 
In days of yore, hypnotists noticed an interesting phenomenon: when they talked to 
people they had hypnotised before, they started to go into trance, even if the 
hypnotist was speaking about the weather! Over time hypnotists developed a 
“hypnotic voice” – a strange sounding monotonous voice, that more often than not 
would bore people into trance. But it solved their problem – subjects would only go 
into trance when they started talking in their strange monotonous voice. They were 
free to discuss the weather at liberty once again! 
 
With time new hypnotists learned from the old sages. They heard these strange 
monotonous voices and thought that there was some kind of power in it. They 
imitated it and taught their students to do the same in time. A pattern was set. 
 
Luckily we now know that you do not need to bore people into trances. You can use 
any voice tone that you like (though a smooth and pleasant voice is to be greatly 
encouraged). What had happened to these hypnotists of yore was nothing more than 
auditory anchoring in action You will recall that anchors can be set in any sensory 
modality. So you can anchor things with, amongst other things, the sound of your 
voice. So what did happen to our delightful hypnotic subjects when they are in 
trance?  
 
In trance, they would have heard the sound of the hypnotists voice, over and over 
again. They may even have heard suggestions like “the sound of my voice will help 
you go deeper and deeper in to trance…” Of course they were anchored to the 
hypnotist’s voice! Every time they heard it they would go back into a trance! 
 
It is strongly recommended that you develop your own range of trance tonalities. 
Otherwise you might find all the people you hypnotised kind of fading away during 
the course of a conversation with you. This might be fun at first, but it does get 
rather tedious after a while. It might even be a little dangerous, if the person you are 
accidentally hypnotising is driving a car – and you are sitting in it! 
 
To begin with I would recommend that you develop a slow, melodious voice for the 
trancework that you do. That way you can distinguish between talking to someone 
whilst “awake” or helping the go into trance. In time you can actually develop a 
whole range of different tonalities which are tonal anchors for them to access different 
types of trances! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
159 
Embedded Commands 
 
The unconscious mind has a tremendous capacity for recognising patterns. In fact 
studies suggest that hidden patterns receive a greater amount of attention when they 
are processed
57. Milton Erickson used this to very good effect with his patients by 
marking out certain words and phrases in a seemingly innocuous communication. 
Once the unconscious detected the subtle pattern, he could directly communicate 
with people’s unconscious whilst completely by-passing their critical system. 
 
You can embed suggestions in a number of ways. Any consistent change in 
inflection, tone, pausing, or non-verbal cue (like an eyebrow lift or a hand gesture), 
will eventually be picked up by the unconscious
58. 
 
An easy way to embed suggestion is to simply pause briefly before and after the 
phrase you wish to mark out: Now… I know a lot of people who cannot… relax 
fully and completely… it appears that something about the way that they think and 
live simply will not allow them to… relax fully and completely… Now… they might 
be able to… relax… just slightly. But it appears that… complete relaxation… 
eludes them!  
 
The same phrases could be marked out by slowing the pace of speech or lowering the 
voice tone slightly as you get to the suggestion: Now I know a lot of people who 
cannot relax fully and completely. It appears that something about the way that 
they think and live simply will not allow them to relax fully and completely. Now 
they might be able to relax just slightly. But it appears that complete relaxation 
eludes them!  
 
This is where hypnosis gets very interesting. With experience and practice you 
might find yourself consistently embedding several different layers of suggestion in 
the simple act of telling a story. If you mark different words and phrases out with 
different features: one with a lowering of the voice, another with a slight quickening 
of speech, a third with a hand gesture, a fourth with an eyebrow lift… you have the 
opportunity to pack a huge amount of suggestions into a relatively short, but very 
intense, period of time! 
                                                
57 Although the principle being engaged is not entirely clear, it appears that the brain detects the incoming 
information as being significantly different from that which immediately preceded it. This triggers a core 
brain orienting response (see Pribram, “Languages of the brain: Experimental paradoxes and principles in 
neuropsychology”, Prentice Hall 1971). In this model, the core brain (specifically the hypothalamus, 
thalamus and amygdale) is constantly sampling the environment. When something novel occurs, like a 
change in tone or patterned behaviour, the brain “dumps” all preceding data and places all its attention on 
the new stimulus. It therefore has a more powerful impact (see Glass, Holyoak and Santa “Cognition”, 
Addison-Wesley, 1979). 
58 Provided the person is capable of detecting it. Hand gestures will have no effect on a person with their 
eyes closed! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
160 
Ideomotor Signalling 
 
Most people have had the experience of falling asleep and having a vivid 
dream/daydream about some physical activity, like playing football or running down 
the street, only to discover that a limb – an arm or a leg – suddenly jerks in response 
to the dream. The dream was so “realistic” that it fooled your body into responding.  
 
Any thought that is focused on exclusively has the ability to affect our bodies so. In 
fact a routine aspect of an athlete’s training regimen might include a process of 
visualisation that is so focused that the same kind of micro-muscular movements 
happen spontaneously. This is called an ideomotor response. 
 
Michel Eugene Chevreul was the first modern scientist to "discover" the ideomotor 
response. At the turn of the 19th century there was much interest in dowsing 
pendulums for finding water. This interest was taken to one extreme by a Professor 
Gerboin of Strasbourg, who attempted to use them to analyse chemicals.  
 
In 1812 Chevreul researched this phenomenon and discovered that suspending a 
pendulum over a bowl of mercury would indeed cause the pendulum to move 
"spontaneously". This reaction was absent when a plate of glass was placed between 
the bowl and the pendulum. To eliminate operator error, he conducted a double 
blind trial, where an assistant would remove and replace the glass plate without his 
knowledge. When he did this, there was no reaction at all in the pendulum. Thus 
Chevreul concluded that the phenomenon was caused by involuntary muscle 
movements of the hand induced by the operators own mental processes.  
 
This simply means that a thought or idea will cause the tiny micro-muscular 
movements to occur. This is picked up and amplified by the pendulum (or dowsing 
stick or any other device you happen to be using) to produce this astonishing effect. 
 
In hypnosis we can use this effect to interact with the unconscious mind. Whilst it is 
possible to suggest to a person that they talk whilst deep in trance, there is 
something about the process that makes speech a little more difficult and hypnotic 
subjects often need to be taught how to speak in trance without reorienting to an 
ordinary state of consciousness. To bypass this inconvenience, you can allow the 
unconscious mind to express itself directly through non-verbal signals such as the 
pendulum, head nods or finger signalling. In time such signals become a little more 
obsolete because you learn to read the spontaneous unconscious BMIRs more 
accurately. Until then using finger signals is a good way to make sure you have 
unconscious cooperation! 
 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
161 
Unconscious Finger Signals 
 
To establish unconscious finger signals is quite straight forward. It is a little difficult 
to demonstrate this in a written context, but most people can produce unconscious 
signals within a few minutes. The following process should help with this: 
 
1. Induce trance:  lets assume that you have hypnotised your client to a 
reasonable level. You want to make sure that his conscious attention will 
not interfere by either trying to hard or actually responding with a conscious 
movement of the finger. An unconscious movement is quite distinct from a 
consciously lifted finger. Those of you who have already witnessed the 
slight jerky motions the unconscious tends to create will know what I 
mean. 
2. Revivify unconscious motion experiences: remind the client in trance that 
she has had many occasion in the past where she experienced unconscious 
movements: avoiding an accident, catching a falling object, jerking the hand 
away from something hot – like a pot or a cigarette. In all these situations 
something moved the hand before she even knew what was happening. The 
unconscious needed to do that to protect her. Now would be a good time to 
do something similar. 
3. Set up instruction: give the unconscious a choice as to which finger it 
wishes to move, spontaneously, unconsciously, to signal a “yes” response. 
It could be any finger on the left hand or the right hand. And you can be 
curious about which finger will be chosen by the unconscious to do that.  
4. Suggest action: tell the unconscious mind to “go ahead and move that 
“yes” finger NOW!” It is important that you phrase this carefully, 
particularly when you get to asking for a “no” response. Observe the client 
carefully for where the motion might be. On a few rare occasions, the 
unconscious decides to play a different game and signals using a different 
system – a change in breathing, flushing of the skin, a movement of a foot. 
If that happens, take it in your stride. When you get a response THANK 
the unconscious for doing so. Be polite! 
5. Repeat for NO: repeat the process to get a no response. When asking for 
the no response it is vital that you are careful with your language. Saying 
“go ahead and lift that “no” finger NOW” would work fine. But if you say 
“could you please lift the “No” finger now?” – the literal answer might be 
YES, I can move it! The unconscious takes everything very literally, so it 
is important to be precise about what you ask or suggest. Otherwise, you 
can see how a novice might get a little confused by what he thinks is a 
strange response.  
6. End trance:  before you end the trance make sure you cancel all 
suggestions, like that the fingers can talk to you on their own! 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
162 
 
Ending Trance 
 
When you end any trance experience there are certain things that you should always 
remember to do in order to ensure that your client has the best possible experience 
with you. 
 
Close Loops 
 
If you used Multiple Embedded Metaphors in your trance process, do remember to 
close all your loops in order to give someone a “complete” experience. Whilst it 
might be OK to leave certain loops open, thereby creating an unconscious drive to 
seek something more (more fun, more enthusiasm, more pleasurable things… those 
are nice things to keep your mind on the lookout for), there are certain loops that 
should really be closed.  
 
I know of at least one person that left a hypnotic seminar (not mine) early without 
saying anything. He felt a little “unusual” for some time. One day he decided to 
have an existential crisis, left town and sat on the mountain for a month to find 
himself again. It appears that he left part of himself behind in that seminar (luckily he 
is fine now). 
 
Cancel Suggestions 
 
This is particularly important if you are doing experimental hypnotic work, if you 
are utilising deep trance phenomena or work with parts therapeutically. You have to 
make sure that everything you suggest is reversed (apart from the therapeutic effect if 
you are doing therapy!) even if it seems like the client did not respond to the 
suggestion. Sometimes there is a significant time lag between suggestion and the 
activation of that suggestion. You do not want someone to be driving home and 
suddenly find their arm becoming paralysed!  
 
If you are working with parts, then remember to re-integrate them into the complete 
personality. Otherwise the splintered personality can begin to create all kinds of 
strange side effects (like my friend who had to go and sit on a mountain to try and 
“find himself” again). 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
163 
Self-Esteem Boosting Suggestions 
 
At the end of the trance experience, as the person is emerging from trance and 
particularly just after they have emerged and are still reorienting themselves to the 
room, that person is hyper-suggestible. This would be a very good time to make all 
kinds of general suggestions about their life improving, them having a fantastic time, 
learning new things, finding things are getting easier and easier etc. 
 
The traditional hypnotic patter for awakening someone might look something like 
this:  
 
in a moment I am going to count from one to five… at the count of five you will 
return to the room… you will feel refreshed, alert and simply fantastic.. you will 
feel like you have taken a bath in a cool, crisp, fresh mountain stream… completely 
invigorated from head to foot… so as I count from one to five… you’ll get more and 
more alert with each number… one, more and more alert… two your mind feeling 
refreshed, your body relaxed and more alert… three, and all the wonderful things 
you have to look forward to.. four, almost there now your unconscious is doing a 
wonderful job of helping you develop and transform… so as the days and the weeks 
and the months go by you feel better about yourself… about the people around you 
and the whole world… in fact things that used to be a problem… just won’t seem 
as big a deal any more… so ready to meet that future FIVE… eyes open, wide 
awake, ready to rock and roll! 
 
Future Pace Results 
 
During this emergence process it would also be a good idea to future pace the results 
of whatever therapeutic or goal getting kind of work you have done. So as part of the 
process you can describe the kind of good things that they can expect to experience 
in the future as their lives improve and all manner of positive things seem to occur. 
 
Feel free to go to town on this one. It is a lovely parting gift to give to people and 
can only do them some good. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
164 
The Meta-Pattern of ALL Change
59 
 
There is something that occurs in every change technique, whether or not that change 
process is a formal pattern of NLP. This process of change mirrors the way in which 
people naturally overcome problems – usually so easily that they are not even aware 
that they are doing it! This is called the Meta-Pattern of change. It is very useful to 
know this pattern, because once you understand it, you will not only understand all 
the NLP “techniques” far better, you will have the freedom to create your own 
techniques to fit the requirements of the situation. 
 
The pattern is this: 
 
1. Associate to Problem: the first step is to associate the client into the 
problem. You have to activate the problem neurology so that the solution 
has somewhere to attach to. Having a solution free floating in space in of 
little value because it does not “kick in” in the problem context! 
 
2. Dissociate: next you need to dissociate the client from the problem. 
Remember state dependant learning? If the client stays “in the problem”, he 
will block himself from his personal resources. Without access to resources 
he is stuck with the problem. Catch 22! 
 
3. Associate to Resource(s): now that the client is free to access resourceful 
states, strategies and harness the creative genius of the unconscious, it is 
time to access a powerful state that will overload the problem neurology and 
blow it out. Associate the client to it fully. 
 
4. Collapse Anchors: the final step is to do a collapse anchors between the 
resource and the problem. This blows out the problem neurology so that 
the same triggers that used to set off the problem, now fire off the solution 
instead.  
 
That is it! When you think about it, the visual squash, swish, 6 step reframe and all 
the other techniques all boil down to these common elements. The visualisations, 
frames and processes are just ways of achieving an association, dissociation, collapse 
anchors etc. In fact, John Grinders formulation of the “New Code” for NLP strips 
everything down to these essential elements and gets rid of all the padding, 
posturing and framing that has been placed around the “old” or formal NLP patterns. 
                                                
59 My thanks go to John Overdurf and Julie Silverthorn for teaching me this most insightful of patterns. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
165 
A Basic Structure for Hypnotherapy 
 
A therapy session can, and maybe even should, take on an almost infinite amount of 
shapes and guises. Sessions are there to achieve a result and anything that will allow 
that to happen (within a framework of ecology (i.e. the study of the consequences) 
and ethics) is to be encouraged. This does not help the novice therapist much. She 
does not necessarily even know what a therapy session should look like. Whilst she 
might be familiar with (and be convinced of the power of) the therapeutic patterns, it 
all has to happen within some kind of context. What should that context be? 
 
The following basic structure is designed to act as guide, especially for those that are 
still new to the experience. This guide is not set in stone. It is not sacrosanct. It 
should be used insofar as it is useful, and ignored if it gets in the way of creating a 
therapeutic benefit. Never sacrifice the reality of a situation to a given theory or 
dogmatic expression! 
 
The basic structure of a therapeutic session is: 
 
1. Therapeutic Preparation 
 
2. Interview Client 
 
3. Identify what Chunk to work on 
 
4. Induce Trance 
 
5. Changework Patterns 
 
6. Test & Future Pace 
 
7. End Trance 
 
8. Task and Dismiss 
 
I will discuss each of these headings more fully in the next few pages. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
166 
Therapeutic Preparation 
The therapist is the tool through which the process of therapy is expressed. As a 
therapist, you need to make sure that you, as a tool, are ready for the task you are 
about to perform. A surgeon will clean his tools after use, store them well, sharpen 
and hone them and disinfect them before using them again. As a therapist you should 
be doing the same thing with your own mental processes. 
 
After each session you must clear your mind, break your state so that you do not 
carry around with you your client’s problems. Taking on board their problems is not 
only unhealthy for you, it can also contaminate what you do with other clients. Not 
only should you take time to “clean” your tools, they also need to be stored away – 
so do not overanalyse your practice. It is good to learn from mistakes and take time 
to review your caseload from time to time to spot patterns. That way you can do 
more of the impactful stuff and less of the things that hinder progress. But do have a 
life outside of your therapy clinic! 
 
Your tools should also be kept honed. That means using your skill sets regularly 
with clients (and yourself!). It means remembering the NLP presuppositions and 
other frames that allow you to view the world in a unique way that makes you a 
better therapist. It means living by the four keys to excellence (PACE) so that your 
own skills continue to grow and you enhance your impact on the clients. 
 
Finally, you must manage your own state! If you have learned hypnosis or NLP 
from a reputable trainer, you should be able to enter a very special state of awareness 
in which you are observant of the client, are respectful of his model of the world and 
trust your own unconscious signals about what you should do next. You need the 
state to access your therapeutic own insights and resources! 
 
Meet and Greet 
Meeting and greeting your client well will allow you to do many things at once. 
This is the stage in which you get to build rapport, trust and comfort, with your 
client. You need to be comfortable within yourself, be in your “therapeutic state” and 
project a sense of warmth and confidence that the client can rely on. 
 
You also have a chance to spot patterns of behaviour that occur naturally, before they 
get too absorbed in “telling you about their problem”. It is a very useful time to get 
a feel for the client.  
 
At this time you get to make an impact on the client as well: are you an expert in 
what you do. Some people like to fill their office with certificates and awards to 
create “social proof” for the client to believe in. Erickson would often have patients 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
167 
wait for him extended periods of time so that they could observe, and be influenced 
by, other patients emerging trance-formed from their experience inside his office. 
Interview Client 
The formal interview can now begin. During the interview you will be doing several 
things: gathering information about the problem, investigation possible resources 
you can utilise, spotting patterns and challenging presuppositions that are limiting 
the client’s choices. Some of the skills you will be employing time and again are: 
 
1. Calibration:  you will need to be very aware of the client and her 
responses. You will be testing both conscious and unconscious responses 
so you have a rich tapestry of the client’s IRs in front of you. 
2. Rapport: this is something else that is ongoing throughout the session. 
3. Investigate Problem: when does it happen, where does it happen, what 
triggers it, how did it start, what other events occurred around the time the 
problem first started, how often does it occur, how long does it last, when 
does it NOT occur, what strategy are they running (TOTE). Use the Meta 
Model to get a very specific and clear understanding of what is happening. 
4. Challenge Problem: it is a good idea to start to challenge or bring into 
question (seeding doubt) the presuppositions and beliefs the client has about 
the world. Your use of the Meta Model as well as of therapeutic 
presuppositions and Milton Model language patterns here means that you 
might “accidentally” blow out the problem there and then! Even if you do 
not you will have achieved two things. Firstly, you will have “loosened 
the concrete” by sowing doubt about problem beliefs and attitudes which 
later on can be turned into full blown changes. Secondly you will have 
more information about the problem to work with. 
5. Formulate Outcome: at this stage you also need to get an idea of what the 
client wants. Use SMART goals and/or the well formedness conditions to 
construct therapeutic outcomes with the client. 
6. Investigate Resources: get a fuller picture of the client’s life and what 
resources she has that could be useful to make the changes she wants. This 
includes finding potential leverage points as in the clients positive beliefs, 
values, commitments, experiences, support groups etc. 
 
Identify what Chunk to work on 
The next step is to sift through all the information you have gathered and decide 
what you can usefully work through given the time you have available and the 
client’s current capacity for change. Some client’s are capable of making tremendous 
changes in one sitting, others need to take baby steps until their neurology feels 
“secure” with the process of change itself. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
168 
Induce Trance 
Next you either formally or informally induce a trance in the client. Hypnotherapy, 
by definition, is done in trance. However on some occasions you might actually 
prefer to keep the client out of trance – or at least out of a formal trance – in order to 
take the next therapeutic step that is needed. 
Changework Patterns 
Some of the fundamental Changework patterns for hypnotherapy have been covered in 
the NLP Techniques section. These are by no means the only processes open to 
hypnotherapy. All of the NLP techniques (anchoring, reframing, submodality 
interventions etc) can be used just as easily during an official trance process. In fact I 
believe (but you don’t have to agree) that all NLP techniques presuppose trance 
anyway. The fact that your client is engaging in the process will actually induce a 
trance all by itself! So technically the NLP techniques are hypnotherapy techniques! 
 
You can also use stories, metaphors and strategy interventions during your 
trancework. These stories can reframe the problem, create metaphorical resolutions, 
anchor or collapse anchors, shift submodalities indirectly or install new strategies. 
Metaphors are very versatile vehicles for therapy and change! 
 
Other patterns of hypnosis are constantly being invented and discovered. In time, I 
hope that you will discover your own patterns and approaches. It is always good to 
take a field forwards. That can only be done through the efforts, insights and 
experimentation of the practitioners in that field. Remember that you now have the 
Meta Pattern of all change. That means you know the “well formedness conditions” 
for creating new and effective therapeutic patterns of your own devising! 
Test & Future Pace 
Testing your work is important. If the therapy is to fall apart, the best place for that 
to happen is in the session with you. That way you can do something about it. The 
more rigorously you test it the better. Encourage your client to try and have the 
problem again (be careful that you avoid using language the actually re-installs the 
problem though!!) if they can. The ultimate test, of course, is to put the client in the 
actual situation that was a problem in the first place. If someone has a fear of heights, 
take them somewhere high up to see their reactions! If you cannot do it in real life, at 
least test it in their imagination! 
 
Future pacing is simply rehearsing future contexts in which the problem would have 
arisen in the past. You want the natural anchors of the situation to spontaneously 
trigger the solution. Future pacing allows that to happen. You can also encourage the 
client to generalise the change by the use of language and suggestion during a future 
pace. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
169 
End Trance 
The mechanics for ending trance have already been covered. Do however remember 
that the client is most suggestible immediately before and immediately after 
emerging from trance. So it is a good idea to make general positive suggestions 
throughout that entire period! As a rule it is good to compliment the client on how 
well she did whilst in trance. Clients who do not know what to expect from 
hypnosis may not know that the experience they had was the right one. You want to 
avoid the possibility that they self suggest failure because they did not have the 
“hypnotic experience” that they think they “should” have had! 
 
You should also avoid suggesting problems to the client. A typical mistake from a 
novice hypnotist is to end the trance process and then look at their client with an air 
of concern (a non-verbal suggestion that something went wrong). Sometimes they 
even ask a leading question like “Was that ok? Did it work for you?” etc. The client 
needs to have faith in the therapist. After all, it is the therapist’s job to believe in the 
client unconditionally in contexts in which the client has forgotten how to believe in 
himself! 
 
Finally, you do not want the client to unpick the therapy, so it is a good idea to 
distract her at the end of the session. Some distractors include talking about the 
weather, commenting on some general event that is happening in the world at that 
time or pointing out a feature in the room. These can be introduced completely 
randomly, without explanation (the slight confusion this might induce is actually 
useful). Alternatively you could start a thread of conversation before the therapy and 
finish the same thread at the end of the session as though nothing had happened in 
between. This approach often leads to the client becoming totally amnesic of the 
entire session. They only remember the brief conversation they had before leaving. 
The unconscious will then have a free hand to put the therapeutic suggestions into 
action! 
 
Task & Dismiss 
At the end of the session you may want to give the client certain tasks to do in order 
to assist whatever therapeutic approach you have decided on for her. These tasks can 
be the same as the ones discussed under “The Structure of Coaching” in the next 
section. The principles discussed there apply equally in the context of hypnotherapy. 
 
Finally it is time to release the client back into the world. The end conversation is 
also an opportunity to check the client has emerged fully from trance so that she is 
capable of functioning properly and safely in the outside world! You do not want a 
client who is half asleep in trance driving away from your practice! 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
170 
NLP Coaching 
Coaching – v – Therapy 
 
Coaching and Therapy are both activities that take place in the same general 
territory. Their mandates intertwine and, whilst many coaches would deny this, 
many coaching situations have a therapeutic effect or enter therapeutic territory. 
Likewise many therapeutic techniques will make use of coaching practices as a tool 
for change. The purpose of both coaching and therapy is to make positive changes in 
the way the client feels, lives and interacts with others. That is the bottom line. 
 
In the past one might have said that therapy looked backwards (into the past and the 
causes of problems), whilst coaching looked forward into the future. But that is no 
longer the case: therapy has branched into the future with such approaches as brief 
therapy, goal oriented therapy, the solution focus paradigm etc. A good therapist will 
also be a coach to her clients. A good coach will simply help the client transform 
situations that are not overly complex and uses certain tools to do that. A coach 
without any therapeutic training simply lacks other, deeper tools for personal change 
and so cannot engage in dealing with more serious problems like drug/alcohol abuse, 
emotional trauma, depression etc (and probably would not want to anyway). 
 
The distinction between the two categories is almost moot. Whether you are a coach 
or you are a therapist you are ethically constraint to only take on clients with 
problems that you have the knowledge and/or experience to help with. Anyone else 
should be referred on to a coach or a therapist that specialises in that particular area. 
Most coaches could not help a person overcome the fear, trauma and self-esteem 
issues created by bullies (either when they were younger or in a current context like 
the workplace). Likewise, most therapists would be quite useless if they tried to help 
a young entrepreneur start a successful business or rescue a failing one. Their areas of 
specialisation are simply different! 
 
Having said all this, there is a simple way to distinguish between therapy and 
coaching. It is a historical fact that the field of “coaching” has developed an almost 
unified technology or paradigm for coaching. Just as the “Meta Pattern of Change” 
can be found in all therapeutic techniques, so you will find a common structure to all 
coaching models that are currently in existence. This section will explore the role of 
a coach and the structure she would use which is distinct from the therapeutic process 
we have already examined. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
171 
The Role of the Coach 
 
A therapist is a guide for his clients. A coach, however, is a facilitator more than a 
guide. That means it is the coach’s responsibility to not-solve the client’s problems 
for him, but to trust sufficiently in her creativity that the right kind of questions will 
lead him to find the best possible answer for him. 
 
A coach’s role is to believe in and support her client. The coach will need to create a 
relationship of trust and mutual respect, because at times she will have to be blunt 
with the feedback she gives. The client has to know that that feedback is in his own 
best interest. He will also have to trust his coach enough to be open about things 
going on in his life which have an impact on the coaching process.  
 
The client is responsible for creating the change he wants. The coach knows that the 
client has all the resources he needs to get the results he wants, so it is the coach’s 
role to focus her client’s mind on what he is experiencing, thinking and feeling in 
such a way as to lead him to generating the ideal solution. This is a very evenly 
balanced relationship: a partnership in change. The coach ends up acting a little like 
a mirror reflecting the truth of the situation back at the client so he can recognise 
what is happening without distorting the image in his own mind.  
 
One of the most fundamental skills in coaching is the ability to ask questions. An 
elegant coaching session might involve the coach asking only a handful of highly 
focused questions, and the client doing all the actual talking! There is an infinite 
variety of the kinds of questions you can ask. As a rule questions should either 
empower the client or challenge a rigid mindset. The Meta Model is ideal for that 
latter function. 
 
Questions are very powerful. Your mind cannot help but answer a question. But your 
mind will answer the question you asked, not the one you should have asked. The 
questions you ask will presuppose either an empowering or debilitating reality for 
you. The direction a question focuses your mind in is crucial. The Meta Model is so 
powerful because the underlying presupposition is: “you are at cause, you are doing 
this so you can change it!” Likewise a debilitating question assumes that you are 
stuck: “why do I always fail?!?” will get you an answer that increases the 
likelihood of failure. 
 
As a coach you must learn to understand and to use questions elegantly. We will 
look a little more at the core coaching questions later on. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
172 
A Basic Structure for Coaching 
 
The basic structure for a coaching session will have many similarities with the 
structure of a therapeutic session – they are both about creating change after all. 
Whilst therapy branches off into therapeutic patterns of change, coaching specialises 
in asking powerful questions. These questions help the client construct new realities 
(through goal setting/challenging rigid mindsets), create personal transformation and 
task him to engage in the process of working toward that reality (remember the 
PACE formula). 
 
The following structure is yet again just another guide, a useful tool for a coach to 
try on for size. If it helps to make a session easier to run and/or more impactful, then 
it has served its purpose well. If it does not discard it and find a better model/guide. 
 
The basic structure for coaching is: 
 
1. Prepare 
 
2. Meet, Greet and Review 
 
3. The Coaching Questions 
 
4. General Information Gathering 
 
5. SMART Goals 
 
6. Honing the Client’s Thinking 
 
7. Tasking 
 
8. Getting Commitment from the Client 
 
9. End Session 
 
We will look at each phase a little more closely in the next pages. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
173 
Prepare 
 
Like a therapist, a coach relies heavily on his ability to calibrate the client and see 
what is happening in the moment. This means that he has to have his perceptual 
filters open and “clean”. The NLP presuppositions we covered under Frames are just 
as valuable here as in the therapeutic context. They help the coach keep his belief in 
the client and flag up potential areas to challenge the client on (directly or indirectly). 
 
Also, as with the therapist, the coach should develop a special state of awareness for 
use during his coaching session. This state will allow him access to his own 
resources, to a deeper form of listening and to the wisdom and creativity that the 
unconscious has to offer. 
 
Meet, Greet and Review 
 
The coach will be meeting with her client regularly, either in person or on the 
telephone. This is a good time to establish or deepen rapport and to create a 
“coaching space”: a time marked out from the daily routine as uniquely dedicated to 
the client’s development.  
 
The additional step that a coach will be taking during this phase is the review. 
Clients that are in the middle of a coaching relationship will have committed to 
doing certain things as a way of creating stepping stones into the future or a way of 
increasing skills, knowledge, experience or insight into their situation. It is the 
Coach’s responsibility to check with her clients that they did in fact follow through 
with their commitments.  
 
The review format can follow the PACE equation:  
 
• 
make sure the client knows what they are trying to achieve (Purpose), 
• 
check the client is not getting stuck in a pattern (Adaptable) 
• 
ensure the client gets appropriate feedback about his performance and learns 
from it (Calibrate) 
• 
confirm that the client has taken action (Engage)! 
 
The review phase is also an opportunity for the client to give feedback on how the 
coaching process is working for him and bring up any areas of concern so that 
adjustments can be made. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
174 
The Coaching Questions 
 
At the start of each session, you must make sure that you set up a context for that 
session. At the very first session with a client the coach will want to set up 
parameters like:  
 
• 
what can the client expect from coaching/her coach,  
• 
what the coach expects from his client. 
• 
how, when and where the coaching sessions will take place, 
• 
getting some background information on the client and her situation. 
 
Then near the beginning of each subsequent coaching session (after the Meet, Greet 
and Review has been done) the coach should ask the two golden questions of 
coaching
60: 
 
What would you like to work through today? 
 
How will you know when you are done? 
 
The first of the two questions sets up the Coaching Frame, the context in which the 
session will be played out. The second question creates an exit strategy: clients need 
to know when they are done so they know when to have a feeling of 
accomplishment. It is also useful so you, the coach, know when you should stop. 
General Information Gathering 
 
Once the Coaching Frame has set up the parameters for that session, it is time to 
explore the territory you have agreed on. The Meta Model will be an invaluable tool 
here. You can hone into specific details, challenge presuppositions, help the client 
empower himself and recover choice. 
 
At the same time it is useful to explore potential resources the client has. Find out if 
they have faced a similar situation before – or if they know someone that successfully 
navigated a similar stretch of water. Also find out what, if anything, they have tried 
in the past to resolve the problem (including their internal strategies). This will tell 
you a lot about what the client should no longer do! 
 
Finally a coach can help her client to analyse and dissect the situation so he fully 
appreciates the potential obstacles in his way. This will also generate useful 
information so the client can better grasp the consequences of any action agreed on 
later. 
                                                
60 Again my thanks goes to John Overdurf & Julie Silverthorn for showing me these questions. They are a 
very elegant way of setting up a session! 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
175 
SMART Goals 
 
The next step is to help the client create some goals for her to aim for. Goals can be 
broken up into different chunk sizes:  
 
• 
small immediate goals that can be accomplished between sessions, 
• 
slightly larger, intermediate, goals that may take a few weeks or months to 
complete, and 
• 
an overarching long term goal which sets the context for the whole coaching 
relationship. 
 
These goals can be formulated using the NLP Well Formed Outcomes conditions or 
the condensed SMART goals covered in the Outcomes section. As a reminder here 
is the SMART formula again: 
 
• 
Specific  
• 
Measurable 
• 
Affect 
• 
Realistic 
• 
Timed 
 
Honing the Client’s Thinking 
 
As soon as you have agreed on a game plan, whether it is short term or a longer term 
thing, the client will have to start thinking about the implications of that goal and 
the kind of behaviours she will have to engage in to get a good result. In the process 
of doing this the client may come up against personal barriers, limiting beliefs, self 
doubt, thinking blocks and misinterpretations of what is happening. It is the coach’s 
task to focus the client’s mind and have hear think more clearly. 
 
The Meta Model is again a great tool for this. Challenging the assumptions the 
client has made can go a long way towards creating a positive frame of mind and 
generating better solutions that will help the client achieve her goals.  
 
Another useful tool is that of “reflecting back” to the client the things she is saying. 
This kind of reflection gets the client to look at herself and her situation again and 
see whether or not she has been distorting things in such a way that she created 
many of the obstacles she thought she was facing! 
 
This is also a good time for the coach to encourage and support her client. She can 
help her client to think big when she needs to, and bring her back down to earth for 
the details when that is appropriate. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
176 
Tasking 
 
Tasking is a method that coaches can use in order to help the client take steps in the 
right direction. Tasking is all about giving the client experience in some way. A 
typical task might involve breaking a goal down into manageable stepping chunks 
which you ask the client to work through. It might also include getting the client to 
learn new skills that she will need in the days ahead. The more experiences the client 
has to draw from, the more resources she has to throw at (and ultimately solve) her 
problems! 
 
There are two kinds of tasks that a coach can set: linear and non-linear. Each type 
of task has a different purpose and gives the client a different kind of experience. 
 
At the heart of tasking lie two questions: 
 
Where are you now? 
Where do you want to be? 
 
These give you a start point and a destination. You can help the client fill in the 
space between these questions with stepping stones that will safely get the client 
from A to B. 
 
Linear Tasking 
Linear tasks are quite straight forward. The client usually generates these himself. 
Once you have asked the two fundamental tasking questions, you can challenge the 
client to create bite-sized stepping stones that will get him from the beginning to the 
end. Here are a few example of what such stepping stones might look like: 
 
• 
Make 10 calls to clients just to “catch up” in the next week – purpose: 
business relationship management. 
 
• 
Call printers and get quotes for a print job by Tuesday – purpose: breaks 
down larger task, like marketing a new course, into manageable pieces. 
 
• 
Play exclusively with your children for 30 minutes each day – purpose: 
create work/life balance and nurture a healthy family. 
 
• 
Take John aside on Friday and talk through/settle the argument from last 
week, being respectful of both his point of view and your needs – purpose: 
conflict resolution. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
177 
Non-linear Tasking 
Non-linear tasking is a form of tasking that comes close to being a therapeutic 
technique. Whereas linear tasking is all about conscious insight and control, non-
linear tasking focuses on unconscious learning. In fact the idea is to make it so that 
the conscious mind is left a little in the dark as to the ultimate purpose. This is 
particularly useful in cases where the client has rigid opinions or beliefs that prevent 
her from moving forwards or recognising the essence of a given type of situation.  
 
Non-linear tasking is very valuable in situations where the client gets in her own 
way constantly, for example if she keeps trying too hard and failing as a result. It is 
also useful for secretly developing a skill or resource in the client which she can use 
to solve a particular problem that has persistently “stumped” her. 
 
The key question to ask yourself in non-linear tasking is: 
 
What experience(s) does the client need to have in order to create the Resource 
of Belief she needs in the current situation? 
 
Here are some examples of non-linear tasks in action: 
 
• 
Go and write the report (or do your homework etc) but when you do it 
make sure you make as many mistakes as possible! Purpose: this is a 
paradoxical task to alleviate performance anxiety (fear of making mistakes!) 
and create a context for natural learning. 
 
• 
Go and sit in the park and watch the way dogs play with each other. Pay 
particular attention to the way they behave when they first meet and 
consider how that applies to this situation. Purpose: to create an 
appreciation of the importance of social cues in interactions – some create 
conflict others trust and comfort. Also good to teach playfulness! 
 
• 
Here is a questionnaire. Go and interview 100 women and ask them these 
questions. [The questionnaire asks questions like “do you prefer it when a 
man smiles, frowns or has a neutral expression when you first meet him?” 
and “do you prefer it when people make eye contact when they talk to 
you?”] Purpose: for a shy man that wants to get into a relationship. He 
needs to learn to approach and talk with women in a natural way. The 
questionnaire achieves a few things. Firstly it gets him doing the behaviour 
he was afraid of without drawing attention to the fact (he thinks he has to do 
a social study). Secondly, the questions can be about the kind of 
communication errors the man makes so that he learns to adjust his 
behaviour without having to be told explicitly. 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
178 
Getting Commitment from the Client 
 
Getting the client to commit to and follow through on his allotted tasks is a vital 
step in the coaching process. Almost every society conditions its members to honour 
their public commitments, i.e. if you say you’ll do something you must do it as 
others may be relying on you. It is a deeply ingrained psychological factor in us. 
This is useful in the coaching context. The mere fact that your client is promising 
you to do something, means that he is more likely to do it. It is much harder to 
break your word to someone else that it is to break a promise to yourself. 
 
If you think the client might refuse a certain task, but it is clearly something very 
important for his continued development, there are a few tactics that you can employ 
to get that commitment more easily. 
 
The first thing you can do is leverage off an important value (towards motivation) or 
jump to a negative consequence of not doing something (away from motivation). For 
example, a client has to do his tax returns but keeps delaying it. If you ask him to 
commit straight away, he may go into a kind of denial where he simply does not 
want to know.  
 
In that case you might challenge him to follow through to the consequences of that 
action, to the worst case scenario. He will naturally arrive at a very unpleasant 
situation. There are strong emotions involved, which can be harnessed for 
motivation. When he rejects that worst case scenario, he can orient into the positive 
consequences of completing the task (peace of mind). After running him through this 
chain his mind will be more open to accepting the task. 
 
Another way to find leverage is known as the contrast principle. If I ask you to give 
me £10, you may refuse because it is a lot of money. But if I ask you for £1000 first 
and then settle for £10, it is much more likely that you will agree. It is a 
significantly smaller loss to you, in relative terms. So when tasking someone, you 
can sometimes ask them to commit to an extreme task, just so they refuse. When 
you ask them to commit to a lesser, though still tough task, they are more likely to 
agree! 
 
End Session 
 
When the session comes to an end simply recap the highlights and maybe get the 
client to recap what he has taken from that session. Then future pace him to look 
forward to your next meeting. 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
179 
Additional Submodalities Checklists 
 
Visual 
Motion/Still 
 
 
Colour/B&W 
 
 
Location 
 
 
Associated/Dissociated 
 
 
Framed/Panoramic 
 
 
Large/Small 
 
 
Near/Far away 
 
 
Focused/Blurred 
 
 
Bright/Dim 
 
 
3D/Flat 
 
 
 
Auditory 
Location of Sound 
 
 
Tone 
 
 
Tempo 
 
 
Volume 
 
 
Duration 
 
 
Pitch 
 
 
Pace 
 
 
Rhythm 
 
 
 
Kinaesthetic 
Location (in body) 
 
 
Breathing Rate 
 
 
Shape 
 
 
Size 
 
 
Temperature 
 
 
Movement 
 
 
Weight 
 
 
Pressure 
 
 
Texture 
 
 
 
Olfactory/Gustatory 
Sweet/Sour 
 
 
Salty 
 
 
Bitter 
 
 
Aroma 
 
 
Intensity 
 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
180 
Submodalities Checklist 
 
Visual 
Motion/Still 
 
 
Colour/B&W 
 
 
Location 
 
 
Associated/Dissociated 
 
 
Framed/Panoramic 
 
 
Large/Small 
 
 
Near/Far away 
 
 
Focused/Blurred 
 
 
Bright/Dim 
 
 
3D/Flat 
 
 
 
Auditory 
Location of Sound 
 
 
Tone 
 
 
Tempo 
 
 
Volume 
 
 
Duration 
 
 
Pitch 
 
 
Pace 
 
 
Rhythm 
 
 
 
Kinaesthetic 
Location (in body) 
 
 
Breathing Rate 
 
 
Shape 
 
 
Size 
 
 
Temperature 
 
 
Movement 
 
 
Weight 
 
 
Pressure 
 
 
Texture 
 
 
 
Olfactory/Gustatory 
Sweet/Sour 
 
 
Salty 
 
 
Bitter 
 
 
Aroma 
 
 
Intensity 
 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
181 
Submodalities Checklist 
 
Visual 
Motion/Still 
 
 
Colour/B&W 
 
 
Location 
 
 
Associated/Dissociated 
 
 
Framed/Panoramic 
 
 
Large/Small 
 
 
Near/Far away 
 
 
Focused/Blurred 
 
 
Bright/Dim 
 
 
3D/Flat 
 
 
 
Auditory 
Location of Sound 
 
 
Tone 
 
 
Tempo 
 
 
Volume 
 
 
Duration 
 
 
Pitch 
 
 
Pace 
 
 
Rhythm 
 
 
 
Kinaesthetic 
Location (in body) 
 
 
Breathing Rate 
 
 
Shape 
 
 
Size 
 
 
Temperature 
 
 
Movement 
 
 
Weight 
 
 
Pressure 
 
 
Texture 
 
 
 
Olfactory/Gustatory 
Sweet/Sour 
 
 
Salty 
 
 
Bitter 
 
 
Aroma 
 
 
Intensity 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
182 
Submodalities Checklist 
 
Visual 
Motion/Still 
 
 
Colour/B&W 
 
 
Location 
 
 
Associated/Dissociated 
 
 
Framed/Panoramic 
 
 
Large/Small 
 
 
Near/Far away 
 
 
Focused/Blurred 
 
 
Bright/Dim 
 
 
3D/Flat 
 
 
 
Auditory 
Location of Sound 
 
 
Tone 
 
 
Tempo 
 
 
Volume 
 
 
Duration 
 
 
Pitch 
 
 
Pace 
 
 
Rhythm 
 
 
 
Kinaesthetic 
Location (in body) 
 
 
Breathing Rate 
 
 
Shape 
 
 
Size 
 
 
Temperature 
 
 
Movement 
 
 
Weight 
 
 
Pressure 
 
 
Texture 
 
 
 
Olfactory/Gustatory 
Sweet/Sour 
 
 
Salty 
 
 
Bitter 
 
 
Aroma 
 
 
Intensity 
 
 
 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
183 
Conversational Hypnosis 
 
"Rebel Psychiatrist’s Amazing Secret 
Lets You Put People Under Your Spell 
Quickly and Easily … and Get Them 
to Do Anything You Want!" 
 
Now you can unleash your natural ability to... 
 
•  Influence anyone to follow your lead  
•  Get clients and customers to happily buy more  
•  Negotiate with stellar success  
•  Compel colleagues to do what you suggest 
•  Get just about anyone to say “Yes”  
•  Convince children and teens to obey your instructions  
•  Keep your lover(s) eternally loyal 
 
And best of all, they will thank you for the 
opportunity to do as you say. 
 
Dear Reader, 
 
If you want to take your hypnosis 
skills to the next level then this may 
be the most important quick letter 
you’ve ever read… 
 
Milton Erickson was the greatest 
hypnotist of all time.  
 
What made his hypnosis so 
powerful was that he had spent 
almost 60 years learning to 
hypnotize his subjects without them 
knowing it…. and hypnotizing them 
inside of a normal-seeming 
conversation. 
 
You may ask, “Why would a 
psychiatrist spend his entire life 
learning how to hypnotize people 
without them knowing it … by using 
normal conversation in hypnotic 
ways?” 
 
It’s because…. 
 
It Was Illegal For Doctors To 
Use Hypnosis… 
 
Even though Milton Erickson had 
been a college professor, doctor, 
and psychiatrist…. it was still 
against the American Medical 
Association rules and regulations to 
use hypnosis with patients. 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
184 
Everyone knew that hypnosis had 
amazing power. Erickson thought 
that it was just this power that 
made the establishment ban its use. 
 
So Milton Erickson spent a lifetime 
perfecting the skills that allowed him 
to take hypnotic control of his 
patients by just “talking to them”. 
 
It was the only way he could keep 
his license to practice medicine! 
 
There are literally thousands of 
stories of what Dr. Erickson 
accomplished through 
conversational hypnosis, but I’d like 
to tell you just one. 
 
How Conversational Hypnosis 
Saved A Maverick Doctors 
License And Changed The USA’s 
Laws About Hypnosis 
 
In 1953 the American Medical 
Association caught wind of the fact 
that the renegade psychiatrist Dr. 
Erickson was doing hypnosis with 
his patients.  
 
They scheduled a “disciplinary 
hearing” in New York where he was 
to be stripped of his license, his 
livelihood, and send home in shame. 
 
Milton Erickson knew that the 
president of the AMA lived in Los 
Angeles.  
 
He found out when the president 
would be flying to New York, and he 
arranged to fly out with both the 
president and another board 
member. 
 
The atmosphere was strained and 
difficult for the first moments of the 
boarding and the flight.  
 
But soon the two board members 
started to have strong feelings of 
rapport and respect for Dr. Erickson.  
 
And the more he “talked” …. in that 
special way of his …. his 
companions got more comfortable 
…. and more relaxed…. and more 
relaxed….. and still more 
comfortable … until… 
 
The Two Grey-haired AMA 
Officials Just Listened With 
Glazed Eyes And Agreed To 
Everything... 
 
By the time the 3 doctors got off the 
plane, they were all fast friends. 
The hearing, instead of being a 
professional massacre, had all the 
charges dropped against Dr. Milton 
Erickson.  
 
The Very Next Year, The AMA 
Reversed Itself 
And Allowed Doctors To Use 
Hypnosis! 
 
That’s the power of Conversational 
Hypnosis.  
 
And when you learn the same 
simple but powerful techniques, you 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
185 
will be able to put people under 
your spell, and easily get them to do 
what you want too! 
 
That’s why I’m very excited to 
announce my brand new and 
revolutionary 16 CD “Power of 
Conversational Hypnosis” program. 
 
This program is the most advanced 
conversational hypnosis program 
currently available in the world! 
 
 
See what this senior member of the Ericksonian Foundation says 
about my groundbreaking work… 
 
“Even after 40 years of studying hypnosis, I am impressed with 
Ledochowski’s contribution to the field.” 
 
Dr, Daniel Araoz, 
American Board of Professional Hypnosis,  
Professor of Mental Health Counseling at long Island University  
 
Director Emeritus 
of the Long Island Institute  
of Ericksonian Hypnosis 
 
   
The Course Contains:- 
 
• 
The 12 CD Main Program 
• 
4  Bonus CDs 
• 
4 Special Conversational Hypnosis Blueprints 
• 
The 600+ Page Manual & Complete Transcripts 
 
"Igor Is A World Class Hypnotist" 
 
"Igor Ledochowski is a world-class hypnotist, coach, and NLP trainer.  
 
"He has greatly helped my company using cutting-edge models of language 
and behavior to take our live programs to the next level." 
 
Nick Kho 
President of Real Social Dynamics 
Los Angeles , California , USA 

The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis™ 
www.StreetHypnosis.com   --   All Rights Reserved 
186 
"Its Like Magic...Absolutely Amazing Results" 
 
“Igor is the definitive expert on the mind, on fast results, and a genius in 
the field of subconscious influence and change. 
 
"He influences you consciously and subconsciously to release an impressive 
potential in people. 
 
"Its like magic: he gets absolutely amazing results! If you want to work 
with the best work with him!! 
 
"But be warned: he gets exceptional results by doing exceptional things... 
sometimes unusual things happen when you are around him.” 
 
David Taylor, 
Global Leadership Expert, 
Author Of The Bestselling “The Naked Leader!" 
www.nakedleader.com 
 
 
Get Your Copy Here… 
 
www.conversational-hypnosis.com 
 
You’ll find more information on the course there as well. 
 
I’m looking forward to hearing about your success with NLP & Hypnosis, 
 
Igor Ledochowski 
 
  

