For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
How To Become A Persuasion 
Master By Hypnotically Exploiting 
Emotions & Pseudo Logic So 
People Quickly Do What You Say! 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Become A Persuasion Master By Hypnotically 
Exploiting Emotions & Pseudo Logic So People Quickly Do 
What You Say 
 
Session 1: How To Create Persuasion Channels In The Mind 
 
The ABS Of Persuasion 
 
Persuasion has only one goal: to get someone to do something for you (make a decision, engage 
in a behaviour, give you information etc.) 
 
The Hypnotic Formula, ABS, still applies in this context: 
 
• A – we have examined how to get the Attention in other masterclasses. Now we will 
focus on how to direct it to a purpose. 
• B – we can either turn off the Critical factor (CF) or we can Hijack it – make it do what 
we want. This is what persuasion focuses on. 
• S – these are the ideas that you want to use to influence people. When suggestions are 
phrased a certain way they become more persuasive! 
 
The Heart Of Persuasion 
 
We persuade people by: 
 
• Dramatising the consequences 
• Appealing to the person’s self-interest (even altruism contains self-interest) 
• Using reason to dig a channel in the mind down which their thoughts will flow 
• Applying emotions as the fuel that makes their thoughts flow down the channels you 
created 
• Using the context in order to tease out the values that people have – i.e. their motivation 
 
The values will decide your strategy, your strategy will dictate which tools you use and how you 
use them. So always start with a context and a set of values when designing a Persuasion 
Strategy! 
 
Strategic Persuasion 
 
Persuasion is not a one shot deal – you do not try and “get your way at any cost”. Because 
abusing your position in one case will create the context to block your persuasion in the future! 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
Use an intense positive intention (H+) when persuading in order to avoid negative fallout in the 
future. 
 
Once you start with (H+) you can use the context & values you have studied in order to choose 
the best route down the Persuasion Strategy Tree. 
 
The Persuasion Strategy Tree 
 
1. Action – v – Accusation: Are you facing an accusation or do you want someone to do 
something? 
 
In order to bring an accusation successfully you need to show: 
• Motivation (why did X do it?) 
• State Of Mind (was it an accident or deliberate?) 
• Action (just thinking it is not enough) 
• Consequence (if alls well at the end – where’s the harm?) 
 
2. Pragmatic – v – Aspirational: Is it easier to show that the action you want is useful to the 
person or moral (i.e. they will be a better person for it) 
 
3. Pleasure – v – Pain: Will the action bring pleasure (something useful or moral) or will it 
bring pain (something harmful or disgraceful)? 
 
4. Probability: What is the likelihood of the consequence in question actually happening? 
 
The more remote it is the less its power. 
 
5. Deduction – v – Induction: Which tool serves a better purpose for carving the channel, 
deduction or induction? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Induction 
Deduction 
Induction 
Deduction 
Probability 
Probability 
Noble 
Base 
Pain 
Pleasure 
Aspirational 
Pragmatic 
Motivation 
State of Mind 
Action 
Consequences 
Action 
Accusation 
Context 
The Persuasion Strategy Tree 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
Pleasure – v – Pain  
 
Whether an action will bring pleasure or pain as a consequence really depends on the frame 
you use. The same situation can be perceived positively or negatively:  
 
A stupid man could be and Honest Man; and Honest Man could be Naïve!  
 
When you have two good things or two bad things to choose between, then you simply 
compare them to show which is the lesser of two evils or the greater of two goods. 
 
Probabilities 
 
The general rule is: the more distant and/or unlikely a consequence is, the less impact it has (i.e. 
the lower its power to persuade will be.) 
 
Some exceptions exist, e.g. a risk which has huge consequences but low chances of occurring 
(e.g. your house being destroyed by a storm). If the preventative action required is small (like a 
small insurance payment) then the person is likely to still be motivated to engage in the action – 
especially if the drama of the consequences is played up! 
 
A defence for the probability of something happening is whether or not the evidence you get is 
True! If you can show its all made up, bad science or lies – the whole persuasion structure can 
collapse. 
 
Certain arguments will help you establish the truth or likelihood of something happening in the 
Past, Present or Future: 
 
The Past 
 
• If something that was unlikely to happen did happen, then the more likely thing probably 
happened as well. E.g. it is unlikely that the pope would murder someone, yet if it turned 
out that he did, then people will be more open to believe that he had a mistress on the 
side as well. 
 
• If its something happened that is usually linked with the event in question, then the event 
is likely to have occurred. E.g. weather reports show it was very cloudy that day, so its 
likely that it rained as well. 
 
• If the lesser event can occur, then the greater one did too. E.g. if an idiot could have 
solved a puzzle, then an average person is likely to have done it too. 
 
• If someone intended to do something, chances are they did (unless other information 
exists to show they were blocked or changed their mind). E.g. Peter left the house angry, 
with a gun in his hand, shouting that “I’ll kill him!!” – he is likely to have shot someone. 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
The Present 
 
• Contraries – if you can see a coin with “heads” facing up, you can usually predict that it 
will have “tails” on the other side. E.g. if we have a cure, then there must be a disease 
that corresponds to it somewhere. 
 
• If you have a part of something, you can infer that the whole is/was present. E.g. you find 
a shoelace, its likely that a whole shoe was there at some point! 
 
The Future 
 
• Intention: again if someone intends to do something, has the power to do it and no 
blocks exist, then its likely that they will do it. E.g. Peter leaves the house in a rage, with 
gun in hand, shouting “I’ll kill him” – chances are that in the near future someone will be 
getting shot! 
 
• Causal Chain: if you have an event that usually predicts or causes another, then you can 
infer that the other is likely to happen. E.g.  you walk past an empty lot and see people 
building a foundation – its very likely that eventually a complete house will be built 
there! 
 
Deduction – v – Induction 
 
These are the two ways that we can get new information. A deductive process (the basis of the 
“European Scientific Method”) allows you to apply certain principles to reason out what 
absolutely must have happened (or will happen.) An inductive process (the basis of the “English 
Scientific Method”) uses the facts – often gained by experience/experiments – to tease out a 
general principle or figure out what is likely to have happened (or is likely to happen.) 
 
Most typically – especially in persuasion – inductive arguments will use examples to get to a 
conclusion. Often inductive processes are mixed with deductive ones to get to a firmer 
conclusion. 
 
Examples: 
 
• Deductive: all men are mortal, Adam is a man, therefore Adam is a mortal. 
 
• Inductive: John has died, Lincoln died, King George II died, since recorded history man 
that has ever lived has died eventually. So probably every man dies eventually. Adam is a 
man, which means he will probably die eventually. 
 
Inductive Arguments 
 
The easiest way to argue inductively is through examples. There are 3 types of inductive 
processes particularly useful for hypnotic persuasion: 
 
1. History (examples from history) 
2. Analogy (this situation is like this other situation) 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
3. Metaphor (in the form of Anecdotes or Inventions) 
• Anecdotes are real life stories of things that happened to you or people you 
know. 
• Inventions are made up stories like Fairy Tales, Films, Novels and Allegories. 
 
For more detailed information on how to use stories hypnotically, see the “Hypnotic 
Storytelling” Masterclass. 
 
Truisms 
 
Truism are a form of hybrid suggestions that mixes inductive and deductive reasoning processes. 
They are very elegant as a lot of information is packed into a simple, easy-to-memorise phrase or 
saying (a Maxim). 
 
To use Truisms, remember: 
 
• Deliver truisms with “gravitas” – with an air of saying something really important and 
meaningful. If delivered in a trivial tone or offhand way, they often have no impact (or 
can backfire) 
• They are well suited for the “Aspirational” (i.e. moral) arguments and suggestions. 
• It is particularly powerful if it confirms an existing bias in the person/group it is given to. 
 
How To Construct Truisms 
 
Truisms are: 
 
• Short & concise 
• To the point 
• Express a moral point or a rule of thumb 
• Reasoned – there must be a logical reason to conclude that idea, either expressed or 
understood. 
 
There are 4 types of Truisms: 
 
1. Accepted Maxim – Waste not want not! 
2. Accepted principle or idea – nurture the things you love! 
3. A shock deduction – this reverses an accepted principle or idea. It will need careful 
explaining or it will backfire: 
 
Prisons do more harm than good – people learn more about committing crimes than they 
would do on the streets! 
 
4. Implied deductions – here you don’t give your full reasoning for the Truism, you imply it 
from elements within the Truism: 
 
People in glasshouses should not throw stones! 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
Mastering the construction and use of truisms will also make you a “wittier” person. The masters 
of the witty retort where the ancient Spartans (we still have the phrase “Laconic Whit” from 
them.) 
 
How To Break Truisms 
 
There are two simple strategies to break the persuasive hold that a Truism can have over people: 
 
1. Find an extreme and expose the flaw 
2. Contrast the Truism with a higher value 
 
Example: 
 
Waste not want not!  
 
Well if we spent all our time grubbing for leftovers – who’d have time to go and make anything 
new?! 
 
Pseudo-logic In The Reasoning Process 
 
There are ways of camouflaging suggestions to make them seem more reasonable. Pure reason 
either proves or disproves something. 
 
Persuasive reason, on the other hand, makes people accept and adopt the idea. The rules for 
being more persuasive with your reason are: 
 
• Don’t spend to long arguing, or you will lose people 
• Be concise – allow people to make natural leaps in their conclusions 
• Keep it simple – its why a stupid argument with passion often wins over a clever 
argument without! 
• Base the conclusions on common knowledge, so that people can follow along with your 
train of thoughts. 
 
All reasoning processes require a context and the facts from that context as building blocks for 
creating the frames/ideas. 
 
Remember, to be persuasive you must seem logical you need not actually BE logical! 
 
17 Tactics In Persuasive Reasoning 
 
1. Opposites:  Prove the opposite quality – war made this mess, peace will heal it! 
 
2. Correlation: If tails exists, so must heads – if the order was good, following it was good! 
 
3. Lesser Certainty: If the less likely is true/false, so is the more likely – if she won’t date me, 
she certainly won’t date you! 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
4. Reversing Time: Change the flow of events to make your point – if you’d have offered a 
reward before getting your daughter back, what’s wrong with asking for one afterwards? 
 
5. The Moral High Ground: Use it ONLY when you have it – if you would not steal it, what 
makes you think that I would?!! 
 
6. Definitions: Define a term, when circumstances meet your definition, you are right – 
trance is caused by CF bypass, there is no CF here, so we must have trance! 
 
7. Simple Authority: Follow previous decisions, especially from moral authorities – you 
know Jesus (or the Dalai Lama/John Lennon etc.) never supported violence. 
 
8. Simple Reframe: All actions have a + and – side – Education creates mindless robots OR 
Education gives people the tools they need for a better life. 
 
9. Compound Reframes: Reframes a double bind – Don’t work: if you’re successful you’ll 
never see your kids, if you fail you won’t feed them… I WILL work: if I succeed I’ll feed 
them, if I fail I’ll see a lot of them! 
 
10. Natural Consequence: Expose the flaw by showing the natural consequences – if you fire 
him for causing the problem, will you promote me for fixing it? 
 
11. The Secret Motive: Suggest a secret motive for the action – I’m only beating you to build 
your character! 
 
12. The True Motive: find the true motive behind an action – he needed the money, of 
course he’d steal! 
 
13. Truth Is Stranger Than Fiction: The story is too strange to be made up – this all fits a little 
too neatly, don’t you think? 
 
14. The Counterexample: Refute the logic with a counterexample – he says he loves cats, so 
why doesn’t he own any?? 
 
15. The Classic Reframe: Change the meaning of an action by giving more information – he 
didn’t push her to hurt her, he pushed her away to save her from the poisonous snake! 
 
16. Cause – Effect: If you have a cause present, you can infer the effect – I only drink when I 
am stressed – and I was NOT stressed! 
 
17. The Ascribed Motive: Because X behaves like Y, he must have the same motive – only 
decent people donate to charities – and Steve has given millions! 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
Session 2: The 7 Emotions Of Persuasion Masters 
 
 
The key to persuasion is Emotions. Negative emotions are just as powerful – often more 
powerful – in motivating an action as the positive ones. When you use negative emotions you 
must be very careful to use them ethically. Some of the negative emotions are introduced here 
so you can protect yourself from them rather than to use them outright. 
 
All Emotions Are Rational 
 
People think that emotions are all irrational. This is not true. All emotions are designed to 
achieve very rational ends. When you know what the structure & purpose of each emotion is, 
you gain the power to influence them for the good. 
 
Remember: 
 
• All Emotions have a purpose and an internal logic 
• When the internal logic is activated, you trigger the emotions 
• Its appropriate to trigger emotions if it fits the outcome in a benevolent way 
 
The 5 Keys To Using Emotions Are; 
 
1. Know the positive purpose of each emotion 
2. Know the conditions that trigger the emotion 
3. Use the facts from the context plus the Pseudo-logic (from session 1) to weave the vessel 
into which the emotions will pour 
4. Use action to release the build up of emotions 
5. Remember to transform negative emotions at the end – do not leave them in the dark 
place!! 
 
We will focus on finding the purpose and conditions for building the emotions, as well as on 
how to release the emotional pressure after they have done their job. 
 
The 4 Emotions Of The Apocalypse 
 
These are the 4 most destructive emotions – the real dark side of humanity. They consist of: 
Fear, Anger, Hate and Guilt. 
 
However, these emotions are misunderstood. When you understand their true purpose, you will 
have the power to use them as a force for good, as well as to release people from the emotional 
prisons they can end up in! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10 
Fear 
 
The Purpose Of Fear 
Fear is designed to protect us from harm – either physical (e.g. a tiger bite) or emotional (e.g. 
losing social standing in the tribe.) 
 
Conditions That Trigger Fear 
Fear arises whenever we anticipate harm in some way. It therefore: 
 
• is always future oriented 
• requires that the event is likely to happen 
• the more likely it is the greater the fear 
• if it happened to others like us – or better than us – then its more likely to happen to us 
• the closer in time the event is, the greater the fear 
• the unknown intensifies fear, we do not know: when it will strike, how intense it will be 
or how long it will last (it could even be permanent – e.g. death) 
• requires that you have HOPE that you can escape from the anticipated harm 
 
If you have NO HOPE of escape (and that is accepted as a fact), you will not trigger fear! 
 
The Consequences Of Fear 
Fear motivates us to Fight, Flee or Freeze (this last one is often forgotten, but is the most likely 
initial response!) 
 
How To Use Fear 
Use fear to motivate action (like self-protection – i.e. fight the problem), change (like moving 
house – i.e. flee the problem) or to inhibit a response (like shooting your mouth off – i.e. 
freezing the problem.) 
 
How To Dissolve Fear 
 
• Physical motion releases the biochemistry of fear. That’s why sports have a calming 
influence. 
• Being rooted in the NOW prevents mental projection into the future. If you’re not in the 
future, you cannot project bad things – so no negative anticipation! 
• Reverse expectations about the future – instead of expecting bad things, allow them to 
expect good. 
• Personal History: having successfully made it through similar situations will make it less 
frightening in future – because you KNOW you can handle it. 
• Aspiration – people will overcome their fears when something big enough is at stake. 
This is traditionally known as “courage” or “heroism” (i.e. extreme courage.) 
• Make it inevitable – when it is genuinely accepted as inevitable and the person no longer 
struggles with “their fate”, fear will vanish. 
 
I must not fear, fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little death that brings total obliteration. I will 
face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past I will 
turn the inner eye to see its path. Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will 
remain. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11 
Anger 
 
The Purpose Of Anger 
Anger gives someone the drive to repel some kind of invasion. Typically it will a boundary that 
has been crossed or an attack on the person’s self esteem (the person feels diminished.) 
 
Conditions That Trigger Anger 
 
• Contempt – you’re needs are unimportant, YOU are unimportant – expressed through 
behaviours like taking people for granted or using them like a doormat. 
• Spite – you don’t deserve this benefit, so I’ll stop you from getting it! – someone goes out 
of their way to block you in some way. 
• Insolence – I am better than you (hence you are worth less!) – usually expressed in 
critique, defamation, gossip etc. 
• Betrayal – you should have protected/helped me but you failed – this often comes in the 
form of a Failed Duty Of Care e.g. a parent failing a child, a doctor misdiagnosing a 
patient, a lawyer misrepresenting a client. 
• Simple Shock, when something bad happens unexpectedly it can trigger anger as a 
defence mechanism. 
• Indirect Attacks – your project/family/thing you value is no good – this is often taken 
personally and will trigger anger. 
• Public Humiliation, when people you admire (or whose admiration you want) or people 
that you are in conflict with see you shamed, it will make things worse. 
 
The Consequences Of Anger 
Anger induces a feeling of strength driven by the desire to “make things right.” It will often 
override conflicting emotions like fear or guilt. 
 
How To Use Anger 
Use anger to motivate action that will re-establish the balance. It is particularly useful to 
temporarily elevate a person above their own insecurities and perceived limitations.  
 
Be careful though that people do not get “addicted” to anger as a means of feeling better about 
themselves or to motivate action in general! 
 
WARNING: do NOT try and stir the anger of people with extremely low self esteem. They may 
end up adopting the criticism, contempt etc. as further proof of their worthlessness! 
 
How To Dissolve Anger 
 
• Involuntary Action – Anger usually confronts a purposeful invasion of a boundary or self 
esteem. If the action can be shown to have been involuntary – i.e. its NOT PERSONAL – 
then the anger will tend to drain away. 
• Balance – when the injury has been redressed, the purpose of the anger vanishes. An 
apology is a ritual lower of status by the person who caused the anger as a way of re-
establish the relative balance of self-worth. Other ways of doing this is to humble 
ourselves and show regret. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
12 
• Forgiveness – this is the BIG CHEESE of anger management. Forgiveness does NOT mean 
you love the other person or accept/validate their behaviour. It’s a mental and emotional 
letting go of the situation as no longer important. 
 
Redirecting Anger 
 
Anger can also be channelled away from destructive actions by: 
 
1. Offering a scapegoat – once it has absorbed the energy of the anger, there is less (or 
none) left to direct at the original target. E.g. Governments have often used war as a way 
of refocusing a nation’s anger away from themselves and onto an “external enemy.” 
 
2. Suffering – when the person causing the anger suffers, it is accepted as symbolic 
punishment and the anger can subside. E.g. Anger towards China before the 2008 
Olympics dissolved after thousands of Chinese lives were lost in a tragic earthquake. 
 
Hate 
 
Hate is very hard to deal with as it is not just a state (or a pure emotion), it is a mixture of an 
attitude (prejudice) with a state (aversion.) 
 
N.B. Do NOT induce hate, it is an unstable emotion. If you come across hate, you can use the 
following insights to HIJACK it, but avoid actually inducing it on purpose! 
 
The Purpose Of Hate 
Hate seeks the complete destruction of the object of hate. By destruction I mean to include a 
functional destruction – e.g. destroying someone’s career instead of murder! 
 
So the purpose of hate is to PROTECT the person by removing a persistent threat! 
 
Conditions That Trigger Hate 
 
Hatred can be “inherited” – i.e. learned from an authority figure (like a parent or mentor.) Some 
people merely pick up the prejudice element, others adopt the full blown aversion + prejudice 
mix. 
 
Hate is induced when: 
 
1. Pain or harm of some kind is perceived 
2. The pain/harm repeats over time 
 
This causes a massive aversion coupled with the irrational prejudice to destroy the source of 
pain/harm. 
 
Hatred can be triggered by constant experiences of fear, anger, physical pain, loss, 
disappointments etc. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
13 
Hate can generalise from an individual case to a class (e.g. racism) and can be polarised from an 
extreme – e.g. strong attraction, coupled with rejection or betrayal can polarise to hatred. 
 
Repeated attacks on friends, family, personal projects or values will cause anger – which can 
fester into hatred over time. 
 
The Consequences Of Hate 
Hate seeks to destroy the perceived source of the perceived pain/harm. Remember of course that 
this destruction could be a functional destruction (e.g. destroying TVs when you hate the 
messages being broadcast, keeping someone in prison or ruining someone’s political career.) 
 
How To Use Hate 
Avoid inducing hate on purpose, it has a way of getting out of control. If you do encounter 
hatred, you could hijack it and initially turn it into a functional destruction. Later, to the extent 
that it is appropriate or necessary, you can pull the plug on hatred by dissolving the underlying 
pain trigger that was being stimulated – e.g. anger or fear. 
 
How To Dissolve Hate 
The destruction of the perceived source of pain will end the hatred behaviour. Often it is 
enough to have a functional destruction, but not always. The hatred has not been eradicated, it 
merely is not stimulated anymore. Sometimes this can lead to a spontaneous healing over time – 
but that is by no means certain. 
 
To dissolve hate, you really need to dissolve the underlying condition – i.e. the fear, anger, pain, 
injustice, inadequacy, loss etc. that is hurting the person. 
 
It really helps to “re-humanise” the object of hate. E.g. if it is an institution, recognising that 
good people work within it could be enough. If dealing with hatred against a person or group, 
then a simultaneous action dissolving the pain and re-humanising the people concerned may be 
necessary. 
 
Forgiveness is as much a part of the solution to Hatred as it is with Anger. Of course, motivating 
the forgiveness can be a very difficult task – the other six of the 7 Emotions Of Persuasion 
Masters will probably have to be used in some combination to break the grip of that hatred can 
get on a person. 
 
For example: you could use a combination of GUILT & ADMIRATION (see below for both of 
these) to motivate the person to “become a better person” and overcome a hate-fuelled 
prejudice like racism etc. 
 
Finally: you can also use DISTRACTION as a form of functionally destroying the object of 
hatred. If the stimulus is removed, the person will not perceive the hatred (unless he introduces 
the stimulus himself by thinking about it!) This is at best a calming tactic – perhaps as a first step 
towards a genuine resolution. 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
14 
Guilt 
 
Guilt is closely related to shame. They are so closely linked that often you can assume one 
where the other is present.  
 
The Purpose Of Guilt 
Guilt is designed to keep the person to a moral/ethical standard. So it seeks to prevent future 
errors of judgement and to make amends for past mistakes. 
 
Conditions That Trigger Guilt 
You need to have: 
 
1. An accepted standard of behaviour. This can be either 
• An internal standard – I let myself down, OR 
• An externally imposed standard – You let us down! 
2. A behaviour that falls below that standard 
3. Some kind of harm/damage has been caused 
 
If one of these is missing, it is unlikely that either Guilt or Shame will be evoked.  The “damage” 
needed to fulfil condition 3 does not have to be “real.” E.g. it could be something like treating 
someone (like Joe) unfairly. The harm is the implied status attack (you are worth less than the 
others) even if the person (i.e. Joe) does not have a clue that it happened! 
 
Guilt is made worse when there are witnesses. The more important the witnesses are, the greater 
the Guilt & Shame that follow! 
 
The Consequences Of Guilt 
Guilt creates a negative feeling and a temporarily lowered sense of self esteem both of which 
are painful. The thought of such punishment is what guides many people’s moral compass – i.e. 
I can’t do that or I’d feel awful! 
 
To escape the pain the person needs to make amends for his actions. The trouble is not all 
actions can be corrected (e.g. if the other person has since died.) This can leave someone with a 
lifelong feeling of guilt! 
 
How To Use Guilt 
Guilt is the most common “natural” persuasion tactic used in personal relationships. Guilt is 
useful to: 
• Get leverage to motivate better future behaviour 
• Get leverage to right a wrong 
 
How To Dissolve Guilt 
Guilt is dissolved in one of two ways (usually they are combined): 
 
1. Make amends – when an apology or reparation are not possible, a symbolic cleansing 
can work (e.g. going to confession.) 
2. Taking the lesson to heart will release the need for the emotion to keep you on track. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
15 
The 3 Musketeers Of Virtue 
 
We will need some positive emotions to counterbalance the use of the more negative 
counterbalance the 4 Emotions Of The Apocalypse. I like to call these the 3 Musketeers Of 
Virtue. They are: Pity, Kindness and Admiration. 
 
You will note that we don’t include love – when love can easily be evoked, most people have 
an intuitive grasp of how to do this already. When it is hard to evoke, it is easier to use the 3 
Musketeers! 
 
Pity  
 
The Purpose Of Pity 
Pity motivates us to help someone that is in need. The hidden purpose is the hope that someone 
would help us if we ever got into the same jam! 
 
Conditions That Trigger Pity 
• Pity is triggered by seeing someone suffer when they do not deserve it! 
 
• The more personal the connection is (they look like you, they come from the same 
neighbourhood, family, profession, school, class, country etc.) the more likely it will 
trigger pity. 
 
• The person must suffer in a way that we are afraid of ourselves at some level (it doesn’t 
need to be exactly the same, just structurally the same: e.g. the wealthy banker who fears 
to lose his money helps out his cousin with a gambling debt!) 
 
• You have to be better off than the person to be pitied! 
 
Consequence & How To Use Pity 
Pity moves people to help someone in need. So apply it when the context singles a person or a 
group out as suffering without justification. Extreme pity manifests as the “White Knight 
Syndrome” someone who wants to come to the rescue of the poor, meek or oppressed. 
 
How Pity Dissolves 
When the conditions evaporate so does pity. People may still be moved to act – but then other 
emotions are activated (usually either Kindness or Admiration.) So: 
 
• When a person deserves to suffer- e.g. a gangster is convicted for tax evasion 
• If the person dissociates from the victim – i.e. they are NOT like me at all! 
• When there is no “secret fear” that it could happen to them – e.g. if they have 
successfully overcome the problem, and know they can handle it anytime 
• When the line is crossed and the “victim” demands too much (triggering Anger) 
• When we are worse off than the “victim” 
 
Then pity tends to dissolve. 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
16 
Kindness 
 
The Purpose Of Kindness 
Kindness is about as altruistic as you can get. It motivates an act for no apparent reward. 
However kindness is the social glue that allows relationships to form (through a kind of mutual 
indebtedness), so look out for hidden rewards. 
 
Conditions That Trigger Kindness 
It is hard to give specific conditions that motivate Kindness as these tend to be hidden rewards 
that are bound up in the action. Here are some of these hidden rewards: 
 
• Admiration – society admires the Kind, so people are motivated to kindness to “be a 
better person” like someone they admire (the reward is intrinsic.)  
• Gratitude – we tend to expect gratitude from the person we assist. This is feedback that 
the other acknowledges their indebtedness, i.e. that a social bond has formed. 
• Affection – much like gratitude, the social bond, and the pay-off for a kindness, might 
simply be to increase affection between the people involved. 
• Status – like Admiration, people may want to BE admired, so the kindness is designed to 
increase their social standing – i.e. so they are perceived as being a better person (the 
reward is extrinsic.) N.B. if this is seen as a ruse, social groups may punish the Arrogance! 
 
Consequences & How To Use Kindness 
 
• Kindness moves people to assist someone in need, or merely to improve their condition 
(e.g. offering a child sweets, paying a stranger a compliment or helping someone gather 
fallen books.) 
• The payoff is how people will feel about themselves when they have done the kindness – 
self esteem rises, as they now belong in the category of people they admire. 
• Kindness is one of the best ways to heal interpersonal conflict and emotional wounds! 
 
How Kindness Dissolves 
Kindness tends to dissolve when the hidden payoff is absent or denied! So: 
 
• When a favour goes unrecognised or unacknowledged, people can assume a personal 
slight and trigger Anger. 
 
An exception to this is if special circumstances intervene – e.g. you help a child with 
special needs (e.g. autism) and they don’t acknowledge your presence. The payoff is now 
Admiration rather than forming a closer social bond! 
 
• If someone violates the implied debt, triggering Anger, it is unlikely the kindness will 
continue or be repeated. 
 
• If the kindness was motivated by the desire to raise their status, AND the social group 
perceives this, it could be construed as arrogance and be punished by lowering the 
person’s status (through criticism or gossip.) It is unlikely to continue without the hidden 
payoff. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
17 
Admiration 
 
The Purpose Of Admiration 
By Admiration I do NOT mean the desire to be admired (though that may come into it), but a 
desire to be more like a role model. Admiration motivates a person to improve themselves.  
 
Conditions That Trigger Admiration 
 
• A quality we want/value is perceived in a role model 
• A role model (someone we admire) also consistently exhibits a quality/value that we may 
not have valued – this is more powerful when society singles this new value out as being 
special 
• The person would like to see more of that quality in their role model – i.e. there are no 
dirty goals, like envy or greed contaminating the issue 
• The person we seek to influence already has this value inside them 
• The person adopts this value subsequently (e.g. because a role model values it) 
 
Consequences & How To Use Admiration 
You can use Admiration to: 
 
• Motivate someone to improve or grow as a person 
• Motivate them to emulate a certain behaviour (e.g. kindness) 
• Motivate someone to face their dark side (e.g. face a fear) 
 
How Admiration Dissolves 
Admiration ceases when: 
 
• When perceive the quality we admire to be stronger/more developed in us than in the 
role model (solution: switch role models!) 
• When the quality ceases to be something we value (e.g. the admiration of a certain social 
group, like the “cool kids” at school) 
• When a personal insecurity is triggered, it can lead to a dirty goal and polarise 
admiration to envy or contempt 
• When the model stops exhibiting the quality we value – e.g. the Wizard in the Wizard of 
Oz, or the Minister caught in flagrante delicto, hey lose their moral authority 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
18 
Session 3: How To Use Emotions & Pseudo-Logic Persuasively 
 
Here are 11 good Frames that combine the power of Emotions & Pseudo-Logic for persuasion 
 
1. 
Threats 
 
This is a classic strategy for inducing fear. Notice that threats do not have to be of violence – 
you can threaten the loss of something (bed without supper) and even project the source of the 
threat outside yourself (if you don’t study the school will kick you out) 
 
Fear of loss is a classic sales strategy employing threats. 
 
 
2. 
Sentiment 
 
This combines the 3 Musketeers Of Virtue into one very compelling argument. It is summarised 
by the Hollywood-fed notion that we should “follow your heart not your head.” There are times 
when this will lead to better consequences, there are times when it is actually bad advice (e.g. 
going back to a bad relationship with your drug-addicted boyfriend…!) 
 
 
3. 
Moderation 
 
This disguises your frame in something that looks reasonable. It takes advantage of the idea that 
the middle path is always best. The problem is the middle is defined by the edges – so changes 
the edges and the middle moves! 
 
This pattern also appeals to people’s desire not to rock the boat or to have a calm and easy life – 
as witnessed when the British allowed Hitler to invade Checkoslovakia in 1938. 
 
 
4. 
Hot Words 
 
This is familiar territory for us. Special words are loaded to skew the meaning towards one 
emotional response or another. E.g. baby, mother, terrorist, thug, saint etc. 
 
You can make a very persuasive point by just loading up an argument with these words to make 
your point. When it is used to destroy or harm this is called a hypnotic curse. It happens 
accidentally all the time (you are useless at maths boy!) When it is used to empower, it is called 
a hypnotic benediction (that is an amazing piece of art you created there!) 
 
A good hypnotic benediction will seem like (and be accepted as) a passionate speech. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
19 
5. 
Virtue In Abundance 
 
This uses the cultural idea that rich & successful people know more about life, success, quality 
etc than the average person. It is typically used to add persuasive power through association (as 
used by the President of the USA) 
 
6. 
Virtue In Poverty 
 
Ironically the exact opposite cultural stereotype also exists. If someone is very poor, the 
Rousseau-like Noble Savage archetype can be used to show a special wisdom untainted by 
modern concepts like greed or social standing (of course this ignores the fact that conditions like 
greed and desire for social status are human conditions and are as likely to arise in a tropical 
paradise as in the middle of Broadway!) 
 
 
7. 
The Emperor’s New Frame 
 
This frame shames people into not disagreeing with the idea. It is introduced by showing how 
someone we look down on (in terms of social status, intellect etc.) recognises the “obviousness” 
of how our cause, implying that only someone seriously defective might disagree, challenge or 
question the idea. Of course if you happen to question the idea, it automatically singles you out 
as the village idiot! 
 
This is a form of intellectual bullying! 
 
 
8. 
Personal Attacks 
 
Personal attacks seek to destroy the validity of an idea by disgracing the source of the idea. It is 
seen in politics when a candidate is accused of having a sleazy past, even when that past has 
nothing to do with the ideas he’s proposing in the present. E.g. someone that had an extra-
marital affair might still very capably create and effective economic policy. 
 
The reverse is also true. You can appeal to a value that a person wants to identify with, so that if 
they refuse your request it implies that they have failed to live up to their own standards (i.e. 
uses the threat of guilt). This is easy to recognise when people introduce ideas like “As a good 
Christian you’ll agree… as an ethical doctor you will no doubt…” 
 
 
9. 
Bad Mouth Frame 
 
Bad Mouthing tries to take the heat of one idea that is a bit shaky by showing how all the other 
options are just as shaky. It basically seeks to tear down the opposition so that your idea looks 
better by comparison. It is very effective (though a bit underhanded) because people make 
choices through comparison – and very rarely to people make the effort to compare things with 
an absolute value as a measuring stick. 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
20 
10. 
Abusive Analogies 
 
These are the equivalent of Personal Attacks – and in fact can be used as such. Essentially you 
use an analogy to ridicule an idea OR the person making it. The analogy is abusive as it is only 
designed to embarrass or ridicule, it is not offered as a way of increasing understanding 
(Analogies are only valid in arguments if they help increase your understanding of an unfamiliar 
point or idea.) 
 
 
11. 
The Neo-Nazi Thought Police 
 
This is a terribly abusive, and very underhand tactic. It is used often by special interest groups in 
order to load their arguments and make punish resistance to their ideas. Some very benevolent 
ideas have been marred this way (socialism, feminism, political correctness etc.) 
 
To engage the Neo-Nazi Thought Police, suggest that the idea you want to destroy is the kind of 
thing that only a taboo social group would engage in. This poisons the whole idea. In order to 
even try an evaluate it, you risk the stigma of becoming a villain. Taboo social groups include: 
 
• The Nazis 
• Sex Crimes (Child Abuse, Rape etc.) 
• Turncoats (unpatriotic behaviour) 
 
Of course the reverse of this is the “Guru Thought Police” where a prominent Guru (Jesus, The 
Dalai Lama, Ghandi) is shown to accept your idea uncritically – hence your audience is not 
allowed to criticise it! 
 
The Erickson Protocol 
 
To combine all the approaches we have covered in this masterclass, consider the simple 
structure that was applied by another master of Conversational Hypnosis – Milton Erickson, MD. 
Erickson could get people to do the most bizarre things, and nobody knew how he was doing it. 
You now have the secrets that will allow you to understand and repeat his amazing successes. 
Here is an outline of what a typical session might look like for Erickson: 
 
1. The client comes in and complains about the problem 
2. Erickson listens intently and makes a detailed map of all the pain spots (things that cause 
fear, anger, hatred, guilt – or even frustration) 
3. Erickson then repeats ALL the pain spots AT LENGTH. The person is now squirming with 
negative emotional energy – they are also deep in trance, as all the conditions of ABS 
have been met! 
4. Erickson promises a resolution IF they follow doctors orders. He makes them promise to 
follow his treatment exactly as outlined, before they hear what it is. When they promise, 
conditions are perfect for a post hypnotic suggestion 
5. Erickson outlines, again in detail, a bizarre (and often unpleasant) behaviour that the 
person has to engage in. It now has the binding force of a suggestion backed by massive 
emotional drives, so the person does it – eventually the behaviour tips them over a 
threshold that resolves the old problem 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© (under license) Streethypnosis Publishing, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
21 
 
Notice how you can use the SAME structure to get any behaviour you want – not just in a 
therapeutic setting: 
 
1. Get a context – e.g. by listening to the person to find out what they want, need or desire. 
2. Find out where their limits are (what do the value, what do they fear, where are their 
personal boundaries etc) 
3. Chose the primary emotion and support emotions that will be most likely to drive the 
behaviour for this person 
4. Construct a pseudo-logical case to show that the conditions for your primary (and 
support) emotions exist 
5. Watch the emotions well up – then intensify it with even more pseudo-logic to show the 
situation is worse (or better) than they even realise 
6. When they are ready to pop attach a behaviour by: 
• Concluding that it’s the only “rational” response to the situation (e.g. from 
anger) 
• Showing it to be a release (e.g. from fear or guilt) 
• Demonstrating how it will augment the positive purpose (e.g. of Admiration or 
Pity) 
 
 
 
 
 

