For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
Discover The Secret Hypnotic Art 
Of Hiding Commands Within 
Parallel Realities So Your 
Conversations & Ideas Quickly 
Change People Forever 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
Discover The Secret Hypnotic Art Of Hiding Commands 
Within Parallel Realities So Your Conversations & Ideas 
Quickly Change People Forever. 
 
Session 1: How To Really Use Embedded Commands 
 
The History Of Embedded Commands  
 
Milton Erickson discovered early in his career that he could hide suggestions inside what 
otherwise seemed ordinary conversations. The two classis examples are the Schizophrenic 
Dictation and Tomato Plant Induction. 
 
The Schizophrenic Dictation 
 
Erickson gave a dictation of random sounding words to a secretary with a headache. He hid 
suggestions for pain relief in the “random” wordlist. The secretary quickly recovered. 
 
Tomato Plant Induction 
 
Erickson was asked to work with a cancer patient that was resistant to the idea of hypnosis. He 
used a loose metaphor about a growing tomato plant and came back to simple therapeutic ideas 
like “feel comfort… feel hope…” The patient quickly overcame his pain and continued pain-free 
for some time. 
 
Neuroscience 
 
There are a number of studies that suggest possible mechanisms for Embedded Commands. One 
is preconscious learning – when the unconscious detects subtle patterns long before the 
conscious mind does AND responds to them. 
 
Another is unconscious priming, where people’s unconscious minds are influenced to give a 
certain response within a short period after the priming. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
How to Use An Embedded Command 
 
To use embedded commands simply: 
 
1. Decide on a SIMPLE hypnotic idea or suggestion: e.g. feel comfort. 
2. Use a simple and repeatable pattern to distinguish the phrase “feel comfort.” The simplest 
way to do this is simply… PAUSE… before and after the hypnotic phrase. 
3. Find an alternative context in which you can hide your command. 
4. Make sure that the context is engaging enough to prevent critical analysis of the subtext 
of the message. Use the hypnotic gaze to create a hypnotic context if necessary. 
5. Repeat the hypnotic phrase and similar alternatives (to trigger the associations) multiple 
times. 
 
A simple exercise is to use your power words and hypnotic themes and this time emphasise the 
suggestion to give the unconscious mind a pattern to detect.  
 
Useful Vehicles For Hiding Embedded Commands 
 
You can use the following vehicles to hide embedded commands in: 
 
• Regular stories & anecdotes 
• Hypnotic metaphors  
• Parallel Realities 
• Extended Quotes 
• Simple Monologue 
• Hypnotic Lectures 
 
Alternative Ways To Present Embedded Commands 
 
• Pauses 
• Tonality (shift to a softer hypnotic tone for the commands) 
• Iconic gestures 
• Subtle gestures (eye movement, “fidgeting” etc) 
 
Remember that for some people we must be more obvious for others more subtle. Some 
unconscious minds may miss a pattern that is too subtle. If in doubt you can become more 
“obvious” about what you are doing. 
 
The Big Questions On Embedded Commands 
 
How Long Do They Work? – embedded commands work like regular suggestions and the usual 
rules apply. Some last longer than others and its impossible to predict how long a suggestion 
will remain active ahead of time. 
 
What Suggestions Should I Use? – keep the suggestions simple. You can use the power loop 
structure to give a sequence of suggestions in a certain order. Of course you need to repeat that 
loop as many times as you would repeat regular simple suggestions. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
Can You Do The Same Things With Embedded Commands As With Regular Suggestions? – Yes 
you can. 
 
What Are the Biggest Mistakes People Make With Embedded Commands? – the most common 
mistakes are: 
 
• Being too obvious about what you are doing. If the conscious mind discovers the 
pattern, the commands are no longer hidden and only work as regular suggestions. 
• Too Few Repetitions. Embedded Commands work through repetition. If you present just 
one suggestion and don’t follow it up, it may not “take.” 
• Psychologically Unsound. People often try to ask for things from the unconscious that it 
would normally protect, without offering any motivation for the unconscious mind to 
follow the suggestions. “Give Me Money” would be more likely to work if you had some 
leverage in the suggestions beforehand. 
• Fighting An Unconscious Need. A specific example of psychologically unsound 
suggestions are those that actually conflict with a belief or a need that already pre-exists. 
You could not, for example, change someone’s sexuality through suggestion. 
 
Exercises: 
 
• Language Flow (power words + Embedded Commands) 
• Simple metaphors: use them to present your suggestions 
• Give direct advice, then start to cloak it in something (as the comfort suggestions were 
cloaked by the Tomato Plant Induction) 
• Switch to your hypnotic voice during stories and other parallel realities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
Session 2: How To Develop Parallel Realities 
 
A Practical Guide To Creating Parallel Realities 
 
The easiest way to create the hypnotic context for embedded commands to work is to hold a 
monologue. A story is an example of this. When you tell a story, other people know to listen 
without interrupting. 
 
Next you will want a simple process, or power loop, to move people through a sequence that 
will achieve the outcome you have in mind. A simple sequence is the “Problem -> Outcome” 
loop. The problem itself often will imply what the solution should be. 
 
Hypnotic Stories As Special Kinds Of Parallel Realities 
 
This is the main power-loop in Erickson’s Boiler Factory: 
 
1. General Curiosity: use your mind more fully, something to learn etc. 
2. The induction: going inside – v – the outside 
3. Connection With The Unconscious: the workers and meeting the foreman 
4. Inner Work: may I stay the night?, inner rhythm; move noise outside; sleep peacefully 
5. Emerging From Trance 
6. Transformation: inner communications 
 
Training Simple Hypnotic Stories 
 
This is a simple way to train yourself to tell stories with embedded suggestions inside them. It is 
the storytelling equivalent of the using the power words. 
 
Decide on your hypnotic themes and suggestions, like relaxing & feeling comfort. Now find a 
simple experience that is related to the hypnotic theme, like sailing. 
 
Now talk about the event (sailing) and let the hypnotic themes (comfort & relaxation) come 
through as often as possible. 
 
Practice this out loud at first. In time you want to practice this with a real person so that your 
brain goes into a higher gear whilst inventing this simple story. 
 
Start with simple, banal stories to embed commands. For example: A snail crossing a courtyard 
can be a simple parallel reality for achievement and success. Often, without trying, these 
“banal” stories end up becoming quite interesting when you start to think about inserting 
embedded commands. 
 
To make it more sophisticated go through more sophisticated “Problem -> Solution” loops. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
How To Create Power Loops  
 
A Power Loop is a hypnotic machine of sorts that allows you to achieve your outcomes.  A 
power loop is made up of many little “mini-loops” that takes someone through a problem 
solving cycle in a step by step sequence. The Erickson Boiler Plate Factory story, it moves from 
curiosity to an induction, to connecting in with the unconscious, to doing some inner work and 
ending with an “awakening” together with a transformation. 
 
You can start doing this for any context in which you want to use embedded suggestions. As an 
example: creating a master hypnotist might require a certain sequence, like: 
 
1. Recognise its time to change 
2. Have a goal to head towards 
3. Gather experience, practice, learn and repeat 
4. Rest periods for integration and health 
5. Reaching the destination 
 
You can use any context, like Geese flying South for the winter. Here are some of the 
suggestions that might come of this: 
 
1. Recognise its time to change: its time for a change, its time to move on 
2. Have a goal to head towards: prepare for the journey, build reserves, have a compass, 
know where you want to go, know how to navigate 
3. Gather experience, practice, learn and repeat: make the journey, move on, begin that 
journey, start moving 
4. Rest periods for integration and health: careful preparation, rest in the evenings, keep 
moving, plenty of ways to nourish yourself,   
5. Reaching the destination: know you’ve made it, reach it, feeling stronger etc. 
 
The story develops more depth as you start to implant suggestions and speak with hypnotic 
intent. 
 
Natural Power Loops 
 
You can create parallel realities and loops using natural experiences that people have every day 
anyway. So you can use a photo-album as a nice metaphor for age regression, and of course as 
a vehicle for presenting the embedded suggestions. 
 
Now we have natural associations to that experience (i.e. the photo-album in our example) 
which are in harmony with our hypnotic goal (regression) and so the suggestions fit into an 
enhanced context. 
 
Also notice how you can take the “storyness” out of the story and focus more on the content. 
 
Here is another example of Natural Power Loops. Making good decisions requires good states 
(the Access State Principle.) We can shift through a sequence of states inside of a context like a 
baby learning to walk. This context naturally allows an ASP state chain to be presented: Feeling 
bad -> Recognising the need for change-> Change state -> Resolution. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
Exercise: Now take this idea and apply it to a common problem – eg Someone that needs help 
with exam nerves. 
 
Here is an example of how you might use Parallel Realities to resolve this issue: 
 
• Fear 
• Go Inside 
• Find resources (confidence, calmness etc) 
• Make correct choices instinctively  
• Succeed 
 
Here are some simple stories that naturally allow these themes to be presented: 
 
1. A fireman rescuing someone from a burning building 
2. Someone lost in the jungle relying on his survival training 
3. A ship captain who breaks down on high seas 
4. The sports team facing an important match 
 
To help you come up with your own scenarios, play the Forest Gump Game: 
 
1. Take any idea (eg Life) and any regular context, situation or thing (a box of chocolates) 
2. Find a connection: life is like a box of chocolates… 
3. Complete the idea without any thought: you never know what you’re going to get! 
 
The Philosophical Induction (Hypnotic Monologue) 
 
The Philosophical Induction is the same essential thing as the loose stories that we have been 
using so far as vehicles for embedded commands. Only this time instead of telling a story we 
present a description or a reasoned, logical argument as the vehicle for offering our embedded 
commands. 
 
So a philosopher might speak in the following terms: 
 
“What is the experience of love? We have all had the good fortune to feel love sometime in the 
past. You can easily remember someone that loves you but what is it that you’re really 
experiencing when you feel love?” 
 
So you can use embedded commands as easily when you present an idea (like meditation) as 
when you tell a story (eg the something that happened to a meditator.) You can do this for 
almost any idea or process: 
 
• Describing the mechanism of a watch 
• Describing the stoic philosophy 
• Reciting medical facts around health and relaxation 
• Describing Hedonism as a philosophical ideal 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Session 3: Your Ultimate Parallel Reality Demonstration 
 
How To Create A Hypnotic Monologue 
 
When I create new hypnotic monologues, I like to go through several phases to create my 
induction. 
 
Stage 1: Brainstorm Embedded Commands 
In this stage I get a piece of paper and I will brainstorm as many words and short phrases as I 
can think of to be used in the Hypnotic Monologue. Sometimes reading books on the subject, 
checking the internet or doing a “Deep Thought” style meditation can help you enrich that list. 
 
Stage 2: Develop The Power Loops 
Consider what kind of power loops you will need in order to install the state, idea or behaviour 
that you are aiming for. 
 
Stage 3: Plan Your Monologue 
Monologues tend to have structures, like any good speech or essay. So I like to plan out the 
major themes I will be using and the kinds of power loops that I will be able to embed within 
those themes. 
 
Stage 4: Rehearse 
I like to rehearse new Hypnotic Monologues so that I get the feel for them. You can do a mental 
rehearsal (make sure to include the audience you are speaking to so it becomes a trigger for your 
performance.) I also like to call a friend and talk about the idea overall, maybe dipping into the 
content from time to time as the spirit moves me. 
 
As I talk about the “speech” or “lecture” part of the monologue I naturally spot opportunities for 
inserting or emphasising embedded commands. I do this for a while until things hit a natural 
stride, a rhythm of talking. I also get a sense of the whole structure clicking inside me, so I know 
where to start, where to go next and how to end. 
 
Stage 5: The Performance 
Now you are ready to actually use the Hypnotic Monologue. The simplest way to begin is to 
recall how you FELT during the rehearsal when you got into your stride. The state will revivify 
the whole performance and you are good to go. Everything will flow naturally from this point. 
 
Hypnotic Monologue 1 – The Self Esteem Machine 
 
This monologue is designed to install the mindset and habits of self esteem in your audience. Of 
course, bear in mind that the performance of this is recorded so will move on from topic to topic 
in a regular sequence. In a real conversational setting I would spend more time on one aspect or 
another based on the person’s reaction. I have tried to demonstrate this by returning to certain 
themes several times during the monologue. 
 
Here is an example of how I went through the 5 Phases for creating a Hypnotic Monologue: 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
Stage 1: Brainstorm Embedded Commands 
Here is the list that I brainstormed. Please note that I did NOT use ALL these in my monologue, 
they are just potentials that I can call on during each performance to emphasise different 
nuances as necessary: 
 
Self Esteem is an enduring 
characteristic 
self regard, worth, respect 
self love 
integrity 
Hold in high esteem 
Think of it as important 
a valued accomplishment 
you value yourself 
know you're important 
quiet knowledge 
you're worth a lot 
you are priceless 
see yourself positively 
feel good about you 
feel good about how you see 
yourself 
feel good about what you do 
you are worth it 
you are worth being loved 
you're worth being accepted 
feel proud of yourself 
hold your head up high 
courage to try new things 
believe in yourself 
respect yourself 
others will respect you 
your safety is important 
your feelings are important 
your ideas are important 
your actions are important 
your health is important 
Good job 
Well done 
take good care 
feel loveable 
feel valuable 
feel proud of yourself 
notice good qualities 
let them grow 
boost self-esteem 
keep learning 
no need to succeed first time 
see yourself positively 
feel confident  
there's a lot more you can 
achieve 
gentle inner voice 
relax and feel good 
don't need to criticise 
anymore 
feel very good about yourself 
in times of trouble look inside 
find peace and comfort 
you can transform bad feelings 
after the rain the sun always 
comes 
people like you 
making friends is natural 
look for good things in them 
people see good in you 
people value you 
find good things in yourself 
trust your instincts 
keep you safe 
you look right 
make a list of things you're 
good at 
review it and feel good 
be gentle with yourself 
a kind inner voice 
listen to the kindness 
find kind people 
find things you did well 
relive your successes in 
dreams 
dream who you want to be 
become your dreams 
accept yourself as you are 
always room to grow 
objectively evaluate your 
actions 
re-evaluate the past from new 
perspective 
be more confident in your 
abilities 
expect a good future 
think positively 
talk confidently 
put others at ease 
make people feel at ease 
focus on your achievements 
learn from mistakes 
move on from mistakes 
focus on what you like about 
yourself 
find all the reasons why 
people like you 
keep learning new things 
keep improving yourself 
love others 
love yourself 
keep a smile on your face 
celebrate your successes 
be grateful  
appreciate what you have  
appreciate who you are & 
what you do 
develop optimism 
everything will work out 
question negative thoughts 
always remember to think 
positive thoughts to balance 
negative 
find things to be thankful for 
focus on the future 
let go of the past 
heal the past 
fill your mind with positive 
messages 
read positive stories 
develop happy endings 
daydream happy events 
find the good in others 
find the good in yourself 
love a lot 
laugh a lot 
smile a lot 
care enough to love yourself 

 
 
 
Stage 2: Develop The Power Loops 
The power loops I was focusing on were very simple: 
 
1. Feel good about yourself 
2. Find value in things 
3. Reframe experiences to find the good in them 
4. Go back to past and reframe it to something good 
5. Build positive memories by doing good things for others 
 
Stage 3: Plan Your Monologue 
I had 4 areas to cover: 
 
1. The definition 
2. How Self Esteem Develops Naturally 
3. How People Block Self Esteem 
4. How To Develop Self Esteem In Someone 
 
I focused most of the power loops in stage 4, though I did introduce them as themes earlier on.  
 
Stage 4: Rehearse 
This step was easy. I called a fellow hypnotist that is a professional coach and started a 
conversation about self esteem. The great thing is that in talking with him I got some great 
additional ideas I had not thought of before which ended up in the recording. 
 
Stage 5: The Performance 
Listen to the audio section to hear the whole thing in action. 
 
 
Hypnotic Monologue 2 – Meditation Power 
 
This monologue is interesting in that I disguised the Parallel Reality a little more by talking about 
a topic that is not directly related to the actual hypnotic theme. It is an example of using slightly 
more covert Parallel Realities.  
 
Here we are using Meditation as a cover topic to install Personal Power in the listeners. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11 
Stage 1: Brainstorm Embedded Commands 
 
concentration meditation 
Strong attention 
greater focus 
mindfullness 
focused mind 
completely focused 
single pointed attention 
special state of 
consciousness 
 
relaxed & calm 
peaceful mind 
inner peace 
inner bliss 
no effort/effortless 
calm mind 
complete equanimity 
serenity of mind 
 
you cannot/don't hear 
you cannot/don't feel 
you cannot/don't see 
you cannot/don't think 
 
in the now 
go beyond thoughts 
become the moment 
at one with the moment 
now is the moment of 
power 
everything is possible in 
the now 
ending the thought stream 
suspend logical thought 
end logical thought 
go with the flow 
 
observe yourself 
learn and grow 
develop insight 
improve your self 
inner guidance 
trust your inner wisdom 
self-awareness 
deep exploration 
 
mental discipline 
impossible to disturb 
indestructible mind 
strong powerful mind 
clear mindedness 
aware of being 
virtue, meditation & 
wisdom 
 
see the true nature of 
reality 
develop power 
inner power 
more powerful (awareness) 
more energy 
transform the mind 
natural action 
physical health  
prosperous & successful 
strong body strong mind 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stage 2: Develop The Power Loops 
 
The power loops were simple:  
 
1. Set the context 
2. Create a setting for trance 
3. Bridge suggestions 
4. Induce trance 
5. Develop the fuel for Personal Power (relaxed attention) 
6. Now is the moment of power 
7. Explore Deeper 
8. Develop an indestructible mind 
9. Bring the effects back outside 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
12 
Stage 3: Plan Your Monologue 
 
1. What Is Meditation 
An experience 
Focus your mind 
Go inside and explore 
Find power 
Real power is co-operative 
 
2. Types Of Meditation 
2 Types: Concentration & Introspective 
Concentration Meditation: develops the 
power of the mind 
Introspective uses the power of the mind for 
personal power 
 
3. The Experience Of Meditation -- What 
Does It Feel Like 
Everyone is different 
If you were to enter a meditation retreat you 
might experience 
 
4. The Meditation Retreat: 
Develop a clear calm focused mind 
Clear your mind 
Change your state 
Feel good 
 
5. The Meditation Retreat 1: The First 
Success 
Develop your concentration 
concentration meditation 
Strong attention 
greater focus 
mindfullness 
focused mind 
completely focused 
one pointed attention 
special state of consciousness 
 
relaxed & calm 
peaceful mind 
inner peace 
inner bliss 
no effort/effortless 
calm mind 
complete equanimity 
serenity of mind 
6. The Meditation Retreat 2: The Second 
Stage 
you cannot/don't hear 
you cannot/don't feel 
you cannot/don't see 
you cannot/don't think 
 
in the now 
go beyond thoughts 
become the moment 
at one with the moment 
now is the moment of power 
everything is possible in the now 
ending the thought stream 
suspend logical thought 
end logical thought 
go with the flow 
 
7. The Meditation Retreat 3: The Third 
Stage 
Feel energy inside 
Your personal power 
Deeper Realms 
The power intensifies 
every cell feels alive 
You can do anything 
 
observe yourself 
learn and grow 
develop insight 
improve your self 
inner guidance 
trust your inner wisdom 
self-awareness 
deep exploration 
go deeper 
look inside 
find inner wisdom/guide/voice 
Be conscious of your inner workings 
 
8. The Meditation Retreat 4: The Fourth 
Stage 
mental discipline 
impossible to disturb 
indestructible mind 
strong powerful mind 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
13 
clear mindedness 
aware of being 
virtue, meditation & wisdom 
 
Consciously unconscious 
Your whole mind working in unison 
Go beyond thoughts 
Be in the now 
 
9. Why Meditate - The Effects Of 
Meditation 
 
see the true nature of reality 
develop power 
inner power 
more powerful (awareness) 
more energy 
transform the mind 
natural action 
physical health  
prosperous & successful 
strong body strong mind 
Nothing to hinder you 
Life is easy 
Always in the flow 
 
You AWAKEN as if from a dream 
Everything seems clearer 
Everything feels more connected 
You are a part of a greater whole 
The universe is on your side 
Nothing upsets you 
Your mind is calm, focused and happy 
You walk through the world with power & 
grace 
 
 
 
Stage 4: Rehearse 
This stage was simple: I called a friend for a brief chat about the concepts and then continued 
with a quick mental rehearsal. 
 
Stage 5: The Performance 
Whilst the ideas and experiences where still fresh in my mind I performed the induction. For this 
sequence I kept my notes from Stage 3 handy – this was the first time I performed the whole 
sequence in one go. After a few performances it can be done totally off the cuff. 
 
 

