For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
Discover The Hypnotic Profiling 
Secrets That Will Let You Read 
People Like An Open Book 
Anytime, Anyplace & With 
Anyone. 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
Discover The Hypnotic Profiling Secrets That Will Let You 
Read People Like An Open Book, Anytime, Anyplace & With 
Anyone. 
 
Session 1: The Four Elements 
 
Hypnotic Profiling 
 
Hypnotic profiling is a tool to allow you to predict people’s behaviours and to understand them 
so well that everything you say to them can have the force of a hypnotic suggestion. 
 
Inside everyone’s mind there are certain filters. People react differently to the same things based 
on how they filter and organize information. This is nothing new to us as hypnotists. The 
purpose of this master class is to fine tune your awareness to start looking for certain useful 
patterns. 
 
Hypnotic profiles are ways of you developing the intuition about people until you seem to be as 
insightful to the lay person as a true master hypnotist should be. 
 
The Fatal Flaw In The Social Sciences. 
There is a fundamental flaw in the thinking of most social scientists – psychologists included. 
 
People feel that in order to make something a science, they need to create numerical values for 
abstract concepts, ie happiness, love, loyalty etc.  
 
The trouble is, these are not the kind of things you can put numbers to. When you do this 
people start often begin to confuse the analogy between something unquantifiable like “a bucket 
of love” as having a genuine measurable quality like a sum of money or a fleet of cars. 
 
When people do this they mistake the menu in a restaurant for the actual meal and may end up 
trying to ‘eat the menu.’  
 
We need to be careful to avoid this mistake when doing hypnotic profiling. We need to 
remember that profiles are merely rough guides to people, a means of training our intuitions to 
pay better attention. We cannot pidgeonhole people and set limits to them because it happens 
to match our theory! 
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
WARNING! – The Limits Of Profiling 
All profiles are context AND state dependant. People can be one way at work, and another way 
with their family or when socializing. The same is true of the person’s state – change your mood 
and your perceptions and behaviours will change. 
 
Therefore, the very first thing you must ask yourself when profiling is ‘what context are they in? 
 
So you will need to create a new profile with every new context you are in. 
 
Based on your profile you can make prediction about this person, and based on the reliability of 
these predictions you can improve and develop your profile. 
 
How To Make Profililing Easy 
When reading a person they are giving you so many signals, it is often hard to realize what to 
pay attention to. But there is a trick to percpetion. Our brain likes to make cotrasts and to look at 
things as polarities. 
 
So we begin profiling by chosing simple polarities in language or behaviour to look out for. This 
can be evolved over time as we gain more information from the person – especially when we 
start to observe them in different contexts. 
 
It is important to keep this feedback loop of observation and profiling constant, as people can 
and DO change. It should be our profiles that adjust to reality, we should not try and force 
people to conform to the boxes we have in our minds for them! 
 
The Two Key Things To Look Out For In Hypnotic Profiling 
There are two basic polarities that we look for in people. These will allow us to make some very 
accurate educated guesses as to how they will behave and what kind of language they will 
respond to! 
 
The First Polarity: Abstractly – v – Concrete Thinking 
 
A person who thinks concretely will usually have a lot to say, giving lots of details, facts, figures 
and refer to real world objects (like the house next door, or their postman, Jim as opposed to 
houses or postmen in general.)  
 
A person who thinks abstractly may speak less but be more pointed or purposeful in 
communication. An abstract thinker tends to use many generalisations (like houses or postmen 
in general as opposed to the house next door, or their postman, Jim) and nominalisations (like 
Love, Beauty and Power.) 
 
The Second Polarity: Left Brain – v – Right Brain 
 
It is common knowledge that different parts of the brain specialise in different tasks. The 
neocortex is a very important part of the  human brain which gives it its distinct look. As a very 
rough guide we can expect certain types of functions from each side of the brain.  
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
Please bear in mind that in ordinary human beings BOTH hemispheres are ALWAYS 
functioning, it is just a question of how much each side is fired up and how well they are 
coordinated together. 
 
As a rule of thumb it is thought that right brain is more spontaneous emotional, and left brain is 
more logical and analytical. So when making this distinctions, decide whether the person is 
more intuitive (they may use words like: I sense, I feel etc) or more logical (they might prefer 
phrases like: this leads to, based on XYZ etc) 
  
Be careful about making the distinction between left and right hemispheres too extreme. You 
can find many blends of both talents in people. So you can have logical thinkers that are artistic 
(a traditional “right brain” activity) like some composers or painters. Then you can have very 
intuitive people engaged in tradional “left brain” activities such as mathematics. 
 
The Four Elements 
When we look at all the possible combinations of the two basic polarities, we are left with four 
rough guides, four simple profiles that will already allow us to understand people better. 
 
To remember these four basic profiles more easily, I have associated each profile with one of the 
four elements. You will see that the element tends to match the “character” that profile suggests 
closely enough to make iteasy to remember: 
 
The Earth Profile  
These tend most towards Concrete & Left Brain styles of thinking. The concrete element keeps 
them rooted in the world and their methodical & logical left brain will churn through all the 
data that their senses are absorbing. This tends to make them more solid, plodding, concrete a 
stable, slow and methodical. 
 
The Fire Profile  
These tend towards Concrete & Right Brain styles of thinking. They tend to be rooted in the 
world and look for the joy of experience in the senses. The tend to live in the moment. 
 
The Air Profile  
These tend towards Abstract & Left Brain styles of thinking. They tend to be engaged more in the 
world of ideas than the world of the senses. Their left brain style makes them quite pragmatic yet 
their removal from the day to day world can seem somewhat distant. 
 
The Water Profile  
These tend towards Abstract & Right Brain styles of thinking. This tends to makes them more 
intuitive and seeking the deeper meaning behind things.  
 
Full Flexibility Thinking 
Remember, everyone is capable of all the activities that make up the four elements. Your mental 
state will predispose you to one particular quadrant at a time. When you learn to alter your 
state, you can gain the benefits of all profile types when you need them. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
It is as a rule true that people will develop one type more than others over time. This is probably 
just the result of them developping a comfort and familiarity with a particular way of thinking. 
Significant life changes or personal effort can result in large shifts in people’s profiles. 
 
 
The Earth Profile In Detail 
Lets imagine a fictitious extremely typical earth person: Earthy Edna. 
 
Edna will be quite a solid, reliable person. Her methodical way of working through things may 
seem slow and plodding to others, but it makes her very reliable and with an eye for detail. She 
works solidly, and is meticulous and logical in what she does. She is likey to be very detail 
orientated. 
 
The left brain is great at planning in a linear fashion. This means Edna will probably like to look 
to the future, and prepare for a “rainy day” in the here and now. 
 
She has a talent for logistics and administration as she has an eye for collecting facts, data and 
sensory information, and organising them in a logical way. Because of her logical and detail 
orientated nature, she likes everything to be nicely arranged and visually appealing.  
 
She’ll have a tendency to look backwards to learn about the future, and prefers specific events 
over abstract ideas. This would make her more of a conservative and tradition oriented person.  
 
The left brain likes linear systems and predictive rules and procedures. Combine that with a 
concrete nature that pays attention to lots of facts and you get a person that is likely to crave for 
the certainty of rules. So we can expect Edna to be profoundly duty bound a law abiding. She is 
likely travel exactly at the speed limit, even if she is in a rush and there are no other cars 
around, and would stop at a red light even in the middle of an empty desert, because that is 
what the rules say! 
 
As concrete thinkers look to the world, Edna is likely to be a very sociable person. Her love of 
rules will make her a stickler for etiquette and protocol, which means she is likely to be a social 
conformist. Her desire to act correctly is very important to her. 
 
Like all people, Edna has her dark sides. She is prone to depression, pessimism and melancholy 
(a by-product of an overactive left brain.) If she is a negative person, Edna is most prone to 
cynicism, doubt or even cold rationalism. In this extrem she is likely to be solemn and serious, 
and not one for pointless merriment. 
 
Edna is going to have a good memory for facts. At a dinner party she’ll be the most likely person 
to remember everyone’s names and can is never at a loss for a subject to talk about. Her ability 
to associate to information means she always have something appropriate to say, though at 
times she might end up dominate the conversation. This makes her a master of small talk. If the 
topic gets more abstract – the so called “deep and meaningful” topics – you may find Edna 
getting lost or bored.  
 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
The Fire Profile In Detail 
Lets imagine Fred to be typical example of a “fiery” profile. 
He is bold, artistic, daring and without restrictions and is a pleasure seeker who really enjoys life 
to the full. As he is right brained primarily, he will live in the moment and will look for the 
deeper meaning and significance behind most things in life. 
 
Fred is not bound by rules, and despises being hemmed in by procedure. He’d probably read 
mystery novels backwards, and will do what he feels like, sometimes deliberately just to spite of 
the rules. He might have foundschool to be dull and suffocating, and could never sit still in the 
classroom.  
 
Although he is right brained, he still thinks in very concrete terms, and hates waffle and useless 
abstract thinking. He thrives on sensory detail. His intuitive nature tend sto make Fred blindly 
optimistic, not bound by negative rationalism or left brain cynicism. 
 
He’ll expect the best, take risks, and when his life goes well he’ll win big. But then he is also 
prone to take gambles and can lose heavily as well. Losses won’t keep him down for long 
though, Fred has a remarkable ability to bounce back and will always adapt to the situation at 
hand. 
 
Fred wears his heart on his sleeve, is often cunning, Wiley, innovative, charismatic and 
persuasive.  
 
Rather than the associational thinking of his friend Edna, Fred thinks emotionally. He lives in the 
now and is therefore observant and like Edna, is fond of literalness and detail, although he is 
great with metaphors, provided he can tie them down to reality and they don’t get too 
pointlessly intellectual. 
 
He’s pragmatic, sociable, lively, emotional, energetic and often quite flamboyant. He is a right 
brained concrete thinker. 
 
The Air Profile In Detail 
Airy Alan is our example of typical air profile. 
 
Alan is what modern education would call “very intelligent.” His thinking is very analytical and 
characterised by the drive for efficiency. 
 
He will analyse any situation to death in order to find the most efficient way of doing things, 
combining both the left brain’s capacity for pragmatism and his abstract thinking which looks 
for the “ultimate” or “better way.” 
 
He thrives on precision and logic and takes delight in puns and dry humour. 
 
Alan has insatiable curiosity, and always needs to find an explanation for something,  when 
watching magic or illusions he always needs to know exactly how the trick is done, and will 
never been satisfied until he finds the answer. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
Some of his friends consider Alan a bit cold or distant, as he hides his feelings and will hide his 
emotions behind a bland expression. 
 
He likes to break things down and see how things work, will always ask ‘how’ and ‘why’ and 
will therefore lean towards scepticism and even cynicism, and sometime’s looks at the world in 
a dark and cold way. 
 
He’s intelligent, purposeful, open minded and far seeing. He’ll experiment in order to find the 
best way of doing something. 
 
Alan is very witty and great with words, definitions and puns, and often is labelled a ‘walking 
dictionary.’ 
 
In summary, Alan is analytical, abstract, sometimes perceived as cold and unsociable, he is 
witty, intelligent, precise and far seeing. He’ll avoid pointless small talk by thrive on purposeful 
abstractions and investigative thinking, always searching for the greater principle. 
 
The Water Profile In Detail 
Watery Wilma will be our example of a water profile. 
 
Wilma is an abstract right brained thinker, which means her mind is looking for a “better way” 
or the “ultimate” but is interested in the human experience. This has shaped her into a deep 
thinker and a very spiritual person. She looks for the meaning behind the meaning, the deepest 
or highest level one can go. 
 
She is independent, yet very empathetic and diplomatic and a great mediator. 
 
She has a fascinating creative streak as she is great at integrating people and ideas, and making 
strong connections and links, bringing things together. Her ability to abstract and the right 
brain’s tendency to unite things means that Wilma likes to bring things from one field to 
another, and find the way to apply knowledge across different fields. 
 
Her creativity is unique, and allows her to be very insightful and intuitive. She is an inductive 
thinker, and thinks in large scale nominalisations. 
 
Wilma is easily annoyed by trivialities, and by people who do not exhibit their best qualities and 
live up to her high expectations. When annoyed, she is quick to show anger and often has 
trouble controlling her emotions. 
 
She is accepting of people, but mostly she is an idealist. She is often sentimental and 
sympathetic, and a very trusting person. 
 
The key idea of water profile is imagination, and Wilmer values this above all else. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Session 2: How To Make The Four Elemental Profiles Match The Real World 
 
All the four personality types are just rough character sketches. As you start to look for more 
polarities, a richer profile begins to emerge.  Think of the Chinese chess board conundrum: 
 
If you place one grain of rice on the first square of the board, two on the second, four on the 
third and keep doubling the grains of rice you place on each square, you will soon run in to 
trouble. There is not enough rice in the whole of our planet to fill even half that chess board as 
the numbers keep rising to astronomical proportions. 
 
Hypnotic Profiles work in the same way. We start off with very simple distinctions, or just a few 
grains of rice, and as you layer polarities together, you soon start to create very unique profiles 
that explain the massive diversity that we have in people’s characters. 
 
The Profiling Game 
Get together with your friends and as a game discuss with people what type (fire, water, air, etc) 
you think the people you know (friends, colleagues, TV stars etc) are – be sure to say WHY you 
would choose one profile over another for people. 
 
Hypnotic Profile Test 1 – State & Context 
First of all, make sure you are interacting with people within the context and the mood that you 
want to profile them in. 
 
Hypnotic Profile Test 2 – Pressure & Surprise 
To test how someone acts in different situation, you can start by turning up the pressure. Say 
something bizarre or out of place and notice how they respond. Next, you could tease them in a 
respectful manner to see how they respond, and also try and put the spot light on them, make 
them the focus of social pressure, and observe how they act. You could also try challenging 
their opinions or statements, and disagreeing with them, just to see how they react. 
 
Hypnotic Profile Test 3 – Psychological Projection 
You can also use psychological projection and hypothetical contexts and situations created in 
stories, for example using ‘my friend John’ to profile them in the contexts you create. Using tools 
such as the mind game magic set of asking ‘what if...’ type questions is another way to do this. 
 
Hypnotic Profile Test 4 – Distractions 
In most situations people are too self conscious to give you pure unconscious information. 
There are several ways to get around this: 
 
1. Catch natural reactions as they occur, keep your eyes open as they act in the situations 
you see them in and notice unconscious clues. 
2. Use misdirection. When using misdirection you could perhaps set them one task, and as 
they perform they task and feel that they are being judged on how well it is done, 
observe their interactions with other people and watch for other information as they are 
distracted with the challenge. 
3. Surprise. Like when doing instant inductions, this bounces the critical and restrictive part 
of the mind out of the picture, and allows for pure unconscious reactions. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
4. Use polarity questions. As a game ask lots of different simple polarity question eg ‘d you 
prefer blue or green’ and then occasionally throw in a more meaningful question ‘do you 
prefer to be practical or inspired’ and, as they are buried in throw away questions, you 
are likely to get accurate genuine responses. 
 
 
Profile Modifier 1: Extraversion – v – Introversion.   
Extraverts are more public, approachable and outgoing, and introverts are more private, reserved 
and often shy.  
 
To test for this polarity as yourself questions like ‘does this person prefer to speak or listen’ etc, 
You can always ask them, but observing their nehaviour is usually more accurate.  
 
Remember that polarities are on a sliding scale, which means some people sit around the 
middle, which can lead to mixed signals coming your way. 
 
NB: If you are going to ask someone a question to establish polarity, never ask the same 
question twice in a row – this could engage the conscious mind too much and they might start 
censoring their answers! Remember, you want pure unconscious information, not them giving 
you what they think you want to hear. 
 
Extroversion Modifier Of The Four Elements 
 
Extroverted Earth Profile 
An Extroverted earth profile might be the typical active host of the party who looks after 
everyone, and always follows protocol.  
 
An Introverted earth profile would normally be quieter and act more indirectly. At a party they 
might be the people that like to help the host as a way of interacting with people without having 
to get into too many conversations. 
 
The introveted earth profile’s love of rules means that they might find more indirect behaviours 
to enforce the rules, like posting a big set of rules in the common area for all to see. 
 
By contrast, an extroverted earth person would be quite happy to confront you directly and be 
‘in your face’ about any breaches of protocol. 
 
Extroverted Fire Profile 
Extroverted Fire characters would be the classic extrovert – charming, persuasive, lively 
energetic sociable character.  
 
An introverted fire type character would still be a passionate, but in a more reclusive way, like 
an artist making his impact on the world indirectly. 
 
Extroverted Air Profile 
For an air type, the extravert would be the classic vsionary leader – he can strategically lead 
people through complex times. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10 
 
An introvert would be more quiet and subtle, working behind the scenes rather than in the lime 
light. Planning and creating blueprints for others to follow might be moe familiar/comfortable 
territory, rather than leading from the front! 
 
Extroverted Water Profile 
An extroverted water person would probably be a teacher that brings groups together, an 
adventurer looking for spiritual growth. People that take up arms in favour of an important cause 
to help humanity would also be a classic example of these combination. 
 
An introverted water person would have the same desires as the extrovert, but would act in a 
more personal or indirect way. Rather than being loud and overt, they would work behind the 
scenes. They tend to like smaller intimate connections: like an arbitrator, coach or mentor who 
takes one person under their wing and nurtures their growth. 
 
Profile Modifier 2: Pleasure – v – Pain  
One can either be motivated primarily towards pleasure, or mainly away from pain. 
 
Pleasure oriented people are often optimistic and cheerful, but can fall down when they avoid 
considering pain or the possible negative consequences of what they do.  
 
People motivated by pain need to have a situation where something is going wrong in order for 
them to do something. When there’s nothing wrong, they will either need to artificially create 
pain, or just be unmotivated.   
 
You can tell the way people are thinking by the language they use. 
 
Profile Modifier 3: The Male – v – Female Polarity 
This deals in the psychological characteristics which we tend to associate with either “male” or 
“female” traits – but really these have nothing to do with gender. You can have a man with a 
female polarity (soft spoken and gentle) or a woman with a male polarity (brash and bold). 
 
The Male polarity is quite aggressive and direct. Key words that descirbe it are: strong, self 
reliant, pushing out into the world. These people will thrive on challenges. At an extreme they 
might be domineering or even abusive. 
 
The Female polarity is softer, gentler and more nurturing. Key words might be: social, nurturing, 
reseptive, encouraging. These people respond better to nurturing comments or compliments. 
 
Like all polarities, these depend on your mood, state and context, so can naturally change. 
 
As an example of combining this polarity with the elemental profiles: an introverted air with a 
male polarity would be extremely certain and strong about their ideas, but may seem aloof or 
arrogant. He would be stimulated by debate, but would rather indirectly create a situation in 
which he is challenged to an argument than to challenge an idea directly himself. 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11 
Profile Modifier 4: Proactive – v – Reactive 
Proactive people are at cause, they make things happen. 
 
Reactive people are at effect, they respond to pressure, think things through, and do not like to 
start things going. 
 
You can spot the differences both in their behaviour  and in their language. A proactive person 
gets up and gets things done, a reactive one will wait to be told what to do.  
 
In their language proactive people will take responsibility with phrases like “trust me… I’ll get it 
done…” etc. A reactive person on the other hand will tend to use the passive tense “it will get 
done… this needs to happen…” 
 
Profile Modifier 5: Optimism – v – Pessimism 
This is an easy one. Optimists expect good things from the future, pessimists expect bad things. 
 
Right brained people have a tendency to be optimists, left brained people tend to be pessimists. 
However this is by no means a given, there are plenty of “analytical” optimists and “intuitive” 
pessimists too! 
 
How To Combine The Modifiers With The Elemental Profiles 
Once you know the main polarities someone fits into, you can combine it with your knowledge 
of the Four Elemental Profiles and get a good idea of how someone my react or need to be 
motivated. 
 
Simple Profile Extensions: 
For example: a reactive optimist would be someone who thinks life it pretty good on the whole, 
but would be unlikely to get up and do anything until something bad happens or they are 
pushed to it by outside forces. 
 
So you would want to use your language to appeal to those aspects of their personality – in this 
case you might need to take the position of authority and command them or maybe point out 
the negative consequences of not doing anything to motivate them to act. 
 
Complex Profile Extensions: 
Let’s look at an unusual combination of modifiers: an extroverted, proactive, AIR profile with a 
pessimistic mainly female ‘energy’ who is motivated by pleasure. 
 
This person, lets call him Alan, would be quite intellectual and quite a planner.  
 
He’ll be good at getting things done, and will work well communicating with other people, and 
the female polarity means he will be very supportive as part of a team, the mastermind behind 
everything.  
 
Alan will also be quite cynical, meaning he will be likely to be cynical about people, so will 
start expecting the worst from people, which might make him a little bit selfish, but will still be 
helping others to get the job done.  
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
12 
Alan is likely to be filled with an exciting vision, he may doubt that his vision is possible, but as 
he is proactive he should have enough energy to get up and try and make it work anyway.  
 
He’ll expect problems, but plan for them and get over them. When things go well Alan is great, 
however when things start going wrong and he is challenged, the female energy coupled with 
his pessimism creates a vicious circle of failure and causes him to begin to collapse. Alan is very 
likely to make a mountain out of a mole hill. 
 
So how do we motivate someone like Alan? 
 
Laying out a master plan will intrigue his curiosity, and then laying out some simple steps his 
proactive nature will allow them to get these simple steps done, despite his pessimism. This will 
start him on a success cycle, which will make him very happy and productive. 
 
Profile Modifier 6: Independence – v – Dependence 
Independent people are generally internally orientated when it come sto validation, i.e. they 
look for validation within themselves. If they feel their own internal standards have been met 
they will likely doubt anyone who contradicts this. They will therefore often reject external 
information which does not match their internal processor. 
 
Dependant  people will look for external sources of validation. They seek other people’s 
opinions if what they do or wear is good enough. This will make them very responsive to others, 
but on the downside they may have confidence issues of difficulty in relying on their own 
initiatives or intuitions. 
 
Profile Modifier 7: Sameness – v – Difference 
Some people prefer change, whereas others prefer consistency, or sameness.  
 
This naturally varies with the context: at home one may be orientated towards sameness, 
looking for the same home, and the same family lifestyle; whilst at work the same person might 
be difference orientated: they need to change careers or significantly change the typr of work 
they do in order to avoid getting bored. 
 
Profile Modifier 8: People – v – Tasks 
Some people are oriented towards people – making sure that there is harmony in the air and 
people are well. Others are more focussed on the task and getting results.  
 
As a rule Earth and Water are more motivated to ensure people do well, and Air and Fire profiles 
are more task orientated. 
 
To motivate people who are people orientated, focus on teamwork and unity, build a sense of 
unity. 
 
To motivate task orientated people simply keep bringing them back to the goal, mission or 
objective. 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
13 
Profile Modifier 9: Options – v – Certainty 
Some people like to have many options open to them. They want to be ABLE to try a whole lot 
of ways and methods and things. This does not mean they will use all the options available to 
them, they just like having the choice. 
 
Others get overloaded with too much choice. They would rather be given a simple, clear route 
to follow. If they find something that works they will want to stick with it rather than fiddle 
around with something that is obviously not broken. 
  
Just by switching someone’s state you can see them change from one end of the spectrum to 
another. 
 
For example: fear will often make someone cling to certainty. Naturally, the profile which has 
the strongest correlation between the options polarity is Fire, and people who are very certainty 
orientated would often be Earth profiles. 
 
Profile Modifier 10: Convincers Strategies 
There are two elements involved in being convinced:  
 
• what information you need, and  
• how often you need that information.  
 
Finding out how someone becomes convinced, whether they need one reference experience or 
many, and how strong and what type of reference experience they need, as well as how often 
they need to be ‘re convinced’ are  very useful things to add to your profile. 
 
Notice how people talk, and observe the way they make judgements and decisions and question 
them on these with ‘why’ questions, to find out how their convincers loop.  
 
Like everything else, these will be affected to some degree by the person’s state and the context 
they find themselves in. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
14 
Session 3: How To Create Your Own Psychological Personality Test 
 
Psychometric Tests 
Psychology has long been drawn to the subject of psychological testing because the discipline 
felt that it needed something vaguely objective in order to qualify as a science (instead of being 
a type of philosophy or worse a pseudo-science.) 
 
The first set of tests originally tried to measure intelligence, the so called “IQ tests.”  
 
Of course, today it is pretty much accepted that intelligence is something that is almost 
impossible to define let alone measure. 
 
The Problem With Psychometric Testing 
The first problem that confronts a psychometric test is what are you actually measuring?  
 
Greek Numbers 
With simple quantifiable things, e.g. distances, this is a simple task. But with more abstract 
concepts such as happiness, intelligence etc, it is ridiculous to try and assign number values 
such as percentages or numerical scales. 
 
The Ancient Greeks considered this very problem some 3,000 years ago and rejected the notion 
that you could put numbers to things that are essentially unquantifiable. A greek, if asked to 
make a comparison of subjective values would be very careful to phrase an analogy along the 
lines of “good compares to great as one compares to ten” – knowing full well that it would be 
grave mistake leading to erros in his thinking should he psotulate that  “one is good and ten is 
great.”  
 
The former statement is a comparative analogy, the latter is a complex equivalence – something 
which is prone to logical fallacies and is the cause of many problems. 
 
If we forget that the numbers are simply an analogy then we start to ‘eat the menu’ – we start to 
do things that you can do with numbers but not with the things they are supposed to be 
measuring.  
 
Modern Numbers 
One social scientist, Stanley Smith Stevens, suggested in 1946 that it is enough to establish a 
standard set of rules by which to apply numbers to unmeasurable things. Eg  if they say they feel 
good, they get a one, if they say they feel great, they get a 10.  
 
The trouble with this is that these words have subjective meanings to different people, so whilst 
you might assign numbers according to a fixed rule, you still have a problem figuring out what 
they actually mean! 
 
The Rasch model is another slightly more acceptable model is where the criteria is decided 
before hand, and much lengthy evaluation is done afterwards to determine how useful that 
information is. 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
15 
Not all psychometric tests are necessarily useless, but pretending that they are precise or nearly 
exact measurements leads to serious problems. 
 
An extreme Air profile for example, may score hugely high score on an IQ test, and an extreme 
fire type may get quite a low score, yet the fire type may well be more successful in real life 
situations. 
 
The Problem With Conclusions 
Another problem lies in how the conclusions you make relate to the data you collected. 
 
For example: if you go into a school and measure shoe sizes you will notice that the kids with 
the largest shoes tend to have the best reading skills. But it would be very wrong to conclude 
that kids with bigger shoes are better at reading!  
 
In reality, of course, kids with bigger shoes are just older, and therefore have had more practice 
reading. So the correlation between the numbers and the skill we are looking for is totally 
accidental. 
 
The Problem OF Experimentor Bias 
Yet another problem is what is known as ‘Experimentor Bias.’ If the experimentor has a certain 
hypothesis it is all too human to try and PROVE that hypothesis. True science seeks to 
DISPROVE a hypothesis and if it cannot it is accepted as a working theory until new information 
comes up. 
 
Beware The Science Frame 
Do not allow yourself to be dazzled by the metaphors of science, and remember that everything 
can be explained or debunked by simple logical steps. 
 
How to Create Your Own Psychometric Test 
There are countless numbers of written psychometric tests in existence, which on the surface 
may appear different and unique, but when you dig deeper it’s really the same basic model 
presented in different ways. 
 
If you do want to use one of these tests you normally have to pay a fair amount of money. My 
preference is to create your own, that way it does what YOU want and its completely free! 
 
1. Chose your priorities; what polarities do you want to explore 
2. For your polarities, create several questions (from 10 to 200)  which will distinguish 
clearly between each polarities, ie do you behave/think/feel this way (polarity one) or 
that way (polarity two) 
3. Mix up the questions for different polarities so that you don’t give away the trend 
4. Apply your test, make certain predictions based on your results, and test the validity of 
your predictions. Adapt your profile based on your findings. 
5. The final step is to legally patent and copy right your test, and charge people for the right 
to use it ;) 
 
Now lets look at some  of the Traditional Psychometric Tests so you can see how easy it is for 
you to make your own. 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
16 
 
Traditional Psychometric 1: The PAPI Scale 
In the 1920s people invented the idea of using written questionnaires to measure personalities 
by investigating different polarities. A number of questions were set and answers were given a 
point system to decide which side of the polarity you fit into. PAPI is one of the classic 
psychometrics from the 1960s. 
 
The PAPI Scale looks at 10 Needs – which are essentially 5 sets of polarities:  
 
Need To Control – v – Need For Rules 
Being Noticed – v – Blending In 
Dominance – v – Social 
Achieve Tasks – v – Support Others 
Change – v – Finishing A Task 
 
When this complicated test is simplified down, it is simply looking at familiar polarities under 
different names: eg (Polarity) Extrovert – v – Introvert =  (PAPI) Being Noticed – v – Blening In. 
 
PAPI does lend itself to exaggeration. So even if you were 51% extrovert and 49% introvert, you 
were called extrovert and only extrovert – which as you can see, is yet another flaw. 
 
Traditional Psychometric 2: Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
These are esentially the Four Elemental Profiles represented with some additional variations by 
looking at a couple of extra poles. Myers-Briggs based the test on observations of polarities by 
the famous psychologist Carl Jung. 
 
Myers-Briggs is based on 4 Polarities: 
 
Extrovert (E) – v – Introvert (I) 
Sensing (S) – v – Intuition (N) ** This is virtually the same as the Concrete – v – Abstract Polarity 
Thinking (T) – v – Feeling (F) ** This is virtually the same as Left – v – Right Brain Polarity 
Judgers (J) – v – Perceivers (P) ** This is virtually the same as Certainty – v – Options Polarity 
 
Traditional Psychometric 3: Keirsey Four Temperaments Sorter 
David Keirsey developped an alternative to the Myers-Briggs test which he published in a book 
(Please Understand Me) with a self evaluation sheet resulting once again in the For Elemental 
Profiles.  
 
Keirsey then traced the Four Elemental Profiles back through time to the ancient Greeks who 
had observed these profiles some 3,000 years  ago. He then cross-referenced all the major 
thinkers all the way up to Myers-Briggs and mapped the Four Profiles into his names for these 
naturally emerging profiles. 
 
Have a look at the table at the end of this manual for an abbreviated version of a table showing 
the Four Profiles mapped throughout history. 
 
 
 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
17 
Traditional Psychometric 4: Hermann Brain Dominance Indicator 
William Hermann developped his own psychometric, which once again talks about the same 
Four Elemental Profiles, whilst he was working at General Electric. 
 
He takes the basic Polarity of Left – v – Right Brain and adds a second Polarity, which is 
essentially the same as our Concrete – v – Abstract Polarity, to create four types. He then 
observed essentially the same distinctions in the four types as we have in Myers-Briggs, Kiersey 
and of course the Four Elemental Profiles. 
 
Traditional Psychometric 5: Strength Deployment Inventory (SDI) 
This psychometric is different only in that it draws on a three pointed polarity: People – v – 
Results – v – Procedures. 
 
The questions are the same as in the other tests, except that at the end you triangulate your 
position on how much of each of the three qualities you express: 
 
1. Seeking harmony with the people that you work with 
2. Seeking to get results (get the job done) 
3. Seeking to follow the rules and procedures correctly 
 
You can see from this that  whilst many psychometric tests have basically reinvented the wheel 
in their own way, you can still take the idea of the qualities and start to combine them in new 
ways to create some unique instruments. 
 
Traditional Psychometric 6: DISC Assessment 
The DISC Assessment is a very popular instrument with coaches and HR departments as well. 
DISC takes the Polarity of Extroversion– v – Introversion and splits it down further to examine 
four qualities: 
 
• Dominance (Extroverted Quality) 
• Influence (Extroverted Quality) 
• Steadiness (Introverted Quality) 
• Conscientousness (Introverted Quality) 
 
So notice how you can keep splitting hairs down to an infinite degree and end up with some 
kind of unique test, unless you know what you’re looking for. 
 
Traditional Psychometric 7: The Big Five 
In the 1930s-1940s people started to look at language (lexical analysis) and how often they are 
used as a way of measuring the patterns in people’s personalities in different societies. Asking 
thousands of people to descirbe people they knew, led to five “natural” Polarities: 
 
1. Openess – an open mind seeking out experiences in art, new ideas, culture etc. 
2. Conscientousness – the Earthy quality of being dutiful, disciplined and following a plan 
3. Extroversion – your tendency to be energetic and seek other’s company 
4. Agreeableness – your compassion and willingness to cooperate with others 
5. Neuroticism – your tendency to feel negative emotions 

 
                  The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are 
 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
18 
 
The Four Elemental Profiles Compared To Other Psychometric Devices 
The following table will give you a good overview of how different people have observed the 
same four core profiles existing in the people around them:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earth 
Fire 
Air 
Water 
 
 
 
 
 
Hippocrates  
Four Humours  
400 BC 
Somber 
(black bile) 
 
Cheerful 
(blood) 
 
Calm 
(phlegm) 
 
Enthusiastic 
(yellow bile) 
 
Plato  
Four Characters 
340 BC 
Sensible 
(pistic) 
 
Artistic 
(iconic) 
 
Reasoning 
(dianoetic) 
 
Intuitive 
(noetic) 
 
Galen  
Four Temperaments 
190 AD 
Melancholic 
 
Sanguine 
Phlegmatic 
 
Choleric 
 
Paracelsus 
Four Totem Spirits 
1550 AD 
Gnomes 
(industrious) 
 
Salamanders 
(changeable) 
Sylphs 
(curious) 
 
Nymphs 
(inspired) 
 
Adickes  
Four World Views  
1905 AD 
Traditional  
 
Innovative 
 
Skeptical 
 
Doctrinaire 
 
Spränger  
Four Value Attitudes  
1914 AD 
Economic  
 
Artistic  
 
Theoretic  
 
Religious 
 
Kretschmer  
Four Character Styles 
1920 AD 
Depressive  
 
Manic  
 
 
Insensitive   
Oversensitive 
Myers-Briggs  
Type Indicator  
1958 AD 
SJ  
(sensing 
judging) 
SP  
(sensing 
perceiving) 
NT  
(intuitive 
thinking) 
NF  
(intuitive 
feeling) 
Hermann 
Hermann Brain 
Dominance Indicator 
1976 AD 
Sequential 
Thinker 
Interpersonal 
Thinker 
Analytical 
Thinker 
Imaginative 
Thinker 
Keirsey  
Four Temperaments 
1978/1998 AD 
 
Guardian 
 
Artisan 
 
Rational 
 
Idealist 
 

