For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
How To Use Hypnotic Power 
States To Programme Your 
Unconscious For Guaranteed 
Success In Any Meeting,  
Project Or Task 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Use Hypnotic Power States To Programme Your 
Unconscious For Guaranteed Success In Any Meeting, Project 
Or Task 
 
Session 1: How To Prepare For Any Important Meeting 
 
State Control & Going First 
 
State Control is the name given to being in charge of your emotions at any time, to control how 
you feel, because this will influence how you think, speak and behave.  
 
As a hypnotist this is especially important, as we need to “Go First” – enter the mind/body states 
that correspond with our suggestions. This makes our subcommunications (a key element in 
suggestion) congruent with our main message. 
 
A Hypnotist should know how to: 
 
• Create states in themselves and others 
• Use those states for his/her purpose 
• Select useful states for the overall outcome 
• Go First – to embody these qualities 
 
There is no quick fix to State Control. To master your emotions takes time and training or 
experience. This way you get to be more of the person you know you can as time goes by. To 
try to be 100% all the time would otherwise lead to burnout as you neglect other parts of 
yourself that need to be respected or addressed. 
 
However on occasion a big event comes up: a big interview, sales meeting or client shows up 
and you have to make the most of the opportunity whilst you have it. At this time you can wheel 
out a Hypnotic Power State to put you in the perfect position for success. 
 
Thought Experiment 
 
1. Think of a person you like 
2. Think of a person you dislike 
 
Your emotions changed, this is how easy it CAN be when you create the right conditions. 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
The Key Areas To Use Power States 
 
1. Prepare For An Important Meeting  - for success in sales, career and life 
2. Hypnotist’s Power State – for better inductions and trancework 
3. Accelerated Learning Power State – take any skill and master it faster 
 
 
Power States In Peak Performance 
 
Sportsmen, musicians, actors and all other “performers” know that your state will decide how 
good you are. The science of “optimal experience” – both in terms of success and happiness – 
has been researched under the term of “Flow States”. These are the states where everything just 
seems to work out and you’re really enjoying the ride. 
 
So why do people “lose” their state? 
 
There are two basic reasons: 
 
1. They are too conditioned to a negative states (for example through having “dirty goals” – 
a goal that triggers negative associations at the unconscious level), or 
2. They are insufficiently conditioned to a positive state, so when the heat is on it collapses 
(under pressure you usually fall back on to what you know.) 
 
To access Power States when you need them you need: 
 
1. Strong reference experiences 
2. Behavioural triggers to activate the states 
3. Practice under conditions close to the real thing (i.e. include pressure and stress as part of 
the rehearsal!) 
 
Hence the 6 Ps: Prior Preparation Prevents Poor Performance! 
 
This masterclass will take you on a crash course of one aspect of the iMethod™ for being able to 
get into Power States when it counts. 
 
How To Access A Power State For Mental Preparation 
 
Step 1: Access Methods 
 
Use either: 
 
1. The iMethod Basic Exercise (if you know it) 
2. Magnetic Hands Self Hypnosis 
3. Another Self Hypnosis Method of your choice. 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
The Magnetic Hands Self Hypnosis Method 
 
1. Rub hands together vigorously 
2. Hold hands approx 3 inches apart, palm facing palm 
3. Focus on the space in between 
4. Feel the sensation in the hands (a force tingling, drawing the hands together, pushing 
them apart, heat etc) 
5. Focus on the sensation until it intensifies 
6. Close eyes and let the sensations draw over you like a warm blanket 
7. Feel peace and tranquillity 
 
Deep Thought 
 
Now that you can access a trance state to prepare your mind, you’ll need to connect with the 
right mechanism that will allow you to “prime” yourself for success. 
 
This is where the iMethod’s “Deep Thought” exercise is perfect: 
 
Step 1: The Classic Method 
 
1. Access Trance (whatever method you prefer) 
2. Take a seed thought like: 
“Who am I?”, “Truth comes from within”, “Trust you’re unconscious” etc. 
3. Mull over, contemplate or think about the Seed Thought. Don’t “think” in the regular 
sense, simply be curious or wonder about what it really means. Let the thought drop into 
your mind like a pebble in a pond and observe whatever impressions come back from 
inside: a thought, an image, a memory, a feeling, a sound etc. 
4. After a little while come back and repeat the seed thought and find out what new “train 
of thought” your unconscious mind throws back at you. 
 
Step 2: Emotional Priming 
 
Once you get good at the regular form of Deep Thought, you can adapt the exercise to evoke an 
emotion. This is NOT forcing and emotion, but stimulating of priming the unconscious mind to 
access a state naturally. 
 
1. Access Trance (use whatever method you like) 
2. Take a Seed Emotion like: 
Love, Happiness, Enthusiasm, Energy, Power, Conviction, Joy etc. 
3. As in the Classic Method, drop the idea of the emotion into your unconscious. Be curious 
about it, what does it mean? How does it feel? How do you know when you’re feeling it? 
Etc. 
4. Keep repeating step 3 until the emotion is evoked spontaneously (it arises inside you 
without you having to “try” and reconstruct it). 
5. Memorise the sensation of being in that state. 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
The Unconscious Success Drill 
 
Now we’re going to use all the skills you’ve built to prime the unconscious mind to succeed at 
any upcoming meeting, task or event. Remember the important elements here are: 
 
1. Access Trance 
2. Start from a place of peace (State Dependant Learning) 
3. Build in a hypnotic phenomenon (this will help you by giving you something to focus on 
and achieve whilst under pressure (i.e. an interim “win”) which is NOT a loaded topic. It 
helps to “burn off” 
 
So here is the complete exercise: 
 
1. Prepare: consider the situation that is coming up so you have a purpose and also activate 
a little of it in your neurology. 
2. Access Trance 
3. Activate a deep trance phenomenon  
• If you’re using the iMethod: use something from the Affirmation Response 
Training.  
• If 
you’re 
using 
the 
“Magnetic 
Hands” 
method: 
the 
feeling 
of 
the  
force” or the movement in your hands (if you allow it to occur) is the hypnotic 
phenomenon. 
4. Allow a feeling of peacefulness to settle over you (NB: DO NOT continue until you have 
mastered whatever performance anxiety may exist enough to get a solid, grounded 
feeling of peace or tranquillity) 
5. Choose the appropriate state for succeeding in the upcoming task or event (e.g. 
Welcoming, Aggressive, Focused, Confident etc.) 
6. Start with something you KNOW will happen (e.g. a greeting or social ritual) 
7. Rehearse key moments in the interaction GOING WELL ONLY! 
8. If you anticipate some tough questions, the rehearse dealing with them elegantly. 
9. Close with a successful resolution to the meeting, task or event. 
10. Stay in the “state” you just built. 
11. Return and maintain the afterglow of the state you just primed. 
12. Don’t focus on what happened, be in the NOW, and spontaneously improvise in the 
situation whilst maintaining the general afterglow of the state.i 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
Session 2: The Hypnotist’s Power State 
 
How To “Burn Off” Excess Anxiety/Pressure 
 
It is vital you do not start the rehearsal process in the Unconscious Success Drill until you have 
achieved a state of peace to work from (the Access State Principle). Here are a few methods to 
help you do that when “the heat is on”! 
 
1. The “Distraction/Refocus” method is basically the one built into the exercise. You distract 
yourself by refocusing ALL your attention on the deep trance phenomenon (automatic 
movement, catalepsy, anaesthesia etc) until you have achieved that. By the time you can 
do this, your anxiety levels will have calmed down (to maintain anxiety you need to have 
part of your focus on an unpleasant future event!) 
 
2. The “Dune” method basically consists of allowing the negative emotion to exist, and 
even “challenging” it to intensify (to pass over you and through you) – note you’re not 
trying to intensify it, you’re challenging whatever mechanism in your unconscious is 
causing the anxiety to do a better job. Typically the emotion will peak and drop off, or 
you “drop through” it to a calm place on the other side. 
 
3. The “Zen” method rests on the realisation that anxiety is just a mechanism triggered in 
the brain, but it really says NOTHING about WHO YOU are. To remind yourself that you 
are not your anxiety, use a “Deep Thought” seed like: “This brain is having a thought” or 
“This body is having a chemical reaction” (note the implied dissociation in the language) 
 
4. The “Emotional Release” technique from the iMethod can also be used. Essentially you 
focus on the sensation, try to label it, check the label back against the experience for 
accuracy and keep adjusting until the experience “pops”. 
 
5. The “Context Reframe” consists of you taking a bigger view of the upcoming event and 
setting it in the context of your whole life, life on planet earth or even the history of the 
universe… at such wide contexts this one event becomes so insignificant that you no 
longer need to feel any pressure from it. 
 
 
How To Us The Unconscious Success Drill When You Don’t Know How To Deal With The 
Situation 
 
Remember ALWAYS start with the state. Burn off the anxiety levels and enter a level of peace or 
tranquillity.  
 
Next begin with the END in mind. What is it you want to achieve? How should the ending look? 
 
Once you have rehearsed the end together with a clean state, you can use the Deep Thought 
classic method to ask: What is the next Step? 
 
When you get an answer rehearse it to check it out – will it work? 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
If so then use this as a stepping stone for the next step etc. If not then go back to the seed 
question: What is the first step. 
 
In some cases you won’t have enough information to be able to do more than one step because 
there are too many variables (what ifs) or you simply don’t have any experience yet. At that 
point simply Begin with the end, go to the first step and let the unconscious mind connect the 
two outside of your awareness. 
 
When you finish your inner preparations make sure to stay in the state you have constructed as 
you go into the situation you prepared for! 
 
FLOW: The Psychology Of Optimal Experience 
 
This is the title of the former Head of Psychology at the University of Chicago, Mihály 
Csíkszentmihály. Whilst that set of studies (spanning more than a decade and thousands of 
people from countries all around the globe) were ostensibly about happiness and creativity, the 
“flow” state that he “discovered” has a very strong correlation with high performance states. 
 
Flow is a “outside” focused trance state which not only feels great it also allows for higher levels 
of creativity and effectiveness in executing a task. It is closely related to the concept of NOW (is 
the moment of power – Personal Power SHM) and is characterized by total immersion in an 
experience, loss of self awareness and complete focus on the task. 
 
The conditions for flow are: 
 
1. Clear goals (also add the idea of CLEAN goals!) 
2. Exclusive focus (required for most forms of trances to occur) 
3. Loss of self – merging with the task 
4. Time distortion (it can expand or contract) 
5. Instant feedback on how well you’re doing 
6. Intrinsic motivation 
7. Perceived control over the situation 
8. Skill levels match the task 
 
We will use these principles to create a special “Hypnotist’s Power State” which will help you 
do better and more creative hypnotic work. This is the ultimate refinement in Going First! 
 
Physical Mechanics For The Hypnotist’s Power State 
 
1. Focus the eyes on an object close by, then something behind it. Note the change of 
focus. 
2. Enter peripheral vision until your breathing is altered spontaneously. 
3. Use your hypnotic gaze to look at your hypnotic subject, and the focus “into” him (i.e. 
look through him) whilst maintaining contact with him – i.e. don’t ignore the person! 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Mental Mechanics For The Hypnotist’s Power State 
 
Just as Session 1 went through nuances for shaping the Unconscious Success Drill out of the 
iMethod’s Deep Thought, so we can take the same idea one step further. The mental mechanics 
for the ideal Hypnotist’s Power State are simply to: 
 
Do the Deep Thought with your eyes OPEN (and attention on the person)! 
 
One of the “Seed Thoughts” you can use on yourself to prime the right state is “Something 
Amazing Is About To Happen!” 
 
Exercise: 
 
1. Begin with “Hypnotist’s Power State” (open eyed trance) 
2. Look “through” the person 
3. Seed Question: How am I going to hypnotise you?? 
4. Keep repeating the seed question until you are inspired to do something. 
5. Do it! 
 
The Hypnotist’s Power State 
 
Once you have set the conditions, as above, you simply have to regulate the HPS to keep the 
momentum going. To do this simply: 
 
1. Keep asking yourself the “Seed Question” – “What do I need to do next?” – remember 
this is a Deep Thought question, so no need to try and answer it analytically! 
2. Use everything you see happening as the “Seed Idea” to stimulate the next thing you 
want to do. 
3. If you get stuck at any point, bounce to the end – to a successful resolution. Get into that 
state and go from there. Its OK to have a long pause as you do this – and if it is not, you 
can always use one of your Power Loops as a gap filler whilst you do the really important 
work! 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
Session 3: How To Use Power States To Master Any Skill 
 
Accelerated Learning And Hypnosis 
Hypnosis has been tied to accelerated learning since the Bulgarian psychologist Georgi Lozanov 
developed a hypnotic method for learning called Suggestopedia. Given that all learning, all 
behaviour and all change occur unconsciously first, it stands to reason to begin the learning 
process here. 
 
We have already looked at two important elements: preparing to USE what you have learned 
and the optimal state for being in the moment and using it (at least for hypnosis!) 
 
Rather than using it, the focus will now be on how to acquire it in the first place! 
 
The Different Types Of Learning 
We can break learning tasks down into all manner of categories. A couple of useful ways to look 
at it might be: 
 
Physical Skills 
These require muscle memory to be trained, as well as some cognitive things (like when to start 
which sequence of movements) 
 
Mental rehearsals are an ideal way of achieving success here. 
 
Intellectual Skills 
These usually accompany pretty much any learning task. Sometimes they are the main focus of 
the entire skill (e.g. mathematics or computing). 
 
Useful devices here are: mental rehearsal (of success), Deep Thought to solve a problem or to 
get insight on a better way of doing things. 
 
Just because we’re focusing on “mind training” for success, don’t ignore “traditional” methods of 
gaining expertise – like talking to and watching masters doing their thing! (this is how you can 
build up implicit (i.e. unconscious) learning automatically!) 
 
Immersion v Time 
As a rule the human mind learns quickly. You don’t read a book one word a day, likewise 
immersing yourself in an activity will let you get a good grasp of a field very quickly. Total 
immersion tends to be a great way to get the core skills quickly. 
 
However its also true that we need time to assimilate and consolidate what we have learned.  
There will always be a tension between the two, but navigating those waters will leave you 
mastering skills in a fraction of the time it would usually take. 
 
Consistent effort over time is ultimately the path to mastery. 
 
Easy Wins 
Always try to start a learning activity with something simple that you can master quickly. It sets 
the scene for later successes to come (and boosts confidence immensely!) 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10 
Learning Tricks 
 
Rhythm 
Rhythm can induce trance and is also a great facilitator in learning something (it helps access 
the right kind of trance or “flow” state). One mistake people make is to have one go at 
something and the STOP! 
 
Better to have several goes in close succession, building up a rhythm so that during each 
experience your unconscious mind can gather the feedback and instantly apply it outside your 
awareness! 
 
Every task has its own rhythm. Make a point of finding it! 
 
This allows you to set in motion another principle: 
 
Reshaping 
Rather than try and get it perfect the first time, you’re better of doing ANYTHING that even 
vaguely resembles what you want and then on each successive attempt, slowly refining it in line 
with the ultimate outcome. 
 
Think of it like a stone mason chipping away at a marble block until he “releases” the statue that 
was hiding inside. 
 
Building a “Rhythm” helps immensely with this process. 
 
Less Haste More Speed 
There is an old rule of thumb worth remembering whenever something new comes along: 
 
Slow = Smooth = Fast 
 
Slow the activity down to the speed that you can deal with it at and then as you get used to it 
start picking up the tempo until its natural to do it quickly. 
 
Thinking v Doing 
Learning is initially about doing – i.e. unconscious participation. Thinking too much about 
something up front can over-engage the conscious mind leading to a Conscious/Unconscious 
conflict (The Law OF Reversed Effect!) 
 
Start by doing in a spirit of Adventure or Curiosity. There is no need to analyse what your are 
doing whilst you’re doing it – you’re just gathering sensory data. Immerse yourself completely in 
the task (remember that flow requires a “merging of consciousness with the task” and a “loss of 
self”) 
 
Later, once you have STOPPED doing, you can think about what you have done and formulate a 
few simple ideas to test the next time you start doing (or during the next cycle). 
 
A great way to keep the conscious mind engaged without interfering is to give it a task to do. 
Shift its attention from what you are doing to the outcome (i.e. the effect) of what you’re doing. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11 
This allows you to maintain an “empty mind” or a “learner’s mind” whilst you are gathering 
experience. You are creating instincts unhindered by premature conclusions based on 
inexperience! 
 
Troubleshooting 
 
Vision 
If you lose your state – i.e. the enthusiasm, curiosity or spirit of adventure – go back to intention. 
Why did you start in the first place? What did you hope to gain? How will you b as a person 
having achieved this all? 
 
Getting in touch with this vision should rekindle the fire. 
 
Plateau Breaks 
Also remember that sometimes taking a break for a little while will allow the unconscious mind 
to gestate and digest the experiences you have had until then. Coming back with a fresh mind 
often takes you back at a higher level than you were at before the break. 
 
Cross Training 
There’s an old saying: a change is as good as a rest.  
 
This is very true of learning. When you go on a plateau break you can still keep the momentum 
going by switching to another task that may be related. A painter may learn to sketch or make 
clay figures. An accountant may take classes in logic and reason. A hypnotist may get a different 
perspective on the unconscious mind by… well the field is wide open (psychology, research, 
alternative therapies, shamanism, religion, art, theatre, business, rhetoric… etc.) 
 
Consistency 
Ultimately remember the lesson from the children’s fable of the Tortoise & the Hare: a steady 
consistent effort will get more results that sporadic hyperactivity! 
 
In A Nutshell 
 
1. Begin with the right state (Flow) 
2. Start with easy wins 
3. Don’t Think! – Maintain an “empty mind” 
4. Find your rhythm 
5. Reflect after you stop doing! 
6. Troubleshoot problems along the way 
 
 

