 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
1 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Unleash Hypnotic Power Loops To Ensure You 
Get Amazing Results With Hypnosis 
 
 
Sample Power Loop: Self Esteem (Restructure Bad Memories) 
 
Mini Loop 1: Regress For Resource 
I want you to form a particularly vivid mental image of a place you find peaceful. I don't 
mind if you can see that image clearly at the conscious level... or if you'd prefer to 
experience it vividly at the unconscious level... what matters is that the feelings you get 
from that image... are particuraly strong... feelings of peace... and restfulness... now... I 
don't know if that experience... relates to an actual place you've been... like an extremely 
pleasureable vacation... or something similarly wonderful... that your unconscious mind 
can conjure up for you... but as you enjoy that experience... I want you to know... that your 
unconscious mind... is preparing you... for something very important... 
 
Mini Loop 2: Set Frame 
You see when you have found this rich place... of tranquility... inner calm... your 
unconscious mind... can take a journey... through your inner strength... the times when 
you surprised people... even surprised yourself... by how determined you were to see 
something through... or the courage that you showed... because it can take courage... to 
face yourself... and be willing to learn... from the experience... and when you have found... 
that inner strength now... you have the perfect conditions... to go into the past... and hunt 
out a memory... 
 
Mini Loop 3: Reframe Negative Experience 
This memory is something very specific... your unconscious mind knows what it is... it is 
very precise... because you still have something left to learn from it... and it has a negative 
charge... of emotions... that you nolonger need... something that you should not let go of... 
until you have absorbed the learnings... and can view the situation... with new 
understandings... because you are much older now... much wiser... you have learned 
many more things in life... that apply to that situation... and you can reevaluate... the 
whole event... in that light... and know that you're safe... and know that you'll come 
through just fine... you might even know... how to handle the whole situation better... 
should it ever arise again... 
 
Mini Loop 4: Support Story (Anecdote) 
A boy I knew went to a new school... and failed terribly... they all laughed at him... thought 
he was stupid... he felt ashamed... and had to work twice as hard... just to keep up... but 
little did he know back then... that he was learning something very important... which 
would prove much more useful than his school work... he was learning to be persistent... 
to keep going no matter what... to persevere despite set backs... and in time his grades 
improved... but more importantly... he had developed a very important pattern of 
behaviour... which in later years... when all around him were failing in business...allowed 

 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
2 
him to persevere... and succeed... Now when he thinks back on his schooldays... he feels 
proud... he knows he was building a valuable foundation for his future life... 
 
Mini Loop 5: Transform (Set Frame) 
And now its time... for your unconscious to let you discover something... because this 
memory it has selected for you... will remind you of something important... that you've 
needed to know... for quite some time... and you'll get these new learnings... not just on an 
intellectual basis... but on an emotional basis... feeling the rightness of it... all the way to 
your toes... liberating you... with experiences of freedom... that this insight... can give 
you... at the unconscious level... 
 
Mini Loop 6: Conscious/Unconscious Dissociation 
And I want your unconscious... to hold back from consciousness... any intellectual hints or 
deeper understandings... about these insights... until the learings have settled... and 
solidified fully... at the unconsious level... so your whole experience changes... bit by bit... 
or all at once... just as soon as you are ready... giving you the freedom you deserve... as a 
person... to enjoy life... and let your personality shine through... freely... 
 
Mini Loop 7: Automatic Action Set 
Let your unconscious take all the time it needs to make that happen... and you don't need 
to move.. or even think anything in particular... just let your mind wander... about... as your 
uconscious mind... goes about the business... of absorbing the changes properly... fully 
and completely... so that you can enjoy the benefits... as a whole person.. in the same 
way as your heart keeps beating automatically... every day... and you've learned to do so 
many things automatically... like shaking someone's hand... no need to think about it... it 
just happens... and only when you're really ready... you'll come back to yourself... feeling 
more energised... and positive... curious to find out... how your unconscious mind... will 
demonstrate these changes to you... 
 
 

