 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
1 
USA +1 310 402 6589 
+44 (0)7970 710 726 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Tell Spellbinding Stories So That People Hang 
On Every Word You Say As They Slip Easily Into 
Hypnosis 
 
Session 1: Creativity & Spontaneity 
 
Remember the core idea of Street Hypnosis is: Storytelling is easy & natural. It only 
stops being easy when you stop making it natural! 
 
So sit back, relax... and let your unconscious do the work! 
 
Creativity Exercises: 
 
1. Word Association Game (2 people take it in turns to come up with an 
association) 
2. Magic Box (imagine a box in front of you. Reach inside and pull something 
out. Say whatever flashes through your mind (words or pictures) without 
thinking or censoring) 
3. Strange New World (imagine a strange new world. Describe in sensory rich 
detail what you see and experience there. Only take it one step at a time, e.g. 
see and egg, then notice its lying in a nest, then notice above it a golden eagle 
protecting it, then notice you're on a mountainside etc...) 
4. Hypnotic World  
 
• choose a hypnotic theme (e.g. relaxation, focus, fascination, trance) 
• Go First! (i.e. start to feel the feelings of the hypnotic theme in your 
own neurology) 
• allow a mental scene to arise from the feelings (this is like the strange 
new world, you just started it differently) 
• describe the scene out loud (use sensory rich descriptions. Its 
important you speak out loud as it makes your mind work differently) 
• use your hypnotic voice (alter your rhythm, timing, pace, tonality etc.) 
 
5. Basic Hypnotic Story (same as hypnotic world, just add a conversational 
introduction that fits the scene, e.g. "I had a strange dream last night..." or "I 
went sailing last week...") 
 
 
 
 

 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
2 
USA +1 310 402 6589 
+44 (0)7970 710 726 
Creativity Blocks: 
 
Remember the main killers of creativity are Blocking and Evading behaviours. Just   
Accept whatever your unconscious mind gives you. You are not responsible for the 
content. This is simply a training exercise. In time you can harness the creativity and 
shape the content to fit the circumstances. 
 
 
Session 2: Storytelling 
 
This session is about telling stories. A lot of stories.  
 
Remember creativity is limitless and it is free. So instead of trying to fix a "broken" 
story - one where the life seems to have been drained from it - simply drop it and 
start a fresh, vibrant, new one. In time you'll know which stories are worth polishing. 
Now raw storytelling experience is more important! 
 
Also remember that storytelling is easy, natural & fun. If it stops being any of these, 
then check your mind for blocking or evading behaviour and correct it.  
 
If you notice yourself about to block or evade something, make yourself jump into 
the experience instead. Make a character talk to you, say something before you can 
think it through. Burst through the walls your mind is trying to erect to contain or 
suppress your creativity. 
 
Your unconscious mind will always make you good offers to move the story on to 
the next step. Your job is to recognise the offer and then to accept it! You do not 
have to be good, clever, funny, witty or anything else. You just have to get out of 
your own way long enough to let your unconscious mind do its job. 
 
The easiest way to accept what your mind offers is to think "Yes and..." instead of 
"No but..." And stop trying to be clever. YOU don't make up the story, your 
unconscious does! 
 
 
The 3 Golden Rules of Storytelling: 
 
1. Start with an Event or a normal Routine 
2. The Event/Routine is Interrupted in some way 
3. Ultimately someone has to be Changed, emotionally affected by the 
experience 
 
An additional element that adds real charm to a story is called Re-incorporation. 
That is when you go full circle and reuse items in the story that you seemed to have 
finished with 
 
 
 

 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
3 
USA +1 310 402 6589 
+44 (0)7970 710 726 
Character & Drama: 
 
What makes the story compelling is that we care what happens to the characters. To 
care for a character we have to have an emotional connection. You cannot logically 
describe the character (he's lonely, she's noble, he's funny...) - there is no emotional 
connection to that.  
 
To experience a character as lonely, noble or funny we must see it in action. The 
character must be up against some unusual or tough situation and respond by nobly, 
with humour or by isolating himself. 
 
Storytelling Exercises: 
 
1. Internal imagery (notice your internal imagery and describe it out loud) 
2. Strange New World (as in Session 1. To make it more interesting make an 
item or a character start to speak. This will add a little pressure and make 
things more dramatic) 
3. Partial Storyteller (in a small group (2-5 people) start telling a story. Only 
make one offer, move the story along just one step and then hand it over to 
the next person. Don't mention the mysterious woman and the expensive 
boat and the secret treasure: that's three offers - and we only want one!) 
4. Incorporation Game (simply get a "seed" item (butterfly, knife, sea, stars, 
kitchen etc) and somehow weave it into your story. For more advanced use, 
make the item an important part of the story) 
5. Magic Number 3 (like the Incorporation Game, only now you have 3 items to 
include.)  
6. Full Circle (Like Magic Number 3. The added challenge then is to start and 
end with the same item - e.g. book, shoe, toilet and back to book at the end.) 
7. Drama Cubed  
 
 
• Take 3 names, 3 places and 3 dreams/problems.  
• Now set 3 scenes introducing character 1 in place 1 with 
dream/problem 1.  
• Do the same for 2 & 3. 
• Once all three are established, bring them together in a scene. 
• First, one by one, they discover each other's dream or problem. 
• Next, those that have a dream must almost lose it somehow (now they 
all have a problem). 
• Finally, one by one, they overcome the problem. This is the perfect 
time to come full circle and use stuff that came up in the other scenes! 
 
 
Session 3: Hypnotic Storytelling 
 
This session is about making your stories do something hypnotic. Essentially you will 
combine the skills you build in the first two sessions and feed them through a new 
set of "hypnotic filters" that will make your stories hypnotic. 
 

 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
4 
USA +1 310 402 6589 
+44 (0)7970 710 726 
Hypnotic Story Exercises: 
 
1. Item Chain (After a warm up do the regular Incorporation Game from Session 
2. This time as soon as you get into a flow, interrupt the story and start a 
brand new one with a new seed item. If you have a partner get him to 
interrupt you and offer you the seed item. It is important that you start a NEW 
story each time. Don't try and incorporate the new item into the old story!) 
2. Emotional Theme (This is like the Hypnotic World exercise in Session 1, 
except now you get to use any emotional them (love, excitement, anger etc.) 
The other improvement is that you will use the principles of Character & 
Drama to set a scene in a way that will evoke the desired emotions. So talking 
about a mother caring for her baby may evoke the emotion of love or nurture, 
but a story about an attack in a dark alley will tend to evoke fear or anxiety. 
Explore a range of emotions with your stories.) 
3. Emotional Roller-Coaster (This combines the skills from the Item Chain and 
the Emotional Theme exercises above. You now choose three separate 
emotions. You tell a story designed to evoke each of the emotions in turn. 
Remember the keys to subtly evoking the desired emotion are Character & 
Drama - let the scene you create do the work. Review your learnings from the 
Drama Cubed exercise in Session 2 if you need to refresh your mind about 
these.) 
4. Emotional Chain (This is identical to the Emotional Roller-Coaster above 
except this time you will fine tune the emotions. The purpose is to move from 
an undesired emotional state (e.g. depression) into a desired one (e.g. joy). 
The way to do this is to carefully sequence the emotions so that the 
"emotional energy" gradually rises with each story. An example of an 
Emotional Chain might be: Depression to Fed Up to Frustration to 
Determination to Enthusiasm to Joy. Note how the chain can have as many 
steps as you need to elegantly move people through emotional states.) 
 
Stories As Vehicles For Hypnosis: 
 
Stories are essentially vehicles that allow you to express hypnotic ideas in different 
forms. Here are the most useful ways to use stories in hypnosis: 
 
1. Emotional Chains - as you have practiced in the Hypnotic Story Exercises, the 
Emotional Chain is a very powerful vehicle for influencing others. You can do 
a whole coaching or therapeutic session this way. Salesmen can move people 
from hesitation to wanton desire, business leaders can enthuse their 
employees. The applications are as endless as your imagination! 
 
2. Isomorphism - an isomorphic story is one which has a linear relationship to 
the problem or situation to be resolved. As the story finds a solution so the 
unconscious will tend to find a similar solution to the real situation.  
 
A simplistic every day example would be someone helping a friend through a 
tough spot by telling a story of how he went through the same kind of 
problem. Isomorphic stories can be more indirect though. So the old Fairy 

 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
5 
USA +1 310 402 6589 
+44 (0)7970 710 726 
Tale of "Little Red Riding Hood" was once a teaching tale to warn young girls 
about protecting their virtue from men. 
 
3. Blending Realities (Audience Participation) - this is a very powerful process 
that stories offer the hypnotist. Whilst you tell your story you begin to blend 
realities by incorporating things that are happening to your audience into the 
stories.  
 
So if there is a sudden breeze in the room, your story develops a sudden 
storm; a loud noise outside becomes a crash of thunder in the story and so 
on. You can even use this to pace the onset of trance in your audience: 
changes in blinking, breathing, time distortions, comfort... all these can be 
suggested and paced within the story.  
 
The simplest example of Blending Realities is the "My Friend John" 
Technique. In this you tell someone about a hypnosis session you did with 
"John". As you describe John's experience, you actually hypnotise the 
hypnosis target in front of you. 
 
4. Interspersal Technique - This is the classic way that "Ericksonians" like to use 
stories. In the Interspersal Technique you tell any story (the content is 
irrelevant) and you mark out with consistent analogues (e.g. a gesture) or 
tonal changes certain words and phrases that are the actual suggestions. So in 
the Classic Storyteller Induction that you have a transcript for you will see the 
following suggestions interspersed in the story: "And with these pleasant 
memories inside his mind, little Allan would go to the Barn in order to 
accomplish the task that waited for him inside. " 
 
5. Parallel Processes & Dual Realities - these are related to isomorphic stories, 
only this time you are shifting the emphasis to giving your hypnosis target a 
suggestion to engage in a mental process that will get the desired outcome.  
 
So you might suggest that they have a dream in which they overcome 
something bad. You can do this isomorphically - i.e. the character in the story 
has the same kind of dream. You can also do it as a dual reality where you 
talk to your hypnotic target directly, but weave this into your story enough for 
some doubt to exist as to whether you are doing this.  
 
The simplest way to do this is to use extended quotes: e.g. "... and the 
magician said to charlie "now go inside and have a powerful dream from 
which you will learn something of great importance!"  
 
 
The important thing to remember when you use these five vehicles is that you can 
use them ALL at the SAME time! That's when your stories develop an incredibly 
hypnotic character! 
 
 
 

 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
6 
USA +1 310 402 6589 
+44 (0)7970 710 726 
Hypnotic Structures For Storytellers: 
 
Now that you know what to make the story do, you can refine things further by using 
these six simple techniques that make stories even more hypnotic. 
 
1. Nested Loops - this is the classic way that stories are made more hypnotic. 
You use the Zeigarnik effect in your favour by telling between 3 - 12 stories in 
a row. You do not finish any of them, but break near the end and start the 
next story. Once the final story is told you can start to "close your loops" by 
finishing your stories in reverse order (i.e. the last story is finished first). This 
has a tendency to create amnesia which is useful to prevent the conscious 
mind from over-analysing what you did.  
 
Nested Loops can be made more sophisticated by incorporating the hypnotic 
story vehicles discussed above (see diagram) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Extended Quotes - this is a great way to talk directly to your hypnotic target 
without breaking out of the story. Essentially have one character in the story 
tell another exactly what you want to suggest to your target. This creates a 
dual reality where the target is left guessing if you're talking to her or not. 
 

 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
7 
USA +1 310 402 6589 
+44 (0)7970 710 726 
3. Stacked Realities - this takes extended quotes to a new level. Now you're 
going to have multiple extended quotes fitted together in a story so that its 
hard to figure out who is saying what to whom. Whilst the conscious mind is 
trying to work this out, your suggestions slip in unchallenged.  
 
A simple way to do this is to fill the story with minor characters and name 
them: "John, who is the brother of my brother's Alex' wife Mary, was talking 
to his brother-in-law Andy - who is married to his eldest sister Angela, about a 
conversation he had with Alex. He said "..."  "  
 
Note how all the names tend to overload conscious processing and how at 
the end we don't know who was actually talking (was it Alex, John or Andy??) 
 
4. Ambiguities - what comes to mind when I say "Bank"? A place with money? 
The side of a river? An aeronautical maneouvre? The fact is your unconscious 
will process all these meanings and offer to consciousness only the one that 
fits the context best. So using ambiguities with a consistent theme will allow 
you to activate unconscious associations outside of any conscious mediation. 
They can also be used more blatantly as embedded suggestions, e.g. "I didn't 
know if I should... go inside...” 
 
5. Switch Referential Index - this is an underused but powerful technique. To 
put it simply you make a "mistake" as you tell the story and switch to the 
second person pronoun "you".  
 
So if the story calls for saying "As John walked in, he started to do the work he 
came here to do" you might say "As John walked in, start to do the work you 
came here to do" If you keep telling the story they don't get a chance to 
analyse the mistake fully and the phrase ends up sticking out inside their mind 
as a direct suggestion to the unconscious. 
 
6. Analogues - again this is an underused technique in hypnosis. An analogue is 
when you use your body-language to add an additional layer of meaning to 
what you're doing. So your story might say "And John took a deep breath and 
went into hypnosis" - if you now pointed at your hypnotic target and nodded 
meaningfully as you said this, it becomes a powerful suggestion that she do 
likewise. This is another way in which you can use the Dual Reality Principle. 
 
Linguistic Tricks For Improving Hypnotic Stories: 
 
 
1. Puns & Wordplay - most people enjoy puns, wordplays and word related 
humour. using this as part of your story creates a kind of rhythm that is more 
"seductive" - in the sense that your target wants to keep listening. This is kind 
of like entertaining them into hypnosis. 
 
2. Hot Words - this is something that many poor hypnotists and poor storytellers 
miss out on. Words have a tremendous power over us. Some words have a 
strong emotional impact. A "baby" makes you feel more than an "infant" - 

 
                        igor@StreetHypnosis.com  
8 
USA +1 310 402 6589 
+44 (0)7970 710 726 
though technically they refer to the same thing. Be aware of the emotional 
undertones in words and use more emotional heavy-hitters like: power, now, 
baby, love, hate, beautiful, wonder, mother (or mum, mom, mami with the 
right people), sunny etc. 
 
3. Conceptual Trance Themes - a conceptual trance theme is a hypnotic theme 
or word that you "rift" around in order to evoke the experience in someone. 
This is essentially what you did in the Hypnotic World exercise in Session 1.  
 
All you are doing is talking about a theme that is hypnotic: e.g. relaxation, 
trance, sleep, hypnosis, focus, absorption, dreams. Talking about any of these 
topics will tend to open the doors to hypnotic states.  
 
You can talk about these themes as a philosopher, scientist, doctor, guru or 
simply as a friend sharing an experience. The point is that in doing this you 
tend to activate useful associations. This also creates a great opportunity for 
using embedded suggestions. 
 
4. Ambient Trance Themes - the themes will be the same kind of themes 
mentioned above in Conceptual Trance Themes (CTTs). The key difference is 
that this is more indirect.  
 
Whilst CTTs allow you to talk about your theme directly (e.g. "People 
normally have 90 minute sleep cycles. When you enter a sleep cycle at first 
you don't dream."), with Ambient Trance Themes (ATTs) you never directly 
mention the trance theme, you evoke it through Characterisation & Drama - 
as you did in the Emotional Theme exercise above.  
 
Talking about a soldier fighting for days, and his battle against fatigue can 
create a context that will allow your audience to feel tires just by listening to 
your description. I remember reading a book about a man who was lost in the 
desert. For some reason I ended up drinking a lot of water that day! 
 
5. Sensory Rich Descriptions - simply use the language of the five senses. Add 
in descriptions of what can be seen, heard, felt, smelt and tasted to bring the 
experience to life. You can do this as a guided process or an open process. A 
guided process gives details - essentially like a novel - which the hypnotic 
target must adapt to.  
 
The open process is "artfully vague" so that the target can choose his own way 
of experiencing what you describe. Here is a guided description of a beach 
"the sand was pale yellow and warm from the hot sun overhead. The sky was 
deep blue and the ocean an exquisite aquamarine. The water felt warm 
against his skin.."  
 
Here is the same scene as an open process "The beach had a unique colour 
and he could feel the temperature of the air. The colour of the ocean 
contrasted to the colour of the beach and the temperature of the water could 
be felt against his skin..." 

