For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
Discover Exactly How Hypnosis 
Masters Create “Hypnotic 
Realities” In Others With Their 
Magnetic Personal Power 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
        igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
Discover Exactly How Hypnosis Masters Create “Hypnotic 
Realities” In Others With Their Magnetic Personal Power. 
 
Session 1: The “Body” Of Personal Power 
 
Personal Power is one of the neglected KEYS to powerful hypnotic interactions. Discover how to 
become the kind of hypnotist that naturally and easily instils in others confidence and belief in 
your abilities! 
 
A useful side-effect is that your own Charisma or Personal Magnetism will increase also! 
 
Personal Power Allows You To: 
 
1. Be More Charismatic  
2. Create “Hypnotic Realities” Internally, Which You Then “Project Out” Onto Others.  
3. Influence Others Through The Power Of Your Personal Reality – Without Overtly Doing 
Anything!  
 
What Is A Reality? 
 
As the name implies, it’s the sum total of what we believe and expect from the world around us 
and our place/abilities within it.  
 
Consensual reality is created when people unconsciously “ping” out to their environment to 
check that their perception of reality is accurate, i.e., still the accepted truth. When they get a 
positive ping back, all is well. But when they don’t, their reality eventually starts to unravel 
itself. This phenomenon lies at the heart of “culture shock”. 
 
What Causes A Weak Grasp Of Reality? 
 
1. People Abdicating Responsibility To A Group (or Leader): i.e., the “Herd Instinct” 
2. Lack Of Focus: if you’re not sure what you believe, you don’t know what you’ll believe! 
3. Lack Of Conviction: this is partially caused by a lack of clarity/focus in thinking, but also 
is due to lack of Personal Power. The less personal power you have, the more readily 
you’ll allow your reality to collapse and align with the reality of someone with more 
Personal Power. 
4. Lack Of Knowledge: most people take things for granted without knowing what it is they 
think they know. A physicist will be much harder to persuade that a machine works as a 
“quantum device”… unless your reasons are intellectually sound to her. 
5. Ego Based Realities Are Prone To Crashes Unless Constantly Supported (see below)  

 
        igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
3 
 
Automatic Defence Mechanisms 
 
The unconscious mind protects each person from ideas s/he is not ready to handle. If you push 
too hard on someone’s reality you may trigger one of these defence mechanisms. Clumsy and 
inept persuaders often do this when they pay attention more to the persuasion “technique” than 
the purpose and spirit of that technique! 
 
Here are some of the most common triggers/responses: 
 
1. Them v. Us Thinking: any information that comes from “Them” is suspect, immediately 
resisted and not to be believed on principle. In fact, if “They” say ‘black’ it tends to 
reaffirm ‘white’ as being truth! 
2. Evasion: this mechanism triggers ANY response that will deflect the focus off the main 
issue/question to at hand. Anger, crying, exuberance, “missing-the-point-completely” 
thinking, and taking the conversation over – these are all examples of this defence 
mechanism. 
3. Autopilot Triggers: to save time we all learn that in certain situations we simply switch 
off and stop processing new information. When you get too many sales call in the 
evenings, you soon learn to recognize a salesman from the slightly unnatural sound of  
their voice and switch off (or hang up!).  The same is true for many who see a beggar on 
the streets or a “Chugger” (a “charity mugger” people who use aggressive conversation 
tactics to shame people into contributing). 
 
What Is Personal Power? 
 
Personal Power is a kind of  “Externally Oriented Interpersonal Trance” which allows you to 
“Powerfully Project An Inner Reality Through Your Unconscious Sub-communications”. 
 
The 3 Keys To Building Personal Power 
 
• Thoughts  –  these create the your reality 
• Feelings  –  these empower the your reality 
• Behaviours  –  these project (i.e. sub-communicate) your reality 
 
Each of these three keys reinforces the other two in an infinitely reversible chain!  Think of a 
triangle – where each corner adds power to the other two corners.... 
 
The Behaviours Of Personal Power 
 
Personal Power 
 
Confidence 
Stillness 
Clear, Smooth Voice 
Vocal Projection (clarity & volume) 
Smooth (typically slow) Movements 
Ignores Irrelevant Stimuli 
Clear, Focused Eye Contact 
Disempowered 
 
Insecurity/Neurotic 
Fidgeting 
Hesitant Staccato (often due to poor breathing) 
Vocal Capping (voice cannot get much louder) 
Jerky, Fast Movements 
Overly Responds/Overly Reacts To Stimuli 
Darting/Restless Eyes (often little eye contact) 

 
        igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
4 
 
Personal Power Exercises 
 
Jedi “Force” Powers: pretend that you have Jedi mind powers and can lift an object with your 
mind if only you concentrate hard enough. This warms up your “mental muscle” to go from 
sluggish/passive to a more active/engaged and focused mode. 
 
Eye Contact: maintain a (friendly!!) eye contact with people in normal conversations long past 
the point where you feel the impulse to look away for a brief moment.  Time yourself on how 
long you can focus your gaze without flinching – i.e., your gaze does not waver from their eye 
(pick one or the other). Often people will break contact (or defocus – which is another form of 
flinching) for a split second. Remember that you can still have an expressive face – don’t go into 
“Zombie” mode! 
 
… Pause… as the name implies, when someone talks to you, stay focused and keep eye contact 
AND every time you answer them, wait for a mental count of “1-1000, 2-1000, 3-1000” or 
longer before you say anything or make any kind non-verbal response. The secret is to not give 
ANY response (no flinching, coughing, swaying from foot to foot, fidgeting) for a few seconds 
and see what happens! 
 
 

 
        igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
5 
Session 2: The “Mind” Of Personal Power 
 
When you stop “supporting” people’s realities (by becoming non-reactive), they often collapse 
their reality.  You will witness them get increasingly nervous and send out more “pings” in an 
effort to get back to “normal”. 
 
How To Create Your Own Reality 
 
1. What Do You Want: if you don’t know what your reality is, nobody else will! 
2. Get Very Clear: remember that mental clarity will help you maintain your own reality. 
3. Focus On Your Vision: once you have an “inner vision” hold on to it with your attention. 
In time you’ll just assume it to be true (see Session 3) but for now, use your focus to 
determine your reality! 
 
How To Project Your Reality 
 
1. States Are The Key To Projection: they drive your sub-communications! 
2. GO FIRST: all realities have a “feel” to them, a set of states associated with them. You 
must inhabit those states yourself. GO FIRST! 
3. Feel It: yes, I am repeating step 2 – it’s important! Intensify the state, believe in the reality 
yourself.  Put aside doubts. Make it real for you! 
4. Do It: now just go into the situation and do your normal thing (remember to still be 
socially responsible – no dark cape wearing hypnotists with mad glaring eyes please!!) 
Your unconscious will take care of sub-communicating the feeling that you should still 
have drifting in the background of your mind. 
 
What Are Reality Tests? 
 
From time to time you’ll get a clash of realities. Someone doesn’t want to let go of their own 
version or they’re afraid to enter your reality (perhaps they tried it but they were too weak to 
maintain it and now want avoid the pain of it collapsing in on them again). 
 
People will test your reality by: joking about it (usually the kind of jokes with a barb attached), 
asking irrelevant questions or making distracting comments (they’re trying to evade the issue), 
confronting you, e.g. with aggressive behaviours (this one is more common amongst children 
but less so among adults) and by attempting to reframe the situation to their liking. 
 
Each of these tests needs to be handled well, or you’ll end up in their reality! 
 
How To Pass Reality Tests 
 
The KEY is don’t react! Don’t get flustered; don’t let your emotions fluctuate. Stay calm, focused 
and in control. 
 
Do not engage is a logical debate. There are some few occasions where logic is the key to 
persuasion. But they are rare in today’s world. You will lose the argument by winning the debate 
because the battle is fought in state not in reason! 
 
 

 
        igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
6 
Tactics you can use include: 
 
• Do a reality test on their reality test (e.g. tease them back!) 
• Repetition without deviation – state your case without ever introducing new elements or 
changes. 
• Inoculate – use the Street Hypnosis Reality Set (see below) to prevent tests in the first 
place! 
• Out-Frame the test – set a frame at the beginning that will make it hard for a test to occur 
later. 
 
The Purpose Of Projecting A Reality 
 
To Capture Their Emotions & Imaginations Whilst Distracting Their Intellect. 
 
The Street Hypnosis Reality Set 
 
This is a “silent script” you run to convey the following attitudes: 
 
1. This demands your undivided attention 
2. You will treat this with respect (by the way – go first on this and treat them with respect) 
3. This is very important 
4. Something amazing is about to happen! 
 
Exercises 
 
1. Change Your Physiology – practice carrying yourself with Personal Power! 
2. Jedi Mind Trick – with the Street Hypnosis Realities as silent scripts 
3. Do Mentally & Physically Challenging Tasks 
4. Command Behaviours – get used to getting people doing what you want. Ask them for 
little things constantly (stand here, shift back a bit, what time is it… etc.) 
5. The “Private Bubble” – focus so intently on your conversation that everything around you 
fades from significance. They will tend to follow you over time – you have a private 
reality bubble now! 
 
This will get you into positive & energized state of confidence, mastery and authority. 
 
 

 
        igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
7 
Session 3: The “Spirit” Of Personal Power 
 
So far we’ve been focusing on doing. The “Spiritual” dimension of Personal Power takes you 
from the realm of “doing” into the realm of “being”. 
 
Remember: your most powerful source of Personal Power is YOU! It’s not about doing more 
things to get more of it, its about STOPPING the things that inhibit its natural flow in you! 
 
Ego v. Self Esteem 
 
We’re all born with self-esteem. There is no such thing as a shy baby – it just expects (and of 
course needs!) to be loved, taken care of, served etc. A baby never doubts himself or his sense 
of value – he cannot even conceive of doing so. 
 
Then life happens: children get hurt, disappointed, ignored, yelled at, talked down to… so many 
things happen that shake us from that natural foundation.  
 
Of course at the time we were too young to have the knowledge or resources to deal with the 
problem, so we come up with a plan B – stories that we tell ourselves about why we’re still 
worthwhile. This is what we call the “Ego” (this has little to do with Freud’s conception). 
 
So some children have the story that they’re smart: they do well at school because they crave 
the love and attention they think this gets them. They have forgotten that they can be loved for 
just who they are. Others do it by being funny, show offs, rebellious… walk into any school and 
you’ll see these stories being formed and reinforced. 
 
These stories are NOT us. They are not even true. Ironically, it is these stories that keep us from 
our personal power. 
 
The Ego is a dissociated entity – it is an intellectual construct that is not plugged into our true 
nature. As such, all energy spent on the story is like blowing hard on a piece of paper to keep it 
floating. When your breath runs out – it comes crashing down. 
 
The Ego feeds off other people’s responses. If they pay attention to you, it feels good. If they 
ignore (or criticize) you, the Ego panics – it’s happy little world is now threatened and it will do 
whatever it can to get back to the status quo. Even if that means sabotaging positive changes! 
 
The Ego creates a strange pseudo-confidence that only functions in very tightly managed 
circumstances (if at all!). Outside of that we tend to lose confidence (like when we try and learn 
something new and feel afraid of failing).  
 
One reason for this fear is “cognitive dissonance” – we have a mental image of how we want to 
be perceived, which we try to project to the outside world. This is the flawless “perfect person” 
most of us think we should be. But inside, we don’t feel like that. So we have an internal battle 
or clash between who we try to make others think we are and what we think we really are. The 
larger that gap, the more psychic pain we feel in trying to “perform”. 
 
A performer is either constantly rehearsing to stay “in the zone” or she risks getting performance 
anxiety when she starts up again. Contrast this with an enthusiast that just loves what she does 

 
        igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
8 
and doesn’t care how good it is. She cannot get performance anxiety as she has nothing to prove 
(but only enjoys)! Often her rate of progress (measured by time spent on a task) is also faster.  
 
The Ego constantly demands external acceptance to keep it afloat. If you withhold this 
acceptance (as in the exercise in Session 1), it starts to get desperate and will eventually crash. 
This is the source of much of people’s “bi-polar” experience in life: great highs followed by 
periods of lows.  
 
Power v. Force: The Question Of Ego In Hypnosis 
 
The desire to be “one up” or be better than someone else in some way is an Ego driven desire. 
Someone with true Self Esteem simply does not care if others are better or worse than him, 
because his sense of value and importance does not come from being compared to others (i.e., 
external reinforcers). 
 
Many people are drawn to hypnosis because they think it will give them power over others.  
Unfortunately they initially miss the point: true power comes from inside – it is about being able 
to move through the world unhindered. Like a candle that shines in a storm just as brightly 
without any fear of ever going out.  
 
Power is the ability to be in command of the self at any moment so that no matter what the 
external circumstances are you have complete access to all your internal resources so you can 
make the maximum positive impact that is possible for you at that time. 
 
So power is independent of external forces.  When people seek power over others – they use 
Force, not true Power! 
 
Force ends up doing as much harm to the operator as to the subject – because it reinforces the 
ego boom-bust cycle. In fact, the more Force “Power” you have the more erratic these cycles 
become (i.e., higher highs and lower lows).  
 
You see this in people that get thrust into “power positions” by fate: e.g., new rock or film stars, 
business gurus, politicians. If they have not been prepared for their sudden rise to power (e.g., 
through many years of hard work to understand the illusion of what they end up with) they go 
through an intense period. Sometimes they come out with true inner power. Sometimes they 
come out more neurotic than ever before – addicted to sex, drugs, alcohol or other problem 
behaviours. 
 
Another important distinction between Power & Force is that people tend to resist being forced.  
However, they are naturally inclined to surrender to Power.  
 
Ego Protection Mechanisms 
 
• Ego has a story to maintain (known as “Saving Face”) 
• It will manipulate others to their detriment to save face 
• It tries to create fear in you to prevent you from doing something where you might lose 
face – i.e., where your story might get exposed as a lie (e.g. Performance Anxiety)  
• It tends to blame others for mistakes or try to rationalize failures 
• It is external to the self, so constantly needs to be reinforced merely to exist! 

 
        igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
9 
Ego Based Realities Are Weak 
 
• They need external support (validation, acceptance, admiration etc) or they crumble. 
• They prevent you from making the mistakes you need to in order to learn. Your learning 
increases with the amount of things you’re willing to do wrong! 
• It is more important to “save face” (i.e., preserve the story) than it is to get results. This is 
the source of much of the destructive “Corporate Politics” that can be witnessed. 
• It gives your true power away – you need others to validate, accept and admire you 
instead of finding everything you need inside yourself! 
 
How to Kill The Ego 
 
• Know Your Self  
 
• Your Identity – Who Are You? 
• Your Values – What Is Important To You? 
• Your Expectations – How Should The World Treat You? 
 
• Deliberately Challenge The Story – have objectives that are not tied up with looking 
good. E.g., when playing tennis, don’t play to win, but see if you can make the ball spin 
one way or another. 
 
This is about feeling the fear and doing it anyway. It is about putting movement back into 
those parts of life that have become paralyzed by the Ego’s attempts at maintaining its 
story. 
 
Remember: What You Resist, Persists! So just accept it and get on with life anyway. 
 
We all tend to be “addicted” to certain ways of being. We’ll unconsciously manufacturer 
situations or excuses to feel angry, sad, frustrated, helpless etc. If you discover that you’re 
getting “upset” once again, don’t take it too seriously. It’s just your body detoxing from 
years of bad habits!  
 
• Let Go Of The Outcome – this does NOT mean don’t have any goals! Simply don’t rely 
on your goals for your sense of value. Goals are about directions not about points. 
 
How To Use Personal Power In Hypnosis 
 
1. Have a purpose (a vision you actually value) and follow it fiercely. 
2. Remember who you are. A Failure ! You Are A Failure (btw “!” is a mathematical 
symbol that denotes “does not mean” or more accurately “does not equal”) 
3. Replace “need to prove hypnosis works” with “curious how hypnosis will work this 
time” 
4. STOP THINKING – get out of your head and into life! 
5. Remember that Now Is The Moment Of Power – this is the only moment you can 
change. Not yesterday or tomorrow. So be here now with all your attention! 
6. Maintain Your State! 
 

