For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
Uncover The Secrets Of Naturally 
Developing Irresistible 
Suggestions 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
Uncover The Secrets Of Naturally Developing Irresistible 
Suggestions 
 
Session 1: “Magnetic” Suggestions 
 
Creating Hypnotic Scenery 
 
Erickson often talked about “setting the scene” for hypnosis and hypnotherapy to work better. 
There is a way to prepare (or “prime”) the mind in order to make it more likely that it will 
“spontaneously” go the way you want it to. This is the purpose of creating irresistible 
suggestions! 
 
When you get good at hypnotic language, you stop DOING it and start BEING an elegant 
hypnotist. Doing language pattern drills is not only fun, it prepares your mind so that later you 
won’t have to think of the words, they will come to you when you need them. 
 
All good hypnotists know that in order to be more successful with hypnosis you have to create 
an air of “mental expectancy”. People have to feel like something BIG or important is about to 
happen. This is where we’ll end up in after taking this journey through irresistible suggestions. 
 
The Power of Words 
 
Words can totally transform us. You are sad, but a well-chosen word or two from a friend can 
break that spell. We have been moved by a beautiful story, energised by an inspired joke, 
motivated by an ingenious explanation or enchanted by an exquisite song.  This is the power 
that the right words can have on people. 
 
“Magnetic” Poetry 
 
But how to find the right words? 
 
Poets and songwriters have often complained how hard it is. This is surprising when you think of 
just how easy it is when you have a helpful tool. To create interesting poetry just buy a cheap 
set of “poetic” fridge magnets. These are words printed on a magnetic strip. You can arrange 
them on your fridge in any order you want. Only a little fiddling will produce some pretty 
“deep” sounding poetry. 
 
Why is that? 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
Well the unconscious mind is freer to express itself. Whilst you think you’re randomly arranging 
the magnets, your unconscious can guide your hand a little. As soon as you come across a 
satisfying combination, you will FEEL it. In other words, your unconscious recognises the power 
of the sentence you just created and makes you FEEL the impact of it. 
 
Hey presto – instant poetry! 
 
We’re going to borrow this concept to improve the power of your suggestions! 
 
Fridge magnets essentially have 5 different types of words that are combined to create these 
powerful and moving poetic sentences. The 5 basic types of words are: 
 
1. Verbs – “doing” words like: run, jump, smile, talk, eat & sleep 
2. Adverbs – words that describe Verbs, like: quickly, slowly, happily, gently, carefully 
3. Nouns – these are basically names, places and things: Paul, cat, dog, London, house 
4. Adjectives – words that describe a noun, like: big, grey, light, complex, fine, strong 
5. Fillers – these are all the words needed to make a sentence complete, like: the, and, to 
etc. 
 
Fridge Magnetism 
 
We’re going to “translate” regular fridge magnets into hypnotic fridge magnets, that will allow 
you to master the art of irresistible suggestion. When we take the 5 categories above, you can fit 
in all kinds of hypnotic language: 
 
1. Verbs = Suggestions: e.g. relax, go into hypnosis, feel good, remember, forget 
2. Adverbs = Presuppositions, distractions, modifiers (we’ll get to these later) 
3. Nouns = Nominalisations: e.g. Happiness, Resources, Memories, Understandings 
4. Adjectives = Qualifiers, distractors, hyperboles (again, we’ll look at these later) 
5. Fillers = Conjunctions, pseudo-logic etc 
 
Now, how do we use these hypnotic fridge magnets? 
 
Consider these suggestions: 
 
Relax 
You can relax 
You can, you know, relax 
You can, you know Paul, relax 
Perhaps you can, you know Paul, relax 
Perhaps you can, you know Paul, relax comfortably 
Perhaps you can, you know Paul, gradually relax comfortably 
Perhaps you really can, you know Paul, gradually relax comfortably 
Perhaps you really can, you know Paul, gradually relax comfortably NOWww! 
 
This is called “internally stacking” a suggestion. The same suggestion (relax) is made more 
complex and develops more “meaning” when you add words around it to make it sound more 
meaningful! 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
 
Internal Stacking 
 
Internally stacking a suggestion works on several levels: 
 
1. Misdirects attention: “relax comfortably” emphasises the idea of comfort. Your thoughts 
will tend to focus on whether or not its IS comfortable, and you’ll tend to forget to think 
about whether or not you’re relaxing! 
2. Overloads the Conscious: the conscious mind can only handle 7 +/- 2 bits of 
information. When your suggestions has 9 levels stack inside it (like the final example 
above) it gets very tricky to keep track of everything that going on – which increases the 
chances that the suggestion can slip inside! 
3. Creates the scenery: this is called “semantic weaving” – you are using language to create 
an atmosphere that feels relaxing or trancelike or whatever else you want the atmosphere 
to be! 
 
How To Use Hypnotic Fridge Magnets 
 
Create 6 lists, these will cover essentially 3 of the categories that we discussed above (verbs, 
adverbs and fillers). Here are the six lists with examples of language: 
 
Verb (hypnotic suggestion)     Filler (conjunction) 
    Filler (modifier 1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Filler (modifier 2) 
 
    Filler (modifier 3)  
    Adverb  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Now listen to the demonstration on the mp3 file to hear these patterns in action. 
 
Relax 
Feel Comfort 
Focus 
Go Deeper 
Go Into Hypnosis 
and 
or 
when 
as 
while 
maybe 
perhaps 
you could 
you might find yourself 
 
Not yet 
Gradually 
Little by Little 
Soon 
In a Moment 
Now 
Suddenly 
Spontaneously 
Immediately 
Instantly 
Effortlessly 
Naturally 
Without Thinking 
Joyfully 
Enthusiastically 
Confidently 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
Session 2: Irresistible Suggestions 
 
5 Levels Of Training 
 
We can take the basic idea of fridge magnets through five levels of training to reach the level of 
irresistible suggestions. We covered the first to levels in Session 1 and will cover the third and 
fourth here: 
 
1. Simple verbs & conjunctions 
2. Level1 + adverbs and verb modifiers 
3. Level2 + nouns (nominalisations and hot words) 
4. Level3 + adjectives (trance themes & hyperboles) 
5. Unconscious Priming 
 
Whenever you use suggestion remember: The Context Is King 
 
Don’t tread suggestions as magic bullets – they have to fit the conversation or you will just come 
across as socially inept or worse mentally deranged! Use your common sense and your “social 
intelligence” to smoothly fit suggestions into the context that you are in! 
 
Also stay at the level of your hypnotic target’s intelligence/vocabulary level. If you use long and 
complex words with someone that has never heard them before, you will have wasted 
everyone’s time! 
 
The Spirit Of Training 
 
Remember these exercises are training tools to get really good at suggestion. They are NOT 
meant to be used blindly to create hypnotic inductions. Your understanding of your hypnotic 
target and your use of hypnotic strategies will always shape what you know into something 
appropriate. 
 
Think of these exercises like a musician’s scales: they give you the flexibility to hit any note 
when you need it, but they are not the music itself! 
 
Here are some good attitudes to approach this stuff with: 
 
1. GO FIRST – when you do hypnosis be IN hypnosis (at least an outwardly focused version 
of it! 
2. Have FUN – this is not a chore! 
3. Explore – you’ll learn the most at the edges. That means you should push it until you 
make a “mistake” – otherwise you won’t know where the edges are. 
 
You may also want to keep a suggestion diary where you write down favourite language 
patterns or phrases you hear from others and reading books. 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
The Power Of Nouns 
 
Nouns are basically people, places, things or concepts. In hypnosis there are two types of nouns 
that are especially useful: 
 
1. Nominalisatons 
2. Hot Words 
 
Nominalisations – are abstract words for concepts, i.e. things that don’t physically exist. More 
specifically when you take a word (like “I love you” or “I am learning X”) and “freeze” it so it 
becomes a thing (like “love” or “learnings”) you get a nominalisation. These are powerful 
hypnotic words because the unconscious mind has more freedom (there’s another 
nominalisation!) to make up its own meaning for the word. 
 
Hot Words – are words that have a particularly strong emotional meaning. As an example: baby, 
fire or death have strong emotional meanings. Saying “the baby burned to death in the fire” feels 
much stronger than “the infant perished in the conflagration.” 
 
Useful Nominalisations 
 
Here are some ideas of nominalisations that will be useful in hypnosis: 
 
High Level Concepts 
Learnings – understandings, knowledge, insight, experience 
 
Resources – abilities, skills, talents, traits 
 
Change – growth, evolution, transformation, metamorphosis 
 
Resources 
Happiness – joy, contentment, delight, light-heartedness 
 
Strength – courage, power, confidence, vigour, resilience 
 
Love – affection, tenderness, warmth, desire, kindness, goodwill 
 
Exercise 
 
Create your own hypnotic language boxes as you did at the end of Session 1. Only this time 
have separate boxes which you can collect into these categories: 
 
1. Level1: verbs, conjunctions & phrase roots 
2. Level2: action accelerators, language softeners, frustrators, modal operators, adverbs 
3. Level3: nouns, nominalisations & hot words 
4. Level4: adjectives, trance themes & hyperboles 
 
Insider Tip – Lack Of Referential Index 
 
When you don’t bother saying who specifically is doing or saying something, you have a lack of 
referential index (LoRI). For example: 
 
You can relax, Peter relaxes, I am relaxing: all the HAVE a referential index. BUT 
People can relax: does NOT – after all which people am I talking about?? 
Relaxation can be enjoyed: this is a PASSIVE LoRI 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
 
Passive LoRI’s are especially powerful. Forget what you learned in English class about active and 
passive verbs. A passive verb is good because its more hypnotic. People need to make sense of 
it by trying it on for themselves at the unconscious level. 
 
To use a Passive LoRI is easy. Simply follow this formula: 
 
X [nominalisation] can be Yed [enjoyed] 
 
So you get: 
 
Happiness can be enjoyed 
Luck can be experienced 
Mastery can be understood 
Relaxation can be discovered 
Elegance can be celebrated etc. 
 
Useful Hot Words & Trance Themes 
 
You can use a dictionary or better still a thesaurus to stimulate your own thinking. These are just 
some examples to get you going: 
 
Hot Words: Amazing, Secret, Wonderful, Astonishing, Fantastic, Elegant, Classy, Exciting, 
Magical, Outrageous, Incredible, Powerful, Thrilling, Compelling, Electrifying. 
 
Trance Themes: Peaceful, Comfortable, Calm, Calming, Soothing, Relaxing, Still, Pleasing, 
Enjoyable, Pleasurable, Warm, Quiet, Patient, Natural. 
 
Now use the fridge magnet concept to put these together into irresistible suggestions and 
hypnotic language patterns! 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Session 3: Undetectable Suggestions 
 
Pebbles In A Pond 
 
The suggestions you make are like pebbles thrown into a pond. Each one will affect the mind in 
a different way, causing ripples to arise. When you throw one in after the other, so that they are 
close in time, then the ripples of one will also affect the ripples of the other.  
 
Each word is like a pebble. Its stirs a train of associations inside of us, built up over a lifetime of 
experiences. Like the pebbles interacting with each other, suggestions blend with each other to 
create new meanings. This way you get to create multiple levels of meaning within a simple set 
of suggestions! 
 
Unconscious Priming Examples 
 
When you prepare the mind to respond in one way over another, you have primed it. Its like 
playing dice with a loaded set of dice – the outcome is going to be in your favour! 
 
Remember the lessons from the Priming studies in the recordings: 
 
1. Hot & Cold cups of coffee (how friendly do you judge a person to be?) 
2. Erickson’s ring story (the lady who couldn’t go into hypnosis until Erickson indirectly 
showed her that her secret about an old engagement was safe) 
3. The hidden bucket of water with “citrus” scented washing up fluids (people clean up 
after themselves when they smell cleaning fluids) 
4. The subliminal gripping study (people grip harder to win more money even if its only 
subliminal) 
5. The investment game study (a backpack or a leather portfolio will influence whether 
people co-operate or compete) 
6. The Shameful or Virtuous memories (people who thought of something shameful needed 
anti-sceptic wipes to “clean their conscience” symbolically) 
7. Grey, Wrinkled, Florida (words with associated meanings to old age can make people 
walk more slowly!) 
8. Erickson’s son wants to borrow the car (he tells lots of car related stories, but Erickson 
catches him out because they were too obvious for him) 
 
How To Use Unconscious Priming 
 
Like the “grey, wrinkled, Florida” study, you want to develop a list of words that are all 
associated with the hypnotic scenery or atmosphere you want people in. Here’s a simple 
process to do this: 
 
1. Begin with the end: think about what you want, and what kind of “place” the mind 
needs to be in in order to naturally do what you say. If you want people to walk slowly, 
the old age is good. If you want people to feel friendly, then friends & family will 
probably be a good end to keep in mind. 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
2. Free Associate:  use the association game to come up with as many different word sor 
phrases that relate to the scene you thought about in step 1. For friends you may have a 
dog (man’s best friend), hugs (how close friends often greet), laughter (something you do 
with friends), appreciation (how friends treat each other) etc. 
 
3. Vocabulary: now write down the vocabulary (dog, hugs, laughter) and start to use it 
liberally but in a different context: e.g. “look at the way this car hugs the road… safety is 
no laughing matter for us… its not just the underdog that can appreciate the advantages 
of this model…” 
 
 
 

