For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
How To Use The Distraction 
Method To Secretly Influence 
People’s Unconscious Mind To 
Give You What You Want. 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Use The Distraction Method To Secretly Influence 
People’s Unconscious Mind To Give You What You Want. 
 
Session 1: The Master Key For Distraction Methods 
 
The Limits Of The Conscious Mind 
 
Hypnotists primarily focus on using Conscious Attention to achieve the hypnotic goal. But there 
are times when the Conscious Attention is limited and causes problems: The Law Of Reversed 
Effect. 
 
The Law Of Reversed Effect = the harder you try to achieve something the more you fail. 
 
Why should this be and what can you do to overcome this?? 
 
The Distraction Method is one of the answers – but only when it sits in the right context! 
 
Metaphors 
 
• How a Cooper bends barrel staves: 
Preparing the wood and bending a little at a time is better than force and instant results. 
 
• The Invention of Chess – and the power of exponential growth: 
How compounding results quickly grow out of all proportions. Example: Rice on a 
chessboard. 
 
• The Butterfly Effect: 
1961, Edward Lorenz’ weather predictions – rounding down from 0.506127 to 0.506 totally 
changed the predictions the farther into the future you looked. 
 
The 2 Master Keys: ABS – ASP 
 
Think like a hypnosis genius. Everything flows from to core principles – the Master Keys to 
understanding hypnosis and creating your own “patterns”: 
 
1. ABS: Absorb Attention – Bypass Critical Factor – Stimulate The Unconscious 
2. ASP: The Access State Principle (Don’t Change Minds – Change Moods!) 
 
Distraction techniques satisfy both A & B of ABS at the same time, 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
Our job as hypnotists is to specialise in methods for directing attention in a way to get the 
outcomes we want.  
 
Special Principle: Where attention goes, energy flows. 
 
The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy 
 
Our focus tends to determine our reality. This means that you tend to get what you focus on (i.e. 
where attention flows energy goes).  
 
But NOT always. Sometimes the more you want a thing (i.e. focus on it consciously) the harder 
it is to get it.  
 
So the rule of a Self-fulfilling Prophecy is not “You Get What You Focus On”, but: 
 
“You Get What You Focus On… Unconsciously” 
 
That tiny addition makes all the difference. 
 
The Nature of Conscious Attention 
 
Conscious Strengths 
The Conscious mind is good for: 
 
• Making Plans 
• Priming/Educating the Unconscious 
• Make Distinction (i.e. streamline your learnings) 
• Cement in an unconscious processs 
 
Conscious Weaknesses 
 
• It tends to obsess over FORM 
• It can activate the Law Of Reversed Effect 
• When you have too many variables it overloads 
• Tends to pop out of the NOW and get stuck on a never ending future or reminiscing 
about the past 
• It takes roughly 5 times as long to respond to something consciously as it does to do it 
unconsciously 
• It can only choose between the limited options that the unconscious mind allows it to 
choose from (a self induced double bind of sorts) 
• ASP: when you are in an Negative State (N-State) you make bad decisions! 
 
Dirty Goals 
 
When the conscious mind activates too many of its weaknesses, it ends up contaminating a goal 
and you’re left with a Dirty Goal. A Dirty Goal is one which you feel is being “sabotaged” (its 
not really, you’re just programming the unconscious to activate to Law of reversed Effect) or one 
which even if you achieve it feels empty and meaningless. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
How Dirty Goals Are Created 
 
• The conscious mind thinks: I need X in order to feel/be Y. 
• ASP – The N-State: we try and escape feeling bad and suddenly magically we come to 
believe that just having X will rescue us (usually it won’t! You’re bringing the N-state into 
the new goal (X) like a bad seed. Eventually you end up in the same place: the N-State!) 
• The more you focus on the FORM (i.e. X) the more you allow the N-State to grow and 
add subtle variations to itself (i.e. frustration, anger, depression etc.) 
• As the N-State increases so does our desperate hold on “X” (the Goal) as a magical 
messiah that will heal all our problems if only we can achieve it. It won’t – the seed of 
our downfall (the N-State) is not being addressed. The more it grows the greater the 
desperate obsession, the more it grows… 
• The growing N-State now gets associated with the  new goal (classical conditioning). This 
goal has now been contaminated – whenever you think or focus on X, you feel the N-
State. The stage for our ultimate failure is set. 
• Even if we get X after all this effort, it will feel like an empty victory. It won’t solve the 
real problem (the N-State). In fact it may actually make the N-State worse because of the 
conditioning! 
 
An “unattached goal” – i.e. one we don’t desperately want/need to work – is a clean goal. The 
N-State is not encouraged to grow, the conditioning never takes place, achieving a clean goal 
will feel satisfying and may actually give us more of what we want (i.e. a Positive/Resource State 
or R-State). 
 
This is why goals in one area of our lives (e.g. business) can work great (they are clean) and in 
another area of our lives (e.g. romance) they mess us up more – they are dirty goals! 
 
NB: you CAN achieve a dirty goal. It just takes more effort and if you do get it you have planted 
the seeds for a new N-State cycle, so the same type of problem crops up again in a different 
guise later on. That’s one reason we keep “having the same problem” over & over again – we 
are creating it! 
 
How To Avoid Dirty Goals 
 
Avoid the conflict between the Conscious attention (on X) and the Unconscious attention (on N-
State). Influence the unconscious mind to associate R-States with X instead whilst the conscious 
mind is distracted somewhere else! 
 
All learning, All behaviour and All change occur UNCONSCIOUSLY FIRST! 
 
The 3 Levels Of Influence 
 
1. Influence: when no blocks present themselves 
2. Persuasion: when intellectual objections/beliefs need to be handled 
3. Change: when problem states and (unconscious) behaviours need to be altered 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
Distraction Methods 
 
1. Meaningful Non-Sequiturs: “Look there’s an elephant!” 
2. Presuppositions of Awareness: “Notice, See, Hear, Feel…” 
3. Internal External Fractionation1 
4. Agreement Reversals
1 
5. Humour 
6. Random Details (Gallway’s “Inner Game” method) 
7. Change Representational Systems 
8. Change Perceptual Psoitions 
9. Change Story, Analogy, Anecdote or Topic 
10. Loaded & Rhetorical Questions 
 
How Do you Know When To Use a Distraction Technique? 
 
When the conscious attention on X triggers unconscious associations that live him in the N-
Sate… DISTRACT! 
 
This makes your life easy: observe the N-State = time to distract! 
 
It also prevents people from automatically rejecting your ideas. If you think there’s a danger of 
it, don’t fight it head on: Distract, Seed a new idea and let it grow! 
 
Some signs you might notice:  
 
• Change in features (e.g. grimace) 
• Change in physiology (e.g. skin colour) 
• Change in voice tones (e.g. heavy sigh) 
• Activation of a defence mechanism (e.g. hyper-criticism) 
• The feeling that you’re “going round in circles” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
1 From the Covert Trances Masterclass 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
Session 2: The Distraction Method For Influence & Persuasion 
 
Summary 
 
1. You get what you focus on… unconsciously 
2. If your conscious and unconscious mind are in conflict – you make bad decisions or 
reject good ideas 
3. If you’re in a N-State, you make bad decisions (ASP) 
 
Seeding Ideas 
 
You’re purpose is to create the conditions so that your target thinks they came up with the target 
idea or behaviour all by themselves. 
 
The Influence Method – is for when there is no conscious objection voiced and you don’t want 
to risk triggering a defence mechanism 
 
The Persuasion Method – is for when you DO get an objection that you cannot ignore or 
override. 
 
The Influence Method 
 
1. Seed an Idea (using hints, presuppositions, implication, non-verbal cues, direct 
statements, stories & analogies or rhetorical questions) 
2. Distract Attention – before they can consciously analyse what you’ve said/hinted at. 
3. Re-orient to resource (any R-State will do, but if you really want to be elegant you use the 
R-State that they are hoping having the goal (X) would give them (lets call it the Super-
State) 
4. Repeat cycles 1-3 over and over to condition the new thought (NB the repetitions don’t 
all have to be in the same session – some ideas need to be carefully seeded and slowly 
cultivated over many meetings!) 
 
Using The Influence Method (The Coaching Exercise) 
 
1. Choose a Context  (sales, therapy etc.) 
2. Choose your message: frames, presuppositions, core ideas 
3. Seed – hint at or state your message directly 
4. Distract – its ok to be obvious when you are practicing. With time you’ll develop the 
elegance and subtlety to distract without being noticed. Sometimes you’ll surprise 
yourself with how seemingly obvious manoeuvres go unnoticed if done naturally! 
5. Reorient to a resource. Its best to catch something that spontaneously emerges (e.g. 
laughter). Tell stories, prime the unconscious (another form of seeding), reframe etc 
6. Re-seed – repeat the seed idea or a related idea. This could be in separate conversations, 
but for practice try and do it in one conversation for now. 
7. Distract again 
8. Reorient to a resource again 
9. Repeat steps 3-8 as often as it takes! 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
 
The Art Of Subtlety 
 
Nature  works in iterations  - little changes that snowball in their effect over time. You don’t 
need to make instant and dramatic changes all at once. In fact for COVERT work you don’t want 
to, or they’ll realise that something is up! In some contexts that’s ok (e.g. therapy) in others you 
will want the realisation to “dawn on them” spontaneously! 
 
The secret of change is the secret of compound interest: you add the changes on top of the 
changes from the last cycle. This works exactly like the grains of rice on a chessboard. 
 
The Australian rabbit: 1859 Thomas Austin releases 24 grey rabbits into the Australian wild to 
have something to hunt. By 1869 there are so many rabbits in Australia that even after shooting 
2 million rabbits that year, the population is barely affected! 
 
The Use Of Influence 
 
The uses are many and subtle. It can help build better relationships (e.g. fractionating rapport), 
for teaching a difficult idea (gradual exposure over time), training a client to get the benefit of 
products he might otherwise ignore… 
 
The Persuasion Method 
 
So what happens if they object? What if they are fixated on a dirty goal and can’t let go (i.e. they 
keep coming back to the same ting over and over)? 
 
This is what the persuasion pattern is for. Essentially you run the Influence Pattern until a 
problem arises, then you: 
 
1. Objection arises 
2. Agreement/Reversal: join/agree with the objection and set the ground to sabotage it 
3. Reframe: do this directly or indirectly through stories, creating doubt, twisting their 
objection to such an extreme they “fight back” (a blow-out) 
4. Go back to the Influence Method 
5. If objection arises again go back to step 1. 
 
Notes On The Persuasion Method 
 
This works great when you need to recover from a mistake: e.g. when I sent out a poorly 
worded business letter. Note that when dealing with strong emotions they may at first get worse 
as they vent and eventually they recede.  
 
Use all the laws of influence you know: reframes, motivators, Cialdini’s laws (e.g. Consistency 
and Reciprocity). 
 
All these methods occur within a NORMAL SOCIAL CONTEXT. Do not start being weird when 
you do this. Notice how conversation naturally jump topics. Aim for the same sense of 
naturalness. USE YOUR SENSES – if you’re being weird you’ll see it n the reactions! 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Session 3: The Distraction Method For Personal Changes 
 
Personal Change 
 
This can be the easiest to do (because you can get quite overt) and yet the hardest to achieve 
(because of the nature of problems). 
 
The basic principle we have discussed still applies: shift their attention away from whatever they 
were focusing on in order to change their state. At first ANY different state is fine – it interrupts 
the old pattern. Ultimately you want to sort for R-States. 
 
If they are fixated on X (i.e. they are running the loop that creates dirty goals) shifting their 
attention to anything that is NOT X is the starting point – anything at all will do at first! Once 
they are suitably distracted bring their unconscious attention onto X (i.e. seed ideas with 
reframes built in) so that it can reprocess “X” in a different way than it was doing! 
 
 
The Basic Pattern For Change 
 
1. Problem arises 
2. Distract attention 
3. Refocus awareness on anything but the problem 
4. Allow the unconscious to find a resource 
5. (Ultimately) reintegrate resource into problem condition for more choices 
 
Remember the natural change cycles mean you don’t have to create an “instant epiphany” or 
some dramatic change all at once. Small changes that work cumulatively are stronger over time. 
 
Use the Distraction Method to create a small change, and then repeat and condition that change 
over time to prevent relapses (recovery strategy). 
 
 
The Change Method 
 
1. Something triggers off a problem (get ONE trigger and work on that, i.e. “When 
specifically did it happen… give me one example of this”) 
2. Distract attention 
3. Reorient to resource (either go hunting for one (e.g. “can you remember a time when…”) 
or allow one to arise spontaneously) 
4. Reintroduce the problem trigger 
5. Allow R-State to integrate  
6. If necessary repeat steps 1-5 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
Cementing In A Change 
 
Why can someone be fine inside the coaching session and then relapse into the problem when 
they are at home? 
 
There is either a sequential incongruity (a parts conflict) or an ecology problem. Often these are 
the result of a dirty goal. In coaching/therapy clients will often present the dirty goal as their 
stated outcome – so beware the N-State signs when they’re speaking about what they want! 
 
It could also be that the new patterns have simply not been ingrained enough, so the old 
conditioning takes over under pressure.  
 
Rule of thumb: the higher the pressure the more the unconscious takes over. If it knows the 
problem pattern better than the solution, it will do the problem well rather than the solution 
poorly! 
 
To overcome these problems we can: 
 
1. Let the Unconscious Mind spontaneously choose the solution or new behaviours (to 
avoid dirty goals or a parts conflict).  
 
The easiest way to do that is to use the Super-State (S-State) – i.e. the feeling they want 
the goal to give them. Its not the racing car that the client wants, it’s the feeling of power 
that he thinks driving will give to him (or the feelings of being “someone” or that he has 
achieved something) 
 
2. Condition in the changes and get the unconscious mind to spontaneously find matching 
behaviours to fill in (in detail) solutions to the original problem trigger.  
 
Then test it across as many contexts as possible. When they run out of new places to test 
– push a little bit more to exhaust ALL the contexts.  
 
As the Conscious mind overloads with doing the solution in more contexts than it can 
keep track of, you can tip them into a TIP (Trance Of Infinite Possibilities) and generalise 
out the learnings! 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10 
The Distraction Method For Change 
 
1. Get the problem (e.g. “What do you want to work through/resolve today?”)  
 
2. Make sure its just ONE specific problem in just ONE specific context! 
 
3. Listen/Watch out for the trigger: typically its something they hear or something they see 
that triggers the N-State 
 
4. Listen/Watch out for the moment the “go unconscious” – the N-State or the problem 
behaviour takes over. This is the “problem trance”. Typically they will say things like “it 
just happens” or “I don’t know what happens next” – these are signs that regular 
consciousness has been sideline (opening the door to the problem trance) 
 
5. Distract attention/break state: the distraction technique is designed to get them OUT of 
the N-State/problem trance – so keep going until you’ve done it! 
 
6. Get the higher purpose behind the Goal: this is the Super-State (i.e. not the fast car, but 
the feeling of power. It will always be a state!) 
 
7. If they go into the Super-State or any R-State: use it (See next step) 
If they go into a “blank state” they are in a TIP use resource language to imply an R-State 
and allow it to emerge. 
 
8. The S-State or R-State back to the trigger (i.e. the context). 
 
If they don’t respond with the R-State within approx 0.5 seconds, fire the R-State trigger 
again. 
 
If they automatically go into the R-State, acknowledge  it (how are you feeling NOW?) 
 
If they say “Yes But… here’s the real problem” then just start again at step one – you are 
slowly peeling the layers away to expose the true heart of the matter! 
 
9. When you do get the S-State or R-State integrating with the problem trigger, then get the 
unconscious to spontaneously choose an appropriate behaviour (what do you want to do 
NOW?) – this will now be a clean goal because you cleaned up the STATE first (ASP)! 
 
10. Repeat as many times as you need to in order to exhaust all possible contexts. Flush out 
every little thing. When they cannot think of a single new context, badger them (nicely!) 
more. This will either bring up some hidden contexts or convince them that they cannot 
do the problem any more! 

