For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
The Stunning Secret Of Covert 
Trances That Will Have You 
Changing People’s Minds More 
Often Than You Change Your 
Socks! 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
The Stunning Secret Of Covert Trances That Will Have You 
Changing People’s Minds More Often than You Change Your 
Socks! 
 
Session 1: The Nature Of Covert Trances 
 
Ethical Influence 
 
Covert Trances happen naturally all the time. Sometimes they create wonderful situations 
spontaneously, other times they are the mechanism through which people imprison themselves 
with stuck thinking and limit their choices to bland, ineffective and sometimes harmful options. 
 
Ethical Influence is the process of helping someone to “unstick” their thinking and expand their 
choices to include better alternatives – including of course the one you would recommend. 
 
As Covert/Conversational Hypnotists we ask the question: how does the problem create a 
context for trance? And what is in the nature of the problem that presupposes a hypnotic ability 
on the part of the person? 
 
ABS – A Simplified Trance Formula 
 
Since James Braid published started publishing on hypnosis topics in 18421, it has been pretty 
much accepted that we require 3 things for a hypnotic process to take effect. Expressed as the  
simple ABS formula, it gives us a unique key to using covert trances for ethical influence: 
 
1. (A) Attention 
2. (B) By-passing of the Conscious Mind 
3. (S) Stimulation of the Unconscious Mind 
 
A - Attention 
 
The first thing we need in order to allow a trance to occur is Attention. Traditionally it is fixated 
on a point (e.g. a hypnodisc a spot on the wall or the infamous “pocketwatch”). In covert 
trances this is actually taken care for us by the problem – it already rivets people’s attention in a 
thought loop! 
                                                
1 Contrary to popular belief, the word “Hypnosis” was NOT coined in James Braid’s seminal work “Neurypnology” 
in 1843, but in a letter entitled “Satanic Agency And Mesmerism Reviewed”, published in 1842 in response to an 
attack on hypnosis by a cleric. Neurypnology was merely the book that popularised the term hypnosis. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
For people using the telephone (e.g. for telesales or telephone coaching), there is an added 
advantage that the telephone tends to promote a hypnotic condition (Fixation of Attention, 
Inhibition Of Motor Movements, Ignoring Irrelevant Stimuli). 
 
The Problem With Problems 
 
A problem can be seen as a thought loop. People get stuck searching for solutions in a confined 
mental space, which does not offer an adequate solution. They then stubbornly loop through the 
limited options they have allowed themselves hoping that the next loop will bring a resolution 
to the problem. 
 
It is much like the following puzzle: 
 
With no more than 4 lines you must join up all the dots in this 9 dot matrix. Once you start, may 
not lift the pen from the paper and you cannot retrace your steps: 
 
Ex. 1-A   
 
 
     
 
 
As people try to solve this puzzle, they typically confine themselves to a mentally imposed box 
around the dots. But the solution is not there. You need to get them to think “outside the box”. 
That's what trance does. 
 
Ex. 1-B 
 
 
     
 
 
Conversational Trances are quicker and more elegant "in the moment" solutions (notice how we 
get the job done with fewer lines!) 
 
Ex. 1-C 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
The  object of Covert Hypnosis is to move someone into the “Trance Of Infinite Possibilities” 
(TIP) and recover choices that they had been cut off from before. 
 
B – By-pass The Conscious Mind 
 
This is the primary purpose of inducing trance. Any trance induction method will do: Direct, 
Conversational Hypnosis, the Non-Awareness Set… 
 
This Street Hypnosis Masterclass will focus on two covert methods: 
 
1. Internal Fractionation 
2. Agreement Reversal Sets 
 
S – Stimulate The Unconscious Mind 
 
The simplest way to think of this is to tip them into a TIP (Trance of Infinite Possibilities). 
 
Many hypnotists are fixated (yes – just like in Example 1-A above!) on better trance induction 
techniques. But the real work only gets done AFTER the trance is induced. Its what happens next 
that counts! 
 
How To (S) Stimulate The Unconscious Mind  
 
There are many methods available to you. Some of these have been covered elsewhere2: 
 
• Conversational Hypnosis 
• Storytelling 
• Hypnotic Power Loops 
• General Process Language 
• Revivification 
• Direct Suggestion 
• Specific Therapeutic Techniques 
 
In this Street Hypnosis Masterclass we will introduce you to (and thoroughly examine) the 
SPiRITS formula for covert trances. 
 
How To (B) By-pass The Conscious Mind – The Internal Fractionation Method 
 
Fractionation occurs when you hypnotise someone, awaken them and then rehypnotise them. 
The more you do this the faster they go back into hypnosis and the deeper they tend to go. 
There is no set time sequence for fractionation – you can do it in an hour, a week or a year! 
 
                                                
2 Check out: The Conversational Hypnosis Home Study Programme, and the following Street Hypnosis 
Masterclasses for more details: “How To Exploit The Unconscious So That People Forget How To Resist You 
And Easily Go Into Hypnosis Every Time Instead”; “How To Tell Spellbinding Stories So That People Hang On 
Every Word You Say As They Slip Easily Into Hypnosis”; and “How To Unleash Hypnotic Power Loops So To 
Ensure You Get Amazing Results With Hypnosis”. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
Fractionation fits the covert “conversational” setting because social conventions demand that 
people make a show of being present and paying attention. Rather than fight this drive we’ll use 
it3!  
 
When people go into hypnosis their focus tends to internalise4. So for the Internal Fractionation 
Method:  
 
1. When their focus is outside we use Voice 1 – our normal speaking voice 
2. When we shift their focus inside, we change to Voice 2 – our covert hypnotic voice 
3. We return to external focus and Voice 1 
4. We refocus them inside and switch to voice 2 
 
Meanwhile the problem is associated to Voice 3 (more on this later!) 
 
In this way we have triggers to move them through the basic states AND we are fractionating 
their experience so they focus more and more inside (and experience trance!) 
 
To do this semi-overtly, use Presuppositions of Awareness: 
 
• Notice 
• Become Aware Of 
• Concentrate On 
• Focus On 
 
To do this covertly, use Revivification: 
 
1. Talk about a holiday, really get into it (R 1 and switch to Voice 2) 
2. Take a break and chat casually 
3. Talk about a favourite film (R 2 and switch to Voice 2) 
4. Take a break and chat casually  
5. Talk about an emotional experience (R 3 and switch to Voice 2) 
 
How To Smoothly Introduce Revivification Questions For Internal Fractionation 
 
The secret of being covert is to NOT be weird! Too many people launch into inappropriate 
questions or make strange comments hoping to zap them into hypnosis. Unless you have a lot of 
trust and rapport, it won’t!  
 
Being weird, using strange language patterns and an abnormal communication style is fine for 
semi-overt hypnosis (like Erickson used) but that requires a context in which hypnosis is all right. 
For covert trances, avoid these! 
 
                                                
3 By the way, to do Ericksonian hypnosis, you START conversationally but you are quite overt about the trance 
process. Everyone will know that something unusual is happening. In covert and conversational hypnosis 
nobody except a trained expert will know that its happening! 
4 You can actually hypnotise someone with all their attention externally focused, but this is the exception rather 
than the norm. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
When you use these covert methods remember to keep your ethics firmly in place. Seek a win-
win solution. Remember that what “goes around comes around”. If you abuse a trust you will 
have wrecked the relationship – all the more so if you are working at the unconscious level! 
 
Enter each situation with the highest intention in mind and seeking to get the best outcome for 
all in question and your covert hypnosis magic will take you to new heights! 
 
Here is an example of how a stalled negotiation might be rescued with an elegant introduction 
of Revivification Questions for Internal Fractionation: 
 
1. Context: Negotiations start off fine 
2. Problem: You hit some kind of wall, regular approaches can’t shake it lose (you now 
have Fixation of Attention – so step 1 of ABS is satisfied) 
3. Pattern Interrupt: Suggest you “take a break” 
4. Self Disclosure: Tell some appropriate stories about yourself that have a hypnotic theme 
(holidays, books & films you’ve seen, hobbies etc.) 
5. Reciprocation: Usually people will respond in kind by sharing similar stories. If they do 
not consider building more rapport (i.e. comfort & trust). You could also force the issue 
by asking things like “did that ever happen to you?” 
6. Revivification Questions: As they talk slowly become more absorbed yourself (GO 
FIRST!), switch voice and ask more in depth questions. 
7. Release Tension: After digging a little go back to casual talk to fractionate. Don’t let the 
mood drift entirely back to normal. Think of it as just coming up for air! 
8. Cycle Through Steps 4-7: Keep gathering resources (R1, R2, R3 etc.) 
9. Integrate: Start to talk about the problem in Voice 2 (NOT Voice 3)! 
10. Move On: Smoothly pass into regular negotiations in Voice 1. Drop into Voice 2 to 
maintain the resource states or add a TIP if necessary! 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
Session 2: Agreement Reversal Sets 
 
How To Master Covert Trances 
 
The problem with learning covert trances is we need to pass through the “awkward/mechanical” 
stage of learning. But Covert hypnosis requires a spontaneous, natural quality so that it can 
seamlessly fit into the social context and adapt to the live conversation (without killing it off – as 
many novices end up doing!!) 
 
The solution to this is simple: start using covert trances semi-overtly. The easiest way to create 
an appropriate context for semi-overt trance inductions is to coach or mentor your friends, 
colleagues etc.  
 
There are many organisations that will put you together with underprivileged children or 
unemployed people as a success mentor/role model – so you can develop your skill and help 
people all at the same time! 
 
CABS & TABS 
 
We’re going to refine the ABS model to make it more useful in changing minds: 
 
(C)   Context 
(A)   Attention 
(B)   By-pass Conscious Mind 
(S)   Stimulate Unconscious Mind 
(T)   Trigger 
(A)   Attention 
(B)   By-pass Conscious Mind 
(S)   Stimulate Unconscious Mind 
 
 
The Meta-Pattern Of Confusion Techniques 
 
All confusion techniques aim to split the conscious mind from the unconscious mind. They are 
in essence a form of Conscious Unconscious Dissociation. There are many techniques that bring 
this principle to life: 
 
• The Conscious/Unconscious Double Bind 
• The Non-Awareness Set 
• The Agreement reversal Sets 
 
Agreement Reversal Sets 
 
The essence of the Agreement Reversal Sets is to: 
 
1. Lead the mind down one path (set of expectations) 
2. Steal the path (change the result drastically from the one anticipated) 
 
Its that simple. All the verbal (and non-verbal) trickery is designed to do just that. Once the path 
has been stolen the Hypnotic Target is left in a kind of mental no-mans-land, which you can 
than use as the jumping off point for a TIP. 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
 
There are 3 Proven Agreement Reversal Sets that we will focus on here: 
 
1. The Doubt/Certainty Pattern 
2. The STOP/Reversal Pattern 
3. The Amplification/Reversal Pattern  
 
Doubt/Certainty 
 
• You may think X... but really its Y… 
 
• You may think X... and you'd be right... in realising that it's not... exactly what you 
think... because 
 
• You may suppose X... and you'd be right... in knowing that it's not... quite what you 
suppose... because 
 
You can elaborate on the basic pattern with the following language adjustments: 
 
Doubt 
 
Think 
Feel 
Expect 
Imagine 
Believe 
Certainty 
 
Realise 
Know 
Discover 
Recognise 
Uncover 
 
STOP/Reversal 
 
• Not only do you need X... but you also need Y 
 
• Not only do you need X... but you also need to STOP... and realise you need other things 
too 
 
• Not only do you need X... but you also need to STOP... and take the opportunity to do 
something important 
 
• Not only do you need think about X... but you also need to STOP... thinking... you need 
to have all the answers... right now… you can… 
 
Amplification/Reversal 
 
Not only do you need to X {e.g. think about X}... but you need to X [general example of X {e.g. 
think}] even more... until... 
 
Notice how you thought X... and now that you have done Z you may as well realise... you can 
think of something very important... 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
How To Use Agreement Reversal Sets  
 
The following sequence moves from “Overt” Language to totally “Covert Language” for using 
with the Agreement Reversal Sets. Substitute the “X” and “Y” in the verbal formulae above for 
the following: 
 
Semi-Overt 
X = Conscious Mind, Y = Unconscious Mind 
 
Mostly Covert 
X = "the obvious", Y = "something much deeper/more important than that" 
 
Totally Covert 
X = Topic of Conversation (i.e. Problem), Y = Unconscious search for meaning/resources 
 
Now use the following conversational sequence: 
 
1. “Light Up The Box” this is where you stimulate the problem so that you have the correct 
neural network active for your solution to work on. 
2. “Find The Switch” find the context and/or the trigger that gets the problem going 
3. Introduce the Agreement Reversal Set use this as a mild pattern interrupt 
4. Tip them into a TIP use general hypnotic language to create an integrative TIP 
experience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10 
Session 3: The SPiRITS Formula For Covert Changes 
 
As covert hypnotists we must ask: 
 
• How Do We Create Elegant Changes In People? 
• How Do We Do This Covertly/Conversationally? 
 
There are two golden rules: 
 
1. Rule 1: Don’t Change Their Minds… Change their Moods! 
2. Rule 2: All Behaviour Is State Dependant. 
 
The Basic Pattern For All Change 
 
Given the two golden rules, we will focus our interventions at the level of STATE. There are 
other points that we can attack, but this is the simplest and for now the most elegant! 
 
(S) State – the state that drives the problem. 
(R) Resource – positive state(s) that can overpower (S) 
(I) Integrate – mix (S) & (R) together 
 
This is at the heart of all change techniques, overt or covert. It is also at the heart of the SPiRITS 
formula we will examine here. 
 
The Problem With Problems 
 
People get themselves into trouble because of an unconscious limitation. If the problem were 
conscious, then they’d have solved it just by thinking about it – as we do with countless 
problems every day without realising it. 
 
The Solution that people try to apply to their problems are often a bigger problem in that they 
create a context that allows the problem to be maintained, when otherwise it would just 
naturally fade away. Ironically the more they try to “solve” the problem, the more stuck they get 
(as in the 9 Dot Matrix brain teaser in Session 1). 
 
The reason that the solution can maintain a problem is that solutions are often Ego-driven5, 
which means that we try to compensate for an unmet need (i.e. a state!) It causes us to make 
faulty conclusions like: 
 
“I’ll be happy when I have a new house” 
 
The formula “I need X to be Y” or “I’ll be Y when I have X” is the wrong way around. The truth 
is that “You’ll get X when you are Y”. You’ll find it a lot easier to creatively solve the problem of 
                                                
5 By Ego I mean the way we used it in the Street Hypnosis Masterclass entitled: “Discover How Hypnosis 
Masters Create “Hypnotic Realities” In Others With Their Magnetic Personal Power”. Essentially the Ego is a 
mask that we wear to protect us after our natural self-esteem is wounded. The mask, in time, exerts its own 
tyranny over the individual: neuroses, anxiety and personal limitations are a few examples of this. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11 
getting a new house when you are happy – because positive states generate infinitely better 
decisions than negative ones! 
 
How To Create A Context For “Natural” Change 
 
There are 3 elements that go into building a “Context” 
 
• Environment 
• Relationship 
• Action/Behaviours 
 
Of these, Relationships are the ultimate context for covert hypnosis. A good relationship will 
transport you beyond the need for artificial techniques into a fluid and natural interaction that 
goes as you intend it to.  
 
Consider techniques to be “training wheels” for your unconscious mind to understand how to 
turn your intention (for influence) into an actual result. 
 
The Instant Success Myth 
 
Beware the Instant Success Myth. Free yourself from the need to get the result after one cycle 
through a hypnotic process. After all nobody will know you’ve “failed” as its all covert anyway – 
so you have all the time in the world to succeed! 
 
If the first cycle does not get the result, it will provide some other result. Use that as your starting 
point to get the next change: Wash, Rinse, Repeat! 
 
The Only 3 things You Need To Do Consciously 
 
Consciously you don’t have to do all that much. You simply: 
 
1. Keep track of the conversation (i.e. Be Aware) 
2. Spot the STATES as they naturally arise (i.e. Use Your Signal Recognition System) 
3. Apply the states as you need to (i.e. Integrate) 
 
That is it! The rest is up to your unconscious mind. Now whilst you’re using the “training 
wheels” you might want to use one or another technique (like Revivification or the Agreement 
Reversal Sets) in order to stimulate your target’s unconscious mind and show your own 
unconscious mind how a different behaviour (that’s all that a hypnotic technique essentially is!) 
will stimulate different responses. 
 
Teaching Trances 
 
All Relationships, All Hypnosis and All Change involve a process of training someone to be a 
certain way. You cannot get away from this no matter how “non-directioning” your approach is. 
So you may as well train the unconscious mind to help the covert hypnosis process. This is 
called Formatting The Unconscious Mind. 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
12 
You can Format The Unconscious through: 
 
• Stories 
• Examples & Hypnotic Sets 
• Revivification & Directionalised Questions 
• Role Models (GO FIRST!) 
• Preframes and Presuppositions 
 
The Ultimate Preframe 
 
The easiest way to preframe any purposeful interaction (i.e. anything that is more than a casual 
chat) is by getting a Big Picture before you begin. The content of the Big Picture (e.g. owning a 
house in the South of France, with a driveway and vineyards nearby) is completely irrelevant. 
What matters is the state that the person goes into whilst they talk about what they want. 
 
If their neural networks don’t light up in an obvious positive way… it’s the wrong Big Picture! 
 
Whilst they describe their Big Picture listen out for the Personal Trance Words (special 
words/phrases that they lean on which, when you repeat them back to them, light up the 
positive states all over again). 
 
In ordinary conversations, you don’t need a Big Picture because these conversations will wander 
about aimlessly anyway. To get Personal Trance Words simply GO FIRST and share stories 
about meaningful experiences and/or dreams & ambitions. When they reciprocate you can 
listen out for and capture their Personal Trance Words (see the end of Session 1 for an example.) 
 
SPiRITS 
 
(S) Set-Up 
(Pi) Pattern Interrupt 
(R) Resources 
(I) Integrate 
(T) Test 
(S) Small Step 
 
(S) Set-Up 
 
To set up the covert trance always begin with two things – in the following order! 
 
1. The Ultimate Preframe (what’s the Big Pircture) 
2. The Problem Construct (get a handle on the problem) 
 
There are 4 Keys To Mastering The Problem Construct: 
 
1. Context (get one and only one specific event – date, time, location… everything) 
2. Trigger (what is it that they see, hear or feel that switches on the problem state) 
3. State (you cannot have a problem without a state to drive it) 
4. Behaviour (what are they doing)  

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
13 
(Pi) Pattern Interrupt 
 
Review sessions 1 & 2 on the 2 strategies we focused on there: 
 
1. Take A Break 
2. Agreement Reversal Sets 
 
Of course any standard hypnotic trance, or special confusion or overload technique will achieve 
this. Just remember to  change your voice from Voice 3 (the “problem voice”) into Voice 2 (the 
trance voice). 
 
(R) Resources 
 
Review sessions 1, 2 & 3 for the strategies we focused on there: 
 
1. Revivification 
2. Agreement Reversal Sets 
3. Trance Of Infinite Possibilities (TIP) 
4. Personal Trance Words 
 
(I) Integrate 
 
If you’re being overt/semi-overt just say “As you’re feeling R, go to the problem context and see 
what happens… NOW!” 
 
If you are being covert then: 
 
• Change your voice to Voice 2 (trance/resource voice) 
• Talk about the problem in Voice 2 
• Mix in the positive PTWs (Personal Trance Words) you picked up during the Big Picture 
Set-Up or the Resource stage 
• Mix in the negative PTWs that are associated to the problem, only now confuse and 
reframe the meaning of these PTWs 
 
(T) Test 
 
To test simply take them back to the context or trigger ad see what happens. If you’re doing this 
covertly, simply resume negotiations/a normal chat (i.e. use Voice 1 – your normal 
conversational voice) and notice what happens. 
 
If something is missing: Wash, Rinse, Repeat… go back to the Pattern Interrupt stage and cycle 
through again. 
 
If all is well, the “shake the tree”. Try to make the problem come back. The more they fail the 
surer it all is. 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
14 
(S) Next Small Step 
 
You must get them to commit to the change behaviourally, that will help them to identify with 
it. Do NOT go for something extravagant or big. Remember we’re being covert here. So go for 
whatever the smallest next step in the sequence would have to be. 
 
Think of it as the pebble that launches the avalanche. 
 
For bonus points associate the next small step with the PTWs for the Big Picture you got during 
the Set-Up. This makes the Next Small Step virtually irresistible because they get an instant 
payoff (the desired state) when they engage! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

