 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
1 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Unleash Hypnotic Power Loops To Ensure You Get 
Amazing Results With Hypnosis 
 
Session 1: Hypnotic Power Loops – The Fundamentals 
 
Remember everyone that has ever mastered anything has gone through a process of developing 
and fine tuning the essential skills of his or her field. Power Loops are the hypnotic equivalent of 
the basic plays in chess, a tennis forehand or a musician’s chords. Master these and you have 
forged the tool that will make you a master! 
 
Now sit back, relax... and let your unconscious do the work! 
 
The Anatomy Of Power Loops: 
 
• Simple Suggestions 
• Process Language (simple suggestions combined into a simple process, like “Close your 
eyes and relax”) 
• Mini Loops (a stepping stone to achieve one natural piece of the hypnotic goal of your 
power loop. Mini Loops are made up of Process Language designed to achieve its own 
mini outcome) 
• Power Loops (these are made up of a sequence of mini loops that are chained together to 
form a path that everyone can follow to achieve the hypnotic outcome, or the purpose of 
the Power Loop) 
 
Your job is to craft and polish a set of power loops that will serve you for your entire hypnotic 
career. These will naturally evolve and be refined as your understandings of hypnosis grow. 
 
 
The Hypnotic Processes: 
 
Every hypnotic process will go through the following sequence: 
 
1. Induce Trance (the trance induction. You should have plenty of examples of these. Each 
induction serves as a kind of “power loop”) 
2. Deepen Trance (typically you’ll have a selection of deepening methods already. You may 
not have as many as for your trance induction, but enough that you can focus your 
attention elsewhere for a while) 
3. Trance Form (this is where you do what you came here to do. Hypnosis is a means not 
an end, so most of your work should go into achieving your hypnotic goals in this phase 
of the trance process) 
4. Exit Trance (there are certain things you need to make sure you do to end a trance 
session, like canceling suggestions that are no longer necessary. It helps a great deal to 

 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
2 
have a few stock routines (i.e. Power Loops) to do this smoothly. You should have at least 
one that you can use without thinking about it) 
 
You should aim to have at least 3 sets of power loops for each of the 4 stages of the hypnotic 
process. In my opinion, you should have about a dozen to a score (12-20) Power Loops for the 
Trance Forming stage – because it is arguably the most important part of the whole sequence. 
 
Trance Formational Processes (Self Esteem): 
 
There are many ways in which you can aim to achieve a hypnotic outcome. For example, one 
of the most basic hypnotic goals you’ll want to aim for (pretty much regardless of what field you 
choose to specialise in) will be to raise people’s self esteem. Here are some examples of 
processes that would help you achieve this –  
 
Therapeutic Loops: 
• Remember positive memories often each day 
• Find a negative memory; Learn from it; Release the emotions so you stop feeling bad 
• Go to a safe place; recall a negative experience (dissociated); follow it through until 
things are safe again; learn that nothing bad lasts forever. 
 
Existential Loops: 
• Feel good every day for no reason at all! 
• Every day little things trigger off a rush of pleasant thoughts & feelings 
 
Metaphysical Loops 
• Remember who you are, what makes you unique and why you have value 
• Listen to your inner voice and become more authentic 
 
Each of these processes can be converted into a full-blown Power Loop. There are three types of 
links that you can make to chain together simple suggestions into powerful process language: 
 
1. Random Links (the two suggestions/processes have no logical connection e.g. “As you 
breathe in, breathe in good memories” – breathing in has no bearing on what memories 
you recall) 
2. Pseudo-Logical Links (the link sounds logical, but on closer examination it turns out to be 
more probable or plausible than logically accurate e.g. “You’ve felt good in the past, so 
you can feel good in the future” – past performance is no guarantee of future 
performance!) 
3. Logical Links (these are actually accurate conclusions given a set of assumptions you can 
work from (these could universals that are generally held as being “true”) e.g. “All 
human life is valuable, you are a human being, therefore your life is valuable.” – given the 
premise the conclusion is actually true.) 
 
Exercise: 
 
Write 50-100 simple suggestions for self esteem. Link them together to form Process Language 
(using the above links). Then put these together into Mini Loops. 
 
 

 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
3 
Session 2: The Structure of Mini Loops & Hypnotic Sets 
 
This session is about refining the Power Loops formation process you learned in session 1 and to 
start creating a special kind of Power Loop called a Hypnotic Set.  
 
The Structure of Mini Loops: 
 
You can use different types of Mini Loops to achieve your mini-outcome in different ways. 
Which you use will be a question of personal style as well as what impact you need to make, 
they all have their advantages. 
 
1. Simple Mini Loops – these are the loops you learned to create in session one. The 
essence of these is to combine simple suggestions using Random, Pseudo-Logical or 
Logical Links. 
 
2. Full Mini Loops – to enrich a mini loop you start to look at the language that you used to 
shape the basic suggestions. Two things you can easily do that will have a very strong 
impact here is to use: 
• Hyperboles (exaggerations like “excellent, vivid, amazing, powerful” they have a 
way of tying up conscious processing as well as adding a lot of “atmosphere” to 
the hypnotic proceedings.) 
• Abstractions (these are ideas that sound like they should be things e.g. Friendship, 
Love, Wisdom, Learnings, Energy: these things only exist as ideas in our minds, you 
could never put a pound of love in a wheelbarrow. These also have a way of 
making the conscious mind work harder to keep a grip on reality. Maybe it is 
because these abstractions are outside of physical reality – no one really knows.) 
 
3. Set Frames – here you set up the context that will give meaning to everything else. You 
are essentially saying “look at everything you’re about to experience this way…” You can 
do this through stories or by just stating it directly. 
 
4. Stories – you can use anecdote, similes (where you say “this situation is a bit like that 
situation”), and vignettes (little slices of life that may contain a life lesson, like watching a 
child ride a bicycle.) 
 
5. Hypnotic Sets – these are universal experiences used to elicit or induce and experience 
through associations which will help the overall hypnotic goal. 
 
6. Conscious/Unconscious Dissociation (CUD) – this is very useful for preventing 
conscious interference. A CUD splits unconscious processes from conscious involvement 
to free the unconscious mind to do hypnotic work without the conscious mind knowing 
what it is doing (and so preventing it from interfering.) 
 
 
 

 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
4 
Hypnotic Sets: 
 
A Hypnotic Set is a special kind of Power Loop. You can scale it down into a Mini Loop to be 
included in other Power Loops or enlarge it to form a Power Loop in its own right. A Hypnotic 
Set is characterised by the way in which it draws on the power of a “set” of experiences to re-
activate the neurology (and the resources) responsible for that kind of activity: e.g. learning, self-
preservation etc. 
 
These are the 5 most important Hypnotic Sets: 
 
1. Early Learning Set 
2. Dream Integration Set 
3. Unconscious Protector Set 
4. Automatic Action Set 
5. Natural Changes Set 
 
The Hypnotic Set Formula: 
 
This is a simple structure that you can follow for creating full blown Power Loops out of 
hypnotic sets: 
 
1. Pre-Frame (this sets the scene. Usually this also paces the targets reality as a way of 
introducing the set) 
2. Provide Examples (give universal examples of the set of experiences you wish to activate. 
The more specific they sound the better, though they should be general enough that it’s a 
safe bet that most people had the same experiences) 
3. Set Frame (this “draws the lesson” out of the examples you have given and sets the scene 
for the hypnotic outcome you want to achieve) 
4. Call To Action (this connects the dots. You have built up a lot of “potential energy” 
through the set, this now releases it in the direction you want that energy released) 
 
The Anatomy Of The 5 Hypnotic Sets: 
 
Here is a breakdown of the 5 most important Hypnotic Sets, so that you can construct your won 
based on these guidelines - 
 
The Early Learning Set 
Purpose: facilitate learning, encourage perseverance or change of perspective. 
 
1. Pre-Frame: you have learned so many things in the past 
2. Examples: learning to read & write, learning to ride a bicycle, learning to walk, learning 
to stand up for the first time, learning to talk, learning to tie you shoelaces etc. 
3. Set Frame: you managed to conquer what seemed insurmountable at first; the world 
looked very different once you learned this; you learned to do skill X (e.g. form mental 
images) 
4. Call To Action: now you can conquer this problem; learn this skill; see this from a new 
perspective etc. 
 
 

 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
5 
The Dream Integration Set 
Purpose: to integrate changes, new lessons or experiences 
 
1. Pre-Frame: everybody dreams; tonight you will have dreams 
2. Examples: wild dreams, recurring dreams, healing dreams, bizarre dreams, deeply 
meaningful dreams, fascinating dreams, boring dreams 
3. Set Frame: dreams are a chance to integrate experiences and learnings 
4. Call To Action: tonight when you dream integrate these experiences and awake refreshed 
in the morning (add the refreshing suggestions to ensure that people don’t feel drained in 
the morning because they think it was “work” as they normally think of it!) 
 
The Unconscious Protector Set 
Purpose: to get the unconscious to automatically look after or protect you in a situation or 
during a specific process 
 
1. Pre-Frame: it is your unconscious’ job to protect you from harm 
2. Examples: startle reflex, blink reflex when a fly is close, hand withdraws from a hot 
object, you narrowly avoid an accident “without thinking” 
3. Set Frame: your unconscious can act independently of your will to look after you, it 
knows what to do and will do it automatically 
4. Call To Action: from now on in situation X you’ll protect him by doing A, B or C (e.g. 
protect his heart by forgetting to eat sweets between meals.) 
 
The Automatic Action Set 
Purpose: to automate a process, e.g. to install a habit or produce a deep trance phenomenon 
 
1. Pre-Frame: your unconscious can act without your thinking about it 
2. Examples: heartbeat, body temperature is regulated, you get dressed in the mornings 
without thinking, you find your way home automatically (or go to the old house if you 
move to a new place in the same city), you think of the words and your pen writes them 
etc. 
3. Set Frame: forming habits (or acting without conscious awareness) is natural 
4. Call To Action: form these new habits or take this new behavior on board (e.g. automatic 
writing or ideomotor signals) and perform it automatically 
 
The Natural Changes Set 
Purpose: to make change easy and natural 
 
1. Pre-Frame: people change constantly without noticing, effort or fuss 
2. Examples: you’ve grown taller; your hair & fingernails grow; you’ve changed tastes since 
you were a child, teenager, young adult (e.g. taste in food, clothes, hobbies, leisure 
activities);  
3. Set Frame: you don’t know how or even when you made most of these changes, yet 
change you did 
4. Call To Action: you can now make these changes quickly and easily in the same way 
 
 
 
 

 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
6 
Session 3: Thinking Strategically & The Top 10 Power Loops 
 
This session is about making you think strategically when you design your own Hypnotic Loops. 
Then you’ll get some guidelines for the kind of processes you can follow to craft the 10 most 
important Hypnotic Loops you’ll have in your arsenal. 
 
Thinking Strategically: 
 
Remember that the ideas behind the Process Loops can be used to provide the structure for any 
kind of trance process, e.g. a hypnotic story, a therapeutic technique or a sequence of 
conversational hypnosis (e.g. for coaching, teaching, sales etc.) 
 
The Top 10 Power Loops: 
 
These are the 10 Power Loops that I have found most useful in my own use of hypnosis as they 
solve the problems or handle the situations that most often arise in a hypnotic session. 
 
1. Self Esteem 
2. New Learnings 
3. Generative Changes 
4. Creativity 
5. Dream Machine 
6. Access Resources 
7. Golden Future 
8. Hypnotic Sets 
9. Continued Process 
10. Abreactions 
 
Here are some suggestions of the kind of processes or ideas that you may want to incude when you 
design your own set of Power Loops to handle these situations. 
 
Self Esteem 
Go back and look at Session 1 above (and listen to CDs 1 & 2) for ample details on how to handle 
these kinds of Power Loops. 
 
New Learnings 
The purpose of these loops is to facilitate learning. I have found that the following situations tend to 
arise frequently in this context –  
 
• 
General Learning Loops – to prepare people for learning things, the early learning set can 
handle this. The essential frame is: you’ve learned before, here are some examples, now 
prepare to learn something new. 
• 
Specific Learning Loops – to prepare people to learn something specific (e.g. the continuation 
of a longer lesson): revivify the last learning session and the things covered then, now prepare 
for today’s lesson. 
• 
Integration – to absorb and assimilate a new lesson or new experiences, use the Dream 
Integration Set. 
• 
Benediction – a special way of ending a lesson and ensure it gets absorbed overnight… 
o Pace content of the day  
o Learning Set 
o Unconscious Call To Action (do your job and absorb & integrate these experiences 
tonight) 
o Dream Integration Set 

 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
7 
 
Generative Changes  
These Power Loops are for people who don’t need to overcome a problem (i.e. remedial changes) but 
just want to get better at something. There are two kinds of loops that are useful here –  
 
• 
Specific Improvement Loops – to improve in a specific context, e.g. a sport or better a specific 
aspect of that sport:  
o find a resource from another field (e.g. focus at work),  
o apply it to this context. 
 
• 
General Improvement Loops – to improve overall (e.g. have a better life, be a better golfer, 
enjoy situation X more):  
o unconscious find 5 random memories, they should seem unconnected at the surface, 
but they’ll have a deeper connection;  
o review them, you’ve missed something important;  
o Learning Set; CUD (Conscious/Unconscious Dissociation) – build on these new 
learnings unconsciously;  
o Future Pace changes. 
 
 
Creativity Loops 
The purpose of these is to enhance creativity, either for its own sake or to assist with problem solving, 
hence the following two loops –  
 
• 
Creative Dreamer – uses the same processes involved in dreaming “creatively” to become 
more creative in general:  
o the unconscious is creative, examples (dreaming),  
o go to the dreaming place,  
o have a dream about X,  
o now apply the new insights. 
 
• 
Problem Solver –  
o select the problem,  
o go to the dreaming place, search for resources,  
o apply them to the problem. 
 
 
Dream Machine 
The Dream Machine turns the randomness of nightly dream processes into valuable self improvement 
time. You can build any machine you want to automatically carry out a process. Typically you’ll create 
a machine to automatically run one of the other power loops at night whilst you sleep, so you get the 
benefits of a hypnotic session as well as a restful night’s sleep! 
 
 
Access Resources 
This one is the bread and butter for hypnotists. There are many processes that will let you find 
resources. Here is a simple and pretty surefire way –  
 
o trusims (we all have inner resources, sometimes we forget we have them);  
o examples (you could use the Early Learning Set here);  
o go back and find memories filled with resources you’ve forgotten;  
o memorise them for future use. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
8 
Golden Future  
As a hypnotists you should be familiar with Future Pacing, Pseudo Orientation In Time, Future 
Progression, Future Memories or similar labels for a process that creates essentially a self fulfilling 
prophecy. Here is a simple process for doing this –  
 
o go into the future; take these learnings/resources/changes with you;  
o test out your new future;  
o make amendments until you are happy/fulfilled etc.;  
o come back with a sense of destiny waiting to happen. 
 
 
Continued Process 
This is a very important Power Loop to handle the situation where you run out of time in a session, but 
the client has not finished the process you have started. Rather than yank him out cold this allows you 
to bring him round and get him ready to function in the normal world without ruining the work you’ve 
already done. Here is a simple process to achieve that –  
 
o pace situation (we’re coming to the end of the session and you still have work to do) 
o CUD (conscious/unconscious dissociation)  
o keep doing this work unconsciously whilst you consciously put yourself back together 
to safely function in the outside world 
o continue this as you go through your normal day as you would normally do 
o let your unconscious present you insights & learnings as they become clear to you in 
the back of your mind 
o so next time we meet we can go even further than where we’re leaving things now. 
 
 
Abreactions 
Abreactions are a very important topic. If there is only one set of Power Loops that you ever master, 
these should be it! 
 
An abreaction is basically a strong negatively charged emotional event that is triggered during a 
hypnotic session. It could be mild (in the form of a little crying) or quite dramatic (thrashing limbs and 
other fits). The most important thing to remember is KEEP YOUR COOL. If you loose it too, or try to 
ignore what is happening, it could end up doing the person some damage. 
 
Here are 3 loops that I advise you to construct and master for use in different situations – 
 
• 
Inoculation – just like a “jab” will immunise you from disease, so you can construct a Power 
Loop that will ensure that the unconscious mind prevents any hidden trauma inadvertently 
being triggered. 
o The Unconscious Protector Set – simply adapt it and use it at the start of the session to 
explicitly ensure that only good things happen during the session. Highly recommended 
if you want to experiment with Age Regression without having to deal with traumatic 
content. NB Avoid doing Regressions unless you’ve been trained to handle negative 
content that might come up – it is not worth the risk of retraumatising the person! 
 
 
• 
Closing the Door – this loop will allow you to safely pull the target out of an abreaction you 
inadvertently triggered without having to do any therapy on the problem. 
o Pace the situation neutrally: you’re having a strong emotional response 
o Ratify the experience: its ok to be feeling what you’re feeling 
o Reframe: you don’t need to deal with this now. Those feelings belong to another time to 
a younger you. 
o Re-orient: right now you can be safe, right here with me in the present, a long, long way 
away from that other time. 
 

 
© igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
9 
• 
Cleaning Out the Room – this loop will allow you to clean up the problem underlying the 
abreaction. Note how it follows essentially a similar structure to the Self Esteem Loops we 
have looked at in great detail. 
o Pace the situation neutrally: you’re having a strong emotional response 
o Ratify the experience: its ok to be feeling what you’re feeling 
o Reframe: this is a chance to learn something and grow as a person, you’re older & 
wiser now 
o Dissociate: float up out of your body and look at her down there; look at that memory 
like you’re in a movie theatre; slide a plate of protective glass between you and that 
memory etc. 
o Witness: review the experience from this safe place and find the lessons you’ll need to 
grow and finally let go of all those negative emotions. 
 
 

