 
 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
How To Create Powerful 
Hypnotic Frames To Win Any 
Argument And Get Your 
Suggestions Easily Accepted, 
Even During The Lightest Covert 
Trance 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Create Powerful Hypnotic Frames To Win Any 
Argument And Get Your Suggestions Easily Accepted, Even 
During The Lightest Covert Trance 
 
 
Session 1: Hypnotic Binds & Other Frames 
 
The Power Of Frame Control. 
 
Frame Control is a very important topic in hypnosis, and in particular in Covert hypnosis. Sadly 
it is often overlooked. 
 
A frame controls the Meaning of a communication by controlling the feelings and responses 
associated to what you are saying. When you use a frame wisely it will allow you to win 
people’s hearts and minds, it will add power to your suggestions, and let you create the 
responses you desire.  
 
The frames that you set, coupled with the ideas and suggestions you present, will control how 
your argument is responded to. 
 
For example, with the frame “all blue animals are cats” any blue creature would be interpreted 
as a cat. 
 
Frames can be used as a powerful force for good, but also to do a lot of damage, just like with 
any other hypnotic principle be sure to always use them ethically. 
 
 
The Basic Logic Behind All Frames 
 
All frames, even the most absurd ones, want to appear reasonable (i.e. have an internal logic). If 
a frame is perceived to be irrational, it will cease to be accepted. Whilst rationality is a cultural 
phenomenon, formal logic is more objective than that. 
 
Formal Logic: 
1st Axiom eg “all blue animals are cats” 
2nd Axiom “this animal is blue” 
So this animal MUST BE a cat! 
 
the information combined with the frame leads to the conclusion that this animal is a cat. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
Frames allow you to either create a true logical conclusion, or to cause someone to go through a 
rationalisation process (like the famous “backwards rationalisation”) in order to reinterpret 
something that is formally illogical as being true. 
 
NB: many conclusions we draw are TRUE but NOT logical given the premises we started from. 
So logic is NOT the only measure of truth. 
 
Example: people buy trivia because they WANT to not because its necessary. Sports trading 
cards, figurines, designer clothes etc. are bought because they make people feel good. We have 
to persuade ourselves that we made the right choice. Often this is done for us when we accept 
the FRAMES that the salesman gave to us. 
 
When you buy the frame, you become the movie star in the advertisement; you make and justify 
a decision outside all logic and reason, and feel pleased with your choice. 
 
 
How Frames Create Meaning 
 
All information exists inside a context, if you do not create this context, people will use the 
social “default”. These contexts that you nestle your information into are your Frames. They help 
people understand the information and interpret the right nuances of it. 
 
Example: 
 
What is a RUNDLET? 
 
Most people don’t know it. But when you add the right context, magically its meaning becomes 
crystal clear:  
 
“The sailors rolled the RUNDLETS of rum down the plank.” 
 
(Hint: a rundlet is a type of barrel that carries approximately 18 (US) Gallons or 15 Imperial 
Gallons) 
 
In one social context transporting alcohol could be considered a terrible terrible crime – eg in 
the USA during the Prohibition or in a fundamentalist society where alcohol is considered an 
evil. In another context, the same activity will be considered an act of piety – eg the Bacchic 
rites, where wine was a communion with the gods. The event has not changed, but the context 
has, and therefore so does the meaning. 
 
 
How To Use Frames 
 
When people present harmful frames, change them! 
 
Frames can be used to build up your arguments. Arguments need to SOUND rational, even if 
they are not. Frames allow you to make your arguments seem logical, even if they are not 
actually rational and will not stand up to the rigors of real logic.  

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
Frames also allow you to test for responses, to get feedback on the concepts you are presenting. 
If people accept the frame, they will accept the idea. If they refuse to accept the frame you must 
create another frame within this frame (stacking frames) and continue to do so until people have 
accepted the frames, so that when you offer your ideas they get accept automatically. 
 
Frames also allow you to clean up your presentation of suggestions. 
 
For example, a meal presented on beautiful plate with wine and good company in a nice 
restaurant with a create atmosphere would be more desirable than the exact same meal slopped 
onto a dish and served in a gutter. 
 
Its all about the context! 
 
Pseudo Logic 
 
People are persuaded by what seems logical, though bare facts/reasons alone (ironically) are 
often not enough. People will often use pseudo logic to hang on to their own prejudices. 
 
As a rule, the more in trance someone is the less logical your suggestions have to be for them to 
be accepted. The converse is also true. 
 
If your suggestions flow within a set of what appear to be reasonable principles, they will be 
easily accepted, even in the lightest of trances. 
 
This is what makes frame control so powerful - you can accomplish all the hard work in the 
lightest of trances. 
 
Hypnotic Frame 1: The Unintended Loophole 
 
This is the “tricky lawyer’s”  approach of looking at the EXACT definition of something, and 
finding exceptions (ie loopholes) by missing the intended point! 
 
E.g.  “Mother said - don’t throw stones at the window” 
 
“She said don’t throw STONES at the window, but I can throw BRICKS” 
“Don’t THROW stones at the window, but can I CATAPULT them” 
 
Here you use emphasise to distort the meaning of a rule to give a particular aspect undue 
reason. 
 
This is useful when you hypnotise people: 
 
Client: This is not working. I don’t think I am going into hypnosis! 
Hypnotist:  Oh, you really don’t THINK you are going into hypnosis, do you?... You really don’t 
THINK that its working, and YET your breathing has changed... 
 
This changes the meaning to the subject not being AWARE of their going into a trance, rather 
than them not believing it. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
This allows you to create a gap in their wall, which you can begin to prise open and soon break 
through all resistance. 
 
Fairy Tales encode much conventional wisdom for us, in a way that speaks directly to the 
unconscious. This Unintended Loophole is a favorite device for allowing the Hero to win 
against an unfair world, to break a double bind that the evil villain is using to trap him. 
 
“You can never run away from me!” 
“No, but I can just walk away... bye bye!” 
 
“All men are born equal” 
 
An unintended loopholes:  
“All MEN are born equal, but not WOMEN” 
 
Or:  
“All men are BORN equal, but what happens after this decides their value” 
 
The ethics of this are questionable, so be sure to use this as a force for good. 
 
Often when in trouble you are in a self inflicted bind, the unintended loophole can help you 
escape this, as you learn this your problems will begin to have exceptions, and eventually 
become less permanent, less imposing, simply because you unconsciously apply the unintended 
loophole to yourself. 
 
Here's an example of this used in a hypnotic context: 
 
Subject: “Hypnosis is evil because it makes you lose your will’ 
Hypnotist: “Oh, Hypnosis is evil as it makes you LOSE your will, so if it strengthens your will it 
must be good (yeah!) Ok, let’s do that kind of hypnosis”  
 
or  
“how about going into a trance where your will helps the process!” 
 
Or even  
“HYPNOSIS is evil, but this is relaxion therapy, an imagination exercise, focused psychology 
etc” 
 
The Great Secrets Of The Unintended Loophole: 
A rule cannot be defined to the point where there are no exceptions. In fact, the tighter you try 
and make a rule the easier it is to find a loophole. Vague rules are tough, it helps if you ask for 
specification 
 
Subject: “hypnosis is evil” 
Hypnotist: “Why is hypnosis evil”? 
Subject: “Because it is...black magic, necromancy etc.” 
 
Specificity gives you much more to work with.  

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
 
We use emphasis to skew the meaning and give one word or phrase undue influence, as a result 
of that the whole idea changes. The text stays the same, but the emphasis changes completely, 
and therefore by exploiting the exact letter of the law over the real spirit of the law the whole 
meaning can change. 
 
Most people perceive the letter of the law as the spirit of the law, you can use emphasis to 
change these around, realising that no rule is ever perfect. 
 
Hypnotic Frame 2: The Analogy Frame 
 
The analogy frame helps us illustrate a point by using experiences that people have already had. 
But people forget that analogy is a tool, not a Truth! 
 
When applied too broadly these actually reduce truth by getting too lost in process rather than 
content. 
 
Example: 
Dogs are like cats, they both have fur and tails.  Cats have spit furballs, therefore, as dogs are 
like cats, dogs must be really cunning to disguise the fact that they also spit furballs. 
 
The analogy is fine for some points, but eventually breaks down.  It is the point of this break 
down – but before it becomes ridiculous – when people don’t realise that the analogy is 
nolonger valid and the frame gets set. 
 
How To Use The Analogy Frame 
 
 
• Present an analogy about something that is convenient for you to use like:  
 
“This car is like a karate master, it appears calm and normal on the outside, but has 
incredible power when you need it.”  
 
We are making the problem, a dull looking car, into its feature, it having hidden power.  
 
 
• When there is a context where a standard analogy already exists, you can hijack this for 
your own benefit:  
 
“Police are like the immune system of society, they keep us safe and attack viruses when 
they threaten us. So as good a thing as it is to boost your immune system, so it is equally 
good to give police extra powers.”  
 
If you are opposed to this, you can hijack this analogy to support your own point of view:  
 
“Well it seems that our police is an immune system full of allergies. It is over reacting to 
harmless stimuli and causing as damage in the process!  You are proposing we add more 
power to this?” 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
• Use the analogy as a way of borrowing the emotional impact from another context.  
 
“This car is my little baby, I have to look after her.”  
 
To defeat this contrast you may hijack the analogy, or use emphasis to exploit an 
unintended loop whole within the analogy. An elegant way of defeating an analogy is by 
taking an analogy too far  
 
“Yes, the car is just like a baby, it leaks like a baby, smells like a baby and makes noise 
and annoys people just like a baby”  
 
By emphasising the negatives we diffuse or steal the emotional component of the 
analogy. If hijacking an analogy doesn’t work it is because you have not hit the “sweet 
spot” of the analogy. Most often it will be the emotional undertone. 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 3: The Historical Frame 
 
The essential power behind the historical frame is the idea that old is good.  
 
“It has worked for my family for 100s of years, it will work for you too!” 
 
The historical frame does not stand up to logical scrutiny, but it seems realistic, it seems 
significant. Even though things that were good in the past might not work now this frame is 
convenient as people do not want to have to think. The historical frame sends the message “this 
has been tried, tested and accepted by others, it will work.” 
 
Use it in a context where history adds a sense of gravitas, where it adds power. 
 
In some contexts old is bad, and old computer or an old meal for example. Exploiting this 
cultural ambivalence can be used to defeat this frame. 
 
For example, “This is a great old fashioned dentist’s office” 
To defeat it: “well, good luck with the root canal, they used to hurt a lot back then!” 
 
This applies a problem from the past and applies it to know. 
 
Powerful phrases when using the historical frame: 
 
“It’s long been established that...” 
“It’s long been established that the moon is made of cheese” 
 
Also phrases that imply age:  
“it’s been known for 100s of year” 
“it’s been proven time and time again.”  
 
This brings the weight of history in your favour. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Look at old cultures, almost any frame, context or idea has, in the past, been thought of before. 
The old cultures are likely to have found someone, somewhere, who somehow found evidence 
to support your point of view. Become a master of history and you will discover many different 
ways of framing something to make it more persuasive. 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 4: Simple Bind 
 
A bind is a way of locking someone around an idea or suggestion, and making it impossible to 
avoid a particular result. 
 
There are three different levels of binds: 
 
1. Simple 
2. Complex 
3. Double 
 
Double binds tend to be well known by hypnotist, although many hypnotists use the same old 
double binds over and over again, Eg: 
 
“Would you like to go into a trance in this chair or that chair?” 
 
With frame setting you can create a context where you can use binds in any way, without 
having to rely on old formulas. 
 
To prevent people from catching your binds a fresh bind is stronger than an old well used bind 
(as it is harder to spot which makes it hard to break and you are much less likely to be 
“caught’”) 
 
How To Create A Simple Bind Anytime Anyplace 
A classic bind is basically a dilemma presented in the form of a loaded question: 
 
“Have you stopped beating your wife yet?” 
 
The only way out of this bind (that people tend to know of) is to actually ignore the construct, 
and avoid the question. No matter what you say, you are agreeing with the bind! No matter how 
you respond to them, there will always be that doubt. 
 
There are two ways to escape the simple bind: 
 
1. Directly challenge the presupposition “I don’t have a wife!”  
 
The trouble with this is that it can cause you to sound defensive, which can detract from 
the force of your argument. It also carries the hidden implication that you are actually 
guilty 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
2. A more elegant way to escape the bind is to exploit an ambiguity within the bind  
 
“Have you stopped beating your wife yet?” 
“Yes! Her tennis game has improved so much I can barely score a point against her!” 
 
This allows you to make a “clean getaway” and can easily be used to put the other side 
on the defensive. This cleanly breaks the bind as it completely rebuts the pre existing 
challenge frame.  
 
The more strategies you apply and the more frames you break the easier it is to get your 
argument across.  
 
How To Create The Simple Bind 
 
1. Start with a fact that you need to be true : “This animal is a cat.”  
This can, if used with care, have a lot of power in the form of an accusation. 
2. Form the statement into a simple yes/no question 
3. Think of another fact that you need to be true 
4. Phrase this as a follow up question to the one in step 2 
5. Assuming that your first two questions are answered in the affirmative, think of a third 
questions which combines the two “yes” answers and asks about a quality. 
 
Example: 
 
1. You can go into a trance 
“Can you go into trance?” 
2. Do you want to do it now  
“Do you want to go into trance right now?” 
3. These two questions lead to  
“How deeply into trance would you like to go right now?” 
 
Now you have a beautiful dilemma which is very difficult to break. To analyse all the layers take 
too much time and effort for people to bother with, so they just accept it. 
 
The representations inside the listeners mind is of the idea that you suggested with your bind, 
and if you quickly move on the frame is left unchallenged and the image remains. 
 
Secrets Of Using The Simple Bind 
 
1. Use time:  
“Were you born this smart?”  
“How long have you been cheating on your exams?” 
 
2. Use a “who when what which” question: 
“Which masterclass do you want to buy next?” 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10 
Hypnotic Frame 5: The Complex Bind 
 
This is basically two binds asked in quick succession without giving someone time to answer the 
first bind: 
 
“Do you know why women have one more pair of wisdom teeth than men? – is it because they 
are simply wiser than men?” 
 
The invention (line one) is taken as fact as the focus of the conscious mind is on the second 
question “is it because they are wiser than men?” 
 
The binds become simple, natural and intuitive. 
 
Example: 
To deal with “resistance” in a hypnotic subject it is useful for them to accept that everyone can 
be hypnotized, as a question  
 
“Do you know that everyone can be hypnotized”  
 
If answered yes, a typical follow up might be  
 
“Do you want to experience hypnosis?”  
 
Then add a “W” question to form the simple bind  
 
“When you go into hypnosis, do you think that you’ll experience it the same way as everyone 
else?” 
 
Finally add an extra question to complete the process 
 
“When you go into hypnosis, do you think you’ll experience it the same way as everyone else 
does? – do you want to find out?” 
 
How To Create A Complex Bind 
 
1. Create a simple bind 
 
2. Tag a useful question onto the end. 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11 
Hypnotic Frame 6: The Double Bind 
 
A double bind is basically a complex bind where a choice is offered to disguise the original 
bind. A double bind is often said to offer “The Illusion Of Choice” as all supposedly different 
choices lead to the same outcome. 
 
Examples: 
“Have you stopped beating your wife yet?”  
Becomes 
“Will you stop beating your wife now, or after I call the police?” 
 
“Do you want to experience a very deep trance now?” 
Becomes 
“Do you want to go into a very deep trance, or would you prefer some conscious awareness of 
the process?” 
 
There is a natural progression from the simple bind, to the complex bind, through to the double 
bind. 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 7: The Paralysis Bind 
 
This is the classical dilemma: “you’re damned if you do and you’re damned if you don’t!” 
 
The point of this is to prevent an entire direction of choice from being explored. 
 
The flaw exploited by the paralysis bind is that you are only damning a few of the many choices 
in a situation, but in such a way that it makes it seem like all the results of a certain choice lead 
to doom. 
 
Example: 
 
”If you buy an expensive car you will spend all your money on taxes, but if you buy a cheap car 
you will spend all your money on repairs, so don’t buy a car – get a bike!” 
 
To break a paralysis bind you can either:  
 
1. Directly deny the consequences “cheap cars don’t cost much to repair!” 
 
2. Directly deny the limitations “well why not buy a mid range car?” 
 
3. Hijack the dilemma. “If I buy an expensive car, I won’t have to repair it, so I’ll save 
money, and if I buy a cheap car, I won’t have to spend much money on taxes, so I’ll also 
save money – so keep your bike, I’m buying a car!”  
 
This uses the structure of their original argument against them, and really shatters their 
frame. 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
12 
Exercise 
 
1. Take a simple frame, Eg “All blue animals are cats” 
 
2. And your desired result “This blue animal is a baboon” 
 
3. Go through each of the frames and binds above, applying each in turn to the original 
frame to ensure your desired suggestion is accepted. (Ie to prove that your blue animal is 
a baboon) 
 
Get used to thinking in terms of frames, practice as much as you can so that fames and binds 
just become natural and spontaneous, a powerful tool which you can easily create from nothing 
so that you can use them to get what you want in any setting. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
13 
 
Session 2: How To Use The Power Of Science To Make Your Frames Even More Effective. 
 
The Role Of Science Today 
 
The role of science in our society has almost become that of a new religion. People don’t 
question it anymore – they assume that because a “scientist” said so it MUST be true.  
 
But science is not an all accurate eternal truth. Science only gives us heuristics – rules of thumb! 
Some are more accurate some are less so. Science will always present us with limited 
conclusion that have flaws at the edges, because it always relies on information that has some 
level of flaw within it: instruments that are not perfect, reliance on other research findings 
(which in turn are slightly flawed), some assumption that cannot be tested etc. 
 
Yet people respond to the pronouncements of the “scientific community” as they used to react 
to the pronouncements of the Pope and other religious figures! 
 
Plus ça change, plus c'est la meme chose! 
 
 
Deductive –v– Inductive Reasoning 
 
The “European Scientific Method” was based on Deductive reasoning, it relies on THINKing - 
i.e. reasoning through a problem. This method is only as good as the assumption upon which it 
is based. 
 
 
The “English Scientific Method” was based on Inductive reasononing, it relies on TINKERing – 
i.e. experimenting, making adjustments and experimenting some more. This method is open to 
many flaws: unconscious experimental bias (the “confirmation bias”), incomplete testing, 
limited contexts etc. 
 
For example: the tinkering method relies on running a series of tests to see if the same outcome 
comes about each time. But if it works in one context it does not mean it will work in another. 
Writing a note may get you out of school early – but it won’t get you out of prison any faster!  
 
Whichever of the “scientific” models people choose, they are prone to errors, errors that we can 
exploit to set persuasive frames – dressed up as real science.  
 
Don’t Get Caught By Pseudo-Science 
When people put blind faith in “Science” they forget that scientists can make mistakes too.  So it 
is useful to develop a sense of caution and cynicism when dealing with “scientific truth” – after 
all scientists always ask to see the data so they can come to their own conclusions – why 
shouldn’t we?! 
 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
14 
The Social Science Trap 
 
The social sciences (sociology, economics, politics, history and psychology) are even more 
prone to flaws, simply because there are so many uncontrollable variables in play. It is often 
impossible to repeat an experiment to get a reliable result. 
  
The Misery Of Numbers 
One such danger in psychology arises when people try and measure abstract concepts, such as 
“misery”, “happiness” or “success.”  
 
But how do you measure things that you can’t put a number to?  
 
The Greeks were aware of the problem of creating a false analogy between concepts like 
“happiness” and the universe of numbers. To do this would be to create the error of Hypnotic 
Frame 1 (The Analogy) that we talked about in Session 1. 
 
Here’s an example of the error in action in a crude enough way to detect it easily: 
 
A little Happiness is LIKE a 1, Absolutely Bliss and inner peace is LIKE a 10. 
 
Giving a child some candy gives them a little happiness. That would be like adding 1. So if you 
give a child 10 pieces of candy, he will reach level 10 – he will get enlightened, he will enter 
absolute bliss and have inner peace… 
 
The universe of numbers and other ideas simply do not mix, and must be kept separate.  
 
The social sciences often break this rule, and therefore create many unreliable and inaccurate 
statistics and come to false conclusions.  
 
The Problem Of Measurement 
You cannot measure individuals. Mostly because you cannot REPEAT an experiment – each 
time you try to the CONDITIONS change because the individual will have learned.  
 
But you can measure groups. By recording group statistics many valuable conclusions have 
been made.  
 
But here is where another crucial mistake is made. People try and apply group statistics to 
individuals.  
 
When you have a group it’s behaviours as a collective can be predicted, but that of an 
individual – even if he belongs firmly in that group – cannot. You cannot have 2.34 children or 
employees, you cannot apply the rules and values on certain groups of peoples onto certain 
individuals. 
 
The Tyranny of Statistics Applied To People 
Imagine we have two people going for the same position in a company. A black woman and a 
white man.  
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
15 
Lets us assume that statistically the black woman is 24% less likely to be employed than the 
white man (I have made this number up, I have no idea what statistics would say about this, 
though I am sure that someone has tried to measure it.)  
 
Consequently she feels intimidated and goes into the interview with the attitude that the odds 
are against her.  
 
However the statistics do not take into account who she really is, what she can do, what 
advantages she actually has. She may be the perfect employee and a master of communication, 
but when she looks at the statistics she thinks that there is no point in keeping with the 
statistically advantaged white man. 
 
Statistics are therefore flawed if either the information going in, or the conclusions coming out, 
are flawed. Statistics are a number, and the way this number is interpreted causes many 
problems. 
 
When we understand this we have a lot of power to make our frames easily accepted and 
agreed with when we know how to make our suggestions conform to the new religion of 
science. 
 
Conversely, be wary of statistics other people present, questions and doubt the validity of 
science and scientific conclusions! 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 8: The Scientific Frame 
 
We can plug into the new religion of science by using  the language of science: science speak. 
 
Because you talk like a scientist, people will think that you are smarter, wiser and better 
educated than others. The language you use cloaks what you say in the power of science. 
 
The Rules Of Science Speak 
 
1. Don’t use one word, when you can use three, five or even ten 
2. Don’t use a short word when you can use long words 
3. Don’t use English when you can use an impressive foreign language, particularly Latin or 
ancient Greek. 
 
This spins people into acceptance trance and allows you to tag any conclusion you like onto 
what you say. You utterances will often not be understood, but because it sounds clever it will 
be accepted, and not challenged. 
 
Example: 
When the hypothalamus is stimulated using somatic triggering mechanisms, the resultant 
cathartic release allows the limbic system to reorganise around improved conceptual models 
so that the individual no longer abreacts to real world stimuli! 
 
Translation: Words can heal! 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
16 
 
Notice how science speak intimidates people into accepting the reasoning process, so that the 
conclusion will be embraced as Truth! 
 
Using actual studies hugely increases the power of your statements, so carefully research the 
social sciences for studies that back your point of view (there are so many conflicting studies, 
you are bound to find one that fits), dress it up in science speak (if it isn’t already) and tag your 
conclusions onto that.  
 
Start getting used to this kind of language, find different, fancier ways of describing your ideas so 
that you can use this as your prestige point onto which to attach many different kinds of ideas. 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 9: Ignorance Is Proof 
 
This is born from the acceptance of the scientific method. This twists the logic of the English 
Method  (i.e. the Tinkering Method) in such a way that you can prove almost anything you want 
to. 
 
It exploits the principle that it is often very difficult to disprove an idea. To disprove an idea you 
basically need to find a counter example, which is intensely difficult until you can search the 
whole universe and report that its not anywhere. Proving that something is TRUE is even harder, 
you have to search the whole universe at the same time and show that you looked under ever 
stone to make sure an exception did not exist! 
 
 
Example: 
 
The US military and scientific establishment have spent over $200 million dollars to prove 
that UFO’s do not exist, yet have found no conclusive evidence. Why can’t they disprove it 
after all that time and effort? Well because UFOs DO exist – it proves it once and for all! 
 
Of course the same could be said of the Easter Bunny, Tooth Fairy and Santa Claus… maybe 
there’s hope for our childhood dreams after all! 
 
 
How To Use The Ignorance Is Proof Frame 
 
1. If it has not been disproved it is valid 
 
2. If it has not been proved that something exists, it does not exist. (again, highly flawed, but 
useful) 
 
3. Use it as a challenge “go on, you prove it isn’t so!”  
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
17 
Not all things lend themselves naturally to the use of this frame. 
 
Positive Example: 
For many years, before we actually “visited” Mars, it was impossible to prove that Martians did 
not exist, Even now all that we can say is that it is unlikely that it exists. No conclusive proof 
that Martians do exist has been found, perhaps they do exist... 
 
Negative Example: 
However if I were to try and persuade you that the Pope died yesterday it would be much 
harder, as all the ramifications one would expect from the Popes passing are not occurring (i.e. 
TV reports, newspapers, church services, gossip etc) 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 10: The Destiny Statistic 
 
We can use statistics to create a sense of destiny about something. This creates a lot of 
emotional pressure to accept the idea. 
 
The destiny statistic relies upon two flaws: 
 
1. Basic Human Psychology – the idea that everyone believes that they are special, 
although in terms of group effects and random probabilities all people weigh the same 
 
2. The Bad Statistical Conclusion – if everything good happens within 10 Kilometres of a 
good hypnotist it just HAS to be caused by the hypnotist. A conclusion which is...absurd! 
 
How To Use The Destiny Statistic 
 
1. Look for a random event that has already occurred 
2. Calculate the odds of this event occurring 
3. When you examine the statistics it becomes too improbable for it to be a coincidence. It 
must be Meant to happen. 
 
Of course, logically speaking, it is false to conclude that destiny had a hand in this – after all 
SOMETHING had to happen, and each SOMETHING is equally unlikely to occur! But when we 
use hindsight to predict the probability of this one event occurring instead of all the other 
possibilities, it confuses the sense into thinking something else is going on. 
 
Example: 
The odds of this happening are 1 million to 1 – you were destined to take this car today! 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 11: The Precision Statistic 
 
97.5% of people reading this will use what they learn within the next 2.1 days. 
 
Giving a precise number will make your idea 3.3796 times more powerful than just using the 
idea on its own. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
18 
This can be used to support and enhance other frames, as in  
 
“The US government spent 201 million dollars, and failed to prove that aliens do not exist, 
obviously they do exist!” 
 
The numbers are persuasive, and the conclusions are powerful, but they are all essentially 
invalid unless you know the who, what, when, where and how that data and conclusions were 
gathered and drawn. 
 
Numbers themselves can be powerful. They can be a powerful tool for changing internal 
experiences “GO 10 times deeper!” – notice that I am purposely abusing the number analogy to 
deepen the hypnotic state. People are responding to the analogy of deepening by an order of 
magnitude. It is NOT a physiological shift that means you have 10 times more “hypnosis” or 
“relaxation” chemicals in your body! 
 
The fact is numbers can be very persuasive  
 
“This product is twice as good as the closest competition!”  
 
Depending on what the numbers are based, the correlation between numbers and concepts is 
often invalid, but people use this all the time – because it WORKS (at least 4 times as well as not 
using it!) 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 12: The Gambler’s Statistic 
 
When you have a random event, like winning the lottery or flipping a coing, statistics will 
predict how likely it is that one or the other result will occur. The mistake people often make is 
to assume that something happening twice in a row is half as likely to occur as something else. 
 
This is a logical error – previous events have NO bearing whatsoever on how likely it is that 
something will happen in the future. 
 
Example: 
 
You flip a coin. The chance for a heads or a tails to come up on a coin test is ALWAYS 50/50 
regardless of what happened before. Each time you flip that coin, luck resets itself and its back 
to a 50/50 chance of coming up heads. 
 
Now it is true that for 5 coin tosses there is a chance of 1 in 32 that every toss will come up 
heads. But that is true of ANY combination of heads and tails across 5 tosses.  
 
So the probability of: 
 
H H H H H  = 1:32 
T H H H H  = 1.32 
H T H H H  = 1.32 
H H T H H  = 1.32 
H H H T H  = 1.32 
H H H H T  = 1.32  
T T H H H 
= 1.32 
H T T H H  
= 1.32 
Etc.
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
19 
The probability of the next event happening is totally independent of the one that precedes it.  
 
The only exception is the situation where each event changes the nature of what is left: taking a 
card from a pack, pulling straws (for the short one), drawing lots, picking members of a team 
etc. 
 
The gamblers statistic leads people to cause themselves several problems: 
 
1. Luck Rationing – Concepts which cannot be equated with numbers are confused:  
“I’ve been unlucky recently; I’m due for a good luck spell!”  
 
As a positive frame however, this works great  
“Hey, you’ve had a bad week, but don’t worry next week you’re due some great luck!” 
 
2. The Sunk Costs Phenomenon – A gambler may think  
“I’ve bet on it to be heads, but it was tails, but I lost a dollar, but If I now bet 2 dollars I 
both cover my investment, and make a dollar profit...(loses again) oh, now to cover my 
losses and make a dollar profit need to bet 8 dollars (several flips later) ok, now I just 
need to bet $1000 000 and I’ll cover my losses, and make that dollar profit...”  
 
This happens all the time in business, real life and other situations. (spending a fortune 
repairing a car in order to “recover your investment.”)  
 
This is a great way of creating frames for people. When they invest in you with their time, 
money etc, they become committed, and are more likely to keep investing in you.  
 
Hypnotic Frame 13: The Exception That Proves The Rule 
 
This is a logical fallacy and an accident of language. 
 
Many years ago the idea of “proving” meant to “test” something. You put things to the proof – 
i.e. you tested them to see if they stood up to the test. If it did not, if you the theory failed, you 
had found an exception that proved the rule and showed it to be false! 
 
This gave rise to the expression The Exception That Proves The Rule. It does not mean it “proof” 
in the modern sense, it means “to test” or “to check out”.  
 
However with time the word “to prove” changed its meaning. “Proof” now came to mean “it 
has been tested and shown to be valid” – in other words the concept became associated with 
the desired consequences of “proving” something. 
 
So now we have a saying, that everyone accepts, but which uses a word that has fundamentally 
changed its meaning. And we have accepted the idea so thoroughly we don’t even question the 
fundamental violation of the scientific method implied by the accidental new meaning! 
 
Of course this allows us to defend Frames from counterexamples – it is an illogical defence, but 
one that is socially likely to get accepted because of this “ancient rule”!  
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
20 
Hypnotic Frame 14: Safety In Numbers 
 
If so many people are doing something it can’t b wrong. Millions of peoples smoke, so it must 
be good. Of course this is a flawed reasoning process, but people think like this all the time. 
 
How to Use Safety In Numers 
 
1. Chose a large collective group of people who follow your idea 
2. Chose a niche group (i.e.  doctors, actors etc) who have special prestige and influence 
and have them endorse your idea 
3. Utilise mob rule. The key here is to appeal to a prejudice that your group already has 
(negative or positive). This creates a frame both based on numbers AND a strong 
emotion. 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 15: The Synchronicity Frame 
 
Often people believe that just because two events are happening at the same time there must be 
some kind of connection between them. One event is often thought to cause another, even 
though they occur independently of each other.  
 
Many cults rely on this kind of thinking to prove their world view. This fits in with pseudo 
science as it has some kind of a relationship to statistics (children with large feet and their 
reading skills).  
 
All you need to do to use this frame is to mention two events which occurred at the same time, 
and leave people to create the link between them. 
 
Hypnotic Frame 16: The False Cause 
 
This is similar to the Synchronicity Frame, where two events, occurring immediately after each 
other, are thought to have a cause and effect relationship.  
 
This often leads magical thinking.  
 
“The dog barked and the TV went off, the dog must be magic!” 
 
This is based around a false cause effect relationship. They may happen one after the other – but 
one event proves NOTHING. If the dog barked on 100 days and on each one the TV went off… 
then you’d have something to think about (of course he might just be barking at the squrrel that 
is messing with the arial!) 
 
Occasionally there is a grain of truth to superstitions. For example, lighting two cigarettes with 
one match is thought to CAUSE bad luck. This came from World War One, where the light 
alerted enemy snipers to your position. But to carry it into a normal context would be irrational. 
 
Incidentally: a phobia is a neurological superstition – brought about by one try learning and the 
associate cause- effect. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
21 
Session 3: How To Hide Scientific Fallacies In Irresistible Frames 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 17: The Tyrannical Principle 
 
This exploits the flaw which occurs when people start with a principle and then try and make 
the facts fit the principle. Facts should suggest principles, not the other way around! 
 
The Tyrannical Principle is a disguised bind – no matter what you do to break the frame, the 
Frame wins. 
 
As the bind in this Frame is disguised it is very hard to break! 
 
Example: 
“This snake oil really works, those people who died from it just did not use it properly!”  
 
The fact, (snake oil kills people) is used to reaffirm the FRAME that snake oil works as a remedy. 
 
Patient: “I don’t think that this therapy is working” 
Psychoanalyst: “Well, let’s examine your resistance to the therapy!” 
 
This results in yet more therapy, the concern raised is never addressed, which means there is no 
correction mechanism in the system. Errors can creep in undetected. 
 
Example: 
You are fundraising for charity, your charity is attempting to help people in Ethiopia, if your 
methods work (people are helped) you say to your investors “look at all the good we’re doing, 
we need more money so that we can do more!” 
 
But if your methods aren’t working (people are not being helped) you say to your investors “ it 
isn’t working yet, we need more money to get it working!” 
 
Either way, you get more money. However, nobody questions whether what you’re doing is 
actually working or not! 
 
Of course the Tyrannical Principle can be used as a Force For Good – as any Frame can. 
 
Hypnotic Frame 18: The Black And White Frame 
 
The black and white frame looks at the world in polar opposites, good/evil wrong/right. This 
sweeps all the shades of grey under the carpet, and create the “exclusive OR.” – it’s either this, 
or it’s that, but it cannot be both. 
 
Because you are hitting polar opposites you are giving two choices, one of which is so terrible 
that no one would ever want to do it. 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
22 
Example: 
“You are either a fascist that wants people to starve on the streets, or you want to pay more 
taxes to save the hungry!” 
 
“You can enjoy the wonders of trance, or you can just sit there and wonder about just what 
you are missing out on.” 
 
The thinking that good and bad can be on a sliding scale, supposedly with shades of grey as to 
HOW good/bad is still a black and white frame.  
 
Emotions are not only good or bad, there are so many other judgements we can make, which is 
why this can seem like you are given choices, when in fact you are not. 
 
This can be used to create an illusion of choice  
 
“You can go through the right door, and suffer pain, misery and torture, or through the left door, 
and experience happiness and joy? The choice is totally yours – I don’t want to influence you 
either way!” 
 
By softening the options the bind can be less catchable. 
 
“You can go into a trance now and enjoy the wonders of your mind, or you can go home and 
just wonder what you missed out on.” 
 
The social sciences constantly make this mistake in their set up for questionaires etc. These 
questionaires are loaded to give you only a Yes/No option, which forces you to one extreme or 
the other when in fact neither extreme fits (much like “have you stopped beating your wife yet, 
Yes or No??!” neither answer actually fits the truth!) 
 
A more sophisticated version of this error is included in the questionaires that give you a 
seeming range of options: “Do you do X Often – Sometimes – Rarely – Never?” 
 
This makes the Black & White frame error, gives Black the value 1 and white the value 10 – so 
that 5 MUST mean a medium shade of grey.  Because the Black & White frame is hidden in the 
numbers (another fallacy of course) it is harder to detect.  
 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 19: The Group/Unit (G-Unit) Frame 
 
 
This is where people try to apply characteristics of a group to an individual in that group, or the 
characteristics of an individual are extrapolated to belong to the whole group to which he/she 
belongs. 
 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
23 
Type 1: Group To Unit 
Mistakes characteristics that many in the group share with characteristics that one person in that 
group must have (NB deleting the “most” confuses matters even more, thus strengthening the 
Frame: 
 
“(Most) Teachers are communists, Tom’s a teacher, he must be a communist!” 
 
Type 2: Unit To Group 
Here the characteristics of an individual in the group gets passed on to the whole group: 
 
“Every member of this Football team is a star athlete – this team is the best in the world!” 
This would be false if, say, the players were great, but had no ability to work in a team. The 
team would be dysfunctional whilst still being made up of all star athletes! 
 
With American English these two Types of G-Unit Frames are easier to pull off, as in the USA 
the distinction between a team/group and memebers of that group are linguistically rarely 
made.. 
 
“The team IS ready”  
“The team ARE tired” 
 
one speaks of a group quality, the other of individual characteristics. In the USA the second 
would also be phrased as: 
 
“The Team IS tired” – which would delete the possibility that Fred, a member of the team, is 
actually not tired, its just the others who are not as fit as Fred! 
 
Type 3: Group Typecasting 
The G Unit frame can be used to easily make false judgements  
 
“John is a cheat. He works at ACME, so everyone at ACME are cheats!” 
 
This is particularly persuasive of you have more examples to back up your claim: 
 
“John is a cheat. Mary is a cheat. Bill is a Cheat. Henry is a Cheat. They all work at ACME, so 
everyone at ACME are cheats!” – what about the 3,000 other employees that are honest?! 
 
Of course it could be used a Force For Good 
“Mary is a beauty, therefore her sister must be too, go out with her!” 
 
Type 4: Individual Typecasting 
When you reverse the Group Typecasting Frame, you get your traditional, mindless prejudice 
type of typecasting.  
 
“Car dealers are shady, Jess is a car dealer, she must be shady.” 
 
As with the first example, you can have two G Unit frames backing each other, so you get 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
24 
“John is a cheat. Mary is a cheat. Bill is a Cheat. Henry is a Cheat. They’re all car dealers, so all 
car dealers are cheats! – Wait a minute: Jess is a car dealer, don’t trust her, she’ll cheat you!” 
 
Type 5: Switching Logical Levels 
There are certain qualities that can only apply to individuals and others that can only apply to a 
group. Often we tend to blur the edges with our language, leading us to false conclusions: 
 
“The Swiss are neutral. Jon is Swiss; therefore he won’t take sides in the office debate.”  
 
This takes the group “political characteristics of the Swiss nation”, and applies them to an 
individual, “Jon”, in a context that has nothing to do with the original characteristic – it just uses 
the same word. 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 20: The Sweeping Generalisation 
This is where you take a general rule, but apply it to a specific example, that it was never meant 
to apply to. 
 
“Big corporations rape the planet, ACME is a big corporation, so therefore all its environmental 
protection actions must secretly be destroying the Earth.”  
 
This is, of course, another example of the G Unit frame and the Tyrannical Principle in action. 
 
By changing the implied “some” to “all” (as in the Type 3 G-Unit Frame), the sweeping 
generalisation suddenly gets reliable legs to stand on.  
 
“SOME corporations damage the environment…” becomes 
“(ALL) corporations damage the environment…” 
 
Like any frame, this can be used as A Force For Good 
 
“This car is perfect for the family man; you’re a family man aren’t you? Well then this car is for 
you!” 
 
The more frames are packed into one sentence the better.  
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 21: The Bootstrap frame 
The bootstrap frame is a circular argument, where you use a frame to prove itself  
 
“Tea cups are red because tea cups are red!” 
 
“Don’t take my word for it, here’s my guarantee” 
(This is like saying – don’t take my word for it, take my word for it!) 
 
This is named the bootstrap frame, as the frame is pulling itself up by its own bootstrap, but has 
nothing to actually lift or support it. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
25 
The Boot Strap frame is a favourite of those who argue for ideological positions, it allows people 
to create a reality in which there frame must be correct. 
 
“Psychoanalysts work to resolve issues, because when you use this process issues get resolved” 
 
This looks like you have provided proof and a good argument, and seems to give a reason for 
people to rationalize their beliefs, but in reality there is no real evidence to support your frame. 
 
Positive Example: 
“I’m happy because I’m so positive, and I know I’m positive, as I’m always happy!” 
 
Sugar-Coating The Bootsrap Frame 
One way to sugar-coat the bootstrap frame is to make your statements so positive and so general 
that people want to apply the frame to themselves.  
 
“I know you are the caring type, and caring people like these products...” 
 
It relies on so-called “Barnum Statements” which are vague positive affirmations that most 
people would want to be associated to. So to get the good feeling of being thought of as 
“caring” they have to be interested in the product (or risk falling out of the category “caring 
people”) 
 
This can also be used to defend frames and answer challenges. 
 
Presenter: “I normally don’t show this to people, but if the audience is particularly smart like 
you, I’ll sneak a peak at it…” 
Heckler: “But how do you know we are smart?” 
Presenter: “Well why else would I show it to you?” 
 
When you understand the needs of an individual or group then you can sugar coat your frame 
to suit them, and piggy back your desired action onto that. 
 
The Power Of Because 
Never doubt the power of the word “because” and how much more powerful your frame will be 
if you appear to justify them. By using the bootstrap frame and the word because people are 
much more likely to respond to your suggestions, even if, rational speaking, you have offered no 
real justification. 
 
Hiding The Bootsrap In Principles 
By using careful language you can hide your bootstrap frame. To do this is easy. Make your 
assertion, 
 
“Hypnosis is evil” 
 
Now reword the idea (“hypnosis is evil”) as a general rule which you apply using “because” 
 
“Hypnosis is evil BECAUSE it is the work of the devil” 
This is like saying “hypnosis is evil because it is evil” – but appears to be much more powerful. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
26 
Alternate Examples Of The Hidden Bootsrap: 
“Hypnosis works on everyone because everyone can alter their states of consciousness.” 
 
“Buying a sports car is safer, as fast engines make for safer cars.” 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame 22: The Red Herrings 
These are ways of using the distraction method to enhance the power of your frames (especially 
shaky ones) by 
 
1. Making weak frames seem more powerful 
 
2. Allowing you to rebut challenges and other frames, even when you have no real content 
to support you. 
 
The mindset you have for Red Herring is the old “look out behind you” and run - trick. 
 
Frame 22.1 Prove The Wrong Point 
By proving SOMETHING related to the point but not actually the point itself will trick many 
people into thinking you have actually proved your point. Your frame is thus accepted with the 
misdirected proof! 
 
“Hypnosis is good for weight loss, as the British medical association approved hypnosis in 1942” 
You have proved the wrong point – you have said nothing about weight loss! 
 
“We have found proof that Jesus Christ was crucified, therefore god must exist!” 
This does not prove the existence of god, merely the existence of Christ as a historical figure. 
 
Frame 22.2 Upping The Ante 
Red Herrings can also be use to defend against challenges to your frame, by switching to a new 
topic which is so emotionally loaded that people cannot see past it. 
 
“How can you justify removing the right to a fair trial?” 
“Well we live in a world where terrorists try to kill mothers and children, they are ruthless with 
us, and we must be ruthless with them!” 
 
This opens a completely different topic, which takes the “heat” off the main frame and its 
challenge. 
 
The secret to Upping the ante is to pick an emotionally charged topic to jump to. People will 
then get caught up in the heat of the moment and your frame gets sucked in with the distraction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
27 
Frame 22.3 Distracting Humour 
Distracting humour allows you to avoid challenges easily because: 
 
1. When you change people’s mood their minds will follow. Humour changes moods 
dramatically, so makes it easy to move people minds from a particular topic. 
 
2. It gives you emotional “brownie points” by appealing to the audience. 
 
3. It weakens the emotional content of the opposite frame and adds it to your argument. 
 
This makes your frame so charming that people no longer care for the challengers frame. 
 
You’ll notice that distracting humour can often be quite harsh. You can choose to be harsh with 
your distracting humour, or exhibit benevolent kindness, so that you are only pointing out the 
flaw in their frame, not in them.  Use these frame to enhance peoples self esteem, rather than 
crush it. 
 
Example: 
“Hypnosis is the work of the Devil and you are evil for using it!” 
“Yeah, my mother was just telling me what a naughty boy I’ve been!” 
 
This takes away the sting of the challenge, without attacking on the challengers self esteem. 
 
Frame 22.4 The Mini Counter Example 
This allows you to attack someone else’s frame. Essentially you prove how one (of possibly 
many) examples that they have given is wrong, and by implication disprove the whole frame. 
It’s an error in logic, but people will assume that what is true for one example will be true for 
the whole frame. 
 
This takes focus away from the main Frame, and focuses people’s attention on one argument or 
example. When you defeat this example it seems like whole original Frame comes tumbling 
down.  
 
To use this, analyse an unhealthy frame and find the weakest point within it. Then spend your 
time exploiting that particular weakness – when that is done, the whole frame will often crash 
along with your example. 
 
Frame 22.5 The Trivial Point 
This is where you focus on a totally minor and barely relevant detail, and use it to prove your 
point  
 
“Don’t buy that car, its red, it looks horrible!”  
 
This distracts from the important things (like price, quality, safety, affordability, need for a car 
etc.) and adds spurious arguments – surprisingly though, this works!  
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
28 
Frame 22.6 The Weight Of Numbers 
If you have only weak arguments (e.g. if you’re using a Type 5 Red Herring – The Trivial Point) 
just stack up lots of them, and people will be more persuaded by the sheer volume of them. 
 
It’s like stacking one page volumes of information, this seems to contain far more information 
than one 15 page volume. This appears to give weight to your arguments by using weight of 
numbers in your favour. 
 
Frame 22.7 The Hypthetical Frame 
The hypothetical Red Herring basically looks for a situation that is totally extreme (maybe even 
unlikely) and then uses that as the “evidence” for rejecting an idea/frame: 
 
“I won’t pay the government taxes, as for all I know they will use the money to fund secret 
kidnappings and assasination projects, which I won’t have a part in!” 
 
This hypothetical Red herring may seem to obvious to be effective, but we are often caught by 
this kind of extreme example unawares – political parties love to use this to justify their actions.  
 
As an example take the banking regulations brought in to prevent “money laundering” – very 
few dangerous criminals have been caught using the information these provisions generate. 
However a lot of tax dodgers did get caught. One might speculate that the Hypothetical frame 
(fight drugs & terorism) was used to enact draconian measures intended for something totally 
different (e.g. stricter tax controls.) 
 
But of course – that would be mere speculation! 
 
 
Closing Words 
 
Remember, the more someone is in trance, the less logical and rational your suggestions have to 
be.  
 
Use frames to begin to pave the way for trance and for total acceptance of even the most 
illogical (though positive and life enhancing!) suggestions. When people accept your frames in a 
normal state, they start down the slippery slope into trance. They are blindly accepting and 
believing what you tell them.  
 
Just be sure to use these frames to trap people in positive realities. After all hypnosis (and 
Hypnotic Frames) is powerful force for good! 
 
 
 
 
 

