For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
How To Use The Dynamic 
Principle To Easily Get Inside 
People’s Minds And Change 
Attitudes, Feelings & The Inner 
Landscape 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Use The Dynamic Principle To Easily Get Inside 
People’s Minds And Change Attitudes, Feelings & The Inner 
Landscape. 
 
Session 1: The Dynamic Principle 
 
Moving From Overt To Covert Hypnosis 
 
The Dynamic Principle can be used within a regular induction to teach you the skills of making 
your hypnosis more “conversational” and therefore more covert. Its also a great way of using 
hypnosis as a Force For Good! 
 
Active – v – Passive Hypnosis 
 
Passive hypnosis is the easiest to master and understand. It’s the most “traditional” form of 
hypnosis and what most people would recognise as being “hypnotic”. Communication is largely 
one way, with some attention being paid to minimal cues (trance signals etc) 
 
Active hypnosis is much more tricky to master, but will give you the insights and subtleties that 
create a true master of hypnosis. In active hypnosis you’re constantly asking for feedback, which 
makes it much easier to build up a clear picture of whats happening inside the person. Active 
hypnosis is interactive.  
 
Dynamic Mental Imagery (DMI) 
 
DMI is a process that uses active hypnosis combined with the Dynamic Principle to do its work. 
It’s a great learning tool for the novice because: 
 
1. Its easy to do 
2. It follows a simple structure 
3. It leaves much room for spontaneous unconscious expression 
4. You gather feedback automatically as you go on 
 
DMI is a form of interactive guided visualisation.  Its easy to the extent that the subject’s 
unconscious mind will be creating all the content. The Hypnotist just sets the scene and then 
lets everything unfold naturally. Once the ball gets rolling, the only task the hypnotist has left is 
to be a “catalyst” – to make sure that you throw enough suggestions in to ensure that things keep 
happening at/bubbling up from the unconscious level. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
The DMI Induction 
 
To use the DMI Induction is relatively easy and opens the doors to discovering many hypnotic 
subtleties. 
 
1. Check with the subject that the starting imagery you want to use (eg a garden or a beach) 
does not contain any negative associations for them (eg a fear of drowning etc) 
2. Explain how to visualise easily – everyone can do it. 
3. Induce trance (relaxation and internal focus) 
4. Create a doorway to the first experience. 
5. Get them to step through the doorway into the garden (or beach, wood, mountain scene 
etc) 
6. Describe some of the scenery to help them orient, but be artfully vague so they fill in 
their own content. 
7. Set expectation for a “path” that leads deeper to a second experience: this could be a 
cave, a well, a forest trail, a cliff, a raft on a river etc. 
8. Find the second “path” and take them deeper inside as you count 10... – 1. 
9. Get them to describe the room/place they end up in. 
10.  Get them to explore the area. 
11.  Start adding in symbols for the unconscious mind to express itself (a secret book, a 
person with a message, something written on a wall, a painting, a window etc) 
12.  Guide interaction with the symbols, paying special attention to meanings and feelings. 
13.  Collect personal trance words as they arise.  
14.  Fire these off at the end as you bring them back.  
15.  To return count up from 1… – 10, and bring them back up the path that took them 
deeper back to the original scene. 
16.  Now fire the trance words off again as they step through the door back into normal 
reality. 
17.  Emerge them from trance and fire the trance words again to give them a nicely rounded 
experience! 
 
Subtleties of the DMI Induction 
 
• Constantly gather feedback “What’s happening now?” 
• Use the echo effect to reflect back to them the exact words, phrases and tonality of the 
descriptions of their experiences (this deepens the trance and stabilises the internal 
experience) 
• Listen out for Personal Trance Words that are significant for them. Use these a lot – they 
are excellent leverage and create a powerful hypnotic experience for them. 
• Seed & Distract – whilst you focus their attention on a certain symbol (eg a picture, or 
the action of a character in the scene) to free the Unconscious to prepare the next phase 
of the experience. 
• Keep the momentum going, if things start to get bogged down, throw in a new symbol or 
draw their attention to something else to keep the momentum going. At ALL COST stop 
them from thinking and analysing everything – being curious and wondering, confused or 
getting sudden insight are all OK as these are all unconsciously driven! 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
• Try to bring the stories to completion – usually things will come back in a full circle: eg a 
symbol that was confusing at first (like a book that they can’t read) suddenly shows 
insights (they can read the text). 
 
The Multiple Uses Of The DMI Induction 
 
There are two kinds of hypnosis: 
 
1. Remedial: therapy to resolve a specific problem 
2. Generative: general improvement without focusing on any problem 
 
The DMI Induction can handle both situations excellently. For remedial hypnosis, the DMI 
constitutes a form of “content free therapy” – you need never know what the problem was, you 
just make sure that you set the expectation up front that the symbols will be all about resolving 
the problem they have in mind. 
 
For Generative hypnosis, you simply run through the process and let the unconscious mind 
choose how to improve that person’s life spontaneously. 
 
Ensuring A Positive Experience 
 
How do you prevent the DMI Induction becoming a trip from hell that stimulates traumatic 
material? 
 
• Positive Reinforcements – use “That’s right” liberally to reinforce anything that is 
positive, this gives the unconscious mind the idea of where to take it. 
• Presuppositions – use preframes and presuppositions to assume that everything will go 
well and that its going to be a very positive experience (“this is going to be a fantastic 
journey through your inner mind”) 
• Go First! If you’re not doing it – why should they? 
 
The role of the hypnotist is to keep an eye on the unconscious activity being generated and 
constrain it to follow only the positive (or in case of therapy, the therapeutically useful) 
experiences. 
 
You can always introduce new information to deal with a “problem”. So if a person has a spider 
phobia and confronts a spider spontaneously in the process, you can furnish them with 
resources (a shield, a guardian etc) to help with that situation. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
Session 2: DMI Induction Coaching  
 
Unconscious Logic 
 
The unconscious mind has 2 main ways of reasoning 
 
1. Association – this has been investigated in many other SHM classes 
2. Symbolism – this is the domain of dream logic. The DMI Induction specialises in this 
kind of logic. 
 
Symbolism is particularly powerful as you can work on many different levels at the same time. 
Just like a dream can have one character look like your friend, but somehow be your father – so 
you can introduce other symbols that have multiple meanings.  
 
Stimulate The Unconscious 
 
As you’re stimulating the unconscious mind, you can get it to chose how best to use the 
hypnotic experience for personal growth. It can chose a problem to work through (remedial 
hypnosis) or to simply enjoy life more (generative hypnosis) – all without the person needing to 
know what is happening at the conscious level! 
 
More Detailed Analysis of the DMI Induction 
 
The Induction 
1. Check that the opening scene you want to use does not have any negative associations 
for the subject (eg don’t get someone that almost drowned to “relax” in a scene where 
he’s drifting on a river!) 
2. Ensure the subject is confident that he/she can visualise, if not get him to “imagine” or 
ask “what is the colour of your car” or another visual question.) 
3. 2-3 minutes of regular, mini trance induction. (Relax, focus inside). This sets the scene 
and prepares the client. 
4. Create a doorway. The gateway experience. This creates a symbol to allow the client to 
enter into a symbolic world. This creates the context of journeying etc that is to come. It 
does not have to be a doorway, any symbol I(eg trap door, tunnel etc) will do.  
5. Allow the door to become vividly aware  
 
The Gateway Experience 
6. Step through the doorway into the scene (forest etc). Ensure the subject is comfortable 
with the scene before hand. Explore the scene for a while, give the subject ideas but do 
not force any on them “you might see...hear...feel etc) (5 minutes should have elapsed so 
far) 
7. Condition the subject into interacting with symbols then lead to the deepening 
experience. 
8. Create a journey process the take them to a deeper level of symbolism (where the 
change-work is to take place)  
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
The Deepening Experience 
9. When you have found the well/lake/path etc, use a 10...1 count so that at the end of it 
they end up at a different world. The hypnotist gives little or no information about the 
next place “there is something important waiting for you etc” Ensure the seed that 
something important is going to happen/problem is solved is firmly planted. 
10. Ensure there are symbols waiting “something/someone is waiting for you”. 
 
The Inner Journey 
11. When the subject enters focus on what he/she is aware of. (this allows the rest of the 
scene to develop unconsciously) Use the echo effect to stabilise the scene. 
12. Spread their attention around the whole scene (eg “look under the table”). 
13. Use your initiative from here, it is unpredictable territory, but refer to coaching notes 
below. 
 
Special Coaching Notes On The Demonstration Induction 
 
• Ensure that it will be a pleasant experience with a preframe/presuspposition (eg “make 
sure you are confident that all the images will be pleasant”) 
• Get an idea of what scene the subject would like to be placed in 
• Make sure that as the door is brought into clarity – as it it carries with it the gateway 
scene, the sanctuary behind it. Create the expectation that the door leads to the gateway 
experience. 
• Distract the conscious mind after he/she steps through the door, this allows the 
unconscious mind to build the scene. 
• After the scene is well established get the subject to do the describing, play the director 
role, and find out what is in the subjects head. 
• See if you can make it seem as if you too are sharing the experience “there are those big 
trees” 
• Look for opportunities to move to the next level, (in this case it was “look under the 
leaves” etc.) 
• Tie in with the symbols the process that you want to happen as you go through the 
deepening experience (ladder etc). (Process, i.e., unconscious delight etc) 
• Always give advanced warning for the 10---1 method. “When I reach 1 you will...” 
• Use the echo effect as if you expected whatever it is to be there. 
• Ensure new symbols occur by asking something similar to “now how is your experience 
changing” – notice the presuppositon that it is changing! 
• Make symbols seem important “the book [or other symbol] has an important message for 
you...” 
• Allow the message to come across in any of the senses (feel, hear, see etc),  
• Respect the subject’s privace – don’t force them to tell if they don’t want to! 
• Allow the subject to process the information – pause to give them time. 
• Continue to imply that you expected what the subject sees to be there “that’s right, there 
ARE... and I wonder if you have noticed...” 
• To generate new symbols ask “so how is your experience changing now” 
• When interacting with symbols create expectation and allowance for any means of            
conveyance of the message held by the symbol “There is a very important message, and I 
am not sure whether you will hear it, see it or just feel or sense it.” 
• Allow the subject the option of keeping the message private. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
• Apply insights gained in the trance experience to apply to real life... “And I wonder what 
other     great changes you’ll see in your life and in particular whatever you had on your 
mind as we started this experience as a result of what you experienced here.” 
• As soon as a shift occurs ask the subject to focus on another symbol seen previously and 
notice how it has changed. 
• At the end tie it all up, repeat all symbols, reinforce the positive change, and unless a 
new return route is presented, return by reversing the way inside (ie the deepening 
experience – in this case 1..10 up the ladder) 
• Allow the gateway experience to fade “only when you feel complete, with your 
unconscious learning’s” 
• Before you emerge them chain all the triggers together. When the subject feels the 
feelings intensely, get them to leave and return to the here and now, with those feelings. 
Remember to get them to close the door behind them as they leave 
• Orient the subject into his/her body, ask them to open their eyes, and re run the chain 
(The most significant feelings and events). 
 
Troubleshooting 
 
If the subject does not wish or is unable to explore further at the beginning to find new symbols, 
allow him/her time to relax where (s)he is in the scene, and if after a few minutes of relaxing 
they still do not wish to continue so the following: throw in a double bind like: “are you ready 
to continue the journey or is this the experience that your unconscious mind wants you to have” 
either way, they experience the unconscious work. 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
Session 3: The Dynamic Principle For Covert Changes 
 
You can take the subtleties you have learned in the Dynamic Mental Imagery Induction and 
apply them in a more covert/conversational setting as well. The point of doing the DMI 
induction is to become very sensitive to peoples internal symbolism. 
 
Personal Metaphors 
 
As you become sensitised to notice people’s inner landscape, you’ll start to hear their personal 
metaphors about life, work, love etc slip out: 
 
Life is hard 
Life is a battle 
Love is like banging your head against a wall 
My Stomach is churning 
 
These are descriptions of the unconscious landscape for that field. You can help expand what 
the unconscious is capable of experiencing by piggy-backing a more wholesome metaphor onto 
their own. It may not change them for good, but it will make an unalterable shift. With enough 
of these the old (negative) metaphor simply vanishes. 
 
This is a though virus: an idea that worms its way into the unconscious and keeps burrowing 
away until positive change emerges. 
 
How To Present A Thought Virus 
 
To be effective a thought virus must survive the first few seconds of contact with someone’s 
mind. If the critical filters reject it then, it will probably die off. If it gets through that first layer, it 
has a chance to burrow in and do its work. 
 
Here are some examples of counters to the personal metaphor “Life is a constant struggle” 
 
1. Agree & Contrast Frame: I can see that, and for me life is an adventure  
You simply agree to calm the critical filter and then slip your thought virus in. 
 
2. Abstraction: Yes, and for me life is like a deep blue ocean 
The more abstract the thought virus, the harder it is for them to analyse and reject. And 
yet the metaphor has a pleasant feel to it, to imply a more positive point of view. 
 
3. Extended Quotes: You know I read a book by the poet Erhardt and he said “Life is an 
adventure” I wonder what he meant by that? 
This is like the “My Friend John” hypnotic induction. Its hard to argue with someone who 
is not there! 
 
The key to these is to wait for a few second to allow them to START processing the idea, and 
then distract them before the get to FINISH processing it! 
 
You can also stack thought viruses by feeding in different ones over a long period of time.  

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
Another simple trick is to get them to explain to you what somebody else meant by their own 
personal metaphor – by forcing them into someone else’s shoes and getting them to justify that 
position, they are experiencing the new metaphor themselves, and their experience will shift. 
 
Thought Viruses In Stories 
 
You can adapt the idea of a thought virus and put it into a story that will break through people’s 
limitations at the unconscious level. This is a special form of the isomorphic story in which you 
follow the SYNTAX but change the content and add a happy ending. 
 
By keeping the syntax, I mean you keep the same structure of: verb, noun, adjective, verb etc. 
that the problem was stated in. Here’s an example: 
 
Structural Analysis Of A Problem 
I have achieved  
--- a number of  
--- goals  
--- this year and  
--- have doubts  
Verb (perfect tense)  --- adjective   
--- noun  
--- noun  
 
--- verb 
 
as to whether  
 
--- I can maintain 
--- this 
subordinate clause  
--- verb 
 
--- unspecified noun 
 
Example Of A Thought Virus Story 
I was talking to my sister today and she said  
---  
Introductory statement  
--- 
 
“I have developed  --- a number of  
--- relationships  
--- this year and  
Verb (perfect tense)  --- adjective   
--- noun 
  
--- noun  
 
 
 
--- I have some uncertainty --- about whether  --- I can keep  
--- them all going.  
--- verb  
 
 
--- subord. clause 
--- verb 
 
--- unspecified noun 
 
 
--- So I told her “As long as you can go into them all with positive intentions and treat each 
person with respect you’ll be fine” 
--- the solution is presented as a piggy back suggestion to the structure of the problem. 
 
 
 

