For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
Instant Street Hypnosis:  Now 
You Can Demonstrate The Power 
Of Hypnosis To Amaze A Crowd, 
Be A Force For Good & Save 
Someone’s Life! 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
Instant Street Hypnosis: Now You Can Demonstrate The Power 
Of Hypnosis To Amaze A Crowd, Be A Force For Good & Save 
Someone’s Life! 
 
 
Session 1: How To Use Hypnosis As A Force For Good  
 
Street Hypnosis 
 
Street hypnosis is the brand of hypnosis that you can use anytime, anywhere with anyone. Street 
hypnosis is an attempt to make the world a better place, one person and one crowd at a time. 
 
There are three poles that you can “navigate” in hypnosis: 
 
1. Overt to Covert Hypnosis 
2. Direct to Indirect Hypnosis 
3. Authoritative to Permissive Hypnosis 
 
Each approach has its strengths and weaknesses.  
 
In street hypnosis the most useful pole is Covert Direct hypnosis. This is due to the nature of the 
environment, you typically do not have the time for indirect hypnosis, covert/overt varies upon 
the situation. Use your skill and flexibility to switch between these methods and your 
effectiveness with hypnosis will skyrocket! 
 
 
Hypnotherapy, Stage Hypnosis & Street Hypnosis 
 
Hypnotherapists typically do not like stage hypnotists, they think they cheapen hypnosis and are 
responsible for many of the misconceptions which they have to dispel. 
 
However, hypnotherapy owes a lot to stage hypnosis: 
 
They are the only reason why hypnosis still exists, without stage hypnotists there would be no 
public knowledge of hypnosis, and therefore no customers for hypnotherapists. 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3
Street Hypnosis  
These are the qualities that characterise Street Hypnosis: 
 
• No negative aspects, such as embarrassments and unpleasant routines 
• A street hypnotist can inspire people to have better lives 
• A street hypnosis can show what is possible and what the mind can do 
• People can come to see hypnosis as a force for good 
• The public can experience the power of hypnosis 
 
How The Street Hypnotist Benefits 
 
• You develop your personal power 
• You master your hypnosis skills at a level that no other hypnotist is trained to do 
• You build the same level of authority and respect as stage hypnotists. 
 
The Ethics Of Street Hypnosis 
 
1. Street Hypnosis is NOT therapy (if you would do it in a pep talk it’s okay) 
2. Be Non Invasive. 
3. You are empowering people. Be sure to inspire them that a better way of life exists, and 
allow them to take the credit for their achievements.  
4. Don’t try to be a guru! 
 
The History Of Street Hypnosis 
 
Hypnosis is not something you do, it’s something you become.  
 
Street Hypnosis was inspired by a TV show in which a magician created very realistic fake 
hypnotic demonstrations in public settings.  
 
One performance showed this hypno-magic taking in a group of young offenders, who quickly 
dropped their angry & hostile attitude to life and briefly opened up to a new outlook on life 
filled with curiousity and wonder. Their momentary transformation was inspiring to see. 
 
One day, as I began my career as a hypnotherapist, I was cahllenged to an impromptu  hypnosis 
demonstration at a party. After demonstrating some simple hypnotic phenomena, people 
became so inspired that they filled up my almost empty client list that night. 
 
With street hypnosis people get inspired to improve their lives. That is why we do it. 
 
How To Do Street Hypnosis 
 
Street Hypnosis is waking suggestion. It is still hypnosis, so you must use the ABS formula: 
 
A: Absorb attention 
B: Bypass the critical factor  
S: Stimulate the unconscious 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4
The Four Stages Of Street Hypnosis 
 
1. Prime the unconscious mind to respond in the desired way 
2. Create the mental conditions for waking trance 
3. Do your street  hypnosis 
4. Create a sense of infinite possibility, create meaning. 
 
How To Prime The Unconscious 
 
1. Create Expectation, you have no certificates on the wall like hypnotherapists, you must 
do it entirely on your own skill in the moment. This is your pre talk.  
2. Set frames around the greatness and safety of hypnosis.  
3. Tell stories about hypnosis to show it is a force for good 
4. Tell case studies which highlight the power and usefulness of hypnosis. 
 
Be sure to subcommunicate the right ideas, so that people trust you and therefore trust hypnosis. 
 
The Mental Conditions For A “Waking” Trance 
 
Use The Street Hypnosis Reality Set: create a “Silent Script” that you run in your mind to remind 
yourself that: 
 
1. The subject I am talking about Demands your undivided attention 
2. You will treat this with respect 
3. Hypnosis is powerful 
4. Something amazing will happen 
 
This will get subcommunicated and people will pick up the same attitude about hypnosis, 
treating it with respect and expecting positive things to happen. This sets the Frame for hypnosis 
being a Force For Good! 
 
How To Create A Waking Trance In Others 
 
• Use a variant of the hypnotic gaze induction: 
o make and maintain calm, fixed, and unrelenting eye contact 
o notice when their eyes start to defocus (that’s their escape into a trance)  
o make sure it is a friendly stare (don’t get aggressive or weird!) 
 
• Do your pre talk whilst maintaining your gaze. 
• Use the “voodoo technique”: do everything with such a strong air of importance so that 
people read significance into it. If you weave enough significance into something the 
power of the suggestions will be enhanced. 
 
How To Use Suggestion To Achieve Your Goal 
 
This is a very rapid and authoritive style of hypnosis, called prestige hypnosis. It is best to stick 
to very direct suggestions like:  “You arm is locked” or “You will feel great” 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5
 
Develop a feel for infinite possibilities 
 
Get them to draw a significant lesson out of the experience “as the days go buy you will start 
feeling better and more self assured.” 
 
Like the closing scene of the TV show “The Walton’s”, finish with a powerful lesson that will 
dramatically improve their future. 
 
Benedictions – v –  Maledictions 
 
A malediction is a “hypnotic curse.” It is a negative suggestion that burrows into someone’s 
mind and ends up creating limitations or unpleasant consequences. It usually happens by 
accident: perhaps a teacher criticises a child’s painting implying that  she’s a dreadful artist, and 
years later the girl has grown up vowing never to draw again. 
 
To avoid maledictions: If you are going to criticise never criticise the person, only criticise the 
behaviour whilst reinforcing a positive attitude towards the person.  
 
A benediction is the opposite of a malediction. It is a “Hypnotic Blessing.” Instead of the 
malediction: “You are useless” A benediction would be “I believe in you.” When offered in a 
hypnotic context (even a naturally occuring one) it has the power to dramatically change 
someone’s life for the better! 
 
The Hypnotic Pep Talk 
 
To use a benedictions as a Hypnotic Pep Talk: 
 
• Use your hypnotic gaze  
• Go first: allow yourself to become overtaken by your positive message 
• Be animated and passionate, unrelenting with your positive intentions 
• Keep hammering away at them: 
o with your gaze  
o with praise/your positive message  
 
• Eventually they will “escape” into a positive trance!  
 
 
Steps For The Benediction 
 
1. Give general self esteem suggestions, make them feel good about who they are as a 
person 
2. Do your hypnotic pep talk 
3. Put in a bright new future: “As a result of XYZ you will be richer, healthier, happier etc.” 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6
Session 2: How To Amaze A Crowd With Hypnosis 
 
How To Amaze & Inspire People With Street Hypnosis 
 
The simple, tried and tested method to amaze and inspire people with hypnosis is: 
 
1. Induce a waking trance (see Session 1) 
2. Demonstrate a “suggestibility test” – or other suggestion experiments – like Arm 
Levitation or Catalepsy 
 
Keep things interactive so that everyone is involved. From there expand into a meaningful 
routine like: 
 
• The Hypnotic Pendulum (where you calibrate for yes/no and ask the unconscious mind 
questions.) This shows hypnosis as a useful and practical tool rather than just a cheap 
trick. 
 
• Hypnotic Anaesthesia. To do this, directly suggest that a particular part of their upper 
forearm (this is the safest area) is…  
 
“becoming completely numb, you can still feel things there but nothing that happens 
there will bother you at all, you will notice it but it will be comfortable and easy to 
ignore.”  
 
Then you can pinch quite hard the skin at the top of the forearm, and then ask the subject 
afterwards if they felt pain, typically they will say no. 
 
From this point you could easily do an instant induction, or a mini hypnosis show. 
 
Your Mini Hypnosis Show 
 
You have no music, stage or equipment, but you do have a crowd – so you’re on a roll! 
 
Rules For A Succesful Mini Hypnotic Show 
 
1. The subjects have to do what you say; they must be conditioned to follow your 
instructions instantly without consciously checking what you say. You have to move fast 
so that you overload them and shut their thinking off. From the start keep issuing 
instructions, layering them and compounding your suggestions and building compliance. 
As soon as you have a response issue another suggestion. Start with simple suggestions at 
first. 
 
2. From there build up, make your suggestions and instructions larger and more significant. 
Create behaviours. To create behaviours, actions, it helps to build a little social pressure. 
 
3. Now go through some kind of quick induction, or rapid induction.  

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7
One way to do this is to convert a suggestibility experiment into an induction. E.g. the 
Finger Vice:  
 
o Just when the fingers touch gently nudge the back of their head forward and say 
“Now just close your eyes and sleep.”  
o When you do a rapid induction they spike into trance, but will soon rise again, so 
you have to quickly move into your deepener to keep them under.  
o Use the four words of power and use a basic induction/deepener. 
 
4. Now you have to escalate your suggestions and keep the momentum going. You have to 
escalate smoothly, such as: 
 
o Give simple suggestions (“someone has walked in with a batch of rotting eggs, and 
they smell terrible and you have to edge away from the smell”) 
o Build it up, escalate the behaviours: “it’s cold in here, freezing, so you have to 
move and try and warm yourself up.” 
o Build it up further and deal with each subject individually (“in a minute I will tap 
you on the shoulder and when I do you will be unable to talk”) 
 
5. Now you will have enough compliance to become even more complicated and dramatic. 
 
Always remember: 
 
• Be nice to the subjects. Use Hypnosis as a Force For Good – so make sure that it is a 
pleasant experience for them. Avoid embarrassing them! 
• Avoid Regressions (as there is a possibility of abreaction). 
  
 
Trouble Shooting Tip: Rapid Inductions 
 
If they don’t shut their eyes when you say “Sleep!!”, take it in your stride. They will take their 
cue from you – so if you get worried they will too! Simply stay calm and gently suggest things 
like: “close your eyes and sleep” again.  
 
Then keep adding suggestions to comfort them: “That’s right, now close your eyes and sleep! 
Such a good, safe, comfortable feeling…” 
 
How To Use Street Hypnosis As A force For Good 
 
After you have built up compliance and have you subject(s) in a deep trance (see above) you 
could try using a Dynamic Mental Imagery journey (see the Dynamic Principle masterclass) or 
you might like to do some “secret” changeword (e.g. where the subject does not tell you their 
problem).  
 
The 6 Step Reframe is a great technique for “secret” changework. 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8
The Simplified 6 Step Reframe 
 
1. Set up yes/no signals with their unconscious mind (finger signals or otherwise) 
2. Get the to pick a problem they have been working on 
3. Ask them to go to the creative part of their mind, the “dream machine” and get it to 
present 10 different behaviours to solve the problem 
4. Go into the future and test them all 
5. Take 3 that you will remember and use over the next couple of months 
6. Wake them up. 
 
Another way to use street hypnosis as a force for good is by creating Generative Changes 
(improvement without doingtherapy) 
 
One way to do this is to create Future Memories, e.g. to improve in golf: 
 
1. Ask “how do you know when your golf swing will be successful”  
2. Feed this back to them 
3. Take them into the future with them feeling like that every time “wouldn’t it be nice if...” 
4. Here you may want to distract them so that they do not consciously interfere with the 
processes. 
 
Remember that all this is of course being done within a hypnotic context – which is why it 
works better than just a pep talk! 
 
Street Hypnosis Routines Which Have A Dramatic Impact On People. 
 
1. Deep Trance Identification (do not do with people with instabilities) 
 
Before you do a Deep Trance Identification always get consent from the person first. A Deep 
Trance Identification is one of the most powerful learning tools that exist. 
 
They unconscious mind does not know how to pretend, so what you pretend about yourself 
eventually becomes real (Stanford Prison Trials). 
 
How To Do A Deep Trance Identification 
 
1. Get lots of behavioural responses first, so that they are conditioned to respond 
2. Ask them to look at the person they want to DTI with (if the person is there) or imagine 
them being there 
3. Ask them to begin to copy their movements, become their shadow 
4. Start copying their mental ideas 
5. Suddenly they become the other person 
6. Then suggest that the actual person is an imposter, trying to copy them, they are the 
actual person, not them. 
 
You can end the deep trance identification by asking them to float out of the new body and 
enter their own; bringing with them all the learnings they gained. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9
2. Healing Energy 
 
You can do this with physical healing or emotional energy. This is not necessarily real energy, 
but perhaps a psychological/hallucinated version. You could even suggest something like Reiki. 
 
Get them to remember the experience of love, health & vitality etc. – and then use suggestion to 
amplify the experience so their whole body is immersed in it. By the end of this experience they 
should be buzzing with whatever type of “healing energy” you invested them with! 
 
Street Hypnosis and Magic 
Magic is meaningless in its raw form, what gives it the excitement is the story’s told around the 
routines: i.e. the patter, the story, the set up. 
 
Street Hypnosis is the same. The routine becomes the release mechanism for all the expectation 
build up in the story and set up.  
 
So, for Healing Energy 
 
• Build an indirect story around something  significant (a ring or similar) can have spiritual 
significance, can carry the essence of the person who gave them 
• Directly suggest that when you touch the ring etc, something amazing will happen, you 
will feel a tingling, an essence, it will be like you were with that person again, all those 
feelings, concentrated and magnified, focused in the palm of your hand. 
• Have the good feeling travel across the body, and settle in the hear 
• Remind that them, every time they see/feel the object that can bring back the good 
feelings and the connection with the person. 
 
You can use this for the glow of love, a healing warmth, a blanket of happiness, a 1000 volts of 
excitement (use this metaphor carefully, don’t mention the word electricity or volts to someone 
that has had bad experiences with these – eg got electrocuted before!) 
 
With any health issue – especially pain reduction – be sure that the subject has already seen a 
doctor and all the appropriate medical people – never treat pain or any other health condition 
without a doctors consent/involvement. 
 
 
3. The Control Panel 
 
One way of giving people control of their mind is to give them a control panel to their mind, 
were they can turn up good feelings and down bad ones.  
 
Be sure that with this it becomes a gift, not something to aspire to – i.e. if they don’t respond to 
this metaphor then give them a different gift. 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10
4. The Hypnotic Blitz 
 
The blitz is a great technique for overloading the critical factor, and persuading people to your 
point of view. (The benediction is also a form of blitz). 
 
To Use The Blitz 
When you use the blitz you generally want to: 
 
• Use a powerful hypnotic gaze. 
• At the same time deliver an intense monologue of hypnotic suggestions.  
• Mingle logic with passion and intuition.  
 
The Step By Step Approach To The Blitz 
 
1. Grab their attention with a shocking statement, or physical touch. 
2. Ramp up the suggestions, pick up the pace, rivet their attention, and don’t let them 
escape. 
3. Always make sure that everything that you say starts off as logical – you’re setting up a 
conflict between what you’re saying (logically correct) and how you’re saying it. 
4. Be very intense, but with acceptant, kind, logical mannerisms. 
 
You are mixing logical statements with completely irrational behaviour. This both bypasses the 
critical factor and stimulates the unconscious, so is a great induction to use. 
 
How To Use The Blitz To Invigorate A Personal Relationship 
You can use the blitz in relationships. 
 
To use the blitz, simply use the “Benediction” protocol and 
 
• Playfully, but intently, blame your partner for being... everything they want to be 
(attractive, smart, sexy, kind etc)  
• throw compliments at them, with a glint in your eyes, as if blaming them for being 
everything that they aspire to in the relationship 
• Be sure to ramp yourself up, go first, and really see them as such and\ amazing person. 
 
Other Uses Of The Blitz 
The hypnotic blitz can be used as a benediction, mixing logic with hypnotic overload to blitz all 
maledictions and install benedictions. The hypnotic blitz teaches the “power” element of 
hypnosis, when you understand the power element of hypnosis your mastery over hypnotic 
technique soars to new heights!   
 
“Power” is often misunderstood by modern hypnotists. “Power” does not come from power over 
someone, but personal power from yourself! 
 
Milton Erickson was so effective as before he turned to his softer style he used very authoritarian 
hypnosis, so when he turned to indirect hypnosis he still had “10,000 volts of power” running in 
the background to back up his indirect suggestions.  

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11
 
Though he was gentle, kindly and respectful, people still comment on how imposing and 
powerful a figure he was – even near the end when he was sitting crippled in a wheelchair.  
 
To become a great hypnotist you must master the performance and the power elements of 
hypnosis. Street Hypnosis teaches you this, and is a force for good, so why not use it as this, and 
let other people benefit from it too. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
12
Session 3: How To Save Someone’s Life With Hypnosis 
 
 
Emergency Hypnosis Protocols 
 
In an emergency there are limited amounts of time to do your work and immense pressure. 
Regular conversational hypnosis is too slow; therefore, as a rule, direct suggestions tend to be 
more appropriate. 
 
Remember you are dealing with an emergency situation, the normal rules of first aid must apply, 
and hypnosis does NOT replace this, but can supplement it in certain situations. 
 
As with the other forms of street hypnosis you need their attention, and you can be very direct 
with your suggestions. 
 
Step 1 – Priming 
Prime their mind to expect that something unusually and hypnotic will happen, prepare them 
for your suggestions, and be very direct (As the bigger the emergency the deeper the altered 
state the victim is in).  
 
Prime people; make them think that “something important will happen.” One of the best way to 
prime people in an emergency situation is simply to say: “I am a doctor.” 
 
However be warned: you cannot do this unless you really are a doctor, do not call yourself 
something that you are not! The next best is to say “I am a medic” but again, make sure you 
really are.  
 
As a hypnotist you can truthfully say “I am a hypnotist” or, if you are, “I am a hypnotherapist” or 
“I am a clinical hypnotist” – Make sure to check your local laws first: each country/state has 
different laws about what you may legally call yourself. 
 
You could also simply say “I am an expert, I’m here to help”. 
 
Step 2 – Attention 
Get and fixate their attention.  
 
Echo the thoughts that they are having, pace their experiences. 
 
Step 3 – Direct Suggestions 
Here’s an example of what this might run like: 
 
“You’ve been burnt, you’re in pain, I can help, I can make the pain go away, in a moment it will 
go away, all I need you to do is...(suggestion time!).” 
 
This relies greatly on your personnel power,  be confident and believe what you say, use the 
ideas behind the hypnotic blitz to break through the trance that they are in, and enter it as an 
authority. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
13
 
Emergency Interventions 
 
The things that a hypnotists is most likely to be able to help with during an emergency are: 
 
• Other assistants being disorganised 
• General panic 
• Fear and panic in the victim 
• Bleeding and pain 
• “Special” problems, eg hyperventilation, post traumatic stress disorder, and mass 
dissociation.  
 
How To Deal With General Anxiety 
 
One of the simplest ways that hypnotists can aid fear and panic is, simply, to be comforting and 
give security.  
 
“You are here now, you’re safe, we know what to do, we’ll take care of you, you’re safe, and 
you’ll be fine.” 
 
It is surprising how many times people forget these important reassurances in an emergency! 
 
How To Deal With Panic 
 
When you become afraid you become to breathe more shallowly, so your oxygen intake 
reduces or you over-oxygenate your blood by breathing “too much” to compensate. Sometimes 
people do not breathe more and they run out of oxygen (leading to dizziness and fainting). 
 
Hyperventilation is not directly dangerous, but it can lead to passing out and it does create a lot 
of emotional strain. 
 
Panic can also cause an asthmatic attack, due to breathing restrictions. 
 
These responses can lead to future fears such a agoraphobia, due to expectation of what will 
happen. 
 
To intervene with hyperventilation use the typical paper bag method, and use direct suggestions  
 
“As you look at me your breathing begins to slow down, you are safe, your fine, and because 
you are beginning to feel more safe and calm, your breathing can stabilise, and you can relax 
and breath normally” 
 
How To Deal With Disorientation 
 
Disorientation is another side effect of panic and medical shock, this can lead to dissociation. 
You want them to be in their body, lucid and orientated, so that they can create a more positive 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
14
mental imprint of the situation. The simplest way to do this is to reorient them to the here and 
now. 
 
Reorient them to positive physical sensations, NOT the injury, but their other functions and 
senses. 
 
Orient them towards the present, deal with the future by preventing traumatic memories form 
setting in and creating them imprint of comfort and calm, deal with it as you would a regression.  
 
Reframe the situation before they can frame it for themselves in a negative way.  
 
Put in a future memory with them feeling empowered, with them feeling like as they could 
survive such a dangerous situation they can do anything!  
 
“You are safe no, you’ve come through this, and you will be stronger in the future, next time you 
go out you will be fine! You will know you will be safe, you will be fine, you have come through 
this, you’re safe, and your fine and you will be fine in the future.” 
 
Dealing With Pain. 
 
As usually, use direct suggestions, and follow the emergency hypnosis protocol.  
 
“In a moment I will touch you on the forehead and you will be fine, the pain will go (touch) 
now a cooling blanket is surrounding you, you will be completely healed...” 
 
Remember that pain has qualities; there are different types of pain (gripping, stabbing, aching, 
repetitive, freezing, burning etc.) If you have time to gather this information you can add the 
counter-quality. E.g. if they’re burning, a feeling of coolness, cool water, would be best to add. 
 
Another method is too use the following process: 
 
• Fixate attention 
• Pace their experience “you’re in pain, pain is a message, you need to pay attention, if you 
don’t pay attention you’ll pay… with pain, and pain is a signal form the body to draw 
attention to something, with your attention there is no need for pain.” 
• Get them to focus on the painful area, and mentally split that into two equal halves. 
• Now get them to focus on one of those halves and divide that half in half again... 
• Keep repeating until they only have a tiny little fraction of the pain left in their awareness 
• Then get them to move that small pain somewhere else. 
• The first movement may be gradual – like an inch or so away. 
• Keep going over longer distances until the “pain” reaches the opposite end of the body. 
• From then on call it a sensation only; never use the word pain. 
• Get them, to shake the pain out of their body, and “feel comfortable, the sensations you 
had will no longer bother you.” 
 
This is called the fractioning method of pain control. The principle behind this is that pain is 
localised, if  their attention is only on half the pain then they are only experiencing half the pain. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
15
The Therapeutic Seal 
 
Sometime s doctors will accidentally retrigger the pain, by asking about or mentioning it – not 
realising that a poorly phrased comment or question from them can have the force of 
suggestion!  
 
You need to protect the subject from such inadvertent “fear & pain” suggestions! 
 
Step 1 – Correctly Answer medical Questions 
Simply future pace and directly suggest that “you will be able to accurately describe the pain 
you had, but no matter what they say you will not feel any discomfort.” 
 
Step 2 – Innoculate Against Future Pain Suggestions 
To prevent all your pain control getting measures being reversed by a negative comment form a 
doctor or medic you need to create a therapeutic seal.  
 
1. First pace their current experiences – i.e. the situation they are in NOW, and the fact that 
there is no discomfort (remember once you have removed pain, you call it a 
“discomfort” or a “sensation” from then on!) 
2. Next future pace possible negative comments from a doctor saying that such comments  
“will only reinforce the power that you have to feel comfortable right now.”  
3. Then create dissociation from the pain – in case they need to describe it to a doctor for a 
diagnosis: “it will be as if you are describing the pain that someone else had, no matter 
what happens you will be feeling comfortable, and the pain will not bother you one little 
bit.” 
 
How To Deal With Bleeding 
 
A direct suggestion to stop bleeding can work, as can metaphors – like rivers turning into 
streams and finally running dry.  
 
Another approach is to deal with sensation. With less blood limbs feel cold, so limbs that feel 
cold are less likely to bleed. In essence its an indirect suggestion for the surface level capillaries 
(small blood vessels) to shut down hence preventing bleeding from surface wounds. 
 
End the process by suggesting them living a happy, normal life. This forms a complete cycle and 
enhances the effect. Wrap it up in a future expectation of well being. This helps reassure people 
– after all the sight of your own blood can be a frightening thing to many people! 
 
How To Deal With General Disorganisation 
 
The more people are present, the less likely it is that someone will do anything. Everyone thinks 
someone else will deal with it. You should Always assume that nobody will do anything unless 
you do. So take charge of the situation and use your hypnosis skills to organise the situation. 
Become an authority figure and take control of the situation. Use simple, direct instructions 
(suggestions) backed up by a lot of personal power. 
 

