For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
How To Use Conversational 
Hypnosis To Make A Killer 
Presentation, Influence Any 
Group, Close Any Deal & Even 
Get A Standing Ovation! 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
How To Use Conversational Hypnosis To Make A Killer 
Presentation, Influence Any Group, Close Any Deal & Even Get 
A Standing Ovation! 
 
Session 1 – How To Prepare For Successful Group Hypnosis 
 
The power of conversational hypnosis will help you to “mesmerise” any group. Use these skills 
to: 
 
• Present a killer sales pitch 
• Command a corporate meeting 
• Keep schoolchildren spellbound to learn with ease 
• Amaze guests at a dinner party 
• Convincingly demonstrate the power of hypnosis 
• Run powerful group hypnosis sessions for change 
 
The Power Of Intention 
 
Every group hypnosis session begins with an intention. No intention = No hypnosis! As a rule 
choose a STATE and a BEHAVIOUR as your intention, i.e.: 
 
1. How will they FEEL during and after your session? 
2. How will they be BEHAVING (what will they be DOING) at the end of it? 
 
As an example, this masterclass has the intention of evoking the states of curiosity, clarity and a 
sense of intellectual adventurousness – to explore the possibilities of group hypnosis. The 
behaviours intended are those of an experienced group hypnotist. 
 
Choose a specific situation in which you want to be using the power of group hypnosis. This 
context will help you to make this masterclass more practical. Decide on how you want your 
audience to FEEL & ACT. For example: 
 
1. Teachers – feeling: clever & empowered; behaviour: ask questions & do homework 
2. Salesman – feeling: excited & inspired; behaviour: sign contract 
3. Stop Smoking Specialist – feeling: motivated & empowered; behaviour: quit for good 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3 
How To Create The Content For Your Group Hypnosis Session 
 
Take time to create the ideas  concepts that you want to implant in your audience's mind. You 
will also come up with content spontaneously in the moment, so let that happen and prepare 
other stuff too! 
 
1. Think about your audience: where are they now? Where do you want them to be at the 
end? What skills, states or other resources are they missing? 
2. As ideas come write each down on a SEPARATE 4x4 file card. Be sure to stick to ONE 
idea per card. 
3. Keep the ideas coming – let the pace carry you away. 
4. Allow the natural chain of associations to lead you to new ideas. 
5. Accept EVERY idea (for now) – do NOT engage your CF to weed out anything yet. 
6. Imagine different people in your audience: 
 
• What do they want? 
• What do they need? 
• What CAN they do already? 
• What CAN'T they do yet? 
 
 
Design Hierarchy 
 
Allow the idea generation to go on as long as necessary – this may be a couple of hours or even 
a couple of weeks. The more you do it the quicker you'll get done. Now you can: 
 
1. Collect your ideas into logical groups 
2. Assign an ordered hierarchy: big ideas leading to more specific sub-ideas, themes, points, 
examples, exercises etc. 
3. Lay the cards out on the floor to map out this design hierarchy (see diagram below) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group Hypnosis 
 
Session 1 
(Prepare – Having) 
Session 2 
(Groups – Doing) 
Session 3 
(Perform – Being) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4 
Insider Secrets 
 
This is an important part of the process I used for my Big Bid Coaching for corporates pitching 
for an ambitious job. It is a powerful way of laying out information AND remembering it 
naturally when you need it! 
 
I prefer not to memorise a speech, rather to memorise the structure of the information hierarchy 
and then speak freely about each point as I get to it. This is particularly powerful if you let your 
emotions format your unconscious – you will automatically choose the right words an phrases 
to express each point. It will also ensure that each group hypnosis session stays fresh even if you 
reuse the same content/ideas! 
 
This structure is the essence of your group hypnosis session. We will focus on delivering it and 
tweaking the structure to maximise the impact now. 
 
 
Setting Up The Room 
 
The room setup is very important You may have no control over the kind of room you have to 
use or the layout of the furniture – or you may have a lot of control. If you do have control then 
keep these points in mind. 
 
Each room has its own dynamics – it has an atmosphere and it skews the group dynamics in one 
way or another.  
 
For example: 
 
1. A “Fake Auction” packs people into an old store like cattle. It tends to build a herd 
mentality. 
2. A Cathedral has elegant, wide & tall spaces. It constantly reminds us of being in the 
presence of something FAR greater than us. 
3. A popular Motivational Speaker will often use sports venues for his rallies to capture the 
air of excitement. 
 
 
The Street Hypnosis heuristics for setting out the room: 
 
1. Ensure there is no barrier between the hypnotist and the audience (i.e. no lectern, 
podium, rail etc) 
2. Set the chairs out in theater style 
3. At informal meetings (e.g. dinner parties, bars, airport lounges) move people around you 
to control the space 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5 
Diagrams of Attention/Energy Flows In Different Group Configurations 
 
 
 
Diagram 1: Energy harmonising in a small group 
  (attention naturally focuses on leader) 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 2: Energy getting lost in a circle  
(attention is on all members of the circle – everyone is  
on the spot!) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 3: The Board Room – Energy mishandled 
(barrier prevents smooth flow, plus no clear leader to 
harmonise attention around) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 4: Harmonised Board Room  
(attention flows smoothly to one central figure) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 5: Theatre Style Seating 
(preserves anonymity of individuals plus 
centers attention on leader) 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6 
Internal Preparations 
 
To prepare your “inner space” you will want to focus on two practices – self hypnosis & the 
Mesmer State. 
 
Sellf Hypnosis 
There a two processes you will want to use during your self hypnosis: 
 
1. Set a positive expectation (i.e. you getting the result you want) 
2. Rehearse a set of behaviours (mentally run through the group hypnosis session) 
 
Mesmer State 
This is essentially the same as the “Hypnotist's State” from the Power of Conversational 
Hypnosis programme. The essential difference is that this version makes a point of focusing on a 
larger group, whereas the Hypnotist's State is about creating a private bubble of reality between 
yourself and one or may two other people. 
 
The Mesmer State will allow you to connect with the whole room as well as to clear your 
emotions so that you do not contaminate the hypnotic session with your personal issues! 
 
Insider Secret to “Going First”: You can evoke an emotion by going first and having that feeling 
yourself first. But you can also choose a complimentary feeling which will have the same 
impact. E.g. You want to evoke a sense of “wonder” - you could go into wonder yourself OR 
you could build up a sense of “knowing anticipation” inside yourself (as you know what is 
coming) and your audience – sensing this – will start to wonder what delights are coming next! 
 
 
Go Ahead & Listen To Bonus CD 1 To Acquire The Mesmer State For Yourself 
 
 
How To Create An Emotional Connection With Your Audience 
 
A critical element in effective group hypnosis is sensing where the audience is at – in particular 
their emotional state. Connecting with the group emotionally will attune your unconscious to 
recognising this and of course makes your suggestions more acceptable to them too. 
 
 Once you have the emotional connection, sense the pockets that seem to be “flagging” and just 
turn your attention to those people until the energy levels rise again. 
 
1. Look (at the person/part of the group) 
2. Acknowledge (head nod, smile, wink – show you have connected) 
3. Check (that the energy levels have risen) 
4. Rove (check the rest of the audience to see where your attention is needed most) 
 
In a small group you can connect the “edges” by looking at one person whilst still touching 
another – both will feel more connected with you. 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7 
Keep your attention on an individual for a longer period – especially if doing more trancy stuff : 
the longer the attention, the more pressure they feel (which is a motivator to retreat into trance). 
Just don't lose “sight” of the rest of the group – stay in peripheral vision. 
 
Check the group for Unconscious Leaders – these are not always those put into a leadership role 
by their job title! Large groups will have several pockets of these (watch out: they can change in 
a blink of an eye!) - connect to these people and you have the audience eating out of the palm 
of your hand! 
 
Remember the Instant Rapport Technique: 
 
Instant Rapport Technique 
 
1. Make friendly eye contact 
2. Smile 
3. Go first (feel a positive feeling) 
4. Breathe deeply 
5. Project the sense of goodwill 
 
Its much like being on a first date – where you feel your emotional energy tingling with goodwill 
towards the other person. It can work its magic outside the romantic arena too! 
 
 
How To Use Opening Gambits To The Secret Induction Start Strongly 
 
The way you begin will set the scene for the rest of the group induction (i.e. your presentation, 
sales pitch, lesson, corporate meeting etc.) Here are some styles that fit different contexts that 
will give your opening a head start: 
 
1. The Rock Star -  This is a high energy, rock n roll entrance. It is favored by 
motivational speakers and business leaders that use personal charisma as a keystone 
to taking their business forwards. Usually a compare comes on first to “warm up” the 
crowd. 
 
2. The Magician -  this is a very dramatic way of starting. Walk on quietly and stand on 
your “spot” in total silence. Stay in the mesmer state and connect to your audience, 
but say NOTHING. The audience will “magically” hush up and pay 110% attention 
to you now. The longer you are silent the greater the levels of anticipation in the 
audience (watch out you can go on TOO long too!) 
 
3. The Charming Host -  this is a very elegant begining, largely because nobody quite 
knows WHEN exactly you did start. It just “kind of happened.” The secret to this is to 
chat conversationally with one or two audience members, slowly add more people to 
your group conversation until you're suddenly “just chatting” with the whole group! 
 
4. The Joker -  this is a fun way to start off and is great for a nervous group as you start 
with the ice breaker. The masters of this approach are stand up comedians – though 
watch out, their irreverent style is not for every audience! 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8 
 
5. The Storyteller – this matches every type of audience. The story should usually match 
the audience's background or reason for being there, though breaking that rule of 
thumb can be very dramatic if you tie a seemingly irrelevant story in to the audience's 
needs. For additional drama try starting the story in the middle or at the end to rivet 
their attention and then jump backwards. 
 
Study any charismatic presenters and you will see that above styles: stand up comedians 
(especially the storytelling kind), TV Evangelist, TV Hosts, Market Stall Pitchers, Actors, 
Motivational Speakers. 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9 
 
Session 2 – How To Harness Group Dynamics To Add Power To Your “Punch” 
 
Why are some groups a pleasure to work with, whilst others turn on you like a pack of rats? 
Why do some hypnotists/hypnotic presenters seem to always get a “good crowd”, whilst others 
get the “lemons? 
 
The answer lies in group dynamics. Get these wrong and you'll get people arguing with you, 
heckling you and making the process hell. Get them right, however, and you almost home free! 
 
Groups Gravitate To Power 
 
This is an challenging thing to say, but it is mostly true. Humans are mammals and mammals 
organise in hierarchies – its in our nature. All groups – even the most polite and “egalitarian” 
ones – unconsciously seek out a leader to align around. As a hypnotist that leader had better be 
you, or someone that is totally behind what you're doing! 
 
Heckling & other forms of resistance are merely a sign that you have not become the authority 
within that group or that you have allowed the group to align itself around you properly. 
 
All groups tend to go through 5 stages of evolution: 
 
1. Form – the group has to identify itself as a group separate from the rest of the world 
2. Storm – the group aligns itself to a hierarchy 
3. Norm – the group now runs smoothly as a unit – subject to Groupthink though 
4. Perform – the group overcomes the problem of Groupthink WITHOUT destroying the 
groups harmony 
5. Transform – each group eventually dissolves (either people leave, change or some 
passes away) this either dissolves the group or it has to evolve to accommodate the 
new changes 
 
How To Format A Group 
 
There are two fundamental rules to “formatting” a group for success: 
 
1. The group must accept YOU as a member 
2. The group accepts you as a figure of authority or leadership 
 
This is something you want to achieve both with old groups (the members know each other 
already) and with new groups (the members don't know everyone else yet). 
 
These are the 3 steps we usually take to achieve our two aims above: 
 
1. Get Compliance – get the group doing things that you suggest 
2. Use Surprise – shake up the configuration by introducing uncertainty 
3. Get Directional Harmony – align the group to all head the same way 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10 
How To Get Group Compliance 
 
This is as easy as making a simple set of requests. Just remember the rules on trance logic – the 
less in trance they are the more reasonable the requests need to sound. 
 
Here are some of the tools & techniques you probably already know for achieving group 
compliance: 
 
1. Yes Sets (get them into agreement states of mind) 
2. Simple Exercises (stretching, chanting, sharing, self-intros, writing something etc) 
3. Offer Obvious Benefits (try doing X now and see how it helps you get Y) 
 
Go and observe a street performer and how he builds a crowd and gets them involved in what 
hes doing – whether clapping to a song or shouting a warning to the clown who's about to get 
into trouble. 
 
How To Use Suprise & Uncertainty 
 
New Groups 
These will already be uncertain – nobody knows each other and no clear leader has emerged 
yet. Take charge of this group and give them simple instructions that will make them feel more 
comfortable around each other (eg introduce people to one another.) 
 
Old Groups 
These can be a little more tricky to work with. You have to break down the existing structure to 
make room for you in it. The key is to shake up the dynamic, this is where surprise is a great tool 
– though anything that generates uncertainty can be made use of: 
 
• In School – try switching the seating arrangement or even taking all the chairs away! 
• Team Building – use self introductions to “break the ice” and put people on the spot 
as individuals 
• Comedian – notice how they will isolate individuals to give them a friendly ribbing, 
of course hecklers get a heavier dose as a warning to others! 
• Stage Hypnosis – the good ones will always separate friends & family from one 
another. That kills the old dynamic off for the show. 
• Social Setting – get creative. Try introducing two groups to each other to break up a 
stale dynamic. 
• Troubleshooting – as a last resort if you have an individualistic crowd that is refusing 
to relax its dynamic you can set them up to fail at something and of course offer a 
solution – if they are success oriented they will automatically align around you at that 
point. 
 
How To Get Group Alignment 
 
Introducing Uncertainty is not enough, once the system is in flux, you have to direct it so that it 
settles in a more harmonious structure. If you get everyone moving in the same direction this 
will happen automatically. 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11 
During a lesson or a training context you can give them a mingling exercise and watch out for 
when the energy spikes in the room. 
 
In other contexts (eg a Dinner Party) you can give reasonable instructions that build curiosity 
and alignment. In a séance you get them to hold hands; at an after dinner Street Hypnosis Demo 
you get people to gather around you; during a corporate event you give them an exercise. 
 
How To Vaccinate The Group Against Offering Resistance 
 
Continuous resistance is a sign that the group is stuck in the Storming stage. This can happen to 
you at any point if you mismanage the group energy. You might say something that strikes a 
negative chord with Unconscious Leaders, you might neglect a part of the audience until they 
“pop out” of the regular group's dynamic etc. As soon as you resolve the problem in the group 
process, the resistance will fade. 
 
The general rule is to offer them Magic Moments (see Session 3) – give them an “aha!” moment 
– or even a “haha!” or “aah!” moment and they start to settle down – then be sure to realign 
them around your initial intention. 
 
The Problem Of Groupthink 
 
This is a vexing issue – especially if you are involved in education. The secret is in goading 
individuals to contribute to the group without actually leaving it. That way you have an 
interesting situation where people are both a herd and an individual at the same time! 
 
If you have ever worked with a high performance team (eg special forces) you will recognise this 
characteristic. The group is much more zingy and feels more alive. A herd is much more 
ponderous and takes more time to move direction. 
 
How Do Groups Form? 
 
A group can either 
 
1. Form Spontaneously 
2. Be Attracted On Purpose 
3. Be Forced 
 
Of these the third is the hardest group you'll ever work with! Before you do anything with them 
you must make sure that they are properly aligned.  
 
How? 
 
Give them a WHY! 
 
Why should you be here today? 
Whats in it for you? 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
12 
What Keeps a Group Together? 
 
• Information – appeal to the intellect with puzzles, brainteasers, news etc 
• Freebies – everyone loves to gain. But once the freebies stop, the crowd will go 
(unless you start offering one of the other sweeteners here) 
• Entertainment – make them feel something and the will stay 
• Transformation – help them grow as people and they will not only stay, they will 
come back dragging their friends with them! 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
13 
 
Session 3 – How To Deliver A Killer Group Hypnosis Session 
 
You have prepared the way, you have formatted the group's dynamics – now its time to shine as 
a group hypnotist! 
 
 
How To 4Mat The Group's Unconscious Minds 
 
Here is a simple method for formating the mind to smoothly accept your ideas. It is equally 
useful for education & personal growth as for sales and management contexts: 
 
1. Set Up Front Contract – this sets out the parameters for the experience (expected 
behaviours, group results etc. e.g in Sales – agree up front that at the end of the pitch 
you'll be asking for the contract and getting a yes/no answer. This saves you wasting 
weeks in agony wondering what will happen) 
 
2. Yes Set – start getting agreements from the group as a whole (apart from aligning them 
it gets them used to agreeing with, an emotional momentum that can only be useful) 
 
3. Motivate – you need to motivate both the conscious and the unconscious minds 
(essentially give them a WHY! The “Unconscious Why” is usually in the form of 
emotions, stories and hypnotic themes.) 
 
4. 4Mat – Bernice McArthy came up with this lovely structure in the 1970s: 
 
• Why? Give the Conscious & the Unconscious a reason for being here and  
exploring the material 
• What? Present Data & Facts 
• How? Offer practical experiences – a walk through demo or better still an 
exercise to illustrate the point 
• What If? Q&A session and insert future memories of a better life as a result of 
the new point of view 
 
 
 
Stories & Magic Moments 
 
Magic Moments are a conversational way to do all three steps of the ABS formula in one go – 
you get to rivet attention, bypass the critical factor and stimulate the unconscious all with a 
simple set of special metaphors. 
 
Once the Magic Moment has hit, you get a window into trance. The window will shut in time (it 
depends on the context and the strength of the Magic Moment – you have anywhere from a few 
seconds to a few minutes usually). So its important to smoothly follow on from a Magic Moment 
with the main purpose of your group hypnosis session. 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
14 
There are 3 kinds of Magic Moments: 
 
1. Physical Metaphors – a magic trick, bar stunt or quirky exercise (eg Aikido's 
“Unbendable Arm”) all with a point attached to it. 
2. Visual Metaphor – a cartoon, diagram, chart or doodles that track and illustrate your 
story or point. 
3. Story Metaphor – a story, anecdote, fairy tale, case study or parable that brings your 
point to life. 
 
To make the above metaphors into true magic moments, they need to achieve two things: 
 
• They must have a point that you can conclude from the story or exercise – its starts to 
create directional harmony in the mind. 
• They should offer an emotional moment – look for the magic emotions: “aha!”, 
“haha!” and “aah!” 
 
 
Discover The Performance Secrets Of The Masters 
 
• Iconic Gestures – powerful gestures like pointing, sweeping hands open, bending the 
head down (eg in contrition) etc. Watch a good Shakespearean actor, motivational 
speaker or preacher – they use these gestures a lot! 
• Emotive Repetition – repeating highly charged words & phrases uses the Law of 
Compounding Effect. Used well it can whip a crowd into a frenzy! 
• Clean Though Pictures – think of a green car, instead of don't think of a red cat. 
• Don't Apologise For Yourself – of course if you misbehave then do apologise. But at 
all other times, own the moment because only you can elevate it to something 
special. 
• Go First! – yup we're back to this one again – could it be an important principle? 
• Be Human – its OK to be fallible, its OK to make mistakes and – YES – its OK to be 
yourself. There is no need to live up to some idealised image of guruhood. Decent 
human is usually much more charismatic (and a lot less pressure!) 
• Emotional Rollercoaster – vary the emotions throughout – fast & furious, slow & 
mellow, intriguing, scary... its the emotions that take the mind for a ride! 
 
 
How To Use Your Voice Like a Powerful Instrument 
 
As a hypnotist – particularly a group hypnotist – your voice is your main tool. A musical 
instrument can move people to tears, it can make them feel giddy with happiness, fired up with 
enthusiasm, as courageous as a lion or as silly as a clown. The human voice is more versatile 
than any instrument we have ever created. That means you can teach your voice to do all these 
things and MUCH MORE! 
 
One of the most fundamental principles in creating emotional experiences with sounds is 
through rhythm. The rhythm literally sweeps us away. So develop different hypnotic rhythms 
that evoke different kinds of emotional states. 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
15 
The easiest way to do that is to practice speaking to music. Listen to the examples created for 
you in this session and you will hear what I mean.  
 
Incidentally it doesn't matter if you are tone deaf, Erickson was and yet he was a master of 
rhythm! 
 
Now You Can Set Hypnotic Triggers For Whole Groups 
 
Hypnotic triggers don't just work on individuals, they work on groups too. You can use anything 
as the actual trigger: 
 
• Iconic Gestures 
• Tone Of Voice 
• Facial Expression 
• Posture  
• Physical Position (eg sitting in a chair, standing at the back or squatting up close) 
 
In order to set a trigger you will need to: 
 
1. Evoke a State – catch something spontaneous (eg laughter), tell a joke, use stories, 
give examples of universal experiences, ask questions about universal experiences or 
simply stimulate the imagination. 
2. Do the Trigger – squat at the front when telling a secret, sit in the chair during 
storytime, head to the back when its time for them to do an activity... 
3. Repeat – eventually the trigger takes. You sit in your chair and your audience puts 
everything down – they go into the perfect state for listening to stories! 
 
15 Examples Of Universal Experiences 
 
1. Losing something dear 
2. Being lonely 
3. Being loved/appreciated 
4. First day nerves (school or work) 
5. Finding something valuable (money, information or insight) 
6. A pleasant surprise 
7. Getting into an argument 
8. Saying exactly the right thing at the right time 
9. Knowing the answer but second guessing yourself 
10. Waiting for ages in a queue 
11. Going on a journey 
12. Meeting an old friend 
13. Regretting doing something 
14. Regretting NOT doing something 
15. Being moved by something or someone special 
 
 
 
 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
16 
How To Handle Q&A Sessions 
 
1. Stay in the Mesmer State 
2. To encourage a question raise your inflection at the end, raise your the eyebrows and 
wait expectantly (then cheat and look right at someone this way!) 
3. Use the Echo Effect to repeat the question asked (buys thinking time) 
4. on tough questions ask “How do you mean that?” - this usually gets the question 
reworded more fairly 
5. Tell the truth – if you don't know the answer, you will not go to jail for it (usually!) 
6. Hecklers & Time Wasters – appeal to the group to park a topic that is going nowhere 
7. Strong emotion – stay respectful, deal with what is happening, don't fear it. Stories are 
great devices for illustrating your point fairly 
 
 
How To Transform A Group 
 
If you allow a group that came together for a purpose to just disband, it fizzles out and people 
sense the lack of closure. In the theater Transformation is reached through a crescendo of 
emotions, the final unraveling of a dense plot, the epilogue lesson (think The Waltons) etc. 
 
As hypnotists we can use group rituals for providing closure. Its part of human culture -  
 
A wedding ends with the procession out 
A high school ends with a graduation 
A retirement starts with a gold watch (sigh!) 
 
To use a social ritual to end your group induction you can: 
 
• Give out individual tasks and get ownership/responsibility for their completion 
• Project to a future meeting (this acts like a post hypnotic suggestion for a reinduction 
trigger) 
• Have a presentation ceremony (hand out gifts, certificates, praise etc) 
• Tell Stories – especially if you close loops that you left open at the start of the session! 
 
 
How To Beat Performance Anxiety 
 
1. Be Chatty – there is no need to aim for confidence, that is a nebulous state without 
competence. Being chatty allows the words to come out which you can shape into a 
hypnotic process. 
 
2. Regulate your breathing – slow and even triggers relaxation. 
 
3. Movement dispels fear – use smooth, elongated and unhurried motions. Also move 
from just freezing to actually using your body to banish a most debilitating fears. 
 
4. Prepare your Self – go back to session 1 and do the self hypnosis exercises 
recommended. 

 
                admin@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Street Hypnosis, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
17 
 
5. Stay in the Mesmer State – that's what its there for! 
 
6. Be yourself – with practice you'll find how much easier it is to be you than someone 
else. 
 
7. Seek professional help – hypnotherapists can help with inner inhibitions, speaking 
coaches or seminars with the actual practice of getting up in front of groups then 
there are Toastmaster clubs that take you through a step by step process to teach you 
to trust your unconscious in front of a group 
 
How To Put Everything Together In One Devastating Hypnotic Experience 
 
Phase 1: Preparation (What you Have) 
 
• Decide on who your audience is 
• Choose your intention (State & Behaviour) 
• Brainstorm the content 
• Organise the content into a hierarchy 
• Prepare your Self (self hypnosis) 
• Prepare the room 
 
Phase 2: Group Dynamics (What you Do) 
 
• Get into the Mesmer State 
• Connect with the audience 
• Start with an Opening Gambit 
• Set your preframes (upfront contract) 
• Align the group 
• launch your content in 4Mat 
• Sprinkle in stories and other metaphors 
 
Phase 3: The Performance (Who you Are) 
 
• Stay in the Mesmer State 
• Cycle through character archetypes 
• Be yourself 
• Use iconic gestures 
• Evoke states and set Triggers 
• Tell stories 
• Play your voice like an instrument (rhythm, pitch, volume etc) 
• GO FIRST!! 
 
 
 
 
 

