For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
SHM 
The Secret To Creating Mind 
Bending Hypnotic Language 
Guaranteed To Change People In 
An Instant 
 
  Street Hypnosis(TM) 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
2
 
 
Street Hypnosis Masterclass 
For The Next Generation Of Hypnosis Masters 
 
The Secret To Creating Mind Bending Hypnotic Language 
Guaranteed To Change People In An Instant. 
 
Session 1: Hypnotic Realities 
 
“Before I learned hypnosis, a word was just a word and a thought was just a thought. 
But then I learned hypnosis, and words became more than just words and thoughts 
became more than just thoughts. Now that I’ve mastered hypnosis words are just words 
and thoughts are just thoughts.” 
 
 
Confusing The Problem 
 
Confusional language is often taught in a bizarre and out-of-context way. The whole purpose of 
confusional language is to create certain effects – it is not an end in itself. Our ability to 
influence other people only exists within the bounds of their reality. We can either: 
 
• Fit our language patterns within their reality. 
• Bend, alter and expand their reality. 
 
You will learn how to create that reality altering effect by looking at the strategic application of 
confusional language. 
 
Reality Strategies 
 
How do we know what is real? 
 
One way to look at this is through our senses. Ignoring some inherited genetic “instincts”, we 
basically arrive in the world with our five senses. Somehow we have to make sense of all the 
messages that we receive through the five channels. 
 
One of the primary ways we do this is by making distinctions. This is a chair, that is a table. This 
is the sky, that is the ground. This is mine, that is yours etc.  
 
The trouble is that when label things this way, we end up not seeing the item anymore, we just 
notice the label. We look at a chair and see only a chair, something arranged to be sat on, not 
something that can be thrown, burned, stood on, jumped off etc. We have limited the potential 
of the chair to something that can only be sat on. 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
3
In nature there are no divisions, everything is all part of one great thing. It is just our intellects 
(NB our intelligence is more than just our intellects!) trying to understand nature that slice the 
pie into little pieces. Thus we create artificial divisions to aid our understandings. 
 
When doing this we accidentally create poles: a chair only makes sense when you contrast it 
against everything that is not a chair. Otherwise it would lose its “thinghood”. 
 
Presupposing Reality 
 
Every word we say is loaded with the assumptions that we make about reality by contrasting our 
ideas to things we don’t mention – and sometimes are not even aware of! 
 
Example: 
 
 
 
“The chair is in the back of the room” 
 
This presupposes certain things. 
 
A “back” cannot make sense without a contrasting “front”; a chair cannot exist unless there are 
“not chairs” that we can point to in order to distinguish our item as a chair. 
 
When we say, “the chair is in the back of the room”, we’re really saying that there are things 
that are called chairs and things that aren’t; things that are called rooms and things that aren’t. 
 
We’re splitting the universe to create contrasts, often in the form of polar opposites, inside of 
what we consider to be reality. To perceive an object and know you’re perceiving it you must 
also be aware of it’s negation. Otherwise you’d just have an unbroken swirl of colours, sounds 
and textures that you wouldn’t know how to respond to! 
 
When we enter the “universe of ideas”, concepts like Love, Compassion, Freedom, Work, 
Enlightenment etc. are ideas that our minds equate to the physical universe. So even in our 
minds, an idea cannot easily exist without its polar opposite to contrast it against. That is why 
our ideas tend to run across poles: “Fast & Slow”, “Love & Hate”, “Arrogance & Insecurity”. 
 
As a rule, we are more motivated by conceptual realities. People are driven more by love than 
by chairs, are more willing to die for peace than cars. 
 
Language defines the limits of reality, as language is what we use to define it. 
 
Our reality ends where our language ends. 
 
If we cannot label things any more we have found the edge of our universe, if we TIP people 
over the edge we have found an entirely new place. This is a true TIP (Trance of Infinite 
Possibilities) as well as the beggings of the mystical experience. 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
4
The Bi-Polar Universe 
 
Our experience of the universe is shaped through the creation of poles. If we are not polarising 
we do not perceive.  
 
Lets examine “The chair is in the back of the room” again. 
 
This statement draws and focuses your conscious awareness. 
 
Your unconscious, however, also knows what there is not; these unconscious elements contain 
the seeds of our limitations as well as solutions we have never considered before. 
 
Most persistent problems are created at the unconscious level. After all, if the problem where 
one that you had conscious control over, you’d have solved it just by thinking about it (as we 
usually do to solve problems).  
 
More importantly, it is often the hidden presuppositions in the way we conceive of a problem, 
situation or idea that effectively keep us stuck in the problem. 
 
Example: 
 
 
 
The Wimbledon Game 
 
Imagine that there are 999 players in the Wimbledon Tennis Championships. It is a standard 
knock-out tournament. So when two players play a match, the loser of each match leaves and 
the winner goes on to the next round. 
 
But some rounds will have an odd number of players. Say 687. Which means that there is an 
odd one out who has no one to play with. To keep things flowing, this person automatically 
goes up to the next round. During an even round, of course, everyone has a partner to play, so 
that only the winners get through to the next round. 
 
Here is the Question: How many matches need to be played in order to get a Wimbledon 
champion? 
 
There are many ways to solve this, most of which are complex and difficult to work out. You 
can do it, but it will take some time and not a little effort! This is because my question has 
hidden presuppositions, which focus your attention in one direction. 
 
But if you break through my thought-trap and focus your attention on a specific, small 
distinction, you will instantly be able to solve the problem. 
 
Here is the question again, but with a different hidden presupposition: 
 
How many people need to lose before there is a clear winner? 
 
The (now very simple) answer is: 998 
 
So language focuses our experience in a way that is either empowering of disempowering. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
5
Reinterpreting Reality 
 
When people get stuck in life, its usually because they get stuck in their thinking. The 
presuppositions that bind them prevent them from looking “outside the box” for a solution. This 
as true of the sales prospect that cannot see the value of your product as it is of the employee 
that can’t seem to change despite being told 100 times. 
 
Confusional language is a great way to push people out beyond the mental constraints of the 
boxes they have set up inside their minds. But there is a problem: 
 
The Negative School Trance 
 
Western education teaches us to fear confusion. It is punished in dozens of subtle ways, often 
quite indirectly: laughter, teasing, scorn, an angry teacher, red marks, a worried “concerned” 
look from a teacher, a “you stupid boy” frown…  
 
So rather than embrace confusion as a lighthouse beam that guides us to a greater map of 
reality, people try to avoid it. So using “clever language” alone won’t get the result, people will 
avoid the experience you’re offering and assume your being weird or trying to make a fool of 
them. 
 
In order to use confusional language elegantly, you must have their minds engaged in following 
the ideas expressed by your language pattern. So it helps immensely if you: 
 
• Are congruent (tonality, expression, bodylanguage, behaviour, set up etc.) 
• Project a sense of “gravitas” (i.e. this is really important) 
• Project a sense of positive anticipation (e.g. something wonderful is about to happen) 
 
That way they take your words seriously (so they try and make sense of it, which is what will 
release the confusion). They will also be curious enough to find out WHAT might happen – 
because the implication is that its going to be good. 
 
Together these two attitudes (going first with “Gravitas” and “Positive Expectation”) create the 
conditions that will allow your language pattern to push them into a TIP (Trance of Infinite 
Possibility.) 
 
The specific TIP that Mindbending Language creates is most easily achieved when you take their 
minds to what the are NOT aware of. This is always the territory of the unconscious. By walking 
in the unconscious landscape, a natural trance arises! 
 
 
How To Use Mindbending Language Effectively 
 
1. Engage their attention with the deep meaning that you project. 
 
2. Take their attention from where it is to where it is not. 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
6
3. Find out what happens. “What is happening now?”  
Ask questions like “How does it feel to... [insert answer to previous question]?” 
 
4. Install positive change, repeat the process if there is negativity. 
The Power Of “Not” 
 
Every Rule Has An Exception 
Remember, as a rule you want to use outcome orientated language rather than negation 
orientated language – or you get the classic reverse bind like “do not think of pink elephants.” 
 
But there is a problem with this basic negation theory: its simply NOT true! 
 
For example: many pain control techniques use straight forward negative suggestions like “you 
will not feel pain.” 
 
How can this work if it breaks the rule of negation? 
 
Conscious Involvement 
The idea of negation is a good rule of thumb; it is useful at a simplistic level. But negation tends 
only to be interpreted as a positive when you have hypnotic rapport – which dampens down 
conscious mental processes. At other times, the conscious mind simply processes the abstracts, 
including the “nots”. 
 
Mixed Communications 
There are other levels at which a negative suggestion can have an impact. For example you can 
offer a mixed communication like,  
 
“don’t close your eyes” or tonally embed a command like,  
 
“Don’t CLOSE YOUR EYES!!”  
 
“Command tone down” is interpreted as an instruction. When you hear command down with 
negation you will pay more attention to the empathised part than the negation part. Without 
such emphasis, the negation is usually still processed correctly. 
 
The Parcelling Effect 
Also, if you are going to use negative suggestion remember that the more you use a certain 
phrase the more the unconscious mind starts looking for different layers in the communication. 
The unconscious parcels information into different groups. 
 
So “Don’t go into a trance” repeated in close proximity will start to get interpreted as: 
 
“Don’t go into a trance” 
“Don’t go into a trance” 
“Don’t go into a trance” 
“Don’t go into a trance don’t go into a trance” etc. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
7
Master Subtle Shifts In Language 
 
Language is one of the main tools we use to shape the information from our senses into a map of 
reality. So subtle shifts in language will change which map of reality we experience. 
 
Example: 
 
Notice your internal experience (e.g. internal images) change when you hear: 
 
“The dog runs” – v – “The dog is running” 
 
The dog runs – simple present tense – tends to create a still picture. 
The dog is running – present gerundive tense – tends to have more movement. 
 
Similarly, different internal experiences arise from other subtle shifts 
 
The dog runs. 
The dog ran.  
The dog was running. 
The dog will run.  
 
As we change subtle things about the language it changes qualities in the mental picture 
created, and hence affects our experience. 
 
Start to make yourself very sensitive to the impact subtle changes in your language can have. 
 
A Secret For Master Hypnotists 
The unconscious responds to a moving & associated image as though it were a real event. A 
“still” picture lacks some reality tone, and so will not tend to get the unconscious mind as 
excited.  
 
The Language Of Movement 
You can use language to subtly put movement in the picture – its called the gerundive case: use 
“running” instead of “run” etc. 
 
The Language Of Association 
The present tense tends to create more association that the past tense. Also, for many people, 
the gerundive (ends in –ing) creates a more associated experience. 
 
“I eat” tends to be more associated than “I ate.” 
“I am eating” tends to be more associated than “I eat.” 
 
Hypnosis Is The Secret Key Behind Socratic Questions 
 
Socrates was a great philosopher that would lead people to enlightenment by goading them with 
tough questions. However his method relied on a very subtle use of language to control where 
the mind goes when it tries to find the answer. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
8
The Socratic Method can be very invasive and destructive; the skill is to lead them to places that 
are empowering. Understanding the subtle shifts in language will let you use Socratic Questions 
to elegantly expand peoples’ awareness to an empowering place, and leaving them there so 
they have more and better options available. 
 
Example: 
 
 
The Problem Destroyer 
 
 
Follow along the experience that the following set of questions take you through – and 
remember TIMING IS EVERYTHING on this! 
 
1. “This is a problem you are having?” 
 
2. “Was this a problem you were having?” 
 
3. “This was a problem you have had” 
 
4. “You could consider a resource that could change things, couldn’t you?” 
 
5. “What might that resource be?” 
 
6. “And how does it feel to have that resource?” 
 
7. “How is it feeling right now?” 
 
8. “How do you feel about that old problem now that you have this resource?” 
 
9. “As you are considering that consider how will you feel next time knowing you have had 
the resource?” 
 
10. “It really was a problem wasn’t it?” 
 
11. “As you think about that problem, it feels different, doesn’t it?” 
 
12. “I wonder how good you will be feeling when you look back to having felt so good as 
you experience the situation again now in that future and think about it again later on.”  
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
9
Session 2: Mindbending Questions 
 
 
Contrasting The Poles 
 
“Can a personal problem exist if we’re not aware of it?” 
 
 
Reality is bipolar in nature. In order to be able to understand something we need to know what 
it isn’t. So in order to have a problem we need to know (at some level) about a solution, 
otherwise we have no point of comparison, and cannot perceive the problem. 
 
Much of our perception works by contrast.  Its like the old film Jurassic Park, where the T-Rex 
was not able to see anything that didn’t move. When our eyes focus on any object, the eyes 
have to keep moving constantly. If you place a dot on the eyeball, after a while it becomes 
invisible – as it moves with the eye, there is no contrast and so no perception! 
 
The white out phenomenon is another example of this. If you are out in a blizzard or when you 
are surrounded by too much whiteness you lose the ability to contrast. At this point your vision 
starts doing very odd things – an effect known as “snow blindness.” 
 
A problem arises in the same way. We cannot know that we have a problem unless (at some 
level) we have an idea of what the solution is, and we realise (through contrast) that we are not 
there. So you cannot have a personal problem unless at some level you are also aware of a 
solution. 
 
Imagine that you were born inside a prison with no walls or bars. You are trapped, but you don’t 
know you are. If you don’t know you are imprisoned, are you really a prisoner?  
 
To free such a prisoner its not enough to tell him “get out of prison!” – you have to guide him 
outside the house and give him time to absorb the outside world! 
 
 
How To Create Your Own Mindbending  Questions 
 
1. Take any hypnosis technique you are aware of. 
2. Change it into a series of questions or comments designed to take the mind form one 
place to another, and impact upon it in a positive way. 
To become skilled at using mind bending hypnotic language you must come to understand the 
impact of language on someone’s nervous system. For example, the changing of tenses in 
session one greatly impacted upon the representation and intensity of the emotional state. 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
10
Example:  
 
 
 
The Decision Destroyer1  
by John Overdurf 
 
This pattern deals with emotions like guilt and regret. Emotions like these are created by 
deciding something in the past that you wish you could change, but know you cannot.  
There are basically four simple questions to ask – NB timing on these is everything! 
 
1. Where were you when you were deciding to that? (i.e. the regret) 
 
2. Where were you just before that?  
 
3. And as you think about that now how many more choices do you have ahead of you? 
 
4. So how are you feeling now?  
 
5. [Optional, ask this to reinforce things if a future pace is needed] And taking this idea 
of having all the choices, and realising that in the future you have the opportunity to 
make the right choices, taking that into the future at the present moment, how do you 
feel about that now? 
These questions are a powerful way to blow out these negative emotions.  These questions tend 
to push people into a TIP – where they get to recover the choices that they had lost.  
 
“Guilt” is an emotion designed to prevent past mistakes from happening again in the future. 
When the lesson is learned (i.e. there is no more danger of repeating the error), the guilt 
disappears. 
 
This is how guilt, regret etc work: we get stuck in a bind – we cannot go forwards for fear of 
repeating the same mistake, but we cannot go back and resolve it either! 
 
These questions work on “timelines” – the way that our minds organise and relate to time: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
1 This pattern is © John Overdurf. It is used here with kind permission. 
Future 
Past 
1 
Present 
A 
B 
C 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
11
1 
Question 1 takes you to position A in time – it orients you to the problem: 
 
= the problem decision 
 
 
The first question first orients your subject into the moment of the problem. The word “deciding” 
also de-nominalises “decision.” A decision is something you are stuck with, “deciding” is a 
process that can be changed, it is fluid, and easy to influence. 
 
As he is orienting to “A”, and before he can get settled in, you interrupt the pattern and take 
them to “B” – the moment just before the problem existed. Here, by definition, they cannot have 
the problem.  
 
Question 3, “Notice how many more options you have available now”, takes them to position 
“C” where the new choices can be taken back into the future. 
 
This takes the problem, blows the doors open, takes them back to somewhere where there is no 
problem, and deconstructs the problem by throwing in a disorienting question. From here you 
orientate people towards a positive future, and help them completely remove the problem. 
 
You could do this whole process as a formal “visualisation”. But doing it conversationally 
through Hypnotic Questions is much quicker and more elegant! 
 
The questions are tools used to put the mind in certain places. 
 
Remember: Timing is crucial. 
 
A Step By Step Guide To Creating Your Own Mindbending Hypnotic Questions 
 
1. Take a process, like a power loop. For example:  
 
• go back,  
• find pleasant resources, and  
• take those resources with you into the future. 
 
2. Take this process and use loaded questions to recreate the experience of each step inside 
people’s minds. The key thing is that whenever you throw out a loaded question, make 
sure they fully engage in it, and observe them and wait until they enter the state that you 
want. As they begin to blossom in the state quickly move on, otherwise the moment will 
fade. The sooner you can catch them before they finish describing a state the better. 
 
3. Take them back to the problem, and just as the state is blossoming blow out the problem 
construct, derail the problem train of though. For example, take them back to before the 
problem occurred, where there is no problem 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
12
4. Empower them with positive choices and send them to a completely positive TIP. 
Cement it by taking their mind to the future and rehearse a better scenario.  
NB: Do not use mindbending language lightly, otherwise people will not take you seriously. 
You need to create a frame in which it is okay to ask these unusual questions, to prevent them 
from disengaging. Use your instant rapport and personal power to maintain a suitable frame. 
 
 
Example 2:   
 
More Mindbending Hypnotic Questions 
 
A typical problem is the “I can’t” problem: “I can’t stop smoking” “I can’t pass my exams” 
The presuppositions here that we need to take care of are: 
 
• That the person is disempowered 
• The person is fixating on the problem 
• The person is stuck in the problem construct. 
Here is another example of Hypnotic Questions designed to address those presuppositions:  
 
1. What’s wrong? 
 
2. What caused the problem? 
 
3. How have you failed to resolve this? 
 
4. How can you overcome the solution to that problem? 
 
5. What would you like to change? 
 
6. When will you stop it!... being a limitation? 
 
7. How many ways do you know that you have resolved this? 
[Alternative: How many more options do you now have?] 
 
8. How do you know that things have changed?  
 
Listen to the audio seminar for a detailed breakdown of what each question is designed to do! 
How People Create Problems 
 
Reality is bipolar in nature. A problem presupposes the existence and awareness (at some level 
anyway!) of a solution. Lets use a chair as a metaphor for a problem. 
 
If you are in a room and you have a chair, and you decide the chair is a problem. The first thing 
people do is try and move the chair. In some cases this solves the problem, it is out of the way. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
13
 
But in other cases things get worse.  
 
“Where attention goes energy flows” by moving the chair we focus on it, and its importance 
grows – so the problem grows inside our minds.  
 
The very act of moving the chair sensitises you to it and enhances the “chairness.” It is like 
when you buy a new car, and as soon as you have it you suddenly realise that so many other 
people have the same car. The number of people with that car has not changed. Your focus on 
them has changed, and your awareness of them as changed to make it seem like more of that 
car have appeared.  
 
Once they have been moving the chair enough and there has been no change, people decide to 
hide it in a cupboard. But by now they are really aware of the chair, and keep thinking about it, 
and their mind keeps going back to the closet with the chair. And it gets worse, as by hiding the 
chair they disempowered themselves, and no longer have control over the chair, but the 
thought, the ghost image, of the chair remains as powerful as ever.  
 
Suddenly the chair is no longer limited by physical limitations, and the thought of it grows 
completely out of proportion. 
 
This is one way in which many problems are created. 
 
How To Get Rid Of The “Chair” Problem 
 
What happens when you take the idea of the chair, and add to it everything that is NOT the 
chair. 
 
By definition chair+ not chair = everything. 
  
The solution to many problems is not to try and get rid of them; the solution is to allow the 
problem to get lost in what is not the problem. This way you get access to resources, not 
problems! 
 
If you bring in more furniture: a table, statues, a library, board games etc., the room becomes so 
full with things that delight you, that the chair gets lost. 
 
Even if the chair does not diminish if you move it into the cupboard again you no longer think 
about it, as your attention is fixated on the positive things in the room.  
 
By adding more contents to the room, the boundaries of the chair dissolve, and the chair is no 
longer a problem. 
 
Also, if you simply contrast the chair to the entirety of existence, the chair is an insignificant 
nothing.  
 
But when compared to the nothingness that was in the room the chair was everything. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
14
 
When your attention steps outside of the problem boundary you open the doorway to a TIP. The 
larger the problem, the greater the TIP will be when you go to the not. The nature of the 
problem dictates the nature of the solution. 
 
 
Example 3:   
 
 
Linguistic Resourcing2  
by John Overdurf 
 
 
Here’s how to blow out the boundary of a problem by adding what is to what isn’t, and creating 
an inability to perceive the problem: 
 
1. What’s the problem? (puts them in the problem) 
 
2. How do you know it’s a problem? (still in the problem, also a reality strategy) 
 
3. When did you decide that? (starts to dissociate from the problem, at the boundaries of the 
problem) 
 
4. When don’t you do it now? (gets them out of the problem. The negative creates a little 
confusion point and begins the TIP) 
 
5. What are you deciding then? (reinforces everything that is not the problem, and moves 
the problem towards the past. This begins to cement your choices down, it opens up the 
funnel of possibilities) 
 
6. How is that different from how you were? (creates a contrast to the problem from outside 
the problem. This takes the attention from the chair and puts it on the couch. This begins 
to narrow down choices towards a positive point)) 
 
7. And how do you know that now? (reorients you to the present with the resources you 
took from the previous question, and creates a contrast frame with the contrast 
empowered, rather than the problem) 
 
8. What are the changes that you want to make right now? (this is a distraction technique. It 
distracts them and presupposes that they have made the change. This buries the chair 
amongst other chairs, and stops the chair from being a problem). 
 
Think of the patterns in terms of the strategy – learn the thinking behind them, not just the 
patterns themselves. 
                                            
2 This pattern is © John Overdurf. It is used here with kind permission. 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
15
Session 3: How To Think Like A Mindbender3 
 
This session is my interpretation of a great model that allows you to use Mindbending Language 
to instantly create a TIP. This model is called “Beyond Words” and was created by John 
Overdurf. 
 
The Key To Hypnotic Questions 
 
The key to hypnotic questions is NOT the answer people arrive at, it is the process they go 
through when trying to find the answer. You can induce a special state of confusion, which 
leads to a TIP that can end up collapsing the problem. 
 
To gain true elegance with mind bending hypnotic language is to be able to spontaneously 
create these hypnotic questions at any moment. 
 
To begin with we need to look at how to break negative realities in a fluid way, so that 
whenever limitations arise your mind instantly goes to places that will overcome those 
limitations. 
 
Cartesian Coordinates 
 
In 1637 the French philosopher/scientist Renee Descartes wrote a remarkable book that has 
shaped western scientific thought. It was called Discourse on the Method of Rightly Conducting 
the Reason, and Searching for Truth in the Sciences4. In part two of that work, he introduced the 
so-called Cartesian Coordinates. Originally this was a tool to assist precision in Geometry, but 
soon other uses were developed for it. 
 
As hypnotists we can use it to understand the nature of polarities, and how to overcome the very 
solution that was presupposed by the problem. The chart below allows you to make intellectual 
contrasts which you can use to send problems flying! 
 
Converse 
 
~A  B 
-1 + 2 (i.e. 2 -1) 
“NOT I” am afraid 
What isn’t you that cannot change? 
Theorem 
 
A  B 
1 + 2 
I am afraid 
I cannot change 
Non Mirror Image Reverse 
 
~A  ~B 
-1  -2 
“NOT I” am NOT afraid 
What are you NOT that cannot NOT change? 
Inverse 
 
A  ~B 
1 -2 
I am NOT afraid 
What can you do that is NOT change? 
                                            
3 This whole session was inspired by John Overdurf’s “Beyond Words” model. All credit goes to him. Any mistakes in reasoning 
or in the process are of course my own. 
4 French title: Discours de la méthode pour bien conduire sa raison, et chercher la verité dans les sciences 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
16
This chart allows you to go beyond the reality of the problem that someone is facing. These 
questions pull the neurological “rug” out  from underneath the neurological problem, and sends 
them spiralling into a TIP.  
 
Remember, we are not looking for an answer; we are looking for them to try to answer. This is 
not the end of the process; this is just the beginning of the process. 
 
These questions can shift people’s focus from the problem to the solution, by changing their 
relationship with the basic materials that they make their reality up from (i.e. the A and B), and 
dissolving the boundaries around the problem. 
 
How To Use The Cartesian Coordinates 
 
You can use the PCAT formula as a loose structure around which to fit your language. This 
becomes your underlying strategy to blow out the problem: 
 
• P= Problem, “What’s the problem, how do you know it’s a problem etc.” It is important 
to isolate a specific example of the problem. 
 
• C= Confuse. Use the Cartesian co ordinates and changing the syntax, mixing solution 
with problem, and changing the order of the problem. This begins to break down the 
meaning of the problem. 
 
• A= Activate the solution. This flows naturally from the confusion. The confusion leads 
into a TIP. Now you can take him back down to Earth and focus him on a concrete 
resource (eg relaxation.) 
 
• T=Transform. The process of applying the resource to the problem, future pacing and 
testing the resource. 
 
To test to see whether the problem has gone, ask questions like –  
 
Think of the last time that you had this problem, and notice that the way you are now is 
different. 
 
or 
 
Think about a time in the future when you may face this problem, remembering to apply these 
great new changes and resources, and what is happening differently? 
 
You can also look at the PCAT forumal in terms of state.  
 
John Overdurf calls this the “Meta Pattern of Change” 
 
 
 
 

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
17
The Meta Pattern Of Change 
 
1. Associate the person to the problem (fires up neurology) 
2. Dissociate them from it (allows freedom to maneouvre) 
3. Associate the person to resources  
4. Apply the resources to the problem 
 
The 7 Magic Questions 
 
This is what allows you to move forward inside the PCAT formula and to bring the process to a 
successful conclusion. 
 
1. How is that a problem for you? This helps you orient to the problem and collapse it 
down into a simple A B construction. 
 
2. How do you feel now? This collapses them into a positive state, use this when you see 
them falling into a positive TIP. When they answer this question this usually collapses 
them down into the resource making it more convrete. 
 
3. What’s happening now? Use this at a more cautious stage, when you don’t know what 
the impact is. If you’re ever stuck, this is the question to ask! 
 
Use the answer to the above questions to feed back into your Cartesian Coordiantes – eg “How 
isn’t feeling...going to stop you from using the problem now?” Just throw out questions, keep 
rephrasing them to see what sticks and what shifts.  
 
If nothing seems to happen just go right back to “so what’s happening now?” and send that 
through the Cartesian “rinse cycle.” 
 
4. How do you feel about that? this intensifies the positive confusion and stimulates the 
unconscious to find more resources without conscious interference. This creates a double 
bind, they know they are confused, but want the confusion. 
 
5. How do you know? Asks for a reality strategy, and installs the resource. 
 
6. Are you sure? This operates the consistency and commitment principle and commits 
them to the resource.   
 
Loop between the questions “how do you know?” and “are you sure?”. Each time you run the 
loop the feelings will solidify and the reality becomes more robust. The ideal occurs when the 
client starts to convince you that they have changed, rather than it being the other way round 
(quite a refreshing change!) 
 
7. As you are thinking about [The Resource] what is happening to [The Problem] now? This 
is the point of the transformation. The question collapses resource and problem together, 
and chains the problem state to the resource. Do this by running a conditioning loop 
around the problem applying the resource.  

 
                igor@StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The materials in this manual and the accompanying audio seminar are © Igor Ledochowski, All Rights Reserved 
 
 
18
 
A Formal Structure For Informal Change 
 
Use the PCAT formula or the Meta Pattern of Change as a background strategem: 
 
1. Define the problem in a Cartesian “A B” polarity, eg “worrying about this makes me 
feel foolish” 
 
2. Have them specify one specific context where this happened. 
 
3. In a formal setting you can use the question “what do you want to work through 
today?” & “So how do you want to be different?”5 to set the parameters 
 
4. Now the unconscious has a starting point and an end point, and will seek to try and 
connect the dots. This ends the “P” phase. 
 
5. Begin the “C” phase by inducing confusion using the Cartesian Coordinates and 
playing with syntax and hypnotic language.  
 
6. Keep cycling through the Cartesian Coordinates to create sponateneous Hypnotic 
Questions and use the 7 Magic Questions until you induce a TIP. 
 
7. Once you have a TIP, you’re into “A”. Use your 7 Magic Questions to solidify what is 
happening. 
 
8. Keep running through the cycles. You are looking to send them into a TIP and then 
get them to solidify on a resource. If nothing seems to stick, just go back and and ask 
“what’s happening now?”. Then use the Cartesian Coordinates with whatever answer 
they give. 
 
9. Once you have a proper resource that they can collapse into, you’re into the “T” 
phase. Simply associate the resource to the old problem with a question like “As you 
are thinking about [The Resource] what is happening to [The Problem] now?” 
 
Once you get used to this, any observers will think you’re having a perfectly normal 
conversation, but for those involved it is a powerful vehicle for change. 
 
 
                                            
5 © John Overdurf, reproduced with kind permission from his Coaching model. 

